0
0
0
2

 

n
a
J
 

4
2

 
 
 

4
5
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

%A L. Ingber

%A P.L. Nunez

%T Statistical mechanics of neocortical interactions:

High resolution path-integral calculation of short-term memory

%J Phys. Rev. E

%V 51

%N 5

%D 1995

Statistical mechanics of neocortical interactions:

High resolution path-integral calculation of short-term memory

Lester Ingber

Lester Ingber Research, P.O. Box 857, McLean, Virginia 22101

ingber@alumni.caltech.edu

and

Paul L. Nunez

Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana 70118

pln@bmen.tulane.edu

We present high-resolution path-integral calculations of a previously developed model of short-term

memory in neocortex.  These calculations, made possible with supercomputer resources, supplant similar

calculations made in L. Ingber, Phys. Rev.  E 49, 4652 (1994), and support coarser estimates made in L.

Ingber, Phys. Rev. A 29, 3346 (1984). We also present a current experimental context for the relevance of

these calculations using the approach of statistical mechanics of neocortical interactions, especially in the

context of electroencephalographic data.

PA CS Nos.: 87.10.+e, 05.40.+j, 02.50.-r, 02.70.-c

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-2- 

Ingber and Nunez

I. INTRODUCTION

This paper describes a higher-resolution calculation of a similar calculation performed in a recent

paper [1], using supercomputer resources not available at that time, and are of the quality of resolution

presented  in  a  different  system  using  the  same  path-integral  code  PATHINT [2]. A more  detailed

description  of  the  theoretical  basis  for  these  calculations  can  be  found  in  that  paper, and  in  previous

papers in this series of statistical mechanics of neocortical interactions (SMNI) [3-18].

The SMNI approach is to develop mesoscopic scales of neuronal interactions at columnar levels of

hundreds of neurons from the statistical mechanics of relatively microscopic interactions at neuronal and

synaptic scales, poised to study relatively macroscopic dynamics at regional scales as measured by scalp

electroencephalography (EEG).  Relevant  experimental  data  are  discussed  in  the  SMNI  papers  at  the

mesoscopic  scales,  e.g.,  as  in  this  paper’s calculations,  as  well  as  at  macroscopic  scales  of  scalp  EEG.

Here, we demonstrate that the derived ﬁrings of columnar activity, considered as order parameters of the

mesoscopic  system,  develop  multiple  attractors,  which  illuminate  attractors  that  may  be  present  in  the

macroscopic regional dynamics of neocortex.

The  SMNI  approach  may  be  complementary  to  other  methods  of  studying  nonlinear  neocortical

dynamics  at  macroscopic  scales. For example,  EEG  and  magnetoencephalography data  have  been

expanded  in  a  series  of  spatial  principal  components  (Karhunen-Loeve  expansion).  The coefﬁcients  in

such  expansions  are  identiﬁed  as  order  parameters  that  characterize  phase  changes  in  cognitive

studies [19,20] and epileptic seizures [21,22], which are not considered here.

The calculations given here are of minicolumnar interactions among hundreds of neurons, within a

macrocolumnar extent of hundreds of thousands of neurons. Such interactions take place on time scales
of  several t , where t is  on  the  order  of  10  msec  (of  the  order  of  time  constants  of  cortical  pyramidal

cells).  This also is the observed time scale of the dynamics of short-term memory. We hypothesize that

columnar interactions within and/or between regions containing many millions of neurons are responsible

for phenomena at time scales of several seconds.

That is, the nonlinear evolution as calculated here at ﬁner temporal scales gives a base of support

for the phenomena observed at the coarser temporal scales, e.g., by establishing mesoscopic attractors at

many macrocolumnar spatial locations to process patterns at larger regions domains. This motivates us to

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-3- 

Ingber and Nunez

continue using the SMNI approach to study minicolumnar interactions across macrocolumns and across

regions.  For example, this could be approached with a mesoscopic neural network using a conﬂuence of

techniques  drawn  from  SMNI,  modern  methods  of  functional  stochastic  calculus  deﬁning  nonlinear

Lagrangians,  adaptive  simulated  annealing  (ASA) [23],  and  parallel-processing  computation,  as

previously reported [16].  Other developments of SMNI, utilizing coarser statistical scaling than presented

here, have been used to more directly interface with EEG phenomena, including the spatial and temporal

ﬁltering observed experimentally [14,15,17,18].

Section  II  presents  a  current  experimental  and  theoretical  context  for  the  relevance  of  these

calculations.  We stress that neocortical interactions take place at multiple local and global scales and that

a conﬂuence of experimental and theoretical approaches across these scales very likely will be required to

improve our understanding of the physics of neocortex.

Section  III  presents  our  current  calculations,  summarizing  10  CPU  days  of  Convex  120

supercomputer resources in several ﬁgures. These results support the original coarser arguments given in

SMNI papers a decade ago [6,8].

Section IV presents our conclusions.

II. EXPERIMENTAL AND THEORETICAL CONTEXT

A. EEG studies

EEG  provides  a  means  to  study  neocortical  dynamic  function  at  the  millisecond  time  scales  at

which information is processed. EEG provides information for cognitive scientists and medical doctors.

A major challenge for this ﬁeld is the integration of these kinds of data with theoretical and experimental

studies of the dynamic structures of EEG.

Theoretical  studies  of  the  neocortical  medium  have  inv olved  local  circuits  with  postsynaptic

potential delays [24-27], global studies in which ﬁnite velocity of action potential and periodic boundary

conditions are important [28-31], and nonlinear nonequilibrium statistical mechanics of neocortex to deal

with multiple scales of interaction [3-18].  The local and the global theories combine naturally to form a

single theory in which control parameters effect changes between more local and more global dynamic

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-4- 

Ingber and Nunez

behavior [31,32], in  a  manner  somewhat  analogous  to  localized  and  extended  wav e-function  states  in

disordered solids.

Recently, plausible  connections  between  the  multiple-scale  statistical  theory  and  the  more

phenomenological global theory were proposed [14].  Experimental studies of neocortical dynamics with

EEG  include  maps  of  magnitude  distribution  over the  scalp [29,33],  standard  Fourier  analyses  of  EEG

time  series [29],  and  estimates  of  correlation  dimension [34,35].  Other studies  have  emphasized  that

many EEG states are accurately described by a few coherent spatial modes exhibiting complex temporal

behavior [19-22,29,31]. These  modes  are  the  order  parameters  at  macroscopic  scales  that  underpin  the

phase changes associated with changes of physiological state.

The  recent  development  of  methods  to  improve  the  spatial  resolution  of  EEG  has  made  it  more

practical to study spatial structure. The new high resolution methods provide apparent resolution in the

2-3  cm  range,  as  compared  to  5-10  cm  for  conventional  EEG [36].  EEG data  were  obtained  in

collaboration with the Swinburne Centre for Applied Neurosciences using 64 electrodes over the upper

scalp.  These scalp data are used to estimate potentials at the neocortical surface.  The algorithms make

use of general properties of the head volume conductor. A straightforward approach is to calculate the

surface  Laplacian  from  spline  ﬁts  to  the  scalp  potential  distribution.  This approach  yields  estimates

similar to those obtained using concentric spheres models of the head [36].

Here we report on data recorded from one of us (P.L.N), while awake and relaxed with closed eyes

(the  usual  alpha  rhythm).  The resulting  EEG  signal  has  dominant  power  in  the  9-10  Hz  range. We

Fourier transformed the 64 data channels and passed Fourier coefﬁcients at 10 Hz through our Laplacian

algorithm  to  obtain  cortical  Fourier  coefﬁcients.  In this  manner  the  magnitude  and  phase  structure  of

EEG was estimated. A typical Laplacian magnitude and phase plot for 1 sec of EEG is shown in Fig. 1.

This  structure  was  determined  to  be  stable  on  1-min  time  scales;  that  is  averages  over 1 min  exhibit

minimal minute to minute changes when the psychological/physiological state of the brain is held ﬁxed.

By contrast, the structure is quasi-stable on 1-sec time scales. To  show this we calculated magnitude and

phase templates based on an average over 3 min.  We than obtained correlation coefﬁcients by comparing

magnitudes and phases at each electrode position for one second epochs of data with the templates. In

this  manner  we  determined  that  the  structure  is  quasi-stable  on  1  sec  time  scales. That  is,  correlation

coefﬁcients vary from second to second over moderate ranges, as shown in Fig. 2. Another interesting

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-5- 

Ingber and Nunez

aspect  of  these  data  is  the  periodic  behavior  of  the  correlation  coefﬁcients;  magnitudes  and  phases

undergo large changes roughly every 6 sec and then return to patterns that more nearly match templates.

We  hav e previously  considered  how mesoscopic  activity  may  inﬂuence  the  very  large  scale

dynamics observed on the scalp [14].  In some limiting cases (especially those brain states with minimal

cognitive processing), this mesoscopic inﬂuence may be sufﬁciently small so that macroscopic dynamics

can be approximated by a quasi-linear “ﬂuid-like” representation of neural mass action [28-31].  In this

approximation,  the  dynamics  is  crudely  described  as  standing  wav es in the  closed  neocortical  medium

with  periodic  boundary  conditions. Each  spatial  mode  may  exhibit  linear  or  limit  cycle  behavior  at

frequencies in the 2−20 Hz range with mode frequencies partly determined by the size of the cortex and

the action potential velocity in corticocortical ﬁbers. The phase structure shown in Fig. 1 may show the

nodal lines of such standing wav es.

B. Short-term memory

SMNI has presented a model of short-term memory (STM), to the extent it offers stochastic bounds

for this phenomena during focused selective attention [1,6,8,37-39], transpiring on the order of tenths of a
second  to  seconds,  limited  to  the  retention  of  7 – 2 items [40]. This  is  true  even for  apparently

exceptional memory performers who, while they may be capable of more efﬁcient encoding and retrieval

of STM, and while they may be more efﬁcient in ‘‘chunking’’ larger patterns of information into single
items,  nevertheless  are  limited  to  a  STM  capacity  of  7 – 2 items [41]. Mechanisms  for  various  STM

phenomena  have  been  proposed  across  many spatial  scales [42].  This “rule”  is  veriﬁed  for  acoustical

STM,  but  for  visual  or  semantic  STM,  which  typically  require  longer  times  for  rehearsal  in  an
hypothesized articulatory loop of individual items, STM capacity appears to be limited to 4 – 2 [43].

Another  interesting  phenomenon  of  STM  capacity  explained  by  SMNI  is  the  primacy versus

recency effect in STM serial processing, wherein ﬁrst-learned items are recalled most error-free, with last-

learned items still more error-free than those in the middle [44].  The basic assumption being made is that
a pattern  of  neuronal  ﬁring  that  persists  for  many t cycles  is  a  candidate  to  store  the  ‘‘memory’’ of

activity that gav e rise to this pattern. If several ﬁring patterns can simultaneously exist, then there is the

capability of storing several memories. The short-time probability distribution derived for the neocortex

is the primary tool to seek such ﬁring patterns.

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-6- 

Ingber and Nunez

It has been noted that experimental data on velocities of propagation of long-ranged ﬁbers [29,31]

and  derived velocities  of  propagation  of  information  across  local  minicolumnar  interactions [4]  yield

comparable  times  scales  of  interactions  across  minicolumns  of  tenths  of  a  second. Therefore,  such

phenomena as STM likely are inextricably dependent on interactions at local and global scales, and this is

assumed here.

III. PRESENT CALCULATIONS

A. Probability distribution and the Lagrangian

As  described  in  more  detail  in  a  previous  paper [1],  the  short-time  conditional  probability  of
changing ﬁring states within relaxation time t of excitatory (E) and inhibitory (I) ﬁrings in a minicolumn

of  110  neurons  (twice  this  number  in  the  visual  neocortex)  is  given by the  following  summary  of

equations.  The Einstein  summation  convention  is  used  for  compactness,  whereby  any index appearing

more than once among factors in any term is assumed to be summed over, unless otherwise indicated by

vertical bars, e.g., |G|.  The mesoscopic probability distribution P is given by the product of microscopic

probability  distributions ps i, constrained  such  that  the  aggregate  mesoscopic  excitatory  ﬁrings M E=

s j, and the aggregate mesoscopic inhibitory ﬁrings M I = S

j˛ E

s j.

j˛

I

P =

G=E,I

PG[M G(r; t + t )|M G(r¢ ; t)]

=

d

s j

j˛ E

s j - M E(r; t + t )

d

j˛

I

s j - M I (r; t + t )

N

j

ps j

(2pt gGG)- 1/2 exp(- Nt LG) ,  

G

(1)

where the ﬁnal form is derived using the fact that N > 100. G represents contributions from both E and I

sources.  This deﬁnes the Lagrangian, in terms of its ﬁrst-moment drifts gG, its second-moment diffusion
matrix gGG¢ , and its potential V¢ , all of which depend sensitively on threshold factors F G,

P» (2pt )- 1/2g1/2 exp(- Nt L) ,

S
P
S
(cid:230)
(cid:231)
Ł
S
(cid:246)
(cid:247)
ł
(cid:230)
(cid:231)
Ł
S
(cid:246)
(cid:247)
ł
P
»
P
Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-7- 

Ingber and Nunez

L = (2N)- 1( ˙M G - gG)gGG¢ ( ˙M G¢

- gG¢ ) + M G JG/(2Nt ) - V¢

,

V¢ =

S V¢

G

G¢ (r (cid:209) M G¢ )2 ,
¢ G

gG = - t - 1(M G + N G tanh F G) ,

gGG¢ = (gGG¢ )- 1 = d G¢

G t - 1 N Gsech2F G ,

g = det(gGG¢ ) ,

(V G - a|G|
G¢ v|G|
G¢ )2 + (f |G|

G¢ N G¢
G¢ )2](a|G|

A|G|
G¢ v|G|
G¢ N G¢ + 1

G¢ M G¢ )
G¢ M G¢ )}1/2
A|G|

1

2

,

F G =

{p [(v|G|

2

G¢ = 1
aG

2

G¢ + BG
AG
G¢

,

(2)

where AG

G¢ and BG

G¢ are  macrocolumnar-averaged  interneuronal  synaptic  efﬁcacies, vG

G¢ are
av eraged  means  and  variances  of  contributions  to  neuronal  electric  polarizations,  and  nearest-neighbor
interactions V¢ are detailed in other SMNI papers [4,6]. M G¢ and N G¢ in F G are afferent macrocolumnar

G¢ and f G

ﬁrings, scaled to efferent minicolumnar ﬁrings by N/N
macrocolumn.  Similarly, AG¢

G and BG¢

G have been scaled by N

is the number of neurons in a
* /N~ 103 to keep F G invariant.  This scaling

~ 10- 3, where N

is  for  convenience  only. For  neocortex,  due  to  chemical  independence  of  excitatory  and  inhibitory
interactions, the diffusion matrix gGG¢ is diagonal.

The  above  dev elopment  of  a  short-time  conditional  probability  for  changing  ﬁring  states  at  the

mesoscopic entity of a mesocolumn (essentially a macrocolumnar averaged minicolumn), can be folded in

time  over and  over by path-integral  techniques  developed  in  the  late  1970s  to  process  multivariate

Lagrangians nonlinear in their drifts and diffusions [45,46]. This is further developed in the SMNI papers

into a full spatial-temporal ﬁeld theory across regions of neocortex.

-
*
*
Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-8- 

Ingber and Nunez

B. PATHINT algorithm

The  PATHINT  algorithm  can  be  summarized  as  a  histogram  procedure  that  can  numerically

approximate the path integral to a high degree of accuracy as a sum of rectangles at points Mi of height Pi
and  width D Mi. For  convenience,  just  consider  a  one-dimensional  system. The  path-integral
representation described above can be written, for each of its intermediate integrals, as

P(M; t + D

t) = (cid:242) dM¢ [g1/2

s

(2p D

t)- 1/2 exp(- LsD

t)]P(M¢ ; t)

= (cid:242) dM¢ G(M, M¢ ; D

t)P(M¢ ; t) ,

P(M; t) = N
i=1

p (M - Mi)Pi(t) ,

p (M - Mi) =

1

D Mi- 1) £ M £

1 ,   (Mi -
0 ,   otherwise .

2

(Mi + 1
2

D Mi) ,

This yields

Pi(t + D

t) = Tij(D

t)P j(t) ,

Tij(D

t) =

2

D Mi- 1 + D Mi

(cid:242) Mi+D Mi/2
D Mi- 1/2
Mi-

dM (cid:242) M j+D M j/2
D M j- 1/2

M j-

dM¢ G(M, M¢ ; D

t) .  

(3)

(4)

Tij is a banded matrix representing the Gaussian nature of the short-time probability centered about the
(possibly time-dependent) drift. Care must be used in developing the mesh in D M G, which is strongly

dependent on the diagonal elements of the diffusion matrix, e.g.,

D M G »

(D

tg|G||G|)1/2 .

(5)

Presently, this constrains the dependence of the covariance of each variable to be a nonlinear function of

that  variable,  albeit  arbitrarily  nonlinear, in order  to  present  a  straightforward  rectangular  underlying

mesh.

S
(cid:236)
(cid:239)
(cid:237)
(cid:239)
(cid:238)
Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-9- 

Ingber and Nunez

A previous  paper [1]  attempted  to  circumvent  this  restriction  by  taking  advantage  of  previous

observations [6,8] that the most likely states of the “centered” systems lie along diagonals in M G space, a

line determined by the numerator of the threshold factor, essentially

E M E - AE
AE

I M I » 0 ,  

(6)

where for neocortex AE
F E » 0,  and L E is  a  minimum. However,  looking  at L I , in F I

I . Along this line, for a centered system, the threshold factor
I M I ) is

E is on the order of AE

the  numerator  (AI

E M E - AI

typically small only for small M E, since for the neocortex AI

I << AI
E.

C. Further considerations for high-resolution calculation

However,  sev eral problems plagued these calculations. First, and likely most important, is that it

was recognized that a Sun workstation was barely able to conduct tests at ﬁner mesh resolutions. This

became apparent in a subsequent calculation in a different system, which could be processed at ﬁner and

ﬁner meshes, where the resolution of peaks was much more satisfactory [2]. Second, it was difﬁcult, if

not impossible given the nature of the algorithm discussed above, to disentangle any possible sources of

error introduced by the approximations based on the transformation used.

The main issues to note here are that the physical boundaries of ﬁrings M G = – N G are imposed by

the numbers of excitatory and inhibitory neurons per minicolumn in a given region.  Physically, ﬁrings at

these  boundaries  are  unlikely  in  normal  brains,  e.g.,  unless  they are  epileptic  or  dead. Numerically,

PATHINT problems with SMNI diffusions and drifts arise for large M G at these boundaries:

(a) SMNI has regions of relatively small diffusions gGG¢ at the boundaries of M G space.  As the

D M G meshes  are  proportional  to  (gGG¢

t)1/2, this  could  require  PATHINT  to  process  relatively  small

meshes in these otherwise physically uninteresting domains, leading to kernels of size tens of millions of

elements.  These small  diffusions  also  lead  to  large  Lagrangians  which  imply  relatively  small

contributions to the conditional probabilities of ﬁrings in these domains.

(b)  At  the  boundaries  of M G space,  SMNI  can  have  large  negative  drifts, gG. This  can  cause

anomalous numerical problems with the Neumann reﬂecting boundary conditions taken at all boundaries.
For example, if gGD

t is sufﬁciently large and negative, neg ative probabilities can result. Therefore, this

D
Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-10- 

Ingber and Nunez

would require quite small D

t meshes to treat properly, affecting the D M G meshes throughout M G space.

A quite reasonable solution is to cut off the drifts and diffusions at the edges by Gaussian factors G

,

gG ﬁ

gGG

,

gGG¢

gGG¢

G + (1 -

)N G/t ,

G =

G=E,I

exp[- (M G/N G)2/C] - exp(- 1/C)

1 - exp(- 1/C)

,

(7)

where C is a cutoff parameter and the second term of the transformed diffusion is weighted by N G/t , the
value of the SMNI diffusion at M G = 0.  A value of C = 0. 2 was found to give good results.

However, the use of this cutoff rendered the diffusions approximately constant over the E and the I

ﬁring states, e.g., on the order of N G. Therefore, here the diffusions were taken to be these constants.

While  a  resolution  of D

t = 0. 5t was taken  for  the  previous  PATHINT  calculation [1],  here  a
t = 0. 01t was necessary to get well-developed peaks of the evolving distribution
temporal resolution of D
for time epochs on the order of several t . As discussed in the Appendix of an earlier paper [6], such a

ﬁner  resolution  is  quite  physically  reasonable,  i.e.,  even beyond  any numerical  requirements  for  such
temporal meshes. That is, deﬁning q in that previous study to be D
arise due to interactions within memory t as far back as M G(t + D
t ).  That is, the mesocolumnar unit
expresses  the  ﬁrings  of  afferents M G(t + t ) at time t + t as  having  been  calculated  from  interactions
M G(t) at the t -averaged efferent ﬁring time t. With equal likelihood throughout time t , any of the N *

t, ﬁrings of M G(t + D
t -

t) for 0 £

t £

t

uncorrelated  efferent  neurons  from  a  surrounding  macrocolumn  can  contribute  to  change  the

minicolumnar mean ﬁrings and ﬂuctuations of their N uncorrelated minicolumnar afferents.  Therefore,
for D
t/t , it is reasonable to assume that efferents effect
t) - M G(t)»
a change  in  afferent  mean  ﬁrings  of D

t /N and to order D
t ˙M G = M G(t + D

t , at least to resolution D

tgG with  variance D

tgGG. Indeed,

t £

t ‡

columnar ﬁrings (e.g., as measured by averaged evoked potentials) are observed to be faithful continuous

probabilistic measures of individual neuronal ﬁrings (e.g., as measured by poststimulus histograms) [47].

When this cutoff procedure is applied with this temporal mesh, an additional physically satisfying
result  is  obtained,  whereby  the D M G mesh  is  on  the  order  of  a  ﬁring  unit  throughout M G space.  The

ﬁ
G
P
D
D
Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-11- 

Ingber and Nunez

interesting  physics  of  the  interior  region  as  discussed  in  previous  papers  is  still  maintained  by  this

procedure.

D. Four models of selective attention

Three representative models of neocortex during states of selective attention are considered, which

are effected by considering synaptic parameters within experimentally observed ranges.

A model  of  dominant  inhibition  describes  how minicolumnar  ﬁrings  are  suppressed  by  their

neighboring  minicolumns. For example,  this  could  be  effected  by  developing  nearest-neighbor

mesocolumnar interactions [5], but the averaged effect is established by inhibitory mesocolumns (IC) by
E = 0. 01N */N. Since there appears to be relatively little I—I connectivity, we set
setting AI
I = 0. 0001N */N. The background synaptic noise is taken to be BE
I = 0. 002N */N.
AI
As  minicolumns  are  observed  to  have ~ 110  neurons  (the  visual  cortex appears  to  have  approximately

E = 10BI

E = 2BE

E = AE

I = 2AE

I = BI

twice  this  density) [48]  and  as  there  appear  to  be  a  predominance  of E over I neurons [29], we  take
N E = 80  and N I = 30.  As supported  by  references  to  experiments  in  early  SMNI  papers,  we  take
G¢ = 0. 1
N */N = 103, JG = 0 (absence  of  long-ranged  interactions), V G = 10  mV, |vG
mV. It is discovered that more minima of L are created, or “restored,” if the numerator of F G contains
terms only in M G, tending to center the Lagrangian about M G = 0.  Of course, any mechanism producing

G¢ | = 0. 1 mV, and f G

more as well as deeper minima is statistically favored.  However, this particular centering mechanism has
plausible  support: M G(t + t ) = 0 is the  state  of  afferent  ﬁring  with  highest  statistical  weight. That  is,
there  are  more  combinations  of  neuronal  ﬁrings s j = – 1 yielding  this  state  more  than  any other
M G(t + t );  e.g., ~ 2N G+1/2(p N G)- 1/2 relative  to the  states M G = – N G. Similarly, M *G(t) is the  state  of

efferent  ﬁring  with  highest  statistical  weight. Therefore,  it  is  natural  to  explore  mechanisms  that  favor

common highly weighted efferent and afferent ﬁrings in ranges consistent with favorable ﬁring threshold
factors F G» 0.

The centering effect of the IC model of dominant inhibition, labeled here as the IC¢ model, is quite

easy for the neocortex to accommodate.  For example, this can be accomplished simply by readjusting the

synaptic background noise from BG

E to B¢ G
E ,

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-12- 

Ingber and Nunez

V G -

(

1

2

B¢ G

E =

I N I -

I + BG
I )vG
AG
vG
E N G

1

2

AG
E vG

E N E

(8)

for both G = E and G = I. This is modiﬁed straightforwardly when regional inﬂuences from long-ranged

E and BG
I

(and  possibly AG

ﬁrings M ‡E are  included [15].  In general, BG

I due  to  actions  of
neuromodulators and JG or M ‡E constraints from long-ranged ﬁbers) are available to force the constant in
the numerator to zero, giving an extra degree(s) of freedom to this mechanism. (If B¢ G

E would be negative,
this leads to unphysical results in the square-root denominator of F G. Here, in all examples where this
occurs,  it  is  possible  to  instead  ﬁnd  positive B¢ G
I

to  appropriately  shift  the  numerator  of F G.)  In this

E and AG

context,  it  is  experimentally  observed  that  the  synaptic  sensitivity  of  neurons  engaged  in  selective

attention  is  altered,  presumably  by  the  inﬂuence  of  chemical  neuromodulators  on  postsynaptic

neurons [49].

By this centering mechanism, the model F G

IC¢ is obtained

IC¢ =
F E

IC¢ =
F I

0. 5M I - 0. 25M E

p 1/2(0. 1M I + 0. 05M E + 10. 4)1/2

,

0. 005M I - 0. 5M E

p 1/2(0. 001M I + 0. 1M E + 20. 4)1/2

.

(9)

establishing excitatory mesocolumns (EC) by using the same parameters { BG

The other ‘‘extreme’’ of normal neocortical ﬁrings is a model of dominant excitation, effected by
I } as in the
I = 0. 01N */N. Applying  the  centering  mechanism  to  EC,

E = 2AE

E = 2AI

G¢ , f G

G¢ , vG

G¢ , AI

IC  model,  but  setting AE
B¢ E

I = 10. 2 and B¢ I

I = 8. 62. This yields

EC¢ =
F E

EC¢ =
F I

0. 25M I - 0. 5M E

p 1/2(0. 05M I + 0. 10M E + 17. 2)1/2

,

0. 005M I - 0. 25M E

p 1/2(0. 001M I + 0. 05M E + 12. 4)1/2

.

(10)

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-13- 

Ingber and Nunez

Now it is natural to examine a balanced case intermediate between IC and EC, labeled BC. This is
I = 0. 005N */N. Applying  the  centering  mechanism  to  BC,

E = AE

E = AI

accomplished  by  changing AE
B¢ E

E = 0. 438 and B¢ I

I = 8. 62. This yields

BC¢ =
F E

BC¢ =
F I

0. 25M I - 0. 25M E

p 1/2(0. 050M E + 0. 050M I + 7. 40)1/2

0. 005M I - 0. 25M E

p 1/2(0. 001M I + 0. 050M E + 12. 4)1/2

,

.

(11)

A fourth model, similar to BC¢ , for the visual neocortex is considered as well, BC¢ _VIS, where N G

is doubled.

F E

BC¢ _VIS

=

0. 25M I - 0. 25M E

p 1/2(0. 050M E + 0. 050M I + 20. 4)1/2

F I

BC¢ _VIS

=

0. 005M I - 0. 25M E

p 1/2(0. 001M I + 0. 050M E + 26. 8)1/2

,

.

(12)

E. Results of calculations

Models BC¢ , EC¢ , and IC¢ were run at time resolutions of D

t = 0. 01t , resulting in ﬁring meshes of
D M E = 0. 894427 (truncated as necessary at one end point to fall within the required range of – N E), and
D M I = 0. 547723. To  be sure of accuracy in the calculations, off-diagonal spreads of ﬁring meshes were
taken  as – 5.  This lead  to  an  initial  four-dimensional  matrix  of  179 · 110 · 11 · 11 = 2 382 490 points,

which  was  cut  down  to  a  kernel  of  2 289 020 points  because  the  off-diagonal  points  did  not  cross  the

boundaries.  Reﬂecting Neumann boundary conditions were imposed by the method of images, consisting

of  a  point  image  plus  a  continuous  set  of  images  leading  to  an  error  function [50].  A Convex  120

supercomputer was used, but there were problems with its C compiler, so gcc version 2.60 was built and

used.  Runs across several machines, e.g., Suns, Dec workstations, and Crays, checked reproducibility of

this compiler on this problem. It required about 17 CPU min to build the kernel, and about 0.45 CPU min
for each D

t-folding of the distribution.

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-14- 

Ingber and Nunez

For model BC¢ _VIS, the same time resolution and off-diagonal range was taken, resulting in ﬁring
meshes  of D E = 1. 26491 and D M I = 0. 774597, leading  to  a  kernel  of  size  4 611 275 elements.  It
required  about  34  CPU  min  to  build  the  kernel,  and  about  0.90  CPU  min  for  each D

t folding  of  the

distribution.

An  initial d -function  stimulus  was  presented  at M E » M I » 0 for  each  model. The  subsequent

dispersion among the attractors of the systems gives information about the pattern capacity of this system.
Data was printed every 100 foldings, representing the evolution of one unit of t . For run BC¢ , data were
collected for up to 50t , and for the other models data were collected up to 30t .

As  pointed  out  in  Sec.  II,  long-ranged  minicolumnar  circuitry  across  regions  and  across

macrocolumns  within  regions  is  quite  important  in  the  neocortex and  this  present  calculation  only
represents a model of minicolumnar interactions within a macrocolumn. Therefore, only the ﬁrst few t

foldings should be considered as having much physical signiﬁcance.

Figure  3(a)  shows  the  evolution  of  model  BC¢ after  100  foldings  of D

t = 0. 01, or  one  unit  of
relaxation time t . Note the existence of ten well developed peaks or possible trappings of ﬁring patterns.

The  peaks  more  distant  from  the  center  of  ﬁring  space  would  be  even smaller  if  the  actual  nonlinear

diffusions were used, since they are smaller at the boundaries, increasing the Lagrangian and diminishing

the  probability  distribution.  However,  there  still  are  two obvious  scales. If  both  scales  are  able  to  be

accessed then all peaks are available to process patterns, but if only the larger peaks are accessible, then

the  capacity  of  this  memory  system  is  accordingly  decreased. This  seems  to  be  able  to  describe  the
“7 – 2”  rule. Figure  3(b)  shows  the  evolution  after  500  foldings  at  5t ; note  that  the  integrity  of  the
different  patterns  is  still  present. Figure  3(c)  shows  the  evolution  after  1000  foldings  at  10t ; note  the
deterioration of the patterns. Figure 3(d) shows the evolution after 3000 foldings at 30t ; note that while

the original central peak has survived, now most of the other peaks have been absorbed into the central

peaks and the attractors at the boundary.

Figure  4(a)  shows  the  evolution  of  model  EC¢ after  100  foldings  of D

t = 0. 01, or  one  unit  of
relaxation time t . Note that, while ten peaks were present at this time for model BC¢ , now there are only

four well developed peaks, of which only two are quite strong. Figure 4(b) shows the evolution after 1000
foldings at 10t ; note that only the two previously prominent peaks are now barely distinguishable.

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-15- 

Ingber and Nunez

Figure  5(a)  shows  the  evolution  of  model  IC¢ after  100  foldings  of D

t = 0. 01, or  one  unit  of
relaxation time t . While similar to model BC¢ , here too there are ten peaks within the interior of ﬁring

space.  However, quite contrary to that model, here the central peaks are much smaller and therefore less

likely  than  the  middle  and  the  outer  peaks  (the  outer  ones  prone  to  being  diminished  if  nonlinear

diffusions were used, as commented on above), suggesting that the original stimulus pattern at the origin
cannot be strongly contained. Figure 5(b) shows the evolution after 100 foldings at 10t ; note that only

the attractors at the boundaries are still represented.

Figure 6(a) shows the evolution of model BC¢ _VIS after 100 foldings of D

t = 0. 01, or one unit of
relaxation  time t . In comparison  to  model  BC¢ , this  model  exhibits  only  six  interior  peaks,  with  three

scales of relative importance.  If all scales are able to be accessed, then all peaks are available to process

patterns,  but  if  only  the  larger  peaks  are  accessible,  then  the  capacity  of  this  memory  system  is
accordingly decreased. This seems to be able to describe the “4 – 2” rule for visual memory. Figure 6(b)
shows the evolution after 100 foldings at 10t ; note that these peaks are still strongly represented. Also
note that now other peaks at lower scales are clearly present, numbering on the same order as in the BC¢

model, as the strength in the original peaks dissipates throughout ﬁring space, but these are much smaller
and therefore much less probable to be accessed. As seen in Fig. 6c, similar to the BC¢ model, by 15t ,

only the original two large peaks remain prominent.

IV. CONCLUSION

Experimental  EEG  results  are  available  for  regional  interactions  and  the  evidence  supports

attractors  that  can  be  considered  to  process  short-term  memory  under  conditions  of  selective  attention.

There are many models of nonlinear phenomena that can be brought to bear to study these results.

There is not much experimental data available for large-scale minicolumnar interactions. However,

SMNI offers a theoretical approach, based on experimental data at ﬁner synaptic and neuronal scales, that

develops attractors that are consistent with short-term memory capacity. The duration and the stability of

such attractors likely are quite dependent on minicolumnar circuitry at regional scales, and further study

will require more intensive calculations than presented here [16].

We  hav e presented a reasonable paradigm of multiple scales of interactions of the neocortex under

conditions  of  selective  attention.  Presently, global  scales  are  better  represented  experimentally, but  the

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-16- 

Ingber and Nunez

mesoscopic scales are represented in more detail theoretically. We hav e offered a theoretical approach to

consistently  address  these  multiple  scales [14-16],  and  more  a  phenomenological  macroscopic

theory [28-32] that is more easily compared with macroscopic data. We  expect that future experimental

efforts will offer more knowledge of the neocortex at these multiple scales as well.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  acknowledge the use of the Tulane University Convex  120 supercomputer for all calculations

presented  in  this  paper. We thank  Richard  Silberstein  of  the  Centre  for  Applied  Neurosciences  for

recording PLN’s EEG data.

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-17- 

Ingber and Nunez

FIGURE CAPTIONS

FIG. 1. Magnitude (upper) and phase (lower) at 9 Hz of 1 sec of alpha rhythm is shown.  The plots

represent  estimates  of  potential  on  the  cortical  surface  calculated  from  a  64  channel  scalp  recording

(average  center-to  center  electrode  spacing  of  about  2.7  cm). The  estimates  of  cortical  potential  wav e

forms  were  obtained  by  calculating  spatial  spline  functions  at  each  time  slice  to  obtain  analytic  ﬁts  to

scalp potential distributions.  Surface Laplacian wav e forms were obtained from second spatial derivatives

(in  the  two surface  tangent  coordinates). Magnitude  and  phase  were  obtained  from  temporal  Fourier

transforms of the Laplacian wav e forms.  This particular Laplacian algorithm yields estimates of cortical

potential that are similar to inverse solutions based on four concentric spheres modes of the head. The

Laplacian appears to be robust with respect to noise and head model errors [36].  The dark and the lighter
shaded regions are 90(cid:176) out of phase, suggesting quasi-stable phase structure with regions separated by a
few centimeters 180(cid:176) out of phase (possible standing wav es).  Data recorded at the Swinburne Centre for

Applied Neurosciences in Melbourne, Australia.

FIG. 2. Changes of alpha rhythm correlation coefﬁcients based on comparisons of magnitude (solid

line)  and  phase  (dashed  line)  plots  of  successive  1-sec  epochs  of  alpha  rhythm  compared  with  spatial

templates based on averages over 3  min of data (similar to Fig. 1). The data show a quasistable structure

with major changes in magnitude or phase about every 6 sec, after which the structure tends to return to

the template structure.

FIG. 3. Model BC¢ : (a) the evolution at t , (b) the evolution at 5t , (c) the evolution at 10t , and (d)

the evolution at 30t .

FIG. 4. Model EC¢ : (a) the evolution at t and (b) the evolution at 10t .

FIG. 5. Model IC¢ : (a) the evolution at t and (b) the evolution at 10t .

FIG. 6. Model BC¢ _VIS: (a) the evolution at t , (b) the evolution at 10t , and (c) the evolution at

15t .

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-18- 

Ingber and Nunez

REFERENCES

[1]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Statistical mechanics of neocortical interactions: Path-integral evolution of short-term

memory,’’ Phys. Rev. E 49, 4652-4664 (1994).

[2]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Path-integral evolution of multivariate systems with moderate noise,’’ Phys. Rev.  E 51,

1616-1619 (1995).

[3]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Tow ards a uniﬁed brain theory,’’ J. Social Biol. Struct. 4, 211-224 (1981).

[4]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical  interactions.  I.  Basic  formulation,’’ Physica  D 5,

83-107 (1982).

[5]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Statistical mechanics of neocortical interactions. Dynamics of synaptic modiﬁcation,’’

Phys. Rev. A 28, 395-416 (1983).

[6]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical  interactions.  Derivation  of  short-term-memory

capacity,’’ Phys. Rev. A 29, 3346-3358 (1984).

[7]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical  interactions.  EEG  dispersion  relations,’’ IEEE

Tr ans. Biomed. Eng. 32, 91-94 (1985).

[8]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Statistical mechanics of neocortical interactions: Stability and duration of the 7+−2 rule

of short-term-memory capacity,’’ Phys. Rev. A 31, 1183-1186 (1985).

[9]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Tow ards  clinical  applications  of  statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical  interactions,’’

Innov. Tech. Biol. Med. 6, 753-758 (1985).

[10]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Statistical mechanics of neocortical interactions,’’ Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 31, 868 (1986).

[11]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Applications of biological intelligence to Command, Control and Communications,’’ in

Computer  Simulation  in  Brain  Science:  Proceedings,  University  of  Copenhagen,  20-22  August

1986, ed. by R. Cotterill (Cambridge University Press, London, 1988), p. 513-533.

[12]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Statistical  mechanics  of  mesoscales  in  neocortex and  in  command,  control  and
communications  (C3):  Proceedings,  Sixth  International  Conference,  St.  Louis,  MO,  4-7  August

1987,’’ Mathl. Comput. Modelling 11, 457-463 (1988).

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-19- 

Ingber and Nunez

[13]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Mesoscales in neocortex and in command, control and communications (C3) systems,’’

in Systems with Learning and Memory Abilities: Proceedings, University of Paris 15-19 June 1987,

ed. by J. Delacour and J.C.S. Levy (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1988), p. 387-409.

[14]  L. Ingber  and  P.L.  Nunez,  ‘‘Multiple  scales  of  statistical  physics  of  neocortex:  Application  to

electroencephalography,’’ Mathl. Comput. Modelling 13, 83-95 (1990).

[15]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical  interactions:  A  scaling  paradigm  applied  to

electroencephalography,’’ Phys. Rev. A 44, 4017-4060 (1991).

[16]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Generic  mesoscopic  neural  networks  based  on  statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical

interactions,’’ Phys. Rev. A 45, R2183-R2186 (1992).

[17]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Statistical  mechanics  of  multiple  scales  of  neocortical  interactions,’’  in Neocortical

Dynamics and Human EEG Rhythms, ed. by P.L. Nunez (Oxford University Press, New York, NY,

1995), p. 628-681.

[18]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Statistical mechanics of neocortical interactions: Multiple scales of EEG,’’  in Fr ontier

Science in EEG: Continuous Waveform Analysis (Electroencephal. clin. Neurophysiol. Suppl. 45),

ed. by R.M. Dasheiff and D.J. Vincent (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1996), p. 79-112.

[19]  A. Fuchs,  J.A.S.  Kelso,  and  H.  Haken,  ‘‘Phase  transitions  in  the  human  brain:  Spatial  mode

dynamics,’’ Int. J. Bifurcation Chaos 2, 917-939 (1992).

[20]  V.K. Jirsa, R. Friedrich, H. Haken, and J.A.S. Kelso, ‘‘A  theoretical model of phase transitions in

the human brain,’’ Biol. Cybern. 71, 27-35 (1994).

[21]  R. Friedrich  and  C.  Uhl,  ‘‘Synergetic  analysis  of  human  electroencephalograms:  Petit-mal

epilepsy,’’ in Evolution  of  Dynamical  Structures  in  Complex Systems, ed.  by  R.  Friedrich  and  A.

Wunderlin (Springer, Berlin, 1992).

[22]  R. Friedrich,  A.  Fuchs,  and  H.  Haken,  ‘‘Spatio-temporal  EEG  patterns,’’  in Rhythms  in

Physiological Systems, ed. by H. Haken and H.P. Koepchen (Springer, Berlin, 1991).

[23]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Adaptive  Simulated  Annealing  (ASA),’’  Global  optimization  C-code,  Lester  Ingber

Research, Chicago, IL, 1993.

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-20- 

Ingber and Nunez

[24]  H.R. Wilson and J.D. Cowan, ‘‘A  mathematical theory of the functional dynamics of cortical and

thalamic nervous tissue,’’ Kybernetik 13, 55-80 (1973).

[25]  W.J. Freeman, Mass Action in the Nervous System (Academic Press, New York, NY, 1975).

[26]  A. Van Rotterdam, F.H. Lopes da  Silva, J. van  der  Ende, M.A. Viergever, and A.J. Hermans, ‘‘A

model of the spatial-temporal characteristics of the alpha rhythm,’’ Bull. Math. Biol. 44, 283-305

(1982).

[27]  W.J.  Freeman,  ‘‘Simulation  of  chaotic  EEG  patterns  with  a  dynamic  model  of  the  olfactory

system,’’ Biol. Cybern. 55, 139-150 (1987).

[28]  P.L. Nunez, ‘‘The brain wav e equation: A model for the EEG,’’ Math. Biosci. 21, 279-297 (1974).

[29]  P.L.  Nunez, Electric  Fields  of  the  Brain:  The  Neurophysics  of  EEG (Oxford  University  Press,

London, 1981).

[30]  R.D. Katznelson,  ‘‘Deterministic  and  Stochastic  Field  Theoretic  Models  in  the  Neurophysics  of

EEG,’’ Ph.D. Thesis, UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 1982.

[31]  P.L. Nunez, Neocortical Dynamics and Human EEG Rhythms (Oxford University Press, New York,

NY, 1995).

[32]  P.L.  Nunez,  ‘‘Generation  of  human  EEG  rhythms  by  a  combination  of  long  and  short-range

neocortical interactions,’’ Brain Topography 1, 199-215 (1989).

[33]  D. Lehmann,  ‘‘Human  scalp  EEG  ﬁelds:  Evoked,  alpha,  sleep,  and  spike-wav e patterns,’’  in

Synchronization  of  EEG  Activity  in  Epilepsies, ed.  by  H.  Petsche  and  M.A.B.  Brazier  (Springer-

Verlag, New York, NY, 1971), p. 301-325.

[34]  J.P. Pijn,  J.  Van  Neerven,  A.  Noest,  and  F.H.  Lopes da  Silva,  ‘‘Chaos  or  noise  in  EEG  signals:

Dependence on state and brain site,’’ Electroencephal. clin. Neurophysiol. 79, 371-381 (1992).

[35]  P.E.  Rapp,  T.R.  Bashore,  J.M.  Marinerie,  A.M.  Albano,  I.D.  Zimmerman,  and  A.I.  Mees,

‘‘Dynamics of brain electrical activity,’’ Brain Topography 2, 99-118 (1989).

[36]  P.L. Nunez, R.B. Silberstein, P.J. Cadusch, R.S. Wijesinghe, A.F. Westdorp, and R. Srinivasan, ‘‘A

theoretical and experimental study of high resolution EEG based on surface Laplacians and cortical

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-21- 

Ingber and Nunez

imaging,’’ Electroencephal. clin. Neurophysiol. 90, 40-57 (1994).

[37]  L. Ingber, ‘‘Editorial: Learning to learn,’’ Explore 7, 5-8 (1972).

[38]  L. Ingber, Karate: Kinematics and Dynamics (Unique, Hollywood, CA, 1981).

[39]  L. Ingber, Elements of Advanced Karate (Ohara, Burbank, CA, 1985).

[40]  G.A. Miller, ‘‘The magical number seven, plus or minus two,’’ Psychol. Rev. 63, 81-97 (1956).

[41]  K.A. Ericsson and W.G. Chase, ‘‘Exceptional memory,’’ Am. Sci. 70, 607-615 (1982).

[42]  H. Eichenbaum, ‘‘Thinking about brain cell assemblies,’’ Science 261, 993-994 (1993).

[43]  G. Zhang and H.A. Simon, ‘‘STM capacity for Chinese words and idioms: Chunking and acoustical

loop hypotheses,’’ Memory & Cognition 13, 193-201 (1985).

[44]  B.B. Murdock, Jr., ‘‘A  distributed memory model for serial-order information,’’ Psychol. Rev. 90,

316-338 (1983).

[45]  R. Graham, ‘‘Covariant formulation of non-equilibrium statistical thermodynamics,’’ Z. Physik B26,

397-405 (1977).

[46]  F. Langouche,  D.  Roekaerts,  and  E.  Tirapegui, Functional  Integration  and  Semiclassical

Expansions (Reidel, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 1982).

[47]  E.R. John, ‘‘Switchboard versus statistical theories of learning and memory,’’ Science 177, 850-864

(1972).

[48]  V.B.  Mountcastle,  ‘‘An org anizing  principle  for  cerebral  function:  The  unit  module  and  the

distributed  system,’’  in The  Mindful  Brain, ed.  by  G.M.  Edelman  and  V.B.  Mountcastle

(Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 1978), p. 7-50.

[49]  V.B. Mountcastle, R.A. Andersen, and B.C. Motter, ‘‘The inﬂuence of attentive  ﬁxation upon the

excitability  of  the  light-sensitive  neurons  of  the  posterior  parietal  cortex,’’ J.  Neurosci. 1,

1218-1235 (1981).

[50]  N.S. Goel  and  N.  Richter-Dyn, Stochastic  Models  in  Biology (Academic  Press,  New York,  NY,

1974).

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

-22- 

Ingber and Nunez

Figure 1 upper

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

Ingber and Nunez

Figure 1 lower

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

Ingber and Nunez

Figure 2

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

Ingber and Nunez

Figure 3a

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

Ingber and Nunez

Figure 3b

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

Ingber and Nunez

Figure 3c

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

Ingber and Nunez

Figure 3d

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

Ingber and Nunez

Figure 4a

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

Ingber and Nunez

Figure 4b

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

Ingber and Nunez

Figure 5a

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

Ingber and Nunez

Figure 5b

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

Ingber and Nunez

Figure 6a

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

Ingber and Nunez

Figure 6b

Statistical Mechanics of Neocortical ...

Ingber and Nunez

Figure 6c

