0
0
0
2

 

n
a
J
 

3
1

 
 
 

7
2
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Newtonian  Relativity,  Gravity,  and  Cosmology

Joseph L. McCauley+
Department  of  Physics

University  of  Oslo
Box  1048,  Blindern

N-0314  Oslo

and

Institute  for  Energy  Technology

Box 40

N-2007  Kjeller

jmccauley@uh.edu

Abstract

Well-known 

to  specialists  but  little-known  to  the  wider  audience  is  that

Newtonian  gravity  can  be  understood  as  geodesic  motion 

in  space-time,

where  time 

is  absolute  and  space  is  Euclidean.  Newtonian  cosmology

formulated  by  Heckmann  agrees  implicitly  with  Cartan's  formulation  but

does  not  unfold  the  underlying  geometric  picture  in  space-time.  I present  the

transformation  theory  of  Newtonian  mechanics  and  gravity  developed  by

Cartan  and  Heckmann,  and  show  via  coordinate 

transformations 

that

Heckmann's  Newtonian  cosmological  model  has  a  center,  so  that  the

cosmological  principle  cannot  hold  globally.

It  is  possible  to  confuse  relativity  principles  with  a  position  of  relativism.

Mach's  principle  has  much  to  do  with  the  latter  and  little  to  do  with  the

former.  Both  general  relativity  and  nonlinear  dynamics  inform  us  that  most

coordinate  systems  are  defined  locally  by  differential  equations  that  are

1

globally nonintegrable:  global extensions  of  local  coordinates  usually  do  not

exist.  I explain  how  defining  inertial  frames  locally  by free  fall  short  circuits

Mach's  philosophic  objections  to  Newtonian  dynamics.

+ permanent address: 

Physics  Department
University  of  Houston

                                                Houston, Texas 77204 USA

2

1.  Newtonian  dust

In  Newtonian  theory  we  can  consider  a  pressureless  dust  obeying the  coupled

quasilinear  equations  of  hydrodynamics

dv
dt

 = 

¶ v
¶ t

 + v(cid:215)

 + (cid:209)

¶ t
(cid:209) 2F

 (cid:209)

(cid:209) v = - 1
   

v = 0

 = 4p

.   (1)

In  a  cosmological  model  each  dust  particle  represents  a  galaxy.  The

connection  with  Newtonian  particle  dynamics  is  provided  by the  method  of

solution  of  (1),  the  method  of  characteristics.  Equations  (1)  are  quasilinear

partial  differential  equations  whose  characteristic  curves  [1,2] are  generated

locally  by  the  differential  equations

 = dxk
vk

dt
1

 =  dvk

- 

¶ xk  .  (4)

These  are  simply  the  equations  of  Newtonian  mechanics:  if  we  think  of  N

dust particles then each dust particle  obeys Newton's  law  in  the  gravitational

field defined by the other N-1 dust particles.  We can  rewrite  the  characteristic

equations  in  the  form

3

r
F
¶
r
(cid:215)
r
r
¶
F
xk = vk

vk = - 

¶ xk                  (4b)

so  that  we  might  attempt  to  study  the  nonlinear  dynamics  of  galaxy

formation  and  evolution  in  the  3N  dimensional  phase  space  of  the  x's  and

v's,  or  as  Newton's  second  law

d2xi
dt2

 + 

¶ xi

 = 0

          (5)

in 3-space.  We  can  think  of  streamlines  in  a 6-dimensional  (x,v)  phase  space

(phase flow  picture)  if  and  only  if  the  solutions  x and  v  are  finite  for  all  real

finite  times,  in  which  case  all  singularities  of  power  series  solutions  of  (5) are

confined  to  the  complex  time  plane.  We  will  see  below  that  this  condition  is

violated  by spontaneous  singularities  in  Newtonian  cosmology.  In  this  case

the  language  of  jet  space  and  caustics  [3] provides  the  right  approach  to  the

analysis  of  the  nonlinear  dynamics  of  galaxy  motions.  

Newtonian  cosmology  is  still  of  interest  for  at  least  two  main  reasons.  First,  it

reproduces  the  same  equation  for  the  Hubble  expansion  as  the  Friedmann

model  in  general  relativity.  Second,  and  more  fundamentally,  Cartan's

formulation  and  interpretation  of  Newtonian  dynamics  provides  the  best

take-off  point  for  general  relativity.  The  problem  of  defining  average

solutions  in  theoretical  cosmology  is  unsolved  in  general  relativity  although

much  headway  has  been  made  in  Newtonian  cosmology.  It  is  hoped  that

perturbation  theory  in  Cartan's  formulation  of  Newtonian  theory  may  shed

some  light  on  how  to  handle  the  problem  in  general  relativity  [4].  

4

¶
F
¶
F
2. The cosmologic principle

The  Hubble  expansion  is  inferred  nonuniquely  from  redshift  data. The  galaxy

distribution  is  obtained  from  the  analysis  of  data derived  from  redshift  data.

The  analogy  of  galaxies  in  an  expanding  universe  with  points  on  an

expanding  balloon  is  well-known.  In  the  Hubble's  law  interpretation  of

redshifts  the  matter  distribution  of  the  observable  part  of  the  universe 

is

implicitly  presumed  to  be  isotropic  and  homogeneous,  so    that  galaxies  appear

to recede from one another with a steady radial velocity field [5]

v = H(t)r             (6)

where  H(t)  is  the  very  slowly-varying  Hubble  'constant'  and  is  given
approximately  by  H(t)» h-1100km/s.Mpc, with  h»

.5  to  .6 in  our  present  epoch.

Since  H(t)  varies  with  time  the  presumed  equivalent  observers  are  accelerated

relative  to  one  another.  The  main  point  to  bear in  mind  is  that  this  simplest

form (6) of the Hubble law implicitly  presumes  the  cosmological  principle,  so

that the usual method of data analysis in cosmology would have to be  revised

or  abandoned  if  the  cosmological  principle  could  be  shown  to  be  false.  For

example, one does not yet know  how  to  generalize  (6) to  handle  the  case of  a

hierarchical  universe,  or  any  other  nonhomogeneous  universe.   

The  cosmologic  principle  is  sometimes  stated  in  the  following  form:  All

observers  are  equivalent; 

there  are  no  preferred  observers:  there  is  no

preferred  vantage  point  from  which  to  observe  the  gross  motions  of  matter  in

the  universe.  This  statement  is  not  precise.  I will  emphasize  in  part 5  below

5

that  the  standard  definition  of  equivalent  observers  simultaneously  defines

those  observers  as  preferred: 

from  their  globally  accelerated  (but  locally

inertial)  reference  frames,  and  from  no  others,  the  Hubble  expansion  would

look  the  same.

Another  way  to  express  the  content  of  the  cosmological  principle  is  to  assume

that  the  distribution  of  matter  in  the  universe 

is  globally  (more  or  less)

homogeneous  and  isotropic.  Equivalently,  one  can  use  the  assumption  that

the  density  is  spatially  constant  at  fixed  times,  with  only  small  deviations

from  uniformity.

The  cosmological  principle  appears  superficially  to  resemble  a  principle  of

relativity,  but  that  principle  is  neither  the  basis  for  the  general  theory  of

relativity nor is it demanded by that theory. The  cosmological  principle  is  not

required  by  any  known  law  of  physics.  Some  writers  allude  to  'the  Copernican

Principle'  but  that  principle  is  merely  another  statement  of  belief  in  the

cosmological  principle  (Copernicus  certainly  did not  adhere  to  the  'principle'

attributed  to  him,  because his  own  model  universe  had  a center).  I defer  the

discussion  of  the  observational  basis  for  or  against  the  cosmological  principle

until  a  second  paper,  and  discuss  here  only  the  attempt  to  realize  the

cosmological  principle  within  an  infinite  Newtonian  universe.

Newtonian  cosmologies  require  flat  space  (a  flat  space is  one  where  Cartesian

coordinates  exist  globally  because 

the  Riemann 

curvature  vanishes

everywhere).  Flat  spaces (and  Newtonian  mechanics)  can  be  realized  in  two

ways: (i) as an infinite unbounded space, or (ii) as a finite  unbounded  space in

the form of a flat 3-torus.  The  latter  is  equivalent  to  solving  (1) with  periodic

6

boundary  conditions,  a common  procedure  in  numerical  simulations  of  the

N-body  problem.

I  review  next  one  of  the  main  building  blocks  of  Newtonian 

(and

Einsteinean)  cosmology:  the  principle  of  equivalence.  The  discussion  leads  us

into  the  transformation 

theory  of  Newtonian  mechanics,  and  to  Cartan's

formulation  of  Newtonian  theory,  which  reflects  the  correct  geometric  nature

of  gravity:  Cartan's  formulation  agrees with  the  infinite  light-speed  limit  of

general  relativity,  whereas  the  standard  textbook  interpretation  of  Newtonian

gravity as a scalar potential  giving  rise  to  a covariant  force  does  not.  In  order

to  arrive  well-informed  at  the  goal  it's  necessary  to  start  at  the  beginning.

3. Free fall and the principle of equivalence   

Consider  N  particles  of  fixed  mass  mi  interacting  only  via  gravity  in  what

follows. For any one of the N bodies the law of inertia states that

dvi
dt

 = 0

    (7)

whenever  no  net  force  acts  on  the  body,  and  in  a  gravitational  field  with
potential  F

  Newton's  second  law

d2xi
dt2

 + 

¶ xi

 = 0

  (5)

generalizes  the  law  of  inertia.  I  assume  in  all  that  follows  that  the  potential  F

is independent of the mass mi of the body described by (5).

7

¶
F
Standard  treatments  of  Newtonian  mechanics  assume,  without  explanation,

that  the  gravitational  potential  transforms  like  a scalar  (Newton  did  not  tell

us  how  gravity  should  transform  under  arbitrary  coordinate  changes).  The

gravitational  force  is  then  forced  to  transform  like  a  covariant  vector.  This

assumption  is  not  only  unnecessary,  it  also  does  not  agree  with  the  infinite

light-speed 

limit  of  general 

relativity.  When 

it 

is  used 

then 

the

transformation 

theory  of  Newtonian  mechanics  does  not  emphasize  the

following  fundamental  fact  about  gravity:  a  reference  frame  in  free-fall  is

locally  inertial.  In  a  freely  falling  frame  a ball  tossed  into  a vacuum  obeys the

law  of  inertia  locally  (not  globally),  is  force-free  and  has  a  trajectory  in  the

freely falling frame that is a straight line  with  constant  speed (by local  I mean

the  consideration  of  a small  enough  spatial  region  that  the  gradients  of  the

gravitational  field  can  be  neglected  for  a short  but finite  time,  whereas  global

refers  to  arbitrarily  large  spatial  regions  and  time  intervals).  The  experiment

could  be performed  by an  astronaut  near  a satellite  falling  freely  about  about

the  earth,  or  by  a  robot  made  to  jump  off  a  cliff  on  Mars.  Treating  the

gravitational  force  as  a  covariant  vector  emphasizes  that  gravity  cannot  be

transformed away globally (tidal forces  cannot  be transformed  away, e.g.). We

want  to  use  instead  a transformation  theory  that  explicitly  makes  use  of  the

fact  that  the  gravitational  force  can  be  made  to  vanish  locally.

The second related fact,  emphasized  by Einstein,  is  the  equivalence  principle.

If we transform  from  a local  inertial  frame  (meaning  here  any  freely  falling

frame, or any frame connected by a Galilean  transformation  to  a freely  falling

frame)  to  a  linearly  accelerated  one,

8

x'i = xi - bi(t)
v'i = vi - bi(t)
a'i = ai - bi(t),       (8)

where dbi/dt is constant for  Galilean  transformations,  then  Newton's  second

law  becomes

d2xi
dt2

 + bi + 

 = 0

¶ xi

.           (5b)

When  d2bi/dt2 is  constant  then  this  is  the  same  as  if  the  accelerated  frame

were  replaced  by a frame  that  is  stationary  in  a gravitational  field  with  local

field  strength  gi  =  d2bi/dt2,  corresponding  to  a  planet  whose  surface  is

transverse  to  the  xi-axis.  By giving  up  the  fiction  that  the  gravitational  force

transforms  globally  like  a  covariant  vector  we  shall  see  that  both  of  these

fundamental  empirical  facts  about  how  gravity  behaves 

locally  can  be

adequately  emphasized  within 

the  transformation 

theory  of  Newtonian

dynamics.

4. Newtonian gravity transforming as a scalar potential

Given  Newton's  second  law,  if  one  asks  for  the  force  that  produces  an  ellipse

with  the  point  of  attraction  at  one  focus,  then  the  result  is  the  inverse  square

law  of  attraction.  Because  this  method  of  derivation  of  gravity  is  due  to

Newton,  he  surely  knew  that  his  description  of  gravity  as an  inverse  square

law  force  is  accurate  only  to  the  extent  that  the  orbits  of  planets  can  be

accurately  described as (nonprecessing)  ellipses  [6]. Note  that  no  assumption

was  made  here  about  how  gravity  behaves  under  arbitrary  coordinate

9

¶
F
transformations. 

I  next  review  the  usual  (and  wrong)  treatment  of  the

transformation  theory  of  Newtonian  dynamics,  where  gravity  is  supposed  to

transform  as  a  scalar  potential.

Assume  that  Newtonian  gravity  can  be described  under  arbitrary  coordinate
transformations  as a scalar  potential  F

. This  means  that  under  differentiable

coordinate  transformations

x'k = fk(x,t),  xi = gi(x',t)       (9)

  the  gravitational  potential  transforms  like

'(x',t) = F

(x,t)            (10)

which  seems  obvious  from  a superficial  standpoint1.  The  gravitational  force
F = - (cid:209)

 must  then  transform  like  a  covariant  vector,  because

'
¶ x'k

 = 

¶ xi
¶ x'k

 

¶ xi.                (11)

It follows that if F = - (cid:209)

 = 0  globally in one frame then F' = - (cid:209)

'F

' = 0 globally

in  all  (global) frames.  This  global perspective  is  misleading  because  it  masks

the  all-important  fact  that  the  gravitational  force  vanishes  in  local  inertial

frames that are defined by free fall. Why does this matter?

                                    
1 A  scalar  that  is,  in  addition,  invariant  would  transform  like  F

(x',t) = F

(x,t).

1 0

F
F
¶
F
¶
F
F
There  are  no  known  global  inertial  frames  (stars  and  galaxies  aren't  fixed, but

accelerate).  All  known  inertial  frames  are  local,  and  the  only  local  inertial

frames  that  we  know  in  nature  are  those  provided  by  free  fall.  By  local,  I

mean  simply  that  the  gravitational  field  is  approximated  over  a  small  but

finite  region  by a  constant,  so  that  the  derivatives  of  the  field  are  ignored

(tidal effects are global and are therefore ignored). The  earth,  in  free  fall  about

the  sun,  is  a  good  local  inertial  frame  over  small  spatial  regions  and  over

times  that  are  short  compared  with  the  rotation  period  of  the  earth  about  it's

axis.  Were  this  not  true  then  Galileo  could  not  have  discovered  the  local  laws

of  free  fall  and  inertia 

from  his  borderline  medieval  perspective  of

Archimedean 

empiricism 

combined  with  neo-Platonic  argumentation.

Galileo  understood  the  law  of  inertia  as a local,  not  global  principle,  but  for

the wrong reason [7]: he did not deviate from Plato  and  Aristotle  in  regarding

uniform  circular  motion  as  'natural',  and  as  requiring  no  mechanical

explanation 

(Aristotle  and  Galileo  also  required  no  explanation 

for

gravitational  free-fall  and  radial  coalescence  of  mass  via  gravity).  Galileo

largely regarded constant  speed  linear  motion  (force-free  motion,  which  we

identify as the law of  inertia)  as only  a local  tangential  description  of  a global

orbit  that  he  believed  (in  agreement  with  Plato  and  Aristotle)  should  be

circular,  at  uniform  speed.  Galileo  described  parabolic  trajectories  of  canon

balls  but  did  not  realize  that  gravity  also  makes  the  planets  accelerate  in

approximately  circular  orbits  about  the  sun.  Newton  was  the  first  to  make  the

connection  between  the  trajectories  of  apples and  the  orbit  of  the  moon,  and

beyond,  although  Huyghens  preceded  Newton  in  using  the  law  of  inertia  (for

tangential  motions)  combined  with  the  second  law  (for  radial  motions),

before  Newton,  to  prove  that  an  inverse  square  force  of  attraction  is  necessary

for  uniform  circular  motion.  Galileo's  local  dynamics  was  new  and  anti-

1 1

Aristotelian,  but was inconsistent  with  his  global view  of  astronomy,  which

remained  Copernican-Platonic  in  spite  of  Kepler's  revolutionary  advances  in

the  very  same  era.  It  was  his  literal  belief  in  the  Copernican  system  that

motivated  Galileo's  argument  and  experiments  supporting  the  law  of  inertia

in  order  to  explain  to  the  Aristotelians  why,  as the  earth  moves,  we  are  not

aware of it.  

The  modern  viewpoint  on  Newtonian  dynamics,  informed  by  general

relativity  and  nonlinear  dynamics,  abandons  the  search  for  global  inertial

frames.  The  modern  viewpoint  emphasizes  that  freely  falling  frames  are

locally  inertial.  Hence,  not  all  inertial  frames  can  be  connected  by  Galilean

transformations.  For  example,  frames  in  free  fall  on  opposite  sides  of  the

earth are both locally inertial, but because both are accelerated toward (or away

from)  each  other  they  cannot  be connected  via  a Galilean  transformation.  By

abandoning  the  fiction  of  global  inertial  frames  and  adopting  instead  the  local

viewpoint  we  will  not  need  Newton's  global  idea  of  absolute  space. The  latter

requires  the  unnecessary  (and  unphysical,  because  unverifiable)  assumption

that  Cartesian  axes can  be extended  all  the  way to  infinity,  an  idea  that  more

or less goes back to Descartes, who arrived at  the  law  of  inertia  independently

of  Galileo  and  regarded  it  as  a  global  law  of  nature  (Galileo's  universe  was

Copernican-Platonic 

spherical  and 

finite,  Descarte's  was 

infinite  and

unbounded).  The  noninertial  effects  identified  by  Newton  as  acceleration

relative  to  absolute  space are  present  if  we  transform  from  a  local  frame  in

free  fall  to  a  locally  accelerated  frame,  but  the  acceleration  is  relative  to  a

frame  that  is  in  free  fall  relative  to  the  mass  distribution  that  generates  the

local  gravitational  field.  I  will  also  discuss  Mach's  criticism  of  the  law  of

inertia  and  Newton's  second  law  in  part  6  below.

1 2

Continuing  with  the  traditional  treatment  of  gravity  as  a  scalar  potential,

Newton's  second  law  in  an  inertial  frame  is  given  by

d2xi
dt2

 + 

¶ xi

 = 0

  ,       (5)

and is  covariant  under  Galilean  transformations  (set d2bi/dt2 = 0 in  (8)). The

law  of  inertia  in  an  inertial  frame  is  given  by

dvi
dt

 = 0

          (7)

and 

is  not  merely  covariant  but 

is  also 

invariant 

under  Galilean

transformations. 

This 

invariance  principle  (Galilean  relativity)  describes

mathematically  the  fact  that  no  mechanical  experiment  can  be  performed  that

detects  motion  at  constant  velocity  relative  to  a  local  inertial  frame.  The

mathematical  basis  for  this  is  that  solutions  of  (7)  in  two  separate  inertial

frames  connected  by a  Galilean  transformation,  but  using  the  same  initial

conditions,  are  identical.  Galilean  invariance  is  the  basis  for  the  identity  of

outcome  of  identically  prepared  experiments  in  two  separate  inertial  frames

[6].

I should  warn  the  reader  that  many  older  books  and  articles  on  special  and

general  relativity  (and  also  some  newer  ones)  have  (mis-)used  the  word

"invariant"  where  instead  they  should  have  used  the  word  "scalar". 

  For
n dqm dqn  is  invariant"  must  be  replaced  by

example,  statements  like  "ds2  = gm

"ds2  is  a  scalar"  under  coordinate  transformations.  The  distinction  between

1 3

¶
F
scalars and  invariants  is  made  clear  by Hamermesh  [7].   Havas  [9] discusses

Newtonian  gravity  transforming  both  as a covariant  vector  and  as  an  affine

connection,  but  does  not  distinguish 

the  word  "scalar" 

from  the  word

"invariant".  He  also  states that  "...  the  fundamental  equations  of  Newtonian

mechanics  are  invariant  under  the  Galilei  group,  those  of  the  special  theory

of  relativity  under  the  transformations  of  the  Lorentz  group,  and  those  of  the

general  theory  of  relativity  under  all  coordinate  transformations  ("principle

of  general  covariance")",  also  confusing  covariance  of  vector  equations  with

invariance  of  differential  equations  and  their  solutions.

Covariance  of  vector  equations  does  not  define  the  physics, which  is  defined

by a principle  of  relativistic  invariance:  the  law  of  inertia  is  covariant  with

respect  to  Galilean  transformations,  but  the  Galilean  relativity  principle  is

reflected  by the  invariance  of  the  law  of  inertia  (7)  and  its  solutions  under

Galilean 

transformations.  Newton's 

second 

law 

is  covariant,  but  not

invariant,  under  the  same  group  of  transformations.

Covariance  does  not  carry  the  weight  of  a  principle  that  can  be  imposed

externally  because it  can  always be achieved  for  any  equation  of  motion  [10].

Rewriting  a  law  of  motion  that  is  correct  in  a  restricted  class  of  frames  of

reference  in  covariant  fashion  does  not  change  the  underlying  invariance

principle that defines the physics [6,11]. As an example,  I will  show,  following

Heckmann,  how  Newton's 

second  law  can  be  made  covariant  under

transformations 

that  include  linearly  accelerated  frames  (covariance  with

respect  to  transformations  to  and  among  rotating  frames  is  also  possible  [11]).

The  invariance  principle  is  still  Galilean  invariance.  Cartan  [6] showed  how

Newton's  second  law  can  be  written  in  covariant  form  with  respect  to

1 4

transformations  to  arbitrarily  accelerated  frames  in  Newtonian  space-time  by

treating  the  gravitational 

force  as  a  "nonintegrable 

connection".  This

beautiful  geometric  picture  does  not  change  the  fact that  Galilean  relativity  is

still  the  basic invariance  principle  of  classical  mechanics.  In  parts 7 and  8 we

see  how  Cartan  brought  to  light  that  the  only  essential  difference  between

Newtonian  and  Einsteinean  mechanics  is  the  replacement  of  local  Galilean

invariance  by  local  Lorentz  invariance.    

5. Newtonian gravity transforms like a gauge potential

I start by abandoning  the  unnecessary  assumption  that  gravity  behaves  like  a

scalar  potential  under  arbitrary  coordinate  changes. 

Instead,  under  a

transformation  from  an  inertial  frame  to  a  linearly  accelerated  frame,

x'i = xi - bi(t)
v'i = vi - bi(t)
a'i = ai - bi(t)  (8)

if  we  allow  the  gravitational  potential  to  transform  like  a  gauge  potential,

'(x') = F

(x) + xibi    (12)

then  Newton's  second  law  is  covariant  with  respect  to  transformations  to  and

among linearly accelerated frames [5],

d2x'i
dt2

 + 

'
¶ x'i

 = 0

.          (5c)

1 5

F
¶
F
The  covariance  of  Newton's  second  law  under  transformations  to  accelerated

frames does not  mean  that  accelerated  frames  are  equivalent  for  the  purpose

of  doing  experiments  in  physics  [6]. Experiments  prepared  and  performed

identically  in  two  differently  linearly  accelerated  frames  will  necessarily  yield

different  numbers,  because  the  solutions  of  Newton's  laws  in  these  frames

are  not 

invariant  under  the  transformation 

(8)  whenever  d2b/dt2„

  02.

Whenever  d2b/dt2=0 then  we  retrieve  the  Galilean  transformation  and  the

equivalence  in  outcome  of  identically  prepared  experiments,  which  is  the

basis for  the  human  ability  to  discover  laws  of  nature  in  the  first  place  [12].

This  viewpoint  disagrees  with  Einstein's 

claims  about 

the  physical

importance  of  covariance  and  the  use  of  arbitrary  reference  frames  for  the

expression of the laws of physics. The modern  viewpoint  (emphasized  earlier

by Fock and Wigner) can be found in the texts by Weinberg [13] and by Misner,

Thorne,  and  Wheeler  [14],  for  example.

If Cartan had thought  only  about  motion  in  space, rather  than  in  space-time,

then  he  might  have  arrived  at  the  point  of  view  discussed  in  the  next  section.

6.  Newtonian  cosmology  (Alta  Via  Heckmann)

The  cosmological  principle,  interpreted  globally,  would  require  a  matter

density  that  is  everywhere  constant,  with  only  small  fluctuations  from  its

average  value.  It  is  well  known  (see  Rindler  [15]), but  is  often  ignored  in

elementary  texts  and  monographs,  that  a  uniform  density  is  impossible  in  an

infinite  Newtonian  universe.  In  other  words,  the  cosmological  principle  can't

be  realized  globally  in  an  infinite  Newtonian  universe,  although  the  same

1 6

assumption  is  allowed  on  a  flat  3-torus,  where  Newtonian  mechanics  also

holds [16].

The  first  assertion  that  uniform  densities  of  infinite  extent  are  impossible  in

Newtonian  mechanics 

is  due  to  Neumann 

[17].  Milne  [18]  and  McCrea

thought  that  they  had  discovered  a  local  approach  that  avoids  the  global

infinity pointed out by  Neumann  [17,18], but later  were  proven  to  have  been

wrong  on  that  point  [19]. Heckmann  [5] assumed  without  checking  carefully

enough that Milne and McCrea indeed had found a way  to  avoid  the  fact that

the  gravitational  force  can't  be  defined  globally  inside  a  uniform  mass

distribution  that  is  infinite  in  extent.  This  is  not  the  main  point  of  interest

here:  Heckmann  independently  discovered  a  key result  of  Cartan's  geometric

formulation  of  Newton's 

laws  of  motion  and  gravity,  namely,  that  the

principle  of  equivalence  can  be built  explicitly  into  Newtonian  theory  if  one

assumes  that  the  gravitational  potential  transforms  like  a  gauge  potential

under  transformations  to  linearly  accelerated  frames  [5].

I  begin  with  the  hydrodynamics  description  of  a  pressureless  Newtonian  dust,

dv
dt

 = 

¶ v
¶ t

 + v(cid:215)

 + (cid:209)

¶ t
(cid:209) 2F

 (cid:209)

(cid:209) v = - 1
   

v = 0

 = 4p

, (1)

whose  characteristic  curves,  generated  by  Newton's  second  law

1 7

r
F
¶
r
(cid:215)
r
r
 = dxk
vk

dt
1

 =  dvk

- 

¶ xk    ,    (4)

and  are  the  trajectories  of  the  dust  particles.  Solving  the  quasi-linear  partial

differential  equations  (1)  is  equivalent  to  solving  the  nonlinear  differential

equations  (4)  with  specified  initial  conditions  (and  with  some  prescribed
initial  density  distribution  r (x,0) at t=0 that determines F

(x,0))

Under  transformations

x'i = xi - bi(t)
v'i = vi - bi(t)
a'i = ai - bi(t)      (8)

the  Abelian  gauge  transformation  rule

'(x') = F

(x) + xibi       (12)

yields  covariance  of  Newton's  second  law,

d2x'i
dt2

 + 

'
¶ x'i

 = 0

  .          (5c)

Note  that  bk=constant  describes  translations,  bk=Vkt  with  Vk  =  constant

describes  restricted  Galilean  transformations,  and  the  frame 
accelerated if d2bk/dt2„ 0.

is  linearly

1 8

¶
F
F
¶
F
A  cosmological  model  is  defined  by a  preferred  class  of  relatively  moving

coordinate  systems.  In  the  preferred  frames  hypothetical  equivalent  observers

with  identical  equipment  and  using  equivalent  techniques  are  supposed  to  be

able to  observe  "the  same  coarse  features  of  the  universe".  Clearly,  such  an

assumption  will  require  some  yet-to-be specified  degree of  uniformity  of  the

matter  distribution.  In  Heckmann's  model1  one  defines  preferred  reference

frames  as those  for  which  the  dust  velocity  field  is  invariant 

(the  analog  in

general  relativity  is  a maximally-symmetric  space, which  can  be  defined  via

invariance  of  the  metric  and  mass-energy  tensor  [13]).  When

x'i = xi - bi(t)       (8b)

we  have

vi(x,t) = v'i(x',t) + bi(t)           (8c)

which  represents  the  Newtonian  law  of  combination  of  velocities.  Require  in

addition  that

v'i(x',t)  =  vi(x',t)             (13)

which  means  that  the  velocity  field  v  must  be  invariant  for  the  preferred  class

of frames that will be defined by using (13)  to  determine  the  functions  bi(t)  in

(8b).

From (8b), (8c), and (13) we obtain

1 9

vi(x,t) = vi(x - b,t) + bi           (14)

so  that

¶ vi(x,t)
¶ xk

 = 

¶ vi(x - b,t)

¶ xk

,             (15)

which  means  that  this  derivative  is  independent  of  x,  so  that

vi(x,t) = aik(t)xk + ai(t).           (16)

I leave it as an exercise for the reader to show that ai=0  is  required,  yielding

vi(x,t) = aik(t)xk                 (17)

which is a generally anisotropic Hubble law of expansion or contraction of  the

matter  distribution.

To  go  further  we  need  the  equation  of  continuity,  which  we  can  more

conveniently  impose  in  the  particle  mechanics  form  [6]

3

i=1

dxi(t) = J(t) 

3

i=1

dxio

.           (18)

Here,  xi(t)  is  the  position  of  a dust  particle  at time  t,  xio  =  xi(0)  is  the  initial

condition at t = 0, and J(t) is the Jacobian of  the  one  parameter  transformation

from  the  variables  xio to the variables xi(t).  It  is  well-known  that

2 0

(cid:213)
(cid:213)
J  = (cid:209)

(cid:215) vJ              (19)

where v is the velocity field of the dust particles in  the  six dimensional  phase

space. Combining this with the Hubble law (17) yields

 = (cid:209)

J
J

(cid:215) v = Tr a(t)

            (20)

where  a(t) is  the  3x3 matrix  in  the  Hubble  law  (17). Hydrodynamicists  might

say that  we are  working  in  the  Lagrangian  rather  than  Eulerian  picture,  but

we are simply studying the characteristic equations (4) by standard  methods  of

nonlinear  dynamics.  The  Lagrangian  picture  of  hydrodynamics  amounts  to

integrating  Newton's  equations  (5)  backward  in  time  while  using  the  fact that

the  initial  conditions  xio  are  trivially  conserved  along  characteristics.  If  the

solutions  of  (5c) do not  have  spontaneous  singularities  (singularities  at  real,

finite  times)  then  we  have  a  flow  in  a  six  dimensional 

(x,v)  phase  space,

where 

the 

trajectories 

can  be  thought  of  as  streamlines, 

and 

the

transformation  from  the  xio  to  the  xi(t)  can  be  regarded  as  a  one-parameter

coordinate  transformation  with  Jacobian  J(t).

If  the  initial  conditions  and  dynamics  permit  the  definition  of  a  once-
differentiable  matter  density  r

 then

dr
dt

 = r

 + v(cid:215)

 = - r

v = -r

 J
J         (21)

along  dust  particle  trajectories  so  that

2 1

(cid:209)
r
(cid:209)
(cid:215)
 = r o/J(t)          (22)

 

along  a  characteristic  curve,  where  r o  is  independent  of  t.  In  chaotic  nonlinear

dynamics  initial  conditions  may  not  permit  the  definition  of  a  smooth

pointwise  density  but  one  can  always  work  with  coarsegrained  pictures

where,  at  least  initially,  densities  are  piecewise  constant.

The  gravitational  potential  obeys

 = vi + vk

- 

¶ xi

¶ vi
¶ xk

                 = - aikxk - aikaklxl     (23)

and  with  a  generally  anisotropic  Hubble  law  vi=aikxk we obtain

¶ 2F
¶ xi¶ xk

 = 

¶ 2F
¶ xk¶ xi  ,      (24)

This  condition  guarantees  that  F

  exists  and  yields  daik/dt=daki/dt,  which

means  that  a  is  a  symmetric  matrix,

aik(t) = aki(t).        (25)

Therefore, 

the  gravitational  potential  corresponding 

to  the  anisotropic

Hubble motion (17) is given by

(x,t) = - 1
2

 (aik(t) + ail(t)akl(t))xixl.        (26)

2 2

r
¶
F
F
It  is  easy  to  show  that  the  potential  is  invariant  under  the  transformations  (8):                  

(x',t) = F

'(x',t).        

We  can  now  see  the  impossibility  of  a static  Newtonian  universe,  where  no

evolution  could  occur.  With

(cid:215) v = Tr a(t) = - 1

 

dr
dt         (27)

and

(cid:209) 2F

 = - Tr a(t) - 

2
a(t)ik

 = 4p Gr

i,k

         (28)

we  find  that

dr
dt

 1

 

d
dt

  =  

i,k

2
a(t)ik

 + 4p Gr

 ‡

 0

 .      (29)

Therefore  dr /dt =  0  is  impossible  and  r (t)  cannot  be  a  constant.  Is  is  still
possible  that  the  density  r

  is  spatially  constant  for  fixed  times  (is  the

cosmological  principle  realizable  in  this  model)?  I  defer  the  analysis  until  the

end  of  this  section,  assuming  temporarily  without  proof  that  a uniform  and

isotropic  Newtonian  universe  is  possible  at  any  given  time  t.

Consider  next  only  isotropic  Hubble  motions.  Starting  with

vi(x,t) = aik(t)xk          (17)

2 3

F
(cid:209)
r
(cid:229)
r
(cid:229)
and

(cid:215) v = Tr a(t) = - J

J          (30)

and  then  imposing  the  isotropy  condition

aik(t) = d

ik  J

3J  ,        (31)

we find that can write

vi(x,t) =  J
3J

 xi         (32)

where  it  follows  that  the  Hubble  'constant'  is  given  by H(t) = (dJ/dt)/3J. Since

the dust particle trajectories are generated by

xi =  J
3J

 xi         (33)

and  one  integration  yields  the  time  evolution  rule

xi(t) = (J(t))1/3 xio.          (34)

Writing dR/dt = (dJ/dt)/3J yields Hubble's law in the form

vi(x,t) = R
R

 xi           (33b)

so that the dust particle trajectories can be written as

2 4

(cid:209)
xi(t) = R(t) xio.          (34b)

The  time  evolution  of  the  dust  particles  is  just  a  rescaling  of  the  initial

conditions  xio where the scale factor is R(t) = (J(t))1/3 , and J(t) is the Jacobian of

the  time  evolution  transformation.  We  can  also  write

r (t) = 

r o
R(t)3

.           (35)

Next,  I  want  to  solve  for  the  parameters  bi(t)  in  order  to  see  what  the

preferred  class  of  equivalent  reference  frames  looks  like.  Combining  the

Newtonian 

law  of  addition  of  velocities  (8)  with  the  generalized  Hubble

motion  (17)  and  the  invariance  condition  (13) that  defines  our  cosmology  we

obtain

vi(x',t) = aik(t)xk - bi(t)

                          =aik(t)(x'k + bk(t)) - bi(t)

   = aik(t)x'k

.       (36)

This  yields  the  differential  equations

bi = aikbk          (37)

that  define  the  preferred  frames.

In the isotropic model, aik = d

ik (dJ/dt)3J = d

ik (dR/dt)R, we have

2 5

bi = R
R

 bi             (38)

which  yields

bi(t) = cR(t)             (39)

with  c  a  constant.  Therefore  the  preferred  frames  are  defined  by  the  one

parameter  coordinate  transformations  (c  is  the  parameter)

x'k = xk - cR(t),            (40)

where R(t) = (J(t))1/3.  Translational  invariance  would  require  that  we find  an

additive  constant  when  we  solve  (the  Friedmann  equation)  for  R(t).  Globally

seen,  the  preferred  frames  are  not  inertial  frames  (we  will  see  later  that  the

form  of  R(t)  rules  out  global  Galilean  invariance).  However,  because  each

frame  is  in  free  fall  in  the  gravitational  field  of  the  other  N-1  dust  particles,

these  frames  are  locally  inertial.

We  now  obtain  the  equation  of  motion 

for  the  expanding  universe.

Combining

 - Tr a(t) = 

i,k

2
a(t)ik

 + 4p Gr

          (41)

with the local isotropy assumption aik = d

ik(dR/dt)/R  with r

 = r o/R3 we find

-3 d
dt

  R
3R

 = (R
R

)

2

 + 

4p Gr o

R3

           (42)

2 6

(cid:229)
which  we can  rewrite  as  Newton's  second  law  for  free  fall  in  the  field  of  a

point  singularity

R = - 

4p Gr o

R2

            (43)

at R  = 0 (since  we are  doing  classical  mechanics,  this  result  should  give  us  a

hint  that  this  universe  has  a  center).  Newton's  equation  of  motion  can  be

integrated  once  to  yield  the  Friedmann  equation  [5]

R2
2

 - 

4p Gr o

R

 = e  = constant

           (44)

Note  that  R  is  only  a scale  factor  so  that  one  should  not  interpret  r o  as  the
mass of the universe. With e  = 0 we have expansion with dR/dt=0 at R=¥
. e >0
yields  expansion  with  finite  expansion  rate  at infinity,  and  when  e <0  there  is
expansion  to  a  finite  value  Rm  =  4p GM/(-e )  followed  by collapse  to  R=0  in

finite  time  (spontaneous  singularity  of  equation  (43)).

The  cosmological  principle  appears  to  hold  locally:  the  density  is  spatially

uniform  except  near  the  boundary  of  the  mass  distribution,  which  is  ignored
in  this  analysis  (boundary  conditions  on  F

 at large  xi  were  never  discussed),

and  except  near  the  point  of  gravitational  collapse  (the  singularity  of  the  mass

distribution).  I  will  explain  below  why  the  mass  distribution  is  necessarily

finite  in  extent,  why  the  uniform  density  must  be  cut  off  after  a  finite

distance,  and  where  the  finite-sized  boundary  of  the  mass  distribution  was

swept  under  the  rug  in  Heckmann's 

treatment.  Locally,  inside  the  mass

2 7

distribution  and  far  from  the  edges  of  the  finite  universe  (imbedded  in  an

infinite  Euclidean  space),  the  density  is  spatially  uniform,  the  universe 

is

locally  homogeneous  and  isotropic,  so  that  the  cosmological  principle  holds

locally  (Milne,  McCrea,  and  Heckmann  had  believed  that  the  cosmological

principle  would  hold  globally  in  this  model).

A  Newtonian  universe  where  the  cosmological  principle  holds  globally

cannot  have  a  singularity  in  time  for  the  density  because  a  spontaneous

singularity  of  (43) defines  the  center  of  the  universe.  I  stress  that  this  finite

time  singularity  of  Newton's  law  is  not  the  same  geometrically/qualitatively

as  the  collapse  of  the  entire  space-time  manifold 

in  general  relativity,

although  the  Friedmann  equation  (43)  describes  both  cases  quantitatively.

Where  is  the  Neumann-Seeliger 

infinity  hidden  in  the  previous  analysis  if

we would  assume,  as did Heckmann  (and  later  Bondi  [20], who  repeated  the
simpler  Milne-McCrea  analysis),  that  we can  take  r (t)  to  be spatially  constant

all  the  way  to  infinity?

I  will  show  first  that  the  universe  defined  by  our  model  has  a  center.  A

hypothetical  observer  who's  near  neither  the  edge nor  the  center  of  the  mass

distribution  won't  know  in  advance  where  the  center  is  located  before  the

collapse  occurs,  unless  he's  carried  out  calculations  that  go beyond the  scope

of these lectures. In other words, a preferred observer sees the contraction  that
occurs  for  e  <  0 but, because of  invariance  of  the  velocity  field,  all  observers

see  the  same  contraction  so  that  none  of  these  observers  can  say in  advance

where the collapse is going to take place.  This center differs  both  qualitatively

2 8

and  quantitatively   from  the  anthropic  center  of  the  universe  that  Plato  and

Aristotle  imagined,  and  also  from  Copernicus'  neo-Platonic  godly  center.

To see why there is a center consider the case where e <0:

1.  Gravitational  collapse  occurs  in  finite  time  (R(t)  vanishes  in  finite  time).

2. xi(t) - xj(t) = R(t)(xio - xjo) vanishes  as the  scale  factor  R  vanishes;  all  particle

displacements  collapse  as  R  vanishes.

3. xi(t)  = R(t)xio  vanishes  as R  vanishes,  so  that  each  and  every  dust  particle

approaches the origin of its coordinate system as the collapse proceeds.

4. x'k  = xk - R(t)  approaches  xk  as  R  vanishes,  so  that  all  coordinate  origins

coincide  at  the  time  of  gravitational  collapse.

The  entire  mass  distribution  disappears  into  a spontaneous  singularity  of  the

nonlinear  differential  equation  (43)  in  finite  time.  In  other  words,  this  model

of  the  universe  has  a  center.

Furthermore,  the  uniform  mass  distribution  cannot  be infinite  in  extent  and

must  have  a  boundary.  Where  was the  violation  of  this  condition  hidden  in

the  analysis?  By introducing  the  idea  of  the  density  and  then  assuming  that
r (t)J(t)  = r o is  constant  we  implicitly  restricted  our  analysis  to  local  internal

regions far from any boundary,  where  the  mass  density  (if  it  exists)  may  look

nearly  uniform.  If we would  assume  that  the  same  condition  could  hold  all
the  way to  infinity  then  we would  not  be  able  to  define  either  F

(x,0)  or  the

gravitational  force.  In  other  words,  the  Neumann-Seeliger 
infinity  was
hidden  in  the  initial  condition  r o.  Milne,  McCrea  and  Heckmann  did not  face

the  infinity  (that  infinity  informs  us  that  a uniform  mass  distribution  cannot

be  spatially  infinite)  because  they  ignored  the  boundary  conditions  on  the

2 9

potential 

  (Milne  had  offered  his  model  as  an  example  of  how  pure

mathematics can be used to short-circuit the need for physics [17]).

In a global analysis the velocity field  and  potential  cannot  be invariant  under

the  transformations 

(8)  that  define  the  preferred  observers  locally.  The

expansion/contraction  does  not  look  the  same  for  observers  near  the  edge as

for observers far from the edges. An observer with a global viewpoint  (a space

traveler    outside  the  mass  distribution,  e.g.)  could  know  where  the  collapse  is

going  to  occur,  while  an  observer  well  within  the  interior  (who  hasn't  done

the necessary calculations) would be ignorant of the fact that  the  universe  has

a center.  The  size  of  the  universe  can  be  taken  as  proportional  to  the  scale

factor  R(t).  For  a  spherical  universe  the  center  of  the  universe 

lies  at  the

sphere's  center.  The  cosmological  principle  doesn't  hold  globally  but  holds

locally well  within  the  interior,  at times  that  are  not  too  near  to  the  collapse

time.

7.  Relativism  or  relativistic  invariance?  

"An  influence  of  the  local  inertial  frame  on  the  stars  is  not  acceptable,  and

hence  it  must  be  assumed  that  the  local  inertial  frame  is  determined 

by  some

average  of  the  motion  of  the  distant  astronomical 

objects.  This  statement  is

known  as  Mach's  principle."

H.  Bondi,  in      Cosmology       [   20]

It  is  difficult  to  discuss  Mach's  principle.  There 

is  still  no  convincing

realization  of  Mach's  Principle.  The  number  of  different  statements  of  Mach's

principle  may  be  on  the  order  of  magnitude  of  the  number  of  different  writers

3 0

F
on  the  subject.  Interesting  attempts  to  realize  Mach's  principle  in  the  context

of classical mechanics can be found in references [21,22,23,24,25].

Mach  himself  offered  no  principle  but criticized  both  the  law  of  inertia  and

Newton's  second  law.  Mach  [26] wrote  from  a  standpoint  of  relativism 

in

philosophy  and  physics  (Descartes  and  Huyghens  were  earlier  advocates  of

relativism2).  Roughly  speaking,  Mach  asserted  that  only  relative  positions,

velocities,  etc.  between  masses  should  enter  into  laws  of  motion,  and  that

mechanics  should  not  be local:  the  entire  universe  should  be  considered  in

defining  inertia.  This  is  a holistic  point  of  view.  I will  argue  below  that  local

laws  of  motion  are  enough,  that  holism  and  relativism  are  unnecessary.

Mach's  call  for  relativism 

is  not  the  same  as  a  principle  of  relativistic

invariance  (Galilean  or  Lorentzian),  and  (upon  closer  inspection)  amounts  to

a criticism of  principles  of  relativistic  invariance  because those  principles  are

based  on 

translational 

invariance 

and 

invariance  with 

respect 

to

transformations  to  uniformly  moving  frames  relative  to  a  local  inertial  frame

that  replaces  Newton's  idea  of  a  fixed,  global  inertial  frame.  Mach  criticized

the  law  of  inertia  [26] (which  is  essentially  the  same  as  criticizing  Galilean,

invariance)  as  not  having  been  derived  from  an

and  also  Lorentzian, 
                                    
2 Barbour [28]argues that Huyghen's belief in Cartesian  mechanism prevented his getting
credit for both Newton's second law and the law of gravity. Newton, in contrast, hated
Cartesian relativism and was driven to dispute it [29]. Newton understood the difference
between  (Galilean)  relativity  and  relativism.  Descartes  adopted  a  position  of  relativism  in  an
attempt  to  avoid  the  Index  and  the  inquisition.  By  asserting  that  the  difference  between  taking
the sun to be fixed or the earth to be fixed (choice of coordinate system, in our language) is
merely a matter of convenience, he hoped to avoid being charged with disputing the notion
that  the  earth  may  stand  still.    Following  Kepler,  (whom  Galileo  completely  ignored)  Newton
showed that this is not merely a matter of convenience, that the sun constitutes a better
approximation  to  an  inertial  frame  than  does  the  earth  for  the  calculation  of  planetary
motions. One can calculate planetary motions from the earth's frame if one wishes, but the
calculations (obtained via transformation from an inertial frame) will be much more
complicated  [30].

3 1

equation  of  relative  motion  of  interacting  bodies. Einstein  was stimulated  by

the  criticism  of  Newtonian  and  Galilean  ideas  found  in  Mach's  historico-

philosophical  book  [26], as  were  many  other  physicists,  psychologists,  and

philosophers  [29],  but  Einstein  did  not  succeed  in  incorporating  Mach's

demand  for  relativism  into  physics,  or  even  in  clarifying  what  we  should

understand  as Mach's  principle.  I will  explain  next  how  Mach's  relativismic

(as  opposed  to  relativistic)  criticism  of  Galileo  and  Newton  can  be  short-

circuited.  It  is  not  an  accident,  or  a  mere  misfortune  of  old  age  (as  some

authors  have  lamented),  that  Mach  did  not  see  his  ideas  of  relativism

reflected  in  Einstein's  work  on  either  special  relativity  or  gravity. 

Mach wanted to define  forces  and  relative  motions  first,  and  then  derive  the

law  of  inertia  from  a reformulated  second  law  of  Newton  (Einstein  did  the

opposite--see  part 8).  He  was misled  by the  pre-Einsteinean  assumption  that

inertial  frames  are  globally  possible.  We  now  expect  that  they  are  not,  and  we

can  reinterpret  Newtonian  physics  with  the  benefit  of  both  Einstein's

contributions  and  insight  provided  by modern  nonlinear  dynamics.  This  is

done,  following  Cartan,  in  the  next  section.  The  following  point  of  view

eliminates  Machian-style  objections 

to  the  appearance  of  inertial 

terms

interpreted  as  accelerations  relative  to  absolute  space, where  absolute  space is

usually regarded as some  undefined  collection  of  global inertial  frames,  or  as

one  global frame  of  reference  fixed in  the  (only  approximately)  "fixed  stars".

In  place  of  this  global  picture  we  can  instead  adopt  the  following  position,

which  relies  upon  and  emphasizes  the  typical  nonintegrability  of  local  laws  of

motion.

3 2

A neutral body subject to no other net force is always locally  in  free  fall  in  the

net  gravitational  field  of  the  rest  of  the  matter  in  the  universe.  A  body in  free

fall  defines  a local  inertial  frame.  There  need  be  no  other 

inertial 

frames 

in

the  universe.  Noninertial  effects then  occur  relative  to  a  local  frame  that  is

accelerated  relative  to  a  local  inertial  frame,  and  therefore  occur  indirectly

relative  to  the  masses  that  determine  the  local  gravitational 

field  over

laboratory  or  observational  times  (the  earth  falls  freely  about  the  sun,  the

moon falls freely about the earth in the field of both the earth and sun, etc.). A

local  frame  is  approximately  inertial  only  for  a finite  time.  In  that  frame  the

law  of  inertia  holds,

dvi
dt

 = 0

,        (7)

where we can [6] and should think of the Cartesian axes xi,

xi(t) = vit + xio,       (45)

as generated  by the  motion  of  three  free  tracer-particles  moving  rectilinearly

with  constant  speeds vi.  In  other  words,  the  law  of  inertia  (7)  generates 

the

local  inertial 

frame,  whose  axes  are  defined  by  (45).  Mathematically,  (7)  is

globally  integrable  in  Newtonian  mechanics  but  we  ask  next  whether  the

applicability  of  this  formal  mathematical  condition  might  be  preempted  by

the  physics of  tracer  particles.  Given  finite  velocities  vi,  the  spatial  extent  of

the Cartesian axes (45) would be limited by the finite time tmax over which the

local  frame  is  approximately  inertial,  which  is  determined  by the  neglected

gradients  of  the  local  gravitational  field.  Also,  for  any  finite  velocity  v  the

differential  equation  (7)  that  generates  the  axes (45) locally  will  fail  to  hold  at

3 3

large  times  t  >>  tmax  because  of  the  (neglected)  field  gradients,  so  that  (7)

would have to be replaced globally by (5).  Even  in  classical  mechanics  there  is

no way to generate  infinitely-long  straight  lines  via  particle  motions  when  it

is  taken  into  account  that  matter  is  distributed  throughout 

the  universe.

However,  in  classical  mechanics  the  speeds vi  can  be  as  large  as  you  like  so

that,  in  principle,  the  axes  of  the  inertial  frame  can  be  imagined  to  extend

spatially as far as you like (corresponding mathematically to the  fact that  (7) is

globally  integrable  in  a  flat  space)  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  frame  is

approximately  inertial  only  over  a  finite  time  tmax. Summarizing,  in  classical

mechanics  a local  inertial  frame  (45), with  axes fixed in  a freely  falling  body,

can only be imagined to extend  in  all  three  directions  to  infinity  by using  the

unphysical  artifice  of  infinite 

tracer-particle  velocities,  but  still  that  local

frame  is  approximately  inertial  only  for  a  finite  time.

Special  relativity  limits  all  speeds  to  no  more  than  the  speed  of  light.

Therefore,  local  inertial  frames  can  be realized  in  a gedanken  experiment  by

tracer  particles  (including  photons)  only  for  finite  times  and  are  also  finite  in

extent.  Cartesian  inertial  frames  extending  to  infinity  cannot  be  constructed  in

a gedanken experiment that takes into account both the speed of  light  and  the

nonemptiness  of  the  universe  (gravity  can  be  eliminated 

locally,  but  not

globally  in  cosmology).  As  Havas  [19] has  noted,  general  relativity  has  two

distinct  mathematical 

limits  where  global  inertial 

frames  are  allowed

mathematically 
integrable, and so (45) holds  mathematically,  if  not  physically,  for  -¥

(the  resulting 

is  Euclidean, 

three-space 

(7) 

is  globally

 £

  t £

 ¥

):

(1) neglect gravity but keep  Lorentz  invariance  (special  relativity  in  an  empty

3 4

universe3),  or  (2) let  the  speed  of  light  go  to  infinity  but  keep  gravity  (local

Galilean  invariance  with  Newtonian  gravity).

"...  -  the  independence  of  the  laws  of  nature  from  the  state  of  motion  in

which  it  is  observed,  so  long  as  it  is  uniform 

-  is  not  obvious  to  the

unpreoccupied  mind.  One  of  its  consequences  is  that  the  laws  of  nature

determine  not  the  velocity  but  the  acceleration  of  a  body..."

E. P. Wigner [12]

In contrast, Mach refused to regard the law of inertia as an independent law of

motion.  He  regarded  it  instead  as  already  defined  by  the  statement  that

acceleration  vanishes  when  net 

force  vanishes.  This 

is  a  superficial

viewpoint,  but  a  viewpoint  that  one  can  easily  adopt  by  default  through

failing  adequately to  appreciate  that  Galilean  invariance  is  the  foundation  of

Newton's second law [6,12].

"...  [the  Mach  Principle]  ... is  the  tendency  to  derive  the  meaning  ... from  the

whole  ...  ."

Otto Neurath [29]

Mach's  vague,  holistic  idea  of  obtaining  the  law  of  motion  of  interacting

bodies first  and  then  deriving  the  law  of  inertia  from  it  puts  the  cart  before

the  horse.    However  philosophically  appealing  and  invulnerable  Mach's

criticism  might  have  seemed  earlier,  we  can  now  see  it's  weaknesses:  Wigner

[12] has pointed out  the  necessity  of  local  invariance  principles  (like  Galilean

relativity)  as  the  basis for  our  ability  to  discover  of  laws  of  nature  in  the  first
                                    
3 One  can  solve  the  Kepler  problem  in  special  relativity [6], but that is not the point here.

3 5

place.  Galileo's  two  local  laws  (the  law  of  inertia  and  the  principle  of

equivalence)  were  necessary  before  the  second  law  could  be  formulated  by

either  Huyghens  (for  uniform  circular  motion  only)  or  Newton  (most

generally).  Mach's  objections  to  Newtonian  mechanics  were  fueled  by  the

mistaken  (and  historically-understandable)  assumption  that  inertial  frames,

infinite  in  extent  and  defined  by  "the  fixed  stars",  instead  of  local  frames

defined by freely falling bodies, could exist for arbitrarily long times.

Summarizing,  physics  is  described  locally  by  differential  equations.  The

differential  equations  of  mechanics  are  universally  applicable,  locally,  so  long

as  we  can  find  approximate  inertial  frames.  Inertial  frames  are  fixed in  locally

freely-falling  bodies (gravitational  interactions  are  always present  in  the  real

universe),  and  are  therefore  approximately  inertial  for  limited  times  only.

Whether or not global laws can be deduced from the local  laws  of  motion  is  a

question  of  integrability.  From  different  geometric  perspectives  both  modern

nonlinear  dynamics  and  differential  geometry  inform  us  that  most  systems  of

differential  equations  are  nonintegrable 

in  one  sense  or  another,  which

means  that  the  calculation  of  correct  predictions  for  very  long  times,  and  over

very  long  distances  cannot  be taken  for  granted.  The  realization  that  correct

global  results  are  very,  very  hard  to  determine  leads  one  to  the  viewpoint  that

cosmology,  in  the  end,  may  not  produce  much  more  than  locally  correct

results.

 I have  argued  elsewhere  [31] that  an  analog  of  the  law  of  inertia  would  be

necessary  for  economics,  sociology,  and  psychology before  there  could  be any

hope  to  retrieve  those  fields  from  the  mathematical  lawlessness  that  is  largely

their  present  content.  The  existence  of  such  an  analog  is  unlikely  because

3 6

people,  unlike  billiard  balls  and  planets,  can  either  cause  or  avoid  collisions

simply  by  changing  their  minds  either  systematically  or  arbitrarily.  The  ability

to  change  one's  mind  is  a  prime  example  of  mathematical 

lawlessness:  a

dynamical  system  (like  the  Newtonian  three  body problem)  cannot  change

it's  orbits  arbitrarily,  and  cannot  learn  from  the  past.  The  absence  of  fixed

mathematical 

law  in  brain-driven  "motions" 

is  the  reason  why  artificial

"law"  is  legislated  (the  motions  of  a deterministic  or  probabilistic  dynamical

system  cannot  be  legislated).  To  argue  that  brain-driven  motions  may  be  more

like  a  neural  network  that  learns,  than  like  a  Newtonian  dynamical  system,  is

the 

same  as  admitting 

that  brain-driven 

behavior 

is  effectively

mathematically  lawless  (such  a  system's  dynamics  must  change  unpredictably

as  it  learns  unexpectedly).      

Mach's  thinking  fed  directly  into  and  reinforced  philosophical  relativism  [28],

whose  extreme  wing  (found  mainly  in  literary  criticism  [32], cultural  studies,

anthropology,  and  sociology)  now  attacks  physics  as  just  another  arbitrary

activity  like  sociology,  where  there  are  no  universal  laws  and  where  a "text"

is  presumed  without  proof  to  have  no  more  meaning  than  a  collection  of

abstract symbols on  a printed  page [33]. Interpretations  of  "texts"  are  regarded

merely  as arbitrary "representations" 

in  the  imprecise  and  undefined  jargon

of  postmodernism.

"... we have to  consider  science  as a human  enterprise  by which  man  tries  to

adapt himself  to  the  external  world.  Then  a  "pragmatic"  criterion  means  ...

the  introduction  of  psychological  and  sociological  considerations  into  every

science,  even  into  physics  and  chemistry. 

....the  sociology  of  science,  the

3 7

consideration  of  science  as  a  human  enterprise,  has  to  be connected  in  a very

tight  way  with  every  consideration  which  one  may  call  logical  or  semantical."

Philipp Frank [29]

Relativismic 

socio-literary  criticism  may  describe  contemporary 

literary

theory  and  the  confusion  within  the  socio-economic  sciences,  but  it  fails  to

shed  light  on  scientific  fields  like  physics,  chemistry,  and  genetics  that  are

grounded  in  empirically-established 

local 

invariance  principles,  and  in

empirically-verified  universally-applicable  local  laws  of  motion  of  interacting

bodies  that  are  based  on  those  invariance  principles.

8. Newtonian gravity is a nonintegrable connection in space-time  

Cartan  [4,6,14,34], with  hindsight  informed  by general  relativity,  noticed  that

we  can  rewrite  Newton's  second  law  for  motion  of  a body of  mass  m  in  a net
gravitational  potential  F

  d2xi
dt2 +

¶ xi

= 0

             (5)

in  the  following  way:

 + 

d2xk
dl 2

¶ 2F
¶ xk2

 ( dt
dl

)2= 0,  d2t
dl 2

 = 0

           (46)

The time t is linear in l
space-time  coordinates  xm   =  (t,x1,x2,x3).  Phoenician 

 and is is affine. We can always  choose  t=l

. Go  next  to

letters  denote  spatial

3 8

¶
F
components  (1,2,3)  of  coordinates,  vectors,  tensors,  and  connections.  Note

that we can write

xm  + G

xn xl  = 0          (47)

where

G oo
i

 = 

¶ xi

, G bc

a  = 0

.          (48)

Newtonian  space-time  is  not  flat  because  the  Riemann  curvature  tensor  is

given by

i

Rojo

 = 

¶ 2F
¶ xj¶ xi

a

, Rbcd

 = 0

          (49)

Three-space 

is  flat  with  Cartesian  coordinates  xi,  and  time 

is  absolute

(simultaneous 
spatially-separated  events  are  allowed),  but 
coordinates  xm   are  not  globally  Cartesian  on  four-dimensional 

the 

four

space-time

manifold  because of  curvature  in  the  three  (t,xi)  sub-manifolds.  Newtonian

gravity  is  therefore  not  a  covariant  vector,  but  is  instead  a  nonintegrable

connection 

  in  space-time.  Kepler's  orbits,  as  described  by  Newton,  are

therefore  geodesics  in  curved  space-time.  Note  that  Heckmann's  treatment  of

the  gravitational  potential 

  as  a  gauge  potential, 

(x',t)  = 

(x,t)  +

xk(d2bk/dt2), under  transformations  x'k  =  xk  -  bk(t)  from  inertial  to  linearly

accelerated  frames,  and  correspondingly  the  principle  of  equivalence,  are

automatically  built  into  Cartan's  interpretation  of  Newton's  laws  (equation

(5) holds  whether  the  frame  is  locally  inertial,  as  is  the  earth  in  it's  motion

3 9

n
l
m
¶
F
G
F
F
F
about the  sun,  or  is  linearly  accelerated,  like  a train  leaving  sentralstasjon  in

Oslo).

Continuing,  we  find  that  the  Ricci  tensor  is  given  by

Roo = (cid:209) 2F

 = 4p

, Rab = 0.          (50)

Newtonian  space-time  is  not  a  metric  space:  a nondegenerate  metric  g cannot

be  defined  that  is  consistent  with  the  covariant  derivative  [14] (Heckmann

may  not  have  been  aware  of  this  restriction).

This  formulation  can  be  extended  to  include  transformations 

to  rotating

frames  as well  [6,14]. In  other  words,  Newtons'  second  law  is  covariant  with

respect  to  transformations 

to  arbitrarily  accelerated  frames  in  space-time,

where  the  local  relativity  principle  is  Galilean  invariance.  General  covariance

plays  no  physical  role  here  or  in  general  relativity.  Arbitrarily  accelerated

frames  are  certainly  not  equivalent 

for  the  performance  of  identically-

prepared  mechanical  experiments.  Local  inertial  frames  are  clearly  preferred,

for  otherwise  there  is  no  identity  of  outcomes  for  experiments  with  identical

preparation  (solutions  of  (7) in  two  different  frames  connected  by a  Galilean

transformation,  but  using  identical  initial  conditions,  are  identical).

A  recent  paper  [35]  on  knot  theory  implicitly  presumes  Cartan's  interpretation

of  Newtonian  mechanics/gravity 

(geodesics  in  space-time  due  to  the

equivalence  principle),  but  without  reference  or  explanation.

4 0

r
Had Einstein been able to  sidestep  Mach  and  global inertial  frames  ("absolute

space")  he  would,  in  principle,  have  been  able to  arrive  more  directly  at  the

formulation  of  general  relativity.  Or,  as  Thomas  Buchert  [36] has  put  it,  "If

Lagrange (could) have had a beer with Newton, then they could  have  derived

the  Einstein-Cartan  theory"  (on  a  nice  Biergarten  tablecloth,  perhaps).

By  starting  with  Cartan's  description  of  Newtonian  mechanics,  and  then

replacing  local  Galilean  invariance  by Lorentz  invariance,  one  arrives  at  the

doorstep of general relativity, which is not a new or  global relativity  principle

at  all  but  is  instead  a  locally  Lorentz  invariant  description  of  gravity  based

upon  the  principle  of  equivalence.  Cartan  showed  how  to  build  the  principle

of  equivalence 

into  Newtonian  mechanics  explicitly.  The  equivalence

principle  was  built  into  Newtonian  mechanics  independently  and  later  by the

cosmologist  Heckmann.  Heckmann  seems  to  have  been  unaware  of  Cartan's

work,  which  shows  that  Newtonian  motion  in  a  gravitational  field  can  be

understood  as geodesic motion  in  space-time,  where  space  is  Euclidean  and

time  is  absolute.  There  are  now  attempts  to  use  Cartan's  interpretation  of

Newtonian  dynamics  as  the  framework  for  formulating  and  doing  averaging

and  perturbation  theory.

9. Einstein's theory of gravity

To  arrive  at  general  relativity  we  could  simply  start  with  Cartan's  description

of  Newtonian  mechanics  and  replace  local  Galilean 

invariance  by  local

Lorentz  invariance  [37]. Instead,  I  will  follow  an  alternative  path  that  uses

only  local  Lorentz  invariance,  the  local  law  of  inertia  (7), and  the  principle  of

equivalence  (see  also  [13] or  [14]). In  other  words,  we start  locally,  making  no

4 1

global assumptions. Global results, if they exist at all, must  follow  from  global

integrability  of  the  resulting  local  law  of  motion.

The law of inertia in any local Lorentz frame is given by

d2xm
dt 2

 = 0

     (7b)

where  t  is the proper time.  

The law of inertia is globally integrable to yield Cartesian coordinates

 xm (t ) = vm

t  + xm o         (51)

(the  vm

  are  constants)  if  and  only  if  the  Riemann  curvature  tensor  vanishes

everywhere  (although  no  one  need  be  concerned  mathematically  about

distances greater than the speed of light times the age  of  the  universe).  Global

integrability  of  (7b), with  no  points  of  the  manifold  excluded,  is  the  formal

mathematical 

(but  not  necessarily  physical)  condition 

to  extend 

local

Cartesian axes defined by (51) all  the  way to  infinity  (the  space-time  manifold

is  then  globally flat).  This  is  equivalent  to  the  assumption  that  the  Lorentz
metric h

 is globally diagonal and constant, and so is given by h

 = (-1,1,1,1).

Instead  of  assuming  that  space-time  is  globally flat,  begin  by transforming  the

locally  Lorentz  invariant 
system qm  = fm (x), xn  = hn (q),

law  of  inertia  (7b)  to  any  other  local  coordinate

4 2

m
n
0 = d2xm
dt 2

 = 

d2qn
dt 2

¶ hm
 
¶ qn  + 

¶ 2hm
¶ qn
¶ qa

 qa qn

.         (52)

So  far,  we  have  only  assumed  that  the  space-time  manifold 

is  locally

Lorentzian  (therefore  locally  flat).

Using

¶ fm
¶ xn  

¶ hn
¶ qk  = d

          (53)

we  obtain  the  law  of  inertia

 

d2qm
dt 2

 + G

 qa qb  = 0

              (50b)

in  any  other  coordinate  system.  The  affine  connections  are  given  by

 = 

¶ hm
¶ xk  

¶ fk
¶ qb
¶ qa

            (54)

and  include  all  noninertial  effects  like  linear  and  angular  accelerations

relative to freely falling frames, and also (according to Cartan [34] and  Einstein

[38]) global gravitational effects as well. The principle of  equivalence  was used

implicitly  because  we  cannot  distinguish  gravity  locally  from  a  linear

acceleration.

4 3

m
k
a
b
m
G
a
b
m
The  q's  are  called  generalized  coordinates.  Synonyms 

for  generalized

coordinates  are  holonomic  coordinates,  or  just  coordinates  [6,14]4. Generally,
the  coordinates  qm   also  do  not  exist  globally  (the  differential  equations  that

generate  them  are  only  locally  integrable)  unless  they  reflect  the  symmetry  of

the  manifold,  like  spherical  coordinates  in  the  Schwarzschild  solution  of

general  relativity.  Again,  the  condition  for  global parallelism,  represented  by
the extension of (51) to  t  = –

,  is  that  the  Riemann  tensor

Rh

 = 

¶ qa

 - 

¶ qb

 + G

 - G

       (55)

vanishes  everywhere.   This  represents  the  essential  physics of  the  transition

from  special  relativity  and  Newtonian  mechanics  to  general  relativity.

The  next  step  would  be  to  generalize  the  Cartan-Newton  equation  (50) for  the

gravitational  potential  to  include  a locally-conserved  mass-energy  tensor  on
the right-hand side. Gravity is here described by  a nonintegrable  connection  G

in  a  locally  Lorentzian  space-time,  and  therefore  is  determined  by  the  ten

gravitational  potentials  gm
coordinates,  G
and  the  local  Lorentz  metric  h  =  (-1,1,1,1) ,    where  ds2  =  h

 (in  the  absence  of  rotation,  and  using  holonomic
  is  symmetric).  Starting  with  a  Cartesian  frame  xm   in  free  fall
n dxm dxn ,  the

transformation  to  any  other  local  coordinate  system  yields

ds2 = h

n dxm dxn  = ga

b dqa dqb

          (56)

                                    
4 A crude dictionary relating turn-of-the-century phrases to modern terminolgy in differential
geometry reads in part as follows: 'holonomic coordinates' [6] represent a 'coordinate basis' [14]
while 'nonintegrable velocities' [6] correspond to a 'noncoordinate basis' [14].

4 4

¥
g
b
a
¶
G
b
h
a
¶
G
h
g
a
t
g
a
G
t
g
a
t
b
a
G
g
h
t
n
m
m
where the metric is given at least locally by

ga

 = h

¶ hm
¶ qa

 

 

¶ hn
¶ qb

.               (57)

The  principle  of  equivalence  combined  with  local  Lorentz  invariance,  not

general  covariance,  is  the  basis  for  general  relativity,  which  is  not  a  global

relativity  principle  at  all  (and  is  also  not  a  theory  based  on  relativism 

in

Mach's  sense)  but  is  a  geometric 

theory  of  gravity.  The  principle  of

equivalence  as  the  physical  basis for  the  geometric  theory  of  gravity  was first

emphasized by Einstein [38].

In  another  paper [39] I  will  discuss  the  observed  distribution  of  the  galaxies

and  ask  whether  there  is  any  evidence  to  support  either  the  cosmological

principle  or  a  hierarchical  universe,  e.g,  a  fractal  universe.

References

1. Sneddon,  I.,     Elements        of        Partial         Differential        Equations   , McGraw-Hill,  New

York (1957).

2. Duff, G.F.D.,     Partial         Differential        Equations   ,  U.  Toronto  Pr.,  Toronto  (1962).

3.  Arnol'd,  V.  I.,       Geometric         Theory         of          Ordinary          Differential         Equations   ,

Chapter  1,  Springer-Verlag,  Berlin  (1983).

4.  Rüede,  C.,  and  Straumann,  N.,       On         Newton-Cartan        Cosmology    , Helv.  Phys.

Act. (1996).

5.  Heckmann,  O.,      Theorien          der                 Kosmologie    ,  Fortschritte  der  Astronomy,

Band  2,  Springer-Verlag,  Berlin  (1942).

4 5

b
m
n
6.  McCauley,  J.L.,      Classical           Mechanics,        flows,        transformations,         integrability,

    and       chaos   , Cambridge, Cambridge (1997).

7.  Galileo,       Dialogue        Concerning        Two        Chief          World        Systems   ,  tr.  by  Stillman

Drake, 2nd ed., U. Cal. Pr., Berkeley (1967).

8.  Hamermesh,  M.       Group        Theory    ,  Addison  Wesley,  Reading  (1962).

9. Havas, P., Rev. Mod, Phys. 36, 938 (1964).

10. Kretschmann, E., Ann. der Physik 53, 575 (1917).

11. McCauley, J.L., American Journal of Physics 45, 94 (1977).

12. Wigner, E.P.,     Symmetries        and         Reflections   ,  Indiana,  Bloomington  (1967).

13. Weinberg, S.,      Gravitation        and        Cosmology    , Wiley, New York (1972).

14. Misner,  C.W.,  Thorn,  K.S.,  and  Wheeler,  J.A.,       Gravitation    , Freeman,  San

Francisco  (1973).15.  Rindler,  W.,  Essential  Relativity,  2nd  ed.,  Springer-Verlag,

(1977).

16.  Buchert,  T.,  and  Ehlers,  J.,  Averaging 

  inhomogeneous  Newtonian

cosmologies,  Astron.  &  Astrophys.  (1996).

17. North. J.D.,     The          Measure        of       the         Universe    , Clarendon Pr., Oxford (1965).

18. Milne, E.A., Quart. J. Math. 5, 64 (1934).  

19. Layzer, D., Ap. J. 59, 268 (1954).

20. Bondi, H.,     Cosmology    , Cambridge, Cambridge (1961).

21. Zanstra, H., Phys. Rev. 23, 528 (1924).

22. Schrödinger, E., Ann. Phys. 79, 325 (1925).

23. Barbour, J. B., and Bertotti, B., Nuovo Cim. B38, 1 (1977).

24. Barbour, J. B., and Bertotti, B., Proc. Roy. Soc. London  A382, 295 (1982).

25. Lynden-Bell, D., and Katz, J., Phys. Rev. D52, 7322 (1995).

26.  Mach,  E.,      The         Science         of           Mechanics   ,  Tr.  from  German,  Open  Court,

LaSalle,  Ill.  (1942).

4 6

27. Barbour, J.E.,      Absolute        or         Relative          Motion?    , Vol.  1, Cambridge,  Cambridge

(1989).

28. Westfall,  R.S.,       Never        at         Rest,         A        Biography        of       Isaac         Newton    ,  Cambridge,

Cambridge (1980).

29. Holton, G.,     Science        and         Anti-Science    , Harvard, Cambridge, Mass. (1993).

30. Hoyle, F.,      Nicolaus        Copernicus   ,  Heinemann,  London  (1973).

31.  McCauley,  J.L.,  Discrete  Dynamics  in  Nature  and  Society  1,  17  (1997);

Physica A237, 387 (1997).

32. Horgan, J.,     The        End        of        Science    , Broadway Books, New York (1997).

33. Gross, P.R., and Levitt, N.,      Higher        Superstition    , Johns  Hopkins,  Baltimore

(1994).

34. Cartan, E.,      On          manifolds         with        an        affine       connection        and       the        general       theory

    of       relativity    ,  tr.  from  French,  Biblios,  Naples/Atlantic  Highlands,  N.J.  (1986).

35. Moore, C., Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 3675 (1993).

36.  Buchert,  T.,  preprint  (1997).

37.  Ehlers,  J.,  in       Relativity,         Astrophysics,         and         Cosmology    ,  ed.  W.  Israel,  D.

Reidel,  Dordrecht  (1972).

38. Einstein, A.,     The          Meaning        of         Relativity,        Princeton,        Princeton     (1953).

39.  McCauley,  J.  L.,  The  Galaxy  Distribution:  homogeneous, 

fractal,  or

neither?,  preprint  (1998).

Acknowledgement

These  notes  reflect  in  part lectures  presented  at the  University  of  Oslo  in  the

spring  of  1997 during  my  sabbatical, during  which  time  I was a guest  of  both

the  Institute  for  Theoretical  Physics  at  the  University  and  the  Physics

Department  of  The  Institute  for  Energy  Technology.  I  am  grateful  to  Jan

Frøyland  and  Arne  Skjeltorp  for  guestfriendship,  and  to  Finn  Ravndal  and

4 7

Øyvind  Grøn  for  persistently  stimulating  questions  and  criticism  during  my

lectures.  Earlier  in  my  sabbatical,  from  September  1996,  through  February

1997,  I  was  guest  professor  in  Lehrstuhl  Wagner  at  Ludwig  Maximillian's

Universität 

in  München,  where  Herbert  Wagner  and  Thomas  Buchert

introduced  me  to  Heckmann's  papers,  which  are  not  available  in  English.

Part  7  can  be  seen  more  or  less  as  an  edited  and  extended  version  of  an

informal  translation  of  the  Newtonian  part  of  Heckmann's  Theorie 

der

Kosmologie.  I  am  also  grateful  to  Julian  Barbour  for  friendly  correspondence

and  criticism  of  my  discussion  of  Mach's  principle  and  relativism.   This  work

was supported  financially  by The  Research  Council  of  Norway,  the   Institute

for Energy Technology (at Kjeller, Norway), and the Departments of Physics  at

the  Universities  of  Oslo  (UIO),  München  (LMU)  and  Houston  (UH).  

4 8

