0
0
0
2

 

n
a
J
 

3
1

 
 
 

9
2
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The  new  science  of  complexity

Joseph  L.  McCauley
Physics  Department
University  of  Houston
Houston,  Texas  77204

jmccauley@uh.edu

key words:
complexity
simulations
laws  of  nature

invariance  principles

socio-economic  sciences

Abstract

Deterministic  chaos,  and  even  maximum  computational  complexity,  have

been  discovered  within  Newtonian  dynamics.  Encouraged  by comparisons  of

the  economy  with  the  weather,  a  Newtonian  system,  economists  assume  that

prices and  price  changes  can  also  obey abstract mathematical  laws  of  motion.

Meanwhile,  sociologists  and  other  postmodernists  advertise  that  physics and

chemistry  have  outgrown  their  former  limitations,  that  chaos  and  complexity

provide    new  holistic  paradigms  for  science,  and  that  the  boundaries  between

the  hard  and  the  soft  sciences,  once  impenetrable,  have  disappeared  along

with  the  Berlin  Wall.  Three  hundred  years  after  the  deaths  of  Galileo,

Descartes, and  Kepler,  and  the  birth  of  Newton,  reductionism  would  appear

to be on  the  decline,  with  holistic  approaches  to  science  on  the  upswing.  We

therefore  examine  the  evidence  that  dynamical  laws  of  motion  may  be

discovered  from  empirical  studies  of  chaotic  or  complex  phenomena,  and

also  review  the  foundations  of  reductionism.

1

Socio-economic fields and "system theory"

I  define  "system  theory"  to  include  mathematical  models  written  in  terms  of

systems  of  deterministic  and  stochastic  ordinary  and  partial  differential

equations,  iterated  maps,  and  deterministic  and  stochastic  automata.  The  idea

is  to  include  every  possible  kind  of  dynamical  modelling.

In  attempts  to  describe  socio-economic  phenomena  from  the  standpoint  of

system  theory  it  is  Platonically  assumed  that  the  probability  distributions

describing prices  and  price  changes,  or  other  social  factors,  are  determined  by

an  objective  mathematical 

law  that  governs  how  the  economic  system

evolves  [1].  This  assumption  is  not  only  sufficient  but is  also  necessary  if  the

idea  of  mathematical  law  in  economics  is  to  make  any  sense.  In  physics  and

chemistry 

the 

ideas  of  entropy,  thermodynamics,  and  nonequilibrium

statistical  mechanics 

are  grounded 

in  universally-valid  microscopic

dynamics.  Without  the  underlying  dynamics  of  particles,  fluids  and  solid  or

plastic bodies there would be no  dynamical  origin  for  macroscopic  probability

distributions.

By a mathematical law of nature I mean a law of  motion,  a mathematical  law

of  time-evolution.  Galileo  and  Kepler  discovered  the  simplest  special  cases.

Their  local  laws  were  generalized  by Newton  to  become  three  universally-

valid  laws  of  motion,  along  with  a universal  law  of  gravity.  Newton's  laws

are  "universal" 

in  the  following  sense:  they  can  be verified,  often  with  very

high  decimal  precision,  regardless  of  where  and  when  on  earth  (or  on  the

moon  or  in  an  artificial  satellite)  careful,  controlled  experiments,  or  careful

observations,  are  performed.  It  is  the  main  purpose  of  this  paper to  stress  the

2

implications  of  the  fact  that  no  comparable  result  has  ever  been  found  in  the

socio-economic  fields.

"Laws"  of  economics,  "laws"  of  human  behavior,  and  the  Darwin-Wallace

"laws"  of  fitness,  competition,  selection  and  adaptation  are  sometimes

mentioned 

in  the  same  context  as  laws  of  motion  of  inanimate  matter

(physics  and  chemistry),  although  since  the  time  of  Galileo  the  word  "law"  in

the  first  three  cases does  not  have  the  same  import  as in  the  case of  physico-

chemical  phenomena.  Confusion  over  what  constitutes  a  law  of  nature  is

ancient:  Aristotle  invented  a  purely  qualitative,  holistic  approach  to  the

description  of  nature.  Not  recognizing  any  distinction  between  the  different

uses  of  the  idea  of  natural  law,  he  lumped  together  as  "motion"  the  rolling  of

a  ball,  the  education  of  a  boy,  and  the  growth  of  an  acorn  [2]. Ibn-Rushd

realized  that  Aristotle's  philosophy  is  consistent  with  a  purely  mechanistic

picture  of  the  universe.  The  growing 

influence  of 

the  mechanistic

interpretation  of  nature  in  western  Europe  set  Tomasso  d'Aquino 

into

motion  in  the  thirteenth  century.  Aristotle  did  not  use  mathematics,  but

mechanism  and  mathematics  go  hand  in  hand.  Is  human  nature,  in  some

still-unknown  mathematical  sense,  also  mechanistic?

In  the  first  chapter  of  his  text  on  elementary  economics  [3],  Samuelson  tries  to

convince  both  the  reader  and  himself  that  the  difference  between  the  socio-

economic  fields  and  the  laws  of  physics  is  blurry,  so  that  economics  can  be

treated as if it would also be a science subject to mathematical law.  Samuelson

claims  that  physics is  not  necessarily  as lawful  as it  appears, that  the  laws  of

physics  depend  subjectively  on  one's  point  of  view.  His  argument  is  based on

a  nonscientific  example  of  ambiguity  from  the  visual  perception  of  art  (figure

3

1), and  is  genetically  related  through  academic  mutation  and  evolution  to  a

viewpoint 

that  has  been 

advanced 

by 

the  postmodernist 

and

deconstructionist  movement 

in  art,  literature,  philosophy,  psychology,  and

sociology. The latter argue that a text has  no  more  meaning  than  the  symbols

on  a  printed  page,  that  there  is  no  universal  truth,  and  therefore  no  universal

laws  of  nature,  and  that  Platonic-Ptolemeic  astronomy  and  Aristotelian

physics  are  still  just  as  valid  as  fields  of  scientific  study  as  are  physics  and

astronomy  since  Galileo  and  Kepler  (who  revived  the  spirit  of  Archimedes).

Samuelson  notes  that  physics  relies  on  controlled  experiments,  and  adds that

in  the  socio-economic  fields  it  is  generally  impossible  to  perform  controlled

experiments. This is not an excuse for bad  science:  controlled  experiments  are

also  impossible  in  astronomy  where  mathematical  laws  of  nature  have  been

verified  with  high  decimal  precision.  See  also  Feynman  [4]  for  criticism  of  the

lack of isolation of cause and effect in the psycho-social fields.    

Platonists 

in  mathematics 

[5]  form  another 

category,  believing 

that

mathematical 

laws  exist  objectively  and  govern  everything  that  happens.

Physics  is  neither  Aristotelian 

(qualitative  and  "holistic")  nor  Platonic

(relying  upon  wishful  thinking,  because  the  "expected"  mathematical 

laws

are  not  grounded  in  careful,  repeatable  empiricism).

The  divorce  of  the  study  of  nature  from  Platonic  and  Aristotelian  notions  was

initiated by Galileo and Descartes  [6], but that  divorce  was not  complete:  with

Galileo's  empirical  discoveries  of  two  local  laws  of  nature,  the  law  of  inertia

and the local  law  of  gravity,  physics became  a precise  mathematico-empirical

science.  Biology,  excepting  the  study of  heredity  since  Mendel  and  excepting

4

biochemistry  and  biophysics  since  the  advent  of  quantum  mechanics,  has

continued  through  the  age  of  Darwin  and  beyond  as  a  largely  descriptive

science 

in 

the 

tradition  of  Aristotle,  with 

reliance  upon  vague,

mathematically-undefined  notions  like  "competition,  natural  selection  and

adaptation".

I  will  explain  why  economic  and  other  social  phenomena 

lie  beyond  the

bounds  of  understanding  from  the  standpoint  of  dynamical  modelling  that

attempts  to  describe  the  time-evolution  of  systems,  even 

if  the  goal  is  merely

to  extract  the  crudest  features 

like  coarsegrained 

statistics.  I will  give  reasons

why  mathematical 

laws  of  economics  do  not  exist  in  any  empirical  or

computationally-effective  [7] sense.  In  order  to  make  my  argument  precise,  I

first 

review 

some 

little-known 

and  poorly-understood 

facts  about

deterministic  dynamical  systems  that  include  Newton's  laws  of  motion  for

particles  and  rigid  bodies,  and  also  nondiffusive  chemically-reacting  systems.

What  does  "nonintegrable"  mean?

We  expect  that  any  system  of  ordinary  differential  equations  generating

critical 

(orbitally-metastable), 

chaotic 

(orbitally-unstable), 

or 

complex

dynamics  must  be both  nonlinear  and  nonintegrable.  Most  of  us  think  that

we  can  agree  on  the  meaning  of  "nonlinear".  Before  asking  "What 

is

complexity?"  we  first  define  what  "nonintegrable"  means  [8,9].

The  ambiguity 

inherent 

in  both  serious  and  superficial  attempts 

to

distinguish  "integrability"  from  "nonintegrability"  was  expressed  poetically  by

Poincaré,  who  stated that  a dynamical  system  is  generally  neither  integrable

5

nor  nonintegrable,  but is  more  or  less  integrable  [10]. For  most  scientists  the

explanation  of  various  roots  to  chaos  (via  period  doubling,  e.g.) has  tended  to

submerge  rather  than  clarify  the  question  how  to  distinguish  those  two  ideas,

but  without  eliminating  many  misconceptions.  Modern  mathematicians

have  managed  to  give  some  precise  definitions  of  nonintegrability  [11] that

are  hard  to  translate  into  simpler  mathematics.  Here,  I  try  to  describe  what

"nonintegrability"  means  geometrically  and  analytically.  

For  the  sake  of  precision  I  frame  my  discussion  in  the  context  of  flows  in

phase space,

 = V(x)

dx
dt

,       (1)

where  phase  space is  a flat  inner  product  space so  that  the  n  axes  labeled  by
(x1,...,xn) can be regarded as Cartesian [12], and  V(x)  is  an  n-component  time-

independent  velocity  field.  Newtonian  dynamical  systems  can  always  be

rewritten  in  this  form  whether  or  not  the  variables  xi  defining  the  system  in

  and  x2  =  dq /dt,  where  q

physical  three  dimensional  space  are  Cartesian  (for  example,  it  is  allowed
have  x1  =  q
 = dx1...dxn are  defined  by (cid:209)
preserve  the  Cartesian  volume  element  dW
(conservative  flows)  while  driven  dissipative-flows  correspond  to  (cid:209)

  is  an  angular  variable).  Flows  that
(cid:215) V  =  0
(cid:215) V  „

  0,

where 

(cid:209) denotes  the  Cartesian  gradient  in  n  dimensions.

 

For  a  velocity  field  whose  components  satisfy  the  condition   V1  +  ... +  Vn  = 0,

then  the  global conservation  law  x1 +  ...  +  xn =  C  follows.  This  abstract  case

includes  chemically-reacting  systems  with  concentration  xi for species i.

6

For  a flow  and  for  any  initial  condition  xo the  solution  xi(t)  = U(t)xio  has  no

finite  time  singularities  [13]  because singularities  of  trajectories  of  flows  are

confined  to  the  complex  time  plane:  the  time  evolution  operator  U(t)  exists

for  all  real  finite  times  t and  defines  a  one-parameter  transformation  group

with  inverse  U-1(t) = U(-t),  so  that  one  can  in  principle  integrate  backward in

time,  xoi  =    U(-t)xi(t),  as  well  as  forward.  In  other  words,  even  driven-

dissipative  flows  are  perfectly  time-reversible.

Many  researchers  use  floating  point  arithmetic  in  numerical  integrations  of

chaotic  systems  but  uncontrollable  errors  are  introduced 

into  numerical

integrations  by the  use  of  floating  point  arithmetic,  and  those  errors  violate

time  reversibility  in  the  simplest  of  cases.  Even  for  a  nonchaotic  driven-

dissipative 

flow  floating-point  errors  will  prevent  accurate  numerical

solutions  either  forward  or  backward  in  time  after  only  a  relatively  short  time

[12]. The  simplest  example  is  given  by the  one  dimensional  flow   dy/dt = y,
all  of  whose  streamlines  have  the  positive  Liapunov  exponent  l
in  time,  and  the  negative  Liapunov  exponent  l

  =  -  1    backward  in  time.

 = 1 forward

Consequently,  the  simple  linear  equation  dy/dt  =  y  cannot  be  integrated

forward  in  time  accurately  numerically,  for  moderately-long  times,  if  floating

point  arithmetic  is  used.

Chaotic  unimodal  maps  zn  = f(zn-1) like  the  logistic  map  f(x) = Dx(1-x) have  a

multi-valued 

inverse  zn-1  =  f-1(zn)  and  therefore  are  not  uniquely  time-

reversible.  Contrary  to  superficial  appearances  based upon  an  unwarranted

extrapolation  of  a numerical  calculation,  time  reversal  is  not  violated  by the

Lorenz  model

7

   d x1
d t

d x2
d t
d x3
d t

= s (x2 ± x1)

= r x1 ± x2 ± x1x3

= ± b x3 + x1x2

        (1b)

in 

the  chaotic 

regime.  The  well-known  numerically-suggested 

one

dimensional cusp map (figure 2) zn =  f(zn-1) that  represents  maxima  of  a time
series  [14]  of  x3(t) at discrete  times  to, t1, ..., tn, ...  ,  where  tn-tn-1  denotes  the

time  lag  between  successive  maxima  zn-1  =  x3(tn-1)  and  zn  =  x3(tn),  can  not

have a double-valued inverse                      zn-1 = f-1(zn): backward integration

zn-1  =  U(tn-1  -tn)zn is  unique  for  a  flow,  and  the  Lorenz  model  satisfies  the

boundedness  condition  for  a  flow [14].  Therefore,  Lorenz's  one  dimensional

cusp map zn = f(zn-1)  is  not  continuous  and  may  even  be  infinitely  fragmented

and  nondifferentiable 

in  order  that  the  inverse  map  f-1  doesn't  have  two

branches.  Note  that  the  Lorenz  model  may  describe  a  chemically-reacting
system if b

 = 1, in which case the flow is driven-dissipative but  is

 = 0 and s

 = r

not  chaotic  (the  flow  is  orbitally-stable,  with  no  positive  Liapunov  exponent

in  forward  integration).

Surprise  has  been  expressed  that  it  was  found  possible  to  describe  a  certain

chaotic  flow  by  a  formula 

in  the  form  of  an 

infinite  series  [8],  but

"nonintegrable"  does  not  mean  not  solvable:  any  flow,  even  a critical,  chaotic

or  complex  one,  has  a unique,  well-defined  solution  if  the  velocity  field  V(x)

satisfies a Lipshitz condition (a Lipshitz  condition  requires  the  definition  of  a

metric  in  phase  space),  or  is  at  least  once  continuously  differentiable,  with

8

respect  to  the  n  variables  xi.  If,  in  addition,  the  velocity  field  is  analytic  in

those  variables  then  the  power  series

 xi(t) = xio + t(Lxi)o + t2(L2xi)o/2 + ....,    (2)

where  L  =  V(cid:215)

,  has  a  nonvanishing 

radius  of  convergence,  so  that  the

solution  of  (1) can  in  principle  be described by the  power  series  (2) combined

with  analytic  continuation  for  all finite  times  [15].  It is  well  known  that  this

is  not  a practical  prescription  for  the  calculation  of  trajectories  at long  times.

The  point  is  that  a large  category of  deterministic  chaotic  and  complex  flows

are  precisely  determined  over  any  desired  number  of  finite  time  intervals  by

analytic formulae.    The  Lorenz  model  (1b)  provides  an  example.  Analyticity 
is
impossible  for  the  case  of  truly  "random"  motion  (like  a -particle  decays),

where  the  specification  of  an  initial  condition  does  not  determine  a trajectory

at  all  (as  in  Feynman's  path  integral),  or  for  Langevin  descriptions  of

diffusive  motion,  where  almost  all  trajectories  are  also  continuous  and

almost  everywhere  nondifferentiable  (as  in  Wiener's  functional  integral).

According to Jacobi and Lie, a completely integrable dynamical  system  has  n-1

global  time-independent  first  integrals  (conservation 

laws)  Gi(x1,...,xn)  =  Ci

satisfying  the  linear  partial  differential  equation

dGi
dt

 = V(cid:215)

(cid:209) Gi = Vk

¶ Gi
¶ xk

 = 0

  (3)

along  any  streamline  of  the  flow.  In  addition,  these  conservation  laws  must

(in  principle,  but  not  necessarily  via  explicit  construction)  determine  n-1

"isolating integrals" of the form xk = gk(xn,C1,...,Cn-1) for k =  1,...,n-1.  When  all

9

(cid:209)
of this holds then the global flow  is  a time-translation  for  all  finite  times  t in

the  Lie  coordinate  system

yi = Gi(x1,...,xn) = Ci, i = 1,...,n-1

yn = F(x1,...,xn) = t + D

      (4)

defined  by the  n-1  conservation 

laws,  and  the  system  is  called  completely

integrable.  The  solution  reduces  in  principle 

to  n  independent 

integrations,

and  the  flow  is  confined  to  a  two-dimensional  manifold  that  may  be  either

flat  or  curved  and  is  determined  by  the  intersection  of  the  n-1  global

conservation  laws.  For  the  special  case  of  a  canonical  Hamiltonian  flow  with  f

degrees  of  freedom,  f  commuting  conservation  laws  confine  the  flow  to  a

constant  speed  translation  on  an  f  dimensional 

flat  manifold.  The  nth

transformation 

function 

F(x1,...,xn) 

is  defined  by 

integrating  dt  =

dxn/Vn(x1,...,xn) = dx/vn(xn,C1,...,Cn-1) to  yield t +  D = f(xn,C1,...,Cn-1). One  then

uses  the  n-1  conservation  laws  to  eliminate  the  constants  Ci  in  favor  of  the

n-1  variables  xi  in  f  to  obtain  the  function  F.  Whether  one  can  carry out  all  or

any  of  this  constructively, 

in  practice,  is  geometrically  irrelevant: 

in  the

description  (4)  of  the  flow  all  effects  of  interactions  have  been  eliminated

globally  via 

a 

coordinate 

transformation. 

The 

transformation 

(4)

"parallelizes"  (or  "rectifies"  [13])  the  flow:  the  streamlines  of  (1)  in  the  y-

coordinate  system  are  parallel  to  a  single  axis  yn for  all  times,  and  the  time

evolution  operator  is  a  uniform  time-translation  U(t)  =  etd/dyn.  Eisenhart

asserted  formally,  without  proof,  that  all  systems  of  differential  equations  (1)

are  described  by a  single  time  translation  operator  [16], but  this  is  possible

globally  (meaning  for  all  finite  times)  only  in  the  completely  integrable  case.

1 0

Although 

time-dependent 

first  integrals  are  stressed  in  discussions  of

integrable  cases  of  driven-dissipative  flows  like  the  Lorenz  model [8], there  is

generally no essential difference between (3) and the case of n  time-dependent

first integrals G'i(x1,...,xn,t) = C'i  satisfying

dGi
dt

 = V(cid:215)

(cid:209) Gi + 

  ¶ Gi
¶ t

 = 0

.        (3b)

Relying  on  the  implicit  function  theorem,  one  conservation  law  G'n(x1,...,xn,t)

=  C'n  can  be  used  to  determine  a  function 

t  =  F'(x1,...,xn,C'n),  whose

substitution  into  the  other  n-1  time-dependent  conservation  laws  yields  n-1

time-independent  ones  satisfying  (3).

The  n  initial  conditions  xio  = U(-t)xi(t)  of  (1) satisfy (3b) and  therefore  qualify

as  time-dependent  conservation 

laws,  but  initial  conditions  of  (1)  are

generally  only  trivial 

local  time-dependent  conservation 

laws:  dynamically

seen,  there  is  no  qualitative  difference  between  backward  and  forward

integration  in  time.  Nontrivial  global conservation  laws  are  provided  by the

initial  conditions  yio, for i = 1, 2, ... ,       n-1,  of  a completely  integrable  flow  in

the  Lie  coordinate  system  (4), where  the  streamlines  are  parallel  for  all  finite

times: dyi/dt = 0, i = 1,...,n-1, and         dyn/dt = 1.  

Algebraic  or  at  least  analytic  conservation 

laws  [8]  have  generally  been

assumed  to  be  necessary  in  order  to  obtain  complete 

integrability.  For

example,  Euler's  description  of  a  torque-free  rigid  body [12]

1 1

   d L 1
d t
d L 2
d t

d L
d t

= a L 2L 3

= ± bL 1L 3

= c L 1L 2

,    (5)

with positive constants a , b , and c satisfying a - b + c =  0, defines  a phase  flow

in  three  dimensions  that  is  confined  to  a  two  dimensional  sphere  that  follows

from  angular  momentum  conservation    L12 +  L22 +  L32  = L2. Here,  we have

completely  integrable  motion  that  technically  violates  the  naive  expectation
that each term in (4) should be given by a single  function: for each  period  t  of

the  motion,  the  transformation  function  F  has  four  distinct  branches  due  to

the  turning  points  of  the  three  Cartesian  components  Li  of  angular  momenta

on  the  sphere.  In  general,  any  "isolating  integral"  gk  describing  bounded

motion  must  be multivalued  at  a  turning  point.  Note  also  that  the  Lorenz

model  defines  a  certain  linearly  damped,  driven  symmetric  top:  to  see  this,  set

a = 0  and b = c = 1 in (5), and ignore all linear terms in (1b).

The  few  mathematicians  who  have  discussed  conservation 

laws  in  the

literature  usually  have  assumed  that  first  integrals  must  be  analytic  or  at least

continuous  [13]  (however,  see  also  ref.  [11] where  nonanalytic  functions  as

first  integrals  are  also  mentioned).  This  is  an  arbitrary  restriction  that  is  not

always  necessary  in  order  to  generate  the  transformation  (4)  over  all  finite

times:  a  two-dimensional  flow  in  phase  space, including  a driven-dissipative

flow, is generally integrable via a  conservation  law  but that  conservation  law

is  typically  singular.  The  conservation  law  is  simply  the  function  G(x1,x2) = C

that  describes the  two-dimensional  phase  portrait,  and  is  singular  at  sources

and  sinks  like  attractors  and  repellers  (equilibria  and  limit  cycles  provide

1 2

examples  of  attractors  and  repellers  in  driven-dissipative  planar  flows)  [12].

For  the  damped  simple  harmonic  oscillator,  for  example,  the  conservation

law  has  been  constructed  analytically  [17]  and  is  logarithmically  singular  at
the  sink.  The  planar  flow  where  dr/dt  =  r  and  dq /dt  =  0  in  cylindrical
coordinates  (r,q )  describes  radial  flow  out  of  a  source  at  r  =  0.  The
conservation  law  is  simply  q

,  which  is  constant  along  every  streamline  and  is

undefined at r  = 0. This  integrable  flow  is  parallelizeable  for  all  finite  times  t

simply  by excluding  one  point,  the  source  at  r  =  0  (infinite  time  would  be

required to leave or reach an  equilibrium  point,  but the  infinite  time  limit  is

completely  unphysical).  "Nonintegrable" 

flows  do  not  occur  in  the  phase

plane.  What  can  we  say  about  "nonintegrability"  about  in  three  or  more

dimensions?

In differential equations [13] and differential geometry [18] there is also an idea

of local  integrability:  one  can  parallelize  an  arbitrary vector  field  V  about  any
"noncritical  point",  meaning  about  any  point  xo where  the  field  V(x)  does  not
vanish.  The  size  e( xo) of  the  region  where  this  parallelization  holds  is  finite

and  depends  nonuniversally  on  the  n  gradients  of  the  vector  field.    This

means  that  we  can  "rectify"  even  chaotic  and  complex  flows  over  a  finite

time,  starting  from  any  nonequilibrium  point  xo.  By  analytic  continuation

[11,19],  this  local  parallelization  of  the  flow  yields  n-1  nontrival 

"local"

conservation  laws  yi  = Gi(x)  = Ci  that  hold  out  to  the  first  singularity  of  any

one of the n-1  functions  Gi,  in  agreement  with  the  demands  of  the  theory  of

first  order  linear  partial  differential  equations  (the  linear  partial  differential

equation  (3)  always  has  n-1  functionally 

independent  solutions,  but  the

solutions  may  be  singular [17]).

1 3

Contemplate  the  trajectory  of  a  "nonintegrable" 

flow  that  passes through  any

nonequilibrium  point  xo, and  let  t = 0 when  x = xo. Let t(xo) then  denote  the

time  required  for  the  trajectory  to  reach  the  first  singularity  of  one  of  the

conservation 

laws  Gk.  Such  a  singularity  must  exist,  otherwise  the  flow

would  be  confined  for  all  finite  times  ("globally")  to  a  single,  smooth  two-

dimensional  manifold.  The  global existence  of  a  two-dimensional  manifold

can  be  prevented, 

for  example,  by  singularities 

that  make 

the  n-1

conservation  laws  Gi multivalued  in  an  extension  of  phase  space to  complex

variables [11]. Generally, as with  solutions  of  (1) defined  locally  by the  series

expansion  (2),  the  n-1  local  conservation  laws  Gi  will  be  defined  locally  by

infinite  series  with  radii  of  convergence  determined  by singularities  that  lie

in  the  complex  extension  of  phase  space.  The  formulae  (4)  then  hold  for  a
finite  time  0£ t<t(xo) that  is  determined  by the  distance  from  xo to  the  nearest
complex  singularity.  Let  x1(xo) denote  the  point  in  phase  space  where  that
singularity  causes  the  series  defining  Gi  to  diverge.  Following  Arnol'd's  [13]

statement  of  the  "basic  theorem  of  ordinary  differential  equations",  we

observe that the streamline of a flow (1) passing through xo can not be  affected

by the  singularity  at x1(xo) in  the  following  superficial  sense  (consistent  with

the  fact  that  the  singularities  of  the  functions  Gi  are  either  branch  cuts  or

phase  singularities):  we  can  again  parallelize  the  flow  about  the  singular  point

x1(xo)  and  can  again  describe  the  streamline 
time
t(xo)£ t<t(x1)  by  another  set  of  parallelized  flow  equations  of  the  form  (4),
where  t(x1) is the time required to reach  the  next  singularity  x2(xo) of  any  one

for  another 

finite 

of  the  n-1  conservation  laws  Gi,  starting  from  the  second  initial  condition

x1(xo).  Reparallelizing 

the  flow  about  any  one  of  these  singularities 

is

somewhat 

like  resetting  the  calendar  when  crossing  the 

international

1 4

dateline,  except  that  a  nonintegrable  flow  is  generally  not  confined  globally to

a  two  dimensional  analytic  manifold.

We  have  reasoned  that  a  "nonintegrable" 

flow  is  piecewise  integrable:

different  sets  of  formulae  of  the  form  (4)  hold  in  principle 
for  consecutive
finite  time  intervals  0£ t(xo)<t(x1),  t(x1)£ t<t(x2),  ...  t(xn-1)£ t<t(xn),  ....  ,  giving
geometric  meaning  to  Poincaré's  dictum  [10]  that  a  dynamical  system  is

generally  neither  integrable  nor  nonintegrable  but is  more  or  less  integrable.

Nonintegrable  flows  are  describable  over  arbitrarily-many  consecutive  time

intervals  by the  simple  formulae  of  the  form  (4)  except  at  countably  many

singular  points  x1(xo), x2(xo), ...  , where  the  n-1  initial  conditions  yio and  the

integration  constant  D must  be reset.  The  relevance  for  Takens's  embedding

theorem is discussed in [9].

Deterministic chaos as simple dynamics

We  have  often  read over  the  last  twenty  years  that  deterministic  chaos  can

explain  complex  phenomena,  but  without  having  had  a  definition  of

"complex".  This  was  the  point  of  view  in  the  era  when  computers  were  used

to  try  to  study  chaoic  motions  via  numerical 

integrations  without  error

control,  based upon  floating  point  forward  integrations  of  chaotic  dynamical

equations  (or  by forward  iterations  of  chaotic  maps).  We  have  since  learned

that  uncontrolled 

numerical 

integrations 

can 

be 

avoided, 

and

correspondingly  that  chaotic  dynamics  can  be  understood  from  a  certain

topologic  point  of  view  as relatively  simple  dynamics.  This  "new"  approach

(roughly  ten  years  old)  is  the  consequence  of  analytic  studies  of  chaotic

1 5

systems  using  controlled  approximations  via  a  purely  digital  method  called

"symbolic  dynamics".  

Symbol  sequences  are  equivalent  to  digit strings  in  some  base  of  arithmetic.

Since we are going to talk about digit strings it is both wise and useful to  begin

with  the  idea  of  a computable  number  [20,21]. The  reason  for  this  is  simple:

"algorithmically 

random" 

numbers 

and 

sequences 

"exist" 

in 

the

mathematical  continuum  but require  infinite  time  and  infinite  precision  for

their  definition,  and  therefore  have  no  application  to  either  experiment  or

computation.

By  a  computable  number,  we  mean  either  a  rational  number  or  an  algorithm

that  generates  a  digit  expansion  for  an  irrational  number  in  some  base  of

arithmetic, 

like  the  usual  grade  school  algorithm 

for  the  square-root

operation  in  base  ten  (the  same  algorithm  also  works  in  any  other  integer

base).  If  we  use  computable  numbers  as  control  parameters  and  initial

conditions,  then  the  chaotic  dynamical  systems  typically  studied  in  physics

and  chemistry  are  computable,  e.g.  via 

(2)  combined  with  analytic

continuation.  The  Lorenz  model  (1b)  provides  one  example.  Systems  of

chemical  kinetic  equations  provide  other  examples.

Seen  from  the  perspective  of  computability,  the  local  solution 

(2)  of  a

dynamical  system  (1) that  is  digitized  completely  in  some  base  of  arithmetic

defines  an  "artificial  automaton",  an  abstract  model  of  a  computer.  The

digitized  initial  condition  constitutes  the  program  for  the  automaton.  In  a

chaotic  dynamical  system  the  part  of  the  program  that  directs  the  trajectory

1 6

into  the  distant  future  is  encoded  as  the  end-string e N+1... of digits in an initial
condition  xo = . e 1.e 2...e N... . For example,the binary tent map xn = f(xn-1),

f(x) = 

2x, x< 1/2

2(1 - x), x > 1/2  , (6)

can  be  rewritten  and  studied  naturally 
xn = .e 1(n)e 2(n)...e n(n)..., with e i(n) = 0  or  1. The  map  (2) is  then  represented  by

in  binary  arithmetic  by  writing                     

the  simple  automaton  [21]

i(n) = 

i+1(n-1), e 1(n-1) = 0
i+1(n-1), e 1(n-1) = 1 .      (6b)

1 - e

For  every  possible  binary-encoded  "computer  program"  xo = .e 1(0)e 2(0)...e N(0)...

this  automaton  performs  only  a trivial  computation:  either  it  reads  a  bit  in

the program, or else flips the bit  and  reads it,  then  moves  one  bit to  the  right

and  repeats  the  operation.  The  logistic  map  at  the  period  doubling  critical

point  [22],  in  contrast,  is  capable  of  performing  simple  arithmetic.

Unlike  the  binary  tent  map  in  binary  arithmetic,  most  dynamical  systems  do

not admit a  "natural"  base of  arithmetic.  The  logistic  map  f(x) = Dx(1-x) with

D arbitrary and the  Lorenz  model  are  examples.  The  series  solutions  of  these

dynamical  systems  can  still  be  rewritten  as  automata  in  any  integer  base  of

arithmetic,  albeit  in  relatively  cumbersome  fashion.  However,  there  is  a

systematic  generalization  of  solution  of  the  binary  Bernoulli  shift  map           

xn  =  2xn-1  mod  1  via  binary  arithmetic  that  sometimes  works:  symbolic

dynamics.  The  symbolic  dynamics  of  a  chaotic  dynamical  system  can  be

defined, and solved digitally  at least  in  principle,  if  the  map  has  a generating

1 7

e
e
partition  [23].  For  the  binary  tent  map  (6)  the  generating  partition, 

in

generation  n,  consists  of  the  2n  intervals  l(n)  =  2-n    that  are  obtained  by

backward  iteration  of  the  entire  unit  interval  by  the  map  (a  chaotic  one

dimensional  map  contracts  intervals  in  backward iteration).  Each  interval  in

the  generating  partition  can  be labeled  by an  n-bit  binary  (L,R)  address (L and

R  are  defined  in  figure  3) called  a symbol  sequence,  as  is  shown  in  figure  4.

The  symbol  sequence  tells  us  the  itinerary  of  the  map,  for  n  forward
iterations,  for  any  initial  condition  that  is  covered  by the  interval  l(n)(e 1e 2...e n)
labeled by the n-bit address e 1e 2...e n, where e i = L or R [21].

Excepting pathological  cases where  the  contraction  rate  in  backward iteration

is  too  slow,  an  infinite  length  symbol  sequence  corresponds  uniquely  to  an

infinitely-precise  initial  condition.    Given  a  symbol  sequence,  coarsegrained

statistics  for  any  number  Nn of  bins  in  the  generating  partition   (Nn  =  2n for

the  binary  tent  map)  can  be  obtained  merely  by reading  the  sequence  while

sliding an N-bit window one bit at a time to the right,  as is  indicated  in  figure

5. Clearly, orbital  statistics  depend  on  initial  conditions,  and  it  is  very  easy to

construct  algorithms  for  initial  conditions  whose  orbital  statistics  do  not

mimic 

the  uniform 

invariant  density  of  the  binary  tent  map  (e.  g.,                                        

xo =  .101001000100001...  qualifies  and  follows  from  an  obvious  algorithm).  I

have  explained  elsewhere  why  "random" 

initial  conditions  may  be  a  bad

assumption  for  a  dynamical  system  far  from  thermal  equilibrium  [9,21].

Because  the  binary  tent  map  generates  all  possible  infinite-length  binary

sequences  (almost  all  of  which  are  not  computable  via  any  possible  algorithm

[20]), we can use that map to generate any histogram that can be constructed in

finitely-many steps, merely by a  correct  choice  of  initial  conditions  [21]. Many

1 8

different  initial  conditions  will  allow  the  dynamical  system  to  generate  the

same  coarsegrained  statistics  because the  precise  ordering  of  L's  and  R's  in  a

symbol  sequence  doesn't  matter  in  determining  the  histograms.

Liapunov  exponents  depend  strongly  on  initial  conditions,  a  fact  that  is  not

brought  out  by  concentration  on  excessively  simple  models 

like 

the

symmetric  tent  map,  or  numerical  attempts  to  extract  "the  largest  Liapunov

exponent"  of  a  chaotic  dynamical  system  like  the  Lorenz  model.  Chaotic

dynamical  systems  like  the  Lorenz  model  or  the  logistic  map  generally

generate  an  entire  spectrum  of  Liapunov  exponents  (and  therefore  also  a

spectrum of largest  Liapunov  exponents).  The  easiest  way to  understand  this

is  to  solve  for  the  generating  partition  and  Liapunov  exponents  of  the

asymmetric tent map [21], where only simple algebra is needed.

We  define  a class  of  initial  conditions 
yield the  same  Liapunov  exponent  l

to  consist  of  all  initial  conditions  that

.  Correspondingly,  we  can  say that  a class

of  symbol  sequences  defines  a  single  Liapunov  exponent.  The  Boltzmann
entropy  per  iteration  s(l )  of  all  symbol  sequences  with  the  same  Liapunov
exponent  l

 defines  the  fractal  dimension  D(l ) = s(l )/l

 of  that  class of  initial

conditions  [12,21], so  that  a  chaotic  dynamical  system  generally  generates

spectra  of  both  Liapunov  exponents  and  fractal  dimensions.

Both  critical  [22] and  chaotic  [23] dynamical  systems  may  generate  a  natural

partitioning  of  phase  space,  the  generating  partition,  but  not 

every

nonintegrable  dynamical  system  defines  a  generating  partition. 

If  a

deterministic  dynamical  system  has  a generating  partition  then  the  symbolic

dynamics  can  in  principle  be  solved  and  the  long-time  behavior  can  be

1 9

understood  qualitatively,  without  the  need  to  compute  specific  trajectories

algorithmically  from  the  algorithmic  construction  of  a  specific  computable

initial  condition.  For  example,  one  need  only  determine  the  possible  symbol

sequences  and  then  read  them  with  a  sliding  n-bit  window  in  order  to

generate  the  statistics  in  the  form  of  a  hierarchy  of  histograms  (figure  5).  In

other  words,  a high  degree of  "computational  compressibility"  holds  even  if

the  dynamical  system  is  critical  or  chaotic.

Every  chaotic  dynamical  system  generates  infinitely-many  different  classes of

statistical  distributions 

for 

infinitely-many  different  classes  of 

initial

conditions,  and  at  most  one  of  those  distributions  is  differentiable  (unlike  the

case  of  equilibrium  statistical  mechanics,  there  is  no  empirical  evidence  to

suggest  that  nature  far  from  equilibrium  evolves  from  unknown 

initial

conditions 

to  generate  differentiable  distributions 

[9]).  The  generating

partition,  if  it  exists,  uniquely  forms  the  support  of  every  possible  statistical

distribution  and  also  characterizes  the  particular  dynamical  system  (the

intervals  l(n)  = 2-n characterize  the  binary  tent  map  and  the  binary  Bernoulli

shift).  For a system with  a generating  partition,  topologic  universality  classes

can  be  defined  that  permit  one  to  study  the  simplest  system  in  the

universality  class [24]. The  infinity  of  statistical  distributions  is  topologically

invariant  and  therefore  can  not be used  to  discern  or  characterize  a particular

dynamical  system  within  a  universality  class  [21].

For  maps  of  the  unit  interval,  both  the  symmetric  and  asymmetric  logistic

maps peaking at  or  above  unity  belong  to  the  trivial  universality  class of  the

binary  tent  map  [21]  (where  all  possible  binary  sequences  are  allowed).  The

topologic  universality  class  is  described  by  figure  4,  and  is  defined  by  the

2 0

complete  binary  tree.  Dynamical  systems  that  generate  complete  ternary  trees

or  incomplete  binary  trees,  e.g.,  define  other  universality  classes.  The  two

dimensional  Henon  map  belongs  to  the  universality  class  of  chaotic  logistic

maps  of  the  unit  interval  peaking  beneath  unity.  The  simplest  model  in  this

topologic  universality  class is  the  symmetric  tent  map  with  slope  magnitude

between  1 and  2, and  the  class is  defined  by a  certain  incomplete  binary  tree

[24].

In these  systems  the  long-time  behavior  can  be understood  qualitatively  and

statistically  in  advance,  so  that  the  future  holds  no  surprises: 

the  generating

partition  and  symbol  sequences  can  be  used  to  describe  the  motion  at  long

times,  to  within  any  desired  degree of  precision  l(n),  and  multifractal  scaling
laws  (via  the  D(l ) spectrum)  show  how  finer-grained  pictures  of  trajectories

are  related  to  coarser-grained  ones.  In  other  words,  universality  and  scaling

imply  relatively  simple  dynamics  in  spite  of  the  fact that  the  word  "complex"

has  often  been  used  to  describe  deterministic  chaos.  

Complex dynamics

Scale  invariance  based upon  criticality  has  been  suggested  as  an  approach  to

"complex 

space-time  phenomena" 

based  upon 

the 

largely  unfulfilled

expectation  of  finding  universal  scaling  laws,  generated  dynamically  by many

interacting  degrees  of  freedom  and  yielding  critical  states  independent  of

parameter-tuning  [25,26],  that  are  ubiquitous  in  nature.  This  is  equivalent  to

expecting  that  nature  is  mathematically  relatively  simple.

2 1

From  the  standpoint  of  computable  functions  and  computable  numbers  we

can  generally  think  of  a deterministic  dynamical  system  as  a  computer  with

the  initial  condition  as  the  program  [21]. Thinking  of  dynamics  from  this

point  of  view,  it  has  been  discovered  that  there  is  a far greater  and  far  more

interesting  degree  of  complicated  behavior  in  nonlinear  dynamics  than  either

criticality  or  deterministic  chaos:  systems  of  billiard  balls  combined  with

mirrors 

[27,27b],  and  even 

two-dimensional  maps  [28],  can  exhibit

universal  computational 

capacity  via  formal  equivalence 

to  a  Turing

machine.  A  system  of  nine 

first  order  quasi-linear  partial  differential

equations  has  been  offered  as  a  computationally-universal 

system  [29].  A

quasi-linear  first  order  partial  differential  equation  in  n  variables  can  be

replaced  by  a  linear  one 

in  n+1  variables.  Maximum 

computational

complexity 

is  apparently  possible 

in  systems  of  linear 

first  order  partial

differential 

equations. 

Such  systems  are  nondiffusive  but  can  describe

damped-driven  dynamics  and  wave  propagation.

For  a  dynamical  system  with  universal 

computational 

capability  a

classification  into  topologic  universality  classes is  impossible  [28].  Given  an

algorithm  for  the  computation  of  an  initial  condition  to  as  many  digits  as

computer  time  allows,  nothing  can  be  said  in  advance  about  the  future  either

statistically  or  otherwise 

  except  to  compute  the  dynamics  with  controlled

precision  for  that  initial  condition,  iteration  by  iteration,  to  see  what  falls  out:

there  is  no  computational  compressibility  that  allows  us  to  summarize  the

system's  long-time  behavior,  either  statistically  or  otherwise.  In  contrast  with

the  case  where  topologic  universality  classes  exist  there  is  no  tree-like

organization  of  a  hierarchy  of  periodic  orbits,  stable,  marginally  stable,  or

unstable,  that  allows  us  to  understand  the  fine-grained  behavior  of  an  orbit

2 2

from  the  coarse-grained  behavior  via  scaling  laws,  or  to  look  into  the  very

distant  future 

for  arbitrary  (so-called  "random") 

initial  conditions  via

symbolic dynamics.  There can be no scaling laws that hold independently of a

very  careful  choice  of  classes of   initial  conditions.  We  do not  know  whethe

either  fluid  turbulence  or  Newton's 

three-body  problem 

fall 

into 

this

category.

Some  degrees  of  complexity  are  defined  precisely  in  computer  science  [30]

but these  definitions,  based soley  on  computability  theory,  have  not  satisfied

physicists  [31,31b,32].  According  to  von  Neumann [33] a system  is  complex

when  it  is  easier  to  build  than  to  describe  mathematically.  Under  this

qualitative  definition  the  Henon  map  is  not  complex  but  a  living  cell  is.  In

earlier  attempts  to  model  biologic  evolution 

[34,35]  information  was

incorrectly  identified  as  complexity.  The  stated idea  was to  find  an  algorithm

that  generates  information,  but  this  is  too  easy:  the  square  root  algorithm  and

the  logistic  map  f(x) = 4x(1-x) generate  information  at the  rate  of  one  bit  per

iteration  from  rational  binary  initial  conditions.

There  is  no  correct  model  of  a  dynamic  theory  of  the  evolution  of  biologic

complexity,  neither  over  short  time  intervals  (cell  to  embryo  to  adult)  nor

over  very  long  time 

intervals 

(inorganic  matter 

to  organic  matter 

to

metabolizing  cells  and  beyond).  There  is  no  physico-chemical  model  of  the

time-development  of  different  degrees of  complexity  in  nonlinear  dynamics.

No  one  knows  if  universal  computational  capability is  necessary  for  biologic

evolution,  although  DNA  molecules 

in  solution  apparently  are  able  to

compute [36], but  not  error-free  like  a  Turing  machine  or  other  deterministic

dynamical  system.

2 3

Moore  has  speculated  that  computational  universality  should  be  possible  in  a

certain  kind  of  conservative  three  degree  of  freedom  Newtonian  potential

flow  [28],  but  so  far  no  one  has  constructed  an  analytic  example  of  the

required  potential  energy.  We  do  not  yet  know  the  minimum  number  of

degrees  of  freedom  necessary  for  universal  computational  capability  in  a

driven-dissipative  flow  (a digital  computer  is  a very  high  degree  of  freedom

damped-driven  dynamical  system  via  electric  circuit  theory).  Diffusive

motion  is  time-irreversible 

(U-1(t)  doesn't  exist  for  diffusive  motion),  but

arguments  have  been  made  that  some  diffusive  dynamical  systems  may  have

an  asymptotic  limit  that  is  reached  asymptotically-fast,  where  the  motion  is

non-diffusive  and  is  even  time  reversible  on  a  finite  dimensional  attractor

[37,38,39],  and  is  therefore  generated  on  the  attractor  by  a  finite  dimensional

deterministic  dynamical  system  (1).  However,  if  a  diffusive  dynamical  system

(the  Navier-Stokes  equations,  e.g.)  can  be  shown  to  be  computationally-

universal  then  it  will  be impossible  to  discover  a single  attractor  that  would

permit  the  derivation  of  scaling  laws  for  eddy cascades in  open  flows,  or  in

other 

flows, 

independently 

of  specific 

classes  of  boundary 

and 

initial

conditions.

With  a  computationally-universal 
(and  therefore  computable)  dynamical
system  (1), given  a specific  computable  initial  condition  xo, both  that  initial

condition  and  the  dynamics  can  in  principle  be  encoded  as the  digit string  for

another  computable 

initial  condition  yo.  If  the  computable 

trajectory                

y(t)  =  U(t)yo  could  be  digitally  decoded,  then  we  could  learn  the  trajectory      

x(t)  =  U(t)xo  for  the  first  initial  condition  (self-replication  without  copying

errors).  This  maximum  degree  of  computational 

complexity  may  be  possible

2 4

in  low  dimensional  nonintegrable 

conservative  Newtonian  dynamics.  Some

features of  nonintegrable  quantum  systems  with  a chaotic  classical  limit  (the

helium  atom,  e.g.)  have  been  studied  using  uncontrolled  approximations

based on the low order unstable  periodic  orbits  of  a chaotic  dynamical  system

[40], but we have  no  hint  what  might  be the  behavior  of  a low  dimensional

quantum  mechanical  system  with  a  computationally-complex  Newtonian

limit.  Interacting  DNA  molecules  obey  the  laws  of  quantum  mechanics  but

the  biologically-interesting  case  can  not  be  reduced  to  a  few  degrees  of

freedom.

Can new laws of nature emerge from studies of complicated motions? [42]

The  empirical  discovery  of  mathematical  laws  of  nature  arose  from  the  study

of  the  simplest  possible  dynamical  systems:  classical  mechanics  via  Galilean

trajectories  of  apples  and  Keplerian  orbits  of  two  bodies  (the  sun  and  one

planet)  interacting  via  gravity,  and  quantum  mechanics  via  the  hydrogen

atom.  Is  there  any  reason  to  expect  that  simplicity  can  be  short-circuited  in

favor  of  complexity  in  the  attempt  to  discover  new  mathematical 

laws  of

nature?  Some  researchers  expect this  to  be possible,  but  without  saying  how

[41]. Consider  first  an  example  from  fluid  dynamics  where  an  attempt  has

been  made  to  extract  a  simple  law  of  motion  from  a  complicated  time  series.

Fluid  turbulence  provides  examples  of  complicated  motions  in  both  space

and  time  in  a  Newtonian  dynamical  system  of  very  high  dimension.  We

know  how  to  formulate 

fluid  mechanical 

time  evolution  according  to

Newton's  laws  of  motion,  the  Navier-Stokes  equations,  but  infinitely  many

interacting degrees of freedom represented by second order coupled  nonlinear

2 5

partial  differential  equations  are  the  stumbling  block  in  our  attempt  to

understand  fluid  turbulence  mathematically.  We  do not  understand  coupled

nonlinear  partial  differential  equations  of  either  the  first  or  second  order  well

enough to be able  to  derive  any  of  the  important  features  of  fluid  turbulence

in  either  the  finite  or  infinite  Reynold's  number  limit  from  the  Navier-

Stokes  equations  in  a systematic  way that  starts with  the  laws  of  energy  and

momentum  transport  and  makes  controlled,  systematic    approximations.

Can  eddy-cascades in  turbulent  open  flows  [43] be  understood  by  trying  to

build  simpler  mathematical  models  than  the  Navier-Stokes  equations?  So

far,  this  goal  remains  nothing  but  an  unfulfilled  hope.  Setting  our  sights

much  lower,  is  it  possible  to  derive  a  mathematical  law  in  the  form  of  an

iterated  map  that  describes  only  the  transition  to  turbulence,  near  criticality?

We  have  noted  above  that  the  binary  tent  map  can  generate  all  possible

histograms  that  can  be  constructed  simply  by  varying  classes  of  initial

conditions.  Statistics  that  are  generated  by  an  unknown  dynamical  system  are

therefore 

inadequate 

to  infer  the  dynamical 

law  that  generates 

the  observed

statistical  behavior 

[21].  That  is  why,  in  any  effort  to  derive  a  simplified

dynamical  system  that  describes  either  turbulence  or  the  transition 

to

turbulence,  one  cannot  rely  upon  statistics  alone.  Instead,  it  is  necessary  to

extract the  generating  partition  of  the  dynamical  system  from  the  empirical

data,  if  there  is  a  generating  partition.

Consider  a  low  dimensional  dynamical  system  that  is  described  by  an

unknown 

iterated  map  defined  finitely  by  a  generating  partition.  With

infinite  precision  and  infinite  time,  it  would  be  possible  in  principle  to  pin

2 6

down  the  map's  universality  class  and  also  the  map,  from  a  chaotic  time

series  by the  empirical  construction  of  the  generating  partition.  With  finite

precision  and  finite  time  one  must  always  resort  to  some  guesswork  after  a

few  steps  in  the  hierarchy  of  unstable  periodic  orbits,  which  are  arranged

naturally  onto  a  tree  of  some  order  and  degree  of  incompleteness 

[24]. In

practice  one  can  discover  at  most  only  a  small  section  of  the  tree  and  its

degree of  pruning,  so  if  one  is  to  narrow  down  the  practical  choices  to  a  few

topologic  universality  classes  of  maps  the  observational  data  must  be

extremely  precise.  Given  the  most  accurate  existing  data on  a fluid  dynamical

system near  a critical  point,  the  unique  extraction  of  the  universality  class of

an iterated map from a chaotic time series has yet to  be accomplished  without

physically-significant  ambiguity  [44],  demonstrating  how  difficult 

is  the

empirical  problem  that  one  faces  in  any  attempt  to  extract  an  unknown  law  of

motion  from  the  analysis  of  complicated  empirical  data.

The  method  of  topologic  universality  classes  [21,23,24]  is  the  only  known  way

to study the long time  behavior  of  a chaotic  dynamical  system  systematically,

meaning  without  the  introduction  of  uncontrolled  and  uncontrollable  errors.

For  truly  complex  dynamical  systems,  therefore,  our  analysis  suggests  that  the

extraction  of    laws  of  motion 

from  empirical  data  is  a  hopeless 

task.  This

conclusion 

does 

not 

provide 

encouragement 

for 

experimental

mathematicians  who  want  to  discover  socio-economic  or  biologic  laws  of

chaotic  dynamics  from  raw  statistics  or  the  analysis  of  time  series  [45]. The

alternative, 

to  imagine  that  one  could  "guess" 

laws  of  nature  without

adequate  empirical  evidence  or  corresponding  symmetry  principles,  would  be

to  ignore  the  lessons  of  Archimedes  and  Galileo  and  revert  to  Platonism.

2 7

Einstein  apparently  became  Platonic  later  in  life,  but  Platonism  was  not

Einstein's  guiding 

light 

(or 

light-shade)  during  his  generalization  of

Newton's  theory  of  gravity,  because that  generalization  is  based upon  a local

invariance  principle:  no  experiment  can  be  performed  to  detect  any  difference

between  a  linearly-accelerated  frame  of  reference  and  the  effect  of  a  local

gravitational  field.  This  local  symmetry  principle  was  not  accounted  for  by

Newtonian 

theory,  and  motivated  Einstein 

to  discover  a  new  set  of

gravitational  field  equations  [46].  

Is  socio-economic  behavior  (mathematically-)lawful?

Is it  reasonable,  even  in  principle,  to  expect that  mathematical  laws  of  socio-

economic  or  other  mathematical 

laws  of  human  behavior  exist  in  any

humanly-discernable  form?  Is it  possible  abstractly to  reduce  some  aspects  of

human  behavior  to  a  set  of  universal  formulae,  or  even  to  a  finite  set  of  more

or less  invariant  rules?  Many  economists  and  system  theorists  [32,47,48], and

even  some  sociologists  [49,50],  assume  that  this  is  possible.

By  disregarding  Galileo's  historic  and  fruitful  severing  of  the  abstract study of

inanimate  motion  from  imprecise  Aristotelian  ideas  of  "motion" 

like  youths

alearning,  acorns  asprouting  [2], and  markets  emerging,  many  mathematical

economists  have  attempted  to  describe  the  irregularities  of  individual  and

collective  human  nature  as if  the  price  movements  of  a  commodity,  which

are  determined  by human  decisions  and  man-made  political  and  economic

rules,  would  define  mathematical  variables  and  abstract universal  equations

of  motion  analogous  to  ballistics  and  astronomy  (deterministic  models),  or

analogous  to  a  drunken  professor  (stochastic  models).

2 8

Mathematical  economists  often  speak  of  the  economy 

[48],  which 

is

determined  by  human  behavior  and  man-made  rules  (and  also  in  part by the

weather, geology, and other limiting physical factors), as if the  economy  could

be studied  mathematically  as an  abstract dynamical  system  like  the  weather.

In  the  latter  case  the  equations  of  motion  are  known  but  cannot  be  solved

approximately  over 

large  space-time  regions  by  using 

floating  point

arithmetic  on  a computer  without  the  introduction  of  uncontrollable  errors.

However,  for  specified  boundary  and  initial  conditions 

the  weather 

is

determined  by  the  mathematical  equivalent  of  many  brainless  interacting

bodies  that  can  not  use  intelligience  to  choose  whether  or  not  to  obey  the

deterministic  differential  equations  whose  rigid  mathematical  rule  they  are

condemned  forever  to  follow.  Chaos  and  complexity  do  not  install  either

randomness, 

freedom  of  choice,  or  arbitrariness 

in 

the  solutions  of

deterministic  dynamical  equations  [21].  The  absence  of  arbitrariness,  or

freedom  of  choice,  is  part  of  the  key  to  understanding  why  mathematics

works  in  physics  but  not  in  the  socio-economic  fields.  Comparing  the  weather

with  socio-economic  behavior 

is  not  a  scientifically-sound 

theoretical

analogy.

Contrary to certain  expectations  [51]  and  to  recent  extraordinary  claims  [52],

there is  no  evidence  to  suggest that  abstract dynamical  systems  theory  can  be

used  either  to  explain  or  understand  socio-economic  behavior.  Billiard  balls

and  gravitating  bodies  have  no  choice  but  to  follow  mathematical  trajectories

that  are 

laid  out  deterministically, 

beyond 

the  possibility 

of  human

convention, 

invention, 

or  intervention, 

by Newton's  laws  of  motion.  The

law  of  probability  of  a  Brownian  particle  also  evolves  deterministically

2 9

according  to  the  diffusion  equation  beyond 

the  possibility 

of  human

convention, 

invention,  or 

intervention. 

In  stark  contrast,  a brain  that  directs

the  movements  of  a  body  continually  makes  willful  and  arbitrary decisions  at

arbitrary  times  that  cause  it  to  deviate  from  and  eventually  contradict  any

mathematical 

trajectory 

(deterministic  models)  or  evolving 

set  of

probabilities 

(stochastic  models)  assigned  to 

it 

in  advance.  Given  a

hypothetical  set  of  probabilities  for  a  decision  at  one  instant,  there  is  no

algorithm  that  tells  us  how  to  compute  the  probabilities  correctly  for  later

times, excepting at best the trivial case of curve-fitting at very short times,  and

then  only  if  nothing  changes  significantly.  Socio-economic  statistics  can  not

be known in advance of  their  occurrence  because, to  begin  with,  there  are  no

known  socio-economic  laws  of  motion  that  are  correct.

Economists  stress  that  they  study open  systems,  whereas  physics concentrates

on  closed  systems.  This  claim  misses  the  point  completely.  We  can  describe

and  understand 

tornadoes  and  hurricanes  mathematically  because  the

equations  of  thermo-hydrodynamics  apply,  in  spite  of  the  fact that  the  earth's

atmosphere 

is  an  open  dynamical  system.  We  can  not  understand  the

collapse  of  the  Soviet  Union  or  the  financial  crisis  in  Mexico  on  the  basis  of

any  known  set  of  dynamics  equations  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  world

economy  forms  a  closed  financial  system.

Mathematical-lawlessness 

reigns  supreme 

in  the  socio-economic 

fields,

where  nothing  of  any  social  or  economic 

significance 

is 

left  even

approximately  invariant  by  socio-economic  evolution,  including  the  "value"

of  the  Mark.  This  is  the  reason  that  artificial  law  ("law")  must  be  used  by

governments  and  central  banks  in  the  attempt  to  regulate  human  behavior,

3 0

both  individually  and  collectively.  Socio-economically,  everything  that  is

significant  changes  completely  unregulated  in  the  absence  of  police-enforced

artificial  law  (the  Roman  method)    or  strong  community  traditions  (the  tribal

method).

In  the  socio-economic  fields  there  are  no  fundamental  constants  because

nothing is  left  invariant  by  the  time  evolution.  That  nothing  is  left  invariant

is  the  same  as  saying  that  the  system  is  not  describable  by  mathematics:

dynamical  systems,  even  discrete  ones  [52b], have  local  conservation 

laws.

Deterministic  dynamical  systems  obey  n-1  local  conservation 

laws  that

prevent  any  external  constraint  from  being  imposed  on  the  system.  You  can

not "legislate" a change in the dynamics of a system that obeys  a deterministic

law  of  motion.

The  division  of  observable  phenomena  into  machine-like  and  not-machine-

like behavior was made by Descartes [53].  In  the  Cartesian  picture  animals  are

supposed 

to  behave  more 

like  machines, 

like 

robots 

that  respond

mechanically  to  stimuli.  People,  in  contrast  with  robots,  can  reason  and  make

decisions freely, or at  least  arbitrarily.  Even  the  most  illiterate  or  most  stupid

people  can  speak,  can 

invent 

sentences  creatively,  and  can  behave

unpredictably  in  other  ways as  well.  The  most  intelligent  dog,  cat,  or  cow

cannot  invent  intellectual  complexity  that  is  equivalent  to  a  human  language

or  a  capitalist  economy.

We  should  ask:  why  should  any  part  of  nature  behave  mathematically,

simulating  an  automaton?  Why  does  the  mathematics  of  dynamical  systems

theory  accurately  describe  the  motions  studied  in  physics,  but  not  the

3 1

"motions" 

(in  Aristotle's  sense)  studied  in  economics,  political  science,

psychology, and sociology?  This  question  leads  to  Wigner's  discussion  of  the

"unreasonable  effectiveness  of  mathematics" 

in  describing  the  inanimate

aspects  of  nature 

that  physics 

traditionally 

studies,  and 

that 

fields

disconnected  from  physics  have  tried  unsuccessfully  to  imitate  merely  by

postulating 

laws  of  motion  that  do  not  pass  the  test  of  reproducibility  of

measurements.

It  is  necessary  to  realize  that,  in  spite  of  Newton's  scholastic  style  of

presentation  of  his  laws,  which  many  mechanics  text  books  unfortunately

mimic,  physics is  neither  postulatory  nor  axiomatic.  Physics  since  Galileo  is

grounded  in  a  deep  interplay  of  empiricism  and  mathematical  abstraction,

and  the  reason  that  this  mathematical  interplay  is  at  all  possible  is  due  to

certain  invariance  principles  (physics would  be impossible  in  the  absence  of

certain  fundamental  constants  of  nature;  those  constants  reflect  certain

invariance  principles).

Reductionism, invariance principles, and laws of nature

Reductionism 

is  the  arbitrary  division  of  nature  into  laws  of  motion  and

initial  conditions,  plus  "the  environment".  We  must  always  be  able  to  neglect

"the  environment"  to  zeroth  order,  because if  nothing  can  be isolated  then  a

law  of  motion  can  never  be discovered.  For  example  air  resistance  had  to  be

negligible  in  order  that  Galileo  could  discover  the  law  of  inertia  and  the  local

law of gravity.

3 2

The  empirical  discovery  of  mathematical 

laws  of  motion 

that  correctly

describe  nature 

is  impossible 

in  the  absence  of  empirically-significant

invariance  principles,  but  there  are  no  laws  of  nature  that  can  tell  us  the

initial  conditions.  Following  Wigner,  laws  of  motion  themselves  obey  laws

called  invariance  principles,  while  initial  conditions  are  completely  lawless

[54].  Why  must  mathematical 

laws  of  motion 

that  describe  nature  obey

invariance  principles?

"It is  not  necessary  to  look  deeper 

into  the  situation 

to  realize  that  laws  of

nature  could  not  exist  without  principles  of  invariance.  This  is  explained 

in

many  texts  of  elementary  physics  even 

though  only  few  of  the  readers  of

these  texts  have  the  maturity  necessary  to  appreciate  these  explanations.  If  the

correlations  between  events  changed 

from  day  to  day,  and  would  be  different

for  different  points  of  space,  it  would  be  impossible 

to  discover 

them.  Thus

the  invariances  of  the  laws  of  nature  with  respect  to  displacements 

in  space

and  time  are  almost  necessary  prerequisites 

that  it  be  possible  to  discover,  or

even  catalogue,  the  correlations  between  events  which  are  the  laws  of  nature.

                                        E. P. Wigner in     Symmetries        and         Reflections    [54]

Nearly  every  elementary  physics  text  shows  that  the  experiments  that  Wigner

had  in  mind  are  the  parabolic  trajectories  of  apples and  blocks  sliding  down

inclined  planes,  the  two  physical  systems  originally  studied  by Galileo  in  his

empirical  discovery  of  the  local  versions  of  Newton's 

first  two  laws  of

motion.  Those  discoveries  would  have  been  impossible  in  the  absence  of  four

fundamental  invariance  principles.

3 3

Without  translational  and  rotational  invariance  in  space  and  translational

invariance  in  time  (at  least  locally,  on  earth  and  within  our  solar  system),

simple  mathematical 

laws  of  motion 

like  the  Keplerian  planetary  orbits  and

the  Galilean  trajectories  of  apples  could  not  have  been  discovered  in  the  first

place.  The  experiments  that  are  needed  to  discover  the  law  of  inertia  are

precisely  reproducible 

because  absolute  position  and  absolute  time  are

irrelevant  as  initial  conditions,  which  is  the  same  as  saying  that  space  is

homogeneous  and  isotropic  (space is  locally  Euclidean)  and  that  the  flow  of

time  is  uniform.  The  translational  invariance  of  the  law  of  inertia  dp/dt=0

means  that  the  law  of  inertia  can  be  verified  regardless  of  where,  in  a tangent

plane  on  earth,  you  perform  the  required  experiment.  The  law  of  Galilean

invariance  is  inherent  in  the  law  of  inertia.

Socio-economic  phenomena  are  not  invariant  in  any  empirically-discernable

sense.  Socio-economic 

time-development  and  the  corresponding  statistics

depend  upon  absolute  position  and  absolute  time,  which  is  the  same  (for  all

practical  purposes)  as  admitting  that  socio-economic 

"motions"  are  not

reducible  to  a  well-defined  dynamical  system.

Dynamical  laws  of  motion  are  postulated 

in  economics,  but  the  laws  of

physics  are  not  mere  postulates:  mathematical 

laws  of  time-development

come  second,  invariance  principles  come  first.  The  law  of  inertia  had  to  be

discovered  first  (Galileo/Descartes)  before  Newton  could  write  down  his

second  order  differential  equation 

that  generalizes  Galileo's 

two 

local

empirical  laws,  the  law  of  inertia  and  the  local  law  of  gravity.  Described from

the  standpoint  of  invariance  and  symmetry,  the  law  of  inertia 

is  the

foundation  of  all  of  physics: from  it  and  Galileo's  local  law  of  gravity  follow

3 4

two  of  Newton's 

three  laws  of  motion  and  his 

law  of  gravity  as  a

generalization,  when  Kepler's  first  law  and  the  action-reaction  principle  are

used [12]. It is superficial and misleading to imagine that the law of inertia  can

be  "derived"  from  Newton's  second  law  merely  by setting  the  net  force  equal

to  zero.

If absolute  time  and  absolute  position  were  relevant  initial  conditions  then

neither  the  law  of  inertia  nor  the  local  law  of  gravity  would  hold:  identically

prepared  experiments  would  yield  entirely  different  outcomes  in  different

places  and  at  different  times.  In  this  case  there  could  have  been  no  regularities

discovered  by Galileo,  and  no  generalizations  to  universal  laws  of  classical

mechanics  could  have  been  proposed  by  Newton.  Physics would,  in  that  case,

have  remained  Aristotelian  and  consequently  would  have  evolved 

like

economics,  sociology,  psychology,  and  political  science:  the  study  of  a  lot  of

special  cases  with  no  universal 

time-evolution 

laws  that  permit 

the

prediction,  or  at  least  understanding,  of  phenomena  over  more  than  the

short  time  intervals  where  curve-fitting  sometimes  "works",  and  with  no

qualitative  understanding  whatsoever  of  the  phenomena  underlying  the

observed  "motions"  and  their  corresponding  statistics.

System  theorists  commonly  assume  that  the  economy  operates 

like  a

dynamical  system,  the  equivalent  of  an  automaton  that  is  too  simple  to

simulate  any  kind  of  creative  behavior,  including  the  violation  of  politically-

enforced  laws  as  occurred  during  the  collapse  of  the  government  of  the

former  Soviet  Union  and  the  peasant  rebellion  in  Chiapas.  This  is  a  strange

assumption.  Without  human  brains  and  human  agreements  based  upon

language,  "laws"  of  economic  behavior  certainly  could  not  exist.  Dogs,  cows

3 5

and  even  peasants  generally  don't  invent  money-economies.  In  contrast,  the

available  geological  and  astronomical  evidence  indicates  that  Newton's  laws

of  motion  held  locally  in  our  corner  of  the  universe 

long  before  human

languages  emerged  on  earth.

Wigner  considers  that  we  can  not  rule  out  that  "holistic" 

laws  of  nature

(beyond general relativity, for example) might exist, but if so then we  have  no

way 

to  discover 

them.  Reductionism 

can  not 

explain 

everything

mathematically,  but  reductionism 

is  required 

in  order  to  explain 

the

phenomena 

that  can  be  understood  mathematically 

from 

the  human

perspective.  Maybe  an  "oracle"  would  be  required  in  order  to  discern  the

workings  of  a  holistic  law  of  motion.

Summarizing,  universal  laws  that  are  determined  by regularities  of  nature

differ  markedly  from  human-created 

systems  of  merely  conventional

behavior.  The  latter  consist  of  learned,  agreed-on,  and  communally-  or

politically-enforced  behavior,  which  can  always  be  violated  by willful  or  at

least  clever  people.  People  and  groups  who  violate  artificial 

law  are

sometimes  called  either  "progressive"  or  "outlaw",  depending  on  which

social  group  does  the  labeling.  In  Wigner's 

language,  all  socio-economic

initial  conditions  matter  because  of  the  lack  of  invariance,  so  that  it  is

impossible  to  discover  any  underlying  correlations  that  could  be identified  as

mathematical 

laws  of  socio-economic 

"progress" 

(note  that  the  idea  of

progress  is  also  a  "motion"  only  in  the  Aristotelian  rather  than  in  the

Galilean  sense).

3 6

Darwinism and neo-Darwinism [551]

"From  a  physicist's  viewpoint,  though,  biology,  history,  and  economics  can  be

viewed  as  dynamical  systems."

       P. Bak and M. Paczuski in     Complexity,        Contingency,        and        Criticality      [52]

"Reductionism" 

(a better  word  is  "science")  is  criticized  by "holists"  for  not

taking  us  far  enough  in  our  understanding  of  the  world  (see  the  introduction

to ref. [32] and also [56]; see also any attempt by the so-called postmodernists  to

discuss science [57]). Some holists hope  to  be able to  mathematize  Darwinism

in  order  to  go  beyond  physics  and  chemistry  (see  discussions  of  "complex

adaptable systems" [32]), but so far they have  not  been  able use  their  invented

dynamics  models  to  predict  or  explain  anything  that  occurs  in  nature.  Physics

and  astronomy, 

since 

the  divorce 

from  Platonic  mathematics 

and

Aristotlelian 

"holism" 

in  the  seventeenth 

century,  have  a  completely

different  history  (or  "evolution") 

than  "political  economy"  and  most  of

biology.  "Emergence,  selection,  and  adaptation"  are  buzz  words  used  by

Darwin-oriented  holists  (see  ref.  [58] for  an  alternative  form  of  "holism"),

while  postmodernists  like  to  toss  around  the  notion  of  "a  new  paradigm  for

science".  According  to  the  postmodernists,  "chaos"  (which  is  merely  a part of

classical  mechanics  or  chemical  kinetics)  is  an  example  of  "a  new  paradigm".

"Paradigms"  are  very  important  for  philosophers  who  have  not  understood

science  at  the  level  of  Galilean  kinematics,  and  who  can  not  distinguish

science  from  pseudo-seience.  Paradigms  and  "metaphors"  are  also  important

                                    
1    Kelly's  book  "Out  of  control"  is  a  bible  of  "paradigms"  of  postmodernist
"holistic" 

thought.

3 7

for  people  who  know  that  a  particular  model  doesn't  represent  what  the

researcher purports to study, but wants to claim that it does anyway.

The  Aristotelian  dream  of  a holistic  approach  to  physics, biology, economics,

history,  and  other  phenomena  was  revived  by Bertanffly  in  1968  [59] under

the  heading  of  system  theory.  System  theory  proposes  to  use  mathematics  to

describe  the  time  evolution  of  "the  whole",  like  a  living  organism  or  a

money-economy,  but  generally  in  the  absence  of  adequate  information  about

the  local  correlations  of  the  connected  links  that  determine  the  behavior  of

the  whole.  

I  call  attempts  to  quantify  the  Aristotelian  style  of  thought  "reductionist

holism", 

or 

"holistic 

reductionism" 

because  any  mathematization

whatsoever  is  an  attempt  at  reductionism 

[42].  Quantification  necessarily

ignores  all  nonquantifiable  qualities,  and  there  are  plenty  of  qualitative  and

quantitative  considerations  to  ignore  if  we  want  to  restrict  our  considerations

to  a  definite  mathematical  model.  Some  physicists  tend  to  believe  that

physics,  which  is  successful  reductionism  (often  with  several-to-high  decimal

accuracy  in  agreement  between  theory  and  reproducible  observations),

provides  the  basis  for  understanding  everything 

in  nature,  but  only  in

principle [60].

There is no effective way to "reduce" the study of DNA  to  the  study of  quarks

but this is not a failure  of  reductionism:  both  quarks  and  DNA  are  accounted

for  by  quantum  mechanics  at  vastly  different  length  scales. In  order  to  adhere

to  the  illusion  that  reductionism  might  also  be  able  account  for  biological  and

societal  phenomena  beyond DNA  in  principle,  physicists  must  leave  out  of

3 8

consideration  everything  that  hasn't  been  accounted  for  by  physics,  which

includes  many  practical  problems  that  ordinary  people  face  in  everyday  life.

When  sociologists  [49,50]  (who,  unlike  physicists,  claim  to  interest  themselves

in  the  doings  of  ordinary  people)  try  to  follow  suit  but  merely  postulate  or

talk  about  dynamics  "paradigms"  in  the  absence  of  empirically-established

invariance  principles,  then  they  reduce 

their  considerations  of  society  to

groundless  mathematical  models,  to  artificial  simulations  of  life  that  have

nothing  to  do  with  any  important  quality  of  life.

Every  computer  simulation  of  a  society  or  an  economy  is  merely  the  creation

of  an  abstract  artificial  and  brainless  society  or  an  artificial  and  brainless

economy.  Mathematical  simulations  cannot  adequately describe real  societies

and 

real 

economies 

although, 

through 

adequate  politico-financial

enforcement,  which  is  truly  a  form  of  selection,  we  can  be  constrained  to

simulate  some  economist's  simulation  of  society  and  economics.  A  money

economy  represents  a  selection  based upon  material  resources  and  human

needs,  desires,  and  illusions.  The  idealized  free  market  system  described  by

Adam  Smith's  "invisible  hand"  represents  a vague  notion  of  autonomy,  or

self-regulation,  inspired  in  part by Calvinism  and  in  part by Watt's  flywheel

governor,  but  is  in  no  scientific  sense  a  "natural"  selection.

Darwin's  ideas  of  "natural  selection,  fitness,  and  adaptation"  may  appear  to

make  sense  in  both  sports  and  the  socio-economic  context  of  daily  life  but

they  are  not  scientifically-defined  mathematical  terms.  That  they  remind  us

of  the  description  of  an  organized  market  economy  is  not  accidental:  Darwin

was  strongly  influenced  during  the  cruise  of  the  Beagle  by his  second  reading

of  Malthus 

[61],  who  was  both  a  protestant  preacher  and  a  worldly

3 9

philosopher.  Terms  like  "selection"  and  "adaptation"  are  reminiscent  of

Adam  Smith's  vague  "invisible  hand"  rather  than  of  scientifically  well-

defined processes like the  dissociation  and  recombination  of  DNA  molecules

described  by  quantum  mechanics  or  chemical  kinetics.

In  an  attempt  to  model  the  origin  of  life,  chemical  kinetic  equations  have

been  used  to  try either  to  discover  or  to  invent  Darwinism  at  the  molecular

level  [35]  but  the  use  of  that  terminology  seems  either  superfluous  or  forced:  a

deterministic  system  of  ordinary  differential  equations,  whether  chemical

kinetic or not, can be described by the  relatively  precise,  standard  terminology

of  dynamical  systems  theory  (stability,  attractors,  etc.). A  stochastic  system  of

chemical  kinetic  equations  can  be  described  by purely  dynamic  terminology

combined  with  additional  terms  like  "most  probable  distribution"  and

"fluctuations".  There 

is  far  less  reason  to  believe  that  Darwin's  socio-

economic  terminology  applies  at  the  macromolecular 

level  than  there  was,

before 1925, to believe that the language of the Bohr  model  correctly  described

the  motions  of  electrons  relative  to  nuclei  in  hydrogen  and  helium  atoms.

There  are  two  main  sources  of  Darwin's  vague  notion  of  "natural  selection".

The  social-Darwinist  origin  of  the  phrase 

is  Malthus's 

socio-economic

doctrine,  which  derives  from  Calvinism  [61] and  can  be  traced  through  the

late  medieval  revival  of  puritanism  by Luther,  Calvin,  and  Zwingli  back  to

the  neo-Platonist  St.  Augustine  [6],  who  bequeathed  to  the  west the  notion  of

selection  called  "predestination". 

In  "predestination"  humans  are  divided

completely  arbitrarily  into  "the  elect"  and  "the  damned"  (according  to  Luther,

man  is  only  an  ass  ridden  by  both  God  and  the  devil,  with  no  choice

whatsoever  as  to  his  ultimate 

fate  [62]).    Here,  "selection" 

is  not  a

4 0

mathematical  idea  that  describes the  time-evolution  of  a  dynamical  system.

The  second  and  only  scientific  motivation 

for  Darwin's  vague  idea  of

"natural 

selection"  came  from  plant  and  animal  breeding,  which  he

mislabeled  as "artificial  selection."  Plant  and  animal  breeding  constitute  the

only  true  case  of  selection  because  they  proceed  via  manipulating  certain

initial  conditions  in  order  to  try  to  achieve  a  desired  result.

Darwinists,  true  to  their  Aristotelian  heritage,  are  condemned 

to  argue

endlessly  to  try  to  find  out  what  their  terminology  means  because  that

terminology  is,  from  a  scientific  standpoint  (empiric  or  theoretic),  completely

undefined.

The  scientific  foundation  of  organic  evolution  was  established  in  Darwin's

time by Mendel, who chose to become an  Augustinian  monk  out  of  financial

necessity  [39] and  was  trained  more  in  mathematics  and  physics  than  in

biology.  In contrast with Luther and Calvin,  Mendel  was not  Augustinian  in

education  and  outlook:  he  was even  a lecturer  in  experimental  physics for  a

while,  and  approached  the  problem  of  heredity  via  isolation  of  cause  and

effect in the spirit of a physicist (or a good auto mechanic2 ).

Darwin  and  his  contemporaries, 

in  contrast,  accepted  a  holistic 

(or

"integrated")  picture  of  heredity  that  made  the  understanding  of  genetics

impossible  [64]. It  was  only  after  Mendel's  reductionist  discovery  that  some

biologists  began  to  dislodge  themselves 

from  the  teleological  notion  of

organic  evolution  as progress toward  a  goal  predetermined  by a  selector  (or
                                    
2  Personally,  I  would  not  entrust  my  auto  to  a  self-proclaimed  "holist"  for
trouble-shooting  prior  to  necessary  repairs.  See  also  Ginsburg  [63b]  for  a
nonmathematical  alternative  to  holism  in  the  social  sciences.

4 1

read by an  "oracle"  capable of  "infinite  knowledge"  of  both  future  and  past).

By ignoring  "the  whole"  in  favor  of  the  most  important  parts inferred  from

performing  simple,  controlled  experiments,  Mendel  found  the  key  that

divorced  the  study  of  heredity  from  unsystematic 

tinkering  and  socio-

economic  doctrine  and  changed  it  into  a  precise  mathematical  science  [64b].

Today, Darwinist  concepts  play a part in  genetics  research  that  is  comparable

to the role played by "waves" in high energy physics.  "Wave-particle  duality",

rather  than  the  Dirac-Feynman  interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics,  is  still

taught  in  physics and  chemistry  courses,  but you  may  scour  the  literature  to

no  avail  in  an  attempt  to  find  reference  to  this  cumbersome  and  unnecessary

philosophic  principle  in  particle  physics  research  papers.

  

Human  history  is  narrative.  This  includes  the  statistics  of  socio-economic

phenomena,  which  constitute  only  one  very  small  part  of  the  entire

narrative,  a  quantitative  part.  There 

is  no  reason 

to  expect  that  the

uncontrolled  approximations  of  system  theory  modelling  can  tell  us  as  much,

quantitatively  or  qualitatively,  about  social  or 

individual  behavioral

phenomena  as  we  can  learn  from  experience  and  by  reading  history  and

novels  (see  [65]  for  an  uncontrolled  approximation  to  the  description  of  some

of the consequences of  the  unrestricted  mechanization).  The  reason  why  it  is

illusory  to  expect to  discover  objective  laws  of  human  history,  including  the

history  ("time-evolution") 

of  socio-economic  development,  was  explained

prosaically in 1952:

"There  can  be  no  'pure  history'---history-in-itself, 

recorded 

from  nobody's

point  of  view, 

for  nobody's  sake.  The  most  objective  history  conceivable 

is

still  a  selection  and  an  interpretation,  necessarily  governed  by  some  special

4 2

interests  and  based  on  some  particular  beliefs.  It can  be  more  nearly  objective

if  those  interests  and  beliefs  are  explicit,  out  in  the  open,  where 

they  can  be

freely  examined 

and  criticized. 

  Historians  can  more  nearly  approach 

the

detachment 

of  the  physicist  when 

they  realize  that  the  historical 

'reality'  is

symbolic,  not  physical,  and  that  they  are  giving  as  well  as  finding  meanings.

The  important  meanings  of  history  are  not  simply  there,  lined  up,  waiting  to

be  discovered."                                 

                                                            Herbert J. Muller, in     The         Uses        of       the        Past    [65]

One dimensional life                                                           

"The  nineteenth 

century,  in  western  Europe  and  North  America, 

saw  the

beginning  of  a  process, 

today  being  completed 

by  corporate 

capitalism, 

by

which  every 

tradition  which  has  previously  mediated 

between  man  and

nature  was  broken."

                                                                     John Berger, in      About        Looking     [66]

John  Berger,  in  a  very  beautiful  essay  introducing  the  latest  edition  of      Pig

    Earth     [67], emphasizes  what  he  calls  the  peasants'  view  of  "circular  time"  in

contrast  with  the  abstract  idea  of  linear  time  used  in  Newtonian  mechanics.  A

related  viewpoint  was  developed  earlier  by the  Spengler  [68], who  was one  is

three  historians  who  attempted  to  construct  evidence  for  a  grand  scheme

according  to  which  human  "history"  evolves.

Following  the  anti-Newtonian  Goethe,  Spengler  imagined  human  societies

as  "organisms"  moving  toward  a  "destiny".  "Destiny"  represents  a  vague  idea

of  organic  determinism 

that  Goethe  assumed 

to  be  in  conflict  with

4 3

mechanistic  time-evolution  that  proceeds  via  local  cause  and  effect.  "Destiny"

was  imagined  to  be  impossible  to  describe  via  mathematical 

ideas,  via

Newtonian-style  mechanism.  In  trying  to  make  a distinction  between  global

"destiny"  and  local  cause  and  effect  Spengler  was  not  aware  of  the  idea  of

attractors  in  dynamical  systems  theory,  whereby  time  evolution  mimics

"destiny"  but proceeds  purely  mechanically 

according 

local  cause  and  effect.

The  Lie-Klein 

idea  of 

invariance 

of  geometry  under 

coordinate

transformations, 

the 

forerunner  of  Nöther's 

theorem  on  symmetry,

invariance,  and  conservation  laws  in  physics, may  have  inspired  Spengler's

attempt  to  compare  entirely  different  cultures,  widely separated  in  time  and

space,  as  they  evolved  toward  "destinies"  that  he  identified  as  fully-developed

civilizations.

Spengler  characterized  western  (European/North  American)  "civilization"

in  the  following  way: the  entire  countryside  is  dominated,  Roman-style,  by a

few  extremely  overpopulated  cities  called  megalopolises.  Traditional  cultures,

derived  from  man's  historic  experience  of  wresting  survival  directly  from

nature,  have  been  replaced  by  the  abstract  driving  force  of  late  civilization,  the

spirit  of  money-making.  Spengler  identified  the  transition  from  early  Greek

culture  to  late  Roman  civilization  as  an  earlier  example  of  the  nearly

"universal"  evolution  from  local  tribal  culture  to  money-driven  civilization.

In  modern 

and  postmodern 

civilization, 

in  a  single  uncontrolled

approximation,  all  traditions  and  ideas  that  interfere  with  "progress"  defined

as large-scale  and  efficient  economic  development  are  rejected  as  unrealistic

or  irrelevant  in  the  face  of  a  one-dimensional  quantitative  position  whose

units may be dollars or marks.  The  dialogue  paraphrased  below  can  be found

4 4

on  pg. 16  the  book      Complexity,          Metaphors,          Models,        and         Reality      [32]  about

complex adaptable systems in biology, economics, and  other  fields.  A,  A',  and

A'',  who  are  paraphrased,  are  theoretical  physicists.

A:  Why  try  to  define  measures  of  complexity?  A  measure  of  complexity  is  just

a number  and  that  doesn't  tell  you  anything  about  the  system.  Assume  that

there's  a particular  state  that  you  want  to  create,  a slightly  better  state  of  the

economy,  for  example.  Suppose  that  you  want  to  know  how  complicated  that

problem  is  to  solve  on  a  computer,  and  that  you're  able  to  characterize

complexity.  One  of  the  proposals  of  A'  for  defining  the  complexity  of  a

problem  is  'what's  the  minimum  amount  of  money  you'd  need  in  order  to

solve  it?'

A'':  The  cost  is  proportional  to  computer  time.

A:  Then  maybe  the  unit  of  complexity  should  be  "money".  If  you're  able  to

formalize  the  difficulty  of  solving  the  problem  of  making  the  economy

slightly better, and you find out that you  can  measure  its  complexity  in  terms

of  dollars  or  yen,  then  that  kind  of  measure  would  be  extremely  useful.

The  prediction  of  a  computable  chaotic  trajectory  is  limited,  decimal  by

decimal or bit by bit, by computation  time,  but there  are  also  integrable  many

body problems that  are  not  complex  but also  require  large  amounts  of  marks

or  dollars.  A''  also  asserts  in  the  same  book      Complexity      (pg.  11)  that  low

dimensional  chaos  is  "not  complex    in  a  true  sense:  ...  the  number  bits

required  for  specification  of  where  you  are  is  highly  limited."  In  part,  this

assertion  is  false:  note  that  the  binary  specification  of  a single  state  xn in  the

4 5

logistic map f(x) = 4x(1-x) requires precisely N(n) = 2n(No - 2) + 2 bits, where No
is  the  number  of  bits in  any  simple  initial  condition  xo = .e 1...e No000... . If the
string  representing  xn is arbitrarily truncated to m£ N(n) bits, then  after  on  the
order of m iterations the first bit (and all other bits) in xn', where n' »
 n + m, is
completely  wrong  [7]. Multiplication  of  two  finite  binary  strings  of  arbitrary

length  cannot  be  carried  out  on  any  fixed-state  machine 

[5],  and 

if

multiplication 

is  done  incorrectly  at  any  stage  then  after  only  a  few  more

iterations  the  bits  in  xn  cannot  be  known  even  to  one-bit  accuracy.  I  expect  that

the  complexity  of  a dynamical  system,  like  fractal  dimensions  and  Liapunov

exponents, can not be described by a single number.

"Paradise...was..the 

invention 

of  a  relatively 

leisured 

class.  ...  Work 

is  the

condition 

for  equality. 

... bourgeois  and  Marxist  ideals  of  equality  presume  a

world  of  plenty, 

they  demand 

equal  rights  before  a  cornucopia 

...  to  be

constructed  by  science  and  the  advancement 

of  knowledge. 

...  The  peasant

ideal  of  equality  recognizes 

a  world  of  scarcity  ...  mutual 

fraternal  aid  in

struggling  against  this  scarcity  and  a  just  sharing  of  what  the  world  produces.

Closely  connected  with  the  peasant's  recognition,  as  a  survivor,  of  scarcity  is

his  recognition  of  man's  relative 

ignorance.  He  may  admire  knowledge 

and

the  fruits  of  knowledge  but  he  never  supposes  that  the  advance  of  knowledge

reduces  the  extent  of  the  unknown. 

... Nothing 

in  his  experience 

encourages

him  to  believe 

in  final  causes 

...  .  The  unknown 

can  only  be  eliminated

within  the  limits  of  a  laboratory  experiment.  Those 

limits  seem  to  him  to  be

naive.

                                                                         John Berger, in     Pig        Earth     [67]

Danksagung

4 6

Dieser Aufsatz  basiert  teilweise  auf  meinem  Eröffnungsvortrag  beim  Winter

seminar  März  1996  auf  dem  Zeinisjoch.  Mein  Dank  gilt  Professor  Dr.  Peter

Plath,  der  mich  zu  diesem  Vortrag  eingeladen  hat  und  auch  zu  dieser

schriftlichen  Form  ermunterte,  sowie  Familie  Lorenz  für  ihre  liebenswürdige

Bewirtung  auf  dem  Zeinisjoch.  Obgleich  der  größte  Teil  des  Seminars  auf

Deutsch  abgehalten  wurde,  entschied  ich  mich  doch,  meinen  Vortrag  auf

Englisch  zu  halten.  Mein  Deutsch  hätte  doch  nicht  ausgereicht,  komplizierten

Gedankengänge  präzise  darzustellen  wiederzugeben.

References

1. J. L. Casti (1990)      Searching       for        Certainty,          What        Scientists       can        know        about

   the        Future      (Wm.  Morrow  &  Co.,  New  York).

2.  R.  S.  Westfall  (1980)       Never        at         Rest,         A        Biography        of        Isaac          Newton    ,  ch.  1

(Cambridge  Univ.  Pr.,  Cambridge).

3. P. A. Samuelson, (1976)     Economics     (McGraw-Hill,  New  York).

4. R.  P. Feynman  (1986)      Surely        You're       Joking          Mr.        Feynman    ,  (Bantom,  New

York) 308-17.

5. J. L. Casti (1992)      Reality       rules:        picturing       the         world       in          mathematics   ,  in  two

volumes  (Wiley,  New  York).

6. Koestler, A. (1959)      The        Sleepwalkers     (Macmillan,  New  York).

7. Hopkin, D., and Moss, B. (1976)       Automata      (Elsevier  North-Holland).

8.  M.  Tabor  et  al  (1991)  in        What        is        Integrability?    ,  ed.  by  V.  E.  Zakharov

(Springer-Verlag,  Berlin).

9. McCauley, J. L. (subm. 5/1996)      Nonintegrability,       chaos,        and       complexity.   

4 7

10.  A.  Wintner 

(1941)      The          Analytical         Foundations         of         Celestial           Mechanics   

(Princeton,  Princeton)  sect.  194-202  &  227-240.

11.  V.  I.  Arnol'd,  V.  V.  Kozlov,    and  A.  I.  Neishtadt  (1993)        Mathematical

     Aspects        of        Classical        and        Celestial          Mechanics,    in       Dynamical        Systems       III   , ed. by

V.I.  Arnold  (Springer-Verlag  ,  Heidelberg).

12. 

J.L.  McCauley 

(forthcoming 

in  1996) 

    Classical            Mechanics:          flows,

   transformations,        integrability,        and       chaos    (Cambridge Univ. Pr., Cambridge).

13.  V.I.  Arnol'd 

(1981) 

     
           Ordinary           Differential          Equations     (M.I.T.  Press,

Cambridge, Mass.).

14. E. Lorenz (1963) J. Atm. Sc.     20     130.

15. H. Poincaré  (1993)      New          Methods        of        Celestial          Mechanics    (AIP,  Woodbury,

NY).

16. L. P. Eisenhart (1961)     Continuous          Groups        of        Transformations     (Dover,  New

York).

17. S.A. Burns and J.I. Palmore (1989) Physica      D37    , 83.

18.  P.J.  Olver  (1993)         Applications         of         Lie          Groups        to          Differential         Equations   

(Springer-Verlag,  New  York)  30.

19.  J.  Palmore  (1995)  private  conversation.

20. A. Turing (1937) Proc. Lon. Math. Soc. (2)     42    , 230.

21.  J.L.  McCauley  (1993)      Chaos,          Dynamics,         and         Fractals:         an          algorithmic

    approach         to         deterministic 

       chaos     (Cambridge  Nonlinear  Science  Series  2,

Cambridge).

22. M. J. Feigenbaum (1988) J. Stat. Phys.     52    , 527.

23. P. Cvitanovic, G. Gunaratne, and I. Procaccia 1503 Phys. Rev. A    38      (1988).

4 8

24.  G.  H.  Gunaratne  (1990)  in         Universality         beyond        the         onset         of        chaos   ,  in

    Chaos:         Soviet         and          American         Perspectives         on          Nonlinear          Science    ,  ed.  D.

Campbell  (AIP,  New  York).

25. G. Grinstein  (1995)  in      Scale       Invariance,       Interfaces,        and         Non-Equilibrium

     Dynamics   , ed. A. Mckane et al (Plenum, New York).

26.  J.  Krug  (1994)  in        Modern         Quantum        Field        Theory       II   ,  ed.  S.  R.  Das  et  al

(World,  Singapore).

27. E. Fredkin and T. Toffoli (1982) Int. J. Theor. Phys.     21     219.

27b. C. Bennett (1982) Int. J. Theor. Phys.     21     905.

28. C. Moore  (1990) Phys. Rev. Lett.     64     2354.

29.  S. Omohundro (1984) Physica     10D       128.

30. M. R. Garey and D.S. Johnson (1979)     Computers        and       Intr       actability:         A         Guide

   to       the        Theory        of         NP-Completeness     (Freeman,  San  Francisco).

31. C. Bennett (1986) Found. Phys.     16     585.

31b. S. Lloyd and H. Pagels (1988) Annals of Phys.     188    , 186.

32.  G.  A.  Cowan,  D.  Pines,  and  D.  Meltzer,  editiors  (1994)      Complexity,

      Metaphors,          Models,        and         Reality      (Addison-Wesley,  Reading).

33. J. von  Neumann  (1966)     Theory        of        Self-Reproducing         Automata      (Univ.  of

Ill., Urbana) pp. 47, 48.

34. M.  Eigen  und  R.  Winkler-Oswatitsch  (1987)     Stufen        zum        Leben,    (R.  Piper,

München).

35.  B.  -O.  Küppers  (1985)      The           Molecular        theory         of         Evolution      (Springer,

Heidelberg).

36. R.J. Lipton (1995) Science     268     542.

37. P. Constantin, C. Foias, O. P.  Manley,  and  R.  Temam  (1985) J. Fluid  Mech.

    150     427.

38. C. Foias, G. R. Sell, and R. Temam (1988) J. Diff. Eqns.     73     309.

4 9

39. P. Constantin,  C. Foias,  B.  Nicolaenko,  and  R.  Teman  (1980)     Integral        and

   Inertial           Manifolds        for         dissipative         Partial          Differential         Equations     (Springer-

Verlag,  New  York).

40. H. Friedrich (Apr. 1992) Physics World 32-36.

41. J. L. Casti (1995) Complexity     1    , 12.

42.  J.  L.  McCauley  (1996)      Simulations,         complexity,         and         laws          of          nature     

(refereed  twice  and  accepted  by editor  John  Casti  for  the  Santa  Fe  Institute

journal  "Complexity",  on  2/9/96 and  then  much  later  rejected  on  5/4/96

because  of  "hostile"  and  "unprintable"  reactions  by  four  "commentators").

43. J. L. McCauley (1991) in      Spontaneous         Formation         of        Space-Time        Structures

    and        Criticality    ,  ed.  D.  Sherrington  and  T.  Riste  (Kluwer,  Dordrecht).

44. A.  Chhabra,  R.  V.   Jensen,  and  K.  R.  Sreenivasan  (1989)  Phys.  Rev.  A    40    ,

4593.

45. E. E.  Peters  (1991)      Chaos        and         Order       in       the        Capital          Markets     (Wiley,  New

York).

46.  A.  Einstein  (1953)      The           Meaning         of          Relativity    ,  Princeton  Univ.  Pr.,

Princeton.

47. J. L. Casti and  A.  Karlqvist  (1991)     Beyond        Belief:         Randomness,         Prediction,

    and        Explanation       in        Science     (CRC Press, Boca Raton).

48. P. W. Anderson, K. J. Arrow,  and  D. Pines,  eds. (1988)     The        Economy        as        an

    Evolving        Complex        System        (Addison-Wesley,  Redwood  City).

49. R. L. Ackoff (1974)      Redisigning       the        Future      (Wiley-Interscience,  New  York).

50.  R.  Collins  (1988)      Theoretical         Sociology      (Harcourt,  Brace,  Janovich,  San

Diego).

5 0

51. D. Ruelle (July, 1994) Physics Today, pp. 24-30.

52. P. Bak  and  M.  Paczuski    (1995)      Complexity,        Contingency,        and        Criticality    ,

subm. to Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci..

52b. J. Palmore (1995) Chaos, Solitons, and Fractals     5     1397.

53. N.  Chomsky  (1968)      Language        and          Mind    ,  Harcourt  Brace  Janovich  (New

York).

54.  E.  P.  Wigner  (1967)      Symmetries         and          Reflections     (Univ. 

Indiana  Pr.,

Bloomington).

55. K. Kelly (1994)       Out        of        Control     (Addison-Wesley,  Reading)  ch.  22.

56. H. Morowitz (1995) Complexity     1      4.

57.  J.- F. Lyotard (1993)     The        Postmodern        Condition:         A         Report        on         Knowledge    ,

trans.  from 

fr.  by  G.  Bennington  and  B.  Massumi 

(Univ.  of  Minn.,

Minneapolis).

58. P. Bak (1994)     Self-Organized        Criticality:         A         Holistic         View        of         Nature     in ref.  

59. L. von Bertalanffy (1968)      General        Systems        Theory      (G.  Braziller,  New  York).

60.  S.  Weinberg  (10/5/1995)       Reductionism           Redux    ,  New  York  Review  of

Books, pp. 39-42.

61. R. M. Young (1985)      Darwin's          Metaphor     (Cambridge Univ. Pr., Cambridge).

62.  H.  A.  Oberman  (1982)        Mensch        zwischen         Gott        und        Teufel     (Severin  und

Seidler  Ver.,  Berlin).

63.  R.  Olby  (1985)         Origins         of           Mendelism      ,  2nd  Ed.  (Univ.  of  Chicago  Pr.,

Chicago).

63b. C. Ginsburg  (1989)     Clues,          Myths,        and       the         Historical          Method     transl.  from

Italian    (Johns  Hopkins  Pr.,  Baltimore)  pp.  96-125.

64. P. J. Bowler (1989)     The          Mendelian         Revolution      (Johns  Hopkins,  Baltimore).

64b.     The         Human         Genome        Project    (1992) Los Alamos Science     20    .

65. K. Vonnegut (1952)     Player        Piano      (Avon  Books,  New  York).

5 1

66. H. J. Muller (1952)     The         Uses        of       the        Past    (Oxford Univ. Pr., New York).

66. J. Berger (1991)      About        Looking      (Vintage Pr., New York).

67. J. Berger (1992)     Pig        Earth      (Vintage Pr., New York).

68.  O.  Spengler 

(1922) 

     Untergang          des           Abendlandes    

  (C.  H.  Bech'sche

Verlagsbuchhandlung,  München).

5 2

Figure Captions

1. Samuelson's  question:  Is it  a  bird  or  an  antelope?  Answer:  neither,  it's  a

continuous  line  between  two  points  plus  a  closed  curve  that,  unlike  both

birds and  antelopes,  is  topologically  equivalent  to  a straight  line  plus  a circle

(from  Samuelson  [3]).

2. Successive  maxima  zn of  a numerically-computed  time  series  x3(t)  for  the

Lorenz  model  are  plotted  against  each  other  (from  McCauley  [21]).  The

drawing  of  a  single  continuous  curve  through  all  of  these  points  would

violate  the  time-reversibility.

3. Assignment  of  the  symbols  L and  R  for  a unimodal  map  (from  McCauley

[21]).

4.  The  complete  binary  tree  defines  the  topologic  universality  class  of  the

binary  tent  map,  and  all  unimodal  maps  of  the  unit  interval  that  peak  at  or

above  unity  and  contract  intervals  exponentially  fast  in  backward  iteration

(from McCauley [21]).

5. An n-bit sliding window (shown for n = 1, 2, and 3) is used  to  read a section

of  a  binary  symbol  sequence  in  order  to  discover  the  corresponding  orbital

statistics, described by histograms with 2n bins (from McCauley [21]).

5 3

