STATISTICAL MECHANICS OF NEOCORTICAL INTERACTIONS:

REACTION TIME CORRELATES OF THE g FA CTOR

Lester Ingber

Lester Ingber Research

PO Box 06440

Wacker Dr PO Sears Tower

Chicago, IL 60606

and

DRW Inv estments LLC

311 S Wacker Dr Ste 900

Chicago, IL 60606

ingber@ingber.com, ingber@alumni.caltech.edu

http://www.ingber.com/

Psycholoquy Commentary on

The g Factor: The Science of Mental Ability

by Arthur Jensen

ABSTRACT: A statistical  mechanics  of  neuronal  interactions  (SMNI)  is  explored  as  providing

some substance to a physiological basis of the g factor. Some speciﬁc elements of SMNI, previously used

to develop a theory of short-term memory (STM) and a model of electroencephalography (EEG) are key

to providing this basis. Speciﬁcally, Hick’s Law, an observed linear relationship between reaction time

(RT) and the information storage of STM, in turn correlated to a RT-g relationship, is derived.

KEYWORDS: short term memory; nonlinear; statistical

0
0
0
2

 

n
a
J
 

3
2

 
 
 

9
4
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Basis for the g factor 

- 2 -  

Lester Ingber

1.  Introduction

1.1.  Context of Review

My speciﬁc interest in taking on this review of “The g Factor” by Arthur Jensen (AJ) is to see if

some  anatomical  and/or  physiological  processes  at  the  columnar  level of neuronal  interactions  can

account for the g factor.

From circa 1978 through the present, a series of papers on the statistical mechanics of neocortical

interactions (SMNI) has been developed to model columns and regions of neocortex, spanning mm to cm

of  tissue. Most  of  these  papers  have  dealt  explicitly  with  calculating  properties  of  short-term  memory

(STM) and scalp EEG in order to test the basic formulation of this approach. SMNI derives aggregate

behavior of experimentally observed columns of neurons from statistical electrical-chemical properties of

synaptic  interactions. While  not  useful  to  yield  insights  at  the  single  neuron  level,  SMNI  has

demonstrated 

its  capability 

in  describing 

large-scale  properties  of  short-term  memory  and

electroencephalographic  (EEG)  systematics  (Ingber, 1982;  Ingber, 1983;  Ingber, 1984;  Ingber, 1991;

Ingber, 1994; Ingber, 1995a; Ingber & Nunez, 1995; Ingber, 1996a; Ingber, 1997).

1.2.  Errors In Simple Statistical Approaches

I must assume that AJ faced very difﬁcult problems in choosing just how much technical details to

give in his broad text, e.g., discussing the extent of expert statistical analyses that have been brought to

bear upon the g factor. Howev er, I do see reason to criticize some general features of the simple statistical

algorithms presented, especially those that overlap with my own mathematical and physics expertise.

The simple approach to factor analysis initiated on page 23,

X = t + e,

(1)

where e is the residual “noise” of ﬁtting the variable X to the independent variable t, has some serious

ﬂaws not addressed by additional material presented thereafter. For example, in this context, I ﬁnd the

arguments in the long footnote 16 on pages 101-103 unconvincing, but I agree with its conclusion:

But  the  question  is  mainly  of  scientiﬁc  interest,  and  a  really  satisfactory  answer  ...  will

become possible only as part and parcel of a comprehensive theory of the nature of g. ... The

distribution  of  obtained  measurements  should  conform  to  the  characteristics  of  the

distribution dictated by theoretical considerations.

I think  it  clear  that  any such  “theoretical  considerations”  must  themselves  be  well  tested  against

Basis for the g factor 

- 3 -  

Lester Ingber

experimental evidence at each spatial-temporal scale purported to be modeled.

It must be understood that there is a quite explicit model being assumed here of the real world —

that of a simple normal Gaussian process. The real issue in many physical/biological systems is that most

often the real multivariable world is much more aptly described by something like

X = t X (X, Y ) + s X (X, Y ) eX

Y = tY (X, Y ) + sY (X, Y ) eY .

(2.a)

(2.b)

When the t’s and s’s are constants, then simple statistics can determine their values and cross-correlations

between the s’s.

Simple  statistical  methods  can  even do OK if

the t’s  are  relatively  simple  quasi-linear

parameterized  functions. Such  simple  methods  fail  quite  miserably  if  the t’s  are  highly  nonlinear

functions,  especially  if  care  is  not  taken  to  employ sophisticated  optimization  algorithms. The  most

terrible ﬂaws often occur because, for the sake of making life easier for the analyst, any model faithful to

the real system is butchered and sacriﬁced, and the s’s are taken to be constants. In general, there can be a

lot  of  “signal”  in  the  (generally  nonlinear)  functionality  of  the  “noise”  terms. In  general,  no  degree  of

fancy quasi-linear statistical analysis can substitute for a proper theory/model of the real system.

In general, the proper treatment of the problem is quite difﬁcult, which is of course no excuse for

poor  treatment. The  solution  in  many disciplines  is  to  go  a  level or two  deeper  in  some  Reductionist

sense, to develop plausible models at the top scale being analyzed. Indeed, this was the call I saw and

responded to in the advertisement for reviewers of the work by AJ:

Commentary is invited from psychometricians, statisticians, geneticists, neuropsychologists,

psychophysiologists,  cognitive  modellers,  evolutionary  psychologists  and  other  specialties

concerned  with  cognitive  abilities, 

their  measurement,  and 

their  cognitive  and

neurobiological basis.

In this context, the successes of SMNI and its agreement with general STM observations are due to

processing stochastic nonlinearities of the forms described above. Attempts to avoid dealing with these

nonlinearities,  derived from  lower-level synaptic  and  neuronal  activity, hav e not  been  as  successful  as

SMNI in detailing STM (Ingber, 1995b).

2.  SMNI Description of Short-Term Memory (STM)

Since  the  early  1980’s,  a  series  of  papers  on  the  statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical  interactions

(SMNI) has been developed to model columns and regions of neocortex, spanning mm to cm of tissue.

Basis for the g factor 

- 4 -  

Lester Ingber

Most of these papers have dealt explicitly with calculating properties of short-term memory (STM) and

scalp  EEG  in  order  to  test  the  basic  formulation  of  this  approach  (Ingber, 1981;  Ingber, 1982;  Ingber,

1983;  Ingber, 1984;  Ingber, 1985a;  Ingber, 1985b;  Ingber, 1986;  Ingber  &  Nunez,  1990;  Ingber, 1991;

Ingber, 1992; Ingber, 1994; Ingber & Nunez, 1995; Ingber, 1995a; Ingber, 1995b; Ingber, 1996b; Ingber,

1997;  Ingber, 1998).  This model  was  the  ﬁrst  physical  application  of  a  nonlinear  multivariate  calculus

developed by other mathematical physicists in the late 1970’s (Graham, 1977; Langouche et al, 1982).

2.1.  Statistical Aggregation

SMNI  studies  have  detailed  a  physics  of  short-term  memory  and  of  (short-ﬁber  contribution  to)
EEG  phenomena  (Ingber, 1984),  in  terms  of M G ﬁrings,  where G represents E or I, M E represents
contributions  to  columnar  ﬁring  from  excitatory  neurons,  and M I represents  contributions  to  columnar

ﬁring from inhibitory neurons. About 100 neurons comprise a minicolumn (twice that number in visual

cortex);  about  1000  minicolumns  comprise  a  macrocolumn. A mesocolumn  is  developed  by  SMNI  to

reﬂect the convergence of short-ranged (as well as long-ranged) interactions of macrocolumnar input on

minicolumnar  structures,  in  terms  of  synaptic  interactions  taking  place  among  neurons  (about  10,000

synapses per neuron). The SMNI papers give more details on this derivation.

In  this  SMNI  development,  a  Lagrangian  is  explicitly  deﬁned  from  a  derived probability
distribution  of  mesocolumnar  ﬁrings  in  terms  of  the M G and  electric  potential  variables, F G. Sev eral
examples have been given to illustrate how the SMNI approach is complementary to other models. For

example,  a  mechanical  string  model  was  ﬁrst  discussed  as  a  simple  analog  of  neocortical  dynamics  to

illustrate the general ideas of top down and bottom up interactions (Nunez, 1989; Nunez & Srinivasan,

1993).  SMNI was applied is to this simple mechanical system, illustrating how macroscopic variables are

derived from small-scale variables (Ingber & Nunez, 1990).

2.2.  STM Stability and Duration

SMNI has presented a model of STM, to the extent it offers stochastic bounds for this phenomena
during focused selective attention.  This 7 – 2 “rule” is well veriﬁed by SMNI for acoustical STM (Ingber,
1984; Ingber, 1985b; Ingber, 1994), transpiring on the order of tenths of a second to seconds, limited to
the retention of 7 – 2 items (Miller, 1956).  The 4 – 2 “rule” also is well veriﬁed by SMNI for visual or
semantic STM, which typically require longer times for rehearsal in an hypothesized articulatory loop of
individual items, with a capacity that appears to be limited to 4 – 2 (Zhang & Simon, 1985). SMNI has
detailed these constraints in models of auditory and visual cortex (Ingber, 1984; Ingber, 1985b; Ingber,

Basis for the g factor 

- 5 -  

Lester Ingber

1994; Ingber & Nunez, 1995).

Another  interesting  phenomenon  of  STM  capacity  explained  by  SMNI  is  the  primacy versus

recency effect  in  STM  serial  processing  (Ingber, 1985b),  wherein  ﬁrst-learned  items  are  recalled  most

error-free,  with  last-learned  items  still  more  error-free  than  those  in  the  middle  (Murdock,  1983). The
basic assumption is that a pattern of neuronal ﬁring that persists for many t cycles, t on the order of 10

msec,  is  a  candidate  to  store  the  “memory”  of  activity  that  gav e rise  to  this  pattern. If  several  ﬁring

patterns can simultaneously exist, then there is the capability of storing several memories. The short-time

probability  distribution  derived for  the  neocortex is the  primary  tool  to  seek  such  ﬁring  patterns. The

highest  peaks  of  this  probability  distribution  are  more  likely  accessed  than  the  others. They are  more

readily accessed and sustain their patterns against ﬂuctuations more accurately than the others. The more

recent  memories  or  newer  patterns  may  be  presumed  to  be  those  having  synaptic  parameters  more

recently tuned and/or more actively rehearsed.

It has been noted that experimental data on velocities of propagation of long-ranged ﬁbers (Nunez,

1981;  Nunez,  1995)  and  derived velocities  of  propagation  of  information  across  local  minicolumnar

interactions (Ingber, 1982) yield comparable times scales of interactions across minicolumns of tenths of

a second.  Therefore, such phenomena as STM likely are inextricably dependent on interactions at local

and global scales.

2.3.  SMNI Correlates of STM and EEG

Previous  SMNI  studies  have  detailed  that  maximal  numbers  of  attractors  lie  within  the  physical
ﬁring space of M G, consistent with experimentally observed capacities of auditory and visual short-term

memory  (STM),  when  a  “centering”  mechanism  is  enforced  by  shifting  background  noise  in  synaptic

interactions,  consistent  with  experimental  observations  under  conditions  of  selective  attention

(Mountcastle et al, 1981; Ingber, 1984; Ingber, 1985b; Ingber, 1994; Ingber & Nunez, 1995). This leads
to all attractors of the short-time distribution lying along a diagonal line in M G space, effectively deﬁning

a narrow parabolic  trough  containing  these  most  likely  ﬁring  states. This  essentially  collapses  the  2
dimensional M G space  down  to  a  1  dimensional  space  of  most  importance. Thus,  the  predominant

physics  of  short-term  memory  and  of  (short-ﬁber  contribution  to)  EEG  phenomena  takes  place  in  a
narrow “parabolic trough” in M G space, roughly along a diagonal line (Ingber, 1984).

Using  the  power  of  this  formal  structure,  sets  of  EEG  and  evoked potential  data,  collected  to

investigate  genetic  predispositions  to  alcoholism,  were  ﬁtted  to  an  SMNI  model  to  extract  brain

“signatures” of short-term memory (Ingber, 1997; Ingber, 1998).  These results give  strong quantitative

Basis for the g factor 

- 6 -  

Lester Ingber

support for an accurate intuitive picture, portraying neocortical interactions as having common algebraic

or  physics  mechanisms  that  scale  across  quite  disparate  spatial  scales  and  functional  or  behavioral

phenomena,  i.e.,  describing  interactions  among  neurons,  columns  of  neurons,  and  regional  masses  of

neurons.

For future  work,  I  have  described  how bottom-up  neocortical  models  can  be  developed  into

eigenfunction  expansions  of  probability  distributions  appropriate  to  describe  short-term  memory  in  the

context  of  scalp  EEG  (Ingber, 2000).  The mathematics  of  eigenfunctions  are  similar  to  the  top-down

eigenfunctions developed by some EEG analysts, albeit they hav e different physical manifestations. The

bottom-up eigenfunctions are at the local mesocolumnar scale, whereas the top-down eigenfunctions are

at  the  global  regional  scale. However,  these  approaches  have  regions  of  substantial  overlap  (Ingber  &

Nunez, 1990; Ingber, 1995a), and future studies may expand top-down eigenfunctions into the bottom-up

eigenfunctions, yielding a model of scalp EEG that is ultimately expressed in terms of columnar states of

neocortical processing of attention and short-term memory.

An optimistic outcome of future work might be that these EEG eigenfunctions, baselined to speciﬁc

STM processes of individuals, could be a more direct correlate to estimates of g factors.

2.4.  Complexity in EEG

In Chapter 6, Biological Correlates of g, AJ puts these issues in perspective:

First,  psychometric  tests  were  never intended  or  devised  to  measure  anything  other  than

behavioral variables. ... at this point most explanations are still conjectural.

However,  most of the chapter falls back to similar too-simple statistical models of correlations between

measured variables and behavioral characteristics.

The  sections  on  Biological  Correlates  of g dealing  with  EEG  recordings  are  incomplete  and  at  a

level too superﬁcial relative most of the other parts of the book. The introduction of “complexity” as a

possible  correlate  to  IQ  is  based  on  faddish  studies  that  do  not  have  any  theoretical  or  experimental

support (Nunez, 1995). If such support does transpire, most likely it will be developed on the shoulders

of more complete stochastic models and much better EEG recordings.

3.  SMNI STM Correlates of the g Factor

Basis for the g factor 

- 7 -  

Lester Ingber

3.1.  High vs Low g Categories

The outline of test categories giving rise to high versus low g loadings on page 35 provides me with

some immediate candidates for further investigations of a physiological basis for the g factor. I think a

good  working  hypothesis  is  that  these  two categories  are  marked  by  having  the  high g loadings  more

correlated  than  the  low g loadings  to  statistical  interactions  among  the  peaks  of  the  probability

distributions  described  above  in the  context  of  SMNI’s theory  of  STM. The  high g categories  clearly

require relatively more processing of several items of information than do the low g categories.

This seems to be a similar correlation as that drawn by Spearman, as described by AJ, in having

“education of relations” and “education of correlates” more highly correlation with high g categories than

the “apprehension of experience.”

3.2.  Mechanisms of High g Categories

From the SMNI perspective, control of selective attention generally is highly correlated with high

utilization of STM, e.g., to tune the “centering mechanism.” This seems similar to Spearman’s correlation

of “mental energy” with high g categories.

There are several mechanisms that might distinguish how well individuals might perform on high g

category tasks. The ability to control the “centering mechanism” is required to sustain a high degree of

statistical  processes  of  multiple  most  probable  states  of  information. The  particular  balance  of  general

chemical-electrical  activity  directly  shapes  the  distribution  of  most  probable  states. For some  tasks,

processing  across  relatively  more  most  probable  states  might  be  required;  for  other  tasks  processing

among larger focussed peaks of most probable states might be more important.

3.3.  Hick’s Law — Linearity of RT vs STM Information

The  SMNI  approach  to  STM  gives a reasonable  foundation  to  discuss  RT and  items  in  STM

storage.  These previous calculations support the intuitive description of items in STM storage as peaks in

the  10-millisecond  short-time  (Ingber, 1984;  Ingber, 1985b)  as  well  as  the  several-second  long-time

(Ingber, 1994; Ingber & Nunez, 1995) conditional probability distribution of correlated ﬁrings of columns

of  neurons. These  columnar  ﬁring  states  of  STM  tasks  also  were  correlated  to  EEG  observations  of

ev oked potential  activities  (Ingber, 1997;  Ingber, 1998).  This distribution  is  explicitly  calculated  by

respecting  the  nonlinear  synaptic  interactions  among  all  possible  combinatoric  aggregates  of  columnar

ﬁring states (Ingber, 1982; Ingber, 1983).

Basis for the g factor 

- 8 -  

Lester Ingber

The RT necessary to “visit” the states under control during the span of STM can be calculated as

the mean time of “ﬁrst passage” between multiple states of this distribution, in terms of the probability P

as an outer integral (cid:242) dt (sum) over refraction times of synaptic interactions during STM time t, and an
inner integral (cid:242) dM (sum) taken over the mesocolumnar ﬁring states M (Risken, 1989), which has been

explicitly calculated to be within observed STM time scales (Ingber, 1984),

RT = -

(cid:242) dt  t (cid:242) dM

dP
dt

.

(3)

As  demonstrated  by  previous  SMNI  STM  calculations,  within  tenths  of  a  second,  the  conditional

probability  of  visiting  one  state  from  another P, can  be  well  approximated  by  a  short-time  probability

distribution expressed in terms of the previously mentioned Lagrangian L as

P =
‘ ‘

1

‘(2p dtg)

exp(- Ldt) ,  

(4)

where g is the determinant of the covariance matrix of the distribution P in the space of columnar ﬁrings.

This expression for RT can be approximately rewritten as

RT » K (cid:242) dt (cid:242) dM  P ln P ,

(5)

where K is  a  constant  when  the  Lagrangian  is  approximately  constant  over the  time  scales  observed.

Since  the  peaks  of  the  most  likely M states  of P are  to  a  very  good  approximation  well-separated

Gaussian peaks (Ingber, 1984), these states by be treated as independent entities under the integral.  This

last expression is essentially the “information” content weighted by the time during which processing of

information is observed.

The  calculation  of  the  heights  of  peaks  corresponding  to  most  likely  states  includes  the

combinatoric factors of their possible columnar manifestations as well as the dynamics of synaptic and

columnar interactions. In the approximation that we only consider the combinatorics of items of STM as

contributing to most likely states measured by P, i.e., that P measures the frequency of occurrences of all

possible combinations of these items, we obtain Hick’s Law, the observed linear relationship of RT versus

STM information storage, ﬁrst discussed by AJ in Chapter 8. For example, when the bits of information

are measured by the probability P being the frequency of accessing a given number of items in STM, the

bits  of  information  in  2,  4  and  8  states  are  given as approximately  multiples  of  ln 2 of items,  i.e.,  ln 2,

2 ln 2  and 3 ln 2, resp.  (The limit of taking the logarithm of all combinations of independent items yields a

constant times the sum over pi ln pi, where pi is the frequency of occurrence of item i.)

(cid:214)
‘
‘
‘
Basis for the g factor 

- 9 -  

Lester Ingber

4.  Conclusion

The book written by AJ provides motivation to explore a more fundamental basis of the g factor. I

have  examined  this  work  in  the  narrow focus  of  some  speciﬁc  elements  of  SMNI,  previously  used  to

develop a theory of STM and a model of EEG.

I hav e focussed on how bottom-up SMNI models can be developed into eigenfunction expansions

of  probability  distributions  appropriate  to  describe  STM. This  permits  RT to be calculated  as  an

expectation value over the STM probability distribution of stored states, and in the good approximation of

such states being represented by well separated Gaussian peaks, this yield the observed linear relationship

of RT versus STM information storage.

This SMNI STM approach also suggests several other studies that can be performed in the context

of examining an underlying basis for the g factor.

REFERENCES

Graham,  R.

(1977)  Covariant  formulation  of  non-equilibrium  statistical  thermodynamics. Z.  Physik

B26:397-405.

Ingber, L. (1981) Tow ards a uniﬁed brain theory. J. Social Biol. Struct. 4:211-224.

Ingber, L.

(1982)  Statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical  interactions.  I.  Basic  formulation. Physica  D

5:83-107.  [URL http://www.ingber.com/smni82_basic.ps.gz]

Ingber, L. (1983)  Statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical  interactions.  Dynamics  of  synaptic  modiﬁcation.

Phys. Rev. A 28:395-416.  [URL http://www.ingber.com/smni83_dynamics.ps.gz]

Ingber, L.

(1984)  Statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical  interactions.  Derivation  of  short-term-memory

capacity. Phys. Rev. A 29:3346-3358.  [URL http://www.ingber.com/smni84_stm.ps.gz]

Ingber, L.

(1985a)  Statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical  interactions.  EEG  dispersion  relations.

IEEE

Tr ans. Biomed. Eng. 32:91-94.  [URL http://www.ingber.com/smni85_eeg.ps.gz]

Ingber, L. (1985b)  Statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical  interactions:  Stability  and  duration  of  the  7+−2

rule 

of 

short-term-memory 

capacity.

Phys. 

Rev. 

A

31:1183-1186. 

[URL

http://www.ingber.com/smni85_stm.ps.gz]

Ingber, L. (1986) Statistical mechanics of neocortical interactions. Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 31:868.

Ingber, L.

(1991)  Statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical  interactions:  A  scaling  paradigm  applied  to

electroencephalography.

Phys. 

Rev. 

A

44:4017-4060. 

[URL

http://www.ingber.com/smni91_eeg.ps.gz]

Basis for the g factor 

- 10 -

Lester Ingber

Ingber, L.

(1992)  Generic  mesoscopic  neural  networks  based  on  statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical

interactions. Phys. Rev. A 45:R2183-R2186.  [URL http://www.ingber.com/smni92_mnn.ps.gz]

Ingber, L. (1994) Statistical mechanics of neocortical interactions: Path-integral evolution of short-term

memory. Phys. Rev. E 49:4652-4664.  [URL http://www.ingber.com/smni94_stm.ps.gz]

Ingber, L. (1995a)  Statistical  mechanics  of  multiple  scales  of  neocortical  interactions,  In: Neocortical

Dynamics and Human EEG Rhythms, ed. P.L. Nunez. Oxford University Press, 628-681. [ISBN

0-19-505728-7.  URL http://www.ingber.com/smni95_scales.ps.gz]

Ingber, L.

(1995b)  Statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical  interactions:  Constraints  on  40  Hz  models  of

short-term 

memory.

Phys. 

Rev. 

E

52:4561-4563. 

[URL

http://www.ingber.com/smni95_stm40hz.ps.gz]

Ingber, L. (1996a) Nonlinear nonequilibrium nonquantum nonchaotic statistical mechanics of neocortical

interactions. Behavioral  and  Brain  Sci. 19:300-301.  [Invited  commentary  on  Dynamics  of  the

brain  at  global  and  microscopic  scales:  Neural  networks  and  the  EEG,  by  J.J.  Wright  and  D.T.J.

Liley.  URL http://www.ingber.com/smni96_nonlinear.ps.gz]

Ingber, L. (1996b) Statistical mechanics of neocortical interactions: Multiple scales of EEG, In: Fr ontier

Science in EEG: Continuous Waveform Analysis (Electroencephal. clin. Neurophysiol. Suppl. 45),

ed.  R.M.  Dasheiff & D.J.  Vincent.  Elsevier,  79-112.

[Invited  talk  to  Frontier  Science  in  EEG

Symposium, 

New

Orleans, 

9 

Oct 

1993.

ISBN 

0-444-82429-4.

URL

http://www.ingber.com/smni96_eeg.ps.gz]

Ingber, L. (1997)  Statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical  interactions:  Applications  of  canonical  momenta

indicators 

to 

electroencephalography.

Phys. 

Rev. 

E

55:4578-4593. 

[URL

http://www.ingber.com/smni97_cmi.ps.gz]

Ingber, L.

(1998)  Statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical  interactions:  Training  and  testing  canonical

momenta 

indicators 

of 

EEG.

Mathl.  Computer  Modelling

27:33-64. 

[URL

http://www.ingber.com/smni98_cmi_test.ps.gz]

Ingber, L.

(2000)  Statistical  mechanics  of  neocortical  interactions:  EEG  eigenfunctions  of  short-term

memory. Behavioral  and  Brain  Sci.

(to  be  published).

[Invited  commentary  on  Tow ard  a

Quantitative Description of Large-Scale Neo-Cortical Dynamic Function and EEG, by P.L. Nunez.

URL http://www.ingber.com/smni00_eeg_stm.ps.gz]

Ingber, L. & Nunez,  P.L.  (1990) Multiple  scales  of  statistical  physics  of  neocortex:  Application  to

electroencephalography. Mathl. Comput. Modelling 13:83-95.

Basis for the g factor 

- 11 -

Lester Ingber

Ingber, L. & Nunez, P.L.  (1995) Statistical mechanics of neocortical interactions: High resolution path-

integral 

calculation  of 

short-term  memory.

Phys.  Rev.  E 51:5074-5083. 

[URL

http://www.ingber.com/smni95_stm.ps.gz]

Langouche,  F.,  Roekaerts, D.  &  Tirapegui,  E.

(1982) Functional  Integration  and  Semiclassical

Expansions. Reidel, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.

Miller, G.A.  (1956) The magical number seven, plus or minus two. Psychol. Rev. 63:81-97.

Mountcastle, V.B.,  Andersen, R.A. & Motter, B.C.  (1981) The inﬂuence of attentive  ﬁxation upon the

excitability of the light-sensitive neurons of the posterior parietal cortex. J. Neurosci. 1:1218-1235.

Murdock,  B.B.,  Jr.

(1983)  A  distributed  memory  model  for  serial-order  information. Psychol.  Rev.

90:316-338.

Nunez,  P.L.  (1981) Electric  Fields  of  the  Brain:  The  Neurophysics  of  EEG. Oxford  University  Press,

London.

Nunez,  P.L.  (1989) To wards  a  physics  of  neocortex,  Vol.  2,  In: Advanced  Methods  of  Physiological

System Modeling, ed. V.Z. Marmarelis. Plenum, 241-259.

Nunez,  P.L.  (1995) Neocortical  Dynamics  and  Human  EEG  Rhythms. Oxford  University  Press,  New

York, NY.

Nunez,  P.L.  &  Srinivasan,  R.

(1993)  Implications  of  recording  strategy  for  estimates  of  neocortical

dynamics with electroencephalography. Chaos 3:257-266.

Risken, H. (1989) The Fokker-Planck Equation: Methods of Solution and Applications. Springer-Verlag,

Berlin.

Zhang, G. & Simon, H.A. (1985) STM capacity for Chinese words and idioms: Chunking and acoustical

loop hypotheses. Memory & Cognition 13:193-201.

