Irreversibility and Measurement in Quantum Mechanics

DOUGLAS M. SNYDER

LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA

In quantum mechanics, in principle a human observer does not require a
macroscopic  physical  instrument  to  make  a  measurement.    A  good  deal  of
evidence  supporting  this  thesis  comes  from  work  on  macroscopic  quantum
tunneling (Das Sarma, Kawamura, & Washburn, 1995).  It is often maintained
that  there  is  nothing  unique  that  a  human  observer  can  do  that  a  physical,
macroscopic  measuring  instrument,  often  of  simple  design,  cannot  also
accomplish.    It  is  generally  argued  that  when  a  macroscopic  measuring
instrument is used, irreversibility characterizes the measurement process.  The
measurement  cannot  be  reversed  even  if  a  human  observer  does  not
immediately see or know the result obtained with the measuring instrument.1

This  irreversibility  has  been  ascribed  to  an  increase  in  entropy  that
occurs when a measurement is made (e.g., van Hove, 1959).  It is implied that
irreversibility is a common element in quantum mechanical measurement, even
characterizing  the  circumstances  where  a  person  might  make  a  measurement
unaided by a macroscopic measuring device.

In a related manner, Bohr (1935) maintained  that  quantum  mechanical
measurement  also  depended  on  the  interaction  between  a  macroscopic
measuring instrument and the physical existent measured.  He noted that when
a macroscopic physical measuring apparatus is used,  there  is  inevitably  some
loss  of  information  concerning  the  measured  system  due  to  the  resulting
physical interaction.  Bohr presented a gedankenexperiment involving a particle
passing through a slit in a diaphragm that is part of an experimental apparatus.
In  one  scenario  in  which  the  position  of  the  particle  passing  through  the
diaphragm is precisely determined, knowledge  of  the  particle’s  momentum  is
lost because of the rigid connection between the diaphragm and the rest of the
apparatus necessary to establish the position of the diaphragm when the particle
passes through.  In another scenario, in which  the momentum of the particle is
precisely determined, knowledge of the position of the particle is lost  because
of  the  flexible  connection  between  the  diaphragm  and  rest  of  the  apparatus
necessary to determine  the  momentum  of  the  diaphragm  before  and  after  the
                                    
1 Generally, this  irreversibility means that  it  is  highly  unlikely  that  the  physical interaction
that is the measurement could occur in the opposite direction of time to the one in which  it  is
occurring or has occurred.

- 1 -

Irreversibility and Measurement

particle passes through the diaphragm.  For Bohr,  once the information is lost
in the measurement process, the measurement cannot be reversed.

It is known that the consideration of a physical system as a macroscopic
system instead of as a collection of microscopic quantum mechanical systems is
arbitrary.    If  the  physical  system  is  considered  in  the  latter  manner,  the
Schr(cid:154)dinger equation provides the basis for a lawful delineation of the physical
existent  that  was  to  be  measured  by  the  macroscopic  apparatus  and  that
microscopic part of the physical system designated the measurement apparatus
with which the system that was to be measured interacts.  The lawful manner in
which these microscopic physical systems function, including their interaction,
is reversible.  Information is not lost, and the concept of entropy, dependent on
a macroscopic physical system, is not relevant.

Thus when physicists maintain that irreversibility  in  measurement  is  a
sufficient  condition  to  ensure  that  a  measurement  has  indeed  occurred,  the
following  feature  of  quantum  mechanical  measurement  is  not  addressed.
Whether a physical system is considered: (1) macroscopic in nature (so as to be
available  to  measure  a  microscopic  physical  system)  or  (2)  a  collection  of
microscopic  physical  systems  some  portion  of  which  interact  with  the
microscopic system of interest  in  a  reversible  fashion  in  accordance  with  the
Schr(cid:154)dinger  equation,  is  an  arbitrary  decision  on  the  part  of  the  individual
considering the overall experimental circumstances.  That  is,  the  presence  of
irreversibility depends on whether a measurement is being made, and whether
or not a measurement is being made  depends  on  an  arbitrary  decision  by  the
experimenter as how the experimental circumstances are structured.

It should be noted that the assumption that irreversibility characterizes a
human  observer  who  does  not  require  a  macroscopic  physical  instrument  to
make  a  quantum  mechanical  measurement  is  unwarranted  in  the  absence  of
specifying  the  neurophysiological  mechanism,  presumably  functioning  like  a
macroscopic  physical  apparatus,  by  which  an  irreversible  measurement  is
made.  Also, given the flexibility in considering a macroscopic physical system
as such or  as  a  combination  of  many  microscopic  systems,  this  result  holds
when  a  macroscopic  measuring  device  is  used  in  making  a  measurement  as
well.  It would be important to specify how this neurophysiological mechanism
involves those physical processes that would be responsible for a macroscopic
physical  instrument’s  ability  to  engage  in  an  irreversible  measurement.    It
would  be 
these  processes 
the
neurophysiological mechanism.

that  would  presumably  underlie 

- 2 -

Irreversibility and Measurement

Another concern should be  noted.    How  do  irreversible  measurement
processes,  presumably  based  on  physical  interaction,  account  for  "negative"
observations (Epstein, 1945; Renninger, 1960)?  In a  negative  observation,  a
measurement  occurs  in  the  absence  of  a  physical  interaction  between  a
measuring instrument and the existent measured, with an accompanying change
in the wave function describing the existent measured.2

Because  of 

to  doubt 

the  above  considerations,  one  has 

that
irreversibility in quantum mechanical measurement has been given an adequate
foundation.  Indeed, the flexibility in the measurement process  as  regards  the
observer(cid:213)s ability  to  consider  a  physical  system  as  a  macroscopic  measuring
instrument  or  instead  as  a  large  system  comprised  of  many  macroscopic
systems indicates the importance of a subjective element.

REFERENCES

Bohr, N. (1935). Can quantum-mechanical description of nature be considered

complete? Physical Review, 49, 1804-1807.

Cook,  R.  J.  (1990).  Quantum  jumps.  In  E.  Wolf  (Ed.),  Progress  in  Optics

(Vol. 28)  (pp. 361-416). Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Das  Sarma,  S.,  Kawamura,  T.,  and  Washburn,  S.  (1995).  Resource  letter
QIMA-1:  Quantum  interference  in  macroscopic  samples.  American
Journal of Physics, 8, 683-694.

Epstein  P.  (1945).  The  reality  problem  in  quantum  mechanics.  American

Journal of Physics, 13, 127-136.

Renninger,  M. 

(1960).  Messungen  ohne  St(cid:154)rung  des  Me§objekts
[Observations Without Changing the Object]. Zeitschrift f(cid:159)r Physik, 158,
417-421.

van Hove, L. (1959). The ergodic behaviour of quantum many-body systems.

Physica, 25, 268-276.

                                    
2 A negative observation depends on the possibility  of  an alternative observation involving  a
physical interaction.  Indeed, Cook  (1990) noted the  possibility  of  a negative observation in
which one existent (a light  photon)  involved in  the  physical interaction can be registered by
the unaided human eye.

- 3 -

