A Connection Between

Gravitation and Electromagnetism

Douglas M. Snyder

Los Angeles, California1

It is argued that there is a connection between the fundamental forces of
electromagnetism and gravitation.  This  connection  occurs  because  of:  1)  the
fundamental significance of the finite and invariant velocity of  light  in  inertial
reference frames in the special theory, and 2) the reliance of the general theory
of  relativity  upon  the  special  theory  of  relativity  locally  in  spacetime.2    The
connection between the fundamental forces of electromagnetism and gravitation
follows immediately from  these two points.  Because this connection  has  not
been acknowledged, a brief review is provided of: 1) the role of the finite and
invariant velocity of light in inertial reference frames in the special theory, and
2) certain fundamental concepts of the general theory, including its reliance on
the special theory locally.

1.

The Velocity of Light in the Special Theory

It is known that the reason that the Lorentz transformation equations of
special relativity differ from  the Galilean  transformation  equations  underlying
Newtonian mechanics is due to the finite value for the invariant velocity of light
in any inertial reference  frame  (i.e.,  a  spatial  coordinate  system  attached  to  a
physical body and for which Newton's first law of motion holds) that is used to
develop simultaneity and time in general in any inertial reference frame.  Other
results  obtained  in  the  special  theory  of  relativity  depend  on  the  Lorentz
transformation equations, as opposed to the Galilean transformation equations,
and are thus dependent on the finite and invariant velocity of light.(1,2,3)

For  an  inertial  reference  frame  W'  with  one  spatial  dimension,  x',  in
uniform translational motion relative to an inertial reference frame W  (with one
spatial dimension, x) with velocity v along the x and x'  axes in the direction of
increasing  values  of  x  and  x',  the  Lorentz  transformation  equations  may  be
stated as:

x'  = (x - vt)/(1 - v2/c2)1/2  

and

t' = [t - (v/c2)x]/(1 - v2/c2)1/2  .

(1)

(2)

- 1 -

Gravitation and Electromagnetism

c is the finite and invariant value for  the  velocity  of  light  in  inertial  reference
frames.  c is found in equations 1 and 2 because of the fundamental role of the
velocity  of  light  in  the  development  of  simultaneity  and  time  in  general  in
inertial reference frames in the special theory.(1)  If an existent with an arbitrarily
great  velocity  (also  represented  by  c)  were  used  instead  of  light  to  develop
simultaneity  in  an  inertial  reference  frame,  c  would  be  arbitrarily  large  and
equations 1 and 2 would become:

x’  = x - vt  

and

t' = t   .

(3)

(4)

Equations 3 and 4 are Galilean transformation equations for W  and W'  for the
circumstances described.

As an example of the significance of the finite and invariant velocity of
light  in  the  special  theory,  it  can  be  noted  that  the  Lorentz  transformation
equations underlie the derivation of the force law in the special theory as well as
the transformation of force in inertial reference frames in uniform translational
motion relative to one another.(4,5)  These transformation of force equations  in
the  special  theory  allow  for  the  invariance  of  Maxwell's  equations  of
electromagnetism in inertial reference  frames  in  uniform  translational  motion
relative  to  one  another.(6)    In  fact,  one  can  use  the  Lorentz  transformation
equations 
laws  of
electromagnetism  for  two  inertial  reference  frames  in  uniform  translational
motion relative to one another while holding that these laws should be invariant.
Doing  this,  one  finds  that  the  transformations  for  the  electric  and  magnetic
components of the field indicated are exactly those that one finds by application
of the transformation equations for force in the special theory to the  electric and
magnetic components of the electromagnetic field.

the  field  differentials 

in  Maxwell's 

to 

transform 

It  should  be  remembered  that  one  of  Maxwell's  most  fundamental
results was the identification of electromagnetic radiation with light because the
measured  velocity  of  light  in  vacuum  is  in  accord  with  the  velocity  of
electromagnetic  radiation  in  vacuum  derived  using  Maxwell's  equations.    It
should  be  emphasized  that  this  identification  of  light  with  electromagnetic
radiation through Maxwell's equations  provides  the  theoretical  foundation  for
the empirical evidence that the velocity of light in vacuum is finite and invariant
and thus does not depend on the velocity of  the  emitting  body  relative  to  the
observer at rest in an inertial reference frame.

- 2 -

Gravitation and Electromagnetism

2.

2.1

The Dependence of the General Theory on the Special Theory

The Principle of Equivalence

It  is  known  that  in  the  general  theory  of  relativity  gravitation
corresponds to spacetime curvature.  Spacetime curvature may be developed by
considering an accelerating reference frame or pattern of  such reference frames
as  a  pattern  of  local  Lorentz  frames  moving  at  slightly  different  uniform,
translational velocities relative to one another.  The accelerating reference frame,
or frames, in general corresponds to an inertial reference frame experiencing a
gravitational  field  because  the  descriptions  of  physical  phenomena  in  these
circumstances are equivalent.  In particular, the  descriptions  of  the  motion  of
physical bodies when described from  a uniformly accelerating reference frame
or  an  inertial  reference  frame  experiencing  a  gravitational  field  of  uniform
intensity are equivalent.(7,8,9)

Thus,  a  uniformly  accelerating  reference  frame  serves  as  a  bridge
between the gravitation-free inertial reference frame from  which the motion of
the uniformly accelerating reference frame is judged and  the  inertial  reference
frame experiencing a gravitational field of uniform intensity that is no different
for  the  description  of  physical  phenomena  to  the  uniformly  accelerating
reference  frame.    The  inertial  reference  frame  experiencing  the  gravitational
field of uniform intensity is equivalent to the gravitation-free inertial  reference
frame  as  concerns  the  description  of  physical  phenomena.    The  principle  of
equivalence provides the theoretical foundation for the basic equality of inertial
and  gravitational  mass  and  allows  for  the  in  general  equivalence  between
accelerating  reference  frames  and  inertial  reference  frames  experiencing  a
gravitational field.(9,10,11)

In  The  Meaning  of  Relativity,  Einstein  stated 

the  principle  of
equivalence in the following way and indicated how it provides the theoretical
underpinning for the essential equality of inertial and gravitational mass:

Let now K be an inertial system.  Masses  which are sufficiently
far from each other and from other bodies are then, with respect
to K, free from acceleration.  We shall also refer these masses to
a system of co-ordinates K', uniformly accelerated with respect
to  K.  Relatively  to  K'  all  the  masses  have  equal  and  parallel
accelerations;  with  respect  to  K’  they  behave  just  as  if  a
gravitational  field  were  present  and  K'  were  unaccelerated.
Overlooking for the  present  the  question  as  to  the  “cause”  of

- 3 -

Gravitation and Electromagnetism

such  a  gravitational  field...there  is  nothing  to  prevent  our
conceiving this gravitational field as real, that is, the conception
that K'  is “at rest” and a  gravitational  field  is  present  we  may
consider  as  equivalent  to  the  conception  that  only  K  is  an
“allowable” system of co-ordinates and no gravitational field is
present.  The assumption of the complete  physical  equivalence
of the systems  of coordinates, K and K', we call the  “principle
of equivalence;” this principle is evidently intimately connected
with  the  law  of  the  equality  between  the  inert  and  the
gravitational mass, and signifies an extension of the principle of
relativity  to  co-ordinate  systems  which  are  in  non-uniform
motion relatively to each other.  In fact, through this conception
we arrive at the unity of the nature of inertia and gravitation.  For
according  to  our  way  of  looking  at  it,  the  same  masses  may
appear to be either under the action of inertia alone (with respect
to  K)  or  under  the  combined  action  of  inertia  and  gravitation
(with respect to K').(12)

2.2

The Special Theory Holds Locally

As  noted, the derivation of the spacetime curvature associated  with  an
accelerating reference frame  may  be  based  on  the  notion  that  an  accelerating
reference frame is composed of a pattern of local Lorentz frames  (essentially,
local, inertial reference frames).  These local Lorentz frames are considered to
have varying uniform, translational velocities,  and  the  Lorentz  transformation
equations of special relativity thus hold for these local reference frames.

In outlining  the  essentials  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  Einstein
discussed an example of how  an  observer  in  an  accelerating  reference  frame
would be affected in his measurements of temporal duration and how his or her
measurements could be accounted for in terms of a local  Lorentz  frame.    He
wrote:

Let us consider a space-time domain in  which  no  gravitational
field exists relative to a reference-body K whose state of motion
has been suitably chosen.  K is then a Galileian reference-body
as regards the domain considered, and the results of the special
theory of relativity hold relative to K.  Let us suppose the same
domain  referred  to  a  second  body  of  reference  K',  which  is
rotating uniformly with respect to K.  In order to fix our ideas,

- 4 -

Gravitation and Electromagnetism

we shall imagine K'  to be in the form  of  a  plane  circular  disc,
which rotates uniformly in its own plane about  its  centre.    An
observer who is sitting eccentrically on the disc K' is sensible of
a  force  which  acts  outwards  in  a  radial  direction,  and  which
would be interpreted as an effect of inertial (centrifugal force) by
an  observer  who  was  at  rest  with  respect  to  the  original
reference-body K.  But the observer on the disc may regard his
disc as a reference-body which is “at rest”; on the basis of  the
general principle of relativity he is justified in doing this.   This
force acting on himself, and in fact on all other bodies which are
at  rest  relative  to  the  disc,  he  regards  as  the  effect  of  a
gravitational field.  But since the observer believes in the general
theory of relativity, this does not disturb him: he is quite in the
right when he believes that a general law  of  gravitation  can  be
formulated- a  law  which  not  only  explains  the  motion  of  the
stars  correctly,  but  also  the  field  of  force  experienced  by
himself.

The observer performs experiments on his circular disc with
clocks and measuring-rods.  In  doing  so,  it  is  his  intention  to
arrive  at  exact  definitions  for  the  signification  of  time-  and
space-data with reference to the circular disc K', these definitions
being based on his observations.  What will be his experience in
this enterprise?

To start with,  he  places  one  of  two  identically  constructed
clocks at the centre of the circular disc, and the other on the edge
of the disc, so that they are at rest relative  to  it.    We  now  ask
ourselves  whether  both  clocks  go  at  the  same  rate  from  the
standpoint of the non-rotating Galileian  reference-body  K.    As
judged from this body, the clock at the centre of the disc has no
velocity, whereas the clock at the edge of the disc is in  motion
relative  to  K  in  consequence  of  the  rotation....the  latter  clock
goes at a rate permanently slower than  that  of  the  clock  at  the
centre  of  the  circular  disc,  i.e.,  as  observed  from  K.    It  is
obvious  that  the  same  effect  would  be  noted  by  an  observer
whom  we will imagine sitting alongside his clock at the  centre
of the circular disc.  Thus on our circular disc, or, to make  the
case more general, in every  gravitational  field,  a  clock  will  go

- 5 -

Gravitation and Electromagnetism

more quickly or less quickly, according to the position in which
the clock is situated (at rest).(13)
What is the general relation for the durations of some occurrence in two
inertial reference frames moving in a uniform translational  manner  relative  to
one  another?    Consider  the  inertial  reference  frames  W  and  W'  discussed
earlier.  If this occurrence maintains its position in W', then the relation between
the durations of this occurrence in W and W' is given by:

(5)

t'/(1 - v2/c2)1/2  .

t = D
Spacetime curvature may then be found for an accelerating frame, or an
associated inertial reference frame in a gravitational field, essentially by deriving
the pattern of special relativistic results that hold  for  the  local  Lorentz  frames
and that compose the global reference frame.(14,15,16)  Specifically, the curvature
of the spacetime continuum can be developed through the use of a field tensor,
.  The use of this tensor allows for local Lorentz frames while also allowing
g
ik
that  these  local  Lorentz  frames  do  not  have  to  be  identical  in  terms  of  their
spacetime characteristics.  Thus, there is the possibility of a pattern of different,
local Lorentz frames, the result of which is a curved spacetime continuum.  The
particular  coordinate  scheme  that  one  applies  to  the  spacetime  continuum  is
arbitrary as long as  it  is  Gaussian  in  nature.    g
  are  certain  functions  of  the
Gaussian  coordinate  scheme  that  transform  for  a  continuous  coordinate
transformation.   g
)  that  holds  in
general for a Gaussian coordinate scheme applied to the spacetime continuum.
 must be able to account for global, gravitation-free inertial reference frames.
g
ik
In the case of such inertial  reference  frames,  g
  reduces  to  a  particular  form
such that the resulting metric is that characteristic of a Lorentz reference frame.
The general covariant field law that applies to g
 of different representations of
ik
the spacetime continuum is given by a set of differential equations in the form
of another symmetrical tensor, R

  has  a  symmetrical  property  (i.e.,  g

  =  g
ki

ik

ik

ik

ik

.(17,18)

ik

Misner, Thorne,  and  Wheeler  summed  up  the  relation  of  the  general
and  special  theories  in  writing,  “General  relativity  is  built  on  special
relativity”.(19)  In elaborating on this statement, the authors wrote:

A  tourist  in  a  powered  interplanetary  rocket  feels  “gravity.”
Can a physicist by local effects convince him that this “gravity”
is  bogus?    Never,  says  Einstein's  principle  of  the  local
equivalence of gravity and accelerations.  But then the physicist
will  make  no  errors  if  he  deludes  himself  into  treating  true

- 6 -

D
Gravitation and Electromagnetism

gravity  as  a  local  illusion  caused  by  acceleration.    Under  this
delusion, he barges ahead and solves gravitational problems by
using  special  relativity:  if  he  is  clever  enough  to  divide  every
problem into a network of local questions, each solvable under
such  a  delusion,  then  he  can  work  out  all  influences  of  any
gravitational  field.    Only  three  basic  principles  are  invoked:
special relativity physics, the equivalence principle, and the local
nature of physics.  They are simple and clear.  To apply  them,
however, imposes  a double task:  (1)  take  spacetime  apart  into
locally flat pieces (where  the  principles  are  valid),  and  (2)  put
these pieces together  again  into  a  comprehensible  picture.    To
undertake  this  dissection  and  reconstitution,  to  see  curved
dynamic  spacetime  inescapably  take  form,  and  to  see  the
consequences for physics: that is general relativity.(19)

3.

The General Principle of Relativity

The principle of equivalence led Einstein to maintain that all frames of
reference  should  be  equivalent  for  the  expression  of  physical  law.    The
conceptual basis of space-time structure in  the  general  theory  has  been  noted
and  has  been  shown  to  be  dependent  upon  its  description  locally  using  the
special theory.  With these aspects of the general  theory  in  mind,  the  general
principle of relativity can be more precisely stated as:

All Gaussian co-ordinate systems  are essentially equivalent  for
the formulation of the general laws of nature.(20)

Einstein wrote in his original paper proposing the general theory:

In  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  space  and  time  cannot  be
defined in such a way that differences of the spatial co-ordinates
can  be  directly  measured  by  the  unit  measuring-rod,  or
differences in the time co-ordinate by a standard clock.

The method hitherto employed [in the special theory as well
as Newtonian mechanics  adhering  to  Euclidean  geometry]  for
laying co-ordinates into the space-time continuum  in  a  definite
manner thus breaks down, and there seems  to be no other way
which would allow us to adapt  systems  of  co-ordinates  to  the
four-dimensional universe so  that  we  might  expect  from  their
application  a  particularly  simple  formulation  of  the  laws  of

- 7 -

Gravitation and Electromagnetism

nature.  So there is  nothing  for  it  but  to  regard  all  imaginable
systems of co-ordinates, on principle, as equally suitable for the
description of nature.  This comes to requiring that:-

The general laws of nature are to be expressed by equations
which hold good for all systems of coordinates, that is, are co-
variant with respect to any substitutions whatever (generally co-
variant).(21)

The  use  of  arbitrary  Gaussian  coordinate  schemes,  and  their  accompanying
metrical coefficients g
, to  represent  the  spacetime  continuum  allows  for  the
development of the  general  formulation  of  physical  law  that  applies  to  these
coordinate  schemes.    As  noted,  g
  transform  for  a  continuous  coordinate
transformation.  R
ik

 is a formulation of gravitational field law for g
ik

.

ik

ik

4.

Light and the General Theory

An important result of relativity theory, specifically the special theory, is
that light has properties associated  with  mass.    This  is  a  consequence  of  the
general  equivalence  of  mass  and  energy  in  the  special  theory.    The  general
equation relating mass and energy is

E = mc2   ,

(6)

where E is the energy equivalent of the relativistic mass  of a physical entity, m
is  this  relativistic  mass,  and  c  is  the  finite  and  invariant  velocity  of  light  in
inertial reference frames.  In the special theory, the kinetic energy of a physical
existent can be expressed by the equation

K = mc2 - m

0

c2   ,

(7)

where K is the kinetic energy, m is the relativistic mass of the physical existent,
 is the rest mass  of this existent, and c is the finite and invariant velocity of
m
0
light in inertial reference frames.  Another form for the kinetic energy is

K = m

0

c2[1/(1 - v2/c2)1/2 - 1]  ,

(8)

where v is  the  uniform,  translational  velocity  of  the  inertial  reference  frames
relative to one another.  The relation between the relativistic mass  of a physical
existent, m, and its rest mass, m
0

, is given by

m = m

0

/(1 - v2/c2)1/2  ,

and the momentum is given by

(9)

- 8 -

Gravitation and Electromagnetism

p = [m

0

/(1 - v2/c2)1/2]v   .

Combining equations 8 and 10 by removing v results in

(K + m

0

c2)2 = (pc)2 + (m

c2)2  .

0

Given

E = K + m

c2  ,

0

E2 = (pc)2 + (m

c2)2   . (22)

0

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

Light has no rest mass in the special theory as it is never at rest according to the
empirically verified postulate of the special theory regarding  the  invariant  and
finite  velocity  of  light  in  inertial  reference  frames.    But  light  does  have
momentum,  p.  For light,

E = pc   

(14)

in the special theory, a relation found in classical electromagnetic theory.  Light
therefore has effective mass.

In sensitive enough conditions, the influence of a gravitational field on
light should thus be  detectable.    Using  the  general  theory,  Einstein  predicted
that  a  light  ray  would  be  deflected  toward  the  sun  in  accordance  with  the
following equation

m  = 1.7 sec. of arc/D

 

(15)

where m  is the angle of deflection and D
 is the distance of the light ray from  the
center  of  the  sun.    Experiments  conducted  in  1919  confirmed  Einstein's
prediction  concerning  the  influence  of  a  gravitational  field  on  the  motion  of
light.(23,24)

The Velocity of Light: Curvilinear Globally, Finite and Invariant

4.1
Locally

Einstein distinguished the global velocity of light in  the  special  theory

from the global velocity of light in the general theory:

With respect to the Galileian reference body K, a ray of light is
transmitted rectilinearly with the velocity  c  [in  accord  with  the
postulate of the special theory].  It can be easily shown  that the
path  of  the  same  ray  is  no  longer  a  straight  line  when  we
consider  it  with  reference  to  the  [uniformly]  accelerated  chest
(reference body K') [relative to K].  From this we conclude, that,

- 9 -

Gravitation and Electromagnetism

in  general,  rays  of  light  are  propagated  curvilinearly  in
gravitational fields.(25)

This is characteristic of the distinction  usually  made  between  the  general  and
special theories concerning the motion of  light.    For  example,  in  his  original
paper on the general theory, Einstein wrote:

It will be seen from these reflexions that in pursuing the general
theory  of  relativity  we  shall  be  led  to  a  theory  of  gravitation,
since we are able to  “produce”  a  gravitational  field  merely  by
changing the system of co-ordinates.  It will also be obvious that
the principle of the constancy of  the  velocity  of  light  in  vacuo
must  be modified, since we easily recognize that  the  path  of  a
ray of light with respect to K' [a uniformly accelerating reference
frame]  must  be  in  general  curvilinear,  if  with  respect  to  K  [a
gravitation-free inertial  reference  frame  relative  to  which  K'  is
uniformly accelerating] light is propagated in a straight line with
a definite constant velocity.(26)
Usually,  in  discussions  of  the  general  theory,  there  is  little  emphasis
placed on the  finite  and  invariant  velocity  of  light  locally.    Yet,  Einstein  did
mention this last characteristic of light in the general theory in The Meaning of
Relativity where he wrote:

In  the  general  theory  of  relativity  also  the  velocity  of  light  is
everywhere the same, relatively to a local inertial system.   This
velocity is unity in our natural measure of time.(27)

Also, in his original paper on the general theory, Einstein implied in a footnote
that the velocity of light locally is invariant and finite:

We must choose the acceleration of the infinitely small (“local”)
system of co-ordinates so that no gravitational field occurs; this
is possible for an infinitely small region.  Let X
, be the
1
,  the  appertaining  co-ordinate  of
co-ordinates  of  space,  and  X
4
time  measured  in  the  appropriate  unit.*    If  a  rigid  rod  is
imagined to be given as the unit measure, the co-ordinates, with
a given orientation of the system  of co-ordinates, have  a  direct
physical meaning in the sense of the special theory of relativity.
* The unit of time is to be chosen so that the velocity of light in
vacuo as measured in the “local” system of co-ordinates is to be

, X
2

, X
3

- 10 -

Gravitation and Electromagnetism

equal to unity.( 28)

5.

Light and Gravitation

If  the  spacetime  continuum  is  locally  Lorentzian,  and  the  velocity  of
light is therefore locally invariant and finite, then the locally invariant and finite
velocity  of  light  provides  a  connection  between  the  fundamental  forces  of
gravitation and electromagnetism.  The invariant and finite velocity  of  light  is
fundamental  to  the  special  theory.    The  special  theory  is  essential  to  the
development of the spacetime  continuum  characteristic  of  the  general  theory.
Therefore, the locally invariant and finite velocity of light is fundamental to the
general theory.

Contrast this conception of the motion of light with that for the motion
of light globally in the general theory.  Here, the generally curvilinear motion of
light is dependent on its having mass, as first indicated in relativity theory in the
special theory.  Light, like any other physical entity, must  hold to the principle
of equivalence.  Thus, its curvilinear motion in an accelerating reference frame,
which can be equivalently considered an inertial reference frame experiencing a
gravitational field, can be interpreted as the effect of the gravitational field on the
light  passing  through  it.    But  these  interesting  considerations  regarding  the
motion of light globally do not alter the fundamental dependence of gravitation
in the general theory on the finite and invariant velocity of light locally.  In fact
the  predictions  in  the  general  theory  concerning  the  motion  of  light  in  a
gravitational  field,  which  have  been  empirically  supported,  depend  on  the
velocity of light being finite and invariant locally.

From a global view, in the general theory, the velocity of light is usually
not invariant in reference frames.  This velocity varies as spacetime is usually a
curved  continuum. 
relies
theory 
fundamentally  on  the  special  theory. 
theory  relies
fundamentally on the finite and invariant velocity  of  light  in  inertial  reference
frames.

the  general 
the  special 

  And 

  Nonetheless, 

locally, 

Why has the dependence of the general theory on the finite and invariant
velocity of light locally not been widely acknowledged?  It may well be that it is
difficult  to  maintain  simultaneously  that  globally  light  travels  in  curved
spacetime and that locally it has a finite and invariant velocity.  This, though, is
the case.  When the dependence of the general theory on  the  velocity  of  light
locally is acknowledged,  and  light  is  not  considered  simply  another  physical
entity that is affected by the general theory (as happens when light is considered

- 11 -

Gravitation and Electromagnetism

globally  and  bent  by  a  gravitational  field),  the  connection  between  the
fundamental forces of gravity and electromagnetism is evident.

6.

Conclusion

It  has  been  extremely  difficult  to  integrate  gravitation  with  the  other
fundamental forces of nature.  It is clear, though, that gravitation depends on a
fundamental characteristic of light in the special theory,  namely  the  finite  and
invariant velocity of light.  It is the case that this finite and invariant velocity of
light holds only in local Lorentz frames, unless of course one is concerned with
flat  spacetime.    But  in  principle,  the  velocity  of  light  is  finite  and  invariant
locally,  even  if  on  a  global  level  in  the  general  theory  it  cannot  be  said  to
generally have an invariant velocity.

The reason this dependence has not been recognized is likely due to the
focus  on  the  very  interesting  results  in  the  general  theory  concerning  the
velocity of light globally.  This velocity stands in such contrast to the finite and
invariant velocity in the  special  theory  that  it  seems  a  contradiction  that  light
could have  a  curvilinear  velocity  globally  and  yet  have  a  finite  and  invariant
velocity  locally.    These  are  the  circumstances,  though,  and  the  finite  and
invariant velocity of light locally in the general theory  provides  the  theoretical
basis for connecting the fundamental forces of gravitation as developed in  the
general theory and electromagnetism that is elegantly  discussed  in  the  special
theory.

Endnotes

1Email: dsnyder@earthlink.net
2Some authors, including Einstein, maintain that in the special theory, it
is the velocity  of  light  that  is  finite  and  invariant  in  vacuum.    Other  authors
believe it is more accurate to write that the speed of light is finite and invariant
in vacuum.  I believe that velocity is the better term to use.  It is true that light
can move in more than a single direction, thus implying that its velocity is not
invariant.  But, the essence of the use of the term velocity as regards light in the
special  theory  is  that  for  a  given  ray  of  light  in  inertial  reference  frames  in
uniform translational motion relative to one another, its speed and direction in
vacuum do not change.

1.

A.  Einstein,  "On  the  electrodynamics  of  moving  bodies,"  in  H.  Lorentz,  A.
Einstein,  H.  Minkowski,  and  H.  Weyl  (editors),  The  Principle  of  Relativity,  a

References

- 12 -

Gravitation and Electromagnetism

Collection  of Original Memoirs  on the  Special  and  General  Theories  of  Relativity
(Dover, 1952, originally 1905), p. 53.
A.  Einstein,  Relativity,  the  Special  and  the  General  Theory  (Bonanza,  1961,
originally 1917), p. 44.
R. Resnick, Introduction to Special Relativity. (John Wiley & Sons, 1961), p.79
Ibid., p. 119.
W. G. Rosser, Contemporary  Physics 1, 453, (1960).
Ref. 3, p. 163.
Ref. 2, p. 66.
A. Einstein, "The foundation of  the  general  theory  of  relativity,"  in  H. Lorentz,  A.
Einstein,  H.  Minkowski,  and  H.  Weyl  (editors),  The  Principle  of  Relativity,  a
Collection  of Original Memoirs  on the  Special  and  General  Theories  of  Relativity
(Dover, 1952, originally 1916), p. 113.
A. Einstein, The Meaning of Relativity (Princeton University Press, 1956, originally
1922), p. 57.
Ref. 2, p. 66.
R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton,  and  M. Sands,  The  Feynman  Lectures  on Physics:
Mainly Electromagnetism and Matter, (Addison-Wesley, 1964), Vol. 2, p. 42-8.
Ref. 9, p. 57.
Ref. 2, p. 79.
Ref. 8, p. 115.

12.
13.
14.
15. M. Born, Einstein's Theory of Relativity. (Dover, 1965, originally 1924), p. 336.
16.

C.  W.  Misner,  K.  S.  Thorne,  and  J.  A.  Wheeler,  Gravitation  (W.  H.  Freeman,
1973), p. 164.
Ref. 15, p. 324.
A. Einstein, Scientific  American, 182(4), 13 (1950).
Ref. 16, p. 164.
Ref. 2, p. 97.
Ref. 8, p. 117.
Ref. 3, P. 123.
Ref. 2, p. 126.
A.  Pais,  A.,  'Subtle  is  the  Lord....':  The  Science  and  the  Life  of  Albert  Einstein
(Oxford University Press, 1982), p. 303.
Ref. 2, p. 75.
Ref. 8, P. 114.
Ref. 9, p. 92.

2.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.

10.
11.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

25.
26.
27.

28.

Ref. 8, p. 118.

- 13 -

