Enhanced photoinduced nematic reorientation in mixture with azo-dye-substituted polymer.

A. Parfenov a) *, A. Chrzanowska

*Diagnostic Instrumentation and Analysis Laboratory, 205  Research Blvd, Starkville, MS 39759,

USA;

Krakow University of Technology Institute of Physics, Podchorazych 1, Krakow 30-084, Poland

The  optically  induced  reorientation  of  nematic  liquid  crystal  doped  with  azo-dye  substituted

polymer is investigated measuring photoinduced birefringence. These measurement reveal the value

(D n~0.1) of induced birefringence of  liquid  crystal  with  dye  polymer  which  significantly  exceeds

the value of  birefringence  previously  obtained  in  nematic  mixture  with  the  low  molecular  weight

dye. More than one order of enhancement is connected with lower diffusivity of polymer.

PACS numbers: 42.70.Df, 42.70.Gl, 78.20.Fm

                                                       
a) on leave from Lebedev Physics Institute, Russia, electronic mail: parfenov@neur.lpi.msk.su

1

The  great  interest  in  light-induced  reorientation  of  nematic  liquid  crystals  1  is  closely

connected with large potential of this effect in such applications as nonlinear optics, photonics and

optical data processing 2. Optical reorientation is greatly enhanced when the liquid crystal is doped

with a small value of light -absorbing dye 2- 4. It is also observed that this specific effect is strongly

sensitive to the molecular structure of the guest-host, and mainly to dye structure 5. It is established

that diffusion of dye molecules in liquid crystal host has great influence on the observed reaction 6,

7.  Recently  the  molecular  theory  7  of  the  resonant  and  viscous  torques  in  trans-cis  systems  with

nematic  liquid  crystals  has  explained  the  main  dependencies  in  terms  of  diffusional  motion  and

hydrodynamic reorientation of molecules in a three component mixture (trans-, cis- conformers and

nematic liquid crystal molecules).

We  report  the  enhanced  optically  induced  reorientation  in  liquid  crystal  doped  with  dye  -

substituted polymer and corresponding induced birefringence. The experiments are performed with

a  homeotropic  LC  cell,  containing  nematic  5CB  from  Merck  (birefringence  D n=0.2)  and

azobenzene  substituted  polymer  poly-Orange  Tom-1  Isophoronedisocyanate.  The  LC  -  polymer

mixture contains 3-5 –wt.% of the latter substance. The molar part of azobenzene in this polymer

is  estimated  as  ca  50%  in  weight.  The  spacers  fixing  the  thickness  of  this  cell  L  are  of  34 m m.

Induced  birefringence  is  observed  in  a  polarised  probe  beam  of  a  diode  laser.  The  absorption

spectra for this polymers presented in 8 as verified coincides with the spectra of its solution in the

LC  (maximum  absorption  density  achieved  1.8-2.0  in  the  solution).  Wavelength  of  laser  diode

radiation (630 nm)  is  far  from  absorption  band  of  polymer  solution.  The  optical  response  of  the

media  is  measured  under  exposure  by  linearly  polarised  light  of  the  wavelength  488  nm  located

within the absorption band of the azobenzene group. The diameter of the illuminated area and light

intensity  are  of  4-9  mm  and  of  2-7  mW/cm2  respectively.  The  polarization  plane  of  diode  laser

2

radiation is set at 45 degrees to the green beam polarization plane (polarization planes are denoted

in Fig.1 by arrows).

The LC cell transmission for the l =630 nm light is observed between polarisers. The change

of the transmission is attributed to the birefringence arising due to the declination of nematic LC

from the homeotropic alignment at the angle q

. This angle determines the induced birefringence as

follow 9 :

D

q
(

n

=

)

(cos

2

q

/

n

2

o

+

sin

2

q

/

n

2

)

e

2/1

n

o

,

(1)

with 

on and 

en ,  refractive  indices  for  ordinary  and  extraordinary  optical  beams  in  liquid

crystal media.

The cell transmission in birefringence regime is determined by induced phase shift D F =2p  D n(

q )L/l  between two polarization components (chosen at 45 degrees to the polarizer axis):

I=I0 T0  sin2(D F  /2)+I scat,  

(2)

with I0, intensity of incident light; T0, transparency of polarizer for light polarized at 0 degrees;

I scat, light intensity scattered and partially depolarized by LC cell.

The change of the LC cell transmission (Equation 2) is measured in a simple scheme (optical

scheme of the experiment is presented in Fig.1), which included the LC cell itself, green Ar laser

(488 nm) for excitation and red diode laser (630 nm). A photodiode registers the transmitted power

of the red beam. The signal from the photodiode is recorded on a plotter with  swiping  speed  1-6

cm/min, well suitable for realized response time. The excitation beam is incident almost normally,

red readout beam - at a small angle of 5 degrees.

3

-
-
The  induced  birefringence D n(q )L is  determined  from  induced  phase  shift p(cid:215) D n(q )L  /l   ~  kp ,

where k is a number of the specific oscillations (shown in the inset in Fig.1) appeared at ascend and

decay of the optical response activated by a pulse of green light. The rise and decay of the induced

phase shift can be well fitted by exponential dependencies of a time (Fig.2). The maximum value of

induced  birefringence  D n(q )  is  estimated  as  0.08-0.10  for  light  intensity  5  mW/cm2.  This  value

corresponds to declination from the initial state at the angel q  ~45 degrees (determined by means of

Equation  1  as  a  value  averaged  over  the  LC  layer  thickness).  The  LC  texture  created  under  the

uniform  illumination  is  not  quite  flat.  Considerable  part  of  the  light  power  (up  to  30%  in  some

cases) is scattered; thereby  diminishing  the  contrast  of  mentioned  oscillations.  An  aggregation  of

polymer in a solution could be a reason for irregularity leading to this scattering.

Known  results  10  are  giving  much  lower  induced  birefringence  ~0.005  for  LC  doped  with

azobenzene D2 dye in the comparable conditions (LC cell thickness ~ 37.5 m m,  only  2-3x  larger

light intensity ~ 10 mW/cm 2). The rise/decay time published is of 1 sec.

The time constant of visco –elastic relaxation [9] of LC is 

t

g

~

2
KL /

, with  g ,  viscosity;

K , elastic coefficient of LC and  L - its thickness. With the given values of thickness and material

constants  it  is  of  order  of  1  second  as  in  mentioned  experiments  with  monomers  10.  In  our

experiments the process of reorientation is characterized by the rise/decay times of 40 seconds and

thus cannot be explained exclusively by visco-elastic relaxation.  Dependencies  of  rise/decay  time

on  the  light  intensity  are  presented  in  Fig.3  as  well  as  the  maximum  phase  shift  achievable  for

given  light  intensity  determined  from  specific  oscillations  at  the  optical  response  as  mentioned

above. The polymer dye in LC imposes longer excitation relaxation than in a case of monomer dye

additive (40 sec compared to 1 sec in 10), but it is much shorter than for light induced reorientation

in  azobenzene-containing  polymer  liquid  crystals  11.    The  measurements  in  the  lower  intensity

4

region  have  obstacles  in  slowing  of  the  LC  -  mixture  response,  while  at  higher  intensities  (5-6

mW/cm2) the visibility of oscillations at the front of response becomes inferior.

The observed difference  explanation  is  probably  concluded  in  a  role  of  polymer  binding  the

dye  molecules.  According  to  the  theory  7  the  resonant  contribution  in  optical  torque  is  strongly

dependent  on  the  diffusion  coefficients  of trans  and  cis  conformers  of  dye  molecules  (and  their

difference).  At  the  same  time  the  doping  dye  molecules  can  be  introduced  in  the  LC  material  in

different forms- as a stand-alone monomer or in the polymer compound as in our experiments. In

the  last  case  the  dye  group  are  included  as  substitute  side-groups.  These  groups  being

comparatively weakly bound with the main polymer chain retain much of the optical properties of

genuine  dye  molecules,  including  absorption  strength  of  oscillator  for  resonant  wavelength.  The

azobenzene inserted in LC in the  same  molar  portion  as  a  monomer  and  as  a  polymer  substitute

acts optically in the same way (absorbs the light and  perpetuates  conformal  transitions  while  the

light is on). At the same time the diffusion coefficient for polymer dye must be significantly lower

than  for  monomer.  Actually  the  rotational  diffusion  is  efficiently  dumped  due  to  interaction

between  neighboring  side  groups,  while  translation  one  is  practically  excluded  for  dye  molecule

attached to the polymer main chain. The dumping of rotational diffusion must strongly depend on

the distance between side-groups attached to main polymer chain.  This  dependence  can  be  tested

directly if different homologues of the same polymer with different separation of substitute become

available.

The  lower  diffusion  coefficient  for  dye  -substituted  polymer  (compared  to  the  monomers)

leads  to  a  lesser  migration  of  dye-initiated  excitations  and  as  a  result  to  a  larger  value  of  the

resonant  torque  per  a  mixture  volume  in  accordance  with  the  mentioned  theory.  Knowledge  of

diffusion  coefficients  for  polymer  and  corresponding  dye  monomer  could  provide  better

quantitative comparison. Unfortunately these coefficients are still to be measured for both polymer

and monomer dissolved in LC.

5

Komitov  12  reports  on  the  planar-homeotropic  transition  in  the  cell  containing  azobenzene-

based  LC  with  ability  of  photoconformation,  when  the  adsorption  of cis-conformers  on  the  LC-

substrate interface prevails over trans- conformer adsorption due to the larger dipole moment. We

can not exclude similar behavior of the dye in our case, which could induce some stabilization of

the homeotropic alignment. At the same time such an adsorption is originated from the interaction

with the substrates. In the case of ITO coated substrates it is logical to assume that this interaction

has  the  nature  of  electrostatic  attraction  to  the  conductive  surface.  As  we  are  taking  uncoated

glasses this stabilizing effect must be effectively reduced. Also in LC-dye mixture the role of this

surface adsorption should not be as large as for the cited case for the used concentrations of dye

(ca  5  weight  %  and  only  small  of  them  are  statistically  under  illumination  in  cis  -form,  which

causes  the  stabilization  of  homeotropic  orientation).  Thus  to  our  opinion  this  stabilization  effect

should not contribute significantly in observed LC reorientation.

In conclusions the azo-dye polymer is used as a photoactive additive to the nematic LC. Under

the  resonant  illumination  this  mixture  exhibits  induced  birefringence.  Comparison  with  the

published results on the LC mixtures containing monomer azobenzene dyes shows significant gain

in  the  value  of  induced  birefringence.  This  observation  of  the  enhanced  induced  birefringence  in

LC-polymer mixture qualitatively proves the theory  7.  Practically  the  sensitivity  enhancement  for

LC-polymer  mixture  (e.g.  the  threshold  of  reorientation  is  only  of  2  mW/cm2)  directly  leads  to

applications in optical technology. For example lower light power requirements open an application

for fiber optics switches and routers as well as optical image processing via nonlinear filtering 13 or

dynamic holography.

The Association for Super-Advanced Electronics Technologies (ASET) and the New Energy

Development  Organization  (NEDO)  supported  in  part  this  study.  We  thank  Electrotechnical

Laboratory and Dr. H.Yokoyama for support.

6

Figures captions:

Figure 1. Optical scheme of the experiment: P –polarizer, PD – photodiode.

Figure 2. Phase shift changes under exposure for the selected intensity of light (5 mW/cm2). Both

rise and decay are well fitted by the exponential dependence with time constant 40 s.

Figure 3. Intensity dependencies of rise/decay times vs light intensity determined as a time constant

t  with approximation by exp(-t/t ) and maximum phase shift achieved at given

illuminating light intensity.

7

References.

1.

B.Ya.  Zel'dovich,  N.F.  Pilipetskij,  A.V.  Sukhov,  N.V.  Tabiryan,  JEPT  Lett.  32,

2.

3.

4.

263 (1980).

I.Janossy, L.Csillag, A.D. Lloyd, Phys.Rev. A 44, 8410 (1991).

I. Janossy, Phys. Rev. E 49, 2957 (1994).

M.I.Barnik,  A.S.Zolot'ko,  V.G.Rumyantsev,  D.B.Terskov,  Crystallogr.Rep.,  40,

691 (1995).

5.

E.Santamato,  G.Abbate,  P.Maddalena,  L.Marrucci,  D.  Paparo,  E.  Massera

Mol.Cryst.Liq.Cryst., 302, 111 (1997).

6.

7.

B.Saad, M.M.Denariez-Roberge, T.V.Galstyan, Optics Letters 23, 727 (1998).

A.Chrzanowska, A.Parfenov, H. Yokoyama, Yu. Tabe. Phys.Rev. E,  (submitted)

(1999).

8.

K.Harada,  M.Itoh,  H.Matsuda,  S.Ohnishi,  A.Parfenov,  N.Tamaoki,  T.Yatagai,

J.Phys.D:Appl.Phys. 31, 463 (1998).

9.

L.M.Blinov,  V.  G.  Chigrinov,  Electrooptic  effects  in  liquid  crystal  materials

(Springer-Verlag, New York, 1994).

10.

B.Saad,  T.V.  Galstyan,  M.  M.  Denariez-Roberge,  M.  Dumont,  Optics

Communications 151, 235 (1998).

11.

12.

Y. Wu, A.Kanazawa, T. Shiono, T. Ikeda., Q. Zhang, Polymer 40, 4787 (1999)

L.Komitov, (personal communication, 1998).

13.  M.  Itoh,  K.  Harada,  S.Kotova,  A.Naumov,  A.Parfenov,  T.Yatagai,  Laser  and

Optics Technology 30, 147 (1998)

8

readout

Excitation

LC cell

transmission

P

t

PD

Fig.1. A.Parfenov, A.Chrzhanowska

Enhanced photoinduced …..

9

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

 
 
 
 
 
,
t
f
i

h
s
 

e
s
a
h
P

1-exp(-t/40)

     5 mW/cm2
 decay
 rise

exp(-t/40)

0

50

Time, sec

100

Fig.2. A.Parfenov, A.Chrzhanowska

Enhanced photoinduced …..

10

p
c
e
s
 
,

e
m
T

i

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

2.5

3.0

  phase shift

 rise
 decay

4.0

3.5
5.0
Light intensity, mW/cm2

4.5

8

6

 
,
t
f
i

h
s
 

 

e
s
a
h
p
m
u
m
x
a
M

i

 

4

2

0

5.5

6.0

Fig.3. A.Parfenov, A.Chrzhanowska

Enhanced photoinduced …..

11

p
