arXiv:physics/0002003v1  [physics.gen-ph]  1 Feb 2000

.

1

IS IT POSSIBLE TO TRANSFER AN INFORMATION

WITH THE VELOCITIES EXCEEDING SPEED OF

LIGHT IN EMPTY SPACE?

L.Ya.Kobelev ∗

Department of Physics, Urals State University
Lenina Ave., 51, Ekaterinburg 620083, Russia

abstract:On the base of the theory of time and space with the fractional dimensions a pos-

sibility for information transferring with any velocities is demonstrated.

01.30.Tt.05.45, 64. 60.A; 00.89.98.02.90. + p

1 Introduction

In the theory of special relativity (SR) the maximal velocity of any signal does not exceed
speed of light in the empty space (the existence of optical taxions does not break SR ) In
the frame of multifractal theory of time and space [1] it is possible to construct the theory
of almost inertial systems [2].
In this theory an arbitrary velocities of moving particles are
possible if the approximate independence of speed of light from the velocity of the light source
and the approximate constancy of speed of light in vacuum are valid (the breaking the low of
constancy speed of light are less than possibility of modern experiment and consist ∼ 10−10c,
see [1]). Is the transfer of the information within the framework of the theory [2]-[4] possible
with any velocities? The diﬃculty of create a signal carrier of the information spreading with
arbitrary large (practically inﬁnitely large) velocity is not the main diﬃculty at the answer
to this question. These signals can be, for example, a beams of charged particles (protons,
ionized atoms) accelerated up to velocities greater then the speed of light (their energy must
be more then energy E0103 where E0=moc2) and then spontaneously accelerated at almost
inﬁnite quantity velocity. These beams may be the carriers of the transferring information.
The diﬃculty consists in the creating the receivers (detectors) of the information recorded by
beams (or single) faster than light particles. According to the theory [2]-[4] a particle with
velocity v > c is spontaneously accelerated up to the velocity v = ∞ and practically ceases to
interact with a surrounding medium. The purpose of this paper is the attempt to analyze some
opportunities of detection of such particles. If the problem of detectors for registration of the
faster than light particles will be decided, the problem of practically instantaneous transfer of
the information at any distances is solved positively.

∗E-mail: leonid.kobelev@usu.ru

2

2 What physical eﬀects are existing for detection of

particles moving with velocity v > c?

Let us suppose validity of the laws of the electrodynamics for the velocities v > c. After
replacing β = p1 − v2/c2 by β ∗ = 4p(1 − v2/c2)2 + 4a2, (see designations a in [2]-[4]) the
In that case for the moving electrical charged
Lorentz’s transformation also may be used.
particle possessing velocity v ≃ ∞ and energy E = √2E0, near to the device playing role of

the detector, there are following eﬀects can be probably used for detection of the fact of transit
of a particle:
a) In the real physical world any of the physical quantities can not be equal inﬁnity, so we shall
introduce for designation of maximal velocity of a particle designation vm (vm is the velocity
of a faster than light particle for which the energy loss accompanying by increase of velocity
is compensated by magniﬁcation of the energy gained from a medium in which the beam of
the particles ﬂow by, i.e. the velocity of a particle becomes practically stationary value, for
example be in thermodynamic equilibrium with the relic radiation that gives the particle the
velocity vm∼ 500c ). There are an almost instantaneous impulses of electrical and magnetic
ﬁelds from an electrical current formed by transit of the faster than light particle through the
media. These impulses could be discovered by detectors that are capable to detect super short
impulses electrical or magnetic ﬁelds;
b)The kinetic energy of a faster than light particle at v > c looks like Ek ≈
m. The
transfer of parts of this energy basically can be registered by high precision detector’s (counters
of prompt particles for example based on use of an inner photoelectric eﬀect) in case when a
faster than light particle has the collision at a proton, nuclear or electron;
c) In the lengthy detector ﬁlled by substances with large density (small free length of collisions
for particles) will arise the multiple collisions of faster than light particles with atoms. It can
gives energy transition from substances to a faster than light particle and by that to decreasing
of its velocity. The power transmission from medium to a particle will gives in decreasing of
temperature of medium and besides gives the radiation of Cherenkov-Vavilov type (in an region
of frequencies deﬁned by number of collisions with atoms of the substance of the detector);
d) When the faster than light particle ﬂy through the substance with many energy levels with
negative temperatures as result may be lost of energy of substance without radiation and
decreasing of negative temperature of active optical substance. Physical laws do not forbid all
numbered methods of detection for ordinary particles with faster than light velocities and their
experimental realization (as well as many other method’s are based on an energy exchange
of a faster than light particle with energy of medium) are possible. The numbered methods
realization depends on the value of maximal velocity vm .

√2E0c2/v2

3 Are the particles with v > c and real mass exist in

nature?

Let us put the question: are the faster than light particles exist in our world? When and where
such particles can be discovered? As the one of consequences of the theory of fractal time (see
[1]), the particles with velocities exceeding the velocity of light must have an energy exceeding
their the rest energy Eo in 103 times. Such particles may be borne for example by explosions of
stars ( in that case it is possible to expect the appearance of the maximum in the spectrum of
γ- quanta for the energies E0103 or at the ﬁrst moments of ”big bang” when temperatures of
the early Universe exceed 1016K. If a neutrinos have the rest mass and its rest energy are small

3

and have the order (or less) 1ev. the neutrinos with faster then light velocities may be produced
by stars, by nuclei explosions and in the reactions of thermonuclear controlled syntheses. May
some super civilization use the faster then light particles, if this civilization has the technology
of receiving the beams of such particle, for record and translating information with the faster
than light velocities ? In that case it is necessary to seek such particles by mentioned above
(or similar) methods.

4 Conclusion

On the basis of the above-stated treatment of possibilities of detection of the particles with the
faster than light speed, it is possible to make a deduction: the prohibitions for transfer and
receiving of the information with faster than light speed are absent (if the theory [1]-[4] are
valid). The question about an existence of the ordinary particles (protons, electrons, neutrinos)
with velocities faster than light and the real mass in nature ( that question was presented (and
decided) for the ﬁrst time in the paper [2] as one of the consequences of the theory of almost
inertial systems that lays beyond of the special relativity and coincides with SR in the case of
ideal inertial systems) is now unsolved. The search of taxions continue more than thirty years.
I don’t mention about the optical taxions. The existence of the optical taxions do not contra-
dict the SR and apparently they are discovered. I think that only careful experimental search
of the ordinary particles with the real mass (the faster than light particles) and experiments
that may examine the fractal theory of time [1] may throw light on this very interesting problem.

We suggest to carry out the experiments for receiving by accelerating the protons with en-
ergies equal ∼ 1012ev. (that gives a protons the velocity equal the speed of light if the theory
[1]-[2] are valid) , then to verify the predictions of the theory that presented in this paper and
papers [2]-[4]

References

[1] Kobelev L.Ya.Fractl theory of time and space/Edit.by Kobelev L.Ya., Ekaterinburg, Kon-

ross,1999,p.136 ;LANL arXiv:physics/0001035 17 Jan 2000

[2] Kobelev L.Ya. Multifractality of time and special theory of relativity Urals State University,

Dep. v VINITI 19.08.99, No.2677-B99 1.

[3] Kobelev L.Ya. Can a particle moves with velosity exeeding the speed of light in empty
space? Urals State University,/Dep. v VINITY, 20.10.99, No.3129-B99;LANL arXiv:gr-
qc/0001042 15 Jan 2000

[4] Kobelev L.Ya. Physical eﬀects of a particles moving with velosity exeeding the speed of
light in empty space /Dep.v VINITY.20.10.99, No.3128-B99; LANL arXiv:gr-qc/0001043
17 Jan 2000

4

