On the Nature of

Measurement in Quantum Mechanics

DOUGLAS M. SNYDER

LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA

Abstract

A number of issues related to measurement show  that  self-consistency
is lacking in quantum mechanics as this theory has been generally understood.
Each issue is presented as a point in this paper.  Each point can be resolved by
incorporating a cognitive component in quantum mechanics.    Measurement  in
quantum mechanics involves the meaning of the physical circumstances of the
experiment.    This  meaning  is  in  part  independent  of  what  traditionally  are
considered purely physical considerations.
Text

The  following  five  points  concern  issues  in  quantum  mechanics  that
indicate that experimenter  variables  play  a  role  in  this  theory.    Each  point  is
followed by a brief discussion.

POINT ONE

1. An experimenter oftentimes may consider a physical interaction either as a
measurement  involving  a  macroscopic  measuring  instrument  interacting
with an observable or in terms of a set of microscopic systems,  including
the observable, functioning lawfully in accordance with  the  Schr(cid:154)dinger
equation.

The question arises:  On the microscopic level, does the abrupt change
in  the  wave  function  associated  with  the  observable  that  often  occurs  in  a
measurement  occur  when  the  observable  and  the  macroscopic  apparatus  are
considered as a set of microscopic physical systems interacting with each other?
According to Bohr,  the answer apparently is,  (cid:210)No.(cid:211)   Bohr  emphasized  that  it
was the macroscopic nature of the measuring apparatus that was responsible for
a measurement.  According to Bohr (1935), there was some loss of control due
to  the  macroscopic  character  of  the  physical  apparatus  used  to  make  a
measurement.    This  lack  of  control  resulted  in  the  limitation  on  knowledge
described  by  the  uncertainty  principle.    Thus  if  the  macroscopic  system  is
considered in terms of its microscopic components, a measurement should not

- 1 -

On the Nature

occur.  There should not be an abrupt change in the wave function  associated
with  the observable.

Here is how Bohr considered measurement in quantum mechanics.  He

wrote:

It  is  imperative  to  realize  that  in  every  account  of  physical
experience one must describe both experimental conditions  and
observations by the same means of communication as one used
in classical physics.  In the analysis of single atomic particles [in
quantum  mechanics],  this  is  made  possible  by  irreversible
amplification  effects  [emphasis  added]—such  as  a  spot  on  a
photographic plate left by the impact of an electron, or an electric
discharge  created  in  a  counter  device—and  the  observations
concern only where and  when  the  particle  is  registered  on  the
plate or its energy on arrival at the counter. (Bohr,  1955/1958b,
p. 88)

Bohr (1955/1958a) essentially defined the phenomenon in quantum mechanics
as the entire experimental context, specifically the experiment that is conducted
on  an  observable.    Bohr  maintained  that  the  experiment  conducted  was
described in terms of the physical apparatus used and the observable measured
and that the physical world in quantum mechanics could only be understood in
terms of the phenomenon.

On  the  lines  of  objective  description,  it  is  indeed  more
appropriate  to  use  the  word  phenomenon  to  refer  only  to
observations  obtained  under  circumstances  whose  description
includes an account of the whole experimental arrangement.  In
such  terminology,  the  observational  problem 
in  quantum
physics  is  deprived  of  any  special  intricacy  and  we  are,
moreover, directly  reminded  that  every  atomic  phenomenon  is
closed in the sense that its observation is based on registrations
obtained  by  means  of  suitable  amplification  devices  with
irreversible functioning such as,  for example, permanent marks
on a photographic plate, caused by the penetration  of  electrons
into the emulsion. (Bohr, 1955/1958a, p. 73)1

                                    
1 Citing Bohr, Wheeler (1981/1983) wrote: (cid:210)A phenomenon is not yet  a phenomenon until  it
has been brought to a close by an irreversible act of amplification such as the  blackening of  a
grain of silver bromide emulsion or the triggering of a photodetector....We are dealing with an

- 2 -

On the Nature

An experiment discussed by Feynman, Leighton, and Sands (1965) that
will  be  discussed  shortly  indicates  that  the  destruction  of  interference  often
associated with  a  measurement  in  quantum  mechanics  does  not  depend  on  a
macroscopic measuring instrument.

POINTS TWO AND THREE

2. A measurement can occur on a microscopic level without depending on a

macroscopic measuring instrument.

3.

The presence or absence of interference may depend on a comparison of
different  observables  in  an  experiment,  even  if  the  observables  cannot
actually be observed by the experimenter.

The Importance of Comparison

In  demonstrating  the  point  that  measurement  does  not  rely  on  a
macroscopic  physical  apparatus  acting  as  a  measuring  instrument  interacting
with  the  observable  measured,  Feynman  et  al.  considered  the  destruction  of
interference on the atomic level in the case of  neutron  scattering  by  a  crystal.
This  destruction  of  interference  depends  on  a  change  in  the  nucleus  in  the
crystal that interacts with the impacting neutron allowing the experimenter to (cid:210)in
principle, find out which nucleus had done the scattering, since it would be the
only  one  with  spin  turned  over(cid:211)  (Feynman  et  al.,  1965,  chap.  3,  p.  8).
Initially, all the nuclei in the crystal have their spin components along a specific
spatial axis set in one direction.  It is a change in the spin component along  a
spatial axis for a nucleus in the crystal impacted by a neutron that distinguishes
this nucleus from other nuclei for which the  spin  component  along  this  same
axis has not changed and which thus all remain in the original direction.

Note that the destruction in interference depends on the  nuclei  that  are
not impacted by  the  neutron  all  having  spin  components  that  are  opposite  in
orientation to the nucleus that is impacted by the incoming neutron.  It is not the
physical interaction between a nucleus in the crystal and the neutron that alone
is responsible for the destruction of interference.  If, in the interaction, the spin
component for the nucleus does not flip and the spin component for the neutron
therefore  does  not  flip,  interference  is  not  destroyed.    In  the  experiment,
destruction  of  the  interference  depends  on  a  microscopic  event,  a  spin
component  flip  on  the  part  of  the  neutron  that  distinguishes  the  path  of  the
                                                                                               
event that makes itself known  by  an irreversible act of  amplification,  by  an indelible record,
an act of registration.(cid:211) (pp. 184-185, 196)

- 3 -

On the Nature

impacting  neutron  from  alternative  paths.    The  different  spin  components
cannot, of course, be observed by the experimenter.

It is the information conveyed to the observer that  determines  whether
or  not  interference  is  destroyed.    The  physical  interaction  alone  does  not
account for the different physical results.  Feynman et al. (1965) had a different
view:

Well,  if  we  can  tell  which  atom  [nucleus]  did  the  scattering,
what have the other atoms  [nuclei]  to  do  with  it?    Nothing  of
course.  The scattering is exactly the same as that from a single
atom. (chap. 3, p. 8)

When Feynman et al. wrote: (cid:210)Nothing of course,(cid:211) their own description
of the  experiment  indicates  their  statement  is  incorrect.    Perhaps,  they  could
argue  that  on  a  physical  level  alone  the  other  nuclei  are  not  involved  in  the
scattering,  or  that  if  considered  in  isolation  the  impacted  nucleus  would  not
show  interference.    Their  own  description  of  the  destruction  of  interference,
though,  in the crystal depends on the  difference  between  the  spin  component
orientations of the impacted nucleus and the other nuclei.  In other words,  the
experimental circumstance involving  numerous  nuclei  is  not  the  same  as  one
involving only one nucleus.

POINT FOUR

4. A measurement needs to make which-way  information  only  in  principle

available to destroy interference.

In  different  works  on  quantum  theory,  Feynman  distinguished  those
circumstances in which wave amplitudes associated with an observable are first
added and the absolute value of the sum is squared to derive the probability of
an  event,  as  opposed  to  taking  the  absolute  square  of  each  of  the  wave
amplitudes and taking their sum to determine the probability of the same event.
Feynman et al. (1965) wrote concerning quantum mechanics:

[1] The probability of an event in an ideal experiment is given by
the square of the absolute value of a complex number f which is
called the probability amplitude...

[2]  When  an  event  can  occur  in  several  alternative  ways,  the
probability amplitude for the event is the sum of the probability
amplitudes for each way considered separately...

- 4 -

On the Nature

[3]  If  an  experiment  is  performed  which  is  capable  of
determining whether one or another alternative is actually taken,
the probability of  the  event  is  the  sum  of  the  probabilities  for
each alternative. (chap. 3, p. 10)

In their experiment discussed above, Feynman et al. (1965) wrote that
the distinction  between  the  different  paths  need  not  actually  be  known  to  an
observer.2  All that is necessary is that their distinction is in principle possible in
the experimental circumstances.

If you could, in principle, distinguish the alternative final states
[of the observables] (even though you do not bother to do so),
the  total,  final  probability  is  obtained  by  calculating  the
probability  for  each  state  (not  the  amplitude)  and  then  adding
them together.  If you cannot distinguish the final states even in
principle,  then  the  probability  amplitudes  must  be  summed
before taking the absolute square to find the  actual  probability.
(Feynman et al., 1965, chap. 3, p. 9)

Point  four  might  appear  to  indicate  that  the  observer  is  not  central  to
measurement in quantum mechanics.  It is important to note that distinguishing
final  paths  constitutes  a  measurement.    Remember,  oftentimes,  the  physical
interaction  occasioning  a  measurement  can  be  a  macroscopic  apparatus
interacting  with  a  microscopic  observable  or  it  can  be  an  interaction  among
microscopic observables  alone  (Point  one).  Because  of  these  different  views
one can take of an interaction, the in principle possibility of distinguishing paths
supports a cognitive component to measurement in quantum mechanics.  

In  this  context,  it  is  important  to  note  negative  observation.    In  a
negative observation, a measurement does not involve a physical interaction at
all (Bergquist, Hulet, Itano, &  Wineland,  1986;  Cook,  1990;  Epstein,  1945;
Nagourney,  Sandberg,  &  Dehmelt,  1986;  Renninger,  1960;  Sauter,
Neuhauser,  Blatt,  &  Toschek,  1986;  Snyder,  1996,  1997).    A  negative
observation occurs where an observation is made by deducing that a particular
physical event must have occurred because another physical event did not occur

                                    
2  In  QED: The  Strange Theory  of  Light  and Matter, Feynman  (1985)  maintained  the  same
principles hold in quantum electrodynamics.  In  sum,  where one can distinguish  between the
possible  routes,  or  developmental  sequence,  for  an  observable,  interference  between  the
component wave amplitudes characterizing the existent is destroyed.

- 5 -

On the Nature

with  subsequent  consequences  for  the  functioning  of  the  physical  world
stemming from the change in knowledge.

POINT FIVE

5. Macroscopic devices may either : 1) interact with an observable acting as a
measuring  instrument    where  coherence  is  destroyed  and  there  is  an
abrupt change in the wave function associated with the observable, or 2)
act as a device in the service of separating a wave function into coherent
components or recombining coherent component wave  functions  so  that
interference is expressed.  There is nothing in the nature of a macroscopic
device itself that necessarily signals a measurement.

An  example  is  a  double-hole  diaphragm  that  is  rigidly  attached  to  a
support through which electrons pass on their way to a screen that they impact
and that records their position (Bohr,  1949/1969).  Coherent component wave
functions  are  developed  as  a  result  of  the  electron  passing  through  the
diaphragm,  resulting  in  interference  which  is  detectable  when  the  electrons
impact the screen.  A macroscopic apparatus in  this  case  does  not  result  in  a
measurement when it interacts with a microscopic observable.  Something else
is needed to distinguish whether a measurement is made.

If,  instead  of  being  fixed,  the  diaphragm  was  movable  due  to
momentum  transfer  between  the  electron  and  the  diaphragm,  a  position
measurement would occur.  Which hole an electron went through on its way to
the screen could be determined by how  the  diaphragm  moved  as  the  electron
passed through (Bohr, 1949/1969).  What is it about allowing the diaphragm to
move  that  changes  its  function  so  dramatically?    The  answer  lies  in  the
destruction of interference, and interference in quantum mechanics depends on
coherent  waves  that  are  mathematically  complex  and  do  not  have  a  physical
existence.

One  can  in  fact  piece  together  coherent  component  wave  functions
associated  with  an  observable  using  a  macroscopic  physical  apparatus.    For
example,  one  may  use  a  one-half  silvered  mirror  to  recombine  coherent
component wave functions  associated  with  a  photon  that  had  originally  been
separated  earlier  by  another  one-half  silvered  mirror.    The  macroscopic
apparatus  used  to  combine  the  component  wave  functions  does  not  destroy
interference.    It  actually  implements  interference  using  the  coherent  wave
functions.

- 6 -

On the Nature

CONCLUSION

Following is a summary of the points made in this paper.

1.

2.

3.

In  many  experimental  circumstances,  a  macroscopic
apparatus appears to be responsible for the  occurrence  of
measurements in quantum mechanics.

Feynman et al.(cid:213)s experiment works as they discussed,  and
their position that a macroscopic physical apparatus is not
always necessary for a measurement is sound.

The  occurrence  of  a  measurement  may  depend  on  a
comparison  of  observables,  even  if  these  observables
cannot be observed but can only be thought about.

4. A  physical  interaction  that  is  considered  a  measurement,
accompanied  by  an  abrupt  change  of  the  wave  function
associated  with  the  observable  measured,  does  not
necessarily have to be considered as such.  The collapse of
the wave function need not  occur  in  another  view  of  the
same  interaction  that  focuses  on  the  interacting  systems
microscopically.

5. A measurement can be said to occur when in principle it is
possible  to  distinguish  possible  measurement  outcomes,
even if these outcomes are not actually measured.

6. Negative observations are possible in quantum mechanics.

7. A macroscopic  physical  apparatus  is  not  necessary  for  a
measurement,  and  indeed  it  can  be  used  to  develop
interference.

Notice the use of the terms  view,  comparison,  and  in  principle.    The
inconsistencies  noted  in  this  paper  indicate  that  quantum  mechanics  is  not
concerned  exclusively  with  the  physical.    A  measurement  affecting  an
observable can be made without a  physical  interaction.    Quantum  mechanics,
though,  always does depend on the mathematically complex waves  associated
with  observables,  and  interference  itself  combines  these  complex  waves.
Anything that can be known about an observable is derived from these waves.

Ascribing a cognitive component to quantum mechanics accounts for the
terms indicating cognition that are noted above as well as the  result  stemming

- 7 -

On the Nature

from Bohr(cid:213)s concept of measurement that depending on one(cid:213)s view there may
or not be an abrupt change of the wave function associated with an observable
when a physical interaction occurs.  One can summarize the points in this paper
by characterizing measurement in quantum mechanics as involving the meaning
of  the  physical  circumstances  of  the  experiment.    This  meaning  is  in  part
independent of what traditionally are considered purely physical considerations.

REFERENCES

Bergquist, J.  C.,  Hulet, R.  G.,  Itano,  W.  M.,  and  Wineland,  D.  J.  (1986).
Observation of quantum jumps in a single atom. Physical Review  Letters,
57, 1699-1702.

Bohr, N. (1935). Can quantum-mechanical description of nature be considered

complete? Physical Review, 49, 1804-1807.

Bohr,  N.  (1969).  Discussion  with  Einstein  on  epistemological  problems  in
atomic  physics.  In  P.  A.  Schilpp  (Ed.),  Albert  Einstein:  Philosopher-
scientist (Vol. 1) (pp. 199-241). La Salle, Illinois: Open Court.  (Original
work published 1949)

Bohr, N. (1958a) Atoms and human knowledge. In N.  Bohr,  Atomic Physics
and Human Knowledge (pp.  67-82).   New  York:  John  Wiley  &  Sons.
(Original work published 1955)

Bohr,  N.  (1958b)  Unity  of  knowledge.  In  N.  Bohr,  Atomic  Physics  and
Human  Knowledge  (pp.  83-93).    New  York:  John  Wiley  &  Sons.
(Original work published 1955)

Cook,  R.  J.  (1990).  Quantum  jumps.  In  E.  Wolf  (Ed.),  Progress  in  Optics

(Vol. 28) (pp. 361-416). Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Epstein,  P.  (1945).  The  reality  problem  in  quantum  mechanics.  American

Journal of Physics, 13, 127-136.

Feynman, R.  P.,  Leighton, R.  B.,  &,  and  Sands,  M.  (1965).  The  Feynman
(Vol.  3).  Reading,

Lectures  on  Physics:  Quantum  Mechanics 
Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley.

Feynman,  R.  P.  (1985).  QED:  The  Strange  Theory  of  Light  and  Matter.

Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Nagourney,  W.,  Sandberg,  J.,  and  Dehmelt,  H.  (1986).  Shelved  optical
electron  amplifier:  observation  of  quantum  jumps.  Physical  Review
Letters, 56, 2797-2799.

- 8 -

On the Nature

Renninger,  M. 

(1960).  Messungen  ohne  St(cid:154)rung  des  Me§objekts
[Observations without disturbing the object]. Zeitschrift f(cid:159)r Physik, 158,
417-421.

Sauter, T., Neuhauser, W., Blatt,  R.  and Toschek, P.  E.  (1986).  Observation

of quantum jumps. Physical Review Letters, 57, 1696-1698.

Snyder, D. M. (1996). On the Nature of the Change in the Wave Function in a
Measurement in Quantum Mechanics. Los Alamos National Laboratory E-
Print  Physics  Archive  (WWW  address:  http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/quant-
ph/9601006).

Snyder, D. M. (1997). Negative Observations in Quantum Mechanics.  APS E-
print  Server  (WWW  address:  http://publish.aps.org/eprint/gateway/
eplist/aps1997jun24_006)  and  Cogprints  Electronic  Archive  (WWW
address: http://cogprints.soton.ac.uk/abs/psyc/199806017).

Wheeler, J.  A. (1983).  Law without law.  In  J.  A.  Wheeler  &  W.  H.  Zurek
(Eds.)  Quantum  Theory  and  Measurement  (pp.  182-213).  Princeton,
New Jersey: Princeton University Press. (Original work published 1981)

- 9 -

