Inquiries into the Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

In Respect to Biochemical Thermodynamics 

Clinton D. Stoner 

Department of Surgery, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, U.S.A. 

 

 

 
ABSTRACT 
Free  energy  and  entropy  are  examined  in  detail  from  the 
standpoint  of  classical  thermodynamics.  The approach is logi-
cally  based  on  the  fact  that  thermodynamic  work  is  mediated 
by  thermal  energy  through  the  tendency  for  nonthermal  en-
ergy  to  convert  spontaneously  into  thermal  energy  and  for 
thermal  energy  to  distribute  spontaneously  and  uniformly 
within the accessible space. The fact that free energy is a Sec-
ond-Law,  expendable  energy  that  makes  it  possible  for  ther-
modynamic  work  to  be  done  at  a  finite  rate  is  emphasized. 
Entropy, as originally defined, is pointed out to be the capacity 
factor  for  thermal  energy  that  is  hidden  with  respect  to  tem-
perature; it serves to evaluate the practical quality of thermal 
energy  and  to  account  for  changes  in  the  amounts  of  latent 
thermal  energies  in  systems  maintained  at  constant  tempera-
ture. With entropy thus operationally defined, it is possible to 
see  that  T∆∆∆∆S°  of  the  Gibbs  standard  free  energy  relation 
∆∆∆∆G° = ∆∆∆∆H° −−−− T∆∆∆∆S° serves to account for differences or changes 
in nonthermal energies that do not contribute to ∆∆∆∆G° and that, 
since ∆∆∆∆H° serves to account for differences or changes in total 
energy,  complete  enthalpy-entropy  (∆∆∆∆H°-T∆∆∆∆S°)  compensation 
must invariably occur in isothermal processes for which T∆∆∆∆S° 
is finite. A major objective was to clarify the means by which 
free  energy  is  transferred  and  conserved  in  sequences  of  bio-
logical  reactions  coupled  by  freely diffusible intermediates. In 
achieving  this  objective  it  was  found  necessary  to  distinguish 
between  a  ‘characteristic  free  energy’  possessed  by  all  First-
Law energies in amounts equivalent to the amounts of the en-
ergies  themselves  and  a  ‘free  energy  of  concentration’  that  is 
intrinsically  mechanical  and  relatively  elusive  in  that  it  can 
appear to be free of First-Law energy. The findings in this re-
gard serve to clarify the fact that the transfer of chemical po-
tential energy from one repository to another along sequences 
of biological reactions of the above sort occurs through trans-
fer of the First-Law energy as thermal energy and transfer of 
the Second-Law energy as free energy of concentration. 
 

INTRODUCTION 
Despite  the  assurance  of  the  First  Law  of  Thermodynamics  that 
energy  is  invariably  conserved,  we  often  concern  ourselves  with 
the conservation of energy. This apparent inconsistency obviously 
must arise from the fact that the ambient thermal energy into which 
high-grade thermal energy and most other forms of energy tend to 
degrade has relatively little ‘available work potential’. And it must 
be this so-called free energy rather than an actual energy that we 
ordinarily seek to conserve, ‘actual energy’ referring to any of the 
various energies recognized by the First Law. 

The  primary  objectives  in pursuing this study were to achieve 
fully operational understandings of free energy and its close rela-
tive entropy and thereby to clarify apparent inconsistencies of the 
above sort and to deal with a number of other problems that tend to 
make the laws and fundamental equations of thermodynamics gen-
erally difficult to interpret and understand. Some of the problems 

and their persistence appear to derive from the common practice of 
viewing  entropy  as  a  measure of disorder. Entropy as disorder is 
not measurable as such and thus is not operational. Whatever the 
case, the findings here suggest that several of the difficulties that 
commonly plague the interpretation of thermodynamic phenomena 
can  be  resolved  by  identifying  and  distinguishing  between  the 
various energies involved and taking into consideration the practi-
cal qualities of the actual energies in respect to free energy. 

The original objective was simply to clarify the means by which 
free energy is transferred and conserved in sequences of stationary-
state  biological  reactions  coupled  by  freely  diffusible  intermedi-
ates.  The  reported  findings  in  this  regard  serve  to  emphasize  the 
need to acknowledge the existence of an intrinsically mechanical, 
phantom-like  free  energy  that  can  disappear  without  a  trace  and 
thereby appear to be free of actual energy. 
Energy,  Temperature,  Work,  Work  Potential,  and  Free  En-
ergy. Energy is usually defined in terms of a capacity of something 
to do work. Actual energy of matter may be classed broadly into 
two  interconvertible  varieties:  energy  of  motion  (kinetic  energy) 
and  energy  of  constrained  motion  (potential  energy).  Energy  of 
motion  can  be  subdivided  into  directed  and  undirected  varieties. 
Disregarding the radiant form, thermal energy is an actual energy 
of undirected (random) motion of the individually mobile particu-
late  constituents  of  macroscopic  amounts  of  matter  and  is  a  me-
chanical kind of energy into which all other forms of actual energy 
tend to convert. Temperature is a property of macroscopic amounts 
of matter and serves to gauge the intensity of the thermal energy. 
Thermal  energy  transfer  occurs  spontaneously  and  net  transfer 
along  a  gradient  of  temperature  is  a  one-way  process,  occurring 
only  from  higher  to  lower  temperature.  In  consequence,  macro-
scopic amounts of matter in thermal contact with one another tend 
to  be  at  the  same  temperature,  a  fact  of  sufficient  fundamental 
importance  to  merit  belated  designation  as  the  Zeroth  Law  of 
Thermodynamics. 

Work  may  be  defined  roughly  as  any  activity  that  is energeti-
cally equivalent to lifting a weight. Since it exists only at the time 
it is being performed, work is generally viewed both as a nonther-
mal  actual  energy  in  transit  between  one  form  or  repository  and 
another and as a means of nonthermal actual energy transfer. We 
shall  be  concerned  here  only  with  ‘thermodynamic  work’  (i.e., 
only  with  work  in  which  the  transit  of  nonthermal  actual  energy 
between forms or repositories occurs through intermediary thermal 
energy).  Accordingly,  ‘conservative  work’,  such  as  that  done  in 
direct  conversions  between  gravitational  potential  energy  and  di-
rected  motional  energy  of  matter,  shall  be  ignored.  Transfers  of 
actual  energy  in  thermodynamic  work  processes  require  specific 
mechanisms that depend on the nature of the energy. Thermal en-
ergy transfer occurs by conduction, convection, and radiation. 

Consistent  with  the  reciprocity  in  the  definitions  of  work  and 
energy, work potential shall be considered here to be the total po-
tential of an energy for doing work. Although in principle all actual 
energies  are  equivalent  to  their  work  potentials  and  thus  are 
equivalent with respect to work potential, they differ with respect 
to available work potential and thus differ with respect to quality, 
the  quality  being  higher  the  greater  the  availability  of  the  work 

Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

potential. The availability of the work potential of an actual energy 
depends on the nature of the energy and on the conditions under 
which work is done. Whereas the work potential of thermal energy 
is completely unavailable at constant temperature, that of all other 
forms  of  actual energy can in principle become available at con-
stant temperature as a result of (i) the tendency of nonthermal ac-
tual energy to convert spontaneously into thermal energy of quality 
(temperature) exceeding that of the ambient thermal energy and of 
(ii)  the  capacity  of  relatively  high-quality  thermal  energy  to  do 
mechanical work through its tendency to distribute spontaneously 
and uniformly within the accessible ambient space. In the course 
of  any  work  thus  done,  actual  energy  and  work  potential  are 
invariably  conserved,  whereas  energy  quality,  or  available  work 
potential (free energy), is invariably consumed. As will be empha-
sized below, the amount of free energy consumed in the course of 
a thermodynamic work process depends greatly on the magnitude 
of the differential in quality between the intermediary and ambient 
thermal energies and thus on how fast the work is done. 

Since it is possible in principle for thermodynamic work to be 
done  under  conditions  of  the  rate  and  the  differential  in  thermal 
energy  quality  being  extremely  small,  any  nonthermal  actual  en-
ergy can be considered to possess in principle an amount of free 
energy  equivalent  to  the  amount  of  the  energy  itself.  In  conse-
quence,  all  actual  energies  other  than  thermal  energy  may  be 
viewed  as  being  completely  interconvertible  through  mechanical 
work  at  ordinary  ambient  temperatures  and  thus  may  be  viewed 
equally as energy of high quality. However, owing to differences 
in barriers to conversion, to differences in complexity of required 
mechanisms, and to consequent unavoidable differences in losses 
of  free  energy  in  real  conversion  processes,  the  qualities  of  the 
various  nonthermal  actual  energies  differ  from  the  standpoint  of 
practical processes. Because gravitational potential energy can be 
converted directly into mechanical work, the energy conserved in 
the  course  of  lifting  a  weight  is  generally  viewed  as  the  form  of 
nonthermal actual energy having the highest quality. 

Although  completely  unavailable  at  constant  temperature,  the 
work potential of thermal energy can be realized at the expense of 
a decrease in the temperature (quality) of the energy, and thus for 
thermal energy having a particular temperature the work potential 
may  be  viewed  as  being  potentially  available.  However,  because 
complete  conversion  of  a  given  amount  of  thermal  energy  into  a 
nonthermal actual energy would require a decrease in the tempera-
ture of the given amount to absolute zero, the potential availability 
of the work potential of thermal energy is quite limited and that of 
ambient thermal energy at ordinary ambient temperatures is practi-
cally nil. 
 
THERMODYNAMICS OF GASES 
The fundamental aspects of thermodynamics are based largely on 
energy  changes  associated  with  changes  in  the  state  properties 
pressure,  volume,  and  temperature  of  an  ideal  gas  in  accordance 
with the ideal gas equation: PV = nRT. In consequence, the nature 
of free energy and its relationship to entropy are best seen by ex-
amining the predictions of the laws of thermodynamics in respect 
to compression and expansion of a gas of this kind. Such will be 
done here by considering an ideal gas confined within a rigid cyl-
inder of the sort shown in Figure 1. The walls of the cylinder are 
assumed to be permeable to thermal energy and in contact with a 
thermal reservoir that is sufficiently large and conductive to vali-
date  the assumption that its temperature remains constant despite 
transmissions of thermal energy between it and the gas. The gas is 
assumed to be confined to the cylinder and separated from a vac-

 

2

 

             
 
Figure 1. Compression and expansion of an ideal gas in a rigid-
cylinder, piston system. The piston is assumed to be massless and 
frictionless and the temperature of the thermal reservoir is assumed 
to be constant. W = an amount of mechanical work; Q = an amount 
of thermal energy; V = volume of the gas; P = pressure of the gas. 
 
 
uum by a massless and frictionless piston by which it can be com-
pressed and allowed to expand. 

It is important to note that, since ideal gases and solutes in ideal 
solution are virtually identical in respect to mechanical thermody-
namic properties at normal ambient temperatures and pressures (1), 
the Figure 1 system is also relevant to the thermodynamics of dis-
solved  substances.  Thus,  although  the  kinetics  would  be  much 
different, the same thermodynamic relationships would apply if (i) 
the gas of Figure 1 were a solute in ideal solution, (ii) the vacuum 
were replaced by the pure solvent, and (iii) the piston were selec-
tively permeable to the solvent. If such were the case, the concen-
tration  and  osmotic  pressure  of  the  gas  as  a  solute  would  corre-
spond to the concentration and pressure of the gas as a gas, and the 
thermodynamic relationships would be largely independent of the 
pressure  on  the  solvent  within  the  normal  atmospheric  range  of 
pressure. 

 According to the ideal gas equation and the First Law of Ther-
modynamics, if an amount of work W were done on an ideal gas in 
compressing it from the maximum volume V1 to a volume V2, an 
amount of thermal energy Q equivalent to the work done would be 
transmitted from the gas to the reservoir in the course of the gas 
achieving  thermal  equilibrium  with  its  surroundings  during  and 
after the compression. According to the ideal gas equation, if the 
compression of one mol of the gas were conducted reversibly (i.e., 
sufficiently  slowly  that  the  gas  would  remain  in  virtual  thermal 
equilibrium with the reservoir), a minimum amount of work Wrev 
energetically  equivalent  to  RT ln(V1/V2)  of  gravitational  potential 
energy would be required to compress the gas, and, according to 
the First Law, an equivalent amount of thermal energy Qrev would 
be  transmitted  from  the  gas  to  the  reservoir  during  the  compres-
sion. In the course of this conversion of energy of the highest qual-
ity  into  the  ambient  thermal  energy,  the  gas  would  be  endowed 
with a potential for conversion of ambient thermal energy into an 
amount  of  work  equivalent  to  that  done  in  compressing  it,  as  is 
obvious from the specifications that the temperature of the reser-
voir be constant and that the compression be conducted reversibly. 
In other words, if one mol of the gas were compressed isothermally 
(reversibly) from V1 to V2, an amount RT ln(V1/V2) of actual energy 
equivalent  in  quality  to  gravitational  potential  energy  would  be 
converted into an amount RT ln(V1/V2) of ambient thermal energy 
plus an amount RT ln(V1/V2) of an energy of the gas which is ordi-
narily ignored when encountered in this context, but which obvi-

Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

ously must be viewed as being free energy. If we were to consider 
this  free  energy  to be actual energy, the First Law of Thermody-
namics would of course appear to be very seriously in error. That it 
is not in error is evident from the fact that, if the free energy were 
not  used  for  reversing  the  degradation  of  the  nonthermal  actual 
energy  into  ambient  thermal  energy,  it  would  simply  disappear, 
never  to  reappear.  Thus,  if  the  compressed  gas  were  allowed  to 
expand from V2 to V1 without doing work on the surroundings, as 
would  be  the  case  if  the  massless  and  frictionless  piston  holding 
the gas in the compressed state (Figure 1) were suddenly released, 
it would do so rapidly without a net change in actual energy of any 
kind in either the gas or its surroundings (2). 

If free energy is not actually energy, what, then, is it? Since in 
the course of the compression phase of the above cyclic process it 
would  become  dissociated  from  the  actual  energies  W  and  Q,  it 
appears in this case to be an available work potential that is free of 
actual energy. The facts (i) that complete recovery of the reversibly 
imparted free energy could be achieved only if the compressed gas 
were allowed to expand and do work at an infinitesimal rate and 
(ii) that, if the gas were allowed to expand without doing work, it 
would do so at the maximum possible rate with complete loss of 
the free energy suggest that free energy expenditure is what makes 
things happen within finite amounts of time. Accordingly, by com-
bining the well-established equations of steady-state kinetics with 
those  of  classical  equilibrium  thermodynamics,  it  is  possible  to 
show  quantitatively  for  stationary-state  (apparent-equilibrium) 
reactions that the faster the reaction, the greater the amount of free 
energy consumed (3). 

To see clearly the nature of the above free energy, we must con-
sider  the  properties  of  an  ideal  gas  in  respect  to  actual  energy. 
Gases in molar amounts at ordinary temperatures generally consist 
of very large numbers of very small particles that are moving ran-
domly  at  very  high  speeds.  They  tend  to  occupy  uniformly  the 
entire space accessible to them and through collisions of the parti-
cles exert pressure on whatever confines them, thereby tending to 
increase the accessible space. The particles of an ideal gas are as-
sumed  to  collide with perfect elasticity and to have volumes that 
are  negligibly  small  in  relation  to  the  space  available  for  their 
translation. In addition, the particles are assumed (i) to be devoid 
of  attractive  and  repulsive  forces,  (ii)  to  be  free  of  influence  by 
fields  of  force  such as the gravitational field, and (iii) to possess 
per mol a total amount of actual energy E which depends only on 
the temperature. According to these assumptions, the actual energy 
of an ideal gas consists exclusively of thermal energy and differ-
ences in this energy on a per mol basis between states at the same 
temperature are zero. Thus, in the above considerations, ∆E for the 
gas was assumed to be zero. 

We may now inquire as to the nature and source of the thermal 
energy that would appear in an ideal gas as it is compressed. The 
thermal energy must come from kinetic energy transmitted by the 
piston to the gas particles as the piston is moved toward the parti-
cles,  this  despite  the  fact  that  an  amount  of  thermal  energy  Qrev 
would be imparted even if the piston were moved extremely (infi-
nitely)  slowly.  The  faster  the  piston  is  moved  the  greater  the 
amount of energy required and thus the greater W and Q must be. 
This implies that the temperature would be determined exclusively 
by the translational kinetic energies of the particles and that in the 
course of thermal equilibration with the reservoir, the kinetic ener-
gies on average would return to their initial values, leaving only a 
diminished volume and a consequent augmentation of the pressure 
to  account  for  the  deposition  of  free  energy  in  the  gas.  Accord-
ingly, experimental observations on real gases suggest that allow-
ing  an  ideal  gas  to  expand  without  doing  work  (i.e.,  without  the 

 

3

particles  expending  kinetic  energy)  would  not  affect  its  tempera-
ture (2). 

According to the ideal gas equation, PV would not change in the 
course of an isothermal change in the state of such a gas on a per 
mol basis. This being the case, RT ln(V1/V2) for an isothermal com-
pression would be equivalent to RT ln(P2/P1) and thus for such a 
compression  one  could  attribute  the  consequent  increase  in  free 
energy either to the decrease in the volume or to the increase in the 
pressure. That it would be appropriate to attribute the increase only 
to the increase in pressure is evident from the facts (i) that driving 
forces  for  change  are  determined  only  by  intensive  variables  (4) 
and  (ii)  that  pressure  is  the  only  intensive variable of the system 
under consideration. 

It may be noted that, since there would be no difference in ac-
tual energy between the states, the increase in free energy can also 
be regarded as being due to an increase in the density of the trans-
lational kinetic energy or in the degree to which the translational 
motions of the gas particles are constrained, in which cases one can 
readily see that the free energy would possess an attribute of poten-
tial energy. In addition, since for an isothermal change the pressure 
and concentration would vary in direct proportion to one another, 
the free energy can also be regarded as being an energy of concen-
tration. In fact doing so is preferable for the purposes of this study 
because  differences  in  this  kind  of  free energy between the reac-
tants  and  products  of  biochemical  reactions  are  ordinarily  deter-
mined  according  to  differences  in  concentrations.  As  will  be 
pointed out below, the nature of this ‘free energy of concentration’ 
is  fundamentally  the  same  for  a  system  in  which  only  chemical 
work  is  possible  as  for  the system here (Figure 1) in which only 
mechanical work is assumed possible. 
Free  Energy  in  Relation  to  Entropy.  Since  free  energy  is  not 
actually energy from the standpoint of the First Law and can dis-
appear without a trace when of the concentration variety, it is nec-
essary to account for its consumption in terms of the actual ener-
gies. As indicated above, the actual energies W and Q are variable 
quantities that depend on how fast the compression or expansion of 
the  gas  is  achieved.  Although  Wrev  for  an  isothermal  (reversible) 
compression  or  expansion  can  be  determined  from  the  ideal  gas 
equation and Qrev for such a process can be determined from Wrev 
by invoking the First Law, neither Wrev nor Qrev is a difference in a 
property, or state function, of the gas. Wrev for such a process can 
be determined from the ideal gas equation because, for conditions 
of constant T, the state variables consist only of the intensive prop-
erty P and the extensive property V which correspond to one an-
other  such  that  PV  defines  an  energy  having  dimensions  of  me-
chanical work (i.e., dimensions of force × distance). 

As  is  evident  from  its  exclusive  dependence  on  pressure  and 
volume, free energy of concentration is a property of an ideal gas. 
However, differences in this property between states can be calcu-
lated  only  if  the  states  have  the  same  temperature.  Although  the 
free energy otherwise has the advantage that it is clearly an actual 
property of the gas, differences in this property between states at 
the same temperature are ordinarily reckoned in terms of the ther-
mal energy that would be transmitted between the gas and its sur-
roundings if the changes giving rise to the differences were to oc-
cur reversibly. The achievement of this requires an additional ex-
tensive state property that corresponds to the intensive state prop-
erty T in such a way as to define an energy having dimensions of 
thermal  energy  when  multiplied  by  T.  In  addition,  since  an  iso-
thermal change in the free energy would not involve a net change 
in the actual energy of the gas and is assumed not to involve a net 
change in the temperature of the surroundings, this extensive state 
property  must  be  limited  to  thermal  energy  that  is  produced  or 

Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

consumed  at  constant  temperature.  In  other  words,  (i)  as  for  any 
other  kind  of  energy, we must have a capacity factor for thermal 
energy that corresponds to the intensity factor for this kind of en-
ergy and (ii) the capacity factor in this particular case must be lim-
ited to thermal energy that either does not contribute to tempera-
ture or is otherwise hidden with respect to temperature. 

The problem of recognizing and meeting this need was solved 
early  in  the  history  of  thermodynamics  research  by  Clausius  (5), 
who  noted that, despite the fact of the amount of thermal energy 
Qrev being located in the surroundings rather than in the gas, Qrev/T 
for an isothermal change in the state of an ideal gas corresponds to 
a  change  in  a  property  of  the  gas.  Clausius  named  this  property 
‘entropy’  and  represented  it  with  the  symbol  S.  With  respect  to 
gases and other chemical substances, the symbol S is now ordinar-
ily  used  to  express  entropy  as  an  intensive  quantity  having  the 
same dimensions as R, the universal gas constant (i.e., dimensions 
of energy per mol per degree Kelvin). As a result, nST defines an 
amount  of  energy  just  as  does  nRT  of  the  ideal  gas  equation,  n 
being the number of mols and nS the extensive component of the 
energy.  However,  whereas  nRT  refers  to  an  amount  of  pressure-
volume work energy, nST refers to an amount of thermal energy 
that is somehow hidden with respect to temperature. Of course if 
the thermal energy of which entropy is the capacity factor were not 
hidden  with  respect  to  temperature,  the  appropriate  comparable 
capacity factor would be the molar heat capacity of the substance. 

The molar heat capacity of a substance refers to the amount of 
thermal energy required to raise the temperature of one mol of the 
substance by one degree Kelvin. The heat capacity of a gas can be 
determined unequivocally only under conditions either of constant 
pressure or of constant volume, in which cases the molar heat ca-
pacities are denoted by CP and CV, respectively. According to the 
classical kinetic theory of gases, CP and CV for an ideal gas would 
be constants having the values 5-2  R  and 3-2  R , respectively, regardless 
of the magnitudes of the state properties temperature, pressure, and 
volume at which they are determined (6). CP exceeds CV by R be-
cause an amount of pressure-volume work equivalent to R would 
be done on the surroundings if the heat capacity were determined 
at  constant  pressure.  Thus,  only  CV  is  a  heat  capacity  that  refers 
exclusively to energy possessed by the gas. 

As one might expect from its relationship to free energy of con-
centration, entropy in general simply appears, never to disappear, 
as free energy vanishes. As a result of the fact that its total amount 
invariably  increases,  entropy  is  often  said  not  to  be  conserved, 
which, of course, is true in the sense that the amount is not a con-
stant. Since the increase is determined by the amount and quality 
of the actual energy that invariably appears as high-quality actual 
energy  and  its  associated  free  energy  disappear,  it  seems  more 
appropriate  and  instructive  to  acknowledge  instead  that  it  is  the 
free energy (quality) of actual energy, or high-quality actual energy 
itself, that is not conserved. Nevertheless, entropy has been univer-
sally  adopted  as  the  principal  index  of  free  energy  consumption, 
this despite the facts that the quality of an energy is determined by 
the  magnitude  of  its  intensive  component  (4)  and  that  entropy, 
being, like volume, an extensive component of an energy, is con-
sequently  relatively  incomprehensible  as  an  indicator  of  energy 
degradation.  However,  as  will  be  outlined  below,  entropy  has an 
important advantage over free energy in this respect in that it can 
be and has been universalized such as to make possible a proper 
(practical) assessment of the quality of thermal energy. 

In this regard it is important to note that the free energy of the 
intermediary  thermal  energy  of  a  thermodynamic  work  process 
mediated  by an ideal gas would be subject to loss by two means 
depending  on  whether  the  thermal  energy  moves  spontaneously 

 

4

down a gradient of pressure by convection, in which case the free 
energy  that  is  subject  to  loss  would  be  the  above-described  free 
energy  of  concentration,  or  down  a  gradient  of  temperature  by 
conduction and/or radiation. If entropy is to be a universal capacity 
factor, it must be capable of serving as the capacity factor for free 
energy that is subject to loss by both these means. In the case of 
convection, the intensive and extensive components of the energy 
are pressure and volume and the extensive component can be read-
ily expressed in terms of entropy. Thus, for an isothermal (reversi-
ble)  compression  of  an  ideal  gas,  the  increase  in  free  energy  of 
concentration  on  a  per  mol  basis  can  be  represented  either  by 
−RT ln(V2/V1)  or  by  −T∆S,  ∆S  being  equivalent  to  Rln(V2/V1),  a 
negative quantity in the case of compression, indicating a decrease 
in the entropy of the gas. Of course the reason why the entropy of 
the gas would decrease in this case is that the thermal energy on 
which the entropy is based would be located in the surroundings 
rather than in the gas. Entropy is universalized by using this vol-
ume-dependent entropy in a Carnot cycle to define an entropy in 
terms of the thermal energy possessed by the gas, in which case the 
free energy that is subject to loss would have temperature and heat 
capacity as its intensive and extensive components. Since both CV 
and  CP  would  be  constants,  any  changes  in  this  ‘derivative’  en-
tropy  must  necessarily  be  expressed  in  terms  of  changes  in  the 
temperature and thermal energy of the gas. 

As is evident from the above-described properties of free energy 
of  concentration,  the  volume-dependent  entropy  of  an  ideal  gas 
could  change  through  either  compression  or  expansion  without 
there being a change in the actual energy of the gas and, in the case 
of expansion, could change in the absence of a net change in actual 
energy of either the gas or its surroundings. Entropy being a state 
property,  it  is  also  evident  that  the  volume-dependent  entropy 
would not depend on the rate of change. In contrast, the tempera-
ture-dependent entropy, being based on thermal energy possessed 
by  the  gas,  would  depend  greatly  on  the  rate  of  change,  a  fact 
which can be readily seen by considering irreversibility in respect 
to an adiabatic cycle of compression and expansion of an ideal gas 
(see APPENDIX). 

In consequence of the different locations of the actual energies 
on  which  the  volume-  and  temperature-dependent  entropies  are 
based, one kind could increase while the other decreases if the gas 
were  to  undergo  a  change  in  temperature  and  thermal  energy  as 
well as in volume. In view of the marked differences between the 
two  entropies,  it  seems  highly  desirable  to  distinguish  between 
them on a regular basis more or less as done originally by Gurney 
(7). In making this distinction in what follows, the kind of entropy 
that depends only on the volume shall be referred to as entropy of 
concentration  to  correspond  with  free  energy  of  concentration. 
That this is appropriate can be seen by noting that the concentra-
tion of a given amount of an ideal gas would vary inversely as the 
volume  regardless  of  the  temperature  and  pressure  and  that 
concentration  can  therefore  be  substituted  for  volume  in  the 
expression  Rln(V2/V1)  for  a  difference  in  the  volume-dependent 
entropy on a per mol basis simply by changing a sign. The kind of 
entropy  that  would  depend  only  on  the  temperature  and  thermal 
energy of the gas shall be referred to as characteristic entropy, and 
the  corresponding  kind  of  free  energy  shall  be  referred  to  as 
characteristic  free  energy.  It  is  important  to  note  that  these 
‘concentration’  and  ‘characteristic’  kinds  of  entropy  and  free 
energy are very similar to but not entirely identical with the ‘cratic’ 
and ‘unitary’ kinds defined by Gurney. 

In contrast to changes in free energy of concentration, changes 
in characteristic free energy are invariably accompanied by equiva-
lent changes in the energies recognized by the First Law. Since, as 

Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

isothermal compression by the same factor at a relatively low tem-
perature. 

noted  above,  the  only  actual  (First-Law)  energy  of  an  ideal  gas 
would be undirected translational kinetic energy, the characteristic 
free  energy  of  such  a  gas  must  necessarily  be  of  the  above-
mentioned, ‘potential’ kind possessed by thermal energy (i.e., that 
recoverable through work only at the expense of a decrease in the 
temperature of the energy as its work potential is being realized). 
In view of the prediction of the ideal gas equation that the size of a 
change in the free energy of concentration due to a compression or 
an expansion between two states of concentration at the same tem-
perature  can  be  determined  on  a  per  mol  basis  according  to 
RT ln(V2/V1)  or  RT ln(P2/P1)  and  thus  would  be  directly  propor-
tional  to  temperature,  it  is  evident that changes in free energy of 
concentration, although not involving net changes in the character-
istic  free  energy  of  the  gas,  would  require  that  the  gas  possess 
characteristic free energy if the changes are to be finite, the charac-
teristic free energy being that associated with the thermal energy at 
the temperature of the two states. Of course the higher the tempera-
ture,  the  greater  the  change  in  free  energy  of  concentration  for a 
given change in concentration of the particles possessing the ther-
mal energy and free energy. 

Changes  in  the  characteristic  free  energy  are  ordinarily  reck-
oned in terms of work done on or by the gas during its compres-
sion or expansion under adiabatic conditions (i.e., under conditions 
in which transmissions of thermal energy between the gas and its 
surroundings  cannot  occur).  If  this  is  to  be  achieved,  one  must 
have knowledge of the capacity factor for thermal energy that de-
termines  temperature  and  refers  only  to  energy  possessed  by  the 
gas. As noted above, CV, the molar heat capacity determined under 
conditions of constant volume, meets this requirement and, for an 
ideal gas, would not depend on the magnitudes of the state proper-
ties at which it is determined. This being the case, the total energy 
for  one  mol  of  such  a  gas  would  be  given  by  CVT  and  finite 
changes  in  total  energy  on  a per mol basis by CV∆T, CV being a 
constant.  Since  reversible  processes  do  not  expend  free  energy, 
CV∆T for any reversible adiabatic compression or expansion would 
be equivalent to the change in characteristic free energy as well as 
to the change in total energy. Thus, if the quality of thermal energy 
were judged on the basis of the predicted changes in the character-
istic free energy of an ideal gas, it would appear to be equivalent to 
that  of  nonthermal  actual  energy.  However,  as  outlined  below,  a 
proper  assessment  of  the  quality  of  thermal  energy  in  terms  of 
changes in the properties of a gas can be achieved only by means 
of the Carnot cycle. 
The Carnot Cycle. Owing to the extensive use of gas heat engines 
to  exploit  the  work  potentials  of  natural  sources  of  nonthermal 
actual  energy,  an  important  concern  of  thermodynamics  is  the 
availability  (quality)  of  the  work  potential  of  thermal  energy  im-
parted to a gas in the course of the gas undergoing a cycle of ex-
pansion  and  compression.  Since  in  a  strictly  adiabatic  or  strictly 
isothermal cyclic process, a gas cannot do more work than is done 
on  it,  net  conversion  of  thermal  energy  into  nonthermal  actual 
energy  is  impossible  in  these  cyclic  processes.  As  pointed  out 
originally  by  Carnot  (8),  such  a  conversion can be achieved in a 
cyclic  process  only  by  combining  isothermal  and  adiabatic  proc-
esses  in  an  alternating  sequence  in  which  the  gas  is  allowed  to 
undergo isothermal expansion with uptake of thermal energy from 
a reservoir at a relatively high temperature, followed by adiabatic 
expansion  and  isothermal  compression  with  transmission  of  a 
smaller amount of thermal energy from the gas to a reservoir at a 
relatively low temperature. Net conversion is achieved exclusively 
as a result of the fact that a gas at a relatively high temperature can 
do  more  work  through  isothermal  expansion  than  is  required  for 

 

5

If all four steps of the Carnot cycle were conducted reversibly, 
none  of  the  characteristic  free  energy  of  the  thermal  energy  ab-
sorbed  isothermally  by  the  gas  at  the  relatively  high  temperature 
and converted through work into the kind possessed by nonthermal 
actual energy would be consumed. However, complete conversion 
of the free energy would be possible only if the gas could undergo 
infinite expansion in the adiabatic expansion phase of the cycle and 
the temperature of the relatively cold gas and reservoir were at a 
temperature of absolute zero. Therefore, since available machines 
are of limited size, and since the thermal sinks ordinarily available 
have  temperatures  much  higher  than  absolute  zero,  complete  or 
nearly complete conversion of thermal energy into energy equiva-
lent  in  quality  to  gravitational  potential  energy  is  far  from  being 
practical. Of course this is the basis for the limited potential avail-
ability of the work potential of thermal energy. 

As  is  evident  from  the  Carnot  cycle  and  the  above-noted  fact 
that the quality of an energy is determined by the magnitude of its 
intensive  component,  the  practical  quality  of  thermal  energy  is 
higher as the temperature is higher. Determination of the quality by 
means of the Carnot cycle requires knowledge of the relationship 
between  temperature  and  volume  in  the  adiabatic  steps.  The  re-
quired information is obtained by defining a characteristic entropy 
in terms of entropy of concentration, which, as noted above, would 
be  a  function only of volume and concentration for an ideal gas. 
Since  entropy  of  concentration  is  a  capacity  factor  for  thermal 
energy that is hidden with respect to temperature, this characteris-
tic entropy must be scaled to thermal energy transmitted to or from 
the  gas  at  constant  temperature,  a  fact  which  is  relevant  to  the 
above-mentioned need to know the relationship between tempera-
ture and volume in the adiabatic steps. The thermal energy to be 
evaluated as to quality is that transmitted to the gas and converted 
into  work  isothermally  at  the  relatively  high  temperature.  Since 
entropy refers to thermal energy, it is the ‘thermal fraction’ of this 
thermal  energy  (i.e.,  the  fraction  transmitted  isothermally  to  the 
surroundings  at  the  relatively low temperature) to which changes 
in the characteristic entropy of the adiabatic steps must be scaled. 
Of course the isothermal transmissions are assumed to be possible 
as a result of the reservoirs being sufficiently large to be capable of 
yielding and accommodating thermal energy without undergoing a 
change in temperature. 

Owing to the fact that it would not be possible for the tempera-
ture and thermal energy of an ideal gas to change independently of 
one  another,  a  change  in  the  characteristic  entropy  can  be 
expressed properly in terms of the temperature and thermal energy 
only  by  means  of  the  differential  equation  dSchar  =  dE/T  or  its 
equivalent.  Since  dE  =  CV dT  and  CV  would  be  a  constant,  this 
equation can be expressed in the forms dSchar = CV dT/T = CV dlnT 
and integrated between two specific temperatures to yield ∆Schar = 
CV ln(T2/T1).  The  comparable  expression  Rln(V2/V1)  for  a  finite 
change  in  the  entropy  of  concentration  on  a  per  mol  basis  is 
obtained essentially in the same manner. In this case, however, it is 
the  pressure  and  volume  that  would  be  incapable  of  changing 
independently  of  one  another.  In  consequence  of  this  and  of  the 
fact  that  the  volume  must  change  if  the  entropy  is  to  change,  a 
change in Sconc can be expressed properly in terms of volume and 
pressure only by means of the differential equation dSconc = PdV/T, 
which  can  be  modified  by  substituting  RT/V  for  P  to  obtain  the 
equation  in  the  integrable  form  dSconc  =  R dlnV.  Of  course  the 
scaling  of  ∆Schar  to  ∆Sconc  in  the  adiabatic  steps  is  accomplished 
through  the  facts  (i)  that  a  net  change  in  entropy  would  not  be 
possible  in  a  reversible  adiabatic  process  and  (ii)  that,  in 

Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

=

V V
(
1
2

/

)

. 

VR C
/

T T
/
2
1

consequence,  the  ratios  of  the  initial  and  final  temperatures  and 
volumes in the adiabatic steps of a reversible Carnot cycle would 
be  constrained  to  agree  with  one  another  according  to  the  rela-
tionship: 

transmitted 

That  ∆Schar  for  the  adiabatic  steps  is  based  on  the  thermal 
isothermally  to  the  surroundings  at  the 
energy 
relatively  low  temperature  is  evident  from  the  facts  (i)  that  the 
maximum efficiency ηmax of a Carnot heat engine is equivalent to 
1 − Tlow/Thigh  and  (ii)  that  ∆Schar  for  the  adiabatic  steps  of  the 
reversible  cycle  is  therefore  equivalent  to  ±CV ln(1 − ηmax),  the 
positive  and  negative  signs  referring  to  the  expansion  and 
compression  steps,  respectively.  By  noting  that  ηmax refers to the 
available  (work)  fraction  of  the  thermal  energy  absorbed at Thigh, 
one can readily see that ∆Schar refers to the unavailable (thermal) 
fraction. For any given finite value of Thigh, the unavailable fraction 
is a linear function of Tlow and decreases to zero as Tlow approaches 
zero. 

The  Carnot  cycle  is  very important in that it universalizes en-
tropy and thereby makes it possible to evaluate the practical quality 
of  thermal  energy  and  to  demonstrate  by  theoretical  means  for 
thermodynamic work processes in general that, if such a process is 
to occur at a finite rate, free energy must be expended and thermal 
energy must be produced in an amount equivalent to the amount of 
free energy consumed, a fact which can be readily demonstrated by 
considering irreversibility in respect to an adiabatic cycle of com-
pression and expansion of an ideal gas (see APPENDIX). In any 
particular  case,  the  fundamental  process  giving  rise  to  the  finite 
rate would be the net conversion of relatively high-quality actual 
energy, both thermal and nonthermal, into ambient thermal energy, 
the spontaneous and unidirectional nature of which is the basis for 
the Second Law of Thermodynamics, which, unlike the First Law, 
acknowledges the existence of free energy and says in effect that if 
thermodynamic work is to be done at a finite rate, free energy must 
be expended. Also unlike the First Law, the Second Law, owing to 
the  fact  that  the  individually  mobile  particulate  constituents  of 
macroscopic amounts of matter at finite temperatures vary widely 
as to translational kinetic energy, is a statistical law appropriate for 
application  only  to  macroscopic phenomena. This means that the 
Second Law is obeyed only on average over time in processes at 
the microscopic level and thus that conversions of ambient thermal 
energy  into  nonthermal  actual  energy  in  chemically  active  sub-
stances  can  occur  at  the  molecular  level.  Of  significance  in  this 
regard is the fact that translational thermal energy at the molecular 
level  is  kinetic  energy  of  the  directed  variety,  a  consequence  of 
which is that no distinction can be made between this form of ac-
tual  energy  and  nonthermal  actual  energy  at  the  molecular  level. 
Accordingly, energy transfer at the molecular level occurs without 
expenditure of free energy, and irreversibility, like temperature and 
pressure in respect to a gas, is a concept applicable only to macro-
scopic phenomena. 
Real  Gases.  As  is  well  known,  the  heat  capacities  of  real  gases 
increase  with  increase  of  temperature  and  correspond  closely  to 
those  predicted  for  an  ideal  gas  over  wide  ranges  of  temperature 
and  pressure  only  for  monatomic  gases  (9).  The  temperature  de-
pendence is due in large part to the fact that the translational and 
radiant  forms  of  thermal  energy  are  capable  of  undergoing  inter-
conversion  with  actual  energy  associated  with  quantized  motions 
within  molecules.  The  energies  of  these ‘intramolecular’ motions 
are reckoned in terms of characteristic entropy and thus appear to 
be generally viewed as being of a thermal nature, this despite the 
facts (i) that the energies of some of the motions undergo oscilla-
tory interconversions with attractive and repulsive potential ener-
gies and (ii) that the motional energies, being intramolecular, seem 
 

best  viewed  as  being  directed  (nonrandom)  kinetic  energies  and 
thus of a nonthermal nature. On the other hand, since radiant en-
ergy is not confined to molecules and is ordinarily unrestricted as 
to direction of emission in a gas, any radiant energy emitted as a 
result of the motions would clearly qualify as thermal energy. 

In accord with their being nonthermal, the energies associated 
with  the  intramolecular  motions  apparently  do  not  contribute  to 
temperature. Such is consistent with the facts (i) that the absolute 
and thermodynamic scales of temperature are based on the proper-
ties of an ideal gas and (ii) that an ideal gas is assumed to possess 
actual energy only of the translational kinetic kind. It may be noted 
that, owing to the discontinuous nature of the intramolecular mo-
tions  in  respect  to  change  of  temperature,  such must be assumed 
for  validity  of  the  widely  accepted,  sweeping  generalization  con-
cerning the reversible Carnot cycle that the ratio of the amount of 
thermal  energy  absorbed  isothermally  at  Thigh  to  the  amount  re-
jected isothermally at Tlow would have the same value regardless of 
the nature of the working substance. 

Despite  their  apparent  nonthermal  nature,  the  energies  associ-
ated with the intramolecular motions appear to be recoverable only 
as thermal energy at the temperature of their reversible production 
and  thus  appear  to  differ  markedly  from  the  kind  of  nonthermal 
energy  that  is  capable  of  converting  spontaneously  into  thermal 
energy  of  quality  exceeding  that  of  the  ambient  thermal  energy. 
Accordingly, their elicitation is associated with diminution of mo-
lecular stability (10) and might be expected thereby more likely to 
diminish than to enhance chemical potential energy of the kind that 
possesses  characteristic  free  energy.  This  kind  of  energy  shall 
henceforth be referred to as ‘characteristic chemical potential en-
ergy’, a distinction made necessary by the fact that free energy of 
concentration is ordinarily treated as if it were chemical potential 
energy, a practice which of course is valid when properly used but 
which ignores the intrinsically mechanical nature of the concentra-
tion-dependent free energy and tends to elicit confusion as to the 
nature  of  characteristic  chemical  potential  energy,  particularly 
when used in reference to an ideal gas. 

Although, as noted above, the energies associated with the in-
tramolecular motions also differ appreciably from what is ordinar-
ily considered to be thermal energy, in view of the current practice 
of  accounting  for  them  appropriately  in  terms  of  characteristic 
entropy and of entropy being the capacity factor for thermal energy 
that is hidden with respect to temperature, it seems appropriate and 
best  for  practical  purposes  to  view  the  energies  as  being  latent 
forms of thermal energy of quality determined by the temperature 
at  which  they  could  be  reversibly  produced.  By  making  this  dis-
tinction we imply that thermal energy that is not latent refers to the 
kind that determines temperature. Since what has been referred to 
above  as  the  radiant  form  of  thermal  energy  is  actually  electro-
magnetic  energy  having  frequency  ν  as  its  intensive  component 
and  nh  as  its  extensive  component,  n  being  any  whole  positive 
number  and  h  Planck’s  constant,  and  can  be  said  to  be  thermal 
energy only in the sense that it is capable of transmitting thermal 
energy and to have a temperature only in virtue of the fact that it 
has a certain distribution as to quality and concentration of photons 
of energy hν as given by Planck’s Law of Heat Radiation when in 
equilibrium  with  matter  at  a  particular  temperature  (11),  this 
‘nonlatent’  thermal  energy  may  be  considered  to  consist  exclu-
sively  of  the  translational  kinetic  kind.  However,  since  electro-
magnetic  energy  is  readily  detectable  and  transmissible  as  such, 
when viewed as being thermal energy it must in some sense also be 
viewed  as  being  a  nonlatent  variety,  particularly  in  respect  to 
transmission of thermal energy. 

6

Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

The  intramolecular  motions  include  rotations  of  entire  mole-
cules and various rotations, librations, and vibrations of molecular 
constituents,  all of which are known to be quantized through the 
occurrence of temperature-specific changes in heat capacity and in 
absorption and emission of characteristic radiant energy (10, 12). 
Of course the possibilities for these kinds of motion are greater, the 
greater the complexity of the molecules and the weaker and more 
flexible  the  bonds  between  the  constituent  atoms.  In  view  of  the 
fact that the intramolecular motions can be elicited through inelas-
tic collisions between molecules, these motions must be capable of 
converting  into  the  translational  motions  that  result  in  the  colli-
sions and, under conditions of constant temperature, must tend to 
be  at  equilibrium  with  the  translational  motions;  otherwise,  con-
trary  to  Planck’s  Law  and  the  Zeroth  Law  of  Thermodynamics, 
there would likely be a temperature differential between the trans-
lational and radiant forms of thermal energy at equilibrium. 

conditions of constant temperature and pressure in chemical reac-
tions and in first-order phase transitions, and, since both are based 
on system energies having the quality of thermal energy, changes 
in  their  amounts  under  these  conditions are actually and best ac-
counted for in terms of characteristic entropy. 

As indicated above, the prediction of the classical kinetic theory 
of gases that CV for an ideal gas would be a true constant implies 
that the amount of thermal energy possessed by a given amount of 
such a gas would be directly proportional to temperature. This in 
turn implies that an ideal gas can be considered to provide linear 
absolute  scales  for  actual  energy  and  free  energy  as  well  as  for 
temperature. Although based on predicted properties of a fictitious 
gas  that  differs  appreciably  from  real  gases  in  that  its  particulate 
constituents possess only translational kinetic energy, these scales 
are very important in that they are commonly used with remarkable 
success as a framework for characterization of the thermodynamic 
properties  of  all  real  substances,  a  fact  which  accords  with  the 
universality  of  the  universal  gas  constant  R.  As  will  in  effect  be 
suggested below, the widespread success of the ideal gas model is 
likely due in large part to the above-noted prediction of the equi-
partition principle being applicable to liquids and solids as well as 
to gases and to temperature in liquids and solids being determined 
by  the  average  kinetic  energies  of  individually  mobile  particles 
consisting of clusters of attractively bound molecules, the average 
size of which tends to increase with decrease of temperature. 
 
THERMODYNAMICS OF LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS 
All  naturally  occurring  gases  possess  net  attractive  forces  and  in 
consequence undergo condensations to form liquids and solids as 
temperature  is decreased. An important but rarely asked question 
is: What determines temperature in these condensed phases? This 
question must be asked and answered correctly if we are to under-
stand how it is possible that equilibrium differences in concentra-
tion  between  the  reactants  and  products  of  a  chemical  reaction 
conducted in solution can serve to measure differences in charac-
teristic chemical potential energy between the reactants and prod-
ucts at various equilibrium temperatures. 

Since  the  particulate  constituents  of liquids can flow and thus 
must be sufficiently free to undergo translational motions, we can 
attribute temperature in this case to the same kind of motions that 
determine temperature in gases. Since the particulate constituents 
are held in the liquid state by attractive (cohesive) forces possessed 
by the particles, one might expect the translational motions of the 
particles to be hindered in respect to intensity of translational mo-
tions  and  thus  in  respect  to  ability  to  contribute  to  and  thereby 
determine temperature. However, in view of (i) the likelihood that 
temperature is determined in both liquids and gases by the average 
intensity of the actual translational motions of the constituent indi-
vidually mobile particles and of (ii) the above-noted prediction of 
the  equipartition  principle  that,  at  any  particular temperature, the 
individually  mobile  particulate  constituents  of  all  gases  will  pos-
sess on average the same amount of translational kinetic energy, it 
seems likely that the average translational kinetic energy possessed 
by the particulate constituents of any liquid would tend to be the 
same as that for any gas if the liquid and gas were at the same tem-
perature.  If  such  were  not  the  case,  it  would  be  very  difficult  to 
understand,  among  other  things,  the  physical  bases  for  the  latent 
thermal  energies  and  for  the  common  observation  that  the  me-
chanical thermodynamic properties of substances in dilute (ideal) 
solution do not differ appreciably from those expected of an ideal 
gas  despite  the  individual  molecules  of  the  substances  differing 
greatly  as  to  such  properties  as  chemical  composition,  size,  net 
charge, and affinity for the solvent. 

7

Due  to  the  existence of net attractive forces between the indi-
vidually mobile particulate constituents of macroscopic amounts of 
real  matter,  thermal  energy  can  also  disappear  and  appear  with 
increase  and  decrease  of  temperature  through  dissociation  and 
association  reactions  that  increase  and  decrease  the  number  of 
particles  whose  motions  contribute  to  and  thereby  determine 
temperature. This phenomenon can be explained on the basis of the 
very  successful  prediction  of  the  equipartition  principle  of  the 
classical kinetic theory of gases that, at any particular temperature, 
individually mobile particles differing as to mass, composition, and 
other properties will possess on average the same amount of trans-
lational  kinetic  energy,  the  amount  being  equivalent  to  1-2 m v-  2,  m 
being the mass and v-    the average velocity (9, 12, 13). According 
to this prediction, if the molecules of a gas at a particular tempera-
ture  were  sufficiently  attracted  to  one  another  that  some  of  the 
molecules  could  expend  attractive  binding  energy  by  binding  to 
one another at that temperature, increasing the temperature would 
result  in  mechanically  induced  dissociations  of  bound  molecules 
and  in  a  portion  of  the  thermal  energy  added  to  the  gas  for  the 
purpose of increasing its temperature being expended to elevate the 
translational kinetic energies of newly formed particles to average 
values  consistent  with 
the 
formation of the additional particles would be accompanied by the 
appearance of attractive forces and thus also of attractive binding 
energy,  it  seems  appropriate  to  view  the  dissociations  of  the 
attractively bound particles as constituting conversions of transla-
tional  kinetic  (mechanical)  energy  into  attractive  binding  energy. 
Also,  since  it  is  unlikely  that  attractive  binding  energy  thus 
generated could be recovered as an energy of quality higher than 
the thermal energy required for its reversible production, and since 
the  attractive  forces  would  extend  beyond  the  bounds  of  the 
particles  possessing  them,  it  seems  appropriate  to  view  the 
attractive binding energy as being an extramolecular kind of latent 
thermal energy of quality determined by the temperature at which 
it could be reversibly produced. As will be pointed out below, one 
could reasonably expect the attractive binding energy to have the 
quality of characteristic chemical potential energy only if the gas 
were supercooled with respect to thermochemical equilibrium. 

temperature.  Since 

the  existing 

Since associations of molecules through mutual attractions are 
likely  to  result  in  some  hindrance  of  intramolecular  motions, 
changes  in  latent  thermal  energy  of  the  extramolecular  kind  at 
temperatures  sufficiently  high  for  elicitation  of  intramolecular 
motions are likely to be accompanied by changes in latent thermal 
energy of the intramolecular kind in the same direction. In contrast 
to  the  intramolecular  kind,  the  extramolecular  kind  can  undergo 
change in response to change not only of temperature, but also of 
pressure and thus of concentration. Both kinds can change under 
 

Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

As is well known, condensations of gases into liquids and of the 
liquids into solids under conditions of constant pressure can occur 
very nearly reversibly at constant temperature with productions of 
amounts  of  thermal  energy  that  greatly  exceed  the  amounts  of 
pressure-volume work done simultaneously. It is important to in-
quire as to where the excess thermal energy comes from in these 
processes. Since the condensations occur as a result of there being 
attractive forces between the particulate constituents, it must nec-
essarily  come  primarily  from  conversions  of  attractive  binding 
energy into thermal energy as the particles associate in the course 
of the condensations. In view of this and of the likelihood that the 
average  translational  kinetic  energies  of  the  individually  mobile 
particulate constituents of at least the liquid and gas phases of any 
substance would be the same if the phases were at the same tem-
perature, it seems likely that such conversions occur through asso-
ciations of particles to form larger and thus fewer particles possess-
ing on average the same amount of translational kinetic energy as 
the particles undergoing the associations. Thus it seems appropri-
ate to view the attractive binding energy that undergoes conversion 
into  thermal  energy  in  phase  transitions  of  the  above  sort  to  be 
latent thermal energy of the above-described extramolecular kind. 
As is particularly well known, thermally induced transitions of 
water  from  solid  to  liquid  and  from  liquid  to  vapor  at  normal 
(atmospheric)  pressures  involve  large  conversions  of  thermal 
energy into latent thermal energy. It is also well known that some 
of the latent thermal energy is of the intramolecular kind and that 
the  conversions  are  capable  of  occurring  at  constant  temperature 
with little consumption of free energy when the nonlatent thermal 
energy  derives  from  ambient  thermal  energy  (14).  By  linking 
reversible production of latent thermal energy in these processes to 
isothermal (reversible) compression of an ideal gas, we can readily 
see  that  both  the  intramolecular  and  the  extramolecular  kinds  of 
latent thermal energy must in fact be viewed as being equivalent in 
quality  to  ambient  thermal  energy  at  the  temperature  of  their  re-
versible  production.  Consider,  for  example,  a  Figure  1  system  in 
which  the  temperature  of  the  thermal  reservoir  is  at  the  melting 
temperature of ice and is maintained constant solely by intercon-
versions between ice and liquid water at constant external pressure. 
If  the  gas  in  such  a  system  were  compressed  reversibly,  thermal 
energy would be produced isothermally in the gas and consumed 
isothermally  in  the reservoir through reversible conversion of ice 
into  liquid  water.  Since  all  of  the  free  energy  of  the  nonthermal 
actual energy imparted to the gas would be retained by the gas and 
could be conserved only through reversal of the above process, it 
would be necessary to consider any latent thermal energy produced 
as a result of translational thermal energy from the gas converting 
ice into liquid water to be equivalent in quality to ambient thermal 
energy at the melting temperature of the ice. 

The above observations being correct, one could reasonably ex-
pect the number of individually mobile particles in a liquid to de-
crease as the temperature is decreased. Since the decrease in num-
ber of particles would necessarily occur through attractive binding 
interactions  among  particles  and  thus  would  be  accompanied  by 
conversion  of  attractive  binding  energy  into  thermal  energy,  one 
could  reasonably  expect  the  heat  capacities  of  liquids  to  be  aug-
mented  by  conversions  of  thermal  energy  into  attractive  binding 
energy as the temperatures of the liquids are increased for the pur-
pose of measuring the heat capacities. That these expectations are 
consistent  with  what  is  observed  experimentally  in  this  regard  is 
particularly clear in the case of water. 

Owing to the molecules of water as compared to those of most 
other  common  solvents  having  particularly  strong  tendencies  to 
associate with one another through their capacities to serve both as 

 

8

a double donor and a double acceptor of hydrogen bonds, the en-
ergy changes in the gas ð liquid and liquid ð solid transitions of 
water are particularly large. The molar heat capacity of the liquid 
at  constant  atmospheric  pressure  is  also  particularly  large  and  is 
close to twice that of the solid near the normal freezing point and 
to twice that of the vapor near the normal boiling point (15). The 
above-noted expectations are clearly consistent with these experi-
mental  findings  and  with  numerous  experimental  and  theoretical 
observations  suggesting  that  the  particulate  constituents  of  liquid 
water consist largely of labile clusters of molecules, the concentra-
tion and average size of which depend on temperature and pressure 
(15-18). 

For  there  to  be  consistency  with  the  above  observations,  it  is 
necessary  to  suppose  that,  for  solids,  temperature  and  to  a  large 
extent also heat capacity are determined by undirected translational 
(vibrational) motions of clusters of molecules (atoms in the case of 
atomic solids) about mean fixed positions and that the average size 
of these clusters tend to increase with decrease of temperature, the 
increase  in  average  size  being  accompanied  by  conversion  of  ki-
netic and potential (attractive + repulsive) vibrational energy into 
thermal  energy.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  the  average  vibrational 
frequency of the clusters would decrease as the average size (mass) 
of the clusters increases and of experimental observations suggest-
ing  that  the  heat  capacities  of  all  naturally  occurring  substances 
tend to approach zero as temperature approaches zero, in consider-
ing this to be the case for a large chunk of a solid maintained close 
to thermochemical equilibrium, it would seem necessary to assume 
that the number and average vibrational frequency of the clusters 
would decrease to unity and zero, respectively, as the temperature 
of the solid is decreased to zero. This and the further assumption 
that  the  atoms  or molecules of the individual clusters vibrate co-
herently  and  consequently  emit  photons  as  clusters  of  indistin-
guishable photons being correct, one could think of the clusters as 
being Bose-Einstein condensates of a sort and of the solid as being 
a Bose-Einstein ideal gas in which the number of particles is not 
conserved  more  or  less  as  the  Bose-Einstein  quantum  statistical 
method  of  deriving  Planck’s  Law  of  Heat  Radiation  predicts  for 
distinguishable clusters of indistinguishable photons in equilibrium 
with a blackbody (see below). Doing so would be consistent with 
the generally accepted Bose-Einstein quantum gas, ‘quasiparticle’ 
(phonon)  interpretation  of  lattice  vibrations  in  crystalline  solids 
(11,  19,  20)  and  thus  with  the  apparent  wave-particle  duality  of 
matter in this case. Doing so would also be consistent with experi-
mental observations (21, 22) indicating that water ice at subfreez-
ing temperatures sublimates (evaporates) in the form of clusters of 
molecules. 

In 1913 prior to the general acceptance of the quantum hypothe-
sis  demanded  by  the  extremely  close  agreement  between  experi-
mental observations and the equation now known as Planck’s Law 
of  Heat  Radiation,  Benedicks  (23)  presented  an  ‘agglomeration 
hypothesis’  which  appears  to  be  generally  consistent  with  the 
above  notions  concerning  what  determines  temperature  and  heat 
capacity in solids. Thus, Benedicks pointed out that Planck’s Law 
can be derived on the basis of the assumptions (i) that the atoms or 
molecules of solids coalesce through cohesive forces to form clus-
ters of increasing size as temperature is decreased and (ii) that the 
thermal  energy  partitions  among  the  clusters  in  accordance  with 
the  equipartition  principle.  He  also  pointed  to  the  possibility  of 
explaining  the  observed  independence  of  the  frequency  spectrum 
of  cavity  (equilibrium  blackbody)  radiation  on  the  nature  of  the 
solid by taking into account the facts (i) that the average mass of 
the  clusters  at  a  particular  temperature  would  be  greater  as  the 
cohesive  force  between  the  constituent  atoms  or  molecules  is 

Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

greater and (ii) that, since the average vibrational frequency of the 
clusters  would  be  lower  as  the  average  mass  of  the  clusters  is 
greater  and  higher  as  the  cohesive  force  between  the  clusters  is 
greater, differences among solids as to cohesive force would tend 
to  cancel  in  respect  to  the  vibrational  frequency  spectrum  of  the 
clusters at a particular temperature and thus also in respect to the 
frequency spectrum of the radiant energy emitted and absorbed by 
the clusters at that temperature. 

In 1915 A. H. Compton (24) tested the agglomeration hypothe-
sis as to utility in accounting for experimentally observed relation-
ships between temperature and heat capacity in simple solids. Us-
ing  Maxwell’s Distribution Law in conjunction with the agglom-
eration hypothesis, he came up with a very simple equation which 
he judged to be at least equally as accurate as the much more com-
plex  but  now  generally  accepted  equation  developed  earlier  by 
Debye (25) on the basis of the quantum hypothesis using arbitrarily 
the assumption that vibrational frequencies at low temperatures are 
limited to the low values characteristic of large clusters of atoms. 
Compton (26) also compared the agglomeration and quantum hy-
potheses as to utility in accounting for the observed inverse rela-
tionship  between  temperature  and  thermal  conductivity  in  solids 
and  found  the  agglomeration  hypothesis  to be clearly superior in 
this case. 

Despite its remarkable successes, the agglomeration hypothesis 
was largely abandoned, presumably as a result of Compton turning 
his attention to his well-known studies on interactions between x-
rays  and  matter,  which  resulted  in  the  general  acceptance  of  the 
quantum hypothesis, and to the textbook view (27) that if the ag-
glomeration hypothesis were valid, one could expect solids to be 
incompressible at temperatures approaching absolute zero, a view 
which has persisted into modern times (28) despite the fact that it 
was  based  on  the  faulty  notion  that  atoms  are  incompressible 
(hard) spheres (see 29). Nevertheless, although not acknowledged 
or  recognized,  the  main  features  of  the agglomeration hypothesis 
were used in the subsequent development of quantum mechanics, a 
fact  which  is  particularly  evident in the case of wave mechanics. 
Thus, Bose-Einstein (quantum) statistics become essentially iden-
tical with Maxwell-Boltzmann (ideal-gas) statistics as temperature 
is increased and assumes a condensation (degeneration) of distin-
guishable particles (parcels) of energy into distinguishable clusters 
(cells)  of  indistinguishable  particles  of  energy  as  temperature  is 
decreased  (9).  Also,  de Broglie’s  fundamental  ideas  on  wave-
particle duality, which, in conjunction with Bose-Einstein statistics 
led  Schrödinger  immediately  to  his  wave  mechanics  (30),  origi-
nated with the realization that derivation of Planck’s Law by con-
sidering  light  quanta  to  be  an  ideal  gas  of  photons  (“atoms  of 
light”) requires the assumption that blackbody radiation other than 
that at the extreme high-frequency end of the observable spectrum 
consists  of  agglomerations  of  photons  that  move  coherently  (31, 
32, 33). Since the frequency at the high-frequency end of the ob-
servable  spectrum  increases  endlessly  with  increase  of  tempera-
ture, this assumption and the essentially identical one at the heart 
of  Bose-Einstein  statistics  being  correct,  most  if  not  all ‘conven-
tional photons’ would be clusters of photons having the same fre-
quency and we could imagine a rational explanation for the pecu-
liar fact of quantum mechanics that what appear to be single pho-
tons can appear to split and interfere with themselves in a wave-
like manner. However, the explanation would not be of a sort that 
would seem likely to account for the considerably more peculiar, 
closely  related  fact  that  electrons,  neutrons,  and  other  genuine 
particles  in  what  seem  highly  likely  to  be  genuine  (indivisible) 
single-particle  states  also  can  appear  to  split  and  interfere  with 
themselves in a wave-like manner (see, e.g., 34, 35). 

 

9

That  temperature  and  heat  capacity  in  solids  is  actually  and 
strongly linked to the average size of actual particles consisting of 
clusters  of  atoms  or  molecules  is  suggested  by  the  results  of  nu-
merous relatively recent studies on the thermodynamic properties 
of ‘nanosolids’ obtained by reducing normal (bulk) solids at tem-
peratures far below their melting points to particles having diame-
ters of a few nanometers and then lightly compacting the particles 
to form pellets that can be easily handled and compared with the 
bulk materials (for comprehensive reviews, see 36, 37). In general, 
the  thermodynamic  properties  of  solids  thus  modified  have  been 
found  to  differ  from  the  normal  such  as  to  suggest  that  the 
temperature  has  in  effect  been  greatly  increased.  Thus,  melting 
temperatures, at least of individual particles, are greatly decreased 
(38), enthalpies (39), entropies (36), heat capacities (36, 39), and 
vapor pressures (40) are greatly increased, and heat capacities ap-
pear not to approach zero as temperature approaches zero (36, 41). 
Most of these changes either have been or can be adequately ex-
plained in terms of the associated large increases in surface area, 
surface attractive binding energy, and number of particles that are 
individually  mobile  under  conditions  of  temperature  where  the 
attractive binding energy has the quality of characteristic chemical 
potential energy rather than of latent thermal energy (see below). 
The  observed  persistence  of  heat  capacity  in  lightly  compacted 
nanosolids at temperatures very close to zero is consistent with the 
theoretical findings of Jura and Pitzer (42) predicting that the heat 
capacities of solids consisting of unconsolidated ‘nano-sized’ par-
ticles will be detectably large at temperatures closely approximat-
ing absolute zero as a result of the particles being capable of un-
dergoing thermally induced translational and rotational motions at 
such temperatures despite the particles possessing an abundance of 
attractive binding energy. 
 
THIRD LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS 
According to the first of two extant versions of the Third Law that 
are relevant here, the entropy change associated with any isother-
mal  (reversible)  process  will  approach  zero  as  temperature  ap-
proaches zero (43, 44). It is important to inquire as to the nature of 
the  entropy  to  which  this  version  refers.  Since  it  concerns  only 
processes  occurring  at  particular  temperatures,  characteristic  en-
tropy of the kind that can change only as a result of a change in 
temperature  can  be  immediately  ruled  out,  thereby  avoiding  the 
uncertainty associated with the prediction of the kinetic theory of 
gases that a reversible decrease in the temperature of an ideal gas 
to zero in a Carnot cycle would be accompanied by a decrease in 
characteristic entropy to −∞, a result necessitated by the fact that 
achievement of the condition T = 0 in the cycle would require in-
creases in the volume and entropy of concentration to +∞. On the 
other hand, entropy of concentration can undergo change at con-
stant  temperature  and  can  do  so  without  necessarily  requiring  a 
change in volume, a fact which can be readily seen by considering 
chemical reactions of the sort: A ð P + Q (i.e., reactions in which 
there  is  a  difference  in  mol  number  between  the  reactants  and 
products  in  the  stoichiometric  equation).  As  will  be  outlined  be-
low, at least for reactions occurring in solution virtually at constant 
volume, a change in entropy of concentration due to a change in 
the  number  of  particles  in  such  a  system  maintained  at  constant 
temperature will be accompanied by a change in the characteristic 
entropy of the system in the same direction and the thermal energy 
on which the characteristic entropy is based will be indistinguish-
able  from  the  above-described  extramolecular  latent  kind.  That  a 
change  in  entropy  of  concentration  would  conform  to  the  above 
version  of  the  Third  Law  can  be  seen  by  noting  that  changes  in 
entropy of concentration at a particular temperature serve to repre-

Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

sent  changes  in  free  energy  of  concentration  and  that,  since  free 
energy  of  concentration  depends  on  the  existence  and  density  of 
translational  kinetic  energy  and  therefore  can  be  expected  to  be 
zero at T = 0, a change in entropy of concentration would not be 
possible at T = 0. 

The same can be said of entropy of mixing, the nature of which 
can readily be seen to be identical with that of entropy of concen-
tration by considering a spontaneous mixing of two distinguishable 
ideal gases at the same temperature and initial pressure. A change 
in  entropy  of  mixing  in  this  case  is  given  by  the  sum  of  the  in-
creases in the entropies of concentration of the individual gases as 
each diffuses (expands) into the space occupied by the other. Ac-
cording  to  this,  entropy  of  mixing  serves  to  account  for  the  free 
energy of concentration that could be used for conversion of ambi-
ent  thermal  energy  into  nonthermal  actual  energy  if  there  were  a 
means by which the diffusion of the substances undergoing spon-
taneous mixing could be harnessed individually to do work, a pos-
sible  means in the above case being an apparatus consisting of a 
cylinder having two chambers separated initially by two opposed 
semipermeable pistons, the piston nearest each gas in its pure form 
being permeable only to that gas. In the absence of such means, the 
mixing would occur without a net change in actual energy, just as 
would  be  the  case  if  the  individual  gases  were  expanding  into  a 
vacuum. 

Presumably,  the  principal  kind  of  entropy  to  which  the  above 
version of the Third Law is ordinarily meant to apply is the charac-
teristic  entropy  associated  with  the  kinds  of  energy  referred  to 
above as intramolecular and extramolecular latent thermal energy. 
As was noted, these forms of energy do not contribute to tempera-
ture  and  can  undergo  change  in  processes  occurring  at  constant 
temperature. Since, at any particular finite temperature, they tend 
to  be  at  equilibrium  with  the  transmissible  (nonlatent)  forms  of 
thermal energy, they can be expected to disappear as temperature 
approaches zero if sufficient time is allowed for them to do so. 

Owing to the tendency of the latent thermal energies to equili-
brate with the transmissible forms, the Third Law is widely inter-
preted to mean that the characteristic entropies of individual sub-
stances  approach  zero  as  temperature  approaches  zero.  Although 
the version thus obtained has proved to be very useful for practical 
purposes and is consistent with experimental observations suggest-
ing that the heat capacities of all naturally occurring substances in 
macroscopic amounts maintained close to thermochemical equilib-
rium will decrease to zero as the temperature is decreased to zero, 
it is considered not to be generally correct as a result of the possi-
bility  for  the  characteristic  entropy  associated  with  the  ex-
tramolecular kind of latent thermal energy to become ‘frozen in’ as 
the temperature is decreased. As implied above, the extramolecular 
kind of latent thermal energy is clearly nonthermal, is possessed by 
all naturally occurring substances at finite temperatures, and con-
sists of attractive binding energy that is subject to loss upon tem-
perature  reduction  through  stabilization  of  neutralizing  attractive 
binding interactions among the particulate constituents whose un-
directed motions contribute to and thereby determine temperature. 
In  this  particular  case,  latent  thermal  energy  and  its  associated 
entropy can become ‘frozen in’ as a result of free molecules con-
densing  during  temperature  reduction  to  form  stable  solids  in 
which the molecules are not arranged as well as they could be for 
maximum  conversion  of  the  binding  energy  into  the  radiant  and 
translational  forms  of  thermal  energy,  which,  in  contrast  to  the 
binding  energy,  are  transmissible  as  such  and  subject  to  direct 
removal through reduction of the ambient temperature. For reasons 
of this sort, the Third Law, as it is applied to individual substances, 

 

10

is  generally  considered  to  be  applicable  in  a  strict  sense  only  to 
pure substances in perfect crystalline states (45). 
 
THERMODYNAMICS OF BIOCHEMICAL REACTIONS 
We shall be concerned here primarily with the very simple, first-
order, uncatalyzed reaction: 

k
k

1

2

                              

→

  
A

 

²²²ı
¹²²²

 

P

  

→

                            (1) 

in which A and P are reactant and product in ideal solution at con-
stant temperature and pressure, k1 and k2 are the forward and back-
ward  rate  constants,  and  the  arrows  preceding  the  reactant  and 
following the product are meant to indicate that a and p, the con-
centrations of A and P, are maintained constant as a result of the 
reaction being in a long sequence of reactions of the sort that one 
might expect to find in living systems. Thus, Reaction (1) as pre-
sented  is  considered  to  be  a  stationary-state  reaction  in  an  open 
system of more or less constant volume and to have a net velocity 
in  the  direction  indicated  regardless  of  whether  the  equilibrium 
constant is favorable or unfavorable. Although the system as pre-
sented is considered to be open and therefore relevant primarily to 
biological systems, in most of what follows it will be considered to 
be closed (i.e., capable of exchanging only thermal energy with the 
surroundings). 

Regardless of the nature of the energy from which it derives, the 
available  work  potential  of  a  chemical  substance  at  a  particular 
combination of temperature and pressure is referred to either as the 
Gibbs energy or the Gibbs free energy. When expressed as an in-
tensive  property  in  terms  of  energy  per  mol,  the  Gibbs energy is 
referred to either as the Gibbs potential or the chemical potential. 
Differences  in  this  potential  between  states  of  a  substance  and 
between  substances  in  well-defined  states  are  denoted  by  ∆G. 
Since it is the difference in the intensive properties of a system that 
determines the driving force for change, the driving force of Reac-
tion  (1) as presented may be considered to be this difference be-
tween A and P as given by the van’t Hoff reaction isotherm: 
            ∆G  =  −RT lnK + RT ln(p/a)  =  ∆G° + RT ln(p/a)          (2) 
Here K is the equilibrium constant, ∆G° is the so-called ‘standard’ 
difference in characteristic Gibbs free energy between one mol of 
A and one mol of P, and ∆G is the amount of Gibbs free energy 
consumed in the net conversion of one mol of A into one mol of P 
under a specific set of conditions of temperature, pressure, a, and 
p,  the  temperature,  pressure,  and  other  environmental  conditions 
being the same as those used in the determination of K and ∆G°. 
Since  ∆G  as  a  driving  force  always  refers  to  free  energy  that  is 
consumed, it is usually presented as −∆G (i.e., as a positive quan-
tity) when used in this sense. 

The van’t Hoff reaction isotherm serves to acknowledge that a 
particulate  substance  that  is  capable  of  undergoing  chemical 
change possesses (i) an available work potential that is independ-
ent of its concentration and is characteristic of the substance in a 
given  environment,  and  (ii)  an  available  work  potential  that  de-
pends only on the number of individually mobile particles per unit 
volume  (i.e.,  only  on  particle  concentration).  The  isotherm,  as  it 
applies to Reaction (1), can be derived from the ideal gas equation 
on the basis of the observation by van’t Hoff (1) that the free en-
ergy of a solute in dilute (ideal) solution depends on the osmotic 
pressure of the solute just as the free energy of an ideal gas would 
depend on its pressure. Since, for an isothermal change in the state 
of such a gas, the pressure and concentration would vary in direct 
proportion  to one another, the expression for a same-temperature 
difference  in  free  energy  of  concentration  in  terms  of  pressure 

Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

 [

−

=

G

p a
/ ) 

RT
 

ln(

°
p a
/

)  

RT

RT
°

a a
ln( /

°
 )] 

      

ln(
−

obtained from the ideal gas equation may be modified by substitut-
ing concentration for pressure. The expression then can be used as 
a  measuring  device  to  determine  differences  in  characteristic 
chemical  potential  energy  between  the  reactants  and  products  of 
chemical  reactions  conducted  in  solution  at  constant  temperature 
and  pressure  from  equilibrium  differences  in  translational  kinetic 
energy density (i.e., from equilibrium differences in free energy of 
concentration). The means by which this is ordinarily achieved in 
respect  to  biochemical  thermodynamics,  in  which  case  the  solu-
tions  are  usually  considered  to  be  ideal,  is  outlined  immediately 
below. 
Determination  of  ∆∆∆∆G°  by  the  Equilibrium  Method.  At  a  given 
temperature  and  pressure,  the  Gibbs  potential  G  of  a  chemical 
substance in ideal solution is equivalent to RT lnc + C, where c is 
the  concentration  and  C  is  an  unknown  constant.  As  is  evident 
from  the  fact  that  it  can  be  expressed  in  the  form  V  =  Ae−G/RT, 
where V = 1-c  = molar volume and A = eC/RT, this foundational rela-
tionship of the classical approach to chemical thermodynamics has 
much in common with those of the Maxwell-Boltzmann statistical 
approach. In consequence of C being unknown, G must be deter-
mined in relation to a reference Gibbs potential G° and its concen-
tration  component  RT lnc°,  which  by  convention  are  subtracted 
from G and RT lnc. Thus, G − G° = RT lnc − RT lnc° and G = G° + 
RT ln(c/c°).  By  convention,  the  difference  in  Gibbs  potential  be-
tween a reactant and a product, such as A and P of Reaction (1), is 
obtained  by  subtracting  the  Gibbs  potential  of  the  reactant  from 
that of the product. Thus, for Reaction (1): 
° −
     
p p
/    )  

P
              
                (3) 
As  may  be seen, acquisition of the reaction isotherm in the form 
(Equation 2) in which it is usually presented and used in respect to 
Reaction  (1)  requires  that  we  get  rid  of  the  RT ln(p°/a°)  term  in 
Equation (3). Since the logarithm of unity is zero, this can be done 
very easily in this particular case by assuming a° = p°. By making 
this  assumption,  we  eliminate  the  free  energy  of  concentration 
(mechanical)  component  of  ∆G°  and  thereby  assume  ∆G°  to  be 
equivalent  to  the  difference  only  of  the  characteristic  (chemical) 
kind of Gibbs free energy between one mol of A and one mol of P. 
Since A and P are assumed to be in the same environment, the 
difference in characteristic free energy on a per mol basis between 
them  in  their  common  environment  could  be  determined  in  a 
closed system from their relative concentrations when the reaction 
is at equilibrium, in which case ∆G would be zero, p/a would be 
equivalent  to  the  equilibrium  constant  of  the  reaction,  and  ∆G° 
would be equivalent to −RT lnK. This assumes of course that the 
equilibrium constant is not so large or small as to preclude meas-
urement of a or p. 

° ]  + [
A
RT
 
ln (

G G
A
∆
G
 

G
] 
 [
= ∆
 

G

° −
P
° 

+

As may be seen by including the reference concentrations in the 
reaction isotherm, the equilibrium constant is invariably a dimen-
sionless quantity. Such is required if the logarithm of an equilib-
rium  constant  is  to  make  sense  (46).  Inclusion  of  the  reference 
concentrations  in  the  isotherm  has  the  additional  advantage  of 
allowing one to see clearly how to handle a reactant or product that 
is maintained at constant concentration or virtually so in the course 
of the reaction. Thus for such a reactant or product, one need only 
specify  the  constant  concentration  to  be  the  reference  concentra-
tion,  in  which  case  the  reactant  or  product  would  be  eliminated 
from the isotherm. Of course any special condition of this nature 
would limit the equilibrium constant to that condition and it would 
thus be necessary to specify the limitation in presenting the equi-
librium constant if not done so by convention. 
 

For  reactions  having  multiple  reactants  and  products,  one’s 
choice of reference concentrations is arbitrary within the restriction 
that  the  sum  of  the  reference  free  energies  of  concentration  on  a 
per  mol  basis  be  the  same  for  the  reactants  as  for  the  products. 
Note that, since Gibbs energies are expressed on a per mol basis 
for each mol of each reactant and product specified in the stoichio-
metric equation for the reaction, reactions having more than or less 
than one mol of a particular reactant or product in their stoichio-
metric  equation  must  be  treated  such  that  ∆G°  for  the  reactions 
2A ð P and 1-2  A  ð  P, for example, be equivalent to G°P   − 2G°A   and 
G°P   − 1-2 G°A  , respectively. Note also that, regardless of the complex-
ity of the reaction, ∆G° is expressed in units of energy per mol. For 
reactions other than the very simple Reaction (1), one might ask: 
energy per mol of what? By taking into account the ideal-gas and 
mechanical (Figure 1) origins of the above method and using reci-
procal concentrations (i.e., molar volumes) rather than concentra-
tions,  one  can  readily  see  that  the  answer  must  be:  per  mol  of 
individually mobile particles. In other words, one can readily see 
that  the  characteristic  Gibbs  energy  of  each  mol  or  fraction  of  a 
mol  of  each  reactant  and  product  specified  in  the  stoichiometric 
equation  is  measured  in  terms  of  the  density  of  the  translational 
kinetic energy possessed by one mol of individually mobile parti-
cles at the temperature of the reaction system. Thus, the ‘per mol’ 
may  be  interpreted  to  indicate  simply  that  the  stoichiometric 
coefficients refer to mols rather than to molecules. 

The conventional way of eliminating the reference term is to as-
sume  for  each  kind  of  reactant  and  product  in  the  stoichiometric 
equation  a  hypothetical  ‘standard  state’  concentration  of  unity  in 
whatever units of concentration are employed. This state is ‘hypo-
thetical’  in  that  the  reactants  and  products  are  assumed  to  have 
properties  identical  with  those  they  would  have  if  they  were  in 
dilute (ideal) solution, in which case the requirement that concen-
trations be in terms of numbers of individually mobile particles per 
unit volume is likely to be met. Although this convention invaria-
bly abolishes the reference concentration term and, since the loga-
rithm of unity to any power is zero, is the most logical and efficient 
means of doing so, the fact of its use is often stated in such a way 
as  to  give  the  very  confusing  impression  that  the  reactants  and 
products must be at a concentration of one molar or one molal, for 
example, if the value of ∆G° is to be correct, implying incorrectly 
that  its  use  has  a  purpose  in  addition  to  specification  of  dimen-
sional units and elimination of the reference term. 
Nature  of  Characteristic  Chemical  Potential  Energy.  As  im-
plied  above,  the  characteristic  component  of the free energy of a 
chemical substance consists of all forms of available work poten-
tial other than the intrinsically mechanical free energy of concen-
tration.  From  the  standpoint  of  chemistry,  the  characteristic  free 
energy of a substance at a particular temperature consists only of 
that associated with what is ordinarily referred to as chemical bond 
energy. Bond energies are usually dealt with in terms only of ther-
mal  energies  of  bond  formation  or  dissociation.  This  being  the 
case,  it  is  necessary  to  inquire  as  to  the  general  nature  of  bond 
energy  as  a  nonthermal  actual  energy.  Since,  other  than  the  ex-
tremely  weak  gravitational  force,  only  Coulomb  (electrostatic) 
forces  and  forces  deriving  therefrom  are  known  to  exist  between 
atoms (47), bond energy as a nonthermal actual energy must con-
sist of these forces and must therefore correspond to what is com-
monly referred to as chemical binding energy. 

Since atoms and molecules possess both attractive and repulsive 
forces,  and  since  the  formation  of  a  kinetically  stable  chemical 
bond at a finite temperature invariably involves the establishment 
of a balance between these forces within an energy barrier to the 
making  and  breaking  of  the  bond,  chemical  binding energy must 

11

Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

refer to the energies of both attractive and repulsive forces. Con-
sider, for example, two kinds of charged atoms A+ and A− which 
possess binding energy only by virtue of their net charges. Since 
unlike  charges  attract  one  another,  binding  energy  for  a  binding 
interaction between A+ and A− must necessarily be viewed as be-
ing attractive. On the other hand, since like charges repel, binding 
energy  for  an  interaction  between  A+  and  A+,  for  example,  must 
necessarily  be  regarded  as  being  repulsive.  Since  the  attractive 
binding  interaction  would  clearly  involve  a  net  consumption  of 
binding  energy,  the  repulsive  one  must  by  implication  involve  a 
net production of binding energy. Since both attractive and repul-
sive binding energy must be forms of nonthermal actual energy, it 
appears from this example that the binding energies of molecules 
possessing particularly large amounts of bond energy are likely to 
be of the repulsive kind. However, as is evident from the fact that 
the bulk of local matter occurs naturally as liquids and solids con-
sisting of attractively bound molecules, most binding interactions 
between atoms are net attractive. In view of this and of the large 
amount  of  energy  required  to  force  like  charges  into  close  prox-
imity to one another, it seems likely that most of the molecules we 
ordinarily think of as possessing relatively large amounts of bond 
energy are molecules in which the constituent atoms are relatively 
unattractive to one another and/or are constrained (bonded) in such 
a way as to prevent optimal neutralization of their attractive forces. 
If we were to consider this invariably to be the case, we would be 
ignoring the fact that, by virtue of the existence of energy barriers 
to  the  making  and  breaking  of  chemical  bonds,  it  is  possible  for 
kinetically  stable  bonds  to  be  formed  between  atoms  despite  the 
interaction being net repulsive. 

As is evident from the fact that most chemical reactions that are 
thermodynamically  favorable  in  respect  to  ∆G°  are  exothermic, 
translational  kinetic  (mechanical)  energy  of  atoms  and  molecules 
can  be  constrained  as  bond  energy.  Uncatalyzed  conversions  of 
translational  kinetic  energy  into  bond energy must occur through 
collisions of the atoms or molecules with sufficient energy to force 
the electronic and other changes (e.g., desolvations) that constitute 
the energy barrier. From the fact that bound atoms and molecules 
tend to dissociate as temperature is increased, it is evident that the 
collision energy can be too high as well as too low. 

Since  the  amount  of  attractive  binding  energy  possessed  by  a 
substance at constant ambient pressure depends on its temperature 
as  well  as  on  its  chemical  composition,  it  is  necessary  to  distin-
guish between changes in attractive binding energy that do and do 
not constitute changes in characteristic chemical potential energy. 
This distinction was in effect made above by considering thermally 
produced  attractive  binding  energy  to  be  extramolecular  latent 
thermal  energy.  According  to  the  treatment  given,  the  attractive 
binding energy that accumulates in an individual substance as its 
temperature is increased at constant pressure from absolute zero to 
the  point  at  which  all  the  molecular  constituents  are  sufficiently 
free to be individually mobile is not characteristic chemical poten-
tial energy. That such is the case is evident from the above consid-
eration  of  a  reversible  conversion  of  ice  into  liquid  water  with 
thermal  energy  deriving  from  nonthermal  actual  energy  used  to 
compress  an  ideal  gas.  As  was  noted,  the  free  energy  of  the 
nonthermal  actual  energy  would  remain  with  the  gas  rather  than 
undergo transfer with the thermal energy that would become latent 
thermal energy of newly formed liquid. 

One  can  reasonably  expect  only  supercooled  phases  of  single 
substances to possess latent thermal energy consisting of attractive 
binding energy having the quality of characteristic chemical poten-
tial  energy.  Thus,  whereas  a  substance  in  a  superheated  phase 
would be out of thermochemical equilibrium as a result of possess-

ing  an  excess  of  translational  kinetic  energy  relative  to  attractive 
binding energy, a substance in a supercooled phase would be out of 
equilibrium as a result of possessing an excess of attractive binding 
energy relative to the mechanical energy. That the excess attractive 
binding energies of substances in supercooled states actually have 
the  quality  of  characteristic  chemical  potential  energy  is  particu-
larly evident from studies on single solids that have been mechani-
cally or otherwise reduced to nano-sized particles at temperatures 
far below their melting points. Single solids thus modified are in 
effect in extremely supercooled states and have chemical reactivi-
ties and other properties, noted above, indicative of the presence of 
exceptionally  large  amounts  of  characteristic  chemical  potential 
energy (48, 49). For instance, graphite reduced to extremely small 
particles by prolonged grinding under inert-gas conditions has been 
observed to be sufficiently reactive to ignite spontaneously at room 
temperature when exposed to air (50). 
Determination of  ∆∆∆∆G° by the Calorimetric Method. Since con-
sumptions and productions of bond free energy under the constant 
temperature, constant pressure, and virtually constant volume con-
ditions  assumed  here  are  accompanied  by  productions  and  con-
sumptions,  respectively,  of  equivalent  amounts  of  energy  having 
the quality of thermal energy at the specified constant temperature, 
differences  in  characteristic  Gibbs  free  energy  between  the  reac-
tants  and  products  of  chemical  reactions  can  be  determined  in 
closed  systems  not  only  by  the  equilibrium  method,  but  also  by 
measuring  thermal  energy  changes  occurring  as  a  result  of  the 
reactions. However, this ‘isothermal’ calorimetric method is much 
more  difficult  and  less  likely  to  be  feasible  in  that  it  requires  a 
means  of  distinguishing  between  thermal  energy  changes  due  to 
bond  energy  changes  and  irrelevant  ones  due  to interconversions 
between  the  latent  and  nonlatent  thermal  energies.  An  irrelevant 
change will occur with any net change in the heat capacity of the 
reaction  system.  Such  a  change  could  occur  as  a  result primarily 
either of a change in the total intramolecular latent thermal energy 
of the system or of a change in the total free energy of concentra-
tion (i.e., in the total number of individually mobile particles in the 
system). As may be seen by comparing the reactions A ð P + Q 
and A2 ð 2A, a net increase in the total free energy of concentra-
tion due to a chemical change under the conditions assumed here 
will be accompanied by an increase in a latent thermal energy that 
will  be  indistinguishable  from  if  not  identical  with  the  above-
described extramolecular kind. 

That  free  energy  of  concentration  should  be  viewed  here  as 
elsewhere  as  being  intrinsically  mechanical  rather  than  chemical 
can be seen by considering a closed Reaction (1) system in which 
A and P possess equal amounts of bond energy on a per mol basis 
and the reaction does not involve a net change in the system as to 
latent  thermal  energy.  In  such  a  system,  an  interconversion  be-
tween A and P would not involve a net change in an actual (First-
Law) energy of any kind of either the system or its surroundings. 
Nevertheless, an irreversible net conversion would occur and thus 
be driven with consumption of free energy if there were a differen-
tial in the concentrations of A and P. Since the system is assumed 
to  be  closed,  a  differential  between  A  and  P  as  to  concentration 
would  be  accompanied  by  differentials  as  to  absolute  amount  of 
both  bond  energy  and  translational  kinetic  energy.  Since,  for  a 
given  differential  in  concentration,  the  magnitude  of  the  driving 
force for the reaction would be a function only of temperature, it is 
evident that, of these two kinds of actual energy, only the thermal 
energy would be relevant in respect to the driving force. However, 
the fact of the reaction not being accompanied by a change in ac-
tual energy would rule out the thermal energy as well as any other 
actual energy of the system as the source of the free energy con-

 

12

Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

sumed  in  driving  the  reaction.  As  will  be  pointed  out  below  by 
comparing Reaction (1) systems with the purely mechanical Figure 
1  system,  the  source of the free energy would be the nonthermal 
actual  energy  used  to  generate  the  differential  in  concentration. 
Since  only  free  energy  from  this  source  could  be  present  in  the 
closed system, it would be necessary to attribute the driving force 
for the reaction simply to the differential in concentration or ‘num-
ber density’ between A and P. Accordingly, the reaction would be 
driven as a result of there being a differential between the number 
of A molecules converting spontaneously into P molecules and the 
number  of  P  molecules  converting  spontaneously  into  A  mole-
cules. 

Consider  now  a  ∆G° = 0  reaction  which  differs  from  the  one 
above in that it involves a net change in latent thermal energy and 
thus  a  net  change  in  heat  capacity.  Since  the  reaction  would  not 
involve a net change in bond energy and the change in latent ther-
mal  energy  would  occur  only  in  the  system,  maintenance  of  the 
system  at  constant  temperature  would  require  transmission  of 
thermal energy between the system and its surroundings. Since for 
a closed system such transmission could be driven only by a gradi-
ent of temperature, and since by definition any latent thermal en-
ergy produced or consumed at a particular temperature would have 
the  same  quality  as  nonlatent  thermal energy at that temperature, 
an interconversion between these energies in such a system main-
tained  at  constant  temperature  would  clearly  be  irrelevant  to  the 
energetics of the chemical changes that constitute the reaction. In 
other words, as a result of the latent and nonlatent thermal energies 
having  different  locations  and  the  same  quality  at  any  particular 
temperature,  an  interconversion  between  these energies in such a 
system could be driven only by a gradient of temperature, which, 
in consequence of the constant-temperature specification, would by 
definition be sufficiently small as not to result in a finite consump-
tion of free energy. From this it is evident that, from the standpoint 
of theory, a change in latent thermal energy in any particular reac-
tion  system  of  the  sort  considered  here  could  be  determined  di-
rectly from a detectable change in thermal energy only if the reac-
tion  could  be  conducted  reversibly.  Consequently,  for  a  reaction 
involving  a  significant  change  in  latent  thermal  energy,  the  only 
way to obtain a reasonably accurate estimate of ∆G° by the calo-
rimetric method would be to determine the difference between the 
amount of nonlatent (detectable) thermal energy produced or con-
sumed in the course of the reaction when the reaction is conducted 
‘completely irreversibly’ (i.e., under conditions of zero work being 
done on the surroundings) and the amount produced or consumed 
when the reaction is conducted very nearly reversibly (i.e., under 
conditions in which very nearly all of the work potential that be-
comes available in the course of the reaction is used to do work on 
the surroundings) (cf. 51, 52). 

For  a  reaction  system  maintained  at  constant  temperature  and 
volume  rather  than  at  constant  temperature  and  pressure,  the  de-
tectable  change  in  thermal  energy  occurring  under  conditions  of 
complete irreversibility would correspond to the algebraic sum of 
the changes in the chemical and latent thermal energies of the sys-
tem. A change of this sort on a per mol basis is usually denoted by 
∆E° and referred to as the difference or change in the total energy 
of the system. The detectable change in thermal energy occurring 
under conditions of near reversibility would correspond closely to 
the change in the latent thermal energy of the system in the oppo-
site direction. Changes of this sort on a per mol basis are denoted 
by T∆S°. The change in bond energy on a per mol basis would be 
given in terms of thermal energy by the difference ∆E° − T∆S° and 
would  correspond  closely  to  the  difference  between  the reactants 
and products in respect to characteristic Helmholtz free energy. 

 

13

°  
sys
= −∆

 

°  
sys
+ ∆
 
 
+ ∆
 

S

 

°    
sys
= ∆
S
°
 
surr
= ∆
T S
°
 
total

 

+ ∆
S
 

Changes in characteristic Gibbs free energy are reckoned in the 
same way except that ∆E° is replaced by ∆E° + P∆V° and referred 
to  as  the  difference  or  change in enthalpy, denoted by ∆H°. The 
P∆V°  component  of  ∆H°  serves  to  account  for  the  pressure-
volume work that would be done on the surroundings (atmosphere) 
by the system or by the surroundings on the system if the reaction 
were to result in an increase or decrease, respectively, in the vol-
ume of the system. In consequence of the P∆V° component, ∆G° 
for  a  Reaction  (1),  for  example,  could  correspond  exactly  to  the 
difference in bond energy between one mol of A and one mol of P 
in  their  common  environment  only  if  ∆V°  for  the  conversion 
should happen to be zero. Although changes in volume ordinarily 
occur,  they  are  usually  small  for  reactions  involving  net  changes 
only  in  small  molecules  in  solution  at  constant  temperature  and 
pressure. At normal (atmospheric) pressures the amounts of energy 
involved are usually also small and sufficiently so to justify con-
sidering  them  to  be  negligible  in  relation  to  the  change  in  bond 
energy. 

The above means of estimating and accounting for differences 
in the characteristic component of the Gibbs free energy is in effect 
a means of doing so in terms of changes in thermal energy of both 
the system and its surroundings in terms only of system properties. 
Thus: 
                            

                           (4) 

∆
T S

= ∆
 

∆
G

H

−

 

−∆

 

(

S

T

G

     

°  
sys

 
=

        

            

°  
sys
° ) 
sys

G T
° /
sys
−∆

H
° /
sys
∆
T S
°
surr

°  
sys
               
                    
Enthalpy-Entropy  Compensation.  The  ∆H°  and  T∆S°  compo-
nents of the above ‘Gibbs standard free energy relation’ (Equation 
4)  are  often  referred  to  as  differences  or  changes  in  energy  and 
entropy, respectively, and are often referred to in such a way as to 
give  the  impression  that  the  ‘energy’  and  ‘entropy’  are  different 
forms  of  energy  that  are  more  or  less  equally  capable  of  driving 
thermodynamic processes under conditions of constant temperature 
and pressure. That doing this is not appropriate is evident from the 
fact that, since ∆H° is equivalent to the algebraic sum of ∆G° and 
T∆S° and serves to represent the difference or change in the total 
energy of the system, T∆S° must represent a difference or change 
in an energy of the system that is independent of the difference or 
change in thermal energy represented by ∆G° and has the quality 
of thermal energy at the temperature of the system. In other words, 
T∆S°  must  serve  as  indicated  above  to  represent  a  difference  or 
change in the kinds of energy referred to as latent thermal energy. 
Accordingly,  the  result  ∆G° =  −T∆S°  for  an  isothermal  process 
would mean simply that the change in thermal energy due to the 
change in the characteristic Gibbs free energy of the system hap-
pens to be accompanied by an equivalent but oppositely directed 
change  in  the  latent  thermal  energy  of  the  system,  and  the  result 
∆G° = ∆H° would mean simply that the process does not involve a 
net change in the latent thermal energy of the system. 

Several  problems  with  current  and  past  interpretations  of  the 
Gibbs standard free energy relation have been pointed out and/or 
discussed  in  recent  years  by  a  number  of  investigators  (see,  e.g., 
53-60).  Some  of  the problems derive from the fact that reactions 
occurring  in  solution  are  ordinarily  accompanied  by  a  ‘solvent 
reaction’  which  is  not  accounted  for  in  stoichiometric  equations 
and which in some cases appears to make equivalent contributions 
of the same sign to ∆H° and T∆S° and thus appears to make little 
or no contribution to ∆G° (53, 61-66). For reactions occurring in 
aqueous  solution,  the  energy  of  this  so-called  ‘enthalpy-entropy 
compensation’ can be quite large as to amount and, in such cases 

Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

where the associated change in ∆G° is very small, obviously must 
derive  from  large  conversions  between  the  latent  and  nonlatent 
thermal energies somewhat as in the case of reversible conversions 
between  the  solid  and  liquid  forms  of  water.  In  this  regard,  it  is 
important to note that, since ∆H° serves to represent the change in 
total energy and thus includes T∆S°, enthalpy-entropy compensa-
tion in a broad sense must invariably occur in processes for which 
T∆S° is finite. 

Although widely acknowledged to be a phenomenon that is not 
well  understood,  enthalpy-entropy  compensation  of  the  solvent-
dependent kind is generally thought to occur as a result of differ-
ences  between  reactants  and  products  with  respect  to  strength  of 
binding  interaction  with  the  solvent  and  thus  with  respect  to 
amount of solvent bound or otherwise immobilized. Such is consis-
tent  with  the  fact  that  binding  interactions  between  solutes  and 
solvents  can  reasonably  be  expected  to  follow  the  same  rules  as 
binding  interactions  between  solutes.  Thus,  binding  interactions 
between molecules of a solute and its solvent to form complexes 
can be either favorable, with net conversion of binding energy into 
thermal  energy,  or  unfavorable,  with  net  conversion  of  thermal 
energy into binding energy. Also, since particles of an undissolved 
solute  idealy  immersed  in  a  solvent  would  be  completely  sur-
rounded by the solvent, one could expect there to be a considerable 
mechanical  (mass-action)  driving force (−∆Gconc) for solvation of 
the  solute  from  the  high  solvent  activity  alone.  Thus,  one  could 
expect some solvation of the solute to occur even if the attractive 
forces  between  the  solute  and  solvent  molecules  should  be  very 
weak. If the attractive forces between molecules of the solute and 
solvent  should  be  weaker  than  those  between  molecules  of  the 
solvent,  one  could  expect  solvation  of  the  solute to be accompa-
nied  by  net  conversion  of  thermal  energy  into  attractive  binding 
energy due to hindrance of bond formation between solvent mole-
cules more or less as proposed by Hildebrand and coworkers (67, 
68),  resulting  in  a  temperature-sensitive  tension  in  the  solvent  at 
the surfaces of the solute molecules similar to that which occurs at 
the interface of the solvent and its vapor. As a result of this ten-
sion, one could expect the existence of a force for minimization of 
the amount of space occupied by the solute. Accordingly, surface 
tension in a liquid results from molecules at the surface possessing 
relatively large amounts of attractive binding energy which in turn 
results in there being a relatively large attractive (contractive) force 
among molecules at the surface that tends to minimize surface area 
(69). 

Consistent with these expectations, solvations of nonpolar (hy-
drophobic) solutes in water tend to be thermodynamically unfavor-
able  with  respect  to  ∆G°  and  the  solubilities  of  such  solutes  in 
water  tend  to  be  lower  as  the  surface  areas  of  the  molecules  are 
larger  (for  recent  reviews,  see  70-72).  In  addition,  water  has  an 
exceptionally  high  surface  tension  which  decreases  with  increase 
of temperature (69), and solvations of nonpolar solutes in water are 
generally accompanied by a temperature-sensitive decrease in the 
amount  of  space  occupied  by  the  solute  (73-75).  In  contrast  to 
∆G°, both ∆H° and T∆S° for solvation tend to be negative, indicat-
ing that the latent thermal energy of the system tends to decrease 
more  than  the  bond  energy  increases.  The  large  negative  T∆S° 
associated  with  the  above  phenomena,  widely  referred  to  collec-
tively  as  ‘the  hydrophobic  effect’,  is  usually  attributed  to  a  tem-
perature-sensitive  ordering  of  water  molecules  at  the  surfaces  of 
the solute molecules (75-78). Accordingly, solvation is ordinarily 
accompanied  by  an  increase  in  heat  capacity  that  can  be  readily 
explained in terms of reversal of the solvent ordering as the tem-
perature is increased for the purpose of measuring the heat capacity 
(70). Consistent with the above, ‘Hildebrand’ interpretation of the 
 

14

hydrophobic effect, the ordering appears to be limited to a single 
layer of water molecules (79). 

Contrary to the Hildebrand view, the postulated ordering of wa-
ter  and  the  observed  increase in bond energy in the hydrophobic 
effect have generally been interpreted to mean that there is an in-
crease in hydrogen bonding, either in number of bonds or in bond 
strength, and that the thermodynamics of the ordering process are 
thus anomalous (72). If we were to consider the ordering actually 
to involve an increase in the number of hydrogen bonds, we could 
expect  it  to  be accompanied by a decrease in bond energy rather 
than  by  the  observed  increase  and  the  thermodynamics  would  in 
fact  appear  to  be  anomalous,  since  hydrogen  bonding  occurs 
through attractive (cohesive) forces and therefore can be expected 
to consume binding free energy. On the other hand, if we were to 
consider the ordering to involve only an increase in hydrogen bond 
strength and were to interpret ‘increase in bond strength’ to mean 
‘increase in bond energy’, we could conceive of the thermodynam-
ics of the ordering process not being anomalous and of there being 
no actual disagreement between the conventional and Hildebrand 
views. Thus it is conceivable that the ordering involves only a net 
increase  in  the  amount  of  bending  and  stretching  of  hydrogen 
bonds, in which case there could be an increase in attractive bind-
ing  energy  without  a  net  decrease  in  the  number  of  bonds.  This 
possibility  is based on the fact that, by virtue of the existence of 
energy barriers to the making and breaking of chemical bonds, the 
energy of a chemical bond must be enhanced if the bond is to be 
broken. In the case of sustained bending or stretching without net 
bond breakage, ‘enhancement energy’ would be retained somewhat 
as in the case of the bonds in a stretched rubber band and would 
consist  exclusively  of  attractive  binding  energy.  As  will  be  out-
lined below by considering a solvent reaction in respect to Reac-
tion  (1),  the  large  negative  T∆S°  and  the  associated  solvent-
dependent  enthalpy-entropy  compensation  in  the  hydrophobic 
effect  can  be  explained  readily  and  operationally  in  terms  of  the 
postulated  ordering  of  solvent  molecules  simply  by  taking  into 
account the fact that the ordering implies immobilization. 

In doing this, it shall be assumed (i) that water is the solvent, 
(ii) that molecules of the solvent bind less strongly to each other 
than  to  A  and  P,  and  (iii)  that  the  attractive  binding  interaction 
between the solvent and P is relatively strong. This being the case, 
we could expect a net conversion of A into P to be accompanied by 
a solvent reaction involving a net conversion of mobile water into 
an immobile, bound form and an associated net conversion of at-
tractive binding energy into thermal energy. In a closed Reaction 
(1) system, we could expect this conversion of binding energy into 
thermal energy to make a negative contribution to the ∆G° for the 
reaction just as would any other net conversion of binding energy 
into  thermal  energy  at  constant  temperature  and  pressure.  There-
fore, we could expect the contributions to ∆H° and T∆S° to differ 
accordingly. How, then, can a difference between the reactant and 
product with regard to solvent immobilization account for solvent-
dependent  enthalpy-entropy  compensation?  As  surmised  by  Ives 
and  Marsden  (62),  this  question  can  be  answered  by  taking  into 
account  changes  in  a  specific  extensive  (size)  variable  of  closed 
reaction systems. 

Enthalpy-entropy  compensation  of  the  above  sort  can  be  ade-
quately  explained  by  invoking  the  above-noted  prediction  of  the 
equipartition principle that, at any particular temperature, the indi-
vidually mobile particles of a gas will possess on average the same 
amount  of translational kinetic energy regardless of the nature of 
the  particles.  That  this  prediction  is  generally  considered  to  be 
correct  and  applicable  to  substances  in  ideal  solution  is  evident 
from  the  fact  that  it  is  implicit  in  the  concentration  term  of  the 

Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

reaction isotherm (Equation 2) through the assumption that, at any 
particular temperature, only the relative concentrations of A and P 
as  particles  matters  in  regard  to  the  difference  in  free  energy  of 
concentration.  According  to  this  assumption,  differences  in  the 
characteristic features of A and P, such as size (mass), net charge, 
amount of bond energy, amount of bound solvent, and amount of 
intramolecular latent thermal energy, are of no consequence what-
ever as regards the contributions of A and P to free energy of con-
centration. In regard to particle size, it may be noted that Einstein 
(80) employed the above assumption in his very successful treat-
ment of Brownian movements of particles of sufficient size to be 
seen by light microscopy. This and the fact that one could reasona-
bly expect to be capable of demonstrating the equilibrium value of 
RT ln( p/a)  for  a  Reaction  (1)  as  a  difference  in  mechanical  (os-
motic) work potential equivalent to the ∆G° for the reaction imply 
(i) that differences in free energy of concentration are differences 
in  the  density  of  translational  kinetic  energy  and  (ii)  that,  at  any 
particular  temperature,  individually  mobile  particles  of  A  and  P 
would possess on average over time equivalent amounts of transla-
tional kinetic energy regardless of their characteristic features. This 
being  the  case,  one  could  reasonably  expect  equipartition  of  the 
translational kinetic energy of a closed reaction system among all 
the particles of the system, including, of course, those of the sol-
vent. 

Accordingly, if P of a closed Reaction (1) system were to im-
mobilize more water than does A, one could expect a net conver-
sion of A into P to be accompanied by (i) a decrease in the number 
of particles in the system, (ii) an equipartitioning of the total trans-
lational kinetic energy of the system among the smaller number of 
particles, (iii) an augmentation of the average translational kinetic 
energy of the particles, (iv) an elevation of the temperature of the 
system, and (v) a transmission of thermal energy from the system 
to  the  surroundings.  Since  the  decrease  in  number  of  particles 
would occur regardless of the driving force for the conversion of A 
into  P  and  thus  regardless  of  whether  the  reaction  is  conducted 
reversibly or irreversibly, it would make a negative contribution to 
both ∆H° and T∆S°. Of course if A were to immobilize more water 
than does P, the sign of the contribution would be positive rather 
than negative. In either case, the contribution could be regarded as 
being  due to a change in free energy of concentration that is not 
accounted for in the stoichiometric equation for the reaction. 

Since the binding of water to solute and of water to water can be 
expected to vary with temperature, one could expect the magnitude 
of  the  contribution  to  be  temperature  dependent.  For  reactions 
involving net changes in large biological molecules, in which cases 
changes in latent thermal energy on a per mol basis tend to be par-
ticularly large, this dependence is particularly noticeable. A ques-
tion currently of interest in this regard is why applications of the 
integrated form of the van’t Hoff equation: 
                            lnK  =  −∆H°/RT  +  constant                           (5) 
to reactions of the above sort do not yield correct values for ∆H° 
despite yielding linear plots of lnK vs 1/T (54-60). This apparent 
discrepancy  can  be  resolved  by  noting  that,  since  lnK  is  also 
equivalent  to  −∆G°/RT,  the  integration  constant  of  Equation  (5) 
must be equivalent to ∆S°/R if the equation is to be consistent with 
Equation (4), and that, since the validity of Equation (4) is beyond 
dispute,  the  right-hand  side  of  Equation  (5)  must  therefore  be 
equivalent  to  −∆G°/RT.  This  being  the  case,  linearity  of  plots  of 
lnK vs  1/T  means  nothing  more  than  that  lnK is directly propor-
tional  to  −∆G°/T,  the  observed  proportionality  constant  being  an 
estimate of 1/R, and that ∆G° is a linear function of T. 

 

15

Role of Free Energy of Concentration in Free Energy Transfer 
and Conservation. As was noted above, the nature of free energy 
of concentration is fundamentally the same for a system in which 
only chemical work is possible as for an ideal gas system in which 
only mechanical work is possible. Accordingly, the concentration 
term  of  the  reaction  isotherm  ignores  completely  the  presence  of 
the solvent. Thus, RT ln( p/a) of Equation (2) would be applicable 
to a closed Reaction (1) system even if A and P were gases in an 
ideal  gas-phase  reaction.  This  being  the  case,  we  can  apply  to  a 
closed  Reaction  (1)  system  virtually  everything  said  above  con-
cerning the energy and entropy changes of an ideal gas associated 
with compression and expansion of the gas between two states at 
the same temperature simply by ignoring the means by which the 
two states were assumed to be achieved and considering a and p to 
be  the  two  states.  The  fact  that  the  volume  would  be  essentially 
constant for the two states in the closed Reaction (1) case would 
not  matter  because  the  difference  in  free  energy of concentration 
between them on a per mol basis could be determined from knowl-
edge of the relative values of a and p. The fact that A and P would 
share the same space also would not matter because A and P would 
be virtually independent of one another in the ideal case and thus 
may  be  thought  of  as  being  individual  systems  within  an  overall 
Reaction (1) system. 

The individual systems of a closed Reaction (1) system may be 
thought of as being pitted against one another in respect to com-
pression and expansion. For instance, if a and p were equal and A 
possessed RT ln10 more bond energy than P on a per mol basis, the 
A system, through ‘expansion’, would be capable of ‘compressing’ 
the P system to the extent that p exceeds a by a factor of ten, at 
which  point  (i)  the  reaction  would  be  at  equilibrium,  (ii)  the 
amount  of  bond  energy  in  the  individual  systems  would  be  the 
same on an absolute amount basis, and (iii) the A and P systems 
would differ as to free energy of concentration on a per mol basis 
by RT ln10. 

Since at equilibrium the absolute amount of bond energy would 
be the same for the A and P systems, the difference in free energy 
of  concentration,  although  generated  as  a  result  of  there  having 
been  a  difference  in  bond  energy  on  an  absolute  amount  basis, 
obviously would not be associated with such a difference at equi-
librium. Therefore, since any consumption of bond free energy in 
the course of the reaction going to equilibrium would be accompa-
nied by the production of an equivalent amount of thermal energy, 
and  since  all of this thermal energy could depart the system as a 
result of the temperature being maintained constant if the conver-
sion of A into P should happen not to result in an increase in the 
latent thermal energy of the system, the free energy of concentra-
tion generated in the P system, like that which one could expect to 
be  generated  in  an  ideal  gas  upon  its  isothermal  compression, 
could appear to be free of the actual energy that undergoes trans-
formation in the course of its generation. 

We turn now to the question of how the difference in free en-
ergy of concentration could be utilized to do chemical work (i.e., to 
convert  ambient  thermal  energy  into  chemical  bond  energy).  As 
noted above, Reaction (1) as presented is assumed to be linked to 
others  through  A  being  a  product  of  a  preceding  reaction  and 
through P being a reactant of a succeeding one in a stationary-state, 
biological-type system. To rule out the possibility of differences in 
free  energy  of  concentration  being  used  to  do  mechanical  (os-
motic) work in addition to chemical work, the individual reactions 
of  this  system  shall  be  assumed  to  be  located  in  the  same  com-
partment.  If  Reaction  (1)  were  thermodynamically  favorable  in 
respect to ∆G°, a difference in free energy of concentration of the 
above sort could be generated and conserved as bond free energy 

Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

through the differential between a and p either pulling preceding 
reactions  or  pushing succeeding ones that are thermodynamically 
unfavorable in respect to ∆G° and thus require thermal energy to 
proceed  in  the  same  direction  as  Reaction  (1).  If  the  individual 
reactions  were  coupled  only  by  freely  diffusible  intermediates, 
transmissions of actual energy between the reactions would occur 
only through transmissions of thermal energy. Of course the role of 
the  differential  in  free  energy  of  concentration  in  conserving  the 
excess  bond  free  energy  of  A  relative  to  P  on  a  per  mol  basis 
would be to increase the number of reactant molecules converting 
spontaneously  into  product  molecules  relative  to  the  number  of 
product  molecules  converting  spontaneously  into  reactant  mole-
cules in the unfavorable reactions. If the stationary-state ratio of p 
to a were infinitesimally smaller than the equilibrium constant of 
Reaction (1), all of the reactions would be operating reversibly in 
the thermodynamic sense and all of the bond free energy would be 
conserved as bond energy. 

Although the biological system as one in which only chemical 
work  is  possible  is  similar  to  the  purely  mechanical  (Figure  1) 
system  in  that  it  employs  a  difference  in  density  of  translational 
kinetic energy to mediate the transfer of free energy from one re-
pository to another, it differs markedly from the purely mechanical 
system  in  that  it  employs the particle-number-density (concentra-
tion)  aspect  rather  than  the  mechanical-energy-density  aspect  of 
the  translational  energy  density.  Owing  to  the  need  for  thermal 
energy transfer between the system and surroundings at a low tem-
perature differential to conserve free energy in the purely mechani-
cal case and the lack of such need to conserve free energy in the 
biological  case,  the  two  systems  also  differ  greatly  as  to  the 
amount of time that would be required for efficient transfer of the 
actual  energy.  Thus,  in  the  biological  case  the  reactions  yielding 
and requiring thermal energy could occur simultaneously in close 
proximity to one another at the microscopic level, a consequence 
of which would be that the requisite thermal energy transfers could 
occur  rapidly  while  the  temperature  of  the  system  is  essentially 
constant.  Thermal  energy  transfer  between  the  biological  system 
and its surroundings would be needed only to rid the system of the 
thermal energy produced as a result of the need for expenditure of 
bond free energy to maintain an appropriate net rate of reaction. If 
the system should require thermal energy to maintain its tempera-
ture, this expenditure of free energy would also serve to meet this 
need. 
 
APPENDIX 
According to the main body of the text, by considering irreversibil-
ity in respect to an adiabatic cycle of compression and expansion 
of  an  ideal  gas,  one  can  readily  see  that  any  irreversibility  in  a 
thermodynamic work process would be reflected only in the char-
acteristic  entropy  and  would  result  in  the  consumption  of  an 
amount  of  characteristic  free  energy  equivalent  to  an  amount  of 
ambient  thermal  energy  produced.  That  these  observations  are 
correct may be seen from the following considerations in reference 
to an adiabatic version of the Figure 1 model of the main body of 
the text. 

If  one  mol  of  an  ideal  gas  in  the  fully  expanded  state V1  at  a 
temperature  T1  of  the  reservoir  were  compressed  to  a  volume V2 
adiabatically,  the  temperature  of  the  gas  would  increase  by  an 
amount  depending  on  the  heat  capacity  and  on  the  amount  of 
energy  ∆E  imparted  to  the  gas.  This  amount of energy would be 
equivalent to the amount of work W done and thus would depend 
on the rate of the compression. Regardless of the rate, W and ∆E 
would be equivalent to CV∆T. Since S, T, and V are state functions 

 

16

and CV would be a constant, the expression for the net change in 
entropy 

∆Snet = ∆Schar + ∆Sconc = CV ln(T2/T1) + R ln(V2/V1) 

1

/

)

(

=

T
2

VR C
/

T V V
1
2

in terms of these parameters would be applicable regardless of the 
rate  of  the  compression.  If  the  gas  were  compressed  reversibly, 
∆Schar would be equivalent to −∆Sconc and T2 could be determined 
from  the  relationship 
.  If  the  gas  were  com-
pressed at a finite rate, T2 would be relatively high and ∆Snet for the 
compression would be finite and positive as a result of the increase 
in  characteristic  entropy  exceeding  the  decrease  in  entropy  of 
concentration.  In  this  ‘irreversible’  case,  T2  could  be  determined 
only  by  experimental means. Although calculation of ∆Snet could 
be  easily  achieved  if  T2  for  the  irreversible  compression  were 
known,  doing  so  would  not  be  helpful  in  respect  to  precise 
quantification  of  the  amount  of  free  energy  consumed.  However, 
since the work potential of the gas would increase by an amount 
equivalent to the amount of work done regardless of the rate of the 
compression, doing so could serve to indicate in a semiquantitative 
fashion  that  work  potential  has  been  rendered  unavailable.  As 
indicated  below,  if  T2  were  known,  the  precise  amount  rendered 
unavailable  could  be  determined  theoretically  by  considering  the 
gas to undergo reversible expansion to its original volume. 

/

2

)

(

VR C
/

T V V
2
1

In  contrast  to  what  would  be  the  case  for  an  ideal  gas  com-
pressed  irreversibly  between  two  states  at  the  same  temperature, 
reversible  expansion  of  the  adiabatically  compressed  gas  would 
result in a fraction of the thermal energy produced as a result of the 
gas being compressed at a finite rate being recovered as work, the 
fraction being that indicated by the efficiency of a Carnot engine 
operating  reversibly  between  T2  and  the  lower  temperature  that 
would exist upon return of the gas to its original volume V1. Since 
∆Schar for the expansion would be equivalent to −∆Sconc, this lower 
temperature  would  be  equivalent  to 
and  would  of 
course  be  higher  than  the  temperature  T1  of  the  reservoir  by  an 
amount depending on how fast the gas was compressed. In addi-
tion  to  the  difference  in  temperature,  there  would  remain  differ-
ences  in  the  pressure,  thermal  energy,  and  characteristic  entropy, 
the  difference  in  characteristic  entropy  being  equivalent  to  that 
existing at the end of the compression phase. Elimination of these 
differences  would  require  removal  of  the  adiabatic  constraint  so 
that an amount of thermal energy CV ∆T could undergo transmis-
sion  to  the  reservoir,  CV ∆T  in  this  case  being  equivalent  to  the 
amount  of  characteristic  free  energy  consumed  as  a  result  of  the 
gas being compressed at a finite rate. Since the amount of the gas 
was specified to be one mol, this amount would be equivalent to 
VC T V V
.  The  value  thus  obtained  divided  by  the 
/
1
temperature of the reservoir would be the net increase in entropy of 
the reservoir and for the overall process. As in any cyclic process, 
the net changes in free energy and entropy would be changes only 
in  the  characteristic  kinds.  Since  the  increase  in  entropy  for  the 
overall  process  would  differ  from  that  incurred  by the gas in the 
compression  phase  and  could  be  determined  quantitatively  only 
through determination of the amount of thermal energy transmitted 
to the surroundings, quantification of the net change in entropy for 
the  cyclic  process  would  in  effect  require  prior  quantification  of 
the net change in free energy. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This work was supported in part by the Stoner Research Fund of 
the Ohio State University Development Fund. 

T−
1

VR C
/

[

(

)

2

2

]

Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

REFERENCES 
1. 

van’t Hoff, J. H. (1929) The role of osmotic pressure in the 
analogy between solutions and gases. Alembic Club Reprints 
19,  5-42.  [Translation  of:  (1887)  Z.  Physik.  Chem.  1,  481-
508.] 

2.  Zemansky, M.W., and Dittman, R. H. (1981) Heat and Ther-
modynamics, 6th Ed., pp.160-161, McGraw-Hill, New York. 
3.  Stoner,  C.  D.  (1992)  An  investigation  of  the  relationships 
between rate and driving force in simple uncatalysed and en-
zyme-catalysed reactions with applications of the findings to 
chemiosmotic reactions. Biochem. J. 283, 541-552. 

23.  Benedicks, C. (1913) Über die Herleitung von Plancks Ener-
gieverteilungsgesetz  aus  Agglomerationsannahme;  einfache 
Beziehung zwischen Härte und Schwingungszahl. Ann. Phys. 
42, 133-162. 

24.  Compton, A. H. (1915) The variation of the specific heat of 

solids with temperature. Phys. Rev. 6, 377-389. 

25.  Debye, P. (1954) On the theory of specific heats. In: The Col-
lected Papers of Peter J. W. Debye, pp. 650-696, Interscience, 
New York. 

26.  Compton,  A.  H.  (1916)  A  physical  study  of  the  thermal 

conductivity of solids. Phys. Rev. 7, 341-348. 

4.  Lewis,  G.  N.,  Randall,  M.,  Pitzer,  K.  S.,  and  Brewer,  L. 
(1961) Thermodynamics, 2nd Ed., p. 13, McGraw-Hill, New 
York. 

27.  Valentiner, S. (1920) Die Grundlagen der Quantentheorie in 
elementarer  Darstellung,  3.  erw.  Aufl.,  p.  19,  Vieweg  und 
Sohn, Braunschweig. 

5.  Clausius, R. (1879) The Mechanical Theory of Heat (Browne, 

W. R., Translator) pp. 69-109, Macmillan, London. 

6.  Glasstone,  S.  (1947)  Thermodynamics  for  Chemists,  pp. 51-

60, Van Nostrand, New York. 

7.  Gurney, R.A. (1953) Ionic Processes in Solution, pp. 80-112, 

McGraw-Hill, New York. 

8.  Carnot,  S.  (1986)  Reflexions  on  the  Motive  Power  of  Fire 

(Fox, R., Translator) Lilian-Barber, New York. 
d’Abro,  A.  (1951)  The  Rise  of  the  New  Physics,  Chaps.  22 
and 40, Dover, New York. 

9. 

10.  Bent, H. A. (1965) The Second Law, pp. 32-133, Oxford, New 

York. 

11.  Born, M. (1989) Atomic Physics, Chaps. 7 and 9, Dover, New 

York. 

12.  Kauzmann, W. (1966) Kinetic Theory of Gases, pp. 91-130, 

Benjamin, New York. 

13.  Hinshelwood, C. N. (1965) The Structure of Physical Chemis-

try, pp. 1-24, Oxford, London. 

14.  Denbigh,  K.  G.  (1981)  The  Principles  of  Chemical  Equilib-
rium, 4th Ed., pp. 196-214, Cambridge University Press, Lon-
don. 

15.  Eisenberg  D.,  and  Kauzmann,  W.  (1969) The  Structure  and 

Properties of Water, Oxford, New York. 

16.  Frank, H.S., and Wen, W.-Y. (1957) Structural aspects of ion-
solvent  interaction  in  aqueous solutions: a suggested picture 
of water structure. Discuss. Faraday Soc. 24, 133-140. 

17.  Némethy, G., and Scheraga, H. A. (1962) Structure of water 
and hydrophobic bonding in proteins. I. A model of the ther-
modynamic  properties  of  liquid  water.  J.  Chem.  Phys.  36, 
3382-3400. 

18.  Liu, K., Cruzan, J. D., and Saykally, R. J. (1996) Water clus-

ters. Science 271, 929-933. 

19.  McQuarrie, D. A. (1976) Statistical Mechanics, pp. 194-217, 

Harper Collins, New York. 

20.  Kaganov, K. I., and Lifshits, I. M. (1979) Quasiparticles (Kis-

sen, V., Translator) Mir, Moscow. 

21.  Barnes, H. T., and Vipond, W. (1909) The sublimation of ice. 

Phys. Rev. 28, 453. 

22.  Barnes,  H.  T.  (1928)  Ice  Engineering,  pp.  31-33,  Renouf, 

Montreal. 

 

17

28.  Mehra, J., and Rechenberg, H. (1982) The Historical Devel-
opment of Quantum Theory, Vol. 1, Part 1, p. 151, Springer, 
New York. 

29.  Benedicks,  C.  (1926)  Metallographic  Researches,  Chap.  1, 

McGraw-Hill, New York. 

30.  Klein,  M.  J.  (1964)  Einstein  and  the  wave-particle  duality. 

The Natural Philosopher 3, 3-49. 

31.  de Broglie,  L.  (1922)  Sur  les  interférences  et  la  théorie  des 
quanta  de  lumière.  Comptes  Rendus  Acad.  Sci.  (Paris)  175, 
811-813. 

32.  de Broglie,  L.  (1928)  Black  radiation  and  light  quanta.  In: 
Selected Papers on Wave Mechanics (de Broglie, L., and Bril-
louin, L., Editors) pp. 1-7, Blackie and Son, London. 

33.  MacKinnon,  E.  (1976)  De Broglie’s 

retrospective. Am. J. Phys. 44, 1047-1055. 

thesis:  A  critical 

34.  Tonomura,  A.,  Endo,  T.,  Matsuda,  T.,  and  Kawasaki,  T. 
(1989) Demonstration of single-electron buildup of an inter-
ference pattern. Am. J. Phys. 57, 117-120. 

35.  Zeilinger,  A.,  Gähler,  R.,  Shull,  C.  G.,  Treimer,  W.,  and 
Mampe, W. (1988) Single- and double-slit diffraction of neu-
trons. Revs. Mod. Phys. 60, 1067-1073. 

36.  Gleiter,  H.  (1989)  Nanocrystalline  materials.  Prog.  Mater. 

Sci. 33, 223-315. 

37.  Greer, A. L. (1993) Thermodynamics of nanostructured mate-
rials. In: Mechanical Properties and Deformation Behavior of 
Materials  Having  Ultra-Fine  Microstructures  (Nastasi,  M., 
Parkin,  D.  M.,  and  Gleiter,  H.,  Editors)  pp.  53-77,  Kluwer, 
Dordrecht and Boston. 

38.  Alivisatos, A. P. (1996) Perspectives on the physical chemis-
try  of  semiconductor  nanocrystals.  J.  Phys.  Chem.  100, 
13226-13239. 

39.  Fecht, H. J. (1996) Formation of nanostructures by mechani-
cal  attrition.  In:  Nanomaterials:  Synthesis,  Properties  and 
Applications (Edelstein, A. S., and Cammarata, R. C., Editors) 
pp. 89-110, Institute of Physics Publishing, Bristol and Phili-
delphia. 

40.  Borel, J.-P. (1981) Thermodynamic size effect and the struc-

ture of metallic clusters. Surf. Sci. 106, 1-9. 

41.  Vergara, O., Heitkamp, D., and Löhneysen, H. v. (1984) Spe-
cific  heat  of small vanadium particles in the normal and su-
perconducting state. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 45, 251-258. 

Nature of Free Energy and Entropy 

42.  Jura, G., and Pitzer, K. S. (1952) The specific heat of small 
particles  at  low  temperatures.  J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  74,  6030-
6032. 

43.  Simon,  F.  (1956)  The  third  law  of  thermodynamics;  an  his-
torical survey. Yearbook of the Physical Society (Great Brit-
ain) 1956, 1-22. 

44.  Zemansky,  M.  W.  (1964) Temperatures Very Low and Very 

High, p. 76, Dover, New York. 

45.  Pitzer,  K.  S.  (1995)  Thermodynamics,  3rd  Ed.,  pp.  82-97, 

McGraw-Hill, New York. 

46.  Boggs, J. E. (1958) The logarithm of “ten apples”. J. Chem. 

Educ. 35, 30-31. 

47.  Moore,  W.  J.  (1972)  Physical  Chemistry,  4th  Ed.,  pp.  913-

915, Prentice-Hall, New York. 

48.  Lin, I. J., and Nadiv, S. (1979) Review of the phase transfor-
mation  and  synthesis  of  inorganic  solids  obtained  by  me-
chanical  treatment  (mechanochemical  reactions).  Mater.  Sci. 
Eng. 39, 193-209. 

49.  Hermann,  H.,  Schubert,  T.,  Gruner,  W.,  and  Mattern,  N. 
(1997) Structure and chemical reactivity of ball-milled graph-
ite. Nanostruc. Mater. 8, 215-229. 

50.  Kosmac,  T.,  and  Courtney,  T.  H.  (1992)  Milling  and  me-
chanical alloying of inorganic nonmetallics. J. Mater. Res. 7, 
1519-1525. 

51.  Maron,  S.  H.,  and  Lando,  J.  B.  (1974)  Fundamentals  of 

Physical Chemistry, pp. 329-331, Macmillan, New York. 

52.  Klotz,  I.  M.,  and  Rosenberg,  R.  M.  (1994)  Chemical 

Thermodynamics, 5th Ed., pp. 129-130, Wiley, New York. 

53.  Lumry, R. (1995) On the interpretation of data from isother-

mal processes. Methods Enzymol. 259, 628-720. 

54.  Ragone, R., and Colonna, G. (1995) Reliability of van’t Hoff 

plots. J. Phys. Chem. 99, 13050. 

55.  Naghibi, H., Tamura, A., and Sturtevant, J. M. (1995) Signifi-
cant  discrepancies  between  van’t  Hoff  and  calorimetric  en-
thalpies. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92, 5597-5599. 

56.  Weber,  G.  (1995)  Van’t  Hoff  revisited:  enthalpy  of associa-

tion of protein subunits. J. Phys. Chem. 99, 1052-1059. 

57.  Weber,  G.  (1996)  Persistent  confusion  of  total  entropy  and 
chemical system entropy in chemical thermodynamics. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 93, 7452-7453. 

58.  Ross, J. (1996) Comments on the article “Persistent confusion 
of  total  entropy  and  chemical  system  entropy  in  chemical 
thermodynamics”  [(1996)  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.S.A.  93, 
7452-7453]. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 93, 14314. 

59.  Holtzer,  A.  (1997)  Persistent  confusion  on  the  van’t  Hoff 

equation. Biopolymers 42, 499-503. 

60.  Liu, Y. and Sturtevant, J. M. (1997) Significant discrepancies 
between van’t Hoff and calorimetric enthalpies. III. Biophys. 
Chem. 64, 121-126. 

61.  Leffler, J. E., and Grunwald, E. (1963) Rates and Equilibria 

of Organic Reactions, pp. 40-56, Wiley, New York. 

62.  Ives, D. J. G., and Marsden, P. D. (1965) The ionization func-
tions of di-isopropylcyanoacetic acid in relation to hydration 
equilibria  and  the  compensation  law.  J.  Chem.  Soc.  1965, 
649-676. 

63.  Lumry,  R.,  and  Rajender,  S.  (1970)  Enthalpy-entropy  com-
pensation phenomena in water solutions of proteins and small 
molecules:  a  ubiquitous  property  of  water.  Biopolymers  9, 
1125-1227. 

64.  Gilli, P., Ferretti, V., Gilli, G., and Borea, P. A. (1994) En-
thalpy-entropy  compensation  in  drug-receptor  binding.  J. 
Phys. Chem. 98, 1515-1518. 

65.  Dunitz, J. D. (1995) Win some, lose some: enthalpy-entropy 
compensation  in  weak  intermolecular  interactions.  Chem. 
Biol. 2, 709-712.  

66.  Grunwald, E. (1997) Thermodynamics of Molecular Species, 

pp. 120-136, Wiley, New York. 

67.  Miller, K. W., and Hildebrand, J. H. (1968) Solutions of inert 

gases in water. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 90, 3001-3004. 

68.  Hildebrand,  J.  H.,  Prausnitz,  J.  M.,  and  Scott,  R.  L.  (1970) 
Regular  and  Related  Solutions,  pp.  137-141,  Van  Nostrand 
Reinhold, New York. 

69.  Davies,  J.  T.,  and  Rideal,  E.  K.  (1963)  Interfacial  Phenom-

ena, pp. 1-54, Academic Press, New York. 

70.  Privalov, P. L., and Gill, S. J. (1989) The hydrophobic effect: 

a reappraisal. Pure Appl. Chem. 61, 1097-1104. 

71.  Muller, N. (1990) Search for a realistic view of hydrophobic 

effects. Acc. Chem. Res. 23, 23-28. 

72.  Blokzijl,  W.,  and  Engberts,  J.  B.  F.  N.  (1993)  Hydrophobic 
effects. Opinions and facts. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 32, 
1545-1579. 

73.  Masterton, W. L. (1954) Partial molal volumes of hydrocar-

bons in water solution. J. Chem. Phys. 22, 1830-1833. 

74.  Edsall,  J.  T.,  and  Wyman,  J.  (1958)  Biophysical  Chemistry, 

pp. 27-46, Academic Press, New York. 

75.  Kauzmann,  W.  (1959)  Some  factors  in  the  interpretation  of 

protein denaturation. Adv. Protein Chem. 14, 1-63. 

76.  Frank, H. S., and Evans, M. W. (1945) Free volume and en-
tropy in condensed systems. III. Entropy in binary liquid mix-
tures; partial molal entropy in dilute solutions; structure and 
thermodynamics  in  aqueous  electrolytes.  J.  Chem.  Phys.  13, 
507-532. 

77.  Némethy, G., and Scheraga, H. A. (1962) Structure of water 
and hydrophobic bonding in proteins. II. Model for the ther-
modynamic properties of aqueous solutions of hydrocarbons. 
J. Chem. Phys. 36, 3401-3417. 

78.  Edsall,  J.  T.,  and  Gutfreund,  H.  (1983)  Biothermodynamics, 

Wiley, New York. 

79.  Gill,  S.  J.,  Dec,  S.  F.,  Olofsson,  G.,  and  Wadsö,  I.  (1985) 
Anomalous  heat  capacity  of  hydrophobic  solvation.  J. Phys. 
Chem. 89, 3758-3761. 

80.  Einstein,  A.  (1956)  Investigations  on  the  Theory  of  the 
Brownian Movement (Cowper, A. D., Translator) Dover, New 
York. 

 

18

