The Universe:  Finite or Infinite ?

In APEIRON Vol. 7 Nr. 1-2, on pages 126-127, Christopher John Davison argues
that the universe must be completely infinite, that is infinite in duration and in size.  The
core of his argument is his asking "those who claim limited size and lifespan to explain
how space and material came into existence from nothing, how it will disappear again,
and to explain the situation beyond the edge of a finite-sized Universe".  The answers
are as follows.

Either the universe arose from and was preceded by absolute nothing or else it, or
its  creator,  always  existed,  that  is  had  no  beginning.    Only  those  alternatives  are
available;  the  positing  of  anything  other  than  nothing  as  a  beginning  immediately
requires  accounting  for  that  something's  existence  so  that  the  only  alternative  to  a
beginning of nothing is no beginning at all.

Thinkers  over  at  least  the  past  4,000  years  have  consistently  come  to  that
conclusion  and,  since  the  universe  arising  from  nothing  seemed  impossible  and
ridiculous,  they  consistently  concluded  that  the  universe  arose  from  something  that
always  existed,  something  that  so  to  speak  was  the  cause  of  its  own  existence.
Shakespeare has King Lear say, "Nothing can be  made out of  nothing."  And, that  so
overwhelming limitation has made thinkers throughout the ages opt for the infinite.

But, under closer examination the infinite that this line of reasoning requires has
problems  as  severe  as  does  the  universe  arising  from  nothing.    Further,  the  universe
arising from nothing is not so insuperable a problem as it has appeared.  Somewhat in
the  manner  that  Alexander  resolved  the  challenge  of  the  Gordian  Knot  [he  drew  his
sword and cut the knot in half] it can be shown not only that the universe could have
arisen from nothing but that it must have, as follows.

The Problem of the Infinite

We can readily grasp the idea of nothing; it is easily within our ken.  But, the idea
of  infinity  is  much  more  difficult.    We  use  expressions  such  as  "without  limit"  and
"unending"  to  convey  the  idea  but  we  do  not  really  comprehend  ["in  our  gut"  so  to
speak] what "forever", "always", "without limit" really signify.  To us the symbol, ∞,
subtly means a specific quantity standing at the end of a long list of increasing numbers,
but its true meaning is that that list of numbers goes on and on, that if we go out and
"stand on" the most distant number we will see still more going on and on, forever.

So, for the universe to extend in space forever and for it to have existed forever is
at  least  as  troubling  as  for  it  to  have  arisen  from  nothing.    Furthermore  something
existing  forever  means  that  it  is  its  own  cause.    But,  that  contradicts  the  essential
requirement that a cause exist independently of what it causes, that the cause "precede"
in the causal sense that which it causes.

To  account  for  existence  it  is  necessary  to  show  why  it  is  as  compared  to  the
alternative,  it  not  being.    Thus  one  must  begin  at  the  beginning,  it  not  being.    The
starting  point  is  absolute  nothing  --  the  state  before  there  was  anything,  before
everything.    It  is  the  only  state  that  requires  no  explanation  nor  accounting  for  its
existence.  It is naturally what one would expect before anything started.

How a Universe Could Arise from Nothing

The problem with a universe [or anything as Lear said] arising from nothing is that
conservation must be maintained.  The inputs and outputs, the amounts at the start, any

1

intermediate  stages,  and  the  finish  must  reconcile.    There  can  be  no  overall  loss  nor
gain.    But,  starting  from  nothing  while  maintaining  conservation  would  appear  to
preclude  any  progress  at  all.    Yet,  paraphrasing  Descartes,  "I  [part  of  the  universe]
think, therefore the universe is."

The resolution of the dilemma is:  The primal nothing changed into something and

a conservation-maintaining equal-but-opposite un-something

That Our Universe Did Arise from Nothing

That  initial  event  was  so  unstable  that  it  exploded  too  immediately  for  the  two
opposites to recombine and cancel.  That explosion was an immense shower of matter
particles and energy now referred to as the "big bang".

But  there  is  another  difficulty  in  the  universe  so  arising  from  nothing  -  the
transition.  How is it possible to accommodate the transition from nothing to something
plus its opposite without an infinite rate of change at the beginning ?  There is only one
mathematical form that can so change and fit all of the circumstances and requirements
of the situation:  the ±[1 - Cos(2πft)] function [the ± for the two equal but
opposite components that maintain conservation].  The infinite series of derivatives of
the function make for the smooth transition.

The development1  from that event, a logical and mathematical derivation of all of
the  fundamental  laws  of  physics  (Coulomb's  Law,  Ampere's  Law,  Newton's  Laws  of
Motion,  Newton's  Law  of  Gravitation,  relativity,  radiation,  fields,  photons,  atomic
structure, nuclear structure, ..., all of the physics of the contemporary universe) from the
necessary  conditions  and  nature  of  that  origin,  shows  that  our  universe  is  the  joint
operation of the something and the un-something, which together result in the universe's
fundamental particles.

Thus  was  the  origin  of  the  universe.    As  for  Davison's  "how  it  will  disappear
again", it is in a long-term exponential decay that began with the "big bang" and never
completely ends.  However, just as the area under the curve ε-t = 1, so the material
universe is finite.

Roger Ellman
320 Gemma Circle
Santa Rosa, CA 95404, USA
RogerEllman@The-Origin.org

Reference

[1]  Ellman  R.,  The  Origin  and  Its  Meaning,  The-Origin  Foundation,  Inc.,  1996,  see

http://www.The-Origin.org for where, how available.

2

