Informational  interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics

Raoul Nakhmanson

Nakhmanson@t-online.de

Ascribing to inanimate matter a possibility to receive, work on and transfer
information allows us to explain quantum-mechanical phenomena including
"delayed-choice"-  and  "Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen  (EPR)"-type  experiments
adhering  to  the  basis  of  local  realism,  and  to  suggest  essentially  new
experiments with microparticles and atoms in which information plays the
principal rôle.

PACS numbers:  03.65.Bz ,  05.70.-a , 89.70.+c .

I. Introduction

The microworld has surprised the "classical" physicists with the following paradoxes:

• Before  quantum  mechanics  (QM)  was  created:  quantization  of  mass,  charge,
energy,  angular  momentum;  the  identity  of  particles  of  the  same  type,  wave-particle
duality, quantum randomness.

• In QM: statistical predictions, Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, Pauli's exclusion

principle, and (implicitly but immanently) collapse of the wave function.

• In standard (Copenhagen) interpretation of QM: rejection of the classical realism, a
trajectories,  etc.;  Bohr's

ban  on  speaking  about  non-measured  parameters, 
complementarity principle.

• In  hidden-parameter  interpretation:  Bell's  theorem  and  non-local  instantaneous

interaction between far separated microobjects.

• In experiments: results in delayed-choice, EPR, Aharonov-Bohm arrangements.
The Copenhagen interpretation is only a translation of the mathematical formalism of
QM  to  the  ordinary  language  but  not  an  interpretation  in  a  common  sense,  because  it
does  not  explain  how,  why,  and  in  which  framework  this  formalism  works.    The
common sense of Planck, Einstein, de Broglie, Schrödinger and many others could not
accept  it:  "ceterum  censeo  copenhaginem  esse  delendam"  .    But  all  attempts  to  find  a
realistic  interpretation  were  unproductive:  they  did  not  forecast  new  results  and
introduce  doubtful  peculiarities  e.g.  non-local  interaction  or  multiplicating  worlds.
Feynman told his students that the quantum world was not like anything that we know;
and although everybody knows QM, many people use it, some of them develop it, but
nobody  understands  it.    Almost  equal  is  Gell-Mann's  sentence:  "QM,  that  mysterious,
confusing  discipline,  which  none  of  us  really  understands  but  which  we  know  how  to
use."

How  must  the  productive  common-sense  interpretation  of  the  quantum  mechanics

look like?

Nakhmanson    p. 1 of 20

! It must accept the existence of real and causal world of local-interacting objects;

! It must make quantum mechanics evident [1]  and explain the above mentioned 

paradoxes as well as all "experimenta crucis"  performed up to now;

! It must be verifiable by means of experiments;

! It must show the frame of quantum mechanics and new horizons beyond it.

A version  of  such  interpretation  has  been  developed  by  the  author  since  1977  [2-4]
and will be summarized as below.  It is based on an assumption what microparticles can
receive,  work  on  and  transfer  information,  that  means,  they  have  some  consciousness
(spirit, ghost, intelligence), or they are automatons created and programmed from some
outside  intelligence.    This  assumption  is  not  a  totally  new  one:  just  after  quantum
randomness was discovered people spoke about the "free will" of electrons.  Later and
more extensively this assumption was discussed e.g. in [5].  But the forerunners did not
develop it to the level of a constructive hypothesis that could be tested experimentally.

In  Section  II  the  indications  for  such  an  assumption  are  named,  the  informational
interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics  is  declared  and  applied  to  explain  the  notions  of
QM and its "paradoxes".  In particular, it will be shown that in the new world picture,
Bell's theorem [6]  is not valid anymore.  Besides this there are some remarks about one
old  paradox  of  physics,  namely,  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics.    Section  III
considers the results of "experimenta crucis"  such as those of "delayed choice" [7, 8]
and  Einstein-  Podolsky-Rosen  ("EPR")  [9,  10]    ones.    Section  IV  presents  schemes  of
"Gedankenexperimente" coming out of the frame of QM to have informational contacts
with "inanimate" matter.  The last schemes do not take into account the direct interaction
between  matter  and  human  consciousness  [11-17]    which  will  be  briefly  touched  in
Section V.

II. Foundation of hypothesis

The idea of microparticle consciousness cannot avoid the following questions:

What clues do we have on the existence of microparticle consciousness?

Have the particles sufficient complexity for it?

What conduced the evolution of microparticle consciousness?

The  clues  supporting  the  assumption  that  "inanimate"  matter  has  some  kind  of

consciousness are the following:

♦ the formula  E=mc2  connecting mass m  and energy E  by virtue of the light 
velocity in vacuum c  - the maximal velocity of the spreading of information;
♦ the informational character of the wave function ψ describing probability in 

contrast to classical potentials describing "tangible" fields transporting energy and 
impulse;

♦ "teleological" movement of matter seemingly in the principle of the least action;

Nakhmanson    p. 2 of 20

♦ quantum-mechanical stochastics which can be seen as optimal tactics of behavior 

to search for all possible alternatives.

The acceptance of consciousness of  microparticles  assumes  their  complex  structure.
Theoretically  it  was  shown  (first  perhaps  by  Markov  [18]  )  that  one  microparticle  can
contain a whole universe ("fridmon", "baby universe").  If one does not go deeper than
Planck's  length  (≈  10-35  m),  one  finds  in  a  microobject  (∅ ≈  10-15  to  10-20  m)  of  the
order  of  1045  -  1060  "Planck  cells",  that  is  much  more  not  only  than  the  number  of
neurons in the human brain, but than the number of atoms contained in all known living
beings too.  Any detailed assumptions about structures and processes providing the work
of particle consciousness are beyond the scope of this article.

The basic circumstance which supports the development of any consciousness is free
will.  Without free will the consciousness is useless.  If free will exists, humans (and not
only  they)  have  the  choice  of  alternatives,  taking  into  account  physical  and  social
conditions.  The more intelligent a choice is, the higher the person's rating in evolution
is.  Therefore: free will evolves intelligence.

The  roots  of  free  will  do  not  lie  in  the  macroworld  which  is  ruled  by  deterministic
laws.  They lie in the microworld, and quantum randomness point to it.  We cannot be
sure that human consciousness is the only product of free will.  It is possible that earlier,
free  will  created  some  consciousness  at  the  level  of  its  roots,  i.e.,  in  the  microworld.
Because the time (measured not in seconds but in events) flowed there much faster, this
consciousness had a longer evolution period.  Perhaps the golden age of it is over, and
now we have to do only with a "rudimentary" consciousness (so called by Cochran, and
Bohm and Hiley [5] ) of automatons following the known rules of QM in the majority of
natural and experimental situations being observed up to now.

The  new  conception  accepts  reality  existing  beyond  our  sense-organs  and  measuring
apparatuses and "exculpates" those who say and/or think like "the atom being in point A
emits one photon having energy E  in the direction AB  at the moment t  " without being
sure whether all these parameters are measured.  Moreover, the questions like "But how
does your electron know, falling from the upper level, where it has to stop?" (Rutherfort
to Bohr, 1911) are permitted.  The QM is only a theory of measurements carried out on
the  microobjects.    For  example,  the  accuracy  of  the  simultaneous  measurements  of
complementary  variables  is  restricted  because  of  an  interaction  with  a  measuring
apparatus that is reflected in Heisenberg's uncertainty principle.  But microparticles know
their variables, they remember what happened and tell it to others.  To do this, they must
have synchronized clocks, measuring rules, and reference points for space and time.  In
this  sense  it  is  possible  to  speak  about  special  ("absolute")  coordinates  and  time,  like
Greenwich's ones.  If we can communicate with particles (see Section IV), the dream of
Einstein and other realists, to know the values of all variables included in a theory, can
become true.

The Fermi-particles obey the Pauli's exclusion principle.  So they can better search for
all possibilities.  Such a behavior is typical of scientists: each of them tries to find his own
theme.    Sometimes  human's  behavior  is  like  a  Bose-particle's  one.    Phenomena  such  as
fashion  in  dress  or  music,  and  applause  or  coughing  in  concert  halls,  are  examples  of
Bose-condensation.    The  same  person  can  manifest  himself  as  boson  or  fermion.    For

Nakhmanson    p. 3 of 20

particles this was only possible in a "big bang" time.  Are we now at the same beginning
stage of evolution?

The evolution of the quantum state pursues some purpose that can be formalized into
an  integral  equation  via  the  least  action  principle.    The  scientists  are  successfully
guessing a view of the least action function deeper than its meaning.  The consciousness
of  each  elementary  particle  solves  this  equation  taking  into  account  all  information
which  it  has.    The  solution  is  its  own  wave  function ψ    which  reflects  the  strategy  of
particle  behavior.    Two  or  more  particles  coming  once  in  interaction  can  have  some
group  strategy  and  common  non-factorized  ("entangled")  ψ-function  controlling  their
behavior in the following near future.

Where is the  ψ-function?  It is not in the real 3-dimensional space.  It is in imaginary
configurational  space,  which,  in  its  turn,  is  in  the  imagination  (consciousness)  of  the
particle.  This explains why it does not affect other particles being in the same 3d-space.
When  the  particle  receives  new  information  (it  can  take  place  by  any  interaction  with
micro- or macroobjects), it corrects its strategy.  Thus occurs the collapse of the wave
function.  It occurs not in the real (infinite) space, but in the consciousness of particle.
The  consequent  time  is  determined  by  the  rapidity  of  this  consciousness.    Therefore,
compared with space-time conditions of experiment, collapse is local and instantaneous.
Von  Neumann  [11],  London  and  Bauer  [12],  and  Wigner  [13]  suggested  that  human
consciousness provokes a collapse of  ψ-function.  This is not so: human consciousness
collapses only the human knowledge about the  ψ-function.  The laws of both collapses
lie beyond physics.  The renovation of the knowledge’s because of interactions can go
without  alteration  of  mass,  energy  and  entropy:  the  new  state  of  particle  can  have  the
same energy and entropy, but different actual information [3].

Through the development of QM the physicists came to the idea about "holism" of the
material world.  The new interpretation explains this holism as having an informational
origin.    The  world  is  entangled  by  information,  its  "internet"  has  existed  since  the  big
bang.

The particle can know only information lying in the lower light cone, i.e., belonging
to the past.  To calculate its own strategy (i.e. ψ-function) successfully the consciousness
of the particle must have an ability to forecast the circumstances in the future using its
knowledge  about  the  past.    It  is  the  very  natural  result  of  development  of  every
consciousness.    Particularly,  all  human  life  is  based  on  such  ability.    If  a  physicist
calculates  the  tomorrow  behavior  of  an  elementary  particle  in  his  laboratory,  he  looks
into the future, and only a part of it depends on his free will.

In the new conception the paradox of "Schrödinger's cat" [19]  vanishes.  The cat is
either alive or dead, and its state always can be seen by an observer.  The mixed "alive-
dead" cat exists only as a phantom in the consciousness of a radioactive atom (if it is still
potentially active), in the consciousness of the observer (if he has not seen the dead cat),
perhaps  in  the  consciousness  of  the  cat,  etc.,  but  not  in  the  real  space.    All  of  them
cannot  forecast  when  the  cat  will  be  killed:  it  depends  on  the  random  generator
controlling the atom activity (about randomisation of quantum events see below).

Nakhmanson    p. 4 of 20

The  new  conception  is  a  "hidden-parameter"  one,  but  these  "parameters"  are  not
mechanical  ones.    But  what  about  Bell's  theorem  saying  that  if  QM  is  valid  no  local
hidden-parameter theory is possible?

The  proof  of  Bell's  theorem  is  based  on  the  next  assertion:  if  Pa  is  a  probability  of
result  a    measured  on  the  particle 1    in  the  point  A    having  a  condition  (e.g.  angle  of
analyzer) α , and Pb is a probability of result b  measured on the particle 2  in the distant
point B  having a condition β , then β  has no influence on the Pa , and vice versa.  Here
Bell  and  others  saw  the  indispensable  requirement  of  local  realism  and  "separability".
Mathematically it can be written as

Pab(λ1i,λ2i,α,β) = Pa(λ1i,α)×Pb(λ2i,β)               (Bell)  ,                      (1)
where    Pab    is  the  probability  of  the  join  result    ab  ,  and    λ1i  and    λ2i  are  hidden
parameters  of  particles  1    and  2    in    an  arbitrary    local-realistic  theory.    Under  the
influence  of  Bell's  theorem  and  the  experiments  following  it  and  showing,  that  for
entangled particles the condition (1) is no longer valid, some "realists" reject locality.  In
this case an instantaneous action at a distance is possible, and one can write

Pab(λ1i,λ2i,α,β) = Pa(λ1i,α,β)×Pb(λ2i,β,α)       (non-locality)  .             (2)
In principle such a relation permits a description of any correlation between a  and b ,
particularly  predicted  by  QM  and  observed  in  experiments.    But  in  the  frame  of  local
realism the condition (1) is not indispensable.  Instead, one can write

Pab(λ1i,λ2i,α,β) = Pa(λ1i,α,β´)×Pb(λ2i,β,α´)        (forecast)  ,                 (3)
where  α´  and  β´  are the conditions of measurements in points A  and B , respectively,
as they can be forecast by particles at the moment of their parting.  If the forecast is good
enough, i.e., α´ ≈ α  and  β´ ≈ β , then (3) practically coincides with (2) and has all its
advantages plus locality.

On the issue of "separability":  The entangled particles have a common strategy and
keep it as long as they can forecast the future at the moment of their parting.  The new-
coming unlooked-for circumstances allow them gradually  to  cut  off  and  forget  the  old
partnership.

The  wave-particle  duality  is  a  mind-body  one.    In  the  space  there  exists  only  the
particle;  the ψ-wave  exists  in  its  consciousness,  as  well  as  the  reflection  of  the  whole
world.  If there are many particles, their distribution in accordance with the  ψ-function,
e.g. interference fringes, looks like a product of real wave in real space.

Because of free will the behavior of particles is not strictly determined.  In situations
allowing alternative outputs the theory gives only a distribution of priorities.  Taking this
into account the particle makes its choice.  The optimal tactics of proportional proving of
all possibilities is randomization of this choice.  It seems as if each particle has its own
random generator.  The same seems to  be  valid  for  people:  our  unconsciousness  often
does not choose the "optimal" way but dices  obviously  using  the  priorities.    However,
our consciousness does not yet make sufficient use of proportional randomization [20] .

It is known that Einstein did not accept the fortuity implicated by QM:  "God does not
play  dice."    Bohr  replied:    "It  is  not  the  job  of  scientists  to  prescribe  to  God  how  He

Nakhmanson    p. 5 of 20

should run the world."  But  the  matter  in  question  is  not  God  but  particles:  they    play
dice.  As was said, people also use random choice.  Some of them believe that so they
transfer the choice of decision to God, i.e., God determines the decision and His rôle is
exactly the one that Einstein wanted.  On the other hand, Einstein believed in Spinoza's
God, "which concerns of nature and give up people themselves".  If Einstein thought the
microparticles might be intelligent, perhaps he would give up microparticles themselves,
so that his God can concentrate Himself on something more important.

Very  likely  the  particles  are  artificial  things  like  some  small  space  ships.    Division
into  different  sorts  or  species  with  internal  identities  is  typical  for  mass  products.    It
simplifies  production,  usage,  repairs,  and  replacement  of  such  objects.    Technical
objects, plants, animals and humans illustrate this very well.  In the last three cases the
production  is  ruled  on  the  genetic  level.    For  example,  people  have  a  very  narrow
statistical  distribution  of  sizes,  masses,  and  performance;  the  world  records  in  sport
differ from the average results not more than twice.  The identity of particles of one sort
in QM is analogous to the identity of vehicles of one sort with respect to traffic rules.
The individual differences (registration number, color, firma-producer, sex and name of
driver, etc.) lie beyond the rules.  The individual knowledge of elementary particles lie
also beyond QM.

Connection  between  physics  and  information  was  touched  in  latent  form  in  earlier
discussions  around  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  and  Maxwell's  "demon"  yet  in
19th  century.    Later  it  was  manifested,  e.g.,  in  [21]  .    One  modification  of  demon's
machine is shown in Fig. 1.  There is a chamber having two pistons 1  and 2  and filled
with  gas.    The  pressure  of  gas  is  estimated  by  atmospheric  one,  temperature  and  the
weight W sitting on the piston 2 .  If last three parameters are constant and the chamber
has no leakage, the pressure of gas and the volume V  occupied by gas are constant too.

W

2
2

      
   
      
   
      
   
      
   
   
      
   
      
   
      
1
      
      

V

FIG. 1.  The chamber with two pistons 1  and 2  contains gas occupying volume
V.  The "demon" moves the piston 1  in time intervals between hits of molecules
and lifts the weight W  by virtue of thermal energy of surrounding only.

The  "demon"  stays  beyond  the  piston  1    and  moves  it,  but  only  in  time  intervals
between the hits of molecules.  Therefore the demon does not spend any energy to do it.

Nakhmanson    p. 6 of 20

Because V  is constant the piston 2  moves up elevating the weight W .  The molecules
reflecting  from  moving  piston  2    lose  their  velocity  i.e.  are  cooled,  but  renew  their
energy  through  contact  with  surrounding.    Therefore  the  demon's  machine  transform
100% of thermal energy coming from the surroundings into mechanical energy, realizing
the "perpetuum mobile of the second kind".  If the piston 2  were fixed at the beginning,
the gas would be compressed and, without performing any work on the gas, its entropy
would be decreased.  Both "results" contradict the second law of thermodynamics.

To  save  the second law of thermodynamics  the concept of information was called

up [21].  The law was rewritten:  instead of ∆S ≥ 0  there came

(4)
where ∆S  is the entropy produced (in our case by demon and his measuring apparatus)
to  have  a  new  information ∆I  (and  to  erase  the  old  one).    In  our  last  case  the  demon
spends a part of this information ∆I'

∆S ≥ ∆I ,

(5)
 to move the piston 1  skillfully to compress the gas and change its entropy ∆S' without
work.  Again

∆I' ≤ ∆I ,

∆S' ≥ ∆I' ,

where both partners are negative.  Combining (4) to (6) leads to

∆S ≥ ∆I ≥ −∆I'  ≥ −∆S' ,  i.e.  ∆S + ∆S' ≥ 0,

(6)

(7)

i.e.  the  common  entropy  increases  (or  stays  constant  for  reversible  processes)  in
accordance with the (corrected) second law.  "We cannot get anything for nothing, not
even an observation", - Gabor concluded.

Nevertheless, the second law persists to be a puzzle which cannot be  deduced  from
mechanics  with  its  time-symmetrical  laws  and,  as  well  as  the  "time  arrow",  must  be
accepted ad hoc .

The informational interpretation of QM can open up a new possibility to understand
the second law:  states with maximum entropy can be preferred by particles for having
some  purposeful  advantages.    For  example,  molecules  of  gas  in  a  chamber  search  the
space and walls better when they are distributing themselves stochastic-homogeneously,
both  as  an  ensemble  as  well  as  individuals  averaged  in  time.    Accordingly,  being
injected in the chamber, the molecules try to develop such a distribution faster and keep
it  forever.    In  the  state  with  maximum  entropy  the  molecules  disperse  themselves
randomly,  but  if  they  discover  a  deviation  from  this  state  they  act  purposefully  and
depress the fluctuation using control of the collision parameters (by collisions with walls
and with each other) and so producing the macroscopic asymmetry of time.

In the book The Chance [22] , issued in 1913, the year of Bohr's atom model, Emil
Borel, a notable pure and applied mathematician and an acquaintance of the de Broglie
family, remarked that humans cause entropy to decrease in small volumes by means of
processes  accompanied  by  increasing  of  entropy  in  big  volumes,  and  then  went  on  as
follows:

Nakhmanson    p. 7 of 20

In  other  words,  the  structure  of  the  universe  is  becoming  more  and  more  subtle  ...  ,    It  is
probable that similar phenomena are going on other scales as well, too large or too small to be
accessible  to  us.    Thus,  the  evolution  of  the  universe  may  be  represented  as  a  gradual
complication of its structure, accessible to understanding and use of beings of lesser and lesser
size.  As there is no absolute standard of length, we may not be afraid of such a lessening of
scales; it seems to us presently that beings of molecular sizes and, all the more, beings so small
in respect to molecules as we are to sun, are objects scarcely deserving our attention; but it is
quite possible that the progressing complexity of the universe will create or has already created
some beings with an organization much more complex than ours.
Following Borel's idea the second law and time arrow in our macroscopical world can
also  be  ascribed  to  the  intellectual  activity  of  microparticles  drawing  off  the
"negentropy"  in  their  world  (Is  part  of  that  drawn  off  also?  [23]  )  .    Therefore  the
microworld  must  own  a  lot  of  "negentropy",  e.g.,  information.    Because  information,
more  as  energy,  is  the  essence  of  life,  can  mankind  ask  microparticles  to  reverse  the
second  law  (and,  on  occasion,  the  direction  of  time)  and  to  return  a  part  of  this
negentropy  to  the  macroscopical  world?    To  do  so,  we  must  have  an  informational
contact with them.  Some ideas of such contacts will be presented in Sections IV and V.

III. experimenta crucis

In  some  experiments  performed  up  to  now,  the  information  spreading  was  implied
and one tried to interrupt it, however without success.  In others one tried to achieve the
information about a material object without having any material contact with it.  Below
we discuss four of the experiments from the new point of view.

M1

1/2

P

D2
0 or 1/4

1/2 or 0

1 or 1/4

D
1

1/2

1

B
1

1/2

S

"

B2

1/2

M

2

FIG. 2.  "Delayed-choice" experiment with Mach-Zender interferometer.
S  is the source of photons,  B1  and B2  are the beamsplitters,  M1  and M2
are the mirrors,  D1  and D2  are the detectors,  P  is the Pockels cell.  The
ciphers indicate probabilities to find a photon.

• Delayed-choice  experiment.    It  was  suggested  by  Wheeler  [7]    and  really
performed in Marylend [8].  Fig. 2 shows the schema.  The particles (photons) coming
from source  S  enter into the Mach-Zender interferometer with beamsplitters  B1  and

Nakhmanson    p. 8 of 20

B2 ,  mirrors  M1  and  M2  and detectors  D1  and  D2 .  In one ("upper") arm of the
interferometer there is the Pockels cell  P , a very fast shutter controlled by a voltage.
The interferometer is tuned so that if the Pockels cell is opened all photons are coming
to the detector D1  due to constructive interference.  The flow of photons is so weak that
no more than one photon in the interferometer is a rule.

The  Pockels  cell  is  at  all  times  opened  (closed),  except  for  a  short  time  interval  τ
(several  nanoseconds)  when  it  is  closed  (opened).    As  a  result  of  experiments  having
been performed, the interference after  B2  appears only if the Pockels cell was opened
during  the    τ    at  the  appropriate  moment  when  a  photon  can  pass  the  Pockels  cell,
independent of its state at other times.

This  result  cannot  be  explained  on  the  level  of  classical  local  realism  thinking  that,
after  B1 , a photon really chooses one arm (upper or lower) of the interferometer:  If the
photon really traveled through the lower arm (this "must be" in 50% of the cases), it is
too far (several meters) from the Pockels cell, and at the above mentioned "appropriate
moment"  is  under  no  "influence"  by  the  cell  (action  spreading  with  velocity  u>c    is
supposed  to  be  impossible).    It  must  be  emphasized  that  independent  of  the  condition
u>c  the "influence" was not ascribed to some known physical mechanism and thought
more as an information-like abstraction.

From a new point of view all this looks different and very natural.  When a photon
meets  the  first  beamsplitter    B1    it  brings  new  information  from  the  source    S  .
Simultaneously it receives from  B1  the fresh information about the past  of the world,
particularly  about  the  interferometer  and  Pockels  cell.    The  physical  conditions  at    B1
induce a 50% choice.  But the decision of photons must be at random: It is the optimal
tactics  for  an  ensemble  of  disconnected  photons.    The  consciousness  of  the  photon
works to find an optimal strategy, i.e., ψ-function.  In this case it is a 50% choice of arm
after  B1  and interference after  B2 , if Pockels cell just appears opened.  To find it, the
photon solves a variation problem (e.g., the wave equation).

Let us suggest that after  B1  the photon takes the lower arm.  It meets the mirror  M2
and  acquires  some  new  information  about  the  past    of  the  world.    In  respect  to
inteferometer, it is the same information, independent of the state of the Pockels cell in
the upper arm, because in the "appropriate moment" the photon is nearer to  M2  as  P  or
even already has left  M2 .  Therefore the part of the wave function of photons relating to
the  interferometer  stays  the  same.    Particularly,  if  at  the  beginning  the  Pockels  cell
appears to be opened, the photon keeps the idea to interfere after  B2 .

Finally,  the  photon  meets  the  beamsplitter    B2    and  must  again  choose  its  path.
Simultaneously it receives from  B2  the fresher information about the past of the world,
including  an  actual  history  of  the  upper  arm  of  the  interferometer  with  the  state  of
Pockels  cell  at  the  "appropriate  moment".    This  information  is  brought  to  B2  with
velocity  of  light,  e.g.,  by  thermal  photons  emitted  by  Pockels  cell  itself:  at  room
temperature  the  characteristic  time  τ    of  several  nanoseconds  is  enough  for    B2    to
receive from  P  several thousands of thermal photons.  Actually, the number of thermal
photons emitted by one and arriving at the other macroobject is

N ≈ 5⋅1010 S1 S2 T 3  τ / L2 ,

Nakhmanson    p. 9 of 20

where  S1    and  S2    are  the  effective  areas  of  the  first  and  the  second  macroobjects,
respectively,  T  is the absolute temperature of S1 ,  τ  is the characteristic time, and L  is
the distance between S1  and S2 .  Substituting the typical values  S1 = S2 = 2 cm2 ,  T =
293°K,  τ = 10-8sec,  and  L = 103 cm, one finds  N ≈ 5000 .

Now the photon has all necessary information to make a decision, namely, to prefer a
direction  of  constructive  interference  (if  the  Pockels  cell  at  the  "appropriate  moment"
was opened) or to make a 50% random choice between two possible directions  (if  the
cell  at  the  "appropriate  moment"  was  closed).    If  the  state  of  Pockels  cell  in  the
"appropriate  moment"  was  different  than  before,  a  reduction  of  the  strategy  (i.e.,  a
reduction  of  wave  function  ψ    relating  to  the  experiment)  takes  place  in  the
consciousness of the photon after interaction with the beamsplitter  B2 .

To  have  a  success  in  the  "delayed-choice"  experiment  (i.e.,  to  have  a  result  going
outside the frame of QM) one can try to cut off the informational contact between the
Pockels cell and the beamsplitter B2 , e.g. by introducing a deep-cooled filter which is
transparent  for  optical  photons  being  measured  but  absorbent  for  thermal  photons.    In
spite of the fact that all the atoms of the filter would know the state of the Pockels cell, if
the filter is cooled by liquid helium, no thermal photons come from it to B2 during the
characteristic  time   τ  .    Further,  one  can  put  the  Pockels  cell  together  with  its  voltage
source in a separate electromagnetic screen to cut off the radio channel [24].  Besides, to
prevent  a  forecast  of  a  state  of  the  Pockels  cell  by  B2    and  other  "member"  of  the
experiment,  it  is  better  to  control  the  cell  using  not  a  regular  but  "good"  random
generator.

• In  scheme  Fig.  2  one  can  indicate  the  existence  of  a  non-transparent  object  (e.g.
closed Pockels cell) if the photon is detected by D2 , in spite of the fact that the photon
has  traveled  via  the  lower  arm  and  does  not  touch  the  object.    The  developing  of  the
theme  is  co-called  "interaction-free  measurements"  [25].    These  experiments  can  be
naturally  explained  within  the  scope  of  the  informational  interpretation  of  QM:    the
photon  receives  the  actual  information  about  the  object  from  the  beamsplitter  B2  .
Moreover,  because  the  experiments  are  performed  in  stationary  conditions,  the  photon
knows all about object just when it is born.

• The situation discussed by Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen [26], and in modern form
by Bohm [27]  and Bell [6], is more complex.  Here two particles flying in the opposite
directions  have  a  common  non-factorizable  wave  function,  i.e.,  common  correlated
strategy.    As  a  consequence,  the  result  of  interaction  of  one  particle  with  some
measurement apparatus is strongly correlated with the result of the interaction of another
particle with another measurement apparatus, in spite of a large space separating of the
two apparatuses.  As it was seemed, such a correlation is possible only if the particles are
connected  by  instantaneous  non-local  interaction.    The  informational  interpretation
offers  another  possibility:  each  apparatus  and/or  the  particle  interacting  with  it  can
forecast the state of the other apparatus at the "appropriate moment" of measuring with a
good probability.  It was mentioned in Section II that such a forecast is the very natural
result of evolution of microparticle consciousness.  In all EPR-experiments made up to
now,  such  forecasts  could  take  place,  without  assuming  a  superluminal  velocity  of
interconnection, because the states of the measurement apparatuses have been changed

Nakhmanson    p. 10 of 20

very  slowly  [9]    or  periodically  [10]  .    To  go  outside  the  scope  of  QM  we  can  try  to
perform EPR-experiments with a "good" random control of measurement apparatuses.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  authors  of  cited  experimental  researches  felt  the
advantage of random control (as it seems more intuitive, because they do not discuss it)
and  sometimes  used  it  [8].    The  peculiarity  of  a  random  signal  series  is  the  non-
predictability of its next term.  Therefore, these authors felt a possibility of "inanimate"
matter to forecast the future, and have tried to restrict it [8, 10].  The authors of recent
work  [28]  said  it  clearly:  “Selection  of  an  analyzer  direction  has  to  be  completely
unpredictable,  which  necessitates  a  physical  random  number  generator.    A  pseudo-
random-number generator cannot be used, since its state at any time is predetermined”
(p.5039).  As a “physical random number generator” they used a  “light-emitting  diode
illuminating a beam splitter whose outputs are monitored by photomultipliers” (p.5041).

Such a point of view must be commented.  It is a right prerequisite that the generator
must  be  unpredictable  for  particles,  but  referring  to  above  “physical”  generator  is  not
enough: If particles have “consciousness” such a generator can also be a “pseudo” one.
Perhaps  a  good  “human”  pseudo-random  generator  is  preferable  because  it  belongs  to
another civilization.

• Aharonov-Bohm  effect  [29].    In  accordance  with  QM  the  frequency  of  wave-
function  oscillations  depends  on  the  energy.    If  the  particle  has  different  energies  in
different arms of the interferometer, it leads to an additional phase shift and changes the
interference  pattern.    The  experiments  were  performed  with  an  electron  interferometer
and a magnetic vector potential and justified the predictions of QM.  It is of interest that
in the experiments the electrons did not cross the magnetic field.  From the old classical
point  of  view  it  looks  like  non-local  action  at  a  distance.    The  new  interpretation
explains it very naturally: electrons know the situation from  the  time  they  are  emitted.
Besides, this effect emphasizes a priority of potential against field (in classical physics
they enjoy equal rights).  From the new point of view it is natural, because potential just
contributes to the action function whose minimum as a function of trajectory is wanted.
It should be observed that the idea of forecasting the conditions on the trajectory is also
included  in  the  least  action  principle.    The  change  from  integral  form  to  a  differential
one  does  not  remove  the  problem:  the  mathematical  derivative  is  an  abstraction,  the
physical  (i.e.  operational)  derivative  is  connected  with  two  distant  points,  and  if  the
particle is in one of them, it knows only the past conditions in the second point and must
extend this into the present and future.  To obtain a "non-QM" result one can try to use
fast random switching of the magnetic vector potential.

IV. Informational experiments

If big strangers from other worlds arrived on the Earth and would like to test human
intelligence, they would not, of course, do it by dipping men into a bath, throwing them
from the tower of Pisa, or bumping them against each other in colliding beams, i.e., the
strangers would not just act in this brutal way in which physicists have treated particles,
hitherto.    Instead  of  this  they  would  try  to  build  an  informational  contact  with  men.
Different levels of reaction on the information being proposed would be expected:

Nakhmanson    p. 11 of 20

0. No noticeable reaction.
1. A reaction showing that information is being received.
2. A reaction showing that information is being deciphered correctly.
3. Sending of reciprocal signals.

Have  physicists  been  searching  "inanimate"  matter  as  a  possibility  to  build  an
informational  contact  with  microparticles?    The  answer  is  "Yes".    Moreover,  if  the
particles are intelligent, up to third reaction level and complete duplex  communication
are possible.

Fig. 3 introduces into this field.  Fig. 3(a) shows a "black box" which is tested by the
linearly polarized light beam.  Inside of the box the beam meets a thick transparent glass
plate  fixed  at  the  Brewster  angle  so  that  all  photons  pass  the  box.    The  glass  plate
manifest itself physically only by space shift ∆z   and time delay ∆t   of output photons.
Further  there  is  a  movable  mirror  ("traffic  divarication")  which  is  controlled  by  the
experimenter to turn or not to turn the beam.  Such a control is a brutal one like a traffic
barrier closing one of two branches of the road.

"a(   )

"b(   )

"c(   )

           
           
            ∆z
∆t
           
           

           
           
           
           
           
           

           
           

           
           

∆z
∆t

∆z
∆t

FIG. 3.  (a ) - "brutal" control,  (b ) and (c ) - informational control .

In  Figs.  3(b)  and  3(c)  the  mirror  is  semi-transparent  and  immovable,  and  the  thick
glass plate is divided into eight thin plates, two of them being thicker than the remaining
six.  As before, the content of the black box manifests itself physically only by the same
space shift ∆z   and time delay  ∆t  .  But if the photons are intelligent and know English
and Morse code, they can read the messages, namely

Nakhmanson    p. 12 of 20

 • — •     •      • • — •   = REF  (reflect)     in Fig. 3(b) ,
   —    • • • •    • — •   = THR  (through)   in Fig. 3(c) ,

and follow the instructions.  Such a control is an informational one like traffic signs on
the road.

It is important to emphasize that the idea of informational experiments with particles,
as it seems, has never been publicly discussed, and all experiments made with particles
up  to  now  cannot  be  considered  as  informational  ones  even  in  retrospect,  that  is,  the
revision of their results would not enable us to make any conclusion relating to this idea.

The way to communication with the particles assumes that they are interested in the
information proposed (first level of reaction), that they learn to decipher the information
(second  level),  and  that  they  wish  to  communicate  (third  level).    The  interest  in
information is thought to be an inherent attribute of each consciousness.  One can try to
use  at  the  beginning  such  an  attractive  "language"  as  music,  and  for  advance  teaching
and  communication  special  languages  have  developed  for  the  project  "Search  for
ExtraTerrestrial Intelligence (SETI)" [30] .

Fig.  4  shows  the  scheme  of  "binary-tree"  experiment.    The  initial  beam  of
microobjects (particles, atoms) enters into a system of beamsplitters (shown by circles).
They  can  be  semi-transparent  mirrors  for  photons,  crystals  for  electrons  or  neutrons,
Stern-Gerlach apparatuses for atoms, etc.  Fig. 4 shows only five rows of beamsplitters,
but  there  can  be  as  many  as  experimentally  feasible.    According  to  present-day
theoretical  ideas  and  practical  experience,  each  of  the  output  beams  has  the  same
intensity, namely, 1/32 of intensity of the initial beam (real beamsplitters may have, of
course, some absorption, but here it is not a matter of principle).

Into each of the right channels of the binary tree is introduced an "informational cell"
(shown by birds), which is a device leaving unchanged the intensity of the beam passing
it, but offering some information to particles.  For polarized photons such a cell may be a
set of transparent plates fixed at the Brewster angle, and the information can be coded,
say, by differences in the materials of plates, their thickness, and distances between them
(see Figs. 3(b), 3(c)) .  Absorption caused by the information cells may be compensated
by  introducing  into  each  of  the  left  channels  a  "compensating  cell"  bearing  no
information, more precisely, bearing less, or less significant information (e.g. the same
glass plates placed randomly or periodically).  The information in each subsequent row
is a sequel of that in the preceding row.

The  commonly  accepted  point  of  view  is  that  the  introduction  of  information  cells,
together  with  compensators,  will  not  change  the  uniform  probability  distribution  of
particles in the output beams.  But if particles are intelligent, and are able to notice the
information offered to them, they may become interested in it.  After a number of rows,
the particles should notice that the information is offered only in the right channels, and
should  prefer  the  choice  of  right  channels  in  passing  through  the  following
beamsplitters.    In  other  words,  particles  could  develop  a  "conditioned  reflex",  of
essentially the same kind as in behavior experiments on living beings.

Nakhmanson    p. 13 of 20

1
32

1
32

1
16

0

0 0 0

1
8

0

000

000

1
4

0000

000

1
4

0

00

1
8

1
16

1
32

1
32

0

1
16

1
16

00

1
8

00
0

000

00
0

1
4

00
0

000

00
0

1
4

00
0

1
8

1
16

1
16

me

(31)

1
8

1
8

0

1
4

0
0

1
4

1
8

1
8

an-y-one else but

1
4

1
4

1
2

1
4

1
2

1
4

ap-ple tree with

Don't sit un-der the

   
   

1

FIG.  4.    Binary-tree  experiment.    Circles  stand  for  beamsplitters,  birds  denote
informational  cells,  worm  denotes  the  particle.    Ciphers  and  apples  (=0)  show  the
probability of detecting the particle in the case of the most rapid formation of a rigid,
conservative  conditioned  reflex.    The  absorption  of  the  particles  by  informational
cells is assumed to be negligible (i.e. the birds do not eat worms more).

Such an inquisitiveness of particles should lead to a change of their distribution in the
output  beams.    For  example,  if  the  conditional  reflex  appears  immediately  and  the
particles  are  "conservative",  i.e.,  they  are  no  more  of  interest  to  the  left  channels,  the
distribution of probability to find the particle in different branches of the binary tree is
like the one shown in Fig. 4 by ciphers.

Deviation  from  the  uniform  distribution  of  particles  in  the  output  beams  will  mean
that  the  particles  at  least  recognize  the  information  offered  and  have  an  interest  in  it.
This, however, still does not mean that the particles understand this information: people
of  modern  times  were  interested  in  ancient  hieroglyphic  symbols  long  before  they
learned how to interpret them.  To establish a deciphering stage, one can, starting from
some row of a binary tree, introduce some specific "requests" into the information cells.
For example, one can "ask" particles to choose a left channel after the next beamsplitter
rather than a right one.  Because between the output branches of the binary tree and the
trajectories of the particles there is a one-to-one interrelation, the honoring of such kind
of requests can easily be detected by an experimenter.  However, the possibilities of an
experiment typified in Fig. 4 are not exhausted by this second level of communication.
Purposefully choosing direction at each subsequent beamsplitter, the particle, in its turn,
can send information to the experimenter using "right" and "left" as a binary code.  For

Nakhmanson    p. 14 of 20

example,  extreme  left  and  extreme  right  trajectories  in  Fig.4  present  00000  =  0    and
11111 = 31, respectively.

The  scheme  in  Fig.  5  shows  another  possibility.    The  short  light  impulse  passes
through  the  semi-transparent  mirror  E    and  penetrate  into  a  volume  limited  by  two
mirrors  A  and  B  having reflection near to 100% .  If the mirrors are perpendicular to
the  direction  of  light  propagation,  then  the  light  impulse  will  undergo  hundreds  of
reflections  before  it  is  essentially  extinguished.    At  each  reflection  of  the  "catched"
impulse a small part of the light goes through the mirrors A  or B  and is registered by
detectors  Da  or  Db  .    A  semi-transparent  mirror  C    is  placed  in  the  middle  position
between A    and  B    and  parallel  to  them.    The  impulses  registered  by  detectors  follow
with time intervals ∆t  = AB / c .  Along the optical path between A  and C  there is an
informational cell I  controlled from the source of information  SI  , so that information
is renewed with the frequency 1/∆t  .  The synchronization is provided from the detector
Da .

15
16

31
32

63
64

7
8

3
4

1
2

Da

1

1
2

0

laser

Da

P

E
50%

Db

1

1
2

0

1
2

1
4

1
8

1
16

1
32

1
64

t

Db

t

SI

IC

A

99.9%

C
50%

B

99.9%

FIG. 5.  The "dynamic" informational experiment.  A ,  B ,  C , and E  are mirrors,
Da  and Db are detectors,  IC  is the informational cell,  SI  is the source of information.
The Pockels cell P  is closed only at the short time interval at the beginning to prevent an
overload of Da by the reflection from A .  Above, output impulses as functions of time
are  shown  for  the  case  of  the  first  level  informational  contact  and  the  most  rapid
formation of a rigid, undisturbable conditioned reflex.  The moment the SI  is switched
on is denoted by arrows.  The timing of SI  is controlled from Da .
Before the informational cell I   is  activated  the  numbers  of  photons  in  the  volumes
AC    and  CB  are  equal  and  the  impulses  registered  by  Da  and  Db  have  the  same
amplitudes  (the  absorption  is  assumed  to  be  negligible).    But  after  it's  activation,  and
provided the photons are able to perceive the information proposed and to be interested
in it, then, after a number of transitions in AB , they should develop a conditioned reflex
and, thus, prefer to remain in the volume AC  to obtain information.  They are able to do
so because of their liberty of choice in interacting with the semi-transparent mirror C .
This means that the photons would mainly reflect from the mirror C  when approaching

Nakhmanson    p. 15 of 20

it from the left, and would mainly go through the mirror C  when approaching it from the
right.    The  number  of  photons  in  the  volume  AC    and  the  amplitude  of  the  output
impulses  beyond  the  mirror  A    would  increase  (twice,  at  most).    The  corresponding
decrease of the number of photons and of output impulses (to zero as a limit) should be
observed  for  the  volume  CB  .    In  Fig.  5,  at  the  top,  the  graphs  of  intensity  of  output
impulses  are  represented  as  functions  of  time,  for  the  case  of  informational  contact  of
the first level and of most rapid formation of a rigid, undisturbable conditioned reflex.
The moment of activation of the informational cell is shown by arrows.

The  scheme  Fig.  5  can  also  be  used  for  informational  contacts  of  second  and  third
levels  by  redistribution  of  photons  between  AC    (e.g.  representing  "0")  and  CB
(representing "1").

D23

3

4

D24

«««

SI

M

S

2

1

FIG.  6    Informational  experiment  with  a  single  atom.    1,  2,  3,  and  4    are  the
energy levels;  D23  and D24  are detectors,    S    is  the  source  of  light,    M    is  the
modulator,  SI  is the source of information .

The  experiments  illustrated  in  Fig.  4  and  Fig.  5  can  be  called  "coordinate-impulse"
ones to distinguish them from the "energy-time" experiment whose scheme is shown in
Fig. 6 .  Here a four-level quantum system, e.g., an atom, with one low (1), one high (2),
and two intermediate (3,4) energy levels is pumped by intensive radiation inducing the
1→2 transition, so that the atom stays not in the state 1 but immediately is translated into
the state 2.  From it, the atom makes transition spontaneously to the state 3 or 4, and later
makes  transition  to  the  state  1  completing  the  cycle.    The  radiation  corresponding  to
some of transitions  2→3,  2→4,  3→1  and  4→1  are detected (in Fig. 6 two detectors
are shown).  Besides, there is an informational action on the atom, e.g., by modulation of
light  coming  from  the  source    S  .    The  modulator    M    is  controlled  by  the  source  of
information  SI ,  which, in turn, is connected with one or more detectors to close the
feedback loop.

The feedback works in such a way as to stimulate a channel and rate of transitions, in
the case of Fig. 6,  the  2→4→1  transitions.  The source  SI  sends a message, e.g., one
line of a page or a measure of a music, only if it receives a signal from detector  D24 .
Each next message continues the previous one, i.e., is the next line or the next measure.

Nakhmanson    p. 16 of 20

If the atom has an intelligence and is interested in the information being proposed, it
develops  a  conditioned  reflex  and  will  prefer  the    2→4    transition  to  the    2→3    one.
Besides, the rates of both  2→4  and  4→1  transitions must increase.  All this can be
registered by the experimenter.  To be sure that the effect is connected with information,
one can make a control experiment to cut off the feedback or/and to use some "trivial"
information, etc.

If the detector  D24  has a small aperture, the spatial  orientation  of  emitted  photons
toward to  D24  may also develop itself as a part of conditioned reflex.  In spite of this
interesting possibility, one must prefer to use effective detection of emitted photons to
facilitate  the  development  of  a  conditioned  reflex.    Perhaps  the  combination  of  an  ion
trap and resonator [32]  provides a good opportunity for informational experiments with
single atoms.

A progress in semiconductor device technology possibly can also be used for such an
"energy-time"  experiment.  In  a  small  metal-oxide-silicon  field-effect 
transistor
(MOSFET) one can observe random telegraph signals corresponding to the charge and
discharge  of  a  single  electron  trap  located  at  the    Si-SiO2    interface  [33].    As  in  the
previous  case,  the  new  information  may  be  sent  to  the  MOSFET  (i.e.  to  the  trap)  by
modulation of light or sound only after the next capture or/and emission of an electron
by the trap.  It closes the feedback loop, and the experimenter may find an increase in the
capture and emission rate.

Like with the schemes of Fig. 4 and Fig. 5, in two last cases one may hope to observe
not  only  an  interest  of  a  quantum  object  (atom,  electron  trap)  to  receive  a  new
information, but deciphering it also, as well as the sending of messages from the object
to the experimenter being coded in states of the atom or electron trap and time intervals
between the states.

V. Informational world of matter

and human consciousness

If  the  microparticles  and  atoms  are  really  "intelligent",  why  they  do  not  manifest
themselves  more  obviously?    For  example,  why  do  molecules  of  air  in  the  room  not
congregate  themselves  near  radio  or  TV  to  hear  music  and  to  watch  a  movie?    A
semantic answer could be, e.g., that they are not interested in it.  Physicists can also take
into  account  the  large  difference  in  spatial  and  temporal  scales  between  structures
analogous  in  their  intelligence  functions,  say,  something  like  the  relation  between  the
size of the solar system and that of the atom (1021).  The molecules of air have millions
of collisions per second, and each of them brings a lot of information.  In the context the
weak and slow alternations of pressure (due to music) or pixel brightness (on TV screen)
are noteless.  Therefore special conditions and arrangements as described in the previous
Section supported by screening and cooling are needed.  They can serve not only to have
an informational contact with separate particles and atoms.  Because it appears that the
material world is entangled by information, the above-mentioned arrangements can also
serve as interfaces to the "internet of matter" .

Nakhmanson    p. 17 of 20

It  is  not  to  exclude  that  the  evolution  of  plants,  animals  and  men  had  found
possibilities  to  develop  the  interfaces  connecting  them  to  the  ghost  of  matter.    Such  a
connection would satisfy not only their inquisitiveness but would be useful also.  Those
who  believe  in  parapsychological  phenomena  (among  them  were  many  notable
physicists), as well as scientists searching mind-matter connections [14-17], can find a
solid  base  in  the  informational  interpretation  of  QM.    For  example,  information  must
spread in an internet of matter without an attenuation law  1/r2  and pass through usual
screens - the peculiarities ascribed to these phenomena.  Telepathy and clairvoyance can
use  the  internet  of  matter  to  send  and  receive  information,  and  forecasting  can  use  in
addition the corresponding presages of particles.  The known descriptions of telekinesis
implicate  the  appearance  of  mechanical  energy.    Such  an  energy  can  be  transformed
from thermal energy with apparent violation of the second law of thermodynamics (see
end of Section II).

It  is  known  that  people  have  several  levels  of  memory.    The  first  one  registers  all
information  received  by  the  sense-organs  but  keeps  it  only  for  a  short  time.    After
selection  the  essential  part  of  it  is  transferred  into  the  second  level,  etc.    The  more
important the information the deeper level it reaches and the longer it is conserved there.
The deepest known level is the genetic one.  The idea of informational contact between
the world of matter and living beings permits the existence of deeper levels of memory
situated  in  the  atoms  and  elementary  particles  of  these  beings  [34].    If  this  is  so,  the
beliefs  in  souls  floating  in  air  and  in  reincarnation  have  chances  to  be  accepted  by
philosophiae  naturalis .

VI. Conclusion

In this paper the informational interpretation of quantum mechanics was presented.  It
is  realistic  with  local  interactions,  it  is  in  agreement  with  common  sense,  it  allows
experimental verification and explains the quantum paradoxes  very  naturally.    It  sheds
new  light  to  problems  of  thermodynamical  irreversibility  and  mind-matter  interaction,
and extends the field for scientific, technical, science-fiction, and religious speculations.
Anyone of these perspectives is interesting enough to prove it.

As  it  seems  not  only  Boltzmann-Shannon  but  semantic  information  also  must  be

introduced in physics.  Was it really a Word at the beginning, if it was?

Nakhmanson    p. 18 of 20

References

[1]    "...  we  want  more  than  just  a  formula.    First  we  have  an  observation,  then  we  have
numbers that we measure, then we have a law which summarizes all the numbers.  But the
real glory of science is that we can find a way of thinking such that the law is evident."

The Feynman lectures on physics  (Addison-Wesley, MA, 1966), p.26-3.

[2]  R.Nakhmanson, Preprint 38-79  (Institute of Semiconductor Physics, Novosibirsk, 1980);

see also A.Berezin and R.Nakhmanson. J. of Physics Essays  3,  331 (1990).

[3]  R.Nakhmanson, in Waves and Particles in Light and Matter,  ed. by A.van der Merwe and

A.Garuccio  (Plenum Press, New York, 1994), p.571.

[4]  R.Nakhmanson, in Frontiers of Fundamental Physics,  ed. by M.Barone and F.Selleri

(Plenum Press, New York, 1994), p.591.

[5]    G.Cocconi,  in  Evolution  of  Particle  Physics,  ed.  by  M.Conversy    (New  York,  1970);
A.A.Cochran,  Found.  Phys.  1,  235  (1971);    J.E.Charon,  L`esprit,  cet  inconnu    (Albin
Michel,  Paris,  1977);    The  Ghost  in  the  Atom,  ed.  by  P.C.W.Davies  and  J.R.Brown
(Cambridge  University  Press,  Cambridge,  1986);    D.Bohm  and  B.J.Hiley,  The  undivided
universe  (Routledge, London, 1993).

[6]  J.S.Bell, Physics 1, 195 (1964).

[7]    J.A.Wheeler,  in  Mathematical  Foundations  of  Quantum  Theory,  ed.  by  A.R.Marlow

(Academic Press, New York, 1978), p.9.

[8]    C.O.Alley,  O.G.Jakubowicz,  and  W.C.Wickers,  in  Proceedings  of  2nd  International
Symposium  on  Foundations  of  Quantum  Mechanics,  ed.  by  M.Namiki  et  al.  (Physical
Society of Japan, Tokyo, 1987), p.36.

[9]  S.J.Freedman and J.F.Clauser, Phys.Rev.Lett. 28, 938 (1972).

[10]  A.Aspect, J.Dalibard, and G.Roger, Phys.Rev.Lett. 49, 1804 (1982).

[11]    J.  von  Neumann,  Die  mathematischen  Grundlagen  der  Quantenmechanik    (Springer,

Berlin, 1932).

[12]  F.London  and  E.Bauer, La  théorie  de  l'observation  en  mécanique  quantique,  No.755  of
Actualités  scientifiques  et  industrielles:  Exposés  de  physique  générale    (Hermann  et  Cie,
Paris,  1939),    engl.  transl.  in Quantum  Theory  and  Measurement,  ed.  by  J.A.Wheeler  and
W.H.Zurek  (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1983).

[13]  E.P.Wigner, in The Scientist Speculates, ed. by I.J.Good (London, Heinemann, 1961); see

also E.P.Wigner, Symmetries and Reflections  (M.T.I. Press, Cambridge, MA, 1970).

[14]  L.Bass, Found.Phys. 5, 159 (1975).

[15]  J.Hall, C.Kim, B.McElroy, and A.Shimony, Found. Phys. 7, 759 (1977).

[16]  R.G.Jahn and B.J.Dunne, Found. Phys. 16, 721 (1986).

[17]  D.I.Radin and R.D.Nelson, Found. Phys. 19, 1499 (1989).

[18]  M.A.Markov, On the Nature of Matter,  (Moscow, 1963, in Russian);  id., Ann. Phys. 59,

109 (1970).

[19]  E.Schrödinger, Naturwiss. 23, 807 (1935).

Nakhmanson    p. 19 of 20

[20]    The  roulette,  lottery,  Monte-Carlo  method  of  numerical  calculation  etc.  are  without
question.  The election of Doge in Venice (697-1797 a.C.) was going in ten steps,  five  of
them used random event generators.  This experience was successful: only one of doge acted
ultra vires .  If the democracy means the same chance for everyone to realize his program,
the  election  must  serve  only  to  estimate  the  priorities  (ψ-function),  not  the  decision,
otherwise  we  have  the  dictatorship  of  majority.    The  decision  must  be  estimated  by
proportional  random  procedure.    Thereto  such  a  procedure  makes  coalitions  and  wars  for
51%  meaningless.    If  Buridan's  ass  ventured  to  use  a  random  procedure  in  choosing  his
bundle of hay, he would thus "quantize" himself into one of the two states, and thus escape
starvation (noted by V.G.Yerkov).

[21]  L.Szillard,  Zs. f. Physik 53, 840 (1929);  D.Gabor, MIT Lectures  (Massachusetts, 1951);
L.Brillouin,  Science  and  Information  Theory    (Academic  Press,  New  York,  1970);
I.Prigogine  and  I.Stengers,  Order  out  of  Chaos    (Shambhala,  Boulder,  1984).    It  must  be
noted,  that  the  matter  of  discussion  cited  is  information  defined  by  Shannon's  formula
(which coincides, within the sign, with Boltzman's one for entropy), not the semantics.

[22]  E.Borel,  Le Hasard  (Paris, 1913).

[23]  "Great fleas have little fleas,

Upon their backs to bite  'em;
Little fleas have lesser fleas,
And so ad infinitum ."

( J. Swift )

[24]  The efficiency of other fast channels (neutrinos, gravitons, ...?) can not be excluded.

[25]  A.C.Elitzur  and  L.Vaidman,  Found.  Phys.  23,  987  (1993);    P.Kwiat,  H.Weinfurter,
T.Herzog, A.Zeilinger, and M.Kasevich, Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 755, 383 (1995);  A.G.White,
J.R.Mitchell, O.Nairz, and P.G.Kwiat, Phys. Rev. A 58, 605 (1998).

[26]  A.Einstein, B.Podolsky, and N.Rosen, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935).

[27]  D.Bohm, Quantum Theory  (Prentice Hall, New York, 1951).

[28]    G.Weihs,  T.Jennewein,  Ch.Simon,  H.Weinfurter,  and  A.Zeilinger,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  81,

5039 (1998).

[29]  Y.Aharonov and D.Bohm, Phys. Rev. 115, 485 (1959).

[30]  H.Freudental, LINCOS: Design of a Language for Cosmic  Intercourse    (North-Holland,

Amsterdam, 1960).

[31]  L.Brown, C.Tobias, and S.H.Stept, Don't Sit Under The Apple Tree .

[32]  G.Rempe, W.Schleich, M.O.Scully, and H.Walther,  in Proceedings  of  3rd  International
Symposium  on  Foundation  of  Quantum  Mechanics    (Physical  Society  of  Japan,  Tokyo,
1989).

[33]  K.S.Ralls,  W.J.Skocpol,  L.D.Jackel,  R.E.Howard,  L.A.Fetter,  R.W.Epworth,  and

D.M.Tennant,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 228 (1984).

[34]    From  this  point  of  view  the  inquisition  had  found  the  best  way  to  spread  heresy  by

burning.

Nakhmanson    p. 20 of 20

