Modulation  Instability  and  Pattern  Formation  in  Spatially

Incoherent  Light  Beams

Detlef Kip,(1,2) Marin Soljacic,(1,3)  Mordechai  Segev,(1,4)

 Evgenia  Eugenieva,(5) and  Demetrios N. Christodoulides(5)

(1) Physics Department, Technion, Haifa 32000, Israel

(2) Physics Department, Universität Osnabrück, 49069 Osnabrück, Germany
(3) Physics Department, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA

(4) Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA

 (5) Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Dept., Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA

Modulation Instability (MI) is a universal process that appears in most nonlinear wave systems in
nature. Because of MI, small  amplitude  and  phase  perturbations  (from  noise)  grow  rapidly  under  the
combined effects of nonlinearity and diffraction (or dispersion, in the temporal domain). As a result, a
broad optical beam (or a quasi-CW pulse) tends to disintegrate during propagation [1,2], leading to
filamentation  [2]  or  to  break-up  into  pulse  trains  [1].  In  general,  MI  typically  occurs  in  the  same
parameter region where another universal phenomenon, soliton occurrence, is observed. Solitons are
stationary localized wave-packets (wave-packets that never broaden) that share many features with real
particles. For example, their total energy and momentum is conserved even when they interact with one
another [3]. Intuitively, solitons can be understood as a result of the balance between the broadening
tendency of diffraction (or dispersion) and nonlinear self-focusing. A soliton forms when the localized
wave-packet induces (via the nonlinearity) a potential and "captures" itself in it, thus becoming a bound
state in its own induced potential. In the spatial domain of optics, a spatial soliton forms when a very
narrow optical beam induces (through self-focusing) a waveguide structure and guides itself in its own
induced waveguide. The relation between MI and solitons is best manifested in the fact that the filaments
(or  the  pulse  trains)  that  emerge  from  the  MI  process  are  actually  trains  of  almost  ideal  solitons.

Therefore, MI can be considered to be a precursor to soliton formation. Over the years, MI has been
systematically investigated in connection with numerous nonlinear processes. Yet, it was always believed
that MI is inherently a coherent process and thus it can only appear in nonlinear systems with a perfect
degree  of  spatial/temporal  coherence.  Earlier  this  year  however,  our  group  was  able  to  show
theoretically [4] that MI can also exist in relation with partially-incoherent wave-packets or beams. This
in turn leads to several important new features: for example, incoherent MI appears only if the ‘strength’
of the nonlinearity exceeds a well-defined threshold that depends on the degree of spatial correlation
(coherence). Moreover, by appropriately suppressing MI, new families of solitons are possible which
have no counterpart whatsoever in the coherent regime [5].  This prediction of incoherent MI actually
reflects on many other nonlinear systems beyond optics: it implies that patterns can form spontaneously
(from  noise)  in  nonlinear  many-body  systems  involving  weakly-correlated  particles,  such  as,  for
example,  electrons  in  semiconductors  at  the  vicinity  of  the  quantum  Hall  regime,  high-Tc
superconductors,  and  atomic  gases  at  temperatures  slightly  higher  than  Bose-Einstein-Condensation
(BEC)  temperatures.  Here,  we  present  the  first  experimental  observation  of  modulation
instability of partially spatially incoherent light beams in non-instantaneous nonlinear media.
We  show  that  even  in  such  a  nonlinear  partially  coherent  system  (of  weakly-correlated
particles) patterns can form spontaneously. Incoherent MI occurs above a specific threshold
that  depends  on  the  beams'  coherence  properties  (correlation  distance),  and  leads  to  a
periodic train of one-dimensional (1D) filaments. At a higher value of nonlinearity, incoherent
MI displays a two-dimensional (2D) instability and leads to self-ordered arrays of light spots.

Before  we  proceed  to  describe  incoherent  MI,  we  revisit  the  main  ideas  that  make  incoherent
solitons  happen.  Until  a  few  years  ago,  solitons  were  considered  to  be  solely  coherent  entities.
However, in 1996 the first experimental observations of solitons made of partially-spatially-incoherent
light [6] and in 1997 of temporally and spatially incoherent ("white") light [7] have proven beyond doubt
that  incoherent  solitons  do  exist.  This  sequence  of  events  has  opened  up  entirely  new  directions  in
soliton science. Since then, numerous theoretical and experimental papers have been published on bright
and dark incoherent solitons: their range of existence and their structure [8-11], their interactions [12],
their stability properties [13], and their relation to multimode composite solitons [14]. The existence of
incoherent solitons proves that self-focusing is possible not only for coherent wave-packets but also for

wave-packets  upon  which  the  phase  is  random.  The  key  to  their  existence  is  the  non-instantaneous
nature of the nonlinearity, which responds only to the beam's time-averaged intensity structure and not
to the instantaneous highly speckled and fragmented wave-front. In other words, the response time of
the nonlinear medium must be much larger than the average time of phase fluctuations across the beam.
Thus, the time-averaged intensity induces, through the nonlinearity, a multimode waveguide structure (a
potential well that can bind many states), whose guided modes are populated by the optical field with its
instantaneous  speckled  structure.  With  this  non-instantaneous  nature  of  the  nonlinearity  in  mind,  we
were motivated to find out if patterns can form spontaneously on a partially coherent uniform
beam, through the interplay between nonlinearity and diffraction, in  a  such  a  random-phase
wave front of uniform intensity.  As a first step, we have shown theoretically [4] that a uniform yet
partially-incoherent  wave-front  is  unstable  in  such  nonlinear  media,  provided  that  the  nonlinearity
exceeds  a  well-defined  threshold  that  is  set  by  the  coherence  properties.  Above  that  threshold,  MI
should occur, and patterns should form. Here, we experimentally verify these predictions, and reveal a
series of new features that relate to the appearance of 2D ordered lattices of filaments.

The main predictions of the incoherent MI theory [4] are as follows. (I) The existence of a sharp
threshold for the nonlinear index change, below which perturbations (noise) on top of a uniform input
beam  decay  and  above  which  a  quasi-periodic  pattern  forms.  (II)  The  threshold  depends  upon  the
coherence  properties  of  the  input  beam:  the  threshold  increases  with  decreasing  correlation  distance
(decreasing  spatial  coherence).  (III)  Saturation  alone,  while  keeping  the  maximum  index  change  and
correlation  distance  fixed,  arrests  the  growth  rate  of  the  MI  and  can  decrease  it  to  below  the  MI
threshold. In the next sections we describe our experimental results that confirm all of these predictions
and also reveal new unexpected features.

In our incoherent MI experiments, we use a strontium-barium niobate (SBN:60) crystal and employ its
photorefractive  screening  nonlinearity  [15,16],  which  is  of  a  saturable  nature.  The  dimensions  of  the
sample  are  a· b· c=7.0· 6.5· 8.0mm3,  where  light  propagation  is  along  the  crystalline  a-axis  and  the
external electric bias field is applied along the c-axis. At moderate intensities (1 Watt/cm2) the response
time of our crystal is t  ˜ 0.1 seconds, thus for any light beam across which the phase varies much faster

than  t ,  the  nonlinear  crystal  responds  only  to  the  time-averaged    (over  times  much  larger  than  t )
intensity  structure.  In  our  experimental  setup,  we  split  a  cw  argon  ion  laser  beam  (of  l =514.5  nm
wavelength) into two beams using a polarizing beamsplitter. Each beam is sent through a rotating diffuser
which introduces a random phase varying much faster than  t ,  acting  as  a  source  of  partially  spatially
incoherent light. Following the rotating diffusers the beams are expanded, collimated and made uniform,
and recombined using another polarizing  beamsplitter. Finally both beams are launched into the crystal
and co-propagate in it.  When an external (bias) dc field is applied to the crystal, the extraordinarily-
polarized beam experiences a large index change, and thus serves as the "signal beam", whereas the
ordinarily-polarized beam experiences only a tiny index change and therefore serves as a background
beam (its only role is to tune the degree of saturation of the nonlinearity [16]). A lens and a polarizer are
used  to  image  the  signal  beam  intensity  at  the  output  face  of  the  sample  onto  a  CCD  camera.  We
control the degree of coherence of the signal beam by adjusting the diameter of the laser beam incident
on  the  rotating  diffuser:  the  larger  the  beam  diameter,  the  higher  the  incoherence  and  the  shorter  the
correlation distance lc. The background beam is made highly incoherent, which guarantees that it never
forms any patterns. We estimate the correlation distance  lc  (at  the  input  face  of  the  crystal,  when  the
system is linear: zero applied field) as the average value of the full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) of the
speckle size on the CCD camera when the diffuser is momentarily stopped.

Upon the application of a sufficiently large bias field to the crystal, the signal beam experiences
MI and forms patterns (Fig. 1). When the input signal beam is uniform, the underlying nonlinearity is of
the form

                                          d n = D n0 [1+ (I0 / Isat)] [ I(r) / (I(r) + Isat ) ] ,                                  (1)

where  I(r)  is  the  local  intensity  as  a  function  of  coordinate  r,  Isat  is  the  intensity  of  the  incident
background beam, and I0 is the intensity of the signal beam at the input face. The term [1+ (I0  /  Isat)]
comes  from  the  fact  that  the  total  current  flowing  through  the  crystal  is  practically  the  photocurrent
generated  by  both  beams  (in  contradistinction  with  the  case  of  bright  screening  solitons,  where  the
soliton beam is very narrow compared to the crystal width and thus does not affect the  photocurrent,
and this factor is equal to unity [15]). In Eq. 1, D n0=-0.5ne
3r33(V/L) is the electrooptic refractive index

change, ne is the extraordinary refractive index, r33 is the electrooptic tensor element, and (V/L) is the
externally applied electric field.

Incoherent MI is observed for a nonlinearity d n exceeding a certain threshold. When an external
voltage  is  applied  to  the  nonlinear  crystal  with  a  magnitude  large  enough  to  allow  for  MI,  the
homogeneous  light  distribution  at  the  output  face  of  the  sample  becomes  periodically  modulated  and
starts to form 1D filaments of incoherent light. In our experiments, the preferred direction of the stripes
is perpendicular to the c-axis of the crystal. We believe that this is due to the existence of striations in
our  sample,  which  act  as  ‘initial  noise’  that  is  eventually  amplified  by  MI.  These  are  index
inhomogeneities  in  planes  perpendicular  to  the  c-axis  that  originate  from  melt  composition  changes
during growth of the crystal. Another possible reason for the preferential 1D directionality might have to
do  with  the  anisotropy  of  the  photorefractive  nonlinearity.    However,  the  final  orientation  of  the
stripes is rather random, with the largest observed angle of the inclination of the stripes relative to the
c-axis being roughly  45 degrees. Figure 1 shows typical examples of MI of partially spatially incoherent
light. Shown is the intensity of the signal beam in the output plane of the nonlinear crystal. The coherence
length of the incoherent light is lc=17.5 m m and the intensity ratio Io/Isat=1.  Figure 1(a) shows the output
intensity  without  nonlinearity  (V/L=0).  The  cases  (b),  (c),  and  (d)  correspond  to  a  value  of  the
nonlinearity just below the threshold for 1D incoherent MI, at threshold, and just above the threshold.
This shows beyond any doubt (1) the existence of incoherent MI, and (2) that incoherent MI occurs
only when the nonlinear index change exceeds a well-defined threshold. In particular, Fig. 1(c) shows a
mixed state exactly at threshold, in which order and disorder coexist. This is a clear indication that the
nonlinear interaction undergoes an order-disorder phase transition. These phenomena were predicted in
our theoretical paper [4]. But the experiments, as often happens in science, reveal new surprises. When
the nonlinearity is further increased, a second threshold is reached: the filaments become unstable [Fig.
1(e)] and start to break into an ordered array of spots (2D filaments)  as  shown  in  Fig.  1(f).  We
emphasize that in all the pictures displayed in this figure, the correlation distance is much shorter than the
distance between two adjacent stripes or filaments. Thus, this work is a clear demonstration that pattern
can form also in weakly-correlated nonlinear multi-particle systems.

Next, we study the dependence of the MI threshold on the coherence properties of the beam.
For a constant intensity ratio I0/Isat, the threshold where MI occurs depends on the incoherence of the
light and on  D n0  (which  we  control  through  the  applied  voltage  V).  To  identify  the  MI  threshold
experimentally, one needs to examine the growth dynamics of perturbations and observe whether they
grow  or  decay.  Obviously,  this  is  very  hard  to  measure,  especially  because  the  initial  perturbations
originate  from  random  noise.  Instead,  we  investigate  the  visibility  (modulation  depth)  of  the  pattern
observed at the output face of the crystal: random fluctuations that do not increase have a tiny (less than
5%) visibility, whereas the perturbations that grow emerge at high visibility (>50%) stripes. We have
conducted numerous experiments with various degrees of coherence of the input beam, and measure the
modulation depth of the output stripes as a function of the applied field (which is translated to  D n0).
Figure 2(a) displays the results: it shows the modulation depth m = (Imax-Imin)/(Imax+Imin) of the light at
the output plane, as a function of D n0 for different correlation distances lc and Io/Isat=1. For the case of a
fully coherent input beam, m becomes large even at a  vanishingly  small  nonlinearity.  This  is  because
coherent  MI  has  no  threshold.  When  the  correlation  distance  is  reduced,  however,  a  well-defined
threshold is observed: the jump from very low visibility to a large visibility is always abrupt, because for
every beam with a finite lc there is always a threshold for MI.  Clearly, the MI threshold shifts towards
higher value of D n0 with decreasing correlation distance lc.

Once the nonlinearity exceeds the threshold for incoherent MI, the transverse frequencies that
have gain grow exponentially and form the periodic patterns shown in Fig. 1. This growth leads to a
large modulation depth (high visibility) in the output patterns, and, equally important, to a considerable
deviation of these stripes from a pure sinusoidal shape, i.e., the propagation dynamics becomes highly
nonlinear. Part of this dynamics was captured in the last figure in [4], by the appearance of the second
spatial  harmonic,  yet  the  experiment  provides  considerably  more  insight  into  the  nonlinear  dynamical
evolution of the patterns. Figure 2(b) shows typical intensity cross-sections of the stripes at the output
plane. In this particular set of data,  lc=17.5 m m and D no values of 2.75*10-4 (i), 4.0*10-4 (ii), 5.0*10-4
(iii), and 8.0*10-4 (iv). At the lowest D no value, MI is barely above threshold (i). For the higher value at
(ii), the modulation depth is higher yet the stripes have a sinusoidal shape. At the high value of (iii), the

shape of the stripes is no longer sinusoidal and several higher harmonics participate. For an even higher
nonlinearity, the spectrum becomes irregular (iv), and 2D breakup into filaments starts to occur.

The  periodicity  (or  the  spatial  frequency)  of  the  1D  filaments  that  emerge  in  the  MI  process
depends  on  the  coherence  properties  of  the  beam  and  on  the  magnitude  of  the  nonlinearity.  In  a
saturable  nonlinear  medium,  for  a  given  intensity  ratio,  the  spatial  frequency  should  monotonically
increase with increasing correlation distance and with increasing  D no [4]. We indeed observe this trend
in our experiments. Figure 3(a) shows the dominating spatial frequency  fmax (number of stripes per unit
length) of the output intensity as a function of correlation distance lc for a constant intensity ratio Io/Isat=1
and three different values of D no. The 1D incoherent MI theory, when applied to the nonlinearity of Eq.
(1),  with  the  parameters  l =514.5  nm,  ne=2.3,  r33=260  pm/V,  and  assuming  a  Lorentzian-shaped
angular power spectrum of the incoherent light, results in the plots shown in Fig. 3(b). Clearly, there is a
good  qualitative  agreement  between  theory  and  experiments.  The  1D  incoherent  MI  theory  also
predicts  the  dependence  of  the  dominating  spatial  frequency  fmax  on  D no,  for  a  given  correlation
distance, as shown in Fig. 3(d). In this case, the experiments confirm the increase of  fmax with increasing
D no, and shift towards higher  D no  values that occurs for decreasing  lc.  However,  experimentally,  we
observe (Fig. 3(c)) a turning point in the plots: the spatial frequency reaches a clear maximum and then
goes down for increasing D no. This is a new feature that was not predicted by the 1D theory. In fact, for
D no values larger than those of the peaks, the 1D stripes become irregular and start to break up into 2D
filaments, and this leads to a decrease in the spatial frequency of the stripes. These new unexpected
effects should be addressed in the context of a 2D incoherent MI theory. It is very possible that a 2D
linearized  MI  analysis  (similar  to  that  of  [4]  but  of  a  higher  dimension)  will  not  suffice  to  explain  the
breakup into an array of filaments, and will have to involve either heavy computation or a  perturbative
nonlinear treatment.

Up to this point, the nonlinearity in our experiments had the form given in Eq. (1), which is not
saturable.  Based  on  the  1D  incoherent  MI  theory  [4],  we  expect  that  saturation  of  the  optical
nonlinearity should arrest the MI growth rate.  To  investigate  saturation  effects,  we  have  modified  the
nature of our photorefractive screening nonlinearity in a rather easy way: by launching a "flat top" beam

that is narrower than the distance between the electrodes in our crystal, yet at the same time is wide
enough to serve as a "quasi-uniform beam" at its flat-top. Since the beam is finite, it does not contribute
to the total current flowing through the crystal at steady state. Hence, the nonlinearity is now  d n = D n0 [
I(r) / (I(r) + Isat ) ], which is the more commonly-used form of the photorefractive screening nonlinearity
[15], and it has a saturable nature.  When we launch such a beam in a biased crystal with  D n0 = 6*10-
4, and with a ratio between the peak intensity and the saturation intensity, I(0)/ Isat = 3, patterns form in
several  regions  on  the  beam,  as  shown  in  Fig.  4.  At  the  flat-top  of  the  beam,  low  visibility  stripes
appear. In this region the nonlinearity is above threshold but in rather deep saturation, so the MI growth
rate is suppressed. Then, at the margins of the beam, where the local ratio I(r) +  Isat  is  around  and
slightly below unity, high-visibility stripes appear. In this region the nonlinearity is above threshold and at
the same time it is not saturated, so the MI growth rate is large. Finally, at the far margins of the beam,
the local nonlinearity is below threshold, because I(r) <<  Isat.    A  nice  by-product  of  this  particular
experiment is the clear evidence (in Fig. 4) that the 1D stripes emerge at different orientations, and are
not affected much by the local noise (striations). We expect that similar experiments with incoherent MI
in the saturated regime and high nonlinearities that lead to 2D "lattices" of filaments (as shown in Fig. 1),
will reveal a wealth of new features, because the "lattice" will now form features of varying order and
varying  scales  in  different  regions  of  the  beam.  This  seems  to  be  a  fascinating  option  and  we  are
currently investigating it in our laboratory.

Before closing, we would like to relate our nonlinear optical system to other nonlinear systems
of  weakly-correlated  particles.  Our  prediction  and  experimental  observation  implies  that  in  all  such
systems,  patterns  will  form  spontaneously,  provided  that  the  nonlinearity  is  larger  than  a
threshold value, which in turn is set by the correlation distance. For example, we expect that 1D
and  2D  patterns  will  form  in  an  atomic  gas  at  temperatures  slightly  above  the  Bose-Einstein-
Condensation temperature: at temperatures at which the atoms possess independent degrees of freedom
(and  cannot  be  described  by  a  single  wave  function,  as  in  the  BEC  state),  yet  they  are  still  weakly
correlated. At least for atoms with attractive collision forces (a negative scattering length), such patterns
should  form,  depending  on  the  dimensionality  of  the  problem  describing  the  atoms  in  the  trap.  The
equation governing the evolution of the "mean field" of an atomic gas is the so-called Gross-Pitaevski

equation [17], which is literally identical to the nonlinear wave equation in nonlinear optics that gives rise
to  (1+1)D  Kerr  solitons.  However,  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  no  such  ideas  of  pattern
formation  through  modulation  instability  have  been  previously  suggested  previously  for
atomic gases [18].   Yet in other areas of physics, in fact, there are already at least some hints that such
patterns  do  exist  in  disordered  many-body  nonlinear  systems.  To  be  specific,  several  experimental
papers have reported a large anisotropy in the  resistivity  of  a  two-dimensional  electron  system  with
weak  disorder  [19].  The  observed  anisotropy  is  now  attributed  to  the  combination  of  nonlinear
transport and weak disorder [20], which is exactly the transport-equivalent of an optical nonlinearity
and  incoherence  in  optical  systems  such  as  ours.  The  theoretical  works  predict  the  existence  of  1D
stripes  (electron  stripes)  of  charge  density  waves  [20].  Spontaneous  formation  of  stripes  was  also
predicted and observed in high-Tc superconductors [21], which is again a nonlinear weakly-correlated
many-body system. Finally, as we have already discussed in Ref. [4],  spontaneously-forming  patterns
are also known in at least one system of classical particles: in a gravitational system. The spontaneous
emergence of patterns in all of these diverse fields of science indicates that pattern formation in nonlinear
weakly-correlated systems is a universal property. It is a gift of nature that in optics we can study it
directly, visualizing every little detail of the physics involved, and at the same time, being able to isolate
the underlying effects and develop a theory that captures the core effects that are indeed universal. Our
hope is to be able to understand such patterns in a higher dimensionality, as we already observe them in
our laboratory, and to draw new exciting implications to other fields of nature.

In conclusion, we have presented the first experimental observation of modulation instability of
spatially-incoherent light beams in a nonlinear optical system. We have proven that modulation instability
occurs when the nonlinearity exceeds a sharp threshold. The MI threshold depends on the degree of
incoherence, that is, the correlation distance, or the maximum distance between two points upon the
beam that are still phase-correlated. We have shown that during the MI process a homogeneous input
wave-front  breaks  into  one-dimensional  stripes.  For  a  higher  nonlinearity,  we  observe  a  second
threshold at which the stripes become unstable and form (spontaneously) a spatially ordered pattern of
two-dimensional filaments (spots).

This  work  was  supported  by  the  Israeli  Science  Foundation,  NSF,  ARO,  AFOSR,  and  the

Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft.

References
(1)  V. I. Bespalov and V. I. Talanov, JETP Lett. 3, 307 (1966); V. I. Karpman, JETP Lett.  6,  277
(1967); G. P. Agrawal, Phys. Rev. Lett.  59,  880  (1987);  S.  Wabnitz,  Phys.  Rev.  A  38,  2018
(1988). A. Hasegawa and W. F. Brinkman, J. Quant. Elect. 16, 694 (1980); K. Tai, A. Hasegawa
and  A.  Tomita,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  56,  135  (1981).For  a  review  on  modulation  instability  in  the
temporal domain,  see G. P. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fiber Optics, Second Ed. (Academic Press, San
Diego, 1995), Chap. 5.

(2) E. M. Dianov et al., Opt. Lett. 14, 1008 (1989); P. V. Mamyshev et al., J. Opt. Soc. Am. B  11,
1254 (1994); M. D. Iturbe-Castillo et al., Opt. Lett. 20, 1853 (1995); M. I. Carvalho, S. R. Singh,
and D. N. Christodoulides, Opt. Comm. 126, 167 (1996).

(3) For a recent review on optical spatial solitons, see G. I. Stegeman and M. Segev, Science  286,

1518 (1999).

(4) M. Soljacic, M. Segev, T. Coskun, D. N. Christodoulides, and A. Vishwanath, Phys. Rev. Lett.

84, 467 (2000)

(5) T. Coskun, D. N. Christodoulides, Y. Kim, Z. Chen, M. Soljacic and M. Segev, Phys. Rev. Lett.

84, 2374 (2000)

(6) M.  Mitchell,  Z.  Chen,  M.  Shih  and  M.  Segev,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  77,  490  (1996);  Z.  Chen,  M.

Mitchell, M. Segev, T. H. Coskun and D. N. Christodoulides, Science 280, 889 (1998).

(7) M. Mitchell and M. Segev, Nature, 387, 880 (1997).
(8) D. N. Christodoulides T. H. Coskun, M. Mitchell and M. Segev, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 646 (1997);

ibid 80, 2310 (1998).

(9) M.  Mitchell,  M.  Segev,  T.  H.  Coskun  and  D.  N.  Christodoulides,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  79,  4990

(1997); ibid 80, 5113 (1998)

(10)  A. W. Snyder and D. J. Mitchell, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 1422 (1998)
(11)  V. V. Shkunov and D. Z. Anderson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 2683 (1998)
(12)  N. Akhmediev, W. Krolikowski and A. W. Snyder, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 4632 (1998)
(13)  O. Bang, D. Edmundson, W. Krolikowski, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4740 (1999).
(14)  M. Mitchell, M. Segev and D. N. Christodoulides, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 4657 (1998).

(15)  M. Segev, G. C. Valley, B. Crosignani, P. DiPorto and A. Yariv, Phys. Rev. Lett.  73,  3211
(1994);  D.  N.  Christodoulides  and  M.  I.  Carvalho,  J.  Opt.  Soc.  Am.  B12,  1628,  (1995);  M.
Segev, M. Shih and G. C. Valley, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 13, 706 (1996).

(16)  M. Shih, M. Segev, G. C. Valley, G. Salamo, B. Crosignani and P. DiPorto, Elect. Lett.  31,

826 (1995); Opt. Lett. 21, 324 (1996).

(17)  See, e.g., Th. Busch and J. R. Anglin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 2298 (2000).
(18)  Prof. Jean Dalibard, Ecole Normale Superieure, Paris, France, Private Communication.
(19)  M. P. Lilly, K. B. Cooper, J. P. Eisenstein, L. N. Pfeiffer, and K. W. West, Phys. Rev. Lett.
82, 394 (1999); ibid 83, 824 (1999); W. Pan, R. R. Du, H. L. Stormer, D. C. Tsui, L. N. Pfeiffer,
K. W. Baldwin, and K. W. West, ibid,  83,  820  (1999);  M.  Shayegan  and  H.  C.  Manoharan,
preprint [cond-mat/9903405] (1999).

(20)  A. A. Koulakov, M. M. Fogler, aand B. I. Shklovskii, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 499 (1996); A. H.
MacDonald  and  M.  P.  A.  Fisher,  preprint  [cond-mat/9907278],  to  appear  in  Phys.  Rev.  B,
(2000); H. MacDonald and M. P. A. Fisher, preprint [cond-mat/0001021] (2000).

(21)  See V. J. Emery et al., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 8814 (1999) and references therein.

Figures

Fig. 1. The intensity structure of a partially-spatially-incoherent beam at the output plane of the
nonlinear crystal. The sample is illuminated homogeneously with partially spatially incoherent light
with a coherence length lc=17.5 m m. The displayed area is 1.0· 1.0mm2  (a-d)  and  0.8· 0.8mm2
(e,f), respectively. The size of the nonlinear refractive index change of the crystal is successively
increased from  (a) D n0=0   (the linear case), to (b) 3.5*10-4 , (c) 4.0*10-4,    (d)  4.5*10-4,    (e)
9*10-4 (e), and (f) 1*10-3. The plots (b-d) show the cases just below threshold (no features), at
threshold (partial features), and just above threshold (features everywhere) for 1D incoherent MI
that leads to 1D filaments. Far above this threshold, at a much higher value of the nonlinearity, the
1D  filaments  become  unstable  (e),  and  finally  become  ordered  in  a  regular  two-dimensional
pattern (f).

Fig. 2. Threshold dependence of incoherent MI: modulation m=(Imax-Imin)/(Imax+Imin)  of  the  light
pattern vs. size of the nonlinearity  D no for different correlation distances  lc  and  an  intensity  ratio
Io/Isat=1.   a) measured values of m for lc=8, 10, and 17.5 m m and for coherent light (lc ﬁ
). The
dotted curves are guides for the eye.   b) intensity cross-sections of the stripes for lc=17.5 m m and
a nonlinear refractive index change of D no=2.75*10-4 (i), 4.0*10-4 (ii), 5.0*10-4 (iii), and 8.0*10-4
(iv).  The  dotted  lines  indicate  the  base  line  of  the  respective  profile.  The  stripes  emerge  as
sinusoidal  stripes  (for  nonlinearity  just  above  threshold),  and  turn  into  square-wave  stripes  at  a
higher nonlinearity, and eventually break up into filaments at a large enough nonlinearity.

 ¥

Fig.  3. The dominating spatial frequency  fmax  (number  of  stripes  per  unit  length)  of  the  output
intensity as a function of correlation distance lc (a, experiment; b, theory) and nonlinear refractive
index change (c, experiment; d, theory). All measured spatial frequencies are for an experimental
parameter  range  where  the  1D  filaments  are  stable  and  2D  instability  is  not  yet  visible.  The
theoretical  curves  in  (b)  and  (d)  are  deduced  form  the  1D  model  described  in  [4]  using  the
nonlinearity of Eq. 1 and l =514.5 nm, ne=2.3, and r33=260 pm/V. The dotted curves in (a) and
(c) are guides for the eye.

Fig. 4.  Suppression of incoherent MI due to saturation of the nonlinearity. The intensity structure
of a finite signal beam (gaussian beam with a width (FWHM) of 1 mm) at the output plane of the
crystal. The intensity ratio (peak of beam to background/saturation intensity) is I0/Isat=3.  Without
nonlinearity (D n0=0), the output beam shows no features. The photograph is taken for D n0=6*10-
4.  The  saturation  nature  of  the  nonlinearity  clearly  suppresses  MI  in  the  center  of  the  beam,
whereas strong modulation and filaments of random orientation occur in the margins of the beam.

