Bell’s theorem, entanglement, and common sense

Raoul Nakhmanson
Nakhmanson@t-online.de

A  simple  analogy 
entanglement within local-realistic world is presented.

to  understand 

the  quantum-mechanical

The  majority  of  professional  physicists  working  in  the  “main  stream”  declare  that
quantum physics is a very strange domain which is not like anything we find in common
life, and that it is unimaginable for our consciousness.  They broadcast such a statement
in professional and popular literature that inspire frustration and feeling of inferiority of
their readers.  Up to now used analogies with Carroll’s personages are directed to show
that these analogies don’t work in accordance with common sense.  The recent example
devoted to entanglement was in [1].

Of course it would be better to find such an analogy which works.  Then it can  be

used for education and popularization, and perhaps for physics itself.

Let’s have a brief look at the history of the “main stream” meaning.  The key words
are  quantum  mechanics  (QM),  reality,  uncertainty,  nonlocality,  entanglement,
interaction-free measurement.  They are interpreted as follows:

QM  is  a  theory  having  its  mathematical  formalism  which  allows  to  describe  the
results of observations and experiments performed on separate microobjects (molecules,
atoms,  elementary  particles,  ...)  and  their  ensembles.    Some  predictions  of  QM
(eigenwerts,  parameters)  are  very  precise,  others  (results  of  interactions  allowing
alternative outcomes) are only probabilistic.

Reality is a physical world which stays behind the QM-formalism.  The question on
its immanent existence is declared by “main stream” as non-scientific.  “No elementary
phenomenon is a phenomenon until it is a registered (observed) phenomenon”[2],  i.e.
we have to think only about so-called “observables”.

Uncertainty is principal impossibility of QM to forecast a result of an interaction e.g.
a measurement having several possible outcomes.  Only possibilities of corresponding
outcomes  can  be  calculated.    This  term  is  used  also  if  two  “non-commutable
observables” (e.g. co-ordinate and impulse) want to be measured simultaneously.  Such
an uncertainty is a very special attribute of QM as  compared  with  the  determinism  of
classical physics.

Nonlocality is a possibility of an instant interaction between far parted objects.

Entanglement  is  such  a  correlation  between  once  interacting  and  later  departed
particles which exceeds the possibility of local-realistic model with hidden parameters.
The wave function of an entangled state can not be written as a product of individual
wave functions.

Interaction-free  measurement  is  a  possibility  to  have  some  information  about  an
object (its existence in some region of space, its form, ...) without any direct interaction
between the object and a measurement apparatus.

Nakhmanson     1

The  base  of  “main  stream”  philosophy  was  founded  by  Bohr.    Planck,  Einstein,  de
Broglie,  Schrödinger,  and  others  criticize  the  agnosticism  of  the  “Copenhagen”
interpretation  of  QM.    Einstein,  Podolsky  and  Rosen  [3]  tried  to  show  the
incompleteness  of  QM  using 
(EPR
Gedankenexperiment).    De  Broglie,  Schrödinger  and  others  tried  to  develop  realistic
models  of  quantum  phenomena.    An  important  work  here  was  made  by  Bohm
presenting in 1952 a consequent hidden-parameter model [4].

example  with 

the 

two  particles 

However  the  essential  parameter  of  Bohm’s  model  -  quantum  potential  -  was
nonlocal for entangled states.  Is nonlocality in any hidden-parameter model?  In 1964
Bell  apparently  found  an  experimental  possibility  to  prove  it  [5].    He  showed  that  in
EPR’s  situation  the  QM  predicts  a  behavior  correlation  between  far  parted  particles
which are stronger than a correlation predicted by an arbitrary local-realistic model with
hidden parameters.  The following experiments [6,7] confirm the QM prediction.  As it
seems, trying to interpret the experiments one has a dilemma: either to reject any reality
except  “observables”  like  Bohr  or  to  accept  nonlocality  like  Bohm.    Both  alternatives
are of course non-compatible with common sense.

So,  must  we  follow  the  “main  stream”  and  reject  common  sense?    Must  we  use
analogies  and  models  which  don’t  work  in  accordance  with  common  sense?    The
answer is not, at least not yet, not all, and not for education.

Let us start with an analogy of the EPR-experiment.  Supposing there are twins, Ralf
and Rolf, living in Frankfurt and working for Lufthansa as pilots.  For their employer
(but not for their families!) they are “indistinguishable particles”.  The twins always try
to dress alike, they believe that this brings them happiness.  Because they are often in
different countries, they agree on an order of sartorial priority: cold before warmth and
rain before dry spell.

Ralf

Rolf

Fig. 1.  Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) experiment and the apparent

non-local interaction of entangled particles.

Nakhmanson     2

Once Ralf flies to England and Rolf flies to Greece (Fig.1).  God who is observing
the  twins,  sees  that  they  carry  clothes  and  shoes  having  the  same  sizes.    He  is  not
surprised: Ralf and Rolf are twins and have the same mechanical (hidden) parameters.
God sees also that their sets of clothes and shoes are identical in fashion and color and
very simple: each of them has only one variant for warm  weather  and  one  variant  for
cold weather.  He does not wonder: such parameters can be stipulated in Frankfurt.

Besides that God sees a very striking correlation: the twins dress alike independent of
the weather!  It is natural if the weather in England and in Greece is the same.  But why
it is so when the weather is not the same?  Why if it is cold in England, not only Ralf
but  also  Rolf  wears  an  overcoat  in  spite  of  the  warm  weather  and  if  it  is  raining  in
Greece, not only Rolf but also Ralf hides beneath an umbrella, regardless of the sun in
England  (Fig.1)?    “What  is  the  matter?”  -  thinks  God,  -  “I  control  experimental
conditions, namely, today’s weather in England and  in  Greece,  and  I  know  the  twins’
financial status, telephoning is too expensive for them.  So it seems there is a non-local
interaction  (entanglement)  between  the  twins.    I  am  sure  it  is  a  new  escapade  of  the
devil!”

God’s  conclusion  was  only  half  true.    In  his  heavenly  chariot  he  fell  behind  the
technical  progress  of  the  20th  century.    He  was  right  suspecting  the  devil.    But  up  to
now the devil does not realize non-local interaction. Instead, he had endowed humans
with  the  ability  to  forecast  future  and  also  had  invented  radio,  television,  power
computer  for  meteorology,  and  communication  satellites  for  support.    Therefore  the
twins using their own experience and radio or TV reports every evening can forecast the
weather  for  tomorrow  in  England  and  Greece  and  dress  in  accordance  with  their
agreement.

The difference between the twins’ situation and the EPR-Bohm-Bell’s analyse is the
ability of living “particles” to forecast future.  The living objects have a non-mechanical
hidden parameter, namely, a consciousness !.

The proof of Bell’s theorem is based on the next assertion: if Pa is a probability of
result a  measured on the particle 1  in the point A  having a condition  (e.g.  angle  of
analyzer) α , and Pb is a probability of result b  measured on the particle 2  in the distant
point  B    having  a  condition β  ,  then β    has  no  influence  on  the  Pa  ,  and  vice  versa.
Herein  Bell  and  others  saw  the  indispensable  requirement  of  local  realism  and
“separability”.  Mathematically it can be written as

Pab(λ1i,λ2i,α,β) = Pa(λ1i,α)×Pb(λ2i,β)            (Bell)  ,                     (1)

where    Pab    is  the  probability  of  the  join  result    ab  ,  and    λ1i  and    λ2i  are  hidden
parameters  of  particles  1    and  2    in    an  arbitrary    local-realistic  theory.    Under  the
influence  of  Bell’s  theorem  and  the  experiments  following  it  and  showing,  that  for
entangled particles the condition (1) is no longer valid, some  “realists”  reject  locality.
In this case an instantaneous action at a distance is possible, and one can write

Pab(λ1i,λ2i,α,β) = Pa(λ1i,α,β)×Pb(λ2i,β,α)     (non-locality)  .         (2)

Nakhmanson     3

In principle such a relation permits a description of any correlation between a and b,
particularly predicted by QM and observed in experiments.  But for living particles in
the frame of local realism the condition (1) is not indispensable.  Instead, one can write

Pab(λ1i,λ2i,α,β) = Pa(λ1i,α,β´)×Pb(λ2i,β,α´)     (forecast)  ,             (3)

where  α´  and  β´  are the conditions of measurements in points A  and B , respectively,
as  they  can  be  forecast  by  particles  at  the  moment  of  their  parting.    If  the  forecast  is
good enough, i.e., α´ ≈ α  and  β´ ≈ β , then (3) practically coincides with (2) and has all
its advantages plus locality.

Persisting in “main stream” one can successfully use the analogy of the twins in an
education  process  and  conclude  e.g.  with  “If  a  baby,  having  more  experience  with  its
parents  than  with  “inanimate”  matter,  could  make  experiments,  the  behavior  of
microparticles would appear to it to be very natural”.

Is the above analogy more than an analogy?  Can “inanimate” matter really own some
“consciousness” and forecast the future?  Some philosophers and physicists supposed it
[8].  There is a development of this idea to the level of a consequent hypothesis which
can  be  tested  experimentally  [9-11].    For  example,  in  EPR-type  experiments  one  can
quickly change an analyzer direction.  Periodical switching [7] must be avoided because
it  is  predictable,  random  switching  is  preferable  [9-12].    The  corresponding  random
generator must be “good” enough to exclude forecasting by the particles, but this issue
is not trivial.  For example Weihs et al. [12] wrote:

“Selection  of  an  analyzer  direction  has  to  be  completely  unpredictable,  which
necessitates a physical random number generator.  A pseudo-random-number generator
cannot be used, since its state at any time is predetermined” (p. 5039).  As a “physical
random number generator” the authors used a “light-emitting diode illuminating a beam
splitter whose outputs are monitored by photomultipliers” (p. 5041).

Such a point of view must be commented.  It is a right prerequisite that the generator
must be unpredictable for particles, but referring to above “physical” generator it is not
clear:  If  particles  have  “consciousness”  such  a  generator  can  also  be  a  “pseudo”  one.
Perhaps a good “human” pseudo-random generator is preferable because it  belongs  to
another civilization.

References

[1] P. G. Kwiat and L. Hardy, “The mystery of the quantum cakes,” Am. J. Phys. 68, 33-36

(2000).

[2]  J.  A.  Wheeler,  “Law  without  law,”  in  Quantum  Theory  and  Experiment,  ed.  by  J.  A.

Wheeler and W. H. Zurek (Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ, 1983) p. 192.

[3] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, “Can quantum-mechanical description of physical

reality be considered complete?” Phys. Rev. 47, 777-780 (1935).

[4]  D.  Bohm,  “A  suggested  interpretation  of  the  quantum  theory  in  terms  of  ‘hidden’

variables,” Phys. Rev. 85, 166-179 (1952).

Nakhmanson     4

[5] J.S.Bell, “On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox,” Physics 1, 195-200 (1964).

[6] S. J. Freedmann and J. F. Clauser, “Experimental test of local hidden-variable theories,”

Phys. Rev. Lett. 28, 938-941 (1972).

[7] A. Aspect, J. Dalibard, and G. Roger, “Experimental test of Bell’s inequalities using time-

varying analyzers,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1804-1807 (1982).

[8] Anaxagoras, Aristoteles, Leibniz, ... See Refs. [9-11] and the literature cited there.

[9]  R.  Nakhmanson,  “Informational  experiments  with  microparticles  and  atoms,”  in  Waves
and  Particles  in  Light  and  Matter,  ed.  by  A.  van  der  Merwe  and  A.  Garuccio  (Plenum
Press, New York, 1994), pp. 571-582.

[10]  R.  Nakhmanson,  “The  ghostly  solution  of  the  quantum  paradoxes  and  its  experimental
verification,”  in  Frontiers  of  Fundamental  Physics,  ed.  by  M.  Barone  and  F.  Selleri
(Plenum Press, New York, 1994), pp. 591-596.

[11]  R.  Nakhmanson,  “Informational  interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics,”  LANL  arXiv,

http://xxx.lanl.gov/pdf/physics/0004047 .

[12] G. Weihs et al., “Violation of Bell’s inequality under strict Einstein locality conditions,”

Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5039-5043 (1998).

Nakhmanson     5

