Combining Research Methods and Results

from Psychology and Physics in the
Investigation of Quantum Mechanics

Douglas M. Snyder

Analysis of modern physical theory indicates that there is a fundamental
link between the observing, thinking  individual  and  the  physical  world  (e.g.,
Epstein,  1945;  Renninger,  1960;  Snyder,  1986,  1992,  1993,  1994,  1995;
Wigner, 1983).  This being the case, both psychological research methodology
and results should be relevant to the exploration of this link.  It is important to
provide  an  example  of  how  psychology  can  add  in  a  unique  way  to  the
exploration  of  the  link  between  cognition  and  the  physical  world  found  in
modern  physical  theory.    A  prototype  for  more  complicated  investigations  is
presented through exploring a question in quantum mechanics.

Gedankenexperiments  are  proposed  that  indicate  that  research  from
psychology is relevant to understanding the relationship between perception and
the physical world in quantum mechanics.  These gedankenexperiments rely on
research in psychology concerning the perceptual and behavioral adaptation of a
human  observer  to  inversion  of  incoming  light.    The  gedankenexperiments
presented  demonstrate  how  the  uncertainty  principle  may  be  affected  by
psychological phenomena.    The  uncertainty  principle  involves  the  inability  in
quantum mechanics to simultaneously measure observable quantities  described
by non-commuting Hermitian operators (e.g.,  the position and momentum of a
particle  along  a  particular  spatial  axis).1    Further,  the  gedankenexperiments
show that it may be possible to know more than one value at a time from a set
of what appear to be mutually exclusive values for a quantity.

research  relevant 

When light is reflected from an object in the world and into the eye, the
structure of the eye is  such  that  the  image  on  the  retina  corresponding  to  the
object is up-down and right-left reversed when compared to the position of the
object  (Dolezal,  1982;  Kandel,  Schwartz,  &  Jessell,  1991).    The  area  of
psychological 
the  proposed  gedankenexperiments
specifically  concerns  the  effect  of  inversion  of  incoming  light  on  visual
experience.  (In the context of this paper, unless more precisely  specified,  the
terms  (cid:210)inversion(cid:211)  and  (cid:210)inverted(cid:211)  will  refer  to  either  rotation  of  the  incoming
                                    
1 Feynman, Leighton, and  Sands’s (1965) implication  that  physical interaction is  responsible
for the constraints of the uncertainty principle is not the case.

to 

- 1 -

Combining Research

light 180o around the line of sight,  or  the  reflection  [or  flipping]  of  incoming
light between the top and lower halves of the visual  field  along  the  horizontal
separating them.)  First,  this research  will  be  reviewed.    Then  the  gedanken-
experiments will be described.

The Effect of Inversion of Incoming Light

on Visual Perception and Visually Guided Behavior

In the late 1800s, Stratton (1896, 1897a, 1897b) investigated the effects
on visual experience of rotating the incoming light 180o around the line of sight
such  that  the  retinal  images  were  right  side  up  instead  of  being  in  their
customary  inverted  orientation.    Stratton(cid:213)s  results  were  remarkable.    In
commenting on the earlier experiment, he wrote:

In  fact,  the  difficulty  of  seeing  things  upright  by  means  of
upright retinal images  seems  to  consist  solely  in  the  resistance
offered by the long-established experience.  There is certainly no
peculiar  inherent  difficulty  arising  from  the  new  conditions
themselves.    If  no  previous  experience  had  been  stored  up  to
stand in opposition to the new perceptions, it would be absurd to
suppose that the visual perceptions in  such  a  case  would  seem
inverted.    Any  visual  field  in  which  the  relations  of  the  seen
parts to  one  another  would  always  correspond  to  the  relations
found by touch and muscular movement would give us (cid:212)upright(cid:213)
vision,  whether the optic image lay upright, inverted, or  at  any
intermediate  angle  whatever  on  the  retina.  (Stratton,  1896,  p.
617)

His  comments  apply  as  well  to  the  results  of  the  second,  more  thorough
experiment.  In his report on the second experiment, he wrote:

The  inverted  position  of  the  retinal  image  is,  therefore,  not
essential to (cid:212)upright vision,(cid:213)  for it is not essential to a harmony
between touch and sight, which, in the final analysis, is the real
meaning  of  upright  vision.    For  some  visual  objects  may  be
inverted  with  respect  to  other  visual  objects,  but  the  whole
system of visual objects can never by itself be either inverted or
upright.    It  could  be  inverted  or  upright  only  with  respect  to
certain non-visual experiences with which I  might  compare  my
visual  system--in  other  words,  with  respect  to  my  tactual  or
motor perceptions. (Stratton, 1897b, pp. 475-476)

- 2 -

Combining Research

Subsequent work by other researchers in which all incoming light  was
rotated  180o  around  the  line  of  sight  (e.g.,  Ewert,  1930;  Snyder  &  Pronko,
1952) or up-down reversed (the top and bottom  halves  of  the  visual  field  are
reversed)  (e.g.,  Dolezal,  1982;  Kohler,  1962,  1964)  has  for  the  most  part
provided substantial support for Stratton(cid:213)s finding concerning the relative nature
of upright vision.  The research indicates that there is a high degree of  flexibility
of the visual system with regard to inversion of incoming visual stimulation on
the retina, including that  an  observer  subject  to  such  reversal  quickly  regains
very significant competency in interacting with the environment.  For example,
Snyder and Pronko (1952) found in their study:

During the 30-day  period  that  the  inverting  lenses  were  worn,
the  visuo-motor  coordinations  were  refashioned  so  that  the
subject  performed  even  better  than  before  the  lenses  were  put
on....Introducing  the  inverted  visual  field  for  30  days  and
subsequent (cid:210)normalization(cid:211) (lenses removed), [sic] modified the
learning  situation.    However,  the  subject  went  on  learning
despite these disrupting factors (p. 116).

In general, visual experience restabilizes quickly considering the relatively very
brief  period  of  time  that  the  light  is  inverted  compared  to  the  subjects(cid:213)  life
experiences  prior  to  their  participation  in  one  of  the  experiments.    Visual
experience regains a sense of normalcy and is accompanied by the coordination
between touch and vision that Stratton  (1897b)  wrote  is  (cid:210)the  real  meaning  of
upright  vision(cid:211)  (p.  497)  (Dolezal,  1982;  Erismann  &  Kohler,  1953,  1958;
Kohler, 1962, 1964; Pronko & Snyder, 1951; Snyder & Pronko, 1952).

As alluded to in the above quote from Snyder and Pronko and as found
by  Ewert  (1930),  in  the  laboratory,  competency  on  sensorimotor  tasks
developed  with  unrotated  light  has  been  shown  to  transfer  to  circumstances
where incoming light is rotated 180o (Snyder & Pronko,  1952).   Furthermore,
increased competency on the same sensorimotor tasks subsequently  developed
with  rotated  light  has  been  shown  to  transfer  to  circumstances  where  the
incoming  light  is  no  longer  rotated  180o  (Ewert,  1930;  Snyder  &  Pronko,
1952).  The learning curve for these tasks was in general fairly smooth,  except
for a spike when the incoming light  was  first  rotated  180o  around  the  line  of
sight.  In natural settings, individuals wearing an optical apparatus that inverted
incoming light have reported such activities as driving an automobile,  riding  a
motorcycle,  or  riding  a  bicycle,  with  a  significant  degree  of  skill  within  a
relatively short time of putting on the apparatus for the first time (Dolezal, 1982;

- 3 -

Combining Research

Erismann & Kohler, 1953, 1958; Kohler,  1962; Snyder & Pronko,  1952).   In
sum, research has indicated that after a relatively brief period of time exposed to
inverted light,  visual  experience  in  general  appears  normal  and  as  this  visual
experience  exists  in  conjunction  with  the  recaptured  competency  of  the
individual in the environment, the visual field is  upright, just as it was upright
before the incoming light was inverted.  The citations to Erismann and Kohler
(1953,  1958)  and  to  Pronko  and  Snyder  (1951)  refer  to  films  that  provide
convincing evidence of both perceptual and  behavioral  adaptation  to  inversion
of incoming light.

In a related study, Brown (1928) wore goggles with prisms that rotated
incoming light 75o around the line of sight for one week,  and he adapted to this
rotation  to  a  significant  degree.    This  adaptation  occurred  even  though  he
described his apparatus as (cid:210)too  unwieldy(cid:211)  (p.  134)  to  wear  every  night  on  a
one-half mile trip to his university where various tests were run.    Other  work
investigating adaptation of the visual system to alterations in incoming light that
did not involve inversion of this light has also indicated a very high degree  of
flexibility  in  the  operation  of  the  visual  system  (e.g.,  Gibson,  1933;  Held,
1965; Held & Freedman, 1963).

Stratton (1899) conducted an experiment in which through the use of a
specific  arrangement  of  mirrors  his  body  image  and  immediate  surroundings
were projected in what without adaptation would be the horizontal direction out
from his body at the  level  just  above  his  shoulders,  his  head  in  the  reflected
image of his body closest to his body and the front of his body facing up.   In
the  very  brief  time  that  Stratton  wore  the  mirror  arrangement,  he  found  that
visual perception and visually guided action showed significant adaptation to the
incoming light.  Stratton wrote:

The whole experience [in this experiment] was thus so similar to
the one with the inverting lenses that I hesitate to present it even
in  this  brief  outline.    But  under  the  circumstances  the  very
similarity  is  a  distinct  addition  to  the  data  from  the  previous
experiment,  since  it  shows  that  the  introduction  of  the  new
factor--that  of  distance--does  not  prevent  an  ultimate  spatial
concord 
and  visual
senses]....The experiment thus suggests that the principle stated
in an earlier paper--that in the end we would  feel  a  thing  to  be
wherever we constantly saw it--can be justified in a wider sense
that I then intended it to be taken. (Stratton, 1899, pp. 497-498)

the  haptic,  kinesthetic, 

[between 

- 4 -

Combining Research

Ewert  (1930)  and  Munn  (1955/1965)  have  disputed  the  finding  that
visual experience becomes upright after experience with rotated incoming light.
It should be noted, though, that the major concern of Ewert and Munn is not so
much the subject(cid:213)s phenomenal experience with rotated light but rather with the
interpretation of what this phenomenal experience means.  For example, Munn
(1955/1965), who was one of Ewert(cid:213)s subjects, wrote:

Localizing reactions became so automatic at times that a (cid:210)feeling
of normalcy(cid:211) was present.  This is probably the feeling reported
by Stratton and interpreted as (cid:210)seeing right-side up.(cid:211) (p. 293)

Or, Ewert concluded that:

In  all  forms  of  activity  where  overt  localizing  responses  are
present  there  is  rapid  adjustment  to  the  distracting  visual
interference  until  at  the  end  of  14  days  of  practice  the
interference  is  entirely  overcome  in  some  of  the  activities
investigated and almost overcome in the other forms....Constant
interference  during  visual  disorientation  does  not  prevent  the
steady growth of a habit. (Ewert, 1930, pp. 353; 357)

Snyder  and  Pronko  (1952)  performed  an  experiment  similar  in  many
respects  to  Ewert(cid:213)s.    Munn  (1955/1965)  wrote  about  Snyder  and  Pronko(cid:213)s
work: (cid:210)The results were essentially like his [Ewert(cid:213)s](cid:211) (p.  294).   In contrast to
Ewert, Snyder and Pronko concluded:

It appears that perceivings form a behavior sequence going back
into  the  individual(cid:213)s  past.    If  the  subject  of  the  present
experiment  had  always  worn  the  inverting  lenses,  his  past
perceivings  would  have  been  of  a  piece  with  those  of  the
moment when the question [(cid:210)Well, how do things look to you?
Are  they  upside-down?(cid:211)  (p.  113)]  was  directed  at  him.
Obviously, then, they would not have been in contrast with the
latter and would not have called attention to themselves.  Stated
in another way, if this subject had somehow developed amnesia
at the point at which he put on the inverting lenses,  then things
could not appear upside-down because there would be no basis
of comparison or contrast.  That they did appear upside-down is
clearly a strict function  of  his  previously  acquired  perceivings.
(pp. 113-114)

- 5 -

Combining Research

In  A  History  of  Experimental  Psychology,  Boring  (1929/1950)  wrote  about
Stratton(cid:213)s work:

In  1896  Stratton  put  the  matter  to  test,  having  his  subjects
[actually only Stratton himself] wear  a  system  of  lenses  which
reversed  the  retinal  image  and  made  it  right  side  up.    The
expected happened.  The perceived  world  looked  upside  down
for  a  time  and  then  became  reversed.    Taking  the  glasses  off
resulted  once  again  in  reversal  which  was  soon  corrected.
Stratton was not,  however,  confused  by  the  homunculus.    He
described  how  up  was  nothing  in  the  visual  sensory  pattern
other than the opposite of down, and that orientation is achieved
by the relation of the visual pattern to somothesis and behavior.
When  you  reach  up  to  get  an  object  imaged  at  the  top  of  the
retina,  then  you  have  indeed  got  the  visual  field  reversed  and
will  not  find  the  object  unless  you  have  on  Stratton(cid:213)s  lenses.
Ewert  repeated  this  experiment  in  1930,  with  similar  results
[italics added]....Had the view of a freely perceiving agent in the
brain not  been  so  strongly  entrenched,  this  problem  could  not
have  continued  to  seem  so  important  in  1604,  1691,  1709,
1838, 1896 and 1930. (p. 678)

Boring  knew  of  Ewert(cid:213)s  work  and  saw  that  the  empirical  results
obtained  by  Ewert  supported  Stratton(cid:213)s  conclusion  even  if  Ewert(cid:213)s  own
conclusion based on the empirical results he found was not in  agreement  with
Stratton(cid:213)s.  Dolezal (1982) wrote concerning the results of his experiment  and
those found in other experiments involving the  inversion  of  incoming  light  to
the observer:

In the course  of  living  in  a  world  transformed,  the  observer(cid:213)s
initial fears become calmed, he or she finds the discomforts quite
tolerable,  the  strange  sights  fade  and  become  common,  and
ineptness changes to competency. (p. 301)

A Biperceptual Capability

Dolezal proposed that the observer who adapts to inversion of incoming
light 
is  biperceptual  and  biperformatory. 
the
simultaneous existence of the visual perceptual capabilities associated with both
pre-inversion and inversion conditions.  These  capabilities  may  be  considered
distinct  reference  frames  for  the  individual  who  has  undergone  inversion  of

  Biperceptual  refers 

to 

- 6 -

Combining Research

incoming light.  Similarly, biperformatory refers to the simultaneous  existence
of an individual(cid:213)s capabilities to act competently in the environment both before
and after inversion of the incoming light.  These capabilities as well are divided
into distinct frameworks for the individual who has experienced and adapted to
this inversion of incoming light.  Dolezal (1982) wrote:

The  adapted  observer  appears  to  differ  from  the  unadapted
observer  in  several  main  respects.    After  some  200  hours  of
living with reversing prisms, an observer once again experiences
visual  stability  of  the  perturbed  environment  [i.e.,  up-down
reversal of incoming light].  This is true for a wide range of rates
of head movements (HMs).  Moreover, the adapted observer has
acquired what  may  be  called  another  (cid:210)personality(cid:211)  (i.e.,  he  or
she  has  the  dual  facility  to  be  perceptually  and  emotionally
comfortable  and  to  act  competently  both  with  and  without
transforming  prisms).    The  adapted  observer  is  thus  a  very
different  creature  from  the  unadapted  observer--somewhat  like
someone with a second language or a novel set of skills that can
only be directly displayed under special circumstances (cf.  state-
dependent learning  and  recall).    The  observer  becomes  what  I
call  biperceptual  and  biperformatory....In  general,  the  adapted
observer is capable of living in both worlds,  under both sets of
information  conditions  and  behavioral 
requirements  with
roughly equal comfort and competence. (p. 297)

Consider the  following  observation  reported  by  the  subject  in  Snyder
and  Pronko(cid:213)s  study,  who  happened  to  be  Snyder,  that  supports  Dolezal(cid:213)s
thesis:

Toward the end of the experiment [i.e.,  the period in which the
subject wore the inverting glasses],  the  subject  was  adequately
adjusted  [adapted]. 
insightful  experience
occurred.    He  was  observing  the  scene  from  a  tall  building.
Suddenly someone asked,  (cid:210)Well,  how  do  things  look  to  you?
Are they upside-down?(cid:211)

  The  following 

The subject replied, (cid:210)I wish you hadn(cid:213)t  asked  me.    Things
were all right until you popped the question at me.  Now,  when
I recall how they did look before I put on  these  lenses,  I  must
answer  that  they  do  look  upside  down  now.    But  until  the

- 7 -

Combining Research

moment that you asked me I was  absolutely  unaware  of  it  and
hadn(cid:213)t given a thought  to  the  question  of  whether  things  were
right-side-up  or  upside-down.(cid:211)  (Snyder  &  Pronko,  1952,
p. 113)

In  a  study  of  retention  of  the  effects  of  such  inversion,  Snyder  and
Snyder (1957) found that when the inverted conditions were reintroduced for a
subject some time after the subject(cid:213)s  initial  experience  with  inverted  light,  the
subject(cid:213)s adjustment the second time to the inverted light indicated that learning
occurred as a result of the first experience and had been retained over a two-year
period between the first and second experiences with inversion of the incoming
light.  Specifically, Snyder and Snyder found that the time to complete various
tasks consistently took less time in the second experience than in the first.   The
learning curves in the first and second experiences were very similar for  each of
the  tasks,  only  in  the  second  exposure  the  times  to  complete  the  tasks  were
consistently lower than the times to complete them in the first exposure.

In his research, Stratton noted how quickly the perceptual framework of
the  subject  exposed  to  inverted  incoming  light  could  switch  between  the
unadapted and the adapted  orientation.    He  also  noted  the  possibility  of  their
coexistence.  For example, on the seventh day of wearing his optical apparatus
in his second experiment with inverted light, Stratton (1897b) wrote:

When  I  watched  one  of  my  limbs  in  motion,  no  involuntary
suggestion arose that it was in any other place or moved in any
other direction than  as  sight  actually  reported  it,  except  that  in
moving my arm a slightly discordant group of  sensations  came
from my unseen shoulder.   If,  while  looking  at  the  member,  I
summoned an image of it in its old position, then I could feel the
limb there too.   But this latter was a relatively weak affair,  and
cost  effort.    When  I  looked  away  from  it,  however,  I
involuntarily felt it in its  pre-experimental  position,  although  at
the  same  time  conscious  of  a  solicitation  to  feel  it  in  its  new
position.  This representation of the moving part in terms of the
new  vision  waxed  and  waned  in  strength,  so  that  it  was
sometimes  more  vivid  than  the  old,  and  sometimes  even
completely overshadowed it. (p. 465)

It is remarkable that the visual system has demonstrated a  great  degree
of  flexibility  in  the  inversion  experiments  given  the  degree  of  artificiality

- 8 -

Combining Research

introduced into the experimental  circumstances  by  the  optical  apparatuses  that
have been used.  For example, in the inverted light experiments, Stratton used a
device that allowed for incoming light to only one eye while the other eye was
covered.  Ewert(cid:213)s device was lightweight but allowed for a limited visual field.
In an attempt to widen the visual field over  that  of  most  other  experiments  in
which  all  incoming  light  is  inverted  for  an  extended  period  of  time,  Dolezal
(1982) built his optical device out of a football helmet and inserted glass prisms
in the limited space usually left open for a  football  player  to  see.    His  device
weighed 8 pounds, 6 ounces.  There is further work to be done  concerning the
effect of inverted light on visual experience and visually guided action.  But the
basic result that there is significant adaptation in visual experience and visually
guided  action  to  inversion  of  incoming  light  has  been  established  (Snyder,
1992, 1993, 1995).

Hard Wiring of the Visual System
and the Isotropy of Space

Originally,  Stratton  was  concerned  with  showing  that  two  theories
concerning  inversion  of  incoming  light  were  incorrect.    Essentially,  these
theories maintained some sort of hard-wiring of either the neural component of
the visual system (the projection theory) or its supporting musculature (the eye
movement theory).  In the projection theory, inversion of the retinal image was
needed because of the crossing of the lines of  direction  of  light  from  external
objects when light from the external world moves through the eye.  Perception
was considered to depend on these lines of direction that projected outward  to
the upright objects in the physical world from which the light rays originated.

The eye movement theory related to the use of the musculature about the
eye to provide definitive information about the correct position of objects in the
world.  Thus, if the eyes move upward in their sockets, they see the upper parts
of  objects  in  the  physical  world,  and  if  the  eyes  move  downward  in  their
sockets, they see the lower part of these objects in the physical world.   In this
process,  though,  movement  of  the  eye  upward,  for  example,  results  in  the
lower portion of the retina receiving more of the incoming light.  Inversion  of
the  incoming  light  would  help  to  correct  this  problem  and  could  provide  the
basis for indicating the upright nature of the physical world.

Many  scholars  have  believed  the  tenet  behind  the  projection  and  eye
movement theories that there is only one way the visual system can function in
order  to  perceive  the  physical  world  as  upright.    This  is  an  assumption  that

- 9 -

Combining Research

Boring (1929/1950) maintained was based on the notion of the homunculus.  It
can be seen in the descriptions of the projection and eye movement theories that
they both have another more basic tenet as an assumption regarding the physical
world.  This assumption is that the physical world itself has an absolute status
regarding its being upright.    For  example,  if  the  physical  world  were  indeed
upside down,  would scholars seriously entertain a theory  of  visual  perception
based  on  the  hard  wiring  of  the  visual  system?    The  assumption  that  the
physical world has  an  absolute  status  regarding  its  being  upright  violates  the
isotropy  of  space  in  that  space  is  not  fundamentally  the  same  in  different
directions.

Manipulating Visual Perception in the
Investigation of a Physical System

How  does  this  adaptability  of  visual  experience  and  visually  guided
behavior to inversion of incoming light help in the analysis of modern physical
theory?    Consider  the  spin  angular  momentum  of  an  electron,  a  quantity
intrinsic  to  the  electron.    (A  classical  analog  to  this  quantity  would  be  the
angular momentum of a spinning top.)   Quantum mechanics  predicts  that  it  is
possible to measure the component of this momentum  along  any  one  of  three
orthogonal  axes,  x,  y,  and  z  (three  spatial  axes  all  at  right  angles  to  one
another).  The spin component  of  the  electron  along  the  z  axis,  or  any  other
spatial axis,  can have one of two values when  measured  (i.e.,  +1/2  h/2p  and
-1/2  h/2p).    Assume  in  an  experiment  that  this  measurement  of  the  electron
occurs in the  following  way.    Through  the  use  of  a  Stern-Gerlach  apparatus
(Eisberg and Resnick, 1974/1985; Liboff, 1993),  a nonuniform magnetic field
oriented along the z axis is placed in the path of the electron.  The value of the
spin  component  of  an  electron  along  the  z  axis  can  be  determined  with  the
Stern-Gerlach apparatus because the electron will take one path in the apparatus
if it has one value and will take another path in the apparatus if it has the other
value.  As an electron exits the apparatus from one of two locations, indicating
which one of two paths  the  electron  took  through  the  apparatus  and  thus  the
value  of  its  spin  component  along  the  axis  of  the  magnetic  field  of  the
apparatus, detectors placed at the exits of the apparatus detect the  electron.    A
human  observer  inspecting  these  detectors  at  the  exits  of  the  Stern-Gerlach
apparatus then can determine which path the electron took and the value  of  its
spin component  along  the  axis  of  the  magnetic  field  of  the  apparatus  and  its
gradient.

- 10 -

Combining Research

Assume  the  z  axis  is  in  the  vertical  direction  relative  to  the  subject,
appearing to go up and down.  The two values of the spin component along the
z    axis  can  be  designated  spin  up  or  spin  down  according  to  the  motion  of
electrons  passing  through  the  Stern-Gerlach  apparatus  relative  to  the  vertical
axis.   Assume that the y   axis runs perpendicular to the ideal plane formed  by
the subject(cid:213)s face and that prior to entering  the  nonuniform  magnetic  field  the
electron is traveling along this axis.   Assume that the  x  axis  runs  horizontally
relative to the subject, from side to side.    The  experimental  circumstances  are
depicted in Figure 31, where + and - refer to the positive and negative directions
along  a  spatial  axis.    According  to  quantum  mechanics,  precise  knowledge
resulting  from  measurement  of  one  of  the  spin  components  means  that
knowledge of each of the other two spin components  is  completely  uncertain.
Precise knowledge of the component along the z  axis,  for example, means that
knowledge of each of the  components  along  the  x  and  y    axes  is  completely
uncertain.

This limitation concerning the knowledge of certain paired quantities in
quantum mechanics also characterizes the simultaneous precise determination of
the  position  and  momentum  of  an  electron  along  a  spatial  axis  (Eisberg  and
Resnick, 1985; Liboff, 1992).  Precise knowledge of the electron(cid:213)s momentum
entails complete uncertainty regarding its position, and precise knowledge of its
position  entails  complete  uncertainty  regarding  its  momentum.    As  Einstein,
Podolsky, and Rosen (1935) wrote:

It  is  shown  in  quantum  mechanics  that,  if  the  operators
corresponding to two physical quantities, say A  and  B,  do  not
commute, that is,  if  AB  „  BA,  then  the  precise  knowledge  of
one  of  them  precludes  such  a  knowledge  of  the  other.
Furthermore, any attempt to  determine  the  latter  experimentally
will alter the state of the system in such a way as to destroy the
knowledge of the first. (p. 778)

Where A and B are the operators  corresponding  to  the  components  of
the  position  and  momentum  of  an  electron,  respectively,  along  a  particular
spatial axis, they do not commute.  Similarly, where A and B are the operators
for  any  two  components  along  orthogonal  spatial  axes  of  the  spin  angular
momentum of an electron, they do not commute.

One can use an apparatus  like  that  developed  by  Stratton  to  rotate  the
incoming light to an experimental subject such that the light is rotated around the

- 11 -

y axis for O

electrons traveling toward
Stern-Gerlach apparatus

-
 

1
2

 
-

z axis
for O

+

direction of magnetic
field and gradient

spin up

detector
detector

spin down

x axis
for O

Observer O

_

Figure 31

Observer O, not wearing the optical apparatus, viewing the spin component along the 
z axis in the spatial structure of O of electrons traveling through a Stern-Gerlach 
apparatus without rotation of the visual field.

C
o
m
b
i
n
i
n
g
R
e
s
e
a
r
c
h

 

Combining Research

y  axis  90o.    Then,  what  was  information  concerning  the  z  axis  is  now
information  concerning  the  x  axis  as  concerns  the  light  impinging  on  the
subject(cid:213)s retina.  Given Stratton(cid:213)s results, there is a good possibility that, after a
period  of  orientation  with  this  apparatus,  particularly  if  it  is  worn  for  an
uninterrupted  period  and  the  subject  is  allowed  to  move  freely  in  the  natural
environment,  the  subject  will  see  the  electron  moving  up  or  down  and  not
sideways.

Indeed,  the  natural  scenarios  tested  by  Stratton  and  others  are  much
more complex than the scenario need be that could be presented to an observer
in a laboratory setting observing the path of an electron along a spatial axis in an
inhomogeneous magnetic field like that created by a Stern-Gerlach apparatus.  It
does appear that adaptation to inverted light depends to a significant degree on a
subject(cid:213)s  experience  in  moving  in  his  or  her  natural  environment  while
incoming  light  is  inverted  by  the  optical  apparatus. 
  Because  of  the
uncomplicated  nature  of  the  adaptation  needed  in  the  proposed  experiment,
though,  the  amount  of  sensorimotor  experience  in  the  natural  environment
required  by  the  subject  for  the  necessary  degree  of  adaptation  of  the  visual
system to occur should not be great.  It should be emphasized that research has
indicated that the shift in the spatial structure  of  the  observer  that  depends  on
sensorimotor  experience  involves  variables  pertaining  to  the  individual,  for
example  the  correspondence  of  kinesthetic  and  haptic  sensation  with  visual
perception  that  develops  over  time.    This  correspondence  among  sensory
modalities is not determined by the object or objects in the physical world that
are perceived.

Once there is a  significant  degree  of  adaptation  in  the  subject(cid:213)s  visual
experience, according to the information impinging on the subject(cid:213)s retina,  the
subject  is  measuring  what  in  the  original  situation  without  rotation  of  the
incoming light is  the  x  axis  (Figure  32).    What  for  observers  in  the  original
situation is up and down along the z axis is for the subject up and down along
the x axis, where the x axis is labeled in terms of the spatial structure associated
with the  observer  who  does  not  wear  the  optical  apparatus.    For  the  subject
wearing the optical apparatus and adapted to the rotated incoming light, the spin
components along the y  and z axes of the spatial structure  associated  with  the
observer who does not wear the optical apparatus are completely uncertain.

It is important to note that for the observer wearing the optical apparatus
and adapted to the rotated light, in his or her shifted spatial structure, the z axis
runs along the vertical or upright direction just as the z axis runs along the

- 13 -

(x axis for O’ in
spatial structure
of O)

z axis for O’

y axis for O and O’

direction of magnetic
field and gradient for O’

-
 

1
4

 
-

electrons traveling toward
Stern-Gerlach apparatus

spin up
for O’

detector

detector

spin down

for O’

+

+

_

+

x axis
for O’

_ _

(z axis for O’ in
spatial structure
of O)
optical
apparatus

_

+

Observer O’

C
o
m
b
i
n
i
n
g
R
e
s
e
a
r
c
h

 

Figure 32

Observer O’, adapted to wearing the optical apparatus, viewing the spin component along the z 
axis in the spatial structure of O’ of electrons traveling through a Stern-Gerlach apparatus with 
90 degree rotation of the visual field, in terms of the spatial structure of O, around the y axis.  (x 
and z axes for O’ in spatial structure of O, who does not wear the optical apparatus, are shown.)

Combining Research

vertical  or  upright  direction  for  the  observer  who  does  not  wear  the  optical
apparatus.  The observer adapted to the incoming light and wearing the optical
apparatus measures the  spin  component  in  his  or  her  shifted  spatial  structure
along the z axis,  just as the observer who does not wear the  optical  apparatus
measures the spin component along the z axis in his or her spatial structure.

It  appears  possible  to  know  the  precise  values  for  two  components
along orthogonal axes of the spin angular momentum of an electron at the same
time for a particular spatial structure, where one takes into  account  one  of  the
orthogonal  axes  as  it  is  perceived  by  an  observer  using  a  different  spatial
structure.  The key to this gedankenexperiment is that a basic shift has occurred
in  the  spatial  structure  for  the  observer  who  wears  the  optical  apparatus  and
adapts to the rotated incoming light.  This shifted spatial structure has the same
significance for this observer as the spatial structure of the observer who does
not  wear  the  optical  apparatus  has  for  this  latter  observer.    This  basic
gedankenexperiment shows  in  a  particular  instance  that  it  is  possible  that  the
uncertainty principle is conditioned by a link between the spatial structure of an
observer in the physical world and the orientation of incoming light relative  to
the  observer.    Of  particular  importance  is  the  evidence  that  there  are  factors
specific to the observer in the development of an individual(cid:213)s spatial structure.

Evidence supporting a biperceptual  character  of  visual  perception  after
adaptation  to  inversion  of  incoming  light  has  been  noted.    This  biperceptual
character of visual perception concerns the simultaneous existence of the distinct
visual  perceptual  capabilities  associated  with  both  pre-inversion  and  post-
inversion  conditions.    It  may  be  possible  for  one  subject  in  the  experiment
outlined above involving spin angular momentum components along orthogonal
spatial  axes  to  be  involved  in  mutually  exclusive  situations  simultaneously
concerning  the  same  concrete  physical  circumstances.    That  is,  the  adapted
subject  may  be  able  to  instantly  shift  from  being  involved  in  one  of  the
experimental scenarios to the other.

A 180o Rotation

There  is  another  circumstance  besides  that  already  discussed  that  is
perhaps even more surprising.   Consider that an optical apparatus is  used  that
rotates incoming light 180o around the line of sight (Figure 33).  For the subject
wearing the apparatus but not yet adapted, the negative direction of the z axis is
associated with spin up and the positive direction of the z axis is associated with
spin  down.    Once  a  significant  degree  of  adaptation  in  the  subject(cid:213)s  visual

- 15 -

Combining Research

experience occurs, when the subject observes that an electron has spin up in the
positive direction of the z axis, according to the information  impinging  on  the
subject(cid:213)s retina the subject is measuring what  in  the  original  situation  without
rotation of the incoming light is spin up in the negative direction of the z axis.
Similarly,  when  the  subject  observes  that  an  electron  has  spin  down  in  the
negative direction of the z axis,  according to the information impinging on  the
subject(cid:213)s retina the subject is measuring what  in  the  original  situation  without
rotation of the incoming light is spin down in the positive direction of the z axis.

If 

in 

terms  of 

this  result 

is  considered 

the  Schr(cid:154)dinger  cat
gedankenexperiment (Schr(cid:154)dinger, 1935/1983), it is as if in  one situation, one
atom of the radioactive material decayed leading to  the  cat(cid:213)s  being  dead  when
observed.    Simultaneously,  in  the  other  situation,  none  of  the  radioactive
material decayed, leading to the cat being alive when observed.    One  situation
involves  the  observer  who  has  not  worn  the  optical  device  and  who  is  not
wearing the device when he or she observes the electron.   The  other  situation
involves the observer who is wearing the apparatus when observing the electron
and who has adapted to the rotated visual field.  In contrast to the Schr(cid:154)dinger
cat gedankenexperiment, each observer(cid:213)s perception is similar in structure.  But
while the effect of the rotation of incoming light for a subject is mitigated upon
adaptation, the historical physical event of the rotation of the incoming light due
to the optical apparatus remains for the observer wearing the device and acts to
distinguish the two situations of the observers.

Practically  speaking,  the  (cid:210)righting(cid:211)  of  the  visual  field  for  the  adapted
subject means that the electron with spin up in the original spatial structure now
has spin down in the original spatial structure even though the electron has spin
up in the spatial structure of the adapted observer.   For the subject wearing the
optical apparatus but who has not adapted to the inversion of incoming light, the
spatial structure of the world is the same as that for the  subject  who  does  not
wear the optical apparatus and for whom light is not inverted.  The  unadapted
subject  knows  that  his  visual  experience  is  altered  by  wearing  the  optical
apparatus but that the world itself remains unchanged.  The  unadapted  subject
knows that the spin component of the electron is up,  that is up for an observer
not  wearing  the  optical  apparatus,  though  it  appears  to  be  down  to  him,
opposite  to  the  direction  found  by  an  observer  not  wearing  the  optical
apparatus.

But with adaptation to  inverted  incoming  light,  including  the  sense  of
normalcy in visual experience and competency in visually guided action that

- 16 -

z axis for O’

y axis for O and O’

electrons traveling toward
Stern-Gerlach apparatus

-
 

1
7

 
-

direction of magnetic
field and gradient for O’

Figure 33

spin up
for O’

detector
detector

spin down

for O’

_

+

_

+

x axis
for O’

_

+

(z axis for O’ in
spatial structure
of O)

Observer O’, adapted to wearing the optical apparatus, viewing the spin 
component along the z axis in the spatial structure of O’ of electrons traveling 
through a Stern-Gerlach apparatus with 180 degree rotation of incoming light, 
in terms of the spatial structure of O, around the y axis.  (x and z axes for O’ in 
spatial structure of O, who does not wear the optical apparatus, are shown.)

(x axis for O’ in
spatial structure
of O)
optical
apparatus

+

_

Observer O’

C
o
m
b
i
n
i
n
g
R
e
s
e
a
r
c
h

 

Combining Research

supports this sense of normalcy, what appears as a spin up component for the
electron to the adapted observer is a spin down component when considered in
terms  of  the  original  spatial  structure,  the  spatial  structure  of  the  subject  for
whom  incoming  light  is  not  inverted.    Unlike  the  unadapted  observer,  the
adapted observer does not maintain that the world is unchanged while his visual
experience  has  been  altered  by  inverting  incoming  light  with  the  use  of  the
optical apparatus.  The adapted observer experiences the (cid:210)real(cid:211) direction of the
spin  component  opposite  to  that  experienced  by  the  unadapted  observer.    In
terms of the impact of incoming light on his retina, the  adapted  observer  who
observes a spin  up  component  experiences  a  spin  component  in  the  opposite
direction to that which the same pattern of light on  the  retina  supports  for  the
unadapted observer (Snyder, 1995).

A Possible Objection

One might object to this conclusion regarding the (cid:210)righting(cid:211) of the visual
field for the adapted subject in the following way.  The artificial reorientation of
the incoming light does not prevent tracing back light impacting the retina to the
physical existent that is the source of the light so that the actual spin component
of the electron along a particular axis in space and the visual perceptions of the
electron(cid:213)s  spin  component  in  space  by  the  observer  for  whom  light  is  not
inverted, or otherwise rotated, and by the individual  adapted  to  the  incoming,
altered light are all in agreement.  That is,  both observers correctly deduce  the
spin component of the electron because they correctly perceive the motion of the
electron in space along the  spatial  axis  along  which  it  is  traveling.    Then  the
visual system could be said to simply adapt to the artificial change in incoming
light but that the internal sensory coordination by the observer ultimately reflects
the absolute positioning of the electron(cid:213)s motion in space as  it  moves  through
the Stern-Gerlach device.

But, consider that instead of using an external optical system to alter the
orientation  of  incoming  light,  another  method  is  used  in  the  gedanken-
experiment to change the orientation of  light  on  the  retina.    Consider  that  the
retinas of an observer with their supporting physiological structures in the eye,
in particular the optic nerve, are rotated 180o.  In  this  arrangement,  an  optical
apparatus external to  the  visual  system  is  no  longer  used.    (Both  procedures
accomplish the same goal, rotation of incoming light 180o on the retina.)   The
results,  though,  of  using  either  the  external  optical  system  or  reorienting  the
retinas themselves should be the same.  The human subject whose retinas have
been reoriented should with adaptation see the  world  upright  even  though  the

- 18 -

Combining Research

incoming light falls on the retinas in the opposite manner to that found for  the
observer whose retinas have not been reoriented, where space is considered in
terms of the spatial structure of this latter observer.   By reorienting the  retinas
themselves, one can no longer reasonably subscribe to the thesis that the visual
system  is  simply  accounting  for  the  artificial  nature  of  the  external  optical
apparatus  in  order  to  correctly  ascertain  the  absolute  positioning  of  the
electron(cid:213)s  motion  in  space.    Here,  no  extra  instrument  is  added.    Only  the
orientation of the incoming light relative to the retina has been changed.

Summary of the Results

of the Gedankenexperiments

Psychology  can  add  in  a  unique  way  to  the  exploration  of  the  link
between  cognition  and  the  physical  world  found  in  modern  physical  theory.
Developing an example of an experiment that combines methodology from both
psychology  and  physics  has  provided  an  interesting  result.    The  gedanken-
experiments presented have indicated the importance  of  an  individual(cid:213)s  spatial
structure in measurement in quantum mechanics.  Two fundamental features of
quantum mechanics are:

1)

2)

quantities 
operators cannot be simultaneously known;

represented  by  non-commuting  Hermitian

only one value from a set of mutually exclusive values for
a quantity can be known at a time.

The gedankenexperiments indicate that both of these features are conditioned by
a link between the spatial structure of an observer in the physical world and the
orientation of incoming light  relative  to  the  observer.    An  individual(cid:213)s  spatial
structure  itself  is  dependent  on  variables  pertaining  to  the  observer,  for
example,  the  correspondence  of  the  haptic,  kinesthetic,  and  visual  senses.
Within a particular spatial structure, the  two  fundamental  features  of  quantum
mechanics  are  correct.    Yet,  when  different  spatial  structures  of  different
observers, or different spatial structures of the same individual who is adapted
to wearing the optical apparatus, are compared, it is likely that these features can
be modified.  Instead, in these latter circumstances, it is possible that:

1)

quantities 
operators  can  be  simultaneously  known  when 
quantities are considered in different spatial structures;

represented  by  non-commuting  Hermitian
these

- 19 -

Combining Research

2) more  than  one  value  for  a  quantity  from  a  set  of  what
would be in one spatial structure mutually exclusive values
can be known at a time.

The model for developing the gedankenexperiments presented  is  based
on adjusting  the  observer  variables  affecting  the  act  of  perception.    The  data
obtained  in  the  measurement  process  concern  quantities  of  the  measured
physical  system,  and  the  expected  empirical  results  are  those  predicted  in
quantum  mechanics.    This  model  contrasts  with  most  research  in  quantum
mechanics  in  which  the  focus  is  on  adjusting  variables  directly  affecting  the
physical system measured or a physical apparatus directly acting as a measuring
instrument.

References

Boring, E. G. (1950). A history of experimental psychology (2nd ed.). New York: Appleton-

Century-Crofts. (Original work published 1929)

Brown, G. G. (1928). Perception of depth with disoriented vision. The British Journal of

Psychology - General Section, 19, 117-146.

Cooper, L. A. (1975). Mental rotation of random two-dimensional shapes. Cognitive

Psychology, 7, 20-43.

Cooper, L. A. (1976). Demonstration of a mental analog of an external rotation. Perception &

Psychophysics, 19, 296-302.

Cooper, L. A., and Podgorny, P. (1976). Mental transformations and visual comparison

processes. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 2,
503-514.

Cooper, L. A., and Shepard, R. N. (1984). Turning something over in the mind. Scientific

American, 251(6), 106-114.

Dolezal, H. (1982). Living in a world transformed. New York: Academic Press.
Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., and Rosen, N. (1935). Can quantum-mechanical description of

physical reality be considered complete? Physical Review, 47, 777-780.

Eisberg, R., and Resnick, R. (1985). Quantum physics of atoms, molecules, solids, nuclei

and particles (2nd ed.). New York: Wiley. (Original work published 1974)

Epstein, P. (1945). The reality problem in quantum mechanics. American Journal of Physics,

13, 127-136.

Erismann, T., and Kohler, I. (1953). Upright vision through inverting spectacles [Film].

University Park, Pennsylvania: PCR: Films and Video in the Behavioral Sciences.
Erismann, T., and Kohler, I. (1958). Living in a reversed world [Film]. University Park,

Pennsylvania: PCR: Films and Video in the Behavioral Sciences.

Ewert, P. W. (1930). A study of the effect of inverted retinal stimulation upon spatially

coordinated behavior. Genetic Psychology Monographs: Child Behavior, Animal
Behavior, and Comparative Psychology, 7, 177-363.

- 20 -

Combining Research

Feynman, P. R., Leighton, R. B., and Sands, M. (1965). The Feynman lectures on physics:

Quantum mechanics (Vol. 3). Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley.

Georgopoulos, A. P., Lurito, J. T., Petrides, M., Schwartz, A. B., and Massey J. T. (1989).

Mental rotation of the neuronal population vector. Science, 243, 234-236.

Gibson, J. J. (1933). Adaptation, after-effect and contrast in the perception of curved lines.

Journal of Experimental Psychology, 16, 1-31.

Goswami, A. (1989). The idealistic interpretation of quantum mechanics. Physics Essays, 2,

385-400.

Held, R. (1965). Plasticity in sensory-motor systems. Scientific American, 213(5), 84-94.
Held, R., and Freedman, S. J. (1963). Plasticity in human sensorimotor control. Science,

142, 455-462.

Kandel, E. R., Schwartz, J. H., and Jessell, T. M. (1991). Principles of neural science

(3rd edition). New York: Elsevier.

Kohler, I. (1962). Experiments with goggles. Scientific American, 206(5), 62-72.
Kohler, I. (1964). The formation and transformation of the perceptual world (H. Fiss, Trans.).

Psychological Issues, 3, 19-133 and 165-173.

Liboff, R. (1993). Introductory Quantum Mechanics (2nd ed.). Reading, Massachusetts:

Addison-Wesley.

Lurito, J. T., Georgakopoulos, T., and Georgopoulos, A. P. (1991). Cognitive spatial-motor
processes: 7. The making of movements at an angle from a stimulus direction: Studies of
motor cortical activity at the single cell and population levels. Experimental Brain
Research, 87, 562-580.

Munn, N. L. (1965). The evolution and growth of human behavior (2nd edition). Boston:

Houghton Mifflin. (Original work published 1955)

Pellizzer, G., and Georgopoulos, A. P. (1993). Mental rotation of the intended direction of

movement. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 2, 12-17.

Pronko, N. H., and Snyder, F. W. (1951). Vision with spatial inversion [Film]. University

Park, Pennsylvania: PCR: Films and Video in the Behavioral Sciences.

Renninger, M. (1960). Messungen ohne St(cid:154)rung des Me§objekts [Observations without

disturbing the object]. Zeitschrift f(cid:159)r Physik, 158, 417-421.

Schr(cid:154)dinger, E. (1983). The present situation in quantum mechanics. In J. A. Wheeler and W.

H. Zurek, Quantum theory and measurement (pp. 152-167) (J. Trimmer, Trans.).
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. (Original work published 1935)

Shepard, R. N., and Metzler, J. (1971). Mental rotation of three-dimensional objects. Science,

171, 701-703.

Snyder, D. M. (1986). Light as an expression of mental activity. The Journal of Mind and

Behavior, 7, 567-584.

Snyder, D. M. (1989). The inclusion in modern physical theory of a link between cognitive-

interpretive activity and the structure and course of the physical world. The Journal of
Mind and Behavior, 10, 153-172.

Snyder, D. M. (1990). On the relation between psychology and physics. The Journal of Mind

and Behavior, 11, 1-17.

- 21 -

Combining Research

Snyder, D. M. (1992). Quantum mechanics and the involvement of mind in the physical

world: A response to Garrison. The Journal of Mind and Behavior, 13, 247-257.

Snyder, D. M. (1993). Quantum mechanics is probabilistic in nature. The Journal of Mind

and Behavior, 14, 145-153.

Snyder, D. M. (1994). On the arbitrary choice regarding which inertial reference frame is

(cid:210)stationary(cid:211) and which is (cid:210)moving(cid:211) in the special theory of relativity. Physics Essays, 7,
297-334.

Snyder, D. M. (1995). On the quantum mechanical wave function as a link between cognition

and the physical world: A role for psychology. The Journal of Mind and Behavior, 16,
151-179.

Snyder, F. W., and Pronko, N. H. (1952). Vision with spatial inversion. Witchita, Kansas:

University of Witchita Press.

Snyder, F. W., and Snyder, C. W. (1957). Vision with spatial inversion: A follow-up study.

The Psychological Record, 7, 21-30.

Stratton, G. M. (1896). Some preliminary experiments on vision without inversion of the

retinal image. The Psychological Review, 3, 611-617.

Stratton, G. M. (1897a). Vision without inversion of the retinal image - 1. The Psychological

Review, 4, 341-360.

Stratton, G. M. (1897b). Vision without inversion of the retinal image - 2. The

Psychological Review, 4, 463-481.

Stratton, G. M. (1899). The spatial harmony of touch and sight. Mind: A Quarterly Review,

8, 492-505.

Wigner, E. (1983). Remarks on the mind-body question. In J. A. Wheeler and W. H. Zurek,

Quantum theory and measurement (pp. 168-181). Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton
University Press. (Original work published 1961)

- 22 -

