A new Loan – Stock Financial Instrument

Alexander Morozovsky1,2

Bridge, 57/58 Floors, 2 World Trade Center,

New York, NY 10048

E-mail: alex@nyc.bridge.com

Phone: (212) 390-6126
Fax: (212) 390-6498

Rajan Narasimhan,

Overture Computing Corp. Ste 203

Jersey City, NJ 07302

E-mail: rajan@overture-computing.com

Phone: (201) 332 0700

Yuri Kholodenko,

Department of Chemistry,
University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104 - 6323
E-mail: kholoden@sas.upenn.edu

Phone: (215) 898 - 7149

Abstract.

A new financial instrument (a new kind of a loan) is introduced.  The
loan-stock instrument (LSI) combines fixed rate instruments (loans, etc.) with other
financial instruments that have higher volatilities and returns (stocks, mutual funds,
currencies, derivatives, options, etc.). This new loan depends on the value of underlying
security (for example, stock) in such a way that when underlying security increases, the
value of loan decreases and backwards. The procedure to create a risk free portfolio and a
technique to fairly price the LSI is described. The philosophy behind this procedure is
quite similar to the Black-Scholes formalism in option theory. Creation of the risk free
portfolio is possible because the change in the underlying security offsets the change in
the value of the loan (or the amount that the borrower has to repay). The new financial
instrument takes an advantage of the fact that on average the stock market grows in time.
It is beneficial for both the borrower and the lender. The LSI is more attractive for the
borrower than the traditional loan is due to the decrease in the amount that has to be
repaid. This attractiveness constitutes the benefit for the lender in terms of the market
share among the borrowers. In addition, the lender can charge the extra premium.
                                                
1 The ideas expressed in this article are the author’s only and do not necessarily correspond to the views of
Bridge, Overture Computing Corp., or University of Pennsylvania.
2 Some material discussed in this article is protected by a pending patent, Serial number: 60/178,940, Filing
date: 02-01-2000.

Introduction.

There are many different financial instruments today that are used for different
purposes.  Stocks and bonds allow one to invest one’s capital and get a return on one’s
investment.  Loans allow a person to borrow capital for a cost (interest).

The idea behind a bond is that it is a way for an investor to earn an interest on an

investment for a certain period of time. The idea behind loans is opposite to that of bonds.
Loans allow a person to borrow money for a fixed period of time.  After/during that
period of time the borrower must return the entire borrowed amount (plus accumulated
interest).

Many calculations in the financial industry are done with, what is known as, the
risk free interest rates. For example, the price of treasury bills or bonds is calculated on
the base of risk free interest rates.

In stocks, unlike bonds, an investor gets a bigger return.  These returns come in
the form of dividends or appreciation in the value of the stock. Higher returns however
come with a price: investment in stocks is characterized by higher risk

Overview of the idea.

In this communication we suggest a new financial instrument that leverages the

higher returns possible with stocks, or stock-like instruments, to create a loan-like
instrument that is beneficial for both lenders and borrowers. The lenders benefit from
higher returns that are not accompanied by increased risk. The borrowers enjoy a lower
cost of the loan that, however, might be associated with increased risk.

We conceive the simplest form of the new financial instrument as follows.  A

lender (for example a bank) will give a borrower a certain amount in cash.  At the same
time the lender will also buy a certain amount of stock or stock-like security (for example
a mutual fund). When the value of the underlying security increases the amount that the
borrower has to repay correspondingly (see below) decreases compared to the amount to
be repaid when a traditional loan is employed.  And vice versa, when the value of the
underlying security decreases the amount that the borrower has to repay correspondingly
increases.  The borrower will make periodic payments that will depend on the loan
amount and the value of the underlying stock. On average the stock market always seems
to go up. Therefore, according to the described idea, the borrower will have to repay less
than he/she would in a traditional loan situation. Thus the financial benefit of this new
loan strategy for the borrower is obvious (at least on average). The financial benefit to the
lender could come from an additional premium that the lender can charge from the
borrower. The borrower's willingness to pay such an additional premium is due to the
reduced repayment amount as described above. At the same time as we show below, the
lender's market risk (risk of losing capital) could still be minimal and independent of the
underlying security value. This is achieved by constructing a risk free portfolio that
consists of the loan and the proper amount of the underlying security. It is important to
understand that financial benefits of both the lender and the borrower come from an
additional investment in a stock market that is associated with a particular loan and from
the lender's ability to construct the risk free portfolio by properly balancing the relative

2

amounts of the loan and the underling security. The situation is quite similar to the
situation that arises when a risk free portfolio (that consists of an option and an
underlying security) is created in option theory. We notice that financial instruments that
could be used as the underlying security include, but are not limited to, stocks, generic
mutual funds, mutual funds based on stock indices such as DJIA, currencies, different
kind of derivatives, like futures, forwards and different kind of options, etc. The pricing
model outlined below is equally applicable to all these cases.

The new LSI can be viewed as the instrument in which the lender invests in the
stock market on behalf of the borrower. If so, one can ask, why wouldn’t the borrower
invest for himself? The answer is very simple. The borrower does not have money to do
so. To have money invested for him, the borrower has to pay to the lender in the form of
an additional premium to the lender. We will return to the question of this additional
premium below.

This new loan-stock instrument (LSI) must have the following properties in order to

exist and be marketable:

1.  The  amount  of  debt  should  decrease  with  time  faster  than  it  would  when  a
traditional loan is employed.  If not, the customers will not be interested in the
LSI.

2.  The value of the LSI should depend on the value of the underlying security.
3.  One should be able to create a risk-neutral portfolio on the basis of this LSI in

order to price it (introduced security).

In the most common model (absence of transaction costs, frictionless market, and so on)
[1,2], the stock dynamic consists of two parts:

      

=dS

  Sdt σ
µ +

Sdz

 

                                                            (1)

Here S is the asset price. The first term describes predictable or deterministic return with
µ being a measure of the average rate of growth of the asset price and dt is a small time
interval.  The  second  contribution  (σSdz)  reflects  the  random  change  in  the  asset  price
with volatility σ and dz is a Wiener process. We intend to construct now the risk-neutral
portfolio in such a way that it will not be affected by the stock value changes.
The portfolio will consists of the loan P and a number of -∆ of the underlying security:

L = P - ∆S

    (2)

The number ∆ has yet to be determined. This step is quite similar to construction of the
portfolio from an option and some amount of the underlying security in option theory.
Following  the  usual  derivation  of  the  Black  –  Scholes  formula  [1,2]  one  immediately
could obtain:

∂
P
∂
t

+

rS

∂
P
∂
S

+

1 σ
2

22
S

2

∂
P
∂
2
S

=

rP

                                             (3)

3

=
where r is the risk free interest rate.  S represents an underlying security with a standard
deviation σ.  Here P is a function of S and t. Black and Scholes solved this equation for
European put and call options.  However this equation could be applied for any other
security.

The solution for calculation of Loan-Stock instrument.

The value of the LSI introduced above depends on the value of the underlying

security. As we have already mentioned the amount to be repaid by the borrower
decreases when the value of the underlying security increases and vice versa. Different
functional forms of such dependence that would satisfy the Black – Scholes equation (3)
can be considered. For example, the value of the loan can be expressed as:

tSP
),(

=

StAq
)(

β−

    (4)

Here A is a constant that represents the value of the loan when S = 1. The term q(t) is
calculated assuming arbitrage-free market conditions. The parameter β (the loan-stock
correlation parameter) determines how sensitive the loan is to the changes of the
underlying security value (SRI).  For example, if β = 0.05, changes in S will affect P less
than they would when β = 0.5. In the limit β = 0 the LSI reduces to a traditional loan that
is not coupled to any underlying security.

One way to calculate q(t) would be to assume that the underlying security could be
modeled by a Wiener process. Substitution of P(S,t) from (4) into the Black – Scholes
equation (3) immediately leads to the differential equation for q(t). The solution of the
equation is straightforward and the result is:

tq
)(

=

e

−

(

r

1
2

ββσ

2

(

++
)1

β
r
)

t

tq
(

0

)

    (5)

Note that in the limit of β = 0 the increase in the loan value follows ert, as it is

expected for the traditional loan. For the newly introduced LSI however the correlation
parameter β has to be chosen in accordance with the desired strength of the connection
between the loan value and the value of the underlying security. For example, the lender
might want to have the value of the loan to decrease 10 % in response to a 100% increase
in the value of the underlying security. It directly follows from (4) that the value of β =
log2(1/0.9) = 0.152 would satisfy this condition. A prime concern of the borrower,
however, is how fast (on average) the loan value would decrease. Under the
circumstances, the answer of course depends on the parameters of the underlying security
dynamics. As we have noticed above (see (1)), the deterministic part of the return for the
asset S that has an expected return µ
=is described by µdt. Therefore, the average growth
of S over time follows the simple rule:   

)( =
tS

µ
teS
0

                  (6)

4

It follows that on average it would take as long as τ = ln2/µ to have S increased 100%
(that is twice).

In complete analogy with the option theory it follows from the above

consideration that the amount of the underlying security (∆) necessary to create a risk free
portfolio is given by the rate of change of the loan value in respect to S:

∂=∆
P
∂
S

,

      (7)

P S t
( , )

Taking into account the connection between P(S,t) and S (formula (4)) this yields
β∆ = −
S
security amounts to |∆|
asset price S can, as always, be modeled by the Poisson distribution or any other
stochastic model.

. The additional investment required to buy ∆ shares of the underlying
=P. We notice that in all the formulas above the underlying

=S = β

We also notice that (4) is not the unique solution to the Black-Scholes equation

(3). Other functional forms of the loan value dependence on the underlying security value
are possible. These other loan-security combinations will also behave as a new financial
instrument (LSI) described above. One additional example of the possible correlation
between the values of the loan and the underlying security is given by:

tSP
),(

=

StA
)(

m

−

StB
)(

n

     (8)

Any such solution (including (4) and (8)) can be used to fairly price the LSI. However,
the first suggested solution (4) is the simplest solution for the Black-Scholes equation (3)
that describes the proposed instrument.

A description of new security and relationship between suggested and existing

instruments.

Above we have introduced and described the new loan - stock financial instrument (LSI).
Contrary to the traditional loan, the value of the LSI is coupled to (and therefore depends
on) the value of an underlying stock (SRI). A borrower borrows from a lender a given
loan amount, based on the terms and conditions of the LSI.  The borrower then makes
periodic payments based on the value of the underlying SRI and the amount borrowed.
The lenders may choose to further insure themselves against possible default of the
periodic payments or the loan amount by asking the borrowers to get an insurance policy,
or getting one themselves. Given the loan amount L and a SRI of value S one can create
the LSI using any solution to the equation (3) that acts like the new financial instrument
just described.

The LSI is a kind of a negative security that behaves like a SRI but has a negative
value.  Table 1 shows a simplified relationship between loans, bonds (FRI), SRIs (stocks)
and their possible applications.

5

Table 1:

Positive Security

Investment decisions made
on the basis of interest rate
Treasury Bonds, Corporate

Bonds, bill etc.

FRI

Investment decisions are

made on the basis of

expected return, volatility
Individual Stocks, Stock

Funds, Options, etc

SRI

Negative Security

Loans

New Financial Instrument

LSI

Illustrative Example.

In this section we provide a reader with an example that illustrates the idea of the new
loan instrument (LSI). The parameters of the problem are assumed to be as follows:

1)  The borrower requires a loan amount of $100,000.
2)  β = 0.347.
3)  µ = 0.2 (A historical expected return of the SRI is20%).
4)  r = 0.1 (Risk free interest rate  is10%).
5)  σ = 0.1 (Historical Variance of the SRI).

For simplicity we also assume that the borrower does not make any periodic payments.
The results of the calculations are shown in Table 2. As usual, the amount owed when
traditional loan is employed follows ert. The amount owed with the LSI is calculated
based on the formulas (4) and (5). In agreement with the conditions of the example the
combination of normalization parameters (A, q(t0), S0) is chosen to satisfy the initial
condition for P(S,t) to be $100,000 on the beginning date of the loan. The underlying
security dynamic is assumed to be described by formula (6). (This of course is true only
on average. In reality the stock value is a subject to stochastic fluctuations). Finally, the
value of the stock part (column four in Table 2) is simply S-β.

It also shows how much SRI the bank needs to hold to break even, i.e. to make the

same amount of money that the bank would make if it held a risk free FRI for an amount
equal to the sum of the loan amount and the value of the SRI.

6

Table 2.
Years

The amount owed with a
traditional loan(FRI), $

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

100000
110517.09
122140.28
134985.88
149182.47
164872.13
182211.88
201375.27
222554.09
245960.31
271828.18

The amount owed with the
(LSI),$  (Subject to
statistical fluctuations).

100000
106498.74
113419.81
120790.67
128640.54
137000.55
145903.86
155385.77
165483.89
176238.25
187691.51

Value of stock part

1.00
0.93
0.87
0.81
0.76
0.71
0.66
0.62
0.57
0.54
0.50

Under the assumption of the continuous re-balancing of the number of shares, the

amount of money that the bank has (without additional premium) will be exactly the
same as the growth of a normal fixed rate loan. This is due to the fact that the change in
the underlying security will offset the change in the value of the new loan security (or the
amount that the borrower has to repay).  This means that if the underlying security price
increases, the value of the new loan-security will decrease in such a way that the sum of
the two amounts will grow exponentially in time with the same rate as the fixed rate loan
would.  The opposite is also true.  If the stock price decreases then the value of the new
loan-security will increase in such a way that the sum will again grow in exactly the same
way as the traditional fixed rate loan would.

However, a strategy for the bank to earn some additional return has to be

specified. The lender proceeds as follows:

1.  At the time when the loan is initiated the lender also buys some units of SRI’s (for

example, shares of stock). The number of shares is determined from the formula (7).
With the parameters described above and assuming the price of a share of the
underlying stock to be just $1.00 one gets ∆ = 34700 with an additional investment of
$34,700.00.

2.  The lender periodically changes the number of shares depending on the value of the
SRI.   For example, the lender might want to recalculate the number of shares held
(and therefore buy or sell some shares of stock) at the end of a certain period of time
(a year for example) based on the value of the underlying stock at that time.

3.  Based on the financial benefits of the new instrument for the borrower (Table 2), the
lender can afford to charge an additional premium from the borrower. Of course the
amount of the premium could not exceed the financial benefit that the borrower
obtains in the LSI comparing with the traditional loan. For example, for the
parameters described above, the additional premium is associated with the additional
investment of $34,700.00 at the beginning of the loan.  We stress however that both
the amount of the loan ($100,000) and the amount of the additional investment
($34,700.00) keep accumulating interest with the fixed rate (r = 0.1 in our example).

7

Therefore, in addition to the competitive attractiveness of the LSI for the borrower
this additional premium constitutes the financial benefit for the lender (as compared
to the traditional loan).

This consideration is illustrated in Table 3.   The third column lists the number of

shares to be bought by the lender to balance its portfolio. (We again assumed that the
underlying security dynamics is described by (6). In reality this assumption is true only
on average). Maximum possible premium for the lender (i.e. the financial benefit of the
borrower that is equal to the difference between the amounts that have to be repaid by
him in a traditional loan and in the LSI) is enlisted in the fourth column.

Table 3
Years

Growth of the money
owed to the bank(FRI)

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

100000
110517.09
122140.28
134985.88
149182.47
164872.13
182211.88
201375.27
222554.09
245960.31
271828.18

Number of stock shares if
price of one share = 1 at
the beginning of the loan.

34700
30256.25
26381.57
23003.09
20057.27
17488.69
15249.05
13296.23
11593.49
10108.80
8814.25

Additional possible
maximal return for the
bank

0.00
4018.35
8720.46
14195.21
20541.93
27871.57
36308.02
45989.50
57070.21
69722.06
84136.67

Possible Disadvantages.

Although the new financial instrument presents several advantages (described

above) over the traditional loans widely used today; there are certain disadvantages
associated with the LSI that should be mentioned.

Borrower’s disadvantage: the borrower is now exposed to the market risk for the

amount invested in the stocks.

Lender’s disadvantage: default risk for the lender increases.  If the stock value
decreases, the possibility that the borrower may default increases.  However since on
average the stock market goes up, this risk decreases with time.  The bank can further
insure against default risk by charging a premium (as described above) or requiring the
borrower to take an insurance policy against such an event.

8

A new kind of bond created by combining the LSI and SRI.

As was shown above, the LSI grows in time with the fixed interest rate r. Therefore a
new kind of bond can be created that combines the LSI (loan-like instrument) and SRI
(stock or stock-like instrument). This new bond portfolio could be packaged and sold to
interested 3rd parties.

Conclusion.

We have described a new type of combined loan-stock financial instrument (LSI).

The risk free portfolio is constructed by combining a traditional loan with some amount
of underlying security. The philosophy behind the LSI is quite similar to the Black-
Scholes formalism in option theory. As a result the mathematical formulations are as well
similar. One could choose more favorable conditions for borrowers by increasing  β, the
parameter that regulates the connection between the loan and the underlying security in
the combined LSI. The increased value of β implies that more money is invested in
stocks or stock like securities on behalf of the borrowers by the lender.  However this is
also more risky for the borrower (and thus for the lender) since the borrower would find
himself more exposed to the market volatility and would have to pay higher periodic
premiums  (monthly, bi-monthly, quarterly, etc.) in the event of the decrease of the
underlying security value. The new financial instrument takes advantage of the fact that
on average the stock market grows in time. The LSI is beneficial for both the borrower
and the lender. The borrower benefits due to the decreased amount that has to be repaid.
This instrument is therefore more attractive for the borrower than the traditional loan.
This attractiveness constitutes the benefit for the lender in terms of market share among
the borrowers. In addition, the lender can charge an extra premium. This premium could
partially be used to cover the transaction costs and an insurance component. In addition,
sellers of the LSI could also create new mortgage-backed-stock securities.

References

1. J. C. Hull,  Options, Futures, and Other Derivatives, Prentice Hall, NJ (1997).

2.  Wilmott P. et al. Option Pricing: Mathematical Models and Computation, Oxford

Financial Press, Oxford (1993).

9

