0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

6

 
 
 

3
1
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

BEAM  CURRENT  MONITORS  IN  THE  NLCTA*

Stanford Linear Accelerator Center,  P.O. Box 4349,  Stanford, California  94309, USA

Christopher Nantista and Chris Adolphsen

Abstract

The current profile along the 126 ns, multi-bunch beam
pulse  in  the  Next  Linear  Collider  Test  Accelerator
(NLCTA) is monitored with fast toroids (rise time ~1 ns).
Inserted  at  several  positions  along  the  beam  line,  they
allow  us  to  track  current  transmission  as  a  function  of
position  along  the  bunch  train.  Various  measurements,
such as rise time, current, width, and slope, are made on
the digitized signals, which can be corrected in software by
means of stored frequency response files.  The design and
implementation of these devices is described.

I.    INTRODUCTION

The  Next  Linear  Collider  Test  Accelerator  [1]  at
SLAC runs with an electron beam bunched at the X-band
frequency  of  11.424  GHz.    A  single  pulse  of  ~126  ns
duration  contains  a  train  of  over  1400  bunches.    This
bunch  train  must  be  brought  intact  through  the  injector
[2],  a  phase  space  tailoring  chicane,  and  the  accelerator
proper,  into  a  spectrometer  and  beam  dump.    A  beam
loading  compensation  scheme  [3]  is  used  to  achieve
uniform acceleration in the structures, minimizing energy
variation along the pulse as it travels through the steering
and focusing lattice.

As  part  of  the  beam  instrumentation  system  of  the
NLCTA, six current monitoring toroids are incorporated at
various locations along the beam line.  These supplement
the current information available from an insertable faraday
cup and a series of beam position monitors.

While  the  latter  are  more  numerous,  the  current
transmission data acquired from them consists of a scalar
value reflecting only the charge density at the leading edge
of the long beam pulse.  The toroid pickups allow us to
view the temporal structure of the beam current (above the
bunching  scale).    By  comparing  signals  at  different
locations, for example before and after the chicane, we can
determine not only where we might be losing current but
also  from  which  part  of  the  bunch  train  it  is  being  lost.
This is crucial as we test our beam loading compensation
scheme.

II.    TRANSFORMER

The heart of our beam current monitoring system is
the  toroidal  Fast  Current  Transformer  manufactured  by
Bergoz  (01170  Crozet,  France). 
  Developed  in
collaboration with Klaus Unser at CERN, this device was
designed specifically for viewing charged particle bunches
in accelerators.  The "rad-hard" model we use has an inner
diameter of 1.1", slightly larger than our beam pipe.  The
azimuthal magnetic induction of the beam current links a

twenty-turn  coil  around  the  toroid  core,  giving  a  1:20
transformer  ratio.    The  core  of  cobalt/molybdenum
amorphous  alloy  ribbon  interleaved  with  nickel/iron
crystalline  alloy  was  designed  to  optimize  frequency
response  (~1ns  rise  time)  and  suppress  ringing.    Fifty
ohms of resistance is embedded within the toroid and an
SMA connector on the outer wall allows for signal pick-
up.    The  basic  circuit  is  illustrated  in  Figure  1  below.
When connected to an oscilloscope with 50W
 impedance,
the transformer yields a nominal signal amplitude of

=

V
sig

I
20

beam
 turns

+

1
50

1
50

1

=

1 25
.

I

beam

.

20 turns

I beam

to 50 W

coax

50 W

Figure 1.  Circuit diagram for fast toroid current monitor.

III.    HOUSING

In  order  for  the  transformer  to  "see"  a  net  current
passing  through  its  center,  the  wall  current  imaging  the
charged particle beam must be diverted around the outside
of  the  device.    The  beam  pipe  section  and  aluminum
housing on which and in which the toroid is installed to
achieve  this  end  are  shown  in  Figure  2  in  a  partly
disassembled view.

The  electrical  continuity  of  the  beam  pipe  is  thus
interrupted  by  an  inch-long  insulating  ceramic  gap.    A
thin coating of kovar deposited on the inner surface of the
ceramic  provides  a  finite  conductivity  to  bleed  off  any
build-up of charge deposited by the beam.  The edges of
the ceramic are metalized and brazed to the beam pipe to
maintain  vacuum  integrity,  and  a  small  bellows  is
included to either side of the gap to relieve stress.

Around  this  structure,  a  mechanically  engineered
aluminum  shell  is  assembled  which  supports  the  toroid
and provides a conducting path for the wall current.  The
housing clamps to the steel beam pipe just beyond each
bellows.  An inner cylinder is brought into contact around
the toroid, and an outer cylinder encloses some cabling,
supports  two  cable  connectors,  and  provides  rigidity.
Spring-loaded pins suspend the toroid around the ceramic.
The  transformer  signal  is  brought  through  the  inner

·
(cid:230)
Ł
(cid:246)
ł
·
-
W
W
W
cylinder to an SMA-to-type N adapter in the outer shell.
To  the  other  type  N  connector  is  soldered  a  flat  wire
looping beween the toroid and the vacuum chamber.  This
can  be  pulsed  to  verify  the  operability  of  the  current
monitor.

ceramic
   gap

AA
AA

pickup

fast toroid

  coax
adapter

BNC

cables

  center
conductor

housing

   pulse  
generator

beam pipe

oscilloscope

Figure 3.  Beam current monitor test and calibration setup.

An HP 8510C Network Analyzer connected between
one  port  and  the  pickup,  with  a  load  on  the  other  port,
showed the response function of the current transformer to
be fairly flat out to about 1.3 GHz, where it drops off 15
dB.  This is consistent with the manufacturer's rise time
specification.

A variable width pulse generator and an oscilloscope
were  also  used  to  study  the  device.    Filling  the  cavity
formed  around  the  bellows  with  microwave  absorber
reduced  the  ringing  from  sharp  pulses,  but  it  was  not
considered  suitable  for  permanent  inclusion  in  a  high
radiation environment.  What was found to improve the
worst  of  our  current  monitors  was  the  sanding  down  of
spacers and application of silver paint to the edges of the
inner  cylinder  halves  to  assure  good  electrical  contact
between them.

To  remove,  as  far  as  possible,  any  remaining
imperfection in their response, each of our beam current
monitors was calibrated in the following way.

Electrical pulses were sent along the center conductor
to  simulate  an  electron  beam.    The  transmitted  pulses
(essentially identical to the input pulses) and toroid pickup
signals were recorded simultaneously with our two-channel
digitizing  scope.    The  Fourier  transform  of  the  latter
waveform could then be divided by that of the former to
give us the effect of the device on the true signal.

Because the Fourier transform of a square pulse has
nodes  at  intervals    of  the  inverse  width,  a  response
function  generated  from  a  single  such  pulse  yields
spurious  noise  (division  by  nearly  zero)  at  these
frequencies.    Attempts  to  correct  a  pulse  of  a  different
width  with  such  a  function  causes  gross  distortions.    It
was thus necessary to use many pulses of various widths
for each calibration, generally about fifteen ranging from 1
ns to greater than a microsecond.  The digitized waveforms
were eight microseconds long, yielding a spacing of 0.125
MHz in our frequency spectra.  The FFT's of the through

Figure  2.    Toroid  and  housing  installed  on  a  beam  pipe
section with one quadrant of the housing removed.

IV.    READOUT

The fast toroid signals are carried by low-loss heliax
cables out from the accelerator enclosure to a rack near the
klystron gallery.  There they are fed through a high band-
width multiplexer into a 250 MHz (1 gigasample/second)
Hewlett Packard 1428a Digitizing Oscilloscope in a VXI
crate.  These instruments are controlled with an embedded,
HPUX,  multi-user  processor,  which  is  networked  to  a
terminal in the NLCTA control room.  The scope is run
using an external trigger synched with the beam.  Software
routines  written  with  HP  VEE  (Visual  Engineering
Environment) graphical programming language are used
for  sending  commands,  receiving  digitized  data,  signal
processing and display.

V.    CALIBRATION

In  an  initial  test  of  our  toroid  assembly  in  the  SLC
linac, the signal displayed significant ringing.  This seems
to  have  been  due  to  capacitance  and  inductance  in  the
circuit  formed  by  our  housing.    To  further  study  its
response  and  try  to  ameliorate  this  effect,  we  fitted  the
current monitor with an aluminum rod center conductor
supported  between  specially  designed  coaxial  cable
adapters, as shown in Figure 3.

signals and those of the toroid signals were added before
dividing the two sums.

The resulting response functions were then stored in
files.    For  any  signal  h t( )  recorded by the beam current
monitor,  a  corrected  signal 
f t( )  could  thereafter  be
)w
obtained with the stored file  G(
}
( )
FFT h t
)

 from the relationship
{
w
(

IFFT

=

( )
f t

.

G

For  greater  speed,  it  is  sometimes  preferable  to  run
our  current  monitors  without  implementing  this
correction.    A  scalar  factor,  also  determined  with  our
coaxial  setup,  is  then  used  to  convert  output  voltage  to
axial  current.    A  typical  effect  of  using  the  fast  Fourier
transform correction is to decrease a ~7 ns rise time to ~6
ns.  Signal droop is not significant for our pulse length.
We measured the L/R time constant of the toroid to be as
large as 35 microseconds.

It  should  be  noted  that  the  performance  of  these
current  transformers  deteriorates  drastically  in  high
magnetic fields (>~500 guass).  In our injector, where the
focusing solenoid field reaches two kilogauss, we had to
substitute a homemade, 100 turn toroid on a G-10 core.

VI.    MEASUREMENTS

As previously mentioned, the HP VEE programming
software  is  used  with  our  beam  current  monitoring
system.   Through its direct I/O capability, we select the
desired current monitor or monitors from the multiplexer,
set up the digitizing scope, and acquire waveforms.  The

signal processing we've encoded not only allows for the
above FFT correction to be applied, but also performs a
number  of  useful  measurements  on  the  pulses.    These
include  beam  current  amplitude,  pulse  width,  rise  time,
fall time, slope of the pulse top, rms variation across the
pulse  top  from  a  linear  fit,  and  integrated  charge  in  the
pulse.    These  measurements  can  be  sent  to  the
CORRELATIONS PLOT program in our control system
and correlated with other variables.

The waveforms and measurement results are displayed
on a convenient user interface panel.  We can run in one-
shot  or  "live"  mode.    In  the  latter  mode,  the  screen  is
updated automatically every few seconds (including time
for  data  processing).    A  feedback  loop  adjusts  the
oscilloscope  range  according  to  the  measured  signal
amplitude,  and  the  two  scope  channels  allow  us  to
monitor two beam current signals simultaneously on the
same  display.    Figure  4  shows  our  display  panel  with
toroids before and after the chicane indicating about 77%
beam transmission.

VIII.    REFERENCES

[1] Ronald  D.  Ruth,  "Results  from  the  NLC  Test
Accelerator," these proceedings.
[2] A. Yeremian, et al., "NLCTA Injector Experimental
Results," these proceedings.
[3] C. Adolphsen, et al., "Beam Loading Compensation
in the NLCTA," these proceedings.

Figure 4.  Current monitor two-signal live display panel.

(cid:236)
(cid:237)
(cid:238)
(cid:252)
(cid:253)
(cid:254)
