The Explanation of the New Astronomical Distance Data

That has Resulted From Measurements of Type Ia Supernovae
Lies Not In a Cosmological Constant and Accelerating Expansion;

Rather, It Is Another Aspect / Effect of the

General Exponential Decay of the Overall Universe.

Roger Ellman

Abstract

In  the  Hubble  model  of  the  universe,  the  distance  to  far  distant  sources  is
determined from the redshift, from which the speed of regression, v, [the redshift being
deemed  due  to  its  Doppler  effect]  and  then  the  distance  v  ⋅  H  [where  H  is  called  the
Hubble constant] are determined.

Recently it has become possible to determine the distance to Type Ia supernovae
by other independent means.1,2  The intrinsic brightness [luminosity] of such supernovae
is related to the pattern [light  curve]  of their flare up  and  back  down,  a process  taking
weeks.    By  comparing  the  intrinsic  brightness,  determined  from  that  pattern,  to  the
observed brightness the distance can be determined from the inverse square law.

Those  new  distance  determinations  exceed  the  Hubble  distance  by  10  -  15%.
The explanation others propose is that an "antigravity effect" is accelerating the universe'
expansion, which had hitherto been thought to be slowing down because of gravitation.
That  has  led  to  their  proposing  reinstatement  of  Einstein's  "cosmological  constant",  a
term  in  his  equations  introduced  to  account  for  gravitation  not  promptly  collapsing  the
universe  and  which  he  disavowed  upon  Hubble's  discovery  of  the  expansion  of  the
universe.    And  that  has  further  led  to  their  proposing  some  form  of  the  Ancients'  fifth
essence, quintessence [the first four being earth, air, fire and water], to account  for  the
"antigravity effect".

Any  "antigravity  effect",  regardless  of  its  cause,  would  have  the  effect  of
counteracting  ordinary  gravitation.    Inasmuch  as  one  of  the  major  current  problems  in
cosmology is to identify more gravitation to account for the cosmos's large scale structure
and galaxies' centrifugal force, any "antigravity effect" to act as the cause of acceleration
would not appear to fit with the rest of the cosmological situation.

An  alternative  explanation  is  presented  --  the  general  exponential  decay  of  the
overall  universe,  which  has  been  analyzed  and  developed  in  several  papers.3,4,5,6    The
universal  decay  accounts  for  the  greater  distances  and  the  necessary  cosmic  energy
without  the  challenge  to  theory  and  to  reasonableness  that  acceleration,  its  unknown
cause, and a cosmological constant involve.

Roger Ellman, The-Origin Foundation, Inc.
                     320 Gemma Circle, Santa Rosa, CA 95404, USA
                     RogerEllman@The-Origin.org

1

Explanation of the New Astronomical Distance Data

That has Resulted From Measurements of Type Ia Supernovae

Lies Not In a "Cosmological Constant" and Accelerating Expansion;

Rather, It Is Another Aspect / Effect of the

General Exponential Decay of the Overall Universe.

Background  of  the  Problem

Roger Ellman

[While  unnecessary  for  astronomers  and  astrophysicists  this  review  is  included
for  the  benefit  of  other  scientists,  who  may  not  be  familiar  with  the  details  of  the
development, details which are essential to understanding the issues.]

The, for years generally accepted, Hubble astronomical model of the universe is
of  a  uniformly  expanding  cosmos  in  which  all  galaxies  are  moving  apart  so  that  their
speed  away  from  us  is  proportional  to  their  distance  from  us,  the  constant  of
proportionality being called the Hubble Constant,  H.  Until recently the distance to far
distant  such  bodies  has  been  determined  by  measuring  the  redshift,  deemed  a  Doppler
effect.  From that one obtains the speed of recession, v, and then the distance v ⋅ H.

Recently it has become possible to determine the distance to far distant galaxies
by  an  alternative  independent  means  based  on  observations  of  Type  Ia  supernovae  in
those  galaxies.1,2    It  has  been  found  that  the  intrinsic  brightness  [luminosity]  of  such
supernovae  is  related  to  the  pattern  [light  curve]  of  their  flare  up  and  back  down,  a
process taking weeks overall.  By comparing the intrinsic brightness, as determined from
that pattern, to the observed brightness the distance can be determined from the inverse
square law.

Those  new  distance  determinations  indicate  distances  exceeding  the  Hubble
model  distance  by  10%  to  15%.    The  interpretation  of  that  result  as  proposed  by  the
researchers  who  developed  the  data  and  others  is  that  some  "antigravity  effect"  is
accelerating the universe's expansion, which expansion had hitherto been thought to  be
slowing down because of gravitation.  That "antigravity effect", by default, would have to
be a property of the empty space, the vacuum, of the universe since it is certainly not a
property of the matter.

That  line  of  thought  has  led  to  the  reinstatement  of  Einstein's  "cosmological
constant"  a  term  in  his  equations  that  he  introduced  to  account  for  the  universe  not
promptly  collapsing  due  to  gravitation  and  which  he  later  disavowed  upon  Hubble's
discovery of the expansion of the universe.

Those implications are so unsettling to theory and to reasonableness that the data
had  been  initially  deemed  in  error.    As  a  result  there  have  been  extensive  analyses  of
sources of error and measurements have been taken on a large enough number of Type Ia
supernovae  to  be  statistically  significant  all  with  the  conclusion  that  the  new  distance
measurements are valid and that theory must be adjusted accordingly.1,2

But,  there  is  an  explanation  of  the  data  alternative  to  that  of  accelerating
expansion, one that carries considerably less challenge to theory and negligible challenge
to reasonableness -- the general exponential decay of the overall universe, which has been
analyzed and developed in several papers. 3,4,5,6  Exponential decay is found throughout
nature so that overall decay of the universe is not unreasonable.

2

The universal decay accounts for the observed greater distances [and shows that
they  are  actually  greater  than  the  reported  measurements  indicate]  and  provides  the
necessary cosmic energy without employing an arbitrary "cosmological constant", a new
"quintessential"  substance,  and  "an  antigravity  effect",  which  are  otherwise  unknown,
unsupported by theory, and contrary to all other data and experience.

The General Universal Decay

The theory of the general exponential decay of the overall universe is derived and
developed in The Origin and Its Meaning.6  The decay is of the same form as the myriad
exponential decays  found throughout  nature  because  all  such  decays  are  aspects  of  the
general  solution  to  the  2nd  order  linear  differential  equation  with  constant  coefficients.
The  universal  decay  is  decay  of  the  quantities  that  we  refer  to  as  the  fundamental
constants, c, h, q, G, and so forth, essentially a decay of the fundamental substance(s) of
material reality.

The  values  of  these  fundamental  constants  are  the  same  everywhere  in  the
universe at any instant of time.  The decay means that they are everywhere uniformly and
consistently exponentially decaying with time.  The requirement that the laws of physics
and  their  fundamental  constants  be  the  same  everywhere  in  the  universe  [Einstein's
"invariance"] includes within it the decay processes acting consistently everywhere.

These fundamental constants interact through the various physical laws of nature
and, therefore, the decay of each constant must be consistent with the decays of all of the
others.  Analysis of all of the implications of that requirement shows that the decay is of
the  length  dimensional  component  of  those  constants.    That  is,  from  among  the
fundamental dimensional components length [L], mass [M] and time [T], it is length
[L] that is in decay.  That develops as follows.

The  decay  being  an  exponential  function  the  independent  variable  of  which  is
time, t, as in for example equation 1, it cannot be the time dimensional component, [T],
that is decaying.
(1)              -t/τ
      c(t) = c0∙ε

Furthermore, mass and time are closely interrelated as in equation 2,
(2)   h·f = E = m·c2

so that if mass, [M], were to decay it would imply that frequency decays and that time,
[T], the inverse of frequency, inversely decays, which the independent variable cannot
do.    That  leaves  only  the  length  component,  [L]  to  be  the  dependent  variable  in  the
decay.

Equation  2  also  illustrates  another  point.    Planck's  constant,  h,  appears  in  the
equation with an exponent of 1 whereas the speed of light, c, appears with an exponent of
2.  For the two decays, that of h and that of c, to be consistent their time constants must
be different.  Planck's constant, h, must decay twice as rapidly as the speed of light, c; its
time constant, τh, must be half that of light, τc.  That is,
(3)   [ -t/τ ]1    [ -t/τ ]2
      [ε    h]  =  [ε    c]  for consistency of the decays,
          ∴∴∴∴ τh  =  0.5 · τc

3

The  time  constant  of  the  general  exponential  decay  of  the  overall  universe  is
derived  and  calculated  in  The  Origin  and  Its  Meaning.6    The  value  for  c,  the
"fundamental" value as compared to that for, for example,  h = 1/2  of that for c, is
(4)   τc = 3.57532·1017 s = about 11.3 billion years

"c" dimensions are L1/T

The values for other constant's decays are the appropriate multiple or sub-multiple of the
value for c.  For example:
(5)   τh = 1/2·τc = 1.78766·1017 s = about 5.65 billion years

      τG = 1/3·τc = 1.19177·1017 s = about 3.77 billion years

"h" dimensions are M·L2/T

"G" dimensions are L3/M·T2

The first definitive experimental observation of this decay [although it remained
unrecognized at the time] was in the tracking  of  the  Pioneer  10 and  11 satellites.   The
observations  were  reported  in  1998  in  Indication,  from  Pioneer  10/11,  Galileo,  and
Ulysses  Data,  of  an  Apparent  Anomalous,  Weak,  Long-Range  Acceleration.7  and  were
further analyzed in 1999 in The Apparent Anomalous, Weak, Long-Range Acceleration of
Pioneer 10 and 11.8  These reported that a weak long-range acceleration towards the Sun
has  been  observed  in  the  Pioneer  10  and  11  satellites  for  which  no  satisfactory
explanation  had  been  obtained  in  spite  of  diligent  efforts  by  a  number  of  parties,  for
which reason it was described as "anomalous".

The  interpretation  of  the  anomalous  acceleration  as being  a  direct  effect  of  the
universal decay was presented in Exponential Decay of the Overall Universe is the Cause
of  "The  Apparent  Anomalous,  Weak,  Long-Range  Acceleration  of  [the  spacecraft]
Pioneer 10 and 11".5  Decay in the gravitational acceleration, aG, acting on the satellites
and due to the Sun means that aG was greater in the past, which means that the satellites
were slowed more in the past than we now would expect in terms of the current value of
aG.  That effect is the "anomalous acceleration" toward the Sun.

The time constant for this decay,  τa,G,  is as given in equation 6.

(6)   τa,G = τc = 3.57532·1017 s = about 11.3 billion years

"a" dimensions are L1/T2

For  that  the  corresponding  [that  is  the  decay-related]  acceleration  toward  the  Sun  is
8.38505·10-8  cm/s2  (the  observed  value  was  reported  as  8.5·10-8  cm/s2
including  other  secondary  effects)  and  the  anomalous  frequency  drift,  stated  as  clock
acceleration, is 2.79695·10-18 s/s2 (the observed value was 2.8·10-18 s/s2).

While  this  was  the  first  definitive,  although  not  then  recognized,  experimental
observation of the decay, every redshift measurement is a partial such observation.  That
is, the decay in the speed of light, c, means that the light from far distant sources, which
we now observe a long time after it was emitted, was emitted at a larger value of c  than
the value we know now.  That greater speed means that the wavelengths all are longer,
are redshifted as we perceive them.

Furthermore, the more distant the source the earlier its light was emitted and the
less decayed is the light's speed.  That means that the greater the [decay-caused] redshift
the more distant the source is.  That relationship is non-linear as is the exponential decay
function and unlike the Hubble model linear relationship.

4

However,  the sources of  such  light  are,  nevertheless,  moving  away  from  us  so
that there is also some Doppler effect.  The redshifts that we observe are a combination of
Doppler and decay effects.

The analysis of the universal  decay  in  The  Origin and  Its Meaning.6  addresses
the  problem  of  determining  what  part  of  the  observed  redshifts  is  due  to  the  Doppler
effect  and  what  part  to  decay.    The  results  are  that  the  Doppler-caused  part  of  the
redshifts could not be more than 10% of the total redshift and is more likely on the order
of only 1% or less.  The remainder of the observed amounts of redshift, 90-99% of them,
are due to the universal decay of the speed of light.  The reasons for this are as follows.

At  the  Big  Bang  the  material  of  the  universe  was  thrust  rapidly  outward  in  all
directions.  Since then the mutual gravitational attraction of all of that material has been
slowing it all down.  The amount of the gravitational slowing is inversely proportional to
the square of the distant between the mutually attracting bodies.  Starting at a very large
speed the distance of separation increased rapidly, meaning that the slowing was rapidly
reduced.  Therefore, most of the slowing, most of the speed loss, had to occur early after
the "Big Bang".

A very large part of the slowing must have taken place by the time the earliest
galaxies  formed,  about  21/2  to  3  billion  years  after  the  "Big  Bang".  Even  if  the  initial
speeds of those earliest galaxies immediately after the Big Bang were almost the speed of
light,  c,  their  speeds  21/2  to  3 billion  years  later  could not have  been  more than  1/10  as
much, c/10, and more likely were on the order of  c/100,  or less.

Since of the observed amounts of redshift, 90-99% is due to the universal decay
of the speed of light it is within the precision of the Type Ia supernovae data to deem the
redshifts to be dominantly due to universal decay.

Application to the Type Ia Supernovae Observations

The values of the fundamental constants c and h in the light, emitted long ago,
that we now observe from a far distant astronomical source are much less decayed than
our local here, now values of those constants.  That is, the light travels at a much greater
speed than the c that we know and its photons carry much greater energy for each same
frequency  than  the  E = h·f  amounts  that  we  know,  meaning  that  they  appear  more
luminous to us.  Both constants are actually greater than, greater relative to, the values,
the  standards  that  we  inherently  use,  directly  experience,  and  in  terms  of  which  we
interpret that ancient light -- the values to which those constants have currently decayed,
"our" values.

Because  that  light  that  we  observe  from  a  far  distant  astronomical  source  is
traveling faster, its source is farther away from us than we deem based on our understood
speed of light.  For example, the situation for a source the light from which is 5 billion
years old when it reaches us is as follows.

(7)   As we perceive it:

distance = [age] · [our value of c]

   = 5 billion (our) light years

As it really is:

distance = [same age] · [155% of our value of c]
   = [155% of same age] · [our value of c]
   = 7.75 billion (our) light years

5

That  would  tend  to  make  the  apparent,  the  observed,  luminosity  of  the  source
appear  less  to  us  by  the  factor  [5/7.75]2  =  0.416  because  of  the  inverse  square
effect.  However, that same light that we observe from its far distant astronomical source
also  carries  a  larger  value  of  Planck's  constant  which  makes  its  intrinsic  luminosity
greater.  For example, the situation for the same source the light from which is 5 billion
years old when it reaches us is as follows.

(8)   As we perceive it:

luminosity = per our Planck's constant

As it really is:

Luminosity = 242% of per our Planck's constant

     = 2.42 · [As we expect it]

That  would  tend  to  make  the  apparent,  the  observed,  luminosity  of  the  source
appear greater to us by the factor 2.42.  The combined effect of the two, the reduction
due to greater distance, greater c, and the enhancement due to larger Planck's constant, h,
is for the present example as follows.

(9)   Net combined effect on perceived luminosity =

= 0.416 · 2.42
= 1.00

There is not net change in the perceived brightness, the inverse square effect of greater
distance being exactly cancelled by the effect of greater intrinsic luminosity.

However, in the case of the Type Ia supernovae experiments, the subject of this
paper, the situation is not the same.  In those experiments, as reported in the papers1,2, the
relationship  between  intrinsic  luminosity  and  the  light  curve  [flare  up  and  back  down
pattern] of Type Ia supernovae was calibrated by observations on relatively near sources.
It is that calibration which is in error, error caused by the [unknown to the experimenters]
effects of the general universal decay of the constants  c and  h.  That error develops as
follows.

The  distances  were  determined  by  means  of  data  on  Cepheid  variable  sources.

As described in the paper1,

"The relative luminosities of this "training set" of SNe Ia were calibrated
with  independent  distance  indicators  (Tonry  1991;  Pierce  1994).    The
absolute  SN Ia  luminosities  were  measured  from  Cepheid  variables
populating the host galaxies (Saha, et al. 1994, 1997)."

[Again for the benefit of non-specialists in astronomy or astrophysics] Cepheid variables
are stars that vary in brightness with regular periods ranging from less than 1 to about 100
days.  In 1912 a relationship [since improved] between the period and the brightness of
Cepheids  was  discovered.    Using  Cepheids  near  enough  that  their  distance  could  be
measured  by  triangulation,  the  brightness  -  period  relationship  for  Cepheids  was
calibrated.    With  that  calibration,  the  distance  to  more  distant  Cepheids  could  be
determined by comparing the observed brightness with the intrinsic brightness calculated
from the Cepheid's period and applying the inverse square law.

The calibration of Cepheids by triangulation means that the source stars were so
near that the [very large time constant] universal exponential decay had negligible effect -
the  source  stars  were  essentially  contemporary.    Therefore,  an  intrinsic  brightness
determined from the Cepheid period contains negligible universal decay effect.

A distant Cepheid has a greater intrinsic brightness as compared to a quite near
but  otherwise  identical  Cepheid  because  the  h  of  the  light  from  the  distant  Cepheid  is
larger than the h of the light from the quite near Cepheid.  The distant Cepheid's actual

6

distance is also greater because the c of its light is greater.  Its light has traveled the time
corresponding to the redshift but at a greater speed so that its source's distance must have
been greater.  As in the hypothetical example of equations 7 - 9, the two effects cancel
out.  Its observed brightness is unaffected by the decay.

For  the  calibration  of  the  Type  Ia  Supernovae  light  curves  by  observations  on
relatively near sources at redshifts in the range z = 0.01 to 0.08 the actual distances to
those sources were as follows.
(10)  

The relationship between the effect on the observed 

wavelength due to exponential decay vs the Doppler effect
is as follows [neglecting the minor residual Doppler part 
in the exponential decay case].

Exponential Decay

             λt=T     -T/τ
                  = ε   
             

λt=0

Doppler Effect

λobs v=V
    
    λv=0 source

1 + z =
 

where

λt=T     corresponds to     λv=0 source
λt=0     corresponds to     λobs v=V

therefore

                      λt=0     +T/τ
             1 + z =       = ε
                      

λt=T

 

 ln[1 + z] = T/τ
 T = τ·ln[1 + z] = Distance in Light-time

The relationship between the initial and final values of  a  quantity,  for example
c(t), that exponentially decays over a time interval,  T,  with  a  decay  constant, τ, is  as
follows.
(11)                    -T/τ                        +T/τ
           c(T) = c(0)∙ε        or     c(0) = c(T)∙ε

(12)  For the relatively near sources used for calibrating the

Type Ia Supernovae light curve vs luminosity.

         Eq 10: T =    D1 @ c(T)≡    D2 @ c(0) ≡ Actual     D2/
  z       τ·ln[1+z]     Current c     [Less-Decayed] c        D1  
 1.01
0.010
0.11
 1.01(5)
0.015       0.17
 1.02
0.23
0.020
0.025
0.28
 1.02(5)
 1.03
0.34
0.030
 1.03(5)
0.39
0.035
 1.04
0.040
0.45
0.045       0.50
 1.04(5)
 1.05
0.56
0.050
 1.05(5)
0.61
0.055
 1.06
0.060
0.66
0.065       0.72
 1.06(5)
 1.07
0.77
0.070
 1.07(5)
0.82
0.075
0.080
0.88
 1.08

    0.11
    0.17
    0.23
    0.29
    0.35
    0.40
    0.47
    0.52
    0.59
    0.64
    0.70
    0.77
    0.82
    0.88
    0.95

0.11
0.17
0.23
0.28
0.34
0.39
0.45
0.50
0.56
0.61
0.66
0.72
0.77
0.82
0.88

7

where:

and:

τ = 11.3 billion light years
T is in billions of years
D is in billions of light years

for astro-ph 98052011

for astro-ph 98121332

typical z = 0.039
typical T = 0.44

typical z = 0.049
typical T = 0.55

The  corresponding  data  and  calculations  for  the  distant  sources,  which  are  the
ultimate  subject  of  the  papers  at  issue1,2  and  of  the  theoretical  interpretation  being
corrected, are as follows.
(13)  For the distant sources being investigated.
         Eq 10: T =    D1 @ c(T)=    D2 @ c(0) = Actual    D2/
  z       τ·ln[1+z]     Current c     [Less-Decayed] c       D1 
 1.35
0.35 
3.42
0.40        3.84
 1.40
 1.45
4.24
0.45 
 1.50
4.62
0.50 
 1.55
5.00
0.55 
0.60 
5.36
 1.60
 1.65
0.65        5.71
 1.70
6.05
0.70 
 1.75
6.38
0.75 
0.80 
6.70
 1.80
 1.85
7.01
0.85 

    4.62
    5.38
    6.15
    6.93
    7.75
    8.58
    9.42
   10.29
   11.17
   12.06
   12.97

3.42
3.84
4.24
4.62
5.00
5.36
5.71
6.05
6.38
6.70
7.01

where:

for astro-ph 98052011

for astro-ph 98121332

typical z = 0.51
typical T = 4.69

typical z = 0.41
typical T = 3.92

To trace the effects of the universal exponential decay as it causes deviations of
results in observations of distant Type Ia Supernovae from as they would otherwise be in
the absence of the decay the effects on the cases corresponding to the above cited typical
values are analyzed below.  The actual investigations presented in the papers1,2 were of a
statistically significant number of such determinations on  specific Type  Ia  Supernovae,
the set approximately averaging the "typical" values.  The analysis process is as follows.
   A.  The effect of   c  decay on the "training" Cepheid

A Cepheid variable is identified in the host galaxy of one of the relatively near
"training"  Type  Ia  Supernovae  and  its  distance  is  determined  according  to  the  usual
Cepheid distance scale.  That is, its intrinsic brightness is determined from its variation
period and its observed brightness is noted.  From those its distance is inferred from the
inverse square relationship.

That distance to the Cepheid is then assigned or designated as the known distance

to the "training" Sn Ia.

In the light  from  that  Cepheid  both its  c and its  h  are  greater  than  our
contemporary  values.    The  greater  c    means  a  greater  distance  and  greater
inverse-square  dimming  of  observed  brightness.    The  greater  h  means  greater
photon  energy  and  an  enhancement  of  observed  brightness.    As  in  the
hypothetical  example  of  equations  7  -  9,  the  two  effects  exactly  cancel.    The
resulting observed brightness of the Cepheid is the same as would be the case in

8

the  absence  of  universal  decay.    The  resulting  distance  determination  to  the
Cepheid is, in that sense, unaffected by the universal decay.  

However,  from  equation  12,  at  values  typical  of  those  reported  in  the
papers1,2 and so noted in equation 12, that distance is moderately incorrect.  The
correct distance to the Cepheid [due to a moderately greater value of c] is about
4.5%  greater.  The  intrinsic  brightness  of  the  typical  "training"  Sn Ia,  inferred
from  its  observed  brightness  and  the  Cepheid-determined  distance,  will  be  an
overstatement [due to that cause, alone] of its actual intrinsic brightness by about
9.6% because it is inferred using a distance about 4.5% too small.  That is, the
affect of the distance on brightness is as the inverse square of the distance and
[1.0/(1.0  −  0.045)]2  = 1.096 ….

The  effect  of  c  decay  causes  the  Cepheid  distance  scale  to  understate  the  Cepheid's
distance and, therefore, the "training" Type Ia Supernova's distance by about 4.5%.   It,
therefore overstates the "training" Sn Ia's intrinsic brightness by about 9.6%.
   B - The effect of   h  decay on the "training" Type Ia Supernova

The  observed  brightness  of  the  "training"  Sn  Ia  is  noted.    That  in  conjunction
with its distance [from Step A] makes it possible to calculate the intrinsic brightness of
the  "training"  Sn  Ia  using  the  inverse  square  relationship.    That  intrinsic  brightness  is
correlated with the "training" Sn Ia's light pattern, which completes the calibration.

As in the hypothetical example of equations 7 - 9, the combined effects
of the c decay and the  h  decay on the observed brightness of the Sn Ia exactly
cancel;  the  observed  brightness  is  independent  of  the  decay.    However,  while
both  distance  and  intrinsic  brightness  affect  observed  brightness,  distance  has
nothing to do with intrinsic brightness; the intrinsic brightness simply is what it
is; it is intrinsic to the source.  [The determining of intrinsic brightness in some
cases by inference from observed brightness and distance is not the same thing.]

The  Sn  Ia's  intrinsic  brightness  is  greater  because  its  h  is  greater  and
greater h means greater photon energy, which enhances brightness.  This excess
is  calculated  using  τh  =  0.5 · τc  =  5.65  billion
brightness 
light  years.  Per equation 11 and using  T = 0.50  [half-way between the
equation 12 typical values], the result is as follows.

(14)                    +T/τ    +0.50/5.65
           c(0)/c(T) 
The effect of  h  decay results in the "training" Sn Ia's observed brightness being about
11% more, due to this effect alone, than if there were no such decay.  
   C - The resulting "training" calibration

 ε     = ε           = 1.11

=

The calibration of intrinsic brightness versus light curve for Type Ia Supernovae
obtained from the "training" set overstates the intrinsic brightness by about 9.6% due to
distance  deviation,  Step  A,  and  by  about  11%  due  to  brightness  deviation,  Step  B,
combined about 1.096 · 1.11 = 1.21, a 21% brightness overstatement.
   D - The distant Type Ia Supernova  independent distance determination

Armed  with  the  Sn  Ia  Light  Curve  vs  Intrinsic  Brightness  relationship,  the
investigation  shifts  from  the  "training"  to  the  far  distant  Sn  Ia  sources  of  interest.    A
distant Type Ia Supernovae is studied and its intrinsic brightness is developed based on
its light curve.  Its observed brightness is noted.  Based on those two datums its distance
is inferred from the inverse square relationship.

9

In  the  light  from  that  Sn  Ia  both  its  c  and  its  h  are  greater  than  our
contemporary  values.    The  greater  c    means  a  greater  distance  and  greater
inverse-square  dimming  of  observed  brightness.    The  greater  h  means  greater
photon  energy  and  an  enhancement  of  observed  brightness.    As  in  the
hypothetical  example  of  equations  7  -  9,  the  two  effects  exactly  cancel.    The
observed brightness is not affected by the decay in that sense.

However,  the  intrinsic  brightness,  obtained  from  the  light  curve,  is
overstated  about  21%  per  Step  C.    Per  the  inverse  square  relationship,  that
corresponds to the Sn Ia appearing to be at a greater distance by the square root
of 1.21, about 1.10, or about 10 % farther away then expected.
   E - The distant Type Ia Supernova  "expected" distance determination

The "expected" distance, is determined by identifying a Cepheid variable in the
host galaxy of the  Sn  Ia  and  attributing  its  distance to  the  Sn  Ia,  also.    In  this  case  no
deviation due to the universal decay is applicable because the "expected" distance means
that found per the usual methods and with no knowledge of the decay.
   F - Overall results

The  "expected"  distance  being  unchanged  and  the  light  curve  derived  distance

being overstated by about 10% results in a total distance deviation of about 10 %.

That is what accounts for, what produces the observation reported in the
abstract to  astro-ph 98052011 that "The distances of the high-redshift SNe Ia
are, on average, 10% to 15% farther than expected...."    

Because the effects of c and of h decay combined leave observed brightness unchanged it
would appear that the decay has no effect on the observation of Sn Ia light curves.  The
analysis of the light curves involves several sophisticated aspects so that the possibility of
a decay effect cannot be ruled out.
Actual Distances and Conclusion

From equation 13 at values typical of those reported in the papers1,2 and so noted
in  equation  13,  the  correct  distance  [due  to  a  somewhat  greater  value  of  c]  is  actually
about  45% greater than the expected.   These  actual  greater  distances  [and,  of  course,
the reported 10% to 15% greater distances] do not result from acceleration of expansion,
nor an "anti gravity effect", nor a cosmological constant.  Rather the Big Bang product
particles  were  not limited  to  our  value  of  the  speed  of  light.    The  limit  back  then  was
much larger.  If the present age of the universe is about the 18 billion years [somewhat
over  1½  time  constants  of  the  speed  of  light  decay]  calculated  in  The  Origin  and  Its
Meaning.6 based on the universal decay, then the original value of  c  was  4.92  times
greater than today's value, as follows.    
(15)                    +T/τ      
           c(0) = c(T)∙ε     = c∙ε         = 4.92·c

+18/11.3

For  ages  of  15  and  10  billion  light  years,  which  represent  some  of  the  extant
estimates  by  physicists,  that  result  is  an  original  c    that  was    3.77    or    2.42    times
greater than today, respectively.

While the universal decay accounts for the Type Ia Supernovae observations in a
reasonable  way,  the  concept  proposed  by  others  that  expansion  of  the  universe  is
accelerating, rather  than  decelerating  as  has  been  thought,  has  problems  of  consistency
with  the  rest  of  cosmology.    Any  "antigravity  effect"  to  account  for  acceleration  of
expansion  of  the  universe,  regardless  of  its  cause,  would  have  the  additional  effect  of
counteracting  ordinary  gravitation.    Inasmuch  as  one  of  the  major  current  problems  in

10

cosmology is to identify more gravitation to account for the cosmos's large scale structure
and galaxies' centrifugal force, any "antigravity effect" to act as the cause of acceleration
would not appear to fit with the rest of the cosmological situation.

The greater distances and greater energy disclosed by the Sne Ia studies are the
result of greater initial and then decaying speeds and the much greater values of Planck's
constant at the time of the Big Bang and during decay after.

Actions Needed to Complete the Verification of the Universal Decay

The universal decay can be verified and further investigated by conducting two
experiments set forth in The Origin and Its Meaning6; the measurement of the value of
each of the two fundamental constants, c  and  h, directly as they are in the light from far
distant astronomical sources.  The measurements must be of the actual light emitted long
ago from a far distant astronomical source, not local, just emitted, light.

The measurements must directly measure the constant sought; they cannot be a
measurement of other quantities with the calculation of the fundamental constant using
laws of physics relating the quantities.  For example, in the usual determinations of the
values of the various fundamental constants  Planck's  constant  is  not  directly  measured.
Rather  its  value  is  inferred  from  other  measurements  [e.g.  the  Rydberg  constant]  and
calculated  via  other  formulations  [e.g.  the  fine  structure  constant].    Such  indirect
procedures may not give correct results in the present experiments.

The  expected  results  of  the  experiments  are  given  in  Figure  1,  below,  which
gives the multiples of our contemporary value of the constants c and h that are expected
to be found in light that was emitted at various times in the past.
   Measuring The Speed of Light, c

Modern  measurements  of  the  speed  of  light  are  done  by  measuring  certain
frequencies and wavelengths that are measurable with very great precision,  c  being the
product of a frequency and its related wavelength. To measure the speed of ancient light
from far distant sources the product of frequency and wavelength is useless. We already
know  that  the  wavelength  is  significantly  different  from  that  in  our  local  light,  the
difference being the redshift. If that redshift were entirely due to universal decay then the
frequency-wavelength  product  would  give  the  correct  speed,  but  at  least  some  of  the
redshift is due to the Doppler effect [on the order of 1% - 10%].

Figure 1

11

The  data  of  interest  is  a  comparison  of  the  c  in  ancient  light  with  that  in
contemporary light. That can be determined by an interferometer type measurement such
as  those  of  Michaelson  /  Pease  and  Pearson  using  the  Foucault  method.  In  those
revolving  mirrors  or  a  toothed  wheel  were  used  to  break  a  monochromatic  [single
frequency]  light  beam  into  segments.  The  beam  was  then  split  into  two  beams  which
were directed over two different paths of known length and then recombined. If the speed
of  travel  over  the  two  paths  were  the  same  then  the  recombination  would  produce  a
perfect  overlap  of  the  waves,  but  if  it  were  different  the  difference  would  show  in  the
resulting interference wave pattern.

To  compare  far  distant  ancient  light  against  contemporary  local  light  the
interference  must  be  generated  between  a  single  frequency  of  the  ancient  light  [as
selected  by  a  spectroscope,  one  of  the  lines  of  the  distant  source's  line  spectrum  being
selected]  and  a  beam  of  local  light  [the  same  frequency  line  as  in  the  ancient  light
spectrum  being  spectroscopically  selected],  no  beam  splitting  being  involved.  As
indicated in the sample data above, the speed difference of the two light beams will be
large and the resulting interference pattern will be accordingly.
   Measuring Planck's Constant, h.

Planck's  Constant,  h,  can  be  directly  measured  using  the  photoelectric  effect.
Figure  2,  below,  illustrates  the  photoelectric  effect  and  its  relationship  to  Planck's
constant.  While the accuracy using the photoelectric effect is not nearly as good as that
provided  by  other  less  direct  means,  the  method  is  quite  sufficiently  accurate  for  the
accuracies involved for the present purposes.  The lines in the figure [which are straight
lines] can be plotted from  as  little  as  two  data  points  for  any  one substance  [of  course
accuracy improves with a greater number of data points and interpolation among them].

Each  data  point  is  obtained  by  shining  light  [in  the  present  situation  the  light
must be from a far distant astronomical source] of a single frequency [as selected by a
spectroscope,  one  of  the  lines  of  the  source's  line  spectrum  being  selected]  on  a
photosensitive surface that emits photoelectrons [the selected line must be of a frequency
greater than the cut-off frequency, e.g. f1 or f2, for the particular photosensitive substance
being used].

Figure 2

Normally in the use of the photoelectric effect the objective is to readily collect a
current  of  photoelectrons  so  that  the  collection  anode  is  set  at  a  positive  electrical
potential  relative  to  the  photoelectron  source,  the  photosensitive  surface  on  which  the
light is shined. [Of course, the entire structure must be in a vacuum for the photoelectrons
to be free to travel without the interference of a relatively dense gas.]

In  the  present  experiment  the  collection  anode  is  set  negative  relative  to  the
photoelectron source, that negative potential being adjustable. Then the negative potential
is made progressively less negative until the first, initial photoelectron current is detected.
That  potential  is  the  energy  of  the  most  energetic  photoelectron  produced  by  the

12

particular frequency of the light being used [the photoelectrons emitted at lesser energies
having been freed from the photosensitive surface with the same high energy but having
lost some within the material before becoming free]. The data point is the energy and the
frequency.

As indicated in the figure, Planck's constant is the slope of the resulting line(s),

which develops as follows.  The energy of a photon of light is given by
(16)

E = h·f

where:

E is the energy,
h is Planck's constant, and
f is the frequency of the particular photon.

The initial energy datum is the electric retarding potential and must be converted to the
units of Planck's constant times frequency as required for the E of equation 16. That done,
then the slope of the line in the figure is

(17)

Energy/frequency = h·f/f = h, Planck's constant.
This  measurement  performed  on  light  from  distant  astronomical  sources  will
result in values for Planck's constant quite noticeably larger than our domestic value, the
difference  being  the  decay  that  has  taken  place  since  the  time  the  sample  light  was
originally emitted at its distant source.

References
[1]   A.G. Riess, A.V. Filippenko, P. Challis, A. Clocchiatti, A. Diercks, P.M. Garnavich,
R.L. Gilliland, C.J. Hogan, S. Jha, R.P. Kirshner, B. Leibundgut, M.M. Phillips, D.
Reiss,  B.P.  Schmidt,  R.A.  Schommer,  R.C.  Smith,  J.  Spyromilio,  C.  Stubbs,  N.B.
Suntzeff,  J.  Tonry,  Observational  Evidence  from  Supernovae  for  an  Accelerating
Universe  and  a  Cosmological  Constant,  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory  Eprint
Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov, astro-ph/9805201.

[2]      S.  Perlmutter,  G.  Aldering,  G.  Goldhaber,  R.A.  Knop,  P.  Nugent,  P.G.  Castro,  S.
Deustua, S. Fabbro, A. Goobar, D.E. Groom, I.M. Hook, A.G. Kim, M.Y. Kim, J.C.
Lee, N.J. Nunes, R. Pain, C.R. Pennypacker, R. Quimby, C. Lidman, R.S. Ellis, M.
Irwin, R.G. McMahon, P. Ruiz-Lapuente, N. Walton, B. Schaefer, B.J. Boyle, A.V.
Filppenko, T. Matheson, A.S. Fruchter, N. Panagia, H.J.M. Newberg, W.J. Couch,
Measurements  of  Ω  and  Λ  From  42  High-Redshift  Supernovae,  Los  Alamos
National Laboratory Eprint Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov, astro-ph/9812133.

[3]            R.  Ellman,  A  Conjecture  Concerning  Red  Shifts,  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory

Eprint Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov, physics/9808051.

[4]   R.  Ellman,  Further  Analysis  of  the  Universal  Decay  Suggested  In  "A  Conjecture
Concerning  Red  Shifts",  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory  Eprint  Archive  at
http://xxx.lanl.gov, physics/9809029.

[5]   R.  Ellman,  Exponential  Decay  of  the  Overall  Universe  is  the  Cause  of  "The
Apparent Anomalous, Weak, Long-Range Acceleration  of [the  spacecraft]  Pioneer
10 and 11", Los Alamos National Laboratory Eprint Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov,
physics/9906031.

[6]   This paper is based on development in R. Ellman, The Origin and Its Meaning, The-
Origin  Foundation, 
the
development is more extensive and the collateral issues are developed.  [It may be
downloaded from http://www.The-Origin.org/download.htm].

Inc.,  http://www.The-Origin.org,  1997, 

in  which 

13

[7]   J. D. Anderson, P. A. Laing, E. L. Lau, A. S. Liu, M. M. Nieto, and S. G. Turyshev,
Indication,  from  Pioneer  10/11,  Galileo,  and  Ulysses  Data,  of  an  Apparent
Anomalous, Weak, Long-Range Acceleration, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 2858 (1998), Los
Alamos National Laboratory Eprint Archive at  http://xxx.lanl.gov, gr-qc/9808081.

[8]   J. D. Anderson, P. A. Laing, E. L. Lau, A. S. Liu, M. M. Nieto, and S. G. Turyshev,
The Apparent Anomalous, Weak, Long-Range Acceleration of     Pioneer 10 and 11,
Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory  Eprint  Archive  at    http://xxx.lanl.gov,  gr-
qc/9903024.

14

