THE JEFFERSON LAB 1 KW IR FEL

D. Douglas, for the IR Demonstration FEL Project Team,

 Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility, Newport News, VA 23606, USA

Abstract

The Jefferson Lab (JLab) IR Demo Free Electron La-
ser (FEL) has completed commissioning and is initiating
user service. The FEL — a high repetition rate, low ex-
traction  efficiency  wiggler-driven  optical  cavity  resona-
tor — produces over 1 kW of tuneable light on intervals
in a 3–6 m m  wavelength  range.  It  is  driven  by  a  35–48
MeV,  5  mA  superconducting  RF  (SRF)  based  energy-
recovering continuous wave (CW) electron linac.

The driver accelerator meets requirements imposed by
low  energy,  high  current,  and  a  demand  for  stringent
beam control at the wiggler and during energy recovery.
These  constraints  are  driven  by  the  need  for  six-
dimensional  phase  space  management,  the  existence  of
deleterious  collective  phenomena  (space  charge,  wake-
fields,  beam  break-up,  and  coherent  synchrotron  radia-
tion),  and  interactions  between  the  FEL  and  the  accel-
erator RF. We will detail the system design, relate com-
missioning highlights, and discuss present performance.

1 SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS

The  FEL  is  a  wiggler-driven  laser  with  an  8  m  long
optical  cavity  resonator  [1].  It  uses  modest  gain,  low
output  coupling,  and  low  micropulse  energy  with  high
repetition  rate  to  avoid  high  single  bunch  charge  while
producing  high  average  power.  This  paradigm  leads  to
the use of SRF technology, allowing CW operation, and
motivates use of energy recovery to alleviate RF system
demands.

The  system  architecture  thus  imposes  two  require-

ments on the driver accelerator:

•

•

delivery  to  the  wiggler  of  an  electron  beam  with
properties suitable for the FEL interaction, and
recovery of the drive beam energy after the FEL.
The first requirement reflects the needs of the FEL sys-
tem itself. Optimized beam parameters are given in Ta-
ble  1.  We  note  the  nominal  FEL  extraction  efficiency
produced with these parameters is >½%. The micropulse
energy is modest; high output power is achieved through
the use of very high repetition rate (20th subharmonic of
the RF fundamental) and CW operation.

The  energy  recovery  requirement  reduces  RF  system
demands (both installed klystron power and RF window
tolerances),  cost,  and  radiation  effects  by  decelerating
the beam after the FEL so as to drive the RF cavities. As
the full momentum spread after the wiggler will be ~5%,

this  creates  a  need  for  a  large  acceptance  transport  sys-
tem.

 Table 1: Optimized system parameters

 Beam energy at wiggler
 Beam current
 Single bunch charge
 Bunch repetition rate
 Normalized emittance
 RMS bunch length at wiggler
 Peak current
 FEL extraction efficiency
d p/p

 rms, before wiggler
 full, after wiggler

 CW FEL power

~40 MeV

 5 mA
 60 pC

 74.85 MHz
 13 mm-mrad

 ~½ psec

 60 A
 >½%
 ¼ %
 5%

 >1 kW

2 SYSTEM CONFIGURATION

2.1  Overview

The  above  system  requirements  couple  to  many  phe-
nomena and constraints. Phase space requirements at the
FEL demand transverse matching and longitudinal phase
space  management  during  acceleration  and  transport  to
the  wiggler.  Similarly,  the  machine  must  provide  ade-
quate  transverse  beam  size  control  while  managing  the
large  longitudinal  phase  space.  Such  transport  and  con-
ditioning of the beam must be performed in the presence
of a number of potential collective effects driven by the
high  current  and  low  energy.  To  avoid  space-charge-
driven beam quality degradation, moderately high injec-
tion  energy  is  needed  [2].  Beam  break-up  (BBU)  and
other impedance-driven instabilities must be avoided [3].
Coherent synchrotron radiation (CSR) must be managed
to  preserve  beam  emittance  [4].  RF  stability  must  be
assured,  particularly  in  transient  regimes  such  as  FEL
turn-on and initiation of energy recovery [5].

Figure 1 illustrates the system concept, which has suc-
cessfully  addressed  these  issues.  The  schematic  shows
the 10 MeV injector, a single eight-cavity Jefferson Lab
cryomodule accelerating to ~40 MeV, an FEL insertion,
and  energy  recovery  transport  from  wiggler  through
module  to  a  beam  dump.  All  acceleration  is  performed
using  standard  CEBAF  1.497  GHz  five-cell  cavities.  A

 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Jefferson Lab 1 kW IR FEL. The machine is shown in the facility vault.

summary  of  the  function  and  performance  of  each  sec-
tion will now be provided.

2.2  Injector

The  electron  source  is  a  DC  photocathode  gun  nomi-
nally  producing  60  pC  bunches  at  320  keV  with  repeti-
tion  rates  of  up  to  75  MHz  [6].  Immediately  following
the  gun  a  room-temperature  buncher  compresses  the
initial  electron  pulse,  which  is  then  captured  by  a  two-
cavity  CEBAF  cryounit  and  accelerated  to  10  MeV.  A
four-quad telescope matches beam envelopes to the linac
acceptance across a three-bend “W” achromat. RF com-
ponent  phases  are  adjusted  to  produce,  in  concert  with
the  injection  line  momentum  compaction,  a  long  (~3
psec  rms)  low  relative  momentum  spread  (~0.1%  rms)
bunch at the entrance of the linac.

 Injected beam quality depends on gun operating volt-
age and charge per bunch; typical normalized emittances
for 320 kV operation are of order 5–10 mm-mrad [7].
 2.3  Linac

 The linac accelerates the injected beam from 10 MeV
to 35–48 MeV using a single high gradient eight-cavity
Jefferson Lab cryomodule. By accelerating 8o off crest, a
phase/energy  correlation  is  imposed  on  the  longitudinal
phase  space;  this  is  used  downstream  for  bunch  com-
pression. The RF cavities also provide transverse focus-
sing, assisting in beam envelope management.

 Immediately  after  the  cryomodule,  a  small  dipole  is
used  to  separate  the  accelerated  and  energy  recovered
beams. The low energy beam is directed to a dump; the
effect of this bend on the full energy beam is corrected
by a subsequent pair of small bends.

 2.4  FEL Insertion

 The FEL is located immediately beyond the linac. As
this  is  prior  to  recirculation  bending,  it  avoids  potential
CSR  degradation  of  beam  quality  and  allowed  a  low
power  “straight  ahead”  operational  (non-energy  recov-
ering)  mode  before  the  recirculator  was  fully  installed;
this  remains  a  useful  diagnostic  configuration.  A  quad-
rupole  telescope  (two  triplets)  matches  beam  envelopes

from module to wiggler. An achromatic four-dipole chi-
cane  between  the  triplets  separates  optical  cavity  and
electron beam components while compressing the bunch
length.  The  chicane  geometry  is  constrained  by  the  tol-
erable  momentum  compaction.  Larger  chicanes  provide
more  space  but  lead  to  higher  compactions  with  more
time  of  flight  jitter;  to  maintain  FEL  pulse/drive  beam
synchronism, the chicane M56 is restricted to –0.3 m.

 The  match  from  module  to  wiggler,  by  virtue  of  RF
focussing,  depends  on  linac  energy  gain.  It  is  therefore
adjusted  operationally  to  compensate  for  gross  (several
MeV)  energy  changes.  After  the  wiggler,  the  electron
beam  (full  momentum  spread  >  5%)  is  matched  to  the
recirculation  transport  using  a  second  quad  telescope.
This  avoids  beam  envelope  mismatch,  large  spot  sizes,
aggravated  optical  aberrations,  error  sensitivities,  and
potential beam loss. As in the linac to wiggler transport,
a  dipole  chicane  embedded  in  the  telescope  moves  the
electron  beam  off  the  optical  cavity  axis;  this  chicane
also  lengthens  the  electron  bunch,  reducing  peak  cur-
rents  and  alleviating  potential  wakefield  and  CSR  ef-
fects. Simulations and experience with the machine indi-
cate  that  space  charge  effects  are  not  significant  above
~25  MeV  [8];  analysis  of  system  performance  and  op-
erational  tuning  is  therefore  possible  using  single-
particle transport models.

 2.5  Recirculator/Energy Recovery Transport

Following  the  FEL  insertion,  the  electron  beam  (full
momentum spread > 5%) is transported through a recir-
culation arc to the linac for energy recovery. This recir-
culator  provides  both  transverse  beam  confinement  and
longitudinal  phase  space  conditioning.  Bending  is  pro-
vided  by  achromatic  and  nominally  isochronous  end
loops  based  on  an  MIT-Bates  design  [9].  Dipole  pa-
rameters (bend and edge angles) and drift lengths are set
to provide M56=0 from wiggler to reinjection point, and,
across each end loop, betatron stable motion in the hori-
zontal  plane  (with  a  tune  of  5/4)  and  imaging  transport
vertically  (-I  transfer  matrix).  The  end  loops  are  joined
by six 90o FODO cells; with the end loop phase advances

and  reflective  symmetry  across  the  backleg,  this  sup-
presses aberrations over the full arc.

Beam path length through the recirculator is adjusted
using steering dipoles adjacent to the large 180o dipoles
and  is  used  to  set  the  phase  of  the  energy-recovered
beam  with  respect  to  the  module  RF  fields.  Each  end
loop has four trim quads and four sextupoles for disper-
sion  and  compaction  control.  A  single  family  each  of
quadrupoles and sextupoles (adjacent to the 180  o bends)
is  used  to  modify  the  linear  and  quadratic  momentum
compactions  from  wiggler  to  reinjection,  so  as  to  com-
pensate  the  slope  and  curvature  of  the  RF  waveform
during energy recovery. This allows simultaneous recov-
ery  of  RF  power  from  the  electron  beam  and  compres-
sion of the beam energy spread at the dump.

The  second  end-loop  delivers  the  longitudinally  con-
ditioned  beam  to  the  linac  axis,  where  it  is  betatron
matched to the cyromodule acceptance using a four-quad
telescope,  and  merged  with  the  injected  beam  using  a
small achromatic three-dipole chicane.

 2.6  Longitudinal Matching Scenario

 Key to the operation of this device is the use of bunch
length compression (to create high peak current for FEL
gain) and energy recovery (to provide RF power required
for acceleration of high average currents) [10]. Figure 2
presents  a  schematic  of  the  longitudinal  matching  sce-
nario  employed  in  the  system.  The  individual  phase-
energy  plots  indicate  the  orientation  of  the  longitudinal
phase space at key locations around the machine.

 The  injector  provides  a  long,  upright,  small  momen-
tum spread bunch (3 psec rms × 30 keV rms), which is
accelerated off-crest in the linac. This imposes a phase-
energy  correlation,  generating  ~¼%  momentum  spread
—  about  100  keV  at  40  MeV  —  over  one  rms  bunch
length.  The  momentum  compaction  of  the  chicane  up-
stream  of  the  wiggler  rotates  this  slewed  phase  space
upright,  generating  a  short  bunch  (0.4  psec  rms)  at  the
wiggler.

 The FEL interaction does not affect bunch length, but
does  generate  a  large  full  momentum  spread.  This  is

evident in Figure 3, which shows the beam at a dispersed
point (h =0.4 m) in the chicane immediately downstream
of  the  wiggler,  without  lasing  (left  image:  full  momen-
tum spread ~1%, or 400 keV) and with lasing (right im-
age: full momentum spread ~5%, or 2 MeV). This is, as
well,  indicative  of  the  rather  large  acceptance  required
of the recirculator. The recirculator momentum compac-
tion is then used to rotate the bunch so that an appropri-
ate phase energy correlation occurs at reinjection.

 The  recirculator  path  length  is  adjusted  by  using  the
aforementioned dipoles to reinject the recirculated beam
180o out of phase with the accelerated beam. This results
in  a  transfer  of  beam  power  to  the  RF  structure,  with  a
resulting recovery of the beam energy. The phase-energy
correlation  imposed  by  the  recirculator  trim  quads  is
selected to compensate the slope of the decelerating RF
waveform.  As  a  consequence,  the  2  MeV  energy  full
spread of the recirculated beam, rather than adiabatically
antidamping  to  a  relative  energy  spread  of  order  20%
during  energy  recovery  to  10  MeV,  energy  compresses
to ~100 keV at the dump, giving a final relative energy
spread of 1%. This 20:1 energy compression requires not
only  the  appropriate  recirculator  M56,  but  also  demands
the proper T566 so as to correct both the lattice quadratic
variation of path length with momentum and the curva-
ture  of  the  decelerating  RF  waveform.  Figure  4  illus-
trates this point by displaying the 10 MeV energy recov-
ered  beam  at  a  dispersed  point  (h ~1  m)  near  the  dump
with and without lasing and without and with sextupoles.
The  beam  is  more  diffuse  and  the  momentum  spread

struction began in the fall of 1997, with milestones met
as indicated in the following chronology:

•
  Oct. 1997
•
  Dec. 1997
•
  Mar. 1998

•

•

Jun. 1998

Jul. 1998

•
  Dec. 1998

•
  Mar. 1999

•

Jul. 1999

1st beam in vault (injector)
1st beam to straight-ahead dump
high  current  single  pass  operation
(1.1  mA  CW 
to  straight-ahead
dump)
wiggler  installed,  1st  light  (155  W
CW at 5 m m /1.1 mA straight ahead)
recirculator  construction  completed,
1st  energy  recovered  beam,  1st  (low
power) lasing with energy recovery
high  power  lasing  with  energy  re-
covery    (>200  W  CW  at  5  m m/1.4
mA)
kW-class  5  m m  operation  (710  W
CW at 3.6 mA; mirror limited)
1.72 kW CW at 3 m m/4.4  mA;  kW-
class tuneable light at 3, 5 and 6 m m
5th harmonic (1 m m) lasing

greater  without  sextupoles  (top)  than  when  sextupoles
are  activated  (bottom).  The  final  beam  spot  is  however
roughly independent of lasing when sextupoles are acti-
vated (bottom left, laser off; bottom right, laser on).

 Energy  recovery  is  quite  efficient.  This  is  illustrated
by Figure 5, which presents the RF drive system forward
powers in each cryomodule cavity with beam off, with 1
mA  of  beam  without  energy  recovery,  and  at  various
currents  with  energy  recovery.  Essentially  all  of  the
beam power is recovered, inasmuch as no power beyond
the zero current value is required.

3 CONSTRUCTION AND

COMMISSIONING HIGHLIGHTS

 IR  Demo  project  funding  started  in  April  1996,  with
construction  and  installation  continuing  through  August
1998.  Commissioning  activities  interleaved  with  con-

•
Sept. 1999 Thomson scattering x-ray production
 Early  in  commissioning,  the  system  was  limited  to
~30% availability by the gun. Effort in this area has led
to  a  very  reliable  electron  source  with  nearly  100%
availability. The presently installed GaAs wafer has pro-
vided  cathode  lifetimes  in  excess  of  600  C  and  has  de-
livered  over  2  kC  total  charge  [11].  Also  noteworthy
during commissioning were the production of 1 m m light
through fifth harmonic lasing [12] and the generation of
intense,  short  x-ray  pulses  through  Thomson  scattering
[13]. The latter holds promise of expanding the scope of
the user facility to support pump-probe experimentation.

 4 PERFORMANCE

 The  driver  accelerator  and  FEL  perform  flexibly,
robustly,  and  reproducibly.  The  system  restores  to  full
power  lasing  in  a  shift  after  long  shutdowns;  during
normal operations, lasing is recovered in minutes after a
vault acess.  Operations  are  simplified  by  a  full  suite  of
diagnostics [14], including beam position monitors, opti-
cal  transition  radiation  based  beam  viewers,  beam  cur-
rent montoring cavities and a “Happek device”, an inter-
ferometric  coherent  transition  radiation  based  bunch
length diagnostic.  The former pair of diagnostics allows
beam  steering  and  transverse  matching,  the  latter  pair
supports the longitudinal matching detailed above.

 The FEL provides pulsed and CW lasing with variable
timing  (within  limits  dictated  by  the  drive  laser  funda-
mental of 75 MHz and the optical cavity length of 8 m)
over continuously tuneable ranges around 3, 5, and 6 m m
(defined by mirror reflectivities).  It is used as a source
by  a  growing  user  community  [15]  and  for  machine
studies. The latter include the topics of FEL/RF stability,
BBU,  CSR,  and  investigations  of  tapered  wiggler  dy-
namics [16]. A typical FEL output spectrum is shown in
Figure 7, a detuning curve is shown in Figure 8.

 
 
 
 
 
of Naval Research, the Commonwealth of Virginia, and
the U.S. Department of Energy through contract number
DE-AC05-84ER40150.

REFERENCES

[1] G. Neil et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., 84, 4:662-5 (2000).

[2] H. Liu et al., Nuc. Inst. Meth. A358: 475-8 (1995).

[3] L. Merminga et al., PAC’99, pp. 1177-9, New York,

29 March-2 April 1999.

[4] R. Li et al., PAC’97, Vancouver, May 1997; R. Li,
EPAC’98,  Stockholm,  June  1998;  R.  Li.,  FEL’99,
Hamburg, August 1999; R Li, EPAC’2000, Vienna,
June 2000.

[5] L. Merminga et al., “FEL-RF Instabilities in Recir-
culating,  Energy-Recovering  Linacs  with  an  FEL”,
FEL’99, Hamburg, August 1999.

[6] D. Engwall et al., PAC’97, pp. 2693-5, Vancouver,

May 1997.

[7] P.  Piot  et  al.,  EPAC’98,  pp.  1447-9,  Stockholm,
June  1998;  P.  Piot  et  al.,  “Emittances  and  Energy
Spread  Studies  in  the  Jefferson  Lab  Free-Electron
Laser”, EPAC’2000, Vienna, June 2000.

[8] H.  Liu,  private  communication;  B.  Yunn,  unpub-

lished.

[9] J. Flanz et al., Nuc. Inst. Meth. A241:325-33 (1985).

[10] L. Merminga et al., PAC’99, pp. 2456-8, New York,
29 March-2 April 1999; P. Piot et al., “Study of the
Energy Compression Scheme to Energy Recover an
Electron  Beam  in  Presence  of  an  FEL  Interaction”,
EPAC’2000, Vienna, June 2000.

[11] T. Siggins et al., “Performance of the Photocathode
Gun  for  the  TJNAF  FEL”,  FEL’2000,  Durham,
N.C., August 2000.

[12] E. Gillman et al., FEL’99, Hamburg, August 1999.

[13] G.  Krafft,  PAC’99,  pp.  2448-9,  New  York,  29

March-2 April 1999.

[14] G. Krafft et al., PAC’99, pp. 2229-31, New York, 29

March-2 April 1999.

[15] Jefferson  Lab  IR  FEL  user  facility  information  is

available on-line at http://www.jlab.org/FEL/.

[16] S. Benson et al., “An Experimental Study of an FEL
Oscillator  with  a  Linear  Taper”,  FEL’2000,  Dur-
ham, N.C.,  August 2000.

[17] C. C. Shih et al., Nuc. Inst. Meth. A304:788 (1991).

[18]  D.  Douglas  et  al.,  “Driver  Accelerator  Design  for
the  10  kW  Upgrade  of  the  Jefferson  Lab  IR  FEL”,
these proceedings.

 5  THE 10 KW UPGRADE

 The U.S. Navy has provided 9.3 M$ initial funding for
an upgrade of this system to 10 kW. The envisioned up-
grade path will entail

•

•

•

•

doubling the injected current from 5 to 10 mA by
increasing the bunch charge from 67 to 135 pC,
installation of two additional cryomodules to raise
the beam energy to ~160 MeV,
upgrading the recirculator to accommodate higher
beam energy and a new FEL insertion embedded
in the machine backleg, and
implementation  of  a  32  m  long  R5  optical  cavity
[17] accommodating high power operation on a 2-
10 m m bandwidth.

Design, prototyping, and procurement activities are now
underway;  with  anticipated  follow-on  funding  upgrade
commissioning is expected to commence in fall 2002. A
description of the machine is available elsewhere [18].

6 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This  paper  presents  the  work  of  members  of  the  Jef-
ferson  Lab  IR  Demonstration  FEL  Project  Team;  I
would like to thank them for their efforts and assistance
in  its  preparation.    I  would  also  like  to  thank  Dr.  Jay
Benesch for a careful reading of the text and many use-
ful suggestions. This  work  was  supported  by  the  Office

 
 
 
 
