C. P. Welsch, K.-U. Kühnel, A. Schempp 

Institut für Angewandte Physik 

Johann Wolfgang Goethe Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany 

Development of Rebunching Cavities at IAP 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Abstract 
 
A  focus  of  work  at  IAP  has  been  the  development  and 
optimization  of  spiral  loaded  cavities  since  the  1970s  
[A. Schempp et al, NIM 135 , 409 (1976)]. These cavities 
feature  a  high  efficiency,  a  compact  design  and  a  big 
variety of possible fields of application.  
 
They  find  use  both  as  bunchers  and  post  accelerators  to 
vary the final energy of the beam. In comparison to other 
available designs, the advantage of these structures lies in 
their small size. Furthermore they can easily be tuned to 
the required resonance frequency by varying the length of 
the  spiral.  Due  to  the  small  size  of  the  cavities  the 
required budget can also be kept low. 
 
Here, two slightly different types of spiral loaded cavities, 
which were built for the REX-ISOLDE project at CERN 
and  the  intensity  upgrade  program  at  GSI  are  being 
discussed. 
 

I. COMMON FEATURES 

A. General Remarks 

 
Large Accelerator facilities very often need to be highly 
flexible  in  terms  of  final  energy  and  the  particles  to  be 
accelerated. With long linear accelerators – like  Alvarez 
or  Wideröe  structures  –  alone,  the  necessary  energy 
variations cannot be attained. Therefore, single resonators 
are  very  often  used.  They  allow  changing  the  energy  of 
the  particles  as  well  as  the  velocity  distribution  of  the 
beam. 
 
 

 

Fig. 1: Schematic Drawing of spiral loaded cavity 

 
In a cylindrical external tank one or more spiral arms are 
placed. At their open end each spiral carries a drift tube 
 

running  along  the  symmetry  axis  of  the  cavity  and  thus 
forming several accelerating gaps.   
 
Different  designs  of 
the  spiral  arms  are  possible, 
depending on the required resonance frequency. The most 
common structure consists of two semi-circles with radii r 
and r/2. This design allows easy manufacturing as well as 
simple  adjustment  inside  the  tank  –  the  drifttubes  are 
automatically  situated  in  the  middle  of  the  cavity. 
Somehow  more  complicated  are  the  “archimedic  Type” 
structures. In this case spirals with constant pitch are used 
allowing resonance frequencies as low as 27 MHz. 
 

B. Characteristic Parameters 

 
The  transittime  factor  T  indicates  the  flexibility  of  an 
accelerator as the quotient of the effectively experienced 
voltage and the total gap voltage. The Rp-value is defined 
as the effective cavity voltage squared over the power P 
put into the cavity. 
 

U

=

T

Gap

,eff
U

tot

=

R

p

U

2
.Cav
,eff
P

 

1
π
a2
λβ





 





I
)

0





 
With n as the number of gaps, the Rp-value is proportional 
to n2 in case of the single-spiral structure and proportional 
to n for a splitring structure. 
The  transittime  factor  is  the  product  of  a  velocity 
dependent and a geometry based term [1] 
 
)

=

T
G

λβ
(
+
π
85,0d

)

⋅

r

⋅

sin

(
⋅
π
85,0
λβ

r






⋅


=

T
V

⋅

n

⋅

2
(
⋅

β
−

ββπ
0

⋅

n

⋅

sin

)





ββπ
0

(
⋅
2

⋅

−
β

d 
= width of acceleration gap 
r 
= radius of curvature of drifttubes (rout-rin) 
a 
= radius of aperture 
β0  = v0 / c;   β  =  v / c 
v0 / v = reference / real velocity of particles 

 
where
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2 shows a plot of the velocity dependent term in case 
of the 36 MHz 11.4 MeV/u rebuncher built for GSI.  
 
The  wide  spectrum  of  possible  applications  is  clearly 
shown in this plot. While many-gap structures are limited 

 

to a narrow energy interval, a 2- or 3-gap accelerator can 
handle  even  particles  with  a  large  deviation  from  the 
design  energy.  This  flexibility  is  characteristic  for  all  of 
the here presented structures. 
 

II. THE INTENSITY UPGRADE 

PROGRAM AT GSI 

 
It is the goal of the intensity upgrade program at GSI to 
fill  the  SIS  up  to  its  space  charge  limit.  This  requires  a 
beam current of up to 15 emA (238U4+), which could not 
be  delivered  by  the  earlier  system.  Therefore  the  old 
wideroe  structure  was  replaced  by  an  RFQ  and  two  IH-
structures,  especially  designed 
to  accelerate  high 
intensity, low charge state  beams.  
Special  attention  had  to  be    paid  in  the  two  stripping 
sections, where high space charge effects are present and 
focussing  elements  in  both  transverse  and  longitudinal 
direction are necessary. 
 

 

 

Figure 2: velocity depend term of the transittime factor 

 
The  resonance  frequency  of  the  structures  can  also  be 
determined from the geometrical dimensions alone [2].  
During  the  last  years  analytical  solutions  for  describing 
these  cavities  have  been  continuously  developed  and 
allow the calculation of not only the transittime factor, but 
also  the  quality  factor  Q,  the  shunt  impedance  and 
resonance frequency with high accuracy. 
Without going into the details, it should be mentioned that 
it  is  possible  to  describe  a  spiral  loaded  cavity  as  a 
transission  line  loaded  with  capacitors  or  as  a  set  of 
capacitors and inductors. Only the geometric dimensions 
of  cavity  and  the  inner  structure  are  necessary  for  these 
calculations  and  are  therefore  applicable  to  all  different 
kinds of structures. Fig. 3 shows the calculated capacity C 
at  each  mm  of  the  36  MHz  11.4  MeV/u  spiral  in  the 
transfer channel at GSI. Included is not only the capacity 
between  the  spiral  and  the  surrounding  tank,  but  also 
between  the  two  spirals  and  interaction  between  the 
windings of each arm. 
 

 

 

Figure 3: capacity C between spiral arm and tank 

 
In  addition  to  these  analytical  calculations,  all  of  the 
above  parameters  are  determined  with  the  MAFIA 
program.  Using  the  obtained  field  distributions,  the 
accuracy  of  the  above  results  can  be  proven  and 
optimisation of the structures can be done. 

 

 

 

Figure 4: part of the UNILAC 

the 

to  counteract 

 
Even though an 108 MHz Rebuncher was already present 
in  the  section  in  front  of  the  Alvarez-linac,  it  was 
necessary 
longitudinal  defocusing 
effects.  
The resonance frequency was chosen to be 36 MHz, like 
the  frequency  in  the  HSI,  providing  a  larger  region  of  
linear forces. 
 
This low frequency and the given length of the structure 
with only l=60 cm required a compact structure. At high 
currents a total voltage of 875 kV was necessary to turn 
the emittance ellipse into an upright position. In order to 
avoid sparks, two spirals with constant pitch ("archimedic 
type") were chosen, shown in Fig 5.  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

Figure 5: View inside 36 MHz 1.4 MeV/u rebuncher 

 
The  radius  of  the  tank  is  only  r=25  cm,  the  aperture 
dap=5.5  cm.  Experiments  showed  that  this  structure  was 
not stable against external mechanical excitations. With a 
length of 210 cm each arm was not inflexible enough to 
resist forced oscillation. Thus two additional copper tubes 
were fixed on each side of the two spirals. 
 

Figure 6: distribution of electric field along axis 

A  number  of  simulations  was  done  to  optimise  the 
particle motion through the buncher [2,3]; always taking 
into  account  the  various  kinds  of  different  ions  that  are 
going to be used at GSI. 
 
Fig 6 shows the distribution of the electric field along the 
beam axis. Since all gaps have the same width, the field 
in  the  middle  gap  shows  double  the  amplitude.  With  a 
quality factor of Q0=2200 and Rp=9 MΩ the input power 
needs to be p=85 kW. 
 
Another  rebuncher  had  to  be  installed  between  the 
UNILAC  and  the  SIS.  In  this  transfer  channel  the  ions 
pass through a carbon foil  where they  get  many of their 
electrons  stripped.  Strong  space  charge  effects  are  the 
result  of 
longitudinal 
debunching.  In  order  to  match  the  beam  into  the  SIS,  a 
second rebuncher counteracts this divergence.  
 
Operated  at  the  same  resonance  frequency  fres=36  MHz, 
the  “archimedic type”  structure  was chosen again. Since 

this  process 

leading 

to  a 

the  design  energy  of  E=11.4  MeV/u  was  a  lot  higher  in 
this  case,  the  total  voltage  needed  to  be  only  U=650kV 
which could be fulfilled with a single spiral.  
Each  of  the  two  gaps  has  a  width  of  2.2  cm  and  the 
diameter of the drifttubes is dap=6 cm. The l=170 cm long 
spiral  has  an  internal  water  cooling  to  secure  stable 
conditions during operations.  
The quality factor is a little higher in this case Q0=3600 
and with a measured value of Rp=4.5 MΩ, an input power 
of p=94 kW is needed. 
 
Both  resonators  are  already  integrated  into  the  GSI 
beamline and are successfully operated. 
 

III. REBUNCHER FOR REX-ISOLDE 

(Radioactive  Beam  Experiment 

 
REX-ISOLDE 
at 
ISOLDE)  is  a  new  project  at  the  online  mass  separator 
ISOLDE / CERN [4]. 
The structure of exotic and neutron rich nuclei, especially 
Na,  Mg,  K  and  Ca,  will  be  studied.  The  nuclei  have  to 
reach energies in the order of the coulomb barrier. 
 
By measuring the arising γ-rays both, static and dynamic 
properties of these hardly known nuclei can be examined. 
 

 

 

 

Figure 7: Part of the REX-ISOLDE beamline 

 

In  order  to  accelerate  the  radioactive  beam  to  the 
necessary  energy,  a  combination  of  an  ion  source, 
penning  trap,  charge  state  breeder,  mass  separator,  an 
Rfq,  an  IH-structure  and  a  7-gap  resonator  is  used  [5]. 
Finally  the  radioactive  beam  hits  the  target  with  a  final 
energy from 0.8 MeV/u to 2.2 MeV/u. 
 
Part of the  whole beamline is shown in Fig. 7. Between 
RFQ  and  IH  a  longitudinal  match  is  necessary.  Beam 
diagnostic  is  done  and  the  beam  is  matched  to  the 
acceptance  of  the  IH  structure.  Limiting  parameter  was 
the total length of only 1.6 m from the exit of the Rfq to 
the  IH.  Two  quadrupole  triplets,  the  diagnostic  box  and 
the rebuncher had to fitted in. Thus the maximum length 
of the rebuncher tank must not exceed 30 cm. 
The  necessary  transformation  of  the  phase  space  ellipse 
required  a  total  voltage  of  25  kV.  Combining  flexibility 
with  high  efficiency,  a  3-gap  splitring  structure  was 
chosen.  
 
 
 

 

 

 

Figure 8: calculated 

 field distribution 

 
The  inner  diameter  of  the  vacuum  tank  is  35  cm  - 
incorporating two spirals with a length of only l=475 mm 
each.  The  beam  aperture  is  dap=6cm  as  in  all  other 
elements of the matching section. 
 
 

Figure 9: View into open splitring cavity 

 
This structure  was also completed and is today operated 
successfully in Munich and will be integrated in the REX-
ISOLDE beamline at CERN soon. 
 
 

Care has to be taken to separate 0- and π-mode from one 
another.  Calculation  and  Measurements  showed  that  the 
unwanted  0-mode  lies  at  f0=159  MHz  and  therefore  far 
enough from the operating frequency of fres=101.28 MHz. 
Furthermore,  the  electric  field  needs  to  be  kept  in 
reasonable  dimensions  in  order  to  avoid  sparking.  The 
result of the calculations is shown in Fig. 8.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

IV. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 

the 

last 

three  decades, 

 
During 
the  efficiency  and 
flexibility of rebunching cavities has been more and more 
developed.  The  compact  size  of  these  cavities  clearly 
separates them from other possible designs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Easy manufacturing, low input power and stability during 
operation  are  the  features  of  these  cavities  that  can  be 
used as rebunchers as well as post accelerators. 
Different  internal  structures  are  possible  and  depend  on 
the  resonance  frequency,  energy  region  and  the  possible 
size.  
Future research will optimise present designs with respect 
to required power input, possible voltages and size. 
 

REFERENCES 

 

 

 
[1] J. Häuser, „Eigenschaften von Spiralresonatoren“, 
thesis, University of Frankfurt, 1989  
[2] C. Welsch „Aufbau und Untersuchung von 
Spiralresonatoren für den Hochstrominjektor der GSI“, 
Diplomarbeit, University of Frankfurt, 1999, 
http://www.carsten-welsch.net 
[3] W. Barth et al, „High Current Beam Dynamics for the 
Upgraded UNILAC“,  
PAC, Vancouver, 1997 
[4] K.U. Kühnel „Aufbau eines Splitringresonators als 
Rebuncher für das REX-ISOLDE Projekt“,  
Diplomarbeit, University of Frankfurt, 1999 
[5] D. Habs et al, „The REX-ISOLDE project“,  
NIM B 126, 218 (1997) 

 

 

 

