A SUPERCONDUCTIVE, LOW BETA SINGLE GAP CAVITY FOR A HIGH 

INTENSITY PROTON LINAC 

 

A.  Facco, V. Zviagintsev1, INFN, Laboratori Nazionali di Legnaro, Italy 

B.  M. Pasini , Universita’ di  Padova, Italy 

 

 

Abstract 

A  single  gap,  352  MHz  superconducting  reentrant 
cavity for 5-100 MeV beams has been designed and it 
is  presently  under  construction.  This  development  is 
being done in the framework of a 30 mA proton linac 
project  for  nuclear  waste  transmutation.  Mechanical, 
cryogenic and rf design characteristics of such cavities 
will be described. 

 
 
1  INTRODUCTION  
 
The  TRASCO 

project 

for 

nuclear  waste 
transmutation  [1]  requires  a  5-100  MeV  linac  for 
acceleration of a 30 mA proton beam. Generally, room 
temperature Drift Tube Linac structures are used in this 
energy  range;  however,  since  the  high  duty  cycle 
required  for  high  current  beams  implies  a  very  high 
power  density  on 
the 
superconducting solution would offer many advantages. 
Among 
gap 
superconducting cavities at 352 MHz, able to cover the 
full  range  of  velocity,  could  allow  a  linac  design with 
high reliability [2].  

resonators  walls, 

possibilities, 

various 

the 

single 

Fig.1 Mechanical design of the reentrant cavity.     

                                                           
1 on leave from ITEP, Moscow, Russia 

This Independently-phased Superconducting Cavities 
Linac (ISCL) scheme, in which the power is distributed 
in a large number of rf sources, allows to increase the 
expected  beam  MTBF (Mean Time Between Failures) 
significantly [3]; this is of outmost importance for ADS 
applications. Keeping the beam loading within about 15 
kW  per  cavity  allows  beam  transport  without  losses 
even  in  case  of  failure  of  one  of  the  cavities,  with  no 
need  to  reset  immediately  the  linac  parameters.  This 
property gives the time for on-line repair or substitution 
of accessible failing components, like rf amplifiers and 
power  supplies,  which  are  usually  the  main  source  of 
beam  shutdown  [4].  We  have  designed  and  we  are 
building  a  single  gap  cavity  that  could  fulfil  the 
required  characteristics  for  an  ISCL,  i.e.:  a  relatively 
large  bore  to  reduce  the  risk  of  beam  losses;  axial 
symmetry of the accelerating field to prevent emittance 
increase  (e.g.,  short  quarter  wave  resonators  usually 
have  a  measurable dipole field component); very wide 
velocity  acceptance  given  by  the  single  gap,  allowing 
for  only  one  resonator  type  along  the  whole  linac; 
simple  geometry,  which  gives 
the  possibility  of 
optimising  the  production  cycle  for  a  low  cost.  A 
further  advantage  of  this  design  is  the  possibility  of 
using  solid  state  rf  amplifiers,  which  can  be  presently 
built at a competitive cost but with an expected increase 
of lifetime and reliability compared to tetrode and IOT 
amplifiers [9].  

In  the  past,  the  main  difficulty  related  to  the 
construction  of  pillbox  type  superconducting  cavities 
was  the  strong  multipacting.  Reentrant  cavities  with 
tolerable  multipacting  have  been  demonstrated  at 
Stanford  [5].  Another  difficulty  related  to  axially 
symmetric  low-β  cavities  is  their  flat  shape,  which 
requires a very strong mechanical structure to hold the 
liquid helium pressure. 
 

2   CAVITY DESIGN 

 
Since our peculiar constraint was the linac reliability, 
we  designed 
the  conservative 
assumptions of operating it at a maximum surface field 
of 25 MV/m, with a total rf surface resistance up to 100 

this  cavity  with 

≅58nΩ  at  4.2  K)  ;  according  to  the  linac 
nΩ  (RBCS
architecture [8], a maximum beam loading of 15 kW is 
foreseen.  The  study  included  rf  design,  multipacting 
simulations and mechanical design. 

The 

studied  with 

rf  design  was 

the  code 
SUPERFISH;  the  calculated  cavity  parameters  are 
listed  in  tab.  1.  The  resonator,  with  an rf  length of 80 
mm and a total length of 135 mm along the beam axis, 
is  rather  short  and  allows  for  a  good  linac  packing 
factor;  its  outer  diameter  is  542  mm.  Both  the  bore 
diameter  and  the  gap  length  are  30  mm,  allowing 
efficient  acceleration  down  to  β=0.1,  i.e.  about  5 
MeV/A.  The  design  value  of  the  accelerating  field  in 
operation  is  8.3  MV/m,  requiring  less  than  7W  per 
cavity. We should remind that the search for maximum 
shunt  impedance  was  not  the  aim  of  this  work.  Since 
the main limitation in low-β superconducting cavities is 
usually determined by the maximum achievable surface 
electric field, related to the onset of field emission, and 
since  our  linac  design  required  relatively  low  energy 
gain  per  cavity,  we  looked  mainly  for  low  surface 
electric and magnetic field, and short size.  

2 

 
Total length 
Internal length 
bore radius 
frequency 
U/Ea
Ep/Ea 
Hp/Ea 
Γ=Rs
×Q 
R’sh (Cu) 
β 
 
Tab. 1 Resonator parameters calculated by means of 

mm 
mm 
mm 
MHz 
J/(MV/m)2 
 
Gauss/(MV/m) 
Ω 
MΩ/m 
 

135 
80 
15 
352 
0.034 
3.05 
30.6 
83.9 
18 
≥ 0.1 

the code SUPERFISH. 

 
The rf power will be fed through a inductive coupler, 
still  under  study,  located  on  the  resonator  equator;  a 
coaxial capacitive coupler in the resonator cut-off tube, 
although  preferable,  would  be  hardly  feasible,  due  to 
the  constraints on the resonator length imposed by  the 
required linac packing factor.   

A deep study of the multipacting (MP) properties of 
the  cavity  was  performed,  with  more  than  50000  runs 
of the simulation program TWTRAJ [6]. The shape of 
the gap, where strong MP could be expected, prevents 
the  onset  of  MP  because  of  the  absence  of  the 
dangerous values of the electric-to-magnetic field ratio. 
The region where most of the multipacting levels were 
concentrated,  in  the  initial  design  schemes,  was  the 
resonator  equator.  Electrons  originated 
in  many 
different  positions  inside  the  resonator  and  drifting  to 
the  equator  were  collected  there  (see  Fig.  2),  building 
very  strong  levels  with  various  multiplicities.  This 
region  was  properly  shaped  with  an  elliptical  contour 

(ratio between axes 1:1.5) and all high field levels have 
been finally eliminated. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.2.  Example  of 

the  multipacting  simulation 
program  output  (the  horizontal  axis  is  stretched  in  the 
picture). The circular contour, as well as the rectangular 
one, was causing high field multipacting levels.                                          
 
The main concern in the mechanical design was related 
to the large force acting on the relatively flat and wide 
resonator  surface.  The  niobium  sheet,  3  mm  thick, 
could not sustain the pressure in the absence of strong 
reinforcement.    We  tackled  this  problem  using  a 
different  approach:  in  our  design,  the  helium  vessel  is 
part of the resonator (like in the LNL bulk niobium low 
beta  cavities  [10]),  and  it  is  welded  to  the  resonator 
wall so that the net force on the total structure is nearly 
cancelled. This design allows a relatively light structure 
with  a  good  stability  and  a  minimum  displacement  of 
the  walls  under  pressure  (limited  to  a  few  microns) 
when the tuner is mounted. The mechanical stresses are 
also confined to rather safe values (Fig. 3,4). The 4.2K 
helium is fed by gravity through a flange on the top of 
the  resonator;  like  in  most  superconducting  linacs  for 
heavy  ions,  there  is  no  separation  between  the  beam 
vacuum and the cryostat one.  

The  tuning  is  obtained,  changing  the  gap  length, by 
means of a mechanical tuner connected to the external 
part of the drift tubes. A “nutcracker” type tuner, driven 
by a piezoelectric or magnetostrictive actuator, is being 
presently considered. Since the required tuning force is 
relatively  low,  the  calculated  Lorenz  force  detuning 
(≅170  Hz/(MV/m)2)  and  helium  pressure  detuning 
(≅140 Hz/mbar) of the bare cavity are not negligible in 
comparison  to  the  1  kHz  resonator  rf  bandwidth  in 
operation. A stiff tuner reduces the pressure detuning to 
≅20 Hz/mbar. The foreseen cw mode of operation gives 
a  nearly  constant  radiation  pressure  on  the  walls  that 
can  be  compensated  by  the  tuner.  The  experimental 

study  of  possible  mechanical  instabilities  and  of  their 
remedies, however, is one of the aims of this prototype 
construction.  For  the  design  and  simulation  of  the 
mechanical structure we used the I-DEAS code [7]. 
 

 
Fig.3. Reentrant cavity 2D mechanical simulation. 
 

 

Fig.  4.  Mechanical  deformation  as  a  result  of  1  bar 
pressure  increase  in  the  helium  bath.  The  maximum 
displacement  is  about  20  µm  in  the  outer  shell  (for 
clarity, the deformation is amplified in the picture). 
 

3   CONCLUSIONS 

 

A  low  beta,  352  MHz  superconducting  reentrant 
cavity  for  high  intensity  proton  beams  has  been 
designed.  This  single-gap  structure  contains  novel 
features  in  the  mechanical  construction and allows for 
acceleration  of  low  beta,  5-100  MeV  protons.  The 
cavity was designed as the accelerating element for an 
Independently-phased  Superconducting  Linac  (ISCL), 
characterized  by  high  reliability  and  efficiency,  for 
ADS  applications.  The  prototype  construction  has 
started and the first rf test is expected within 2000.  
 
 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

 
We  are  grateful  to  M.  Comunian  and  A.  Pisent  for 
their collaboration and their clarifying suggestions. We 
thank  also  H.  Safa  and  R.  Parodi  for  the  fruitful 
discussions about multipacting. 

 

 

REFERENCES 

[1]  http://trasco.lnl.infn.it/ 
[2]  M.  Comunian,  A.  Facco,  A.  Pisent,  “A  100  MeV 
linac:  beam  dynamics 
superconducting  proton 
the  XIX  Int.  Linear 
issue”,  Proceedings  of 
Accelerator  Conference,  Chicago,  August  23-28, 
1998. 

[3]  M.  Pasini,  “Studio  della  sezione  di  media  energia 
di un linac superconduttivo ad alta intensita’”, Tesi 
di Laurea, Universita’ di Padova, A.A. 1999-2000. 
[4]  Piaszcyk  C.M.,  “Accelerator  as  a  repairable 
system”,  Proc.  Of  the  Workshop  on  Reliability  of 
High Power Proton Accelerators, Aix-en-Provence 
1999. 

[5]  P.H.  Ceperly,  J.S.  Sokolowski,  I.  Ben-Zvi,  H.F. 
Glavish  and  S.S.  Hanna,  “Beam 
test  of  a 
superconducting  niobium  cavity  for  a  heavy  ion 
accelerator”,  Nuclear  Instruments  and  Methods 
136 (1976) 421-423. 

[6]  P. Fernadez, R. Parodi, “User’s guide TW-TRAJ”, 

SERA 90-224/mcl. 

[7]   www.sdrc.com 
[8]  A.  Pisent,  M.  Comunian,  A.  Facco,  M.  Pasini, V. 
Zviagintsev,  L.Celona,  G.  Ciavola,  S.  Gammino, 
INFN-LNS, Catania,  G. Lamanna, “TRASCO 100 
MeV High Intensity Proton Linac”, Proc. of the 7th 
EPAC Conference, Vienna, Austria, 1992. 

[9]  T. 

Ruan 

et 

al., 

“Low 

cost  High  
Power UHF MOSFET Amplifier", Proceedings of  
the  7th  Annual  Workshop  on  European 
Synchrotron 
Sources, 
7,  
Berlin, Germany, November 1999. 

ESLS 

Light 

[10] A.Facco, J.S. Sokolowski and B. Elkonin, “A bulk 
niobium  low  beta  superconducting  quarter  wave 
resonator  for  ALPI”,  Proc.  of  the  3rd  EPAC 
Conference,  Berlin,  1992,  vol.2,  p.  127.                             

