MEASUREMENT  OF  THE  TEMPORAL  RESPONSE  OF

FERROELETRIC  PHOTOCATHODES

M. Castellano, M. Ferrario, F. Tazzioli, INFN-LNF; L. Catani, INFN-ROMA2;

L. Giannessi, ENEA-CRE, I. Boscolo, S. Cialdi, M. Valentini, University and INFN Milano.

Abstract

Various  photoemissive  materials,  among  which
ferroelectric ceramics are tested as photo  emitters  at  INFN
Frascati Laboratories. In  order to  understand  the  physical
processes  involved  in  the  emission  and  to  characterize
them  as  photocathodes  for  use  in  linac  injectors,  it  is
important  to  measure the  temporal  shape  of  the  emitted
current. As  the  duration of  the  laser  pulse  is  25  ps,  the
required resolution is of the order of  few ps.  An  apparatus
has  been set  up  for the  purpose,  consisting  of  a  30  kV
electron  gun,  a  microwave  transverse  deflecting  cavity
which translates the  temporal distribution  of  the  electron
bunch into  a spatial  one,  a  fluorescent  screen  on  which
the  deflected beam traces a sector of  a  circle  and  various
focusing and charge measuring items.  The  image  on  the
screen is detected via  a CCD  camera and a frame grabber.
We describe  the  performance  of  the  apparatus  and  some
preliminary temporal distribution measurements.

1  INTRODUCTION

The measurement of  the  time  correlation between laser
pulse  and  emitted  current  from  a  photocathode 
is
important  to  characterize  the  cathode  itself  and  the
suitability  of  the  generated  electron  pulse  for  further
acceleration in  injectors.  In  our  case the  photon  pulse  is
obtained  from  a  mode  locked  Nd-Yag  laser  and  has  a
duration of  25  ps.  The cathodes to  be tested are  made  of
either ferroelectric PLZT  ceramics [1]  or  doped  Diamond
[2].  The ceramics are  expected  to  exhibit  a  multiphoton
response starting  from  the  green  wavelength  range  (532
nm) while the  diamond samples  start  emitting  in  the  UV
range. The measuring system has been initially  set  up  for
the  green light  (second harmonic of  the  laser) but  can be
readily adapted to  UV radiation. The ceramic cathodes are
disks  of  16  mm  diameter,  0.7  to  1  mm  thickness,
provided with a uniform metallic film electrode on the rear
side and with a grating interconnected by  an external ring
on the front (emitting) side. This configuration allows  the
application of  a bias  to  improve  the  emission  efficiency
[3]. For the same reason the sample can also  be heated by
a  resistive  wire.  The  cathodes  are  rugged  and  need  no
special precautions in handling. The vacuum requirements
are dictated by the high voltage used in the gun.

2  EXPERIMENTAL  SYSTEM

The bunch length  is  measured by  a known  technique  [4]
similar  to  that  used  in  streak  cameras.  The  beam,
generated by  photo  excitation and accelerated to  about  30
keV in  a DC  gun,  is  deflected by  two  sinusoidal  crossed
magnetic fields, in time quadrature with  each other,  which
impress  a transverse momentum  to  the  various  slices  of
the  bunch.  The  image  seen  on  a  fluorescent  screen
downstream of  the  deflector is  a sector of  a  circle  whose
length,  divided  by  the  full  circumference,  gives  directly
the  bunch length  in  units  of  the  RF  period. A  sketch  of
the system is shown in Fig.1.

DC

SCREEN

A

M

S

L

C

CAMERA

Figure 1: Measuring system. C=cathode,L=laser beam,
M= mirror, A=anode, S=solenoid, DC= deflecting cavity.

The deflecting fields are created by  exciting  the  TM110
mode in a microwave resonator powered at  2450  MHz by
two  loop  antennas spaced by  90  degrees on  the  azimuth.
The  loaded  Q  of  the  Aluminum  cavity  in  matched
condition  is  5000  and  the  microwave  power  required  to
impart  a deflection of  3  cm  at  a distance  of  40  cm  to  a
beam  having  an  energy  of  50  keV  is  250  W  for  each
antenna.  The  duration  of 
is
determined by  the  jitter  in  the  starting  time  of  the  laser
pulse with respect to the trigger, which is about  4  µs.  An
RF  duration of  10  µs  has  been chosen.  A  sketch  of  the
microwave system is shown in Fig. 2.

the  microwave  pulse 

The microwave signal does not need to  be synchronized
with the  laser pulse  because varying phases of  the  bunch
with respect to the RF waveform produce only an azimuth
shift of  the  image,  which  can be instantaneously  grabbed
pulse by pulse.  This  means that  the  microwave generator
can be an oscillator  (magnetron), which is  much  cheaper
than a klystron amplifier.

The diagnostic devices consist  of  the  microwave cavity
itself,  a  wall  current  monitor  and  a  fluorescent  ceramic
screen  plus  a  CCD  camera  with  frame  grabber.  The

signals induced in  the  monopole  modes of  the  cavity can
be used as a very sensitive indicator of the  presence of  the
beam in the initial setting up of  the  instrument.  The  wall
current monitor can be  used to  estimate the  bunch charge
and the bunch length of very long  bunches (exceeding the
RF period).

Microwave
generator

C

o
O

o

90

H

DC

PS

T

Fig 2. Sketch of the microwave system. C= circulator,

H= hybrid junction, PS= phase shifter, T= tuner,

DC= directional coupler.

respect  to  the  electron  beam  axis,  but  can  also  be
deformed by  an imperfect balance  of  the  two  microwave
channels.  The  resolution  of  the  time  measurement  is
given  by  the  thickness  of  the  trace  which  is  mainly  the
dimension of the beam spot  focused by  the  solenoid. The
minimum  dimension  of  the  spot  is  determined  by  the
beam emittance and space charge.
In Fig. 4 is shown  the  image intensity  distribution along
the perimeter of the elliptical figure.

image  intensity    distribution    along  circumference

.

u
.
a
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

6000

5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

0

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

abscissa on perimeter (a.u.)

3  OPERATION  OF  THE  SYSTEM

Figure 4: Image intensity distribution.

The  system  has  been  set  operating  with  green
wavelength (532  nm).  This  makes laser  beam  alignment
easier  but  brings  serious  problems  of  image  detection
because the emission efficiency of the  ceramic cathodes at
this  wavelength  is  still  very  low.  The  laser  signal  to
obtain  tens  of  pC  of  bunch  charge  is  of  the  order  of
milliJoules.  The  green  light  diffused  by  the  cathodes
illuminates  the  target  and  overwhelms  the  fluorescence
induced  by  the  beam.  We  have  solved  this  problem  by
introducing a low pass filter in front of the camera, taking
advantage of  the  fact  that  the  Chromium  doped  ceramic
employed  emits  substantially  red  light.  In  Fig.  3  is
shown a picture of the beam taken with the frame grabber.

Figure 3: Image of the beam on the screen.

The shape of the image, for a continuous beam, should be
an ellipse due to the screen being  bent  at  45  degrees with

One  notices  that  the  beam  trace  fills 

the  whole
perimeter of the  ellipse.  This  means that  in  this  case the
bunch length is  very large. In fact due to  the  high  power
density of the laser beam (3 mJ on a laser spot  of  about  2
mm  diameter)  the  cathode  surface  is  very  close  to
breakdown.  The  image  of  the  head  of  the  bunch  is
superimposed to  a periodic pedestal due to  the  tail  of  the
bunch  and  to  the  imperfect  balance  of  the  sinusoidal
deflecting  fields.  In  order  to  see  the  perimeter  partially
filled  (and  therefore  only  one  bump  on  the  figure)  one
should decrease the  laser  power  and  beam  intensity,  but
one  cannot  go  below  the  sensitivity  threshold  of  the
ceramic  screen.  We  plan  to  install  a  higher  efficiency
cathode  and  to  employ  an  intensified  camera.  A  long
bunch  can  anyhow  be  useful  to  balance  the  deflecting
fields by minimizing the pedestal bumps.

It is to be noticed that with this system we  measure the
bunch length at the deflecting cavity location,  which is  at
20  cm  from  the  cathode.  This  length,  for  a  given  laser
pulse length, depends on gun voltage and space charge. In
Figures 5 and 6 are shown the evolutions  of  bunch length
from  the  cathode  to  the  deflection  cavity  for  different
bunch charges, as obtained with the HOMDYN code [5].

Space charge effects result  in  a bunch  longer  than  the
initial  laser  pulse  length  <L>=8  ps,  even  in  the  low
charge limit of 1 pC. For the same reason we  think  that  a
direct  measurement  of  the  electron  distribution  exiting
from  the  surface  of  the  cathode  is  difficult  by  this
technique, unless low charge and high voltage are applied,
nevertheless  one  can  obtain  some  useful  information
about  the  cathode  temporal  response  by  comparing
measurements with computations.

25  KV

REFERENCES

100

80

60

40

20

]
s
p
[
 
 

>
L
<

1 pC
10 pC
17 pC

0

0

0.05

0.1

Z_[m]

0.15

0.2

Figure 5: Evolution of bunch length from cathode to
deflector by 25 kV voltage applied. Maximum extracted

charge in this case is 17 pC

[1]  A.Doria,  I.  Boscolo  et  al.  "A  robust  and  powerful
green  light  photoemission  source",  Applied  Physics
Letters, Vol 74, N 6, Feb 1999.
[2]  I.  Boscolo  et  al.  "Diamond  and  Nd  doped  diamond
photoemitters", Submitted to Optics Communications.
[3]  I.  Boscolo  et  al.,  "Experiments  on  photoemission
from ferroelectric ceramics", EPAC 2000- Vienna.
[4] A.V. Alexandrov et  al.,  "Experimental study of GaAs
as a photoemitter", Physical  Review E,  Vol  51,N  2,  Feb
1995.
[5]  M.  Ferrario,  J.  E.  Clendenin,  D.  T.  Palmer,  J.  B.
Rosenzweig,  L.  Serafini,  "HOMDYN  Study  For  The
LCLS  RF  Photo-Injector", Proc.  of  the  2nd  ICFA  Adv.
Acc.  Workshop  on  "The  Physics  of  High  Brightness
Beams", UCLA, Nov., 1999, see also SLAC-PUB-8400.

]
s
p
[
 
 

>
L
<

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

50  KV

1 pC
10 pC
33 pC

0.05

0.1

Z_[m]

0.15

0.2

Figure 6: Evolution of bunch length from cathode to
deflector by 50 kV voltage applied. Maximum extracted

charge in this case is 33 pC.

4  CONCLUSIONS

An  instrument  which  is  able  to  measure  the  bunch
lengths  of  electrons  emitted  by  a  photocathode  with  a
resolution of  a few picoseconds has  been successfully set
operating.  Only  very  preliminary  results  have  been
obtained  but  we  plan  to  proceed  in  the  near  future  to
calibrate accurately the  instrument  and  to  perform  bunch
length measurements on the various rugged photocathodes
that are being studied in our laboratory.

AKNOWLEDGMENTS

We wish  to  thank  the  technicians L.  Cacciotti  and  R.
Sorchetti  whose work has  been essential  to  obtain  these
results.

