THE DARHT PHASE 2 LINAC*

H. L. Rutkowski, L. L. Reginato, W.L. Waldron, K. P. Chow, M. C. Vella, W. M. Fawley,

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA 94720

R. Briggs, Science Applications International Corp., 7041 Koll Center Parkway, Suite 260

Pleasanton, CA 94566

S. Nelson, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 7000 East Avenue, Livermore, CA 94550

Z. Wolf, Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, 2575 Sand Hill Rd., Menlo Park, CA 94025

D. Birx, Science Research Laboratory, 15 Ward Street, Somerville, MA 02143

Abstract

   The  second  phase  accelerator  for  the  Dual  Axis
Hydrodynamic  Test  facility  (DARHT)  is  designed  to
provide an electron beam pulse that is 2µs long, 2kA, and
20  MeV  in  particle  energy.    The  injector  provides  3.2
MeV so that the linac need only provide 16.8 MeV.  The
linac  is  made  with  two  types  of  induction  accelerator
cells.  The first block of 8 cells have a 14 in. beam pipe
compared to 10 in. in the remaining 80 cells.  The other
principal difference is that the  first  8  cells  have  reduced
volt-sec  in  their  induction  cores  as  a  result  of  a  larger
diameter  beam  pipe.    The  cells  are  designed  for  very
reliable high voltage operation.  The insulator is Mycalex.
Results  from  prototype  tests  are  given  including  results
from  solenoid  measurements.    Each  cell  contains  a
solenoid  for  beam  transport  and  a  set  of  x-y  correction
coils  to  reduce  corkscrew  motion.    Details  of  tests  to
determine  RF  mode 
to  BBU
generation  are  given.    Blocks  of  cells  are  separated  by
“intercells”  some  of  which  contain  transport  solenoids.
The intercells provide vacuum pumping stations as well.
Issues of alignment and installation are discussed.

impedances  relevant 

1 INTRODUCTION

   The  Dual-Axis  Radiographic  Hydrodynamic  Test
(DARHT)  facility  at  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory
(LANL)  is  a  pulsed  X-ray  radiography  machine  for  the
national  Stockpile  Stewardship  Program.    It  consists  of
two linear accelerators oriented at 90° to each other and
with  both  pointed  at  the  same  target.    The  first  linac
(Phase  1)  is  a  short  pulse  single  shot  accelerator  using
ferrite induction cells.  The Phase 2 linac is a long pulse
linac using Metglas induction cells.  The beam at the exit
of the accelerator is required to be 2 kA of electrons at 20
MeV and with a 2 µs long flat current pulse.  Downstream
kicker  systems  being  designed  and  built  by  Lawrence
Livermore  National  Laboratory  (LLNL)  will  select  4
short pulses out of the 2 µs macropulse for delivery to the
X-ray  conversion  target.    The  physics  design  issues  that
dominate the design are transverse RF mode impedances

*Work supported by the US Department of Energy under contract
DE-AC03-76SF00098

and  Q's  that  can  generate  BBU,  transport  solenoid  field
alignment and energy flatness both of which contribute to
corkscrew motion of the beam centroid, vacuum quality,
and  emittance  growth.    The  engineering  issues  that
dominate the design are packing enough volt-seconds of
induction  core  material  into  a  cell  within  the  pre-set
building  size  constraints,  high  voltage  reliability  of  the
systems,  mechanical  stability  and  alignment,  and
providing  sufficient  space  for  diagnostics,  sufficient
maintenance  capability,  and  adequate  vacuum  pumping.
The  injector  provides  a  3.2  MeV,  2kA  beam  to  the
accelerator in a pulse with 2.1 µs flat current and a 500 ns
rise  time  (0-99%).    The  linac  consists  of  88  accelerator
cells  adding  16.8  MeV  to  the  beam  energy.    The  first  8
cells  are  called  "injector  cells"  and  are  designed  to
transport  the  entire  injector  pulse  to  a  Beam-head  Clean
Up  Zone  (BCUZ),  which  chops  off  the  pulse  rise  time.
This beam element is designed and built by LANL.  The
rest of the linac consists of 80 "standard cells", which are
in  blocks  of  6  except  for  a  final  block  of  8.    The
cellblocks  are  separated  by  removable  elements  called
intercells.    The  beam  exiting  the  linac  should  have
transverse motion of the centroid from all causes less than
10%  of  the  beam  radius  (5  mm)  and  normalized
emittance of no more than 1000 π mm-mrad.

Figure 1 - DARHT Phase 2 Linac

2 ACCELERATOR INDUCTION CELLS

   A drawing of the standard accelerator cell is shown in
fig. 2.  The beam tube has an inner diameter of 10 inches
as  chosen  from  preliminary  BBU  and  beam 
loss
considerations.    The  induction  cores  are  Honeywell
(Allied  Signal)  2605-SC  Metglas  with  a  specified  v-s

product  of  0.48  v-s  per  cell.    Actual  delivered  cores  are
providing  up  to  0.51  v-s.    Each  cell  contains  4  pancake
sub-cores  and  the  entire  ensemble  is  driven  as  a  single
unit by a single pulser.  The cores are assembled into the
aluminium cell housing and then vacuum pumped before
the  cell  is  filled  with  Shell  Diala  high  voltage  oil.    The
beam  tube  is  304  stainless  steel  and  is  hollow  to
accommodate  a  transport  solenoid  immersed  in  a  water-
cooling jacket.

Figure 2 - Standard Accelerator Cell

   The  solenoid  is  a  wound  copper  coil  with  polyester-
amide-imide insulated conductor wet-wound and painted
in  Castall  301  epoxy.    Each  coil  has  2400  turns  in  12
layers  and  can  be  driven  to  provide  0.2T  field  on  the
beam  tube  axis  within  the  limits  of  the  cooling  system
provided by LANL.  The solenoids will be operated in a
pulsed mode except for the injector cell solenoids.

   The insulator is Mycalex (dielectric constant 6.7) and is
a  structural  member  of  the  cell.    It  is  a  mica-glass
composite chosen for its high strength without brittleness
and its excellent vacuum and high voltage properties.  Its
high  dielectric  constant  was  initially  thought  to  present
TM  mode  impedance  problems  and  considerable  design
effort  using  the  AMOS  code  was  necessary  to  find  an
optimal structure and ferrite damping design.  Outside the
beam tube and in the oil-filled section, flexible PC board
type  corrector  coils,  both  vertical  and  horizontal,  are
wrapped around the tube.  The entire cell is supported by
a  6  strut  mounting  system  developed  at  Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) for the Advanced
Light  Source.    It  uses  differential  screws  to  allow
precision  movement  of  the  heavy  cell  (7  tons)  during
alignment.    The  cells  are  vacuum-sealed  to  each  other
using a clamp ring-bellows system that allows movement
for alignment.  Each accelerator cell will be fiducialized
with respect to the magnetic axis of  its  solenoid  using  a
standard stretched wire technique by LANL.  In that way,
each  cell  can  be  aligned  with  respect  to  the  ideal  beam
axis as it is installed  in  the  linac.    The  magnetic  axis  of
each solenoid is to be within 400 µ of the ideal beam axis
(3σ)  for  offset  and  within  3  mrad  (3σ)  for  tilt  in  both
Euler angles. The injector cells are a scaled version of the
standard cells.  The beam tube ID was enlarged to 14 in.

while  keeping  the  outer  cell  dimensions  constant.    The
main effects are to enlarge the beam tube, solenoid, and
insulator while sacrificing Metglas volume on the  inside
of  the  cores.    Consequently,  the  injector  cells  operate  at
175  kV  pulse  voltage  compared  to  193  kV  for  the
standard  cells  to  maintain  constant  pulse  length.    The
beam  tube  enlargement  allows  full  transmission  of  the
injected  pulse  to  the  BCUZ  and  takes  advantage  of  the
well  known  scaling  (1/b2  where  b  is  the  tube  radius)  for
BBU  in  pillbox  cavities(1). 
  Three  prototypes  were
constructed  as  part  of  the  design.    The  first,  without  a
solenoid, was built in two forms for high voltage testing
and  RF  transverse  mode  measurements  at  LBNL.    The
second  was  an  earlier  version  of  the  injector  cell  design
while  the  third  was  the  final  standard  cell  design.    Both
were sent to the THOR facility at LANL.  The cells have
shown  excellent  high  voltage  performance  and  each
standard  production  cell  is  tested  at  200  kV  for  2000
shots before shipping.

3 TRANSVERSE MODE MEASUREMENTS

   Measurements  using  both  the  standard  TSD(2)  method
for highly damped cavities and a new two-wire excitation
-  loop  pickup  method  invented  by  two  of  the  authors
(Briggs  and  Birx)  were  used.    The  optimal  damping
geometry  and  ferrite  placement  was  chosen  by  a
computer design activity using AMOS.  The standard cell
measurements  were  carried  out  initially  on  the  first
prototype  cell  and  finalized  on  the  first  production
standard  cell.    The  dipole  transverse  mode  frequencies
were  found  to  be  170,  230,  and  577  MHz  with  real
impedances  of  182,  259,  and  283  ohms  per  m
respectively.  These values were found to be sufficiently
low  by  the  integrated  beam  dynamics  team.    The  two
methods were found to agree within experimental error so
that the two wire-loop technique was used by itself on the
injector cell.  The injector cell frequencies were 152 and
200  MHz  shifted  from  the  standard  cell  and 
the
impedances  were  152  and  149  ohms  per  m,  well  within
the limits established by the beam dynamics studies.  The
damping ferrite used was CMI Technology, tile material,
N2300, distributed azimuthally around the beam tube on
the oil side in pie sections, which were separated to avoid
saturation by the driver pulse current.

4 MAGNETIC CHARACTERIZATION

MEASUREMENTS

   The  solenoids  were  designed  to  be  fine  wire  magnets
using  many  turns.    This  design  eliminates  the  need  to
package  an  internally  cooled  bulky  conductor  in  a  very
confined  space, 
reduces  power  consumption,  and
provides very  high  quality  field.    Several  (10)  solenoids
have  been  characterised  at  Stanford  Linear  Accelerator
Center  (SLAC)  prior  to  their  installation  in  accelerator
cells.  The solenoids are first installed in their beam tube

housings, which are welded shut.  They are then  sent  to
SLAC  where  they  are  aligned  using  standard  SLAC
measurement procedures and their fields are measured.  A
rotating  coil  probe  method  is  used,  which  gives  data  on
the transverse field components as a function of distance
along the axis in the solenoid.  This data is then processed
in a fitting routine at LBNL to find the effective magnetic
axis  of  the  solenoid.    A  few  solenoids  have  also  been
checked for sextupole fields, which have turned out to be
negligible.  If a large effective tilt (>1.0 mrad) is detected
in one run, the solenoid is realigned and rechecked.  The
largest effective tilt between the magnetic and mechanical
solenoid axes in the set of measurements taken with both
standard cell solenoids and injector cell solenoids is 0.70
mrad. 
  After  field
measurements,  the  solenoids  are  returned  to  LBNL  for
assembly into accelerator cells.

  The  range  is  0.03-0.7  mrad. 

5 INTERCELLS

   The  cellblocks  in  the  linac  are  separated  by  intercells,
which  provide  a  removable  element  that  allows  sliding
the interlocking accelerator cells apart for removal in case
of  maintenance.    They  also  allow  for  diagnostic  ring
removal  at  each  cellblock,  insertion  of  intercepting
diagnostics,  and  vacuum  pumping.    A  cross-section
drawing  of  an  azimuthally  symmetric  intercell  is  shown
in  fig.  3.    The  diagnostic  ring,  designed  by  LANL,  is
shown between the downstream bellows and the housing
of the downstream cell.  The intercell body provides the
positive side of the accelerating gap for the upstream cell
whose  beam  pipe  and  insulator  are  shown.    This  figure
shows  an  intercell  with  a  transport  solenoid.    Only  the
first  4  intercells  have  these  solenoids,  which  are  needed
for beam transport matching to reduce emittance growth
and BBU.  In the other 5 intercells, the solenoid is absent
and the extra axial space is used for additional pumping
speed.    Twelve  current  return  bars  complete  the  circuit
across the pumping throat opening to smooth the B field
of  the  return  current.    Each  opening  is  filled  with  95%
open area stainless steel mesh to shield the intercell cavity
from beam generated RF.  The intercells are mounted on
the upstream cell with turnbuckle struts and the weight is
supported by a single point suspension "pogo stick".    In
this way, the intercell can be independently aligned to the
ideal  abeam  line.    Vacuum  modelling,  backed  up  by
empirically  determined  outgassing 
rates  on  actual
production  cells,  yields  an  average  background  pressure
on axis of < 1.5x10-7 Torr between the BCUZ exit and the
exit  of  the  first  four  cell  blocks  of  standard  cells.    It  is
approximately  0.8x10-7  Torr  after  that  due  to  the  higher
pumping speed available after the intercell solenoids are
eliminated.  This should be adequate to eliminate ion hose
instability.

Figure 3 - Intercell

6 CONCLUSION

   A  high  quality  design  for  DARHT  Phase  2  linac
accelerator  cells  has  been  achieved  and  cells  are  in
production.    These  cells  have  been  shown  to  have
excellent high voltage performance even with some beam
loss,  and  measurements  have  shown  the  RF  mode
impedances  relevant  to  BBU  are  sufficiently  low  to
ensure  meeting  design  requirements.    The  background
pressure  has  been  reduced  by  good  vacuum  system
design  to  safe  limits.  Also,  a  very  high  quality  solenoid
field  has  been  achieved  within  operational  and  cooling
system  constraints.    Finally,  a  design  has  been  achieved
which  delivers  the  energy  and  pulse  length  required  in
spite of serious space restrictions.

REFERENCES

[1]  R. J. Briggs, D. L. Birx, G. J. Caporaso, V. K. Neil,
and  T.  C.  Genoni,    Particle  Accelerators,  18,  1985,
pp 41-62

[2] L. S. Walling, D. E. McMurry, D. V. Neuffer, and H.
A.  Thiessen,  Nuc.  Inst.  Meth.,  A281,  1989,  pp433-
447

