Funneling with the Two-Beam RFQ* 

 

H. Zimmermann, A. Bechtold, A. Schempp, J. Thibus, IAP, Frankfurt, Germany 

Institut für Angewandte Physik, Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universität, 
Robert-Mayer-Straße 2-4, D-60054 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 

 

Abstract 

New high current accelerator facilities like proposed for 
HIDIF or ESS require a beam with a high brilliance. These 
beams  can  not  be  produced  by  a  single  pass  
rf-linac. The increase in brightness in such a driver linac is 
done by several funneling stages at low energies, in which 
two  identically  bunched  ion  beams  are  combined  into  a 
single  beam  with  twice  the  frequency  current  and 
brightness. Our Two-Beam-RFQ funneling experiment is a 
setup  of  two  ion  sources,  a  two  beam  RFQ,  a  funnel 
deflector  and  beam  diagnostic equipment to demonstrate 
funneling of ion beams as a model for the first funneling 
stage  of  a  HIIF  driver.  The  progress  of  the  funneling 
experiment and results of simulations will be presented. 

1  INTRODUCTION 

The beam currents of linacs are limited by space charge 
effects  and  the  focusing  and  transport  capability  of  the 
accelerator. Funneling is doubling the beam current by the 
combination  of  two  bunched  beams  preaccelerated  at  a 
frequency  f0  with  an  rf-deflector  to  a  common  axis  and 
injecting  into  another  rf-accelerator at frequency 2*f0, as 
indicated in fig. 1. 

 
 

the proposed HIDIF-injector with two-beam RFQs in front 
of  the  first  and  second  funneling  sections  is  shown  in 
figure 3. The HIDIF linac starts with 16 times 3 ion sources 
for 
to  allow  so-called 
„telescoping“  at  the  final  focus  [5].  With  four  funneling 
stages the frequency has been increased from 12.5 MHz to 
200 MHz accordingly [6].  

three  different 

ion  species 

 

Fig. 2: Experimental set-up of the two-beam funneling 

experiment. 

 

 
For studies of the new two-beam RFQ structure and the 
rf-deflector, the first two-beam funneling experiments have 
been  done  with  He +-ions at low energies to facilitate ion 
source operation and beam diagnostics. 
 

Fig 1: Principle of funneling. 

 

 

By  the  use  of  the  two-beam  RFQ  the  two  beams  are 
brought  very  close  together  while  they  are  still  radially 
and  longitudinally  focused.  Additional  discrete  elements 
like  quadrupole-doublets  and  -triplets,  debunchers  and 
bending  magnets,  as  they  have  been  proposed  in  first 
funneling  studies,  are  not  necessary  [1,2,3].  A  short  rf-
funneling  deflector  will  be  placed  around  the  beam 
crossing position behind the RFQ (fig. 2). The layout of  

 

*Work supported by the BMBF 

Fig. 3: Layout of the 12.5...200MHz linac system for 

400 mA of Bi+. 

 

 

Two  small  multicusp  ion  sources  and  electrostatic 
lenses,  built  by  LBNL  (Lawrence  Berkeley  National 
Laboratory) [7,8] are used. The ion sources and injection 
systems are attached directly on the front of the RFQ with 
an angle of 76 mrad, the angle of the beam axes of the two-
beam RFQ. 

Figure 2 shows a scheme of the experimental set-up of 
two-beam  funneling  experiment  with  a  slit-grid 

the 
emittance measurement device on the right side. 

2  ION SOURCES INJECTION SYSTEMS 

AND TWO-BEAM RFQ 

Two  multicusp  ion  sources  have  to  deliver  two 
identically ion beams. This operation has been tested on 
an  emittance  measurement  device.  The  measured 
emittances  of  both  ion-sources  show  differences  up 
to 30% [4]. 

The two-beam RFQ consists of two sets of quadrupole 
electrodes, where the beams are bunched and accelerated 
with a phase shift of 180° between each bunch, driven by 
one  resonant  structure.  With  the  use  of  identical  RFQ 
electrode  designs  for  both  beam  lines,  the  electrodes  of 
one beam line are installed with a longitudinal shift of 2.55 
cm (i.e.  b
l /2  at  final  energy)  to  achieve  the  180°  phase 
shift between the beam bunches of each beam line. The 
measured  normalized  90%  RMS-emittance  of  the  two 
beams are equal within 6 % [4]. 

3  FUNNELING-DEFLECTORS 

To bend the beam to a common axis we use two types, 

the singlegap and the multigap funnel deflector.  

Fig. 4: Schemes of the single- and multigap funnel 
deflectors. The arrows show the electric field during 
different periods. a) a one cell singlegap deflector , b) a 

three cell mu ltigap deflector, c) multigap deflector with one 

central drift tube. 

 
The  deflectors  are  mounted  at  the  point  of  beam 
crossing, which is 52 cm behind the RFQ. This device is 
like  a  plate  capacitor,  oscillating  with  the  same  resonant 
frequency  as  the  RFQ.  The singlegap deflector is shown 
in Figure 5.  

Fig. 5:  Figure of the singlegap funnel deflector . The 
deflector discs are mounted at water-cooled stems. The 

 

length is about 2 m. 

 

The angle between the two beam axis is 76 mrad. The 
singlegap funnel deflector bends this angle down to zero 
by  a  voltage,  which  is  in  our  experiment  about  25  kV. 
Figure  6  shows  a  simulated  beam  bending  with  the 
singlegap  funnel  deflector  for  one  beam.  The  deflector 
bends the beam from an average angle of 38 mrad down to 
zero.  

 

 
Fig. 6: Simulation of the beam bending in the singlegap 
funnel deflector . The angle is bending down from 38 mrad 

down to zero. 

Fig. 7: Emittance measurement while the singlegap 

deflector is switched off. 

 

Fig. 8: Emittance measurement while the singlegap 

 

deflector is switched on. The two emittances are merged 

into a common beam. 

 

Figures 7 and 8 show two emittance measurements. If 
the  funnel  deflector  is  switched  off,  the  beam  drifts 
through the deflector and we measure the beam-angle of 
76 mrad.  Figure  8  shows  an  emittance  measurement  with 
the  singlegap  funnel  deflector  switched  on.  The  two 
beams are merged into a common beam. 

Fig. 11: Emittance measurement while the multigap 

 

deflector is switched on. The two beams are merged to a 

single beam. 

CONCLUSION 

The measured emittances demonstrate, that both funnel 
deflectors brought the two beams to a common axis. The 
form of the measured ellipses show however, that we have 
to improve the matching of the beam to the RFQ to reduce 
the beam radius and phase width. As long as there is no 
matching  section  at  the  end  of  the  RFQ  electrodes,  the 
beam  is  too  large  to  measure  emittance  growing  during 
funneling with our emittance measurement device.  

REFERENCES 

Fig. 9: Simulation of funnelling 

 

 
Fig 9 shows a simulation of beam bending of two 

beams. The angle is reduced from 37.5 mrad down to zero. 
The “banana form” of the simulated emittance is caused 
by inhomogeneous electric fields [10]. 

In a multigap funnel deflector the bending is done by 
many gaps, which reduce the bending voltage. Figure 10 
shows a beam simulation for the multigap funnel deflector 
with  nine  gaps.  Figure  11  shows  an  emittance 
measurement with the multigap funnel deflector. 

Fig. 10: Simulation of the beam bending by the multigap 

funnel deflector. 

 

 [1]  K.  Bongardt  and  D.  Sanitz,  Funneling  of  Heavy  Ion 
Beams,  Primary  Report,  Kernforschungszentrum 
Karlsruhe, 11 04 02P14C (September 1982) 

[2]  J.F. Stovall, F.W. Guy, R.H. Stokes and T.P. Wangler, 
Beam Funneling Studies at Los Alamos, Nucl. Instr, 
and Meth. A278 (1989) p.143 

[3]  K.F.  Johnson,  O.R.  Sander,  G.O.  Bolmer,  J.D. 
Gilpatrick, F.W. Guy, J.H. Marquardt, K. Saadatmand, 
D.  Dandoval  and  V.  Yuan,  A  Beam  Funnel 
Demonstration:  Experiment  and  Simulation,  Particle 
Accelerators, Vols. 37-38 (1992) p. 261 

[4]  H.  Zimmermann,  A.  Bechtold,  A.  Schempp,  

J. Thibus, PAC99, IEEE 99CH36366 (1999) p. 55 

[5]  M.  Basco,  M.  Churazov,  D.  Koshkarev,  Fusion 

Engineering and Design 32-33 (1996) p. 73. 

[6]  A. Schempp, The injector for the HIDIF driver linac, 
in  Physics 

Instruments  and  Methods 

Nuclear 
Research A415 (1998) 209-217 

[7]  K.N.  Leung,  Multicusp  Ion  Sources,  Rev.  Sci. 

Instrum. 65(4) (1994) p. 1165. 

 [8]  R.  Keller  in:  The  Physics  and  Technology  of  Ion 
Sources,  Edited  by  I.  G.  Brown,  Wiley-Interscience 
Publication, New Yo rk. 

[9]  A. Schempp, Design of Compact RFQs, Proc. Linear 

Accelerator Conference 1996, CERN 96-07, p. 53. 

[10] J. Thibus, Intrep 2000-10 

