An ECR hydrogen negative ion source at CEA/Saclay: preliminary results. 

R. Gobin*, P-Y. Beauvais, O. Delferrière, R. Ferdinand, F. Harrault, J-M. Lagniel. 

Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique, CEA-Saclay, DSM/DAPNIA/SEA 

91191 Gif sur Yvette Cedex, France 

*e-mail: rjgobin@cea.fr 

 

 
 
Abstract: 

0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
8
1

 

 
 
 

3
4
1
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

toward 

The  development  of  a  high  intensity  negative  ion 
source  is  part  of  a  considerably  larger  activity  presently 
undergoing  at  CEA  Saclay  in  the  field  of  high  intensity 
linear  accelerators.  Preliminary  studies 
the 
construction  of  a  2.45 GHz  ECR  H- ion source have been 
performed  for  few  months.  This  new  test  bench  takes 
advantage of our experience on the French high intensity 
proton source SILHI. In the new source, the high-energy 
electrons created in the ECR zone are trapped by a dipole 
magnetic  filter.  A  rectangular  200 mm 
long  plasma 
chamber  and  an  intermediate  iron  shield  are  used  to 
minimize  the  magnetic  field  in  the  extraction  region.  A 
second  magnetic  filter  separates  electrons  and  negative 
ions 
in  a  10 kV  extraction  system.  To  reduce  the 
electron/H -  ratio, 
is  slightly 
polarized.  The  design  allows  future  evolutions  such  as 
cesium  injection,  higher  energy  extraction  and  plasma 
diagnostics.  The  installation  of  the  source  is  now  in 
progress.  The  first  helium  plasma  has  been  produced  for 
few  weeks  to  verify  the  electron  separator  behavior.  The 
design, computations and the first results of the source are 
presented.  
 

the  plasma  electrode 

I - Introduction 

Potential  applications  of  high  current  accelerators 
include  the  production  of  high  flux  neutron  beams  for 
spalliation  reactions  (ESS),  future  reactors,  nuclear  waste 
treatment,  exotic  ion  facilities  or  neutrino  and  muon 
production  for  high-energy  particle  physics.  The  high 
intensity  beams  for  these  accelerators  may  reach  an 
energy as high as 1 GeV. In France, CEA and CNRS have 
undertaken  an  important  R&D  program  on  very  high 
beam power (MW class) light-ion accelerators for several 
years.  Part  of  the  R&D  efforts  are  concentrated  on  the 
IPHI  (High  Intensity  Proton  Injector)  [1]  demonstrator 
project.  This  10 MeV  prototype  of  linac  front  end  will 
accelerate  CW  beam  currents  up  to  100 mA.  It  will 
consist  of  an  intense  ion  source,  a  radio  frequency 
quadrupole  (RFQ)  and  a  drift  tube  linac  (DTL). The High 
Intensity  Light  Ion  Source  (SILHI)  development,  based 
on  the  2.45 GHz  ECR  plasma  production,  has  been 
performed  for  several  years  leading  to  a  great  experience 
in  high  current  proton  beam  production.  Taking  into 
account  this  advantage,  CEA  wh ich  is  involved  in  the 
ESS studies, decided to develop a hydrogen negative ion 
source also based on the ECR plasma production.  

Section  II  gives  an  overview  of  the  SILHI  proton 
source  performance  in  CW  and  pulsed  mode.  The  new 

also 

and 

includes  magnetic 

hydrogen  negative  ion  source  is described in section III 
which 
trajectory 
computations.  Electron  separator  efficiency  and  proton 
density  have  been  measured  and  preliminary  results  are 
reported  in  section  IV.  Then  the  conclusion  presents,  in 
section  V,  the  future experiments planned to improve the 
negative ion source performance. 

 

II - SILHI, High Intensity Proton Source 

is  produced  by  2  coils 

To  summarize  the  high  intensity  proton  source 
efficiency,  the  most  significant  results  are  reported 
hereinafter.  The  SILHI  proton  source  [2]  has  been 
designed  to  reach  a  long  lifetime  and  a  very  high 
reliability.  It  operates  at  2.45 GHz.  The  magnetic  field 
BECR = 875 Gauss 
tunable 
independently. The quartz RF window has been installed 
behind  a  water-cooled  bend  to  escape  the  beam  of 
electrons  produced  and  accelerated  back  to  the  plasma 
chamber,  in  the  HV  extraction  system.  The  RF  window 
works  well  since  the  production  of  the  first  beam  in  July 
1996.  Nevertheless  the  boron  nitride  (BN)  disc  located  at 
the RF entrance is affected by the backstreaming electrons 
and  must  be  systematically  replaced.  Its  lifetime  is 
estimated  to  be  higher  than  1000 hours for ~ 100 mA CW 
beams,  then  more  than  40 days  of  continuous  operation 
for such beams. 

The plasma is easily obtained when the RF power is 
larger  than  350 W  with  the  standard  magnetic  field  and 
operating  gas  pressure  (10-3 Torr in the plasma chamber). 
The  source  is  generally  operated  5  days  a  week  for 
8 hours  daily  runs.  Less  than  10 min.  are  needed  each 
morning  to  restart  the  sourc e with a 100 mA CW beam at 
95 keV. The tune up time is reduced to 2 min. after a shut 
down using an automatic procedure. Less than 6 hours are 
usually  needed  to  obtain  the  nominal  beam  parameters 
after an operation in the source or in the low energy beam 
transport  (LEBT).  This  recovery  time  for  pumping,  HV 
column conditioning and tune up is mainly induced by the 
BN disc outgassing under plasma warming.  

The  best  performances  are  clearly  obtained  when  
two ECR zones are simultaneously located at both plasma 
chamber  extremities.  The  source  efficiency  increases  to 
0.145 mA/W  (250  mA/cm2)  for  850 W  RF  forward  power 
in  these  conditions  instead  of  0.105 mA/W with a single 
ECR zone at the RF entrance. 

Three long runs have been performed to analyze the 
reliability  –  availability  of  the  source.  In  October  1999, 
with  a  75 mA  –  95 keV  continuous  beam,  the  reliability 
reached  99.96 %  for  a  104 H  long  operation.  Only  one 

beam trip occurs during the test. The beam stopped during 
2'30''  just  one  hour  after  the  beginning  of  the  statistics 
leading to a 103 H uninterrupted operation. 

field  as  low  as  possible  close  to  the  extraction  area  in 
order to limit the amount of high energy electrons in this 
zone and to insert the C shape electromagnetic filter.  

In  pulsed  mode,  rather  short  plasma  rise  and  fall 
times  have  been  achieved  during  some  preliminary 
experiments  done  using  a  modulation  of  the  2.45 GHz 
magnetron  power  supply.  Plasma  pulses  with  10 µs rise 
time and 40 µs fall time have been observed.  

For  a  80  mA  CW  proton  beam,  the  nominal  r,r'  rms 
normalized  emittance  is  lower  than  0.3 pi mm mrad  and 
the  proton  fraction  better  than  85 %  (12 %  for  H2+  and 
3 %  for  H3+).  Several  measurements  have  shown  strong 
improvements  of  the  emittance  (0.11 pi mm mrad) when a 
buffer  gas  (H2, N2, Ar or Kr) is injected in the LEBT. The 
space-charge  compensation  (SCC)  factor  has  been 
measured  at  several  points  along  the  LEBT.  A  strong 
dependence on the number of free  electrons in the LEBT 
line  was  found.  The  SCC  can  be  much  lower  than 
expected  without  an 
increased  electron  production 
induced  by  adding  heavy  gases  for  example.  Low  SSC 
leads to a strong emittance increase in the LEBT. 

 

III - Negative hydrogen ion source design 

Taking 

into  account 

this  experiment  on  high 
intensity  beams,  it  has  been  recently  decided  to  study  a 
new  source  for  negative  hydrogen  ion  production.  The 
aim  is  to  obtain  a  long  lifetime  source  with  high 
reliability.  As  demonstrated  with  SILHI,  these conditions 
could  be  reached  with  sources  in  which  the  plasma  is 
generated  by  ECR.  In  classical  sources,  filament  or 
antenna lifetime reduces considerably the reliability. 

different 

To  design  the  source,  several  contacts  have  been   
undertaken  with 
foreign 
laboratories  (Ecole  Polytechnique,  CEA  Cadarache,  CEA 
Grenoble,  CERN,  Frankfurt  University)  which  are 
involved  in  H -  studies.  A  step  by  step  work  has  been 
decided before the final design.  

national 

and 

First,  the  production  of  hydrogen  negative  ions  has 
to be demonstrated in volume production mode before to 
discuss Cesium or Xenon injection or other improvement 
like Tantalum surface [3].  

Extracted  negative  ions  and  electrons  have  to  be 
separated  by  means  of  a  magnetic  dipole.  To  avoid  H2 
excited  molecule destruction, high energy electrons have 
to be eliminated in the plasma close to the extraction area 
by  using  a  magnetic  filter.  To  do  that  preliminary 
magnetic calculations have been performed to design the 
C  shape  magnetic  electron  separator  and  magnetic filter. 
Otherwise,  the  axial  magnetic  field  provided  by  the  two 
coils to reach BECR has also been calculated as well as the 
iron  shielding.  All  computations 
including  particle 
extraction  (Fig.  1)  have  been  done  with  Axcel  [4],  Opera 
2D and 3D codes [5]. 
source 

2.45 GHz 
(BECR = 875 Gauss)  with  a  water  cooled  copper  plasma 
chamber.  The  rectangular  (standard  WR  284  waveguide) 
plasma  chamber  length  has  been  chosen  at  210 mm 
instead  100 mm  for  SILHI  to  reach  an  axial  magnetic 

operates 

This 

also 

at 

 

 

 

Fig 1: Hydrogen negative ions and electrons separation 

The electrons are collected on the electrode 

 

The  RF  signal  is  produced  by  a  1.2  kW  magnetron 
source  and  is  fed  to  the  source  via  standard  rectangular 
waveguides and an automatic tuning unit. A three section 
ridged  waveguide  transition  is  placed  just  before  the 
aluminum  nitride  (AlN)  window.  This  window  is  located 
at the RF entrance in plasma chamber. It is protected from 
backstreaming  ions  or  electrons  by  a  2  mm  BN  sheet.   
The  Mo  plasma  electrode  is  biased  to  a  few  volt  power 
supply. 

Figure  2  shows  a  cross-sectional  view  of  the 
experimental  setup.  Several ports have been managed in 
the  plasma  chamber  for  future  plasma  diagnostics 
(Langmuir probe, Laser detachment, …). 

The  source  and  its  ancillaries  (power  supplies,  RF 
generator,  gas  injection,  …)  are  grounded  and  the  10 kV 
extraction  system  is  installed inside the vacuum chamber. 
The collector is also linked to an independent HV power 
supply.  The  80 mm  aperture  C  shape  tunable  electron 
separator  is  located  inside  the  vacuum  vessel.  By  using 
positive  or  negative  HV  power  supplies,  negative  and 
positive extracted beams could be respectively observed. 

 

Fig 2: Cross-sectional view of the source  

 

 

and extraction system 

 

IV- Preliminary results 

To  verify  the  source  behavior,  the  first  plasma  has 
been  produced  by  injecting  hydrogen  gas  in  the  plasma 

the  plasma  confinement 
the  extraction  zone. 
Computations  have  been  already  undertaken  by  using  a 
multipole magnetic configuration.  

in 

For higher energy extraction and to enhance the AlN 
window  lifetime,  RF  magnetron  source  pulsation  work 
will be also performed.  

When  the  first  step  (volume  production  mode  of 
hydrogen negative ions) will be reached, the second step 
will  consist  to  improve  the  performance  by  Xenon  and 
Cesium  injection,  Tantalum  surface.  Then  to  characterize 
the  beam,  the  source  will  be  installed  close  to  the  SILHI 
HV  platform.  The  beam  will  be  accelerated  through  a 
dedicated accelerator column and analyzed in a diagnostic 
box located on the platform.  

The  source  efficiency  will  be  analyzed  at  higher  RF 
power.  It  is  also  planned  to  characterize  it  at  higher  RF 
frequency (10 GHz for example).  

 

Acknowledgments 

Many  thanks  to  the  members  of  the  IPHI  team  for 
their  contributions,  especially 
to  G.  Charruau  and 
Y. Gauthier  for  their  technical  assistance.  The  authors 
would 
J. Faure,  A. Girard, 
C. Jacquot,  G. Melin,  J  Sherman,  K  Volk    and  the  CERN 
source  team  for  their  fruitful  collaboration  and  valuable 
discussions. 
 

thank  M. Bacal, 

also 

References 

 [1]  P-Y. Beauvais  et  al,  "Status  report  on  the  Saclay 
High-Intensity  Proton  Injector  Project  (IPHI)",  EPAC 
2000 Vienne (Austria)  
[2]  J-M. Lagniel  et  al.,  Rev.  Sci.  Instrum.  Vol.  71  n° 2, 
830 (2000). 
[3] J. Peters, Rev. Sci. Instrum. Vol. 71 n° 2, 1069 (2000). 
[4] 
Wiesbaden, Germany. 
[5]  Opera  2D  and  3D,  ©  Vector  Fields  Limited,  Oxford, 
England. 

INP,  D-65205 

3.42", 

P. Spädtke, 

"Axcel-V 

chamber.  After  some  outgassing  troubles,  it  has  been 
quite  easily  obtained  when  the  ECR  zone  was  located  at 
the  RF  entrance  in  the  plasma  chamber.  The  RF  forward 
power  was  500 W with a reflected power lower than 10 % 
and  with  an  operating  pressure  of  3  10-3 Torr  in  the 
plasma  chamber.  As  the  magnetron  pulsation  is  not  yet 
available,  it  has  been  decided  to  pulse  the  extraction 
voltage  (8 ms/s)  with  a  continuous  plasma  for  the 
experiments described hereinafter. 

The  electron  separator  efficiency  has  been  verified 
with  an  Helium  plasma.  The  total  extracted  negative 
charges 
trough  a  5 mm  diameter  plasma 
electrode) are collected on the extraction electrode for the 
nominal value of the magnetic dipole.  

(20 mA 

In  Hydrogen,  the  positive  charge  density  has  been 
also  checked  with  a  -  6 kV  pulsed  extraction  voltage.  A 
10 mA/cm2  beam  density  has  been  obtained  with  the 
magnetic  filter  switched  off.  The  density  has  been 
reduced  by  a  factor  2  with  a  Bdl ?  500 Gauss.cm 
magnetic  filter.  With  a  pulsed  positive  extraction  voltage 
(+  5 kV),  the  electron  density  also  decreases  when  the 
magnetic filter is switched on. It also decreases by tuning 
the plasma electrode voltage. 

 

V- Conclusion 

  Figure  3  shows  a  general  view  of  the  source  test 
stand. The first plasma has been produced for few weeks 
and any negative hydrogen ion beam has been observed 
since  then.  Copper  (from  plasma  chamber  body)  and 
carbon pollution due to O-ring attack by the RF has been 
seen,  it  is  probably  the  main  reason  of  the  hydrogen 
negative  ion  destruction.  Improvements to avoid this RF 
attack  are  in  progress.  However,  the  electron  separator 
and the magnetic filter behavior seems quite satisfactory.  

 

 

 

Fig 3: General view of the source test stand 

 
Compare  to  the  SILHI  results,  the  positive  ion 
density is very low because of the magnetic configuration. 
High  negative  ion  beam  intensity  could  not  be  produced 
in such conditions. In the near future, after resolving the 
O-ring problem, different studies will be done to enhance 

