STATUS OF THE RFD LINAC STRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 1

D.A. Swenson, Linac Systems, 1208 Marigold Dr. NE, Albuquerque, NM  87122

0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
0
3

 

 
 
 

2
4
2
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

The  Proof-of-Principle  (POP)  prototype  of  the  Rf-
Focused  Drift  tube  (RFD)  linac  structure  is  currently
under test at Linac Systems, after years of delay due to a
variety  of  technical  problems.    A  discussion  of  these
technical problems and their solutions will be presented.
The  status  of  these  tests  will  be  reported.    Plans  for
future  development  of  this  linac  structure  will  be
revealed.    Potential  uses  of  this  linac  structure  for  a
variety of scientific, medical, and industrial applications
will  be  described,  including:  proton  linac  injectors  for
proton  synchrotrons,  compact  proton  linacs  for  PET
isotope  production,  epithermal  neutron  sources  for  the
BNCT  application,  energy  boosters  for  proton  therapy,
compact  portable  neutron  sources  for  thermal  neutron
radiography,  and  pulsed  cold  neutron  sources  for  cold
neutron physics and related applications.

in 

laboratory 

the  Linac  Systems 

1  STATUS OF THE POP PROTOTYPE
The  POP  prototype[4,6,9]  came  into  operation  on  June
19,  2000 
in
Waxahachie, TX.  We had about 9 mA of  25-kV  beam
entering the  RFQ  and  about  9  mA  of  beam  transmitted
through the RFQ and RFD linac structures.    That  beam
impinged on a 1.25-MeV-thick absorber foil and Faraday
cup  assembly.    The  beam  that  passed  through  the
absorber  foil  and  into  the  Faraday  cup  (the  accelerated
beam)  showed  the  expected  threshold  for  both  rf  fields
and  injection  energy.    Because  we  suffer  from  an
inadequate  amount  of  rf  power  (180  kW)  and  are
operating very close to the linac excitation threshold, the
accelerated beam corresponded to only about 4% of the
transmitted  beam. 
  Nevertheless,  we  now  have
conditions  that  produce  a  steady  0.3-mA  beam  of
protons at 1.636-MeV for hours at a time.

The  initial  operation  was  sporadic  as  a  result  of
several  problems  (in  addition  to  the  near  threshold
operation),  which  have  now  been  rectified.    We  have
always  had  a  “breathing”  phenomenon,  which  we
attributed to some mechanical vibrations in the drift tube
stems.    A  description  of  the  solution  to  this  problem  is
given below.    We  often  witness  a  10%  decline  in  RFQ
fields after 15 seconds of operation.  A description of the
solution to this problem is also given below.

2  BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE RFD

LINAC STRUCTURE

 The RFD linac structure[1-4] resembles a drift tube linac
(DTL) with radio frequency quadrupole (RFQ) focusing
incorporated  into  each  drift  tube.    The  RFD  drift  tubes
comprise two  separate  electrodes,  operating  at  different
electrical  potentials  as  excited  by  the  TM010  rf  fields,
each  supporting  two  fingers  pointing  inwards  towards
the opposite  end  of  the  drift  tube  forming  a  four-finger
geometry that produces an rf quadrupole field along the
axis.  The particles traveling along the axis traverse two
distinct regions, namely, the gaps between the drift tubes
where  the  acceleration  takes  place,  and  the  regions
inside  the  drift  tubes  where  the  rf  quadrupole  focusing
takes  place.    This  new  structure  could  become  the
structure  of  choice  to  follow  RFQ  linacs  in  many
scientific, medical, and industrial applications.

3  TECHNICAL PROBLEMS AND

SOLUTIONS

Successful operation of the POP was delayed for more
than a year by a host of minor problems, each of which
have  now  been  overcome. 
  Descriptions  of  these
problems  and  the  solutions  that  were  employed  are
presented below:

RFQ  Alignment:    The  RFQ  is  assembled  from  four
pieces  of  machined  copper,  namely  two  major  pieces
(top  and  bottom)  and  two  minor  pieces  (sides),  each
representing  one  vane  of  the  four-vane  structure.    The
mechanical  precision  of  these  pieces  was  not  what  it
should or could have been.  The resulting assembly was
difficult  to  excite  in  the  quadrupole  mode.    Measuring
the  actual  geometry  and  placing  shims  between  pieces
allowed  the  quadrupole  mode  to  be  excited.    Four-rod,
dipole-mode  detuners,  of  the  type  developed  at  Los
Alamos,  were  incorporated  in  the  upstream  end  of  the
structure for additional stability.  In the future, a tooling
fixture  will  be  used  to  support  the  major  and  minor
pieces  during  machining 
the  desired
precision.

to  achieve 

RF  Power  Tubes:    The  rf  power  system  employed
fifteen  YU-141  Planar  Triodes  (PSI/Eimac);  one  in  the
intermediate  power  amplifier,  IPA-1,  two  in  IPA-2  and
12 in the final power amplifier (FPA).  We started with a
full  complement  of  tubes,  but  quickly  suffered  6  or  7
partial  failures,  making  it  impossible  to  reach  the  rated
power of the system (240 kW at 600 MHz).  Because of
fabrication problems at Eimac, it took more than a year

We are confident that, with adequate rf power and the
improvements that are identified below, the performance
of  the  RFD  linac  structure  will  come  up  to  our
expectations.
                                                       
1 Work supported by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) and the National Cancer Institute (NCI).

to get back to a full complement of good tubes and the
rated power output.

Multipactoring:  The twin bladed RFD stem geometry
is  prone  to  multipactor.    Initially,  we  were  unable  to
break through the multipactor barrier.  In that situation,
it  is  impossible  to  optimize  the  rf  power  system  and
coaxial  drive  line.    Our  first  attempt  to  overcome  the
multipactoring was to coat the RFD drift tubes and stems
with carbon black from an acetylene torch.  This worked
and allowed us to optimize the rf power system.    Next,
we  decided  to  try  a  cleaner  and  more  robust  cure  for
multipactoring, namely vapor deposition  of  a  thin  layer
of titanium.  This also worked and allowed us to excite
the RFD structure to high field levels.  Some changes in
the  RFD  stem  geometry,  to  reduce  the  area  of  parallel
surfaces, should reduce the potential for multipactor.

Cavity Q:  At this point, it was obvious that the Q of
the system was less than expected, resulting in a power
requirement  that  was  beyond  the  capabilities  of  the  rf
power  system.    We  launched  a  search  for  the  cause  of
the  depressed  Q.    Several  causes  were  under  suspicion,
namely the quality of the copper plating, the spring-ring
joints to the end walls, the end walls, and the drift tube
stems.  Because of the very short tank (350 mm), the two
end  walls  and  associated  rf  joints  have  an  unusually
large  negative  effect  on  the  cavity  Q.    Because  of  the
very low injection energy (0.8 MeV), the number of drift
tubes  and  associated  stems  for  the  short  tank  are
unusually  large,  which  has  a  negative  effect  on  the
cavity Q.  In order to separate the possible causes of the
depressed  Q,  we  removed  the  12  drift  tubes  and
measured the Q of TM010 and TE111 modes in the empty
tank.    The  former,  which  is  effected  by  both  the
conductivity  of  the  copper  and  the  end  seals,  was  only
38% of theoretical.  The latter, which is not effected by
end seal conductivity, was 68% of theoretical.  We took
this  to  mean  that  both  the  copper  plating  and  the  end
seals were part of the problem.

End  Seals:    We  decided  to  re-machine  the  tank  and
end walls to replace the spring ring and o-ring seals with
Helicoflex  copper  seals,  providing  both  rf  and  vacuum
seals.  One end of the tank was then modified to employ
a custom flexed-fin rf joint backed by an o-ring vacuum
seal.  Future designs will employ that configuration.

Copper  Plating:    We  decided  to  have  the  RFD  tank
and  end  plates  stripped  of  their  original  copper  plating
and re-plated by a copper plating company that had done
work for other proton linac projects.  In the end, though,
the cavity Q is still only 60% of what it should be.

Stem Power:  A closer analysis of the RFD stem losses
revealed  that  the  stem  losses  were  unnecessarily  high
and that slight changes in the geometry would reduce the
stem  losses  by  50%.    This  observation,  of  course,  was
too late for the POP and we had to live with the higher
stem losses.  In the future, the modified  stem  geometry
will be used.

Rf Drive Line:  In a short rf drive line (approximately
one wavelength) with no circulator, the length of the line
has a large effect on the response of the rf system to the
reflected power associated with cavity filling and cavity
arcs.    To  provide  some  degree  of  adjustment,  we
installed  and  additional  length  of  3-1/8”  coaxial  line
fitted with a sliding stub tuner.  This helped to determine
the optimum rf drive line length for the system.

Breathing:    The  RFD  tank  was  quite  sensitive  to
mechanical  impact.    Throughout  this  work,  we  were
plagued  with  a  “breathing”  phenomenon,  which  we
assumed  was  due  to  mechanical  vibrations  of  the  drift
tube stems, which in turn caused a periodic oscillation in
the  resonant  frequency  and  rf  field  levels  in  the
structure.  The driving force for this  vibration  appeared
to be rf field, duty factor, and pulse rate dependent.  This
mechanical  vibration  was  in  the  vicinity  of  20  Hz.
Variation of the pulse repetition rate in the vicinity of 20
Hz,  caused  the  observable  effects  to  vary  significantly.
Recently,  we  cured  this  effect  by  placing  an  insulating
spacer between the two blades of the RFD stems at about
2/3 the distance from the outer wall to the drift tube.  We
plan to braze a ceramic spacer, at about that location, in
all future RFD drift tubes.

Fading:  We have noticed a “fading”  phenomenon  in
the RFQ fields.  We can get more fields in the RFQ after
it has been off for several minutes.  This field level fades
by about 10% in the next 15 seconds.  Recently, we have
determined that this is due to a thermal distortion of the
resonant coupler that couples the RFD fields to the RFQ.
This effect has been mitigated by optimizing the tuning
of  the  resonant  coupler  during  operation.    In  future
designs,  the  resonant  coupler  will  be  stiffer  and  more
intimately  coupled 
thus
eliminating this thermal distortion effect.

the  cooled  structures, 

to 

We have learned a lot in the process of solving these
problems.  These  technical  problems  can  be  avoided  in
the future.

4  MODIFICATIONS TO REDUCE THE

RF POWER REQUIREMENT

Even  with  solutions  to  all  of  these  problems,  the  rf
system  could  not  produce  enough  power  to  excite  the
structure to the threshold for proton acceleration.  At this
point,  it  would  have  been  expensive  to  increase  the
power of the rf system.  Instead, we searched for ways to
reduce the power requirement of the linac structure.

First, we modified the RFD tank to reduce the design
gradient from 7.72 MV/m to 5.90 MV/m.  Twelve cells
at  this  reduced  gradient  resulted  in  a  shorter  tank  (by
22.86  mm)  with  reduced  drift  tube  spacing.    This
required drilling 12 new holes in the keel of the tank for
mounting  the  drift  tubes.    In  order  to  drill  these  new
holes in virgin metal, the longitudinal plane of the drift
tube stems (and RFD lenses) had to be rotated 7.2Q about
the axis of the tank.  This modification reduced the beam

energy from 2.50 MeV to 2.00 MeV and the required rf
power  by  40%.    Unfortunately,  this  did  not  reduce  the
required  rf  power  enough  to  allow  operation  with  the
power available from the rf system

Next, we modified the RFD tank to reduce the number
of drift tubes from 12 to 9.  This shortened the tank by
93.48  mm  and  reduced  the  required  power  by  another
19%.    This  reduced  the  beam  energy  of  the  structure
from  2.00  MeV  to  1.636  MeV. 
  It  was  in  this
configuration that we saw the first accelerated beam.

 In  summary,  the  energy  and  intensity  of  the  beam
from  the  POP  was  less  than  expected  because  of  the
changes that we had to make to fit within the available rf
power.  Several design and fabrication flaws raised the rf
power requirement above the original estimate, namely,
the Q of the cavity (18,600) never got to where it should
have  been  (30,000),  the  RFD  stem  design  was  not
optimum, tank modifications left 12 additional drift tube
mounting holes to be plugged,  the  very  short  tank  (less
than  one  diameter)  accentuated  the  end  wall  and  end
joint  losses,  and  the  very  low  average  beam  energy
accentuated the drift tube stem losses.  Future RFD linac
designs will employ a number of improvements that will
rectify these problems.

applications, 

of  two  different  linac  systems,  which  address  two
different  medical 
isotope
production  for 
the  PET  application,  and  neutron
production  for  the  BNCT  application.    These  systems,
with minor  modification,  could  be  used  to  satisfy  other
scientific, medical, and industrial applications.

namely 

The  PET  unit[4],  for  example,  is  based  on  a  compact,
12-MeV proton linac with an peak proton beam current
of  10  mA  and  an  average  proton  beam  current  of  120
m A.  This unit, with minor modifications, could be used
for  production  of  other  isotopes,  as  injectors  for  proton
synchrotrons,  and  as  injectors  for  high  intensity  linear
accelerator for energy or materials related applications.

The  BNCT  unit[5,7],  on  the  other  hand,  is  based  on  a
compact 2.5-MeV proton linac with a peak and average
proton  beam  current  of  10  mA.    This  unit,  with  minor
modifications,  could  be  used  for 
thermal  neutron
analysis (TNA), neutron activation analysis (NAA), non-
destructive  testing  (NDT),  thermal  neutron  radiography
(TNR), explosive detection, and gem irradiation.

The  basic  principles  of  the  RFD  linac  structure  are
now proven, our designs are mature, and we are ready to
accept contracts for the development of RFD-based linac
systems for practical applications.

5  POTENTIAL USES FOR THE RFD

7  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

LINAC STRUCTURE

applications. 

We expect the RFD linac structure to form the basis of
a new family of compact, economical, and reliable linac
systems serving a whole host of scientific, medical, and
industrial 
  The  principal  medical
applications include the production of short-lived radio-
isotopes  for  the  positron-based  diagnostic  procedures
(PET and SPECT), the production of epithermal neutron
beams  for  BNCT,  and  accelerated  proton  beams  for
injection 
the
energies  required  for  proton  therapy.    We  also  propose
an S-Band version of the structure to serve as the 10-70-
MeV portion of a 200-MeV booster linac for the proton
therapy  applications.    A  modest  scientific  application
includes the production of pulsed cold neutrons for cold
neutron physics and related applications[8].

into  proton  synchrotrons 

to  produce 

The  principal  industrial  and  military  applications
include the production of intense thermal neutron beams
for Thermal Neutron Analysis (TNA), Thermal Neutron
Radiography (TNR), and Nondestructive Testing (NDT).
High  duty  factor  RFD  linac  systems  could  produce
nanosecond bursts of fast neutrons to support Pulsed Fast
Neutron Analysis (PFNA).

6  PLANS FOR CONTINUED

DEVELOPMENT OF THE RFD LINAC
Further  development  of  RFD-based  linac  systems  is
dependent  on  further  financial  support  or  development
contracts.    We  have  mature  designs  for  all  components

The  people  who  played  a  significant  role  in  the
development  of  the  RFD  linac  structure  and  the  POP
prototype are: Frank Guy and Ken Crandall (accelerator
physics),  Joel  Starling  (mechanical  engineering  and
commissioning),  Jim  Potter  (rf  power),  John  Lenz
(thermal  calculations),  and  Sylvia  Revell  (radiation
safety).  Jerry Duggan (Univ. of North Texas) facilitated
the titanium coating of the drift tube stems.

REFERENCES

1.  D.A.  Swenson,  “RF-Focused  Drift-Tube  Linac

Structure”, LINAC’94, Tsukuba, 1994.

2.  D.A.  Swenson,  Crandall,  Guy,  Lenz,  Ringwall,  &
the  RFD  Linac

Walling,  “Development  of 
Structure”, PAC’95, Dallas, 1995.

3.  D.A.  Swenson,  F.W.  Guy,  K.R.  Crandall,    “Merits
of the RFD Linac Structure for Proton and Light-Ion
Acceleration Systems”, EPAC’96, Sitges, 1996.

4.  D.A.  Swenson,  K.R.  Crandall,  F.W.  Guy,  J.M.
Potter, T.A. Topolski, “Prototype of the RFD Linac
Structure”, LINAC’96, CERN, Geneva, 1996.

5.  D.A.  Swenson,  “CW  RFD  Linacs  for  the  BNCT

Application”, CAARI’96, Denton, 1996.

6.  D.A.  Swenson,  K.R.  Crandall,  F.W.  Guy,  J.W.
Lenz, W.J. Starling, “First Performance of the RFD
Linac Structure”, LINAC’98, Chicago, 1998.

7.  D.A.  Swenson,  “Compact,  Inexpensive,  Epithermal
Neutron Source for BNCT”, CAARI’98, Den., 1998.
8.  R.C. Lanza, “Small Accelerator-Based  Pulsed  Cold

Neutron Sources”, CAARI’98, Denton, 1998.

9.  D.A.  Swenson,  F.W.  Guy,  and  W.J.  Starling,
2.5-MeV  RFD  Linac

“Commissioning 
Prototype”, PAC’99, New York, 1999.

the 

