HIGH-BRIGHTNESS BEAMS FROM A LIGHT SOURCE INJECTOR:

THE ADVANCED PHOTON SOURCE

LOW-ENERGY UNDULATOR TEST LINE LINAC*

G. Travish, S. Biedron, M. Borland, M. Hahne, K. Harkay, J. W. Lewellen, A. Lumpkin,

S. Milton, N. Sereno, Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439

Abstract
The use of existing linacs, and in particular light source
injectors,  for  free-electron  laser  (FEL)  experiments  is
becoming more common due to the desire to test FELs at
ever  shorter  wavelengths.  The  high-brightness,  high-
current  beams  required  by  high-gain  FELs 
impose
technical specifications that most existing linacs were not
designed  to  meet.  Moreover,  the  need  for  specialized
diagnostics,  especially  shot-to-shot  data  acquisition,
demands  substantial  modification  and  upgrade  of
conventional linacs. Improvements have been made to the
Advanced Photon Source (APS) injector linac in order to
produce 
beams.
Specifically, effort has been directed at generating beams
suitable  for  use  in  the  low-energy  undulator  test  line
(LEUTL)  FEL  in  support  of  fourth-generation  light
source research. The enhancements to the linac technical
and diagnostic capabilities that allowed for self-amplified
spontaneous emission (SASE) operation of the FEL  at
530 nm are described. Recent results, including details on
technical  systems 
improvements  and  electron  beam
measurement techniques, will be discussed. The linac is
capable  of  accelerating  beams  to  over  650 MeV.  The
nominal  FEL  beam  parameters  used  are  as  follows:
217 MeV energy; 0.1–0.2% rms energy spread; 4–8 µm
normalized rms emittance; 80–120 A peak current from a
0.2–0.7 nC charge at a 2–7 ps FWHM bunch.

high-brightness 

characterize 

and 

1  OVERVIEW

test 

low-energy  undulator 

The 
line  (LEUTL)  self-
amplified  spontaneous  emission  (SASE)  free-electron
laser  (FEL)  project  has  as 
the
identification and study of issues relevant to linac-based
fourth-generation  x-ray  light  sources  [1], 
including
verifying the behavior of the SASE FEL with  varying
electron beam parameters. Therefore, good characterization
and control of the electron beam is critical to the success
of the project.

its  primary  goal 

The  LEUTL  project  has 

taken  a  conservative
approach towards producing a drive beam for the SASE
FEL. The project began with the available APS injector
and made numerous improvements and additions to the
system over the past 2+ years to allow for the production,
preservation, and measurement of high-brightness beams.
A description of the system, starting at the head of the
linac, follows.

to 

the  existing 

optimal  drift  distance 
linac.  The
photoinjector replaced an existing low peak current, large
energy spread DC thermionic gun. The ATF PC gun has
been well characterized and proven in several installations
around the world, and is intended to produce beams of
over 100-A peak current with emittances below 5 µm, as
opposed  to  the  DC  gun  that  produced  <  75-A  peak
current and > 100-µm emittances.

A drive laser for the photocathode gun was purchased
commercially,  installed  into  a  laser  room  constructed
adjacent to the linac tunnel, and integrated into the APS
control system [3]. An optical transport line delivers the
laser either into the APS linac enclosure or into an rf test
area adjacent to the laser room.

thermionic-cathode 

The APS injector linac is constructed from standard
SLAC-type  traveling-wave  disk-loaded  linac  sections.
One  linac  section  immediately  following  the  gun  is
powered by a single klystron; the remaining twelve linac
sections are grouped into three sectors, each of which is
powered  by  a  single  klystron  equipped  with  SLED
cavities.  Two 
rf  guns  provide
redundant injection capability for the APS storage ring
[4], and one of the guns has performance  sufficient  to
allow limited FEL studies. Improvements made to  the
linac for LEUTL (as  well  as  APS  operations)  include
rearranging the focusing lattice and realigning  all  linac
sections and magnets. Upgrades made to the rf system
improved the power stability from over 7% (pk-pk over
several seconds) to better than 2%, and phase  stability
from several degrees to about 2 degrees over short time
periods (seconds). Further improvements to the focusing
lattice and the rf system are ongoing.

The APS linac and LEUTL transport lines contain
four  energy  spectrometers,  a 
three-screen  emittance
measurement region, and several metal foils for providing
light to optical transition-radiation (OTR) and  coherent
transition-radiation (CTR) diagnostics. The undulator hall
proper contains additional diagnostics stations for  both
the electron beam and the photon beam generated by the
FEL interaction. The linac diagnostics are described  in
detail in section 4, but first we discuss the project goals
and design parameters.

2  PROJECT GOALS

In collaboration with  the  Accelerator  Test  Facility
(ATF) at Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) a 1.6-
cell,  S-band  photocathode  (PC)  rf  gun  and  emittance
compensation  solenoid  [2]  was  installed  at  the  near-
                                                
* Work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract No. W-31-109-ENG-38

The  LEUTL  FEL  operates  in  high-gain  SASE  mode,
generating light from 530 nm down to less than 100 nm.
A  principal  portion  of  the  FEL  studies  is  being
devoted  to  experimental  verification  of  scaling  laws
derived from SASE FEL theory, such as the variation of
output power with beam parameter changes. Theoretical

both 

requires 

comparison 
beam
characterization and good beam stability over long  and
short time scales. Significant technical effort and study
time are dedicated to improving and understanding  the
linac in order to achieve the above goals.

high-resolution 

The technical development program also focuses on
additional aspects of accelerator technology anticipated to
be  useful  for  future  light  source  construction.  As  an
example, a magnetic bunch compression system [5] has
been installed into the linac with parameters similar to
the  BC-1  compressor  in  the  LCLS  design  [6].  The
LEUTL compressor will allow for the study of the onset
of coherent synchrotron radiation and other effects as the
compression is varied. The bunch compressor will soon
be used along with the LEUTL SASE FEL to verify the
theoretical  tradeoffs  between  high  peak  currents  and
emittance.

beam 

from 

the 

to 

electron 

calculate 

parameters 

3  DESIGN PARAMETERS
necessary 

The 
are
straightforward 
undulator
specifications (a planar undulator with a period of 3.3 cm,
a  normalized  field  of  3,  and  an  effective  average
betafunction of 1.5 m at 217 MeV) and the desired FEL
characteristics (maximum gain at 530 nm). Following the
conservative approach described in the previous section,
the initial demands on the electron beam were kept  to
within state of the art (see Table 1).

Table 1: Design beam parameters for the LEUTL FEL

Value

217 MeV

Parameter
Energy
Energy Spread (rms)
Charge
Bunch Length (FWHM)
Peak Current
Emittance (normalized rms)
Since achieving the performance listed in Table 1 is
nontrivial,  a  number  of  diagnostics  were  installed  to
properly characterize the beam and provide guidance for
improvements.

0.1%
1 nC
5–7 ps
150 A
5 µm

4  DIAGNOSTICS

Prior to the LEUTL project,  the  APS  linac  was  only
required  to  provide  a  low-brightness,  modest  current
beam for injection [7].  As  such,  the  linac  diagnostics
consisted of modest resolution devices used for tuning up
the beam. After significant upgrade efforts, the APS linac
now  incorporates  many  diagnostics  for  determining
various  beam  parameters  throughout  the  system.  The
diagnostics used for characterizing the LEUTL beam are
described below in roughly the order they appear on the
beamline:

An  Integrating  Current  Transformer  (ICT),  located
just after the PC gun, measures beam charge; resolution
is better than 10 pC, and accuracy is estimated to be 10%
at nominal charges (1 nC).

YAG  screens  with  charge-injection  device  (CID)
cameras are located after the PC gun and at a few points
along the accelerator. The screens are used to determine

beam size, with an approximate resolution and accuracy
of 50 µm (at present charge densities).

Beam  position  monitors  (BPMs)  provide  beam
trajectory information along the linac and transport line
with  a  resolution  of  50 µm  (25 µm  with 
improved
electronics, better than 10 µm with the BPMs used in the
transport lines after the linac). The BPM data are used in
a  trajectory  control  law  (that  employs  a  previously
measured response matrix of steering magnets and BPMs)
to  actively  correct  the  beam's  average  trajectory.  The
control law is especially useful in maintaining a trajectory
that  best  minimizes  and  compensates  for  transverse
wakes.

Bending  magnets  located  in 

linac  sections  L3
(midway) and L5 (at the end of the linac) are used for
determining  beam  energy  and  energy  spread  at
~135–160 MeV and ~217–650 MeV, with resolutions of
0.033%/pixel and 0.05%/pixel, respectively.  Additional
bend  spectrometers  are  installed  midway  in  the  long
transport line between the linac and undulators, as well as
after the undulators.

Bunch length measurements can be made in one of
three ways. One method uses an insertable mirror at the
end of the linac to generate OTR that is transported to a
streak camera with  a  resolution  of  about  1 ps.  Bunch
length is also measured using the last accelerating section
(L5)  and  the  so-called  zero  phasing  technique  [8].
Finally, an optical high resolution spectrometer applied
to the FEL output light has been used to indirectly obtain
the bunch length [9].

Emittance measurements are primarily made using a
three-screen arrangement, with drift  spaces  between  the
screens. The three-screen system is accurate, helps with
betafunction matching, and does not  suffer  from  space
charge effects or quadrupole calibration errors. A software
utility automates the entire process. Presently the system
uses YAG screens located several meters after the linac,
but OTR mirrors may be employed in the near future to
avoid saturation effects and improve resolution. While it
is  difficult  to  estimate  the  accuracy  of  the  system,  a
resolution of better than 1 µm in emittance is possible
when the beam is properly matched.

The above diagnostics were the primary tools used to
characterize the photoinjector-generated beam. In addition,
fluorescent screens and CID cameras are placed along the
linac/LEUTL line. These are used in conjunction with a
digitizing image analysis system to measure the beam's
position and transverse profile. Finally,  diagnostics  on
the drive laser measure pulse energy (joulemeter with a
resolution of better than 1 µJ out of 500 µJ), spot size
(CCD camera with a resolution and accuracy of 100 µm
with improvements planned), and pulse length  (single-
shot autocorrelator with a resolution of better than 100 fs
and a total system accuracy of perhaps 20%) on a shot-to-
shot basis.

5  MEASURED PERFORMANCE

Using the above described diagnostics, the beam is well
characterized each run shift, often several times per shift.
The measurements are made concurrently when possible
(i.e., charge and emittance), and in rapid succession when

necessary (i.e., energy spread then emittance). Moreover,
the measurements tabulated here represent repeatable data
taken under the same linac conditions used to  run  the
FEL.  While  the  capability  of  saving  and  restoring
machine settings has long existed at the APS [10], the
performance  levels  demanded  of  the  linac  by  LEUTL
required substantial improvements in readback systems,
power  supplies,  magnet  degaussing  routines,  and  rf
system 
significant
improvement made to the system over the past two years
is 
reproduce  beam
characteristics with minimal manual adjustments.

controls.  Perhaps 

this  ability 

restore  and 

the  most 

to 

Referring to Table 2, the energy spread measurements
are  perhaps  the  least  certain  due  to  optical  resolution
limits in our  present  spectrometers.  The  bunch  length
measurements are typically made using the zero-phasing
technique  mentioned  above  (and  agree  with  the  less
frequently  used  streak  measurements).  Finally, 
the
emittance measurements have the largest variation due to
trajectory jitter and wakefield effects, as we discuss in the
next section.

Table 2: Measured parameters for the LEUTL beam when
tuned for FEL operation

Parameter
Energy
Energy Spread (FWHM)
Charge
Bunch Length (FWHM)
Peak Current
Emittance (norm. rms)

Value

217 MeV
< 0.15%
0.5 nC
3–4 ps
~140 A
< 7 µm

Diagnostic
Bend magnets
Bend magnets

ICT

Zero phase
Calculated
3 screen

6     I S S U E S

Having followed a conservative and proven approach with
the  photoinjector,  it  was  originally  thought  that  the
moderately high-brightness  beams  required  for  LEUTL
would be straightforward to produce. However, due to the
inherent sensitivity of the photoinjector to the solenoid
field, laser spot size, and input rf, it became clear that
simply duplicating past efforts was insufficient. Indeed, a
number of constraints specific to LEUTL implied that a
suitable operating regime would have to be discovered.
Finding a good operating point for the photoinjector has
been complicated by the need to traverse  a  number  of
accelerator structures before reaching  a  complete  set  of
diagnostics. Below are  some  of  the  major  issues  that
limited  beam  quality  during 
the  operating  periods
presented in this paper.
Cathode nonuniformity: While scanning the laser across
the cathode surface, it was observed that some structure,
as projected by the beam onto a YAG screen, remained
stationary. These observations  imply  that  the  structure
arose from some nonuniformity of the cathode, not the
laser. Visual inspection using a 70 degree (off normal)
cathode port supports the above observations: the cathode
center appears pitted and concentric machining rings are
evident.
Wakefields:  Proper  compensation  of 
transverse
wakefield  is  critical  to  preserving  the  beam  emittance
through the long linac. Compensation involves finding

the 

the 

trajectory  through 

the  correct 
linac.  Typically,
wakefield compensation is used; however, the jitter and
drifts in the various systems means that the  transverse
wakefields are only partially compensated and for only a
portion of the shots. In addition to the above challenges,
it is felt that the first linac section (right after the gun)
has an undetermined defect that makes it impossible to
find a trajectory that does not suffer from severe phase
steering.  Longitudinal  wakefields  are  compensated  by
simple  rf  phasing,  and  have  proven  to  be  much  less
problematic than the transverse wakes.
Jitter: Transverse trajectory jitter (pointing error) greater
than the beam diameter is often observed at the end of the
linac.  Most  of  the  jitter  appears  to  come  from  the
injector. A significant portion of the jitter may be caused
by the pointing jitter of the drive laser (which at the time
of the measurements reported here was not relay imaged
onto the cathode). The remainder of the jitter is caused by
rf amplitude and phase  jitter  in  combination  with  the
possible 
section  problem  described  above.
Appropriate rf power and phase levels can be varied to
find a “sweet spot” where the effects of jitter are reduced;
however, the appropriate parameter set changes with beam
charge, launch phase, emittance, etc.

linac 

7  NEXT STEPS

Driven by the dictates of the FEL and by work of interest
to  future  fourth-generation  light-sources,  the  LEUTL
photoinjector will be pushed to produce lower-emittance
beams with higher peak  currents.  The  magnetic  bunch
compressor—currently undergoing  commissioning—will
further increase the peak current.

By reducing the jitter and drift of the various support
systems (rf, power supplies, laser, etc.), a more optimal
operating  regime  should  be 
improved
resolution energy  spectrometer  is  also  being  designed.
Longer term improvements in the rf and laser subsystems
are also being considered.

found.  An 

While the initial lasing goal of the LEUTL FEL has
been met [11], the primary goal is to understand the FEL
SASE process. As such, characterizing the input electron
beam will continue to be paramount.

REFERENCES

[1] S.V. Milton, Proc. EPAC2000, to be published.
[2] M. Babzien et al., Phy. Rev. E 57, 6093 (1998).
[3] G. Travish et al., Proc. FEL 1999, to be published.
[4] J.W. Lewellen, Proc. PAC 1999, 1979, (1999).
[5] M.  Borland  et  al.,  “A  Highly  Flexible  Bunch
these

Compressor  for  the  APS  LEUTL  FEL,” 
proceedings.

[6] LCLS Design Study Report, SLAC-R-521, 1998.
[7] M. White et al., Proc. PAC 1995, 1073 (1996).
[8] D.X. Wang, Proc. LINAC 1996, 303, (1997).
[9] V. Sajaev et al., Proc EPAC2000, to be published.
[10] R. Soliday et al., “Automated Operation of the APS
Linac Using the Procedure Execution Manager,” these
proceedings.

[11] S.V. Milton et al., Phy. Rev. Lett. 85, 988 (2000).

