A LOW-CHARGE DEMONSTRATION OF ELECTRON PULSE

COMPRESSION FOR THE CLIC RF POWER SOURCE

R. Corsini, A. Ferrari, J.P. Potier, L. Rinolfi, T. Risselada, P. Royer, CERN, Geneva, Switzerland

Abstract

The CLIC (Compact Linear Collider) RF power source
is based on a new scheme of electron pulse compression
and  bunch  frequency  multiplication  using  injection  by
transverse RF deflectors into an isochronous ring. In this
paper,  we  describe  the  modifications  needed  in  the
present  LEP  Pre-Injector  (LPI)  complex  at  CERN  in
order  to  perform  a  low-charge  test  of  the  scheme.  The
design of the injector (including the new thermionic gun),
of the modified linac, of the  matched  injection  line,  and
of the isochronous ring lattice, are presented. The results
of  preliminary  isochronicity  measurements  made  on  the
present installation are also discussed.

1  INTRODUCTION

The time structure of the CLIC drive beam is obtained
by the combination of electron bunch trains in rings using
RF deflectors [1]. The next CLIC Test Facility (CTF3) at
CERN  will  be  built  in  order  to  demonstrate  the  scheme
and  to  provide  a  30  GHz  RF  source  with  the  nominal
parameters [2]. CTF3 will be installed in the area of the
present LPI complex. As a preliminary stage, the existing
installation will be modified in order to perform a test of
the combination scheme at low charge. The layout of the
LPI complex after the modifications is shown in Figure 1.
The  first  part  of  the  LEP  Injector  Linac  (LIL)  will  be
dismantled  and  shielding  blocks  will  be  added,  creating
an independent area that can be used for component tests
and  later  for  the  commissioning  of  the  new  CTF3
injector.  The  LIL  bunching  system  will  be  moved
downstream and a new gun [3] will be installed. Eight of
the  sixteen  accelerating  structures  of  LIL,  the  extraction

lines  to  the  PS  complex,  and  the  positron  injection  line
between LIL and EPA will be removed.

2  THE INJECTOR AND THE LINAC
The new triode gun has a design voltage of 90 kV. Its
control grid can be pulsed in order to provide a train of up
to  seven  pulses  with  a  repetition  rate  of  50  Hz.  The
nominal pulse length is 6.6 ns FWHM, and the pulses are
spaced by 420 ns, corresponding to the Electron Positron
Accumulator  (EPA)  circumference.  The  nominal  peak
current of the gun is 1 A. The present bunching system of
LIL,  composed  of  a  single-cell  pre-buncher  and  a
standing wave buncher, will be used.  It will be powered
by a 30 MW klystron and will provide a 3 GHz bunched
beam  at  4  MeV,  with  a  normalised  rms  emittance  of
50 5 mm mrad.  Each  pulse  will  then  be  composed  of
20 bunches each with a charge of 0.1 nC and a length of
about 10 ps FWHM. These values are extrapolated from
measurements made on the present installation [4].

The  pulse  train  will  be  accelerated  to  a  maximum
energy  of  380  MeV,  using  eight    travelling  wave
accelerating structures, powered in groups of four by two
40 MW klystrons.

The  beam  parameters  have  been  chosen  to  minimise
the energy spread generated by beam-loading in the LIL
structures, while still keeping a charge per bunch which is
high  enough  to  give  a  good  resolution  for  the  streak
camera  measurements  of  the  beam  time  structure.  The
beam-loading  parameter  in  LIL  is  0.2  MeV/nC  per
structure.  The  resulting  energy  spread  within  each  pulse
is  about  3  MeV.    An  additional  energy  difference  of
roughly  3  MeV  will  occur  between  the  first  two  pulses,
i.e., before the steady state is reached.

CTF3 Injector

Gun and 

bunching system

Injection line

10 m

CTF II

LIL

Figure  1:  Layout  of  the  LPI  complex  after  the  modifications  planned  for  the  CTF3  preliminary  phase.

EPA

The total energy spread of about 6 MeV is within the
EPA  acceptance  (H  1%  total).  It  can  nevertheless  be
reduced  by  a  factor  two  by  delayed  RF  filling  of  the
structure  or  by  dumping  two  out  of  the  seven  pulses  of
the train. For the frequency multiplication test, one needs
five pulses maximum.

the  first 

the  other  between 

The linac optics will be adapted to the new layout. Two
quadrupole triplets, one located after the bunching system
and 
two  acceleration
structures,  will  provide  matching  to  the  modified  LIL
FODO  lattice.  The  last  two  LIL  structures  will  be
removed  and  replaced  by  a  matching  section  to  the
injection  line.  The  design  of  the  linac  optics  and  of  the
matching sections is presently in progress. Apart from the
new  gun,  no  new  equipment  is  needed  and  only  a  re-
arrangement of the existing components suffices.

3  THE INJECTION LINE

The present line from LIL to EPA is achromatic in both
planes.  In  addition  to  the  main  horizontal  bending
magnets,  the  line  contains  two  small  vertical  dipoles,
since the levels of LIL and EPA differ by 15 cm in order
to  allow  injection  from  the  inside  of  the  ring.  However,
the  line  must  also  be  made  isochronous,  in  order  to
preserve the bunch length from the linac to the ring. This
is essential for  the  combination  process,  for  which  short
bunches (< 20 ps FWHM) are needed.  Furthermore, the
line has to be re-matched to the new ring lattice. A new
optics  of  the  line  has  been  found  which  satisfies  the
requirements of the CTF3 preliminary phase.

If  R  is  the  6x6  dimensional  transfer  matrix  of  the
injection  line,  the  achromatic  condition  implies  that  the
matrix elements R16 , R26 , R36 and R46 are equal to zero. To
preserve the bunch length, the elements R51 , R52 , R53 , R54
and R56 must be small. In particular this last condition is
not satisfied in the present line, for which R56 = -1.05 m
(against  a  requirement  of  |R56|  <  0.1  m).  R56  will  be
controlled in the new arrangement by three high-gradient
quadrupoles,  placed  between  the  bending  magnets  and
the septa. The eight other coefficients, as well as the two
transverse lattice functions -X and -Y, can be controlled by
five  quadrupoles  in  the  straight  section  of  the  injection
line  (the  gradients  and  the  positions  of  these  five
quadrupoles were chosen independently in order to fulfil
all the requirements).

The dispersion and the --functions of the new injection
line  are  displayed  in  Figure  2.  The  Twiss  parameters  at
the  entrance  of  the  line  are  the  ones  required  for  the
transverse  matching  at  the  injection  point  in  the  ring
(-X = 31  m,  ,X  =  -2,  -Y = 5  m,  ,Y  =  -1).  The  beam
envelope  is  within  the  acceptance  of  the  line.  The  R51  ,
R52 , R53 , R54 and R56 coefficients remain small enough for
no bunch lengthening to occur.

1000.

)

m

(
β

500.

Dy

βy

Dx

βx

1.

0.0

-1.

-2.

-3.

-4.

-5.

)

m

(

D

0.0

0.0

2.

4.

6.

8.

12.

14.

16.

18.

-6.

20.

10.
s (m)

Figure 2: Optics functions of the new injection line.

Two quadrupoles must be added to the present layout,
and some of the existing quadrupoles must be moved. All
quadrupoles  in  the  line  will  be  fed  with  independent
power  supplies.  However,  the  geometry  of  the  line  is
preserved, such that no major hardware modifications are
needed.  The  quadrupoles  and  power  supplies  from  the
dismantled beam lines can be reused in the new injection
line.

4  THE RING LATTICE

The lattice of the EPA ring will be modified to become
isochronous  and  thus  to  preserve  the  bunch  length  and
spacing  during  the  combination  process  (three  to  five
turns).

A  first  isochronicity  test  has  been  performed  in  the
present ring [5]. The isochronous lattice was obtained by
changing the strength of the quadrupoles without making
any  hardware  modification.  Measurements  of  the  beam
time  structure  were  made  using  a  streak  camera.  The
bunch  length  increased  rapidly  over  a  few  turns  in  the
normal case, while no significant bunch lengthening was
observed  over  50  turns  in  the  isochronous  case.  An
evaluation  of  the  momentum  compaction  has  been
obtained by measuring the bunch spacing, yielding values
of , as small as 2.3  K 10-4, close to the goal of the future
CTF3 (|, | @ H 10-4).

The  dispersion  in  the  modified  isochronous  lattice  is
shown in Figure 3, together with that of the normal lattice
used  for  LEP  operation.  In  the  isochronous  case,  the
dispersion  varies  strongly  in  the  straight  sections.  The
injection  line  was  therefore  badly  matched  to  the  ring,
and  the  larger  beam  envelopes  gave  rise  to  beam  losses
on the first few  turns.  The  situation  will  be  worse  when
the RF deflectors are installed, since they will reduce the
available aperture.

To  solve  this  problem,  in  the  new  isochronous  lattice
the  dispersion  is  made  zero  in  the  straight  sections  [6].
The dispersion and the --functions are shown in Figure 4.
This needs the displacement of four quadrupoles, and the
decoupling of one of the existing families.

)

m

(

x
D

4.

3.

2.

1.

0.0

-1.

-2.

-3.

-4.

1st turn

septum

injection  line

 deflector

local orbits

 deflector

isochronous optics

standard optics

-10.

0.0

10.

20.

30.
s (m)

40.

50.

60.

70.

5th turn

Transverse deflector field 

 = 10 cm

 Figure 3: Dispersion in the present EPA ring, for different
optics (half ring shown).

)

m

(

β

80.

70.

60.

50.

40.

30.

20.

10.

0.0

D x

β x

β y

4.

2.

0.0

-2.

-4.

-6.

-8.

)

m

(

x

D

-10.

0.0

10.

20.

40.

50.

60.

70.

30.
s (m)

-10.

-12.

Figure  4:  Optics  functions  of  the  new  EPA  ring  lattice
(half ring shown).

5  THE COMBINATION TEST

Two  transverse  RF  deflectors  will  replace  the  present
fast injection kickers. They  will  create  a  time-dependent
closed bump of the reference orbit, allowing interleaving
of  three  to  five  bunch  trains  (see  Figure 5).  The
combination  test  requires  C = n ( H /N)  where  n  is  an
integer, C is the ring circumference, N is the combination
factor  and    is  the  RF  wavelength  in  the  deflectors  and
the linac. Combination factors of 3, 4 and 5 will be tested
in the preliminary phase of CTF3. One arc of the ring will
be  displaced  by  7.5  mm,  in  order  to  fulfil  the  condition
with N = 4. The other combination factors can be tested
by  changing  the  RF  frequency  by  H  150  kHz.  The
bandwidth  of  the  klystrons  is  wide  enough  to  cover  this
range.  The  accelerating  structures  will  be  tuned  in
operation  to  follow  the  change  of  the  RF  frequency,  by
varying their temperature  H 3  GC.  The RF deflectors are
travelling  wave  iris-loaded  structures,  for  which  the
resonant  mode  is  a  deflecting  mode  with  a  5/2  phase
advance  per  cell  and  a  negative  group  velocity.  They
have been used in the past to measure the bunch length in
LIL [7]. Each one is 27 cm long, with 6 cells and an iris
diameter of 2.3 cm.

/5 (2 cm)

Fig. 5: Principle of injection by transverse RF deflectors,
for  a  combination  factor  of  5.  After  injection,  the
circulating  bunches  follow  orbits  that  are  inside  the
septum. After five turns the beam is extracted.

 Each will be powered by one of the existing 30  MW
klystrons and a power of about 4 MW each is needed for
the  nominal  deflecting  angle  of  2  mrad  at  380  MeV.
While one of the fast injection  kickers  will  be  removed,
the  other  will  be  displaced  but  kept  in  the  ring  to  allow
conventional single-turn injection. It will be used during
commissioning,  to  check  the  ring  optics  prior  to  the
installation of the RF deflectors. Also, one of the positron
injection kickers, located at the opposite side of the ring,
will  remain  in  place  and  will  be  used  to  extract  the
circulating beam to a dump.

REFERENCES

[1] H.  Braun  and  16  co-authors,  “The  CLIC  RF  Power
Source-A Novel Scheme of Two Beam Acceleration
for eH Linear Colliders”, CERN 99-06 (1999).

[2] CLIC  Study  Team,  “Proposals  for  Future  CLIC
Studies  and  a  New  CLIC  Test  Facility  (CTF3)”,
CERN/PS 99-047 (LP) and CLIC Note 402 (1999).

[3] H.  Braun,  L.  Rinolfi,  "Technical  description  for  the

CLIO gun", CTF3 Note 2000-07, April 2000.

[4] R.  Corsini,  A.  Ferrari,  L.  Rinolfi,  T.  Risselada,  P.
Royer,  F.  Tecker,  "New  measurements  of  the  LIL
bunch  length  and  lattice  parameters",  PS/LP  Note
2000-02 and CTF3 Note 2000-13, July 2000.

[5] R.  Corsini,  J.P.  Potier,  L.  Rinolfi,  T.  Risselada,
“Isochronous  Optics  and  Related  Measurements  in
EPA”,  Proceedings  of  the  7th  European  Particle
Accelerators Conference, Wien, June 2000

[6] T. Risselada, to be published.
[7] M.A.  Tordeux,  "Etude  des  longueurs  de  paquets  du

LIL à 4 MeV", PS/LP Note 93-14 (MD).

