ACCELERATION FOR THE m-STORAGE RING n-SOURCE

David Neuffer, FNAL, Batavia, IL 60510, USA

Abstract

In  a  m -storage  ring  neutrino  source,  a  high-intensity
proton source produces pions  from  a  target,  and  muons
from pi-decay are collected and cooled, accelerated to 10-
50 GeV energies, and inserted into a storage ring, where
mu-decay  produces  neutrino  beams.  The  system  must
accept  a  large-emittance  large-energy-spread  beam.    A
low-frequency acceleration system is used to capture and
phase  rotate  the  m
's,  and  a  ~200  MHz  high-gradient
system  is  used  for  cooling  and  initial  acceleration.  A
superconducting  rf  (SRF)  scenario  using  a  200MHz
linac,  and  200 
linacs
accelerates  the  beam  to  full  energy.  These  systems,
variations  and  alternatives,  and  R&D  status  and
requirements are discussed.

to  400MHz 

recirculating 

1  INTRODUCTION

In 

this  paper  we  discuss 

the  acceleration
requirements  of    a  m -storage  ring  neutrino  source,  and
describe  the  current  accelerator  research  program.    An
overview of a m -storage ring n -source is shown in figure
1.[1]    This  example  uses  the  parameters  developed  for
the Fermilab feasibility study, which is a primary source
for  this  report.    The  muon  source  is  based  on  a  high-
intensity proton synchroton which generates short, high-
intensity pulses of protons.  These pulses are transported
onto  a  high-intensity  target,  where  they  produce  large
numbers of pions.  The pions are captured within a high-
field solenoid, which is  adiabatically  matched  to  a  low-
field  solenoid  transport  which  also  contains  a  low-
frequency  acceleration  system.    The  pions  decay  to
muons  within  the  transport,  while  the  acceleration
system  rotates  the  beam  in  phase  space,  limiting  the
energy  spread  while  lengthening  the  bunches.    The  m
bunches  are  cooled  by  ionization  cooling.  The  cooled
bunches  are  then  accelerated  through  a  linac  and  a
sequence  of  recirculating  linacs  to  full  energy,  where
they  are  inserted  into  a  storage  ring.  m -decay  in  the
straight sections of the ring provide n -beams, from (m
e +‘
m ), which are directed toward a detector placed
at a distance optimal for n -oscillations (3000 km away in
ref. 1).  The design is largely based on the collaboration
m +-m
-  Collider studies [2, 3, 4]  The ref. 1 design goal is
a 50 GeV m -storage ring, and uses a 1MW proton source
(16 GeV, 15 Hz, 3· 1013 p/pulse) to obtain ~3· 1020 stored
/year or ~1020 decays in a long-baseline straight section.
In this note we will describe the acceleration systems
used  for  m
  capture,  cooling,  and  acceleration,  with  an
emphasis  on  those  used  for  acceleration  of  the  beam  to
full  energy.    These  acceleration  systems  are  the  largest
cost items in the system and have some novel properties.

n e+ n

 ﬁ

 

 

 Fig. 1: Layout of a m -storage ring n -source. (from ref. 1).

2  ACCELERATION FOR m-CAPTURE
In  the  n -factory  scenario,  protons  produce  p ’s  in  a
target,  and  the  resulting  p -beam  is  captured  in  a
solenoidal  focusing  system  and  continued  through  a
transport where p ’s  decay  into m ’s,  following p
  +
m .  The initial  p ’s, and the product m ’s, are produced
with  a  very  large  energy  spread.    Due  to  this  energy
spread,  the  beam  bunch  length  increases  in  the  decay
longitudinal  position-energy  (f -E)
transport  and  a 
correlation develops with the lower energy beam trailing
behind  the  higher  energy  muons.  To  reduce  the  energy
spread,  the  beam  passes  through  acceleration  systems
which decelerate the head of each bunch and accelerate
the  tail,  obtaining  a  long  bunch  with  small  energy
spread.

  m

  ﬁ

   Two  types  of  acceleration  systems  have  been

considered for this p

 capture section:

• 

• 

a low frequency rf system based on the use of ~30
MHz rf (~5 MV/m), and
an induction linac system  (~200  ns long pulses at
~1MV/m.

In  the  m +-m
-  Collider  scenarios  of  ref.  [2,3]  a  low-
frequency rf system is used, which requires a ~50m long
~30MHz rf system at ~5MV/m and obtains a ~10m long
d Erms  ~  40MeV,  which  requires  energy
bunch  with 
cooling for complete beam capture.

m
‘
n
ﬁ
m
In the n -source of ref. 1, a 50 m decay drift is followed
by a 100m induction linac with  D V = -0.5 to 1.5 MV/m
is used, obtaining an ~60m long bunch with 
 20
MeV,  Ekinetic  =  200MeV  is  obtained.    This  beam  is
transported  through  an  absorber  and  a  200  MHz
bunching  system,  which  forms  the  ~10%  energy  spread
bunch into a string of ~40 200 MHz  bunchlets.

d Erms @

 In ref [5] an rf system is combined with an induction
linac, to obtain energy spreads  minimized to 10   MeV or
less, and from there captured into a string of 175 MHz
bunchlets for subsequent cooling.  Both the low frequen-
cy rf systems and the induction linac require significant
extensions of present technology.

Designs  for  the  induction  linac  module  have  been
developed  by  S. Yu  and  I.  Terechkine  et  al.,  and  these
initial designs may be changed.   In ref. [1] the  100m
long induction linac is composed of 1m modules(see fig.
2),  with  0.1m  gaps  between  conducting  tubes.    Each
module  consists  of  a  set  of  toroidal  magnetic  cores
surrounding  an 
induction  gap  between  cylindrical
conductors.  A  pulser  sends  high-current  pulses  to  the
module  that  change  the  core  magnetic  fields,  and  the
changing  magnetic  field  generates  an  accelerating
voltage across the induction gap.  The induction module
includes  a  3  T 
from
superconducting  coils  inside  central  conductors,  inside
the  induction  cores.  The  modules  have  a  20  cm  radius
beam  channel  within  the  conductors,  and  a  20  cm
annular gap between the cylinder and the cores, so that
the magnetic cores have an inner radius of 45cm and an
outer  radius  of  ~80  cm.  The  magnetic  material  of  the
cores 
(newer)
nanocrystalline  compounds.    Each  module  contains  10
6cm thick cores, so the entire system requires ~600000kg
of material.

be  Finemet,  Metglas, 

field,  obtained 

solenoidal 

can 

or 

A significant problem is the development of a suitable
power supply and  pulser system for the induction linac.
While  single  pulses  are  comparatively  easy,  Ref.  1
includes  a  design  with  4  sequential  pulses  (~100  ns
pulses  spaced  by  400  ns)  at  15  Hz,  corresponding  to  4
initial proton bunches from a 15 Hz proton driver.  For
each gap, the inductor energy is supplied by a  Thyristor
swiched  capacitor  bank  (72  m F,  4kV),  which  feeds
energy 
into  4  magnetic  compressor  pulse  charge
modules, 4 pulse forming lines, and delay lines and cell
cables  leading  into  the  induction  modules.    The  total
system  requires  8  MW  cw  power  and  is  quite  large  in
overall size and scope.  Variations on this design concept
are  also  being  studied.  Further  design,  as  well  as
prototype testing, will be needed to find an optimal and
verified solution.

Low-frequency rf  is also possible and is more adapted
to a multi-bunch scenario.  However the cavities required
are  very  large  and  the  gradients  needed  are  larger  than
previously obtained at these frequencies.

Fig.  2.  Overview  of  two  induction  linac  modules,  showing
cutaway  views  of  cylindrical  conducting  tubes  separated  by
accelerating  gaps  surrounded  by  ferrite  cores,  with  focusing
fields from solenoid al coils within the tube walls.

3  ACCELERATION FOR m-COOLING
Following the f -E rotation the m -beam is captured into
a  string  of  rf  buckets.    To  improve  acceptance  through
the following accelerator and storage beam, The  m -beam
is cooled using ionization cooling.  The baseline cooling
requirement is a reduction of transverse  emittances by a
factor of ~10, to e

 0.0015 m.

t,N,rms @

the  cavities  are 

The cooling system requires high gradient acceleration
as well as strong focusing.  In the development of the  n -
source studies, a ~ 200 MHz frequency was chosen. The
frequency  is  high  enough  that  high  power  sources  are
practical,  and 
to
accommodate the large emittance beams.  To confine the
large  emittance  beams  and  to  focus  the  beams  into  the
absorbers, strong solenoidal magnetic fields with B  @
 5T
are needed, which include coils surrounding the cavities.
Since superconducting rf (SRF) does not function in high
magnetic fields, it is not used here.

large  enough 

Since m ’s interact weakly with materials, it is possible
to  have  cavities  with  material  crossing  the  beam  line.
One  cavity  design  under  construction  consists  of
cylindrical “pill-box” Cu cavities with Be foils covering
the  beam  irises.    In  this  configuration  the  maximum
electric fields are at the acceleration gaps, which enables
maximum  acceleration  gradients.    An  alternative  confi-

guration has a  gridded iris.  The cooling system requires
acceleration gradients of ~15MV/m at 200 MHz.

Figure 3 shows a cooling cell with 200 MHz  gridded
cavities, liquid hydrogen absorbers, and superconducting
magnetic coils providing ~5T focusing fields.  ~100m of
such  structures  are  required  in  a  complete  cooling
system.

RF power requirements are quite high for this normal-
conducting,  high-gradient,  low-frequency  structure.    A
multibeam 10 MW  klystron [1] is required for every ~2m
of cavity structure, or ~75 klystrons for a complete 150m
long  cooling  channel.  Initial  designs  are  ~4m  long
multibeam klystrons, with ~2.4m long IGBT modulators;
these  coud  be  arranged  transverse  to  the  cavities.  The
overall  power  requirements  are  quite  large:  ~750MW
peak power but “only” ~2MW average power.

While  various  other  possible  cooling  configurations
are  under  consideration,  the  major  variants  are  in  the
external 
the  absorber
configurations.    The  rf  requirements  for  the  required
cooling  remain  roughly  the  same:  ~100m  (or  more)  of
~15MV/m, ~200MHz rf acceleration structures.

systems  and 

focusing 

in 

However,  the  total  installed  cooling  rf  could  be
reduced if a multiturn cooling system were developed.  A
“Ring Cooler” with up to 10 turns may be possible.

Figure  3:  A  cell  for  m -cooling,  including  gridded  acceleration
cavities, liquid hydrogen absorbers, and magnetic coils.

 4  ACCELERATION SCENARIOS

 A baseline acceleration scenario was developed for ref.
1  by  Neuffer,[6]  and  after  some  modification  and
development was included in that study.  Parameters are
displayed in Table 1.  It consists of a 3  GeV Linac, which
injects  into  a  4-turn  RLA  (using  200  MHz  SRF)  which
would  take  the  beam  to  11GeV,  followed  by  a  5-turn
RLA to take the beam to 50 GeV (using 400 MHz SRF).
The design concept has been explored in some detail by
Lebedev, who has developed beam transport systems for
the  linac,  and  by  J.  Delayen  and  H.  Padamsee,  who
explored acceleration requirements.[1]

  energies  greater  than  ~10  GeV  the  acce-
leration system dominates the cost of the  n -Factory, and
the  acceleration  structures  and  power  sources  dominate
that cost.  Multiturn use of the acceleration structures (in
an RLA) reduces the rf costs (balanced by an increase in
beam  transport  costs).    Also  higher-fre quency  SRF

 For  final  m

should  be  much  lower  in  cost  (both  in  structure  and
power  requirements),  and  this  mandates  an  increase  in
frequency where the beam dynamics allows it.

 The critical requirement is that the acceleration must
be fast enough to avoid m -decay, which means real-estate
acceleration gradients more than a few  MeV/m; say  eV¢
>  ~5MeV/m.    This  includes  transport  elements;  the
design  goal  is  V ¢   >  15  MV/m  within  the  acce leration
cavity and < 67% of the transport length devoted to non-
cavities  (i.  e.,  focusing,  return  arcs,  spreaders,  cryo-
module connections, etc.).
4.1 Linac

z @

 Initial  acceleration  is  obtained  in  a  200  MHz  SRF
linac. In the linac, the initial acceleration is off crest (by
- 77(cid:176) )in  order  to  capture  the  beam  from  cooling,  which
has  an  rms  bunch  length  of  ~15cm  (5 s
  full  width  =
0.75m  or  180(cid:176) )  and  rms  energy  width  of  20MeV
(100MeV full width).  As the bunch accelerates the beam
adiabatically damps over the first ~1  GeV of acceleration
to s
 80 MeV. The phase is moved to
crest over the linac length (a linear ramp in phase with
distance was used).

 4cm and  d Erms @

 In Ref. [1, 9] transverse focussing from injection to ~ 2
GeV 
is  provided  by  solenoids,  with  central  field
increasing from ~1T to 5T over the linac.  Initially the
solenoids  are  spaced  between  two  cavities  (~6m  apart),
and  this  is  increased  to  4-cavity  cells  at  1  GeV  (~12m
cells)  Throughout the linac the accelerating cells occupy
~50%  of  the  actual  linac  length,  so  the  effective
accelerating gradient is ~7.5 MV/m.  There may be diffi-
culty 
the
the 
superconducting cavities.

solenoidal 

isolating 

fields 

from 

in 

 Solenoid focusing is not essential in the linac.   Popovic
has  developed  a  scenario  relying  on  quadrupole  FODO
focusing, which could be continued into the RLA.[8]

 For the remainder of the linac, and for the following
RLA  linacs  and  arcs,  a  triplet  focusing  configuration  is
used (in ref. 1).[9]  The advantages of a triplet is that the
beam  remains  nearly  round  throughout  the  cavities
(focused  in  both  x  and  y),  enabling  long  magnet-free
sections for  multi-cavity  cryomodules (up to 10m long).
Also only one dimension (i. e.,  x) has a large size in the
triplet, and therefore large  chromaticity; a 1-D chromatic
correction  may  be  adequate.    Alternative  “FODO”
lattices for the arcs, which enable both x and y correction
are also possible.
4.2 RLA design

 Linac acceleration is continued until the beam is fully
relativistic  and  the  longitudinal  beam  size  ( d z-d E/E)  is
matched into a RLA acceptance. For ref. 1, 3  GeV was
chosen for the transition energy into a first RLA.

 The principles of  m -RLA acceleration are described in
ref.  [7].    In  an  RLA  the  beam  is  injected  into  a  linac,
accelerated,  and  returned  by  arc  transports  for  multiple

passes of acceleration through the same linac(s).  At the
end of each linac, beam transport (through dipoles) sorts
the beam by energy directing each pass beam through a
separate return arc transport.  At the end of the arc the
separate transports are recombined for acceleration in the
following linac.  To cleanly separate the various passes,
the  beam  energy  width  must  be  less  than  the  energy
difference.  The energy widths and the costs of separate
transports limit the number of  recirculation turns.

 Because  m -bunches  have  a  large  longitudinal  phase
space, it is desirable to accelerate off-crest and use non-
isochronous  return  arcs  to  obtain  stable  longitudinal
motion (controlling energy spread  d E) through each pass
as  well  as  to  match  the  s
z-d E  bunch  sizes  into  the
following  accelerators.    Since  each  return  transport  is
f s  and  chronicity  M 56  =
separate  the  central  phase 
d(d z)/d(d p/p) can be tuned in each turn.

 The  first  RLA  (200  MHz)  takes  the  beam  from  the
linac  to  a  suitable  energy  for  injection  into  RLA2
(400MHz).    The  longitudinal  motion  must  confine  the
beam  and  match  the  beam  into  RLA2,  which  means
reducing the bunch length by a factor of ~2.  The beam
transport  must  accept  the  full  energy  spread,  which
changes from  d E/E = – 2.5s
 = – 8% to – 4% at extraction
into RLA2, with the rms bunch length changing from 4.2
to 2.2cm, as the beam is accelerated from 3 to 11  GeV.
Lattices with the desired optics have been developed by
Lebedev and Bogascz.[9]

 In  RLA2  the  beam  is  accelerated  within  a  stable  rf
bucket and then injected into the storage ring, where the
design  constraint  is  to  obtain  a  minimal  energy  spread
for  easier  acceptance  in  the  storage  ring.    At  the
parameters  of  table  1,  the  energy  spread  reduces  from
– 4% to – 1% (with a maximum of  – 6% at E = 20GeV) in
RLA2 with a maximum of as the beam accelerates to 50
GeV. A similar scenario of  Lebedev[9] uses M56 =  2  m
and  keeps  the  beam  energy  small  throughout  RLA2,  at
the  cost  of  a  smaller  acceleration  bucket.    Transverse
motion  is  not  yet  detailed  for  RLA2.  Results  of  simu-
lations  of 
the
acceleration sequence are displayed in fig. [5].
4.3 SRF and power considerations.

longitudinal  motion 

through 

the 

 The 200 MHz cavities are 1.5m long two-cell cavities.
Scaling  from  TESLA/LEP  II,  the  cells  are  75cm  long,
and have an outer radius of 65 cm with beam apertures of
~20cm.    The  400  MHz  cavities  are  half  the  transverse
size  of  these,  and  would  come  in  4-cell  1.5m  cavities
(similar  to  LEP  II).  These  would  be  grouped  into  cryo-
modules  consistent  with  the  focusing;  10m  (4-cavity)
cryomodules are in the present design.

 RF power design is also discussed in ref. [1].  The 200
MHz cavities in the linac and RLA1 require 820 kW/cell
with a fill time of  2ms.  The 400 MHz cavities of RLA2
require only 200 kW/cell.  With klystrons of peak power
of  8—9MW  (240—270kW 
linac

ave.  power),  the 

requires  25  klystrons 

requires  32  klystrons  (10  cells/ klystron,  3.6GV  total
voltage),  RLA  1  requires  23  klystrons  (2.6  GV  total
voltage),  and  RLA2 
(60
cells/klystron, 8.5 GV total)  The total average power is
20.4 MW  (7.9, 5.7, 6.8 MW for Linac, RLA1, RLA2).
Note  that  a  400  MHz  RLA2  would  require  4·
  more
power.    The  total  number  of  klystrons  in  the  SRF
accelerator  is  approximately  the  same  as  that  of  the
normal conducting cooling section, which has less than
2GV of total voltage.
4.4 Acceleration variations

 Since the accelerator is the largest cost item, it can be
possible  to  greatly  decrease  the  cost  by  changes  in  that
system.  It would be desirable to use higher-frequency rf
systems,  and  a  scenario  which  moved  the  acceleration
from 200 to 400 MHz earlier (and possibly on to 800 …)
could  be  much  more  affordable.    More  cooling  in  the
scenario (including energy cooling) may enable this.

 Overall  costs  could  also  be  reduced  by  adding  more
passes in each RLA, reducing rf requirements at the cost
of additional transport.

 Significant  changes  are  also  required  if  a  different
final energy is chosen. For a 20  GeV  scenario, a 2  GeV
linac with a single 6-pass RLA is being considered.  A
400 MHz rf system could be used for the RLA, if beam
size and energy spread are controlled.

 Costs  could  also  be  reduced  if  an  “FFAG-like”
configuration could be developed.  This would be similar
to  an  RLA  with  acceleration  modules  and  return  arc
transport.    The  difference  is  that  the  beam  transport  is
designed with a broad enough energy spread acceptance
that  all  of  the  energy  turns  return  within  the  same  arc.
Thus  the  number  of  turns  of  acceleration  could  be
increased  from  4—5  to  ~10—20,  reducing  the  rf
structure requirements.  The transport costs may be sig-
nificantly  less  (since  the  number  of  return  arcs  is  re-
duced,  but  at  the  cost  of  higher  d E-acceptance  tran-
sports).

 5 RF R&D PROGRAM 

The  m -storage  ring  n -source  requires  new  rf  systems
and R&D programs have been initiated to develop these
systems.    The  minimum  rf  system  requirements  are  an
induction linac (or low-frequency rf) for initial capture, a
~200 MHz normal-conducting rf system  for cooling, and
an  efficient  200  MHz  SRF  acceleration  rf.    R&D  on
development  of 
linac  systems  has  been
initiated by S. Lee at LBL.  200 MHz rf studies are based
at LBL and at Fermilab. Initial designs of rf cavities have
been developed, both with Be windows and with  gridded
irises.    These  studies  will  build  on  the  805  MHz  R&D
program, which has built Be window cavities (and open
cell  cavities),  and  will  provide  high-gradient  tests  of
these  structures.    A  test  setup  for  200  MHz  rf  will  be
added  to  the  Fermilab  805  MHz  test  lab.    Also  Super-

induction 

Accelerator for m-storage ring  
 
 
 
 RLA1 

Injection Linac  

Linac 

RLA2 

to m-storage ring  

Fig. 4. Overview of accelerator for the m

Linac 
-storage ring n

Return 
arcs 

-source.

conducting rf programs designing and building prototype
accelerating cavities have been initiated by  Padamsee et
al. at Cornell and by  Delahaye et al. at TJNAF.

6 CURRENT STATUS AND PLANS

A 6-months study on the physics potential[10] for a  m -
storage ring  n -source and a feasibility study on the beam
facilities[1] have just been completed at Fermilab. These
studies conclude that the physics potential of that source
is interesting and important, and that the general concept
is  technically  feasible.    The  feasibility  study  identified
key  “cost  drivers”  (expensive  components  and  features)
and performance limitations; the critical cost drivers are
the acceleration and beam cooling systems.

 In the next year, a design study based at BNL will be
developed  with  somewhat  different  scope,  and  facility
requirements,  and  some  site-dependent  con straints.    In
this  study  the  collection  and  cooling  channel  will  be
reoptimized  for  performance  and  affordability,  and  the
acceleration will also be  reoptimized.

REFERENCES

LBNL-38946 

-  Collider  -  A  Feasibility  Study,  BNL-52503,
(1996),

[1] N. Holtkamp and D.  Finley, ed. “A Feasibility Study
of  a  Neutrino  Source  Based  on  a  Muon  Storage  Ring”,
Fermilab, April 15 th, 2000.
[2]  m +m
Fermi-Lab-Conf.-96-092, 
presented at the Snowmass 96 workshop (1997).
[3] C. M. Ankenbrandt et al.,  Phys. Rev. Special Topics
Accel. Beams 2, 081001 (1999).
[4]  Muon  Collider  and  Neutrino  Factory  notes,  see
http://www-mucool.fnal.gov/notes/notes.html.
[5]  R.  Palmer,  C  .Johnson,  E.  Keil,  CERN-SL-99-070-
AP, Nov 1999. MUCOOL note Nr. 67.
[6] D. Neuffer, MuCOOL-note 75, January 2000.
[7]  D.  Neuffer,  Nucl.  Inst.  and  Meth.  A  384,  p.  263
(1997).
[8] M. Popovic, these Linac 2000 proceedings (2000).
[9] V. Lebedev and A. Bogacz, unpublished (2000).
[10] C.  Albright et al., “Physics at a Neutrino Factory”,
Fermilab study  FERMILAB-FN-692, May 10, 2000.

3
11
4
1.15

50 GeV m-Accelerator Parameters
Parameter
Initial Kinetic Energy 0.12
Final Kinetic Energy 3.0
Number of turns
1
Rf Voltage/linac
3.6
77ﬁ
-6(cid:176)    30(cid:176)
Acceleration phase
---         0.5ﬁ
M56 per arc
Rf frequency
200
15 ﬁ
Rms bunch length
Rms energy spread 20 ﬁ
Linac length (2 per RLA) 500    
Arc length

Linac  RLA1 RLA2
11 GeV
50 GeV
5
4.3   GV
0(cid:176)
25ﬁ
0.3ﬁ
0  m
400 MHz
  1.5  cm
 220 MeV
800    m
700    m

 2     ﬁ
 160 ﬁ
200
220

1.4  

200

   4  ﬁ
  80 ﬁ

---

Fig. 5 Simulation of longitudinal motion in acceleration;  f -d E plots of
beam at linac injection (0.12  GeV kinetic energy), beginning of RLA1
(2.97GeV),  beginning  of  RLA2  (10.9  GeV,  400  MHz),  and  end  of
RLA2(50.7 GeV).

