OVERVIEW OF THE APT ACCELERATOR DESIGN*

J. F. Tooker, R. Bourque, D. Christiansen, J. Kamperschroer, G. Laughon, M. McCarthy,

M. Schulze, General Atomics, San Diego, CA  92186

Abstract

target/blanket 

The accelerator for the APT Project is a  100 mA CW
proton  linac  with  an  output  energy  of  1030  MeV.    A
High Energy Beam Transport (HEBT) conveys the beam
to  a  raster  expander,  that  provides  a  large  rectangular
distribution  at  a 
(T/B)  assembly.
Spallation neutrons generated by the proton beam in the
T/B reacts with Helium-3 to produce tritium.  The design
of  the  APT  linac  is  an  integrated  normal-conducting
(NC)/superconducting  (SC)  proton  linac;  the  machine
architecture has been discussed elsewhere [1].  The NC
linac consists of a 75 keV injector, a 6.7-MeV 350-MHz
RFQ (radio frequency quadrupole), a 96-MeV 700-MHz
CCDTL (coupled-cavity drift-tube linac), and a 700-MHz
CCL (coupled-cavity linac), with an output energy of 211
MeV. This is followed by a SC  linac, that employs 700-
MHz  elliptical  niobium  5-cell  cavities  to  accelerate  the
beam to the final energy.  The SC linac has two sections,
optimized  for  beam  velocities  of  b
  =0.82.
Each section is made up of cryomodules containing two,
three, or four 5-cell cavities, driven by 1-MW 700-MHz
klystrons.    The  singlet  FODO  lattice  in  the  NC  linac
transitions to a doublet focusing lattice in the SC  linac,
with  conventional  quadrupole  magnets  in  the  warm
inter-module spaces. This doublet lattice is continued in
the HEBT.  An overview of the current linac design will
be presented.

  =0.64  and  b

1  INTRODUCTION

Figure 1 shows the architecture of the APT 1030 MeV
accelerator.  It is a normal conducting accelerator up to
211  MeV.  A  75-KeV  injector  generates  the  cw  proton
beam  and  acceleration  continues  through  a  RFQ,  a
CCDTL, and a CCL to 212 MeV.  This is followed by a
superconducting accelerator to the final energy.  The first
SC section has 102 five-cell medium-b  niobium cavities
optimized for b
 = 0.64.  At the end of this section, the
proton beam energy is 471 MeV.  The second section is a
high-b
  section  that  has  five-cell  niobium  cavities
optimized  for  b
  =  0.82.    To  attain  an  output  energy  of
1030 MeV, 140 cavities are needed.  A HEBT directs the
beam around a 90 degree bend to a 45 degree switchyard,
where the beam goes straight to a beam stop for tuning or
to the target/blanket.

                            
*Supported by DOE Contract DE-AC04-96AL99607

Figure 1: Architecture for APT 1030 MeV accelerator

2  ACCELERATOR DESIGN

The  following  sections  describe  the  design  of  the

various stages of the APT Linac.
2.1  Low Energy Linac

The LE linac consists of the injector, a 350-MHz RFQ,

a 700-MHz CCDTL, and a 700-MHz CCL.
2.1.1  Injector

The  2.8-m  long  injector  has  a  radio  frequency  (RF)-
driven  ion  source  that  produces  a  110-mA  cw  proton
beam at 75  keV [1].  A low energy beam transport that
has two solenoid magnets matches the proton beam into
the acceptance of the RFQ.
2.1.2  RFQ

 The RFQ is an eight-meter long structure built of four
resonantly  coupled  segments  tuned  for  350  MHz  [1].
The  RFQ  accepts  the  75-keV,  110-mA  beam  from  the
injector  and  produces  a  6.7-MeV,  100-mA  beam.    It  is
driven  by  three  1.2-MW  klystrons.    The  RFQ  has  been
operated  in  the  Low  Energy  Demonstration  Accelerator
of APT and its performance is discussed elsewhere [2,3].
 2.1.3  CCDTL

 A  700-MHz  CCDTL  [4]  accepts  the  100-mA  beam
from  the  RFQ  and  accelerates  it  to  96  MeV.    The
CCDTL cavities are grouped into six resonant structures
called supermodules that span a length of 112.8 m.  The
first supermodule consists of a series of side-coupled 2-
gap drift-tube  linac  (DTL)  cavities  with  the  quadrupole
magnets [5] of the FODO lattice located between them.
The  focusing  lattice  begins  with  a  period  of  8-b
  to
match the beam from the RFQ and transitions to 9-b
 at
9  MeV  to  provide  additional  space  for  the  quadrupole
magnets and beam diagnostics.  Module two is made up
of DTL cavities with two drift tubes, forming a series of

l
l
three-gap cavities connected by coupling cells.  Modules
3  to  6  consist  of  two-cavity,  two-gap  segments.    To
maintain  strong  transverse  focusing,  the  quadrupole
magnets in the FODO lattice continue with the same 9-
 periodicity.  The first module is energised by a single
one  MW  klystron.    The  other  five  supermodules  are
energised by up to five klystrons.
 2.1.4  CCL

cavities each (see Figure 3), providing a shorter 4.877-m
focusing  period.  This  was  done  to  improve  the  match

 The CCL is composed of five supermodules spanning
a  length  of  110.4  m.    Each  is  made  up  of  a  string  of
seven-cell  segments  side-coupled  to  form  a  single
resonant  structure  energised  by  up  to  seven  one  MW
klystrons.    The  singlet  9-b
  FODO  lattice  is  continued
throughout the CCL

  This  code  automates 

frequencies  and  coupling. 

 The Coupled-Cavity Tuning (CCT) code [6] has been
developed to help design the CCL cavities (and later the
CCDTL  cavities). 
the  RF
calculations using CCLFISH and iterates the geometry of
the  accelerating  cavity,  the  geometry  of  the  coupling
cavity,  and  the  separation  between  them  to  achieve  the
correct 
  The  resultant
geometry  can  then  be  fed  into  a  CAD  program  to
generate  the  drawings.    Four  cold  models  are  planned
along  the  length  of  the  CCL  to  validate  the  code.
Figure 2  shows  one  of  the  CCL  cold  models  designed
with  CCT.  Three-D  RF  analysis  and  coupled
RF/structural  analyses  are  also  being  performed  on  this
cw  RF  structure  [7]  to  address  cavity  sizing  and  the
effects of high RF power densities.

from the LE linac,

Figure 3: Cross-section of two-cavity cryomodule.

The high-b

The remaining 30 cryomodules in the medium-b
 section
contain  three  cavities  each,  with  a  longer  6.181-m
focusing  period.    Each  cryomodule  in  the  medium-b
section  is  powered  by  a  single  1-MW  klystron.    Each
cavity is fed by a single RF coaxial power coupler, so that
the  RF  power  from  each  klystron  is  divided  by  two  or
three, with up to 420 kW per coupler.

 section is a series of 35 four-cavity  cryo-
modules  with  the  room  temperature  doublet  quadrupole
magnets  in  the  warm  regions  between  them.    This
section has a period of 8.540 m. Each high-b
 cryomodule
is powered by two 700 MHz klystrons.   The power from
each klystron is split by two to feed a single RF coaxial
power coupler on each of two cavities.
 2.3  High Energy Beam Transport

 The doublet lattice of the HE  linac is continued along
the  transport  line  of  the  HEBT.    There  are  ten  periods
(85.4 m) prior to a 90 degree bend.  If the dipole magnets
of this bend are de-energized, the beam goes straight to a
0.1%  duty  cycle  beam  stop  for  tuning.    If  they  are
energized,  the  beam  is  then  directed  to  a  45  degree
switchyard.    Here  the  beam  can  go  straight  to  a  beam
stop capable of handling 2% of the full beam power.  It is
used  during  commissioning,  start  up,  and  tuning  of  the
accelerator.    The  45°  bend  in  the  switchyard  can  then
direct the beam from this beam stop to the target/blanket
assembly.    The  beam  is  expanded  onto  the  target  by  a
beam  raster  system  [9],  which  sweeps  the  beam
uniformly over the 19-cm wide by 190-cm high tungsten
target.
 2.4  RF Power System

 Three  1.2-MW,  350-MHz  klystrons  are  used  to
energise  the  RFQ.    Only  two  are  required  to  accelerate
the beam in the RFQ; the third is a spare so that the linac

Figure 2: Cold Model of CCL Segments 283 & 284

 2.2  High Energy Linac

The  superconducting  cavities  of  the  HE  linac  are
contained  in  cryomodules  that  provide  the  thermal
insulation  and  connection  to  the  cryogenics  system  to
maintain  the  cavities  at  their  operating  temperature  of
2.15  K.    In  the  HE  linac,  the  FODO  lattice  of  the  LE
linac  transitions  to  a  doublet  lattice,  consisting  of
normal-conducting  quadrupole  magnets  [8]  located  in
the warm regions between the cryomodules. The first six
cryomodules  in  the  medium-b
  section  contain  two

b
l
l
can continue to operate if one of the 350-MHz RF power
systems fails.   The power from each klystron is split by
two, feeding six iris couplers in the RFQ cavity.  This is
shown in Figure 4.
 

 

Figure 4: Three waveguide feeds to RFQ Cavity.

in 

the  LE 

linac  and 

 The  supermodules 

the
superconducting cavities in the HE linac are powered by
1-MW,  700-MHz  klystrons.    There  are  52  klystrons  in
the LE linac, 36 klystrons in the medium-b
 section of the
HE linac, and 70 klystrons in the high-b
  section  of  the
HE linac for the 1030 MeV accelerator. The power from
each  klystron  is  split  by  two,  except  for  two  locations.
The  first  module  of  the  CCDTL  is  fed  by  a  single
klystron, where the power is split by four.  For the three-
cavity cryomodule, the power is split by three, with each
cavity  fed  by  a  single  power  coupler,  as  shown  in
Figure 5.

 2.5  Cryogenics System

the  cryo-distribution 

 The cryogenic system [10] supplies helium cooling to
maintain  the  niobium  cavities  at  2.15  K.    This  system
provides to the 1030 MeV accelerator approximately 15
kW of refrigeration at 2.15 K for the superconducting RF
cavities  and  approximately  64  kW  of  refrigeration
between 5 K and 30 K for the thermal intercepts on the
RF power couplers, thermal shields in the cryomodules,
and 
system.  The  cryogenic
distribution  line  contains  two  sets  of  supply  and  return
lines, and runs the length of the HE  linac.  Sets of four
U-tube  transfer  lines  connect  each  cryomodule  to  this
distribution  line.    The  distribution  line  is  supplied  by  a
cryogenics plant, where three, semi-independent helium
refrigerators  provide  the  closed-loop  helium  cooling.
Each  refrigerator  contains  a  4-K  coldbox  using  gas-
bearing  turbine  expanders,  a  2-K  coldbox  with  cold
compressors  to  generate  the  sub-atmospheric  conditions
within the cryomodule, warm helium compressors for gas
compression,  liquid  and  gas  storage,  and  appropriate
instrumentation and controls.

REFERENCES

[1] J. Tooker, et al., “Overview of the APT Accelerator
Design,” Proc. 1999 Particle Accelerator Conf., New
York City, March-April 1999

[2]  L.M.  Young,  et.  al.,  “High  Power  Operations  of

LEDA,” these proceedings.

[3] M.  Schulze, et. al., “Beam Emittance Measurements

of the LEDA RFQ,” these proceedings.

[4] R. Wood, et. al, “Status of Engineering Development
of  CCDTL  for  Accelerator  Production  of  Tritium,”
Proc. 1998 Int. Linac Conf., Chicago (August 1998).
[5] S. Sheynin, et. al, “APT High Energy Linac Intertank
Assembly  Design,”  Proc.  1999  Particle  Accelerator
Conf., New York City, 1999

[6] P.D. Smith, “CCT, a Code to Automate the Design of

Coupled Cavities,” these proceedings.

{7} G. Spalek, et.  al.,  “Studies  of  CCL  Structures  with

3D Codes,” these proceedings.

[8]  S.  Sheynin,  “APT  High  Energy  Linac  Intertank
Assembly  Design,”  Proc.  1999  Particle  Accelerator
Conf., New York City, 1999.

[9]  S.  Chapelle,  et.  al,  “Testing  of  a  Raster  Magnet
System for Expanding the APT Proton Beam,” Proc.
1999  Particle  Accelerator  Conf.,  New  York  City,
1999

[10] G. Laughon, “APT Cryogenic System,” Proc. of the

1999 Cryogenic Engineering Conf., Montreal,
Canada, July, 1999

 

 Figure 5: RF power splitting to 3-cavity cryomodule.

 

.

