OVERVIEW OF THE HEAVY ION FUSION PROGRAM*

C.M. Celata, Ernest Orlando Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

 for the U.S. Virtual National Laboratory for Heavy Ion Fusion

0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
8
1

 

 
 
 

6
6
1
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

ignition, 

the  ability 

The world Heavy Ion Fusion (HIF) Program for inertial
fusion  energy  is  looking  toward  the  development  and
commissioning  of  several new experiments.   Recent  and
planned upgrades of the facilities at GSI, in Russia, and in
Japan  greatly  enhance 
to  study  energy
deposition in  hot  dense matter.    Worldwide  target  design
developments  have  focused  on  non-ignition  targets  for
nearterm experiments and designs which,  while  lowering
the  energy  required  for 
tighten  accelerator
requirements.  The U.S  program is  transitioning  between
scaled  beam  dynamics  experiments  and  high  current
experiments with power-plant-driver-scale beams.  Current
effort  is  aimed  at  preparation  for  the  next-step  large
facility,  the  Integrated  Research  Experiment  (IRE)--  an
induction  linac  accelerating  multiple  beams  to  a  few
hundred MeV,  then  focusing to  deliver tens  of  kilojoules
to  a  target.    The  goal  is  to  study  heavy  ion  energy
deposition, and to test  all  of  the  components and physics
needed for an engineering test  of  a power plant  driver and
target chamber.   This  paper will  include  an  overview  of
the Heavy Ion Fusion program abroad and a more in-depth
view of the progress and plans of the U.S. program.

1  INTRODUCTION

The international program  in  Heavy  Ion  Fusion  is  at
the  threshold  of  planning  and  constructing  experiments
which will test many accelerator and target issues in

~2-3 MeV
~1 A / beam

~ 100 Mev

~10 A / beam

~ 10 Gev

~400 A / beam

~ 10 Gev

~4000 A / beam

Figure 1:  Induction linac driver subsystems & parameters

parameter ranges relevant to  an eventual  powerplant.    In
Europe,  Russia,  and  Japan 
is  on
measurements  of  stopping  of  heavy  ions 
in  matter.
Accelerator  studies  there  focus  on  the  challenge  of
delivering very high-current beams to  the  target.    In  the
U.S., small scaled experiments  have been completed, and

the  emphasis 

a  series  of  accelerator  experiments  using  driver-scale
beams are in the construction and design phases.  This
paper will concentrate on the U.S. program, since it  relies
on  a  linac  approach  and  has  an  accelerator  physics
program dedicated to  energy  production  research.      Note
that much of the work cited here, and much more detail on
HIF can be found in [1].

2  HIF RESEARCH IN THE U.S.

2.1  The Induction Linac Approach

Present Heavy Ion  Fusion  indirect drive targets  require
1-7  MJ  of  heavy ions  delivered to  the  target in  about  10
ns,  at  a  kinetic  energy  ~  2-10  GeV.    The  total  charge
implied by  this  requirement leads  to  significantly  higher
line charge densities than can be stored in  a single  storage
ring.    While  European  designs  have  concentrated  on
combining  and compressing pulses  from several rings  in
the last phase of transport to the target, the  U.S.  approach
is to make use of  the  efficiency of  the  induction linac for
transporting  high  current  beams  in  a  single  multibeam
linac.    A  schematic  view  of  one  possible  power  plant
accelerator  (driver)  is  shown  in  Fig.  1.    An  injector
provides multiple  (~30-200)  beams  of  heavy  ions  (e.g.,
Cs+)  at  ~  1.5-2  MeV,  with  current  per  beam  of
approximately  1  A. 
  The  beams  are  space-charge-
dominated, with  tune  depressed by  space charge to  ~1/10
of the single particle tune.  They are accelerated in  parallel
through induction cores which encircle the array of beams.
Each beam is individually focused by quadrupoles-- in the
example  of  Fig.  1,  electrostatic  quadrupoles  at  low
energy, with  a transition  to  magnetic  quadrupoles  at  50-
100 MeV.    Maximizing  the  transverse current density of
the  beam array,  thereby    minimizing  the  induction  core
radius,    is  important  in  controlling  the  cost  of  the
accelerator.    But  electrostatic  quadrupoles  optimize  at  a
smaller aperture than  is  optimal  for  high  overall  current
density  in  magnetic  quadrupoles.      Therefore  a  4-to-1
transverse  combining  of  beams 
the
transition  to  magnetic  focusing.    After  combining,  the
beam is  accelerated  to  its  final  energy,  then  compressed
longitudinally  by  a factor ~ 10  to  obtain  the  short  pulse
required by the target.  It  is  of  utmost  importance to  keep
the emittance growth in  the  accelerator low,  in  order that
the  beams can be focused to  a  spot  of  a  few  millimeter
radius at the  target.    Desirable final normalized emittance
is £

 about 20 p

included  at 

is 

 mm-mrad.

                                                
*  This  work  supported  by  the  Office  of  Energy  Research,  U.S.  Department  of  Energy,  under  contract  number  DE-AC03-
76SF00098.

