The Beam Halo Experiment at LEDA

P. L. Colestock, T. Wangler, C. K. Allen, R. L. Sheffield, D. Gilpatrick and the Diagnostics Group,
M. Thuot and the Controls Group, the LEDA Operations Team, Los Alamos National Laboratory,

M. Schulze and A. Harvey, General Atomics, Los Alamos, NM 87545

0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
8
1

 

 
 
 

9
5
1
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

indicates 

that  protons  under 

Due to the potentially adverse effects of the generation of
halo  particles  in  intense  proton  beams,  it  is  imperative  to
have a clear understanding of the mechanisms that can lead
to  halo  formation  for  current  and  proposed  high-intensity
linacs.    To  this  end  a  theoretical  model  has  been
developed,  which 
the
combined  influence  of  strong  space  charge  forces  and
periodic  focussing  in  a  linear  transport  channel  can  be
kicked  into  halo  orbits.    However,  no  experimental
measurements of beam halo in proton beams have yet been
carried  out.    In  this  paper  we  report  the  progress  of  an
effort  to  carry  out  an  experiment  to  measure  beam-halo
using the existing high-intensity proton beam of the LEDA
facility.    A  linear  transport  channel  has  been  assembled
with 
the
expected  small  beam  component  in  the  beam  halo  as  a
function of beam parameters.  The experiment is based on
the use of an array of high-dynamic-range wire and beam
scrapers to determine the halo and core profiles along the
transport channel.  Details of the experimental design, the
expected halo measurement properties will be presented.

the  appropriate  diagnostics  for  measuring 

1  INTRODUCTION

The  interest  in  understanding  the  formation  of  a  halo
distribution around an intense proton beam has increased in
recent  years  with  the  development  of  new  applications
requiring such beams.  In order to understand this process,
a  theoretical  model  has  been  developed  and  extensive
computer  simulation  has  been  carried  out,  reviewed
elsewhere  in  these  proceedings.1    Although  an  extensive
theoretical  literature  has  evolved,  there  has  been  no
definitive test of the model to date, owing in part to the fact
that  few  intense  proton  beams  of  the  required  intensity
exist.

At  the  Low  Energy  Demonstration  Accelerator  (LEDA)2
at  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory,  we  have  embarked
upon  a  program  to  carry  out  a  first  test  of  the  halo
formation  model  using  the  available  intense  proton  beam
from LEDA.  A 52 quad transport line is being constructed
following  the  RFQ  of  the  LEDA  injector,  a  100  mA,  6.7
MeV  proton  beam  with  a  capability  for  continuous

operation.  We will use, however, a pulsed beam with a 20
µsec  pulse  length  and  a  10-4  duty  factor  in  order  to
facilitate the use of direct wire and scraper measurements
of the beam profiles.

The  purpose  of  this  program  is  to  make  a  detailed
comparison,  for  the  first  time,  between  the  theoretical
model of halo formation and beam profiles in a controlled
way.

2 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

An overall view of the halo transport line is seen in Fig. 1.
The transport channel consists of 52 quadrupoles with a G-
l  =  2.5  T,  the  first  four  of  which  have  extra  strength  to
permit  mismatching  the  beam  from  the  RFQ  as  it  passes
into the transport channel.  An array of up to nine scanners
will  be  used  to  monitor  beam  profiles  in  two  dimensions
over the length of the transport channel, and details of the
scanner design are given elsewhere in these proceedings.3
A scanner consists of 33 µ diameter carbon filaments that
can  safely  intercept  the  entire  beam  current  and  can  be
passed  through  the  core  of  the  beam.    Beam  current  is
determined by secondary emission.  On the same assembly
a scraper plate is mounted which permits measurement of
the diffuse halo region.  Taken together, the beam profile
measurements should permit a dynamic range of 105 .

The philosophy for scanner placement is the following: the
first  scanner  is  used  to  determine  the  beam  distribution
emerging from the RFQ, and this provides a critical initial
condition on the halo evolution.   The second group of four
scanners  is  placed  after  quadrupole  13,  which  is  where
simulations show the beam is largely debunched.  Since the
transverse space charge forces depend on the longitudinal
phase  space  density,  it  is  reasoned  that  a  fairly  uniform
domain  for  the  halo  formation  should  occur  downstream
from this point.  Four scanners are used to ensure complete
coverage of the phase space over a full betatron period (68
degrees per cell).  A final array of four scanners at the end
of the transport channel permits a similar measurement of
phase space in the region where the halo is expected to be
fully  developed.    Additional  diagnostics  include  an  array
of beam position monitors, resistive-wall current monitors,
current 
lossmonitors.

toroids 

beam 

and 

              Figure 1 Overall Layout of the Beam Halo Experiment on LEDA.
The transport line consists of 52 quadrupoles between the LEDA RFQ and
the  HEBT/beam  stop.    The  first  four  quadrupoles  are  used  to  create  a
controlled  mismatch  from  the  RFQ.    A  series  of  nine  dual-axis,  high
dynamic-range  wire/scraper  scanners  will  be  used  to  measure  halo
properties.

Details of the wire scanner design and implementation are
given elsewhere in these proceedings4 , as well as aspects
of  the  complex  control  system  required  for  driving  the
scanners and acquiring scanner data.5

  

Beam operation will be limited to < 20 µsec macropulses
to limit the power delivered to the scraper elements, and a
software algorithm has been devised to prevent insertion of
scrapers  into  the  core  of  the  beam.    However,  the
combined use of wire filaments and scraper elements will
permit  a  complete  beam  profile  to  be  obtained.    Profile
data  will  rely  on  shot-to-shot  repeatability  of  the  RFQ,
which has been measured to be about 1%.  Position jitter
was also measured to be a negligible effect.

Because  of  previously  existing  constraints  on  LEDA,  the
quadrupole  magnets  permit  only  a  3  cm  bore  beampipe,
which is expected to be approximately 50% larger than the
largest halo orbit.  Moreover, the core beam size is about 1
mm RMS, which requires 5 mil alignment tolerances.  This
was carried out using a taut-wire system for magnet center
fiducialization, and a precision alignment rail spanning the
length of the transport line.  Each magnet was individually
mapped  and  aligned  relative  to  the  rail,  along  with  beam
position  monitors.    Load  stresses  and  thermal  expansion
were  measured  to  be  negligible  alignment  factors.    1  –  2
mil  tolerances  were  achieved.    An  array  of  steering
magnets  will  be  employed  to  correct  for  misalignment
errors  in  conjunction  with  the  eight  beam  position
monitors.    The  magnets  are  powered  in  strings  of  eight,
each with individual shunts for trim control.  Four singlet
supplies 
the
match/mismatch magnets at the exit of the RFQ.  Once the
beam  has  exited  the  transport  channel,  it  enters  the  high-
energy beam  transport  line  (HEBT)  and  terminates  in  the
beam stop, both commissioned in a previous LEDA run.

individually 

power 

are 

used 

to 

3 EXPERIMENTAL OBJECTIVES

the  halo  formation 

The experimental objective is to verify the halo formation
model  which 
requires  a  detailed  comparison  with
simulations. This can, in principle, be obtained by the array
of nine scanners and the data will be fitted to the results of
beam  simulations.    Such  an  endeavor  requires  a  massive
data acquisition and simulation effort and is expected to be
completed  some  months  after  data-taking  has  come  to  a
conclusion.  However, as noted in reference 2, a workable
single-parameter  measure  of 
is
described based on the fourth moment of the  distribution.
This  will  serve  as  a  rough  measure  of  the  existence  of  a
halo.  However, a complete confirmation of the model will
require  as  complete  a  phase  space  picture  as  possible.
Another  signature  of  halo  formation  according  to  the
theoretical  model  is  the  maximum  extent  of  the  halo
particles.  This value is achieved shortly after the mismatch
quadrupoles, with only the number of particles within  the
halo distribution increasing along the transport channel.  A
measurement  of  this  maximum  particle  radius  using  the
sensitive  scraper  diagnostic,  in  particular  as  a  function  of
the  mismatch  strength,  will  provide  an  important    test  of
the theory.

An alternative approach is to vary the tune of the transport
line  effectively  rotating  the  distribution  past  a  set  of
scanners  with  fixed  orientation.    Since  simulations  show
that  both  the  core  and  halo  distributions  can  be  made  to
rotate rigidly over some phase range, it may be possible to
use  the  an  inverse  Radon  transform  to  form  a  detailed
picture of phase space.  Whether this elegant technique can
be  made  to  work  in  the  experimental  environment  of  an
intense beam remains to be seen.

                                                                                              

1 T. Wangler and K. R. Crandall, “Beam Halo in Proton
Linac Beams,” these proceedings.
2 J.D.Schneider, “Operation of the Low-Energy
Demonstration Accelerator: The Proton Injector for
APT,”Proc. 1999 IEEE Particle Accelerator Conf. (IEEE
Catalog No.CH36366, 1999), pp.503-507.
3 R. Valdiviez, N. Patterson, J. Ledford, D. Bruhn, R.
LaFave, F. Martinez, A. Rendon, H. Haagenstad,
J. D. Gilpatrick, and J. O’Hara, “Intense Proton Core and
Halo Beam Profile Measurement: Beam Line Component
Mechanical Design, “ these proceedings. .
4 J. D. Gilpatrick, D. Barr, D.  Bruhn, L. Day, J. Ledford,
M. Pieck, R. Shurter, M Stettler, R. Valdiviez, J.
Kamperschroer, D. Martinez,  J. O'Hara,  M. Gruchalla,
and D. Madsen, “Beam Diagnostics Instrumentation for a
6.7-MeV Proton Beam Halo Experiment,” these
proceedings.
5 L.Day et al, “Control system for the LEDA 6.7 MeV
proton beam halo experiment,” these proceedings.

4   RUN PLAN

At the present time, all of the magnets and beamline have
been installed, as well as most of the diagnostics hardware.
Final  checkout  of  the  associated  electronics  and  control
systems  has  begun.    Moreover,  the  LEDA  RFQ  and
injector are being readied for operation.

Current  run  plans  indicate  that  beam  operation  will
commence  shortly  following  this  conference,  with  a
commissioning  and  shakedown  period  for  new  hardware.
Full  data-taking  will  begin  early  in  FY  01  and  the
experiment is expected to continue until Spring 2001.

Because of the necessity to handle large amounts of beam
profile  data,  the  initial  emphasis  will  be  placed  on  fully
integrating  the  new  diagnostic  hardware  into  the  EPICS-
based control system.

Due  to  the  potential  for  beam-induced  damage  at  the  full
current available from the RFQ (100 mA), it is planned to
implement a fast-protect system based on beam losses that
will  prevent  any  such  damage.    An  extended  period  of
operation at low currents (10 mA) is planned until the fast-
protect  system  is  in  place,  and  all  diagnostics  have  been
checked out at low power densities.

5   SUMMARY

We  have  described  the  elements  of  an  experiment  to  test
the theoretical model for halo formation that is soon to be
carried  out  on  the  LEDA  facility.    The  purpose  of  the
experiment  is  to  verify  the  model  with  a  detailed
measurement  of  phase  space  along  a  linear  transport
channel,  and  by  comparing  this  experimental  information
to analytical models and simulations.  The combination of
large  dynamic-range  profile  diagnostics  and  large-scale
simulations  should  provide  a  unique  and  comprehensive
test of the theory.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
from 

the  U.S.
The  authors  acknowledge  support 
Department of Energy, and wish to give a special thanks to
the many dedicated staff who have braved a fire and other
challenges to put together this experiment in a short time.

REFERENCES

