ANALYSIS OF THERMALLY INDUCED FREQUENCY SHIFT FOR THE

SPALLATION NEUTRON SOURCE RFQ*

S. Virostek, J. Staples,

LBNL, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

Abstract

The  Spallation  Neutron  Source  (SNS)  Front-End
Systems  Group  at  Lawrence  Berkeley  National  Lab
(LBNL)  is  developing  a  Radio  Frequency  Quadrupole
(RFQ) to accelerate an H- beam from 65 keV to 2.5 MeV
at the operating frequency of 402.5 MHz.  The 4 section,
3.7 meter long RFQ is a 4 vane structure operating at 6%
duty factor.  The cavity walls are made from OFE Copper
with a GlidCop® outer layer to add mechanical  strength.
A set of 12 cooling channels in the RFQ cavity walls are
fed and controlled separately from 4 channels embedded
in the vanes.  An ANSYS® finite-element model has been
developed to calculate the  deformed  shape  of  the  cavity
for given RF heat loads and cooling water temperatures.
By  combining  the  FEA  results  with  a  SUPERFISH  RF
cavity  simulation,  the  relative  shift  in  frequency  for  a
given change in coolant temperature or heat load can be
predicted.  The calculated cavity frequency sensitivity is -
33  kHz  per  1°C  change  in  vane  water  temperature  with
constant-temperature  wall  water.    The  system  start-up
transient was also studied using the previously mentioned
FEA model.  By controlling the RF power ramp rate and
the 
independent  wall  and  vane  cooling  circuit
temperatures, the system turn-on time can be  minimized
while limiting the frequency shift.

1  INTRODUCTION

The SNS is an accelerator-based facility to be built for
the  US  Department  of  Energy  at  Oak  Ridge  National
Laboratory  (ORNL)  through  a  collaboration  of  six  US
national  laboratories.    The  facility  will  produce  pulsed
beams  of  neutrons  for  use  in  scattering  experiments  by
researchers  from  throughout  the  world. 
  LBNL  is
responsible  for  the  design  and  construction  of  the  SNS
Front  End  [1],  which  will  produce  a  52  mA,  2.5  MeV,
6% duty factor H- beam for injection into a 1 GeV linac.
The  Front  End  consists  of  several  components:  an  ion
source  [2]  and  low  energy  beam  transport  line  (LEBT)
[3],  an  RFQ  [4,5]  and  a  medium  energy  beam  transport
line (MEBT) [6].

The RFQ resonant frequency is a function of both the
cavity geometry and particularly the spacing of the vane
tips.  There is a frequency shift  of approximately 1 MHz

per  0.001  inch  (25  microns)  change  in  the  tip-to-tip
spacing.  This dependence results in very tight machining
tolerances  on  the  individual  vanes  of  ±0.0003  inch  (8
microns)  in  order  to  achieve  a  final  frequency  which  is
within  the  range  of  the  fixed  slug  tuners.    During
operation,  a  combination  of  RF  power  dissipated  in  the
cavity  walls  and  heat  removal  through  the  cooling
passages  will  cause  the  cavity  to  distort  and  shift  in
frequency.  By appropriately controlling the temperature
of the RFQ cooling water continuously during operation,
the  cavity  design  frequency  of  402.5  MHz  will  be
maintained.

This  paper  will  summarize  the  studies  conducted  to
determine the RFQ frequency sensitivity to cooling water
temperature  changes.    The  predicted  values  will  be
compared  to  those  obtained  experimentally  through
testing of the completed prototype  RFQ  module  (Figure
1).  The operating scenario required to rapidly bring the
system  up  to  full  RF  power  while  maintaining  the
required  frequency  through  cooling  water  control  will
also be presented.

Figure 1: First completed SNS RFQ module.

2  RFQ DESCRIPTION

The SNS RFQ will accelerate an H- ion beam from 65
keV  to  2.5  MeV  over  its  3.73  meter  length.    The  4
modules  are  constructed  of  C10100  oxygen  free  copper
(OFE) with an outer layer of Glidcop AL-15.  The OFE
copper  was  selected  due 
its  superior  brazing
characteristics and the Glidcop for its ability to maintain
strength after brazing.  The GlidCop is brazed to the outer

to 

                                                           
* This work is supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under
Contract No. DE-AC03-76SF00098.

surface  of  the  OFE  and  covers  the  cooling  passages
which  are  milled  into  the  back  side  of  the  copper  vane
piece.    The  vacuum  seals  for  all  penetrations  (RF  ports,
tuners,  vacuum  ports  and  sensing  loops)  are  recessed
beyond the outer layer of GlidCop such that the braze is
not  exposed  to  the  cavity  vacuum.    Also,  since  the
cooling  channels  do  not  penetrate  the  ends  of  the
modules, there are no water-to-vacuum joints in the entire
system.

For  joining  the  vanes  together,  a  zero-thickness
brazing process has been selected in order to maintain the
±0.001 inch (25 microns) vane tip-to-vane tip  tolerance.
With  this  method,  the  joint  surfaces  are  brought  into
close  contact  with  Cusil  wire  braze  alloy  having  been
loaded  into  grooves  in  the  joint  surfaces  prior  to
assembly.  The alloy is spread throughout the joint during
the  braze  cycle  by  means  of  capillary  action.    This
technique permits the RFQ modules to be assembled and
the cavity frequency measured prior to the braze cycle to
allow for dimensional adjustments, if necessary.

The  RF-induced  thermal  load  on  the  cavity  walls  is
removed  by  means  of  a  dual  temperature  water  cooling
system.    This  setup  allows  fine  tuning  of  the  structure
frequency  in  operation  as  well  as  during  the  RF  power
transient  at  start-up.    A  schematic  of  the  RFQ  cross
section  showing  the  OFE  copper,  Glidcop  and  cooling
channel  geometry  is  shown  in  Figure  2.    The  12  outer
wall channels are on a separately controlled water circuit
from the 4 vane channels.

3  FINITE ELEMENT MODELING

A finite element model of the RFQ has been developed
using ANSYS and consists of a 3-D slice of one quadrant
of  the  RFQ  cross  section.    The  surface  nodes  on  either
side of the slice are constrained to remain coplanar such
that  the  longitudinal  stresses  are  correctly  calculated
while allowing for overall thermal growth along the RFQ
axis.    This  could  not  be  achieved  with  2-D  plane  strain
elements  which  would  over-constrain 
the  model
longitudinally and result in artificially high z-component
compressive stresses.  The loads  and  constraints  applied
to  the  model  include  RF  heating  on  the  cavity  walls,
external  atmospheric  pressure,  convective  heat  transfer
and  water  pressure  on  the  cooling  passage  walls  and
boundary  conditions  imposed  by  symmetry  constraints.
With 18°C water in the vane channels and 24°C water in
the cavity walls, the resulting temperature profile ranges
between 25 and 29°C at full RF gradient with an average
linear power density of 90 W/cm (Figure 3).  The average
power density on the outer wall is 1.7 W/cm2.  The model
has  also  been  used  to  calculate  stresses  and  cavity  wall
displacements.

Figure 3: Predicted RFQ cavity wall temperature profile.

 4  FREQUENCY SHIFT STUDIES

 In  order  to  predict  the  frequency  shift  of  the  RFQ
cavity  under  various  thermal  conditions,  a  computer
program  was  developed  which  combines  the  ANSYS
displacement  results  with  SUPERFISH  calculations  of
frequency  sensitivity.    It  was  determined  that  the  RFQ
frequency  shifts  by  –33  kHz  for  every  1°C  rise  in  the
vane  cooling  water.    Preliminary  measurements  on  the
completed first RFQ module have yielded a value of –32
kHz/°C.  This sensitivity to vane water temperature  will
be used to fine tune the RFQ frequency during operation
based  on  sensing  probe  measurements.    The  calculated
frequency shift for changes in the wall water temperature
is +26 kHz/°C.  For equal changes in the vane and wall
water temperatures, the shift is -7 kHz/°C.

Figure 2: SNS RFQ cross section geometry.

possible until the 2 curves meet.  This operating scheme
results in an acceptable frequency error of 45 kHz at low
power  and  drops  off  to  less  than  5  kHz  within  60
seconds.

 6  CONCLUDING REMARKS

The SNS RFQ resonant frequency will be regulated by
dynamically  adjusting  the  water  temperature  in  the  4
cooling  channels  embedded  in  the  vanes  while  holding
the  water  temperature  in  the  12  wall  channels  constant.
The  theoretical  frequency  sensitivity  to  vane  water
temperature  of  –33  kHz/°C  was  confirmed  by  a
measurement of –32 kHz/°C on the completed first RFQ
module.    Also,  by  adjusting  both  wall  and  vane  water
temperatures  during  start-up,  the  RF  power  can  be
increased  to  its  full  value  in  150  seconds  or  less  while
holding  the  frequency  error  low  enough  to  allow  RF
power transfer.

7  REFERENCES

[1] R.  Keller  for  the  Front-End  Systems  Team,  “Status
of the SNS Front-End Systems”, EPAC ’00, Vienna,
June 2000.

[2] M.A.  Leitner,  D.W.  Cheng,  S.K.  Mukherjee,  J.
Greer,  P.K.  Scott,  M.D.  Williams,  K.N.  Leung,  R.
Keller, and R.A. Gough, “High-Current, High-Duty-
Factor  Experiments  with  the  RF  Driven  H-  Ion
Source for the Spallation Neutron Source”, PAC ’99,
New York, April 1999, 1911-1913.

[3] D.W.  Cheng,  M.D.  Hoff,  K.D.  Kennedy,  M.A.
Leitner,  J.W.  Staples,  M.D.  Williams,  K.N.  Leung,
R.  Keller,  R.A.  Gough,  “Design  of  the  Prototype
Low Energy Beam Transport Line for the Spallation
Neutron Source”,  PAC  ’99,  New  York,  April  1999,
1958-1960.

[4] A.  Ratti,  R.  DiGennaro,  R.A.  Gough,  M.  Hoff,  R.
Keller,  K.  Kennedy,  R.  MacGill,  J.  Staples,  S.
Virostek,  and  R.  Yourd,  “The  Design  of  a  High
Current, High Duty Factor RFQ for the SNS”, EPAC
’00, Vienna, June 2000.

[5] A.  Ratti,  R.A.  Gough,  M.  Hoff,  R.  Keller,  K.
Kennedy, R. MacGill, J. Staples, S. Virostek, and R.
Yourd, “Fabrication and Testing of the First Module
of  the  SNS  RFQ”,  Linac  ’00,  Monterey,  August
2000.

[6] J.  Staples,  D.  Oshatz,  and  T.  Saleh,  “Design  of  the

SNS MEBT”, Linac ’00, Monterey, August 2000.

 The  calculations  described  above  were  based  on
nominal input temperatures for the vane and wall cooling
channels.  However, as the water flows from the inlet to
outlet end of each RFQ module, its temperature will rise
as it absorbs heat.  Also, there will be a net heat transfer
from  the  higher  temperature  wall  water  to  the  lower
temperature  vane  water.    The  predicted  values  of  2.7°C
rise  in  vane  water  temperature  and  0.4°C  rise  in  wall
water 
temperature  create  a  different  cross  section
temperature profile at the outlet end of the RFQ module.
The  calculated  frequency  error  due  to  the  higher  water
temperatures is –80 kHz from the inlet to the outlet end
of a 93 cm long module.  This error is considered minor
and  can  be  corrected  by  adjusting  the  position  of  the
fixed slug tuners along the length of the RFQ modules if
necessary.

 5  START-UP TRANSIENT

 A series of transient analyses were performed using the
same FEA model to determine the frequency performance
of  the  system  during  ramp-up  of  the  RF  power.    With
18°C water in the vanes and 24°C water in the walls and
no heat on the cavity walls, the resonant frequency is 216
kHz  higher  than  the  nominal  402.5  MHz,  outside  the
passband of the cavity.  Setting the vane water at a higher
temperature  and  the  wall  water  at  a  lower  temperature
will bring the cavity frequency down.  As the RF power
is  applied,  the  water  temperatures  are  correspondingly
adjusted 
their  nominal  operating  values.
However,  the  ramp-up  rate  for  the  RF  power  must  be
limited  since  the  cooling  systems  cannot  respond  fast
enough to keep the frequency error low.  Figure 4 shows
a comparison between the frequency shift caused by the
water temperatures and that due to the cavity wall heat.

towards 

Figure 4: RFQ transient frequency error.

 The error for wall heat is actually negative, but is plotted
as  positive  for  comparison  purposes.    The  difference
between these 2 curves is the net frequency error versus
time.  As shown in the inset, the power is ramped up from
10% to 100% of full power in 150 seconds.  Initially, the
water  temperatures  are  adjusted  at  the  highest  rate

