Status of Superconducting RF Linac Development for APT*

K. C. D. Chan, B. M. Campbell, D. C. Gautier, R. C. Gentzlinger, J. G. Gioia, W. B. Haynes, D.

J. Katonak, J. P. Kelley, F. L. Krawczyk, M. A. Madrid, R. R. Mitchell, D. I. Montoya, E. N.
Schmierer, D. L. Schrage, A. H. Shapiro, T. Tajima, J. A. Waynert, LANL, Los Alamos, NM

87544, USA

 J. Mammosser, TJNAF, Newport News, VA 23606, USA
J. Kuzminski, General Atomics, San Diego, CA 92186, USA

Abstract

This paper describes the development progress of high-
current  superconducting  RF  linacs  in  Los  Alamos,
performed to support a design of the linac for the APT
(Accelerator Production of Tritium) Project.   The  APT
linac design includes  a  CW  superconducting  RF  high-
energy section, spanning an energy range  of  211–1030
MeV, and operating at a frequency of 700 MHz with two
constant-b
 sections (b = 0.64 and b= 0.82).  In the last two
years, we have progressed towards building a cryomodule
with  b =0.64.  We completed the  designs  of  the  5-cell
superconducting cavities and the 210-kW power couplers,
and are currently testing the cavities and the couplers.  We
are scheduled to begin  assembly  of  the  cryomodule  in
September 2000.  In this paper, we present an overview
of the status of our development efforts and a report on
the results of the cavity and coupler testing program.

1  INTRODUCTION

Development of Superconducting (SC) RF Technology
for high-current CW proton linacs, performed in support
of the linac design for the  APT  Project  [1],  has  been
underway at Los Alamos since 1997 [2].  The goal is to
design, build and test 5-cell cavities and power couplers to
their specifications and integrate them into  a  prototype
the  19th
cryomodule.    Since  our  report  given  at 
International Linac Conference [3] in August 1998,  we
finished the design of the cavities  and  couplers,  which
were built and tested.  We also completed the design of
the prototype cryomodule.  The major components of the
cryomodule are now being fabricated.  

In this paper, we will report the test results of the 5-
cell cavities, the test results of the power couplers, and
the progress of cryomodule  fabrication.    We  will  also
report  the  results  of  a  series  of  tests  at  cryogenic
temperature that determined experimentally the heat leaks
between the 2-K operating temperature of the cavities and
room temperature.  Because of space limitation, we will
not describe the designs of the cavities, the couplers, or
the cryomodule, as they can be found in Ref. 3.

                                                
*  Work supported by US Department of Energy

2  STATUS OF CAVITY

DEVELOPMENT

The APT 5-cell cavities consist  of  the  bare  cavities
made of niobium (RRR=250), and  the  inner  and  outer
helium  vessels  made  of  unalloyed  titanium  [4].    A
completed bare cavity is shown in Fig. 1.  These bare
cavities were fabricated by CERCA in France.  The half-
cells were formed by spinning, and they were  electron-
beam welded to form bare cavities.  The fabricated bare
cavities are RF-tested before they are sent  to  Titanium
Fabrication  Corporation  for  installation  of  an  inner
helium vessel by an electron-beam-welding process.  To
date, inner helium vessels have been installed on two of
the four cavities (Fig. 2).  Following inner-helium-vessel
installation, the cavities will be RF tested again to insure
that cavity performance has not been degraded during the
inner-helium-vessel  installation. 
required
performance 
is  confirmed,  outer  helium  vessels,
instrumentation, and tuners will be installed to complete
the cavities for integration into the cryomodule.

  After  the 

Figure 1  Bare niobium 5-cell cavity

Cavity testing is being  shared  between  Los  Alamos
National  Laboratory  (LANL)  and  Thomas  Jefferson
National Accelerator Facility (TJNAF).  To date, a total
of three cavities have been tested successfully.  

Before 

testing, 

the
following: 1) removal of 150  m m with (1,1,2) buffered-
chemistry polishing at acid temperatures below 15˚C; 2)

cavity  processing 

includes 

high-pressure  water  rinsing;  and  3)  cavity  baking  at
150˚C.

transmission.  The second test, totally-reflected power was
performed by replacing the RF load with a “sliding short”
and completely reflecting forward power, thus setting up a
standing-wave pattern in the coupler-cavity system.  By
varying the location of the sliding short, we were able to
locate  the  maximum  of  the  standing-wave  pattern  at
sixteen locations over one wavelength along the system.
This test allowed us to simulate the situation when the
CW beam is interrupted.  The third test, the condensed-gas
test, was performed by cooling the tapered end of the outer
conductors to LN temperature,  allowing  observation  of
  Condensed-gas
effects  of  residual-gas  condensation. 
effects  were  reported  to  be  important 
in  enhancing
multipacting.

Figure 2  Cavity with inner helium vessel installed

Caviy test results so far are summarized in Fig. 3.  The
Q-values achieved have been more than a factor of two
higher than the required 5x109 at the operating gradient of
5 MV/m.  The highest gradient reached of 10 MV/m is a
factor of two higher than  the  operating  gradient.    For
these cavities, we observed electron activities starting at 3
MV/m.  The highest gradients were achieved with helium
processing.  After helium processing, cavity performance
shown  remained  if  the  cavities  were  kept  at  LHe
temperature.  The highest gradient reached was limited by
excess radiation and/or not enough RF power, and not by
quenches.

1.0E+11

1.0E+10

1.0E+09

1.0E+08

0

2

8

6

4
Eacc (MV/m)

10

12

14

Sylvia
Germaine
Eleanore
APT spec.

Figure 4  Test stand for coupler at room temperature

Couplers  with  fixed  and  adjustable  coupling  were
tested.  The adjustability of the coupler was accomplished
with BeCu bellows (tip bellows) located close to the tip
of  the  inner  conductor  (Fig.  5).    RF  power  was  fed
through RF windows  with  two  ceramic  disks.    These
windows  were  fabricated  by  EEV,  England,  and  were
tested to 1 MW.

Results of high-power testing are summarized here:

1.  Both fixed and adjustable couplers achieved a power

Figure 3  Performance of APT 5-cell cavities

2. 

3  STATUS OF COUPLER

DEVELOPMENT

The APT power couplers are required to transmit 210
kW of RF power [5].  They were tested on a test stand at
room temperature (Fig. 4) [6].  Three types of tests were
performed:  transmitted power, totally reflected power, and
condensed  gas. 
transmitted-power
capability, was performed simultaneously with two power
couplers up to 1-MW.  Power was transmitted from one
coupler, through  a  copper  pillbox  cavity,  to  a  second
coupler,  and  finally  to  a  water-cooled  RF  load.    The
couplers  and  copper  cavity  were  matched  for  100%

  The 

test, 

first 

level of 1 MW CW in the transmitted-power tests;
In  the  reflected-power  tests,  the  fixed  couplers
achieved  850  kW  CW  at 
the  APT  operating
condition; achieved 550 kW CW and 850 kW at 50%
duty cycle at all sliding short positions;

3.  We did not observe any significant multipacting in
any of the tests.  With the couplers operating at 10-7
Torr, there was some vacuum activity that changed
the  residual  gas  pressures  at  levels  of  10-9  Torr
around 250 kW;

4.  Data from the condensed-gas tests did not show any

enhancement of multipacting

respectively, 10 and 30 watts.  This performance is  as
predicted by our thermal model.

Figure 6  Milling the o-ring grove on the cryostat

6  SUMMARY

The SCRF development has tested the 5-cell cavities
and  couplers  experimentally.    The  measured  RF  and
thermal  performance  greatly  exceeds  the  APT  required
performance.    We  will  be  ready 
the
cryomodule in September 2000.

to  assemble 

REFERENCES

[1] P.  W.  Lisowski,  The  Accelerator  Production  of
Tritium  Project,  Proc.  1997  Part.  Accel.  Conf.,
Vancouver, BC, Canada, May 1997, p.3780.

[2] K. C. D. Chan, et al., Engineering Development of
Superconducting  RF  Linac 
for  High-Power
Applications,  Proc.  6th  Euro.  Pact.  Accel.  Conf.,
Stockholm, Sweden, June 1998, p.1843.

[3] K.  C.  D.  Chan,  et  al.,  Progress  of  APT
Superconducting  Linac  Engineering  Development,
Proc.  19th  Intern.  Linac  Conf.,  Chicago,  USA,
August 1998, p.986.

[4] S. Atencio, et al., Design, Analysis, and Fabrication
of the APT Cavities, Proc. 1999 Part. Accel. Conf.,
New York City, USA, May 1999, p.965.

[5] E. N. Schmierer, et al., Development of the SCRF
Power Coupler for the APT Accelerator, ibid., p.977.
[6] E. N. Schmierer, et al., High-Power Testing of the

APT Power Coupler, this Proceedings.

[7] B. M. Campbell, et al., Engineering Analysis of the
APT Cryomodules, Proc. 1999 Part. Accel. Conf.,
New York City, USA, May 1999, p.1327.

[8] Joe Waynert, Los Alamos National Laboratory,

private communication.

Figure 5  Adjustable inner conductor

temperatures  as  calculated 

After high-power operations of the adjustable couplers,
we  observed  failures  of  the  tip  bellows  and  electron
etching.  Two tip bellows failed after reaching 750 kW.
Preliminary  inspection  indicated  that  the  failures  were
caused by excess temperature at the tip bellows, which
agreed  with 
thermal
simulations.  Thermal simulations also showed that the
temperature of the tip-bellows could be effectively reduced
by  400˚C  by  copper  plating  the  BeCu  bellows  and
cooling using gaseous helium (instead of air) as in the
cryomodule design.  The electron etching is marks on the
inner  conductors  that  look  like  electron  tracks.    The
density of the etching and the depths of the marks increase
with RF power levels.  

in 

The coupler test results have been encouraging.  The
APT Project Office has initiated a change in the coupler
specification from 210 kW  to  420  kW.    This  change
decreases the number of couplers by one-half, leading to a
cost saving of more than $60M in the APT plant design.

4  STATUS OF CRYOMODULE

DEVELOPMENT

We have completed the final design of the cryomodule
[7].  Fabrication of major components is in progress at
Ability Engineering Technology in Chicago (Fig.6).  All
the components will be delivered to Los Alamos by the
middle of September.

5 CRYOGENIC TEST RIG RESULTS
We completed the experiments that measured the heat
leaks from room temperature to 2 K via a power coupler
[8].  In our design, this  heat  leak  is  minimized  by  a
double-point heat-intercept approach.  Without simulated
RF heating,  the  heat  leak  to  2  K  by  one  coupler  is
measured as one watt.  The  low-temperature  and  high-
temperature  heat  intercept,  respectively,  removed  2.5
watts and 12 watts of heat.  With RF heating simulated
for 210 kW of coupler transmitted power, the heat leak to
2  K  was  1.4  watt.    The  heat  removed  by  the  low-
temperature  and  high-temperature  heat  exchangers  was,

