IHEP EXPERIENCE ON CREATION AND OPERATION OF RFQS.

O.K. Belyaev, O.V. Ershov, I.G. Maltsev, V.B. Stepanov, S.A. Strekalovskikh, V.A. Teplyakov,

A.V.Zherebtsov, IHEP, Protvino, Russia

Abstract

The new 1.8 MeV proton RFQ was completed and start
operation in the IHEP in 1997. It was built according to
the  plan  of  modernization  of  the  injection  system  to  the
booster of the IHEP proton synchrotron. In this paper we
will  describe  design  features  of  the  RFQ  and  scientific
and engineering achievements which was reached since its
creation and operation.

Introduction

An insistent need to modernize the  injection  system  was
caused  by  following  reasons.  The  old  injector  is  under
operation since 1983 (the initial part of  this linac − RFQ
since 1990)  [1].  Most  of  RF  and  other  equipment  be-
comes old and should be modified. Besides it was decided
to modify  the  accelerating  system.  The  attractive  feature
of this RFQ is a high acceleration rate (1.4  MeV/m at the
end (Fig.1)) which allows better matching on longitudinal
motion with next part of the linac. It was reached due to
proper  variation  of  phase  Φ  and  transit  time  factor  ϑ
along the RFQ (Fig.1) In its turn high values of ϑ (0.66 at
the end) were achieved by using a trapezoidal modulation
of electrodes at the end of the RFQ instead of sinusoidal
ones (Fig.2).

Figure.1: RFQ parameters along the linac

 

Figure2: Sinusoidal and trapezoidal RFQ electrodes

“Trapezoidal” electrodes allows to obtain high ϑ with-
out  increasing  of  the  modulation  factor  and  hence  peak

 

field on the surface [2]. Indeed, the following expression
defines ϑ as a first approximation [3]:

ϑ
≈

sin(

πα
)
πα

,                                 (1)

 where  α=g/βλ,  g  – length  of  a  gap.  As  this  formula
shows,  ϑ-factor  increases  with  decrease  in  the  gap
length. This expression is correct for RFQ structures too.
One  may  define 
the  space
, i.e. the whole cell except of a small piece
where
at the top of a sinusoid. But if the sinusoid top is «cut off»
then  the  «gap»  will  decrease  and  according  to  (1)  ϑ
increases.

the  «gap»  here  as 

0≠zE

Main parameters of this RFQ are given in the Table.

RFQ parameter
Input energy
Output energy
Operating frequency
RF voltage
Synchronous phase
Maximum surface E-field
Capture
Operating beam current
Total length
Characteristic bore radius
Total number of cells
«sinusoidal» cells
«trapezoidal» cells

 Table : RFQ parameters
Value
0.1 MeV
1.8 MeV
148.5 MHz
140 kV
-90÷-30 deg
250 kV/cm
99%
120 mA
2563 mm
7.59 mm
91
71
20

Acceleration structure and RFQ option.
The general view of the RFQ is shown in Fig.3.

Figure 3: General view of the RFQ.

2H resonator  was  used  as  an  accelerating  structure  of
the RFQ (Fig.4). It consists of 520 mm diameter RF vac-

uum tank  and two 164 mm diameter resonators which are
pieces  of  tubes  with  slits.  Accelerating  electrodes  are
mounted at edges of these slits. The tank and resonators
are  manufactured  of  aluminium  alloy  and  coated  with
100 µm copper layer.

The technology of galvanic coating provides very good
polished  surfaces  with  high  conductivity.  Electrodes  are
machined  of  oxygen-free  copper.  An  50 µm  deformable
indium seal in the mount unit is used  for better electric
junction between electrodes and resonators. 3 ion  pumps
provide a high (of the order 
torr) vacuum. Besides
additional getter  pump  can  keep  a  good  enough  vacuum
during  downtime  of  the  linac.  Water-cooling  pumping
through channels in the tank and resonators  provides  re-
quired temperature stability.

−⋅
8
105

Figure 4: Cross section of the RFQ.

The  choice  of  this  accelerating  structure  was  caused
due to an absence of parasite oscillation modes in the im-
mediate  neighbourhood  of  the  operating  mode  and  tech-
nological effectiveness of its manufacture.

RF tuning was carried out by separated action on elec-
tric  and  magnetic  fields  in  front  and  end  faces  of  the
2H resonator. The small perturbation method was used for
measurements of  an E-field quadrupole component. Re-
sults  are  shown  in  the  Fig.5.  As  the  figure  shows,  nor-
malized  distribution  is  well  agreed  with  required  curve.
The rms deviation is 

%3.1=σ

Q-factor  for  2H-resonator,  calculated  with  help  of
PRUD-0 code [4], is equal to 15800. Measured Q-factor
is 13600 (86% of calculated one). RF power losses which
dissipates  in  the  resonator  walls  at  this  value  of  the
Q-factor is about 200 kW.

 Tuning of the operating frequency  was carried out by
rotational  rings  as  adjusting  units  (Fig.4).  Each  ring

.

∆
f

/

190

KHz

=∆
t

changes  a  frequency  by  8  KHz.  High-speed  automatic
trimming  (
)  is  used  to  compensate
frequency detuning while the accelerator is  under  opera-
tion. This  system  also  keep  a  frequency  deviation  in  the
range of  ± 1.5 KHz.
 

/

c

 
 Figure 5: Distribution of the E-field quadupole component
as  a  function    of  the  cell  number.  The  solid  curve  –  re-
quirements, asterisks – measurements.
 

The  regular  X-ray  radiation  control  along  the  RFQ
permits  to register pollution of electrodes by vapor com-
ponents from the Ion Source [5]. The surge exhaust vol-
ume putting into the LEBT of the RFQ and periodic RF
conditioning for cleaning electrodes permitted to increase
the  break-down 
to
450 kV/cm (3.4  kE ).

structure  up 

limit 

the 

in 

The RF power system

The RF power is supplied in the resonator with external
inductive coupling loop through the vacuum-tight ceramic
window  placed  in  the  RF  tank.  It  allows  to  excite  the
resonator  both  by  the  single  final  power  amplifier  and
power amplifier mounted on the resonator [6].

Fig.6  shows  the  block  scheme  of  the  RF  transmission
system. The resonator (R) is excited by the two-stage final
power  amplifier  (FA)  which  is  integrated  with  the  RF
vacuum tank (Fig.4). The symmetric coupling loop which
is an inductive shoulder of the anode circuit links the final
cascade  (C2)  with  the  resonator.  The  coupling  loop  is
immersed  into  the  ceramic  window  (CrW).  This  link  is
equivalent  to  that  which  is  provided  via  the  multiple
2/π electric length feeder. The C2 was realized using the
12 triodes  push-pull  amplifier  with  common  greed [7].
The pre-amplifier cascade (C1) is inductively linked with
FA  and  realized  according  the  similar  2-triodes  scheme
[6].  The  pre-exciter  (PE)  contains  quarter-wave  anode
circuit triodes amplifier cascades (A1), (A2). It is excited
by wide-band transistor amplifier (TA). The RF amplitude
and  phase  are  controlled  by    high-speed  phase  shifter-
attenuator (PSA) which is mounted at the TA entry. The
operating  frequency  is  generated  by  0.5 W  stabilized
driver (SD).  A maximum pulse power of the final ampli-
fier is equal to 600 kW, anode voltage in FA − 12 kV, in

PE − 6 kV. The modulator (M) forms 80 µs pulses of the
anode  voltage.  A  method  of  voltage  addition  in  tiristor
cells with pulse transformer help is used in the modulator.
A compensation due to the beam load is provided by the
PSA  and  modulator  adjusting  via  a  signal  from  the  pro-
grammed  control  system  (PCS).  Besides  two-circuit  sys-
tems for an amplitude and phase automatic control (ACA
and ACP) is under development. To increase the dynamic
stabilization  under  action  of  the  accelerated  beam  addi-
tional adjusting circuit is used which is controlled by the
signal from the beam current pick-up (BCP).

Conclusions

The  RFQ  with  permanently  growing  accelerating  rate
was created. It allows to obtain  better matching with next
part  of  the  linac  and  decrease  (1.5  times  approximately)
the RFQ length.

torr) and simplify the vacuum system.

Materials, technologies of manufacturing and assembly
which  were  used  permit  to  obtain  the  high  vacuum
−⋅
8
(
105
Efforts which were made against pollution of electrodes
by Ion Source operation products and regular  RF  condi-
tioning  allowed  to  obtain  high  value  of  the  breakdown
limit (3.4  kE ).

The new RF  power  system  with  final  power  amplifier
integrated  with  the  RF  vacuum  tank  (Fig.4)  was  created
and  tested.  New  modular  concept  was  used  in  the  high
voltage  modulator.  As  a  result  it  demonstrates  a  reliable
5 Hz operation.

Figure 6: the RF block scheme.

Beam measurements

Measurements  of  beam  parameters  were  carried  out
both  in  LEBT  and  HEBT  lines.  The  injection  system  of
the RFQ consists of the Ion Source and LEBT including
2 matching  solenoids  and  heavy  masses  separating  colli-
mators.  The  total  LEBT  length  is  equal  to  620 mm.  For
measurements of the beam parameters the test stand was
created. It includes beam diagnostics apparatus and auto-
matic data acquisition system. To obtain a matched beam
at the entry of the  RFQ  a  number  of  measurements  of  a
beam emittance in different points of LEBT are required.
Adjusting Ion Source and LEBT parameters including the
plasma emitter, two-gap optics and solenoids, permits us
to approach required input parameters of the beam. This
procedures  allows  to  obtain  the  output  beam  emittance,
which  is  1.5-2 times  greater  than  calculated  one.  Fig.7
shows measured 120 mA output beam emittance.

References

[1]  Zherebtsov  A.V  et  al.,  IHEP  Preprint  90-29,  –  Prot-
vino, 1990.
[2] A.Zherebtsov. Using the 3D electric fields for calcu-
lations of the RFQ parameters. Proceedings of the Second
Int.  BDO  Workshop,  July  4-8  1995,  St.Petersburg,  Rus-
sia.
[3] Kapchinsky I. The theory of linear resonant accelera-
tors: dynamics of particles. – M.: Energoizdat, 1982.
 [4] Abramov A.G. et al., IHEP preprint 83-3, Serpukhov,
1983.
[5]  Belyaev  O.K.,  Stepanov  V.B.  Proceedings  of  XVI
Nat.ional Acc. Conf., Protvino,1998,v.1,p.228.
      Belyaev O.K. et al. IHEP preprint 2000-21, Protvino,
2000.
[6] Stepanov V.B. et al. “Acceleration of Polarized  Pro-
tons to 1 Tev in the Fermilab Tevatron”. Progress report
SPIN Collaboration, USA, Aug. 1, 1994, p.37-50.
[7]  Kisly  O.  Et  al.  Proceedings  of  XVI  Nat.ional  Acc.
Conf., Protvino,1998,v.1,p.110

Figure 7: Measured transverse beam emittance. Solid

lines – are calculated ellipces.

