2.856-GHz MODULATION OF

CONVENTIONAL TRIODE ELECTRON GUN

S. J. Park, J. S. Oh, J. S. Bak, M. H. Cho, W. Namkung, PAL/POSTECH, Pohang, S. Korea

Abstract
For  the  generation  of  picosecond  (<  100  ps)  giga-hertz
electron  beam  pulses,  we  suggest  the  RF  modulation  of
the  conventional  triode  electron  gun.  The  feasibility  of
this  scheme  has  been  experimentally  studied  by
modulating  the  triode  gun  (with  the  Y-824  cathode-grid
(KG)  structure  provided  by  the  CPI  Eimac)  with  2.856-
GHz  pulsed  RF’s  generated  by  a  solid-state  amplifier
(SSA). In this paper, we present the methods and results
of this investigation.

1  INTRODUCTION

Triode electron guns are used as the sources for linear
injectors.  The  essential
colliders  and  storage  ring 
component  of  the  triode  gun  is  the  cathode-grid  (KG)
structure  whose  inter-electrode  spacing  is  very  short
((cid:1)0.17 mm).  The short inter-electrode spacing combined
with  the  use  of  a  high-voltage  (HV)  nanosecond  pulser
has  made  it  possible  to  generate  single  or  multiple
nanosecond  electron  beam  pulses  from  the  gun[1][2].
Refer  to  Fig.  1  for  the  schematic  diagram  of  the
conventional triode gun.

part  of  the  linac.  Furthermore  long-pulse  (over  several
tens  of  microseconds)  operation  is  possible  which  is
beneficial for FEL experiments and industrial accelerators.
R. J. Becker et al. have modulated their triode gun by 1
GHz RF to obtain high-frequency long-pulse trains for the
FELIX[3].  In  order  to  analyze  the  RF  modulation
characteristics,  they  represented  their  KG  structure  as  a
simple  resistance.  This  becomes  inaccurate  as  the  RF
frequency  increases  because  the  impedance  of  the  KG
structure becomes a combination of resistance, inductance,
and  capacitance.  In  order  to  evaluate  the  required  RF
power  at  the  frequency  of  2.856  GHz,  a  simple  semi-
analytic  calculation  of  the  RF  modulation  has  been
performed[4]. We have sliced the electron beam  starting
from  the  cathode  into  a  number  of  disks  and  solved  the
equation  of  motion  for  them  with  different  initial  RF
phases. From this calculation, it was found that RF power
of  about  100  W  was  required  to  be  coupled  to  the  KG
structure  for  the  peak  beam  current  of  ~1  A  at  the
modulation frequency of 2.856 GHz.

2  EXPERIMENT

2.1  Zero-Beam-Voltage Test

In  order  to  study  the  feasibility  of  the  scheme,  an
experimental set-up has been prepared. In this set-up, no
HV  is  applied  between  the  KG  structure  and  the  anode.
We  tried  to  obtain  the  envelope  of  the  modulated  pulse
train by measuring the current flowing out of the cathode.
Refer  to  Fig.  2  for  the  schematic  diagram  of  the
experimental set-up.

Figure 1: Schematic diagram of conventional triode gun.

Generation  of  picosecond  pulses  from  the  conventional
triode  gun  has  not  been  practical  because  of  the  large
capacitance  (~25  pF)  of  the  KG  structure  and  the
unavailability  of  picosecond  HV  pulsers.  In  order  to
overcome  these,  RF  modulation  of  the  KG  structure  is
suggested.  The  advantage  of 
this  scheme  becomes
apparent  when  it  is  used  as  the  electron  source  of  a  RF
linac.  If  the  triode  gun  is  modulated  at  the  same  RF
frequency  as  the  accelerating  structure,  the  bunching
system  which  includes  the  pre-buncher  and  the  buncher
can be removed. This will greatly simplify the beginning

Figure 2: Schematic diagram of experimental set-up (zero-
beam-voltage test) for the 2.856-GHz modulation of the

conventional triode gun.

2856-MHz  sinusoidal  signal  is  fed  into  the  SSA  and
amplified in a pulsed form. The pulsed RF power is then
attenuated to  a  required  level  and  measured  by  a  crystal
detector  attached  to  directional  couplers.  Impedance
matching  is  done  by  a  coaxial  3-stub  tuner.  A  special
taper was fabricated to connect the Y-824 socket structure
to  the  standard  N-type  connector.  For  feeding  of  heater
current to the innermost heater socket, a cable should run
across  the  inner  and  outer  conductors  of  the  taper.  This
point  is  located  as  close  as  to  the  Y-824  at  which  the
voltage standing  wave  minimum is  located.  Bias  voltage
(between the cathode and the grid) is provided through a
bias tee. Insertion loss of the transmission line (excluding
the taper and 3-stub tuner) was about 2.4 dB. The cathode
current, IK, flowing from the cathode, was measured by an
oscilloscope  with  50-ohm  input.  An  1-µF  capacitor  is
inserted to block out DC bias. The IK was measured and
plotted with varying heater voltage (Vh), bias voltage (Vb),
and peak  RF  power (Prf).  The  results are  summarized  in
Fig. 3.

2.2  High-Voltage Test

As the next step, HV was applied between the grid of
the KG sructure and the anode. For this a HV deck was
installed  and  all  the  instruments  and  components  were
place  on  it.  See  Fig.  5  for  the  schematic  diagram  of  the
set-up.

Figure 5: Set-up for the high-voltage test of the 2.856-

GHz modulation of conventional triode gun.

The waveform of electron beam pulses were measured by
the  use  of  a  coaxial  pick-up.  A  N-type  coaxial
feedthrough  was  mounted  on  a  2.75″  CF  flange.  An
Aluminium button was attached to the center conductor of
the coaxial feedthrough. (see Fig. 6)

Figure 3: Result of IK measurement with varying Vh, Vb,

and Prf

Figure 6: Coaxial pick-up for measuring the electron

beam pulse waveform.

 The pick-up is meant only to measure the time structure
of the electron beam pulses. Absolute measurement of the
total  charge  is  not  the  purpose.  The  capacitance  of  the
button  as  measured  by 
the  TDR  (Time  Domain
Reflectometry) technique was about 4 pF. Electrical pulse
signals  from  the  coaxial  pick-up  were  measured  using  a
20-GHz  sampling  oscilloscope  (Tektronix  11801B  with
SD-24 sampling head). A 56-ns delay line (Model 5056,
Picosecond  Pulse  Labs.)  was  used  to  delay  the  pulse
signals  before  entering  the  sampling  oscilloscope.  The
delay  line  also  provides  trigger  signals  at  –6  dB  of  the
pulse signals. The bandwidth of all cables and connectors
were ~20 GHz.

In  Fig.  7,  we  show  the  measured  electron  beam  pulse
waveforms  together  with  the  input  RF  waveforms  for
comparison.  Experimental  conditions  at  the  time  of  the
measurement are as follows:

Figure 4: Typical cathode current and RF powers

waveforms

Fig.  3(a)  shows  that  the  cathode  current,  IK  saturates  by
the  space-charge  effect.  Fig.  3(b)  and  3(c)  shows  the
dependencies  of  the  IK  on  the  Vb  and  the  Prf.  Cathode
current and RF power waveforms are shown in Fig. 4.

1.  Acceleration HV = 50 kV,
2.  Peak Input RF Power = 500 W,
3.  RF Pulsewidth = 0.9 µs,
4.  RF Pulse Repetition Frequency = 30 Hz,
5.  Bias (Cathode-Grid) Voltage = 0 VDC.

corresponding to the RF modulation frequency
of  2.856  GHz.  The  peak  pulse  current  was
roughly ~100 mA.

3.    The feasibility of the 2.856-GHz modulation of
conventional triode gun has been demonstrated.

With these achievements, further work should include the
followings:

pick-up.

2.      Measurement  of  pulse  waveform  with  varying

1.    Improvement of the response time of the coaxial

operation parameters.

3.    Increase of peak beam current up to 1 A.

In order to improve the response time of the coaxial pick-
up we  are  trying to  reduce  the capacitance  of  the  beam-
collecting  button  below  2  pF.  With  this,  it  may  be
possible to measure 100-ps or less electron beam pulses.
In  order  to  increase  the  beam  current,  one  may  adopt  a
coaxial  resonant  cavity  which  is  loaded  by  the  KG
structure.  With  this,  RF  losses  in  the  transmission  lines
could be minimized and the efficient coupling of the RF
power to the KG structure would be achieved.

REFERENCES

[1] R. F. Koontz, “One Nanosecond Pulsed Electron Gun
System,” IEEE  Trans. Nucl.  Sci.  Vol. 26,  No.3,  pp.
4129-4130 (1979).

[2] R. Chaput, “Electron Gun for the FEL CLIO,” Proc. of
the  1990  Eupean  Particle  Accelerator  Conference,
Nice, France, pp. 544-546.

[3]  R.  J.  Becker  et  al.,  “1-GHz  modulation  of  a  high-
current electron gun”, Nucl. Instrum. Methods, A307,
pp543-551 (1991).

[4]  S.  J.  Park  et  al.,  “Proposal  of  Direct  2.856-GHz
Modulation  of  PLS  Electron  Gun,”  Oral  Poster
Presented  at  the  RF96  Workshop,  1996,  Shonan
Village Center, Japan.

Figure  7:  2.856-GHz  modulated  electron  beam  pulse
waveforms  (a),  and  input  RF  waveforms  (b).  Top  and
bottom  waveforms  are  macro  and  micro  pulses
respectively.

the  coaxial  pick-up.  Since 

The  period  of  the  measured  waveform  was  350  ps
corresponding  to  the  RF  frequency  of  2.856  GHz.  The
shape  of  the  waveform  was  almost  sinusoidal  with
negative  offset.  This  is  thought  to  be  due  to  the  limited
response  speed  of 
the
capacitance of the pick-up was 4 pF, the RC time of it is
50 ohms x 4 pF = 200 ps. This is too long to measure 100-
ps pulses. Measured peak pulse current was about 10 mA.
This  is  not  total  current  because  the  pick-up  button
intercepts  only  a  part  of  the  total  charge.  Based  on  our
experiences  of  nanosecond  pulse  measurement  with  the
same coaxial pick-up,  rough estimation of  the true  pulse
current is obtained by multiplying a factor of 10. Thus the
true peak pulse current could be roughly estimated to be
100 mA.

3  SUMMARY AND FURTHER WORK

The  feasibility  of  the  2.856-GHz  modulation  of  the
conventional  triode  electron  gun  has  been  investigated
experimentally. We summarize the results as follows:

1.      Test  with  zero  beam  voltage  showed  that  the
cathode current  in the  KG structure  under  the
2.856-  GHz  RF  modulation  exhibited  usual
space-charge 
behaviour.
Furthermore,  the  dependencies  of  the  cathode
current on  the  bias  voltage and  the  RF  power
were as expected.

saturation 

2.      We  have  generated  and  measured  2.856-GHz
modulated electron beam pulses. The period of
the  measured  pulse  waveform  was  350  ps

