REVIEW OF SOLID-STATE MODULATORS

E. G. Cook, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA

Abstract

Solid-state  modulators  for  pulsed  power  applications
the  first  fast  high-power
have  been  a  goal  since 
available.  Recent
became 
semiconductor  devices 
improvements 
the  speed  and  peak  power
in  both 
capabilities of  semiconductor  devices  developed  for  the
power conditioning and traction industries have led to a
new  generation  of  solid-state  switched  high  power
modulators with performance rivaling that of  hard  tube
modulators and thyratron switched line-type modulators.
These new solid-state devices offer the promise of higher
efficiency and longer lifetimes at a time when availability
of standard technologies is becoming questionable.

A brief discussion of circuit topologies and solid-state
devices is followed by examples of modulators currently
in use or in test. This presentation is intended to give an
overview  of 
the  current  capabilities  of  solid-state
modulators in various applications.

Many  of 

1  BACKGROUND
the  high-voltage  power  conditioning
requirements  of  the  accelerator  community  have  been
satisfied by the use of conventional thyratron, ignitron,
sparkgap or, when  more  waveform  control  is  required,
hardtube  switches.  Modulators  using 
these  switching
devices  have 
to  various
combinations of repetition rate, lifetime, efficiency, pulse
width agility, average power, cost, and sometimes switch
availability.

limitations  with 

regard 

As accelerator requirements become  more  demanding,
particularly  with  regard  to  average  power, 
lifetime,
pulsewidth  agility,  and  repetition  rate,  some  of  these
conventional switching devices are  inadequate.  However
use of solid-state devices in these applications has been
held back by device limitations usually in either voltage
rating, peak switching power, or switching speed.

2  SOLID-STATE DEVICES

fast 

used 

commonly 

The  most 

high-power
semiconductor device is the inverter grade thyristor which
is available with voltage ratings > 1kV at  kA  average
currents. These thyristors are closing switches that require
a current reversal through the device to commutate off,
and  most  high-voltage  pulsed-power  applications  have
limited the use of  thyristors  as  replacements  for  other

closing switches. The semiconductor industry’s continued
development of devices for traction applications and high
frequency switching  power  supplies  have  created  entire
families of devices that  have  a  unique  combination  of
switching capabilities. For the first time we are seeing
production quantities of devices that may be considered to
be  close  to  "ideal  switches".  These  ideal  switches  are
devices that have a fast turn-off capability as well as fast
turn-on characteristics; devices that have minimal trigger
power  requirements  and  are  capable  of  efficiently
switching large amounts of energy in very short periods
of time and at high repetition rates if so required.

(IGBTs).  These  devices 

There are two devices that come close to meeting these
criteria  for  ideal  switches,  Metal  Oxide  Semiconductor
Field Effect Transistors (MOSFETs) and Insulated  Gate
Bipolar  Transistors 
and
applications utilizing these devices are the focus of this
paper. As shown in Table 1, both MOSFETs and IGBTs
are devices that can switch large amounts of power with
trigger  power.  MOSFETs  have
modest 
substantially 
IGBTs
generally are more efficient, handle more power, and are
capable of being manufactured at higher voltage ratings. A
very  brief  explanation  of  how  these  devices  function
follows this section – more detailed information is readily
available from vendors and manufacturers.

faster  switching  speeds  while 

levels  of 

Table1. MOSFET and IGBT Capabilities

Parameter

MOSFET

1200
100
>80
< 20

Max. Peak Operating Voltage (V)
Peak Pulsed Current Rating (A)
Derated Peak Power  (kW/Device)*
Switching Speed – ON & OFF (ns)
Gate Controlled Pulsewidth
Control Power  (µJ/Pulse)
Device Cost ($/kW switched)
    *MOSFET – Voltage Derating ~ 80% of Max. Vpeak
    *IGBT-Voltage Derating ~60% of Max. Vpeak

< 5
0.30

20ns-DC

IGBT
3300
3000
>7000
< 200

600ns-DC

< 30
0.15

2.1 MOSFETs

As  seen  in 

the  simplified  schematic  in  Fig.  1,
MOSFETs are three terminal devices with the terminals
labeled drain, source and gate. MOSFETs are enhancement
mode devices that rely upon  majority  carriers  for  their
operation. Electrically the gate to source connection looks

This work performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by University of  California  Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory under contract No. W-7405-Eng-48.

Gate

Drain

Source

Fig.1 MOSFET Device Symbol (N-type shown)

like  a  capacitor  and  with  zero  gate-source  voltage  the
channel  (the  region  between  drain  and  source)  is  very
resistive.  As  the  gate-source  voltage  is  increased,  the
electric field pulls electrons into the channel and increases
the flow of current, i.e. ,the flow of drain-source current is
enhanced by the gate-source voltage. Once the gate-source
capacitance is charged, no additional energy is required to
keep the device on.

For pulsed power applications where the goal is to turn
the device on very quickly, a fast, large gate current (10’s
of amperes) is required during turn-on but little power is
needed thereafter. Likewise, during turn-off, a large current
must be pulled out of the gate-source  capacitance.  The
gate drive circuit must be capable of sourcing and sinking
these currents at the required repetition rate.
2.2 IGBTs

As depicted in Fig. 2, an IGBT is also a three-terminal
device that combines the high input impedance and gate
characteristics  of  a  MOSFET  and  the  low  saturation
voltage of a bipolar transistor. As the MOSFET is turned
on,  base  current  flows  in  the  pnp  bipolar  transistor,
injects carriers into the transistor and turns on the device.
While  gating  off  the  MOSFET  initiates  the  turn-off
process for the transistor, the time required for fast turn-
off of the transistor also depends on other factors such as
carrier recombination time. Typically both the turn-on and
turn-off times for an IGBT are slower than  those  of  a
MOSFET, but the peak current density in an  IGBT  is
approximately five times higher than that of a MOSFET
having the same die area.

3  SWITCH CIRCUIT TOPOLOGY

these  high  voltage 

Single solid-state devices generally don't have the peak
voltage rating required for most  accelerator  applications
and, consequently, many devices are usually required for
their  use  in  fast  high-voltage  circuits.  Two  circuit
topologies  currently  using  MOSFETs  and  IGBTs  to
achieve 
levels  offer  significant
advantages over other circuit topologies including PFNs,
Blumlein lines, and, high step-up ratio transformers. The
first circuit approach is to  connect  as  many  switching
devices in series as is needed to meet  the  application's
requirements.  The  second  approach  uses  what 
is
commonly referred  to  as  an  induction  adder  where  the
switching devices drive the primary winding of multiple
transformers and the secondary windings of each of  the
transformers  are  connected  in  series  to  generate  the

Collector

Gate

IGBT

Emitter

Fig. 2 Simplified Schematic for an IGBT

required high voltage. In general, regardless of the switch
circuit topology, the total cost of the solid-state devices
required to switch a given peak power is determined by the
peak power capability of  each  switch  -  it  matters  not
whether the devices are arranged in series, parallel, or a
combination of both.

When MOSFETs or IGBTs are used, the capabilities of
a high-voltage pulsed circuit are greatly enhanced. Since
these devices can be gated off as well as gated on, the
circuit now has the capability of variable pulsewidth even
on a pulse-to-pulse basis, and the circuits may also be
operated at high repetition rates. Within the limits of their
current  rating  (which  can  be  increased  by  paralleling
devices), these switches give the circuit topologies a low
source impedance, thereby allowing the load to vary over
a  substantial  impedance  range.  As  with  all  solid-state
devices,  the  expected  lifetimes  of  properly  designed
circuits are very long.
3.1 Series Switch Topology

A common circuit topology for series stack approach is
shown in Fig. 3. In this topology a high voltage power
supply charges a DC capacitor bank. The series stack of
solid-state devices is connected between the capacitor bank
and the load. Gating the stack on and off applies the full
bank  voltage  across  the  load  with  the  pulsewidth  and
repetition rate being controlled by the gate trigger pulse.
The rise and fall times of the load voltage are determined
by the switching characteristics of the specific solid-state
devices used in the stack. Implementation of series stack
approach requires very careful attention to proper DC and
transient voltage grading  of  the  switches  in  the  series
stack to force a uniform distribution of voltage across all
the series elements under all conditions. All devices must
be triggered simultaneously - isolated trigger signals and
isolated  power  sources  are  usually  required.  Careful
attention to stray capacitance is very important.

Controls for the series stack are also critical,  as  the
control circuits must sense load conditions so faults can
be  quickly  detected  and  the  stack  gated  off.  Stacks
assembled with IGBTs can normally sustain short circuit
conditions for a short period of time (usually specified to
be ~10µs for high power devices) which gives more than
adequate time to turn the stack off.

An important operational advantage of the series stack
approach is the ability to obtain any desired pulsewidth
from  the  minimum  pulsewidth  as  determined  by  the
capabilities of the switching devices out to and including

Gate Drive Circuits and Controls

#1

#2

#n

Storage
Capacitor

DC
Power
Supply

Load 
Impedance

confined to within the structure. It may help to think of
an adder as an induction accelerator with the beam replaced
with a conductor.

An adder circuit has a definite maximum pulse width
limitation as determined by the available volt-seconds of
the transformer magnetic cores. In comparison with the
series stack topology, the adder has the additional expense
of  the  transformer  mechanical  structure  including  the
magnetic cores, and a circuit to reset the magnetic cores
between  pulses.  The  gate  controls,  being  ground
referenced are simpler and less expensive.

Fig. 3 Typical Series Switch Topology

a DC output. The series circuit topology can yield lower
hardware costs but this is partially offset by the additional
costs  for  the  voltage  grading  components  and  costs
associated with achieving the appropriate isolation and/or
clearance voltages for the control system, gate  circuits,
enclosures, etc.
3.2 Adder  Topology

in  series.  Typically, 

for 

In  the  adder  configuration  shown  in  Fig.  4, 

the
secondary windings of a number of 1:1 pulse transformers
are  connected 
fast  pulse
applications,  both  the  primary  and  secondary  winding
consists of a single turn to keep the leakage inductance
small. In this configuration, the voltage on the secondary
winding is the sum of all the voltages appearing on the
primary  windings.  An  essential  criteria  is 
that  each
primary drive circuit must be able to provide  the  total
secondary  current,  any  additional  current  loads  in  the
primary circuit, plus  the  magnetization  current  for  the
transformer. This drive current criteria is easily met with
the circuit shown in Fig. 4 - the source impedance of a
low  inductance  DC  capacitor  bank  switched  by  high
current IGBTs or a parallel array of MOSFETs or smaller
IGBTs is very low (<<1W
). The physical layout for this
circuit is important as it is necessary to maintain a small
total loop inductance – it doesn’t require much inductance
to affect performance when the switched di/dt is measured
in kA/µs.

In this layout, the solid-state devices are usually ground
referenced to take advantage of standard trigger circuits and
reduce  coupled  noise  by  taking  advantage  of  ground
planes. The need for floating and isolated power supplies
is also eliminated. The pulse power ground and the drive
circuit ground have a common point at the switch source
lead but otherwise do not share  common  current  paths
thereby reducing switching transients being coupled into
the  low  level  gate  drive  circuits.  The  lower  switch
voltages and the corresponding compact conductor loops,
i.e., low inductance, enables very fast switching times on
the order of tens of nanoseconds.

Voltage grading for individual devices is not a major
concern. The transformer provides the isolation between
the primary and secondary circuit and if the transformer is
designed  as  a  coaxial  structure,  the  high  voltage  is

Capacitor

V chg
+

-

Drive
Circuit

Switch
Array

Drive
Circuit

Drive
Circuit

Drive
Circuit

0 v

-V 

chg

+

-

0 v
-V chg

+

-

0 v
-V chg

0 v
-V chg

R

L

V
out

0

Vout

V

(   ~ 4* V 
V
pk

chg

)

Transformer
Secondary

Transformer
Core

Transformer
Primary

Fig.4 Simplified Schematic of Adder Circuit

Transformers

4  MOSFETS AND IGBTS IN
ACCELERATOR APPLICATIONS

Including commercial ventures and government funded
projects, MOSFETs and IGBTs are being used in several
applications that  impact  accelerator  technology.  A  few
examples are discussed.
4.1 Next Linear Collider (NLC) Klystron

Modulator

For the past several years, researchers at SLAC have
been developing a solid-state modulator based on an IGBT
switched  adder  topology.  This  aggressive  engineering
project has made significant progress in demonstrating the
capabilities  of  high-power  solid-state  modulators.  The
performance requirements are listed in Table 2.

The IGBTs currently used in the NLC modulator are
manufactured by EUPEC and are rated at 3.3kV peak and
800A average current. They have been successfully tested
and operated at 3kA peak current at 2.2kV. EUPEC and
other  manufacturers  have  devices  with  higher  voltage
ratings (>4.5 kV) that are also being evaluated.

Table 2. NLC Klystron Modulator Requirements
Number of NLC Klystrons
Operating Pulsed Voltage
Operating Pulsed Current
Repetition Rate
Risetime/Falltime
Flattop Pulse Duration
Energy Efficiency

8 each
500kV
2000 amperes
120 Hz.
<200ns 10-90%
3.0µs
>75%

The NLC modulator circuit has demonstrated combined
risetime and falltime that meet requirements.  A  10-cell
prototype capable of generating a 22 kV pulse at 6 kA has
been operated as a PFN replacement (~1/10 the volume of
the thyrtron switched PFN) to drive a 5045 klystron in
the  SLAC  linac.  Fig.  5  is  a  photo  of  the  10-cell
prototype.

Fig. 6 DTI's 125kV, 400A Solid-State Switch

Table 3. ARM II Modulator Specifications
Design Voltage
Maximum Current
Pulsewidth
Maximum Burst PRF
Number of MOSFETs

45 kV (15kV/Adder Module)
4.8-6 kA
200ns-1.5µs
1 Mhz
4032

Fig.  5  IGBT  Switched  Induction  Adder  -  10  Cell
Prototype

4.2 Diversified Technologies Inc. (DTI)

DTI manufacturers and markets a broad range of series-
switched IGBT modulators that cover a voltage range of
up to 150 kV and peak power of 70 megawatts.  They
have demonstrated switching times of <100ns and pulse
repetition rates from DC to 400 kHz. Their hardware has
applications  in  accelerator  systems  including  klystron
modulators, ion sources, kicker modulator, and  crowbar
replacements. These solid-state modulators are specifically
designed to compete with and replace vacuum tube based
systems.  A  photograph  of  one  of  their  PowerMod™
systems is shown in Fig. 6.

Fig.7 ARM II Module
configuration. Its specifications are listed in Table 3. A
photo of a single adder module is shown in Fig. 7.

Fast kicker pulser development at LLNL has been based
on the previous ARM modulator development. As listed
in  Table  4,  the  major  differences  in  requirements  are
related  to  the  faster  risetime,  falltime,  and  minimum
pulsewidth. To control the stray inductance, each parallel
array of MOSFETs drives a single pulse transformer. A
photo of the kicker assembly is shown in Fig. 8.

4.3 Advanced Radiographic Machine (ARM) and

Fast Kicker Development at LLNL

The ARM II modulator was one of the first high-power
applications  of  power  MOSFETs  used  in  an  adder

Output Voltage
Voltage Risetime/Falltime
Pulsewidth

Burst Frequency

20 kV into 50W
<10 ns 10-90%
16ns-200ns variable within  
burst
>1.6 MHz - 4 pulses

Table 4. Fast Kicker Specifications

5  CONCLUSIONS

introduced 

that  offer 

Faster  and  higher  power  solid-state  devices  are
constantly  being 
significant
advantages for pulse power applications. These devices are
being incorporated into a significant number of modulator
designs and used in various projects for specific accelerator
applications.  As 
these  devices
continues  to  improve,  they  will  replace  more  of  the
conventional switch technologies.

the  performance  of 

REFERENCES

[1] H. Kirbie, et al, "MHz Repetition Rate Solid-State
Driver  for  High  Current  Induction  Accelerators",
1999 Part. Accel. Conf., New York City, Mar.29-
April 2, 1999,    http      :ftp.pac99.bnl.gov/Papers/   

[2]  R.  Cassel,  "Solid  State 

Induction  Modulator
Replacement  for  the  Conventional  SLAC  5045
Klystrons  Modulator",  LINAC  2000 
-  XX
International  Linac  Conf.,  Monterey,  CA,  August
21-25, 2000

[3] W. J. DeHope, et  al,  "Recent  Advances  in  Kicker
Pulser Technology for Linear Induction Accelerators",
12th IEEE Intl. Pulsed Power Conf., Monterey, CA,
June 27-30, 1999

[4] Yong-Ho Chung, Craig P. Burkhart, et al, "All Solid-
state  Switched  Pulser  for  Air  Pollution  Control
System",  12th  IEEE  Intl.  Pulsed  Power  Conf.,
Monterey, CA, June 27-30, 1999

[5]  M.  Gaudreau,  et  al,  "Solid  State  Modulators  for
Klystron/Gyrotron  Conditioning,  Testing, 
and
Operation",  12th  IEEE  Intl.  Pulsed  Power  Conf.,
Monterey, CA, June 27-30, 1999

[6] E. Cook, et al, "Inductive Adder Kicker Modulator for
DARHT-2",  LINAC 2000 - XX International Linac
Conf., Monterey, CA, August 21-25, 2000

Fig. 8 Photo of Complete Fast Kicker Assembly

4.4 First Point Scientific

First  Point  Scientific  has  developed  a  variety  of
MOSFET  switched  adder  systems.  Based  on 
their
Miniature Induction Adder (MIA - see Fig. 9), they have
demonstrated high repetition  rate,  high-voltage  systems
for air pollution control. First Point Scientific has also
developed  a  prototype  for  an  economical,  fast,  high
repetition rate modulator featuring pulse width agility and
waveform control for a small recirculator to be used in ion
accelerator experiments.

Fig. 9 First Point Scientific -  Miniature  Induction
Adder

