PROGRESS ON THE 140 KV, 10 MEGAWATT PEAK, 1 MEGAWATT 

AVERAGE POLYPHASE QUASI-RESONANT BRIDGE, BOOST 

CONVERTER/MODULATOR FOR THE SPALLATION NEUTRON 

SOURCE (SNS) KLYSTRON POWER SYSTEM 1 

William A. Reass, James D. Doss, Robert F. Gribble, Michael T. Lynch,  

and Paul J. Tallerico 

Los Alamos National Laboratory, P.O. Box 1663, Los Alamos, NM 87544  

 

 

Abstract 

electrical  design 

This  paper  describes 

and 
operational  characteristics  of  a  zero-voltage-switching 
20  kHz  polyphase  bridge,  boost  converter/modulator 
for  klystron  pulse  application.    The  DC-DC  converter 
derives  the  buss  voltages  from  a  standard  13.8  kV  to 
2300  Y  substation  cast-core  transformer.    Energy 
storage  and  filtering  is  provided  by  self-clearing 
metallized  hazy  polypropylene  traction  capacitors.  
Three  “H-Bridge”  IGBT  switching  networks  are  used 
to generate the polyphase 20 kHz transformers primary 
drive  waveforms.    The  20  kHz  drive  waveforms  are 
chirped the appropriate duration to generate the desired 
klystron pulse width.  PWM (pulse width modulation) 
of  the  individual  20  kHz  pulses  is  utilized  to  provide 
regulated output waveforms with adaptive feedforward 
and feedback techniques.  The boost transformer design 
utilizes  amorphous  nanocrystalline  material 
that 
provides the required low core loss at design flux levels 
and switching frequencies.  Resonant shunt peaking is 
used  on  the  transformer  secondary  to  boost  output 
voltage  and  resonate  transformer  leakage  inductance.  
With  the  appropriate  transformer  leakage  inductance 
and peaking capacitance, zero-voltage-switching of the 
IGBT’s  is  attained,  minimizing  switching  losses.    A 
review of these design parameters and a comparison of 
computer  calculations,  scale  model,  and  first  article 
results will be performed. 

of 

The 

bock 

1  MAJOR COMPONENTS 
simplified 

diagram 

the 
converter/modulator system is given in Figure 1.  This 
system  economizes  costs  by  the  utilization  of  many 
standard  industrial  and  utility  components. 
  The 
substation  is  a  standard  13.8  kV  to  2300  Y  cast-core  
transformer  with  passive  harmonic  traps  and  input 
harmonic chokes.  These components are located in an 
outdoor  rated  NEMA  3R  enclosure  that  does  not 
require  secondary  oil  containment  or  related  fire 
suppression equipment.  An SCR regulator is helpful to 
optimize  the  IGBT  switching  parameters.    The  SCR 
regulator  also  accommodates  incoming  line  voltage 
variations  and  other  voltage  changes  resulting  from 
transformer and trap impedances, from no-load to full-
load.  The  SCR  regulator  also  provides  the  soft-start 
function.    The  SCR  regulator  provides  a  nominal  +/- 
1500 Volt output to the energy storage capacitors. The 
energy  storage  capacitors  are  self-clearing  metallized 
hazy  polypropylene  traction  motor  capacitors.    As  in 
traction  application,  these  capacitors  are  hard  bussed 
parallel.  These capacitors do not fail short, but fuse or 
“clear” any internal anomaly.  At our capacitor voltage 
rating  (2  kV)  there  has  not  been  a  recorded  internal 
capacitor buss failure. In this application, as in traction 
motor application, the capacitor lifetime is calculated to 
be  1e9  hours.    Insulated  Gate  Bipolar  Transistors 
(IGBT’s) are configured into three “H” bridge circuits  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Figure 1: Simplified Block Diagram. 

_______________________________________ 
1 Work supported by The U.S. Department of Energy 

to generate a three phase 20 kHz square wave voltage 
drive  waveform.    The  IGBT’s  are  “chirped”  the 
appropriate  duration  to  generate  the  high  voltage 
klystron  pulse,  typically  1.3  mS.  Due  to  the  IGBT 
switching  power  levels,  currents,  and  frequencies 
involved, low inductance busswork and bypassing is of 
paramount importance.  The boost transformers utilize 
amorphous  nanocrystalline  material  that  has  very  low 
loss at the applied frequency and flux swing.  Operating 
at 20 kHz and about 1.6 Tesla bi-directional, the core 
loss is about 1.2 watts per pound in our application, or 
320 W per core.  Each of the “C” cores (one for each 
phase) weigh 260 lbs. and has a 3.5” by 5” post.  By 
appropriately spacing the secondary from the primary, 
the  transformer  leakage  inductance  can  be  resonated 
with  secondary  shunt  peaking  capacitors  to  maximize 
voltage  output  and  tune  the  IGBT  switch  current  to 
provide  “zero-voltage-switching”.    The  zero-voltage-
switching  is  provided  when  the  IGBT  gate  drive  is 
positive,  but  reverse  transformer  primary  circulating 
current is being carried by the IGBT internal freewheel 
diode.    We  have  tuned  for  about  4  uS  of  freewheel 
current  before  the  IGBT  conducts  in  the  normal 
quadrant.          This  tuning  provides  for  about  15% 
control  range  for  IGBT  pulse  width  modulation 
(PWM).    The  ability  of  IGBT  PWM  of  the  active 
klystron  voltage  pulse  permits  adaptive  feedback  and 
feedforward  techniques  with  digital  signal  processors 
(DSP’s) to regulate and provide “flat” klystron voltage 
pulses,  irrespective  of  capacitor  bank  “start”  voltage 
and  related  droop. 
  Line  synchronization  is  not 
absolutely required as the adaptive DSP can read bank 
voltage  parameters  at  the  start  of  each  pulse  and 
calculate  expected  droop. 
  A  standard  six-pulse 
rectification  circuit  is  used  with  a  “pi-R”  type  filter 
network.    The  diodes  are  fast  recovery  ion-implanted 
types  that  are  series  connected  with  the  appropriate 
compensation  networks.    The  diodes  have  the  second 
highest power loss (after the IGBT’s) and are forced oil 
cooled.  The filter network must attenuate the 120 kHz 
switching  ripple  and  have  a  minimal  stored  energy.  
The  stored  energy  is  wasted  energy  that  must  be 
dissipated  by  the  klystron  at  the  end  of  each  pulse.  
With the parameters we have chosen, the ripple is very 
low  (~300  volts)  and  the  klystron  fault  energy  (in  an 
arc-down) is about 10 joules.  Even if the IGBT’s are 
not turned off, the transformer resonance is out of tune 
because  of  the  fault  condition,  and  little  difference  in 
klystron  fault  energy  is  realized.      If  the  IGBT’s  fail 
short,  through  the  transformer  primary  winding,  the 
boost  transformer  will  saturate  in  about  30  uS,  also 
limiting  any  destructive  faults  to  the  klystron.    In  a 
faulted  condition,  the  klystron  peak  fault  current  is 
about twice nominal, with low dI/dT’s. 

2   MODELING 

The 

of 

IGBT 

losses, 

such 

as 

switching 

losses, 

system 

electrical 

complete 

switching 

the 
converter/modulator  system  has  been  modeled 
in 
extreme  detail.    This  includes  design  studies  of  the 
utility  characteristics,  transformer  and  rectification 
methodology, 
boost 
transformer  parameters,  failure  modes,  fault  analysis, 
and  system  efficiencies.    Various  codes  such  as 
SCEPTRE,  MicrocapIV,  Flux2D,  and  Flux3D  have 
been used to complete these tasks.  SCEPTRE has been 
primarily used to examine IGBT and boost transformer 
performance  in  great  detail  to  understand  design 
parameters 
IGBT 
commutation  dI/dT,  buss  inductance,  buss  transients, 
core  flux,  core  flux  offset,  and      transformer  Eigen 
frequencies.    Flux2D  and  Flux3D  have  been  used  to 
examine  transformer  coupling  coefficients,  leakage 
inductance,  core  internal  and  external  flux  lines, 
winding  electric  field  potentials,  and  winding  field 
stresses.    The  Flux2D  and  Flux3D  were  particularly 
useful  to  examine  transformer  secondary  winding 
profiles that gave the desired coupling coefficients with 
minimized  electrical  field  stresses.      MicrocapIV  has 
been used to examine overall design performance of the 
system.  This includes the utility grid parameters such 
as power factor, line harmonics, and flicker.   We have 
optimized  the  design  to  accommodate  the  IEEE-519 
and  IEEE-141  standards. 
  The  MicrocapIV  uses 
simplified  switch  models  for  the  IGBT’s,  which  does 
not accurately predict their losses.  However, the code 
has  been  very  useful  to  examine  tradeoffs  of  circuit 
performance  with  the  lumped  elements  such  as  the 
boost transformer, shunt peaking capacitance, the filter 
networks, and the input energy stores.  MicrocapIV is 
also  adept  at  making  parametric  scans  to  determine 
component  sensitivities  and  tolerances.    Comparisons 
between the SCEPTRE and MicrocapIV codes show no 
significant  differences 
the  system  operational 
performance  such  as  switching  currents,  switching 
voltages,  and  output  voltage  parameters.    A  typical 
output  of  MicrocapIV,  Figure2,  shows  the  zero-
voltage-switching  of  a  pair  of  IGBT’s  in  the  top 
waveform  as  compared  to  the  transformer  primary 
winding current in the middle waveform. 
 

in 

 

Figure 2: Details of Waveforms. 

 
The  negative  IGBT  current  before  turn-on  is  the 
freewheel  diode  current.    This  negative  current  is  of 
paramount importance to provide a loss-less turn-on of 
the IGBT, excessive PWM can cause the IGBT to fall 

out of synchronization with the winding current.  Limits 
of PWM are necessary to ensure this condition does not 
happen, causing over-heating of the IGBT’s.  A detail 
of the klystron voltage rise time, about 75 uS, is shown 
at the bottom.  With the appropriate optimization, good 
klystron  pulse  fidelity  can  be  obtained  as  shown  in 
Figure  3.    The  model  shows  the  resulting  droop  from 
the capacitor energy stores. 

 

The enclosure is an integral part of a ground plane (also 
noted  in  the  picture)  to  minimize  any  radiated  noise.  
The  converter/modulator  is  completely  (electrically) 
sealed  at  all  points.    Unfortunately,  vendor  delays  of 
the SCR phase control rack will not permit full average 
power operation until December 00 or January 01.  We 
will therefore use a pair of 10 kW power supplies for 
initial  debug  operations  and  testing  to  full  output 
voltage,  current,  and  pulse  length,  but  at  a  reduced 
pulse rate. 

Figure 5:  Oil Tank Basket Assembly 

Figure 3   Klystron Cathode Voltage. 

 

3  SCALE MODEL RESULTS 

A  scale  model  has  been  built  and  has  been  used 
extensively  to  prove  various  design  concepts.    As 
electronic  control  subsystems  become  available,  they 
can  be  tested  and  debugged  with  the  scale  model.  
Figure  4  shows  the  first  results  we  obtained  with  our 
adaptive  power  supply  feedback  and  feedforward 
system.  The lower most trace shows the capacitor bank 
voltage  droop  of  20%,  five  times  worse than the SNS 
bank  design  (~4%  droop).    The  scale  model  shows  a 
droop  that  follows  the  capacitor  voltage  (as  can  be 
  With 
expected)  without  any  adaptive  controls. 
adaptive 
is 
considerably  improved  as  well  as  having  a  better  rise 
time.    Further  efforts  to  optimize  the  loop  parameters 
should be able to provide a flat output voltage pulse. 

performance 

control, 

flattop 

the 

 

 
Figure 4:  Adaptive Feedfoward/Feedback 

4 PROJECT STATUS 

few  subassemblies  needed  before 

The  status  of  the  first  article  is  moving  along  well.  
The  construction  efforts  are  nearing  completion  with 
only  a 
final 
integration.  The oil tank basket is shown in Figure 5.  
The  high-voltage  rectifier  assemblies  are  in  the  lower 
portion of the figure.  The IGBT switch boards can be 
seen on top of the converter/modulator in their “edge” 
connectors.    The  oil  tank  and  safety  enclosure  is 
depicted  in  Figure  6.    Most  prominent  is  the  cooling 
panel  for  the  IGBT’s  and  oil/water  heat  exchanger.  

Figure 6:  Oil Tank & Safety Enclosure 

5  CONCLUSION 

industrial 

The converter/modulator will be demonstrating many 
new  technologies  that  will  hopefully  revolutionize 
long-pulse  klystron  modulator  design.    These  items 
include  self-clearing  capacitors 
in  a  modulator 
application,  large  amorphous  nanocrystalline  cores, 
high-voltage and high-power polyphase quasi-resonant 
DC-DC conversion, and adaptive power supply control 
techniques.  These design and construction efforts will 
hopefully  come  to  closure  in  less  than  a  year  after 
conception.    Design  economies  should  be  realized  by 
the  use  of 
traction  motor  components 
(IGBT’s  and  self-clearing  capacitors)  and  standard 
utility  cast-core  power  transformers.    The  modular 
design minimizes on-site construction and a simplified 
utility 
reduces 
  The  design  does  not  require 
installation  costs. 
capacitor  rooms  and  related  crowbars. 
  Design 
flexibility is available to operate klystrons of different 
voltages  by  primarily  changing  the  boost  transformer 
turns  ratio. 
individual  full-scale 
components  and  scale  model  results  all  agree  to  date 
with  modeling  efforts 
the  design 
indicate 
technology will be imminently successful. 

interconnection 

testing  of 

scheme 

further 

  All 

that 

