CW PERFORMANCE OF THE TRIUMF 8 METER LONG RFQ FOR EXOTIC

IONS

R. L. Poirier, R. Baartman, P. Bricault, K. Fong, S. Koscielniak, R. Laxdal, A. K. Mitra, L. Root, G.

Stanford, D. Pearce, TRIUMF, Vancouver, B. C. Canada

Abstract
The ISAC 35 MHz RFQ is designed to accelerate ions of
A/q up to 30 from 2keV/u to 150keV/u in cw mode. The
RFQ structure is 8 meters long and the vane-shaped rods
are supported by 19 rings spaced 40 cm apart. An unusual
feature of the design is the constant synchronous phase of
-25°;  the  buncher  and  shaper  sections  are  eliminated  in
favor of an external multi-harmonic buncher. All 19 rings
are  installed  with  quadrature  positioning  of  the  four  rod
electrodes aligned to +/- 0.08 mm. Relative field variation
and quadruple asymmetry along the 8 meters of the RFQ
was measured to be within +/- 1%. Early operation at peak
inter-electrode voltage (75kV) was restricted by the rapid
growth of dark currents due to field emission; the nominal
operating power of 75 kW increased to 100 kW in a few
hours. A program of high power pulsing, followed by cw
operation have all but eliminated the problem leading to a
successful  150  hour  test  at  full  power.  Successful  beam
test results confirm beam dynamics and rf designs.

1 INTRODUCTION

The  accelerator  chain  of  the  ISAC  radioactive  ion  beam
facility includes a 35.3 MHz split ring RFQ, operating in
cw  mode,  to  accelerate  unstable  nuclei  from  2  keV/u  to
150  keV/u.  The  RFQ  structure  is  8  meters  long  and  the
vane-shaped  rods,  comprised  of  40cm  long  cells,  are
supported by 19 rings. Full power tests on a single module
[1]  and  on  a  three-module  assembly  [2]  enabled  us  to
complete  the  basic  electrical  and  mechanical  design  for
the  RFQ  accelerator.  An  initial  2.8m  section  [3]  of  the
accelerator  (7  of  19  rings)  was  installed  and  aligned  to
allow preliminary rf and beam tests to be carried out. The
full complement of 19 rings shown in Fig. 1 has now been
tested to full rf power with beam.

2 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS

the  RFQ 

is  dominated  by 

The  design  of 
three
considerations. Firstly, the low charge-to-mass ratio of the
ions dictate a low operating frequency to achieve adequate
transverse  focusing.  Secondly,  continuous  wave  (cw)
operation is required to preserve beam intensity. Thirdly,
the  desire  to  minimize  the  length  of  the  structure  and  its
cost.  No  single  feature  of  this  RFQ  gives  it  exceptional
status, but the combination of novel features and unusual
design parameters adopted to address these considerations
can be argued to give it “landmark” status.
The relative tuning difficulty of an RFQ scales roughly as
the  vane-length,  L,  divided  by  the  free-space  wavelength
λ;  for  ISAC  this  ratio  is  ≈  1  which  is  typical  of  RFQs.

However, the alignment difficulty scales as  L/r0 where  r0
is the bore radius; and the structure length L=8 m of ISAC
makes this aspect unusually challenging. The vane voltage
of  75  kV  is  moderate,  and  the  electric  field  limitation
comes not from consideration of the Kilpatrick factor, but
rather  from  the  c.w.  requirement  and  cooling  limitations.
Both  these  considerations  feed  into  the  challenge  and
complexity  of  the  mechanical  design  regarding  stiffness,
stability  and  tolerances.  Though  there  are  several  c.w.
proton  RFQs  and  one  light-ion  RFQ,  ISAC  is  unique  in
c.w.  operation  for  heavier  ions.  There  is  no  other  RFQ
operating  in  cw  mode  in  this  frequency  range  with  a
charge to mass ratio of 1/30.

Figure 1. Full compliment of 19 rings installed and

aligned

2.1 Beam Dynamics [4]

Though  it  is  now  well  accepted  that  a  design  strategy
different from that for high current proton linacs, be used
for low current, light and heavy ion RFQs, this was not so
at the design time six years ago. The Kilpatrick factor at
1.15 is rather modest. However, because of the power vs.
cooling  requirement  one  cannot  increase  the  acceleration
rate by merely raising the voltage. In order to reduce the
structure  length,  the  buncher  and  shaper  sections  were
completely  eliminated  in  favour  of  a  discrete  four-
harmonic  saw-tooth  pre-buncher  located  5m  upstream.
This  has  also  the  benefits  of  reduced 
longitudinal
emittance 
allowing
experimentalists to do “time of flight” work with an 86 ns
time structure. These  gains  are  made  at  the  expense  of  a
slightly  lower  beam  capture  of  80%.  Acceleration  starts
immediately after the radial matching section (RMS) and
the vane modulation index (m) ramps quickly from 1.124
to 2.6, while the bore shrinks from 0.71 to 0.37 cm in the
remaining 
sections.  A

accelerator 

the  RFQ 

exit 

and  of 

at 

booster 

and 

conventional  LANL-type  design,  as  for  protons,  would
have resulted in a 12 meter long linac.
To  maintain  reasonable  acceptance,  the  vane  design  has
characteristic radius to pole tip r0 = 0.741cm. Though one
could single out m and φs as unusual, it is the combination
of  parameters,  chosen  so  as  to  hasten  acceleration
(particularly in the early cells), which is remarkable. The
focusing  parameter  B=3.5,  which  is  “low  to  typical”  of
ion-RFQs,  is  carefully  balanced  against  a  comparatively
large  peak  RF-defocusing  parameter  ∆=  –0.  0408.  For
RFQs  in  general,  φs  rarely  exceeds  -30o  and  m  is  rarely
above 2 while in ISAC the synchronous phase φs = -25o is
large and constant which maximizes the  acceleration  and
m=2.6  which  is  a  record  for  operational  RFQs.  Here  we
the  definition  φs  =-90o/0o  gives  min/max
adopt 
acceleration.
There are several other features of the beam dynamics and
vane shapes, which at the time of design were considered
quite  novel.  An  exit  taper  was  substituted  by  a  much
shorter transition cell, and a transition cell was introduced
between  the  RMS  (m=0)  and  the  booster.  Both  entrance
and  exit  region  fields  of  the  RFQ  vanes  were  modeled
with an electrostatic solver. To minimize machining costs,
vanes with constant transverse radius of curvature ρ  =  r0
were  adopted;  this  leads  to  significant  departure  (up  to
35% for ISAC) from the two term potential either  where
ka ~ unity and/or where m is large. Here k=2π/(βλ) and a
is the local minimum bore radius. The cell parameters a,m
were  systematically  corrected  to  compensate  for  this
effect.
The RFQ is also unusual in that the vanes are rotated 45
degrees  from  the  usual  horizontal/vertical  orientation.
Matching  into  and  out  of  the  RFQ  therefore  requires  a
round  beam.  The  matching  into  the  RFQ  is  achieved  by
four  electrostatic  quadrupoles.  They  are  the  same  design
as the other quadrupoles in the beam transport line except
for the last one. In order to retain an acceptance of greater
than  100  π  mm-mrad  through  the  matching  region  this
quadrupole  is  very  small  (1  inch  long  by  1  inch  inside
diameter).

2.2 RF

From a structural point of view, the low frequency of the
RFQ  dictates  that  a  semi-lumped  resonant  structure  be
used  to  generate  the  required  rf  voltage  between  the
electrodes.  Various  RFQ  models  were  built  [5]  and  the
structure proposed for the ISAC-I accelerator, is a variant
of  the  4-rod  structure  developed  at  the  University  of
Frankfurt  [6].  The  unique  design  feature  of  this  4-rod
structure is the single split ring rather than a separate ring
for  each  pair  of  electrodes  resulting  in  only  8%  of  the
power  being  dissipated  in  the  tank  walls,  negating  the
need  for  water  cooling  the  tank  walls.  The  choice  of  the
split  ring  design  along  with  the  choice  of  making  ρ  =  r0
has  negated  the  requirement  for  individual  stem  tuners.
This  type  of  structure  was  chosen  for  its  relatively  high

specific shunt impedance, its mechanical stability and the
elimination  of  an  unwanted  even-type  transmission  line
mode  in  favour  of  the  desired  odd-mode.  The  parasitic
even-mode  was  identified  as  cause  of  a  serious  loss  of
transmission in the HIS RFQ [7] at GSI.

2.3 Mechanical

the  cyanide  bath  solution.  In 

The  mechanical  design  of  the  RFQ  [8]  has  two  major
unique features: (1) The vacuum tank is square in cross-
section  and  split  diagonally  by  an  “O”  ring  flange  into
two parts, the tank base and the tank lid. Each part was
plated  separately  using  the  triangular  enclosure  as  the
container  for 
this
configuration,  the  copper  plating  is  easier  and  it  gives
full unobstructed access to the RFQ modules for ease of
installation  and  alignment.  (2)  The  basic  design  of  the
RFQ structure is different from other RFQ structures in
that  the  maximum  rf  current  carrying  surface  (rf  skin)
has  been  de-coupled  from  the  mechanical  support
structure (strong-back). The rf skin encloses the strong-
back  but  is  attached  only  where  it  meets  the  electrode
supports, thus allowing for thermal expansion of the skin
without  loading  the  structure  and  causing  electrode
misalignment.

3 ALIGNMENT

Vertical
Horizontal

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0

-0.02

i

v
e
D

m
m
n

 

i
 

n
o
i
t
a

-0.04

-0.06

-0.08

-0.1

0

2

4

6

10

8
12
Ring Number

14

16

18

20

Figure 2. Mechanical alignment of RFQ rings

The alignment goal was to achieve quadrature positioning
of the rod electrodes to within 0.08 mm. Beam dynamics
calculations indicate that at this level, emittance growth is
smaller than 1%. The alignment philosophy [8] was based
on manufacturing 19 identical rings and mounting them on
precision ground platens, which are accurately aligned in
the vacuum tank prior  to  ring  installation.  Each  platen  is
special steel 63.5 mm thick with an offset axial rail bolted
and  doweled  in  place.  The  platen  and  rail  are  accurately
ground  in  one  set-  up,  thus  providing  an  accurate  datum
for mounting and locating the ring bases. Each platen has
5 adjustable mounting points, 3 vertical and 2 lateral, and
special  alignment  targets.  The  platens  are  adjusted  and
aligned  in  the  tank  using  the  theodolite  intersection
method.  Once  the  platens  are  aligned  they  are  locked  in
position  and  ready  for  installation  of  the  rings.  The

alignment  of  the  ring  assemblies  on  the  platens  was
accomplished  by  the  same  method.  Because  of  the
manufacturing  procedures  and  alignment  philosophy
adopted,  when  the  electrodes  were  installed  on  their
mounting  surfaces  they  were  aligned  by  definition,
assuming that the fabrication tolerances were met.
The  three  dimensional  theodolite  technique  involves
locating  two  theodolites  within  a  known  grid  then
measuring  the  angles  to  monument  targets  to  compute
their  coordinates.  The  theodolites  and  grid  lie  along  one
side  of  the  RFQ,  and  so  the  horizontals  off  axis
measurements are less accurate because they are close to
the theodolite sight line. The alignment results are shown
in Fig. 2.

the  RFQ  and  was  guided  by  the  straight  edges  of  the
electrodes. Nine bead pull runs were made for each set of
measurements;  carriage  only,  four  separate  runs  with  the
dielectric  bead  in  each  of  the  four  quadrants  and  four
separate  runs  by  rotating  the  carriage  and  the  bead
together.  The  carriage  only  run  was  used  as  the  average
perturbation  reference,  the  run  by  rotating  the  carriage
with  the  bead  was  used  to  correct  any  asymmetry  in  the
carriage  and  the  four  separate  runs  were  corrected
accordingly.
Both the average peak field variation and the quadrupole
field asymmetry were deduced from the measurements and
are shown in Fig 4. The results are within the target of +/-
1% field strength variation.

4 SIGNAL LEVEL TESTS

Figure 3. RFQ tank ready for signal level tests

4.1 Frequency, Q and Impedance Measurements

Following the mechanical alignment the lid was  installed
as  shown  in  Fig.  3  ready  for  signal  level  tests.  The
frequency  and  Q  are  measured  with  a  network  analyzer
and the shunt impedance is derived from two independent
R/Q  measurements;  ∆C  method  and  input  admittance
method [9]. Results are compared to MAFIA calculations
in Table 1.
Table 1. Comparison  of  measured  values  with  calculated
MAFIA values.

Parameter
Frequency (MHz)
Q
Rshunt (k-ohms)
Rshunt (k-ohms-m)
R/Q

MAFIA Measured
34.7
14816
61.9
470.4
4.18

35.7
8400
36.75
279.3
4.375

4.2 Bead-pull measurements

Since the electrodes have no shoulder upon which to rest
the dielectric bead on when measuring the lower gap, the
sagging  of  the  bead  was  overcome  by  fabricating  a  bead
carriage from teflon that traveled down the center bore of

Figure 4. Bead pull measurement results

4.3 Transmission line mode measurement.

The decision to install the rf power amplifiers for the ISAC
accelerator RF systems several wavelengths away from the
RF structures, was based on our experience with matching
high  Q  loads  to  power  sources  via  a  long  length  of
transmission line on other RF systems at TRIUMF [10]. In
order to minimize the possibility of a parasitic oscillation
at a transmission line mode, it is best for the transmission
line  electrical  length  to  be  a  multiple  of  λ/2.  The
parameters of the amplifier tuned circuit and the resonant
cavity coupled at each end of the transmission line have an
effect  on 
the
transmission  line.  For  the  RFQ  system,  the  transmission
line resonances were measured to be 2.45 MHz apart. The
electrical length of the line was adjusted via a trombone to
nλ/2  indicated  by  the  cavity  resonance  fo  being  centrally
located between the two resonances making the difference
from fo to the first transmission line resonance 1.225 MHz.

the  equivalent  electrical 

length  of 

only 5 kW and then levels off in 2 days. A successful 150
hour  test  at  full  power  was  achieved.  With  no  dark
currents present, the power requirement to reach an inter-
electrode  voltage  of  75  kV  is  75  kW.  The  amplifier  is
capable of 150 kW for peak power pulsing.

6 BEAM TESTS

In 1998 an interim beam test was completed with the first
7  ring  section  (2.8m)  accelerating  beams  to  55keV/u.  In
1999 the final 12 rings were added. Beam commissioning
of the complete 19 rings was finally completed this year.
The  RFQ  was  operated  in  cw  mode  for  all  beam  tests.
Beams  of  4He1+,  14N1+,  20Ne1+  and  14N2
1+  all  have  been
accelerated to test the RFQ at various power levels.
In the initial 7-ring test a dedicated test facility was placed
downstream  of 
final  19-ring
configuration  the  test  station  was  placed  downstream  of
the  MEBT  and  the  first  DTL  section.  The  test  facility
includes a transverse emittance scanner, and a 90° bending
magnet  and  Fast  Faraday  cup  for  longitudinal  emittance
estimations.

the  RFQ.  For 

the 

This is a necessary adjustment for the stable operation  of
the rf system.

5 FULL POWER TESTS

In  preparation  for  full  power  tests  the  RFQ  tank  was
baked out for three days at 60° C by uniformly powering
eighty-four 500W heaters on the tank walls, covered with
a  glass  fiber  blanket  to  contain  the  heat  (Fig  5).  At  the
same  time  60  degree  water  was  circulated  through  the
structure cooling system. A base pressure of 1.4 *10-7 torr
was  achieved,  which  increased  to  4.0*10-7  torr  with  full
RF power applied.

Figure 5. RFQ system ready for bake-out.

Careful  cleaning  procedures  and  high  power  pulsing
drastically  reduced  the  growth  rate  of  dark  currents
associated  with  field  emission.  The  pulses  were  128  us
long at a rate of 500 Hz at a peak amplitude of ~100 kV
peak. The gradual reduction of dark currents is indicated
in  Fig.  6  by  the  reduction  of  the  slope  of  the  sequential
graphs,  which  are  in  chronological  order  from  top  to
bottom. Each graph plotted is for a constant voltage after
two hours of high power pulsing.

105

100

95

90

)

26 AUG 99

85

80

W
k
(
 
r
e
w
o
P

75

70

65

60

13 OCT 99

0

5

10

15

Time in Hours

20

25

30

Figure 6. Increase in power level due to dark currents

Initially at the nominal voltage of 74 kV, the dark currents
caused an increase of power from 75 kW to 100 kW in 2
hours.  Now  the  power  due  to  dark  currents  increases  by

Figure  7.  (a)  RFQ  beam  test  results  showing  capture
efficiency for beams of N+ as a function of  relative  vane
voltage.  The  beam  capture  for  both  bunched  and
unbunched  initial  beams  are  recorded  (squares)  and  are
compared with PARMTEQ calculations (dashed lines). In
(b) the results for both N+ and N+ 
2 are plotted with respect
to absolute vane voltage.

Beam  capture  has  been  measured  as  a  function  of  RFQ
vane  voltage  for  each  ion  and  for  both  unbunched  and

bunched input beams. The MEBT quadrupoles were used
as a velocity filter to remove the unaccelerated beam. The
results for atomic and molecular Nitrogen are given in Fig.
7  along  with  predicted  efficiencies  based  on  PARMTEQ
calculations.  The  RFQ  capture  efficiency  at  the  nominal
voltage is 80% in the bunched case (three harmonics) and
25% for the unbunched case in reasonable agreement with
predictions. A separate measure of  the  timing  pulse  train
obtained from scattering the beam in a gold foil shows that
5% of the accelerated beam is distributed in the two 35.4
MHz  side-bands.  This  means  that  after  chopping  the
overall  capture  efficiency  in  the  11.8  MHz  bunches  will
be  75%.  This  will  eventually  be  increased  to  80%  by
adding a fourth harmonic to the pre-buncher.
By  varying  the  MEBT  rebuncher  while  measuring  the
product of energy spread and time width at an  energy  or
time focus gives an estimate of the longitudinal emittance.
The results are shown in Fig. 8 for a 4He1+ beam and give
an  emittance  of  0.5  π  keV/u-ns  in  agreement  with
simulations. The measured energy of 153keV/u also is in
agreement with design.
Transverse emittances were measured before and after the
RFQ.  The  results  show  that,  when  the  matching  is
optimized,  the  emittance  growth 
is
consistent  with  zero  for  the  7-ring  configuration  for  an
initial  beam  of  15π-mm-mrad.  In  the  19-ring  test  the
emittance  scanner  was  moved  after  the  90°  bend  in
MEBT.  In  this  case  the  emittance  growth  was  non-zero
but less  than  a  factor  of  two.  It  has  not  been  determined
what part of the emittance growth is in the RFQ and what
part is contributed by the optics.
longitudinal  acceptances  were
The 
explored  with  a  so-called  ‘pencil  beam’  defined  by  two
circular apertures of 2mm each separated by 0.7m placed
in the RFQ injection line. One steering plate was available
downstream  of  the  collimators  to  steer  the  ‘pencil  beam’
around  the  RFQ  aperture.  In  the  case  of  the  longitudinal
acceptance the energy and phase of the incident beam was
varied while recording the beam transmission.

in  both  planes 

transverse  and 

The  acceptance  opens  up  for  off-centered  beams  with
values of 400 π %-deg at 35 MHz or 0.7 π keV/u-ns. The
expected  longitudinal  acceptance  based  on  PARMTEQ
simulations is 0.5π keV/u-ns.
In  general  the  beam  test  results  demonstrate  a  strong
confirmation  of  both  the  beam  dynamics  design  and  the
engineering concept and realization.

7 ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We would like to thank Gerardo Dutto, and Paul Schmor,
for their valuable technical and managerial discussions.
We  are  especially  grateful  to  Roland  Roper  (machine
shop) who took on the responsibility of the fabrication and
manufacturing details of rings, jigs and fixtures. A special
thanks 
the  mechanical
assembly and installation of the rings, and to Peter Harmer
for  the  organization  and  integration  of  the  RFQ  with  all
the ancillary systems.

to  Bhalwinder  Waraich  for 

8  REFERENCES

 [1] R.L. Poirier, P.J. Bricault, K. Jensen and A. K. Mitra, “The
RFQ  Prototype  for  the  Radioactive  Ion  Beams  Facility  at
TRIUMF”, LINAC96, Geneva, Switzerland

[2]  R.L.  Poirier,  P.  Bricault,  G.  Dutto,  K.  Fong,  K.  Jensen,  R.
Laxdal,  A.K.  Mitra,  G.  Stanford,  “Construction  Criteria  and
Prototyping for the ISAC RFQ Accelerator at TRIUMF”, Proc.
1997 Particle Accelerator Conference.

[3] R. L. Poirier, et al, “RF Tests on the Initial 2.8m Section of
the  8m  Long  ISAC  RFQ  at  TRIUMF”,  LINAC98,  Chicago,
USA.

[4] S. Koscielniak et al, “Beam Dynamics of the TRIUMF ISAC
RFQ”, LINAC96, Geneva, Switzerland.

[5]  P.  J.  Bricault,  et  al,  “RFQ  Cold  Model  Studies”,  PAC95,
Dallas Texas, USA.

[6] A.  Schempp,  et  al.,  Nucl.  Instr.  &  Meth.  B10/11  (1985)  p.
831.

[7] J.Klabunde, et al, “Beam dynamics simulations in a four-rod
RFQ”, LINAC94, Tsukuba, Japan, pg.710.

Figure 8. Energy spectrum and corresponding pulse width
for an accelerated beam of 4He1+.

[8]G. Stanford, D. Pearce,    R.  L.  Poirier,  “Mechanical  Design,
Construction  and  Alignment  of  the  ISAC  RFQ  Accelerator  at
TRIUMF”, LINAC98, Chicago, USA.

 Based  on  the  steering/transmission  data  the  transverse
acceptance  was  estimated  to  be  ≤  140  π  mm-mrad.  The
longitudinal acceptance was measured for both a centered
and  an  off-centered  beam  (Ac=2.7  mm)  at  the  nominal
RFQ voltage using the pencil beam. The energy and phase
settings where the acceptance dropped to 50% of the peak
value  were  used  to  define  the  longitudinal  acceptance
contour.  The  acceptance  of  the  centered  beam  was
estimated to be 180 π %-deg at 35MHz or 0.3π keV/u-ns.

[9]  P.  Bourquin,  W.  Pirkl  and  H.-H.  Umstatter,  “RF  and
Construction  Issues  in  the  RFQ  for  the  CERN  Laser  Ion
Source”, Proc. XVIII LINAC Conference, CERN,  p381(1996)

[10] R. L. Poirier et al, “Stabilizing a Power Amplifier Feeding
a High Q Resonant Load”, PAC95, Dallas Texas, USA.

[11]  R. Laxdal, et al, “First Beam Tests with the ISAC RFQ”
LINAC98, Chicago, USA.

