A NEW LINEAR INDUCTIVE VOLTAGE ADDER DRIVER

FOR THE SATURN ACCELERATOR

M. G. Mazarakis, R. B. Spielman, K. W. Struve, F. W. Long
Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM 87185, USA

Abstract

Saturn is a dual-purpose accelerator.  It can be operated
as a large-area flash x-ray source for simulation testing or
as a Z-pinch driver especially for K-line x-ray production.
In  the  first  mode,  the  accelerator  is  fitted  with  three
concentric-ring  2-MV  electron  diodes,  while  in  the  Z-
pinch mode the current of all the modules is combined via
a  post-hole  convolute  arrangement  and  driven  through  a
cylindrical  array  of  very  fine  wires.    We  present  here  a
point  design  for  a  new  Saturn  class  driver  based  on  a
number  of  linear  inductive  voltage  adders  connected  in
parallel.    A  technology  recently  implemented  at  the
Institute of High Current Electronics in Tomsk (Russia) is
being utilized[1].

In the present design we eliminate Marx generators and
pulse-forming  networks.    Each  inductive  voltage  adder
cavity is  directly fed  by  a  number  of  fast  100-kV  small-
size  capacitors  arranged  in  a  circular  array  around  each
accelerating gap.  The number of capacitors connected in
parallel to each cavity defines the total maximum current.
By  selecting  low  inductance  switches,  voltage  pulses  as
short as 30-50-ns FWHM can be directly achieved.

The voltage of each stage is low (100-200 kV).  Many
stages are required to achieve multi-megavolt accelerator
output.    However,  since  the  length  of  each  stage  is  very
short  (4-10  cm),  accelerating  gradients  of  higher  than  1
MV/m can easily be obtained.  The  proposed new  driver
will  be  capable  of  delivering  pulses  of  15-MA,  36-TW,
1.2-MJ to the diode load, with a peak voltage of ~2.2 MV
and FWHM of 40-ns.  And although its performance will
exceed the presently utilized driver, its size and cost could
be much smaller (~1/3).  In addition, no liquid dielectrics
like  oil  or  deionized  water  will  be  required.    Even
elimination  of  ferromagnetic  material  (by  using  air-core
cavities) is a possibility.

1 INTRODUCTION

Saturn  is  a  pulsed  power  accelerator  presently  in
operation at Sandia[2].  It represents a modification of the
old PBFA I[3] accelerator used for ion fusion research.  It
is named Saturn because of its unique multiple ring diode
design  which  is  utilized  while  operating  as  an  x-ray
bremsstrahlung  source.  As  an  x-ray  source  Saturn  can
deliver to the three-ring e-beam diode a maximum energy
of 750 kJ with a peak power of 32 TW providing an x-ray
exposure  capability  of  5  x  1012  rads/sec  over  a  500cm2
area.  As such it is the highest power electrical driver for
bremsstrahlung  production in the  world.    As  a  z-pinch

driver Saturn can deliver up to 8 MA to a wire or gas-puff
load.    A  700-kJ  total  x-ray  output  was  obtained  from
aluminum or tungsten wire pinches, and a 60-70-kJ K-line
radiation from aluminum

2 PRESENT ACCELERATOR

CONFIGURATION

Fig.  1  Schematic  representation  of  the  present  Saturn
configuration

flow 

the 

follows 

following 

Figure  1  is  a  schematic  representation  of  the  Saturn
configuration presently in effect.  It utilizes conventional
pulse power architecture.  The driver starts with 36 Marx
generators as the principal energy source.  Then ensues a
cascade  of  pulse  compression  stages  to  convert  the
microsecond FWHM Marx output to the 50-ns final pulse
that  powers  the  electron  diode  or  the  z-pinch  load.    The
power 
stages:  The
microsecond  pulses  are  stored  in  36  water  intermediate
store  capacitors.    From  there  through  36  triggered  gas
switches  they  charge  36  pulse-forming  lines  which
through  36  self-breaking water switches launch the  short
pulses  into  36  triplate  water  transmission  lines  and
impedance  matching  transformers.    Finally,  the  short
(now  ~50  ns)  pulse  is  applied  to  the  diode  through  a
water-vacuum  insulating  ring  interface.    The  36  vertical
triplate 
three
horizontal triplate disks in a water convolute section.  In
the vacuum section the power is split into three parts and
feeds 
insulated
transmission  lines  (MITL)  that  power  the  three  separate
rings of the e-diode.  A final pulse compression of 25:1 is
achieved.    To  accomplish  all  that,  the  device  requires
substantial dimensions.  The overall diameter is 30 m and
the  height  5  m.    The  36  Marxes  are  immersed  in  a
250,000-gallon oil-filled annular tank while the rest of the
device  is  in  250,000  gallons  of  deionized  water.    In  our

three  conical-triplate  magnetically 

transmission 

lines  are  connected 

to 

proposed  design,  utilizing  the  fast-pulser  technology[5],
the  entire  Saturn  device  will  be  smaller  than  17  m  in
diameter and will be only 5 m in height.  In addition, no
water and oil tanks are required.  Except for the 5-m high,
4-m  diameter  cylindrical  central  section  which  is  in
vacuum,  the  entire  accelerator  is  in  the  air  and  readily
serviceable.

The  three  diodes  are  concentric  and,  hence,  have
different  power  requirements.    The  innermost  diode
requires  less  power  than  the  outside  one  to  achieve  the
same x-ray area average output.  The diode design is such
that  a  power  partition  with  a  ratio  of  3:2:1  from  outside
ring to center ring is required.  The bottom triplate MITL
feeds  the  largest  outer  diode  ring  while  the  top  MITL  is
connected with the innermost diode ring.

3 NEW SATURN DESIGN BASED ON OUR

FAST PULSER ARCHITECTURE

In  our  new  design  we  utilize 

the  revolutionary
technology of the fast pulser[4].  We select 24 modules of
~700  kA,  2.2  MV  each  to  produce  a  total  current  of  the
order of 14 MA.  The novelty of the design is that each of
the  24  modules  is  a  self-magnetically-insulated  voltage
adder.  No liquid or solid insulator is utilized between the
inner cathode electrode and the  outer anode  cylinder.    A
coaxial geometry is adopted.  The stages of each module
voltage  adder  are  of  relatively  low  voltage  (100  kV).
Therefore,  in  principle  a  20-stage  structure  would  be
enough to  obtain a 2 MV output.   However,  because  we
adopted a design where the output impedance is equal to
the  characteristic  impedance  of  the  pulser[4],  the  peak
voltage of each stage will not exceed  55  kV.  Hence,  40
stages  per  module  will  be  necessary.    The  prime  power
per  stage  is  a  circular  array  of  24,  30-kA,  maximum-
current fast capacitors.  The inductance and capacitance of
each  capacitor  is  25  nH  and  11  nF  respectively,  which
provide  a  very  fast,  LC = 17  ns,  time  constant  for  the
system.    Hence,  no  further  pulse  power  compression  is
required.  The power-pulse FWHM from its onset has the
required width to be applied directly to the diode.

The  capacitor  arrays  are  switched  to  the  accelerating
gaps  through  very  low  inductance,  ~  1  nH,  externally
triggered  switches. 
  Two  candidates  are  presently
considered  and  being  evaluated.    The  first,  developed  in
Russia[5],  is  a  ring  switch  that  has  a  fraction  of  1-nH
inductance switching large currents up to ~ 1 MA through
multiple conducting channels.  It can do that at a low 100-
kV voltage.  The second is being developed in Sandia[6].
It 
high-gain
photoconductive  semiconductor  switch  (PCSS)  that  can
switch up to 250-kV, 7-kA currents in a parallel array of
six,  2-inch  wide  GaAs  wafers. 
the
photoconducting  switch  can  be  further  improved  to
increase the current per unit width by at least one order of
magnitude  for  the  same  size.    The  Russian  switch  has
already reached maturity, and the design and hardware are
readily  available.    Those  switches  make  it  possible  to

  We  believe 

(~50  pH) 

is 

a 

low 

inductance 

switch  at  low,  100-kV  voltage  and  still  produce  very
narrow  50-ns  pulses  directly  from  the  capacitors  without
the  need  of 
expensive  pulse
compression.

cumbersome 

and 

The fastest capacitors available to date are the compact
Maxwell Laboratories S type capacitors model 31165 [7].
They  are  very  small  (58x150x274  mm2)  and  very  fast
(L=25  nH  and  C=40  nF).    These  capacitors  could  easily
be  modified  to  the  faster  ones  (L=25  nH,  C=  11  nF)
considered  in  the  present  point  design.    Although  the
capacitor dimensions could  be  further  reduced  or  special
semi-circular  geometries  could  be  developed,  for  the
purpose  of  our  point  design  the  dimensions  of  the
presently 
31165  Maxwell
capacitors were assumed.

off-the-shelf 

available 

Fig. 2  Cross-sectional view of the new design

The  accelerator  gaps  are  magnetically  insulated  with
Metglas.TM  A very  small MetglasTM  cross-sectional  area
(10  cm2)  is  needed  because  of  the  modest,  2.4x10-3
voltsecs  of each  gap.  Therefore, the dimensions  of  each
module are as follows:  The overall diameter is 2.2 m and
the length 2.4 m (Fig. 2).  The cathode electrode is conical
starting with a diameter of 1.17 m and terminating at the
output  end  with  a  1.08  m  diameter  cylinder.    The  anode
electrode  is  a  1.20-m  inner  diameter  cylinder.    A  4-m
coaxial  MITL  vacuum  transmission  line  connects  each
module  to  the  respective  conical  triplate  MITL  of  each
diode  ring.    The  coaxial  MITL  is  longer  than  the
minimum  required  (2  m)  in  order  to  provide  easy
accessibility and servicing of the accelerator.  Throughout
the power flow from the voltage adders to the diode rings
self-magnetic  insulation  and  impedance  matching  was
rigorously  implemented.    The  power  partition  ratio  of
3:2:1  for  the  diode  rings  was  retained  since  the  same
diode  as  the  one  presently  operating  was  assumed  to  be
utilized

One of the advantages of the proposed design is that the
diode insulating stack of the central section is eliminated.
The only insulator left is the short plastic ring insulating
each  of  the  ~60-kV  accelerating  gaps  of  the  modules.  A
total  of  24  modules  are  required  to  provide  the  15  MA
current to the diode.  To maintain the proper power ratio,
4, 8,  and  12  modules  are  connected  respectively to the

top,  middle  and  bottom  conical  triplate  MITL’s.    A
minimum  anode-cathode  gap  of  1  cm  was  maintained
throughout the entire power flow transport.

     Table 1: Comparison of the two designs’ performance

Level

Top
Middle
Bottom

Top
Middle
Bottom

New Point Design

Zsource
Ohms

Zload
Ohms

Vload
MV

I load
MA

0.91
0.45
0.30

0.99
0.38
0.33

2.5
2.2
2.4

Present Accelerator Performance

0.66
0.33
0.22

0.99
0.38
0.33

2.1
2.1
2.1

2.5
5.7
7.4

1.8
3.9
6.2

Table 1 summarizes the peak pulse power parameter of
the  new  point  design  and  compares  it  with  the  present
accelerator  performance. 
  The  design  was  done
analytically  and  verified  numerically  utilizing  the  circuit
design code SCREAMER[8].

Figure 3 provides the voltage current and power for the

outer-diode ring connected to the bottom MITL.

8

6

4

2

0

-2

0

Vload (MV)
Iload (MA)
Pload (TW)

20

15

10

5

0

P
l
o
a
d
 
(

T
W

)

50

100

time(ns)

150

-5
200

Fig. 3 Outer diode ring  (bottom MITL) waveforms.

Similar  pulse  waveforms  are  applied  to  the  other  two
diode rings.  Figure 4 is a three dimensional rendition of
the entire accelerator.

The  same  design  can  deliver  to  a  Z-pinch  load  a
maximum  total-current  of  15  MA.    In  this  case  only  2
conical MITLs will be utilized with each connected to 12
voltage-adder  modules.    Details  of  this  application  and
design  optimization  will  be  presented 
future
publication.

in 

5 SUMMARY

We  have  developed  a  point  design  for  an  alternative
pulsed power driver for the Saturn accelerator.  It has the
same  or  higher  power  and  energy  output  as  the  one
presently  in  operation.    However,  its  size  is  appreciably
reduced  from  the  present  30-m  diameter  to  17  m.    The
overall height remains the same and of the order of 5 m.
The  expensive  large  amounts  of  oil  and  deionized  water
are eliminated together with the requirement for a central
water-vacuum  interface-insulating  stack.    A  first  cut
estimate of the cost suggests a relatively modest value of
~$10 M.  A cheaper device of ~$5 M could be built if the
MetglassTM cores are substituted with air core equivalents.
Because  of  the  very  short  pulse  40-ns  FWHM,  the
dimensions of an air core  device  will  not  be  appreciably
larger than our MetglassTM point design

6 REFERENCES

[1] B.M. Kovalchuk, and A. Kim "High Power Driver for

Z-pinch Loads."  Private Communication, 1998.

[2] D.D.  Bloomquist,  R.W.  Stinnett,  D.H.  McDaniel,
J.R.Lee,  A.W.Sharpe,  J.A.Halbleib,  L.G.  Schlitt.
P.W. Spence, and P. Corcoran, "Saturn, A Large Area
X-Ray  Simulation  Accelerator,"  Proc.  6th  IEEE
Pulsed  Power  Conference,  Arlington,  VA,  1987,
p.310.

[3] T.H.  Martin,  J.P.  VanDevender,  G.W.Barr,  S.A.
Golstein,  R.A.  White,  and  J.F.  Seamen,  "IEEE
Transactions  on  Nuclear  Science,"  NS-28,  No.  3,
3368 (1981).

[4] M.G.  Mazarakis,  and  R.B.  Spielman,  "A  Compact,
High-Voltage  E-Beam  Pulser,"  12th  IEEE  Pulsed
Power Conference, Monterey, CA, July 1999.

[5] B. M. Kovalchuk, "Multi-Gap Spark Switches," Proc.

11th IEEE Pulsed Power Conference, 1997, p. 59.

[6] F.J.  Zutavern,  G.M.  Loubriel,  et  al.,  "Properties  of
for  Pulsed  Power
  IEEE  Pulsed  Power

High  Gain  Gas  Switches 
Applications,"  Proc.  11th 
Conference, 1997, p. 959.

[7] Maxwell  Laboratories,  Inc.,  "Capacitor  Selection
Guide"  Maxwell  Laboratories,  Inc.  San  Diego,  CA,
Bulletin No. MLB-2112B.

[8] M.  L.  Kiefer,  K.  L.  Fugelso,  K.  W.  Struve,  M.  M.
Widner,  "SCREAMER,  A  Pulsed  Power  Design
Tool, User’s Guide for Version 2.0." Sandia National
Laboratory, Albuquerque, N.M., August 1995 

Fig. 4  A  3 D visualization of the new Saturn point design

                                                
 
Sandia is a multiprogram laboratory operated by
Sandia Corporation, a Lockheed Martin Company,
for the United States Department of Energy under
Contract DE-AC04-94AL85000.

