Control System for the LEDA 6.7-MeV Proton Beam Halo Experiment1

L. A. Day, M. Pieck, D. Barr, K. U. Kasemir, B. A. Quintana, G. A. Salazar, M. W. Stettler

Los Alamos, Los Alamos National Laboratory, NM 87545, USA

0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
9
1

 

 
 
 

2
8
1
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

several 

types 

of 

beam 

system.  This 

system 

Measurement  of  high-power  proton  beam-halo
formation  is  the  ongoing  scientific  experiment  for  the
Low Energy Demonstration Accelerator (LEDA) facility.
To  attain  this  measurement  goal,  a  52-magnet  beam  line
containing 
diagnostic
instrumentation  is  being  installed.  The  Experimental
Physics  and  Industrial  Control  System  (EPICS)  and
commercial  software  applications  are  presently  being
integrated  to  provide  a  real-time,  synchronous  data
acquisition  and  control 
is
comprised  of  magnet  control,  vacuum  control,  motor
control,  data  acquisition,  and  data  analysis.  Unique
requirements  led  to  the  development  and  integration  of
customized  software  and  hardware.  EPICS  real-time
databases,  Interactive  Data  Language  (IDL)  programs,
LabVIEW  Virtual  Instruments  (VI),  and  State  Notation
Language  (SNL)  sequences  are  hosted  on  VXI,  PC,  and
UNIX-based  platforms  which  interact  using  the  EPICS
Channel  Access 
protocol.
Acquisition and control hardware technology ranges from
DSP-based  diagnostic 
the  PLC-
controlled  vacuum  system.  This  paper  describes  the
control  system  hardware  and  software  design,  and
implementation.

instrumentation 

communication 

(CA) 

to 

1 

INTRODUCTION

As  part  of  the  linac  design  for 

the  accelerator
production  of  tritium  (APT)  project  the  first  10-MeV
portion of this 100-mA proton accelerator was assembled
at the Los Alamos Neutron Science Center (LANSCE) in
1999  and  was  in  operation  for  over  one  year.  Now,  this
Low-Energy  Demonstration  Accelerator 
(LEDA)
provides  the  platform  for  a  new  experiment:  attaining
measurements of high-power proton beam-halo formation.
For this purpose a 52-magnet beam line has been installed
into  the  LEDA  beam  line  between  the  Radio  Frequency
Quadrupoles (RFQ) and the High Energy Beam Transport
(HEBT).

LEDA is using the distributed control system based on
EPICS  [1,  2].  Extensions  to  the  existing  control  system
were developed for controlling the devices listed in  Table
1 in section 3.2. This table also shows device locations as
defined  by 
the  numbered
quadrupole magnet.

the  space  upstream  of 

extensions 

EPICS  is  a  toolkit  for  building  distributed  control
systems  that  originated  at  Los  Alamos  and  is  now
developed 
jointly  by  a  collaboration  of  over  100
institutions  [3].  It  is  the  basis  for  operator  controls
interfacing.  Specific 
to  EPICS  CA
communication protocol have been developed to integrate
additional controls configuration and visualization options
into  EPICS.    IDL,  a  commercial  visualization  tool,  has
been integrated to provide more complex data processing
and  visualization  options.  LabVIEW  has  been  integrated
to enable simple,  cost  effective  PC  solutions  to  selective
instrumentation control.

Provided below is a summary of the important control
system  components.  Brief  descriptions  of  computer
system  architecture,  hardware,  software,  and  external
interfaces are presented. These designs have been, or are
being integrated into the control system for LEDA.

2  CONTROL SYSTEM STRUCTURE

AND NETWORK TOPOLOGY

The  Halo  Experiment  extends  the  LEDA  controls
hardware  architecture  by  3  PC-Input/Output  Controllers
(IOC)s  and  2  VXI-IOCs.  The  extension  is  comprised  of
four  principal  systems  covering  Quadrupole  Magnet
Control,  Steering  Magnet  Control,  Diagnostic,  and
Vacuum System Control.

The control system’s communication service is built on
a  TCP/IP-based  network  and  uses  EPICS  CA  as  the
primary  protocol.  Access  to  the  controls  network  is
limited  by  an  Internet  firewall  for  safety  and  traffic
congestion  reasons.  A  second  independent  local  area
network  has  been  created  to  isolate  the  distributed  I/O
modules from the control system’s network.

focus/defocus 

3  QUADRUPOLE MAGNET CONTROL
The  52-quadrupole-magnet 
(FODO)
lattice  provides  a  platform  to  create  phase  space  halo
formation.  The  first  four  quadrupole  magnets  are  each
independently  powered  by  a  500A/15V  EMI/Alpha-
Scientific  power  supply  (Singlet).  Depending  on  how
those  magnets  are  adjusted,  a  match  or  mismatch  of  the
RFQ output beam to the lattice is created.

The next 48 magnets are powered in groups of 8. Each
set  of  magnets  is  powered  by  an  Alpha-Scientific
500A/100V Bulk Power Supply with an 8 Channel Shunt
Regulator  that  allows  an  individual  current  trim.  With

                                                          
1 This work supported by the Department of Energy under contract W-7405-ENG-36.

certain magnet settings, the development of specific halo
formations can be observed along the lattice.

3.1  Quadrupole Magnet Control Hardware

The quadrupole magnet control subsystem uses as PC-
IOC computer an Intel Pentium II 500Mhz equipped with
two network cards. The first card establishes the physical
connection  to  the  LEDA  controls  network.  The  second
card creates a local area network for National Instruments
(NI)  modular  distributed  I/O  system  called  FieldPoint
(FP).  It 
includes  analog  and  digital  modules,  and
intelligent Ethernet network module that connects the I/O
modules to the PC-IOC computer.

 Using  the  robust  Ethernet  networking  technology  to
position  intelligent,  distributed  I/O  devices  closer  to  the
sensors,  or  units  under  test,  leads  to  a  significant  cost
savings and performance improvement. The most obvious
benefit  to  this  solution  is  the  savings  in  signal  wiring.
Replacing  long  signal  wires  with  a  single,  low  cost
network  cable  saves  significant  time  and  money  during
installation  and  testing.  Furthermore,  distributed  I/O
systems, such as NI FP, also include special capabilities to
improve  the  reliability  and  maintainability  by  using  the
built-in, onboard diagnostic capabilities.

Table 1.  Halo lattice beam line component locations

Device

Singlet PS

Bulk PS /Shunts

Steerers
Fast Valve

Beam Line Valves

Ion Pumps
Ion Gauges

WS/HS

Locations

(Quadrupole Magnet #)

1, 2, 3, 4

5-12, 13-20, 21-28, 37-44, 45-52
4, 6, 15, 17, 26, 28, 36, 38, 47, 49

2

17, 36, 52

6, 10, 15, 21, 28, 34, 40, 44

13, 31, 42

5, 21, 23, 25, 27, 46, 48, 50, 52

3.2  Quadrupole Magnet Control Software

The  NI  LabVIEW-based  quadrupole  magnet  control
system  that  runs  on  the  Windows  NT  operating  system
consists of 60 subroutines combined into 10 processes (4
Singlets  +  6  Bulk/Shunt  Regulator).  These  independent
software  processes  share  CPU  cycles  based  on  priority.
To ensure proper operation, the control processes for the
set-points have highest priority, while the display  related
processes have lower priorities.
The  LabView  uses  an 

in-house  built  ActiveX
Automation  Server  allowing 
the 
the
LabVIEW  system  in  the  EPICS  environment  by  serving
values  of  general  interest  to  Graphical  User  Interfaces
(GUI) that are clients to CA.

integration  of 

Using  the  EPICS  GUI  called  Display  Manager  (DM),
the  control  processes  drive  the  power  supply  values  and

set-points  by  interpreting  mouse  clicks  and  text  entries
into commands.

To  meet  the  magnetic  field  setability  specifications,
magnet  hysteresis  must  be  compensated  by  ramping  the
field past the set-point and then reducing the field to  the
set-point.  This  led  to  a  control  process  solution  for  the
Bulk and Singlet power supplies that operates in form of a
State  Machine  where  the  states  are  idle,  ramp  up,  soak
and ramp down. According to the magnet specification the
process  control  ramps  up 
to  a  desired  set-point,
overshoots,  stays  for  a  specific  time  at  that  overshoot
value  and  ramps  back  down  to  the  operator  desired  set-
point. Ramp up rate (Amps/step), overshoot value (Amps
above desired set-point), soak time (sec), and ramp down
rate  (Amps/step)  are  individual  settable  by  the  operator.
Basic  binary  operation  like  AC  Voltage  On/Off,  DC
Voltage On/Off, and interlock reset are provided as well.

The display processes are limited to voltage and current
read  backs,  status  indication  for  PS  interlocks,  and
Local/Remote status.

4  STEERING MAGNET CONTROL
The task of the beam’s 10 steering magnets (horizontal
and vertical) is to correct the position of the beam at the
end of every set of BPM/steering magnet associated pair
that is separated by approximately 10 quadrupole magnets
(see Table 1).  Since the FODO-lattice period has a phase
advance of approximately 80 degrees, each pair of BPMs
can detect  and  each  pair  of  steering  magnets  can  correct
the  beam’s  position  and  angle  that  might  be  caused  by
misaligned quadrupoles.

4.1  Steering Magnet Control Hardware

The  steering  magnet  control  system  uses  an  Intel
Pentium  II  450Mhz  PC-IOC  equipped  with  one  network
card  and  two  NI  Plug  &  Play  PCI  General-Purpose
Interface  Bus  (GPIB/IEEE  488.2)  controller  cards.    This
so  called  two-bus  GPIB  controller  system  interfaces  20
KEPCO 20V/5A power supplies, 10 for horizontal and 10
for vertical. All 10 power supplies on each bus are linked
together  in  a  linear  configuration  (daisy-chain).  This
hardware  architecture  combines  the  cost-effectiveness  of
general-purpose  PCs  with  the  standardized  and  widely
used GPIB solution. Due to the limitation of GPIB (max
cable  length  20m)  the  PC-IOC  is  located  next  to  the  2
racks of steering power supplies.

4.2  Steering Magnet Control Software

The  NI  LabVIEW-based  steering  magnet  control
system  that  runs  on  a  Windows  NT  operating  system
consists  of  80  subroutines  incorporated  into  1  process.
This all-in-one design follows a iterative control sequence
between  the  individual  power  supplies  on  both  buses:  1)
writing  to  the  first  power  supply  on  the  first  bus  then
writing  to  the  first  power  supply  on  the  second  bus.  2)

reading  from  the  first  power  supply  on  the  first  bus  and
then  reading  from  the  first  power  supply  on  the  second
bus.  This  continues  until  the  10th  power  supply  has  been
iterated  and  then  starts  over  again.  This  strategy  was
chosen  for  possible  closed-loop  beam  correction  where
the amount of beam spill is critical. Having the described
procedure  in  place  reduces  possible  beam  spill  by
reducing the reaction time of two  corresponding  steering
power supplies to a minimum of ~4ms.

The  developed  GUI  shows  the  change  of  current  and
voltage read backs as the operator changes the current set-
points  via 
fields  and  slider  controls.
Furthermore,  the  most  important  information  about  the
status  of  the  power  supplies  is  read  out  from  the  16-bit
status register.

text  entry 

5  VACUUM SYSTEM

The  devices  for  the  vacuum  system  for  the  Halo
Experiment  beam-line  comprise  of  one  Fast  Beam-line
Isolation  Valve,  three  Beam  Line  Valves,  three  Ion
Gauges, three Convectron Gauges, and 8 Ion Pumps.

5.1  Vacuum System Control Hardware

The vacuum control subsystem operates as a standalone
system. That is, all hardware components are local to the
Halo Beam-line, hardwired together, network isolated and
fully functional, i.e., the subsystem, contains all interlocks
and  requires  no  input  from  remote  computer  control
equipment during normal operation.

Remote  accessibility  is  established  through  the  NI

distributed I/O modules called FP (see section 3.2).

5.2  Vacuum System Control Software

The DirectSoft PLC is the heart of the vacuum control
system and has incorporated all functionality. There is no
direct  access  to  the  PLC’s  CPU/memory  components
during normal operation. Thus, all signals are propagated
through  the  associated  PLC  input/output  modules.  A
custom 
logic  program  containing  equipment
interlocks,  resides  and  runs  (continuous  loop)  in  the
volatile  memory  of  the  CPU  module.  Though,  the
program is lost during a power shut down, the ladder logic
program  is  loaded  from  the  flash  memory  and  started
shortly after power is resumed. Its initial state after reboot
is a safe mode state in which all devices are turned off.

ladder 

6  WIRE SCANNER/HALO SCRAPER
There are nine Wire Scanner /  Halo  Scraper  (WS/HS)
assemblies  installed  into  the  LEDA  Halo  Beam-line  [5].
These  assemblies  contain  three  measurement  devices  for
each  horizontal  and  vertical  axis.  Data  acquired  from
these  devices 
to  provide  projected  beam
distribution 
information.  One  wire  scanner  device
measures beam core distribution within +/- 3 rms widths
while two halo scraper devices measure the edges of beam

is  used 

distribution  outside  2.5  rms  widths.  These  devices  are
attached  to  an  actuator  driven  by  a  stepper  motor  [6],
which drives either the WS or one of the HS into the beam
in  incremental  steps.  At  each  WS  step,  the  amount  of
secondary  electrons  (SE)  generated  is  measured  and
normalized against synchronous beam current data [7]. At
each  HS  step,  the  proton  beam  charge  is  measured  and
normalized  against  the  overlapping  WS  data.  Together,
this provides a complete beam distribution profile.

6.1  Control Solutions

Measurement  control  uses  CA  Server  to  communicate
between  EPICS  modules  running  on  Kinetic  Systems’
HKBaja60 in VXI IOCs, LabVIEW running on a PC IOC,
and IDL running on Sun Workstations. The ability of CA
Server  to  provide  a  communication  means  between
software  applications  running  on  different  platforms
allows  the  flexibility  to  choose  tools  that  best  suit  the
specific requirements.

EPICS  real-time  processing  meets  the  requirement  to
acquire  synchronous  beam  pulse  data  at  the  rates  of  1-6
Hz.  Data  is  continuously  acquired  from  beam  current
monitors,  wires,  and  scrapers  by  DSPs  mounted  on  the
VXI  boards  into  local  circular  buffers.  Data  is  extracted
from these buffers by the EPICS database when triggered.
LabVIEW offers timely and cost effective methods for
controlling  actuator  motion.  VIs  were  implemented  to
interface with off-the-shelf motor drivers. CA Client runs
on the PC to enable communications between  LabVIEW
and the other control system modules.

IDL provides flexible data processing and visualization
options.  Operators  have  the  flexibility  to  process  data
independently  and  fine-tune 
the  processing  on-line
without  interrupting  beam  operations.  The  results  are
displayed graphically in plots as they are calculated.

The  EPICS’  display  manager  (DM)  serves  as  the
interface 
for  operator  control.  Operators  control
measurement parameters and view measurement status on
a DM GUI.

6.2 

 Implementation

control, 

and 

IDL 

starts 

 The  operator 

sets  parameters  and 

the
measurement from the WS/HS controls DM GUI. EPICS
database  process  variables  are  used  to  pass  data  and
commands  between  EPICS  WS/HS  data  acquisition,
LabVIEW  motor 
data
processing/visualization  modules.  A  SNL  sequence
manages the execution of the separate control modules by
setting  process  variables  to  known  command  values.
These variables are monitored through CA  by  associated
modules.  When  the  expected  command  is  received  by  a
module,  execution  is  initiated.  This  flow  is  illustrated  in
Figure 1.

For  each  step  in  a  measurement,  the  SNL  sequence
sends  motor  parameters  to  LabVIEW  via  a  process
variable specifying Z location, horizontal or vertical axis,

and  stepper  motor  position.  LabVIEW  sets  a  response
variable  to  notify  the  sequence  when  the  stepper  motor
has reached the required destination.

Kinetic Systems

HKBaja60

EPICS Database

SNL Sequence

VXI Module
DSP Acquisition

VXI

Actuator

PC

NI Motion Control

Lab View

Wire & scraper

sensors

SUN

IDL

EPICS DM

Figure 1: Wire Scan/Halo Scraper Control

Meanwhile,  each  WS  and  HS  pair  has  its  SE  charge
waveform signal acquired by its DSP during every beam
pulse. When LabVIEW notifies the SNL sequence that the
stepper  motor  is  in  position,  the  sequence  sets  a  process
variable to trigger the database to upload the active  wire
or  scraper’s  data  along  with  the  associated  beam  current
monitor’s data, for normalizing, into waveforms.

This  synchronous  data  is  locally  processed  within  the
EPICS database and also processed in IDL routines. The
local  processing  completes  automatically  within 
the
database.  These  functions  produce  results  of  global
control  system  interest  such  as  unit  conversion  and
averaging. Because the EPICS database is loaded at boot
time,  these  functions  are  fixed,  i.e,  the  majority  of
parameters  cannot  be  conveniently  modified.  However,
the  results  are  time-stamped,  therefore,  they  can  be
archived  and  made  available  for  synchronous  data
retrieval.

IDL  is  utilised  for  specialized  and  flexible  processing
and  visualization.  Functions  can  be  created  and/or
modified on-line from the control room without affecting
beam  operations.  Furthermore,  IDL  provides  more
complex  options  for  viewing  data.  After  data  acquisition
is complete, the SNL sequence notifies IDL at which time
IDL gets all necessary data for processing. The WS or HS
data is normalized and plotted against the motor’s position
producing  the  beam’s  profile  visually  in  real  time.
Operators  are  able  to  view  the  measurement’s  progress
and  abort  the  scan  if  undesirable  results  are  presented.
Processing  parameters  can  be  adjusted  if  desired,  and  a
new measurement started.

Ethernet (CA)

SNL Communication

Database Communication

    REFERENCES

[1]  L.R.  Dalesio  et  all.,  Nucl.  Instrum.  Meth.  In  Phys

Research A352 (1994), 179-184

[2]  D.  Moore  and  L.R.  Dalesio,  “A  Development  and
Integration  Analysis  of  Commercial  and  In-House
Control Subsystems” Conf. Proc. LINAC98, Chicago
August 1998

[3] M.  Thuot,  et  al.,  ”The  Success  and  the  Future  of

EPICS” LINAC96, Geneva, Aug. 1996.

[4] D.  Moore  and  L.R.  Dalesio,  ”A  Development  and
Integration  Analysis  of  Commercial  and  In-House
Control  Subsystems”,  LINIAC98,  Chicago,  Aug.
1998.

[5] J. D. Gilpatrick, et all, “Beam Diagnostics

Instrumentation for a 6.7-MeV Proton Beam Halo
Experiment,” these proceedings.

[6] R. Valdiviez, et al., “Intense Proton Core and Halo
Beam Profile Measurement: Beam Line Component
Mechanical Design,” these proceedings.

[7] Power,  J.,  et  al,  “Beam  Current  Measurements  for
LEDA,” Proceedings of the 1999 Particle Accelerator
Conference, New York, 1999

