0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
7
1

 

 
 
 

1
0
1
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

THE CLIC MAIN LINAC ACCELERATING STRUCTURE

I. Wilson, W. Wuensch, CERN, Geneva, Switzerland

Abstract

and 

gives 

the 

structure 

This  paper  outlines  the  RF  design  of  the  CLIC
linac
(Compact  Linear  Collider)  30  GHz  main 
accelerating 
resulting
longitudinal and transverse mode properties. The critical
requirement  for  multibunch  operation,  that  transverse
wakefields  be  suppressed  by  two  orders  of  magnitude
within  0.7  ns  (twenty  fundamental  mode  cycles),  has
been  demonstrated  in  a  recent  ASSET  experiment.  The
feasibility  of  operating  the  structure  at  an  accelerating
gradient  of  150  MV/m  for  130  ns  has  yet  to  be
demonstrated.  Damage  of  the  internal  copper  surfaces
due to high electric fields or resulting from metal fatigue
induced  by  cyclic  surface  heating  effects  are  a  major
concern requiring further study.

1  INTRODUCTION

A  major  effort  has  gone 

into  developing  an
accelerating  structure  for  the  CLIC  main  linac  that  can
operate  with  an  average  gradient  of  150 MV/m,  that
maintains an acceptable short-range  wakefield,  and  that
has highly suppressed long-range transverse wake fields.
The latter design criterion is a result of multibunching -
a  common  feature  among  linear  collider  designs  in
which multiple-bunch trains are accelerated during each
RF pulse in order to reach design luminosities (1035 cm-2
sec-1 at 3 TeV for CLIC [1]) in a power-efficient way.

 A  structure,  called 

For  CLIC,  beam  dynamics  simulations  indicate  that
the  amplitude  of  the  single-bunch  transverse  wakefield
must  decrease  from  its  short-range  value  by  a  factor  of
100  during  the  first  0.67 ns  (which  is  the  time  between
bunches  in  the  train  and  which  corresponds  to  twenty
30 GHz  accelerating  mode  cycles)  and  that  it  must
continue to decrease at least linearly for longer times [2].
the  TDS  (Tapered  Damped
transverse  wakefield
Structure),  capable  of  such 
suppression, has been developed [3]. The suppression is
achieved  primarily  through  damping.  Each  cell  of  the
150-cell  TDS  is  damped  by  its  own  set  of  four
individually  terminated  waveguides.  This  produces  a  Q
of below 20 for the lowest dipole band. The waveguides
have  a  cutoff  frequency  of  33 GHz  which  is  above  the
30 GHz  fundamental  but  below  all  other  higher-order
modes.  Cell  and  iris  diameters  are  tapered  along  the
length  of  the  structure  in  order  to  induce  a  frequency
spread in the dipole bands which is called detuning. Iris
dimensions  range  from  4.5  to  3.5 mm.  Detuning  de-
coheres  the  wakefield  kicks  further  suppressing  the
transverse wakefield.

A  first  pass  through  the  RF  design  of  the  TDS,  for
both  fundamental  mode  performance  and  transverse
wakefield  suppression,  has  now  been  made.    Certain
weaknesses  in  the  design,  with  regard  to  operation  at
very high gradients, have become apparent and are being
addressed in a complete re-optimisation of the structure.

2. GEOMETRY AND FUNDAMENTAL

MODE CHARACTERISTICS

The geometry of a TDS cell is shown  in  Figure  1.  A
full  structure  consists  of  150  cells.  Iris  diameters  (2a)
vary linearly from 4.5 mm at the head of the structure to
3.5 mm  at  the  tail.  The  relationship  between 
iris
diameter  (2a)  and  cell  diameter  (2b)  necessary  to
maintain a fundamental mode frequency of 29.985 GHz
was  obtained  using  HFSS.  Q,  R'/Q,  and  group  velocity
(vg)  as  a  function  of  b  were  then  calculated.  The
relationship  between  a  and  b  is  plotted  in  Figure  2  and
Q, R'/Q, and vg are plotted in figure 3.

Figure1: Geometry of TDS cell and damping

waveguides.

The nominal CLIC beam consists of a train of 0.6 nC
bunches spaced by 20 cm. Operating the structure  at  an
average accelerating gradient of 150 MV/m results in the
loaded  and  unloaded  accelerating  gradient  profiles
plotted in Figure 4. The corresponding  power  flows  are
plotted in Figure 5.

Figure 2: Relationship between 2b (y axis) and 2a (x
axis) for correct fundamental mode frequency. Units are

mm.

Figure 3: Fundamental mode characteristics as a
function of cell number. R'/Q is in k/m, vg/c is a

percentage. Q is nearly constant and has a value of 3600.

Figure 5: Loaded and unloaded power flows in units of

MW as a function of cell number.

The highest surface field occurs in the first cell of the
structure  and  has  a  value  of    420 MV/m.  For  a  150 ns
long  pulse,  a  pulsed  temperature  rise  of  about  250 GC
occurs in the cell wall between the waveguides.

3. DIPOLE MODE CHARACTERISTICS.
The  damping  waveguide  terminating  load  is  made
from silicon carbide. The geometry of the load is shown
in Figure 6. The principle behind this compact load, and
the  method  by  which  the  complex  permittivity  was
obtained  is described in reference [5]. The amplitude of
the  reflection  coefficient,  S11,  as  a  function  of
frequency was calculated using HFSS - see Figure 7. The
transverse  wakefield  was  then  calculated  using  the
double-band  circuit  model  described  in  reference  [4].
The  result  is  plotted  in  Figure  8.  The  transverse
wakefield suppression of the TDS and the validity of the
tools used to model  it  was  verified  in  an  experiment  in
the  ASSET  facility  [6]  at  SLAC.  The  calculated  and
measured wakefields are plotted in Figure 9.

Figure 4: Loaded and unloaded accelerating gradient

[MV/m] as function of cell number.

Figure 6: Geometry of the 30 GHz load.

4. CONCLUSIONS

A  complete  first  pass  has  been  made  through  the
design  of  the  TDS,  for  both  the  accelerating  and  the
transverse  modes.  The  transverse  mode  suppression  is
well  within  the  specifications  for  CLIC  and  has  been
demonstrated experimentally.

The  situation  for  the  fundamental  mode  for  an
accelerating  gradient  of  150 MV/m  is  less  favourable.
The 420 MV/m peak surface electric field at the input of
the structure is quite high, the feasibility of which must
clearly be demonstrated.
The 250G pulsed surface heating of the cell walls is of
even greater concern, since it is probably well above an
acceptable  value.  The  temperature  rise  may  be  reduced
by  optimising  the  cell  geometry,  in  particular  by
decreasing both the thickness and width of the coupling
iris. In this way the coupling of the damping waveguides
to the dipole mode  can  be  maintained  while  decreasing
the perturbation of the fundamental mode currents.

An  overall  shift  to  smaller  irises  (dimension  2a)  and
fewer  cells  -  thus  maintaining  the  same  RF  to  beam
efficiency - would reduce both the peak surface electric
field  and  the  pulsed  surface  heating  in  the  first  cell.
Beam  dynamics  simulations  are  needed  to  determine
how much increase in the transverse wakefield due to the
smaller irises can be tolerated.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The  authors  would  like  to  acknowledge  their  sincere
and  deep  appreciation  to  Micha  Dehler  and  Michel
Luong, who have both made substantial contributions to
the development of this structure. Special thanks are also
extended  to  Erk  Jensen  for  maintaining  the  circuit
model.

REFERENCES

[1] J.P.Delahaye,  I.  Wilson,  “CLIC,  a  Multi  TeV  eH
Linear Collider”, CERN/PS 99-062 (LP), November
1999.

[2] D.Schulte,  “Emittance  Preservation  in  the  Main

Linac of CLIC”, EPAC’98, Stockholm, June 1996.

[4] M.Dehler,  “Modeling  a  30GHz  Waveguide  Loaded
Detuned  Structure  for  the  Compact  Linear  Collider
(CLIC)”, CERN/PS RF 98-09.

 [5] M.Luong, I.Wilson, W.Wuensch, “RF Loads for the
CLIC  Multibunch  Structure”,  PAC’99,  New  York,
March 1999.

 [6]  C.  Adolphsen  et.  al.  “Wakefield  and  Beam
Centering Measurements of a Damped and Detuned
X-Band Accelerator Structure”, PAC’99, New York,
March 1999.

[3] M.Dehler, 

I.Wilson,  W.Wuensch,  “A  Tapered
for  CLIC”,

Damped  Accelerating  Structure 
LINAC'98, Chicago, August 1998.

Figure 7: Amplitude of the reflection coefficient, S11,

as a function of frequency in units of GHz.

Figure 8: Computed transverse wakefield.

Figure 9: Results from the ASSET test.  The amplitude
of the transverse wake in units of V/(pCbmmbm) is
plotted against time in ns. The test was made using a

scaled 15 GHz structure.

