INDUCTIVE-ADDER KICKER MODULATOR FOR DARHT-2

E. G. Cook, B.S. Lee, S.A. Hawkins, F.V. Allen, B.C. Hickman, H.C. Kirbie

Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory

C.A. Brooksby – Bechtel Nevada

Abstract

An all solid-state kicker modulator for the Dual-Axis
Radiographic Hydrodynamic Test facility (DARHT-2) has
been  designed  and  tested.  This  kicker  modulator  uses
multiple solid-state modules stacked in an inductive-adder
configuration  where  the  energy  is  switched  into  each
section of the adder by a parallel array of MOSFETs. The
modulator features  very  fast  rise  and  fall  times,  pulse
width agility  and  a  high  pulse-repetition  rate  in  burst
mode. The modulator can drive a 50W
 cable with voltages
up  to  20  kV  and  can  be  easily  configured  for  either
positive  or  negative  polarity.  The  presentation  will
include test data collected from both the ETA II accelerator
kicker and resistive dummy loads.

1  BACKGROUND

The  DARHT-2  accelerator  facility  is  designed 

to
generate 1 kA electron beam pulses of 2µs duration. The
LLNL  designed 
fast  kicker,  based  on  cylindrical
electromagnetic  stripline  structures,  cleaves  four  short
pulses out of this long pulse. The requirements for the
modulator that drives this kicker are listed in Table 1.

Table 1. Performance Requirements

Parameter

Requirement

Output Voltage
Voltage Rise/Falltime
Flattop Pulsewidth

Burst Rate

±20kV into 50W
£ 10ns (10-90%)
16ns–200ns 
adjustable)
4  pulses  @1.6MHz(~600ns
between leading edges)

(continuously  

also significantly slower. After consideration of various
circuit topologies, the adder configuration used by ARM
was selected  as  the  baseline  for  the  kicker  modulator;
MOSFETs were selected as the switching device.

The key parameter in the performance requirement  is
the minimum pulsewidth of 16ns. As a class of devices,
1kV rated MOSFETs have demonstrated the required rise
and falltime; however, the critical information needed was
to determine whether MOSFETs are capable of switching
significant  current  while  simultaneously  achieving  the
required minimum pulsewidth. Device datasheets do not
necessarily provide all the information required to make a
definitive decision: testing is essential.

2  DEVICE EVALUATION AND

SELECTION

In order to use a reasonable number of devices, only
MOSFETs capable  of  operation  at  voltages  of  ‡
  800
volts were evaluated. The evaluation circuit  is  a  series
circuit consisting of a low inductance DC capacitor bank,
a resistive load, and the MOSFET. Devices were evaluated
on the basis of switching speed at various peak currents,
waveshapes,  minimum  output  pulsewidth,  and  ease  of
triggering. Extensive testing of many devices from several
vendors produced several that were acceptable and led to
the selection of the APT1001RBVR. During testing, this
device exhibited the cleanest rise and fall waveshapes and
met the pulsewidth, risetime, and falltime requirements.
We were  also  able  to  measure  a  peak  current  of  ~35
amperes  before  seeing  an  unacceptable  drain-source
voltage drop (we arbitrarily chose a voltage drop of < 20
volts  during  conduction  of  the  current  pulse  as  our
acceptance criteria).  The  APT1001RBVR  has  a  1000V
maximum drain to source rating, an average current rating
of 10A, and a pulsed current rating of 40A.

these  devices 

A ±10kV modulator design based on planar triodes was
originally used for this application [1]. While the hard-
tube performance was very good, concerns regarding future
availability  and  reliability  of 
led  to
consideration  of  a  solid-state  replacement.  Personnel
within this program had developed considerable expertise
with parallel and series arrays of power MOSFETs during
the  successful  design  and  testing  of 
the  Advanced
Radiograph  Machine  (ARM)  modulator,  a  high  power
pulser  developed 
to  show  feasibility  of  solid-state
modulators for driving induction accelerators. While ARM
was designed for higher voltages and currents than required
by the kicker, its requirements for rise and fall times were

During  the  early  testing  of  MOSFETs,  it  became
apparent that the MOSFET gate drive circuit was also an
essential element in achieving the best performance from
the individual devices. The  coupling  between  the  drive
circuit  and  the  MOSFET  had  to  have  very  low  loop
inductance as the peak drive current required to achieve fast
switching  performance  was  on  the  order  of  tens  of
amperes. Even the devices within the gate drive circuit had
to be very fast and have short turn-on and turn-off delay
times. An early decision was that each MOSFET would
require  its  own  dedicated  gate  drive.  A  simplified
This work performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by University of  California  Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory under contract No. W-7405-Eng-48.

schematic of the drive circuit is shown in Fig. 1. The
input device of the gate drive has a level-shifting  TTL
input circuit internally coupled to a MOSFET totem pole
output. This circuit drives a fast, high current MOSFET
(peak  current  ±20  amperes)  totem  pole  device  which
drives the gate of the power MOSFET (capacitive load) to
turn it on and sinks current from the MOSFET to turn it
off. The gate drive circuit components require a dc voltage
of ~ 15 volts.

TTL
Input

+

Vcc

to Power
MOSFET
Gate

Level Shifting Logic
and Driver

High Current 
Totem-pole Driver

Fig. 1 Simplified Schematic of MOSFET Drive Circuit

3  CIRCUIT TOPOLOGY

for 

in  series.  Typically 

In  the  adder  configuration  shown  in  Fig.  2, 

the
secondary windings of a number of 1:1 pulse transformers
are  connected 
fast  pulse
applications,  both  the  primary  and  secondary  winding
consists of a single turn to keep the leakage inductance
small. In this configuration, the output voltage on  the
secondary  winding  is 
the  sum  of  all  the  voltages
appearing on the primary windings. The source impedance
of the MOSFET array and the DC capacitor bank must be
very low (<<1W
) to be able to provide the total secondary
current, any additional current loads in the primary circuit,
plus the magnetization current for the transformer core.

DC Capacitor

MOSFET
Array

Drive
Circuit

Drive
Circuit

Drive
Circuit

Drive
Circuit

Transient
Voltage
Protection
Circuit

V chg
+

-

0 
-V chg

+

-

0 
-V chg

+

-

0 
-V chg

0 
-V chg

R
L

V
out

0

Vout

Vpk

(   ~ 4* V 
V
pk

chg

)

Transformer
Secondary

Transformer
Core

Transformer
Primary

Fig. 2  Simplified Schematic of Adder Circuit

Transformers

The layout for this circuit is important as it is necessary
to mimimize total loop inductance – it doesn’t take much
inductance to affect performance when the switched di/dt is
greater than 40kA/µs.

The MOSFETs shown in Fig. 2 have their source lead
connected to ground. This is chosen so that all the gate
drive  circuits  are  also  ground 
thereby
eliminating  the  need  for  floating  and  isolated  power
supplies. The pulse power ground and the  drive  circuit
ground have a common point at the MOSFET source but
otherwise  do  not  share  common  current  paths  thereby
reducing switching transients being coupled into the low
level gate drive circuits.

referenced, 

Overvoltage  transients  can  be  generated  by  energy
stored in the stray loop inductance, energy stored in the
transformer  primary,  and/or  voltage  coupled  into 
the
primary circuit from the secondary (usually due to trigger
timing  differences  in  stages  of  the  adder).  Transient
protection for the MOSFETs is provided  by  the  series
tightly
combination  of  snubber  capacitor  and  diode 
coupled  to  the  MOSFET.  The  capacitor  is 
initially
charged to the same voltage as the DC capacitor bank.
When the MOSFET is turning on, the diode prevents the
snubber  capacitor 
the
MOSFET. As the MOSFET turns off, transient voltages
that may exceed the voltage on the snubber capacitor turns
the diode on so that the capacitor can absorb the energy.
The parallel resistor allows the excess capacitor voltage to
discharge into  the  DC  capacitor  between  bursts.  Good
performance  of  the  overvoltage  circuit  requires  a  low
inductance  capacitor  and  a  diode  with  a  low  forward
recovery voltage.

from  discharging 

through 

Not shown in the simplified circuit layout is the reset
circuit for the magnetic cores. The cores require reset so
that they do not saturate during a voltage pulse. As this
circuit operates in a well defined pulse format, it is not
necessary  to  actively  reset  the  core  between  pulses.
Consequently,  a  DC  reset  circuit 
is  used  and  is
implemented by connecting a DC power supply through a
large  isolation  inductor  to  the  ungrounded  end  of  the
secondary  winding  of  the  adder  stack.  In  the  interval
between bursts, the reset current will reset and bias the
magnetic cores. This approach is simple to  incorporate
and  requires  few  additional  components  but  has  the
disadvantage of requiring more magnetic core material in
the transformers.

4  COMPONENT LAYOUT

The overall circuit is chosen to have 24 MOSFETs per
primary circuit (12 per board). This gives a comfortable
margin in peak current capability that  allows  for  extra
loading in the primary circuit, a reasonable magnetization
current, and total load current. The adder transformer  is
designed to look very much like an accelerator cell of a
linear  induction  accelerator  with  the  primary  winding

to  a 

totally  enclosing  the  magnetic  core  (an  annealed  and
Namlite insulated Metlgas® 2605 S1A tapewound toroid
purchased  from  National/Arnold).  A  photograph  of  a
MOSFET  carrier  board  connected 
transformer
assembly is shown in Fig. 4. The gate drive circuit boards
receive their trigger pulses from a single trigger circuit
which is connected to the pulse generator by either optical
fiber or  coaxial  cables.  A  complete  adder  assembly  is
stack of transformer assemblies bolted together as shown
in Fig. 5. The secondary winding is usually a metal rod
that is  positioned  on  the  axial  centerline  of  the  adder
stack. The rod may be grounded at either end of the adder
stack to generate an output voltage of either polarity.

5  TEST RESULTS

The  modulator  is  undergoing  extensive  testing  into
both resistive loads and into the kicker structure used on
the ETA II accelerator at LLNL. The modulator has been
operated at variable pulsewidths and at burst frequencies
exceeding 15 MHz. Fig. 6 is an oscillograph depicting
operation on ETA II (with ~500A electron beam current)
at ~18kV into 50W
 (Ch1 is the drain voltage on a single
MOSFET and Ch4 is the output current  at  100A/div).
The  four  pulse  burst 
the
pulsewidth  agility  of  the  modulator  at  variable  burst
frequency at an output voltage of ~10kV also into 50W

in  Fig.  7  demonstrates 

.

Fig. 4 Transformer Assy. with a MOSFET Carrier Bd.

Fig. 6 Operation of Kicker Pulser on ETA II

Fig. 7 Four Pulse Burst at 10 kV into 50W

 Load

6  CONCLUSIONS

A fast kicker modulator based on MOSFET switched
adder technology has been designed and tested. MOSFET
arrays in  an  adder  configuration  have  demonstrated  the
ability to generate short duration and very fast risetime
and falltime high-voltage pulses.

REFERENCES

[1] W.J. DeHope, et al, "Recent Advances in Kicker Pulser
Technology  for  Linear  Induction  Accelerators",  12 th  IEEE
Intl. Pulsed Power Conf., Monterey, CA, June 27-30, 1999
[2] Yong-Ho Chung, Craig P Burkhart, et al, "All Solid-state
Switched Pulser for Air Pollution Control System",12th IEEE
Intl. Pulsed Power Conf., Monterey, CA, June 27-30, 1999

Fig. 5 Complete Kicker Modulator Assembly

