RF SYSTEM UPGRADES TO THE ADVANCED PHOTON SOURCE  
LINEAR ACCELERATOR IN SUPPORT OF THE FEL OPERATION* 

T.L. Smithú, M.H. Cho­, A.E. Grelick, G. Pile, A. Nassiri, N. Arnold  

Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL60439 USA 

 

 

Abstract 

The S-band linear accelerator, which was built to be the 
source  of  particles  and  the  front  end  of  the  Advanced 
Photon  Source  [1]  injector,  is  now  also  being  used  to 
support a low-energy undulator test line (LEUTL) and to 
drive  a  free-electron  laser  (FEL).  The  more  severe  rf 
stability  requirements  of  the  FEL  have  resulted  in  an 
effort 
identify  sources  of  phase  and  amplitude 
instability and implement corresponding upgrades to the rf 
generation  chain  and  the  measurement  system.  Test  data 
and 
implemented  and  planned  are 
described. 

improvements 

to 

1   INTRODUCTION 

The  rf  power  for  the  APS  linear  accelerator  [2]  is 
provided by five klystrons (L1 through L5), each of which 
feeds one linac sector; L1 feeds rf power to a thermionic 
rf gun via the exhaust of one accelerating structure (AS). 
 

The L2, L4, and L5 sectors are conventional sectors, each 
using  a  SLED  cavity  assembly  [3]  to  feed  four  ASs.  L3 
supplies  rf  power  to  the  photocathode  gun  located  at  the 
beginning  of  the  linac.  For  normal  storage  ring  injection 
operation,  L1,  L2,  L4,  and  L5  are  operated;  for  self-
amplified  spontaneous  emission  (SASE)-FEL  operation, 
all  units  are  operated.  A  pulsed  solid-state  amplifier  is 
used  to  drive  the  klystrons.  The  pulsed  amplifier  is 
preceded  by  a  drive  line  that  feeds  all  sectors,  phase 
shifters,  a  PIN  diode  switch  used  for  VSWR  protection, 
and  a  preamplifier.  The  rf  for  the  entire  linac  is  derived 
from an ovenized, synthesized source and 10-Watt GaAs 
FET  amplifier,  which  feeds  both  the  drive  line  and  a 
reference line. The VXI-based measuring system for each 
sector  is  housed  in  a  separate  cabinet,  and  each  system 
uses the reference line to derive phase measurements. The 
overall APS linac rf system is schematically shown in Fig. 
1. 

0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
7
1

 

 
 
 

2
2
1
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1: APS linac rf schematic diagram. 

                                                           
* Work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Sciences, under Contract No. W-31-109-ENG-38. 
ú Email; tls@aps.anl.gov 
­ Permanent address; Physics Department, POSTECH, Pohang, S. Korea, Email: mhcho@postech.ac.kr 

2   PHASE STABILITY 

2.1 Phase Stability Test Unit 

A new phase measurement circuit (Fig. 2) was built that 
allowed  two  2856-MHz  signals  to  be  input  to  a  double-
balanced  mixer  with  the  resultant  mixer  output    (IF) 
showing  a  phase  relationship  between  the  two  input 
signals.  A  network  analyzer  was  used  to  measure  the 
phase  at  2856  MHz  of  a  variable  phase  shifter  for 
calibration over the variable phase shifter vernier scale. 

For  calibration  of  the  phase  stability  test  unit,  a 2856-
MHz  signal  generator  output  was  split  and  connected  to 
the two inputs. Both variable attenuators were adjusted so 
the  mixer  LO  and  RF  inputs  =  +10  dBm.  The  variable 
phase shifter was adjusted around the zero crossing to get 
a calibrated reading of 1 mV = 0.219o. To make accurate 
calibrated  linac  phase  measurements,  LO  and  RF  ports 
were  always  set  to  +10  dBm  and  measurements  were 
always taken at the mixer IF output zero crossing. 

Figure 2: Block diagram of phase stability test unit. 
 
2.2 Modulator Upgrades 

The  modulator  is  a  classic  line  design  with  a  pulse 
forming  network  (PFN)  and  thyratron  switch.  The  DC 
high-voltage  power  supply  section  charges  the  PFN  to  a 
voltage  of  up  to  35  kV  before  each  pulse.  When  the 
modulator  is  triggered,  the  PFN  is  discharged  by  the 
thyratron  (EEV1836A)  through  the  primary  of  a  pulse 
transformer,  resulting  in  a  high-power  pulse  on  the 
secondary (approx. –300 kV for 5 µs) being applied to the 
klystron  cathode.  Precise  regulation of the PFN charging 
voltage is desired, since the klystron phase and amplitude 
are  sensitive  to  this  voltage.  Original  modulator  power 
supplies  had  3-phase  variable 
the 
incoming  AC  voltage  control,  which  are  ineffective  for 
high  speed  regulation.  The  electromechanical  regulator 
plus 
the  series-connected  command-charging  switch 
combination  also  did  not  satisfy  our  goal  of  better  than 
99% availability. 

transformers  for 

All  modulators  have  been  upgraded  and  now  use  a 
constant current mode, solid state, high frequency inverter 
type high-voltage power supply (EMI-303L). This power 
supply  provides  better  than  ±0.3%  charging  voltage 

regulation  performance  [4],  improving  klystron  output 
phase  stability.  The  phase  stability  measured  across  the 
klystrons has improved by a factor of 2 to 2.5. 

2.3 Adjustment of Phase Compensation Circuit 

The low-level pre-amp phase shifter assembly operates 
on  a  2856-MHz  CW  signal  with  the  add-on  function  of 
phase  compensation  during  the  klystron  drive  pulse.  The 
compensation is designed to cancel out rather slow phase 
settling of the 400-W amplifier output pulse that is due to 
the thermal time constant of the pulsed output transistors 
within  the  amplifier.  The  leading  edge  of  the  rf  gate 
triggers  an  adjustable  R-C  circuit,  providing  an 
exponential  waveform  that  is  applied  to  a  dedicated 
compensation  phase  shifter  [5].  The  practice  has  been  to 
adjust  the  compensation  for  the  flattest  drive  phase  after 
settling of a leading edge transient. It has been determined 
that  adjusting  for  best  phase  at  the  klystron  output  can 
improve  system  performance.  Figures  3  and  4  show  the 
L3  klystron  phase  before  and  after  the  compensation 
adjustment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: L3 Klystron phase – before adjustment of phase 
compensator. 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  4:  L3  Klystron  phase  –  after  adjustment  of  phase 
compensator. 

 

2.4 Modulator Trigger Adjustments 

A  typical  “phase  pushing”  specification  from  the 
klystron  vendor  (Thomson)  could  be  approx.  600  V = 1o 
of  phase  shift.  This  varies  with  the  cathode  voltage used 
and  the  unique  characteristics  of  each  klystron.  The 
modulator  trigger  could  be  adjusted  so  that  the  flattest 
section  of  the  cathode  voltage  is  present  during  the  time 
when  the  beam  is  present.  This  would  produce  a  more 

stable phase. Figures 5 and 6 show data before and after 
modulator adjustments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: L2 before modulator trigger adjustments. 

S

 

 

Figure 6: L2 after modulator trigger adjustments. 

 

2.5 Trigger Jitter  

Each  modulator-klystron  subsystem  receives 

three 
modulator triggers, an rf drive gate, a SLED PSK trigger, 
and  a  klystron  pulse  trigger.  Each  trigger  has  unique 
timing 
trigger 
requirements 
distribution  delays, 
the  beam 
transmission  time.  A  number  of  commercial  precision 
delay  generators  (SRS:DG535)  and  VXI-based  delayed 
trigger  generators  are  the  main  hardware  units  for  the 
trigger system.  

that  are 
internal  delays,  and 

functions  of 

trigger 

An  approximately  10-ns 

jitter  has  been 
observed, for example, between the rf drive and the SLED 
PSK  trigger  during  normal  injection  operation  to  the 
booster  ring.  However,  the  requirement  of  the  phase 
stability  for  the  current  on-going  SASE-FEL  experiment 
(LEUTL [6]) is less than 2o, which is equivalent to 2-ps in 
time.  An  experimental  study  is  planned  to  explore  the 
possibility  of  satisfying  the  above  requirement,  without 
replacing the existing trigger delay system, by improving 
the flat-top of the klystron output power characteristics. 

 

3   ON-LINE PHASE MEASUREMENT 

SYSTEM 

Phase  is  measured  online  using  reference  and  sample 
signals that are synchronously downconverted to 20 MHz. 
A vector detector operating at 20-MHz produces I and Q 
vector  signals  from  which  phase  is  calculated  using 
software [7]. 

Each  existing  I/Q  demodulator  is  implemented  with 
analog circuits utilizing two double-balanced mixers in an 
insulated,  ovenized  enclosure.  Because  10  MHz 
bandwidth 
to  follow  SLED  waveforms 
accurately,  there  is  a  20  MHz  component  that  cannot  be 
completely  filtered  out  and  constitutes  noise  in  the 
measurements  because  it  is  asynchronous  to  the  pulse 
timing and hence the sample in each pulse. 

is  required 

The  planned  upgrade  will  use  a  12-bit  flash  A-to-D 
converter  sampling  synchronously  to  the  20-MHz  IF  at 
80-MSa/s, to allow retrieval of data unaffected by carrier 
noise. Together with a reduction of LO noise, achieved by 
upgrading  to  a  newer  IF  reference  oscillator  design,  it  is 
expected that the repeatability of the relative phase value 
in  consecutive  readings  will  be  within  a  fraction  of  one 
degree.  This  should  allow  the  use  of  feedback  to  reduce 
phase perturbations. 

 

4   FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 

light 

source, 

requires 

Linear  accelerator  operation  for  a  SASE  FEL,  the  4th 
generation 
state-of-the-art 
performance  from  the  all  linac  subsystems,  especially  rf 
power (within ±0.1% shot-to-shot) and phase (less than 1o 
rms  jitter  shot-to-shot  and  ±5o  rms  long-term  drift).  To 
satisfy  such  tight  criteria, both low-level and high-power 
rf systems are under evaluation together with development 
of  a  precision  on-line  phase  detector system. Along with 
the  upgrade  of  relevant  hardware  components  and 
subsystems,  a  beam-based  optimization  study  of  the 
operation  parameters,  such  as 
trigger  and  phase 
compensation adjustment, is also planned. 

 

5   REFERENCES 

[1]  7-GeV  Advanced  Photon  Source  Conceptual  Design 

Report, ANL-87-15, April 1987. 

[2]  M.  White  et  al.,  “Construction,  Commissioning  and 
Operational  Experience  of  the  Advanced  Photon 
Source (APS) Linear Accelerator,” Proc. XVIII Int’l 
Linear  Accelerator  Conf.,  Geneva,  Switzerland, 
August 26-30, 1996, pp. 315-319, 1996. 

[3]  Z.D.  Farkas  et  al.,  “SLED:  A  method  of  doubling 

SLAC’s energy,” SLAC-PUB-1453, June 1974. 

[4]  R.Fuja et al., “Constant-current charging supplies for 
the  APS 
linear  accelerator  modulators,”  Proc. 
PAC’97,  Vancouver,  Canada,  May  1997,  pp.  1269-
1271, 1998. 

[5]  A.E.  Grelick  et  al.,  “Phase  control  &  intra-pulse 
phase  compensation  of  the  APS  linear  accelerator,” 
PAC’95, Dallas, May 1995, pp. 1082-1084, 1996. 

[6]  S.V.Milton  et  al,  “Observation  of  Self-Amplified 
Spontaneous  Emission  and  Exponential  Growth  at 
530 nm,” PRL 85(5), pp. 988-991, July 2000. 

[7]  A.E.  Grelick  et  al.,  “RF  &  beam  diagnostic 
instrumentation at the APS linear accelerator,” Proc. 
XVIII  Int’l  Linear  Accelerator  Conf.,  Geneva, 
Switzerland, August 26-30, 1996, pp. 851-853, 1996. 

