The birth of special relativity.
"One more essay on the subject".

Jean Reignier*

Université Libre de Bruxelles

and

Vrije Universiteit Brussel.

0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
8
2

 

 
 
 

9
2
2
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Introduction.

In the general context of epistemological seminars on the occurrence of rapid
transitions  in  sciences,  I  was  asked  to  report  on  the  transition  from  classical  to
relativistic physics at the turn of the century1.  This  paper  is  a  revised  and  extended
version of this report.

During the first few years of the twentieth century, two very important changes
occurred in physics, which strongly influenced its development all along the century.
These upheavals are: on the one hand, the irruption of the idea of quantisation, i.e. the
discretisation of (some) physical quantities which up to these days were considered as
continuous; and on the other hand, the relativity which deeply modified our physical
conceptions of space and time. The history of the quantum revolution is well known; it
has been carefully studied by many historians of science and their works do indeed
converge towards a fairly unique version of the birth of the quantum theory 2. No such
general  agreement  seems  to  exist  at  present  for  the  history  of  the  birth  of  special
relativity. The subject was treated by many authors, but their conclusions are sometimes
widely  divergent.  Should  one  conclude  that  their  approaches  were  not  always
conducted in a strictly scientific and historical way? Not necessarily. This regrettable
situation could also result from different factors which can influence an "objective"
analysis 3:

- At the difference with the quantum revolution which starts at a very precise
date with the work of only one physicist (i.e. Max Planck, 14 December 1900), the
history of the relativistic revolution begins sometime in the ninetieth century, at a date
which is more or less a matter of convention, depending on the importance one agrees
to give to one physical phenomenon or another.

-  The  long  way  towards  a  relativistic  physics  is  therefore  much  complex.
Furthermore, the original texts are not always correctly appraised because we read them
with the background of our relativistic scholar education.

- In modern educational systems, special relativity is generally introduced fairly
early,  to  students  which  are  not  well  informed  about  the  problems  concerning  the
electrodynamics of moving bodies. These problems were discussed at length during the
ninetieth century; they are at the origin  of special relativity. When modern students
finally hear about them, one generally presents the sole elegant solution that relativity
proposes.

-  It  is  therefore  tempting  to  present  an  oversimplified  version  of  the  history
which can be caricatured as follows: "In 1905, a young genius of only 26 conceived

*  Address:  Département  de  Mathématique,  CP  217,  Campus  de  la  Plaine  ULB,  Université  Libre  de
Bruxelles, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgique.
Email: jreignie@vub.ac.be
1 Centre for Empirical Epistemology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 18 December 1997 and 29 January
1998.
2 For this reason, I only mention in the bibliography the excellent books of Jammer [Ja-66], [Ja-74], and
of Mehra and Rechenberg [Me-Re-82/87].
3 Not to mention here less objective elements (like nationalism, and even racism) which alas plagued the
relativistic adventure.

1

alone a wonderful theory which saved physics from the muddy situation where older
conservative minds had let it go".

This presentation of the creation of special relativity by Albert Einstein (1879-
1953)  is  readily  accepted  by  a  large  majority  of  students,  because  it  is  simple,  and
pleasant  to  hear  when  one  is  around  twenty  4. Only a small minority notices that it
contains  some  anomalies.  Is  it  not  strange  that  the  fundamental  relativistic
transformations  are  called  "Lorentz's  transformations"  and  not  "Einstein's
transformations" (H.A. Lorentz, 1853-1928)? The perplexity of these students increases
if they are told that the name was given by a third physicist (i.e. Henri Poincaré, 1854-
1912), in a paper [Po-05] published one month before the famous paper by Einstein [Ei-
05;  4].  Furthermore,  students  soon  learn  that  the  mathematical  space  where  these
transformations  become  fully  geometric  is  called  "Minkowski's  space",  from  the
mathematician  H.  Minkowski  (1864-1909).  One  solves  generally  this  problem  of  a
possible profusion of creators by explaining that, if it is indeed true that Lorentz and
Poincaré found some results, they were not really "relativistically minded", i.e. that they
remained glued in the old vision of an absolute space filled by some mythic ether, and
an absolute Newtonian time. Only Einstein proposed at once this modern vision of a
relative  space-time,  and  the  mathematician  Minkowski  later  on  described  its
mathematical structure [Mi-09]. Of course, one should not suspect historians of science
to really believe such a simplified history. Nevertheless, it has some influence, and it
partly explains the definite opinion widespread among scientists about the respective
merits of the creators of the new theory.

Let us give some examples of the divergent opinions that exist in the scientific

literature. Let us start with the case of some well-known books:
-  In  1922  appears  the  famous  book  "Des  Relativitätsprinzip  ",  which  presents  a
recollection of original papers on the special and general theory of relativity [So-22]. It
was supposed to give an account of the growth of the theory, under the stimulus of
physical experiment. No room is given here to the work of Poincaré 5.
- In 1951 appears the book "A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity ", by
Ed. Whittaker [Wi-51]. One finds here an important Chapter entitled " The relativity
theory  of  Poincaré  and  Lorentz",  where  these  two  authors  are  presented  as  the
incontestable creators of the relativity. Einstein's own contributions are restricted to the
discovery of the formulas of aberration and of the Doppler effect.
- In 1971, M.A. Tonnelat publishes her "Histoire du principe de relativité " [To-71].
She explains at large that if Lorentz and Poincaré did indeed find some formulas, the
"spirit" of their works was not at all relativistic, and therefore, the full merit of the
creation of relativity goes to the sole Einstein.
-  In  1981,  A.I.  Miller  publishes  "Albert  Einstein's  special  theory  of  relativity.
Emergence (1905) and early interpretation(1905-1911) " [Mi-81]. This book is very
well documented and objective in its account of the facts. Miller presents and discusses
the  contributions  of  many  authors,  among  them,  of  course,  the  trilogy  Lorentz,
Poincaré, Einstein. His conclusion is also that Einstein alone should be gratified of the
"relativistic revolution". One might reproach to this otherwise excellent book, that it
doesn't make any prospective effort in looking for a possible issue of the "dead" theory
of Lorentz and Poincaré. Notice also that in a more recent paper [Mi-94], Miller adopts
a more radical opinion: Lorentz and Poincaré could not possibly find relativity in 1905.
Whatever it may be of this opinion, it remains true that the book itself is probably the
best documented among the many books published up to now on the subject.
- Let me also quote the book of A. Pais "Subtle is the Lord,...The science and life of
Albert Einstein " [Pa-82]. Chapter 3 of this book contains an analysis of the birth of
special relativity which leaves the reader no doubts that the sole father of relativity is
Einstein. Lorentz and Poincaré are at most precursors which didn't really understand

4 I have even seen a strip cartoon relating this story for children!
5 His name appears in one of the two papers by Lorentz, but only for the remark that one should not
change a theory at each new order of approximation; this remark is certainly fundamental but its creative
importance is rather weak. Poincaré's paper [Po-06] is quoted twice in Notes by Sommerfeld following
Minkowski's contribution, but again for unimportant details.

2

the  revolutionary  character  of  the  new  relativistic  spirit.  In  particular,  Pais  severely
criticises Poincaré's habit to present Lorentz's contraction as a "third hypothesis". Pais
stigmatises this attitude and considers it as an evidence that Poincaré didn't understand
Einstein's theory. However, Pais himself does not try to analyse why, and in which
circumstances,  Poincaré presented relativity in that way. Alternative explanations other
than a crude misunderstanding exist (see f.i. Pi-99, or Re-00).
- I finish this rapid and limited review with the recent book of Y. Pierseaux [Pi-99].
This author proceeds to a detailed comparative analysis of Einstein's and Poincaré's
approaches  to  relativity.  He    takes  into  account  the  general  context  in  which  these
works were performed, and also the different attitudes of both authors with respect to
physical theories. Pierseaux  concludes that two slightly different theories exist, which
are otherwise totally equivalent. He calls this: "The fine structure of relativity ".

So  much  for  books.  One  finds  also  in  the  literature  a  lot  of    original  papers
treating the subject of the birth of relativity. Most of them do not escape the discussion
of the famous question of priority. It is not possible to report here on all these papers,
and I apologise for the many authors that I shall not quote. For those physicists which
would like to read the fundamental paper of Poincaré with modern scientific notations
and in English, I recommend the translations of H.M. Schwartz [Sc-71] and of A.A.
Logunov  [Lg-95].  Notice  that  Logunov  inserts  comments  on  Poincaré's  results,  and
concludes to his priority. This point of view is also vigorously defended by J. Leveugle
[Le-94]. Alternatively, many other authors share the opinion that Lorentz and Poincaré
were working on a kind of parallel project, the relativistic character of which is at least
uncertain.  Therefore,  they  conclude  that  Einstein  is  the  only  true  creator  of  special
relativity.  I  select  here  (and  I  recognise  that  my  choice  is  largely  arbitrary),  in
chronological order and without trying to make a distinction between moderate and
more radical opinions, the papers by G.H. Keswani [Ke-65], S. Goldberg [Go-67], I.Yu.
Kobzarev [Ko-75], A.I. Miller [Mi-94], M. Paty [Pa-94], J. Stachel [St-95].

In  view  of  all  these  divergent  opinions,  and  keeping  in  mind  that  it  will  be
difficult to avoid in fine  the delicate question of priorities, I shall postpone it as much
as possible and organise this paper with deep roots in the ninetieth century  6 (Parts 1
and 2). Then, I shall consider the period 1900-1910, with a particular attention to the
works of Poincaré and Einstein of 1905 (Part 3). Part 4 contains my conclusions; they
are rather close to the ones formulated by Pierseaux [Pi-99] who asserts that one should
distinguish a kind of "fine structure" in the formulation of special relativity:

- on the one hand, a formulation with an ether which was created by Lorentz and
Poincaré essentially during the years 1900-1905 from a pure electrodynamics point of
view;

- on the other hand, a formulation without ether, based on Principles expressed
by Einstein in 1905. This formulation was further developed by Einstein himself, but
also by Planck, who became fascinated by this new physics based on Principles which
renewed  mechanics  and  thermodynamics  (1906-1908).  Later  on,  this  formulation
became also geometric in the hands of Minkowski (1908).

Altogether, I conclude that it would be fair to recognise the merits of at least
three authors and to speak of special relativity as "the Lorentz-Poincaré-Einstein theory
of relativity".

Part 1.- Nineteenth century roots.

One can hardly deny that the deepest root of relativity is to be found in the work
of  Galileo  who  asserts  that  "motion  is  like  nothing",  by  which  he  means  that  the
description of mechanical phenomena is not affected by motion [Ga-32]. Of course, and
this was promptly recognised, this assertion is only true if one restricts motion to the
very  special  case  of  uniform  translations.  For  all  other  kinds  of  motion,  Newton's
fundamental law implies the existence of an agent called "force". And the complete set

  6  Remember  that  the  paper  was  originally  a  contribution  to  seminars  on  the  occurrence  of  "rapid"
transitions in science. Not all these changes were really so "rapid"!

3

of  Newton's  postulates  (i.e.  the  fundamental  dynamical  law,  the  action-reaction
principle, and S.Stevin's addition law of forces) cannot be true in arbitrary co-ordinates
frames and with an arbitrary notion of time. This fact played an important role in the
conviction  of  scientists  that  something  like  an  absolute  space  and  an  absolute  time
should exist. However, this absolute space was considered as totally immaterial and no
mechanical way exists to identify it: this is the essence of the Galilean relativity. (For a
discussion of the mechanical aspect of absolute space, see for example Po-02).

Some evidence for a "materialisation" of absolute space appears at the beginning
of the ninetieth century when it was recognised that Huyghens's wave conception of
light is to be preferred to Newton's corpuscular one (Thomas Young's interferences,
1801).  At  this  epoch,  a  wave  theory  can  only  be  thought  of  as  a  mechanical  wave
theory, which of course presupposes the existence of some vibrating medium. Augustin
Fresnel (1788-1827) has been the champion of this idea. In a really impressive series of
works, from 1815 to his death, he accumulated so much evidence in favour of the wave
theory  of  light  that  the  latter  was  later  on  considered  as  firmly  established.  After
Fresnel, one can assert that light is just a high frequency vibration of some universal
medium called ether, and therefore, physical optics can be considered as the science
that studies this medium. This study revealed rather strange properties and introduced
some puzzling questions concerning the nature of ether, for instance:

- the transversality of light vibration (polarisation) seems to imply a very high
rigidity of ether; is this high rigidity compatible with the total lack of resistance that
ether offers to the motion of matter (f.i. the motion of planets) ?

- is the ether inside transparent bodies different or alike the ether of vacuum ?
- why is the ether of transparent bodies usually dispersive, and why does this

dispersive property appear to be so specific of the body ?

- what does happen to ether when a transparent body moves?

This last question will retain our attention because it played an important role in
the long way to relativity. As early as 1822, Fresnel proposed a formula for a "partial"
drift of the ether contained in a moving body 7. This formula is based on his mechanical
model of light propagation in ether and, following an earlier proposal by Young, on an
assumed concentration of ether in transparent bodies proportional to the square of the
refraction index. According to Fresnel, we get the following result. Let c be the velocity
of light in vacuum and let n be the refractive index of the transparent body; according to
the wave theory, the velocity of light inside the body at rest in the absolute frame of
reference defined by the surrounding ether is c/n . Let us now consider the same body in
motion  with  a  velocity  v  with  respect  to  this  absolute  frame,  and  let  us  ask  for  the
absolute velocity of light inside the moving body (for simplicity, we only consider light
propagation parallel to the velocity of the body). The answer depends on the fraction of
internal ether carried on by the moving body. Fresnel assumed that only the excess of
ether  with  respect  to  vacuum  should  be  considered  as  moving.  It  means  that  the
effective velocity of body's ether is not v, but that it is reduced by the fraction a
 = (r 1-
r 0)/r 1  ,  where r 1  and r 0  are  the  densities  of  ether  in  the  body  and  in  the  vacuum,
respectively. Then, according to the Galilean law of composition of velocities, the light
velocity in the body as seen by an observer at rest in the absolute frame of the ether is
equal to : c/n  ±  a
 v , (+ or -, depending on the relative sign of the propagations, i.e.
opposite  or  alike,  respectively).  If  one  further  adopts  Young's  proposal  of  an  ether
concentration  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  refractive  index  :  r 1  =  r 0  n2 ,  the
"Fresnel's ether partial drift coefficient  a

  " becomes :

(1) 

 = 1- 1/n2 .

7 The same formula was also derived later by Stokes (1846) , in a slightly different way (see [Wh-51] ,
Ch 4).

4

a
In  the  second  half  of  the  ninetieth  century,  several  experiments  were
performed in order to test this value of Fresnel's drift coefficient 8 ( Fizeau 1859,  Hoek
1868,  Airy  1871,  Michelson  and  Morley  1886).  Fizeau's  experiment  is  a  pure  local
laboratory experiment which uses a high velocity water current, and directly measures
the drift coefficient. All the other experiments are indirect experiments which try to
exhibit the motion of the Earth with respect to ether, presumably with a velocity of the
same  order  as  its  velocity  around  the  Sun  (v  @
  30  km/sec).  They  are  "first  order"
experiments in the sense that they are sensitive to the first power of the ratio v/c = 10-4
if the drift coefficient has a value different of the one predicted by Fresnel's theory . No
effect  of  earth  motion  was  observed,  so  that  these  experiments  were  interpreted  as
confirming  the  value  of  Fresnel's  drift  coefficient.  I  shall  not  report  here  on  these
experiments (see f.i. : [Wh-51] Ch 4, [To-71] Ch 4, [Re-99]). Enough is to say that the
nice confirmation of Fresnel's value did endow this drift coefficient with the status of a
scientific truth, of which theories had to take account.

After Maxwell's achievement of the synthesis of the electricity and magnetism
theories (around 1865), it became rapidly clear that light was an electromagnetic wave
phenomenon,  and  therefore,  that  one  had  to  identify  the  optical  ether  and  the
electromagnetic  ether  (ether  of  Faraday).  This  unification  solved  some  of  the  old
problems of the ether theory (e.g. the transverse character of light polarisation), but at
the same time it posed some new ones (e.g. should one identify the transverse Fresnel's
vibration with the wave electric field or alternatively with the wave magnetic field ?).
Furthermore, Maxwell's electromagnetic theory introduces phenomenological constants
which are specific of the medium under consideration: it is a  four fields theory (i.e. the
electric field E , the electric displacement D, the magnetic field H, and the magnetic
induction B), related two by two  by phenomenological constraints:

(2)

D = e  E, 

B = m

 H  .

The  dielectric  constant  e   and  the  magnetic  permeability m
    are  empirical  constants
which characterise the body under study (i.e. the propagating medium). Empirically, it
turns out that for higher frequency electromagnetic phenomena, like a light wave, e  is
not  really    a  constant:  it  depends  on  the  frequency  of  the  wave  that  propagates
(dispersion). Therefore, it became evident, as already perceived in the older mechanical
theory, that dispersion is to be associated with some dynamical mechanism that should
be introduced in one way or another in Maxwell's theory. Notice also that Maxwell's
theory says nothing about what happens when the body moves with respect to ether.
There were immediately several proposals in order to take dispersion into account and
to  extend  the  theory  to  moving  bodies,  and  in  the  matter,  the  question  of  the  well
established  Fresnel's  drift  coefficient  was  one  of  the  distinguishing  factors.  It  is  of
course out of question to present and to discuss here these different approaches 9. I shall
limit myself to the sole Lorentz's theory which finally emerges above all others (Part
2a). On the one hand, this theory remains the basis of our present understanding of
electromagnetic phenomena in matter, and on the other hand, it progressively guided
Lorentz to the discovery of the relativistic transformations.

Part 2.- Lorentz and Poincaré between 

1875 and 1904.

H.A. Lorentz.
(1853-1928)

J.H. Poincaré.

(1854-1912)

8 Fresnel's drift coefficient is also often called Fizeau's drift coefficient, because of its first experimental
verification.
9 A detailed presentation of all these tentative approaches can be found in [Wi-51].

5

(1875)
Ph. D. at Leyden
"Over der terugkaatsing en 
breking van het licht" 10.

 

Engineer from Polytechnique
Paris (1875).
Doctor in Mathematics (1879) 11.

2a) Lorentz's classical electrodynamics.

The basic idea of Lorentz's theory is as old as the atomic idea itself: matter is
nothing else than atoms moving in vacuum. The originality lies in that, on the one hand,
the  vacuum  is  now  identified  with  Maxwell's  ether  which  carries  electromagnetic
phenomena; and on the other hand, that atoms contains microscopic particles called
electrons  that  are  sensitive  to  the  electromagnetic  fields  and  that  also  contribute  to
create  these  fields.  Maxwell's  ether  is  characterised  by  the  two  electromagnetic
constants e 0  and  m 0 which are true  constants,  totally  independent  of  the  waves  that
propagate in ether, and Lorentz judiciously puts them equal to one, according to an
appropriate  choice  of  units.  In  doing  this,  Lorentz  effectively  works  with  only  two
vacuum fields: the electric field in vacuum e and the magnetic field in vacuum h. In
matter, these fields act on electrons which, by their presence and motion, act on the
fields; therefore, from a macroscopic point of view, the vacuum fields are modified by
the presence of matter. In that way, Lorentz succeeds to explain, at least qualitatively,
nearly all phenomena concerning matter (at rest in the ether) and light: emission and
absorption of light, reflection, refraction, dispersion of the refractive index, scattering of
light (visible light and later X-rays), etc. 12

Frequently also, Lorentz's qualitative explanations become quantitative provided
they  are  completed  by  some  phenomenological  parameters  in  order  to  better
characterise matter. As an example, Lorentz obtains in 1878, the celebrated Lorentz-
Lorenz's  formula  which  relates  the  molecular  polarisability  coefficient  g   to  the
refractive index n:

(3)

g  = 3 (m/M) (n2 -1)/(n2 + 2) ,

where m and M are the molecular and the specific masses, respectively. When used
with  a  bit  of  phenomenology,  this  formula  is  very  interesting:  on  the  one  hand,  the
atomic  dispersive  refraction  index  n  can  be  related  through  Lorentz's  theory  to  the
atomic spectral lines; on the other hand, one can use the empirical additivity of the
molecular polarisability of mixtures and/or of weakly bound molecules; therefore, it
becomes  possible  to  compute  the  refraction  index  of  mixtures  or  of  weakly  bound
molecules from the spectral lines of their atomic constituents (Cf.[Ro-65]).

At first sight, it would seem that Lorentz's model of matter with atoms bathing
in an ether permanently at rest will conflict with the idea of a partial drift of the ether.
But Lorentz will rapidly prove (1886) that it is not so and that his model is compatible
with  the  appearance    of  an  ether  drift  coefficient,  which  furthermore  is  precisely
Fresnel's  one.  This  remarkable  achievement  is  obtained  by  a  reinterpretation  of
Maxwell's constraint relations (2) and the replacement of the static electric force eE
which acts on electrons at rest by the "Lorentz force" which acts on electrons moving
with the velocity v :

(3)

e E

e [ E + (v/c) ·

 H ] .

Lorentz even improves his effective drift coefficient by introducing a dispersive term
which was later on observed by Zeeman (1911). More details on these questions can be
found in [Wi-51], or [Re-99].

10 " On the reflection and refraction of light".
11 "Sur l'intégration des équations aux dérivées partielles à un nombre quelconque d'inconnues".
12  A  remarkable  exception  is  the  photo-electric  effect  which  indeed  needs  another  ingredient,  i.e.
Planck's quantum of action.

6

ﬁ
This Lorentz's approach of the problem of Fresnel's ether drift coefficient has a
very important consequence: it proves that it is impossible to exhibit any effect of the
relative  motion  of  the  Earth  with  respect  to  ether  by  "first  order  experiments".
Therefore,  one  has  to  consider  experiments  sensitive  to  (v/c)2,  i.e.  "second  order
experiments". At that time (1886), such an experiment existed already and it had given
a negative result (A. Michelson,1881). Michelson's conclusion was that the ether was
totally  drifted,  at  the  difference  with  Fresnel's  partial    drift  and  therefore  also  with
Lorentz theory. However, Lorentz pointed out a small error in Michelson's calculations,
which reduced the predicted effect by a factor two, so that the precision of this early
Michelson experiment became insufficient to settle the question. The situation changed
a few years later, when a higher precision Michelson's experiment totally confirmed the
earlier  result  (A.  Michelson  et  E.  Morley,1887).  Truly,  Lorentz  had  to  change
something to his theory. He makes then the very astonishing proposal that the ether
wind has a dynamical effect of contraction of all objects along the direction of motion
13!

This  contraction  reduces  the  length  of  the  longitudinal  arm  of  Michelson's
interferometer  in  such  a  way  that  it  exactly  compensates  the  second  order  effect  of
Earth motion:

(4)

d L »

 0.5 L (v/c)2.

This reduction of length is common to all materials and is therefore not measurable by
any mechanical device (length standards are reduced in just the same way). In fact, the
contraction  is  indirectly  measured  by  the  negative  result  of  Michelson-Morley's
experiment ([Lo-95]). This is a typical case of introducing an ad-hoc explanation in
order  to  save  a  theory!  In  the  same  paper  [Lo-95],  Lorentz  introduces  two  other
concepts  which  will  turn  out  to  be  most  important  for  the  problem  of  the
electrodynamics of moving bodies:

i) the idea of "local time" : when considering some event which happens at time
t and place (x , y, z) in a frame at rest in ether from a frame moving parallel to x with
velocity v, one should not only change the space co-ordinates according to the Galilean
formula:

(5)

x' = x - vt , 

y' = y , 

z' = z ,

but one should also use another time, the "local time", given by:

(6)

t' = t - vx/c2 .

Indeed, it is immediately seen by direct calculation that this change of time is necessary
in order to preserve the d'Alembertian 14, i.e. the basic equation of electromagnetism,
up to second order terms in the ratio v/c :
 F  =   1
c2

' F  +  O[ (v/c)2 ]  ;

1
c2

 

∂2F
∂t2

  - D

(7)

  - D

 

∂2F
∂t'2

ii) the idea of "corresponding states" : in order to obtain the invariance of the
electromagnetic phenomena in the moving body frame, again up to second order terms
in v/c , one has to change the electromagnetic "state" of the system (i.e. the electric and
magnetic fields) in an ad-hoc  way:

(8)

E'x' = Ex ,

E'y' = Ey - (v/c) Hz ,  E'z' = Ez + (v/c) Hy ,

13 The same proposal was made independently and simultaneously by G.F. FitzGerald (1892).
14 Remember that the d'Alembertian is equal to the difference: second derivative with respect to time
divided by c2 minus the laplacian i.e., the sum of the second derivatives with respect to space; it is the
typical equation of phenomena of wave motion (strings, sound, light, etc.)

7

(9)

H'x' = Hx ,

H'y' = Hy + (v/c) Hz,  H'z' = Hz - (v/c) Ey .

Notice that change (8) is the one proposed earlier by Lorentz for the force acting on a
moving electron (see Eq.3); change (9) is new.

The next year brought a triumphant confirmation of the basic ideas of Lorentz
by his theoretical calculation of the recently discovered Zeeman's effect, and by the
experimental verification of some subtle new details predicted by his approach. The
calculation rests on the idea of a small perturbation of the classical motion of an atomic
electron when one creates an external magnetic field (constant in space and time). It
contains only one parameter 15, nl. the ratio e/m of the electric charge to the mass of the
electron.  The  detailed  experimental  verification  of  Lorentz's  predictions  by  Zeeman
includes the first experimental determination of this ratio (in magnitude and sign), one
year before the famous direct measurement on cathode rays by J.J. Thomson (Cf. [Lo-
02], [Ro-65]). Lorentz and Zeeman will be recompensed by the Nobel Prize in Physics
1902.

We  see  that  around  the  year  1900,  Lorentz  had  succeeded  to  create  a  very
powerful and flexible theory which explained all known electrodynamics effects for
matter at rest in ether, and also the non observation of any new effect caused by its
motion with respect to ether, including second order effects in the ratio v/c.

In  reaction  to  critics  by  H.  Poincaré  who  pointed  out  that  the  technics  of
changing slightly the explanation at each new order of perturbation was not really very
convincing (local time in first order, contraction of lengths in second order 16), Lorentz
makes a last effort in order to produce formulae which eliminate all observable effects
of motion with respect to ether to all orders in the ratio v/c. This is the famous 1904
paper: "Electromagnetic phenomena in a system moving with any velocity less than that
of light " [Lo-04] (presented on 27 May 1904), which can be considered as the top of
his work on the electrodynamics of moving bodies. One finds in this work:

- the "correct" Lorentz's transformation 17,
- the theorem of corresponding states written to all orders in v/c,
- Lorentz's  formulation of the "electron dynamics". The origin of the electron
mass is purely electromagnetic; as a consequence, the mass term in Newton's equations
of  motion  depends  on  the  velocity  of  the  electron  with  respect  to  the  ether,  and  it
appears  not  to  be  exactly  the  same  whether  the  acceleration  caused  by  forces  is
longitudinal or transversal, i.e. parallel or perpendicular to the velocity; furthermore, the
electron in motion with respect to ether is dynamically contracted in the direction of
motion (Lorentz-FitzGerald's contraction).

In  conclusion  of  this  rapid  review  of  the  work  of  Lorentz,  one  can  certainly

assert the following:

- on the one hand, Lorentz's electrodynamics is really the basis of our modern
conception  of  matter:  a  microscopic  approach  to  all  phenomena,  with  dynamical
mechanisms describing the light-matter interactions; furthermore, Lorentz was the first
to recognise the necessity to bring some changes in the kinematical formulae of the
Galilean transformation;

15 It is a remarkable piece of chance that the quantum of action h doesn't appear in this "normal" Zeeman
effect. This is not any more the case for the so-called "abnormal" Zeeman effects, where the electron spin
and magnetic moment make the pattern much more complex. The abnormal Zeeman effect was only
understood a quarter of a century later, after the introduction of the spin and magnetic moment of the
electron.
16  In  his  Lecture  Notes  on  "Electricité  et  Optique"  (1901),  Poincaré  speaks  of  this  accumulation  of
hypotheses as ".. des petits coups de pouce". In "La Science et l'Hypothèse" (1902), he writes "... il fallait
une explication; on l'a trouvée; on en trouve toujours; les hypothèses, c'est le fond qui manque le moins".
17 Although it is not written in the same way as to-day. Lorentz persists in his way of thinking: he firstly
performs a Galilean transformation, which he later on complements by a change of the "kinematical
state", i.e.  introducing a scaling of space and of the "local time".

8

- on the other hand, it is not so easy to recognise Lorentz as one of the founding
fathers of special relativity. He maintains the idea of an ether as a privileged medium
which is the "cause" of certain real  effects (like the Lorentz real contraction of bodies
in  motion  with  respect  to  ether).  His  transformations  are  basically  two  steps
transformations: Galilean transformations (which form a group), followed by ad-hoc
"corresponding states" changes (which do not). This way of reasoning forbade him to
discover  the  group  property  of  the  full  transformation,  which  makes  his  theory
"relativistic". This attitude reminds us of the ancient attitude of "saving appearances" in
astronomy. Once the appearances are saved, Lorentz doesn't care to re-evaluate the real
role of ether.

This revaluation will be done by Poincaré and by Einstein, in two different ways

however:

- Poincaré conserves the idea of an ether as a truly existing medium, because
such a medium seems to be necessary for our understanding of the electromagnetic
phenomena. However, he insists on the group character of the Lorentz transformations,
which reduces the ether to a secondary role. The ether frames are ordinary members of
the infinite set of inertial frames, and no physical experiment allows to select them in
this set. Any inertial frame can legitimately ("à bon droit") be considered as the ether
frame! This amounts to an elimination "de facto "  of the ether, because we loose any
possibility to identify it [Po-05], [Po-06].

- Einstein eliminates the ether "de jure"  when he constructs a kinematics which
makes no reference at all to such a medium [Ei-05; 4]. He avoids carefully to make any
reference to an ether when he discusses the properties of light.
We shall analyse these two approaches in more details in Part 3.

2b) Poincaré's Oeuvre, from 1875 up to 1904.

Henri  Poincaré  is  reputed  as  one  of  the  most  important  and  creative
mathematicians of the last quarter of the ninetieth century. He was then considered as a
kind  of  living  King  of  the  mathematics.  His  mathematical  Oeuvre  is  immense  and
contains contributions to all domains of mathematics: arithmetic, geometry, algebra,
analysis,  ordinary  and  partial  differential  equations,  group  theory  and  analysis  situs
(topology). It is important for our subject to recall that Poincaré is one of the founding
fathers of the theory of continuous groups (S. Lie's groups ) and in particular, that he
wrote between 1899 and 1901 two important memoirs on a general presentation of this
theory 18. Poincaré was also a great mechanician: analytical mechanics, mechanics of
continuous media and celestial mechanics; his work on the three body problem received
the Price of the King of Sweden in 1889 and it is considered to-day as a pioneering
work for modern approaches to chaos. All these mathematical tools play an important
role in his works on physics, in particular in his work on relativity. To-day, it is not so
well known that Poincaré was also a great physicist. This oblivion contrasts with his
reputation at the beginning of the twentieth century. It is known from the archives of
the Nobel Foundation that between 1901 and 1912 he was, with 49 presentations, the
person most frequently proposed to the Nobel Prize in physics (Cf. Ma-98). Poincaré
can be considered as the father of Mathematical-Physics, i.e. this approach to physical
theories which carefully uses the richness and strength of mathematical rigor. For the
period 1887-1901, his contribution to physics counts not less than (Cf. Po-01):

-18 memoirs (1887-1892) on the differential equations of mathematical physics;
- 9 memoirs (1890-1894) on hertzian waves;
-36 memoirs (1889-1901) critically reviewing existing physical theories;
-  several  books  (lecture  notes)  corresponding  to  his  most  varied  teaching.
Particularly important for our subject are his "Théorie Mathématique de la Lumière " of

18 Cambridge Philosophical Transactions 18  (1899)  220-255;  Rendiconti  del  Circolo  Matematico  di
Palermo  15  (1901)  48  p.  Completed  later  by  a  third  memoir:  Rendiconti  del  Circolo  Matematico  di
Palermo 25 (1908) 61 p.

9

1899 and his "Electricité  et  Optique " of 1901; they present and discuss the various
approaches to electromagnetism and optics proposed by "the successors of Maxwell".

In  1895  Poincaré  publishes  a  series  of  four  papers  entitled  "A  propos  de  la
théorie  de  M.  Larmor  "  where  he  critically  discusses  and  compares  the  different
existing theories of electro-optics, i.e. the different adaptations of the older mechanical
theories  of  light  (Fresnel,  Helmholtz,  Mac  Cullagh)  to  a  Maxwellian  approach,  as
proposed by Larmor, Helmholtz, Lorentz , J.-J. Thomson and Hertz. Poincaré proposes
three criteria which he considers as being essential in order to get an acceptable theory:

1) the theory should account for Fresnel's drift coefficient;
2) it should contain the idea of conservation of electricity and magnetism;
3) it should be compatible with the Newtonian principle action=reaction.

Poincaré observes that none of the existing theories satisfies all three requirements. For
example  Hertz's  theory  violates  the  first  condition,  Helmoltz's  theory  violates  the
second, and Lorentz's theory violates the third. Poincaré discusses several alternative
interpretations of this state of affairs: either the theories are incomplete, or the three
criteria are (for some obscure reason) mutually incompatible, or they would become
compatible  only  by  a  radical  modification  of  admissible  hypotheses.  He  finally
concludes that one should temporarily abandon the idea to build a theory that would
conform the three requirements, and that one should temporarily again retain the theory
which seems least defective  , i.e. the theory of Lorentz:

"  Il  faut  donc  renoncer  à  développer  une  théorie  parfaitement  satisfaisante  et  s'en  tenir

provisoirement à la moins défectueuse de toutes qui paraît être celle de Lorentz".

Nevertheless,  Poincaré's  disquietude  with  respect  to  the  violation  of  the

action=reaction principle is clearly stated:

"Il me paraît bien difficile d'admettre que le principe de réaction soit violé, même en apparence,
et qu'il ne soit plus vrai si l'on envisage seulement les actions subies par la matière pondérable et si on
laisse de côté la réaction de cette matière sur l'éther."

Finally, Poincaré makes a very important statement concerning the future of the
electrodynamics of moving bodies: facts are accumulating in favour of the idea that it
would  turn  out  to  be  impossible  to  exhibit  any  effect  of  the  motion  of  bodies  with
respect  to  ether;  it  seems  only  possible  to  observe  effects  of  the  relative  motion  of
ponderable matter with respect to ponderable matter:

" L'expérience a révélé une foule de faits qui peuvent se résumer dans la formule suivante: il est
impossible de rendre manifeste le mouvement absolu de la matière, ou mieux le mouvement relatif de la
matière par rapport à l'éther; tout ce qu'on peut mettre en évidence, c'est le mouvement de la matière
pondérable par rapport à la matière pondérable".

He suggests that one should look for a theory which fulfils this requirement to all order
in v/c and he expresses the hope that the difficulty of Lorentz's theory with the principle
of reaction might be solved at the same time.

As it was correctly pointed out by Goldberg [Go-67], the major importance of
this paper is that it sets the framework for all Poincaré's subsequent work and attitudes
in the area of the electrodynamics of moving bodies.

From now on, Poincaré will carefully watch all the developments of Lorentz's
theory.  At  the  occasion  of  the  25-th  anniversary  of  the  thesis  of  Lorentz,  Poincaré
contributes to the anniversary volume by a (somewhat provocative) paper where he
comes back on the difficulty of the theory with respect to the principle of reaction [Po-
00]. He proposes to consider as a solution that the electromagnetic energy be viewed as
a kind of "fictitious fluid" with an inertial mass equal to E/c2; he shows that this would
be enough to restore the conservation of the momentum in the processes of emission
and absorption of radiation, at least to first order in v/c . And Poincaré insists on the
necessity to make use of the "local time" in order to obtain the conservation, and for the
first time, he explains the physical content to this idea of local time which up to then
was considered as an artificial mathematical trick:

10

" Pour que la compensation se fasse, il faut rapporter les phénomènes, non pas au temps vrai t,

mais à un certain temps local t' défini de la façon suivante.

Je suppose que des observateurs placés en différents points, règlent leurs montres à l'aide de
signaux lumineux; qu'ils cherchent à corriger ces signaux du temps de la transmission, mais qu'ignorant
le  mouvement  de  translation  dont  ils  sont  animés  et  croyant  par  conséquent  que  les  signaux  se
transmettent également vite dans les deux sens, ils se bornent à croiser les observations en envoyant un
signal de A en B, puis un autre de B en A. Le temps local t' est le temps marqué par les montres ainsi
réglées.

Si alors c = 1/ (cid:214)

parallèle à l'axe des x positifs, on aura:

 K0 est la vitesse de la lumière, et v la translation de la terre que je suppose
t' = t - v x /c2 . "

Poincaré states clearly that the compensation is only to first order in v/c except if one
further makes another hypothesis on which he will presently not comment (clearly the
Lorentz-FitzGerald  contraction).  It  should  be  stressed  that  Poincaré  was  the  first  to
discuss the concept of simultaneity and the problem of defining a common time for
distant clocks. This goes back to a philosophical paper of 1898 [Po-98], but it is first
explicitly borne out by a calculation in this anniversary paper of 1900. In September
1904, at the St-Louis Conference, he presents essentially the same reasoning and adds
the "third hypothesis"  19 of the Lorentz-FitzGerald contraction in order to obtain the
recently proposed new Lorentz's local time. In order to report on an event which takes
place at point x and time t in the ether frame, one should use in the moving frame the
"local time",

(10)

t'(t,x) = g

 ( t  -  vx / c2) ,

where g   is the inverse of Lorentz-FitzGerald's contracting factor:

(11)

 g  = (1- v2/c2)-1/2 .

At the occasion of this Conference, Poincaré discusses the problems met by a
physics  based  on  Principles.  Among  these  principles,  he  discusses  at  length  the
Principle of Relativity which he enunciates as follows:

" The principle of relativity according to which the laws of physical phenomena should be the
same,  whether  for  an  observer  fixed,  or  for  an  observer  carried  along  in  a  uniform  movement  of
translation; so that we have not and could not have any means of discerning whether or not we are carried
along in such a motion."

But Poincaré is too lucid a physicist to accept "Principles" as "evidently true", as Truths
given  by  some  God.  Therefore  he  insists  on  the  necessity  to  get  experimental
confirmation of the Principles 20.

"These principles are results of experiments boldly generalised; but they seem to derive from

their generality itself an eminent degree of certitude."

Coming back to the difficulties met by the Principle of Relativity in the recent past, he
concludes:

19 In the past, this "third hypothesis" of Poincaré has been the source of rather radical attacks against his
presentation of relativity (see f.i. Pa-82). The point was recently clarified (see Re-00). It turns out that
historically,  Poincaré  was  right  to  present  in  1904  the  Lorentz-FitzGerald  contraction  as  a  third
hypothesis, and not any more after 1905. However, his reasons to leave out the third hypothesis being
essentially mathematical (group arguments), they would have appeared to the physicists audiences of the
time as less clear and convincing than the then generally accepted idea of a contraction.
20 Strangely enough, this idea that Principles are largely conventions that should in any case always be
borne out by experiment has been vigorously used by some authors in order to minimise the contributions
of Poincaré to the theory of relativity (see f.i. Mi-94).

11

" Thus, the principle of relativity has been valiantly defended in these latter times, but the very

energy of the defence proves how serious was the attack."

It  is  clear  that  end  1904,  Poincaré  is  at  the  eve  to  create  a  new  "electron
mechanics".  In  his  book  on  the  history  of  relativity,  Miller  produces  an  interesting
document [Mi-81]: a letter from Poincaré to Lorentz written end 1904 or early 1905
(unfortunately not dated) where he makes some points which are very illuminating of
the state of evolution of the question. Lorentz's transformations contain a general scale
factor (written l(v)) that Lorentz got much difficulties to put equal to one. Poincaré
points out that the set of parallel translations form a group (now called the group of
"boosts"),  and  that  a  rather  natural  hypothesis  21    on  the  electron  structure  is  then
enough to reduce this scale factor to one. Incidentally, this letter contains explicitly but
without any comment the new relativistic formula of addition of parallel velocities 22.

Part 3.- 1905.

The long march towards relativity is now very close to an issue. Two of the
important actors of the creation of special relativity are sitting in due place. They are
known as very respectable scientists and it is expected that their works (past and future)
will be scrutinised by many other physicists in the world. Up to now, I did not speak
much about the third main actor of the saga of relativity: Albert Einstein (1879-1955).
This is not surprising since during the period covered in Parts 1 and 2, Einstein was too
young to participate. Furthermore, beginning 1905, Einstein is still nearly unknown in
the world of the physicists interested in electrodynamics. His early publications (five all
together between 1901 and 1904) concerned thermodynamics and statistical physics.
Even in this domain, these papers didn't really awake interest. Then comes the "Annus
Mirabilis 1905" which will see this young physicist growing from his modest position
to such a prominent one, that for many years, the whole world of physicists will pay
much attention to what he says and what he writes.

It  starts  with  a  paper  on  the  black  body  radiation  where  applying  his  own
thermodynamical methods to examine the well known Wien's formula, Einstein shows
that  light  exhibits  features  that  make  it  alike  a  gas  of  non  interacting  particles.  As
straightforward applications of this "heuristic" point of view, Einstein gives very simple
explanations of some not yet understood phenomena, the best known being the photo-
electric effect. This work will be recompensed by the Nobel Prize in Physics 1921.
Three  other  papers  concern  the  Brownian  motion  and  are  directly  derived  from  his
Ph.D. thesis [Ei-05; 2,3,6]. They are again in the general trend of his previous work on
thermodynamical and statistical physics. Even to-day, these papers remain considered
as important (see comments and analysis by biographs of Einstein, f.i. Pa-82). None of
these papers concern directly or indirectly the electrodynamics of moving bodies. At
most can one say that his heuristic point of view on light did convince Einstein that
light was not simply a wave phenomenon, and therefore, that ether might be a useless
hypothesis. It is at least what Einstein himself declared in 1952 in a letter to  Von Laue:
" In 1905, I already knew with certitude that Maxwell's theory doesn't correctly predict
the fluctuations of radiation pressure in a thermal enclosure. I convinced myself that the

21 It is a model dependent hypothesis on the structure of the electron; it must respect the idea that the
very structure of the electron can well depend on the absolute value of the velocity but not on its sign.
22 This absence of comments was sometimes interpreted as an indication that Poincaré did not really
grasp the physical meaning of this addition law (Cf. f.i. Mi-94). However, beside this implicit derivation
from the group property, Poincaré makes an explicit one in his 1905 paper [Po-06] by computing the
derivative of the displacement with respect to time (to local time). Furthermore, in [Po-08]  he describes
explicitly what does physically happen when performing such an addition. One can easily check, through
a calculation following closely what he says, that he indeed describes this new addition law (Cf. Pi-99,
p.143-146).

12

only way to save the situation was to give to radiation the objective status of a "being",
which of course doesn't exist in Maxwell's theory".

Then came the famous paper "Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Körper ", [Ei-05; 4]
(received on 30 June 1905), now considered by nearly all physicists as the founding
paper of the special theory of relativity. As I explained in the Introduction, for many
physicists this conviction is only a product of their education. Not so many of them
have really read the original paper. And those who read it are stil much more numerous
than the very small number of physicists who read the two papers published at the same
time by Poincaré (Po-05 received on 5 June, and Po-06 received on 23 July 1905). This
is certainly a very curious case in view of the respective reputation of the two scientists
in 1905. One might hastly conclude that the reason is simply that one of the papers is
right and the other wrong. We shall see that it is not at all so simple 23.

Let  us  start  with  a  short  comparison  of  the  contents  of  the  papers  of  both

authors:

        Poincaré
Sur la dynamique de l'électron.

            Einstein

Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Körper.

0- Introduction.

0- Introduction

1- Lorentz's transformation.

1- Definition of simultaneity.

2- The principle of least action.

2- On the relativity of lengths and times.

I- Kinematical part.

3-The Lorentz transformation and
the principle of least action. 

4- Lorentz's group.

3- Theory of the transformation of
co-ordinates and times from a stationary
system to another system in uniform
translation relatively to the former.

4- Physical meaning of the equations
obtained in respect to moving rigid bodies
and moving clocks.

5- Langevin's waves.

5- The composition of velocities.

6- Contraction of electrons.

7- Quasi stationary motion.

8- Arbitrary motion.

9- Hypotheses concerning 
gravitation.

II- Electrodynamical part.

6- Transformation of the Maxwell-Hertz
equations for empty space. On the nature
of the electromotive forces occurring in a
magnetic field during motion.

7- Theory of Doppler's principle and
of aberration.

8- Transformation of the energy of light
rays. Theory of the pressure of radiation
exerted on perfect reflectors.

9- Transformation of the Maxwell- Hertz
equations when convection currents are
taken into account.

23 I discard the rather trivial explanation based on the comparative fame of the periodics where these
papers were published. It is true that Annalen der Physik was better known to physicists than Rendiconti
del Circolo Matematico di Palermo, but the content of Poincaré's paper was previously communicated to
the Comptes Rendus de l'Académie des Sciences in a sufficiently detailed way to catch the attention of
physicists interested in electrodynamics [Po-05] .
13

10- Dynamics of the slowly accelerated
electron.

This dry presentation of titles of paragraphs calls for two remarks:

i)  the  length  of  the  titles  is  in  no  way  representative  of  the  real  length  and
importance of the content of the paragraphs; remember that the total lengths of the two
papers are respectively of 47 pages for Poincaré and 30 pages for Einstein;

ii)  it  would  probably  be  fair  to  add  to  Einstein's  paper,  as  a  complementary
eleventh paragraph, his famous paper on the equivalence of mass and energy which
proceeds essentially along the same ideas (Ei-05; 5, received on 27 September 1905).

In  the  Introduction  of  their  respective  papers,  both  authors  clearly

announce the guide line of their works:

-  Poincaré  wants  to  continue  the  1904  work  of  Lorentz,  to  put  it  in  a  more
rigorous mathematical form, to discard definitely some rival models of the electron and
(above all?) to try to extend Lorentz's ideas to the theory of gravitation.

- Einstein wants to eliminate from Maxwell's theory some difficulties brought in
by the idea of an absolute rest. He claims that this can be done very simply with the
following two postulates: the "Principle of Relativity" , and the postulate  " ... that light
is always propagated in empty space with a definite velocity c which is independent of
the state of motion of the emitting body." 24
Therefore, it is immediately clear that the two authors will develop different programs.
Let  us  now  compare  in  a  more  detailed  way  the  contents  of  both  papers  in
subdividing them according to broad subjects: Lorentz's transformation, covariance of
the electromagnetism, dynamics of a relativistic particle.

1- Lorentz's transformation.

Although Lorentz's transformation is more or less present in nearly all chapters
of both works, I shall limit myself here to the paragraphs that concern specifically the
transformation of the co-ordinates, i.e. §1 to 5 (Kinematical part) for Einstein, and §1
and 4 for Poincaré.

In  §1,  Einstein  discusses  the  notion  of  simultaneity  and  makes  the  very
important point that this notion is only clear and evident for "local" events, i.e. events
which happen at approximately the same place, and that the discussion of simultaneity
of "distant" events requires at first some synchronisation of distant clocks. He proposes
the  synchronisation  procedure  by  exchange  of  light  signals,  based  on  the  second
fundamental postulate of his paper that light always propagates with the same velocity c
in all directions in any inertial frame of reference  25. Since Einstein's paper does not
mention  any  reference,  one  can  legitimately  infer  that  this  fundamental  thought  is
entirely of his own 26. But one can just as well remember that Poincaré discussed the
concept of simultaneity in rather similar terms as early as 1898 27, and that he proposed

24 Formulated in that way, the second postulate is a bit confusing: in a wave theory, the velocity of the
wave doesn't depend on the velocity of the emitting body. Einstein means that the velocity of light has
the same absolute value in all inertial systems, and that this value is independent of the direction of
propagation.
25 Einstein doesn't really define what he means by an "inertial frame of reference". He says only that it is
a frame of reference where "the equations of mechanics hold good", which is a bit incoherent with his
own paper. Later, in (1913), he added the footnote "to the first approximation" which of course weakens
the mistake, but doesn't make the definition more precise.
26 Some authors have discovered that in his "Bureau des Brevets" in Berne, Einstein had to examine
proposals  in  order  to  synchronise  the  clocks  of  distant  railways  stations  by  exchange  of  telegraphic
messages (private communication of I. Daubechies).
27 This paper contains philosophical considerations on Time and its Measurement. One finds there some
premonitory  sentences,  like  the  following  ones:  1)  about  the  dating  of  astronomical  facts:  "Il  (the
astronomer) a commencé par admettre  que la lumière a une vitesse constante, et en particulier que sa
vitesse est la même dans toutes les directions. (..) Ce postulat ne pourra jamais être vérifié directement
par  l'expérience;  ....".  2)  In  the  conclusions:  "Il  est  difficile  de  séparer  le  problème  qualitatif  de  la

14

the procedure of synchronisation by exchange of light signals and its application to
obtain Lorentz's local time in his 1900 paper and at the St-Louis conference of 1904
[Po-98,  Po-00,  Po-04].  If  one  can  reasonably  assume  that  both  the  1898  and  1904
papers were unknown to Einstein in 1905, it is not so clear for the 1900 paper, since
Einstein  does  refer  to  it  in  a  subsequent  publication  of  May  1906  [Ei-06].  This
troublesome interrogation will probably never be answered.

In §2, Einstein discusses the application of his two Principles to two important

concepts:

-  the  possible  difference  of  length  of  a  rigid  rod  when  it  is  viewed  from  the

frame where the rod is at rest, or alternatively from a moving frame;

- the delicate question of the simultaneity of distant events, viewed from their

common rest frame or alternatively from a moving frame.
In  my  opinion,  this  is  a  most  interesting  paragraph,  where  Einstein  shows  most
explicitly the originality of his approach.

In §3, Einstein proceeds to a derivation of Lorentz's co-ordinates transformation
from the two enunciated Principles. Notice that one doesn't find the name of Lorentz in
this paragraph, nor the name of any one else who wrote or used the same formulae
before 1905 (Voigt 1887, Lorentz 1899 and 1904, Larmor 1900, Poincaré 1904). This is
a bit strange because these formulae were already well known. This silence can be put
in parallel with the complicated title of the paragraph; it is possible that Einstein wants
to emphasise the difference between his interpretation  and the one of previous authors.
The message may be: the physical content  of these formulae being new, the formulae
are    new  .  Here  again,  we  shall  probably  never  know.  Schematically,  Einstein's
demonstration proceeds along three steps:

-  The  first  step is a detailed analysis of the events corresponding to a go and
back light exchange along the direction of propagation of the moving frame, with the
hypotheses that the transformation is linear and that the light velocity is the same in
both  directions  in  all  frames.  This  gives  him  the  ordinary  Lorentz's  transformation,
including the arbitrary global scale factor l(v) that we mentioned earlier; Einstein writes
it f (v). It is interesting to remark that Einstein does separate this factor. This is a kind of
a priori choice which has no real justification, except of course if one already knows the
answer (again the same interrogation about a previous knowledge). He meets then the
old problem of how to get rid of this factor f (v).

- In the second  step ,  Einstein performs a kind of inverse transformation, and

deduces from it that :

(12)

 f (v) f (-v) =1.

In essence, this is a first application of the principle of relativity, with the requirement
of a total reciprocity between the two translating frames.

- In the third step , Einstein considers again the events corresponding to a go and
back  light  exchange  but  now  in  a  direction  perpendicular  to  the  translation.  This  is
entirely  new!  I  mentioned  already  that  Poincaré  had  discussed  several  times  the
synchronisation  of  clocks  placed  along  the  direction  of  translation  (i.e.,  essentially
Einstein's  first  step).  But  Einstein  is  the  first  to  complement  this  longitudinal
synchronisation  by  a  transverse  one.  He  deduces  from  this  operation  the  physical
meaning of the factor f (v): it corresponds to a contraction of the length of a transverse
rigid rod when it is seen from a moving frame. He makes then the clever statement that,

simultanéité du problème quantitatif de la mesure du temps; soit qu'on se serve d'un chronomètre, soit
qu'on  ait  à  tenir  compte  d'une  vitesse  de  transmission,  comme  celle  de  la  lumière,  car  on  ne  saurait
mesurer une pareille vitesse sans mesurer  un temps." 3) Again in the conclusions: "Nous n'avons pas
l'intuition directe de la simultanéité, pas plus que celle de l'égalité de deux durées. (....) La simultanéité de
deux événements, ou l'ordre de leur succession, l'égalité de deux durées, doivent être définies de telle
sorte que l'énoncé des lois naturelles soit aussi simple que posible."

15

because the rod is perpendicular to the direction of motion, this possible contraction can
well depend on the relative velocity, but not on its sign! Therefore:

(13)

 

f (v) = f (- v),

which, together with (12), gives:

(14)

 

f (v) = 1.

Einstein's  derivation  of  Lorentz's  transformation  is  most  interesting  in  that  it
differs  on  some  important  points  from  the  previous  approaches  by  Lorentz  and  by
Poincaré.  Firstly,  Einstein  constructs  a  proof  of Lorentz's transformation from first
principles. Secondly, he discusses the relations between two inertial  frames , none of
them being privileged; this is particularly clear in step 2. Contrariwise, Lorentz and
Poincaré always discuss the relations between the privileged ether frame and another
frame in uniform translation with respect to the former. At first, it seems that the latter
attitude  is  not  "relativistic".  However,  it  has  some  advantage  because  it  avoids  the
delicate question of defining the concept of inertial frame: there exists an ether, and the
frames at rest in ether are absolute Newton's frames. Inertial frames are then frames in
uniform translation with respect to the ether.

For Lorentz, in full conformity with this idea, the fundamental transformations
remain the Galilean transformations, and the rest of the story is a question of changing
things  in  an  appropriate  manner  (local  time,  scaling,  corresponding  kinematics  and
electromagnetic states), in order to obtain a formal  appearance of equivalence of the
electromagnetic phenomena in moving frames and absolute frames.

For Poincaré, it is not quite so simple. His approach evolves slowly from the
original Lorentz's position towards a detailed study  and possibly a proof  of Lorentz's
transformation, and a revision of the status of the ether. Indications and evidences of
this evolution are:

- Firstly, that the calculations giving the physical meaning of Lorentz's local
time (1900, 1904) are hardly separable from some implicit demonstration of Lorentz's
transformation, similar to Einstein's first step (see Re-00 for details).

- Secondly, the evolution in time of Poincaré's attitude about the problem of the
scale factor (i.e. Lorentz's l(v) or Einstein's f (v)). In his letter to Lorentz, he recognises
the existence of the group of "boosts", and he finds the relativistic addition of parallel
velocities and a multiplication law for the scale factor: two successive parallel boosts
characterised by velocities v and v' are equivalent to a parallel boost  characterised by a
velocity v'' , with the rules:

(15)

(16)

v'' = (v +v')/ (1 + v v'/c2),

l(v'') = l(v) l(v') .

At the time of his letter to Lorentz, Poincaré doesn't yet use fully the resources of group
theory, so that he comes back to the electron theory where he picks up a currently used
explicit form of l(v):

(17)

l(v) = [1 - (v/c)2] m ,

where  m  is  some  model  dependent  parameter;  clearly,  only  m=0  can  fit  the
multiplication law (16), and this means that l(v) is equal to one. But in §4 of his 1905
paper,  Poincaré  goes  much  farther.  He  makes  a  complete  analysis  of  the  Lorentz's
group (so did he term this new group), i.e., including not only the boosts, but also the
spatial rotations. Then, he can easily show without any hypothesis coming from the
electron theory, and without the transverse synchronisation, that l(v) must be equal to
one.

16

- Thirdly, this group structure being firmly established and remembering that
Poincaré knows very well what a group structure means, it becomes evident that the
ether frames loose their privileged status. This understanding is clearly stated in the
introduction of the paper:

"..; deux systèmes, l'un immobile, l'autre en translation, deviennent ainsi l'image exacte l'un de l'autre."

Let us also remark that Poincaré's study of the Lorentz's group is extraordinary

modern:
- derivation of the associated Lie group;
- theorem that any Lorentz's transformation can be seen as a Lorentz's boost along x,
preceded and followed by an appropriate  rotation;
- theorem that any Lorentz's transformation can be resolved into a dilatation and a linear
transformation which leaves unaltered the quadratic form: x2 + y2 + z2 - t2 ;
- geometrical interpretation of the latter (continuous) transformation as a rotation in the
four dimensional space:
x , y , z , t (cid:214)

1 ;

- discovery of the electromagnetic field invariants (§ 3 , 5):

(18)

E2 - H2,

E . H ,

and of several kinematics invariants when more particles are present (§9);
- proof that several physical quantities are the individual components of "four partners"
that vary under Lorentz's transformations like the three space co-ordinates and the time.
Examples are: the force reduced to unit volume or (alternatively) reduced to unit charge
and the corresponding work per unit time, the four component velocity : g   v, g       (or
momentum: mg v, mg  ; as usual, I write g  = (1- (v/c)2) -1/2 ), the electric current  and
electric charge densities, the vector and the scalar electromagnetic potential in Lorentz's
gauge, etc.

Let us finally notice that the new law of addition of velocities (parallel and non-
parallel composition) was found by Einstein (§5) and by Poincaré (§1) in nearly the
same way: the combination of the velocity vector w of a particle with the velocity v of a
frame moving along the x axis. Einstein doesn't hesitate to extrapolate the law to the
case  of  a  "light  particle"  moving  along  x  with  the  velocity  c  and  he  finds  in  this
calculation a confirmation of his postulate that the light velocity remains equal to c in
all  inertial  frames  28.  This  kind  of  extrapolation  will  of  course  never  be  done  by
Poincaré  who  considers  that  light  and  material  particles  have  completely  different
status.

2- Covariance of electromagnetism.

Let us now consider the electrodynamical part (except the dynamical equation
for particle motion, which we will discuss later), i.e. § 6-9 for Einstein, and § 1-3 and 5
for Poincaré. Both authors want to make sure that Maxwell's equations are invariant
under Lorentz's transformation. In vacuum, where e 0 and m 0 can be taken equal to one
(see Eq.2), these equations can be written in two equivalent ways:

- Either , in terms of the physical fields, electric field E and magnetic field H

(remember that e 0 and m 0  are equal to one):

(19)

div H  = 0  ,

28  Funny  enough,  Einstein  doesn't  make  w  =  c  but  v  =  c  !  This  amounts  to  consider  a  Lorentz's
transformation of velocity c, i.e. a frame (an observer) going as fast as light, clearly an impossible case.
Simple misprint or Einstein's subconscious old dream of following a light ray ?

17

-
(20)

(21)

(22)

∂H
∂t

rot E +  1
c  
div E  = 4 p r

  =  0  ,

  ,

rot H -  1
c  

∂E
∂t

  =  4 p

 j  ,

where r
obviously constrained by the relation:

 is the electric charge density and j is the electric current density; these are

(23)

∂r
div j + 
∂t

 = 0  ,

which expresses  the conservation of electricity; in the case of a material current with a
"local" charge of velocity u, the density current j is equal to r

 u;

- Or , in terms of a scalar potential V and a vector potential A constrained by a
gauge condition; this corresponds to a trivial integration of the homogeneous equations
(19) and (20):

(19')

(20')

(21')

(22')

H = rot A  ,

E  = - 1
c  
  - D

 

  - grad V ,

∂A
∂t
 V  =  4 p r

  ,

∂2V
∂t2
∂2A
∂t2

1
c2

 

1
c2

  - D

 A  =  4 p  j   ,

with Lorentz's gauge constraint:

(24)

div A + 1
c 

∂V
∂t

 = 0  .

It is interesting to notice that Einstein chooses to use the first set of equations
while Poincaré chooses to use the second  29; furthermore, the way they respectively
proceed  is  characteristic  of  their  preoccupations.  I  shall  not  reproduce  here  the
calculations of these authors, but I shall try to indicate their ways of reasoning.

One remembers that Poincaré insisted in his paper "À propos de la théorie de M.
Larmor  " of 1895 , on the absolute necessity of the conservation of the electric charge.
He will now apply it on the changing of frame operation: the total electric charge in
some spatial volume in the (x,y,z,t) frame must be the same as the total electric charge
in the corresponding volume (obtained through Lorentz's transformation) in the (x', y',
z', t') frame. In that way, he gets the relation between corresponding electric charge
densities r
'. Since the kinematics gives the relation between the velocities u and
u', he immediately obtains the relation between the electric current densities j and j'. He

 and r

29 Poincaré's results are obtained for the full conformal group, including the dilatation parameter. Only
later,  does  he  prove  that    l(v)  is  equal  to  one.  In  this  comparative  report,  I  take  l(v)  =1  from  the
beginning.

18

checks  the  covariance  of  the  conservation  law  (23)  30.  He  also  checks  the  formal
covariance of the d'Alembertian operator and, imposing the covariance of Eqs. 21' and
22' , he gets the relation between the four partners Ax , Ay , Az , V and their homologues
A'x', A'y' , A'z' , V' ; he sees that they transform just alike the co-ordinates x , y , z , ct
(four-vectors)  ;  he  checks  the  covariance  of  the  gauge  constraint  (24).  From  the
kinematics, the latter results, and Eqs. 19' and 20' , he computes the relations between
the six partners Ex , Ey , Ez , Hx , Hy , Hz , and their homologues E'x' , E'y' , E'z' , H'x' ,
H'y' , H'z' , as they were already found by Lorentz [Lo-04]  31. He finally checks the
covariance of the Eqs. 19 to 22. Poincaré considers then the Lorentz's force on the unit
electric charge,  when this force is written in just the same formal way in both frames;
he shows that there exists a "four partners" set : Fx , Fy , Fz , F.u ,  that transforms just
in the same way as the co-ordinates x , y , z , ct  (four vector). This achieves the proof
of covariance of the Maxwell equations.

Einstein  considers  firstly  equations  (20)  and  (22)  with  j  =  0,  i.e.  the
electromagnetic field in empty space (no electric charge and no electric current). He
takes  these  equations  as  they  are  written  in  one  frame,  performs  Lorentz's
transformation on the co-ordinates and assumes that the so obtained equations have
again  the  same  form  (20)  and  (22)  in  the  other  frame.  This  gives  him  the  relations
between the six partners Ex , Ey , Ez , Hx , Hy , Hz , and their homologues E'x' , E'y' , E'z'
, H'x' , H'y' , H'z' ; these relations are those already found by Lorentz [Lo-04]. Then, he
immediately looks for some physical consequences of this transformation law of the
free-fields (§ 7 and 8). In that way, he obtains the relativistic formula for the Doppler
effect (including the entirely new transverse Doppler effect), the aberration of light, the
radiation pressure on perfect reflectors, and the transformation of the energy of a "light
complex"  32 . He notes (without any allusion to the famous quantum formula E = hn
that he derived three months earlier):

"It is remarkable that the energy and the frequency of a light complex vary with the state of

motion of the observer in accordance with the same law."

In  §  9,  Einstein  terminates  his  proof  of  the  covariance  of  Maxwell's  equations.  He
considers  Eqs.  20-22  including  now  the  electric  charge  density  r
  and  the  electric
current density r
 u. Assuming the equations to be valid in one frame 33, he performs the
co-ordinates transformation and the transformation of the fields that he found in § 6 for
the free fields. This latter operation indicates that Einstein considers the fields (and
therefore  the  light)  as  physical  entities,  which  should  transform  in  the  same  way,
independently  of  their  possible  coupling  to  charges  and  currents.  From  these
transformations, he deduces the transformation law of the densities of electric charge
and  electric  current.  He  notes  (with  an  evident  satisfaction)  that  the  latter  is  only
covariant if one adopts the new law of addition of velocities that he found in § 5:

30 Poincaré's results differ slightly from Lorentz's ones. Only Poincaré's results do satisfy the covariance
of the conservation law (23).
31 As it is well known, they only differ from the older Lorentz's formulae [Lo-95]  reproduced in our
Eqs. 8  and 9  by the presence of a factor g   in the right hand side of the components E'y', E'z' , H'y' and
H'z' .
32 Einstein's conceptual relations with light are not simple: he speaks alternatively of "light rays", "light
waves", and of "light complex", the latter remaining undefined. In the case of the energy, it seems that
the "complex" is the light contained in some sphere moving with the wave (with velocity c) in one frame.
This  sphere  is  viewed  as  an  ellipsoid  moving  with  velocity  c  in  the  other  frame.  The  energy  of  the
"complex"  is the product of the "time averaged energy density " times the volume. Notice that if Einstein
discusses at length properties of "existing light" (Doppler effect, energy  of a "light complex", radiation
pressure), he avoids to discuss the process of emission of light by accelerated particles.
33 For the first time, Einstein makes here an allusion to Lorentz : "If we imagine the electric charges to
be invariably coupled to small rigid bodies (ions, electrons), these equations are the electromagnetic basis
of the Lorentzian electrodynamics and optics of moving bodies" . This doesn't tell us much on which
work of Lorentz between 1886 and 1904 he refers to.

19

"Since - as follows from the theorem of addition of velocities (§ 5) - the vector u' is nothing else
than the velocity of the electric charge, measured in the system k, we have the proof that, on the basis of
our kinematical principles, the electrodynamic foundation of Lorentz's theory of the electrodynamics of
moving bodies is in agreement with the principle of relativity."

The next sentence is interesting; Einstein writes:

"In addition, I may briefly remark that the following important law may easily be deduced from
the developed equations: If an electrically charged body is in motion anywhere in space without altering
its charge when regarded from a system of co-ordinates moving with the body, its charge also remains -
when regarded from the "stationary "system K - constant."

In other words, the final statement of these paragraphs on electrodynamics is just the
starting point of the analogous Poincaré's study. This underlines the difference of point
of  view  between  the  two  authors  in  their  simultaneous  and  original  first  complete
proofs of the covariance of Lorentz's electrodynamics.

Let me now come back on § 5 of Poincaré's paper (Langevin waves) which has
no counter part in Einstein's paper. It concerns the electromagnetic field created by a
charged particle in motion. It is well known that this field can be separated into two
parts:  a  part  linear  in  the  acceleration  of  the  particle  (that  Langevin  calls  "the
acceleration wave") and another part which depends only on the velocity (that Langevin
calls "the velocity wave"). We know that only the former subsists asymptotically and
that  it  represents  the  radiation  (light)  actually  emitted  by  the  accelerated  particle.
Poincaré observes that the velocity wave is nothing else than the Lorentz's transform of
the static electric field of the particle at rest, when the particle is given its velocity by a
proper Lorentz's transformation. Things are not so easy to handle for the accelerated
wave.  However,  Poincaré  remarks  that  essential  features  of  the  wave,  previously
discovered  by  Hertz  for  the  emission  of  radiation  by  a  slowly  moving  accelerated
particle,  must  remain  true  when  the  particle  has  a  higher  velocity  because  they
correspond to Lorentz's invariant quantities . These properties are the following ones:
the  electric  and  magnetic  fields  have  the  same  magnitude,  they  are  mutually
perpendicular and they are both perpendicular to the normal to the wave front. Poincaré
shows here his handiness in manipulating invariants to elucidate rather complicated
physical phenomena.

But  Poincaré  is  not  yet  completely  satisfied  with  his  direct  check  of  the
covariance of Maxwell-Lorentz's equations of §1. He wants to complete his analysis by
a careful study of the derivation of these equations from a principle of least action (§ 2
and  3).  This  part  of  the  paper  is  really  a  master  piece  of  the  calculus  of  variations.
Poincaré  succeeds  to  derive  Maxwell-Lorentz's  equations  and  Lorentz's  force  in  a
covariant way from the variation calculus. He uses the following "action" 34:

(25)

J = 

dt dt   

 + r

∂E
∂t

 v  .A - 1
2

  E2 + H2   ,

the integral being taken over all space (dt  is the volume element of space ) and time;
alternatively, he also uses the simpler form:

(25')

J = 

dt dt   1
2

   H2 - E2    ,

which  is  equivalent  to  the  former  and  which  will  prove  easier  to  handle  in  the
calculations of the dynamics of the electron.

34    Poincaré's  calculus  is  based  on  conventions  which  differ  by  signs  from    the  modern  notations.
Therefore, I change the sign of his lagrangian density in order to agree with current conventions.

20

Furthermore, as it was correctly pointed out by Logunov [Lg-95], some details
of the calculations of § 3 leave no doubt about the understanding by Poincaré of the
relativity of length and time intervals measured in different inertial reference frames.

3-The dynamics of the electron.

Let  us  now  consider  the  problem  of  establishing  the  dynamical  equations  of
motion for a particle. No other part of the detailed comparison of the works of both
authors can better illustrate the difference of their interests. Einstein's treatment of the
problem is short (§10), simple and totally unusual for the epoch. He doesn't refer to any
kind  of  electromagnetic  structure  of  the  electron  as  it  was  then  customary  (Cf.  the
works of J.J. Thomson (1881), J. Larmor (1894), Abraham [Ab-02], Lorentz [Lo-04],
Langevin  [La-05]  and  others).  Poincaré's  treatment  is  extensive  (§  6-8),  of  higher
mathematical level, and essentially based on the electromagnetic model of the electron;
it also provides the title of the paper.

Let us start with Einstein's treatment of the problem. He considers some material
particle with a definite mass and electric charge, and he calls it "electron" only for the
sake of convenience. Einstein assumes that, if this particle is instantaneously at rest,
then Newton's dynamical equation of motion must be valid, with the sole electric force
on the right hand side. According to the principle of relativity,  if he then communicates
to  this  particle  its  actual  velocity  by  an  appropriate  Lorentz's  transformation,
transforming  of  course  accordingly  the  acceleration  and  the  force,  he  finds  the
relativistic instantaneous equation of motion. Einstein performs this transformation for
an instantaneous velocity along the x-axis and stops there his reasoning. He apparently
doesn't realise that this equation is then only instantaneously valid and that an instant
later,  the  motion  will  not  any  more  be  along  the  x-axis.  Therefore  his  dynamical
equation of motion is not correct. Furthermore, probably influenced by Abraham's work
(not quoted), he makes a wrong choice for the definition of the force and accordingly,
he gets a wrong value for the "transverse" mass. Nevertheless, he mentions that:

"With a different definition of forces and accelerations we should naturally obtain other values
for the masses. This shows us that in comparing different theories of the motion of the electron we must
proceed very cautiously."

He generalises his results by a mere sleight of hand:

"We  remark  that  these  results  as  to  the  mass  are  also  valid  for  ponderable  material  points,
because  a  ponderable  material  point  can  be  made  into  an  electron  (in  our  sense  of  the  word)  by  the
addition of an electric charge, no matter how small ."

It looks as if  Einstein were not really interested in the question of the electron
dynamics 35. Nevertheless, he goes one step further with his (wrong) equation and he
uses (correctly!) the sole x-component for a finite rectilinear motion along the x-axis, in
order to compute the kinetic energy of the electron as being the energy withdrawn from
the electrostatic field when the electron increases its velocity from zero to its actual
value v. In that way, he finds that the kinetic energy of the electron is equal to:

(26)

W = mc2 [ (1- v2/c2)-1/2 - 1] .

This formula interests him much more than the dynamical equations themselves. He
extends immediately its validity to any ponderable matter, ".... by virtue of the argument
stated  above ". We shall see later how this bold extension will allow him to derive his
famous mass-energy equivalence formula.

One  sees  that  Einstein  did  not  really  succeed  in  1905  to  get  the  correct
dynamical equations of motion of an electron. But his genial intuition was then enough

35 The correct dynamical equations of motion were obtained along Einstein's way of reasoning by Max
Planck [Pl-06]. See also Pl-07 and Pl-08.

21

to put him right away very close to his most extraordinary discovery of the equivalence
of mass and energy [Ei-05; 5].

Let us now come to Poincaré's treatment of the problem. I shall present it with
some  details,  because  it  is  really  the  centre  of  the  paper.  Poincaré  adopts  fully  the
electromagnetic image of the electron, as it was previously proposed by several authors
(see  refs.  here  above):  dynamically,  the  electron  is  nothing  else  than  the
electromagnetic field created by its own electric charge. Therefore, the "action" that
defines the electron free motion is the electromagnetic action (25'), where the fields are
created by the charge e. In order to avoid the divergence of the action integral at small
distances that happens in the case of a point particle, one has to assume that the charge
is distributed in some (unknown) way in a very small volume. All authors agree that, in
the absence of any physically privileged direction (i.e., for an electron at rest in the
ether), this distribution of charge is spherically symmetric. The models differ from each
other  when  some  privileged  direction  exists,  f.i.  when  the  electron  is  in  uniform
translation with respect to the ether. Poincaré wants to compare these different models
on grounds of their reaction to the general Lorentz's transformation, including the scale
factor  l(v).  Beside  the  traditional  cases  of  the  electron  at  rest  in  the  ether  and  the
electron  in  uniform  translation  with  respect  to  the  ether,  he  wants  to  consider  what
happens to the latter when one formally  carries it to rest by a Lorentz's transformation;
this is the essence of his distinction between the "real" electron (l'électron "vrai") and
the  "ideal"  electron  (l'électron  "idéal").  He  adopts  a  general  ellipsoidal  model  with
cylindrical symmetry around the velocity, therefore characterised by two parameters:
the longitudinal axis r, and the transversal axis q r. As usual the electron is spherically
symmetric when at rest in ether, but this hypothesis turns out to be of no importance in
the  following,  because  the  discussion  focuses  on  the  difference  between  the  "real"
electron and the "ideal" electron. Poincaré pays special attention to the three following
models, but his discussion remains general:

Electron model.

At rest in ether.

Real electron.

Ideal electron.

Abraham:

Langevin:

Spherical.

Lorentz:

Spherical.

Spherical and rigid.

Prolate ellipsoid.

Oblate ellipsoid,
constant volume.

Spherical, but
dilated volume.

Oblate ellipsoid,
contracted volume.

Spherical, alike
in the ether.

If  one  compares  these  three  models  on  grounds  of  the  general  conformal  Lorentz's
transformation with l = l(v), one sees that Abraham's model is not compatible with this
transformation (rigid spherical  electron), that Langevin's model corresponds to l(v) =
[1  -  (v/c)2]1/6,  and  that  Lorentz's  model  corresponds  to  l(v)  =1.  If  one  extends  the
comparison within the larger class of models considered by Poincaré, the conclusion
remains that Lorentz's model is the only one  compatible with l(v) =1, i.e. compatible
with a group structure based on the sole relative velocity. In other words, Lorentz's
model is the only one which can be called "relativistic". In the crucial choice which he
will have to make, between a very satisfactory purely electromagnetic model which
unfortunately  is  non  relativistic  (Langevin),  and  a  non  completely  electromagnetic
model which is relativistic (Lorentz), Poincaré doesn't hesitate:

"L'avantage  de  la  théorie  de  Langevin,  c'est  qu'elle  ne  fait  intervenir  que  les  forces
électromagnétiques et les forces de liaison: mais elle est incompatible avec le postulat de relativité; c'est
ce que Lorentz avait montré, c'est ce que je retrouve à mon tour par une autre voie en faisant appel aux
principes de la théorie des groupes. Il faut donc en revenir à la théorie de Lorentz; mais si l'on veut la
conserver et éviter d'intolérables contradictions, il faut supposer une force spéciale qui explique à la fois
la contraction et la constance de deux des axes . J'ai cherché à déterminer cette force, j'ai trouvé qu'elle
peut  être  assimilée  à  une  pression  extérieure  constante,  agissant  sur  l'électron  déformable  et
compressible, et dont le travail est proportionnel aux variations du volume de cet électron ".

22

The choice is clear and shows the importance that Poincaré gives to the principle of
relativity.

The  calculations  of  Poincaré  are  too  complex  to  be  reproduced  here.
Nevertheless,  it  is  important  to  give  some  details  in  order  to  appreciate  the  crucial
choice  that  is  made  here.  Starting  with  the  ordinary  Maxwell's  expressions  for  the
energy  and  the  momentum  of  a  purely  electromagnetic  system,  Poincaré  computes
these quantities for the ideal electron (W', P' = 0) and for the real electron (W, P). With
the help of Lorentz's transformation of the fields and of the volume element dt , he
finds:

(27)

(28)

W  = 

W'  l(v)
1 - (v/c)2

   1 + 1
3

 (v/c)2

  ,

Px  =  4
3 c2

  

W'  l(v)
1 - (v/c)2

  v  ,

(the components Py and Pz being zero for a real electron in uniform translation along
the x axis). Poincaré computes also the Lagrangian function (i.e. the action by unit of
time) of the electromagnetic electron from Eq. 25' :

(29)

L = 

 dt   1
2

   H2 - E2   =  - W'  l(v)  1 - (v/c)2  .

When he compares the canonical expressions of energy and momentum of a particle
derived from this Lagrangian with the values (27) and (28), he sees that the full scheme
is consistent only if l(v) = [1 - (v/c)2]1/6, i.e., the value of Langevin's model. A simple
check of this calculation (otherwise, a bit sophisticated) is obtained by computing the
low velocity approximations of (27) and (28):

(27')

(28')

W  =  W' +  W'
c2

   5
6

  + l'(0)   v 2  + O(v4) ,

Px  =  4
3

  W'
c2

  v  +  O(v3)  ,

from which we see that the masses associated, on the one hand, with the kinetic energy,
and on the other hand, with the momentum, are only equal if the derivative l'(0) = - 1/6 .
This is the case of Langevin's model. But Poincaré rejects Langevin's model because it
is non relativistic, and he takes the alternative option to complete Lorentz's model by
introducing non electromagnetic forces. Through rather cumbersome calculations, he
finds  that  it  is  sufficient  to  introduce  a  constant  external  pressure  whose  work  is
proportional to the volume of the electron 36. It is remarkable that this complementary

 Tm

36 Nowadays, with our better knowledge of the relativistic tensor calculus, the calculations of Poincaré
    defines  an  energy-
can  be  understood  in  a  much  simpler  way.  The  energy-momentum  tensor  Tm
 by integration of the fourth components Tm0  over all space, if and only if, it is
momentum four vector Pm
conserved: ¶
 = 0. This is not possible for the electromagnetic energy momentum tensor in case of
the presence of electric charge (the electron). Therefore, one has to complete this electromagnetic energy-
momentum tensor in order to satisfy the conservation condition. The simplest solution is to introduce ad-
hoc  diagonal  terms,  like  a  constant  external  pressure  for  the  space  components  Tkk  ,  and  the
corresponding work for the time component Too. (Cfr. for instance: Ar-66 or Jc-75).The pressure and its
work can eventually be computed if one chooses a model for the electrostatic charge distribution of the
electron (example of such a calculation in Ar-66,); but such a calculation is not necessary if the goal is
simply to get the equation of motion of the electron as an entity.

23

n
n
n
potential of forces doesn't change the general form of the Lagrangian (29), now written
with  l(v)  =1.  One  gets  in  that  way  the  full  compatibility  of  the  general  canonical
formalism with the principle of relativity. The rest of the story is then straightforward:
from the Lagrangian (29') of the electron in free motion 37, the canonical formula (30),
and  the  Lorentz's  force  acting  as  an  external  force  on  this  electron,  one  obtains
Poincaré's dynamical equation (31) :

(29')

(30)

(31)

L = - W' 

 1 - ( v / c )2  ,

   

d
dt

∂L
∂vk

   = Fk  ,  ( k = 1,2,3) ,

 

d
dt

( W' / c2 ) vk
 1 - ( v / c )2

  = e [ Ek + ( v ·

 H )k ]   ,  (k = 1,2,3).

Unfortunately, Poincaré doesn't write his equations in this elegant and modern way. He
uses  units  such  that  W'/c2  is  equal  to  one  (and  therefore,  he  possibly  misses  the
discovery of the mass energy relation...!), and he uses cumbersome notations which
tend to obscure the content of the equations 38.

Poincaré  doesn't  make  an  explicit  use  of  this  equation.  Instead  of  that,  he
controls  once  more  that  the  equation  is  relativistically  covariant  and  that  Lorentz's
approach is the only one which can give such a covariance. In the latter derivation, he
extends  the  validity  of  the  dynamical  equation  to  arbitrary  forces  provide  they
transform under Lorentz's transformation as does the electromagnetic Lorentz's force.
Equation  (31)  corresponds  to  the  motion  of  one  electron  in  some  external  field,
neglecting the loss of energy due to its own radiation (quasi stationary motion). In § 8 ,
Poincaré shows that it can be extended to a system of electrons, where the motion of
each electron is submitted to a common external field and to the electromagnetic field
created by all the other ones.

At the end of his long paper, Poincaré tries to build a model of a relativistic
gravitation (§9). We retain of this paragraph that it was the occasion to discover several
"four partners" which transform alike "time and space co-ordinates", and also several
kinematical invariants. He finally obtains a gravitational attraction law between two
massive bodies which "improves" Newton's law in the sense that it is "retarded" and
"relativistic covariant":

"Nous voyons d'abord que l'attraction corrigée se compose de deux composantes; l'une parallèle
au vecteur qui joint les positions des deux corps, l'autre parallèle à la vitesse du corps attirant. Rappelons
que quand nous parlons de la position ou de la vitesse du corps attirant, il s'agit de sa position ou de sa
vitesse au moment où l'onde gravifique le quitte; pour le corps attiré, au contraire, il s'agit de sa position
ou de sa vitesse du moment où l'onde gravifique l'atteint, cette onde étant supposée se propager à la
vitesse de la lumière."

Poincaré notices that his tentative approach to build a new gravitational law compatible
with  the  general  requirements  of  Lorentz's  invariance  and  the  Newton's  law  as  low
velocity limit, cannot have a unique solution. As an example, he immediately proposes
several  alternative  ones.  These  new  gravitational  laws  were  never  really  applied  in
astronomy.  The  sole  application  was  an  early  estimate  of  the  advance  of  Mercury's
perihelion; it was found to be in the good direction, but too small (7'' instead of 38",
mentioned in [Po-53]). These attempts to build a gravitational law in the framework of

37 W' is as before the total energy of the ideal electron (electron at rest); it contains now the electrostatic
energy and the work of the pressure.
38 It might be possible that to-day hastened readers would not recognise that Poincaré's  eq. 5 of § 7  is
nothing else than  eq. 31 here above!

24

special relativity are now totally superseded by Einstein's theory of gravitation (1913-
1916).

 
As I said at the beginning of this Part 3, one should include in Einstein's 1905
work, the paper "Ist die Trägheit eines Körpers von seinem Energie inhalt abhängig?"
that he wrote in September [Ei-05; 5]. He imagines that a body at rest in some inertial
frame  sends  plane  waves  of  light  in  some  direction  with  an  energy  L/2,  and
simultaneously just the same quantity of light in the opposite direction 39. Because of
the symmetry of the process, the state of motion of the emitter is not changed: the body
remains at rest, but its total energy is reduced by an amount L. Einstein considers then
the same process from another inertial frame in uniform translation along the common x
axis. In this frame, the energies of the plane waves of light have the transformed values
that were computed in his preceding paper:

(32)

L'
2

 =  L
2

  

1 ± v cos f
 
1 - (v/c)2

  ,

where f
 is the angle of emission with respect to the x axis. Here again, because of the
symmetry of the emission, the state of motion of the body is not changed, but its total
energy is reduced by an amount L/(1-(v/c)2)1/2 .  Let  E0 and E1 be the total energies
before and after the process in the rest frame, similarly H0 and H1 the corresponding
energies in the moving frame; one has evidently:

(33)

( H0 - E0 ) - ( H1 - E1 )  = L 

1

1 - ( v / c )2 

  - 1    ;

Einstein envisages the possibility that in each frame a conventional additive constant
could be added to the kinetic energy K in order to define the total energy : E = K + C,
similarly, H = K' + D (remember that in Eq. 26 he only obtains the transformation law
of the kinetic energy !). However, these conventional constants C and D do not change
in the physical process, and therefore, they disappear from Eq. 33 which becomes the
difference of kinetic energy (as seen from the moving frame) when light is emitted:

(33')

K0  -  K1 = L 

1

1 - ( v / c )2 

  - 1    .

If we compare with the expression (26) of the kinetic energy, we see that it looks as if
the body had lost a fraction L/c2 of its mass when emitting (at rest) an energy L in the
form of radiation. Einstein concludes:

"  The  fact  that  the  energy  withdrawn  from  the  body  becomes  energy  of  radiation  evidently

makes no difference, so that we are led to the more general conclusion that:

The mass of a body is a measure of its energy-content; if the energy changes by L, the mass
changes in the same sense by L/9 x 10 20, the energy being measured in ergs, and the mass in grammes.
It is not impossible that with bodies whose energy-content is variable to a high degree (e.g. with

radium salts) the theory may be successfully put to the tests.

If  the  theory  corresponds  to  the  facts,  radiation  conveys  inertia  between  the  emitting  and

absorbing bodies."

39 This reasoning is typical of a thermodynamics way of thinking. One considers a process, without
questioning about the way it can happen: by means of which mechanism can such a localised "body" emit
such plane waves? Which kind of body do we have to consider? Certainly not an electron since it cannot
emit light when it remains at rest ! However, the crucial formula (26)  giving the kinetic energy (which
will be used at the end of the reasoning) was derived for an electron, and only boldly extended to any
ponderable matter!

25

During the period 1906-1907, Einstein published three other proofs of his mass
energy relation; this underlines enough the importance he attached to his equivalence
law. May be did he also consider that this first proof was not convincing enough in
view of the enormous importance of the discovery?

Part 4.- Conclusions.

Historians sometimes like to speculate on "What would have happened if ...?"
40. This of course is not really "good" history; but in our case, it is certainly a valid
alternative to the vain quarrels on the question of priority, or on the question of a "real
understanding" of the meaning of relativity by one among its creators. Let us therefore
try to play the game.

The question "What would have happened if ...?" cannot reasonably be posed in
the  case  of  works  which  continuously  developed  on  many  years,  like  Lorentz's
electrodynamics. In thirty years (1875-1905), the great physicist built an Oeuvre that
contains so many results that profoundly influenced the development of physics that it
becomes nearly impossible to envisage the possibility of its non existence.

The question "What would have happened if ...?"  can more reasonably be posed
in case of rather isolated events (like Poincaré's 1905 papers), or a fortiori, in case of
totally unexpected events (like Einstein's original paper "Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter
Körper" ).

"What would have happened if Poincaré's papers of 1905 did not exist"? The
answer  is  immediate  since  these  papers  were  nearly  forgotten  41  and  didn't  really
influence the later development of physics!

"What would have happened if Einstein's original paper "Zur  Elektrodynamik
bewegter Körper"  of 1905 did not exist"? This time, the answer is not so easy to give.
On the one hand, all important formulae existed already or would have appeared at the
same time in Poincaré's papers (even if some of them are there derived in a different
way;  see  f.i.  the  formulae  of  the  new  dynamics).  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  clear  that
Einstein's radical approach announced some kind of new physics. Although it is most
probably true that Einstein grasped some ideas in earlier works of Lorentz and Poincaré
(f.i.: the idea of synchronisation of distant clocks by exchange of light signals that he
probably met in [Po-00], or Lorentz's transformation formulae that he knew to exist and
which played probably the role of a guideline 42), their new derivation opened the way
to  further  progress.  This  potentiality  was  probably  perceived  early  by  some  very
influent physicists (like Max Planck) who emphasised the importance of the work of
the young physicist and encouraged further developments.

Einstein versus Poincaré ! We meet here one of the mysteries of scientific fate.
A priori, in 1905, the comparative chances of success of the two works looked rather
unequal. On the one hand, one of the greatest mathematicians of the turn of the century,
whose reputation as a physicist was also great, of which each new contribution to both
disciplines was eagerly looked for by the scientific world. On the other hand, a young
physicist  nearly  unknown.  At  the  same  time,  they  both  publish  the  solution  of  an
important problem that troubled physics for many years. Of course, as we have seen,
the two papers are not identical and each of them has its own merits. Among these
respective merits, one has to acknowledge a higher mathematical level of reasoning in
Poincaré's  work,  and  a  new  insight  on  the  problem  that  opens  the  way  to  further
developments in Einstein's work. As an example, I recall that Poincaré keeps on firmly,
with  full  mathematical  rigour,  a  pure  wave  theory  of  light  (as  it  was  commonly

40 For example "What would have happened if the issue of some rather decisive battle, like the battle of
Waterloo, had been different ?".
41 Except for details like Poincaré's pressure.
42 Not necessary to insist on the fact that what I  write here is pure speculation, since Einstein not only
makes no reference to previous works, but denies to have known about them (see Mi-81, Pa-82).

26

admitted at the time), maintaining thereby the very existence of an ether whose physical
properties determine those of light and gravitation [Po-06]:

"Si la propagation de l'attraction se fait avec la vitesse de la lumière, cela ne peut être par une
rencontre fortuite, cela doit être parce que c'est une fonction de l'éther; et alors, il faudra chercher à
pénétrer la nature de cette fonction, et la rattacher aux autres fonctions du fluide."

 Einstein rejects radically the existence of such a medium and finds skilfully his way
between contradictory conceptions of light, using the rather vague concept of "light
complex". For Einstein, Relativity should be considered independently of Maxwell-
Lorentz's electromagnetic theory; it is a fundamental Principle that defines a general
framework where theories have to be developed.

This  difference  of  conception  is  certainly  not  enough  to  justify  that  only  the
work of the latter is to-day considered as the founding paper of Relativity, while the
work of the former is nearly forgotten. So what? Why does the living history of our
century ( i.e. education, scientists knowledge and even public knowledge) remember
only one name? One can put forward a lot of hypotheses: Poincaré's wrong choice when
addressing his main paper to a mathematical journal not so well known to physicists
(?), mathematical presentation unfamiliar to physicists (?), impact of the immediate
support to Einstein's work by Planck and other important German physicists (?), early
death  of  Poincaré  (1912)  which  prevents  a  possible  sharing  of  a  Nobel  Prize  for
Relativity with Einstein and Lorentz (?). I don't think that any one of these hypotheses
can  give  a  satisfactory  explanation.  It  is  also  often  said  that  Einstein  was  more
"relativist" than Poincaré. The detailed comparison of the contents of the 1905 papers
does  not  support  this  assertion.  It  is  however  true  that  an  important  difference  of
attitude with respect to the new theory exists between the two men after 1905:

- Poincaré seems to consider that the question is settled and makes no new effort

to go further;

-  at  the  opposite,  1905  is  for  Einstein  the  starting  point  for  new,  advanced

studies on the consequences of the Principle of Relativity.

In  this  sense,  Einstein  is  a  "more  relativistically  committed"  scientist  than
Poincaré. Even if one limits the discussion to special relativity (as I do in this paper),
Einstein's "post 1905" contributions to relativity are important, and it is worth to stress
that they were directly inspired by the new spirit he introduced in his first paper. His
1907  review  paper  [Ei-07]  contains  not  only  some  essential  clarifications  on  the
Principles he makes use of (nl. his concepts of "identical" clocks and solids rods), some
improvements of his earlier results (nl. the new relativistic mechanics), but it contains
also new and important contributions: further clarification of the mass-energy relation,
extension of the Principle of Relativity to accelerated frames, Principle of "Equality of
the  inertial  and  the  gravitational  masses"  ,  and  the  first  predictions  concerning  the
influence  of  a  gravitational  field  on  light.  If  one  includes  General  Relativity  in  the
discussion, then of course Einstein's work is much more important than the work of any
one else.

 Nevertheless, in spite of this incontestable dominance, when Einstein received
the Nobel Prize in Physics 1921 (given only in 1922), the mention was " for his services
to Theoretical Physics, and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric
effect ", with no explicit mention to his work on Relativity  [No-67]. The presentation
speech was given by Professor S. Arrhenius, Chairman of the Nobel Committee for
Physics.  It  contains  only  a  short  allusion  to  relativity  as  being  the  subject  of  lively
debates in philosophical circles, which has also some astrophysical implications still
under examination. Einstein could not attend the ceremony (he was then in Japan) and
there  was  no  Nobel  Lecture.  It  was  replaced  by  a  "Lecture  delivered  to  the  Nordic
Assembly  of  Naturalists  at  Gothenburg"  in  1923,  entitled  "Fundamental  ideas  and
problems of the theory of relativity". These facts look strange enough to awake the
attention  of  historians  and  biographs.  Pais  makes  a  detailed  analysis  of  the
circumstances  in  §30  of  his  book  [Pa-82]  :  "How  Einstein  got  the  Nobel  Prize".
Although many physicists nominated several times Einstein for his work on relativity, it
seems  that  the  Academy  of  Sweden  was  in  no  hurry  to  award  relativity  before

27

experimental issues were clarified, first in special relativity, later in general relativity.
Pais concludes that it was the Academy's bad fortune not to have anyone among its
members who could competently evaluate the content of relativity theory in those early
years. Leveugle proposes an alternative explanation to these strange facts [Le-94]. The
Academy  could  have  been  influenced  by  the  publication  in  1921  of  the  obituary  of
Poincaré, written in 1914 by Lorentz, where the great old scientist whose authority in
the matter was incontestable wrote:

"Poincaré a formulé le Postulat de Relativité, terme qu'il a été le premier à employer".

This sentence was strong enough to stand an insurmountable obstacle to the possible
attribution  of a Nobel Prize for relativity to any one else. Whatever the reason, one can
only notice that no Nobel Prize of Physics was attributed for one of the major discovery
in physics of the century!

Let  us now come back again on the question of the ether. It is generally asserted
that Einstein rendered this notion completely obsolete.  It is at least the conclusion that
some physicists promptly derive from his 1905 introduction:

"The introduction of a "luminiferous ether" will prove to be superfluous inasmuch as the view
here to be developed will not require an "absolutely stationary space" provided with special properties,
nor assign a velocity-vector to a point of the empty space in which electromagnetic processes take place".

This  conclusion  must  however  be  tempered  by  the  following  other  Einstein's
formulation [Ei-20]:

"According to the theory of general relativity, space possesses physical properties; therefore, in
this  sense,  an  ether  exists.  According  to  the  theory  of  general  relativity,  space  without  ether  is
inconceivable, for non only the propagation of light would be impossible, but furthermore, there would
be no possible existence for rods and clocks, and therefore also for space-time distances in a physical
sense. However, this ether must no be conceived  as having the property which characterises ponderable
media, i.e. as being formed of parts that can be followed in time: the notion of motion cannot be applied
to it".

In  between,  Einstein  had  built  general  relativity  and  understood  that  the  physical
properties of light and gravitation forced us to come back to a less radical position on
the subject. In a sense, this was a kind of revenge for the two other creators of special
relativity.

28

[Ab-02]

[Ar-66]

[Ei-05; 1]

[Ei-05; 2]

[Ei-05; 3]

[Ei-05; 4]

[Ei-05; 5]

[Ei-05; 6]

[Ei-06]

[Ei-07]

[Ei-20]

[Ei-93]

[Ga-32]

[Go-67]

[Ja-66]

[Ja-74]

[Jc-75]

[Ke-65]

[Ko-75]

[La-05]

[Le-94]

Bibliography.

M. Abraham, Dynamik des Elektrons ,
Göttinger Nachrichten (1902) 20-41.
H. Arzeliès, Rayonnement et dynamique du corpuscule chargé fortement
accéléré.
Gauthier-Villars, Paris, (1966).
A. Einstein, Über einen die Erzeugung und Verwandlung des Lichtes 
betreffenden heuristschen Gezichtspunkt ,
Ann. d. Ph. 17 (1905) 132-148.
A. Einstein, Eine neue Bestimmungen des  Moleküldimension ,
Ph. D. Thesis; Ann. d. Ph. 19 (1906) 289-306
A. Einstein, Über die von der molekularkinetischen Theorie der Warmte
geforderde Bewegung von in ruhenden Flüssigkeiten suspendierten 
Teilchen ,
Ann. d. Ph. 17 (1905) 549-560.
A. Einstein, Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Körper,
Ann. d. Ph., 17 (1905) 892-921;
English reprint in [So-22], French reprint in [Ei-93].
A. Einstein, Ist die  Trägheit eines Körpers von seinem Energie inhalt 
abhängig?,
Ann. d. Ph., 18 (1905) 639-641;
English reprint in [So-22], French reprint in [Ei-93].
A. Einstein, Zur Theorie der Brownschen Bewegung ,
Ann. d. Ph. 19 (1906) 371-381.
A. Einstein, Das Prinzip von der Erhaltung der 
Schwerpunktsbewegungen und die Trägheit der Energie,
Ann. d. Ph., 20 (1906) 627-633;
French reprint in [Ei-93].
A. Einstein, Relativitätsprinzip und die aus demselben gezogenen 
Folgerungen,
Jarhb. der Radioaktivität, 4 (1907) 411-462 & 5, 98-99.
French reprint in [Ei-93].
A. Einstein, L'éther et la théorie de la relativité.
Lecture delivered at the Univ. of Leyde on 5 May 1920.
Gauthier-Villars, Paris, (1953).
A. Einstein, "Oeuvres choisies", 6 tomes,
Éd du Seuil et CNRS, (1993); see tome 2:"Relativités".
Galileo, Dialogo, Giornata seconda , (1632)
Ed. Naz. delle Opere di Galileo Galilei, Tome 7, 212-214.
S. Goldberg, Henri Poincaré and Einstein's theory of relativity,
Am. J. of Phys., 35, 934-944.
M. Jammer, The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics , 
McGraw-Hill Cy, New York, (1966).
M.Jammer, The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics ,
Wiley-Interscience Publ., New York, (1974).
J.D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics,
(2nd. Ed.), J. Wiley & Sons, Inc., New-York, (1975).
G.H. Keswani, Origin and concept of relativity,
Brit. J. Phil. Sc., 15 (1965) 286-306, 16 19-32.
I.Yu. Kobzarev, Henri Poincaré's St.Louis lecture, and theoretical 
physics on the eve of the theory of relativity,
Sov. Phys. Usp.,17 (1975) 584-592.
P. Langevin, Sur l'origine des radiations et l'inertie electromagnétique ,
J. Physique et Radium, 4 (1905) 165-182.
J. Leveugle, Henri Poincaré et la relativité,
"La jaune et la rouge", avril (1994).

29

[M-R-82/87] J. Mehra and H.Rechenberg, The historical development of quantum 

A.A. Logunov, On the articles by H. Poincaré on the dynamics of the 
electron,
Publ. Depart. of the Joint Inst. for Nuclear Research, Dubna (1995), 
transl. by G. Pontecorvo.
H.A. Lorentz, Versuch einer Theorie der elektrischen und optischen 
Erscheinungen in bewegten Körpern , 
Leiden: E.J. Brill (1895); reprint in Collected Papers 5 , 1-137.
H.A. Lorentz, The theory of electrons and the propagation of light , 
Nobel Lecture, Dec. 1902;
reprint in "Nobel Lectures: Physics", Elsevier (1967).
H.A. Lorentz, Electromagnetic phenomena in a system moving with any 
velocity less than that of light ,
Proc. R. Acad. Amsterdam 6 (1904) 809;
reprint in Collected Papers 5 , 172-197.
H.A. Lorentz, The theory of electrons and its applications to the 
phenomena of light and radiant heat ,
Teubner, Leipzig (1909); reprint by Dover (1952).
J. Mawhin, Henri Poincaré et les mathématiques sans oeillères ,
Revue des Questions Scientifiques 169 (1998) 337-365.

theory,
5 tomes, Springer-Verlag, Berlin (1982/1987).
H. Minkowski, Raum und Zeit,
Conf. Köln (1908), Phys. Zeit., 20 (1909) 104-111;
English reprint in [So-22].
A.I. Miller, Albert Einstein's special theory of relativity. 
Emergence (1905) and early interpretation(1905-1911), 
Addison-Wesley Pub. Cy., New-York, (1981).
A.I. Miller, Why did  Poincaré not formulated special relativity in 1905?,
in "Henri Poincaré, Science et Philosophie",
Ak. Verlag, Berlin,  and Blanchard, Paris,  (1994).
Nobel Lectures, Physics 1901-1921 ,
Nobel Foundation & Elsevier, Amsterdam (1967).
A. Pais, Subtle is the Lord... The science and life of Albert Einstein,
Oxford Univ. Press (1982).
M. Paty, Poincaré et le principe de relativité,
in "Henri Poincaré, Science et Philosophie",
Ak. Verlag, Berlin,  and Blanchard, Paris,  (1994).
Y. Pierseaux, La " structure fine " de la théorie de la relativité restreinte,
Thèse de Doctorat, Université Libre de Bruxelles, (1998);
also L'Harmattan, Paris, (1999).
M. Planck, Das Prinzip der Relativitätund  die Grundgleichungen der 
Mechanik ,
Verh. D. Phys. Ges. ,4 (1906) 136-141.
M. Planck, Zur Dynamik bewegter Systeme ,
Berliner Bericht, 13 (1907) 542-570;
Ann. d. Physik, 26 (1907) 1-34.
M. Planck, Bemerkungen zum Prinzip der Aktion und Reaktion in der 
allgemein Dynamik,
Verh. D. Phys. Ges., 9 (1908) 301-305.
H. Poincaré, À propos de la théorie de M. Larmor ,
L'éclairage électrique (1895);
reprint in "Oeuvre" Tome IX, 369-426.
H. Poincaré, La mesure du temps ,
Rev. de Métaphysique et de Morale 6 (1898) 1-13.
H. Poincaré, La théorie de Lorentz et le principe de réaction ,
Archives Néerlandaises des Sciences Exactes et Naturelles, 2ième série, 
5 (1900) 252-278; reprint in "Oeuvre" Tome IX, 464-488.

[Lg-95]

[Lo-95]

[Lo-02]

[Lo-04]

[Lo-09]

[Ma-98]

[Mi-08]

[Mi-81]

[Mi-94]

[No-67]

[Pa-82]

[Pa-94]

[Pi-98]

[Pl-06]

[Pl-07]

[Pl-08]

[Po-95]

[Po-98]
 
[Po-00]

30

[Po-01]

[Po-04]

[Po-05]

[Po-06]

 [Po-08]

[Po-53]

 
[Re-99]

[Re-00]

[Ro-65]

[Sc-71]

[St-95]

[So-22]

[To-71]

[Wi-51]

H. Poincaré, (Analyse de ses travaux scientifiques rédigée en 1901), 
"Oeuvre" Tome IX, 1-14, (1954).
H. Poincaré, Les principes de la physique-mathématique ,
Conférence de St-Louis (1904);
reprint in "Physics for a New Century", Am. Inst. of Phys. 281-299.
H. Poincaré, Sur la dynamique de l'électron,
C.R. Ac. Sc. Paris, 140, 5 juin 1905,1504-1508;
reprint in "Oeuvre" Tome IX, 489-493.
H. Poincaré, Sur la dynamique de l'électron,
Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo, 21 (1906) 129-175;
reprint in "Oeuvre" Tome IX, 494-586.
H. Poincaré, "La dynamique de l'électron ",
Revue générale des sciences pures et appliquées 19 (1908) 386-402; 
reprint in "Oeuvre" Tome IX, 551-586.
H. Poincaré, Les limites de la loi de Newton ,
Lectures Notes: Fac. Sc. Paris 1906-1907;
Published by J. Chazy in Bulletin Astronomique 17 (1953) 121-269.
J. Reignier, Éther et mouvement absolu au 19º siècle ,
Revue des Questions Scientifiques 170 (1999) 261-282.
J. Reignier, À propos de la naissance de la relativité restreinte.
Une suggestion concernant la "troisièmehypothèse" de H. Poincaré.
Bull. Acad.Roy. Belg., Cl. Sc., séance du 05/02/2000. (To appear).
L. Rosenfeld, Theory of electrons ,
Dover Publ. NY(1965).
H. Schwartz, Poincaré's Rendiconti Paper on Relativity,
Am. J. Phys., 39 (1971) 1287-1294, 40 (1972) 862-871 & 1282-1287.
J. Stachel, History of relativity ,
in "20th century physics", Vol.1 (1995) 249-356,
Am. Inst. of Phys. Press, (1995).
A.Sommerfeld, Des Relativitätsprinzip,
Teubner, 4 th ed, (1922);English translation (1923),
reprint by Dover (1960).
M.A. Tonnelat, Histoire du principe de relativité ,
Flammarion, Paris, (1971).
Ed. Whittaker, A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity,
Ed. of the Am. Inst. Phys. "The History of Modern Physics",Vol.7 
(1971).

31

