DRIVER ACCELERATOR DESIGN FOR THE 10 KW UPGRADE OF THE 

JEFFERSON LAB IR FEL 

 

D. Douglas, S. V. Benson, G. A. Krafft, R. Li, L. Merminga, and B. C. Yunn 

Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility, Newport News, VA23606, USA 

Table 1: IR Demo and Upgrade Parameters 

Parameters 
energy (MeV) 

Dem
o 

Upgrade 
35-48  80-210 

Iave (mA) 

FEL rep. rate 

(MHz) 

Qbunch (pC) 

bunch s

l (psec) 

Ipeak (A) 

d p/p (%) 

e N (mm-mrad) 

h FEL  

D Efull after FEL 

5 

18.75
-75 
60 

0.4 

60  

¼% 

<13 

½% 
5% 

10 

3.9-125 
135 @ 
75 MHz 
0.2 @ 
135 pC 
270 @ 
135 pC 

½% 

<30 

1% 
10% 

Achieved 
(5/2000) 
20-48 

5 

18.75-75 
135 @ 37.5 

MHz 

0.4 @ 60 pC 

60 @ 60 pC 

¼%  @ 60 pC 
5-10 @ 60 pC 
25 @ 135 pC 

>1% 
6-8% 

 

Abstract 

An upgrade of the Jefferson Lab IR FEL [1] is now un-
der  construction.  It  will  provide  10  kW  output  light 
power in a wavelength range of 2–10 m m. The FEL will 
be  driven  by  a  modest  sized  80–210 MeV, 10 mA en-
ergy-recovering  CW  superconducting  RF  (SRF)  linac. 
Stringent  phase  space  requirements  at  the  wiggler,  low 
beam energy, and high beam current subject the design to 
numerous constraints. These are imposed by the need for 
both  transverse  and  longitudinal  phase  space  manage-
ment,  the  potential  impact  of  collective  phenomena 
(space  charge,  wakefields,  beam  break-up  (BBU),  and 
coherent synchrotron radiation (CSR)), and interactions 
between  the  FEL  and  the  accelerator  RF  system.  This 
report addresses these issues and presents an accelerator 
design  solution  meeting  the  requirements  imposed  by 
physical phenomena and operational necessities. 

1  DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

The Jefferson Lab IR Upgrade FEL will be an evolu-
tionary derivative of the JLab IR Demo FEL. As such, it 
retains  the  paradigm  invoked  for  the  earlier  machine  – 
that  of  a  low  peak,  high  average  power  wiggler-driven 
optical cavity resonator with an energy recovering SRF 
linear accelerator driver operating at high repetition rate. 
The 10 kW design goal will be achieved via an increase in 
both drive beam power (doubled current and quadrupled 
energy) and FEL extraction efficiency (from ½% to 1%), 
and will be accommodated through use of an R5 optical 
cavity geometry [2]. 

This  system  concept  imposes  two  fundamental  re-

quirements on the driver accelerator design: 

• 

the accelerator must deliver an electron beam to 
the  wiggler  with  the  phase  space  appropriately 
configured to drive the FEL interaction, and 
it must energy recover the beam after the FEL. 

• 
The first requirement reflects the need of the FEL for 
specific electron beam properties at the wiggler. These, 
and  other  relevant  system  parameters,  are  presented  in 
Table  1.  Particularly  important  are  high  charge  and  a 
short bunch (to provide high peak current for sufficient 
FEL  gain).  The  energy  recovery  requirement  alleviates 
demands  on  the  RF  drive  system  (both  installed  power 
and  RF  window  tolerances),  limiting  cost  and  reducing 
radiation power from the dumped drive beam.  

 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

Both primary requirements imply numerous subsidiary 
constraints that must be met in the presence of phenom-
ena that can provoke beam quality degradation with con-
sequential  poor  system  performance.  These  include 
space  charge,  BBU,  CSR,  and  the FEL/RF interaction. 
Amongst the subsidiary constraints are: 

full (6-d) phase space matching at the wiggler,  
longitudinal  matching  and  transverse  beam  size 
control during energy recovery,  
preservation  of  beam  quality  in  the  presence  of 
the aforementioned phenomena,  
large acceptance energy recovery transport, and  
insensitivity to, and means for the compensation 
of,  typical  accelerator  errors  such  as  misalign-
ments, excitation errors and phase errors. 

These  requirements  parallel  those  imposed  on  the 
JLab IR Demo FEL driver; the scope is, however, some-
what more challenging, as inspection of Table 1 implies. 
Not  only  must  the  charge  per  bunch  double,  the  bunch 
length at the wiggler must halve so as to quadruple the 
peak  current;  moreover,  the  energy  recovery  process 
must accommodate double the momentum spread. 

2  DESIGN SOLUTION 

Figure 1 illustrates a machine design solution meeting 
the above requirements. It comprises a 10 MeV injector 
(an upgrade of the existing IR Demo injector from 5 to 

s
Figure 1: Jefferson Lab 10 kW IR Upgrade FEL. The machine is shown in the facility vault. 

 

10 mA), a linac consisting of three Jefferson Lab cryo-
modules generating 70 to 200 MeV of energy gain, and a 
recirculator.  The  latter  provides  beam  transport  to,  and 
phase  space  conditioning  of  the  accelerated  electron 
beam for, the FEL and then returns and prepares the drive 
beam for energy recovery in the linac. A summary of the 
function of each machine section will now be provided. 
The injector is a direct upgrade of the IR Demo injec-
tor [3] from 5 mA at 10 MeV to 10 mA at 10 MeV. The 
current  will  be  doubled  by  an  increase  of  the  single 
bunch charge from 60 pC to 135 pC while maintaining 
the 75 MHz repetition rate. Adequate source and injector 
performance  has  already  been  demonstrated  at  the  ele-
vated bunch charge at a source-limited repetition rate of 
37.5  MHz  [4]  and  will  be  characterized  at  full  power 
when a higher power RF drive system is installed. 

Transverse  and  longitudinal  phase  space  management 
begin  in  the  injector.  A  four  quad  telescope  matches 
beam envelopes to the betatron acceptance of the down-
stream  linac,  while  the  choice  of  RF  parameters  and 
momentum compaction of the injection line conspire to 
produce a long, low momentum spread bunch at the linac. 
The linac, which will accelerate the beam by 70 to 200 
MeV,  comprises  three  Jefferson  Lab  cryomodules;  the 
first  and  third  are  conventional  5-cell CEBAF designs, 
the central module is based on new 7-cell Jlab cavities 
[5]. The lower gradient 5-cell modules are placed at the 
end  of  the  accelerator  to  limit  RF  focussing  induced 
mismatch of the low energy injected and energy recov-
ered  beams.  Quad  triplets  between  modules  provide 
beam envelope control during both acceleration and en-
ergy  recovery;  the  beam  is  accelerated  (energy  recov-
ered) off crest (off trough) so as to impose a phase en-
ergy correlation on the longitudinal phase space. This is 
used in subsequent transport to longitudinally match the 
beam to the required phase space at the wiggler (dump). 
The  first  segment  of  the  recirculator  provides  trans-
port of the drive beam from the linac to the FEL. Imme-
diately following the linac, a small dipole separates the 
energy  recovered  and  full  energy  beams,  directing  the 
low  energy    beam  to  a  dump.  A  set  of  three  additional 

identical dipoles completes a chicane of the high energy 
beam,  returning  it  to  the  linac  axis  and  directing  it 
through a six quad telescope, which transversely matches 
it  to  a  recirculation arc. This arc, based on a Bates ge-
ometry [6], is used to transport the beam to the machine 
backleg and to longitudinally condition it in preparation 
for  the  FEL  interaction. The arc first and second order 
momentum compactions (M56 and T566) are selected (us-
ing trim quads and sextupoles) to rotate the bunch (which 
has been slewed by off-crest acceleration) upright at the 
wiggler and to eliminate phase space curvature, produc-
ing a short bunch and high peak current. Downstream of 
the arc, a FODO transport line conveys the beam to the 
FEL insertion. 

The FEL insertion commences with a chicane around 
the upstream end of a 32 m R5  high power optical cavity. 
This provides clearance between electron beam and opti-
cal  components  and  generates  momentum  compaction 
for  a  final  compression  of  the  bunch  length  to  that  re-
quired at the wiggler. A six quad telescope transversely 
matches  the  beam  to  the  wiggler;  a  second  telescope 
downstream of the wiggler provides a transverse match 
from wiggler to the energy recovery transport. A pair of 
small chicanes embedded in the telescopes allows incor-
poration of a 16 m broadband optical cavity, which will 
be used for initial FEL tune-up.  

The energy  recovery  transport  consists  of  a  second 
Bates-style  endloop  (returning  the  beam  to  the  linac) 
followed by a six quad telescope. The beam is matched to 
the arc by the second telescope of the FEL insertion; the 
energy  recovery  telescope  matches  beam  envelopes 
from the arc to the linac acceptance. Trim quads, sextu-
poles, and octupoles in the arc adjust momentum com-
pactions through third order to longitudinally rotate the 
short, very large momentum spread bunch and adjust its 
curvature and torsion in preparation for energy recovery. 
As  energy  recovery  occurs  off-trough,  the  imposed 
phase-energy  correlations  are  selected  to  generate  en-
ergy  compression  during  energy  recovery,  yielding  a 
long, low momentum spread bunch at the dump. 

)
)

m
m

(
(

35
35

30
30

25
25

20
20

15
15

10
10

5
5

0
0

0
0

-5
-5

linac
linac
linac

arc
arc
arc

FEL
FEL
FEL

arc
arc
arc

linac
linac
linac

beta x
beta x
beta y
beta y
10*eta x
10*eta x

20
20

40
40

60
60

80
80

100
100

120
120

140
140

160
160

180
180

path length (m)
path length (m)

Figure 2: Lattice Functions in IR Upgrade  

3  SINGLE PARTICLE DYNAMICS 

The  accelerator  design  is  being  evaluated  using  stan-
dard  methods.  Figure  2  provides  the  obligatory  plot  of 
lattice functions; the chromatic and geometric variations 
of  these  and  other  relevant  phase  space  parameters  has 
been examined for both the linac to wiggler and wiggler 
to linac transports. The overall system behavior in these 
initial studies is appropriate for the support of FEL op-
erations.  Ray-tracing  simulations  of  energy  recovery 
from wiggler to the linac back-end suggest that IR Demo 
performance can be duplicated with proper adjustment of 
the linear, quadratic, and cubic momentum compactions 
of the Upgrade transport system. 

4  BEAM DYNAMICS AND COLLECTIVE 

PHENOMENA 

Beam dynamics concerns include configuration of the 
electron beam for the FEL interaction and the impact of 
collective  effects.  Initial  studies  at  135  pC  indicate 
source  performance  is  adequate.  To  achieve  the  higher 
peak current in the Upgrade, the longitudinal phase space 
can be managed as in the Demo [7]. Adiabatic damping 
will  reduce  the  bunch  intrinsic  relative  momentum 
spread (the “thickness” of the slewed phase ellipse) after 
the  module;  when  rotated  upright  at  the  wiggler,  the 
bunch will then be shorter. Recirculator sextupoles will 
be  used  in  concert  to  compensate  both  lattice  and  RF-
waveform  induced  curvature  of  the  longitudinal  phase 
space. 

A  number  of  collective  phenomena  can  compromise 
system performance. These include space charge, wake-
field effects, BBU, CSR, and the FEL/RF interaction. All 
are under examination within the context of the machine 
design presented above. Space charge effects are signifi-
cant primarily in the injector and at the energy recovery 
dump;  at  energies  over  25  MeV,  IR  Demo  experience 
indicates  system  behavior  will  be  insensitive  to  space 
charge driven phenomena. To date, adequate performance 
at  the  design  single  bunch  charge  of  135  pC  has  been 
demonstrated. Further PARMELA and empirical analysis 
of machine performance, particularly in the injector, will 
occur as the project continues [8]. 

A  preliminary  analysis  of  wakefield  effects  [9]  sug-
gests  an  impendence  budget  based  on  (2”  aperture)  IR 
Demo components will yield marginally acceptable beam 
performance  at  the  FEL.  This  is  a  “worst  case”  result 
subject to improvement through use of larger (3”) aper-
ture  components,  which  may  be  allowed  following  a 
cost-risk-benefit analysis of the vacuum system design.  
Preliminary results extracted from a rudimentary CSR 
simulation  using  a  1-dimensional  longitudinal  wake 
model  suggest  Upgrade  performance  will  not  be  com-
promised  by  CSR  effects.  Future  work  will  involve  the 
application  of  a  more  sophisticated  CSR  model  to  the 
design;  this  will  allow  comprehensive  analysis  of  CSR 
effects in the system, including dependence on details of 
charge distribution within the bunch [10].  

Investigation  of  BBU  effects  suggests  instability 
thresholds will significantly exceed anticipated operating 
currents [11]. Study of the FEL/RF interaction suggests 
that instability in the IR Demo, and thus similarly in the 
IR Upgrade, is managed by feedback mechanisms in the 
RF drive system [12].  

5  PROJECT STATUS 

US  Navy  funding  of  9.3  M$  has  commenced.  A  pre-
liminary machine design has been generated and has gone 
into  engineering.  Full  funding  of  construction  is  ex-
pected in 2001, with beam operations starting in 2002. 

6  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This work was supported by the U. S. Dept. of Energy 

under contract number DE-AC05-84ER40150. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  D. Douglas for the Jefferson Lab IR Demonstration 
FEL  Project  Team,  “The  Jefferson  Lab  1  kW  IR 
FEL”, these proceedings. 

[2]  C. C. Shih, et al., Nuc. Inst. Meth. A304:788 (1991). 
[3]  D. Engwall  et al., PAC’97, pp. 2693-5, Vancouver, 

May 1997. 

[4]  T. Siggins et al., “Performance of the Photocathode 
Gun for the TJNAF FEL”, FEL’2000, Durham, N.C., 
August 2000. 

[5]  J. R. Delayen et al., PAC’99, pp. 934-6, New York, 

29 March-2 April 1999. 

[6]  J. Flanz et al., Nuc. Inst. Meth. A241:325-33 (1985). 
[7]  D. Douglas, op. cit. 
[8]  B. Yunn, work in progress. 
[9]  L. Merminga and B. Yunn, “Electron Beam Collec-
tive  Effects  in  the  Jefferson  Lab  10  kW  IRFEL”, 
FEL’2000, Durham, N.C., August 2000. 

[10] R. Li, PAC’99, pp. 118-22, New York, 29 March-2 

April 1999; R. Li, these proceedings. 

[11] L. Merminga et al., PAC’99, pp. 1180-2, New York, 

29 March-2 April 1999. 

[12] L. Merminga et al., “FEL-RF Instabilities in Recircu-
lating,  Energy-Recovering  Linacs  with  an  FEL”, 
FEL’99, Hamburg, August 1999. 

 

