0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
8
1

 

 
 
 

4
5
1
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

TESTING AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS ON THE ADVANCED 

PHOTON SOURCE (APS) LINEAR ACCELERATOR (LINAC) HIGH-

POWER S-BAND SWITCHING SYSTEM 

A.E. Grelick, N. Arnold, S. Berg, D. Dohan, G. Goeppner, Y.W. Kang,  

A. Nassiri, S. Pasky, G. Pile, T. Smith, S.J. Stein  

Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 60439  USA 

 

 

Abstract 

An  S-band  linear  accelerator  is  the  source  of  particles 
and  the  front  end  of  the  Advanced  Photon  Source  [1] 
injector.    In  addition,  it  supports  a  low-energy  undulator 
test line (LEUTL) and drives a free-electron laser (FEL).  
A  waveguide-switching  and  distribution  system  is  now 
under construction.  The system configuration was revised 
to  be  consistent  with  the  recent  change  to  electron-only 
operation. 
  There  are  now  six  modulator-klystron 
subsystems,  two  of  which  are  being  configured  to  act  as 
hot  spares  for  two  S-band  transmitters  each,  so  that  no 
single  failure  will  prevent  injector  operation.    The  two 
subsystems  are  also  used  to  support  additional  LEUTL 
capabilities and off-line testing.  Design considerations for 
the  waveguide-switching  subsystem,  topology  selection, 
control and protection provisions, high-power test results, 
and current status are described.   

1  INTRODUCTION 

The  rf  power  for  the  APS  linear  accelerator  [2]  is 
provided by five klystrons (L1 through L5), each of which 
feeds one linac sector.  L1 feeds rf power to a thermionic 
rf gun via the exhaust of one accelerating structure.  L2, 
L4, and L5 are conventional sectors, each using a SLED 
cavity  assembly  [3]  to  feed  four  accelerating  structures.  
L3  supplies  rf  power  to  the  photocathode  gun  located  at 
the  beginning  of  the  linac.    For  normal  storage  ring 
injection operation, L1, L2, L4, and L5 are operated, and 
for  the  SASE-FEL  operation,  all  five  units  are  operated.  
A  sixth  klystron-modulator  system  was  installed  in  the 
linac gallery.   Design work is in progress on a waveguide 
distribution  and  switching  system  to  allow  the  third  and 
sixth subsystems to serve as hot spares.  This is a change 
from  the  original  version  of  the  system  [4],  that  would 
have allowed the sixth subsystem to serve as a hot spare 
for  any  of  the  others.    The  most critical design issue for 
this  system  is  waveguide  switch  reliability  at  35  MW-
peak power. 

2  TOPOLOGY CHANGES  

The  change  from  positron  to  electron  operation  in  the 
together  with  LEUTL  operating 
APS  storage  ring, 
requirements,  changed 
linac  configuration  by 
eliminating the L3 accelerating structure.  The L3 klystron 
therefore became an obvious candidate to be used as a hot 

the 

spare.  The current switching system topology is shown in 
Figure 1.  There are now two separate sections.  The first, 
which covers the guns and lower energy sectors is in the 
process of being installed.  In this low-energy section, the 
L3  klystron  serves  as  a  hot  spare  for  the  L1  and  L2 
klystrons  and  powers  either  the  photocathode  rf  gun,  to 
support  LEUTL  operation,  or  the  gun  test  room.    In  the 
second, or high-energy section, the L6 klystron serves as a 
hot spare for the L4 and L5 klystrons and powers the test 
stand  for  switches  and  other  high-power  waveguide 
components.    Implementation  of  the  high-power  section 
has been put on hold pending firm decisions on the likely 
use of higher power klystrons and additional accelerating 
structures in order to provide increased energy for LEUTL 
operation. 

3  HIGH-POWER COMPONENTS 

3.1  Waveguide Switches 

sulfur  hexafluoride 

The  waveguide  switches  must  be  highly  reliable  at  a 
peak power of 35 MW.  Tests had already confirmed that 
commercially  available, 
(SF6) 
pressurized,  WR284  waveguide  switches  were  subject  to 
damage due to breakdown at peak powers greater than 30 
MW [5].  Scaling to the same field strength in the larger 
WR340 waveguide yielded a prediction of operation to 43 
MW  before  having  significant  breakdown  problems.  
Tests  of  WR340  waveguide  switches  were  set  up  an 
additional  time  at  Stanford  Linear  Accelerator  Center 
(SLAC)  Klystron  Microwave  Laboratory. 
  The 
unsuccessful  results  of  the  original  WR340  waveguide 
switch tests [5] were traced to the fact that, contrary to our 
expectations, the purchased WR284-to-WR340 transitions 
were  not  tapered  transitions.    This  time,  electroformed, 
tapered  transitions  were  used.    WR340  switches,  which 
had  been  reworked  by  electropolishing,  were  operated 
when pressurized with SF6 at 30 PSIG.  The results were 
consistent with the prediction.  Three out of four switches 
operated  at  a  peak  power  of  43  MW  or  greater  before 
repetitive  arcing  occurred.    The  fourth  switch  suffered  a 
severe  arc  during  conditioning  and  showed  a  decreased 
return  loss  as  evidence  of  degradation.  To  further 
maximize  high-power  reliability,  an  SF6  conditioner-
dehydrator system is being used to supply pressure in the 
interconnecting waveguides and switches. 

 

.Figure 1: Switching system configuration. 

 

A  similar  system,  which  also  provides  constant 
circulation of the SF6, has been used successfully used at 
the Duke University Free-Electron Laser Laboratory at up 
to  34-MW  peak  power  [6].    Addition  of  this  further 
refinement has not been implemented to date but remains 
an option for the future. 
 

3.2  New WR340 Window 

The  WR284  waveguide  system  uses  purchased 
waveguide windows to provide isolation between vacuum 
and  pressurized  sections  and  to  keep  to  an  irreducible 
minimum  any  possibility  of  contamination  reaching 
accelerating structures or SLED cavities.   

A window is under development in-house for use with 
the WR340 waveguide.  A return loss of greater than 40 
dB  on  all  units  has  been  set  as  a  design  goal.    The 
prototype  window  has  achieved  a  pre-braze  measured 
return loss of 52 dB.  However, very strong sensitivity of 
return  loss  to  assembly  pressure  has  raised  concern  over 
the  ability  to  maintain  tolerances  during  the  brazing 
process. 
  Therefore,  a  modified  design,  which 
incorporates  tuning  adjustments  that  can  be  set  after 
brazing,  has  been  created.    Figure  2  is  a  drawing  of  the 

modified  window  design,  showing  the  tuning  adjustment 
provisions. 

Figure 2: Tunable window design. 

 

4  CONTROL IMPLEMENTATION 

Implementation of controls for the switching system is 
being coordinated with the new, more flexible equipment 
interlock system.  Programmable logic controllers (PLCs) 
were  chosen  for  the  new  interlocks  for  their  ease  of 
configuration and diagnostic capabilities. 

Each  sector  of  the  linac  will  eventually  have  its  own 
interlock  chassis  where  all  interlock  cabling  is  run.   The 
PLC that resides in this chassis (see Figure 3) watches all 
inputs  and  generates  the  proper  permits  based  on  the 
interlock logic.  The status of all inputs and outputs from 
each  interlock  chassis  will  be  available  in  the  form  of 
operator screens.  Additionally, a time-stamped fault stack 
was created to aid in diagnostics.  

The  interface  to  the  high-power  components  of  the 
switching system will utilize the same type of PLC as the 
new interlock system.  This PLC will be responsible only 
for actuating the switch itself and verifying that the switch 
is in a valid position.  The switching PLC will notify the 
interlock  PLCs  via  either  discreet  outputs  or  high-level 
messages  of  the  switch  positions.   The user  interface to 
the switching system will be a rack-mounted touch panel 
with a key switch.  Activating the key switch will disable 
klystron drive, enable waveguide switch power, and place 
the  switching  PLC  in  the  active  mode;  all  accomplished 
via hard-wired connections. 

The design of the interlock logic is complicated by the 
fact that the cause and effect relationships are dependent 
on the current operating mode of the linac.  For example, 
if a loss of vacuum in one waveguide section occurs, the 
proper  modulator-klystron  must  be  notified.    It  is  the 
responsibility  of  the  local  PLC  interlock  system  to  grant 
or deny permits based on the input conditions, as well as 
the switch positions.  

Figure 3: PLC in interlock chassis. 

 

5  CURRENT STATUS AND PLANS 

Waveguide  switch  rework  and  testing  is  close  to 
completion.    The  window  design  is  not  complete  and  is 
the  probable  gating  item  in  the  schedule.    Interlock  and 
interface circuits have been tested and are ready to install 
in  most  cases.  A  complete  compatibility  review  is 
required before the system design can be considered final. 
In any event, commissioning is expected to be underway 
during the first half of fiscal year 2001. 

6  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The authors wish to thank G. Caryotakis and S. Gold of 
SLAC for providing access to their laboratory to perform 
high-power  tests,  and  J.  Eichner  and  G.  Sandoval,  also 
from SLAC, for their help in assembling and operating the 
test set-up.  We also thank D. Meyer for operation of the 
Argonne high power tests; J. Crandall, H. Deleon, J. Hoyt, 
T. Jonasson, and J. Warren for setting up the various test 
configurations; and C. Eyberger for editorial assistance. 

This  work  is  supported  by  the  U.S.  Department  of 
Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract 
No. W-31-109-ENG-38. 

7  REFERENCES 

[1]  7-GeV  Advanced  Photon  Source  Conceptual  Design 

Report, ANL-87-15, April 1987. 

and  W.  Wesolowski, 

[2]  M.  White,  N.  Arnold,  W.  Berg,  A.  Cours,  R.  Fuja, 
A.E.  Grelick,  K.  Ko,  Y.  L.  Qian,  T.  Russell,  N. 
Sereno, 
“Construction, 
Commissioning  and  Operational  Experience  of  the 
Advanced Photon Source (APS) Linear Accelerator,” 
Proceedings  of 
the  XVIII  International  Linear 
Accelerator Conference, Geneva, Switzerland, 26-30 
August, 1996, pp. 315-319, (1996). 

[3]  Z.  D.  Farkas  et  al.,  “SLED:  A  Method  of  Doubling 

SLAC’s Energy,” SLAC-PUB-1453, June 1974. 

[4]  A.E.  Grelick,  N.  Arnold,  S.  Berg,  R.  Fuja,  Y.W. 
Kang, R.L. Kustom, A. Nassiri, J. Noonan, M. White, 
“A  High  Power  S-band  Switching  System  for  the 
Advanced  Photon  Source  (APS)  Linear  Accelerator 
(Linac),” Proceedings of the XIX International Linac 
Conference,  August  23-28,  1998,  Chicago,  IL,  pp. 
914-916 (1998) 

[5]  A.  Nassiri,  A.  E.  Grelick,  R.  L.  Kustom,  M.  White, 
“High  Peak-Power  Test  of  S-Band  Waveguide 
Switches,”  Proceedings  of 
the  1997  Particle 
Accelerator  Conference,  Vancouver,  BC,  Canada 
(1998) 

[6]  P.  G.  O’Shea  et  al.,  “Accelerator  Archaeology-The 
Resurrection of the Stanford Mark-III Electron Linac 
at  Duke,”  Proceedings  of 
the  1995  Particle 
Accelerator Conference, May 1-5, 1995, Dallas, TX, 
pp. 1090-1092 (1996) 

 
 

 

 

 

