Collector Failures on 350 MHz, 1.2 MW CW Klystrons at the Low

Energy Demonstration Accelerator (LEDA)

D. Rees, W. Roybal, J. Bradley III, LANL, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA

Abstract

We  are  currently  operating  the  front  end  of  the
accelerator production of tritium (APT) accelerator,  a  7
MeV radio frequency quadrapole (RFQ) using three, 1.2
MW  CW  klystrons.  These  klystrons  are  required  and
designed to dissipate the full beam power in the collector.
The  klystrons  have  less  than  1500  operational  hours.
One collector has failed and all collectors  are  damaged.
This paper will discuss the damage and the difficulties in
diagnosing the cause. The collector did not critically fail.
Tube  operation  was  still  possible  and  the  klystron
operated up to 70% of full beam power with  excellent
vacuum. The indication that finally led us to the collector
failure was variable emission. This information will be
discussed.  A  hydrophonic  system  was  implemented  to
diagnose collector heating. The collectors are designed to
allow for mixed-phase cooling and with the hydrophonic
test equipment we are able to observe:  normal,  single-
phase  cooling,  mixed-phase  cooling,  and  a  hard  boil.
These data will be presented. The worst case beam profile
from a collector heating standpoint is presented. The paper
will also discuss  the  steps  taken  to  halt  the  collector
damage on the remaining 350 MHz klystrons and design
changes  that  are  being  implemented  to  correct 
the
problem.

1  INTRODUCTION

The APT 350 MHz, 1.2 MW, CW klystrons operating
on LEDA are similar in design to the English Electric
Valve (EEV) 352 MHz klystrons at CERN,  APS,  and
ESRF with one difference.   The  APT  klystrons  were
designed to allow for the steady-state dissipation of the
full DC beam power (95 kV, 20 A,  1.9  MW)  in  the
collector.  This requirement was intended to mitigate AC
grid transients which could result from loss of accelerator
beam since the APT accelerator is heavily beam loaded or
from  interlock-induced,  short-term,  accelerator  outages.
Each klystron was factory tested to this requirement and
operated at LEDA without an interlock to limit the time
the collector was subject to the full beam power in the
event the RF drive to the klystron is interrupted.

Three klystrons of this type provide power to a RFQ.
Approximately 2.4 MW of RF power is required from the
klystrons for the RFQ.  Three klystrons are connected to
the RFQ which acts as the power combiner.  The system
is designed so that only two of the three klystrons are
required for operation.  Waveguide switches are included in
each  waveguide  run  so  that  a  failed  klystron  can  be
removed.    The  switch  reflects  a  short  circuit  at  the

appropriate phase back to the  RFQ  and  the  other  two
klystrons can be used to continue operations.  A picture
of the klystron is included in Fig. 1.

Figure 1: EEV 350 MHz APT klystron.

2  DISCOVERY OF DAMAGE

2.1  Initial Indications

The first indication of a problem was an audible boiling
in the collector.  The collector is a mixed-phase collector
which allows for boiling and recondensation within the
collector  grooves.    The  audible  boiling  was  not  this
mixed-phase boiling.  The noise was the result of large
steam  bubbles  being  transported  at  the  high  water
velocities 
the  collector  cooling  pipes  and
metering.  We notified the vendor of the boiling and were
told it was nothing to worry about.  This boiling was
noticeably worse on one of the three klystrons, but was
observable on all klystrons for high collector powers.

through 

In order to keep the audible boil to a minimum we had
been operating the klystrons at the minimum beam power
required for RFQ operations.  Earlier in the day we had
increased the klystron beam  power  from  approximately
1.1 MW to 1.5 MW to allow for increases in RFQ beam
current and provide more margin for field control.  We had
operated several hours at this new operating point with
neligible ion pump current (less than .2 uA) when  we
experience a large vacuum event that triggered both the
high voltage interlock (which triggers at 10 uA ion pump
current) and the filament power interlock (which triggers
at 100 uA of ion pump current). We suspended operations
and attempted to recondition the klystron.  Although we
were able to recondition the klystron, as we operated at
higher beam power we began to observe variable cathode
emission.
2.2  Variable Emission

As we reconditioned the klystron, we discovered that as
we increased beam power, cathode current would vary by

Figure 2: Strip chart record illustrating variable emission with changes in collector power.

several  amps  when  increasing  or  decreasing  the  RF
drive.  We could also cause this same variation by small
changes in cathode voltaage.  Our system operates with a
mod-anode regulator tube that maintains  the  mod-anode
voltage at a fixed setpoint relative to the cathode voltage
and we carefully monitored this voltage, as well as the
filament current, to verify neither of these factors  were
causing the change in cathode current.  Finally, we did a
series of tests where we triggered our arc detectors which
inhibit RF drive to the klystrons.

Fig. 2 shows the results of one of these tests.   In the
figure, the RF power is observed to go  to  zero  and  a
coresponding  plunge  in  cathode  current  is  observed.
When the RF power is reestablished, the cathode current
is observed to slowly return to its previous value.  The
filament current and mod-anode voltage relative to cathode
voltage is observed to be constant over the variation in
cathode  current.    From  this  data  we  concluded  copper
vapor  from  the  collector  was  poisoning  the  cathode
emission as we increased the thermal load in the collector.
It  was  also  interesting  that  the  vac-ion  pump  power
supply did not register an increase in vacuum and indicated
very low current throughout this test.
2.3  Damage Assessment

Based on this result and conversations over the duration
of our testing, EEV had two klystron engineers visit our
site.  We removed the end of the collector water jacket
from the klystron and observed the damage shown in Fig.
3.  From Fig. 3 it is observed that several portions of the
collector had become quite hot and dimples had resulted
from  a  combination  of  the  heat,  water  pressure,  and
vacuum  forces.    The  general  collector  shape  had  also
distorted.  It was now elliptical in cross  section  rather
than round.  Also, the collector end had drooped and the
bottom of the conical shaped portion of the collector was
actually resting on the water jacket.  

2.4  Short Term Solution

We inspected the collectors of all the klystrons and all
showed various levels of damage ranging from minimal to
the significant damage shown in Fig. 3.  All collectors
showed  indications  of  droop  and  three  of  the  four
collectors were becoming elliptical rather than round in
cross section.  All collectors had  less  than  1000  high
voltage hours and one had only 60 high voltage  hours
since delivery.

Of the four klystrons, one klystron had a bucking coil
in place to minimize magnetic field penetration into the
collector.  This klystron had the least damage.  Two other
klystrons  had  this  bucking  coil 
installed  but  not
electrically connected to the magnetic circuit.  The fourth
klystron did not have the bucking coil installed.  We were
dismayed to discover the variation in the magnetic circuit
of the klystrons, but were encouraged by the fact that the
klystron with the bucking coil operable showed the least
damage. We took the following short-term steps to return
the klystrons to service due to programmatic pressure.

Figure 3: External view of collector damage.

The klystron in Fig. 3 was returned to the factory for
rebuild  still  under  vacuum  and  operable  at  low  beam
powers.    The  collector  jackets  of  the  remaining  three
klystrons were  adjusted  to  center  the  collectors  in  the
water jackets in order to compensate for the droop, and
supports were welded on the inside of the water jacket to
support the end of the collector to avoid further droop.
An acoustical measurement system was installed on the
collector to validate the effect of the bucking coil and to
characterize safe regions of operation.  The sensor was a
microphone on the collector cooling return.  These results
are presented in Fig. 4.  The four curves in Fig. 4 show
some unexpected results.  The mixed phase boiling that
the collector was designed to accommodate manifests as
an increase in the higher frequency audio components of
Fig.  4.  This  increase  can  be  used  as  a  qualitative
indication of peak collector heat load.  From Fig. 4 it can
be seen that the localized collector heat load at 77 kV,
14.5 A is actually higher than at 85 kV, 17.1 A.   This
suggests that the beam power is better distributed over the
collector at 85 kV.     The plots in Fig. 4 were measured
without RF power with the full beam power dissipated in
the collector.  Fig. 4 also shows that application of the
bucking  coil  lowers  the  localized  collector  heat  load.
Using this tool we were able to define an allowable safe
operating region and also regions to  avoid.    Operation
with  three  klystrons  at  an  85  kV  voltage  provides
sufficient power for the RFQ with full accelerator beam
current and sufficient control margin.

The data in Fig. 4 were measured on the klystron that
had  the  second  most  significant  amount  of  collector
damage.      The  other  two  klystrons  showed  a  similar
behavior  but  not  the  same  magnitude  of  accoustical
variation.  For all klystrons, operation between 70 kV and
80 kV resulted in audio indications of increased localized
heating.

to 

the  steps 

In  addition 

taken  above,  we  also
implemented a beam interlock such that above 70 kV of
beam voltage, 100 kW of RF power was required or an
interlock would remove high voltage within 15 seconds.  
We would have preferred a shorter interlock period, but
the 15 second interval was a compromise with the RFQ
operations team and with EEV.

3  LONG TERM SOLUTIONS

EEV has redesigned the collector so it is  capable  of
achieving the initial requirements.  The details provided
below  are  intentionally  vague  to  protect  proprietary
information.  Additional modeling was conducted using a
recently  released,  new  version  of  one  of  the  beam
dynamics codes originally used in  the  collector  design.
The beam was  discovered  to  penetrate  further  into  the
collector than originally thought. Additional length  has
been added to the collector in the new  collector  design
some.  The conical collector end has been changed to a
shape which reduces the thermal stress.  The bucking coil

is now a required part of the design.  The water jacket
design has been changed to maintain a high flow velocity
over the entire collector.  The supports on the end of the
collector implemented as part of the short term solution
have become a part of the design.  We also conducted x-
ray  measurements  of  the  klystron  internal  to  the  lead
shielding and discovered that the beam alignment could be
improved.  These results were duplicated by EEV.  EEV
is taking steps to improve beam alignment.

Figure 4: Collector audio profile.

4 CONCLUSION

We  discovered  the  initial  collector  design  to  be
inadequate  for  satisfying  our  requirements.    We  have
worked closely with  EEV  to  diagnose  and  modify  the
collector design.  The first 350 MHz klystron with the
new collector design is scheduled for factory  testing  in
August,  2000. 
  The  factory  acceptance  tests  of  the
collector  have  been  significantly 
increased  and  an
inspection of the collector is conducted at the conclusion
of the testing.  After delivery of this initial tube, another
klystron from Los Alamos will be rebuilt to include the
new  collector.    The  remaining  two  klystrons  at  Los
Alamos  had  only  slight  collector  damage  and  will
continue to be used on LEDA.

As  part  of  diagnosing  the  collector  problem,  we
developed  a  useful  and  interesting  tool  to  characterize
localized  collector  heat 
load  using  an  acoustical
measurement.  This tool led to the unexpected result that
lower beam  powers  had  higher  localized  collector  heat
loads than operation a higher beam powers.

We  have  operated  the  three  remaining  klystrons  for
slightly over 1000 cumulative hours since the collector
problem  was  discovered.    The  two  slightly  damaged
klystrons show no sign of further damage. The remaining
klystron with the most  significant  damage  is  showing
signs  of  further  degradation.    We    hope  that  it  will
continue to meet the RFQ needs until  the  replacement
tube arrives in early September.  

