Entropy shows that global

warming should cause

increased variability in the

weather*

by John Michael Williams

P. O. Box 2697,
Redwood City, CA 94064
jwill@pacbell.net

Copyright (c) 2000, John Michael Williams

All Rights Reserved

* Posted at the American Physical Society Web site as aps1998nov15_001

John Michael Williams                                         Global Warming v. 1.5.2                                                                  1

ABSTRACT

Elementary physical reasoning seems to leave it inevitable that global warming

would increase the variability of the weather.   The first two terms in an

approximation to the global entropy may be used to show that global warming has

increased the free energy available to drive the weather, and that the variance of the

weather has increased correspondingly.

I. INTRODUCTION

Hasselmann [1] summarized the evidence that there has been about a .5o C

warming of the globe over the past century.   The question remains open of whether

this warming should be attributed to human activity.   Regardless of its cause, we

attempt here an understanding of the most obvious effect of a secular warming of the

Earth’s atmosphere:  Increased variability of the weather.

If the Earth’s atmosphere and superficial layers of ocean water could be treated as

a closed system, it might be possible to quantify the observed temperature rise as an

effect (if not a side effect) of a complex, deterministic collection of closely coupled

(viz, poorly separated) weather processes.

However, the system involved is an open one driven mainly by a continual influx

of radiation from the Sun, and by the rotation of the Earth.   The system is too big to

solve deterministically because of:  (a) the number of data required to describe its

state; (b) the necessarily incomplete instrumentation for monitoring its state; (c) the

difficulty of providing input for such monitoring data, were a computer programmed

for prediction; (d) the lack of an obvious way of separating the variables underlying

John Michael Williams                                         Global Warming v. 1.5.2                                                                  2

the data; (e) the lack of a valid way of spatially partitioning the system for long-term

analysis; and (f) a dearth of accurate historical data much before 1900.

One would have to predict at least air, sea, and land temperature; humidity; local

air pressure, clouds, wind, and precipitation rates over a span of decades.

Meteorologists achieve considerable success by using a stochastic framework of

analysis  in more or less localized  regions of space-time.

So, a different approach must be taken.   Let us treat the weather system as a

deterministic one defined by a set of potentials (of temperature, water concentration,

air pressure, etc.) assumed coupled by kinetic interactions which latter we will not

attempt to analyze.   For simplicity, because we are dealing with global (as opposed

to polar, oceanic, or day-night warming), no spatial factor will be included.

We assume that the kinetics result in a linear (or, stochastically, Markovian)

coupling among the potentials, so that system changes do not retain state except in

the value of the potentials.   A global Hamiltonian or similar approach would not

work, because of complexity in estimating the flux of energy over the long term.

II. ENTROPY0 DECREASES

We begin by showing that the entropy (Entropy0) associated with the total free

energy of the system, formally computed as in thermodynamics, decreases with

global warming:

John Michael Williams                                         Global Warming v. 1.5.2                                                                  3

Consider the global temperature Tt as a function of time t in increments of a

calendar year.   Call the corresponding total system energy Ut, and assume it

partitioned into kinetic energy Kt, potential energy Pt, and heat energy Qt.   Based

on Hasselmann and others, we consider it established that T2000 - T1900 amounts to
about 0.5o C.   Without affecting the conclusion, we approximate the actual

temperatures as T2000 = 290o K and T1900 = 289.5o K.    We note that a small ~.06 K

warming of the oceans has been observed [4] during the latter half of period in

question, but we ignore it.

For total energy in the system, we have Ut = Kt + Pt + Qt.   Combining K and P to

represent workable (free) energy W, we have

Ut = Wt + Qt                                                                                                  (1)

Now we define the change in Entropy0 by the difference, d  St,

d  S2000 = d  Q2000/T2000 - d  Q1900/T1900                                                      (2)

in which d  Q represents heat flux from the weather.   Avoiding the useless concept of

"wasted" heat in an open system, we rewrite (2) using the previous definitions as:

d  S2000 = (U2000 - d  W2000)/T2000  -  (U1900 - d  W1900)/T1900.                   (3)

We recognize here that the postulated potentials must have different zeroes:   The

U values represent system totals which are kinetic or aerodynamic transfers to the

atmosphere by the Earth’s rotation, or are heat or radiative input from the Sun.  So,

assuming gas-molecular kinetics or Planckian radiation justifies the use of the

Kelvin zero.

John Michael Williams                                         Global Warming v. 1.5.2                                                                  4

However, the W values primarily represent potentials developed on the

atmospheric interaction with water, ice, and land.   Heat of vaporization of water

stores about 540 calorie/kg.   Although sea water would freeze below the centigrade

zero, liberating about 80 calorie/kg, it would return this free energy at the low end of

the potential when melted at the centigrade zero.   So, to describe the weather, we

consider only the centigrade zero.   The evaluation of Entropy0 as a term in the

overall approximation depends on this approximation, by which we relate the overall

zeroes.

Expressing d  W1900 and U1900 in terms of d  W2000 and U2000, we get:

d  W1900 = d  W2000(T1900/T2000) deg C    @

 d  W2000(289.5 - 273)/(290 - 273)             (4)

  .971d  W2000;                                                                                                (5)

   U1900 = U2000(T1900/T2000)  deg K  @   U2000(289.5/290)                                         (6)

  .998U2000.                                                                                                   (7)

Substituting (5) and (7) into (3) above for the relation for a negative value of d  S,

d  W2000  ‡    .069U2000             (about 7%).                                                   (8)

Therefore, the Entropy0 of this system would be expected to have decreased with

global warming if the free energy flux exceeded about 7% of the total.   A typical

value of the free energy flux from the Sun’s radiation would be about 15% for

evaporative conversion alone [2], so we may be assured of the decrease.

@
@
John Michael Williams                                         Global Warming v. 1.5.2                                                                  5

Some comment:  For a closed system with a limited store of free energy, as the

system did work, the free energy would be seen as being converted irreversibly to

heat; the entropy then necessarily would increase until no more work could be done.

During the 19th century, when steam engines were the high technology, there was

a theory of the universe that predicted a "heat death":  All motion would cease after

all the free energy was converted to heat, resulting in a lukewarm, totally disordered

mixture, with no potential likely to be found anywhere.  This "Big Blah" theory

doesn’t apply to the open system of the Earth’s weather.

III.  ENTROPY1 INCREASES

Next, we show that thesecond term in our approximation, the Entropy1 of the

system, as defined by its randomness but without regard for the total free energy,

increases with global warming.

We consider that, knowing the current weather at any given time and place, to the

extent one could predict the weather elsewhere (spatially) or into the future

(temporally), to that extent would be the Entropy1 of the system lower.   In

particular, correlation or coherence would imply more organization, more potential

for prediction that works, and so more free energy.   On the other hand, a high

Entropy1 would imply a high amount of unpredictability in the weather in space-
time.   This definition is consistent with quantitative definitions of the  -S pilog2pi

entropy of information theory [3].

John Michael Williams                                         Global Warming v. 1.5.2                                                                  6

Again, looking at the several to perhaps several dozen potentials in the system,

we ignore the kinetics and view each potential as being controlled directly by one or

more of the others.

Call the potentials Pi = P1, P2, . . ., etc.   We consider just one potential instance at

a time as a representative of any other of the same kind.  In general, one of the

potentials, Pi, will determine another, Pj, so that, within small enough intervals,

Pj = f(Pi)  @

 kPi                                                                                             (9)

in which k is a constant of proportionality peculiar to the two potentials.   We may

simplify by treating each P as measured by its absolute value difference from some

suitably chosen zero.   This is a trivial approach implied directly by the concept of

potential.

Immediately, it may be seen in (9) that a small, possibly random change in Pi, dPi,

will have an effect proportional to Pi.   In particular, the standard deviation  dP i  of

a potential Pi, viewed as a random variable, will be related linearly to that of  Pj  by

the proportionality factor k:

dP

j

=

k dP

i

.                                                                                             (10)

Also, Pi being in the system, an increase in Pi itself will be accompanied by an

increase in its standard deviation.   This leads directly to the sought result:  The

standard deviation will increase with an increase in the potential itself.   We see

that temperature has increased with global warming; therefore, we expect increased

John Michael Williams                                         Global Warming v. 1.5.2                                                                  7

variability in the temperature, as well as increased variability in the other

potentials in the system.

IV.  CONCLUSION

The opposite directions of Entropy0 and Entropy1 are partly because of the merely

formal correctness of the thermodynamic definition of Entropy0, and partly because

Entropy1, as the second term in an approximate solution to an otherwise intractable

problem, implies both spatial and stochastic factors absent from Entropy0.   If we

look at the meaning of these two terms, we see that, if global warming should

continue, the decrease in Entropy0 would mean more free energy to drive the

weather; the increase in Entropy1 would mean a harder time predicting which way it

will go.

REFERENCES

1.  K. Hasselmann, Science, 276, 914 - 915 (1997).

2.  P. E. Kraght, "Atmosphere (Earth)", p. 216 in D. M. Considine, Ed., Van

Nostrand’s Scientific Encyclopedia (5th ed.), (Van Nostrand Reinhold, San

Francisco, 1976).

3.  C. E. Shannon and W. Weaver,  The Mathematical Theory of Communication

(University of Illinois Press, Urbana, 1949).

4.  S. Levitas, et al, Science, 287, 2225 - 2229 (2000).

