RF PROCESSING OF X-BAND ACCELERATOR STRUCTURES  

AT THE NLCTA* 

 

C. Adolphsen, W. Baumgartner, K. Jobe, R. Loewen, D. McCormick,  

M. Ross, T. Smith, J.W. Wang, SLAC, Stanford, CA  94309  USA 

T. Higo, KEK, Tskuba, Ibaraki, Japan 

 

Abstract 

During  the  initial  phase  of  operation,  the  linacs  of  the 
Next Linear Collider (NLC) will contain roughly 5000 X-
Band  accelerator  structures  that  will  accelerate  beams of 
electrons and positrons to 250 GeV. These structures will 
nominally  operate  at  an  unloaded  gradient  of  72  MV/m. 
As  part  of  the  NLC  R&D  program,  several  prototype 
structures have been built and operated at the Next Linear 
Collider  Test  Accelerator  (NLCTA)  at  SLAC.  Here,  the 
effect  of  high  gradient  operation  on 
the  structure 
performance  has  been  studied.  Significant  progress  was 
made  during  the  past  year  after  the  NLCTA  power 
sources  were  upgraded  to  reliably  produce  the  required 
NLC  power  levels  and  beyond.  This  paper  describes  the 
structures,  the  processing  methodology  and  the  observed 
effects of high gradient operation. 

1  INTRODUCTION 

Over  the  past  four  years,  four NLC prototype X-Band 
(11.4 GHz) accelerator structures have been processed to 
gradients of 50 MV/m and higher at the NLCTA [1]. The 
structures  are  traveling  wave  (2π/3  phase  advance  per 
cell),  nearly  constant  gradient  (the  group  velocity  varies 
from 12% to 3% c) and 1.8 m long (206 cells) with a fill 
time of 100 ns. They were built in part to test methods of 
long-range transverse wakefield suppression. In two of the 
structures  (DS1  and  DS2),  the  deflecting  modes  are 
detuned, and in the other two (DDS1 and DDS2), they are 
damped as well [2]. The changes made for these purposes 
should  not  affect  their  performance  as  high  gradient 
accelerators,  which  is  the  focus  here.  For  completeness, 
results are included from a prototype JLC structure (M2) 
that was processed at the Accelerator Structure Test Area 
(ASTA)  at  SLAC  [3].  This  detuned  structure  is  shorter 
(1.3  m,  150  cells)  and  has  a  somewhat  lower  group 
velocity (10% to 2% c) than the NLC structures. 

2  FABRICATION AND HANDLING 

The  cells  of  four  of  the  five  structures  where  single-
diamond turned on a lathe, which produces better than 50 
nm  rms  surface  roughness:  those  of  DS1  where  turned 
with poly-crystalline diamond tools which yields a surface 
roughness  of  about  200  nm  rms.  Before  assembly,  the 
________________
 

* Work Supported by DOE Contract DE-AC03-76F00515. 

cells  were  chemically  cleaned  and  lightly  etched  in  a 
several step process interleaved with water rinses. For the 
NLC  structures,  the  steps  include  degreasing,  alkaline 
soak,  acid  etch  and  finally  an  alcohol  bath  followed  by 
blow  drying  with  N2.  The  M2  cells  were  cleaned  in  a 
similar manner but with a weaker acid etch and the final 
cleaning was done with acetone. The bonding and brazing 
of  the  cells  into  structures  were  done  in  a  hydrogen 
furnace  for  the  NLC  structures  and  in  a  vacuum furnace 
for  M2.  Before  installation  in  the  NLCTA,  the  NLC 
structures were vacuum baked at 450-550 °C for 4-6 days 
and  filled  with  N2. The M2 structure was filled with N2 
after assembly and baked in situ at 250 °C for 2 days after 
installation  in  ASTA.  Based  on  the  structure  geometries 
and the vacuum pump configuration, the maximum pres-
sure  levels  in  the  NLC  structures  after  several  days  of 
pumping were estimated to be in the low 10-8 Torr scale 
while  the  M2  pressure  was  likely  in  the  mid  10-8  Torr 
scale. 

3  RF PROCESSING 

Of  the five structures, only two (DDS1 and M2) were 
systematically processed to gradients that were not limited 
by  available  power  (about  200  MW  was  needed  to 
produce  NLC-like  gradients).  The  other  three  structures 
were  processed  in  the  NLCTA  to  gradients  of  about  50 
MV/m  and  used  for  beam  operation.  The  bulk  of 
processing was done at 60 Hz with 250 ns pulses (100 ns 
ramp, 150 ns flat top) at NLCTA and 150 ns square pulses 
at ASTA. The processing rate was paced by rf breakdown 
in  the  structures  that  reflected  power  toward  the  sources 
(klystrons) and increased the structure vacuum pressures. 
To  protect  the  klystron  windows,  the  rf  power  was  shut 
off  when  more  than  5  MW  of  reflected  power  was 
detected  just  downstream  of  them.  The  rf  was  then  kept 
off for a period of time (30 seconds to many minutes) to 
allow the structures to pump down. Without this interlock, 
it is likely that the gas pressure would have built up in the 
structures over many pulses, causing breakdown on every 
pulse (the pressure threshold to cause breakdown appears 
to  be  in  the  high  10-7  Torr  scale).  Thus,  the  reflected 
power  limit did not greatly hinder the processing, and in 
fact  it  suppressed  continuous  breakdown  (as  added 
protection,  the  rf  was  automatically  shut  off  if  specific 
pump pressures were exceeded). 

The initial processing of the structures was done manu-
ally.  That  is,  the  power  was  slowly  increased  by  an 
operator who also decided when to reset the power after a 
trip, for example, by monitoring vacuum pump readings. 
Such  operator  oversight  was  important  since  breakdown 
was generally accompanied by large pressure increases in 
the structures (10 to 100 times higher). Above gradients of 
about  60  MV/m,  however,  the  pressure  increases  were 
typically below a factor of ten and sometimes too small to 
be  detectable.  With  the  smaller  pressure  increases,  auto-
mated  control  of  the  processing  was  practical.  It  was 
developed  for  both  M2  and  DDS1  processing,  allowing 
unattended,  around-the-clock  operation,  which  improved 
the processing efficiency. 

For  DDS1,  the  processing  control  algorithm  was  typi-
cally setup to increase the structure input power by 1% if 
a reflected power trip did not occur within 2 minutes, and 
to decrease the power by 2% if a trip occurred within 10 
seconds.  These  times  were  measured  relative  to  the 
resetting of the rf power, which was ramped-up over a 30 
second  period  starting  immediately  after  a  trip.  If  a  trip 
occurred  between  10  seconds  and  2  minutes,  the  power 
level was not changed. Also, it would not be increased if 
any pump pressure readings were above tolerance levels. 
The  algorithm  for  processing  M2  used  roughly  the  same 
logic.  

The  automated  processing  yielded  smoothly  varying 
peak  power  levels  when  viewed  over  several  hour  time 
intervals.  The  mean  power  level  depended  on  the 
algorithm  parameters  and  on  the  reflected  power  trip 
threshold,  which  as  noted  above,  was  set  to  protect  the 
klystron  windows.  When  processing  DDS1  near  its 
maximum  power  level,  roughly  half  of  the  trips  were 
immediately proceeded by one or more consecutive pulses 
with  significant  reflected  power.  The  first  pulse  in  the 
sequence  likely  initiated  a  pulse-by-pulse  gas  build-up 
that eventually produced reflected power large enough to 
cause the trip (in many of these cases, the location of the 
breakdown  appears  to  move  upstream  in  the  structure 
during  this  sequence  of  pulses).  The  distribution  of 
reflected  power  per  pulse  was  broad  and  peaked  at  low 
values.  Above  the  minimum  threshold  that  could  be  set, 
the  rate  of  reflected  power  pulses  was  roughly  ten  times 
that  above 
threshold  (about  100/hour 
compared to 10/hour). If the trip threshold were lowered 
during  processing,  fewer  multi-pulse  trips  would  occur 
but the increase in the trip rate decreased the steady-state 
power level. So the nominal threshold was used to expe-
dite processing. 

the  nominal 

The  M2  structure  was  processed  in  ASTA  during  a 
several  week  period  dedicated  for  this  purpose.  An 
average  gradient  of  50  MV/m  was  reached  in  about  20 
hours.  Achieving  higher  gradients,  however, 
took 
exponentially  longer.  The  processing  was  stopped  after 
440 hours at which time a maximum gradient of 85 MV/m 
had  been  attained.  Prior  to  its  use  in  NLCTA,  DS1  was 
also  processed  in  ASTA  [5].  Again,  50  MV/m  was 

achieved  fairly  quickly,  in  about  30  hours.  After  200 
hours,  the  maximum  source  power  was  reached,  which 
produced a 68 MV/m structure gradient. 

In contrast, DDS1 was processed in a piecewise manner 
over  a  three  year  period  because  of  rf  power  generation 
and  transport  limitations  (which  were  eventually  over-
come), and because it was used for beam operation. Thus, 
its  processing  history  is  harder  to  quantify.  After  55 
MV/m  was  reached  using  the  nominal  NLCTA  rf  pulse 
(100  ns  ramp,  150  ns  flat  top),  the  pulse  length  was 
shortened  (100  ns  ramp,  50  ns  flat  top)  in  an  attempt  to 
speed  up  processing.  Over the course of several hundred 
hours,  the  gradient  was  increased  to  73  MV/m,  after 
which it remained nearly unchanged during 300 hours of 
processing. A 250 ns square pulse was then used to better 
simulate  NLC  operation,  which  immediately reduced the 
maximum gradient to 70 MV/m. During the last 600 last 
hours of processing, the gradient has not increased above 
this level. 

4  EFFECT OF PROCESSING 

Past  experience  has  shown  that  rf  breakdown  causes 
surface  damage  to  the  tips  of  cell  irises  where  the  fields 
are  highest  (about  twice  the  accelerator  gradient).  To 
quantify  any  changes  in  the  NLC/JLC  structures,  both 
visual  inspections  and  rf  measurements  were  made.  For 
the latter, a bead-pull technique was used as the primary 
means to measure the rf phase profile along the structures 
relative  to  the  nominal  phase advance [4]. Since a nylon 
string  has  to  be  pulled  through  the  structure  in  this 
procedure, a noninvasive method of determining the phase 
profile  using  beam  induced  rf  was  developed.  However, 
the  dispersion  that  occurs  during  the  rf  propagation 
through the structure introduces systematic phase changes, 
so this technique is best used for measuring relative phase 
changes. 

Table 1 summarizes the processing results from the five 
structures including the net phase change and the number 
of cells with discernable phase shifts. The phase changes 
for  all  but  DDS1  were determined from bead-pull meas-
urement comparisons: the DDS1 value is based on a com-
parison  of  the  initial  bead-pull  profile  with  the  latest 
beam-based measurement. As an example, Figure 1 shows 

Table 1: Structure Processing Summary 

Structure 

Hours  
Operated 

Max 
Grad. 
(MV/m)   

Phase 
Change 
(deg.) 

# Cells  
Affected 

M2 

DS1 

DDS2 

DS2 

DDS1 

440 

550 

550 

1000 

2700 

85 

54 

54 

50 

73 

25 

7 

8 

20 

60 

70 

80 

100 

150 

120 

)
s
e
e
r
g
e
d
(
 
r
o
r
r
E
 
e
s
a
h
P
 
t
e
N

10
5
0
-5

-10
-15
-20
-25

0

50

100

150

200

 

)
s
e
e
r
g
e
d
(
 
e
s
a
h
P
F
R

 

80

60

40

20

0

-20

0

20

40

60

80

100

 

  Cell Number 

 
Fig. 1: Bead-pull measurement of the DS2 phase profile 
before (solid) and after (dotted) 1000 hours of high power 
operation. 

 
Fig. 2: Phase of beam induced rf measured at different 
times  separated  by  about  300  hours  of  processing  (first 
measurement = solid, second = dashed and third = dotted). 

Time (ns) 

bead-pull  measurements  of  DS2  before  and  after  high 
power operation. One sees that a phase shift occurs at the 
upstream  end  of  the  structure,  which  is  also  true  in  the 
other four. In Figure 2, beam-based phase measurements 
of DDS1 are shown at three different times separated by 
about  300  hours  of  processing  with  the  short  pulse  (the 
gradient was 60-70 MV/m in the first interval, and 68-73 
MV/m in the second). Each curve is the phase profile of 
the rf induced by the passage of a 20 ns bunch train (11.4 
GHz  bunch  spacing)  through  the  structure.  The  rf  is 
coupled out at the end of the structure so the rf induced in 
the first cell comes out last. The large phase increase after 
100 ns is due to dispersion. The dispersion also smoothes 
out  any  fast  phase  variations  as  does  the  finite  length  of 
the bunch train (a 2 ns train is now being used). However, 
a  progressive  increase  in  the  phase  can  be  seen.  The 
direction  corresponds  to  an  increase  in  the  cell  frequen-
cies, which would occur if copper were removed from the 
tips of the cell irises (removing a 10 µm layer around the 
curved portion of the irises yields a 1° phase shift per cell 
in  the  front half of DDS1 where the irises are 1.0 to 1.5 
mm  thick).  The  phase  shifts  seen  in  the  bead-pull 
comparisons also correspond to higher frequencies. 

In  Table  1,  one  sees  that  the  phase  change  increases 
with  both  gradient  and  operation  time.  The  DS1  and 
DDS2 results are interesting to compare, especially since 
these  structures  were  powered  from  the  same  rf  source. 
While DS1 had been processed earlier (see above) and has 
conventionally  machined  cells,  its  phase  change  during 
operation  in  the  NLCTA  is  nearly  the  same  as  DDS2, 
which  was  installed  new  and  has  diamond-turned  cells. 
(DS1 was retuned after its processing at ASTA: the phase 
shift incurred there is not known). 

The visual inspections of the structures were done using 
a  boroscope  that  could  access  the  first  and  last  30  cells. 
All  structures  except  DDS1  were  examined.  Essentially 
no  damage  was  observed  at  the  downstream  end  of  M2 
while  the  NLC  structures  showed  a  small  amount  of 
pitting on the tips of the irises in this region. The pits are 
generally less than 30 µm wide and cover less than a few 
percent of the surface area. The depths of the pits are hard 

to estimate, but are probably less than their widths. With 
this aspect ratio, it takes little rf energy to create them. For 
example,  just  10-5  of  the  energy  in  an  rf  pulse  would 
vaporize (30 µm)3 of copper if it were converted to heat. 
For the upstream cells in both M2 and the NLC structures, 
it looks as if pitting has completely eroded off a layer of 
the  iris  surfaces,  leaving  them  covered  with  50-100  µm 
wide  dimples.  Also,  the  surface  color  is  a  dull  silver  in 
contrast to the shiny copper color of the downstream cells. 

5  CONCLUSION 

Five  prototype  NLC/JLC  structures  have  been  proc-
essed to high power and show upstream iris damage and 
phase advance changes at gradients as low as 50 MV/m. 
One  explanation  is  that  the  lower  rf  propagation  imped-
ance  at  the  upstream  ends  of  the  structures  (due  to  the 
higher  group  velocity)  leads  to  more  energy  being 
absorbed in breakdown arcs, which act as low impedance 
loads [6]. This model may also explain why early proto-
type cavities and structures that had long fill times or low 
group  velocities  performed  well  at  high  gradients  (for 
example,  a  75  cm  long  NLC  structure  with  5%  group 
velocity was processed to 90 MV/m without any apparent 
phase  change).  A  series  of  low  group  velocity  structures 
are  being  built  to  verify  this  model  as  a  first  step  to 
developing  a  high  gradient  version  for  NLC/JLC.  Also, 
the characteristics of structure breakdown are being exten-
sively studied [7,8]. 

6  REFERENCES 

J. Wang et al., PAC 99 Proc., p. 3423 (April 1999). 

[1]  R. D. Ruth et al., SLAC-PUB-7288 (June 1997). 
[2] 
[3]  R. Loewen et al., SLAC-PUB-8399 (June 1997). 
[4]  S. Hanna et al., SLAC-PUB-6811 (June 1995). 
[5] 
[6]  C. Adolphsen, SLAC-PUB-8572 (in progress). 
[7]  C. Adolphsen et al., SLAC-PUB-8573 (Sept. 2000), 

J. Wang et al., SLAC-PUB-7243 (August 1996). 

which is an expanded version of this paper. 
Joe Frisch et.al., TUE03, these proceedings. 

[8] 

