RF CAVITIES FOR THE MUON AND NEUTRINO FACTORY

COLLABORATION STUDY *

A. Moretti, N. Holtkamp, T. Jurgens, Z. Qian and V. Wu, FNAL, Batavia, IL 60510, USA

0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
8
1

 

 
 
 

2
5
1
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

is  studying 

A  multi-laboratory  collaboration 

the
feasibility  of  building  a  muon  collider,  the  first  phase  of
which  maybe  a  neutrino  factory.  The  phase  space
occupied  by  the  muons  is  very  large  and  needs  to  be
cooled  several  orders  of  magnitude  for  either  machine,
100,000 to 1 million for the collider and ten to 100 for the
factory.  Ionization  cooling  is  the  baseline  method  for
muon cooling. This scheme uses hydrogen absorbers and
rf  re-acceleration  in  a  long  series  of  magnetic  focusing
channels  to  cool  the  muons.  At  Fermilab  two  rf  cavity
types are under study to provide the required cooling rf re-
acceleration.  A  805  MHz  high  gradient  cavity  for  the
collider  and  a  201  MHz  high  gradient  cavity  for  the
neutrino  factory.  The  805  MHz  cavity  currently  under
going  cold  testing  is  a  non-periodic  pi-mode  cavity  with
the  iris  openings  shaped  to  follow  the  contour  of  the
beam. The 201 MHz cavity uses hollow thin metal tubes
over the beam aperture to terminate the field in a pillbox
type  mode  to  increase  its  shunt  impedance.  This  is
possible  because  muons  have  little  interactions  with  thin
metal  membranes.  Details  of  these  cavities  and  cold
measurement data will be presented.

1  INTRODUCTION

An  international  collaborative  study  of  muon  colliders
and neutrino factories has been going on for a number of
years  [1,  2,  3].  The  lead  laboratories  for  this  study  are
BNL,  CERN,  Fermilab  and  LBL.  A  collider  or  neutrino
factory for high-energy research needs a large number of
muons to produce a high luminosity beam. Because of the
muons short lifetime, they need to be transported quickly
through the accelerator complex. The muons are produced
from pions decays off of a proton  beam  hitting  a  high-Z
target in a solenoidal magnetic decay channel. The muons,
thus, produced  occupy  a  very  large  6-demensional  phase
space which must be reduced (cooled) quickly by several
orders of magnitude to meet the luminosity requirements.
Ionization  cooling  has  been  chosen  as  the  cooling
technique.  In  this  technique  muons  lose  transverse  and
longitudinal  momentum  as  they  pass  through  a  low-Z
absorbing  material.  The  longitudinal  momentum  is  then
restored by rf re-acceleration in large aperture rf cavities.
The process is repeated numerous times to reduce the 6-
demensional  phase  space  of  the  muons  sufficiently  for
acceptance  by  the  accelerator  complex  and  meet  its
luminosity requirements.
*Work  supported  by  the  US  Dept.  of  Energy,  contract
DE-AC02-76CH0-3000.

    Currently,  at  Fermilab  and  LBL  high  gradient,  high
shunt impedance large beam aperture rf cavities are being
studied at 201 and 805 MHz [4]. Accelerating gradients of
15  MV/m  and  30  MV/m  for  201  and  805  MHz
respectively  are  required  for  the  most  favored  scenarios.
LBL is studying pill-box type rf cavities with 125 micron
beryllium windows over the aperture, due to their higher
shunt  impedance  and  low  radio  of  peak  surface  field  to
accelerating field. Fermilab is studying a 201 MHz cavity
with  thin  hollow  beryllium  or  aluminum  tubes  over  the
aperture. The tubes terminate the aperture electric fields in
a  pillbox  type  mode  and  increase  its  shunt  impedance
towards that of a true pill-box cavity. At Fermilab, also, a
805  MHz  open  cell  cavity  has  been  designed  and  a  cold
model  has  been  built  and  tested.  To  increase  its  shunt
impedance  the  iris  openings  have  been  dimensioned  to
follow the beam’s contour as it passes through the cavity.

thin  walled 

low-Z  metallic 

2  GRIDDED 201 MHZ CAVITY DESIGN
The  201  MHz  gridded  cavity  is  bellow  shaped  to
increase  its  shunt  impedance  and  has  a  set  of  crossed
(gridded)  hollow 
tubes
covering the bean aperture, Fig.1. The tubes can be easily
forced gassed cooled, a great advantage over 125 micron
Be window covering the beam aperture. In this design the
tubes  are  made  of  aluminum  4  cm  in  diameter,  125
microns thick in the middle and 500 microns at its ends.
The cavity has a 0.60 m major radius, a length of 0.64 m
and  beam  aperture  of  0.64  m.  Current  mechanical  and
electrical designs limit the Be window aperture design to
0.38  m.  When  connected  to  neighboring  cavities,  the
cavities are separately driven with a phase advance of pi
per cavity. Other phase advances are possible because the
grids  were  designed  to  minimize  the  coupling  between
neighboring cavities.

     The  computer  program  MAFIA  was  used 

to
optimize  the  design  of  the  cavity.  The  number  of  tubes
and  their  diameters  were  varied  to  maximize  the  shunt
impedance,  reduce 
the  peak  surface  electric  field,
minimize material intercepting the beam and the coupling
between  neighboring  cavities  with  the  beam  aperture  set
at 0.64 m. Following the above criteria, four vertical and
four  horizontal  tubes,  4  cm  in  diameter  resulted  in  the
most satisfactory cavity design. The cavity, Fig. 1, has  a
Qo  of  63,000,  shunt  impedance  of  32.0  MOhm/m  and
requires 4.5 MW to achieve a accelerating gradient of 15
MV/m. The peak surface electric field  at  this  gradient  is
25  MV/m,  an  acceptable  1.7  times  the  Kilpatrick  Limit.

Figure 1: Aperture Tube Layout

Figure 2: 805 MHz iris loaded cavity with a beam envelope matched aperture.

 3  OPEN CELL 805 MHZ CAVITY DESIGN
The 805 MHz cavity is an iris-loaded structure with the
aperture of the iris dimensioned to follow the five-sigma
contour  of  the  beam,  Fig.  2.  This  allows  the  design  to
maximize  the  shunt  impedance  without  material  in  the
beam path. This may increase cooling channel efficiency.
However,  cooling  simulations  have  shown  little  if  any
improvement when compared  to  125  Be  window  design.

The design does eliminate the difficult mechanical and rf
electrical heating problems of the Be window design. The
beam aperture in the middle of the cavity is 0.16 m and at
the ends 0.08 m.

    The  computer  programs  Mafia  and  Superfish  were
used to optimize the design. The criteria of the design was
to  maximize  shunt  impedance  while  obtaining  nearly
equal and reasonable peak surface electric fields on all the
cavity  irises.  The  cavity,  shown  in  Fig.2,  has  a  Qo  of

35,600, a shunt impedance of 33.5 Mohm/m and requires
27.7  MW  for  a  accelerating  gradient  of  30  MV/m.  The
peak  surface  electric  field  is  77  MV/m,  2.9  times  the
Kilpatrick limit. This might be acceptable for the required
short  cooling  pulse  length  of  210  microseconds.  A  high
power  copper  vacuum  cavity 
is  currently  under
construction  and  breakdown  studies  are  planned  in  a
Fermilab test facility under construction.

A  full-scale  aluminum  model  of  the  cavity  has  been
built.  The  model  was  built  to  test  the  accuracy  of  the
computer calculation and the machining accuracy of the
parts.  The  machining  accuracy  called  for  was  +/-  13
microns.  Measurements  on  the  model  were  very  good.
The  measurements  agreed  with  calculations  to  within  5
microns. Bead-pull measurements of the field profile were
in agreement with calculations to within 5 %. The model
was  further  used  to  determine  the  size  of  the  critical
coupling slot.

slot dimensions for critical coupling are determined to be
(height, depth, width) =  (6.2, 2.2, 8.2) cm.

5  CAVITY RESEARCH STATUS

agreement  with  Mafia 

Measurements  of  the  frequency,  field  profile  and
coupling  slot  size  on  the  aluminum  model  were  in
excellent 
and  Superfish
calculations. A 805 MHz copper high power test cavity is
under construction. Electric field breakdown and vacuum
conditioning studies are to take place in a high power test
facility  currently  under  construction  at  Fermilab.  Design
studies of high gradient 201 MHZ cavities are currently in
progress at Fermilab and LBL. The goal of these studies is
to  produce  several  high  power  prototype  cavities  in  the
next two years. A test facility at Fermilab is currently in
the early design stage.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Palmer, A. Tollestrup, and A. Sessler, Proc. of the
1996 DPF. DPB Summer Study "New Directions for
High Energy Physics", Snowmass, Co (1996).

[2] Status of Muon Collider Research and Developments

and Future Plans, Fermilab-PUB 98/179.

[3]  Neutrino  Factory  Physics  Study,  Fermilab  Report:

Fermilab-FN-692.

[4]  J.N.  Corlett,  et.al.,  Proc.  of  1999  PAC,  "Rf
the  Muon  Cooling

Accelerating  Structures  for 
Experment",pp 3149-3151, New York, 1999.

[5] D. Li,et.al., Proc. of 1998 Linac Conf., "Calculations
of the External Coupling to a Single Cell Rf Cavity",
pp 977-979, Chicago, 1998.

the 

to  produce 

 4 HIGH POWER RF COUPLER DESIGN
Mafia 3D time  domain  and  2D  eigenmode  solvers  are
used  for  the  coupler  simulations  [5].  The  model  consists
of  the  first  two  cells  of  the  six  cell  cavity  with  a
rectangular  waveguide  (the  height  is  one  half  of  the
standard WR975 waveguide height) attached to the outer
wall  of  the  first  cell  (see  Figure  2).  Energy  coupling
between  the  waveguide  and  the  cavity  is  through  a
rectangular slot. The height of the slot is chosen to be that
of  the  waveguide,  in  order  to  minimize  the  ratio  of  the
maximum  coupler  voltage  to  waveguide  voltage,  while
the depth is the outer wall thickness of the cell. The width
is  varied  to  achieve  critical  coupling.  All  corners  of  the
coupling slot’s cross section are rounded to a radius of 7
mm. To simulate the total wall loss in cell 3 through 6 in
the  actual  cavity,  the  conductivity  of  the  second  cell  is
adjusted 
is
determined using the 2D eigenmode solver where the wall
loss of each cell can be calculated; hence the conductivity.
In the simulation,  it  is  important  that  cell  1  and  2  are  in
tune and have the correct relative energy distributions.

loss.  The  conductivity 

The  coupling  coefficient  (β)  calculation  employs  the
energy  method  [5]  in  which  two-time  domain  runs  are
needed.  In  the  first  time  domain  run,  each  cell  is  tuned
separately  to  805  MHz  and  to  have  the  right  energy
distribution. After tuning, the two-cell structure is excited
by  a  monochromatic  dipole  signal  located  inside  the
second  cell.  The  3D  electric  and  magnetic  fields  are
recorded  at  four  carefully  chosen  time  steps.  From  these
fields,  the  power  loss  at  the  cavity  wall  and  the  power
flow out of the cavity into the waveguide are calculated.
The  coupling  coefficient  is  computed  as  the  ratio  of
external  power  over  wall  loss.  A  low  power  test  is
performed  on  a  full-scale  (six-cell)  aluminum  model  to
check  the  simulations.  For  a  set  of  coupler  dimensions
that is close to critical coupling (β = 1), the measured β is
0.976. The simulation result is 1.000. Finally, the coupling

