0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
6
1

 

 
 
 

3
9
0
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

AUTOMATED OPERATION OF THE APS LINAC USING THE 

PROCEDURE EXECUTION MANAGER 

 

R. Soliday, S. Pasky, M. Borland, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439, USA 

 

Abstract 

The Advanced Photon Source (APS) linear accelerator 
has two thermionic cathode rf guns and one photocathode 
rf gun.  The thermionic guns are used primarily for APS 
operations  while  the  photocathode  gun  is  used  as  a free-
electron  laser  (FEL)  driver.    With  each  gun  requiring  a 
different  lattice  and  timing  configuration,  the  need  to 
change  quickly  between  guns  puts  great  demands  on  the 
accelerator  operators.    Using  the  Procedure  Execution 
Manager  (PEM),  a  software  environment  for  managing 
automated  procedures,  we  have  made  start-up  and 
switchover  of  the  linac  systems  both  easier  and  more 
reliable.  The PEM is a graphical user interface written in 
Tcl/Tk 
invoke  ‘machine 
procedures’  and  control  their  execution. 
  It  allows 
construction  of  procedures  in  a  hierarchical,  parallel 
fashion,  which  makes  for  efficient  execution  and 
development.    In  this  paper,  we  discuss  the  features  and 
advantages  of  the  PEM  environment  as  well  as  the 
specifics of our procedures for the APS linac. 

that  permits 

the  user 

to 

Figure 1: Procedure Execution Manager 

1  TCL/TK CODE 

1.2  Machine Procedures 

1.1 PEM 

The  Procedure  Execution  Manager  (PEM) 

is  a 
graphical  user  interface  tool  that  allows  the  user  to 
execute  Tcl/Tk  machine  procedures  and  monitor  their 
progress  (see  Figure  1)  [1].    At  the  Advanced  Photon 
Source (APS), PEM procedures are used routinely during 
the  operations  of  the  different  accelerators  including  the 
linac.  A key advantage of the PEM is that it can be easily 
expanded  by  adding  new  machine  procedures  without 
changing the familiar user interface.  The PEM allows the 
user  to  select  an  execution  mode:  Automatic,  Semi-
Automatic, or Manual.  These levels signify the amount of 
interaction and monitoring that will occur.  The machine 
procedures  include  ‘steps’  at  which  the  PEM  can  pause.  
Manual  mode  pauses  at  all  steps.    Semi-Automatic  only 
pauses at the first step.  Automatic runs without pausing at 
any of the steps.  As shown in the figure, a collection of 
routines  can  be  grouped  together  and  given  a  title.    The 
machine procedures shown here are specifically designed 
for linac operations.  Additional PEM screens exist for all 
of the accelerators at the APS.  Since it was first written 
in  1996,  the  PEM  has  proven  to  be  a  very  reliable  and 
useful program. 

A machine procedure is a Tcl/Tk procedure that follows 
a particular format where certain utility functions must be 
called  from  within  the  procedure  [2].    These  procedures 
are  loaded  into  the  PEM  by  using  Tcl/Tk’s  built-in  auto 
loading feature.  The PEM then accesses a configuration 
file that lists the machine procedures that can be executed 
during a session.  A simple example is shown here: 
 
proc APSMpWriteThis {args} { 
  APSMpStep “Writing to file” 
  set fd [open /tmp/stuff w] 
  puts $fd “$args” 
  close $fd 
  APSMpReturn ok “data written” 
} 
 

This procedure writes the value of ‘args’ to a file.  Note 
that  the  last  statement  is  APSMpReturn.    This  must  be 
used  in  place  of  the  return  statement  in  all  machine 
procedures. 

For  each  machine  procedure  there  can  also  be  a 
companion  description  procedure  defined  as  shown 
below.  The return value from the description procedure is 
displayed  in  the  ‘Description’  frame  of  the  PEM  tool 
when the corresponding procedure is selected. 
 
proc APSMpWriteThisInfo {} { 
  return “Place description of procedure here.” 
} 

Machine  procedures  are  designed  to  be  executed 
primarily  from  within  the  PEM.    The  PEM  takes  full 
advantage  of  the  format  of  a  procedure  to  permit 
monitoring  and  controlled  execution.    These  machine 
procedures  may  also  be  executed  from  any  APS  Tcl/Tk 
library, which allows them to be executed like any other 
Tcl/Tk procedure. 

1.3  Installation 

In  order  to  run  the  PEM,  Tcl/Tk  with  the  Tcl-DP 
extension  must  be  installed.    The  latest  versions  are 
recommended.    The  APS  Tcl/Tk  library  and  the  PEM 
packages must also be installed.  All of these are located 
on the OAG web site1. 

2  LINAC APPLICATIONS 

  Normally 

The  linear accelerator has three guns:  two thermionic 
rf  guns  mainly  used  to  support  APS  injections  and  one 
photocathode  rf  gun  for  experimental  projects.    All  of 
these guns are important to APS as well as to future user 
demands. 
are 
parasitically  operated  during  user  beam  mode.    If  stored 
beam  is  lost,  it  is  important  to  the  Operations  Group  to 
have  a  fast  and  reliable  transfer  from  the  experimental 
project to the APS injection configuration.  This fast and 
reliable  method  of  switching  to  and  from  the  thermionic 
guns has been accomplished using the PEM tools. 

experimental  projects 

In the past, operators manually initiated and monitored 
all systems involved in the switchover using Motif Editor 
and  Display  Manager  (MEDM)  screens.    Since  the linac 
has  a  multitude  of  MEDM  screens  that  control  every 
aspect of operations, the switchover was not an easy task.  
Operators normally had to switch back and forth between 
many  MEDM  screens  as  they  worked.    As  demands  on 
the  operators  increased  due  to  system  changes,  some 
small  shell  scripts  where  written  to  perform  tasks 
automatically.    Although  the  scripts  worked  well,  they 
were  not  always  reliable  because  changes  to  machinery 
and  operational  procedures  were  being  made  without 
warning.    Also  most  of  these  scripts  were  not  regulated 
and did not have much of an error checking ability.  When 
configured  properly,  PEM  procedures  follow  the  same 
steps  an  operator  would  take  during  equipment  start-up.  
The  PEM  tools  not  only  repeat  steps  faster,  they  also 
provide reproducibility.  

Using  PEM  tools  for  linac  operations,  the  operator  no 
longer  has  to  open  multiple  windows  and  work  on  one 
task at a time.  Instead, the PEM is able to efficiently use 
multitasking  to  alleviate  the  burden  on  the  operators  in 
what  can  often  be  a  stressful  situation.    By  making  the 
interface of the PEM simple and consistent, new machine 
procedures  can  be  added.    Operators  can  read  the 
corresponding  description  and  view  the  steps  of  a 
procedure to become familiar with it.  This is not intended 
                                                           
1 http://www.aps.anl.gov/asd/oag/oaghome.shtml 

to reduce operator training, however; it merely acts as an 
additional  source  of  information  that  may  be  valuable  to 
operators. 

3  PEM DEVELOPMENT 

There are several different types of machine procedures 
ranging from simple low-level procedures to a collection 
of  many  submachine  procedures.    Often  a  machine 
procedure is a collection of smaller core procedures linked 
together  either  in  series  or  in  parallel.    In  doing  so,  we 
were  allowed  to  work  in  a  simple  progression.    Core 
procedures  are  the  lowest  level  procedures  that  do  the 
actual  work  and  are  written  first.    Once  these  core 
procedures have been tested, larger parent procedures are 
formed  that  call  on  all  of  the  necessary  machine 
procedures.  This process is repeated many times, creating 
many  levels  of  parent  procedures.    Table  1  shows  an 
example  of  the  machine  procedures  called  when  the 
photocathode start-up procedure is used.  There are more 
layers than this table shows, but they are too numerous to 
display. 
 

Table 1: Machine procedures called from the 

photocathode start-up procedure 

1.  Start up photocathode gun with power supplies 

a.  Start-up power supplies 

 

Turn off unused power supplies 
Turn on needed power supplies 
Condition power supplies 

i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv.  Wait for conditioning to finish 

b.  Start up photocathode gun 

i. 
ii. 
iii. 

Shut down thermionic gun 
Bring modulators to standby 
Bring modulators back up 

 
 

Using  a  modular  method,  the  PEM  can  decrease  the 
execution  time  by  taking  two  or  more  nonsequential 
procedures  and  running  them  in  parallel.    These  parallel 
procedures  can  split  off  indefinitely  into  subparallel 
procedures.    All  procedural  steps  report  back  to  the 
original  PEM  and  communicate  the  steps  as  they  occur.  
This  causes  an  interleaving  of the steps displayed by the 
PEM  as  the  execution  progresses.    Eventually,  prior  to 
exiting  or  executing  additional  steps, 
the  parallel 
procedures  must  be  joined.    This  joining  ensures  that  all 
steps  have  been  completed  successfully  prior 
to 
continuing with the program. 

Another advantage of a modular method is the ability to 
make  a  change  in  a  core  procedure.    If  this  machine 
procedure  is  called  by  multiple  machine  procedures,  the 
change will affect all of them.  This means that multiple 
source  codes  do  not  need  to  be  changed  if  a  design  or 
operation change is implemented that requires a change in 
a core machine procedure.  

Figure 2: Dialog for photocathode gun start up with power supplies  

The PEM has proven itself to be a useful tool capable 
of handling a wide array of tasks.  Switching between 
the operating modes with the assistance of the PEM has 
been made almost trivial for the operator.  Without the 
assistance  of  the  PEM,  the  method  for  switching 
operating  modes  would  require  detailed  knowledge  of 
all the systems, execution of all the switchover steps in 
the correct order, and a lot of time. 

5  ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

PEM  was  implemented  by  C.W.  Sanders,  formally 
of  APS,  based  on  concepts  developed  by  M.  Borland 
and C.W. Sanders.  This work is supported by the U.S. 
Department  of  Energy,  Office  of  Basic  Energy 
Sciences, under Contract No. W-31-109-ENG-38. 

6  REFERENCES 

[1]  M.  Borland,  “The  Procedure  Execution  Manager 
and  its  Application  to  Advanced  Photon  Source 
Operation,”  Proceedings  of  the  1997  Particle 
Accelerator  Conference,  May  12-16,  1997, 
Vancouver, Canada, pp. 2410-2412 (1998). 

[2]  C.W.  Saunders, 

Manager.” 
manuals/APSPEM/APSPEM4.html. 

“PEM-Procedure  Execution 
http://www.aps.anl.gov/asd/oag/ 

The  dialog  screen  shown  for  the  switchover  to  the 
photocathode gun (see Figure 2) allows the operator to 
select  a  snapshot  file  to  be  restored  at  the  end  of  a 
switchover.    A  snapshot  file  is  a  database  file  that 
includes all of the lattice power supply settings needed 
to reproduce the same beam as when the snapshot was 
recorded.    Once  executed,  the  PEM  procedure  opens 
another  display  window  that  shows  each  step  as  it 
occurs.  The particular procedure shown in Table 1 will 
start up and condition the power supplies and in parallel 
start up the photocathode gun.  The subprocedures for 
the power supply start up and photocathode gun start up 
are  run  in  series.    Because  this  machine  procedure  is 
able to do many tasks at once as well as perform many 
safety checks, it allows the operator to attend to many 
other tasks. 

When  an  unexpected  condition  occurs,  the  PEM 
displays  a  dialog  box  to  the  operator  containing  a 
description  of  the  problem  and  requests  that  the 
operator  attempt  to  fix  it  manually.    Buttons  for 
continuing and/or aborting are often displayed on these 
dialog  boxes.    An  abort button is always displayed on 
the  PEM  screen  during  execution  for  those  situations 
when  something  may  go  wrong  and  continued 
operation  of  the  PEM  may  be  unnecessary  or  unwise.  
Along these same lines, a log daemon is used with the 
PEM to log any and all error messages that may occur 
during normal operations.  This has been used to track 
down some obscure problems that occur infrequently. 

4  CONCLUSION 

Without  the  use of the PEM, the multiple operating 
modes  of  the  linac  at  the  APS  would  not  be  possible.  

