COMMISSIONING OF IH-RFQ AND IH-DTL

FOR THE GSI HIGH CURRENT LINAC

W. Barth, P. Forck, J. Glatz, W. Gutowski, G. Hutter, J. Klabunde, R. Schwedhelm,

P. Strehl, W. Vinzenz, D. Wilms, GSI Darmstadt, Germany

U. Ratzinger, Institute for Applied Physics, University Frankfurt am Main, Germany

Abstract

The  new  1.4  MeV/u  front  end  HSI  (HochStromInjektor)
of the Unilac accelerates ions with A/q ratios of up to 65
and with beam intensities in emA of up to 0.25 A/q. The
maximum  beam  pulse  power  is  up  to  1300  kW.  During
the stepwise linac  commissioning  from  April  to  Septem-
ber  1999  the  beam  behind  of  each  cavity  was  analysed
within two weeks. A very stable Ar1+ beam out of a vol-
ume plasma source MUCIS was used mainly. The meas-
ured norm. 80 % emittance areas around 0.45 p
 mm mrad
are close to the results from beam simulations. Up to 80 %
of the design intensity at the linac exit were achieved. In
February 2000 an U4+ beam from the MEVVA source was
accelerated for the first time.

1  INTRODUCTION

H-type  RFQ-  and  DTL-structures  are  well  suited  and
frequently used meanwhile at the front end of proton and
heavy ion linacs. The recent GSI heavy ion linac project is
characterized  by  three  quite  ambitious  parameters:  The
high  A/q-value  of  up  to  65,  the  high  beam  current  –  for
example 15 emA of  238U4+,  and  the  normalized  horizontal
emittance of less than 0.8 p
 mm mrad for the U73+ beam at
synchrotron  injection  after  having  passed  two  stripping
processes.  Multiturn  injection  into  the  horizontal  phase
space  of  the  synchrotron  SIS  18  should  then  allow  the
accumulation  and  acceleration  of  up  to  4·1010  U73-ions.
This aim as well as the state of the art in ion source devel-
opment  dictated  the  parameter  choice  for  the  new  linac
[1].  The  original  Wideröe  DTL  section  was  replaced  by
H-type  structures  (Fig.  1).  They  allow  to  increase  the
voltage  gain  by  a  factor  of  2.5  while  keeping  the  total
length  of  the  installations.  Additionally,  the  injection
energy  into  the    Unilac  was  reduced  from  11.4 keV/u  to
2.2 keV/u. These changes allow a convenient matching of
high current beams from MUCIS or MEVVA ion sources
to  the  Unilac [2,3,4].  Several  aspects  of  the  new  91 MV
linac are described in ref. [5,6,7]. The new 36 MHz power
amplifier  is  described  in  ref.  [8].  The  choice  of  this  fre-
quency,  which  is  one  third  of  the  succeeding  Alvarez-
DTL frequency resulted from beam dynamics calculations
as  well  as  from  corresponding  cavity  sizes  [7].  RF-  and
beam results from the IH-RFQ and from  the  Super  Lens
SL, which were invented during this project, are reported

in  this  paper  as  well  as  the  corresponding  results  of  the
IH-DTL.

Fig. 1:  General drawing of the HSI

2  TIME SCHEDULE

The main injector of the GSI complex had to be replaced
at  the  end  of  this  project.  A  nine  month-period  was  per-
mitted  to  remove  the  Wideröe-DTL  as  well  as  to  install
and to commission the new injector, rf equipment and the
1.4 MeV/u  charge  separator.  During  that  period  all  GSI
experiments  were  supplied  exclusively  by  the  High
Charge  State  Injector  [9].  The  linac  assembly  and  com-
missioning was done tank by tank and a beam diagnostics
bench  [10]  was  installed  behind  the  component  under
investigation. The following time schedule shows the key
events:
17. Dec. 1998 Last beam from the Wideröe structure
March

1999 Beam injection into the 2.2 keV/u

transport line

28. April 1999 Acceleration by the IH-RFQ
31. May 1999 Beam injection into the Super Lens
22. July
1999 Acceleration by the IH-DTL, tank 1
06. Sept. 1999 Acceleration by the IH-DTL, tank 2
and beam transport to the gasstripper

3 COMPONENT TESTS AND ALIGNMENT

The rf tuning results from all cavities as well as rf power
tests  with  the  first  and  the  last  of  10  RFQ  modules  are
described in ref. [11]. The flatness of the voltage distribu-
tion  along  the  mini  vanes  is  within  –
 1 %.  The  vane
alignment within each module is given by the precision of
the  inidividual  components.  No  adjustment  during  the
final  assembly  was  foreseen.  The  deviation  in  the  trans-
versal  position  of  the  vane-carrier  rings  was  below
0.05 mm.  The  precision  of  each  carrier  ring  is  within

 0.01 mm. The RFQ modules were then bolted  together
and  after  the  final  installation  in  the  Unilac  tunnel  the
vertical  module  displacement  was  up  to  0.1 mm  along  a
sine-shaped half wave, while the horizontal displacement
was  up  to  –
 0.25 mm  along  an  S-shaped  curve.  As  the
total  RFQ  length  is  9.4 m,  the  related  angular  deviations
from the beam axis are quite acceptable.
The Super Lens [12], an 11-cell RFQ with enlarged aper-
ture and synchronous phase – 90°, acts as a 3-dimensional
focusing  lens  into  the  IH-DTL  and  is  bolted  on  the  low
energy end plate of cavity IH1. The large tank modules of
the DTL cavities were manufactured and copper plated in
time as well as the bulk copper drift tubes. Some technical
effort  became  necessary  during  the  design  and  construc-
tion of the cavity internal quadrupole triplets: the cores are
laminated  and  the  material  is  cobalt  steel  alloy  (Vaco-
flux50, Fa. Vacuumschmelze). The quadrupoles with core
aperture  diameters  of  38 mm  and  50 mm  reach  up  to
1.27 T  and  1.23 T,  respectively,  at  the  pole  tips.  These
fields were demonstrated successfully in all cases. Due to
the  complex  pulse  structure  of  the  Unilac  the  magnets
have  to  allow  pulsed  operation  with  a  pulse  rise  time  of
16 ms only and pulse repetition rates of up to 20 Hz. This
corresponds    to  voltages  of  up  to  700 V  applied  on  the
coils. With the exception of one singlet, which is showing
intolerable leak currents at repetition rates above 5 Hz, all
lenses have reached the specifications. The present situa-
tion  causes  no  restriction  with  respect  to  synchrotron
injection.  Anyway  the  corresponding  triplet  will  be  re-
placed  at  the  first  opportunity.  The  alignment  results  of
the  triplets  are  –
  0.1 mm  for  the  magnetic  axis  of  each
singlet within the corresponding triplet. The deviations of
all  linac  components  from  the  beam  axis  are  up  to
 0.25 mm.  The  triangulation  measuring  technique  was
applied.
After  final  installation  in  the  Unilac  tunnel  the  vacuum
pressure  became  better  than  2·10-8  hPa  for  all  structures
within  one  month.  All  cavities  came  on  rf  power  after
about  2  days  of  preconditioning,  where  only  some  10 W
were  accepted  at  vacuum  pessures  up  to  7·10-6  hPa.  The
RFQ  as  well  as  the  Super  Lens  show  pronounced  dark
current  contributions  at  voltage  amplitudes  above  the
75 %  design  level  [7].  IH1  shows  modest  dark  current
contributions  while  IH2  seems  to  become  free  of  that
effect after some more operation time. 238U4+-levels (that is
90 %  of  the  A/q  =  65  design  level)  were  provided  and
used in beam times since 02/2000.

4  BEAM COMMISSIONING

 The  mobile  diagnostics  instrumentation  consisted  of
4-segmented  capacitive  pick-up  probes,  beam  transform-
ers, slit-grid as well as single shot, pepper pot type emit-
tance  measurement  devices  and  diamond  detectors  for
bunch length detection [10].
 

 Beam Energy:
 The  time  of  flight  technique  was  used  to  measure  the
beam  energy  [5-7].  In  all  cases  the  correct  energy  was
received immediately after first beam injection and at the
nominal rf parameters.
Additionally, the exit energy dependence on rf amplitude
and phase can be measured and compared to beam simu-
lations. Fig. 2 shows as an example the energy profile of
IH2, which was calculated by LORASR and verified quite
well by TOF measurements.

Fig. 2:  Dependence of the IH2 exit energy on rf ampli-
tude  and  phase  of  the  same  tank  (LORASR
simulation).

 
 Pulse Shaping by the LEBT Chopper:
 An important feature of the high current pulse shape is the
rise  time  to  full  intensity:  This  defines  the  amount  of
beam energy to be handled, while machine parameters are
changed or optimized. The linac beam pulse is defined by
a  chopper,  which  is  located  immediately  in  front  of  the
RFQ. It has a rise time of about 0.5 m s [4]. After reaching
the chopper voltage design levels pulse rise times of 5 m s
are  measured  now  as  shown  qualitatively  by  the  dashed
curves  in  Fig.  3,  it  is  the  time  resolution  of  the  current
transformers.  The  curves  measured  during  the  commis-
sioning show the quality of the flat top as well as the con-
servation  of  the  beam  pulse  shape  along  the  linac.  This
demonstrates  the  performance  of  the  rf  control  loops,
which  are  acting  very  well  though  the  beam  current  is
close to the design level of 10 mA Ar+ in this example. In
case  of  the  IH-DTL,  up  to  44 %  of  the  rf  power  are

–
–
pumped into the beam. More detailed investigation on the
pulse  shape  will  be  based  on  capacitive  pick-up  signals
[5].
 
 Transmission:
 At a given beam current from the ion source the injected
beam current into the linac was varied by cutting the hori-
zontal  beam  emittance  with  slits.  Especially  the  beam
transmission along the RFQ depends very much on the slit
width and is ranging from 60 % at Iin = 18  mA (measured
in front of the quadruplet lense) up to around 100 % at Iin<
4 mA.  The  transmission  along  IH1  (IH2)  is  above  90 %
(95 %)  for  the  whole  current  range  and  is  approaching
100 % at current levels below 2 mA. So far the RFQ has
reached the design current (10 mA), while a maximum of
8 mA was measured behind of IH2.
 
 Transverse Emittance:
 Down to the RFQ exit the slit-grid emittance device was
used for all current levels. At higher beam energies, high
current  and  full  pulse  length,  only  single  shot  measure-
ment techniques could be applied. Fig. 5 shows maximum
current  emittance  plots  from  different  commissioning
steps.  The  measured  LEBT  emittance  shows,  that  the
matching  into  the  RFQ  causes  beam  losses  at  high  input
beam  currents:  the  normalized  RFQ  acceptance  was  cal-
culated to be 0.3 p
 mm mrad only. At the exit of IH2 and
 

at  a  beam  current  of  7.5 mA  the  measured  norm.  80 %
emittance  area  of.  0.45  p
  mm  mrad  is  well  contained
within  the  90 %  area  resulting  from  LORASR  calcula-
tions.  More  detailed  studies  about  the  RFQ  transmission
and  comparisons  with  simulations  are  planned  for  the
future.  Bunch  shape  measurements  with  high  resolution
were done by using diamond detectors [10].

Beam 

 Fig. 3: 
the  HSI.
Dashed  lines  correspond  to  an  improved  chopper  per-
formance (see Ref. 4)    

transformer  signals  along 

 Fig. 4: Horizontal emittance measurements taken during different commissioning steps along the HSI

 

REFERENCES

[1] U. Ratzinger, Proc. 1996 Linac Conf. Geneva,

CERN 96-07, p. 288

[2] P. Spädtke, H. Emig, K.D. Leible, C. Mühle,
H. Reich, B.H. Wolf, Proc. 1998 Linac Conf.,
Chicago, ANL 98/28, p. 884

[3] H. Reich, P. Spädtke, Rev. Sci. Instr., Vol. 71

(2000), p. 707

[4] L. Dahl, P. Spaedtke, these Proceedings
[5] W. Barth, these Proceedings
[6] U. Ratzinger, Proc. EPAC 2000, Vienna, to be

published

[7] U. Ratzinger, Proc. HIF 2000, San Diego, accepted

for publication in Nucl. Instr. Meth. A

[8] G. Hutter, W. Gutowski, W. Hartmann, G. Kube,

[9]

M. Pilz, W. Vinzenz, these Proceedings
J. Klabunde, Proc. 1992 Linac Conf. Ottawa,
AECL-10728, p. 570

[10] P. Forck, F. Heymach, T.Hoffmann, A. Peters,

P. Strehl, these Proceedings

[11] H. Gaiser, K. Kaspar, U. Ratzinger, S. Minaev,

proc. 1999 PAC Conf., New York, p. 3552

[12] U. Ratzinger, R. Tiede, Proc. 1996 LINAC Conf,

Geneva, p. 128

