PULSED NEUTRON SOURCE USING 100-MEV ELECTRON LINAC

AT POHANG ACCELERATOR LABORATORY*

G. N. Kim#, H. S. Kang, Y. S. Lee, M. H. Cho, I. S. Ko, and W. Namkung

Pohang Accelerator Laboratory, POSTECH, Pohang 790-784, Korea

0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
5
1

 

 
 
 

8
6
0
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

The  Pohang  Accelerator  Laboratory  operates  an
electron linac for a pulsed neutron source as one of  the
long-term  nuclear  R&D  programs  at  the  Korea  Atomic
Energy Research Institute. The designed beam parameters
are as follows; The nominal beam energy is 100 MeV, the
maximum beam power is 10 kW, and the beam current is
varied  from  300  mA  to  5A  depends  on  the  pulse
repetition  rate.  The  linac  has  two  operating  modes:  one
for  the  short  pulse  mode  with  the  repetition  rates  of  2  -
100 ns and the other for the long pulse mode with the 1
m s  repetition  rate.  We  tested  an  electron  linac  based  on
the  existing  equipment  such  as  a  SLAC-5045  klystron,
two  constant  gradient  accelerating  sections,  and  a
thermionic  RF-gun.    We  investige  the  characteristics  of
the linac, and  we report  the status of  the pulsed  neutron
source facility including a target system and the time-of-
flight paths.

1  INTRODUCTION

The  nuclear  data  project  as  one  of  the  nation-wide
nuclear  R&D  programs  was  launched  by  the  KAERI  in
1996  [1].    Its  main  goals  are  to  establish  a  nuclear  data
system, to construct the infrastructure for the nuclear data
productions  and  evaluations,  and  to  develop  a  highly
reliable  nuclear  data  system.    In  order  to  build  the
infrastructure for  the  nuclear  data  production,  KAERI  is
to  build  an  intense  pulsed  neutron  source  by  utilizing
accelerator  facilities,  technologies,  and  manpower  at  the
Pohang  Accelerator  Laboratory  (PAL). 
  The  PAL
proposed  the  Pohang  Neutron  Facility  (PNF),  which
consists of a 100-MeV electron linac, a water-cooled Ta
target,  and  at  least  three  different  time-of-flight  (TOF)
paths [2].  We designed a 100-MeV electron linac [3] and
constructed  an  electron  linac  based  on  experiences
obtained  from  construction  and  operation  of  the  2-GeV
linac at PAL.

In  this  paper,  we  describe  the  characteristics  of  the
electron  linac,  and  then  we  present  the  status  of  the
Pohang Neutron Facility (PNF).
___________________
*Work supported in part by  POSCO, MOST, and KAERI
# Email: gnkim@postech.ac.kr ; Joint appointment at the Institute
of High Energy Science, Kyungpook National Univ., Taegu , Korea.

2  CHARACTERISTICS OF E-LINAC

2.1  Construction of electron linac

We constructed an electron linac for the various R&D
activities  of  the  neutron  facility  by  utilizing  the  existing
components  and  infrastructures  at  PAL  on  December
1997  [4].  The  design  beam  parameters  of  the  electron
linac are as follows; The beam energy is 100 MeV with
the energy spread less than 1%, the peak current is 20A,
the  beam  pulse  width  is  6-m s,  and  the  rms  normalized
emittance  is  less  than  30  p mm-mrad.  The  electron  linac
consists  of  a  thermionic  RF-gun,  an  alpha  magnet,  four
quadrupole  magnets, 
two  SLAC-type  accelerating
structure,  a  quadrupole  triplet,  and  a  beam-analyzing
magnet. A 2-m long drift space is added between the first
and  second  accelerating  structures  to  insert  an  energy
compensation magnet or a beam transport magnet for the
future  FEL  research.    The  RF-gun  is  a  one-cell  cavity
with a tungsten dispenser cathode of 6 mm diameter.  The
RF-gun  produced  an  electron  beam  with  an  average
current  of  300  mA,  a  pulse  length  of  6-m s,  and
aproximate  energy  of  1  MeV  [5].    The  measured  rms
emittance for the beam energy of 1 MeV was 2.1 p mm-
mrad.  The alpha magnet is used to match the longitudinal
acceptance  from  the  RF-  gun  to  the  first  acceleration
structure. Electrons move along a a -shaped trajectory  in
the alpha magnet,  and the  bending angle is  278.6o.   The
higher energy electron has a  longer path length than  the
lower energy electron, thus the length of electron beams
is  not  lengthened  or  is  shortened  in  the  beam  transport
line from the RF-gun to the first accelerating structure.

the  first  and 

installed  between 

Four quadrupole magnets are used to focus the electron
beams in the beam transport line from the thermionic RF-
gun  to  the  first  accelerating  structure.  The  quardupole
triplet 
the  second
accelerating structure is  used to focus  the electron  beam
during the transport to the experimental beam line at the
end of linac.  There are three beam current transformers
(BCT)  and  three  beam  profile  monitors  for  beam
instrumentation. The BCT is the toroidal shape of ferrite
core 25 turns-wound by 0.3 mm diameter enameled wire.
The  beam-analyzing  magnet  has  a  bending  angle  of  30
degrees and zero pole-face rotation.

The main components of RF system consist of a SLAC
5045  klystron  and  an  80-MW  modulator,  and  RF
waveguide  components,  etc.  Two  branched  waveguides
through  a  3  dB  power  divider  from  the  main  klystron
waveguide are  connected  accelerating structures.  A  high

second  accelerating 

power  phase-shifter  is  inserted  in  the  waveguide  line  of
the 
structure.  The  branched
waveguide  with  a  10  dB  power  divider  from  the  main
waveguide  is  connected  to  the  RF-gun  cavity  through  a
high-power  phase-shifter/attenuator  and  a  high-power
circulator. The circulator is pressurized with dry nitrogen
at 20 psig. Two waveguide windows isolate the circulator
from the evacuated waveguide line.

2.2  Beam Acceleration

 After the RF-conditioning of the accelerating structures
and  the  wave-guide  network,  we  tested  the  beam
acceleration.    The  maximum  RF  power  from  a  SLAC
5045 klystron was up to 45 MW.  The RF power fed to
the RF-gun was 3 MW.  The maximum energy is 75 MeV,
and  the  measured  beam  currents  at  the  entrance  of  the
first accelerating structure and at the end of linac are 100
mA  and  40  mA,  respectively.      The  length  of  electron
beam pulses is 1.8 m s, and the pulse repetition rate is 12
Hz.  The measured energy spread is 1% at its minimum.
The energy spread was reduced by adjustment of the RF
phase for the RF-gun and by optimization of the magnetic
field for the alpha magnet.

 3 STATUS OF NEUTRON FACILITY
 The  Pohang  Neutron  Facility  consists  of  a  100-MeV
electron  linac,  a  photo-neutron  target,  and  at  least  three
different time-of-flight (TOF) paths.

 

3.1 Photo-neutron Target

 High-energy  electrons  injected  in  the  target  produce
gamma  rays  via  bremsstrahlung,  these  gamma  rays  then
generate  neutrons  via  photonuclear  reactions.  We  are
considering  tantalum  rather  than  fissile  material  because
the technology for handling and the target characteristics
are well known [6]. The neutron yield depends sensitively
on  the  materials  and  the  target  geometry.    The  target
system is desgined using the MC simulation codes, EGS4
and MCNP4.  The target system, 4.9-cm in diameter and
7.4-cm in length, is composed of ten sheets of Ta plates,
and there is 0.15-cm water gap between them, in order to
cool the target effectively [7].  The estimated flow rate of
the cooling water is about 5 liters per minute in order to
maintain  below  45  oC.      The  target  housing  is  made  of
Titanium.  The  conversion  ratio  obtained  from 
the
MCNP4  code  from  a  100-MeV  electron  to  neutrons  is
0.032.    The  neutron  yield  per  kW  beam  power  at  the
target is  2.0· 1012  n/sec,  which is  about  2.5%  lower  than
the calculated value based on the Swanson’s formula [8].
Based  on  this  study,  we  constructed  a  water-cooled  Ta-
target system.

3.2 Time-of-Flight Path

 The pulsed neutron facility based on the electron linac
is  a  useful  tool  for  high-resolution  measurements  of

micro-scopic neutron cross-sections with the TOF method.
In  the  TOF  method,  the  energy  resolution  of  neutrons
depends on the TOF path length.  Since we have to utilize
the  space  and  the  infrastructures  in  the  laboratory,  the
TOF  paths 
are  placed
perpendicular to  the electron  linac. We  constructed a  15
m long TOF path perpendicular to the electron linac. The
TOF tubes were made by 15 and 20 cm diameter of the
stainless pipes.

experimental  halls 

and 

3.3 Neutron Production Experiment

 The  neutron  production  facility  PNF  was  operated
from  January  2000.  We  measured  the  neutron  TOF
spectra for several samples with the pulsed neutron beam.
The  experimental  arrangement  for  the  neutron  TOF
spectrum  measurement  is  shown  in  Fig.  1.  The  target  is
located  in  the  position  where  the  electron  beam  hits  the
center  of  the  photoneutron  target,  which  is  also  aligned
with  the  center-  line  of  the  TOF  tube.  The  target  was
installed  at  the  center  of  a  water  modulator,  50  cm  in
diameter and 30 cm long aluminum cylindrical shape, to
moderate the fast neutrons. A lead block, 20cm x 20cm x
10 cm, was inserted in front of the TOF tube to reduce the
gamma-flash  generated  by  the  electron  burst  from  the
target.  The  sample  was  placed  at  the  midpoint  of  the
flight  path.  There  is  1.8  m  thick  concrete  between  the
target room and the detector room.

Fig.  1.  Experimental  arrangement  for  TOF
spectra measurement

 For  the  neutron  TOF  spectrum  measurement,  a  6Li
glass scinitillator BC702, 12.5 cm in diameter and 1.5 cm
in thickness was mounted on an EMI-93090 photomultiplier,
and it  is  used  as  a  neutron  detector.  In  order  to  monitor
the  neutron  intensity  during  the  measurement,  a  BF3
proportional counter, 1.6 cm in diameter and 5.8 cm long
was placed inside the target room at a distance of about 6

m from the target. The BF3 counter was inserted in a 30.5
cm diameter polyethylene sphere and surrounded by 5 cm
thick borated polyethylene plates and Pb bricks to shield
thermal neutrons and gamma flash.

 During the experiment, the electron linac was operated
with a repetition rate of 12 Hz, a pulse width of 1.5 m s, a
peak current of 30 mA, and electron energy of 60 MeV.
The total operated period is about two weeks from March
2000.  During this period, we spend most of time to check
the  radiation  level  around  the  facility  and  to  reduce  the
electronic noises originated from the RF source.

 The  block  diagram  of  the  data  acquisition  system  is
also  shown  in  Fig.  1.    The  TOF  signal  from  the  6Li-
ZnS(Ag) scintillator  was connected  through an  ORTEC-
113  pre-amplifier  to  an  ORTEC-571  amplifier,  the
amplifier  output  was  fed  into  a  discriminator  input  and
used  a  stop  signal  of  a  150  MHz  time  digitizer  (Turbo
MCS).    The  lower  threshold  level  of  the  discriminator
was  set  to  30  mV.    The  Turbo  MCS  was  operated  as  a
16,384-channel time analyzer.  The channel width of the
time analyzer was set to 0.5 m s.  The 12 Hz trigger signal
for a modulator of an electron linac was connected to an
ORTEC-550  single  channel  analyzer  (SCA),  the  output
signal  was  used  as  a  start  signal  of  a  Turbo  MCS.    The
Turbo  MCS  is  connected  to  a  personal  computer.    The
data were collected, stored and analyzed on this computer.
In  order  to  determine  the  flight  path  distance  for  our
facility, we used neutron TOF spectra for Sm, Ta, W, and
Ag sample runs.  A Cd filter of 0.5 mm in thickness was
used  to  suppress  thermal  neutrons.  The  samples  were
placed at the midpoint of the flight path.

 The  resonance  energy  E  and  the  channel  number  I  in
Table  2  are  used  to  find  the  flight  path  length  L  in  the
following equation by the method of least squares fitting.
 

=

I
 

3.72

t

+

L
E

t

t

 

 In the above equation, D
t is the channel width of the time
digitizer and set to 0.5 m s.  The delay time t  is the time
difference  between  the  start  signal  from  the  RF  trigger
and  the  real  zero  time.  The  flight  path  length  L  is
determined  from  the  fitting.    As  shown  in  Fig.  2,  the
results of the fit are: L=10.81– 0.02 m and t =0.87 m s.

4. SUMMARY

The nuclear data project was launched by KAERI from
1996 in order to support nuclear R&D programs, medical
and  industrial  applications.  We  have  constructed  and
tested an electron linac for the pulsed neutron facility by
utilizing  the  existing  components  and  infrastructures  at
PAL.  The  characteristics  of  accelerated  electron  beams
are  about  75  MeV  of  energy,  12  Hz  of  repetition  rate,
1.8m s  of  pulse  width  and  about  40  mA  of  peak  current.
We made a 15-m TOF path perpendicular to the linac in

Fig.  2  A  fit  of  the  flight  path  length  to
resonance energies

order  to  test  a  Ta-target  system  and  a  data  acquisition
system.  We  tested  the  neutron  production  and  measured
the neutron TOF spectra. Using the resonance energy of
TOF spectra for various  samples, we measured the  TOF
path length of the neutron facility.

REFERENCES

[1] Ministry of Science and Technology of Korea (1999), “1997
Request for Project on Long-Term Nuclear R&D Program.”
[2] G. N. Kim, J. Y. Choi, M. H. Cho, I. S. Ko, W. Namkung
and J. H. Chang, “Proposed neutron facility using 100-MeV
electron  linac  at  Pohang  Accelerator  Laboratory,”  Proc.
Nuclear Data for Science and Technology, Trieste, May 19-
24,  1997,  p.  556,  Italian  Physical  Society,  Bologna,  Italy
(1997).

[3] J. Y. Choi, H. S. Kang, G. N. Kim, M. H. Cho, I. S. Ko and
W.  Namkung,  “Design  of  100-MeV  Electron  Linac  for
Neutron  Beam  Facility  at  PAL,”  Proc.  Of  1997  KAPRA
Workshop (Seoul, Korea, Jun. 26-27, 1997), 88 (1997).

[4] H. S. Kang, J. Y. Choi, Y. J. Park, S. H. Kim, G. N. Kim, M.
H.  Cho,  and  I.  S.  Ko,  “Beam  Acceleration  Result  of  Test
Linac,” Proc. 1st Asian Particle Accelerator Conf. (Tsukuba,
Japan, Mar. 23-27, 1998) 743 (1998).

[5] H. S. Kang, G. N. Kim, M. H. Cho, W. Namkung, and K. H.

Chung, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 44, 1639 (1997).

[6] J.  M.  Salome  and  R.  Cools,  Nucl.  Instr.  Meth.  179,  13

(1981).

[7] W.  Y.  Baek,  G.  N.  Kim,  M.  H.  Cho,  I.  S.  Ko  and  W.
Namkung,  “Design  of  the  Photoneutron  Target  for  the
Pulsed  Neutron  Source  at  PAL,”  Proc.  Workshop  on
Nuclear  Data  Production  and  Evaluation  (Pohang,  Korea,
Aug. 7-8, 1998).

[8] W.  P.  Swanson,  “Radiological  Safety  Aspects  of  the
operation of Electron Linear Accelerators,” IAEA Tech. Rep.
188 (1979).

D
·
D
·
