ANALYSES OF KLYSTRON MODULATOR APPROACHES FOR NLC ∗

Anatoly Krasnykh, SLAC, Box 4349 Stanford, CA 94309

ENERGY TRANSFER EFFICIENCY

Abstract

the  delay 

Major changes to the Next Linear Collider (NLC) design
were facilitated by the experimental testing of the 75 MW
X-band  klystron  at  a  3.0  µsec  pulse  width  1  and  new
component  development  allowing 
line
distribution  system  (DLDS)  to  operate  with  eight  bins
instead  of  four.  This  change  has  a  direct  effect  on  the
design of the klystron modulator.  The general approaches,
which are being studied intensively, are: the conventional
base line modulator with two klystrons 2, a Hybrid version
of  the  baseline  with  a  solid-state  on/off  switch,  a  solid-
state induction type modulator that drives eight klystrons 3,
and a solid-state direct switch modulator 4.  Some form of
pulse  transformer  is  the  matching  element  between  the
klystron  beam  and  the  energy  store  in  the  all  of  these
approaches except the direct switch.  The volume and cost
of the transformer is proportional to the peak pulse power
and the output pulse width. The recent change in the NLC
design requires double the transformer effective core area,
and  increase  both  the  size  and  cost  of  modulator.  In  the
direct  switch  model  there  is  no  pulse  transformer.  The
klystron beam potential is practically equal to the potential
of the energy storage element.  Here the solid-state switch
blocks the  500  kV DC  voltage of the  storage element. In
this  paper 
transformerless  modulator  approaches  are
presented  based  upon  a  Marx  method  of  voltage
multiplication  using  on/off 
Insulated  Gate  Bipolar
Transistors  (IGBT’s)  instead  of  on  switches.  DC  voltage
power supply system is much simpler as compared to the
power system of the direct switch approach.

INTRODUCTION

The current design of the future linear colliders consists of
two X-band linacs powered by over 1,600 klystrons.  The
facility  will  consume  in  excess  of  200  MW  of  average
power. The total number of NLC klystrons and modulators
can  be  reduced  if  RF  pulse  duration  is  longer.  The  pulse
width  for  NLC  klystrons  is  not  precisely  defined  for  the
time  being.  The  present  klystron  modulator  for  NLC
requires  a  500  kV,  530  A,  3  microsecond  flat  top  pulse
with 120 PPS to drive a pair of 75 MW klystrons. These
parameters are used in planning for the NLC, but R&D is
continuing  on  klystron  improvements.  The  design  of
multiple  beam  klystrons  with  lower  beam  potential  is  an
example  of  a  possible  improvement.  The  modulator  for
such  a  klystron  or  group  of  klystrons  will  be  simpler,
reliable, and less expensive.

The major design requirements for the modulator are cost,
efficiency,  reliability.  The  efficiency  is  one  important
parameter due to large number of modulators for NLC. It
is  useful  to  identify  losses  into  two  separate  efficiencies.
The first component is a ratio of the energy delivered into
klystron beam and PFN storage energy. It is the discharge
energy  efficiency.  A  second  component  is  a  ratio  of  the
flat top portion of the klystron pulse energy and the energy
of  pulse  width.  It  is  energy  transfer  efficiency.  The
efficiency of modulator is a product of these components.
It  was  shown  2  that  the  discharge  energy  efficiency  of
~92-93%  can  be  obtained  for  PFN  using  oil  filled
capacitors,  two  gap  thyratron  and  conventional  pulse
transformer  for  the  150  MW  and  1.5  µsec  output  levels.
The energy transfer efficiency is still close to ~70%. The
pulse  transformer  is  one  element  of  modulator,  which
limits the energy transfer efficiency due to a limitation of
the transmission band of the pulse power. It is well known
that  the  rise  time  of  pulse  transformer  is  limited  by  the
period  which  is  determined  by  the  leakage  inductance  L
.
and the distributed capacitance C, as following 
LC
The  geometry  of  high  voltage  pulse  transformer  fixes  L
and  C.  It  is  evident  also  that  a  transformer  with  a  small
number of turns ought to have a wider bandwidth. On the
other hand the reduction of the number of turns produces
larger pulse droop and core size for the given pulse width.
Moreover,  for  transformers  with  a  low  L  and  C  the
inductance  of  the  current  loop  between  the  PFN  and  a
load
primary  winding 
capacitance (Cg) can play a noticeable role on the rise/fall
time as well as energy transfer efficiency. For optimal case
it has been found that the energy transfer efficiency can be
evaluated by
1
2
t
+
t

through  switch  (Lc)  and 

π
2
⋅

1

pw
λ

η

te

t ~1

the 

+

1

+

1

+

1

+

1

k

2

⋅

k

1

1
4
d
p

⋅

≅

1

≅

1

rf

⋅

3

where trf  is the flat-top duration, w1 and p are the number
turns  and  the  circumference  of  primary  winding,  d  is  the
average  distance  between  primary  and 
secondary
windings.  Coefficients  k1=Lc/L  and  k2=Cg/C  are  the
additional  parts  of  the  primary  inductance  and  the
secondary  load  capacitance,  which  have  been  normalized
by L and C of the transformer. The effective length of rf-
pulse is λ=ctrf /(n-1)ε0.5, where c is the velocity of light, n
is  the  turn  ratio,  and  ε  is  the  dielectric  constant  of  the
media  between  windings.  The  coefficient  w1p/λ<1  is
responsible  for  the  transmission  of  the  energy  and  has  to
be minimized (i.e. to use a media with lower ε, and lower

                                                
∗ Work supported by Department of Energy contract DE-AC03-76SF00515

is  ~0.035 

turn ratio) for the given amount of w1p. For example, this
coefficient 
the  conventional  pulse
transformer. The coefficient (1+4d/p) 0.5 is responsible for
the degree of the high voltage isolation between windings
and  it  is  ~1.24.  The  contribution  of  k2  is  higher  as
compared to k1 for the high power modulators.

for 

High  core  dynamic  capacity  effect  can  take  noticeable
place during transmission of the high pulse power through
transformer.  Actually  equations,  which  describe 
the
processes in the pulse transformer, assume that a velocity
of field propagation in the core material is instantaneous.
However  the  core  magnetizing  velocity  is  a  function  of
conductivity  of  the  ribbon,  effective  pulse  permeability,
etc. The step  of the  power starts to propagate  in  the  core
material from periphery to the center. The velocity  of the
magnetization has to be extremely fast in the beginning of
process. This can happen when an extremely large spike of
the magnetizing current amplitude takes place. The quality
of  the  core  material,  ribbon  thickness,  and  the  core
geometry are responsible for this effect. The charge of the
load capacity, of the transformer distributed capacity, and
of  the  effective  core  dynamic  capacity  goes  practically
simultaneously.  The  value  of  this  capacity  depends  on
dB/dt and amplitude of H (t) for the simple case.

In spite of described effects the demonstrated efficiency
of  modulator  is  rather  high.    For  instance,  the  energy
transfer is ~70% for 1.5 microsecond rf-pulse duration 2. It
is  expected  that  the  total  efficiency  can  be  improved  on
~12%  for  3  microsecond  pulse  width  in  the  conventional
modulator configuration.

The use of features of coupled transmission lines lies in
the base of an idea how the energy transfer efficiency can
be  improved.  The  first  approach  is  related  to  the  use  of
coupled  transmission  lines,  which  support  true  TEM
modes.  The  approach  consists  of  a  bunch  of  small
transformers, which are connected as shown in Fig. 1a).

They are used as transmission line elements. The buffer

elements  always  will  additionally  dissipate  some  amount
of energy.

Fig. 1b)

Fig 1c)

Fig.  1:  a)  scheme  of  distributed  line  transformer,  b)
scheme of a conventional transformer with additional fast
cells, and c) scheme of modulator based on coupled pulse
forming lines.

Approach  presented  in  Fig  1c)  has  no  buffer  elements.
One port of primary transmission line can be open. Other
port of this line has the switch for discharge of PFN. Here
PFN  is  created  by  the  lumped  C0  capacitors  and  the
primary winding of  pulse transformers  PT. The energy is
stored in capacitors of the first transmission line. Primary
windings  of  pulse  transformers  have  a  floating  potential.
The charge of the second line is equal to zero. The output
pulse  is  started  when  the  switch  is  on.  The  TEM  wave
starts  to  propagate  toward  the  end  of  line.  The  storage
energy  is  launched  partly  in  the  load  and  partly  on  the
charge  of  the  second  line  capacitors  C1.  After  the  double
propagating time, the energy is extracted at the load. This
approach  was  evaluated  experimentally  as  well  as  by
computer  simulation.  The  aim  of  these  experiments  was
‘proof of principle’ i.e. to show a  possibility  of the  pulse
formation  on 
inductors  and
distributed  capacitances  here  are  not  parasitic  elements.
They  are  parts  of  pulse  forming  network.  The  output
waveform of the voltage for two-coupled PFN with a step
up voltage transformation is shown in Fig. 2.

load.  The 

leakage 

the 

Fig.1a)

Both  lines  are  uniform  and  linear  for  a  simple  case.  The
power step of the modulator is launched at the input of the
coupled  line.  The  number  of  cells  and  their  parameters
will  determinate  the  transmission  band  of  the  pulse
transformation. If the group velocity of the exciting TEM
wave of the first line is equal to the group velocity of the
second  line,  the  energy  of  the  pulse  will  be  launched  on
the load with high efficiency.

Two  coupled  pieces  of  transmission  lines  are  added  to
the  primary  and  secondary  winding  of  PT0  as  shown  in
Fig.  1b).  The  initial  part  of  the  pulse  power  is  launched
into the load though the fast coupling lines. The coupling
is due to fast PT1. The rest of power is transmitted through
PT0.  Modulators  based  on  schemes  of  Fig.  1a)  and  1b)
consist of cells, which are not used in the pulse formation.

V

 
,
t
u
o
V

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

-100

0

200

400

t, nsec

600

800

1000

Fig. 2:  Output waveform for two-coupled PFN with a step
up voltage transformation.

The rise and fall times  for this  approach  can  be  better  as
compared  to  the  conventional  modulator.  The  energy
transfer  efficiency  will  be  higher  if  a  ferrite  material  is
used as a core in this design. The process of the dynamic
magnetization  of  a  ferrite  material  in  nanosecond  range
goes with much lower loss as compared to the iron ribbon.

Evaluation  of  the  total  efficiency  for  a  distributed  line
transformer approach gives a value of ~83% for 1.5 usec
pulse duration.

TRANSFORMERLESS APPROACH

This modulator has no problems, which relate to the use
of a ferromagnetic media for transformation of the energy
(such as a limitation of the  volt-second  product,  dynamic
losses, etc.). Presented approach is based upon a modified
Marx  method.  The  modified  Marx  method  charges
capacitors  in  parallel  and  partially  discharges  them  in
series  through  IGBT  assembly  5.    The  possible  circuit
schematics are shown in Fig. 6a) and b).

a)

b)

Figure 3: A Marx type modulator concepts.

Because  the  switch  elements  are  on/off  devices,  pulse
duration is variable, and the efficiency is high. The voltage
multiplication of a Marx circuit is equal to the number of
cells  used.  Pulse  droop  is  low  depending  only  on  energy
storage  capacity  and  load  impedance.  Compensation  for
small droop is possible via a bouncer at the low potential
side.  Extrapolating  this  transformerless  approach  for  the
NLC seems to be attractive especially for time being when
the pulse width is not fixed.

recharging 

The  circuit  schematic  shown  in  Fig.  3a)  is  a  topology
with  active  recharge  switches.  They  allow  a  reduction  of
the  charging  loss.  The  topology  of  Marx  type  modulator
with 
is
presented 
the  NiZn  ferrite  core
transformers  are  used  for  charging  process.  The  isolation
distance  d  between  primary  windings  is  varied  according
to the applying pulse voltage.

in  Fig.  3b).  Here 

through 

isolation 

transformers 

The  main  problem  of  the  Marx  type  modulator  is
parasitic capacitance. The amplitude of the transient inrush
current  and  its  derivative  di/dt,  which  flows  thought  the
switches,  can  destroy  solid-state  assembly.  To  get  some
experience  with  the  transformerless  approach  a  10  cell
solid 
type  modulator  was  designed,
manufactured and tested 5. Methods of reduction of inrush
current were experimentally evaluated. It was  shown  that
amplitude of transient current can be reduced by factor of
~10  to  keep  the  solid  state  switch  working  point  within
Reverse  Biased  Safe  Operating  Area  (RBSOA).  The

state  Marx 

volume  of  solid  state  Marx  type  modulators  is  larger  as
compared to  the  transformer  concepts  due  to  the  absence
of  ferromagnetic  media  with  a  high  permeability.  The
design of multiple beam klystrons is presently under study
at  SLAC  6.  Authors  offer  the  possibility  of  considerably
lower  cathode  voltage.  The  transformerless  approach  can
be  effective  and  low  cost  solution  for  multiple  beam
klystron modulator design.

CONCLUSION

transformers.  The  bandwidth  of 

The discharge energy efficiency can be  ~92-93% for the
150 MW and 1.5 µsec output level. However, the energy
transfer efficiency is only ~70%. This result was received
on Test Bed modulator  2. For high  power  modulators  the
dynamic capacitive effect of the core magnetizing can play
a  noticeable  role.  Effect  is  inherent  for  all  high  power
pulse 
the  PFN-
KLYSTRON energy transmission is limited by this effect
and by the  well-known  geometrical effects.   Ways  of  the
rise of energy transfer efficiency had been discussed. The
use  of  the  inductively  coupled  distributed  lines  can
overcome  the  limitation  on  the  pulse  transformation
bandwidth. Evaluation of total efficiency for a distributed
transformer  concept  gives  a  value  of  >80%.
line 
Computer  simulations  and 
low  voltage  experiments
suggest the possibility to get a faster rise time on the load
with a higher efficiency.

A transformerless modulator approach is presented on a
Marx  method  of  the  voltage  multiplication  using  on/of
IGBT’s.  Approach  has  no  problems,  which  relate  to  the
use  of  a  ferromagnetic  media  for  transformation  of  the
energy.  The  transient  process  in  Marx  modulator  was
analyzed  and  effective  methods  of  reduction  of  inrush
current  was  experimentally  obtained  and  kept  the  solid
stage switch working point within of RBSOA.

A  new  semiconductors  based  on  materials  with  a  wide
band gap (for example, Silicon Carbide) will push  up the
voltage hold-off and make solid state modulator designs at
higher voltages simpler and more efficient in the future.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This material would not be prepared without the help of
R. Koontz, S. Gold, and R. Akre.

REFERENCES
                                                
1   D. Sprehn et al, SLAC-PUB-8346, March 2000.
2   R. Koontz et al, PAC 1997, Vancouver, B. C., Canada.
3   R. Cassel et al, 24th International Power Modulator
Symposium, 2000, Norfolk, VA, USA.
4   M. Gaudreau et al, 23th International Power Modulator
Symposium, Rancho Mirage, CA, 1998
5   R. Akre et al, A Solid State Marx Type Modulator for driving
a TWT, 24th International Power Modulator Symposium, 2000,
Norfolk, VA, USA.
6   G. Caryotakis et al, The Next Linear Collider Klystron
Development Program, this Conference.

