MULTIPACTORING CODE FOR 3D ACCELERATING STRUCTURES

L.V.Kravchuk, G.V.Romanov, S.G.Tarasov

Institute for Nuclear Research of RAS, 117312, Moscow Russia

Abstract

   The  simulation  code  has  been  developed  to  investigate
possible  electron  multipacting  in  the  RF  cavities  using
preliminary  calculated  field  components.    The  code
provides  different  options  of  numerical  study  of  the
electron  multipacting  including  search  of  the  resonant
trajectories and simulation of an electron multiplication.

1  INTRODUCTION

The new simulation code MultP has been developed on
the base of the previous one [1] to investigate an electron
multipacting  in  RF  cavities  using  numerically  calculated
field  components.  The  principal  advantage  of  the  MultP
code is development of multipacting simulation procedure
for 3D shape of RF cavity.

An  easy  and  convenient  interface  along  with  a  broad
range  of  possibilities  is  considered  as  an  important  goal.
As  a  whole  the  MultP  is  performed  as  a  Windows
application.

The  MultP  provides  different  options  of  numerical
study  of  the  electron  multipacting.  Particularly  it  is
possible:

• 
• 
• 

• 

to track separate electrons;
to track a group of electrons;
to  scan  electric  field  levels  and  initial  phases  of
electron and to determine a possibility of resonance
electron multipacting;
to simulate multiplication of a number of randomly
distributed electrons.

0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
7

 

 
 
 

5
1
0
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

space-charge 

Charged  particle  trajectory  calculations  in  MultP  are
straightforward  and  involve  numerical  integration  up  to
tens thousands of particles (limited by a computer power).
Independent trajectory calculations are performed for each
particle,  so  the  code  is  applicable  to  the  early  stage  of
multipacting  before 
effects  become
important  or  to  the  trajectories  of  separate  particles.  At
each integration time step the MultP checks the status of
the  particles:  are  they  inner  or  outer  in  respect  to  the
cavity walls? The inner particle remains unimpeded. The
outer particle is restored to its position just before entering
the  wall  and  is  assigned  a  momentum  corresponding  to
that of secondary electrons and directed oppositely. If the
particles  can  not  eject  secondary  electron  or  if  the
collision  occurs  during 
the  decelerating  phase  of
electromagnetic  field  the  simulation  for  this  particular
particle terminates. A number of the secondary particles is
random  and  depends  on 
the  secondary  emission
coefficient. The value of initial velocity of the secondary
particle is also random inside interval selected by user.

3  DESCRIPTION OF THE OPTIONS

 3.1  Tracking of the electrons

   For  the  code  options  demonstration  purposes  the  350
MHz  spoke  cavity  is  used  [2].  In  the  code  the  cavity  is
displayed as the views in different planes of Cartesian co-
ordinate  system  (see  Fig.1).  The  scaling  in  the  views  is
distorted  to  fit  the  windows,  but  the  windows  can  be
opened outside of the main window with right ratio of the
axes.

2  GENERAL DESCRIPTION

The  program  MultP  uses  3D  field  map  calculated  by
MAFIA. The files containing the field components are the
files  in  standard  text  output  format  of  MAFIA.  The
components  may  be  calculated  by  other  code  and
presented in mentioned format as well. These files are not
used  directly.  MultP  creates  its  own  file  containing
interpolations of all field solutions to derive values E and
B at the position of particles. This file is created once for
given  problem  at  first  call  of  the  program.  During  this
procedure  the  distortions  of  field  components  near  the
curved  surfaces,  sharp  edges,  corners  etc  given  by
MAFIA  are  smoothed.  Using  the  already  pre-processed
field  data  for  subsequent  runs  of  the  program  increases
speed  of  calculations.  The  geometry  of  the  investigated
cavity  is  described  by  the  user-written  parameter-listing
file.

Fig.1. The main window of the code.

range from 1 to a value, specified by the user. The result
is displayed as a phase/field diagram [3] shown in Fig.3.
 The  red  regions  represent  the  trajectories  that  are  the
closest to the resonance. To exclude the trajectories with
the  energies  outside  the  user  defined  range  one  should
enable energy filter control (Fig.4).

   Though  the  code  gives  an  opportunity  to  investigate  a
probability  of  the  multipacting  in  the  most  general  form
(simulation  of  multiplication  of  randomly  distributed
electrons),  but  this  way  is  rather  time  consuming.  The
tracking of separate electrons and group of electrons helps
to  grope  the  areas  and  the  levels  of  RF  field,  which  are
favourable for multipacting.
   To define the initial position of electron one can type its
co-ordinates  in  the  boxes  or  click  mouse  button  at  the
positions in the views where one wants to put the particle.
By  default  the  program  finds  the  nearest  point  on  the
surface and positions the particle at this point.
   To observe a general character of electron motion in the
area  of  interest  it  is  convenient  to  launch  a  group  of
electrons with different initial positions. One has to define
a number of particles and two points on a cavity wall. The
line will be filled with particles.
   After the initial velocities of electrons, the initial phase
and the amplitude of the field are chosen in control boxes
the trajectories are being calculated. The calculation of a
trajectory  terminates  if  number  of  collisions  exceeds  the
predefined value or in a case of a negative phase.
   The  collision  history  window  contains  the  information
about the trajectories after each collision (Fig.2).

Fig.3. Phase/field diagram.

Fig.2. Trajectories of a group of electrons.

 3.2  Phase/Field diagram

 Tracking of a single electron or a group of electrons can
help  to  find  suspicious  points  inside  a  cavity.  The
phase/field diagram gives a certain answer to the question
whether  the  resonant  multiplication  can  exist  at  the
suspected point.

 For the point of interest one should define an interval of
electron  final  energies  in  which  the  secondary-emission
coefficient is greater than 1, the desired intervals and steps
of  scanning  of  phase  and  field  levels.  The  program
calculates  a  lot  of  trajectories  and  chooses  among  them
the  resonant  ones  for  orders  of  multipacting  within  the

Fig.4. Phase/field diagram. Energy filter enabled.

 3.3  Direct simulation of multipacting

   Straightforward  simulation  of  multipacting  is  the  most
reliable  way  to  check  the  existence  of  the  multiplication
process.
   First  of  all  the  maximum  value  of  the  secondary
emission coefficient and the interval of collision energies
where this coefficient is greater than 1 are defined. During
the simulation the secondary particles are launched if the
incident  electrons  have  an  appropriate  energy.  The
number  of  the  secondary  electrons  is  defined  by  the
secondary  emission  coefficient.  The  initial  velocities  of
the  secondary  electrons  are  randomly  distributed  in  the
interval from zero to user defined value.

   The  starting  electrons  (number  is  defined  by  user)  are
randomly distributed over all cavity or over chosen area.
Their  initial  energies  are  randomly  distributed  in  the
interval  defined  by  user  and  the  initial  phases  are
randomly  distributed  in  the  interval  0-120  degrees  (this
interval is fixed). The process is controlled with the use of
windows  showing  the  current  number  of  particles  vs
number of rf cycles, phase distribution at the moment of
collision, energy distribution at the  moments  of  collision
(see Fig.5, Fig.6 and Fig.7).

Fig.5. Multiplication of the electrons in the resonant
discharge.  Number  of  particles  versus  number  of
the cycles.

Fig.6.  Equilibrium  phase  distribution  at  the  moment
of emission in the resonant discharge.

Fig.8.  The  electron  trajectories  in  the  non-resonant
multipaction.

CONCLUSION

field  components.  The  main 

   The program “MultP” has been developed to investigate
the electron multipacting in RF cavities using preliminary
calculated 
task  was
development  of  multipacting  simulation  procedure  for
realistic 3D shape of RF cavities. An easy and convenient
interface  along  with  a  broad  range  of  options  were
considered as an important goal.
   The code uses MAFIA text files to generate 3D RF field
map.  A  static  magnetic  field  of  uniform  distribution  can
be applied in addition to RF fields.
   So  far  the  code  uses  the  special  user-written  file  to
describe  a  cavity  geometry.  The  geometry  generator
which  will  use  MAFIA  description  of  a  cavity  shape  is
being developed now.
   The authors wish to acknowledge Alexander Feschenko
for fruitful discussions and support.

REFERENCES

[1] L.Kravchuk  et  al,  “The  Computer  Code 

Investigation  of  Multipactor  Discharge 
Cavities”, PAC’99, p.2789, New York, 1999.

for
in  RF

[2] K.W.Shepard  et  al,  “Prototype  350  MHz  Niobium
Spoke-loaded  Cavity”.  PAC’99,  p.  955,  New  York,
1999.

[3]  V.A.Puntus,  G.V.Romanov    .  “Multipacting  in  the
at  MMF”,  EPAC'98,

Phase  Beam  Monitor 
Stockholm, 1998, pp.1583-1565.

Fig.7.  Equilibrium  energy  distribution  of  electrons
at the moments of collision in resonant discharge.

   Along with these control windows the program displays
the current position of the particles as the moving points
or as trajectories lines (see Fig. 8).

