HIGH-POWER  CIRCULATOR  TEST  RESULTS  AT  350  AND  700  MHZ

W. T. Roybal, J. Bradley III, D. Rees, P. A. Torrez,
D. K. Warner, LANL, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA

J. DeBaca, (General Atomic) LANL, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA

Abstract

The  high-power  RF  systems  for  the  Accelerator
Production of Tritium (APT) program require high-power
circulators at 350 MHz and 700 MHz to protect 1 MW
Continuous Wave (CW) klystrons from reflected power.
The 350 MHz circulator is based on the CERN, ESRF,
and APS designs and has performed very well.  The 700
MHz  circulator  is  a  new  design.    Prototype  700  MHz
circulators  have  been  high-power  tested  at  Los  Alamos
National  Laboratory  (LANL).    The  first  of  these
circulators has satisfied performance requirements.  The
circulator  requirements,  results  from  the  testing,  and
lessons learned from this development are presented and
discussed.

1  INTRODUCTION

The  APT  350  and  700  MHz  klystrons  require
circulators that are capable of operating indefinitely with
up to full reflection at any phase.  The circulators were
specified to function properly under these conditions at
power levels up to the maximum CW forward power out
of each klystron:  1.2 MW for the 350 MHz klystron and
1 MW for the 700 MHz klystron.  A 350 MHz circulator
was  easily  produced  as  352  MHz  circulators  at  these
power levels are already in use.  The APT 350 MHz, 1.2
MW circulator produced by Advanced Ferrite Technology,
Inc. (AFT) is shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1: AFT 350 MHz APT Circulator.

Development  of  the  1  MW,  700  MHz  circulator  was
more challenging.  AFT was initially the sole vendor, but
we  chose  Atlantic  Microwave  Corporation  as  a  second
vendor  after  several  failures  by  AFT  to  meet  the  high-
power  operating  requirements.    Los  Alamos  National
Laboratory worked closely with both AFT and Atlantic
Microwave  Corporation  to  develop  and  test  700  MHz
prototypes for APT.

2  CIRCULATOR  REQUIREMENTS
The  APT  circulator  specifications  for  insertion  loss,
isolation  and  waveguide  contention  flanges  for  the  350
and 700 MHz circulators are shown in Table 1.

Table 1: APT Circulator Specifications

Requirement
Insertion Loss
Isolation
Flange

350  MHz
< 0.05 dB
> 26 dB
WR2300

700  MHz
< 0.05 dB
> 26 dB
WR1500

The  limits  on  circulator  loss  were  determined  by  the
required control margin for the APT accelerator and the
maximum  saturated  klystron  power.    These  factors
dictated that the sum of all waveguide and circulator losses
be less than 5%.  This in turn required that the budget of
allowable insertion loss for the circulators be 0.05 dB at
the design center frequency of the RF system.

At least 26 dB of isolation is required in order to protect
the  klystron  from  excessive  reflected  power  while
operating at megawatt CW power levels.  We specified
that the vendors demonstrate this ability while operating
at full power with a short circuit on the output port and
over the range of all possible phases of reflected power.
The circulator is required to operate under all conditions of
the  specification  without  arcing.    Arc  detectors  were
required to verify that no arcing occurred and to protect the
circulator in the event of arcing.  Finally, the circulator is
required to satisfy all requirements from startup to steady-
state operating temperature without the need for operator
adjustments to a Temperature Compensating Unit (TCU).
A TCU is typically used to adjust the magnet coil current
at  the  circulator,  thereby  maintaining  the  fields  at  the
ferrite  plates  for  maximum  isolation  over  a  range  of
operating temperatures.

3  TEST  RESULTS

3.1  AFT 350 MHz Circulator

The AFT 350 MHz circulator was tested at power levels
up  to  1100  kW  with  a  waveguide  shorting  plate  on  the
output port.  A shorting plate on the output port produces
a standing wave in the circulator ferrite.  Various lengths
of waveguide were inserted between the circulator and the
shorting plate to adjust the phase of the standing wave.
The  maximum  voltage  stress  in  the  circulator  occurs
when this standing wave has an E-field maximum in the
ferrite  at  the  center  of  the  circulator.    We  tested  the

voltage breakdown (arcing) characteristics by placing the
E-field  maximum  at  the  center  of  the  circulator.    The
maximum dissipated power in the circulator occurs when
this standing wave has an H-field maximum in the ferrite
at the center of the circulator.  We added a quarter wave
section  of  waveguide  between  the  circulator  and  the
shorting plate to obtain an H-field maximum at the center
of  the  circulator  to  test  the  dissipated  power
characteristics.  The data taken in the H-field maximum
configuration showed the highest power dissipation in the
ferrite, supporting our calculations.

As expected, the 350 MHz circulator provided by AFT
met  all  requirements  without  failure.    The  circulator
performed well and demonstrated >26 dB of isolation with
less  than  0.05  dB  of  insertion  loss  at  all  phases.
Continuous operation in both the maximum E and H field
configurations demonstrated reliable voltage standoff at
the  voltage  maximum  and  reliable  power  handling
capabilities  at  the  maximum  steady–state  temperature.
No arcs were detected over the full range from turn on to
steady-state  operation.    Once  the  TCU  was  properly
adjusted  to  the  optimum  setting,  the  entire  set  of  tests
were performed without requiring further adjustment.
3.2  AFT 700 MHz Circulators

AFT has delivered three 1.0 MW, 700 MHz circulators
for  use  on  the  Low  Energy  Demonstration  Accelerator
(LEDA).  All three circulators have been tested on a test
stand and each one has had difficulty meeting the final
high-power  acceptance  test  criteria.    The  problems
encountered included arcing, poor isolation, and poor TCU
performance.    A  total  of  5  high-power  testing  sessions
were  required  for  the  first  circulator  to  meet  all
specifications.    As  a  result  of  this  performance,  we
selected Atlantic Microwave as an alternate vendor.

AFT initially approached this development by scaling
down the well-demonstrated 350 MHz WR2300 circulator
to  be  packaged  in  WR1500  waveguide  and  operate
equivalently  at  700  MHz.    The  prototype  met  all  low
power requirements on the bench but had problems under
high power.  A picture of one of the three AFT 700 MHz
circulators delivered to LANL is shown in Figure 2.

After  demonstrating  that  it  could  pass  all  low  power
tests at AFT, the AFT 700 MHz prototype circulator was
shipped  to  Los  Alamos  for  high-power  testing.    We
obtained a sliding short device from Mega Industries for
the  full-power,  full-reflection  circulator  tests.    This
sliding short installed on the output port of the circulator
allowed us to vary the RF phase of the short continuously
over a range more than 360 degrees.

The first test resulted in continuous arcing at forward
power levels greater than 275 kW at E-field maximum.
During the testing AFT personnel determined that there
was an incorrect cooling water distribution between the
ferrite plates and the reduced-height waveguide.  Attempts
were made at Los Alamos to restrict the coolant flow to

the  waveguide  and  matching  posts  in  order  to  increase
coolant  flow  to  the  ferrite  plates.    Results  from  these
efforts were positive but the circulator continued to arc at
power levels of 500 kW.

Figure 2: AFT 700 MHz APT Circulator Installed on the

Test Stand.

The circulator was rebuilt for the second set of high-
power tests.  The second test showed improvement over
the first test; however, arcing again limited the circulator
to  just  over  500  kW  at  E-field  maximum.    Internal
inspection revealed arcing on the threads of a bolt used to
attach the ferrite plates to the water connection and to the
waveguide  structure.    A  major  redesign  and  rebuild
followed these findings.  The circulator was fitted with a
new  design  for  supporting  the  plates  in  place  and
connecting the water lines to the ferrite plates.

For the third test, it seemed that the arcing issue was
resolved.  The circulator was tested to full power without
arcing  at  almost  all  phases.    Only  at  the  H-field
maximum the isolation did not meet specification.  Over
the range of sliding short positions ±15 degrees about the
H-field  maximum  postion,  the  transmitter's  klystron-
reflected-power interlock tripped off the high voltage and
did not allow further testing.  Manual adjustments could
be  made  to  the  TCU  to  prevent  the  tripping  off  of  the
system,  but  the  specificaton  required  operation  without
manual adjustment of the TCU.  It was also determined
that  the  speed  of  the  adjustment  of  the  sliding  short
contributed to the running away of the reflected power to
the klystron.  The TCU needed to respond more quickly to
sudden changes in phase.

The focus was then turned to upgrading the capabilities
of the TCU.  Improvements such as the addition of a fast-
feed-forward loop were added to the electronics to obtain
better performance.  The fourth test demonstrated the 26
dB of isolation required, but the circulator arced under full
power at the H-field max.  The arc spot was located on the
top  plate  and  on  the  waveguide  wall.    The  plate  was
replaced and the waveguide wall arc damage was cleaned
for the fifth high-power test.

The  fifth  and  final  AFT  circulator  high-power
acceptance  test  took  place  without  incident.    The
circulator passed all requirements for insertion loss and

isolation  at  high  power  when  presented  with  a  variable
sliding  short.    The  sliding  short  was  varied  in  both
directions at all possible speeds.  Reflected power at the
klystron did not exceed 2 kW and no arcs were detected.  A
plot of the power dissipated in the circulator versus the
phase of the waveguide short during the final AFT test is
given in Figure 3.  Full power from the 1.0 MW klystron
combined with waveguide losses, circulator losses, sliding
short  losses,  and  accuracy  of  power  meters  and
calibrations yielded just over 900 kW of forward power
delivered through the circulator, reflected off the sliding
short, and dissipated at the high-power water load.

The  two  remaining  AFT  prototype  circulators  are
scheduled for rebuilding for better high-voltage standoff
and  the  TCUs  will  be  upgraded  to  be  equivalent  to  the
TCU that was used with the circulator that passed final
acceptance.

20

15

10

5

0

)

W
K

(
 
r
e
w
o
P
d
e
t
a
p

 

i
s
s
i
D

900 KW

100 150 200 250

50
 Phase (Degrees)

Figure 3: Plot of Dissipated Power versus Phase for the

AFT 700 MHz Circulator Tested at LANL.

3.3  Atlantic Microwave 700 MHz Circulator

After  the  second  failed  test  of  the  AFT  700  MHz
circulator, we had Atlantic Microwave begin to develop a
circulator  for  APT  to  serve  as  a  backup  source  in  the
event  that  AFT  could  not  resolve  their  700  MHz
circulator  problems.    The  first  part  of  the  3-part
development  plan  was  to  design  the  circulator.    The
second part was to develop and build a circulator with a
single plate of ferrite material that would be rated for 100
kW CW at 700 MHz.  The third part would be to deliver a
full megawatt CW circulator prototype.

Atlantic  Microwave  had  completed  the  design  and
delivered the single plate 100 kW circulator to LANL by
the  time  of  the  AFT  circulator  failed  its  fourth  test.
Figure  4  shows  the  Atlantic  Microwave  100  kW
prototype circulator installed on the test stand.

The Atlantic Microwave circulator performed well at its
100  kW  power  rating  and  passed  all  of  our  testing
requirements at this power level.  The circulator was then
tested at power levels above its 100 kW rating.  First we
adjusted the sliding short to produce an E-field maximum
in the center of the circulator and raised the RF power in
50  kW  steps.    The  circulator  was  allowed  to  come  to

steady-state  temperature  at  each  50  kW  step.    The
circulator began to arc when the power reached 600 kW.
The  circulator  was  then  tested  with  the  sliding  short
adjusted to produce an H-field maximum in the center of
the circulator and with the RF power level increased in 50
kW steps as before.  Under these conditions, the circulator
power reached only 300 kW before the circulator isolation
degraded to the point that further increases in power were
not possible.  Improvements to the isolation can be made
by using a TCU to compensate for temperature effects in
the  ferrite.    The  100  kW  circulator  prototype  did  not
include a TCU, but the design of the full-scale 1.0 MW
circulator will include a TCU.

Figure 4: Atlantic Microwave 700 MHz 100 kW

Circulator Installed on the Test Stand.

4  CONCLUSIONS

The  development  of  a  700  MHz  circulator  for  APT
proved to be far more challenging than the development of
the 350 MHz circulator.  Simply scaling down the well
demonstrated 350 MHz WR2300 circulator resulted in a
prototype  that  met  all  low  power  requirements  on  the
bench but did not meet our specifications at high power.

Rigorous testing procedures revealed inherent arcing and
isolation problems in the initial prototype AFT circulator
and led to substantial changes to the internal design.  The
lessons learned in correcting the arcing problems in high
field  regions  within  the  circulator  structure  led  to  the
redesign  of  the  circulator  interior  for  improved  voltage
stand  off.    Lessons  learned  in  providing  adequate
temperature compensation at higher response rates led to
the  development  of  a  faster,  smarter  Temperature
Compensating  Unit.    The  problems  encountered  in  the
testing phase of the AFT circulator also led us to develop
an alternative supplier of high power circulators.

The high power testing results give us confidence that
we can obtain a fully functional and reliable circulator for
every high-power RF system required for APT.  A second
supplier  also  provides  a  safety  margin  in  meeting  the
challenging production and delivery deadlines required if
the  full  APT  accelerator  becomes  fully  funded  and
hundreds of these circulators must be produced.

