INDUSTRIAL FABRICATION OF MEDIUM-BETA SCRF CAVITIES

FOR A HIGH-INTENSITY PROTON LINAC

J.Kuzminski, General Atomics, San Diego, CA 92186, USA

K.C.D.Chan, R.Gentzlinger, LANL, Los Alamos, NM 87545 USA

P. Maccioni, CERCA, Romans, France

Abstract

During 1999, four 700-MHz, medium-beta (b

 = 0.64),
superconducting  radio  frequency  (SCRF)  cavities  for  a
high-intensity  proton 
linac  project  at  Los  Alamos
National  Laboratory  (LANL)  were  manufactured  by
industry.  The SCRF cavities  were designed by a LANL
team 
in  Los  Alamos,  New  Mexico,  USA,  and
manufactured at a CERCA plant in Romans, France. The
cavities were made of 4-mm-thick, solid niobium sheets
with a residual resistivity ratio (RRR) greater than 250.
These  niobium  sheets  were  supplied  by  Wah  Chang
(USA),  Heraeus  AG  (Germany),  and  Tokyo  Denkai
(Japan).  The SCRF cavities  were shipped to LANL for
performance testing.  This paper describes the experience
gained during the manufacturing process at CERCA.

 1  INTRODUCTION

Recently, a considerable interest emerged in the high-
intensity  proton  linacs  ranging  in  energy  from  1  to  2
GeV  because  of  the  variety  of  possible  applications,
including  the  Accelerator  Production  of  Tritium  (APT),
Accelerator  Transmutation  of  Waste 
(ATW),  and
Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) [1].  These applications
require  powerful  proton  accelerator  drivers  capable  of
delivering to the target a proton beam of up to a hundred
megawatts.  The  high  beam  power  and  continuous-wave
(CW) regime of operation  required by most applications
make  the  accelerator  design  based  on  the  SCRF
technology desirable.

Elliptical  SCRF  cavities  are  successfully  applied  to
accelerate electrons.  However, for particles with b <1, the
cavity shape poses some challenging problems, such as a
higher likely of multipacting during the cavity operation.
To  answer  these  questions  an  Engineering  Design  and
Demonstration (ED&D) program  was initiated at LANL
within the APT project. One goal of the ED&D program
was  to  build,  deliver,  and  test  a  complete  cryomodule
containing two medium-beta (b
 = 0.64), 700 MHz, 5-cell
niobium SCRF cavities with helium vessels.

Supported by the U.S. Department of Energy under contract
No. DE-AC04-AL89607.

Because  the  APT  linac  would  require  a  large-scale
application  of  superconducting  technology,  industrial
participation  in  fabrication  of  SCRF  cavities  and  other
accelerator  components  is  necessary.  Burns  and  Roe
Enterprises Inc. with General Atomics (BREI/GA) were
selected by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) as the
prime contractor for the APT project.  Under a contract
with  DOE,  BREI/GA  coordinated  the  industrialization
part of the ED&D program.

 2  SCRF CAVITIES MANUFACTURING

2.1  Medium-beta SCRF cavity design

requirements

Design of the b

 = 0.64, 700-MHz, 5-cell ED&D SCRF
cavity underwent many iterations before the final version
was  released  for  fabrication  [2].  Design  work  was
supported  by  extensive  structural  and  thermal  analyses
performed using the ABACUS® finite  element  code  [3].
In addition, an experimental program to determine at 2 K
the  mechanical  properties  of  Nb,  Ti,  and  their  mutual
joints  was  initiated  at  Florida  State  University  [4].
Information  obtained  from  these  measurements  was
essential to determining the structural requirements, i. e.,
maximum  flaw  size  in  the  SCRF  cavity  and  He  vessel
welds.

Inner He Vessel

Vent Pipe

Outer He
Vessel

Tuner

Cavity

Figure  1.  Cross  section  of  the  b
  =  0.64,  700-MHz,  5-cell
ED&D SCRF cavity with helium vessels (computer rendering).

We present here the main features of the ED&D cavity
design.    The  b
  =  0.64,  700-MHz,  5-cell  ED&D  SCRF
cavity shown on Figure 1 is made from 4 mm thick solid
Nb  (RRR grade  250)  sheets.    There  are  two  ports  for
power  couplers  (PC),  two  ports  for  higher-order  mode
(HOM)  couplers,  and  one  port  for  the  RF  pick-up.  To
improve  RF  power  transmission  to  the  cavity,  the
diameter of the PC beam tube was increased to 160 mm.
Two tuner flexures are located on the beam tube cut-offs
opposite  the  PC  side.  These  are  made  from  unalloyed
grade 2 Ti.

The  inner  helium  vessels  (Figure  1)  made  from
unalloyed  grade  2  Ti  are  welded  to  the  elliptical  heads
spun  from  unalloyed  grade  2  Ti  and  to  the  beam  tube
through  special  Ti  edge-welded  bellows.    The  outer
vessel has four access ports that may be welded shut after
installation of cavity instrumentation.

Design  requirements  for  manufacturing  of  ED&D
cavities were specified in the Scope of Work (SOW) that
was released to industry. These included the frequency of
the  fundamental  accelerating  mode  (p-mode)  to  be
698.75  MHz  at  room  temperature,  RF  energy  density
along the cavity axis (E-field flatness) to be within 10%,
accelerating gradient Eacc = 6.5 MV/m and the unloaded
quality factor Q0 = 5×109 at Eacc = 6.5MV/m.  These last
two were not a part of technical requirements for cavity
acceptance, but were suggested design goals.
2.2  Fabrication of SCRF at CERCA

After winning a competitive bid process, CERCA  was
selected  as  the  fabricator  of  four  ED&D  SCRF  cavities.
The  cavities  were  manufactured  in  Romans,  France.  A
detailed  SOW  that  specified  design  requirements  was
submitted  with  the  contract  documents. 
  CERCA
provided manufacturing drawings and the manufacturing
plan  with  detailed  procedures  for  each  manufacturing
step, including an outline of the Quality Assurance plan
based on the ISO 9000 approach.  These were reviewed
and  accepted  by  the  technical  team  from  BREI/GA  and
LANL before cavity fabrication began.

Special attention was paid to provide sufficient quality
controls at each step of the manufacturing process.  All
measurements and checks required by the manufacturing
plan  were  performed  and  signed  by  the  qualified  QA
technician and documented in the cavity traveller.  When
a nonconformance  occurred,  a  detailed  nonconformance
report  (NCR)  was  issued.  The  work  stopped  until  the
corrective  action  were  proposed  and  accepted  by
BREI/GA  and  the  LANL  team.    In  addition,  periodic
visits  to  the  CERCA  manufacturing  plant  in  Romans
were made to provide oversight and ensure the quality of
the manufactured parts.

CERCA  manufacturing  plan  called  for  fabrication  of
half-cells  by  spinning.    Two  half-cells  were  spun  to
validate the process. Geometry of each cell was measured

afterwards  by  a  computerized  coordinate  measuring
machine  (CCMM)  and  found  to  be  within  specified
tolerances of ±0.35 mm.

The cavity design requires single pass full-penetration
cosmetic  underbead  electron-beam  (EB)  welds.  The
welding  parameters  were  determined  for  each  weld
design  and  demonstrated  on  specimens  of  equal
thickness.    Since  the  equator  weld  is  the  most  critical
operation of the fabrication process, two spare half-cells
were EB welded together at the equator to validate those
weld  parameters.  The  RRR  of  the  parent,  heat  affected
zone,  and  the  welded  material  between  high  grades  of
niobium  were  measured  at  Oregon  State  University  in
Corvallis,  Oregon  [5]  to  ensure  that  the  RRR  did  not
degrade more than 10%. No RRR degradation was found
within the accuracy of the measurement. [5]

Before  starting  the  EB  welding  of  the  cavity  parts,
CERCA  was  required  to  provide  specimens  of  high-to-
low  RRR  Nb  and  low  RRR  Nb-to-Ti  EB  welded  joints.
inspected  to  ensure  that  a
These  specimens  were 
complete  penetration  was 
these
parameters.  Once  welding  parameters  were  established
and  validated,  CERCA  was  committed  to  maintain  the
weld parameters, and change them only after testing and
acceptance by BREI/GA and LANL team.

achieved  using 

Beam tube cut-offs and PC ports were made from Nb
grade 250 material, while the HOM ports and RF pick-up
tube  were  made  from  (reactor)  RRR  grade  40  material.
Stainless  steel  CONFLAT®  flanges  were  brazed  to  Nb
tubes using a procedure developed by CERCA.

Figure  2.  Fabrication  of  ED&D  SCRF  cavities  at  CERCA.
In  the  foreground  are  “dumb-bells”  formed  by  EB-welding  of
half-cells.  In the background, a finished cavity is removed from
the EB welder’s chamber.

EB-welding  of  SCRF  cavities  followed  the  well-
defined  sequence  described  in  the  manufacturing  plan.
First, 
(iris  weld,
performed from inside) to form “dumb-bells”  (see Figure
2).  Next,  dumb-bells  were  EB-welded  together  (equator

two  half-cells  were  EB-welded 

weld) to form an intermediate structure (see Figure 3). A
single-pass,  full-penetration  EB-weld  was  performed
from the outside. Finally, the beam tube cut-offs with end
half-cells  were  EB-welded  (equator  weld)  to  form  the
five-cell cavity.

Before  each  EB-welding  operation,  parts  were
thoroughly cleaned (buffered chemical polishing, 1:1:1),
rinsed in ultra-pure water, and dried under ultra-pure N2.
Adherence  to  this  procedure  was  carefully  checked  and
documented on the sign-off sheet in the traveller.

Figure 3. Beam tube cut-off and an intermediate part formed

by EB-welding of dumb-bells prior to the final EB-welding.

Before shipment to LANL, all cavities underwent BCP
(1:1:2) that removed 150 m m of Nb from the cavity inner
surface.    Cavities  were  filled  with  ultra-pure  N2  at  1.3
bar,  sealed,  and  shipped  to  LANL  in  specially  designed
containers.

 3  SCRF CAVITY PERFORMANCE

 All four SCRF cavities manufactured by CERCA were
cold-tested  at  2  K  to  determine  their  performances.
Cavities  GERMAINE  and  SYLVIE  were  tested  at
Thomas  Jefferson  National  Accelerator  Facility  [6],  and
ELEANORE  and  AYAKO  were  and  are  to  be  tested  at
LANL respectively [7].  Cavities  were tuned to required
frequency.  RF  energy  density  along  the  cavity  axis  (E-
field  flatness)  was  demonstrated  to  be  better  than  5%,
thus  exceeding  design  requirements.  Prior  to  testing,
cavities  underwent  a  light,  buffered  chemical  polishing
that  removed  ~20  m m  of  Nb  from  the  cavity’s  inner
surface,  followed  by  a  high-pressure  (90  bar)  ultra-pure
water rinsing.

 Preliminary  results  for  ELEANORE,  GERMAINE,

and SYLVIE are presented on Figure 4.

 Maximum  accelerating  gradient  Eacc  reached  during
tests was  limited  by  the  available  RF  power.  As  can  be

seen, performances of all three cavities exceeded the APT
design goal. At the time this paper was written, testing of
AYAKO was still underway.

 After  testing,  the  cavities  were  filled  with  ultra-pure
nitrogen at a pressure of 1.3 bar, sealed, and shipped for
the installation of the helium vessels.

1.E+11

1.E+10

0

Q

1.E+09

1.E+08

ELEANORE

SYLVIE

GERMAINE

APT Design Goal

SYLVIE with INNER
VESSEL

0

2

4

6

Eacc (MV/m)

8

10

12

 Figure  4.  Performance  of  ED&D  SCRF 

cavities
manufactured  by  CERCA.    ELEANORE  and  SYLVIE  were
built from Wah-Chang-supplied Nb and GERMAINE from Nb
supplied by Heraeus AG.

 4  CONCLUSION

During  1999,  four  SCRF  cavities  were  successfully
manufactured  by  CERCA  for  the  APT  project.    During
this process, a constant interaction between the customer
and  industrial  partners  resulted  in  high-quality  product
that exceeded the APT design goal.  Preliminary results
at  2 K  show  maximum  accelerating  gradient  Eacc  in
excess  of  10  MV/m,  the  highest  achieved  to  date  in
medium-beta  multi-cell  SCRF 
Industry
experience injected into the manufacturing plan allowed
simplification  of  the  fabrication  process  and  suggested
cost-saving approaches.

cavities. 

 REFERENCES

[1] K.C.D.  Chan,  G.P.  Lawrence,  and  J.D.  Schneider,
Development of RF Linac for High-Current Applications,
NIM B 139 (1998) 394-400.

[2] R.Gentzlinger et al.,“Fabrication of the APT Cavities,”  in
Proceeding  of  the  18th  Particle  Accelerator  Conference,
New York, 1999.

[3] R.Mitchell  et  al.,  “Structural  Analysis  of  the  APT
in  IX  Workshop  on  RF

Superonducting  Cavities”, 
Superconductivity” Santa Fe, 1999.

[4] R.P.Walsh et al., “Low Temperature Tensile and Fracture
Toughness Properties of SCRF cavity Structural Material”,
in IX Workshop on RF Superconductivity” Santa Fe, 1999.

[5] W.H.Warnes, private communication.
[6]
J.Mammosser, private communication.
[7] T.Tajima, private communication.

