DEVELOPMENT OF THE LOW ENERGY ACCELERATOR FOR KOMAC

B.H. Choi, J.M. Han, Y.S. Cho, K.S. Kim, Y.J. Kim, KAERI, Taejon, Korea

I.S. Ko, Postech, Pohang, Korea

K.S Chung Hanyang Univ, Seoul, Korea

K.H. Chung, Seoul Nat. Univ., Seoul, Korea

Abstract

KAERI (Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute) has
been  performing  the  project  named  KOMAC  (Korea
Multi-purpose  Accelerator  Complex)  within  the  frame
work  of  national  mid  and  long  term  nuclear  research
plan.  The  final  objectives  of  KOMAC  is  to  build  a  20-
MW (1 GeV and 20 mA) cw (100% duty factor) proton
linear  accelerator.  As  the  first  stage,  the  low  energy
accelerator  up  to  20  MeV  is  being  developed  in  KTF
(KOMAC  Test  Facility).  The  low  energy  accelerator
consists of  an  injector,  RFQ,  CCDTL,  and  RF  systems.
The  proton  injector  with  Duoplasmatron  ion  source  has
been  developed,  and  the  LEBT  with  solenoid  lens  is
under development.  The RFQ linac that will accelerate
a  20mA  proton  beam  from  50keV  to  3MeV  has  been
designed  and  is  being  fabricated.  The  RF  system  for
RFQ is being developed, and the CCDTL up to 20MeV
is  being  designed.    The  status  of  the  low  energy
accelerator will be presented.

1  INTRODUCTION

The  KOMAC  accelerator  has  been  designed 

to
accelerate  a  20  mA  cw  proton/H-  with  the  final  energy
1GeV cw super-conducting linac [1].  In the first stage of
the project, we are developing cw accelerating structure
up  to  20MeV,  and  operate  the  accelerator  in  10%  duty
pulse mode.  After the first stage, we will challenge the
cw  operation  of  the  accelerator.    The  20MeV  proton
accelerator  is  constructing  in  the  KTF  (KOMAC  Test
Facility), and will  be commissioned in  2003.  After  the
commissioning,  KTF  will  provide  the  proton  beam  for
the many industrial applications.

In  the  KTF,  we  are  developing  the  proton  injector,
LEBT,  3MeV  RFQ,  20MeV  CCDTL,  and  RF  system.
The proton injector is already developed, and the 3MeV
RFQ  will  be  constructed  in  this  fiscal  year.    Also  we
have  a  plan  to  develop  the  basic  Super-Conducting
cavity technology in the KTF for the second stage super-
conducting accelerator of the KOMAC.  Fig. 1 shows the
plan of the KTF and Fig. 2 shows the status of the KTF.

The status of the low energy accelerator developments

in KTF will be introduced in this paper.
 

 

 

 Figure 1: Plan of KTF 20MeV Accelerator

 

Figure 2: Status of KTF 20MeV Accelerator

2  PROTON INJECTOR [2]

For  20  mA  proton  beam  at  the  final  stage,  KOMAC
requires the ion source with  the proton beam current  of
30 mA at the extraction voltage of 50 kV.   Normalized
rms  emittance  of  less  than  0.3  p
  mmmrad  is  also
required for good matching of ion beam into RFQ.
The proton injector with a duoplasmatron ion source is
shown in Fig. 2 (left side).  The system is composed of
an  accelerating  high  voltage  power  supply,  ion  source
power  supplies  in  a  high  voltage  deck,  gas  feeding
system, and vacuum system.

The  injector  has  reached  beam  currents  of  up  to  50
mA  at  50  kV  extraction  voltage  with  150  V,  10  A  arc
power.  The extracted beam has a normalized emittance
of 0.2  p
  mmmrad from  90  % beam  current  and  proton
fraction of over 80 %.  The proton fraction is measured
with deflection magnet and scanning wire.

The beam can be extracted without any fluctuation in
beam current, with a high voltage arcing in 4 hours.  The
cathode lifetime is about 40hr.  To increase the filament
lifetime,  it  is  necessary  to  lower  the  arc  current  or  to
change  the  tungsten  filament  to  other  cathode  such  as
oxide cathode.

3 LEBT

    Low-energy  beam  transport  (LEBT)  consists  of  two
solenoids,  two  steering  magnets,  diagnostic  system,
beam control system, and funnelling system to transports
and  matches  the  H+  for  20mA  and  H-  for  3mA,  beams
from the ion source into the RFQ. The main goal of the
LEBT  design  is  to  minimise  beam  losses.  The  design
codes  used  are  TRACE  3D  and  PARMTEQM.  The
PARMTEQM-simulated  solenoid  settings  are  B=2800G
and  B=3900G,  the  RFQ  transmission  rate  is  more  than
90%.  Two  solenoid  magnets  constructed  are  20.7cm-
long,  16cm-i.d.,  are  surrounded  by  a  low  carbon  steel
and  provide  dc  fields  £ 5000G  on  the  axis.  During  the
winter of 2000, we will test the LEBT to obtain a proper
matching condition with the RFQ.

4 RFQ [3]

The  KTF  RFQ  bunches,  focuses,  and  accelerates  the
50keV  H+/H-  beams,  and  derives  a  3.0MeV  beam  at  its
exit, bunched with a 350MHz. The RFQ is a 324cm-long,
4-vanes type, and consists of 56 tuners, 16 vacuum ports,
1 coupling plate, 4 rf drive couplers, 96 cooling passages,
and  8  stabiliser  rods.  The  RFQ  is  machined  of  OFH-
Copper, integrate from separate  four sections which  are
constructed  by  using  vacuum  furnace  brazing.  The  RF
system  for  the  RFQ  is  operated  with  350MHz  at  100%
duty-factor by one klystron of 1MW.

   Its design was completed. In the RFQ design, a main
issue is to accelerate the mixed H+/H- beam at the same
time. The motion of the mixed H+/H- beam into the RFQ
has  been  studied  by  using  a  time  marching  beam
dynamics  code  QLASSI.  The  longitudinal  beam  loss
increases with the concentration of negative ions by the
bunching  process  which  is  distributed  by  attractive
forces when the ratio of H- is more than 30%.. Because
of  the  space  charge  compensation  in  the  low  energy
sections,  the  transverse  beam  loss  decreases  with  the
mixing ratio of H-.

The average RFQ cavity structure power by rf thermal
loads is 0.35 MW and the peak surface heat flux on the
cavity  wall  is  0.13  MW/m2  at  the  high  energy  end.  In
order  to  remove  this  heat,  we  consider  24  longitudinal
coolant passages in each of the sections. In the design of
the  coolant  passages,  we  considered 
thermal
behaviour  of 
the  vane  during  CW  operation  and
manufacturing costs. The thermal and structure analysis
is  studied  with  SUPERFISH  and  ANSYS  codes.  The

the 

temperature of the coolant passages on the cavity wall is
varied to maintain the cavity on resonance frequency.

As a test bed for 3MeV RFQ, the design, construction,
electrical  test,  and  vacuum  test  of  the  0.45MeV  RFQ
have  been  finished.  Design  of  the  RFQ  was  done  by
KAERI and  POSTECH, a  fabrication was  done at  Dae-
Ung  Engineering  Company  and  VITZRO  TECH  Co.,
Ltd.  A  difficult  process  in  the  fabrication  of  the  RFQ
was to braze. Because of the leak of the brazing surface
and the strain of the RFQ structure by the furnace heat, it
is  important  to  determine  an  appropriate  shape  of  the
brazing  area.  To  determine  it,  we  have  performed  two
brazing test. Fig. 3 shows a 96.4cm long 0.45MeV RFQ
which  was  brazed  in  a  vacuum  furnace.  The  RFQ  was
brazed  in  a  vertical  orientation  with  LUCAS  BVag-8,
AgCu alloy with a liquid temperature of 780  oC. Testing
of the brazed RFQ showed it to be leak-tight.

The coolant passages in the cavity wall and vane area
were  drilled  with  a  deep  hole.    The  entrances  of  deep
holes at the vane end was brazed.  The exact dimension
of the undercut was determined empirically by cutting a
vane of the hot model which was fabricated of the OFHC.
In the case  of  the  RFQ with a  modulated vane tip,  the
resonant frequency of the RFQ cavity linearly decreases
with  undercut  depth.  However,  in  the  case  of  the  RFQ
cold  model  with  a  constant  vane  tip,  the  resonant
frequency of the RFQ cavity non-linearly decreases with
undercut depth.

Figure 3: A brazed 0.45MeV RFQ

The  3MeV  RFQ  cold  model  of  aluminium  was
fabricated  and  tested.    A  low-level  RF  control  system,
which  maintains  proper  amplitude(within  – 1%)  and
phase(within – 1(cid:176) ), has been designed. A cold model of a
tuner has been fabricated and is being tested.

Assembly  works  of  the  3MeV  RFQ  will  be  done  in

March, 2001.

5  CCDTL [4]

CCDTL will accelerate the 3MeV 20mA proton beam
to  the  energy  of  20MeV.    The  structure  design  of
CCDTL is based on the 100% duty factor.

 Table 1: Major Design Parameters of CCDTL cavity

 

  - Structure : 700MHz CCDTL
-  Length : 25m
-  Aperture Diameter : 10/15mm
  - No of EMG : 130 (8 b
 FODO)
-  Total Structure Power : 1.15MW
-  Sturcture Power per length : 50kW/m avg.
  - Surface E : <0.9 Kilpatrick

is  87%  of 

 
 The CCDTL  cold  models  are  fabricated  to  check  the
design, the tuning method, and the coupling coefficients
and  the  fabrication  method.  The  measured  resonant
frequency  is  700.8  MHz  without  air  and  humidity
compensation.    The  measured  Q  value  of  the  cavity
without  brazing 
the  calculated  Q  by
SUPERFISH  without  any  surface  cleaning.    The  super-
drilled  coolant  path  is  well  fabricated,  and  this  type
cooling method will be used for the CCDTL construction.
The field profile is measured with a bead perturbation
method.  The field measurement system is shown in Fig.
4.  A 2mm diameter and 2mm long alumina cylinder is
used  for  the  bead.  The  stepping  motor  drive  system
controls  the  position  of  the  bead  with  an  accuracy  of
0.2mm.  The frequency shift is measured with a network
analyzer  (HP4306A/85064A).    Because  the  temperature
controlled  room  is  not  available,  the  measurement  was
carried  with  the  careful  check  of  the  unperturbed
resonance frequency before and after the experiment.

 

 

 Figure 4: CCDTL Field Measurement

 

 Fig.  5  shows  the  one  measured  field  profile  in  one
cavity of the aluminium cold model.  The measured field
profile in a cavity agrees with the calculated profile.  But,

the field uniformity in the multi-cavity is not good.  It is
necessary  to  increase  the  field  uniformity  by  the  fine
tuning of the cavity.  This will be done with the brazed
copper  cold  model  that  will  be  fabricated  in  this  year.
The copper model will be fabricated with the study.  As
a  back-up  of 
the  design  study  for
conventional DTL will be performed.

the  CCDTL, 

25

20

15

10

5

0

0

50

100

150

 

 

 Figure 5: Measured Field Profile in One Cavity

 (x: Position(mm), y: Field(Arb.))

 6  SUMMARY

 The  low  energy  proton  accelerator  for  KTF 

is
designed.    The  proton  injector  can  provide  the  proton
beam  for  RFQ.    The  RFQ  is  fabricating  and  will  be
tested  with  1MW  RF  system.    The  CCDTL  is  studied
with cold models, and the hot model will be fabricated.

 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This  work  was  supported  by  the  Korea  Ministry  of

Science and Technology.

REFERENCES

[2]  Y.S.Cho, 

[1] B.H.Choi et al, “Overview of the KOMAC Project”,
Proceedings  Of  the  3rd  International  Conference
ADTTA'99 (1999).
al, 
for 

et 
development 
Accelerator  Complex”,  Rev.  Sci. 
969(2000).

“‘High-current 
source
the  Korea  Multipurpose
Instr.,  71,

ion 

[3]  J.M.  Han  et  al.,  “A  3MeV  KOMAC/KTF  RFQ

Linac”, in this conference (2000).

[4]  Y.S. Cho  et al,  “Cold Model  Test of  The  KOMCA
CCDTL  Cavities”,  Proceeding  of  EPAC2000,
Vienna, (2000).

l
This figure "tud21_1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0008141v1

This figure "tud21_2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0008141v1

This figure "tud21_3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0008141v1

This figure "tud21_4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0008141v1

