Highlights of AAC 2000 Workshop

J.B. Rosenzweig, Department of Physics and Astronomy,

University of California, Los Angeles, 405 Hilgard Ave., Los Angeles, CA 90095

Abstract

The  Advanced  Accelerator  Concepts  2000  (AAC2K)
Workshop  was  held  in  Santa  Fe  in  June,  2000,  and
included  a  wide  array  of  conceptual  and 
theoretical
advances at the  frontier of accelerator physics.  This  paper
reviews  the  highlights  of  the  workshop,  with  subjects
ranging  from  acceleration  using  lasers,  plasmas  and
microstructures, to  the  beam  physics  of  muon  colliders.
Particular  emphasis  is  given  to  the  topics  which  are
relevant to research at existing  linear accelerator facilities,
and the  effect of  this  research on  the  capabilities of  such
facilities.

1  INTRODUCTION

The field of advanced accelerators, which is  in  search of
new  and  revolutionary  technology  to  allow  progress  in
high  energy  physics  experimentation,  holds  approxi-
mately  biannual  meetings.  The  latest  in  this  series,
Advanced Accelerator Concepts  2000,  was  held  in  June,
2000  in  Santa  Fe,  New Mexico,  and was hosted  by  Los
Alamos  National  Laboratory,  which  also  hosted  the
original workshop in the series[1].

The advanced accelerator  field  initially  emerged  in  the
early  1980’s  as  a  response  to  the  need  to  scale  linac
technology to  TeV-class colliders. It  was  realized  at  that
time, and it is still  true today, that  some  dramatic change
in  the  physical  and  technological  paradigms  of  charged
acceleration are necessary in  order to  build a compact and
affordable version of  such  a collider. The search for  such
alternate  technologies  has  now  matured  into  a  vigorous
sub-field  of  accelerator  physics.  The  field  of  advanced
accelerator concepts (AAC) has renewed sense of  purpose
in  light  of  both  the  failure  of  the  SSC,  and  in  the
considerable experimental progress made in the field.

In this paper, we review the  conceptual structure of  the
AAC  field,  and  mark  its  progress  as  of  AAC2K.  It  is
important to keep in mind that, even  with  dramatic proof-
of-principle  experimental  results,  that  AAC  has  yet  to
produce a working accelerator in  the  sense  that  the  linac
community  would recognize one.  Nevertheless, the  AAC
field has  already made a strong  impact  on  the  linac field,
as  AAC  efforts have pushed the  state of  the  art in  linac-
based experiments. AAC  work has  thus  stimulated  great
progress in  electron beam sources (notably  the  rf  photo-
injector), and in ultra-low emittance, sub-picosecond beam
measurements.  These techniques have already found their
way into  the  more conventional fields  of  linear  colliders
and free-electron lasers. It can be expected that  AAC  work
will  next  introduce  non-conventional  technologies  into

the  rf linac and related high  energy physics  fields, in  the
form of novel radiation and particle sources, and lenses.

2   AAC: PHYSICAL PRINCIPLES

In order to  review the  progress made in  AAC  that  was
evident  in  the  workshop,  we  first  introduce  the  major
categories of advanced accelerator schemes.
 • Wake-field accelerators (WFA): This type  of accelerator
uses  what might  be best  termed  a  novel  approach  to
creation  of  high  frequency  rf  power,  using  a  tightly
bunched beam pulse or train of  pulses  which traverses
a high impedance environment.  The accelerating beam
may  traverse  the  same  environment  (collinear  WFA)
or a nearby structure (a two-beam accelerator, or TBA).
The  WFA  addressed  the  problems  of  power  creation
and distribution at high frequency and high  fields. The
highest  impedance  environment  one  may  use  is  a
plasma (PWFA[2]) of high  density  n0 ,  in  which  the
power  radiated  by  the  beam  in  its  wake  (generalized
Cerenkov radiation) is  in  the  form  of  electrostatic  or
electromagnetic  plasma  waves.  On  the  more  conv-
entional  side,  dielectric  and  metallic  structures  have
been studied for WFA use;  the  CLIC[3] linear collider
is essentially a TBA based on metallic structures.
•   Direct laser acceleration: Since  lasers are known  to  be
a  cheap  and  efficient  source  of  electromagnetic
radiation at extremely high field and power levels, they
are  very  attractive 
for  AAC  applications.  For
relativistic  beam  particles,  however,  acceleration  is
only  made  possible  by  bending  particle  trajectories
(inverse free-electron  laser,  or  IFEL[4]),  or  by  intro-
ducing non-vacuum boundary or impedance conditions.
These conditions can be similar  to  rf linac structures,
or  deformed  into  a  planar  geometry[5,6],  or  use  the
inverse Cerenkov effect, or  ICA[7].  The  obstacles  to
realization of  such  schemes center on  the  problem  of
scaling  the  accelerating  wave  down  in  size  by  four
orders  of  magnitude(!)  from  present  rf  linac  tech-
nology. On the other hand, laser-based techniques have
the tide of history  on  their  side; all  technologies have
been pushed towards miniaturization in recent years.
•   Plasma  accelerators:  This  classification  clearly  over-
laps  with  the  previous  two,  but  is  often  discussed
separately  in 
the  context  of  intense  laser-plasma
interaction.  Plasma  waves  can  be  excited  by  lasers,
just as with electron beams  in  the  case of  the  PWFA,
when  the  laser  pulse  is  very  short  compared  to  the
plasma  wavelength  λ
  (laser  wake-field
p
accelerator, or LWFA[8]) and modulated at  the  plasma
wavelength 
or
PBWA[9]). In  plasmas,  since  the  medium  is  already
ionized, structure  breakdown  does  not  limit  the  field
amplitude,  and  acceleration  rates  of  several  GeV/m
have been reported[8,9].  Plasma accelerators have sev-

accelerator, 

beatwave 

(plasma 

=

π

/ 0
en r

eral interesting byproducts, notably plasma lenses[10],
which  may  have  application  in  linear  collider  final
foci, and ultra-high brightness particle sources[11].

3  PROGRESS REPORTED AT AAC2K

3.1 Wake-field Acceleration

Progress  in  WFA  was  reported  in  a  number  of
significant  areas at  AAC2K.  Investigators  at  the  facility
most  dedicated to  WFA  research, the  Argonne Wake-field
Accelerator  (AWA),  showed  experimental  results  in  the
areas of  multiple-pulse  excitation[12]  which  verified  the
linear  theory  of  Cerenkov  wake-fields.  In  addition,  the
AWA performed initial acceleration experiments using  the
so-called step-up transformer, a form TBA in  which the  rf
power excited  by  the  drive  beam  wake  in  one  dielectric
tube is transferred to another tube of  higher impedance, in
which a test  beam is  accelerated[13].     The  investigation
of dielectric wakes (coherent Cerenkov emission) has been
extended  at  the  AWA  to  an  experiment  designed  to
observe  a  signal  similar  to  that  expected  by  an  EM
shower  induced  by  the  interaction  of  a  high  energy
neutrino  with  lunar  matter[14],  as  in  a  newly  proposed
scheme of ultra-high energy neutrino detection.

The E-157 collaboration has reported acceleration using
the  PWFA  mechanism  in  the  so-called  “blow-out”[2]
regime at the SLAC FFTB.  The  3.3  nC,  2  psec rms,  30
GeV beam is  injected  into  a  1.4  m  long,  very  uniform
plasma  of  density near  1014  cm-3 .  Much  of  the  beam  is
decelerated, with  the  tail  being  accelerated  by  the  wake-
field. This beam was observed by a time-resolved imaging
and energy measurement system.  The analysis of  the  data
taken in  this  experiment  has  proven  difficult  due  to  the
presence of  strong  transverse  kicks  which  mimic  energy
changes  in  the  spectrometer.  The  data  is,  despite  these
problems,  consistent  with  the  computational  models  of
the  PWFA  in  this  nonlinear  regime,  with  wakes  in  the
range of several hundred MeV/m measured[15].

As  the  acceleration  gradient  in  wake-field  accelerators
has long been recognized to scale strongly with  the  bunch
−2 ),  several AAC  photoinjector labs  have
length  (with  σ
z
developed  bunch  compressors.    Pulse  compression  with
such  high  currents  and  low  emittances  has  inherent
physics  interest,  due to  such  poorly  understood processes
as  coherent  synchrotron  radiation  and  related  emittance  
growth. Also measurement of such pulses  in  the  sub-psec
regime presents serious challenges, giving rise to methods
beyond the  limits  of  streak  camera  resolution[16]  which
rely on coherent transition  radiation.   The performance of
compressor systems  at  the  FNAL  A0  photoinjector[16],
the UCLA Neptune lab[17], and the  Univ.  of  Tokyo[18],
were all reported at  AAC2K.    The 5  nC,  2  psec bunches
produced at A0 were used by a UCLA team to  drive wake-
fields in  the  blow-out  regime which  also  reached  several
hundred MeV/m, nearly stopping  the  17  MeV beam in  8
cm of a  7 1013

 cm-3 plasma[19].

×

 The  availability  of  50  GeV electron beams which can
be compressed to less than 30 µm rms pulse length  at  the
end of the SLC arcs at SLAC  gave rise to  the  suggestion
by  Katsouleas that  a dense plasma  of  5  m  length  placed
after  the  arcs  could  double  the  energy  of  the  SLC
collisions[20].  This  suggestion,  termed  the  wake-field
“after-burner”, will undoubtedly spur further investigation.
3.2 Laser Acceleration

Experiments  on  direct  laser  acceleration  which  use
structures, despite having been generally proposed for over
a  decade,  have  just  begun.  The  daunting  challenges
(aperture, timing)  of  scaling  the  acceleration  wavelength
into 
to  be  considerable.  
Progress in a 1 µm(!)  wave-length planar-geometry exper-
iment  termed  LEAP[21]  at  Stanford  was  reported  at
AAC2K, yet without definitive proof of acceleration .

infrared  have  proven 

the 

Acceleration,  however,  has  been  reported  for  years  in
non-structure-based (IFEL,  ICA) experiments at  the  BNL
ATF  using  10  µm  light.  The  next  generation  of  laser
acceleration experiment, in  the  form of  a  scheme  termed
STELLA, has just begun to produce impressive results  as
reported  at  AAC2K.  STELLA  (STaged  ELectron  Laser
Acceleration[22]) is a two-stage system based on a 10  µm
IFEL. The first stage microbunches the several psec (mm)
ATF  beam into  the  10  µm  IFEL  period.  This  beam  is
then injected  at the correct phase for acceleration into   the
second stage , where the captured beam is  accelerated with
small  phase  and  energy  spread.    Some  results  of  this
remarkable experiment  are  shown  in  Fig.  1,  which  dis-
plays  the  momentum  spectrometer  images  of  a  beam
before interaction, after the  bunching  of  the  beam  in  the
first  stage,  and  after  the  capture  and  acceleration  of  the
beam in  the  second IFEL  stage.  This  robust  result  thus
shows  the  first  precise  manipulation  of  accelerating
electron beams in waves with only 31 fsec period.

Figure 1. False-color  spectrometer images from STELLA
experiment    at  BNL  ATF  (a)  without  IFEL,  (b)  after
initial stage IFEL bunching,  and (c) after correctly phased
second IFEL stage (courtesy Ilan Ben-zvi).
3.3 Plasma Accelerators, Lenses and Sources

In  the  past  few  AAC  workshops,  great  leaps  forward
into multi-GeV/m acceleration was reported in laser-driven
plasma accelerators.  No such  discoveries were reported at
AAC2K,  which  found  other  plasma-based  experiments,
including PWFA, in the spotlight.

In  the  context  of  PWFA,  an  important  milestone  in
beam-plasma  interaction  was  reported  by  the  E-150

collaboration  at  SLAC.  In  this  experiment,  positron
beams at the FFTB were injected into short plasmas,  with
the  measured focusing of  the  beam from 8  µm  to  4  µm
rms  width[10,23]. This  promising  result  has  resounding
implications  for  use  of  plasmas  for  focusing  and
accelerating positrons in future colliders.

The highest level of attention at  AAC2K in  the  area of
laser-plasma acceleration was given  to  the  production  of
high-brightness electron beams  by  the  breaking  of  large
amplitude, laser-driven plasma waves. Pioneering work on
this effect performed at  the  Univ.  of  Michigan (UM) was
reviewed  by  Umstadter[24].  Further  work  using  a  more
intense laser at  LBNL  was  also  presented,  in  which  the
extracted  high  brightness  fsec  electron  pulses  were
measured  to  have  energies  in  excess  of  25  MeV[25].
Further  control  over  the  injection  dynamics  of  these
electron micropulses is  expected when the  wave-breaking
is  dictated  by  the  collision  of  the  a  second    laser
pulse[25],  or  caused  by  a  sharp  density  transition,  as
proposed in the context of the PWFA by Suk, et al.[26].

Figure  2.  Radiographic film  spectrum of  protons  emitted
by  PW  laser interaction with  solid  target,  showing  peak
near maximum energy (courtesy T. Cowan).
3.4 Heavy Particle Acceleration

While the  AAC  Workshop  traditionally  is  focused  on
acceleration and manipulation  of  electrons  and  positrons,
at  AAC2K  there  was  much  discussion  of  advances  in
heavy particle accelerator physics.

The recent  emphasis  of  laser-plasma  based  sources  of
electrons  has  been  recently  paralleled  by  the  unexpected
discovery of ion beam generation from multi-TW  to  PW,
sub-psec laser-solid interactions. At AAC2K, results  from
the  UM  group (in  the  ten  TW regime),  as  well  as  from
LLNL (PW class laser) were reported.  In the  lower power
experiments, it has been shown  that  the  energetic (several
MeV) ions are generated on the upstream sided of the thin-
foil  targets.  In  the  LLNL  experiments[27],  on  the  other
hand,  the  accelerated    ions  (>30  MeV)  are  found  to  be
derived from the back side of  the  target,  ejected along  the
surface  normal.  In  both  experiments,  the  emitted  ions

showed small  transverse  phase  space  extent.  Even  more
remarkably,  in  the  LLNL  case  the  energy  spectrum
showed a notable peak near the maximum observed energy
— the  emitted  ions  formed  a  true  narrow  band  (and
initially sub-picosecond) beam. While such observation of
such  unprecedentedly  high  brightness  ion  beam  sources
capture  the  imagination,  it  is  not  yet  clear  how  one
captures such  a beam into  a  more  conventional  linac  to
use it in applications.

The recent emergence of muon colliders , and the related
the
concept  of  neutrino  factories,  was  recognized  in 
working groups  at  AAC2K.  There are  many  challenging
research  problems  which  need  to  be  investigated  before
such  projects are undertaken, such  as  ionization  cooling,
and manipulation  of  beam phase spaces  under  conditions
where the angular momentum of the beam is  nonzero[28].
It  was  apparent  from  the  presentations  at  AAC2K  he
muon/neutrino  factory field is  still  in  its  youth,  and that
with the onset of active experiments to  prove the  relevant
principles, 
this  proposed  high-energy  physics
instrument will grow in importance in the near future.

that 

4  REFERENCES

1.  Laser  Acceleration  of  Particles,  AIP  Conf.  Proc.  9 1
(AIP, New York, 1982)
2. J.B.Rosenzweig, et al., Phys.Rev.A 44, R6189 (1991)
3. “The CLIC Study of  a Multi-TeV e±  Linear Collider”,
Jean-Pierre Delahaye, et al. Proc. 1999 Part. Accel. Conf.
250 (IEEE, New York,1999)
4. R. Palmer, J. Appl. Phys., 43 3014 (1972).
5.  Y.Huang,  R.L.Byer, Appl.Phys. Lett. 69 2175  (1996)
6. J.B. Rosenzweig, A. Murokh, and C.  Pellegrini,  Phys.
Rev.  Lett.  74, 2467  (1995).
7. W.D. Kimura, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 546 (1995)
8. K. Nakajima, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 4428 (1995)
9. C.E. Clayton, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 37 (1993)
10. P. Chen, et al. Phys. Rev. D 40, 923-926 (1989)
11. D.Umstadter et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 2073 (1996)
12. J.G. Power, et al.,  Phys. Rev. E, 60, 6061 (1999).
13. P. Zou, et al., Rev. Sci. Inst. 71,  2301  (2000).
14. P. Gorham, et al., LANL e-print hep- ex/ 0004007.
15. P. Muggli, these proceedings.
16. M. Fitch, et al. . Proc. 1999 Part. Accel. Conf.
2181 (IEEE, New York,1999).
17. S. Anderson, et al., to appear in Proc. AAC2K (AIP)
18. M. Uesaka, et al., to appear in Proc. AAC2K (AIP)
19. N. Barov, et al., to appear in Proc. AAC2K (AIP)
20. T. Katsouleas, to appear in Proc. AAC2K (AIP)
21. E. Colby, et al., to appear in Proc. AAC2K (AIP)
22. W.D Kimura, et al., to appear in Proc. AAC2K (AIP)
23. J. Ng, et al., to appear in Proc. AAC2K (AIP)
24. Xiaofang Wang, et al. PRL, 84,5324 (2000)
25. W. Leemans, these proceedings.
26. H. Suk, et al., to appear in Proc. AAC2K (AIP)
27.  T.  Cowan,  to  appear in  Physics  of  High  Brightness
Beams (World Sci., Singapore, 2000).
28. G.Penn, J.S.Wurtele, Phys.Rev.Lett. 85, 764 (2000)

