file:///C|/Eigene Dateien/FP/HTML/FP.htm

Second law versus variation principles 
  

by W.D. Bauer 

Abstract: 

We apply Pontrjagin's extremum principle of control theory to mechanics and transfer it to equilibrium thermodynamics in order to test it as an ansatz.This
approach allows to derive the Boltzmann distribution as result of a variation problem. Furthermore, a principle of extremal entropy can be derived and -last
not least - the second law in a modified form. Contrary to the Clausius version of second law, the derivation can predict second law violations if potential
fields are included into consideration. This is illustrated by a experimental example from literature. Therefore, a purely mathematical approach of
thermodynamics, which derives the direction of irreversibilities from the inverse variational problem built around the thermodynamic formalism, can
contradict the Clausius second law for some special cases. 
  
  
  

1. Introduction 

The big success of the second law in thermodynamics relies on the fact that it predicts the direction of the known irreversible
processes correctly. The inherent problem with it is that it is based on experience. Therefore, due to axiomatic character of second
law, the question arises incidentally, whether the second law is an overgeneralisation. 
On the other hand, unconsciously and without any notice, other basic concepts are used in order to explain the direction of
irreversibilities in thermodynamics. This can be the case if a chemist speaks about that his reaction is "driven by enthalpy". 
Landau and Lifshitz [1] obtain the direction of electro-thermodynamic irreversibilities by the application of variational principles
on potentials. Because variational principles are included in the mathematics of a physical problem, the question arises, whether
the second law as additional physical principle becomes obsolete if this purely mathematic aspect is included into consideration . 
This article checks the consistence and equivalence of the second law against approaches using the variational principles applied
to potentials. 
We will present a field-dependent derivation of equilibrium thermodynamics from classical mechanics of a many particle system.
Many elements and steps of this derivation are well known [2][3]. The new point is that we use the information about the
Hamiltonian from the extremum principle of Pontrjagin[4] gained from classical mechanics and and transfer it into
thermodynamic as extremum principle of the potentials. Therefrom, the Boltzmann distribution, an extremum entropy principle
and a modified second law is derived for special examples. 
  
  
  

2. The Hamiltonian as minimizing function 

It is well known that the equations of motion are a solution of the Lagrange variational problem. The solution is obtained, if the
functional 

is an extremum, where x(t0)=x0and x(t1)=x1 are start and end point of the path. 
It is not so well known in physics [4] that the variational problem can be regarded as a special case of a problem of control theory
if we substitute 

(t) , where u(t) is the control function to be optimized. The functional for a control theory problem be 

with 

and 

 .The Hamiltonian is defined to 

The adjunct system is defined to 

Acc. to the Pontrjagin theorem the optimum control function u(t) can be determined by looking for the extremum of the
Hamiltonian, i.e. 

1 of 12

04.09.00 16:20

If we differentiate for t the solution is exactly the Euler-Lagrange equation 

file:///C|/Eigene Dateien/FP/HTML/FP.htm

 and 

 as defined above. 

because of 
The extremum of the Hamiltonian is a minimum because Huu > 0 . 
Similarly, as shown by Landau and Lifshitz [1], the Lagrangian of electrostatics can be varied with respect to electric coordinates
E or D. If only one Maxwell equation is given the other can be reconstructed by the variation formalism applied to any
thermodynamic potential. These results could be embedded in a more general mathematical framework [6] which derives general
relativity including all sub-theories using a Lagrange energy approach developed to second order. 
  
  
  

3. The transition from mechanics to thermodynamics 

As shown in the last section the mechanic Hamiltonian (or inner energy) goes to an extremum with respect  to 
the equation of motion of the many particle system is inserted into the Hamiltonian.  Non-stationary variations of the solution
deviate from the extremum. Such variations relative  to a stable stationary state can exist physically  if the Hamiltonian varies in
time if the system goes into the equilibrium by phase transitions which change the number of degrees of freedom or constraints
between the particles. Then, Htot changes in time during non-equilibrium until equilibrium is reached. 
This interpretation, however, holds only for stable states (or equilibrium thermodynamics), because the time t is not contained in
the description as independent  variable there. It is different for dynamic processes (or equilibrium thermodynamics[7,8]) where t
is contained explicitely . 
In equilibrium, due to energy conservation, the Hamiltonian is constant. Then, the time mean of the Hamiltonian is identical to the
Hamiltonian as well. 
If the assumption is founded that the ergodic  hypothesis can be applied to a  many particle system, the mean total energy in time
of all particles is identical to the ensemble average or in mathematic language(using the definition  T as measuring time interval)

  if the solution of

where  is the Hamilton energy of a single particle  = p2/(2m) + 
particles due to the real fluid behaviour. H( 
and W( 

 + U( 

 ) = 

 , 

 ,

) is the probability function of the ensemble. The probability function is normed acc. to 

 and 

 represents the mean inner potential between the
 ) is the total energy formula of a single particle in the field U( 

 )

As shown in the last section the stationary mechanic Hamiltonian sits in an extremum with respect to all particle velocity
coordinates. If we transfer this feature from mechanics into thermodynamic notation as an ansatz analogously, then at every space
cell the Hamilton density function 

representing the sum of all particles of each energy 
function is the Lagrange function 

 should go to an extremum as well. The Legendre transform of this Hamilton

with H= 

 +U( 

 ) and 

. From the Euler-Lagrange equation 

we obtain the corresponding differential equation 

The solution of this differential equation is the Boltzmann distribution. 

2 of 12

04.09.00 16:20

file:///C|/Eigene Dateien/FP/HTML/FP.htm

 introduced in order to get dimensionless units. It holds W0=1 due to (8). 

with 
Contrary to mechanics, however, the second variation is exactly zero. Therefore, neither a minimum neither a maximum
Hamiltonian exists with respect to the chosen independent coordinates here. Now, the conventional thermodynamic description
can be obtained by a coordinate transformation of the Hamiltonian ensemble average (or inner energy) Htot . 

Proof: 
We take the total differential of the ensemble average 

for and r , where 

 . Then it follows 

using the definitions of unit area:=A and V := volume. 

We discuss each partial derivatives of (15): 

1) We change the 
If the partial derivative of (14) is taken respectively to 
write 

 coordinate of the first derivative by inserting the Boltzmann distribution W( 

))] in (14).
, the potential term U(ri) cancels to zero due to (13) . Therefore, we can

):= exp[-

 /(kT(

,

We identify the specific Boltzmann entropy density 

 +U(

as new independent coordinate. 
We note here that due to eq.(16) the variational formalism from eq.(10) ff. can be applied as well either to Hamiltonian energy 
either for entropy density if H= 
be derived  here from the extremum principle of the Hamiltonian. If we apply information theory additionally we obtain the
Boltzmann distribution as maximum entropy distribution of all possible Shannon entropy distributions [9]. 
We see however, that the maximum entropy principle contains less information than the extremum principle of the Hamiltonian
because spatial information of the potential U(
 . As it  will shown
later, this can lead to contradictions. In thermodynamics this weakness is compensated by the additional demand that the material
equation  have to be designed such that second law is always fulfilled [10]. 

. Therefore, the extremum entropy principle can be regarded to

) is lost during partial differentiation of (14) with respect to 

) is replaced trivially by 

2) Due to the coordinate transformation 

 the second partial derivative of (15) can be written 

We denote P* as the global total pressure. It is a fictive value without any physical empirical relevance. It is constant over the
volume in equilibrium in the field and characterizes mathematically the global coupling over the volume. Due to H(

) = 

,

 + U(

), P* can be evaluated as 

3 of 12

04.09.00 16:20

file:///C|/Eigene Dateien/FP/HTML/FP.htm

) can be identified as the measureable pressure. The second term represents the additional hydrostatic or barometric pressure

P(
contribution due to the outer field. 

3) The third partial derivative of (15) is 

We denote µ* as global total potential[5]. It is constant over the volume in equilibrium and characterizes mathematically the
global coupling over the volume similarly to the total pressure. Due to the norm of W(
this can be evaluated to 

), comp.eq. (8), and H(

,

,

) = 

 + U(

)

) as the chemical potential of a substance without field. 

with µi(
The above space dependent formalism of thermodynamics allows to deal generally with static and space dependent
thermodynamic problems in potential fields like hydrostatic or barometric pressure and coincides with other known formulations
of space dependent equilibrium thermodynamics [11]. 
The thermodynamic equilibrium conditions can be found by the following control problem: 
The mean Hamilton energy H(S,V,ni) can be regarded acc. to section 2 to to be controled by the control vector u=(S(r),V(r),ni(r))
and should go to an extremum.We have to optimize 

The solution of this problem is acc.to the line of section 2. In the end we get the equations 

which are the conditions of equilibrium because of T= H/ S, P*=- H/ V and µi= H/ ni. 
The second variation of the Hamiltonian (or inner energy)  with respect to the new coordinates system depends from the choice of
the material, the fields and similarly from the  inner potentials Uij of the  material acc. to the variational point of view discussed 
here. We will prove in the next section that it is not  an absolute  minimum generally which would  be  necessary to obtain
Clausius's version of the second  to be valid  generally. 
  
  
  

4. The second law as consequence of the extremum principle of the Hamiltonian 

The minimum principle of potentials is derived in many textbooks of thermodynamics from second law [12]. In this section we
will reverse this procedure and derive the second law from the extremum behaviour of the Hamiltonian. Acc. to section 2 and 3
the second derivative of the Hamiltonian can be obtained principally from the mathematics of the problem and gives independent
information about the direction of the extremum of the potentials. This information is independent from any additional empirical
physical information like second law. Therefore, the question has to be discussed whether both approaches are equivalent. 
It will be shown in the following that both approaches make the same prediction for thermodynamic standard cases where
irreversibilities obey dH<0. However, if potential fields are included into consideration the variational approach can predict
second law violations for special cases. 
  

4.1. Thermodynamic standard case - no fields present 
As an example we discuss the behaviour of a cycle of a simple fluid  which may condensate. We imagine a periodic cycle which
includes a reversible part of the closed  path over the points 1-> 2-> 3 . The path 3-> 1 is irreversible. During this phase the fluid
has contact  with the (only) heat of environment at constant temperature T. 
We start at the cycle  at  point 1 of the dewline of a phase diagram of a simple substance like water, comp. fig.1 , 2 and 3. The
path 1->2 is an isentropic expansion (dS1-> 2= 0). At  point 2 the volume is separated  into two parts 2' and 2´´  by closing a tap.
One part 2´contains vapour only, the other2´´  liquid and vapour.  Then both volumes are recompressed  isentropically back to the
initial total volume (dS2-> 3= 0). At point 3 the tap is reopened, the system is set into contact with the heat bath of environment 
and the cycle is closed 3->1  irreversible at constant volume. 
Because the inner energy H is a potential it holds 

4 of 12

04.09.00 16:20

 due to minimizing of H during irreversible transitions. This follows as well
Acc. to the second law it should hold 
from the 2nd variation of the Hamiltonian with respect of pi. Therefrom follows using dH = -PdV + TdS , dS1->2 = dS2->3 = 0 and 

 

file:///C|/Eigene Dateien/FP/HTML/FP.htm

From 

 follows then 

This result is in accordance with the standard versions of the second law. 

4.2 Violation of 2nd law acc. to the extremum principle if fields are present 
The inner energies H' and H" of a capacitive loaded thermodynamic system are defined [1]by 

where we used the definitions 
omitted in all formulas for convenience. The same formulas can be written in differentials 

:= susceptibility, E:= electric field, P:= electric polarisation. The dielectric constant of vacuum is

Regarding the 2nd derivative with respect to the electric variables P or E of both these potentials we see in formulas (28) that for
constant homogeneous dielectrics the potential H'(V,S,ni,P) approaches a minimum in the extremal state of thermodynamic
equilibrium and H''(V,S,ni,E) approaches a maximum in the equilibrium state, if  > 0, dS=0 and dV=0. Therefore, because the
second variations of H with respect of the fields are identical to the second derivative of H with respect to the field coordinate [1],
the following unequalities hold for irreversible changes of state 

Due to the Legendre transformation formalism analogous expressions on eq.(28) and (29) hold for free enthalpy, i.e. 

and 

In words, these equations (28) - (31) can be interpreted as "electric Chatelier-Braun-principle", which states for simple dielectrics
that they tend to discharge themself. 
In order to show the contradiction between second law and the "electric le Chatelier-Braun principle" we regard an isothermal
electric cycle with an irreversible path into a maximum of G´´ at constant field E, comp. fig.4 and 5:  Because G'' is a potential,
we have for a closed cycle over three points(1->2->3->1) 

According to the extremum principle 

23G''irrev > 0 holds. Because of the isofield (E2=E3) irreversible change of state (2->3) we

have also

. This zero expression is added to the second formula of (32) and we can write 

5 of 12

04.09.00 16:20

file:///C|/Eigene Dateien/FP/HTML/FP.htm

Regarding the sign of this integral we see that the orientation of this cycle is reversed compared to the usual hysteresis of a
ferroelectric substance. Because the cycle proceeds isothermically (with only one heat reservoir) the Clausius statement of second
law is violated. 
The proof is as follows: Due to energy conservation and because H" is a potential 

holds. Therefrom, because the first term is negative, it follows that the net heat exchange  T dS has a positive sign. This implies 

dS>0 because T=constant . This means that the cycle takes heat from the environment and gives off electrical work under

isothermal conditions which is contrary to the Clausius formulation of the 2nd law. 

 

Example: 
A concrete physical model containing this contradiction to the 2nd law can be found in polymer chemistry. Wirtz and Fuller [13]
[14] investigated electrically induced sol-gel phase transitions of polymer solutions. To explain their experiments they used a
Flory-Huggins model [15] extended by an electric interaction term. Their model describes the qualitative behaviour of such
solutions correctly, however, they did not note the inconsistence regarding to Clausius version of second law. 
This can be shown by proceeding a isothermal closed cycle, which is the electric analog of a Serogodsky or a van Platen cycle of
binary mixtures discussed recently [16]. This closed splitted cycle is proceeded using a dielectric sol-gel mixture in a capacitor
like polystyrene in cyclohexane (upper critical point solution) or p-chlorostyrene in ethylcarbitol (lower critical point solution).
The composition of the solution is separated periodically by a demixing phase transitions induced by switching off the field. After
the separation of both phases by splitting into two volumes they are remixed again (irreversible phase !) after openig the
separating tap in a strong field. 
The cycle is started in the 2- phase region at zero field at the points 1, comp. fig.4,5 and 6, where the volume is splitted by closing
the tap separating both phases. Then a strong electric field E is applied. So we reach the points 2' and 2'' representing different
phases of the solution in both compartments. Then we open the tap and let mix the solutions in both compartments. During the
mixing (2->3) the electric field is kept constant by decharging the capacitor during the decline of the dieleletric constant, cf. fig.7.
Then, in the phase diagram fig. 6 and as well in fig.4 + 5, the mixed solution is at the phase separation line at point 3. In the last
step of the cycle the capacitor is discharged completely and the system goes back into the 2-phase area to point 1 and demixes.
According to the theory (cf. Eq. 31) 

Now, we define S:=V´/V to be the splitting factor of the total volume V , V' and V'' are the volumes of the compartments each
where V:=V´+V". We write the difference of the free enthalpy using the definition or G´´ in (30) assuming 
dependent from 

 and independent from E for zeroth order 

:=  -1 to be

The right side of the first line represents the stored linear combined field energy of the separated volume parts (points 2' and 2") at
point 2, the second line stands for the field energy difference (1->3) of both the connected compartments containing of two
volume parts of the coexisting phases ´ and ". In the first line S, , 
dependent from E in 2-phase area. 
For the system investigated by Wirtz et al., the Flory free-energy density approach of an incompressible dilute monodisperse
polymer solution is useful. The "ansatz"[13,14] is 

" are constant, in the second line S, , 

' and 

' and 

" are

where N:= polymerisation number, 
constant of the monomer solution,
Therefrom, the chemical potential µ and osmotic pressure 

 := total dielectric constant, p := dielectric constant of the polymer solution, m:= dielectric
:=1/(kT) with k:=Boltzmann number and 

:=Flory parameter. 

 follow to 

The phase equilibrium is determined by the equations 

6 of 12

04.09.00 16:20

file:///C|/Eigene Dateien/FP/HTML/FP.htm

The first equation describes the chemical potential to be equal in both phases. The second equation is the Maxwell construction
applied to the chemical potential. The solution of this system of equations can be done numerically or by deriving a parameter
representation [13,14]. Results are shown qualitatively in fig.6 . 
  

5.Conclusion 

The analogies between  mechanics and thermodynamics- shown in tab.1- suggest that the direction of irreversibilities can be
understood from a variation principle applied to inner energy analogously to the extremum principle of Pontrjagin applied to
mechanics. Therefrom, it can be derived the Boltzmann distribution, an extremum entropy principle and the second law in a 
modified  form which allows second law violations if fields are included into consideration. 
This  result becomes understandable  if we note that the reverse problem of variational calculus (i.e. the reconstruction of a
variation functional from a function or differential equation) cannot be solved  uniquely,  because the solutions can differ by a
integration constant. These integration constants can contain other variables to be varied. Therefore, the prediction of the direction
of an irreversibility  based on the evaluation of the potential or based only on entropy can be different, because the entropy as
derivative of a potential has lost information. The lost integration constants, however, influence the direction of the irreversibility
in the state space acc. to the variational calculation applied to all possible coordinates of the Hamiltonian. 
Acc. to a purely  mathematical variational approach of thermodynamics all empirical information about a system is in the
potential describing the  material behaviour. Therefrom, the application of all possible  variation principles allows to determine
the directions of the irreversible processes. Contradictions to second law between due to "strange" material behaviour are
excluded by this approach  a priori. Instead of this Clausius's version of second law can be violated under defined conditions. 
Therefore,  model systems showing this theoretical contradiction between second law and second variation of inner energy could
be interesting for experimental research. 
  
  
  

References: 
  

1) L.D. Landau, E.M.Lifshitz 
 Elektrodynamik der Kontinua , §18 
Akademie Verlag ,  Berlin 1990,  5 Auflage 

2) M. Leontovich 
Introduction à la thermodynamique Physique statistique 
Edition Mir, Moscou, 1983 transduction francaise1986 

3)  R.L. Stratonovich 
 Nonlinear  Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics I, Springer Berlin, 1992 

4) Bronstein-Semendjajew 
Taschenbuch der Mathematik, Harri Deutsch, Frankfurt, 1984 

5) The term total potential stems from van der Waals and Kohnstam 
see for example: V.Freise Chemische Thermodynamik BI Taschenbuch 1973  (in German) 

6) V.Benci, D.Fortunato, Foundations of Physics 28,No.2, 1998, p. 333 -352 
A new variational principle for the fundamental equations of classiccal physics 

7) L. Onsager, S. Machlup,  Phys. Rev. 91, No.6, 1953, p. 1505 

8) I. Gyarmati  Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics 
Springer, Berlin, 1970 

9) F. Topsoe Informationstheorie 
B.G.Teubner  Stuttgart 1974 (in German 

10) W. Muschik, H. Ehrentraut,   J. Non-Equilib. Thermodyn. 21, 1996, p. 175-192 

11) J.U. Keller  Thermodynamik der irreversiblen Prozesse, 

7 of 12

04.09.00 16:20

file:///C|/Eigene Dateien/FP/HTML/FP.htm

de Gruyter, Berlin, 1977  (in German) 

12) Stephan K., Mayinger F. 
Thermodynamik Bd.II     Springer Verlag   Berlin, New York   1988 

13) D. Wirtz,  G.G. Fuller,   Phys.Rev.Lett.71 (1993) 2236 

14) D. Wirtz,  K. Berend,  G.G. Fuller   Macromolecules 25 (1992) 7234 

15) J. Des Cloizeaux ,G. Jannink 
Polymers in Solution         Oxford University Press, Oxford 1987 

16)  W.D. Bauer, W  Muschik,    J. Non-Equilib. Thermodyn. 23 (1998), p.141-158 

17)P. Debye,  K. J. Kleboth,    Chem.Phys.42 (1965) 3155 
  

Tab.1: analogous features between thermodynamics and mechanics 
  
mechanics
time mean or least action functional
Hamilton energy
non-extremal state of functional
Legendre transformations, i.e. L, H
Pontrjagin's extremum principle
second variation of the Hamiltonian

thermodynamics
ensemble average
inner energy
non-equilibrium state
Legendre transformations, i.e. U, H, F, G 
extremum principle of potentials
"second law"

  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Captions: 

Fig.1: Cycle with periodic irreversibility of a simple fluid: 
1-2 isentropic expansion, 2 splitting the volume, 2-3 separate isentropic compression of both compartement, 3 opening the tap,
3-1 irreversible closing of the cycle and contact with heat bath of environment at T=constant, comp. fig.2 and 3 and text 

8 of 12

04.09.00 16:20

file:///C|/Eigene Dateien/FP/HTML/FP.htm

fig.2: Cycle with periodic irreversibility in the T-S phase diagram of a simple fluid 
1-2 isentropic expansion, 2 splitting the volume, 2-3 separate isentropic compression of both compartement, 3 opening the tap,
3-1 irreversible closing of the cycle and contact with heat bath of environment at T=constant, comp. fig.1 and 3 and text 

fig.3:  Pressure P vs. total volume V of a cycle of a simple fluid  with periodic  irreversibility 
1-2 isentropic expansion, 2 splitting the volume,  2-3 separate isentropic compression of both compartement, 3 opening the tap,
3-1 irreversible closing of the cycle and contact with heat bath of environment at T=constant, comp. fig.2 and 3 and text 

9 of 12

04.09.00 16:20

file:///C|/Eigene Dateien/FP/HTML/FP.htm

fig 4: Isothermic isobaric electric cycle with a diluted polymer solution as dielectric 
1) voltage U=0: system in 2-phase region 2) both volumes separated, rise 
of voltage from zero to U=const.: each volume compartment in 1-phase region 
3 ) voltage U=const.: opening the tap and returning to the phase separation line 
by remixing 
back to section 4.2 or section 4.2 Example 

fig.5: Isothermal electric cycle in capacitor with electrically induced phase transitions; 
charge Q versus voltage U plotted; 
1 starting at 2 phase area line with zero field, 1-2 applying a field 
with tap closed, 2 opening the tap, 2-3 discharging and remixing in field, 
3 returning to starting point 1 by discharging the capacitor; a negative 
work area is predicted according to Gibbs thermodynamics contrary to the second law 
back to section 4.2 or section 4.2 Example 

10 of 12

04.09.00 16:20

file:///C|/Eigene Dateien/FP/HTML/FP.htm

 vs. volume fraction 

   (with T:=temperature) 

fig.6: 
phase diagram of a polymer solution with and without electric field E 
according to [13,14]; plot shows modified Flory-parameter versus volume fraction 
of polymers; points 1: E=0, 2-phases, both points 1 at the phase 
separation line; points 2: E=const., both points 2 of the splitted volume 
in 1 phase area; point 3: E=const., after opening the tap: point 3 returns 
exactly at the phase separation line; more information about the construction 
of this phase diagrams, see references [14,15] 
back to section 4.2 Example or section 4.2 end of Example 

11 of 12

04.09.00 16:20

file:///C|/Eigene Dateien/FP/HTML/FP.htm

 versus volume fraction 

 of polymers in a dilute solution; 

fig.7: Dielectric constant 
points 1, 2 and 3 refer to points in fig.1-3. According to the theory [13,14,15] 
d2 /d 2>0 holds near the critical point. Therefore 
the dielectric constant has to decline during remixing 2->3. Observations at a similar 
system[17] support this prediction 
back to section 4.2 Example 

) has to turn to the left and 

(

12 of 12

04.09.00 16:20

