EXOTIC ION-BEAMS, TARGETS AND SOURCES

J.A. Lettry, CERN, Geneva, Switzerland

Abstract

short-lived 

Exotic  beams  of 

radioisotopes  are
produced  in  nuclear  reactions  such  as  thermal  neutron
induced  fission,  target  or  projectile  fragmentation  and
fusion reactions. For a given radioactive ion beam (RIB),
different production modes are in competition. For each
of them the cross section, the intensity  of  the  projectile
beam and the target thickness define an upper production
rate. The final yield relies on the optimisation of the ion-
source, which should be fast and highly efficient in view
of the limited production cross section, and on obtaining
a  minimum  diffusion  time  out  of  the  target  matrix  or
fragment  catcher  to  reduce  decay  losses.  Eventually,
either  chemical  or  isobaric  selectivity  is  needed  to
confine unwanted elements near to the production site.

These  considerations  are  discussed  for  pulsed  or  dc-
driven  RIB  facilities  and  the  solutions  to  some  of  the
technical  challenges  will  be  illustrated  by  examples  of
currently produced near-drip-line elements.

1  INTRODUCTION

Over the last 30 years, RIB facilities based on Isotope
On  Line  (ISOL)  and  in-flight  fragment  separators  [1-4]
played  a  major  role  in  very  different  research  domains
such  as  astrophysics,  atomic  physics,  nuclear  physics,
solid state physics and nuclear medicine.

Nuclei far from  stability  (so  called  exotic  nuclei)  are
produced in spallation, fragmentation, fission and fusion
nuclear  reactions  between  the  primary  beam  particles
and  the  target  nucleus.  RIB  facilities  consist  of  four
parts.  The  driver  produces  a  primary  beam  of  particles
and  directs  them  to  the  target  where  the  nuclear
reactions  take  place.  This  is  followed  in  the  case  of
ISOL by the ion source  and  the  separator  which  ionise
and  select  the  isotopes  and  direct  them  to  the  physics
experiment.  The  drivers  at  the  origin  of  the  nuclear
reaction are based on light or heavy ion accelerators and
on  various  actinide  fission  processes.  The  fission  of
uranium  produced  via  high-energy  protons  or  thermal
neutrons  is  now  being  complemented  by  fast  neutron
induced fission [5] and even photofission [6].

Existing  RIB  facilities  can  be  classified  according  to
the  typical  time  span  between  the  nuclear  reaction  and
the delivery of the radioisotope to the experimental set-
up  into  three  complementary  categories:  the  2s-class
regrouping the in-flight fragment separators; the ms-class
where  fragments  are  caught  and  thermalized  in  a  noble
gas  beam  stopper;  and  the  s-class  where  fragments  or
fission products are stopped or produced at rest in solids,

diffuse  out  of  the  target  material  and  eventually  get
ionised in the ion source. Ion sources will be described is
section 2 and targets in section 3.

2 

ION-SOURCES ALONG
MENDELEEV’S TABLE

RIB  ion-sources  should  be  fast  to  limit  the  decay
losses  of  short-lived  isotopes,  efficient  as  the  available
amount  of  material  is  limited  by  the  production  cross
section,  and  chemically  selective 
isobar
contaminants  and  confine  unwanted  species  as  close  as
possible  to  the  production  area.  In  this  section,  a
selection of single charge ion sources is briefly presented
according  to  their  chemical  properties,  all  of  them
designed to work close to the high-radiation target area.

to  reduce 

2.1  Alkalis, alkaline earth and rare earth

A  feature  common  to  alkalis,  alkaline  earth  and  rare
earth elements is their low ionisation potential (between
3.9  and  6  eV).  This  property,  shared  by  some  diatomic
molecules,  allows  a  very  efficient  ionisation  on  a  high
temperature metallic surface. The ionisation of an  atom
bouncing  from  a  high-temperature  metallic  surface  was
observed  for  the  first  time  in  1923.  Its  efficiency  is
described  as  a  function  of  the  difference  between  the
energy  required  to  remove  an  electron  from  its  surface
(its  work  function)  and  the  ionisation  potential  of  the
atom.  Since 
then,  high-temperature  cavities  were
designed  to  optimise  the  ion  fraction  caught  by  the
extraction field. A commonly used geometry consists of
a  simple  refractory  metal  (niobium,  tantalum,  tungsten
or rhenium) tube heated by a dc-current.

2.2  Metals

Plasma ion sources are based on a controlled electron
beam of a few hundred eV which generates a plasma in a
low  pressure  of  noble  gas  in  a  high-temperature  cavity
with  a  low  magnetic  field.  The  Forced  Electron  Beam
Arc Discharge (FEBIAD) sources [6-7] efficiently ionise
all elements which do not have strong chemical reactions
with  the  ion  source  materials.  Their  intrinsic  low
thermo-
chemical 
chromatographic  methods.  The  material  and 
the
temperature  of  the  transfer  line  between  the  target  and
the ion source is chosen according to the elements to be
condensed.

selectivity 

is 

improved 

via 

The  Resonant  Ionisation  Laser  Ion  Source  (RILIS)
[8,9] is based on the stepwise excitation of 2 or 3 atomic
transitions  leading  either  to  auto-ionising  states  or

directly  to  the  continuum.  The  interaction  between  the
laser  beams  and  the  atoms  takes  place  in  a  high-
temperature  metallic  cavity.  While  drifting  towards  the
extraction hole, the RILIS ions are confined by a radial
potential well originating  from  the  electron  layer  at  the
surface of the hot metal. The RILIS elegantly solves the
selectivity  issue  with  the  notable  exception  for  the
alkalis, which are ionised in the high-temperature cavity.
It  is  a  proven  technique  for  the  efficient  production  of
radioisotopes of  19  elements.  In  principle  an  individual
ionisation  scheme  can  be  developed  for  75%  of  the
elements  [10].  The  RILIS  atoms  are  ionised  within  the
few ns laser pulse, but the different path lengths of drift
towards  extraction  leads  to  a  RILIS  ion  bunch  of
typically  a  few  tens  of  2s  duration.  The  micro-gating
technique consists in deflecting the  surface-ionised  ions
from  the  experimental  set-up  to  a  beam  dump  between
two RILIS ion bunches. The selectivity towards surface-
ionised isobars can be increased up to a factor of 10 via
micro  gating  [11].  A  very  elegant  solution  to  the
selective  ionisation  of  refractory  elements  is  the  Ion
Guide  Laser  Ion  Source  (IGLIS)  [12]  at  Leuven:
recoiling  refractory  metals  fragments  are  stopped  in  a
noble  gas  catcher,  thermalized  and  neutralized,  and
eventually ionised via resonant laser ionization.

2.3  Halogens

Halogens  have  high  electron  affinities,  therefore,  a
halogen atom hitting a low work function material has a
tendency to pick an electron from the surface and to be
released  as  a  negative  ion.  The  LaB6  ISOLDE  surface
ion  source  [13]  efficiently  produced  negatively  charged
beams of chlorine, bromine, iodine and astatine. Due to
its reactivity, fluorine beams could not be produced this
way  but  rather  as  a  molecular  side  band  (AlF+)  in  a
plasma  ion  source  [14]  A  dedicated  Cs  sputter  ion
sources was tested off-line for fluorine production [15].

2.4  Gaseous elements

Despite  their  high  ionisation  potentials,  noble  gases,
nitrogen and oxygen are very efficiently ionised in ECR
ion sources. Besides the standard high-charge-state ECR,
a new generation of ECR designed for single-charge ions
was developed [16]. Compact, equipped with permanent
magnets  and  fed  with  the  commercial  2.45  MHz  RF
generators.  They  have  efficiencies  of  the  order  of  90%
for 1+ argon.

FEBIAD  ion  sources  equipped  with  a  cooled  Cu-
transfer  line  are  very  selective,  the  only  contaminants
being the higher charge state of the heavier noble gases.
Their  efficiency  is  of  the  order  of  50%  for  the  heavier
gases drops to typically 1% for the lighter.

3  SELECTED DRIVERS, TARGETS

AND ION BEAMS

to 

targets  and  drivers  dedicated 

This  section  is  dedicated  to  the  presentation  of
examples  of 
the
production of radioisotopes belonging to specific regions
of  the  chart  of  nuclides.  As  more  powerful  drivers  are
planned,  targets  must  be  designed  to  cope  with  higher
power  densities.  The  challenge  is  to  dissipate  the
deposited  heat  in  a  target  that  must  be  kept  at  high
temperature  for  maximum  diffusion  speed.  In  the  cases
presented,  the  radioisotopes  are  stopped  or  produced  at
rest.  The  release  of  radioisotopes  from  thick  targets  is
governed  by  diffusion  out  of  the  target  matrix,  folded
with  the  usually  faster  effusion  from  the  surface  of  the
target material to the ion source [17]. A release function
gives the probability density for an atom produced at t=0
to be released at a given time [18]. It is the  normalised
and  decay-loss  corrected  equivalent 
time
dependence of the radioisotope current. The sharp rise of
the  first  few  ms  is  usually  associated  with  the  effusion
process,  while  the  slower  tail  gives  information  on  the
diffusion process. As release  curves  are  often  measured
with  pulsed  beams,  the  induced  temperature  shock
affects  the  release  during  the  heat  transport  transient
time of typically 1s. The last part of the release function
is representative of the diffusion process.

to 

the 

Neutron-rich  isotopes  are  mainly  produced  in  the
fission  of  actinides  to  benefit  from  the  neutron  excess.
Fission  can  be  induced  by  high-energy  charged  ions,
thermal  or  fast  neutrons  and  even  photons  [19].  The
distribution  of  the  fission  fragments  in  the  chart  of
nuclides depends on the  energy  of  the  primary  particle,
and  is  widest  for  high-energy  primary  particles.  In  this
case, fragmentation and spallation reactions contribute to
the  production  of  both 
respectively  heavy
radioisotopes, on top of the fission products. Among the
highest  cross-sections,  the  fission  of  235U  via  thermal
neutrons is characterised by its well-known double peak.
On the other side of the valley of stability, isotopes close
to the proton drip line have to be produced by spallation
of a slightly heavier element, or by fragmentation.

light 

3.1  A target for a high flux reactor

tool  for 

Thermal neutron induced fission is, thanks to its very
high  cross  section,  a  very  powerful 
the
production  of  fission  fragments  as  demonstrated  for
decades  by  the  OSIRIS  facility  in  Studsvik.  The  next
generation of such facilities was proposed at Grenoble (
PIAFE  project  at  the  ILL  high  flux  reactor  [20])  and
Munich  (Munich  Accelerator  for  Fission  Fragments
MAFF  [21]  currently  under  construction).    One  of  the
objectives  of  MAAF  is  the  production  of  superheavy
elements  via  fusion  reaction  between  two  different
neutron-rich fission products. This would be realised by
implanting  neutron-rich  fission  fragments  on  line  on  a

substrate,  to  constantly  regenerate  a  thin  very  neutron
rich  target  and,  simultaneously,  accelerate  other  fission
fragments at high energy onto  this  target  [22].  The  235U
primary target consists of 1g uranium carbide in a porous
graphite  matrix.  It  is  confined  in  a  rhenium  vessel
directly connected to the ion source (surface, plasma or
laser). The  lifetime  of  the  target  and  ion  source  system
has to exceed the cycle of the reactor of 52 days. One of
the  preferred  ion  sources  to  match  this  challenge  is  the
RILIS, as all complex parts are out of the highly active
region except for the high-temperature metallic cavity.
The  neutron  flux  of  maximum  3K1011  n/cm2s  can  be
adjusted via the position of the target at the edge of the
reactor.  The  fission  power  heats  up  the  target  to  a
nominal  temperature  above  2000GC.  A  higher  fission
rate density  can  be  achieved  than  with  charged  particle
induced fission schemes  where  energy  losses  contribute
to the heating. The expected fission rate is 1014 s-1.

control  over  the  maximum  temperature  increase  and
measurements show the expected increase of the rapidly
released isotopes induced by the thermal shock.

The synchronous production of isotopes with half-lives
of  a  few  ms  duration  reduces  dramatically  the  data
acquisition time fraction. As an example, for  14Be  (4.35
ms) the background is reduced by a factor 200 for a data
acquisition time of more than 12 half-lives.

The  pulsed  generation  of  radioisotopes  in  a  target
without  (or  with  a  very  reduced)  thermal  shock  is
possible  for  fission  products  if  the  fission  is  generated
with pulsed neutrons. A uranium carbide target placed in
the vicinity of a tantalum cylinder bombarded with high-
energy  pulsed  protons  corresponds  to  this  description
and is presently under test at ISOLDE. The principle of
the conversion has been demonstrated at  Orsay  (section
3.3),  Gatchina  (ISIS)  [27]  and  of  course  in  spallation
neutron sources.

3.2  Dc vs. pulsed proton beam drivers

3.3  Molten Uranium target

The  ISOLDE  facility  driver  used  to  be  a  600MeV
synchrocyclotron  (SC)  for  2  decades.  Following  the
move  of  the  facility  to  CERN’s  Proton  Synchrotron
Booster (PSB) [23,24], all targets developed for the  dc-
beam  of  the  SC  were  tested  with  low  frequency  proton
pulses  at  the  PSB.  Similar  targets  are  currently  very
successful at TRIUMF [25] with one order of magnitude
higher  dc-proton  current.  The  effects  of  the  increase  of
energy  density  of  3  orders  of  magnitude  between  the
almost continuous SC and  the  pulsed  PSB  proton  beam
are briefly described in this section.

lead.  The 

transfer 

lines  between 

Molten metal targets: The thermal shock generated by
a  pressure  wave  during  the  2.4  2s  proton  pulse  was
sufficient  to  break  the  welds  of  the  target  container,  to
generate vapour pressure bursts, and to splash the molten
metal  into  the  ion-source  [26].  Corrosion  and  even
cavitation-like  attacks  were  observed  on  a  Ta-container
for  molten 
the
containers  and  the  ion-sources  were  equipped  with
temperature  controlled  baffle  systems,  also  designed  to
condense  the  excess  of  vapours.  This  intermediate
temperature control allows in some cases to reach higher
temperature.  The  power  of  a  1  GeV  proton  beam  at  an
average current of 1 2A heats up a lead target unit up to
800GC and sets the power dissipation limit of the present
design, which can be improved by cooling.
Metal  foil  targets:  The  rapid  release  from  metal
targets  benefits  from  the  pulsed  production  of  the
radioisotopes, which allows additional noise suppression
by collecting data only after the proton pulses, according
to the release and to the specific  half-life.  On  the  other
hand,  the  temperature  increase  following  the  proton
pulse  can  reach  600GC  and  occurs  in  metals  that  are
often  beyond  their  elasticity  domain.  This  leads  to  the
destruction of the target container and rapid sintering of
the target material. Defocusing the proton beam gives a

the 

Fast  neutrons  resulting  from 

interaction  of
deuterium  with  a  light  converter  (beryllium,  carbon  or
liquid lithium) do induce 238U fission. One of the aims of
the  first  proposal  by  Nolen  [5]  was  to  remove  the
charged particle energy losses from the high temperature
uranium target. This concept was partly tested within the
PARRNe  project  [28,29].  The  primary  targets  called
neutron converters were built out of low Z material  but
as  demonstrated  by  the  spallation  sources,  high  Z
materials including uranium can be envisaged. The RIB
production  of  uranium  carbide  and  molten  uranium
targets  coupled  to  graphite  and  beryllium  converters
were compared at deuteron energies between 15 and 150
MeV.  The  net  gain  of  neutron  production  using  Be
converters was reduced by geometrical effects as the C-
converter  can  be  placed  closer  to  the  high-temperature
target.  While  the  fast  release  from  uranium  carbide
matrix  is  well-known,  the  first  measurement  from
molten  uranium  confirmed  the  usually  slow  (tens  of
seconds) release behaviour common to all molten metal
targets. The challenging container for molten uranium at
high temperature was made out of sintered  yttria  which
kept 200g uranium at temperatures up to 1700GC [30] for
a  few  days.  Observations  of  the  container  after  the  run
showed no damage but a blackening of the yttria (due to
oxygen losses).

These  tests  will  be  used  as  a  benchmark  for  the
simulation  codes  necessary  to  optimise  the  numerous
parameters such as deuteron energy, converter and target
thickness  and  geometry.  With  this  technique  applied  in
SPIRAL-II,  a  target  of  typically  3  kg  238U  would  be
necessary to achieve of the order of 1014 fissions/s.

3.4  Very thin Ta-foil target for neutron halo

nuclides

the 

target  geometry  and 

The half-lives of the neutron halo nuclides 11Li (8.7ms)
and 14Be (4.34ms) are comparable to the typical effusion
time from a standard tantalum foil target. Their diffusion
time  constants  are  even  orders  of  magnitude  larger.
Therefore, 
the  diffusion
thickness  must  be  optimised  to  reduce  the  large  decay
losses  of  four  orders  of  magnitude.  Instead  of  the  130
g/cm2  20 2m  Ta-foils  contained  in  a  20  cm  long  2  cm
diameter  oven  only  10  g/cm2  2  2m  Ta-foils  were
deposited  in  a  u-shaped  support  and  oriented  along  the
beam axis inside the oven or target container [31]. This
container  was  connected 
ion-source
consisting  of  a  3  mm-diameter  30 mm  long  tungsten
cavity. While lithium was ionised on the 2400GC surface,
the  RILIS  laser  beams  ionised  the  beryllium  isotopes.
The  specific  yield  from  11Li  increased  by  a  factor  of
more  than  20  and  its  absolute  yield  reached  7000
ions/2C (1.4 GeV protons). The best yield of  12Be (23.6
ms)  obtained  increased  by  an  order  of  magnitude,  and
doubled for  14Be. This  successful  example  demonstrates
that  a  target  has  possibly  to  be  designed  for  each  or  a
few specific isotopes.

to  a  surface 

3.5  Radiation-cooled high-power targets

Radiation-cooled  targets  or  very  refractory  materials
were first proposed by Bennet et al. [32] within the RIST
project.  The  RIST  target  consists  of  a  succession  of
diffusion-bonded 25 2m Ta-spacers and discs. A hole of
decreasing diameter is cut in the centre to distribute the
power  along  the  axis.  The  target  is  designed  to  work
with 100 2A pulsed beam of 800 MeV protons. The total
electrical power that could be dissipated by radiation at
2400GC in an off-line test reached 30 kW.
The  heavy  ion  beam  from  GANIL  foreseen  for  the
SPIRAL  project,  has  a  total  power  of  6kW.  The  short
range  of  heavy  ions  in  matter  sets  stringent  constraints
on the target/catcher material. The shape of the graphite
target developed for noble gas isotopes is a succession of
increasing diameter 0.5 mm thick disks held on a central
rod  which  can  also  be  used  as  heating  resistor.  The
heavy-ion  beam  circles  around  the  axis.  The  target  is
contained  in  a  water-cooled  box  and  the  gaps  between
two  adjacent  disks  are  designed  to  increase  the  heat-
radiating  surface  (2500GC).  In  addition  they  allow  a
ion  source.  The
rapid  effusion 
micrometer-size  graphite  structure  is  optimum  for  fast
diffusion.  During  the  test  of  the  first  prototype,  the
sublimation  temperature  of  graphite  was  reached  and
resulted  in  a  hole  located  at  the  Bragg  peak.  A  heat
transfer code including heat radiation, was developed to
define the final geometry of a target which was then able
to dissipate the power.

the  ECR 

towards 

A  complementary  approach  based  on  conductive
cooling was tested at TRIUMF, where a water-cooled set
of diffusion-bonded disks of molybdenum representing a
medium  temperature  target  was  submitted  to  a  100 2A
beam of 500 MeV protons. The heat transfer calculations
showed small discrepancies with respect to the recorded
temperatures [33].

3.6  Target for alkali suppression

The on-line production of neutron-rich copper isotopes
is very efficient with high-energy protons impinging on a
thorium (or uranium) target. Unfortunately, the  yield  of
rubidium  isobars  is  four  orders  of  magnitude  higher.  A
target  unit  was  therefore  designed  to  purify  the  copper
signal  from  its  rubidium  isobars.  The  micro-gating
technique  around  the  typically  30  2s  laser  ionised  Cu
bunches  contributes  to  the  selectivity  by  a  factor  of  4.
Thanks  to  their  low  ionisation  potential,  rubidium
isotopes will be in a positive charge state already inside
the 
target  oven.  The  dc  heated  high-temperature
tantalum oven  generates  an  electric  field,  which  directs
rubidium  ions  opposite  to  the  RILIS  cavity  (while  the
neutral  copper  atoms  are  insensitive  to  this  electric
field).  At  this  point,  a  small  aperture  extraction  system
collects them. The selectivity gain measured on a Ta-foil
target is 5 for rubidium and caesium, and it rapidly drops
for elements  with  higher  ionisation  potentials.  The  last,
but not least, way to reduce the production of rubidium
is to generate the fission via fast neutrons produced in a
converter placed close to the target  oven.  The  expected
cross-section ratios contribute to the selectivity up to an
order  of  magnitude.  These  suppression  systems  are  in
addition  to  the  selectivity  provided  by  the  resolving
power of the mass separator.

3.7  Ion beam manipulation

The  characteristics  of  radioactive  ion  beams  such  as
emittance, energy spread or charge state sometimes have
to be matched to the physics set-up or to the acceptance
of the following beam optics element. For this purposes
an increasing number of facilities make use of ion traps
and gas cells. An ion trap acting as buncher and used to
improve  the  beam  emittance  is  installed  in  the  REX-
ISOLDE  LINAC  [34]  which  requires  a  q/m  larger  than
0.25. Its charge state breeding relies on the trapping and
bunching  of  the  ions  prior  to  the  injection  into  an
Electron Beam Ion Source (EBIS). In this trap, up to 107
ions are accumulated and bunched, and their emittance is
reduced  by  one  order  of  magnitude  to  match  the
acceptance and the time structure of the EBIS. At the Ion
Guide Isotope Separator Leuven (IGISOL) facility, laser
ionised refractory metal fragments are transported  via  a
noble  gas  flow.  The  skimmer  electrode  used  to  extract
the  singly  charged  fragments 
induces  an  energy
straggling  which  vanished  when  the  skimmer  was
replaced by a Sextupole Ion Guide (SPIG).

The Rare Isotope Separator (RIA) includes, beside the
standard ISOL and in-flight separation, a new production
scheme. In this variant, the fragments (possibly produced
on a liquid Li target) will be stopped in a noble gas cell
where,  after  thermalization,  the  singly  charged  ions  are
transported by weak electric fields towards the ion beam
transport  system.  Preliminary  tests  showed  that  the
release time from such a gas cell is well below 1 s [35]
depending  on  the  thickness  of  the  gas  cell  (in  this  case
length K pressure). This part of the RIA project aims at
combining the ion beam quality from an ISOL technique
and the short release delays of a fragment separator.

[7] R.  Kirchner,  K.  H.  Burkard,  W.  Hüller  and  O.
Klepper, Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. 186, 295 (1981).
[8] V.I.  Mishin  et  al.,  Nucl.  Instrum.  and  Meth.  B

73,550 (1993).

[9] A.  E.  Barzakh,  et  al.,  Nucl.  Instrum.  and  Meth.  B

126, 85 (1997).

[10] U. Koester et al., Proc. of the RNB–5 Conf. Divonne

2000, to be published in Nucl. Phys. A.

[11] J. Lettry et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum., 69, 761 (1997).
[12] Y. Kudriavtsev  et  al.,  Nucl.  Instrum.  and  Meth.  B

114, 350 (1996).

[13] B. Vosicki et al., Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. 186, 307

4  CONCLUSION

The  standard  complementary  methods  used  in  RIB
facilities  are  now  completed  with  an  intermediate  one,
namely  the  stopping  of  fragments  in  gas  cells  as  in  the
RIA  project.  The  increase  of  the  total  beam  power
available  at  TRIUMF,  or  expected  for  the  SIRIUS
project,  has  triggered  a  large  effort  in  the  development
of  high  power  targets  for  high-energy  proton  driver
schemes. The targets developed for moderate intensities
or dc. beams could be adapted for beam intensities up to
20 2A and for the today’s pulsed drivers. The limitation
on  the  maximum  power  which  can  be  deposited  in  a
small  target  volume,  can  be  overcome  partially  for  the
production  of  fission  products,  by  the  introduction  of  a
converter  producing  fast  neutrons.  However,  fission  in
reactor-based  facilities  like  MAFF  sets  a  challenging
goal of 1014 fissions/s.

A large R&D effort from the whole RIB community is
visible,  as  witnessed  by  the  RIA  project  and  by  the
creation  of  study  groups  on  targets,  traps  and  ion-
sources,  triggered  by  the  EURISOL  facility  project.
Obviously,  with  the  expected  intensities,  not  only  the
target  area,  but  in  a  less  critical  manner  the  beam
transport, traps and experimental set-ups will have to be
designed  with  regard  of  their  contamination  when
handling the very intense beams foreseeable in the near
future.

REFERENCES

(1981).

[14] R. Welton et al., Proc. of the RNB–5 Conf. Divonne

2000, to be published in Nucl. Phys. A.

[15] G.  Alton,  et  al.,  Nucl.  Instrum.  and  Meth.  B  142,

578 (1998).

[16] A. Villari et al., Proc. of the RNB–5 Conf. Divonne

2000, to be published in Nucl. Phys. A.

[17] J.R.R. Bennett, Proc. of the RNB–5  Conf.  Divonne

2000, to be published in Nucl. Phys. A.

[18] J. Lettry  et  al.,    Nucl.  Instrum.  and  Meth.  B  126

(1997) 130.

[19] Y.  Oganesian,  Proc.  of  the  RNB–5  Conf.  Divonne

2000, to be published in Nucl. Phys. A.

[20] PIAFE  project  report,  ed.  By  U.  Köster  and  J.-A.

Pinston, ISN Grenoble, 1998.

[21] D.  Habs  et  al.,  Nucl.  Phys.  A616 

(1997).

http://www.ha.physik.uni-muenchen.de/maff/
[22] U. Köster, AIP Conf. Proc. 475, 269, (1998).
[23] B. Allardyce and R. Billinge, CERN PS/DL 89-37.
[24] B. Allardyce et al., CERN PS/92-46 (PA).
[25] R. Laxdal et al., These proceedings.
[26] J. Lettry et al., Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. B 126 171,

(1997).

[27] J.Nolen  and  V.  Panteleev,  communication  to  the

TWIST workshop GANIL Caen 2000.

[28] S.  Kandri-Rody  et  al.,  Nucl.  Instrum.  and  Meth.

B160, 1, (2000).

[29] F.  Clapier  et.  al.,  Phys.  Rev.  Special 

topics,

Accelerators and Beams, 1, 013501 (1988).

[30] O. Bajeat, communication  to  the  TWIST  workshop

GANIL Caen 2000.

[1] H.  Grunder,  Proc.  of  the  RNB–5  Conf.  Divonne

[31] J.R.J.  Bennett  et  al.,  Proc.  of  the  RNB–5  Conf.

2000, to be published in Nucl. Phys. A.

Divonne 2000, to be published in Nucl. Phys. A.

[2] B. Jonson, Proc. of the RNB–5 Conf. Divonne 2000,

[32] J.R.J. Bennett, Nucl. Instrum. and Meth.  B 126, 105

to be published in Nucl. Phys. A.

(1997).

[3] I.  Tanihata,  ENAM  98  AIP  Conf.  Proc.  455,  943

[33] W.  Talbert  et  al.,  Proc.  of  the  RNB–5  Conf.

(1998).

[4] H.  Ravn,  Radioactive  ion-beam  projects  based  on
the  two  accelerator  or  ISOL  principle,  Phil.  Trans.
R. Soc. Lond. A 365, 1955 (1998).

[5] J.  Nolen,  RNB-3  Conf.  Proc.  D.  Morissey  Ed.,

Editions Frontières, Gif sur Yvette. 111, (1993).

[6] R. Kirchner  and  E.  Roeckl,  Nucl.  Instrum.  and

Meth. 133, 187 (1976).

Divonne 2000, to be published in Nucl. Phys. A.

[34] O. Kester et al., these proceedings.
[35] G.Savard et al., Proc. of the RNB–5 Conf. Divonne

2000, to be published in Nucl. Phys. A.

