DESIGN OF THE JLC/NLC RDDS STRUCTURE USING PARALLEL

EIGENSOLVER OMEGA3P *

Z. Li, N.T. Folwell, K. Ko, R.J. Loewen, E.W. Lundahl, B. McCandless, R.H. Miller, R.D. Ruth,

M.D. Starkey, Y. Sun, J.W. Wang, SLAC; T. Higo, KEK

Abstract

The  complexity  of 

through  computer  modeling 

the  Round  Damped  Detuned
Structue (RDDS) for the JLC/NLC main linac is driven by
the  considerations  of  rf  efficiency  and  dipole  wakefield
suppression.  As  a  time  and  cost  saving  measure  for  the
JLC/NLC, the dimensions of the 3D RDDS cell are being
determined 
to  within
fabrication  precision  so  that  no  tuning  may  be  needed
once  the  structures  are  assembled.  The  tolerances  on  the
frequency  errors  for  the  RDDS  structure  are  about  one
MHz  for  the  fundamental  mode  and  a  few  MHz  for  the
dipole modes. At the X-band frequency, these correspond
to errors of a micron level on the major cell dimensions.
Such  a  level  of  resolution  requires  highly  accurate  field
solvers and vast amount of computer resources. A parallel
finite-element  eigensolver  Omega3P  was  developed  at
SLAC that runs on massively parallel computers such as
the  Cray  T3E  at  NERSC.  The  code  was  applied  in  the
design of the RDDS cell  dimensions  that  are  accurate  to
within  fabrication  precision. 
the
numerical approach of using these codes to determine the
RDDS dimensions and compare the numerical predictions
with the cold test measurements on RDDS prototypes that
are diamond-turned using these dimensions.

  We  will  present 

1  INTRODUCTION

The  1  TeV  JLC/NLC[1,2]  collider  consists  of  ten
thousand X-band accelerator structures. Each structure is
made up of 206 cells with dimensions tailored from cell to
cell  to  detune  the  dipole  modes  frequencies  to  suppress
the  dipole  wakefields.  The  cells  are  optimized  to  have  a
round profile for higher rf efficiency. With the manifolds
and slots added to damp the wakefields, the structure cells
become  fully  3  dimensional  and  complex,  as  shown  in
Fig. 1. A time and cost saving approach for the structure
design is to determine the 3D RDDS dimensions through
computer  modeling  and  to  machine  the  cells  using  high
precision  diamond  turning  machines.  With  the  advanced
modeling  and  machining  tools,  the  structure  can  be
designed and manufactured  with  a  greater  accuracy  such
that  no  tuning  will  be  need  once  the  structure  is
assembled.  The  frequency  tolerance  on  the  fundamental
mode of the X-band structure is about 1~MHz in order to
maintain a better than 98% acceleration efficiency in the

                                                          
*Work supported by the DOE, contract DE-AC03-76SF00515.

structure. At the frequency of 11.424~GHz, this tolerance
corresponds to one micron in the major dimensions of the
cell.  To  model  the  RDDS  with  such  an  accuracy,  vast
computer  resources  and  accurate  field  solvers  are
required.  With 
the  newly  developed  finite-element
parallel  code  Omega3P  running  on  massive  parallel
supercomputers,  such  an  accuracy  is  readily  achievable.
In this paper, we will present the numerical design of the
RDDS  structure  using  the  Omega3P  code.  We  will
compare  the  numerical  results  with  the  rf  measurements
on the high precision machined cells.

2  RDDS STRUCTURE

The  round  damped-detuned  structure  (RDDS)[3]  was
designed  to  suppress  wakefields  in  the  JLC/NLC  linacs.
The  RDDS  consists  of  206  cells  connected  via  slot
openings to four pumping manifolds that run the length of
an  accelerator  section.  The  dimensions  of  the  cells  are
chosen  such  that  the  deflecting  modes  are  detuned  in  a
prescribed manner such that the wakefields are decohered
and reduced in magnitude. The coupling slots provide the
conduit by which the wakefields within the structure can
escape  out  to  the  manifold  to  be  absorbed  externally,
the  wakefields.  The
thereby 
fundamental  frequency  of 
to  be
determined within 1~part of 10,000, which corresponds to
an accuracy in the 3D cell dimensions of one micron. This
complex  shape  can  only  be  modeled  accurately  by
conformal meshes on unstructured grids.

further  decreasing 

the  RDDS  needs 

Figure 1. Round damped-detuned structure: cell profile
optimized  for  rf  efficiency,  dipole  modes  detuned  and
damped to suppress long-range wakefield.

 3  OMEGA3P

Omega3P[4,5],  a  thrust  effort  in  the  DOE  Grand
Challenge,  is  a  new  3D  eigensolver  designed  to  model

large,  complex  RF  cavities  with  unprecedented  accuracy
and speed by employing advanced eigensolver algorithms
on massively parallel supercomputing platforms. The code
uses  quadratic  finite  element  formulations  for  field
interpolation,  uses  unstructured  mesh  to  model  complex
geometries. The code takes advantage of existing parallel
libraries  such  as  ParMETIS[6]  for  mesh  partitioning  and
load balancing, and AZTEC[7] for scalable matrix-vector
operations.  The  unstructured  mesh  is  generated  using
existing packages such as SIMAIL[8] and CUBIT[9]. The
mesh  generator  can  take  geometry  inputs  from  solid
models  obtained  with  popular  CAD 
tools  such  as
SolidEdge  and  EMS.  Omega3P  is  written  in  C++
programming 
on
supercomputing  platforms  such  as  SGI  T3E,  IBM  SP2,
and Linux clusters. The code also runs on single processor
workstations.

currently 

language 

and 

runs 

With  the  parallel  code  Omega3P,  the  computational
domain  is  divided  into  smaller  subdomains  via  domain
decomposition with each subdomain fitted into one of the
processors  for  computation.  This  allows  to  model  large
complex  problems  with  much  higher  grid  resolutions
within reasonable run time, far beyond the computational
resource  that  can  be  provided  by  single  processor
workstations.  It  provides  a  tool  that  is  essential  for
modeling  complex  rf  components  such  as  the  RDDS
structure.

3.1 Omega3P convergence

The convergence of Omega3P on modeling the RDDS1
cell  is  as  shown  in  Fig.  2.  The  color-coded  mesh  shows
the  domain  decomposition  for  the  16-processor  parallel
computation. The mesh was generated using CUBIT. The
frequency converges as the fourth power of the mesh size.
To reach a better than 1 MHz accuracy for the RDDS cell,
the run time is less than 20 min on 16 processors.

0.38 M D.O.F.

11.4252

11.425

11.4248

11.4246

11.4244

)
z
H
G

(
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

1.8 M D.O.F.

11.4242

2.9 M D.O.F.

11.424

rough  machine  table.  These  cells  were  diamond  tuning
machined.  The  cell  profiles  were  measured  using  a  high
precision  mechanical  CMM  machine.  The  profile  error
and  skin  depth  effect  were  corrected  on  the  measured
frequencies  in  order  to  compare  with  the  numerical
results.

Table 1. Comparison of numerical result using Omega3P
and  the  cold  test  measurement  on  diamond  turning
machined cells.

 Cell
 001
 102
 203

 Numerical(MHz)

 Meas.(MHz)

 Diff.(MHz)

 11420.57
 11420.35
 11420.09

 11420.3
 11420.4
 11419.7

 0.27
 -0.05
 0.39

 
 Omega3P  results  agree  with  the  cold  test  measurement
within half a MHz. The dimensions determined by using
Omega3P  has  reached  an  accuracy  well  within  the
manufacturing tolerance. These benchmark results give us
the  confidence  of  determining  the  RDDS  dimensions
numerically  using  Omega3P.  As  a  result,  the  number  of
cold  test  cells  for  the  RDDS1  structure  was  reduced,
minimizing  the  cost  and  turn  around  time  of  structure
R&D.

4 DETERMINE RDDS1 STRUCTURE
MACHINE TABLE USING OMEGA3P

RESULTS

the  numerical  results  of 

The  RDDS1  structure  machine  table  was  generated
based  on 
the  Omega3P
calculation.  The  dimensions  of  seven  cells  along  the
structure  were  calculated  using  Omega3P,  running  on
NERSC SGI/CRAY T3E, with up to 3 million degrees of
freedom for the numerical model. The third-order Spline
function  interpolation  was  used  to  obtain  the  dimensions
of the rest of the cells. Since the code models only perfect
conducting materials, the skin depth effect of 0.7 MHz for
copper was corrected for the final machine table.

del_sf00
del_sf0pi
del_sf1pi
del_sf20

Single-disk RF-QC

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

dX^4

]
z
H
M

Figure 2. Paralell modeling of the RDDS1 cell. Left)
domain  decomposition,  each  color  assigned  to  one
processor; right) convergence of the  Omega3P  eigen
solver,  converges  as  the  fourth  power  of  the  mesh
size.

 
 
 

3.2 Comparison with cold test cells

i

[
 
n
o
i
t
a
v
e
D
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

 

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

-0.5

-1

-1.5

-2

0

50

100

Disk number

150

200

Three  test  cells  were  calculated  using  Omega3P  on
NERSC SGI/CRAY T3E with about 3 million degrees of
freedom.  The  dimensions  of  the  test  cells  were  from  the

Figure  3.  Single  cell  RF  QC  of  the  RDDS1  cells.
Shown are the deviations of the fundamental and dipole
modes at zero and PI phase advances.

modeling  complex  rf  components  with  unprecedented
accuracy and speed.

The  206  RDDS1  structure  were  diamond  tuning
machined[10].  The  frequency  of  zero  and  PI  phase
advance  of  the  fundamental  and  dipole  modes  were
measured for each disk. The deviations of the frequencies
from  a  smooth  curve  fitting  of  the  corresponding  mode
are as shown in Fig. 3. The rms values for all of the four
modes are better than 0.5 MHz. We are confident at this
point  that  both  the  numerical  predictions  and  high
precision  machining  of  the  3D  RDDS  cell  dimensions
have achieved an accuracy better than 10-4 in frequency or
1  micron  in  major  cell  dimensions,  which  is  well  within
the NLC design tolerance.

5 RF PULSE HEATING

Damping  slots  perturb  current  of  accelerating  mode,
which causes additional wall loss and reduces the Q of the
accelerating  mode.    This  wall  loss  is  concentrated  in  a
small region around the slot opening, as shown in Fig. 4.
The  power  density,  if  high,  can  cause  large  temperature
rise  during  the  rf  pulse.  It  is  shown  in  ref[11]  that  a
temperature rise of 1200C can result in structural damage
on  the  copper  surface.  It  is  important  to  evaluate  and
minimize, if necessary, this pulse heating. Since the high
power  is  distributed  within  a  thin  region,  a  good  mesh
resolution 
the  power  density
accurately,  to  which  Omega3P  is  an  ideal  tool.    The
temperature  rise  on  the  copper  surface  can  be  estimated
using the following formula[12]

to  calculate 

is  need 

∆ =
T R H

S

wall

2

pulse

t
ckπρ

where  Rs=1/σδ  is  the  surface  resistance,  Hwall  is  the
magnetic  field  on  the  wall  (proportional  to  the  wall
current),  Tpulse  is  the  rf  pulse  length,  ρ  is  the  density  of
copper,  c  is  the  specific  heat  of  copper,  and  k  is  the
thermal conductivity.

At  an  average  gradient  of  70  MV/m,  the  rf  pulse
heating  temperature  ris  for  the  RDDS1  structure  is  from
250C to 550C depending on the location along the structure
as shown in Fig. 4. As a comparison, the temperature rise
for the detuned RDS temperature is about 140C. The high
temperature rise at the end of the structure is due to dipole
detuning which may be reduced in the future design.

6 SUMMARY

The RDDS1 X-band structure is the first structure that
was optimized and designed using parallel finite element
code  Omega3P.  The  Omega3P  results  were  compared
with  cold  test  measurements.  The  accuracy  of  Omega3P
predictions  on  the  RDDS  cell  dimensions  is  better  than
10-4,  or  1  MHz  at  X-band  frequency.  The  final  machine
table of the RDDS1 structure was determined numerically
using  Omega3P.  This  approach  becomes  possible  only
with advanced field solver and supercomputing resources.
Omega3P is shown to be a powerful and essential tool for

Figure  4  Pulse  heating  of  the  RDDS1  structure.  Top)
wall loss power distribution, clear enhancement around
the  wide  slot;  bottom)  temperature  rise  along  the
structure.

REFERENCES

[1] JLC Design Study, KEK Report 97-001, 1997.
[2] Zeroth-order  design  report  for  the  Next  Linear
Collider,  LBNL-PUB-5424,  SLAC  Report  474,
UCRL-ID-124161, 1996.

[3]  J. Wang, et al, Design Fabrication and Measurement
of  the  First  Rounded  Damped  Detuned  Accelerator
Structure (RDDS1), this proceedings.

[4] K. Ko, High Performance Computing in Accelerator

Physics, this proccedings, WE201.

[5] N.T.  Folwell,  et  al,  SLAC  Parallel  Electromagnetic
Code Development & Applications, this proceedings,
THA17.

[6] George  Karypis,  et  al,  “ParMETIS:  Parallel  Graph
Partitioning  and  Sparse  Matrix  Ordering  Library:
Version  2.0,”  University  of  Minnesota,  September
24, 1998.

[7] Aztec User's Guide, SAND95-1559, 1995.
[8] SIMAIL user's manual, Simulog 1995.
[9] CUBIT 

user's  manual, 
http://endo.sandia.gov/cubit.

SAND94-1100, 

or

[10] T. Higo, et al, Meeting Tight Frequency Requirement
this

of  Rounded  Damped  Detuned  Structure, 
proceedings, THA02.

[11] D.P. Pritzkau, Possible High Power Limitations From

RF Pulse Heating, SLAC-PUB-8013.

[12] G.  Bowden,  RF  Surface  Heating  Stresses,  NLC  ME

Note, No. 8-96 Rev 0, August 23, 1996.

