Analysis of Causality Issue in Near-field Superluminally
Propagating Electromagnetic and Gravitational Fields

William D. Walker

Royal Institute of Technology, KTH-Visby

Department of Electrical Engineering

Cramérgatan 3, S-621 57 Visby, Sweden

bill@visby.kth.se

1 

Introduction
A  simple  relativistic  analysis  is  presented  which  shows  that  near-field
superluminal  longitudinal  electric  signals  generated  by  an  electric  dipole  cannot  be
used  to  violate  Einstein  causality  by  using  the  relativistic  “sync  shift”  effecta.  The
analysis  shows  that  because  a  signal  has  some  time  extent  (i.e.  after  a  signal  is
initiated  one  must  wait  at  least  one  period  for  the  frequency  and  amplitude
information  to  be  determined),  an  electric  dipole  can  be  used  to  transmit  a  signal
backward in time, but not before the same signal was initiated, thereby prohibiting a
user from changing the signal that was transmitted. Although the analysis is presented
specifically  for  superluminal  near-field  longitudinal  electric  fields,  the  result  would
also apply for any type of signal that is superluminal in a spatial region less than one
wavelength.  Therefore  the  superluminal  near-field  transverse  electric  and  magnetic
fields,  which  are  also  generated  by  an  electric  dipole,  cannot  be  used  to  violate
causality using the “sync shift” effect, since they are known to be superluminal in a
region less than one wavelength near the source.  In addition, the gravitational fields
generated by an oscillating mass, which are known to be superluminal in a region less
than  one  wavelength  near  the  source,  cannot  be  used  to  violate  causality  using  the
“sync shift” effect.

2  Theoretical analysis

The  following  relativistic  analysis  looks  at  the  consequences  of  transmitting  a
superluminal  near-field  longitudinal  electric  field  from  an  amplitude-modulated
electric dipole to a moving electron which then reflects the signal back to the source.
The result is analysed to see if it is possible to transmit a signal backward in time so
that the information can be used to change the same information that was transmitted,
thereby violating causality.

                                                
a Sync shift effect – Term used to refer to the relativistic effect that enables superluminal signals to be
transmitted  backward  in  time.  The  Lorentz  transformation  for  time  change:  t´=  [t - (v/c2)x],
where t = L/w and   x = L (transmission distance), can become negative when the signal velocity
(w) is much greater than the velocity (v) of a moving observer: w > (c2)/v [3].

1

A stationary electric dipole transmits a longitudinal electric field toward an electron
which moves away at constant velocity (v) (ref. Figure 1).

Stationary
electric dipole

A

Transmitted
longitudinal
signal
wt

B

Moving
electron

v

L1

Figure 1: Stationary electric dipole (A) transmitting
longitudinal signal to moving electron (B) at a distance (L1)
away from the stationary electric dipole.

The dipole and the moving electron are separated by distance (L1). From the analysis
presented in several papers by the author, the longitudinal electric field generated by
an  oscillating  electric  dipole 
to  propagate  (group  speed)  nearly
instantaneously  provided  the  propagation  distance  (L1)  is  much  less  than  one
wavelength  (~  (cid:1)T/10)  [1,  2,  3].  It  is  assumed  that  the  signal  to  be  transmitted  is  an
amplitude-modulated  signal  with  a  modulation  wavelength  ((cid:1)T)  (ref.  Figure  2).  The
beginning of the signal starts at time (BT) and the end of the signal ends at time (ET).

is  known 

(cid:1)T

Signal

BT

Time

ET

Figure 2: Diagram of an amplitude-modulated signal with modulation
wavelength ((cid:1)T). The modulated signal starts at time (BT) and ends at
time (ET).

This process can be represented  graphically using a  Minkowski  space-time  diagram
(ref. Figure 3).

2

T

R

ct

wt

wr

ET

ER

BT

BR

wt

wr





T/10

B

A

ct´

c

x´

x

Figure  3:  Space-time  diagram  of  an  instantaneous  signal  ((cid:1)T)
propagating from stationary point (A) to moving point (B),  and  then
instantaneously reflecting back to point (A), resulting in signal ((cid:1)R).

The diagram shows the space-time co-ordinates (x, ct) of the stationary electric dipole
(A) superimposed with the moving electron (B) space-time co-ordinates (x´, ct´) [4].
The stationary electric dipole is timelike and is represented by the (ct) axis, and the
moving electron (travelling with velocity v) is represented by the (ct´) axis. The signal
(wavelength  =  (cid:1)T)  is  transmitted  nearly  instantaneously  (wt)  to  the  moving  electron
and is seen as a horizontal line intersecting the (ct) and (ct´) axes. Since the signal has
some time extent (i.e. the signal has a period cT = c/f  = (cid:1)T), the end of the signal (ET)
will be transmitted some time ((cid:1)T) after the beginning of the signal  (BT). The angle
((cid:2)) between the space-time co-ordinates is known to have the following relationship
[Tan((cid:2))  =  v/c].  This  follows  from  the  fact  that  the  moving  electron  (ct´  axis)
travelling  with  velocity  (v)  is  related  to  the  graph  co-ordinates:  v  =  x/t,  therefore
v/c = x/(ct) = Tan((cid:2)). If the longitudinal signal were then reflected (wr) by the moving
electron  (B) toward  the  stationary  electric  dipole  (A)  (ref.  Figure  4),  it  would
propagate nearly instantaneously  according to its co-ordinate system (i.e.  parallel  to
the x´ axis).

Stationary
electric dipole
A

Reflected
longitudinal
signal
wr

B

Moving
electron

v

L2

Figure 4: Moving  electron  (B)  reflecting  longitudinal  signal  back  to
stationary electric dipole (A) located a distance (L2) away.

3

The beginning of the signal arrives at the electric dipole (A) at time (BR) and the end
of  the  signal  arrives  at  the  electric  dipole  (A)  at  time  (ER).  Note  that  the  largest
separation  distance  between  the  dipole  and  the  moving  electron  is  ((cid:1)T/10),  thereby
enabling  the  longitudinal  signals  to  propagate  nearly  instantaneously.  The  time
difference (c(cid:3)t) between the transmission of the end of the signal (ET) and the return
of  the  end  of  the  signal  (ER)  can  then  be  calculated  using  simple  trigonometric
relationships (ref. Figure 5).

(cid:1)T/10

(cid:2)

ET

c(cid:3)t

ER

Figure  5:  Trigonometric  diagram  relating  the  time  difference  (c(cid:3)t)
between the transmission of the end of the signal (ET) and the return
of the end of the signal (ER) to parameters ((cid:1)T, (cid:2)).

these 

two 

relations  and  solving 

time:  (cid:3)t´= (cid:4) [(cid:3)t - (v/c2)(cid:3)x],  where  (cid:3)t = 0,  (cid:3)x = L1, 

From  Figure  5  it  can  be  seen  that  Tan((cid:2))  =  (c(cid:3)t)/((cid:1)T/10)  and  it  is  known  that
Tan((cid:2)) = v/c.  Equating 
for  c(cid:3)t  yields:
c(cid:3)t = (v (cid:1)T)/(10 c). This result can also be obtained by using Lorentz transformations.
From  the  moving  electron’s  perspective,  the  end  of  the  signal  (ET)  propagates
and
backward 
(cid:4) = 1/Sqrt[1-(v/c)2].  When  the  moving  electron  reflects  the  signal,  from  its
perspective, the electric dipole moves with velocity (v) and sees a contracted distance
(cid:3)x = L2 = L1/(cid:4). The end of the signal (ER) therefore arrives at the electric dipole (A)
at  time:    (cid:3)t  =  (cid:4)  [0 - (v/c2)L1/(cid:4)],  where  L1  =  (cid:1)T/10.  Therefore  one  obtains  the  same
solution 
diagram:
c(cid:3)t = -(v (cid:1)T)/(10 c). Since the velocity of the moving electron (v) can be at most (c),
then:    c(cid:3)t  <  (cid:1)T/10  <  (cid:1)T.  This  result  indicates  that  although  the  signal  can  be
transported backward in time ((cid:1)R arrives before (cid:1)T), it cannot be transported before the
same signal was initiated (ER > BT), thus preserving causality. The signal transmitted
backward in time cannot be used to change the same signal that was sent.

as  was  obtained 

in 

from 

the  Minkowski 

space-time 

3  Conclusion

A  simple  relativistic  analysis  has  been  presented  which  shows  that  near-field
superluminal  longitudinal  electric  signals  generated  by  an  electric  dipole  cannot  be
used to violate Einstein causality with the relativistic “sync shift” effect. The analysis
has shown that because a signal has some time extent (i.e. after  a signal is initiated
one must wait at least one period for the frequency and amplitude information to be
determined), an electric dipole can be used to transmit a signal backward in time, but
not before the same signal was initiated, thereby prohibiting a user from changing the
signal that was transmitted.

It  should  be  noted  that  in  the  model  presented  it  was  assumed  that  the  signal
information was contained in one period ((cid:1)T) of an amplitude-modulated signal. In a

4

real physical system several wavelengths may be required to encode and decode the
information. One consequence of this is that it would reduce the spatial region over
which the information travels superluminally [3]. In addition, it would also increase
the  effective  signal  wavelength  ((cid:1)T)  used  in  the  modelling  of  the  problem,  thus
making it even more difficult for the signal to be transported before the same signal
was initiated (ER >>BT), and thus making it more difficult to violate causality.

the  analysis 

is  presented  specifically  for  superluminal  near-field
Although 
longitudinal electric fields, the result would also apply for any type of signal that is
superluminal  in  a  region  less  than  one  wavelength.  In  order  to  violate  causality  a
signal must be superluminal in a spatial region greater than at least one wavelength.
Therefore,  the  superluminal  near-field  transverse  electric  and  magnetic  fields
generated  by  an  electric  dipole  cannot  be  used  to  violate  causality  using  the  “sync
shift” effect, since these fields are also known to be superluminal in a region less than
one wavelength near the source.

In addition, in reference [1] the gravitational fields generated by an oscillating mass
are  also  found  to  be  superluminal  in  a  region  less  than  one  wavelength  near  the
source.  Analogous  to  the  electric  dipole  and  moving  electron  system,  if  a  moving
mass were to reflect the superluminal near-field gravitational fields  generated by an
amplitude-modulated  mass,  then  the  signal  would  arrive  back  in  time  at  the
transmitter  mass,  but  not  before  the  signal  was  initiated,  thereby  prohibiting  a  user
from  changing  the  same  signal  that  was  transmitted.  It  is  therefore  concluded  that
superluminal near-field gravitational fields cannot be used to violate causality  using
the “sync shift” effect.

In  conclusion,  contrary  to  Einstein’s  hypothesis  that  superluminal  signals  are
incompatible  with  relativity  theory  [5],  this  paper  has  shown  that  superluminal
signals,  such  as  the  superluminal  near-field  electromagnetic  fields  generated  by  an
electric  dipole  or  the  superluminal  near-field  gravitational  fields  generated  by  a
vibrating mass, are compatible with relativity because the spatial region in which they
are superluminal is less that one wavelength. Although these superluminal fields can
be used to transmit signals backward in time using the “sync shift” effect, the signals
cannot  be  decoded  before  the  same  signals  were  initiated,  thereby  preserving
causality.

References
                                                
1   W. D. Walker, (1998) Superluminal propagation speed of longitudinally oscillating electrical fields,

Conference  on  causality  and  locality  in  modern  physics,  Kluwer  Acad.  Expanded  paper  found  at  electronic  archive:
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/gr-qc/9706082

2   W. D. Walker, (1999) Superluminal near-field dipole electromagnetic fields, International Workshop “Lorentz Group, CPT

and Neutrinos”, Zacatecas, Mexico, 23-26 June 1999, to be published in conference proceedings, World Scientific.
Expanded paper found at electronic archive:   http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0001063

3  W. D. Walker, (2000) Experimental evidence of near-field superluminally propagating electromagnetic fields, Vigier III

Symposium “Gravitation and Cosmology”, Berkeley, California, USA, 21-25 August 2000, to be published in conference
proceedings, Kluwer Acad. Expanded paper found at electronic archive:   http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0009023

4  R. Resnick, (1968) Introduction to special relativity, John Wiley pub., Appendix A,

Also reference  J. W. Hinson, relativity website:    http://www.physics.purdue.edu/~hinson/ftl/index.html

5 A. Einstein, (1907) Die vom relativitätsprinzipgeforderte trägheit der energie, Ann. Phys., 23, 371-384, English  translation in

A. Miller, (1998) Albert Einstein’s special theory of relativity, Springer-Verlag New York, 223-225

5

