SLC Final Performance and Lessons* 

Nan Phinney# 

SLAC, P.O. Box 4349, Stanford CA 94309  (USA)  

Abstract 

0
0
0
2

 
t
c
O
3

 

 
 
 

8
0
0
0
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

the 

techniques 

control. 

Precision, 

to  develop 

The  Stanford  Linear  Collider  (SLC)  was  the  first 
prototype  of  a  new  type  of  accelerator,  the  electron-
positron linear collider. Many years of dedicated effort 
were  required  to  understand  the  physics  of  this  new 
technology  and 
for 
maximizing  performance.  Key  issues  were  emittance 
final  beam  optimization  and 
dilution,  stability, 
background 
non-invasive 
diagnostics  were  required  to  measure  and  monitor  the 
beams  throughout  the  machine.  Beam-based  feedback 
systems  were  needed  to  stabilize  energy,  trajectory, 
intensity  and  the  final  beam  size  at  the  interaction 
point.  A  variety  of  new  tuning  techniques  were 
developed  to  correct  for  residual  optical  or  alignment 
errors.  The  final  focus  system  underwent  a  series  of 
refinements in order to deliver sub-micron size beams. 
It  also  took  many  iterations  to  understand  the  sources 
of  backgrounds  and  develop  the  methods  to  control 
them.  The  benefit  from  this  accumulated  experience 
was seen in the performance of the SLC during its final 
run in 1997-98. The luminosity increased by a factor of 
three  to  3*1030  and  the  350,000  Z  data  sample 
delivered was nearly double that from all previous runs 
combined. 

1  INTRODUCTION  

The concept of an electron-positron linear collider was 
proposed as a way of reaching higher energy than was 
feasible with conventional storage ring technology. The 
SLC, built upon the existing SLAC linac, was intended 
as an inexpensive way to explore the physics of the Z0 
boson  while  demonstrating  this  new  technology  [1]. 
Both  goals  were  much  more  difficult  to  achieve  than 
anticipated,  with  the  SLC  only  approaching  design 
luminosity  after  ten  years  of  operation.  As  the  first  of 
an entirely new type of accelerator, the SLC required a 
long and continuing effort to develop the understanding 
and  techniques  required  to  produce  a  working  linear 
collider.  Precision  diagnostics,  feedback,  automated 
control  and  improved  tuning  algorithms  were  key 
elements  in  this  progress.  In  parallel,  there  was  an 
international  collaborative  effort  to  design  an  e+e- 
collider to reach an energy of 1 Tev or higher [2]. Both 
projects  benefited  from  a  close  interaction.  The  SLC 
drew on the ideas and techniques developed for a future 
machine  while  the  collider  design  has  been  heavily 
influenced by the experience gained with the SLC. 
_______________________ 
*Work supported by the U.S. Dept. of Energy under contract 
DE-AC03-76SF00515 
# Email: nan@slac.stanford.edu 

from  1992-1998.  The  bars 

Figure  1:    SLD  luminosity  showing  the  performance 
improvement 
show 
luminosity  delivered  per  week  and  the  lines  show 
integrated  luminosity  for  each  run.  The  numbers  give 
average polarization.  

 

2  SLC HISTORY 

in  mid-1987,  with  many  upgrades 

The  SLC  was  first  proposed  in  the  late  1970s,  with 
design  studies  and  test  projects  starting  soon  after. 
in  October,  1983  and  was 
Construction  began 
completed 
in 
succeeding  years.  After 
two  difficult  years  of 
commissioning,  the  first  Z0  event  was  seen  by  the 
MARK  II  detector  in  April  1989.  The  MARK  II 
continued to take data through 1990. In 1991 the SLD 
experiment  was  brought  on 
line  with  a  brief 
engineering  run.  SLD  physics  data  taking  began  the 
next  year  with  a  polarized  electron  beam.  More  than 
10,000 Z0s were recorded with an average polarization 
of 22%. In 1993, the SLC began to run with ‘flat beam’ 
optics  with  the  vertical  beam  size  much  smaller  than 
the  horizontal,  unlike  the  original  design  where  the 
beam  sizes  were  nearly  equal  [3].  This  provided  a 
significant increase in luminosity and SLD logged over 
50,000  Z0s.  The  polarized  source  had  also  been 
upgraded  to  use  a  ‘strained  lattice’  cathode  which 
provided polarization of about 62% [4].  

thinner  strained 

For  the  1994-95  run,  a  new  vacuum  chamber  was 
built  for  the  damping  rings  to  support  higher  beam 
intensity [5] and the final focus optics was modified to 
produce smaller beams at the Interaction Point (IP) [6]. 
A 
the 
polarization up to nearly 80%. Over 100,000 Z0s were 
delivered  in  this  long  run.  For  the  next  runs,  the  SLD 
experiment  was  upgraded  with  an  improved  vertex 
detector with better resolution and larger acceptance. In 
1996,  operations  were  limited  by  scheduling  constants 
and  50,000  Z0s  were  delivered.  The  final  run  of  the 

lattice  cathode  brought 

SLC  began  in  1997  and  continued  through  mid-1998. 
The luminosity increased by more than a factor of three 
and a total of 350,000 Z0s were recorded, nearly double 
the  total  sample  of  events  from  all  previous  SLD  runs 
[7]. Because of the high electron beam polarization, the 
small and stable beam size at the interaction point, and 
a  high-precision  vertex  detector,  the  SLD  was  able  to 
make  the  world's  most  precise  measurements  of  many 
key  electroweak  parameters  with  this  data  sample. 
Figure 1 shows the SLC luminosity history. 

3  1997-98 PERFORMANCE 

30

in 

to 

2
  /cm

to  changes 

During  the  1997-98  run,  the  SLC  reached  a  peak 
luminosity  of  300  Z0s    per  hour  or  3*10
/sec. 
The  luminosity  steadily  increased  throughout  the  run, 
demonstrating  that  the  SLC  remained  on  a  steep 
learning  curve.  A  major  contribution 
this 
performance  came 
from  a  significant  disruption 
enhancement,  typically  50-100%.  The  improvement 
was  due 
tuning  procedures  and 
reconfiguration  of  existing  hardware  with  no  major 
upgrade  projects.  Improved  alignment  and  emittance 
tuning  procedures  throughout  the  accelerator  resulted 
in minimal emittance growth from the damping rings to 
the  final  focus.  In  particular,  a  revised  strategy  for 
wakefield  cancellation  using  precision  beam  size 
measurements at the entrance to the final focus proved 
effective  for  optimizing  emittance.  The  final  focus 
lattice  was  modified 
stronger 
demagnification  near  the  interaction  point  and  to 
remove residual higher-order aberrations.  

provide 

to 

The  luminosity  of  a  linear  collider  L  is  given  by 

=

L

+

fNN
4

x

y

 

H

d

(1) 

10

where N± are the number of electrons and positrons at 
the  interaction  point  (IP),  f  is the repetition frequency, 
x,y are the average horizontal (x) and vertical (y) beam 
sizes, and Hd is a disruption enhancement factor which 
depends on the beam intensities and  the transverse and 
longitudinal  beam  sizes.  At  the  SLC,  the  repetition 
frequency  was  120  Hz  and  the  beam  intensity  was 
limited  by  wakefield  effects  and  instabilities  to  about 
4*10
  particles  per  bunch.  The  only  route  to  higher 
luminosity  was  by  reducing  the  effective  beam  size. 
Taking  emittance  as  the  product  of  the  beam  size  and 
angular  divergence  (q
x,y,    the  basic 
strategy was to decrease the emittance and increase the 
angular  divergence.  A  key  breakthrough  was  the 
understanding  that  the  effective  beam  size, s
x,y  ,  must 
be  evaluated  from  the  integral  over  the  beam  overlap 
distribution and not the RMS. Properly calculated, s
x,y  
decreases with larger q
x,y as shown in Figure 2. Further 
reduction  of  the  vertical  size  was  possible  by  the 
addition  of  a  permanent  magnet  octupole  on  each side 
of the final focus as shown in Figure 3. 

x,y  =  s

x,y),  e

x,y

q

 
Figure  2:    Horizontal beam size vs angular divergence 
at  the  SLC  IP  showing  the  reduction  in  beam  size  for 
larger  q *.  The  upper  curves  are  for  the  1996  optics, 
calculated using the RMS beam size (solid) and correct 
luminosity-weighted  effective  beam size (dashed). The 
lower curve (dot-dashed) is for the 1998 optics.  

Figure  3:    Vertical beam size vs angular divergence at 
the SLC IP showing the dependence of beam size s
y on 
divergence  q
y,  without  (upper)  and  with  octupoles 
(lower) to cancel higher order aberrations. Both curves 
are the luminosity-weighted effective beam size.  

 

10

Beam  sizes  as  small  as  1.5  by  0.65  microns  were 
achieved  at  full  beam  intensity  of  4*10
  particles  per 
pulse.  With  these  parameters,  the  mutual  focussing  of 
the beams in collision becomes significant, resulting in 
a  further  increase  in  luminosity.  The  strength  of  the 
effect  is  characterized  by  the  disruption  parameter, 
Dx,y, for each plane which is the inverse focal length in 
units of the bunch length, s z. 
2

(2) 

=

D

,
yx

zeNr
s+
(

x

,
yx

 

)

y

Recorded  SLD  event  rates  confirmed  the  theoretical 
calculations  of  the  disruption  enhancement  which  was 
typically  50-100%  [8].  Figure  4  shows  the  measured 
disruption enhancement. The enhancement is calculated 
as  the  ratio  of  the  measured  SLD  event  rate  to  that 
predicted for rigid beams without disruption.  

s
p
s
-
s
s
g
s
s
interrupt 

betatron  phase  provide  a  measurement  of  the  beam 
emittance  in  a  few  seconds.  The  wires  scan  across  the 
beam  during  a  sequence  of  pulses  scattering  a  small 
fraction  of  the  particles  on  each  pulse.  Downstream 
detectors  measure  the  number  of  scattered  particles  at 
each  step  to  map  out  the  beam  profile.  Wire  scanners 
were  absolutely  essential  for  matching  the  positron 
beam  into  the  SLC  linac  since  invasive  monitors  like 
fluorescent  screens  would 
the  electrons 
needed to produce more positrons. Over several years, 
more  than  60  wire  scanners  were  installed  throughout 
the  SLC  from  the  injector  to  the  final  focus  to 
characterize  the  beam  transverse  size  and  energy 
distribution.  Many  of  these  were  scanned  routinely  by 
completely  automated  procedures  to  provide  real-time 
monitoring  and  long  term  histories  of  the  beam 
properties.  In  1996,  a  novel  ‘laser  wire’  beam  size 
monitor  was  developed  and  installed  near  the  SLC  IP 
[10]  to  measure  the  individual  micron-scale  beams 
which  would  destroy  any  conventional  wire.  This 
device  placed  an  optical  scattering  center  inside  the 
beam  pipe  with  light  from  a  high  power  pulsed  laser 
brought  to  a  focus  of  400-500  nm.  The  e+  or  e-  beam 
was  scanned  across  the  laser  spot  and  its  shape 
reconstructed from the number of scattered particles at 
each  step.  This  device  was  a  prototype  for  the  beam 
size monitors which will be needed for the micron-size 
beams of a future linear collider.  

To  maintain  the  optical  matching  to  high  precision 
required not only the development of the measurement 
devices  themselves  but  many  iterations  of  refinements 
in the data processing algorithms. Typically four wires 
were  used  to  provide  a  redundant  measurement  of  the 
phase  space.  Non-gaussian  distributions 
required 
different  fitting  algorithms  to  parameterize  the  beam 
shape. Since a single measurement required many beam 
pulses,  it  was  essential  to  filter  out  errant  data.  Beam 
position monitors near the scanners were used to fit the 
trajectory  on  each  pulse  and  correct  the  expected 
position  of  the  beam  with  respect  to  the  wire. 
Automated procedures require robust fitting algorithms 
with  careful  error  analysis.  The  accumulated  SLC 
experience  underscores  several  essential  requirements 
for linear collider diagnostics. In addition to providing 
sufficient  precision,  the  scans  must  be  non-invasive  to 
allow  frequent measurements during normal operation. 
Automated  procedures  are  needed  so  the  scans  can  be 
regularly  scheduled  to  provide  long  term  history  and 
allow  correlation  with  other  events.  Future  collider 
designs  have  incorporated  these  lessons  and  included 
precision diagnostics and correction elements.  

5  FEEDBACK 

Another  lesson from the SLC experience is the crucial 
importance  of  feedback 
inherent 
instabilities  of  a  linear  collider.  Feedback  controlled 

to  combat 

the 

Figure 4:  Measured disruption enhancement factor as a 
function  of  luminosity.  At  the  highest  luminosity,  the 
enhancement exceeded 100%. 

 

4  DIAGNOSTICS 

in  understanding  often 

A  key  element  in  improving  the  performance  of  the 
SLC  was  the  development  of  precision,  non-invasive 
diagnostics  to  characterize  and  monitor  the  beams. 
Breakthroughs 
followed  
quickly  on  the  heels  of  a  new  diagnostic  tool  which 
allowed  insight  into  the beam quality and correlations. 
One  example  was  the  characterization  of  a  microwave 
instability in the damping rings. Beginning in 1990, the 
maximum  beam  intensity  was  limited  by  errant  pulses 
which  created  high  backgrounds  in  the  detector.  By 
correlating  the  energy  and  trajectory  on  a  pulse-to-
pulse  basis,  the  problem  was  traced  to  the  damping 
rings.  Only  when  a  diagnostic  was  developed  to 
monitor  the  bunch length continuously while the beam 
was in the rings was it possible to identify the cause, a 
longitudinal  instability  due  to  the  interaction  of  the 
intense  bunches  with  the  impedance  of  the  vacuum 
chambers.  The  beam  intensity  could  be  increased  only 
after these chambers were rebuilt in 1994.  

Emittance  preservation  in  a  linear  collider  requires 
tight control of the trajectories and optical matching in 
the  linacs  and  transport  lines.  If  the  beam  is  not 
matched  to  the  lattice  at  the  entrance  of  the  linac,  the 
inherent energy spread of the beam will cause slices of 
different energy to filament. Dispersion from the beam 
passing off-axis through the quadrupoles interacts with 
the  correlated  energy  spread  along  the  beam  to  create 
an  x–z  (or  y–z)  correlation  or  tilt.  If  the  beam  passes 
off-axis  through  the  structures,  wakefields  from  the 
head  of  the  bunch  act  on  the  tail  to  cause  another  x–z 
correlation. To avoid these effects, one must be able to 
accurately characterize the beam profile and optimize it 
as a function of lattice and trajectory changes. 

 The  key  to  emittance  control  at  the  SLC  was  the 
development of wire scanners which allowed a precise, 
rapid,  non-invasive  measurement  of  the  beam  profile. 
The  first  scanners  were  installed  at  the  beginning  and 
end of the linac in 1990 [9]. Four scanners separated in 

the beam energy and trajectory, stabilized the polarized 
source,  and  maintained  and  optimized  collisions. 
Several  generations  of  development  were  required  to 
produce the flexible feedback systems used throughout 
the  SLC.  The  first  ‘slow’  SLC  energy  and  trajectory 
feedback was implemented in 1985. This was followed 
by  prototype  pulse-to-pulse  feedback  using  dedicated 
hardware. Energy and trajectory feedback at the end of 
the linac was developed in 1987 and collision feedback 
in  1989.  A  generalized  database-driven  system  [11] 
was  implemented  starting in 1991. This feedback used 
existing  hardware,  making  it  relatively  easy  to  add  a 
new  system  anywhere  needed.  In  order  to  avoid 
overcorrection,  the  sequence  of  trajectory  feedbacks 
along  the  main  linac  were  connected  by  a  ‘cascade’ 
system  which  allowed  each  feedback  to  communicate 
with  its  next  downstream  neighbor.  Transfer  matrices 
between  the  feedbacks  were  adaptively  calculated. 
Online  diagnostics  of  the  feedback  performance  were 
expanded  over  several  years 
to  provide  better 
monitoring  and  histories.  A  luminosity  optimization 
feedback  was  developed  in  1997  to  improve  the 
resolution of the final optical tuning at the IP. By 1998, 
the  SLC  had  more 
than  50  feedback  systems 
controlling over 250 beam parameters. 

The optimization feedback is an interesting example 
of  a  system  which  may  have  wide  applicability  for 
future machines. To achieve and maintain the minimum 
beam  size  at  the  SLC  IP,  five  final  corrections  were 
routinely  optimized  for  each  beam.  These  included 
centering  of  the  x  and  y  beam  waist  positions,  zeroing 
of the dispersion h x and h y, and minimization of an x–y 
coupling  term.  Since  the  first  SLC  collisions,  an 
automated procedure was used to scan the beam size as 
a  function  of  each  parameter  and  set  the  optimum 
value. The beam size was measured with a beam-beam 
deflection scan but this technique lacked the resolution 
required  to  accurately  measure  micron-size,  disrupted 
beams. It was estimated that poor optimization caused a 
20-30%  reduction  in  luminosity  during  the  1996  run 
[12].  For  1997,  a  novel  ‘dithering’  feedback  was 
implemented  which  optimized  a  direct  measure  of  the 
luminosity (i.e. the beamstrahlung signal) as a function 
of small changes in each parameter [13]. By averaging 
over 1000s of beam pulses, it was possible to improve 
the  resolution  by  a  factor  of  10.  A  similar  ‘dithering’ 
feedback  was  developed  to  minimize  emittance  at  the 
end  of 
the  linac  but  never  fully  commissioned. 
Optimization  feedback  modeled  on  this  system  has 
been incorporated in the designs of future colliders. 

The SLC feedback systems were essential for reliable 
operation  of  the  accelerator  and  provided  several  less 
obvious  benefits.  Feedback  compensated  for  slow 
environmental  changes  such  as  diurnal  temperature 
drifts  or  decreasing  laser  intensity  and  provided  a  fast 
response  to  changes  such  as  klystrons  cycling.  It 
facilitated  a  smooth  recovery  from  any  interruption  to 

operation.  Feedback  improved  operating  efficiency  by 
providing  uniform  performance  independent  of  the 
attention or proficiency of a particular operations crew. 
An  important  benefit  was  that  the  feedback  decoupled 
different  systems  so  that  tuning  could  proceed  non-
invasively  in  different  parts  of  the  machine  while 
delivering  luminosity.  Feedback  also  provided  a  very 
powerful  monitor  of  many  aspects  of  the  machine 
performance.  Much  of  the  SLC  progress  came  from 
using  feedback  to  automate  as  many  routine  tuning 
operations as possible. 

In  spite  of  the  critical  importance  of  feedback  for 
SLC  operation,  there  were  several  areas  in  which  the 
feedback  performance  was  less  than  optimal.  Many  of 
the  problems  occurred  in  the  sequence  of  trajectory 
feedbacks  along  the  main  linac.  To  avoid  having 
multiple feedbacks respond to an incoming disturbance, 
a  simple  one-to-one  system  was  used  where  each  loop 
communicated with the next downstream feedback. The 
topology  of  this  ‘cascade’  system  was  limited  by 
bandwidth  and  connectivity  constraints.  However,  in 
the  presence  of  strong  wakefields,  the  beam  transport 
depends  on  the  origin  of  the  perturbation  and  a  more 
complex  interconnection  is  required.  Each  feedback 
must  have  information  from  all  upstream  systems  to 
determine 
ideal  orbit  correction.  Simulations 
indicate  that  a  feedback  system  with  a  many-to-one 
cascade  can  avoid  overcorrection  problems  [14]. 
Another  problem  which  has  been  studied  and 
understood concerns the configuration of monitors and 
correctors  in  each  system.  Traditional  SLC  feedbacks 
were  distributed  over  at  most  two  sectors  (200  m), 
constraining  the  orbit  locally  but  allowing  oscillations 
to  grow  elsewhere.  Simulations  have  shown  that  a 
better  trajectory  can  be  achieved  if  the  devices  are 
distributed  over  a  longer  region.  The  success  of  the 
SLC feedback systems coupled with new understanding 
of their limitations has produced a robust design for the 
feedback required for the NLC. 

the 

6  TUNING ALGORITHMS 

feedback  provided 

A  variety  of  innovative  optical tuning techniques were 
developed for the SLC. These included precision beam-
based alignment using ballistic data and other methods, 
as  well  as  betatron  and  dispersion  matching.  The 
luminosity  optimization 
the 
resolution  required  to  align  the  final  focus  sextupoles 
and  octupoles.  In  the  non-planar  SLC  arcs,  a  4-D 
transfer  matrix  reconstruction  technique  with  careful 
error  analysis  allowed  minimization  of  coupling  terms 
and  synchrotron  radiation  emittance  growth.  An 
extension  of  this  method  allowed  an  adjustment  of the 
effective  spin  tune  of  the  arc  to  preserve  maximum 
polarization.  A  two-beam  dispersion  free  steering 
algorithm  developed  for  the  SLC  linac  was  later 
applied successfully at LEP.   

to  generate  wakefield 

An important technique used for emittance control in 
the  SLC  linac  was  to  introduce  a  deliberate  betatron 
oscillation 
tails  which 
compensated  for  those  due  to  alignment  errors  [15]. 
Wire  scanner  measurements  of  the  beam  profile  were 
used  to  characterize  the  wakefield  tails,  and  then  an 
oscillation  was  created  by  one  of  the  linac  trajectory 
feedbacks  which  was  closed  by  the  next  feedback. 
Since  1991,  this  method  was  applied  with  reasonable 
success  using  wires  in  the  middle  and  near  the  end  of 
the  linac.  One  problem  was  that  careful  tuning  was 
required to find the optimal phase and amplitude for the 
oscillation. The cancellation is also very sensitive to the 
phase advance between the source of the wakefield and 
the  compensating  oscillation  so  any  change  in  the 
optics  required  retuning.  Simulations  also  showed  that 
significant  emittance  growth  could  occur  in  the  200 m 
of linac downstream of the last wires [16]. For the 1997 
run, a different strategy was adopted. Wire scanners at 
the entrance to the final focus were used for tuning out 
wakefield  tails  to  ensure  that  the  entire  linac  was 
compensated. In addition, the induced oscillations were 
made  nearer  the  end  of  the  linac  where  the  higher 
energy  beam  was  less  sensitive  to  optics  changes, 
making  the  tuning  more  stable.  This  technique  was 
successful in reducing the emittance growth in the SLC 
linac  by  more  than  an  order  of  magnitude.  Figure  6 
shows the evolution of beam size over time. 

)
s
n
o
r
c
i
m

(
 
e
z
i

 

S
m
a
e
B

1 0

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

XXXX     *

*     s

yyyy

S L C   D e s i g n

X

Y

)

2

s
n
o
r
c
i
m

(

 
y

x

1 0

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

1 9 8 5

1 9 9 0 1 9 9 1 1 9 9 2 1 9 9 3 1 9 9 4 1 9 9 6 1 9 9 8

Y e a r
Y e a r
Y e a r
Y e a r

 

Figure  5:    Evolution  of  beam  size  at  the  SLC  IP  over 
time  from  1991  to  1998  showing s
x  (blue-middle), s
y 
(green-lower)  and  the  product  s
y  (red-upper).  The 
final beam area was 1/3 of the original design value.  

x

7  CONCLUSIONS 

More  than  ten  years  of  SLC  operation  has  produced 
much  valuable  experience  for  future  linear  colliders. 
Because a linear collider lacks the inherent stability of 
a  storage  ring,  it  is  a  much  more  difficult  machine. 
Significant progress was made on precision diagnostics 
for  beam  characterization  and  on  flexible,  intelligent 
feedback 
for  optical 
matching,  beam-based  alignment,  and  wakefield 
control  were  developed  and  refined.  The  beam-beam 
deflection  was  shown  to  be  a  powerful  tool  for 

systems.  New 

techniques 

lesson  from 

The  most  enduring 

stabilizing and optimizing collisions. Important lessons 
were  also  learned  on  collimation  and  background 
control  and  on  many  other  issues  not  discussed  here. 
Both  the  SLC  and  future  colliders  benefited  from  an 
intense  exchange  of  ideas  and  experiments.  It  is  the 
experience  and  knowledge  gained  with  the  SLC  that 
gives confidence that the NLC design contains the tools 
required to commission and operate a linear collider. 
the  SLC 

is 
undoubtedly  that  any  new  accelerator  technology  will 
present  unanticipated  challenges  and  require  consider-
able  hard  work to master. Once a technology becomes 
routine,  it  is  easy  to  forget  the  initial  effort  that  was 
needed.  At  the  SLC  as  elsewhere,  the  most  difficult 
problems  were  almost  always  those  which  were  not 
expected. It is also clear that the experience gained on 
an operating accelerator is complementary to that from 
demonstration  projects.  The  discipline  of  trying  to 
produce  physics  forces  one  to  confront  and  solve 
problems  which  are  not  relevant  otherwise.  The  SLC 
finally  reached  near  design  luminosity  due  to  the 
creativity  and  dedication  of  a  large  number  of  people 
over many years. 

REFERENCES 

report 

for 

the  Next  Linear 

[1]  B. Richter, "The SLAC Linear Collider", Geneva Accel. 
Conf. (1980). 
[2]  "Zeroth-order  design 
Collider", SLAC-R-474, 2 vol. (1996). 
[3]  C.  Adolphsen  et  al.,  "Flat  beams  in  the  SLC",  PAC, 
Washington, DC (1993). 
[4]  T.  Maruyama  et  al.,  "Electron  spin  polarization  in 
photoemission  from  strained  GaAs  grown  on  GaAsP", 
Phys.Rev.B46:4261-4264 (1992). 
[5]  K.  Bane,  et  al.,  "High  intensity  single  bunch  instability 
behavior  in  the  new  SLC  damping  ring  vacuum  chamber", 
PAC, Dallas, TX (1995) 
[6]  F.  Zimmermann  et  al.,  "Performance  of  the  1994/1995 
SLC final focus system", PAC, Dallas, TX (1995) 
[7]  P.  Raimondi,  et.al.,  "Recent  luminosity  improvements  at 
the SLC", EPAC, Stockholm, Sweden (1998). 
[8]  T.  Barklow,  et.al.,  "Experimental  evidence  for  beam-
beam disruption at the SLC", PAC, New York, NY (1999). 
[9]  M.  Ross  et  al.,  Wire  scanners  for  beam  size  and 
emittance measurements at the SLC, PAC, San Francisco, CA 
(1991). 
[10] R. Alley et al., "A laser-based beam profile monitor for 
the SLC/SLD interaction region", NUIMA,A379,363 (1996). 
[11]  T.  Himel,  et  al.,  "Adaptive  cascaded  beam-based 
feedback at the SLC," PAC, Washington, DC (1993). 
[12]  P.  Emma  et  al.,  "Limitations  of  interaction-point  spot-
size tuning at the SLC", PAC, Vancouver, Canada (1997). 
[13]  L.  Hendrickson,  et  al.,  "Luminosity  optimization  feed-
back in the SLC," ICALEPCS, Beijing, China,  (1997). 
[14]  L.  Hendrickson,  et  al.,  "Beam-based  feedback  simula-
tions for the NLC Linac," LINAC, Monterey, CA (2000). 
[15]  J.  Seeman,  et  al.,  "The  Introduction  of  trajectory 
oscillations to reduce emittance growth in the SLC LINAC", 
HEACC, Hamburg, Germany (1992). 
[16]  R.  Assmann,  "Beam  dynamics 
Vancouver, Canada (1997). 

in  SLC",  PAC, 

s
s
s
s
*
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
*
*
s
s
s
s
