THE PHYSICAL ORIGIN OF MASS AND CHARGE II

Erik A. Haeffner

Eskadervägen 48, 183 58 TÄBY, SWEDEN,  haeffner@algonet.se

This article is forthcoming in Galilean Electrodynamics.

is  an  alternative  version  of  a  document  which  already  can  be  found  on 

This  article 
the  net.
(http://www.aalgonet.se/~haeffner.  The  scientific  message  is,  however,  now  presented  on  a  somewhat
lower  abstraction  level,  with  the  ambition  that  wellknown  and  generally  accepted  experimental  facts  may  be
identified  more  convenient  and  obvious  as  direct  consequences  of  a  new  physical  concept  here  disclosed  and
discussed.
The  new  concept  CER  (Condensed  Electromagnetic  Radiation),  proposed  in  this  article,  indicates  an
electromagnetic  origin  of  mass  particles,  in  fact,  an  overwhelming  amount  of  experimental  evidence  confirms
that the CER concept is fundamental for the physical explanation of mass particle properties.
Two  well  established  physical  phenomena  may,  among  others  indicated  in  the  manuscript,  be  pointed  out  as
conclusive for the new theory:
–Parametric  down  conversion  is  a  commonly  used  expression  to  describe  the  phenomenon  when  a  light  wave
passing an optically active crystal is converted into two new oppositely polarized light waves. According to the
new theory it should in consequence be possible to produce two new CER particles if the initial electromagnetic
radiation, EMR, has a high enough energy (frequency) equivalent with the sum of the energies (masses) of the
new particles. The pair production phenomenon (electron and positron) is thus explained by the CER concept.
–The second apparent proof is the existence of the first generation leptons and quarks. These may be predicted as
CER particles, each produced by the superposition of two plane polarized EMR at right angle with a quantum
phase  difference  of  π / 6   as  described  and  illustrated  in  the  manuscript.  A  consequence  of  the  new  physical
interpretation of mass is the conclusion that all material in the universe is of electromagnetic origin, either in the
form of   EMR :   E = hυ   or as    CER :    E  = hυ =  mc

2

   (mass particles)

Introduction
The concept of mass has a central and fundamental position in the science of physics. Quantities such as charge
and  energy  are  correlated  to  mass.  Electrical  charge  does  not  exist  without  mass,  in  fact,  it  might  be  called  a
property of mass which in itself is a form of energy, as discovered by Einstein.
The three most important theories of modern physics; Quantum Mechanics, Special Relativity and the Standard
Model cannot, however, give a straightforward explanation of the physical nature or the origin of mass.
In Quantum Mechanics mass is described both in the form of wave equations and as point particles where the
energy content is concentrated to a mathematical point. The waves are then interpreted to express the probability
to find a particle within a certain space-time region. As pointed out in a study by Marmet ( 2 ) it is not easy to
find  a  logical  definition  of  Quantum  Mechanics  as  a  theory  of  physics  and  in  this  rather  diffuse  situation  to
determine if the concept of mass has a physical meaning at all. The negative opinion of Einstein in considering
the physical reality of Quantum Mechanics is wellknown but to a large extent ignored. He has, however, given a
good  reason  for  his  opinion.  ”I  am,  in  fact,  firmly  convinced  that  the  essentially  statistical  character  of
contemporary  quantum  theory  is  solely  to  be  ascribed  to  the  fact  that  this  theory  operates  with  an  incomplete
description of physical systems ” ( 3 )
There has been many other efforts in the history of physics to introduce mathematical models of wave structures
intended to decribe mass particles. Among those with a wide scientific background is a paper by M. Wolff. (6)
Difficulties arise often, however, when the mathematical models are compared with experimental facts or when
the nature and origin of waves should be explained.
The  Standard  Model  is  a  classification  system  in  which  all  elementary  particles  are  ordered  in  families,
generations and classes according to which forces keep particles together. The internal physical nature and
structure  of  most  fundamental  particles  -  leptons  and  quarks  -  is  so  far  not  known  and  not  needed  for  the
classification as such but of course much wanted for the understanding of nature.
Special  Relativity  is  a  rational  and  logical  description  of  particle  physics.  Masses  exist  independently  of  an
observer.  Relativistic  corrections  are  used  to  give  a  description  independent  of  the  observers  velocity.  This
rational  mathematical  description  of  nature  conforms  with  experimental  facts  but  cannot  provide  a  physical
explanation of the existence of mass particles.
Summarizing: None of these mentioned three theories can, severally or in combination, explain the  nature  or
the origin of mass. For that purpose an additional physical theory is consequently needed.
In this article a new physical concept Condensed Electromagnetic Radiation, CER, is introduced with the aim to
fill this gap and to constitute a physical explanation of the nature and the origin of mass and charge. The CER

1

concept will be compared with physical realities, such as the existence of fundamental mass particles and
scientifically accepted experimental facts.

The CER Concept
Following  wellknown  physics  we  find  that  in  a  linear  or  plane  polarized  electromagnetic  radiation,  EMR,  the
electric and magnetic field strength vectors oscillate in planes perpendicular to each other and to the direction of
propagation.  If  we  superimpose  two  independent  electrical  oscillations  we  can  produce  in  different  ways
polarized EMR. If the two oscillations are in phase and at right angle we find as a result a new plane polarized
electromagnetic radiation. Should the two initial EMR:s still have the same amplitude but there exists a phase
difference of 90 degrees, circular polarized electromagnetic radiations will appear. With a phase difference of 30
degrees  or  150  degrees  the  radiation  is  said  to  be  elliptically  polarized  with  the  electric  vectors  rotating
respectively to the right and to the left when looked upon in the direction of radiation propagation.( fig 1., fig 2.)

Ey = 1
Ex = 0
Fig 1. Superposition of X-vibrations and Y-vibrations in phase.

Ey = 1
Ex = −1

Ey = 0
Ex = 1

Ey = 1
Ex = 1

           

          

      

(

= A sin  ωτ + φ

If the initial vibrations are:
), where
Ey
ω  =  frequency in radians/s
τ  =  time in seconds
φ  =  phase difference,  and
Ex
A = B = the amplitude of vibrations, we find figures of polarization as shown on fig 2.

) ;  assu min g 

= B  sin   ωτ(

 

             a)                                b)                              c)

Fig  2.  Superposition  at  right  angle  of  oscillations  Ex  and  Ey  with  the  same  amplitude  at  phase  differences:
a) φ  =

  c) φ  =  

  b) φ  =

π

 

6

π

2

5π
6

The endpoints of electrical vectors in a circularly polarized EMR moving in space can be illustrated by a spiral
spring, fig 3.

Circular Polarization
C

2

Elliptical Polarization

Fig  3  Formation  (a,d),  propagation  (b,e)  and  condensation  (c,f)  of  circulary  and  elliptically  polarized  wave
packets, CER.

     

    

If the frequency is high the distance between subsequent threads of the spring is small. We now foresee –the
hypothesis– that at a certain small distance the individual electromagnetic wave units are squeezed into a closely
packed wave packet, which we call a Condensed Electromagnetic Radiation, CER, and identify as a CER
mass particle. In the same way we can produce elliptically polarized CER mass particles. (It should be noted that
the expression ”condensed” here means a condensation in space-time, not to be confused with ordinary gas
condensation. It should also be noted that we here interpret  Planck´s  constant h as the energy content of one
EMR wave unit. If we multiply  h  with the  frequency  υ , we will get  an amount of energy  hυ, which has been
called a photon or elderly  a  "light quanta" (energy quantum). These  EMR energy quantities are not
massparticles.  The CER concept, on the other hand, describes how  EMR wave units after circular or elliptical
polarization are transformed into  mass particles. We can calculate the number of  wave units  in an electron  by
dividing the rest energy of the electron   with  Planck´s constant, and find that the electron as a CER particle
contains  1.2356  x  10 

  wave units. )

20

The  CER  concept  of  circularly  or  elliptically  polarized  electromagnetic  radiation  in  a  condensed  state  as  a
physical identification of mass, is discussed in the following sections and investigated as how this concept agrees
with wellknown and scientifically accepted physical phenomena.

Leptons and quarks as CER particles
Through  the  theoretical  and  experimental  development  of  the  standard  model,  the  plurality  of  elementary
particles have slowly found their place in a framework of families, classes and generations. Leptons and quarks
of  the  first  generation,  fig  4,  are  now  assumed  to  be  the  real  fundamental  particles  from  which  all  the  other
”elementary” particles originate either as excitation states or as composite mass particles.
It  is  then  obviously  important  to  investigate  how  the  CER  hypothesis  will  conform  with  the  symmetry  and
properties  of  these  mentioned  most  fundamental  particles.  Fig  4  illustrates  polarized  EMR  waves,  each

composed of two linear polarized  EMR’s with phase differences in 4 steps, 

;

; 0  quadrant I, followed

3π
6

2π
6

;

π

6

by the 4 symmetrically opposite phase difference angles in quadrant III. We might describe the phase difference

°( ) and from 

90

°(

180

)to 

°(

270

)as  increasing  the  degree  of

going  from  0°,  in  steps  of   

°( ) to 

30

π

6

3π
6

6π
6

9π
6

polarization  of the resultant EMR.

In the CER concept it is assumed that at a certain small distance between adjacent electrical vector spiral units in
circular and elliptical EMR (fig 3) these superimpose to compress the EMR into CER mass particles. It would
thus be possible to identify the existing most fundamental particles with the illustrated species of polarized CER.
The two bottom lines of fig 4 indicate the first generation of leptons and quarks with their electrical charges. We
find that these  most  fundamental particles of the  standard model may easily be  identified  as  CER  particles  by

their symmetry and charge which increases in polarization steps of 

30o(

)

π

6
  

3

Quadrant I

Quadrant III

       

             

            

             

           

30o
π

 90o
Phase
3π
difference φ        
6
  

Leptons and
quarks

               

           

               

60o
2π
6
  

270o
9π
6
  
        e                   u                 d                 νe              νe               d                   u                e
            + 1

180o
6π
6
  

210o
7π
6
  

240o
8π
6
  

                 0                0            + 1
3

             + 2
3

               -

6
  

1

3

Ch arg e             -1              -

0 o

0
  

2

3

Particle
name

       electron       

up quark
antiparticle     down quark   

antineutrino
electron type

   

neutrino
electron type  

down quark
antiparticle     up quark        positron

Fig 4 Superposition at right angle of two plane polarized EMR  waves with the same amplitude but with phase

difference of n 

 where n = 0,1,2,3 (quadrant I) and 6,7,8,9 (qadrant III).

π

6

The  resultant  CER  wave  packets  are  identified  in  symmetry  and  in  electric  charge  with  leptons  and
quarks of the first generation.

This  identification  will  also  explain  the  charge  unit  of  the  electron  and  the  positron  as  corresponding  to  the
maximum  polarization  possible.  The  quarks  appear  as  elliptically  polarized  CER  wave  packets  with  different
polarization degrees. The electron neutrinos are each formed of two superimposed plane polarized EMR at right
angle and in phase. They consequently have a mass according to the fundamental equation
hν  =  mc
hν
c2

m  =  

2

 

The explanation of the old problem why the electron has the experimentally well determined charge e, and
nothing else, higher or lower, is then simply that it has the maximum polarization degree possible as a CER
particle.

Confirmation of the new theory by experimental facts:
Pair Production - Annihilation
If  an  EMR  travels  into  a  crystal  that  has  nonlinear  optical  properties,  two  new  EMR:s  with  opposite  angular
momentum  are  created,  that  is  one  clockwise  and  one  anticlockwise  circularly  polarized  electromagnetic
radiations. The sum of the energies of the two new radiations equals exactly the energy of the parent EMR. The
phenomenon is called spontaneous parametric down conversion.
According to the CER concept as described above the secondary polarized radiations should at a certain
frequency be converted to CER mass particles. That is also the case in physical reality, when a high energy EMR
>  1.02  MeV,  in  the  vicinity  of  a  nucleus  is  transformed  into  one  electron  (mass  energy  0.51  MeV)  and  its
antiparticle the positron with the same mass. The reaction is wellknown as pair production and may physically
be  interpreted  as  a  spontaneous  down  conversion  of  a  high  energy  electromagnetic  radiation.  The  pair
production phenomenon is an experimental confirmation of how CER mass particles are produced by the
condensation of high energy circular polarized electromagnetic radiation.

4

Relativistic mass effects
"A real world", or in other words, a physical realism implies or has a necessary prerequisite that mass and
electromagnetic radiation exist independently of an observer. Einsteins discovery or deduction that the velocity
of EMR is a constant c in vacuum and independent of any observers own velocity is, in fact, the physical
foundation of all relativistic phenomena.
A CER mass particle is physically a compressed or condensed wave packet of circularly or elliptically polarized
electromagnetic radiation which in itself has the velocity c. If we assume that the wave packet is moving with a
velocity v relative to the constant velocity c we find that when calculating the frequency ω  (radians per s) of the
polarized  electromagnetic  radiation  constituting  the  CER  wave  packet  we  must  consider  the  Doppler  effect  in
order to determine the shift of frequency when the wave packet with a velocity v is moving relative to c. When
the velocity v is increasing the frequency ω  is also increasing according to the formula:

ω

=

ω

1

 
  
 

 
o 1+ v
  
c
 
1− v2
c2

As the mass is directly proportional to the frequency according to

hω o   =  m oc2   where   h = h
2π

  

we find that the mass of a CER particle follows the formula for relativistic increase with velocity

=

m1

 
 
m o 1+ v
  
  
c
 
 
1− v2
c2

The increase of mass when a particle is moving relative to the fixed EMR velocity c may then be interpreted as a
Doppler  effect  increasing  the  frequency  of  the  EMR  which  constitutes  the  CER  wave  packet.  No  observer  is
needed for this deduction as only internal physical relations are used in the c frame of a reference.

 Waves associated to mass particles
A  wellknown  mathematical  formula  used  to  indicate  wave  properties  of  mass  particles  is  the  de  Brolie  wave
length
λ =  

h

m ⋅  v

h = Planck´s constant,
m = particle mass and
v = particle velocity as measured by an external observer.

This equation is physically supported by diffraction experiments where a stream of electrons pass through slites
in a screen and then produce a diffration pattern on a parallell target screen. There is so far no physical
explanation of the origin or nature of these mass particle  waves  producing the diffraction patterns. Textbook
formulations are that the de Broglie  waves somehow are "associated " with mass. It is also often pointed out that
matter  waves  are  not  of  electromagnetic  origin.  However,  by  introducing  the  new  concept  CER,  Condensed
Electromagnetic Radiation, we have established that mass particles really are of electromagnetic origin. We can
therefore  look  on  the  de  Broglie  phenomenon  with  diffraction  patterns  created  by  mass  particles  in  the
light of the CER concept.

2
Starting with the fundamental equation hυ = mc
where
h = Planck´s constant
υ = frequency of electromagnetic radiation, EMR
m = the mass of a CER wave packet
c = EMR velocity in vacuum

5

If we exchange υ with   c / λ , where λ  = wave length, we get λ  =  

h
m ⋅ c

It has been shown that the electron and the other leptons and quarks of the first generation confirm with respect
to charge and symmetri their identity as CER particles. We can then treat the electron as a CER  mass particle
with  the  experimentally  determined  mass  me  and  use  the  formula  above  to  calculate  the  wavelength  λ e  will
decrease, also found by diffraction experiments.
It has been shown that the electron and the other leptons and quarks of the first generation confirm with respect
to charge and symmetry their identity as CER particles. We can then treat the electron as a CER mass particle
 and use the formula above to calculate the wavelength  λ e of an

with the experimentally determined mass m 
electron at rest. Using the known constants h and c we find λ e  =  2.42 x 10 
What happens if the electron moves towards, as an example, a diffraction chamber with a velocity  ν? A velocity
of  a  CER  particle  is  always  a  movement  relative  to  the  constant  velocity  c.  As  has  already  been  shown  the
electron mass will then increase according to the relativity equation

 cm

-10

e

=

m1

 
 
m o 1+ v
  
  
c
 
 
1− v2
c2

From the equation   λ =

h
m ⋅ c

 we realize that when the electron mass increases its wavelength  λ e  will decrease,

as also found by diffraction experiments
The CER concept can consequently provide a physical explanation of what has been called " matter waves" or
"associated waves". It should be noted that there is no reference to an "observer" or the relative velocity to such
an "observer" when calculating the wavelength of a mass particle.
An  alternative  way  to  estimate  the  wavelength  of  the  electron  is  by  using  the  experimentally  found
( )is
Compton scattering relation, which describes the relation of wave lengths when an incoming EMR  λ
scattered by an electron at an angle  θ  from its initial direction. The scattered EMR will then get the new
wavelenght λs     and the scattered electron is found to have the dimension of a wavelenght  λ e according to
the equation λs   -  λ
When θ = 90 
θ = 90 ° it is found that the ”Compton wavelenght” λ e  =  
θ = 90 
θ = 90 

)
0    =  λe     1- cos θ

(

0

h
me ⋅ c

which is the same value as already found if we concider the electron as a CER mass particle. This means
that we have found another experimental confirmation of the CER concept.

Uncertainty relations
The basic postulate of Quantum Mechanics is the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. If a complete mathematical
description of fundamental physics can be built on this postulate is a question that has been discussed both by
physicists  and  philosophers  for  decades.  Steven  Weinberg  (  4  )  and  many  others  confirm  that  Quantum
Mechanics provides a precise framework for calculating energies, trasition rates and probabilities. Marmet ( 2 )
and others have, on the other hand, found many absurdities when comparing the QM mathematical descriptions
with a physical reality. These scientific controversies have apparently their root in a problem that already Gödel (
5  )  discussed.  The  mathematics  of  a  system  ensures  that  there  are  no  internal  mathematical  contradictions.
Mathematics cannot, however deduce results from relations that are external to the mathematical system.
With the introduction of the CER concept we can end this controversy and give the Heisenberg deduction of the
uncertainty principles a physical meaning. The starting point is the same relationship E = hυ  as Heisenberg used
for the mathematical formation of a Fourier wave packet. The difference is that according to the CER concept
the  wave packet is identified physically as compressed electromagnetic radiation. In that way  we  can  give  the
foundation  of  Quantum  Mechanics  a  physical  reality.  This  is  shown  (ref.1)  by  a  simple  deduction  of  the
Heisenberg uncertainty relations using the CER wave packet concept .

The  question,  however,  to  what  extent  further  quantum  theory  mathematical  transformations  correspond  to
physical realities will not be discussed here.

6

Conclusions
The new concept of condensed electromagnetic radiation CER indicates a physical structure of mass particles. It
has  been  demonstrated  that  the  fundamental  particles  leptons  and  quarks  of  the  first  generation,  which  in  the
Standard Model are thought as building blocks of composite particles, coincide in charge and symmetry with a
series  of  CER  wave  packets  where  the  phase  difference  between  originally  plane  polarized  EMR  waves  is

π

6

integer multiples of  

 radians.

Besides this successful demonstration of the physical origin of mass and charge the CER concept is supported by
the explanation it provides of, so far mysterious, phenomena of nature such as mass  particle  production,  mass
increase with velocity, elementary particle symmetries, charge quantization, wave structure of matter, etc. The
CER concept is consequently of interest for further physical studies and experiments. What comes to mind, as a
high priority, is the synthesizing of existing or new particles through the building up, or expressed in physical
terminology, the superposition of high energy EMR:s which might differ in phase, frequency and amplitude. A
consequence of the new physical interpretation  of  mass  is  the  conclusion  that  all  materia  in  the  universe  is  of
electromagnetic origin, either in the form of  EMR :   E = hυ   or as    CER :    E  = hυ =  mc

2

  

The Planck - Einstein energy formulas above appears then as very fundamental equations of the universe.

References
[ 1 ] E.A. Haeffner, The Physical  Origin of Mass and Charge.

http://www.algonet.se/~haeffner, (Febr. 1, 1997)
(Officially  registered  June 2, 1995)

[ 2 ]   P. Marmet, Absurdities in Modern Physics. A Solution. (1993), Ed. Les Editions du Nordir, c/o
        R.  Yergeau, 165 Waller Simard Hall Ottawa, On, Canada K1N6N5.

http://www.newtonphysics.on.ca/Heisenberg/contents.html (1997)

[ 3 ] P.A. Schilp, ed. Albert Einstein: Philosopher - Scientist, pp 666,672

Evanston,IL: Library of Living Philosophers, (1949)

[ 4 ] S. Weinberg,  Dreams of a Final Theory.

Hutchinson  Radius, London, (1993)

[ 5 ] S.C. Kleene, The Work of Kurt Gödel. The Journal of  Symbolic  Logic, 41 No 4, (1976)

[ 6 ] M. Wolff, "Beyond the Point Particle  - A Wave Structure for the Electron",

Galilean  Electrodynamics 6 (5), 83-91 (1995)

Acknowledgement.

The  author sincerely thanks the Editor Dr  Cynthia K. Whitney for her kind
advice and support during the publishing  procedure.

7

