PROGRESS IN INDUCTION LINACS

Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, California  94550 USA

George J. Caporaso

1 INTRODUCTION

FET-switched

 modulator

Abstract

This presentation will be a broad survey of progress in
induction technology over the past four years.     Much
work has been done on accelerators for hydrodynamic test
radiography and  other  applications.    Solid-state  pulsers
have  been  developed  which  can  provide  unprecedented
flexibility and precision in pulse format and accelerating
voltage  for  both  ion  and  electron  induction  machines.
Induction linacs can now be built which can operate with
MHz  repetition  rates.  Solid-state  technology  has  also
made  possible 
the  development  of  fast  kickers  for
precision control of high current beams.  New insulator
technology  has  been  developed  which  will 
improve
conventional induction linacs in  addition  to  enabling  a
new class of high gradient induction linacs.

The last several years have seen dramatic advances in
linear induction accelerator technology.  There have been
revolutionary advances in pulsed power  drivers  for  both
accelerators and fast kickers that now offer unprecedented
speed,  pulse  format  flexibility  and  voltage  precision.
Some of this new technology will be used in the 2nd axis
of DARHT.    New  compact  focusing  lenses  have  been
developed for Heavy Ion Fusion drivers and advances  in
insulators and dielectrics for pulse forming lines offer the
possibility to realize a new class of induction accelerators
with  gradients  an  order  of  magnitude  higher  than  the
current state of the art.

2 ADVANCED RADIOGRAPHY AS A

DRIVER OF INDUCTION

TECHNOLOGY

A significant impetus for the development of advanced
technology  has  come  from  the  area  of  flash  x-ray
radiography for stockpile stewardship.   The  cessation  of
underground nuclear testing has placed increased emphasis
on flash x-ray radiography.  In order to meet the need for
acquiring multiple line-of-sight, multiple time frame data
during a single hydrodynamic test a concept was developed
that provides these features using a single accelerator [1].

By equipping a long pulse induction linac with a pulsed
power source capable of running in the  MHz  range  and
using fast kickers multiple pulses and many lines of sight
could be achieved.

This concept is illustrated in Figure 1 which shows the
key elements of advanced technology necessary to make the
scheme viable.  A solid-state modulator powered by Field
Effect Transistors (FETs) is shown along with a fast kicker
capable of switching kiloampere level beams into different
transport lines.

50 ns

50 ns

50 ns

200 ns

2.5 µs

injector

20 - 50 MeV, 2 - 6 kA

 accelerator

kickers

 4 - 12 lines 

of sight

200 ns - 2 µs

500 ns

2.5 µs

variable interpulse 

spacing down to 500 ns 

for  10 pulses

 Metglas cell

100 ns

100 ns

induction

adder 

hard tube
modulator

Fig. 1.  Linear induction accelerator  concept  for  multi-
axis, multi-time frame flash x-ray radiography.

2. A.  SOLID-STATE MODULATOR

The basic concept of the solid-state modulator is shown
in figure 2.  The accelerating voltage is established on a
large capacitor bank which is connected (and disconnected)
from the load by a fast switch, which is this case is a
series-parallel array of FETs.  The load in this case is an
induction core.

CCCC

Induction

cell

reset
circuit

I cell

Reset
interval

time

C1

+

FETs
S1

Charge
system

Opto-
isolator

Control

Vcell

Close
S1

time

reset on

Open
S1

Fig. 2.  Basic circuit concept for the solid-state modulator.
A fast switch (FET arrays) connect and disconnect a pre-
charged capacitor  to  the  induction  cell.    Note  that  the
output voltage is negative in this illustration.

The induction core permits these circuits to be stacked
in an inductive voltage adder configuration.  A fast reset

circuit is also provided to enable the modulator to operate
at very high repetition rates.

This  circuit  concept  allows  the  pulse  format  to  be
changed  without  changing 
the  circuit  configuration.
Simply by programming the optical trigger sequence the
width and inter-pulse time for each pulse can be changed at
will.  A single layer of the ARM-II modulator is shown in
Figure 3.

Fig. 5.  The three-stage ARM modulator assembly which
produces  45  kV  (open  circuit)  at  4.8  kA  and  1  MHz
repetition rate.

A  typical  burst  which 
flexibility is shown in Figure 6.

illustrates 

the  pulse  format

Fig. 3.  A single switch board of the ARM-II modulator.
The board contains 12 FETs which switch 100 Amps each
at roughly 800 volts.  These circuit boards are stacked in
series to provide 15 kV for the ARM-II modulator.  There
are four of these stacks in parallel around a Metglas core to
provide 4.8 kA.

The circuit boards shown in Figure 3. Are stacked in
series  and  parallel  to  provide  a  modulator  capable  of
running at 1 MHz with full reset and at 2 MHz without
reset.

Fig. 4.  A single ARM-II modulator capable of generating
a programmable burst of variable width pulses at 15 kV
(open circuit voltage) and 4.8 kA output current.

The ARM-II modulator was designed to be stacked in
an inductive voltage adder  configuration.    A  three-stage
adder is shown in Figure 5.

Fig. 6.  Typical burst from the modulator showing the
pulse format agility of the system.  The horizontal scale is
2 µsec. per division.

This technology will also be used to power the

high current kicker for the 2nd axis of DARHT.

2. B.  FAST, HIGH-CURRENT

KICKER

The second major piece of technology inspired by the
needs of Advanced Radiography is a precision, fast kicker
capable of handling long multi-kiloamp beam pulses. In

order to obtain switching times of order 10 ns. the source
of  the  fields  must  be  inside  the  beam  pipe. 
  A
configuration was chosen which is similar to a stripline
configuration similar to that of a stripline beam position
monitor was chosen.  The concept is shown in Figure 7.

drive cable

drive plate 
termination

drift space

septum 
magnet

driven plate

switched beam 

positions

bias dipole 

windings

non-driven plate

Fig. 7.  Fast, high-current kicker concept.  The system
consists of four equal size striplines.  One opposite pair of
electrodes is powered to produce switching in a plane.  In
this illustration the top  electrode  is  powered  negatively
while the bottom electrode is powered positively to switch
the beam downward in the vertical plane.  Since the pulser
technology  employed  is  unipolar,  a  D.C.  bias  dipole
winding  wrapped  over  the  kicker  vacuum  housing  pre-
steers the beam upwards to obtain a full range of vertical
motion.

The system that has undergone extensive testing on the

ETA-II accelerator at Livermore is shown in Figure 8.

picture captures a single ETA-II pulse in the act of being
switched from one position to another.

4 cm

Fig. 9.  A single beam pulse from ETA-II caught in the
act of switching from an initial position on the right to
the final position on the left.  The image is created by
light  striking  a  quartz 
foil  approximately  60  cm
downstream of the end of the kicker.  The total centroid
shift is some 4 cm with a kicker plate voltage of ± 9 kV.

2. C.  DARHT

The  Dual  Axis  Radiographic  Hydrodynamic  Test
(DARHT) facility is under construction at Los Alamos.  It
consists of a single 70 ns pulse, 20 MeV, 4 kA induction
linac  which  is  in  operation  and  a  second,  long  pulse
machine  under  construction  now. 
  The  second  axis
(DARHT-2) will produce a 2 µsec, 20 MeV pulse at up to
4 kA.  A kicker system will be used to extract a sequence
of 4 relatively short radiographic pulses out of the long
pulse and direct these to the x-ray converter target.

Fig.  8.    Stripline  kicker  system  used  on  ETA-II.    A
system very similar to this will be deployed on the second
axis of  DARHT  to  produce  a  sequence  of  radiographic
pulses from a 2 µsec pulse in the accelerator.

The kicker system has been very successful.  Beams of
up to 2 kA, 50 ns wide at 6 MeV have been steered rapidly
with  precision.    An  image  from  the  switched  beam
intercepting a  quartz  foil  is  shown  in  Figure  9.    The

Fig. 10.  The DARHT facility at LANL.  The axes of the
two radiographic machines are at right angles.

3 ADVANCES IN HEAVY ION FUSION

TECHNOLOGY

There have been numerous advances in the technologies
required for Heavy Ion Fusion driver development.   Very
compact  superconducting  lenses  have  been  developed

which will lead to increased accelerating  gradients.    An
example of such a lens is shown in Figure 11.

economical choices for the several different accelerator cell
systems employed in a driver.

4 ADVANCED INSULATORS AND THE

DIELECTRIC WALL ACCELERATOR

4. A.  HIGH GRADIENT INSULATORS

In the past few years a new class of insulators has been
developed that has superior performance for  short,  long
and  bi-polar  pulses. 
  Called  simply  high  gradient
insulators  (HGI)  these  are  novel  configurations  of
conventional insulating materials [2].

The basic idea of the HGI is to interrupt the normal
insulator  with  finely  spaced,  floating  electrodes.    The
typical spacing between electrodes can be a few mm down
to 0.1 mm.  In general, the voltage holding ability  of
these  configurations  improves  as  the  period  length  is
shortened.  Insulators have been fabricated from dielectrics
such as kapton, rexolite, lexan and fused silica.  A few
samples are shown in Figure 12.  These insulators have
flashover strengths 2 to 5 times higher than conventional
insulators.

A startling result is the excellent performance of these
insulator configurations in the proximity of high current
electron beams.  One such test is shown in Figure 13.

HGI

Wall current

monitor

Wire mesh

1 kA beam

Velvet
cathode

Fig. 11.  Superconducting quadrupole using a Rutherford
cable on a flat support (Martovetsky at LLNL).

Compact pulsed magnets suitable for focussing arrays
of beamlets have also been developed.  A prototype array
for the Integrated Research Experiment (IRE) is shown in
Figure 12.

insulator 

test  using 

  High  gradient 

Fig.  13. 
the
kapton/stainless steel insulator shown on the right side of
the figure.  The insulator measured 22 cm outer diameter
by 2 cm in axial length.  A velvet cloth 1 cm in radius
was used as a cathode  while  a  highly  transparent  wire
mesh was used as an anode.  A 20 ns. FWHM, 440 kV
pulse was placed across the outer diameter of the insulator.
The cathode produced a  1  kA  electron  beam  repeatedly
with no breakdowns.  As the voltage was increased signs
of insulator breakdown at the end of the pulse could be
observed.  The breakdown-free accelerating gradient in the
presence of this beam was 22 MV/Meter.

Fig. 12.  Compact, pulsed quadrupole lens array  for  the
IRE.

Improved  characterization  of  magnetic  core  materials
such  as  Metglas,  Finemet  and  Silicon-Iron  under
conditions comparable to those found in a driver have been
completed  which  will  lead  to  the  most  efficient  and

In another test of the insulator in the presence of beam
an ETA-II induction cell was modified to accept a high
gradient insulator.  The standard insulator, a slanted piece
of rexolite with a slant width of 3.75 cm was replaced
with a high gradient version with a straight wall and only
1 cm wide.

This cell was installed on the end of ETA-II about 10
cm from a graphite beam stop.  Voltage was applied to

the cell by coupling the beam return current through load
resistors.  The cell took the full beam current (2 kA, 50
ns pulses at 6 MeV) at 1 Hz for an entire day.  The cell
logged over 10,000 shots with no breakdowns.  The cell
was operated at up to twice it’s normal operating voltage
with a straight wall insulator having a direct line of sight
to the beam and a width almost one quarter of the standard
insulator with no breakdowns at 17.5 MV/Meter.

These results suggest the possibility of an accelerator
configuration  that  might  have  a  considerably  higher
gradient than conventional induction accelerators.

4. B.  THE DIELECTRIC WALL

ACCELARATOR

The basic  concept  for  a  Dielectric  Wall  Accelerator
(DWA) is shown in Figure 14. A conventional induction
machine has an accelerating field only in the gap, which
occupies a relatively small fraction of the axial length of
an accelerating cell.  If the conducting beam pipe could be
replaced  by  an 
fields
characteristic of the gaps might be applied uniformly over
the entire length of the accelerator yielding a much higher
gradient.

insulating  wall,  accelerating 

 1 meter

E-field in gaps only

 

Dielectric Wall

Continuous E-field

Pulse Forming Line

Fig. 14.  Basic idea of the DWA.

State of the Art Induction 

Accelerator

 0.75 MeV/meter Gradient

Dielectric Wall 

Accelerator

 20 MeV/meter Gradient

In order  to  supply  an  accelerating  voltage  over  the
entire structure a suitable pulse forming line must be used
along with a closing switch to initiate the voltage pulse.
One such concept is shown in Figure 15.

The Asymmetric Blumlein is configured as two radial
transmission lines with different dielectrics.  These lines
are initially  charged  to  the  same  voltage  but  opposite
polarities so that there is no net voltage across the pair of
lines.  If switches on the outer diameter are closed, waves
will propagate radially inward leaving zero voltage in their
wakes.  Because the dielectrics in the lines have different
values of permittivity, the waves travel at different speeds.
When the faster of the two waves hits the inner boundary
of  the  line  there  will  be  a  reflection  because  of  an
impedance mismatch which will boost the voltage of that
wave, causing the polarity of that line to reverse which
generates a net accelerating voltage across the line I.D.

Initially charged

Switches closed

Fast wave reflects

+

-

+

+-

"Slow" line

+

-

-

+

- +

-

+

"Fast" line

High Gradient 

Insulator

CL

CL

-

+

CL

Fig. 15.  The concept of the Asymmetric Blumlein one of
several schemes for providing an accelerating pulse over
the DWA.

5 CONCLUSIONS

in 

Many 

important 

technological  advances 

the
induction accelerator field have taken place over the past
several years.  A revolution in pulsed power technology
has  boosted  the  maximum  repetition  rate  of  induction
machines by three orders of magnitude over the previous
record providing unprecedented pulse format flexibility and
voltage precision.  Progress in compact magnetic lenses
and lens arrays for Heavy Ion Fusion  promise  systems
with  higher  average  accelerating  gradients.    Advanced
understanding of magnetic core material will permit the
construction  of  more  efficient  and  economical  fusion
drivers.    A  new  class  of  high  gradient  insulators  has
demonstrated superior performance in a variety of modes
and promises to make possible the construction of novel
high gradient accelerators.

 6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

It  is  a  pleasure  to  acknowledge  the  help  of  many
colleagues at LLNL, LANL, LBNL, Honeywell FM&T
and  elsewhere:  Yu—Jiuan  Chen,  Judy  Chen,  Steve
Sampayan,  Jim  Watson,  John  Weir,  Ed  Cook,  Tim
Houck, Glen Westenskow, Hugh Kirbie, Dave  Sanders,
Mike Burns, Mike Krough, John Barnard and Art Molvik.
This paper is dedicated to my friend Dan Birx who was
a true genius and an outstanding human being who had a
profound influence on this field.

This work was performed under  the  auspices  of  the
U.S.  Department  of  Energy  by 
the  University  of
California Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under
contract W-7405-ENG-48.

7 REFERENCES

[1] G. 

J.  Caporaso,  “Linear 

Induction  Accelerator
Approach for Advanced Radiography” in Proc. 1997
Part. Accel. Conf.

[2] G. 

J.  Caporaso, 

   in          Frontiers         of          Accelerator

Technology   , World Scientific, 1996.

