Is the Basic Unit System a String?

Edgar Paternina.

Electrical engineer Author of Physics and The Principle of Synergy, published
in CD ROM in English and Spanish at Amazon.com.

Contact: epaterni@epm.net.co

 Abstract

The main aim of this paper is to present an overview of the need of a new way
of coping the fundamental equations of physics, see the references. Our main
aim is to build a new metrics in which both time and space are included, but in
some sort of minkowskian union of the two and in such a way that that union
preserves an independent reality, and where energy, can be taken as the real
fundamental issue of that metrics, instead of the particle concept. A departure
from General Theory of Relativity is clear, but then the BUS concept behaves
itself as a fundamental string.

Introduction

We are not interested from the beginning in the motion of a particular point in
space. Our main aim is to build a new metrics in which both time and space
are included, but in some sort of minkowskian union of the two and in such a
way that that union preserves an independent reality, and where energy can be
taken as the real fundamental issue of that metrics.

The  particle  point  of  view  in  physics  is  true  but  partial.  And  it  is  this
partialness  the  one  we  are  trying  to  avoid  from  the  beginning  and  as  so
gravitation will not occupy an exceptional position with regard to the  other
forces,  particularly  the  electromagnetic  forces,  but  energy  as  a  conceptual
starting point will be the one that will occupy an exceptional epistemological
position in our constructs.

Being our starting point an integral one we will relate that problem with the
need  to  frame  in  a  unified  conceptual  scheme    the  radical  duality  of  the
Universe expressed, in general, in the following dyads:

1

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

the particle and the wave problem expressed dramatically in physics as the
momentum and position electron problem of Quantum Mechanics.

the  relation  between  the  whole  or  form  and  the  part,  the  so-called
generalization-specialization problem

the qualitative aspects of reality and its quantitative ones

the relation between rotational movement and linear movement being the
latter a special case of the former

the  relation  between  time  and  space  and  the  fact  they  are  always  in  a
unified framework or sphere of reality, the so-called space time continuum.

-  The relation between two poles in a magnetic field and the fact each one of
them cannot be isolated makes the magnetic field a very fundamental one
where oneness, openness and wholeness are main features.

-  And  finally  the  relation  of  the  signifier  and  the  signified  in  case  of  the
linguistic sign and as an example that transcends physics but that has the
same nature or dynamic pattern.

A Symbol for differentiating

These  two  different  orders  of  reality    must  be  clearly  differentiated,  that  is,
separated, so to speak, in different boxes, just as apples and oranges. And for
this we need a special symbol of differentiation, but also of another one that
integrates  them    both  in  a  unified  framework,    having  then  a  Basic  Unit
System in which both components are integrated. This Bus concept is then a
whole/part entity or a holon as defined by Ken Wilber[6], and as so with it a
new  holonic  metrics  emerges.  The symbol  for separation  was discovered  by
Cardano in 1545, when trying to solve the simple algebraic equation

x² +1 = 0

and  the  symbol    for  its  integration  or  the  interdependence  of  the  two  state
variables was found by Leonard Euler in 1745 when studying infinite series.

   J(θ)
  e  =    Cos(θ)  + J*Sin(θ)    (1)

2

Apparently  the  cos  and  sin  functions  seem  to  be  the  same  mathematical
functions,  except by the fact they differ by 90 degrees. But they do indeed are
different from each other not only  by that fact -which is some way to escape
from  unidimensionality-  but  also  by  the  way  they  change  their  sign  by
changing their angle θ, so

Cos(θ) = Cos(-θ)

Sin(θ) = -Sin(θ)

having this second one two solutions, the plus and minus sign of  the square
root of minus one problem. We can say then that the first component of  ER is
nondual, and the second one is dual. The first one has to do with the whole,
the second one with the part or a binary logic. The first one with a geometric
or  just  a graphical  representation  and the  second  one  with  its  corresponding
algebraic  or  mathematical  representation.  The  first  one  with  the  dynamic
nature  or time and the second one with space.

From the physical point of view we need a metrics where we have two state
variables, the well-known S and T variables, one related with space, and the
other one, the dynamic part of reality, related with time. We will replace them
though by E and R, because we will use S for representing  the whole physical
reality or what Minkowski named the quadratic differential expression, which
is an invariant or else it represents the same nature of reality, physical reality
in this case. In this sense reality is independent from the observer or its frame
of references and space by itself, and time by itself, are doomed to fade away
into  mere  shadows  as  Minkowski  put  it  in  his  classical  paper  Space  and
Time[7].  We  have  then  a  fifth  sphere  of  reality  as  an  intermediate  domain
between the observer and the object that we have named the sphere of Form,
where  reality  can  be  represented  not  as  something  relative    but  as    a  new
metrics in which the laws of nature hold good independently of the system of
reference  as  the  holon  concept  is  a  Basic  Unit  System  that  preserves  the
isomorphic properties of all systems.

A New Sphere of Reality and the Complex Plane

The introduction of  this sphere of reality is necessary both from the point of
view of Euler Relation where we have the complex plane by just assigning θ a
value of 90 degrees, and from the point of view of the need of a metrics with

3

which    we  can  represent  the  space  time  continuum  so  we    will  have  a  new
differential quadratic element defined as:

                                J(θ)
DS  = Abs(DS)* e                      (2)

that can be represented in rectangular coordinates as

DS  = d E  + J* d R                    (2)

that gives us according to the Pythagorean Theorem

DS² = d E²  - d R²      (3)

where  d R²  = d x² +d y² + d z²

and  it  is  this  integral  space  time  mathematical  representation  the  one  that
permits  us  to  find  again  all  the  fundamental  equations  of  physics,  including
the well-known Schrödinger Wave Equation[1,2,3,4,5]. With this new concept
of unit in which the part and the whole are included, we have defined a new
metrics  with  which  reality  can  be  represented  without  the  reductionistic
drawback, because the Uncertainty Principle is included. But on the other side
the concept of dimension acquires its real connotation associated with the four
dimensional  space  time  continuum,  where  for  having  closed  system  and
objects we need to solve (2) or (3), that is, we need to find laws or relations
between the two main component of the BUS concept. And for this we need to
consider not only the observed manifestation of that entity represented by the

4

BUS, associated in some cases with a clear graphical representation, but also
with  the  chance  it  has  a  corresponding  and  almost  exact  mathematical
representation, such as in a planet, where on the one side we have an ellipse
and on the other we have a corresponding equation for it. In this case we have
a closed system with its state completely determined, and when this is the case
we can make predictions, we can make measurements.

The  main  departure  of  this  new  approach  in  regard  to  the  well-known
approach due to Einstein where (3) or the “linear element” was generalized as

  DS ² =  Σ Gij dXi*dXj

is precisely to reduce  the whole problem to find 10 functions Gij according to
the rules of Tensor Analysis, so to speak, to just an analytical problem, not a
geometric  problem  anymore,  as  geometry  was  then  reduced  to  algebra.  So
Einstein wrote  “Thus, according to the general theory of relativity, gravitation
occupies an exceptional position with regard to other forces, particularly the
electromagnetic forces, since the ten functions represent the gravitational field
at the same time define the metrical properties of the space measured..” If we
assimilate each Gij to a dimension, mathematical dimension, we will need to
posit 10 dimensions to solve the whole problem, and in spite those additional
dimensions have no physical meaning at all.

Expression (2) is an infinitesimal rotating vector or pointer or else a tiny loop
or string vibrating at certain frequency, but it can also vibrate at other modes
or frequencies, but in the complex plane. The fact that with it we can deduce
the  Schrödinger  Wave  Equation  takes  us  to  think  that  the  main  and
fundamental concept behind everything physical is energy, and defined like a
frequency  multiplied  by  Planck’s  constant  h,  and  not  precisely  the  particle
concept, even though the latter is a derived one, and  an electron can be seen
just as a whirlpool of energy.

The  fact  that  with  (2)  and  (3)  we  can  find  all  the  fundamental  equations  of
physics as is shown in the references,  makes it possible for us to have ways to
express the same  general  laws  of  nature  or  dynamic  patterns  from  a  unified
conceptual  point  of  view,    which  was  the  central  claim  of  the  systems
sciences, so the unity of science is granted not by the reduction of all sciences
to  physics  but  by  those  isomorphic  regularities[5]  of  the  different  levels  of
reality,  including  the  physiosphere  or  the  so-called  four  dimensional  space
time continuum and the biosphere too as in that new domain we have named

5

the domain of form and represented by the complex plane, life can be defined
as an animated form.

The problem of two arrows of time and the Second Law of Thermodynamics
is associated with the definition of open systems, and in this case that problem
is overcome because  with  (2) we have found the equations of the pendulum,
a truly open system.

The Principle of Synergy

The production of electrical energy or Alternating Current is a real example of
what  I  have  called  the  application  of  the  principle  of  synergy.  In  that
production we have a threefold physical magnetic structure rotating because of
the hydraulic turbines and at the end, what we have is a rotating magnetic field
that by Maxwell  Laws induces in each one of the terminals of that threefold
structure  the three phase AC we use daily. Mathematically we can represent
this situation by considering three dyads of space and time vectors, that is,

                        J(θ)                        J(wt)
A  = Abs(A)* e           +  Abs(A)* e

                         J(θ+120)                   J(wt)
A  = Abs(A)* e           +  Abs(A)* e

                        J(θ+240)                   J(wt)
A  = Abs(A)* e           +  Abs(A)* e

by using ER we decompose each one of the above equations in sin and cos,
and after summing them up we finally obtain that the three space components
become null, so we have just a dynamic expression:

                        J(wt)
A  = Abs(A’)* e

By mathematical inevitability we can represent that sum as in the figure

6

What we have here is just a sum 1-2-3 that is greater than the sum of its parts
and  what  this  means  is  that  we  have  an  open  system  that  is  interchanging
energy  with  the  environment, so in this  sense  this  is  something  practical,  as
the  extra  that  can  be  in  the  whole  that  is  not  in  the  parts  comes  from  the
environment,  from  the  field  concept  as  a  rotating  entity  and  which  is  a
complete  whole  by  itself  just  in  case  of  the  magnetic  field,  a  reason  why  it
seems so fundamental in the universe.

Synergy is today a fashionable catchword, a word we  hear almost everyday in
the business environment and it means precisely that sum that is greater than
the  sum  of  its  parts.  In  this  sense  it  is  synergy  with  the  help  of  the  field
concept and the Basic  Unit System or Holon concept, the one that permits us
to define

Entropy = f (-Synergy)

so  that  problem  of  the  two  time  arrows  is  not  our  problem  anymore,  and
Entropy is just the result of the not application of that principle of synergy. If
we apply this principle  we can have emergent states, or movements as that of
the  pendulum  that  seemed  to  violate  the  infamous  Second  Law  of

7

Thermodynamics.  Before  finishing  we  want  to  point  out  some  of  the  main
features of this new metrics

-  We do not need to use Tensor Analysis whose main disadvantage being its

abstraction from the point of view of physical representation

-  We do not need then to introduce additional strange dimensions, with no

physical meaning at all

-  A Basic Unit System by definition is a rotating entity but in the complex

plane and as such it behaves like a string

-  The  complex  representation  of  the  BUS  concept  reduces  complexity  by

minus one degree[5]

-  We have with the BUS concept a new way of presenting the Uncertainty

Principle [1,5]

-  We have a new way of finding the fundamental equations of physics in the

line of reasoning of that claim put by the systems sciences

-  We  have  then  a  new  holonic  worldview  by  introducing  an  intermediate
level of reality between the observer and the object that definitely permits
us to exorcise  the ghost of consciousness from physics.

References

  (

1. Epsilon Pi. Physics and The Principle of Synergy Amazon.com.1999
2.  The  Basic  Unit  System  Concept  and 
the  Principle  of  Synergy 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/html/physics/9908040 )
3. Electromagnetism, Relativity and the Basic Unit System
( http://xxx.lanl.gov/html/physics/9908042)
4. Gravitational Fields and The Basic Unit System concept
 ( http://xxx.lanl.gov/html/physics/9908045  )
5. The Principe of Synergy and Isomorphic Units
 ( http://xxx.lanl.gov/html/physics/0010022 )
6.  Ken  Wilber.  Sex,  Ecology  and  Spirituality.  Shambhala  Boston  &
London. 1995
7. Einstein at all. The Principle of Relativity. Dover Publications, INC.1952

© 2000 by Epsilon Pi. All rights reserved.

8

