The Mass Discrepancies That Are Implied By Galactic Rotation Curves
               [ i.e. Dynamically Inferred Mass Minus Observed Mass ]

Are Not Correctly Resolved by the Proposed Hypotheses:

              [That Galaxies Contain a Large Amount of "Dark Matter"]
              [or of a Modification of Newtonian Dynamics, MOND];
 Rather,  The Discrepancies Are Apparent, Not Real, and Are a Further
        Effect or Aspect of the Exponential Decay of the Overall Universe.

Roger Ellman

Abstract

In  general,  galaxies  are  rotating  systems,  a  balance  of  gravitational  attraction
[G·M·m/R2] and centripetal force [m·V2/R] maintaining the structure.  When the central
mass is far greater  than  the  orbiting  masses the  dynamics,  referred  to  as  Keplerian,  are
such that the orbital velocities are inversely proportional to the square root of the radial
distance from the central mass [V =(G·M/R)½], as for example in our solar system.  A
curve or plot of velocity vs. path radius is termed a Rotation Curve.

For  galaxies  that  we  view  as  the  thin  disk  not  the  spiral  or  globular  spread  in
space, we see one end moving toward us relative to the center and the other end moving
away.    The  rotational  velocities  are  measured  by  observing  the  variations  in  redshift
along the galactic diameter represented by the disk.  Galactic rotation curves so obtained
are not of the expected Keplerian form, an inverse square root; rather, [beyond the radius
of the dense galactic central core] the curves are essentially flat.

In  a  solid  sphere,  where  the  density  is  uniform  throughout,  all  parts  move  at
rotational  velocities  directly  proportional  to  radius.    Since  the  observed  flat  galactic
rotation  curves  fall  between  the  Keplerian  inverse  square  root  of  radius  and  the  solid's
direct proportion to radius, it is inferred that matter that we have not observed  must  be
dispersed throughout the galaxy, a halo of "dark matter" that causes the rotation to take
the form that the rotation curve exhibits -- thus the "dark matter" hypothesis.1

The mass discrepancy phenomenon only appears where the acceleration is V2/R
<  ∼  10-8  cm/sec2.    Modeling  related  to  that  gives  an  alternative  hypothesis:
Modification of Newtonian Dynamics or MOND, that gravity and or inertia behave in a
modified manner when g or a < 10-8 cm/sec2.  No justification has been developed
other than that the hypothesis correlates with the mass discrepancies.2,3

An  alternative  explanation  is  presented  --  the  general  exponential  decay  of  the
overall universe, which has been analyzed and developed in several papers.4,5,6,7,8  The
universal decay accounts for the mass discrepancies because the effect of the decay is to
make the rotation curves appear to deviate from the form expected in a Keplerian outer
galactic disk although the actual rotational behavior does not.

Roger Ellman, The-Origin Foundation, Inc.
                     320 Gemma Circle, Santa Rosa, CA 95404, USA
                     RogerEllman@The-Origin.org

1

The Mass Discrepancies That Are Implied By Galactic Rotation Curves
               [ i.e. Dynamically Inferred Mass Minus Observed Mass ]

Are Not Correctly Resolved by the Proposed Hypotheses:

              [That Galaxies Contain a Large Amount of "Dark Matter"]
              [or of a Modification of Newtonian Dynamics, MOND];
 Rather,  The Discrepancies Are Apparent, Not Real, and Are a Further
        Effect or Aspect of the Exponential Decay of the Overall Universe.

Background Of The Problem

Roger Ellman

[While  unnecessary  for  astronomers  and  astrophysicists  this  review  is  included
for  the  benefit  of  other  scientists,  who  may  not  be  familiar  with  the  details  of  the
development, details which are essential to understanding the issues.]

In  general,  galaxies  are  rotating  systems,  a  balance  of  gravitational  attraction
[G·M·m/R2] and centripetal force [m·V2/R] maintaining the structure.  A curve or plot of
rotational velocity vs. path radius is termed a Rotation Curve.

When the central mass is far  greater than  the  orbiting  masses  the  dynamics  are
such that the orbital velocities are inversely proportional to the square root of the radial
distance from the center mass [V =(G·M/R)½], as for example in our solar system and as
illustrated in Figure 1, below.  Such rotational dynamics and rotation curves are referred
to as Keplerian.

Figure 1 - A Keplerian Rotation Curve

In the case of a solid sphere, where the density is uniform throughout, all parts
move  at  rotational  velocities  directly  proportional  to  radius  as  illustrated  in  Figure  2,
below.

2

Figure 2 - The Rotation Curve of a Solid Sphere

The form of galaxies as we are able to  directly  observe  them  is  that  of  a fairly
spherical  dense central  core  and  a  transition  from  that  to  the  much  more  extensive  flat
disk  which  has  a  far  smaller  density  of  more  widely  dispersed  stars.    The  portion  of
galactic  rotation  curves  that  pertains  to  the  dense  central  core  of  the  galaxy  would  be
expected to exhibit approximately the same velocity - proportional - to - radius form as
illustrated for a solid sphere in Figure 2.  Likewise, the more dispersed flat disk, minor in
mass  compared  to  the  dense  central  core,  would  be  expected  to  exhibit  the  Keplerian
form of Figure 1.

Consequently, the expected form of galactic rotation curves would be that of the
above  Figures  1  and  2  combined  plus  a  smooth  transition  between  the  two  regions,  as
illustrated in Figure 3, below.

Figure 3 - The Expected Form of Galactic Rotation Curves
Based on Their Observable Matter

For galaxies that present themselves in an edge view of the thin disk not as their
spiral or globular spread in space, it is possible to measure the rotational velocities and
obtain  a  rotation  curve.    We  see  one  end  of  the  presented  flat  disk  moving  toward  us
relative  to  the  center  and  the  other  end  moving  away.    The  rotational  velocities  are

3

measured along the galactic diameter represented by our view of the disk  by  observing
the variations in redshift, the variations being a Doppler effect.

Galactic  rotation  curves  so  obtained  turn  out  not  to  exhibit  the  expected
Keplerian form, an inverse square root of radius.  Rather, actual galactic rotation curves
derived from  redshift observations along the disk exhibit a flat form, that is they exhibit
rotational velocity independent of radius.  The overall curve, after the portion pertaining
to  the  dense  central  core  of  the  galaxy,  is  a  transition  to  a  flat  curve  in  the  region
corresponding to the spread-out galactic disk as in Figure 4, below.

Figure 4 - A Typical Actual Galactic Rotation Curve as Obtained
From Galactic Disk Measurements of Redshifts

Because the form of the flat portion of galactic rotation curves lies between the
case of a dominant central mass, as in the Keplerian inverse square root of radius form
[Figure 1], and the case of a  uniformly  dense mass,  with  its  direct  proportion  to radius
form  [Figure  2],  it  has  been  inferred  that  matter  that  we  have  not  observed  must  be
dispersed throughout the galaxy as a halo of "dark matter" that causes the rotation to take
the form that the rotation curve exhibits -- thus the "dark matter" hypothesis.1

This mass discrepancy phenomenon only appears where the acceleration is  V2/R
<  ∼  10-8  cm/sec2.    Modeling  related  to  that  gives  an  alternative  hypothesis:
Modification of Newtonian Dynamics or MOND, that gravity and or inertia behave in a
modified manner when ag or ai < 10-8 cm/sec2.  No justification or cause for that
behavior has been developed other than that as a hypothesis it gives results that correlate
with the mass discrepancies. 2,3

Flat  rotation  curves  are  observed  not  only  in  individual  galaxies,  but  in  galaxy
clusters and in even larger groups of galactic clusters, all of which rotate under the same
G·M·m/R2 = m·V2/R. law.  As a consequence it has been hypothesized that there is a
substantial amount of "dark matter" throughout the universe to the largest scale.

But, there is an explanation of these data alternative to that of "dark matter" or
MOND, an explanation that avoids the several  problems  that  have  been encountered in
exploring  and  developing  the  "dark  matter"  galactic  halos  and  MOND  1,2,  and  which
correlates with other recent discoveries.6,7  That is the general exponential decay of the
overall  universe,  which  has  been  analyzed  and  developed  in  several  papers. 4,5,6,7,8
Exponential decay is found throughout nature so that overall decay of the universe is not
unreasonable.

4

The universal decay accounts for essentially all of the rotational dynamics mass
discrepancies [there may well be, nevertheless, some modicum of non-luminous matter in
galaxies and throughout the universe].

The General Universal Decay

The general exponential decay of the overall universe is derived and developed in
8  The decay is of the same form as the myriad exponential
The Origin and Its Meaning. 
decays  found  throughout  nature  because  all  such  decays  are  aspects  of  the  general
solution  to  the  2nd  order  linear  differential  equation  with  constant  coefficients.  The
universal decay is decay of the quantities that we refer to as the fundamental constants, c,
h, q, G, and so forth, essentially a decay of the fundamental substance of material reality.

The  values  of  these  fundamental  constants  are  the  same  everywhere  in  the
universe at any instant of time.  The decay means that they are everywhere uniformly and
consistently  exponentially  decaying  with  time.    That  the  laws  of  physics  and  their
fundamental  constants  must  be  the  same  everywhere  in  the  universe  [Einstein's
"invariance"] includes within it the decay processes acting consistently everywhere.

These fundamental constants interact through the various physical laws of nature
and, therefore, the decay of each constant must be consistent with the decays of all of the
others.  Analysis of all of the implications of that requirement shows that the decay is of
the  length  dimensional  component  of  those  constants.    That  is,  from  among  the
fundamental dimensional components length [L], mass [M] and time [T], it is length
[L] that is in decay.  That develops as follows.

The  decay  being  an  exponential  function  the  independent  variable  of  which  is
time, t, as in for example equation 1, it cannot be the time dimensional component, [T],
that is decaying.
(1)              -t/τ
      c(t) = c0·ε

Furthermore,  mass  and  time,  the  inverse  of  frequency,  are  closely  interrelated  as  in
equation 2,
(2)   h·f = E = m·c2

so that if mass, [M], were to decay it would imply that frequency decays and that time,
[T], the inverse of frequency, inversely decays, which the independent variable cannot
do.  That leaves only length, [L], to be the dependent variable in the decay.

Equation  2  also  illustrates  another  point.    Planck's  constant,  h,  appears  in  the
equation with an exponent of 1 whereas the speed of light, c, appears with an exponent of
2.  For the two decays, that of h and that of c, to be consistent their time constants must
be different.  Planck's constant, h, must decay twice as rapidly as the speed of light, c; its
time constant, τ
(3)   [ -t/τ ]1    [ -t/τ ]2
      [ε    h ]  =  [ε    c ]  for consistency of the decays,
          ∴∴∴∴ τ

h, must be half that of light, τ

c.  That is,

h  =  0.5 · τ
c

The  time  constant  of  the  general  exponential  decay  of  the  overall  universe  is
derived  and  calculated  in  The  Origin  and  Its  Meaning.8    The  value  for  c,  the
"fundamental" value as compared to that for, for example,  h = 1/2  of that for c, is
(4)   τ
c = 3.57532·1017 sec = about 11.3 billion years

"c" dimensions are L1/T

5

The  values  for  other  constant's  decays  are  the  appropriate  multiple  or  sub-

multiple of the value for c.  For example:

(5)   τ

h = 1/2·τ

c = 1.78766·1017 sec = about 5.65 billion years

"h" dimensions are M·L2/T

      τ

G = 1/3·τ

c = 1.19177·1017 sec = about 3.77 billion years

"G" dimensions are L3/M·T2
Occurrences of the Effect of the Decay

The first definitive experimental observation of this decay was in the tracking of
the Pioneer 10 and 11 satellites.  The observations were reported in 1998 in Indication,
from Pioneer 10/11, Galileo, and Ulysses Data, of an Apparent Anomalous, Weak, Long-
Range  Acceleration.7  and  were  further  analyzed  in  1999  in  The  Apparent  Anomalous,
Weak,  Long-Range  Acceleration  of  Pioneer  10  and  11.10    These  reported  that  a  weak
long-range  acceleration  towards  the  Sun  has  been  observed  in  the  Pioneer  10  and  11
satellites  for  which  no  satisfactory  explanation  had  been  obtained  in  spite  of  diligent
efforts by a number of parties, for which reason it was described as "anomalous".

The  interpretation  of  the  anomalous  acceleration  as  being  a  direct  effect  of  the
universal decay was presented in Exponential Decay of the Overall Universe is the Cause
of  "The  Apparent  Anomalous,  Weak,  Long-Range  Acceleration  of  [the  spacecraft]
Pioneer 10 and 11".6  Decay in the gravitational acceleration,  aG,  acting on the satellites
and due to the Sun means that  aG  was greater in the past, which means that the satellites
were slowed more in the past than we now would expect in terms of the current value of
aG.  That effect is the "anomalous acceleration" toward the Sun.

The time constant for this decay,  τa,G,  is as given in equation 6.
(6)   τa,G = τc = 3.57532·1017 sec = about 11.3 billion years

"a" dimensions are L1/T2

For  that  the  corresponding  [that  is  the  decay-related]  acceleration  toward  the  Sun  is
8.38505·10-8  cm/sec2  (the  observed  value  was  reported  as  8.5·10-8  cm/sec2
including  other  secondary  effects)  and  the  anomalous  frequency  drift,  stated  as  clock
acceleration,  is  2.79695·10-18  sec/sec2  (the  observed  value  was  2.8·10-18
sec/sec2).

While this was the first definitive, experimental observation of the decay, every
redshift  measurement  is  a  partial  such  observation.    That  is,  the  decay  in  the  speed  of
light, c, means that the light from far distant sources, which we now observe a long time
after it  was  emitted,  was emitted  at  a  larger  value  of  c    than  the  value  we  know  now.
That  greater  speed  means  that  the  wavelengths  all  are  longer,  are  redshifted  as  we
perceive them.

Furthermore, the more distant the source the earlier its light was emitted and the
less decayed is the light's speed.  That means that the greater the [decay-caused] redshift
the more distant the source is.  That relationship is non-linear as is the exponential decay
function and unlike the Hubble model linear relationship.

However,  the  sources  of  such  light  are,  nevertheless,  moving  away  from  us  so
that there is also some Doppler effect.  The redshifts that we observe are a combination of
Doppler and decay effects.

Likewise, recent  discrepancies in the  determination  of  the  distance  of  some  far
distant  galaxies  is  a  currently  unresolved  problem  that  has  resulted  in  some  rather
extreme  hypotheses.    In  the  Hubble  model  of  the  universe,  the  distance  to  far  distant

6

sources  is  determined  from  the  redshift,  from  which  the  speed  of  regression,  v,  [the
redshift being deemed due to its Doppler effect] and then the distance v ⋅ H [where H is
called the Hubble constant] are determined.

Recently it has become possible to determine the distance to Type Ia supernovae
by  other  independent  means.11,12    The  intrinsic  brightness  [luminosity]  of  such
supernovae  is  related  to  the  pattern  [light  curve]  of  their  flare  up  and  back  down,  a
process  taking  weeks.    By  comparing  the  intrinsic  brightness,  determined  from  that
pattern, to the observed brightness the distance can be determined from the inverse square
law.

Those new distance determinations exceed the Hubble distance by  10  -  15%.
The explanation others propose is that an "antigravity effect" is accelerating the universe'
expansion, which had hitherto been thought to be slowing down because of gravitation.
That  has  led  to  their  proposing  reinstatement  of  Einstein's  "cosmological  constant",  a
term  in  his  equations  introduced  to  account  for  gravitation  not  promptly  collapsing  the
universe  and  which  he  disavowed  upon  Hubble's  discovery  of  the  expansion  of  the
universe.    And  that  has  further  led  to  their  proposing  some  form  of  the  Ancients'  fifth
essence,  quintessence  [the first  four  being  earth, air,  fire  and  water], to account  for  the
"antigravity effect".

Any  "antigravity  effect",  regardless  of  its  cause,  would  have  the  effect  of
counteracting  ordinary  gravitation.    Inasmuch  as  one  of  the  major  current  problems  in
cosmology is to identify more gravitation to account for the cosmos' large scale structure
and galaxies' centripetal force, any "antigravity effect" to act as the cause of acceleration
would not appear to fit with the rest of the cosmological situation.

An  alternative  explanation  is  the  general  exponential  decay  of  the  overall
universe,  which  accounts  for  the  greater  distances  and  the  necessary  cosmic  energy
without  the  challenge  to  theory  and  to  reasonableness  that  acceleration,  its  unknown
cause, and a cosmological constant involve.  This is fully developed in The Explanation
of the New Astronomical Distance Data That Has Resulted From Measurements of Type
Ia  Supernovae  Lies  Not  In  a  "Cosmological  Constant"  and  Accelerating  Expansion;
Rather,  It  Is  Another  Aspect  /  Effect  of  the  General  Exponential  Decay  of  the  Overall
Universe.7

The  analysis  of  the  universal  decay  in  The  Origin  and  Its  Meaning.8  addresses
the  problem  of  determining  what  part  of  the  observed  redshifts  is  due  to  the  Doppler
effect  and  what  part  to  decay.    The  results  are  that  the  Doppler-caused  part  of  the
redshifts could not be more than 10% of the total redshift and is more likely on the order
of  only  1%  or  less.    The  remainder  of  the  observed  amounts  of  redshift,  90-99%  of
them,  are  due  to the universal  decay  of  the  speed  of  light.    The  reasons  for  this  are  as
follows.

At  the  Big  Bang  the  material  of  the  universe  was  thrust  rapidly  outward  in  all
directions.  Since then the mutual gravitational attraction of all of that material has been
slowing it all down.  The amount of the gravitational slowing is inversely proportional to
the square of the distant between the mutually attracting bodies.  Starting at a very large
speed the distance of separation increased rapidly, meaning that the slowing was rapidly
reduced.  Therefore, most of the slowing, most of the speed loss, had to occur early after
the "Big Bang".

A very large part of the slowing must have taken place by the time the earliest
galaxies formed, about 2½ to 3 billion years after the "Big Bang". Even if the
initial speeds, immediately after the Big Bang, of the material of those earliest galaxies
were almost the speed of light, c, their speeds 2½ to 3 billion years later could
not have been more than 1/10  as much, c/10, and more likely were on the order of   c/100,  or

7

less.    Thus  most  of  the  observed  amounts  of  redshift,  90-99%  is  due  to  the  universal
decay of the speed of light.

Application of the Decay to Rotation Curves

The above-cited behavior of the Pioneer 10 and 11 satellites presents one of the
effects of the universal decay -- an always present, essentially constant, independent  of
separation  distance  increment  of  gravitational  attraction  in  addition  to  the  amount  of
gravitational attraction expected in Newtonian terms.  This comes about because decay of
gravitation means that earlier gravitation was greater.  The analysis in Exponential Decay
of  the  Overall  Universe is  the  Cause  of  "The  Apparent  Anomalous,  Weak,  Long-Range
Acceleration of [the spacecraft] Pioneer 10 and 11" 6 develops that the magnitude of the
increment, ∆aG, is dependent on the speed of light and its decay time constant as follows.

Where, from equation 1, the speed of light decay is c(t) = c0·ε     ,  then

 -t/τ
c

(6)         d[c(t)]    c    [where c is the local
      ∆aG =        =        contemporary value]
  dt      τ
c

The contemporary local value of c is 2.9979…·1010 cm/sec  for our solar
c  =  3.575…·1017  sec  from  equation  4,  our  solar

system.    With  the  time  constant,  τ
system contemporary local increment of constant gravitational acceleration is
(7)          2.997…·1010
      ∆aG =                 = 8.385…·10-8 cm/sec2    [Sol local]
             3.575…·1017

For  galaxies  distant  up  to  on  the  order  of  500  million  light  years  this
value  increases  to  on  the  order  of    8.7·10-8  cm/sec2    the  higher  values  due  to  the
slightly  lesser  amount  of  decay  that  has  taken  place  that  many  years  earlier  than  the
present at the  very  long  term  time  constant involved,  on  the  order  of    11.3  billion
years.  For the present analysis, consistent with the limited accuracy of rotation curves,
the  intermediate  value  of    8.5·10-8  cm/sec2    will  be  used,  for  all  galaxies  in  that
distance range.  For any specific galaxy the more precise value of  ∆aG  can be calculated
by obtaining that galaxy's less decayed value of c from equation 1 and then  ∆aG from
equation 6.

That acceleration, ∆aG, acting alone as a gravitational acceleration maintaining a

mass in orbit, would produce a rotation curve as in Figure 5, below.

Figure 5 - The Rotation Curve of the Decay-Produced Increment of Gravitational
Acceleration Acting Alone
That  rotation  curve  of    ∆aG    is  of  the  correct  form  to  convert  a  galactic  rotation  curve
exhibiting a Keplerian form [as in Figure 3] to a flat one [as in Figure 4], as illustrated in
Figure 6, below, by superimposing the curves.

8

Figure 6 - The Decay-Produced Increment of Gravitational Acceleration Acting Alone
Superimposed on the Expected and Actual Rotation Curves [Fig. 3 & 4]

Of course, the rotational velocities corresponding to the components of the total
acceleration  cannot  properly  be  added.    Rather,  the  accelerations  must  be  summed  and
the resulting rotational velocities then obtained as follows,
(8)   Total Acceleration = "natural acceleration" + ∆aG
      V2    G·M
        =    +  ∆aG
      R      R2

            G·M            ½
      V  =    +  R·∆aG 
             R            
which  produces  the  observed  actual  flat  portion  of  the  rotation  curve  in  the  region
corresponding to where the "expected" form is Keplerian and the "natural" accelerations
are  G·M/R2  <<  ∆aG.

This  behavior  largely  corresponds  to  the  MOND  behavior  which  was  obtained
essentially  by  fitting  behavior  to  observation  in  spite  of  lacking  a  physical  justification
for  that  action.    That  is,  the  effect  of  the  universal  decay  is  also  to  explain  why  the
MOND hypothesis has had whatever success it has experienced -- MOND is a simulation
of reality but for incorrect, rather missing, physical reasons.

Conclusion

The  universal  decay  avoids  the  considerable  difficulties  with  the  hypothesized
"dark matter" that is assumed to exist on the basis of rotation curves, and it provides the
requisite physical justification behind, and completely replaces, MOND.  It does so with
physical justification based upon completely independent observations -- the Pioneer 10
and 11 data.  McGaugh  3 has shown that if MOND is assumed the resulting universe is
one in which structure grows rapidly and to large scales, and the universe is made up of
baryons.  Those same results apply more securely to the universe of the universal decay.

Actions Needed to Complete the Verification of the Universal Decay

The universal decay can be verified and further investigated by conducting two
experiments set forth in The Origin and Its Meaning  8; the measurement of the value of

9

each of the two fundamental constants, c  and  h, directly as they are in the light from far
distant astronomical sources.  The measurements must be of the actual light emitted long
ago from a far distant astronomical source, not local, just emitted, light.

The measurements must directly measure the constant sought; they cannot be a
measurement of  other  quantities  with the calculation  of  the fundamental  constant using
laws of physics relating the quantities.  For example, in the usual determinations of the
values  of  the  various  fundamental  constants  Planck's  constant  is  not  directly  measured.
Rather  its  value  is  inferred  from  other  measurements  [e.g.  the  Rydberg  constant]  and
calculated  via  other  formulations  [e.g.  the  fine  structure  constant].    Such  indirect
procedures may not give correct results in the present experiments.

The  expected  results  of  the  experiments  are  given  in  Figure  5,  below,  which
gives the multiples of our contemporary value of the constants c and h that are expected
to be found in light that was emitted at various times in the past.

   Measuring The Speed of Light, c

Figure 7

Modern  measurements  of  the  speed  of  light  are  done  by  measuring  certain
frequencies and wavelengths that are measurable with very great precision,  c  being the
product of a frequency and its related wavelength. To measure the speed of ancient light
from far distant sources the product of frequency and wavelength is useless. We already
know  that  the  wavelength  is  significantly  different  from  that  in  our  local  light,  the
difference being the redshift. If that redshift were entirely due to universal decay then the
frequency-wavelength  product  would  give  the  correct  speed,  but  at  least  some  of  the
redshift is due to the Doppler effect [on the order of 1 - 10%].

The  data  of  interest  is  a  comparison  of  the  c  in  ancient  light  with  that  in
contemporary light. That can be determined by an interferometer type measurement such
as  those  of  Michaelson  /  Pease  and  Pearson  using  the  Foucault  method.  In  those
revolving  mirrors  or  a  toothed  wheel  were  used  to  break  a  monochromatic  [single
frequency]  light  beam  into  segments.  The  beam  was  then  split  into  two  beams  which
were directed over two different paths of known length and then recombined. If the speed
of  travel  over  the  two  paths  were  the  same  then  the  recombination  would  produce  a
perfect  overlap  of  the  waves,  but  if  it  were  different  the  difference  would  show  in  the
resulting interference wave pattern.

To  compare  far  distant  ancient  light  against  contemporary  local  light  the
interference  must  be  generated  between  a  single  frequency  of  the  ancient  light  [as

10

selected  by  a  spectroscope,  one  of  the  lines  of  the  distant  source's  line  spectrum  being
selected]  and  a  beam  of  local  light  [the  same  frequency  line  as  in  the  ancient  light
spectrum  being  spectroscopically  selected],  no  beam  splitting  being  involved.  As
indicated in the sample data above, the speed difference of the two light beams will be
large and the resulting interference pattern will be accordingly.

   Measuring Planck's Constant, h.

Planck's  Constant,  h,  can  be  directly  measured  using  the  photoelectric  effect.
Figure  6,  below,  illustrates  the  photoelectric  effect  and  its  relationship  to  Planck's
constant.  While the accuracy using the photoelectric effect is not nearly as good as that
provided  by  other  less  direct  means,  the  method  is  quite  sufficiently  accurate  for  the
accuracies involved for the present purposes.  The lines in the figure [which are straight
lines] can  be  plotted  from  as  little  as  two  data  points  for  any  one  substance  [of  course
accuracy improves with a greater number of data points and interpolation among them].

Figure 8

Each  data  point  is  obtained  by  shining  light  [in  the  present  situation  the  light
must be from a far distant astronomical  source]  of  a single frequency [as selected  by a
spectroscope,  one  of  the  lines  of  the  source's  line  spectrum  being  selected]  on  a
photosensitive surface that emits photoelectrons [the selected line must be of a frequency
greater than the cut-off frequency, e.g. f1 or f2, for the particular photosensitive substance
being used].

Normally in the use of the photoelectric effect the objective is to readily collect a
current  of  photoelectrons  so  that  the  collection  anode  is  set  at  a  positive  electrical
potential  relative  to  the  photoelectron  source,  the  photosensitive  surface  on  which  the
light is shined. [Of course, the entire structure must be in a vacuum for the photoelectrons
to be free to travel without the interference of a relatively dense gas.]

In  the  present  experiment  the  collection  anode  is  set  negative  relative  to  the
photoelectron source, that negative potential being adjustable. Then the negative potential
is made progressively less negative until the first, initial photoelectron current is detected.
That  potential  is  the  energy  of  the  most  energetic  photoelectron  produced  by  the
particular frequency of the light being used [the photoelectrons emitted at lesser energies
having been freed from the photosensitive surface with the same high energy but having
lost some within the material before becoming free]. The data point is the energy and the
frequency.

As indicated in the figure, Planck's constant is the slope of the resulting line(s),

which develops as follows.  The energy of a photon of light is given by

(16)

E = h·f

where:  E is the energy,

  h is Planck's constant, and
  f is the frequency of the particular photon.

11

The initial energy datum is the electric retarding potential and must be converted to the
units of Planck's constant times frequency as required for the E of equation 16. That done,
then the slope of the line in the figure is

(17)

Energy/frequency = h·f/f = h, Planck's constant.
This  measurement  performed  on  light  from  distant  astronomical  sources  will
result in values for Planck's constant quite noticeably larger than our domestic value, the
difference  being  the  decay  that  has  taken  place  since  the  time  the  sample  light  was
originally emitted at its distant source.

References

       [N.B.  The first three references themselves further reference many of the large and

significant number of papers on their topics.]

[1]   J.A. Sellwood and A. Kosowsky, Does Dark Matter Exist ?, Los Alamos National

Laboratory Eprint Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov, astro-ph/0009074.

[2]      Mordehai Milgrom, The Modified Dynamics -- Status Review, Los Alamos National

Laboratory Eprint Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov, astro-ph/9810302.

[3]      Stacy  McGaugh,  MOND  in  the  Early  Universe,  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory

Eprint Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov, astro-ph/9812328.

[4]            R.  Ellman,  A  Conjecture  Concerning  Red  Shifts,  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory

Eprint Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov, physics/9808051.

[5]   R.  Ellman,  Further  Analysis  of  the  Universal  Decay  Suggested  In  "A  Conjecture
Concerning  Red  Shifts",  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory  Eprint  Archive  at
http://xxx.lanl.gov, physics/9809029.

[6]   R.  Ellman,  Exponential  Decay  of  the  Overall  Universe  is  the  Cause  of  "The
Apparent  Anomalous,  Weak,  Long-Range  Acceleration  of  [the  spacecraft]  Pioneer
10 and 11", Los Alamos National Laboratory Eprint Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov,
physics/9906031.

[7]   R.  Ellman,  TheExplanation  of  the  New  Astronomical  Distance  Data  That  Has
Resulted From Measurements of Type Ia Supernovae Lies Not In a "Cosmological
Constant" and Accelerating Expansion; Rather, It Is Another Aspect / Effect of the
General  Exponential  Decay  of  the  Overall  Universe,  Los  Alamos  National
Laboratory Eprint Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov, physics/0007058.

[8]  This paper is based on development in R. Ellman, The Origin and Its Meaning, The-
Origin  Foundation, 
the
development is more extensive and the collateral issues are developed.  [It may be
downloaded from http://www.The-Origin.org/download.htm].

Inc.,  http://www.The-Origin.org,  1997, 

in  which 

[9]   J. D. Anderson, P. A. Laing, E. L. Lau, A. S. Liu, M. M. Nieto, and S. G. Turyshev,
Indication,  from  Pioneer  10/11,  Galileo,  and  Ulysses  Data,  of  an  Apparent
Anomalous, Weak, Long-Range Acceleration, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 2858 (1998), Los
Alamos National Laboratory Eprint Archive at  http://xxx.lanl.gov, gr-qc/9808081.
[10]  J. D. Anderson, P. A. Laing, E. L. Lau, A. S. Liu, M. M. Nieto, and S. G. Turyshev,
The Apparent Anomalous, Weak, Long-Range Acceleration of     Pioneer 10 and 11,
Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory  Eprint  Archive  at    http://xxx.lanl.gov,  gr-
qc/9903024.

12

[11] A.G. Riess, A.V. Filippenko, P. Challis, A. Clocchiatti, A. Diercks, P.M. Garnavich,
R.L. Gilliland, C.J. Hogan, S. Jha, R.P. Kirshner, B. Leibundgut, M.M. Phillips, D.
Reiss,  B.P.  Schmidt,  R.A.  Schommer,  R.C.  Smith,  J.  Spyromilio,  C.  Stubbs,  N.B.
Suntzeff,  J.  Tonry,  Observational  Evidence  from  Supernovae  for  an  Accelerating
Universe  and  a  Cosmological  Constant,  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory  Eprint
Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov, astro-ph/9805201.

[12] S.  Perlmutter,  G.  Aldering,  G.  Goldhaber,  R.A.  Knop,  P.  Nugent,  P.G.  Castro,  S.
Deustua, S. Fabbro, A. Goobar, D.E. Groom, I.M. Hook, A.G. Kim, M.Y. Kim, J.C.
Lee, N.J. Nunes, R. Pain, C.R. Pennypacker, R. Quimby, C. Lidman, R.S. Ellis, M.
Irwin, R.G. McMahon, P. Ruiz-Lapuente, N. Walton, B. Schaefer, B.J. Boyle, A.V.
Filppenko, T. Matheson, A.S. Fruchter, N. Panagia, H.J.M. Newberg,  W.J.  Couch,
Measurements  of  Ω  and  Λ  From  42  High-Redshift  Supernovae,  Los  Alamos
National Laboratory Eprint Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov, astro-ph/9812133.

13

