 

1

A phase-locked frequency divide-by-3 optical 

parametric oscillator 

A. Douillet, J.-J. Zondy, G. Santarelli, A. Makdissi, and A. Clairon  

0
0
0
2

 

v
o
N
3

 

 
 
 

9
0
0
1
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
Abstract--  Accurate  phase-locked  3:1  division  of  an  optical 
frequency  was  achieved,  by  using  a  continuous-wave  (cw) 
doubly  resonant  optical  parametric  oscillator.  A  fractional 
frequency stability of 2×10-17 of the division process has been 
achieved for 100 s  integration time.  The technique developed 
in  this  work  can  be  generalized  to  the  accurate  phase  and 
frequency control of any cw optical parametric oscillators. 
 
Index Terms—Optical parametric oscillators, high precision 
measurements, phase-locking loops. 
 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

that 

laser 

 
Novel  compact  optical  frequency chains rely on visible to 
near  IR  broad  frequency  combs  (spanning  one  octave) 
provided  by  a  femtosecond 
is  spectrally 
broadened  by  self-phase  modulation  in  photonic  bandgap 
fibers [1-2]. The traceability of the frequency measurement 
to  the  microwave  primary  standard  is  provided  by  the 
phase-locking of the RF repetition rate of the femtosecond 
laser, which defines the comb mode spacing. Provided that 
we  are  able  to  synthesize  a  frequency  difference  equal  to 
ν/N within the span of the comb (ν is the frequency to be 
determined and N an integer divider), the frequencies ν, and 
the related subharmonics ν/Ν and (1-N-1)ν can be deduced 
in  a  straightforward  step.  Thus,  the  use  of  an  optical 
division by N can considerably reduce the required span of 
the comb generator, and at the same time, reduce by N2 the 
φ  noise  requirement  for  the  phase-locking  (or  beatnote 
counting)  of  two  of  the  frequency  markers  to  the  nearest 
comb modes. 

Continuous-wave optical parametric oscillators (OPO) 
are  promising  optical  frequency  dividers.  Divide-by-two 
(N=2) frequency degenerate OPOs have been demonstrated 
[3]. For a non-degenerate 3:1 OPO (3ω→2 ω, ω), the idler 
wave  must  be  frequency  doubled  so  that  the  RF  beat 
between the signal and the doubled-idler waves can be used 
to  phase  lock  the  device  to  zero  or  to  an  RF  reference 
frequency [4]. The advantage of these OPO-based dividers 
is  that  they  require  only  a  single  pump  laser  source  to 
generate subharmonics outside the comb spectrum. In a free 
running  OPO,  the  phase  coherence  of  the  subharmonic 

                                                           
 Laboratoire  Primaire du Temps et des Fréquences (BNM-
LPTF),  Bureau  National  de  Métrologie  /  Observatoire  de 
Paris,  61,  Avenue  de 
l’observatoire,  F-75014,  Paris 
(France) 

waves  is  ultimately  limited  by  the  phase  diffusion  noise 
stemming  from  the  spontaneous  parametric  fluorescence. 
Once these waves are phase-locked, the coherent nature of 
the parametric division process leads to subharmonic phase-
noise  reduction  by  N2  relative  to  the  pump  laser  phase 
noise.  We  report here on an accurate phase-locked optical 
frequency  divider  of  a  diode  laser  operating  in  the  range 
840-850  nm.  We  show  that  even  with  a  weak  beatnote 
signal-to-noise ratio, and without a fast electro-optic cavity 
length  actuator,  it  is  possible  to  achieve  a  very  high 
fractional stability and long-term operation of the divider. 
 

II.  THE DRO DIVIDER SETUP 

A.  Experimental 

 
The doubly resonant optical parametric oscillator (DRO) is 
pumped  by  a  master-oscillator  power  amplifier  (MOPA) 
AlGaAs  diode  laser  which  is  optically  injected  by  a 
AlGaAs  extended-cavity  diode  laser  (Fig.1).  The  pump 
wavelength  is  λp=843.06  nm  and  its  short-term  linewidth 
100 kHz. The available power at the DRO input is 0.4 W. 
The  nearly  spherical  DRO  cavity  consists  of  two  highly 
reflective (at the signal and idler wavelengths) ZnSe mirrors 
spaced  by  L=106  mm.  Their  radius  of  curvature  is  R=50 
mm.  The  cavity  length  can  be  tuned  using  a  20  mm  long 
piezoelectric  transducer  (PZT).  A  multi-grating,  19  mm 
long  periodically  poled  lithium  niobate  (PPLN,  poling 
period  Λ=29.2  µm)  is  temperature  phase-matched  (T= 
100°C)  for  the  3ω→(2ω±δ)+(ω m δ)  interaction.  The  δ 
quantity  (δ<<ω)  represents  the  small  radio-frequency 
mismatch from perfect division ratio. An intra-cavity CaF2 
Brewster plate was inserted in order to couple out as much 
as  3  mW  of  idler  power  (without  the  plate  only  200  µW 
exits  the  rear  mirror),  at  the  expense  of  an  increased 
oscillation threshold (65 mW compared with 15 mW). The 
available  signal  power  is  6  mW.  We  perform  the  second-
harmonic  generation  (SHG)  of  the  idler  wave  in  a  PPLN 
sample (Λ=35 µm, T=68°C). About 3 mW of signal (2ω±δ) 
and  5  nW  of  useful  doubled-idler  (2ω m 2δ)  waves  are 
mixed  on  a  5  GHz  bandwidth  avalanche  photodiode.  The 
resulting  3δ  frequency  beat  signal  is  used  to  control  the 
division  ratio  of 
the 
experimental setup can be found elsewhere [5]. 
 
 

the  DRO.  Further  details  of 

 

2

 
 
Fig. 1. The DRO, idler SHG and 3δ beanote detection set-
up.  FI:  Faraday  isolator;  PBS:  polarizing  beamsplitter; 
LWP:  long-wave  pass  filter;  CFP:  confocal  Fabry-Perot; 
PZT:  piezo-electric  transducer..  Two  wavemeters  (not 
shown) enable to tune the DRO close to the 3:1 division. 

B.  Single mode pair operation and beatnote detection 

 
Due  to  the  weak  dispersion  of  the  extraordinary  index  of 
refraction of lithium niobate from 2.53 µm to 1.26 µm, the 
signal  and  idler  free  spectral  ranges  (FSR  ≈  1.15  GHz) 
differ  by  only  1  or  2  MHz.  Consequently  more  than  700 
nearly  resonant  signal-idler  mode  pairs  can  experience 
similar gain within a mode cluster, giving rise to permanent 
axial mode hops (a few gigahertz away) or cluster hops (a 
few  tens  of  gigahertz)  under free running DRO operation. 
The  DRO  natural  tendency  to  mode-hop  requires  a 
permanent and effective sub-nanometric servo control of its 
cavity length in order to detect a stable beatnote prior to the 
phase-locking step. Single mode pair operation is achieved 
with  a  standard  side-of-fringe  (sidelock)  servo.  The  error 
signal  of  this  servo  loop  is  built  by  comparing  the  signal 
wave power detected by an InAs photodiode to a reference 
voltage  that  sets  the  frequency  detuning 
  of 
ω ) from the cavity eigenmode frequency 
the signal wave (
s
=ω
sL  is the signal wave optical path length of 
the resonator and q the mode number). This error signal is 
then  integrated  and  fed  back  to  the  PZT  transducer.  The 
bandwidth of the sidelock integral servo is limited to 1 kHz 
by mode-hops. Let us note that this sidelock servo is not a 
pure  frequency  servo.  While  it  maintains  constant  both 
relative  detunings,  it  does  not  correct  for  the  drift  of  the 
cavity eigenmode frequencies. Furthermore it converts any 
power fluctuation into a frequency correction. The resulting 
beat at 3δ under pure sidelock servo is hence expected to be 
noisy.  Under  sidelock  servo,  the  DRO  can  oscillate  on  a 
single mode pair during 5-15 minutes, which leaves enough 
time to proceed to the phase-locking step. 

ω−ω=∆

qc 2/

L
s

 (

s
c

s

s

s
c

The selection of the appropriate mode pairs (e.g. those 
yielding  a  beanote  falling  within  the  5  GHz  electronic 
detection bandwidth) is the first experimental difficulty we 
had  to  overcome.  Because  of  the  high  mode  pair  density, 
the  particular  pair  captured  by  the  sidelock  is  usually 

sidelock 

random. Fine tuning of the OPO-PPLN temperature and of 
the  sidelock  reference  voltage  have  to  be  repetitively 
processed until a 3δ beat signal in the frequency range 200 
MHz-5 GHz, with a typical power level of –50dBm and a 
signal  to  noise  (S/N)  ration  of  a30  dB  in  a  100  kHz 
bandwidth, is detected on the spectrum analyzer. The beat 
frequency drift is rather low (less than 1 MHz per minute). 
Unfortunately  the  large  short-term  frequency  jitter  (a300 
kHz  peak-to-peak  excursion)  under 
servo 
combined  with  the  limited  bandwidth  of  the  unique  PZT 
transducer (<10 kHz) prevented us from performing a direct 
phase  locking,  by  summing  (after  a  proper  filtering)  the 
phase  error  derived  from  a  stable  RF  source  with  the 
sidelock  error  signal.  With  a  wide  enough  control 
bandwidth provided  for instance by an electro-optic phase 
modulator  [3-4],  such  a  procedure  would  readily work. In 
the present case, since the sidelock servo (which maintains 
the  pre-requisite  single  mode  operation)  has 
to  be 
maintained  during  the  phase  locking  step,  various  nested 
servo  loops  that  we  shall  detail  in  the  following  section 
have to be implemented simultaneously in order to achieve 
a phase locked divider. 
 

III.  THE PHASE-COHERENT FREQUENCY DIVIDER 

 
The  ways  we  found  to  circumvent  these  difficulties  are 
multiple.  Given  the  noisy  feature  of  the  free  running 
beatnote,  the  procedure  must  comply  to  the  following 
preliminary  steps.  At  first  we  reduced  the  large  beat 
frequency fluctuations by replacing (in a continuous way to 
prevent a mode hop) the sidelock servo by a much quieter 
pure  frequency  lock  servo.  This  consequently  reduces  the 
required dynamical range of the phase servo by minimizing 
the  beat  frequency  jitter  and  drift.  Secondly  we  increased 
further  the  dynamic  range  of  the  phase  error  signal  by 
dividing the beanote frequency (by 128) in order to reduce 
the control bandwidth required to achieve a stable (free of 
phase  jumps)  phase  locked  loop.  Finally,  to  increase  the 
long-term operation of the phase-locked divider (limited by 
the  occurrence  of  a  mode  hop),  we  developed  a  method 
allowing  the  coexistence  of  the  frequency  (FL)  and  the 
phase locked (PL) loops. Fig.2 sketches the various nested 
loops  that  we  have  implemented  to  achieve  a  long-term 
phase  locked,  mode-hop-free  operation  during  more  than 
one hour. 

Let us describe now in detail the phase locking steps. 
Once a “free running” beatnote is captured according to the 
procedure described in section II.B, its frequency is down-
converted to a fixed RF frequency of 100 MHz by mixing it 
with  a  microwave  synthesizer  synchronized  to  a  high 
stability 10 MHz reference from an H-maser. To avoid false 
triggering  of  the  digital  by-128  frequency  divider,  due  to 
additive AM noise, we have improved the S/N ratio of the 
down-converted  beatnote  by  phase-locking  a  100  MHz 
voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO) to it. This servo loop is 
denoted  the  tracking  loop  in  fig.2.  The  bandwidth  of  this 
phase  loop  is  wide  enough  (1  MHz)  to  track  almost 

 

3

perfectly  the  phase/frequency  fluctuations  of  the  optical 
beat. 
 

 

Loop filter 

Sidelock Loop 

PD 

signal

amplifier 

PZT 

PPLN 

OPO cavity 

idler 
SHG 

BS 

Avalanche 
photodiode 

DBM 

DBM 

Microwave 
synthesizer 

Tracking 

Loop 

H-MASER 

Frequency Loop 

Loop filter 

Loop filter 

Σ 

VCO 
~ 
Phase 
Loop 

Loop filter 

÷128 

Phase 
detector 

RF 

Synthesizer 

Fig.  2.  The  phase/frequency  nested  loops  block  diagram, 
comprising.  The  sidelock  loop  is  disabled  once  the 
frequency loop is effective. DBM: double-balanced mixer; 
PD: InAs photodiode. 
 
The 20 dB S/N ratio achieved in the loop bandwidth makes 
very improbable noise-induced cycle slips. The higher S/N 
ratio at the VCO output also allows convenient counting of 
the beat frequency with a RF counter referenced to the H-
maser,  for  further  diagnosis  of  the  stability  of  the  DRO 
divider. 

the 

frequency  and 

difference  between 

When  the  tracking  loop  is  closed,  the  correction 
voltage  applied  to  the  VCO  varicap  is  proportional  to  the 
the  down-converted 
frequency 
instantaneous 
free-running  VCO 
frequency.  This  voltage  provides  the  error  signal  of  the 
frequency  loop  (FL)  of  fig.2.  By  feeding  back  (with  an 
appropriate  sign)  this  correction  voltage  to  the  PZT,  one 
slaves  in  turn  the jittered 3δ beat  frequency to the natural 
VCO  frequency.  Tuning  the  VCO frequency  results hence 
in  the  tuning  of  the  3δ  beat  frequency.  To  insure  a 
permanent and stable control of the DRO cavity the FL and 
sidelock  error  signals  are  summed  before  integration  and 
both loops are used simultaneously for a while. The stable 
coexistence  of  both  loops  is  possible  because  both  error 
signals  have  a  large  dynamic  range  and  provide  similar 
physical  information.  When  the  gain  of  the  FL  servo  is 
sufficiently large the sidelock loop can be disabled without 
inducing a mode hop. Operating the divider under pure FL 
provides  a  strong  reduction  of  the  beatnote  fluctuations 
down  to  a  few  kiloHertz  level  compared  with  300  kHz 
when both loops are coexisting, meaning that the sidelock 
acts as a noise source for the FL. As a consequence, under 
pure FL operation the DRO tendency to mode hop is then 
notably  reduced.  In  Fig.  3  we  have  plotted  the  Allan 
standard deviation σy(τ) of the DRO, under sidelock (upper 
curve)  and  frequency  lock  (lower  curve).  The  data  were 
derived from 3δ frequency measurements using 1s counting 
gate  time.  The  quantity  σy  ,  where  y  is  defined  as 
iν   and  νi=118.6  THz  is  the  idler  frequency, 
y=<δ(t)>/

measures the stability of the optical frequency division. Fig 
3  illustrates  the  additional frequency noise  brought by the 
sidelock servo, as compared with the FL servo. The origin 
of this additional noise stems from the hybrid nature of the 
information  carried  by  the  side-of-fringe  discriminator 
signal, as discussed in section II. In particular we suspect a 
specific  thermally  induced  AM  to  FM  noise  conversion 
processes [5] to be the cause of the large frequency jitter of 
the 3δ beat under pure sidelock servo. Indeed, the 300 kHz 
jitter cannot be reasonably imputed either to the small pump 
laser  amplitude  noise  (1%  intensity  fluctuation  would 
correspond  to  10  kHz  frequency  excursion  given  an 
estimated cavity linewidth of ~5 MHz) or to the acoustical 
cavity perturbations since they are efficiently corrected by 
the FL loop. 
 

 

)

τ

(

σ

y

 
,

n
o
i
t
a
i
v
e
D
 
n
a
l
l

A

10 -9

1 0 -10

1 0 -11

1 0 -12

1 0 0

1 0 1

A v eragin g T im e, τ(s) 

 

1 0 2

 
Fig. 3. Allan standard deviation of the 3:1 divider frequency 
noise, relative to the idler frequency under sidelock (circles) 
and  frequency  lock  (triangles).  The  frequency  locking  of 
the OPO beatnote to the VCO decreases the beat noise by 
almost two decades at τ=1s. 
 

To this point, the beat fluctuations are low enough to 
allow  the  final  phase-locking  step.  The  100  MHz  VCO 
output is digitally  divided by 128 and the resulting output 
signal  mixed  in  a  digital  phase  detector  with  a  781  kHz 
synthesizer, synchronized to the H-maser. The output phase 
error  signal  has  a  128π  peak-to-peak  dynamic  range, 
because of the  division  stage,  and  hence  allows a reduced 
phase  locking  loop  bandwidth.  The  most  natural  way  to 
control the beatnote frequency when the FL loop is closed 
is to change the VCO varicap voltage. We took advantage 
of  this  entry  point  to  phase  lock  the  DRO  divider.  In  this 
way  we  achieved  in  fact  a  cascaded  phase  locking  of  the 
beatnote. This loop is denoted the phase loop (PL) in fig.2. 
Hence the VCO itself acts as a second fast transducer of the 
DRO  divider.  Furthermore,  summing  on  the  VCO  varicap 
the  tracking  and  phase  lock  correction  signals  leads  to  a 
simultaneous  operation  of  both  the  FL  and  the  PL  loops. 
the  down-converted  beat 
Under  FL  and  PL  action, 
frequency 
the 
millihertz level for τ=100 s counting gate time. 

fluctuations  dramatically  dropped 

to 

The  residual  phase  error  at  the  output  of  the  phase 
detector was displayed on an FFT spectrum analyzer (fig.4) 
and  used  to  adjust  the  relative  gains  of  the FL  and  PL by 
the 
minimizing 
variance 
φ∫=σφ
. The small peak at 22 kHz is due to a  PZT 
S
f

residual 

phase 

error 

(

)

df

2

 

4

resonance  frequency  which  ultimately  limits  the  overall 
gain of the system. The sharp low-frequency peaks at ~ 50 
Hz  and  ~100Hz  are  due  to  the  electrical  power  supply 
pickups  and  the  remaining  broader  peaks    (20,  250  and 
1000 Hz)  probably due to the acoustical resonance of the 
φσ  
2
DRO  mechanical  structure.  The  major  contribution  to 
arises from the broad noise feature between 103 and 104Hz 
in  fig.4,  which  we  identified  as  possibly  originating  from 
thermo-optically  induced  AM  to  FM  noise  conversion  (a 
weak thermal self-stabilization of the optical path length of 
the DRO was observed as in ref. [5]). The total phase noise 
2.1
variance  deduced  from  the  spectrum  of  fig.4  is 
 
rad2 corresponding to only 
30% of the beatnote 
energy  in  a  narrow  coherent  peak.  Indeed,  the  measured 
residual 3δ beatnote linewidth was 3 kHz, and no coherent 
peak  was  clearly  visible.  The  DRO  could  remain  phase-
locked  for  more  than  one  hour,  without  any  mode  hop, 
which  highlights  the  robustness  of  the  combined  FL/PL 
loops. The numerical modeling of the action of the nested 
loops reveals that such a coexisting FL/PL loop system can 
tolerate  very  large  frequency  jumps  (hence  the  reduced  
mode hop events). In particular, when the phase goes out of 
lock  the  FL  brings  back  the  frequency  error  within  the 
capture  range  of  the  phase  lock  loop,  shortening  its 
recapture delay by a factor of 100. 
 

=σ− φ )

2 =σφ

exp(

2

in  a 

We  have  achieved  a  phase-coherent  optical  frequency 
division  by  3  of  843  nm  light,  using  a  doubly  resonant 
optical  parametric  oscillator.  A  relative  optical  divider 
frequency stability of 2×10-17 for 100 s integration time, at 
the  idler  wave  is  achieved,  which  highlights  the  potential 
resolution  of  parametric  dividers 
frequency 
measurement  setup.  This  PPLN-DRO  also  generates  a 
comb of phase-locked frequencies (ωp/3, 2ωp/3, ωp, 4/3ωp, 
5ωp/3,  2ωp)  from  various  non-phase  matched  conversion 
mixings that occur within the chip. Measuring any interval 
between these sidebands leads to a simple determination of 
all frequencies of the comb. Combined with a femtosecond 
Ti:Sa 
[2],  such  a  phase-locked  OPO 
subharmonic comb can provide a direct microwave to deep 
mid-IR  link  or  reduce  by  one  third  the  required  span  of 
repetition rate stabilized femtosecond lasers. An alternative 
implementation  of  3:1  DRO  dividers  would  consist  in 
patterning both OPO and idler SHG interactions on a single 
PPLN chip. The intra-cavity cascaded nonlinearities would 
then  induce  a  self  phase  locking  of  the  signal  and  idler 
waves  by  mutual  injection  locking.  Such  an  all-optical 
phase  locking  would  avoid  the  use  of  the  complex 
electronic phase-lock loops. 
 

laser  clock 

- 1 5

1 0

)

τ

(
σ

y

1 0 - 1 6

1 0 -1

-2

1 0

)
z
H

(
 
 
)

τ

(
σ

- 1 7

1 0

0

1 0

1

1 0
τ     ( s )

2

1 0

Fig. 5. Allan standard deviation of the 3:1 divider frequency 
noise, relative to the idler frequency (left axis) and absolute 
variance of δ, as a function of the integration counter gate 
time (τ =1, 10, 100s).  
 

 

V.  REFERENCES 

 
[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

J.Reichert, R.Holzwarth, Th.Udem, and T.W. Hänsch, “Measuring 
the frequency of light with mode-locked lasers” Opt. Commun., Vol. 
172, pp. 59-68 (1999) 

S.A.  Diddams,  D.J.  Jones,  J.  Ye,nS.T.  Cundiff,  J.  L.  Hall,    J.K. 
Ranka,  R.S.  Windeler,  R.  Holzwarth,  T.  Udem  and  T.W.  Hänsch 
“Direct link between microwave and optical frequencies with a 300 
THz  femtosecond  laserg  comb,”  Phys. Rev. Lett.,  Vol. 25, pp. 186-
188 (2000) 

D.  Lee  and  N.C.  Wong,  “  Tunable  optical  frequency  division 
using  a  phase-locked  optical  parametric  oscillator”,  Opt.  Lett.,  Vol. 
17, pp. 13-15 (1992) 

S.  Slyusarev,  T.  Ikegami,  S.  Ohshima,  “Phase-coherent  optical 
frequency division by three of 532-nm laser light with a continuous-
wave  optical  parametric  oscillator”,  Opt.  Lett.,  Vol.  24,  pp.  1856-
1858 (1999). 

A.  Douillet,  J.-  J.  Zondy,  A.  Yelisseyev,S.  Lobanov  and  L. 
Isaenko,  “Stability  and  frequency  tuning  of  thermally  loaded 
continuous-wave AgGaS2 optical parametric oscillators”, J. Opt. Soc. 
Am. B, Vol. 16, pp. 1481-1498, (1999) 

 
Fig. 4. Residual phase noise spectrum of the phase locked 
divider (relative to the offset δ quantity scaled to the idler 
frequency), measured from the phase error signal, when all 
loops in fig.2 (except the sidelock loop) are closed. 
 

The  Allan  standard  deviation  of  the  phase-locked 
divider is reported in fig.5. The improvement of the short-
term (τ=1s) stability of the division process is nearly three 
orders of magnitude compared with the stability under FL 
action  only  (see  fig.3).  For  longer  integration  time  (up  to 
τ=100s  gate  time),  the  stability  decreases  as  τ-1,  meaning 
that the residual phase excursion is bounded to less than 2π 
in the long term. This also demonstrates that no cycle slips 
occurred during the measurement. This is a clear signature 
of the phase locking of the nearly subharmonic waves. 
 

IV.  CONCLUSION 

 

