Newton’s aether model  
Eric Baird  (eric_baird@compuserve.com) 

Isaac Newton is usually associated with the idea of absolute space and time, and with 
ballistic light-corpuscle arguments. However, Newton was also a proponent of 
wave/particle duality, and published a “new” variable-density aether model in which light 
and matter trajectories were either bent by gravitational fields, or deflected by an aether 
density gradient. Newton’s (flawed) aether model can be considered as an early attempt at a 
curved-space model of gravity.  

 
1.  Introduction 
Modern textbooks typically say that Newton 
believed that space and time were absolute and 
inviolable. However, a reading of Newton’s 
“Principia” [1] and “Opticks” [2] reveals a 
rather different picture, with Optiks in 
particular documenting Newton’s attempt to 
produce a model of gravity in which a 
gravitational field could be represented as a 
series of light-distance differentials, or as a 
variation in lightspeed or refractive index. This 
can be compared to Einstein’s “refractive” 
approach to gravitational light-bending in 1911 
( [3] §4 ) and to his description of general 
relativity as a (nonparticulate!) gravitational 
aether model in 1920 [4][5].  

We briefly look at some of the features of 
Newton’s model, the mistake that doomed it to 
obscurity [6], and some of the consequences of 
this mistake on the subsequent development of 
physics. 

2.  Absolute space? 
In “Principia”, Newton was careful to 
distinguish between relative space and time, 
which were to be defined by observations and 
instrument readings, and absolute space and 
time, which were to relate to more abstract (and 
possibly arbitrary) quantities that might or 
might not have an identifiable grounding in 
physical reality. Finite-lightspeed effects had 
already been seen in the timing offsets in the 
orbits of Jupiter’s moons, so this distinction 
was important. Newton insisted that the words 
“space” and “time” should by default refer to 
“absolute” (deduced, mathematical) quantities 
rather than their “apparent” counterparts, but 
statements from Newton regarding “absolute 
space” and “absolute time” do not automatically 
mean that Newton believed that directly-
measurable distances and physical clock-rates 
were also absolute – (Principia, Definitions: 
“… the natural days are truly unequal, though 
they are commonly considered as equal … it 
may well be that there is no such thing as an 
equable motion, whereby time may be 
accurately measured.”).   

In “Opticks”, Newton’s idealised absolute space 
is occupied by a “new” form of medium whose 
density depends on gravitational properties, 
with variations in aether density producing the 
effects that would otherwise be described as the 
results of a gravitational field. The resulting 
metric associates a gravitational field with 
signal flight-time differences (see: Shapiro 
effect) that deflect light, leading to a normalised 
lightbeam-geometry that is not Euclidean. Since 
these effects are described in modern theory as 
the effects of curved space, it seems reasonable 
to interpret Newton’s “absolute space” as an 
absolute Euclidean embedding-space that acts 
as a container for non-Euclidean geometry, 
rather than as an indication that Newton 
believed that gravity had no effect on measured 
or perceived distances, times, or “effective” 
geometrical relationships.    

3.  Lightspeed problems 
Newton and Huyghens had opposing ideas on 
how a lightspeed differential deflected light: 

Newton view:  

”A gravitational gradient is associated with 
a change in speed of freely falling particles, 
with the speed being higher where the 
gravitational field is stronger. The bending 
of light at an air-glass boundary and the 
falling of light-corpuscles in a gravitational 
field can be described as the deflection of 
light towards regions of higher lightspeed.” 

Huyghens view:  

”If a region has a slower speed of light, it 
will tend to collect light from the 
surrounding region. If a light-signal 
wavefront encounters a lightspeed gradient 
across its surface, with a faster natural speed 
on one side and a slower speed on the other, 
the retardation of the wavefront’s “slower” 
side will steer the wavefront towards the 
slower-speed region.” 

Measurements of relative lightspeeds in 
different media in the 19th Century showed that 
it was Huyghens’ explanation that was correct.   

arXiv reference:  http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/  physics/0011003 

“Newton’s aether model”                         Eric Baird                        1 November 2000  

page 2 / 2 

 
4.  Huyghens’ principle 
Huyghens’ principle is illustrated in the 
following diagrams of a light plane-wave 
hitting a glass block:.  

 (a) 

 (b) 

Figure (a) shows the progress of a wavefront 
hitting a lightspeed transition boundary,  
(b) shows the resulting change in direction of 
the wave normal.  

At the start of the experiment, the leftmost edge 
of the advancing wavefront hits the air/glass 
boundary at A. A short time later, the rightmost 
edge of the wavefront has advanced by a 
distance c1 and the rightmost edge of the 
wavefront has reached the boundary at B. By 
this time, the leftmost edge has penetrated the 
glass a smaller distance c2  (because lightspeed 
in glass is slower) and the new wavefront lies 
along a line between B and a tangent centred on 
A with radius c2 . The wavefront normal is 
deflected to point more towards the region of 
slower lightspeed, with the exact relationship 
being  

INCIDENCE

ANGLE

sin
sin

REFRACTION

ANGLE

=

c
1
c
2

 

5.  The “corrected” gravitational  
     aether  
We can make Newton’s description compatible 
with Huyghens’ principle by inverting his 
lightspeed and aether-density relationships. 
After these substitutions, the relevant queries in  
Opticks read: 

Qu 19x (rewritten)   

Doth not the Refraction of Light proceed from the 
different density of this Aetherial Medium in 
different places, the Light receding always from  
the [rarer] parts of the Medium? And is not the  
density thereof [less] in free and open spaces void of 
Air and other grosser Bodies, than within the Pores 
of Water, Glass, Crystal, Gems, and other compact 
Bodies?  …  

Qu. 21x (rewritten)  

Is not this Medium much [denser] within the dense 
Bodies of the Sun, Stars, Planets and Comets, than 
in the empty Celestial spaces between them?  
And in passing from them to great distances, doth it 
not grow [rarer] and [rarer] perpetually and thereby 
cause the gravity of those great Bodies towards one  
 

another, and of their parts toward the Bodies; every 
Body endeavouring to go from the [rarer] parts of 
the Medium towards the [denser]?  …  
… And though this [Decrease] of density may at 
great distances be exceeding slow, yet is the elastick 
force of this Medium be exceeding great, it may 
suffice to impel Bodies from the [rarer] parts of the 
medium towards the [denser], with all that power 
which we call Gravity. …  

6.  Some other issues 
Opticks’ Query 1, on light-bending effects:  

Do not Bodies act upon Light at a distance, and by 
their action bend its Rays; and is not this action 
strongest at the least distance? 

This query does not make a distinction between 
gravitational light bending (action of gravity on 
unspecified “corpuscles”, mentioned in 
Principia), and more conventional lensing 
effects. Query 4 makes conventional optical 
effects more “gravitational” by proposing that 
“… rays of Light … reflected of refracted, begin to 
bend before they arrive at the Bodies …”      

Query 17: Total internal reflection at a glass-air 
boundary introduced the philosophical problem 
of how the behaviour of light in glass could be 
affected by properties of a region that the light 
did not actually reach. How does light “know” 
what is beyond the glass, if it never actually 
passes beyond the glass? Newton’s answer – 
that there must also be a hyper-fast wave-effect 
whose interference patterns then steer the 
subsequent light signal – predates the “pilot 
wave” description of the two-slit problem in 
quantum mechanics.  

Query 21 introduces the supposition that the 
aether might be particulate, but includes a slight 
qualification: “… (for I do not know what this 
Aether is) …”.    

Query 28 recognises that lightwaves are not 
compression waves in the gravitational 
medium, since a compression-wave would have 
a tendency to spread out into less compressed 
regions (a lightbeam would then be deflected 
towards “dark” regions).   

Newton’s perplexity at how a single medium 
could then support both gravitational signals 
and electromagnetic signals can be compared to 
Einstein’s similar musings in 1920 (“… two 
realities that are completely separated from each other 
conceptually, although connected causally, namely, 
gravitational ether and electromagnetic field …”. [4]   

Quest. 30 (sic) asks whether light and matter 
are not interconvertible, and Quest. 31 touches 
on the idea of stronger short-range forces being 
at the heart of chemical reactions. 

arXiv reference: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/  physics/0011003 

“Newton’s aether model”                         Eric Baird                        1 November 2000  

page 3 / 3 

 
7.  Effective curvature 
In the diagrams below, (a) shows genuinely flat 
space, (b) shows the aether-density gradient 
associated with the “corrected” version of 
Newton’s variable-density aether model, and (c) 
shows the same map, extruded so that light-
distances can be measured directly from map 
distances in the map:  

 

(a) :truly flat space, (b): variable-density aether on  
flat background, (c): normalised light-distance map 
The physics of maps (b) (“aether-density 
gradient”) and (c)  (“curved space”) can be 
equivalent (see: Thorne [7], Chapter 11 “What 
is Reality?”). 

 

Gravitational field approximated as a series  

of shells of increasing refractive index 

Although Cavendish did not calculate the sun’s 
light-bending effect until the late 18th Century, 
Newton had already made similar calculations 
for the effects of a variable-density medium, in 
order to predict optical effects caused by the 
Earth’s (variable density) atmosphere [6] ). 

8.  Effective closure 
Our “corrected” version of Newton’s aether 
model (with the time taken by light to cross a 
distance increasing or decreasing with 
gravitational field strength), allows a 
nominally-infinite universe containing a 
“central” concentration of matter to appear to 
its inhabitants as a closed hyperspherical 
universe with an even distribution of matter and 
no distinguishable centre [8] – figure 2 of 
Einstein’s ”Geometry and Experience” lecture 
[9] gives a method of mapping between these 
two equivalent descriptions. 

9.  Historical consequences 
The advantage of expressing a gravitational 
field as a variation in density of an underlying 
medium was that wavefronts and particles 
would then be deflected by the same amount 
(w/p equivalence, gravity as a “spatial density” 

effect). John Michell’s 1783 letter to Henry 
Cavendish was able to build on the arguments 
in Principia and Opticks and conclude that light 
climbing out of a gravitational well should lose 
energy, with the image of a high-gravity star 
viewed through a prism being offset towards the 
weaker end of the spectrum [10]. Michell’s 
paper also calculated the R=2M event horizon 
radius, and discussed the “modern” method of 
finding non-radiating stars from the motions of 
their “normal” companions. Michell did not 
describe distance-dependent signal flight-time 
differences in his double-star scenario (such as 
those expected in simple ballistic-photon theory 
superimposed on flat space, discounted by 
deSitter in 1913 [11][12][13]), possibly 
because of uncertainty as to whether Newton’s 
aether should support multiple superimposed 
lightspeeds. LaPlace also derived the R=2M 
relationship, and Cavendish and Soldner both 
calculated “Newtonian” values for the Sun’s 
bending of light (see: [14][15][16] and Thorne 
[7] pp.122-123 & 132-133).   

The disagreement between Newton’s and 
Huyghens’ arguments (Section 3), and the 
subsequent disproof of Newton’s lightspeed 
predictions (Foucault, 1850) had serious 
consequences for the idea of wave-particle 
duality, with Optiks going out of print until 
1931, and its contents apparently unknown to 
Einstein as late as 1921[4]. Other related work 
suffered a similar fate – laPlace removed his 
reference to the r=2M radius in later editions of 
his book (Thorne [7] p.122-123), Cavendish’s 
calculation of solar light-deflection did not find 
its way into print until 1921, and Michell’s 
paper dropped out of the citation chain and was 
only “rediscovered” in about 1979 [17][18]. 
After Laplace and Soldner’s published “light-
corpuscle” pieces in 1799 and 1801, there 
seems to be a “gap” in the reference chain until 
Einstein’s 1911 paper. Even after Riemann’s 
groundbreaking work on non-Euclidean 
geometry [19], attempts to construct curved-
space models were not always taken seriously 
(e.g. Clerk Maxwell on W.K. Clifford’s work, 
~1869,  “the work of a space-crumpler” [20]).     

Spatial-curvature models remained 
problematical until after Einstein had repeated 
Michell’s gravity-shift exercise (apparently 
oblivious to most or all of these earlier works!) 
and concluded that the situation could not be 
resolved unless an increased gravitational field 
was also associated with a reduction in the rate 
of timeflow. By arguing that gravity distorted 
maps of timeflow across a region, Einstein then 
opened the door to models of spacetime 
curvature based on Riemann’s geometry, the 
most famous being his own general theory.  

arXiv reference: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/  physics/0011003 

“Newton’s aether model”                         Eric Baird                        1 November 2000  

page 4 / 4 

 
10.  Conclusions  
Newton’s aether model arguably represents one 
of the most serious missed opportunities in the 
history of gravitational physics.  

Newton’s repeated attempts to unify various 
branches of physics led him to the concept of 
wave/particle duality and to a model of gravity 
in which the gravitational field could be 
described as a density gradient, and in which the 
deflection of light or matter by the field was 
modelled as the effect of a variation in 
refractive index. In singly-connected space, this 
approach can be topologically equivalent to a 
curved-space model of gravity [7] (by contrast, 
general relativity is a curved spacetime model of 
gravity). 

However, Newton’s model inverted a key 
lightspeed relationship. Instead of being a 
description in which the gravitational field itself 
was the medium (to misquote Marshall 
McLuhan, “The medium is the metric.”,   
see also: Einstein: “the aether of general relativity” 
[4] “If we imagine the gravitational field … to be 
removed … no ‘topological space’.” [21]), Newton’s 
model produced a description of a gravitational 
medium that was displaced by the gravitational 
field, and this led to the model and its 
associated principles and predictions (such as 
wave/particle duality, gravitational light-
bending and gravitational shifts) being largely 
forgotten until Einstein’s 20th Century work on 
quantum mechanics and general relativity.  

Rindler has already pointed out that the 
mathematical machinery for general relativity 
was available in the Eighteenth Century [22]. 
Given that Michell’s gravity-shift prediction  
was tantalisingly close to being a prediction of 
gravitational time dilation (the effect missing 
from 18th Century curved-space models), it 
seems that the loss of Newton’s aether model 
may have significantly held back the progress of 
gravitational physics. 

REFERENCES 
                                                             

[1]   Isaac Newton Principia Vol s. I & II  

[2]   Isaac Newton Opticks (Bell London 1931). 

[3]   A. Einstein, "On the Influence of Gravitation on the 

Propagation of Light" (1911),  
translated in The Principle of Relativity  
(Dover, NY, 1952)  pp.97-108. 

[4]   A. Einstein, "Aether and the Theory of Relativity" 
(1920), translated in Sidelights on Relativity  
(Dover, NY, 1983)  pp.1-24. 

 

 

 

                                                                                 

[5]   Under general relativity, spacetime is a stressable, 

draggable thing that interacts with matter and can 
support a range of physical parameters – the 
gravitational field parameters (under general 
relativity, spacetime is a stressable, draggable thing 
that interacts with matter and can support a range of 
physical gravitational field parameters (the gmn ).  

[6]   D.T.Whiteside (editor) The Mathematical Papers 

of Isaac Newton,  Volume VI ,1684-1691   
(C.U.P. Cambridge 1974),  
Appendix 3,4 footnotes pp.422-437.  

[7]   Kip S. Thorne, Black holes and timewarps: 

Einstein’s outrageous legacy  
(W.W. Norton, NY, 1994)  

[8]  Ronald Gautreau. “Cosmological Schwarzchild radii 

and Newtonian gravitational theory,”  
Am.J.Phys. 64  1457-1467 (1996)   

[9]  A. Einstein, "Geometry and Experience” (1921), 

translated in Sidelights on Relativity  
(Dover, NY, 1983) pp.25-56.  

[10]  John Michell, “On the Means of discovering … of 
the Fixed Stars … ,” Phil.Trans.Royal Soc. (1784)  
pp. 35-57 & Tab III, sections 30-32.  

[11]  W. deSitter, "A proof of the constancy of the velocity 
of light,"  Kon.Acad. Weten. 15 1297-1298 (1913).  

[12]  W. deSitter, "On the constancy of the velocity of 

light," Kon.Acad.Weten. 16 395-396 (1913). 

[13]  Kenneth Brecher, "Is the Speed of Light Independent 

of the Velocity of the Source?,"  
Phys. Rev. Letters 39 1051-1054 (1977). 

[14]  Clifford M. Will, "Henry Cavendish, Johann von 

Soldner, and the deflection of light,"  
Am. J. Phys. 56  413-415 (1988). 

[15] Pierre-Simon laPlace Exposition du System du 

Monde, page reproduced in  
Misner, Thorne and Wheeler Gravitation  
(W.H. Freeman NY 1971) fig 24.1,  pp.623. 

[16]  Peter Simon Laplace, essay (1799), translated and 

reprinted in The Large-Scale Structure of 
Spacetime  Stephen W. Hawking and G.F. Ellis 
(Cambridge 1973) Appendix A, pp. 365-368   

[17]  Simon Schaffer, "John Michell and Black Holes," 

Journ. Hist. Astronomy 10, 42-43 (1979).  

[18] Gary Gibbons, "The man who invented black holes," 

New Scientist 28 June 1979, 1101 (1979)  

[19] Wolfgang Rindler “General Relativity before special 

relativity: An unconventional overview of relativity 
theory,”  Am.J.Phys. 62 (10) 887-893 (1994)  

[20]  Paul Nahin, Time Machines: Time Travel in 
Physics, Metaphysics and Science Fiction  
(AIP Press, NY, 1993)  Tech Note 4:5 pp. 315-316 

[21]  A. Einstein Relativity: The Special and the 

General Theory, 15th ed. (1954) Appendix V: 
"Relativity and the Problem of Space"  pp.135-157. 

[22] Wolfgang Rindler, “General relativity before special 

relativity: An unconventional view of relativity 
theory,” Am.J.Phys. 62 887- 893 (1994).  
 
 

arXiv reference: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/  physics/0011003 

