Are Short and Long Gamma Ray Bursts Really of
Different Origin?

Ernst Karl Kunst
Im Spicher Garten 5
53639 Königswinter
Germany
e-mail: ErnstKunst@aol.com

0
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
6
 
 
 
3
1
0
2
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Short and long gamma ray bursts (GRBs) are of the same origin and,
furthermore, correlated with their duration, as will be shown in the following.

Key words: Gamma ray bursts - origin - vacuum Cerencov radiation

According to a NASA press release, Jay Norris of the Goddard Space Flight Center
found that the shorter GRBs, lasting less than 2 seconds (s), have different
charasteristics than longer bursts [1]. Because I could not find the original paper in
the literature I refer in the following to this press release, especially since the
general results given there are fully sufficient to be compared with some theoretical
derivations.

According to Norris have short GRBs (< 2 s) significantly fewer pulses and are their
lag times (the lag of lower-energy pulses behind high-energy pulses) 20 times
shorter than the lags in the longer GRBs. Therefore, he proposed that the short
bursts are produced in physically different objects.

In the following is demonstrated that these experimental findings do exactly
coincide with theory predicting a common origin of all GRBs. In [2] the outlines of
this theory have been drawn, according to which GRBs and related phenomena in
the X-rays and the ultra-violet have their origin not in known or speculative
astronomical objects but rather in the vacuum Cerenkov radiation caused by the
superluminal propagation of extraterrestrial spaceprobes in the interstellar space
(see also [3]). Cerenkov radiation in all wavebands is generated along the flight
paths of the superluminal spaceprobes, whereby the photons of highest energy
depend on the superluminal velocity of the probe or craft. On the grounds of the
Cerenkov angle and the known duration of GRBs their distance is basically
calculable. Furthermore, a correlation between duration, distance, relative number
and intensity of GRBs has been shown to exist. It is demonstrated that this
correlation also comprises the above stated decrease of pulses and shortening of
lag times in short GRBs.

According to theory the Cerenkov radiation generated by a superluminal
extraterrestrial spaceprobe hurtling through the galactic space is emitted along and
in a very narrow cone in the direction of its flight path. An observer in the vicinity of
Earth will observe a GRB exactly then, when the spaceprobe crosses the line of
sight in a very narrow angle (Fig. 1) and the generated Cerenkov radiation is bright
enough to be observed. The radiation cone comprises - depending on the velocity -

2

photons of all wavebands till down to the radio waveband. 
Fig. 1 shows (exaggerated) that the ”visible” gamma light track in the sky
constitutes the side B¯ C¯  of the triangle ABC, where A¯ B¯  and A¯ C¯  are the “lines of
sight” to the points of the track wherefrom photons of lowest (B) and highest
(gamma) energy (C), respectively, are received and the distance coincides with A¯ C¯
of this triangle. Due to the different Cerenkov angle of the respecitve radiation will
the Cerenkov point source be observed to recede backward in time along B¯ C¯  from
point C to point B and beyond with decreasing frequency from ever more distant
points with ever lower velocity in the plane of the sky.

Fig. 1 shows two tracks of vacuum Cerenkov radiation which we assume be
generated by spaceprobes crossing the line of sight of the observer at point A with
the same superluminal speed - implying them to be alike in all physical properties -
but in different distances. It is clearly evident that the respective distance is
proportional to the length of the observable Cerenkov track of gamma radiation B¯ C¯
and D¯ E¯ , respectively, which again is proportional to the duration of the GRB. On the
other hand, the tracks B¯ C¯  and D¯ E¯  are, independent on their different length or
duration, exactly of the same spectral composition, with the photons of the same
highest energy at the points B and D and of lowest energy at the points C and E,
respectively. As has extensively been shown in [2] will owing to the track geometry
the photons (pulses) of highest energy generally arrive first at the observer in point
A and subsequently photons (pulses) of ever lower energy. Therefore, in connection
with Fig. 1 is clear that B¯ C¯  and D¯ E¯  exhibit exactly the same energy spectrum, but
the latter on a much shorter scale so that firstly the number of photons or pulses
must be proportional and secondly lag times or arrival times of photons of different
energy inversely proportional to B¯ C¯ /D¯ E¯  = D /D  (cid:17) n /n , where D means
duration and n number of bursts in the respective distance or of the respective

B¯ C¯   D¯ E¯

B¯ C¯  

D¯ E¯

3

duration within some time. If a mean of 30 - 40 s for the longer and of 1.5 - 2 s for
the short GRBs is assumed this results in (cid:17) 20 - the result of Norris -, exactly as it
does if the number of bursts with a duration of (cid:17) 30 s (29) is divided by the number
with a duration of 1.5 s (1.45) [4] (the latter number indeed has been calculated,
because the mean burst distribution at 1.5 s is disturbed by a small event maximum 
(see [2]) and, therefore, may not look very convincing).     

Furthermore, follows from this hypothesis that the duration times of the subsequent
Cerenkov radiation in the X-rays, visible light etc. (“afterglow”) of GRBs obey the
same law. Therefore, in the case of very short GRBs a shortening of the duration
times of this radiation in accord with the above relation is to expect, which
presumably is the cause that it has not been detected yet. 

References

[1] ftp://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/pub/PAO/Releases/2000/00-132.htm
[2] Kunst, E. K.: On the Physical Cause and the Distance of Gamma Ray Bursts       
     and Related Phenomena in the X-Rays and the Ultra-Violet, physics/0004034
[3] Kunst, E. K.: Is the Lorentz Transformation Distant-Dependent?
     physics/9911022
[4] Fishman, G. J. et al., Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser. 92, 229 (1994) 

