The Direct Contradiction Between Two Popular Hypotheses --
Cosmic Acceleration / Quintessence and Dark Matter,
and Its Implications

Roger Ellman

Abstract

Recent distance determinations to Type Ia supernovae [ SNe Ia ] by new means
exceed the Hubble distance by 10 - 15%.1,2  The explanation that has been offered is  an
"anti-gravity effect" accelerating the universe' expansion.  The effect is attributed to some
unknown  substance  pervading  cosmological  space,  a  modern  variant  on  the  Ancients'
fifth essence, "quintessence".

In  other  research 3,  the  study  of  galaxies  and  the  larger  cosmic  structures  of
groups  of  galaxies  as  rotating  systems,  with  their  concomitant  balance  of  gravitational
attraction [G·M·m/R2] and centripetal force [m·V2/R], has disclosed a component of the
gravitational  attraction  that  cannot  be accounted  for.   It  is  inferred  that  a  halo  of  "dark
matter" pervades the galaxies and supplies the unaccounted for gravitation.

Therefore, we are confronted with the contradiction:
[1] the SNe Ia data with its hypothesis that the cosmos is operated on by an "anti-

 
gravity effect", and

[2] the rotation curves data which indicates that an additional gravitational effect

is operating, not an anti-gravitational one.

The  two  hypotheses  are  mutually  exclusive.    At  least  one  is  completely  incorrect  [the
hypothesis, not the data] and quite possibly both hypotheses are wrong.

That  being  the  case,  it  is  essential  that  alternative  explanations  for  the  SNe  Ia
data and the rotation curves data be sought.  The status of such alternatives is reviewed
and a new alternative suggested.

Roger Ellman, The-Origin Foundation, Inc.
                     320 Gemma Circle, Santa Rosa, CA 95404, USA
                     RogerEllman@The-Origin.org

1

The Direct Contradiction Between Two Popular Hypotheses --
Cosmic Acceleration / Quintessence and Dark Matter,
and Its Implications

Roger Ellman

The  Problem - The Contradictory Hypotheses

[1]  New Data From Type Ia Supernovae

The, for years generally accepted, Hubble astronomical model of the universe is
of  a  uniformly  expanding  cosmos  in  which  all  galaxies  are  moving  apart  so  that  their
speed  away  from  us  is  proportional  to  their  distance  from  us,  the  constant  of
proportionality being called  the  Hubble  Constant,  H.    Until  recently  the  distance to  far
distant  such  bodies  has  been  determined  by  measuring  the  redshift,  deemed  a  Doppler
effect.  From that one obtains the speed of recession, v, and then the distance v /H .

Recently it has become possible to determine the distance to far distant galaxies
by  an  alternative  independent  means  based  on  observations  of  Type  Ia  supernovae
[ SNe Ia ] in those galaxies.1,2  It has been found that the intrinsic brightness [luminosity]
of such supernovae is related to the pattern [light curve] of their flare up and back down,
a  process  taking  weeks  overall.    By  comparing  the  intrinsic  brightness,  as  determined
from  that  pattern,  to  the  observed  brightness  the  distance  can  be  determined  from  the
inverse square law.

Those  new  distance  determinations  indicate  distances  exceeding  the  Hubble
model  distance  by  10% - 15%.    The  interpretation  of  that  result  as  proposed  by  the
researchers  who  developed  the  data  and  others  is  that  some  "anti-gravity  effect"  is
accelerating the  universe's  expansion,  which  expansion  had  hitherto  been thought  to  be
slowing down because of gravitation.

Because such an effect requires a cause, the effect is attributed to some unknown
substance pervading cosmological space, a modern variant on the Ancients' fifth essence,
or "quintessence".  That "anti-gravity effect", by default, would have to be a property of
the  empty  space,  the  vacuum,  of the  universe  since it  is  certainly  not  a  property  of  the
matter.

The  line  of  thought  has  led  to  the  reinstatement  of  Einstein's  "cosmological
constant"  a  term  in  his  equations  that  he  introduced  to  account  for  the  universe  not
promptly  collapsing  due  to  gravitation  and  which  he  later  disavowed  upon  Hubble's
discovery of the expansion of the universe.

Those implications are so unsettling to theory and to reasonableness that the data
had  been  initially  deemed  in  error.    As  a  result  there  have  been  extensive  analyses  of
sources of error and measurements have been taken on a large enough number of Type Ia
supernovae  to  be  statistically  significant  all  with  the  conclusion  that  the  new  distance
measurements are valid and that theory must be adjusted accordingly.

The new SNe Ia distance determinations do not state that the expansion
of  the  universe  is  accelerating,  nor  that  there  is  some  kind  of    "antigravity"
effect,  nor  that  there  is  some  new  substance,  quintessence.    The  data  only
forces the conclusion that there is a problem in the purely Hubble conception
of  the  cosmos  or  at  least  in  the  Hubble-based  method  of  determining  the
distance to distant objects.

[2]  New Data From Galactic Rotation Curves

2

In  other  research 3,  the  study  of  galaxies  and  the  larger  cosmic  structures  of
groups  of  galaxies  as  rotating  systems,  with  their  concomitant  balance  of  gravitational
attraction  [G·M·m/R2]  and  centripetal  force  [m·V2/R],  has  disclosed  a  component  of
gravitational attraction that cannot be accounted for.  When the rotating system's central
mass is far greater than the orbiting masses [e.g. our solar system], the dynamics, which
are  referred  to  as  Keplerian  for  that  case,  are  such  that  the  orbiting  bodies'  orbital
velocities  are  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the  radial  distance  from  the
central mass [V =(G·M/R)½].  A curve or plot of orbital velocities vs. their path radii is
termed a Rotation Curve.

For  galaxies  that  we  view  as  the  thin  disk  not  the  spiral  or  globular  spread  in
space, we see one end moving toward us relative to the center and the other end moving
away.    The  rotational  velocities  are  measured  by  observing  the  variations  in  redshift
along the galactic diameter represented by the disk.  Galactic rotation curves so obtained
are not of the expected Keplerian form, an inverse square root; rather, [beyond the radius
of the dense galactic central core] the curves are essentially flat.

In  a  solid  sphere,  where  the  density  is  uniform  throughout,  all  parts  move  at
rotational  velocities  directly  proportional  to  radius.    Since  the  observed  flat  galactic
rotation curves fall between the Keplerian inverse square root of radius and the uniform
density's direct proportion to radius, it is inferred that matter that we have not observed
must be dispersed throughout the galaxy, a halo of "dark matter" that causes the rotation
to take the form that the rotation curve exhibits -- thus the "dark matter" hypothesis.

The rotation curves and the data on which they are based do not state
that the galaxies  have the hypothesized  "dark matter"  halo.    The  curves  and
the  data  only  indicate  that  the  rotating  bodies  are  experiencing  greater
gravitational attraction toward the center of rotation than can be accounted for
by  the  observable  galactic  structure.    The  halo  of  "dark  matter"  is
hypothesized as the cause of that additional gravitation.

Therefore, we are confronted with the contradiction:
[1] the SNe Ia data with its hypothesis that the cosmos is operated on by an "anti-

 
gravity effect", and

[2] the rotation curves data which indicates that an additional gravitational effect

is operating, not an anti-gravitational one.

The  two  hypotheses  are  mutually  exclusive.    At  least  one  is  completely  incorrect  [the
hypothesis, not the data] and quite possibly both hypotheses are wrong.

That  being  the  case,  it  is  essential  that  alternative  explanations  for  the  SNe  Ia
data and the rotation curves data be sought and alternative, more viable, hypotheses for
them be developed and tested.

Current Results Related to Alternative Hypotheses

The only research involving data from new measurements that might be deemed
an  intended investigation of  alternative  hypotheses is that  of  measurements  intended  to
explore the constancy or long term variation in the value of the fine  structure  constant,
α.4  The researchers report stability of α to 1 part in 105 back to 4.8·109 years ago.
Inasmuch  as  α  is  dimensionless  its  constancy  should  be  little  more  a  surprise  than  the
0 , the natural logarithmic base.  And, inasmuch as α is defined as
constancy of π or of ε
a function of the fundamental constants:  c, q, h or h/2π, and µ
0 investigation
of the stability of those would be more to the point.

0 or ε

3

An  alternative  hypothesis  for  the  rotation  curves  anomalous  gravitation  and
implied mass discrepancy has been proposed and theoretically analyzed.5, 6  Referred to
as  MOND,  Modification  of  Newtonian  Dynamics,  the  hypothesis  suggests  that  the
gravitational anomaly stems not from additional ["dark"] matter but from a variation in
the  Newtonian  dynamics  of  gravitation  at  small  accelerations.    That  is,  the  theorists,
having  noted  that  the  gravitational  anomaly  is  only  noticeable  in  the  regions  of  the
rotation curves where the acceleration is well below 10-8 cm/sec2 propose that gravity
and or inertia may behave in a modified manner when g or a < 10-8 cm/sec2.

However, an alternative reason for the anomaly so being not noticeable could be
the  presence  of  a  constant  gravitational  type  acceleration  present  at  a  value  somewhat
above  10-8  cm/sec2.  That is, the effect of such a constant accleration  would  not be
noticeable  when  the  ambient,  or  "natural"  acceleration  is  much  larger;  rather  it  would
only  start  to  be  noticeable  when  that  otherwise  acceleration  had  become  sufficiently
smaller.  Is there evidence of such an unusual constant acceleration ?

Yes,  there  is.    Exactly  such  an  acceleration  has  been  extensively  observed  and
reported  in  the  behavior  of  the  Pioneer  10  and  11  satellites  [and  to  a  lesser  extent  the
Galileo, and Ulysses] over a number of years.7,  8  An acceleration towards the Sun has
acted on those satellites consistently over the period.  The effect is believed to be general;
however, it is so small [as is the rotation curves' anomalous acceleration used to justify
"dark matter"] that it has only been measurable in the case of those satellites because of
their  not  having  had  course  corrections  over  an  extended  number  of  years.    The
acceleration  is  independent  of  distance  from  the  Sun,  appears  to  be  constant  and
continuous, and is observed to have a value of about 8.5·10-8 cm/s2.

We  have,  then,  an  apparently  present  but  unexplained  gravitational  type
acceleration  operating  in  the  rotation  curves,  and  at  the  same  time  an  observed  and
measured equivalent acceleration operating in the path behavior of the Pioneer 10 and 11
satellites as they travel far out from the Sun.

Numerous suggested explanations of this acceleration have been investigated and
rejected  for  various  valid  reasons  to  the  effect  that  they  don't  fit  the  actual  observed
behavior.    But,  even  without  having  to  hand  an  explanation  of  how  the  Pioneer
anomalous  acceleration  comes  about  we  do  have  to  hand  in  it  an  actual  behavior  that
corresponds  to  and  explains  the  rotation  curves  problem.    We  have  to  hand  an
explanation  that  does  not  require  inventing  unseen  matter.    We  have  to  hand  an
explanation that does not require changing Newton's law of gravitation and / or his laws
of motion.  Surely such a situation merits investigation and analysis.

Of  course,  one  cannot  be  content  with  the  situation  until  a  satisfactory
explanation of the Pioneers' anomalous acceleration has been developed.  Has there been
any progress in that regard ?  Yes, there has, an analysis that correlates precisely with the
Pioneer observations.9  Not only that, the same  analytical  explanation also  resolves  the
Type Ia Supernovae distance discrepancies and does so without requiring the invention of
some kind of "anti-gravity" effect and of a new kind of substance, or "quintessence", to
explain it.10

Surely,  it  is  not  merely  of  interest,  but  rather,  it  is  urgent  that  this  hypothesis,
which can be validated or disproved by two experiments as proposed in the cited papers,
9, 10 be investigated.

References

       [N.B.  The first three references themselves further reference many of the large and

significant number of papers on their topics.]

4

 [1]  A.G. Riess, A.V. Filippenko, P. Challis, A. Clocchiatti, A. Diercks, P.M. Garnavich,
R.L. Gilliland, C.J. Hogan, S. Jha, R.P. Kirshner, B. Leibundgut, M.M. Phillips, D.
Reiss,  B.P.  Schmidt,  R.A.  Schommer,  R.C.  Smith,  J.  Spyromilio,  C.  Stubbs,  N.B.
Suntzeff,  J.  Tonry,  Observational  Evidence  from  Supernovae  for  an  Accelerating
Universe  and  a  Cosmological  Constant,  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory  Eprint
Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov, astro-ph/9805201.

 [2]  S.  Perlmutter,  G.  Aldering,  G.  Goldhaber,  R.A.  Knop,  P.  Nugent,  P.G.  Castro,  S.
Deustua, S. Fabbro, A. Goobar, D.E. Groom, I.M. Hook, A.G. Kim, M.Y. Kim, J.C.
Lee, N.J. Nunes, R. Pain, C.R. Pennypacker, R. Quimby, C. Lidman, R.S. Ellis, M.
Irwin, R.G. McMahon, P. Ruiz-Lapuente, N. Walton, B. Schaefer, B.J. Boyle, A.V.
Filppenko, T. Matheson, A.S. Fruchter, N. Panagia, H.J.M. Newberg,  W.J.  Couch,
Measurements  of  Ω  and  Λ  From  42  High-Redshift  Supernovae,  Los  Alamos
National Laboratory Eprint Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov, astro-ph/9812133.

 [3]  J.A. Sellwood and A. Kosowsky, Does Dark Matter Exist ?, Los Alamos National

Laboratory Eprint Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov, astro-ph/0009074.

 [4]  C. L. Carilli, K. M. Menten, J. T. Stocke, E. Perlman, R. Vermeulen, F. Briggs, A.
G. de Bruyn, J. Conway, and C. P. Moore, Astronomical Constraints on the Cosmic
Evolution  of  the  Fine  Structure  Constant  and  Possible  Quantum  Dimensions,
Physical  Review  Letters  --  December  25,  2000  --  Volume  85,  Issue  26,  pp  5511-
5514  and  also  available  at  the  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory  Eprint  Archive  at
http://xxx.lanl.gov, astro-ph/0010361.

 [5]  Mordehai Milgrom, The Modified Dynamics -- Status Review, Los Alamos National

Laboratory Eprint Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov, astro-ph/9810302.

 [6]  Stacy  McGaugh,  MOND  in  the  Early  Universe,  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory

Eprint Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov, astro-ph/9812328.

 [7]   J. D. Anderson, P. A. Laing, E. L. Lau, A. S. Liu, M. M. Nieto, and S. G. Turyshev,
Indication,  from  Pioneer  10/11,  Galileo,  and  Ulysses  Data,  of  an  Apparent
Anomalous, Weak, Long-Range Acceleration, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 2858 (1998), Los
Alamos National Laboratory Eprint Archive at  http://xxx.lanl.gov, gr-qc/9808081.
 [8]  J. D. Anderson, P. A. Laing, E. L. Lau, A. S. Liu, M. M. Nieto, and S. G. Turyshev,
The Apparent Anomalous, Weak, Long-Range Acceleration of     Pioneer 10 and 11,
Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory  Eprint  Archive  at    http://xxx.lanl.gov,  gr-
qc/9903024.

 [9]        R. Ellman, Exponential Decay of the Overall Universe is the Cause of "The Apparent
Anomalous, Weak, Long-Range Acceleration of [the spacecraft] Pioneer 10 and 11,
Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory  Eprint  Archive  at  http://xxx.lanl.gov,
physics/9906031.

[10]        R.  Ellman,  The  Explanation  of  the  New  Astronomical  Distance  Data  That  Has
Resulted From Measurements of Type Ia Supernovae Lies Not In a "Cosmological
Constant" and Accelerating Expansion; Rather, It Is Another Aspect / Effect of the
General  Exponential  Decay  of  the  Overall  Universe,  Los  Alamos  National
Laboratory Eprint Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov, physics/0007058.

[11]        R. Ellman, The Mass Discrepancies That Are Implied By Galactic Rotation Curves
[i.e. Dynamically Inferred Mass Minus Observed Mass] Are Not Correctly Resolved
by  the  Proposed  Hypotheses:    [That  Galaxies  Contain  a  Large  Amount  of  "Dark
Matter"]  or  of  [a  Modification  of  Newtonian  Dynamics,  MOND];    Rather,    The
Discrepancies  Are  Apparent,  Not  Real,  and  Are  a  Further  Effect  or  Aspect  of  the
Exponential Decay of the Overall Universe, Los Alamos National Laboratory Eprint
Archive at http://xxx.lanl.gov, physics/0011062.

5

