The cosmic origin of supersymmetry and internal symmetry

Ding-Yu Chung

In 

the 

low-energy 

the  big  bag  universe, 

Supersymmetry  involves  a  symmetrical  change  in  spacetime  labels  in  terms  of
spacetime  coordinates,  while  internal  symmetry  involves  a  symmetrical  change
in non-spacetime labels in terms of charged fields, isotopic spin, and colors.  In
this  paper,  the  cosmic  origin  of  supersymmetry  and  internal  symmetry  is
explained  by  the  cyclic  dual  universe,  the  coexistence  of  the  unobservable  big
bag universe and the observable big bang universe. The cosmic cycle starts with
the  eleven  dimensional  Planck  supermembrane  with  the  Planck  mass.  The
supersymmetry  of  the  Planck  supermembrane  is  broken  into  a  Kaluza-Klein
structure  where  the  lower  dimensional  spacetime  has  lower  energy  than  the
higher  dimensional  spacetime. 
the  Planck
supermembranes are slowly broken and decay into concerted particles that then
are slowly recombined.  It undergoes a gigantic slow cosmic oscillation between
the  high-energy  eleven  dimensional  spacetime  and 
four
dimensional spacetime.  It is like a gigantic cosmic particle-wave.  The big bang
universe  is  the  collapsed  cosmic  oscillation  due  to  the  disruption  by  the  non-
spacetime  labels,  independent  of  the  spacetime  of  the  cosmic  oscillation.    It  is
like 
the  collapse  of  microscopic  particle-wave  by  a  system  (such  as
measurement)  independent  of  microscopic  particle-wave.    The  collapse  of  the
cosmic  oscillation  results  in  the  immediate  decay  into  the  four  dimensional
spacetime  and  the  seven  dimensional  internal  space  (non-spacetime).  The
remnants of the cosmic oscillation are cosmic radiation, gravity, and microscopic
particle-wave in the four dimensional spacetime.  Internal symmetries for gauge
bosons,  leptons,  quarks,  and  black  holes  are  in  the  seven  dimensional  internal
space.  There  is  no  curled-up  space  dimension  and  compacitification.  Except  at
the very beginning of the cosmic cycle and black hole, the big bang universe has
pure  four-dimensional  spacetime.  The  unobservable  big  bag  universe  is  the
supersymmetry 
the
observable  big  bang  universe 
four-plus-seven
the 
dimensional  universe.    The  two  universes  are  separated  by  the  dematerialized
zone  everywhere  all  the  time.    The  big  bang  universe  absorbs  space  from  and
emits space to the dematerialized zone, when the spacetime dimensions in both
universes are compatible.  The results are the inflation during the big bang, the
late-time cosmic accelerated expansion, the cosmic accelerated contraction, and
the final cosmic accelerated contraction. The cosmic cycle starts with all Planck
supermembranes for both universe, and ends with all black hole universe in the
big  bang  universe.  The  inflation  is  not  an  add-on  but  a  necessity  to  start  the
cosmic  cycle.  According  to  the  calculation,  we  are  now  at  the  peak  of  the  late-
time cosmic accelerated expansion.

four-to-eleven  dimensional  spacetime  universe,  while 

internal  symmetry 

is 

1

 1.

Introduction

Supersymmetry  involves  a  symmetrical  change  in  spacetime  labels  in
terms of spacetime coordinates, while internal symmetry involves a symmetrical
change  in  non-spacetime  labels  in  terms  of  charged  fields,  isotopic  spin,  and
colors.  In this paper, the cosmic origin of supersymmetry and internal symmetry
is explained by the cyclic dual universe, the coexistence of the unobservable big
bag  universe  and  the  observable  big  bang  universe.  The  cosmic  cycle  for  both
universes  starts  with  the  eleven  dimensional  Planck  supermembrane  with  the
Planck mass. The supersymmetry of the Planck supermembrane is broken into a
Kaluza-Klein structure where the lower dimensional spacetime has lower energy
than  the  higher  dimensional  spacetime.  In  the  big  bag  universe,  the  Planck
supermembranes are slowly broken and decay into concerted particles that then
are slowly recombined.  It undergoes a gigantic slow cosmic oscillation between
four
the  high-energy  eleven  dimensional  spacetime  and 
dimensional spacetime.  It is like a gigantic cosmic particle-wave.

low-energy 

the 

The  big  bang  universe  is  the  collapsed  cosmic  oscillation  due  to  the
disruption  by  the  non-spacetime  labels,  independent  of  the  spacetime  of  the
cosmic  oscillation.    It  is  like  the  collapse  of  microscopic  particle-wave  by  a
system (such as measurement) independent of microscopic particle-wave.  The
collapse  of  the  cosmic  oscillation  results  in  the  immediate  decay  into  the  four
dimensional  spacetime  and  the  seven  dimensional  internal  space  (non-
spacetime).

The two universes are separated by the dematerialized zone everywhere
all the time.  The big bang universe absorbs space from and emits space to the
dematerialized  zone,  when  the  spacetime  dimensions  in  both  universes  are
compatible.    The  results  are  the  inflation  during  the  big  bang,  the  late-time
cosmic accelerated expansion, the cosmic accelerated contraction, and the final
cosmic  accelerated  contraction.  The  cosmic  cycle  starts  with  all  Planck
supermembrane for both universe, and ends with all black hole universe for the
big bang universe.

In  the  Section  2,  the  unobservable  big  bag  universe  involving  the
supersymmetry breaking of the eleven dimensional Planck supermembrane and
the  cosmic  oscillation  will  be  discussed.    The  Section  3  covers  the  cosmic
oscillation  breaking.    The  Section  4  briefly  reviews  the  observable  big  bang
universe.  In the Section 5, the four periods of the active cosmic dematerialized
zone will be discussed.

2.

The Unobservable Big Bag Universe

A supermembrane can be described as two dimensional object that moves
in an eleven dimensional space-time [1].  This supermembrane can be converted
into the ten dimensional superstring with the extra dimension curled into a circle to
become a closed superstring.   Based on this eleven-dimensional

2

supermembrane, the extra space dimension assumes a Kaluza-Klein substructure
for the broken Planck supermembrane.  

In the Kaluza-Klein substructure, each space dimension can be described
by a fermion and a boson.  The masses of fermion and its boson partner are not
the same.  This supersymmetry breaking is in the form of a mass hierarchy with
increasing masses from the dimension four to the dimension eleven as

 

F4 B4 F5 B5 F6 B6 F7 B7 F8 B8 F9 B9 F10 B10 F11 B11

where  B  and  F  are  boson  and  fermion  in  each  spacetime  dimension.  The
probability  to  transforming  a  fermion  into  its  boson  partner  in  the  adjacent
dimension  is  same  as  the  fine  structure  constant,  α,  the  probability  of  a  fermion
emitting  or  absorbing  a  boson.    The  probability  to  transforming  a  boson  into  its
fermion partner in the same dimension is also the fine structure constant, α.  This
hierarchy can be expressed in term of the dimension number, D,

M D-1, B 

  = M D, F αD, F, 

(1)

M D, F      = M D, B αD, B, 

 (2)

where MD, B and MD,F  are the masses for a boson and a fermion, respectively, and
αD, B or αD,F is the fine structure constant, which is the ratio between the energies
of a boson and its fermionic partner.  All fermions and bosons are related by the
order 1/α.  (In some mechanism for the dynamical supersymmetry breaking, the
effects of order exp (-4π2/ g2) where g is some small coupling, give rise to large
mass hierarchies [2].)  This Kaluza-Klein substructure for the big bag universe is
not like the conventional structure where the energy in the extra space dimension
is very high, because the observed universe is the big bang universe, not the big
bag universe.

This supersymmetry breaking is through decay.  The big bag universe starts
from the Planck supermembrane that decays into concerted particles in the decay
mode,  and  undergoes  a  gigantic  slow  cosmic  quantum  oscillation  between  the
high-energy  small  eleven  dimensional  spacetime  and  the  low-energy  large  two
dimensional spacetime.  The expansion depends only on the decay mode, and the
contraction  depends  only  on  the  combination  mode  that  combine  the  concerted
particles  together.  There  are  no  force  field  and  cosmic  radiation  in  the  big  bag
universe.

As  in  a  microscopic  quantum  system  before  the  measurement  process,
there  are  no  independent  permanent  components  within  the  big  bag  during  the
cosmic quantum oscillation.   The average dimension of the particles in the big bag
changes continuously and concertedly.  All particles are in a concerted change.

The decay mode in the big bag universe is different from the decay mode
in the big bang universe.  In the decay mode in the big bag universe, the decay
particles are in a concerted state as in the microscopic quantum system before

3

the measurement.  All decay particles “remember” their parent Planck
supermembranes, as the in the microscopic system before the measurement, all
individual spin states remember their original composite spin state regardless of
time and space.  Instead of explosive exponential radiation decay in the big bang
universe, the decay in the big bag universe is extremely orderly, one at the time
per parent Planck supermembrane.   As soon as one particle decay, all other
decay particles adjust their masses, so average mass of the particles in the big
bag universe decreases with time.  All of them are under the concerted change.

Only basic physical constant about time is the Planck time (5.39 x10-44

second).  The decay rates for unstable hadrons in the big bang universe are close
to the Planck time.  The decay rate in the big bag universe is much slower than the
Planck time, because it relates to the time span of the big bag universe in one
oscillation.   It can only be a fraction of power of the Planck time.  It appears that
the decay rate is one particle per one-fourth power of the Planck time (1.52 x10-11
second) per parent Planck supermembrane.   With this decay rate, the time span
of the big bag universe in one oscillation is very long.  For example, it takes 27.6
billion years to decay from the Planck supermembrane to the four dimensional
bosons.

3. The Collapse of the Cosmic Oscillation

The cosmic oscillation, the cosmic particle-wave, is collapsed by non-

spacetime label, independent of spacetime of the cosmic oscillation.  The non-
spacetime label system is derived from the Planck supermembrane crossing in
small portion of the Planck supermembranes.

The Planck supermembrane crossing is the crossing of two Planck
supermembranes.  It involves the crossing of seven space dimensions from two
Planck supermembrane, resulting in the lepton-quark composite with four
dimensional spacetime.  The lepton-quark composite consists of seven
dimensions mostly for leptons and seven auxiliary dimensions mostly for quarks.
The result of this crossing is shown in Fig. 1.

To make the lepton-quark composite permanent requires non-spacetime

labels, such as lepton number and quark (baryon) number, which are
independent of spacetime. All space labels other than the four dimensional
spacetime are replaced by non-spacetime labels.   The spacetime labels are
retained only in the four dimensional spacetime.  Therefore, two eleven
dimensional Planck supermembranes are merged into the lepton-quark
composite consisting of two sets of four spacetime dimensions and seven
internal space dimensions.   There is no curled-up space dimension.  The
compactification process to curl up space dimension is unnecessary.    Except at
the very beginning of the cosmic cycle and black hole, the big bang universe has
pure four dimensional spacetime. The big bag universe is the supersymmetry
four-to-eleven dimensional universe, while the big bang universe is the internal
symmetry four-plus-seven dimensional universe.

4

Different particles with non-spacetime labels behave differently in

spacetime.  Without concerted behavior for all particles with non-spacetime
labels, the cosmic oscillation collapses, as the collapse of a microscopic system
by a system, such as the measurement process, that disrupts the concerted
change in the microscopic system.

The permanent non-spacetime labels require the violations of symmetries
(CP and P) in spacetime and the internal symmetry acting on the non-spacetime
labels.   CP nonconservation is required to distinguish the lepton-quark
composite from the CP symmetrical cosmic radiation that is absence of the
lepton-quark composite.  P nonconservation is required to achieve chiral
symmetry for massless leptons (neutrinos), so some of the dimensional fermions
can become leptons (neutrinos).  Various internal symmetry groups are require
to organize leptons, quarks, black hole particles, and force fields.  The force
fields include the long-range massless force to bind leptons and quarks, the
short-range force to bind quarks, the short-range interactions to change quarks
and leptons, and the short-range interaction for the particles inside black hole.
Finally, the gauge bosons, leptons, and quarks absorb the common scalar field
of four dimensional spacetime to acquire the common label of four dimensional
spacetime through Higgs mechanism.   The results are the gauge bosons (Table
1) and the periodic table of elementary particles (Table 2).

After the collapse, the remnants of the cosmic oscillation are in the four

dimensional spacetime.  They are cosmic radiation and gravity, corresponding to
the expansion and the contraction in the cosmic oscillation. Cosmic radiation
maximizes the distance between any two objects as in the expansion, while gravity
minimizes the distance between any two objects as in the contraction.  The
interactions of cosmic radiation and gravity toward all materials are indiscriminate.
Everything can be involved in the same expansion and the contraction.  Both
cosmic radiation and gravity  follow the property of spacetime.  Ubiquitous cosmic
radiation represents spacetime, and gravity is the curvature of four dimensional
spacetime.   Cosmic radiation and gravity do not need internal space.

The remnant of the cosmic oscillation is also shown in microscopic particle-

wave in quantum mechanics.  In the wavefunciton, the spread out momentum
corresponds to the continuously changing momentum in the cosmic oscillation,
and the spread out location corresponds to the continuously changing size of the
cosmic oscillation.   The cosmic uncertainty principle, therefore, is the uncertainty
to identify a particle with precise position and momentum in the cosmic oscillation.
Microscopic particle-wave is the remnant of ever changing spacetime in the cosmic
oscillation.  Microscopic particle-wave does not need internal space.   While the
time scale of the cosmic oscillation is the large one-fourth power of the Planck
time, the time scale of microscopic particle-wave is the small Planck time.

3. The Observable Big Bang Universe

The collapsed cosmic oscillation in the big bang universe results in four

5

dimensional spacetime and seven dimensional internal space.  The seven
dimensional internal space is the base for the gauge bosons and the periodic table
of elementary particles as described in details in Reference 3.  It is briefly reviewed
here.

For  the  big  bang  universe,  the  seven  internal  space  dimensions  are

arranged in the same way as the spacetime dimensions in the big bag universe.

 

 F5 B5 F6 B6 F7 B7 F8 B8 F9 B9 F10 B10 F11 B11

where B and F are boson and fermion in each spacetime dimension. The gauge
bosons in the big bang universe can be derived from Eqs. (1) and (2).   Assuming
αD,B = αD,F , the relation between the bosons in the adjacent dimensions, then, can
be expressed in term of the dimension number, D,

where D= 6 to 11, and E5,B and E11,B are the energies for the dimension five and
the dimension eleven, respectively.

The lowest  energy is the Coulombic field, E5,B

M D-1, B =  M D, B  α2 D ,

E 5, B  = α M6,F
= α Me,

(3)

(4)

where Me is the rest energy of electron, and α = αe , the fine structure constant for
the  magnetic  field.    The  bosons  generated  are  called  "dimensional  bosons"  or
0, and the number of extra
"BD".  Using only αe, the mass of electron, the mass of Z 
dimensions (seven), the masses of BD as the gauge boson can be calculated as
shown in Table 1.

6

Table 1.  The Energies of the Dimensional Bosons
BD = dimensional boson, α = αe

2 cos θw

BD MD

B5

B6

B7

B8

Me α
Me/α
M6/αw

M7/α2

M8/α2
B9
B10 M9/α2
B11 M10/α2

GeV

3.7x10-6

7x10-2

91.177

1.7x106

3.2x1010

6.0x1014
1.1x1019

Gauge Boson

Interaction

A

π1/2
0
ZL

XR

XL

0
ZR
G b

electromagnetic, U(1)

strong, SU(3)

weak (left), SU(2)L

CP (right) nonconservation,
U(1)R
CP (left) nonconservation, U(1)L

weak (right), SU(2)R
black hole, large N color field

In Table 1, αw is not same as α of the rest, because there is symmetry
group mixing between B5 and B7 as the symmetry mixing in the standard theory of
the electroweak interaction, and sinθw is not equal to 1.  As shown in Reference 3,
B5, B6, B7, B8, B9, and B10 are A (massless photon), π1/2, ZL
respectively, responsible for the electromagnetic field, the strong interaction, the
weak (left handed) interaction, the CP (right handed) nonconservation, the CP (left
handed) nonconservation, and the P (right handed) nonconservation, respectively.
The calculated value for θw is 29.690 in good agreement with 28.70 for the
observed value of θw [4].

0,
0, XR, XL, and ZR

The calculated energy for B11 (G b, black hole gluon, equivalent to the
Planck supermembrane) is 1.1x1019 GeV in good agreement with the Planck
mass, 1.2x1019 GeV.  G b is the eleven dimensional gauge boson for the
interaction inside the event horizon of the black hole.  The confinement of all
particles inside black hole is similar to the confinement of all quarks inside hardon,
so the internal symmetry is based on large N color [5].  Black hole gluon
corresponds to gluon, and black hole gluino, the supersymmetrical partner,
corresponds to quark.  Therefore, inside the horizon of black hole, the gravitational
force goes zero, and the large N color field appears.  The eleven dimensional
black hole gluon and gluino are surrounded by the four dimensional gravity.

These eleven dimensional black hole gluons and gluinos are still in internal

space (color) whose internal symmetry generates large N color force field.  They
are not eleven dimensional Planck supermembranes that hold together by the
tangle of D-branes and strings.   The event horizon is the dividing line between the
four dimensional spacetime labeled force and the internal space labeled force.  As
described later, all black hole universe is the end of the cosmic cycle, and all
Planck supermembrane is the beginning of the cosmic cycle.

7

The calculated masses of all gauge bosons are also in good agreement
with the observed values.  Most importantly, the calculation shows that exactly
seven extra dimensions are needed for all fundamental interactions.

The model for leptons and quarks is shown in Fig. 1.  The periodic table for

elementary particles is shown in Table 2.

Lepton

                 νe         e        νµ                                    ντ                  l9                l10
    

                           µ7     τ7

                                        µ8

           D  =  5          6 
    

 7                   
a  =                          0    1      2     3     4      5  0      1     2
  
                                     d7      s7        c7   b7    t7          b8       t8
                                    u7
      u       d            3µ
Quark

 
  

                        µ′                   q9          q10

         8               9       10       11

Fig. 1.  Leptons and quarks in the dimensional orbits
D = dimensional number, a = auxiliary dimensional number

Table 2.  The Periodic Table of Elementary Particles
D = dimensional number, a = auxiliary dimensional number

D

A = 0

1

2

a = 0

1

2

3

4

5

Lepton
l5 = νe
l6 = e
l7 = νµ
l8 = ντ
l9
F10
F11

5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Quark
q5 = u = 3νe
q6 = d = 3e
q7 = 3µ
q8 = µ'
q9

τ7

µ7
µ8

u7/d7 s7
t8
b8

c7

b7

t7

Boson
B5 = A
B6 = π1/2
0
B7 = ZL
B8 = XR
B9 = XL
0
B10 = ZR
B11 = G b

D is the dimensional orbital number for the seven extra space dimensions.
The auxiliary dimensional orbital number, a, is for the seven extra auxiliary space
dimensions, mostly for quarks.   All gauge bosons, leptons, and quarks are located
on the seven dimensional orbits and seven auxiliary orbits.  Most leptons are
dimensional fermions, while all quarks are the sums of subquarks.

The fermion mass formula for massive leptons and quarks is derived from

Reference 3 as follows.

8

M

F

,
aD

=

∑

M

+

M

F

D

0,

AF

,
aD

=

∑

M

F

D

0,

M

B

−

D

0,1

=

∑

M

F

D

0,

M

F

D

0,

α
D

+

+

3

2
3

2

   (5)

a

∑

a

=

0

4

a

a

∑

a

=

0

4

a

Each  fermion  can  be  defined  by  dimensional  numbers  (D's)  and  auxiliary
dimensional  numbers  (a's).    The  compositions  and  calculated  masses  of  leptons
and quarks are listed in Table 3.

Table 3.   The Compositions and the Constituent Masses of Leptons and Quarks
D = dimensional number and a = auxiliary dimensional number

Composition

Calc. Mass

Leptons
νe
e
νµ
ντ
µ
τ
µ'
Quarks
u
d
s
c
b
t

Da
Da for leptons
50
60
70
80
60 + 70 + 71
60 + 70 + 72
60 + 70 + 72 + 80 + 81
Da for quarks
50 + 70 + 71
60 + 70 + 71
60 + 70 + 72
50 + 70 + 73
60 + 70 + 74
50 + 70 + 75 + 80 + 82

νe
e
νµ
ντ
e + νµ  + µ7
e + νµ  + τ7
e + νµ + µ7 + ντ + µ8

u5 + q7 + u7
d6 + q7 + d7
d6 + q7 + s7
u5 + q7 + c7
d6 + q7 + b7
u5 + q7 + t7  + q8 + t8

 0
0.51  MeV (given)
 0
 0
105.6 MeV
1786  MeV
136.9 GeV

330.8 MeV
332.3 MeV
558   MeV
1701  MeV
5318  MeV
176.5 GeV

The  calculated  masses  are  in  good  agreement  with  the  observed
constituent masses of leptons and quarks [5,6].  The mass of the top quark found
by  Collider  Detector  Facility  is  176  ±  13  GeV  [6]  in  a  good  agreement  with  the
calculated  value,  176.5  GeV.    The  masses  of  elementary  particles  can  be
calculated using the periodic table with only four known constants: the number of
the  extra  spatial  dimensions  in  the  supermembrane,  the  mass  of  electron,  the
mass  of  Z°,  and  αe.      The  calculated  masses  are  in  good  agreement  with  the
observed values.

5.

The Cosmic Dematerialized zone

9

The two universes are together yet separate everywhere all the time.  They
are separated by the cosmic dematerialized zone everywhere all the time.  Nothing
can pass through the dematerialized zone.    When the spacetime dimensions in
the two universes are different, the cosmic dematerialized zone remains dormant.
When the spacetime dimensions in the two universes are compatible, the cosmic
dematerialized  zone  becomes  active.    During  this  period  of  compatibility,  the  big
bang  universe  can  either  absorb  space  from  or  emit  space  to  the  cosmic
dematerialized zone.
 
During  one  cycle  of  the  universe,  there  are  four  periods  of  active  cosmic
dematerialized zone.   The first period of active cosmic dematerialized zone is the
  The  Planck
inflation  at 
supermembranes that decay in a short time into internal symmetry four-plus-seven
dimensional  universe.    As  soon  as  the  decay  takes  place,  the  cosmic
dematerialized  zone  becomes  dormant  due  to  the  difference  in  the  spacetime
dimensions between the two universes.

the  expansion  of 

the  universe. 

the  start  of 

The dormant cosmic dematerialized zone becomes active when the

energy level of the decay mode in the big bag is equal to the energy level
between the five-dimensional spacetime and the four dimensional spacetime as
in the big bang universe.  The big bang universe again starts to absorb space
from the cosmic dematerialized zone.  The space absorption in the big bang
universe causes accelerated expansion in the big bang universe.  It is the
second period of active cosmic dematerialized zone, which is happening at the
present as late-time cosmic accelerated expansion.
 
The  evidence  for  late-time  cosmic  accelerated  expansion  is  from  the
recent  observations  of  large-scale  structure  that  suggests  that  the  universe  is
undergoing cosmic accelerated expansion, and it is assumed that the universe is
dominated  by  a  dark  energy  with  negative  pressure  recently  [8].    The  dark
energy  can  be  provided  by  a  non-vanishing  cosmological  constant  or
quintessence [9], a scalar field with negative pressure.  However, a cosmological
constant  requires  extremely 
  Quintessence  requires  an
explanation  for  the  late-  time  cosmic  accelerated  expansion  [11].    Why  does
quintessence dominate the universe only recently?   One of the explanations is
the k-essence model where the pressure of quintessence switched to a negative
value at the onset of matter-domination in the universe [11].

fine-tuned 

[10]. 

According to the cyclic dual universe model, this late-time cosmic

accelerated expansion is caused by the space absorption during the second
period of active cosmic dematerialized zone.  The compatible energy level for the
big bag universe and the big bang universe is between the energy levels of the
five dimensional fermion and the four dimensional boson.  From Eqs (1) and (2)
and Table 1, the energies of the five dimensional fermion and the four
dimensional boson are calculated to be 2.72 x10-8 GeV and 1.99 x10-10 GeV,
respectively.  The energy of the Planck supermembrane is 1.1x1019 GeV from
Table 1.  The energy ratio between the Planck supermembrane and the five
dimensional fermion and the four dimensional boson are 4.17 x1026 and 5.71
x1028, respectively.   In other words, there are 4.17 x1026 five dimensional fermions
10

and 5.71 x1028 four dimensional bosons per Planck supermembrane.  The decay
rate is one particle per one-fourth power of the Planck time (1.52 x10-11 second)
per parent Planck supermembrane.   The total time for the decay is 0.2 billion
years for the five dimensional fermion, and 27.6 billion years for the four
dimensional boson.  Therefore, the space absorption starts in 0.2 billion years
after the Big Bang, and ends in 27.6 billions years, and the space absorption
causes accelerated expansion in the big bang universe.

If the relative rate of the rise and the fall of the space absorption in the big
bang universe during this period follows a smooth curve with respect to time, the
maximum relative rate (100) of space absorption occurs in about 13.9 billion
years after the big bang.  It is coincidentally about the age of the universe.  The
relative rate of space absorption versus time is shown in Fig. 2.

 

 
f
o
e
t
a
r
 
e
v
i
t
a
e
r

l

n
o
i
t
p
r
o
s
b
a
e
c
a
p
s

 

100.0

50.0

0.0

0.2

13.9

27.6

billions of years

Fig. 2.  relative rate of the space absorption in the big bang
universe versus time

In other words, the greatest acceleration occurs at the peak of the space
absorption in 13.9 billion years after the big bang.

The oscillation of the big bag now is in the expansion mode.  The big bag

universe may expand all the way down to the beginning of the two dimensional
spacetime, or may expand only down to the beginning of the four dimensional
spacetime, that is about 14 billion years from now.  When the oscillation is in the
contraction mode in the future, and the big bag universe again passes the four
dimensional spacetime, the big bang universe will emit space to the cosmic
dematerialized zone to pay back the space absorbed during the second period of
the active cosmic dematerialized zone.  The result is the accelerated contraction
of the big bang universe.  This third period of the active cosmic dematerialized
zone prevents the big bang universe to expand forever with an infinite large
space.  Therefore, the big bang universe and the big bag universe can contract
together.

Toward the end of the contraction mode, black holes become the
dominating feature in the big bang universe.  Black hole contains eleven
dimensional black hole gluon and gluino surrounded by gravity.  When both
universes are near eleven dimensional spacetime, they again become
compatible.  In this last period of active cosmic dematerialized zone, the big
bang universe again emits space to the cosmic dematerialized zone.  The result
is to gather all material in the big bang universe for the final contraction into the

11

eleven dimensional black hole gluons and gluinos surrounded by four
dimensional gravity in one area.

Moment after the final accelerated contraction, the space absorption

starts to start the inflation.  The inflation is anti-gravity that annihilates gravity
surrounding the black hole gluons and gluinos.  Without gravity, black hole
gluons and gluinos disappear as quarks disappear outside of hadrons.  What
remain are the eleven dimensional Planck supermembranes that hold together
by the tangle of D-branes and strings.  Immediately, the eleven dimensional
Planck supermembranes decay, and another cosmic cycle starts.  The inflation,
therefore, is not an add-on but a necessity to start the cosmic cycle.

6.

Conclusion

Supersymmetry  involves  a  symmetrical  change  in  spacetime  labels  in
terms of spacetime coordinates, while internal symmetry involves a symmetrical
change  in  non-spacetime  labels  in  terms  of  charged  fields,  isotopic  spin,  and
colors.  In this paper, the cosmic origin of supersymmetry and internal symmetry
is explained by the cyclic dual universe, the coexistence of the unobservable big
bag universe and the observable big bang universe.

The  cosmic  cycle  for  both  universes  starts  with  the  eleven  dimensional
Planck supermembrane with the Planck mass. The supersymmetry of the Planck
supermembrane  is  broken  into  a  Kaluza-Klein  structure  where  the  lower
dimensional spacetime has lower energy than the higher dimensional spacetime.
In  the  big  bag  universe,  the  Planck  supermembranes  are  slowly  broken  and
decay into concerted particles that then are slowly recombined.  It undergoes a
gigantic  slow  cosmic  oscillation  between  the  high-energy  eleven  dimensional
spacetime  and  the  low-energy  four  dimensional  spacetime.    It  is  like  a  gigantic
cosmic particle-wave.

The  collapse  of  the  cosmic  oscillation  is  caused  by  the  lepton-quark
composite  derived  from  the  crossing  of  two  sets  of  the  seven  dimensions  from
two Planck supermembranes.  To maintain the lepton-quark composite requires
non-spacetime  labels  independent  of  spacetime.  The  spacetime  labels  for  the
two  sets  of  seven  dimensions  are  replaced  by  non-spacetime 
labels.
Consequently,  the  cosmic  oscillation  collapse  due  to  the  disruption  by  the  non-
spacetime  labels,  independent  of  the  spacetime  of  the  cosmic  oscillation.    It  is
like 
the  collapse  of  microscopic  particle-wave  by  a  system  (such  as
measurement)  independent  of  microscopic  particle-wave.    The  collapse  of  the
cosmic  oscillation  results  in  the  immediate  decay  into  the  four  dimensional
spacetime  and  the  seven  dimensional  internal  space.    There  is  no  curled-up
space  dimension  and  compacitification.  Except  at  the  very  beginning  of  the
cosmic  cycle  and  black  hole,  the  big  bang  universe  has  pure  four  dimensional
spacetime.  The  unobservable  big  bag  universe  is  the  supersymmetry  four-to-
eleven dimensional spacetime universe, while the observable big bang universe
is the internal symmetry four-plus-seven dimensional universe.

12

In the four dimensional spacetime, there are cosmic radiation, gravity, and
microscopic  particle-wave.  In  the  seven  dimensional  internal  space,  there  are
internal symmetries for gauge bosons, leptons, quarks, and black hole.
gauge bosons and the periodic table of elementary particles can be derived from
the  collapsed  cosmic  oscillation.  There  is  black  hole  gluon  specifically  for  the
interaction  inside  black  hole.    The  masses  of  gauge  bosons  and  elementary
particles can be calculated using the periodic table with only four known constants:
the  number  of  the  extra  spatial  dimensions  in  the  supermembrane,  the  mass  of
electron, the mass of Z°, and αe.   The calculated masses are in good agreement
with the observed values.

The

The two universes are separated by the dematerialized zone everywhere
all the time.  The big bang universe absorbs space from and emits space to the
dematerialized  zone,  when  the  spacetime  dimensions  in  both  universes  are
compatible.    The  results  are  the  inflation  during  the  big  bang,  the  late-time
cosmic accelerated expansion, the cosmic accelerated contraction, and the final
cosmic  accelerated  contraction.    The  cosmic  cycle  starts  with  all  Planck
supermembrane for both universe, and ends with all black hole universe for the
big  bang  universe.  The  inflation  is  not  an  add-on  but  a  necessity  to  start  the
cosmic cycle.  According to the calculation, we are now at the peak of the late-
time cosmic accelerated expansion.

13

 References

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

C.M.Hull and P.K. Townsend, Nucl. Phys. B 438 (1995) 109; E. Witten,
Nucl. Phys. B 443 (1995) 85.
E. Witten 1982 Nucl. Phys. B202 (1981) 253; T. Bank, D. Kaplan, and A.
Nelson A  1994 Phys. Rev. D49 (1994) 779.
D. Chung, Speculations in Science and Technology 20 (1997) 259;
Speculations in Science and Technology 21(1999) 277; hep-ph/0003237;
Concise Encyclopedia of on Supersymmetry to be published by Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
P. Langacher, M. Luo , and A. Mann, Rev. Mod. Phys. 64 (1992) 87.
J. Maldacena, Adv. Theor. Math Phys. 2, 231 (1998); hep-ph/0002092.
CDF Collaboration, 1995 Phys. Rev. Lett 74 (1995) 2626.
C.P. Singh, Phys. Rev. D24 (1981) 2481; D. B. Lichtenberg Phys. Rev.
D40 (1989) 3675.
N. Balcall, J.P. Ostriker, S. Perlmutter, and P.J. Steinhardt, Science 284,
1481-1488, (1999).
R.R. Caldwell, R. Dave, and P.J. Steinhardt, Phys.Rev.Lett.80, 1582
(1998).
J.D. Barrow & F.J. Tipler, The Antropic Cosmological Principle, Oxford UP
(1986) p.668.
C. Armedariz-Picon, V. Mukhanov, and P.J. Steinhardt, Phys.Rev.Lett.85,
4438 (2000).

14

