A  Unifying  Hypothesis  for  the  Conformational  Change  of  Tubulin

Deborah  Kuchnir  Fygenson
Department of Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106

Microtubule dynamic instability arises from the hydrolysis of GTP  bound  to  the  β-monomer of  the  tubulin  dimer.   The
conformational change induced by  hydrolysis is  unknown,  but  microtubules  disassemble into  protofilaments  of  GDP-bound
tubulin that curve away from the  microtubule  axis.    This  paper presents the  unfolding of  a  portion  of  the  tubulin  molecule
into the microtubule interior  as  a  plausible,  unifying  explanation for diverse structural and kinetic  features of  microtubules.
This is the first specific structural hypothesis for the hydrolysis induced conformational change of tubulin that simultaneously
explains weakening of lateral bonds,  bending about  longitudinal  bonds,  changes in  protofilament  supertwist  associated with
GTP  hydrolysis,  structural  features  of  GDP-tubulin  double  rings,  faster  disassembly  at  higher  temperatures  and  slower
disassembly  in  the  presence  of  glycerol  and  deuterium  oxide.  As  such,  the  hypothesis  makes  a  strong  case  for  further
theoretical investigation and direct experimental tests.

(    ∆l

Microtubules  are  hollow,  cylindrical  aggregates  of  the
protein  tubulin,  25  nm  in  diameter.   In vivo  as  well  as  in
vitro,  individual  microtubules  switch  repeatedly  between
growing  (assembling)  and  shortening  (disassembling)  from
their  ends,  exhibiting  macroscopic  fluctuations  in  overall
l~ )  under  otherwise  constant 
length 
chemical
conditions (Kirschner and Mitchison,  1986).    This  puzzling
“dynamic instability” is fueled by  the  hydrolysis of  tubulin-
bound guanosine tri-phosphate (GTP) (Hyman et  al.,  1992),
which  is  loosely  understood as  triggering  a  conformational
change in  the  tubulin  molecule  that  eventually  destabilizes
the  aggregate (Tran et  al.,  1997).    The structure  of  tubulin
has  been  solved  with  3.7Å  resolution  (Nogales  et  al.,
1998b),  but  the  physical  nature  of  the  conformational
change is not yet known (Downing and Nogales, 1998b).

change  of 

This paper  presents and explores the  hypothesis  that  the
hydrolysis-induced  conformational 
tubulin
involves  a  portion  of  the  sparsely  structured  N-terminal
domain  of  the  β-tubulin  molecule  “unfolding”  into  the
interior of the microtubule.    It  is  shown  that  such  a  change
can  destabilize  the  aggregate  in  a  manner  consistent  with
structural data (Mandelkow et al., 1991).  From  the  data, the
effective  size  of  the  unfolded  region  is  deduced  and  a
candidate locus in the  three dimensional structure of  tubulin
is  identified.   The hypothesis  leads to  novel  interpretations
of two important structural results:  the  hydrolysis associated
change in microtubule supertwist  (Hyman et  al.,  1995),  and
the  structure  of  GDP-tubulin  double-rings  (Diaz  et  al.,
1994).  It also provides a unifying explanation for the  effects
of  temperature  (Fygenson  et  al.,  1994)  and  glycerol
(Fygenson, 1995) on microtubule disassembly rates.  
theoretical 

and
experimental  investigations.    If  verified,  the  existence  of
localized unfolding  will  enable  major  advancements  in  the
understanding  of  microtubules.    It  will  also  establish  the
biological  relevance  of  localized  unfolding  as  a  subset  of
for
protein  conformational  change,  opening 
quantitative  modeling  and  testing  of  a  novel  class  of
molecular machines.

results  motivate 

the  way 

further 

These 

BACKGROUND

Tubulin  is  a  heterodimer  of  nearly  identical  α-  and  β-
tubulin  polypeptides  (Burns  and  Surridge,  1994).    These
monomers each bind one molecule of GTP  and are bound  to
one  another  in  a  head-to-tail  arrangement  (αβ)  with  the
GTP-binding site of α-tubulin buried at the  interface and the

GTP-binding site  of  β-tubulin  exposed at  the  opposite  pole
(Nogales  et  al.,  1998b).    Dimers  spontaneously  aggregate
head-to-tail into protofilaments, burying the β-bound GTP at
the dimer-dimer (αβ-αβ) interface.  Protofilaments  aggregate
in  parallel (ββ,αα)  to  form  the  microtubule  wall.    Lateral
bonds  are  slightly  tilted  and  angled  inwards,  so  that  13
protofilaments close  naturally to  form  a  tube  whose axis  is
parallel to the protofilament axis and whose surface lattice  is
described  by  a  left-handed  three-start  helix,  with  a  seam
(where the tube  closed) along  which  monomers  of  one  type
interface  laterally  with  monomers  of 
type
(Mandelkow et al., 1986).  (See Fig. 1).

the  other 

GTP

GDP

α

β

GTP

GTP

φ

−

+

Fig.  1.    Schematic  of  microtubule  structure.  In  solution,
tubulin  binds  GTP  non-exchangeably  (red)  on  the  α-monomer
and  exchangeably  (white)  on  the  β-monomer.    The  GTP-laden
dimer  aggregates  into  a  left-handed,  three-start  helical  lattice
characterized  by  an  angle  φ.   Microtubules  typically  form  with
13  protofilaments  that  align  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  tube.
Monomers  interface  laterally  with  monomers  of  the  same  type,
except  along  one  protofilament  pair  that  forms  a  seam  (dashed
line).  Within the microtubule,  GTP  bound  to  the  β-monomer  i s
hydrolyzed  to  GDP,  which  is  non-exchangeable  (red)  until  the
dimer  returns  into  solution  after  disassembly.  

Fygenson

The  main  difference  between  α-  and  β-tubulins  is  in
binding GTP.  α-bound GTP is effectively  sequestered –  not
exchanged and not hydrolyzed – but β-bound GTP is  labile  –
exchangeable  in  the  free  dimer  and  hydrolyzed  to  (non-
exchangeable)  guanosine  di-phosphate 
the
protofilament  (Weisenberg  et  al.,  1976).    A  significant
amount  of  the  free energy of  this  hydrolysis  goes  into  the
microtubule  via  a  conformational  change  of  the  tubulin
dimer (Caplow et al., 1994).

(GDP) 

in 

Although  the  hydrolysis  reaction  is  closely  coupled  to
microtubule assembly (Carlier and Pantaloni,  1981;  Stewart
et al.,  1990),  its  consequence is  to  destabilize the  structure.
Experiments  indicate  that  unhydrolyzed  GTP-tubulin  is
limited  to  the  last  layer  of  subunits  at  the  end  of  a
microtubule  (Voter  et  al.,  1991;  Walker  et  al.,  1991;
Drechsel and Kirschner, 1994).    The usual  interpretation  is
that  this  layer  acts  as  a  “GTP-cap”,  keeping  an  otherwise
unstable  microtubule  intact  (Mitchison  and  Kirschner,
1984).    Numerical and  analytical  models  along  these  lines
reproduce  some  salient  features  (Martin  et  al.,  1993;
Flyvbjerg  et  al.,  1996)  but  do  not  imply  a  microscopic
mechanism to justify the tuning of their parameters.  At  this
point,  an  understanding  of  microtubule  dynamics  awaits
greater knowledge of  the  hydrolysis-induced  conformational
change (Downing and Nogales, 1998a).

in 

Circular  dichroism  (Howard  and  Timasheff,  1986)  and
Raman  spectroscopy (Audenaert et  al.,  1989)  show  a  slight
change 
tubulin  secondary  structure  content  after
hydrolysis,  but  by  far  the  strongest  signature  of  the
conformational change has  appeared in  electron micrographs
of growing  and shortening  microtubules  (Mandelkow et  al.,
1991).  At the ends of growing microtubules,  protofilaments
of  different lengths  are  straight  and  closely  associated.    In
shortening  microtubules,  protofilaments  separate  from  one
another  and  curl  back,  away  from  the  microtubule  axis,
forming  characteristic blunt  “blossoms”  at  the  microtubule
ends (Tran et al., 1997;  Muller-Reichert et  al.,  1998).    This
observation  is  the  basis  for  comments  about  the  tubulin
shaped"
dimer  adopting  a  "curved"  or  "kidney-bean 
conformation,  held under tension  in  the  microtubule  lattice
(reviewed  in  (Tran  et  al.,  1997;  Downing  and  Nogales,
1998a)).    Localization  of  the  hydrolyzed  nucleotide  at  the
inter-dimer  interface  is  highly  suggestive,  but  which  and
how  residues  shift  to  generate  tension  and  weaken  lateral
bonds  is  an  important  subject  of  active  research  (Davis  et
al., 1994; Sage et al., 1995).  

H Y P O T H E S I S

Consider α-  and β-tubulin  as  solid  spheres  of  radius  b.
Suppose that hydrolysis of β-bound GTP causes a portion  of
β-tubulin, initially  condensed onto  the  monomer  surface, to
"unfold" into solution.  Over time, this  domain will  explore
a  volume  of  radius  ρ  centered  on  the  surface  of  the  β-
tubulin  sphere  (some  of  which  is  excluded  by  the  sphere
itself) (Fig. 2a)., This unfolded region is herein referred to  as
an entropic bristle domain (EBD) to evoke  its  analogy with
the  entropic brushes commonly  used to  inhibit  aggregation
in colloids (Hoh, 1998; Milner, 1991).  

If they are tethered to the side of β-tubulin that faces into
the microtubule interior, EBDs will be sterically hindered.

2

ρ
b

a)

b)

c)

α

β

α

β

α

β

α

β

Rpf

Fig.  2.    Schematics  of  the  proposed  entropic  bristle  domain
(EBD)  on  β-tubulin.    a )   Side  view  of  a  single  β-tubulin
monomer (gray) of  radius  b,  with  an  EBD  (red)  of  characteristic
size ρ.  b)  Cross-section of a microtubule  cut  along  a  row  of  β-
tubulins.  Shading (red) indicates regions of overlap where  EBDs
sterically  hinder  one  another. 
the
aggregate  releases  EBDs  from  confinement  at  the  expense  of
lateral bonds.  c) Side view of  a  pair  of  protofilaments  oriented
as  in  a  microtubule.    For  simplicity,  the  α-tubulin  monomers
(light gray) are  drawn  contacting  the  β-tubulin  monomers  (dark
gray) equidistant on either side of the EBD (red).  Note the  slight
overlap  of  the  EBDs  with  the  α-tubulin  spheres.    A  radius  of
curvature  Rpf eliminates the overlap.

  Radial  expansion  of 

/

b

1

>

R


b


)
φ

− (



µ

ρ
    

In  the  microtubule  surface  lattice,  a  row  of  β-tubulins
follows a helix of radius  Rµ with a pitch given by  the  angle
φ  (Fig.  1).    Geometry  dictates  that  EBDs  on  laterally
adjacent β-tubulins will overlap if
cos
In  the  longitudinal  direction, by  contrast,  β-tubulins  are
  α-tubulins  do  not
separated  by  α-tubulins  (Fig.  1). 
hydrolyze  GTP  and  so  presumably  do  not  release  EBDs.
Thus,  longitudinally  spaced  EBDs  will  not  overlap  unless
ρ> 2b.    They will  be  sterically  hindered,  nevertheless,  by
    
overlap with  neighboring  α-tubulin  “spheres”.   If the  EBD
anchored on a β-tubulin is at an  angle ξ  from  a  neighboring
α-tubulin,  the  geometrical  criterion  for  overlap  can  be
written as

.

(

ρ

≥

b 5 4

cos

−

ξ

−

1

)

.

3

a)

b)

Fygenson

The  criteria  for  overlap  are  important  because  the
resulting  steric hindrance between EBDs costs  entropic  free
energy.  The cost  is  greater in  the  lateral direction, where it
is  equivalent  to  a  pressure  radially  outward  that  favors
separation  of  the  protofilaments  (Fig.  2b). 
the
longitudinal direction, there is less overlap,  but  still  there is
pressure on  the  neighboring  α-tubulins  that  is  relieved  by
increasing ξ.    Thus,  a  straight  protofilament  (ξ=90°)  will,
upon the unfolding of  EBDs,  curve back and away from  the
microtubule  axis  (ξ>90°) as  it  separates from  its  neighbors
(Fig. 2c).

  In 

into 

In  this  way,  a  conformational  change  consisting  of
nothing  more  than  the  release  of  an  EBD 
the
microtubule  lumen  can explain  the  most  striking  structural
characteristics of  a  disassembling  microtubule  (Mandelkow
et  al.,  1991;  Tran  et  al.,  1997).    Preferential  breaking  of
lateral bonds over longitudinal  ones  is  expected, even if  the
two  are  comparable  in  strength,  because  lateral  bonds  are
subject  to  greater  stress  (from  closer  packed  EBDs)  than
longitudinal  ones.    Curling  of  separated  protofilaments  is
expected,  even  if  α-tubulins  do  not  change  conformation,
because  curvature  places  α-tubulins  outside  the  EBDs  on
neighboring β-tubulins.  

Size  of  the  unfolded  domain

The effective size of  the  hypothetical  EBD on  β-tubulin
can be deduced from measurements (Mandelkow et al.,  1991)
of  the  radius  of  protofilament  curvature,  Rpƒ,  using  a
geometrical no-overlap criterion

ρ=


b


+
5 4


1


.

−

b Rpf
/
b = 2nm, 

and 

R p =19 nm 

For 
equation
gives ρ = 2.7 nm.    (Note:  This  result  assumes  the  EBD is
anchored  equidistant  from  the  two  neighboring  α-tubulins
along  the  protofilament,  but  the  calculation  is  relatively
insensitive  to  the  location  of  the  anchor point.    Anchoring
closer to one α-tubulin than the other gives ρ < 2.9 nm.)

this 

Given  this  size,  it  is  possible  to  guess  roughly  the
number  of  amino  acids  involved  in  the  EBD.    If  ρ  is
interpreted (albeit loosely)  as  the  radius  of  gyration  of  the
self avoiding random walk executed by backbone of the  EBD
polypeptide, then  it  should  scale  (Doi  and  Edwards,  1986)
with the step size, a, and the number of steps,  N,  to  the  3/5
power,  ρ≈N3/5a.    Taking  ρ=2.7nm  and  a=3Å  this  relation
suggests that the EBD might involve ~40 amino acids.

Location  of  the  unfolded  domain

The  structure  of  tubulin  in  an  assembly  competent,
taxotere  stabilized  conformation  is  known  with  3.7Å
resolution (PDB entry  TUB1) (Nogales et  al.,  1998b).    The
authors  of  that  work point  out  that  the  N-terminal  domain
contains  "…long  predicted  loops  on  the  putative  inside
surface of  the  microtubule  [that  ]    correspond  to  a  region  of
the sequence that can accommodate insertions and deletions."
In particular, after the first β-strand (B1; residues 3-8) and α-
helix (H1; residues 12-23), there is a large loop (residues 24-
64)  before a  short  β-strand (B2; residues 65-70).    The next,
rather short,  α-helix  (H2;  residues  74-79)  is  also  followed
by a loop (residues 80-92) and a  short  β-strand (B3; residues
93-97).    Yet  another  large  loop  (residues  97-110)  precedes
the  third  α-helix  (H3;  residues  111-127).  (See  Fig.  3.)

Fig.  3 .   Cartoon  structure  of  β-tubulin,  from  entry  1TUB  i n
the  Protein  Data  Bank 
(http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/)  using
RasMol 
(http://www.umass.edu/microbio/rasmol/getras.htm).
a) view  in  profile:    microtubule  interior  on  the  left  and  exterior
on  the  right.  b)  view  from  the  center  of  the  microtubule.   The
supposed EBD is colored red.  Portions of the N-terminal  domain
which  might  anchor  the  EBD  to  the  protein  core  are  colored
black  (residues  1-23,  111-133).   The  GDP-ligand  is  green  and
the taxotere molecule is  blue.   Arrows  indicate  residues  thought
to  interact  with  the  β-bound  GTP.    Circles  indicate  potential
anchor  sites.

Although  they  appear  close  packed  in  the  space-filling
rendition  of  the  published  crystal  structure,  the  authors
specifically note,  "Strands B2  and B3 are  poorly  defined  in
the  unrefined  density  map.    The  residues  in  the  loops
connecting  H1  and  B2,  and  H2  and  B3,  are  included  for
completeness, but were built in very weak density."

Thus, the  N-terminal domain of  β-tubulin  is  a  plausible
locus for the hypothetical EBD.  Although they  wrap around
themselves,  the  loops  in  this  region  (residues  24-110)  are
not  intertwined with  the  rest  of  the  molecule  (Fig.  3a).  In
any rendition, the EBD would involve at least the first,  large
loop  (residues  24-64)  of  the  N-terminal  domain.  One

Fygenson

possibility  is  that  the  EBD  is  a  ~80  amino  acid  loop
(residues 24-110) anchored to the β-tubulin surface at its  two
ends.    In  the  N-terminal  domain,  at  least  three  segments
appear to interact with  the  GDP  (Nogales et  al.,  1998a),  so
some  residues  in  the  loops  may  well  be  held  near  the  β-
tubulin surface by  a  third phosphate group.    Furthermore,  a
stretch near the top of H1 (residues 15-25) interacts with  the
taxotere  molecule  (Fig.  3b),  suggesting  that  this  drug's
stabilizing  effect might  derive from  an  attractive interaction
that  effectively localizes the  EBD.    This  would explain  the
otherwise surprising location of the drug binding site  on  the
microtubule interior (Amos and Lowe, 1999).  

IMPLICATIONS  FOR  STRUCTURES

The  estimated  size,  ρ,  of  the  hypothetical  EBD  is
particularly interesting  in  relation  to  the  spacing  of  EBDs
across  the  seam  in  the  microtubule.    The  dimensions  are
such that

.

2

2

b

b

2

2

<

2
ρ

b R

−
1


2

 <
/ µ
The  left-hand  inequality  implies  that  EBDs  overlap  across
the  seam when curved toward each  other  in  a  microtubule.
The  right  hand  inequality  implies  that  EBDs  would  not
overlap across the  seam if  not  constrained  to  curve  toward
each  other,  as  might  occur  when  a  microtubule
disassembles.    The  rest  of  this  section  explores  two
consequences  of  these  two  inequalities  that  lead  to  new
interpretations of structural data.  

Slipping  at  the  seam

Although the  apparent size of  the  EBDs should be  large
enough  to  repel across  the  seam  inside  a  microtubule,  the
microtubule  surface  lattice  is  not  square,  so  the  repulsion
would  not  be  symmetric  across  the  seam  (Fig.  4a).    To
balance  the  forces,  the  mismatched  protofilaments  should
slip  so  as  to  increase  the  left-handed  helical  pitch  of  the
monomers.    The  distance  slipped,  ∆ ,  will  cause  the
protofilaments  to  adopt  an  angle  θ   with  respect  to  the
microtubule  axis  such  that  tanθ=∆/2bN,  where  N  is  the
number  of  protofilaments  and  2b  is 
the  width  of  a
protofilament.    The  angle  means  that  the  protofilaments
twist around the  microtubule  with  a  characteristic pitch,  Lp,
given by

2

bN

=

θ

=

cos
θ

p

L
  
the  approximation  holds  for  small  θ 

cos

tan

θ

≈

2

)

(
2

bN
∆

2

)

(
2

bN
∆

 

(i.e.,

where 
    ∆ << 2bN ).  

Twisting protofilaments are well  known  in  microtubules
which  form  with  a  protofilament  number different  from  13
(Wade  et  al.,  1990;  Chretien  and  Wade,  1991).    In  such
microtubules,  protofilaments  at  the  seam  must  “shift”  a
distance ε  to  make  lateral  bonds  come  into  register.    The
/ ε  that  is,
resulting  “supertwist” has  a  pitch  L
by  convention,  negative when it  is  left-handed (i.e.,  ε  <   0
for shifts  that  go  decrease  the  three-start  helical  pitch)  and
positive  when it  is  right-handed (i.e.,  ε > 0  for shifts  that
increase the  three-start helical pitch).    Thus,  the  release  of
EBDs should cause protofilaments to develop a tighter  right-
handed or looser left-handed supertwist, according to

≈ (
2

bN

)

p

4

2

p

bN

L
    

≈ (
2

)
+(
/ ε ∆ .

)
This  argument  suggests  a  new  interpretation  of  cryo-
electron  microscopy  data  that  measured  the  protofilament
supertwist  in  microtubules  “before”  and  “after”  hydrolysis
(Hyman et  al.,  1995).    For  the  former,  microtubules  were
assembled  from  tubulin  bound  to  GMPCPP,  a  slowly
hydrolyzable analogue of GTP.  For  the  latter,  microtubules
were assembled in the standard way, in the presence of  GTP,
which  quickly  hydrolyzes.    Measurements  were  made  on
microtubules with N=12, 13, 14, 15.  

(L*

supertwist 

right-handed 

Before  hydrolysis,  microtubules  with  N=14,  15  had  a
(Lp=9.0, 4.1µm,
pronounced 
respectively)  whereas  microtubules  with  N=13  showed  a
slight  left-handed supertwist  (Lp=-14.8µm).    The supertwist
handedness  of  microtubules  with  N=12  (|Lp|=3.7 µm)  was
not  reported.    After  hydrolysis,  the  supertwist  pitch  was
different:  tighter  for  the  right-handed  (ε>0)  microtubules
p(14, 15)=6.6, 3.5µm)  and  looser  for  the  left-handed
(L*
p (N=13)=∞)  and  undetermined  microtubules,
(ε<0), 
(|L*

p(N=12)|=4.7µm).  
From  this  data,  the  EBD  hypothesis  predicts  that  the
microtubules  with  N=12  were  left-handed.    Furthermore,
using the first set of  measurements (before hydrolysis,  ∆=0)
to estimate ε, the EBD hypothesis allows one to derive  from
the  second  set  of  measurements  (after  hydrolysis,  ∆>0)
estimates  of  ∆=1.3, 1.8, 1.3, 1.5 Å  for  respective  values
of N=12, 13, 14, 15.  These values are consistent with  a  1.5
Å shift in layer-line spacing reported in the same experiment
and provide a coherent interpretation of the data for all values
of N.  The alternate interpretation of the  1.5Å  shift  in  layer-
line spacing as an overall shortening  of  the  tubulin  dimer is
not  consistent  with  the  looser 
left-handed  supertwists
reported  for  N=12  and  N=13  microtubules  (Hyman  et  al.,
1995).

Spirals  from  the  seam.

Given  the  structure  of  the  microtubule  surface  lattice,
EBDs on either side of the seam should not overlap as  much
as  other neighboring  EBD  pairs  (Fig.  4a).    In  fact,  given
their  size,  EBDs  on  either  side  of  the  seam  might  not
overlap at  all  if  the  protofilaments  were  not  constrained  to
→∞).    The  EBD  hypothesis  therefore
angle inward (i.e.,  Rµ
suggests  that,  upon  disassembly,  the    protofilaments  that
comprise  the  seam  might  not  separate  from  one  another.
Instead, they could curl back and away  from  the  microtubule
axis  as  a  pair,  just  like  a  single  protofilament.    If  the
protofilaments  in  the  pair  rotate  slightly  about  their  long
axes  (Fig.  4a,  inset),  their  EBDs  would  avoid  all  steric
hindrance, even that due to overlap with laterally adjacent α-
tubulins.  The overlap condition

+

=

ρ
    

φ δ
sin

−

,

1

b 5 4

cos
with  ρ=2.7nm,  b=2nm  and φ<20°,  indicates that  a  rotation
of  δ=8°  would  suffice.    The  total  bend  angle  between
laterally adjacent monomers,  2δ=16°,  would then  be  similar
to  the  bend  in  the  longitudinal  bond  between  monomers
along  a  curled protofilament  (Howard and  Timasheff,  1986;
Melki et al., 1989).

Furthermore,  if  an  isolated  seam  were  to  curl  straight
back onto itself, it could form a stable spiral, with the outer

(

)

Fygenson

δδ

a)

5

δδ

γ

b)

γ

x

∆ > 0

φ

Fig.  4 .     Schematics  of  the  microtubule  lattice  with  emphasis  on  the  seam.   α-tubulins  are  light,  β-tubulins  are  dark,  EBDs  are
outlined in red dashes and regions of overlap are shaded in red.  a)  Microtubule lattice cut  open,  laid  flat  and  viewed  from  the  inside.
The helical  pitch  of  the  lattice  is  characterized  by  the  angle  φ  between  a  row  of  monomers  and  the  horizontal.   The  upper  portion
depicts a perfectly rhombic lattice, as would be expected in the absence of EBDs.  Dashed arrows represent forces acting  on  β-tubulins
at  the  seam  due  to  overlapping  EBDs.   Solid  arrows  show  resultant  forces  which  cause  slippage  at  the  seam.    (The  lower  portion
depicts a lattice with a defect along the seam, caused by slipping a distance ∆.)  Top: During disassembly, protofilaments at the  seam
curve back and away from the microtubule axis  without  separating.  The  isolated  pair  could  adopt  the  preferred  rhombic  lattice  motif
while  rotating  slightly  apart  to  eliminate  any  hindrance  of  the  EBDs  (curved  arrows).    The  angle  of  rotation,  δ,  for  each
protofilament, as viewed along the protofilament axis, is defined in the inset at left.   b)  Microtubule  lattice  closed  into  a  tube,  with
an  isolated  seam,  viewed  in  profile,  curling  back  upon  itself  into  a  spiral.   The  EBDs  on  the  inner  protofilament  pair  are  pressed
against  the  outer  protofilament  pair.    The  angles  of  rotation,  δ  and  γ,  for  protofilament  pairs  in  the  outer  and  inner  rings,
respectively,  and  the  separation  between  the  pairs,  x, viewed along the protofilament axis, are defined in the inset.

protofilament  pair  nested  between  EBDs  on  the  inner  one
(Fig.  4b).    EBDs on  the  inner  pair  would  splay  further  to
each side as they press against the outer pair (Fig.  4b,  inset)
and the distance separating the protofilament cores, x , would
be  related  to  the  angle  of  rotation  γ  of  the  inner  EBDs
according to

+(
ρ

) =
2

b

2

x

+

2

b

−

2

xb

cos

γ

.

This  provides an  alternate interpretation of  the  structure
of  the  so-called  double-rings  of  GDP-tubulin,  often  seen
among  the  disassembly  products  of  microtubules  (Howard
and Timasheff, 1986; Melki et al., 1989).  The best resolved
measurements  of  GDP-tubulin  double-rings,  from  x-ray
scattering of  concentrated solutions  (Diaz et  al.,  1994),  can
not  differentiate between α  and  β  tubulins,  but  do  resolve
the  separation  between 
the
dimensions  and  orientations  of  the  ellipsoidal  repeat  unit:
4nm  (tangent to  the  ring)  ×  7nm  (at  -60°  from  the  radial
axis)  ×  8nm  (perpendicular to  the  plane of  the  ring).    As  a
spiraled seam,  the  observed  inter-ring  separation,  x=5.5nm,
 and  the  estimated  EBD  size,  ρ=2.7nm,  would  together

the  rings,  x=5.5nm,  and 

                                                                        
explain the size (7nm~2b+ρ)   and orientation,  γ=56°,  of  the
intermediate  ellipsoidal  axis.    Similarly,  the  major  axis
(8nm=2b+2b) would be interpreted as  crossing  the  seam and
the  minor  axis  (4nm=2b)  as  the  size  of  a  single  tubulin
monomer along a protofilament.

to 

the  microtubule 

A spiraled seam leads to a  very  different interpretation of
the  double-ring  structure  than  suggested  by  the  authors  of
the x-ray scattering study (Diaz et al.,  1994).    They propose
that  the  double  rings  are  only  one  monomer  thick,  and
"correspond  to  two  neighbor  protofilaments  curved"  in  a
direction  "tangent 
(i.e.,
sideways)".  In  addition to  the  unusual  monomer  thickness,
this  interpretation is  puzzling,  as  the  authors  note,  in  that
"lateral  contacts  between  monomers  in  the  microtubule
become  necessarily  out  of  register  in  the  outer  and  inner
rings  with  different  numbers  of  subunits".    Lateral  bonds
between tubulins,  suggested in  the  sideways  ring  structure,
would usually  require a  specific alignment  of  their  surfaces.
No particular positioning between tubulins on  the  two  rings
would be necessary, however, for a pair of rings derived from

surface 

6

i

/

)
n
m
m
µ
(
 
y
b
m
e
s
s
A

l

 
f
o
 
e
a
R

t

l

i

/

)
n
m
m
µ
(
 
y
b
m
e
s
s
a
s
D

i

 
f
o
 
e
t
a
R

0
10

4

3

2

1

8

6

4

2

0

Fygenson

a  spiraled seam with  EBDs.    Steric  interactions would hold
the outer ring between EBDs on the inner ring.  

The notion that double rings  derive from  a  spiraled seam
structure  is  supported  by  two  cryo-electron  microscopy
studies (Mandelkow et  al.,  1991;  Nicholson  et  al.,  1999).
In  the  earlier  study,  cross  sectional  views  of  nested  rings
composed of  protofilament  pairs  are  explicitly  documented.
(See  Fig.  3  in  (Mandelkow  et  al.,  1991).)    In  the  more
recent  study,  reconstructions  averaging  under 
imposed
rotational  symmetry  clearly  show  that  the  outer  ring  has
been curved "so  that  the  'bumpy'  side of  tubulin,  which  in
the microtubule corresponds to the  inside surface, now  faces
the outside of  the  double ring,  whereas the  flatter side faces
the inside." (See Fig. 4. in (Nicholson et al., 1999)).

IMPLICATIONS  FOR  DISASSEMBLY

Another  consequence  of  the  EBD  hypothesis  is  that
microtubule  disassembly is  driven, at  least  in  part,  by  the
entropic  free  energy  gained  when  a  cohort  of  unfolded
domains escape the  confinement of  the  microtubule  lumen.
This  leads to  qualitative  predictions  about  the  microtubule
disassembly rate as a function of  intensive  variables such  as
temperature, concentration of  glycerol  and  concentration  of
deuterium oxide (D2O).   The  rest  of  this  section  compares
predictions with experiments using these three variables.

Effect  of  temperature

Because the  free  energy  attributable  to  EBD  overlap  is
inherently entropic, it should increase at  higher temperatures
and lead to faster rates of  microtubule  disassembly.    At  first
this prediction appears to contradict the well known  fact that
microtubules are, overall, more stable at  higher temperatures
(Dustin,  1984). 
  However,  measurements  of  single
microtubule  dynamics  as  a  function  of  temperature  show
that  both  assembly  and  disassembly  of 
individual
microtubules  are faster at  higher temperatures (Fygenson  et
al., 1994).  The greater stability overall is due  to  a  reduction
in  the  frequency  of  transitions  from  growth  to  shortening
(catastrophe)  and  an  increased  probability  of  the  reverse
(rescue).    The  increased  rate  of  assembly  indicates  a
strengthening of lateral bonds at higher temperatures that, by
itself,  would lead to  a  decreased  rate  of  disassembly.    The
EBD  hypothesis  thus  provides  an  elegant  and  plausible
interpretation of the increased disassembly rate.  

Effect  of  glycerol  and  D2O

Because  the  size  of  an  EBD  is  effectively  its  time-
averaged volume  in  the  surrounding  solvent,  poor  solvents
should decrease ρ, reduce the  amount  of  overlap,  and lead to
slower rates of microtubule disassembly.    Glycerol and D2O
are standard "poor solvents" that generally reduce the  specific
volume of proteins (Kresheck et al., 1965;  Timasheff, 1993;
Priev  et  al.,  1996).    Both  are known  to  increase the  extent
and stability of microtubules in bulk  (Schilstra  et  al.,  1991;
Chakrabarti et  al.,  1999).    A  common  explanation  is  that
the  poor  solvents  increase  the  strength  of  hydrophobic
  However,
interactions 
tubulin 
and
single  microtubule 
measurements  of 
disassembly require a different explanation.

assembly 

between 

dimers. 

Increasing the concentration of glycerol up to 3M

(Fygenson, 1995) has no effect on the rate at which single
microtubules assemble, but causes a steady decrease in their

0

1

2

3

4

Concentration of Glycerol (M)

Fig.  5.  Effect  of  glycerol  on  the  average  rate  of  a)  assembly
and  b)  disassembly  at  the  plus  ends  of  individual  microtubule
(reprinted from (Fygenson, 1995)).  Methods are  as  described  i n
(Fygenson  et  al.,  1994).   Tubulin  concentration  was  14  µM  i n
buffer  containing  1mM  GTP,  2mM  MgSO4,  2mM  EGTA,  and
100mM  Pipes  at  a  pH  6.9  and  temperature  18.5°C.    Points  are
averages  from  a  total  of  1  hour  of  observation. 
  Error  bars
represent  one  standard  deviation.   In  a)  the  line  represents  the
assembly  rate  in  the  absence  of  glycerol.    In  b)  the  line  is  a
least-squares fit to the data.

rate of disassembly (Fig. 5).  Increasing  the  concentration of
D2O up  to  60%  does the  same (see Fig.  4  in  (Panda et  al.,
2000)).    The constant  assembly  rate  indicates  that  the  free
energy  in  lateral  bonds  is  unchanged  by  the  co-solvents.
Therefore,  the  increased  rate  of  disassembly  must  be
attributed 
the  hydrolysis-induced
conformational  change  and  is,  again,  consistent  with  the
EBD hypothesis.

the  nature  of 

to 

CONCLUSION

The hypothesis presented here, in which  a  portion  of  the
β-tubulin  monomer  unfolds into  an  entropic bristle  domain
on  the  interior  of  the  microtubule,  provides  a  unifying
explanation  for  several  diverse  results  in  the  microtubule
field,  ranging  from  the  structural  to  the  kinetic.    This
hypothesis  is  significantly  more  powerful  than  current,
practically  unfalsifiable  statements 
that  describe  GTP-
hydrolysis as  selectively weakening lateral bonds  more than
longitudinal  ones  and  the  tubulin  dimer  as  consequently
“kidney  bean”
adopting 

"curved"  or 

"kinked", 

a 

Fygenson

conformation.    The  putative  EBD  is  physically  tractable,
structurally  specific,  and  highly  suggestive  of  further
calculations  and  experimentation  that  would  refine  and
definitively test the  hypothesis.    For  example,  a  calculation
of the free energy cost of confining  polypeptide loops  on  an
asymmetric,  inwardly  curved  lattice  has  the  prospect  of
quantitative  comparison  with  measurements  of  the  free
energy  stored  in  lateral  inter-tubulin  bonds  (Vulevic  and
Correia,  1997)  and with  changes in  the  rate of  microtubule
disassembly in  different solvent  conditions (Schilstra  et  al.,
1991;  Panda  et  al.,  2000)  and  is  the  focus  of  ongoing
research.    A  stability  analysis  of  how  such  a  quasi-one-
dimensional  polypeptide  brush 
edge-
perturbations might lead naturally to a  mechanistic model of
the  mysterious  catastrophe  and  rescue 
that
characterize microtubule dynamic instability.  

transitions 

responds 

to 

A  definitive test  of  the  EBD  hypothesis  would  involve
site-directed mutagenesis  of  tubulin  (Davis  et  al.,  1993)  to
change the net length of the disordered loops found in  the  N-
terminal  domain.    Cryo-electron  microscopy  could  be  used
to look for a commensurate change in the radius of  curvature
of  protofilaments  made  of  the  purified  mutant  protein.
Video-enhanced DIC  microscopy  could  be  used  to  quantify
any  associated  change  in  the  rate  of  single  microtubule
disassembly.  

The  EBD  hypothesis  is  especially  rich  in  corollary
predictions  that  bear  directly  on  open  questions  in  the
microtubule  field.    One  example  is  the  origin  of  sudden,
discrete changes in assembly and disassembly rates of  single
microtubules  (Gildersleeve  et  al.,  1992).    It  has  been
suggested (Guenette and Solomon,  1993)  that  these changes
are due to the presence of defects that change the microtubule
protofilament  number  (Chretien  et  al.,  1992).    The  EBD
hypothesis predicts that  microtubules  with  a  greater number
than
of 
microtubules with fewer protofilaments.  This is because  the
volume in the microtubule lumen scales as  the  square of  the
number  of  protofilaments  (V∝N2),  whereas  the  number  of
EBDs scales only linearly (n∝N),  so  the  free energy cost  of
confinement,  which  increases  with  density,  decreases  with
(F=ƒ(n/V)=ƒ(N/N2)=ƒ(N-1)).  The
protofilament  number 
prediction could be tested by comparing disassembly rates of
microtubules with different protofilament numbers.

disassemble  more 

protofilaments 

slowly 

Another example comes from  microtubule  protofilament
number  distributions.    It  is  known  that  buffer  conditions
(Ray et al., 1993) or drugs (Andreu et al.,  1994;  Diaz et  al.,
1998)  can  influence 
the  distribution  of  protofilament
numbers in spontaneously  nucleated microtubules,  but  little
is  known  about  why.    The  EBD  hypothesis  suggests  a

7

potentially  insightful  experiment,  reasoning as  follows:    In
the  sheet-like  tubulin  aggregates  that  precede  microtubule
nucleation  (Fygenson  et  al.,  1995),  hydrolysis  occurs
(Carlier et al., 1997) and some EBDs  may  be  released before
the sheets close to form tubes.  The presence of EBDs would
induce the  sub-critical aggregates to  adopt a  larger radius of
curvature  and  bias  them  toward  closing  with  a  greater
number of protofilaments.  The  prediction is  that  conditions
that slow or inhibit the release of EBDs (i.e., conditions  that
stabilize  microtubules  against  disassembly)  will  nucleate
microtubules  with  lower  protofilament  numbers. 
  To
observe the  effect, it  may  suffice to  simply  tip  the  balance
of time scales  toward faster tubulin  association  as  compared
with  hydrolysis  and  EBD  release.    If  so,  microtubules
nucleated  by  rapid  quench  (high  tubulin  concentrations)
would average fewer protofilaments than those nucleated near
onset (low tubulin concentrations).

Yet  another  example  is  the  question  of  mechanism
underlying  effects  of  microtubule-associated  proteins  and
microtubule-binding  drugs,  such  as  taxol  (Wilson  et  al.,
1999).    Agents  which  promote  microtubule  assembly  but
inhibit  dynamics might  be  suspected to  prevent  the  release
of  the  EBD.    Those  which  prevent  assembly  but  do  not
induce  disassembly  could  be  involved  in  attracting  the
released EBD to another part of the tubulin surface.  

this  conformational  change 

It  is  my  hope  that  the  EBD  hypothesis  will  lead  to  a
stimulating  dialogue between experiment  and  theory  in  the
microtubule  field.    If 
is
eventually  proven  in  tubulin,  there  will  be  significant
impact  outside the  field as  well.    It  would  substantiate  the
notion that localized unfolding can be a biologically  relevant
type  of  conformational  change  (Hoh,  1998)  and  provoke
similar  hypotheses  in  other  biological  systems.    And,
because the energetics associated with EBDs are accessible to
generalized  physical  theory  and  modeling,  refinement  of
those  theories in  biological  systems  would open  a  path  for
the  rational  design  of  conformational  change  in  artificial
proteins or synthetic molecular machines.

I thank Drs. J.M. Andreu, H.P.  Erickson,  J.  Hoh  and S.
Inoué for stimulating  comments  on  an  early version  of  the
manuscript.

This  work was supported in  part by  the  MRL  Program  of
the National Science Foundation under Award No.  DMR00-
80034  and  by  a  National  Science  Foundation  CAREER
Grant No. 9985493.

Fygenson

8

R E F E R E N C E S
Amos,  L.  A.,  and  J.  Lowe.  1999.  How  Taxol  stabilises

microtubule structure. Chem Biol. 6:R65-69.

Andreu,  J.  M.,  J.  F.  Diaz,  R.  Gil,  J.  M.  de  Pereda,  M.
Garcia  de  Lacoba,  V.  Peyrot,  C.  Briand,  E.  Towns-
Andrews,  and  J.  Bordas.  1994.  Solution  structure  of
Taxotere-induced  microtubules  to  3-nm  resolution.  The
change in  protofilament  number is  linked  to  the  binding
of the taxol side chain. J Biol Chem. 269:31785-31792.
Audenaert,  R.,  L.  Heremans,  K.  Heremans,  and  Y.
Engelborghs.  1989.  Secondary  structure  analysis  of
tubulin  and  microtubules  with  Raman  spectroscopy.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 996:110-115.

Burns, R. G., and  C.  D.  Surridge. 1994.  .  In  Microtubules.
J.  S.  Hyams  and C.W.Lloyd,  editors. Wiley,  New  York.
3-32.

Caplow,  M.,  R.  L.  Ruhlen,  and J.  Shanks.  1994.  The  free
energy  for  hydrolysis  of  a  microtubule-bound  nucleotide
triphosphate  is  near  zero:  all  of  the  free  energy  for
hydrolysis is  stored in  the  microtubule  lattice  [published
erratum appears in  J  Cell  Biol  1995  Apr;129(2):549].  J
Cell Biol. 127:779-788.

Carlier,  M.  F.,  D.  Didry,  and  D.  Pantaloni.  1997.
Hydrolysis  of  GTP  associated  with  the  formation  of
tubulin  oligomers  is  involved in  microtubule  nucleation.
Biophys J. 73:418-427.

Carlier, M.  F.,  and D.  Pantaloni.  1981.  Kinetic  analysis  of
guanosine  5'-triphosphate  hydrolysis  associated  with
tubulin polymerization. Biochemistry. 20:1918-1924.
Chakrabarti, G.,  S.  Kim,  M.  L.  Gupta,  Jr.,  J.  S.  Barton,
and  R.  H.  Himes.  1999.  Stabilization  of  tubulin  by
deuterium oxide. Biochemistry. 38:3067-3072.

Chretien,  D.,  F.  Metoz,  F.  Verde,  E.  Karsenti,  and  R.  H.
in  microtubules:
individual

1992.  Lattice 
Wade. 
numbers 
protofilament 
microtubules. J Cell Biol. 117:1031-1040.

defects 
vary  within 

Chretien,  D.,  and  R.  H.  Wade.  1991.  New  data  on  the
microtubule  surface lattice  [published  erratum  appears  in
Biol Cell 1991;72(3):284]. Biol Cell. 71:161-174.

Davis, A., C. R. Sage, C. A. Dougherty, and K.  W.  Farrell.
1994.  Microtubule  dynamics  modulated  by  guanosine
triphosphate  hydrolysis  activity  of  beta-tubulin.  Science.
264:839-842.

Davis, A., C. R. Sage, L. Wilson, and K.  W.  Farrell.  1993.
Purification  and  biochemical  characterization  of  tubulin
from 
the  budding  yeast  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae.
Biochemistry. 32:8823-8835.

Diaz,  J.  F.,  E.  Pantos,  J.  Bordas, and J.  M.  Andreu. 1994.
Solution  structure of  GDP-tubulin  double rings  to  3  nm
resolution and comparison with microtubules. J Mol  Biol.
238:214-225.

Diaz, J. F., J. M.  Valpuesta,  P.  Chacon,  G.  Diakun,  and J.
M.  Andreu. 1998.  Changes  in  microtubule  protofilament
number induced by  Taxol  binding to  an  easily  accessible
Internal  microtubule  dynamics.  J  Biol  Chem.
site. 
273:33803-33810.

Doi,  M.,  and  S.  F.  Edwards.  1986.  The  Theory  of  Polymer

Dynamics. Oxford University Press, New York.

Downing,  K.  H.,  and  E.  Nogales.  1998a.  Tubulin  and

microtubule structure. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 10:16-22.

Downing,  K.  H.,  and  E.  Nogales.  1998b.  Tubulin  structure:
insights  into  microtubule  properties  and  functions.  Curr
Opin Struct Biol. 8:785-791.

Drechsel, D.  N.,  and  M.  W.  Kirschner.  1994.  The  minimum
GTP cap required to stabilize microtubules [published erratum
appears  in  Curr  Biol  1995  Feb  1;5(2):215].  Curr  Biol.
4:1053-1061.

Dustin, P. 1984. Microtubules. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Flyvbjerg,  H.,  T.  E.  Holy,  and S.  Leibler.  1996.  Microtubule
dynamics:  Caps,  catastrophes,  and  coupled  hydrolysis.
Physical  Review.  E.  Statistical  Physics,  Plasmas,  Fluids,
and Related Interdisciplinary Topics. 54:5538-5560.

Fygenson,  D.  K.  1995.  Microtubules:  the  rhythym  of  growth
form.  Ph.D.  Princeton  University,

and  evolution  of 
Princeton.

Fygenson,  D.  K.,  E.  Braun,  and  A.  Libchaber.  1994.  Phase
diagram  of  microtubules.  Physical  Review.  E.  Statistical
Physics,  Plasmas,  Fluids,  and  Related  Interdisciplinary
Topics. 50:1579-1588.

Fygenson, D. K., H. Flyvbjerg, K. Sneppen, A.  Libchaber, and
S.  Leibler.  1995.  Spontaneous  Nucleation  of  Microtubules.
Physical Review E. 51:5058-5063.

Gildersleeve, R.  F.,  A.  R.  Cross,  K.  E.  Cullen,  A.  P.  Fagen,
and  R.  C.  Williams,  Jr.  1992.  Microtubules  grow  and
shorten at intrinsically variable rates. J Biol Chem. 267:7995-
8006.

Guenette, S.,  and  F.  Solomon.  1993.  Microtubule  assembly:
Pathways,  dynamics,  and  regulators.  Current  Opinion  in
Structural Biology. 3:198-201.

Hoh,  J.  H.  1998.  Functional  protein  domains  from  the
thermally  driven  motion  of  polypeptide  chains:  a  proposal.
Proteins. 32:223-228.

Howard,  W.  D.,  and  S.  N.  Timasheff.  1986.  GDP  state  of
rings.  Biochemistry.

tubulin:  stabilization  of  double 
25:8292-8300.

Hyman,  A.  A.,  D.  Chretien,  I.  Arnal,  and R.  H.  Wade.  1995.
Structural  changes  accompanying  GTP  hydrolysis 
in
information  from  a  slowly  hydrolyzable
microtubules: 
analogue  guanylyl-(alpha,beta)-  methylene-diphosphonate.  J
Cell Biol. 128:117-125.

Hyman, A. A., S. Salser, D. N. Drechsel,  N.  Unwin,  and T.  J.
Mitchison.  1992.  Role  of  GTP  hydrolysis  in  microtubule
dynamics: information from  a  slowly  hydrolyzable analogue,
GMPCPP.  Mol Biol Cell.  3:1155-1167.

Kirschner, M.,  and T.  Mitchison.  1986.  Beyond self-assembly:

from microtubules to morphogenesis. Cell. 45:329-342.

Kresheck, G. C., H. Schneider,  and H.  A.  Scheraga. 1965.  The
thermal  stability  of  proteins.
transfer  of  model

effect  of  D2-O  on 
Thermodynamic  parameters  for 

the 

the 

Fygenson

compounds from H2-O to  D2-O.  J Phys  Chem.  69:3132-
3144.

Mandelkow,  E.  M.,  E.  Mandelkow,  and  R.  A.  Milligan.
1991.  Microtubule  dynamics  and  microtubule  caps:  a
time-resolved  cryo-  electron  microscopy  study.  J  Cell
Biol. 114:977-991.

Mandelkow, E.  M.,  R.  Schultheiss,  R.  Rapp,  M.  Muller,
and  E.  Mandelkow.  1986.  On  the  surface  lattice  of
microtubules:  helix  starts,  protofilament  number,  seam,
and handedness. J Cell Biol. 102:1067-1073.

Martin,  S.  R.,  M.  J.  Schilstra,  and  P.  M.  Bayley.  1993.
instability  of  microtubules:  Monte  Carlo
Dynamic 
simulation  and  application 
types  of
microtubule  lattice  [see  comments].  Biophys  J.  65:578-
596.

to  different 

Melki,  R.,  M.  F.  Carlier,  D.  Pantaloni,  and  S.  N.
Timasheff. 1989.  Cold  depolymerization  of  microtubules
to  double  rings:  geometric  stabilization  of  assemblies.
Biochemistry. 28:9143-9152.

Milner,  S.  T.  1991.  Polymer  Brushes.  Science.  251:905-

914.

Mitchison, T., and M. Kirschner. 1984.  Dynamic instability

of microtubule growth. Nature. 312:237-242.

Muller-Reichert,  T.,  D.  Chretien,  F.  Severin,  and  A.  A.
Hyman.  1998.  Structural  changes  at  microtubule  ends
accompanying  GTP  hydrolysis: 
information  from  a
slowly  hydrolyzable  analogue  of  GTP,  guanylyl
(alpha,beta)methylenediphosphonate. Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci
U S A. 95:3661-3666.

Nicholson,  W.  V.,  M.  Lee,  K.  H.  Downing,  and  E.
Nogales. 1999. Cryo-electron microscopy of  GDP-tubulin
rings. Cell Biochem Biophys. 31:175-183.

Nogales,  E.,  K.  H.  Downing,  L.  A.  Amos,  and  J.  Lowe.
1998a.  Tubulin  and  FtsZ  form  a  distinct  family  of
GTPases. Nat Struct Biol. 5:451-458.

Nogales,  E.,  S.  G.  Wolf,  and  K.  H.  Downing.  1998b.
Structure  of  the  alpha  beta  tubulin  dimer  by  electron
crystallography 
[published  erratum
appears in  Nature 1998  May  14;393(6681):191].  Nature.
391:199-203.

[see  comments] 

Panda,  D.,  G.  Chakrabarti,  J.  Hudson,  K.  Pigg,  H.  P.
Miller,  L.  Wilson,  and R.  H.  Himes.  2000.  Suppression
of  microtubule  dynamic  instability  and  treadmilling  by
deuterium oxide. Biochemistry. 39:5075-5081.

Priev,  A.,  A.  Almagor,  S.  Yedgar,  and  B.  Gavish.  1996.
Glycerol  decreases  the  volume  and  compressibility  of
protein interior. Biochemistry. 35:2061-2066.

9

Ray,  S.,  E.  Meyhofer, R.  A.  Milligan,  and  J.  Howard.  1993.
Kinesin follows  the  microtubule's  protofilament  axis.  J Cell
Biol. 121:1083-1093.

Sage,  C.  R.,  C.  A.  Dougherty,  A.  S.  Davis,  R.  G.  Burns,  L.
Wilson,  and K.  W.  Farrell.  1995.  Site-directed  mutagenesis
of putative GTP-binding sites of yeast beta-  tubulin:  evidence
that alpha-, beta-,  and gamma-tubulins  are atypical GTPases.
Biochemistry.  34:16870.

Schilstra,  M.  J.,  P.  M.  Bayley, and S.  R.  Martin.  1991.  The
effect  of  solution  composition  on  microtubule  dynamic
instability. Biochem J. 277:839-847.

Stewart,  R.  J.,  K.  W.  Farrell,  and  L.  Wilson.  1990.  Role  of
GTP  hydrolysis in  microtubule  polymerization: evidence  for
a  coupled  hydrolysis  mechanism.  Biochemistry.  29:6489-
6498.

Timasheff,  S.  N.  1993.  The  control  of  protein  stability  and
association by weak interactions with water: how  do  solvents
affect  these  processes?  Annu  Rev  Biophys  Biomol  Struct.
22:67-97.

Tran,  P.  T.,  P.  Joshi,  and E.  D.  Salmon.  1997.  How  tubulin
subunits are lost from the shortening  ends of  microtubules.  J
Struct Biol. 118:107-118.

Voter,  W.  A.,  E.  T.  O'Brien,  and  H.  P.  Erickson.  1991.
Dilution-induced  disassembly  of  microtubules:  relation  to
the  GTP  cap.  Cell  Motil
dynamic 
Cytoskeleton.  18:55-62.

instability  and 

Vulevic,  B.,  and  J.  J.  Correia.  1997.  Thermodynamic  and
structural analysis of microtubule  assembly:  the  role of  GTP
hydrolysis. Biophys J. 72:1357-1375.

Wade, R.  H.,  D.  Chretien,  and D.  Job.  1990.  Characterization
of microtubule protofilament  numbers.  How  does the  surface
lattice accommodate? J Mol Biol. 212:775-786.

Walker, R. A., N. K. Pryer, and E.  D.  Salmon.  1991.  Dilution
of  individual  microtubules  observed  in  real  time  in  vitro:
evidence that cap size is  small  and independent of  elongation
rate. J Cell Biol. 114:73-81.

Weisenberg, R.  C.,  W.  J.  Deery,  and  P.  J.  Dickinson.  1976.
Tubulin-nucleotide interactions during the polymerization and
depolymerization  of  microtubules.  Biochemistry.  15:4248-
4254.

Wilson, L., D.  Panda, and M.  A.  Jordan. 1999.  Modulation of
microtubule  dynamics by  drugs: A  paradigm  for  the  actions
STRUCTURE  AND
of 
FUNCTION. 24:329-335.

regulators.  CELL 

cellular 

