ALFVEN WAVE GENERATION BY MEANS OF HIGH ORBITAL

INJECTION OF BARIUM CLOUD IN MAGNETOSPHERE

V.N. Oraevsky, Yu.Ya. Ruzhin, V.I. Badin, M.G. Deminov

Institute of Terrestrial Magnetism, Ionosphere and Radiowave Propagation, Troitsk, Moscow Region,

142190, Russia

ABSTRACT

An analysis of the Alfven wave generation associated with the barium vapor release at altitudes ~ 5.2 RE

in  the  magnetosphere  is  presented.  Such  injections  were  executed  in  G-8  and  G-10  experiments  of  the

Combined Radiation and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) mission. It is shown that the generation of

Alfven waves is possible during the total time of the expansion of plasma cloud. The maximum intensity

of these waves corresponds to the time of complete retardation of the diamagnetic cavity created by the

expansion  of  the  plasma  cloud.  The  Alfven  wave  exhibits  a  form  of  an  impulse  with  an  effective

frequency  ~  0.03-0.05  Hz.  Due  to  the  background  conditions  and  wave  frequency,  the  wave  mainly

oscillates  along  the  geomagnetic  field  between  the  mirror  reflection  points  situated  at  ~  0.7  RE  i.e.  the

wave is trapped by the magnetospheric Alfven resonator. The reflection coefficient is about 80-85%. The

wave amplitude is sufficient to the generation of plasma instabilities and longitudinal electric field, and to

an increase in the longitudinal energy of electrons accelerated by this field up to ~ 1 keV. These processes

are the most probable for altitudes ~ 1 RE. The auroral kilometric radiation (AKR) at frequencies ~ 100

kHz is associated with these accelerated electrons. It is shown that the acceleration of electrons and AKR

can be observed almost continuously during the first minute and then from time to time with pauses about

35-40 s till 6-8 min after the release. Apparently, these findings do not contradict the experimental data.

The  betatron  acceleration  of  electrons  at  the  recovery  of  the  geomagnetic  field  is  also  discussed.  This

mechanism could be responsible for the acceleration of electrons resulting in the aurorae and ultra short

radio wave storm at frequencies 50-300 MHz observed at the 8-10th min after the release.

INTRODUCTION

2

The  atomic  barium  releases  at  altitudes  ~  5.2  RE  in  the  magnetosphere  were  executed  in  G-8

(February 17, 1991) and G-10 (January 20,1991) experiments of the Combined Radiation and Radiation

Effects Satellite  (CRRES)  mission  (Bernhardt,1992).  A  number  of  effects  resulting  from  the  expansion

and  ionization  of  the  barium  cloud  were  observed:  the  creation  of  a  diamagnetic  cavity  with  the

background  magnetic  field  almost  totally  excluded;  formation  of  irregularities  on  the  surface  of  the

diamagnetic  cavity  and  in  the  plasma  cloud;  increase  in  the  auroral  activity  (for  G-10:  very  faint  rays

upon 4 min after the release and a more distinct increase in the auroral activity upon 9-10 min after the

release);  auroral  kilometric  radiation  (AKR)  with  frequencies  about  100  kHz  that  apparently  was

observed for a long time (Bernhardt, 1992). During the G-8 experiment, an ultra short radio wave storm at

frequencies 45-90, 235, and 280 MHz started upon approximately 10 min after the release (Oraevsky et

al., 1995). Huba et al. (1992) carefully studied the processes of formation of the diamagnetic cavity and

large-scaled  plasma  irregularities  and  the  results  of  their  theoretical  analysis  well  agree  with  the

experimental data.  Oraevsky  et al. (1995) proposed  theoretical  estimates for  the possible mechanism of

the ultra short radio wave storm.

The  main  goal  of  this  work  is  to  present  a  qualitative  study  of  the  possibility  of  the  Alfven  wave

generation at the expansion of the plasma cloud in the magnetosphere and the estimates of some plausible

effects  associated  with  this  wave.  In  addition,  the  possibility  of  plasma  heating  by  the  collapse  of

diamagnetic cavity is qualitatively discussed since the electrons with high energies are necessary for an

explanation  of  the  auroral  activity  and  ultra  short  radio  wave  storm.  Our  study  and  estimates  are

qualitative and preliminary formulating rather a hypothesis than a strict result.

GENERATION OF THE ALFVEN WAVE

We use the parameters relevant to the experiment G-10 when at the time t = 0 (03:30 UT January 20,
1991),  the  N0  =  1.86  1025  barium  atoms  (M0  =  mN0  =  4240  g)  were  injected  into  the  magnetospheric

densities of thermal electrons 2 cm

background conditions for this height were as follows: the geomagnetic field B0 = 1.35 10

plasma  at  the  height  h  =  5.2  RE  (8.9N,  75.6W,  33179  km)  [Bernhardt,  1992;  Huba  et  al.,1992].  The
−3 G, number
−3, Alfven speed VA = B0/(4πρ)1/2 = 2
−3 and hydrogen atoms ~ 50 cm
108 cm/s, ion gyrofrequency Ω(H+) = 13 rad/s, gyroperiod τ(H+) = 2π/Ω(H+) = 0.5 s, ion thermal velocity
−1, electron
vT(H+) = 9 105 cm/s, Larmor radius r(H+) = 6 104 cm, collision frequency ν(H+, H) = 4 10–8 s
thermal velocity vTe = 4 107 cm/s. The densities of background ions and atoms are extremely low and we

can assume that the barium cloud expands into vacuum until its  total  ionization.  We neglect the orbital

velocity of the satellite and assume that the barium cloud is spherical with the radius R0 = V0 t where V0 =
1.2 105 cm/s is the radial velocity of the atomic barium. We express the time variations of the n(Ba) and
n(Ba+) in a very approximate form

n(Ba) = N0 exp(−t/τion) / [(4/3) π R0
dn(Ba+) / dt = (1/τion) n(Ba) ,

3] ,

3

(1)

(3)

(4)

(2)
where τion = 28 s is the ionization time scale for barium. The B0, V0, and τion presented here are the same
as those used by Huba et al. (1992). The initial velocity of the Ba+ is V0. The barium parameters for the
−2  rad/s,  gyroperiod
background  magnetic  field  are  the  following:  the  gyrofrequency  Ω(Ba+)  =  9.5  10
τ(Ba+) = 66.4 s, Larmor radius r(Ba+) = V0/Ω(Ba+) = 1.3 106 cm. For these Ba+ parameters, the density of

the kinetic energy of cloud ions exceeds the density of the geomagnetic field energy upon a few seconds

after the release and a diamagnetic cavity with the background magnetic field almost totally excluded is

created. Huba et al. (1992) have studied in detail the dynamics of the diamagnetic cavity, evolution of the

ion velocity, and formation of the large-scaled plasma irregularities. Here we neglect these irregularities

and the time variation of the mean radial velocity of ions takes the form
2 / [4π m(Ba+) n(Ba+) V0

V = V0 (1 – B0

2])1/2 = V0 (1 – C1 t3 / [1 – exp(–t/τion)])1/2 ,

where C1 = V0B0

2/3M0. This equation follows from the energy conservation law (Huba et al., 1992)

m(Ba+) n(Ba+)V2 + B0

2/4π = m(Ba+) n(Ba+)V0

2.

The Eq. 3 shows that the velocity V decreases with time. This indicates that the kinetic energy of ions is

spent for the creation of diamagnetic cavity .The radius of this cavity obeys the equation

dR/dt = V.

We can see from the Eqs. (3) and (4) that, at a certain time t = tB, the velocity V becomes zero and the
cavity radius reaches its maximum R = RB. If tB >> τion, tB = 38.7 s and RB = 46.5 km. These values are
overestimated since tB is in fact comparable to τion. Note that almost only the newly created ions with the

velocity V0 provide an expansion of the diamagnetic cavity. However, the cavity already generated decays
slowly. Therefore, the Eq. (3) for a given time t contains n(Ba+) obtained by the integration of the Eq. (2)

with respect to time from 0 to t. Due to the slow cavity decay, we can approximately assume that V = 0

and  R  =  RB  during  a  certain  time  interval  following  the  complete  retardation.  Apparently,  this  time

interval is not smaller than 10-20 s.

Let us consider a spherical layer of the thickness ∆R = R0 − R. Note that the magnetic field in this

layer exceeds the background field since the magnetic field lines "flow about" the diamagnetic cavity and

"escape"  into  the  magnetosphere  (see  Figure  1a).  Assume  that  the  magnetic  field  in  the  spherical  layer

equals  2B0.  The  boundary  of  the  diamagnetic  cavity  and  the  "flowing  about"  magnetic  lines  move  in

radial direction with the velocity V. For this reason, the radial velocity of magnetized electrons equals V
as well. The initial radial velocity of ions is V0. Thus, a radial current JR proportional to V0−V arises. For a
fixed time t, this current is produced by ions and electrons originated over the time interval from (t − τR)
to  t  where  τR  =  τ(Ba+)/8  =  4  s  since  this  interval  approximately  corresponds  to  the  strictly  radial  Ba+

motion immediately after ionization. The motions of the rest of ions are non-correlated with each other

4

and  yield  no  contribution  to  the  radial  current.  For  the  initial  period  of  expansion,  the  plasma  kinetic
energy is much greater than the energy of the magnetic field forced out by the cloud: V ≈ V0, R ≈ R0, and

almost all currents are closed inside the cloud. To take this into consideration, we assume

τR = (1 − V/V0) τ(Ba+)/8 .

(5)
The τR reaches its maximum at V = 0. Taking into account (2) and (5), we can express the radial current in

the form

                                         t

JR(t) = e (1/τion)   (V0 − V) n(Ba) dt ,

                                      t − τR

(6)

where the Eq. (1) and (3) determine the n(Ba) and V as explicit functions of time. We can find using these

functions that for a relatively short time interval after the release, the integrand is a slow function of time:
(V0 − V) ~ 0.5V0C1t3, n(Ba) ~ 1/t3. For this interval, JR depends on time almost linearly. Near the moment
of complete retardation t = tB, the current JR sharply increases due to an increase in τR and (V0−V) mainly.
For t > tB, this current decreases being proportional to 1/t3. We can see these variations of V, R, and JR in
Figure 1b. This plot shows that tB = 34.5 s, RB = 33.6 km. The time interval 34.5 ≤ t ≤ 39 s corresponds to
−7 A/m2. The duration of this current impulse at the
the maximum of the radial current JR = JRm = 4÷4.5 10
level of 0.5÷0.75 JRm is ∆t = 10-15 s. This permits to estimate the effective period and frequency of the
Alfven wave impulse: T = 20-30 s, f = 1/T = 0.03-0.05 Hz, ω = 0.2-0.3 rad/s. Below we consider the JR

impulse  in  detail.  Note  that  the  quantities  V,  R,  and  JR  are  estimated  under  an  assumption  on  the

homogeneous density distribution of barium atoms inside the sphere of the radius R0. For a more realistic
Gauss distribution, the decrease in the density maximum is slower: tB ≈ 50 s, RB ≈ 37  km (Huba  et al.,

1992); and we can expect that the JR current will reach its maximum at a later time after the release.

The currents JR arising in the spherical plasma layer (envelope) will generate the azimuthal currents

JΦ and the currents JΘ. We assume an azimuthal symmetry of the plasma envelope and, consequently, the

currents JΦ do not contribute to the current continuity divJ = 0. In addition, the contribution of JΦ is taken

into account by the implication of magnetic field changes. For this reason, we consider the currents JR and

JΘ  only.  In  this  case,  the  currents  JΘ  flow  along  the  magnetic  field  (see  Figure  1a  where  the  lower

hemisphere of the plasma envelope is shown for 0.5π < Θ < 1.5π). The currents JΘ do not close inside the
plasma layer and transit (near Θ ≈ π) into the longitudinal currents Jz which flow out from the envelope.
Outside the plasma layer, we assume  a cylindrical geometry of the magnetic field with coordinates r,ϕ,

and  z  where  the  z-axis  is  parallel  to  the  magnetic  field  and  positive  outward  the  plasma  cloud.  The

currents Jz are the longitudinal currents of the Alfven wave. The JR is an external current source for the

Alfven wave. This JR current is closed by the radial Jr current of the Alfven wave through the longitudinal

currents (see Figure 1a). Near the region of generation, the Alfven wave occupies a cylinder of the radius

5
r = rC ≈ R0 − R and the amplitude of the longitudinal current of this wave is Jm ≈ JR. Here we take into

account  the  current  continuity  and  that  the  magnetic  field  outside  the  plasma  layer  is  equal  to  the

background  field  B0.  We  can  estimate  the  amplitudes  of  the  magnetic  Bϕ  and  electric  Er  fields  of  the

Alfven wave near the generation region

Jm ≈ JR ;   Bm ≈ (2π/c) Jm rC ;   Em = (VA/c) Bm ,

(7)

(8)

where the JR is determined by the Eq. (6), VA is the velocity of propagation of this wave. For fixed z and t,

the longitudinal current Jz integrated from 0 to rC must yield zero since the Alfven wave does not carry

free charges. The simple functions obeying this condition and the Alfven wave equations are as follows:

Jz = –Jm (1 – 3 x2);   Bϕ = – 2.6 Bm x (1 – x2) ;   Er = – 2.6 Em x (1 – x2) ,

where  x  =  r/rC  and  Jm,  Bm,  and  Em  amplitudes  are  determined  by  the  Eqs.  (7).  Figure  1c  shows  the

behavior of the functions (8). We can see that it agrees with the qualitative scheme of currents in Figure

1a: the longitudinal currents flow into the cloud (Jz < 0) in the central region of the cylinder and flow out

(Jz > 0) in its peripheral region. The Jm amplitude corresponds to the current flowing into the cloud. For

the current flowing out, the amplitude equals 2Jm. The formulae (8) show that the scale length for changes

in Bϕ and Er is approximately equal to 0.5 rC. We take this fact into account in the Eqs. (7) for Bm and Em.
Since  Jm  ≈  JR,  the  Jm  depends  on  time  (near  the  generation  region)  according  to  Figure  1b  where  the

maximum Jm corresponds to the interval 34.5 < t < 39 s. The maximum Bm corresponds to the end of this
−2. For the same time, Em ≈
interval (t ≈ 38÷39 s) when the Bm ≈ 3÷4 10
6÷7 mV/m in the background plasma.

−5 G and δBm = Bm/B0 ≈ 2÷3 10

Thereby, the expanding plasma envelope is a source of the Alfven waves. The maximum intensity of

these waves corresponds to the time that immediately follows the complete retardation of the diamagnetic

cavity. This maximum exhibits the form of an impulse with the following parameters in the background
magnetosphere near the region of generation: the effective frequency ω ≈ 0.2÷0.3 rad/s, amplitude of the
−2),
longitudinal current Jz ≈ 4÷4.5 10
and electric field amplitude Er ≈ 6÷7 mV/m.

−7 A/m2, magnetic field amplitude Bϕ ≈ 3÷4 10

−5 G (Bϕ/B0 ≈ 2÷3 10

PROPAGATION OF THE ALFVEN WAVE

We still use the parameters relevant to the experiment G-10 when the atomic barium was released at

the altitude h = 5.2 RE in the northern hemisphere. This point is situated on the L-shell 7.2 i.e. the apex of

the magnetic field line corresponds to the height h = 6.2 RE. Let the h1 be the height 5.2 RE in the southern

hemisphere, the hN = hS be the height 0.7RE in the northern and southern hemispheres respectively, with
the densities of hydrogen and oxygen ions being equal to each other at 0.7RE: m(H+)n(H+) = m(O+)n(O+).
−3, B ≈
The heights hN and hS are selected since the Alfven speed reaches its maximum there: ne ≈ 15 cm
0.1G, VA ≈ 6.5 109 cm/s. The corresponding distances along this magnetic field line are as follows: h1 − h0

6
= 5.72RE, hN − h0 = hS − h1 = 5.34RE. The total length of this field line is approximately equal to 17.9 RE.

Below hN and hS, the speed VA rapidly decreases and reaches its minimum at the height of the F2 peak of
the ionosphere (hmF2 ≈ 300 km): VA ≈ 3-4 107 cm/s. The Alfven wave propagating upward from altitudes

h  <  hmF2  can  be  reflected  by  the  upper  wall  of  the  ionospheric  Alfven  resonator  (IAR)  i.e.  the  height

interval hmF2 < h < hN and then reflected by the ionospheric dynamo-region (h = 120 km). Thus the wave

can  be  trapped  by  the  IAR  (Polyakov  and  Rapoport,  1981).  Note  that  the  Alfven  wave  can  propagate

freely  when  the  VA  decreases  with  propagation  and  can  be  reflected  from  the  region  where  the  VA

increases with propagation.

For  our  case,  there  is  a  similar  magnetospheric  Alfven  resonator  (MAR)  situated  on  the  field  line
between hS and hN. The Alfven speed takes its minimum (VA ≈ 9 107 cm/s) at the apex of the field line
taking  its  maximum  (VA  =  VAm  ≈  6.5  109  cm/s)  at  hN  and  hS.  The  Alfven  wave  is  generated  inside  the

MAR and can be trapped by this resonator. The reflection coefficient for the boundary of the MAR is

K = (1 – π kAm H)/ (1 – π kAm H) ,

(9)
where  kAm  =  ω/VAm  is  the  wave  number  of  the  Alfven  wave  at  the  boundary  of  the  MAR  and  H  is  a

characteristic scale of the decrease in this wave number when the wave propagates from the apex to the

MAR boundary. The Eq. (9) is similar to that presented by Polyakov and Rapoport (1981) for the IAR.
For this case,  ω ≈ 0.2-03 rad/s, VAm ≈ 6.5 109 cm/s, H ≈ 1.25RE, and K = 0.8-0.85.  The reflected wave

takes about 80-85% of energy of the incident wave and only 15-20% penetrates into the ionosphere. The

reflected wave can propagate either through the barium cloud or beside it. The latter can be attributed, for

example, to that the drift velocity of the plasma cloud with the diamagnetic cavity inside differs from the

drift velocity of the Alfven wave in an external electric field. If the wave intersects the plasma cloud, it

can be completely trapped by the cloud which is a specific resonator itself. This conclusion follows from

the  Eq.  (9)  for  typical  densities  of  the  plasma  cloud  at  t  <  100  s.  We  suppose  that  the  wave  initially

emitted to the northern hemisphere and reflected once from the boundary of the MAR becomes trapped

by the plasma cloud and leaves there all its energy heating the plasma of the cloud. On the contrary, the

wave  initially  emitted  to  the  southern  hemisphere  will  never  intersect  the  plasma  cloud  and  loses  its

energy  in  the  regions  of  reflection.  This  assumption  is  conditioned  by  that  the  distance  h0  -  hS  is

approximately  twice  as  the  distance  h0  -  hN.  We  will  further  consider  only  this  weakly  decaying  wave.

The propagation of this wave from one reflection point to another takes about 35-40 s. The amplitude of

this  wave  decreases  by  a  factor  of  4  upon  6-8  reflections  that  is  approximately  upon  4-6  min  after  the

generation.

ACCELERATION OF ELECTRONS

Introduce  an  effective  longitudinal  current  Jeff  =  e  ne  vTe.  Near  the  generation  region,  the  thermal
−7 A/m2. Since the electrons carry the

velocity of electrons is vTe = 4 107 cm/s, ne = 2 cm

−3, and Jeff ≈ 1.3 10

7

longitudinal  current  of  the  Alfven  wave,  Jz  =  e  ne  vd  where  vd  is  the  drift  velocity  of  electrons  in  the

Alfven wave. When Jz > Jeff, the drift velocity of electrons exceeds their thermal velocity (vd > vTe) and

the  plasma  instabilities  occur.  Strengthening  the  amplitude  of  plasma  waves  can  give  rise  to  a  plasma

turbulence  and  anomalous  resistance.  An  anomalous  collision  frequency,  in  turn,  gives  rise  to  a

longitudinal  electric  field  Ez  (see,  for  example,  Sagdeev  and  Galeev,  1969;  Liperovsky  and  Pudovkin,
1983 ). Inside the magnetospheric Alfven resonator, ne = n(H+). The condition Te/Ti > 3 that is necessary

for  development  of  the  ion-acoustic  instability  is  not  always  fulfilled.  Therefore,  the  electrostatic  ion-
cyclotron instability (EIC) is more probable. The growth rate of the EIC is γ ∼ Ω(H+), its threshold is vC ≈
0.4 vTe, and the characteristic frequency of excitation is Ω ≈ 1.5 Ω(H+) (see, for example, Liperovsky and

Pudovkin, 1983). The growth of the EIC wave amplitude gives rise to the EIC turbulence and anomalous
resistance.  For  the  developed  EIC  turbulence,  the  anomalous  collision  frequency  is  νa  ≈  5  Ω(H+)

(Liperovsky  and  Pudovkin,  1983).  For  these  conditions,  we  can  estimate  the  longitudinal  electric  field

using the equation (Sagdeev and Galeev, 1969)

Ez ≈ (4 π νa / ωp

2) Jz ,

(10)
where ωp is the electron plasma frequency and Jz is the longitudinal current of the Alfven wave. The Eq.

(10) shows that for a fixed Jz, the longitudinal field reaches its maximum near the boundaries of the MAR
−3, Ω(H+) = 5.8 102 rad/s and Ez = 3.4
i.e. at the altitudes h ≈ RE. For this height, B0 = 6 10
−7  A/m2  that  somewhat  exceeds  the  threshold.  Let  the  ZT

mV/m,  if  we  assume  for  estimates  Jz  =  1  10

−2 G, ne = 4 cm

denote  a  characteristic  longitudinal  scale  of  the  turbulent  layer  containing  the  field  Ez.  Apparently,  the

anomalous skin length of the Alfven waves (Lysak and Dum, 1983; Trakhtengertz and Feldshtein, 1987)

determines this scale. For our case, ZT = 400-500 km according to estimates. Coming into the turbulent

layer, the suprathermal and energetic electrons will be accelerated along the magnetic field. They gain the

energy

We = e Ez ZT.

(11)
crossing  the  turbulent  layer.  For  the  conditions  considered,  We  ≈  1.3-1.7  keV.  Since  the  Alfven  wave

contains  the  longitudinal  currents  of  both  directions,  the  electrons  will  be  accelerated  both  toward  the

apex  of  the  field  line  and  toward  the  ionosphere.  The  electrons  accelerated  toward  the  ionosphere  will

change the ionospheric conductivity and give rise to a diffuse aurora.

Estimate the time intervals in which electrons can gain such energies assuming that the longitudinal
−7 A/m2. As mentioned above, the amplitude of the longitudinal current Jm ≈

threshold current is Jz ≈ 1 10

JR.  Figure  1b  shows  that  the  longitudinal  current  exceeds  the  threshold  at  t  >  20  s.  The  maximum

amplitude of the longitudinal current in the Alfven wave impulse exceeds the threshold approximately by

a factor of 4. As indicated above, the amplitude of the Alfven wave takes a quarter of the initial amplitude

only upon 6-8 oscillations between the boundaries of the MAR. It means that the acceleration of electrons

8

could occur within the interval 0.5 < t < 4-6 min after the release. This acceleration is virtually continuous

for  the  first  minute  becoming  then  discrete  with  repetitions  every  35-40  s  due  to  processes  at  both

boundaries  of  the  MAR.  It  is  difficult  to  estimate  the  time  of  aurorae  related  to  the  acceleration  of

electrons.  Apparently,  this  time  approximately  corresponds  to  the  3-6th  min  after  the  release.  It  was

mentioned above that electrons are also accelerated toward the apex of the field line. These electrons will

oscillate between the mirror points without precipitation. After each acceleration session, the number of

such  electrons  can  increase.  Eventually,  these  electrons  can  precipitate  giving  rise  to  a  really  observed

aurora. Note that, according to the G-10 experiment, the first aurorae were observed upon 4 min after the

release.

The  acceleration  of  electrons  at  altitudes  h  =  RE  will  be  accompanied  by  the  auroral  kilometric

radiation (AKR) at frequencies ~ 100kHz (see, for example, Lyons and Williams, 1984). The AKR can be

observed as a continuous radiation during the first minute (starting upon 20 s after the release) and then in

a discrete manner with pauses of 35-40  s  till 4-6  min after  the  release.  Apparently,  this  result  does  not

contradict the G-10 experiment.

DISCUSSION

Our analysis of the processes associated with the Alfven wave is very approximate and qualitative.

The  most  significant  approximation  was  used  in  modeling  the  Alfven  wave  generation.  Namely,  the

external source JR was considered as independent of the Alfven wave that is we neglected the back action

of  the  Alfven  wave  on  the  source.  Moreover,  the  formation  of  the  diamagnetic  cavity  and  plasma

envelope was modeled in a very simplified form. In particular, we neglected the Hall term of the MHD

equations which involves a development of strong irregularities in both the cavity and plasma envelope

considerably  complicating  the  phenomenon  (Huba  et  al.,  1992)  Nevertheless,  our  findings  do  not

contradict some results of the G-10 experiment. In particular, the relation of the AKR to generation and

propagation of the Alfven wave is, apparently, the most natural.

We cannot explain the processes observed upon 5-6 min after the release using only the Alfven wave

model.  At  the  same  time,  these  processes  were  rather  intense  and  resulted  in  aurorae  clearly  observed

approximately  upon  8-10  min  after  the  release  (Bernhardt,  1992)  and  ultra  short  radio  wave  storm  at

frequencies 50-300 MHz (Oraevsky et al., 1995). The electrons of relatively high energies 1-10 keV are

necessary  for  these  phenomena.  It  is  plausible  that  such  electrons  can  be  attributed  to  the  well  known

betatron  heating  (see,  for  example,  Akasofu  and  Chapman,  1972)  which  occurs  at  the  collapse  of  the

diamagnetic  cavity  that  is  a  recovery  of  the  magnetic  field  to  its  background  value  B0.  The  spherical
diamagnetic cavity created by the expansion of the plasma cloud reached its maximum radius RB ≈ 35 km
at t = tB ≈ 0.6 min. Denote the minimum magnetic field in the cavity for t = tB as BB. The G-10 experiment
indicates that B0/BB > 102 (Bernhardt, 1992; Huba et al.,1992). For our estimates, assume that B0/BB =103.

9

Since  the  diamagnetic  cavity  could  be  topologically  disconnected  from  the  lines  of  force  of  the

geomagnetic  field,  we  suppose  that  the  inner  plasma  cannot  escape  from  the  cavity.  For  this  case,  the

lifetime of the diamagnetic cavity is determined by the diffusion of magnetic field

τm = 4 π σ RB

2/c2,

(12)

where σ is the plasma conductivity inside the cavity. In turn, the plasma conductivity is determined by the

Coulomb collisions. Therefore, the conductivity is independent of the plasma concentration but increases
3/2. In our case, τm ≈ 8-10  min
with growth in the electron temperature Te: σ = e2 ne/(me νe ) ; νe ∼ ne/Te

since  we  suppose  that  the  aurorae  are  attributed  to  the  collapse  of  diamagnetic  cavity.  This  permits  to
estimate the electron temperature TeB for t = tB using the formula (12). Thus we obtain TeB ~ 10-2 eV. Such

temperature is quite plausible, if we take into account cooling the inner plasma under the expansion (note

that the real temperature can be higher since the lifetime is also determined by the processes of plasma

escape).  In  addition  to  thermal  (cold)  electrons  with  the  temperature  TeB,  there  can  be  suprathermal

electrons  in  the  cavity,  for  example  the  photoelectrons  with  energies  5-10  eV  originating  due  to  the

continuous photoionization of neutrals. For these relatively hot electrons, the characteristic time between

the Coulomb collisions is about 500 s. Therefore, these initially suprathermal electrons can be accelerated

to the energies 5-10 keV via the betatron mechanism. The possible initial concentration of such electrons
−3. The concentration
can be about 10-100 cm-3 since the number density of cold electrons exceeds 103 cm

and energy of these electrons can be quite sufficient for the observed aurorae. Note that the electrons of

the same energies were invoked in explanation of the ultra short radio wave storm (Oraevsky et al., 1995).

CONCLUSIONS

The qualitative study of the processes resulting from the barium release at altitudes ~ 5.2 RE shows

that the generation of Alfven waves is possible  during the total  time  of  the  expansion  of  plasma cloud.

The  maximum  intensity  of  these  waves  corresponds  to  the  time  of  the  complete  retardation  of  the

diamagnetic cavity created by the expansion of the plasma cloud. For conditions relevant to the G-8 and

G-10  experiments  of  the  CRRES  mission,  the  Alfven  wave  exhibits  the  form  of  an  impulse  with  an

effective  frequency  ~  0.03-0.05  Hz.  Due  to  the  background  conditions  and  wave  frequency,  the  wave

mainly oscillates along the geomagnetic field between the mirror reflection points situated at ~ 0.7 RE i.e.

the wave is trapped by the magnetospheric Alfven resonator. The reflection coefficient is about 80-85%.

The wave  amplitude is sufficient to the  generation  of  plasma  turbulence,  the  longitudinal  electric  field,

and to an increase in the longitudinal energy of electrons accelerated by this field up to ~ 1 keV. These

processes  are  the  most  probable  for  altitudes  ~  1  RE.  The  auroral  kilometric  radiation  (AKR)  at

frequencies ~ 100 kHz is associated with these accelerated electrons. It is shown that the acceleration of

electrons and  AKR  can  be  observed  almost  continuously  during  the  first  minute  and  then  from  time  to

time with pauses about 35-40 s till 6-8 min after the release. Apparently, these findings do not contradict

10

the experimental data. The betatron acceleration of electrons at the recovery of the geomagnetic field is

also  discussed.  This  mechanism  could  be  responsible  for  the  acceleration  of  electrons  resulting  in  the

aurorae and ultra short radio wave storm at frequencies 50-300 MHz observed at the 8-10th min after the

V.I. Badin acknowledges the support of the Russian Foundation for Basic Research, project no. 99-

release.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

05-65080.

REFERENCES

Akasofu, S.-I., and S. Chapman, Solar-Terrestrial physics, Oxford University Press, 1972.

Bernhardt, P. A., Probing the magnitosphere using chemical releases from the Combined Release and

Radiation Effects Satellite, Phys. Fluids, B 4, 2249, 1992.

Huba, J. D., P. A. Bernhardt, and J. G. Lyon, Preliminary Study of the CRRES Magnetospheric Barium

Liperovsky, V. A., and M. I. Pudovkin, Anomalous resistivity and double layers in the magnetospheric

Releases, J. Geophys. Res., A 97, 11, 1992.

plasma (in Russian), Nauka, Moscow, 1983.

Dordrecht, Holland, 1984.

transport, J. Geophys. Res., 88, 365, 1983.

Lyons, L. R., and D. J. Williams, Quantitative aspects of magnetospheric physics, D. Reidel,

Lysak, R. L., and C. T. Dum, Dynamics of magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling including turbulent

Oraevsky, V. N., Yu. Ya. Ruzhin, A. S. Volokitin and R. V. Gorgutsa, High frequncy electromagnetic

radiation in CRRES geostationary injections, Adv. Space Res., 15, (12)99, 1995.

Polyakov, S.V., and V. O. Rapoport, Ionospheric Alfven resonator, Geomagnetizm i Aeronomiya

(Gemagn. Aeron.), 21, 816, 1981.

Sagdeev, R. Z., and A. A. Galeev, Nonlinear plasma theory, Benjamin, N. Y., 1969.

Trakhtengertz, V. Yu., and A. Ya. Feldshtein, Turbulent regime of the magnetospheric convection,

Geomagnetizm i Aeronomiya (Gemagn. Aeron.), 27, 258, 1987.

11

V ,
km/s
1.0

0.5
R ,
km
40
20
JR ,
A/km2
0.3
0.2
0.1

Jz/Jm
1
0
-1
Er/Em
1
0
-1

Vo

V

Ro

R

b)

c)

10

20
30
time, sec.

40

50

0.0

1.0

0.5
r/rC

a)

Ro

R

JR

rC

Jr

Jz

Fig. 1a.  The qualitative scheme of the radial current JR inside the plasma envelope (between the

diamagnetic cavity of the radius R and the boundary of the plasma cloud with the radius R0), and the

longitudinal Jz and radial Jr currents of the Alfven wave. Thin curves are the magnetic field lines, rC is the

radial width occupied by the Alfven wave.

Fig. 1b.  The characteristic features of the plasma envelope depending on time following the barium

release: V is the radial velocity of the expansion of the diamagnetic cavity and magnetic field lines

surrounding this cavity, V0 is the radial velocity of barium ions immediately after ionization of barium

atoms.

Fig 1c.  The qualitative scheme of the radial distribution of the longitudinal current Jz and transversal

electric field Er of the Alfven wave at a fixed time. The Jm and Em are their maximum amplitudes.

