ANOMALOUS RESISTANCE IN CRITICAL IONIZATION

VELOCITY PHENOMENA

Institute of Terrestrial Magnetism, Ionosphere and Radiowave Propagation, Troitsk, Moscow Region,

V.I. Badin

142190, Russia

ABSTRACT

To describe the generation of the electric field by a discontinuity of the Hall current, an equation of the

third  order  is  obtained  using  the  electric  charge  conservation  and  Ohm  laws.  The  solutions  of  this

equation  are  used  to  model  the  electric  impulses  detected  in  experiments  aimed  to  verify  the  Alfven

hypothesis  on  the  critical  ionization  velocity  at  collisions  of  neutral  gas  with  magnetized  plasma.  A

quantitative agreement with experiment is attained and the main features of measured signals are modeled

under  an  assumption  on  the  strong  anomalous  resistance  behind  the  discontinuity.  Apparently,  the

anomalous  resistance  occurs  due  to  trapping  the  current  carriers  by  a  small-scaled  modulation  of  the

electric field.

INTRODUCTION

H.  Alfven  (1960)  first  proposed  the  ionization  of  the  neutral  gas  streaming  across  magnetic  field

lines  to  explain  some  features  of  the  Solar  System.  According  to  his  hypothesis,  a  gas  can  be  ionized
when its velocity exceeds the critical value Vc=(2eφi/M)1/2 where φI is the ionization potential of the atom,

M is its mass, and e is the absolute value of the electron charge, with the gas velocity being determined in

the  reference  frame  where  the  transversal  electric  field  is  zero.  This  hypothesis  encouraged  wide

experimental  studies  (Brenning,  1992).  First,  there  were  laboratory  experiments  with  homopolars  and

plasma  guns.  Later,  space  experiments  with  injections  of  rapidly  ionized  vapors  were  carried  out  The

number  of  space  experiments  executed  is  now  rather  great,  though  some  phenomena  remain  not

completely  understood  yet.  The  generation  of  electric  fields  and  precipitation  of  energetic  particles  are

among these phenomena. It is more convenient to study the physical mechanisms of these processes in a

laboratory experiment since the latter can provide simultaneous measurements of all necessary parameters

such as particle number densities and temperatures, electric and magnetic fields.

Strong  electric  fields  (or  electric  structures)  produced  by  the  interchanging  positive  and  negative

volume  charges  were  detected  in  laboratory  and  space  experiments  (Piel,  Mobius,  and  Himmel,  1980;

Venkataramani  and  Mattoo,  1986;  Kelley  et  al.,  1991).  The  electric  fields  exhibit  a  form  of  potential

barriers  or  wells  with  amplitudes  of  the  order  of  hundred  Volts.  These  structures  named  as  ionization

fronts were supposed to play a key role in the ionization process. For today, there is no generally accepted

theory  of  the  generation  of  such  structures,  although  there  is  a  qualitative  model  (Piel,  Mobius,  and

Himmel, 1980). N. Brenning (1992) noticed that a discontinuity of the Hall current could be among the

possible mechanisms for generating the strong electric fields.

V. Badin (1997, 1998) proposed to model the generation of these structures in terms of the theory of

the dynamo-effect in a strong discontinuity taking into account the time changes in the volume density of

electric  charges.  One  of  the objectives of  this  work  is  to  elaborate  the  proposed  model  of  the  dynamo-

effect in order to analyze laboratory experiments.

FORMULATING THE PROBLEM

Consider  an  ionized  gas  moving  along  the  x-axis  of  the  rectangular  Cartesian  coordinate  system.

Direct  the  z-axis  along  the  magnetic  field.  Take  a  reference  frame  in  which  the  component  Ey  of  the

electric  field  equals  zero.  Assume  a  strong  discontinuity  moving  along  the  x-axis  with  the  velocity  u0.

Assume  also  the  characteristic  scale  of  the  studied  structure  along  the  y-axis  is  much  greater  than  that

along the x-axis and neglect the y-derivatives. Use the equations for the density ρ of electric charges

∂ρ/∂t + div j = 0,

div E = 4πρ.

Assume that the current density obeys the Ohm law j = σE, with the conductivity σ being different for

two sides of the discontinuity. Then we obtain from Eqs. (1) and (2)
∂2Ex /∂t∂x + 4πσP∂Ex /∂x + 4π∂jz /∂z = 0,

where σP is the Pedersen conductivity and jz is the current along the magnetic field.

In laboratory experiments, the longitudinal conductivity was high enough and the longitudinal field

was  not  observed  (Brenning,  1992).  Therefore,  we  can  integrate  Eq.  (3)  by  z  supposing  ∂Ex  /∂z  ≡  0.

Assume that the field is symmetrical with respect to the line z = 0, and the walls of the discharge volume

are situated at z = ±L where L is a half of the height of the discharge tube along the magnetic field. Upon

integrating from 0 to L, the Eq. (3) contains the current jz(L) to the wall of the discharge tube. As a rule,

the wall is made from  an  insulating material (glass) which contains conducting  elements (probes, other

instruments  etc.).  A  metal  cover  on  the  outer  surface  shields  the  experimental  device.  Assume  that  the

(1)

(2)

(3)

electric field is potential E = −grad φ and the shield potential equals zero. For this case, the current to the

wall can be estimated as

jz(L) = Γ∂φ/∂t + φ/R,

discharge tube per unit area.

where  Γ  is  the  average  electric  capacitance  and  R  is  the  average  active  resistance  of  the  wall  of  the

Let  us  find  a  solution  of  the  Eq.  (3)  which  moves  with  the  discontinuity  i.e.  depends  only  on

ξ = x − u0t. For this case, the Eqs. (3) and (4) yield
d3φ/dξ3 − KPd2φ/dξ2 − KCkdφ/dξ +K2
where KP = 4πσP /u0, KC = 4πГ, K2

Rkφ = 0,

R = 4π/Ru0, and k = 1/L.

Let the subscript "1" denote the gas behind the discontinuity (ξ < 0) and the subscript "2" correspond

to  the  gas  before  the  discontinuity  (ξ  >  0).  The  boundary  conditions  can  be  written  as  follows  (Badin,

1997):

σP1∂φ/∂ξ − σP2∂φ2 /∂ξ = (σH1u1 − σH2u2)B/c ≡ I          at ξ = 0,

where σH is the Hall conductivity, B is the magnetic field, c is the speed of light, and I is a jump of the

Hall current;

φ1 = φ2          at ξ = 0;

+∞

∞−

ξ)(

dLjz

= IL

(assume I = const for simplicity).

ELECTRIC SHOCK IMPULSE

φ1 = C1 exp(λ1ξ) + C3 exp(λ3ξ)          for ξ < 0,

φ2 = C2 exp(λ2ξ)                                 for ξ > 0,

characteristic equation
λ3 − KPλ2 − KC kλ + KR

2k = 0,

We can express the solution of the Eq. (5) (tending to zero at ξ → ±∞) in the following form:

where the constants Ci  are determined by the boundary conditions, and the numbers λi are  roots of the

with Re(λ1, λ3 ) > 0 and λ2 < 0. The discriminant of the Eq. (11) is proportional to the expression

Q = 1 − 4KP

3/27kKR

2 − 2KCKP /3KR

2 − KC

2KP

2 /27KR

4 − 4kKC

3 / 27KR

4.

For Q > 0, the dimensionless ratios in the Eq. (12) are obviously restricted. To simplify calculations,
2 indicates a small

we assume them small enough. Note that the smallness of the parameter η = KP

3 /kKR

Pedersen conductivity in comparison with the conductivity of the experimental device. For this case, the

complex conjugate roots of the Eq. (11) approximately are

λ1,3 ≈ (kKR

2)1/3(1/2 ± i31/2/2).

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

For  a  high  Pedersen  conductivity,  when  η  >>  1  and  Q  <  0,  the  real  negative  root  of  the  Eq.  (11)

For  the  obtained  roots  λi,  we  can  approximately  express  the  solution  of  the  Eq.  (5)  satisfying  the

boundary conditions (6–8) in the following form:

ϕ
1

≈

exp(

−
ξ
1
1
l
)[
12

sin(

3
2

−
+
πξ
1
l
1

−

)3

sin(

3
2

−
ξ
1
l
)]
1

          for ξ < 0, 

K
c
KR
2

2
R

2

for ξ > 0, 

approximately is

λ2 ≈ − (kKR

2/KP)1/2 −kKC /2KP.

I
2
∆
3

0

l
1
R
1

ϕ
2

≈

Il
1
R
1

0

∆

exp(

−−
ξ
1
l
)
2

 

where the lengths
l1 = (kK2

R1)-1/3  and  l2 = (kK2

R2/KP2)-1/2

respectively, and

=∆
0

σ
P
1
R

2

2

l
l
1

+

2

σ
P
R
1

l
1
l

2

. 

are characteristic scales of the electric shock impulse behind the discontinuity and in front of it

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

Fig. 1.  The floating probe potential (solid curve) and electric shock calculated by the formulae
(13, 14) (dashed curve).

COMPARISON WITH EXPERIMENT

Figure  1  presents  the  floating  probe  potential  (solid  curve)  in  the  experiment  with  a  plasma  gun

(Venkataramani  and  Mattoo,  1986).  The  potential  profile  corresponds  to  the  neutral  number  density
(argon atoms) Nn ~ 1013 cm-3 and electron number density Ne ~ 5·1012 cm-3. The model of conductivity of
a weakly ionized gas yields the following nominal estimates: σP ≈ 2.6·1010 s-1 and σH ≈ 1·1010 s-1. The plot

shows  that  the  oscillations  of  potential  were  detected  only  on  the  trailing  edge  of  the  impulse.  In  the

framework of the proposed model, this indicates that the leading edge of the impulse is determined by the

real  (negative)  root  of  the  characteristic  equation  while  the  complex  conjugate  roots  correspond  to  the

trailing edge.

cm).

To  calculate  the  scales  of  the  impulse,  one  should  estimate  the  active  resistance  R.  It  is  the  most

probable that the current to the wall takes its path through the measuring circuits and/or other conducting

elements of the experimental device. In this case, the current closes along the wall of the discharge tube

across  the  magnetic  field  lines.  Consequently,  we  can  estimate  the  resistance  as  R  ~  d/σP  where  d  is  a

characteristic scale length. Assume that d ~ 1 cm (the distance between the Langmuir probes was about 2

The  experimental  potential  profile  is  well  approximated,  if  we  assume  l1  =  7  cm  (experimenters
indicated the impulse scale of 5 cm). The formulae (15) yield for this case l2 ≈ 4.5 cm and σP1 ≈ 4.6·104s-1.

Assuming for the σP2 its nominal value and supposing that the jump of the Hall current is of the order of

the  nominal  current  itself  σHBu0  /c,  we  obtain  by  the  formulae  (13,  14)  the  potential  profile  which  is

shown in Figure 1 by the dashed curve. We can see that the measured and calculated curves agree, if we
assume for σP1 the value indicated above that differs from nominal by a factor exceeding 105. Note that

such conductivities can really provide η1 << 1 and η2 >> 1 in accordance with our assumptions.

The proposed model gives an explanation for the experimentally discovered features of the observed

electric structures: the scaling that is a relation of the width of potential barrier to the neutral gas density

and  the  invariance  of  the  potential  maximum  with  respect  to  this  density  (Venkataramani  and  Mattoo,

1986).  Namely,  the  Pedersen  conductivity  of  a  rarified  gas  is  proportional  to  the  number  density  of
-1/3  that agrees with

neutrals and, according to the formula (15), the scale length l1 is proportional to Nn

experiments. For low neutral gas densities, the maximum of the potential (13) approximately equals
φ1max ≈ Iu0Γexp(−π/31.5)/∆0.

This quantity is almost independent of the neutral gas density since the Hall conductivity of a rarefied gas

2.
is proportional to Nn

It  is  unlikely  that  a  strong  anomalous  resistance  behind  the  discontinuity  can  be  associated  with

scattering in the plasma turbulence since the inertia of heavy ions is rather strong. If we supposed that the

anomalous resistance is attributed to the growth in the effective collision frequency, this frequency would
exceed 2·1010 s-1 i.e. exceed the Larmor frequency of electrons. Such strong scattering would provide an

isotropic plasma conductivity and a longitudinal electric field that was not observed in the experiment.

Apparently,  trapping  the  current  carriers  (first  of  all  ions)  by  a  small-scaled  modulation  of  the

electric  field  is  responsible  for  this  anomalous  resistance.  Scattering  can  diminish  the  energy  of  the

directed motion of ions and the ions can be trapped. The small-scaled modulation of the electric field is

clearly seen in experimental potential profiles for low neutral gas densities (Venkataramani and Mattoo,

1986).

DISCUSSION

A hypothesis on the possible strong plasma resistance involves into equations the time derivative of

the volume density of electric charges. This increases the order of the modeling equation and brings into

consideration  dissipative  structures  as  modeling  objects.  In  contrast  to  waves,  these  structures  are

completely localized in the vicinity of their generation that complicates observations.

The use of a dissipative structure as a model for the detected electric impulse enables us to attain an

agreement  with  experiments.  The  proposed  model  can  explain  the  main  features  of  measured  signals

under an assumption on the very strong resistance behind the discontinuity. Apparently, this anomalous

resistance is attributed to trapping the current carriers by a small-scaled modulation of the trailing edge of

the electric shock.

The  proposed  mechanism  of  the  anomalous  resistance  is  of  interest  for  the  phenomena  of

acceleration  of  charged  particles.  Namely,  when  it  operates  in  rarified  plasma,  the  trapped  particles

spatially arranged can produce a strong self-consistent electric field while free particles can gain energy

with  a  weak  scattering.  This  sort  of  acceleration  mechanism  is  very  promising  for  various  resistive

processes in space plasmas. Perhaps, it will find technological applications as well.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

REFERENCES

713, 1960.

This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research, project no. 99-05-65080.

Alfven, H., Collision between a Nonionized Gas and a Magnetized Plasma, Rev. Mod. Phys., 32, 710-

Badin, V.I., Electric Field of a Shock Wave Propagating Across a Magnetic Field, Plasma Phys. Rep., 23,

934-939, 1997, errata: ibid., 24, 532, 1998.

Badin, V.I., Dynamo-Effect in a Strong Irregularity, Cosmic Res., 36, 205, 1998.

Brenning, N., Review of the CIV Phenomenon, Space Sci. Rev., 59, 209-314, 1992.

Kelley, M.C., C.M. Swenson, N. Brenning, K. Baker, and R. Pfaff, Electric and Magnetic Field

Measurements Inside a High-Velocity Neutral Beam Undergoing Ionization, J. Geophys. Res., 96,

9703-9718, 1991.

Piel, A., E. Mobius, and G. Himmel, The Influence of the Plasma Inhomogeniety on the Critical Velocity

Phenomenon, Astrophys. Space Sci., 72, 211-221, 1980.

Venkataramani, N., and S.K. Mattoo, Space Charge Sheath in Plasma-Neutral Gas Interaction, Astrophys.

Space Sci., 121, 83-103, 1986.

