Observation of transformation of chemical elements during electric discharge

Urutskoev L.I., Liksonov V.I.

"RECOM" RRC “Kurchatov Institute”

Moscow, Shchukinskaya st. 12-1

tel. 196-90-90, fax 196-1635

e-mail: sergeysmr@mail.ru

Tsinoev V.G.

RRC “Kurchatov Institute”

123182 Moscow, Kurchatov square, 1, tel. 196-73-65

Results of experimental studies of electric explosion, in water, of foils made of extremely pure materials
are  presented.  New  chemical  elements  detected  both  by  spectroscopic  measurements  during  the  electric
discharge and by a mass-spectrometer analysis of sediments after the discharge have been found to appear. A
"strange" radiation associated with the transformation of chemical elements has been registered.   A hypothesis
has been put forward that particles of the "strange" radiation have magnetic charge.

Abstract.

Introduction

The  physics  of  electric  explosion  of  wires  in  water  has  been  discussed  in  many  papers,  reviews,  and
monographs  [1-3],  which  is  mainly  due  to  the  large  interest  to  this  phenomenon  for  numerous  practical
applications.  One  of  such  tasks  is  shattering  of  concrete  foundations.  As  a  rule,  devices  for  this  purpose  use
relatively  low-voltage  high-capacity  batteries  (U~  5  kV)  to  obtain  the  required  energy  storage  of  order  of
several tens of  kJ. The characteristic discharge time for such batteries is about several hundreds microseconds.
Ordinarily, the electric discharges are produced in a narrow (d~20 mm) pit filled with a liquid and the discharge
is initiated by exploding wires.

A  feature  of  such  an  electric  explosion  scheme  is  that  reflected  waves  act  on  the  plasma  channel
produced  in  a  closed  volume.  They  rapidly  brake  the  motion  of  the  channel  boundaries,  the  channel  stops
expanding, and the pressure at the surface significantly increases. In this processes pressure in the channel can
exceed the one attainable at a shock front.

An additional increase of the energy input into the channel can be attained by initiating the discharge by
wires  made  of  materials  which  has  a  larger  thermal  effect  in  reactions  with  water.  These  are  titanium,
zirconium, and beryllium. This possibility has been studied in both the very early [1-4] and later papers [5].

The present work was initially dedicated to study of the efficiency of electric explosion of titanium foils
in water to shatter concrete. The experiments revealed that the concrete has been smashed by electric explosion
and  its  fragments  have  flown  away  with  substantial  velocities.    A  rough  estimate  of  kinetic  energy  of  the
fragments  based  on  a  visual  rapid  taking  pictures  (with  a  rate  of  300  frames  per  second)  was  ~8  kJ.  It  is  the
willing  to  study  such  an  effective  mechanism  of  the  capacitor  battery  energy  transformation  into  the  kinetic
energy of concrete splinters that initiated the experiments results of which are presented in this paper.

The experiment scheme, diagnostics, and results.

The scheme of the experiment is shown in Fig. 1. The capacitor battery has been discharged into a foil
in water. The energy storage of the battery at a charging voltage of U ~ 4.8 kV was W~50 kJ. The capacitor
spark-gaps [6] provided the commutation of the capacitor bank. The energy was supplied to the load by cables
3  with  an  induction  of  L=0.4  mcH.  The  load  was  a  Ti  foil  that  was  welded  to  Ti  electrodes  5  by  pressure
contact welding. The electrodes were mounted on a polyethylene cover 6 which in turn was attached through
seals  7    to  the  explosion  chamber  8  also  made  of  polyethylene.  The  explosion  chamber  represented  a  torus
which was filled with a liquid  through eight holes 9 uniformly drilled around a circle. Distilled water was used
as a working liquid in most experiments. The number of load varied from one to eight in different experiments.
Analog oscillographs and rapid analog-cipher transformers attached to computers were used to register electric
signals. The typical oscillograms of the current and voltage are shown in Fig. 2. Since various diagnostics were
used in the experiments, we believe worthwhile describing diagnostics and methods in line with experimental
material presentation.

Fig. 1.

 1 - capacitor battery, 2 - spark-gap, 3 - cable,

4 -foil, 5 - electrode, 6 - polyethylene cover, 7 - seal,

8 - explosion chamber, 9 - distilled  water.

During experimental studies of electric explosion of foils in water, an intensive glowing was found to
appear above the dielectric cover. In Fig. 2 we present oscillograms of signals from the photodiode (PD) and
the photo-multiplying tube (PMT-35) mounted above the dielectric cover. As seen from the oscillograms, at the
moment of the current disruption, which is noted by many authors [3], a glowing emerges above the explosion
chamber, which persists over the time period exceeding the current pulse duration by more than 10 times. Since
the  beginning  of  the  glowing  coincides  with  the  voltage  drop  (see  Fig.  2),  it  is  tempting  to  explain  the
appearance of the glowing by the ordinary electric break-down in the supplying high-voltage inputs. However,
the experimental results described below can not be explained by electric break-down only.

The  first  argument  is  that  by  supplying  a  static  voltage  of  U~10  kV  (just  such  a  tension  amplitude
appears  at the moment of  the  current  disruption),  we do not observe electric  break-down  on  the  power  high-
voltage inputs.

Fig. 2.

a. Tension oscillogram

b. Load current oscillogram

c. Signal from photodiode
d. Signal from PMT-35 attached to interference filter l =432 nm

The second argument relates to a significant difference between the duration of the current pulse ~0.15
ms and that of the glowing ~5 ms. However, the recombination time of plasma, which appeared in the air, ~0.1

ms,  is  much  smaller  than  the  observed  glowing  duration,  which  does  not  allow  us  to  explain  the  observed
glowing duration by electric break-down during the current pulse [7]. In the experiments the spectrum of the
glowing and the dynamics of the ball-like plasma formation (BPF) were studied.

To study the spectral composition of the radiation, three types of spectrographs were used STE-1 (4300
A-2700  A),  ISP-51  (6500  A-4500  A),  and  DFS-452  (4350  A-2950  A),  which  allowed  us  to  obtain  the  time-
integrated spectrum (during one shot). The temporal behavior of the narrow spectral fragment was studied with
two  PMT-35  located  1  meter  above  the  setup  with  two  different  interferometric  filters  (l 1=432 nm,  l 2  =457
nm) (Fig. 3).

Fig. 3.

Scheme of diagnostics set up

Torus

1. 

2. 

3. 

High-voltage lead-ins

Ball-like plasma formation

4.  Mirror

5. 

Dielectric cover

To register the image of the glowing, three methods with different time resolution were used. The most
"quick" method used electron-optical transformers (EOT)[8]. Six EOTs in the frame regime with the exposure
time T~130 mcs and the frame delay time T~1 ms allowed to get 6 frames in one shot. The EOTs were set at a
distance of 2.5 m from the axis of the setup as shown in Fig. 3. A mirror was mounted ~1 m above the setup by
the  angle  45  degrees  to  the  vertical  line,  which  permitted  us  to  simultaneously  register  two  projection  of  the
glowing.

To register the glowing an industrial high-speed camera "IMAGE-300" was also used, which enabled us
to register 300 frames per second with an exposure time of ~2 ms. For the camera synchronization, a special
quartz clocks was designed. The time-integrated wide-field pictures were taken with a standard TV-camera.

Fig. 4b presents an EOT-gram which clearly shows that the glowing appears in the middle between the
electrodes above the dielectric cover and has a spherical shape. Using signals from calorimeters, photodiodes,
and with account of the results of spectral measurements, the light energy emitted by BPF was estimated to be
W~1kJ.

Based on the results of more than 100 tests, the typical dynamics of the spherical-like glowing can be
described  as  follows.  At  the  moment  of  the  current  disruption  a  very  bright  diffuse  glowing  emerges  in  the
channel above the setup  (Fig. 4a), as if the total space is glowing. Then the glowing fades and in the next spot a

spherical-like glowing is clearly seen. No dynamics is observed during the subsequent 3-4 ms (Fig. 4c,d,e), and
then  the  glowing  sphere  starts  dividing  into  many  small  "balls".  In  some  experiments  the  "ball"  was  noted  to
rise by 15-30 cm above the dielectric cover and then dissociate (Fig. 4f).

               

a                                                                                           b

     

c                                                                                         d

    

e                                                              f

Fig. 4.

Pictures seen on the EOT screens.

Exposure time 130 mcs.

The moment of exposure in Fig, 4a coincides with

the time of current pulse.

Time delay between the frames 1 ms

It should be noted that the characteristic feature of the spherical plasma formation (BPF) is its selectivity
with respect to the earth coating of the power and diagnostic cables. In experiments where "earths" of the high-
voltage  cables  were  not  thoroughly  insulated,  the  BPF  often  "shorted"  on  the  cable  coating,  as  is  seen  from
EOT-grams. This fact was also supported by measurements of currents, I, on a shunt built in the power cable
coating.  As  seen  from  Fig.  5,  at  the  moment  when  BPF  touches  the  cable  coating,  a  current  emerges  in  the
circuit, the so-called "echo".

7 m s

The signal form the shunt built in the high-voltage

Fig. 5.

cable coating

Long-lived  plasma  formations  in  vacuum  were  observed  in  some  experiments  in  various  laboratories
[9,10]. A distinctive feature of the experiment under discussion is spectral measurements. It is the results of the
spectral measurements that became a key to understand the physics of BPF and largely determined the direction
of further studies. Fig. 6 demonstrates the fragments of the optical spectra obtained with spectrographs located
as shown in Fig. 2. Fig. 6 reveals a spectral line structure in the entire spectral band. In addition, a continuum is
also seen, especially in the red part of the optical spectrum.

a)

b)

Fig. 6

a).    Fragment  of  the  plasma  emission  spectrum  obtained  with  ISP-51
spectrometer (the upper and bottom spectra are from Cu and Zn standards)
b).  Fragment of the plasma emission spectrum (upper) and the iron
standard spectrum (bottom) in the wavelength range 3800-4100A obtained
with STE-1 spectrometer.

The  identification  of  spectral  lines  led  to  two  unexpected  results.  First,  no  oxygen  and  nitrogen  lines
were  found  (only  very  weak  traces  of  them  were  present  in  separate  "shots"),  whereas  just  these  lines  are

always  seen  during  electric  discharge  in  the  air.  Second,  a  lot  of  lines  (more  than  1000  lines  in  individual
"shots") and, accordingly, a lot of the corresponding chemical elements were discovered. The spectral analysis
revealed that most abundant elements in plasma were Ti, Fe (even very weak lines were detected), Cu, Zn, Cr,
Ni, Ca, Na. If the presence of Cu and Zn lines in the spectrum can be explained by a sliding discharge along the
setup  units  and  power-supply  cables,  the  presence  of  other  lines  can  not  be  interpreted.  Variation  of  the
experiment conditions, in particular  change  in mass of the exploding foil, led only to the redistribution in the
lines intensity, with the element composition changing insignificantly.

Since  titanium  foils  were  exploded,  the  presence  of  Ti  lines  suggested  that  some  fraction  of  the  foil
material penetrates through the seals to occur above the setup. In order to check this assumption, the mixture of
water and the foil (the "sample" below) was extracted from the channels and subjected to a mass-spectrometer
analysis. The results of the analysis are shown in Table 1. The table demonstrates that the original foil consists
of  99.7%  of  titanium.  The  isotope  analysis  of  the  foil  shows  that  Ti  isotopes  are  present  in  their  natural
abundance.

Element

Fraction of atoms,
%

99.71643

Ti

Na

Mg

Al

Si

P

S

Cl

Ka

Ca

V

Cr

Mn

Fe

Ni

Co

0.00067

0.00068

0.00921

0.00363

0.03078

0.03570

0.00337

0.00253

0.03399

0.00195

0.00844

0.00253

0.10613

0.04193

0.00202

Table 1.

The original composition of titanium foil.

The method of studying the "samples" was as follows. The "sample" was first evaporated to yield a dry
sediment,  which  was  then  carefully  mixed  to  a  homogeneous  state,  and  after  that  was  subjected  to  mass-
spectrometer  analysis.    The  mass-spectrometer  in  use  measured  atomic  masses  starting  from  carbon.  Clearly,
gases  could  not  be  measured  with  mass-spectrometer.  It  should  be  noted  that  since  the  mass  of  the  powder
under  study  was  about  0.5  grams,  it  could  be  visually  seen  that  after  the  evaporation  the  "sample"  had  a
inhomogeneous structure.

Unexpected were the results of mass-spectrometer analysis of the "samples", with the typical example
presented in Fig. 7a. The total number of all atoms detected in the "sample" is taken for 100%. Fig. 7b shows a
histogram of Ti isotope distribution discovered in the same "sample" and in the original foil for comparison (the
natural  ratio).    The  total  mass  of  Ti  is  taken  for  100%  in  histograms  in  Fig.  7b.  Note  that  the  isotope  ratio
strongly changes in Ti remained after the "shot". The comparison of histograms reveals that the percentage of
"shortage" of Ti48 in Fig. 7b coincides with the "shortage" of Ti in Fig. 7a.

 Abundance of atoms V, Ni, Ba, Pb 0.1-0.01%

1,5

0,5

2

1

0

80

60

40

20

0

B  

N a M g

A l

S i

C a

C r

Fe

C u

Zn

a)

Ti isitope content, %

Experiment

Nature ratio

Ti46

Ti47

Ti48

Ti49

Ti50

b)

Fig. 7.

Results of mass-spectrometer analysis of products in test 226(Ti load).

a) Percent composition of atoms of "alien" elements in the sample. The

fraction of Ti atoms in the experiment products is 92 %.

b) The ratio of Ti isotopes before and after the experiment

All measures were taken to provide the "purity" of the experiment. All electrodes were made of highly
purified titanium, new polyethylene caps were used in each "shot". All seals were also made of polyethylene.
Since the pressure in the chamber increases during the "shot" due to ohmic heating and chemical reaction of Ti
with water, nothing can penetrate the chamber from outside. So only Ti and possibly carbon is expected to be in
the  "sample".  However,  in  mass-spectra  of  the  "samples"  obtained  in  more  than  200  experiments  lines  of
elements ("alien" elements) were detected which were absent in the original material of the exploding foil and
electrodes.

To  avoid  possible  errors  in  measuring  mass-spectra,  some  control  "samples"  were  divided  into  three

parts and directed to three different mass-spectrometers in different laboratories.

Other methods such as electron sounding, X-ray structure, X-ray phase, and X-ray fluorescent analyses,
have also been used. The results of electron sounding of a fragment of one of the "samples" are shown in Fig. 8.

Of course, the results obtained by the different methods differ numerically, but qualitatively all methods reveal
the presence of a substantial amount of "alien" elements.

The result of electron sounding of a fragment of one of the samples.

Fig. 8.

The averaged result of mass-spectrometric analyses performed for the "samples" obtained  in  different
shots is shown in Fig. 9. The mean fraction of Ti transformation is 4%. The comparison of histograms in Fig. 7a
and  Fig.  9  discovers  the  same  elements  among  the  "alien"  ones,  although  their  relative  contributions  in  the
mass-spectra are of course different. This difference in the specific weight is explained by different conditions
of the experiments. The following parameters were changed in the experiments: the energy input into the foil,
the number of channels, the mass and size of the foil, an external magnetic field (in some experiments). Thus
the experiments using Ti foil as a load revealed the presence of the same "alien" elements. The same conclusion
was obtained from spectrometric measurements.

3 0

2 5

2 0

1 5

1 0

5

0

N a M g A l

S i

K

C a

V

C r

F e

N i C u

Z n

Fig. 9.

The mean percent of "alien" elements atoms in 24 tests (N 169-240) for titanium load.

As noted above, a correlation has been observed between the fraction of mixtures in the "text" and the
"skewness"  of  the  isotopic  distribution  of  titanium  remaining  in  the  "sample".  In  all  isotopic  analyses  of
sediments the relative fraction of isotopes Ti46, Ti47, Ti49, Ti50 was observed to  increase and Ti48  to  decrease.
This experimental fact enabled us to suppose that all the decrease of Ti is due to "disappearing" of Ti 48 isotope.
The plot in Fig. 10 is drawn by assuming that the total "disappearing" (burning out) of Ti load is due to only the
burning out of Ti48. Only experiments with titanium foils as a load were taken to this plot. The plot shows that
the  points  either  fall  along  a  straight  line  y=x,  or  lie  in  the  upper  hemiplane.  The  last  fact  indicates  that
predominantly  "alien"  elements  fly  out  of  the  channel,  which  is  in  qualitative  agreement  with  spectral
measurements from which follows that the fraction of the "alien" elements in plasma is quite significant.

 The correlation of decrease of Ti48 
fraction (percents by weight) and "alien" 
elements fraction 
 (21 experiments )

 
8
4
T

i

 
f
o
 
e
s
a
e
r
c
e
d

%

 
,
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f

40

30

20

10

0

0

5

10

"alien" elements fraction , %

Fig 10.

The correlation of decrease of Ti48 fraction and increase of the"alien" elements fraction (percents by weight).

Fig. 11 presents the histogram of the mean composition of the products for experiments with zirconium
Zr foil as a load. The original zirconium foil contained 1.1% of niobium, which was subtracted from the final
product composition. Comparing Fig. 9 and Fig. 11 suggests each original loads produces individual spectrum

of  chemical  elements.  This  statement  holds  for  other  foils  (Fe,  Ni,  Pb,  V,  Ta),  which  were  used  in  other
experiments.

3 0

2 0

1 0

0

A l

S i

C a

T i

C r

F e

N i

C u

Z n

Fig. 11.

The mean percent of atoms of "alien" elements in 5 tests with zirconium load.

Since  the  transformation  of  elements  must  have  been  associated  with  some  radioactive  emission,
intensive  search  for  gamma-radiation  and  neutrons  have  been  done.  To  register  gamma-radiation  integral
dosimeters, X-ray films, and CsI scintillator detectors with PMT-30 have been used. No significant X-ray flux
has  been  detected  in  any  experiment.  As  followed  from  mass-spectrometric  results,  the  number  of  acts  of
transformation was 1019-1020 per shot, so clearly even one gamma-ray photon per transformation act would led
to an enormous gamma-ray flux of P~1020.

1~0,4m, a

In order to register neutrons we used 2 plastic scintillator detectors with PMT-30. The detectors were
mounted at a distance  a
2~0,8m  from  the  setup  axis.  In  Fig.  12  the  typical  signal  from  PMT-30  is
presented  with  a  duration  of  T~100  ns.  Such  a  short  duration  was  a  great  surprise  since  the  current  pulse
duration was ~ 20 ms. In order to measure the time of arrival of particles, a special transformer was designed
which formed a standard pulse  of  ~10  ms  from    external signal with ~10 ns. Thus the studied pulse from the
detector triggered the oscillograph, then was directed to the oscillograph input through a delay line, and only
after  that  entered  the  transformer  and  ACP.  The  time  delay  in  the  turn-on  of  two  oscillographs  registering
signals from two plastic detectors allowed us to measure the radiation propagation velocity. It was found to be
V~20-40 m/s. Such a low velocity precluded signals to be neutrons, since then they must have been ultra cold
and  could  not  reach  the  detector  and  moreover  to  overcome  the  light-shielding  cover  made  of  aluminum.  To
understand  the  nature  of  the  radiation  and  obtain  its  "self-portrait",  a  method  using  photo  emulsions    was
applied.

Fig. 12.

The signal from polystyrol scintillator detector.

The  following  materials  have  been  used  in  the  experiment:  a  fluorographic  film  RF-ZMP  with
sensitivity 1100 R-1 at a level 0.85 above the haze, a radiographic medical film RM-1MD with sensitivity 850R-
1 at a level 0.85 above the haze, nuclear photo plates of type R with a thickness of the emulsion layer of 100
mcm,  high-resolution  photo  emulsions  with  a  sensitivity  ~0.1  GOST  units  and  a  resolution  of  up  to  3000
lines/mm.

All the materials were processed after the exposure in the corresponding developers: the fluorographic
films  in  D-19  developer  during  6  min  at  temperature  200C,  the  plates  in  a  phenydon-hydrochinon  developer
using isothermal method.

The  inspection  of  the  processed  materials  revealed  micro  and  macro  effects.  Macro  effects  included
those  that  can  be  seen  by  naked  eye  or  using  a  magnification  glass  with  up  to  5  times  magnification.  Micro
effects  included  those  seen  under  magnification  from  75  to  2025  times.  Films  and  photo  plates  were  set  at
different  distances  from  the  center  of  electric  explosion  (from  20  cm  to  4  m)  in  radial  and  normal  planes
assuming cylindric symmetry of the experiment (Fig. 13).

Fig. 13. The scheme of photo detectors location

1 - the site of electric explosion of foils

2 - permanent magnets

3 - the plate with nuclear emulsion

4 - films

5 - magnetic field coil

6 - films near the permanent magnet

All the materials were carefully  wrapped in the black paper, which had preliminary been inspected to
have damages. After the exposure in the setup and developing photodetectors, the paper has been expected once
again.

The  very  first  experiments  revealed  a  wide  variety  of  track  forms,  including  continuous  straight  lines,

dumbbell-like ("caterpillar") tracks, and long tracks with a complex form similar to spirals and gratings.

Fig. 14a demonstrates a typical very long (1-3 mm) track similar to that of a caterpillar or a tire-cover
protector. These tracks are characterized by having the second parallel trace with darkening and length different
from  the  main  one.  The  track  presented  in  Fig.  14a  was  formed  on  the  fluorographic  film  RF-ZMP  with
emulsion  layer  thickness  10  mcm.  In  Fig.  14b  a  magnified  fragment  of  the  track  is  shown  which  clearly
demonstrates  a  complicated  pattern.  Notably  that  with  a  grain  size  of  ~1  mcm,  the  track  width  is  about  ~20
mcm.  The  estimate  of  the  energy  of  particles  obtained  from  the  darkening  area  is  E~700  MeV  assuming
Coulomb braking. Taking into account the position of the photo detector (shown in Fig. 13) and the track size,
the track can not be explained by alpha, beta, or gamma-radiation (recall that RF-film is wrapped in the black
paper and is surrounded by the air). To check the nature of the "strange" radiation, the remnants of the foil and
water were extracted from the channel after the explosion and put into a Petri cap (the "sample"), and the photo
detector was set 10 cm away as shown in Fig. 15a. The film RF pressed to fiber glass washer was used, and the
entire  detector  was  enveloped  in  the  black  paper.    The  fiber  glass  washer  was  used  because  in  the  previous
experiments    we  noted  that  the  "strange"  radiation  clearly  demonstrates  properties  of  the  transition  radiation.
The  exposure  time  was  T~18  hours.  The  result  is  presented  in  Fig.  15b.  The  inspection  of  Fig.  14  and  15
suggests that the darkening of the film in both cases was due to identical reasons. This in turn implies that the
radiation was not caused by acceleration  and had a nuclear origin. It should be noted that the position of the
detector  planes  normal  to  the  radius  vector  in  both  cases  allows  the  interpretation  that  the  source  of  the
registered emission moved with a non-zero angular velocity.

Fig. 14.

The typical track on the film.

Fig. 15.

a)  The scheme of experiment. 1 - Petri cap; 2 - the sample; 3 - film; 4 - fiber glass.

b) The track and its magnified fragment.

The  detection  of  the  same  tracks  using  nuclear  emulsions  with  thickness  100  mcm  permits  us  to  state
that the source caused the darkening flies strictly in the photo emulsion plane, since the depth of the beginning
and the end of the track inside the emulsion differs by less than 10-15 mcm.

Assuming the electric pulse in Fig. 12 and the track are due to one and the same reason and accounting

for the track length and the pulse duration, we arrive at the estimate of the radiation source velocity b =10-3.

A series of experiments was performed to study the effect of the external magnetic field on the picture
observed. Using a magnetic coil located as shown in Fig. 13, a weak magnetic field H~20 G was imposed in the
site of explosion.

The  photodetectors  were  set  as  shown  in  Fig.  13(3).  The  typical  tracks  registered  are  shown  in  Fig.
16(a,b),  with  a  nuclear  photo  emulsion  as  photo  detector.      It  is  seen  from  the  Figure  that  the  track  strongly
changes and the trace becomes "comet"-like in shape.

500 mcm

a

b

100 mcm

   c

0,7 mm

3 mm

1,5 mm

Fig. 16.

a) The "comet"-like trace

b) A magnified fragment of the "comet head"

c) The "flaky" trace

A  more  detailed  study  of  the  structure  under  microscope  with  225  times  magnification  allowed  us  to
single  out  a  round  head  (Fig.  16b)  with  the  darkening  density  D>3  and  a  long  tail  with  decreasing  darkening
density similar to the "comet tail" (Fig. 16a). Six such "comets" were detected inside the area 4 cm2. Their sizes
varied  from  300  mcm  to  1300  mcm  and  the  energy  of  particles  derived  from  the  darkening  area  reached
E~1GeV.

In  some  experiments  the  detector  (and  not  the  entire  setup)  was  put  in  the  magnetic  field.    Fig.  16c
shows the traces obtained by a photo detector consisting of three RF-films folded together and located near a
samarium-cobalt magnet (B ~ 1.2 kG) as shown in Fig. 13(b).

The positions of  darkenings in Fig. 16c coincide geometrically, which exclude them to be artifacts. The
energy  absorbed  in  the  three  films  with  account  only  the  photo  emulsion  layer  thickness  (~10  mcm)  is
estimated to be E~700 MeV.

Thus  it  is  clearly  seen  that  the  magnetic  field  affects  the  "strange"  radiation.  In  addition  to  the  tracks
shown,  we  have registered  some  tracks  quite  different in shape from the "classical" ones. Part of these tracks
not presented in this paper is very similar to scratches or ink spots. Exactly the same tracks were observed in
experiments  by  Matsumoto  [11]  using  other  types  of  photo  detectors  and  in  experiments  with  breakdown  in
water.  This  precludes  us  from  unconditionally  relating  them  to  artifacts.  However,  already  today  we  can  say
with a significant reliability that one or two types of particles can hardly explain all tracks which appear during
the registration of the "strange" radiation.

Discussion of experimental results. A magneto-nucleon catalysis hypothesis.

Let us try to emphasize the main properties of the observed phenomena. Apparently, it is the symmetry
of location of plasma channels that was the reason for the BPF appearance, which in turn allowed the dynamics
and optical spectrum of the emergent radiation to be studied. >From Fig. 5 a purely visual association between
the BPF and ball lightning arises. There are at least two major problems in physics of ball lightning:  the reason
for appearance and failure to explain the source of radiation. The experimental results reported here can suggest
a  reason  for  the  BPF  appearance.  Indeed,  the    optical  spectra  analysis  and  mass  spectrometry  results  are  in
qualitative  agreement.  This  allows  us  to  suppose  that  during  the  process  a  fraction  of  materials  leaks  through
the  seals.  However,  even  if  not  to  analyze  how  plasma  penetrates  through  the  seals,  two  questions  remains.
Why all the plasma coalesces into a ball and does not dissociate and why this occurs in such a short time since
we do observe the BPF already on the first EOT frame  (in some "shots").

One can try to explain the BPF using the cluster model [9] of the fractal ball model [12], however we
have looked for a hypothesis which can explain all experimental facts. Such a hypothesis, in our opinion, could
be the formation of magnetically-charged particles (magnetic monopoles). The first attempt to explain the ball
lightning by magnetic monopoles was done in paper [13]. This paper suggested to explain  the properties of ball
lightning  by  Rubakov's  effect  [14]  predicted  for  super-heavy  monopoles  which  should  exist  in  the  Great
Unification Theory [15,16] (the so-called GUT monopoles). In our opinion, the experimental results obtained in
our  paper  provides  no  serious  support  for  the  hypothesis  [13].  However  the  assumption  that  magnetic
monopoles form in the plasma discharge in water could be one possible reason for the obtained experimental
results, how unusual this assumption might appear.

Indeed, a wide track similar to the trace of a "crawling caterpillar" [17] was expected just for classical
monopoles [18,19]. The estimate of energy dissipated in the emulsion by radiation E~1 GeV coincides with that
expected  for  magnetic  monopoles.  A  visual  change  in  the  track  shape  observed  in  the  presence  of  magnetic
field also gives support to this assumption.

To  confirm  directly  the  fact  of  magnetic  monopole  creation  in  plasma  discharge  an  experiment  was
performed using the idea from paper [20], in which iron foils were suggested to be taken as a monopole trap. In
our experiment we used three 57Fe foils, which has an ideal structure and a significant field near the nucleus.

Since both N and S magnetic monopoles must appear, the foils under study were located near different
poles  of  a  strong  magnet  with  the  magnetic  field  strength  H~1  kG  in  anticipation  of  selection  of  monopoles.
Thus N-monopoles were expected to attract by the S-pole and S-monopoles by the N-pole of the magnet. The

magnets were set at a distance of h~70 cm away from the site of electric explosion. The third foils was used as
a standard.

Due  to  a  large  magnetic  charge  the  monopoles  "captured"  in  the  trap  must  change  the  magnetic  field
near 57Fe nucleus, which can be measured by Moessbauer effect for a sufficiently large number of the "trapped"
monopoles.

The results of measurements showed that in the foils located near the N-pole the absolute value of the
superfine  magnetic  field  increased  by  0.24  kG.  In  another  foil  (S)  it  decreased  by  approximately  the  same
amount 0.29 kG. The measurement error was 0.012 kG.

Fe-standard:   H = 330,42 kG
Fe-north -N : H = 330,66 kG, D N  = 0,24kG
Fe-south -S :  H = 330,13kG, D S  = -0,29kG
Taking  into  account  that  the  magnetic  field  in  57Fe  has  the  opposite  sign  with  respect  to  its
magnetization, we can state with certainty that S-particles (at the N-pole of the magnet) increase the negative
superfine field, while the particles with the opposite sign decrease it, with  the relative change being ~8·10-4.

From analysis of Moessbauer spectra of ferromagnetics, the absorption line width is known to increase.
This phenomenon is related to inhomogeneity of internal magnetic fields near nuclei. An analysis of spectra of
irradiated  foils  revealed  an  additional  absorption  line  broadening  comparable  with  the  ordinary  magnetic
broadening. This possibly relates to a chaotic absorption of the monopoles in the lattice of iron.

Fe-standard:     r_1=0.334/0.300/0.235 mm/s

Fe-north -N   :  r_1=0.363/0.328/0.250 mm/s

Fe-south -S   :  r_1=0.366/0.327/0.248 mm/s

The measurements error 0.003 mm/s.

No  quadruple  shift  of  levels  is  discovered,  i.e.  no  change  of  the  electric  field  gradient  in  crystal  is
observed.  The  results  of  this  experiment  strongly  support  the  magnetic  monopoles  hypothesis.  Unfortunately,
these measurements do not allow to decide whether magnetic monopoles have electric charge.

Using  the  hypothesis  of  magnetic  monopole  formation  we  can  suggest  that  the  observed  BPF  are
magnetic clusters. In analogy with [9] we can suppose that the role of ion is played by a monopole coupled with
the  foil  atom  nucleus,  and  the  solvation  occurs  due  to  interaction  of  the  monopole  magnetic  charge  with
magnetic moment of oxygen atoms.

The  main  regularities  experimentally  observed  during  the  transformation  of  chemical  elements  can  be

summarized as follows.

of the original isotope content.

1. The transformation occurs predominantly with even-even isotope, which leads to a notable distortion

2.  Experiments  with  foils  made  of  different  chemical  elements  have  shown  that  they  transform  into

individual spectra of elements, and the statistical weight of each element is determined by concrete conditions.

3. For the set of chemical elements resulted from the transformation there is a minimal difference  D
 Åb
between the binding energy of the original element and the mean over spectrum binding energy of the formed
elements.  The  difference  of  binding  energies  D Eb  =  Eorig  -
  Eform  (with  account  of  the  real  isotope  ratios)
calculated  from  mass-spectrometric  measurements  in  different  tests,  falls  within  the  range  D Eb  <  0.1
MeV/atom, which is clearly due to mass-spectrometric measurements errors.

4. No increase in the binding energy difference D Eb  as a function of the transformation fraction of the

original chemical element has been detected.

5.  All  nuclei  of  chemical  elements  resulted  from  the  transformation  are  in  the  ground  (non-excited)

state, i.e. no appreciable radioactivity has been found.

To  explain  the  element  transformation,  we  have  put  forward  the  working  hypothesis  of  magneto-
nucleon  catalysis  (MNC).  We  introduced  this  term  to  designate  the  process  which  supposedly  occurs  in  the
plasma channel. The essence of MNC is that the magnetic monopole with a large magnetic charge and an even

small kinetic energy can overcome Coulomb barrier and become bound with atomic nucleus. The MNC must
have many common features with muon catalysis [21], in which the Coulomb barrier is substantially decreased
due to the large mass of mu-meson. Since the magnetic monopole seems to be a stable particle, the MNC may
be more effective.

The experiments established that the transformation and hence the MNC occurs only inside the plasma

channel.

In conclusion, the authors greatly acknowledge the members of the staff of "RECOM" A.G. Volkovich,
S.V.  Smirnov,  V.L.  Shevchenko,  S.B.  Shcherbak,  and  to  members  of  the  staff  of  "Kurchatov  Institute"  V.A.
Kalenskii,  R.V.  Ryabova,  Yu.P.  Dontsov,  B.V.  Novoselov,  and    A.Yu.  Shashkov  for  assistance  in  the
experiments. We also deeply thank A.I. Voikov for financial support of the present study and A.A. Rukhadze
for support and help.

References

1. Electric explosion of conductors. Moscow, Mir, 1965.

2. Gulii G.A. Scientific principles of technological use of discharges. Kiev, Naukova Dumka, 1990.

3. Burtsev V.A., Kalinin N.V., Luchinskii A.V. Electric explosion of conductors and its application in

electro-physical units.  Moscow, "Energoizdat", 1990.

4. Naugol'nykh K.A., Roi N.A., Electric discharges in water. Moscow, Nauka, 1971.

5. Pasechnik L.I., Fedorovich P.D., Popov L.Yu. Electric discharge and its industrial applications. Kiev,

Naukova Dumka, 1980.

6. Mesyats G.A. Generation of powerful nanosecond pulses. Moscow, "Sov. Radio", 1974, p.90.

7. Smirnov B.M. Physics of weakly ionized gas. Moscow, "Nauka", 1972, p. 415.

8. Aranchuk L.E., Vikharev V.D., Korolyov V.D. Resonance instability of relativistic electron beam in

plasma. ZhETP (JETP) v.8, p. 1280-1295, 1984.

9. Stakhanov I.P. On the physical nature of ball lightning. Moscow, "Nauchnij Mir", 1996, p. 262.

10. Ball lightning in the laboratory. Moscow, "Chemistry", 1994, p. 256.

11.  Matsumoto  Takaaki  “Observation  of  mesh-like  traces  on  nuclear  emulsions  during  cold  fusion”,

Fusion Tech. V. 23, , 1993, p. 103-113.

12. Smirnov B.M. Fractal ball - a new state of matter. UFN (Physics-Uspekhi), v. 161, N8, p. 141-153,

1991.

13.  Korshunov  V.K.  Polyakov-t'Hooft  magnetic  monopole  drift  in  the  air  and  the  "Ball  lightning"

phenomenon. Moscow, IVT AN SSSR, 1991, vyp. 2, p. 133.

14. Rubakov V.A. Super-heavy magnetic monopoles and proton decay. Pis'ma ZhETP (JETP Lett.), v.

33, N 12, p. 658-660, 1981.

v.20, p.430 -433.

15.  Polyakov  A.M.,  Spectrum  of  particles  in  quantum  field  theory.  Pis'ma  ZhETP  (JETP  Lett.), 1974,

16.t Hooft G. - Nucl. Phys. Ser. B, 1974, v.79, p.276.

17. Amaldi Å., Baroni G., Braduer H. and et. Search for Dirac Magnetic Poles. - CERN Report, 63-13.

18. Dirac P. A. M. - 1931, Proc. Roy. Soc. Ser. A, v.133, p60.

19. Shwinger J. Magnetic Poles and quantum the field theory- 1966, Phys. Rev., v.144, p.1087.

20. Martemjanov V.P., Khakimov S.Kh. Dirac monopole braking in metals and ferromagnetics.  ZhETP

21.  Zel'dovich  Ya.B.,  Gerstein  S.S.  Nuclear  reactions  in  cold  hydrogen.  M.,  UFN  (Physics-Uspekhi),

(JETP), v. 62, N 1, p. 35-41, 1972.

vol. LXXI, N 4, p. 581-630, 1960.

