Independence of events and quantum structure of the light 

in Einstein(cid:146)s special relativity 

Yves Pierseaux, Bruxelles and Oxford 
(ypiersea@ulb.ac.be, yves.pierseaux@philosophy.ox.ac.uk). 

 

 

 

1- Einstein(cid:146)s principles of relativistic kinematics 

2- Einstein(cid:146)s 1905 proclamation of independence of events 

3- Events, points of light and quanta of light in January paper 

4-Events, points of light and complex of light in June paper 

5-  PoincarØ(cid:146)s principles of implicit relativistic kinematics of deformable rods 

6- Independent true time, material points and wave of light in PoincarØ(cid:146)s SR with ether 

Conclusion 

 
 
1- Einstein(cid:146)s principles of relativistic kinematics 
 

Everything  seems  have  been  said  about  the  famous  miraculous  year  1905  of  
the  young  Einstein.  Many  authors,  physicists,  philosophers  and  historians,  have 
analysed  the  multiples  connections  between  the  three  mains  papers:  quanta  of  light 
(January) brownian motion (March) and special relativity (June)[1].  

The  most  important  is  perhaps  this  one  of  de  Broglie  whose  the  source  of 
inspiration  for  wavy  mechanics  is  the  contrast  between  the  transformation  of  the 
frequency of light (Einstein January) and the transformation of the frequency of clock 
(Einstein  June).  Anyway  it  is  well  known  that  Einstein  himself  has  developed  a 
synthesis  between  quanta  of  light  and  brownian  motion  in  1909  on  duality  of  the 
structure of the radiation. 

However  according  also  to  Einstein  himself,  the  three  papers  have  not  the 
same  statute:  the  first  and  the  second  are  (cid:147)constructive  theories(cid:148)  while  the  last  (cid:150) 
special relativity (SR) - is essentially a theory of principle [1]. 

January  and  March  articles  consist  essentially  in  works  of  statistical 
thermodynamics  that  show  the  reality  of  atomic  structure  of  matter  (March)  and  the 
hypothesis  of  atomic  structure  of  radiation  (January).  Einstein(cid:146)s  SR  (June)  look 
deeply different because it is based on principles (more precisely two principles) that 
are independent of any consideration on the structure of the matter or radiation.  

But,  in  Einstein(cid:146)s  own  words,  thermodynamics  and  relativity  are  the  best 
examples  of  theory  of  principles.  Einstein  insist  often  on  the  analogy  between  the 
principles of  special relativity and the principles of thermodynamics. In his response 
to  Ehrenfest  about  the  question  of  rigidity  Einstein  underlines  even  more  precisely 
that (cid:147)the principle of relativity together with the principle of constancy of velocity of 

1

light(cid:148)  is  to  conceived  as  a  (cid:147)heuristic  principle(cid:148)  and  also  as  being  (cid:147)similar  to  the 
second principle of thermodynamics(cid:148). 

We want to analyse Einstein(cid:146)s analogy in depth not to contest that Einstein(cid:146)s 
kinematics  are  based  on  principles  (on  the  contrary!)  but  because  there  exist  others 
principles  in  physics  for  example  principle  of  reaction,  principle  of  least  action 
etc(cid:133)(see  for  instance,  PoincarØ  1904  conference  in  Saint  Louis  on  (cid:147)principles  of 
mathematical physics(cid:148)). 
  
2- Einstein(cid:146)s 1905 proclamation of independence of events 
 

We  suggest  here  a  new  way  of  research  because  we  can  find  in  each  of  the 

three Einstein(cid:146)s articles the concept of (cid:147)independent events(cid:148) (unabh(cid:228)ngig Ereignis): 
 
Quanta of light (January, paragraph 5) 
 
In calculating entropy by molecular-theoretical methods, the word probability is often used in a sense 
differing from the way the word is defined in probability theory. In particular, case of equal probability 
are often hypothetically stipulated when the theoretical model employed are definite enough to permit a 
deduction  rather  than  a  stipulation.  I  will  show  in  a  separate  paper  that  in  dealing  with  thermal 
processes,  it  suffices  completely  to  use  the  so-called  statistical  probability  and  hope  thereby  to 
eliminate a logical difficulty that still obstructs the application of Boltzmann(cid:146)s principle. Here, I shall 
give only its general formulation and its application to very special cases. 
It is meaningful to talk about the probability of a state of a system, and if furthermore, each increase of 
entropy can be conceived as a transition to a state of higher probability, then the entropy S1 of a system 
is a function of the probability of its instantaneous state. Therefore if we have two systems S1 and S2 
that do not interact which each other, we can set S1 = ϕ (W1)  S2 = ϕ (W2) 

It these two systems are viewed as a single system of entropy S and probability W, then: 
S = S1 + S2 = ϕ (W) 
The last equation tells us that the states of the two systems are events that are independent of each 
other(voneinander unabh(cid:228)ngig Ereignis)(cid:148). From these equations it follows that: 

W = W1 W2 

and 

 

ϕ (W1 . W2) = ϕ (W1) + ϕ (W2) 
If S0 denotes the entropy of a certain initial state and W is the relative probability of a state of entropy 
S, we obtain [for Einstein always reference 1, always my italics and my bold]: 
 

−

S

S

0

=

ln
k W

 
Brownian motion (March, paragraph 4) 
 
Obviously  we  must  assume  that  each  individual  particle  executes  a  motion  that  is  independent of the 
motions of all the other particles; the motions of the same particle in different time intervals must also 
be considered as mutually independent processes, so long as we think of these time intervals as chosen 
not to be too small. 
We now introduce a time interval τ, which is very small compared with observable time intervals but 
still large enough that the motions performed by a particle during two consecutive time intervals can be 
considered as mutually independent events (unabh(cid:228)ngig Ereignis).[1] 
 
Special relativity (June, paragraph 1) 
 
We have to bear in mind that our judgements involving time are always judgments about simultaneous 
events (gleichzeitige Ereignisse). If, for example, I say that (cid:147)the train arrives here at 7  o(cid:146)clock(cid:148) that 
means (cid:147) the pointing of the small hand of my watch to 7 and the arrival of the train are simultaneous 
events(cid:148). 
 

 

2

 

We notice that in the three case the concept of independent event is in the core 

Annus  Mirabilis  begins  with  Einstein(cid:146)s  inversion  of  Boltzmann(cid:146)s  principle: 
independent  states  or  independent  events  are  directly  connected  with  Einstein(cid:146)s 
conception  of  statistical  probability  in  one  of  the  two  most  important  paragraphs  of 
the article (see3).  

I have show in my  book [2] that Einstein(cid:146)s  definition of probability with the 
inversion  of  Boltzmann(cid:146)s  principle  is  remained  essentially  the  same  from  1903  to 
1925 (gas of photons).  
 
Brownian motion  
 

Einstein treats fundamentally the Brownian motion as a random walk and the 
independent  events  take  place  in  the  most  important  paragraph  of  the  paper  where 
Einstein  deduces  his  famous  relation  of  fluctuation-diffusion  of  Brownian  particle 
from which Perrin will show experimentally the reality of the atoms. 

of the article. 
 
Quanta of light  
 

 

 
Special relativity 
 

Einstein(cid:146)s  simultaneous  events  at  the  same  place  are  of  course  independent 
events.  There  is  indeed  no  causal  connection  between  the  motion  of  the  train  that 
arrives in a given place (for example the station of Schaerbeek) and the motion of the 
small hand that arrives in a given place (for example the figure 7). We showed [2] that 
the crucial importance of independence of events is not only true for the events at the 
same  place  (in  Minkowki(cid:146)s  cone  of  light)  but  also  for  distance  events  (on  and  out 
Minkowki(cid:146)s cone of light).  

 
The  reader  could  be  have  the  impression  that  we  play  on  the  word 
(cid:147)unabhangig  Ereignisse(cid:148)  because  in  the  two  first  cases  the  sense  of  word  would  be 
purely  mathematical  while  only  in  the  last  case  it  would  have  a  physical  meaning 
connected with space and time.  

We shall show in the details (this is the reason of the length of the quotations) 

that it is in the three case the same physical concept.  

It  is  obvious  for  the  Brownian  motion  where  each  displacement  D  of  the 
particle in a time t is an event. We insist on the fact it is the first time in the history of 
physics that the movement of a particle is described as a serie of independent events. 

In  the  article  on  quanta  of  light  the  deep  physical  meaning  of  Einstein(cid:146)s 
concept of event is directly visible in its identification with the concept of state (see 
the  quotation).  We  shall  show  that  Einstein(cid:146)s  definition  of  independent  states  or 
events is directly connected with the deduction of independent quanta of light (see 3). 
The two first articles establish clearly a discontinuous structure of matter and 
light. The standard look of Einstein(cid:146)s SR is, on the contrary, essentially based on the 
continuous  conception  of  the  field.  The  young  Einstein  however never  uses in 1905 
the concept of field while that he uses all the time the concept of event.  

 

3

 The  advent  of  an  event  means  deeply  that  suddenly  something  happens 
somewhere et therefore implies  a concept of discontinuity.  The collision is of course 
the best example of an event.  

The classical continuous trajectory of a point material can be represented by a 
series of events but it is in this case wrong events or events in a weak sense. Indeed 
each  event  is  completely  determined  by  the  precedent  because  the  initial  state  x,  v 
determines completely the next positions and velocities of the material point.  

The true event (in a strong sense of Prigogine) is thus a coincidence of events. 
This  is  precisely  the  definition  given  by  Einstein  in  his  famous  paragraph  on 
simultaneity in SR. 

We want to concentrate here the attention on the synthesis between quanta of 
light  and  SR.  We  notice  only  about  the  Brownian  motion  that  (see  Einstein(cid:146)s 
quotation)  the  mutually  independent  process  and  mutually  independent  event  are 
deeply  connected  in  Einstein(cid:146)s  logic.  So  Einstein  defines  in  his  second  synthesis  on 
SR  an  event  as  the  limit  of  a  process  ((cid:147)To  determine  the  position  of  a  process  of 
infinitesimally short duration that occurs in a space element (point event) we need a 
Cartesian system ). 

It  is  interesting  to  notice  about  Einstein(cid:146)s  logic  that  Einstein(cid:146)s  himself 
underlines  the  necessity  (cid:147)to  eliminate  a  logical  difficulty  that  still  obstructs  the 
application of Boltzmann(cid:146)s principle(cid:148). 

 

 
3- Events, points of light and quanta of light in January paper  
 

We insist on the fact that Einstein characterises the state of a system according 
to Boltzmann(cid:146)s principle by the entropy S or the probability W. After his definition of 
probability  of  independent state or event, he considers a set (or a gas) of (cid:147)points(cid:148). I 
use inverted comas because these points are not the usual material points of classical 
mechanics.  
 
We now treat the following special case. Let a volume V0 contain a number n of moving points (e.g. 
molecules) to which our discussion will apply. The volume may also contain any arbitrary number of 
other  moving  points  of  any  kind.  No  assumption is made about the law governing the motion of the 
points under discussion in the volume except that, as concerns this motion, no part of the space (and no 
direction  within  it)  is  preferred  over  the  others.  Further,  let  the  number  of  (aforementioned)  moving 
points under discussion be small enough that we can disregard interactions between them. 
This system, which, for example, can be an ideal gas or a dilute solution, possesses a certain entropy 
S0. Let us imagine that this state has a different value of entropy (S), and we now wish to determine the 
difference in entropy with the help of Boltzmann(cid:146)s principle. 
 

This space of points is homogenous and isotropic. Einstein applies therefore - 
in order to find the temporal evolution of the system ((cid:147)each increase of entropy can be 
conceived  as  a  transition  to  a  state  of  higher  probability(cid:148))  -  not  the  second  principle  of 
Newton(cid:146)s mechanics but the second principle of Boltzmann(cid:146)s thermodynamics.  

In the point of view of mechanics, Newton(cid:146)s law is the law of change of state 
(cid:150) defined by the position x or q and velocity v or p- of the material point. In the point 
of view of the young Einstein, Boltzmann law is the law of change of state1 - defined 
by V and S - of the n  independently moving (cid:147)points(cid:148):  
  

                                                           
1 I showed in my book that the mysterious expression “law of change of states”  Einstein’s principle of relativity 
could be the Boltzmann law. We notice that k is at the level of a principle theory while h is only a the level of a 
constructive theory (see conclusion). This is the reason for which I have notice N/R by k. 

 

4

We ask: how great is the probability of the last-mentioned state relative to the original one? Or: how 
great is the probability that a randomly chosen instant of time, all n independently moving points in a 
given  volume  V0  will  be  found  (by  chance)  in  the  volume  V?  Obviously, this probability, which is a 
(cid:147)statistical probability(cid:148) has the value: 

 
From this, by applying Boltzmann(cid:146)s principle, one obtains 

W

= (

n

)

V
V
0

−

S

S

0

=

nk

ln

V
V
0

Lorentz  insisted  in  Solvay  Conference  in  1911  on  the  fact  that  Einstein(cid:146)s 
statistical probability has nothing to do with Gibbs(cid:146)s definition of probability based on 
the element dpdq in the space of phase. Anyway if the state of Einstein(cid:146)s points were 
defined  by  classical  mechanics,  it  is  impossible  that  the  motions  of  the  points  were 
fundamentally independently.   This is the deep reason for which Einstein rejects the 
definition  of  equiprobability  (see  quotation)  based  on  (cid:147)a  mechanical  priori  model(cid:148). 
According  to  Einstein,  this  a  priori  model  is  precisely  this  one  of  standard  Gibbs(cid:146)s 
statistical mechanics. 

Einstein(cid:146)s    independently  moving  (cid:147)points(cid:148)  suppose  another  definition  of  the 
state of this points. Einstein(cid:146)s thermodynamical definition (V, S) of state implies the 
definition  of  independent  state  not  from  a  element  of  the  phase  space  but  from  an  
(cid:147)element of volume(cid:148) and an (cid:147)element of duration(cid:148) and therefore - to the limit - a point 
event (x, y, z, t). 
 
By an elementary event we will understand an event that is supposed to be concentrated in one point 
and  is  of  infinitely  short  duration.(cid:148)[Einstein,  SR,  1910]  (cid:147)To  determine  the  position  of  a  process  of 
infinitesimally short duration that occurs in a space element (point event) [Einstein, SR, 1907] 
 

We  have  so  shown  that  concept  of  independent  events  is  the  same  that  the 
concept  of  independently  moving  (cid:147)points(cid:148)  whose  each  independent  state  is  not 
characterised by (x, v) - as in Gibbs mechanical statistics- but by (x, y, z, t). We have 
however not yet shown that this latter is the same concept that independently quanta 
of light. Let us go on with Einstein(cid:146)s quotation: 
 
Paragraph 6 (cid:147)Interpretation according to Boltzmann(cid:146)s principle of the expression for the dependence of 
the entropy of monochromatic radiation on volume 

In section 4 (limiting law for the entropy of monochromatic radiation at low radiation density) for the 
dependence of the entropy of monochromatic radiation on volume ((cid:133)) 

And  compare to the general formula expressing the Boltzmann(cid:146)s principle 

We arrive in the following conclusion. 

−

S

S

0

=

k

ln(

E

1
k

) β ν

V
V
0

−

S

S

0

=

ln
k W

5

 

 

If monochromatic radiation of frequency ν and energy E is enclosed (by reflecting walls) in the volume 
V, the probability that at a randomly instant the total radiation energy will be found in the portion V of 
the volume V0 is: 

W

= (

E
1
β ν
k

V
V
0

)

this  we 

From 
thermodynamically as if it consisted of mutually independent energy quanta of magnitude βkν. 

that  monochromatic 

further  conclude 

radiation  of 

low  density  behaves 

The  logic  structure  of  this  extraordinary  paper  is  that  Einstein  obtains  in  his 
paragraph 4 a relation between entropy and volume for the Wien radiation and in his 
paragraph 5 a similar relation thanks to the applying of Boltzmann(cid:146)s principle as the 
fundamental law of movement for his independent points (W-> S). Einstein(cid:146)s strategy 
in paragraph 6 consists logically in a comparison and an inversion (S->W).  

The famous disagreements between Planck and Einstein about the structure of 
light  and  the  definition  of  probability  are  the  same  thing.  Einstein(cid:146)s  inversion  of 
Boltzmann  principle  means  not  only  that  the  relation  may  be  mathematically  in  the 
other sense but implies physically that (cid:147)the probability that at a randomly instant the 
total  radiation  energy  will  be  found  in  the  portion  V(cid:148)  in  others  words,  if  Einstein(cid:146)s 
probability has a physical sense, Einstein(cid:146)s quanta has also a physical sense. 

Einstein(cid:146)s  (cid:147)points(cid:148)  can  be  as  well    material  point  or  light  point  whose  the 
singularity consists in his velocity v = c. The deepest meaning of the relation E = β k 
ν  in  Einstein(cid:146)s  paper  is  that  the  structure  of  monochromatic  radiation  consists  in  a 
discontinuous serie of independent point events. 
 
4-Events, points of light and complex of light in June paper  
 

It  is  well  known  that  Einstein(cid:146)s  kinematics  implies  the  deletion  of  the  ether. 
The first meaning of the existence of this medium is that the light is a wave and there 
is no point with velocity of light (v = c).  

In the first part of his article, Einstein never speak of wave of light. Einstein(cid:146)s 

In his paragraph 3, Einstein deduces the transformation of the coordinates of 

basic concept is ray of light (in the sense of geometrical optics), i.e. a point of light. 
 
an event: 
 
To any system of values x, y, z, t, which completely defines the place and the time on an event in the 
stationary system K, there belongs a system of values ξ, η, ζ, τ, determining that event relatively to the 
system  k,  and  our  task  is  now  to  find  the  system  of  equations  connecting  this  quantities  ((cid:133)).  We 
obtain: 

x = ϕ γ (x-v t), η = ϕ y, ζ = ϕ z, 
τ = ϕ γ (t - vx/c2)  

We must show that Einstein(cid:146)s transformations of event  supposes an extension 
of the classical notion of material point. In other words: it is not only in the first part 
of his article that Einstein characterises the light as a point but also in the second part.  
In  the  famous  polemic  of  priority  between  PoincarØ  and  Einstein,  Whittaker, 
who  attributes  the  discovery  of  SR  to  Lorentz  and  PoincarØ,  conceded  that  the 
Doppler  formula  was  deduced  by  Einstein  and  not  by  PoincarØ.  Is  it  a  historical 
contingence? 

 

 

6

The  first  time  that  Einstein  speaks  of  the  electrodynamic  (sic)  wave  in  his 
famous June paper, he applies his Lorentz(cid:146)s transformation at (cid:133) a point v = c of the 
plane of a wave plane (paragraph 7):  
  
In the system K and very far from the coordinate origin, let there be a source of electrodynamic waves 
(cid:133)[whose  the  phase  is]  Φ  =  ωt  (cid:150)  k  x.    We  want  to  known  the  character  of  these  waves  when 
investigated by an observer at rest in the moving system k. Applying the transformation equations for 
electric and magnetic forces found in section 6 and those for coordinates in section 3, we immediately 
obtain: Φ(cid:146) = ωτ (cid:150) κκκκ ξ.ξ.ξ.ξ. 
 

It is of course forbidden to make v = c in LT but the state (x, y, z, t) of a light 
point is an event. The propagation of the light consists in Einstein(cid:146)s SR fundamentally 
in  a  serie  of  events.  The  concept  of  event  implies  a  extension  of  the  domain  of 
application of LT. 

The physicists credit often Einstein with the discovery of the relativistic law of 
composition of the speed and PoincarØ with the discovery of the structure of group of 
Lorentz  transformations  (LT).  But  in  fact  the  two  elements  are  in  each  approach 
(Einstein(cid:146)s  §  5  and  PoincarØ(cid:146)s  §  4).  The  interesting  point  is  not  in  these  polemical 
questions  of  priority  but  the  fact  that  Einstein  applies  his  LT  for  light  point  unlike 
PoincarØ whose the law of composition of velocities concerns the material systems or 
the material points: 

It is noteworthy that the Lorentz transformations form a group. For, if we put: 

          x(cid:146) = l k (x + εt), 

 

 y(cid:146)= l y,   

z(cid:146) = l z,     

t(cid:146) = k l (t + εx) 

 

x(cid:148) =l(cid:146) k(cid:146)(x(cid:146) + ε’t(cid:146)),  

y(cid:146) = l(cid:146)  y,   

z(cid:146) = l(cid:146) z,   

t(cid:148) =l(cid:146) k(cid:146) (t(cid:146)+ ε’x(cid:146))  

x(cid:146) = l(cid:148) k(cid:148) (x + ε"t), 

 y(cid:148)= l(cid:148) y, 

 z(cid:148) = l(cid:148) z, 

 t(cid:148) = l(cid:148) k(cid:148) (t + ε"x) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

and 

 

with 

we find that 

 
[2d, §4, 1905] 
 

paragraph 5: 
 

 

 

 

 

ε

′′ =

+ ′
ε ε
εε1
+
′

=

u

+
v w
vw
2
c

+1

=

u

=

c

+
c w
w
c

+

1

7

Einstein  introduces  his  kinematics  theorem  of  addition  of  velocities  in  his 

If w also has the direction of the x-axis v, we get 

 
It  follows  from  this  equation  that  the  composition  of  two  velocities  that  are  smaller  than  c  always 
results in a velocity that is smaller than c.  
It  also  follows  that  the  velocity  of  light  c  cannot    be  changed  by  compounding  it  with  a  (cid:147)subliminal 
velocity(cid:148). For this case we get: 
 

 

 

PoincarØ(cid:146)s  relation  is  formally  the  same  than  Einstein(cid:146)s  one  but  it  concerns 
only  the  systems  or  material points. The  most important difference between the two 
conceptions  consist  in  the  case  v  =  c.  Einstein  The  reader  could  be  think  that 
Einstein(cid:146)s substitution v = c is not fundamental but Einstein writes in his paragraph 4: 
 
For  v=c,  all  moving  objects  (cid:150)  considered  from  the  (cid:147)rest(cid:148)  system,  -  shrink  into  plane  structures.  For 
superluminal velocities our considerations become meaningless. 
 

We return now in the second part of the article. In his paragraph 8, Einstein deduced, 
after the Doppler relations, the mode of transformation of energy and frequency of what he 
calls a (cid:147)complex of light(cid:148). 
 
It is noteworthy that the energy and the frequency of a light complex vary with the observer(cid:146)s state of 
motion according to the same law. 
 

Many authors have of course underlined the similarity between quanta of light 
of January and complex of light of June. They generally said that Einstein(cid:146)s deduction 
of  proportionality  relation  between  frequency  and  energy  confirms  only  that 
Einstein(cid:146)s  SR  is  a  theory  of  principles  and  therefore  not  depending  of  a  classical  or 
quantum model of the light. It is necessary to say that but it is not sufficient because 
to  obtain  this  relation  energy-frequency,  Einstein  has  one  more  time  applies  the 
Lorentz transformation to a light point v = c (paragraph 8).  
 
The surface elements of the spherical surface [in K] moving with the velocity of light are not traversed 
by  any  energy.  We  may  therefore  say  that  this  surface  permanently  encloses  the  same  light complex. 
We investigate the quantity of energy from the system k, i.e. the energy of the light complex relative to 
the system k. 
 

In order to obtain his quantum relation, Einstein considers a quite singular limit case 

not only for the applying of LT but also for Maxwell-Lorentz equations themselves. 
Lorentz don(cid:146)t like this approach of the young Einstein writes in the final proceedings of the 
Conference in Brussels (1911): 
 
There is nothing in Maxwell equation that can encloses a quantity of energy in a limited volume 
 

The  light  complex  were  not  more  appreciated  that  by  the  physicists.  The  young 
Einstein was however not wrong because the volume and the energy changes in function of 
the time. In fact, Einstein treats, in a very singular manner, the Maxwell equations not as an 
wave equation but as equation of movement of a light point. Light complex is a finite volume 
around the light point characterised by a frequency. We find again to the limit the concept of 
event and that Einstein(cid:146)s representation of the light is deeply discontinuous.  
 

Penrose writes: 

 
To me it is virtually inconceivable that he would have put forward two papers in the same year which 
depended  upon    hypothetical  views  of  nature  that  he  felt  were  in  contradiction  with  each  other.[1. 
preface] 
 

We proved there is no contradiction: quanta of light and complex of light are 
on  the  same  side  of  the  quantum-classic  frontier  the  most  important  of  the  present 
physics.  When  the  young  When  Einstein  considers  the  Maxwell  equations  as  an 
application his kinematics of events, he doesn(cid:146)t treat them classically.  

8

His  treatment  consist  to  associate  to  a  point  light  wavy  properties  (the  first 
being  already  that  the  light  point  is  a  point  whose  the  speed  is  independent  of  the 
source  that  emits  it).    We  find  again  (cid:147)de  Broglie(cid:148)  but  not  for  the  electron  but  the 
photon, in the strong quantum sense of the concept. 

However, we don(cid:146)t want say here that SR, in the standard sense where SR is 
the group properties of Lorentz transformation, imposes a quantum conception of the 
light. Indeed we must now prove that there exist another SR based on a purely wavy 
representation of the light and on a implicit kinematics of material point. 
 

 

 

5-  PoincarØ(cid:146)s principles of implicit relativistic kinematics of deformable rods 
 
 
  
The main mistake of PoincarØ(cid:146)s supporters in the discover of SR (1905) is to 
extract elements in PoincarØ(cid:146)s work (for example, the synchronisation of the clocks, 
the  scepticism  with  respect  to  the  ether,  the  statement  of  principle  of  relativity,  the 
structure of  group of LT (cid:133)) and  to insert them in Einstein(cid:146)s logic (or axiomatic) in 
order to show that PoincarØ had Einstein before Einstein. This is of course unpleasant 
for Einstein but in my opinion also for PoincarØ. 

Indeed  with  this  method  of  extraction-insertion  it  is  absolutely  impossible  to 
understand  PoincarØ(cid:146)s  relativistic  logic.  PoincarØ(cid:146)s  logic  is  deeply  different  than 
Einstein(cid:146)s one because his theory of relativity proves the existence of the ether while 
Einstein(cid:146)s one proves the absence of this latter: this is truly an antinomy in the sense 
of Kant. 

I show in my book that the PoincarØ(cid:146)s scepticism dates back to long before his 
crucial  interest  for  Lorentz  theory  based  on  the  existence  of  the  ether  and  the 
electrons.  According  to  PoincarØ  the  main  problem  of  Lorentz  theory  is  his 
incompatibility with the principle of reaction (PoincarØ 1900): what is the dynamical 
force for responsible  of  the real contraction of length in ether ( Lorentz hypothesis, 
LH)? 

PoincarØ(cid:146)s  guide  for  the  theory  of  relativity  is  clearly  the  third  principle  of 
mechanics  in  the  same  epistemological  manner  that  the  second  principle  of 
thermodynamics  is  Einstein(cid:146)s  guide.  In  his  fundamentally  1905  work  he  determines 
this force exerted by the ether on the electron: 

But in the Lorentz hypothesis [LH], also, the agreement between the formulas does not occur just by 
itself; it is obtained together with a possible explanation of the compression of the electron under the 
assumption  that  the  deformed  and  compressed  electron  is  subject  to  constant  external  pressure,  the 
work done by which is proportional to the variation of volume of this electron.(cid:148) (my italics) [2d, intro.] 
 

PoincarØ(cid:146)s aim in his 1905 work is to show dynamically ( with his pressure of 
ether)  the  compatibility  between  the  principle  of  relativity  and  principle  of  real 
contraction: 
 
So Lorentz hypothesis [LH] is the only one that is compatible with the impossibility of demonstrating 
the  absolute  motion  [RP];  if  we  admit  this  impossibility,  we  must  admit  that  moving  electrons  are 
contracted such a manner to become revolution ellipsoids whose two axis remain constant [2d, § 7]. 
 

It is true that there is no theory of space-time in PoincarØ(cid:146)s 1905 work. There 
is  however  a  implicit  kinematics  (real  contraction  of  deformable  rod)  behind  his 

 

9

dynamics  (PoincarØ  deduce  fundamental  equations  of  relativistic  dynamics  by 
introducing the ether pressure) .  

Implicit  PoincarØ(cid:146)s  kinematics  is  based  on  two  postulates  (principle  of 
relativity  and  LH)  exactly  of  the  same  manner  that  explicit  Einstein(cid:146)s  kinematics  is 
based on two postulates (principle of relativity and light principle).  

 
PoincarØ(cid:146)s SR with ether implies another use of LT: 
 

In accordance with LH, moving electrons are deformed in such a manner that the real electron becomes 
an ellipsoid, while the ideal electron at rest is always a sphere of radius r ((cid:133)) The LT  replaces thus a 
moving real electron by a motionless ideal electron(cid:148). (2d, §6) 
 

In  order  to  illustrate  this,  we  can  use  Tonnelat(cid:146)s  diagram    [22]      (fig  1,  we 
adopt  PoincarØ(cid:146)s  and  Einstein(cid:146)s  respective  notations  in  the  following,  see  former 
respective quotations about LT): 

In Einstein(cid:146)s SR, the contraction of the moving rod γ-1L  is not real but is the 
reciprocal result of a comparison of measurement made on identical rods2 L from one 
system to the other with the well known use of LT (dashed lines). 

In PoincarØ(cid:146)s SR the contraction of the moving rod k-1L is by principle (LH) 
real in K(cid:146). By the use of LT the length of the rod in K(cid:146) (for observers in K(cid:146)) seems be 
equal to L. Reciprocally, we can of course reverse the role of  K and K(cid:146)(where ether is 
now chosen at rest) and reverse the continuous lines and dashed lines. 

The calculation with the LT is also very easy. Suppose the ether is chosen by 
definition at rest in K. The real length of the rod placed in the moving system K(cid:146) is 
thus k-1 L. The first LT x(cid:146) = k (x (cid:150) εt)  (cid:147)replaces(cid:148) (in PoincarØ(cid:146)s terms) in any time t 
(see below) the length moving real rod k-1L by a motionless rod L. 

According  to  PoincarØ  ,  the  real  differences  are  compensated  by  a  (cid:147)good  use(cid:148)  of  LT. 
According to Einstein, the identical processes seem to be different by another (cid:147)good use(cid:148) of LT. This is 
of course valid for the rods but also for the clocks. 

Now  we  must  show  that  PoincarØ(cid:146)s  LT  is  fundamentally  a  transformation  of 
the coordinates  of a material point and not a transformation of the co-ordinate of an 
event. 
 
5-  Independent  true  time,  material  points  and  wave  of  light  in  PoincarØ(cid:146)s  SR 
with ether 
 

We showed that ether plays an essential role in PoincarØ(cid:146)s SR. But  it is not an 
absolute ether in the sense of Lorentz.  Indeed, according to PoincarØ only a relative 
speed  can  be  measured  with  respect  to  the  ether.  The  group  structure  implies  that 
PoincarØ(cid:146)s  relativistic  ether  can  be  chosen,  for  all  the  couples  of inertial systems,  at 
rest  in  one  of  the  two  frames  but  the  other  is  then  in  movement  with  respect  to  the 
ether. The relativistic ether supposes that the light is a wave.  

The  direct  consequence  of  wavy  representation  of  the  light  is  PoincarØ(cid:146)s 
convention  of  synchronisation  based  on  the  duality  local  time  and  true  time.  Indeed 
the  two  inertial  system  are  not  in  the  same  state  of  movement  with  respect  to  the 

                                                           
2  Max  Born,  who  was  a  specialist  of  rigidity  in  Einstein(cid:146)s  special  relativity:  (cid:147)A  fixed  rod  that  is  at  rest  in  the 
system  S  and  is  of  length  1  cm,  will,  of  course,  also  have  the  length  1  cm,  when  it  is  at  rest  in  the  system  S(cid:146), 
provided that the remaining physical conditions are the same in S(cid:146) as in S. Exactly the same would be postulated of 
the  clocks.  We  may  call  this  tacit  assumption  of  Einstein(cid:146)s  theory  the  (cid:147)principle  of  the  physical  identity  of  the 
units  of  measure(cid:148).(cid:148)    [14,  my  italics  p252]  This  is  not  really  a  third  hypothesis  because  Einstein(cid:146)s  deduces  the 
identity of his rods from his relativity principle. The rigidity is not important. The important thing in the spirit of 
the young Einstein(cid:146)s text, is to postulate the existence in Nature of processes giving units of length and time. 

 

10

relativistic  ether.  In  his  talk  on  (cid:147)The  principles  of  mathematical  physics(cid:148),  PoincarØ 
considers optical signals as optical perturbations:  
 

1- (Two observers are at rest relative to ether, System K) 

“The most ingenious idea has been that of local time. Imagine two observers [A and B] who wish to 
adjust their watches by optical signals; they exchange signals, (…) And in fact, they [The clocks of A 
and B] mark the same hour at the same physical instant, but on one condition, namely, that the stations 
are fixed.  
  
2- (Two observers are moving relative to ether, System K’) 
In the contrary case the duration of the transmission will not be the same in the two senses, since the 
station A, for example, moves forward to meet the optical perturbation emanating from B, while the 
station B flies away before the perturbation emanating from A.” 
The watches adjusted in that manner do not mark, therefore the true time; they mark the local time, so 
that one of them goes slow on the other (de telle manière que l’une retarde sur l’autre). It matters little, 
since we have no means of perceiving it.” (…) 
(for exact compensation, we must add LH, former quotation) 
Unhappily, that does not suffice, and complementary hypotheses are necessary. It is necessary to admit 
that bodies in motion undergo a uniform contraction in the sense of the motion.” [2b]  

 

 

PoincarØ(cid:146)s  synchronisation  is  clearly  based  for  his  second  system  K(cid:146)  on  the 

duality of the true time t and the local time t(cid:146).  

This  is  PoincarØ(cid:146)s  (cid:147)tour  de  force(cid:148)  to  have  shown  that  his  second  principle 
(LH)  implies  for  the  local  time  (cid:150)  not  the  Lorentz  expression  t(cid:146)  =  t  +  εx  -  but  the 
expression given by the fourth LT: t(cid:146) = k (t + εx). 

We  proved3  that  Einstein(cid:146)s  radical  elimination  of  ether  implies  that  he 
prepares  identically  his  two  systems  K(t)  and  k(τ),  ((cid:147)light  clocks(cid:148)  or  better  (cid:147)clocks 
with photons(cid:148)) in the same state of synchronisation. 

This is the reason for which the duality true time-local time have no sense in 
Einstein(cid:146)s logic. PoincarØ(cid:146)s relativistic ether hasn(cid:146)t got a particular state of movement, 
but  his  two  systems  are  never  in  the  same  state  of  moving  relative  to  it.  This  is  the 
direct  consequence  of  the  wavy  nature  of  the  light  that  propagates  in  a  medium. 
PoincarØ(cid:146)s  local  time  is  not  a  internal  time,  given  by  identical  clocks,  in  the  second 
frame K(cid:146). 

The main interest here is the incompatibility of the concept of local time and 
the  concept  of  event.  The  local  time  t(cid:146)A=  k  (t  +  ε  xA)  (or  the  apparent  time  in  the 
vocabulary  of  PoincarØ)  is  a  time  that  depends  of  three  factors:  firstly  of  course  the 
independent  true  time  (independent  doesn(cid:146)t  mean  absolute),  secondly  of  the  speed 
(the difference of state of moving of  the two systems relative to ether) and thirdly of 
the place of the observer placed for example in A:  

Let  us  consider  one  point  at  true  time  with  the  true  coordinates  x,  y,  z.  What  will  be  the  apparent 
coordinates x(cid:146), y(cid:146), z(cid:146) at apparent time t(cid:146)? 
x(cid:146) =  k (x + εt), 

t(cid:146) = k  (t + εx) 

 y(cid:146)= y,     

z(cid:146) =  z, 

   

 

Let  us  the  units  by  such  a  way  that  the  speed  of  light  equals  to  1.  What  is  the  meaning  of  ε?  The 
translation velocity of the system in the sense of the x-axis et has the value (cid:150)ε.  
In the same way t(cid:146) is the apparent time, because in two points, the apparent time differs of the true time 
with a quantity proportional to the abscissa. [Cours a la Sorbonne, 3a] 

                                                           
3  Einstein(cid:146)s  synchronisation  of  identical  clocks  within  the  second  system  k  is  exactly  the  same  than  the 
synchronisation in the first system because the speed of light is of course exactly the same. (cid:147)It is essential to have 
time defined by means of stationary clocks in stationary system ((cid:133))(cid:148) [ §1, June 1905]. To do this [deduce LT] we 
have to express in equations that τ is nothing else than the set of data of clocks at rest in system k, which have been 
synchronized according to the rule given in paragraph 1(cid:148). 

 

11

 
The local time (apparent time) in A means that the time of an (cid:147)event(cid:148)4 in B is 
not the time given at the place B where this event occurs. This is not a time of event in 
Einstein(cid:146)s  sense  of the coincidence  of two independent events. It is not necessary to 
consider  the  distance  simultaneity  (necessarily  independent  events)  in  both  SR 
because already Einstein(cid:146)s definition of simultaneity (coincidence) at the same place 
is sufficient.  

Even if PoincarØ doesn(cid:146)t use the concept of event, let us introduce an (cid:147)event(cid:148) 
in weak sense i.e. in the sense of a point on the trajectory of material point. We must 
then of course have two material points to consider the simultaneity of two (cid:147)events(cid:148). 
We underline then that in the well known laplacian deterministic point of view of the 
classical  mechanics  the  two  (cid:147)events(cid:148)  considered  (for  example  the  two  points  are 
simultaneously  at  a  given  distance)  cannot  be  independent.  This  is  exactly  what 
PoincarØ admitted in his text on (cid:147)L(cid:146)espace et le temps(cid:148) en 1911 [3a]. 
the 

The  choice  between 

time  (PoincarØ)  and 

independence  of 

the 

independence of events (Einstein) is then clearly antinomic. 
 
Conclusion 
 

The fact that SR is basically considered as a theory of space-time implies that 

historically Einstein must be considered as the author of this theory.  

Indeed PoincarØ has not developed in 1905 as Einstein a kinematics based on 
two  principles  but  (cid:147)only(cid:148)  a  relativistic  dynamics  or  more  precisely  a  relativistic 
dynamic  of  continuous  medium.  But  the  opposition  between  SR  (cid:147)with  principles(cid:148) 
(Einstein)  and  SR  (cid:147)without  principles(cid:148)  (PoincarØ) 
is  superficial  (historical 
contingence)  because  it  is  easy  to  see  that  there  is  a  implicit  kinematics  of  material 
point and wave of light behind PoincarØ(cid:146)s relativistic dynamics. 

The  comparison  of  Einstein(cid:146)s  kinematics  of  events  with  PoincarØ(cid:146)s  implicit 
kinematics  of  material  point  is  very  interesting  because  it  shows  the  deep  and 
irreducible  singularity  not  only  about  Einstein(cid:146)s  principle  of  identity  of  units  of 
measure but also about Einstein(cid:146)s complex of light or photons.  

The  idea  of  a  (cid:147)fine  structure(cid:148)  of  SR  means  that  the  borderline  classical-

quantum, the main cut of the physics of XX century, passes between the two SR. 

The  reader  could  think  that  we  contest  that  Einstein(cid:146)s  SR  is  based  on 
principles because we show that it exist a quantum representation hidden behind this 
principles. But quantum theory is no longer a constructive or an heuristic theory as at 
the epoch of old quantum theory. The quantum theory is now considered as a theory 
of principles or a genuine picture of world.  

 The  existence  of  a  (cid:147)fine  structure(cid:148)  of  SR  opens  a  new  way  of  research  that 
consists to transform Einstein(cid:146)s SR (cid:150) without any change in his historical originality - 
under  the  (cid:147)enormous  pressure(cid:148)  of  classical  PoincarØ(cid:146)s  theory,  CSR)  in  a  real 
relativistic quantum theory (QSR) of the light (photons), the time (quanta of time) and 
the space (acausal zone).  

In others words, we can overtake the fierce concurrency between Einstein and 
PoincarØ  on  the  market  of  the  priorities  in  a  genuine  dialectical  interaction  between 

                                                           
4 Even if Poincaré doesn’t use concept of event let us introduce an “event” in weak sense i.e. in the sense of a point 
on the trajectory of material point. We must then of course have two material points to consider the simultaneity of 
two “events”. We underlines then that in the laplacian point of view of the classical mechanics the two “events” 
considered (for example the two points are simultaneously at a given distance) are not independent. 

 

12

the  two  complete  and  coherent  relativistic  logics.  The  philosophical  opposition 
(cid:147)continous-discontinous(cid:148) becomes then a physics opposition (cid:147)quantum-classic(cid:148). 
 

References 

 
Einstein 
[1a] Einstein(cid:146)s miraculous year, Five papers that change the face of physics, edited and introduced by 
John Stachel, Princeton University Press, 1998. 
 
[1b]  1907.  (cid:147)Relativit(cid:228)tsprinzip  und  die  aus  demselben  gezogenen(cid:148).  Folgerungen  Jahrbuch  der 

Radioaktivit(cid:228)t, 4, p 411-462 § 5, p 98-99. 

[1c] 1910 (cid:147)Principe de relativitØ et ses consØquences dans la physique moderne(cid:148) (1Łre des trois 
publications francophones-suisses- d(cid:146)Einstein). Archives des sciences physiques et naturelles, 29, p 5-
28 et 125-244. 
 
PoincarØ 
[2a]  1900.  (cid:147)La  thØorie  de  Lorentz  et  le  principe  de  rØaction(cid:148).  Archives  nØerlandaises  des  sciences 

[2b] 1904 (cid:147)Les principes de la physique mathØmatique(cid:148). CongrŁs international d(cid:146)Arts et de Sciences., 

[2c] 1905 (cid:147)La dynamique de l(cid:146)Ølectron(cid:148). Comptes rendus de l(cid:146)AcadØmie des sciences de Paris, 5 juin, 

exactes et naturelles, 2Łme sØrie, 5. 

exposition universelle (cid:224) Saint Louis. 

140, 1504-1508. 

[2d] 1905. (cid:147)Sur la dynamique de l(cid:146)Ølectron(cid:148). Comptes rendus de l(cid:146)AcadØmie des sciences de Palerme; 
dans Rendiconti d. Circ. mat. de Palermo, 21, 1906. 
 
 
[3a] Pierseaux Yves, (cid:147)La (cid:147)structure fine(cid:148) de la relativite restreinte(cid:148),Paris, L(cid:146)Harmattan, 1998  
[3b] Pierseaux Yves, (cid:147)Euclidean PoincarØ(cid:146)s SR and non Euclidean Einstein-Minkowski(cid:146)s SR(cid:148), PIRT, 
2000. 
 
[4] Born M. (cid:147)Einstein(cid:146)s theory of Relativity(cid:148) 1949 Dover, New York, 1965. original,  
[5] Tonnelat M.A. (cid:147)Histoire du principe de relativitØ (cid:148) (Flammarion, Paris, 1931).  

 

13

