The  manipulation  of  massive  ro-vibronic  superpositions  using
time-frequency-resolved  coherent  anti-Stokes  Raman  scattering
(TFRCARS): from quantum control to quantum computing

R. Zadoyan, D. Kohen,† D. A. Lidar,§ V. A. Apkarian, Department of Chemistry,
University of California, Irvine CA 92697-2025.

ABSTRACT

Molecular  ro-vibronic  coherences,  joint  energy-time  distributions  of  quantum
amplitudes,  are  selectively  prepared,  manipulated,  and  imaged  in  Time-
Frequency-Resolved  Coherent  Anti-Stokes  Raman  Scattering 
(TFRCARS)
measurements using femtosecond laser pulses.  The studies are implemented in
iodine  vapor,  with  its  thermally  occupied  statistical  ro-vibrational  density
serving as initial state. The evolution of the massive ro-vibronic  superpositions,
consisting  of  103  eigenstates,  is  followed  through  two-dimensional  images.  The
first- and second-order coherences are captured using time-integrated frequency-
resolved  CARS,  while  the  third-order  coherence  is  captured  using  time-gated
frequency-resolved  CARS.  The  Fourier  filtering  provided  by  time  integrated
detection  projects  out  single  ro-vibronic  transitions,  while  time-gated  detection
allows  the  projection  of  arbitrary  ro-vibronic  superpositions  from  the  coherent
third-order polarization. A detailed analysis of the data is provided to highlight
the  salient  features  of  this  four-wave  mixing  process.  The  richly  patterned
images  of  the  ro-vibrational  coherences  can  be  understood  in  terms  of  phase
evolution  in  rotation-vibration-electronic  Hilbert  space,  using  time  circuit
diagrams.  Beside  the  control  and  imaging  of  chemistry,  the  controlled
manipulation  of  massive  quantum  coherences  suggests  the  possibility  of
quantum  computing.  We  argue  that  the  universal  logic  gates  necessary  for
arbitrary  quantum  computing  –  all  single  qubit  operations  and  the  two-qubit
controlled-NOT (CNOT) gate – are available in time resolved four-wave mixing
in  a  molecule.  The  molecular  rotational  manifold  is  naturally  “wired”  for
carrying  out  all  single  qubit  operations  efficiently,  and  in  parallel.  We  identify
vibronic  coherences  as  one  example  of  a  naturally  available  two-qubit  CNOT
gate,  wherein  the  vibrational  qubit  controls  the  switching  of  the  targeted
electronic qubit.

                                                
† Present address: Smith College, Chemistry Department, Northampton, MA 01063.
§ Permanent address: Chemistry Department, University of Toronto, 80 St. George St., Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5S 3H6.

1

I. INTRODUCTION

Coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS) is a well established and broadly
applied  spectroscopic  tool,1,2  the  subject  of  textbooks.3,4,5  When  carried  out  with
ultrafast  lasers,  within  a  single  experiment,  CARS  combines  the  elements  of
preparation, manipulation, and interrogation of molecular coherences. These are
the key ingredients of quantum control, be it applied to quantum chemistry,6,7,8 or
quantum  computing.9,10  It  is  from  this  perspective  that  we  present  our  multi-
dimensional 
the  well-
characterized  system  of  diatomic  iodine  in  the  gas  phase,  and  at  room
temperature.

frequency-resolved  CARS  studies  on 

time-  and 

that 

coherences 

ro-vibronic 

Quantum  coherences  can  be  defined  by  their  two-dimensional  mapping
along  relevant conjugate  variables, such as time and energy.1 This is  familiar  in
practice  in  the  characterization  of  optical  pulses  by  such  means  as  frequency
resolved  optical  gating  (FROG).11  An  equivalent  characterization  of  molecular
coherences  is  enabled  through  joint  time-frequency-resolved  CARS  (TFRCARS)
spectroscopy.  This,  we  recently  demonstrated  through  time-gated,  frequency-
resolved detection of the anti-Stokes polarization (TGFCARS) in iodine vapor at
room  temperature.12  The  experiment  served  to  illustrate  that  the  third-order
coherence  of  the  molecule  could  be  imaged  directly  as  an  interferogram  on  the
time-frequency  plane,  and 
consisting  of
superpositions  of  103  states  could  be  rigorously  decomposed  in  such  maps.
There,  we  emphasized  that  although  fs  pulses  are  used,  the  third-order
coherence  in resonant  CARS  can  be  detected  with  rotational  resolution,  since  it
evolves freely until the unset of decoherence. In room temperature vapor iodine
ro-vibrational decoherence would  be  determined  by pure  dephasing  due  to  the
Doppler  inhomogeneous  width  of  lines  (t  ~  10-9s).  With  regard  to  chemical
dynamics,  this  implies  that  transients  captured  in  fs  time  can  be  analyzed  with
high  resolution  (∆ω  ~  0.02  cm-1).  Here,  we  extend  the  analysis  to  first-  and
second-  order  coherences,  detected  through  time-integrated  frequency-resolved
CARS.  As  in  our  prior  development,  we  maintain  the  intuitive  languages  of
discussing vibrational coherences in terms of wavepackets,13 while ro-vibrational
coherences14,15 are treated as  phase  evolution  in  vector  space.  As  an  example,  in
such a treatment, the counter-intuitive result that condensed phase CARS signals
should  be  more  deeply  modulated  than  in  the  gas  phase  can  be  understood  in
terms  of  the  spatial  extent  of  vibrational  superpositions.16  In  contrast,  the
description  of  time  evolution  of  rotational  superpositions  as  purely  phase
evolution  of  eigenstates  in  Hilbert  space  is  more  natural  and  suggestive  in
computational applications.

                                                
1 In keeping with common practice energy, frequency, wavelength and angular frequency are
interchangeably used in the text. The time-energy space is invariably refereed to as time-
frequency while the experimental data are presented on a time-wavelength axis.

2

interferometry,21,22 

The concept that the controlled manipulation of quantum coherences can
be  used  for  quantum  computation  or  information  transfer,  dates  to  an
annunciation  on  general  grounds  by  Feynman,17  followed  by  the  formal
arguments  presented  by  Deutsch.18  This  very  active  field  of  research  was  more
recently  catapulted  forward  by  the  development  of  algorithms  that  take
advantage of quantum parallelism to achieve exponential speed-up in particular
tasks. The most notable among these being Shor’s algorithm for factorization of a
number into its primes,19 and Grover’s search algorithm,2 to search an arbitrarily
large data base with a single query.20 The field has since advanced dramatically,
with  physical  proofs  of  principle  based  on  the  demonstration  of  universal
quantum  logic  gates,  realized  through  a  variety  of  experimental  approaches.
Among  examples  are:  all  optical 
cavity  quantum
electrodynamics,23  ion  traps,24  superconducting  Josephson  junctions,25  and  an
explosion of studies in NMR following the  initial propositions.26,27 More  specific
tasks,  such  as  a  search  algorithm  through  the  preparation  and  manipulation  of
Rydberg  Superposition  states  in  atomic  beams,28  have  also  been  demonstrated.
The  latter  belongs  to  the  category  that  does  not  require  entanglement,29  and
therefore  can  be  argued  that  does  not  allow  exponential  speed-up  without  the
expenditure of an exponential overhead in resources.30 Physical realizations that
involve entanglement,31 to-date, have been limited to several qubits (the quantum
analog of a bit),32 with extensions to larger numbers being a nontrivial challenge.
ro-vibronic
spectroscopy  of  molecular 
The  multidimensional  coherent 
coherences 
the  controlled  manipulation  of  massive  Quantum
involves 
superpositions; as such, it presents an  opportunity  for executing  quantum logic
on  a  very  large  manifold  of  states.  After  presenting  the  experimental  data  and
their interpretation, we discuss the natural structure of the tensor space in which
the ro-vibronic polarization is manipulated, and the naturally available “wiring”
of  quantum  logic  gates  for  computational  tasks.  The  massiveness  of  the  ro-
vibrational  superposition  that  is  manipulated,  consisting  of  103  states,  and  the
precision  with  which  coherences  can  be  transferred  between  ro-vibronic  states,
makes  the  system  particularly  attractive  for  computation  with  massive
parallelism.

Molecular  iodine  is  chosen  for  these  studies  because  of  its  spectroscopic
convenience,  well  characterized  spectroscopy,  and  the  fact  that  it  has  already
been  scrutinized  by  fs  CARS  experiment  and  theory  in  the  gas  phase.33,34,35,36
Although  unintended,  we  discover  several  unexpected  electronic  scattering
channels  in  iodine.  We  discuss  these  for  completeness.  The  multiple  electronic
resonances  that  lead  to  complexity  in  the  data  can  add  significant  flexibility  in
the tailored manipulation of electronic coherences.

Prior  to  presenting  the  experimental  results  and  their  analysis,  we
establish  the  frameworks  to  be  used  in  the  interpretation  of  vibronic  and  ro-

                                                
2 Although provably faster, Grover’s algorithm gives square root speed-up over classical
algorithms.

3

vibronic contributions to resonant CARS, along lines already introduced in two
preceding  papers.12,16  Coherent  Raman  scattering  (CRS)  is  a  four-wave  mixing
process that involves measuring the third-order material polarization in response
to  the  application  of  three  input  beams.5  The  fourth  rank  hyperpolarizability
tensor  that  mediates  the  process  allows  selectivity  by  experimental  control  on
time-orderings  and  Cartesian  components  of  the  applied  fields,  hence  the
proliferation of acronyms devised  to  highlight  specialization.  In  fs CARS, input
pulses  of  different  color  are  chosen  such  that  the  detected  coherent  material
polarization  occurs  to  the  blue  of  the  input  pulses.  Single  color  fs  CRS,  often
identified  by  its  frequency  domain  acronym  of  degenerate  four-wave  mixing
(DFWM), has been implemented in small gas phase molecules to explore aspects
of  molecular  control.37,38  In  condensed  media,  the  same  measurements  appear
under  the  heading  of  three-pulse  photon  echo.39,40  Both  time-gated41  and
frequency-resolved42,43  stimulated  photon  echo  measurements  have  been
performed,  which  combined,44  would  be  equivalent 
to  our  TGFCARS
experiments.  The  more  complete  four-wave  mixing  measurements  involve
heterodyne  detection  of  the  radiation,  to  yield  amplitudes  and  phases  of  all
fields.45,46, Heterodyne detected three-pulse photon echo measurements have been
extended to the infrared, and have been implemented to the study of peptides.47
Reviews  of  these  inherently  multi-dimensional  fs  spectroscopies  of  vibronic
excitations have recently appeared.48,49

A)  Vibronic  Coherences

In  time  resolved  CARS,  the  third-order  polarization,  P(3),  induced  by  the
application  of  three  short  laser  pulses  is  probed.3-5  As  in  the  more  common
implementations, here too, two  of the pulses are chosen to have the same color
and  are  identified  as  pump,  P  and  P’; while  the  third,  red-shifted  pulse  is
identified as Stokes, S. The signal consists of the polarization propagating along
− kS .  Choosing  both  pump  and  Stokes
+ kp’
the  anti-Stokes  wavevector,  k AS
+ )  ↔  B( 3 Π
colors to overlap the dipole allowed X( 1Σ
+ ) electronic transition, we
0g
0u

= k p

may expect the rotating wave approximation to hold, and the consideration may
be limited to scattering processes that are resonant in all orders. We will initially
restrict the consideration to the two-electronic state molecular Hamiltonian,

H = X HX X + B (HB

+ Te ) B

(1)

in which HB and HX are the vibrational Hamiltonians in the excited and ground
electronic  states,  respectively.  Within  the  interaction  representation  of  time
dependent  perturbation  theory,  P(3)  is  the  expectation  value  of  the  dipole
operator:50

4

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

P(3)(t) = ϕ
X

(t) ˆ µ ϕ
B

(1)(t) + c.c.
(2 )(t) ˆ µ ϕ
(t) + ϕ
B
X

( 0)

(3)

where

and

 

ˆ µ = µ( ϕ
X

ϕ
B

+ ϕ
B

ϕ

X )

ϕ(n) (t) = i
(cid:2)
(cid:1)(cid:1)

t

∫

−∞

dt’e

− iH (t − t’) ˆ µ ⋅E(t' )

ϕ(n −1)(t' )

with applied fields described by their envelopes  El(t):

E l(t) = ˆ ε 

l[El(t)e

−iω

lt + El

* (t)e

+iω

lt] where l = P, P’, S

The possible contributions to (2), which are generated by the permutations of the
P, P’, and S pulses in (5), can be illustrated by the familiar double-sided Feynman
diagrams,  as  in  Figures  1  and  2.  The  equivalent  time-circuit  diagrams,  which
prove useful in describing the material response in both state representation and
in classical51 or  semiclassical  propagations,52  are  also  shown  in  the  figures.  As  it
will become clearer, the time-circuit diagrams are quite useful in keeping track of
the material response in state space.

Choosing  ω

P  to  the  red  of  the  absorption  maximum  and  ω

S  outside  the
> kB T ),  only  the  first  term  in  Eq.  2  (Fig.  1)  can  be
absorption  band  ((cid:2)ω
electronically  resonant  in  all  three  pulses.  Further,  by  experimentally  choosing
the sequence P, followed by S, followed by P', we may transcribe the diagram in
Fig. 1 to the explicit third-order perturbation expression:13

− (cid:2)ω
s

p

(3) (t) = Pk AS
Pk AS

( 0,3)(t ) + Pk AS
t 2
t3

t

(3, 0)(t)

= k

∫
(cid:2) 3 dt3

−∞

∫

−∞

dt2

e
dt1

∫

−∞

−i (ω
P’

−ω
S

+ω

P )t

(cid:1)(cid:1)

+ c.c.

× ϕ

XeiH X t / = ˆ µ e−iH B (t −t 3 )/ = ˆ µ EP’(t3)e − iHX (t3 − t2 ) / = ˆ µ E S

* (t2 )e−iH B (t 2 −t1 ) / = ˆ µ E P(t1)e − iHX t1 / =ϕ

X

X

(0 )

The content of (6) can be readily visualized in the wavepacket picture of Fig. 3.
For all times, the bra state vector  ϕ
(t)  evolves subject to the bare, ground state
molecular Hamiltonian.  The fields act on the ket state.  At t1, the pump prepares
a wavepacket in the B state,  ϕ
(1) (t) , in the Franck-Condon window carved out
B
by  the  pump  laser.  In  this  first  order  coherence,  the  packet  on  the  B  potential
evolves until t = t2, when the Stokes pulse arrives.  The portion of the packet that
overlaps with the Stokes window can now be transferred to prepare the second-
order (or the Raman) packet,  ϕ
( 2)(t) . The Raman packet evolves on the X state
X
until t = t3, when the P’ pulse acts.  Now amplitude proportional to overlap of the

5

P

AS

− ω

− (2ω

Raman packet with the pump window is transferred to the B-state, to prepare the
third-order  packet  ϕ
(3) (t) .  In  this  third-order  coherence,  the  system  evolves
B
freely,  radiating  every  time  the  vibrational  packet  reaches  the  anti-Stokes
window,  which  is  located  at  the  inner  turning  point  of  the  B-state  potential
where  the  energy  conservation  condition  δ[ω
S )]  can  be  satisfied.
This  resonantly  created  third-order  polarization  will  persist  long  after  the
termination of pulses, until destroyed by collisions. Recursions in the third-order
polarization  imply  structure  in  the  AS  spectrum,  as  already  argued  and
demonstrated.12  If  we  make  an  analogy  with  photon  echo,  the  observable
recursions  in  the  third-order  polarization  would  be  more  appropriately
described as photon reverberations. Note, in first- and third-order the bra and ket
are in separate electronic states, therefore the system is in a ro-vibronic (rotation-
vibration-electronic)  coherence.  In  second-order,  the  Raman  packet  is  in  a  ro-
vibrational coherence in an electronic population on the X-state. Finally, note that
the complex conjugation indicated in (6) ensures that the third-order polarization
is real, and that a diagram conjugate to each of those illustrated in Figures 1 and
2 is operative in the process. The concepts of wavepackets and coherences derive
from  somewhat  different  starting  points;  nevertheless,  we  marry  the  languages
to take advantage of the intuition contained in each.

B) Ro-vibrational Coherences:

The complete rotation-vibration contribution to P(3) can be given in terms  of  the
density matrix in Hilbert space:

ρ(t) =  

∑  

∑

j

j ’

∑

χ’,v ’, j’

χ,v , j

m’= − j’

m = − j

∑ c(χ’, χ,v’,v, j’, j,m’, m) χ’,v’, j’,m’;t χ, v, j,m;t

(7a)

in  which  χ, v,  j,  m  designate  electronic,  vibrational,  rotational  and  magnetic
quantum  numbers  of  eigenstates  (χ,χ‘  =  X,  B).  After  three  interactions  with  the
laser field, the expectation  value of the dipole  over  the  third-order  polarization
Tr[ ˆ µ ρ(3)(t)]  is  measured.  Starting  with  a  given  initial  eigenstate  of  the  thermal
density  |X,v,j><X,v,j|,  the  dipole  operator  (3)  ensures  that  after  the  first
interaction with the radiation field the first-order coherence is prepared:

ρ(1)(t) =

∑ c(v,v’, j + 1, j) B,v’, j + 1;t X,v, j + c(v, v’, j − 1, j) B,v’, j − 1;t X,v, j

[

]+ c.c.

v’,v , j

= ϕ
B

(1)(t) ϕ

(0) (t) + ϕ

(1)(t) ϕ

(0) (t) + c.c.

B

X

X

(7b)

6

X

in which the state coefficients are a function of the applied field (4), and contain
Frank-Condon factors and rotational matrix elements. The second pulse prepares
the  electronic  population,  ρ(2)(t) = ϕ
(0) (t) + c.c.,  which  is  a  ro-vibrational
(2)(t) ϕ
coherence  ρ(2)(t) = ∑ c(v", j" ) X,v", j";t X,v, j;t + c.c.   with  j”  =  j,  j±2  and  v”  ≠  v
since P and S pulses do not have any spectral overlap. Finally, according to Fig.
1, in the four-wave process a given eigenstate is forward propagated on excited
→t43, then dipole projected back onto the
B→X→B states over the intervals t21
original  eigenstate  and  propagated  in  reverse-time  over  the  t34  interval.  This
three-time correlation contributes a unity (reaches its maximum value) when the
phase accumulated over the time-circuit is an integer multiple of 2π:3

→t32

X

Ω(t;’,",’’’) = [Ev, j
= ω
v , j
= 2πn

X (t1
X t41

(cid:1)(cid:1)

B

− t 4 ) + Ev’’’, j’’’
+ ω
B
v’’’, j’’’

(t4
+ ω
X
v ", j"

− t3) + Ev ", j"
(t3
+ ω
B t12
t23

t34

v ’, j’

X

− t2 ) + Ev ’, j’

B (t2

− t1)]/ (cid:2)

(8)

B
v ’, j +1

− ω
v , j

This defines the condition for phase coherence in CARS, for a given path in state
space. Note, for a given path in vibrational space – v, v’, v”, v’’’ – the ∆j=±1 dipole
selection  rules  lead  to  six  rotational  paths  to  close  the  time-circuit.  This  is
illustrated  in  Fig.  4,  in  a  standard  diagram  showing  optical  transitions  with
vertical arrows (Fig. 4a), and in a schematic “wiring” diagram (Fig. 4b). The bra-
state,  <v,j;t|,  represented  by  the  lower  line  in  Fig.  4b,  acts  as  a  reference  for
defining instantaneous phases of the evolving ket-states. Thus, the instantaneous
complex  amplitudes  in  the  coherent  superposition  a’|v’,j+1><v,j|  +  b’|v’,j-
−iΩ’(t)   with
the  P-pulse  are  given  as:  a’(t) = c’e
1><v,j|  prepared  by 
Ω(t) = (ω
X )(t − t1 ), where c’ is determined by the laser field and transition
matrix elements. For a laser pulse short in comparison to ro-vibrational periods,
phase  evolution  under  the  pulses  may  be  ignored.  Thus,  the  amplitudes  in  the
final  superposition  a’’’|v’’’,j+1><v,j|  +  b’’’|v’’’,j-1><v,j|  are  controlled  by  the
interference  between  the  three  paths  that  connect  each  of  the  final  j±1  pair  of
eigenstates  to  the  initial  coherent  j±1  pair,  with  path  lengths  controlled  by  the
delay between laser pulses. The detectable polarization consists of contributions
from closed circuits from each of the thermally occupied initial eigenstates, as a
squared, real quantity with a definite phase. Since it is the bulk polarization that
is  detected  experimentally,  and  the  individual  time-circuits  starting  from  each
statistical initial state is phase-locked by the sudden action of the P-pulse at t = t1,
all components of the radiation may interfere among themselves. Both phase and
magnitude  information  is  contained  in  the  polarization,  and  can  be  retrieved46
                                                

3 Contrary to the practice of identifying the ground state quantum numbers with double
primes,  we  will  identify  the  ground  state  indices  without  primes  while  first,  second  and  third
order states are identified with one, two, and three primes, respectively.

7

(phase,  to  within  a  sign  in  the  present  measurements).  We  will  discuss  the
information  stored,  manipulated,  and  retrieved  in  the  various  order  quantum
coherences after presenting the experiment and its analysis.

II. EXPERIMENTAL

Experimentally, it is more natural to think about the four-wave mixing process in
terms  of  bulk  polarization.3  In  the  long-wave  limit,  the  third-order  bulk
susceptibility  probed  in  CARS,  P(3),  results  from  molecular  contributions,  P(3)  =
NP(3),  where  N  is  the  molecular  number  density,  and  the  third-order  molecular
polarization is the response to three applied fields mediated by the fourth rank
hyperpolarizability tensor, γ:

(3 )

Pρ

(ω

0,t) =

∑ γρστν(−ω

∑

στν

(1,2,3)

0 ,ω

1,ω

2 ,ω

3 )Eσ(k3

ω

3 ,t3)Eτ(k2

ω

2,t2 )Eν(k1

ω

1,t1)

(9)

≡ ω
We use two colors for the three input beams: ω
S ,
1
in the forward BOXCARS arrangement illustrated in Figure 5.53 The three beams
propagating  along  separate  wavevectors,  after  passing  through  separate  delay
lines, are brought into focus using a single achromatic doublet (fl = 25 cm). Two
∫
(t) = drei(k P
pinholes serve to spatially filter,  Pk AS
, the forward-scattered
coherent polarization along the anti-Stokes (AS) wavevector:

P’ and ω

≡ ω
P

= ω
3

− k S )rP

= ω

+k P’

2

( 3 )

(3 )

with associated energy conservation condition:

k AS

= k p

+ kp’

− kS

ω
0

≡ ω

= 2ω

P

− ω
S

AS

(10a)

(10b)

In  conventional  implementations,  the  signal  consists  of  the  directional
coherent AS polarization collected with a single element square-law detector, as
a function of delay between pulses:

S(t1,t 2,t 3) = dt 4[

∫

Pk AS

(3)(t4 ;t3,t2 ,t1)]2

(11)

Instead,  we  record  the  spectrally  resolved  AS  radiation  in  one  of  two  modes:
time-integrated or time-gated detection.

In  Time-integrated  frequency-resolved  CARS  (TIFRCARS),  the  spatially
filtered  AS  polarization  is  dispersed  in  a  1/4-m  monochromator  and  detected
using a CCD array. The integration is over t≡t4, and since pulsed lasers are used,
the limits of integration can be extended to ±∞:

8

IAS (ω;t1,t2 ,t3 ) = [ dte

−iωt

(3)(t)]2

PAS

(12)

∞

∫

−∞

The  recorded  AS  spectrum  is  composed  of  the  signal  elements  (pixels)  of  the
array

S(ω

0 ) = [ dω∫

f (ω− ω

∫
0 ,δω) dte− iωt

(3)(t)]2

PAS

∞

−∞

= [ dω∫

f (ω− ω

0 ,δω)PAS

(3)(ω)]2

(13)

∞

−∞

∞

−∞

0

with  f(ω-ω
,δω) defined  as  the  amplitude  bandpass  of  the  spectrometer.  By
selecting  the  time  delays  between  pulses,  t1,  t2,  t3,  the  time  integrated  spectrum
(12) yields images of the first and  second  coherences. Thus,  following  the  time-
circuit diagram in Fig. 1, the AS spectrum obtained as a function of t21 with t32 = 0
(i.e., with P pulse preceding the coincident S and P’ pulses), yields the evolution
in first-order coherence:

S(ω,t21) = S(ω;δ[t3

− t2 ],t2

− t1) ≡ S(ω,t< )

∫
= [ dte −iωt

(3)(t,δ[t3
PAS

− t2 ],t2

− t1 )]2

(14a)

Similarly, the time integrated spectrum obtained with coincident P and S pulses,
δ[t2-t1], as a function of delay of the P’ pulse, yields the evolution in second–order
coherence:

S(ω,t32) = S(ω;t3

− t2 ,δ[t2

− t1 ]) ≡ S(ω,t> )

∫
= [ dte−iωt

PAS

(3)(t,t3

− t2 ,δ[t2

− t1 ])]2

(14b)

Since  P  and  P’  pulses  are  identical,  in  practice,  one  of  the  pump  pulses  is
overlapped in time with the Stokes pulse and the second pump pulse is scanned
in  time.  The  experimental  convention  uses  negative  time,  S(t<),  to  identify
measurement  in  first-order  coherence  over  t21,  and  positive  time  signal,  S(t>),  to
in  second-order  coherence,  over  t32.
identify  measurement  of  evolution 
Experimentally, coincident pulses imply two pulses with a relative delay that is
small  in  comparison  to  their  width.  The  relative  delay  is  adjusted  while
optimizing a particular signal.

Time-gated frequency-resolved CARS (TGFCARS) is implemented by passing
the AS beam through a Kerr gate before entering the monochromator. The Kerr
cell  consists  of  a  5-mm  long  cuvette  filled  with  CS2,  held  between  a  cross-
polarized pair of prisms (see Fig. 5).  A few percent of the 800 nm fundamental of

9

the  Ti:Sapphire  laser,  polarized  at  45°  relative  to  the  CARS  beam  and  passed
through a separate delay line, is used to induce Kerr rotation in the cell.  Spatial
and  temporal  overlap  of  the  gate  pulse  with  the  CARS  pulse  is  obtained  using
the  non-resonant  signal  from  air.    This  also  provides  a  calibration  of  the  gate
width,  δt  =  500  fs,  in  agreement  with  the  known  Kerr  response  of  CS2.54    For  a
fixed  time  sequence  of  input  pulses,  the  CARS  spectrum  as  a  function  of  gate
delay, t4, yields the two-dimensional image of the evolving third-order coherence

S(ω

∫
0 ,t4 ) = dtg(t4

− t,δt)S(ω

0 ,t)

  

(15)

Since, the width of the Kerr gate is comparable to vibrational periods in iodine;
the signal will smooth over the vibrational modulation. The  spectral  resolution,
δ, is determined by the broader of the spectrometer bandpass or the inverse gate
width:  δ2  =  δω2+c-2δt-2.  TGFCARS  is  similar  to  heterodyne  detection,  however,
since the pulses used in the experiment are not phase  locked,  only  an envelope
function appears in (15), and phase information is lost.
The  fs  laser  source  used  in  these  experiments  consists  of  a  Ti:Sapphire
 
oscillator,  which  is  chirped  pulse  amplified  at  1  kHz  to  an  energy  of  700
µJ/pulse, and compressed to a pulse width of 70 fs.  The pulse is split with a 50%
beam splitter to pump two three-stage optical parametric amplifiers (OPA).  The
OPA output is frequency up-converted by sum generation, to provide tunability
in the 480-2000 nm spectral range. The time-frequency profiles of the pulses are
adjusted  with  two-prism  compressors  following  each  OPA.  The  pulses  are  not
transform-limited. The OPA output is adjusted to yield a bandwidth of 450 cm-1.

Critical alignment of beams in space and time is crucial for the successful
execution  of  the  experiments.    This  is  achieved  by  first  optimizing  the  non-
resonant CARS signal  obtained from a 200 µm thick glass plate,  then  removing
the  plate  and  optimizing  the  non-resonant  CARS  signal  from  air,  and  finally
inserting  the static  quartz  cell  containing  I2  heated  to  50°C  in  the  beam  overlap
region. The cell is positioned to optimize the signal, then beam paths are adjusted
to compensate for changes introduced by the cell windows.

III. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

A)  The ro-vibrational third-order coherence – TGFCARS:

A  time-gated,  frequency-resolved  CARS  (TGFCARS)  spectrum  is  shown  in
Figure  6.  The  image  was  obtained  with  coincident  S+P’  pulses,  t23  =0,  delayed
from  the  P  pulse  by  one  vibrational  period  in  the  B  state,  t12  =  380  fs.  A  nearly
identical image is obtained with all three pulses in coincidence, t12=t23=0. The AS
polarization,  which  is  patterned  by  interference  among  ~103  ro-vibrational

10

transitions  is  followed  for  55  ps,  with  an  effective  resolution  of  20  cm-1.  This
direct  image  of  the  third-order  coherence  was  previously  analyzed  in  some
detail.12 The main features of the interferogram are easily understood:

a)  An  intense  signal  occurs  at  t  =  0,  which  within  1.5  ps  decays  to  a  12  ps
period  of  silence  indicating  complete  destructive  interference.  At  t  =  0,
since  Ω  =  0  for  all  eigenstates  in  the  superposition,  all  states  radiate  in
phase.  Given  the  dense  manifold  of  ro-vibrational  states  under  the
sampling gate, the initial decay is simply the dephasing time given by the
inverse  of  the  detection  bandpass  (20  cm-1).  The  period  of  silence
corresponds  to  a  flat  distribution  of  phases  of  rotational  transitions
collected under the time-frequency window of detection.

b)  As  the  highest  observable  rotational  states  execute  an  Ω  =  2π  phase
rotation, Eq. 8, the polarization reappears, and develops into five chirped
trails  of  rotational  revivals  in  the  five  vibrational  states  v  =31-36  of  the
third-order wavepacket. The periodicity of recursions  can  be  understood
as the beat between adjacent spectral components of the polarization. The
hyperbolic trails result from the inverse dependence of recursion time, τ
r,
on rotational quantum number:
 1/τ

r = 2(B”-B’)j/c

(16)

where  B”  and  B’  are  the  rotational  constants  in  the  ground  and  excited
states, respectively.12

c)  The  trails  develop  a  complex  pattern  due  to  interference  between
different  rotational  transitions  of  a  single  vibrational  transition,  as  the
difference between rotational recursions  (winding  numbers)  of  rotational
states in a given vibration increases with time. Interference also occurs as
rotational  recurrences  from  different  vibrations  overlap  in  the  time-
frequency plane.

All  details  of  the  two-dimensional  interferogram  can  be  reproduced  using  the
accurately known spectroscopic constants of iodine,55 as shown in the simulation
in  Fig.  6.  The  image  of  the  third-order  polarization  is  reconstructed  by
considering the AS radiation sampled under the time-frequency gate, consisting
of P- and R-branch transitions ( j-1→j and j+1→j ):

S(ω,t4 ) =
(cid:1)(cid:1)

ω−δω

 
 
 

∫

ω−δω

t −δt
∫
dω dt
t +δt

g(ω,t − t4 )

∑ e

X

−βE v, j

∑

v ,v’"

j

[c(v, j,v’’’, j ± 1)e

−i (Ev "’, j ±1

B

− E v , j

X )t 4 / =

2
 
 
]
 

(17)

with coefficients:

11

c(v, j, v’’’, j ± 1) = µ

BX

4 c( j, j ± 1)c(v,v’’’)δ[EL
4 + D
4 [D

2 D

+ D

− E v, j ]3
2 D

2

2

j , j±1

j , j ±1

j , j B1

j , j±1

j ±1, j ±2

= µ
BX

(cid:1)(cid:1)

× E(ω

p)E(ω

S)E(ω

p )δ[(cid:2)ω

p

− Ev’’’ j’’’,v’’ j’’]δ[(cid:2)ω

S

∑
]
v ’,v "

v v’’’ v’’’ v’’ v’’ v’ v’ v

− Ev " j", v’j’ ]δ[(cid:2)ω
p
(18a)

− Ev’ j’, vj]

where, for linearly polarized all-parallel fields56

Dj, j ±1

=

j∑ j,m 10 j ± 1,m

m = − j

(18b)

While  their  evaluation  is  straightforward,  since  within  the  sampling  bandpass
the transition coefficients are slow functions of wavelength, we set c(v,j,v’’’,j±1) =
1 in the simulations. The good comparison between  simulation  and  experiment
in Fig. 6 validates this approximation, and suggests robustness of the detectable
polarization.  The  latter  consideration  is  quite  valuable  in  the  quantum
computational applications to be considered.

The interference structure in the third-order polarization occurs on several
time-frequency scales, therefore the detected image can vary substantively with
the choice of laser  colors.  The  simulations  in Fig.  7  and  8  are  instructive  in  this
regard.  They  are  used  to  illustrate  the  interference  pattern  on  a  spectral  range
much larger than the experiment. In Fig. 7a the recursion trails of the P-branch of
transitions from v’’’= 34 is shown. In Fig. 7b, both P- and R- branches of v’’’ = 34
are  included  to  show  the  interference  between  rotational  branches  of  a  single
vibrational band. Fig. 8 illustrates the third-order polarization for v’’’ = 26-45 in
the  B  state.  The  image  in  Fig.  8a  is  obtained  by  summing  over  the  squared
transition  probabilities,  as  opposed  the  squared  sum  required  by  Eq.  17  and
shown in Fig. 8b. This allows the illustration of the ro-vibrational revivals, with
and  without  interference  among  the  transitions.  Remarkably,  the  intricate,
predictable pattern that arises after a few rotational revivals (the slow pattern of
interferences  in  8b  reflects  the  variation  of  vibration  dependent  rotational
constants), is expected to last until decoherence, therefore until t ~10-9s.57

B)  First- and second-order coherences – TIFRCARS:

Time-integrated frequency-resolved CARS (TIFRCARS) spectra, as a function of
time  delay  between  P  and  coincident  S+P  pulses  are  shown  in  Figure  9a;  with
representative temporal and spectral slices shown in Figures 9b and 9c.  The data
were acquired with non-transform limited pulses, with pump centered at λ
P = 553
nm (∆λ
S = 20 nm, ∆τ
P = 70 fs) and Stokes centered at λ
S
=  90  fs).  The  time-integrated  spectra  in  Fig.  9c  identify  the  ro-vibrational
composition of the prepared third-order coherence. Vibrational recursions which
form  the  high  frequency  modulation  of  the  time  slices  in  Fig.  9b,  appear  as
stripes  in  the  time-frequency  image  in  Fig.  9a.  At  t  =  0,  when  the  three  input

S = 577 nm (∆λ

P = 15 nm, ∆τ

12

pulses overlap, a dense, nearly structureless spectrum which arises from multiple
interaction  diagrams  is  observed,  see  Fig.  9b.  Upon  introducing  delays  longer
than a vibrational period in the excited or ground electronic state, the scattering
signal  intensity  drops,  and  significantly  simplified  spectra  emerge.  We  will  be
concerned  with  the  signal  at  finite  time  delays,  when  the  P  pulse  is  delayed  or
advanced relative to the coincident P+S pair, as defined by Eq. 14. In Figure 10,
we show the same data as in Fig. 9, now stretched to time delays  of t = ±25 ps.
The  time  step  in  these  scans  is  correspondingly  coarser,  ∆t  =  100  fs,  suitable  to
obtain images of rotational recursions.

Evolution in first order coherence is followed over the t12 interval, or at negative
time  according  to  our  convention  (14a).  At  ω
P  =  553  nm,  the  P  pulse  prepares  a
packet centered near v’ = 22 in the B state, and  the observed period of 370 fs is
consistent  with  the  87cm-1  spacing  of  vibrational  levels  at  this  energy:  τ  =
(cid:1)/[E(v=22)-E(v=21)] = 380 fs. At 0 > t > -2ps, the waveform is deeply modulated; it
consists  of  sharp  vibrational  recurrences  which  lose  intensity  with  time,  as  the
rotational  density  starts  to  evolve.  Rotational  revivals  occur  with  a  wide
dispersion  in  time,  for  t  <  -2ps,  leading  to  the  slow  rolling  background.  Once
rotational  phases  spread,  vibrational  recurrences  appear  with  greatly  reduced
depth  of  modulation.  As  ro-vibrational  states  which  have  executed  different
numbers of periods (windings) overlap, the vibrational recursions blur, and  the
fast  modulation  is  nearly  eliminated  at  t<  -6  ps,  see  Fig.  9b.  The  spectral  slices
provide complementary information and check the consistency of interpretation.
The spectrum at t = - 2ps consists of the vibronic progression B(v’ = 27-34) → X(v
= 0).  At this early time in the evolution of rotational phases, the band profile of
each  vibration  approximates  the  thermal  distribution  of  rotational  states,  with
population peaking near j =  50.   This spectrum  also allows to establish that  the
contribution  of  transitions  terminating  on  v  =  1  is  negligible  (less  than  5%).  As
time progresses, see the slice at t = - 4ps, the rotational band profiles sharpen and
shift to lower j states, to states which have not yet evolved out of phase. At later
time,  at  t  =  -6ps  and  t  =  -8ps,  the  spectra  lose  definition,  retaining  little
resemblance  to  the  trivially  recognizable  spectrum  at  t  =  -2  ps.  The  spectral
features  now  consist  of  a  congested  set  of  ro-vibrational  resonances,  due  to
overlapping  ro-vibrational  transitions  that  fall  within  the  spectral  bandpass  of
the monochromator.

Evolution in the second-order coherence is followed over the t32 time interval, or at
positive  time  according  to  our  convention  (14b).  This  tracks  the  evolution  of  the
Raman packet on the X state. The persistent shallow modulation observed in the
waveforms  in  Fig.  9b,  occur  with  a  period  of  160  fs.  This  is  consistent  with  a
packet  near  X(v”  =  4),  which  could  also  be  inferred  from  the  Raman  resonance
condition ω = ω
S,. In contrast, the set of prominent peaks at 0 < t < 1ps in the
541  nm  waveform  show  a  period  of  350fs.  Quite  clearly,  these  vibrational
resonances do not belong in the ground electronic state – they are not part of the
Raman  packet  created  by  the  P+S  pulses.  Evidently,  an  additional  scattering

P-ω

13

channel contributes to the signal.  This is re-enforced by the congested spectra at
positive  time  (see  Fig.  9c),  which  do  not  show  a  simple  vibrational  progression
even at early time. This additional scattering channel cannot be  reconciled with
the two-electronic state Hamiltonian that we have assumed until now. Resonant
scattering  over  yet  another  electronic  state  is  implicated.  To  be  certain,  we
consider the explicit wavepacket simulation of the 2-D image of vibronic CARS
within the two-electronic state Hamiltonian.

C) Numerical simulation of vibronic TIFRCARS:

Ignoring all rotational contributions, the vibronic CARS spectra are simulated by
the  wavepacket  propagation  method  of  Kosloff  and  Kosloff.58  The  simulations
were performed assuming that the laser fields only couple the X and B electronic
potentials,  which  are  both  described  as  Morse  functions.59  The  various  order
wavepackets  are  obtained  sequentially  according  to  Eq.  4,  by  integrating  the
time-dependent Hamiltonian, starting with:

∂
∂t

i(cid:2)
(cid:1)(cid:1)

ϕ
X

(0 )(t) = HX

ϕ
X

(0)(t)

(19)

and evaluating all contributions to the third-order polarization:

∂
∂t

i(cid:2)
(cid:1)(cid:1)

ϕα

(n )(t) = Hα ϕα

(n)(t) + µαβEl(t)e

± iω

l t ϕβ

(n −1)(t)  

(20)

where l = P, S, P’ and for n even, α = X and β = B while for n odd, α = B and β =
X. The  third-order polarization  in  this  perturbation  treatment  is  represented  by
the  sequential  absorption  and  emission  of  photons  (−ω
l,  respectively,
when acting on the ket state). For the laser envelope,  El(t), a Gaussian of fwhm =
P = ω
70 fs is used, with a transform limited spectral width of 210 cm-1. Taking ω
= 550 nm, and ω
S = 571.5 nm, all permutations of the  fields  in  (20)  generate  ten
different-order packets, which are simultaneously propagated for 20 ps. The time
dependent  spectra  are  then  evaluated  by  Fourier  transformation  of  the  third-
order time dependent polarization along the AS direction:

l,  and  +ω

P’

S(ω,τ) =

dte

(3)

−iωtP2k P − kS

(t,τ)

2

∞

∫

−∞

(21)

The  calculated  time-frequency  image  is  shown  in  Figure  11.  The  simulated
spectra have been convoluted with a Gaussian of fwhm = 70 fs to compensate for
the absence of rotations in the comparisons with experiment.

14

Since,  all  possible  timing  diagrams  are  explicitly  included  in  the
computation, their contribution to the final observables can be directly assessed.
Thus, at negative time, the AS polarization formally consists of:

(3)

P2k P −k S

(t) = ϕ

(0) ˆ µ ϕ
B
X

(3)(ω

P ’, −ω

S ,ω

P,t) + ϕ

X

(2) (ω

S, −ω

(1)(ω

P’,t) + c.c.

 while at positive time (see diagrams in Fig. 2):

(3)

P2k P

−k S

(t) = ϕ

(0) ˆ µ ϕ
B
X

(3)(ω

P ’, −ω
P ’,t) ˆ µ ϕ

S ,ω
P,t)
(1) (ω

B

+ ϕ
X

(2)(ω

S, −ω

P,t) + ϕ

X

(2) (ω

S ,−ω

(1)(ω

P’,t) + c.c.

B

P ,t) ˆ µ ϕ
B
(22)

P,t) ˆ µ ϕ
(23)

For the chosen input pulses, the contribution from the first term in both (22) and
(23)  is  three  orders  of  magnitude  larger  than  the  rest  of  the  terms.  Hence  the
importance of the time-circuit diagram in Fig. 1 which has been used in all of our
discussions.  The  closed  nature  of  the  time  circuit  diagrams  implies  that  each
initial  statistical  state  can  be  separately  evaluated,  and  co-added  to  obtain  the
overall  signal.  As  such,  it  is  verified  that  although  the  thermal  occupation  of
B(v=1)  is  35%,  its  contribution  to  the  final  spectrum  is  negligible  (<1%).  This  is
the result of the strong selectivity of the nonlinear CARS process, as expressed by
the weights of states in Eq. 18.

The agreement between simulation and data over the t12 interval (negative
time) is quite acceptable, given that rotations are not included in the simulation.
The  simulation  predicts  a  rather  simple  vibrational  progression.  The  first
recursion occurs with a  relatively  compact packet,  giving  a  pulse width limited
signal.  Due  to  the  anharmonicity  of  the  potential,  the  recurrences  in  the  signal
broaden with time and develop a chirp. By the tenth recurrence, near t = 4 ps, the
packet  splits  and  shows  a  doubling  in  the  signal,  in  good  agreement  with  the
experimental 2-D image of Fig 9a.

The  predicted  image  at  positive  time  is  rather  similar  to  that  at  negative
time. It consists of a simple vibrational progression, now with a recurrence given
by  the  X-state  vibrational  period.  The  simulation  does  not  reproduce  the
congested  and  strongly  blue  shifted  spectrum  observed  in  the  experiment  at
positive time (see Fig. 9c). Indeed, in the two-electronic state Hamiltonian, if time
evolution is ignored under the laser pulses, then the spectral composition of the
CARS signal should be symmetric  in time. This  would  be  the  expectation  if  we
were  to  note  that  states  in  the  third-order  superposition  are  determined  by
energy  conservation,  δ[E-(2ω
S)].  Evolution  of  the  molecular  Hamiltonian
under  the  laser  pulses  breaks  this  symmetry.  The  simulations  show  that  at
negative  time,  the  spectral  intensity  peaks  near  530  nm,  near  the  wavelength
predicted  by  the  energy  conservation  condition  (10a).  At  positive  delay,  the
spectral maximum of the third order polarization shifts down by two vibrational
quanta,  to  533  nm.  The  down-shift  is  the  result  of  chirp  generated  by  the
sequential  action  of  two  pulses  on  a  fast  evolving  packet,60,61  which  is  a  process

P-ω

15

inherent  to  resonant  Raman  preparation.  Despite  the  spectral  shift  of  two
vibrational  quanta,  inspection  of  the  Wigner  distribution  of  third-order  packet
created  after  one  period  of  evolution  in  either  first  or  second  order  coherence
does not reveal any clear difference. The vibrational superposition is essentially
unchanged.

The  simulated  spectral  asymmetry  in  time  is  in  the  opposite  direction  of
what is observed in the experiment in  Fig. 9c. We  have  verified  experimentally
that  the  spectral  envelopes  and  their  time-asymmetry  are  sensitive  to  small
delays  in  time  overlap  of  the  nominally  coincident  S+P  pulses.  Similarly,
although not systematically studied, we have verified that spectral envelopes are
sensitive  to  the  chirp  in  the  laser  pulses.  Either  the  chirp  of  the  lasers  must  be
included  in  the  simulations,  or  chirp  must  be  eliminated  from  the  pulses  to  be
more quantitative in this comparison. At present, we do not fully understand the
bi-modal spectral distribution observed at positive time (see spectrum at t = 2ps
in  Fig.  9).  An  intriguing  possibility  is  the  interference  between  preparation  of
Raman  packets  via  the  B  and  B”  surfaces  (see  Fig.  12).  Indeed,  interference
between these two channels has been identified previously in the analysis of the
resonant Raman spectra of iodine in rare gas solids.62

D) P(1,2)(t)
   

 contribution – Interference between vibronic packets:

Laser chirp cannot explain the vibrational recurrences that appear at 0<t<1ps in
the waveforms for λ = 532 nm – 541 nm in Fig. 9b. This set of recurrences appears
most  prominently  in  the  541  nm  waveform,  where  as  many  as  four  resonances
are  observed  with  a  period  of  350  fs,  over  a  background  modulated  at  twice
higher frequency by the vibrational packet on the X state. The observed period is
too slow to be assigned to a packet on the X state, and it is distinctly faster than
the 380 fs period of the packet prepared by the pump pulse near v = 22 of the B
state.  A  packet  near  v=  19  of  the  B  state  would  have  the  observed  period.
However,  energetically,  such  a  packet  could  not  be  prepared  with  the  pulses
used.  Moreover,  if  prepared,  it  would  not  be  expected  to  decay  as  rapidly  as
observed.  Since  the  simulations  succeed  in  capturing  the  negative  time  image,
and  since  they  contain  all  timing  diagrams  of  the  third-order  polarization,  we
may  conclude  that  these  anomalous  vibronic  resonances  involve  an  additional
electronic state in the molecular Hamiltonian.

A  consistent  interpretation  of  this  scattering  channel  is  obtained  by
considering  the  interferometric  signal  between  two  vibrational  packets  in  the  B
state, separately prepared by the pump and Stokes pulses near v = 22 and v = 14,
and cross-correlated via a transition to a short-lived excited electronic state. The
suggested time-circuit diagram for this process is given in Figure 12. It assumes
optical  coupling  between  the  B  state  and  a  higher  lying  electronic  surface  that
can be reached  with  the P’-photon. Energetically,  a  manifold  of  I*+I  and  I*  +  I*
repulsive potentials are accessible. We assume in the figure that the transition is

16

B(0u)↔I*I*(0g),  which  we  have  previously  analyzed.63    To  be  clear,  consider  the
transcription  of  the  time-circuit  diagram  of  Fig.  12  to  the  explicit  perturbation
expression for a given spectral component of the AS polarization:

P(1,2) (ω

As) = dt

∫ ϕ

B

(1) (t;−ω

s ) ˆ µ 

CBeiωAS t ϕ

C

(2) (t;ω

p,ω
p’)

∞

−∞

∞

∫
= dt

t

∫

dt3

−∞

−∞

(cid:1)(cid:1)

× ϕ
B

(1)(t2;−ω

s ) eiH B (t − t2 ) / = ˆ µ 

BCeiω

ASte−iHC (t − t3 )/ = ˆ µ 

CBE

p’ (t3 )e

−iω

p’t3 e−iH B (t3

− t2 ) / = ϕ
B

(1) (t2 ;ω
p )

(24)

in  which  the  time  origin,  t2,  is  taken  as  that  of  the  coincident  arrival  of  P+S
pulses.  For  a  dissociative  upper  state,  since  the  resonant  scattering  is  in  effect
instantaneous, we may suppress evolution past t3.  Since the duration of the laser
is short in comparison to the period of motion, the snapshot limit is appropriate.
Then in terms of the dipole dressed wave packets, φ, we have:

P(1,2) (t) = φ

(1)(t;−ω

s ) E(ω

p’)δ[ω

p

− ∆VCB] φ

B

(1)(t;ω

p ) + c.c.

B

= φ
B

(1)(t;−ω

= dpdqdp’dq’

∫

s ) W(q) φ
(1) (t; −ω
φ
B

B

(1)(t;ω

p ) + c.c.

s ) p’,q’ p’, q’ W(q) p,q p,q φ

B

(1)(t;ω

p ) + c.c.

 

(25)

where  t  is  the  time  delay  between  the  arrival  of  S+P  and  P’  pulses.  Given  an
assumed  form  of  the  upper  state  potential,  Eq.  24  is  easily  integrated
numerically.  Analytical  evaluation  of  Eq.  25  is  possible  by  taking  a  stationary
Gaussian for the window function, W(q), and Gaussian packets for the P- and S-
prepared  superpositions.  If  we  were  to  assume  a  window  delta  in  space,  then
(25) reduces to the cross correlation between the S- and P-prepared packets. This
correlation in energy representation, yields the strictly temporal evolution of the
signal:

P(1,2) (t) =

∑ φ

(1)(t;−ω

s ) v’ v’ v’ ˆ P  v"

B

∑ v" v" φ

(1)(t;ω

p ) + c.c.

B

v’

= µ

2 c(v’, v")

CB

 
 
∑ v’ e
av ’
 

v’

− iω

v ’t +α

v "
 
 
 
∑ v’ e
bv’
 
 

v’

+ iω

v’t + β

+ c.c.

 
 

 

(26)

where

17

av’

= µ
BX

2

∑ e− βEv v’ v 2 E(ω

p )δ[(cid:2)ω

p

− ∆Evv’]

and

bv’
(cid:1)(cid:1)

v

v

= µ
BX

2

∑ e−βE v v’ v 2 E(ω

S )δ[(cid:2)ω

S

− ∆E vv’]

(27)

and the projector from  v”  to  v’  in  (26)  is  the  stimulated  Raman  process  spelled
out  in  (24).  Under  the  assumption  that  this  process  does  not  color  the  CARS
spectrum  we  may  set  the  coefficients  c(v’,v”)  to  a  constant.  Using  the
experimental spectral profiles of the P- and S-pulses, the vibrational amplitudes
in  each  of  the  prepared  superpositions  are  defined  according  to  (27),  and  the
expected time-dependent CARS signal obtained according to (26). The simulated
P(1,2)(t) contribution to the signal is shown in Fig. 13. Note, the scattering at t = 0
has  contributions  from  several  diagrams,  and  therefore  will  be  modulated  as  a
function  of  AS  wavelength.  This  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  13  by  showing  the
waveforms  obtained  at  two  wavelengths.  The  spectral  dispersion  of  the
waveform is  given in (24).  The  observable  signal  can  also  be  understood  as  the
cross-correlation  between  the  two  packets.  Thus,  for  an  S-prepared  packet
centered at v = 14 with a mean vibrational spacing of  ω 
S  = G(v=14) – G(v=13) =
102.6 cm-1 (period = 325 fs), and a P-prepared packet centered at v = 22, with ω 
p =
G(v  =  22)  –  G(v=21)  =  87.6  cm-1  (period  =  380  fs);  the  signal  is  obtained  by
squaring (26):

I (1, 2)(ω

As,t) = I cos(

t + ϑ)cos(

t + ϑ)e

−t / τ

(28)

ω 
S

+ ω 
p

2

ω 
S

− ω 
p

2

The signal contains three characteristic time constants:

a)  A  fast  modulation  at  the  center  frequency,  τ

b) A slower modulation at the difference frequency, τ

p )  =  350  fs,
corresponding to the superposition moving out of the window as a whole;
p ) = 2 ps,
corresponding  to  decay  of  the  signal  as  the  S-  and  P-prepared  packets
split;

 = 2/(ω 
2

 ∼ 2/(ω 
1

S   +  ω 

S  -  ω 

c)  An  even  slower  decay  envelope  given  by  the  dispersion  of  frequencies
within each distribution, namely, the spreading of the individual packets
dictated by the local anharmonicities on the B state, τ

 = 1/ω
3

exe  = 15 ps.

The  slower  decay  time,  τ
3,  is  now  convoluted  with  the  rotational  dephasing
which  occurs  on  a  similar  time  scale;  and  intensities  in  signal  recurrences  will
now depend on the rotational phase distribution. Note, despite the decay of the
modulation, this  channel will contribute to  the  scattering  process  at  all  positive
times, responsible in part for the broad time-integrated spectra at positive times
in Fig. 9c.

18

Additional  electronic  resonances  can  be  inferred  from  the  known  dense
manifold of electronic states of iodine,  and from  experiments  in  which  we vary
the time  ordering in the  sequence  of  non-overlapping  pulses.  As  example,  note
that  the  B”  state  (Fig.  3)  which  is  directly  accessible  from  the  ground,  must
contribute  to  CARS  at  positive  delays.  Under  coincident  P+S  pulses,  packets
created by the P pulse on both the B and B” surfaces may be transferred to the X
state with the S pulse. Due to the difference in the curvature of potentials, the B
and B” channels of scattering would create a bimodal vibrational distribution in
the X state, which  would then be  reflected  in  the  AS  spectrum.  However,  since
the  B”  state  is  dissociative,  it  cannot  contribute  to  CARS  at  negative  delays.  A
delay of <20 fs after the P pulse would be sufficient to ensure that the B” packet
escapes further interrogation.

In  short,  there  are  several  distinct  electronic  scattering  channels  that  are
observed  to  contribute  to  the  CARS  signal  at  positive  delay,  while  a  single
channel dominates the signal at negative delay.

E) The ro-vibrational contribution to first- and second-order images:

The  ro-vibrational  contribution  to  the  time-integrated  CARS  spectrum  can  be
written down with the help of the diagram in Fig. 4. Since the detection involves
integration over t4, the signal is determined by the time intervals t32 and t21. For a
given path in vibrational state space, v’,v”,v’’’, three rotational circuits contribute
to a given ro-vibronic transition in the CARS spectrum. Thus, for a P(j) transition
we have:

(3) (v’,v",v’’’) = { (2 j + 1)e
IP ( j)

βEv , j [ c1e

− i[ωv ’, j +1t 21 +ωv ", jt32 −ωv , jt31 ]

+c2e
+c3e

− i[ω

v’, j −1t21

+ω

v", jt 32

−ω

v , jt 31 ]

−i[ωv ’, j −1t21 + ωv ", j −2t32 −ωv , jt31 ] +c.c. ]}2

 

(29)

in  which  the  weighting  coefficients  are  the  transition  matrix  elements
encountered in (18).  Ignoring the slowly varying coefficients, namely rotational
matrix elements and F-C factors, but retaining the energy conservation condition
derived  from  the  spectral  composition  of  the  pulses  c(v’,v”,v’’’)  =  δ[EL-Ev,j]3,  it  is
possible to reproduce the experimental waveforms of Figure 8 and 9. At positive
delay (t32 = 0), the AS spectral line intensity will be modulated according to:

(3) (v’,v",v’’’,t21) = (2 j + 1)
e
IP ( j)

{

βEv , j

∑

v’,v"

[
c(v’,v",v’’’)
e

−i (ω

v ’, j +1

− ω

v , j )t21

−i (ω

v’, j −1

−ω

+ 2e

v , j )t21 +c.c.]}2

(30a)

while at negative time (t21 = 0):

19

βE v, j
(3) (v’,v",v’’’,t32 ) = (2 j + 1)
IP ( j)
e

{

c(v’,v", v’’’)

−i (ω

v", j

−ω

2[ e

v, j )t32 + e

− i(ω

v ", j −2

−ω

v , j )t 32 +c.c.]}2

∑

v’,v "

(30b)

(31a)
(31b)

These  impulse  response  functions,  when  convoluted  with  the  laser  cross-
correlation function yield the finite pulse signals. Carrying out the square in (30)
yields the rotational recursions at beat frequencies:

(cid:1)(cid:1)[(Ev’, j +1
(cid:1)(cid:1)[(Ev ", j

− Ev , j) − (Ev’, j −1
− Ev , j ) − (Ev ", j −2

− Ev, j)]/ (cid:2) = 4B (v’) j
− Ev , j)] / (cid:2) = 4B (v") j

where  B(v’)  and  B(v”)  are  the  vibration  dependent  rotational  constants  in  the
excited  and  ground  electronic  states,  respectively;  and  the  over-bar  implies
averaging  over  the  v’,v”  states  that  are  accessible  under  the  broadband  laser
pulses.

In  Fig  14  we  provide  a  comparison  between  simulation  (30)  and  an
experimental  waveform  sliced  from  the  two-dimensional  image  in  Fig.  9.  The
simulation uses (30a) and (30b) separately, and joins them at t = 0. This results in
the  mismatch  of  amplitude  for  the  peak  at  t=  0.  At  t=  0,  since  t21  =  t32,  the  two
diagrams shown as insets are degenerate, and therefore interfere (destructively).
On  this  time-scale  since  the  evolution  is  entirely  vibrational,  the  effect  is
reproduced in the explicit wavepacket simulations of Fig. 11. To match the depth
of modulation in experiment and simulation, we have used a convolution width
of 70 fs in t12, and a width of 140 fs in t23. This effective reduction of modulation
depth  for  interrogating  the  Raman  packet  is  expected,  and  discussed  in  some
depth previously.16 It is a result of the separation between positive and negative
momentum components of the Raman packet as it enters the resonance window.
In Fig. 15 we provide the same comparison as in Fig. 14, but now for the
coarse  grain,  long-time  scan  of  Fig.  10a.  Although,  single  rotational  lines  are
resolvable, the experimental spectra are instrument  limited  by  the  spectrometer
bandpass  of  8  cm-1.  Thus  in  the  waveform  of  Fig.  14  which  corresponds  to  the
spectral slice at 538 nm, the main contributing transitions are: R54(29-0), P50(29-
0), R89(30-0), P85(30-0), R111(31-0), P108(31-0) where in parenthesis we give the
vibrational transition. Note, in contrast with the third-order coherence obtained
with  gated  detection,  in  this  case  the  lines  that  overlap  in  the  observation
window  do  not  interfere  -  they  are  simply  convoluted  with  the  spectral
bandpass. The use of short pulses forces the fan-out in vibrational state space. In
the present v’ = 23-28 and v” =  2-5 are the main contributors  to the signal. The
vibration  dependence  of  rotational  constants  (due  to  coriolis,  centrifugal  and
higher  order  distortions)  generates  dispersion  in  rotational  recurrences  even
when a single line is being monitored. Accordingly, the rotational  recursions of
Fig. 10 can be understood, as resulting from the  overlap of several different ro-
vibrational lines in the spectral bandpass of detection.  The prominent recursion
is  that  of  the  thermal  maximum  in  the  rotational  population,  j~50,  for  which

20

the B (v’) ≈ B(v’= 25) = 0.02414   cm-1,55  which  leads  to  a  period  of  6.9  ps  (31a)  as
seen in  Fig. 15  (we  have not included higher order corrections  to  the  rotational
constant  in  the  simulations).  For  the  Raman  packet  of  Fig.  10b,  the  dominant
recursion  occurs  at  t  ~  4.5  ps,  consistent  with  B (v") ≈ B(v"= 3) = 0.036966   cm-1.55
Due  to  approximations  made  in  weighting  coefficients  and  spectroscopic
constants, the match between experiment and simulation in Figures 14 and 15 is
not  exact.  Nevertheless,  the  comparison  is  sufficiently  detailed  to  confirm  our
analysis of the manipulated molecular coherences.

IV. DISCUSSION

the  experimental 

The  detailed  exposition  of  the  experimental  time-frequency  resolved  CARS
measurements and their analysis in vapor iodine serves mainly for the purposes
of  understanding  the  four-wave  mixing  process  with  the  molecule  acting  as
mixer. Despite the fact that we are interrogating a diatomic, the participation of a
large number of rotational states in the molecular coherence makes the analysis
valuable. The time-frequency images are understood and reproduced in terms of
phase evolution in multi-dimensional state space; formally, in the Hilbert space,
(cid:1),  consisting  of  the  tensor  product  of  electronic,  vibrational,  and  rotational
spaces:  (cid:1)  =(cid:2) (cid:1)HO  ⊗ (cid:2) (cid:1)YLE  ⊗ (cid:2) (cid:1)URW.  The  time-circuit  diagrams  and  the  phase  coherence
condition  (8)  provide  the  necessary  bookkeeping  to  describe  the  various  order
coherences,  as  demonstrated  by  reconstructing 
two-
dimensional images. The images contain information. The interferometric nature
of the images, most clearly illustrated for the third-order coherence (figures 6-8),
implies  that  the  encoded  information  retains  the  wave  nature  inherent  in
quantum  amplitudes.  Such  data  can  be  used  to  reconstruct  the  molecular
Hamiltonian, by extracting accurate spectroscopic constants. Also, the significant
control exercised over the evolving molecular coherence through the three input
laser fields  can  be taken  as a paradigm  for  molecular  control.  The  latter  aspect,
for  the  important  case  of  single-color  four-wave  mixing  has  been  recently
explored.61,64  A  useful  application  of  quantum  control  is  to  be  expected  in
quantum computation, or quantum information transfer, which we explore here.
The  observable  coherent  polarization  is  the  outcome  of  operations  on  a
rot .
quantum  register  consisting  of  the  superposition  of  product  states 
The nontrivial superposition of product states provides entanglement,65 an aspect
unique  to  quantum  information  and  key  to  scalable  parallelism  in  quantum
computing.9,10  In  the  present  case,  the  Born-Oppenheimer  separated  molecular
Hamiltonian  offers  the  ro-vibronic  Hilbert  space  of  2× m× n  (el⊗ vib⊗ rot)
dimensions  with  the  possibility  of  three  natural  entanglements.  While  the
dimensionality  is  quite  large,  m~10  and  n~102,  the  structure  of  this  space  does
not  conform  to  the  theoretically  optimal  structure  of  2N  dimensional  space,
namely,  the  space  of  N  qubits.    Nevertheless,  given  efficient  parallel  logical
operations  on  a  register  of  103  elements  and  a  processor  speed  of  10-15s  -  10-12s,

vib

el

21

significant  applications  can  be  expected.  Tasks  that  rely  on  few  entanglements
include Grover’s search algorithm,20 and quantum cryptography.66 The mundane
building blocks for such applications – reset, logical operation, and readout – can
be readily inferred from the data presented. In what follows we first consider the
measurement  and  readout  process  more  closely,  then  present  the  minimal  but
sufficient  set  of  efficiently  executable  universal  logic  gates  for  all-purpose
quantum  computing.  It  should  be  clear  from  the  onset  that  the  stored  and
retrieved information is in the complex amplitudes of eigenstates that define the
evolving  coherences.  Process  control  is  provided  by  the  coherence  of  the  laser
fields,  which  can  be  thought  to  consist  of  a  time  sequence  of  discrete  spectral
components.

A) Measurement and Readout

There is a fundamental difference between time-gated detection and time-
integrated  detection  of  the  anti-Stokes  polarization.  The  first  allows  readout  by
projection  on  superposition  states,  while  the  latter  projects  out  a  single
component  of  the  evolving  polarization  for  observation.  This  is  directly
illustrated  for  the  electronic-rotational  entanglement  as  discerned  from  the
rotational recurrences in various order coherences.

of 

an 
electronically 
b∑ B v’’’ j’’’ , with 

When  using  time-gated  detection,  the  prominent  rotational  recurrence
frequency  in  third-order  coherence  occurs  at  |2(B’-B”)j|,  at  the  beat  between
consecutive  P-branch  or  R-branch  transitions  of  the  AS  polarization  (B’  and  B”
are  the  rotational  constant  of  the  molecule  in  the  B  and  X  electronic  state,
respectively). Noting that the classical rotation frequency of a diatomic is 2Bj, the
observed recurrence is recognized as the difference between classical periods of
rotation on the ground and excited electronic surfaces. It would appear that over
the  t43  interval  the  molecule  rotates  forward  on  one  electronic  surface  and
backward on the other. The observable period of rotational recurrence reports a
property 
state:
ϕ =

a∑(
a∑ X v j +
 In contrast, when using time-integrated detection, the rotational revivals
occur (31) with a frequency of 4B’j in first-order coherence, during t21, and at 4B”j
in  second-order  coherence,  during  t32,  i.e.,  at  twice  the  classical  frequency  of
rotation  in  the  excited  and  ground  state,  respectively.  Despite  the  fact  that  in
first-order the evolution is in an electronic coherence while in second-order it is a
vibrational  coherence  that  evolves  as  an  electronic  population  on  the  ground
electronic  surface,  in  both  cases  the  property  of  a  single  electronic  state  is
measured. It would appear that the molecule is rotating in the excited electronic
state  during  t21,  just  as  it  must  rotate  in  the  ground  electronic  state  during  t32.
These results can be understood using the time-circuit diagram of Fig. 4b. With t4
integrated out, and either t12 = 0 or t23 = 0, only two circuits contribute to a given
transition.  In  the  observable  beat  between  two  such  circuits,  the  common  path

maximally 
b∑(
)2 =

)2 = 0.5.67

entangled 

22

over <v,j| is cancelled (31), yielding the beat between states  separated by 2j’ or
2j”.  While  this  explains  the  signal,  more  fundamental  is  the  recognition  that
although  over  t21  the  system  evolves  in  an  electronic  superposition,  Fourier
filtering  over  t4  projects  out  the  excited  electronic  state,  as  recognized  by
observing  a  rotational  frequency  that  reflects  the  rotational  constant  of  the  B
state.

TGFCARS  detection  projects  out  all  transitions  that  fall  under  the  time-
frequency bandwidth of detection. A dramatic manifestation of this is the period
of  silence  at  2  <  t4  <  10  ps  in  the  third-order  image  of  Fig.  6.  This  is  the  time
interval  in  which  complete  destructive  interference  occurs  among  the  sampled
transitions.  In  terms  of  the  Bloch  sphere,  by  virtue  of  the  equal  electronic
superposition  ( B + X ) / 2  the system evolves in the π/2 plane, and the silence
occurs as the rotational phases span a flat distribution over all azimuthal angles.
This  occurs  despite  the  fact  that  a  thermal,  statistical  density  serves  as  initial
state, and therefore the radiators in different j states  are not  initially  correlated.
The sudden preparation of the initial state, and the fact that the  CARS  signal is
due to bulk polarization, establish a well defined phase among the independent
molecules. An even clearer demonstration of inter-molecular coherence in CARS
is the observation of beating between vibrations of different molecules in liquid
solutions.68

The  above  considerations  of  rotation-electronic  entanglement  apply
equally  well  to  vibronic  coherences.  For  example,  in  time-integrated  detection,
the  excited  vibrational  period  is  observed  during  t21  despite  the  fact  that  the
system  is  in  an  electronic  superposition.  In  time-gated  detection,  a  vibrational
beat  between  excited  and  ground  state  packets  occurs,  which  is  effectively
smoothed out in the experiments due to the width of the Kerr-gate.

A corollary to the observation that all transitions that fall under the time-
frequency  gate  of  detection  interfere,  is  that  any  selected  pair  (or  sets)  of
transitions can be made to interfere as long as they can be brought under a given
time-frequency  gate.  Such  “hard-wiring”  can  be  accomplished  experimentally,
e.g., by dispersing the AS polarization then recombining selected spectral ranges
on a single detector element after a suitable delay line. Alternatively, instead of
using  an  impulse  to  drive  the  time  gate,  it  is  possible  to  use  a  temporally
modulated  gate  field  to  detect  pre-selected  superpositions,  i.e.,  heterodyne
detection of CARS using a specifically tailored local  oscillator. Such hardwiring
creates  selective  quantum  correlations,  in  effect,  producing  entanglement
through measurement.

B) Universal Logic Gates

The  universal  logic  gates  sufficient  to  demonstrate  a  quantum  computer
consist  of  the  one-qubit  operations  and  the  two-qubit  controlled-not  (CNOT)
gate.69  The  full  set  of  one-qubit  operations  is  given  by  the  Pauli  spin  matrices.70
Here,  they  can  be  readily  demonstrated  on  the  rotational  coherences,  and  the

23

vibration-electronic  entanglement  is  a  readily  available  two-qubit  CNOT  gate.
We first offer the more suggestive representation of the single qubit operations in
terms of classical logic gates.

i) One qubit Operations
Consider  the  time  integrated  signal,  and  in  particular,  of  the  spectrally
resolved j-1→j transition illustrated in Fig. 4a. Let us assign the logical value “1”
to  the  presence  of  this  line,  and  “0”  to  its  absence  in  the  TIFRCARS  spectrum.
The  upper  level  of  this  transition  |B,v’’’,j-1>  is  connected  to  the  two  coherent
inputs  eiΩ(v ", j ) X,v", j   and  eiΩ(v ", j −2) X,v", j − 2 ,  with  phases  Ω(v", j;t 2 )  and
Ω(v", j) = [ω(v", j) − ω(v, j)]t32
freely
evolving bra-state (see Fig. 1). As in the case of the simulations in Figures 14 and
15,  here  too,  we  neglect  differences  in  amplitude  due  to  transition  matrix
elements.  Then  for  the  experimental  data  where  t21  =  0,  the relative  phase
between  the  two  input  lines  is  determined  by  the  time  interval  t32,  namely  the
time  delay  between  S-  and  P’-pulses.    Assigning  the  logical  values  “1”  for  Ω  =
2nπ and “0” to Ω = (2n-1)π for integer n, we may construct a truth table for the
visibility of this particular spectral component:

+ Ω(v", j;t2 )   determined  relative 

the 

to 

1100
       ⊕ 1010
1001

(33)

This  bivalent  representation  of  interference  between  two  input  channels  can  be
recognized as the inverted exclusive-OR gate,  XOR , (XOR, had we assigned “1”
to  the  absence  of  the  line  from  the  spectrum).  The  XOR  gate  allows  modulo  2
addition, which is described by the ⊕  operation. The same consideration applied
to all nodes in Figure 4b produces the equivalent circuit of Figure 16. The figure
describes the bivalent logic of the coherence  transferred around the time-circuit
diagram  of  a  single  initial  ro-vibrational  eigenstate.  If  we  were  to  consider  the
coherent superposition prepared by the P-pulse at t = t1, as the input qubit:

≡ a’ B,v’, j +1;t1

+ b’ B,v’, j −1;t1

in

and  identify  the  output  qubit  as  the  coherent  superposition  prepared  at  t  =  t3,
after action of the S- and P’-pulses:

≡ a’’’ B,v’’’, j +1;t3

+ b’’’ B, v’’’, j −1;t3

out

then  using  the  diagram  of  Fig.  16  it  is  easily  shown  that  if  fully  connected,  the
circuit  flips  the  logical  states  between  input  and  output  (a’→ b’’’  and  b’→a’’’).
Indeed,  this  is  the  bivalent  prescription  for  the  simulation  of  the  TIFRCARS

(34a)

(34b)

24

signal for the second order coherence shown in Fig. 15 and given by (30) for the
continuous representation.

The circuit of Fig. 4b is more flexible than what is inferred by the bivalent
logic. The relative phase in the superpositions evolve continuously. Moreover, in
TGFCARS  detection  the  relative  phase  in  the  output  qubit  is  accessible
information.  To  keep  track  of  this  information,  we  re-write  Eq.  29  in  the  two-
dimensional space of the qubit.

out

= ˆ µ EP’(t3)U(t32) ˆ µ ES(t2)U(t21)
 
 
a'
a'
   
   
= ˜ U (t32) ˜ U (t21)
= ˜ U (t31)
 
 
 
 
b'
b'

in

(35)

In  the  snapshot  limit,  since  the  ro-vibrational  phases  are  frozen  during  the
vertical  transitions,  the  entire  evolution  reduces  to  one  of  phases  over  paths
prescribed by the timing of the spectrally broad, temporally sharp pulses:

˜ U (t21) =
(cid:1)(cid:1)

eiΩ(v’, j +1)
 
  

 
  

 
= eiΩ 1
  

eiΩ(v’, j −1)

ei2 B’(2 j +1)t21 / =

 
  

(36)

with overall phase Ω = (Te

+ Ev’

− Ev

+ Ej +1

B,v’ − Ej

X,v)t12 /(cid:2);

˜ U (t32 ) = eiχ eiχ2 + eiχ0
 
  

eiχ0

e iχ0
eiχ−2 + eiχ0

 
  

= eiχ

eiχ

[
0 1 + σ

]eiχ

2

x

 
1
  

 
  

ei(χ−2 − χ2 )

(37)

X,v )t23 /(cid:2).
+ Ev"
with  overall  vibronic  phase  (cid:1)(cid:1)χ= (Te
All  rotations  under  SU(2)  are  accessible  under  the  timing  conditions  already
realized in the presented data. Thus,

− Ev )t23 /(cid:2);  and  (cid:1)(cid:1)χ

X,v" − Ej

= (Ej +i

i

for t32

= 0 and (cid:1)(cid:1)t21
 
˜ U (t31) = ˜ U (t21) = eiΩ 1
  

= (2n −1)π(cid:2)/[2B’(2j +1)]
 
  = 2eiΩσ

−1

z

(38)

This  simply  states  that  the  free  evolution  of  the  qubit  in  the  t21  interval
corresponds  to  rotation  around  the  z-axis  on  the  Bloch  sphere.  This  rotation
occurs with 4B’j periodicity (38a), namely, the recursion period of the first order
coherence (31a). If we do not take advantage of the overall vibronic phase, then
to execute (cid:1)
z rotation on the manifold of j states, it would be necessary to use a
chirped pulse, with a coherence similar to the third order polarization of Fig. 6.
The  fast  vibronic  phase,  Ω,  allows  the  execution  of  the  transformation  on  all  j
states in parallel, by using a short pulse.

25

= 0,  χ

0

For  t21
= (2n−1)π:

χ+ χ
2

= 2nπ,  χ

2

− χ−2

= 2nπ; therefore (cid:1)(cid:1)t32

= nπ(cid:2)/[2B’(2j −1)]  and

˜ U (t31) = ˜ U (t32) =

 
0 1
  
1 0

 
  = 2σ

x

(39)

0

= (Ej

X,v" − Ej

X,v)t23/ (cid:2) = (BX,v" − BX, v)t23 /(cid:2),  and  rotational  constants  of
Since  (cid:1)(cid:1)χ
different  vibrations  within  the  same  electronic  state  are  similar,  χ
0~0  is  easily
fulfilled.  As  before,  it  is  necessary  to  take  advantage  of  the  vibronic  overall
phase, χ, for parallel execution of (cid:1)
x rotation on the manifold of rotational qubits.
The  execution  of  a  (cid:1)
y  rotation  requires  finite  t21  and  t32.  The  required
 
conditions  are  readily  obtained.  In  principle  this  is  superfluous,  since  arbitrary
rotation around two independent axes is sufficient to span the  full  space  of  the
two-dimensional qubit.

 ii) Two-qubit controlled gate
A useful two-qubit CNOT gate would be one that operates  on entangled
states,  using  qubits  in  different  spaces  as  target  and  control.71  Until  now,  the
electronic and vibrational qubits have been used as simple state tags, with their
states  determined  by  the  order  of  interaction  with  the  laser  field.  This
determinism  in  the  electronic  state  is  the  result  of  choosing  P.  S.  P’  colors  that
yield  only  one  diagram  in  the  four-wave  mixing  process.  To  control  electronic
qubits arbitrarily, it is necessary to create a multiplicity of interfering paths. This
is realized in single-color four-wave mixing, or for the condition where all three
input  fields  overlap  spectrally,  since  under  such  conditions  CARS  and  CSRS
paths can interfere. As an illustrative example, consider the vibrational phase of
an  input  vibronic  qubit  to  control  the  electronic  superposition  in  the  output
qubit.

At  the  expense  of  greatly  reducing  the  vibrational  vector  space,  let  us
return to the wavepacket picture |ϕ
v> and assign it a logical value |1> when the
packet  is  in  the  Frank-Condon  window  of  the  X↔B  transition,  and  |0>
otherwise. To further conform to quantum logic implementations, let us code the
electronic  qubit  as  |0>  ≡  |X>  and  |1>  ≡  |B>.  Then,  after  preparation  of  the
initial coherence with the first pulse, the action of the pulse at t= t2 can be defined
as:

  ϕ

v

ϕ
el

E S (t2 )  →     ϕ

v ( ϕ

v

⊕ ϕ

el )

(40a)

Which  reads:  if  the  vibrational  packet  is  in  the  F-C  window,  then  change  the
electronic  state.  This  can  be  verified  to  be  the  two-qubit  CNOT  gate  with  the
logical values

26

1 0  →   1 1
1 1  →   1 0
0 0  →   0 0
0 1  →   0 1

(40b)

Depending on t2, the operation in (40) controls the electronic superposition  that
will  evolve  in  the  t32  interval.  Thus,  taking  ω
B  as  the  frequencies  of
vibrational packets in the X and B states, respectively; starting with the coherence
v’ B X ϕ
ϕ
v  prepared by the pump pulse; the possible outcomes of the action of

X  and  ω

the pulse at t2 are:

v’ B X ϕ
ϕ

v

E(t2 )  →    

. ϕ

v’ B B ϕ
v’ X X ϕ
v ’ X X ϕ

v

. ϕ
.a ϕ

v      if t21

v     if t21
+ b ϕ

E(t2 )  →    

E(t2 )  →    

= 2nπ/wX                              
= 2nπ/wB                            
= 2nπ/wB
v’ B B ϕ
v   if t21
(41)

= 2mπ/wX    

v’ B B ϕ

v’ X X ϕ

v .  When  t21  =  2nπ/ω

v . Finally, when t21 = 2nπ/ω

When  t21  =  2nπ/ω
X,  the  bra-packet  on  the  X  electronic  surface  is  in  the  F-C
window  when  the  second  pulse  arrives,  therefore  an  electronic  population  is
created  in  the  B  state:  0 B X 1   →  ϕ
B,  the  ket-
packet  on  the  B  electronic  state  is  in  the  F-C  window  when  the  second  pulse
arrives, therefore an electronic population is created on the X surface:  1 B X 0
B = 2mπ/ω
→  ϕ
X, when the packets on the B
in  the  F-C  window,  an  electronic
and  X  surfaces  are  simultaneously 
superposition is created:  1 B X 1   →a ϕ
v ’ X X ϕ
v .  Thus,  at  a
given  delay,  the  electronic  superposition  to  be  prepared  is  controlled  by  the
phase  of  the  vibrational  packet.  In  effect,  in  single-color  four-wave  mixing,  the
contributions from various diagrams can be controlled, P93)=aP(0,3)+bP(1,2), to drive
the  system  to  the  desired  state.  Indeed,  these  timing  conditions  have  been
experimentally verified in degenerate four-wave mixing studies on I2.37,37,61,64

v’ B B ϕ

+ b ϕ

v

Similar  controlled  gates  are  possible  between  rotation-vibration,  and
rotation-electronic qubits.72 Here, we are satisfied by indicating that the requisite
two-qubit  CNOT  gate  and  the  one-qubit  operations  are  naturally  wired  in
molecular four-wave mixing, sufficient to identify the potential of the system for
quantum  computing.  A  schematic  of  the  general  conceptual  approach  to  using
the present network for a single path in vibrational  vector  space is  provided  in
Fig.  17.  In  the  example,  a  broad-band  P-pulse  resets  the  quantum  register,  a
structured S-pulse writes, the P’-pulse is used to process, and the output register
is  read  either  in  TIFRCARS  mode,  or  in  TGFCARS  with  heterodyne  detection
using the gate pulse (G-pulse) as local oscillator.

27

V.

CONCLUSIONS

TFRCARS  yields  multi-dimensional  images  of  molecular  coherences,  which  we
have  presented  here  as  a  set  of  three  two-dimensional  plots.  The  images  of  the
various  order  molecular  ro-vibrational  coherences  contain  sufficient  detail  to
allow an accurate characterization of the molecular Hamiltonian. Although it has
been  previously  demonstrated  that  time  resolved  measurements  can  provide
spectroscopic constants of high accuracy,73 and the present method of extracting
two-dimensional images has the advantage of multiplexing, such an application
to  stable  small  molecules  is  of  limited  value.  The  unique  advantage  of  the
method as a spectroscopic tool is in its ability to characterize transient spectra, or
transient  species.  This  derives  from  the  fact  that  the  method  permits  transform
limited  observation  and  interrogation  of  the  conjugate  time  and  frequency
coordinates.  Consider  the  application  of  the  method  to  image  chemistry.  The
simplest  example  would  be  that  of  unimolecular  dissociation.  If  the  process  is
slower than the speed of the Kerr shutter in use, as in rotational predissociation,74
then  it  should  be  possible  to  directly  record  the  ro-vibrational  tracks  of  the
dissociating  complex  in  third  order-coherence  using  TGFCARS.  An  image,
similar to that in Fig. 6 would now provide a map of the ro-vibrational channels
to bond-breaking. More generally, consider evolution along a reactive coordinate
Q(t) that has been set in motion via a short optical pulse. Then the second-order
coherence  would  image  the  evolution  of  frequencies  orthogonal  to  Q,  the
stiffening  or  loosening  of  bonds  due  to  chemistry  (or  any  other  change).  If  the
pulses  used  are  shorter  than  the  time  scale  of  evolution  along  Q,  direct  images
are  obtained.  Otherwise,  a  deconvolution  similar  to  that  used  in  the  frequency
resolved  optical  gating  (FROG)  to  characterize  laser  pulses,11  would  be  applied.
Indeed,  the  time  gated  photon  echo  measurements  in  the  liquid  phase
accomplish these very aims, with evolution along the solvation coordinate being
the  target  of  interest.39-42  The  same  principles  applied  to  protein  unfolding  and
excitonic dynamics have been given recently.75,76

TFRCARS, or more generally four-wave mixing experiments, can be used
as a method for molecular coherence control.  This  concept is  usually  associated
with  the  possibilities  of  controlled  chemistry.  In  practice,  such  applications  are
likely to be somewhat limited.

Time-frequency-resolved  four-wave  mixing  using  a  molecule  as  mixer,
allows  the  preparation,  manipulation,  and  readout  of  massive  quantum
superpositions  with  sufficient  control  to  consider  applications  to  quantum
computing. Parallels can be drawn  between  this  approach  and  NMR,77 which is
the maturer field of coherence control.78 For example, the P(0,3) polarization can be
regarded as stimulated photon reverberations, in analogy with the NMR photon
echo.79  The  optical  four-wave  mixing  approach  has  important  advantages  with
regard  to  the  manipulation  and  transfer  of  massive  coherences,  which  is  an
important  step  toward  practice  in  quantum  computation.  Since  the  third-order
polarization is the observable, the optical process does not require polarization of

28

the thermal initial ensemble, which is required in NMR and a major source of the
limitation to few qubits.80 The optical four-wave mixing method circumvents this,
since it allows the sequential manipulation of the initial coherence struck by the
first  pulse  on  a  thermal  background  that  does  not  interfere  with  the  signal.
Moreover, since the  manipulations involve  optical  pulses,  single  operations can
be accomplished on fs-ps time scales. Given the Doppler control of decoherence
in  rarified  media  at  room  temperature,  103  –  104  operations  can  be  completed
prior to loss of signal. Clearly a major challenge in the proposed approach is in
cascading, to enable multiple sequential operations. Note, at least in oracle type
applications  single  qubit  logic  gates  can  be  implemented  with  efficiency  and
parallelism, and the required  quantum  CNOT  gate  can  be  readily  implemented
in  one  step.  Recognizing  that  the  observable  output  in  the  four-wave  mixing
experiment  is  a  coherent  radiation  field,  it  is  not  too  difficult  to  imagine
sequential processing, or networking, by having the AS beam from one stage act
as  one  of  the  input  fields  for  a  second  stage.  The  considerations  we  have
presented, we believe, are sufficient to encourage a search for useful algorithms
that naturally map on molecular networks.
 
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The  support  of  this  research  through  grants  from  the  US  AFOSR  (F49620-98-1-
0163)  and  the  NSF  (9725462),  is  gratefully  acknowledged.  Discussions  with  Z.
Bihary and J. Eloranta were most valuable in formulating some of the quantum-
computational  concepts  presented  here.  Discussions  with  A.  Ouderkirk  on
physical  designs  of  four-wave  mixing  cascades  to  construct  logic  networks,  is
fondly acknowledged.

29

REFERENCES
                                                
1. N. Bloembergen, Pure Appl. Chem. 10 (1987) 1229.
2.

J.  J.  Valentini,  in  Spectrometric  Techniques,  vol  4.,  (Academic  Press,  New
York, 1985).

3. D.  L.  Mills,  Nonlinear  Optics,  second  ed.,  (Springer,  Berlin,  1998);  R.  W.

6. 

4.
5.

Boyd, Nonlinear Optics, (Academic Press, New York, 1992).
Y. R. Shen, The Principles of Nonlinear Optics (Wiley, New York, 1984).
S. Mukamel, Principles of  Nonlinear  Optical  Spectroscopy, (Oxford University
Press, New York, 1999).
S.  A.  Rice  and  M.  Zhao,  Optical  Control  of  Molecular  Dynamics”,  (Wiley
Interscience, New York, 2000); D. J . Tannor and S. A. Rice, J. Chem. Phys. 83
(1985) 5013.
P. Brumer and M. Shapiro, Acc. Chem. Res. 22 (1989) 407; Ann. Rev. Phys.
Chem., 43 (1992) 257.
R. J. Gordon and S. A. Rice, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 48 (1997) 601.

8.
9. D. Bouwmeester, A. Ekert, A. Zeilinger, The Physics of Quantum Information
(Springer,  Berlin,  2000);  H.  K.  Lo,  S.  Popescu,  and  T.  Spiller,  Eds.,
Introduction  to  Quantum  Computation  and  Information  (World  Scientific,
Singapore, 1997).

7. 

10. M.  A.  Nielsen  and  I.  L.  Chuang,  Quantum  Computation  and  Quantum

Information, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 2000).

11. R.  Trebino,  K.  W.  DeLong,  D.  N.  Fittinghoff,  J.  N.  Sweetser,  M.  A.
Krumbugel, B. A. Richman, D. J. Kane, Rev. Sci. Instruments, 68 (1997) 3277.

12.  R. Zadoyan and V. A. Apkarian, Chem. Phys. Lett. 326 (2000) 1.
13. D. J. Tannor, S. A. Rice, and P. Weber, J. Chem. Phys. 83 (1985) 6158.
14. P. M. Felker, A. H. Zewail, J. Chem. Phys. 86 (1987) 2460; M. Gruebele A. H.

Zewail, J. Chem. Phys. 98 (1993) 883.

15.  R.  Uberna,  M.  Khalil,  R.  M.  Williams,  J.  M.  Papanikolas,  S.  R.  Leone,  J.
Chem.  Phys.  108 (1998) 9259;  R. Uberna,  R; Z.  Amitay, R.  A.  Loomis,  S.  R.
Leone, Far. Disc. 113 (1999) 385.

16. M.  Karavitis,  R.  Zadoyan,  and  V.  A.  Apkarian,  J.  Chem.  Phys.  114  (2001)

4131.

17.  R. Feynman, J. Theor. Phys. 21 (1982) 467.
18.  D. Deutsch, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A, 400 (1985) 97.
19.  W. Shor, in Proc. 35 th Annual Symposium on the Foundations of Computer
Science,  Edited  by  S.  Goldwasser  (IEEE  Computer  Society,  Los  Alamitos,
CA 1994), p124; P. W. Shor, S.I.A.M. J. on Computing, 26, 1484 (1997).
20.  L.  K.  Grover,  Proc.  28  Ann.  ACM  Symp.  On  the  Theory  of  Computing
(ACM press, New York, 1996) p.211; Phys. Rev. Lett. 78 (1997) 325; ibid. 79
(1997) 4709.

21.  C. H. Bennett, F. Bessette, G. Brassard, L. Salvail, and J. Smoilin, J. Cryptol. 5
(1992) 3; A. K. Ekert, J. G. Rarity, P. R. Tapster, and G. M. Palma, Phys. Rev.
Lett., 69 (1992) 1293.

30

                                                                                                                                                
22.  N. J. Cerf, C. Adami, and P. G. Kwiat, Phys. Rev. A. 57 (1998) R1477.
23.  Q.A.  Turchette,  C.J.  Hood,  W.  Lange,  H.  Mabuchi  and  H.J.  Kimble,  Phys.  Rev.

Lett. 75 (1995) 4710.

24.  C.  Monroe,  D.  M.  Meekhof,  B.  E.  King,  W.  M.  Itano,  And  D.  J.  Wineland,
Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  75  (1995)  4714;  C.  A.  Sackett,  D.  Klelpinski,  B.  E.  King,  C.
Langer, V. Meyer, C. J. Myatt, M. Rowe, Q. A. Turchette, W. M. Itano, D. J.
Wineland, C. Monroe, Nature, 404 (2000) 256.

25.   Y. Nakamura, Y.A. Pashkin and J.S. Tsai, Nature, 398 (1999) 786.
26.  N. A. Greshenfeld, I. L. Chuang, Science, 275 (1997) 350.
27.  D. G. Cory, A. F. Fahmy, T. F. Havel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 94 (1997)

1634.
J. Ahn, P. H. Bucksbaum, T. C. Weinacht, Science 287 (2000) 463.

28. 
29.  P. Knight, Science 287 (2000) 441.
30.  D. A. Meyer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 2014.
31.  The  nontrivial  superposition  of  product  states,  is  taken  as  the  working
definition  of  entanglements.  More  extensive  discussions  can  be  found  in
references 8 and 9.

32.  S. L. Braunstein, A. Mann, M. Revzen, Phys. Rev.  Lett. 68 (1992) 3259.
33. M. Schmitt, G. Knopp, A. Materny, W. Kiefer, Chem. Phys. Lett. 280 (1997)
339;  ibid.  270  (1997)  9;  J.  Phys.  Chem.  A  102  (1998)  4059;  T.  Siebert,  M.
Schmitt,  A.  Vierheilig,  G.  Flachenecker,  V.  Engel,  A.  Materny,  and  W.
Kiefer, J. Raman Spectrosc. 31 (2000) 25.

34. S. Meyer, and V. Engel, J. Raman Spectrosc. 31 (2000) 33.
35. G. Knopp, I. Pinkas, Y. Prior, J. Raman Spect., 31 (2000) 51.
36. For  an  example  of  time-resolved  rotational  CARS,  see:  T.  Lang,  K.  L.

Kompa, M. Motzkus, Chem. Phys. Lett. 310 (1999) 65.

37.  E.  J.  Brown,  Q.  G.  Zhang,  M.  Dantus,  J.  Chem.  Phys.  110  (1999)  5772;  I.
Pastrick,  E.  J.  Brown,  V.  V.  Lozovoy,  B.  I.  Grimberg,  M.  Dantus,    Farad.
Discuss. 113 (1999) 21.

38.  Lozovoy, VV; Pastirk, I; Brown, EJ; Grimberg, BI; Dantus, M., Int. Rev. Phys.

Chem. 19 (2000) 531.

39. P.  Vohringer,  D.  C.  Arnett,  R.  A.  Westervelt,  M.  J.  Feldstein,  and  N.  F.
Scherer, J. Chem. Phys. 102 (1995) 4027; W. P. de Boerj, M. S. Pshenichnikov,
and D. A. Wiersma, J. Phys. Chem. 100 (1996) 11806.

40.  T.  Joo,  Y.  Jia,  J.  –Y.  Yu,  M.  J.  Lang,  and  G.  R.  Fleming,  J.  Chem.  Phys.  104

(1996) 6089.

41. P. Vohringer, D. C. Arnett, T.-S. Yang and N. F. Scherer, Chem. Phys. Lett.
237 (1995) 387; M. S. Pshenichnikov, K. Duppen and D.  A. Wiersma,  Phys.
Rev. Lett. 74 (1995) 674; S. Weiss, M. A. Mycek, J.-Y. Bigot, S. Schmitt-Rink,
D. S., Chemla, D. S. Phys. Rev. Lett. 69 (1992) 2685; D. S. Kim, J. Shah, T. C.
Damen,  W.  Schäfer,  F.  Jahnke,  S.  Schmitt-Rink,  K.  Köhler,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.
69 (1992) 2725.

42. L. D. Book and N. F. Scherer, J. Chem. Phys. 111 (1999) 792.

31

                                                                                                                                                
43.  M.  C.  Asplund,  M.  Lim,  R.  M.  Hochstrasser,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.,  323  (2000)

44.

269.
J. D. Hybl, S. M. G. Faeder, A. W. Albrecht, C. A. Tolbert, D. C. Green, D. M.
Jonas, J. Luminescence, 87 (2000) 126.

45. S. M. Gallagher, A. W. Albrecht, T. D. Hybil, B. L. Landin, B. Rajaram, D. M.

Jonas, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B-Optical Physics, 15 (1998) 2338.

46.  E. Tokunaga, A. Terasaki, T. Kobayashi, Optcis. Lett. 17 (1992) 1131.
47.  M. C. Asplund, M. T. Zanni, and R. M. Hochstrasser, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

USA, 97(2000) 8219-8224.

48.  S. Mukamel, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 51 (2000) 691.
49. P.  Hamm,  R.  M.  Hochstrasser,  Ultrafast  Infrared,  Raman  Spectroscopy,  M.D.

50. 

51.

Fayer, Ed., (Marcel Dekker, New York, 2000).
for an excellent development, see; W. Domcke, G. Stock, Adv. Chem. Phys.
100 (1997) 1.
J.  Almy,  K.  Kizer,  R.  Zadoyan,  V.  A.  Apkarian,  J.  Phys.  Chem.  104  (2000)
3508.

52. M. Ovchinnikov, V. A. Apkarian, and G. A. Voth, J. Chem. Phys. (in press,

2001).

(1999) 807.

53. S.  Maeda,  T.  Kamisuki,  Y.  Adachi,  Advances  in  Nonlinear  Spectroscopy,  30

54. D. McMorrow, W. T. Lotshaw, G. A. Kenny-Wallace, IEEE J. Quant. Electr.
24, 443(1988); T. Steffen,  N. A. C.  A.  Meinders,  K.  Duppen,  J.  Phys.  Chem.
102 (1998) 4213.

55. S.  Gerstenkorn  and  P.  Luc,  Atlas  du  spectre  d’absorption  de  la  Molecule

d’iode, CNRS, Orsay, 1978.

56. R. N. Zare, Angular Momentum, (Wiley Interscience, New York 1987).
57. Note,  the  decoherence  time  of  relevance  is  entirely  determined  by  ro-
vibrational  linewidths,  which  in  room  temperature  I2  is  given  by  Doppler
widths ~0.02 cm-1, therefore an inhomogeneous dephasing time of 10-9 s.

58. D. Kosloff and R. Kosloff, J. Comp. Phys. 52 (1983) 35.
59. G.  Herzberg,  “Molecular  Spectra  and  Moplecular  Structure:  I.  Spectra  of

diatomic molecules (Van Nostrand, Princeton, 1950).

60. R.  Zadoyan,  N.  Schwentner  and  V.  A.  Apkarian,  Chem.  Phys.,  233  (1998)

61. 

353.
I.  Pastirk,  V.  V.  Lozovoy,  B.  I.  Grimberg,  E.  J.  Brown,  and  M.  Dantus,  J.
Phys. Chem. A, 103 (1999) 10226.

62.  M. Ovchinnikov and V. A. Apkarian, J. Chem. Phys. 106 (1997) 5775.
63. A.  V.  Benderskii,  R.  Zadoyan,  V.  A.  Apkarian,  J.  Chem  Phys.,  107  (1997)

64.  V.  V.  Lozovoy,  B.  I.  Grimberg,  I.  Pastirk,  M.  Dantus,  Chem.  Phys.

8437.

(submitted).

32

                                                                                                                                                
introduced  by  E.  Schrodinger,
65. A 
naturwissenschaften,  23  (1935)  807,  translated  in  Proc.  Am.  Phil.  Soc.  124
(1980) 323.

translation  of  verschrankung, 

66. C. H. Bennett, F. Bessette, G. Brassard, L. Salvail, and J. Smolin, J. Cryptol. 5

(1992) 3.

(1987) 373.

67. To  collapse  the  electronic  superposition  in  TGFCARS,  to  distinguish
between  evolution  on  excited  and  ground  states,  it  would  be  necessary  to
use phase locked pulses and heterodyne detection.

68.  R. Leonhardt, W. Holzapfel, W. Zinth and W. Kaiser, Chem. Phys. Lett. 133

69. D. P. DiVincenzo, Phys. Rev. A, 51 (1995) 1015.
70. H. A. Bethe and E. E. Salpeter, Quantum Mechanics of One- and Two-Electron

Atoms, (Wiley, New York, 1957), p. 48.

71. The first stage of the circuit diagram in Fig. 15 has the structure of the two-
qubit quantum CNOT gate, which requires the flipping of the logical value
of a target qubit based on the logical state of the control qubit (i.e., and XOR
between control and target). Thus, if we were to identify the control qubit as
|ϕ>c  ≡   |B,v’,j-1>  and  the  target  qubit  |ϕ>T  ≡   |B,v’,j+1>,  then  in  the  two-
level logic, under the Stokes-pulse arriving at t2, the output qubits consist of
  ⊕   |ϕ>T  and  |X,v”,j-2;  t2>  =  |ϕ>T.  The  first  of  these
|X,v”,j;  t2>  =    |ϕ>c
outputs changes state if the instantaneous value of the control qubit is “1”.
This CNOT gate would be universal if the input qubits were independently
prepared. As defined, the utility of this CNOT is limited because it operates
within a single time-circuit diagram.

72 . Z. Bihary, D. Lidar, and V. A. Apkarian (manuscript in preparation).
73.  M. Gruebele and A. H. Zewail, J. Chem. Phys. 98 (1993) 883.
74.  See  for  example,  A.  Batista,  B.  Miguel,  J.  Zuniga,  A.  Requena,  N.

Halberstadt, K. C. Janda, J. Chem. Phys. 111 (1999) 4577.

75  C. Scheurer, A. Piryatinski, and S. Mukamel, J. Am. Chem. Soc. (submitted,

76.

2000).
J. C. Kirkwood, C. Scheurer, V. Chernyak, and S. Mukamel, J. Chem. Phys.
114 (2001) 2419.

77.  For a general discussion of parallels between multi-dimensional  NMR  and
nonlinear  optical  spectroscopies,  see  ref.  48  and  earlier,  J.  I.  Steinfeld,
Molecules and Radiation, (MIT Press, Cambridge Mass, 1985) 2nd edition.
78.  R. R.  Ernst, G. Baudenhausen, A.  Wokaum,  Principles  of  nuclear  magnetic
resonance in one and two dimensions (Oxford University Press, New York,
1987).

79.  E. L. Hahn, Phys. Rev. 80 (1950) 580.
80.  For a good discussion of the NMR  approach to  computing and  limitations

therein, see Ch. 7 in ref. 10.

33

Figure Captions

Fig. 1: Diagrammatic  representation  of  time-resolved  CARS.  Both  time-circuit

and Feynman diagrams are illustrated for a non-overlapping sequence of P, S, P’

pulses, with central frequency of the S-pulse chosen to be outside the absorption
spectrum  of  the  B←X  transition,  to  ensure  that  only  the  P(0,3)  component  of  the

third-order  polarization is  interrogated.  In  this  dominant  contribution,  all  three

pulses act on bra (ket) state while the ket (bra) state evolves field free. Note, for

the Feynman diagrams, we use the convention of Ref. 5, which is different than

that of Ref. 4.

Fig.  2:  Diagrammatic  representation  of  electronically  all-resonant  CARS  with

coincident Pump and Stokes pulses, P+S, followed by P’. The first diagram is the

same  as  that  of  Fig.  1.  To  be  resonant  in  all  fields,  the  ϕ(2) ˆ µ ϕ(1) ≡ P(2,1)

contribution can only be initiated from vibrationally excited states of the ground

electronic surface. The time-circuit diagrams make it clear that for this process to
have significant cross section, ω

S ~kBT must hold.

p-ω

Fig.  3:  The  wavepacket  picture  associated  with  the  evolution  of  the  ket-state  in

the  diagram  of  Fig.  1,  for  resonant  CARS  in  iodine.  The  required  energy

matching condition  for  the  AS radiation, Eq. 10b of text, can only be met when
the packet reaches the inner turning point of the B-surface. Once prepared, ϕ(3) (t)

will oscillate, radiating periodically every time it reaches the inner turning point.

Fig. 4: The “wiring” diagram of rotational eigenstates for a given path – v, v’, v”,

v’’’ – in vibrational state space.

a)  Conventional  diagram:  The  rotational  selection  rule,  ∆j=±1,  limits  the

possible paths. The dark solid lines  connect the  paths that lead  to  the
P-branch (j-1→j) transition in the CARS  spectrum.  These  are  the  only

34

relevant paths when the measurement involves TIFRCARS of the j-1→j

transition. The gray lines connect the path for the R-branch transition,
j+1→j.  Interference  occurs  when  two  transitions  terminate  on  one

eigenstate. Note also that the coherence transferred to <v’’’,j±3| is lost

from the detectable AS polarization.

b)  Schematic diagram, useful for the interferometric analysis of the four-

wave  mixing  process.  The  diagram  highlights  the  phases  gained  by

evolution  along  different  paths  in  ro-vibronic  state  space.  Each  inner

loop  is  equivalent  to  a  Mach-Zehnder  interferometer,  with  nodes

corresponding  to  a  time  at  which  the  applied  radiation  field  may

stimulate interference between two paths.

Fig. 5: Experimental arrangement for TGFCARS.  The sample consists  of iodine

vapor  contained  in  a  quartz  cell  heated  to  50°C.    The  forward  BOXCARS

geometry  is  used,  with  the  three  input  beams  brought  to  focus  using  a  25  cm

achromatic doublet, and a pinhole to spatially filter the anti-Stokes radiation. The

AS beam is t-gated using a Kerr cell with CS2 as active medium, then dispersed

through  a  1/4-m  monochromator,  and  detected  using  a  CCD  array.  An

experimental spectral slice, at t = 2 ps, is shown in the inset.

Fig.  6:  Image  of  the  third-order  ro-vibronic  coherence  obtained  by  time  gated

frequency resolved CARS (TGFCARS): Experiment (right panel), simulation (left

panel). The vibrational assignment is indicated at the population maxima, near j

= 50, for each state. Note, the signal at t = 0 is strongly saturated.

Fig.  7:  Simulation  of  the  third-order  coherence  for  v’’’  =  34  showing  the

rotational  revivals,  or  winding  pattern  of  rotational  recursions:  a)  P-branch

transitions;  b)  P-  and  R-branch  transitions.  Note  the  interference  between

branches, and within the same branch.

35

Fig.  8:  Simulation  of  the  role  of  interference  in  the  third-order  polarization,  for

v’’’  =  26-45.  a)  The  signal  evaluated  according  to  Eq.  17  of  text,  under  the

assumption  of  white  spectra  for  the  three  pulses,  and  after  setting  all  matrix

elements to unity. b) The third order polarization with interferences suppressed

by squaring contributions from each eigenstate before summing, as required by

Eq. 17.

Fig.  9:  Time-integrated  frequency-resolved  CARS  image  of  first-  and  second-

order  coherences  and  cross  sections:  a)  Two-dimensional  time-wavelength

image; b) Waveforms (time-slices) at selected wavelengths; c) Spectra at selected
times. Negative  time corresponds to scanning t21,  with  δ[t3-t2],  during  which  the

first-order  electronic  coherence  is  monitored.  Positive  time  corresponds  to
scanning t32, with δ[t2-t1], during which the second-order vibrational coherence is

monitored.

Fig.  10:  Coarse  grain  images  of  time-integrated  frequency  resolved  CARS:  a)

First-order coherence, where t = t21 ; b) Second-order coherence, where t = t32.

Fig. 11: Wavepacket simulations of first- and  second-order  coherence images of

Fig. 9a, within the two-electronic state Hamiltonian.

Fig.  12:  Time  circuit  diagram  for  the  resonant  P(2,1)  contribution  and  the  likely

potential energy surfaces that are involved.

Fig.  13:  The  P(1,2)  contribution  simulated,  using  Eq.  26  of  text,  based  on  the

experimental spectral profile of the laser pulses, Eq. 27.

36

Fig.  14:  Spectral  slice  of  the  TIFRCARS  signal  in  Fig.  9b  at  538  nm.  The  peaks

identified  with  stars are  assigned to  the  P(1,2)  contribution  shown  in  Fig.  13.  The

simulation is according to Eq. 30 of text.

Fig. 15: Spectral slice from the coarse scan TIFRCARS of Fig. 10b. The simulation

is according to Eq. 30.

Fig. 16: Two-level logic equivalent to the wiring diagram in Figure 4.

Fig. 17: The  rotational network  controlled with structured pulses for reset  (=P),

write (=S), process (=P’), and read (G).

37

t
1

t
2

|v',j'>

t
3

t
4

|v"',j"'>

P

S

P'

AS

|v",j">

|v,j>

<v,j|

AS

P'

S

P

|v"',j"'>

|v",j">

|v',j'>

t
4
t
3

t
2

t1

( 0 )(t) ˆ 

m j

X

(3 )(t)

B

|v,j>

<v,j|

j
a)

b)

b')

c)

a)

b)

c)

]
1
t
 
–
 
2
t
[

]
2
t
 
–
 
3
t
[

d
d
2.5 104

2 104

)

1
-

1.5 104

m
c
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

1 104

5000

0

2

P

P'

S

B(0

)

u

(3)(t)

(1)(t)

B"

X(0

)

g

(2)(t)

R (Å)

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

j
j
j
<v"',j+3|

<v"',j+1|

<v"',j-1|
<v"',j-3|

<v',j+1|

<v',j-1|

<v",j+2|

<v",j|
<v",j-2|

|v,j>

t

1

t

2

t

3

t

4

j + 1 e iEj +1t / h
  

j - 1 e iEj - 1t / h
  

j + 1 e iEj +1t / h
  

j - 1 e iEj - 1t / h
  

j + 2 e iEj +2t / h
  

j eiE jt / h
  

j - 2 eiE j- 2t / h
  

iE jt / h j

e
  

-
)
s
p
(
 
e
m
T

i

36

35

34

33

32

31

Wavelength

a)

b)

)
s
p
(
 
e
m
T

i

Wavelength (nm)

)
s
p
(
 
e
m
T

i

Wavelength (nm)

60

)
s
p
(
 
e
m
T

i

40

20

0

Wavelength (nm)

2
3
t

)
s
p
(
 
e
m
T

i

2
1
t

Wavelength (nm)

-8

-6

-4
-2
Time (ps)

0

2

4

520

530

540

Wavelength (nm)

)
s
p
(
 
e
m
T

i

Wavelength (nm)

)
s
p
(
 
e
m
T

i

Wavelength (nm)

)
s
p
(
 
e
m
T

i

Wavelength (nm)

4 104

3 104

2 104

)

1
-

m
c
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

1 104

P S

P'

)
I*I*(0
g

)
B(0
u

B"

)
X(0
g

R (Å)

0

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

t
n
e
m

i
r
e
p
x
E

n
o
i
t

l

a
u
m
S

i

=536 nm

AS

=538.8 nm

AS

P(1,2)

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

time (ps)

l
l
-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

t

21

t

32

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I
 

S
R
A
C

A

Experiment

Simulation

*

*

-8

-6

-4

-2

2

4

0
Time (ps)

1000

F
J

3000

2000

0

-1000

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I
 

S
R
A
C

t

21

Experiment

Simulation

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

 (ps)

t

21

<v’,j+1|

<v’,j-1|

<v”,j+2|

<v”,j|

<v”,j-21|

<v’’’,j+1|

<v’’’,j-1|

P

S

P’

G

|
?

>

|

0

>

