The  Principle  of  Synergy  and  Isomorphic  Units,  a  revised
version

Edgar Paternina

Electrical engineer. With experience in the area of real time control centers with
State  Estimator  included,  an  algorithm  that  validates  the  complex  equations  of  a
power system.

Contact: epaterni@epm.net.co
__________________________________________________________________

Abstract:  A  solution  to  the  part  and  whole  problem  is  presented  in  this
paper by using a complex mathematical representation that permits to define
the Holon concept as a unit that remains itself in spite of complex operations
such  as  integration  and  derivation.  This  can  be  done  because  of  the
remarkable  isomorphic  property  of  Euler  Relation.  We  can  then  define  a
domain  independent  of  the  observer  and  the  object  where   the  object  is
embedded.  We  will  then  be  able  to  have  a  Quantum  Mechanics  solution
without the "observer drawback", as Karl R. Popper tried to find all his life
but  from  the  philosophical  point  of  view  and  which  was  Einstein  main
concern  about  QM.  A  unit  that  has  always  similar  or  identical  structure  or
form, despite even complex operations such as integration and derivation, is
the ideal unit for the new sciences of complexity or just the systems sciences
where structure or form, wholeness, organization, and complexity are  main
requirements. A table for validating the results obtained is presented in case
of the pendulum formula.

Keywords: whole, part, Holon, bus, energy, synergy, complex numbers,
isomorphic properties

__________________________________________________________________

1. Introduction: Three basic attributes of reality

In his General System Theory, Ludwig von Bertalanffy wrote:

Reality, in the modern conception, appears as a tremendous hierarchical order of
organized  entities,  leading,  in  a  superposition  of  many  levels,  from  the  physical
and chemical to biological and sociological systems. Unity of Science is granted,
not  by  a  utopian  reduction  of  all  sciences  to  physics  and  chemistry,  but  by  the
structural uniformity of the different levels of reality.

1

That structural uniformity or isomorphism of the different levels of reality is
the main concern of this paper, and its main aim will be to present a new way of
"seeing"  reality  by  means  of  some  isomorphic  units,  or  co-variant  units,  so  to
speak, units in which the form is one important attribute as well. A basic recurrent
design  or  pattern  that  can  be  used  to  interpret  and  explain  those  problems  where
dynamic interactions or an organized complexity appear.

The  problem  of  form  appeared  in  classical  physics,  but  precisely  in  those
fields  where  the  field  concept  was  unavoidable.  The  magnetic  field  problem,
whose  existence  can  even  be  felt  by  putting  two  permanent  magnets  near  by,  is
really  one  of those  problems  of  nature  that  after  all  were  hiding  a  great  mystery.
With the magnet we can not only present theoretical examples of those three basic
fundamental  attributes  that  are  the  basic  to  an  isomorphic  unit,  but  the  magnetic
field to be well represented, from the mathematical point of view, we must also use
a  complex  number  mathematical  symbolism.  Those  three  basic  attributes  are:
wholeness, oneness and openness.

The  wholeness  attribute  can  be  seen  easily  in  the  case  of  a  magnet,  where
each magnet split from another magnet is precisely a whole new magnet. This new
"part" that came from an old whole is a whole too. To obtain a whole from another
whole is like to obtain a son from a father, or an object from the instantiation of a
class and in this same sense Ken Wilber[8] wrote To be a part of a larger whole
means  that  the  whole  supplies  a  principle(or  some  sort  of  glue)  not  found  in  the
isolated parts alone, and this principle allows the parts to join, to link together, to
have something in common, to be connected, in ways that they simply could not be
on their own...When it is said that "the whole is greater than the sum of its parts,"
the  "greater"  means  "hierarchy"...This  is  why  "hierarchy"  and  "wholeness"  are
often uttered in the same sentence

Associated  with  this  wholeness  attribute  is  that  binary  or  dual  aspect  of
reality,  where  we  have  always 
two  "opposites"  or  more  appropriately,
complementary or polar entities within a comprehensive whole, or just a unit that
transcends duality, the oneness attribute, that can be found physically in a magnet.
The within and the without [4 ] some sort of dynamic structure embedded in a unit
that  cannot  be  split  in  its  two  components.  Structures  that  perform  well  in  a
changing environment must be capable to reflect the without, they must have, as it
were, a storing capacity to reflect that without.

The magnet has also another remarkable attribute associated with form, with
the  environment  or  interface  or  some  sort  of  a  medium  to  separate  an  internal
milieu  from  an  external  environment[13],  as  it  were,  a  field  concept,  or  the
openness  attribute.  At  this  point  is  important  to  recall  that  these  three  attributes
cannot be considered on their own. They are linked together by some sort of glue.
This  is  the  main  characteristic  of  this  new  way  of  "seeing"  reality  in  which  we
must  always  have  in  mind  that  gluing  principle,  we  will  name  the  Principle  of

2

Synergy. At this point of reasoning we are taken to think in open systems, as those
systems capable of exchanging with the environment

2.  Thirdness as an alternative way of codification

For representing mathematically such kind of problems, it is necessary to use
a  language  that  permits  to  define  a  unit  embedded  in  a  comprehensive  whole,
environment or dynamic structure, and which can include also a radical duality or
polarity,  which  can  be  generated,  precisely  because  that  inherent  coincidentia
oppositorum or that tension, that manifests as a field that makes by definition that
unit an open system: the self-preservation attribute.

The  main  aim  of  this  semiotic  codification[16]  is  to  integrate  in  a

comprehensive whole the radical duality of the universe that can be codified as

-  (the original, (the potential/the actual))

- (Being or reality, (mind or consciousness/form)

- (Form, (time/space))

- (wholeness, (Oneness/Openness))

where:
-  with openness we associate the field concept,

-  with oneness the dual nature properly speaking not in the monadic sense,

-  and  with wholeness the nondual or qualitative nature of reality, in the thirdness

sense.

It is important to notice that we have two fundamental entities:

-  one that stands on its own and

-  another  one  dual  embedded  in  another  parenthesis  and  separated  by  a  symbol
“/” of the or type in the sense that the one excludes the other in its manifestation
The symbol  “,”    is  for  differentiating  two  different  and  fundamental orders of
reality,  and  the  symbol  (  ),  is  for  integrating  them  both  in  a  comprehensive
whole.  It  is  the  relation  between  these  two  components  that  permits  us  to
redefine the uncertainty principle in a new context as we will see later.

A Holon has embedded a within and a without, as it were, an analytical and

 
a synthetic capacity, or a partness and a wholeness attribute.

3

  The openness attribute is then related with a capacity to generate a field that
is concomitant with those entities we can named holonic -to use a term coined by
Ken Wilber- such as magnetic entities, electrons, linguistic signs, cells, life, mind
and beings in general.

3. Complex number and thirdness

Complex  numbers  have  the  capacity  not  only  to  represent  that  binary  or
duality aspect of reality or the chance to have two polarities included in one unit,
but also the nondual or wholeness attribute, we have related with that capacity to
generate a new whole, the self-replication attribute.
       Complex  numbers  were  born  when  trying  to  solve  the  simple  algebraic
equation
                       x² + 1  =  0

                       x²  =  -1

                       x   =  Sqr(-1)  =  J
where as a solution we have the square root of a negative one or the radical unit J.

- 

From  the  point  of  view  of  "real"  number  perspective  it  does  not  exist  a
solution  for  this  simple  problem  and  as  so  it  was  necessary  to  make  a  paradigm
extension or paradigm shift, and to define a new type of more general numbers to
solve the problem. The solution J was named "imaginary" by Descartes for the first
time  and  since  then,  complex  numbers  remained  as  some  sort  of  a  strange
mathematical  tool.  It  was  Leonard  Euler  in  1745,  the  one,  that  finally  found  a
mathematical symbol for representing that new entity that included both  kinds  of
numbers:
- 

those named real and which we will term nondual for reasons we will see later,
and
those  named  "imaginary",  we  will  name  dual  on  the  other  hand  for  apparent
reasons too.
Why  was  it  written  by  David  Berlinski  in  “Tour  of  the  Calculus”(1196,
Heinemann) that “the area in thought that the calculus made possible is coming to
an  end” and  that  “it  is  a  style  that has  shaped  the  physical  but  not  the  biological
science”?  A reason is that area in thought of classical mathematics was  definitely
restricted to the without of things, to the surface, to the reduced part. And as so it
could  only  be  codified  from  a  monadic  world  perspective  and  in  a  way  that  the
within necessarily had to be reduced to the without of things[16 ], the quantitative
to the qualitative. In such a monadic world we have:
-  (within/without)...  reduced to... (without)
-  (qualitative/quantitative)...  reduced to... (quantitative)
-  (whole/part)... reduced to... (part)

4

-  (potential/actual)...  reduced to... (actual)

Being  the  main  advantage  of  this  mathematical  methodology    or  language
that  with  it,  we  can  work  with  close  systems,  reversible,  universal,  deterministic
and atomistic [16 ]

Problems  of  growth  has  been  associated  from  the  point  of  view  of  a
mathematical representation with the number epsilon or Euler number since a long
time ago. And it was by studying infinite series, that Euler found that entity, that
not only could represent those two kinds of numbers, nondual and dual, but also it
included  those  cyclical  waveforms,  sine  and  cosine,  that  occur  so  frequently  in
nature  wherever  we  have  cyclical  phenomena.  But  the  most  important,  the  most
cogent argument to use this kind of new numbers, that have been used by Electrical
Engineering  since  Oliver  Heaviside  and  Steinmetz  introduced  them  at  the  end  of
the  19th  century  to  solve  alternating  electrical  current  circuits,  is  precisely,  its
inherent  isomorphic  property,  that  permits  them  to  make,  as  it  were,  co-variant
representations, or to make simpler complex operations.

it  was  used  for 

Evidently  such  a  useful  mathematical  entity,  was  adequate  to  represent
dynamic  realities,  and 
time  for  representing
electromagnetic fields at the end of the 19th century, and after that, vectors  were
born in physics, but then they are taught, in general, without making any references
to this complex number origin. Up to that moment complex numbers had not been
used in practical cases, and  as  so  it  justifies  why  the  complex  plane  was delayed
100 years from its real birth at the end of the 18th century.

the  first 

A  unit  that  has  always  similar  or  identical  structure  or  form,  despite  even
complex operations such as integration and derivation, is the ideal unit for the new
sciences  of  complexity  or  just  the  systems  sciences  where  structure  or  form,
wholeness,  organization,  and  complexity  are  main  requirements.  Another
important  point  is  that  it  can  also  be  used  to  define  then  a  Basic  Unit  System
concept in which uncertainty is included, and as so open systems.

Classical  physics  had  as  it  main  aim  to  resolve  natural  phenomena  into  a
play  of  elementary  units,  as  it  were,  to  resolve  those  phenomena  into  their  parts,
isolated parts, I mean, so the concept of particle  was  always  the  starting point of
the  whole  framework.  But  that  part  or  particle  needed  to  be  considered  as  an
isolated entity, that is, as a closed system, in which there  were no interactions at
all with the environment[2]. This ideal model to represent reality was so restrictive
that it definitely failed, the way we all know.

An adequate framework for representing reality, the whole reality,  must  be
complex,  in  the  sense,  that  it  must  not  only  include,  the  dual-logical-nature  of
reality, but also it must include, that another  aspect  related  with  form,  wholeness
and oneness.

The  form,  the  structure  must  be  co-variant[5],  that  is,  it  must  remain  the
same  in  spite  of  a  progressive  modification  of  that  same  structure.  In  this  way
adaptation or changeness as a fundamental process can give us persistent properties

5

for  that  structure  or  just  despite  complex  operations  such  as  integration  and
derivation  done  upon  that  structure.  There  is  another  more  important  aspect  to
recall, and it is the need not to reduce uncertainty, in certain cases, to be able just
to manage it. And here we come across with the fundamental problem of open and
closed systems. When we have an open system, in general,  that uncertainty  is  an
essential  part  of  the  problem,    of  its  openness  attribute,  and  in  this  sense  that
uncertainty cannot be reduced unless we close the system, so that we determine its
state completely defining then ideal objects of study, that can fail in real cases. The
interactions  of  a  closed  system  are  reduced  almost  to  zero  and  then  the  system
becomes a static system and not precisely a steady state system. Open systems and
that  second  law  are  in  some  sense  "incompatible"  if  we  establish  a  hierarchical
framework  in  which,  that  second  law  is  just  a  special  case  of  the  behavior  of  an
open system.

4. Euler Relation and Its Isomorphic Properties

Up to this moment we have been seeing the emergence of a new concept of
unit that includes in its mathematical representation the dual and nondual nature of
reality,  i.e.,  a  relationship  between  the  part  and  the  whole  or  just  a  unit  that  is  a
whole  and  a  part  at  the  same  time  or  a  Holon  as  Ken  Wilber  named  it  [8],
represented succinctly as:

(whole, part)

What we aim at this moment is to show that Euler Relation, is precisely the
mathematical symbol necessary to make an adequate mathematical representation
of the Holon concept by taking J as the symbol for differentiation. The whole/part
entity we have named a Basic Unit System can be codified then as:

               e J( Ø )  =  Cos (Ø) + J Sin (Ø)                                               

   By  assigning  values  to  Ø,  from  Ø  =  0  to  Ø  =  90  degrees,  we  obtain  both  a
horizontal  and  a  vertical  line,  respectively,  i.e.,  the  complex  plane,  which  can  be
"seen"  as  a  fifth  sphere  of  reality  or  a  totality  that  can  be  used  to  represent  or
contain the four dimensional space-time continuum.

It can also be seen as a mathematical representation of the domain of Form,
in the same line of that domain imagined by the perennial philosophy with Plato.
Karl  R.  Popper  in  the  intent  to  transcend  dualism  envisioned  this  domain  as  a
"third  world",  independent  from  mind  or  the  subject  and  the  object.   Karl  R.
Popper main concern in Objective Knowledge [10]was precisely to avoid what he
called  an  essentialist  explanation  by  introducing  this  "third  world",  as  a  world

6

independent  both  from  the  object  and  the  subject.  Only  through  a  mathematical
representation  we  can  avoid  any  semantic  pitfall.  In  the  following  figure  we  can
see two systems S and S´ in interrelation, and apart each other an angle, being the
whole domain of representation the complex plane.

                                                                         
In general we can then envision Ø acquiring all values, from zero to 360 degrees,
or just, some sort of a clock pointer, or a vector rotating about an origin at a given
frequency, where Ø = wt and w = 2¶f
 

7

                                                                        
A vector rotating about a point, is what we term the centerness attribute of Euler
Relation,  that  has  to  do  with  its  natural  cyclical  behavior.  We  could  say  nature
loves the cyclical waveform behavior, as we find it everywhere, from the motions
of  the  stars  and  the  planets,  to  the  tides  on  earth,  our  heartbeats  and  our
psychological  states  and  even  that  motion  that  has  always  exerted  such  a
fascination upon human mind, I mean, the pendulum motion. In Euler relation we
have two types of cyclical waves separated by the radical J, and what this means is
that those two type of cyclical waves are very different in nature, and this is what
we are going to show in the following.
In Euler Relation we then have a:
Dual, symmetric or binary component that can be represented with the sine

function:

                    (-) = Sin (-θ)                                            (+) = Sin (θ)
_________________________________o________________________________

                                         
and a Nondual one component that can be represented with the cosine function:

     Cos(Ø ) = Cos(-Ø)

We  must recall that the dual component or that component associated with
the  sine  function  changes  with  changing  the  sign  of  the  angle  Ø,  and  that  the
nondual  component  or  cosine  function  remains  the  same  with  changing  that  sign
angle, so we have in this unit those two requisites we pointed out at the beginning

8

of  this  paper  necessary  for  representing  reality.  This  mathematical  process  of
changing sign is associated with changing the rotation sense, counterclockwise or
clockwise as we will see later, so it has to do with a very general sense of rotation
of the whole structure.

Historically  Euler  Relation  was  associated  with  the  problem  of  the  infinite

series:

  x
e   =  1 +  x  +  x² / 2!  +  x³ / 3!  +...                 

where by replacing

                            x  = J*Ø

we  obtain  finally  Euler  Relation  by  separating  those  terms  that  are  affected  by  J
from the others, obtaining the nondual or cosine expression and the dual affected
by J, or sine expression.
   
This infinite series is Euler Relation, where, e = 2.71828. The main point to
notice  at  this  very  moment,  is  the  cosine  and  sine  nature  of  the  two  components
separated by J.

Cosine or nondual nature of Euler Relation

From Euler relation we obtain the cosine function represented by

         Cos (wt)  =  ( e J( wt ))/ 2+  ( e - J( wt )) / 2

The  cosine  function  is  expressed  as  the  sum  of  two  vectors  rotating  in
opposite directions[14], one of them in counterclockwise or positive direction at an
angular velocity w, and the second one in the clockwise or negative direction at an
equal angular velocity w. As the vector rotate the two dual components cancel each
other,  and as so the sum  is  a  purely  real  or  nondual vector,  nondual, because  we
cannot obtain the opposite by changing the sign of the angle. The axis of the cosine
function is in fact that axis not affected by J, the so called real axis, we have named
the nondual axis instead. It’s  important to recall the radical duality, expressed in
that inherent polarity or tension of those two vectors rotating in opposite directions
but in a comprehensive whole, i.e., the complex plane.
                                                                                                            

9

                                                                   

Sine or dual nature of Euler Relation

From that same Euler Relation we obtain the sine function represented by

         Sin (wt)  =  [( e - J( wt )) / 2- ( e J( wt ))/ 2]* J

The sine function is expressed as the sum of two vectors rotating in opposite
directions,  one  of  them  in  counterclockwise  or  positive  direction  at  an  angular
velocity w, and the second one in the clockwise or negative direction at an equal
angular velocity w. As the vector rotate the two nondual components cancel each
other, and as so the sum is a purely, as it were, "imaginary" or a dual vector. Dual
because by just changing the sign of the angle we can obtain the opposite.

   
The axis of the sine function is in fact the J axis(see how the sine function is
affected  by  J),  the  so-called-imaginary-axis,  or  the  symmetry  axis,  where
symmetry  is  defined  as  similarity  of  forms  or  arrangement  on  either  side  of  a
dividing  line,  so  on  one  side  we  have  a  positive  magnitude  and  on  the  other  we
have a negative sign for that magnitude.

10

                                               
 
From this point of view it is not perfectly general to say that the sinusoidal
wave, as an adjective, is the same for both sine and cosine functions even though
we can obtain the one from the other by the addition of a phase angle of -90°; that
addition is not at all a trivial one though.

To  avoid  any  ambiguity  we  must  differentiate  clearly  the  asymmetrical  or
nondual nature of the one, and the symmetrical or dual nature of the other. Reality
is  in  fact  composed  of  two  components,  but  in  the  physical  domain,  i.e.,  the  "
imaginary" domain, the dual nature is easily grasped and as so we can  really  say
nature "loves" the sinusoid, and normally it hides as a mystery, its nondual nature.

The  nondual  nature  must  always  be  discovered.  It  is  some  sort  of  fixed  or
nonchanging  component  to  which  the  change  of  the  system  as  a  whole  can  be
referred,  but  as  a  point  of  reference  it  must  be  discovered,  it  must  be  chosen  or
requires a decision. In this sense we can say that the foundation of all reality is an
ultimate  frame  of  reference  in  which  the  nondual,  the  nonchanging  is  at  the
background[17] or up from the point of view of hierarchy and this implies then an
"inclusive"  attribute  that  is  essential  to  have  always  in  mind  when  dealing  with
reality. That frame of reference, we have named the domain of Form, permits us to
define a domain independent of the observer and the object, as within it the object
11

is embedded. We will then be able to have a Quantum Mechanics solution without
the "observer  drawback",  as  Karl  R.  Popper  tried  to  find  all  his  life but  from  the
philosophical point of view and which was Einstein main concern about QM too.

5. The resonant effect: "merry-go-round" effect

Phase  angle  and  magnitude  are  the  two  main  state  variables  of  that  unit
obtained  with  Euler  relation  and  that  has  been  named  a  phasor  in  EE.  The  Basic
Unit  System  concept  will  be  a  rotating  entity  in  the  complex  plane  at  a  given
frequency, that can be codified as:
(Energy, (angle/magnitude))
In most practical problems all vectors, in the complex plane, must be riding
with  the  same  frequency,  so  that  a  sort  of  "merry-go-round"  effect[14]  exists.
Vectors are seen as stationary with respect to each other then, so the ordinary rules
of vector geometry can be used to manipulate them as with that "merry-go-round"
effect  we  obtain  some  sort  of  static  framework  within  dynamism.  This  is  a  real
impossibility with the monadic “real” numbers mathematical representation.

We  have  then  the  chance  to  have  the  phenomenon  of  resonance.  We  are
acquainted with such a phenomenon specially in the production of musical sounds
and  certain  type  of  vibrations  but  the  important  point  to  recall  is  that  through
resonance  we  can  explain  those  cases  where  small  changes  can  often  produce
large effects, [13]
 
positive or -negative sense of the vector rotation:
- 

We must recall the fact that the phase or the angle sign is associated with the

In the cosine case we can interchange both rotation vectors, by changing their
sign and nothing changes, the form remains the same, they cannot be segregated
just as in a magnet where we cannot differentiate the two polar components as
they are seen always as one, as it were, the oneness property.

Resuming  we  have  with  ER  a  fundamental  structure  with  two  components

-  In  the  sine  case  that  interchange,  or  changing  of  signs  of  the  angle,  affects  the
final-resulting vector with respect to its position in relation with the nondual axis.
 
separated by the radical J:
-  one nondual in which wholeness is an essential attribute and which brings us to
mind that self-awareness capacity that permits us as humans to think about our
own  thinking  process,  that  permits us  reflectivity  or  to  know  that  we  know,  a
new way of "seeing"; a way to be conscious of our being that makes us different
from  the  animal  world.  This  nondual  component  is  precisely  that  one  that
permits us to represent the within of things[4]. With this within attribute we can
envision a storing capacity of energy as that one we find in magnetic fields or
an  information  storing  capacity  in  general.  This  within  attribute  as  a  storing
information  capacity  at  its  highest  manifestation  is  very  different  from
consciousness, being more related with a fifth sphere of reality or just in plain
mathematical  words  with  the  complex  plane.  That  pretension  to  reduce

12

everything  to  consciousness  is  not  our  pretension  anymore.  A  greater  within
means  a  greater  complexity  or  a  greater  without,  that  can  or  cannot  be
necessarily a greater consciousness.

-  one  dual  in  which  we  can  have  two  parts  separated  or  clearly  differentiated.
Parts  separated,  is  precisely  that  condition  necessary  for  the  application  of
analytical procedures, being the second one, the chance to linearize.
We  will  see  in  what  follows  that  ER  most  important  isomorphic  property  is
precisely  to  reduce  complexity  to  a  minus  one  degree  making  linear  the
representation  of  non-linear  operators  without  reducing  them.  These  two  basic
components are united in that mathematical symbolism called Euler Relation and
at the same time separated in a radical way by J, repeating again at a higher level
of representation the same basic structure we have found within that same relation,
an  inclusiveness  attribute.  We  have  then  a  fundamental  and  basic  minimum
structural complexity represented by Euler Relation.

Is  this  basic  minimum  structural  complexity  the  one  necessary  to  represent
reality  at  its  most  profound  structure?  Does  this  basic  minimum  structural
complexity  give  us  those  isomorphic  properties  needed  for  representing  and
deducing the  most  fundamental laws of  physics  and  reality?  The  answer  to  these
two questions will be yes, and this is what this proposal is all about.

6. Complex Algebra and Isomorphic Properties

Vectors are ideal mathematical entities when relationships are important and
as  so  we  have  vector  sums  and  differences,  but  also  multiplication,  division,
derivative and integrals and every one of these operations can be represented in the
complex plane as some sort of complex metrics and even the resulting geometrical
figures  are  simpler  than  those  obtained  in  normal  geometry[14].  The  powerful
advantage  of  complex  number  is  seen  in  computations,  or  when  using  complex-
algebra,  where  the  isomorphic  property  of  Euler  Relation  manifests  all  its  co-
variant power.

The  main  restriction  we  must  pose  from  the  very  beginning  is  that  of  the
same  frequency.  All  rotating  vectors  considered  must  have  the  same  angular
velocity  or  frequency,  so  that  we  can  have  the  "merry-go-round"  effect[14].  The
frequency  in  this  sense  is  that  variable  that  can  in  fact  produce  large  effects  in  a
system  that  was  previously  chaotic  before  acquiring  it[13].  The  order  of  this
system  depends  on  that  acquired  same  frequency  for  all  entities  conforming  the
system.  This  "restriction"  is  in  fact  the  central  point  for  the  system  acquiring  a
higher  ordered  state  [13].  That  frequency  is  associated  with  one  of  the  essential
state variables of the system, the angle, being the other the magnitude. The state is
in fact that one in which having a "merry-go-round" effect gives us as a result an
organized complexity.

13

Rewriting ER again

                        e J( Ø )  =  Cos (Ø) + J Sin (Ø)

we can note that it is a unit vector standing at an angle Ø from the nondual or real
or main axis
                                      1 = Sqr [ Cos ²(Ø) + Sin ²(Ø) ]

that can be represented by the following figure

                                                 
We can have then in general, entities represented as

                             A = Abs (A)* e J( Ø )
that can be represented in a rectangular form as

14

or 

where

And

A = a-nondual + J * a-dual

A-nondual = Abs(A)*Cos(Ø)

A-dual = Abs(A)*Sin(Ø)

With  these  two  expressions  the  complex  algebra  was  established  having  in  mind
that we must not mix oranges and apples. Must we abandon the reduction tendency
with this complex representation?. Must we make a radical distinction between the
two basic components that are used to represent reality?.

   The nondual components must be used with nonduals, and the dual components
with  duals.  In  this  way  all  laws  of  normal  algebra  and  arithmetic  are  preserved.
This radical separation preserves homogeneity on the one hand and heterogeneity
on the other.

If  we call qualitative those aspects related with the phase angle it is shown
they  are  summed  instead  of  multiplied  within  complex  algebra.  This  capacity  of
complex numbers to reduce a nonlinear operation to a linear one, is in fact the one
that  makes  them  such  a  powerful  simplifier  tool,  and  adequate  to  represent  the
complex nature of reality. Linearization does not affect at all the quantitative part,
just the qualitative one. This gives us a new capacity to think the whole correctly
15

and the chance to introduce boldly in our intellectual frameworks new categories.
A  new  world  outlook  is  obtained  that  includes  in  itself  an  explanation  and
development of new things and even solves once and for all the paradoxes of wave
and  particle  as  we  will  see  when  deducing  the  complex  Schrödinger  Wave
Equation.

Differentiation and integration. We have already pointed out that remarkable
property of ER we have qualified as isomorphic and that has to with the fact that
the integration and differentiation of ER, are themselves ER of the same frequency.
   By  the  rules  of  elementary  Calculus,  the  derivative  of  an  ER  with  a
constant magnitude has the same magnitude as the original vector multiplied by the
frequency w, but the angle has been advanced by 90°.                 

    
And  the  integration  is  the  dual  operation  as  that  of  differentiation  and  as  so  the
integration  of  an  ER  with  constant  magnitude,  has  the  same  magnitude  as  the
original vector divided by the frequency w, the angle has been retarded by 90°, or
just the expression multiplied by -J , as were, an opposite sense of rotation.

       F -1   (INTEGRATION)

      F '    (DIFFERENTIATION)

16

This way of reasoning is exactly the application of what  can be  named  the
duality principle, which is a way of applying a binary logic or symmetry to obtain
a dual reality from the other components.

The  complex  vector  algebra  simplifies  mathematical  operations  by  one
degree  or  it  reduces  complexity  by  one  degree.  With  it  a  real  isomorphic  tool  is
obtained  as  even  complex  operations  such  as  differentiation  and  integration  are
reduced to simple algebraic operators.

This  reduction  of  complexity  by  minus one  degree  permits us to  comply  with

linearization and

those two conditions of analytical procedures:
- 
-  to  have  weak  interaction  between  the  parts  in  those  cases  in  which  the  general
open system is closed, which was what Ludwig Von Bertalanffy pointed out as the
central and methodological problem of systems theory[12].
 
Euler  Relation  is  the  ideal  isomorphic  unit,  as  the  sums,  differences,
integrals,  and  derivatives  of  Euler  Relation  functions  of  a  given  frequency  are
themselves  Euler  Relation  functions  of  the  same  frequency,  they  do  not  change
their form with these operations, they remain invariant or just co-variant. No other
mathematical  function  is  preserved  in  this  fashion,  as  so  it  is  the  ideal  one  for
filling that requirement Einstein put in his The foundation of the General Theory of
Relativity, [5], when he wrote "The general laws of nature are to be expressed by
equations  which  hold  good  for  all  systems  of  co-ordinates,  that  is,  are  co-variant
with respect to any substitutions whatever(generally co-variant)".

7. A complex Geometry and Synergy

Our next step is to define a differential complex geometry in which we have

a differential of reality defined as a Basic Unit System or a Holon such that

                DS = Abs (DS)* e J( Ø )

                           

The late Abraham Maslow was the one who coined the term "synergy" , an
obscure  term  from  anthropology,  but  he  used  it  for  the  first  time  in  business  to
describe  how  wealth  can  be  created  from  cooperation.  Creation  of  wealth,
emergence  of  new  things  and  structures  that  modify  themselves  to  give  better
performance  are  main  issues  of  the  so-called-sciences-of-complexity  or  systems
sciences[13].
 
Structure  and  environment  or  thirdness(Oneness)[16]  and  openness  they
both  claim  for  a  whole  that  is  greater  than  the  sum  of  the  parts,  for  a  basic  and
fundamental framework in which three fundamental and interdependent entities are
put in mutual interaction. They pose the need to have as starting point not only a
minimum structure, but also a minimum system of elements in interaction.

17

In  the  physical  domain  synergy  can  be  found  whenever  we  have  a  real
transformation  of  energy  to  another  useful  way  or  level  which  presupposes
interchange or transformation of energy between systems. This "useful way" is in
fact the real source of new  applications  and in this  sense  synergy  is there,  where
we  have  emergence  of  new  realities  or  just  open  systems  that  have  exchanging-
energy-capacity with the environment.

That  whole  greater  than  the  sum  of  its  parts  has  nothing  to  do  with

metaphysic, as that "greater" comes from the very nature of an open system.

Electrical  energy,  or  the  alternating  current  we  use  at  home,  is  in  fact  the
result of the application of  the  Principle  of  Synergy  where  energy  is  transformed
from  a  primary  source,  hydraulic  to  electrical  energy,  by  moving  a  threefold
magnetic structure, which gives at the output the AC energy we can utilize in many
ways.

If  we consider three-double-complex-vectors or just Buses, one in space and

one in time, codified as:

                       J(θθθθ)             J(wt)
A = Abs(A)* e        +        e

                      J(θθθθ+120)       J(wt)
A = Abs(A)* e        +        e

                      J(θθθθ+240)       J(wt)
A = Abs(A)* e        +        e

At last we have

   A' =Abs (A')* e J( wt )

where  they  correspond  to  a  three  physical  disposition  displaced  120°  from  one
another, on the one hand, and on the other to a dynamic entity or field. It is shown
that  the  physical  disposition  cancels  or  the  cause-effect  relationship  is  subtle.  It
depends  on  the  interchanging  of  energy  or  information  with  the  environment
through field concept.

a rotating entity or Bus at a given frequency.
   A  given  frequency  is  precisely  the  one  attribute  that  makes  it  possible,  the
"merry-go-around"  effect,  i.e.,  that  new  order  or  reality  that  comes  from  the
application of the Principle of Synergy. If the frequencies are not the same for the
three independent entities we won’t have the desired "merry-go-around" effect. We

18

have  some  sort  of  emergence  state  in  which  one  small  effect  -a  small  change  in
frequency- gives us a large effect.                            
   Those three, or six independent entities, in interrelationship conform one entity, a
whole picture, a form represented by a circle.

The  Principle  of  Synergy,  or  the  gluing  principle  can  be  represented  by  a
fundamental sevenfold structure

19

                              

The main point to recall is the structure represented by
- 
- 

three inner or nondual relations, or just the 1-1, 2-2 and 3-3 relations
three outer or dual relations, or just the 1-2, 2-3 and 1-3 relations
The wholeness attribute is associated with an emergent property represented by

the 1-2-3 relation.

Even though we have a holistic property in this codification, it is embedded
in a Basic Unit System or Holon, not in a general abstraction where the hierarchy-
relationship between the part and the whole is not clear at all.

The  Bus(Holon)  concept  is  embedded  in  a  formal  complex  mathematical
framework,  whose  generality  is  associated  with  those  isomorphic  properties  we
have already presented and that gives us a real internal consistency which allows to
treat steady-state systems by the same general techniques or methodology.

Furthermore  those  six  relations  are  some  sort  of  detailed  complexity  as
opposed to the 1-2-3  relation  that  is  the  complexity  of  the  whole.  The  traditional
problem between the part or detail and the whole is not a problem anymore with
this  sevenfold  structure  that  can  be  used  at  different  levels  of  reality  without
reducing the one to the other, as its “actualization”[16] depends on a frequency, not
necessarily in a law or relation between the two basic components.

The  fact  we  use  a  complex  mathematical  symbolism,  as  a  tool,  for
representing this sevenfold structure avoids that syncretic whole reasoning Galileo
used when he wrote There are seven windows given to animals in the domicile of
the  head,  through  which  the  air  is  admitted  to  the  tabernacle  of  the  body,  to
enlighten,  to  warm  and  to  nourish  it.  What  are  these  parts  of  the  microcosmos?

20

Two  nostrils,  two  eyes,  two  ears,  and  a  mouth.  So  in  the  heavens,  as  in
macrocosmos,  there  are  two  favorable  starts,  two  unpropitious,  two  luminaries,
and Mercury undecided and indifferent. From this and many other similarities in
nature, such as seven metals, etc., which is were tedious to enumerate, we gather
that the numbers of planets is necessarily seven. But it also prevents using as a key
guiding  principle  the  primacy  of  the  whole  which  results  in  arrogant  role  of
dominance when applied to organizations. But let’s go to the applications.

8. The Pendulum

The  pendulum  movement  is  so  remarkable  not  just  for  its  role  as  a
cornerstone in the birth of modern science that permitted Galileo a paradigm shift,
but also because, it is the most natural example of an open system. When looking
at the swinging body he saw a body that almost succeeded in repeating the same
motion over and over ad infinitum. Its success in repeating the same motion over
an  over  lies  in  its  interrelationship  with  the  environment  or  on  its  openness
attribute.
By looking at the pendulum Galileo reported that the pendulum's period was
 
independent of amplitude for amplitudes as great as 90°, his view of the pendulum
led him to see far more regularity than we can now discover there.[18] Is this view
of seeing more regularities than there really existed part of the incapacity of normal
science  to  explain  pendulum-like  regularities  in  a  most  documented  way,  and
following  a  mathematical  methodology  with  no  leaps?  Or  How  else  are  we  to
account  for  Galileo's  discovery  that  the  bob's  period  is  entirely  independent  of
amplitude,  a  discovery  that  the  normal  science  stemming  from  Galileo  had  to
eradicate and that we are quite unable to document today. [18]

The  exact  simple  pendulum  solution  implies  the  solution  of  a  first  order
differential equation which implies too an integration whose solution is an elliptic
integral. This means the introduction of an approximation factor that could only be
found by observations of the pendulum real behavior, some sort of trial and error
procedure.  This  normal  mathematical  symbolism,  I  mean,  not-complex-
mathematical symbolism, cannot give reason of that approximation factor without
using some sort of methodological leaps, to explain deviations.

Normal  science  works  with  closed  systems,  that  is,  systems  that  do  not
exchange with their environment. The pendulum movement seems to violate even
that infamous second law of thermodynamics. It gives us a natural sense of eternity
just as the poet Jacques Bridaine wrote

"Eternity is a pendulum whose balance wheel says unceasingly only the two words,
in the silence of a tomb, 'always! never! always!...'"

21

After exploiting the cyclical wave nature of Euler Relation in EE, it is obvious to
expect we will be able to explain all those natural phenomena such as that of the
pendulum, in which we have cyclical or wave movements too.

For  achieving this it is necessary  to  realize  a  real  paradigm  shift.  With  the
complex plane we have introduced in fact a new sphere of reality in which we have
embedded both the nondual and dual nature of reality, and as so a complex metrics,
whose main characteristics are:
- on the one hand, its isomorphic property that gives us a powerful methodological
tool to explain those cases in which real dynamism is involved
- on the other that property we have associated with a "merry-go-round" effect that
permits us to make a mathematical representation of real dynamic entities or else
generation  of  forms.  In  the  pendulum  its  form  is  continually  generating  itself  by
just a mere impulse.

A new sphere of reality or the sphere of form, in which the four-dimensional
space-time  continuum  is  embedded.  A  new  category  or  totality  that  contains  the
physiosphere,  but  also  that  sphere  in  which  we  can  have  animated  forms,  as  it
were,  the  biosphere,  or  the  Bergson-Theilhard  de  Chardin  DURATION[1,4]
concept which is quite different from the space time continuum.

A complex metrics is then a top-down metrics. From the notion of the Basic
Unit  System  and  those  normal  regularities  already  known  from  physics,  but  also
from those properties obtained from geometry, we can obtain the state of our Bus
system, through a methodology in which instead of starting with the postulation of
a  differential  equation,  we  start  with  the  Bus  concept  as  a  tool  to  integrate,  or
obtain that state.

From the point of view of the BUS, the pendulum movement is a rotational
motion.  The  pendulum  as  a  Bus  is  then  an  open  steady  state  system.  The  earth
gravitational field is its context.

By observing that cyclical movement we can observe a maximum angle θ, or

θmax, for a corresponding maximum displacement Smax.

Solving  this  problem  means,  integrating  ,  some  sort  of  constitutive

characteristic, not a summative one.

22

                                 

The complex trajectory DS between S = o to S = Smax will be

    Smax                             Smax                             Smax
 ∫ DS     = Cos (θmax )*  ∫ DS   +  J*Sin (θmax)* ∫ DS
0                                      0                                     0

so we have
                   J(θmax)
S = Smax* e

  J(wt)
e

where θ = wt

we note that this is a static and potential expression related with space, and as so
we  must  introduce  its  dynamic  counterpart  by  multiplying  both  parts  of  the
equation by the basic unit of time given by:

The reality S of the pendulum is generated and represented by:

23

Intuitively, from geometry we know that in a circle we have
Smax = L* θmax

Where L is the radius or the cord length of our bob system and θmax, that angle
subtended by the arch, so we have

                      J(wt +θmax)
S(t) = Smax* e

                    J(wt +θmax)
S(t) = L* e

as  a  general  dynamic  expression  in  which  the  principle  of  synergy  is  included.
Whenever we have rotation synergy is at hand.

9. Balancing Equality and the Pendulum

To obtain the pendulum harmonic motion or just its steady state, we must apply

a balancing or a compensating equality, between two driving forces or polarities:
-  an inner one related with the weighting mass of the bob and
-  an outer one related with the so-called-inertial mass.

This  equality  played  a  very  important  role  in  Einstein’s  works  about
gravitational fields[5]. Up to that time that equality had been considered a mystery
in the Newtonian framework. It generated those famous thought experiments with
elevators, in which bodies are subjected on the one hand to an inertial force, and on
the other to the gravitational field.

When these two forces or polarities within a comprehensive whole become
equal  then  we  have  a  harmonic  motion  or  a  motion  that  almost  succeeded  in
repeating  itself  over  and  over  ad  infinitum.  A  balancing  loop  which  implies  a
rotational motion or the Synergistic Principle means that the law of opposites must
always be considered in a comprehensive whole, or dynamic context, producing a
cyclical movement. But if we consider inertial forces then we must apply Newton
Second  Law,  but  this  time  in  the  fivefold  continuum,  or  in  the  complex  plane
context.

The first derivative of S(t)

                      S(t)    =  L* e J(wt + Ømax) 
is
                     dS/dt    =  L *Ømax*e J(wt + Ømax)

24

and the second derivative:

                 d 2 S/ d t 2   = - (L*Ømax*w*w)*e J(wt + Ømax)
being

 amax = ( L * Ømax * w *w *)

the maximum absolute value of acceleration.

According  to  that  second  law  we  have  at  the  maximum  point  Smax  the

inertia "vector", which tends to maintain the motion as:

Fmax = m *( L * Ømax * w * w)

if  we  apply,  on  the  other  hand,  the  vector  composition  of  forces  and  using
tangential components at that point we have the mass "vector" as:

Fmax = m * g * Sen(Ømax)

so equating both the inertial and the mass "vectors" we've got:

L*Ømax*w*w = g*Sen(Ømax)

the angular velocity is:

w = sqr( g * Sen(Ømax) /( Ømax * L))

w = 2*Pi *f

but if

and

T = 1/f, where f is the frequency and T the period then

T = 2*Pi *sqr((L/g) *( Ømax /Sen(Ømax))

which is the exact pendulum formula.

The factor

sqr( Ømax /Sen( Ømax) )

25

tends to one when Ømax is small  and it  can be omitted  as  long  as the  amplitude
does not exceed 10°.

In Table 1, in the second row we can see the values K of the elliptic integral,
in the third row the corresponding factor according that integral, and in the fourth
row  the  corresponding  factor  obtained  with  the  Bus  concept.  In  the  fifth  row  we
can see the difference in error between the elliptic factor and the Bus Factor. This
difference in errors as the amplitude increases can be taken as a fallibility criterion
for  those  angles  greater  then  30  degrees  where  the  error  between  the  two  is
definitely unacceptable.

Table 1. Approximation Factor for the Period of a simple Pendulum

Ø(angle)
K
2K/Pi
Ø /Sen(Ø)
Error(%)

20°

10°

30°

60°

0°
1.571 1.574 1.583 1.598 1.686 1.854 2.157 2.768 Infinite
1.000 1.002 1.008 1.017 1.073 1.180 1.373 1.762 Infinite
1.000 1.005 1.002 1.047 1.209 1.570 2.418 5.235 Infinite
0.000 0.298 -0.595 2.865 11.248 24.84 43.217 66.34 N/A

150° 180°

120°

90°

The exact solution introduces a nonlinear character in the pendulum motion which
gives  reason  of  its  real  behavior  defined  by  the  well  known  observed  laws.
Normally  this problem  was  solved  by  resolving  a  differential  equation,  that  gave
finally an elliptic integral, or some kind of solution that must be validated with the
real observed behavior of the pendulum, as an elliptic integral cannot be expressed
in terms of the usual algebraic or trigonometric functions, see  Vector Mechanics
for Engineers. [3]

Galileo did not know this factor, and  so  he  extended the  application of  the
observed pendulum laws far beyond its real range, even to 90 degrees. But the fact
that the time of any amplitude were independent of the mass of the body made he
think  in  the  falling  of  bodies  and  specially  in  the  well-known  Pisa  Tower
experiment,  in  which  both  an  iron  and  a  wood  sphere  fall  with  the  same  time,
which means in all cases, the trajectory followed by those bodies is an invariant.
The  pendulum  is  essentially  a  device  for  measuring  time.  It  is  in  fact  the
contrivance  of  time.  Its  form  unfolds  itself  in  time,  it  is  the  dynamic  device  for
excellence. Differently from those movements of classical Newtonian  mechanics,
like those of the planets, in which time does not play really any role and in which
we  could  talk  about  the  chance  to  invert  time,  the  pendulum  movement  in  this
sense is not a classical movement, and it answers the question posed by Thomas S.
Kuhn about that movement.

The  Principle  of  Synergy  applied  to  the  pendulum  explains  why  this
principle  seems  opposed  to  that  infamous  second  law,  as  with  it  forms  can  be
generated and we can obtain in natural way a steady state open system.

26

10. Quantum Mechanics

The  Quantum  Mechanics  problem  before  being  a  scientific  problem  is  a
philosophical problem as from the beginning it touches the same nature of reality
and  the  relation  of  the  subject  with  that  reality.  The  relation  between  object  and
subject,  the  active  factor  of  the  subject  in  the  process  of  cognition  is  in  fact  an
epistemological problem  that has to  do  with  the  way  the  subject  defines  what  he
understands by objects[10, 15]. But this philosophical problem can be found in the
idea of the active role of language in the shaping of our worldviews or images of
the  world,  and  as  so  it  is  primitive  and  was  the  main  concern  not  only  of
philosophers  but  also  of  historians  as  we  can  see  in  Adam  Shaff’s  book  History
and Truth.  And  we  know  also the  efforts  done  by  Karl  Popper  during  all his  life
and specially in the introduction of his Quantum theory and the Schism in physics.
From  the  Postscript  to  the  Logic  of  Scientific  Discovery  [11]  to  exorcise
consciousness or the observer from physics.

Reality is independent of human mind, of the subject perceiving it, and we

can distinguish in it three great realms:

- 

the subject that perceives that reality

-  the object perceived by the subject as reality, the intersubjective domain

- 

reality per se

that we can codify in a holonic way as

(The subject, (the field of consciousness /reality)

or just as the big three

(“I”, (“We”/”It”))

The  structure  of  reality  perceived  by  the  subject  is  crucial  in  the
determination  of  the  objects  of  study,  those  objects  normally  studied  by  science.
But  science  is  a  product  of  human  activity  and  as  so  language  is  crucial  in  the
determination  of  those  objects  of  study.  This  problem  took  Karl  R.  Popper  to
define a third world, as an intermediate world between consciousness and objective
reality[10].

As we have seen we can have two kinds of mathematical languages, a partial
one  that  not  necessarily  denies  complex  numbers  as  it  uses  them  in  "convenient
ways", and an integral one in which complex number are used for building a unit in
which  the  radical  J  is  some  sort  of  operator  to  distinguish  between  two  different
27

orders of reality, as it were, the nondual and the dual nature of reality embedded in
that  same  unit.  In  this  sense  this  is  not  a  new  theory  of  everything  but  a  way  of
"seeing" and interpreting reality in which uncertainty is always concomitant.

When we talk about Reality per se we are not meaning a third world as that
of Plato, divine, superhuman and eternal, but of reality as defined by Mortimer J.
Adler in his Adler's Philosophical Dictionary [9] where he wrote:

BEING  The  word  "being"  is  an  understanding  of  that  which  in  the  twentieth
century is identified with reality.

What does the word "real" mean? The sphere of the real is defined as the sphere of
existence that is totally independent of the human mind...Another distinction  with
which  we  must  deal  is  that  between  being  and  becoming,  between  the  mutable
being  of  all  things  subject  to  change,  and  the  immutable  being  of  that  which  is
timeless  and  unchangeable.  That  is  eternal  which  is  beyond  time  and  change.  In
the  real  of  change  and  time,  past  events  exist  only  as  objects  remembered,  and
future events exits only as objects imagined.

Historically  the  prevailing  structure  of  reality  has  been  a  dualistic  one  in
which reality as a whole is divided in just two domains, being each one, as it were,
parallel  to  the  other,  with  no  possibility  of  integration  in  case  of  gross  dualism.
Normally  there  has  been  some  sort  of  partialness  depending  on  the  accent  put
either in philosophy as the queens of all science, or in science as the real-objective
science.  Philosophy  and  Ontology  are  not  considered  normally  as  independent
domains,  but  for  our  purpose  and  aim,  philosophy  must  look  for  an  integrated
image  of  reality  and  in  the  searching  of  methods  of  generalization  so  that
philosophical  theses  are  kept  from  contradicting  science,  in  other  words  it  must
contribute to oneness and not to partialness. On the other hand Ontology must look
for the more-being, and as such realism must be concomitant as a main issue.

An  open  system  can  have  a  variable  center  and  as  such  its  external
manifestation or its form cannot be determined, as its field or circle of influence is
variable,  and  this  will  be  the  case  for  the  electron.  Other  open  systems  in  which
both its center and its radius are not variable will have a more determined state and
will  be  near  to  an  ideal  closed  system.  But  this  issue  has  to  do  directly  with  the
Uncertainty Principle, in which we have as in philosophy no univocal conditions as
those  we  can  obtained  with  closed  systems.  But  the  important  point  is  the
correlation  we  have  between  closed  systems,  measuring  instruments  and  open
system  and  the  Uncertainty  Principle.  The  incapacity  to  measure  the  momentum
and  the  position  of  an  electron  at  the  same  time,  has  been  associated  with  a
philosophical  problem  that  has  to  do  with  an  emphasis  on  the  subject  doing  the
experiment, pointing out the fact that the structures of the subject are crucial in the
way he defines reality or its object of study, which is similar to that philosophical
problem in which language is considered as a factor that creates reality.

28

We can talk about metaphysics when we have assertions for which we don’t
have  procedures  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  laws  on  the  other,  that  can  be  used  to
verify  those  assertions.  In  the  latter  case  when  we  have  laws  we  can  built
measurement  instruments  to  verify  the  Data.  On  the  other  hand  we  have  known
procedures that when used they take us to a series of consistent results, that can be
described  qualitatively,  but not  necessarily  quantitatively.  In  both  cases  our  main
task as scientists and philosophers must be the searching of truth.

In  our  case  we  will  consider  this  problem  of  the  Uncertainty  Principle,  in
case of an electron, as the impossibility to determine the state of the corresponding
Basic Unit System because there is not a law with which we can interrelate its two
components, as it were, its dynamic counterpart and its static one. In this way we
can  separate  the  scientific  problem  of  Quantum  Mechanics  from  a  philosophical
problem which I think was the aim of Karl Popper when defining his "third world
theory".  In  our  case  there  are  clear  differentiation  between  precision  and
uncertainty, as there are cases such as the electron case in which there is no way to
reduce  the  qualitative  to  the  quantitative,  which  was  Karl  R.  Popper  requisite  to
increase the degree of contrastability of certain theories.

11. The complex Schrödinger’s  wave Equation

The trajectory or more appropriately the reality of an electromagnetic entity
as  that  of  the  electron,  which  as  a  matter  of  fact  behaves  as  a  wave,  can  be
represented by the bus concept as

DS = Abs (DS)* e J( Ø )

                           

we can codify it too as

(energy, (time/space))  or  (energy, (t/s))

or

(Energy, (wave/particle))

A  general  conceptualization  of  the  Bus  concept  can  be  seen  as  a  mathematical
codification  of  energy  in  its  most  primary  definition,  but  energy  "is  like  a
frequency multiplied by Plank's constant h"

E = h*f

and that angle ø can be replaced by

29

ø = 2*p / h * (p* x - E *t)

a well-known expression taken from Quantum Mechanics

and

1/λ =  p/h

where λ is de Broglie’s wave length, h is Plank’ s constant, and p is the momentum
of  the  particle  –a  BUS  rotating  at  a  very  slow  unknown  rotational  speed  in  the
complex plane- that can be written too as

p² = 2*E* m
The  two  state  variables  of  the  BUS  in  this  case  are  x  and  t,  so  to  able  to
determine  its  state,  we  must  find  or  know  a  relationship  between  them.  The
geometric-like behavior of the pendulum gave us the clue to find that relationship.
In  case  of  the  planet  movements it is the  second  Kepler’s  Law  associated  with  a
central force  movement  the one  that  permits  to  determine  its  state  and  in  case of
the Lorentz’s transformation group, the fundamental equation of electromagnetism
it was the constancy of the velocity of light[6].

The electron does not behaves like a classical particle or a planet subjected
to  a  central  force,  we  don’t  know,  like  in  the  pendulum  a  way  to  link  its  two
components,  as  it  were,  its  energy  and  its  particle  nature.  Its  state  cannot  be
determined.

For  the  electron  we  cannot  find  a  relationship  between  its  two  state
variables, being this another way to present the Uncertainty Principle which means
from the geometrical point of view we will not have a known trajectory followed
by the electron, as was the case for the pendulum and the planets. In both of these
cases we have a "real" differential equation associated with. In the electron case we
have  the  well-known  complex  Schrödinger  wave  Equation  that  was  presented  by
him in 1926 as a postulate, i.e., as a way of saying that equation does not have just
one solution starting from initial conditions, so the need to measure was replaced
by  qualitative  methods,  where  one  must  focus  in  a  behavioral  area  and  not  in
finding  laws  that  permit  us  to  measure  in  the  classical  way.  In  case  of  the
pendulum its form changes with time, but at the same time, its centerness attribute
is localized, which seems not to be the case for the electron case.

Our aim is to deduce that complex wave Equation in the context of the Bus
concept. Let us suppose an unknown general solution, as a function of space and
time, as it were, of its two state variables

                              J(2λ/h*(p *x – E *t))
S(x, t) = Abs(S) * e

30

Please note the variable Ψ(x, t) usually called “the wave function” in QM has been
replaced by S(x, t) which is a complex function that contains by definition a wave
character[7].  S(x, t) has to do with the real trajectory of the entity in question in
the complex plane so in a certain real sense it is a complex amplitude too.

Let us rename

Abs(S) by S

to distinguish the magnitude from the complex quantity. Expressing E as function
of momentum and replacing

E = p²/2m

we have
                           J(2p/h*(p *x – p²/2m *t))
S(x, t)  = S *e

                           J(2p/h*(p x)         – J2p/h* p²/2m *t
S(x, t)  = S *e  *            e                              (1)

the point here is to follow the well-known-wave procedure by making two partial
derivatives of this expression with respect to space and one partial derivative with
respect  to  time.  By  equating  them  we  obtain  the  complex  Schrödinger  Wave
Equation.  At  this  point  it  is  important  to  recall  the  isomorphic  property  of  Euler
Relation as the one that makes it possible this result, as it were, the permanence of
the unstable.

The first partial derivative with respect to space gives

                                                       2ππππJ* p /h* x         -2πJ/h*( p²/2m)*t
∂∂∂∂S(x, t)/ ∂∂∂∂x = J(2ππππ/h)*p*S*e                     *  e

where the internal derivative of

 2ππππJ* p /h* x
e

31

is J(2ππππ/h)*p

and the rest of the expression can be represented by S´´ so

               J(2ππππ/h)*p      -J(2ππππ/h)* ( p²/2m)*t
S´´ = S* e             *    e

the second partial derivative gives us

∂∂∂∂²S(x, t)/ ∂∂∂∂²x =( J(2ππππ/h)*p) ²* S´´

or else S´´

S´´ = ∂∂∂∂²S(x, t)/ ∂∂∂∂²x/( J(2ππππ/h)*p) ²

-2ππππJ/h*( p²/2m)

so we have

or else

∂∂∂∂S(x, t)/ ∂∂∂∂t = -2ππππJ/h*( p²/2m) *S´´

S´´ =    ∂∂∂∂S(x, t)/ ∂∂∂∂t /-2ππππJ/h*( p²/2m)

S´´ =  - ∂∂∂∂S(x, t)/ ∂∂∂∂t* 2hm / 2ππππJ *p²     (3)

S´´ = -∂∂∂∂²S(x, t)/ ∂∂∂∂²x* h² / 4ππππ²* p ²                              (2)

If  we  now  take  the  partial  derivative  of  (1)  with  respect  to  time,  the  internal
derivative is

32

equating both Ψ" expressions 2 and 3

∂∂∂∂²S(x, t)/ ∂∂∂∂²x*h²/4ππππ²* p² =  ∂∂∂∂S(x, t)/ ∂∂∂∂t*2hm / 2ππππJ *p²

and by eliminating and organizing terms on both sides we obtain finally:

∂²S(x, t)    h²             h          ∂S(x, t)
-------------   * -------------  =   -------- * ----------------------
∂²x            8π² * m       2πJ          ∂t

we  obtain  the  well-known  Schrödinger‘s    Wave  Equation,  introduced  by  him  in
1926, for a free particle moving in x' s direction. This equation was presented then,
as a postulate as there was no means to deduce it, from more basic principles, none
the less, we have just applied the wave procedure to the BUS concept based on the
principle  of  synergy.    Richard  P.  Feynman  wrote[7]  in  his  famous  lectures  on
Physics:

In  principle,  Schrödinger  ‘s    equation  is  capable  of  explaining  all  atomic

phenomena except those involving magnetism and relativity.

We  must  take  into  account  though  that the  Bus  concept  as  a  powerful  tool
has been used for finding the Lorentz’s group of equations that give reason both of
relativity and electromagnetism, but also of gravitational fields.
The symbolic representation

(Energy, (t/x ))

establishes a hierarchy in the sense that wholeness or energy can stand on its own,
and the other two state variables, t and x, cannot. When the state of the system is
determined t and x are related by means of some law or relation, the wholeness or
energy is linked to (oneness, openness). When they cannot be linked as the case of
the electron we have uncertainty and energy prevails on its own.

There  is  an  emergent  conclusion  in  all  this,  and  it  is  that  the  fundamental  of
physical reality is energy, and not a particle( or the mass concept).

A particle is a Bus or Holon rotating at an unknown low frequency but in the
complex plane or in reality represented in that plane, so that its state is completely
determined, or else the qualitative aspect is reduced to the quantitative one in such
a way no possibility of a field or just a storing capacity is feasible different from its
well determined state. It is important to remember at this point that the Bus concept
as a mathematical symbolism also has that wholeness attribute that is at the base of
growth, each whole has the capacity to generate another whole, but always having

33

in mind that openness attribute that also permits us to define the Bus in general as a
symbol  for  representing  a  steady  state  open  system.  It  is  not  a  metaphysical
concept that came from nothing. It is a concept in which a gluing principle as that
of the Principle of Synergy permits us to define that oneness attribute.

12. Conclusions and Suggested applications

From  all  this  exposition  emerges  a  conceptual  framework  that  not
necessarily  reduces  everything  to  the  most  elementary  levels  of  reality,  but  as  a
good  engineering  conceptual  tool  opens  new  avenues  for  future  research  and
development. The important point to recall at the outset is the need to abandon the
old dualistic framework that has the natural tendency to put the whole or the part as
a "primacy" not as a fundamental component of  the  Basic  Unit  System.  The  Bus
concept is a part/whole complex mathematical concept that has embedded, as  we
have  seen,  the  nondual  and  the  dual  nature  of  reality,  but  also  the  Principle  of
Synergy  in  which  the  whole  is  greater  than  the  sum  of  its  parts  that  gives  us  a
medium  to  interpret  reality,  as  it  were,  in  organic  ways.  We  have  a  minimum
threshold of complexity in that structure.

In  general,  reality  can  be  analyzed  as  buses  within  buses  within  buses,  but
the  Principle  of  Synergy  implies  a  same  frequency  to  obtain  that  "merry-go-
around" effect  or that  emergent  steady  state  or new  order  or that  higher  complex
state where we have an organized complexity. One of the most important point to
recall  of  this  symbolism  is  that  we  do  not  need  to  make  any  reference  to
anthropomorphic  concepts  such  as  psyche  or  consciousness  to  explain  those
emergent states where we find a whole greater than the sum of the parts. But from
the  point  of  view  of  the  whole  reality  we  obtain  a  framework  in  which  by  the
introduction  of  a  fifth  sphere  of  reality,  that  of  form,  we  have  then  a  sevenfold
structure where the space-time continuum is embedded in that fifth sphere, where
life can be defined as an animated form, but then we have mind or the noosphere as
the sixth sphere of reality, but also the Being as that one that has embedded them
all, in an all encompassing way.

Having  found  such  a  powerful  explaining  tool,  it  is  obvious  to  feel  an
imperious need to share with the scientific community such a framework that can
not only illuminates its actual practice by  defining the  objects  of  study  in  certain
cases  but  also  establishing  clearly  the  impossibility  to  reduce  those  objects  to
isolated units in other cases. The whole concern of Ludwig von Bertalanffy in its
GST[2] when he wrote

We may state as characteristic of modern science that this scheme of isolated units
acting in one-way causality has proved to be insufficient. Hence the appearance, in
all  fields  of  science,  of  notions  like  wholeness,  holistic,  organismic,  gestalt,  etc.,

34

which  all  signify  that,  in  the  last  resort,  we  must  think  in  terms  of  systems  of
elements in mutual interaction.

is then the same concern of all this paper, but our main point is the integration of
those three big three, Being,  Mind  and  Form  or  as  Ken  Wilber  wrote  in  its   Sex,
Ecology and Spirituality the Spirit of Evolution [8]

With Kant, each of these spheres is differentiated and set free to develop its  own
potentials without violence...These three spheres, we have seen, refer in general to
the  dimensions  of  "it",  of  "we",  and  of  "I"...In  the  realm  of  "itness"  or  empiric-
scientific truths, we want to know if propositions more or less accurately match the
facts  as  disclosed...In  the  realm  of  "I-ness",  the  criterion  is  sincerity...And  in  the
realm  of  "we-ness"  the  criterion  is  goodness,  or  justness  or  relational  care  and
concern...What  is  required,  of  course,  is  not  a  retreat  to  a  predifferentiated
state...what  is  required  is  the  integration  of  the  Big  Three.  And  that,  indeed,  is
what  might  be  called  the  central  problem  of  postmodernity...how  does  one
integrate them?

Science, philosophy  and  ontology  and  its  integration  implies  a science  that
looks for truth but with an openness criterion, a philosophy that looks for oneness
without the reductionism tendency but also  an ontology that looks for wholeness
as a fundamental principle.

To manage complexity properly it is very essential to have a basic structure

and among the possible conceptual structures we can have
-  a binary or dual one and
-  a thirdness one that by mathematical inevitability becomes a sevenfold structure
This  sevenfold  structure  has  been  used  successfully  in  many  fields  in  a
natural way but also recently we can find its application in many other fields too.
For example the three-"tiers" architectural approach to client/server  solutions  and
which  looks  for  separating  the  various  components  of  a  client/server  system  into
three  "tiers"  of  services  that  must  come  together  to  create  an  application  is
precisely  a  solution  whose  main  aim  is  to  manage  the  changing  complexity  and
which  requires  a  basic  hierarchy  that  starts  with  the  service  to  the  client.  A  tool
must be adapted in every case so that we can avoid what can be named the "Galileo
syncretic whole reasoning" about that sevenfold structure. Maybe Galileo powerful
mind "saw" the powerful explaining capacity of this structure but his time was just
the beginning of a science in which the binary or dual structure would prevail.

Structure and environment are the main starting point of the new sciences of
complexity  or  in  the  studies  of  complex  adaptive  systems  in  which  adaptation  to
the environment implies always a minimum conceptual structural framework.

User  services  or  interface  or  environment,  business  services  or  an  adaptive  plan,
and data services or representation of changing structures in a general way, are just

35

some  of  the  new  applications  we  can  found  in  the  General  Systems  Sciences  or
Sciences  of  complexity  of  this  sevenfold  framework  with  which  we  definitely
transcend  the  dualistic  worldview  and  which  is  really  very  different  from  the
holistic  paradigm,  and  not  just  from  the  conceptual  point  of  view  but  even  more
important from the practical point of view.

1. Bergson Henry.Creative Evolution. University Press of America.1983.
2. Bertalanffy von Ludwig. General System Theory George Braziller.1969.
3. Beer and Johnston. Vector Mechanics for Engineers. McGraw-Hill. 1962
4. Chardin Teilhard de. The Phenomenon of Man. Perennial Library.1975
5. Einstein et All. The Principle Of relativity. Dover.1952
6. Epsilon Pi. Physics and The Principle of Synergy Amazon.com.1999
7. Feynman. Fìsica.  Vol III. Fondo Educativo Interamericano S. A.
8. Ken Wilber. Sex, Ecology, Spirituality. Shambhala. 1995
9. Mortimer J. Adler.  Adler’s Philosophical Dictionary. Touchstone Books, 1995
10. Popper K.R. Conocimiento Objetivo. Tecnos. 1998.
11. Popper K.R. Teoría Cuántica y el cisma en Física. Tecnos. 1985
12. Saussure Ferdinand de. Course in General Linguistic. 1997
13. Stuart Kauffman. At Home in the Universe. Oxford Paperbacks.1995.
14. Scott R.E., Essigmann M.W. Linear Circuits. Addison-Wesley. PC.1967
15. Shaff Adam. Language and Cognition. McGraw-Hill.1973
16. Taborsky, Edwina. The Complex Information Process. Entropy. 2000, 2, 81-97
17. The I Ching. Richard Wilhelm Translation. Princeton .University Press.1990
18.  Thomas  S.  Kuhn.  The  Structure  of  Scientific  Revolutions.  The  University  of
Chicago Press.1996

© 2000 by Epsilon Pi. All rights reserved.
 
 

36

