SLAC–PUB–8142
May 1999

Planar  Waveguide  Hybrids  for  Very  High  Power  RF*

C.D. Nantista, W.R. Fowkes, N.M. Kroll#, and S.G. Tantawi‡

Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, P.O. Box 4349, Stanford, CA  94309

Abstract

Two basic designs have been developed for waveguide hybrids, or 3-dB couplers, capable

of  handling  hundreds  of  megawatts  at  X-band.    Coupling  is  provided  by  one  or  two

connecting waveguides with h-plane junctions and matching elements.  In the former case,

the connecting waveguide supports two modes.  Small apertures and field-enhancing e-

bends are avoided to reduce the risk of rf breakdown.  The h-plane symmetry also allows

the use of over-moded rectangular waveguide in which the height has been increased to

reduce field amplitudes without affecting the scattering matrix.  The theory and designs are

presented, along with the results of prototype tests of functionality and power-handling

capability.  Such a device is integral to the rf pulse compression or power distribution

system [2] of the Next Linear Collider (NLC) [1] for combining, splitting, and directing

power.  This work was motivated by the observation of rf breakdown at power levels

above 200 MW in conventional and modified magic-T's.

presented at  the 1999 IEEE Particle Accelerator Conference

New York, New York, March 29-April 2, 1999

* Work supported by Department of Energy contract DE–AC03–76SF00515

and grant DE-FG03-93ER40695.

# Also University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093.

‡ Also with the Communications and Electronics Department, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt.

1

I.  INTRODUCTION

The design of the Next Linear Collider (NLC) [1] includes plans for powering the

high-gradient accelerator structures of the main linacs with 11.424 GHz X-band klystrons

through a pulse compression or power distribution system [2].  In such a system pulsed rf

will need to be combined, split, or directed at peak power levels reaching 600 MW.  A

basic component required is a waveguide hybrid, or 3-dB directional coupler, capable of

handling  very  high  power  levels.    Prototype  rf  systems  have  employed  conventional,

matched magic T's in WR90 (0.9"x0.4") waveguide.  As power levels were increased,

these proved inadequate and a modified design was developed, in which the matching post

in the waveguide junction was replaced with a thick fin.  While simulations showed this

design to have lower field strengths, it's reliability proved to still be inadequate.  These

magic  T's  exhibited  frequent  rf  breakdown  at  power  levels  above  200 MW,  which

inspection showed to occur primarily at the mouth of the e-bend [3].

With this motivation, we have subsequently developed two novel planar hybrid

designs  capable  of  reliably  handling  hundreds  of  megawatts  of  peak  power  at  X-band

(11.424 GHz).  These each consist of four rectangular waveguide ports, which operate in

the  TE10  mode, connected through four or two h-plane T-junctions, yielding, respectively,

a two-rung ladder or an "H" geometry.  In the latter case, the single connecting waveguide

carries two modes.  Figure 1 illustrates the two design geometries.

Small apertures, slots, and field-enhancing e-bends are avoided to reduce the risk of

rf  breakdown.    Matching  features  maintain  the  translational  symmetry  of  these  cross-

sections.  Electric fields terminate only on the flat top and bottom surfaces.  This h-plane

symmetry also allows the use of over-moded rectangular waveguide in which the height

has been increased to reduce field amplitudes without affecting the scattering matrix.  Both

are  quadrature  hybrids  (i.e.  the  coupled  port  fields  are  90(cid:176)   out  of  phase),  and  directly

2

opposite port pairs are isolated.  That is, the scattering matrices, with properly chosen,

symmetric reference planes and the indicated port numbering, are of the form

S =

1
2

0

1

i

0

1

0

0

i

i

0

0

1

0

i

1

0

.

4

3

1

2

4

1

3

2

a)

b)

Figure  1.  Schematic  of  the  h-planar  geometries  of  the  a)  two-

rung  ladder  and  b)  "H"  hybrid  designs.    Power-flow  arrows

indicate output ports for the indicated input port.

II.  TWO-RUNG  LADDER  HYBRID

The two-rung ladder hybrid is basically a realization in rectangular waveguide of

R.H. Dicke's coaxial-line synthesis of a biplanar magic T [4], or of a modified microstrip

branch-line hybrid.  In transmission line theory, this device requires the distances between

all adjacent junctions to be (n/2 plus) one quarter wavelength and the two connecting lines

to have a characteristic admittance that is  2  times that of the main lines.  The resulting

circuit can be shown to yield the desired scattering matrix.

In  waveguide,  whose  width  is  not  small  compared  to  a  wavelength,  the  two-

dimensional  geometry  necessitates  matching  elements  in  the  T-junctions  to  adjust  the

3

-
-
-
-
Ø
º
Œ
Œ
Œ
Œ
ø
ß
œ
œ
œ
œ
complex  impedances.    A  mode  matching  code  was  used  to  determine  the  radius  and

placement of a post that would yield a three-port junction with the desired scattering matrix,

from which the hybrid ring circuit could then be constructed.  The fields were expanded in

cylindrical harmonics about the post in the junction region and in normal modes in the

rectangular port regions.  The full hybrid design was verified with the finite-element field

solver HFSS.  The peak field amplitude was found to be 44.1 MV/m at 300 MW with a

waveguide height of 0.900 inch.

III.  "H"  HYBRID

The "H" hybrid can be viewed as a variation of the above with the two connecting

waveguides collapsed into one in which two modes are utilized.  Thus, in a transmission

line picture, the requirement of two connecting lines is not circumvented.  The coupling

mechanism is actually the same as that of the Riblet short-slot coupler [5], although this

geometry provides separated ports and no sharp-edged wall interruptions.

The connecting guide is wide enough that both the  TE10  and the  TE20 modes can

propagate, and these are excited with comparable amplitudes by the fields of a single port.

They are excited with a relative phase such that their fields add constructively on the side

nearest the input port and destructively on the other side.  If they were to slip in phase by p

radians, the  TE10  wave would enhance the opposite lobe of the  TE20 wave, sending the

power out the farthest port.  To get a 3-dB split, therefore, the total phase lengths for these

two modes through the connecting guide must differ by an odd multiple of p /2.

The T-junctions in this design have been matched by shaping the walls with blunt,

triangular protrusions at the symmetry plane, rather than with free-standing posts.  The

result is essentially a side-wall coupler with the common wall removed and two back-to-

back mitred 90(cid:176)  bends at either end.  The connecting guide must be narrower than twice the

standard guide width in order to keep the  TE30 mode cut off.  Simple mitred bends used in

a preliminary design therefore led to narrow ports (half the connecting guide width).  To

4

accommodate standard-width ports and avoid the added length of width tapers, a small

vertical ridge was placed in each port to match into an effective asymmetric mitred bend.

The  TE20 mode is thus matched independently at each junction.  The width and length of

the connecting guide are adjusted to simultaneously meet the above phase length difference

requirement and cause the small  TE10  mismatch at the two junctions to cancel.  HFSS was

used extensively in the design process to calculate scattering matrices.  The peak field of the

final design was found from simulation to be 39.5 MV/m at 300 MW with a waveguide

height of 0.900 inch.

IV.  TESTS

A copper high-power vacuum-flanged prototype of each of these hybrids has been

built and tested.  They were both made over-moded, the two-rung ladder in 0.9 inch square

guide and the "H" in double-height (0.9"x0.8") guide.  This necessitated height tapers at

the ports for compatibility with our test setup and other WR90-based components.  The top

and  bottom  were  tapered  symmetrically  with  one-inch  long  half-cosine  tapers.    An

HP 8510C Network Analyzer was used to measure the scattering matrix parameters in the

vicinity  of  the  design  frequency.    The  results  over  a  500  MHz  span  are  presented  in

Figure 2.

The measured insertion losses, when corrected for the predicted loss of the flange

adaptors  used  and  WR90  curved  h-bends  built  onto  two  ports  of  the  "H"  hybrid  to

accomodate a particular installation, give ~1.5% for the two–rung ladder hybrid and ~0.9%

for the "H" hybrid.  We define this loss as 1

(|

S
21

+
2
|

|

S
31

2
| )

.  It is dominated by ohmic

loss.  For the two-rung ladder, the reflected signal and isolation at 11.424 GHz were both

about -26 dB, accounting together for 0.49% misdirected power.  For the "H" they were

-33 dB and -37 dB, respectively, accounting for 0.07% misdirected power.  The measured

coupling  at  11.424  GHz,  corrected  for  loss  (i.e.  10

log[|

S
31

2
|

/(|

S
21

2
|

S+
|

31

2
| )]

),  was

-3.19  dB  for  the  former  hybrid  and  -2.96  dB  for  the  latter  (the  ideal  being  -3.01  dB).

5

-
Finally, Figure 2 shows the "H" hybrid to have a significantly broader bandwidth, as one

would expect from the more compact geometry.

The hybrids were later high-power tested in the pulse compression system of the

Accelerator Structure Test Area (ASTA) [3], where they were processed with pulsed rf to

peak power levels exceeding 400 MW in 150 ns pulses and performed successfully without

breakdown problems or excessive X-ray production.

V.  CONCLUSIONS

In response to the problem of rf breakdown in multi-hundred-megawatt X-band rf

systems being developed for a next generation linear collider, we have conceived and

produced two new types of rectangular waveguide hybrid, with relatively open interiors

and completely two-dimensional designs, perpendicular to the electric field lines.  The latter

feature makes their circuit properties independent of height, allowing for their construction

in over-height waveguide to reduce fields.  Prototypes of both designs performed similarly

and quite well.  The "H"-shaped hybrid has the advantage of broader bandwidth and is

more compact.  HFSS simulation suggests that it has peak fields lower by about 11% for a

given power flow and waveguide height.  The absence of free-standing matching elements

may also be an advantage with regard to cooling.

One  goal  in  our  component  development  program  is  to  limit  surface  fields  at

anticipated  power  levels  to  values  below  40  MV/m  in  order  to  avoid  rf  breakdown

problems.    For  a  power  flow  of  300  MW  in  one  port,  both  hybrid  designs  meet  or

approach this goal in square guide (0.9"x0.9").  By contrast, our original and modified

magic T's had peak fields of approximately 80 MV/m and 63 MV/m, respectively, at this

power level and could not be made over-moded in height.

For testing and for their intended use, we required standard, single moded ports on

our prototypes, for which the peak field at 300 MW is 49 MV/m.  Smooth height tapers

were incorporated at the ports to bring the peak fields in the interior of these devices, where

6

standing waves cause some enhancement, below the peak port field.  With reference planes

taken  just  inside  these  tapers,  the  hybrids  proper  are  thus  over-moded.    To  take  full

advantage of these hybrid designs, one would not normally use single-moded ports, but

remain over-moded, perhaps matching into a  TE11 mode in circular waveguide.

To comfortably handle 600 MW, the hybrid height would have to be increased to

1.75 inches.  In such waveguide, taper design becomes non-trivial because the   TE12  mode

can propagate.  Mode conversion due to mechanical imperfections also becomes more of a

concern as a device becomes more over-moded.  It may therefore be preferable to use a

configuration which incorporates two hybrids to further increase power-hancdling capacity.

Figure  2.  Scattering  matrix  elements  for  our  two  hybrid  prototypes

measured  over  a  frequency  range  of  500  MHz  centered  on  the  design

frequency of 11.424 GHz.

     

7

REFERENCES

[1] The NLC Design Group, Zeroth-Order Design Report for the Next Linear Collider,

LBNL-PUB 5424, SLAC Report 474, and UCRL-ID 124161, May 1996.

[2] S.G. Tantawi et al., "A Multi-Moded RF Delay Line Distribution System (MDLDS) for

the Next Linear Collider," to be published in Physical Review-Special Topics.

[3] A.E. Vlieks et al., "High Power RF Component Testing for the NLC," presented at the

19th International Linear Accelerator Conference (LINAC 98) Chicago, IL, August 23-28,

1998, SLAC-PUB-7938 (1998).

[4] Montgomery, Dicke, and Purcell, Principles of Microwave Circuits, Radiation Lab.

Series,  1948,  p. 451.

February  1952,  p. 180.

[5]  Henry  J.  Riblet,  "The  Short-Slot  Hybrid  Junction,"  Proceedings  of  the  I.R.E.,

8

