Thermal and Nonthermal Mechanisms of the
Biological Interaction of Microwaves*

by John Michael Williams

jwill@AstraGate.net

P. O. Box 2697

Redwood City, CA 94064

2001-02-04

Copyright (c) 2001, John Michael Williams

All Rights Reserved

* This paper originally was submitted to the US Federal Communications Commission (the NTIA) as

a Comment response on the question of unlicensed operation of ultrawide-band (UWB) devices.
The author, and not the UWB Working Group itself, bears full responsibility for everything in this
paper.

J. M. Williams                       Thermal and Nonthermal Interactions of Microwaves

2

Abstract

Research in the past on the biological effects of microwaves often has been based
on faulty assumptions.   The major flaw has been the premise that microwaves only
produce thermal effects in tissue.   This premise easily may be proven illogical and
physically incorrect.   Furthermore, assuming only thermal effects leads one to an
optimist's error of quantification in which calories are counted instead of joules.
Past investigations have been mislead both by these assumptions and by
stereotyped experiments using only narrow-band radiation sources.   Recent studies
show that wide-band microwaves bring out biological effects which are unrelated to
those caused by heat flow.   A review by Kenneth Foster provides a basis for
criticism and improved understanding.

PACS Codes:

87.10.+e General, theoretical, and mathematical biophysics

87.22.-q

Physics of cellular and physiological processes

87.50.-a

Biological effects of electromagnetic and particle radiation

87.50.Jk Radiofrequency and microwave radiation (power lines)

87.54.-n Non-ionizing radiation therapy physics

Introduction

Kenneth Foster's seminal review, "Thermal and Nonthermal Mechanisms of
Interaction of Radio-Frequency Energy with Biological Systems" will be referred to
as KF2000 in the following.

I would like to spend considerable discussion on the overall method of analysis of

the problem, as shown in KF2000 Figure 1.   I think the approach, even for
expository or didactic purposes, is wrong and may be seriously misleading.  As will
be shown, the underlying problem is the use of engineering technique to quantify or
formulate new understanding:  Understanding, as opposed to proper application,
represents a function of science, not of engineering.

I also have comments on numerous specific points in the paper.   These points
accurately exemplify methods which have become accepted in the older literature in
this field.   Although many of my comments express disagreement with findings or
opinions cited in KF2000, I do in general think the paper provides a good basis of
review of the literature, with a balanced openness to future improvements in
knowledge of the subject.

The Model of Analysis Should be Changed

To begin, I do not think a paper addressed to an audience of engineers need be
cast in a familiar engineering stereotype.  Engineers in general may be assumed to

J. M. Williams                       Thermal and Nonthermal Interactions of Microwaves

3

be intelligent and well-educated and therefore capable of understanding new
approaches.   All electrical or electronic engineers will have a very firm basis in
electricity and magnetism.  They won't need filters or antennas to understand the
body.   However, the KF2000 method of analysis seems to model a biological
response as somewhat like a message from a radio receiver; so, it looks for an
antenna isolated or decoupled from a set of RF amplifiers perhaps themselves
decoupled from audio amplifiers finally triggering a bio-servo response.

This becomes an error when it leads the author to an emphasis on the electronics

of the electromagnetic radiation (EMR), and not on the fundamental reasons for
those electronics.  Filters are for radios or servo systems.   There are no filters in the
body, so analysis by filter stages necessarily will be wrong.  For example, on p. 18
the author says,

"The electric field induced inside the body by an external
electric or magnetic field [or EMR--jmw] depends strongly on
frequency and the geometry of the system.   Because of the
conductivity of body tissues, it is difficult to couple low
frequency fields into the body through air, and DC fields are
excluded entirely."

This is wrong.   The penetration of a field is attenuated at least exponentially
with depth by any uniform body tissue, as shown in KF2000 Fig. 4 and documented
in papers cited throughout Section II of KF2000.   For example, a typical equation
relating the field intensity at depth d in tissue to the applied intensity in air would
take the form, for some tissue- and unit-dependent constant k, and frequency f in
Hz,

(

,
d f

)

=

I

tissue

I

air

exp

(

k d f

1 2

)

.                                                                (1)

The tissue depth for a given intensity becomes less, the higher the frequency, not
greater.   Penetration increases with decreasing frequency.  In the quote above, the
author apparently is generalizing from metallic reflection to a biological response:  A
DC voltage applied across the body, whether by EMR, a static field in air, or wires
from a battery, will cause current to flow by ionic conduction in the body fluids.  The
more conductive the body, the greater the current.   When the coupling is through
air, the current flow will stop because of the resistivity of air, but displaced charges
will remain displaced to cancel the field applied.

In the quote above, the author is thinking of reflection of EMR from a (very

conductive) metal:  There, the penetration is small; and, for DC, the internal field is
close to zero.  However, the reason the penetration, or the DC field, in a metal is
small is that the charge carriers in the metal, electrons, are responding so actively
that they cancel the field by their motion (in the case of microwaves) or by their
static relocation (in the case of DC).

When oscillating electrical (or magnetic) fields are applied to the body in air, the
reason the penetration is limited is because the biological effect, an oscillating flow
of ions, is large near the surface, declines exponentially with depth, and is

(cid:215)
-
(cid:215)
(cid:215)
J. M. Williams                       Thermal and Nonthermal Interactions of Microwaves

4

absorptive.   Deeper, the field is weaker, so motion will be less whether the deep
tissue be conductive or not.   So the quote above is misdirective if not completely
wrong.

Returning specifically to the issue of describing serial filter stages as in KF2000

Figure 1, to accept the KF2000 model, one has to abandon the idea that the EMR
applied to the organism might interact anywhere it can penetrate.   KF2000 Figure
1, and nearby text, presumes that EMR has sequential effects at stages separate
enough to be considered isolated (or, shielded) from one another except for
connecting filters.  Such nice sequencing can be achieved by good engineering
design, but one should not insist on discovering it in a nonengineered organism.

The problem implied by KF2000 Figure 1 may be seen by considering an analogy
of two containers of 250 ml of water, one a 6-cm diameter paper cup, and the other a
50-cm diameter paper plate:  Which one would warm more rapidly in a microwave
oven?   Both are "high-pass" to the ~2 GHz microwave oven excitation because of the
~30 GHz (~1 cm wavelength) first E-dipole harmonic of liquid water.

The problem also may be seen by trying to diagram not the signal flow, but the

geometry of an organism that would allow such an analysis to be valid.   A two-
dimensional representation of this geometry might be as follows:

Figure 1.   Organism geometry implied by the KF2000, Fig. 1, filter
system.

The problem now becomes obvious:  There is a contradiction in separating
KF2000's  "Target Structure" from "Inside of Body".   Merely because the human
body might have a certain geometry does not mean that interaction of EMR with the
target structure depends upon that geometry.   Counterexamples to KF2000 Figure
1 are easy to construct:

Suppose, for example, that the target structure were a set of metal fillings in the

teeth and the EMR were in the broadcast TV or GHz range.   Clearly, a fraction of
the current induced in the fillings by EMR beamed at the body would be
independent of the height of the person.

J. M. Williams                       Thermal and Nonthermal Interactions of Microwaves

5

Now, true, the body can act as an "antenna", but any small component of the
EMR "high-passed" by the body merely would be superposed on the EMR directly
interacting with the fillings.   The EMR directly acting would depend on shielding,
reflection, and refraction by the teeth and lips, not by any generality representable
by "Inside of Body".  It would be incorrect in this example to describe the body
(actually, the mouth) as a high-pass filter:  In fact, if anything, the circumference of
the open mouth would define a bandpass for EMR capable of exciting the fillings.

The same argument might be applied anywhere in the body--for any "target

structure".   The skull, for example, bandpasses EMR finally interacting in the scalp
and the flesh of the face.  Both geometrical resonance and the microwave "skin
effect" (no pun intended) would channel microwave energy from the skull into the
flesh outside the skull.   KF2000 Figure 1 would imply that the interaction with the
skull could be filtered only to the brain and other organs inside the skull.

We suggest that analysis of the effect of EMR on human biological response
should focus on tissue and organ boundaries as they exist in the body, not on "the
body" as a radio chassis in any general sense.   This idea will be expanded
immediately below.

We also point out that the belief that microwaves do not produce tissue effects
other than heat seems to be a prejudice based on history more than science, as may
be seen by the review in Chapter 7 of Durney, et al (1999).   The history seems based
on attempts to discover how the body "was engineered".   KF2000 and others rightly
have reserved final judgement on this belief.

The belief that heat might exclude other responses seems connected to inaccurate

usage of the term, "biological mechanisms".   "Biological mechanisms" has no
meaning in terms of the living body; actually, "biological mechanisms" merely refers
to measurements or theory typically made by people studying biology.  The real,
physical mechanisms driving life involve the same atomic coulomb fields--valence
and conduction electrons--and the same molecular dipoles that change in the
picosecond scale of the fastest optical instruments.   It is an error unknowingly to
avoid this level of analysis, or to claim that life at this level is as random as an ideal
gas, in trying to understand the interactions of microwaves with living tissue.  If the
microwaves are well-ordered at this level, and if the tissue is well-ordered (alive) at
this level, then well-ordered interactions must be taking place before the end-result
of heat.

The difficult question is how to apply the microwaves so they are amplified by the

living organism at a level easily observable by persons studying the biology.  Thus,
the question is not how to postulate a "design" for the organism but rather how to
seek empirically to use what is there, whatever science reveals of it, as an effective
interface to our instruments.

EMR Interaction Can Not All Be Heat

Consider a tissue boundary such as the mucous membrane of the stomach wall or

the endothelium of a large blood vessel.   Such a boundary will be enclosed in cell

J. M. Williams                       Thermal and Nonthermal Interactions of Microwaves

6

membranes with a regular coulomb structure, the structure being organ dependent
when relaxed in the absence of EMR.

For example, without much loss of generality, let us take a structure consisting of
electric dipoles which happened to be aligned with positive pole locally pointing into
some polar fluid such as water.  This is shown in Figure 2:

Figure 2.   Unaligned electric dipoles in a fluid (left) bounded by solid
tissue with a membrane layer of aligned dipoles.

Now, how would microwave EMR raise the temperature of the fluid?  More

generally, how can one understand the effect of microwave EMR on the structures in
Figure 2?  Especially, how could a coherent, regularly structured beam create
increased disorder (heat) in the fluid?

The effect within the bulk of the fluid is easy to understand:  The dipoles initially

may be assumed arranged at random with respect to one another.   When they are
rotated (torqued) together, all magnitudes in phase with the EMR, they interact at
random distances and phases with respect to one another.  Thus, the EMR-induced
motions contribute random momentum and therefore random energy.   This is
shown in Figure 3.  In that figure, the Poynting vector 
propagating as a plane wave from left to right, with a few illustrative EMR torque
angles shown.   The Poynting vector is given to define the direction of the incident
EMR as the direction of  E H·

, were the medium removed and replaced by vacuum.

r
J  is shown for EMR

J. M. Williams                       Thermal and Nonthermal Interactions of Microwaves

7

Figure 3.  Sketch of the effect of a plane EMR beam propagating in a
bulk fluid of polar elements, with a net result of increasing the
temperature.  The E-vector magnitude and polarity (+ up) is shown on
an arbitrary vertical scale.  The EMR torque on a few illustrative polar
elements is shown as a vectorial angle.

So, the net effect of the EMR is to deposit energy in the fluid.  This energy

macroscopically is completely disordered and therefore is heat energy.

Now consider the same EMR near the fluid boundary:   The boundary is more

ordered than the bulk of the fluid, so some EMR energy will be delivered to the
membrane as free energy, not heat.   It is not physically possible that no free energy
would be delivered.   As it happens, in the absence of EMR, the fluid dipoles will
tend to be somewhat ordered (correlated) close to the membrane anyway, so as to
tend to line up with the membrane dipoles.   This means that random motion
because of heat is screened from the membrane dipoles to some extent by the dipoles
in the immediately adjacent fluid.   The heat in the fluid immediately adjacent to
the membrane is represented by lower-amplitude, less random velocities of larger,
more correlated ionic elements.  All this is sketched in Figure 4, where, for variety, a
gaussian-tapered beam envelope is assumed.

J. M. Williams                       Thermal and Nonthermal Interactions of Microwaves

8

Figure 4.  Effect of a gaussian EMR beam propagating from a polar fluid
across an organ boundary with a polarized membrane.  Necessarily,
some EMR energy will be transferred to the boundary as free energy,
not as heat.

If we assume in general that the Poynting vector 

r
J  will not be perfectly

perpendicular to the boundary, then the interaction in Figure 4 will deliver some
r
linear momentum transverse to 
J ; the EMR beam will be refracted.   The angle of
refraction will be proportional to the amount of free energy delivered to the
boundary dipoles.   The momentum transferred to the membrane will correspond
entirely to free energy; no heat will be involved.   We ignore here the dielectric and
other properties quantifying the direction and amount of refraction.  For now, we
also ignore diffraction and reflections (which would set up standing wave
modulations in the incident beam).

  So, we may see that an ordering effect will occur in the direction of propagation,

and also in general transverse to it.   Because all body tissue is ordered at organ
boundaries, and also is ordered in bulk (except maybe fat, and fluid such as blood,
lymph, or a digestive juice), all body tissue will receive free energy from EMR.

We therefore assert that the burden of proof should be on the claim that
microwaves act like microwave ovens and do nothing but cause heat to be
transferred to living tissue.  Based on the prima facie argument of this section, EMR
should be assumed have nonthermal effects on living tissue unless explicitly
provable otherwise.

We move to one, final point in this initial, overall discussion of KF2000 with the

observation that the body cells, especially the individual nerves and sensory
receptors, function as ordered systems of boundaries in fluid.   The temperature of
the body always causes disorder in the ubiquitous body fluids; nevertheless, nerves
and muscles do perform orderly functions, which of course require free energy.

J. M. Williams                       Thermal and Nonthermal Interactions of Microwaves

9

The mechanism of action of nerves, muscles, and systems of them, has been

described in terms of membrane depolarization.   This depolarization occurs because
membranes are not only populated by structure-related dipoles as in the figures
above, but also are more sparsely populated by specialized channels which can open
or close to regulate exchange of ions, primarily sodium (Na+) and potassium (K+),
but also calcium and perhaps other ions.

Living cells generally internally are more negative than their local environment,

thereby storing some free energy in an electric potential across their bounding
membranes.  This potential difference is electrochemical and depends on continuous
expenditure of energy to maintain higher intracellular K+ concentrations  and lower
intracellular Na+ concentrations than would be so during chemical (osmotic)
equilibrium.   The ion gradients are controlled by enzyme action which does its work
using the adenosine triphosphate (ATP) energy store available to cells throughout
the body.

 Specifically, resting neurons typically expend energy to operate a Na-K "pump"

which keeps the potential inside the cell about 70 mV more negative than the
outside (Regan, 1972, p. 7).   The membrane can liberate energy very locally by
allowing some extracellular Na+ to flow in and some intracellular K+ to flow out.
An additional osmotic potential also exists.  Dendritic  depolarization (e. g., "C"
nerve fiber sensory response) may cause the -70 mV potential to drop close to 0 V
immediately adjacent to the depolarized areas of the cell membrane.

When the originally resting electric field across a nerve membrane develops a
steep enough spatial gradient, the specialized closed channels are forced to open,
causing a spread of depolarization, which may become a nerve action potential
under proper circumstances.   The sudden depolarization during an axonal action
potential may cause the resting potential of -70 mV to swing past 0 to perhaps +10
mV.   This action probably is what KF2000 describes as having the relatively slow
time constant on the order of milliseconds.  For example, see the review of
"membrane excitation" in KF2000, p. 20.

We note, aside, that diffusion permits the approximate equation of locally steep
spatial gradients with locally sudden temporal ones and is essential in the Hodgkin-
Huxley and similar approaches:  For ion species j in concentration 

(
,
u x t

)

,

j

)

(
,
u x t
¶
x
¶

D

(
,
u x t

)

r

=

)

(
,
u x t
¶
t
¶

;   so, 

u
¶
x
¶

(

)
loss

(

)
system input .             (2)

u
¶
t
¶

Here, the hypothetical "Na-K pump" would function to keep (loss) = (system input)
when averaged over long times.

The membrane channels in a neuron originally are held closed by polar molecules

(PM) which open for depolarization because of smaller-scale, faster coulombic
(electrical) response.      At some level, the time-constants of processes seen as a
nerve action potential will be on microsecond and nanosecond scales.   It may be
convenient to describe the response in terms of a single characteristic time constant,
but arbitrary time constants control the response at arbitrary levels of analysis.

-
-
(cid:181)
-
J. M. Williams                       Thermal and Nonthermal Interactions of Microwaves

10

Clarification or Refutation of Common
Misconceptions

These are in the form of comments on specific approaches or theoretical

assumptions reviewed in KF2000.

p. 16, Figure 4.   The field penetration vs. frequency curves tend to fall on straight
lines, except between about 108  and 1010  Hz (wavelength between a couple of cm and
a few m), where they seem to level off somewhat before starting a steeper descent.
The attenuation in muscle is greater than in fat at all frequencies, probably
reflecting the greater water (polar) fraction of muscle, but perhaps also related to
the more regular organization (larger membrane fraction in the hierarchical fascicle
structures) of muscle tissue than fat.

Some data have shown a loss of frequency dependence of electrical properties in

all soft tissue for very high frequencies around 20 GHz (see Durney et al, 1999).
Presumably, at high enough frequencies significantly water-distinct tissues would
converge to somewhat distinct levels of absorbance.

p. 17, Eq. 4:  The terminology of the interpretation seems ambiguous.   What is

being referred to as "dipole"?   The magnetic permeability even of blood is
insignificantly different from that of vacuum.   However, in nearby text, the result
for typical human flesh in the quasistatic limit is said to be that the magnetic dipole
DM  contributes about 15 x the electric dipole  DE  to the induced electric field  Ei .
Also, the  Ei  (same as 

r
D ?) is the sum of the electrically and magnetically induced

contributions; so, is it correct to write, for some constant k, 
Presumably  DM  and  DE  are the (orthogonal) components of the incident EMR, if
plane wave?  Would we have,  D

D
E

E
i

=

=

?

?

M

, and  D
E

r
B
i

r
P
i

M

(
k D

+

)

p. 17, IIIB, the Resonance Region.   It would not be unreasonable consider this

somewhere between wavelengths of about 5x the height of a human to 1/5 the
length of the smallest bone, organ, or opening in the body--say, 10 m to 0.1 mm; this
would imply free space microwave frequencies of perhaps 30 MHz to 1000 GHz.
Again, just because the math gets complicated here doesn't mean that organ, tissue,
or cellular response has to be determined here.   However, in this region, the local
geometry of body structures can concentrate fields by factors of ten or more.

pp. 17-18, cites Chen & Gandhi, in 1991, with simulation results for a half-cycle

of 40 MHz at 1 kV/m peak found about 1 to 4 A, depending on target organ
geometry; the conclusion was that the internal field was about 1/3 the incident field
in air.   Both in this and the quasi-static regime, an approximation is maybe 10 mV
induced for every incident V/m, assuming a grounded human in a vertically
polarized E field and pulses lasting some tens of ns.   This is an interesting and
useful generality.

p. 18, IV:  The Laplace representation, using a "cell" of two concentric spheres,

seems completely divorced from reality and merely a choice based on available
computer programs.   Applied to a cell (rather than to the nucleus of a cell), the

@
J. M. Williams                       Thermal and Nonthermal Interactions of Microwaves

11

reasoning thus resembles the assumption that microwaves induce only heat because
heat can be calculated and measured easily.

Spherical symmetry implies field cancellations unwarranted in living,

multicellular organisms.  In fact, even unicellular organisms almost never are
spherical in geometry:  Why?  Because they need asymmetry to locomote or to sense
chemical or other field differences necessary to survival.  Otherwise, the cell would
have to wait at random for life to come to it--a survival strategy good enough for the
nucleus (or a virus) to survive inside a cell, but a strategy as random as heat for the
cell as such!

The only spherical cells in the human body are fat cells or perhaps some kinds of

blood cell.   Modelled as ellipsoids, sensory or motor nerve cells would have
eccentricities on the order of 105  or more.

The spherical model in this section must be assumed irrelevant to the question of
nonthermal interaction.   However, perhaps it might be corrected for geometry, and
organized to match the observed data on actual living cells:

For example, allow a cell diameter of 10 5-

 m and length of 10 1-

 m.   Many human

nerve cells would fit this.  So, the eccentricity would be something like 104 .
Therefore, allowing for living organization, one might approximate the living cell by
a chain of 104  of the objectionable spherical cells, each of twice the spherical radius
to correct for surface vector cancellation because of spherical symmetry.  Because of
series addition of resistance, the capacitivity to conductivity ratio in KF2000 Eq.
(12) would be increased lengthwise by a factor of about 104 ; but, radially it would be
decreased by a factor of  2 2
time-constant of maybe 0.1  m s  locally (in a plane perpendicular to the long
direction), but one of about  01 10
longest dimension of the cell.   The projection of an incident EMR Poynting vector
thus would interact by the time-constant of the living cell, but depending on the
angle of incidence, over a range of something like 10 14: .  The membrane potentials in
KF2000 Figure 5 then would have to be corrected by some factor between 1 and 104 ,
depending on angle of incidence of the EMR on the elongated, living cell.

@m s ms globally, in a direction exactly on the

.  Using KF2000 Eq. (12), the result would be a

1 2

. (cid:215)

2 @

1

4

To continue the example of the living cell just described, the preceding reasoning
 V

would lead one to expect a membrane potential somewhere between 10 6-
 and 10 2-
for a 1 V/m incident E field.   Because pulsed UWB fields may be expected to reach
several kV/m, EMR-induced membrane potentials on the order of several times the
normal neuronal resting levels of -70 mV should be anticipated.   Thus, in this case,
the assumption of heat was based clearly on an invalid spherical simulation.

p. 19, IV discussion of time-domain response.   One must recognize that standing
wave components will be found everywhere near organ boundaries, especially where
muscle and either bone or skin are close.   The medium always being absorptive, the
reflected wave amplitude will be smaller than the incident, creating an oscillating,
standing field with a net DC component, the polarity depending on local phases
(Durney, et al, 1999).  The geometry of the resultant DC field essentially will be
unrelated to incident frequency, except for being multiple half-wavelengths in size,

J. M. Williams                       Thermal and Nonthermal Interactions of Microwaves

12

but it will be fairly closely related to the geometry and tissue properties of the
organism.   If the incident field or organism is moving, the standing wave patterns
will be transitory, persisting perhaps for milliseconds or seconds.  The time-change
of the DC component then should be expected to impose cm-scale, changing, DC
spatial patterns on nerve cell receptive processes, which should cause sensory
responses.

It seems reasonable that this would be the theoretical basis for use of UWB or

other pulsed radar transmitters to harass living humans and animals.

p. 20, VA 2, Rate of temperature increase.   Rapid thermal expansion of tissue
water caused by 5  m s, 1-10 GHz, ~104 W m/
 pulses is said to explain "microwave
hearing" of radar.  At 1 GHz, the wavelength would be about 30 cm; at 10 GHz, 3
cm.   Presumably, different tissues would cause a temporal transient proportional in
intensity to their differential absorbance.   However, a more efficient mechanism
would be differential spatial amplitude over the skull, because of refraction,
diffraction, and reflection of the EMR pulse, and possibly because of occurrence of
briefly existing standing modes.

p. 21, VC, Field-charge interactions.   The conclusion here was that random

thermal motion of ions in solution would be some 8 or 9 orders of magnitude greater
than the velocity to an ion added by a (steady) field of 1kV/m; therefore, field-charge
interactions would be drowned out in thermal noise.  However, there are three
serious flaws in this conclusion:

First, the extracellular fluids are not filled with small ions, but rather with
macromolecular assemblages (Regan, 1972, p. 1) with far greater organization
(correlation) than the "ideal gas" on which the use of Boltzmann's formula is based.
At a given temperature, then, the thermal velocities will be far less than the ones
presented in KF2000.   Much of the fluid thermal energy will be internal to the
assemblages and will not be available to add noise to EMR-membrane interactions.
See also Schulten (2000).

Second, the conclusion refers to the distant fluid extracellular medium, not to the

partially screening region near the membrane of a living cell.

Third, as is well known, small drift displacements in general may correspond to

very large measured values of electrical current.   These displacements are
superposed on the average random thermal motion and are independent of it
because they are not random.   See also Huang, et al (2000).

For example, a coaxial-plate capacitor with properties similar to a 1-cm long

o
unmyelinated "C" nerve fiber, 0.5  m m in diameter, and with 100 A
membrane, at 1 GHz (KF2000, Fig. 3) would have capacitance,

-thick

=

C

2pe

(

ln

r
outer

d
r
inner

)

=

(
(

ln

(
.
0 5 10

2 20 8 85 10
p

.

2

12

10

)
10
)

11

-10
.
0 02

)

6

6

+

100 10

.
0 5 10

500

pF.                (3)

(cid:215)
(cid:215)
(cid:215)
(cid:215)
(cid:215)
-
-
-
-
-
@
@
J. M. Williams                       Thermal and Nonthermal Interactions of Microwaves

13

Now, charging a 500 pF capacitor to 1 kV means that  5 10 7

 coulomb of charge

must be moved between the plates.   That amounts to over 1012  charge carriers (ions
of unit charge); so, doing 9 orders of magnitude less still amounts to a displacement
across the membrane of maybe 103  ions of the kind described in KF2000.   Thermal
activity on these scales averages out to zero and should be ignored when describing
the drift movement of several, if not many hundreds or thousands of, ions.  KF2000's
comments about random thermal motion must be rethought.

p. 21, VC, Field-permanent-dipole interactions.  KF2000 provides an expression
for torque on a membrane dipole from an electric field E, as  torque
qcos , with
m  a dipole moment and q  the angle between the field and dipole.  Then, Eq. (20) is
supposed to give the response time constant t  for dipole alignment by Stokes's law
as,

E= m

= 4

t

3a

p h
kT

,                                                                                                  (4)

in which a is the dipole element radius (membrane half-width), kT  is Boltzmann's
constant times the absolute temperature, and h  is a fluid-dynamic viscosity causing
the interaction to be inelastic.

The reasoning is that if the time-constant in (4) is too low, it implies that the

dipole moment must be small, so very little torque can be applied, and the
interaction of the field with the membrane will be small.  KF2000 Table II gives
data for various cell elements, showing that very large field strengths are required
for significant energy transfer to the membrane.

However, the dependence on one time parameter to interface all elements of the

implied system again seems to be in error:  It assumes that the only membrane
interaction, above some thermal threshold, must be thermal!   This is an incredible
assumption:  If any significant heat could be stored in the membrane, it would lose
structural integrity.   What is the reason that energy transferred to the membrane
would not be transferred to the hypothetical "Na-K pump", to a subset of the PM
gating system, or simply to geometric displacement (local compression or dilation) of
the membrane in some phase-related way?   And why should not each conceivable
channel for momentum or energy be associated with its own, arbitrary time
constant?

p. 22, final paragraph of V.  KF2000 states that "The mechanisms described
above are well-established and noncontroversial".   Yes, heat is noncontroversial as
the end-product of any interaction.   It is definitely a safe haven.  However, the
errors of concept explained in detail at the start of these comments suggest that the
use of heat by KF2000, as well as by many others in the long history cited in
KF2000, must be in error.  Errors of agreement can add nonlinearly with errors of
understanding to produce unwarranted noncontroversy.

The present list of comments, as well as the final "paradox" discussion in KF2000,
seems to show that the problem of microwave-tissue interaction, especially for UWB
microwaves, is not well understood by the majority of researchers or writers who

(cid:215)
-
J. M. Williams                       Thermal and Nonthermal Interactions of Microwaves

14

have been publishing papers in this field.   Therefore, the lack of controversy
claimed by KF2000 should be replaced by serious questioning of the assumptions
underlying the reportedly widespread agreement.

In closing, it is interesting that KF2000 does not cite Lu et al (1999), who have

found that UWB microwaves can cause a drop in blood pressure in rats.
Speculation as to the apparently nonthermal mechanism of the Lu et al findings
might have been interesting.

References

Durney, C. H., Massoudi, H, and Iskander, M. F.  Radiofrequency Radiation

Dosimetry Handbook (4th ed., online; updated 1999).  Brooks Air Force Base
(USAFSAM-TR-85-73), Armstrong Research Laboratories (AL/OE-TR-1996-
0037).  Available at
http://www.brooks.af.mil/AFRL/HED/hedr/reports/handbook/home.html.

Kenneth Foster, K.    Thermal and Nonthermal Mechanisms of Interaction of Radio-
Frequency Energy with Biological Systems, IEEE Transactions on Plasma
Science, 2000, vol. 28 (1), pp. 15 - 23 (February issue).

Huang, Y., Rettner, C. T., Auerbach, D. J., and Wodtke, A. M.   "Vibrational

Promotion of Electron Transfer".   Science, 2000, 290, 111 - 114.   For example,
p. 112:  "[others have found that] the vibrational relaxation of small molecules
on insulating surfaces [occurs] on a millisecond time scale, indicating that
vibration couples very weakly to phonons of the solid."

Lu, S. T., Mathur, S. P., Akyel, Y, and Lee, J. C.  "Ultrawide-Band Electromagnetic
Pulses Induced Hypotension in Rats".  Physiology and Behavior, 1999, 65(4/5 -
January), 753 - 761.

Regan, D. Evoked Potentials.   London:  Chapman and Hall, 1972.

Schulten, K.   "Exploiting Thermal Motion".   Science, 2000, 290, 61 - 62.   Science
Perspective on Balabin, I. A. and Onuchic, J. N., "Dynamically Controlled
Protein Tunneling Paths in Photosynthetic Reaction Centers", 114 - 117.  For
example, p. 61:  "[proteins and RNA] work at physiological temperatures and
thus experience thermal motion, yet their function, which requires correct
alignment of parts and steering of reactions, is executed with precision."

