R. I. Khrapko 1

What is mass?

Abstract

Does the mass of bodies depend on their velocity? Is the mass additive if separate
bodies are joined together to form a composite system? Is the mass of an isolated system
conserved? Diﬀerent teachers of physics and specialists give diﬀerent answers to these
questions because there is no general agreement on the deﬁnition of mass..We shall show
that the notion of the velocity-dependent relativistic mass should be given preference over
that of the rest mass.

1
0
0
2
 
r
a

1. Introduction

Max Born (1962): “The mass of one and the same body is a relative quantity.

Statements to the same eﬀect can be also found in textbooks.
S. P. Strelkov (1975): “The dependence of mass on velocity is a principal proposition of

M
 
One of the achievements of the special theory of relativity is the statement about the equiv-
9
1
alence of mass and energy in a sense that the mass of a body increases with its energy including
 
 
kinetic energy; therefore, the mass depends on the velocity of the body. This relationship is
]
h
unambiguously interpreted in the works of renowned physicists.
p
It is to
-
n
have diﬀerent values according to the system of reference from which it is measured, or, if
e
g
measured from a deﬁnite system of reference, according to the velocity of the moving body. It
.
s
is impossible that mass is a constant quantity peculiar to each body.” [1].
c
Richard Feynman (1965): “Because of the relation of mass and energy the energy associated
i
s
y
with the motion appears as an extra mass, so things get heavier when they move. Newton
h
believed that this was not the case, and that the masses stayed constant.” [2].
p
[
 
 
1
v
Einstein’s mechanics.” [3].
1
However, recently there had been a return to the Newton’s belief. According to this belief
5
0
the mass of a body does not change with increasing velocity and remains equal to the rest mass.
3
L B Okun’ is a dedicated mouthpiece of this tendency [4, 5]. Earlier, a similar viewpoint was
0
advocated in the book [6).
1
0
L. B. Okun’ (1989): “The mass that increases with speed – that was truly incomprehensible.
/
s
The mass of a body m does not change when it is in motion and, apart from the factor c, is equal
c
i
to the energy contained in the body at rest. The mass m does not depend on the reference
s
y
frame. At the end of the twentieth century one should bid farewell to the concept of mass
h
dependent on velocity. This is an absolutely simple matter!” [4].
p
:
v
([6], p. 137).
i
X
r
a
abroad.

This opinion is shared by the authors of certain textbooks for university students published

J. Wheeler at al. (1966): “The concept of relativistic mass is subject to misunderstanding”

R. Resnick et al. (1992): “ ‘The Concept of Mass’ by Lev B. Okun (see Ref.

[5] of this
letter) summarizes the views held by many physicists and adopted for use in this book. But
there is not universal agreement on the interpretation of Eq.

E0 = mc2.

(35)

1Moscow Aviation Institute, 4 Volokolamskoe Shosse, 125871, Moscow, Russia.

E-mail: tahir@k804.mainet.msk.su

Subject: Khrapko

1

This equation tells us that a particle of mass m has associated with it a rest energy E0.
Nevertheless Eq. 35 asserts that energy has mass” [7]

A serious confusion that arose from the reversion to the Newtonian concept of mass is

reﬂected in the following dialogue:

“Schoolboy: ‘Does mass really depend on velocity, dad?’ Father physicist: ‘No! Well, yes...

Actually, no, but don’t tell your teacher.’ The next day the son dropped physics.” [8].

We hope that we shall succeed in this letter to formulate a rational approach to the deﬁnition

of mass.

context.

There are two diﬀerent deﬁnitions of the inertial mass, coincident in the non-relativistic

2. A splitting of a deﬁnition of mass

Deﬁnition 1. “In ordinary language the word mass denotes something like amount of sub-
stance. The concept of substance is considered self-evident.” (See [1] p. 33.) More precisely:
mass is deﬁned “as a number attached to each particle or body obtained by comparison with
a standard body whose mass is deﬁne as unity” [9].

Deﬁnition 2. Mass is a measure of the inertia of a body, i.e. the coeﬃcient of proportionality

in the formula

or in the formula

F = ma.

p = mv.

(1)

(2)

R

Because F, a, p and v have indisputable operational deﬁnitions, formulas (1) and (2) give
the operational deﬁnition of mass. These formulas will be used to make the aforementioned
comparison (see Def. 1) in order to obtain the number m attached to a body.

For the operational deﬁnition of momentum, see [10]. Here is an extract from this work:
”The meaning of the operational deﬁnition consists in the identiﬁcation of two terms: ‘deﬁni-
tion’ and ‘determination’. The operation used to deﬁne a momentum is essentially as follows.
When a certain obstacle causes a moving particle to stop, a force F(t) is measured with which
the particle acts on the obstacle during retardation. The particle’s initial momentum equals
F(t)dt, by deﬁnition. It is postulated that this integral is independent of
the integral p =
retardation characteristics, i.e. the form of the function F(t).”

Unfortunately, the attached number determined by formulas (1) and (2) using the oper-
ational deﬁnitions of F, a, p, v for one and the same body, i.e.
for the same ‘amount of
substance’, turns out to be dependent on the speed of the body; when the body has a speed,
it also depends on the choice of the formula, (1) or (2). Therefore, the deﬁnition of mass for
a body in motion splits in three. ‘The amount of substance’ speciﬁed by the attached number
from Def. 1 is no longer a measure of a inertia of the moving body.

(a) In order to determine the ‘amount of substance’, i.e. the attached number from Def. 1,
the body must be stopped and formula (1) or (2) used for a low speed. The number received
by this method is called the rest mass. By deﬁnition, this mass does not change when the body
undergoes acceleration.

(b) If the body is not stopped to measure its mass, formula (1) is known to give no unam-
biguous result. Because the force and acceleration are not properties of the body, the coeﬃcient
in formula (1) depends on the direction of the force relative to the body’s velocity. As a matter
of fact, this coeﬃcient, in general, becomes a tensor. Therefore, the deﬁnition of the mass by

2

formula (1) is completely inadequate. It is even not worth considering if the body’s speed is
not suﬃciently low.

(c) In contrast, formula (2) is valid at any speed including that of light. For this reason,
it and only it gives the operational deﬁnition of the mass of a moving body. Such a mass is a
measure of the inertia of a moving body. It is called the relativistic mass.

It appears appropriate to cite M. Born once again: “In physics, as we must very strongly
emphasize, the word mass has no meaning other than that given by formula p = mv. It is the
measure of resistance of a body to changes of velocity.” (See [1], p. 33)

At this point, a problem arises. Which of the two masses, the rest mass of (a) or the
relativistic mass of (c), is to be called simply mass and denoted by the letter m without a
subscript and thus regarded as the ‘chief’ mass. This is not a matter of terminology. The
problem has serious psychological and methodological implications.

It can be resolved through the comparison of the properties of diﬀerent masses. The rest
mass will be denoted by the symbol m0 and the relativistic mass by the symbol m (otherwise,
the latter will have no simple designation at all).

3. System of particles

If two particles having momenta p1 = m1v1 and p2 = m2v2 join together into a single whole
system, the momenta are known to add up so that p = p1 + p2. Moreover, the four-dimensional
momenta are also summed giving P = P1 + P2. The 4-momentum P is by deﬁnition tangential
to the world line of a particle in Minkowski space and its spatial component equals an ordinary
momentum p. Hence, the time component is equal to the relativistic mass m:

This immediately leads to the conclusion that the relativistic masses are simply summed

up: m = m1 + m2, when particles join together into a system.

Things diﬀer when rest masses come into question.

In the 4-dimensional sense, the rest

mass of a particle is the modulus of its 4-momentum (to an accuracy of c):

P = {m, p}.

m0 =

m2 − p2/c2.

Therefore, the rest mass of a pair of bodies with rest masses m01, m02 is not equal to the sum
m01 + m02 but is determined by a complicated expression dependent on momenta p1, p2 [4]:

m0 =

m2

01 + p2

1/c2 +

m2

02 + p2

2/c2

− (p1 + p2)2/c2.

s

(cid:18)q

2

(cid:19)

A similar formula for the rest mass is presented in [6] (c = 1):

M 2 = (Esystem)2 − (px

system)2 − (py

system)2 − (pz

system)2.

(3)

(4)

It follows from formulas (3) and (4) that the rest mass is lacking the property of additivity.
We think that physicists do not mean the rest mass when they speak about beauty as a criterion
for truth.

4. A violence to mind

q

q

3

The thing is that both the relativistic mass (a time component of 4-momentum) and the

rest mass (its modulus) obey the conservation law. This is ascertained in [4].

However, it is not so simple to accept that a non-additive quantity is conserved. Indeed,
according to (3) and (4), the rest mass of a system does not change as a result of particle
collisions or nuclear reactions. But as soon as a system of two moving bodies is mentally
divided into two separate bodies, the rest mass will change because the rest mass of the pair
is not equal to the sum of the rest mass of the bodies of the pair. In our opinion, the use of
non-additive notions entails a serious intellectual burden: a pair of photons, each having no
rest mass, does have a rest mass.

Another very diﬃcult question is: “Does energy have a rest mass?” The correct answer
may be as follows: the energy of two photons will have a rest mass when they move in opposite
directions. A system of two photons will have zero rest mass if they move in the same direction
[4]. Thus, it appears that even the authors of the textbook [7] failed to solve the problem.

Furthermore, photons moving in the same direction have no rest mass while the rest mass
of the body which emitted them decreases. Therefore, it may be suggested that some of the
body’s rest mass has been converted into the massless energy of photons. However, according
to (3), (4) the rest mass of the system body-photons has been conserved during radiation!

Unable to bear such an intellectual burden, the advocates of the rest mass concept refuse
to adopt the law of conservation of the rest mass of a system, in deﬁance of the formulas (3),
(4). Now, they state that “rest mass of ﬁnal system increases in an inelastic encounter” ([6], p.
121). In contrast, nuclear reactions lead to ‘the mass defect’. For example, in the synthesis of
deuteron, p + n = D + 0.2 MeV, its rest mass is less than that of the neutron and proton.

At the same time, it follows from formulas (3), (4) that there must be no rest mass ‘defect’
during nuclear reactions. In our example, the allegedly lacking rest mass of the system at stage
D + 0.2 MeV is actually provided by a massless γ-quantum with the energy of 0.2 MeV. This
disturbs the additivity of the system’s rest mass.

It is easy to understand why the schoolboy dropped physics in the face of such a confusion

concerning the rest mass.

5. Underlying psychologic reason

For all that, many physicists consider the rest mass to be the ‘chief’ one and denote it by
the symbol m instead of m0. Simultaneously, they discriminate against the relativistic mass and
leave it without notation. This causes an additional confusion making it sometimes diﬃcult to
understand which mass is really meant. This situation is exempliﬁed by the statement from [7]
cited above.

These physicists agree that the mass of a gas in a state of rest increases upon heating because
the energy contained in it grows. However, there seems to exist a psychological barrier which
prevents relating this rise to a larger mass of individual molecules due to their high thermal
velocity.

The said physicists sacriﬁce the concept of a mass as a measure of inertia, sacriﬁce the
additivity of mass and the equivalence of mass and energy to a label attached to each particle
and bearing information about a constant ‘amount of substance’, just because such a label is in
line with the deeply ingrained Newtonian concept of mass. For them, radiation that ”transmits
inertia between emitting and absorbing bodies” (according to A Einstein [11]) has no mass.

The main psychological problem is how to establish the identity between mass and energy
(which varies) and regard these two entities as one. It is easy to accept that E0 = m0c2 for a

4

body at rest. The authors of Ref.
[6] entitled Chapter 13 as “The equivalence of energy and
rest mass”2 It is more diﬃcult to admit that the formula E = mc2 is valid for any speed. The
remarkable formula E = mc2 is described by L. B. Okun’ as ‘ugly’ [4].

Transition from the rest mass to the relativistic one in the relativistic theory appears to

encounter the same psychological problems as transition from proper to relative time.

It is appropriate to quote from Max Planck here:

“An important scientiﬁc innovation rarely makes its way by gradually winning over
and converting its opponents: it rarely happens that Saul becomes Paul. What does
happen is that its opponents gradually die out and that the growing generation is
familiarized with the idea from the beginning: another instance of the fact that the
future lies with youth. For this reason a suitable planning of school teaching is one
of the most important conditions of progress in science.” [12].

Unfortunately, the important concept of relativistic mass is carefully isolated from youth:
the present paper has been rejected by editors of the following journals: “Russian Physics
Journal”, “Kvant” (Moscow), “American Journal of Physics”, “Physics Education” (Bristol).
“Physics Today”.

6. Conclusions

Thus, the relativistic mass has a natural operational deﬁnition based on the formula p = mv.
It is additive and obeys the law of conservation. Also, it is equivalent to both energy and
gravitational mass. It should be referred to as mass and denoted by the letter m.

The rest mass is not conserved or lacks the property of additivity. Here, the advocates of
the rest mass concept contradict themselves; at ﬁrst, they justly maintain that the rest mass
is conserved but not additive, then they say that it is additive but not conserved. It is not
equivalent to energy. It should be denoted as m0 and used with caution especially if the notion
is applied to a system of bodies.

The relativistic mass together with momentum are transformed as coordinates of an event

during transition to a new inertial laboratory:

Speciﬁcally, if p′ = 0 then m′ = m0, and

m =

m′ + p′v/c2
1 − v2/c2

,

p =

p′ + m′v
1 − v2/c2

.

m =

m0
1 − v2/c2

,

p =

m0v
1 − v2/c2

.

q

q

q

q

It is worthwhile to note in conclusion that if instead of the coordinates t, x,... we use the
coordinates t′, x′,... the relativistic mass m and the rest mass m0, which are both scalars, will
be expressed by the formulas

mc = ui′

pj′

gi′j′, m0c =

pi′pj′gi′j′,

2The title is characteristically ambiguous implying the equivalence between the rest energy and the rest

q

mass.

5

which are valid for the curved space of GTR. Here, ui′
and gi′j′ are the unit vector of the ex-
perimentalist, 4-momentum of the body, and metric tensor of the new coordinates, respectively.
It is assumed that for the initial coordinates t, x,..., ui = δi

0, g00 = 1, gii = −1,...

, pj′

A photon has no rest mass-energy, hence no proper frequency. But its mass-energy and
frequency can be measured in experiment as E = hν = cuipjgij and prove to be of any value
I thank G. S. Lapidus whose comments helped to
depending on the experimenter’s speed.
improve the text of this paper.

This paper has been published in Physics - Uspekhi 43 (12) 1267 (2000), http://www.ufn.ru
Uspekhi Fizicheskikh Nauk 170 (12) 1363 (2000), http://www.ufn.ru
http://www.mai.ru/projects/mai works/index.htm
This topic is elaborated in physics/0103008.

References

1. Born M., Einstein’s Theory of Relativity (New York: Dover Publ., 1962) p. 269.
2. Feynman R., Character of Physical Law (London: Cox and Wyman, 1965) p. 76.
3. Strelkov S. P., Mechanics (Moscow: Nauka, 1975) p. 533 (in Russian).
4. Okun’ L. B., “The concept of mass”, Soviet Physics Uspekhi 32 (7), 629–638 (1989).
5. Okun’ L. B., “The concept of mass”, Physics Today 42 (6), 31 (1989)
6. Taylor E. F., Wheeler J. A., Spacetime Physics (San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1966).
7. Resnick R., Halliday D., Krane K. S., Physics, Vol. 1 (New York Wiley, 1992), p. 166,

8. Adler C. G. “Does mass really depend on velocity, dad!” Am. J. Phys. 55, 739 (1987).
9. Alonso M., Finn E. J., Physics (Wokingham, England: Addison- Wesley, 1992) p. 96.
10. Khrapko R. I., Spirin G. G., Ramrenov V. M., Mechanics (Moscow: Izd. MAI, 1993).
11. Einstein A. “Ist die Tragheit eines Korpers von seinem Energiegehalt abhangig?’ Ann.

d. Phys. 18, 639 (1905).

12. Planck M., The Philosophy of Physics (George Allen & Unwin Ltd, London, 1936), p.

167.

90.

6

