 "... we want more than just a formula.  First we have an
observation, then we have numbers that we measure, then
we  have  a  law  which  summarizes  all  the  numbers.    But
the  real  glory  of  science  is  that  we  can  find  a  way  of
thinking such that the law is evident."

"The Feynman lectures on physics",
Addison-Wesley, MA, 1966, p.26-3.

THE GHOSTLY SOLUTION OF THE QUANTUM PARADOXES
AND ITS EXPERIMENTAL VERIFICATION*

Raoul Nakhmanson

Frankfurt am Main, Germany†

This conference is entitled "Frontiers of fundamental physics".  What does this mean?  Is it
the frontiers of today's physical knowledge, or is it the frontiers of physics itself as a science?
In  my  paper  I  shall  try  to  show  that  today  it  is  the  same:  the  frontiers  of  contemporary
physical knowledge coincide with the conceptual frontiers of physics as a science regarding
the behaviour of so-called inanimate matter and even cross over to invade into the kingdom
of ghost.  Such a point of view permits a very natural interpretation of quantum phenomena,
and suggests essentially new experiments in which information plays the principal rôle.

The microworld has surprised the "classical" physicists with the following paradoxes:1,2
1)  Before  quantum  mechanics  (QM)  was  created:  quantization  of  mass,  charge,  energy,

angular momentum; the identity of particles of the same type; wave-particle duality.

2)  In  QM:  statistical  predictions,  Heisenberg's  uncertainty  principle,  Pauli's  exclusion

principle.

3) In standard (Copenhagen) interpretation of QM: rejection of the classical realism, a ban
on speaking about non-measured parameters, trajectories, etc.; Bohr's complementarity prin-
ciple, collapse of the wave function.

The Copenhagen interpretation is only a translation of the mathematical formalism of QM
to  the  ordinary  language  but  not  an  interpretation  in  a  common  sense,  because  it  does  not
explain how, why, and in which frames this formalism works.  Feynman told his students that
the quantum world was not like anything that we know; and although everybody knows QM,
many people use it, some of them develop it, but nobody understands it.

In  discussions  about  QM  the  "Gedankenexperimente"  play  an  important  rôle.    We  will

discuss three of them which were really performed:

1) Delayed-choice experiment.3  In one arm of an interferometer a Pockels cell is placed
which closes the path of photons at the short moment when they can pass the cell.  In accor-
dance with old local-realistic concept each photon flies only in one arm of the interferometer.
If it is the arm with the cell the photon will be absorbed and nothing will be registered.  If it is
another arm, the short  work  of  the  cell placed far away  does not  act on  the  photon  and  the
same interference  as without the cell  must be  registered.    But  no  interference  was  found  in
accordance with QM.
                                                          
* Shortened version of a report which was read on September 30, 1993 in Olympia, Greece.
† Present address:  Waldschmidtstrasse 131,  60314 Frankfurt,  Germany.
Frontiers of Fundamental Physics, Edited by M. Barone
and F. Selleri, Plenum Press, New York, 1994

591

2)  Aharonov-Bohm  effect.4    In  accordance  with  QM  the  frequency  of  wave-function
oscillation depends on the energy.  If the particle has different energies in different arms of
the interferometer, it leads to an additional phase shift and changes the interference pattern.
The  experiments  were  performed  with  an  electron  interferometer  and  a  magnetic  vector
potential  and  justified  the  predictions  of  QM.    It  is  of  interest  that  in  the  experiments  the
electrons did not cross the magnetic field.  From the old classical point of view it looks like
non-local action at a distance.

3) Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) experiment.  It  was  suggested  in5 and modernized by
Bohm.6    Here  two  particles  emitted  simultaneously  have  common  non-factorisable  wave
function  and  are  measured  after  parting  by  a  large  distance.    There  is  some  correlation
between the results measured.  Bell has shown7 that any local realistic theory (i.e. theory with
hidden parameters and restricted velocity of interaction) estimates the uppermost limit of such
correlation,  and  this  limit  is  smaller  than  predicted  by  QM.    The  experiments  being
performed2 are in accordance with QM, and today's dominant opinion is that local realism has
been  disproved  and  one  must  refuse  either  reality  lying  beyond  the  measurements  (like
Copenhagen) or locality.  Later I will show that this conclusion as well as Bell's theorem itself
do not have the generality being ascribed to them.

The EPR-scheme raises a question about separability.  "Common sense" prompts that after
some  time  and  distance  the  "magic"  correlation  between  particles  must  disappear,  i.e.  the
factorisation  of  the  wave  function  must  take  place.    But  how?    The  analogous  question  is
connected  with  measuring  procedure  itself:  If  interaction  between  particle  and  apparatus
allows several output results, the QM forecasted end state is a superposition of these results.
But in practice the result of each measurement is a pure state, and the result of the series is a
statistical mixture.  It seems as if QM does not describe the whole measurement process.8

There are some explanations of the EPR paradox.  From the Copenhagen point of view it
is so as it is.   Speaking  about  some  hidden parameters  of  particles, e.g.  directions  of  spins,
before the measurement, has no sense, and Bell's theorem and experiments justify this.

Non-local theories with hidden parameters.9  Here an instantaneous action at a distance is
provided by instantaneous collapse of the wave function in all space.  The critics emphasize
that these theories only rewrite the Schrödinger's equation in a more complex form, giving the
same results and nothing new.

Action of future on the past.10  If such action is possible, the future conditions of measu-
rement can act on the hidden parameters of particles at the moment of their departure to tune
them for correct correlation.  Up to  now there is no complete theory ready to  defy  critique.
But common sense prompts that such a world can not be stable.

Fatalism.  This possibility was noted particularly by Bell.11  In the spirit of Laplace it is
possible  to  think  that  everything  is  pre-determined,  particularly  our  choice  of  position  of
analyser.  Here we are confronted with the old problem of "free will".  If free will exists man
(and not only he) can control the choice of alternatives taking into account physical and social
conditions.  The following chain of syllogisms supports the existence of free will:

→ Useful changes are selected and consolidated by evolution.
 +  During evolution the volume of the human brain increases.
 =  The volume of brain is a useful quantity.
 +  Intelligence depends on the brain volume; as a rule,
        the greater the volume, the higher the intelligence.
 =  Intelligence is useful.
 +  Intelligence can develop itself only if it can choose among several
        alternatives; only in such situations can intelligence be useful.
 =  Free choice, i.e. free will exists.

One can reply that the increase of the brain volume as well as evolution itself are included
in the fatalistic scenario.  But if one considers the existence of free will ad hoc as an axiom,
then, in accordance with these syllogisms, free will gives intelligence a chance to evolve.

592

The roots of free will do not lie in the macroworld which is ruled by deterministic laws.
They lie in the microworld, and quantum uncertainty points to it.  Human intelligence is not
the only product of free will.  It is possible that earler, the free will created some intelligence
at the level of its roots, i.e. in microworld.  Because the time (measured not in seconds but in
events) flowed there much faster, this intelligence  had a longer evolution period.  Perhaps the
golden age of it is over, and now we have to do it only with a "rudimentar" intelligence (so
called by Cochran12).  The additional pointers on intelligent matter are the Einstein's formula
E = mc2 , the informational character of the wave function ψψψψ, the principle of the least action,
and quantum-mechanical stochastics.13

The development of quantum physics was a step across the boundary between matter and
ghost  drawn  by  Descartes.    Physicists  felt  it  and  spoke  about  the  free  will  of  electrons  and
ghost  (spirit,  consciousness,  intelligence)  in  matter.    Similar  meanings  were  expressed  by
Charles  Galton  Darwin,  Eddington,  Heisenberg,  Schrödinger,  Pauli,  Jordan,  Margenau,
Wigner, Charon, Cochran, and others.  Feynman said that it looks as if a computer is in each
point of space.  Cambrige University Press has published a book touching this theme11 con-
taining interviews with Bell, Bohm, Wheeler, Peierls, Aspect, and others.

Some interesting analogies between microworld and people have been noticed.  Niels Bohr
saw the manifestation of his complementarity principle in human thinking.  Margenau wrote
about Pauli's exclusion principle:14

"Prior  to  that  time,  all  theories  had  affected  the  individual  nature  of  so-called  'parts';  the  new  principle
regulated  their  social  behaviour...    The  particles,  though  initially  assumed  to  be  free,  are  seen  to  avoid
each  other...    In  a  crude  manner  of  speaking,  each  particle  wants  to  be  alone;  each  runs  away  then  it
'smells' the other, and its sense of smell is keener the more nearly its velocity equals to the other's."

This was said about Fermi-particles.  Such behaviour is typical for scientists: each of them
tries to find  his  own theme.   Sometimes people's behaviour is  like  a  Bose-particle.  Pheno-
mena  such  as  fashion  in  dress  or  music,  and  applause  or  coughing  in  concert  halls,  are
examples of Bose-condensation.   The  same man  can  manifest himself  as  a  Bose-  or Fermi-
person.  For particles this was only possibe in "big bang" time.  Are we now at the same stage
of evolution?

The next example concerns the EPR-experiment.  Let us suppose there are twins, Ralf and
Rolf, both of whom live in Frankfurt and work for Lufthansa as pilots.  They fly all over the
world  but  mainly  to  England  and  Greece.    For  Lufthansa  (not  for  their  families!)  they  are
indistinguishable "particles".  The twins always try to dress alike, they believe that this brings
them  happiness.    Because  they  are  often  in  different  countries,  they  agree  on  an  order  of
sartorial priority: cold before warmth and rain before dry spell.

Figure 1.  Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) experiment and the apparent non-local interaction.

593

God,  who  is  observing  the  twins,  sees  as  a  rule  the  striking  correlation:  the  twins  dress
alike!  For example, Ralf and Rolf arrive in England and Greece, respectively.  If it is cold in
England, not only Ralf but also Rolf wears the overcoat in spite of the warm weather; if it is
raining  in  Greece,  not  only  Rolf  but  also  Ralf  hides  beneath  an  umbrella,  regardless  of
whether  it  is  raining  or  not  (Fig.1);  etc..    "What  is  the  matter?"  -  thinks  God,  -  "I  estimate
experimental  conditions,  namely,  weather  in  England  and  Greece  and  the  twins'  financial
status,  telephoning  is  too  expensive  for  them.    It  seems  there  is  a  non-local  interaction
between the twins.  I am sure it is a new escapade of the devil!"

God's conclusion was only half true.  In his heavenly chariot he fell behind the technical
progress  of  the  20th  century.    He  was  right  suspecting  the  devil.    But  up  to  now  the  devil
does not realize non-local interaction. Instead, he has invented television, power computer for
meteorology,  and  communication  satellite.    Because  of  it  the  twins  watch  TV  at  every
evening for a good tomorrow world weather forecast .

Although our behaviour occurs in real space-time, the strategy of it is not there.  It is in our
consciousness,  which  controls  our  behaviour,  taking  into  account  physical  and  social  laws
and  circumstances.    To  develop  a  strategy  we  use  our  knowledge  only  about  the  past,  and
propagate it on the future.  The thoroughness of the forecast depends on the information taken
into account and the power of the intelligence.

But  let  us  come  back  to  physics.    Unfortunately  the  idea  about  intelligent  matter  is  not
developed  up  to  now.    They,  who  spoke  about  ghost  in  matter,  did  not  go  beyond  such  a
statement and did not suggest any hypotheses and schemes which could be tested experimen-
tally.  From another side physicists  using QM do  not  see  the  necessity  of  such  an  idea  and
follow  the  principle  thought  as  old  as  Aristoteles  but  named  after  William  of  Ockham
"Ockham's Razor":

"entities should not be multiplied beyond necessity".

Niels Bohr said, that there are trivial and deep statements.  To be asked "What is a deep
statement?"  he  answered:  "It  is  such  a  statement,  that  an  opposite  statement  is  also  a  deep
one."  If one accepts the Ockham's principle as a deep statement then, according to Bohr,

"entities should not be canceled beyond necessity"

must also be accepted as a deep statement.  Besides, the practical necessity is not the only or
main criterion of theory.

A  consistent  development  of  the  idea  of  intelligent  matter  naturally  interprets  quantum
paradoxes as well as QM itself within the limits of local realism, and suggests essentially new
experiments with microparticles and atoms in which information plays the principal rôle.

In the new conception the wave function   ψψψψ is a strategy-function.  It reflects an optimal
behaviour of particles.  It is not in the real 3-dimensional space.  It is in imaginary configura-
tion space, which, in its turn, is in the imagination (consciousness) of the particle.  When the
particle  receives  new  information  (it  takes  place  by  any  interaction  with  micro-  or  macro-
objects), it can change its strategy.  Thus occurs the collapse of the wave function.  It occurs
not in the real (infinite) space, but in the consciousness of particles.  The consequent time is
determined  by  the  rapidity  of  this  consciousness.    Therefore,  compared  with  space-time
conditions  of  experiment,  collapse  is  local  and  instantaneous.    Von  Neumann  and  Wigner
suggested that human consciousness has influence on the collapse of  ψψψψ- function.  It is not
so: in the human consciousness only the human knowledge about the  ψψψψ- function collapses.
The laws of both collapses lie beyond physics.

The wave-particle duality is a mind-body one.  In the space there exists only the particle;
the wave exists in its consciousness, as well as the reflection of the whole world.  If there are
many particles, their distribution in accordance with the  ψψψψ- function looks as a real wave in
real space.

594

Particles are artifical things.  Division into different sorts or species with internal identities
is typical for mass products.  It simplifies production, usage, repairs, and replacement of such
objects.    Technics,  plants  and  animals  illustrate  it  very  well.    In  the  last  two  cases  the
production is ruled at the genetic  level.   For example,  people  have a very narrow  statistical
distribution of sizes and masses; the world records in sport differ from the middle results not
more than twice.  The identity of particles of one sort in QM is analogous to the identity of
vehicles of one sort with respect to traffic rules.  The individual differences lies beyond QM.

Because  of  free  will  the  behaviour  of  particles  is  not  strictly  determined.    In  situations
allowing alternative outputs the theory gives only a distribution of priorities.  Taking this into
account  the  particle  makes  its  choice.    The  optimal  tactics  of  proportional  proving  of  all
possibilities by an ensemble of disconnected particles is randomization of this choice.  To do
it the particles must have the generators of random signals.

If some theory and random generator (RG) are used to choose the alternative, it looks like

a complete algorithm.  Well, but where is the free will now?  Is it only to change the RG?

The answer is, that purpose and means create a dependence.  Really free is he who has no
purpose and no desire including the desire of freedom.  Therefore there is a danger that in the
"Konsumgesellschaft"  we  transform  ourselves  into  some  kind  of  automata.    Perhaps  the
microworld  did  not  avoid  it.    But  the  new  turn  of  development  can  be  connected  with  a
change of purpose or new information.  Besides, Gödel's theorem prompts, that the space of
correct  statements  can  be  manifold.    In  such  a  case  to  reach  a  new  fold  one  must  make  a
"quantum jump".  "Do not sin against logic, one reaches nothing new", - said Einstein.

Pauli's  principle  and  Bose-  and  Fermi-particles  were  discussed  above.    These  types  of
social behaviour are optimal for searching (fermions) and power action (bosons).  In the last
case some macroscopical effects can be observed (in superconductors, superfluids, lasers).

With respect to Heisenberg's uncertainty principle: In the new conception it reflects not the
reality but QM as a theory of measurement.    In reality  the  particle  has  definite  coordinates,
impulse, trajectory, etc..  But during an interaction with the measurement apparatus it has a
possibility to choose the next state.  It solves this problem using its intelligence (reflected in
the  ψψψψ- function), random generator, and freedom (e.g. reflected in the choice of RG).  Neither
QM nor any other theory predicts a particular result: it would be a refusal of free will.

In spite of this, the dream of Einstein and other realists, to know the values of all parame-
ters included in a theory can become true.  Particles remember what happened and tell it to
others.  To do this, they must have synchronised clocks, measure rules, and reference points
for space and time.  In this sense it is possible to speak about absolute coordinates and time,
like Greenwich's  ones.  If  we  can  communicate  with  particles13,15,  they  can  say  everything
about their parameters and forecast their and our future.

The new concept includes the previous realistic ones: empty waves2 and parallel worlds16
exist,  but  not  in  the  real  world:  as  virtual  possibilities  they  exist  in  the  consciousness  of  a
particle.    Not  the  real10  but  a  forecasted  future  acts    on  the  past  .    The  above  mentioned
danger of total algorithmisation looks like a stochastic fatalism .

The  new  explanation  of  delayed-choice  and  EPR  experiments,  and  suggestions  how  to
have  "non-QM-results",  were  done  in13.    The  essence  is,  that  particles  are  well  informed
about the world and its development.  The Aharonov-Bohm effect has the same explanation.
Besides, this effect emphasizes a priority of potential against field (in classical physics they
enjoy equal rights).  From the new point of view it is natural, because potential just contribu-
tes to the action function whose minimum as a function of trajectory is wanted.  It should be
observed that the idea of forecasting the conditions on this trajectory is also included in the
least action principle.  The change from integral form to a differential one does not solve the
problem: the notion of derivative is connected with two points, and if we are in one of them,
we know only the past conditions in the second point and must extend this into the present.

The proof of Bell's theorem is based on the next assertion: if a particle 1  is measured in
the point A  having a condition (e.g. angle of analyser)  α , and Pa is a probability of result a ,

595

1i,α)×Pb(λ

2i,α,β) = Pa(λ

then a condition  β  existing in a distant point B , there is a measured particle 2 , has no influ-
ence on the Pa , and vice versa.  Here Bell and others saw the indispensable requirement of
local realism.  Mathematically it can be written as
Pab(λ

2i,β)      ,         (Bell)                        (1)
1i,λ
where  Pab  is the probability of the join result  ab , and  λ
2i are hidden parameters of
particles  1    and  2    in    an  arbitrary    local-realistic  theory.    Under  the  influence  of  Bell's
theorem and the following experiments some "realists" reject locality.  In this case an instan-
taneous action at a distance is possible, and one can write
1i,α,β)×Pb(λ
1i,λ

2i,β,α)   .    (non-locality)               (2)
In  principle  such  a  relation  permits  a  description  of  any  correlation  between  a    and  b  ,
particularly predicted by QM and observed in experiments.  But in the frame of local realism
the condition (1) is not indispensable.  Instead, one can write

2i,α,β) = Pa(λ

1i and  λ

Pab(λ

1i,λ

Pab(λ

2i,α,β) = Pa(λ

2i,β,α´)   ,     (forecast)                   (3)
where  α´  and  β´  are the conditions of measurements in points A  and B , respectively, as
they  can  be  forecast  by  particles  at  the  moment  of  their  parting.    If  the  forecast  is  good
enough, i.e. α´ ≈ α  and  β´ ≈ β , then (3) practically coincides with (2) and has all its advan-
tages plus locality.

1i,α,β´)×Pb(λ

On the issue of separability:  The EPR-particles have a common strategy.  It can continue
as long as they can forecast the future.  But particles can also have so intensive interactions
(e.g.  with  detectors)  that  initial  strategy  is  not  important  anymore.    In  both  cases  the  con-
sciousness of the particle has an ability to cut off and forget the old partnership.

QM  is  "microsociology".    Like  its  humane  sister,  it  makes  only  probabilistic  forecasts.
The transition to classical physics is the transition from sociology of persons to sociology of
crowds:  the  level  of  freedom  decreases  and  behaviour  becomes  deterministic.    Feynman's
statement "quantum world is not like anything that we know" is right only if we do not take
into  account  living  beings.    If  a  baby,  having  more  experience  with  his  parents  than  with
"inanimate" matter, could make experiments, the behavior of microparticles would appear to
it to be very natural.

REFERENCES

  1. M.Jammer. The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-Hill, New York (1966).
  2. F.Selleri. Quantum Paradoxes and Physical Reality, Kluwer, Dordrecht (1990);  Wave-Particle Duality,

F.Selleri, ed., Plenum Press, New York (1992).

  3. J.Baldzuhn, E.Mohler, and W.Martienssen. Z. Phys.-Cond. Matt. 77B,  347 (1989) and Refs. cited there.
  4. Y.Aharonov, D.Bohm. Phys.Rev. 115,  485 (1959).
  5. A.Einstein, B.Podolsky, and N.Rosen. Phys.Rev. 47,  777 (1935).
  6. D.Bohm. Quantum Theory, Prentice Hall, New York (1951).
  7. J.S.Bell. Physics 1,  195 (1965).
  8. E.Wigner, in The Scientist Speculates, I.J.Good, ed., London (1962);  G.Ludwig, in Werner Heisenberg und

die Physik unserer Zeit, Vieweg, Braunschweig (1961).

  9. L. de Broglie. J.Phys.Radium 8,  225 (1928);  D.Bohm. Phys.Rev. 85,  166 (1952).
10. O.Costa de Beauregard. Nuovo Cimento  B42,  41 (1977).
11. The Ghost in the Atom. P.C.W.Davies and J.R.Brown, eds., Cambridge University Press (1986).
12. A.A.Cochran. Found. Phys. 1,  235 (1971).
13. R.Nakhmanson, in Waves and Particles in Light and Matter,  A.van der Merwe and A.Garuccio, eds.,

Plenum Press, New York (1994), p. 571.

14. H.Margenau. The Nature of Physical Reality. McGray-Hill, New York (1936).
15. R.Nakhmanson. Preprint 38-79, Institute of Semiconductor Physics, Novosibirsk (1980); see also Ref.13

and A.Berezin and R.Nakhmanson. J. of Physics Essays  3,  331 (1990).

16. H.Everett III. Rev.Mod.Phys. 29,  454 (1957);  see also B.S. DeWitt. Phys.Today 9,  30 (1970).

596

