On the Dependence of
Electromagnetic Phenomena on
the Relativity of Simultaneity

DOUGLAS M. SNYDER
LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA

ABSTRACT

Maxwell’s  equations  hold  in  inertial  reference  frames  in  uniform
translational motion relative  to  one  another.    In  conjunction  with  the  Lorentz
coordinate  transformation  equations,  the  transformation  equations  for  the
electric and magnetic field components in these reference frames can be derived.
As the derivation of  the  Lorentz  coordinate  transformation  equations  depends
on the relativity of simultaneity, and indeed on the argument on the relativity of
simultaneity,  electromagnetic  phenomena  indicate  that  human  cognition  is
involved in the structure and functioning of the physical world.

TEXT

It  is  known  that  the  relativity  of  simultaneity  underlies  the  Lorentz
coordinate transformation equations for two inertial reference frames in uniform
translational motion relative to one another.  It has been shown  that an arbitrary
decision  on  the  part  of  the  individual  considering  the  two  inertial  reference
frames as to which is the "stationary" and which the "moving" reference frame
is  involved  in  arguing  the  relativity  of  simultaneity.    This  arbitrary  decision
leads to the result that cognition is involved in the relativity of simultaneity and
therefore in the structure and functioning of the physical world described with
the use of the Lorentz coordinate transformation equations (Snyder, 1994).

The consideration of electromagnetic phenomena in terms of the special
theory  is  particularly  important  because  the  special  theory  allows  for  a  clear
explanation of these common phenomena and,  in contrast,  explanations  based
in Newtonian mechanics do not.  The arbitrary decision regarding the direction
in which the relativity of simultaneity is argued is at the core of electromagnetic
phenomena.  This last result follows from the fact that  the  Lorentz  coordinate
transformation  equations  allow  for  the  correct  determination  of  electric  and
magnetic field components for inertial reference frames in uniform translational
motion relative to one another.  As Einstein wrote (1910/1993) in a quote that
will be given later, one can hold that Maxwell’s  laws of  electromagnetism  are
valid in two such inertial frames and use the Lorentz coordinate transformation

- 1 -

On the Dependence

to deduce  the  electric  and  magnetic  field  components  in  one  of  the  reference
frames once these field components are specified in the other reference  frame.
Thus,  the  relative  character  of  forces  due  to  electric  and  magnetic  fields  that
intrigued  Einstein  are  dependent  on  the  argument  on  the  relativity  of
the  Lorentz  coordinate
simultaneity  because 
transformation equations.  This paper will attempt to demonstrate this point  in
some detail.

this  argument  underlies 

THE RELATIVE CHARACTER OF FORCES
DUE TO ELECTRIC AND MAGNETIC FIELDS

Allow that the electrically  charged  test  particle  is  at  rest  in  one  of  the
inertial reference frames and that both electric and magnetic fields  are  present.
In  the  inertial  reference  frame  where  the  test  particle  is  at  rest,  only  a  force
associated with an electric field  is  exerted  on  the  test  particle.    In  the  inertial
reference frame where the particle is moving in a uniform translational manner,
both the magnetic and the electric fields in general affect the test particle.

In the words  with which  Einstein  began  his  first  paper  proposing  the

special theory of relativity:

is  known 

It 
that  Maxwell’s  electrodynamics--as  usually
understood at the present time--when applied to moving bodies,
leads to asymmetries which do not appear to be inherent  in  the
phenomena.  Take,  for  example,  the  reciprocal  electrodynamic
action  of  a  magnet  and  a  conductor  [corresponding  to  the
electrically charged test particle].   The  observable  phenomenon
here depends only on the relative  motion  of  the  conductor  and
the  magnet,  whereas  the  customary  view  draws  a  sharp
distinction between the two cases in which either the one or the
other  of  these  bodies  is  in  motion.    For  if  the  magnet  is  in
motion  and  the  conductor  is  at  rest,  there  arises  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  magnet  an  electric  field  with  a  certain
definite energy, producing a current at the places  where parts of
the conductor are situated.  But if the  magnet  is  stationary  and
the  conductor  is  in  motion,  no  electric  field  arises  in  the
neighbourhood of the magnet.  In the conductor,  however,  we
find an electromotive force [due to the motion of the  conductor
in the magnetic  field  associated  with  the  magnet],  to  which  in
itself there is no  corresponding  energy,  but  which  gives  rise--

- 2 -

On the Dependence

assuming equality of relative motion in the two cases discussed-
-to  electric  currents  of  the  same  path  and  intensity  as  those
produced  by  the  electric  forces  in  the  former  case.  (Einstein,
1905/1952, p. 37)

Considerations of the type just  noted  in  the  quote  from  Einstein  were
central to  his  development  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity.    In  a  statement
prepared for a meeting of the Cleveland Physics Society in 1952 honoring the
centenary of Michelson’s birth, Einstein wrote:

What  led  me  more  or  less  directly  to  the  special  theory  of
relativity was  the conviction  that  the  electromotive  force  acting
on a body in motion in a magnetic field was  nothing else but an
electric field.  But I was also guided by the result of the Fizeau-
experiment  and  the  phenomenon  of  aberration.  (Shankland,
1964, p. 35)

The Lorentz Force Law

To provide a bit of context for  the  quote  immediately  above,  consider
the following.  The basic outline of the program in Newtonian mechanics is that
a general law relates an external force applied to an object to the motion of this
object, specifically that the  object  accelerates  in  direct  proportion  to  the  force
applied to the object in the direction in which the force is applied.  There are,  in
addition,  various  laws  that  specify  the  different  forces,  Newton’s  law  of
gravitational force being  a  prominent  example  of  such  a  law.    In  Newtonian
mechanics,  the  general  force  law  is  F  =  ma,  where  F  is  the  external  force
applied to an object, m is the object’s mass,  and a is the acceleration associated
with the  application  of  the  force.    For  electromagnetic  phenomena,  the  basic
specification  of  the  force  on  an  electrically  charged  particle  is  given  by  the
Lorentz Force Law:

F = (qE) + (B x v)

where F is the force experienced by the particle, q is the charge of the particle,
E is the electric field, B is the magnetic field, and v is the uniform translational
velocity,  if  any,  of  the  electrically  charged  particle  (Halliday  &  Resnick,
1960/1978).    The  term  qE  indicates  that  the  particle  experiences  an  electric
force, irrespective of the particle’s motion.  The term B x v indicates that if the
particle is moving and there is a magnetic field, the particle experiences a force
orthogonal to the direction of the field and its  motion.  (The exception is where
the  motion  of  the  particle  and  the  direction  of  the  field  are  in  the  same,  or

- 3 -

On the Dependence

opposite, directions.)  Thus in an inertial reference frame where the particle  is
moving in uniform translational motion through an electric field and a magnetic
field,  the  particle  experiences  a  force  with  two  components,  one  due  to  the
electric field and another associated with the magnetic field.    If  one  considers
the force exerted on the particle from the perspective of an inertial frame moving
in the same manner as the particle, the particle experiences a force which is due
only to an electric field.  Irrespective of the inertial reference frame from which
the particle is considered, as Einstein noted, "The observable phenomenon  here
depends  only  on  the  relative  motion  of  the  conductor  [in  our  case,  the
electrically  charged  particle]  and  the  magnet"  (p.  37),  not  on  the  inertial
reference frame from which it is considered.

A MORE DETAILED ANALYSIS OF
THE RELATIVE CHARACTER OF
ELECTRIC AND MAGNETIC FIELDS THEMSELVES

Now  here is Einstein’s  quote, alluded to earlier, in which he noted the
dependence  of  the  transformation  equations  for  the  field  components  in
Maxwell’s laws on the Lorentz coordinate transformation  equations.  He noted
explicitly the consequences of this dependence.

Let  us  apply  the  [Lorentz]  transformation  equations...to  the
Maxwell-Lorentz equations representing the magnetic field [and
electromagnetic phenomena in general].  Let Ex, Ey, Ez  be  the
vector  components  of  the  electric  field,  and  Mx,  My,  Mz  the
components of the magnetic field, with respect to the system  S
[where the system S(cid:213)  is in uniform translational motion relative
to  S  along  the  x  and  x(cid:213)  axes].    Calculation  shows  that  the
transformed  [Maxwell-Lorentz]  equations  will  be  of  the  same
form as the original ones if one sets

Ex’ = Ex

Ey’ = §(Ey - v/c Mz)

Ez’ = §(Ez + v/c My)

Mx’ = Mx

My’ = §(My + v/c Ez)

Mz’ = §(Mz - v/c Ey)
[where § = (1/(1 - v2/c2)1/2 ].

- 4 -

On the Dependence

The vectors (Ex’, Ey’, Ez’) and (Mx’,  My’,  Mz’)  play the same
role  in  the  [Maxwell-Lorentz]  equations  referred  to  S’  as  the
vectors (Ex, Ey, Ez) and (Mx,  My,  Mz)  play  in  the  equations
referred to S.  Hence the important result:

The existence of the electric field, as well as that of  the magnetic
field, depends on the state of motion of the coordinate system.

The  transformed  [Maxwell-Lorentz]  equations  [for 
inertial
reference frames in uniform translational motion relative  to  one
another] permit us to know an electromagnetic field with respect
to any arbitrary system in nonaccelerated motion    S   ’ if the  field is
known relative to another system    S    of the same type.

These  transformations  would  be  impossible  if  the  state  of
motion of the coordinate system played no role in  the definition
of  the  [electric  and  magnetic  field]  vectors.    This  we  will
recognize  at  once  if  we  consider  the  definition  of  the  electric
field strength: the magnitude, directions,  and  orientation  of  the
the
field  strength  at  a  given  point  are  determined  by 
ponderomotive force exerted by the field on the unit quantity of
electricity  [the  charged  particle],  which  is  assumed  to  be
concentrated in the point considered and at  rest  with  respect  to
the system of axes.

The  [Lorentz]  transformation  equations  [used  to  transform  the
Maxwell-Lorentz  equations  for  electromagnetism]  demonstrate
the
the  difficulties  we  have  encountered...regarding 
that 
phenomena caused by the relative motions of a closed [electric]
circuit  and  a  magnetic  pole  [associated  with  a  magnetic  field]
have been completely averted in the new theory.

For  let  us  consider  an  electric  charge  moving  uniformly  with
respect to a magnetic pole.   We may observe  this  phenomenon
either from a system of axes S linked with the magnet [where B
x v results in a force but no electric field], or from a system of
axes  S’  linked  with  the  electric  charge  [where  a  changing
magnetic  field  generates  an  electric  field].    With  respect  to  S
there exists only  a  magnetic  field  (Mx,  My,  Mz),  but  not  any
electric field.  In contrast, with respect to S’  there exists--as can
be seen  from  the  expression  for  E’y  and  E’z--an  electric  field

- 5 -

On the Dependence

that acts on the electric charge at rest relative to  S’.    Thus,  the
manner of  considering  the  phenomena  varies  with  the  state  of
motion  of  the  reference  system:  all  depends  on  the  point  of
view, but in this case these changes in the point of view play no
essential role and do not correspond to anything that one  could
objectify,  which  was  not  the  case  when  these  changes  were
being  attributed  to  changes  of  state  of  a  medium  filling  all  of
space. (Einstein, 1910/1993, pp. 140-141)

It is useful to provide the set of transformation equations for the electric
and  magnetic  field  components  for  Einstein’s  example  where  there  is  only  a
magnetic field in S where an electric charge is at rest.   According to the electric
and magnetic field transformation equations given by Einstein, the result for the
scenario just described results in the following equations:

Thus,  where no electric  field  exists  in  S  and  no  electric  force  is  thus
exerted on the electric charge, in S’ there are forces associated with both electric
and magnetic fields on the electric charge.

It  should  be  noted  that  where  S’  is  the  "stationary"  frame  and  S  the
"moving" frame, for an electric charge at  rest  in  S’,  a  similar  situation  exists
except for certain changes in certain electric field  components  in  S  due  to  the
change  in  direction  of  the  velocity  of  the  reference  frames  relative  to  one
another.

Ey’ = §(- v/c Mz)
Ez’ = §(v/c My)
Mx’ = Mx
My’ = §(My)
Mz’ = §(Mz) .

Ey = §(v/c Mz’)
Ez = §(- v/c My’)
Mx = Mx’
My = §(My’)
Mz = §(Mz’) .

- 6 -

On the Dependence

The  similarity  between  this  set  of  equations  and  the  set  of  equations
when  S  is  the  "stationary"  inertial  reference  frame  is  due  to  the  ability  to
consider either S or S’ the "stationary" reference frame and the other frame the
"moving"  reference  frame  in  arguing  the  relativity  of  simultaneity  and
employing  particular  set  of  the  Lorentz  coordinate  transformation  equations
dependent  on  a  particular  direction  in  which  the  relativity  of  simultaneity  is
argued.

In  sum,  that  Maxwell’s  equations  hold  in  inertial  reference  frames
supports  the special theory, in particular the Lorentz coordinate transformation
equations that allow for the derivation of  the  transformation  equations  for  the
electric  and  magnetic  field  components  in  these  reference  frames.    As  the
derivation of the  Lorentz  coordinate  transformation  equations  depends  on  the
relativity  of  simultaneity,  and  indeed  on  the  argument  on  the  relativity  of
simultaneity,  electromagnetic  phenomena  indicate  that  human  cognition  is
involved in the structure and functioning of the physical world.   One  need  go
no further than to note that the  integrity  of  the  special  theory  depends  on  the
ability  to  argue  the  relativity  of  simultaneity  with  either  one  of  two  inertial
reference  frames  in  uniform  translational  motion  relative  to  one  another  the
reference frame in which simultaneity is first defined in the argument.    If  this
were not the case,  then the fundamental tenet of the special theory that  inertial
reference  frames  are  equivalent  for  the  description  of  physical  phenomena
would not hold.

REFERENCES

Einstein,  A.  (1952).  On  the  electrodynamics of  moving  bodies. In  H.  Lorentz, A.  Einstein,
H. Minkowski, and H. Weyl (Eds.), The principle of relativity,  a collection  of  original
memoirs on the special and general theories of relativity (pp. 35-65) [W.  Perrett and G.
B. Jeffrey, Trans.]. New York: Dover. (Original work published 1905)

Einstein,  A.  (1993).  The principle of  relativity  and its  consequences  in  modern  physics.  In
The  Collected  Papers  of  Albert  Einstein:  Vol.3,  (pp.  117-142)  (A.  Beck,  Trans.).
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. (Original work published 1910)

Halliday, D. & and Resnick, R. (1978).  Physics:  Part 2  (3rd ed.). New York:  John  Wiley  &

Sons. (Original work published 1960)

Shankland, R.  S.  (1964).  Michelson-Morley experiment. American  Journal  of  Physics,  32,

16-35.

Snyder, D.  M.  (1994).  On  the  arbitrary  choice  regarding  which  inertial  reference  frame  is
"stationary" and which is "moving" in the special  theory of  relativity.  Physics  Essays,
7  , 297-334.

- 7 -

