On Whether People Have the
Capacity to Make Observations of
Mutually Exclusive Physical Phenomena

Douglas M. Snyder
Los Angeles, California

Abstract

It has been shown  by Einstein, Podolsky,  and Rosen  that  in  quantum
mechanics either one of two different wave functions can characterize the same
physical  existent,  without  a  physical  interaction  responsible  for  which  wave
function occurs.    This  result  means  that  one  can  make  predictions  regarding
mutually  exclusive  features  of  a  physical  existent.    It  is  important  to  ask
whether people have the capacity to  make  observations  of  mutually  exclusive
phenomena?    Our  everyday  experience  informs  us  that  a  human  observer  is
capable of observing only one set of physical circumstances at a time.  Evidence
from psychology, though, indicates that people may have the capacity to  make
observations  of  mutually  exclusive  physical  phenomena,  even  though  this
capacity is not generally recognized.  Working independently,  Sigmund Freud
and William  James  provided  some  of  this  evidence.    How  the  nature  of  the
quantum  mechanical  wave  function  is  associated  with  the  problem  posed  by
Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen is addressed at the end of the paper.

In  this  paper,  information  has  been  assembled  from  a  number  of
sources  in  physics  and  psychology  in  order  to  explore  an  issue  in  quantum
mechanical  measurement,  namely  the  possibility  of  measuring  mutually
exclusive  physical  phenomena.    The  resolution  of  this  issue  has  important
implications for psychology as well as physics and,  indeed,  what  their  future
relationship with one another will be.  The problem that occasioned the topic of
this paper was  initially  addressed  by  Einstein,  Podolsky,  and  Rosen  (1935).
Their problem concerned the ability in quantum mechanics to make predictions
regarding quantities of a physical existent  that  from  a  physical  standpoint  are
mutually  exclusive.    The  question  is  whether  human  observers  have  the
capacity  to  make  observations  that  would  confirm  the  mutually  exclusive
features characterizing the physical existent?  The  roots of Einstein, Podolsky,
and Rosen(cid:213)s problem, as well as the primary concern of this paper,  lie  in  the

Text

- 1 -

On Whether People

broad principles of quantum mechanics, in particular as they concern the nature
of the wave function associated with a physical entity.

Writings by Sigmund Freud and William James indicate that people may
have  the  capability  to  make  observations  on  mutually  exclusive  physical
phenomena.  These  writings  are  explored.    Also,  current  descriptions  of  the
mental  disorders  discussed  by  James  are  provided  as  additional  evidence  to
support  Freud(cid:213)s  and  James(cid:213)s  conclusions.    How  the  nature  of  the  quantum
mechanical wave  function  is  associated  with  the  problem  posed  by  Einstein,
Podolsky, and Rosen is addressed at the end of the paper.

QUANTUM MECHANICS

Einstein, Podolsky,  and Rosen showed  that in  quantum  mechanics  an
individual  may  know  quantities  of  a  physical  existent  that  from  a  physical
standpoint  are  mutually  exclusive.1    An  example  would  be  the  spin  angular
momentum components of an electron along  orthogonal  spatial  axes.    In  one
situation, if the spin component of the electron along one of the axes is known
precisely (e.g., the z axis), knowledge of the spin component along one of the
other axes (e.g., the y axis) is completely uncertain.  The spin component along
the  y  axis  has  a  50-50  chance  of  having  either  of  two  possible  values.    In
another situation, the spin component along the y axis can be known  precisely,
and the spin component along the z axis is then completely uncertain.  The spin
component along the z axis in this situation has a 50-50 chance of having either
of two possible values.

According to Einstein, Podolsky,  and Rosen,  either of these situations
can characterize the electron.  Which one does depends on an event that cannot
physically affect the electron.  It cannot physically  affect  the  electron  because
the change in the quantum mechanical wave function occasioned  by  the  event
occurs  instantaneously  throughout  space  and  is  therefore  not  subject  to  the
velocity limitation of the special theory of relativity.    The  question  arises:  Do
human observers have the capacity to make observations of mutually exclusive
physical phenomena, such as those that characterize the electron?

There  are  a  number  of  points  supporting  the  importance  of  human
observation  in  quantum  mechanical  measurement.    The  first  point  is  that  a
quantum  mechanical  measurement  does  not  take  a  final  form  until  a  human

                                    
1  Bohm  (1951)  and then  Bell (1964)  detailed out  Einstein,  Podolsky,  and Rosen(cid:213)s  proposal.
Experimental evidence (e.g., Aspect, Dalibard, & Roger, 1982) supports this proposal.

- 2 -

On Whether People

observer records an observation, due to the ability to consider all of the physical
(cid:210)measurement(cid:211)  interactions  as  quantum  mechanical  interactions  (Wigner,
1961/1983; Snyder, 1992).   A second point is that the occurrence of what are
called  (cid:210)negative(cid:211)  observations  indicates  that  a  person, 
in  his  or  her
observational  capacity,  is  centrally  involved  in  making  measurements  in
quantum  mechanics  (Bergquist,  Hulet,  Itano,  &  Wineland,  1986;  Epstein,
1945;  Nagourney,  Sandberg,  &  Dehmelt,  1986;  Renninger,  1960;  Sauter,
Neuhauser,  Blatt  &  Toschek,  1986).    In  negative  observations,  there  is  no
physical interaction in a measurement of some  physical  quantity,  the  physical
existent  generally  changes,  and  yet  a  human  observer  is  involved  in  the
measurement process.  Thus, the human observer is central to measurement in
quantum mechanics.

How can we understand that there then exists the possibility of a person
making  mutually  exclusive  observations  on  a  physical  existent  in  quantum
mechanics?    Our  everyday  experience  informs  us  that  a  human  observer  is
capable of observing only one set of physical circumstances at a time.

EVIDENCE FROM PSYCHOLOGY

Evidence  from  the  discipline  of  psychology  indicates  that  individuals
indeed have the capacity to simultaneously observe mutually exclusive features
of a physical existent.  Research on the experiential and behavioral adaptation to
inversion of incoming light can be combined with experimental scenarios from
quantum  mechanics  involving  mutually  exclusive  physical  circumstances  to
show  the aforementioned capacity of human observers.    It  can  be  shown  for
the
example  in  analogous  circumstances  to 
Schr(cid:154)dinger  cat  gedankenexperimient  that  essentially  Schr(cid:154)dinger(cid:213)s  cat  can
both  be  alive  and  dead  for  different  observers  and  very  likely  for  the  same
observer (Snyder, 1992, 1993, 1995a, 1995b, 1997).

that  usually  discussed 

in 

There is other evidence as well that is relevant to the proposed enhanced
observational capacities of humans that has not previously been brought to bear
on the issues before us.   The evidence in each  case  is  not  new,  and  it  stems
from the observations of keen observers of the human mind,  James and Freud.
The  quotes  that  follow  are  long  ones.    Both  James  and  Freud  stated  their
positions  very  well,  and  the  matter  before  them  was  subtle  as  evidenced  by
Freud(cid:213)s  own  question  on  the  subject  regarding  whether  the  matter  of  his
concern was real or illusory and by James noting how much easier conceptually

- 3 -

On Whether People

things would be if mutually exclusive selves and/or consciousnesses were not
supported by empirical data.

The psychological tendency in people to maintain a sense of wholeness
and integrity is a strong one.   It has been considered, for example, a hallmark
of mental health.  Yet the data indicate that the mind has a larger capability for
maintaining diverse, or mutually exclusive, viewpoints at the same time.  It is
this feature of the mind that both James and Freud were concerned with in the
work to be discussed.  They saw evidence of it in those diagnosed as having a
mental illness, and they extended the results of their  investigations  with  these
individuals to those who are normal.

It should be emphasized that these mutually exclusive  viewpoints  may
exist simultaneously.  Yet, they maintain some connection to each other.   That
is they affect one another, and it may be said  that each would not exist without
the other.  But this is very different than stating that these viewpoints are really
simply  modes  of  expression  of  a  unified  consciousness.    Instead  they  are
entities existing in a common world and thus maintaining certain relations with
one another, but nonetheless existing as distinct and separate entities.

Near the end of his life, Freud (1940a/1964) wrote a description of key
elements of psychoanalysis entitled An Outline of Psychoanalysis.  In a section
of this work entitled (cid:210)The External World,(cid:211) he took up a topic he had  begun in
a  paper  that  he  had  written  about  a  few  years  before  but  which  he  never
completed.    In  this  earlier  paper,  (cid:210)Splitting  of  the  Ego  in  the  Process  of
Defence,(cid:211) Freud (1940b/1964) began by wondering whether the topic he  was
about to  discuss  was  really  of  significance  or  whether  he  had  explored  it  in
depth before.  This statement is quite  curious.   In this paper and in An  Outline
of Psychoanalysis, Freud attempted to grapple in a new way with the issue of
there being two distinct psychological elements  working within  an  individual,
oftentimes working at odds  with one another.  This,  of course,  seems to be a
basic  premise  of  psychoanalysis  and  generally  falls  under  the  rubric  of
intrapsychic dynamics.  Indeed, the direction of an individual(cid:213)s personality after
childhood is in Freud(cid:213)s  psychoanalysis  determined  by  the  relative  balance  of
energy  at  the  disposal  of  the  ego  on  the  one  hand  and  other  psychological
structures such as the id and super-ego as well as the demands put on the ego
by the external world.

Freud(cid:213)s  curiosity  though  was  drawn  anew  to  this  incongruity  that  a
single  individual  could  simultaneously  have  these  conflicting  psychological

- 4 -

On Whether People

elements.  He approached the topic of mutually exclusive  situations  involving
the mind initially from areas where this mutual  exclusivity  is  readily  apparent
and then proceeded to work  toward the less extreme types  of  mental  disorder
and  finally  to  normal  psychological  functioning.    Freud(cid:213)s  discussion  is
compelling and points toward the need to systematically explore the potential in
individuals 
to  simultaneously  manifest  mutually  exclusive  modes  of
psychological functioning.  What generally passes  as  (cid:210)normality(cid:211)  in  our  own
experience  masks  these  distinct  modes  in  some  sort  of  integration  or
unification.    But  this  (cid:210)integration(cid:211)  is  not  actually  a  fusing  of  the  mutually
exclusive modes.  It is more of an enveloping of the modes as the ego exerts as
much  effort  as  it  can  to  enwrap  them  in  a  skin  that  makes  them  appear
integrated, consistent, and understandable.  Thus  the act of eating for example
can express both destructive and constructive features of the mind and be seen
as a single act, though  these  mutually  exclusive  features  cannot  reduced  to  a
single  feature  of  the  mind.    Psychopathological  conditions,  though,  present
situations  where  a  single  act  does  not  allow  for  fusing,  or  (cid:210)integration(cid:211)  of,
these different psychological features  and  pointedly  shows  that  the  veneer  of
unification in  everyday  experience  masks  the  fundamental  and  simultanaeous
presence of mutually exclusive psychological features.

In  The  Principles  of  Psychology,  James  (1899)  suggested  the  same
point concerning (cid:210)integration(cid:211) in discussing certain behaviors of hysterics that
today  would  be  found  in  individuals  diagnosed  with  Conversion  Disorder
and/or Dissociative Identity Disorder.

The 

simultaneously 

exclusive  modes 

existing,  mutually 

of
psychological functioning  have their own  perceptual systems.   This being the
case,  Freud(cid:213)s and James(cid:213)s work  is significant to the problem explored  in  this
paper.  Though their work was concerned largely with mental disorder,  there is
a  current  running  through  it  indicating  that  the  mutually  exclusive  modes  of
psychological functioning  are  general  factors,  not  limited  to  mental  disorder.
The denial that may characterize one perceptual mode in some forms of mental
illness turns into different kinds and levels of  attention,  or  different  forms  of
adaptation, concerning features of the physical world for the mutually exclusive
modes of functioning in the (cid:210)normal(cid:211) mind.  The mutually exclusive perceptual
phenomena  that  the  mind  can  support  can  be  tied  to  the  mutually  exclusive
features of a physical existent that can occur in quantum mechanics.

First,  a portion of (cid:210)The  External  World(cid:211)  from  Freud(cid:213)s  An  Outline  of
Psychoanalysis is presented.    His  unfinished  paper,  (cid:210)Splitting  of  the  Ego  in

- 5 -

On Whether People

Defence(cid:211) is then presented.  From The  Principles  of  Psychology,  part  of  the
chapter entitled (cid:210)The Relation of Minds to Other Things(cid:211) is presented.

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS : THE EXTERNAL WORLD

 According to Freud, the ego is the psychological structure that has the
executive duties for  mental  functioning.    It  manages  the  conflicting  demands
exerted  by  other  psychological  structures  and  those  imposed  by  the  external
world.  In its executive role, the ego is responsible for rational thought as well
as consciousness.

the  most 

important  of 

We have repeatedly had to insist on the fact that the ego  owes  its
its  acquired
origin  as  well  as 
characteristics to its relation to the real external world.   We  are
thus  prepared  to  assume  that  the  ego(cid:213)s  pathological  states,  in
which it most approximates once again to the id, are  founded on
cessation  or  slackening  of  that  relation  to  the  external  world.
This  tallies  very  well  with  what  we  learn  from  clinical
experience-namely, that the precipitating cause of  the  outbreak
of psychosis is either that reality has become intolerably painful
or that the instincts have become extraordinarily intensified-both
of which, in view of the rival claims made on the ego by the id
and the external world, must lead to the same result. (p. 201)

This is a straightforward view of psychoses in which  the ego is simply
too weak to stand up to and manage the demands of the id or the external world
and the individual simply withdraws from rational interaction with the physical
world.   The ego,  which is the psychological structure  that  interfaces  with  the
external  world, 
  The  pleasure  principle  dominates
psychological functioning  according  to  which  the  individual  seeks  immediate
gratification without distinguishing whether the source of the gratification is real
or illusory.

is  overwhelmed. 

The problem of psychoses  would be simple and perspicuous if
the  ego(cid:213)s  detachment  from  reality  could  be  carried  through
completely. (p. 201)

But Freud says the situation is not so simple.  Rather we get a situation
like two executive structures, two egos each functioning  independently  of  the
other.  Freud discussed this situation in the case of psychoses.

- 6 -

On Whether People

But that seems to happen only rarely or perhaps never.   Even in
a state so  far removed from  the reality of  the external world  as
one  of  hallucinatory  confusion,  one  learns  from  patients  after
their recovery that at the time in some  corner of  their  mind  (as
they  put  it)  there  was  a  normal  person  hidden,  who,  like  a
detached spectator, watched the hubbub of  illness  go  past  him
[italics added].  I do not know  if we may assume that this is so
in general, but I can report the same of other psychoses with a
less  tempestuous  course.    I  call  to  mind  a  case  of  chronic
paranoia in which after each attack of jealousy a dream conveyed
to  the  analyst  a  correct  picture  of  the  precipitating  cause,  free
from any delusion.  An interesting contrast was  thus brought to
light: while we are accustomed to discover from the  dreams  of
neurotics jealousies which are alien to their waking lives,  in this
psychotic case the delusion which dominated  the  patient  in  the
day-time was corrected by his dream.  We  may probably take it
as being generally true that what  occurs  in  all  these  cases  is  a
psychical  split.    Two  psychical  attitudes  have  been  formed
instead of a single one-one, the normal one which takes account
of reality, and another which under the influence of  the instincts
detaches the ego from  reality.  The two  exist alongside of  each
other [italics added except  for  (cid:210)split(cid:211)].    The  issue  depends  on
their relative strength. If the second is or becomes the  stronger,
the  necessary  precondition  for  a  psychosis  is  present.    If  the
relation  is  reversed,  then  there  is  an  apparent  cure  of  the
delusional  disorder.    Actually  it  has  only  retreated  into  the
unconscious  just  as  numerous  observations  lead  us  to  believe
that the delusion existed ready-made for  a  long  time  before  its
manifest irruption. (. p. 201-202)

Freud then extended his discussion of the splitting of the  ego  to  other

psychopathological  conditions.  He began by discussing fetishes.

The view  which  postulates  that  in  all  psychoses  there  is  a
splitting of the ego could not call for so much notice if  it did not
turn  out  to  apply  to  other  states  more  like  the  neuroses  and,
finally,  to  the  neuroses  themselves  [italics  added  except  for
(cid:210)splitting of the ego(cid:211)].  I first became convinced of this in cases
of fetishism.  This abnormality, which may be counted as one of

- 7 -

On Whether People

the perversions, is, as is well known, based on the patient (who
is almost always male) not recognizing the fact that females have
no penis-a fact which is extremely undesirable to him since it is
a  proof  of  the  possibility  of  his  being  castrated  himself.    He
therefore  disavows  his  own  sense-perception  which  showed
him that the female  genitals  lack  a  penis  and  holds  fast  to  the
contrary  conviction.    The  disavowed  perception  does  not,
however,  remain  entirely  without  influence  for,  in  spite  of
everything, he has not the courage to assert that he actually saw
a penis.   He takes hold of something else instead-a part of the
body or some other object-and assigns it the  role  of  the  penis
which he cannot do without.  It is usually something that he in
fact saw at the moment at which he saw the female genitals, or it
is something that can suitably serve as a symbolic substitute for
the penis.   Now  it would be  incorrect  to  describe  this  process
when  a  fetish  is  constructed  as  a  splitting  of  the  ego;  it  is  a
compromise formed with the help of displacement, such as  we
have been familiar with in dreams. (pp. 202-203)

It is  a  compromise  where  the  underlying  concern  to  the  individual  is
unconscious and yet there is some allowance for his concern and the perception
accompanying it, namely the existence of a penis in a woman.

But our observations show  us  still  more.    The  creation  of  the
fetish  was  due  to  an  intention  to  destroy  the  evidence  for  the
possibility  of  castration,  so  that  fear  of  castration  could  be
avoided.  If females, like other living creatures, possess a  penis,
there is no need to tremble for the continued possession of one(cid:213)s
own penis. (p. 203)

Here we have the origin of the development of two executive functions,
the splitting of the ego.  Also, note that there is a consistent and thorough basis
for  the  development  of  an  alternative  executive  function.    The  individual(cid:213)s
intention  is  to  get  rid  of  the  possibility  of  castration,  an  attempt  that  cannot
wholly succeed because according to  Freud,  this possibility is a basic element
of psychosexual development.  Thus we arrive at the beginning of two mutually
exclusive attitudes toward the same phenomenon.  Note  though  that  this  split
ego nonetheless relies on an some acknowledgement by at least one part of the
ego (in this case, the part of the ego that disavows the individual(cid:213)s perception)

- 8 -

On Whether People

of the other executive function that together with the former constitute the split
ego.

Then Freud showed that we indeed  have  two  executive  functions  that
appear to be functioning independently of each other.   The (cid:210)normal(cid:211) executive
function develops independently of the (cid:210)abnormal(cid:211) one.

Now  we  come across fetishists  who  have  developed  the  same
fear of castration as non-fetishists and react in the same way  to
it.   Their behaviour is therefore simultaneously expressing  two
contrary  premisses  [italics  added].  On  the  one  hand  they  are
disavowing the fact of their perception-the fact that they saw  no
penis  in  the  female  genitals;  and  on  the  other  hand  they  are
recognizing the fact that females have no penis and are drawing
the correct conclusions from it. (p. 203)

Note that both attitudes involve perception and thus the involvement of the ego
in both is essential.  The ego is split, maintaining contrary attitudes in response
to the fear generated by sexual impulses seeking uninhibited expression.

The  two  attitudes  persist  side  by  side  throughout  their  lives
without  influencing  each  other.  Here  is  what  may  rightly  be
called a splitting of  the ego  [italics  added].    This  circumstance
also enables us to understand how it is that fetishism is so  often
only partially developed.  It does not govern the choice of object
exclusively  but  leaves  room  for  a  greater  or  lesser  amount  of
normal  sexual  behaviour;  sometimes,  indeed,  it  retires  into
playing a modest part or is limited to a mere hint.   In festishists,
therefore,  the  detachment  of  the  ego  from  the  reality  of  the
external world has never succeeded completely. (p. 203)

Freud then proceeded one step further by showing how the splitting of
the ego is not limited to psychoses and fetishes.  He showed how in  the general
process of psychological development, an individual  may  disavow  aspects  of
their perceptions that ameliorate some demand being made on a child.  Note that
these  demands  from  the  external  world  assume  importance  in  large  measure
because of  instinctual  demands  that  are  not  acceptable  in  the  external  world.
Freud wrote that this disavowal is at the heart of  the  development  of  the  two
independently functioning executive functions.

- 9 -

On Whether People

It must not be thought that fetishism presents an exceptional
case as regards a splitting of the ego; it is merely a  particularly
favourable subject for studying the  question.    Let  us  return  to
our thesis that the childish ego, under the domination of the real
world,  gets rid of undesirable instinctual demands by  what  are
called  repressions.    We  will  now  supplement  this  by  further
asserting  that,  during  the  same  period  of  life,  the  ego  often
enough finds itself in the position of fending off some demand
from the external world which it feels distressing and  that this is
effected by means of a disavowal of the perceptions which bring
to knowledge this demand from reality.  Disavowals of this kind
occur very often and not only with fetishists; and whenever we
are in a position to study them they turn out to be half measures,
incomplete attempts at detachment from reality.  The disavowal
is always supplemented by an  acknowledgement;  two  contrary
and independent attitudes always arise and result in the situation
of  there  being  a  splitting  of  the  ego.    Once  more  the  issue
depends  on  which  of  the  two  can  seize  hold  of  the  greater
intensity. (pp. 203-204)

Freud then noted again that the process of the splitting of the ego,  is not
uncommon  to  psychological  development.  Freud  then  noted  the  existence  of
distinct and opposing attitudes that are represented in behaviors of the neurotic.
These are found in neurotic symptoms.

The  facts  of  this  splitting  of  the  ego,  which  we  have  just
described, are neither so new nor so strange as they may at first
appear.  It is indeed  a  universal  characteristic  of  neuroses  that
there are  present  in  the  subject(cid:213)s  mental  life,  as  regards  some
particular  behaviour,  two  different  attitudes,  contrary  to  each
other and independent  of  each  other.  In  the  case  of  neuroses,
however,  one  of  these  attitudes  belongs  to  the  ego  and  the
contrary  one,  which  is  repressed,  belongs  to  the  id  [italics
added]. (p. 204)

Freud  then  noted  that  neurosis  and,  I  believe,  fetishism  are  different
topographically or structurally regarding the splitting of the ego, not in terms of
process.  He noted that they both involve compromise between two distinct and
opposing attitudes without fully distinguishing what the essential difference is.
Freud implied that  as  far  as  our  general  awareness  is  concerned,  individuals

- 10 -

On Whether People

function  with  a  unified  sense  of  our  experience  and  that  the  simultaneous
existence of the distinct and opposing attitudes is not what we generally feel.  If
we become aware of such attitudes, they generally are in a sequence, one at a
time, not all at the same time.

The difference between this case and the other [discussed in the
previous paragraph] is  essentially  a  topographical  or  structural
one, and it is not always easy to decide in an individual instance
with which of the two possibilities one  is  dealing.  They  have,
however,  the  following  important  characteristic  in  common.
Whatever the ego does in its efforts of defence, whether it seeks
to  disavow  a  portion  of  the  real  external  world  or  whether  it
seeks to reject an instinctual demand from the internal world,  its
success is never complete and unqualified. The outcome always
lies  in  two  contrary  attitudes,  of  which  the  defeated,  weaker
one, no less than the other,  leads to psychical complications. In
conclusion,  it  is  only  necessary  to  point  out  how  little  of  all
these  processes  becomes  known  to  us  through  our  conscious
perception [where we  act  with  a  unified  sense  of  experience].
(p. 204)2

SPLITTING OF THE EGO IN THE PROCESS OF DEFENSE

According to Strachey (1964), this paper was written shortly before An
Outline of  Psychoanalysis.3   Freud  (1940b/1964)  began  this  work  by  noting
that he was unsure whether the conflicting attitudes in neurosis,  and in normal
behavior as well,  are fundamentally different than that found for a splitting  of
the ego in psychoses and fetishes.

I  find  myself  for  a  moment  in  the  interesting  position  of  not
knowing  whether  what  I  have  to  say  should  be  regarded  as

                                    
2 [discussed in the previous paragraph] is from the original text.
3 (cid:210)Splitting of the Ego in the Process of Defence(cid:211) is presented  after the  text  from  An  Outline
of Psychoanalysis because in the latter  work Freud extends  his  notion  of  the  splitting  of  the
ego to neurosis and and by implication to general psychological functioning.  Strachey (1964)
wrote that  in  An  Outline  of  Psychoanalysis,  Freud  (cid:210)extends  the  application  of  the  idea of  a
splitting of the ego beyond the cases of fetishism and of the psychoses to neuroses  in  general.
Thus  the  topic  links  up  with  the  wider  question  of  the  (cid:212)alteration  of  the  ego(cid:213)  which  is
invariably brought about by the processes of defence(cid:211) (p. 274).

- 11 -

On Whether People

something  long  familiar  and  obvious  or  as  something  entirely
new and puzzling. But I am inclined to think the latter.

I have at last been struck by the fact that the ego of a person
whom we know  as a patient in analysis must,  dozens  of  years
earlier,  when  it  was  young,  have  behaved  in  a  remarkable
manner  in  certain  particular  situations  of  pressure.    We  can
assign  in  general  and  somewhat  vague  terms  the  conditions
under which this comes about, by saying that it occurs under the
influence  of  a  psychical  trauma.    I  prefer  to  select  a  single
sharply defined special case,  though it certainly does not  cover
all the possible modes of causation. (p. 275)

Freud began by talking about the general  process  of  development  that
may 
to  psychopathology.  The  distinguishing  characteristic  of
lead 
psychopathology for Freud is that the instinctual  demand  is  stronger  than  the
capability of the ego to manage it in the face of reality.

Let us suppose, then, that a child(cid:213)s ego is under the sway  of
a powerful instinctual demand which it is accustomed to satisfy
and that it is suddenly frightened by an experience which teaches
it that the continuance of this satisfaction will result in an almost
intolerable real danger.  It must now  decide either  to  recognize
the  real  danger,  give  way  to  it  and  renounce  the  instinctual
satisfaction,  or  to  disavow  reality  and  make  itself  believe  that
there is no reason for fear,  so  that it  may  be  able  to  retain  the
satisfaction.  Thus there is a conflict between the demand by the
instinct and the prohibition by reality. (p. 275)

Here  is  the  prototypical  developmental  situation  confronting  a  child
where  the  desire  for  instinctual  satisfaction  must  be  managed  because  of
perceived negative consequences from the environment that will result from the
continuation  of  behavior  directed  toward  this  satisfaction.    The  path  to
psychosis  lies  in  a  strong  disavowal  of  reality.    The  path  to  psychological
maturity and to neurosis lies in reducing instinctual satisfaction.4

                                    
4 These alternatives toward  satisfying  the  demands of  the  environment or  of  instinct  actually
blend with one another in  the  individual.   There may  well  be  a  simple  denial of  some  event
while  intact  reality testing  is  maintained.   There is  very often instinctual  satisfaction where
the primary reaction of the individual is to control it and  even to  minimize  it,  particularly its
primitive expression.

- 12 -

On Whether People

But Freud  was  headed  somewhere  else,  somewhere  that  can  only  be
found by a more subtle consideration of psychodynamics.  Freud presents the
situation  where  two  executive  agencies  take  different  approaches  toward
handling the drive to instinctual expression in the face of limitations imposed by
the environment.  One of these agencies appears in some ways as the ego that is
too  weak  to  stand  up  to  the  instinctual  demands.    This  agency  develops  a
symptom,  the  fetish,  that  allows  for  some  disguised  primitive  sexual
expression.  The other agency appears like the normal ego engaging in normal
mature sexual expression.   But this agency is anything but normal, relying on
the other one to provide the (cid:210)cover,(cid:211) a way of dealing with the fear generated
by the desired instinctual expression  so  that  this  agency  can  go  on  its  merry
way  without  being  aware  of  this  fear.    This  situation  Freud  refers  to  as  a
splitting  of  the  ego.    The  executive  agencies  are  intertwined,  but  yet  for  all
intents and purposes are also independent as each embodies what  generally  is
considered either a normal, healthy ego or a neurotic one.

But in fact the child takes neither course, or rather he takes both
simultaneously, which comes to  the  same  thing.  He  replies  to
the conflict with two contrary reactions, both of which are valid
and  effective.  On  the  one  hand,  with  the  help  of  certain
mechanisms  he  rejects  reality  and  refuses  to  accept  any
prohibition; on the other hand, in the same breath he recognizes
the  danger  of  reality,  takes  over  the  fear  of  that  danger  as  a
pathological symptom and  tries  subsequently  to  divest  himself
of the fear.  It  must  be  confessed  that  this  is  a  very  ingenious
solution  of  the  difficulty.  Both  of  the  parties  to  the  dispute
obtain their share: the instinct is allowed to retain its satisfaction
and proper respect is shown to reality. But everything has to be
paid for in one way or another, and this success is achieved  at
the  price  of  a  rift  in  the  ego  which  never  heals  but  which
increases  as  time  goes  on.  The  two  contrary  reactions  to  the
conflict persist as the centre-point of a splitting of the ego.  The
whole  process  seems  so  strange  to  us  because  we  take  for
granted the synthetic nature of the processes of the ego.  But we
are  clearly  at  fault  in  this.  The  synthetic  function  of  the  ego,
though  it  is  of  such  extraordinary  importance,  is  subject  to
particular  conditions  and  is  liable  to  a  whole  number  of
disturbances. (pp. 275-276)

- 13 -

On Whether People

Freud  then  introduced  the  specific  features  of  the  case  history  he
presented that illustrates how  the general  principles  discussed  in  the  previous
quoted paragraph may be manifested.

It will assist if I introduce an individual case history into this
schematic disquisition. A little boy, while he was  between three
and four years of age,  had become  acquainted  with  the  female
genitals  through  being  seduced  by  an  older  girl.  After  these
relations  had  been  broken  off,  he  carried  on  the  sexual
stimulation set going in this way by zealously practicing manual
masturbation; but he was soon caught at it by his energetic nurse
and was  threatened  with  castration,  the  carrying  out  of  which
was, as usual, ascribed to his father. There were thus present in
this case conditions calculated to produce a tremendous effect of
fright. A threat of castration by itself need  not  produce  a  great
impression. A  child  will  refuse  to  believe  in  it,  for  he  cannot
easily imagine the possibility of losing such a highly prized part
of his body. His [earlier] sight of the female genitals might have
convinced  our  child  of  that  possibility.  But  he  drew  no  such
conclusion from it, since his disinclination to doing so  was  too
great and there was  no motive present which could compel him
to.  On the contrary, whatever uneasiness he may have felt was
calmed by the reflection that what was  missing would yet make
its appearance: she would grow one (a penis) later. Anyone who
has observed enough small boys will be able to recollect having
come across some  such  remark  at  the  sight  of  a  baby  sister(cid:213)s
genitals. But it is different if both factors are present together. In
that case the threat revives the memory of the perception  which
had hitherto been regarded as harmless and finds in that memory
a  dreaded  confirmation.  The 
thinks  he
understands why the girl(cid:213)s genitals showed  no sign  of  a  penis
and no longer ventures to doubt that his own  genitals may meet
with the same fate. Thenceforward he cannot  help  believing  in
the reality of the danger of castration. (pp. 276-277)

little  boy  now 

The  usual  result  of  the  fright  of  castration,  the  result  that
passes  as  the  normal  one,  is  that,  either  immediately  or  after
some considerable struggle, the boy gives way to the threat and
obeys the prohibition either wholly or at least in part (that is,  by

- 14 -

Freud noted that the fetish involved a loosening of the tie to reality, but

unlike the psychoses, involved a displacement of value only.

On Whether People

no longer touching his genitals with his hand).  In other words,
he gives up, in whole or in part,  the satisfaction of the instinct.
We are prepared to hear, however, that our present patient found
another way out. He created a substitute for the penis which he
missed in females-that is to say, a fetish. In so  doing,  it is true
that he had disavowed reality, but he had saved his own  penis.
So long as he was not obliged to acknowledge that females have
lost their penis,  there was  no need for him to believe the threat
that had been made against him: he need have  no  fears  for  his
own  penis,  so  he  could  proceed  with  his  masturbation
undisturbed. (p. 277)

This behaviour on the part of our patient strikes  us  forcibly  as
being a turning away from reality-a procedure which we should
prefer  to  reserve  for  psychoses.    And  it  is  in  fact  not  very
different. Yet we will suspend our judgement,  for  upon  closer
inspection we shall discover a not unimportant distinction.  The
boy did not simply contradict his perceptions  and  hallucinate  a
penis where there was none to be seen; he effected no more than
a  displacement  of  value-he  transferred  the  importance  of  the
penis to another part of the body,  a procedure in which he was
assisted  by  the  mechanism  of  regression  (in  a  manner  which
need  not  here  be  explained).    This  displacement,  it  is  true,
related  only  to  the  female  body;  as  regards  his  own  penis
nothing was changed. (p. 277)

Freud wrote the final part of this  unfinished  piece.    He  discussed  the
widely  differing  behaviors  reflective  of  the  functioning  of  two  independent
psychological agencies.

This way of dealing with reality, which almost  deserves  to
be  described  as  artful,  was  decisive  as  regards  the  boy(cid:213)s
practical  behaviour.  He  continued  with  his  masturbation  as
though it implied no danger to his penis; but at the same time, in
complete contradiction to his apparent boldness or indifference,
he developed a symptom which showed that he nevertheless did
recognize  the  danger.  He  had  been  threatened  with  being

- 15 -

On Whether People

immediately 

father,  and 

castrated  by  his 
afterwards,
simultaneously with the creation of his fetish, he  developed  an
intense fear of his father  punishing  him,  which  it  required  the
whole force of his  masculinity  to  master  and  overcompensate.
This  fear  of  his  father,  too,  was  silent  on  the  subject  of
castration: by the help of regression to an oral phase,  it assumed
the form of a fear of being eaten by his father. At this point it is
impossible to forget  a  primitive  fragment  of  Greek  mythology
which  tells  how  Kronos,  the  old  Father  God,  swallowed  his
children and sought to swallow his youngest son  Zeus like  the
rest,  and how  Zeus was  saved  by  the  craft  of  his  mother  and
later  on  castrated  his  father.  But  we  must  return  to  our  case
history  and  add  that  the  boy  produced  yet  another  symptom,
though it was  a slight one,  which  he  has  retained  to  this  day.
This was an anxious susceptibility against either of his little toes
being  touched,  as  though,  in  all  the  to  and  fro  between
disavowal and acknowledgement, it was  nevertheless castration
that found the clearer expression.... (pp. 277-278)

Now  James(cid:213)s work will be explored  concerning  the  possibility  of  the
mind simultaneously manifesting what James referred to as mutually exclusive
consciousnesses.

THE PRINCIPLES OF PSYCHOLOGY

Immediately  before  beginning  his  section  of  (cid:210)Unconsciousness  in

Hysterics,(cid:211) James (1899) wrote:

a lot of  curious  observations  made  on  hysterical  and  hypnotic
subjects,  which  prove  the  existence  of  a  highly  developed
consciousness in places where it has hitherto not been suspected
at all.  These observations throw such a novel light upon human
nature that I must  give them is some  detail.    That  at  least  four
different and in a certain sense rival  observers  should  agree  in
the same conclusion justifies us  in the accepting the conclusion
as true [italics added]. (p. 202)5

                                    
5 James listed more  than  four individuals in  the  material presented here who  could meet  this
criterion.  Among them are Pierre  Janet,  Jules  Janet,  Binet,  Gurney,  Beaunis, Bernheim,  and
Pitres.

- 16 -

On Whether People

(cid:212)Unconsciousness(cid:213) in Hysterics

James began by describing a common symptom of severe cases of what
was  known  as hysteria, namely some  alteration  of  the  body(cid:213)s  sensibility  that
did not correspond to a meaningful organic disease pattern.

is  contracted.  Hearing, 

One  of  the  most  constant  symptoms  in  persons  suffering
from hysteric disease in its extreme forms consists in alterations
of  the  natural  sensibility  of  various  parts  and  organs  of  the
body.    Usually  the  alteration  is  in  the  direction  of  defect,  or
an(cid:190)sthesia. One or both eyes are blind,  or color-blind, or there
is hemianopsia (blindness to one half the field of view),  or  the
taste,  smell  may  similarly
field 
disappear,  in  part  or  in  totality.  Still  more  striking  are  the
cutaneous  an(cid:190)sthesias.  The  old  witch-finders  looking  for  the
(cid:212)devil(cid:213)s  seals(cid:213)  learned  well  the  existence  of  those  insensible
patches  on  the  skin  of  their  victims,  to  which  the  minute
physical  examinations  of  recent  medicine  have  but  recently
attracted attention again. They may  be  scattered  anywhere,  but
are very apt to affect one side of the body. Not infrequently they
affect an entire lateral half, from head to foot; and the insensible
skin of, say, the  left side will then be found separated from the
naturally sensitive skin of the right by a perfectly sharp  line  of
demarcation down the middle of the front and back.  Sometimes,
most  remarkable  of  all,  the  entire  skin,  hands,  feet,  face,
everything, and the mucous membranes, muscles and joints  so
far  as  they  can  be  explored,  become  completely  insensible
without  the  other  vital  functions  becoming  gravely  disturbed.
(pp. 202-203)

James explained the ways known at the time that could make hysterical

anesthesia disappear, in particular by noting the use of a hypnotic trance.

These hysterical an(cid:190)sthesias can be made to disappear more
or  less  completely  by  various  odd  processes.  It  has  been
recently found that magnets, plates of metal, or the electrodes of
a battery, placed against the skin, have this peculiar  power.  And
when one side is relieved  in  this  way,  the  an(cid:190)sthesia  is  often
found to have transferred itself to the opposite side,  which until
then  was  well.  Whether  these  strange  effects  of  magnets  and

- 17 -

On Whether People

the  patient(cid:213)s  mind 

metals be due to their direct physiological  action,  or  to  a  prior
((cid:212)expectant  attention(cid:213)  or
effect  on 
(cid:212)suggestion(cid:213)) is still a mooted question. A still better  awakener
of sensibility is the hypnotic trance,  into  which  many  of  these
patients  can  be  very  easily  placed,  and  in  which  their  lost
sensibility  not  infrequently  becomes  entirely  restored.  Such
returns  of  sensibility  succeed  the  times  of  insensibility  and
alternate with them. (p. 203)

Then James went one step further and  noted  that  hysterical  anesthesia
and its absence, alternating in  some  kind  of  cyclical  pattern,  need  not  be  the
only scheme of presentation of these different states of consciousness.    Also,
these different states may  be  simultaneous,  giving  rise  to  James(cid:213)s  contention
that there may exist different forms of  consciousnesses  simultaneously  which
are independent of one another.

But Messrs.  Pierre Janet and A.  Binet have shown  that  during
the times of an(cid:190)sthesia, and coexisting with it, sensibility to the
an(cid:190)esthetic  parts  is  also  there,  in  the  form  of  a  secondary
consciousness entirely cut off from the primary or normal one,
but  susceptible  of  being  tapped  and  made  to  testify  to  its
existence in various odd ways. (p. 203)

James noted that hysterics may have  a  very  limited  scope  of  attention
and that these individuals are open to a (cid:210)method of distraction(cid:211) that allows both
consciousnesses to express themselves simultaneously.

Chief amongst these is what M.  Janet  calls  (cid:212)the  method  of
distraction.(cid:213)  These hysterics are apt to  possess  a  very  narrow
field of attention,  and  to  be  unable  to  think  of  more  than  one
thing  at  a  time.    When  talking  with  any  person  they  forget
everything  else.    (cid:210)When  Lucie  talked  directly  with  anyone,(cid:211)
says M. Janet, (cid:210)she ceased to be able to hear any other person.
You may stand behind her,  call her by name, shout  abuse  into
her  ears,  without  making  her  turn  round;  or  place  yourself
before her, show her objects, touch her,  etc.,  without attracting
her notice.  When finally she becomes aware of you,  she thinks
you  have  just  come  into  the  room  again,  and  greets  you
accordingly.  This singular forgetfulness makes her liable to tell

- 18 -

On Whether People

all her secrets aloud, unrestrained by the presence of unsuitable
auditors.(cid:211) (p. 203)

James noted how  Janet used this (cid:210)method  of  distraction(cid:211)  to  show  the
simultaneous existence  of  different,  independent  consciousnesses.    Note  that
here  the  same  sense,  hearing,  is  being  used  by  both  consciousnesses
simultaneously.

Now  M.  Janet found in several subjects like  this  that  if  he
came up behind them whilst they were plunged in conversation
with a third party, and addressed them in a whisper, telling them
to  raise  their  hand  or  perform  other  simple  acts,  they  would
obey  the  order  given,  although  their  talking  intelligence  was
quite unconscious of receiving it.  Leading them from one thing
to  another,  he  made  them  reply  by  signs  to  his  whispered
questions,  and finally made them answer in writing, if a pencil
were  placed 
their  hand.  The  primary  consciousness
meanwhile went on with the conversation,  entirely  unaware  of
these  performances  on  the  hand(cid:213)s  part.  The  consciousness
which presided over these latter appeared in its turn to be quite
as little disturbed by the upper consciousness(cid:213)s  concerns.  This
proof  by  (cid:212)automatic(cid:213)  writing,  of  a  secondary  consciousness(cid:213)s
existence, is the most cogent and striking  one;  but  a  crowd  of
other facts prove the same thing.  If I run through them rapidly,
the reader will probably be convinced. (p. 204)

in 

James  proceeded  to  discuss  ways  in  which  there  could  be  a
psychological split  in  perception  that  underlaid  the  simultaneous  existence  of
mutually  exclusive  situations.    Note  the  similarity  to  Freud(cid:213)s  example  of  a
splitting of the ego where one executive agency appears normal but is in fact not
because of its co-existence, and relationship, with a clearly disordered executive
agency.    Also,  note  that  the  sense  of  touch  is  being  used  by  both
consciousnesses simultaneously.  One claimed that it cannot feel with one hand.
The other relied on the sense of touch in that same hand to adjust to the object in
it.

The  apparently  an(cid:190)sthetic  hand  of  these  subjects,  for  one
thing, will often adapt itself discriminatingly to whatever object
may  be  put  into  it.  With  a  pencil  it  will  make  writing
movements; into a pair of scissors it will put its fingers and  will

- 19 -

On Whether People

open and shut them, etc., etc. The primary consciousness,  so  to
call it, is meanwhile unable to say whether or no [sic]  anything
is in the hand, if the latter be hidden from  sight.  (cid:210)I put a pair of
eyeglasses into L(cid:142)onie(cid:213)s an(cid:190)sthetic hand, this hand opens it and
raises it towards the nose, but half way  thither it enters the field
of  vision  of  L(cid:142)onie,  who  sees  it  and  stops  stupefied:  (cid:212)Why,(cid:213)
says she, (cid:212)I have an eyeglass in my left hand!(cid:213)(cid:211) M.  Binet found
a  very  curious  sort  of  connection  between  the  apparently
an(cid:190)sthetic  skin  and  the  mind  in  some  Salp(cid:142)tri(cid:143)re-subjects.
Things  placed  in  the  hand  were  not  felt,  but  thought  of
(apparently  in  visual  terms)  and  in  no  wise  referred  by  the
subject to their starting point in the hand(cid:213)s sensation. A  key,  a
knife, placed in the hand occasioned ideas of a key or  a  knife,
but the hand  felt  nothing.  Similarly  the  subject  thought  of  the
number 3,  6,  etc.,  if the  hand  or  finger  was  bent  three  or  six
times by the operator, or if he stroked it three, six,  etc.,  times.
(p. 204)

James also pointed out that one consciousness  may  have  certain  ideas
due to the other consciousness having had a certain experience, with the former
not  knowing  about  the  latter.    James  provided  more  examples  of  the
phenomenon of one consciousness being affected by an experience of the other
without the former consciousness knowing of the latter(cid:213)s experience.

In  certain  individuals  there  was  found  a  still  odder
phenomenon, which reminds one of that curious idiosyncrasy of
(cid:212)colored  hearing(cid:213)  of  which  a  few  cases  have  been  lately
described with great care by foreign writers.  These individuals,
namely, saw the impression received by the hand,  but could not
feel it; and the thing seen appeared by no means associated with
the hand,  but  more  like  an  independent  vision,  which  usually
interested and surprised the patient.  Her hand being hidden by a
screen, she was  ordered to look at another screen and to tell of
any visual image which might project itself thereon.    Numbers
would  then  come,  corresponding  to  the  number  of  times  the
insensible member was raised,  touched, etc.  Colored lines and
figures would come, corresponding to similar ones traced on the
palm;  the  hand  itself  or  its  fingers  would  come  when
manipulated; and finally objects placed in it would come; but on

- 20 -

On Whether People

the hand itself nothing would ever be felt. Of course simulation
would not be hard here; but M.  Binet  disbelieves  this  (usually
very  shallow)  explanation  to  be  a  probable  one  in  cases  in
question. (p. 205)

In a footnote on this last quote, James shows  clearly that he maintained

that more than one self may exist for a person.

This  whole  phenomenon  shows  how  an  idea  which  remains
itself  below  the  threshold  of  a  certain  conscious  self  [italics
added]  may  occasion  associative  effects  therein.    The  skin-
sensations unfelt by the patients primary consciousness awaken
nevertheless their usual visual associates therein. (p. 205)

James continued by explicitly pointing out differences in perception of the same
stimuli among the various consciousnesses that exist at  the  same  time  for  the
same sensory modality as evidenced by explicit responses from the subject.

The usual way in which doctors measure the delicacy of our
touch is by the compass-points.  Two points are normally felt as
one whenever they are too close together for discrimination; but
what is (cid:212)too close(cid:213) on one part of  the  skin  may  seem  very  far
apart on another.  In the middle of the back or on the thigh,  less
than 3 inches may be too close; on the  finger-tip  a  tenth  of  an
inch is far enough apart. Now,  as tested in  this  way,  with  the
appeal made to the primary consciousness,  which talks through
the mouth and seems to hold the field alone, a certain person(cid:213)s
skin may be entirely an(cid:190)sthetic and not feel the compass-points
at  all;  and  yet  this  same  skin  will  prove  to  have  a  perfectly
normal sensibility if the appeal be made to that other  secondary
or  sub-consciousness,  which  expresses  itself  automatically  by
writing  or  by  movements  of  the  hand.  M.  Binet,  M.  Pierre
Janet,  and  M.  Jules  Janet  have  all  found  this.    The  subject,
whenever touched, would signify (cid:212)one point(cid:213) or (cid:212)two points,(cid:213) as
accurately as if she were a normal person.  She would signify it
only by these movements; and of the movements themselves her
primary  self  would  be  as  unconscious  as  of  the  facts  they
signified,  for  what  the  submerged  consciousness  makes  the
hand do automatically is unknown to  the  consciousness  which
uses the mouth. (pp. 205-206)

- 21 -

On Whether People

James discussed similar phenomena to that presented for discriminative touch in
the case of visual perception.

Messrs.  Bernheim  and  Pitres  have  also  proved,  by
observations, too complicated to be given in this  spot,  that  the
hysterical blindness is no real blindness  at  all.    The  eye  of  an
hysteric which is totally blind when  the  other  or  seeing  eye  is
shut,  will do its share of vision perfectly well  when  both  eyes
are  open  together.    But  even  where  both  eyes  are  semi-blind
from hysterical disease, the method of automatic writing proves
that  their  perceptions  exist,  only  cut  off  from  communication
with the upper consciousness.  M.  Binet has found the hand of
his patients unconsciously writing down words which their eyes
were  vainly  endeavoring  to  (cid:212)see,(cid:213)  i.e.,  to  bring  to  the  upper
consciousness.  Their submerged  consciousness  was  of  course
seeing  them,  or  the  hand  could  not  have  written  as  it  did.
Colors are similarly perceived by the sub-conscious self,  which
the  hysterically  color-blind  eyes  cannot  bring  to  the  normal
consciousness.  Pricks,  burns,  and  pinches  on  the  an(cid:190)sthetic
skin, all unnoticed by the upper self, are recollected to have been
suffered,  and complained of,  as  soon  as  the  under  self  gets  a
chance  to  express  itself  by  the  passage  of  the  subject  into
hypnotic trance. (p. 206)

James  then  summarized  the  results  and  stated  his  conclusion  that  an
that  exist
individual  may  show  mutually  exclusive  consciousnesses 
simultaneously.    Importantly,  he  noted  that  these  consciousnesses  were  not
aware  of  the  same  object  at  the  same  time.    He  called  this  characteristic
(cid:210)complementary.(cid:211)  He exemplified this with the case of the post-hypnotic trance
behavior of Lucie.

It  must  be  admitted,  therefore,  that  in  certain  persons,  at
least,  the  total  possible  consciousness  may  be  split  into  parts
which  coexist  but  mutually  ignore  each  other,  and  share  the
objects of knowledge between them. More remarkable still, they
are  complementary. 
the
consciousnesses,  and by  that fact you  remove it from the other
or  others  [italics  added].  Barring  a  certain  common  fund  of
information, like the command of language, etc., what the upper

  Give  an  object 

to  one  of 

- 22 -

On Whether People

self  knows  the  under  self  is  ignorant  of,  and  vice  versa.  (p.
206)6

James then provided an example of the conclusion that he just drew that
led to his discussion of a second self, or executive agency, besides the one that
is shown publicly.

M.  Janet  has  proved  this  beautifully  in  his  subject  Lucie.
The following experiment will serve as the type  of  the  rest:  In
her trance he covered her lap with cards, each bearing a number.
He then  told  her  that  on  waking  she  should  not  see  any  card
whose number was a multiple of three.  This is the ordinary so-
called  (cid:212)post-hypnotic  suggestion,(cid:213)  now  well  known,  and  for
which Lucie was a well-adapted subject. Accordingly, when she
was  awakened  and  asked  about  the  papers  on  her  lap,  she
counted and said she saw  those only whose  number was  not  a
multiple of 3.   To the 12,  18,  9,  etc.,  she was  blind.    But  the
hand, when the sub-conscious self was interrogated by the usual
method  of  engrossing  the  upper  self  in  another  conversation,
wrote that the  only  cards  in  Lucie(cid:213)s  lap  were  those  numbered
12,  18,  9,  etc.,  and  on  being  asked  to  pick  up  all  the  cards
which  were  there,  picked  up  these  and  let  the  others  lie.
Similarly when the sight of certain things was  suggested to the
sub-conscious  Lucie,  the  normal  Lucie  suddenly  became
partially or totally blind.   (cid:210)What is the matter? I can(cid:213)t see!(cid:211)  the
normal  personage  suddenly  cried  out  in  the  midst  of  her
conversation,  when  M.  Janet  whispered  to  the  secondary
personage  to  make  use  of  her  eyes. 
  The  an(cid:190)sthesia(cid:213)s,
paralyses,  contractions  and  other  irregularities  from  which
hysterics  suffer  seem  then  to  be  due  to  the  fact  that  their
secondary personage has enriched itself by robbing the primary
one of a function which the latter  ought  to  have  retained.  (pp.
206-207)

James then indicated how  Jules Janet attempted to resolve the  symptoms  of  a
patient that were under the control of the less accessible executive structure.

                                    
6 (cid:210)In certain persons, at least, the total possible  consciousness may  be  split  into  parts which
coexist  but  mutually  ignore each other(cid:211)  and  (cid:210)complementary(cid:211)  are  italicized  in  the  original
text.

- 23 -

On Whether People

The  curative  indication  is  evident:  get  at 
the  secondary
personage,  by  hypnotization  or  in  whatever  other  way,  and
make her give  up  the  eye,  the  skin,  the  arm,  or  whatever  the
affected  part  may  be.    The  normal  self  thereupon  regains
possession,  sees,  feels,  or is able to move again.   In  this  way
M.  Jules  Janet  easily  cured  the  well  known  subject  of  the
Salp(cid:142)tri(cid:143)re,  Witt.,  of  all  sorts  of  afflictions  which,  until  he
discovered the secret of her deeper trance, it had been difficult to
subdue.  (cid:210)Cessez  cette  mauvaise  plaisanterie,(cid:211)  he  said  to  the
secondary  self-and  the  latter  obeyed.  The  way  in  which  the
various  personages  share  the  stock  of  possible  sensations
between them seems  to  be  amusingly  illustrated  in  this  young
woman.  When awake, her skin is insensible everywhere except
on  a  zone  about  the  arm  where  she  habitually  wears  a  gold
bracelet.  This zone has feeling; but in the deepest trance, when
all  the  rest  of  her  body  feels,  this  particular  zone  becomes
absolutely an(cid:190)sthetic. (p. 207)

James  provided  an  example  of  the  incongruent  sets  of  coordinated
behaviors that an individual may display, providing support for the existence of
mutually exclusive consciousnesses that simultaneously exist.

Sometimes  the  mutual  ignorance  of  the  selves  leads  to
incidents  which  are  strange  enough.  The  acts  and  movements
performed  by  the  sub-conscious  self  are  withdrawn  from  the
conscious one,  and the subject will do all sorts  of incongruous
things of which he remains  quite  unaware.  (cid:210)I  order  Lucie  [by
the method of distraction] to make a pied de nez,  and her hands
go forthwith to the end of her nose.  Asked what she  is  doing,
she replies that she is doing nothing, and  continues  for  a  long
time  talking,  with  no  apparent  suspicion  that  her  fingers  are
moving in front of her nose.   I make her walk about the room;
she  continues  to  speak  and  believes  herself  sitting  down.(cid:211)
(p. 208)

James  provided  other  examples,  examples  that  show  the  degree  to
which an individual may go to maintain the incongruent sets of behaviors and
his own witnessing such behaviors.

- 24 -

On Whether People

M.  Janet  observed  similar  acts  in  a  man  in  alcoholic
delirium.  Whilst the doctor was  questioning him,  M.  J.  made
him  by  whispered  suggestion  walk,  sit,  kneel,  and  even  lie
down on his face on the floor, he all the while believing himself
to be standing beside his bed. Such bizarreries sound incredible,
until one has seen their like. Long  ago,  without  understanding
it, I myself saw a small example of the way in which a person(cid:213)s
knowledge may be shared by the two selves.  A young  woman
who had been writing automatically was  sitting with a pencil in
her hand, trying to recall at my request the  name of a gentleman
whom  she  had  once  seen.  She  could  only  recollect  the  first
syllable.  Her  hand  meanwhile,  without  her  knowledge,  wrote
down  the last two syllables. In  a  perfectly  healthy  young  man
who can write with the planchette, I lately found the hand to be
entirely  an(cid:190)sthetic  during  the  writing  act;  I  could  prick  it
severely without the Subject knowing the  fact.  The  writing  on
the planchette, however,  accused me in strong terms of hurting
the hand.  Pricks  on  the  other  (non-writing)  hand,  meanwhile,
which,  awakened  strong  protest  from  the  young  man(cid:213)s  vocal
organs,  were  denied  to  exist  by  the  self  which  made  the
planchette go. (p. 208)

James discussed hypnosis specifically, and the evidence that individuals
who are given directions when in a hypnotic trance to engage in certain actions
indeed perform these actions when they are no longer in a trance and have no
recollection of the actions having been suggested to them in a trance.

We get exactly similar results in the so-called post-hypnotic
suggestion. It is a familiar fact that certain  subjects,  when  told
during a [hypnotic] trance to perform an act or to experience an
hallucination after waking,  will when the time comes,  obey the
command.  How  is  the  command  registered?  How  is  its
performance so  accurately timed?  These problems were long a
mystery, for the primary personality remembers nothing  of  the
trance or the suggestion, and will often trump up an improvised
impulse  which
pretext  for  yielding  to  the  unaccountable 
possesses  the  man  so  suddenly  and  which  he  cannot  resist.
Edmund  Gurney  was  the  first  to  discover,  by  means  of
automatic writing, that the secondary self is awake, keeping its

- 25 -

On Whether People

attention constantly fixed on the command and watching for the
signal of its execution. (pp. 208-209)

James  then  combined  post-hypnotic  trance  with  (cid:210)automatic  writers,(cid:211)  those
apparently suffering from hysteria.

Certain trance-subjects who  were also automatic  writers,  when
roused from trance and put to the planchette,-not knowing then
what  they  wrote,  and  having  their  upper  attention  fully
engrossed  by  reading  aloud,  talking,  or  solving  problems  in
mental  arithmetic,-would  inscribe  the  orders  which  they  had
received, together with notes relative to the time elapsed and the
time  yet  to  run  before  the  execution.    It  is  therefore  to  no
(cid:212)automatism(cid:213) in the mechanical sense  that  such  acts  are  due:  a
self presides over them, a split-off, limited and buried, but yet a
fully  conscious,  self [italics added]. More than this,  the  buried
self  often  comes  to  the  surface  and  drives  out  the  other  self
whilst  the  acts  are  performing.    In  other  words,  the  subject
lapses into trance again when the moment arrives for execution,
and has no subsequent recollection of the act which he has done.
Gurney and Beaunis established this fact, which has since been
verified  on  a  large  scale;  and  Gurney  also  showed  that  the
patient  became  suggestible  again  during  the  brief  time  of  the
performance.  M.  Janet(cid:213)s  observations,  in  their  turn  well
illustrate the phenomenon. (p. 209)

We see then that James noted that  there  were  two  executive  agencies,
often unaware of each other and each corresponding to Freud(cid:213)s concept of ego,
governing their respective psychological agencies.  James used Janet(cid:213)s subject
Lucie to support his point that post-hypnotic trance behavior demonstrates these
two executive agencies.  He quoted Janet:

(cid:210)I  tell  Lucie  to  keep  her  arms  raised  after  she  shall  have
awakened.  Hardly is she in the normal state, when  up  go  her
arms above her head,  but she pays  no  attention  to  them.    She
goes,  comes,  converses,  holding  her  arms  high  in  the  air.    If
asked  what  her  arms  are  doing,  she  is  surprised  at  such  a
question, and says very sincerely: (cid:212)My hands are doing nothing;
they are just like yours.(cid:213)...  I command her to weep,  and when
awake she really sobs, but continues in  the midst of her tears to

- 26 -

On Whether People

talk of very gay matters. The sobbing over,  there  remained  no
trace  of  this  grief,  which  seemed  to  have  been  quite  sub-
conscious.(cid:211) (pp. 209-210)

In the following, James expressed his own sense of the unusual character of the
behavior of L(cid:142)onie and Lucie.

The  primary  self  often  has  to  invent  an  hallucination  by
which to mask and hide from its own  view the deeds which the
other self is enacting. L(cid:142)onie 3 (M. Janet designates by numbers
the different personalities which the subject may display.) writes
real letters, whilst L(cid:142)onie 1 believes that she is knitting; or  Lucie
3  really  comes  to  the  doctor(cid:213)s  office,  whilst  Lucie  1  believes
herself to be at home. This is a sort of delirium. The alphabet, or
the series of numbers, when handed over to the attention of the
secondary personage may for the time be lost to the normal self.
Whilst the hand writes the alphabet, obediently to command, the
(cid:212)subject,(cid:213) to her great stupefaction, finds herself unable to recall
it,  etc.  Few  things  are  more  curious  than  these  relations  of
mutual  exclusion,  of  which  all  gradations  exist  between  the
several partial consciousnesses [italics added].7 (p. 210)

James then began to discuss opinions regarding whether these  mutually
exclusive consciousnesses characterize those of use who  are (cid:210)normal(cid:211) as  well
as those who suffer from hysteria.  The (cid:210)normal(cid:211) mind to this day is generally
considered to be unitary in nature integrating disparate experiences within itself
and with a cohesive sense that is called one(cid:213)s identity.

How  far  this  splitting  up  of  the  mind  into  separate
consciousnesses may exist in each one of us  is a problem.  M.
Janet  holds  that  it  is  only  possible  where  there  is  abnormal
weakness,  and  consequently  a  defect  of  unifying  or  co-
ordinating power.   An hysterical  woman  abandons  part  of  her
consciousness  because  she  is  too  weak  nervously  to  hold  it
together.    The  abandoned  part  meanwhile  may  solidify  into  a
secondary or sub-conscious self.   In a perfectly sound  subject,
on the other hand,  what is dropped out of mind at one moment
keeps coming back at the next.   The whole fund of experiences

                                    
7 The text in parentheses appears as a footnote in The Principles of Psychology.

- 27 -

On Whether People

and knowledges remains integrated, and no split-off portions of
it can get organized stably enough  to  form  subordinate  selves.
(p. 210)

Attempting  to  provide  further  evidence  for  the  existence  of  a  second
consciousness,  or  executive  agency,  James  provided  evidence  for  certain
characteristics of the executive agency that dwelled mostly in the background.

to 

them 

in  hypnotism 

The  stability,  monotony,  and  stupidity  of  these  latter  is  often
very  striking.  The  post-hypnotic  sub-consciousness  seems  to
think  of  nothing  but  the  order  which  it  last  received;  the
cataleptic  sub-consciousness,  of  nothing  but  the  last  position
imprinted  on  the  limb.    M.  Janet  could  cause  definitely
circumscribed reddening and tumefaction of the skin on two of
his  subjects,  by  suggesting 
the
hallucination of  a  mustard-poultice  of  any  special  shape.  (cid:210)J(cid:213)ai
tout le temps pens(cid:142) (cid:136) votre sinapisme,(cid:211) says the subject,  when
put back into trance after the suggestion has taken effect.  A man
N.,...whom  M.  Janet  operated  on  at  long  intervals,  was
betweenwhiles  tampered  with  by  another  operator,  and  when
put to sleep  again  by  M.  Janet,  said  he  was  (cid:212)too  far  away  to
receive orders,  being  in  Algiers.(cid:213)    The  other  operator,  having
suggested that hallucination, had  forgotten  to  remove  it  before
waking the subject from his trance, and the poor passive trance-
personality had stuck for weeks in the stagnant dream.  L(cid:142)onie(cid:213)s
sub-conscious performances having been illustrated to  a  caller,
by a (cid:212)pied de nez(cid:213) executed with her left hand in the  course  of
conversation, when, a year later, she meets him again, up goes
the same hand to her nose again, without L(cid:142)onie(cid:213)s  normal  self
suspecting the fact. (pp. 210-211)

 James, though, appeared to differ from Janet and  maintain that these mutually
exclusive consciousnesses may characterize anyone.

All  these  facts,  taken  together,  form  unquestionably  the
beginning of  an inquiry which  is destined to throw a new  light
into the very  abysses  of  our nature. It  is  for  that  reason  that  I
have cited at such length in this early chapter of  the book.  They
prove one thing conclusively, namely, that we must never take a
person(cid:213)s testimony, however sincere, that he has felt nothing, as

- 28 -

On Whether People

proof positive that no feeling has been there. It may have  been
there as part of  the consciousness of  a  (cid:212)secondary  personage,(cid:213)
of whose experiences the primary one whom  we  are consulting
can naturally give no account.8 (p. 211)

Next  James  focused  on  the  relationship  between 

these  distinct
consciousnesses.   In particular, he pointed out that there is a recognition of at
least one consciousness of the other whereby the former consciousness actively
excludes some feature of the world from its own experience.

In hypnotic subjects (as we shall see in a later chapter) just as it
is  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world  to  paralyze  a  movement  or
member by simple suggestion,  so  it is easy to produce what  is
called  a  systematized  an(cid:190)sthesia  by  word  of  command.  A
systematized an(cid:190)sthesia means an insensibility, not to  any  one
element of  things,  but  to  some  one  concrete  thing  or  class  of
things.  The subject is made blind or deaf to a certain  person in
the  room  and  to  no  one  else,  and  thereupon  denies  that  that
person  is  present,  or  has  spoken,  etc.    M.  P.  Janet(cid:213)s  Lucie,
blind to some of the numbered cards in her lap (p.  207 above),
is a case  in  point.  Now  when  the  object  is  simple,  like  a  red
wafer or a black cross,  the subject, although  he  denies  that  he
sees it when he looks straight at it,  nevertheless gets a (cid:212)negative
after-image(cid:213) of it when he looks away again,  showing  that  the
optical impression of it has been  received.  Moreover  reflection
shows  that  such  a  subject  must  distinguish  the  object  from
others like it in order to be blind to  it.  Make  him  blind  to  one
person in the room, set all the persons  in a row,  and tell him to
count them. He will count all but that one.  But how  can he tell
which one not to count without recognizing who  he is?  In like
manner, make a stroke on paper or blackboard, and tell him it is
not there, and he will see nothing but the clean paper or board.
Next  (he  not  looking)  surround  the  original  stroke  with  other
strokes exactly like it, and ask him what he sees.   He will point
out one by one all  the  new  strokes,  and  omit  the  original  one
every time, no matter how numerous the new strokes may be, or

                                    
8  (cid:210)We must  never take a person(cid:213)s  testimony,  however sincere, that  he  has  felt  nothing,  as
proof positive that no feeling has been there.(cid:211) is from original text.

- 29 -

On Whether People

in what order they are arranged.  Similarly, if the original single
stroke  to  which  he  is  blind  be  doubled  by  a  prism  of  some
sixteen degrees placed before one of his eyes  (both  being  kept
open), he will say that he now sees one stroke,  and point in the
direction  in  which  the  image  seen  through  the  prism  lies,
ignoring still the original stroke. (pp. 211-212)

Having discussed the point implied in Freud(cid:213)s  writings on splitting of the ego,
namely that one consciousness or ego must distinguish the other/s in order to be
(cid:210)blind(cid:211) to it, James then discussed this very important point in more detail.

Obviously, then, he is not blind to the kind of stroke in the
least.  He is blind only to one individual stroke of that kind in a
particular position on the board or paper-that  is  to  a  particular
complex object; and,  paradoxical as it may seem  to  say  so,  he
must  distinguish  it  with  great  accuracy  from  others  like  it,  in
order to remain blind to it when the others are brought near.   He
discriminates it, as a preliminary to not seeing it at all.

Again, when by a prism before one eye [and only that eye] a
previously  invisible  line  [presumably  through  hypnosis]  has
been  made  visible  to  that  eye,  and  the  other  eye  is  thereupon
closed or screened, its closure makes no difference; the line still
remains visible. But if then the prism be removed, the line will
disappear even to the eye which a moment ago saw  it,  and both
eyes will revert to their original blind state.

We  have,  then,  to  deal  in  these  cases  neither  with  a
blindness of the eye itself, nor with a mere failure to notice, but
with something much more complex; namely, an active counting
out and positive exclusion of certain objects. It is as when  one
(cid:212)cuts(cid:213)  an  acquaintance,  (cid:212)ignores(cid:213)  a  claim,  or  (cid:212)refuses  to  be
influenced(cid:213) by a consideration. But the perceptive activity which
works  to  this  result  is  disconnected  [italics  added]  from  the
consciousness  which  is  personal,  so  to  speak,  to  the  subject,
and  makes  of  the  object  concerning  which  the  suggestion  is
made, its own private possession and prey. (pp. 212-213)

Notice  that  the  consciousness  that  employs  this  (cid:210)blindness(cid:211)  to  some
particular  feature  of  the  world  is  not  aware  of  its  own  blindness.    These
consciousnesses  are  mutually  exclusive  since  one  is  concerned  with  the

- 30 -

On Whether People

occurrence of some experience and the other is concerned with its denial.  It is
really to say that two executive agencies are functioning in one mind.   As if to
reinforce the radical nature of the these he discussed, James wrote in a footnote:

How to conceive of this state of mind is not easy.  It would
be  much  simpler  to  understand  the  process,  if  adding  new
strokes  made  the  first  one  visible.  There  would  then  be  two
different objects apperceived  as  totals,-paper  with  one  stroke,
paper with many strokes; and, blind to the former, he would see
all that was in the latter, because he would have apperceived it as
a different total in the first instance.

A process of this sort occurs sometimes (not always) when
the new strokes, instead of being mere repetitions of the original
one,  are lines which combine  with  it  into  a  total  object,  say  a
human face. The subject of the trance then may regain his sight
of the line to which he had previously been blind, by seeing it as
part of the face. (p. 213)

James was struggling in the above quote with the mutual exclusivity of
the two different consciousnesses,  implying two different executive functions.
He tried to show  that if  some  perceptual  totality  underlaid  the  phenomena  he
discussed,  one could argue that there is but  one  executive  mental  agency  and
that the apparently mutually exclusive phenomena reflect are perceptual wholes
of which they are part.  He discussed the human face in this regard.   It should
be remembered that James maintained, difficult as it was  for him,  that distinct
and different consciousnesess could simultaneously exist for the same person.

James concludes by giving an example from everyday life for a normal

person of the phenomenon discussed.

The mother who is asleep to every sound but the stirrings of
her  babe,  evidently  has  the  babe-portion  of  her  auditory
sensibility systematically  awake.  Relatively  to  that,  the  rest  of
her  mind  is  in  a  state  of  systematized  an(cid:190)sthesia.  That
department, split  off and disconnected from  the  sleeping  part,
can none the less wake the latter up in case of need.  So  that on
the  whole  the  quarrel  between  Descartes  and  Locke  as  to
whether the mind ever sleeps is less near to solution than ever.
On a priori speculative grounds Locke(cid:213)s view that  thought  and
feeling may at times wholly disappear seems the more plausible.

- 31 -

On Whether People

As glands cease to secrete and muscles to contract, so  the brain
should  sometimes  cease  to  carry  currents,  and  with  this
minimum  of  its  activity  might  well  coexist  a  minimum  of
consciousness.  On  the  other  hand,  we  see  how  deceptive  are
appearances, and are forced to admit that a part of consciousness
may sever its connections with other parts and yet continue to be
[italics  added].    On  the  whole  it  is  best  to  abstain  from  a
conclusion. The science of the near future will doubtless answer
this question more wisely than we can now. (p. 213)

Whether James(cid:213)s questions concerning whether the mind sleeps has or
has not been answered conclusive is secondary to the point that evidence comes
from  physics  that  mutually  exclusive  consciousnesses  exist,  supporting  the
findings of James and Freud.

THE CONTEMPORARY CONSIDERATION OF HYSTERIA

In order to demonstrate that the mental disorder that James referred to as
hysteria is present today,  some quotes are  presented  from  the  Diagnostic  and
Statistical  Manual  of  Mental  Disorders  (1994),  known  as  DSM-IV.    Today,
hysterical symptoms are considered within two disorders: conversion disorder
and dissociative identity disorder.

Conversion Disorder

Following are quotes from the DSM-IV on conversion disorder.

Conversion Disorder involves unexplained symptoms or deficits
affecting  voluntary  motor  or  sensory  function  that  suggest  a
neurological or other general medical condition.   Psychological
factors  are  judged  to  be  associated  with  the  symptoms  or
deficits....

Conversion symptoms  typically  do  not  conform  to  known
anatomical pathways and physiological mechanisms, but instead
follow  the  individual(cid:213)s  conceptualization  of  a  condition.    A
(cid:210)paralysis(cid:211)  may  involve  inability  to  perform  a  particular
movement or to move an entire body part,  rather  than  a  deficit
corresponding  to  patterns  of  motor  innervation.    Conversion
symptoms are often inconsistent.  A (cid:210)paralyzed(cid:211) extremity  will
be  moved  inadvertently  while  dressing  or  when  attention  is
directed  elsewhere.  If  placed  above  the  head  and  released,  a

- 32 -

On Whether People

(cid:210)paralyzed(cid:211) arm will briefly retain  its  position,  then  fall  to  the
side, rather than striking the head.  Unacknowledged strength in
antagonistic  muscles,  normal  muscle  tone,  and  intact  reflexes
may  be  demonstrated.    An  electromyogram  will  be  normal.
Difficulty  swallowing  will  he  equal  with  liquids  and  solids.
Conversion (cid:210)anesthesia(cid:211) of a foot or a  hand  may  follow  a  so-
called stocking-glove distribution with uniform (no proximal to
distal  gradient)  loss  of  all  sensory  modalities  (i.e.,  touch,
temperature,  and  pain)  sharply  demarcated  at  an  anatomical
landmark rather than  according  to  dermatomes.    A  conversion
(cid:210)seizure(cid:211)  will  vary  from  convulsion 
to  convulsion,  and
paroxysmal activity will not be evident on an EEG....

to 

and 

thus 

referred 

functioning 

Conversion  symptoms  are  related  to  voluntary  motor  or
sensory 
as
are 
(cid:210)pseudoneurological.(cid:211)    Motor  symptoms  or  deficits  include
impaired  coordination  or  balance,  paralysis  or 
localized
weakness,  aphonia,  difficulty  swallowing  or  a  sensation  of  a
lump in the throat, and urinary retention.  Sensory symptoms or
deficits include loss  of touch or pain  sensation,  double  vision,
blindness,  deafness,  and  hallucinations.    Symptoms  may  also
include seizures or convulsions.   The more medically naive the
person,  the  more  implausible  are  the  presenting  symptoms.
More sophisticated persons tend to have more subtle symptoms
and  deficits  that  may  closely  simulate  neurological  or  other
general medical conditions....

Reported rates of Conversion Disorder have varied  widely,
ranging from 11/100,000  to 300/100,000  in general population
samples.  It has been reported as a focus of treatment in 1%-3%
of outpatient referrals to  mental  health  clinics.  (Diagnostic  and
Statistical  Manual  of  Mental  Disorders,  1994,  pp.  445,  452-
455)

Dissociative Identity Disorder

disorder.

Following  are  quotes  from  the  DSM-IV  on  dissociative  identity

Dissociative  Identity  Disorder  (formerly  Multiple  Personality
Disorder)  is  characterized  by  the  presence  of  two  or  more

- 33 -

On Whether People

distinct  identities  or  personality  states  that  recurrently  take
control of the individual(cid:213)s behavior accompanied by an inability
to recall important personal information that is too  extensive  to
be explained by ordinary forgetfulness....

Dissociative  Identity  Disorder  reflects  a  failure  to  integrate
various aspects of identity,  memory,  and  consciousness.  Each
personality  state  may  he  experienced  as  if  it  has  a  distinct
personal history,  self-image, and  identity,  including  a  separate
name.  Usually  there  is  a  primary  identity  that  carries  the
individual(cid:213)s given name and is passive,  dependent,  guilty,  and
depressed.  The  alternate  identities  frequently  have  different
names and characteristics that contrast with the primary identity
(e.g.,  are  hostile,  controlling,  and  self-destructive).  Particular
identities may emerge in specific circumstances  and  may  differ
in reported age and gender, vocabulary, general knowledge, or
predominant affect. Alternate identities are experienced as taking
control in sequence, one at the  expense  of  the  other,  and  may
deny knowledge of one another,  be  critical  of  one  another,  or
appear  to  be  in  open  conflict.  Occasionally,  one  or  more
powerful  identities  allocate  time  to  the  others.  Aggressive  or
hostile  identities  may  at  times  interrupt  activities  or  place  the
others in uncomfortable situations.

Individuals  with  this  disorder  experience  frequent  gaps  in
memory  for  personal  history,  both  remote  and  recent.  The
amnesia is frequently asymmetrical. The more passive identities
tend  to  have  more  constricted  memories,  whereas  the  more
hostile, controlling, or (cid:212)protector(cid:211) identities have more  complete
memories.  An  identity  that  is  not  in  control  may  nonetheless
gain  access  to  consciousness  by  producing  auditory  or  visual
hallucinations  (e.g.,  a  voice  giving  instructions).  Evidence  of
amnesia  may  be  uncovered  by  reports  from  others  who  have
witnessed behavior that is disavowed by the individual or by the
individual(cid:213)s own  discoveries (e.g.,  finding items of clothing  at
home  that  the  individual  cannot  remember  having  bought).
There may be loss  of memory not only for recurrent periods of
time, but also an overall loss  of biographical memory for some
extended period of childhood. Transitions  among  identities  are

- 34 -

On Whether People

often  triggered  by  psychosocial  stress.  The  time  required  to
switch  from  one  identity  to  another  is  usually  a  matter  of
seconds,  but,  less frequently, may be  gradual.  The  number  of
identities  reported  ranges  from  2  to  more  than  100.  Half  of
reported cases include individuals with 10 or fewer identities....

The  sharp  rise  in  reported  cases  of  Dissociative  Identity
Disorder in the United States in recent years has been subject to
very  different  interpretations.  Some  believe  that  the  greater
awareness of the  diagnosis  among  mental  health  professionals
has resulted in  the  identification  of  cases  that  were  previously
undiagnosed. In contrast, others believe that the  syndrome  has
been overdiagnosed in individuals who  are  highly  suggestible.
(Diagnostic and  Statistical  Manual  of  Mental  Disorders,  1994,
pp. 477, 484-486)

The  problem  discussed  by  Einstein,  Podolsky,  and  Rosen  on  the
possibility of there existing simultaneously mutually exclusive situations in the
physical world has been noted.   Now  the root of this problem in terms of the
nature of the wave function in quantum mechanics will be discussed.

HOW THE NATURE OF THE WAVE FUNCTION IN
QUANTUM MECHANICS UNDERLIES THE PROBLEM
POSED BY EINSTEIN, PODOLSKY, AND ROSEN

How the nature of the wave function is central to the problem posed by
Einstein,  Podolsky,  and  Rosen  in  1935  will  be  discussed  through  a
presentation of  Einstein(cid:213)s  view  of  the  wave  function  in  quantum  mechanics.
Einstein  (1949/1969)  addressed  the  relevant  broad  principles  of  quantum
mechanics as well as the argument he developed with Podolsky and Rosen  in
his (cid:210)Autobiographical Notes.(cid:211)  Bohr(cid:213)s response to this problem is discussed as
it is central to understanding the underlying issues.

Einstein first noted that Newtonian mechanics is readily  understood  in

terms of the realistic basis of physics.

Physics  is  an  attempt  conceptually  to  grasp  reality  as  it  is
thought independently of its being observed.   In this sense one
speaks of (cid:210)physical reality.(cid:211)  In pre-quantum physics there was
no doubt as to how  this  was  to  be  understood.    In  Newtons
theory reality was  determined by a  material  point  in  space  and

- 35 -

On Whether People

time  [functioning  in  a  deterministic  manner  independent  of
cognition]; in Maxwells theory, by the field in space and time.
(pp. 81, 83)

Einstein (1949/1969) continued:

In quantum mechanics it is not so  easily seen [i.e.,  the realistic
basis  of  physics].    If  one  asks:  Does  a  Y-function  of  the
quantum  theory  represent  a  real  factual  situation  in  the  same
sense in which this is the case of a material system of points or
of an electromagnetic field, one hesitates to reply with a simple
(cid:210)yes(cid:211) or (cid:210)no(cid:211); why?  What  the  Y-function  (at  a  definite  time)
asserts,  is  this:  What  is  the  probability  for  finding  a  definite
physical magnitude q (or p) [of a physical system] in a definitely
given interval, if I measure it at time t?  The probability is here to
be viewed as an empirically determinable, and therefore certainly
as a (cid:210)real(cid:211) quantity which I may determine if I create  the  same
Y-function very often and perform a q-measurement each time.
But  what  about  the  single  measured  value  of  q?    Did  the
respective individual system  have  this  q-value  even  before  the
measurement?      To  this  question  there  is  no  definite  answer
within  the  framework  of  the  [existing]  theory,  since  the
measurement is a process which implies a finite  disturbance  of
the system from the outside [generally resulting in the change in
wave  function  that  occurs  immediately  throughout  space];  it
would therefore be thinkable that  the  system  obtains  a  definite
numerical value for q (or p), i.e., the measured numerical value,
only through the measurement itself. (p. 83)9

Then Einstein  presented  the  essence  of  a  gedankenexperiment  that  he
had  proposed  earlier  with  Podolsky  and  Rosen  (Einstein,  Podolsky,  and
Rosen, 1935).

We  now  present...the  following  instance:    There  is  to  be  a
system which at the time  t  of  our  observation  consists  of  two
partial  systems  S
,  which  at  this  time  are  spatially
separated [without limit on the separation] and (in the  sense  of

  and  S

2

1

                                    
9  The term  existing,  along  with  the  brackets that  enclose it,  that  are found in  the  quote  are
actually part of the quoted material and not added by myself.

- 36 -

On Whether People

12

the  classical  physics)  are  without  significant  reciprocity.    The
total system is to be completely described through a known Y-
function Y
  in the sense of quantum mechanics.  All quantum
theoreticians  now  agree  upon  the  following:  If  I  make  a
complete  measurement  of  S
,  I  get  from  the  results  of  the
measurement  and from Y
  an entirely definite Y-function  Y
2
  [immediately].    The  character  of  Y
of  the  system  S
  then
2
depends upon what kind of measurement I undertake on S
.

12

1

2

1

1

2

,  I get,  however,  a  very  different  Y

Now it appears to me that one may speak of the real factual
situation of the partial system S
.   Of this real factual situation,
we know to begin with, before the measurement of S
, even less
1
than we know of a system described by the Y-function.  But on
one supposition we should, in my opinion, absolutely hold fast:
the real factual situation of the system S
 is independent of what
2
is done with the system S
, which is spatially separated from the
1
former.  According to the type of measurement which I make of
S
  for  the  second  partial
system (Y
,...).   Now,  however,  the real situation of  S2
must be independent of what happens to S
.   For  the same real
situation of S
 it is possible therefore to find, according to one(cid:213)s
choice,  different  types  of  Y-function.    (One  can  escape  from
this conclusion only by either assuming that the measurement of
S
  or  by
denying independent real situations as such to things which are
spatially separated from each other.   Both alternatives appear to
me entirely unacceptable.)

  ((telepathically))  changes  the  real  situation  of  S

,  Y

1

2

1

2

2

2

2

1

If now...physicists...accept this consideration  as valid, then
B [a particular physicist] will have to give  up  his  position  that
the  Y-function  constitutes  a  complete  description  of  a  real
factual situation.  For  in this case [i.e.,  the  case  of  a  complete
description] it would be impossible  that  two  different  types  of
Y-functions  [representing  mutually  exclusive  situations]  could
be  co-ordinated  [simultaneously]  with  the  identical  factual
situation  of  S
  [the  same  concrete  physical  circumstances].
(Einstein, 1949/1969, pp. 85; 87)

2

- 37 -

On Whether People

(1935) 

Bohr(cid:213)s 

response 

the  measuring 

to  Einstein,  Podolsky,  and  Rosen(cid:213)s
gedankenexperiment was  that  there  is  an  unavoidable  interaction  between  the
physical  existent  measured  and 
their
gedankenexperiment that cannot be ignored.  Essentially,  Bohr(cid:213)s  response was
that the situation Einstein, Podolsky,  and Rosen were referring to  is  quantum
mechanical in its structure.   That  is,  the  structure  of  the  gedankenexperiment
presented by  Einstein,  Podolsky,  and  Rosen  was  based  on:  (1)  probabilistic
prediction rooted in the quantum mechanical  wave  function  that  describes  the
physical system,  and (2) the in general immediate change throughout space of
the wave function upon measurement of the physical system.

instrument 

in 

Furthermore, Bohr was  saying that because the  situation  described  by
Einstein,  Podolsky,  and  Rosen  is  framed  within  the  theory  of  quantum
mechanics,  their  result  that  two  very  different  wave  functions  (really  two
mutually  exclusive  views  of  the  world)  can  characterize  the  same  concrete
physical circumstances in quantum mechanics is incorrect.  According to  Bohr,
the particular interaction of the measuring apparatus and S
  is associated with a
specific state of S
.   But Einstein, Podolsky,  and
2
Rosen(cid:213)s  result  is  basically  correct.    Two  very  different  wave  functions  can
indeed characterize the same concrete physical circumstances, even if  the  state
of S
.   The velocity limitation of  the
special theory  of  relativity,  the  velocity  of  light  in  vacuum,  is  not  a  limiting
factor  in  the  change  of  the  wave  function  throughout  space  when  a
measurement is made.

  depends on the measurement result at S

 upon the measurement of S

1

1

2

1

Where Bohr was  correct was  in noting that the conception  of  physical
reality that they indeed adopted in their gedankenexperiment was  that (cid:210)physics
is an attempt conceptually to grasp reality as it is thought independently  of  its
being observed(cid:211) (Einstein, 1949/1969,  p.  81),  and this conception of physical
reality  is  not  part  of  quantum  mechanics.    Yet  it  is  quantum  mechanics  that
Einstein,  Podolsky,  and  Rosen  used  to  structure  their  gedankenexperiment.
According  to  Bohr,  in  not  allowing  for  the  interaction  between  the  physical
existent measured and the measuring process, of which the observer is the chief
component, in defining an element of physical reality, they were able to frame
their  argument  so  as  to  obtain  the  result  that  quantum  mechanics  is  not  a
complete theory of the physical world.  Thus, Bohr was  correct in his criticism
up  to  a  point,  and  Einstein,  Podolsky,  and  Rosen  were  correct  without  the
artificial  constraint  of  their  realistic  definition  of  the  physical  world  and  its
essential independence of the physical theory describing it.

- 38 -

On Whether People

JAMES(cid:213)S INFLUENCE ON BOHR

In the mid-1920(cid:213)s,  Bohr  came  to  believe  that  in  quantum  mechanics,
certain  quantities  (such  as  the  position  and  momentum)  of  certain  physical
existents (such as an electron) cannot both be known  with arbitrary precision.
He  argued  that  in  principle  descriptions  of  these  quantities  are  mutually
exclusive.  In that the mutually exclusive descriptions of these quantities could
both  describe 
together  could
simultaneously apply to the existent in pre-quantum physics,  Bohr called these
descriptions complementary.  Bohr  anchored  complementarity  to  the  physical
world because, for Bohr,  the mutually exclusive descriptions were determined
by the concrete experimental arrangements that the physicist had selected (e.g.,
one  experimental  arrangement  to  measure  position  and  another  experimental
arrangement to measure momentum of an electron) (Bohr, 1935).

the  existent  and  as 

these  descriptions 

Bohr was significantly influenced by William James in his development
of the concept of complementarity, a central concept in the  theory of  quantum
mechanics.  Jammer (1966/1989) argued that  James(cid:213)s  work  had  a  significant
impact  on  Bohr(cid:213)s  work  in  physics,  specifically  in  his  development  of
complementarity.  Jammer noted, (cid:210)Bohr repeatedly admitted how  impressed he
was  particularly by the  psychological  writings  of  this  American  philosopher(cid:211)
(p. 182).  It appears that Bohr was well-acquainted with certain ideas discussed
in James(cid:213)s The Principles of Psychology.  Jammer argued that it was  probably
James(cid:213)s use  of  the  term  complementarity  in  the  context  of  his  discussion  of
work on hysteria that we have reviewed that had the major impact on Bohr.

In  contrast  to  Bohr(cid:213)s  above  stated  view  of  complementarity,  Bohr
(1934/1961)  seems  to  have  suggested  that  complementarity  itself  might
fundamentally  involve  the  fundamental  structuring  of  perception,  namely  the
essential separation between that which is perceived and the perceiving  person.
In this separation only a part of the world is accessible to  the perceiving person
because this person of necessity maintains a particular stance in the world.

For  describing our mental  activity  [which  includes  perceptions
of the physical world], we require, on one hand,  an objectively
given content to be placed in opposition to a perceiving  subject,
while,  on  the  other  hand,  as  is  already  implied  in  such  an
assertion, no sharp sensation between object and subject can be
maintained,  since  the  perceiving  subject  also  belongs  to  our
mental  content.    From  these  circumstances  follows...that  a

- 39 -

On Whether People

complete  elucidation  of  one  and  the  same  object  may  require
diverse points of view which defy a unique description. (Bohr,
1934/1961, p. 96)

Consider  the  following  quote.    Here  Bohr  appeared  to  attribute  the
extent of the realm of the measurable space upon which physics depends,  and
rooted  in  basic  psychological  experience,  to  whether  a  physical  entity  is
considered part of the physical world that can be measured by an  observer  or
instead is an extension of the human observer who is attempting to measure the
physical world.

It  is  very  instructive  that  already  in  simple  psychological
experiences we come upon fundamental features not only of the
relativistic but also of the reciprocal [complementary] view.  The
relativity of our perception  of  motion,  with  which  we  become
conversant  as  children  when  travelling  by  ship  or  by  train,
corresponds  to  common-place  experiences  on  the  reciprocal
character of the perception of touch.   One need only  remember
here  the  sensation,  often  cited  by  psychologists,  which  every
one has experienced when attempting to orient himself in a dark
room by feeling with a stick.   When the stick is held loosely, it
appears to the sense of touch to be an object.  When,  however,
it is held firmly, we lose the sensation that it is a foreign body,
and the  impression  of  touch  becomes  immediately  localized  at
the  point  where 
the  body  under
is 
investigation.  It would scarcely be an exaggeration to maintain,
purely  from  psychological  experiences,  that  the  concepts  of
space  and  time  by  their  very  nature  acquire  a  meaning  only
because of the possibility of neglecting the  interaction  with  the
means of measurement. (Bohr, 1934/1961, pp. 98-99)

the  stick 

touching 

It appears that the inescapable interaction between the measuring apparatus and
the  physical  entity  measured  that  was  at  the  heart  of  Bohr(cid:213)s  concept  of
complementarity might indeed be subsumed in the more fundamental structure
of perception.

In addition, with a bit more attention to James(cid:213)s description of hysteria,
Bohr  may  well  have  recognized  that  Einstein,  Podolsky,  and  Rosen(cid:213)s
experiment  really  afforded  the  possibility  of  mutually  exclusive  situations
characterizing the same concrete physical circumstances.  As discussed,  James

- 40 -

On Whether People

acknowledged 

(1899) 
(cid:210)possible
the 
consciousnesses...[that  nonetheless  may]  coexist....[even  though  you  may]
give an object to one of the  consciousnesses,  and  by  that  fact  you  remove  it
from the other or others(cid:211) (p. 204).

hysteric  manifests 

that 

CONCLUSION

Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen showed that in quantum mechanics two
different wave functions can characterize  a  physical  existent.    This  raises  the
question whether observations of  mutually  exclusive  physical  phenomena  are
possible?    Evidence  from  psychology  has  been  presented  that  indicates  that
people  may  indeed  have  the  capacity  to  make  such  observations.    There  is
additional evidence supporting this conclusion from  research  on  adaptation  to
inversion of incoming light.

The  evidence  from  psychology  presented  here  in  large  part  stemmed
originally from  the  study  of  mental  illness.    Both  Freud  and  James  saw  the
relevance of their  insights  to  normal  mental  functioning  as  well.    One  might
question  the  usefulness  of  insights  originally  gained  from  a  study  of  mental
phenomena characterizing a small percentage of  people.  But this circumstance
is  not  different  than  situations  concerning  physical  phenomena  where  broad
physical  principles  are  developed  initially  on  the  basis  of  evidence  from
physical phenomena that at least at first are not frequently encountered and seem
to have little to do with understanding the vast majority of physical phenomena
that we encounter in our daily lives.  Thus, stellar aberration, the propagation of
light in moving media, the invariant velocity of light in vacuum, and even what
appeared as the curious properties of electric and magnetic fields in  Einstein(cid:213)s
day were significant factors in the development and verification  of  the  special
theory of relativity (Resnick, 1968).  The odd findings that subatomic particles
had  wave-like  properties,  and  that  light  had  particle-like  properties  led  to
quantum theory, a theory much more powerful than classical physics, including
Newtonian mechanics, in understanding physical phenomena.

REFERENCES

Aspect, A.,  Dalibard,  J.,  and  Roger,  G.  (1982).  Experimental  test  of  Bell(cid:213)s
inequalities  using  time-varying  analyzers.  Physical  Review  Letters,  49,
1804-1807.

- 41 -

On Whether People

Bergquist, J.  C.,  Hulet,  R.  G.,  Itano,  W.  M.,  and  Wineland,  D.  J.  (1986).
Observation of quantum jumps in a single atom. Physical Review  Letters,
57, 1699-1702.

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of  Mental Disorders  (4th  ed.).  (1994).  (pp.
445,  452-457,  477,  484-487).  Washington,  DC:  American  Psychiatric
Association.

Bell, J. S. (1964). On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen paradox. Physics, 1,  195-

200.

Bohm, D. (1951). Quantum Theory. New York: Prentice-Hall.

Bohr, N. (1935). Can quantum-mechanical description of nature be considered

complete? Physical Review, 49, 1804-1807.

Bohr,  N.  (1961).  Atomic Theory and  the  Description  of  Nature.  Cambridge,

England: Cambridge University Press. (Original work published 1934)

Einstein,  A.  (1969).  Autobiographical  notes.  In  P.  A.  Schilpp  (Ed.),  Albert
Einstein:  Philosopher-scientist  (Vol.  1)  (pp.  1-94).  La  Salle,  Illinois:
Open Court. (Original work published 1949)

Einstein, A.,  Podolsky,  B.,  and Rosen,  N.  (1935).  Can  quantum-mechanical
description of physical reality be considered complete? Physical Review,
47, 777-780.

Epstein,  P.  (1945).  The  reality  problem  in  quantum  mechanics.  American

Journal of Physics, 13, 127-136.

Freud,  S.  (1964a).  An  outline  of  psychoanalysis.  In  J.  Strachey  (Ed.  and
Trans),  The  Standard  Edition  of  the  Complete  Psychological  Works  of
Sigmund Freud (Vol. 23, pp. 141-207). London:  The Hogarth Press  and
the Institute of Psycho-Analysis. (Original work published 1940)

Freud, S. (1964b). Splitting of the ego in the process of defence. In J. Strachey
(Ed.  and  Trans),  The  Standard  Edition  of  the  Complete  Psychological
Works of Sigmund Freud (Vol. 23, pp.  271-278).  London: The Hogarth
Press  and  the  Institute  of  Psycho-Analysis.  (Original  work  published
1938)

James, W.  (1899).  The Principles of  Psychology (Vol. 1).  New  York: Henry

Holt and Company.

- 42 -

On Whether People

Jammer,  M.  (1989).  The  Conceptual  Development  of  Quantum  Mechanics.
New  York:  Tomash  Publishers  and  American  Institute  of  Physics.
(Original work published 1966)

Nagourney,  W.,  Sandberg,  J.,  and  Dehmelt,  H.  (1986).  Shelved  optical
electron  amplifier:  observation  of  quantum  jumps.  Physical  Review
Letters, 56, 2797-2799.

Renninger, M. (1960). Messungen ohne st(cid:154)rung des meobjekts [Observations
without disturbing the object]. Zeitschrift f(cid:159)r Physik, 158, 417-421.

Resnick, R. (1967). Introduction to Special Relativity. New York: Wiley.

Sauter, T., Neuhauser, W., Blatt,  R.  and Toschek, P.  E.  (1986).  Observation

of quantum jumps. Physical Review Letters, 57, 1696-1698.

Snyder,  D.  M.  (1983).  On the  nature  of  relationships  involving  the  observer
and the observed phenomenon in psychology and physics. The Journal of
Mind and Behavior, 4, 389-400.

Snyder, D. M. (1992). Quantum mechanics and the involvement of mind in the
physical  world:  A  response  to  Garrison.  The  Journal  of  Mind  and
Behavior, 13, 247-257.

Snyder,  D.  M.  (1993).  Quantum  mechanics  is  probabilistic  in  nature.  The

Journal of Mind and Behavior, 14, 145-153.

Snyder,  D.  M.  (1995a).  On the quantum  mechanical  wave  function  as  a  link
between cognition  and  the  physical  world:  A  role  for  psychology.  The
Journal of Mind and Behavior, 16, 151-179.

Snyder,  D.  M.  (1995b).  The Mind and the Physical World:  A  Psychologist(cid:213)s
Exploration of Modern Physical Theory. Los Angeles: Tailor Press.

Snyder, D. M. (1997). An Essay on the Relationship between the Mind and the

Physical World in Modern Physical Theory. Los Angeles: Tailor Press.

Strachey, J.  (1964).  Editor(cid:213)s  note:  Die  ichspaltung  im  abwehrvorgang.  In  J .
Strachey  (Ed.  and  Trans),  The  Standard  Edition  of  the  Complete
Psychological  Works  of  Sigmund  Freud  (Vol.  23,  pp.  273-274).
London:  The  Hogarth  Press  and  the  Institute  of  Psycho-Analysis.
(Original work published 1938)

Wigner, E. (1983). Remarks on the mind-body question. In J.  A.  Wheeler and
W.  H.  Zurek,  Quantum  Theory  and  Measurement  (pp.  168-181).

- 43 -

On Whether People

Princeton,  New  Jersey:  Princeton  University  Press.  (Original  work
published 1961)

- 44 -

