High pressure operation of the triple-GEM

detector in pure Ne, Ar and Xe

A. Bondar, A. Buzulutskov   ∗

,  L. Shekhtman

 Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia

Abstract

 We  study  the  perfor mance  of   the  triple-GEM  ( Gas  Electron  Multiplier)  detector

in  pure  noble  gases  Ne,  Ar  and  Xe,  at  different  pressures  var ying  from  1  to  10

atm.  In  Ar  and  Xe,  the  maxi mum  attainable  gain  of  the  detector  abruptly  drops

down  for  pressures  exceeding  3  at m.  In  contrast,  the  maxi mum  gain  in  Ne  was
found  to  increase  with  pressure,  reaching  a  value  of  10 5  at  7  at m.  The  results

obtained  are  of  particular  interest  for  developing  noble  gas-based  cryogenic

particle detectors for solar neutrino and dar k matter search.

                                                     

∗

  Co r r e sp o nd i n g  a ut ho r .  T el:  + 7 -3 8 3 2 -3 0 2 0 2 4 ;   fax :  + 7 -3 8 3 2 -3 4 2 1 6 3 .

 E mai l:  b uz ul u @i np . n s k.s u

1

This  study  is  moti vated  by  the  growing  interest  in  developing  cr yogenic

double-phase particle detectors for solar neutrino and dar k  matter  search  [1,2].  In

such  detectors,  the  ioni zation  produced  in  a  noble  liquid  by  a  neutrino  or  weakl y

ionizing  particle  interaction,  in  Ne  or  Xe  correspondingl y,  is  extracted  from  the

liquid to a gas phase, where it is detected with the help of the gas multiplier.

In  traditional  gaseous  detectors,  namel y  in  the  multi -wire  proportional  and

parallel-plate  avalanche  chambers,  the  maximum  gain  obtained  in  pure  noble

gases is by far too low due to photon- and  ion-mediated  secondar y  processes.  The

multi -GEM  (Gas   Electron  Multiplier  [3])  multiplier  could  provi de  a  solution:  it

has  been  recentl y  shown  that  the  triple-  and  quadruple-GEM  structures  can

effectivel y  operate  in  pure  Ar   and  its  mi xtures  with  Ne  and  Xe,  reaching  rather
high gains, up to 10 5 , at  at mospheric pressure   [4].

Another  problem  is  that  the  densit y  of  noble  gases  near   the  boiling  point,  at

nor mal  pressure,  is  higher  compared  to  that  at  room  temperature.  For  example,  in

Ne,  Ar  and  Xe  the  densit y  difference  is  as  large  as  a  factor  of  10.5,  2.8  and  1.6,

correspondingl y  [5].  This  means,  that  the  operation  of  gas  detectors  at  low

temperature  and  at mospheric  pressure  can  be  equi valent  to  that  at  high  pressure

and  room  temperature.  On  the  other  hand,  it  was  shown  that  the  maxi mum  GEM

gain rapidl y decreases with pressure in Ar/CO 2 and Xe/CO 2 [ 6].

In  this  paper  we  report  on  the  perfor mance  of  a  triple-GEM   detector  in  pure

noble  gases  at  hi gh  pressures,  varyi ng  from  1  to  10  at m.  The  noble  gases

investi gated  are  Ne,  Ar  and  Xe.  We  show  that  the  gain  dependence  on  pressure  is

strongl y affected by the gas nature.

The  experimental  setup  is  shown  in  Fi g.1.  3  GEM  foils  (50  µm  t hick  kapton,

80  µm  diameter  and  140  µm  pitch  holes,  28×28  mm 2  active  area)  and  a  printed

curcuit board (PCB), mounted in cascade  with  1.6  mm  gaps,  were  installed  within

a  stainless  steel  vessel.  The  vessel  was   filled  with  Ne,  Ar   or  Xe  at  a  certain

pressure. The noble  gases  purity  was  99.99%.  The  detector  was  irradiated  with  an

X-ray tube through an Al window.

The  GEM  and  PCB  electrodes  were  connected  to  a  resisti ve  hi gh-vol tage

divider,  as  shown  in  Fi g.1.  The  divider   was  opti mi zed  in  such  a  way  as   to

2

maxi mi ze  the  gain  in  Ar  at  1  at m  and  at  the  same  ti me  to  prevent  the  parallel -

plate amplification mode in inter -GEM (transfer) and GEM -PCB (induction)  gaps.

In  particular,  the  voltage  drops   across  GEMs  were  not  equal   and  increased  from

the  first  to  last  GEM,  si milar  to  that  used  in  [4].  Typical  electric  fields  in  the

transfer  and  induction  gaps ,  at  1  at m,  were  below  1.2,  3.0  and  2.8  kV/cm  in  Ne,

Ar  and  Xe  correspondingl y.  The  same  di vider  was  used  in  the  measurements  with

other  pressures  and  gases.  It  should  be  remarked,  however,  that  the  opti mi zed

divider for them mi ght be different.

The  anode  si gnal  was   readout  from  the  PCB  either  in  a  current  or   pulse-

counting  mode.  The  anode  current  value  was  al ways  kept   below  100  nA,  using  X -

ray  attenuation  filters,  to  prevent  char ging-up  effects.  The  ratio  of  the  anode

current  to  the  current  recorded  in  the  drift  gap  provi des  the  gain  value.  The

maxi mum  attainable  gain  was  defined  as  that  at  which  neither  dar k  currents  nor

anode current instabilities (discharges)  were obser ved for at least about 1 min.

Fig.2  shows  the  gain-voltage  characteristics  of  the  triple-GEM  detector  in  Ar,

at  different  pressures.    One  can  see  that  there  are  two  t ypes  of  the  gain

dependence  on  pressure.  Below  3  at m,  the  maxi mum  gain  weakl y  depends  on
pressure,  var ying  from  4×10 4  to  10 5  .  In  this  pressure  range  it  was  limited  by  the

onset  of  the  dar k  current,  of  the  order  of  few  hundreds  nA,  most  probabl y  arisen

due  to  the  ion  feedback  bet ween  GEM  elements  [4].  At  hi gher  pressures,  the

maxi mum  gain rapidl y dropped down to below 10  at  7  at m.  Here  the  li mitation  on

the maxi mum gain was i mposed by GEM dischar ges.

In  Xe,  the  pressure  dependence  of  the  maxi mum  gain  also  consisted  of  t wo

parts: a slow  decrease  below  2  at m  and  ver y  fast  drop  at  hi gher  pressures  (Fi g.3).
On  the  other  hand,  the  maxi mum  operation  gain  was  lower:  it  did  not  exceed  10 4.

The  maxi mum  gain  in  Xe  was  li mited  by  dischar ges  in  the  whole  press ure  range.

In  addition,  among  other  gases  studied  Xe  was  found  to  be  the  worst  in  ter ms  of

the  discharge  detri mental  effect:  at  least  in  two  cases  all  3  GEMs  were

completel y  destroyed  after  few  dischar ges   when  operated  in  Xe,  while  in  Ne  and

Ar  even  hundreds  dischar ges  did  not  result  in  noticeable  degradation  of  the

triple-GEM structure.

3

It  is  interesting,  that  the  maxi mum  gain  (dischar ge)  boundar y  in  Ar  and  Xe  at

higher  pressures  looks  li ke  a  barrier  in  the  voltage  drop  across  a  GEM,  of  about

700  V,  which  cannot  be  overcome.  This  is  probabl y  related  to  the  properties  of

the discharge mechanis m in gi ven gases.

Neon  showed  quite  different  behavior  compared  to  Ar  and  Xe  (see  Fi g.4).

Unlike  Ar  and  Xe,  the  maxi mum  gain  in  Ne  turned  out  to  be  a  growing  function
of  the  pressure:  it  increased  from  10 3  at  1  atm  to  above  10 5  at  7  at m.  The

limitation  on  the  maximum  gain  in  Ne  was   imposed  by  dischar ges.  Note  that  the

operation  voltages  in  Ne  are  considerably  lower  compared  to  those  in  Ar  and  Xe.

Another  interesting  obser vation  is  that  the  gain-voltage  characteristics  in  Ne

almost  do  not  change  with  pressure,  for  above  5  at m,  in  contrast  to  Ar  and  Xe.

This  is  unusual  for  traditional  gaseous  devices,  for  which  one  would  rather

expect  the  E/p  behavior  of  the  detector  characteristics.  The  detector  perfor mance

in  Ne  was  studied  in  a  pulse-counting  mode  as  well,  using  a  char ge-sensiti ve

amplifier: the data were in coherence with those obtained in the current mode.

We do not aware at the moment of any consistent explanation of GEM behavior

at  high  pressures.  We  can  onl y  speculate  that  the  violation  of   E/p  scaling  in  Ne

could  indicate  on  the  existence  of  some  geometrical  factors  governing  the  gas

amplification  mechanism  at  hi gh  pressures,  si milar  to  that  of  the  avalanche

confinement  in  GEM  holes   considered  in  [8].  We  also  believe  that  the  rather  low

cross-section  of  electron-atomic  collisions  in  Ne,  as   compared  to  other  gases  [7],

may play an i mportant role.

In conclusion,  we have studied for  the  first  time  the  hi gh-pressure  operation  of

a  triple-GEM   detector  in  pure  Ne,  Ar  and  Xe.    Neon  showed  quite  different

pressure  dependence  of  the  maxi mum  gain  as  compared  to  Ar  and  Xe:  in  Ar   and

Xe  the  maxi mum  gain  drastically  drops  down  f or  pressures  exceeding  3  at m,

while  in  Ne  it  increases  with  pressure  up  to  7  at m.  In  all  the  gases  studied  there

exist  an  opti mal  pressure  at  which  the  triple-GEM  detector  has   the  maxi mum
gain:  10 4  at  1  at m,  10 5  at  3  at m  and  10 5  at  7  at m  in  Xe,  Ar  and  Ne

correspondingl y.  One  can  see  that  the  opti mal  pressures  are  close  to  those

corresponding  to  appropriate  gas  densities  near  the  boiling  points.  This  means

that  the  triple-GEM  detector,  in  terms   of  gain  characteristics,  is  a  good  candidate

4

for  the  proposed  cr yogenic  double-phase  particle  detectors.  At  the  same  ti me,  the

gas  amplification  mechanism  in  GEM  at  hi gh  pressures  is  still  unclear.  Further

investi gations are required.

We thank Drs. M. Leltchouk and D. Tovey for useful discussions.

References

[ 1 ]  V.  Rad e k a,  P .  Re h a k,  V.  T ch er ni at i ne,  J .  Do d d ,  M .  L el tc ho u k,  W .  J .  W i l l is ,  P r i va te

c o m mu n ic at io n  a nd   t he   r e p o r t   o n  “T h e   N e vi s  L a b o r a to r ie s  S u m me r   2 0 0 0   E d u c a tio n

W o r k s ho p ” ,  B N L  a nd   Co l u mb ia  U ni ve r sit y ( N e vis   L a b o r a to r i es) ,   2 0 0 0 ,   un p ub li s hed .

[ 2 ]  D.  T o ve y,   P r i va te   c o m mu n i c a tio n  a nd   U K  Dar k  M at te r   Co ll a b o r a tio n  P r o p o sa l  o n

Gal a c t ic  Dar k  M a tt e r   Se a r c h,   S he f f ie ld  U n i ve r si ty,  2 0 0 0 ,   u np u b li s h e d .

[ 3 ]  F.  Sa u li,  N uc l.  I n str . a nd   M e t h.   A 3 8 6  ( 1 9 9 7 )  5 3 1 .

[ 4 ]  A.  B uz u l ut s ko v,  A.  B r e sk i n ,  R.  C h ec hi k,   G.   Gar ty,   F.  Sa u li,   L.  S he k h t man ,   N uc l.

I n str . a nd   M e t h.   A 4 4 3  ( 2 0 0 0 )  1 6 4 .

[ 5 ]  T he  I n fr a r e d  H a nd b o o k, E d s. W . W o l f e ,   G. Zi s si s,  E RI M ,   An n  Ar b o r ,   M i c h . ,  1 9 9 3 .

[ 6 ]  A.  B o nd a r ,   A.  B u z ul u ts ko v ,   F .   S a ul i,  L .   S h e k ht ma n ,   N uc l .   I n str .   a nd   M eth .     A  4 1 9

( 1 9 9 8 )  4 1 8 .

[ 7 ]  Y. P .   Ra iz e r ,  G as  Di s c har ge  P h ys i c s, N a u ka ,   M o s c o w,  1 9 8 7  ( i n  R us s ia n) .

[ 8 ]  A. B uz u l ut s ko v,  L. S h e kh t ma n ,  A. B r e s sa n,   A.  Di  Ma ur o ,  L.  Ro p ele ws k i, F .   S a ul i,  S.

B ia gi,  N uc l.  I n s tr .  a nd  M e t h.   A 4 3 3  ( 1 9 9 9 )  4 7 1 .

5

1
M
E
G

2
M
E
G

3
M
E
G

B
C
P

St. steel
vessel

Al window

X-ray
source

p
a
g
 
t
f
i
r

D

m
m
 
4

m
m
 
6
.
1

m
m
 
6
.
1

m
m
 
6
.
1

R

0.9R

R 0.95R R

R

R

Fig.1 A schematic view of  the triple-GEM detector operated at hi gh pressures.

+H.V.

Fig.2 Detector gain as a function of the voltage drop across the last GEM, in

Ar at different pressures.

6

Fig.3 Detector gain as function of the voltage drop across the last GEM , in Xe

at different pressures.

Fig.4 Detector gain as a function of the voltage drop across the last GEM, in

Ne at different pressures.

7

