Tight open knots

(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:2)1, (cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:4)(cid:7)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:5)(cid:15)(cid:12)(cid:16)(cid:12)(cid:17)1 and Andrzej Stasiak2

13R]QD(cid:20) 8QLYHUVLW\ RI 7HFKQRORJ\(cid:15)
1LHV]DZVND (cid:20)(cid:22)$(cid:15) (cid:25)(cid:19) (cid:28)(cid:25)(cid:24) 3R]QD(cid:20)(cid:15) 3RODQG

e-mail: Piotr.Pieranski@put.poznan.pl
2 Laboratory of Ultrastructural Analysis, University of Lausanne, Switzerland

ABSTRACT

The  most  tight  conformations  of  prime  knots  are  found  with  the  use  of  the  SONO

algorithm. Their curvature and torsion profiles are calculated. Symmetry of the knots is

analysed. Connections with the physics of polymers are discussed.

PACS: 87.16 Ac

1.  Introduction

From the point of view  of topology knots  are closed,  self-avoiding  curves1,2.
Tying a knot in practice we operate on a finite piece of a rope3. At the end of the knot

tying procedure a compact knotted structure with the two loose ends is created. To fix

the knot type we splice the ends of the rope (outside the knotted structure, of course);

without cutting the rope, the knot type cannot be changed. The same knot type fixing

effect is reached if instead of splicing the loose ends we pull them apart and attach to

parallel walls. In what follows we shall refer to such structures as open knots.

Open knots are more common in nature than the closed knots. As indicated by
de  Gennes4  such  knots  are  spontaneously  tied  and  untied  on  polymeric  molecules.

Their  existence  changes  considerably  macroscopic  properties  of  the  materials.  In

general,  the  topological  aspects  of  the  microscopic  structure  of  polymeric  materials
prove to be an important issue of the physics of polymers5,6,7.

As we know well from the everyday experience, knots tied on a piece of rope

can be tightened by pulling apart its loose ends as much as possible. Obviously, there

is always a limit to such a knot tightening process – a particular conformation of the

knot  is  reached  at  which  the  loose  ends  cannot  be  pulled  apart  any  more.  We  shall

refer to such conformations as the tight open knots. As laboratory experiments prove,

the  final  conformation  of  a  tightened  knot  depends  on  two  major  factors:  the  initial

conformation  from  which  the  knot  tightening  procedure  starts  and  the  physical

parameters of the rope on which the knot is tied. The rope-rope friction coefficient, its

elasticity  constants  etc.  are  to  be  taken  into  account.  To  get  rid  of  such  material

dependent parameters we  consider below knots tied on the perfect rope. The perfect

rope has from the physical point of view somewhat contradictory properties:

 i. 

it is perfectly hard - to squeeze its circular cross-section into an ellipse the

infinite energy is needed,

 ii. 

it  is  perfectly  flexible  -  as  long  as  none  of  its  circular  cross-sections

overlap no energy is needed to bend it,

iii. 
 

it is perfectly slippery - no energy is needed to tighten a knot tied on it.

Introduction of the notion of the perfect rope allows us to define better the subject of

our study.  In  the same  sense  introduction  of  the notion  of hard  spheres  clarified  the

formulation of the packing problems.

Take a  piece of the  perfect  rope  of  length  L  and  tie  a  knot  on  it.  Stretch  the

ends of the rope apart as much as possible and measure the distance L’ between them.
Obviously, L’≤L. The difference L-L’ can be seen as the length of the rope engaged

within the knot. Dividing this value by the diameter  D of the used rope we obtain a
dimensionless number Λ known as the open thickness energy8. In the case of closed

knots,  in  which  the  ends  of  the  rope  are  spliced,  L’=0.  Knots  in  conformations  for
which  Λ  reaches  its  global  minimum  are  called  ideal9.  More  detailed,  rigorous

analysis  of  the  thickness  energy  functionals  were  performed  by  O’Hara,  Simon,
Rawdon and Millett10. The most tight open conformation of a knot of a given type, i.e.
the conformation at which Λ reaches its global minimum, is an interesting object of
which  very  little  is  known.  As  suggested  by  the  present  authors11,  peaks  within  its

curvature  profile  indicate  places  at  which  the  real  rope  would  be  most  prone  to

rupture. This hypothesis was verified on the trefoil knots tied on starch gel (spaghetti)

filaments. Below we describe in  detail the curvature and torsion profiles of tight open

knots.

2.  Open knots tied and tighened on the the perfect rope

Perfect  ropes  do  not  exist  in  nature.  However,  they  are  easily  simulated  in

numerical  experiments.  The  algorithm  we  used  in  the  numerical  experiments

described below is SONO (Shrink-On-No-Overlaps) used previously in the search for
the most tight (ideal) conformations of closed knots12.

To  demonstrate  how  SONO  algorithm  performs  the  knot  tightening  task  we

present results of a numerical experiment in which the initial conformation of the rope

is so entangled, that at the first sight one cannot decide if it is knotted or not.

Fig. 1 Numerical simulation of axial shrinkage of the perfect rope entangled into a clumsy
overhand  knot  (the  open  trefoil  knot).  Notice  that  nugatory  crossings  are  easily  removed
while the entanglements due to knotting remain.

As  seen  in  the  figure,  SONO  algorithm  performs  the  disentangling  task

without any problems. That the perfect rope is perfectly flexible and that there is no

friction at its self-contact points is here of primary importance.

To  compare  the  approximate  values  of  Λ  we  obtained  in  numerical

experiments with a Λ value known precisely, we considered also the case of the Hopf

link  for  which  the  length  of  its  open  form  would  simply  correspond  to  the  minimal
length  of  the  unopened  component  threaded  by  the  opened  one.  As  easy  to  see  Λ

equals in this case exactly 2π. See Figure 2.

Figure 2. The ideal open Hopf link.

As laboratory experiments performed by Diao et al. indicated8, Λ varies with

the knot type – different knots reduce the rope length in a different manner. Figure 3

presents  the  most  tight  conformations  of  the  open  trefoil  (31)  and  figure-eight  (41)

knots tied and tightened by SONO on pieces of rope of identical length L.

Fig. 3 The most tight open conformations of the trefoil (31) and figure-eight (41) knots tied
on pieces of the rope of the same length.

Clearly, in accordance with laboratory experiments described in ref.8, the trefoil knot
engages  less  rope  than  the  figure-eight  knot.  The  values  of  Λ  we  obtained  for  these

knots  are,  respectively,  10.1  and  13.7  (±  0.05).  Values  provided  by  Diao  et  al.8  are

significantly  larger:  10.35  and  14.65.  The  difference  between  results  obtained  in

laboratory  and  numerical  experiments  exceeds  errors  specified  by  the  authors.  Most

probably problems with  friction encountered in experiments performed on real ropes

do  not  allow  one  to  enter  the  most  tight  conformations  of  the  knots  accessible  in
numerical  experiments  performed  on  perfect  ropes.  Table  I  shows  the  Λ  values  we

found  for  the  most  tight  closed  and  open  conformations  of  a  few  prime  knots.  To
provide a natural Λ unit, we included into the table also the rigorous value of Λ known

for  the  Hopf  link    Interestingly  enough,  the  difference  of  length  of  the  most  tight

closed and open forms proves to be very close to 2π also for several other chiral knots.

On  the  other  hand,  for  achiral  knots,  41  and  63,  the  differences  are  significantly

different.

Knot type

Open form

Closed form

Difference

Hopf link

31

41

51

52

63

6.28

10.1

13.7

17.3

18.4

20.7

12.56

16.33

20.99

23.55

24.68

28.88

6.28

6.23

7.29

6.25

6.28

8.18

Table I The normalized minimal length Λ of the most tight conformations of a few prime
knots in their open and closed forms. Λ values for the closed forms of the knots were taken
from ref.12. Rolfsen notation was used to indicate the knot types13.

3.  Symmetry of the curvature and torsion maps of the 31 and 41 open knots

Calculating the curvature and torsion of a smooth (differentiable twice) curve

defined by analytical formulae is a trivial task. On the other hand, the determination

of the curvature and torsion maps of the knots simulated in numerical experiments is

extremely  susceptible  to  the  inaccuracies  with  which  positions  of  the  consecutive

points  of  the  simulated  knot  are  given.  To  find  the  curvature,  the  first  and  second

derivatives must be known. In the case of torsion, the third derivative is also needed.

The discrete differentiation procedures reveal a considerable noise present within the

curvature and torsion maps. To get rid of the noise, we took averages over a large set

of the maps calculated in long  runs  in which the tightened  knot  was  moving  slowly

there and back along the simulated rope. The slow oscillatory motion of the knot was

introduced on purpose to minimise effects stemming from the discrete structure of the

simulated  rope.  Figure  4  presents  consecutive  curvature  maps  registered  in  a  short

interval cut  out from one of  such  runs.  Averaging  the  instantaneous  curvature  maps

within  a  reference  frame  which  moves  together  with  the  knot  we  obtain  curvature

maps which are much better defined. Figure 5 presents such maps found for the most

tight 31 and 41 knots. The knots were tied on the numerically simulated perfect rope

consisting of 200 segments of equal length.

Fig.4  Curvature  maps  of  the  31  knot  registered  in  a  numerical  experiment  in  which  the
tightened  knot was slowly moving there and back along the simulated rope.

The  plots  display  a  few  interesting  features  which  we  shall  discuss  below

emphasising those of them, which according to us may survive in the limit of the most

tight open conformations.

Let  us  start  with  the  discussion  of  the  curvature  profiles.  Within  some

accuracy  limits,  both  profiles  can  be  seen  as  consisting  of  two  mirror  symmetrical

parts.  We  assume  here  that  the  external  zero  curvature  regions  are  extended  to

infinity.  The  curvature  profile  of  e.g.  the  31  knot  seen  from  both  ends  of  the  knot
looks almost identical. If by the curvature profile we understand the curvature κ as a

function of the arc length l, this symmetry property can be expressed as follows: in the

middle of the knot there exists such a point lm, that on the left and on the right of it
curvature profiles are identical κ(lm+ε) = κ(lm-ε).

In the case of the numerically simulated discretized knots the mirror symmetry

is not exact.  It seems to us, and we would like to express it as a conjecture, that in the

case of the ideal open conformations of both 31 and 41 knots the mirror symmetry of

the  curvature  profile  should  be  exact.  Mirror  symmetry  of  the  curvature  profile

reflects the twofold rotational symmetry of the open knot conformation.  Let  us note

here that the point symmetry elements of the closed ideal conformations of the 31 and

41 knots are different.

One of the most distinct local features of the both curvature landscapes are the

double peaks  visible at the entrance to the knots. As described previously, the inner
peak  develops  only  at  the  final  stage  of  the  tightening  process11.  Laboratory

experiments prove that at the points of high curvature the filaments, on which knots

are tied, are most susceptible to breaking.

Fig. 5 The most tight open trefoil (31) and figure-eight (41) knots together with their maps of
curvature and torsion.
a)  The trefoil knot shown in the figure (left) is of right-handed type and like other chiral

knots cannot be converted into its mirror image.

b)  The map of curvature of the open trefoil knot shows a mirror symmetry (mirror plane is
vertical  and  is  in  the  centre  of  the  map)  thus,  an  identical  map  of  curvature  would  be
obtained  for  the  left  handed  enantiomer  of  this  knot.  The  curvature  is  normalised  in
respect to the diameter of tightly knotted tubes: value 1 is attained when the local radius
of curvature corresponds to the diameter of the tube,  value  2  would  correspond  to  the
radius of curvature being equal to the radius of the tube (points of sharp reversals).
c)  The map of torsion of the open trefoil knot shows also a mirror symmetry, thus, for left-

handed enantiomer the map of torsion would be reversed along the vertical axis.
d)  Figure eight knot is achiral and is easily convertible into its mirror image (see Fig. 6).
e)  The map of curvature of the open figure eight knot shows perfect mirror symmetry and

thus has no polarity.

f)  The  map  of  torsion  of  the  open  figure  eight  knot  shows  a  clear  polarity  -  the  passage
from  the  left  to  right  is  different  from  this  from  the  right  to  left.  The  total  torsion  is
however zero as it is expected for an ideal form of achiral knot.

The  maps  of  torsion  show  important  differences  between  chiral  31  knot  and

achiral 41 knot. The map of torsion of the 3l knot shows a mirror symmetry while the

torsion map of the achiral knot 41 shows a symmetry of different kind: in the middle

of the knot there exists such a point lm, that on the left and on the right of it torsion
profiles are  of identical magnitude but of  an  opposite sign  κ(lm+ε)  =  -κ(lm-ε).  Thus,

observing  the  torsion  we  can  distinguish  between  the  two  ends  of  this  knot.  Taking

into account curvature and torsion, which provide the complete descriptors of a given

trajectory,  we  see  that  a  time  reversed  travel  through  a  chiral  knot  31  is

indistinguishable from the original one. In contrast to that, in the achiral 41 knot   we

can  distinguish  between  time  reversed  travels  –  the  signs  of  the  torsion  component

appear during the travels in the reversed order. In the 41 knot the time reversed travel

is  identical  with  the  not  reversed  travel  along  the  mirror  image  of  the  original  knot

(the mirror reflection changes left-handed regions into right-handed and contrary). As

could  be  expected  for  achiral  knots  the  total  torsion  cancels  to  zero  while  this  of

course is not the case for achiral knots.  It may  seem surprising that achiral  knots 41

are in fact polar while this is not the case for a chiral knot 31. Interestingly, the ideal

open configuration of 41 knot is congruent with its mirror image. Figure 6.

Fig.6 Congruency of the open 41 knot with its mirror image. Rotation by π/2 is followed by a
mirror reflection.

Although,  by  definition,  all  achiral  knots  can  be  continuously  converted  into  their

mirror  images  there  is  only  a  small  subset  of  their  configurations  which  upon  rigid
transformation are congruent with their mirror images14.

4.  The problem of the local minima

Several  independent  starting  configurations  of  such  simple  knots  as  31  or  41

were converted during our simulations to configurations essentially identical to those

shown in  Fig.  3.  This  was,  however,  not  the  case  for  more  complicated  knots.  Fig.7

shows what happens when the most tight closed configuration of 52 knot is opened in

three  different  positions  and  the  ends  are  pulled  apart.  Three  different  final

configurations  are  obtained  and  to  pass  from  one  to  another  the  string  has  to  be

loosened  and  loops  have  to  be  moved  along  the  knot.  Apparently  the  three  different

configurations  constitute  different  local  minima  in  the  configuration  space  of  tight

open knots. Interestingly the nice symmetrical configuration shown in Fig. 7a causes

biggest effective shortening of the string and is thus furthest from the global minimum.

The configuration shown on Fig. 7c may in fact represent a  global minimum for this

knot  as  its  effective  shortening  of  the  tube  is  smallest.  This  configuration  does  not

show any symmetry.

Fig. 7 Three different local minima in the configuration space of open knots 52. (a) Knot 52
in its most tight closed configuration. Three distinct sites 1, 2 and 3 were used to open the
knot. (b), (c), (d) The local minima configurations obtained upon opening the closed knot in
sites 1, 2 and 3 respectively. Notice that the  symmetrical conformation 1 engages  more  of
the  rope    length  than  the  other  two  configurations.  The  conformation  3  represents
presumably a global minimum and thus would corresponds to an ideal open configuration of
52 knot.

Fig. 8 Local minima conformations of the 63 knot. Notice the symmetry of the conformation
marked as (d). See text for its discussion.

To  check  if  symmetrical  configurations  may  constitute  local  minima  in

configuration space of more complex tight open knots  we  took  the  most  tight closed

configuration of achiral knot 63 and opened it in different positions. See Fig. 8. Upon

pulling apart the opened ends we noticed that one of the openings led to a nice regular

form  congruent  with  its  mirror  image.  It  seems  to  us  that  this  form  constitutes  the

global minimum.

5.  Discussion

Perfect  ropes  do  not  exist  in  nature,  but  polymeric  molecules  are  not  far  from

being  perfect.  Put  into  the  perpetual  motion  by  thermal  fluctuations  they  never  get

blocked  by  friction  which  plays  such  an  important  role  in  the  macroscopic  world

allowing, for instance, to stop the huge mass of a docking ship with a rope tied in an
appropriate manner (round turn and two half hitches) to the bollard15. Time averaged
conformations of the open knots tied on polymeric molecules are very similar to the

ideal open knots we considered above. In particular, the length of the molecular rope
engaged  within  such  knots  should  be  directly  related  to  the  Λ  value  we  calculated.

Properties of the knotted molecules are essentially different form the unknotted ones.
For  instance,  their  gel  mobility  coefficients  are  essentially  different16,17.  In  general,

polymeric  materials  in  their  phases  in  which  the  fraction  of  knotted  molecules  is
considerable,  should  display  interesting  physical  properties4.  When  the  polymer

technology will provide us with such materials is difficult to predict today. Certainly,

the  properties  of  a  polymer,  whose  all  molecules  are  tied  into  right-handed  trefoil

knots will be different from the polymer within which all the knots are left-handed.

Acknowledgement

We  thank  G.  Dietler  and  J.  Dubochet    for  helpful  discussions.  This  work  was

carried out under projects: KBN  5PO3B01220 and SNF 31-61636.00.

                                                
1 L. H. Kauffman, Knots and Physics (World Scientific Publishing Co., 1993).
2 C. C. Adams, The Knot Book (W.H. Freeman and Company, New York, 1994).
3 C. W. Ashley, The Ashley Book of Knots (Doubleday, New York,  1993)
4 P.-G. de Gennes, Macromolecules, 17, 703 (1984).
5 M. D. Frank-Kamentskii and A. V. Vologodskii, Sov. Phys. Usp. 24 679 (1981);

                                                                                                                                           
6 A. Y. Grossberg, A. R. Khokhlov, Statistical physics of macromolecules, AIP Press,

1994.
7 A. Y. Grossberg, A. Feigel and Y. Rabin, Phys. Rev. A 54, 6618-6622 (1996).
8 Y. Diao,  C. Ernst and  E. J. Janse van Rensburg in Ideal  Knots,  eds.  Stasiak,  A.,

Katritch, V. and Kauffman, L. H. World Scientific, Singapore, 1998, p.52-69.
9 

V.  Katritch,  J.  Bednar,  D.  Michoud,  R.  G.  Sharein,  J.  Dubochet  and  A.  Stasiak,
Nature 384, 142 -(cid:18)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:18)(cid:22)(cid:22)(cid:23)(cid:24)(cid:25)(cid:6)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:6)(cid:28)(cid:8)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:31)(cid:6) (cid:27)(cid:6)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:6)!(cid:13)(cid:9)(cid:3)"(cid:31)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:27)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:31)(cid:6)#(cid:27)(cid:6)$%(cid:16)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:7)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:8)"&

A. Stasiak, Nature 388, 148 (1997).
10 See chapters by: E. Rawdon; J. A. Calvo and K. C. Millett; J. Simon; J. O’Hara in

Ideal  Knots,  eds.  A.  Stasiak  ,  V.  Katritch  and  L.  H.  Kauffman,  (World  Scientific,

Singapore, 1998).
11  P.  (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:31)(cid:6) (cid:11)(cid:27)(cid:6) Kasas,  G.  Dietler,  J.  Dubochet  and  A.  Stasiak,  Localization  of

breakage points in knotted strings, submitted to New J. Phys. (2000).
12  P.  (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:6) (cid:2)"(cid:6) Ideal  Knots,  eds.  A.  Stasiak,  V.  Katritch  and  L.  H.  Kauffman,

(World Scientific, Singapore, 1998)
13 D. Rolfsen D  Knots and Links (Berkeley: Publish or Perish Press, 1976).
14 C. Liang and K. Mislow, J. Math. Chem. 15, 1 (1994).
15  L. H. Kauffman, Knots and Physics (World Scientific Publishing Co., 1993) p.325.
16 A. Stasiak, V. Katritch, J. Bednar, D. Michoud and J. Dubochet, Nature 384, 122

(1996)
17 V. Vologodskii, N. Crisona, B. Laurie, P. (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:31)(cid:6)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:6)Katritch, J. Dubochet and

A. Stasiak, J. Mol. Biol. 278, 1-3 (1998).

