Classical teleportation
Raoul Nakhmanson
Nakhmanson@t-online.de

The examples of “classical teleportation” are done and discussed.  Like
“quantum ones” they are far away from the science-fiction prototype.

THERE ARE:  Two bodies  A  and  B  having the same sizes and thermal characteristics,
and temperatures of 1000C° and 0°C, respectively.

QUESTION:  Is it possible, without introducing a new energy, only by thermal contact
between  A  and  B , to make the temperature exchange, i.e. to have the temperatures
of  A  and  B  0°C and 1000°C, respectively?

The  100%  of  asked  people,  including  graduate  physicists,  said  “Impossible”.  All
shared  the  stronger  restriction:  “All  the  times  the  temperature  of  B  stays  below  the
temperature of A “.

Nevertheless the question has a positive answer.

Let us start with the note that the initial and final states have the same energy and
entropy.    It  means  that  an  exchange  process,  if  it  exists,  does  not  brake  the  laws  of
thermodynamics.  Therefore our task is to find and to demonstrate such a process.

Let us suppose the bodies A  and  B  are balks with rectangular cross-sections, and
their length is  much greater  than the  minimal cross-section  side.    Such  a  supposition
does not restrict the generality, because each form can be divided in such balks.
A 1000°C

(a)

(b)

B  0°C

A  500°C

B  500°C

 Fig. 1

Fig. 1(a) shows the initial state.  If we bring the body A  in thermal contact with the
body B  simultaneously over the whole area of its biggest face, then, after a short time
of  equalizing  of  temperature  over  the  (shortest)  width,  the  both  bodies  would  have
500°C  (Fig.  1(b)).    The  common  entropy  rises  and  common  information  decreases.
This  is  a  “short  circuit”  process.    It  is  the  first  reaction  of  our  imagination,  but,  of
course, not a solution of the problem.

Nakhmanson   1/8

A  1000°C

B  0°C

(a)

(b)

(c)

B  1000°C

A  0°C

z

x

 Fig. 2

(d)

(e)

Fig. 2(a-e) presents the solution.  Only the ends of biggest faces of A  and  B  come
in  contact  at  the  beginning.    After  that  A    slides  along  B    keeping  in  good  thermal
contact  with  B    over  all  common  area.    After  ending  the  contact  (Fig.  2(e))  the
exchange of energy, entropy, and information is completed.

A

 

1

0

0

0

°

C

~1000°C

B

Fig. 3

A  ~0°C

B

0

°

C

It  is  said  the  new  one  is  only  the  old
one being forgotten.  The heat exchangers
with counter flows of gas or liquid (Fig. 3)
are widely used in technics.  As a rule they
works  under  steady-state  conditions,  i.e.
the  temperature    T    is  a  function  of  the
space  coordinates  only,  and  does  not
depend  on  time    t  .    On  the  contrary,  the
process presented in Fig. 2 includes some
interesting dynamics.

Let  us  suppose  the  velocity  of  body  A    in  Fig.  2  is  small  enough  to  realize  a
temperature  equalization  along  the    z–axis,  and  there  is  a  homogeneity  along  the    y-
axis being normal to the Fig. 2-plane.  Under such a condition the temperature of the
process  presented  in  Fig.  2  is  a  function  of  time  t    and  coordinate  x    only,  i.e.  T  =
T(x,t).  The flow of heat  I(x,t) can be written as
A+λλλλ

(1)
where vA is the velocity of body  A ,  cA is its specific heat per unit of length, λλλλ
A , λλλλ
B
are the heat conductivities of  A  and  B  along  x-axis.  The first member of the right
part of (1) reflects the transfer of heat indebted to moving of  A , the second member
reflects the diffusion of heat.  Out A  cA = λλλλ
B = 0 out B ,
where cB is its specific heat per unit of length.  Assuming cA , cB , λλλλ
B are constants
and substituting (1) in the heat balance equation

A = 0.  Analogously cB = λλλλ
A , λλλλ

I(x,t) = vA(cid:127)cA(cid:127)T – (λλλλ

B)(cid:127)(∂T/∂x)  ,

(cA+cB)(cid:127)(∂T/∂t) = – divI = – (∂I/∂x)  ,

(2)

leads to the equation for the temperature T(x,t) :

∂T/∂t = – vA(cid:127) [cA/(cA+cB)](cid:127)(∂T/∂x) + [(λλλλ

A+λλλλ

B)/(cA+cB)](cid:127)(∂2T/∂x2)  .

(3)

Nakhmanson   2/8

(a)

(b)

(c)

The second  member  of  right  part  of  (3)  reflects  the  diffusion  erosion  of  a  heat  field,
and  the  rest  reflects  the  drift  of  this  field  along  the    x-axis.    Velocity  of  this  drift  is
equal zero out A , is equal to  vA  in the interval of  x  where  A  is alone, and is equal
to  vA(cid:127)cA/(cA+cB)  in the interval of  x  where A  and  B  are together.  If the bodies  A
and  B  are identical the last velocity is equal to  vA/2 .

A  1000°C

B  0°C

z

x

(d)

(e)

 Fig. 4

B  1000°C

0°C

A  0°C

Fig. 4(a-e) shows the different phases of heat exchange between  A  and  B  for cB =

2cA . In this case a half of  B  gets all heat and temperature of  A .

Processes shown in Figs. 2 and 4 are reversible: at any time by changing  vA  to  -vA
we restore, within the diffusion erosion, the initial state.  It is clear from the symmetry,
and  it  is  a  formal  consequence  of  Eq.  (3):  without  the  diffusion  member  the
simultaneous change  vA  to  -vA  and  t  to -t  does not alter this equation.  Diffusion
erosion is also shown in Figs. 2 and 3.  After many direct-and-reverse repetitions this
erosion spreads out to homogeneous distribution of heat over both bodies.

The initial state with homogeneous heat distributions (in our examples 1000°C and
0°C) is the simplest case.  Eq. (3) says that the bodies  A  and  B  can have arbitrary
initial  heat  distributions,  and  during  the  slide  contacting  they    exchange    these
distributions,  so  at  the  end  the  heat  field  of    A    “transmigrates”  (with  scale  factor
cA/cB) to  B , and vice versa.  An example, for simplicity with  cA = cB  and  λλλλ
B=0,
is presented in Fig. 5(a-e).  The transformation of the length of “impulses” along the
x-axis  is  like  that  for  light  impulses  travelling  through  transparent  media  having
refraction indexes  cA ,  (cA+cB) , and  cB ,  respectively.

A=λλλλ

Nakhmanson   3/8

A,°C

1000

0

500

B,°C
0

1000

0

z

x

Fig. 5

(d)

(e)

(a)

(b)

(c)

B

A

What a peculiarity differs the processes shown in Figs. 1 and 2 , and allows to do
something  “impossible”?    In  the  first  case  the  surfaces  being  contacted  have  very
different temperatures.  The process goes fast and through very non-equilibrium states.
It is impossible to reverse these states.  On the contrary, in the second case every new
small  step  in  the    x-direction  brings  in  contact  areas  having  small  temperature
difference.  The system passes an infinite series of quasi-equilibrium states which can
be (quasi-)reversed.

It is not easy to realize the processes shown in Figs. 2, 4, and 5.  One must ensure a
good slide thermal contact between  A  and  B ,  select an optimal velocity  vA (slow
enough  to  equalize  temperature  over  the  width,  i.e.  in    z-axis,  and  fast  enough  to
eliminate  diffusion  erosion),  and  find  a  possibility  of  quantitative  registration  of  the
heat field.  To simplify the problem one can use anisotropic material having  λλλλz>>λλλλx .
An  artificial  anisotropy  can  be  made  by  introduction  of  thermo-isolating  partitions
dividing the length of bodies into sections.

It seems such partitions liquidate the diffusion erosion at all.  But because of finite
(i.e. not infinite small) length of each section  l  the temperature  T  would be a step
function of  x.  At each new shift  l  in  x-direction contact sections having finite (i.e.
not  infinite  small)  temperature  differences.    This  leads  to  temperature  erosion  and  is
equivalent to the appearance of a heat conductivity

λλλλ =l(cid:127)|vA|(cid:127)cA(cid:127)cB/(cA+cB) = l2(cid:127)f(cid:127)cA(cid:127)cB/(cA+cB)  ,

(4)

A+λλλλ

where    |vA|    is  the  absolute  value  of    vA  ,    f  =  |vA|/l    is  the  frequency  of  section
B  in Eq. (3) the heat conductivity  λλλλ≠0  only in  x-
contacting.  In difference to λλλλ
interval where both bodies  A   and   B  are, and only  in  movement  when  vA, f ≠ 0  .
The formula (4) at  cA=cB  coincides with the classical formula for heat conductivity
indebted to particles (molecules in gas, electrons and phonons in solid state) if  l , |vA|
and    f    denote  the  mean  values  of  free  path,  velocity,  and  collision  frequency  of
particles, respectively.  It is not a surprise, because the nature  of heat conductivity is
the same: it is a transfer of energy over the finite distance l .

Nakhmanson   4/8

Processes which are similar to the ones presented in Figs. 2, 4, and 5, one can find
in  other  parts  of  physics,  particularly  in  hydrostatics.    A  problem  similar  to  the  one
formulated at the beginning of this paper, can look like this:

THERE ARE:  Two vessels  A  and  B  having the same size and standing on the same
table.  The vessel  A  is full with water, the vessel  B  is empty.

QUESTION:    Is  it  possible,  without  introducing  a  new  energy  but  only  by  water
connection of A  and  B , to make the exchange of water levels, i.e. to have  A  empty
and  B  full?

The  first  answer  could  be:  “Impossible.    The  connected  vessels  would  have  the

same level, i.e. be half full”.

The idea of positive solution is similar to the one shown in Fig. 2.  Vessels  A  and
B   must be divided in sections by  partitions,  and  each  section  must  have  an  opening
near the bottom.  The vessels must be shifted one against another so that the sections
of  A  consecutively connect themselves with sections of  B  through said openings.

Fig. 6

         

Fig. 7

Figs. 6(a-e) and 7(a-e) present photos of a hydrostatic model in the same phases as
in  Figs.  2(a-e)  and  4(a-e),  respectively.    Fig.  8(a-e)  shows  the  transformation  of
sinusoidal  distribution,  Fig.  9(a-e)  shows  exchange  of  two  such  distributions  having
different  periods.    The  water  was  red  colored  by  potassium  ferro  cyanide  and
photographed through a violet filter to have a better contrast.

The advantages of a hydrostatic model (as compared with a heat one) are visuality,
simple  building  of  initial  distribution,  and  the  possibility  to  pause  the  process  at  any

Nakhmanson   5/8

time.    There  is  only  one  limitation  concerning  the  shift  velocity:  it  must  be  small
enough to provide levelling in sections of  A  and  B  coming in connection.

Fig. 8

      

Fig. 9

The differential equation for water’s level  H(x,t)  turns out from (3) by substitution
B  and change  T  to  H  and  cA, cB to cross-

of  λλλλ  (determined by (4)) instead of  λλλλ
section areas per unit of length  sA, sB of  A  and  B, respectively.

A+λλλλ

The relationship between drift and erosion in the right part of (3) can be altered by
changing  the  character  of  moving.    By  moving  “two  steps  forward  –  one  step
backward” the  vA-value stays in (4) as before but must change itself to  vA/2  in (3).
By  moving  “step  forward  –  step  backward”  the  drift  member  in  the  right  part  of  (3)
disappears converting (3) to the ordinary heat conductivity equation.

The problem can be easy generalized for a two-dimensional head field  T(x,y,t).  For
example if a thin (small size in  z-direction) hot disk  A  slides over  an equal but cold
disk  B,  they would exchange their temperatures.  If both disks have some different
heat  fields  (“pictures”),  they  would  exchange  their  field,  etc.    All  this,  of  course,  is
correct within diffusion erosion.

The word “teleportation” was introduced first in science-fiction literature.  It means
destroying  objects  (people,  as  a  rule)  being  in  its  actual  place  and  their  recreation  in
another place.  In spite of nature and peculiarities of teleportation are firm secrets, “de

Nakhmanson   6/8

facto” (if such an expression is valid here) teleportation is instant (thought it does not
depend on distance) and all-penetrating (thought it cannot be screened).

There  is  no  scientific  definition  of  “teleportation”,  but  the  expression  “quantum
teleportation” can be found today in a good hundred of scientific publications [1].  The
matter  is  a  reproduction  of  a  state  of  an  elementary  particle  or  an  atom.    Although
“quantum  teleportation”  has  to  do  only  with  simplest  objects,  de  facto  (here  without
quotation-marks)  it  does  not  own  advantages  of  its  literature  prototype.    It  is  not
instant and not all-penetrating, it does not “teleport” an object, but its state only, and
therefore  it  needs  raw  material  at  arrival  and  pollutes  the  environment  at  departure.
For practical purpose one prefers a direct transport of a particle, an atom, or a human
being: it is simpler and cleaner.

But  if  we  restrict  ourselves  with  the  translation  of  the  state  only,  “quantum
teleportation” is not something new.  Long before such phenomena have been known
in  classical  physics.    Let  us  remember  e.g.  the  school  experiment  with  two  identical
pendulums having weak connection.  Here is also “teleportation”  of  a  state  of  whole
macroobject,  namely,  “classical  teleportation”.    One  can  argue  that  in  this  case  we
translate the mechanical state only, and many other parameters of both pendulums can
be  different,  up  to  states  of  atoms  and  elementary  particles,  but  this  argument  seems
not important.  Firstly, in this case one has right to ignore such “hidden parameters” as
long  as  they  stays  outside  of  “mechanical  world”.    Secondly,  who  knows  how  many
different  “hidden  parameters”  (up  to  consciousness  [2])  have  particles  with  identical
behavior in “quantum world”, more exact, in “world of quantum mechanics”?

T(eleporter)

A(lice)

B(ob)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

T(eleporter)

B(ob)

Fig. 10

A(lice)

The processes discussed in this paper are also examples of “classical teleportation”.

Fig. 10 shows one more.  There are three participants marked with Morse code:

•  —  = A(lice),    —  • • •  = B(ob),  and   —  = T(eleporter) .
Teleporter exchanges its state firstly with Alice, secondly with distant Bob, and on the
way  back  returns  himself  his  original  state  and  place.    As  a  result  Alice  and  Bob
exchange their places.

Nakhmanson   7/8

Examples shown in Figs. 2, 4-10 confirm the known fact of conservation of entropy
and connected Shannon information in reversible processes.  But at the same Shannon
information  the  system  can  have  different  semantic  information.    It  is  clear  e.g.  by
comparison of yesterday’s and today’s newspapers.  In Figs. 2, 4-10 the conservation
of  peculiarities  of  distributions,  i.e.  the  conservation  of  semantic  information  is  also
seen.  We have started this paper with a question, and finish it with another one:  Is it
true in general that in reversible processes the semantic information keeps itself?

Note:  The experiments shown in Figs. 6-9 were made in Institute for Semiconductor
Physics  (Novosibirsk,  USSR)  twenty-five  years  ago.    Author  indebt  A.  Yatsenko  for
assistance in the time they were carried out.

References

[1]  A. Cabello, “Bibliographic guide to the foundations of quantum mechanics and
quantum information”,  http://arXiv.org/ps/quant-ph/0012089 , p.p.
17-18 .

[4]  R. Nakhmanson, “Informational interpretation of quantum mechanics”,

http://arXiv.org/pdf/physics/0004047  .

Nakhmanson   8/8

