SLAC-PUB-8815
April 2001

STATUS REPORT AND FUTURE PLANS FOR THE PEP-II B FACTORY*

Alan S. Fisher, SLAC, Stanford, CA 94309, USA

Abstract

Table 1. Some PEP-II Design Parameters.

The PEP-II B Factory at SLAC has been in
operation with the BABAR detector since the summer of
1999. The peak currents and luminosity steadily
increased through the end of the 2000 run on October
31. By that
time, 0.75 A of electrons (the design
current) routinely collided with 1.4 A of positrons in
657 bunches, to give a peak luminosity of 2.6×1033 cm-
2·s-1. We delivered an integrated luminosity of up to
184 pb-1 per day and 1033 per week; BABAR logged a
total of 25 fb-1. Three days of machine development at
the end of the run raised the peak luminosity to
3.29×1033, exceeding the design goal of 3.0. BABAR
then logged data for an hour, starting with a peak of
3.20. Next, we achieved the design value for positron
current, 2.14 A, operating without collisions.

The major limitation has been growth in the size of
the positron beam in the low-energy ring (LER) due to
electron clouds and multipacting. Since the arcs
benefit from antechambers and a TiN coating with low
secondary emission, our efforts have concentrated on
the straights, where we added solenoid windings. Each
straight wound allowed higher LER current without
blow-up, and a consequent
increase in luminosity.
the bunch-by-bunch luminosity
Measurements of
showed that the effect becomes significant by about the
tenth bunch in a train, but clears after a short gap.
Careful control of
the fill pattern has thus been
essential in raising luminosity.

For the 2001 run, which began in February, we
added a third LER RF station, to collide with more
LER current and more bunches, and also tried
reducing βx
* from 50 to 35 cm, with the goal of
reaching a luminosity of 5×1033 by year’s end. In

Table 2. PEP-II Records, as of March 2001. The data incorporates the
new luminosity calibration discussed in Section 2.1.

Peak LER current [mA]
Peak HER current [mA]
Number of full buckets
Peak luminosity [1033 cm-2·s-1]
Peak luminosity with BABAR [1033 cm-2·s-1]
Integrated luminosity per shift [pb-1]
Integrated luminosity per day [pb-1]
Integrated luminosity delivered per week [pb-1]
Integrated luminosity delivered per month [pb-
1]
Total luminosity integrated by BABAR [fb-1]

Goal
2140
750
1658
3.0
3.0
45
135
785
3300

Achieved
2140
920
1658
3.29
3.20
66
184
1033
3820

26

* Work supported by the US Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC03-76SF00515.

Circumference [m]
RF frequency [MHz]
Harmonic number
Colliding bunches
Current [mA]
Beam energy [GeV]
CM energy [GeV]
βx
* [cm]
εx
* [nm]
σx, σy, [µm] 
σz [mm] 
Tune shift
Aspect ratio at IP (v/h)
Crossing angle

*, βy
*, εy

LER

HER

2199.322
476.00
3492
1658

10.58

2140
3.119

50, 1.5
49, 1.5
157, 4.7
12.3

750
8.973

50, 1.5
49, 1.5
157, 4.7
11.5

0.03
0.03
0 (head on)

2003, we plan to add a fourth LER and sixth HER RF
station to reach 1×1034.

1 INTRODUCTION
The PEP-II B Factory, a 2.2-km asymmetric collider
at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center[1], was built
in collaboration with the Lawrence Berkeley[2] and
Lawrence Livermore[3] National Laboratories to study
CP violation by tracking decays of B mesons moving
in the lab frame. At a single interaction point (IP), 9-
GeV electrons in the high-energy ring (HER) collide at
zero crossing angle with 3.1-GeV positrons in the low-
energy ring (LER). Table 1 lists some PEP design
parameters[4]. The first collisions were observed in
July 1998, when the rings were commissioned without
the BABAR detector. After its installation in May 1999,
commissioning of
system
began; physics runs followed shortly
afterward. By the end of 1999,
the
luminosity had passed 1×1033 cm-2·s-1.

full

the

2 THE 2000 RUN

2.1 Highlights

The 2000 run, from January through
October, achieved a number of records,
In the machine-
as Table 2 shows.
development days at the end of the run,
the luminosity reached a peak of 3.29
×1033 cm-2·s-1, exceeding the design
goal of 3.0. BABAR then took data for a

Table 3. Parameters for Record Luminosity.

Peak luminosity [1033 cm-2·s-1]
Current [mA]
Number of bunches
Σx,y at low current [µm]
IP beam sizes, x, y (average) [µm]
Horizontal tune shift
Vertical tune shift

LER

HER

3.29

1550

800

692
210, 6.7
147, 5

0.069
0.055

0.060
0.028

short while at 3.20. This luminosity was achieved with
currents of 1550 mA in LER and 800 mA in HER,
filling only 692 bunches and so suggesting that higher
luminosities will be possible in the future. Table 3
summarizes the parameters for this luminosity.

the

integrated

During October,

luminosity,
measured over a shift, day, week or month, all
in single ring
exceeded the design goals. Also,
operation, the LER current was raised to the design
value of 2140 mA, and the HER reached 920 mA,
exceeding the goal of 750.

This luminosity is a bit higher than values reported
previously. The BABAR group recently refined their
calibration of our luminosity monitor, based on a
detailed off-line study of e+e–→e+e– and e+e–→µ +µ –
decays. This correction, which adds 6% to the
luminosity, is incorporated here.

2.2 Thermal and Vacuum Issues

As the currents increased during the run, thermal
limitations became apparent in several components. A
number of bellows required modest air cooling. More
severely, the connectors and directional couplers on
the longitudinal feedback kickers overheated, at one
point burning some of the Heliax-cable insulation.
New couplers and additional cooling were added
immediately, with more improvements added during
the downtime (Sec. 3.4); temperatures there are now
closely monitored with thermocouples at numerous
points.

the

strikes

long “high-power

Two permanent-magnet dipoles (B1), located inside
BABAR on either side of the IP, bring the beams into
head-on collision. They create hot synchrotron fans
that
travel outside the detector to cooled chamber
surfaces 10 to 15 m away. The hottest fan, from the
electrons,
dump”
chamber at grazing incidence over several meters.
This water-cooled, rectangular, copper chamber began
to leak at one corner, where it was brazed to a
stainless-steel vacuum flange. The hot fan caused one
side of the chamber to expand more than the opposite
side; over many cycles, the stress cracked the braze.
While building a replacement chamber with an
improved design, we patched the leak to finish the run.
A metal “boot” was epoxied to the region outside the

leak and evacuated with a turbomolecular pump, in
to maintain acceptable vacuum inside the
order
beampipe. However, we limited the electron current to
a maximum of 600 mA until the final weeks of the
run, in order to avoid further damage. The chamber
was replaced during the downtime between the 2000
and 2001 runs.

For the longer term, the most worrisome thermal
constraint has been found on the bellows at
the
forward (downstream electron) end of the “support
tube”—the 40-cm-long beryllium beampipe enclosing
the IP and running between the inboard ends of the
two B1 magnets. Some power from the beam goes into
a mode trapped by a synchrotron-radiation mask just
outboard of the support tube, and this power appears to
leak through the shielding fingers of the bellows. The
water lines for cooling the support tube enter from the
other end and turn around a few centimeters away
from the bellows, reducing the cooling there. The
bellows is deep inside the detector, tightly surrounded
by the silicon vertex tracker
(SVT), making it
inaccessible until the scheduled access to the SVT in
two years. The most we can do until then is to force a
small flow of dry air along the support tube. The
benefit is limited, since a radial ion pump outboard of
the bellows on each side blocks the flow of air along
the tube wall.

Measurements of the dependence of the bellows
temperature on the currents in the two rings show a
largely quadratic behavior, indicative of heating from
high-order modes rather than synchrotron radiation.
The LER also has a linear term. We interpret this as a
change in bunch length with current, since we also
found a linear dependence on bunch length by varying
the LER’s RF voltage. The cross term from the
product of the HER and LER currents, responsible for
about 10% of the heating, varied with a scan of the
arrival phase of the HER relative to the LER at the IP.
The spatial periodicity suggested a trapped mode with
a frequency of 5.4 GHz.

2.3 Multipacting and Electron Clouds

rate. We also observed that

Last spring and summer, the current in many LER
ion pumps grew slowly as a function of beam current,
then crossed a threshold and increased at a much
greater
the specific
(normalized) luminosity, which depends only on the
sizes of the overlapped beams at the IP, was found to
drop significantly at currents below those at which
beam-beam limitations should come into effect.

Although pump current is normally proportional to
this increased current dropped
pressure, much of
immediately when the beam was aborted. The rest of
the signal, from gas desorbed by the beam, decayed
exponentially over tens of seconds. We attributed the
rapidly lost pump current to the collection of electrons

threshold,

released by synchrotron radiation from the beampipe
walls. The rapid rise with current then was interpreted
as a multipactor process: the electrons are drawn into
the positron beam and accelerated across
the
beampipe, releasing more electrons in a cascade that
creates an electron cloud. In some cases the process
was clearly resonant: as the beam current increased
over
increased
the pump current
rapidly to a peak, then decreased. The details of this
resonance depend on the bunch current, bunch
spacing, beampipe geometry, and wall cleanliness. A
solenoid wrapped around the beampipe adjacent to the
ion pump reduced the electron cloud by preventing
photoelectrons
from crossing through the beam
potential and ejecting more electrons from the opposite
wall.

first

At the same time, we observed that the LER beam
size, measured by the synchrotron-light monitor,
exhibited similar behavior, growing little with current
below a threshold, and then increasing rapidly. The
threshold was lower, and the growth somewhat more
rapid, with the beams in collision, but it was also
present in single-beam operation. We attribute it to the
onset of the electron-cloud instability (ECI)[5] due to
the cloud created by multipacting. Two techniques
have been helpful in controlling this effect: solenoidal
fields and short gaps in the fill pattern.

in

the

receives

antechamber

Since the arcs have much more synchrotron
radiation than the straights, they might be expected
also to have denser electron clouds. However, LER arc
chambers are made of aluminum extrusions with an
antechamber. Downstream of each dipole, a “photon
stop”
hard
synchrotron radiation from the bend. Secondary
electrons are thus kept out of the main chamber and
the field of the positron beam. To further suppress the
the aluminum walls are coated with titanium
ECI,
their
nitride (TiN),
secondary-emission
coefficient.
the beampipes in PEP’s
straight sections are mostly stainless-steel cylinders.
The material and the circular geometry permit the
growth of the instability.

to lower
In contrast,

the

solenoids

Consequently, we added our

to the
straights. Solenoidal windings wrapped directly on the
tubes, with a typical field of 30 G, noticeably helped in
reducing the LER beam blow-up, even when only a
single straight was wrapped with about 100 m of
windings in the drift spaces. We have now added
solenoids
total of
six straights,
approximately 600 m. As each straight was wound, the
threshold for beam-size growth moved higher and the
luminosity increased.

to all

for

a

The electron cloud builds up quickly, but also
decays quickly, and so small gaps in the fill pattern
can have a big effect. PEP’s design called for filling
every second RF bucket (2.1 ns per bucket) around the

entire ring except for a 5% gap for both clearing ions
field.
and ramping up the beam-abort kicker’s
However, our injection control allows us to fill any
specified bucket
to any desired charge. As we
gradually raised the beam currents while optimizing
luminosity, we began with fewer buckets, to keep a
high charge per bunch until limited by beam-beam
effects. However, we kept
to uniform fill patterns;
early in the year we filled every 8th (called a “by-8”
fill), then every 6th, 4th, and finally 3rd by October. (We
preferred not to use by-2 too quickly because bunch n
then experiences a parasitic near-crossing with bunch
n±1 on either side of the IP, just outboard of the B1
magnets.)

Our luminosity monitor has a mode that sweeps a
gate across the fill pattern to provide a display of the
luminosity from each bunch. We observed a strong
drop (≈60%) in luminosity from the first to the last
buckets, and this drop had a time constant of about
100 buckets. By inserting various “microgaps” in the
fill pattern, we determined that removing even 6 to 12
buckets allows a noticeable recovery. The luminosity
significantly improved after adjusting the total number
of filled buckets, the number of and length of gaps,
and the length of the individual trains. The record
luminosity was achieved with a by-3 fill in which 10
bunches were filled, followed by 6 left empty (bucket
numbers 0, 3, 6…27; 48, 51…), for a total of 692
bunches.
current
The
into the relative
monitors
strengths of the two beams. The first LER train,
following the main gap,
focused than
subsequent ones because it hasn’t encountered a thick
electron cloud. As a result, there can be significant
loss of electrons from the first HER train. After top-
off,
luminosity,
which drops as electrons are lost. To counteract this,
we gradually increase the charge per LER bunch in the
first train with a programmed ramp.

this train begins with the highest

bunch-by-bunch
also provide

luminosity
insight

is better

and

2.4 Other Issues

Considerable effort went

into learning how to
decouple the rings and compensate for the twist given
to the beams by BABAR’s solenoidal field. The most
helpful technique was to generate a large orbit wave
with a corrector in one plane,
then to observe the
coupling into the other plane with the beam-position
monitors (BPMs). Two correctors 90º apart in betatron
phase are needed per plane. Careful comparisons with
the model can localize errors in the compensation
provided by skew quadrupoles in the region of the IP.

A number of feedbacks were added during the run to
keep the luminosity high. The IP loops dither the
HER’s position (x, y) and angle (x′, y′) at the IP to
maximize the luminosity monitor’s signal. HER/LER

combined angle loops move both rings together at the
the luminosity monitor,
IP to optimize pointing at
about 10 m away. Other loops maintain beam position
in sextupoles and in the pick-ups for
transverse
feedback.

cooling water

HER and LER orbit loops use BPMs in the arcs on
either side of the IP to determine a kick near the IP
that compensates for thermal motion of the magnet
supports (“rafts”) next to BABAR, mostly due to diurnal
temperature variations. Since that time, we have had
some success in reducing the motion by using our
temperature-controlled
limit
temperature changes in the rafts on either side of
BABAR, and we are trying to determine if these loops
remain helpful.
Backgrounds

problem.
Radiation-detecting PIN diodes inside BABAR, near the
SVT, abort the beams several times a day when the
levels exceed a safe dose. We have been learning how
to tune the rings to reduce backgrounds. Improvement
should be seen later in the 2001 run (once sufficient
scrubbing has taken place) due to our downtime work
on the IP-area vacuum chambers.

in BABAR

remain

to

a

The HER is also subject at times to sudden drops in
lifetime, often accompanied by bursts of radiation at
the SVT diodes,
leading to a beam abort. We
tentatively attribute this to dust particles falling into
the beam, but have not been able to trace the source of
the dust to individual vacuum chambers. At times the
lifetime remains low (and the backgrounds high) for
several minutes, which may be caused by a plasma
from ionized dust. At times shaking the HER (with
swept-frequency sinusoidal motion excited through the
transverse-feedback kickers) restores the lifetime, but
more often we are forced to abort the beam.

3 2000–2001 DOWNTIME WORK
The PEP shutdown—from November 1 through
February 2—allowed us to make several improvements
addressing the issues discussed above.

3.1 Solenoids for the Arcs

We have begun to wrap the far longer extent of the
arcs, to determine whether the arcs contribute in part
to the ECI. Half of one arc was wound in January. The
work is more difficult because the antechamber gives
the beampipe a greater perimeter, and because a steel
support tube running above the aluminum chamber
makes wrapping difficult.

The beam chamber within the extrusion is an
ellipse, with a narrow opening on the +x side leading
through a neck to the antechamber. With this
geometry, it may not be necessary to use a solenoidal
field;
instead, a horizontal dipole field oriented to
direct stray electrons through the neck could be

sufficient to suppress the instability. Such a field turns
out to be much easier to arrange on our chambers.
Long L-shaped forms can be wound in advance with
coils running along the length of the L. The base of
the L, with one side of the coil, is placed in contact
with the chamber, while the returning side of the coil
runs along the other arm of the L, further from the
beam. When placed above and below the elliptical part
of the beampipe, the pair of coils produces a horizontal
field at the beam. The polarity of the field is reversed
every 2 m to cancel the steering. We are installing half
an arc of these coils for comparison with half an arc of
solenoids.

3.2 Vacuum Improvements

The HER’s high-power dump chamber (Sec. 2.2)
was replaced, eliminating the major vacuum leak near
the IP. Starting 12 m away from the IP on the opposite
(outgoing electron) side, a new chamber with large
titanium-sublimation pumps was installed to lower the
pressure in a 9-m region that appears to be a
significant source of backgrounds.

The number of ion pumps was doubled in LER Arc
7, following a program to increase the base pumping
speed in all the LER arcs, and so to obtain a higher
beam lifetime, which has typically been 1 hour when
colliding. (Ti-sublimation pumps in the antechambers
provide additional speed for the outgassing from the
photon stops.) The leaks that caused a somewhat
elevated pressure were fixed. A few minor
leaks
remain due to difficulties with the tin-foil seals on the
aluminum flanges.

3.3 Background Reduction

New horizontal collimators were installed in the
LER, 12 and 25 m upstream of the IP. These have a
motorized jaw on both sides (±x).

A shielding wall was installed at the tunnel mouth,
on the forward side of BABAR, to reduce backgrounds
due to radiation from the tunnel. A similar wall was
previously installed on the backward side.

We installed pulsed beam-separator magnets, which
should provide cleaner injection by separating the
beams during fills and top-offs, and then rapidly
bringing them back into collision.

3.4 RF and Feedback

A third LER RF station was added,

to provide
enough power for currents of up to 3 A. The cooling
for the connectors and couplers of the longitudinal
feedback kickers was improved, as discussed in Sec.
2.2.

3.5 Survey

The entire ring was resurveyed. Errors in individual
components were found and corrected. In addition, we
adjusted for some settlement of BABAR by smoothly
adjusting the beamlines on either side to match, since
there was no time to reposition the detector.

4 STATUS OF THE 2001 RUN
The goal for the run, which lasts from February to
the end of August, is to reach a peak luminosity of
5×1033 cm-2·s-1, and to deliver an integrated luminosity
of 32 pb-1 over this time.

At this time (mid-March), the run has been difficult,
probably because of many changes in too short a time.
In January, even before the run started,
the RF
frequency was increased by 600 Hz, to better center the
beams in the rings. While this should be beneficial in
the longer term, we then weren’t able to return to the
horizontal orbits of October as we turned back on.

While the machine was still scrubbing, recovering
from the extensive vacuum work, we took the
opportunity to do machine development, and lowered
βx
* from 50 to 35 cm, first in the LER, and then the
following week in the HER.

With the tighter beam in LER, the positrons for the
time dominated the electrons in beam-beam.
first
Electron beam loss was common, and there was little
margin for error in tune adjustment with changes in
currents. However, we were able to get
to a peak
luminosity of 2×1033. The subsequent decrease in the
HER βx
* strengthened HER somewhat, but the tune
space
beam loss was
and
difficult,
remained
unacceptably frequent, precluding effective tuning.

Early in March we changed course, trying to revert
as much as possible to the configuration of late
October. We did not, of course, undo the magnet
repositioning from the new survey, but we restored the
RF frequency and the βx
* values. The magnet
configurations were reloaded, and the ring orbits were
steered back to the saved orbits from October.

After these changes, it was easier to maintain the
beams in collision, providing time to tune the IP skew
quadrupoles and optimize luminosity. The peak
luminosity is typically 2.2×1033 at this time.

Thermal constraints now limit

the currents and
hence the luminosity. When new hot components are
discovered, we add more thermocouples and set the
beam-abort thresholds with caution. The result is that
thermal aborts are now more frequent than before, not
because the machine is hotter, but because we are
looking in hotter places and have set lower limits. For
example, the connectors on the kicker chambers for
longitudinal
feedback still get hot and now have
numerous thermocouples. The heating is more severe
with the by-3 fill pattern used in October (when we

were less aware of the problem), leading us to operate
mostly with by-2 now.

In addition to the hot components found last year,
we have recently discovered a high temperature that
comes and goes erratically at a LER gate valve 12 m
before the IP. The cause may be a LER synchrotron
fan from upstream that should be blocked by a mask.
However, the mask does not span the full height of the
chamber, and small changes in the orbit may allow
some of the fan to hit the valve.

If the vertical angle of the HER at the IP is high,
then its B1 fan heats a large HER vacuum flange about
8 m away. Because this fan caused a leak in the past,
the temperature limit is now set low. The HER IP
position and angle feedback loops move HER to find
the best overlap with LER for luminosity. At times the
feedbacks appear to move the HER angle upward,
apparently following some change in the LER and
causing an abort. We suspect an intermittent problem
with a BPM may cause a LER orbit feedback to move,
potentially causing either of these thermal problems.
Consequently, we are reviewing the performance of all
loops. Some may need improvement, while others may
no longer be needed, since the drifts they were
designed to compensate may now be reduced.

We are also losing beam several times a day due to
trips of the HER RF stations. In some events, the RF
may not have been the cause;
the high
reflected power appears to follow a beam abort from
some other source that fails to register with the abort
system.

instead,

have

Once we

fully returned

to October’s
performance, we plan to reintroduce the changes in
frequency and βx
*. When we commission the third
LER RF station, the shorter bunch length will permit
us to reduce βy
* from its present 12.5 mm; a 10-mm
lattice is ready to try with beam, and a 7-mm lattice is
ready for a magnet test. We will also commission the
pulsed separator magnets.

5 PLANS FOR 2002 AND BEYOND
The medium-term goal is to reach a luminosity of
1034 cm-2·s-1 by the end of 2003. We have begun
building two more RF stations (one per ring), to get
the higher current and shorter bunches this goal
requires. The new stations should be ready by the fall
of 2002.

For the long term, we have begun studying paths to
3×1034 cm-2·s-1. Both rings would require more
current—1.5 A in the HER and 4 A in the LER—and
thus more cooling and more RF power. Similarly, the
bunch-by-bunch
be
feedbacks would
to
strengthened. We would further reduce βy
* to about 6
mm, which would involve moving the IP quadrupoles
inward. We would then need to further shorten the

have

bunches, perhaps with a lower α or with third-
tighter IP would
harmonic RF cavities. The new,
change from our head-on configuration to one with a
crossing angle of perhaps ±3 mrad, allowing more
bunches without the parasitic crossings.

5 ACKNOWLEDGMENT

I wish to thank the accelerator

and BABAR
physicists, machine operators,
and members of
SLAC’s technical staff, whose efforts have made PEP-
II successful.

REFERENCES

[1] U.S. Dept. of Energy contract DE-AC03-76SF00515.
[2] U.S. Dept. of Energy contract DE-AC03-76SF00098.
[3] U.S. Dept. of Energy contract W-7405-Eng-48.
[4] PEP-II: An Asymmetric B Factory, Conceptual Design
Report, LBL-PUB-5379, SLAC-418, CALT-68-1869,
UCRL-IC-114055, UC-IIRPA-93-01, June 1993.

[5] K. Ohmi and F. Zimmermann, “Head-Tail Instability
Caused by Electron Clouds in Positron Storage Rings,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3821 (2000).

