Planar microfluidics - liquid handling without walls

A. Rathgeber, C. Strobl, H.-J. Kutschera, and A. Wixforth

Center for NanoScience (CeNS), University of Munich, D-80539 Munich, Germany

The  miniaturization  and  integration  of  electronic  circuitry  has  not  only  made  the  enormous

increase in performance of semiconductor devices possible but also spawned a myriad of new

products and applications ranging from a cellular phone to a personal computer. Similarly, the

miniaturization  and  integration  of  chemical  and  biological  processes  will  revolutionize  life

sciences.  Drug  design  and  diagnostics  in  the  genomic  era  require  reliable  and  cost  effective

high throughput technologies which can be integrated and allow for a massive parallelization.

Microfluidics is the core technology to realize such miniaturized laboratories with feature sizes

on a submillimeter scale. Here, we report on a novel microfluidic technology meeting the basic

requirements for a microfluidic processor analogous to those of its electronic counterpart: Cost

effective production, modular design, high speed, scalability and programmability.

Microfluidic systems miniaturize chemical and biological processes on a submillimeter scale.

Reducing the dimensions of macroscopic biological or chemical laboratories is advantageous

for the following reasons: The small scale allows for the integration of various processes on

one chip analogous to integrated microelectronic circuitry. Thus manual handling, e.g. when

transferring reagents from one process step to the next, can be reduced. Such an integration is

the prerequisite for a fully automated data management system covering all steps of a given

chemical or biological process. Furthermore, the required reagent volumes are reduced thus

saving  both  material  costs  and  process  time  as  many  of  the  time  consuming  amplification

steps for biological substances can be omitted. Finally, the miniaturization results in enhanced

precision  by  providing  more  homogenous  reaction  conditions  and  in  shorter  times  for

diffusion driven reactions.

Several approaches to realize microfluidic systems have been reported. One approach relies

on the miniaturization of classical fluid handling devices such as pumps, valves and tubes

using etching technologies known from semiconductor industry. Here, small pumping units

based  on  e.g.  piezoelectric  actuation  or  mechanically  moving  parts  are  fabricated  by  deep

etching processes on appropriate substrates such as glass, quartz or silicon (1). Closed tubes

and fluid reservoirs are generally obtained by capping the etched channels with a cover plate,

using anodic bonding.

Secondly,  fluid  handling  systems  have  been  reported  that  take  advantage  of  the  small

dimensions of the microfluidic channel itself (2). As the width of a channel approaches the

typical  length  scale  (the  Debye  length)  of  the  space  charge  regions  near  a  solid/liquid

interface, size dependent electrokinetic or electrocapillary effects can be exploited to handle

and  control  the  fluid  flow.  As  the  chemical  potentials  of  the  solid  and  the  liquid  at  their

interface  differ  considerably,  a  space  charge  region  close  to  the  interface  forms.  This  is

similar to the well-known Schottky effect in semiconductor devices. An external electric field

along  this  space  charge  region  induces  both  an  electric  and  fluidic  current  close  to  the

interface.  If  the  channel  is  sufficiently  narrow,  this  space  charge  current  drags  along  the

neutral fluid near the center of the channel and electro-osmotic flow is observed.

Liquid motion can also be induced by spatially modulating the wetting properties of a solid

substrate. For aqueous solutions, this can be achieved by patterning the substrate such that

hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions are formed. In this case, the liquid prefers to cover the

hydrophilic  regions  and  avoids  to  reside  on  the  hydrophobic  areas.  Several  techniques  to

realize such a modulation of the wetting properties have been reported, so far. These include

microcontact printing (3), vapor deposition, and photolithography (4, 5).  Fluidic  motion  or

guided  flow  on  the  substrate  can  be  observed  (6)  by  changing  the  wetting  properties  with

time. For example, a light induced guided motion of fluids has been reported using a special

surface treatment, where the free energy could locally be changed under illumination (7).

Other  research  groups  make  use  of  ‘peristaltic  pumps’  based  on  the  ultrasonically  driven

deformation of thin membranes (8). The momentum trasfer from the membrane to the liquid

induces acoustic streaming (9) and thus creates a guided flow along etched microchannels.

Another  elegant  peristaltic  pumphas  been  reported  emplying  polymer  films  (10)  that  are

pneumatically deformed in the desired fashion to induce liquid flow along the channels.

So  far,  in  most  of  the  microfluidic  systems  liquids  are  moved  in  tubes  or  capillaries.  This

approach, however, suffers from the severe drawback that the pressure required to overcome

surface tension and adhesion of the liquid to the walls of the channel can be enormous. As the

pressure scales inversely with the minimum channel dimension, decreasing channel diameters

increase  the  required  pressure  even  further.  Thus  these  systems  require  very  powerful

pumping units and valves which are not easily implemented on a microscopic scale.

Furthermore, small amounts of liquid cannot be simply handled in tubes, as these need to be

completely filled in order for the pumping mechanism to work properly. The small quantities

of probe liquid in this case have to be separated from each other by barriers of immiscible

liquid or air bubble. In any case, however, closed tube operation is restricted to continuous

flow processes. Such miniaturized systems mimic laboratories using hoses and tubes rather

than  beakers  and  eppendorfs.  Most  of  the  work  in  macroscopic  laboratories,  however,  is

carried out as a batch process. A typical example is the simple task of mixing two reagents or

dissolving  a  substance  in  a  liquid. A  lab  assistant  would  measure  the  required  amounts  in

separate  beakers,  and  then  pour  the  substances  in  a  third  beaker  while  agitating  with  a

magnetic stirrer. To date, this simple task is nearly impossible to handle given the working

principles  of  microfluidic  systems  described  above.  Guiding  liquids  on  a  free  surface

overcomes  the  restrictions  inherent  to  liquid  handling  in  capillaries.  However,  there  is  no

pumping mechanism available to date which would meet the requirements as defined by the

lab-on-a-chip applications: Electronic control, high speed and cost effectiveness.

Here,  we  would  like  to  report  on  a  novel  approach  to  liquid  handling  on  smallest  scales

allowing for a programmable control of both batch and continous processes at high speed. Our

technology  meets  the  basic  requirements  of  a  microfluidic  processor  in  that  it  is

programmable and scalable, allows for massive parallelization and modular design and can be

manufactured using standard semiconductor process technology.

In analogy to an electronic microprocessor, we define functional blocks, connected by fluid-

conducting  circuits.  The  confinement  of  the  liquid  to  the  circuits  is  achieved  by  lateral

potential wells, which are defined by a controlled modification of the surface free energy (11).

A momentum transfer from surface acoustic waves (SAW) propagating along the surface of

the given substrate pumps the liquids along these fluidic circuits. Such waves are modes of

elastic energy confined to a layer of about one acoustic wavelength measured from the surface

of  the  chip.  They  can  be  excited  by  several  means,  most  commonly  using  metallic

interdigitated  electrodes  on  top  of  a  piezoelectric  substrate.  The  application  of  a  radio

frequency signal to such an interdigitated transducer (IDT) leads to the excitation of a SAW

with a wavelength defined by the geometry of the IDT. This small surface displacement can

couple efficiently to the liquid on top of the surface and induce acoustic streaming. Typical

displacement  amplitudes  of  a  SAW  are  in  the  nanometer  regime,  and  can  be  externally

controlled by adjusting the excitation signal. To date, SAW technology is rather advanced, as

SAW devices act as radio frequency filters, resonators, and oscillators for many applications

such as mobile communication and television (12). For the fluidic purpose as described here,

the IDTs may be easily optimized in terms of actuation efficiency. For instance, single phase

unidirectional transducers (SPUDTs) have been emplyoyed in our experiments. In comparison

to  many  other  liquid  handling  schemes,  the  use  of  SAW  actuation  allows  for  a  “remote

control” mode as the liquid needs not be in direct physical contact with the IDT transforming

electromagnetic energy in an electromechanic excitation. The SAW rather propagates across

the surface and interacts with the liquid at the desired location.

To define the fluidic trajectories on our processor we modulate the free energy of the surface

laterally. For  aqueous  solutions,  this  is  achieved  by  a  lateral  patterning  of  the  wetting

properties of the surface, hence defining regions which act as lateral confining potentials for

the liquid. In this sense, the surface tension in microfluidic systems is no longer prohibitive

but is actually exploited to define the fluidic confinement.

In  Fig.  1,  we  show  the  effect  of  modulating  the  free  energy  of  a  surface  to  define  fluidic

circuits on that surface. There are different ways to achieve such a well defined modulation of

the  wetting  properties.  Here,  we  show  our  results  using  a  homogenous  silanization  of  the

surface  with  subsequent  photolithographic  lateral  patterning.  To  define  the  hydrophobic

regions on the chip surface, we use octa-decyl-trichlorsilane (OTS), following a silanization

procedure as described by (13). Employing this technique, a self assembled layer of about 2.6

nm thickness is formed on the surface, resulting in a wetting angle of about 110°. To define

the  fluidic  circuits,  the  hydrophobic  monolayer  is  removed  using  a  plasma  assisted  ashing

process, leaving a hydrophilic track behind. Meanwhile, other techniques for modulating the

surface free energy such as microstructuring our samples have been tested and successfully

applied.  The  main  idea  to  create  a  lateral  potential  well  to  confine  the  liquid,  however,

remains the same in all cases.

a)

c)

b)

d)

Fig. 1: a) Side view of a small water droplet on a hydrophilic part of the sample. The wetting
angle is adjusted to about 32°, in this case. b) Side view of a small droplet on a hydrophobic
part of the sample. The wetting angle in this case is increased to about 110°. c) and d) show
top views of lithographically defined fluidic circuits, formed by a lateral modulation of the
surface free energy.

In Fig. 1a and 1b, we show two different wetting angles on hydrophilic (a) and hydrophobic

(b)  areas,  respectively.  Fig.  1c  and  1d  show  a  top  view  of  lithographically  defined  fluidic

cicuits, indicating the versatility of the employed method.

As  can  be  seen  from  the  figure,  many  different  geometries  for  such  fluidic  circuits  and

reservoirs can be realized. They can be straight or curved, they can include constrictions (see

Fig. 1d) or other geometrically defined structures that may add functionality to the device.

Also, the circuits do not necessarily consist of a single stripe as shown in the figure: more

sophisticated,  multi-striped  geometries  resembling  railroad  tracks  are  presently  under

investigation.  Small  amounts  of  liquid  are  deposited  on  the  processor  surface  using  a

conventional, piezoelectrically driven ink jet nozzle, directed towards a hydrophilic region of

the chip serving as a reservoir for the fluid. Shallow etching of these compartments may be

used  to  enhance  the  confinement.  Quantities  as  small  as  one  nanoliter  and  below  can  be

applied to the chip in an accurate and reproducible manner.

The whole microfluidic processor is encapsulated to prevent the chip from contamination and

to control the thermodynamics, for instance to maintain a given relative humidity and to avoid

the evaporation of small droplets. For specific applications, it is possible to cool or heat parts

of the microfluidic processor, e.g. using meander-like on-chip heaters or a Peltier element.

The  package  also  contains  the  ink  jet  nozzle(s)  to  'load'  specific  reservoirs  for  further

acoustically driven dispensing on the chip.

In our case the chip is either made of LiNbO3 or quartz (SiO2). Both materials are standard

piezoelectric substrates for SAW applications. To achieve biocompatibility the LiNbO3–chip

is usually covered with a thin (0.1µm to 3µm) SiO2 layer, using a plasma enhanced chemical

vapor  deposition  (PECVD)  process.  For  specific  applications,  however, the  surface  of  the

substrate may be covered by a thin film of almost any desired material, including metals such

as gold. The surface acoustic waves are excited by metallic interdigitated transducers (IDT) of

different  application-related  designs,  including  single  phase  unidirectional  transducers

(SPUDT) to increase the pumping efficiency.  The  IDT  are  deposited  by  a  standard  planar

process  on  appropriate  sites  of  the  chip.  If  the  transducers  are  fed  with  a  radio  signal

frequency (in the present case 150 MHz on a LiNbO3-chip), a SAW with a wavelength of

about  23  µm  is  launched  along  the  desired  direction.  Both  continous  wave  and  pulsed

excitation of the SAW are possible, depending on the application. Other substrates may also

be used, as long as they support surface acoustic waves, which most crystalline materials do.

The substrates need not be piezoelectric themselves. It is sufficient to deposit a piezoelectric

material such as ZnO on the regions of the surface, where the IDT's are located.

The interaction between the SAW and the liquid on the chip surface leads to a momentum

transfer  and  the  application  of  a  net  force  from  the  wave  to  the  liquid.  Depending  on  the

amplitude of the SAW and the confinement of the fluid this force can either induce acoustic

streaming inside the liquid or it can move the whole volume across the surface of the chip.

The acoustic streaming within the liquid can be employed to pump the entire volume without

moving  its  center  of  mass  and/or  to  actuate  suspended  particles  in  the  liquid.  Also,

turbulences within the liquid can be excited which effectively stir liquids on smallest scales.

Once  the  amplitude  of  the  SAW  exceeds  a  critical  value,  the  pinning  of  the  boundary  is

overcome and the whole volume is actuated, i.e. its center of mass changes its position. Here,

the liquid can be moved either in form of single droplets or in larger volumes on a fluidic

circuit. This critical SAW amplitude depends on the actual volume of the droplet, the specific

geometry of the fluidic circuit, and the surface properties which can be easily understood in

terms of well known pinning forces at the three-phase boundary between the liquid, the solid

surface and the surrounding gas. In any case, however, the critical SAW amplitude and the

required pulse sequence can be determined very reproducibly. Hence, the mode of operation

(streaming,  stirring,  pumping,  actuation  of  droplets  or  a  combination  thereof)  can  be

predetermined and is electrically controllable. The laterally patterned fluidic circuits keep the

liquids  confined  to  the  tracks  as  long  as  the  SAW  amplitude  (or  the  equivalent  effective

pressure) does not exceed a second critical value. This property of the system can be used, for

instance, to rinse the whole structure with an appropriate liquid.

In Fig. 2, we show a time series for an acoustically driven small droplet (V≈ 50 nl) being

guided along a fluidic circuit of about 300 µm width. A series of SAW pulses of about 1 msec

length at a repetition rate of 10 msec propagates from left to right, 'pushing' the droplet along

the track. The velocity of the droplet can be adjusted by the amplitude of the SAW, the pulse

width and/or the repetition rate. In the present experiment, a rather slow movement of the

droplet (about 2.35 mm/sec) has been chosen. It should be noted, however, that very high

droplet velocities up to 5 cm/sec have been observed, so far. This limit, however, is presently

given by the time resolution of our experimental setup.

t=0 sec

t=0.15 sec

t=0.3 sec

0

300

600

900

1200

x/µm

Fig. 2: Time series of an acoustically actuated single droplet (approx. 50 nl), moving along a
fluidic track defined by a controlled lateral modulation of the surface free energy. The speed
of the droplet can be adjusted by the amplitude or the timing sequence of the pulsed surface
acoustic  wave.  In  the  present  experiment,  the  speed  is  set  to  about  2.35  mm/sec,  which  is
rather  slow  for  our  technique.  The  droplet  can  be  moved  over  large  distances  and  then  be
brought to a stop at a desired position on the chip. Note the nice side effect that can be seen
from the figure: The possibility to realize a moveable and adjustable microlens for optical
readout or excitation purposes.

Such  a  moving  droplet  is  very  well  suited  to  deliver  smallest  amounts  of  liquid  to  certain

areas  on  the  chip,  thus  'loading'  the  spots  of,  for  instance  a  microarray,  with  a  desired

chemical or fluid. For this purpose, we have fabricated a device with small areas of reduced

wetting angle arranged in a checkerboard geometry. The geometry, the proper design of the

surface chemistry and the speed of the droplet define the size and the volume of the deposited

droplets, in our case less than 50 picoliters, each.

250 µm

Fig. 3: Loading of a microarray with a spot distance of about 70 µm using an acoustically
actuated droplet moving from left to right acting as a reservoir. Within the fluidic track, a
checkerboard geometry of specially treated surface areas has been lithographically defined.
The large droplet of about 50 nl volume selectively wets these areas, leaving an array of small
droplets  behind,  each  having  a  volume  of  only  50  picoliters.  The  small  circles  have  been
added to the figure to enhance and visualize the contours of the smaller droplets. Again, the
droplets and the droplet array can be used as a moveable and adjustable optical system of
lenses for readout purposes.

Moreover,  many  droplets  on  different  circuits  can  be  moved  independently  of  each  other,

employing  different  SAWs  with  different  propagation  directions  and/or  amplitudes.  Using

two counterpropagating SAWs it is possible to move two droplets towards each other. Here,

we make use of the fact that the SAW is strongly attenuated by a liquid in its propagation

path. The amplitude of the SAW moving from, say left to right, is strongly reduced behind the

droplet being pushed from left to right. Hence, this SAW will have a significantly reduced

effect on the droplet moved by the second SAW in the other direction.

Using  such  'printed  circuits',  programmable  fluidic  processors  with  decoupled  functional

blocks can be designed to perform many different tasks. Not only are we able to control the

trajectory of the droplet with high accuracy. By using different SAWs and different droplets, a

typical laboratory batch process can be designed. For instance, two droplets of different fluids

can  be  moved  independently  of  each  other  towards  a  'reaction  chamber',  where  they  are

merged and - again acoustically driven - mixed in a controlled manner to significantly speed

up  the  reaction  for  the  required  chemical  or  biological  processes.  In  many  conventional

microfluidic devices, the reaction speed is generally limited by diffusion as small amounts of

liquid often exhibit laminar rather than turbulent flow, depending on the relevant Raynolds

number.  The  slowness  of  the  diffusion  is  a  severe  draw-back  for  current  lab-on-a-chip

applications since typical areas of e.g. DNA microarrays are as large as 1 cm2 and above.

To demonstrate the power of the acoustically driven microfluidics described here, we show in

Fig.  4  three  snapshots  of  a  chemical  reaction  between  two  small  droplets.  The  volume  is

approximately about 40 nanoliters each. We chose a chemoluminescence experiment, based

on the luminole reaction that is routinely used as a marker in diagnostics. Both droplets are

acoustically  pumped  towards  each  other  until  they  merge  and  react.  The  same  SAWs  that

actuate the droplets are then used to stir the compound and hence provides more homogenous

reaction conditions within the sample. Within the time resolution of our experiment, given by

the frame rate of our CCD camera of about 20msec, the reaction occurs nearly instantaneously

across the whole volume of the combined droplets. This can be nicely traced by observing the

luminescence  in  the  liquid.  No  special  care  has  been  taken  to  control  the  mixing  process

beyond the acoustical stirring. In principle, the geometry of the 'reaction' chamber could be

adjusted such that the mixing occurs even more homogeneously as in the experiment shown

here.

Fig. 4: An acoustically induced chemical reaction between two small droplets. Both droplets
are moved independently towards each other until they merge. The acoustic pumping induces
strong turbulences within the combined droplets, thus dramatically increasing the speed of the
reaction.

So far, we have only regarded the purely mechanical interaction between a SAW and (fluid)

matter  on  the  surface  of  the  substrate.  However,  as  SAWs  on  piezoelectric  substrates  are

accompanied by strong lateral and vertical electric fields, a direct coupling of these fields to

polarizable or charged substances is also possible. Such an acoustoelectric coupling has been

used in the recent past to study the interaction between SAWs and mobile electrons and holes

in semiconductor layered systems (14) to acoustically move those charges along the plane of a

semiconductor  quantum  well  (15).  For  our  microfluidic  processor,  direct  acoustoelectric

coupling  can  also  be  exploited  for  charged  or  polarizable  media.  For  instance,  the

superposition of two or more SAWs leads to an interference pattern with well defined nodes

of zero electric field and zero mechanical deformation of the surface. This can be used for

both an additional electric confinement, similar to acoustic levitation in intense sound fields

(16),  and  for  transporting  media  by  moving  nodes  of  zero  electrical  and/or  mechanical

potential across the surface. Hence, the electrically driven actuation of liquids and particles,

molecules and cells suspended in a liquid is also possible with planar fluidics.

Another  physical  effect,  occurring  at  free  surfaces  can  be  exploited  to  realize  pressure

dependent  valves  or  switches,  which  are  essential  parts  of  a  microfluidic  processor.

Neglecting the effects of gravity, the pressure within a small amount of liquid is constant.

This  constant  pressure  determines  the  shape  of  the  droplet  and  leads  to  the  fact  that  the

curvature  of  thze  droplet  surface  is  constant  (exept  for  the  circumference  and  the  parts

touching the surface). Therefore,  a constriction (similar to the one shown in Fig. 1d) can act

as a virtual barrier within a fluidic circuit. However, if a pressure (or momentum) above a

certain threshold is applied to the liquid it can overcome the constriction without leaving the

hydrophilic  area.  Meanwhile,  we  have  successfully  demonstrated  the  functionality  of  such

pressure  dependent  valves  and  switches  and  have  used  this  phenomenon  to  separate  small

amounts of liquid from a bigger volume serving as a reservoir. The effect can also be used to

measure the amount of liquid within a small compartment, a technique that will be reported

elsewhere.

It should be noted at this point, that the very same SAW technology described here can also

be used for sensor applications (17) on the same chip used for liquid actuation. Hence, we are

able to add even more functionality to our microfluidic processor. SAW sensors are already

used for many different applications, mostly based on the sensitivity of SAW’s to loading a

free surface with a finite mass. A simple sensor application for our fluidic processor would for

instance consist of a feedback system with one SAW moving a droplet from one location to

another, while the transmission of a second SAW is used to determine whether the droplet has

arrived  at  its  designated  position.  Here,  we  make  use  of  the  fact  that  liquids  on  a  surface

strongly  attenuate  SAWs.  Using  a  specially  designed  IDT  structure  allowing  for  a  spatial

resolution, even more sophisticated sensors can be designed (18). We use so-called slanted

transducers  which  transmit  a  relatively  narrow  SAW-beam  with  the  specific  point  of

excitation and sound path defined by the actual SAW frequency. This narrow SAW beam can

be  swept  along  the  whole  aperture  of  the  slanted  transducer  by  modulating  the  excitation

frequency. The transmitted SAW intensity can then be used as the sensing quantity. Also, a

two-dimensional spatial resolution is possible using two sets of slanted transducers with two

perpendicularly propagating SAWs. The principle of such two-dimensional SAW sensors has

been shown before to be sensitive to the presence of free charges close to the surface or mass

loading effects (18). Of course, such slanted transducers can also be employed for pumping

and stirring liquids. Here, the spatial tunability of the sound path gives additional flexibility

for, e.g., multiplexing different fluidic circuits.

In summary, we have realized the basic features of a programmable microfluidic processor by

combining  the  lateral  modulation  of  the  surface  free  energy  with  a  SAW  driven  liquid

handling system. We exploit the increased contribution of surface tension effects to confine

the  liquids  under  investigation  to  defined  fluidic  circuits  for  guided  flow  and  to  realize

pressure  dependent  valves  and  switches.  The  independent  and  controlled  movement  of

different  droplets  is  feasible  employing  different  acoustic  waves  which  can  be  controlled

separately. The interaction between the surface waves and the liquid leads to streaming effects

and turbulences, which can be used to induce and accelerate physical, chemical or biological

reactions or to solve solid substances in a liquid. As our technology allows for the movement

of  single  droplets  across  the  surface  different  functional  blocks  are  effectively  decoupled

making  it  possible  to  describe  the  whole  system  as  a  sum  of  its  parts.  Furthermore,  our

acoustically driven liquid handling system is scalable and the pumping mechanism has been

found to work for volumes as small as several picoliters all the way up to several 100 µl.

These are the prerequisites to build design libraries similar to those used in the semiconductor

industry thus reducing the development time for new and complex systems. Our experimental

results suggest that the acoustically driven liquid handling on a free surface has the potential

to define a new generation of microfluidic processors that comprise all the characteristics of

their electronic counterparts.

References:

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

J. G. Smits,  Sensors and Actuators A21-23, 203 (1990).

A. Manz, C. S. Effenhauser, N. Burggraf, D. J. Harrison, K. Seiler and K. Fluri,

J. Micromech. Microeng. 4, 257 (1994).

G. P. Lopez, H. A. Biebuck, C. D. Frisbie, G. M. Whitesides, Science 260, 647 (1993).

G. Möller, M. Harke, H. Motschmann, Langmuir  14, 4955 (1998).

H. Gau, S. Herminghaus, P. Lenz, R. Lipowski, Science 283, 46 (1999).

S. Daniel, M. K. Chaudhury, J. C. Chen, Science 291, 633 (2001).

K. Ichimura, S. K. Oh, M. Nakagawa, Science 288, 1624 (2000).

8. 

R. M. Moroney, R. M. White, R. T. Howe, Appl. Phys. Lett. 59, 774 (1991)

9.

W.  L.  Nyborg:  Acoustic  Streaming, in Physical  Acoustics  2B,  Ed.  W.P.  Mason,

10. M. A. Unger, H. P. Chou, T. Thorsen, A. Scherer, S. R. Quake,

Academic Press 265, (1965).

Science 288, 113 (2000).

11.

B. Zhao, J. S. Moore, D. J. Beebe, Science 291, 1023 (2001).

12.  D. P. Morgan, Surface Wave Devices for Signal Processing,

13.

14.

16.

9. 

(Studies in electrical and electronic engineering 19), Elsevier (1991).

D. E. Kataoka, and S.M. Troian, Nature 402, 794 (1999).

C. Rocke, S. Zimmermann, A. Wixforth, J.P. Kotthaus, G. Böhm, G. Weimann,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 4099 (1997).

15. M. Rotter, A.V. Kalameitsev, A.O. Govorov, W. Ruile, A. Wixforth,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 2171 (1999).

S. Bauerecker, B. Neidhart, Science 282, 2211 (1998).

Acoustic Wave Sensors: Theory, design, and physico-chemical applications,

D. S. Ballantines et al.,  eds.  (Academic Press, San Diego, London, 1997).

10.  M. Streibl, F. Beil, A. Wixforth, C. Kadow, A. C. Gossard,

IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium Proceedings, 11 (1999).

19. M. Streibl, A. Wixforth, J.P. Kotthaus, A.O.Govorov, C. Kadow, A.C. Gossard,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 4139 (1999).

We gratefully acknowledge very useful discussions with J. P. Kotthaus, and Th. Bein (Center

for  NanoScience,  Munich),    P.  Leiderer,  and  C.  Schäfle  (University  of  Konstanz),  and  J.

Scriba, E. Neuhaus, and Ch. Gauer (Advalytix AG). This work has been financially supported

by Advalytix AG.

