The Cyclic Universe

Ding-Yu  Chung

The  cyclic  universe  model  is  a  modification  of  the  ekpyrotic  universe  and  the
pyrotechnic universe models. The cosmological model is  the  cyclic  universe  based  on
the  cosmic  cycle  of  the  fractionalization  and  condensation.    The  cyclic  universe  goes
through  the  six  transitions:  the  triplet  universe,  the  inflation,  the  big  bang,  the
quintessence,  the  big  crush,  and  the  deflation  transitions.    The  universe  starts  with
eleven  dimensional  space-time  with  two  boundary  9-branes  (the  pre-observable
boundary  9-brane  and  the  hidden  boundary  9-brane)  separated  by  a  finite  gap
spanning an intervening bulk volume.  The triplet transition starts when the bulk 9-brane
is generated from the hidden boundary 9-brane, and collides with the pre-observable 9-
brane. The collision starts the inflation transition.  The collision is the brane dimensional
interference  mixing  between  the  pre-observable  9-brane  and  the  bulk  9-brane.    The
results are the mixed  branes  (combined  brane  dimensions)  from  3-  mixed  brane  to  9-
mixed brane, the internal space (cancelled brane dimensions) where gauge fields and
matter fields reside, the bulk space where gravity resides, 3-brane vacuum, and cosmic
radiation. The brane dimensional interference mixing ends with equal mass proportions
of  mixed  branes  from  3  to  9  (ordinary  and  exotic  dark  matters).    All  mixed  branes
formed  in  the  brane  dimensional  interference  mixing  occur  simultaneously,  so
superluminal  expansion  (the  inflation)  is  necessary  to  accommodate  simultaneous
brane dimensional interference mixing of all high and low energy mixed branes. Cosmic
radiation generated during the inflation leads to the big bang for the cosmic expansion.
Meanwhile,  the  hidden  brane  undergoes  stepwise  fractionalization,  changing  in
stepwise  manner  from  9-brane  to  3-brane.    The  observable  universe  expands  in  a
constant  rate  until  the  quintessence  transition,  involving  the  interaction  between  the
hidden universe and the observable universe, and causing the late cosmic accelerating
expansion and contraction in the observable universe. After the quintessence transition,
the observable universe starts to contract in a normal rate.  Afterward, there are the big
crush  transition  (the  reverse  of  the  big  bang)  and  the  deflation  (the  reverse  of  the
inflation).  The  cosmic  structure  again  consists  of  eleven  dimensional  space-time  with
two boundary 9-branes separated by a finite gap spanning an intervening bulk volume.
The 3-mixed brane is the mixture of leptons and quarks.   The structure of 3-mixed brane
with brane space dimensions in internal space and bulk space resembles to the structure
of  atomic  orbital.    Consequently,  the  periodic  table  of  elementary  particles  can  be
constructed to account of all ordinary leptons, quarks, gauge bosons, and hadrons.  The
masses of ordinary leptons, quarks, gauge bosons, and hadrons can be calculated with
only four known constants: the number (seven) of spatial dimensions in the internal space
and  the  bulk  space,  the  mass  of  electron,  the  mass  of  Z°,  and  αe.      The  calculated
masses are in good agreement with the observed values.

1

1.

Introduction

Both of the ekpyrotic universe model [1] by J. Khoury, B. A. Ovrut, P. J. Steinhardt,
and N. Turok and its modification, the pyrotechnic universe model [2], by R. Kallosh, L.
Kofman, and A. Linde involve a five-dimensional space-time with two boundary 3-branes
separated  by  a  finite  gap  spanning  an  intervening  bulk  volume.    The  two  boundary  3-
branes are the visible brane (our observed universe) and the hidden brane.  The hidden
brane  occupies  larger  volume  than  the  visible  branes.    The  bulk  volume  contains  an
additional 3-brane, which is free to move across the bulk space.

The hot big bang is created by the collision of the slowly moving bulk brane with
our  observable  brane.    The  energy  from  the  collision  is  translated  into  matter  and
radiation,  heating  the  universe  a  temperature  a  few  orders  of  magnitude  smaller  than
the  unification  scale.    The  gravitational  backreaction  due  to  the  kinetic  energy  of  the
bulk brane triggers cosmic expansion.  As pointed out in [2], a plausible solution for the
pyrotechnic universe model is inflation.

The  cyclic  universe  model  is  a  modification  of  the  ekpyrotic  universe  and  the
pyrotechnic  universe  models.  The  modification  involves  the  replacement  of  two
boundary  3-branes  and  one  bulk  3-brane  in  a  five-dimensional  space-time  in  the
ekpyrotic  universe  and  the  pyrotechnic  universe  model  by  the  two  boundary  9-branes
(the pre-observable boundary 9-brane and the hidden boundary 9-brane) and one bulk
9-brane in eleven-dimensional space-time. As in the pyrotechnic universe model, there
is inflation.  The cosmological model is the cyclic universe based on the cosmic cycle of
the  fractionalization  and  condensation.    The  cyclic  universe  goes  through  the  six
transitions:  the  triplet  universe,  the  inflation,  the  big  bang,  the  quintessence,  the  big
crush, and the deflation transitions (Fig. 1).

(1) the triplet universe

(2)  the inflation

(6) the deflation

(3) the big bang

(5) the big  crush

Fig. 1: the six cosmic transitions

(4) the quintessence

The  universe  starts  with  eleven  dimensional  space-time  with  two  boundary  9-
branes  (the  pre-observable  boundary  9-brane  and  the  hidden  boundary  9-brane)
separated  by  a  finite  gap  spanning  an  intervening  bulk  volume.    The  triplet  transition
starts when the bulk 9-brane is generated from the hidden boundary 9-brane. As soon
as  the  bulk  9-brane  is  generated,  it  quickly  collides  with  the  pre-observable  9-brane.
The collision starts the inflation transition.  During the inflation, there is a continuos flow
of the bulk 9-brane generated from the hidden brane to maintain a continuos collision.

2

The  collision  is  the  brane  dimensional  interference  mixing  between  the  pre-
observable 9-brane and the bulk 9-brane.  Some of the brane space dimensions of the
bulk  branes  combine  with  the  brane  space  dimensions  of  the  pre-observable  branes,
while some of them cancel the brane space dimensions of the pre-observable branes.
The combined branes are the "mixed branes", consisting of mixed branes from 3- to 9-
mixed branes with 3- to 9- brane space dimensions.  The space for the canceled brane
space dimensions is internal space where gauge fields and matter fields reside.  Each
mixed brane still has one bulk space where gravity resides as in the Randall - Sundrum
mechanism [3].   The brane dimensional interference mixing is shown in Fig. 2.

observable  brane

  

           bulk brane  hidden brane
       

 

              

◊
°• 9-mixed brane

°•8-mixed brane

°•7-mixed brane

1019
 Gev  
 
      
 E
      
               
        
      0  •3-brane vacuum
          ∝
 

°• 6-mixed brane

°• 5-mixed brane      

°• 4-mixed brane

•3-mixed brane 

 cosmic radiation

mixed brane wavelength  

   

  0

Fig 2:  the inflation: the simultaneous brane dimensional interference mixing

• = mixed brane , 
3-mixed brane = ordinary (baryonic) matter
4- to 9- mixed branes = exotic dark matter

Ο
  = internal space, ◊ = bulk space

In this proposal, energy increases with dimensionality in a cascade manner.  (A
higher  dimensional  space-time  has  higher  energy  than  the  lower  dimensional  space-
time.) The lower brane has less energy than the higher brane.  Consequently, the brane
dimensional  interference  mixing  results  in  the  release  of  enormous  energy  as  cosmic
radiation  residing  in  the  four  space-time  dimensional  vacuum  (3-brane  vacuum).
Therefore,  the  energy  resulted  from  the  collision  between  the  pre-observable  9-brane
and  the  bulk  brane  is  in  the  form  of  the  energy  release  from  the  brane  dimensional
interference mixing.

The ordinary (baryonic) matter is 3-mixed brane (the mixture of lepton and

quarks), consisting of one bulk space, 6 internal space dimensions, and cosmic

3

radiation in 3-brane vacuum space.  The brane dimensional interference mixing
transforming 9-brane to n-mixed brane is as follows.

(9 - n) brane space dimensions in the pre-observable brane + bulk brane
= n-mixed brane with n brane space dimensions + bulk space + (9 - n) internal
space dimensions + cosmic radiation in 3-brane vacuum

This brane dimensional interference mixing is  essentially  the  fractionalization  of
the  pre-observable  boundary  9-brane  and  the  bulk  9-brane.    The  brane  dimensional
interference  mixing  ends  with  equal  mass  proportions  of  mixed  branes  from  3  to  9
(ordinary and exotic dark matters).  All mixed branes formed in the brane dimensional
interference  mixing  occur  simultaneously,  so  superluminal  expansion  (the  inflation)  is
necessary to accommodate simultaneous  brane  dimensional  interference  mixing  of  all
high  and  low  energy  mixed  branes.  Therefore,  as  in  the  pyrotechnic  universe  model,
this cycle universe model goes through the inflation transition.

Cosmic  radiation  generated  during  the  inflation  leads  to  the  big  bang  for  the
cosmic expansion in the observable universe.  After the brane dimensional interference
mixing, the space-time in the hidden brane and the space-time in the observable brane
are  no  longer  the  same,  so  the  bulk  space  ceases  to  exist,  and  the  remaining  bulk
brane that does not involve in the collision becomes a part of the hidden brane.

Meanwhile  without  the  mixing  of  branes,  the  hidden  brane  undergoes  in  a
different kind of expansion: stepwise fractionalization.   In stepwise fractionalization, the
hidden  brane  changes  in  stepwise  manner  from  9-brane  to  3-brane,  followed  by
condensation  from  3-brane  to  9-brane  later.  The  stepwise  fractionalization  and
condensation  lead  to  a  very  slow  steady  expansion  and  contraction  without  cosmic
radiation.  The hidden brane does not have gauge force fields and matter fields.

The  observable  universe  expands  in  a  constant  rate  until  the  quintessence
transition,  when  the  hidden  brane  fractionalizes  into  3-brane,  compatible  with  the  3-
brane  vacuum  in  the  observable  universe.    The  compatibility  allows  the  hidden  brane
again generates the bulk brane as quintessence that moves to the 3-brane observable
vacuum in the observable universe, causing the late cosmic accelerating expansion in
the observable universe.  After a certain period, the cosmic cycle of franctionalization-
condensation starts the condensation phase.  The quintessence bulk 3-brane starts to
condense  into  4-brane,  incompatible  with  the  3-brane  vacuum  in  the  observable
universe.    Consequently,  quintessence  in  the  observable  universe  moves  back  to  the
bulk  space,  causing  the  cosmic  accelerating  contraction  in  the  observable  universe.
The  quintessence  transition  involves  both  the  accelerating  expansion  and  the
accelerating contraction for the observable universe.  It is also the tuning point for the
hidden universe and the quintessence bulk universe from the stepwise fractionalization
to the stepwise condensation.

When  all  quintessence  moves  back  to  the  bulk  space,  the  observable  universe
and hidden universe do not have the compatible space-time, so the bulk space ceases
to exist, and the quintessence bulk brane becomes a part of the hidden universe.  The
observable universe starts to contract in a normal rate.  At the end of  the  contraction,
the  observable  universe  becomes  essentially  a  cosmic  black  hole,  and  the  hidden

4

brane approaches to become  9-brane.    This  is  the  big  crush  transition,  the  reverse  of
the big bang.

The deflation transition, the reverse of the inflation  for  the  observable  universe,
occurs when there is simultaneous condensation process.  All lower branes condense
to  pre-observable  9-branes  and  bulk  9-branes  that  return  to  the  hidden  branes.
Meanwhile,  the  branes  in  the  hidden  universe  reaches  9-branes  through  the  stepwise
condensation.    The  cosmic  structure  again  consists  of  eleven  dimensional  space-time
with  two  boundary  9-branes  separated  by  a  finite  gap  spanning  an  intervening  bulk
volume.   A new cosmic cycle starts with the flow of the bulk 9-brane from the hidden 9-
brane  through  the  bulk  space  to  the  pre-observable  brane.    The  universe  is  a
continuous cycle of fractionalization and condensation along dimensionality.

The 3-mixed brane is the mixture of leptons and quarks.   The structure of 3-mixed
brane with space dimensions in internal space and bulk space resembles to the structure
of  atomic  orbital.    Consequently,  the  periodic  table  of  elementary  particles  can  be
constructed to account of all ordinary leptons, quarks, gauge bosons, and hadrons.  The
masses of ordinary leptons, quarks, gauge bosons, and hadrons can be calculated with
only four known constants: the number (seven) of spatial dimensions in the internal space
and  the  bulk  space,  the  mass  of  electron,  the  mass  of  Z°,  and  αe.      The  calculated
masses are in good agreement with the observed values.

2.

The Dimension Hierarchy

The  universe  is  a  continuous  cycle  of  fractionalization  and  condensation  along
dimensionality.    In  this  proposal,  energy  increases  with  dimensionality  in  a  cascade
manner.    Each  space  dimension  can  be  described  by  a  fermion  and  a  boson  as  the
following hierarchy [5]:

 

B4 F5 B5 F6 B6 F7 B7 F8 B8 F9 B9 F10 B10 F11 B11

where B and F are boson and fermion in each space-time dimension. The probability to
transforming  a  fermion  into  its  boson  partner  in  the  adjacent  dimension  is  same  as  the
fine structure constant, α, the probability of a fermion emitting or absorbing a boson.  The
probability to transforming a boson into its fermion partner in the same dimension is also
the fine structure constant, α.  This hierarchy can be expressed in term of the dimension
space-time number, D,

M D-1, B  = M D, F αD, F,

M D, F  = M D, B αD, B, 

(1)

(2)

where MD, B and MD,F  are the masses for a boson and a fermion, respectively, and αD, B
or αD,F is the fine structure constant, which is the ratio between the energies of a boson
and its fermionic partner.  All fermions and bosons are related by the order 1/α. Assuming

5

αD,B = αD,F , the relation between the bosons in the adjacent dimensions, then, can be
expressed in term of the space-time dimension number, D,

M D-1, B =  M D, B  α2 D ,

(3)

3. 

The Matter Fields and the Gauge Fields in the Ordinary Universe

The collision of the bulk 9-brane and the pre-observable boundary 9-brane leads

to the observable universe consisting of the mixed branes.  Our observable ordinary
(baryonic) universe is 3-mixed brane.  Exotic dark matter in the observable universe has
various branes from 4-mixed brane to 9-mixed brane.  It does not have the same gauge
fields as the ordinary matters, but it has the same gravity, so it cannot be seen, but can
be observed by gravity. The ordinary (baryonic) matter is one of the seven mixed
branes at equal mass proportions, so the baryonic mass fraction is calculated to be
0.14.  The universal baryonic mass fraction was found to be 0.13 by the observations of
primordial deuterium abundance [4].   The calculated value agrees well with the
observed value.

Before the brane dimensional interference mixing, the bulk brane has 10 space

dimensions, and the pre-observable brane has 10 space dimensions, so the total
number of space dimension is 20.  In order to maintain the conservation of number of
space dimensions (brane space, internal space, and bulk space dimensions), the
structure of the observable branes after the brane dimensional interference mixing has
two separate sets of 10 space dimensions.  One set is the main set with 10 space
dimensions, and the other set is the auxiliary set with 10 space dimensions.  The
auxiliary set is dependent on the main set, and the auxiliary set is derived from the main
set, so the total set appears to have 10 space dimensions.  For ordinary matter, the
main set consists of the lepton 3-brane and the 7 main space dimensions in internal-
bulk space.  The auxiliary set consists of the quark 3-brane, and the 7 auxiliary space
dimensions in internal-bulk space.  There are two separate sets of 10 space
dimensions, and the total number of space dimensions is 20.  The total set is shown in
Fig. 3.

Since the lepton 3-brane is the main brane, and the quark 3-brane is the auxiliary

brane, quarks must behave as leptons (integer charge and hypercharge) in order to be
observable.  The seven main dimensions are for all major functions, including light
leptons, dimensional fermions, gauge bosons, and gravity.   The seven auxiliary
dimensions are for mostly quarks, including quark matter field, heavy lepton (µ and τ)
matter field, and the binding energy among quarks in hadrons.

As shown in Fig. 3, in the internal-bulk space, the auxiliary space dimensions

locate in the middle of the main space dimensions.  In internal-bulk space, the seventh
main space-time dimension is marked as the start of the auxiliary space dimensions as
the fifth space-time dimension is the start of the main space dimensions, because there
is a mixing (as in the symmetry mixing in the electroweak interaction between U(1) and
SU(2)) between the fifth and the seventh main space-time dimensions. The first

6

auxiliary dimension is parallel to the seventh main space-time dimension.

The structure of 3-mixed brane with space dimensions in internal space and bulk

space resembles to the structure of atomic orbital.  Consequently, the periodic table of
elementary particles can be constructed to account of all ordinary leptons, quarks, gauge
bosons, and hadrons as described in details in Reference 5.  It is briefly reviewed here.

Each of six main spatial dimensions in internal space is represented by a gauge

field with a specific internal symmetry for specific space-time symmetry.  CP
nonconservation is required to distinguish the permanent lepton-quark composite state
from the CP symmetrical radiation that is absence of the permanent lepton-quark
composite state.  P nonconservation is required to achieve chiral symmetry for
massless leptons (neutrinos), so some of the dimensional fermions can become leptons
(neutrinos).

Various internal symmetry groups in internal-bulk space are require to organize

leptons, quarks, black hole particles, and force fields.  The force fields include the long-
range massless force to bind leptons and quarks, the short-range force to bind quarks,
and the short-range interactions for the flavor change among quarks and leptons.

Finally, the ordinary gauge bosons, leptons, and quarks absorb the common

scalar field of four-dimensional space-time to acquire the common label of four-
dimensional space-time through Higgs mechanism.   The results are the ordinary gauge
bosons (Table 1) and the periodic table of ordinary elementary particles (Table 2).

For  the  gauge  bosons,  the  seven  main  dimensions  in  internal-bulk  space  are

arranged as the below.

 

 F5 B5 F6 B6 F7 B7 F8 B8 F9 B9 F10 B10 F11 B11

where B and F are boson and fermion in each space-time dimension. The ordinary
gauge bosons can be derived from Eqs. (1) and (2).   Assuming αD,B = αD,F , the relation
between the bosons in the adjacent dimensions, then, can be expressed in term of the
dimension number, D,

where  D=  6  to  11,  and  E5,B  and  E11,B  are  the  energies  for  the  dimension  five  and  the
dimension eleven, respectively.

The lowest  energy is the Coulombic field, E5,B

M D-1, B =  M D, B  α2 D ,

(3)

E 5, B  = α M6,F
= α Me,

(4)

where Me is the  rest  energy  of  electron,  and  α  =  αe  ,  the  fine  structure  constant  for  the
magnetic  field.    The  bosons  generated  are  called  "dimensional  bosons"  or  "BD".    Using
only αe, the mass of electron, the mass of Z 
dimensions in internal-bulk space, the masses of BD as the ordinary gauge boson can be
calculated as shown in Table 1.

0, and the number (seven) of spatial

7

Table 1.  The Energies of the Dimensional Bosons
BD = dimensional boson, α = αe

BD MD

GeV

2 cos θw

B5

B6

B7

B8

Me α
Me/α
M6/αw

M7/α2

M8/α2
B9
B10 M9/α2
B11 M10/α2

3.7x10-6

7x10-2

91.177

1.7x106

3.2x1010

6.0x1014
1.1x1019

π1/2
0
ZL

XR

XL

0
ZR
G

Ordinary
gauge boson
A

Interaction, symmetry

electromagnetic, U(1)

strong, SU(3)

weak (left), SU(2)L

CP (right) nonconservation,
U(1)R
CP (left) nonconservation, U(1)L

weak (right), SU(2)R
gravity, space-time

In Table 1, αw is not same as α of the rest, because there is a mixing between B5

and B7 as the symmetry mixing between U(1) and SU(2) in the standard theory of the
electroweak interaction, and sinθw is not equal to 1.  As shown in Reference 5, B5, B6, B7,
B8, B9, and B10 are A (massless photon), π1/2, ZL
responsible for the electromagnetic field, the strong interaction, the weak (left handed)
interaction, the CP (right handed) nonconservation, the CP (left handed)
nonconservation, and the P (right handed) nonconservation, respectively.  The calculated
value for θw is 29.690 in good agreement with 28.70 for the observed value of θw [6].   The
calculated energy for B11 is 1.1x1019 GeV in good agreement with the Planck mass,
1.2x1019 GeV.

0, XR, XL, and ZR

0, respectively,

The calculated masses of all ordinary gauge bosons are in good agreement with

the observed values.  Most importantly, the calculation shows that exactly seven main
spatial dimensions in internal and bulk space are needed for all fundamental interactions.
The two sets of seven spatial dimensions in internal-bulk space result in 14 spatial
dimensions (Fig. 3) for gauge bosons, leptons, and quarks.   Quarks and heavy leptons (µ
and τ) are in seven auxiliary spatial dimensions.  The periodic table for ordinary
elementary particles is shown in Table 2.

8

Lepton 3-brane
                 νe         e        νµ                                    ντ                  l9                l10
    

                           µ7     τ7

                                        µ8

           D  =  5          6 
    

 7                   
a  =                          0    1      2     3     4      5  0      1     2
  
                                     d7      s7        c7   b7     t7          b8       t8
                                    u7
      u5       d6            3µ

 
  

                        µ′                   q9          q10

         8               9       10       11

Quark 3-brane

Fig. 3.  Ordinary leptons and quarks in the dimensional orbits
D = main dimensional number, a = auxiliary dimensional number

Table 2.  The Periodic Table of ordinary elementary particles
D = dimensional number, a = auxiliary dimensional number

D

a = 0

1

2

a = 0

1

2

3

4

5

Lepton
l5 = νe
l6 = e
l7 = νµ
l8 = ντ
l9
F10
F11

5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Quark
q5 = u5 = 3νe
q6 = d6 = 3e
q7 = 3µ
q8 = µ'
q9

τ7

µ7
µ8

u7/d7 s7
t8
b8

c7

b7

t7

Boson
B5 = A
B6 = π1/2
0
B7 = ZL
B8 = XR
B9 = XL
0
B10 = ZR
B11 = G

D is the dimensional orbital number for the seven main spatial dimensions in
internal-bulk space.  The auxiliary dimensional orbital number, a, is for the seven auxiliary
spatial dimensions, mostly for subquarks.   All ordinary gauge bosons, leptons, and
subquarks are located on the seven dimensional orbits and seven auxiliary orbits.  Most
leptons are dimensional fermions, while all quarks are the sums of subquarks.

The  fermion  mass  formula  for  massive  leptons  and  quarks  is  derived  from

Reference 5 as follows.

M

F

,
aD

=

∑

M

+

M

F

D

0,

AF

,
aD

=

∑

M

F

D

0,

M

B

−

D

0,1

=

∑

M

F

D

0,

M

F

D

0,

α
D

+

+

3

2
3

2

   (5)

a

∑

a

=

0

4

a

a

∑

a

=

0

4

a

9

Each  fermion  can  be  defined  by  dimensional  numbers  (D's)  and  auxiliary  dimensional
numbers (a's).  The compositions and calculated masses of ordinary leptons and quarks
are listed in Table 3.

Table 3.   The Compositions and the Constituent Masses of Ordinary Leptons and Quarks
D = dimensional number and a = auxiliary dimensional number

Composition

Calc. Mass

Leptons
νe
e
νµ
ντ
µ
τ
Quarks
u
d
s
c
b
t

Da
Da for leptons
50
60
70
80
60 + 70 + 71
60 + 70 + 72
Da for quarks
50 + 70 + 71
60 + 70 + 71
60 + 70 + 72
50 + 70 + 73
60 + 70 + 74
50 + 70 + 75 + 80 + 82

νe
e
νµ
ντ
e + νµ  + µ7
e + νµ  + τ7

u5 + q7 + u7
d6 + q7 + d7
d6 + q7 + s7
u5 + q7 + c7
d6 + q7 + b7
u5 + q7 + t7  + q8 + t8

 0
0.51  MeV (given)
 0
 0
105.6 MeV
1786  MeV

330.8 MeV
332.3 MeV
558   MeV
1701  MeV
5318  MeV
176.5 GeV

The calculated masses are in good agreement with the observed constituent
masses of ordinary leptons and quarks [7,8].  The mass of the top quark found by Collider
Detector Facility is 176 ± 13 GeV [7] in a good agreement with the calculated value, 176.5
GeV.   The calculated masses are in good agreement with the observed values.   As
shown in Reference 5, the masses of hadrons can also be calculated based on binding
energy derived from the auxiliary space dimensions.  The calculated values for the
masses of hadrons are in good agreement with the observed values.  Most importantly,
the calculation shows that exactly seven auxiliary spatial dimensions are needed for all
leptons and quarks.

4.

The Quintessence

The observable universe expands in a constant rate until the quintessence
transition, when the hidden brane fractionalizes into 3-brane.  During the quintessence
transition, the quintessence bulk brane (quintessence) moves to the 3-brane observable
vacuum in the observable universe, causing the late cosmic accelerating expansion in
the observable universe.

The  evidence  for  late-time  cosmic  accelerating  expansion  is  from  the  recent
observations  of  large-scale  structure  that  suggests  that  the  universe  is  undergoing
cosmic accelerating expansion, and it is assumed that the universe is dominated by a

10

dark energy with negative pressure recently [9].  The dark energy can be provided by a
non-vanishing cosmological  constant  or  quintessence  [10],  a  scalar  field  with  negative
pressure.    However,  a  cosmological  constant  requires  extremely  fine-tuned  [11].
Quintessence requires an explanation for the late- time cosmic accelerating expansion
[12].    Why  does  quintessence  dominate  the  universe  only  recently?      One  of  the
explanations is the k-essence model where the pressure of quintessence switched to a
negative value at the onset of matter-domination in the universe [12].

According to the proposal, this late-time cosmic accelerating expansion is

caused by the quintessence, the quintessence bulk 3-brane, moving to the four
dimensional observable vacuum in the observable universe. From Eqs (1) and (2) and
Table 1, the energies of the five dimensional fermion and the four dimensional boson
are calculated to be 2.72 x10-8 GeV and 1.99 x10-10 GeV, respectively.  The energy of
the eleven dimensional supermembrane is 1.1x1019 GeV from Table 1.  The energy ratio
between the eleven dimensional supermembrane and the five dimensional fermion and
the four dimensional boson are 4.17 x1026 and 5.71 x1028, respectively.   In other words,
there are 4.17 x1026 five dimensional fermions and 5.71 x1028 four-dimensional bosons
per eleven dimensional supermembrane. The rate of the stepwise fractionalization is
assumed to be 5.39 x10-44 second, that is Tp
4 where Mp is the Planck mass.)  The total time for the
vacuum energy is equal to Mp
fractionalization is 0.2 billion years to generate all five dimensional fermions, and 27.6
billion years to generate all four-dimensional bosons.  Therefore, the quintessence input
starts in 0.2 billion years after the Big Bang, and ends in 27.6 billions years, and
quintessence input causes accelerating expansion in the observable universe.

1/4 where Tp is the Planck time. (The

At the end of cosmic accelerating expansion in the observable universe, the

quintessence in the observable universe moves back to the quintessence bulk space,
causing the cosmic accelerating contraction in the observable universe.  It is the
reverse quintessence transition.  It is the start of the contraction for the observable
universe, and the gradual condensation (stepwise changing from 3-brane to 9-brane)
for the quintessence bulk brane and the hidden brane.

5.

The Fractionalization-condensation in quantum mechanics

The  study  of  semi-conductor  crystals  at 

the
fractionalization  of  electron  in  the  form  of  a  separation  of  spin  and  charge  or  literal
fractionalization of electric charge [13].  H. J. Maris also found a way to break electron
into  quasi-electrons  in  liquid  helium  [14].    This  spontaneous  tendency  for  an  object  to
fractionalize is the base to interpret quantum mechanics.

temperature  shows 

low 

The three most important non-classical features in quantum mechanics are the

nonlocal operation, the interference effect, and the collapse of wavefunction.  In this
proposal, the base of quantum mechanics is the spontaneous tendency for an object to
fractionalize into quasistates and condense quasistates. This quasistate is equivalent to
the eigenfunction in the wavefunction.  An object with the fractionalization-condensation is
equivalent to the unitary wavefunction.  All quasistates during fractionalization can
communicate with one another to preserve the integrity of the object regardless of

11

distance, implying nonlocal operation.  The integrity of an object is equivalent to the
unitary in the wavefunction.  In the wavefunction, all eigenfunctions can communicate with
one another.  There is no time in the wavefunction at a fundamental level.   The
combination of the fractionalization and the integrity leads to nonlocality in quantum
mechanics.

At the same time, all quasitates during condensation overlap with one another

because they are originally from one source.   The combination of the condensation and
the integrity results in interference effect in quantum mechanics.

The disruption of the fractionalization-condensation is equivalent to the collapse of

wavefunction.  When the fractionalization-condensation is disrupted externally by the
interaction with environment  [15] or measurement, or is disrupted by internal
transformation, such as decay, an object loses the fractionalization-condensation
(nonlocality-interference).  Therefore, when an object is isolated and stable, the object
has nonlocality-interference.   When an object is not isolated and stable, the object loses
nonlocality-interference, and becomes a classical object instead of quantum object.
The cosmic origin of quantum mechanics is derived from the simultaneous
fractionalization-condensation in the observable universe.  During the inflation, the pre-
observable 9-branes fractionalize into various lower branes simultaneously and
instantly.  During the deflation, various lower branes condense into 9-branes
simultaneously and instantly.   The cosmic inflation and the cosmic deflation lead to the
microscopic instant fractionalization-condensation that allows all quasistates from an
object to appear simultaneously.

6.

Conclusion

The cyclic universe is based on the ekpyrotic universe and the pyrotechnic
universe models. The modification involves the replacement of two boundary 3-branes
and one bulk 3-brane in a five-dimensional space-time in the ekpyrotic universe model
by the two boundary 9-branes (the pre-observable boundary 9-brane and the hidden
boundary 9-brane) and one bulk 9-brane in eleven-dimensional space-time.  As in the
pyrotechnic universe model, there is the inflation.  Furthermore, the cosmological model
is the cyclic universe based on the cosmic cycle of the fractionalization and
condensation.  The cyclic universe goes through the six transitions: the triplet universe,
the inflation, the big bang, the quintessence, the big crush, and the deflation.

The structure of matter derived from the cyclic universe model provides the base
for the periodic table of ordinary elementary particles.  The baryonic mass fraction and the
masses  of  ordinary  elementary  particles  and  hadrons  can  be  calculated  with  only  four
known constants: the number (seven) of spatial dimensions in the internal space and the
bulk space, the mass of electron, the mass of Z°, and αe.   The calculated masses are in
good agreement with the observed values.
 
cascade supersymmetry where energy increases with dimensionality in a cascade
manner.  There is no compacification.  The spatial dimensions that greater than 3 exist

In this proposal, there is no supersymmetry breaking.  Supersymmetry itself is a

12

in internal-bulk space.  Instead of beginning and end, there is a continuous cosmic
cycle of fractionalization and condensation.

References

[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]

J. Khoury, B. A. Ovrut, P. J. Steinhardt, and N. Turok, hep-th/0103239
R. Kallosh, L. Kofman, and A. Linde, hep-th/0104073
L. Randall and R. Sundrum, Nucl. Phys. B557 (1999) 79: Phys. Rev. Lett. 83
(1999) 3370: Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999) 4690
D. Tytler, S. Burles, L. Lu, X-M, Fan, A. Wolfe, and B. Savage, AJ, 117 (1999) 63;
F. C. van den Bosch, A. Burkert, and R. A. Swaters, astro-ph/0105082
D. Chung, hep-ph/0003237.
P. Langacher, M. Luo , and A. Mann, Rev. Mod. Phys. 64 (1992) 87.
CDF Collaboration, 1995 Phys. Rev. Lett 74 (1995) 2626.
C.P. Singh, Phys. Rev. D24 (1981) 2481; D. B. Lichtenberg Phys. Rev. D40
(1989) 3675.
N. Balcall, J.P. Ostriker, S. Perlmutter, and P.J. Steinhardt, Science 284, 1481-
1488, (1999).

[10] R.R. Caldwell, R. Dave, and P.J. Steinhardt, Phys.Rev.Lett.80, 1582 (1998).
[11]

J.D. Barrow & F.J. Tipler, The Antropic Cosmological Principle, Oxford UP (1986)
p.668.

[12] C. Armedariz-Picon, V. Mukhanov, and P.J. Steinhardt, Phys.Rev.Lett.85, 4438

(2000).

[13] P.W. Anderson, Science, 235, 1196 (1087); P. A. Lee and N. Nagaosa, Phys. Rev.

B45, 966 (1992); T. Senthil and Matthew P.A. Fisher, cond-mat/0011345

[14] H.J. Maris, J. Low Temp Phys. 120, 173 (2000)
E. Joos quant-ph/9908008; quant-ph/9803052
[15]

13

