A SHAKY ROAD TO SUBNANOMETER BEAMS.  
NLC GROUND MOTION, VIBRATION AND STABILIZATION STUDIES1 
 
Andrei Seryi, SLAC, Stanford, USA 
 

The  integrated  spectrum  over  a  particular  frequency 
band  gives  the  corresponding  RMS  motion.  It  is  easy  to 
see that the natural ground motion is quite small, as low as 
a  fraction  of  a  nanometer,  for  frequencies  higher  than 
several Hz (see Figure 2). 

Abstract 

Ground motion and vibration can be a limiting factor in 
the  performance  of  future  linear  colliders.  Investigations 
of ground motion have been carried out around the world 
for  several  decades.  In  this  review,  results  of  recent 
investigations  of  ground  motion  as  well  as  ongoing 
developments of stabilization methods are presented.  

1  GROUND MOTION STUDIES 
Ground motion can conveniently be divided into ‘fast’ 
and  ‘slow’  when  studying  its  effect  on  a  linear  collider. 
Fast motion (f > a few Hz) cannot be adequately corrected 
by  a  pulse-to-pulse  feedback  operating  at  the  repetition 
rate  of  the  collider  and  therefore  primarily  causes  beam 
offsets  at  the  IP.  Slow  motion  can  be  compensated  by 
feedback and thus results only in beam emittance growth. 
Another  consideration 
that 
produces  relative  displacements  is  different  (discussed 
below)  for  slow  and  fast  motion  with  a  boundary 
occurring somewhere in a milli-Hz range.  

the  mechanism 

that 

is 

 
Figure  2:  Ground  motion  measured  in  Hiidenvesi  cave 
showing the amplitude for different frequency bands [5]. 

The  motion  in  the  low  frequency  bands  in  Figure  2  is 
much  larger,  the  order  of  a  micrometer,  however  it  is 
important  to  emphasize  that  the  amplitude  shown  is 
absolute, i.e. it is the motion of a single point with respect 
to  an  inertial  reference  frame.  What  is  important  for  a 
linear  collider  is  the  relative  motion  of  two  quadrupoles 
separated by distances less than the betatron wavelength. 

 
Figure  1:  Power  spectrum  of  absolute  ground  motion 
measured in different sites [1,2,3,4,5]. 

Fast  motion  is  typically  represented  by  a  power 
spectrum  as  shown  in  Figure  1.  The  power  spectrum  of 
absolute  displacement  generally  follows  a  1/ω4  behavior 
on  top  of  which  are  added  the  particular signatures from 
the  contribution  of  different  sources.  For  example, 
cultural noise (human produced) typically manifests itself 
above  1  Hz.  Motion  from  ocean  waves  causes  a  peak 
around 0.14 Hz.  

                                                           
1 Work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Contract DE-AC03-76SF00515. 

 
Figure  3:  Example  of  correlation  measured  in  the  SLC 
tunnel for 100 m separation between probes [4]. 

Correlation  measurements  have  shown  [1,2,4]  that 
natural  ground  motion  consists  mostly  of  elastic  waves 
with  a  wavelength  given  by  the  phase  velocity  in  the 
media. The slowest band of ‘fast’ motion has quite a long 
wavelength and is therefore highly correlated (see Figure 
3) and does not cause harmful effects on a linear collider. 
In  the  NLC,  the  tolerance  on  jitter  in  the  position  of 
elements  varies  significantly.  The  tolerance  for  the  Final 
Doublet  (FD)  is  a  fraction  of  the  beam  size  at  the  IP, 
around  1  nm.  Some  of  the  quadrupoles  in  the  beam 
delivery system have very tight tolerances as well, on the 
order of 5-10 nm. The jitter tolerances for the main linac 
quadrupoles are also of the order of 10 nm, since there are 
many  of  them.  The  relevant  frequency  range  for  these 
tolerances  is  determined  by  the  beam-based  feedback 
which  would  effectively  compensate  for  motion  slower 
than  about  1/20  of  the  repetition  rate;  for  the  JLC/NLC 
design, the frequency band of concern is f > 6 Hz. More 
detailed  evaluations  of  tolerances  are  given  in  the  next 
section.  

that  the  NLC  detector  must  be  designed  carefully  with  a 
goal  of  minimizing  vibration.  Moreover,  all  of  the 
the 
support  equipment 
conventional 
accelerator will have to satisfy vibration criteria. 

facilities 

for 

The  fast  motion  and  vibration  discussed  above  is  not 
the only issue for a linear collider. Ground motion below 
0.01  Hz  or  so,  in  spite  of  being  very  slow,  can  have  a 
rather  short  wavelength,  causing  misalignments  of  the 
collider  and  producing  emittance  growth.  This  motion  is 
not wave-like and can be inelastic. There are two types of 
motion  –  one  is  diffusive  and  another  is  systematic.  The 
model  for  the  diffusive  motion  parameterizes  the  RMS 
relative  misalignment  as  an  ATL  law  [2,8]:  ∆X2  =  ATL 
where  T  is  the  time  since  perfect  alignment  and  L  is  the 
distance between points.  

The  parameter  A  varies  by  a  few  orders  of  magnitude 
when measured in different places and is clearly site and 
geology  dependent.  For  example,  measurements  at  the 
DESY site gave a value of A = 10-5 µm2/m/s [9] while in a 
tunnel  built  in  rock  in  Japan,  A  =  2*10-9  µm2/m/s.  The 
latter measurements also showed an increase in the value 
of  A  when  blasting  was  used  for  the  tunnel  construction 
[10].  For  diffusive  motion  with  a  value  of  A  =  5*10-7 
µm2/m/s, similar to observations at SLAC in the SLC and 
FFTB  tunnels  [11,7],  the  linear  collider  would  require 
continuous beam based alignment on a time scale of every 
30 minutes in order to prevent emittance growth. 

 
Figure 4: Integrated spectrum of absolute motion in SLC 
sector  10  compared  with  the  motion  near  the  SLD 
detector  for  a  variety  of  situations.  The  top  curves  show 
motion on the SLD with and without the electronic racks 
on. The lower curves show the noise on the pit floor under 
nominal conditions and when most of the noise sources in 
the  building  were  turned  off  (SLD  door  opened,  most  of 
on-SLD racks turned off) [6]. 

From  these  considerations,  one  can  conclude  that 
natural fast ground motion does not represent a limitation 
for  a  linear collider (for present parameters) and the real 
concern is cultural noise produced in the vicinity, whether 
external  or  internal  to  the  tunnel  or  vibrations  produced 
on  the  accelerator  girder  itself.  An  example  of  cultural 
noise  is  shown  in  Figure  4  where  the  noise  measured  on 
the floor of the SLC collider hall and on the SLD detector 
is  shown  in  comparison  with  a  quiet  location  at  SLAC. 
Most  of  the  noise  is  produced  by  very  local  sources  – 
building  ventilation,  nearby  compressors,  etc.  –  and  by 
various  equipment  mounted  on  the  SLD  itself.  It is clear 

 

Figure 5: Horizontal  X and vertical motion of the center of 
the  3  km  SLAC  tunnel  with  respect  to  its  ends  plotted 
along with external atmospheric pressure [7]. 

Recent  measurements  at  SLAC  have  shown  that  the 
value  of  A  can  depend  on  changes  in  atmospheric 
pressure  acting  on  the  ground  [7].  Figure  5  shows  data 
taken  in  the  3  km  SLAC  tunnel  over  a  period  of  one 
month.  There  is  a  clear  tidal  component  seen  in  the 
transverse  motion  of  the  tunnel  and  there  is  a  clear 
correlation  of  the  motion  with  external  atmospheric 
pressure.  This  correlation  was  observed  over  a  wide 
frequency  band  (3E-6  –  1E-3  Hz)  where  the  power 
spectrum of the tunnel motion behaved as 1/ω2 (the same 
as the ATL law) and thus the value of A could be derived. 

The  spectrum  of  atmospheric  pressure  was  found  to 
behave  in  a  similar  way  (also  as  1/ω2)  and  its  amplitude 
Ap was surprisingly correlated with A as shown in Fig.6. 

The observation that the deformation of the linac tunnel 
is  correlated  with  atmospheric  pressure  variation  [7]  can 
be  explained  by  assuming  that  the  pressure  acts  on  the 
ground  whose  properties  vary  along  the  linac.  This 
variation  can  be  due  to  changes  in  the  Young’s  modulus 
E,  changes  in  the  topology  of  the  surface,  or  changes  in 
the  characteristic  depth  of  the  softer  surface  layers.  It  is 
worth  noting  that  in  this  case  the  atmosphere-driven 
contribution  to  A  scales  as  1/E2  and  therefore  depends 
strongly  on  geology  which  may  be partly responsible for 
the large variation of A observed in different places. 

The ground motion model for the SLAC site [13] uses 
measurements of fast motion taken at night in sector 10 of 
the  SLAC  linac  [4].  Figure  7  shows  the  spectrum  of 
absolute  and  relative  motion  for  this  model.  To  evaluate 
different  levels  of  cultural  noise,  we  augment  this  model 
to  include  two  other  cases  with  significantly  higher  and 
lower  noise  contributions.  The  measured  spectra  and  the 
approximations used in the models are shown in Figure 1.  
The  “HERA  model”  is  based  on  measurements  in 
DESY [3] and corresponds to a very noisy shallow tunnel 
located  in  a  highly  populated  area  where  no  precautions 
were  taken  to  reduce  the  contribution  of  various  noise 
sources in the vicinity or in the tunnel. The “LEP model” 
corresponds to a deep tunnel where the noise level is very 
close  to  the  natural  seismic  level,  without  additional 
cultural  sources  outside  or  inside  of  the  tunnel.  The 
“SLAC  model”  represents  a  shallow  tunnel  located  in  a 
moderately populated area. 

 

Figure  6:  Parameter  A  of  the  ATL  law  defined  from 
tunnel  plotted  against  the 

vertical  motion  of  SLC 
amplitude Ap of the atmospheric pressure spectrum [7]. 

Very slow ground motion can also be systematic in time 
over  periods  of  months  to  years.  Such  motion  has  been 
observed at SLAC, CERN and other places [12]. In some 
cases such motion can also be described by a simple rule 
for its RMS relative misalignment [13]: ∆X2 = AST2L with 
another  site-specific  coefficient  AS.  At  SLAC  it  appears 
that  the  systematic  motion  dominates  on  a  time  scale 
greater  than  105  seconds. Studies to investigate this slow 
ground motion in more detail are currently in progress at 
many different laboratories. 

2  MODELING 
In  order  to  accurately  characterize  the  influence  of 
ground  motion  on  a  linear  collider,  a  comprehensive 
mathematical  model  is  required.  Such  a  model  would 
temporal  and  spatial 
include  understanding  of 
properties  of  the  motion  and  of  the  driving  mechanisms. 
In most cases an adequate representation for such a model 
consists  of  the  2-D  power  spectrum  P(ω,k)  based  on 
measured spectra of absolute motion and correlation. 

the 

 
Figure 7: Measured (points) and modeling spectrum p(ω) 
of  absolute  motion  for    the  2  AM  SLAC  ground  motion 
model  [4,13].  The  lower  curves  show  the  spectra  of 
relative motion p(ω,L)/2 for different separation L.  

As  an  example  of  how  such  models  can  be  used,  a 
comparison  of  the  performance  of  the  NLC  Final  Focus 
for different ground motion models is shown in Figure 8. 
One can see that a site located in a highly populated area 
without  proper  vibration  sensitive  engineering  would 
present significant difficulties for a linear collider with the 
parameters considered. Stabilization of more components 
than just the final doublet would be necessary. A site with 
noise  similar  to  the  “SLAC  model”  would  certainly  be 
suitable,  while  the  “LEP  model”  would  be  suitable  even 
for much more ambitious beam parameters. These results 
should  not  be  considered  as  an  attempt  to  evaluate  any 
particular  site,  or  even  the  models,  because  for  a  fully 
consistent  assessment,  various  in-tunnel  noise  sources  as 
well  as  vibration  compensation  methods  must  be 
considered as an integrated system.  

The  SLAC  ground  motion  model  includes  all  of  the 
features that are presently known, including wave motion, 

diffusive  motion  and  systematic  motion.  Figure  9  shows 
how  these  types  of  motion  affect  the  behavior  of  RMS 
relative  misalignment  over  time.  One  can  see  that  this 
curve can be divided into three regions: wave dominated, 
ATL-dominated and systematic motion dominated. 

met  without  additional  active  measures.  Several  methods 
are  being  developed  to  provide  the  necessary  relative 
stability  for  the  final  doublet,  among  them  position 
stabilization  via  feedback  and  correction of the magnetic 
center  position  with  dipole  coils  via  feedforward.  Both 
methods would rely on either inertial measurements of the 
motion  by  seismometers  or  on  optical  interferometric 
measurements of their position with respect to each other 
or to stable ground under the detector (“Optical anchor”).  

 
Figure  8:  Integrated  spectral  contribution  to  the  RMS 
equilibrium IP beam offset for the NLC Final Focus with 
final  doublets  supports  at  ±8  m  for  different  models  of 
ground  motion.  Dashed  curves  correspond  to  the  case 
when the relative motion of the FDs is eliminated [14]. 

3  STABILIZATION METHODS 
For  the  NLC,  the  ground  motion  and  vibration  issues 
have  been  systematically  addressed  by  proper  design, 
careful  consideration  of  sites  and  geology,  and  by 
development of appropriate stabilization methods. 

An important issue for the NLC design is the location. 
An  ideal  site  should  have  little  external  cultural  noise, 
now  or  in  the  future.  Solid  rock  is  the  preferred 
surrounding  media  since  fast  motion  will  be  better 
correlated  and  slow  motion  will  be  reduced.  In  real  life 
the  proximity  to  an  existing  major  laboratory would also 
be  a  great  advantage.  This  proximity  would  not 
necessarily  mean  compromising  the  other  requirements 
since a deep tunnel version of the NLC could have good 
geology and low noise and still be located near an existing 
lab. This is true for all of the deep tunnel NLC locations 
that have been considered in both Illinois and California.  
Of course a good site alone is not sufficient, the noise 
generated  by  the  linear  collider  equipment  itself  and  by 
conventional  facilities  equipment  must  be  appropriately 
controlled  and  minimized  (by  design  and  by  further 
passive  or  active  damping).  This  would  allow  the 
tolerances  to  be  met  without  any  additional  active 
stabilization  or  correction  techniques  for  all  of  the 
focusing  and  accelerating  elements  of  the  linear  collider 
with the only exception being the final doublet.  

Though 

the  NLC  detector  must  be  designed 

to 
minimize  vibrations,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  tolerances  for 
the  final  quadrupoles  mounted  on  the  detector  could  be 

 

 

Figure 9: RMS relative motion versus time for two points 
separated by 30 m for the 2 AM SLAC site ground motion 
model [13]. 

The “Optical anchor” developed first at SLAC [15] and 
now  being  expanded  at  UBC  [21]  has  demonstrated  a 
resolution of about 0.2 nm [15] which would be more than 
sufficient for measuring the position of the FD. 

Figure  10:  Integrated  spectrum  measured  on  the  floor 
(ch0)  and  on  top  of  a  1500  kg  PEP-II  quadrupole  (ch1) 
stabilized  with  the  use  of  three  STACIS  vibration 
insulation stands [18,20]. 

An attempt to stabilize the position of a quadrupole was 
made  at  DESY  as  part  of  the  S-Band  linear  collider 
project [16]. In this case a single seismometer and a single 
piezo-mover  were  used  to  stabilize  the  effective  position 
of the quadrupole center. A reduction of RMS motion by 

a factor of 3 was achieved (from 100 nm to about 30 nm 
for frequencies higher than a few Hz).  

Another attempt at inertial stabilization was performed 
at  SLAC  using  three  commercial  STACIS  insulation 
stands  now  produced  by  TMC  [17]  to  stabilize  the 
position  of  a 1500 kg PEP-II quadrupole [18,20]. In this 
case the floor motion was reduced by about a factor of 20 
(from 40 nm to 2 nm for f > 2 Hz). However, additional 
slow  noise  of  the  order  of  200  nm  was  introduced  (see 
Figure  10)  and  the  performance  in  the  horizontal  plane 
was not as satisfactory.  

 

Figure 11: Simulated performance of the fast intra-bunch 
feedback  showing  the  capture  transient  for  an  initial 
beam-beam  offset  of  about  three  sigma.  The  upper  plot 
shows the position of the beams at the IP. The lower plot 
shows  the  position  of  the  outgoing  beam  at  the  BPM 
(blue), the analog response of the BPM processor (green), 
and  the  kicker  drive  signal,  in  arbitrary  units  (red). 
Essentially full luminosity is restored in 42 ns [24]. 

These first examples of inertial stabilization (or inertial 
sensing  for  feedforward)  do  not  satisfy  the  requirements 
for  NLC.  In  a  real  collider,  the  system  must  detect  and 
appropriately  minimize  motion  of  two  extended  and 
the 
separated  FDs  without  excessively  disturbing 
correlation  with  the  rest  of  machine.  In  addition,  the 
system  must  work  in  an  external  magnetic  field  and  it 
must  be  compact  and  reliable.  R&D  to  address  these 
issues  will  continue  at  SLAC  and  in  other  laboratories 
[21,22,23]. 

In  addition  to  the  beam  independent  methods  of  IR 
stabilization,  beam  based  methods  are  also  being 
developed, in particular a fast correction within the bunch 
train. The intra-train feedback will use a position monitor 
(BPM) near the IP to detect the offset of the first bunches 
of the train. The signal is the beam-beam deflection due to 
the  relative  offset  of  the  beams  and  fast  kickers  are  then 
used  to  correct  the  rest  of  the  bunch  train.  Recent 
preliminary  evaluation  indicates  that  such  system  is 
technically feasible with available components and could 
provide  efficient  capture  of  beams  with  several  sigma 

[24].  This  would  significantly 

offset 
the 
requirements on incoming beam jitter and on stabilization 
of  the  FD.  Further  R&D  will  concentrate  on  a  technical 
demonstration of this system.  

reduce 

 

CONCLUSION 
Ground  motion  and  vibration  are  important  issues  for 
any  future  linear  collider  and they have been extensively 
studied  and modelled at different laboratories around the 
world.  In  this  paper,  we  have  outlined  our  present 
understanding  of 
the  ground  motion  and  vibration 
problem  and  described  the  models  used  to  evaluate  the 
effects.  We  have  also  discussed  the  ongoing  efforts  on 
stabilization  techniques  that  are  being  pursued  by  the 
NLC group. 

The  review  presented  is  certainly  just  a  brief  snapshot 
of  this  very  actively  developing  field.  To  get  a  broader 
picture  of  the  issues,  including  discussion  of  similar 
problems  in  circular  accelerators  as  well  as  in  non-
accelerator  experiments,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the 
proceedings  of  the  recent  ICFA  Workshop  on  Ground 
Motion held at SLAC in November 2000 [19].  

This  paper  summarizes  results  obtained  by  many 
people from laboratories throughout the world. The author 
would like to acknowledge all of their contributions.  

REFERENCES 

[1]  B. Baklakov, et al. Tech. Phys. 38, 894 (1993). 
[2]  V.M. Juravlev et al. CERN-SL-93-53. 
[3]  C.Montag, V. Shiltsev, et al., DESY HERA 95-06, 1995. 
[4]  NLC ZDR Design Group, SLAC Report-474 (1996). 
[5]  V.M. Juravlev et al. HU-SEFT R 1995-01. 
[6]  A.Seryi, M. Breidenbach, J. Frisch, SLAC-PUB-8594. 
[7]  A.Seryi, SLAC-PUB-8597, 2000. 
[8]  V. Shiltsev, in Proc. IWAA95, KEK-95-12, 1995. 
[9]  R.Brinkmann,  J.Rossbach,  Nucl.  Inst.  Meth.  Phys.  Res. 

[10]  S.Takeda,  et  al.,  KEK  Prepr.  99-135,  in  Proc.  IWAA 

Sect. A 350, 8 (1994). 

1999. 

[11]  R.Assmann,  et al. SLAC-PUB-7303, 1996. 
[12]  R.Pitthan, SLAC-PUB-7043, SLAC-PUB-8286, 1995, 99. 
[13]  A.Seryi, T.Raubenheimer, SLAC-PUB-8595, 2000. 
[14]  A.Seryi, et al, SLAC-PUB-8596, 2000. 
[15]  M.Woods,  in  Proceed.  of  LC97  Workshop,  Zvenigorod, 

1997, vol.3, p.1591. 

[16]  C.Montag, DESY-97-030, Feb. 1997. 
[17]  TMC,  http://www.techmfg.com/  STACIS  piezoelectric 
active vibration isolation system with inertial feedback. 
[18]  G.Bowden, G.Mazaheri, NLC ME Note 7-96, June 1996. 
[19]  Proceedings  of  22nd  Advanced  ICFA  Beam  Dynamics 
Workshop  on  Ground  Motion  in  Future  Accelerators, 
November 6-9 2000, SLAC-WP-18, 2001. 

[20]  G.Bowden  et  al.,  Tests  of  STACIS  at  SLAC,  in  SLAC-

[21]  T.Mattison,  Vibration  suppression  R&D  at  UBC,  in 

[22]  J.Frisch  et  al.,  Vibration  suppression  R&D  at  SLAC,  in 

WP-18, 2001. 

SLAC-WP-18, 2001. 

SLAC-WP-18, 2001. 

[23]  CLIC stability studies, http://clic-stability.web.cern.ch/ 
[24]  S.Smith, LCC Note 0056, March 2001, SLAC. 

