28.05.01   18:09   R E Zimmermann: URAM 11/2001

1

Beyond the Physics of Logic:
Aspects of Transcendental Materialism or
URAM in a Modern View

Rainer E. Zimmermann

IAG Philosophische Grundlagenprobleme,
FB 1, UGH, Nora-Platiel-Str. 1, D – 34127 Kassel /
Clare Hall, UK – Cambridge CB3 9AL1 /
Lehrgebiet Philosophie, FB 13 AW, FH,
Lothstr. 34, D – 80335 Muenchen2
e-mail: pd00108@mail.lrz-muenchen.de

Abstract

It  has been  shown  at  other  occasions  [1]  that  recent  results  of  modern  physics
can be used to shed some more light onto the foundations of the world, provided
the actual task of philosophy is being re-interpreted in terms of a theory which is
following up the results of science rather than laying the grounds for the latter,
contrary to what the original intention of Aristotelian prima philosophia would
imply. As it turns out, the interpretation of the main results of present research
dealing  with  aspects  of  quantum  information  theory  and  quantum  gravity,  re-
spectively,  as  well  as  with  self-organized  criticality,  suffices  to  re-construct  a
large  class  of  phenomena  not  only  within  the  field  of  physics  proper,  but  also
within chemistry, biology, and even the social sciences. As seen under a philo-
sophical perspective, it can be shown that the general conceptualization of such
a unified view of the world has been prepared on a long line of thought which
begins  with  the  Greek  Stoá  and  leads  up  to  the  theories  of  Spinoza,  Schelling
and Bloch as some of its representatives, eventually showing up in a somewhat
modified  form  in  what  can  be  called  transcendental  materialism  today.  [2]  As
seen under the physical perspective however, it can be demonstrated how a phi-
losophy re-interpreted in the above-mentioned sense can unfold a heuristic po-
tential  which  is  able  to  produce  guidelines  of  orientation  as  to  deciding  about
competing  concepts  in  physics.  [3]  On  the  other  hand,  such  a  philosophy  can
also  hint  towards  what  science  cannot  deal  with  at  all,  pointing  to  what  is
beyond  the  scientifically  treatable.  We  show  that  questions  of  ultimate  reality
and meaning can only be answered within a framework of speculative philoso-
phy  which  is  rooted  though  in  what  sceptic  philosophy  is  able  to  derive  from
scientific results. Hence, cataleptic phantasy is what is asked for, but this is not

                                                          
1 Permanent Addresses.
2 Present Address.

28.05.01   18:09   R E Zimmermann: URAM 11/2001

2

an  arbitrary  technique  of  imagination,  but  rather  something  whose  nucleus  is
that sort of logic which itself is being produced by the underlying physics.

1  Philosophy & Science

Nothing is more difficult to mediate than the totality of mediation itself. Namely
that which is encompassing and expressing the worldly (welthaft) existing as a
unity  which  in  turn  implies that  there  is  only  one  world  for  us  in  one  piece  (a
holistic world that is) of which humans and all what they perceive, is a part. To
be more precise: It is a produced fragment which is producing and re-producing
itself all the time. All this despite the phenomenological variety of what can be
concretely  found  within  worldly  (welthafter)  praxis  which  appears  to  us  very
often as an irritating, disparate manifold of an amazing richness of form. In this
sense, everything is indeed related to everything  else: the  physical foundations
of the cosmology of our Universe to biological evolution, the mathematical mo-
delling of the world to the aesthetical forms of expression in the arts, as well as
the everyday  life  within  the  social  process  to  the  formation  of structure  within
non-living nature. However, to merely accept this fact (which is difficult enough
for  its  own part)  means  nothing but  to  support  a  somewhat  tautological,  if  not
even trivial, insight. What we need instead is the explicit derivation of the one
from the other, i.e., a methodologically consistent, systematic illumination of the
totality  which  establishes  the  interrelationships  among  all  these  different  per-
spectives of the world which are themselves produced by the manifold of rese-
arch fields – in turn showing up itself as a relationship between derivation and
mediation at the same time.
Basically, it is only philosophy which uses a suitable language adequate to the-
matize this complex fact. This is so because the sciences (being primarily single
sciences aiming at a unique field of research) are restricted qua definitione to a
specific section of this totality. This is also true for aesthetics as the theory of the
arts.  On  the  other  hand,  the  common  language  of  everyday  life  (which  indeed
aims  towards  that  totality)  is  by  far  too  unclear  and  unprecise  so  that  it  is  not
able to open relevant insight into the worldly (welthafte) totality. What we need
therefore, is a language which is situated somehow „within the middle“ of all of
these, and it is philosophy only which can offer such a language. This is mainly
so because philosophy can be visualized as a „science of totality“ from the out-
set (as Hans Heinz Holz has formulated a long while ago).
Unfortunately, this fact has been forgotten for long as far as main line philoso-
phy  is  being  concerned.  In  particular,  the  more  recent  philosophy  of  the  20th
century, after world war II, has more or less completely suppressed the line of
thinking  which  is  mainly  based  on  this  fact,  essentially  in  favour  of  a  self-
centring discussion of philosophy itself, taking its label for its contents. This is
due to the neo-Kantian effort dating back to the 19th century, to eventually esta-

28.05.01   18:09   R E Zimmermann: URAM 11/2001

3

blish a new, formal unity of the sciences, philosophy, the arts, and religion. Al-
though this mainly apologetic enterprise has been subject to failure from the be-
ginning on, it is nevertheless determining European (and in particular German)
philosophy  still  today  by  its  two  basic  components  of  activities:  the  history  of
philosophy on the one hand and the foundations of concepts on the other. Con-
crete praxis then, shows up only in terms of a developmental history of thinking,
divorced from any practical relationship to worldly (welthafte) and also empiri-
cal existence – being enshrined in a kind of „pure motion of thoughts“ which has
lost already sight of the world of everyday life, of the socially mediated and po-
litically  active  human  being.  Hence,  the  history  of  philosophy  is  very  often
mixed up with philosophy proper, the practise of doing history with actual phi-
losophizing. And concentrating on the motion of thoughts means to actually for-
get about  what these thoughts  actually  do  reflect  at  all  –  thinking  all  the  time,
uncorrectly though, that the latter would not be important, once the mechanism
of  relexion  itself  would  have  been  uncovered.  This  view  is  also  supported,
though  from  another  perspective,  by  analytic  philosophy  which  dominates  the
Anglo-Saxon region of languages. Here also, the systematization of thinking is
more  important than that  about  which  thinking  actually  thinks.  Moreover,  it  is
assumed,  also  uncorrectly,  that  what is being  thought  can  always  be  said,  thus
denying the unconscious and the necessity for any hermeneutic which is surpas-
sing formal logic.
This  is  how  philosophy  leaves  not  only  the  conception  of  critically  reflecting
praxis, but is also leaving itself, because the former basically expresses the lat-
ter’s nucleus of activity. It is not very astonishing therefore, that more and more
often, philosophers are not able to contribute anything new to ongoing discussi-
ons of public life, not because they would not have available the appropriate in-
ventory of concepts, but rather because they would not even recognize the pro-
blematic  relevance  of  all  these  aspects  of  practical  life.  At  the  same  time,  this
ideological  tendency  serves  also  a  much  more  personal  interest,  namely  one
which aims at the securing of an isolated field of discourse which is exclusively
reserved for the philosophical discourse alone. This has become very obvious in
the  recently  emerged  field  of  „cognitive  science“,  where  each  explicitly  mate-
rialistic  model  is  being  rejected  from  the  outset  by  this  „philosophical  lobby“,
based on the false premise of indicating that this would be nothing than late re-
lics of the mechanical materialism of the 19th century, and a primarily reductio-
nistic  effort  with  the  objective  of  eventually  taking  over  philosophy  in  merely
scientific terms.  However,  keeping  to  this  false  premise  means  to  forget  about
the fact that a philosophy which can be understood in terms of a dialectical and
transcendental  materialism  visualized  within  a  modern  perspective  is  nothing
but the result of critically reflecting recently gained insight in the various fields
of science. In other words: only such an approach can be called practical in the
first  place.  However,  in  order  to  really  understand  this  idea,  it  is  necessary  to
agree  to  two  premises  which  so  far  have  not  been  part  of  philosophical
reasoning very frequently: 1) philosophy has to be  understood  as  one  which  is

28.05.01   18:09   R E Zimmermann: URAM 11/2001

4

dealing with the critical reflexion of what can be found within the world, and it
is following up therefore the results of science rather than laying the grounds for
them, 2) philosophy has to be understood as one which is orienting itself accor-
ding to what science has found out about the world, in the first place, due to the
actual horizon of knowledge of a given  epoch.  This is  so because  the sciences
are „in charge“ of the single sectors of  worldly  (welthaften)  actuality,  philoso-
phy however, is „in charge“ of the totality of all these sectors. Hence, in being
oriented with a view to the sciences, philosophy is not at all duplicating the lat-
ter’s work. Contrary to that, philosophizing means primarily to critically reflect
each single sector of the uncovered worldly (Welthaften) with a view to the glo-
bal interrelationships among all possible sectors, to ask for necessary and suffi-
cient conditions for the main structural aspects of single sectors, and for possible
alternatives. In this sense, philosophical reflexion gains more and more a heuri-
stic connotation: The unification of the scientifically (necessary) segmented ac-
tuality is no self-purpose therefore (not a l’Art pour l’Art), in very much the sa-
me way as the arts are never self-purpose: On the contrary, the important point
is to show, within all what is empirically observable, what is not more subject of
science, as Theunissen has argued.
Only if philosophy is actually being visualized under this new perspective, will
it be able to offer relevant insight and guidelines for an ethically adequate beha-
viour  within  the  worldly  (welthaften)  praxis  we  do  observe.  Obviously,  this
viewpoint secures the relevance of what is going on in the sciences at the present
time. There is no question of eventually falling back to 19th century knowledge.
Nevertheless, it cannot be disputed that the  line of  thinking  on  which  we  have
based here this new viewpoint as one of its results, originates in the thinking of
the  German  idealistic  philosophers  (especially  the  Tübingen  group:  Hölderlin,
Schelling,  Hegel),  but  also  in  the  thinking  of  Feuerbach  and  Marx.  The  re-
construction of this line which in turn is based itself on earlier roots at least da-
ting back as far as to Spinoza, has been topic then, in its modern version within
20th century philosophy, in the conceptions of Bloch and Sartre, both different,
but nevertheless also very similar in their detailed structure, being able in turn to
give for us a relevant frame of orientation for a future philosophy still to come.
It is the objective of this present paper to stress this point.
Hence, the important aspect is not to get rid of the historic genesis of thinking,
and  we  can still  learn  from  our  predecessors.  However,  we  cannot  stop  at  this
historical sight. We have to ask further: What shall we do with it? Namely given
what  is  our  present  knowledge  at  the  time.  In  this  sense,  ethics  is  essentially
knowledge as I have formulated at an earlier occasion. [4] If this is the case, then
we have to start with the knowledge. However, knowledge is always a mediated,
communicated and communicable, thus linguistically expressable one. Hence, in
order to arrive at the goal of a philosophy which can be visualized as one which
is „charged“ with heuristic potential, and which can give a feedback to the sci-
ences  again,  after  having  critically  reflected  what  is  being  known  at  a  given
epoch, we have to clarify three basic aspects: 1) the detailed nature of the afo-

28.05.01   18:09   R E Zimmermann: URAM 11/2001

5

rementioned mediating totality, 2) the re-construction of a new concept of pra-
xis,  3)  the  illumination  of  the  relationship  between  this  new  concept  of  praxis
and a similarly adequate concept of theory.
In the following we discuss these three aspects in terms of an example dealing
with  the  fundamental  categories  which  determine  human  thinking  decisively
from the beginning on: space and time. We will understand that it is physics it-
self  which  „pre-defines“  these  concepts  which  for  us,  are  common  everyday
concepts  at  the  same  time,  and  which  structures  them  in  mathematical  terms.
However, in doing so, physics also demonstrates that these concepts turn out to
be genetically produced concepts, and hence they cannot be fundamental. What
we have to accept therefore, in order to dissolve this apparent contradiction, is
that space and time are nothing but complex compositions of signs with which
we characterize central aspects of the world we perceive, for giving a fixed basis
to our own orientation. In this sense, these concepts underly a principle of selec-
tion which is very similar to the respective principle we use in biology. In other
words: Humans show up as biologically produced entities whose mode of being
is  thinking,  but  who  are  also  able  to  reproduce  and  produce  aspects  of  their
world (and themselves). Hence, we can think of humans as a produced mode of
production. And it is this mode of production which is determining human expe-
rience decisively.

2  The Logic of Space and Time

There  is  hardly  anything  which  would  be  more  familiar  to  human  beings  than
the characterization of the world in terms of the fundamental categories of space
and time. It is time which fills the space of everyday life with meaning (to quote
Bachtin) and nothing determines our everyday life more completely than (artifi-
cially defined) clock time. Concepts which are derived from this conceptualiza-
tion of the  world  in terms  of  space-time  determine  themselves  the  structure  of
human  language.  Hence,  communication  itself  is  conceptually  constituted  in
terms of space-time structure. A large class of languages incorporates a charac-
teristic dichotomy of pairwise ordered concepts which model motion (including
evolution) as a composition of changes per time distance. This dichotomy is also
mapped onto the polar relationship of noun and verb which symbolically repre-
sents the contradiction between rest and motion. In fact, it is the grammar of the
stoician  Zeno  dominating  the  whole  European  space  of  languages  until  today
that has originally emerged from a detailed philosophizing about the relationship
between  space  and  time.  Usually,  the  categories  of  space  and  time  are  being
„corporalized“ as a kind of container in which worldly (welthafte) processuality
is  visualized of being  happening.  Space  and  time  provide  a  kind of  „stage“  on
which the world takes place. World as theatre, as stage of life, as comedy is a
collection of established literary topoi. In Kantian terms, space and time are the

28.05.01   18:09   R E Zimmermann: URAM 11/2001

6

forms of conception (Anschauungsformen) under which the world is being taken
into sight.
What  is  it  then  that  we  call  world,  and  how  can  we  apply  these  categories  of
space and time to this world? Basically, the world is visualized as the set of all
that has been perceived – despite the fact that soon somewhat interpolated and
extrapolated  extensions  creep  into  this  conception,  rarely  noticed  in  everyday
context, mainly due to the fact that we do not only cognitively process what we
have  perceived,  but  that  we  also  communicate  it  all  the  time.  Indeed:  We  can
process the perceived at all, just because we have acquired a certain expectatio-
nal intention (or anticipation) produced by our communicating in the first place.
From our first days on we acquire techniques of an inventory which is there at
hand  for  us.  Socialization  is  mainly  the  learning  of  utilizing  these  techniques.
However, once  we  would  like  to  find  a  foundation  for  them,  we  have  to  draw
from a lore which is present in our experience, an experience which is subject to
the same subjective socialization so that our actions within daily life are based
on  a  reflexion  which  can  at  most  offer  preliminary  results.  Actions  (which  al-
ways display behaviour towards Others and the environment) are limited there-
fore in their practical scope, effectivity and adequacy (in short: in their compe-
tence).  Hence,  a  picture  of  the  world  which  is  primarily  constituted  from  this
somewhat incomplete information about the world is hardly able to provide us
with guidelines for a really adequate behaviour (what ethics should actually do).
What we can do at most is to find a moral consensus which refers us to a frame
of  reference  as  to  what  adequate  behaviour  could  be.  This  frame  of  reference
however cannot be otherwise than incomplete and therefore false. From there it
is a long way to a reasonable ethics.
The basic reason for this divergence from what is aimed at is perception itself:
This is obviously restricted from the beginning on such that primary perception
(produced by the biological data of the sensoric input) is always fragmentary. So
in  optical  terms  we  can  only  perceive  a  tiny  section  of  the  electromagnetic
spectrum  which  we  call  light.  Different  sections  (ultra-violet,  ultra-red  and
gamma radiation) we can perceive at most as damage or in terms of organic de-
fects, and they do not serve as controllable means of orientation. Similarly tiny
is the acoustic section we perceive with our ears. And if we compare the optical
and  acoustic perceptions  with  the  others  (smelling,  tasting,  touching),  they  ap-
pear as background sensory perceptions rather than equal means of grasping the
world. Hence, if we perceive only a tiny fraction of what there actually is, why
should it be surprising at all that we have hardly access to our world as it is re-
ally  there?  Of  course,  measuring  devices  can  help  us  to  extend  our  means  of
perception. But this perception is not immediate, but mediated at best; it is se-
condary perception.
What we recognize is that humans gain their access to the world only in terms of
mapping  sensoric  input  to  their  brain.  Instead  of  dealing  with  the  „real  thing“
directly, humans achieve their access only by a two-step transformation of what
there actually is: by a first step of transforming what there is into sensoric input

28.05.01   18:09   R E Zimmermann: URAM 11/2001

7

data, by a second step of translating the incoming information to data which can
be  interpreted  (determined  by  what  is  saved  in  the  brain  and  is  usually  called
experience).  But  even  worse:  The  successive  registration  of  input  data  is  not
even synchronous with the „picture“ which is being composed then as interpre-
tation of these data. This is because the brain releases a given information only
when all data have arrived which correspond to that information. As we can cle-
arly understand, the time data need to arrive at the appropriate brain section  is
different  according  to  their  nature:  Obviously,  optical  data  have  to  choose
another lane for being transported to the brain than acoustic data have. The brain
collects them into a single time window (of milliseconds). If this window is clo-
sed in the end, the brain presents us the corresponding information as a picture
or a series of pictures similar to a movie. Strictly seen, we can say that the brain
„composes“ a movie representing the incoming information and „plays“ it to us.
The movie director is partially the biological „hardware“ which fixes the causal
frame of perception, partially the already saved „software“ (which in turn con-
sists  of  the  internal  „programmes“  steering  the  brain  itself,  and  of  information
acquired and composed in the past called experience).
Do not worry about our describing these aspects in terms of computer language.
In  fact,  what  we  have  done  so  far  is  not  only  to  give  a  description  of  what  is
known about perception today, but we have also demonstrated that descriptions
themselves,  that  is  namings  and  connections  between  namings,  can  only  be
thought in terms of metaphorizations. Only a consensually accepted metaphor is
able to express something which generates maximal understanding. And because
many people deal by now with both movies and computers, it is very likely that
metaphors from that domain, though obviously time-dependent as they are, can
improve the understanding of the concepts underlying the ongoing discussion. In
other words: Nobody would have been able to deal with the metaphors chosen
here some hundred-fifty years ago. But because today, we visualize conscious-
ness in terms of an information processing system, we can use a computer meta-
phor, because for us today, the computer is the leading paradigm. But this does
not tell us how things really are, what we simply do is to model them according
to our present leading paradigms which serve as foundations of communication.
Hence,  never  is  what  we  call  world directly  accessible  to  us.  Everything  is  al-
ways mediated by a mapping procedure. In other words: According to what we
perceive do we model the world and produce a picture of the world. In fact, we
produce  our  world  by  means  of  this  mapping  procedure.  (But  note  that  the
procedure we use is itself an outcome of the process we try to model!)
In philosophical terms, nevertheless, we assume the realistic viewpoint: We as-
sume that exterior to our thinking and independent of ourselves there actually is
something. But how what there is actually is in truth, we cannot find out at all.
Because only a tiny fraction of  what  there is  can be perceived.  Hence,  we  can
decide: either we call what we can model according to our cognitively processed
perception our world. Then what exists really is exterior to our world, in parti-
cular  beyond  space,  time  and  matter.  Then  we  have  a  multitude  of  worlds,  to

28.05.01   18:09   R E Zimmermann: URAM 11/2001

8

assume  anything  else  would  be  unjustifiable  anthropomorphism.  –  Or,  we  call
what there is outside, the world. Then our world is nothing but a mediated parti-
al aspect of the totality which is this world. Hence, mediation is due then to the
biological characteristica of humans. Again, there is a multitude of perspectives
then under which the world can be taken into sight. Both cases have in common
that there is one region about which we can know something, and another region
about which we cannot know anything. And in both cases what we call „funda-
mental categories“ is not really fundamental.
To philosophize about the one region is subject to sceptic philosophy, about the
other is subject to speculative philosophy. But speculation does not mean arbi-
trary  imagination:  On  the  contrary, speculation  is  restricted  with  a  view  to  the
framework which is prescribed in terms of the sceptic approach reflecting what
we already know about the world. That is to say, whatever speculation we choo-
se,  we  have  to  arrive  at  least  at  the  results  of  knowledge  obtained  about  our
world as far as it is accessible in empirical terms. This is a minimal compatibi-
lity condition we have to satisfy in any case. Even more: Although what we call
fundamental categories turns out to be more than questionable, whatever model
we actually choose, we have to end up with the result that what we do perceive
must be compatible with what we cannot perceive, because as part or aspect of
totality we always remain part or aspect of totality.
And this confronts us with another problem: If we accept the aforementioned we
have  to  differ  in  future  between  two  perspectives  or  two  levels  of  description.
What we can know and what falls therefore into the domain of sceptical philo-
sophy, can be expressed in terms of language, in particular in terms of propositi-
ons. As we have seen already, language itself is structured in spatial and tempo-
ral terms, and reflects therefore the fundamental categories which serve as fra-
mework for our thinking. This is different however in the case of the second (in
principle more fundamental) perspective: In that case we have to deal with a re-
gion which is not itself constituted in spatial and temporal terms. Nevertheless,
for its description we have to use the same language which is based on the fun-
damental categories which „have nothing to say“ about this region. Obviously,
this must be very difficult. But we recognize now the advantage of our language
being constituted such as to act basically by means of metaphors: only then do
we have a possibility at all to signify things which lie outside our inventory of
signs. Despite of this we can at least approximate meanings which might even-
tually gain practical relevance.
The consequences are obvious: Scientific modelling relies always on the scepti-
cal aspect. In terms of a spatio-temporal perspective it is not difficult therefore,
to  talk  about  „evolution“.  We  can  state  the  following:  Humans  are  biological
entities  which  have  emerged  from  the  evolutive  differentiation  of  structures
within the interplay of selection and mutation on this very planet. However, as
can be clearly recognized, this is only true according to the sceptical perspective.
Because, according to the speculative perspective, there is no evolution, because
there is no spatio-temporal processuality. In other words: Human consciousness

28.05.01   18:09   R E Zimmermann: URAM 11/2001

9

is structured in such a way that its modelling leads to reasonable results, provi-
ded we model them according to the fundamental categories of space and time.
This enterprise is nothing but practical. In this sense, a speculative foundation of
the same model is rather unpractical. But it is the only way to eventually achie-
ve something like a „true“ foundation. Because, as Schelling already knew, the
foundation of something is always outside of what it is foundation to: „ ... foun-
dation is against that to which it is foundation, non-being.“ [5] Hence, the first
form  of  foundation  is  nothing  but  the  regression  onto  the  origin:  Everything
which actually is, can at best be reduced to its beginning. (Schelling called this
„mechanism“.)  This  foundation  however  is  that  of  praxis.  The  second  form
makes possible to derive what is out of its foundation. The possible is being un-
folded  by  going  progressively  forward  to  what  there  has  become.  (Schelling
called this „organism“.) Both these movements are not identical: The regressive
component displays what there actually has become, the progressive component
displays what there could have become. The philosophical insight into the foun-
dation  of  totality  is  based  exactly  on  that  discrepancy  between  the  two  move-
ments.  In  this  sense,  foundation  means  to  uncover  possibility  and  actuality,  to
construct the boundary between them, and to talk about their  mutual  relations-
hip. We note two basic results: First of  all,  the  foundation of being is not not-
hing(ness), but it is something; it is what is not, but can be. It is possibility. Not-
hing(ness) however is what is not, but also cannot be. It is the impossible. If so-
mething  has  become  actual,  then  it  must  have  been  possible  in  the  first  place.
The inverse is not true. [6] (And hence, there cannot be a creatio ex nihilo.) On
the  other  hand,  this  is  rather  a  methodological  insight,  speculative  philosophy
goes  onto  progression.  (Schelling  called  it  „positive“.)  Sceptical  philosophy
goes onto regression. (Schelling called it „negative“.) In manifold variations this
contradiction is always intrinsic and shows up as contradiction between synthe-
sis and analysis, and between deduction and induction. (At the time of Schelling,
people referred to the contradiction between rationalism and empiricism. [7] )
But  note:  Philosophy  cannot  stay  with  this  contradiction  alone.  Because  every
methodological dualism is itself perspectively determined. In reality, regression
is always limited from the outset, because it is sceptical. And although the scep-
tical perspective refers back to the speculative one, as to its „natural“ contradic-
tion, this contradiction itself is somewhat artificial again, because it is  actually
being  produced  by  the  restriction  in  terms  of  perspectives  in  the  first  place.
Strictly  spoken,  this  contradiction  is  itself  negative.  Consequently,  Schelling
tried to derive a „true principle of being“ which he called potentia ultima. This
potential  was  thought  as  indicator  for  a  „reality  before  all  possibility“.  [8]  He
attempted  this  approach  by  means  of  a  basically  idealistic  philosophy.  Ne-
vertheless, his merit is mainly to visualize the problem in systematic terms from
the beginning on such that method and system fall into one. Although Schelling
falls back behind Spinoza who aims at existence rather than at essence, and also
introduces important materialistic connotations into his philosophy (because for
the latter, the attribute of substance, is in the end space itself), he recognizes the

28.05.01   18:09   R E Zimmermann: URAM 11/2001

10

organicity of systems: „The system must have a principle which is constituted in
itself and by itself, which reproduces itself in every part of the whole; it must be
organic:  one  must  be  determined  by  all,  and  all  by  one:  it  must  not  exclude
anything,  not  unilaterally  subordinate  or  even  suppress  anything.“  [9]  In  this
formulation, Schelling expresses as early as 1810  what today  turns out to be  a
central aspect within the context of modern research: reproduction. If the whole
system reproduces itself, then its  subsystems  are  being produced.  However  we
recognize the critical point here: Reproduction can remain static and is not au-
tomatically referred to a concept of motion or of dynamical process. Production,
on the contrary, points always to a dynamical activity, because something acts
upon something else. Hence, self-reproduction can be visualized as permanent,
instrinsically resting, processing of itself by itself. But production asks for histo-
ry. It asks for spatio-temporal constitution.
Hence, we are back to perspectivity: The excellence of Spinoza’s approach is in
the constitution of the attribute (which is essentially one). The attribute of exten-
sion (res extensa) has to be visualized as a whole which acts onto itself by self-
diffentiating into parts. It is not constituted by parts. [10] Also, for Spinoza, it is
only  the  imagination  which  goes  onto  parts.  In  reality,  matter  is  only  one.  Its
partition can only be observed modaliter, but not realiter. Space is the principle
of  matter  as  principle  of  order.  But  space  is  not  really  there:  it  permanently
processes itself. In so far it satisfies Schelling’s organicity condition. And what
Spinoza  calls  attribute,  Schelling  would  call  system.  The  world  as  it  is  under-
stood  in  terms  of  a  system,  this  is  nature  as  worldly  (welthafte)  totality.  If  we
take  both  of  them,  Spinoza  and  Schelling,  together,  we  recognize  as  the  prin-
ciple  of  the  self-organizing  worldly  (welthaften)  being  producing  space  which
reproduces itself in producing its parts.

3   The Physics of Logic

Now what about the viewpoint of physics  which is the  appropriate science  „in
charge“  of  the  problems  discussed  here?  It  is  surprising  to  note  that  modern
scientific  research  is  dealing  with  not  less  than  five  aspects  of  what  we  have
discussed so far: 1) with the relationship between substance and attribute (if we
stay with the Spinozist terminology for a while), 2) with the onto-epistemic me-
diation of what there is with what there is being known, 3) with a universal prin-
ciple  of  selection  governing  the  unfolding  of  structures  in  nature,  4)  with  the
detailed ordering of  a  hierarchically  structured  derivation  of the  evolution  pro-
per,  5)  with  the  methodological  transition  from  logic  to  hermeneutic.  I  have
discussed technical details of this at other places (see the above references). We
simply  concentrate  here  on  the  essential  results  and  ask  what  they  actually  do
mean with respect to the problems discussed here.

28.05.01   18:09   R E Zimmermann: URAM 11/2001

11

The  main  problem  of  physics  today  is  the  fact  that  apparently,  physics  takes
place in two disjoint domains (or worlds) each of which claim to represent the
one  and  only  world:  On  the  one  hand,  we  have  Einstein’s  theory  of  relativity,
describing macroscopically a world which can be visualized as space-time, i.e.,
a  four-dimensional  space  with  a  metric  (an  invariant  measure  of  distance  bet-
ween points) and a specific signature of this metric (meaning that the sign of the
temporal coordinate is different from the other signs). – On the other hand, we
have  quantum  theory,  describing microscopically  a space  which  is  not  really  a
space of concrete observables, but an abstract state space (Hilbert space) which
essentially  describes  the  set  of  all  possible  states  of  a  physical  system.  This
space has a large number of dimensions (interesting cases are actually infinite-
dimensional),  and  its  signature  does  not indicate  any  sign  differences.  In  other
words:  two  completely  different  descriptions  of  one  and  the  same  world.  John
Baez  has  recently  called  this  a  „deeply  schizophrenic  world  view  of  physics“.
[11]  Hence,  relatively  early,  the  idea  of  „pre-geometry“:  If  we  are  not  able  to
unify both these disjoint theories within the world, it might be possible to do so
outside the world. So the basic idea was to introduce an  abstract  mathematical
structure from which it would be possible to actually derive space and time (and
matter), the contradiction between relativity and quantum theory included. First
approaches are connected with the names of John Wheeler, Roger Penrose, and
Stephen Hawking. Today, this attempt is dominated by two competing theories:
the  theory  of  superstrings  (or  M  theory  recently)  and  the  theory  of  loops.  The
former visualizes the elementary buildings blocs of the world on the fundamen-
tal level as string-like entities which vibrate in various oscillating modes (howe-
ver  in  a space  of  up  to  eleven dimensions)  whose oscillations  produce  „tones“
(similar to a violine) representing elementary particles. The latter is not so diffe-
rent in starting from microscopic loops which essentially describe tiny inherent
curvatures  and  can  be  visualized  as  knotted  strings.  There  is  convergence,  but
both of these theories have their disadvantages: The string people suffer, becau-
se  they  have to start  from  a  background space  which  is  very  similar  to  that  of
special  relativity  theory  –  although  their  theory  shall  derive  space  and  time  in
the first place! The loop people suffer, because the technical difficulties of their
theory  make it unlikely to achieve many empirical confirmations very quickly.
They  can  correctly  claim  however,  that  they  start  from  a  purely  combinatorial
structure without any reference to space or time (which is very much in the sen-
se of Einstein’s basic idea).
At the end of the sixties (of the last century) Roger Penrose has proposed a sort
of derivation which now, thirty years later, turns out to be of relevance for the
loop theory. As „skeleton“ of the world he chooses an abstract network whose
„knots“  have  the  property  of  spin  (individual  angular  momentum)  only.  They
permanently exchange spin according to the conservation of angular momentum.
Hence, this spin network is a fluctuating web which expresses nothing but this
permanent  exchange  of  spin  numbers  among  knots.  It  is  purely  combinatorial
and thus underlies the observable space. In fact, physical space can be thought

28.05.01   18:09   R E Zimmermann: URAM 11/2001

12

of as superposition  or  „condensation“  of  many  „layers“  of  this  network.  There
is,  together  with  the  spin  network,  a  dual  web  consisting  of  a  triangulation,  a
covering of the network by  triangles such that their  centre of  mass  is identical
with one of the network’s knots. This can be visualized as minimal quantization
of  space  in  the  following  sense:  Because  the  covering  de-composes  „proto-
space“ into elementary portions described by the length of the triangle sides, one
can  define  an  intrinsic  quantization  of  space  volume  and  space  surface  which
corresponds  to  the  configuration  of  spin  numbers.  Hence,  re-arrangements  of
spin  numbers  cause  re-arrangements  of  quantizations;  only  the  duality  relation
remains conserved. This describes the microscopic domain.
On the macroscopic domain which is the observable level of the (classical) phy-
sical world, we have the processes whose dynamics represents the formation of
structure (i.e. the production of new structures). Under the perspective of a clas-
sical,  macroscopic  observer,  formation  of  structure  means  basically  change  of
space topology. The phenomenological space is three-dimensional. It can be un-
derstood  as  the  boundary  of  four-dimensional  space-time.  Hence,  a  change  in
the components of this space implies a change of its boundary. In mathematical
terms, the formation of structure in this sense, is a mapping from an old space
configuration to a new one. Such mappings are called cobordisms, because they
map  spaces  onto  each  other  which  are  cobordant.3  The  important  point  is  that
cobordisms as describing a change of structure are not themselves functions, but
spaces! Which has the following consequence: A cobordism describes the tem-
poral  change  of  a  space  topology  which  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the  complete
space-time,  not  only  by  the  time  coordinate,  as  is  the  usual  case  for  classical
physics. Hence, time shows up here as a quotient of change which is being inte-
grated  into  the  form  of  space  itself  and  which  is  not  separable  from  it.  The
reason for humans nevertheless „observing“ time as being separated from space
is simply that we are obliged to perceive everything in a sequential manner (one
after the other). We cannot perceive everything at the same time. Hence the old
proverb: that time is what prevents everything from happening all at once. We
can read this as a direct confirmation of the fact that time turns out to be a hu-
man  property  of  perception,  but  nothing  that  would  be  „really“  there  indepen-
dent of humans.
We  note  two  important  consequences:  On  the  one  hand,  it  can  be  shown  that
there is an explicit correspondence between each three-dimensional space com-
ponent  and  a  Hilbert  space  such  that  for  each  cobordism  on  the  macroscopic
level we have a microscopic change of state. On the other hand, cobordisms sa-
tisfy  axioms  of  (mathematical)  categories.  They  are  essentially  sets  of  objects
and mappings among objects (morphisms) which obey two axioms (of the exi-
stence of identities and compositions). A fundamental category in physics is that
of  Hilbert  spaces  (Hilb)  whose  objects  are  the  spaces  themselves,  whose  mor-
phisms are linear operators among them. In this sense, objects of the category of
                                                          
3 As the name implies, two spaces are said to be cobordant, if there is another space of one dimension more such
that its boundary is the disjoint union of the other two spaces.

28.05.01   18:09   R E Zimmermann: URAM 11/2001

13

cobordisms  (nCob)  are  (n-1)-dimensional  spaces,  the  morphisms  among  them
are  n-dimensional  cobordisms.  Mappings  among  categories  are  called  „func-
tors“. They map objects to objects and morphisms to morphisms.
Because it is primarily the morphisms that determine the characteristics of a ca-
tegory, the theory of categories is mainly one which deals with relationships and
interactions among objects and morphisms rather than with constitutive parts or
elements in the fashion of  set  theory.  Hence,  as  higher-dimensional  analoga to
sets, categories have their specific meaning for the evolutionary aspects of phy-
sics.  The  central  point  here  is  that  a  theory  of  everything  (TOE)  like  quantum
gravity shows up as a functor itself. This functor is the aforementioned mapping
which  represents  the  correspondence  between  the  categories nCob  and  Hilb.  It
completely expresses the form of the theory and its contents.
It is comparatively easy  now  to  recognize the basic insight  of this  referring us
back  to  the  original  five  points  under  discussion:  The  actual  relationship  bet-
ween  the  fundamental  level  of  physics  and  the  classical  level  of  physical  phe-
nomenology can be visualized as a formal analogue of the relationship between
substance and attribute. The concrete world of daily perceptions shows up as a
perspective restriction of the real world on the fundamental level. In particular,
the formerly „fundamental“ categories of space and time are uncovered as being
derived  categories  instead.  On  the  other  hand,  the  representation  of  the  theory
and of what the theory itself represents turn out to be one and the same. In this
sense, we can speak of „onto-epistemic“  mediation (according to a concept in-
troduced by Sandkühler). If the theory is the functor by which it is represented
symbolically, then there is a systematic parallelism between thinking and what
thinking is thinking about. This can be easily compared with the conception of
Spinoza.4 Even more: The mediation of the fundamental and classical levels of
physics  underlies  itself  the  correspondence-producing  action  of  the  theory-
functor. Hence, we can assume that there is a unique principle which universally
steers the production of correspondences. Recently, several ideas have been pre-
sented in order to locate such a universal principle. [13]
Obviously,  the  problem  of  finding  an  adequate  translation  of  abstract  fluctua-
tions  in  a  spin  network  on  the  fundamental  level  into  phenomenological
processes which can be observed in the world is nothing else than the problem
of finding a translation of the level of substance into the level of attribute. The
actual foundation of our world is at stake. But there is one more point to note:
Basically,  logic  itself  can  be  represented  by  algebraic  structures  such  that  the
explicit  semantics  implied  by  this  logic  is  expressible  in  algebraic  terms.  The
axiomatic  structure  of  a  category  is  nothing  but  such  an  algebraic  structure.
Hence, each category represents a concrete process, represents at the same time
the  mapping  (representation) of  this process  and  uncovers  the  logical  structure
of this representation. This threefold function of a (mathematical) category secu-
res the consistency of the aforementioned fact that the theory is the functor. Part

                                                          
4 Ethics 2p7: „Ordo et connexio idearum idem est ac ordo et connexio rerum.“ [12]

28.05.01   18:09   R E Zimmermann: URAM 11/2001

14

of the axiomatic underlying the category is the composition rule: If A, B and C
are objects of a category, and f, g, h are morphisms of the form

f: A → B, g: B → C, h: A → C,

then we shall have for the composition of the first two: g o f = h. Now note the
following: The objects can actually mean complete languages (sets of objects =
words  and  morphisms  =  correspondences  which  follow  a  given  axiomatic
structure = their logic = grammar). Assume that A stands for German, and B for
English, and C for French (so that the chosen category is that of all possible lan-
guages).  Then  we  clearly  recognize  here  a  crucial  difference  as  compared  to
formal languages (such as mathematics): While in the case of the latter, transla-
tions must be always complete (so that the composition rule is strictly satisfied),
in the case of the former, this is not possible. A German text which is translated
into English first, and then into French will usually be different from a German
text which is translated directly into French. In other words: g o f ≠ h. Why is
that? Because, in general, a translation between logics is always „exhausting“ or
not  possible  at  all  (null).  The  underlying  axiomatic  structure  guarantees  consi-
stency. (Extraterrestric humans, if we meet them one day, would always be able
to translate our mathematical representations into their (mathematical) language.
Conversely, we would always be able to comprehend what they mean when tal-
king  about  mathematics.  Otherwise  we  would  not  have  met  them  in  the  first
place.) Not so in the case of everyday language: Contrary to formal languages, it
has the task to map everything what there is, independent of strict, logical requi-
rements. But why is it that we cannot express what is beyond logic in adequate
terms? Because we lack the necessary information: There are many things which
cannot be forged into any closed, consistent, propositional form. Hence, we can
never completely know what is meant with what is said. What we actually mean
depends on the individual context, and this is mainly a result of a singular socia-
lization. (Hence, the real problem as to these extraterrestric people would be to
find out something about their emotions which determines their mentality deci-
sively – and our political behaviour.) In the case of everyday language not logic
is at stake, but hermeneutic. This is not an art of knowing, but rather an art of
guessing. (This does not mean that the latter would not have to rely on the for-
mer.) So logic is for hermeneutic the necessary, but not sufficient condition of
understanding. Hence, hermeneutic can be visualized as generalization of logic
by incomplete information. Logic turns out to be a special case of hermeneutic:
It is valid, if translations are path-independent (in the sense of category theory).
In general and complex situations however translations are path-dependent.
So  we  notice  a  surprising  fact:  that  crucial  aspects  of  the  problems  intuitively
discussed  before  with  a  view  to  philosophical  argumentation  are  already  for  a
long time subject of scientific research. Only the language utilized and the ob-
jectives  defined  by  the  respective  research  are  different.  Looking  more  closely
reveals however that this is not very surprising indeed, given the assumption we

28.05.01   18:09   R E Zimmermann: URAM 11/2001

15

mentioned before: that humans are part of nature, a producing product of nature,
to be more presise.

Preliminary Conclusions

Coming back to our computer metaphor: The recent (and very successful) movie
Matrix [14] has illustrated another aspect of what we have discussed so far. The
movie describes a future in which humans are being exploited by intelligent ma-
chines which deceive them by an artificial world (whose software is called ma-
trix) in order to controll them. The problem of the protagonists (a small group of
humans who was able to „de-couple“ from the matrix) is to find a way of influ-
encing  (that  is:  re-programming)  the  matrix  software.  We  will  not  discuss  the
various inconsistencies of the movie’s plot here or the celebrated action scenes.
(In fact, the movie is nothing but a recent version of an old idea.5) What we will
do is to compare the basic idea with our topic here. Obviously, there is an „onto-
epistemic“ level of interpretation in that movie which implies the simple state-
ment that nobody is able to determine his/her’s ontological state. Because (given
a „perfect simulation“) there is no way to give a criterion for differing between
simulation and real world (or concrete world modaliter and real world realiter).
This  is  nothing  but  the  problem  of  substance  and  attribute.  But  using  here  the
computer metaphor (because we talk about actual simulation software), displays
humans as subroutines of a higher-order matrix programme to which we have no
perceptive access. As a part of a larger programme, we cannot have knowledge
of detached parts of the same programme, unless by indirect speculation. But the
latter would not eventually enable humans to gain actual insight into the matrix
programme, but would rather serve the purpose of somehow improving the in-
sight into our own programme. Which is far more modest. And it is perhaps this
sort  of  modesty  which  would  serve  as  a  reasonable  basis  for  any  future  ethics
which is to be derived from the resulting relationship between sceptic and spe-
culative aspects of our present model of the world.
In  fact,  this  perspective,  to  visualize  the  world  as  a  permanent  computational
process which is  part  of  a  larger  whole, is very  much  compatible  with  what is
going on in present research: So far, there are only few publications dealing ex-
plicitly with a combination of quantum gravity and quantum computation, but a
number  of  important  indications  are  already  at  hand.  Indeed,  classical  physics
could  be visualized  as  one  which  emerges  from  a  choice  of transport  channels
processed  quantum  information  on  the  fundamental  level  has  to  make.  These
channels would be the vertex lines of the spin network through which informati-
on is able to percolate (like coffee in a filter).
                                                          
5 This is going back to a novel by Daniel F. Galouye’s of 1964 which has been adapted to a movie for German
television as early as 1973 by Rainer Werner Fassbinder. There is another movie by Josef Rusnak with the same
topic which is much nearer to the novel: The 13th Floor, 20th Century Fox, 1999.

28.05.01   18:09   R E Zimmermann: URAM 11/2001

16

But we realize that in order to answer the open questions, only an interdsicipli-
nary and mutually heuristic cooperation of both science and philosophy can pro-
duce  deeper  insight  into  the  underlying  fundamental  structures.  So  far,  such  a
cooperation has been publicly demanded but more often feared in practise. It is
time now to take the next step.

I  thank  for  stimulating  and  illuminating  discussions  on  the  topic  Mary  Hesse
(Cambridge, UK) and Richard Bell (Wooster/Cambridge, UK).

Acknowledgements

References

[1] R.E.Zimmermann (1999): The Klymene Principle. IAG Series. Kassel Uni-
versity Press.
[2] R.E.Zimmermann (1998): Die Rekonstruktion von Raum, Zeit und Materie.
Moderne Implikationen Schellingscher Naturphilosophie. Frankfurt: Lang. – Cf.
id. (2001): Spinoza in Context: A Holistic Approach in Modern Terms. In: E.
Martikainen (ed.), Infinity, Causality, and Determinism, Cosmological Enterpri-
ses and their Preconditions, Finish Academy of Sciences Colloquium, New
York: Lang, in press. (see also: http://www.arXiv.org, gr-qc/0004077 v2)
[3] R.E.Zimmermann (2000): Classicity from Entangled Ensemble States of
Knotted Spin Networks. A Conceptual Approach. (Contribution icmp2000, Im-
perial College London) http://www.arXiv.org, gr-qc/0007024.
[4] R.E.Zimmermann (1999): Ethik heisst im Grunde Wissen. In: id., K.-J. Gru-
en (eds.), Existenz & Utopie, System & Struktur VII/1&2, 11-21.
[5] F.W.J.Schelling (1972): Grundlegung der positiven Philosophie. (Munich
1832) ed. H.Fuhrmans, Torino: Bottega d’Erasmo, 440.
[6] Ibid. [5], 385.
[7] Ibid. [5], 247.
[8] Ibid. [5], 443.
[9] F.W.J.Schelling (1973): Stuttgarter Privatvorlesungen. (1810) ed. M.Vetoe,
Torino: Bottega d’Erasmo, 102sq.
[10] H.Rombach (1981): Substanz, System, Struktur. 2nd ed., 2 vols. Freiburg &
Munich: Alber (1965), 30-38. – Cf. B. de Spinoza (1999): Ethica (1670) 1p15s.
(ed. Bartuschat, Hamburg: Meiner)
[11] J.C.Baez (2001): Higher-dimensional algebra and Planck scale physics. In:
C.Callender, N.Huggett (eds.), Physics meets philosophy at the Planck scale,
Cambridge University Press, 177-195.
[12] Cf. [10], Spinoza, op.cit., 108.

28.05.01   18:09   R E Zimmermann: URAM 11/2001

17

[13] S.Kauffman (1996): Investigations. The Nature of Autonomous Agents and
the Worlds They Mutually Create. http://www.santafe.edu/sfi/People/kauffman  –  P.Bak:
How Nature Works. The Science of Self-Organized Criticality. New York:
Springer/Copernicus. – L.Smolin: The Life of the Universe. Oxford University
Press, 1997. (Cf. also [1] for a detailed discussion of the latter.)
[14] A. & L.Wachorski (1999), Warner Bros.

