 

 

A Conjecture about a "vision" model for 
blind men. 

L. A. Amarante Ribeiro

Retired Associate Professor of Physics Department, ICEx, UFMG 

lincoln@coltec.ufmg.br <mailto:Lincoln@coltec.ufmg.br>

Abstract

In this work we present a "vision" model for blind people, preferentially for 
those ones of birth origen. The model should be implemented using the 
avaiable computational resources at the moment. The model uses a 
simulation of an optical image by an appropriate sonorous "image" 
according to certain rules. 

 

It is an old dream of mankind to solve the problem of the human blindness in 
a general way and of the congenital blindness in particular,  to get a method 
that allows to the faulty visual to have an insight of the images that surround 
him and to have a common language with those which see in the traditional 
way. The rise of computers and modern sensors gives us a great hope that 
we can build a sophisticated equipment to overcome that limitation of the 
human being,  the visual deficiency. At least an attempt in that direction is 
already on progress(1). In this work we will present a possible solution for the 
problem. Although the model is good for all the well-known types of 
blindness, it better adapts to the congenital blindness, perhaps due to the 
long time that will be worn-out in the learning of the method by a blind man. 
That is at least what we preliminarly suppose. The method that we will 
denominate Vision-sonic is based on the following fundamental point: It is 
well known by the psychologists, synesists and even for lay that there is a 
perceptive sharpness of another active senses in the blind men by the lack of 
the sight of the vision. In general they are much more sensitive to several 
aspects of the audition as height, timbre and intensity than a person which 
has perfect ownership of its visual abilities. By this reason we had the idea 
of trying to use this aspect to supply the vision deficiency. We intend to use 

sounds to simulate  the faulty of an image in the brain. This can be obtained, 
for example in the following way: a digital camera gets a digitalized image 
of the landscape which the person wants to observe. Soon after a file of 
images is generated, Bitmap say (BMP) of the photo. The digital file, this 
way generated, is swept in a computer through a special software that has 
the function of transforming each pixel of the image in a sound information 
recorded in a file WAV , say according to a rule that we expose here. There 
are several ways of doing the correspondence image-sound with advantages 
and disadvantages  at least now they won't be discussed here. In a first 
method we make a correspondence which can be : for the red (R)the note la 
(A), the note fa (F) for green t(G) the note re (D) for blue (B). So each visual 
pixel RGB would be equivalent to a sound chord AFD. The choice of very 
temperate musical notes is arbitrary. We could choose any frequency for the 
sound that represents each color following a convenience pointed by 
psychologists. Chosen the notes or frequencies, the heights of the sound 
correspond to the basic colors and the intensities of the notes of a chord, the 
representation of the color tone, they would correspond to the several 
proportions of RGB in the tone of the pixel. A second method consists of 
doing the same correspondence between the basic colors and the musical 
notes. However the proportions with each color enters in a certain color tone 
would be simulated by a duration of the sound and not by its intensity. So 
we would have for each tonality, the emission of three notes in succession, 
instead of a chord. A third naïve method, but perhaps the one of easier 
learning would be to use simply the seven musical notes to simulate the 
seven colors of the rainbow and we leave the resolution sideways in 
different tones. Only the experience can decide for one of these methods. 
Once implemented the technological aspects of the transformation of image 
files in the corresponding sound files, we would passe to the other phase: the 
one of a child's instruction in the recognition of the representative sounds of 
the several images. We could begin for example, showing  him a yellow card 
with a blue circle of a certain diameter. We would describe the content of the 
image for the child and we make him to hear the corresponding sound. Soon 
after we would modify the color of the circle for red and we repeated the 
procedure with other colors, until  he memorize the most important colors of 
the spectrum. Soon after we would change the size of the circle 
progressively with the same color, so that it is acquired the size notion, we 
move for another illustrations and so forth being  the child intructed to 
associate a certain group of sounds with the several aspects of an image, 
such as, its forms, position, dimensions, color, etc. With this we believe that 
we can build an engine able to do people with visual deficiency come " to 
see " in a very close future . If the deficiency is not coming from lesions in 

the responsible cerebral area for the vision, it is possible to excite this area 
by means of a equipment built with this purpose transforming the sound in 
electric pulses that they will work the nerves transmitters of the light, 
substituting the paper of rhodopsin(2)

Conclusive results regarding to a blind man real capacity to interpret the 
incoming sound signs of an image is beyond the purposes of this article and 
the only way of test thating that point of view it is through experiences. 

References

P. B. L. Meijer - Experimental " An System goes Auditory image 
representations ", IEEE transactions of Biomedical Engineering, vol 39, No. 
2 pp 112-121, Feb. 1992 

K. Palczewski et all. -" Structure of Rhodopsin ", Science 2000, August 4, 
289, 734-745 

This document was created with Win2PDF available at http://www.daneprairie.com.
The unregistered version of Win2PDF is for evaluation or non-commercial use only.

