Detection of the primary scintillation light from dense Ar, Kr 

and Xe with novel photosensitive gaseous detectors 

 

L. Periale1,2, V. Peskov3, P. Carlson3, T. Francke3, P. Pavlopoulos2, P. Picchi 1,2, F. 
Pietropaolo 4,2 

1 Torino University, Torino, Italy 
2 CERN, Geneva, Switzerland 
3 Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden 
4 INFN Padova, Italy 

Presented at the Vienna Wire Chamber Conference 

Vienna, February 2001 

 
 

The detection of primary scintillation light in combination with the charge or secondary 
scintillation  signals  is  an  efficient  technique  to  determine  the  events  “t=0”  as  well  as 
particle  /  photon  separation  in  large  mass  TPC  detectors  filled  with  noble  gases  and/or 
condensed noble gases. 
The aim of this work is to demonstrate that costly photo-multipliers could be replaced by 
cheap  novel  photosensitive  gaseous  detectors:  wire  counters,  GEM’s  or  glass  capillary 
tubes coupled with CsI photocathodes. 
We have performed systematic measurements with Ar, Kr and Xe gas  at pressures in the 
range of  1-50 atm as well as some preliminary measurements with liquid Xe and liquid 
Ar. With the gaseous detectors we succeeded in detecting scintillation light produced by 
22  keV  X-rays  with  an  efficiency  of  close  to  100%.  We  also  detected  the  scintillation 
light produced by β’s (5 keV deposit energy) with an efficiency  close to 25%. 
Successful  detection  of  scintillation  from  22  keV  gamma’s  open  new  experimental 
possibilities  not  only  for  nTOF  and  ICARUS  experiments,  but  also  in  others,  like 
WIMP’s search through nuclear recoil emission. 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

I. Introduction 

Liquid  Ar/Xe  (LAr/Xe)  TPC’s  are  powerful  large-mass  detectors  which  can  be  used  in 

many  experiments.  A  relevant  example  is  the  ICARUS  experiment  at  Gran  Sasso.  The 

same technique could be used  for the nTOF experiment to perform n/gamma separation 

or in experiments oriented on WIMP search. 

One of the most powerful concepts of the LAr/Xe TPC is the detection and processing of 

two signals: the primary scintillation produced by charged particles or radiation and the 

charge signal produced by drifting primary electrons on a system of electrodes (usually 

wires)  immersed  in  the  liquid.  Charge  multiplication  around  the  electrodes  was  also 

investigated  (see  for  example  [1]  and  references  there  in).  In  some  cases,  instead  of 

charge  signals  or  together  with  them,  secondary  scintillation  light  can  be  used.  The 

secondary scintillation light can be generated in the region of strong electric field inside 

the  liquid  (or  outside  in  the  case  of  the  double-phase  detectors).  An  advantage  of  this 

approach is that it gives a powerful method for  particle separation, because the ratio of 

these two signals depends on energy and other characteristics of the particles (or photons) 

[ 2]. Earlier, expensive photo-multipliers (PMTs) with window transparent to VUV were 

mostly used for the detection of the primary scintillation light (see [1-3] and references 

there in). 

The aim of the present work is to implement into TPCs a novel photosensitive gaseous 

detector: a wire counter or GEM/capillary-type plate combined with CsI photocathodes. 

We name of this device is gaseous photo-multiplier or GPM.  

Such detectors have the same quantum efficiency (QE) as vacuum PMTs, but in contrast 

to  PMTs  they  are  cheap,  compact,  can  be  manufactured  with  large  sensitive  area,  are 

position  sensitive  and  insensitive  to  magnetic  fields.  GPMs  with  CsI  and  other  solid 

photocathodes show advantages with respect to ordinary photosensitive gaseous detectors 

due  to  their  good  time  resolution  and  the  possibility  to  work  at  low  temperatures  (see 

[4,5] and references therein)   

II. Experimental set up 

Our  experimental  set  up  is  presented  schematically  in  Fig  1.  Basically  it  contains  a 

scintillation chamber, separated by windows from the GPM and the PMT. In some tests 

 

 

 

no separation window was used between the scintillation chamber and GPM. Inside the 
scintillation chamber a source was installed: 241Am, Cd or 60Sr. In some experiments we 
also  used  57Co  placed  outside  the  test  chamber.  The  scintillation  chamber  could  be 

pumped and/or filled with noble gases: Ar, Kr or Xe at pressure p=1-50 atm or in liquid 

phase. The following GPMs were used: a single-wire counter with a CsI cathode, double 

GEM  operating  in  tandem,  and  capillary  tubes  operating  in  tandem,  and  a  home  made 

GEM/capillary–type detector. The latter, for reason which will be presented below, was 

called  “optimized  GMP”.  The  single-wire  counter  had  the  diameter  of  the  cathode 
cylinder of 3.8 cm, and the diameter of the gold coated tungsten anode wire of 80 µm. (a 

disc ~2 cm diameter). To achieve the highest possible QE its design has a special feature: 

the disc (diameter of 22mm) covered with a CsI layer was placed on a distance of 8mm 

from  the  anode  wire.  Two  sizes  of  GEM’s  were  used:  3x3  cm2  and  10x10  cm2.  In  all 

measurements they were use in tandem. Two types of configurations were tested; either 

they were combined with CsI photo-cathodes placed few mm apart from the first GEM, 

or  the  upper  GEM  was  covered  with  CsI  photosensitive  layer.  Capillary  plates  had  a 
diameter of 20 mm and the size of holes of 100 µm. Similarly to GEM they operated in 

tandem  and  were  combined  with  CsI  photo-cathodes.  The  picture  of  the  “optimized 

GPM” is presented in Fig 2. It was made from G10 plate, 2 mm thick with drilled holes, 

1mm diameter each. The detector was operated in a single step configuration only. Most 

CsI  photo-cathodes  used  were  prepared  at  CERN  [6]  however  home–made  sprayed 

photo-cathodes were also used. To avoid photo-chemical reaction of CsI with the cupper 

the GEM and “optimized GPM” electrodes were covered in advance with Ni/Au layers. 

All detectors operated in P10 or Ar+5%CH4 gas. A charge-sensitive amplifier Ortec 142 

AH  was  connected  to  the  anode  wire  via  a  de-coupling  capacitor.  When  necessary,  the 

signals from the charge-sensitive preamplifier were additionally amplified by a research 

amplifier  Ortec  450.  The  GPM  also  had  a  small  Be  window  allowing  to  use  an  X-ray 

source for amplitude calibration. 

The PMT we used was EMI-9426 with a MgF2 window. Signals from the GPM and the 

PMT were recorded on a Le Croy digital oscilloscope. 

The  distances  between  the  Am-source,  the  CsI  photo-cathode  and  the  PMT  were  5  cm 

and  6.5  cm,  respectively.  The  typical  solid  angle  for  detection  in  measurements  with 

 

 

single  wire  counter  was  Ω~10-2.  In  the  case  of  other  types  of  GPM,  due  to  their  lower 

efficiency we worked with increased solid angles (up to Ω~10-1). 

III. Results 

1. Detectors with windows, operating in quenched gases 

a) Results with single wire counter 

a-1) Results at 1 atm 

The  first  tests  were  done  with  a  strong  source  of  primary  scintillation,  241  Am,  to 

measure  the  GPM’s  quantum  efficiency.  In  order  to  estimate  the  number  of  photo-

electrons emitted from the CsI photo-cathode by individual scintillation bursts produced 

by alpha particles, we used an external 55Fe source [7,8]. Each 5.6 keV monochromatic 

X-ray  photon  produces  ~220  primary  electrons  inside  the  GPM  volume.  By  comparing 

the 55Fe pulses with the scintillation pulses one concluded that the scintillation light from 

alpha particles, produced around 200, 100 and 20 primary electrons from the CsI photo-

cathode  in  Xe,  Kr  and  Ar  respectively.  The  quantum  efficiency  of  the  CsI  cathode 

deduced in these measurements was QE~ 20% at 175 nm. 

In the next set of measurements we tried to detect scintillation light produced by 22 keV 

X-rays  from  Cd  (see  Fig  3).  The  probability  of  detection  was  then  estimated  from  the 

ratio  of  the  measured  number  of  counts,  n,  from  those  which  one  can  expect  from  the 

known source intensity, N, [7,8]: 

ξ=n/N (1) 

Detection  probability  ξ  close  to  100%  was  reached  for  22  keV  X-rays  in  Xe.  From 

similar measurements we found  ξ~50% in Kr and ξ~10% in Ar. 

As a final step we tried to detect scintillation light produced by βs from  90Sr (MIP). To 

minimize the scattering we strongly collimated the Cd source and oriented it parallel to 

the  window  at  a  distance  of  5  cm.  The  typical  signals  and  pulse  height  distribution  are 

shown in Fig 4. The efficiency estimated with the method described above was ~ 25%. 

 

 

 

 

a-2) Results obtained with dense Xe  

Fig 5 shows the intensity of the primary scintillation light as function of Xe density. One 

sees that in liquid Xe, compared to gaseous Xe at 1 atm the signal drops only by a factor 

of two. 

b) Results with GEM and capillaries  

Intense  efforts  are  underway  to  use  micro-pattern  detectors  in  combination  with  solid 

photo-cathodes (see for example [9,10] and references therein).  

As a comparison we also tested the operation of double GEM and double capillary plates, 

combined with photo-cathodes placed few mm apart form these detectors, as well as the 

configuration  where  their  upper  cathodes  were  covered  with  CsI  [8].  Results  obtained 

with  micro-pattern  detectors  can  be  summaries  as  follows:  we  succeeded  in  detecting 
primary scintillation light produced by α’s; compared with single wire counters, the total 

gain was lower by an order of magnitude (see Fig 6) and the efficiency η (η defined as 

efficiency per unit detector area and solid angle)was lower by a factor of 3-4 [11]. 

These  tests  show  that,  in  the  case  of  window  approach,  micro-pattern  detectors  do  not 

offer any advantage compared to single-wire (only complications because micro-pattern 

detectors should be operate in multi-step configuration) especially for the applications in 

TPCs where there is no need for extremely high position resolution. 

2 Windowless detectors operating in pure noble gases 

As mentioned in the introduction, to increase the sensitivity of the TPC one has to work 

in charge multiplication mode. Charge multiplication in pure noble liquids or gases is a 

difficult  task.  This  is  why  the  use  of  secondary  scintillation  light  was  suggested.  The 

secondary  scintillation  light  can  be  produced  near  the  electrodes  in  liquid  or  gas  phase 

(the so called double-phase TPC). In the latter case, for detection of primary or secondary 

scintillation  light  it  would  be  convenient  to  use  windowless  detectors.  Micro-pattern 

detectors  may  have  advantages  because  they  can  operate  in  pure  noble  gases.  This  is 

because possible photon feedback is geometrically blocked. To verify this possibility we 

performed several tests with GEMs, capillary tubes and optimized GPM. 

 

 

 

 

 

a) Windowless GEM and capillary tubes 

We made short tests of operation in pure noble gases of GEMs [11] and capillary tubes 

with CsI photo-cathodes placed 3 mm apart as well as with capillary tubes whose upper 

cathodes was covered with CsI. Results obtained can be summaries as follows. 

1) All detectors worked in pure noble gases, however two or more steps of multiplication 
were  required  to  get  gains  >103  (see  [11]).  This  makes  the  detection  system  too 

complicated. 

2)  The  dynamic  range  of  the  multi-step  configuration  was  narrow,  due  to  limits  on  the 

maximum  allowed  total  charge  in  the  avalanche  before  break-down  appears  (see[12]). 

This restricts the dynamic range and reduces the sensitivity of the TPC. 
3)  The  detection  efficiency  of  the  windowless  GPMs  η,  was  measured  with  primary 

scintillation produced with alphas. In Ar the detection efficiency was 2-2.5 less than the 

detection  efficiency  of  a  single  wire  counter.  However  in  Xe  and  Kr  it  was  lower  by  a 

factor of 8-15. 

Therefore, this type of windowless detector can compete with a single wire counter with 

a  window  only  if  the  window  is  made  of  CaF.  In  the  case  of  MgF2  window  (which  is 

more transparent to Ar scintillation light), the single wire counter will be superior in gain, 

efficiency and maximum achievable gain. 

b) Tests of optimized GPM 

From  [12]  it  follows  that  several  thin  micro-pattern  detector  operating  in  tandem  are 

equivalent in maximum achievable gain to one detector with a thick avalanche gap. This 

is  why  we  developed  and  extensively  tested  an  optimized  design  of  GPM  with  a 

combination of capillary tubes and GEM (see Fig 2). 

This detector allowed us to get rather good results. Without CsI coating it can operate at 
gains close to 104, but with CsI the maximum achievable gain lowers to 103 due to ion 

feedback. 

Two  possible  functions  of  optimized  GPMs  were  studied.  The  first  was  to  use  a 

windowless GPM for detection of primary and secondary scintillation light. Fig 7 shows 

pulses from a GPM and a PMT produced by the scintillation light produced by 122 keV 
X-rays. The detection efficiency η was 15 times lower compared to a single wire counter. 

 

 

 

However,  in  practice,  since  the  detector  has  a  very  simple  and  rigid  design,  one  can 
compensate  its  low  value  of  η  by  using  a  large  surface  detector.  In  this  case  the  total 

efficiency is  

Σ=η SΩ (2) 

where  S  is  the  detector  sensitive  surface  and  Ω  is  the  detection  solid  angle  that  can  be 

made sufficiently large even larger than a single wire counter with window can offer. 

The  second  possible  application  of  the  optimized  GPM  was  to  use  it  as  primary 

scintillation  light  amplifier  (see[13]).  The  main  advantage  of  this  approach  is  that  in 

contrast to charge multiplication it has a linear response. The disadvantage is that one has 

to use another detector, for example with window, to detect the amplified light. 

IV. Discussion- 

1. Detectors with window 

Results presented in this work demonstrated that the scintillation light from noble gases 

could be successfully detected by GPMs. One of the best options among them is a single–

wire  counter.  These  detectors  are  very  simple  and  cheap.  They  are  sensitive  to  single 

photo-electrons  and  at  the  same  time  practically  have  no  “dark  current”  or  “spurious” 

pulses  (typical  of  PMTs),  and  therefore  it  is  beneficial  in  the  search  for  very  weak 

signals. 
As a consequence, we succeeded to detect scintillation light produced by αs, 60 keV and 

22  keV  X-rays,  with  detection  probability,  ξ,  close  to  100%.  With  the  probability  of 

~25% we detected the scintillation light produced by βs with 5 keV deposit energy.  

Since the detected signals were at the level of single electrons, no energy resolution was 

obtained for 22 keV X-rays. Single electron signals is a result of the small solid angle for 
the scintillation light detection (Ω~10-2). With a larger solid angle or by using reflective 

coating in the scintillation chamber, better results are expected. 

The  most  important  result  obtained  in  these  measurements  was  that  the  primary 

scintillation light does not drop significantly with pressure. This opens the possibility to 

use primary scintillation in high pressure detectors (similar to what was used in the case 

of liquid noble gases).  

 

 

 

Once more our experiments demonstrated the superiority of GPMs with respect to PMTs: 

the  GPM  has  the  same  quantum  efficiency  of  the  PMT,  but  no  noise  pulses  or  after-

pulses.  Therefore  the  use  of  GPMs  for  “high  rate”  application,  for  example  nTOF,  is 

crucial. 

2. Windowless detectors 

Results can be explained from formula (2) in which 
η= QckT (3) 

where  c  is  an  extraction  efficiency  compared  to  vacuum  (it  depends  on  the  gas,  it  is 

higher in Xe, lower in Ar), k is a collection efficiency from the photo-cathode surface, T 

is the window transparency (in the case of GPMs with window). 

In the case of single-wire counters, c=0.5-1 (depending on applied voltage) and k=1. 

In the case of micro-pattern detectors with CsI deposited directly on their cathode (GEM, 

capillary  tubes,  optimized  GPM),  k<1  and  c=0.5-1  (if  they  operate  in  quenched  gases) 

and c<<1 if they operate in noble gases. 
Therefore, in the case of Ar the total efficiency Σ of the single wire counter with window 

(low T) can be close to the total efficiency of the windowless GPMs (high T, but low k 
and c). In the case of Kr and Xe the efficiency η=Qkc of the “optimized GPM” was lower 

than single wire detector with window. However, it could be compensated by using large 

sensitive surface.  Finally we conclude that  “optimized GPMs” can compete with single 

wire counters in some cases. 

VI. Conclusion 

For  the  first  time  the  scintillation  light  from  Ar,  Kr  and  Xe  was  detected  with  a  GPM. 

This  may  open  a  possibility  to  use  simple  and  cheap  readout  of  high  pressure  or  noble 

liquid  scintillation  detectors.  Advantages  of  GPMs  compared  to  PMTs  are:  low  cost, 

large area, insensitivity to magnetic fields, as well as very simple and compact designs. 

This  technique  can  be  applied  not  only  in  some  important  physics  experiments,  like 

WIMPS  search,  but  also  in  medicine  and  industry  to  improve  the  time  and  position 

resolution of various detectors. 

 

 

 

 

 

We thank I. Crotti for technical assistance and the C. Williams , Sauli and  Braem group 

for friendly help. We would like also to thank L. Ropelewski for often discussions and 

Acknowledgments. 

help through this work 

References: 

[1] D. Cline et al., Asropart. Phys. 12 2000 373 

R. Periale, Tesi di laurea in Fisica-INFN e Universita’di Torino, Italy 1998  

A.J.P.L.Policarpo et al., Nucl. Instr and Meth in Phys.Res. A365 (1995) 568 

[2] F. Arneodo et al "Scintillation efficiency of nuclear recoil in LXe" 

to be appear in Nucl. Instr and Meth in Phys.Res. A, 2000 

[3] A. Bolozdynia et al., Nucl. Instr and Meth in Phys.Res. A385 (1997) 225 

[4] V. Peskov Journ. Appl. Spectr. 48 (1988) 316 

[5] V. Peskov “Gaseous detectors with solid photocathodes” CERN Yellow report 97-06 

(1997) 48 

[6] A. Braem Lab. CERN 

[7] I. Periale et al., “First observation of the primary scintillation light from Ar, Kr and 

Xe with GPM” nTOF Intern. Report, CERN, August  2000 

[8] I. Periale et al., “Observation of a primary scintillation light produced by X-rays and 

MIP in noble gases with GPM” nTOF Intern. Report, CERN August 2000 

[9] A. Sharma “Gaseous micropattern detectors in Astrophysics, Radiology and Plasma 

Physics” to be published in IEEE Nucl. Sci, 2000 

[10] V. Peskov et al., Nucl. Instr and Meth in Phys.Res. A433 (1999) 492 

[11] I. Periale “Study of windowless micropattern detectors for LArTPC application” 

nTOF Intern. Report, CERN February 2001 

[12] V. Peskov et al., “The study and optimization of new micropattern detectors for high 

rate applications” submitted to IEEE Nucl. Sci 

[13] D. Cline et al "Measurements of scintillation amplification in Xe detector with CsI 

luminescence plate" Presented at the 4th Int. Symp. on Sources and Dark Matter in the 

Universe - 2000 Marina del Rey, CA, USA. 

 

 

 

 

Figure captions 

Fig. 1  Schematic drawing of the experimental set up. 

Fig. 2 Photo of optimized GPM. 

Fig. 3 Oscillograms of the signals from the GPM (the upper beam) and the PMT (the 

meadle beam) in the case of the detection a primary scintillation light produced by 22 kev 

X-rays in Kr at a pressure of 1 atm. A pulse-height spectrum is also shown (the lowest 

Fig. 4 Oscillograms of the signals from the GPM and the PMT in the case of the detection 

of the primary scintillation light produced by beta particle with 5 kev deposit energy. Xe, 

beam) 

1 atm.  

Fig. 5 Dependence of the intensity of the primary scintillation light (produced by 30 keV 

photons) with Xe density. Note that in the case of LXe a 60keV souse was used  

Fig. 6 Gain of double-step GEM operating in P10 gas at 1atm. Diamond- without CsI 

Fig. 7 Signals from the optimized GMP and PM produced by scintillation light from Xe 

coating, squares- with CsI coating 

at p=2.5 atm by 122keV gamma-rays. 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4 

 

 
.

b
r
a
(
 
n
o
i
t
a
l
l
i
t
n
i
c
s
 
y
r
a
m

i
r
P

)
s
t
i
n
u

1,2

1

0,8

0,6

0,4

0,2

0

0

1

2

3

4

Xe density(g/cm3)

Figure 5 

 

 

 

 

 

100000

10000

n
i
a
G

1000

100

10

1

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

Voltage (V)

Figure 6 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 7 

 

 

 

 

 

