Evaluation of various planar gaseous detectors with CsI photocathodes 

 

for the detection of primary scintillation light from noble gases 

 

L. Periale1,2, V. Peskov3∗, P. Carlson3, C. Iacobaeus4,  T. Francke3, N. Pavlopoulos1,  
F. Pietropaolo1,5 , T. Sokolova6 
 

1CERN, Geneva, Switzerland 
2Torino University, Torino, Italy 
3Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden 
4Kaorlinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden 
5 INFN Padova, Italy 
6University for Friendships between the Nations, Moscow, Russia 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Presented at the 1st Topical Symposium on Functional Breast Imaging with 
Advanced Detectors 

Rome, April 2001 

 
 
 
 
Noble gases and liquids are excellent scintillators and this opens a unique opportunity to 
directly detect the primary scintillation light produced in these media by photons or 
particles. This signal can be used for several purposes, for example as a start signal for 
TPCs or for particle’s identification. Usually photomultipliers (PMs) are used for the 
detection of the scintillation light. In our previous work we have demonstrated that costly 
PMs could be replaced by gaseous detectors with CsI photocathodes . Such detectors 
have the same quantum efficiency as the best PMs but at the same time are cheap, simple 
and have high position and time resolutions. 
The aim of this work is to evaluate various planar type gaseous detectors with CsI 
photocahodes in order to choose the best one for the detection of the primary scintillation 
light from noble gases and liquids. 
 

                                                           
∗ Corresponding author: Vladimir.Peskov@cern.ch 

I. Introduction 

 
Advanced detectors based on noble gases and liquids are using both excellent scintillation 

properties of this media and the fact that charge, released by photons or particles in the 

detector’s volume, can be freely moved and collected on electrodes. 

Note, for example, that Xe in a gaseous or liquid phase emits as much photons per unit of 

deposit energy as the best crystal scintillator such as NaI. This opens a unique 

opportunity to directly detect the primary scintillation light produced by photons or 

particles. This signal can be used for several purposes; for example as a start signal for 

TPCs or for particles identification [1]. Relevant examples could be the Icarus 

experiment [2], LXe PET [3], high –pressure gamma detectors [4] or detectors for 

WIMP’s search [5]. 

Nowadays PMs are usually used for the detection of the primary scintillation light. 

However, PMs that are sensitive to UV light and capable of operating at low 

temperatures are very expensive and thus do not allow a high granularity. 

In our previous work we have demonstrated that PMs could be replaced by gaseous 

detectors with CsI photocathodes[1]. Such detectors have the same quantum efficiency as 

the best PMs, but at the same time are cheap, simple, and have high position and time 

resolutions [6]. 

The aim of this work is to evaluate various planar type gaseous detectors with CsI 

photocahodes in order to choose the best one for the detection of the primary scintillation 

light from noble gases and liquids.  

 

II. Experimental set up 

As was demonstrated in our previous work, the intensity of the primary scintillation light 

produced by 30-120 keV x-rays in well cleaned LXe is only two times less than in a 

gaseous Xe at 1 atm [1]. Therefore for comparative studies, a simplified prototype 

operating at 1-2 atm can be used. The schematic drawing of our experimental set up is 

shown in Fig.1. It essentially contains two parts: a scintillation chamber and attached to 

it, a test chamber with a planar detector installed inside. Both chambers can be coupled to 

each other either through a separating CaF2 window or directly without any window. In 

some experiments the window was coated with a Cr layer (~30 nm thick) and may also  

be additionally coated with a semitransparent CsI photocathode 0.2 µm thick  

The scintillation chamber was flushed by Ar, Kr or Xe at pressure P=1-2 atm. The 

scintillation light was produced by x- rays (28 -122 keV) from 241Am or 57Co, or by an 

alpha source  241Am installed inside the test chamber. 

In some studies the primary scintillation light was too weak to perform reliable 

measurements. In this case we used a “light amplifier”. The principle of operation was 

the same as the gas scintillation chamber. It was designed from three parallel meshes, 20 

mm and  5 mm apart respectively, across which a high voltage was applied (see Fig. 1).  

Primary electrons produced by the radioactive source drifted through the first mesh and 

produced a secondary scintillation light between the second and the third meshes.  

Inside the test chamber one of the following detectors were mounted: Multiwire 

Proportional Counter (MWPC),  Parallel-Plate Avalanche Counter (PPAC), Gas Electron 

Multiplier (GEM ), Capillary  Plates (CP), Home Made Capillary Plate (HMCP), Micro 

Mesh Gas  detector (MICROMEGAS.  

The MWPC had pitches of anode wires of 3 mm in length and with diameters of 100 µm. 

The upper cathode was the metalized CaF2 window and  the lower cathode was a well 

polished stainless steel disc. In some measurements it was coated with a CsI layer of 0.3 

µm in thickness. In experiments without the separation window, the upper electrode was 

a metallic mesh .The PPAC had a similar design: the CaF2 window served as the cathode 

and the anode was a stainless steel disc. The gap between the electrodes was of  2 mm. 

GEMs were obtained from CERN and had  standard designs: the diameter of holes was 

50 µm with pitches of 120 µm. The CPs used in this work were the same as described in 

[7]. The HMCPs are described in [1]. MICROMEGAS were manufactured by us [8] and 

had the gap between the cathode mesh and the stainless steel anode of 100 or 150 µm. In 

order to have the highest possible gain and time resolutions HMPC and CP were often 

run in “CAT mode” when its anode was in direct contact with the readout plate.  

In some measurements the outer cathode surfaces of GEM, CP, HMCP and 

MICROMEGAS were coated with a 0.3 µm thick CsI layer. In this case we used GEMs 

or HMCP to avoid a photochemical reaction of CsI with Cu, their cathodes were covered 

with a Ni/Au layer. 

Our experimental set up allowed a fast exchange of the detectors without exposure of the 

CsI photocathodes to air. This ensured the reproducibility of the results. 

In the case of a set up with a window, detectors operated in P10 or in a mixture of Ar 

with 3 or 5% of CH4. Some detectors  (PPAC and MWPC) can be coupled to the window 

directly, while others had a drift region (3-10 mm) between them and the window.  

 

 

In the case of a set up without a window, detectors operated in the same pure noble gases 

as the scintillation chamber. In some measurement with this set up, a Hg lamp with a 

narrow band filter (182 nm) was also used. The signals from the meshes and the detectors 

were recorded with low noise charge sensitive amplifiers [9]. In the case of current 

measurements, a Ketley 487 picoampermeter was used. 

III. Experimental procedure and results 

III-1 Detectors with a window 

III.-1.1 Semitransparent CsI photocathodes 

a) The monitoring of the photocathode quantum efficiency 

In comparative studies of various detectors it was very important to monitor actual 

quantum efficiency of the CsI photocathodes. For this purpose, a mesh (80% optical 

transparency) was installed in control measurements between the CaF2 window and the 

detector,(see Fig.1) and the signal from the mesh produced by the light from the 

scintillation chamber was measured as a function of the applied voltage. Typically this 

signal increases  with voltage until (at voltages of a few kV) it reaches a plateau. In the 

plateau region the amplitude of the measured signal was: 

∆V=kIAmΩQg,  (1) 

 

 

 

where IAm is the intensity of the primary scintillation light produced by alpha particles, Ω 

is a solid angle at which this light reaches the photocathode, Qg -the CsI quantum 

efficiency in the gas media and k - a  light multiplication factor of the light amplifier. The 

relative changes of the quantum efficiency under various conditions and for various 

detectors were measured from the relative changes of the signal amplitudes. To estimate 

the absolute value of the quantum efficiency a calibrated charge sensitive amplifier was 

used [9]. In independent control measurements we also measured the amplitude of the 

charge signal from another alpha source installed inside the test chamber (see Fig.1). 

When the chamber was pumped we were able as well to measure the absolute quantum 

efficiency of the CsI photocathode in vacuum Qv. This gave us the most important 

reference. Indeed the quantum efficiency of the photocathode in the gas media is 

Qg=QvG(E/P)  (2), 

where G is a coefficient which depends on a gas and reduced electric field E/P [10]. Thus 

for the same Qv , the quantum efficiency in the gas Qg may vary  depending on gas 

conditions and   especially with E/P ratio. 

 

b) Comparative studies of various planar detectors 

The evaluation of various planar detectors was done through measurements and  the 

comparison of pulse amplitudes produced by the scintillation light of alphas or x-rays.  

If alphas produced Nph, then a fraction of it  NphΩ1 would enter the light amplifier, where 

Ω1 is a corresponding solid angle. 

The number of photons reaching the photocathode from the light amplifier would be  

kNphΩ1Ω2, 

photocathode. 

where Ω2 is the solid angle at which the secondary scintillation light reaches the CsI 

The number of created photoelectrons from the CsI photocathode would be 

The amplitude of the signal from the detector would be  

Ne= kNphΩ1Ω2Qg     (3). 

∆V= ACsNe      (4), 

where A is  the  gas gain, Cs- photoelectron’s collection efficiency. 

Thus from measured pulse amplitude ∆V (by the calibrated charge sensitive amplifier ) 

and the gas gain A, one can calculate the photocathode quantum efficiency. Low gas 

gains (A<50) were measured using a Hg lamp. The gas gain was determined  as a ratio of 

the  measured current at the given voltage to the value of the current in the plateau region. 

High gains  (for the given voltage) were estimated from the linear plot of the lnA vs 

voltage, using the results obtained with the Hg lamp.   

In order to independently verify these calculations, we introduced to the detector’s drift 

region 6 keV photons from 55Fe. Each absorbed photon created nFe primary electrons 

(around 220) and this gave an amplitude of 

∆VFe=AnFe      (5). 

Comparing the measured signal ∆V with the ∆V Fe one can determine Ne and therefore 

Qg(E/P). As an example Fig. 2 shows amplitudes from CP as function of applied voltage 

due to the scintillation light produced by alpha particles and due to the charges produced 

by Fe. The ratio of these two signals allowed Qg be to determined. 

Usually,  results of calculations performed from both measurements agreed within 30- 

40%. In Table 1 mean values are presented of the efficiency of various detectors 

determined from the two types of measurements. One can see that the highest quantum 

efficiency was measured for detectors coupled to the semitransparent CsI photocathode 

without any drift region: PPC and MWPC. This high value of the Qg is obviously due to 

the higher electric field near the cathode surface (high value of G(E/P) [10]). 

 

 

 

III-1.2  Planar detector with reflective CsI photocathodes 

All detectors described above were also tested with reflective CsI photocathodes. 

 In the case of MICROMEGAS, GEM and CP, the cathode surfaces facing the light 

source were coated with CsI layers of 0.3 µm thick. Typically, gaseous detectors with CsI 

photocathodes had less maximum achievable gain than the same detectors without the 

CsI photocathode (see for example Fig.3).  This is because the probability of the 

secondary processes increases with the cathode quantum efficiency [11]. 

The method of the measurements of the quantum efficiency of the detectors with 

reflective photcathodes was similar to the one decried above. One should note however, 

that in the case of GEM and CP only part of created photoelectrons were pushed by the 

electric force inside the amplification gaps. Formally, this could be described as a 

collection efficiency Cr. Thus the measured signal amplitude was ∆Vc= CrANe, where Cr, 

depending on a detector’s design, could be ≤1. The mean values of CrQg obtained from 

these measurements and calculations are presented in Table 1.  

III-2 Windowless Detectors with Reflective Photocathodes 

a)  Measurements with radioactive sources 

It is known that gaseous detectors can operate in pure noble gases. However, their gains 

are limited by photon and ion feedback which give the maximum values for wire types of 

detectors of A ~102-104 (depending on gas ) [10-12]. From this point of view CP and 

HMCP may have advantages because their cathodes are well shielded geometrically from 

the avalanche emission. As an example Fig. 4 shows pulses from HMCP, operating in 

pure Xe at a gain of ~104. 

detectors.  

A procedure similar to the one described above was used to evaluate CQg for windowless 

The results obtained so far are presented in Table 2. In each these measurements the 

voltage setting was optimized to get the maximum possible signal from the detectors 

(E<1kV/cm). The main conclusion is that detectors coated with the CsI layer in general, 

had less efficiency and less gain compared to detectors operated in quenched gases. The 

only exception were  the detectors operating in Ar and measuring  Ar scintillation light. 

In this particular case windowless GEM and HMCP could compete in detection 

efficiency with window type detectors, but only for the reason that  the CaF2 window cuts 

most of the Ar radiation. 

b)  Measurements with the Hg lamp 

Complimentary measurements were done with an Hg lamp. In current mode one can 

operate detectors at relatively low gains and therefore, any type of detectors could be 

tested in pure noble gases including MICROMEGAS (Fig.5). The main conclusion from 

these measurements is that efficiency in this mode is much lower than at high gain mode 

(due to the field effect). 

 

 

IV. Discussion 

From the results presented in Tables 1 and 2 one can conclude that the highest efficiency 

in detection of the primary scintillation light from noble gases was achieved with PPAC 

with a reflective photocathode operating in quenched gases. However, for practical 

reasons  MWPC could be  better for some applications. This is because these types of 

gaseous detectors have no destructive sparks, damaging photocathodes and amplifiers.  

All other tested detectors have less efficiency. This is because other types of detectors 

either have a lower electric field near the cathode and therefore higher photoelectron back 

diffusion [10,11], or lower collection efficiency C due to their geometry.   

Among windowless detectors GEM and HMCP operating in Ar have the most practical 

inters. These detectors have a reasonably high Qg, but at the same time dramatically 

simplify the readout technique.  One should admit however, that in Xe and Kr 

windowless detectors have less QgC  efficiency exists compared to detectors with 

windows. 

V. Conclusions 

 

 

Primary scintillation light of noble liquids and gases can be recorded by gaseous 

detectors with solid photocathodes [1]. Both designs, either with windows and without 

windows can be used. Among the designs with windows the highest efficiency have 

PPAC and MWPC with reflective photocathodes. Among the windowless detectors the 

best choice could be GEM / capillary type detectors. 

Acknowledgements 

We thank I. Crotti and L. Ropelewski for their help and support thorough this work 

[1] L. Periale at al., “Detection of the primary scintillation light from dense Ar, Kr and 

Xe with novel photosensitive gaseous detectors” CERN preprint-XXX-2001(Los 

[2] F. Arnedo et al.,  Nucl. Instr. in Phys. Res. A464 (2001) 286 

[3] Yu. Chepel et al., IEEE Nucl. Sci. 46 (1999) 1038 

[4] A. Bolozdynia et al., Nucl. Instr. in Phys. Res. A385 (1997) 225  

[5] D. Cline at al., “A WIMP detector with two –phase Xe” Preprint UCLA-APH-0116-

[6] V. Peskov “Gaseous detectors with solid photocathodes” CERN Yellow report CERN 

[7] V. Peskov et al., Nucl. Instr. in Phys. Res. A433 (1999) 492  

[8] P. Fonte te al., Nucl. Instr. in Phys. Res. A419 (1998) 405 

[9] The amplifiers were obtained from E. Aprile group, Columbia University, USA 

[10] V. Peskov Sov. Phys Tech. Phys V. 22, #3 (1977) 335 

[11] V. Peskov Sov. Phys Tech. Phys v. 20, #6 (1975) 791 

[12] V. Peskov  . Jour. Tech. Phys., 42 (1972) 2564. 

References: 

Alamos) 

2/99 

97-06 (1997) 48 

 

 

 

Figure captions: 

Fig.1. Experimental set up 

Fig. 2. Amplitude of signals from CP detecting scintillation light from Xe (1) and  CP 

detecting charge produced by 55Fe (2) 

Fig. 3. Gains vs voltage for MICROMEGAS (1), double GEM (2) and CPs (3) without 

(small symbols) and with (large symbols) a CsI layer  

Fig 4. Pulses from the HGPM  detecting primary and secondary scintillation light in Xe at 

Fig. 5 Current vs. voltage for MICROMEGAS operating in pure Ar at various drift 

fields:1-50 V/mm, 2-350 V/mm.  

Table 1. Efficiency (to Xe scintillation light) of various window –type gaseous detectors 

with semi-transparent and reflective CsI photocathodes operating in quenched gases  

QgCs(%), E(kV/cm)  QgCr(%), E(kV/cm) 

5.6              ~3 

14              ~3 

7.4             15-20 

19.6           15-20 

MICROMEGAS 

Ar+5%CH4 

4.5              3.3 

 

2.4               3.3  

3.9              >1  

CP (CAT mode) 

Ar+5%CH4 

2.2               3.3  

2.9                >1  

HMCP (CAT mode)  Ar+3%CH4 

2.3               3.3  

4.6                 >1 

p=2atm. 

Detector 

MWPC 

PPAC 

GEM 

 

 

Gas 

P10 

P10 

P10 

Table 2. Efficiency of  windowless detectors with reflective CsI photocathodes operating 

in pure noble gases; E≥1kV/cm 

Detector 

MWPC 

GEM 

CP 

HMCP 

 

QgCr(%) in Xe 

QgCr(%) in Kr 

QgCr(%) in Ar 

7.1 

1.9 

1.5 

2.3 

5.1 

1.4 

 

1.8 

11.6 

3.6  

 

3.8 

 

 

 

Figure 1 

)

V

(
 
e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
A

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

2

1350

1400

1450

1500

1550

Voltage (V)

1

 

 

 

 

Figure 2 

1

n
i
a
G

100000

10000

1000

100

10

1

2

3

0

500

1000

1500

2000

 

Voltage (V)

 

 

 

Figure 3 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4 

)

A
n
(
 
t
n
e
r
r
u
C

10000

1000

100

10

1

0

0,1

0,01

1

2

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

Voltage (V)

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 5 

