A  Foundational  Approach  to  Physics

Peter Rowlands

1
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 

9
1
 
 
 
4
5
0
6
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

IQ  Group  and  Science  Communication  Unit,  Department  of  Physics,  University  of  Liverpool,  Oliver
Lodge Laboratory, Oxford Street, P.O. Box 147, Liverpool, L69 7ZE, UK. e-mail prowl@hep.ph.liv.ac.uk
and prowl@csc.liv.uk

Abstract. A core level of basic information for physics is identified, based on an analysis
of the characteristics of the parameters space, time, mass and charge. At this level, it is
found  that  certain  symmetries  operate,  which  can  be  used  to  explain  certain  physical
facts and even to derive new mathematical theorems. Applications are made to classical
mechanics, electromagnetic theory and quantum mechanics.

1 A foundational level

Certain  aspects  of  physics  suggest  the  existence  of  a  core  level  of  basic  information
which is completely independent of any hypothesis or model-building. This information
is concerned with the definition of the fundamental parameters of measurement and how
they are structured. Here, we are not so much describing nature itself as specifying the
characteristics of the simplest categories needed to make such a description possible. It
is, of course, sometimes argued that physics should not necessarily  be  concerned  with
the simplest possible ideas because nature may well not be simple in principle, but this
argument is based on a misconception. Physics as we know it has evolved because it has
created  a  set  of  simple  categories  which  have  been  successful  in  devising  the  human
construct that we call the ‘description of nature’. Whether or not such simplicity is truly
characteristic of ‘reality’ is a question outside the realm of physics.

Now, the purpose of isolating a foundational level for physics would be to give a
simple  account  of  those  important  facts  which  are  purely  concerned  with  our  own
processes of measurement, and not with, say, the nature of matter or the structure of the
universe.  Such  information,  if  isolated,  could  be  dealt  with  more  efficiently  than  if
linked, unnecessarily, with more specific or more complicated theories, and could lead
to  the  creation  of  wholly  new  sources  of  foundational  information.  In  addition,  if  we
pitch our foundational theories at a high level of sophistication, as we are often tempted
to  do,  we  cut  ourselves  off  from  understanding  their  origins.  Many  truly  fundamental
results  have  often  turned  out  to  be  simple  in  principle,  even  when  it  has  taken  a
sophisticated  approach  to  find  them.  The  simple  bases  are  often  found  only  after  a
prolonged  struggle  with  more  complicated  ideas,  but  it  is  possible  that  we  could
discover some of them more easily by a direct analysis.

1

In attempting to reach the foundational level, then, we need to separate out the truly
fundamental ideas from the mass of sophistications which inevitably accompany them,
but  the  really  basic  ideas  may  not  be  particularly  difficult  to  find.  Obviously,  for
example,  space  and  time  are  basic;  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  a  theory  of  physics
without  space  and  time.  This  is  not  necessarily  true  for  a  combined  space-time;
combinations, by definition, are not basic. If we use space-time as basic, we lose sight of
the separate identities of space and time, which are surely important at the fundamental
level. It is certainly not true that in combining them we have explained one in terms of
the  other.  We  should  really  regard  space-time,  whether  curved  or  otherwise,  as  a
sophistication,  as  something  to  be  discovered  after  we  have  investigated  the  separate
identities of space and time.

Once we have selected space and time, there is only one other type of information
that  is  likely  to  fit  the  description  ‘basic’,  for  the  fundamental  bases  of  the  whole  of
physics are undoubtedly the four known interactions: gravity; electromagnetism; and the
strong  and  weak  nuclear  forces.  Once  we  truly  understand  these,  then  we  will  also
understand  physics.  But  we  already  know  something  about  them.  We  know,  for
example,  that  the  source  terms  for  gravity  and  the  electromagnetic  interaction  are,
respectively,  mass  and  electric  charge.  We  don’t  know  the  source  terms  for  the  weak
and strong forces as precisely, but we know that such terms must exist; and, according
to the rules of quantum electrodynamics, they should be more like electric charge than
like  mass.  Also,  although  the  three  nongravitational  forces  are  very  different  under
normal  conditions,  the  Grand  Unified  Theories  of  particle  physics  suggest  that,  under
ideal conditions, they would be identical. It is reasonable, therefore, to assume that the
differences between these forces are not basic, but a ‘sophistication’, to be explained in
terms of the physical particles that actually exist, after we have established the basics. I
have, therefore, found it convenient to describe the unknown sources for the weak and
strong  interactions  as  weak  and  strong  ‘charges’,  and  to  refer  sometimes  to  the  three
nongravitational sources under the collective label ‘charge’. Something like this concept
is actually used when we talk about the process of ‘charge conjugation’.

Thus, we have four basic parameters – space, time, mass and charge – and we can
use such techniques as dimensional analysis to show that all other physical parameters
arise from compounded versions of these elementary ones. We can also show that it is
precisely these parameters which are assumed to be the elementary ones in the statement
of the CPT theorem. It is perhaps slightly surprising that physicists have been so often
prepared to tackle fundamental questions without taking proper account of these basic
ideas. Although we can’t hope to analyse really basic ideas, we can learn a great deal by
setting one off against the other. It would surely be profitable to examine the properties
of these parameters as closely as possible and  look  for  patterns,  or  symmetries  of  one
sort or another, that would help to clarify their meaning and uses. Symmetry has been
such a powerful tool in understanding particle physics and the fundamental interactions
that we have every reason to expect to find it here. We should, at any rate, examine the
properties of our parameters to see whether or not it exists.

2

2 Conserved and nonconserved: mass and charge versus space and time

Perhaps the first thing that we notice when we closely examine  space, time, mass and
charge is that the last two are conserved quantities and the first two nonconserved. The
conservation  laws  of  mass  and  electric  charge  are  among  the  most  fundamental  in
physics,  and  we  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  they  are  true  without  exception.
Almost certainly, also, some type of conservation law applies to the other two types of
charge  and  manifests  itself  in  such  properties  of  fundamental  particles  as  lepton  and
baryon  conservation.  In  addition,  the  conservation  laws  of  mass  and  charge  are  not
merely  global,  applying  to  the  total  amount  of  each  quantity  in  the  universe,  but  also
local, applying to the amount of each quantity at a given place in a given time. It is as
though each element of mass or charge had an identity which it retained throughout all
interactions,  subject only, in the case of charge, to its annihilation by an element  with
the opposite sign. We could, in principle, label each unique element with an identity tag
which  it  would  never  lose.  Mass  and  charge,  thus,  have  identical  conservation
properties, apart from the fact that masses have no elements with opposite sign.

When we look  at  nonconservation,  as  manifested  by  space  and  time,  we  might  at
first  imagine  that  it  is  merely  the  absence  of  conservation,  but  this  is  not  so.
Examination shows that it is the exact opposite of conservation and it is just as definite a
property.  Nonconservation  is,  in  fact,  one  of  the  most  interesting  and  important  of  all
physical  properties,  and  it  manifests  itself  in  many  different  ways.  Thus,  just  as  the
elements of mass and charge have individual, specific and permanent identities, so those
of  space  and  time  have  no  identity  whatsoever,  and  this  fact  has  to  be  incorporated
directly into physics at all levels. We refer, for example, to the property of translation
symmetry for both space and time. This means that every element of space and time is
exactly like every other, and is not only indistinguishable in practice, but must be stated
to  be  indistinguishable  when  we  write  down  physical  equations.  And  this  translation
symmetry is not an insignificant philosophical concept; it is responsible for two of the
most  important  laws  in  nature,  for  Noether’s  theorem  shows  us  that  the  translation
symmetry  of  time  is  precisely  identical  to  the  conservation  of  energy,  and  that  the
translation  symmetry  of  space  is  precisely  identical  to  the  conservation  of  linear
momentum.

Space, in addition, because it is three-dimensional, also has rotation symmetry; this
means  that  there  is  no  identity,  either,  for  spatial  directions.  In  addition  to  having  no
unique elements, space also lacks a unique set of dimensions. One direction in space is
identical to any other; this is the fact that is responsible for space’s affine structure, the
infinite number of possible resolutions of a vector into dimensional components. Space
rotation symmetry is a very important property and we will return to it later. Noether’s
theorem  shows  that  it  is  exactly  the  same  thing  as  the  conservation  of  angular
momentum.

The  exactly  opposite  nature  of  conservation  and  nonconservation  could  be
illustrated  by  expressing  the  identity  or  uniqueness  properties  of  mass  and  charge  in
terms of ‘translation’ asymmetries. Translation asymmetry then means that one element

3

of mass or charge cannot be ‘translated to’ (or exchanged for) any other within a system,
however similar.

But  translation  and  rotation  symmetry  are  not  the  only  manifestations  of
nonconservation in space and time. The whole of physics is based on defining systems
in  which  conserved  quantities  remain  fixed  while  nonconserved  quantities  vary
absolutely.  A  conserved  quantity  can  only  be  defined  with  respect  to  changes  in  a
nonconserved quantity. In effect, we look at how mass and charge, and such quantities
as  energy,  momentum,  force  or  action  remain  constant,  or  zero,  or  a  maximum  or  a
minimum,  because  of  the  more  fundamental  requirements  involving  mass  and  charge,
while the space and time coordinates alter arbitrarily. The alteration of space and time is
expressed by describing them in terms of differentials. The very fact that we have based
physics  on  differential  equations  and  the  definition  of  systems  involving  conservation
requirements  is  an  expression  of  the  presence  of  both  absolutely  conserved  and
absolutely nonconserved terms in nature.

The  absoluteness  of  the  nonconservation  properties  is  manifested  in  the  gauge
invariance  used  in  both  classical  and  quantum  physics.  In  classical  or  quantum
electrodynamics,  electric  and  magnetic  fields  terms  remain  invariant  under  arbitrary
changes in the vector and scalar potentials, or phase changes in the quantum mechanical
wavefunction, brought about, essentially, by translations (or rotations) in the space and
time  coordinates.  Gauge  invariance  tells  us,  in  effect,  that  a  system  will  remain
conservative under arbitrary changes in the coordinates which do not produce changes in
the  values  of  conserved  quantities  such  as  charge,  energy,  momentum  and  angular
momentum.  In  other  words,  we  cannot  know  the  absolute  phase  or  value  of  potential
because we cannot choose to fix values of coordinates which are subject to absolute and
arbitrary change. Even  more significantly, in  the  Yang-Mills  principle  used  in  particle
physics,  the  arbitrary  phase  changes  are  specifically  local,  rather  than  global.
Nonconservation, therefore, must be local in exactly the same way as conservation.

3 Real and imaginary: space and mass versus time and charge

Now, space and time are alike in their nonconservation, but we know that there must be
fundamental differences between them; otherwise, they would be indistinguishable. One
such distinction is evident in the very mathematical combination which produces four-
dimensional  space-time.  This  is  the  fact  that,  while  Pythagorean  addition  produces
positive values for the squares of the three spatial dimensions, the squared value of time
becomes negative. A convenient way to represent time, then, is by an imaginary number,
as  in  the  Minkowski  space-time  4-vector  used  in  relativity.  This,  of  course,  does  not
make  time  ‘imaginary’  in  itself;  but  it  is  important  for  us  to  ask  why  this  particular
‘trick’ actually works. It is not really adequate to describe it as a ‘convenience’ without
explaining why it is convenient. One interesting fact is that an imaginary representation
would also make uniform velocity imaginary, while acceleration would remain real.

To try to get beyond the facile explanation that the trick is good because it works,
we  should  see  if  we  can  learn  anything  relevant  from  the  representation  of  mass  and

4

charge. Here, we have the intriguing fact, long known but never explained, that forces
between  like  masses  are  attractive,  whereas  forces  between  like  (electric)  charges  are
repulsive; that is, the forces between like masses and like charges have opposite signs.
Now, the force laws effectively square mass and charge terms, in the same way as space
and time  terms are  squared in Pythagorean addition. Suppose,  then,  that  we  choose  to
represent  charges  by  imaginary  numbers  and  masses  by  real  ones.  We  then  have  a
symmetrical representation for the Newton and Coulomb force laws:

F = – 

F = – 

 

Gm1m2
r2
iq1iq2
4πεor2 

In addition, of course, the other two forces – the strong and weak interactions – are
like the electromagnetic in being repulsive for like particles, and so the source terms for
these  forces  would  also  presumably  be  defined  by  imaginary  numbers.  But  the  three
types of source would have to be distinguished from each other in some way. And here
we  have  a  stroke  of  luck,  for  the  mathematics  required  for  such  a  situation  is  already
available and has been well-known for a hundred and fifty years. This is the quaternion
system, discovered by Hamilton in 1843, in which i, j and k, the three square roots of –
1, are related by the formulae:

         

      i2 = j2 = k2 = ijk = –1 .

For  historical  reasons,  quaternions  became  a  proscribed  concept  at  the  end  of  the
nineteenth century, and they still have a reputation for being ‘difficult’ or ‘esoteric’; but,
in  fact,  they  are  remarkably  easy  to  use,  being  effectively  the  reverse  of  the  4-vectors
used  in  Minkowski  space-time:  three  imaginary  parts  and  one  real  (ordinary  real
numbers), as opposed to three real parts and one imaginary. But the real significance of
quaternions is that they are unique. As Frobenius proved in 1878, no other extension of
ordinary  complex  algebra  involving  imaginary  dimensions  is  possible:  if  we  require  a
dimensional imaginary algebra (as the source terms for the electromagnetic, strong and
weak interactions suggest we might) then we have only one possible choice – an algebra
based  on  one  real  part  and  three  imaginary.  (This  is,  of  course,  if  we  wish  to  retain
associativity.  One  further  extension  exists  in  the  8-part  octonions  or  Cayley  numbers,
which break associativity, and which are discussed later in the paper.)

Hamilton discovered the quaternions after finding that a system with two imaginary
parts  was  impossible,  and,  almost  immediately,  he  felt  that  he  was  on  to  the  true
explanation of 3-dimensional space, with time taking up the fourth or real part. By our
analysis, it would be more convenient to apply them to the three imaginary components
of  charge,  with  mass  taking  up  the  real  part.  However,  space  and  time  would  then
become a three real- and one imaginary-part system by symmetry. In this sense, the three
components  of  charge  (say,  ie,  js,  kw)  could  be  considered  as  the  ‘dimensions’  of  a
single  charge  parameter,  with  their  squared  values  used  in  the  calculation  of  forces
added, in the same way as the three parts of space, by Pythagorean addition:

5

space-time
mass-charge

ix
ie

jy 
js 

kz 
kw

it
m

One remarkable consequence of adopting this symmetry as an exact one would be
that  the  vector property of space would be extended to incorporate a quaternionic-like
‘full’ product between two vectors, combining the scalar product with i times the vector
product.  It  is  the  extra  vector  terms  in  this  product  which  are  responsible  for  the
otherwise ‘mysterious’ spin property in quantum mechanics.

It is here that we can now return to the subject of the rotation symmetry of space. If
charge,  like  space,  is  a  three-dimensional  parameter,  then  we  need  to  investigate  how
the  dimensions  behave  with  respect  to  each  other.  Immediately,  we  should  expect  a
difference  from  space,  since  charge  is  a  conserved  quantity.  In  fact,  we  should  expect
conservation  in  dimension  as  well  as  in  quantity;  in  principle,  charge  should  exhibit
rotation  asymmetry.  That  is,  the  sources  of  the  electromagnetic,  weak  and  strong
interactions  should  be  separately  conserved,  and  incapable  of  interconversion.
Immediately, this should tell us that the proton, which has a strong charge measured by
its baryon number, cannot decay to products like the positron  and  neutral  pion,  which
have none. Attention to basics here would require the separate conservation of the three
charges to be built into Grand Unified Theories. Particle theorists have been puzzled as
to  why  the  proton  does  not  decay;  but  basic  reasoning  suggests  that  there  may  be  an
answer. (The Weinberg-Salam unification of electromagnetic and weak forces is not, of
course,  affected  because  this  theory  is  a  statement  of  the  identity  of  effect  in  the  two
interactions, under ideal conditions, not of identity of the sources; the three quaternion
operators i, j and k are different sources, though identical in effect.) In addition, separate
conservation laws would easily lead to baryon and  lepton  conservation,  baryons  being
the only particles with strong, as well as weak, components, and leptons being the only
particles with weak, but no strong, components.

In  view  of  such  advantages  in  applying  an  imaginary  representation  to  the  three
types of charge, we may be inclined to ask if there is any further benefit; and, in fact,
there is, for imaginary numbers have yet another important property. This is the fact that
equal  representation  must  be  given  to  positive  and  negative  values  of  imaginary
quantities.  Unlike  real  numbers,  imaginary  ones  allow  neither  positive  nor  negative
values to be privileged in algebraic equations. In other words, every equation which has
a  positive  solution  also  has  an  algebraically  indistinguishable  negative  solution  (the
complex  conjugate).  Thus,  all  our  charges  (but  not  necessarily  masses)  must  exist  in
both  positive  and  negative  states.  This  is  the  precise  requirement  for  the  existence  of
antiparticles;  even  those  particles,  such  as  the  neutron  and  neutrino,  which  have  no
electric  charge  still  have  antiparticles  because  they  have  strong  and/or  weak  charges
whose  signs  may  be  changed  (under  the  process  of  charge  conjugation,  already
mentioned).

6

4 Divisible and indivisible: space and charge versus time and mass

Now  space  is  like  time  in  being  nonconserved,  like  mass  in  being  real,  and,
apparently,  like  charge  in  being  dimensional.  Dimensionality,  however,  doesn’t  really
look like a basic property. Is there any basic property which explains it? It seems very
probable that there is, and, in looking at this question, it will be necessary once more to
examine the relationship between space and time.

Space and time have often been assumed to be alike in most respects, but there is
good evidence that they are fundamentally different. Space, for example, is always used
in  direct  measurement;  in  fact,  it  is  impossible  to  measure  anything  but  space.  Our
‘time’-measuring  devices,  such  as  pendulums,  mechanical  clocks,  and  crystal  and
atomic  oscillators,  all  use  some  concept  of  repetition  of  a  spatial  interval.  Special
conditions have to be used to set up such measurements, whereas any object whatsoever
can be used to measure space. Space also is reversible – and it is this reversibility which
is used in the measurement of time – but time is not.

It  may  be  convenient  here  to  mention  the  famous  paradoxes  of  Zeno  of  Elea.  Of
course,  these  are,  in  a  sense,  ‘answered’  by  the  use  of  limits  or  infinite  series,  but
Whitrow, who has made the most extensive and influential recent study, thinks that the
answers still leave the problem incomplete.1 In the well-known argument about the race
between  Achilles  and  the  Tortoise,  Achilles,  in  any  number  of  time  intervals,  should
never catch up with the Tortoise, to whom he has given a lead, because, each time he
thinks he has caught up, he finds the Tortoise has already moved further ahead, even if
only by an ever smaller amount. Another example is the Dichotomy Paradox, in which
an object moving over any distance can never get started because it must cover half the
distance before it covers the whole, and a quarter of the distance before it covers half,
and  so  on;  to  go  any  distance  in  a  finite  amount  of  time,  it  must  already  have  been
involved in an infinite number of operations.

The  problem  seems  to  be  the  infinite  divisibility  of  time;  Achilles,  for  example,
never catches  the Tortoise because we have assumed that the time for the race can  be
divided up into finite intervals. On the basis of these, and similar paradoxes, Whitrow
writes:  ‘One  can,  therefore,  conclude  that  the  idea  of  the  infinite  divisibility  of  time
must be rejected, or ... one must recognize that it is ... a logical fiction.’ And the more
recent authors, Peter Coveney and Roger Highfield conclude that: ‘Either one can seek
to  deny  the  notion  of  ‘becoming’,  in  which  case  time  assumes  essentially  space-like
properties; or one must reject the asumption that time, like space, is infinitely divisible
into ever smaller portions.’2 The paradoxes seem to show, according to  Whitrow,  that
motion is ‘impossible if time (and, correlatively, space) is divisible ad infinitum’5

Zeno’s  paradoxes  pose  fundamental  problems  for  the  nature  of  space  and  time;
Bertrand  Russell  considered  them  ‘immeasurably  subtle  and  profound’,  and  Alfred
North. Whitehead thought that they showed an ‘instant of time’ to be ‘nonsense’.2 Our
reason for including them here is to  show  that  there  is  good  evidence  that  one  cannot
simply assume that time can be indefinitely subdivided like space. There is every reason
to believe, in fact, that time, unlike space, is an absolute continuum. There is no infinite

7

succession of measurable instants in time, as supposed in the paradoxes, because there
are no  instants. Time cannot actually be divided. To use  a  more  contemporary  jargon,
space is digital, time is analogue – and we have both concepts in nature because we have
both parameters.

We  can  also  say  that  time  is  the  set  of  reals  with  the  standard  topology
superimposed  (and  is  nonalgorithmic);  space  is  the  set  of  reals  without  the  topology
(and is algorithmic). Henri Bergson, according to Whitrow, ‘enthusiastically adopted the
view’ that time ‘is wholly indivisible’, ‘as a means of escaping the difficulties raised by
Zeno, concerning both temporal continuity and atomicity, without abandoning belief in
the reality of time. ... Unfortunately, in attacking the geometrization (or spatialization)
of time he went too far and argued that, because time is essentially different from space,
therefore it is fundamentally irreducible to mathematical terms.’

Continuity  is  a  word  with  many  meanings,  and  different  uses  of  the  word  have
caused  confusion.  The  ‘continuity’  attributed  to  space  because  of  its  indefinite
divisibility is not what is meant by the absolute continuity of time. Absolute continuity
cannot  be  visualised  and  any  process  used  to  describe  it  would  deny  continuity.  The
property which space has that is often referred to as ‘continuity’ is indefinite elasticity,
its  ‘continual’  recountability  or  its  unending  divisibility.  But  the  very  divisibility  of
space  is  what  denies  it  absolute  continuity;  and  the  elastic  nature  of  the  divisibility
comes  from  the  entirely  different  property  of  nonconservation.  We  expect  a
nonconserved quantity to have nonfixed units, but they are units nonetheless. The whole
process  of  measurement  depends  crucially  on  the  divisibility  of  space,  or  creation  of
discontinuities  within  it.  Thus  the  entire  problem  of  Zeno’s  paradoxes  disappears  as
soon  as  we  accept  that  we  can  have  discontinuities  or  divisibility  in  space,  but  not  in
time.

Space can be discontinuous in both quantity and direction;  it  can  be  reversed  and
changed  in  orientation;  and,  without  both  of  these  properties,  measurement  would  be
impossible.  Time,  however,  cannot  be  reversed,  precisely  because  it  is  absolutely
continuous. Any reversal of time would require discontinuity. For the same reason, time
cannot be multidimensional, or, in our terminology, ‘dimensional’. The same distinction
occurs between mass and charge. Mass is an absolute continuum present in all systems
and at every point in space (if only in the form of fields and energy); this is why there is
no negative mass, for negative mass would necessarily require a break in the continuum.
Charge, on the other hand, is divisible and observed in units; of course, because charge
is a conserved quantity, unlike space, these units must be fixed, unlike those of space.
Again,  charge  as  a  noncontinuous  quantity  is  also  dimensional,  and,  thus  we  might
suggest  divisibility  as  the  ‘cause’  of  dimensionality;  and,  though  it  is  not  a  direct
argument  that  divisibility  causes  dimensionality,  it  is  immediately  apparent  why
absolutely continuous quantities must be nondimensional.

There  is,  however,  a  more  direct  argument  for  the  dimensionality  of  discrete
quantities.  One  cannot,  in  fact,  demonstrate  discreteness  in  a  one-dimensional  system.
Though  we  think  of  a  line  as  one-dimensional,  it  is  in  fact  no  such  thing:  it  is  a  one-
dimensional  construction  within  a  two-dimensional  one.  If  our  space  was  truly  one-

8

dimensional  we  would  only have  a  point  with  no  extension.  We  couldn’t  demonstrate
discreteness,  and  certainly  not  discreteness  with  variability,  as  we  demand  of  space.
Interestingly,  it  is  dimensionality  as  such,  rather  than  any  particular  level  of
dimensionality  which  is  responsible  for  creating  the  additional  level  of  discreteness
required by the introduction of algebraic numbers, and even of transcendental numbers
such  as  π;  two  independent  dimensions  are  sufficient  to  create  the  required  level  of
incommensurability  at  the  rational  number  level,  and  the  introduction  of  a  third
dimension requires no qualitatively new type of number.

To  return  to  time’s  nondimensionality,  one  often  reads  about  a  ‘reversibility
paradox’,  where  time,  according  to  the  laws  of  physics  is  reversible  in  mathematical
sign, when it is clearly not reversible in physical consequences. Time, however, we need
to  remember,  is  characterised  by  imaginary  numbers,  and  imaginary  numbers  are  not
privileged according to sign. Thus, it is quite possible to have a time which has equal
positive and negative mathematical solutions because it is imaginary, but which has only
one  physical  direction  because  it  is  continuous.  (The  corresponding  unipolarity,  or
single sign, of mass is the reason why we have a CPT, rather than an MCPT, theorem, C
standing  for  charge  conjugation,  P  for  space  reflection  and  T  for  time  reversal,  all  of
which have two mathematical sign options.)

The  distinction  between  space  and  time  has  many  interesting  consequences.  In
principle, when we mathematically combine space and time in Minkowski’s 4-vector, as
symmetry apparently requires us to do, we have two options: we can either make time
space-like (or discrete) or space time-like (or continuous). This seems to be the origin of
wave-particle  duality.  The  discrete  options  lead  to  particles,  special  relativity  and
Heisenberg’s quantum mechanics.4,5,6 The continuous options lead to waves, Lorentzian
relativity and Schrödinger’s wave mechanics. Heisenberg makes everything discrete, so
mass  becomes  charge-like  quanta  in  quantum  mechanics;  Schrödinger,  on  the  other
hand,  makes  everything  continuous,  so  charge  becomes  mass-like  wavefunctions  in
wave  mechanics.  In  measurement,  the  true  situations  are  restored,  for  Heisenberg
reintroduces continuous mass via the uncertainty principle and the virtual vacuum, while
Schrödinger reintroduces discrete charge via the collapse of the wavefunction. (With the
altered parameters represented by S*, T*, M*, C*, the respective options are S, T*, M*,
C (Heisenberg) and S*, T, M, C* (Schrödinger).)

Another aspect of the distinction between space and time occurs in the fundamental
fact that time, in the definition of velocity and acceleration, the basic quantities used in
dynamics,  is  the  independent  variable,  whereas  space  is  the  dependent  variable.  This
situation arises because time, unlike space, is not susceptible to measurement. We have
no control over the variation of time, and so its variation is necessarily independent.

The fundamental distinction between the status of space and time almost certainly
also has relevance in mathematics. In the seventeenth century, there were two processes
of  differentiation:  the  discrete  (or  Leibnizian),  essentially  modelled  on  variation  in
space;  and  the  continuous  (or  Newtonian),  essentially  modelled  on  variation  in  time.
Like particles and waves, each is a valid option, for differentiation is a property linked
to  nonconservation,  and  not  concerned,  in  principle,  with  the  difference  between

9

absolute  continuity  and  indefinite  divisibility.  (The  solutions  of  Zeno’s  paradoxes  that
invoke the concept of limit tacitly assume the Newtonian definition of differentiation.)
Again, it is probable that the Cantorian definition of an absolutely continuous set of real
numbers  has  equal  validity  with  the  idea  of  an  infinitely  constructible,  though  not
absolutely  continuous,  set  of  real  numbers  based  on  algorithmic  processes.  (We  may
note  here  the  fundamental  significance  of  the  Löwenheim-Skolem  theorem,  that  any
consistent  finite,  formal  theory  has  a  denumerable  model,  with  the  elements  of  its
domain  in  a  one-to-one  correspondence  with  the  positive  integers.)  The  mathematical
options  that  are  available,  here  and  elsewhere,  are  almost  certainly  a  reflection  of  the
availability of physical options. Continuity and discontinuity, finiteness and infinity, and
so  on,  probably  exist  as  mathematical  categories  because  they  are  also  physical
categories.

Abraham Robinson, in his Non-Standard Analysis,3 treats infinitesimals as though
they had the properties of real numbers, and says that proofs of many theorems become
much  simpler  by  this  method,  although  all  non-standard  proofs  may  be  duplicated  by
standard  ones  (and vice  versa).  Non-standard  analysis  can  also  be  related  to  Skolem’s
non-standard arithmetic of 1934, with its denumerable model of the reals, and what has
been  described  as  non-Archimedean  geometry,  which  relates  this  to  space.  These
versions  of  non-standard  mathematics  are  a  reflection  of  the  discrete  nature  of  space
while ‘standard’ results (based on limits) rely on the continuity of time.

5 A group of order 4

From what we have seen, then, the four basic parameters seem to be distributed between
three  sets  of  opposing  paired  categories:  real  /  imaginary,  conserved  /  nonconserved,
divisible / indivisible, with each parameter paired off with a different partner in each of
the categories, according to the following scheme:

space

real

nonconserved

divisible

time

mass

imaginary

nonconserved

indivisible

real

conserved

indivisible

charge

imaginary

conserved

divisible

The  properties  where  they  match,  seem  to  be  exactly  identical,  and  where  they
oppose,  to  be  in  exact  opposition.  (Certain  representations,  however,  like  the  Dirac
equation  involve  mathematical  reversals  of  physical  properties,  the  Lorentz-invariant
structure  demanding  either  timelike  space  or  spacelike  time,  with  corresponding
reversals in the properties of mass or charge.) Mathematically, this scheme incorporates
a group of order 4, in which any parameter can be the identity element and each is its
own inverse.7,8,9

10

An algebraic representation is easily accomplished by representing the properties of
space  (real,  nonconserved,  divisible)  by,  say,  a,  b,  c,  with  the  opposing  properties
(imaginary, conserved, indivisible) represented by –a, –b, –c. The group now becomes:

space

time

mass

charge

a

–a

a

–a

b

 b

–b

–b

c

–c

–c

c

With group multiplication rules of the form:

         
        
         

a * a = –a * –a = a
a * –a = –a * a = –a
a * b = a * –b = 0

and similarly for b and c, we can establish a group multiplication table of the form:

*

 space

 time

 mass

 space

 space

 time

 mass

 time

 time

 mass

 mass

 space

 charge

 charge

 space

 charge

 charge

 mass

 time

 charge

 charge

 mass

 time

 space

This is the characteristic multiplication table of the Klein-4 group, with space as the
identity  element  and  each  element  its  own  inverse.  However,  there  is  no  reason  to
privilege space with respect to the other parameters, since the symbols a and –a, b and
–b, c and –c are arbitrarily selected, and any of the other three parameters may be made
the  identity  by  defining  its  properties  as  a,  b,  c.  For  example,  if  mass  is  made  the
identity element, then the group properties may be represented by:

space

time

mass

charge

a

–a

a

–a

–b

–b

b

b

–c

c

c

–c

11

 space

 space

 charge

 time

 mass

kS

kS

(–)jT

(–)iC

(–)1M

and the multiplication table becomes:

*

 mass

 charge

 time

 space

 charge

 time

 mass

 mass

 time

 time

 mass

 charge

 space

 mass

 charge

 space

 space

 time

 charge

Various further representations are possible, and seem to be relevant, in particular,
to the mathematical structure of the Dirac equation. For example, the identity element,
say mass, could be represented by the scalar part of a quaternion (1) and the other three
terms  by  the  imaginary  operators  i,  j,  k,  if  we  choose  only  the  modular  values,  and
ignore the + and – signs:

*

1M

iC

jT

kS

1M

1M

iC

jT

kS

iC

iC

(–)1M

(–)kS

jT

jT

jT

kS

iC

(–)1M

With  the  +  and  –  signs  added,  we  would  require  the  full  (and  now  cyclic)
quaternion group structure of eight components. It is important to recognise here that the
quaternion  operators  are  extrinsically  derived  and  not  an  integral  component  of  the
parameters space, time, mass and charge. Though the addition of these operators creates
a new group structure, this structure is a relation between new mathematical constructs
and  not  between  the  parameters  themselves;  it  also  presupposes  the  validity  of  the
original symmetry between the parameters.

If  the  3-dimensionality  of  charge  and  space  is  directly  involved,  the  overall
structure would require a quaternion and a 4-vector within another overall quaternion-
type arrangement. This could be accomplished using an octonion, with sixteen members
(±1m,  ±is,  ±je,  ±kw,  ±et,  ±fx,  ±gy,  ±hz),  though  this  is  no  longer  a  group.  The
nonassociativity  of  the  dimensional  terms  in  the  octonion  extension  seems  to  be  lost
within  terms  which  effectively  cancel  each  other  out,  and  are  of  no  physical
significance.

12

If  charge  is  taken  as  the  identity  element,  and  is  represented  by  a  scalar,  the
remaining  structure  for  time,  space  and  mass  (and,  implicitly,  the  energy,  momentum
and  mass  operators)  becomes  that  of  the  Dirac  algebra,  and  SU(5)  or  U(5).  Such
representations do  not determine the properties of space, time,  mass  and  charge.  They
exist because the group has four components, and can, therefore, be represented by a 4-
component structure like quaternions, in which the link between elements is made by a
binary operation (squaring); but the link between a group with four components and a 4-
dimensional space-time or mass-charge may be in itself significant.

Using the postulated group as a working hypothesis, it becomes possible to explore
possible constraints on the laws of physics, as a result of group properties (as is shown
below).  Another  area  to  be  investigated  might  be  the  way  in  which  the  relationship
between the quaternion representation and the requirement of separate conservation for
charges might affect the fundamental particle structures that are possible.8,9,10

6 Scaling relations

The group elements are required to be their own inverses, and to be each identities. In
addition,  the  group  multiplication  rule  (when  all  possible  arrangements  are  taken  into
consideration) requires:

        

       charge* time = space* mass .

A  binary  operation  which  makes  this  possible  is  the  squared  multiplication  of  units,
such as already exists for space and time in the 4-vector combination and for mass and
charge when they are combined in a quaternion. It is also inherent in the description of
charge,  time,  space  and  mass  as,  respectively,  quaternion  (or  possibly  pseudovector),
pseudoscalar,  vector  and  scalar,  that  the  units  of  their  squared  quantities  must  be
comparable  numerically.  To  create  the  necessary  number  of  independent  fundamental
relationships,  we  need  to  define  three  scaling  constants  (or  rather  scaling  parameters,
since  they  need  not  be  actually  constant  if  they  are  known  to  vary  according  to  some
fixed rule). And since the system has inherent duality in making each quantity its own
inverse, then we must define a relation between each quantity and the inverse of every
other, for which one further scaling constant (or parameter) will suffice. (The existence
of the binary operation of squaring within the parameter group seems to be linked to the
same  operation  being  responsible  for  the  4-dimensionality  of  space-time  and  mass-
charge.)

The group relationship predicts that such fundamental constants must  exist,  while
effectively ensuring that their individual values have no independent meaning. To relate
these to familiar scales of measurement, we create them from combinations of the four
historically-generated  fundamental  constants  G,  c,  h  (or  h−),  4πεo.  (Here,  for
convenience, we assume that ‘charge’ has the electromagnetic value, though this is not a
necessary  assumption,  and  a  grand  unified  value  could  be  used  instead;  the  actual
‘values’ of the constants are not particularly significant – only the fact that some such
scaling must exist.)

13

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

We can now express the scaling relations between the units of space (r), time (t),
mass (m), and charge (q) as follows (with the equality sign being interpreted as meaning
‘equivalence’):

r = ict

r = 

G
c2  m

iq = (4πεoG)1/2 m

The respective imaginary and quaternion operators required by t and q are significant in
determining  the  signs  of  their  squared  units.  These  operators  are  normally  subsumed
within the symbols t and q, but here they are added for emphasis.

The further relations between any parameter and the inverse of any other can all be

derived from:

m = 

h
c2  

1
it

 

This  last  result  is  the  one  that  we  recognise  as  being  responsible  for  quantization  of
energy and other physical properties. Quantization could thus be said to be a  result  of
the  fact  that  each  parameter  is  its  own  inverse.  Quantization  and  duality  of  scale  are
aspects of the same phenomenon.

The  four  independent  scaling  constants  in  the  above  scheme  become  c,  (G  /  c2),
(4πεoG)1/2, and (h / c2) (or  h− / c2). These are merely the scaling relations between  the
units of each quantity, but the presence of c2 and h informs us that these quantities are
fundamental to physics, whether classical, relativistic or quantum. In principle, any term
related  to  another  by  a  scaling  relation  in  a  meaningful  physical  equation  can  be
replaced by that term to produce another meaningful equation.

A significant aspect of the binary operation between parameters is the squaring of
the  units  of  each,  or  the  multiplication  of  a  unit  of  any  parameter  by  an  identically-
valued  unit  of  the  same  parameter.  Now,  units  of  mass  and  charge  have  individual
identities, unlike those of space and time, and so the ‘squaring’ of their units becomes
the multiplication of individual units, such as m1m2 and q1q2, and such ‘squaring’ must
be a universal operation between any units of mass and charge, no individual unit being
privileged. It will be convenient to give this process the name of ‘interaction’. (It will be
recognised that ‘interaction’ in this sense is nonlocal.)

7 Constructed quantities

The most fundamental laws of physics are essentially definitions and conservation laws.
Classical mechanics, for example, is structured on only two fundamental requirements:
the construction of a quantity involving conserved and nonconserved parameters (force,
energy, momentum, action, Lagrangian, Hamiltonian) and the definition of its behaviour
under  variation  of  the  variable  components,  that  is,  whether  it  is  defined  to  be  zero,

14

invariant,  or  an  extremum.  Essentially,  the  laws  of  classical  mechanics  are  set  up  to
define what is meant by a conservative system.

Now,  the  key  concepts  in  classical  mechanics  (as  in  other  aspects  of  physics)  are
those which combine the minimum information necessary to distinguish the conserved
and nonconserved parameters. Of the conserved quantities, mass is universal and never
zero, and therefore must be present; charge, however, is local, and can take zero values.
To  specify  the  conservation  or  invariability  of  mass,  we  also  need  to  specify  the
nonconservation or variability of space and time; hence, these parameters are included
in  differential  form.  A  convenient  way  to  define  a  system,  therefore,  would  be  the
construction of a quantity containing mass and the differentials of space and time. The
most immediately useful constructs then include p = m dr / dit and F = dp / dit (with
time, most conveniently specified as the independent variable). The second quantity, as
has  been  previously  explained,  has  the  advantage  of  producing  a  real  rather  than  an
imaginary  construct.  Now,  space,  of  course,  is  really  a  vector  (neglecting,  for  the
moment, any 4-vector aspects); to incorporate this aspect, we may multipy both terms by
the unit vector r / r, to yield the familiar quantities, momentum,

and force,

   

    

p = m 

dr
 dit

 

F = 

dp
dit

  .

(Imaginary  and  quaternion  labels  are  retained  here  for  emphasis  but  would  not,  of
course, normally be used.)

The  definitions  of  such  quantities  are,  as  yet,  purely  mathematical  and  convey  no
additional  physical  information.  This  can  now  be  supplied,  however,  by  using  the
scaling  relations  to  find  other  quantities  to  which  these  defined  ones  can  be  related,
while  at  the  same  time  applying  the  conditions  for  conservation  and  nonconservation.
This  enables  us  to  set  up  a  system  of  equations  for  classical  mechanics  and
electromagnetic theory.

8 Classical mechanics

From (2) and (3), remembering that each element of mass is unique, we may derive the
expression

In differential form, under the specific conservation of mass elements,

      Gm1m2 = h 

r
it 

      Gm1m2 = h 

dr
dit

  ,

   

Gm1m2
c2it

  = m 

   = p .

dr
dit

15

from which

       

The  mass  term  on  the  right  hand  side,  of  course,  is  a  new  mass  unit,  distinguishable
from m1 and m2.

By differentiation, and a further substitution,

                     

– 

Gm1m2
c2i2t2   = – 

Gm1m2
r2

  = 

dp
dit

  .

Applying the unit vector, r / r, this becomes

                          

– 

Gm1m2
r3

  r = 

dp
dit

  ,

which is a combination of Newton’s law of gravitation and second law of motion, with
the  left  hand  side  a  new  equivalent  quantity  for  force,  conventionally  described  as
gravitational force.

Neither m1 nor m2 is, of course, privileged, and so the equation can also be written

in the form:

                            

– 

Gm1m1
r3

  r = 

dp
dit

 

Interpreting the vectors r and p as directed from m1 to m2 means that reversing the mass
terms produces reversed vectors, from m2 to m1, as required by Newton’s third law of
motion.

The  equivalent  case  for  charges  defines  Coulomb’s  law  of  electrostatics  and
introduces  electrostatic  force  (with  the  opposite  sign,  and  hence  reversed  vector,  for
identically valued charges):

                               

   

q1q2
4πεor3  r = 

dp
dit  .

All the other significant and relations of classical mechanics, in any of its forms, can be
derived now by purely mathematical manipulation. For example, nterpreting a ‘system’
to  mean  any  combination  of  unit  masses,  the  conservation  of  momentum  follows  by
integration of the total force over time, and the conservation of angular momentum (L =
r × p) from the fact that dp / dt in a conservative system is zero.

Direct  manipulation  of  the  scaling  relations  reveals  that  momentum  terms  are
equivalent  to  mcr  /  r,  and  that  scalar  terms  of  the  form  Gm1m2  /  r  and  q1q2  /  4πεor,
which  we  may  describe  as  gravitational  and  electrostatic  potential  energies,  are
equivalent to those of the form mc2; in each of these cases, m may be described as an
‘equivalent  mass’.  Though  these  results  normally  emerge  only  from  relativity  theory,
they  are  actually  inherent  in  the  structure  from  which  classical  mechanics  must  be
derived.

Further  results  follow  from  on  immediately  from  the  mathematical  definition  of
new concepts. Thus, defining velocity as v = dr / dit and acceleration as a = dv / dit, and
field intensity as F / m, we have, in the case of constant mass, F = ma, and can define
gravitational field intensity as

16

                   

      

      g = – 

Gm
r3   r

and electrostatic field intensity as

                                

iq
4πεor3  r .
From vector theory, we can show that, for the related scalar potentials, φ = – Gm / r

     E = – 

and φ = – iq / 4πεor,
                                      
and
                                  

    

      g = – ∇φ

      E = – ∇φ ,

and, also, that the respective force laws are equivalent to the Laplace equations

                                
and
                                

– ∇2φ = ∇.g = 0

– ∇2φ = ∇.E = 0 ,

in a space without sources, and to the Poisson equations,

                            
and
                            

– ∇2φ = ∇.g = 4πρG

– ∇2φ = ∇.E = ρ / εo ,

in a space with them. None of this requires any new physical argument.

9 Classical electromagnetic theory

To replace nonrelativistic equations with relativistic ones, we simply replace all vector
terms with 4-vectors, r, for example, being replaced by (r, ict). This procedure can be
done,  of  course,  with  purely  mechanical  equations,  to  generate  the  standard  results  of
special  relativity,  but  it  is  particularly  significant  in  classical  electromagnetic  theory,
which  follows  on  immediately  from  applying  4-vector  terms  to  the  definition  of
electrostatic force.

The  significant  fact  here  is  that  charge  is  locally  conserved,  and,  hence,  by  a

standard argument, the continuity equation,

              

       

  + ∇.j = 0 ,

∂ρ
∂t

must apply, with ρ defined as the charge density and j = ρ v as the current density. The
differential operator in this equation is a 4-vector, and so, recognisably, is the quantity
with scalar and vector parts, ρ and j / c.

17

Now, the scalar part of this latter quantity appears in Poisson’s equation,

                             

    – ∇2φ = ρ / εo ,

which  is  the  differential  form  of  Coulomb’s  law,  and  so  we  should  expect  to  find  an
equivalent vector part (A / c) for φ, and an equivalent scalar part (– (1 / c2) ∂2 / ∂t2) for
 = ((1 / c2) ∂2 / ∂t2 – ∇2)  is  itself  a  universal
∇2.  Since  the  new differential operator ð
scalar, we may separate out the scalar and vector parts of the total equation to give the
wave equations:

and

      

      

      ð

 φ = ρ / εo

      ð

 A = j / εo

It  is  significant  that  φ  and  A  are  arbitrary  to  the  point  where  they  satisfy  these
equations  (the  condition  of  gauge 
invariance,  as  previously  discussed  under
nonconservation). For convenience, we can arbitrarily restrict the values using a gauge
condition. If we choose the so-called Lorentz gauge, in which

and define new vectors E and B, without reference to physical characteristics, such that

                              

     

  + ∇.A = 0 ,

∂φ
∂t

and

                

     E = – ∇φ + 

∂A
 
∂t

                  

     B = ∇ × A ,

we obtain the four Maxwell equations in their standard form, and identify E and B as
the electrostatic and magnetic field vectors.

10 Conservation laws and fundamental symmetries

The outline derivations of classical mechanics and electromagnetic theory show that the
group  structure  of  space,  time,  mass  and  charge  has  the  power  to  derive  conventional
results  in  a  relatively  simplified  form.  Numerous  new  mathematical  results  can  be
generated by even more direct uses of the symmetries. As previously noted, Noether’s
theorem  requires  the  translation  symmetry  of  time  to  be  linked  to  the  conservation  of
energy.  Of  course,  since  energy  is  related  to  mass  by  the  equation  E  =  mc2,  then  the
translation symmetry of time is also linked to the conservation of mass. To put it another
way, the nonconservation of time is responsible for the conservation of mass. This is a
result we could have derived from symmetry alone; and so, extending the analogy, we
could  link  the  conservation  of  the  quantity  of  charge  with  the  nonconservation,  or
translation  symmetry  of  space;  and  since  the  latter  is  already  linked  with  the
conservation  of  linear  momentum,  we  could  propose  a  theorem  in  which  the

18

conservation of linear momentum was responsible for the conservation of the quantity
of charge (of any type). By the same kind of reasoning, we could make the conservation
of type of charge linked to the rotation symmetry of space, and so to the conservation of
angular momentum, as in the following scheme:

symmetry

space
translation

time
translation

space
rotation

conserved
quantity 

linear
momentum

energy

angular
momentum

linked
conservation

value of
charge

value of
mass

type of
charge

In  fact,  we  can  immediately  show  these  principles  to  be  true  in  special  cases.  As
Fritz  London  showed  in  1927,  the  conservation  of  electric  charge  within  a  system  is
identical to invariance under transformations of the electrostatic potential by a constant
representing  changes  of  phase,  and  the  phase  changes  are  of  the  kind  involved  in  the
conservation  of  linear  momentum.  Since,  in  a  conservative  system,  electrostatic
potential  varies  only  with  the  spatial  coordinates,  this  is,  in  effect,  a  statement  of  the
principle that the quantity of electric charge is conserved because the spatial coordinates
are not, which is a special case of the first predicted relation.

In  the  second  case,  there  is  the  relation  between  spin  and  statistics  observed  in
fundamental  particles.  Fermions  and  bosons  have  different  values  of  spin  angular
momentum; and they also differ in that fermions probably carry weak  units of charge,
where bosons have none. It thus appears to be the presence of a particular type of charge
which  determines  the  angular  momentum  state  of  the  particle,  so  conservation  of  this
type of  charge is linked with the value of angular momentum.  The  validity  of  the  full
theorem,  and  its  application  to  particle  physics,  can  be  derived  using  the  quantum
mechanical formalism derived in the next section.11

11 The Dirac equation

Yet another significant mathematical result follows from the basic representations of 4-
vector  space-time  and  quaternion  mass-charge.  A  direct  combination  of  these  two
constructs,  putting  the  four  parameters  onto  an  equal  overall  footing  in  a  single
mathematical representation, produces a 32-part algebra which is identical in all respects
to the 32-part algebra used in the Dirac equation for the electron, but much simpler in
form and more powerful.11-18 The components of this algebra can be described as:

19

2 complex numbers
6 complex unit vectors
6 complex unit quaternions
18 complex vector quaternions

(1,i)
(1,i) × (i,j,k)
(1,i) × (i,j,k)
(1,i) × (i,j,k) × (i,j,k)

Terms  equivalent  to  the  five  gamma  matrices  (for  example,  ii,  ji,  ki,  j,  ik)  are  easily
derived.) A group version, with + and – units requires 64 terms (as does (S*, T*, M*,
C*) × (S, T, M, C)).

Once the Dirac algebra has been established, it is a relatively easy process to show
that  the  Dirac  equation  follows  from  quantization  of  a  basic  classical  conservation
equation, and the algebra, in this case, becomes simplified to a virtually pure quaternion
algebra,  as  the  vector  element  is  removed  via  a  scalar  product.  We  begin  with  the
Lorentz-invariant relationship between energy, mass and momentum:

E2 − p2 − m2 = 0 .

Factorization  of  this  expression  requires  the  use  of  a  complex  and  noncommutative
algebra, viz. quaternions:

(kE + iip + ijm) (kE + iip + ijm) = 0 .

We  can  also  incorporate  the  factor  e i(Et 
information:

  p.r)  without  requiring  new  physical

      (kE + iip + ijm) (kE + iip + ijm) e i(Et 

 p.r)  = 0

In the classical equation, E and p are variables within the requirement that E2 − p2 is
a constant for fixed m2. However, quantization changes the status of these terms so that,
for stationary quantum states, E and p become fixed, along with m. The variability now
becomes  confined  to  the  space  and  time  parameters  incorporated  into  the  exponential
term, which can now be seen, physically, to represent the entire group of space and time
translations and rotations.

A more general variability of space and time can be incorporated by replacing the

factor (kE + iip + ijm) from the left with the differential operator

  

  

 

               



ik
     

∂
∂t


 + i∇ + ijm



acting on the ‘wavefunction’

ψ = (kE + iip + ijm) e

−i(Et − p.r)  ,

20

producing the expression

             



   
ik

∂
∂t

 + i∇ + ijm  ψ = 0 ,





which we recognise as the Dirac equation (in a form already second quantized because
the  quantization  process  has  been  applied  to  both  the  differential  operator  and  the
wavefunction).

It  will  be  recognised  that  the  need  for  quantization  of  E  and  p  comes  from  the
inverse  relation  between  m  and  t,  and  that  the  process  has  a  profound  effect  on  the
classical energy-conservation equation. In quantizing via the Dirac equation, and, at the
same time, imposing Lorentz-invariance, we effectively restructure the properties of the
physical quantities involved, though our physical interpretation of the quantities remains
unchanged.

In  incorporating  both  the  explicit  quantization  of  E-p-m  and  the  quaternion
operators,  the Dirac equation  combines  S*  and  T  with  an  effective  restructuring  of  M
with the properties of C. Significantly, this has five components. The fact that only one
direction of spin is well-defined is a consequence of using S* for S.

In  classical  relativistic  theory,  we  emphasize  the  4-vector  nature  of  (iE,  p)  and
describe  E2  −  p2  as  an  invariant,  but,  here  we  incorporate  the  invariance  directly,  and
define  a  new  term  with  five  components,  (kE  +  iip  +  ijm),  with  quantized  rest  mass.
This  5-‘dimensional’  quantity  combines  the  effects  of  3-dimensional  conserved  and
nonconserved  parameters  (the  momentum  term  p  having  3  dimensions,  although  only
one is normally defined). In effect, we structure mass (or energy-momentum-mass) as a
3-dimensional  quantized  and  conserved  parameter,  like  charge  (with  one  of  the
‘dimensions’  being  itself  dimensional).  This  is  the  result  previously  achieved  by
structuring charge-mass-space-time as a quaternion, with charge  as the  real  or  identity
element.

12 Conclusion

The  prediction  of  new  mathematical  theorems  and  the  derivation  of  new  algebraic
concepts,  as  well  as  the  procedures  for  obtaining  standard  theorems  in  classical
mechanics,  electromagnetic  theory  and  quantum  mechanics,  show  that  the  method  of
symmetry  based  on  fundamental  basic  principles  is  not  just  a  philosophical  issue,  but
also  a  powerful  method  of  generating  new  results,  and  of  codifying  existing  ones.  In
fact, it is almost inevitable that new discoveries will follow after any successful exercise
in getting down to the basics.

21

References

 1 G. J. Whitrow,  The Natural Philosophy of Time (Nelson, London, 1961), pp. 135-57
2 
P. Coveney and R. Highfield, The Arrow of Time (London, 1990), pp. 28, 143-4, 157.
3  A. Robinson, Non-Standard Analysis (Princeton University Press, 1996, original publication, 1966).
4 

P.  Rowlands,  Waves  Versus  Corpuscles:  The  Revolution  That  Never  Was  (PD  Publications,
Liverpool, 1992)
P.  Rowlands,  Quantum  indeterminacy,  wave-particle  duality  and  the  physical  interpretation  of
relativity  theory  from  first  principles.  Proceedings  of  Conference  on  Physical  Interpretations  of
Relativity Theory III, British Society for Philosophy of Science, London, September 1992, 296-310.
P. Rowlands, Quantum uncertainty, wave-particle duality and fundamental symmetries, in S. Jeffers,
S.  Roy,  J-P.  Vigier  and  G.  Hunter  (eds.),  The  Present  Status  of  the  Quantum  Theory  of  Light:  A
Symposium  in  Honour  of  Jean-Pierre  Vigier  (Fundamental  Theories  of  Physics,  vol.  80,  Kluwer
Academic Publishers), 1997, 361-372.
P. Rowlands, The Fundamental Parameters of Physics. Speculat. Sci. Tech., 6, 69-80 (1983).
P. Rowlands, A new formal structure for deriving a physical interpretation of relativity. Proceedings
of Conference on Physical Interpretations of Relativity Theory II, British Society for Philosophy of
Science, London, September 1990, 264-8.
P. Rowlands, The Fundamental Parameters of Physics: An Approach towards a Unified Theory (PD
Publications, Liverpool, 1991).

5 

6 

7 
8 

9 

10  P. Rowlands and J. P. Cullerne, A Symmetry Principle for Deriving Particle Structures. Proceedings

11  P.  Rowlands  and  J.  P.  Cullerne,  Applications  of  the  nilpotent  Dirac  state  vector  (33  pp),

of ANPA XX, Cambridge, September 1998.

xxx.lanl.gov/quant-ph/0103036.

12  P.  Rowlands,  An  algebra  combining  vectors  and  quaternions:  A  comment  on  James  D.  Edmonds’

paper. Speculat. Sci. Tech., 17, 279-282 (1994).

13  P. Rowlands, Some interpretations of the Dirac algebra. Speculat. Sci. Tech., 19, 243-51 (1996).
14  P.  Rowlands,  A  New  Algebra  for  Relativistic  Quantum  Mechanics.  Proceedings  of  Conference  on
Physical Interpretations of Relativity Theory V, British Society for Philosophy of Science, London,
September 1996, 381-7.

15  P. Rowlands,  The  physical  consequences  of  a  new  version  of  the  Dirac  equation,  in  G.  Hunter,  S.
Jeffers  and  J.-P.  Vigier  (eds.),  Causality  and  Locality  in  Modern  Physics  and  Astronomy:  Open
Questions and Possible Solutions, Kluwer, 1998, 397-402.

16  P. Rowlands, Further Considerations of the Dirac Algebra. Proceedings of Conference on Physical
Interpretations  of  Relativity  Theory  VI,  British  Society  for  Philosophy  of  Science,  London,
September 1998.

17  P.  Rowlands  and  J.  P.  Cullerne,  The  connection  between  the  Han-Nambu  quark  theory,  the  Dirac

equation and fundamental symmetries. Nuclear Physics A 684, 713-715 (2001).

18 P.  Rowlands  and  J.  P.  Cullerne,  The  Dirac  algebra  and  its  physical  interpretation  (36  pp),

xxx.lanl.gov/quant-ph/00010094.

22

