 
 

 
 
 
 

 

&RVPRORJ\(cid:3)7KURXJK(cid:3)7LPH(cid:3)
$QFLHQW(cid:3)DQG(cid:3)0RGHUQ(cid:3)&RVPRORJ\(cid:3)LQ(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)0HGLWHUUDQHDQ(cid:3)$UHD(cid:3)
Monte Porzio Catone (Rome), Italy, June 18-20, 2001 

)520(cid:3)7+((cid:3)(3,&<&/(6(cid:3)2)(cid:3)7+((cid:3)*5((.6(cid:3)72(cid:3).(3/(5¶6(cid:3)(//,36((cid:3)
7+((cid:3)%5($.’2:1(cid:3)2)(cid:3)7+((cid:3)&,5&/((cid:3)3$5$’,*0(cid:3)

’LQR(cid:3)%RFFDOHWWL(cid:3)
Dipartimento di Matematica “G. Castelnuovo”(cid:3)
Università degli Studi di Roma “La Sapienza” 
Rome, Italy 
boccaletti@uniroma1.it 

$EVWUDFW(cid:3)

The  principle  that  celestial  bodies  must  move  on  circular  orbits  or  on  paths resulting  from the 
composition of circular orbits has been assumed as a constant guide in the astronomical thougth of 
the peoples facing the Mediterranean sea as from the second century B.C. until the beginning of the 
XVII century. The mathematical model based on such an assumption, the theory of epicycles in all 
its versions and modifications, has been taken as a scheme for all astronomical calculations during 
at  least  eighteen  centuries,  from  Hipparcus  to  Kepler.  Kepler,  who  in  1609  eventually  put  aside 
what,  paraphrasing  Kuhn,  can  be  called  the  circle  paradigm,  at  the  beginning  of  his  Astronomia 
Nova says: 

“Planetarum  motus  orbiculares  esse  peremnitas  testatur.  Id  ab  experientia  mutuata  ratio  statim 
praesumnit  gyros  ipsorum  perfectos  esse  circulos.  nam  ex  figuris  circulus,  ex  corporibus  coelum, 
censentur perfectissima. Vbi vero diligenter attendentes experientia diversum docere videtur; quod 
Planetae  a  circuli  simplici  semita  exorbitent;  plurima  existit  admiratio,  quae  tandem  in  caussas 
inquirendas homines impulit.”1 

As  it  is  known,  in  Astronomia  Nova  (1609),  Kepler  succeded  to  establish  the  two  laws  which 
after him were named the first and the second Kepler’s laws. The revolution he performed by giving 
up  the  circle  paradigm  is  of  fundamental  importance  and  represents  the  indispensable  premise  to 
Newtonian  theory.  This  revolution,  the  result  of  what  Kepler  called  his  “war”  against  Mars,  is 
usually underestimated if one considers the break carried out with respect to the pre-Kepler celestial 
kinematics.  In  “Astronomia  Nova”  we  assist  to  the  attempt  of  Kepler  to  get  for  Mars  an  orbit 
consistent  with  the  results  of  Tycho  Brahe’s  observations.  Passing  through  several  phases 
(“hypotesis  vicaria”,  oval,  …)  and  step  by  step  discarding  the  hypoteses  wich  gave  results  in 
contrast with observations, Kepler arrived at establishing (Astronomia Nova, Chapter LIX) that the 
orbit of Mars around the Sun is an ellipse. 

Here an esposition is given of this work of analysis by Kepler wich is, in the history of science, 
one  of  the  early  examples  of  rigorous  setting  up  of  a  model  which  correctly  explains  the 
experimental results. 

                                                 

1  Johannes  Kepler,  New  Astronomy:  “The  testimony  of  the  ages  confirms  that  the  motions  of  the  planets  are 
orbicular. It is an immediate presumption of reason, reflected in experience, that their gyrations are perfect circles. For 
among  figures  it  is  circles,  and  among  the  bodies  the  heavens,  that  are  considered  the  most  perfect.  However  when 
experience is seen to teach something deviate from a simple circular path, it gives rise to a powerful sense of wonder, 
which at length drives men to look into causes.”, translated by William H. Donahue, Cambridge U. P., 1992, p. 115 

,QWURGXFWLRQ(cid:3)

My  talk  concerns  Johannes  Kepler  and  the  significance  and  weight  one  must  attach  to  his 
“revolution”,  which  consisted  in  the  introduction  of  elliptic  orbits  for  the  planetary  motions. 
According to a noted scholar of him, “(Kepler) est, pourrait-on dire, à la fois en avance, et en retard 
sur ses contemporaines”2. In the sub-title of this talk I made use of the celebrated Kuhn’s definition 
of  paradigm.  It  is  surprising  that  such  a  remarkable  example  of  breaking  off  of  a  paradigm  still 
extant  after  eighteen  centuries  was  not  considered  by  Kuhn  with  more  attention.  In  fact  he  just 
observed that “Kepler’s account of his prolonged struggle with the motion of Mars and Priestley’s 
description of his response to the proliferation of new gases provide classic examples of the more 
random sort of research produced by the awareness of anomaly.”3 

Charles  Sanders  Peirce  (1839-1914),  the  beginner  of  pragmatism  in  the  American  philosophy, 
was certainly of opposite opinion on the “randomness” of the introduction of elliptic orbits, since he 
went so far as to define it “the greatest piece of Inductive reasoning ever yet conducted”4. 

In  order  to  set  the  “ORQJ(cid:3) ZDU”  of  Kepler  against  Mars  -  “inobservabile  sidus”  according  to 
Plinius’s  definition  quoted  by  himself  -  in  the  right  historical  context,  let  us  briefly  outline  the 
situation in the eighteen centuries preceding Kepler, starting from the Greeks of third century B.C. 

7KH(cid:3)WKHRU\(cid:3)RI(cid:3)HSLF\FOHV(cid:24)(cid:3)

The Greeks formalized their ideas about the motion of celestial bodies in the WKHRU\(cid:3)RI(cid:3)HFFHQWULFV(cid:3)
and in the WKHRU\(cid:3)RI(cid:3)HSLF\FOHV(cid:17)(cid:3)The fundamental fact to keep in mind is that according to the Greeks 
the celestial bodies could not move on any kind of curve unless it was a circle (the perfect curve and 
therefore the only one worthy of a celestial body). This implied that any motion could only be either 
a uniform circular motion or a combination of uniform circular motions. We should also add that, in 
so  doing,  they  renounced  the  possibility  of  considering  seriously  the  problem  of  investigating  the 
true  nature  of  the  physical  system  of  the  world,  namely  of  finding  the  causes  of  the  motion  of 
celestial  bodies.  The  various  mathematical  elaborations  were  basically  oriented  towards  the 
GHVFULSWLRQ(cid:3)of motions. Through a crude schematization, we can say that from Hipparchus (second 
century B.C.), through Ptolemy (second century A.D.), to Kepler (1609 is the year of publication of 
Astronomia Nova), and finally to Newton (the 3ULQFLSLD(cid:3)was published in 1687) attention has been 
given mainly to the NLQHPDWLFV(cid:3)and not to the G\QDPLFV(cid:3)RI(cid:3)celestial bodies. 

The  theory  which  almost  certainly  appeared  first  is  that  of  the  HFFHQWULFV(cid:17)(cid:3) At  the  basis  of  this 
theory the Earth is situated at the centre of the universe and the Moon rotates around it on a circular 
orbit with a period of(cid:3)27 days; the Sun also rotates around the Earth with a period of one year; the 
centre of these orbits does QRW(cid:3)coincide with the position of(cid:3)the Earth. The inner planets, Mercury 
and Venus, move on circles whose centres are always on the line joining the Sun and the Earth; the 
Earth remains outside these circles. The outer planets (Mars, Jupiter, Saturn) also move on circles 
whose centres are on the line joining the Earth and the Sun, but these circles have so great a radius 
as  to  always  encircle  both  the  Earth  and  the  Sun.  This  theory  was  employed  by  Hipparchus  to 
represent the motion of(cid:3)the Sun. 

The HFFHQWULF(cid:3)(see Fig. 1) is a circle whose centre (&) does not coincide with the position of the 
observer6 on the Earth (()(cid:17)(cid:3)If the Sun (6) moves with uniform motion on this circle, and hence the 
angle  $&6(cid:3)increases uniformly, it will not be the same  for  the angle $(6: this will increase(cid:3)more 
slowly when 6 is close to $ (the apogee, or farthest point from the Earth) and more quickly when 6 
is close to % (the perigee, or closest point to the Earth). 
 
                                                 
2 A. Koyré: La Révolution Astronomique – Copernic Kepler Borelli, Hermann, Paris, 1961, p. 119 
3 Thomas S. Kuhn: The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Second edition, University of Chicago Press, 1970, p. 82 
4 C. S. Peirce: The New Elements of Mathematics, edited by Carolyn Eisele, Vol. III/1, Mouton Publishers, The Hague-
Paris, 1976, p. 170 
5 D. Boccaletti, G. Pucacco: Theory of Orbits, Vol. 1, Second Edition, Springer Verlag, 2001 
6 As the observer is in a geocentric system, motions should be reproduced as seen from the Earth. 

The motion of the Sun could equally be obtained by means of(cid:3)the epicycle model, which dates 
back to Apollonius (end of(cid:3)the third century B.C.). In such a model, the body whose motion must be 
represented is considered to be moving uniformly on a circle (epicycle). The centre of the epicycle 
moves  uniformly  on  a  second  circle  called  the  GHIHUHQW.  To(cid:3) demonstrate  the  said  equivalence,  we 
shall refer to Fig. 2. If one takes as the deferent a circle equal to the eccentric but with its centre at ( 
(the dashed circle), and if one takes the point 6(cid:10) on it such that (6(cid:10) is parallel to &6, then 6(cid:10)6 is equal 
and also parallel to (&. Then the Sun 6, which moves uniformly on the eccentric, can be considered 
in the same way to be in uniform motion on a circle of radius 66(cid:10) whose centre 6(cid:10) moves uniformly 
on the deferent. In this case, therefore, the two methods lead to the same result. The arrows in Fig. 2 
show that the motion on the epicycle must occur in a direction opposite to that of the motion on the 
deferent. 

Similar considerations apply for the motion of the Moon, although in this case the theory turns 
out to be very rudimentary and fails to give an account of the greater complexity of the lunar motion 
compared  to  the  solar  one.  Hipparchus  found  a  way  to  overcome  these  difficulties  by  taking  an 
eccentric  whose  centre  describes  a  circle  around  the  Earth  in  a  period  of  nearly  9  years 
(corresponding to the  motion  of  the apses). The epicycle theory was later improved by  using as a 
deferent an eccentric circle and by introducing a new point called the HTXDQW, placed symmetrically 
to the Earth with respect to the centre of the deferent. This point replaced the centre of the deferent 
as  a  point  from  which  to  see  the  centre  of  the  epicycle  moving  with  constant  angular  velocity. 
Somehow, this violated the rule that the considered circular motions should be uniform. Later still, 
the  theory  was  improved  by  adding  secondary  epicycles,  epicycles  which  had  an  epicycle  as  a 
deferent. 

We shall not deal with this matter further, since our purpose has been only to capture the spirit of 
the epicycle theory. It would be the basis of the Ptolemaic system which would reach, substantially 
unchanged in its fundamental structures, the age of the Renaissance and beyond. It is well known, 
in  fact,  that,  during  the  thirteen  centuries  following  the  composition  of  the  $OPDJHVW,  the  models 
worked  out  by  Ptolemy  were  modified  and  improved  several  times,  particularly  by  the  Arabian 
astronomers, and therefore instead of the Ptolemaic system one should speak of Ptolemaic systems; 
however, the basic  concepts  have  never been a matter of controversy. The Earth was immobile at 
the  centre  of  the  world  and  all  the  other  bodies  moved  around  it  with  motions  that,  however 
complicated, would have to be explained as suitable compositions of circular motions. 

7KH(cid:3)&RSHUQLFDQ(cid:3)UHYROXWLRQ(cid:3)DQG(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)FLUFXODU(cid:3)PRWLRQV(cid:26)(cid:3)

The  idea  of  circular  motion  continued  to  obsess  even  Copernicus,  who  with  his  work  ‡’H(cid:3)
5HYROXWLRQLEXV(cid:3) RUELXP(cid:3) FRHOHVWLXP·  (published  in  Nuremberg  in  1543,  the  year  of  his  death) 
founded  the  new  cosmology  and  established  a  new  theory  of  planetary  motion.  The  title  of 
Chapter 4 of the first book of ’H(cid:3)5HYROXWLRQLEXV(cid:3)in fact reads: “Quod motus corporum coelestium 
sit aequalis ac circularis, perpetuus, nel ex circularibus compositus”8 (“The reason why the motion 
of celestial bodies is uniform circular and perpetual or composed of circular motions”), and later on, 
with the need to employ rectilinear motion, he deemed it necessary to demonstrate that a rectilinear 
motion could be generated by the composition of two circular motions. By moving the centre of the 
system from the Earth to the Sun, Copernicus succeeded in obtaining for all the planets, as for the 
Earth,  quite  simple  orbits  (circular  in  a  first  approximation)  and  no  longer  curves  like  that  of 
Figure 3,  which  represents  the  orbits  (seen  from  the  Earth!)  obtained  from  the  epicycle  theory. 
Copernicus  granted  to  the  Earth,  nevertheless, a prime role, by assuming in his  planetary  theories 
that the centre of the terrestrial orbit, rather than the barycentre of the Sun-planet system, was the 
centre of every motion. Of course, this led to mistakes which still required the use of epicycles as 
correctives  in  order  to  be  in  agreement  with  the  results  of  the  observations  (albeit  still  rather 

                                                 
7 D. Boccaletti, G. Pucacco: Theory of Orbits, Vol. 1, Second Edition, Springer Verlag, 2001 
8 Nikolaus Kopernicus: Gesamtausgabe, Munich, 1949 

inaccurate). This, however, did not worry the astronomers, who were used to a veritable crowd of 
epicycles;  in  fact,  Copernicus,  in  that  little  work  known  as  &RPPHQWDULROXV,  which  he  had 
circulated handwritten and which seems to precede the editing of the ’H(cid:3)5HYROXWLRQLEXV, concluded 
almost in triumph: “And in this way, Mercury moves altogether by seven circles, Venus by five, the 
Earth by three and, around it, the Moon by four; at last Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, each by five. As a 
consequence, 34 circles are sufficient to explain the entire structure of the universe, as well as the 
dance of the planets”. Notwithstanding the error of having assumed the centre of the terrestrial orbit 
to be the centre of every motion (an error which, as later emphasized by Kepler, is considerable in 
the case of Mars’s motion), Copernicus marked the beginning of a new era for astronomy and for 
the determination of the orbits of celestial bodies. The world had to wait a little less than 70 years 
from  the  publication  of  ’H(cid:3) 5HYROXWLRQLEXV(cid:3) to  reach,  with  Kepler,  the  very  high  point  of  what  we 
have called “the kinematics of celestial bodies” and at the same time the sunset of the epicycles. 

However,  the  disappearance  of  the  epicycles  was  only  temporary:  some  time  later,  like  the 
Phoenix, they rose again from their ashes. In fact, as remarked (perhaps for the first time) by G. V. 
Schiaparelli  in  the  last  century,  Fourier  series  expansions  brought  the  epicycles9  back  again,  in 
modern dress, in celestial mechanics. 

 

 

 

)LJ(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:3) (cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

)LJ(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:3) (cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

)LJ(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:22)(cid:3)

       

 

.HSOHU(cid:3)HVWDEOLVKHV(cid:3)ZKHUH(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)WUXH(cid:3)FHQWUH(cid:3)RI(cid:3)SODQHWDU\(cid:3)PRWLRQV(cid:3)LV(cid:17)(cid:3)7KH(cid:3)
SXEOLFDWLRQ(cid:3)RI(cid:3)0\VWHULXP(cid:3)&RVPRJUDSKLFXP(cid:3)

After  having  received  his  master’s  degree  from  the  University  of  Tübingen  on  August  159110, 
Kepler entered the theological course. His intention was to become a priest, but halfway through his 
third  year  an  event  occurred  that  completely  changed  his  life.  Georgius  Stadius,  teacher  of 
mathematics of the Lutheran School, died in Graz, and the local authorities asked the University of 
Tübingen  for  a  new  teacher.  Kepler  was  chosen  for  this  task,  thus  he  interrupted  the  study  of 
theology. 

On  11  April  1594,  Kepler  arrived  at  Graz  and  took  up  his  duties  as  teacher  and  provincial 
mathematician.  He  began  to  teach  mathematics  and  astronomy.  Since  he  had  few  pupils,  he  had 
much time to take the study of astronomy again. In 1596 this study resulted in the publication of the 
work  which is usually called Mysterium  Cosmographicum, though the complete  title is  extremely 
longer and each part of it has a well definite meaning (see Figure 4). 

We give the reader an excerpt from the preface in which Kepler speaks about the genesis and the 

purpose of his work. 

“Quo  tempore  Tubingae,  ab  hinc  sexennio  clarissimo  viro  M.  Michaeli  Maestlino  operam 
dabam:  motus  multiplici  incommoditate  vsitatae  de  mundo  opinionis,  adeo  delectatus  sum 

                                                 
9  See  G.  Schiaparelli:  Scritti  sulla  Storia  dell’Astronomia  Antica,  Parte  Prima,  Tomo  Secondo,  Zanichelli,  Bologna, 
1927, reprinted by Mimesis-IsIAO, Milano, 1997, p.335 
10 We cannot dwell upon Kepler’s life. We refer the reader to Max Caspar: Kepler, Dover Publications Inc., New York, 
1993 

Copernico,  cuius  ille  in  praelectionibus  suis  plurimam  mentionem  faciebat:  vt  non  tantum  crebro 
eius  placita 
in  physicis  disputationibus  candidatorum  defenderem:  sed  etiam  accuratam 
disputationem  de  motu  primo,  quod  Terrae  volutione  accidat,  conscriberem……Atque  in  hunc 
vsum partim ex ore Maestlini, partim meo Marte, quas Copernicus in Mathesi prae Ptolomaeo habet 
commoditates, paulatim collegi……Donec tandem Anno, etc. 95, cum ocium a lectionibus cuperem 
bene……toto animi impetu in hanc materiam incubui. Et tria potissimum erant, quorum ego causas, 
cur ita, non aliter essent, pertinaciter quaerebam, Numerus, Quantitas, et Motus Orbium.”11 

to 

an 

are 

the 

spheres 

explanation  of 

interesting.  Quoting 

We  cannot  dwell  upon  his  work 
on  the  whole,  however  it  is  enough 
to  say  that  Kepler  aimed  chiefly  at 
giving 
the 
relations  among  the  orbits  of  the 
planets  known  at  that  time.  Kepler 
set up a complicated model in which 
planetary 
enclosed 
five  platonic  solids, 
within 
the  cube  between 
starting  with 
Saturn  and  Jupiter 
the 
till 
octahedron  between  Venus  and 
Mercury.  But  as  far  as  our  task  is 
concerned,  above  all 
the  clear 
exposition of the Copernican system 
from 
is 
Dreyer12: 
instructive 
“By 
the 
that 
diagrams 
Ptolemaic  epicycles  of  the  outer 
planets  are  seen  exactly  under  the 
same  angle  from  the  earth  as  the 
orbit  of  the  earth  is  from  a  point  in 
each  of  the  outer  planetary  orbits, 
and he shows how this explains why 
Mars  has  an  epicycle  of  such 
enormous  size,  while  that  of  Jupiter 
is  much  smaller  and  that  of  Saturn 
smaller  still,  though  their  excentrics 
are  much  larger  than  that  of  Mars. 
The  Ptolemaic  system  could  assign 
no 
curious 
arrangement, nor for the strange fact 
in 
that 

three  planets  when 

very 
shows 

two 
he 

cause 

this 

the 

for 

                                                 

)LJ(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:23)(cid:3)

11  “When  I  was  studying  under  the  distinguished  Michael  Maestlin  at  Tübingen  six  years  ago,  seeing  the  many 
inconveniences  of  the  commonly  accepted  theory  of  the  universe,  I  became  so  delighted  with  Copernicus,  whom 
Maestlin often mentioned in his lectures, that I often defended his opinions in the students' debates about physics. I even 
wrote  a  painstaking  disputation  about  the  first  motion,  maintaining  that  it  happens  because  of  the  rotation  of  the 
earth……I  have  by  degrees  –  partly  out  of  hearing  Maestlin,  partly  by  myself  -  collected  all  the  advantages  that 
Copernicus  has  over  Ptolemy……At  last  in  the  year  1595  [in  Graz]  when  I  had  an  intermission  in  my  lectures,  I 
pondered on this subject with the whole energy of my mind. And there were three things above all for which I sought 
the causes as to why it was this way and not another - the number, the dimensions, and the motions of the orbs.” The 
translation is from O. Gingerich: Kepler Johannes, in Dictionary of Scientific Biography, Charles Scribner’s sons, New 
York, 1981 
12 J. L. E. Dreyer: History of Planetary Systems from Thales to Kepler, Cambridge University Press, 1906, p. 373 

opposition to the sun should be in the perigees of their epicycles. Neither could it explain why the 
periods of the inner planets in their excentrics should be equal to that of the sun, nor give any reason 
why  the  sun  and  moon  never  became  retrograde.  All  these  facts  are  so  simply  explained  by  the 
doctrine  of  the  earth’s  annual  motion,  while  Copernicus  is  also  able  to  account  for  precession 
without requiring “WKDW(cid:3)PRQVWURXV(cid:15)(cid:3)KXJH(cid:3)DQG(cid:3)VWDUOHVV(cid:3)QLQWK(cid:3)VSKHUH(cid:3)RI(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)$OSKRQVLQHV.” Certainly, it 
is difficult to see how anyone could read this chapter and still remain an adherent of the Ptolemaic 
system.” (See Figures 5 and 6). 
 

 

)LJ(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:24)(cid:3)

 
Although Kepler’s complicated geometrical model actually did not match with phisycal reality, 
anyhow  it  led  Kepler  to  display  a  fundamental  incongrousness  of  the  Copernican  theory.  As  we 
noted above, as a matter of fact Copernicus referred the orbits of the planets to the socalled “mean 
Sun” (that is, to the centre of the Earth’s orb), rather than to the real Sun, even if he had placed the 
Sun at the centre of the universe. In fact, he wanted “to benefit by a shortening of calculations and 

nimium 

not  to  trouble  the  painstaking 
lector  of  Ptolemy  departing 
notably  from  him”  [tamen  ut 
calculum  iuvet  compendio,  et 
Ptolomeo 
ne 
recedendo,  diligentem 
eius 
lectorem  turbet]13.  Obviously, 
the  two  points  (the  mean  Sun 
and  the  real  Sun)  are  at  a 
distance  measured 
any 
at 
instant by the eccentricity. 

a 

Kepler wanted the distances 
of  the  planets  from  the  centre 
of  motions.  The  latter  cannot 
be  a  merely  geometric  point, 
because  the  distances,  which 
have to play a fundamental role 
in  Kepler’s  model  of  universe, 
cannot  be  measured  from  an 
imaginary  point.  The  origin  of 
the motions of planets must be 
located uniquely in the body of 
the  Sun,  and  not  in  the  centre 
of the Earth’s orb. 

made 

among 

Kepler 

planets. 

Paradoxically,  the  changes 
in 
that 
Copernicus’s  model  made  it 
much more “Copernican”. As a 
consequence, 
other 
things,  the  Earth  was  truly 
considered  in  the  same  way  of 
the 
In 
other 
conclusion,  Kepler 
removed 
from  Copernicus’s  model  of 
last  Ptolemaic 
universe 
the 
remnants.  Obviously, 
this 
required  to  recalculate  all  the 
distances  (Kepler’s  old  teacher 
Maestlin  provided  that),  and 
introduced  some  discrepancies 
of 
with 
observations.  In  addition,  the 
shifting  of 
the  centre  of 
motions  from  the mean Sun to 
later 
the  real  Sun  obliged 
Kepler  to  introduce  the  equant 
(punctum 
again, 
which  had  been  removed  by 
Copernicus.  Anyhow,  Kepler 

aequans) 

previous 

results 

)LJ(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:25)(cid:3)

                                                 
13 Mysterium Cosmographicum, Chap. XV 

did not changed his mind and waited for more reliable and precise observations. His encounter with 
Tycho  Brahe  resulted  as  fundamental  with  regard  to  this  problem  and  influenced  heavily  his 
following work. 

We  can  conclude  our  few  hints  about  Mysterium  Cosmographicum  with  the  words  of  Owen 
Gingerich: “Seldom in history has so wrong a book been so seminal in directing the future course of 
science”14. 

$VWURQRPLD(cid:3)1RYD(cid:3)DQG(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)ILUVW(cid:3)WZR(cid:3).HSOHU¶V(cid:3)ODZV(cid:3)

Astronomia  Nova,  the  second  work  of  Kepler  (published  in  Prague  in  1609),  is  certainly  the 
work  that  most  intrigued  both  the  contemporaries  and  the  descendants.  It  is  a  work  that  does  not 
resemble  any  other  previous  work,  in  both  style and content. It has not the bombastic  aspect of a 
scientific treatise; it looks rather like a diary in which the author notes day after day the results he 
obtained. But besides the results he obtained, there is also the passion with which the investigation 
is carried on and the little tricks adopted. All is mixed with religious-philosophycal considerations 
and  autobiographical  details.  Moreover,  certain  chapters,  previously  written,  are  adapted  to  new 
results.  Let  us  call  upon  one  of  the  greatest  historian  of  ancient  astronomy  to  speak:  “I  wish  to 
give…some  examples  of  those  rather  trivial  obstacles  which  every  careful  reader  of  Kepler’s 
publications had to meet on practically every page. If Kepler ever did make any attempt to give a 
final polish to his writings, one can only say that he was not very successful. The number of trivial 
computing  errors  is  enormous,  parameters  are  changed  without  explanation  (usually  belonging  to 
different stages of investigation, e. g. concerning the motion of the apsidal line of Mars), references 
to observations accessible to no one else are quoted sometimes in an incomplete form, sometimes 
for  no  evident  reason,  and  so  forth.  To  the  historian  of  astronomy,  this  way  of  presentation  is  a 
blessing as great as a real disaster that leaves a city in total shambles is to the archaeologist”15. Of 
course,  Neugebauer  does  not  intend  to  diminish  the  greatness  of  Kepler,  but  only  to  forgive  the 
readers  contemporary  with  him:  “……contemporaries  cannot  be  blamed  if  their  reaction  was 
different  from  ours”16.  Kepler  inform  us  just  in  the  title  page  (see  Figure  7)  that  his  work  is 
“Plurium  annorum  pertinaci  studium  elaborata”  (worked  out  in  a  tenacious  study  lasting  many 
years17). Another fundamental element appearing in the subtitle is that Astronomia Nova is “based 
upon causes”, i. e. it is Celestial Physics. 

The aim Kepler propose  to  himself is  therefore not only to give a more rigorous kinematics to 
the motion of planets, but also to individuate the cause of the motion itself. The latter objective was 
not  hit,  and  it  was  necessary  to  wait  for  Newton’s  work.  Anyhow,  the  result  that  the  motion  of 
planets is due to an action exerted by the Sun comes from Kepler, even if Kepler did not think of 
gravity but of a magnetic force. We do not deal with that, but only with the work (the “ZDU” against 
Mars, as he himself called it) done to come to the formulation – still rough and approximative - of 
the First and Second Kepler’s Laws, as they are called today. 

It  is  common  knowledge  that  beginning  from  the  century  after  the  publication  of  Astronomia 
Nova  the  demonstrations  given  by  Kepler  (including  the  comparison  between  hypotheses  and 
observations) were not considered as unquestionable. Newton himself, for instance, considers that 
Kepler had “guessed” the elliptical form of the orbit: “……Kepler knew ye Orb to be not circular 
but  oval  &  guest  it  to  be  elliptical……”18.  After  Newton,  generations  of  scholars  attempted  to 
interpretate  Kepler’s  fascinating  work  and  its  refined  Latin19.  Delambre  was  one  of  the  most 
important  scholars  of  Kepler’s  work.  He  describes  Astronomia  Nova  as  “……l’ouvrage  le  plus 
beau,  le  plus  important  de  Képler……cette  composition  dont  Lalande  et  Bailly  ont  donné  des 

                                                 
14 Owen Gingerich, loc. cit. 
15 O. Neugebauer: Notes on Kepler, Communications on Pure and Applied Mathemathics, Vol. XIV, 1961, pp. 593-597 
16 Ibidem 
17 Donahue’s translation (see Note 1) 
18 H. W. Turnbull (ed.): The correspondence of Isaac Newton, II, Cambridge, 1960, pp. 436-437 
19 Fortunately for the reader, we have now the excellent translation of Donahue (see Note 1) 

extraits  fort  amples,  mais  qui sont loin 
d’être  complets;  et  dont  Lalande  a  dit 
que  tout  astronome  la  devait  lire  au 
moins  une  fois  dans  son  entier”20. 
Notwithstanding this, Delambre did not 
spare  Kepler  his  criticism  with  regard 
to the lack of evidence and the presence 
of  mistakes,  as  we  will  see  later. 
Another  great  Kepler’s  scholar,  Robert 
Small21,  is  nearly  contemporary  with 
Delambre.  Almost  a  century  later,  we 
can  remember  the  above  cited  Dreyer 
and also A. Berry22, then passing to our 
contemporaries Owen Gingerich, Curtis 
Wilson, 
E.  G.  Aiton,  Bruce 
Stephenson23. 

Neverthless,  unlike  the  above  cited 
authoritative scholars, we do not intend 
to  enter  into  a  technical  discussion. 
Even if in our exposition we follow the 
line  drawn  by  Curtis  Wilson  in  his 
works,  our 
is  not  of 
intention 
attempting  to  introduce  new  technical 
or  historical-philosophical  elements. 
Indeed  we  want  to  emphasize  the 
revolutionary  innovation  introduced  by 
the  elliptical  orbit  in  a  scientific  world 
where  during  eighteen  century  only 
circular  orbits  had  been  handled.  The 
is  even  more 
character  of  rupture 
stressed  by the fact that this revolution 
has  not  been  received 
its  real 
significance  for  long  time  and  that  it 
was accepted only later as an empirical 
proposition 
the  above  cited 
Newton’s  opinion).  As  everybody 
knows,  Kepler  began  to  work  at  the 
theory  of  Mars’s  motion  in  1600. 
During his studies he used the results of 
Tico Brahe’s observations, far the most precise of those available at that time. Let us mention that 
Tycho  had  at  his  disposal,  when  he  was  still  living  in  Denmark,  a  personal  observatory equipped 

)LJ(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:26)(cid:3)

(see 

in 

                                                 
20 Jean-Baptiste Joseph Delambre: Histoire de l’Astronomie Moderne, Tome Premier, Mme. Ve. Courcier, Paris, 1821, 
p. 389 
21 R. Small: An Account of the Astronomical Discoveries of Kepler, London, 1804 – Repr. Madison, Winsconsin, 1963 
22 A. Berry: A Short History of Astronomy – From earliest times through 19th century, 1898, Reprinted Dover 1961 
23 The list of Kepler’s scholars is obviously very long and there are many important contributions. We just cite those 
who  particularly  devoted  themselves  to  the  subject  of  this  paper.  The  reader  can find exhaustive bibliographies in O. 
Gingerich  (see  Note  11),  Curtis  Wilson:  Kepler’s  derivation  of  the  elliptical  path,  Isis,  (cid:24)(cid:28),  1968,  pp.  5-25;  From 
Kepler’s Laws, So-called, to Universal Gravitation: Empirical Factors, Archive for History of Exact Sciences, (cid:25), 1970, 
pp.  89-170;  E.  J.  Aiton:  Kepler’s  Second  Law  of  Planetary  Motion,  Isis,  (cid:25)(cid:19),  1969,  pp.  75-90;  Bruce  Stephenson: 
Kepler’s Physical Astronomy, Princeton U. P., 1994; J. Evans, The hystory and practice of ancient astronomy, Oxford 
U. P., 1998. Finally, a wide bibliography was included in the Dover edition of Max Caspar’s work – see Note 10. 

with  the  most  precise  instruments  ever  constructed  before  the  telescope.  He  had  left  Denmark  in 
1597 and two years later he had settled in Bohemia. Kepler paid him a first visit in January 1600. 
The  following  year  he  became  his  collaborator  and  then  succeeded  him  to  the  office  of  imperial 
mathematician in 1601. Thus, Astronomia Nova and the “two laws” were elaborated during the first 
part  (1600-1612)  of  Kepler’s  staying  in  Prague.  The  work  was  published  after  complicated 
vicissitudes,  including  the  controversies  with  Tycho  Brahe’s  heirs  in  1609.  When  Kepler  joined 
Tycho the first time in 1600, an opposition of Mars to the Sun had just taken place and a table of 
oppositions  had  been  elaborated  beginning  from  1580.  Tycho  had  also  a  very  good  theory  at  his 
disposal,  by  which  he  could  represent  the  longitudes  in  opposition  with  an  error  of  only  2’,  but 
neither  the  latitudes  nor  the  annual  parallaxes.  Kepler’s  “war”  against  Mars  started  at  that  point. 
However, it is necessary to have arms to go to the war; Kepler had two arms, already set up in the 
Mysterium. The first one was the convincement that all planetary motions should be referred to the 
real  Sun  and  not  to  the  mean  Sun;  the  second  one  was  that  all  the  planets,  including  the  Earth, 
should  move  in  the  same  way  (around  the  real  Sun).  Maintaining  the  former  argument,  Kepler 
examines existing data on the oppositions of superior planets, and, according to Delambre, “……se 
jette  dans  un  labyrinthe  de  calculs,  qui  ne  sont  pas  de  la  dernière  exactitude;  il  travaille  sur  des 
observations  qui  ne  sont  pas  d’une  grande  précision;  ses  raisonnemens  sont  obscurs  et  ses 
conséquences incertaines……”24. Neverthless, Kepler obtained his first success, which consisted of 
removing  the  oscillations  in  the  latitude  bequeathed  by  the  previous  theories.  Kepler’s  thesis  was 
that  the  plane  of  Mars’s  orbit  should  have  a  constant  inclination  with  respect  to  the  plane  of  the 
ecliptic and should pass through the real Sun. 

According to Kepler, one of the reasons of complications in Copernicus’s theory of latitudes was 
the substitution of the real Sun by the mean Sun. He used three different methods to demonstrate his 
thesis. The second one was founded on observations concerning the particular situation in which the 
planet is in quadrature with the Sun, and both the Earth and the Sun lay on the line of nodes. In this 
case  the  observed  latitude  is  equal  to  the  inclination.  By  means  of  the  three  methods  he  found  a 
constant  inclination  of  1°50’.  So  it  was  that  the  (apparent)  oscillations  in  Mars’s  orbits  were 
eliminated.  At  that  point  Kepler  proclaimed  Copernicus  “divitiarum  suarum  ipse  ignarus”25 
(ignorant of his own riches). 

The  successive  and  more  important  step  was  the  determination  of  the  position  of  the  line  of 

apsides, of the eccentricity and of the mean anomaly at any epoch. 

If we assume that a planet moves on a circular orbit around the Sun (Copernicus), we need three 
points to determine this orbit (in practice three observations performed at an opposition). Also for 
Ptolemy,  who  made  use  of  the  equant  and  assumed  the  Sun  and  the  equant  at  the  same  distance 
from  the  centre  of  the  circle  and  on  the  opposite  side  to  it  (bisection  of  the  eccentricity),  three 
oppositions  were  sufficient.  On  the  contrary  Kepler,  who  did  not  assume  the  bisection  of  the 
eccentricity even if using the equant, needed four oppositions. Among the ten oppositions observed 
by Tycho and the other two observed by himself in 1602 and 1604 (we recall that they happen about 
every  780  days)  he  chose  the  ones  of  1587,  1591,  1593  and  1595  and  deduced  the  exact  time  of 
opposition referred to the true Sun from them. At the exact time of opposition the Earth lies on a 
straight  line  between  Mars  and  the  Sun.  Therefore,  Mars  is  seen  from  the  Earth  against  the 
background of the stars just as it would be seen by an observer standing on the Sun. Kepler was the 
first  who  calculated  the  oppositions  with  respect  to  the  real  Sun  and  not  to  the  mean  Sun.  Those 
measurements provided the heliocentric longitude of Mars, i. e. its position on the ecliptic as it is 
seen from the Sun, but did not provide the distance from the Sun. To get the latter, an assumption is 
needed. At first, Kepler assumed a model of Ptolemaic type: Mars moves of uniform motion on a 
circular orbit around a point (the equant), which is not the centre of the circle; the Sun is off centre 
also. We called this model of Ptolemaic Type because the Ptolemaic configuration can be obtained 
from it simply replacing the Sun by the Earth. The unknown quantities are the line formed by the 
                                                 
24 Delambre, op. cit., p. 397 
25 Astronomia Nova, XIV, p. 81 

centre of Mars’s orbit, the position of the Sun and the equant and the ratios of the distances between 
these  points  and  the  radius  of  Mars’s  orbit.  As  we  reminded  above,  Kepler  did  not  assume  the 
bisection of the eccentricity, i. e. the same distances Sun-centre and centre-equant, but he wanted to 
place the centre of the orbit in the right position, between the Sun and the equant, in order to yield 
the  best  fit  between  observations  and  theory.  He  devoted  the  whole  Chapter  XVI  of  Astronomia 
Nova (fifteen “in folio” pages) to the exposition of the calculations performed to achieve the best 
fit.  However,  already  at  the  fifth  page  he  warned  the  reader:  “Si  te  hujus  laboriosae  Methodi 
pertaesum  fuerit,  jure  mei te misereat, qui eam ad minimum septuagies  ivi  cum plurima temporis 
jactura, & mirari defines hunc quintum jam annum abire, ex quo Martem aggressus sum, quamvis 
annus  MCIII  pene  totus  opticis  inquisitionibus  fuit  traductus.”26  We  show  in  Figure  8  the 
reproduction of one of the diagrams of Chapter XVI, where G, H, I and J represent the four positions 
of  Mars  at  the  four  oppositions,  D,  E  and  F  represent  the  Sun,  the  centre,  and  the  equant, 
respectively, and LK is the line of apsides. 

2’12’’ 

the  maximum 

The result of these wearisome calculations was 
for Kepler the heliocentric longitude of Mars with 
a  precision  comparable  with  that  of  observations, 
being 
discrepancy. 
Neverthless,  the  assumed  model,  later  called 
“K\SRWKHVLV(cid:3) YLFDULD”,  failed  to  give  the  correct 
distance between Mars and the Sun. This distance 
can  be  obtained  by  considering  the  triangle  Sun-
Earth-Mars,  obviously  when  they  are  not  in 
opposition. By means of the hypothesis vicaria, of 
observations  and  of  Tycho’s  theory  of  solar 
motion  (turned  into  a  theory  of  Earth’s  motion 
through a simple geometrical transformation), one 
can calculate the positions of the sides Sun-Mars, 
Mars-Earth  and  Earth-Sun,  respectively.  The 
angles  of  this  triangle  can  be  obtained  with  a 
precision  of  four  minutes  of  arc.  Therefore,  the 
ratios 
calculated 
trigonometrically. If one repeat this calculation for 
two observations, i. e. for two triangles, and makes 
use of Tycho’s theory for the ratios of the two distances Earth-Sun (practically equal), the ratios of 
the  corresponding  distances  Mars-Sun  can  be  determined.  By  calculating  the  distance  Mars-Sun 
when Mars was near the line of apsides, Kepler found out that the centre of Mars’s orbit must be 
located nearly halfway  between  the  Sun and the equant, whereas the best fit obtained through the 
hypothesis vicaria had given about 0.61 times the distance. On the other hand, if one took as good 
the  value  of  about  0.5  (bisection  of  the  eccentricity  à  la  Ptolemy),  one  obtained  the  eccentrical 
longitude with an error of 8’. But Kepler could not consent to so great an error: “Nobis cum divina 
benignitas  Tychonem  Brahe  observatorem  diligentissimum  concesserit,  cujus  ex  observatis  error 
hujus  calculi  Ptolemaici  VII  minutorum  in  Marte  arguitur;  aequum  est,  ut  grata  mente  hoc  Dei 
beneficium  &  agnoscamus  &  excolamus……Nunc  quia  contemni  non  potuerunt,  sola  igitur  haec 
octo minuta viam praeiverunt ad totam Astronomiam reformandam, suntque materia magnae parti 
hujus operis facta.”27 Therefore, the trust in the reliability of Tycho’s results and his obstinacy led 

)LJ(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:27)(cid:3)

sides 

can 

the 

be 

of 

                                                 
26 “If the wearisome method has filled you with loathing, it should more properly fill you with compassion for me, as I 
have gone through it at least seventy times at the expense of a great deal of time, and you will cease to wonder that the 
fifth  year  has  now  gone  by  since  I  took  up  Mars,  although  the  year  1603  was  nearly  all  taken  up  by  optical 
investigations.” (Donahue’s translation) 
27  Astronomia Nova, Chap. XIX, p. 113-114. “Since the divine benevolence has wouchsafed us Tycho Brahe, a most 
diligent  observer,  from  whose  observations  the  8’  error  in  Ptolemaic  computation  is  shown,  it  is  fitting  that  we  with 

Kepler  to  look  for  new  ways.  He  had  two  theories  at  his  disposal:  Tycho’s  theory  (turned  into  a 
theory of Earth’s motion) and the hypothesis vicaria for Mars. Both made use of circular orbits with 
uniform angular motions around a point within the circle. Both gave, for the correspondent planet, 
the  correct  heliocentric  longitude  within  two  minutes  of  arc.  However,  whereas  Tycho’s  theory 
gave the correct Earth-Sun distance, the hypothesis vicaria gave the wrong distance Mars-Sun. The 
assumptions of the hypothesis vicaria were two: circular trajectory and uniform motion around the 
equant. One or the other or both had to be wrong. If one held the assumption of circular trajectory, 
the  equant  was  subjected  to  oscillations,  and  this  made  no  sense.  Kepler  began  the  study  of 
planetary  motion  again,  looking  for  rules  which  were  solid  in  the  same  way  for  all  planets.  He 
arrived  to  establish  an  approximate  rule,  which  is  the  ancestress  of  the  area  law.  Exploiting  the 
assumption of the bisection of eccentricity, he arrived to maintain that the velocity of a planet varies 
inversely with respect to its distance from the Sun. 

Although this is true only at perihelion and aphelion, Kepler generalized the rule, extending it to 
the whole orbit and to whatsoever planet. We used the term “velocity”, but this is not exact because 
Kepler did not have the idea of instantaneous velocity as we intend it. He always spoke of the time 
(“PRUD” in Kepler’s Latin) necessary to cover a given arc. For him “the elements of time and space 
were infinitesimal magnitudes but never zero, so that he envisaged time not as a flowing instant, but 
as  a  succession  of  durations”  (Aiton).  Reformulated  in  the  light  of  these  considerations,  the  rule 
becomes:  the  times  necessary  to  cover  small  equal  arcs  are  approximately  proportional  to  the 
distances  of  these  arcs  from  the  Sun. This rule worked well for the Earth’s orbit and  agreed with 
Tycho’s theory. Kepler took a further step toward what we now call the second law. He divided the 
semicircle  (remember  that  he  was  still  using  circular  orbits)  into  180  arcs  of  one  degree  each, 
evaluated their distances from the Sun and, by summing the distances comprised in a given sector, 
put this sum proportional to the time elapsed to sweep the sector itself. After that, he replaced the 
sum of the distances comprised within a sector by the area of the sector itself, as if those segments 
were thick. In this way the area law was born. Its application to Earth’s motion works well enough, 
with a discrepancy of only 34’’ (remember that Earth’s orbit has a very small eccentricity!). On the 
contrary,  for  Mars  the  discrepancy  was  remarkable.  Here  the  most  difficult part of  Kepler’s work 
began and also did the incubation of the revolutionary idea. Kepler still considered Mars’s orbit as a 
circular one, with the Sun off centre. The Sun pushes the planet around by a “VSHFLHV(cid:3)LPPDWHULDWD”, 
an immaterial virtue, which weakens in proportion to the distance. This point, still deserving to be 
deeply  discussed,  has  been  recently  re-examined  by  Bruce  Stephenson28, who  rejected the current 
interpretation. However, this goes beyond the scope of our talk. Kepler studied the complete orbit of 
Mars during the whole period (687 days) of its motion and compared the outcome of the area law 
with  the  predictions  of  the  hypothesis  vicaria.  The  results  of  the  two  theories  coincided  in  the 
apsides and in the quadrants, but not in the octants (with a discrepancy of about 8’). By assuming 
the circularity of the orbit and the area law, one obtained that the planet moved too rapidly about the 
apsides  and  too  slowly  about  the  quadrants.  Then  either  the  circular  orbit  was  wrong  or  the  area 
law, or both. In the first case, one had to reduce the area near the quadrants, and to shorten the times 
for the given arcs accordingly, i. e. to make the orbit be oval. In Chapter XLV of Astronomia Nova 
the study begins “De causis naturalibus hujus deflectionis planetae a circulo”, i. e. on the causes of 
the non-circularity of the orbit. 

At  that  time,  the  great  difficulties  which  Kepler  met  with  concerned  the  quadrature  of  the 
ovoidal orbit. At the end, to simplify the computations, he replaced the oval by an ellipse he called 
“auxiliary ellipse” (it was not yet the true ellipse and the Sun was not in one of the two foci). After 
very  cumbersome  calculations  concerning  the  “moonlet”  comprised  between  Mars’s  orbit  and the 
eccentric  circle,  he arrived to demonstrate  on  the  basis  of  the  area  law that the true orbit deviates 

                                                                                                                                                                  
thankful  mind  both  aknowledge  and  honour  this  benefit  of  God……Now,  because  they  could  not  have  been ignored, 
these eight minutes alone will have led the way to the reformation of all of astronomy, and have constituted the material 
for a great part of the present work.” (Donahue’s translation) 
28 Bruce Stephenson, op. cit., pp. 68-69 

very  little  from  the  auxiliary  ellipse.  Finally,  he  realized  that,  replacing  everywhere  the  radius 
vector  of  the  eccentric  circle  by  the  same  quantity  times  the  cosine  of  the  optical  equation 
(“GLVWDQWLD(cid:3)GLDPHWUDOLV”, as Kepler called it), he obtained a complete agreement with the distances 
resulting from Tycho’s observations. 

He had discovered that the radius vector of Mars is always given by the equation 
U

+=
D

DH

(

 

cos

D  being  the  radius  of  the  eccentric  circle,  H  the  eccentricity  and  (  the  eccentric  anomaly 
(measured from the aphelion after the ancient fashion). Obviously, it is easy at present time to assert 
that Kepler had already obtained the correct result and the orbit was elliptic with the Sun at one of 
the  foci.  However,  Kepler  still  continued  to  worrying  with  circles  before  definitively  surrending 
himself  to  the  elliptic  motion.  He  concluded  Chapter  LVIII  finally  admitting  “O  me  ridiculum! 
perinde  quasi  libratio  in  diametro,  non  possit  esse  via  ad  ellipsin.  Itaque  non  parvo  mihi  constitit 
ista  notitia,  juxta  librationem  consistere  ellipsin;  ut  sequenti  capite  patescet:  ubi  simul  etiam 
demonstrabitur,  nullam  Planetae  relinqui  figuram  Orbitae,  praeterquam  perfecte  ellipticam; 
conspirantibus  rationibus,  a  principiis  Physicis,  derivatis,  cum  experientia  observationum  & 
hypoteseos  vicariae  hoc  capite allegata.”29 And  Chapter LIX is  the  chapter of the  triumph:  all the 
pictures  are  surmounted  by  the  triumphal  car  (see  Figure  9,  where  a  picture  from  p.  286  of 
Astronomia  Nova  is  reproduced).  In  this  chapter,  the  first  and  the  second  law  (as  we  call  them 
today) are demonstrated and connected one to the other. But, as noted by Koyré, “aucun autre peut-
être n’est plus embarassé, touffu - et confus – que celui-ci”30. 

In Chapter LIX Kepler explains the theorems on the properties of conics which he needs for the 
“physics”  to  be  worked  out  in  Chapter  LX.  At  the  end,  with  the  consciousness  of  having  dealed 
with a somewhat complicated matter, he apologizes to the reader by saying that he would have met 
with the same difficulties in reading Apollonius’s treatise. But then, before this passage there is an 
assertion  showing  all  Kepler’s  legitimate  pride  for  the  achieved  success  and  his  awareness  that  it 
was due to right physical principles and mathematical rigour. “Quod nisi causae physicae, initio a 
me susceptae, loco principiorum, probae essent nunquam in tanta subtilitate inquisitionis consistere 
potuissent.”31 As we have striven to expound so far, in Astronomia Nova one would look in vain for 
a  formulation  (as  the  one  we  use  today)  of  the  two laws. Kepler was more outspoken  in  the fifth 
book of Epitome, where the foci of the ellipse are called with this name (invented by himself in his 
work  on  optics),  but  it  is  completely  evident  from  his  conclusions  that  in  Astronomia  Nova  the 
circle paradigm is definitively broken. We can add that it was not an easy undertaking. 

Besides the hindrance due to the almost sacred nature of the circular model, there was the real 
difficulty  of  discriminating  between  the  two  models  (elliptic  orbit  and  area  law  versus  eccentric 
circle with the equant). As J. Evans shows with great lucidity in the last pages of his book32, it was a 
dilemma not easy to be solved. 

 
 
 
 
 

                                                 
29 “O ridicolous me! To think that the reciprocation on the diameter could not be the way to the ellipse! So it came to 
me  as  no  small  revelation  that  through  the  reciprocation  an  ellipse  was  generated.  This  will  be  made  clear  in  the 
following chapter, where it will be demonstrated  at the same time, through the agreement of arguments from physical 
principles  with  the  body  of  experience,  mentioned  in  this  chapter,  that  is  contained  in  the  observations  and  in  the 
vicarious  hypothesis,  that  no  figure  is  left  for  the  planet  to  follow  other  than  a  perfectly  elliptical  one.”  (Donahue’s 
translation) 
30 A. Koyré, op. cit., p. 267 
31 “And unless the physical causes that I had taken in the place of principles had been good ones, they would never have 
been able to withstand an investigation of such exactitude.” (Donahue’s translation) 
32 J. Evans, op. cit., pp. 441-443 

)LJ(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:28)(cid:3)

 
 
 
 
 

