31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

1

Recent Conceptual Consequences of Loop Quantum Gravity
Part II: Holistic Aspects

Rainer E. Zimmermann

IAG Philosophische Grundlagenprobleme,
FB 1, UGH, Nora-Platiel-Str.1, D – 34127 Kassel /
Clare Hall, UK – Cambridge CB3 9AL1 /
Lehrgebiet Philosophie, FB 13 AW, FH,
Lothstr.34, D – 80335 München2
e-mail: pd00108@mail.lrz-muenchen.de

Abstract

Based on the foundational aspects which have been discussed as consequences
of ongoing research on loop quantum gravity in the first part of this paper, the
holistic aspects of the latter are discussed in this second part, aiming at a consi-
stent  and  systematic  approach  to  eventually  model  a  hierarchically  ordered  ar-
chitecture of the world which is encompassing all of what there actually is. The
idea is to clarify the explicit relationship between physics and philosophy on the
one hand, and philosophy and the sciences in general, on the other. It is shown
that the ontological determination of worldliness is practically identical with its
epistemological determination so that  the  (scientific)  activity  of  modelling  and
representing the world can be visualized itself as a (worldly) mode of being.

Introduction

We  have  seen  in  the  first  part  of  this  present  paper  [1]  that  a  clear  distinction
between the (physical) world and its foundation has not very often been the to-
pic  of  conceptualizing  ongoing  research  in  modern  physics.  The  same  is  even
more pertinent as to the holistic aspects of this approach: The point is that if we
visualize some abstract mathematical structure as representing what we can infer
about  some  suitable  foundational  basis  of  the  world,  provided  consistency  is
being secured in terms of being able to actually derive what we know about the
world from that structure, then this representation serves as a mode of descripti-
on of all what there actually is in worldly terms, i.e. it is not only referring to the
world  as  it  can  be  described  in  terms  of  physics,  chemistry,  and  biology  (or
computer science), but also in terms of psychology, sociology, economics, and

                                                          
1 Permanent addresses.
2 Present address.

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

2

everything else. In other words: It is our usual perception of everyday life map-
ped as a gross average of all what there is that is nothing but a collection of as-
pects of the (universally) underlying being of worldliness as it can be visualized
under  the  perspective  of  the  human  mode  of  being.  And  within  the  course  of
communication, these aspects are permanently phrased into a propositional form
which  is  governed  by  the  appropriate  language  chosen.  Hence,  the  ordering  of
available modelling procedures is itself a linguistic aspect. Such fairly traditio-
nal  insight  of  philosophy  [2]  is  however  alien  to  modern  science,  despite  its
formal language (mathematics) being only a special case of the aforementioned.
This is mainly so because the primary task of science is to deal with the world as
it can be perceived (observed). Hence, science is exclusively aiming at the empi-
rical world, not at its foundation. And this empirical world is visualized moreo-
ver  as  a  stratified  set  of  regions  accessible  to  various,  more  or  less  disjoint,
disciplines. It is only because of the conceptual „competition“ between (classi-
cal) relativity theory on the one hand and quantum theory on the other therefore,
that theory has been forced to conceptually „leave“ this empirical world in order
to find a common foundation for both these basically incompatible theories each
of which claim to describe one and the same Universe.
The important consequence is after all, that the modelling (i.e. observing, con-
ceptualizing, and re-constructing) of the world itself turns out to be part of the
process it is going to model in the first place. In other words: If we call the sub-
tratum  of  the  world  „matter“  (or  more  precisely:  „space-time-matter“),  then
thinking itself is nothing but a form of this matter. It is probably a very complex
form as to that, but it is basically nothing else than that sort of matter which is
available  from  the  beginning  on,  and  this  is  physical  matter.  However,  as  we
have seen before, though the world can be visualized in terms of physical mat-
ter, matter is not already substance. Instead, substance is the world’s (and hence
matter’s) foundation. Nevertheless, if thinking of the physical world, we are ba-
sically thinking of its „framework categories“ which are space, time, and matter.
And those are the categories with respect to which we actually phrase our pro-
positions, in the first place.
Note that what we advocate here is not necessarily a sort of classical reductio-
nism, nor is it something  which  could be  summarized  as  „naturalism“  or  mere
„materialism“: First of all, we have to take care of the differentiating power of
our  arguments.  (If  everything  is  matter  and/or  nature,  then  nothing  is.)  Hence,
the crucial point is that each level of complexity (of the observable world) has a
common boundary with some higher level, as well as with some lower level, but
that obviously, all these (worldly) levels of structure are irreducible with repect
to  each other.  [3]  This is  so  because  lower  levels  are  „sublated“  within  higher
levels in the threefold Hegelian sense of the meaning of „to sublate“ (namely: to
raise,  to  conserve,  and  to  abolish,  at  the  same  time).  In  this  sense,  as  Thomas
Kuhn has shown some time ago, Newtonian physics e.g. shows up as a special
case of relativity, if a certain limit of the latter is being taken in terms of para-
meters  which  are  part  of  the  theory.  But  in  cognitive  terms,  this  is  a  different

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

3

outcome  as  compared  to  the  period  when  relativity  theory  was  yet  unknown.
Both cases (visualizing Newtonian physics as a special case, and visualizing the
whole of mechanics in terms of Newtonian physics) differ in their space of im-
plications.  The  latter  has  been  enlarged  by  now.  Hence,  their  associated
viewpoints are irreducible.
The reason for this is mainly that humans have to think sequentially – collecting
one  argument  after  the  other.  They  are  digitalizing  the  world  which  primarily
shows up as an analogous process in order to be able to conceptualize it. Irredu-
cibility therefore, is a cognitive analogue of temporality. This is also the reason
for  calling  the  materialism  put  forward  here  „transcendental  materialism“,  be-
cause the word „transcendental“ implies that the substratum discussed is not al-
ready substance itself: The foundation of the world is not accessible to an inha-
bitant  of  that  world,  due  to  the  fact  that  perception  is  restricted.  (There  is  an
evolutionary aspect to that, because humans have not developed their cognitive
capabilities for being able to do science and/or philosophy and/or art, but rather
for being able to survive under given conditions. Hence, all these research acti-
vities form part of this permanent improvement of survival capacities, but spe-
culating about the foundation is a result of some kind of „excess capacity“ clo-
sely related to a necessary „space of free play“ serving the increase of flexibility
(resilience) of evolution.) Moreover: The observed process (of evolution) can be
thought of as a „self-process“ of the underlying foundation. Or rather: as a self-
explication of the latter.
On the other hand, second, when all of this stuctural hierarchy is, as we know by
now,  simply  a  property  of  human  perception  according  to  which  the  world  is
actually being modeled, then in principle, the world as being visualized in terms
of a complex hierarchy of forms is nothing but the (epistemological) representa-
tion of what humans can grasp of the underlying substance, given their perspec-
tive which is developed according to what they can perceive. Hence, instead of
being an indication of the world’s complexity, the observed hierarchy of forms
is nothing but an indication for human reflexion’s tendency to actually simplify
what  it  perceives.  Despite  the  obvious  complexity  of  the  world  therefore,  this
world is, as it turns out, much less complex than its foundation. The point is that
reflexion means reduction of complexity, in the first place. [4] And this can be
visualized  as  the  characteristic  human  activity  indeed:  to  model  the  world  in  a
simplified way in order to make it tractable for human praxis.
In the following we will discuss some consequences of this viewpoint: First of
all, we will have a look at the important role of language as a mode of semiolo-
gical  communication  governing  the  process  of  modelling.  We  start  with  some
formal  preparations of  this  (section  1)  and  continue  then  with  its  cognitive  as-
pects.  (section  2)  Human  graphism  is  a  significant  example  for  the  process  of
abstraction which is underlying the modelling of the world. (section 3) We will
notice that this is also the foundation of  any  suitable  concept  of  consciousness
which  we  can  re-couple  therefore  to  our  formal  starting  point.  (section  4)  We
will visualize then „daily life“ as a kind of coarse graining of this cognitive cor-

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

4

respondence. (section 5) And we will try to draw some ethical conclusions from
these results. (section 6)

1  The Transition from Logic to Hermeneutic

So  everything  starts  with  language.  Or  to  be  more  precise:  It  starts  with  the
communication of (reflexive) thoughts and its mapping in terms of appropriate
scripture.  If  we  visualize  a  language  as  a  collection  of  lexicology,  syntax,  and
semantics, then we have to look for the correspondence between its phonology
and its graphology first. We can think of oral language as a category ORL who-
se objects are phonemes and whose morphisms are rules that produce chains of
phones  (tones)  which  are  meaningful.  Correspondingly,  scripture  (written  lan-
guage)  is  a  category  SCRPT  whose  objects  are  graphemes  and  whose  mor-
phisms are rules that produce chains of letters. Writing then, is simply a functor
ORL  →  SCRPT.  There  is  also  a  formal  correspondence  between  the  detailed
structuring of the morphisms in ORL and that in SCRPT being cared of by this
functor. Additionally, there are some more criteria of form such as eugraphical
and/or  rhythmic  aspects  (of  syllables  e.g.),  and  there  is  a  characteristic  sub-
structuring  of  the  respective  lexicology,  syntax,  and  semantics.  While  the  first
(lexicology)  is  dealing  with  the  form  of  words  (conjugation)  and  with  their
functions  (tempus,  modus,  genus),  the  second  is  simply  a  system  which  asso-
ciates structure descriptions with propositions. In other words: A syntax is a sy-
stem of rules which models the consistent distribution of word forms. Referring
to earlier work by Chomsky [5], we call a grammar generative, if it provides for
the  consistent  association  of  three  basic  components:  syntactic  (relating  to  in-
formation which is necessary to identify and/or interpret propositions), phonolo-
gical (relating to information necessary to interpret the phonetic structure, thus
mapping  the  syntactic  structure  to  the  phonetic),  and  semantic  (mapping  the
syntactic structure to the appropriate meaning). Hence, it is the syntactic structu-
re of a language that specifies its deep structure (as to its semantic interpretati-
on) as  well  as  its surface structure  (as  to  its  phonetic interpretation).  Note  that
„interpretation“  here  is  still  referring  to  the  technical  aspects  of  propositional
ordering,  not  yet  to  the  full  hermeneutic  process,  although  the  former  is  ob-
viously being placed at the beginning of the latter. The reason for this is mainly
that the ordering principles in the sense of the syntax have to be checked in the
first  place,  before  one  would  be  able  to  actually  extract  the  (probably)  correct
meaning of what has been said or written. In order to display the systematic of a
language  in  more  detail,  there  are  well-known  examples  of  graphic  mappings
which represent the detailed structure of a syntax as introduced by Chomsky in
terms of suitable tree diagrams ([5], p.90) of the type:

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

5

P
      ↓      
                                                     NP   Aux  VP
↓      ↓       
  N     M  V   NP
                          
                    Det   N

All of the links are directed here, and standard abbreviations have been used for
the various terms (P: proposition, VP: verbal phrase, NP: nominal phrase, Det:
determinator, N: nomen, Aux: auxiliary phrase, M: modal verb). Phrase markers
of this type indicate that the syntax can be mapped in detail by means of directed
graphs, i.e. in terms of a category PHRS whose objects are vertices and whose
morphisms are edges. In other words: There will be a pair of functors ORL →
PHRS,  and  SCRPT  →  PHRS  such  that  both  the  underlying  systematic  of  the
respective categories as well as their semiotic contents are being represented in
terms of appropriate digraphs. (Note that the symbol strings as those utilized for
scriptures themselves are also contained in these functors.)
We  cannot  develop  a  whole  theory  of  languages  here  by  means  of  categories
(this  will  be  actually  done  elsewhere  [6]).  But  the  important  point  for  us  is  to
notice that while we are able to represent linguistic aspects in categorial terms,
we can also utilize what we know about their underlying logical consequences.
So in the following we concentrate on the interpretational procedure as it is re-
lated  to  the  analysis  of  propositions.  We  use  the  aforementioned  as  an  insight
into the fact that modelling is essentially based on a systematic  of  predication.
However, we will not deal with more foundational aspects of linguistics, as they
are being advocated by Chomsky. In particular, we do not share Chomsky’s as-
sumptions on the universality of generative grammars. [7] (For a more detailed
description  of  linguistic  principles  refer  to  the  standard  volume  of  Lyons.  [8])
But what we do is to stay with the logical consequences of interpretations. This
has been discussed  in  more  detail  elsewhere  [9],  [10],  when  referring  to  a  sui-
table  approach  to  formalizing  the  transition  from  logic  to  hermeneutic  demon-
strating at the same time that the latter can be visualized as a generalized version
of the former, for the case of incomplete information.
In this sense, the description of processes can be mapped in terms of propositi-
ons formulated in some language. Hence, under this perspective, languages alto-
gether can be thought of as being categories whose objects are propositions for-
med  out  of  a  given  generative  grammar  including  some  suitable  lexicology,
syntax, and semantics, satisfying rules as laid down above, these rules being im-
plicit  in  the  category’s  morphisms.  Translation  then  is  a  functor  between  lan-
guage  categories  mapping  objects  to  objects  (propositions  to  propositions)  and
morphisms  to  morphisms  (rules  to  rules).  The  idea  of  this  approach  is  that

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

6

translations are path-dependent with respect to compositions. This can be shown
in that the diagram of the form

A → B
↓ 
↓
C ⇔ C

is not commutative, if A, B, and C mean any natural languages. (The double ar-
row indicates the identity mapping.) But it is commutative, if A, B, and C refer
to  different  logical  languages  (i.e.  formal  languages  with  different  underlying
logics). What we can say is that in the case of the logics, the information (with
respect to the semantics of the propositions utilized, e.g. with a view to applica-
tions in physics) is complete. Hence, translation of propositions is commutative
with respect to the diagram shown above, if we deal with logic. It is thus path-
independent.  But  for  hermeneutic,  which shows up  here  as  a  generalized  logic
for  incomplete  information,  it  is  path-dependent.  (To  turn  this  the  other  way
round: Logic is a hermeneutic with complete information. Each hermeneutic has
thus its logic nucleus: This means nothing is completely arbitrary. On the con-
trary, there is always a rational aspect which is at the foundation of what is ac-
tually being said about the world.)

2  Semiological Structures of Perception

The important insight of the previous section is that the world shows up as one
which is inherently „questionable“ in the sense that it is offering itself to herme-
neutic interpretation from the beginning on. And it is this „beginning“ which is
initialized in  terms  of  (human)  perception.  As  has  been  shown  earlier  in  some
more  detail  [11],  the  basically  anthropological  foundation  of  the  mode  of  per-
ception turns out as the underlying motivation for developing the viewpoint of
what is referred to as „transcendental materialism“. The idea is that perception is
not  primary  in  this  sense,  but  it  is  „preformatted“  according  to  the  biological
evolution which has been actually taken by humans. In other words: If percepti-
on is a product of the process which is being perceived afterwards, then the cor-
respondence between that perception and what is being perceived is very close
in the first place. Probably, one can speak of a kind of „fine tuning“ which me-
ans that not very many variations of this „preformatting“ appear to be possible.
So what we assume is that not only is perception tuned to the perceivable world,
but also is the mode of modelling the world as a „cognitive work“ operating on
what has been perceived. That is, all means of modelling, such as the pertinent
graphism admitting of diagrammatic representations of models, are actually in-
cluded in this cognitive fine tuning of a product of the world to the rest of this
world.

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

7

While we leave the explicit graphism for the next section, we concentrate here
on the general semiological aspects of perception: As has been shown by Leroi-
Gourhan [12], it is the co-evolution of language and tools technology which re-
sults in an epistemological unification of gesture and tool by means of producing
an explicit sign structure of the world. Signs turn out to be the basic elements of
reflexion,  because  they  combine  the  task  of  reflexion,  i.e.  the  abstracting  of
symbols from concrete reality in order to constitute a parallel world of language
which is able to act upon reality more effectively, with its communicative aspect
showing up as its narrative structure. The framework categories for this unifica-
tion are space and time: In fact, the association of temporal rhythms with spatial
structures can be interpreted as a domestication of space and time. Social space
therefore,  is  gaining  the  connotation  of  a  mapping  of  space-time  geometry  in
metaphorical form. (Most critics of this philosophical approach, particularly tho-
se from the fields of science, forget to take this „metaphorization“ into account
when discussing  formal  analogues  as  they  are  utilized  sometimes  in  the  philo-
sophical field.)
In so far the cognitive aspect of human beings is turning out  as immediate  ex-
pression of this aforementioned co-evolution. Piaget has already pointed to the
utilization of category theory [13] when showing that perception and cognition
are  based  on  what  he  calls  „pre-categories“  derived  from  „rough  systems  of
morphisms“  in  a  permanent  struggle  between  invariant  forms  and  transforma-
tions. This is the reason for the structural morphisms which establish a hierarchy
of mediated functors and functor categories to also carry their own internal lo-
gic. In other words: The process of signification itself shows up within an impli-
cit double connotation of representing the intendend structure on the one hand,
and of contextualizing it within a categorial framework of logical consistency on
the other hand.
This has been the basic motivation for discussing consciousness itself in  terms
of geometric and/or computational metaphores. (We will come back to this in a
later  section.)  In  a  sense,  we  can  visualize  the  process  of  modelling  the  world
according to what can be perceived as a kind of „global algorithm“ which is im-
plemented  into  the  world  from  the  outset.  On  the  other  hand,  this  global  sign
structure of the world which is being re-processed all the time within the frame-
work of the fundamental categories of space and time (note the double meaning
of  „categories“  here  which  parallels  the  corresponding  double  meaning  of  the
word „topoi“) can be thought of as being mediated „down“ into the local macro-
and  into  the  individual  micro-environment  in  terms  of  „local  algorithms“  with
respect to chosen strategies of modelling. Hence, „metaphorization“ of the world
is the underlying process of its understanding according to the explicit utilizati-
on of local strategies of hermeneutic signification. (In fact, as it turns out after
all, „hermeneutic signification“ shows up here as a tautology rather.)
The fact that the world presents itself as something which is „questionable“, as
we have mentioned before, shows up in the micro-detail of the process of signi-
fication which is underlying the communicating of the results of modelling the

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

8

world,  in  terms  of  a  „gap“  between  the  signifier  and  its  associated  significate.
This  is  what  Lacan  shows  when  deriving  the  process  of  signification  from  its
linguistic elements. [14] The signifier is with respect to the significate in a rela-
tion of type S/s, where the „slash“ refers to the fact that there is always a non-
deletable  gap  between  the  one  and  the  other  such  that  the  signifier  is  never
capable of exhausting the  exact  meaning  of  what is being signified.  (Note  that
the significate is thought here in terms of phonemes rather than of graphemes.)
A  metaphore then,  is  a kind of  transformation  of  signifiers,  written  in  Lacan’s
terminology as S‘/S x S/s. Hence, „understanding“ what is being said means ba-
sically „transforming metaphores“ within a given context. As Lacan discusses in
more  detail,  this procedure  is  at  the  foundation  of  most  of  the  psycho-analytic
phenomena. We will not go into these details here, but the important point for us
is that language is thus centred around interpretation, and that social phenomena
(which  are  always  phenomena  of  communication)  derive  from  that  „que-
stionability“ of the world which can be operated upon by modelling it, but which
can  never  be  solved  completely.  Hence,  speaking  about  the  world  (as  well  as
symbolizing/signifying the structure of the world), visualized as an interpretati-
on which because of its communicability is always translation at the same time,
shows up as permanent mis-representation/distortion or transposition (in Freudi-
an terms: „Ent-Stellung“). And this is what causes social phenomena.
But there are two further consequences of this: First of all, this process of per-
manent mis-representation (in the procedure of representing) is the social basis
for innovations. This is so, because each new metaphore acts as an „impertinent
predication“ onto the body of traditional language, and thus unfolds its heuristic
potential. ([15], pp. vi, 87.) In this sense, the metaphore is to common language
(including  poetry)  what  the  model  is  to  science.  ([15],  p.228)  It  is  no  coinci-
dence that innovative research can be related in this way to innovative thought
in general. [16]
A second point to that is that the same process is also at the foundation of the
permanent  differentiating  of  differences  which  is  determining  the  perception
within the world. Deleuze has noted that to seperate substance from attribute (in
the  Spinozist  tradition  of  „omnis  determinatio  est  negatio“)  is  possible  by  ab-
straction  only.  Hence,  what  is  being  expressed  is  also  veiled  at  the  same  time
and needs therefore, further interpretation. [17] In this sense, „expressio“ com-
prises always of both „explicatio“ and „complicatio“. This is the reason for the
fact that traditional metaphores of  expression  (such  as  „mirrors“  that  reflect or
„germs“  which  are  expressed  in  unfolding)  point  from  the  beginning  on  to
graphic means of communication. More recently, Louis Kauffman has presented
similar (though mathematically more rigorous) arguments in favour of founding
the world (spacetime) on constitutive differentiations. [18] In the theory of diffe-
rentiation as it has been presented by Derrida [19], the same aspect is showing
up, because in the double meaning of the word „différance“ (from: différencier
and  différer,  at  the  same  time)  the  process  of  producing  differences  and  the
process  of  delaying  (suspending)  the  presence  (of  structure)  which  is  actually

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

9

being produced by this differentiating, is thought of as being set into one. In this
sense, the active articulation of space-time is included in the structure of the dis-
course as it can be described in linguistic terms.  We do not argue in favour of
analytical  philosophy  though  (referring  to  the  „linguistic  turn“  of  philosophy),
because  the  articulation  actually  being  undertaken  has  always  a  material  sub-
stratum.  In  other  words:  This  discursive  form  of  articulation  is  nothing  but  a
form of matter itself.

3  Morphogenesis as Unfolding of Graphical Representation

This  can  be  hardly  made  clearer  than  by  utilizing  the  insight  gained  from  the
anthropologically underlying graphism which is intrinsic to all forms of discour-
se. As Leroi-Gourhan has shown, the emergence of graphic symbols at the end
of the paleoanthropus period can be interpreted as an indication for a new rela-
tionship between the cooperative poles of hand and face. ([12], ch.VI) The im-
portant point is that the graphism  is  emerging  however  from  abstraction  rather
than from naive actuality. In other words: Graphism does not mean primarily the
mapping of concrete forms. Instead, the realism of mappings is a late product of
a  long  development.  Graphism  means  also  an  unfolding  of  three  new  (spatial)
dimensions as compared to the one (temporal) dimension which is open to pho-
netic expression. Much later then, it is the linearization of the graphism which
actually creates scripture, but which restricts again this recently gained expressi-
ve freedom. Hence, the basic idea is to visualize the first graphism as a mode of
expression which opens up a true parallel (of equal weight) to phonetic langua-
ge. In this sense, the graphic result is mythographic rather than significative. The
gesture interprets the (spoken) word, and the word comments on the graphism.
But it is the (linear) graphic mapping then which leads to a consequent regula-
rization  and  thus  restriction  of  symbols.  Grammar’s  time  is  approaching.  And
here is the  root of  rationality,  because  restriction  means  to  actually  restrict  the
expressive means for the irrational moments of life, in the first place.
This  is  the  reason  for  the  materiality  of  signification:  The  application  of  the
hands in actually producing something could be expressed in terms of gestures
which characterized  the  „language of  the hands“.  (This  function of  the gesture
has  not  been  lost  until  today.)  Its  analogue  was  the  (spoken)  „language  of  the
face“. And the first graphism tried to express the gesture in terms of a spatially
fixed  copy-picture  (or  mythogram).  Modern  scripture  and  graphic  mappings
however, aimed at the transition from the mythographic gesture to the formali-
zed  gesture.  Standardization  of  expression,  though  connected  with  explicit  re-
striction, opened up new horizons of communication. Hence, the universality of
diagrammatic applications, not only within the framework of formalized langua-
ges: Graphic design is always representation. But it is, though strictly regulari-
zed  very  often,  a  formal  translation  of  the  material  gesture.  The  gap  between

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

10

object  and  mapping  cannot  be  overcome,  but  abstraction  secures  the  universal
applicability  of  this  modernized  (linear)  graphism.  And,  as  we  have  seen,  this
abstraction is always of equal weight than the original concretization.
Those are the basic ingredients of assembling knowledge by means of modelling
the world: It is the intrinsic graphism which is securing the relevance of the out-
come. We have a recursive systematic of producing structures by means of mo-
delling and designing (i.e. re-constructing) them in graphical terms: By doing so
we  do  not  leave  the  cycle  of  abstraction.  We  rather  circulate  them  under  the
formal  and the  „natural“  (i.e.  hermeneutic)  perspectives.  This  can  be  indicated
by the following diagram:

→→→ physics →→→
↓
↑ 
↓
↑ 
↓
↑ 
                                       semiology                 mathematics
                                     (herm.) logic               (form.) logic
                                     metaphorization         geometrization
↑ 
↑ 
↑ 

↓
↓
↓
                                              ←← philosophy  ←←

What is being  transported  via the  route  indicated  by  those  arrows  is  the  afore-
mentioned „expressio“ which shows up as both „explicatio“ and „complicatio“.
The empirically found is modelled in terms of physics utilizing the appropriate
mathematical  language.  The  latter  is  primarily  based  on  a  formal  logic  which
can expressed in terms of an adequate graphic design. (One has only to think of
recent  diagrammatic  techniques  as  introduced  by  knot  theory.)  Intuitively,  this
skeleton of a graphism (heavily restricted by precise rules) can be visualized as a
rudimentary kind of geometrization: Essentially, the utilized graphs do not only
depict spatial and temporal dimensions, but they also transform one type of di-
mension into the other. Categories (and more recently, topoi) are examples for a
static  mapping  of  dynamical  phenomena.  Philosophy  then,  is  the  field  which
transforms  a  formal  input  into  a  hermeneutic  output  in  doing  essentially  two
things: first, isolating basic (epistemic and thus cognitive) structures of scientific
fields  in  order  to  unify  them  into  one  conceptual  whole  which  can  eventually
serve as a presentation of the present totality of the world (this is what science
cannot do), second, delimiting the knowledge gained against what is beyond sci-
ence in principle, thus opening up the perspective as to what is discovered once
the restriction of the formal discourse are lifted somewhat. The latter is what we
call „foundational activity“ of philosophy. The resulting generalized models are

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

11

re-phrased then in terms of a path-dependent, hermeneutic logic of translations
(of meanings). Mathematics is being replaced then by semiology, geometrizati-
on is replaced by metaphorization. The clockwise motion indicates an increasing
context-(and  thus  path)-dependence  of  argumentation.  The  important  point  is
that  although  this  motion  of  arguments  looses  more  and  more  its  formal
strictness  by  means  of  the  increasing  relevance  of  the  metaphorical  design,  it
nevertheless is capable of an innovative, heuristic injection of argument once the
results  are  being  fed  back  into  the  available  theories  of  physics.  This  is  the
reason for always having a mixture of these different types of argument in phy-
sical theories rather than pure mathematical arguments only. (A detail Feynman
has actually noticed a long time ago. [20])  This recursive process of producing
knowledge has been discussed in more detail elsewhere. ([9], first reference) But
for  us  here,  it  suffices  to  notice  the  relevance  of  the  graphism  intrinsic  to  the
process of producing knowledge.

4  The Structure of Consciousness

It is important to realize that the right-hand side of the above diagram depicts a
part  of  the  process  which  has  its  macroscopic  foundations  in  language  itself.
Hence, it is itself accessible in terms of social philosophy and anthropology. On
the other hand, the left-hand side of the diagram refers to the microscopic foun-
dations of language accessible in terms of psycho-analysis, as we can see when
thinking of the remarks we made earlier with respect to the work of Jacques La-
can.  This  line  of  argument  has  been  utilized  therefore,  for  eventually  determi-
ning  the  details  of  consciousness  itself.  We  cannot  discuss  this  problem  here.
This  has  been  done  earlier.  ([9],  second  reference)  But  what  we  can  do  is  to
collect all those aspects which shed some more  light  onto the  relationship  bet-
ween graphism and representation in the modelling of the world.
Starting  with  what  we  have  learned  from  dealing  with  the  generic  difference
between world and foundation, and thinking of the fact that it is human reflexion
and representation which is actually modelling this difference in the first place,
we can straightforwardly conclude that consciousness, as it is being conceptuali-
zed  according  to  the  same  sort  of  modelling,  shows  up  as  a  classical  and  thus
emergent property of the world. This rules out any direct quantum approach to
consciousness,  because  the  concept  itself  is  primarily  defined  in  terms  of  the
„experience“ humans do actually have of it. The quality of experience however,
is a conscious correlate to the brain; and the brain is a macroscopic object. This
does not mean that the brain’s macroscopic behaviour would not be determined
by its microscopic and thus quantum level. But on that level it cannot be experi-
enced, because human perception (as we have seen) is restricted to the classical
level. Also, it cannot be experienced on the fundamental level, because in being
the foundation of the world, it is not its proper part. It is rather to the world what

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

12

possibility  is  to  actuality.  Nevertheless,  as  a  possibility,  consciousness  is  in-
herent of course to the foundation. But this does not mean that the fundamental
level  is  „thinking“  as  we  know  it.  Hence,  any  kind  of  universal  pan-psychism
has to be ruled out as to that. (Note by the way that human reflexion is the ne-
cessary but not sufficient condition for performing actions. The initiation of ac-
tions being undertaken by humans has always a macroscopic quality to it. That
is,  ontologically,  humans  are  (classical)  parts  of  their  (classical)  macro-world.
On this level, their models of the world, although remaining models all the time,
become concrete.
From  the  beginning  on,  it  has  been  the  main  problem  of  talking  about  con-
sciousness  to  define  an  appropriate  relationship  between  consciousness  and
brain. The easiest approach was to visualize this relationship as an analogue to
the relationship between software and hardware. Hence, the computational me-
taphore was being created. By many authors, its difficulties have been located in
the problem of symbolic representation. [21] As we have seen earlier, within the
onto-epistemic view, perception and cognition are closely tied to a generic gra-
phism  which  is  in  turn  determining  the  non-separable  relationship  between  re-
flexion  and  communication  (as  well  as  action).  On  the  one  hand,  this  can  be
shown when talking about cognitive categories in terms of their being represen-
ted  by  attractors  of  connected  (and  massively  parallelly  organized)  dynamical
systems. ([21], p.5sq.) Because the model of attractors is itself a representation
which can be translated into a suitable graphism. Hence, symbols are mediated
all the time in terms of other symbols, even if on a very basic (if not fundamen-
tal)  level,  symbols  and  logical  operations  are  difficult  to  locate.  ([21],  p.8)  In
fact, as we have seen, it is possible to sketch out a level of quantum computation
in principle. Whether it will be possible to actually connect this level with expli-
cit brain functions on the neurological level, remains another question.
On the other hand, the celebrated counter-argument of Penrose, assuming a ge-
neric non-computability on a basic level of organization, might vanish, if visua-
lized under the perspective of viewing consciousness in classical terms. Becau-
se,  on  a  classical  level,  a  somewhat  „fuzzy  average“  computability  might  be
achieved which turns out to be fairly universal. (In fact, this may be interpreted
as  a  direct hint  as  to  the  question  why  the  world  is  frequently  constituted  in  a
hermeneutical rather than logical manner.)
Visualizing consciousness as an emergent macro-structure of the classical world,
its „software“ is to that of the fundamental level what the user language is to the
machine language. The relationship between the two would be compatible with
the recursive modularity of the brain as it is being discussed in terms of a self-
organizing  process  according  to  the  principles  of  self-organized  criticality
(SOC),  comparable  with  Conway’s  „game  of  life“  utilized  for  a  model  of  the
edge-of-chaos type. [22] The proposal is here that this type of dynamics is self-
similar across multiple scales of neural organization (as it is usually the case for
systems  in  SOC),  utilizing  a limit-cycle  attractor  for  recognition,  participation,
and  engagement  states,  while  utilizing  a  chaotic  attractor  for  ready,  receptive,

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

13

and disengaged states. ([22], p.57) Note that even the „machine language“ could
be of a somewhat fuzzy type here so that non-computablity in the sense of Pen-
rose  is  not  challenged.  (Leaving  aside  for  the  time  being  what  can  indeed  be
challenged, such as the immanent Platonism of the Penrose approach.) [23]
There  is  however,  a  complicated  problem  of  self-reference  when  dealing  with
necessary conditions for consciousness: What we do just now is to think of hu-
mans as a product of a natural evolution which has been actualized all the neces-
sary conditions for the possibility of eventually emergent human beings, starting
from  what  we  call  the  „Big  Bang“  until  „recently“  (i.e.  some  100.000  years
ago). In other words: There must be galaxies and stars, planetary systems as well
as  appropriate  physical  conditions,  first,  before  it  is  possible  to  eventually  ac-
tualize human  beings  on  various planets.  Hence,  the  condition  for  having  con-
sciousness as we know it, is the complete history of the Universe itself. (In fact,
this  viewpoint  is  the  basis  for  deriving  a  principle  of  cosmological  selection
then, as Smolin has done.)
But on the other hand, that this is really the case, is an assumption of telling this
story  in  the  first  place,  i.e.  of  modelling  the  world  such  that  this  outcome  is
being achieved at all. And we know already that we do our modelling according
to what we perceive and cognitively grasp. We have to admit therefore, that the
picture developed cannot be correct in absolute terms. Because, space and time
have been shown to be framework categories of human thinking. But if so, then
in modelling the world, it is simply pretended  that  the  world  has  developed  in
the aforementioned way, because this assumption is fitting well to what we can
observe. But what we can observe, is not the whole story! We do as if the world
develops within evolution, governed by the categories of space and time which
enter explicitly the formal representation of our models. Doing so works well as
far  as  a  wide  range  of  applications  is  concerned.  But  as  to  a  discussion  of  the
underlying foundation of the world, this is not really telling much.
In order to clarify this important point, we discuss the following: Take, e.g., the
tubulins  of  the  Penrose  model  again.  [24]  They  are  biological  entities,  and  ac-
cording to our view of planetary evolution, we would suppose that it is necessa-
ry to develop the physical, chemical and so forth conditions for biological enti-
ties first, before being able to actually observe living beings which utilize tubu-
lins  in  their  consciousness.  On  the  other  hand:  If  there  would  be  nothing  else
than the quantum mechanical equivalent to what tubulins (according to Penrose)
are actually doing, then we would not really expect to have consciousness after
all. If indeed consciousness should be implemented on a more fundamental level
(as  Hameroff  mentions  referring  to  the  Platonian  view  of  Penrose),  then  we
would expect that it is not consciousness as we know it, but rather some potenti-
al form of it (and this is not the same). Probably, the term „panexperientialism“
in the sense of Whitehead ([23], p.136) is also not quite to the point. At  most,
some sort of „prototype consciousness“ could be visualized on the fundamental
level as mentioned before. (It is unlikely that spin networks could „have experi-
ence“ in the sense we are used to handle it.)

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

14

Hence, we cannot really claim that „the Universe (on some fundamental level) is
conscious“, but what we can say instead is that it encompasses the possibility of
consciousness (as we know it). It includes it in its field of possibilities, because
it has an informational structure (of quantum nature) which is the necessary (but
not sufficient) condition for consciousness. This argument can be transferred to
the  Penrose-Hameroff  model:  It  is  not  actually  said  here  that  consciousness  is
functioning in quantum terms or even that it would be quantum indeed, but rat-
her that what we call (classical) „consciousness“ as a macroscopic phenomenon
is a derivative of what goes on at the fundamental level. And if we probe the fi-
ne structure of this quantum level (and beyond), we would find that the roots of
consciousness are deeply embedded  in  conditions of  quantum  information.  Al-
though tubulins then, could be discussed in terms of quantum theory, the basic
argument here would not be changed. [24]
Note  that  if  consciousness  emerges  in  the  cosmological  era  of  classical  bits
(which is actually the same as saying that we put a condition on the history of
the Universe!), then physical observers will utilize a Boolean logic. In terms of
this Boolean (i.e. classical) logic, it may be actually helpful to apply the afore-
mentioned functor Past. The point is that applying this functor leads to a back
projection of the Universe as it has become now (at observer time) onto its ori-
gin, if visualized in terms of categories of space and time. This projection must
find  its  natural  endpoint  at  the  boundary  of  the  classical  domain.  This  means
nothing else than stating that the historical viewpoint under which the Universe
can be  described,  is  closely  tied  to  the  concept  we  develop  of  the  human  con-
sciousness, in the first place. And it breaks down at the quantum level.

5  Modelling Everyday Life (Conclusion I)

We arrive now at two (short) conclusions of this. The first deals with the philo-
sophical consequences as to human orientation within the world. It will be topic
of  this  present  section.  The  second  deals  with  the  ethical  implications  of  this,
and will be topic of the next section.
First of all, it should be noticed that we have not actually shown the derivational
dependence of all what there  is  from  its  underlying  foundation.  What  we  have
done instead is to argue in favour of the principles of this dependence and then
to  look  for  indications  that  demonstrate  the  plausibility  of  their  assumption.
Hence,  we  have  basically  argued  in  a  heuristic  manner,  and  this  is  essentially
what the philosophical approach to science, the taking in sight of what physics
has to offer, actually means.
Note  that  we  have  not  argued  in  the  manner  of  what  is  usually  referred  to  as
„analytical  philosophy“,  because  despite  our  interest  in  language,  we  have  not
forgotten  that  there  actually  is  something  about  which  language  speaks.  The
point is that philosophy of science cannot be based on the available (scientific)

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

15

theories alone, in so far as they are simply sets (or categories rather) of proposi-
tions which satisfy certain pre-defined rules. More than that there is also a „me-
taphysical“ base point from where we have to argue, thus projecting an intrinsic
(if  not  generic)  systematic  framework  onto  the  aforementioned  theories.  This
base point in turn, is derived from general rules of philosophical thinking, in the
first place. The „theorem of sufficient reason“, „Ockam’s razor“, or simply, the
„principle of thought line consistence“ ([9], first two references) are only a few
examples for these rules. Another one is the primary difference between world
and  foundation.  Hence,  although  these  general  rules  do  not  actually  interfere
with ongoing practical research, they nevertheless  re-structure  the  actual set of
(still heuristic) starting points for any scientific enterprise. (This is, as mentioned
before, what Feynman had noticed some time ago.)
What  we  have  actually  shown  however,  is  that  these  heuristic  aspects  emerge
from  a  line  of  thought  which  characterizes  aspects  of  substance  metaphysics.
Obviously,  this  must  be  a  modern  sort  of  metaphysics  today,  as  we  cannot  go
back  anymore  to the  state  of knowledge  as  it  was  common  some  300  years  in
our  past.  Hence,  and  we  have  argued  thus,  it  is  „transcendental  materialism“
which points to an innovative approach toward these aspects. Nevertheless, one
basic result of ancient metaphysics has not changed at all until today: This is the
fact that once we accept its underlying assumptions, we have to admit their uni-
versality for all what there actually is in onto-epistemic terms. Of course, kno-
wing that physics is at the „bottom“ of all what there is including everyday life
in all its detailed aspects, does not save us having to do the „hard work“. That is,
it will be extremely unlikely that one day we might develop some sort of „beha-
vioural physics“ (as Comte originally thought 200 years ago). We will have to
describe all the various fields according to their appropriate level of complexity
in  their  own  language,  and  we  cannot  expect  to  eventually  replace  psycho-
analysis or economics by physics or quantum gravity.
But the insight we actually gain by knowing this, is more a heuristic insight into
what  kind  of  orientation  humans  should  be  involved  in  the  future.  Hence,  this
insight develops  an  eventually  normative  function,  and  leads  therefore  to  a  re-
consideration  of  ethical  aspects  of  human  life.  According  to  an  expression  of
Hogrebe, we can call this a „fundamental heuristics.“ [25]

6  Rationality as Ethical Implication (Conclusion II)

But note also something else: In a completely different field, namely that of ur-
ban planning, it has been shown recently how the holistic conception of practi-
cally  „embedding“  the  intended  topic  into  its  structural  background  based  on
elementary principles of evolution deriving from a suitably chosen foundation is
not only present in every technical detail of daily life, but also unfolds normative
power within its framework. [26] In fact, as it turns out, the results exhibited by

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

16

a  close  analysis  of  the  various  aspects  of  city  life  point  towards  what  we  may
justifiably  call  „metaphysical  implications“.  This  viewpoint  is  still  not  very
common  within  European science.  On  the  other  hand,  nobody  (including  most
of  the  scientists)  would  doubt  the  justification  of  Asian  „metaphysical“  archi-
tecture  when  applying  principles  such  as  those  of  the  Feng  Shui  to  the  actual
erection of buildings. (In fact, the Needham institute in Cambridge (UK) is built
according to these principles.) And it is not very difficult to recognize harmoni-
zing aspects within Asian city structure such as displaying the existence of „dif-
ference  within  a  framework  of  repetition“.  However,  as  Henri  Lefebvre  has
pointed out some time ago ( cf. [27], pp. 157sq.), this Asian structure of social
space has one serious drawback: it is an attribute of power. It implies and is im-
plied by divinity and empire, and it thus combines knowledge with power. Na-
ture  (whether  available or  constructed)  is  harmonized  according  to  a  hierarchy
of principles which explicitly centres around the emperor, i.e. the representation
of a feudal system. Obviously, this is something which explicitly contradicts the
insight gained in the period of European enlightenment. Hence, contrary to the
Asian approach, introducing the concept of de-centralization into the city struc-
ture reflects a fundamentally European approach so as to deal with these „meta-
physical“  aspects  of  daily  life.  Indeed,  as  we  can  find  out  when  analyzing  va-
rious fields in detail, de-centralization is not only a secularized principle of so-
cial organization, but also a basic principle of evolutionary processes abundant
in  nature  (if  visualized  in  terms  of  modern  European  science).  This  illustrates
clearly  that  ethical  implications  of  this  „metaphysical“  background  are  always
present: In fact, we realize this in the very catalogue of (technical) measures ta-
ken when thinking of the underlying objectives showing up within the details of
urban planning.  It is  not  a  coincidence  that  these  implications  are  tied  to  legal
aspects of democratic policies such as defining technical rights (e.g. of pedestri-
ans) with respect to the human rights convention.
The point is that the decision for utilizing scientific methods is from the begin-
ning on a decision for choosing an onto-epistemic approach to the world. Hence,
it  is  also  a  decision  in  favour  of  acknowledging  a  rational  nucleus  of  all  what
humans  can  perform  within  their  environment.  This  aspect  is  important  when
thinking of the fact that contrary to what is usually claimed, political decisions
are almost always based on emotional and explicitly irrational rather than on ra-
tional aspects. Nevertheless, ethics is the „science“ (if you like) of what is ade-
quate.  This  is  the  difference  between  ethics  and  morality:  The  former  tells  us
what is adequate or not according to what we presently know, the latter values
what is good and bad according to what we presently believe. Hence, politics, or
rather its practical application in daily life in terms of elections, planning, exe-
cutive  actions  and  so  forth  (we  are  only  talking  about  political  systems  which
are based on principles of European democratic, legal, and republican thought),
is usually judged following the prejudiced structure of traditional morality, and
not, as it should be, the objective structure of rational ethics. The point is that the
ancient problem of the Big Revolutions of the 18th century (the American, and

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

17

the French), namely the transformation of the bourgois into the citoyen has not
been solved lately. But if this cannot be achieved, it could be possible perhaps to
approach a more modest objective: namely to transform the respective instituti-
ons instead, especially, if they are already of the democratic, legal, and republi-
can type.
But beyond this layer of everyday politics, there is another, deeper layer of the
intrinsic  mediation  of  the  ontological  and  epistemological  levels  of  modelling
the world and pratically behaving accordingly. In fact, if the Santa Fe school, or
some of its individual protagonists, or protagonists from its vicinity, like Stuart
Kauffman, Per Bak, and also Lee Smolin, talk about evolutionary principles on a
fundamental  level  of  nature  (of  which  humans  are  a  product),  then  what  they
actually do (perhaps without realizing this very clearly) is to aim at this intrinsic
mediation and to connect it to an explictly ethical perspective (though the out-
come  might  be  different  as  can  be  seen  by  the  detailed  views  of  all  of  them).
Hence, to visualize, as we put forward here, the world and everything what there
is (including the city as a special example) as an emergent computational system
consisting of massively parallel microworlds  eventually  creating  an observable
macroworld, means to apply the computational paradigm in an ethical perspecti-
ve: If there is a computational paradigm, then there is a realistic possibility for
an algorithmic approach to the world. It is mathematical logic in fact which pro-
vides this algorithm. And although we have to accept that many aspects of hu-
man life within social systems cannot be completely modelled according to ma-
thematical  procedures,  what  we  can  do  nevertheless,  is  to  notify  the  logical
nucleus in all what there is, and this is the rational nucleus, at the same time.

Acknowledgements

For helpful discussions at various occasions with respect to the problems men-
tioned here I thank Marc Ereshefsky (Calgary/Cambridge), Inga Gammel (Aar-
hus/Cambridge),  David  Robson  (London/Cambridge),  Alan  Thiher  (Colum-
bia/Cambridge), Paola Zizzi (Padova).

References

[1] R.E.Zimmermann (2001): Recent Conceptual Consequences of Loop Quan-
tum Gravity. Part I: Foundational Aspects. http://www.arXiv.org, physics/0107061.
[2] R.E.Zimmermann (2000): Loops and Knots as Topoi of Substance. Spinoza
Revisited. http://www.arXiv.org, gr-qc/0004077 v2. See also: Spinoza in Context. A
Holistic Approach in Modern Terms. In: E.Martikainen (ed.), Infinity, Causality,

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

18

and Determinism, Cosmological Enterprises and their Preconditions, Finish
Academy of Sciences Colloquium, Amsterdam, New York: Lang, in press.
[3] R.E.Zimmermann (1995): The Onto-Epistemic Perspective of the World. In:
K.G.Bowden (ed.), Proc. ANPA 16 (Entelechies), London, 137-154.
[4] R.E.Zimmermann (1998): Emergence and the Hierarchies of Form: An On-
to-Epistemic Approach to Metaphysics. In: K.Mainzer, A.Müller, W.Saltzer
(eds.), From Simplicity to Complexity, Part II, ZiF Conference, Bielefeld, 1994,
Braunschweig: Vieweg, 153-162.
[5] N.Chomsky (1973): Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, ref. to the German
edition, Frankfurt a.M., Berlin: Suhrkamp, Akademie.
[6] R.E.Zimmermann (2001): Systematics as Normative Holism. In: Ethical Im-
plications of Systems Thinking (section 3.3), Bertalanffy Anniversary Confe-
rence, Vienna, forthcoming. – See also id. (2001): Graphismus & Repraesentati-
on. Zu einer poetischen Logik von Raum und Zeit. [Graphism & Representation.
On a Poetical Logic of Space and Time.] J. Communication, Media & Design, 1
(2). In press.
[7] N.Chomsky (1977): Reflections on Language, ref. to the German edition,
Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp.
[8] J.Lyons (1977): Semantics, 2 vols., Cambridge University Press.
[9] R.E.Zimmermann (1998): Die Rekonstruktion von Raum, Zeit und Materie.
[The Re-construction of Space, Time, and Matter.] Frankfurt a.M.: Lang. – Id.
(1999): The Klymene Principle. Kassel: At the University Press. – Id. (2000):
Loops and Knots as Topoi of Substance. Spinoza Revisited. Op.cit. [2] – Id.
(2000): Classicity from Entangled Ensemble States of Knotted Spin Networks.
A Concepual Approach. (icmp2000, Imperial College London) http://www.arXiv.org,
gr-qc/0007024. – Id. (2001): Beyond the Physics of Logic. Aspects of Transcen-
dental Materialism or URAM in a Modern View. (URAM 11, Toronto)
http://www.arXiv.org, physics/0105094. – Id. (2001): Subjekt und Existenz [Subject &
Existence], Berlin: Philo. – Id. (2001): Relational Concepts of Space and Time
in Leibniz and the Foundations of Physics. (7th Int. Leibniz Congress, Berlin.) In
press.
[10] R.E.Zimmermann (2001): Kontext-Chirurgie, Metaphorisierung und poeti-
sche Praxis. Nochmals zur progressiv-regressiven Methode Sartres. [Context
Surgery, Metaphorization, and Poetical Praxis. Oncemore on Sartre’s progressi-
ve-regressive method.] In: P.Knopp, V.v.Wroblewsky (eds.), Jean-Paul Sartre,
Carnets 2000, Berlin: Philo, 49-63.
[11] R.E.Zimmermann, W.Voelcker (1997): Topoi of Emergence. Theoretical
Foundations and Practical Applications. In: 7th Annual Meeting of the Chaos
Club Munich. See also R.E.Zimmermann (1997): Evolution as Emergent Unfol-
ding of its Foundation: Aspects of Negator Algebra (Topoi of Emergence II).
http://pw1.netcom.com/~trifonov/linear_xenology.html (American Mathematical Society). Mo-
dified versions of this have been published as: Topoi of Emergence. On the
Metaphorization of Geometry. Tucson III: Toward a Science of Consciousness,
1998, section 04.03 (Integrative Models), Abstract No.942,

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

19

http://www.zynet.co.uk/imprint/Tucson/1.htm. See more recently R.E.Zimmermann,
W.Voelcker (2001): Topoi of Emergence, http://www.arXiv.org, nlin.AO/0105064
and R.E.Zimmermann (2001): Basic Aspects of Negator Algebra in SOC,
http://www.arXiv.org, nlin.AO/0105065.
[12] A.Leroi-Gourhan (1964/65): La geste et la parole. [Gesture and Speech],
Paris: Albin Michel.
[13] J.Piaget (1992): Morphisms and Categories. Comparing and Transforming.
Ed. T.Brown. Hillsdale (N.J.): Earlbaum. Note in particular G.Henriques: Mor-
phisms and Transformations in the Construction of Invariants. Ibid. (ch.14),
207-214.
[14] J.Lacan (1966): L’instance de la lettre dans l’inconscient ou la raison de-
puis Freud. [The Insistence of the Letter Within the Unconscious or Reason sin-
ce Freud.] In: id., Ecrits, Paris: du Seuil, 493-528.
[15] P.Ricoeur (1975): La métaphore vive. [The living metaphore] Paris: du
Seuil.
[16] Cf. M.Black (1962): Models and Metaphors, Cornell University Press. –
M.B.Hesse (1965): The Explanatory Function of Metaphor. In: B.-Hillel (ed.),
Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
[17] G.Deleuze (1968): Différence et répétition. [Difference and Repetition] Pa-
ris: Presses Universitaires de France.
[18] L.H.Kauffman (1993): Knots and Physics. Singapore etc.: World Scientific.
See in particular: ch.31. (Network Design – Differences As Pregeometry)
[19] J.Derrida (1967): L’écriture et la différence. [Scripture and Difference] Pa-
ris: du Seuil.
[20] R.P.Feynman (1965): The Character of Physical Law. Cambridge (Mass.):
MIT Press.
[21] E. Mac Cormac, M.I.Stamenov (eds.)(1996): Fractals of the brain, fractals
of the mind. In search of a symmetry bond. Amsterdam, Philadelphia: Benja-
mins. Here: Introduction, 1-29.
[22] D.M.Alexander, G.G.Globus (1996): Edge-of-Chaos Dynamics in Recursi-
vely Organized Neural Systems. In: E.MacCormac, M.I.Stamenov (eds.), op.cit.
[21], 31-73.
[23] S.Hameroff (1998): Funda-mental Geometry: the Penrose-Hameroff ‚Orch
OR‘ Model of Consciousness. In: S.A.Huggett et al. (eds.), The Geometric Uni-
verse, Science, Geometry, and the Work of Roger Penrose, Oxford University
Press, ch.9, 135-160.
[24] This example has been discussed with Paola Zizzi in messenger sessions of
10th, 13th, and 16th January, 2000. The discussion has been accompanied by two
of her papers, one untitled referring to consciousness in the Universe’s qubit and
bit eras, and another one called: Emergent Consciousness: From the Early Uni-
verse to Our Mind. http://www.arXiv.org, gr-qc/0007006.
[25] W.Hogrebe (1989): Prädikation und Genesis. Metaphysik als Fundamental-
heuristik im Ausgang von Schellings ‚Die Weltalter‘. [Predication & Genesis.

31.07.01   22:13   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences II

20

Metaphysics as Fundamental Heuristics Starting From Schelling’s The World
Ages] Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp.
[26] R.E.Zimmermann, A.Soci, G.Colacchio (2001): Reconstructing Bologna.
The City as an Emergent Computational System – A Study in the Complexity of
Urban Structures. Part I: The Basic Idea & Fundamental Concepts.
Forthcoming. (to be put into nlin.AO)
[27] H.Lefebvre (1991): The Production of Space, Oxford: Blackwell. [French
edition of 1974, 1984, Paris: Anthropos]

