Integrator

A

E

Filter

Grating

LD

PZT

40 MHz
Oscillator

BS

Phase
Detector

A

Phase Delay

A

EOM

A

High Pass

BS

Photo
Detector

Resonator

(a)

(b)

50 W

1 m F

1 m F

IC+

LD

IC–

Fig.1

Schoof et al.

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

-40

-20

0

20

40

Frequency [MHz]

    Fig.2

A. Schoof,  J. Grünert, S. Ritter, A. Hemmerich    

10

1

0.1

0.01

1000

100

10

1

0.1

101 102 103 104 105 106
frequency [Hz]

    Fig.3

a

b

10-7

10-5

10-3

10-1

Observation Time [s]

    Fig.4

A. Schoof,  J. Grünert, S. Ritter, A. Hemmerich    

Reducing the linewidth of a diode laser below 10 Hz by

stabilization to a reference cavity with finesse above 105

 A. Schoof, J. Grünert, S. Ritter, and A. Hemmerich †

Institut für Laserphysik, Universität Hamburg, Jungiusstraße 9,

D-20355  Hamburg, Germany

An extended cavity diode laser operating in the Littrow configuration emitting near

657 nm ist stabilized via its injection current to a reference cavity with a finesse of more than

105 and a corresponding resonance linewidth of 14 kHz. The laser linewidth is reduced from a

few MHz to a value below 10 Hz. The compact and robust setup appears ideal for a portable

optical frequency standard using the Calcium intercombination line.

PACS Numbers: 32.80.Pj, 42.55.Px, 42.62.Fi

1

 

During the past decade diode lasers have become one of the workhorses in modern

atomic  physics,  quantum  optics  and  laser  spectroscopy.  The  desire  for  simple,  robust  and

possibly  portable  laser  sources  has  stimulated  extensive  efforts  to  extend  their  usefullness

even to applications where ultimate frequency stability is a prerequisite, as e.g. for ultra high

precision spectroscopy or metrology. Although linewidth reduction of diode lasers by means

of reference cavities has been explored extensively [1], the kHz and sub-kHz-domains have

only recently been reached. Bianchini et al. have reported a distributed Bragg reflector (DBR)

laser  stabilized  to  a  reference  cavity  of  finesse  2800,  achieving  better  than  10  kHz  mean

frequency deviation (Allan variance) for observation times above 1 microsecond employing a

servo bandwidth of 1 MHz [2].  A laser linewidth of about 5 kHz has been obtained in this

work.  Vassiliev  et  al.  have  stabilized  a  Littman-configured  extended  cavity    laser  to  a

reference  cavity  of  finesse  5800  showing  a  resolution  of  600  Hz  in  a  spectroscopic  appli-

cation [3]. Recently, Oates et al. have used a Littman type laser in combination with an even

higher finesse cavity (50 kHz line width) and could obtain a laser linewidth around 50 Hz [4].

In  this  paper  we  demonstrate  a  particularly  robust  and  straight  forward  electronic

frequency stabilization of a diode laser to a 14 kHz resonance of a Fabry-Perot resonator with

a finesse of 1.1* 105. The reference cavity consists of an ultra low expansion glass (ULE)

spacer and optically contacted high quality dielectric mirrors. In the present work we have

placed the 10 cm long zylindrical resonator (diameter = 5 cm) on two viton rings on a slightly

V-shaped aluminium platform mounted directly on the laser table with no further vibrational

isolation.  Employing  the  Pound  Drever  Hall  (PDH)  technique  [5]  to  control  the  injection

current  of  the  laser  diode  with  a  servo  bandwidth  up  to  5  MHz  we  obtain  an  emission

linewidth of the locked laser below 10 Hz. To our knowledge electronically stabilized diode

lasers  with  such  narrow  linewidths  have  not  yet  been  reported.  Our  light  source  appears

particularly  suited  for  a  portable  optical  frequency  standard  using  the  Calcium

intercombination line.

Our experimental setup is sketched in fig.1. The light source is an extended cavity

diode laser using a holographic grating in Littrow configuration (see ref. [6]), a particularly

robust  and  compact  choice  at  the  expense  of  slightly  less  inherent  frequency  stability  as

2

compared to Littman type lasers. Using the Mitsubishi laser chip ML1016R-01, we typically

get about 15 mW output power at 657 nm with a spectral linewidth of a few MHz integrated

over  a  second  (dominated  by  technical  low  frequency  noise)  and  about  200  kHz  within  a

millisecond. About 1 mW is directed to the reference resonator via an electro-optic modulator

(EOM) generating frequency modulation (FM) sidebands at 40 MHz with a power of about 1

% of that of the carrier. Careful mode matching lets us couple up to 40 % of the carrier into

the resonator. The light reflected from the incoupling mirror is recorded by a photo diode

(EG&G FFD 040). The non-resonant sidebands and the resonant carrier produce a 40 MHz

beat component which is recorded and demodulated in a phase detector (Minicircuits, RPD1).

An  adjustable  phase  delay  circuit  before  the  EOM  allows  to  pick  the  desired  quadrature

component.  The  demodulated  signal  serves  as  the  error  signal  for  a  proportional  and  an

integrated feedback branch. The integrated error signal is fed to the piezo-electric transducer

(PZT)  adjusting  the  grating  of  the  extended  cavity  laser.  This  relatively  slow  frequency

adjusting element offers a servo bandwidth of only a few 100 Hz in combination with large

frequency excursions of a few GHz. In order to extend the servo bandwidth, the error signal is

high pass filtered and fed directly to the laser cathode. The adjustable high pass filter serves

to  compensate  for  frequency  dependent  phase  lags  ocurring  in  the  diode  laser  chip.  The

values  of  the  variable  resistors  (typically  with  Rmax    being  a  few  hundred  Ohms)    and

capacitors (typically a few 10 pF) in the simple passive filter circuit (sketched in fig.1 (b))

had to be adjusted according to the specific diode chip being used. The filtered error signal is

AC-coupled to the laser diode as sketched in fig.1 (b).

In fig. 2 the error signal and the power transmitted through the resonator is plotted

while the grating of the extended cavity laser is tuned. The upper two traces show the error

signal (a)  and the transmitted signal (b) when both servo loop branches are disconnected. We

recognize the expected transmission resonance and the corresponding dispersive error signal.

The lower two traces ((c) and (d)) show the respective signals, if the proportional servo loop

is activated.  When the laser frequency is tuned sufficiently close to the cavity resonance,

locking  to  this  resonance  occurs  and  the  tuning  of  the  grating  is  compensated  yielding  a

plateau-like transmitted signal in (c). The corresponding error signal (d) needed for providing

3

this compensation is proportional to the detuning of the grating as expected. Traces (c) and

(d)  show  that  frequency  excursions  of  more  than  five  MHz  are  compensated  by  the  fast

injection current feedback loop yielding a very robust locking performance. Note also that the

locked  transmitted  signal  (d)  is  much  larger  than  the  unlocked  one  (b)  because  in  the

unlocked case the laser emission frequency during its scan is driven back and forth across

resonance by noise in a time shorter than the cavity decay time of 11 microseconds.

In fig.3 we show the spectral noise density in [Hz/Hz1/2] derived from recording the

error signal for closed servo loop (at point E in fig.1) with a spectrum analyzer. In order to

translate noise power correctly into frequency noise it was not sufficient to scan the unlocked

laser and record the corresponding error signal because its emission spectrum was too broad

for appropriately resolving the 14 kHz resonances. Thus we have extended our setup such

that the laser could be locked alternatively to a second comparable cavity. An accousto-optic

modulator was used for tuning across the resonance of the first cavity  and the corresponding

error  signal  was  recorded  with  sufficient  resolution.  Fig.3  is  composed  of  two  parts.  The

section  between  5  Hz  and  100  kHz  is  recorded  with  a  Hewlett  Packard  FFT-analyzer

(HP35665A) at 1 Hz resolution while the section between 100 kHz and 5 MHz results from

an  Advantest  spectrum  analyzer  (R4131D)  with  a  resolution  bandwidth  of  1  kHz.  In  the

spectral density of fig.3 three maxima can be identified. The peak at 3.8 kHz corresponds to

the resonance frequency of the piezo controled grating. The relative maximum around 100

kHz results from the imperfect spectral response of the input circuitry for the injection current

feedback. A refined design of the adjustable high pass filter should reduce that part of the

noise. A particularly pronounced peak at 3 MHz indicates the relaxation oscillations of the

fast feedback branch. The dashed line corresponds to a white frequency noise level of S2  =

3.1 Hz2/Hz which represents an upper bound of the spectral density over the entire frequency

axis  besides  a  small  fraction  around  the  PZT  oscillation  frequency  of  3.8  kHz.  White

frequency noise is known to yield a Lorentzian spectral power density of the laser emission

with a linewidth of p

 * S 2  which amounts to  10 Hz in our case. [7]. Clearly, this value for

the  linewidth  has  to  be  regarded  as  an  upper  bound  and  the  actual  linewidth  relevant  in

spectroscopic applications can be significantly lower. The spectral density is dominated by

4

slow noise components between 100 Hz and 10 kHz indicating that there is a lack of servo

gain  in  this  frequency  range  due  to  the  low  frequency  roll  off  of  the  ac-coupled  injection

current  feedback.  Significant  improvement  in  this  frequency  range  should  be  possible  by

optimization of the servo gain and by reduction of the technical noise below 10 kHz with the

help of a vibration isolation of the reference resonator in a vacuum. The spectral noise density

in fig.3 is everywhere more than 10 dB above the noise level of the electronic circuitry of

about 5*10-3 Hz/Hz1/2 which thus provides a neglible contribution to the emission linewidth.

We have also measured the intensity noise of the laser with and without locking finding no

significant difference. Thus we believe that the absolut stability of the laser is determined by

the stability of the reference cavity.

The spectral performance of the laser can also be explored in the time domain. In fig.4

we  show  the  Allan  variance  [8]  S (t),  a  time  correlation  function  particularly  suitable  for

analyzing noise processes, which can be calculated from the spectral noise density S(n ) as

2

S (t)

  =  2 

 ¥

 0

sin4(p
dn  S(n ) 2
 
(p

t)2

t)

(1)

As is indicated by the dotted lines (b) and (c) in fig.4, the Allan variance S (t) within the time

intervals [200m s – 3ms] and [3ms – 1s] is well approximated by the expressions S

a(t)  =  Ca*

t–1/2  with Ca = 1.24 Hz/Hz1/2, and S

b(t) = Cb* t–1 with Cb = 0.063. The change of slope at 3 ms

reflects the onset of the integrated feedback for the grating PZT. The time interval [50ns –

200m s] is dominated by oscillations around 100 kHz and 3 MHz reflecting the corresponding

resonance peaks in fig.3. As is directly seen from eq.1, the noise expression S

a(t)  corresponds

to white frequency noise of Sa =  2 Ca = 1.75 Hz/Hz1/2. This confirms an upper bound for the
laser  linewidth  of  p

a(t)  represents  an  upper  bound  of  the  Allan

    10  Hz,  since  S

  *  Sa

  2    »

variance for all times.

In  summary,  we  have  stabilized  a  Littrow  type  extended  cavity  diode  laser  to  a

reference resonator with a finesse above 105 obtaining a reduction of the emission linewidth

from a few MHz down to a value below 10 Hz. In forthcoming experiments the reference

cavity  will  be  thermally  and  mechanically  decoupled  from  the  environment.  We  expect  a

significant  reduction  of  the  linewidth  limiting  technical  noise  below  10  kHz.  Further

5

n
n
improvements should be possible by optimized adjustment of the injection current feedback

loop and by further increasing the reference cavity finesse and the servo bandwidth. Diode

lasers showing a linewidth deep in the sub-Hz domain appear well within reach.

This  work  has  been  partly  supported  by  DAAD  (415  probral/bu)  and  DFG  (DFG-

He2334/2.3)  and  by  the  European  human  potential  programme.  It  is  a  pleasure  to

acknowledge that this work has profited significantly from discussions with F. Riehle, J. Hall,

C. Oates, and F. Cruz.

6

Figure Captions

Fig. 1. (a)  Sketch  of  the  experimental  setup.  A  =  amplifier,  BS  =  beam  splitter,  EOM  =

electro-optic modulator, LD = laser diode, PZT = piezoelectric transducer. (b) Sketch of the

high pass filter employed in the injection current feedback loop and the coupling to the laser

diode. LD = laser diode, IC–

 denote the connections to the injection current driver.

Fig. 2. For explanation see text. Graphs (b) and (d) share the same scale for their y-axis.

Fig. 3. Spectral  noise  density  in  Hz/Hz1/2  of  the  error  signal  measured  at  point  E  in  the

scheme of fig.1. The dashed line indicates an upper white noise level of 3.1 Hz2/Hz.

Fig. 4. Allan variance of spectral density of fig.3. The dotted lines indicate time dependences

t–1/2  (a) and t–1  (b).

7

References

†

1.

2. 

4 .

5.

Email: hemmerich@physnet.uni-hamburg.de

H. Telle, Appl. Phys. B 49, 217-226 (1989).

G. Bianchini, P. Cancio, F. Minardi, F. Pavone, F. Perrone, M. Prevedelli, and M. 

Inguscio, Appl. Phys. B 66, 407-410 (1998).

3. 

V. Vassiliev, V. Velichansky, P. Kertsen, T. Trebst, and F. Riehle, Opt. Lett. 23, 

1229-1231 (1998).

C. W. Oates,  F. Bondu,  R. Fox, and L. Hollberg, Eur.Phys. J. D 7, 449-460 (1999).

R. Drever, J. Hall,  F. Kowalski, J. Hough, G. Ford, A. Munley, and H. Ward, Appl. 

Phys. B 31, 97-105 (1983).

6.

L. Ricci,  M. Weidemüller, T. Esslinger,  A. Hemmerich, C. Zimmermann, V. Vuletic,

W. König, T. Hänsch, Opt. Comun. 117, 541 (1995). The described system is 

commercially available at TUIoptics GmbH: http://www.Tuioptics.com/.

7. 

C. Audoin, Metrology and Fundamental Constants, Proceedings of the International 

School of Physics "Enrico Fermi" Varenna, Course LXVIII, North Holland,  

Amsterdam (1980).

8 .

D. Allan, Proc. IEEE 54, 221 (1966).

8

