25.07.01  14:53  REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences

Recent Conceptual Consequences of Loop Quantum Gravity
Part I: Foundational Aspects

Rainer E. Zimmermann

IAG Philosophische Grundlagenprobleme,
FB 1, UGH, Nora-Platiel-Str.1, D – 34127 Kassel /
Clare Hall, UK – Cambridge CB3 9AL1 /
Lehrgebiet Philosophie, FB 13 AW, FH,
Lothstr.34, D – 80335 München2
e-mail: pd00108@mail.lrz-muenchen.de

Abstract

Conceptual consequences of recent results in loop quantum gravity are collected
and discussed here in view of their implications for a modern philosophy of sci-
ence which is mainly understood as one that totalizes scientific insight so as to
eventually achieve a consistent model of what may be called „fundamental heu-
ristics“  on  an  onto-epistemic  background  which  is  part  of  recently  proposed
transcendental materialism. This enterprise is being understood as a serious at-
tempt of answering recent appeals to philosophy so  as to provide  a  conceptual
foundation for what is going on in modern physics, and of bridging the obvious
gap  between  physics  and  philosophy.  This  present  first  part  of  the  paper  deals
with foundational aspects of this enterprise, a second part will deal with its holi-
stic aspects.

Preliminary Statement

In  his  report  on  the  13th  International  Congress  on  Mathematical  Physics
(icmp2000)  at  Imperial  College  London,  Abhay  Ashtekar  formulates:  „In  the
quantum  gravity  [contributed]  session,  while  the  first  two  talks  were  on  „stan-
dard“  mathematical  physics  topics  on  the  interface  of  general  relativity  and
quantum  physics,  the  last  two  were  on  the  interface  between  quantum  gravity,
philosophy  of  science  and  quantum  computing.  Unfortunately,  this  attempt  to
broaden [sic] and reach out to neighboring field[s] did not succeed; there was a
marked difference in the level of precision and emphasis between the two sets of
talks.“ [In:  http://gravity.phys.psu.edu/mog/mog16/node13.html] He forgot to tell that he him-
self as the session’s chairman found it necessary at the time to explicitly stress

                                                          
1 Permanent addresses.
2 Present address.

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

2

this „reaching out“ to other fields twice, namely at the very beginning of the ses-
sion and immediately before the first talk of the second half. And this announ-
cement was made in such an apologetic tone that it was clearly signalled to most
of the audience that now would come the right moment for a little nap. In fact,
the  announcement  could  well  be  read  as  some  sort  of  excuse  for  having  been
forced  to  take  on  these  two  talks  despite  being  chairman.  The  reaction  was
equally obvious and clear, particularly among the younger colleagues who still
believe in authority rather than in their own critical abilities. (Letting aside the
fact that the available time for the talks was decisively shortened without prior
notice and one of the overhead projectors broke down -  i.e., that the session was
not very well organized anyway.) So this attempt could hardly be called an ex-
periment.  Instead,  one  should  call  it  a  self-fulfilling  prophecy.  The  question  is
whether it is really useful (and serves the purpose) to  define  everything  that  is
being  done  by  one  group  of  people  (let  us  call  it  the  Pittsburgh  group)  as  an
advancement of the desired interaction between physics and philosophy, and to
negate alternative approaches without actually discussing them at all. Precision
and emphasis are aspects which have to be cleared within a framework of open
communication, not by means of self-defined verdicts. At least, so is the custom
in European continental philosophy.

Introduction

It  has been  shown  at  other  occasions  [6]  that  recent  results  of  modern  physics
can be used to shed some more light onto the foundations of the world, provided
the actual task of philosophy is being re-interpreted in terms of a theory which is
following up the results of science rather than laying the grounds for the latter,
contrary to what the original intention of Aristotelian prima philosophia would
imply. As it turns out, the interpretation of the main results of present research
dealing  with  aspects  of  quantum  information  theory  and  quantum  gravity,  re-
spectively,  as  well  as  with  self-organized  criticality,  suffices  to  re-construct  a
large  class  of  phenomena  not  only  within  the  field  of  physics  proper,  but  also
within chemistry, biology, and even the social sciences.
As seen under a philosophical perspective, it can be shown that the general con-
ceptualization of such a unified view of the world has been prepared on a long
line of thought which begins with the Greek Stoá and leads up to the theories of
Spinoza, Schelling and Bloch as some of its representatives, eventually showing
up in a somewhat modified form in what can be called transcendental materia-
lism today. ([6], reference 5) As seen under the physical perspective however, it
can  be  demonstrated  how  a  philosophy  re-interpreted  in  the  above-mentioned
sense can unfold a heuristic potential which is able to produce guidelines of ori-
entation as to deciding about competing concepts in physics. Such a function of
philosophy  has  often  been  asked  for,  but  has  rarely  been  realized  so  far  when

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

3

there  actually  was  one of  the  few  occasions to  explicitly  deal  with  it  in  detail.
One problem of this is to sort out what would be the appropriate philosophical
approach to pertinent questions, in the first place. In the present paper we shall
try to contribute somewhat to a further clarification.
This unsatisfactory development of the past has its reasons, of course. In parti-
cular, the more recent philosophy of the 20th century, after world war II, has mo-
re or less completely suppressed the line of thinking which has been mentioned
above,  essentially  in  favour  of  a  self-centring  discussion  of  philosophy  itself,
taking its label for its contents. This is due to the neo-Kantian effort dating back
to the 19th century, to eventually establish a new, formal unity of the  sciences,
philosophy, the arts, and religion. Although this mainly apologetic enterprise has
been subject to failure from the beginning on, it is nevertheless determining Eu-
ropean continental (and in particular German) philosophy still today by its two
basic  components  of  activities:  the  history  of  philosophy  on  the  one  hand  and
the foundations of concepts on the other. Concrete praxis then, shows up only in
terms of a developmental history of thinking, divorced from any practical relati-
onship  to  worldliness  and  empirical  existence  –  being  enshrined  in  a  kind  of
„pure motion of thoughts“ which has lost already sight of the world of everyday
life, of the socially mediated and politically active human being. Hence, the hi-
story of philosophy is very often mixed up with philosophy proper, the practise
of doing history with actual philosophizing. And concentrating on the motion of
thoughts means to actually forget about what these thoughts actually do reflect
at all – thinking all the time, uncorrectly though, that the latter would not be im-
portant, once the mechanism of relexion itself would have been uncovered. This
view is also supported, though from another perspective, by analytic philosophy
which  dominates  the  Anglo-Saxon  countries.  Here  also,  the  systematization  of
thinking is more important than that about which thinking actually thinks. Mo-
reover, it is assumed, also uncorrectly, that what is being thought can always be
said, thus denying the necessity for any hermeneutic which is surpassing formal
logic.
At  the  same  time,  this  ideological  tendency  serves  also  a  much  more  personal
interest, namely one which aims at the securing of an isolated field of discourse
which is exclusively reserved for the philosophical discourse alone. This has be-
come very obvious in the recently emerged field of „cognitive science“, where
each  explicitly  materialistic  model  is  being  rejected  from  the  outset  by  this
„philosophical lobby“, based on the false premise of indicating that this would
be nothing than late relics of the mechanical materialism of the 19th century, and
a  primarily  reductionistic  effort  with  the  objective  of  eventually  taking  over
philosophy  in  merely  scientific  terms.  However,  keeping  to  this  false  premise
means  to  forget  about  the  fact  that  a  philosophy  which  can  be  understood  in
terms of a dialectical and transcendental materialism visualized within a modern
perspective  is  nothing  but  the  result  of  critically  reflecting  recently  gained  in-
sight in the various fields of science. In other words: only such an approach can
be called practical in the first place.

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

4

But although being oriented with a view to the sciences, philosophy is not at all
duplicating the latter’s work. Contrary to that, philosophizing means primarily to
critically reflect each single sector of the uncovered worldliness with a view to
the global interrelationships among all possible sectors, to ask for necessary and
sufficient  conditions  for  the  main  structural  aspects  of  single  sectors,  and  for
possible alternatives. In this sense, philosophical reflexion gains more and more
a  heuristic  connotation:  The  unification  of  the  scientifically  (necessary)  seg-
mented  actuality  is  no  self-purpose  therefore:  On  the  contrary,  the  important
point  is  to  show,  within  all  what  is  empirically  observable,  what  is  not  more
subject of science.
In the following we discuss the foundation of the physical world in terms of re-
cent progress made in the understanding of the concept of spin networks. (sec-
tion 1) We try to clarify the concept of „foundation“ itself, and come to a con-
ceptual conclusion which is somewhat different from the common utilization of
this concept in physics. Subsequently, in an attempt of introducing the notion of
downward and upward causation, we deal with aspects of quantum computation,
and with the concepts of loops and knots. (sections 2 and 3) The idea is to find a
common basis for building and re-tracing a hierarchy of modelling the actuality
of the  world  as  a progressive  evolution towards  increasing  complexity.  Hence,
both the approach of topological quantum field theory (section 4), and the con-
ception  of  self-organized  criticality  (section  5),  will  be  helpful  in  order  to  de-
scribe the explicitly dynamical architecture of this modelling. Smolin’s principle
of cosmic selection (section 6) will add some more insight into this, if being vi-
sualized in a somewhat modified way. The forthcoming second part of this pre-
sent paper will deal with a possible generalization of this approach trying to re-
ach  out  into  regions  beyond  physics,  hence  trying  to  „climb“  the  hierarchy  of
wordly structures.

1  Spin Networks & Spin Foams

Recall  that  essentially,  spin  networks  in  the  sense  of  Penrose  [1]  are  coloured
graphs,  i.e.  trivalent  graphs  with  edges  labelled  by  spins.  More  generally,  the
edges can be thought of as being labelled by group representations and the ver-
tices as being labelled by intertwining operators. For the case that the respective
group  is  SU(2)  and  the  graph  is  trivalent,  the  original  form  of  a  spin  network
emerges. As Baez has shown in some detail for the simplified case of BF theory
[2], the full development of the basic ideas about spin networks is comparatively
straightforward,  if  visualized  within  the  context  of  loop  quantum  gravity.  The
two crucial innovations of the latter are first its insistence on a background-free
approach to gravity and second that it uses a formulation of Einstein’s equations
in which – similar to gauge theory in general – parallel transport rather than the
metric is important. Spin networks fit generically into this framework. The im-

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

5

portant result is that the elementary excitations as represented in terms of Hilbert
space terminology (in fact, originating from the quantizing of cotangent bundles
associated with a suitable space of connections) turn out to be spin network ed-
ges of dimension one. [3] This leads straightforwardly to spin foams as a two-
dimensional  replacement  of  one-dimensional  Feynman  diagrams:  A  spin  foam
shows up as a two-dimensional complex built from vertices, edges, and polygo-
nal faces. The edges are labelled by  intertwining  operators, the  faces  by  group
representations. The idea of spin foams is to work with path integrals that can be
understood  as  analogues  of  the  afore-mentioned  Feynman  diagrams.  Conse-
quently, a generic slice of a spin foam is a spin network. The motivation for this
comes mainly from the problem that, as Baez notes, „[w]hile Penrose originally
intended for spin networks to describe the geometry of space-time, they are re-
ally better for describing the geometry of space.“ ([2], p.2) The dynamics (ente-
ring via the  Hamiltonian  constraint)  is  practically  absent.  So  that  the  necessity
arises to introduce the „evolutionary“ aspect in terms of some path integral for-
malism or of something which „sums over states“ (the latter given by means of
spin  networks).  This  refers  mainly  to the  work of  Rovelli  and  Smolin  [4]  who
for  the  first  time  replaced  the  original  spin  networks  by  „embedded  spin  net-
works“, i.e. usual spin networks plus an immersion of their graphs into a three-
dimensional  manifold,  calling  equivalence  classes  of  spin  networks  under  dif-
feomorphisms s-knots. These do not live on a manifold, i.e. they are not located
somewhere, but they actually are this somewhere. Since spin network states of
type <Sspan the loop state space, one can see that any ket state ψ> is uniquely
determined by the values of the <Sfunctionals on it:

ψ(S) := <Sψ>.

In this sense, a quantum state of the geometry of space is being described by a
linear  combination  of  spin  networks.  Areas  and  volumes  take  on  a  discrete
spectrum of quantized values. And the transition amplitudes between states are
computed as sums over spin foams. Hence, spin network states show up as ele-
mentary quantum excitations of the gravitational field carrying quanta of volume
at their vertices (nodes) and quanta of area on their edges (links).
There is however (beside technical aspects), a conceptual problem  to  this:  The
point is that as loop quantum gravity is primarily based on canonical quantizati-
on,  a  concept  of  „fixed  background  time“  is  necessary  in  order  to  describe  a
state (of the geometry). This means that it is not so clear what a „generic slice“
(of a spin foam) should actually be. In other words: What would be a „natural
time  distance“  or  „lapse“  between  spin  network  states?  [5]  On  the  other  hand,
this touches a more critical question, namely: „How fundamental is ‚fundamen-
tal‘?“  As  it  turns  out,  the  expression  „fundamental“  is  utilized  differently,  in
physics, and in philosophy. This can be seen as follows:
As quoted already, Baez refers to Penrose stating that he „intended for spin net-
works  to  describe  the  geometry  of  space-time.“  And  he  explicitly  formulates:

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

6

„Spin networks were first introduced by Penrose as a radical, purely combinato-
rial description of the geometry of spacetime.“ ([2], pp.1-2, emphasis mine) As
it appears, this is not quite true: Because Penrose derives his original idea from
the fact that physics plays in two different „worlds“, the continuous space of ge-
neral relativity (a Lorentz manifold of dim = 4 and sign =  – 2) on the one hand,
and the space of quantum theory (a Hilbert manifold of high (or infinite) dimen-
sion and positive-definite sign) on the other. Assuming that a unification of both
within the (physical) world would not be possible, his idea is to „build up both
space-time  and  quantum  mechanics  simultaneously  –  from  combinatorial  prin-
ciples  –  ...“  ([1],  p.151)  Hence,  what  he  does  is  to  actually  leave  the  physical
world  in  a  conceptual  sense  in  order  to  start  from  an  abstract  structure  from
which spacetime could be eventually derived. In other words: This structure ta-
kes the (philosophical) connotation of a substance in the traditional metaphysi-
cal sense, referring to something which is beyond the world (beyond space and
time that is) while spacetime as it is topic of both the theory of general relativity
and of quantum theory is visualized under two different aspects of the same un-
derlying entity, hence as attributes of that substance. The difficulty of  actually
performing this task of describing such an abstract structure (be it in mathemati-
cal, physical, or philosophical terms) is in the fact that space and time cannot be
excluded from this conceptual discussion from the outset, because of epistemo-
logical reasons: we use them as the very categories of thinking. There is no way
to express what we think otherwise than by means of (propositional) language.
And languages (at least those of European descent) utilize explicitly space and
time categories from which they derive their lexicology, syntax, and semantics.
Hence, the conceptual emergence of 3-space as described in this early paper by
Penrose  refers  to  the  process  of  thinking,  i.e.  to  emergence  in  epistemological
terms, rather than to a physical process, i.e. to emergence in ontological terms.
The point is that we have to model the emergence of spacetime according to our
available  language  (i.e.  modaliter),  while  „in  reality“  (i.e.  realiter),  the  combi-
natorial  structure  as  introduced  by  Penrose  is  permanently  underlying  all  what
there is. In this sense, it is referred to as being fundamental. Therefore, general
relativity  actually  describes  spacetime  as  we  can  visualize  it  in  classical  terms
when modelling it according to Einstein’s theory based on empirical (i.e. obser-
vable  and  perceivable)  aspects  of  the  physical  world.  But  spin  networks  as  a
combinatorial, abstract structure, serve to visualize an underlying entity we can-
not  actually  perceive  at  all.  In  a  (meta-theoretical)  way,  general  relativity  is  a
concrete model of the Universe, spin network theory is an abstract model of the
foundation  of  the  Universe.  The  difference  between  the  former  and  quantum
theory  is  simply  that  in  the  case  of  quantum  theory,  it  is  not  so  easy  to  differ
between its empirically accessible parts and its purely interpretational parts. It is
comparatively easy to recognize this conceptual problem as the ancient problem
of the relationship between substance and attribute. [6]
This  means  that  the  original  question  („How  fundamental  is  ‚fundamental‘?“)
points to a conceptual (and thus philosophical) gap between the physical world

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

7

and  its  foundation:  Indeed,  within  the  recent  approach,  spin  networks  serve  to
quantize space and determine the „boundary“ of the Planck scale. When discus-
sing flux lines of a gravitational field piercing black hole horizons and exciting
curvature degrees of freedom on the surfaces, Ashtekar and Krasnov can visua-
lize  each  micro-state  as  an  elementary  bit  of  information.  [7]  But  if  there  ac-
tually are quanta of space (and time), then there are space and  time.  (And  not
their foundations.) And if these quanta refer to bits, they refer to classical infor-
mation,  not  to  quantum  information.  In  fact,  Wheeler’s  conception  of  „It  from
Bit“  (mentioned  by  Ashtekar  and  Krasnov)  has  to  be  replaced  now  by  a  more
subtle conception of „It from Qubit“. ([8], p.47)
But, even if so, the question is also whether it is possible to continue modelling
the foundation (i.e. the truly fundamental level of physics) by utilizing classical
concepts  such  as  space,  time,  and  even  causality  (indicating  proper  light  cone
structures).  Because  this  would  be  then  something  outside  the  Universe.  (As
Schelling  once  formulated  a  long  time  ago:  „  ...  foundation  is  against  that  to
which it is foundation, non-being.“ [9], p.440) This obviously speaks against a
path integral approach, at least on the really fundamental level. A similar argu-
ment has been formulated earlier by Crane. [10] Therefore, the more recent ap-
proaches by Barrett and Crane put the emphasis on algebraic and categorial as-
pects of the theory, and mainly on topological quantum field theories. [11] On
the  other  hand,  very  rarely,  the  substance-attribute  relationship  is  even  men-
tioned when talking about quantum gravity, but then only in passing: „We har-
bour no illusion that such traditional philosophical ideas are likely to be heuristi-
cally  helpful,  let  alone  a  prerequisite,  for  theory-construction.“  ([12],  p.40)
Strong  words indeed!  Indicating that  everything  would have  been tried  before,
and one would really know about substance. But this is not quite  the  case,  be-
cause  the  knowledge  among  physicists  –  and  analytical  philosophers  –  of  mo-
dern interpretations of Spinoza’s substance metaphysics is not only limited, but
practically absent, as can be empirically demonstrated even among those (few)
who deal seriously with metaphysics at all. Even the relationship between Leib-
nizian and Spinozist theory is not well understood. Hence, what we can state is
the following:
All of this uncovers the fact that the term „fundamental“ is usually utilized for
the „boundary“ region of spacetime rather than for the truly fundamental level of
consideration. Within the picture of loop quantum gravity, this boundary region
is  constituted  by  means  of  spin  networks  which  define  the  „lowest  level“  of
(quanta of) space. Re-reading a famous passage of Rovelli’s can clarify what is
being meant with „fundamental“: There is an obvious contradiction between the
proposition  that  „[w]e  know  that  there  is  a  regime  in  which  all  present  funda-
mental theories break down“, and the proposition that „[i]n a sense, ‚there is no
time‘ at the fundamental level.“ ([13], pp.207, 213) Because in the former case,
there are no fundamental theories in this sense: It may be (or rather: it is likely)
that Einstein has visualized his theory as fundamental when thinking of geome-
try as being substance, but the advent of quantum theory has destroyed this ho-

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

8

pe. ([6], reference 6) On the other hand, quantum theory for itself is not funda-
mental enough, as the role of gravitation within attempted TOEs seems to indi-
cate. Note that most approaches in quantum theory deal with an interpretation of
the theory in its traditional form as it has been handed down to us from the times
of Schroedinger and Heisenberg. There is hardly any reference in this as to the
role of gravity. On the really fundamental level however, there is no space and
no time at all, be it quantized or not. So the real problem is to think the foundati-
on of the world in a way which marks clearly its categorial difference from the
world itself, and then to re-construct the transition from this fundamental level
to the boundary of (quantized) world.
Such  an  approach  is  the  only  possibility  to  actually  avoid  the  „ontological  va-
gueness“  Goldstein  and  Teufel  noted  recently.  ([14],  p.276)  They  actually
discuss the Bohmian approach. But their statement, that „[t]he unobserved phy-
sical  reality  becomes  drastically  different  from  the  observed,  even  on  the
macroscopic level of daily life“ ([14], p.281), originally thought of as criticizing
„classical“ quantum theory, takes on a completely new connotation now, if vi-
sualized  within  the  framework  of  what  we  have  discussed  so  far.  Because  in-
deed, there would be two practically disjoint regions now: the (physical) domain
of  what  can  be  observed  in  principle,  and  the  (fundamental)  domain  of  what
cannot be observed in principle. This is not quite in the pure tradition of physics,
but we would not like to join in the stating of a theory being „scientific“ depen-
dent on the question whether there are empirical data available or not, contrary
to current opinion. (Cf. [12], p.36) The point is simply that any TOE has to co-
ver parts of reality (i.e. has to talk about them in propositional terms) which are
not  accessible  to  measurement  in  principle.  Nevertheless,  one  would  call  it  a
scientific  theory.  This  is  not  really  a  new  insight.  (Cf.  [13],  p.191)  But  this  is
also the place where modern philosophy actually enters the discussion. Because
it is its genuine task to actually deal with this transition between foundation and
world (possibility and actuality). [15] So instead of simply appealing all the time
to philosophy ([13], p.182), or of listing problems that might be topics of philo-
sophy ([14], p. 279sqq.), physicists should by now take some advice from a field
which  has  cultivated  consistent,  systematic,  and  logical,  if  not  mathematical
thinking  for  a  long  time.  In  fact,  it  can  be  shown  that  quite  a  long  time  ago,
within the period of Italian Renaissance, the introduction of mathematical argu-
mentation  into  science,  explicitly  cultivated  by  physicists  nowadays,  corre-
sponds  to  a  somewhat  clandestine  re-introduction  of  previously  criticized  sub-
stance into the constitution of world views. ([16], p.181sq.)
So there are in fact precise though heuristic results as offered by philosophical
insight: One point is the absence of causality on the truly fundamental level of
physics. Another point is the possible relevance as to the explicit difference of
the  Leibnizian  model  (favoured  by  present  physics  as  far  as  it  is  interested  in
philosophical conceptualization) as compared to the Spinozist approach.
As to the first we have to ask whether the re-conceptualization of spin networks
in the sense of Penrose is not unwillingly falling back behind the original com-

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

9

binatorial insight gained: namely to derive spacetime from a purely combinato-
rial structure. Smolin admits that spin network states as they are introduced now
„are  not  purely  combinatorial objects“  ([17],  p.7),  they  actually  show  up  as  „a
mixture of combinatorial spin networks, causal sets, and critical behaviour mo-
dels.“ ([18], p.3, emphasis mine) Hence, the second is being „put in by hand“,
the  third  is  referring  to  self-organized  criticality  in  the  sense  of  the  Santa  Fe
school (which might turn out to be independent of a substratum). This strategy
of building in causality from the outset is put forward in a large number of pa-
pers. [19] However, the problem is in the transition from combinatorial to spatial
and temporal structures: The causal sets showing up in the functor Past refer to
events which are ill-defined on the fundamental level. (Without space and time
one would not know what an event actually is.) And the causal history is defined
as a succession (or even recursion) of Pachner moves which are essentially local
unitary  operators.  Hence,  the  formulation  of  an  amplitude  for  going  from  net-
work 1 to network 2 in the well-known form of

A(1→2) = ∑ (histories 1→2) Π (moves per history) Amove

as a sum-over-histories. But this approach appears to be somewhat unsatisfacto-
ry,  because  we  essentially  talk  about  combinatorial  moves.  And  the  question
„How much time needs a Pachner move?“ is probably as difficult to answer as
the question „How much time needs a Reidemeister move?“. [20] The problem
is similar to that of spin foams when talking about a „generic slice“ and the ap-
propriate „lapse“. If the „time step“ is in the tetrahedra of the triangulating con-
struction [21], can this then be rephrased in terms of some tp which generically
accompanies lp?  This  is not  the  idea  of  Penrose  though:  „The  final  theory  that
emerges must have a fundamentally non-local character.“ ([22], p.424) And we
can add: „ ... must be a-temporal therefore.“
The other point is a little more involved, but basically on the same line of argu-
ment:  The  main  difference  between  the  Leibnizian  and  Spinozist  concepts  of
space  is  that  Leibniz  explains  away  space  and  ends  up  with  objects  only  such
that  space  shows  up  as  a  cognitive  approximation  of  the  set  of  relationships
among them.  Spinoza  on  the other hand,  explains  away  objects  and stays  with
the spatial region alone. For him, objects show up as a cognitive approximation
of the fact that some spatial region is object-like (we observe a pebble, because
space is pebbly in some region). [6] In terms of Einstein’s diffeomorphism inva-
riance, these two views seem to be equivalent (if actually visualizing space as a
set  of  relationships  anyway).  However,  for  Spinoza,  space  as  we  know  it  was
essentially the only attribute of substance. Or more precisely: What humans per-
ceive of space (and call physical space) is what they are capable of perceiving
under the only attribute (res extensa) which falls into their mode of being. The
other attribute (res cogitans) gains by this the connotation of a materialistic deri-
vation, and time shows up as its property. Obviously, what humans perceive of
the attributes cannot be fundamental.

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

10

Both these points, causality  being visualized  as  an  emergent  rather  than  a  fun-
damental concept, and the Spinozist view, spacetime being self-relational rather
than  relational,  challenge  Smolin’s  criteria  for  a  background  independent  ap-
proach (namely numbers 3, 5 and 6, respectively). [23]
If we are visualizing therefore space quanta in terms of spin network states and
include  an intrinsic  ordering principle  called time  (evolution),  the  largest  com-
mon  denominator  of  this  consideration  might  be  to  view  the  web  of  spin  net-
works  as  the  „boundary  layer“  of  worldliness,  as  the  borderline  between  the
fundamental  and  the  empirical.  Hence,  it  is  natural  to  ask  two  questions  first:
What  would  come  „below“  this  boundary  level  of  the  world  (in  terms  of  spin
networks), and what would come „above“ this level? Some aspects of these que-
stions are being discussed in the next two sections.

2  Downward Causation: Quantum Computation

Note first that when we speak of „causation“ we refer to the consistent unfolding
of our ideas dealing with the re-constructing of hierarchical levels of reasoning
rather than with concrete physical processes.  The point  is  that  the quantum  le-
gacy stands somewhat against this acquired consistency, because its characteri-
stic  aspects  tend  to  counteract  rational  assumptions.  This  can  be  clearly  seen
with  respect  to  the  concept  of  time:  Recall  Feynman’s  famous  „integral  argu-
ment“ in favour of visualizing the Universe as  a quantum  computer.  Then,  the
integral of the celebrated form,

P(A→B) = ∫γ exp (iS/h) dΓ2

can be essentially interpreted such that it defines the  probability  for  a  physical
system going from some state A into another state B. The idea is that this transi-
tion is actually being performed over all possible paths γ at the same time – but
that we can observe only that path for which δS = 0, and we call this the „classi-
cal path“. However, the action here is simply defined in terms of the usual time
integral of the appropriate Lagrangian,

S = ∫ L dt,

and  we  wonder  what  the  usual  time  is  actually  meaning  on  this  fundamental
level,  where  transitions take  many  ways  at  the  same  time.  (This  problem  is  of
course the same for utilizing the time-dependent Schroedinger equation even if
talking of unitary transformations. Indirectly, this also causes the interpretational
difficulties of the Hamiltonian constraint.) ([14], p.279)

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

11

On the other hand, leaving the classical time parameter aside for a moment, the
„computer  paradigm“  is  plausible  in  the  first  place,  provided  some  discrete
computing  algorithm  can  be  found of  which  space  and  time  turn  out  to  be  the
classical approximation. Intuitively, it is the spin networks themselves that can
be  offered  as  a  fundamental  sort  of  „information  channel“,  their  web  structure
constituting a „cosmic internet“ of very basic kind, possibly in the recently pro-
posed  sense  of  Zizzi.  [24]  There  is  an  alternative  approach  to  computing  net-
works of this kind by Hitchcock. [25] In principle, this universal computer can
be visualized then as analogy of a system which percolates information through
available  sites of  a  cellular  (automaton)  structure.  This  sort of  model  has  been
mentioned several times before. [26]
But there is another point to that: In the approach of Barrett and Crane, the idea
is to generalize  topological  state  sum  models  in  passing  from  three  to  four  di-
mensions by replacing the characteristic SO(3) group with SO(4), or its appro-
priate spin covering, SU(2) x SU(2), respectively. [11] The concept of spin net-
works  is  also  generalized  then,  by  introducing  graphs  with  edges  labelled  by
non-negative  real  numbers  (called  „relativistic  spin  networks“).  Applying  this
kind  of  „spin  foam“  model  to  Lorentzian  state  sums  demonstrates  their  finite-
ness in turn implying a number of choices made from physical and/or geometri-
cal  arguments.  [27]  The  really  interesting  aspect  of  this  is  its  relation  to  the
group SL(2,C): because this is the double cover of SO(3,1) and the complexifi-
cation of SU(2) which in turn is the double cover of SO(3). On the other hand,
SL(2,C)  is  the  group  of  linear  transformations  of  C2  that  preserve  the  volume
form. Thanks to an e-mail crash course on these matters referring to the Barrett-
Crane model and made available online by John Baez and Dan Christensen [28],
where they use the terminology of the former’s quantum gravity seminar [29], it
is easy to understand that constructions in the sense of Barrett-Crane turn out to
be invariant under SL(2,C). In other words, we essentially deal with states in C2
which are spinors. And it is from quantum theory and special relativity that we
know  about their  relevance.  [30]  On  the  other  hand,  as  Baez  notes,  and  as  we
will see shortly, a state in C2 can also be called a qubit. So „[w]hat we [a]re re-
ally  doing,  from  the  latter  viewpoint,  is  writing  down  ‚quantum  logic  gates‘
which manipulate qubits in an SU(2)-invariant [in fact, SL(2,C)-invariant] way.
We [a]re seeing how to build little Lorentz-invariant quantum computers. From
this viewpoint, what the Barrett-Crane model does is to build a theory of quan-
tum  gravity  out  of  these  little  Planck-scale  quantum  computers.“  ([28],  p.42)
This  is  obviously  very  much  on  line  with  the  arguments  of  Zizzi,  Hitchcock,
Lloyd and others. ([8], [24] – [26]) Moreover, it is referring to the explicit level
of  spin  networks:  That  is,  the  aforementioned  „boundary  layer“  between  the
physical world and its foundation shows up as a „shift of quantum computing“
processsing the fundamental information necessary for performing the transition
from foundation to world (or in other words: for actually producing a world out
of its foundation).

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

12

Note however that consequently, when we are dealing with quantum computati-
on, we are still talking about this boundary layer, not  yet  about  the  foundation
itself. Because what we encounter  when talking  about  time,  we  also  encounter
when thinking of linearity: the quantum legacy again. This means that the com-
putational base pair leads naturally to a definition of a qubit state as a vector in a
two-dimensional complex vector space with inner product such that a normali-
zed vector can be represented by an expression of the form

such that

α0> + β1>;  α, β∈C,

α2 + β2 = 1.

The collection of n such qubits is a quantum register (of size n); and a quantum
logic gate is simply a device which performs a fixed unitary operation on selec-
ted  qubits  in  a  fixed  period  of  time.  Hence,  a  quantum  network  consists  of
quantum logic gates whose computational steps are being synchronized in time
(parallel). The size of the network is equal to the number of gates. Again, what
we see is that the problem is „in the time“ showing up here within the usual fra-
mework  of  qantum  theory.  So  when  looking  for  an  „underlying  fundamental
level“ beyond space and time, what we have to do is to step beyond this frame-
work. It will not really help to pass to „entangled qubit states“ (i.e. those which
are non-separable and cannot be written as a tensor product), so long as we defi-
ne quantum computers in terms of a family of quantum networks performing the
activity of quantum computation, and visualizing the latter as a unitary evolution
of  these  networks.  [31]  In  principle,  this  context  is  not  being  left  in  all  of  the
possible  applications  of  entanglement,  be  it  of  maximal  or  mixed-state  type.
([32], pp.142, 222) In the end, disentanglement shows up then as an intermediate
state  on  the  way  from  entanglement  towards  classicity,  but  it  is  not  anything
beyond  the  physicality  of  the  aforementioned  „boundary  layer“:  The  use  of  a
background  time  analogue  (by  means  of  unitary  transformations)  precludes  a
real extension on to a truly fundamental level of modelling.
Another  question  would  be  whether  the  „direction  of  development“,  namely
from entanglement towards disentanglement is actually the correct choice of de-
scribing  the  onset  of  classicity.  Because,  if  we  remember  the  phenomenon  of
decoherence as a means to produce classicity, then this is basically the result of
entanglement (of qubits with some environment) rather than disentanglement:

(α0> + β1>)m> → α0>m0> + β1>m1>

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

13

such that the density operators are of the form

α2     αβ*             α2             αβ* <m0m1> 
                                              →                                                   ,
α*β      β2             α*β <m1m0>      β2        

and as <m1m0> → 0, „coherences“ vanish. A similar transition we would need
from  the  foundation  onto  the  „boundary  layer“  of  (quantum)  spin  networks.  If
we visualize the foundation as a structure without any spatial and temporal con-
notation, but would like to stay with a computational analogue, then we would
think of this sort of „fundamental computational process“ as some kind of fluc-
tuation permanently exchanging spin network states (which themselves serve as
quantum logic gates for quantum computation „on the other side“ of the bounda-
ry layer configuration). But unlike the idea of evolving spin networks in a spin
foam fashion according to some intrinsic time measure defining the generic sli-
ces  between  spin  networks,  this  fluctuation  would  be  essentially  non-local,  in
the  sense  that  as  seen  under  the  perspective  of  the  foundation,  it  would  be  al-
ways and everywhere. (This has been earlier referred to as „intrinsic vibrational
states“  [26],  third  reference.)  If  visualized  under  the  classical  perspective  of  a
physical observer within the world however, this fact could only be consistently
conceptualized, if thought of in terms of differentiating spatial and temporal di-
stances, and bringing representations of this kind into some sort of digital suc-
cession. The difficulty of rephrasing such a model utilizing a language which is
basically  structured  in  a  spatial  and temporal  manner,  is topic  of  presently  on-
going  work.  (Cf.  [5],  first  reference)  Originally  ([26],  third  reference),  it  was
thought of utilizing recent insight of Bieberich for this task. [33] This looks still
very promising and is part of the aforementioned project under way.

3  Upward Causation: Wilson Loops & Knots

The other „direction“ of the argument is easier to tackle. This is mainly so be-
cause loops and knots have been discussed in some detail by now. Note that ac-
cording to the standard terminology (we follow here essentially [34]), a loop in
some space Σ, say, is a continuous map γ from the unit interval into Σ such that
γ(0) = γ(1). The set of all such maps will be denoted by ΩΣ, the loop space of Σ.
Given a loop element γ, and a space A of connections, we can define a complex
function on A x ΩΣ, the socalled Wilson loop, such that

TA(γ) := (1/N) TrR P exp ∫γ A.

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

14

Here, the path-ordered exponential of the connection A∈A, along the loop γ, is
also known as the holonomy of A along γ. The holonomy measures the change
undergone by an internal vector when parallel transported along γ. The trace is
taken in the representation R of G (which is the Lie group of Yang-Mills theo-
ry),  N  being  the  dimensionality  of  this  representation.  The  quantity  measures
therefore the curvature (or field strength) in a gauge-invariant way. For gravity,
it is more appropriate to choose Wilson loops that are constant along the orbits
of the diffeomorphism action so that

T(ϕ o γ) = T(γ) for all ϕ∈Diff(Σ).

Note that because the original idea of this came from Witten who introduced a
new class of manifold invariants in terms of generalized Feynman integrals, na-
mely of the form,

Z(M) = ∫ dA exp[(ik/4π) S(M, A)],

with M being a 3-manifold without boundary, A the gauge field (connection) on
M, and the action S the integral over M of the trace of the Chern-Simons 3-form,
we are on the „safe side“ here with the path integral formalism, because we are
dealing  with  the  level  „above“  the  aforementioned  „boundary  layer“  as  repre-
sented by the spin networks themselves. This can be seen as follows: Over a gi-
ven loop γ, the expectation value < T(γ)> turns out to be equal to a knot invariant
(the  „Kauffman  bracket“)  such  that  when  applied  to  spin  networks,  the  latter
shows up  as  a deformation  of  Penrose’s  value  V(Γ).  This is  mainly  due  to  the
fact that

< T(γ)> = Kk(γ) = (1/Z) ∫ dµ(A) exp [(ik/4π) S] T(γ, A).

So, for any spin network Γ (replace γ by Γ), the old relation holds up to regula-
rization. Hence, spin networks are deformed into quantum spin networks (which
are  essentially  given  by  a  family  of  deformations  of  the  original  networks  of
Penrose labelled by a deformation parameter q = exp (4π/(k+2)) for the Chern-
Simons case). Note also that the Chern-Simons invariant is important when ha-
ving  a  non-zero  cosmological  constant  Λ,  because  there  is  an  exact  physical
state of quantum gravity given by ΨCS (A) = exp (k/4π SCS (A)), where k is ac-
tually related to Newton’s constant by G2Λ = 6π/k. This state can be shown to
reproduce Kk(Γ) above.
As  Kauffman  has  shown  [35],  the  condition  of  being  a  knot  invariant  can  be
thought  of  as  being  equivalent  to  the  diffeomorphism  constraint.  In  particular,
knot states, i.e. loop functionals that depend only on the  knotting  of the  loops,

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

15

can  completely  solve  the  diffeomorphism  constraint.  [36]  But  then,  they  are
knotted states of spin networks rather than spin networks themselves, and they
cannot be the true elementary quanta of space. ([36], p.16) They rather depend
on  loops  as  their  independent  variables.  (And  in  fact,  they  have  non-local  de-
pendence on the connection.) ([37], p.63) But as far as all information present in
the  holonomy  can  actually  be  reconstructed  from  the  Wilson  loops,  the  latter
become  fundamental  variables  in  themselves.  The  point  is  however,  that  they
constitute „the worldly side“ of increasing structural complexity. In other words:
They are structurally more complex than (unknotted) spin networks. In this sen-
se, loops can carry diffeomeorphism-invariant information which is not necessa-
rily in their knot-theoretical representation. ([34], p.7) And they can be shown to
solve  the  Wheeler-deWitt  equation,  in  the  first  place.  ([36],  p.16;  [38],  p.435)
But as to the path integral formalism, we are on the „safe side“, because above
spin network level, we do not have any problems with the reasonable interpreta-
tion of time parameters or similar things.

4  TQFT: Cobordisms & Categories

From here, we can discuss the further unfolding of structure, parallel to results
in topological quantum field theory (TQFT), as discussed for the simplified case
of BF theory. [2] Be A0 the moduli space of flat connections on P, the physical
phase space, and be G  the group of gauge transformations of the bundle P. Re-
call  then  the  definition  of  a  spin  foam  which  is  very  much  alike  the  one  for  a
spin network, only one dimension higher. Hence, a spin foam is essentially ta-
king one spin network into another, of the form F: Ψ→Ψ’. Just as spin networks
are designed to merge the concepts of quantum state and geometry of space, spin
foams shall serve the merging of concepts of quantum history and geometry of
space-time. As we have already mentioned, very much like Feynman diagrams
do, also  spin  foams  can  be  used  to  evaluate  information  about  the  history  of  a
transition of which the amplitude is being determined. Hence, if Ψ and Ψ’ are
spin  networks  with  underlying  graphs  γ  and  γ’,  then  any  spin  foam  F:  Ψ→Ψ’
determines an operator from L2(Aγ /Gγ) to L2(Aγ’ /Gγ’) denoted by O such that

<Φ’, O Φ> = <Φ’, Ψ’><Ψ, Φ>

for any states Φ, Φ’. The evolution operator Z(M) is a linear combination of the-
se operators weighted by the amplitudes Z(O). Obviously, we can define a cate-
gory with spin networks as objects and spin foams as morphisms.
Hence, it turns out, in fact, that L2(A /G) is actually being spanned by spin net-
work states. Call such a state Ψ∈ Fun(A /G) so that any spin network in S ( =

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

16

space) defines such a function. Because Fun is an algebra (namely consisting of
all functions on A of the form Ψ(A) = f(T exp ∫γ1 A ... T exp ∫γn A), where f is a
continuous complex-valued function of finitely many holonomies which are re-
presented here by the integral expressions), multiplication by Ψ defines an ope-
rator on Fun. We call this operator spin network observable.
So what we essentially do is the following: Given the (n-1)-dimensional space S
and a triangulation of S, choose a graph called the dual 1-skeleton. Express any
state in Fun(A /G) as a linear combination of states coming from spin networks
whose  underlying  graph  is  this  dual  1-skeleton.  Define  now  space-time  as  a
compact oriented cobordism M: S → S’, where S, S’ are compact oriented mani-
folds of dimension n-1. Choose a triangulation of M such that the triangulations
of  S,  S’  with  dual  1-skeletons  γ,  γ’  can  be  determined.  The  basis  for  gauge-
invariant Hilbert spaces is given by the respective spin networks. Then the evo-
lution operator Z(M): L2(Aγ/Gγ) → L2(Aγ’/Gγ’) determines transition  amplitudes
<Ψ’, Z(M) Ψ> with Ψ, Ψ’ being spin network states. Write the amplitude as a
sum over spin foams from Ψ to Ψ’: < , > = ∑F:Ψ→Ψ’ Z(F) plus composition rules
such that Z(F’) o Z(F) = Z(F’ o F). This is a discrete version of a path integral.
Hence, re-arrangement of spin numbers on the „combinatorial level“ is equiva-
lent to an evolution of states in terms of Hilbert spaces in the „quantum picture“
and  effectively  changes  the  topology  of  space  on  the  „cobordism  level“.  This
can be understood as a kind of manifold morphogenesis in time: Visualize the n-
dimensional manifold M (with ∂M = S ∪ S’ - disjointly) as M: S → S’, that is as
a  process  (or  as  time)  passing  from  S  to  S’.  This  is  the  mentioned  cobordism.
Note that composition of cobordisms holds and is associative, but not commuta-
tive. Consequently, these results can also be formulated in the language of cate-
gory  theory:  As  TQFT  maps  each  manifold  S  representing  space  to  a  Hilbert
space Z(S) and each cobordism M: S → S’ representing space-time to an opera-
tor Z(M): Z(S) → Z(S’) such that composition and identities are preserved, this
means that TQFT is a functor Z: nCob → Hilb. Note that the non-commutativity
of operators in quantum theory corresponds to non-commutativity of composing
cobordisms, and adjoint operation in quantum theory turning an operator  A:  H
→  H’  into  A*:  H’  →  H  corresponds  to  the  operation  of  reversing  the  roles  of
past and future in a cobordism M: S → S’ obtaining M*: S’ → S.
So what we have here in the end, is the structural mediation of the micro-level of
physics  with  the  macro-level  of  (physical)  forms.  As  re-arrangements  of  spin
numbers in the combinatorial network correspond to re-arrangements of spatial
quantizations  within  the  triangulation  picture,  and  as  both  correspond  to  a
macroscopic  evolution of  form  in  terms  of  spacetime  as  it  can  be  observed  by
some  classical observer, this  can be visualized  as  the  true  onset  of  a  theory  of
emergence (once, a generalization beyond BF theory is being achieved).

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

17

5  SOC: The Mediation of Micro & Macro

What  TQFT  is  achieving  for  the  structural  mediation,  self-organized  criticality
(SOC) in the sense of the Santa Fe school is doing for the dynamical mediation
in terms of an explicit transition rule („fourth law stuff“). [39] Stuart Kauffman
starts  from  the  basic  idea  that  the  Universe  is  non-ergodic  with  respect  to  its
hierarchical complexity. This is the underlying motivation for assuming the exi-
stence of a „fourth law“ of thermodynamics which actually steers the dynamics
of evolutionary processes. The definition is essentially that a transition (of a gi-
ven physical system) from one state to another is such that it leads into the „ad-
jacent possible“ meaning the set of all possible states for that system which are
one  reaction  step  away  from  the  already  actualized  states.  Hence,  compatible
with  the  principles  of  self-organized  criticality  [40],  the  idea  is  to  base  global
outcomes  of  processes  on  local  interactions.  Because  this  assumption  implies
also that the actual flow from the possible to the actual would be such that the
dimensionality  of  the  „adjacent  possible“,  on  average,  expands  as  rapidly  as  it
can (probably constituting by this an „arrow of time“), the Universe altogether
might  tend  to  flow  towards  maximal  complexity.  With  a  view  to  percolation
models,  Kauffman  has,  in  close  cooperation  with  Smolin,  applied  these  basic
aspects  to  spin  networks  themselves.  He  visualizes  them  as  knotted  structures,
and  as  such  as  combinatorial  objects  similar  to  symbol  strings  of  a  grammar,
becoming  „collectively  autocatalytic“,  namely  as  „knots  acting  on  knots  to
create  knots  in  rich  coupled  cycles  not  unlike  a  metabolism.“  ([39],  ch.7,  p.2)
We will discuss these aspects again in the second part of this present paper. Mo-
re important here for the time being is to notice the basic consequence of such
an approach:
When  we  try  to  re-construct  the  mediation  between  the  micro-level  and  the
macro-level of the physical world as we can observe it, what we actually do is to
re-construct our own modelling of the world. All what we can do is to model the
world  according  to  what  we  perceive  of  it.  The  set  of  such  models  we  call
knowledge. [6] At most, we can model the foundation of the world according to
what we know about the world in this sense. Hence, we proceed in a somewhat
transcendental fashion: We permanently ask for the necessary conditions under
which the world exists, given the facts we know about it. But we know before-
hand  that  the  outcome  of  this  must  be  necessarily  incomplete,  simply  because
our means of perception are incomplete. (They are even incomplete with respect
to what we actually know.) [42]
This  basically  implies  that  in  principle,  there  is  no  chance  to  eventually  com-
plete  the  information  we  can  extract  about  the  world  altogether.  Even  worse:
According to our own models we can well assume that the lifetime of humans is
finite as compared to the lifetime of the Universe. Hence, there is not even the
chance  to  eventually  develop  an  all-encompassing  „final“  model  of  our  own
component of the world. As I have shown elsewhere in some detail [43], this has
significant ethical implications. (We come to that in the second part of this pre-

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

18

sent paper.) Nevertheless, this incomplete situation for human life is an intrinsic
part of the whole process. It could not be otherwise. Therefore, what humans do
all the time (namely to model their world) has to be visualized as a generic phe-
nomenon of the very process they actually try to model. This is the reason for a
permanent self-reference which is being built in from the beginning into all the
modelling  as  it  is  achieved  in  terms  of  the  various  forms  of  research.  In  other
words: Developing a structural mediation between micro- and macro-level, and
finding a dynamical rule which generates it, is not only performing the required
re-construction of a permanently becoming knowledge as part of the process of
which  it  actually is  knowledge,  in  the  first  place,  –  and  communicating  it  into
the social collective by means of appropriate semiological techniques –,  it also
is the very process itself. But what we call „process“ in worldly terms, is not a
process at all, if visualized under the perspective of the foundation of the world.
Because  in  order  to  define  a  process  we  need  the  adequate  categories  within
whose framework to phrase the definition. And for us, these are space and time.
So, in the end, we are back to the beginning, and we note the following:
The most we can do is to assume that there actually is something at all, indepen-
dent of human existence. This is a basic ontological statement, and we call it a
statement  of  „realism.“  But  what  that  something  actually  is,  we  cannot  know.
We can only model aspects of it. This is the related epistemological statement.
What we have to understand is that these statements do not primarily refer to our
incomplete knowledge, but that instead it is the very tension between the „That“
and  the  „What“  of  existence,  which  produces  our  framework  of  categories,  in
the first place. What does that mean in practical terms?  It  means  that  what  we
can do is to model the world according to the insight gained by developing our
ruling  paradigms:  A  number  of  centuries  ago,  it  was  appropriate  to  model  the
Universe according to the clock paradigm, because the mechanism of the clock
(a first digitalization of some process, by the way) served as an innovative mo-
del for describing organizing processes. Obviously, they were not self-organized
at the time, the existence of some maker of the universal clock being assumed in
the  first place.  Nowadays,  it  is  more  appropriate  to  model  the  Universe  accor-
ding to the computer paradigm, because it is this technology which has replaced
the  classical  (and  mechanical)  technology  of  a  clockwork.  And  the  universal
computer is thought of as being initiated by self-assembly. Hence, the Universe
is visualized as being self-organizing.
Basically therefore, modern substance, as we have seen earlier, can be modelled
according  to  a  universal  (quantum)  computer.  (Provided  we  do  not  forget  that
this sort of metaphore is referring to the boundary of substance rather.) The me-
diation from spin networks via  knotted  structures  up  to  macroscopic structures
as performed for a simplified case in terms of topological quantum field theory,
turns out as a specific re-construction fitted to the original paradigm. The same
is true  when  looking  for  a  dynamical  rule  which  is  steering  the  explicit  unfol-
ding of structure. As we will see shortly, we can recover the same aspect again,
when talking about life in the Universe. In fact, the combination of the computer

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

19

paradigm  with  biological  selection  is  the  best  we  can  achieve  for  the  present
modelling of the world.

6  The Cosmic Selection of Life

In  this  sense,  Smolin  has  introduced  a  generalized  concept  of  selection  by  tal-
king about selection of Universes rather than of species. [26] This cosmic selec-
tion rule can be interpreted as the worldly version of the aforementioned „knot
metabolism“  as  discussed  by  Kauffman.  The  biological  species  definition  is
being replaced by a type definition of Universes.
Hence,  Smolin  postulates  that  Black  Holes,  instead  of  representing  singular
points of „physical breakdown“ in the Universe, serve as a sort of tunnel into the
early  states  of  a  novel  Universe  being  actually  produced  by  a  „bouncing“
process  under  extremal  conditions,  mapping  the  micro-version  of  a  „final  sin-
gularity“ to the „initial singularity“ of a Universe coming to life. This is a con-
ception similar to Wormholes and/or Baby-Universes. The idea is then that the
production of Universes is such that those with a high production rate of Black
Holes (and thus of novel Universes) are selected. Consequently, Smolin speaks
of a theory of „cosmological natural selection“. ([26], pp.88, 96, 108; [41]) Al-
though  this  approach  is  not  free  of  misunderstanding  and  drawback  (I  have
discussed this in some detail in [26], second reference), its advantage is first, the
utilization  of  aspects  of  Waddington’s  „fitness  landscape“  deriving  primarily
from the „galactic ecology“ of interstellar matter, and second, its compatibility
with the principles of self-organized criticality. ([26], pp.159, 168-171) This also
sheds  some  more  light  onto  the  position  which  life  itself  is  taking  within  this
picture: „Life perhaps might be seen to have evolved a way to ride these flows
and cycles [of self-organized criticality] the way a surfer rides the flow of ener-
gy in water waves.“ ([26], p.154sq.)
In the meantime, it has been shown that there are new arguments in favour of a
biological analogue to selection: Patel has argued that the relevance of Grover’s
search algorithm for the information processing in genetic DNA reveals that life
has taken the route of digitalizing its information. [44] Based on this, Zizzi as-
sumes  that the observation  probability  of  a  state,  when  applying  amplitudes  in
the quantum algorithm approach, can be related to a similar value which is valid
for the early Universe, provided a suitable de Sitter model is being chosen. [45]
This also sheds some more light on the question whether it would be useful to
generalize the concepts of life and/or consciousness with a view to their univer-
sal role within the world:
The point is here that these concepts fall under the „rule of generality“: That is,
if we assume that the Universe altogether is a living entity, then finally, we end
up with having no reasonable meaning left for the concept of life. (If everything
is life, nothing is.) If, on the contrary, we would like to save the differentiating

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

20

function  of  the  concept,  we  cannot  possibly  implant  life  and/or  consciousness
(as  we  know  it)  on  the  quantum  level  of  the  consideration.  This  is  mainly  so,
because the concepts we utilize (by means of our language) can be shown to be
emergent  concepts.  If  so,  thinking  itself  is  emergent,  and  so  is  consciousness,
and  finally,  life  altogether.  On  the  other  hand,  the  necessary  conditions  for
eventually having life at all, have to be intrinsic conditions of the process itself.
From what we have discussed before, we know already that „process“ carries a
model  connotation  only  rather  than  being  of  ontological  significance.  Hence,
what we do is to utilize concepts of life and consciousness in order to symbolize
the self-reference we experience when producing models of the world such that
each  model  contains  at  least  one  self-model.  But  because  there  is  not  really  a
process, the underlying correlate of what we call life (or consciousness) must be
actually present on the truly fundamental level all the time. We can call this cor-
relate „proto-consciousness“ (or „proto-life“ as for that), but we cannot overco-
me its merely epistemological connotation in really ontological terms. And this
will be the starting point for the second part of this present paper.

Preliminary Conclusion

What we have found out so far is that, so long as we stay within the field of phy-
sics proper, presently available models of loop quantum gravity are able to pro-
vide for a theoretical basis to eventually re-construct the evolution of the world
in terms of some theory of emergence, mediating the world as it is being obser-
ved  with  its  foundation.  Given  certain  ontological  qualifications,  this  approach
turns out as a suitable case study for actually differentiating between world and
foundation in scientific terms. At the same time however, it becomes quite clear
that until now, this significant difference has not yet been topic of physical theo-
ry.  Hence,  the  concept  of  „fundamental“  has  to  rephrased  somewhat;  and  the
heuristic implications of its new utilization have to be discussed in some detail.
This is where modern philosophy comes in. Contrary to the sciences which take
a specialized perspective as to their respective field, philosophy tries to achieve
a reasonable totalization of all the scientific fields. In this sense, it is generalistic
rather than specialistic. Only the totalization of the world, not the mere summing
of all its specialized perspectives, can relate it properly to its foundation. And it
is only this relationship which can serve as a universal framework of orientation
for our wordly existence.

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

21

Acknowledgements

For clarifying and illuminating discussions in an early stage of this paper while
meeting at the icmp2000 at Imperial College London I thank Paola Zizzi (Pado-
va) and David Robson (London/Cambridge).

References

[1] R.Penrose (1970): Angular Momentum: An Approach to Combinatorial
Space-Time, in: T.Bastin (ed.), Quantum Theory and Beyond, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 151-180.
[2] J.C.Baez (1999): An Introduction to Spin Foam Models of BF Theory and
Quantum Gravity. (Preprint)
[3] J.C.Baez (2001): Higher-dimensional algebra and Planck scale physics. In:
C.Callender, N.Huggett (eds.), Physics Meets Philosophy at the Planck Scale.
Cambridge University Press, 177-195.
[4] C.Rovelli, L.Smolin (1995): Spin Networks and Quantum Gravity.
http://www.arXiv.org, gr-qc/9505006.
[5] R.E.Zimmermann, D.Robson (2001): The Emergence of Space and Time
from Entangled Qubit Processing. Forthcoming. – In a personal talk with Julian
Barbour on 16th November 1999, when referring to his then recently published
book, he agreed that the necessary „lapse“ defining (in this case) time slices
would be a „creation of consciousness.“ Cf. J.Barbour (1999): The End of Time,
London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, p.330. The question of how to reconcile this
with the brain’s characteristic time window of some milliseconds will be
discussed in the forthcoming second part of this present paper.
[6] R.E.Zimmermann (2000): Loops and Knots as Topoi of Substance. Spinoza
Revisited. http://www.arXiv.org, gr-qc/0004077 v2. See also: Spinoza in Context. A
Holistic Approach in Modern Terms. In: E.Martikainen (ed.), Infinity, Causality,
and Determinism, Cosmological Enterprises and their Preconditions, Finish
Academy of Sciences Colloquium. New York, Amsterdam: Lang. In press. Also
more recently: Beyond the Physics of Logic. Aspects of Transcendental Mate-
rialism or URAM in a Modern View. URAM 11, Toronto. http://www.arXiv.org, phy-
sics/0105094. Also: Relational Concepts of Space and Time in Leibniz and the
Foundations of Physics. In: 7th Int. Leibniz Congress, Berlin, September 2001,
forthcoming. – For a general introduction of transcendental materialism see in
particular my book on Schelling: Die Rekonstruktion von Raum, Zeit und Mate-
rie [The Re-construction of Space, Time, and Matter], Frankfurt a.M. etc.: Lang,
1998. – See finally R.E.Zimmermann, W.Voelcker, C.Yurtoeven (1999): Philo-
sophical Aspects of Spin Networks. An Alternative Einstein Memorial. In:
K.Bowden (ed.), Proc. ANPA 21, Cambridge (UK), in press.

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

22

[7] A.Ashtekar, K.Krasnov (1998): Quantum Geometry and Black Holes.
http://www.arXiv.org, gr-qc/9804039 v2.
[8] P.A.Zizzi (2000): Holography, Quantum Geometry, and Quantum Informati-
on Theory. Entropy 2, 39-69. (Also: http://www.arXiv.org, gr-qc/9907063)
[9] F.W.J.Schelling (1972): Grundlagen der positiven Philosophie [Foundations
of Positive Philosophy](Munich 1832), ed. H.Fuhrmans, Torino: Bottega
d’Erasmo.
[10] L.Crane (1995): Clock and Category: Is Quantum Gravity Algebraic?
http://www.arXiv.org, gr-qc/9504038.
[11] J.W.Barrett, L.Crane (1997): Relativistic Spin Networks and Quantum
Gravity. http://www.arXiv.org, gr-qc/9709028 v2. See also J.C.Baez, J.W.Barrett
(2001): Integrability for Relativistic Spin Networks, http://www.arXiv.org, gr-
qc/0101107.
[12] J.Butterfield, C.Isham (2001): Spacetime and the philosophical challenge of
quantum gravity. In: C.Callender, N.Huggett (eds.), Physics Meets Philosophy
at the Planck Scale. Cambridge University Press, 33-89.
[13] C.Rovelli (1997): Halfway Through the Woods. In: J.Earman, J.D.Norton
(eds.), The Cosmos of Science, Essays of Exploration, University of Pittsburgh
Press, Konstanz: Universitaetsverlag, 180-223.
[14] S.Goldstein, S.Teufel (2001): Quantum spacetime without observers: On-
tological clarity and the conceptual foundations of quantum gravity. In:
C.Callender, N.Huggett (eds.), Physics Meets Philosophy at the Planck Scale.
Cambridge University Press, 275-289.
[15] A.Shimony (1997): On Mentality, Quantum Mechanics and the Actualiza-
tion of Potentialities. In: R.Penrose et al., The Large, the Small, and the Human
Mind, The 1995 Tanner Lectures, Cambridge University Press, 144-160.
[16] P.Kondylis (1990): Die neuzeitliche Metaphysikkritik [The Modern Cri-
tique of Metaphysics]. Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta.
[17] L.Smolin (1997): The future of spin networks, http://www.arXiv.org, gr-
qc/9702030.
[18] F.Markopoulou (1997): Dual formulation of spin network evolution,
http://www.arXiv.org, gr-qc/9704013.
[19] This goes back to the earlier paper by F.Markopoulou, L.Smolin (1997):
Causal evolution of spin networks, http://www.arXiv.org, gr-qc/9702025, pointing to a
weak motivation for this strategy: „But in this case [if causality is ill-defined as
put forward by Penrose] it is not clear what the canonical commutation relations
would mean as they are defined with respect to an a priori causal structure.“
(ibid., p.2) Again: It is the relationship to canonical quantization which unneces-
sarily carries its own problems over to a consideration of the fundamental level.
Later on, it is said that „[a]nother motivation for this work [F.Markopoulou
(1998): The internal description of a causal set: What the Universe looks like
from inside, gr-qc/9811053 v2] is to develop the proposal advocated in [1] that
causality persists at the Planck scale. Before we can argue whether or not this is
plausible, there is the question of how to describe the causal structure.“ The re-

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

23

ference [1] is here the paper gr-qc/9702025. A philosopher would argue vice-
versa: If causality at the Planck scale does not appear plausible, do not bother
with its introduction by hand. But despite having not quite cleared the issue,
causality is being treated subsequently as an accomplished fact, cf. e.g. L.Smolin
(1998): Strings as perturbations of evolving spin networks (hep-th/9801022),
S.Kauffman, L.Smolin (1998): Combinatorial dynamics in quantum gravity
(hep-th/9809161 v2), F.Markopoulou, L.Smolin (1999): Holography in a quan-
tum spacetime (hep-th/9910146).
[20] L.H.Kauffman (1995): Knot Logic. In: id. (ed.), Knots and Applications,
Singapore etc.: World Scientific, 1-110.
[21] Cf. gr-qc/9704013 [18] and gr-qc/9811053 v2 [19].
[22] R.Penrose (1998): Afterword. In: S.A.Huggett et al. (eds.), The Geometric
Universe, Science, Geometry, and the Work of Roger Penrose, Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 423-431. – Some more detailed work is still under way in
R.E.Zimmermann, P.A.Zizzi: The Functor Past Revisited. A Quantum Compu-
tational Model of Emergent Consciousness. And: Oncemore the Functor Past.
Percolation Through Spin Networks and a Re-Interpretation of Spin Foams. Cf.
also R.E.Zimmermann (1999): The Klymene Principle. A Unified Approach to
Emergent Consciousness. Kasseler Philosophische Schriften [Kassel University
Press]. (Also: http://www.ernst-bloch.net/akt/mitbei/klymene.zip)
[23] L.Smolin (1998): Towards a background independent approach to M theo-
ry, http://www.arXiv.org, hep-th/9808192.
[24] P.A.Zizzi (2001): The Early Universe as a Quantum Growing Network,
http://www.arXiv.org, gr-qc/0103002.
[25] S.Hitchcock (1999): Quantum Clocks and the Origin of Time in Complex
Systems, http://www.arXiv.org, gr-qc/9902046 v2. Also id. (2000): Feynman Clocks,
Causal Networks, and the Origin of Hierarchical ‚Arrows of Time‘ in Complex
Systems from the Big Bang to the Brain. Part I: Conjectures. gr-qc/0005074. See
also: the Protvino version, August 2000, MSUCL-1172.
[26] L.Smolin (1997): The Life of the Cosmos, Oxford University Press. –
S.Lloyd (1999): Universe as a quantum computer. http://www.arXiv.org, quant-
ph/9912088. – (I have commented on this in my gr-qc/0007024. See also [19],
first reference, and [22], third reference, above.)
[27] L.Crane, A.Perez, C.Rovelli (2001): A finiteness proof for the Lorentzian
state sum spinfoam model for quantum general relativity. http://www.arXiv.org, gr-
qc/0104057.
[28] J.C.Baez, D.Christensen (2000): Spin foams and gauge theories. E-mail
discussion. http://jdc.math.uwo.ca/spin-foams/s.p.r.
[29] J.C.Baez (2001): Quantum Gravity [Seminar], Notes taken by
M.C.Alvarez, http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez.
[30] R.E.Zimmermann (1998): Rem Gerere – Zur Logik der Operationalisierung
in der heutigen Philosophie [On the Logic of Operationalization in Nowadays
Philosophy], Appendix: Prä-Geometrische Aspekte der modernen Physik [Pre-
geometric Aspects of Modern Physics], in: id., K.-J.Gruen (eds.), Hauptsätze des

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

24

Seins, Die Grundlegung des modernen Materiebegriffs [Theorems of Being, The
Foundations of the Modern Concept of Matter], System & Struktur VI/1&2,
149-228. (In particular sections 1.4 through 1.6 of the appendix on spinors and
twistors.)
[31] A.Ekert, P.Hayden, H.Inamori (2000): Basic concepts in quantum compu-
tation. CQC, (p)reprint, Oxford.
[32] J.Preskill (1998): Quantum Information and Computation (Lecture Notes
for Physics 229), California Institute of Technology.
[33] E.Bieberich (1999): Non-local quantum evolution of entangled ensemble
states in neural nets and its significance for brain function and a theory of con-
sciousness, http://www.arXiv.org, quant-ph/9906011 v2. – See also by the same
author: Structure in human consciousness, and: In search of a neuronal correlate
of the human mind, both under http://cogprints.soton.ac.uk.
[34] R.Loll (1994): The Loop Formulation of Gauge Theory and Gravity, in:
J.C.Baez (ed.), Knots and Quantum Gravity, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1-19.
[35] L.H.Kauffman (1994): Vassiliev Invariants and the Loop States in Quantum
Gravity, in: J.C.Baez (ed.), Knots and Quantum Gravity, Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 77-95.
[36] C.Rovelli (1998): Loop Quantum Gravity. In: Living Reviews in Relativity,
vol.1, 1998-1. http://www.livingreviews.org/Articles/Volume1/.
[37] R.Gambini, J.Pullin (1996): Loops, Knots, Gauge Theories, and Quantum
Gravity. Cambridge University Press.
[38] J.C.Baez, J.P.Muniain (1994): Gauge Fields, Knots, and Gravity. Singapore
etc.: World Scientific.
[39] S.Kauffman (1996): Investigations. The Nature of Autonomous Agents and
the Worlds They Mutually Create.
http://www.santafe.edu/sfi/People/kauffman/Investigations.html.
[40] P.Bak (1996): How Nature Works. The Science of Self-Organized Critica-
lity. New York: Springer. – See also J.P.Crutchfield, M.Mitchell (1994): The
Evolution of Emergent Computation. SFI Technical Report 94-03-012.
[41] A similar approach to a biological model of the Universe, down to an expli-
cit DNA structure of its „genetic“ components, is a common term in science fic-
tion literature dating back at least until 1984, the idea being attributed to Wil-
liam Voltz. Cf. K.Mahr (1986): Die Physik vom Dienst [The Physics on Duty],
in: H.Hoffmann (ed.), Werkstattband [Workshop Volume] Perry Rhodan, Ra-
statt: Moewig, 197-208. Also E.Vlcek, K.Mahr (1986): Die Herrschaft des
Hexameron [The Reign of the Hexameron], Talk delivered at the PR World
Conference, 6th September 1986, in: H.Hoffmann (ed.), op.cit., 424-443.
[42] R.E.Zimmermann (2001): Signaturen. NaturZeichen & DenkZettel. Zur
morphischen Sprache der politischen Oekonomie. [Signatures. Signs of Nature
& Reminders of Thinking. Towards a Morphic Language of Political Econo-
mics.] Natur & Oekonomie [Nature & Economics], Introductory Number, Pa-
derborn: Mentis. In press.

25.07.01   14:53   REZ   NA

25

[43] R.E.Zimmermann (2001): Subjekt & Existenz. Zur Systematik Blochscher
Philosophie. [Subject & Existence. On the Systematic [Architecture] of Blochi-
an Philosophy.]  Berlin: Philo.
[44] A.Patel (2000): Quantum Algorithms and the Genetic Code.
http://www.arXiv.org, quant-ph/0002037 v2.
[45] P.A.Zizzi (2000): Private Communication. (1st May 2000)

