 

 

 

Milan M. Ćirković 
Suzana Cvetićanin 
 

BACKWARD CAUSATION, ISOLATION AND THE PURSUIT OF JUSTICE 

Abstract. The recent operationalization of the famous Newcomb's game by Schmidt (1998) 
offers an interesting and thought-provoking look at the plausibility of backward causation in a 
Newtonian universe. Hereby we investigate two details of the Schmidt's scenario which may, 
at least in principle, invalidate his conclusion in two different domains: one dealing with the 
issue  of  Newtonian  predictability  in  specific  instance  of  human  actions,  and  the  other 
stemming  from  a  possible  strategy  aimed  at  obviating  the  anthropically  oriented  view  of 
backward  causation  as  applied  to  a  judicial  and  ethical  problem  posed  by  a  version  of  the 
scenario.  We  conclude  that  the  scenario  is  at  least  to  be  more  complex  than  originally 
presented in order to remain viable. However, it points to a very deep and delicate question of 
compatibility of backward causation with the conventional ethical standards. 
  
 
1.  Introduction: Schmidt's operationalization of Newcomb's “paradox” 
 

In a recent thought-provoking study, Schmidt (1998) has offered a physically 
plausible  way  for  realization  of  the  famous  Newcomb's  “paradox”  (or  Newcomb's 
game).1 As is rather well-known, the crucial step in operationalization of this paradox 
is construction of a physical model for accurate prediction of the outcome of a human 
choice  between  the  two  simple  alternatives.  Schmidt's  solution  is  based  on  the 
possibility  of  existence  of  a  collection  of  microscopic  beings  (“dwarfs”)  which 
should, in principle, be able to predict motions of particles in our macroscopic worlds 
(“gigantions” in colourful jargon of this scenario) with the same degree of confidence 
human  scientists  predict  motions  of  objects  in  celestial  mechanics.  Their  own 
microworld  is  based  on  a  different  class  of  particles,  called  “tinions”.  Science  and 
technology of dwarfs' civilization are far ahead of ours own in Schmidt's scenario, and 
they  are  able  to  predict  motions  in all particles  in  a  human being—the player in the 
Newcomb's game—exactly 24 hours in advance. If specific physical conditions listed 
in  the  Appendix  of  the  Schmidt's  paper  are  satisfied,  dwarfs  are  allegedly  able  to 
calculate  the  outcome  of  the  player's  decision  sufficiently  in  advance  to  put  in  the 
second  box  £0  or  £1,000,000,  in  accordance  with  the  game's  propositions.  This 
represents  a  particular  form  of  physical  operationalization  of  backward  causation, 
since it is implied that the player's choice prima facie backward causes the decision of 
dwarfs whether to put the prize into the second box. 

There  are  two basic issues  we  would like to  investigate in  the  present  paper. 
The first is the problem of isolation of a physical system in the context of suggested 
Newtonian world as perceived by Schmidt's dwarfs. The second is connected with the 
second, sinister version of the Newcomb's game presented by Schmidt, in which death 
of  a  sentient  being  depends  on  the  player's  choice.  In  a  suggested  trial  for  murder 
caused through what is perceived as a backward causation primer, the outcome of the 
trial should not be known in advance of the standard judicial procedure (according to 
our usual perceptions of justice). However, using the very same model for backward 
causation,  a  skillful lawyer  can reduce the entire procedure, and jurors' deliberations 
in particular, to an absurd.   

1 

2.  Are humans sufficiently isolated? 
 

Even the purely classical predictions in the completely understood system will 
fail  if  the  system  is  insufficiently  isolated.  The  level  of  accuracy  of  predictions 
achieved in celestial mechanics which are used as analogy of Schmidt is based on an 
prima  facie  accidental  (or  explicable  teleologically)  physical  circumstance:  the  fact 
that large bodies of the Solar system are few and easily identifiable, as well as located 
at large distances from outside perturbers. In the specific case, the average distance to 
other  stars  at  the  Solar  system's  distance  from  the  Galactic  center  is  of  the  order  of 
magnitude  of  1  pc,  that  is  at  least  4  orders  of  magnitude  larger  than  the  average 
distance of bodies in the Solar system upon which the predictive power of Newtonian 
dynamics  is  usually  tested.  Since  the  gravitational  force  decreases  in  the  Newtonian 
approximation  as  the  inverse  square  of  distance,  this  means  that  Laplace,  Gauss, 
Lagrange and  other pioneers of celestial mechanics have been justified in neglecting 
those  perturbation  terms  arising  from  interactions  with  objects  external  to  the  Solar 
system, as classically understood.2  

It is obvious that the player in the Newcomb's game can not be considered as 
an isolated system in the same way as the Solar system is. Player is a human being, 
which constantly interacts with its environment by both long- and short-range forces. 
Objects  in  his  environment  are  located  at  distances  which  are  comparable  to  his 
characteristic  size,  i.e.  the  average  distance  between  two  individual  gigantions 
constituting  his  body.  Therefore,  there  can  be  no  multipole  expansion  in  which  all 
terms  of  higher  order  can  be  neglected,  as  it  is  the  standard  case  in  celestial 
mechanics. Self-consistent  solution of  the  equations  of motions for gigantions in his 
body require not only their complete initial conditions, but also initial conditions of all 
objects  in the player's environment. In Schmidt's story, for instance, the player has a 
prolonged  interaction  with  gigantions  in  his  bed  during  the  night  before  the  game. 
However,  the  initial  state  of  his  bed  has  been  determined,  by  other  things,  by  the 
motion  of  the  player  during  previous  evening,  as  well  as  his  tidy/untidy  habits, 
presence of other people in his living space, etc. The motions of the player during the 
previous evening, in its turn, has been influenced among other things by the quality of 
his dinner, which has been prepared by a cook in a restaurant, etc. etc. provided that 
all these interactions have taken place within previous 24 hours. These are only short-
ranged  interactions.  A  host  of  further  unpleasant  questions  are  posed  by  the  hardly-
fathomable  but  entirely  conceivable  influence  of  long-range  forces.  Is,  for  example, 
our behavior influenced by lunar and solar tides, as has been frequently suggested in 
the course of human history? And even if one could show that these phenomena are 
irrelevant  to our behavior  (which  has not happened so far), we need still to be good 
enough  Cartesians  to  admit  that  they  do  influence  the  trajectories  of  motion  of 
gigantions  in  our  body.  And  the  situation  is  per analogiam the same with terrestrial 
and  extraterrestrial  electromagnetic  fields,  as  well  as  any  other,  currently  unknown 
(but  very  plausible,  like  the  universal  scalar  field  beloved  in  the  contemporary  field 
theory and quantum cosmology) long-range interactions.  

Here the Newtonian simplicity we got accustomed to betrays us. Since in the 
Newtonian mechanics there is no limiting velocity of propagation for interactions, the 
fully self-consistent picture would have to be the Laplacean one—that is, taking into 
account the state of gigantions in the entire universe. We need not dwell upon various 
criticisms  which  this  Laplacean determinism  has  faced; some of the recent ones  can 
be  found  in  the  systematic  exposition  by  Feinberg,  Lavine  and  Albert  (1992).  We 
need only to ask whether the observations of gigantions in the entire universe (and the 
 
2 

Newtonian universe is infinite!) is feasible by however advanced science of dwarfs. It 
seems clear that the answer is negative. In the work of Feinberg et al. it is emphasized 
that  
 

in the case of the future motion of planets in the solar system, for example, 
it would be necessary to include the effects of other stars, and ultimately of 
other galaxies, if the predictions are to be extended sufficiently far into the 
future. If some of these distant influences are omitted, then the predictions 
will become increasingly less accurate as time goes on. Ultimately, since 
every mass in the universe can influence every other one at least throught 
gravity, a precise description of the future motion of any body would have 
to include the effects of all other bodies. 

 
Practically  the  identical  statement  could  be  used  in  description  of  the  problem  of 
prediction of human motions from the point of view of dwarfs. Only issue here is the 
quantitative  balance  between  the  short  time-scale  (24  hours)  and  much  vaster 
complexity of human motions and far smaller degree of isolation of individual human 
system under considerations.  
 
However,  many  additional  physically  realistic  assumptions  can  be  made  to 
alleviate this problem. We may abandon strictly Newtonian physics, but remain in the 
classical  (i.e.  non-quantum)  framework  if  we  assume  that  the  limiting  velocity  of 
interaction is c, in accordance with the relativity theory. In that case, the cosmological 
boundary  conditions  become  irrelevant,  and  all  interesting  phenomena  need  to  be 
observed  only  in  the  sphere  of  radius  of  24  light-hours  (a  few  times  larger  than  the 
Solar system3). This is more modest requirement, but, unfortunately, it introduces an 
additional problem, which can be neglected in the strictly Newtonian case, and that is 
the  problem  of  information  transfer  to  the  machine  doing  actual  predictive 
calculation. Streams of data incoming onto the dwarfs' machine will need a substantial 
fraction of the time interval of 24 hours to reach the machine, and the data from the 
boundary  of  this  (conventionally  speaking!)  causally  connected  region  will  arrive 
exactly 24 hours later, leaving no time whatsoever for calculation (which, as has been 
discussed  in  the  information  theory  and  cybernetics,  needs  a  finite  amount  of  time 
under all circumstances). If we assume that you still can calculate something with a 
partial amount of data, we run into a sort of informational Zeno's paradox (of Achilles 
and  the  tortoise):  more  data  you  have  to  analyze,  lesser  time  you  have  for  the 
computations,  and  lesser  accuracy  will  be  obtained.  Thus,  the  perfect  accuracy 
required,  supposedly,  for  predicting  the  behavior  of  such  a  complex  system  as  the 
player is when faced with the two boxes in the morning, is not achieved.  
 
This objection can be stated in the following precise manner. In his Appendix 
dealing  with  the  physical  side  of  the  proposed  scenario,  Schmidt  puts  forward  the 
following necessary conditions:  
 

In order for Newcomb's game to be possible in the way I described it, it 
needs  to  be  the  case  that  dwarfs  can  exist  which  satisfy  the  following 
requirements: 
 
1.  They  need  to  be  able  to  perform  observations  which  are sufficiently 
accurate  and  comprehensive  that,  on  their  basis,  the  player's  actions 
can be predicted 24 hours in advance. 

2.  They need to be able to calculate their predictions on the basis of this 

observational data in a sufficiently short time...  

 

3 

 
The other two requirements concern interactions between the world of dwarfs and our 
world,  and  are  hardly  questionable  whatsoever.  However,  these  two  initial 
requirements  warrant,  as  we  have  seen,  extremely  close  scrutiny.  What  we  question 
here  needs  not  be  anyone  of  them  individually,  but  rather  the  coexistence  of 
assumptions 1. and 2. in Schmidt's appendix. While each of these assumptions may be 
valid  independently  (and  this  applies  more  to  the  assumption  2,  rather  than  the 
assumption  1.  which  is  uncertain,  in  our  opinion,  under  any  circumstances4),  their 
coextensive temporal validity is seriously doubted by external interactions.  
 
Additional difficulty presents the fact that, if the backwards causation is real, 
even in the limited sense of Schmidt (1998), than occurences at some point A distant 
from the player but in (conventional) causal contact with him (i.e. less than 24 light-
hours distant) may be determined by future events which will occur in 24-light-hours 
sphere around A. This, in turn, would require additional prediction in the A's region, 
requiring observations, some of which will have to be performed more than 24 light-
hours from the point of location of the player. Although admittedly contrived, there is 
no  obvious  reason  why  this  chain  of  occurences  cannot  be  constructed  with  some 
ingenuity  and  the  dwarfs'  powerful  technology.  Thus,  we  are  again  left  with  the 
cosmological boundary conditions.   

 

 
3.  Backward causation and human justice 
 

We  now  consider  the  trial  of  the  player  in  modified,  “deadly”  version  of 
Newcomb's game. In this version, as told by Schmidt, we have evil tiny robots which 
are programmed to kill an innocent dwarf if and only if the player in the Newcomb's 
game  is  predicted  to  take  the  box  with  the  £1,000  cheque.  The  moral  and  juridical 
responsibility of the player for the crime which has occured in the past now becomes 
an issue. (Of course, as noted by Schmidt, the primary guilt lies with the programmer 
of the robots.) Thus, Schmidt envisages a trial of the player for complicity in murder 
in (human, and the importance of this qualification will become clear from our further 
discussion)  court.  While  the  defense  tries  to  exculpate  the  player  by  invoking  the 
deterministic  arguments  according  to  which  his  actions  could  not  be  essentially 
different, since his decision was determined by motion of gigantions inside his body, 
the  prosecution  bases  its  case  on  absence  of  such  a  necessity  as  perceived  by  the 
player  himself, and his greed which led  him  to  take  the money. In the deliberations, 
two  different  perspectives  are  noticed  and  defined  by  Schmidt  in  the  following 
manner: 
 

1.  Mechanically  oriented  description  of 

scenario:  The  particular 
configuration (and motion) C of the particles in the player's body, in the boxes, 
and  in  the  environment  shortly  before  the  moment  when  the  prediction  was 
made  caused  the  robot  to  predict  that  the  player  would  take  the  £1,000.  (In 
consequence, it killed a dwarf.)...  

the 

2.  The anthropically-oriented description: After thinking about the tiny innocent 
dwarf for a while, which would be killed if and only if the player were to take 
the £1,000, the greedy player nevertheless decided to take the £1,000, because 
he wanted the money to buy a new car. As a result, this is what the tiny robot 
predicted (by some technical method which we understand in principle, but in 
which we have no particular interest), and so it killed the innocent dwarf. 
4 

 

 
However,  only  the  anthropically-oriented  description  fits  well  with  the  normative 
concepts  of  human  justice,  as  well  as  our  intuitions  about  the  world  (which  do  not 
incorporate  backward  causation!).  Accordingly,  as  we  have  expected,  the  court5 
pronounces the player guilty for the complicity in dwarf's murder.6   

As Schmidt correctly notes, this judgement is in agreement with our common 
moral judgement. However, it can hardly be the end of the story. While the judgement 
is  necessarily  based  upon  compatibilism  (of  free  will  with  deterministic  classical 
physics), it still can lead upon conclusions we are, to say at least, uncomfortable with. 
In order to demonstrate this, let us modify the story of the trial in the following way, 
noticing  that  the  mechanically-oriented  description  fits  better  with  the  defense 
strategy, than with the prosecution. For that reason, the defense may introduce, in the 
last moment, a surprising witness: the famous dwarf engineer and programmer of the 
predicting machine.  We  may  also, in  order  to  improve  upon  the  setting  of  the story, 
assume that the engineer is a little bit scientistically-minded and represents a fraction 
of the dwarven society which is worried that the entire scandal with the murder could 
adversely  influence  the  project  of  further  development  of  the  predicting  machines. 
The  investigation  goes  as  follows  (presumably  using  a  particular  high-tech  device 
enabling communication between the court and the witness in real time): 
 
Defense: As far as we understand, your Machine is not permanently working? 
Engineer:  No,  of  course  not.  The  reasons  of  energy  consumption  prevent  us  from 
having it permanently predicting behaviour of a selected target 24 hours in advance. 
That is the reason the Newcomb's game has been set up only in individual instances.  
Defense: Can you describe for this court the instance of its latest use? 
Engineer:  With  pleasure.  While  personally  believing—together  with  most  of  the 
scientific community of ours (in sad contradistinction to our nation as a whole)—that 
the  defendant  is  not  guilty,  as  well  as  motivated  by  scientific  reasons  of  further 
exploration of the predictive capabilities of the Machine, we have decided to put it on 
further test. Therefore, before coming to this courtroom, I have had the latest round of 
predicting  the  behavior  of  the  jury  members  during  next  24  hours.  I  hope  you 
understand  that it  is  quite  a  feat, much more  difficult than in cases of prediction for 
the Game. However, it is based on the same physical principles. Therefore, just as 
in  the  case  of  our  predictions  of  the choice of player in the experiment you humans 
call  the  Newcomb's  game,  we  have  accurately  predicted  the  outcome  of  jury's 
deliberations, i.e. whether the defendant will be found guilty or not. After all, it is a 
simple binary choice, just as in the original version of the Newcomb's game. 
Defense: So, what is your prediction? 
Judge:  Although  there  is  no  relevant  formal  precedents,  I  warn  you  that  this  may 
constitute an illegal influence upon the jury.  
Engineer:  We  have  envisaged  this  possibility  on  the  basis  of  our—still  only 
preliminary—understanding  of  human  concepts  of  just  trial.  Therefore,  we  have  put 
the predicted verdict into a sealed envelope which we shall leave in the possession of 
the judge. 
Judge: And I shall open it only after the jury deliberations are over, and the verdict is 
pronounced.  
 

What  can  be  outcome  of  such  a  trial?  From  both  our  colloquial  and 
“metaphysical” points of view, it does look that the only consistent judgement could 
be  pronouncing  the  player  not  guilty.  To  perceive  this,  assume  for  the  moment  that 
 
5 

jurors  decide  that  the  player  is  guilty  for  murder.  Dwarf  engineers  have,  evidently, 
predicted  this  and  therefore  after  breaking  the  seal,  the  judge  will  read  the  “guilty” 
verdict.  However,  does  this  not  show  (a  posteriori)  that  the  mechanically-oriented 
description  is  valid?  And  that,  consequently,  the  player  should  have  been  acquitted. 
One  should  recall  that  the  text  in  the  sealed  envelope  is  based  exclusively  on  the 
technically-oriented description (the only one relevant for dwarfs, as we shall discuss 
further below). By pronouncing the defendant guilty as charged, the jury will offer an 
unmistakeable  proof  of  the  relevance  of  the  technologically-oriented  description  of 
circumstances leading to the crime, that is, supporting the assertion of the defense that 
there  was  no  real  alternative  for  the  player  than  to  take  the  £1,000  box  with  all 
consequences.  In  other  words  (more  of  colloquial  nature),  how  are  jurors  to  be 
supposed  to  judge  upon  the  fate  of  a  human  being,  if  they  are  subject  to  the  same 
necessity as the defendant?   

like 

jury's  deliberations,  necessarily 

At this point, the prosecution may choose from two strategies we envisage at 
present. It may emphasize the uncertainties in the prediction (and especially in cases 
which, 
inter-human 
interactions), along the lines we have discussed in §2 and others—that is, essentially 
try  to  refute  the  accuracy  of  the  Machine's  prediction  in  the  changed  circumstances. 
The  second  possible  recourse  would  be to deny the value of this new application of 
the  predicting  Machine,  since  it  is  still  grounded  in  the  mechanically-oriented 
description, and therefore irrelevant to human justice.  

include  strong 

We believe that the dwarven technology  will be able  to  withstand  any attack 
along  the  prosecution's  first  strategical  option.  That  is,  under  the  assumptions 
implicit in the very formulation of the trial, that is, the unmistakeable correlation of 
murder  with  the  subsequent  “greedy”  choice  of  the player. If the uncertainties  of §2 
(or  any  other  physical  problems)  prove  fatal  for  the  very  concept  of  accurate 
prediction  machine,  so  better  for  the  player,  since  she  will  never  have  to  face  trial.7 
However,  it  is  hard  to  see  why  the  purely  quantitative  increase  in  its  task  when 
applied  to  the  entire  jury  should  necessarily  invalidate  the  work  of  the  sufficiently 
advanced prediction machine.    

The  second  strategy  left  for  the  prosecution  has  much  better  chances  of 
success—at  least  as  far  as  human  jurors,  lawmakers  and  the  general  public  are 
concerned—but it is very important to fully understand its consequences and the price 
that comes with it. The prosecution may opt to call upon thinkers of anti-reductionist 
attitude as witnesses—for instance Prof. Roger Penrose8 of that world may be called 
to testify—in order to prove that there is no common (“middle”) ground between the 
mechanically-oriented  and  the  anthropically-oriented  descriptions  of  even  the  very 
same sequence of events (even more reproachable from this point of view would be to 
attempt  to  derive  the  anthropically-oriented  description  from  the  mechanically-
oriented  one).  The  justice  has  nothing  to  do  with  mechanically-oriented  description 
whatsoever; it  entails only the anthropically-oriented description by definition. If the 
anthropically-oriented description can be construed as including a crime, than it is the 
simple duty of the court to establish  it (by actual  reconstruction of  that description), 
and acts subsequently to punish the guilt.  

In effect, this line of  attack is parallel  to the (in)famous central compatibilist 
thesis  that  although  one  possesses  a  capacity  to  act  otherwise,  one  still  will  not 
exercise  this  capacity.  Parallel  but  not  equivalent,  because  the  law  is  intended  to  be 
concerned with acts exclusively, and not just any acts in metaphysical sense, but acts 
associated  with  adequate  records  in  the  sense  of  Feinberg  et  al.  (1992).  Thus,  the 
second  strategy  for  prosecution  when  faced  with  the  specific  prediction  of  the 
 
6 

outcome of the trial reduces, in our opinion, to a quid pro quo. This form of reasoning 
means that effectively, the trial is not trial of historical actions, but of capacities—and 
it does seem too high a price.9  

One  needs  to  note,  finally,  another  off-shoot  of  the  fact  that  even  in  the 
original  Schmidt's  presentation,  the  mechanically-oriented  description  given  by  the 
dwarf  engineer  is  basically  a  defense  testimony,  which  the  player's  lawyer  could 
invoke to support his opinion on the innocence of the player. On the other hand, the 
judgement  pronounced  in  Schmidt's  story  does  seem  both  juridically  and  ethically 
sound to us. Does this mean that dwarfs necessarily possess a different juridical and 
ethical systems? Should we conclude that these issues are not scale-invariant? Not at 
all, since in stricto sensu the engineer's testimony (in the original story) only points to 
a  necessary  degree  of  observer-dependence  of  the  entire  issue.  Dwarfs  may  be 
complete  libertarians  in  their  own  (tinion)  society,  and  possess  the  ethical  norms 
which severely  punish both premeditated and accidental murder of a member of any 
sentient species, irrespectively of size and other secondary properties (as one ought to 
naturally  expect  from  a  truly  advanced  and  enlightened  society).  However,  their 
advanced  science  teaches  them  that  our  world  (complete  with  behavior  of  us  and 
other macroscopic creatures) is deterministic, at least to the degree required by their 
experiments.  There  is  no incompatibility here,  since  the  deterministic notions apply 
on  the  level  outside  of  the  dwarven  society.  To  the  exactly  the  same  degree, 
capacities of dwarfs are different from those of humans. There is, again, no grounds 
for  our  possible  moral  indignation  over  the  attitude  of  the  dwarf  engineer  or  the 
mechanically-oriented  description.  As  a  smart  lawyer  (or  philosopher)  among  both 
dwarfs  and  humans  could  perceive,  what  is  really  in  default  here  is  the  Schmidt's 
artificial division of the universe10 into strictly distinct gigantion and tinion domains.11 
That  is,  the  necessity  of  some  sort  of  what  is  usually  called  truth  value  relativism 
arises when the boundaries of the two worlds (gigantion and tinion) are crossed. (And 
in this world the issue of logical incoherence of truth value relativism in the particular 
case of dwarf vs. human moral is no more.) This seems like another issue of relation 
between  the  properties  of  agency  and  the  backward  causation,  which  has  been 
recently  emphasized  by  Brown  (1992).  The  basic  difference  between  us  and  the 
dwarfs in the Schmidt's story is the one in agency. However, this touches the broader 
problem  whether  the  backward  causation  is  compatible  with  some  or  all  human 
ethical standards. We can not enter into discussion of this topic here. 
 
 
4. Conclusions  
 

The appeal to human language explicated by Schmidt in the §2 of his paper is 
important,  but  should  not  be  overrated.  As  we  have  discussed,  the  appeal  to  human 
language can actually made the situation worse, for while sticking to the formalities, 
one may condemn  the player in the deadly version of the game, one intuitively (and 
on  the  colloquial  level)  can  not  understand  why  should  this  be  so  when  fair  trial 
implies  that  the  outcome  is not known  before the  end  of  the judicial procedure, and 
when jurors are supposed to be under no pressure to agree on one or another verdict. 
Therefore, the norms of human language and the notion following from it (as the very 
notion  of 
labelled  as 
“metaphysical”),  may  actually  increase  our  difficulties,  instead  of  liberating  us  from 
them.  This  applies  to  the  entire  research  on  causation.  As  elaborated  by  Collier 
(1999),  causation  represents  a  transfer  of  information,  either  in  metaphysical  or 
 
7 

instance,  which  can  be  hardly 

trial”,  for 

the  “fair 

colloquial  domain.  Otherwise,  the  very  attempt  made  by  Schmidt  to  justify  the 
assumptions  in  his  scenario  by  appeal  to  postulates  of  the  classical  physics  is  non 
sequitur. The problem of isolation of systems under consideration is clear in both the 
metaphysical and everyday treatment of causation. If a traffic jam prevented me from 
attending an important business meeting, and therefore caused a chain of subsequent 
occurences  in  my  life,  it  is  only  natural  that  I  hold  all  drivers  present  at  streets  that 
day,  as  well  as  the  city  transportation  authorities  (partially)  responsible  for  the 
situation. It is only natural that it is concluded without any appeal to “metaphysical” 
assumptions.  We  conclude  that  the  problems  exposed  here  may  not  be  avoided  by 
passing-the-buck to the “metaphysical causation”.   

This  is  not  to  say  that  Schmidt’s  model  does  not  provoke  very  interesting 
issues  of  rather  “metaphysical”  nature.  The  relationship  between  various  physical 
models  of  prediction  to  the  notion  of  backward  causation  is  certainly  one  of  them, 
deserving further attention. In this respect, an interesting question to be answered by 
future  investigation  is  whether  the  classical  uncertainties  in  the  Schmidt’s  model 
represent  a  new  argument  against  the  backward  causation  in  any  classical  world? 
However, we can not delve at this rather subtle issue at present.  

Another specific property of the model discussed is that this particular form of 
backward causation is rather exclusive, in the sense that existence of another form of 
such causation may interfere with the predictive processes in Schmidt's scenario, thus 
invalidating  the  accuracy  and  the  very  point  of  the  scenario.  Suppose,  for  instance, 
that  some  sufficiently  powerful  and  knowledgeable  humanitarian  organization 
perceives the disastrous results of a described experiment (the murder of a dwarf and 
subsequent trial), and decides to prevent this by supplying to the robots a false report 
on machine's prediction  viz. the  player's decision. If they  do it  later and using some 
physically different model of backward causation, they will invalidate the accuracy of 
the  original  model.  The  report  of  the  machine  represents  a  record  in  the  sense  of 
Feinberg et al. (1992), and it clearly limits all subsequent retrodictions—for instance 
those by the police investigators. (This turn of events may, in contradistinction to the 
Schmidt's model, initiate some well-known causal paradoxes, but this is not important 
for us here.) Therefore, the Schmidt's model is exclusive enough.  

Schmidt's  model  is  certainly  an  ingenious  attempt  to  use  properties  of  the 
classical  physics  to  achieve  realization  of  the  Newcomb's  game,  which  certainly 
deserves to be investigated in detail. Although we do not find direct inconsistencies in 
it, we do warn that its simplicity is misleading; both its physical and its ethical aspects 
need to be more complicated, to say at least, in order to remain consistent and viable. 
 
Acknowledgements.  The  authors  are  happy  to  express  his  gratitude  to  Prof.  Petar 
Grujić  for  bringing  our  attention  to  this  issue,  as  well  as  Maja Bulatović and  Vesna 
Milošević-Zdjelar for invaluable help in obtaining some of the references.  
 
Milan M. Ćirković 
Astronomska Opservatorija  
Volgina 7, 11000 Belgrade, SERBIA 
e-mail: arioch@eunet.yu 
 
Suzana Cvetićanin 
Institute “Mihajlo Pupin – Poslovne usluge”  
Volgina 15, 11000 Belgrade, SERBIA 
e-mail: scvetic@labtel.imp.bg.ac.yu 

 

8 

Oxford). 

Laws and Explanation, ed. by H. Sankey (Kluwer, Dordrecht). 

References 
 
Brown, B. 1992, Canadian Journal of Philosophy 22, 429. 
Collier, J. 1999, “Causation is the Transfer of Information” in Causation, Natural 
 
Craig, W. L. 1987, Philosophia 17, 331.   
Feinberg, G., Lavine, S. and Albert, D. 1992, Journal of Philosophy 89, 607.   
Jewitt, D. 1999, Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci. 27, 287.   
Munitz, M. K. 1986, Cosmic Understanding (Princeton University Press, Princeton). 
Nozick, R. 1969, “Newcomb's Problem and Two Principles of Choice” in Essays in 
 
Honor of Carl G. Hempel, ed. by N. Rescher (Reidel, Dordrecht), p. 115. 
Penrose, R. 1989, The Emperor's New Mind (Oxford University Press, Oxford). 
Price, H. 1996, Time's Arrow and Archimedes' Point (Oxford University Press,  
 
Schmidt, J. H. 1998, Brit. J. Phil. Sci. 49, 67.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 For the original formulation and ramifications dealing with the decision theory, see Nozick (1969). In 
it  a  human  being  (henceforth  “the  player”)  is  confronted  with  the  following  game  set  up  by  a 
hypothetical  being  or  machine  (or  collection  of  beings  or  machines)  capable  of  predicting  accurately 
the  player's  actions.  The  player  is  shown  two  boxes,  B1  and  B2;  the  box  B1  contains  £1,000  and  B2 
contains either £1,000,000 or nothing. Her options are to take either B2 or both boxes; in former case, 
the predictor has already put in it £1,000,000, and in the latter case there will be nothing in B2, so the 
player gets only £1,000. Important additional evidence is that the predictor has performed his actions in 
advance, and can not subsequently influence the contents of the boxes. What is the correct choice? A 
rather comprehensive list of references up to 1987, together with important theological implications is 
given by Craig (1987).  
2 Moreover, the terms due to interactions with a large number of small bodies in the Solar system are 
neglected too; otherwise, no progress could be made whatsoever, since we are still busily discovering 
new members of the Solar system, in recent years notably those of the Kuiper Belt (e.g. Jewitt 1999). 
However,  in  order  to  make  the  point  of  argumentation  as  simple  as  possible,  let  us  suppose  that  the 
dwarfs’  inventory  of  gigantions  making  up  the  player  of  the  Newcomb’s  game  is  complete,  and 
consider only external influences.  
3  As  defined  by  orbit  of  the  outermost planet, Pluto. It is, however, still deep inside compared to the 
Oort comet cloud.  
4 Inherent uncertainty here is succintly put by Feinberg, Lavine and Albert (1992):  
 

It  should  be  also  pointed  out  that  the  specification  of  even  a  single  physical 
quantity  to  arbitrary  precision  requires  giving  a  real  number,  which  contains  an 
infinite  amount  of  information,  i.e.  all  of  its  digits.  A  more  prudent  approach  to 
what  must  be  specified  in  order  to  make  predictions  would  be  to  find  out  how 
much can be predicted on the basis of a finite amount of information, such as the 
first N digits of the initial position and velocity of an object. 

 
The  issue  now  is:  how  big  N  must  be  for  each  gigantion  in  order  for  the  complex  organization  of 
human  brain  to  decide  in  the  case  of  the  Newcomb's  game?  Intuition  suggests  that  such  a  complex 
system  is  likely  to  be  what  Feinberg  et  al.  (1992)  call  “extremely  sensitive  to  initial  conditions”,  in 
other  words,  N  must  be  very  large.  However,  the  Schmidt's  scenario  is  not  elaborate  enough  for  our 
conclusion  whether  tinion-based  machinery  (which  are  still  limited  by  basic  requirement  of  finite 
memories and computing capacities) can make the problem tractable or not.   

 

9 

                                                                                                                                            
5  Or,  more  precisely,  the  judge.  In  the  discussion  below,  we  have  chosen  to  have  a  (petty)  jury 
pronouncing  the  verdict,  because  the  situation  is  essentially  the  same,  and  the  irrelevance  of  any 
quantitative increase in the predictive task is better demonstrated.   
6  Although  Schmidt  does  not  elaborate  on  the  issue,  obviously  the  programmer  of  the  killer  robots 
bears at least the same degree of guilt. This circumstance is not important for our discussion, although 
it  may  well  be  in  the  context  of  the  wider  investigation  of  judicial  and  ethical  consequences  of 
operationalized backward causation.  
7 That is not to say that the murder still could not occur and be accompanied by some particular action 
of the player, but we shall have no evidence whatsoever about the causal connection between the two. 
This is similar to the Mellor’s barbecuer argument against the backward causation (see the discussion 
in Brown 1992).   
8 See, for instance, Penrose (1989).  
9  Not  only  because  this  form  of  anti-reductionism—ironically  enough,  when  the  ideological  roots  are 
taken  into  account—clandestinely  reintroduces  the  horrifying  notion  of  “objective  guilt”,  which 
(implicitly coupled with “subjective innocence”) formed the very basis of the Soviet Marxist “judicial” 
system and is responsible for at least a dozen of million deaths in the greatest mass murder in human 
history.  What  people  were  held  responsible  for  in  the  Stalinist  version  of  “justice”  were  actually 
capacities in the compatibilist sense, certainly not actions.   
10 Understood as the “intelligible whole”; see, for instance, Munitz (1986).  
11  And  we  may  as  well  notice  that  the  anthropically-oriented  description  is  not  called  as it is without 
reason; it is meant to apply in the human society exclusively.  

 

10 

