TOPOLOGICALLY MODULATED ELECTROMAGNETIC SIGNALS AND PREDICATE
GATES FOR THEIR PROCESSING

G.A. Kouzaev

Alliance of Technology and Science Specialists of Toronto
2-2075 Meadowbrook Rd., Burlington
L7P 2A5 ON Canada
Tel.: 1 (905) 3318317, e-mail: g132uenf@hotmail.com

  by 

Abstract.  In  the  paper  an  idea  to  create  predicate  logic
components  for  electromagnetic  signals  carrying  digital
their  amplitudes  and  spatial  field
information 
distributions is proposed. The two parameters play a role of
predicate  and  predicate  variable.  A  circuitry  for  digital
processing  the  signals  is  suggested  and  considered.  The
results  are  interested  for  design  predicate  engineering  for
artificial intellect computers.
1.  Introduction.  The  most  efficient  results  in  signal
processing  have  been  achieved  by  using  optimal  logical
system  for  certain  type  of  signals.  For  instance,  Boolean
logic  is  optimal  for  pulses  of  a  voltage  or  a  current.
Quantum logic requires quantum or quantum-like objects [1-
3].  Electromagnetic  signals  have  spatial  and  amplitude
characteristics  and  the  question  on  the  optimal  set  of
methods and algorithms for them  has not been solved yet.
Several years ago a special class of the signals as a series of
pulses  with  analog  or  digitally  changed  amplitudes  and
discretely modulated spatial structures was proposed [4-6].
The  spatial  characteristics  are  discrete  vector  images  of
electromagnetic  fields  changed  abruptly  because 
their
topological nature (Fig.1).

Fig.1.  Topological  charts  of  impulses  of  even  and  odd
modes in a coupled strip transmission line.

  Each  chart  of  electromagnetic  fields  corresponds  to  a
logical  variable  and  transformations  of  the  images  are
provided due to diffraction effects in passive components of
electronic circuits. Theoretically estimated time delay of the
transformation  is  about  several  parts  of  a  picosecond  for
micron sized components [4-6].  On Fig. 2 an example of a
gate for switching the signals into different layers of IC is
shown.

Fig. 2. A passive gate for switching topologically modulated
signals into different layers of an IC. I- input coupled strip
transmission lines, II – output strip transmission line (even
mode  impulses,  “1”),  III-  output  2-conductor  transmission
line (odd mode impulses, “0”).

Recent results are in the field of procesing signals by spatal
structures  and  semiconductor  gates.  Multivalued  circuits
allowed to process amplitude and spatial information were
proposed and modeled for parallel computing. In [6] it was
shown  a  possibility  to  get  the  third  logical  state  due  to
superposition of two topologically modulated fields like in
quantum systems. A basic theory of the similarity between
quantum logic  and logic for spatially modulated signals was
considered in [7-9]. In this paper  all  approaches,  including
pseudo-quantum gates are united by using predicate logic as
a natural sytem for topological signals carrying information
by two physical levels.

2.  Application  of  predicate 
for  processing
topologically  modulated  field  signals.  As  well  known,
predicate  logic  is  a  higher  level  of  logic  regarding  to  the
Boolean system [9,10]. The logic is especially pertinent for
simulation  of  natural  languages  and  used  in  software  for

logic 

artificial  intellect.  The  simplest  predicate  logic  system    S
consists of a variable T and a predicate A:
S=(A, T)                                                                            (1)

The formula represents a verb construction and means that
variable  T  has  feature  of  A.  In  the  case  of  topologically
modulated field signals the amplitudes and spatial structures
of  them  correspond  to  A  and  T,  respectively.  Thus,  the
signals are natural carriers of predicate information and that
is caused simplicity of fundamental predicate gate design.

3.  Predicate  gates  for  electromagnetic  topologically
modulated  fields.    Predicate  logic  deals  with  multiplace
signals and allows to process several logical  levels  at  the
same  time.  Due  to  that  the  full  number  of  fundamental
logical  operations  depends  exponentially  on  a  number  of
variables and predicates. From one hand, it forces to find a
logically non-contradictory set of logical expressions. From
another  point  of  view,  the  large  set  of  logical  operation
opens  a  possibility  to  approximate  better  the  features  of
natural languages distinguished by their contradictions.
Let’s consider a standard set of basic logical operations:
S=‘ S,
S=S1(cid:217) S2,
S=S1(cid:218) S2,                                                                          (2)
In (2)  the first formula means NOT operation,  (cid:217) - AND, (cid:218) -
OR.
Taking  into  account  manyplaced  nature  of  the  signals  the
full  number  of  logical  operations  is  45  including  atomar
formula  (1).  A  logical  gate  is  possible  to  design  for  each
operation.  The  design  should  be  based  on  parrallel
processing  logical  levels  contained  into  different  physical
characteristic  of  topologically  modulaed  signals.  Usually,
the different nature makes easier the design.
In  this  paper,  the  recently  developed  gates  for  passive
processing topological signals (Fig. 2) were used for design
predicate logical circuits. One of the 12 possible gates NOT
is shown on Fig. 3 where input 1 and output 6  are  coupled
strip transmission lines with signals as impulses of odd and
even modes .

Fig.3. Predicate gate NOT for topologically modulated field
pulses.    I-input  coupled  strip  transmission  lines,  II-Output
strip transmission lines.
The  developed  gate  inverts  only  amplitudes  of  signals
thanks  to  used  transistor  inverters  in  the  design.    As  an
example on Fig. 4 transient results are shown for inversion
input odd mode amplitude. The circuit is able to work with
single mode impulses or in multimode regime.

Fig.  4.  Input  and  output  diffetrential  voltages  of  an  odd
mode impulse in the gate NOT.

4.  Conclusion.    It  was  shown  that  spatially-modulated
electromagnetic  signals  of  certain  class  allow  to  realize
fundamental  predicate  gates  by  an  easy  manner.  The
possible circuitry is perspective for design artificial intellect
processors.

References

1.  R.P. Feynman. Quantum mechanical computers. Optics

News. 11. (1985). No 2. P. 11.

2.  D.  Deutch.  Quantum 

the  Church-Turing
principle  and  the  universal  quantum  computer.  Proc.
Royal Soc., A, 400. (1985). P. 97 –117.

theory, 

3.  P.  W.  Shor.  Algorithms  for  quantum  computation:
factoring.  Proc.  35th  Annual
discrete 
Symposium  on  the  Foundation  of  Computer  Science.
(1994). P.124.

log  and 

4.  G.A.  Kouzaev.  Topological  pulse  modulation  of
electromagnetic  field  and  super  high-speed  logical
circuits in microwave range. Proc. Int. URSI Symp. on
Electromagnetic Theory, St.–Petersburg, Russia, 23-26
May 1995, 584-586. 1995.

5.  G.A.  Kouzaev,  I.V.  Nazarov,  A.S.  Tcherkasov.
Physical  basement  for  super-high  speed  processing
spatially-modulated  field  signals.  Proc.  28  European
Microwave  Conf.    Amsterdam.  October  5-8.    V.2.  P.
152-156. 1998.

6.  G.A. 

Kouzaev. 

electromagnetic 

Information 
field 

properties 

superpositions. 

of
J.

Communications Technology and Electronics. 40.1995.
P. 39-47.

7.  G.A.  Kouzaev, 

logical  circuits 

Unconventional 
modulated 
Http://xxx.itep.ru/physics/9911065

I.V.  Nazarov  A.V.  Kalita.
topologically
for 
signals.

9. 

8.  G.A.  Kouzaev.  Multivalued  processing  spatially
modulated signals. Proc. of 30th European Microwave
Conf. Session EuMc/P2. 2000.
  G.A.  Kouzaev,  V.V.  Cherny,  T.A.  Lebedeva.  Multi-
valued  processing 
spatially  modulated  discrete
electromagnetic signals. Proc. of Int. Conf. on Systems,
Cybernetics, Informatics. Orlando, USA, July, 2000.
10.  A.A. Stolayr. Introduction to elementary mathematical

logic. Dover Publ. N.-Y.

11.  R. M. Smullayn. First-order logic. Dover Publ. N.-Y.

