PROCESSING STUDIES OF X-BAND ACCELERATOR STRUCTURES  
AT THE NLCTA* 
 
C. Adolphsen, W. Baumgartner, K. Jobe, F. Le Pimpec, R. Loewen, D. McCormick,  
M. Ross, T. Smith, J.W. Wang, SLAC, Stanford, CA  94309  USA 
T. Higo, KEK, Tskuba, Ibaraki, Japan 

 

Abstract 

RF  processing  studies  of  1.8-m  X-band  (11.4  GHz) 
traveling wave structures at the Next Linear Collider Test 
Accelerator  (NLCTA)  have  revealed  breakdown-related 
damage at gradients lower than expected from earlier tests 
with  standing  wave  and  shorter,  lower  group  velocity 
traveling wave structures. To understand this difference, a 
series  of  structures  with  different  group  velocities  and 
lengths  are being processed. In parallel, efforts are being 
made  to  improve  processing  procedures  and  to  reduce 
structure  contaminants  and  absorbed  gases.  This  paper 
presents results from these studies. 

1  INTRODUCTION 

During the past eight years, several prototype NLC/JLC 
X-band accelerator structures were built to test methods of 
long-range transverse wakefield suppression and to study 
high gradient performance [1]. Most of the structures are 
1.8-m  long  (206  cells),  traveling  wave  (2π/3  phase 
advance per cell) and nearly constant gradient. To achieve 
the  last  condition,  the  group  velocity  relative  to  c  (≡  vg) 
varies  from  12%  to  3%  along  the  1.8-m  structures, 
yielding  a  100  ns  fill  time.  Four of these structures were 
installed  in  the  NLCTA  to  operate  initially  at  50  MV/m 
unloaded gradient with 240-ns pulses, the first-stage NLC 
rf  parameters  at  the  time.  These  parameters  have  since 
evolved to 70 MV/m and 386 ns to reduce the NLC cost. 
To  achieve  this  higher  gradient  in  the  1.8-m  prototypes, 
about 170 MW of input power per structure is required.  

During the past year, the high power testing capability 
at  the  NLCTA  increased  significantly,  allowing  auto-
mated,  around-the-clock  processing  at  higher  gradients. 
During this period, it was discovered that the net rf phase 
advance through the prototype structures had increased by 
roughly  20  degrees  per  1000  hours  of  operation  at 
gradients  as  low  as  50  MV/m  [2].  This  was  surprising 
since  earlier  tests  had  shown  that  gradients  of  more  than 
80 MV/m could be readily achieved in standing wave and 
shorter,  lower  vg  traveling  wave  structures  [3].  Such 
structures had been used because high gradients could be 
achieved with the limited rf power available at the time. A 
major  clue  as  to  the  cause  of  this  discrepancy  was  that 
most  damage  in  the  1.8-m  structures  occurred  in  the 

________________
 

* Work Supported by DOE Contract DE-AC03-76F00515. 

upstream  end  where  vg  is  highest  (12%  to  5%).  Little 
damage  occurred  in  the  downstream  end  where  the  vg  is 
comparable to that in the early test structures (< 5%). 

2  RF CIRCUIT AND BREAKDOWN 

From  the  1.8-m  and  early  structure  results,  it  was 
hypothesized that the upstream damage was related to the 
higher  group  velocity  in  this  region.  This  relation  was 
proposed in part because the rf power required to achieve 
a given gradient increases with vg. Also, if the structure is 
viewed as a transmission line and rf breakdown as a load 
impedance, the fraction of incident power absorbed during 
breakdown increases with vg. The net effect, assuming the 
breakdown  impedance  is  real  and  small  compared  to  the 
structure  impedance,  is  that  the  power  absorbed,  Pabs, 
scales as, 

P
abs

~

v

2
g
(
QR

)

2

ϕ
)
sin(
+
v2)

g

sin(

ϕ

cos(

ϕ
)

Gradient

2

 

where R is the cell shunt impedance, Q is the cell quality 
factor, and ϕ is the phase advance per cell. Only vg varies 
significantly  along  the  1.8-m  structures,  so  if  damage  is 
directly related to absorbed power, the gradient at which a 
given level of damage occurs scales as the inverse of vg. 

Another  possible  explanation  for  the  greater  damage 
upstream  is  that  reflected  rf  energy  from  a  breakdown 
causes  an  over-voltage  upstream  that  initiates  further 
breakdown  within  the  same  rf  pulse.  Such  events  have 
been  observed,  although  more  than  70%  of  breakdowns 
appear to occur in a single location. 

3 STRUCTURE COMPARISONS   

To  better  understand  high  gradient  limits,  a  series  of 
structures with different lengths and vg profiles are being 
processed.  In  addition,  various  improvements  are  being 
made to the structure cleaning and handling procedures. In 
particular,  a  degassing  process  has  been  adopted  that 
includes ‘wet’ and ‘dry’ H2 firing at 950 ºC, a two-week 
vacuum  bake  at  650  ºC,  and  a  one-week  in-situ  bake  at 
220  ºC.  This  procedure  was  used  for  the  last  two  low  vg 
structure tests described below. Finally, the rf processing 
protocol  has  been  improved  in  an  attempt  to  minimize 
structure damage. Processing is done at a 60 Hz pulse rate 
under  computer  control.  Typically  a  target  gradient  is 
achieved using a sequence of progressively longer pulses 
(e.g., 50, 100, 170 and 240 ns). If breakdown is detected 

(>  10%  drop  in  transmitted  energy),  the  rf  is  shut  off, 
brought  back  to  full  amplitude  at  a  reduced  pulse  width 
(50  ns),  then  ramped  to  full  pulse  width.  The  recovery 
time is about one minute.  

 The first structure tested in this program was made by 
cutting off the last 52 cells of one of the 1.8-m structures 
(DS2).  This  region  was  chosen  because  it  showed  no 
discernible phase shift from its previous operation at less 
than 50 MV/m. The shortened structure was operated for 
about  1700  hours  with  240  ns  square  pulses  at  gradients 
up  to  73  MV/m.  The  structure  incurred  some  damage 
during  initial  processing  to  over  70  MV/m.  This  was 
indicated by a 5º  net phase shift as measured using beam-
induced rf. However, subsequent running for 650 hours at 
65  MV/m  and  750  hours  at  70  MV/m  produced  no 
measurable phase change (< 1º). The breakdown rates at 
the end of the run the were fairly low: about one per hour 
at  70  MV/m  and  one  per  four  hours  at  65  MV/m.  The 
value at 65 MV/m would be marginally acceptable for the 
NLC when scaled to the proposed operating conditions. 

The  goal  of  the  next  test  was  to  compare  the 
performance of two structures of different lengths but the 
same vg profile. For this purpose, two new structures were 
fabricated  with  an  initial  vg  of  5%.  One  was  20  cm  long 
(23 cells) and the other 105 cm long (120 cells) with the 
first 23 cells identical to those in the shorter structure. The 
cell  parameters  were  varied  along  the  structures  to  make 
the  iris  surface  fields  constant,  thus  eliminating  field 
strength  differences  as  a  factor  in  the  comparison.  Also, 
power  was  split  evenly  to  feed  the  structures  so  they 
witnessed the same fields. Unfortunately, an unexpectedly 
large  reflection  from  the  loads  on  the  shorter  structure 
produced  a  roughly  10%  over-voltage  within  it,  so  a 
simple  comparison  of  the  results  cannot  be  made.  None-
theless,  the  breakdown  rates  in  the  two  structures  were 
comparable during processing to the highest gradients, so 
the  short  structure  was  not  significantly  superior  in  this 
regard. In general, these rates were similar to those meas-
ured in the previous test but the phase shift was less (3.5º) 
after 500 hours of operation. 

During the two tests discussed above, one of the 1.8-m 
prototype  structures 
that  had  not  been  previously 
processed (DDS3) was operated to determine the gradient 
at  which  damage  began.  Although  a  ‘more  gentle’ 
processing  protocol  was  used  than  in  the  past,  a  damage 
threshold  of  45-50 MV/m was found, consistent with the 
earlier  1.8-m  structure  results.  This  range  is  markedly 
lower  than  the  70-75  MV/m  level  for  the  lower  vg 
structures. Also, at the various pulse lengths, the gradient 
at which the breakdown rate initially exceeded several per 
hour  occurred  at  the  50-60  MV/m  level  in  the  low  vg 
structures  compared  to  30-40  MV/m  in  the  1.8-m 
structure. 

Currently, two 53-cm structures are being processed in 
parallel,  one  with  a  5.0-3.3%  vg  profile,  and  one  with  a 
3.3-1.6% vg profile. An in-line stainless-steel load is being 
used  to  reduce  the  power  to  the  lower  vg  structure.  The 

goal  was  to  equalize  the  gradients,  but  with  only  one 
iteration  of  the  load  design,  the  resulting  attenuation  is 
less  than  desired,  yielding  a  6%  higher  gradient  in  the 
lower vg structure. 

This pair of structures has processed much more rapidly 
than ones in the past, so far to 77 MV/m for the lower vg 
structure  and  73  MV/m  for  the  higher  vg  structure.  No 
discernible  phase  shift  has  been  observed  in  either 
structure  after  achieving  these  levels.  After  280  hours  of 
operation,  the  breakdown  rate  in  the  lower  vg  structure 
was  about  1  per  hour  at  70  MV/m;  in  the  higher  vg 
structure,  the  rate  was  about  one  per  two  hours  at  66 
MV/m. The faster processing may be related to the deeper 
etching (few microns versus sub-micron) used in cleaning 
the  cells  before  assembly,  although  refinements  of  the 
new baking procedures may have contributed as well. The 
current  program  is  to  process  these  structures  to  higher 
gradients to find their damage threshold. 

4  BREAKDOWN OBSERVATIONS 

Various  studies  have  been  done  to  learn  more  about 
breakdown,  including  the  examination  of  cell  irises  after 
processing,  the  determination  of  breakdown  rate  depend-
ence  on  pulse  length  and  gradient,  and  the  measurement 
of  various  emission  signals  (rf,  light,  X-rays,  sound  [4], 
vacuum  pressure  and  electron  currents)  before,  during, 
and  after  breakdown.  No  consistent  precursors  to  break-
down  have  been  found  nor  is  there  definitive  evidence 
from SEM, EDX [5] and RGA measurements as to what 
triggers breakdown. The breakdown rate has little depend-
ence  on  the  structure  vacuum  pressure  for  values  up  to  
10-7 torr. The rate decreases slowly once a given gradient 
has  been  reached;  a  faster  reduction  can  be  achieved  by 
first  processing  to  a  higher  gradient.  In  general,  the 
breakdown  rate  rises  exponentially  with  gradient,  and 
more than linearly with pulse length. 

The most detailed information on breakdown has come 
from  analyzing  the  transmitted  and  reflected  rf  from  the 
structures. Figure 1 shows an example. Such information 
can  be  used  to  determine  the  breakdown  time  during  the 
pulse,  the  breakdown  location  in  the  structure  and  the 
amount of rf power absorbed after breakdown. In general, 
the  transmitted  power  falls  to  essentially  zero  about  100 
ns after breakdown. It fully recovers several microseconds 
after the main rf pulse, when the power from the contin-
ued discharge of the NLCTA pulse compression system is 
many  orders  of  magnitude  smaller.  The  distribution  of 
peak  reflected  power  is  broad  and  peaked  at  low  values: 
the mean is typically 10% to 20% of the input power. Up 
to  about  80%  of  the  incident  rf  energy  is  absorbed  after 
breakdown  begins,  although  only  a  very  small  fraction  
(10-5 ) of the rf energy, if converted to heat, is needed to 
produce  a  pit  of  the  size  observed  on  the  cell  irises. 
Simulations  using  particle-in-cell  codes  of  the  rf  interac-
tion  with  breakdown-generated  electrons  and  ions  are 

being  done  to  understand  this  energy  absorption  phe-
nomenon [6]. 

The distribution of breakdown times during the pulse is 
fairly  uniform.  One  puzzling  result  is  that  about  10%  of 
the  breakdowns  occur  after  the  main  pulse,  when  the 
power is less than 10% of maximum. The distribution of 
breakdown  locations  in  the  structure  is  generally  skewed 
toward the upstream end. It differs depending on whether 
the  structure  is  being  processed  to  a  higher  gradient  for 
the first time or it is running at a gradient lower than has 
been achieved. Figure 2 shows a plot of fractional missing 
energy  versus  breakdown  location  in  each  case.  A 
common feature is the clustering of events near the input 
coupler.  At  the  highest  gradients,  breakdown  occurs 
deeper into the structure, mostly with high missing energy 
(> 40%). The events near the coupler include a distinct set 
of ‘soft’ events with lower missing energy, slower falloff 
in transmitted power, and a common iris origin (probably 
the  input  cell  iris)  as  evidenced  by  the  phase  of  the 
reflected  rf.  A  new  coupler  design  that  increases  group 
velocity in a two-step transition from the input rectangular 
waveguide  to  the  structure  cells  will  be  tested  shortly  in 
an attempt to eliminate the events near the coupler.   

Perhaps  the  most  important  observation  from  the  rf 
measurements  is  that  for  the  longest  pulse,  highest 
gradient operation, breakdown tends to occur clustered in 
time  in  localized  regions  of  the  structure  (so  called 
‘spitfests’). Figure 3 shows an example of the breakdown 
location history when operating in this regime. In general, 
the breakdown location propagates to the upstream end of 
the structure, where the breakdowns are mainly ‘soft’ and 
occur at a low rate. This migration process tends to repeat 
after  a  large-missing-energy  breakdown  occurs  deeper  in 
the  structure.  Such  cycles  suggest  that  breakdown  can 
cause  secondary  damage  that  lowers  the  threshold  on 
subsequent pulses. Evidence for secondary damage is seen 
on the irises after processing in that the number of pits is 
much  larger  (10-100  times)  than  the  number  of  rf  trips 
that had occurred during processing. Also, the occurrence 
the 
of  spitfests 
distribution  of  breakdown  times  during  the  pulse  is 
surprisingly  flat  after  the  pulse  has  been  lengthened.  If 
such  collateral  damage  depends  on  group  velocity,  it 
would explain why cell irises with the same surface field 
both  damage  and  process  differently  in  low  and  high 
group velocity structures. 

increases  with  pulse 

length,  and 

5  OUTLOOK 

The  results  from  the  low  vg  structure  tests  are 
encouraging  for  the  NLC  goal  of  70  MV/m  unloaded 
gradient operation. However, the average iris radius of the 
current  test  structures  is  too  small  to  meet  NLC  short-
range  wakefield  requirements.  To  increase  the  iris  size 
while  maintaining  low  vg,  a  structure  with  higher  phase 
advance per cell (150º instead of 120º) will be used [7]. 
Three designs are being developed, one with 5.1% initial 

vg that is 0.9 m long and two with 3.2% initial vg that are 
0.9  m  and  0.6  m  long.  Prototypes  of  these  designs  are 
scheduled  to  be  processed  by  the  end  of  the  year.  Also, 
tests  of  standing  wave  structures  have  started  and  will 
continue  to  fully  evaluate  their  feasibility  [8].  Finally, 
various  methods  of  pre-treating  the  structures  will  be 
tried, including glow discharge cleaning. 

6  REFERENCES 

J. W. Wang, SLAC-Report-339 (July 1989). 
J. Frisch et al., SLAC-PUB-8580 (Aug. 2000). 

[1]  C. Adolphsen, et al., SLAC-0559 (April 2000). 
[2]  C. Adolphsen, et al., SLAC-PUB-8573 (Sept. 2000). 
[3] 
[4] 
[5]  R. Kirby, private communication. 
[6]  V. Dolgashev et al., FPAH057, these proceedings. 
[7]  Z. Li et al., FPAH061, these proceedings. 
[8]  R. Miller et al., FPAH062, these proceedings. 
 
 

a)

b)

0

100

200
Time (ns)

300

  Fig. 1: Example of (a) reflected and (b) transmitted power  
for  a  breakdown  pulse  (solid)  and  normal  pulse  (dashed).

a)

b)

First
Cell

Breakdown
Location

Last
Cell

First
Cell

Breakdown
Location

Last
Cell

    Fig.  2:  Fractional  missing  energy  versus  breakdown 
location  when  (a)  processing  to  a  higher  gradient  and  (b) 
running  at  a  gradient  lower  than  the  maxiumum  achieved.

)

W
M

(
 
r
e
w
o
P

60

40

20

0
200

150

100

50

0

 

F
R
g
n
i
s
s
i

M

 
l
a
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
F

n
w
o
d
k
a
e
r
B

 
r
e
t
f
a
 

y
g
r
e
n
E

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

Last
Cell

n
w
o
d
k
a
e
r
B

n
o
i
t
a
c
o
L

First
Cell

0
0

20
20

40
40

60
60

140
140

160
160

180
180

80
80

120
120
100
100
Breakdown Number

  Fig. 3: Sequence of breakdown locations during 'spitfests.'

 

