SLAC-PUB-8889 
June 2001 
 
 

ROOM TEMPERATURE ACCELERATOR STRUCTURES FOR LINEAR 
COLLIDERS* 

 
R.H. Miller, R.M. Jones, C. Adolphsen, G. Bowden, V. Dolgashev, N. Kroll Z. Li, R. Loewen, C. 
Ng, C. Pearson, T. Raubenheimer R. Ruth, S. Tantawi, J.W. Wang, SLAC, Menlo Park, CA, U 
 
 

 

 
 

 
Abstract 

 
Early tests of short low group velocity and standing wave structures indicated the viability of operating X-band linacs 
with accelerating gradients in excess of 100 MeV/m.  Conventional scaling of traveling wave traveling wave linacs with 
frequency scales the cell dimensions with λ.  Because Q scales as λ1/2, the length of the structures scale not linearly but 
as λ3/2 in order to preserve the attenuation through each structure.  For NLC we chose not to follow this scaling from the 
SLAC S-band linac to its fourth harmonic at X-band.  We wanted to increase the length of the structures to reduce the 
number  of  couplers  and  waveguide  drives  which  can  be  a  significant  part  of  the  cost  of  a  microwave  linac.  
Furthermore, scaling the iris  size of the disk-loaded structures gave unacceptably  high  short range dipole  wakefields.  
Consequently,  we  chose  to  go  up  a  factor  of  about  5  in  average  group  velocity  and  length  of  the  structures,  which 
increases the power fed to each structure by the same factor and decreases the short range dipole  wakes by a similar 
factor.  Unfortunately,  these longer (1.8 m)  structures  have not performed nearly as  well in high  gradient tests as  the 
short structures.  We believe we have at least a partial understanding of the reason and will discuss it below.  We are 
now studying two types of short structures with large apertures with moderately good efficiency including: 1) traveling 
wave structures with the group velocity lowered by going to large phase advance per period with bulges on the iris, 2) π 
mode standing wave structures. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Paper presented at the 2001 Particle Accelerator Conference 
Chicago, USA 
June18 –June22, 2001 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ROOM TEMPERATURE ACCELERATOR STRUCTURES FOR LINEAR 
COLLIDERS* 
R.H. Miller, R.M. Jones, C. Adolphsen, G. Bowden, V. Dolgashev, N. Kroll Z. Li, R. Loewen, C. 
Ng, C. Pearson, T. Raubenheimer R. Ruth, S. Tantawi, J.W. Wang, SLAC, Menlo Park, CA, USA 

 
Abstract 

Early  tests  of  short  low  group  velocity  and  standing 
wave  structures  indicated  the  viability  of  operating  X-
band  linacs  with  accelerating  gradients  in  excess  of  100 
MeV/m.  Conventional scaling of traveling wave traveling 
wave  linacs  with  frequency  scales  the  cell  dimensions 
with  λ.    Because  Q  scales  as  λ1/2,  the  length  of  the 
structures scale not linearly but as λ3/2 in order to preserve 
the  attenuation  through  each  structure.    For  NLC  we 
chose  not  to  follow  this  scaling  from  the  SLAC  S-band 
linac  to  its  fourth  harmonic  at  X-band.    We  wanted  to 
increase the length of the structures to reduce the number 
of  couplers  and  waveguide  drives  which  can  be  a 
significant  part  of  the  cost  of  a  microwave  linac.  
Furthermore,  scaling  the  iris  size  of  the  disk-loaded 
structures  gave  unacceptably  high  short  range  dipole 
wakefields.  Consequently, we chose to go up a factor of 
about  5  in  average  group  velocity  and  length  of  the 
structures, which increases the power fed to each structure 
by  the  same  factor  and  decreases  the  short  range  dipole 
wakes  by  a  similar  factor.    Unfortunately,  these  longer 
(1.8  m)  structures  have  not  performed  nearly  as  well  in 
high gradient tests as the short structures.  We believe we 
have at least a partial understanding of the reason and will 
discuss it below.  We are now studying two types of short 
structures  with  large  apertures  with  moderately  good 
efficiency including: 1) traveling wave structures with the 
group  velocity  lowered  by  going  to  large  phase  advance 
per  period  with  bulges  on  the  iris,  2)  π  mode  standing 
wave structures. 

 1 HIGH GRADIENT RF BREAKDOWN 
The high gradient RF breakdown testing is reported in 
detail by Adolphsen [1].  There are several interesting and 
some surprising results that affect the choice of structure 
design,  which  we  will  discuss  here.    The  first  is  that  as 
suggested  by  Adolphsen  the  viable  operating  gradient 
appears to vary almost linearly  with the inverse of the of 
the  group  velocity.    A  related  observation  is  that  the 
structures  process  very  rapidly  with  a  relatively  small 
number  of  arcs  up  to  a  gradient  that  also  varies  slightly 
less  than  linearly  with  the  inverse  of  the  group  velocity.  
Above that gradient the arcing rate increases dramatically 

____________________________________________ 

*Work supported by the U.S. DOE, Contract DE-AC03-76SF00515.  
 

and progress to higher gradients is very, very slow. 

The  second  and  perhaps  the  most  surprising  result 
occurred during the simultaneous testing of a 105cm long 
structure  and  a  20cm  long  structure  driven  by  the  same 
klystron  through  a  3  dB  coupler  so  that  the  drive  levels 
and  history  would  be  identical.    Both  structures  were 
designed  to  be  approximately  constant  gradient,  but 
precisely  constant  peak  surface  field  on  all  disks.    Both 
had an initial group velocity of 5% of the velocity of light.  
The short structure was identical to the first 20 cm of the 
long  structure.    One  might  have  expected  the  105cm 
structure  to  have  roughly  5  times  as  many  arcs  as  the 
20cm  structure.    Instead,  the  two  structures  had  equal 
numbers  of  arcs  at  all  power  levels  within  the  statistical 
variation, except during the very early processing.  This is 
less surprising in view of the fact that the vast majority of 
the arcs in the long structure occur in the first 20cm.   

The  third  interesting  fact  emerging  from  the  high 
gradient  testing  is  observed  when  a  structure  has  been 
processed  up  to  some  level  with  a  short  pulse  and  the 
pulse  length  is  increased  significantly.  The  rate  of 
breakdowns 
the  arcs 
increases  dramatically  with 
distributed  uniformly  in  time  within  the  pulse,  not 
concentrated in the added portion of the pulse. 

frequently  degraded 

The fourth interesting result occurred in an experiment 
studying  high  electric  field  gradients  in  rectangular 
waveguide,  Dolgashev  [2].    The  large  dimension  of  the 
waveguide  had been reduced to lower the  group velocity 
to  about  0.18c  in  order  to  raise  the  field  strengths  that 
could  be  reached  with  available  power.    The  striking 
observation was that when the pulse length was less than 
400ns  and  the  peak  surface  gradient  was  80  MV/m  the 
arcs never degraded the high gradient performance of the 
waveguide.  When the pulse length was more than 500 ns 
the  arcs 
the  high  gradient 
performance.  The degradation observed was a higher rate 
of  arcing,  or  the  inability  to  reach  80MV/m  and  higher 
xray levels on pulses where no arcing occurs. 
that 

it  may  be 
important  to  consider  the  energy  deposited  at  the  site  of 
an arc when an arc occurs for two reasons.  First, it may 
alter the microwave parameters of the structure by causing 
a tiny, deposited-energy-dependent change in the resonant 
frequency  of  the  cell  in  which  the  arc  occurs  and  thus 
change the phase advance and the match of the structure.  
Secondly,  there  probably  is  a  deposited  energy  threshold 
above  which  the  high  gradient  performance  of  the 

These  four  observations  suggest 

 

 
 

 

structure  is  degraded.    Above  this  threshold  an  arc  is 
likely  to  cause  surface  damage  which  causes  successive 
arcs to occur at or in the vicinity of the original site.  For 
many  years  people  have  observed  that  RF  processing  is 
not  always  monotonic;  that  sometimes  an  arc  causes  a 
setback,  lowering  the  RF  power  which  the  device  being 
processed will accept.  It has also been realized that it was 
advantageous  to  high  power  process  with  a  short  pulse 
until  the  desired  gradients  are  reached,  and  then  slowly 
increase the pulse length.  The energy deposited in an arc 
in a travelling wave structure should vary linearly with the 
incident  power,  the  pulse  length,  and  the  group  velocity.  
It  may  also  depend  on  other  parameters  such  as  the 
frequency,  phase  advance  per  cell  and  geometric  factors 
such as the gap across which the breakdown occurs.  The 
damage  threshold  almost  surely  depends  on  the  physical 
properties  such  as  melting  point  of  the  material  from 
which  the  structure  is  made.    Despite  our  ignorance  of 
these  issues,  it  still  may  be  useful  to  define  a  damage 
parameter, D. 

D = PTvg/c 

 

 

  (1) 

P is the input power, T is the pulse length, vg is the group 
velocity and c is  the  velocity of light.  To get an idea of 
what may reasonable we can look at SLAC (ignoring any 
frequency and geometry dependence).  The highest power 
operation  of  the  standard  SLAC  S-band  sections  with  a 
rectangular  pulse  (unSLEDded)  occurred  in  the  injector 
where  several  sections  ran  routinely  with  25  MW  2.5  µs 
long  pulses.    The  initial  group  velocity  of  these  constant 
gradient  sections  was  .02c.    With  these  parameters  the 
damage  parameter  is  1.2  Joules.    It  is  important  to  note 
that only a minuscule fraction of this can be dissipated at 
the site of the arc.  In the high gradient testing the X-band 
1.8  meter  Damped  Detuned  Structures  (DDS)  processed 
very  easily  and  essentially  monotonically  up  to  about  35 
MeV/m  with  a  44  MW,  240ns  pulse.    The  initial  group 
velocity  is  .12c,  giving  a  damage  parameter  of  1.3  J, 
suggesting that this may be a useful parameter.  The four 
observations from the high gradient testing reported above 
all  suggest  that  for  gradients  above  some  damage 
threshold  most of the arcs result  from damage caused by 
previous arcs rather than  from the initial existing defects 
such  as  inclusions  and  microscopic  points  in  our  copper 
structures.  We have also observed both with the SLAC S-
band structures and  with the  NLC X-band structures that 
it  is  possible  to  have  arc  damage  from  which  it  is 
impossible to recover.  That is that a reasonable amount of 
high  gradient  processing  cannot  recover  the  gradient  at 
which the structure had been operating.  The conservative 
course  of  action  may  be  to  design  to  run  below  the  arc 
damage threshold for which our damage parameter D may 
(or  may  not)  be  a  useful  indicator.    If  D  were  a  precise 
measure  of  the  limit  for  monotonic  processing  then  the 
gradient at which monotonic processing ends would scale 
linearly  with  the  1/vg.    We  observe  a  less  than  linear 
scaling, but the number of samples is very small.  Perhaps  
vg/c  in  the  damage  parameter  needs  an  experimentally 
determined exponent which is less than unity. 

 

 

.05c. 

.03c  and 

2 TRAVELING WAVE STRUCTURES 
The present design for the unloaded gradient for NLC is 
72 MeV/m.  To achieve this with a damage parameter of 
the order of 1 Joule will require an initial  group velocity 
in  our  approximately  constant  gradient  structures  of 
between 
  We  are  presently  testing 
structures  at  each  of  these  values.    The  tested  structures 
would  not  be  satisfactory  for  NLC  because  the  apertures 
are too small causing excessive dipole wakefields.  Z. Li 
[3]  has  designed  structures  for  each  of  these  group 
velocities  using  150o  phase  advance  per  cell  and  thicker 
disks  to  achieve  these  lower  group  velocities  with  the 
same average iris diameter as in the vg = 0.12c structure.  
The  0.05c  structure  is  90cm  long,  while  the  0.03c 
structure  is  60  cm  long.    R.M.  Jones  [4]  is  studying 
detuning  these  and  damping  them  using  either  manifold 
damping or local damping to reduce the long-range dipole 
wakes  by  a  factor  greater  than  100.    The  initial  results 
look  quite  promising.    The  wakefield  for  the  0.05c 
structure  with  10%  Gaussian  detuning  and  manifold 
damping is shown in Fig. 1.  It is difficult to go below an 
initial group velocity of .03c without reducing the average 
iris  diameter,  which  we  don't  want  to  do  because  of  the 
short-range dipole wakes.  We are uncomfortable about  

100

10

1

0.1

0.01

0.001

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

m
m
m
C
p
(cid:5)

(cid:5)

V

(cid:3)

e
k
a
W

2

4
(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)
s (cid:3)

6
(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)
m (cid:4)

8

 
Figure 1: Wakefield for two 90cm long manifold-damped 
10% detuned structures with .05c initial vg. 

 
going  to  phase  advances  larger  than  150o  per  period 
because of the reduced bandwidth, and thicker disks hurt 
the shunt impedance. 

3 STANDING WAVE STRUCTURES 
There  is  some  argument  for  designing  the  NLC 
structure  to  operate  at  unloaded  gradients  as  high  as  100 
MeV/m, to accommodate an energy upgrade above 1 TeV 
in  the  same  tunnel.    We  think  this  forces  us  to  consider 
standing  wave structures.  Standing wave structures have 
several  advantages  over  travelling  for  high  gradient 
operation.  The first is that for a given gradient the input 
power  required  scales  roughly  as  length,  and  stranding 
wave  structures  can  be  made  arbitrarily  short  without 
sacrificing efficiency.  Secondly, because a standing wave 
structure  is  a  high  Q  resonant  cavity  the  reflection 
coefficient goes very, very close to unity almost instantly 
when  loaded  by  an  arc.    In  this  way  a  standing  wave 

cavity  is  more  self-protecting  than  a  travelling  wave 
structure.    We  are  studying  20  and  30cm  π-mode 
structures  with  15  and  23  cells,  respectively.    We  think 
this range is a reasonable compromise between tolerances 
and  the  costs  associated  with  a  large  number  of  short 
structures.  Figure 2 is computer cutaway of our first 15-
cell  π  mode  cavity.    Two  of  these  are  currently  in  high 
power testing.  We propose to braze 6 to 10 of these short 
structures  together  to  form  a  single  precision  aligned 
assembly.  Each multicell cavity will have an odd number 
of  cells  and  be  driven  through  the  center  cell.    Center 
driving relaxes the tolerances by a factor of 4. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Computer cutaway of 15-cell π-mode cavity. 

The  standing  wave  cavities  in  each  half  of  the  assembly 
will be driven by a single oversize rectangular waveguide 
with  a  directional  coupler  splitting  off  the  appropriate 
power  for  each  cavity.    When  this  is  done  right  all  the 
power reflected from the cavities goes into dummy loads 
in  the  approximation  that  all  the  cavities  have  the  same 
coupling and the  same resonant frequency.  Thus, in this 
approximation the assembly looks like a matched load to 
the RF source.  Of course when a cavity arcs it upsets the 
match, but since each cavity is getting a small fraction of 
the  total  power  the  reflected  power  goes  like  the  small 
fraction squared. 

3.1 Dipole Wakefield Reduction 

in 

The  same  general  methods,  namely  detuning  and 
damping,  are  available  for  reducing  dipole  wakefields  in 
standing wave cavities as were used in the traveling wave 
structures.  However, because the cavities are so short the 
implementation  will  be  different.    Tapering  the  iris 
diameters  with  compensating  changes 
the  cell 
diameters still appears to be the best way to tune the first 
dipole band while keeping fundamental π mode frequency 
constant.  By decreasing the thickness of the disks as the 
iris diameters decrease we find we can reduce the spread 
in cell to cell coupling of the fundamental.  We can get an 
8% detuning of the first dipole band with the fundamental 
mode cell to cell coupling varying from 5.2% at the large 
iris  cells  down  to  2.2%  at  small  iris  end.    We  intend  to 
vary  the  iris  size  and  therefore  the  dipole  frequencies 
monotonically from one end to the other of a 6 or 9 cavity 
assembly having a total of about 135 cells.  Fig. 3 shows 
the  amplitude  and  phase  from  an  equivalent  circuit  for 
each cell of a 15 cell cavity in which the coupling varies 
from 3.5% to 2.2% as it might in the last cavity at the high 
dipole frequency end of a 6 cavity assembly.  The phase 
shifts,  which  are  caused  by  the  power  flow,  can  be 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

compensated  for  by  adjusting  the  length  of  the  cells  to 
keep  a  velocity  of  light  beam  on  the  crest  in  each  cell.  
Fig.  4  shows  the  dispersion  curve  for  each  cell  (as  if  it 
were in a periodic structure).  The cell fundamental mode 
resonant  frequencies  have  been  tuned  to  achieve  a  flat 
field,  which  requires  that  the  π  mode  frequencies  for  all 
the interior cells coincide at about 11.4 GHz.  The cells at 
each  end,  because  they  are  full  cells  rather  than  a  half-
cells, must be tuned so the π/2 modes are at 11.4 GHz. 

Because  the  cavities  are  so  short,  we  tried  what  might 
be called end damping.  We put a low Q (10) dipole mode 
cavity  in  the  drift  tube  between  each  pair  of  23  cell 
cavities and at each end of the full assembly. We have a 
preliminary  simulation  of  this  and  the  wakefield  is 
presented in Fig. 4.  It appears to be promising, but this is 
certainly  neither  a  full  nor  optimized  design.  We  have  a 
concept  for  the  lossy  dipole  cavities  but  they  have  not 
been designed. 
 
 

Figure  3:  Phase  and  amplitude  of  the  fundamental  mode 
in the 15 cells of a dipole detuned π mode cavity. 
 

Figure 4: Dispersion curves for the fundamental mode of 
the 15 cells of a π-mode cavity with dipole mode detuning 

 
 
 
Figure 5: Wakefield for six 23 cell π-mode cavities in a 
monotonically detuned assembly with a low Q dipole 
cavity every 23 cells. 

4 REFERENCES 

[1] C. Adolphsen, Paper ROAA003 this conference 

[2] V. Dolgashev, Paper FPAH057 this conference 
[3] Z. Li, Paper FPAH061 this conference 
[4] R.M. Jones, Papers FPAH058 & MPPH068 this conf. 

 

 

