15.08.01   18:29   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences III

1

Recent Conceptual Consequences of Loop Quantum Gravity
Part III: A Postscript On Time

Rainer E. Zimmermann

IAG Philosophische Grundlagenprobleme,
FB 1, UGH, Nora-Platiel-Str.1, D – 34127 Kassel /
Clare Hall, UK – Cambridge CB3 9AL1 /
Lehrgebiet Philosophie, FB 13 AW, FH,
Lothstr.34, D – 80335 München2
e-mail: pd00108@mail.lrz-muenchen.de

With a view to the results discussed in the first two parts of this paper, the con-
cept of time is revisited oncemore and chosen as an example in order to demon-
strate the meaning of „fundamental“ in both physical and philosophical terms. It
is shown that if arguments are given in favour of or against the concept of time,
then their ontological state has to be clarified in the first place.

Abstract

Introduction

In the two preceding parts of this paper, aspects of modern metaphysics with a
view  to  consequences  of  recent  results  in  loop  quantum  gravity  have  been
discussed  in  some  detail,  under  both  a  foundational  [1]  as  well  as  holistic  [2]
perspective. It has been found that on a truly fundamental level, the world turns
out to be beyond traditional framework categories such as space and time. The
important  point  is  however,  to  actually  identify  that  fundamental  level,  in  the
first place. The terminology of philosophy and physics is different here so that it
is necessary to give a sound definition of the „foundations“ of the world. Accor-
ding to a tradition which refers back to philosophers such as Spinoza, Leibniz,
and  others,  we  have  noticed  that  (re-phrasing  Schelling  in  fact)  foundation  is
against  that  to  which  it  is  foundation,  non-being.  Hence,  it  is  to  the  physical
world we (empirically) observe what possibility is to actuality. Space and time
therefore  (as  well  as  matter),  are  concepts  which  have  no  ontological  meaning
beyond  the  physical  world.  With  respect  to  the  truly  fundamental  level  (non-
being),  they  are  emergent  properties of  the  world  to  which  this  level  is  funda-
mental. As to time in particular, the foundation of the world is „eternal“ in the
strict sense, not referring to an infinite time length, but to a complete absence of

                                                          
1 Permanent addresses.
2 Present address.

15.08.01   18:29   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences III

2

time instead. Nevertheless, the conception of visualizing time (if not also space)
as  something  which  is  available  on  the  fundamental  level  of  the  world  is  still
under dispute. So recently, Smolin has discussed what he calls challenges to the
arguments aiming at the elimination of time. [3]
As  a  postscript  to  the  first  two  parts  of  this  paper,  we  will  discuss  here  a)  the
question as to from what position the arguments in favour of the elimination of
time actually do argue, and b) what it is therefore, that Smolin defines as chal-
lenges  of  that  argumentation.  We  start  first  of  all  with  recalling  some  of  Bar-
bour’s arguments as he has explained them in his book. [4]

1  Barbour’s Conception Revisited

Barbour  visualizes  the  physical  (quantum)  world  as  a  static  world  onto  which
time is being projected by human observers. In a sense, there is a collection of
possible  states  of  the  world,  and  the  human  brain  composes  a  movie  of  a  se-
quence  of  states  selected  from  this  collection.  Hence,  the  points  of  a  world  of
such Nows are worlds unto themselves: „No thread of time joins them up.“ ([4],
p.45) A given situation as it is being signified by some observer as having de-
veloped historically, can be thought of as a time capsule, i.e. a single configura-
tion  of  the  Universe  „that  seems  to  be  the  outcome  of  a  dynamical  process  of
evolution  through  time  in  accordance  with  definite  laws.“  ([5],  p.408)  Hence,
the meaning of law here refers to rules which tell us how to transform configu-
rations  from  being  possible  to  becoming  actual  (to  establish,  as  Barbour  says,
which configurations go from the „heap“ of possibilities into that of actualities).
([5],  p.409)  Alternatively,  the  respective  probability  distribution  for  one  or  the
other transition of this kind can be visualized as distribution of a kind of „mist“
such that the appearance of time arises from the fact that the mist is concentrated
on time capsules. Hence, the likeliness to experience a Now that is a time cap-
sule is greater than to experience one which is not. ([4], p.52) In fact, this can be
equivalently  discussed  in  terms  of  the  celebrated  Wheeler-DeWitt  equation  of
the form HΨ = 0, where H is an appropriate Hamiltonian operator, and Ψ is the
„wave function of the Universe“.
I have criticized this approach earlier in the following sense: The idea that time
emerges out of timelessness, is not new as far as philosophy is being concerned.
Hence, Barbour’s sample world, called „Platonia“, should be named  „Spinoza-
nia“ instead. (This is so because substance encodes structures in its potentiality,
but not concepts humans develop with respect to these structures.) Time shows
up as a convention, i.e. as part of human communicative strategies, rather than
as something which is a generic property of the Universe. It is only property of
the human world (of the physical Universe that is), in so far as there  is  a  con-
vention which turns out to be practical for human life, if conceptualized accor-
ding to what humans perceive of their world. The actual choice is twofold then:
Either we  agree  that  humans  perceive their  world in some  incomplete  manner.

15.08.01   18:29   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences III

3

Then  they  model  their  world  according  to  this  incomplete  perception.  Or  we
agree that their mode of perception defines their worldliness. Then they  model
their world completely. But there may be many worlds. In the one case, humans
perceive  the  one  (unique)  real  world  under  their  generic  (modal)  perspective.
Hence, there may be many such perspectives. In the other case, humans perceive
their own (modal) world as it is. But the real world is a collection of the many
worlds.  Recalling  Spinoza’s  conception  of  the  one  substance  and  its  infinitely
many attributes, we realize that these two cases are essentially equivalent as far
as epistemology is concerned, but different from the ontological point of view.
There is no crucial experiment one could give in favour of the one or the other.
But the speculative consequences are manifold.
The point is that we have to carefully separate the physics from the philosophy.
Barbour formulates: „If we could see the universe as it is, we should see that it
is static. Nothing moves, nothing changes.“ ([4], p.39, emphasis mine) In strict
terms, this is not quite correct: The expression „static“ implicitly refers to a con-
vention of physics, namely to call something static for which the time variable is
absent in the relevant functions. But substance is not  static,  because it is not  a
reduction of some function to another one for which the „parameter“ t can be set
to zero or does not show up at all. This is so because „t“ was never present, in
the first place. Hence, the term „static“ refers to physics, not to philosophy. On
the other hand, the formulation of „the universe as it is“ refers to the case of the
real Universe. But this is not empirically attainable for humans who can visuali-
ze the Universe in modal terms only. Hence, „it is“ is a formulation which refers
to  philosophy,  not  to  physics.  Consequently,  to  be  precise,  the  formulation
should rather be of the form: „If we could perceive (or measure) the universe as
it is realiter [but what we cannot actually do], we should notice that there is no
time.“ [Only modaliter therefore, do we have the impression of a world which
appears as if there were time. And we speak and behave accordingly.]
Note by the way though that even within the world, time perception is far from
being settled. Instead it is highly contextual. The more so, as we know by now
that even in everyday terms, we cannot be sure about our temporal perception.
As Eagleman and Sejnowski have shown recently [6], human temporal percepti-
on refers to a generic „time window“ of about 80 msec which is utilized by the
brain in order to co-ordinate sensory input data belonging to one and the same
event, but arriving in a sequential manner at the cerebral stimulus centre due to
their different channels (and speeds) of propagation. Basically, for being able to
synchronize  all  of  them  thus  producing  one  perceived  event,  the  brain  has  to
actually backdate the result. In other words: Even with respect to common eve-
ryday perceptions (pain e.g.) do we live „in our past“. This is already very much
on the line of what Barbour calls the „movie“ our brain composes of all the in-
coming sensory perceptions,  and  to  a  lapse  function  which  is  being  created by
this procedure of composition. The consequences of this for the human means of
constructing their (everyday) world has been discussed in more detail in [7].

15.08.01   18:29   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences III

4

Hence, coming back to the fundamental concept of time, the dynamics described
by Barbour is essentially one of 3-dimensional  Riemannian  spaces  sequentiali-
zed in terms of an ordering principle. This idea going back to John Wheeler in
the  sixties  is  discussed  in  Julian  Barbour’s  book,  where  he  points  out  that  the
„key geometric property of space-times that satisfy Einstein’s equations reflects
an underlying principle of best matching built into the foundations of the theo-
ry.“  ([4],  p.176)  The  time  separation  of  spatial  slices  shows  up  here  as  what
Barbour calls a distinguished simplifier, as an ordering principle for making un-
foldings simple. ([4], p.180) If time is being visualized as a mere ordering prin-
ciple, then, in  philosophical terms,  we  are  left  with  space  as  an  attribute.  Note
however,  that  the  dimensionality  of  space  is  only  a  finite  representation  then,
which does not reflect the true nature of space, but only our modal attitude to-
wards  it  with  a  view  to  spatial  ordering.  This  has  been  shown  earlier  [8]  with
respect  to  the  approach  of  topological  quantum  field  theory  which  points  to  a
direct correspondence between the change of spin numbers in spin networks (on
the „microscopic level“ of description) and the change of space topology (on the
„macroscopic level“ of description). Note again that „time“ showed up here not
as a function, but as a manifold. And this is particularly interesting, because with
a view to what Barbour tells us about the „absence“ of time, this means that the
concept of time is intrinsically included here as a pragmatic ordering principle
for localizing topology changes. This is similar to what Prigogine calls the „age
of a system“, which is roughly a frequency of formations of new structures in a
system making the latter more complex. Time as a convention then, would be an
approximate „average“ over such ages. Hence, time shows up as being associa-
ted  to  a  kind  of  measuring  device  for  local  complexity  gradients.  So  what  we
have in the end, is a rough (and simplified) outline of the foundations of emer-
gence, in the sense that we can localize the fine structure of emergence (the re-
arrangements of spin numbers in purely combinatorial terms being visualized in
philosophical  terms  as  a  motion-in-itself)  and  its  results  on  the  „macroscopic“
scale (as a change of topology being visualized by physical observers as a moti-
on-for-itself). This is actually what we would expect of a proper theory of emer-
gence.  But  note  also  that  space  and  time,  in  the  classical  sense,  are  obviously
absent on a fundamental level of the theory, although they can be recovered as
concepts  when  tracing  the  way  „upward“  to  macroscopic  structures.  In  other
words:  even  as  a  gross  average  feature  for  „shortsighted“  human  scientists  (as
Penrose indicates it at the end of his first twistor paper), space and time would
nevertheless turn up  as  (philosophical) categories of  concepts,  simply,  because
the meaning of these categories is well-adapted to what humans actually percei-
ve  of  their  world  (and  communicate  to  other  humans).  This  is  in  fact,  a  point,
where Barbour’s argument seems to break down (if discussed within this philo-
sophical  perspective):  What  he  essentially  shows  in  his  book  is  that  quantum
theory, in so far as it is foundational, describes partly what was called non-being
(or  substance)  in  former  times.  Hence,  there  is  neither  space  nor  time  in  real
terms  (  =  realiter, i.e.  with  respect to  what there  is  in  an  absolute  sense  of  the

15.08.01   18:29   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences III

5

world’s foundation), but there is space  and  time  in modal  terms  (  =  modaliter,
i.e. with respect to what humans perceive of their world). The former refers to
substance, or, alternatively, to what speculative philosophy is all about. The lat-
ter refers to the physical world, or, to what sceptical philosophy is all about. The
one  relies  on  theoretical  speculation  according  to  what  we  know  -  speculating
about  the  foundation  of  the  world,  which  is  outside  (logically  „before“)  the
world, and of which we are not a part therefore, and hence, about which we can-
not  actually  know  anything.  The  other  refers  to  the  empirical  world,  about
which,  with  the  help  of  experiments,  we  can  obtain  knowledge,  in  fact.  Ob-
viously,  in  terms  of  physics,  the  first  (speculative)  aspect  is  corresponding  to
physical theory, in so far as it is foundational. The second (sceptical) aspect cor-
responds to physical theory, in so far as it is empirical.

2  Smolin’s Arguments

So  what  we  realize  is  that  communicational  difficulties  between  physics  and
philosophy arise when the demarcation  of their  respective  fields  of  activity  re-
mains unclear. To make this more precise has been one task of this present pa-
per.  The  difficulty  of  interdisciplinary  co-operation  is  that  each  participant  is
asked to give up his/her own prejudices,  in  the  first place,  because  „interdisci-
plinary“ does not refer to either discipline, but to something which is „between“
the disciplines, and which is something entirely new, therefore.  (Similar  to  the
connotation of „intercultural“ which does not refer to any of the various cultu-
res, but to this innovative „in between“.)
Hence,  checked  against  this  attitude,  we  can  easily  realize  that  the  arguments
which are listed by Smolin [3] in order to challenge Barbour’s conception centre
around physical epistemology, but do not conceptualize the notion of time with
a  view  to  precise  differentiation  of  „world“  and  „foundation“.  So  his  starting
point is already one which neglects the  aforementioned demarcation.  He states
„that every observable in a theory of cosmology should be measurable by some
observer inside the universe“ and that „all mathematical constructions necessary
should be realizable in a finite time.“ This is certainly a useful assumption, if the
reasonable modelling of physical phenomena is concerned, but it does not carry
any additional philosophical connotation so that the further statement: „However
my view is that this question [of the absence of time] is not one that can be sett-
led by philosophical argument alone.“ is not mediated with the epistemological
starting point. (Besides the fact that there is probably no reasonable philosopher
who would seriously undertake „to settle this question“ by himself.)
In fact, the question is not (and we have discussed this by now in some detail)
whether measurements within the physical world are limited somehow in terms
of information to be gained (or not). Or whether, in principle, time could be eli-
minated from theories about that world. The fact is: there is time (at least in epi-
stemological  terms  of  a  utilized  concept)  down  to  the  basic  quantum  level  of

15.08.01   18:29   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences III

6

theories.  The  real  question is instead:  Is  there  time at  all  in  the  real  world  (of
which we can only observe a tiny part in principle)?
Smolin  also  emphasizes  the  role  played  by  the  requirement  „that  a  theory  of
cosmology must be falsifiable in the usual way ... This leads to the requirement
that  a  sufficient  number  of  observables  can  be  determined  by  information  that
reaches a real observer inside the universe to determine either the classical hi-
story or quantum state of the universe.“ (emphasis mine) Hence: „If we want to
do  cosmology,  we  must  restrict  ourselves  to  theories  in  which  all  observables
are accessible to real observers inside the universe.“ Again, the oberserver who
is a part of the Universe, cannot be a real observer, but rather a modal one. In
fact, there are no observers except modal ones. (They are not inside the Universe
though, because their perception actually defines the structures which constitute
the Universe. Instead, they are an intrinsic part of the Universe.)
Similar conceptual problems we can find in other passages: Smolin quotes e.g.
Markopoulou who argues in favour of an „interconnected web of Hilbert spaces
tied  to the  causal  structure such that  each  act of  observation  [considered  as  an
event] is represented in terms of a Hilbert space constructed to represent the in-
formation available.“ Obviously, this is a formal problem of physical epistemo-
logy,  but does not  tell  anything  about  the  foundational  aspects.  (Because  there
modally  is  a  causal  structure  so  long  as  we  have  space  and  time  (quanta),  i.e.
down  to  the  spin  network  level.  But  what  about  the  foundation  of  spin  net-
works?)
The same problem occurs with the information transport within the world: „It is
only  by  insisting  that  the  context  of  real  observers  inside  their  universe  is  de-
fined by the information that reaches them by means of radiation that propagated
from their past that a link is made between the issue of observability of the uni-
verse and its causal structure.“  True  for physics.  But obviously,  if  on the truly
fundamental level, there is no time (and space), the propagation of radiation is
ill-defined.  Hence,  the  „projective  mechanism“  (of  what  we  might  call  the
functor Past) has its starting point in the classical world (on the level of humans
that  is).  Back  projection  comes  first,  propagation  of  information  from  the  past
comes second. (Note that this does not mean that humans would arbitrarily con-
struct  phenomena  which  they  define  afterwards.  Contrary  to  that  sort  of  solip-
sism, we assume that there is something real (independent of human perception),
but how it really „looks“ cannot be perceived.)
The point is that human observers conceptualize the world as if it would be con-
stituted of phenomena whose information is propagated through space and time.
So if for Smolin, it appears as being „hard to divorce the notion of causal struc-
ture from a finite speed for the propagation of information and hence time.“ he
is quite correct. But this does not tell us anything about the real world, it simply
characterizes the perception of the modal world.
So what we realize is that it is essentially the unclear demarcation of epistemo-
logical  and  ontological  problems  (i.e.  of  physical  and  philosophical  questions)
that creates misunderstandings in the discussion of  basic  framework  categories

15.08.01   18:29   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences III

7

such  as  space,  time  (and  matter).  This  is  demonstrated  again  when  Smolin  co-
mes to his conclusions: „If the universe is discrete and time is real, and is itself
composed of discrete steps, then time may be none other than the process which
constructs, not only the universe, but the space of possible universes relevant for
observations made by local observers. / Beyond this, there is the possibility of a
quantum  cosmology  in  which  the  actual  history  of  the  universe  up  till  some
moment and the space of possible universes present at this ‚instant‘ are not two
different things, but are just different ways of seeing the same structure whose
construction is the real story of the world.“
It  is  difficult  to  see  how  time  (whether it  is  visualized  in  real  or  modal  terms)
can be a process. (This appears to be a problem of lexicology rather than of phy-
sics or philosophy.) And as it is a local concept utilized by observers, how can it
construct the  Universe  altogether?  And  what  about  „the  space  of  possible  uni-
verses“?  The  foundation  of  the  world  (possibility  as  opposed  to  actuality)  has
not been defined in the paper at all (as far as I can see). So what concept of pos-
sibility is here utilized all of a sudden? Finally: How can „the actual history of
the  universe“  (as  re-constructed  by  the  modelling  of  some  observer)  and  „the
space  of  possible  universes“  be  one  and  the  same  thing  of  which  different  as-
pects can be observed (by whom)?

3  Conclusion

Hence, our main result here is the following: Barbour, in so far as he addresses
the physical problem of time, discusses the problem of whether quantum theory
could be formulated without a time variable. But as far as he discusses (as is his
declared intention) the question whether there is time in principle (in real terms,
not  in  modal  terms),  he  addresses  a  philosophical  problem.  As  to  the  first,  he
raises interesting questions. As to the second, he does not tell us anything new.
(Hence, the title of his book is somewhat exaggerating.) Smolin however, in so
far he addresses the physical problem of time, can list a number of challenges to
the problem of whether quantum theory could be formulated without a time va-
riable. But as far as he discusses the question whether there is time in principle,
addressing therefore a philosophical question, he does not give any philosophi-
cal argument. Hence, as to the first, he also raises interesting questions. But as to
the second, he does not only tell us nothing new, but nothing at all, so that his
conclusions are more than unclear.
Apparently, the problem is that many physicists have realized by now that their
theories need philosophical conceptualization. This is actually an old idea dating
back to a famous talk given by René Thom some time ago. [9] And in the me-
antime, there is a number of philosophers around who have also some knowled-
ge  of  physics.  And  in  fact,  there  have  been  occasions  by  now  to  enhance  the
communication among the disciplines. One example  can be  found  in  [10].  But
innovative  results  from  such  interactions  can  only  be  expected,  if  the  various

15.08.01   18:29   REZ: Recent Conceptual Consequences III

8

oppositions which have emerged during the long history of separation which has
characterized  the  relationship  between  physics  and  philosophy  (as  well  as  the
relationship of schools within physics and philosophy, respectively) for the last
two hundred years can be successfully dissolved. Hence, communication should
replace confrontation.

References

[1] R.E.Zimmermann (2001): Recent Conceptual Consequences of Loop Quan-
tum Gravity. Part I: Foundational Aspects. http://www.arXiv.org, physics/0107061.
[2] R.E.Zimmermann (2001): Recent Conceptual Consequences of Loop Quan-
tum Gravity. Part II: Holistic Aspects. http://www.arXiv.org, physics/0107081.
[3] L.Smolin (2001): The present moment in qantum cosmology: Challenges to
the arguments for the elimination of time. http://www.arXiv.org, gr-qc/0104097.
[4] J.B.Barbour (1999): The End of Time. The Next Revolution in Our Under-
standing of the Universe. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
[5] J.B.Barbour (1994): The Emergence of Time and Its Arrow from Timeless-
ness. In: J.J.Halliwell et al. (eds.), Physical Origins of Time Asymmetry, Cam-
bridge University Press, 405-414.
[6] D.M.Eagleman, T.J.Sejnowski (2000): Motion Integration and Postdiction in
Visual Awareness. Science 287, 2036-2038.
[7] R.E.Zimmermann (2001): Signaturen. NaturZeichen & DenkZettel. Zur
morphischen Sprache der politischen Ökonomie. [Signatures. Signs of Nature &
Reminders of Thinking. Towards a Morphic Language of Political Economics.]
Natur & Oekonomie [Nature & Economics], Introductory Number, Paderborn:
Mentis. In press.
[8] R.E.Zimmermann (2000): Loops and Knots as Topoi of Substance. Spinoza
Revisited. http://www.arXiv.org, gr-qc/0004077 v2. See also: Spinoza in Context. A
Holistic Approach in Modern Terms. In: E.Martikainen (ed.), Infinity, Causality,
and Determinism, Cosmological Enterprises and their Preconditions, Amster-
dam, New York: Lang. In press.
[9] R.Thom (1979): Towards a Revival of Natural Philosophy. In: W.Guettinger,
H.Eikemeier (eds.), Structural Stability in Physics, Berlin etc: Springer, 5-11.
[10] C.Callender, N.Huggett (eds.): Physics Meets Philosophy at the Planck
Scale, Cambridge University Press, 2001.

