Huagang Yan and Zhixiang Liu

Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Capital University of Medical Sciences,

1 THE UNCERTAINTY RELATIONSHIP IN MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (MRI) 1
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

The uncertainty relationship in MRI is shown. The result of uncertainty re-
lationship is compared with other factors inﬂuencing the resolution of MRI.
Our estimations show that the uncertainty relationship is of no signiﬁcance in
practice.

Beijing 100054, China

Abstract

PACS No.: 87.61.-c

It is well known that if we want to improve resolution in microscopy, we should use light, or matter
wave of shorter wavelength. For example, when we observe a cell, seeable light will work, but when
we observe a cell organ, an electronic microscopy is needed. The reason is simple, for that we can
have shorter wavelength by electron than light. Resolution is directly associated with the diﬀraction
of wave. If the object lens is round, the image is expected to be an Ali spot, expanding an angle

(1)

(2)

2θ = 2 sin−1 1.22λ
D

.

∆x
d

≥ θ,

Here D is the diameter of the lens, λ is the wavelength of the light. If two dots with distance of ∆x are
needed to be distinguished, the resulting two Ali spots should not overlap. Therefore, the following
condition should be satisﬁed:

where d is the distance between the two dots and the object lens. Thus we have ∆x ≥ d sin−1 1.22λ
D .
When λ ≪ D , ∆x ≥ 1.22λ
D d. This is the limit of optical microscopy. We can see here that if d and D
are of the same order, which is usually true in the case of microscopy, then the resolution is close to
the wavelength. For electronic microscopy, the above argument also holds. To observe smaller object,
the wavelength should always be shorter. In fact, this idea has been penetrating the development
of high energy physics. Shorter wavelength means greater moment, hence also means higher energy.
Therefore, more energetic accelerators are built in order to detect smaller particles, such as quark
and sub-quark matters. We know that this actually reﬂects the Heisenberg uncertainty relationship,
∆x∆p ≥ ¯h
4π . Thus, ∆x ≥ λ
4π
when ∆λ is close to λ, which is a common case in detecting small objects (where pulses are used), the
resolution is of the same order as the wavelength. It is not strange at all, for the uncertain relationship
originates from the wave nature of matter.

2 . Since from this formula and de Broglie relationship, we have ∆x∆λ ≥ λ2

1This work was supported by the Institutional Fund of Capital University of Medical Sciences.

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
5
0
9
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

However, people who are familiar with MRI may have noticed that, in medical MRI, although we
are not going to obtain micrograph, that is, the resolution is not very high, yet the electromagnetic
wave used is in the region of radiowave, whose wavelength is about 1 meter long. It is well known that
the MRI graph in medicine can attain the resolution of 1 mm. It seems that the limit we obtained
above has been broken. Is there anything wrong with the uncertainty relationship? Let us review the
principle of MRI ﬁrst.

The most common MRI in medicine employs the nucleus of Hydrogen, i.e. proton. We also
use proton in following discussion for convenience. And as most people did in literature, we use the
language of induction and radiation in classical electrodynamics, instead of absorption and transition
in quantum mechanics. In a strong magnetic ﬁeld B, the proton spins inside human body will more
or less be subject to the same orientation of B. Practically, the magnetic ﬁeld used in medical MRI is
about of 1 Tesla, and consequently, only about 1 ppm of the protons array in the direction of B and
thus have in-phase procession. Therefore, in this circumstance, due to the molecular motion, most
protons act the same as when there is no external magnetic ﬁeld.

In medical MRI, we place a human body in a strong magnetic ﬁeld. Let the magnetic ﬁeld be in
direction z. The radiowave pulse is applied from direction x. If the frequency of the radiowave is the
same as the frequency of proton procession (Larmor procession), it will be absorbed by the protons
and the spin of the protons will deviate from direction z, and as a result, the Larmor procession will
radiate radiowave of the same frequency. The amplitude of the radiowave depends on the magnet
moments of those teamed procession protons projected on x-y plane, i.e., the transverse components
of the magnetic moments. Detecting the radiowave will give us some information of the transverse
components of the magnetic moments, and in term give us information of the density and environment
of the protons inside human body. Here we disregard how the grayscale of the resulting graph is related
to those information of human body. Instead, we are concerned with the location of the information.
The most commonly used location method is as follows: the ﬁrst step is slice selection (in direction
z for example.); the second is phase encoding (in direction y for example); the third step is frequency
encoding. The last two steps are usually repeated in order to form a 2-D image. Every step adopts
gradient magnetic ﬁeld, diﬀerent in gradient direction and duration time. From the Larmor equation
ω = γB, we know that a speciﬁc magnetic ﬁeld will result in speciﬁc Larmor procession frequency.
Therefore by detecting the radiowave of the frequency, we can know the location of the protons
emitting the radiowave, as long as we know the spatial dependence of the magnetic ﬁeld.

Given the frequency resolution of the receiver coil, the greater the gradient, the higher the spatial

resolution. The reason is as follows:

∆ω = γ∆B,
∆B
∆ω
γGz
Gz

=

,

∆z =

(3)

where Gz is the magnetic gradient in direction z, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio and ∆ω is the frequency
resolution of the receiver coil.

Let us now consider how Gz and ∆ω aﬀect the resolution. Intuitively, one can conclude from Eq.
(3) that smaller ∆ω and greater Gz are positive for the improvement of resolution. In this paper, we
want to investigate the restriction set by the uncertainty relationship on the resolution, and discuss if
we could make a MRI microscopy with the capacity of optical microscopy. Firstly, let us review the
measurement of frequency. A person who has ever heard of resonant beat of guitar caused by two
close frequency will not wonder that, with the lower speed of the beat, the two frequencies are closer
to each other. To determine the frequency diﬀerence between the two waves, we need to catch at least
one beat. Suppose the frequency diﬀerence is ∆ν, then the least time we should wait is ∆t ≥ 1
∆ν .
That is, the smaller the diﬀerence, the longer the measuring time.

Let us now turn to another point. As we discussed above, to image a small object, a short
wavelength is needed. While according to de Broglie relationship, shorter wavelength means greater
momentum. Great momentum is liable to produce signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the object, moving it,
or even ionizing it. The process of observation will inﬂuence the object, which is fundamental in
quantum mechanics. MRI is also subject to the rule, for the spin and quantized angular moment is a
phenomenon belonging to the realm of quantum mechanics.

Those who are familiar with Stern-Gerlach experiment may have noticed that the gradient mag-
netic ﬁeld is used in the experiment in order to separate the two groups of electrons. And indeed it
is this experiment that conﬁrms the existence of electron spin. This experiment utilized the coupling
between the magnetic moment of spin and external gradient magnetic ﬁeld. So a proton in a gradient
magnetic ﬁeld is also subject to a force! The mathematics involved is actually quite simple:

~F = −∇E = ∇(~µ · ~B) = µz

ˆk = µzGzˆk.

dBz
dz

Here we suppose there is no gradient in the direction of x and y. This force together with the duration
time we mentioned above will remind us of the notion of momentum, for ∆~p = ~F ∆t, which is the
so-called momentum theorem. Therefore.

Note that µzBz = γSzBz = ωSz = ω ¯h

2 , where Sz is the component of spin momentum on axis z. So

∆p = F ∆t = µz

∆t ≈

dBz
dz

∆(µzBz)
∆z

∆t.

∆p ≈

∆t =

∆ω
∆z

¯h
2

∆ν∆t
2∆z

h ≥

1
2∆z

h.

2 , this is just the uncertainty relationship we have been seeking 2. Now we see that if
Hence ∆p∆z ≥ h
we want to improve the resolution in direction z, the momentum in this direction will get more and
more unstable. The same conclusion can be drawn for the direction of x and y.

To what extent will the uncertain relationship aﬀect MRI then? Let us make an estimation.
Suppose the proton is free from its surroundings and let us see how far it will move during the
period when the external gradient magnetic ﬁeld is applied. A typical gradient in clinic practice is
10mT/m. Let us ﬁrst ﬁnd how long the gradient magnetic ﬁeld should be applied in order to achieve
the resolution of 1mm:

∆ω = ∆z · γGz

= 1mm × 2π × 42.5MHz/T × 10mT/m
= 2π × 425Hz.

The according measuring time, i.e., the duration of the gradient magnetic ﬁeld, t ≥ 1
∆ν = 2.35ms.
This is the bottomline of duration time in one direction. If we want to obtain a 2-D imaging, with
100 lines and the same resolution in the perpendicular direction, the total measuring time will be
(2.35ms+ 2.35ms) ×100 = 470ms. Planar Echo Imaging (EPI), the fastest MRI technique, approaches
this limit [1].

The acceleration of the proton under the gradient magnetic ﬁeld is

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

a =

=

·

=

=

γGz
mp

µzGz
mp

¯h
F
mp
2
42.5Mhz/T × 0.01T/m × 6.63 × 10−34J · s
2 × 1.67 × 10−27kg

(8)
2The reason that the h diﬀers from the ¯h of the exact form of uncertain relationship is that ∆p and ∆z we used are

= 8.43 × 10−2m · s−2.

not the standard deviation.

So the distance proton has been walking is: δz = 1
2at2 = 2.3 × 10−7m. This is neglectable compared
with the resolution we designed (1mm). Moreover, protons in human body are not free at all. They
exist mostly in the form of water (H2O) and fat (−CH2−) and are aﬀected by random molecular
motion. Therefore, the excursion of the proton will be much smaller than the above ﬁgure.

One may expect that if we want to improve the resolution further, the movement of proton caused
by the gradient may become signiﬁcant. Theoretically this is true. However, there is another factor
which is practically more important than the excursion. It is the diﬀusion eﬀect caused by molecular
motion and the gradient[2, 3, 4]. It diﬀers from the excursion eﬀect in that it is essentially the thermal
diﬀusion of magnetization. We made an estimation using water. The resulting resolution limit caused
by excursion is about 1 Angstrom3, while the resolution limit set by diﬀusion is[5]

(∆r)D =

DTacq,

2
3

s

(9)

where D is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient. The D for water is about 2×10−5cm2/s at room temperature. Tacq
is the time of signal acquisition, i.e., the duration of measurement. This formula indicates that Tacq
will limit the improvement of resolution. Suppose Tacq is 1.5ms, it will set the lowest bound of 1.4µm
on the resolution. Usually the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of biological sample is less than that of water. The
resolution can be improved further. But short acquisition time means great gradient. The switch of
such strong gradient is not only a diﬃcult technical problem , but also harmful to the sample.

In above discussion we only considered the theoretical limits posed by excursion and molecular
motion, however, there is another more serious problem, that is, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). With
the improvement of resolution, the volume of the sample will shrink inevitably. So the SNR will
decrease naturally. This problem can be partly solved by introducing High-Temperature supercon-
ductive receiver coil [6, 7] and some other techniques[5]. But the thermal noise is still insurmountable,
for the wavelength of radiowave is so long, the thermal noise is signiﬁcant even at low temperature.

One of the authors, Yan, wishes to give thanks Dr. Yan Feng, a postdoc at Institute of Physics,

Chinese Academy of Sciences, for his kind help in looking for references.

[1] E. Mark Haacke et.al, Magnetic Resonance Imaging-Physical Principles and Sequence Design.

References

New York, J. Wiley & Sons, c1999.

[2] E. L. Hahn, Phys. Rev. 80, 580(1950).

[3] H. Y. Carr and E. M. Purcell, Phys. Rev. 94, 630(1954).

[4] R. F. Karlicek, Jr. and I. J. Lowe, J. Magn. Reson. 37, 75(1980).

[5] Z. H. Cho, C. B. Ahn, S. C. Juh, and H. K. Lee, Med. Phys. 15, 815(1988).

[6] R. D. Black, T. A. Early, P. B. Roemer, O. M. Mueller, A. Mogro-Campero, L. G. Turner, and

G. A. Johnson, Science 259, 793(1993).

[7] R. D. Black, T. A. Early and G. A. Johnson, J. Magn. Reson. A113, 74(1995).

3It is evident that this estimation is meaningless. It is merely based on magnetic gradient and random molecular
motion. A photon emitted by a single proton can not be probed for a reason we will mention in the discussion of
signal-to-noise ratio. Only the radiation emitted by enough in-phase protons can be probed.

