\\ 

\\  

\\ 

  

     

Title: In Search of Hidden Variables  

Author: M. R. Mahdavi 

Comments: 10 pages, 5 figures  

Subj-class: quant-ph, physics      

       Here,  I  attribute  the  non-commuting  character  of  the  components  of  the  velocity 

operator ( in the Dirac theory of the electron) to a peculiarity in the physical make-up of 

the particle part of the electron. As a result I conclude that the electrostatic fields of an 

electron, as seen by an observer, are in the form of short duration pulses issuing from it. 

I then show why it is that the value of the charge of the electron is related to the speed of 

light and Planck constant via the formula for the fine-structure constant, and as a result 

suggest  that  the  speed  of  propagation  of  such  pulses  of  electrostatic  fields  through 

space  is  ~137c.  It  is  then  shown  why  it  is  that  these  faster  than  light  signals  do  not 

contradict the facts of Lorentz transformations. At the end an experiment is proposed for 

verifying the existence and the electromagnetic nature of faster than light signals.    

1. INTRODUCTION   

      The idea that quantum phenomena might be explained in terms of hidden-variables 

is  fairly  old.  It  was  first  employed  in  a  practical  way  by  David  Bohm  [1,2]  ,  whereby  he 

managed  to  arrive  at  a  causal  interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics.  More  recently  the 

idea  of  hidden  variables  has  been  used  by  the  proponents  of  local  realistic  models  in 

questioning 

the  validity  of  Bell  experiments  and  challenging 

the  Copenhagen 

interpretation of quantum mechanics [3-4] . 

      In this, the first of a series of papers on the subject of sub-quantum physics, I shall  

take  a  direct  approach  to  the  subject  of  hidden-variables  and  the  conjectured  sub-

quantum  physics.  That  is,  by  taking  the  unusual  step  of  taking  the  predictions  of  the 

Dirac theory of the electron at their face value, I shall try to reveal the nature of one of 

the  hidden  variables  and  give  an  outline  of  the  problems  which  will  be  considered  in 

future papers.     

      On purpose the subject matter of this paper is limited  to only a few related points. 

The  reason  is  that,  in  the  absence  of  any  experimental  evidence,  the  approach  to  the 

subject of sub-quantum physics must of necessity be based on intuitive reasoning. This 

gives  the  whole  effort  a  speculative  outlook  unless  at  the  outset  a  prediction  of  the 

theory is presented which can be put to the test of the experiment.         

2.  PECULIARITIES  OF THE DIRAC THEORY OF THE ELECTRON 

  

 

      The  Dirac  theory  [5]  ,  for  both  the  free  electron  and  electron  in  the  presence  of 

external  fields,  exhibits  peculiarities  which  confront  one  with  serious  conceptual 

difficulties. Here we limit ourselves to those encountered in the free electron theory.  

    The Dirac theory predicts that: 

     i. A measurement of the instantaneous value of a component of velocity is certain to 

yield the results ±c. This by itself does not cause any problems as it can apparently be 

explained  in  terms  of  the  uncertainty  relation.  But,  our  way  of  looking  at  things  will 

eventually get us into a serious difficulty ( see sects. 4 and 6 ).      

    ii.  A  component  of  the  velocity  is  composed  of  two  part,  a  constant  part    connected 

with  the  momentum  via  the  classical  relativistic  relation,  and  an  oscillatory  part.  The 

oscillatory  part  of  the  velocity  is  a  natural  prediction  as  it  can  provide  a  basis  for 

understanding the source of the intrinsic angular momentum of the electron. 

    iii.  The  components  of  the  velocity  operator  do  not  commute  with  one  another.  This 

means that if one measures the component of the velocity in a particular direction one 

can not at the same time obtain any information about the components of the velocities 

in  any  other  direction.  This  is  the  serious  difficulty  which  eventually  convinced  some 

physicist to look for another representation for the electron.    

      Now, we propose that iii means that a measurement of the instantaneous velocity of 

the electron along a selected direction will yield one of the three results: ±c or no result. 

That  is,  due  a  peculiarity  in  the  physical  make-up  of  the  electron  (  which  we  shall 

presently  consider),  one  can  not  observe  the  electron  at  all  times.  Rather,  that  this 

physical  peculiarity,  in  conjunction  with  the  electron’s  oscillatory  motion,  allows  one  to 

observe  or  make a physical measurement only when the direction of the motion of the 

electron  is  almost  perpendicular  to  one’s  viewing  direction.  Therefore,  one  can  only 

briefly observe the electron for a time period ∆t after which, due to its oscillatory motion, 

it  will  be  lost  from  one‘s  view  for  a  time  period    β

∆t,  until  such  times  as  when  the 

-1

oscillatory motion once again brings the electron into ones view. During the time period 

when  the  electron  is  lost  to  one’s  view  the  result  of  a  measurement  of  a  dynamical 

variable will be; no results. Or equivalently one can not obtain any information about the 

component  of  the  velocity  in  any  other  direction  other  than  the  one  perpendicular  to 

one’s viewing direction. 

       As for the physical peculiarity that results in this limitation on the observation (or  the 

interaction ) angle, we propose that contrary to the accepted view, an electronic charge 

is  not  in  the  form  of  a  sphere  on  whose  surface  an  amount  of  charge  -q    is  uniformly 

distributed; rather, that it resembles a thin disc, as if cut from the spherical one, with the 

center of the disc coinciding with that of the sphere ( Fig.1). Thus all the charges are to 

be found on the periphery of the disc and none on its flat sides. The electric field lines 

are still radial, but emerge from the rim and none emerges from its flat sides.  

    Next,  imagine  that  the  disc  shaped  pole  moves  in  such  a  way  that  n,  the  normal 

vector to the plane of the disc, is parallel to the direction of the instantaneous velocity c ( 

Fig. 2, where we are looking edgewise at the disc ). As a result of the shape of the pole 

and  the  oscillatory  motion  there  is  a  limitation  on  the  angle  of  observation  (  or  the 

interaction angle ). As shown in the figure the interaction angle is limited to 

± on either 

β
2

side of the line r which lies in the plane of the disc and passes through its center.  

   Clearly,  even  if  interaction  between  elementary  particles  did  proceed  according  to 

causal  laws,  nonetheless,  because  of  the  limitation  on  the  interaction  angle,  such 

interactions will appear to an observer to be of a random character. 

     Next,  consider  what  happens  when  one  observes  an  electron.  Because  of  the 

limitation  on  the  observation  angle  the  electrostatic  fields  of  the  electron,  reaching  the 

point  of  observation,  will  be  in  the  form  of  pulses  of  duration  ∆t,  separated  by  time 

intervals of β

∆t  ( Fig.3 ). The value of the electric intensity in each pulse is equal  to  

-1

-1

β

E, where E is the average and measurable electric intensity. Up till now it has been 

assumed  that  the  electric  fields  of  a  charge  are  in  the  forms  of  a  continuous  lines 

emanating from a charge. According to this conception the speed of travel of static fields 

through space is equal to the speed of light. However, from what has been said it is clear 

that  c  is  an  average  speed  and  that  an  individual  pulse  must  travel  with  a  speed  β

-1
 

times  greater  than  that  of  light.  Thus,  when  we  observe  an  electron  we  first  receive  a 

pulse that moves with the speed β

c. The next pulse, however, as it were, lingers on for 

-1

a time interval   β

∆t  before starting its travel through space. Hence, what one sees on 

-1

the average corresponds to static fields traveling with the speed of light through space. 

For this reason the forms of Lorentz transformations are not altered.    

     Considering  the  above  we  now  propose  that  quantum  mechanics  is  a  non-local 

theory; the non-locality arising as a consequence of the faster than signals. We also hold 

that the results of the Bell-type experiments provide indirect evidence in support of the 

idea of faster than light signals.    

3. INTIMATIONS OF THE UNCERTAINTY RELATION AND THE EXCLUSION  

 

 

    PRINCIPLE 

     In  our  interpretation  of  the  Dirac  theory  there  is  a  hint  of  the  uncertainty  principle, 

since  at  the  time  that  the  electron  is  lost  from  ones  view  one  can  not  have  any 

information in regards to it position or its momentum. In this we can detect a sort of an 

inherent  uncertainty  concerning  the  position  and  momentum  of  the  electron.  However, 

one may verify that the picture that we have obtained does not in all respect correspond 

to the uncertainty relation. 

    Now consider two electrons in close proximity to one another. Clearly the amount of 

the  charge  that  is  distributed  on  the  rim  of  a  disc  is  β

  greater  than  the  value  of  the 

measured electronic charge. Consequently, when the two electrons are in a favourable 

interaction  condition,  e.,  g.,  when  their  discs  are  coplanar  as  in Fig. 4 , the strength of 

the interaction between them is very strong, being β

 times greater than the strength of 

-1

-2

the  interaction  in  the  classical  conception  of  things.  However,  because  of  the  random 

interactions  between  them,  the  strength  of  the  interaction  on  the  average  works  out  to 

the classical one.      

     Next  consider  what  happens  if  we  try  to  constrain  two  electrons,  having  exactly  the 

same  energies,  to  take  up  the  following  positions  in  space.  In  Fig.  4  at  time  t  the  two 

electrons  are  in  favourable  interacting  positions.  Now,  because  they  have  the  same 

energy their oscillatory motions will be identical ( this is evident from the Dirac theory ). 

Therefore,  after  one  complete  cycle  of  the  oscillatory  motion  the  two  electrons  once 

again will be in favourable interaction positions. The average strength of the interaction 

V between the two is not now reduced to the classical one; rather, it is β

 times stronger 

-1

than  V.  Therefore,  if we wish to constrain two electrons to remain in close proximity to 

one another, and in the relevant equations we insert the classical values of the potential, 

this  will  be  a  legal  step  if  only  the  two  electrons  have  different  energies.  Otherwise  at 

times they will interact strongly with one another. In this we have more than a hint of the 

exclusion principle.     

        

      

       

 

4. THE FINE-STRUCTURE CONSTANT 

     The dimensionless constant 

≅α

 frequently appears in the equations of physics 

1
137

at  and  below  the  atom  level.  Its  inverse  value  is  equal  to  the  coupling constant for the 

strong interactions. Also, the mass of a pi-meson is equal to 2x137 times the mass of the 

electron. One can hardly think of all this as being due to pure coincidences. Rather, one 

is more inclined to the view  that the fine-structure constant must have a deep physical 

significance. In the theory propounded here we have a natural candidate for the source 

of  the  fine-structure  constant,  namely,  the  ratio  of  appearance  to  disappearance  times 

the electron, or more precisely the interaction angle. Let us see if we can give this point 

of view some additional support.     

     Clearly, the measured value of the electronic charge is determined by the ratio of its 

appearance  to  its  disappearance  times  β.This  ratio  itself  is  determined  by  three 

parameters,  the  interaction  angle  which  we  have  assumed  to  be  equal  to  β  itself,  the 

instantaneous  velocity  of  the  electron,  and  the  trajectory  along  which  the  oscillatory 

motion takes place. The last one is one of the factors which determine the value of the 

intrinsic  angular  momentum  of  the  electron.  Hence  we  may  say  that  the  value  of  the 

charge  is  also  related  to  the  value  of  the  intrinsic  angular  momentum.  .  From  these 

considerations  we  may  conclude  that  the  value  of  the  electronic  charge  is  given  by  a 

relation of the form 

                                                     

q

β∝

                                                    (1) 

dbca
h

In  writing  down  this  relation,  however,  we  have  taken  the  apparently  illegal  step  of 

equating  the  instantaneous  velocity  of  the  electron  with  that  of  light  c.  This  we  shall 

consider in the concluding part of the paper.   

Now, comparing (1) with the formula for the fine-structure constant 

                                                   

α

=

                                                    (2) 

we may guess that β is either exactly equal to α, or that at the most it differs from it by a 

geometrical factor, say for example, 

β

=

.   

      Considering  the  above  we  now  propose  that  the  velocity  of  the  faster  than  light 

q2
04
hcπε

α
2
π

signals are ~ 137c.  

             

 

5. A PROPOSED EXPERIMENTS FOR TESTING OUR INTERPRETATION OF THE 

    DIRAC THEORY  

       Ideally  two  distinct  types  of  experiments  are  required  for  verifying  the  validity  or 

otherwise of our proposed ideas. One for testing the idea of intermittent interactions and 

another for verifying the existence of faster than light signals. The former type does not 

seems to be technically feasible. Hence, we limit ourselves to a description of the latter.         

       At time t0 a pulse of electrons moving with velocity v is let through the gate G (Fig. 

5). Simultaneously a voltage V is switched on between the two poles at position A. It will 

now take a time ∆t for the electron pulse to reach the detector D. Now, assume that the 

electrostatic fields, as in the classical conception of things, propagate through space with 

the velocity of light. We choose the distance d in such a way that d/c is slightly greater 

than ∆t. In that event the electron pulse will not be subjected to the electric field of the 

dipole and will arrive at the detector. However, if the static fields are in the form of pulses 

of faster than light signals then the electron pulse will suffer a deflection and will not be 

detected.  In  principle  this  set  up  can  even  be  used  for  measuring  the  speed  of  faster 

than light signals, e. g., by increasing the distance d till the point is reached, where the 

electron pulse can be detected at D. 

 

        

6. CONCLUSIONS  

     The intended purpose of the paper is to provide plausible evidence in support of a  

concrete form of hidden-variable theory and also suggest an experiment for verifying the 

validity or otherwise of our interpretation of the Dirac theory of the electron. In doing so 

the  reader  might  get  the  impression  that  what  we  are  advocating  is  that,  quantum 

mechanics is a disguised form of classical physics. This is far from the case.  

   The  discussion  on  the  fine-structure  constant  was  not  altogether  necessary  at  this 

juncture. We could have simply said that we conclude that the pulses of the electrostatic 

fields  travel  with  a  velocity  greater  than  that  of  light.  However,  we  wrote  down  the 

relation  (1),    to  show  that  sub-quantum  physics  has  little  in  common  with  classical 

physics and to bring out the extent of the task lying ahead.  

   Thus, consider that we have a particle that moves with the velocity of light. Clearly, if it 

were to have a rest mass, then because of its motion with the velocity of light its mass 

should be infinite. Therefore, we must conclude that the particle in question initially does 

not  have  the  attribute  of  inertial  mass.  Rather,  that  its  mass  arises  as  the  result  of  the 

constraining  effect  of  the  agency,  as  yet  unknown  to  us,  which  forces  it  to  undergo  its 

oscillatory motion. Now, if the said particle does not have an inertial mass it then follows 

that it can not have a Coulomb charge. For, if it did then upon being subjected to a force 

it will be accelerated to infinite velocity within zero time period. In that event it would act 

as an infinite source of electromagnetic energy. Hence, if we wish to continue we must 

for the time being assume that, the Coulomb charge or any other charges carried by the 

electron arise as a result of the motion of the said particle with the characteristic velocity 

   These  and  other  problems,  for  example,  the  nature  of  the  de  Broglie  waves  and  the 

connection  between  the  known  forces  of  nature  will  be  considered  in  subsequent 

c. 

  

 

papers.                

References: 

1. D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 166 (1952 ). 

2. D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 180 (1952 ).  

3. A. Fine, Syntheses 50, 279 (1982). 

4. L. E. Szabo, Found. Phys. 30, 1891 ( 2000 ).  

5. P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, 261 (Oxford Univ. press,  

   1958 ) 

 

β

F ig .1.

On a disc shaped pole the electronic charge is distributed
on its rim  ( shaded area in the figure )

 

 

Bisecting plane Γ

Disc sh aped pole

c

n

r

β

F ig .2.

Looking along  a dire ction r one c an only  observe the
electron’s electrostatic fields when ones dirction of view
is at  an angle  ±
 to the direction of m o tion c o f the
disc .

β
2

π
2

 

 

E

∆ t

∆ t

F ig .3.

The electrostatic  fields o f an  ele ctron are in the form
of short pulses of duration ∆ t seprated by tim e intervals
of β -1 ∆ t .

β -1∆ t

t

 

 

e 1

e 2

F ig .4.

Two   e lec tr on s   in   f a vo u r ab le   in te ra c tio n   po s itio n

 

 

 

Detector

A

d

v

G

Electron Pulse

F ig .5.

 

