 
Milan M. Ćirković 

 

 

 

ANTHROPIC FLUCTUATIONS VS. WEAK ANTHROPIC PRINCIPLE 

 
 
Abstract. A modern assessment of the classical Boltzmann-Schuetz argument for large-scale 
entropy  fluctuations  as  the  origin  of  our  observable  cosmological  domain  is  given.  The 
emphasis  is  put  on  the  central  implication  of  this  picture  which  flatly  contradicts  the  weak 
anthropic principle as an epistemological statement about the universe. Therefore, to associate 
this  picture  with  the  anthropic  principle  as  it  is  usually  done  is  unwarranted.  In  particular, 
Feynman's  criticism  of  the  anthropic  principle  based  on  the  entropy-fluctuation  picture  is  a 
product of this semantic confusion.  
 

Various  anthropic  principles  have  been  discussed  during  the  last  quarter  of  

century by cosmologists and philosophers alike (for the bibliography up to 1991, see 

Balashov 1991; for the most comprehensive treatment of issues involved, see Barrow 

and  Tipler  1986).  In  spite  of  this—by  now  already  rather  long—history  (especially 

taking  into account earlier important contributions like those of Barnes, Whitrow or 

Hoyle), there are still more than a few misunderstandings and confusing issues in the 

field of anthropic reasoning. In order to reduce large ambiguities and confusion still 

reigning  in  these  discussions,  here  we  investigate  at  some  length  one  of  the  most 

important  problems  allegedly  amenable  to  an  “anthropic”  solution,  namely,  the 

problem of the thermodynamical arrow of time. As we shall see, this is a nice example 

of actual misuse of the appeal of anthropic principles. 

Let  us imagine  a  static,  spatially  finite  and eternally existing universe. For a 

working  model,  we  can  consider  classical  Einstein  (1917)  model  which  marked  the 

beginning  of  the  modern  cosmology.  This  model  is  a  static,  topologically  closed 

universe  with  a  cosmological  constant.  Let  us  also, for  the  time  being,  forget  about 

gravitational collapse, existence of black holes and possible singularities within their 

horizons, and assume that all interactions are classical, and that the equation of state 

of  matter  is  always  such  as  to  prevent  formation  of  singularities.  Now  we  wish  to 

consider fate of a much smaller region within such a universe, a region which we shall 

call—for  obvious  reasons—the  observable  region,.  What  conclusions  can  one  draw 

from  the  existence  of  a  large  thermodynamical  disequilibrium  in  the  observable 

region?  

This issue has, historically, been the central part of Boltzmann's thinking about 

the nature of the second law of thermodynamics. Although he knew nothing about the 

1 

cosmic  microwave  background,  he  knew  very  well  the  Olbers'  paradox  and 

understood  that  the  thermodynamical  disequilibrium  is  a  necessary  (although 

presumably  not  sufficient)  condition  for  creation  of  life  and  ultimately  intelligence. 

Therefore,  he  suggested  two  possible  recourses:  one  which  postulated  very  special 

initial  conditions  (that  is,  a  universe  of  finite  age,  and  low  initial  entropy),  and 

another, that what we see is a large enough fluctuation of entropy creating the local 

condition  of  thermodynamical  disequilibrium,  while  all  matter  is  approaching 

equilibrium  reigning  in  the  universe  at  large.  Since  any  intelligent  observers  could 

exist  in  the  disequilibrium  condition,  it  is  only  reasonable  that  we  perceive  the 

universe as we do, far from equilibrium, and possessing a definite thermodynamical 

arrow of increasing entropy. In the words of Boltzmann (1895) himself:   

 

 

 

If  we  assume the universe great enough, we can make the probability of 

one  relatively  small  part  being  in  any  given  state  (however  far  from  the 

state of thermal equilibrium), as great as we please. We can also make the 

probability great that, though the whole universe is in thermal equilibrium, 

our world is in its present state. It may be said that the world is so far from 

thermal  equilibrium  that  we  cannot  imagine  the  improbability  of  such  a 

state. But can we imagine, on the other side, how small a part of the whole 

universe  this  world  is?  Assuming  the  universe  great  enough,  the 

probability that such a small part of it as our world should be in its present 

state, is no longer small.  

However,  this  is  not  stated  by  Boltzmann  as  the  primary  option,  and  he  even  gave 

credit  for  this  idea  to  his  assistant,  Dr.  Schuetz.  The  other  possibility—listed  as  the 

primary  option—is  the  existence  of  special  initial  conditions  of  very  low  entropy, 

from  which  the  universe  evolves  toward  states  of  higher  and  higher  disorder.  Now, 

there exists a problem in an ever-existing universe that the initial conditions need to 
be  formulated  in  asymptotic  limit  t  →  −∞,  and  these  difficulties  are  circumvented 

only by additional postulates, like that of spacetime as an infinite reservoir of negative 

entropy (Davies 1974). In evolving universes of finite age, like the Friedmann models, 

this is seemingly alleviated by postulating a singular origin at t = 0, although another 

problem  appears  in  place  of  the  previous  one:  improbability  of  so  low  entropy  Big 

Bang when compared to the generic case of global singularity (Penrose 1979). In spite 

2 

of  these  circumstances,  as  Barrow  and  Tipler  point  out  in  their  (1986)  monograph, 

invoking  some  kind  of  special  initial  conditions  was  in  general  much  more  popular 

among  cosmologists,  and  for  a  good  reason.  Since  Hubble's  discovery  of  the 

expanding  universe—and  in  particular  since  the  victory  of  the  standard  Big  Bang 

cosmology over its great steady state rival (Kragh 1996)—the special character of the 

initial  conditions  became  a  part  of  the  core  of  the  standard  cosmological  paradigm. 

However, from time to time, the second option has also been put forward, mainly by 

philosophers, and it is there that the main obstacle to its operationalization has been 

noted. The intrinsic difficulty in the entropy-fluctuation picture is connected with the 

very basis of statistical reasoning employed. In words of Price (1996): 

 

 

 

If  we  wish  to  accept  that  our  own  region  is  the  product  of  “natural” 

evolution from a state of even lower entropy, therefore, we seem bound to 

accept that our region is far more improbable than it needs to be, given its 

present entropy... If the choice is between (1) fluctuations which create the 

very low-entropy conitions from which we take our world to have evolved, 

and  (2)  fluctuations  which  simply  create  it  from  scratch  with  its  current 

macroscopic configuration, then  choice (2) is overwhelmingly  more pro-

bable.  Why?  Simply  by  definition,  once  entropy  is  defined  in  terms  of 

probabilities  of  microstates  for  given  macrostates.  So  the  most  plausible 

hypothesis—overwhelmingly so—is that the historical evidence we take to 

support the former view is simply misleading, having itself been produced 

by  the  random  fluctuation  which  produced  our  world  in  something  very 

close to its current condition.  

This is the crux of the problem: our observations in the entropy-fluctuation picture do 

not correspond to reality—and not for epistemological, but for physical reasons. The 

argument has been put forward for the first time by von Weizsäcker (1939). The entire 

evidence  pertaining  to  what  is  conventionally  called  past  is  false  or  simulated; 

notably, this applies to cosmological knowledge on the physical state of the universe 

at  previous  epochs.  Beyond  certain  region  which  surrounds  our  spatiotemporal 

location,  the  universe  is  in  thermodynamical  equilibrium,  but  we  have  no  real 

information  on  matter  in  that  external  region.  In  the  internal  region,  however,  it  is 

only natural to see things in such a way that states of smaller and smaller entropy are 

3 

envisaged as we look deeper and deeper into the (conventionally labelled) past. If one 

could  apply  Boltzmann-Schuetz  model  to  the  modern  cosmology  (which  can  be,  in 

general,  fairly  well  approximated  by  Newtonian  models,  except  very  close  to  the 

initial  singularity),  this  “simulation”  would  include  such  paramount  observations  in 

modern  cosmology,  as  is  the  existence  and  properties  of  cosmic  microwave 

background radiation or young galaxies seen in modern deep-field images. 

 

However, in order to see the main point of the present study, it is not necessary 

to track the details of possible application of this model to conventional cosmological 

wisdom. There is an entirely different aspect of the story, which is seen in Barrow and 

Tipler's  dubbing  the  Boltzmann-Schuetz  idea  “anthropic  fluctuation  picture”, 

therefore  implying  its  close  connection  with  at  least  some  of  the  various  anthropic 

principles. The present author has argued elsewhere that at least some of the so-called 

anthropic  principles  are  certainly  not  principles,  but  workable  scientific  hypotheses 

(Ćirković and Bostrom 2000). What exactly is “anthropic” in the Boltzmann-Schuetz 

entropy fluctuation model? 

The  central  idea  is,  of  course,  that  we  could  not  exist  in  the  state  of 

thermodynamical  equilibrium,  and  that,  therefore,  some  restrictions  on  possible 

worlds are imposed by our existence as intelligent observers in this specific case. Is 

that  enough  to  constitute  anthropic  nature  of  an  argument?  This  does  not  seem 

obvious at all. For instance, nobody has invoked anthropic reasoning when discussing 

incapability  of  other  planets  in  the  Solar  system  to  support  life  and  intelligence; 

underlying  physical  mechanisms  in  this  case  are  (allegedly)  sufficiently  well 

understood  (e.g.  Dole  1964)  that  the  teleological  mode  of  explanation  can  be 
substituted  by  a  more  conventional  one.1  Weak  anthropic  principle  (henceforth 

WAP), the very foundation of entire anthropic reasoning, has been originally defined 

by the following locution (Carter 1974):  

 

 

…the effect that we must be prepared to take account of the fact that our 

location  in  the  universe  is  necessarily  privileged  to  the  extent  of  being 

compatible with our existence as observers. (p. 127) 

Alternatively, one can use the definition of Barrow and Tipler (1986):  

                                                           
1 In this connection see the analysis of explanatory power of anthropic arguments by Balashov (1990); 
somewhat different opinions are expressed in Earman (1987) and Kragh (1997).  
 

4 

 

 

 

The  observed  values  of  all  physical  and  cosmological  quantities  are  not 

equally probable but they take on values restricted by the requirement that 

there  exist  sites  where  carbon-based  life  can  evolve  and  by  the 

requirement that the Universe be old enough for it to have already done so. 

(p. 16) 

Tha latter does explicitly deal with observations, and not “underlying reality” (or just 

“values of all… quantities”). However, as a statement on observations, it possesses no 

true  epistemological  value.  The  reason  for  this  (seemingly  too strong)  thesis  can  be 

found in subsequent discourse of the same authors in discussion, for instance, of the 

dimensionality of space, one of the great questions of theoretical physics which is an 

obvious field for anthropic reasoning. The very title of the seminal Ehrenfest (1917) 

article on the topic (discussed at length in the Barrow and Tipler monograph, pp. 258-

276) speaks for itself: In what way does it become manifest in the fundamental laws of 

physics  that  space  has  three  dimensions?  The  usage  of  “manifest”  instead  of,  say, 

“apparent”  or  “perceived”  indicates  that  the  explanation  is  to  be  offered  through 

anthropic  reasoning  for  something  taken  at  the  phenomenal  level.  This  should  be 

compared  with  “simulations”  of  reality  implicit  in  the  Boltzmann-Schuetz  picture; 

while those can be interpreted as “observed values” in Barrow and Tipler definition, 

there is contradiction with the Carter's requirement that our location (on which data 

are not simulated) imposes true restrictions on the state of the universe at large. This 

seems another instance in which Barrow-Tipler definition is inferior to Carter's, from 

a  physical—one  may  even  say  practical—point  of  view  (for  more  on  the  issue  of 

definitional differences see Bostrom 2002).  

In  the  amount  in  which  WAP  is  a  cornerstone  of  the  entire  anthropic 

reasoning,  Boltzmann-Schuetz  idea  is,  therefore,  antithetical  to  the  substance  of  the 

latter.  It  implies  not  only  a  negation  of  the  cognitive  value  of  our  observations,  but 

also breaks the basic connection between the local and global processes. The point of 

the WAP constraints, as there were conceived by Dicke and explicated by Carter, has 

been exactly to deal with real properties of the universe, not how the universe could or 

should look like. It should not just look flat enough; it must really be flat in order for 

WAP  to  meaningfully  work.  Presumably,  a  thesis  suggesting  that  WAP  is  dealing 

only  with  observations  of  ours  with  all  their  inherent  limitations  can  be  defended. 

5 

However, in the view we are defending here, it would present a betrayal of the spirit 

of  the  entire  anthropic  reasoning,  and—what  is  much  worse—would  ultimately 

require  a  revision  of  most  of  our  basic  assumptions  first  of  all  in  cosmology  and 

particle  physics,  and  contingently  in  other  scientific  disciplines  as  well.  Obviously 

(from the context of their writings) that Dicke, Carter, Barrow and Tipler, and other 

authors, have not been considering the possibility that our empirical evidence is just a 

mirage. 

This  is, of  course, not to imply that the entropy-fluctuation picture is simply 

wrong,  even  in  the  framework  of  our  classical,  non-expanding  universe.  However, 

there  is  a  host  of  epistemological  problems  with  it  which  make  it  at  least  highly 

suspicious.  Whether  a  theory  implying  simulated  nature of  most empirical  evidence 

may  be  considered  scientifical  at  all  is  not  obvious.  For  instance,  there  seems  to 

appear  problems  with  falsifiability  in  the  Popperian  sense.  As  far  as  cosmology  is 

concerned,  in  a  founding  paper  of  the  historically  crucial steady state theory, Bondi 

and  Gold  (1948)  have  emphasized  the  desirability  of  as  uniform  physical  laws  as 

possible. In addition, the conceptual ease of empirical refuting the steady state theory 

made it a paradigm of the Popperian notion of scientific theory, as later elaborated by 

Bondi (1967). Although the steady state theory is now universally considered defunct, 

its impact in the epistemology and philosophy of cosmology has been instrumental in 

the  formation  of  modern  cosmological  thought.  In  the  now  accepted  standard 

paradigm  based  on  Friedmann  models  the  uniformity  of  laws  is  preserved  in  entire 

spacetime  except  at  initial  (and  possibly  final)  singularity.  The  Boltzmann-Schuetz 

picture  is  an  extreme  example  of  opposite  attitude,  in  which  the  very  concept  of 

physical law becomes vacuous. Therefore, it is hardly a scientific theory in Popperian 

sense.  Parenthetically,  the  entropy-fluctuation  picture  for  the  same  reasons  violates 

Reichenbach's  principle  of  the  common  cause,  which  states  that  improbable 

coincidences are always associated with an earlier common cause. Therefore, it puts 

us  in  an  uncomfortable  position  of  having  to  consider  only  sufficiently  isolated 

systems  as  causally  ordered.  This  potentially  undermines  most  of  usual  notions  of 

description  in  physical  sciences,  since  one  can  never  be  entirely  certain  that  his 

system  is  isolated  enough.  A  similar  (but  less  disturbing)  situation  occurs  in  some 

other  attempts  to  make  local  physics  dependent  on  largely  unknown  and  potentially 

unknowable  cosmological  processes  or  boundary  conditions  (for  instance,  in  Hoyle 

 

6 

and  Narlikar  attempts  at  building  an  action-at-distance  description  of  inertial 

properties of matter; e. g. Hoyle and Narlikar 1972; Hoyle 1975).  

One can reach the same conclusion from another point of view. The entropy 

fluctuation  picture  (correctly)  and  the  anthropic  principle  itself  (in  our  opinion 

incorrectly)  have  been  criticized  on  the  basis  of  what  can  be  called  “Adam’s 

dilemma”  (from  Milton's  Paradise  Lost);  the  most  widely  cited  formulation  of  this 

criticism  is  due  to  Feynman  (1965).  The  great  physicist  concluded  that  the  entropy 

fluctuation picture is “ridiculous” since it requires much larger entropy fluctuation in 

both  spatial  and  temporal  sense  than  the  one  necessary  for  the  actual  emergence  of 

intelligent  observers;  thus  it  is  in  conflict  with  Occam's  razor.  This  criticism,  while 

prima  facie  irreproachable,  applies  seriously  only  to  the  classical,  Boltzmann 

discussion.  As  we  have  noted,  Boltzmann  and  Schuetz  have  actually  known next to 

nothing  about  what  we  perceive  today  as  the  state  of  the  universe  on  cosmological 

scales,  and  could  rely  only  on  a  very  limited  set  of  local  (in  spatiotemporal  sense) 

observations.  Moreover,  even  today  it  is  not  at  all  obvious  how  large  entropy 

fluctuation is actually needed for the emergence of life and intelligence on Earth. As 

an  antidote  to  Feynman's  cognitive  optimism,  one  may  cite  the  classical  study  of 

Collins and Hawking (1973), where it was argued that properties of spacetime on the 

largest scales are necessary preconditions for our existence (the detailed discussion of 

this issue is to be found in Barrow and Tipler 1986). Boltzmann, however, was quite 

correct that any size of fluctuation can, ultimately, be achieved in his globally static 

world of classical physics; in this sense, Feynman may only criticize this picture on 

account  of  its  improbability,  i.e.  sufficiently  small  measure  on  a  subset  of  all 

conceivable  observer-creating  fluctuations.  This measure  is  small  indeed,  at least in 

the  spatial  sense,  since  the  observed  universe  is  so  much  bigger  than  the  terrestrial 

biosphere (as far as the temporal scale is concerned, the case is much more difficult to 

establish,  since  the  timescales  for  evolution  of  intelligence  are  comparable  to 

cosmological  timescales  in  realistic  Friedmann-Robertson-Walker 

  universes). 

However,  this  problem  is  entirely  circumvented  by  recalling  the  overwhelming 

probability that our empirical knowledge is simulated in this picture. The fluctuation 

could  indeed  be  much  smaller,  as  Milton's  Adam,  Feynman  and  others  supposed; 

however, we do not need to know about this. In fact, it is due only to the widespread 

confusion  plaguing  the  field  that  Feynman  has  reportedly  criticized  anthropic 

 

7 

principle,  when  discussing  the  entropy-fluctuation  picture.  His  criticism  is  in  place 

when applied to the conventional form of the latter, but the picture itself has nothing 

to do with the anthropic principle whatsoever. Interestingly enough, in the course of 

this  criticism,  Feynman  has  put  forward  a  necessity  for  a  time-asymmetric  law  of 

nature to explain the entropy gradient, a proposal which was later strongly publicized 

by Penrose (for instance see Penrose 1979).    

It  has  been  established  long  ago,  notably  by  great  French  physicist, 

mathematician  and  philosopher  Henry  Poincaré  (1946)—and  later  elaborated  by  the 

founder of the modern computer science Wiener (1961)—that the sense of increasing 

entropy  is  essential  for  existence  of  intelligent  observers.  Without  entering  into 

discussion on whether other forms of complex organization of matter can exist in an  

entropy-decreasing  universe,  one  notes  that  in  the  Boltzmann  entropy  fluctuation 

picture, there is necessarily a finite period of time in which the entropy did actually 

decrease. This  period,  therefore,  necessarily preceeded the appearance of intelligent 

life on our planet. Together with our knowledge about the history of human intelligent 

observers,  this  gives  us  a  lower  limit  to  our  local  displacement  relative  to  the 

minimum of the entropy curve. However, since one can envisage the time when exact 

mechanism of evolution and processes accompanying emergence of intelligence will 

become  known  facts,  it  seems  a  posteriori  improbable  that  a  smooth  transition 

between “simulated” (cosmological) and “real” (anthropo-biological) evidence could 

be  achieved.  This  may  be  regarded  as  a  possible  (still  distant,  of  course)  argument 

against  the  entropy  fluctuation  picture  per  se,  although  we  can  not  devote  more 

attention to this issue here.  

The present discourse applies to the classical universe, considered as a single 

topologically  connected  cosmological  domain.  In  the  recent  literature  in  both 

cosmology and philosophy, there is a surge of interest in the concept of multiverse—

set  of  different  cosmological  domains,  possibly  causally  and/or  topologically 

disconnected from our “observable” domain—as the most comprehensive description 

of everything that exists. A variation on the Boltzmann-Schuetz theme can be played 

within  the  multiverse  framework,  in  which  our  existence  as  observers  selects  a 

particular domain (“universe”), as a domain of exceptionally low entropy content. A 

detailed discussion of this idea is beyond the scope of the present work, but two points 

may  be  made  immediately.  Since  the  anthropic  selection  effect  affects  initial 

 

8 

conditions  (“Big  Bangs”)  of  multiple  universes,  such  a  proposal  would  arguably  be 

closer to the Boltzmann’s primary option than to the entropy-fluctuation picture. On 

the  other  hand,  such  an  approach  would  essentially  vindicate  our  observational 

knowledge  on  the  structure  of  our  domain  on  the  largest  scales,  thus  leading  to  no 

epistemological quandary of the sort discussed in the present article.  

In  conclusion,  modern  understanding  of  the  entropy-fluctuation  picture 

immediately  implies  the  simulated  nature  of  most  of  our  cosmological  evidence  (as 

well as all other evidence pertaining to the perceived past). This does not correspond 

to the phenomena in common empirical sense of the word, and therefore immediately 

implies a massive violation of the WAP constraints. Thus, the attribute “anthropic”, 

arbitrarily  associated  with  this  picture,  is  largely  shallow  and  superficial.  By 

unravelling  this  semantical  confusion,  we  immediately  gain  a  proper  account  of  the 

problem  von  Weizsäcker,  Feynman  and  others  have  perceived,  which  can  not  truly 

jeopardize the epistemological and methodological status of WAP (and, contingently, 

other anthropic principles incorporating WAP as their core).  

Acknowledgements. The author wishes to hereby thank to Vesna Milošević-Zdjelar 

for supplying some of the references, as well as to Dr Nick Bostrom and Prof. Petar 

Grujić for stimulating discussions.  

Astronomical Observatory of Belgrade  

Volgina 7, 11160 Belgrade, Serbia, YUGOSLAVIA 

References 

Balashov, Yu. 1990, Comments Astrophys. 15, 19. 

Balashov, Yu. 1991, Am. J. Phys. 59, 1069. 

Barrow, J. D. and Tipler, F. J. 1986, The Anthropic Cosmological Principle (Oxford 

Bondi, H. 1967, Assumption and Myth in Physical Theory (Cambridge University 

University Press, New York).   

Press,   London). 

Bondi, H. and Gold, T. 1948, Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc. 108, 252.  

9 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bostrom, N. 2002, Anthropic Bias: Observation Selection Effects (Routledge, New 

York). 

Boltzmann, L. 1895, Nature 51. 413.  

Carter, B. 1974, in Leslie, J. 1990. (edt.) Physical Cosmology and Philosophy  

(Macmillan Publishing Company, London). 

Collins, C. B. and Hawking, S. W. 1973, Astrophys. J. 180, 317.  

Ćirković, M. M. and Bostrom, N. 2000, Astrophys. Space Sci. 274, 675. 

Davies, P. C. W. 1974, The Physics of Time Asymmetry (University of California 

Press, Berkeley).  

Dole, S. H. 1964, Habitable Planets for Man (Blaisdell Pub. Co., New York).  

Earman, J. 1987, Am. Phil. Quart. 24, 307. 

Ehrenfest, P. 1917, Proc. Amst. Acad. 20, 200.  

Einstein, A. 1917, Sitz. Preuss. Akad. Wiss., p. 112. 

London). 

Hoyle, F. 1975, Astrophys. J. 196, 661. 

Feynman, R. P. 1965, The Character of Physical Law (Cox and Wyman Ltd.,  

Hoyle, F. and Narlikar, J. V. 1972, Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc. 155, 305. 

Kragh, H. 1996, Cosmology and Controversy (Princeton University Press, Princeton). 

Kragh, H. 1997, Danish Yearbook of Philosophy 32, 65. 

Penrose, R. 1979, in General Relativity: An Einstein Centenary, ed. by Hawking,  

S. W. and Israel, W. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge), p. 581. 

Poincaré, H. 1946, The Foundations of Science (Science Press, Lancaster). 

Price, H. 1996, Time's Arrow and Archimedes' Point (Oxford University Press,  

New York). 

von Weizsäcker, C. 1939, Annalen der Physik 36, 275. 

Wiener, N. 1961, Cybernetics (John Wiley and Sons, New York). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10

