THE LIGO SUSPENDED OPTIC DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM 
 
J. Heefner, R. Bork, LIGO Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, 
USA 

PSN# 1848 

 

 

Abstract 

local  control  of  each 

The  original  LIGO1  suspension  control  system  [1] 
used  analog  circuitry  to  implement  the  closed  loop 
damping  required  for 
the 
suspended  optics.  Recent  developments  in  analog  to 
digital  converters  (ADC),  digital  to  analog  converters 
(DAC),  increased  processor  speed  and  performance, 
and  the  use  of  reflective  memory  have  made  a  digital 
alternative  possible.  Such  a  control  system  would 
provide additional performance and flexibility that will 
be  required  for  operation  of  the  interferometers.  This 
paper  will  describe  the  real-time  digital  servo  control 
systems  that  have  been  designed,  developed  and 
implemented  for  the  LIGO  suspended  optics.  In 
addition,  the  paper  will  describe  how  the  suspension 
controls  have  been  integrated  into  the  overall  LIGO 
control and data acquisition systems [2]. 

1 INTRODUCTION 

located 

The  LIGO 

interferometers 

in  Hanford, 
Washington  and  Livingston,  Louisiana  are  Michelson 
laser  interferometers  enhanced  by  multiple  coupled 
optical resonators. These coupled optical resonators are 
4  kilometer  long  Fabry-Perot  cavities  placed  in  each 
arm  of  the  interferometer.  The  mirrors  that  form  the 
cavities  are  suspended  from  a  single  loop  of  wire 
mounted  inside  suspension  cages  that  are,  in  turn, 
mounted  on  seismically  isolated  optical  platforms 
within the LIGO vacuum system. Control of the optic is 
achieved using voice coil actuators that act on magnets 
attached  to  the  surface  of  each  optic.  Shadow  sensors 
are  used  to  measure  movement  and  orientation  of  the 
optic with respect to the suspension cage.  

There  are  two  types  of  optic  suspensions  in  LIGO. 
The  Large  Optic  Suspension  and  the  Small  Optic 
Suspension.  Generically  these  suspension  types  are 
identical and only differ in optic size, dynamic range of 
motion and absolute noise floor of the controls. In the 
case  of  the  Large  Optic  Suspension  controls  the  key 
requirements are: 

§  Dynamic range of longitudinal motion: 20ump-p 
§  Dynamic range of angular motion: 500uradp-p 
§  Noise: 5 x 10-20*(f/40)-2 for f>40Hz 

Key requirements of the Small Optic controls are: 

                                                           
1 Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory 

§  Dynamic range of longitudinal motion: 27ump-p 
§  Dynamic range of angular motion: 1500uradp-p 
§  Noise: 3 x 10-18*(f/40)-2 for f>40Hz 

The  Large  and  Small  Optic  controls  have 
functional requirements: 
§  Provide  for  “local”  damping  of  the  suspended 
optic  using  the  shadow  sensors  and  voice  coil 
actuators. (Nominally 6 Large and 7 Small). 

two 

§  Provide  a  means  for  the  LIGO  Length  (LSC)  and 
the 
(ASC)  controls 

Alignment 
longitudinal position and orientation of the optic. 

to  control 

2 HARDWARE AND SYSTEM DESIGN 

In the original LIGO suspension control system, the 
local  damping  loop  for  each  optic  was  implemented 
using a completely analog solution. In this the solution, 
the  shadow  sensor  signals  were  amplified  and 
combined to form signals corresponding to longitudinal 
position, pitch and yaw readings.  A 10-pole chebychev 
filter with a zero at DC then filtered these signals. The 
filtered  signals  were  then  combined  with  inputs  from 
the  LSC  and  ASC  to  form  control  signals  in  the 
position,  pitch  and  yaw  degrees  of  freedom.  These 
signals  were  passed  to  an  output  matrix  and  sent  to 
each of the actuators. Early on in the commissioning of 
the  LIGO  interferometers  it  was  recognized  that  a 
digital 
additional 
performance  and  flexibility  required  for  operation  of 
the  interferometers  at  their  design  sensitivity.  Some  of 
the limitations of the analog option were: 
§  The  velocity  damping  provided  by  the  chebychev 
filter  was  not  necessarily  optimal  and  in  some 
cases  a  DC  coupled  servo  was  desired.  In  other 
cases  it  was  desired  to  have  different  filter 
characteristics  for  different  optics  or  different 
modes  of 
interferometer  operation.  These 
characteristics included gain bubbles at the micro-
seismic peak (~0.16 Hz). 

solution  would  provide 

the 

§  The  input  and  output  matrices  were  simple  gain 
stages. A more optimal solution required frequency 
shaping in the matrices. 

§  The interface to the LSC and ASC systems was via 
cables  and  connectors  where  the  ASC  and  LSC 
signals  originate  in  racks  many  meters  away. 
Interference  and  noise  was  an  issue  for  these 
sensitive signals. 

§  The ASC and LSC systems [3] were implemented 
using  digital  servos  and  a  more 
integrated 
approach  including  the  suspension  systems  was 
desired. 

it  was  decided 

After  carefully  considering  the  alternatives  and  the 
operational  issues  involved  with  replacing  existing 
systems 
implement  a  digital 
alternative  for  the  suspension  controls.  This  solution 
uses  VME  based  CPUs,  ADCs,  DACs  and  reflective 
memory  modules.  The  models  and  types  are  listed  in 
Table 1. 
 

to 

Table 1: VME modules used in systems 

Type 
CPU 

ADC 
DAC 

to  1GHZ, 

Characterisitcs 
850MHz 
VxWorks® OS 
16 bit, 32 Channels 
16 bit, 8 channels 

Model 
VMIC2 
Pentium III 
ICS3-110B 
Pentek4 
6102 
VMIC 5579 

PMCbus,  single  mode 
and multi-mode fiber 

Reflective 
Memory 
All  custom  analog  electronics  used  for  signal 
conditioning and actuator drive are mounted in 19-inch 
rack mount chassis or Eurocard format crates located in 
the  suspension  racks.  These  custom  electronics  are 
typically  very  low  noise  (1-2nV/(cid:214) Hz),  high  dynamic 
range  circuits.  The  timing  for  the  ADCs  and  DACs  is 
derived  from  the  same  GPS  (Global  Positioning 
System)  based  timing  system  used  by  the  LIGO  data 
acquisition system [2]. 

Since  the  suspension  controls  act  as  the  actuation 
point  for  the  ASC  and  LSC  systems,  the  suspension 
controls  had  to  be  integrated  into  their  reflective 
memory  networks.  There  are  three  reflective  memory 
loops for the ASC and LSC controls, one for each arm 
of the interferometer and one for the corner station. In 
addition  there  is  a  reflective  memory  network  for  the 
LIGO  data  acquisition  system.  Each  node  of  the 
network  is  connected  in  a  loop  using  single  mode  or 
multi-mode fiber. Data written to a memory location at 
one node is passed to each node in the loop. In this way 
data can be shared among nodes. 

3 LOCAL DAMPING LOOP 

All  of  the  software  is  modular  and  built  around  a 
block  of  code  that  contains  gain,  3  filters  (up  to  4 

                                                           
2 VMIC, Huntsville, AL, USA 
3 Interactive Circuits and Systems, Ltd., Gloucester, Ontario, 
Canada 
4 Pentek, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA 

 

 

 
second  order  sections  each),  an  enable,  offset  adjust 
and  an  excitation  input.  Each  of  the  3  filters  can  be 
enabled or bypassed on the fly by the operator. Figure 1 
shows  the  structure  of  a  basic  code  building  block 
(BCBB). 

Gain 

SOS1 

SOS2 

SOS3 

Excitation 

Offset 

 

Figure 1: Basic Code Building Block (BCBB) 
All  filters  are  implemented  using  IIR  filters  formed 
by  second  order  sections  (SOS1,  SOS2,  SOS3).  The 
coefficients for each filter are stored as a text file that is 
read by the code on start up. This allows the operator to 
select  different  servo  filters  on  the  fly  by  enabling  or 
bypassing  various  filters,  or  editing  the  filter  text  file 
and  restarting  the  system  can  change  the  entire 
configuration. 

The basic code blocks are then combined to form the 
algorithms  for  each  of  the  suspension  local  damping 
loops. The figure below is a block diagram of the code 
necessary  to  form  the  local  damping  loop  for  a  single 
optic. 

BCBB 

BCBB 

BCBB 

BCBB 

I
n
p
u
t
 

M

a
t
r
i
x
 

BCBB 

BCBB 

O
u
t
p
u
t
 

M

a
t
r
i
x
 

BCBB 

BCBB 

BCBB 

BCBB 

BCBB 

 
Figure 2: Block Diagram of Code For A Single 
Local Damping Loop 
In  the  local  damping  loop  for  each  optic,  the  four 
sensor inputs are combined to form the three degrees of 
freedom: position, pitch and yaw. These are shown top 
to  bottom,  respectively  between  the  input  and  output 
matrices in Figure 2. The function of the output matrix 
is  to  form  the  four  actuator  signals  from  the  three 
degrees of freedom. It should be noted that there is also 
a transverse degree of freedom for each optic that is not 
shown in the figure. This degree of freedom is handled 
separately by a single input, single output control loop 
formed by basic code building blocks. Not shown in the 
diagram  is  the  addition  of  the  length  and  alignment 
signals  supplied  by  the  LSC  and  ASC  systems.  These 
signals are added to their respective degrees of freedom 
just prior to the output matrix. 

4 SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 

One of the functions of the suspension controls is to 
provide  the  LSC  and  ASC  actuation  on  each  of  the 
mirrors.  This  function  requires  that  the  suspension 
controls  be  distributed  throughout  the  LIGO  site  and 
also  that  they  be  tightly  coupled  to  the  LSC  and  ASC 
systems. This is accomplished by using multiple CPUs 
and  VME  crates  coupled  via  fiber  optic  reflective 
memory  loops.  These  reflective  memory  loops  allow 
sharing  of  data  from  one  processor  to  the  next.  The 
higher bandwidth requirements of the LSC system drive 
the  clock  rates  for  the  actuator  outputs  to  16384 
samples per second, far higher than would be required 
for  the  local  damping  loop  alone.  For  these  reasons, 
local controls were distributed among five VME crates 
as shown in Table 2. 

Table 2: VME Crate Locations and Functions 

Functions 

 

Location  Clock 
Rate 
2048 

Vertex 
Crate 1 

Read  sensor  inputs  for  all  vertex 
optics 
Perform  input  matrix  and  servo 
filters calcs for all vertex optics 
Perform  output  matrix  calcs  and 
output actuator signals for all SOS 
Perform  mode  cleaner 
length 
controls 
DAQ/GDS 
suspensions 

interface 

for 

all 

16384  Output matrix calcs for up to three 

vertex LOS 
LSC  and  ASC  interface  for  up  to 
three vertex LOS 

16384  Same as output crate 1 

Vertex 
Crate 2 

Vertex 
Crate 3 
X End 

16384 

In and Out matrix calcs for X end 
ASC X end functions 

Y End 

16384  Same as X end, but Y end 
The  vertex  input  crate  performs  the  equivalent  of 
750  second  order  section  IIR  filter  calculations  2048 
times per second and each of the output crates perform 
the equivalent of up to 80 sections at 16384 times per 
second. 

5 INTERFACE TO DAQ, GDS AND 
EPICS 

The LIGO DAQ and GDS systems are interfaced via 
reflective  memory.  One  of  the  functions  of  the  vertex 

 
input  crate  is  to  read  and  write  data  from  and  to  this 
reflective  memory.  Using  the  DAQ  and  GDS  an 
operator  can  look  at  data  from  the  system,  measure 
transfer  functions,  plot  power  spectra  and 
input 
diagnostic  test  signals,  in  real  time.  A  more  complete 
description of the functions and operation of the DAQ 
and GDS systems are described in reference [2]. 

Routine  operator  interface  is  via  EPICS5.  Through 
EPICS,  the  operator  can  monitor  the  system,  change 
matrices,  gains  and  offsets,  engage  filters  and  invert 
servo polarity. A Motorola MVME 162 CPU is located 
in each of the VME crates listed in Table 2. This CPU 
processes  the  database  records,  state  code,  etc.  for  the 
controls  located  in  that  crate.  Data  is  communicated 
between  the  front  end  CPU  (Pentium  III)  and  the 
EPICS  CPU  via  shared  memory  across  the  VME 
backplane.  This  is  done  in  an  effort  to  minimize  the 
burden  on  the  front  end  CPU  and  allow  it  to  handle 
only the time critical front end servo controls. 

6  EXPERIENCE TO DATE AND 
FUTURE PLANS 

At this time the digital suspension controls for the 4 
kilometer interferometer located in Hanford have been 
installed  and  tested  and  the  interferometer  is  being 
commissioned.  All  components  for  the  other  two 
interferometers  have  been  prepared  and  are  ready  for 
installation.  To  date,  no  major  changes  to  the  basic 
design  are  anticipated  and  the  design  appears  to  meet 
all  of  the  system  requirements  necessary  for  the 
interferometers to reach their full sensitivity. 

7 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

We  thank  the  entire  LIGO  team  for  assistance  and 
support. This work was supported by National Science 
Foundation Grant PHY-920038. 

8 REFERENCES 
[1]  J.  Heefner,  ‘Large  and  Small  Optics  Suspension 
Internal  LIGO 

Electronics  Final  Design’, 
Technical Note T980043-00-C, 1998. 

[2]  R.  Bork,  D.  Barker,  ‘An  Overview  of  the  LIGO 
Control  and  Data  Acquisition  Systems’,  these 
proceedings. 

[3]  J.  Heefner,  R.  Bork,  R.  Abbott,  P.  Fritschel,  ‘The 
  Control 
Interferometer  Sensing  and 

LIGO 
System’, these proceedings. 

                                                           
5  EPICS-  Experimental  Physics  and  Industrial  Control 
System 

