Model Channel Ion Currents in NaCl – SPC/E Solution with
Applied–Field Molecular Dynamics

Paul S. Crozier*, Douglas Henderson†, Richard L. Rowley*, and David D. Busath‡

*Department of Chemical Engineering †Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry ‡Department of Zoology and Center for
Neuroscience Brigham Young University Provo, Utah 84602

ABSTRACT

Using periodic boundary conditions and a constant applied field, we have simulated current flow through an 8.125 Å internal
diameter,  rigid,  atomistic  channel  with  polar  walls  in  a  rigid  membrane  using  explicit  ions  and  SPC/E  water.  Channel  and  bath
currents  were  computed  from  ten  10-ns  trajectories  for  each  of  10  different  conditions  of  concentration  and  applied  voltage.  An
electric  field  was  applied  uniformly  throughout  the  system  to  all  mobile  atoms.  On  average,  the  resultant  net  electric  field  falls
primarily across the membrane channel, as expected for two conductive baths separated by a membrane capacitance. The channel is
rarely occupied by more than one ion. Current-voltage relations are concentration-dependent and superlinear at high concentrations.

INTRODUCTION

Many molecular dynamics (MD) studies have been
performed  with  atomistic  models  of  ion  channels
during the past two decades (for exemplary reviews,
see Roux and Karplus, 1994; Forrest and Sansom,
2000).  These  have  focused  primarily  on  the
structures  of  the  channels  and  the  energetics  and
dynamics of their contents, which consist of explicit
water  molecules  and  one  or  a  few  ions  in  the
channel  with  no  applied  potential.  In  the  past  few
years, this type of study has dramatically intensified
(Allen et al., 1999; Guidoni et al., 1999; Roux and
MacKinnon,  1999;  Allen  et  al.,  2000;  Aqvist  and
Luzhkov, 2000; Berneche and Roux, 2000; Capener
et  al.,  2000;  Guidoni et al., 2000; Hu et al., 2000;
Roux  et  al.,  2000; Shrivastava and Sansom, 2000)
with  the  discovery  of  the  crystal  structure  of  a
bacterial  potassium  channel  (Doyle  et  al.,  1998),
which  is  expected  to  serve  as  a  prototype  for  the
structures of voltage-gated channels.
____________________

Keywords:  Permeation,  NEMD,  P3M  Ewald,  selectivity,
explicit solvent
Corresponding  author:  David  D.  Busath,  Zoology  Dept.,
Brigham  Young  University,  Provo,  UT  84602,  USA.  E-mail:
David_Busath@byu.edu

These  computations  have  drawn  attention  to  the
structure and reduced diffusion coefficients of water
molecules  in  the  confined  space  and  have
demonstrated  some  of  the  energetic  components
responsible  for  ion  selectivity  in  biological
channels, but generally do not attempt to simulate
ion flow in the aqueous baths outside the channel or
the process of channel entry and crossing.

The  equilibrium  properties  of  ions  in
channels  have  also  been  studied  with  statistical
mechanics  and  simulation  approaches  using
simplified channel models (Vlachy and McQuarrie,
1986; Sorensen and Sloth, 1992; Lozada-Cassou et
al., 1996; Lynden-Bell and Rasaiah, 1996; Hartnig
et al., 1998; Lo et al., 1998; Roux, 1999; Tang et al.,
2001; Tang et al., In press). For instance, based on
the  mean  spherical  approximation,  the  excess
chemical potential for binding divalent ions relative
to  monovalent  ions  in  a  confined  space  with
constrained charges helps explain the selectivity of
a voltage-gated calcium channel for Ca++ over Na+
(Nonner  et  al.,  2000).  The  result,  which  identifies
space/charge  competition  as  the  mechanism  of
binding  selectivity,  has  been  confirmed  by
canonical ensemble Monte Carlo simulations used
to  determine  the  distribution  of  ions  between  a
cylindrical bath surrounding a periodically infinite
“channel”  containing  confined  negative  charges

(Boda  et  al.,  2000;  Boda  et  al.,  in  press;  see  also
Golding et al., 2000).

Efforts to examine the flow of ions into and
through  channels  have  been  carried  out  using
Nernst-Planck  (NP)  (Levitt,  1978;  Levitt,  1982;
Levitt, 1987; Sancho and Martínez, 1991), Poisson-
Nernst-Planck (PNP) simulations (Peskoff and Bers,
1988;  Chen  et  al.,  1997a,b;  Chen  et  al.,  1999;
Kurnikova  et  al.,  1999;  Hollerbach  et  al.,  2000,
Cardenas  et  al.,  2000),  and  Brownian  dynamics
(BD)  (Jakobsson  and  Chiu,  1987;  Chiu  and
Jakobsson, 1989; Bek and Jakobsson, 1994; Chung
et  al.,  1998;  Chung  et  al.,  1999;  Im  et  al.,  2000;
Corry  et  al.,  2000a;  Corry  et  al.,  2001).  These
simulations treat ions as point charges (NP, PNP) or
spheres (BD), and the water as a viscous continuum
dielectric  in  order  to  speed  simulation  processing.
The BD simulations are superior to the NP and PNP
simulations for narrow pores because the volumes
of  the  ions  are  considered  explicitly  (Moy  et  al.,
2000; Corry et al., 2000b). From studies of current-
voltage-concentration  relationships  with  BD,  it  is
clear  that  substantial  radial  dipole  potentials  are
required to offset the dielectric boundary effects in
order  for  ions  to  enter  channels  like  the  nicotinic
acetylcholine  receptor  (NAChR)  (Chung  et  al.,
1998),  that  the  dipoles  in  pore  lining  of  the  KcsA
potassium  channel  allow  the  observed  multiple
occupancy and permeability of the channel (Chung
et al., 1999), and that the constriction zone in OpmF
porin  channels  presents  an  energy  barrier  that  is
responsible,  rather  than  selective  vestibule
occupancy, for the observed channel selectivity (Im
et al., 2000).

importantly 

Perhaps  more 

from  a
methodological  point  of  view,  these  BD  studies
have  begun  to  address  a  central  issue  about
boundary conditions: how to treat the connection to
the essentially infinite bath and membrane found in
experimental conditions. Im et al. (2000) use grand
canonical  Monte  Carlo  (GCMC)  steps  in  two  thin
slabs of solution 15 Å from the membrane surfaces
to maintain constant chemical potential in the baths
and BD steps to simulate ion flow through the baths
and  channel.  This  approach  demonstrates  a  key
issue: the ion occupancy of the volumette near the
entry and exit of the channel fluctuates considerably
and  is  a  Poisson  distributed  random  variable  if
interactions between particles are neglected  (Roux,
1999; Im et al., 2000).

Furthermore, 

the  dynamics  of 

ion
permeation  have  been  illuminated  and  shown  in
some  cases  to  differ  from  expectations  based  on
preconceptions  about  free  energy  profiles  and
transport  over  energy  barriers.  For  instance,
potassium  entry  into  the  cytoplasmic  end  of  a
smooth-walled  model  of  the  KcsA  potassium
channel  is  only  weakly  (rather  than  linearly)
dependent  on  cytoplasmic  [K+]  and  is  strongly
dependent  on  membrane  potential  (Chung  et  al.,
1999).  Both  of  these  results  are  counterintuitive
from  the  point  of  view  of  near-equilibrium
permeation  theory  (i.e.  rate  theory;  Hille,  1992)
because  collisions  of  cytoplasmic  ions  with  the
channel  are  expected  to  rise  linearly  with
concentration  (Läuger,  1976)  and  to  be  relatively
independent  of  applied  potential  due  to  the
conductive nature of the bath (Andersen, 1983a).

BD simulations may suffer from neglect of
the  volume  and  molecular  polarization  of  water
molecules,  especially  as  they  mediate  interactions
between ions within the channel, between ions and
the channel walls, and between ions in the channel
and  ions  near  the  channel  entry  or  exit.    It  is
therefore desirable to consider the effects of solvent
and  ion  momentum  explicitly  using  classical  MD.
This requires a small system size, but is shown here
to be feasible with periodic boundary methods that
allow  continuous  flow  without  ion  repositioning.
We  refer  here  to  this  particular  form  of  non-
equilibrium MD (NEMD) as applied-field MD.

The  model  channel  and  membrane  system
that we use is simple, consisting of a rigid atomic
pore  with  polar  walls  (i.e.  partial  charges  on  the
pore atoms) and internal diameter similar to that of
NAChR  (Hille,  1992)  embedded  in  a  rigid,
uncharged  membrane.  The  rigid  membrane  helps
prevent accumulation of momentum along the axis
of  channel  flow  and  enhances  computational
efficiency, which, together with the small size of the
system and the P3M Ewald sum electrostatics, made
it feasible to simulate a period sufficient to measure
current flow.

COMPUTATIONAL METHODS

Model System

Applied-field NVT NEMD simulations were
performed using a 25 × 25 × 55 Å (in the x-, y-, and
z-directions  respectively)  simulation  box  with

2

periodic boundary conditions in all three directions.
Rigid,  fixed-in-space,  model  membrane  walls
consisted  of  neutral  Lennard-Jones  (LJ)  spheres
placed on square lattices at z = 15 Å and z = 40 Å.
Center-to-center spacing of the LJ spheres in the x-
and  y-directions  was  set  at  2.5  Å,  and  the  LJ
parameters for each were set at σ= 2.5 Å and ε/k =
60  K,  with  cross  interactions  between  the  mobile
particles  calculated  using  standard  Lorentz-
Berthelot (LB) rules. A 4-sphere ×  4-sphere section
centered at x = y = 12.5 Å in each 10-member ×  10-
member wall was removed to form the entrance to
the channel structure.

The  model  channel  structure  was  formed
using  eleven  twenty-member  rings  of  LJ  spheres
with  the  same  parameters  as  those  assigned  to  the
membrane  spheres.  Rings  were  given  a  center-to-
center  diameter  of  10.625  Å,  which  yields  an
internal diameter for the channel of 8.125 Å (after
subtracting  two  atomic  radii,  or  σσσσ).  In  addition  to
the  LJ  parameters,  each  channel  sphere  was
assigned a partial charge of –0.5 e, +0.5 e, -0.35 e,
or  +0.35  e  in  a  repeating  pattern  around  each
identical 
twenty-member  ring  (e  being  the
elementary  charge).  The  partial  charges  were
designed to simulate those commonly used for the
peptide units in proteins (Brooks et al., 1983) and
approximately simulate the polarity of a backbone-
lined channel such as the gramicidin channel or the
P  region  of  the  potassium  channel.  These  spheres
were  also  held  rigid  at  even  spacing  around  the
perimeter of each ring, with each ring centered at x
= y = 12.5 Å and placed at 2.5 Å intervals along the
z-axis  from  z =  15  Å  to  z =  40  Å,  forming  a  tube
connecting  the  two  membrane  walls.    Each
successive  ring  was  rotated  9º  about  the  z-axis
relative  to  the  previous  ring  in  order  to  produce  a
helical pattern of charge distribution along the tube
as  shown  in  Figure  1.  The  positioning  of  the
membrane and channel spheres rendered the walls
impermeable to the mobile atoms. The remainder of
the volume of the simulation cell was accessible to
the  mobile  particles  making  up  the  aqueous
electrolyte solution.
The electrolyte solution consisted of a combination
of SPC/E water molecules (Berendsen et al., 1987),
Na+ ions, and Cl- ions. SPC/E water was used rather
than  TIP3P  water  because 
in  preliminary
simulations with 1.0 M NaCl in TIP3P

Figure 1.
Snapshot  of  the  1  M  NaCl  in  SPC/E  water
simulated  system  showing  the  channel  and  membrane
structure.    Sodium  and  chloride  ions  are  the  large  green  and
blue  spheres,  respectively.    Neutral  membrane  atoms  are
drawn  as  transparent  light  blue  spheres,  while  the  charged
atoms  comprising  the  channel  walls  are  depicted  as  small
spheres for ease in viewing channel contents. The small black,
blue, yellow, and white channel wall spheres carry charges of
–0.5,  -0.35,  0.35,  and  0.5  e  respectively.    True  system  and
species dimensions are given in the text. This image and those
in figures 12 and 13 were rendered using VMD (developed by
the Theoretical Biophysics Group in the Beckman Institute for
Advanced  Science  and  Technology  at  the  University  of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign), (Humphrey et al., 1996).

water  we  found  that  the  ions  had  an  anomously
strong tendency to form ion pairs and clusters. The
LJ  and  coulombic  interaction  parameters  for  the
model water molecules and model ions were those
used by Spohr (1999), and are repeated in Table 1
for  convenience.  Note  that  the  cross  parameters
differ  from  those  that  would  be  obtained  from  the
LB rules.

Simulation Procedure and Details

Ten  sets of ten simulations were performed

using the model system described above.

O-O
O-Na+
O-Cl-
Na+-Na+
Na+-Cl-
Cl--Cl-

σσσσ (Å)

3.169

2.876

3.250

2.730

3.870

4.860

εεεε/k (K)

78.187

62.724

62.724

43.001

20.512

20.186

Table 1. Electrolyte solution Lennard-Jones parameters.

3

ion
Systems  containing  a  nominal 
concentration of 0.5, 1 or 2 M were each tested at
0.55,  1.1  or  2.2  V  externally  applied  potential,  as
well as a tenth set at 0.5 M, and 0.0 V.  The exact
numbers  for  the  nominal  concentrations  were  608
water molecules, 4 Na+ ions, and 4 Cl- ions for the
0.5 M case; 600 water molecules, 8 Na+ ions, and 8
Cl- ions for the 1 M case; and 584 water molecules,
16 Na+ ions, and 16 Cl- ions for the 2 M case. These
systems were close to experimental liquid densities
and, as shown below, had reasonable ion and water
mobilities.

Each  of  the  100  runs  consisted  of  1  ns  of
equilibration  time  followed  by  10  ns  of  data
collection using a time step of 2.5 fs. Each run was
performed on a single CPU of a 64-node SGI Origin
2000  supercomputer  and  required  approximately
two weeks of CPU time. Mobile particle positions
were  stored  at  2.5  ps  intervals  (every  1000  time
steps) for analysis by a post-processor program.

An  electric  field  producing  the  membrane
potential was uniformly applied in the z-direction to
all mobile particles in the simulation cell, whether
in  the  bath  or  in  the  channel,  producing  the
specified potential drops across the 55 Å simulation
cell.    Because  of  the  external  electric  field  we
expect to see some charge build-up in the form of
an electrochemical double layer at both membrane
walls.    It  will  be  shown  later  that  as  an  ensemble
average,  this  double  layer  does  indeed  form  in
accordance  with  expectations  from  the  membrane
capacitance,  neutralizes  the  electric  field  in  the
reservoir  region,  and,  under  opposition  from
channel  water,  magnifies  the  field  across  the
membrane.  The  combination  of  the  applied  field
and  the  response  of  the  mobile  particles  yields,
approximately  and  on  average,  the  expected
constant electric field across the membrane and zero
field  in  the  conductive  baths,  resulting  in  a
membrane potential equal to the drop in the applied
potential  across  the  unit  cell.  The  average  state
generally consists of an ion-free channel; it will also
be  shown  below  that  during  current  flow  the
membrane potential changes.

Previous  work  (Torrie  and  Valleau,  1980;
Eck and Spohr, 1996; Crozier et al., 2000b) shows
that proper simulation of the electrochemical double
layer requires adequate representation of long-range
electrostatic  interactions,  including  those  acting
beyond  the  dimensions  of  the  primary  simulation
cell.  Several methods have been developed for the

interactions  and 

estimation of these long-range forces, including the
charged  sheets  method  (Torrie  and  Valleau,  1980;
Boda  et  al.,  1998),  the  Ewald  sum  method  (Parry,
1975),  and  mesh  Ewald  methods  (Hockney  and
Eastwood,  1988;  Darden  et  al.,  1993;  Essmann  et
al.,  1995).    The  charged  sheets  method  has  been
shown to be inadequate for our purposes (Crozier et
al., 2000b), and the standard Ewald sum method is
far too computationally demanding (Crozier et al.,
2000a).  We use the particle-particle/particle-mesh
(P3M)  method  because  of  its  demonstrated
flexibility  and  superiority  to  other  mesh  Ewald-
methods  (Deserno  and  Holm,  1998a).    We  follow
the  implementation  recommendations  of  Deserno
and  Holm  (1998a,  1998b),  and  refer  to  their
excellent  discussion  of  optimization  and  error
minimization for mesh-Ewald calculations (1998b).
P3M implementation details are as follows.
A  seventh-order  charge  assignment  function  was
used  along  with  a  16-point  ×  16-point  ×  64-point
grid in the x-, y-, and z-directions, respectively.  All
real-space  coulombic
LJ 
interactions  were  truncated  at  rcut  =  10  Å.    The
reciprocal-space  portion  of 
the  Coulombic
interactions was determined by 1) assignment of the
charges to the mesh according to the seventh-order
charge  assignment  function,  2)  transformation  of
the  charged  mesh  to  Fourier  space  using  a  fast
Fourier transform, 3) multiplication by the optimal
influence function to determine the potential at each
mesh point, 4) ik differentiation in each direction to
find  the  respective  electric  fields,  5)  inverse  fast
Fourier transform back to real space for fields in all
three  directions,  6)  assignment  of  the  mesh-based
electric fields back to the particles according to the
same seventh-order charge assignment function, and
7)  computation  of  the  reciprocal-space  force
contribution on each particle given the electric field
and  the  charge  on  each  particle.  For  our  model
system,  α,  the  parameter  that  divides  the  P3M
calculation 
into  real-  and  reciprocal-space
contributions, was set at a constant value of 0.3028
Å -1  according  to  the  optimization  scheme  of
Deserno and Holm (1998b).  The optimal influence
function was computed only once for each run (at
the beginning).

Gaussian  bond  and  temperature  constraints
were  used  (Edberg,  et  al.  1986;  Rowley  and  Ely,
1981),  with  feedback  correction  to  remove
numerical  drift  error.    In  all  cases,  the  system
temperature  was  maintained  at  25º  C.  A  fourth-

4

order  Gear  predictor-corrector  integration  scheme
was used to integrate the equations of motion.

Channel (and bath) currents were computed
from  net  charge  displacements  during  intervals  of
∆t=2.5 ps as:

∑ ∆
q z
j
j

j=

i

∆

tL

[1]

where i is the calculated current, qj is the charge on
ion j, ∆zj is the net –displacement of ion j within the
channel (or bath) during the interval ∆t, and L is the
channel  (or  bath)  length.  The  sum  is  over  all  ions
appearing  in  the  channel  (or  bath)  during  the
interval,  including  interpolations  for  charges
moving  from  one  region  to  the  other  during  ∆t.
Small charge movements due to rotations of water
molecules were neglected.

Results

Ion Trajectories

As  implied  above,  the  applied  field  is
oriented  such  that  it  drives  the  mobile  positively
charged  atoms  towards  higher  values  of  z,  and
negatively charged atoms towards lower values of z,
and  rotates  water  molecules  to  orient  their  dipole
vectors parallel to the applied field. In the plots used
here, the z-position is measured from the left-hand
periodic boundary. The membrane is centered in the
simulation cell between z values of 15 and 40 Å.
• 
The z-coordinates of all the ions in the system are
shown as a function of time during the simulation
period for one of the conditions tested, (2 M NaCl,
0.55 V total applied potential) in Figure 2. The ten
10-ns  runs  have  been  concatenated  into  one  trace.
Thus  some  ion  passage  trajectories  that  appear  to
terminate or initiate abruptly in mid channel really
represent  events  occurring  at  the  concatenation
boundary.  Because  of  the  large  applied  potential,
the  ion  motions  along  the  z  direction  within  the
channel are quite uniform with minor fluctuations.
Nine  complete  Na+  passages  and  one  Cl-  passage
(starting  at  50  ns)  can  be  observed,  with  the  Cl-
passing in the opposite direction (from high to low
z),  as  expected.  The  passages  appear  to  occur
randomly  in  time,  as  expected  for  a  stochastic
process.  Occasional  visits  of  Cl-  ions  at  the
negatively polarized interface (40-43 Å) and of Na+
ions at the positively polarized interface (12-15 Å)
can be identified in Figure 2. These partly represent
capacitative charge, but in many cases they are due

Na+   ((cid:1))  and  Cl-  (× )  ion  z-positions  as  a
Figure 2.
function of time for the case of 2 M NaCl with 0.55 V applied
potential.  Symbols appear at 100 ps intervals. The ten runs of
10  ns  each  are  plotted  consecutively  for  a  total  of  100  ns  of
simulation time.

to partial channel entries, especially where the ions
get closer than σ (~2.5 Å) to the membrane sphere
centers at z=15 Å and z=40 Å. In the baths (z=0-10
Å  and  z=45-55  Å),  the  ions  are  uniformly
distributed. For our model channel, the time-course
of the channel current during a single ion passage is
not  rectangular,  both  because  of  random
fluctuations and because the velocity tends to
increase as the ion approaches the exit. This is seen
in  Figure  3,  which  shows  the  average  velocity  of
Na+ as a function of z-position at each of the three
applied  potentials  utilized  for  2  M  NaCl.    The
velocity starts at 2-3 m/s for 0.55 and 1.1 V, 4-5 m/s
for  2.2  V.  For  the  lowest  voltage,  it  remains
relatively  constant  throughout  the  passage,  until  it
nears the exit (38 Å), at which point it undergoes an
abrupt increase up to ~16 m/s (39 Å) and then falls
back to <5 m/s as the ion reaches the outer ring of
channel atoms and membrane atoms (40 Å), and to
near 0 m/s as the ion enters the bath. At the higher
applied fields, the ion gains momentum as it passes
through the channel.
Statistics taken from the trajectories for all of the 10
cases are given in Table II. The first two columns
contain the independent variables for the 10 cases.
The  average  time  for  passage  through  an  entry
region  (including  failed  entries)  extending  from

5

currents. However, both have an uncertainty due to
counting errors associated with the Poisson process
of  channel  crossings,  which  can  be  deduced  from
the square root of the number of observed crossings.
For  the  lower  concentration,  the  counts  limit  our
certainty  of  passage  frequency  to  an  order  of
magnitude, so we do not focus on detailed patterns
in  the  currents.  Rather,  we  simply  note  that  the
channel and bulk currents generally agree to within
a few pA of statistical fluctuation, as expected from
Kirchhoff’s current law (Horowitz and Hill, 1982),
and  they  generally  increase  with  applied  potential
and concentration.

The  next  5  columns  of  Table  2  present  the
average time fractions for the occupancy states for
the  main  channel  region  (15-40  Å).  Although  the
accuracies of these numbers are limited only by the
frequency  with  which  we  saved  trajectory  frames,
their  usefulness  for  describing  the  steady  state
probabilities  of  occupancy  depends  on  the
underlying statistics of the random processes of ion
entry and exit. Because in the best case (2 M, 2.2 V)
we  only  observed  ~62  crossings,  the  accuracy  of
such Poisson statistics is only of the order of 10%.
We therefore show them only to suggest trends, but
we feel that detailed kinetic analysis of the results
(in  terms  of  discrete  step  models,  for  instance)  is
unwarranted  with  this  data  set.  The  channel  is
primarily  occupied  by  water  only  (no  ions)  or  by
one Na+. Occasional occupancy by Cl-, Na+ and Cl-,
or two Na+ ions are noted, especially at 2 M and 2.2
V,  but  it  is  obvious  that  the  model  channel  is
primarily  selective  for  Na+  and  is  a  single-  rather
than  multiple-occupancy  channel.  Double  Cl-  and
triple occupancy (by any ions) were never observed.
For  narrow  cylindrical  channels,  for  example
gramicidin, saturation in the current-voltage relation
at high voltages (Andersen, 1983a) suggests that the
rate of ion entry is essentially voltage-independent,
presumably  because  the  electric  field  in  the
conductive  bath  is  negligible;  but  translocation
(and, to a lesser extent, exit from the channel) are
expected to increase substantially with voltage. This
combination  leads  to  the  prediction  that  channel
occupancy  should  decrease  as  applied  potential  is
increased. We note an opposite trend here, at least
for  differences  between  0.55  and  1.1  V.  Na+
occupancy ranges from .021 to .302, increasing with
concentration as expected (because the entry rate is
expected 
the  bath
concentration),  but  also  increasing  with  voltage.

to  be  proportional 

to 

Average  net  velocity  of  sodium  ions  as  a
Figure 3. 
function  of  z-coordinate.  Data  is  shown  for  the  2  M  NaCl
cases  at  0.55  V  (◊), 1.1 V ((cid:2)),  and  2.2  V  (×). The arrows in
this  and  subsequent  Figures  (5-8)  mark  the  entry  and  exit  of
the channel.

12.5-17.5 Å, through the interior from 17.5-37.5 Å,
and through an exit region of the channel

from 37.5-42.5 Å are given in three rows per
cell in the third column. These are calculated from
the  inverse  of  the  mean  ion  velocities  in  these
regions. The passage time for the four-fold longer
interior  step  is  0.32  –  2.24  ns,  generally  less  than
four  times  the  entry  step  passage  time  and  much
more  than  four  times  the  exit  step  passage  time,
contrary  to  what  one  would  expect  if  ion  velocity
were  constant  throughout  the  passage.  The  long
average  entry  passage  time  reflects  the  fact  that
many  ions  penetrate  only  a  short  distance  into  the
channel and then return out of the channel, reducing
the population average forward velocity. The short
average  exit  passage  time  is  due  to  rapid
acceleration  of  the  ion  as  it  approaches  the  exit.
Passage  times  through  all  three  regions  decrease
with 
increasing  applied  potential  but  are
independent  (to  within  statistical  errors)  of  bath
concentration.

The channel and bulk currents calculated from
equation 1 are given in the fourth column of Table
2.  For  reference,  1  pA  represents  0.625  complete
channel  crossings  per  100  ns  simulation  time.
Although  the  standard  deviations  for  the  currents
are  not  presented,  we  note  that  they  were  much
smaller  for  the  channel  currents  than  for  the  bulk

6

This implies that the effective entry rate is voltage
dependent, more so than translocation and exit from
the channel at these voltages.

The average ionic current through the channel is

shown as a function of total applied potential in

Figure  4.  As  expected,  the  current  increases
with applied potential and with concentration of the
bathing  ion.  Although  the  current-voltage  (I-V)
relationship appears to be superlinear in 1 M and 2

M NaCl and sigmoidal in 0.5 M NaCl, the large size
of  the  error  bars  prevent  detailed  assertions  about
the  I-V  shapes.  Therefore,  we  have  chosen  just  to
draw  a  spline  curve  through  the  points  as  an  eye
guide, rather than to fit a simplified model function.
Nevertheless,  there  appears  to  be  a  progression  in
shape  from  sub-  to  superlinear  with  increasing
concentration.

Table 2. Mean entry (12.5 < z
< 17.5 Å), passage (17.5 < z <
37.5  Å),  and  exit  (37.5  <  z  <
42.5  Å)  times  for  Na+  ions,
average  current  as  measured
in  the  channel  region  (15  <  z
<  40  Å)  and  bulk  reservoir
and  occupancy
region, 
probabilities  for  the  ten  cases
tested. 
  Probabilities  are
defined  as  the  total  time  that
the  system  was  found  in  a
given  state  divided  by  the
total  simulation  time,  where
the occupancy states were: no
ions, one Na+ ion, one Cl- ion,
one  Na+  and  one  Cl-,  or  two
Na+   ions  in  the  channel
region.  On  no  occasion  did
more  than  one  Cl-  or  more
than  two  ions  occupy  the
channel.

Conc.
(mol/L) 

V
(volts)

 t (ns)
entry
pass.
exit

P(0)

P(Na+)

P(Cl-)

P(Na++Cl-)

P(2 Na+)

0.0

N/A

0.996

0.004

0

0

0.979

0.021

0

0

0

0

0

0.908

0.091

0.001

2E-5

0.931

0.046

0.023

0.872

0.126

0.002

0.859

0.139

0.002

0.800

0.174

0.019

0.007

0.852

0.137

0.010

0.001

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

i (pA)
chan
bulk

0.00
-0.49

2.60
1.74

19.7
21.1

21.6
20.8

8.52
7.90

24.7
19.0

68.1
69.1

18.1
20.3

35.4
38.1

99.5
98.8

0.55

1.1

2.2

0.55

1.1

2.2

0.55

2.15
1.09
0.18

0.24
0.65
0.05

0.20
0.33
0.02

0.76
2.24
0.12

0.30
0.80
0.05
0.18
0.37
0.03

0.63
1.12
0.12

0.57
0.73
0.07

0.20
0.32
0.04

2

1.1

0.792

0.206

0.001

0.001

7E-5

2.2

0.740

0.203

0.047

0.007

0.003

Ion/water structure

• 
The  current  flow  through  the  channel  is  related  to
the charge structure throughout the system, i.e. the
positions of ions and water dipoles. As a description
of this structure, Figure 5 gives the average

localized density of each of the four charged species
as a function of z for the 100 ns simulation at 0.5 M
and 1.1 V. For each point, the local density (in units
of  moles/liter)  is  calculated  from  the  average

7

occupancy of a narrow slab centered at that point. In
the region of the bulk and the interface, the volume
accessible  to  the  mobile  atom  centers  is  taken  as
that of a square slab 25 Å on a side (parallel to the
x-y plane) and of thickness (in the z dimension) of
0.025 Å. In the region of the channel (15 < z < 40
Å),  the  cross  sectional  area  of  a  right  cylinder
approximately in contact with the

membrane  on  the  left  (6  <  z  <  8  Å)  whereas  [Cl-]
falls  below.  In  contrast,  [Cl-]  rises  slightly  above
and [Na+] falls below on the right (45 < z < 47 Å).
The  asymmetry  between  cation  and  anion
concentration continues up to the channel entrance,
defined as the planes of the membrane atom centers
at  15  and  40  Å.  Of  course,  the  excess  average  of
cations on the left and anions on the right cannot be
detected  in  any  single  snapshot,  but  represents  a
probability  density  constituting  the  capacitative
charge on the membrane. In this case, the average
net  charge  is  +1.29×10-6 coul/cm2  (0.54  e)  on  the
right and –1.62 ×10-6 coul/cm2 (-0.63 e) on the left,
corresponding  to  a  specific  capacitance,  Q/VA,  of
2.74 µF/cm2  for  the  membrane. This  is  nearly  10-
fold  higher  than  would  be  computed  from  ε0/d  =
0.30  µF/cm2,  where  ε0  is  the  permitivity  of  free
space and the membrane is assigned a thickness of
d=30  Å  (which  approximately  takes  into  account
the  membrane  interface  atom  radii).  This  is  also
higher than is usually observed for lipid membranes

), and triangles (▲

Current  as  a  function  of  externally  applied
Figure 4.
potential  and  ion  concentration.    The  diamonds  (◆
),  squares
(■
) represent the 0.5 M, 1 M and 2 M cases
respectively.  Error bars represent +1 standard deviation of the
calculated  currents.  Solid  curves  are  eyeguide  splines  drawn
manually.

van  der  Waals  surface  of  the  channel  atoms,
51.85 Å2, is used to define the volume accessible to
the mobile atoms in the channel. This is an arbitrary
volume, because the different atom species differ in
their  van  der  Waals  parameters,  but  serves  to
normalize  the  density  calculation  for  the  sake  of
comparison between channel and bulk.

The  ion  and  water  atom  densities  approach  a
bulk-like  uniform  distribution  by  ~7  Å  from  the
bilayer.  This  uniformity  is  one  success  of  the
applied field NEMD method (Crozier et al., 2001).
In spite of the applied field in the bulk region, the
densities  are,  on  average,  constant  and  the  net
electric field negligible (see below) as expected for
a conducting medium.

During  this  simulation,  the  channel  was
occupied  only  by  water  molecules  90.8%  of  the
time  and  by  Na+  (and  water)  9.1%  of  the  time
(Table II), so the profile primarily reflects the state
of the unoccupied channel. [Na+] and [Cl-], plotted
at  ten  times  their  actual  values,  are  0.5  M  in  the
bulk,  but  [Na+  ]  rises  above  0.5  M  near  the

 

8

Figure 5.
Average  density  of  the  various  species  as  a
function  of z  for  the  0.5  M  and  1.1  V  applied  potential  case.
The  SPC/E  water  density  is  divided  into  O  (solid  bold  line)
and H (dotted bold line) species and is seen above the chloride
ion  (solid  line)  and  sodium  ion  (dotted  line)  density
distributions.    For  improved  viewing,  ion  densities  were
multiplied by different factors, namely j=1.0 (O), 0.5 (H), 10.0
(Na+), and 10.0 (Cl-).  Moreover for the channel region (15 Å
<  z  <  40  Å),  all  densities  were  multiplied  by  an  additional
factor of twelve, because only roughly 8.3% of the volume in
that region was accessible to the particles.

experimentally  (~1  µF/cm2).  The  discrepancy  is
probably due to the water in the channel.

In Figure 5, the density of the SPC/E water
near the two boundaries of the system (z = 0 and 55
Å)  is  56.4  M,  approximately  that  of  bulk
waterAlthough  there  is  no  reason  to  expect  the
SPC/E model of water to give reasonable pressures
in  this  NVT  simulation,  mobility  of  the  ions  and
water  were  reasonable,  with  the  average  water
diffusion  coefficient  in  the  bulk  compartment
(specifically 0 < z < 5 Å and 50 < z < 55 Å) being
computed as 2.3×10-5 cm2/s, that of Na+ as 1.3×10-5
cm2/s,  and  that  of  Cl-  as  1.1×10 -5  cm2/s.  Three
layers  of  water  ordering  can  be  observed  with
increasing structure
near the membrane surface, seen as peaks in oxygen
density at 5, 9, and 12 Å on the left. Similar peaks
occur  on  the  right.  The  water  structure  may  be
important  in  the  overall  potential  profile  for  this
system,  but  may  not  be  significant  to  biological
systems  where  the  lipid  head  group  structure  is
much  more  complex  and  the  head  groups  are
mobile.

The water oxygen atoms in the channel have
an  average  density  near  that  in  the  bulk.  They  are
clearly structured in 10 layers, corresponding to the
eleven rings of atoms forming the channel wall, and

Figure 6.
Comparison  of  the  total  electrostatic
potential as a function of z for the 0.5 M systems with 0.0 V
(solid line), 0.55 V (dotted line), 1.1 V (dashed line), and 2.2
V (dash-dot line) applied potential.  In each case the potentials
were calculated using a test charge positioned on the z axis for
the average charge distribution from the entire simulation.

9

oriented by the applied potential. The Na+ density in
the channel also shows peaks. These are located at
the oxygen minima and suggest a steric preference
for more vacant locations. As will be shown below,
strong  interactions  between  water  and  the  channel
walls  are  only  modestly  disrupted  by  Na+  in  the
channel. Electrostatic potential

The  contributions  of  the  particles  of  the
system and the applied potential to the net electrical
potential  along  the  axis  of  the  channel  was
computed  from  the  ensemble  average  charge
distribution.  In  doing  this,  we  took  care  to  avoid
delta function contributions to the potential due to
close proximity of charged particles to the test point
by performing the calculation strictly in reciprocal
space,  setting  rcut  to  2  Å,  re-adjusting  the  tuning
parameter,  α ,  and  excluding  the  real-space
contributions. This method yielded the same result
as  was  obtained  by  direct  integration  of  charge
along  z  (based  on  the  Poisson  equation)  for  a
system  with  a  bilayer  but  no  channel  (i.e.
homogeneous in two of the three dimensions).  The
total potential drop for the four voltages studied is
shown in Figure 6. The figure is dominated by the
no-ion  occupancy  state,  as  the  channel  is  mostly
ion-free. As can be seen, there is very little potential
drop in the bath for the ion-free channel state and
the  total  voltage  drop  of  1.1  V  occurs  across  the
membrane.

To  help  understand  the  origin  of  this
electrostatic  potential,  it  is  useful  to  examine  how
the applied potential orients the water molecules in
the system. This is shown in Table 3, which gives
the  total  ensemble  average  cosine  of  the  angle
between the water dipole and the z axis for each of
four  different  regions.  Column  I  is  the  central
region of the bath near the periodic boundaries (z<5
or z>50 Å), column II is near the left wall (5<z<15
Å), column III is in the channel (15<z<40 Å), and
column IV is near the right wall (40<z<50 Å). This
statistic would be zero for fully randomized water
orientations. It should be noted that the orientation
increases with applied potential near the walls and
in the channel, and is negligible everywhere when
no  potential  is  applied  and  at  all  voltages  in  the
central  region.  The  slight  reductions  in  channel
water orientation at higher bath ion concentrations
may  reflect  increased  disruption  of  the  channel
waters by passing ions.

The  electrostatic  potential  can  be
decomposed  into  water  and  ion  contributions  that

can  be  understood  in  terms  of  two  major  dipoles:
the channel water dipole and the capacitative charge
dipole.  The  water  molecules  in  the  channel  are
oriented  by  the  net  potential  (Figure  5,  Table  3)
with  the  negative  end  of  the  dipole  towards  the
channel entry at z=15 Å. The ion distribution at the

C o n c . 
( m o l/L) 

V
(volts)

_cos(θ)_

I

II

III

0.0

0.00

-0.02

-0.08

0.55

0.00

0.5

0.55

0.00

0.55

0.00

0.02

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.00

0.01

1.1

2.2

1.1

2.2

1.1

2.2

1

2

0.03

0.04

0.06

0.02

0.04

0.05

0.02

0.02

0.04

0.66

0.76

0.83

0.63

0.75

0.81

0.62

0.74

0.79

IV

0.00

0.06

0.07

0.08

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.04

0.05

0.06

Table 3. Ensemble average water orientation for region I near
the boundaries, II near the left wall, III in the channel, and IV
near the right wall. See text for details.

membrane  water  interface  forms  the  capacitative
charge,  which  constitutes  a  macroscopic  dipole
oriented  in  the  opposite  direction.  The  channel
water  produces  an  increased  local  membrane
capacitance and affects the ion density in the bath
near the channel openings.
The total potential drop across the membrane has an
approximately  linear  profile  except  at  the  ends  of
the  channel,  where  the  contribution  of  the  water
molecules results from oriented water dipoles in the
structured layers near the interface and contribute a
significant biphasic potential. This has the shape of
the  potential  expected  from  a  combination  an
infinite sheet of surface charge and an infinite sheet
of dipoles. In the present case, the potential is due
strictly to the water molecules and ions because the
membrane atoms are all neutral. The total potential
drop  occurs  primarily  in  the  channel  region  at  the
four applied potentials of 0.0, 0.55, 1.1, and 2.2 V
as shown in Figure 6.

10

Figure 7.
Individual  ion  potential  energy  (due  to
interactions  with  the  whole  system,  excluding  the  applied
potential)  as  a  function  of  z  for  the  2  M  and  0.55  V  applied
potential case.  This figure differs from Figures  6 in that the
simulated ions themselves were used to compute the potentials
(no test particle insertions were used) and LJ interactions were
included.  Only  ions  within  2  Å  of  a  line  drawn  through  the
center of the channel were included in the averaging.

Ion potential energy decomposition
There  is  enough  sampling  with  these  long
trajectories  that  the  average  ion-environment
interaction  energy  can  be  used  directly  as  a  rough
gauge  of  the  free  energy  barriers  for  ion  passage,
without  resorting 
to  specialized  sampling
techniques such as umbrella sampling. In Figure 7,
we present one of the major components of the total
system  potential  energy,  the  ion-environment
interaction  energy,  as  a  function  of  the  ion  z
position  for  the  case  of  2  M,  0.55  V.  Here  the
environment  is  defined  as  all  water  molecules,  all
other  ions,  and  all  membrane  and  channel  wall
atoms, as well as their long-range images, including
both local and inverse space components. Excluded
from  the  sum  are  the  water-water,  water-channel,
and  water-membrane  interaction  energies  and  the
applied  potential.  Because  we  used  the  SPC/E
model  for  water  and  there  are  no  other  bonded
atoms  in  the  system,  only  nonbonded interaction
energies play a role in the interaction energy. The
energies in bulk cannot be directly compared to free
energies of hydration because they neglect changes
in  the  water  energy  due  to  dissolved  charges.  For
Na+  there  is  a  small  interaction  energy  barrier  of
about  15  kJ/mol.  The  barrier  peaks  to  the  right  of

the  channel  center  at  ~30  Å  and  declines  quite
sharply towards the exit at 40 Å. The fact that the
interaction energy remains favorable throughout the
channel  suggests  that  the  polar  channel  walls  can
almost  fully  compensate  for  the  second  shell  and
more  distant  electrostatic  coordination  of  the  ion,
and  is  consistent  with  MD  simulations  performed
by Roux and Karplus (1994) for Na+ entry into the
gramicidin channel. In contrast, the average Cl- -
environment interaction energy has a barrier of ~30
kJ/mol. We suspect that the channel water energy

would  also  contribute  further  to  this  peak
based  on  geometric  considerations  shown  below.
Again,  the  barrier  tends  to  be  highest  towards  the
channel exit, which, for Cl-, is on the left.

The increased energy barrier to Cl- passage
can  be  partly  ascribed  to  the  channel  water
molecules  and  their  interactions  with  the  channel
wall. Figure 8 shows the average H, O, Na+, and Cl-
densities as a function of distance from the center of
the  channel  for  one  of  the  trajectories.  Oxygen
density is seen to peak near 3 Å from the channel
center  with  H  peaks  on  either  side.  Thus,  the
channel  walls  strongly  attract  the  channel  water
molecules.  Both  Na+  and  Cl-,  when  present,  stay
nearer  the  axis  than  most  of  the  channel  waters,
which  is  more  problematic  for  Cl-  than  for  Na+
because the proximity of the water oxygens would
be  repulsive  for  Cl-  but  attractive  for  Na+.  The
structural consequences are illustrated in Figures 9
and 10, which display the frustrated coordination of
Cl- and felicitous coordination of Na+, respectively,
by channel waters.

Discussion

We have computed the current flow through
a  model  ion  channel  using  applied  field  MD.
Sufficient complete passages were obtained in 100
ns  simulations  to  provide  reasonable  estimates  of
the current for membrane potentials as low as 0.5 V
with permeant ion concentrations as low as 0.5 M.
Although  both  values  are  above  those  seen  in
animals,  such  values  have  been  attained  in  lipid
bilayer  experiments  (e.g.  Andersen,  1983a).  This
represents  considerable  progress  toward  effective
modeling  of  ion  transport  through  channels  under
realistic conditions.

To  achieve  closed  circuit  conditions  and
thus  prevent  charge  buildup  during  and  after  ion
passage,  we  utilized  periodic  boundaries  in  the  z
dimension. With explicit water and ions, it is

Average  density  of  the  various  species
Figure 8. 
inside  the  channel  (15<z<40  Å)  for  the  2  M,  0.55  V  case.
Density is given as a function of r, the distance from the center
of the channel, where r=5.3125 Å corresponds to the center of
the  spheres  that  make  up  the  channel  walls  (marked  by  the
arrow). For plotting convenience ion densities were multiplied
by 100 and hydrogen densities were divided by 2. Traces for
the  various  species  are:  O  (solid  line),  H  (dotted  line),  Na+
(dash-dot line), and Cl- (dashed line).

conceptually  reasonable  to  represent  the  effect  of
metalic electrodes using a constant field throughout
the  system.  The  explicit  mobile  water  molecules
and ions should respond to the applied field to
produce 
the  expected  macroscopic  voltage
conditions,  which  include  little  resistance  in  the
aqueous  baths  and  a  constant  field  across  the
membrane.  Although  non-polarizable  electrodes
(such as Ag/AgCl electrodes) work on a somewhat
different  principle,  the  electrostatic  effects  should
be  comparable.  We  have  demonstrated  that  the
expectations  about  the  net  voltage  drops  are
reasonable on average, even for high voltages.
To  make  simulation  of  multiple  ion  passages
feasible,  we  minimized  the  system  size,  used  a
simplified  channel  and  bilayer,  used  an  optimized
P3M algorithm, computed the trajectories for each
condition  piecewise  in  parallel,  and  utilized  only
high concentrations and voltages where the number
of ions in the small baths and the driving force on
the  ions  would  be  appreciable.  Physiological
concentrations  and  voltages  would  require  much
longer  and  larger  simulations.  A  system  with
completely  mobile  channel  and  membrane  atoms
would  obviously  require  much  more  computer

11

processor time, especially with the addition of the
nonpolar  lipid  atoms.  However,  one  advantage  of
explicit solvation is that there is no need to employ
artificial  methods  to  represent  local  dielectric
constants.  Furthermore, our results here show that
such  improvements  are  necessary  to  take  into
account correlated motions of bath ions and water
molecules  that  are  likely  to  occur  during  ion
passage. For instance, as an ion is localized to the
entry of a channel, the nearby capacitative charge,
channel  water  structure  and  probably  the  counter-
ion  distribution  will  be  distorted,  significantly
affecting  the  energetics  and  motions  of  the
permeating  ion.  In  many  cases,  they  will  serve  to
reduce  expected  potential  energy  barriers,  an
expected  negative  feedback  mechanism.  These
changes must be understood to correctly predict the
entry rate relative to translocation and exit, which is
needed  to  correctly  assess  structure-function
permeation relationships, like those currently being
explored with gramicidin channels (Andersen et al.,
1998;  Busath  et  al.,  1998;  Cotten  et  al.,  1999;
Anderson et al., in press; Thompson et al., in press;
Markham et al., in press).
Here,  we  will  first  compare  our  apparent  channel
conductance and current voltage relationship shapes
to  those  measured  for  biological  channels
(specifically the NAChR channel and gramicidin A
channel).  We  will  then  compare  these  findings  to
those of recent BD simulations. Finally, we evaluate
the electrical characteristics of our

Figure 9.
Snapshot  of  a  chloride  ion  in  the  channel
along with all water molecules and channel wall atoms that are
within 3 Å (in the z-direction) of the chloride ion.

12

Figure 10.
Snapshot  of  a  sodium  ion  in  the  channel
along with all water molecules and channel wall atoms that are
within 3 Å (in the z-direction) of the sodium ion.

system and consider the statistical uncertainties and
conceptual inadequacies of our approach.

Our  model  channel  is  not  intended  to
represent any specific biological protein, but has an
internal  diameter  (8.125  Å)  similar  to  that  of  the
NAChR,  porins,  voltage-gated  calcium  channels,
and  others  (cf.  Hille,  1992,  Koebnik  et  al.,  2000).
The wall polarity, due to the partial charges on the
atoms lining the wall, was designed through the use
of standard peptide unit atomic charges to be similar
to that of a channel lined by the protein backbone,
such as is the case in the gramicidin channel and the
P region of a potassium channel, both of which are
narrower  in  diameter  and  accommodate  only  a
single  file  of  water  molecules  and  ions.  If  the
channel  conductance  is  computed  in  the  usual
fashion  as  the  current  divided  by  the  total  applied
potential, a value of 32.9 pS  is obtained for the 2M
NaCl  at  0.55  V,  slightly  higher  than  the
conductance  of  a  gramicidin  A  channel  in  2  M
NaCl, 30.4 pS at 0.2 V (Busath, et al., 1998), and
lower than that of a NAChR channel, 44 and 49 pS
in  chromaffin  cells  and  myotubes,  respectively,
under  physiological  conditions  (as  cited  in  Hille,
1992,  pg.  332).  Because  the  model  channel  used
here  is  not  structurally  identical  to  either  type  of
biological channel, and furthermore has rigid walls,
this agreement to within an order of magnitude of
experimental values is to be considered good. The
model  channel  has  somewhat  lower  conductance
than expected for its diameter. This is probably due

to  the  restriction  of  the  Na+ 
ions  to  the
neighborhood  of  the  channel  axis  by  the  channel
waters, as well as the immobile channel walls.

The current voltage relations of gramicidin
channels  in  phosphocholine  bilayers  shift  from
sublinear in 0.1 M NaCl to slightly superlinear in 1
M NaCl (Becker et al., 1992; Busath et al., 1998).
This  is  consistent  with  the  superlinearity  in  the
model  channel  I-Vs  for  the  moderate  and  high
concentrations.  The  superlinearity  is  interesting,
because at such high voltages one might expect the
currents  to  saturate.  Perhaps  saturation  would
become  evident  at  lower  concentrations,  and  is
beginning  to  appear  in  our  0.5  M  NaCl  results
(although  in  a  distorted  form  due  to  statistical
fluctuations). For instance, in gramicidin channels,
saturation is clearly evident when the concentration
is reduced to 0.1 M (Andersen, 1983a).

The  selectivity  for  cations  observed  here
may  be  a  general  property  of  channels  of  the
diameter used here. In our channel, water molecules
were  generally  adsorbed  on  the  wall  surface  and
rotated  with  many  of  the  protons  pointing  toward
the wall and oxygen atoms near the center (Figure
8),  a  favorable  orientation  for  coordination  of
cations but not for anions. This is reminiscent of the
water  structure  observed  for  smooth-walled
nonpolar  3-Å  radius  cylinders,  suggesting  that  the
channel  water  structure  (and  channel  selectivity)
may be yet a general property of the channel wall
curvature (Lynden-Bell and Rasaiah, 1996).

The  applied-field  MD  simulations  can  be
compared to recent BD simulations. Using explicit
ions  and  smooth-walled  channels  with  reflective
boundaries  surrounding  the  system  volume,  an
applied  field,  and  induced  charge  at  the  dielectric
interface  boundaries,  Chung  and  colleagues
performed simulations of model NAChR (Chung et
al.,  1998),  potassium  (Chung  et  al.,  1999),  and
calcium  (Corry  et  al.,  2000a;  Corry  et  al.,  2001)
channels.  Their  simulations  were  typically  0.5-1.0
µs long for each state point, and they covered many
more state points than we considered. It appears that
their production speed was roughly 50 times faster
than  ours  due  to  omission  of  explicit  water
molecules.  They  used  a  long  time  step  of  100  fs
(with  a  short  one  of  2  fs  for  steep  regions  on  the
energy surface) but don’t include water molecules;
we used a uniform time step of 2.5 fs and included
explicit water molecules. Interestingly, Chung and
colleagues found that the lag between the time the

entry  site  is  disoccupied  and  the  time  another  ion
enters  (i.e.  the  inverse  of  the  entry  rate  constant)
was  strikingly  voltage-dependent.  This  is  contrary
from  gramicidin  channel
to  expectations 
experiments (Andersen, 1983a), where sublinearity
of  I-V  relations  is  obtained  at  near-physiological
cation concentrations and interpreted to imply little
or  no  voltage-dependence  of  the  entry  step.  Here,
we  too  found  a  strong  voltage  dependence  to  the
inverse of the mean empty time. Although the field
in  the  conductive  bath  just  outside  the  channel
should be small and should not significantly affect
approach of an ion to the channel, it is possible that
voltage does affect the distribution of ions around
the  recently  vacated  channel  or  the  correlated
motions of ions and water molecules near the mouth
of the channel.

Finally,  it  is  interesting  to  relate  the
electrical  parameters  of  our  system  to  those  of  a
macroscopic  system.  The  effects  of  periodic
boundaries and a small unit cell can be dramatic and
need  to  be  carefully  considered  to  determine  the
legitimacy  of  comparisons  with  experimental
results. In the central cell, the bilayer has an area of
625  Å2,  a  predicted  capacitance,  based  on
membrane  area,  thickness  and  the  permittivity  of
free  space,  of  0.30  µ F/cm2,  and  an  apparent
capacitance, based on the observed excess charge in
the double layer, of 2.74  µF/cm2. This derives from
a  net  capacitative  charge  of  1.46×10-19  C  in  the
central cell at the 1.1 V applied potential, or 0.59 e.
The excess observed membrane capacitance may be
due to the channel water, which raises the effective
dielectric  constant  of  the  membrane.    Our
observations imply that local ion concentration near
a channel may be increased above bulk not only by
interfacial  polarization  due  to  the  average
membrane capacitance (Andersen, 1983b; Becker et
al., 1992), but also by a factor of up to 9 more due
to the polarity of the channel and its contents. It is
possible that the periodic boundary conditions result
in  some  interactions  between  the  central  box  and
images  that  affect  the  ion  passage.  This  will  be
explored  in  future  calculations.  Clearly,  our
simplified  model  also  lacks  other  electrostatic
features  considered  germane  to  modulation  of  ion
channel  conductance.  Atomic  polarizability  of
alkane chain atoms (which yields a typical dielectric
constant  of  ~2)  would  somewhat  reduce  the
electrostatic barrier to translocation (Jordan, 1984).
The  interfacial  dipole  layer,  known  to  affect

13

gramicidin  channel  conductance  (Busath  et  al.,
1998)  is  not  properly  represented  by  the  water-
membrane interface in the model. However, judging
from  the  Na+-environment  interaction  energy
(Figure  7),  the  so-called  “image  barrier”  is  quite
low in our system (~15 kJ/mol), probably due to the
moderately  large  diameter  of  the  channel  and
continued solvation  of  the  ion  in  the channel.  The
interfacial dipole potential in our system is ~0.3 V
(Figure  6A),  similar  to  that  measured  for
phospholipid bilayers (Pickar and Benz, 1978).

Electrophysiologists  might  be  concerned
about  a  possible  series  resistance  artifact  in  our
system.  The  specific  conductivity  of  1M  NaCl  is
12.9 Ω-cm (measured in our lab). For an accessible
volume  of  25Å  length  (total)  and  625  Å2,  the
resistance  of  the  bath  regions  in  our  central  cell
should  be  51.6  MΩ .  Compared  to  the  channel
resistance,  which,  using  the  conductance  for  1  M
NaCl  at  1.1  V  in  Table  2,  is  44.5  GΩ ,  this  is  a
negligible series resistance. We note, in this context,
that  the  observed  conductance  of  the  channel  is
lower  than  expected  for  a  volume  conductor  with
bulk  conductivity  and  the  dimensions  of  the
channel,  which,  from  the  channel's  ion  accessible
radius  (~2  Å),  the  channel  length,  and  the  bulk
solution resistivity, would be ~390 pS in 1 M NaCl.
This  can  be  attributed  to  immobilization  of  the
channel water molecules by the polar, rigid channel
walls reducing ion mobility in the pore and to the
potential energy barrier for ion crossing, as well as
other atomistic factors.

In  summary,  multiple  ion  passages  can  be
simulated  in  a  model  channel  if  sufficient
concentration  and  voltage  are  utilized.  The  use  of
periodic  boundary  conditions  prevents  artificial
charge buildup and yields closed circuit conditions.
A  uniform  applied  field  results  in  appropriate
compensations  by  SPC/E  water  molecules  and
explicit  Na+  and  Cl-  ions.  Although  applied-field
MD  simulations  are  currently  too  time-consuming
to  use  for  modeling  extensive  physiological  data
sets,  it  is  nevertheless  evident  that  extensive
sampling of trajectories and direct computations of
channel  currents,  albeit  under  extreme  conditions,
are  feasible  with  this  method.  The  results
demonstrate  the  importance  of  including  explicit
solvent  in  the  simulation  and  suggest  that  future
analysis of ion transport trajectories can be carried
out  without  presuppositions  about  the  solvent
response or the reaction coordinate.

14

Acknowledgements

We  thank  Nathan  Holladay  and  John  Harb
for  valuable  comments  and  discussion  on  the
results.  This  project  was  supported  in  part  by  the
National  Science  Foundation  (Grant  No.  CHE98-
13729)  and  by  the  National  Institutes  of  Health
(Grant No. AI 23007).

REFERENCES

Allen, T. W., S. Kuyucak, and S. H. Chung. 1999.
Molecular  dynamics  estimates  of  ion  diffusion  in
model hydrophobic and KcsA potassium channels.
Biophys. J. 77:2502-2516.

Allen,  T.  W.,  S.  Kuyucak,  S.-H.  Chung.  2000.
Molecular  dynamics  study  of  the  KcsA potassium
channel. Biophys. Chem. 86:1-14.

Andersen,  O.  S.  1983a.  Ion  movement  through
gramicidin  A  channels.  Studies  on  the  diffusion-
controlled association step. Biophys. J. 41:147-165.

Andersen,  O.  S.  1983b.  Ion  movement  through
gramicidin  A  channels.  Interfacial  polarization
effects  on  single-channel  current  measurements.
Biophys. J. 41:135-146.

Andersen,  O.  S.,  D.  V.  Greathouse,  L.  L.
Providence,  M.  D.  Becker,  and  R.  E.  Koeppe  II.
1998. Importance of tryptophan dipoles for protein
tryptophans  in
function:  5-fluorination  of 
gramicidin  A  channels.    J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.
120:5142–5146.

Anderson, D. G., R. B. Shirts, T. A. Cross, and D.
D.  Busath.  Non-contact  dipole  effects  on  channel
permeation. V. Computed potentials for fluorinated
gramicidin. Biophys. J. In the press.

Aqvist,  J.  and  V.  Luzhkov.  2000.  Ion  permeation
mechanism  of  the  potassium  channel.  Nature
404:881-884.

Becker, M.D., Koeppe II, R.E., and Andersen, O.S.
1992.  Amino  acid  substitutions  and  ion  channel
function. Model-dependent conclusions. Biophys. J.
62:25-27.

Bek,  S.  and  E.  Jakobsson.  1994.  Brownian
dynamics  study  of  a  multiply  occupied  cation
channel:  Application  to  understanding  permeation
in potassium channels. Biophys. J. 66:1028-1038.

Berendsen,  H.  J.  C.,  J.  R.  Grigera,  and  T.  P.
Straatsma. 1987. The missing term in effective pair
potentials. J. Phys. Chem. 91:6269-6271.

Berneche,  S.  and  B.  Roux.  2000.  Molecular
dynamics  of  the  KcsA  K+  channel  in  a  bilayer
membrane. Biophys. J. 78:2900-2917.

Boda,  D.,  D.  Busath,  D.  Henderson,  and  S.
Sokolowski. 2000. Monte Carlo simulations of the
mechanism for channel selectivity: The competition
between volume exclusion and charge neutrality. J.
Phys. Chem. 104:8903-8910.

Boda,  D.,  K.-Y.  Chan,  and  D.  Henderson.  1998.
Monte Carlo simulation of an ion-dipole mixture as
a  model  of  an  electrical  double  layer.  J.  Chem.
Phys. 109:7362-7371.

Boda, D., D. Henderson, and D. D. Busath. Monte
Carlo study of the effect of ion and channel size on
the selectivity of a model calcium channel. In press.

Brooks,  B.  R.,  Bruccoleri,  R.  E.,  Olafson,  B.  D.,
States,  D.  J.,  Swaminathan,  S.,  and  M.  Karplus.
1983.  CHARMM:  A  program  for  macromolecular
energy, minimization, and dynamics calculations. J.
Comput. Chem. 4:187-217.

Busath, D. D., C. D. Thulin, R. W. Hendershot, L.
R. Phillips, P. Maughn, C. D. Cole, N. C. Bingham,
S.  Morrison,  L.  C.  Baird,  R.  J.  Hendershot,  M.
Cotten,  and  T.  A.  Cross.  1998.  Noncontact dipole
effects on channel permeation. I. Experiments with
(5F-Indole)Trp13 gramicidin A channels. Biophys. J.
75, 2830-2844.

Capener, C. E., I. H. Shrivastava, K. M. Ranatunga,
L. R. Forrest, G. R. Smith, and M. S. Sansom. 2000.
Homology  modeling  and  molecular  dynamics
simulation studies of an inward rectifier potassium
channel. Biophys. J. 78:2929-2942.

Cardenas,  A.  E.,  Coalson,  R.  D.,  and  M.  G.
Kurnikova.  2000.  Three-dimensional  Poisson-
influence  of
theory  studies: 
Nernst-Planck 

15

membrane  electrostatics  on  gramicidin  A  channel
conductance. Biophys J. 79:80-93.

Chen, D., L. Xu, A. Tripathy, G. Meissner, and R.
Eisenberg. 1997a. Permeation through the calcium
release  channel  of  cardiac  muscle.  Biophys.  J.
73:1337-1354.

Chen,  D.  P.,  J.  Lear,  and  R.S.  Eisenberg.  1997b.
Permeation  through  an  open  channel.  Poisson-
Nernst-Planck theory of a synthetic ionic channel.
Biophys. J. 72:97-116.

Chen, D. P., L. Xu, A. Tripathy, G. Meissner, and
B.  Eisenberg.  1999.  Selectivity  and  permeation  in
calcium  release  channel  of  cardiac  muscle:  Alkali
metal ions. Biophys. J. 76:1346-1366.

Chiu,  S.W.  and  E.  Jakobsson.  1989.  Stochastic
theory of singly occupied ion channels. II. Effects
of  access  resistance  and  potential  gradients
extending into the bath. Biophys. J. 55:147-157.

Chiu,  S.W.,  E.  Jakobsson,  S.  Subramaniam,  and
J.A.  McCammon.  1991.  Time-correlation  analysis
of  simulated  water  motion  in  flexible  and  rigid
gramicidin channels. Biophys. J. 60:273-285.

Chung,  S.  H.,  T.W.  Allen,  M.  Hoyles,  and  S.
Kuyucak.  1999.  Permeation  of  ions  across  the
potassium  channel:  Brownian  dynamics  studies.
Biophys. J. 77:2517-2553.

Chung, S.H., M. Hoyles, T. Allen, and S. Kuyucak.
1998.  Study  of  ionic  currents  across  a  model
membrane  channel  using  Brownian  dynamics.
Biophys. J. 75:793-809.

Corry,  B.,  T.  W.  Allen,  S.  Kuyucak,  and  S.-H.
Chung.  2000a.  A  model  of  calcium  channels.
Biochim. et Biophys. Acta 1509:1-6.

Corry,  B.,  S.  Kuyucak,  and  S.H.  Chung.  2000b.
Tests  of  continuum  theories  as  models  of  ion
channels.  II.  Poisson-Nernst-Planck  theory  versus
Brownian dynamics. Biophys. J. 78:2364-2381.

Corry  B.,  T.  W.  Allen,  S.  Kuyucak,  and  S.  H.
Chung.  2001.  Mechanisms  of  permeation  and
selectivity in calcium channels. Biophys J. 80:195-
214.

Cotten, M., C. Tian, D. Busath, R. Shirts, and T. A.
Cross.    1999.    Modulating  dipoles  for  structure-
function  correlations  in  the  gramicidin  A  channel.
Biochemistry 38:9185–9197.

Crozier,  P.  S.,  R.  L.  Rowley,  and  D.  Henderson.
2000a.  Molecular  dynamics  calculations  of  the
electrochemical  properties  of  electrolyte  systems
between  charged  electrodes.  J.  Chem.  Phys.
113:9202-9207.

Crozier,  P.  S.,  R.  L.  Rowley,  N.  B.  Holladay,  D.
Henderson,  and  D.  D.  Busath.  2001.  Molecular
dynamics  simulation  of  continuous  current  flow
through  a  model  biological  membrane  channel.
Phys. Rev. Letters 86:2467-2470.

Crozier,  P.  S.,  R.  L.  Rowley,  E.  Spohr,  and  D.
Henderson.  2000b.  Comparison  of  charged  sheets
and corrected 3D Ewald calculations of long-range
forces  in  slab  geometry  electrolyte  systems  with
solvent molecules. J. Chem. Phys. 112:9253-9257.

Darden,  T.,  D.  York,  and  L.  Pedersen.  1993.
Particle  mesh  Ewald:  An  N-log(N)  method  for
Ewald  sums  in  large  systems.  J.  Chem.  Phys.
98:10089-10092.

Deserno, M, and C. Holm. 1998a. How to mesh up
Ewald  sums.  I.  A  theoretical  and  numerical
comparison  of  various  particle  mesh  routines.  J.
Chem. Phys. 109:7678-7693.

Deserno, M, and C. Holm. 1998b. How to mesh up
Ewald sums. II. An accurate error estimate for the
particle-particle-particle mesh algorithm. J.  Chem.
Phys. 109:7694-7701.

Doyle, D. A., J. M. Cabral, R. A. Pfuetzner, A. Kuo,
J.  M.  Gulbis,  S.  L.  Cohen,  B.  T.  Chait,  R.
MacKinnon.  1998.  The  structure  of  the  potassium
channel:  Molecular  basis  of  K+  conduction  and
selectivity. Science 280:69-77.

Eck, B., and E. Spohr. 1996. Computer simulation
of  hydrated  ions  near  a  mercury  electrode.
Electrochim. Acta. 42:2779-2788.

Edberg,  R.,  D.J.  Evans  and  G.P.  Morriss.  1986.
Constrained  molecular  dynamics:  Simulations  of

16

liquid alkanes with a new algorithm. J. Chem. Phys.
84:6933-6939.

Essmann,  U.,  L.  Perera,  M.  L.  Berkowitz,  T.
Darden,  H.  Lee,  and  L.  G.  Pedersen.  1995.  A
smooth  particle  mesh  Ewald  method.  J.  Chem.
Phys. 103:8577-8593.

Forrest, L.R. and M. S. Sansom. 2000. Membrane
simulations: Bigger and better? Curr.  Opin. Struct
Biol. 10:174-180.

Golding,  D.,  J.-P.  Hansen,  and  S.  Melchionna.
2000. Size selectivity of narrow pores. Phys.  Rev.
Lett. 85:1132-1135.

Graf,  P.,  A.  Nitzan,  M.G.  Kurnikova,  and  R.D.
Coalson.  2000.  A  dynamic  lattice  Monte  Carlo
model of ion transport in inhomogeneous dielectric
environments: Method and implementation. J. Phys.
Chem. B 104:12324-12338.

Guidoni,  L.,  V.  Torre,  and  P.  Carloni.  1999.
Potassium and sodium binding to the outer mouth of
the K+ channel. Biochem. 38:8599-8604.

Guidoni, L., V. Torre, and P. Carloni. 2000. Water
and  potassium  channel  dynamics  inside  the  KcsA
K+ channel. FEBS Letters 477:37-42.

Hartnig,  C.,  C.  Witschel,  and  E.  Spohr.  1998.
Molecular  dynamics  study  of  electrolyte-filled
pores.  Ber.  Bunsenges.  Phys.  Chem.  102:1689-
1692.

Hille,  B.  1992.  Ionic  Channels  of  Excitable
Membranes  2n d  Ed.  Sinauer  Associates  Inc.
Sunderland, MA.

Hockney,  R.  W.,  and  J.  W.  Eastwood.  1988.
Computer  Simulation  Using  Particles.  Institute  of
Physics Publishing, Bristol, UK.

Hollerbach,  U.,  D.  P.  Chen,  D.  D.  Busath,  and  B.
Eisenberg. 2000. Predicting function from structure
using the Poisson-Nernst-Planck equations: Sodium
current  in  the  gramicidin  A  channel.  Langmuir
16:5509-5514.

Horowitz,  P.  and  W.  Hill.  1980.  The  Art  of
Electronics.  Cambridge  University  Press.
Cambridge, UK.

Levitt, D.G. 1987. Exact continuum solution for a
channel that can be occupied by two ions. Biophys.
J. 52:455-466.

Hu,  J.,  S.  Goldman,  C.G.  Gray,  and  H.R.  Guy.
2000. Calculation of the conductance and selectivity
of an ion-selective potassium channel (IRK1) from
simulation  of  atomic  scale  models.  Molecular
Physics 98:535-547.

Humphrey,  W.,  A.  Dalke,  and  K.  Schulten.  1996.
VMD  -Visual  Molecular  Dynamics.  J.  Molecular
Graphics 14:33-38.

Im,  W.,  S.  Seefeld,  and  B.  Roux.  2000.  A  grand
canonical  Monte  Carlo—Brownian  dynamics
algorithm  for  simulating  ion  channels. Biophys. J.
79:788-801.

Jakobsson,  E.  and  S.W.  Chiu.  1987.  Stochastic
theory of ion movement in channels with single-ion
occupancy.  Application  to  sodium  permeation  of
gramicidin channels. Biophys. J. 52:33-45.

Jordan, P.C. 1984. The total electrostatic potential
in a gramicidin channel. J. Membr. Biol. 78:91-102.

Koebnik,  R.,  K.  P.  Locher,  and  P.  Van  Gelder.
2000.  Structure  and  function  of  bacterial  outer
membrane  proteins:  Barrels  in  a  nutshell.  Molec.
Microbiology 37:239-253.

Kurnikova,  M.G.,  R.D.  Coalson,  P.  Graf,  and  A.
Nitzan.  1999.  A  lattice  relaxation  algorithm  for
three-dimensional  Poisson-Nernst-Planck  theory
with  application  to  ion  transport  through  the
gramicidin A channel. Biophys. J. 76:642-656.

Läuger, P. 1976. Diffusion-limited ion flow through
pores. Biochim. et Biophys. Acta 445:493-509.

Levitt, D.G. 1978. Electrostatic calculations for an
ion channel. II. Kinetic behavior of the gramicidin
A channel. Biophys. J. 22:221-248.

Levitt,  D.G.  1982.  Comparison  of  Nernst-Planck
and  reaction-rate  models  for  multiply  occupied
channels. Biophys. J. 37:575-587.

Lo,  W.Y.,  K.-Y.  Chan,  M.  Lee,  and  K.-L.  Mok.
1998.  The  molecular  simulation  of  electrolytes  in
nanopores.  J. Electroanal. Chem. 450:265-272.

Lozada-Cassou, M., W. Olivares, and B. Sulbarán.
1996. Violation of the electroneutrality condition in
confined charged fluids. Phys. Rev. E 53:522-530.

Lynden-Bell,  R.-M.  and  J.  C.  Rasaiah.  1996.
Mobility and solvation of ions in channels. J. Chem.
Phys. 105:9266-9280.

Markham,  J.  C.,  J.  A.  Gowen,  T.  A.  Cross,  D.  D.
Busath. Comparison of gramicidin A and gramicidin
M channel conductance dispersion properties. In the
press.

Moy, G., B. Corry, S. Kuyucack, and S.-H. Chung.
2000. Tests of continuum theories as models of ion
channels.  I.  Poisson-Boltzmann  theory  versus
Brownian dynamics. Biophys. J. 78:2349-2363.

Nonner,  W.,  L.  Catacuzzeno,  and  B.  Eisenberg,
2000.  Binding  and  selectivity  in  L-Type  calcium
channels:  A  mean  spherical  approximation.
Biophysical Journal 79:1976-1992.

Parry, D. E., 1975. The electrostatic potential in the
surface region of an ionic crystal. Surf. Sci. 49:433-
440.

Peskoff, M. and D. M. Bers. 1988. Electrodiffusion
of  ions  approaching  the  mouth  of  a  conducting
membrane channel. Biophys. J. 53:863-875.

Pickar,  A.  D.,  and  R.  Benz.  1978.  Transport  of
oppositely  charged  lipophilic  probe  ions  in  lipid
bilayer  membranes  having  various  structures.  J.
Membr. Biol. 44:353-376.

Roux,  B.  1999.  Statistical  mechanical  equilibrium
theory of selective ion channels. Biophys. J. 77:139-
153.

Roux,  B.,  S.  Bernèche,  and  W.  Im.  2000.  Ion
channels,  permeation,  and  electrostatics:  Insight

17

into the function of KcsA. Biochemistry 39:13295-
13306.

Roux,  B.  and  M.  Karplus.  1994.  Molecular
dynamics  simulations  of  the  gramicidin  channel.
Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 23:731-761.

Roux, B. and R. MacKinnon. 1999. The cavity and
pore  helices  in  the  KcsA K+ channel: Electrostatic
stabilization  of  monovalent  cations.  Science
285:100-102.

Rowley, R. L. and J. F. Ely. 1981. Non-equilibrium
molecular  dynamics  simulations  of  structured
molecules. Part I. Isomeric effects on the viscosity
of butanes. Molec. Phys. 72:831-846.

Sancho,  M.  and  G.  Martínez.  1991.  Electrostatic
modeling  of  dipole-ion 
in
gramicidinlike channels. Biophys. J. 60:81-88.

interactions 

Sansom,  M.  S.,  I.  D.  Kerr,  J.  Breed,  and  R.
Sankararamakrishnan. 1996. Water in channel-like
cavities:  structure  and  dynamics.  Biophys.  J.
70:693-702.

Shrivastava,  H.  and  M.  S.  Sansom.  2000.
Simulations of ion permeation through a potassium
channel:  Molecular  dynamics  of  KcsA  in  a
phospholipid bilayer. Biophys J. 78:557-570.

Sorensen,  T.  S.,  and  P.  Sloth.  1992.  Ion  and
potential distributions in charged and non-charged
primitive  spherical  pores  in  equilibrium  with
primitive  electrolyte  solution  calculated  by  grand
canonical  ensemble  Monte  Carlo  simulation.
Comparison  with  generalized  Debye-Hückel  and
Donnan  theory.  J.  Chem.  Soc.  Faraday  Trans.
88:571-589.

Tang,  Y.-W.,  I.  Szalai,  and  K.-Y.  Chan.  2001.
Diffusivity  and  conductivity  of  a  primitive  model
electrolyte in a nanopore. Mol. Phys.  99:309-314.

Tang,  Y.-W.,  I.  Szalai,  and  K.-Y.  Chan.  2001.
Diffusivity and conductivity of
solvent primitive model electrolyte in a nanopore by
equilibrium and
nonequilibrium molecular dynamics simulations, J.
Phys. Chem. B. In the press.

Thompson,  N.,  G.  Thompson,  C.  D.  Cole,  M.
Cotten, T. A. Cross, and D. D. Busath.  Non-contact
dipole effects on channel permeation. IV.  Kinetic
model of 5F-Trp13 gramicidin A currents.  Biophys.
J. In the press.

Torrie,  G.  M.,  and  J.  P.  Valleau.  1980.  Electrical
double layers. I. Monte Carlo study of a uniformly
charged surface. J. Chem. Phys. 73:5807-5816.

Spohr,  E.  1999.  Molecular  simulation  of  the
electrochemical  double  layer.  Electrochim.  Acta.
44:1697-1705.

Vlachy,  V.  and  D.  A.  McQuarrie,  1986.  Ion
distributions  in  a  cylindrical  capillary.  J.  Phys.
Chem. 90:3248.

18

