DEVELOPMENT OF NUCLOTRON MAGNET POWER SYPPLY
CONTROL SYSTEM

B. Vasilishin, V. Andreev, V. Gorchenko, A. Kirichenko, A. Kovalenko, I. Kulikov,
B. Omelchenko, V. Karpinsky, S. Romanov, B. Sveshnikov, A. Tharenkov, V. Volkov, JINR,
Dubna, Russia

361(cid:6)7+$3(cid:19)(cid:22)(cid:26)

1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
2
2
 
 
 
2
6
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

The  magnetic  field  control  subsystem  of 
the
Nuclotron-  a  superferric  heavy  ion  synchrotron-  is
described.  The  bending  (BM),  focusing  (QF)  and
defocusing  (QD)  magnets  are  powered  by 
three
supplies.  The  BMs  are  driven  by  the  supply  of  a  6.3
kA nominal current. The QFs and QDs are  connected
in  series  and  powered  by  the  6  kA  supply.  An
additional supply of 200 A for the QFs is used to keep
the  required  ratio  IQF/IQD.  The  BM  magnetic  field
shape  is  set  by  a  pulse  function  generator  which
produces  a  reference  burst  (B0-train)  with  a  0.1  Gs
resolution. A real B-train of the bending  magnet  field
with the same (0.1 Gs) resolution is used for feedback
loop  and  as  reference  function  for  the  QD  and  QF
supplies.  The  QD  and  QF  trains  are  utilized  for
feedback loop in the QD and QF supplies. The control
of slow extraction system supplies is described as well.

is 

intended 

1 INTRODUCTION
The  superconducting  synchrotron  Nuclotron  based
on  miniature  iron-shaped  field  magnets  was  put  into
operation  in  March  1993  at  the  Laboratory  of  High
Energies  JINR.  The  accelerator 
to
accelerate nuclei and multi-charged ions including the
heaviest  ones  (uranium)  up  to  an  energy  of  6  GeV/u
for the  charge  to  mass  ratio  Z/A=1/2.  Twenty  runs  of
the  accelerator  have  been  performed  by  the  present
time.  Since  December  1999,  the  slow  extraction  has
operated  on  the  Nuclotron.  The  Nuclotron  Control
System (NCS), which is  in  progress  [1],  has  provided
efficient  support  for  a  successful  operation  of  the
machine  during  all  runs.  The  most  important  part  of
the NCS is the Nuclotron magnet power supply control
subsystem  (MPSC),  which  provides  control  and
monitoring  of  magnetic  field 
the  Nuclotron
elements.

in 

There  are  96  bending  magnets  (BM),  32  focusing
(QF)  and  32  defocusing  (QD)  quadrupoles,  32
correcting  multipoles  in  the  Nuclotron  magnetic  ring
with a circumference of 251.1 m. The maximum value
of the magnetic field is about 2 T. The BMs are driven
by  the  supply  of  a  6.3  kA  nominal  current.  The  QFs
and QDs are connected in series and excited by the 6.3
kA supply. An additional supply of 200 A for the QFs

is  used  to  keep  the  required  ratio  IQF/IQD  during  an
accelerator cycle.

The  extraction  process  is  realized  by  excitation  of
the  radial  betatron  oscillation  resonance  Qx=20/3.  A
20-th harmonic of sextupole nonlinearity is excited by
two  pairs  of  sextupoles  (ES1…ES4).  The  lenses  of
each  pair  connected  in  series  are  supplied  from
separate  sources.  It  permits  one  to  excite  an  arbitrary
phase  of  the  sextupole  disturbance.  Four  extraction
quadrupoles  (EQ1…EQ4)  connected  in  series  and
driven  from  one  source  are  used  to  perform  the  tune
shift 
x  within  the  resonance  band.  The  beam  is
extracted  by  means  of  an  electrostatic  septum  (ESS)
and a Lambertson magnet (LM). The LM is connected
in  series  with  the  BMs,  but  there  is  an  additional
power  supply  for  the  LM  used  for  beam  correction  in
the vertical plane.

ß4

2 GENERAL MPSC DESCRIPTION
The  MPSC  performs 

following  main

the 

functionality:

•  Downloading and interpreting of  information
on  the  required  magnetic  cycle  parameters
and calculation of corresponding waveforms.
•  Generation  of  analog  signals  for  control  of
the  Nuclotron  magnetic 
in
accordance  with  the  parameters  specified  on
the operator console.
•  Generation  of  cycle 

for
synchronization  of  the  Nuclotron  subsystems
with a magnetic cycle.

timing  pulses 

elements 

•  Data  presentation 

in  graphical  and 

text
formats,  transmission  of  the  complete  set  of
information  on  the  MPSC  status  to  the
database and alarm server.

A  schematic  diagram  of  the  MPSC  is  shown  in
Fig.1.  The  magnetic  cycle  is  specified  at  a  B(t)  level,
and  the  waveforms,  which  drive  the  power  supplies,
are  generated  by  function  generators  controlled
through  console  software.  The  BM  magnetic  field
shape is set by a pulse function generator (PFG) which
produces 3 reference bursts: (B0)+-train according to a
the  magnetic  field,  (B0)-  -train
rising  parts  of 
according  to  a  falling  part  and  B0-train  (B0=(B0)++
(B0)-).  One  pulse  of  the  trains  corresponds  to  0.1  Gs

field.  The 

the  magnetic 

(B0)+-train
change  of 
increments  and  (B0)-  -train  decrements  the  pattern  B0
analog  function  generator  (AFG)  based  on  a  16  bit
DAC. Each train consists of a certain number (£ 4096)
series  (vectors)  of  pulse.  The  vector  is  determined  by
two  24-bit  integers:  the  number  of  steps  (pulses)  and
step  size.  Each  vector  defines  part  of  the  magnetic
cycle  with  the  constant  time  derivation,  which  is
determined  by  the  pulse  frequency  (step  size)  in  this
vector.  The  parabolic  form  of  initial  part  of  the  cycle
and  the  edges  of  flattops  is  approximated  by  set  of
linear parts. The output analog signal (AB0) of the B0
AFG is fed to the magnetic field forming system. The
B0-train  is  passed  to  the  timing  pulse  selector  (TPS)
which  generates  timing  pulses  for  synchronization  of
Nuclotron subsystems.

3 SLOW EXTRACTION CONTROL
Slow  extraction  power  control  starts  by  the  timing
pulse  from  the  TPS.  A  timing  diagram  of  the
extraction  process  is  shown  in  Fig.2.  Just  after  the
beginning of a magnetic field cycle, a horizontal orbit
bump is created with the help of four correcting dipole
magnets (b) in the extraction section to shift the beam
to the inner wall of the vacuum chamber.  This  allows
one  to  avoid  beam  losses  on  the  ESS  and  LM  during
the  first  turns.  After  reaching  the  flattop  energy,  the
horizontal beam tune  is  shifted  to  the  resonance  band
edge  by  decreasing  the  field  gradient  in  the  QDs  and
QFs  (a).  At  this  time,  the  magnetic  fields  of  the  ESs
and  EQs  increase  to  the  set  values  (e  and  f).  During
the  extraction,  the  EQs  current  is  linearly  varied  (f),
the  beam  spill
rate  defines 
and 
duration (h).

the  change 

Figure 1: Schematic diagram of the MPSC.

The  BM  induction  transducer  produces  an  analog
signal  proportional  to  the  derivation  (DB)  of  the  real
magnetic field in the BMs. This signal enters to the B-
timer which generates B+ and  B-  trains  corresponding
to the real magnetic field. These trains are supplied to
the  B  analog  function  generator,  which  generates  an
analog  signal  AB  of  the  real  field  in  the  BMs  in  the
same  standard  as  AB0.  The  real  B+  and  B-  trains  and
the corresponding analog function AB are used for the
feedback  loop  and  as  a  reference  for  the  QD,  i.e.  the
BM power supply is  a  master  and  the  QD  supply  is  a
slave.  The  QD  trains  are  utilized  for  control  as
described  above  and  as  a  reference  for  an  additional
supply of the QFs.

Figure 2: Timing diagram of extraction processes.

the  extraction  power
The  waveforms  driving 
supplies  are  generated  by 
the  16  bit  function
generators, which are started by a pulse from TPS. All
the  obtained  current  waveforms  measured  with  a  step
of  1  ms  are  compared  with 
the  corresponding
references. Difference signals are used for the feedback
loop of the corresponding power supplies.

the Data Viewer allow the users to select data sets for
visual  observation  or  printing  on 
remote
workstations  (Fig.  3).  The  alarm  server  monitors
continuously  any  changes  of  the  MPSC  state  and
detects fault conditions.

the 

Figure 3: Example of magnetic field cycle parameters.

6 CONCLUSION
The  MPSC  has  been  successfully  used  in  all
Nuclotron  runs  being  capable  of  generating  precision
rumps ranging from a fraction of kGs/s up to 10kGs/s.
Modifications  will  be  undertaken  to  improve  the
stability  of  slow  extraction  supplies  and  to  reduce  the
ripples in the extracted beam. The 16 bit DACs will be
replaced with 18 bit devices. These improvements will
permit  one  to  realize  the  feedback  loop  “extracted
beam currentﬁ power supplies”.

The  authors  are  grateful  to  L.Sveshnikova  for  her

help in preparing this paper.

REFERENCES
[1]  V.  Andreev  et  al,  “Nuclotron  Control  System”,

PAC’97, Vancouver, May 1997.

4 HARDWARE COMPONENTS
The  main  part  of  hardware  interface  is  in  the
CAMAC  standard.  All  modules  were  developed  and
manufactured at LHE, JINR.

A  1  MHz  signal  generated  by  the  master  oscillator
of the MPSC is the basic PGF clock. This ensures that
the B0-train does not vary by – 0.01Gs.

The PGS has individual outputs for the B0, (B0)+ and
(B0)--  trains.  Pulses  from  the  cycle  timer  (cycle  start)
cause the restoration of the initial PGF state and give a
start  for  function  generation.  The  function  proceeds
until  the  last  defined  vector  has  been  produced.  The
(B0)+ and (B0) --trains, as well as the B+ and B- -trains,
are converted into a 16 bit analog representation (AB0,
AB)  to  control  the  BM  power  supply.  Pulses  of  the
vector  ends  are  also  produced  by  the  PGF.  These
pulses drive the 16 bit analog function generator of the
magnetic  field  derivation  (DB0).  In  combination  with
the real field derivations DB and DQD, this function is
used to improve dynamic characteristics of the field.

The  2-channel  cycle  timer  generates  pulses  of  the
cycle  beginning  and  bursts  to  drive  the  measuring
devices. The  clock  period  can  vary  over  a  range  from
1m s to hundreds of seconds. The multi-channel trigger
TPS based on a 18 bit  counter  is  used  to  generate  the
timing pulse corresponding to a definite value of B.

The digital functions (B0…QF) are monitored using
a  pulse  train  analyzer  which  samples  the  function  at
4096 points during every machine cycle. An additional
diagnostics  is  achieved  by  a  direct  measurement  of
power  supply  output  currents  and  voltages,  with  the
help  of  a  high  performance  multi-channel  ADC  with
an onboard memory.

includes,  for 

5 SOFTWARE
The  set  of  parameters  is  specified  through  the
instance,
console  menu.  This  set 
parameters  of  parabolic  segments  and  linear  fractions
at  various  parts  of  the  magnetic  cycle,  a  maximum
value  of  the  field,  the  number  of  flattops  and  their
duration,  flattop  locations  relative  to  the  magnetic
field  values,  accelerator  cycle  duration  and  so  on.
Software  provides  the  storing  and  retrieving  settings,
automatic  recording  with  a  time-stamps  of  all  made
adjustments,  as  well  as  means  of  stepping  back
through  these  changes.  The  MPSC  status  is  available
in the dynamic database. It is updated each accelerator
cycle. The  archive  database  keeps  a  long-term  history
of  the  system.  The  database  access  (routines)  named

