Being at Rest

Douglas M. Snyder
Los Angeles, California1

When I was a boy, I had a favorite ride at the amusement park in Santa
Monica.  I would walk into a  large  cylinder  along  with  other  riders,  and  we
would all stand  with  our  backs  against  the  inside  wall  of  the  cylinder.    The
cylinder  would  begin  to  rotate  around  its  axis,  and  the  speed  of  its  rotation
would increase until it was  rotating very quickly.  Then, the floor upon which
we were standing would drop away.

Amazingly, we did not fall.  In fact, we were glued to the cylinder wall.
I felt glued to the wall by a force that was  pushing  me  flat  against  it  and  the
direction of which was  along a line through me and which emanated from the
center  of  the  cylinder.    I  was  restrained  by  the  cylindrical  wall  itself,  the
counterforce  being  experienced  as  equal  to  the  force  pushing  me  outward.
What  held  me  up  against  the  force  of  gravity  was  the  force  due  to  friction
resulting from my body pressing against the wall of the cylinder.

For an observer located outside the ride and at rest,  the analysis of the
motion would be much different.  This observer can be considered to be in an
inertial reference frame.  This observer(cid:213)s analysis would be that the direction of
my velocity is always tangent to the rotating cylinder.  My  velocity  would  be
like a piece of a spinning top that breaks off at the edge of the  top.    Like  the
rotating  cylinder,  the  magnitude  of  the  velocity  is  constant.    But,  unlike  the
piece of the spinning top, the direction of my motion is constantly altered due to
a force applied to me by the cylinder wall that is responsible for my continual
acceleration toward the cylindrical axis (i.e., a centripetal force).(1)

In this analysis of the dynamics of my motion, the frictional force due to
my  body(cid:213)s  pressing  against  the  cylinder  is  also  responsible  for  keeping  me
from  falling.    This  observer  at  rest  in  an  inertial  reference  frame  would
essentially maintain an explanation of the dynamics of my motion in accordance
with Newtonian mechanics.  On the other hand, my experience of the dynamics
of  my  motion  is  similar  to  analyses  of  rotational  motion  maintained  by
Descartes,  where  a  real  outward  directed  force,  for  example,  is  considered
responsible for the climbing of water up the inside of a rotating bucket. (2)

In the Newtonian analysis of rotational motion,  this  outward  directed,
centrifugal  force  is  not  essential.    Only  a  centripetal  force  is  required.    A

- 1 -

Being at Rest

complete and accurate understanding of my motion on the amusement park ride
is achieved without centrifugal force.   Indeed,  Newton(cid:213)s analysis of rotational
motion,  in  conjunction  with  Newton(cid:213)s  law  of  gravitation,  is  responsible  for
remarkably accurate predictions concerning the motions  of  the  planets  around
the sun.    The  question  arises  as  to  why  I  experienced  this  outward  directed
force  when  it  appears  that  a  complete,  accurate,  and  economical  explanation
does not require it.   Is  this experience just an insignificant oddity, or can it be
seen to reveal something basic about the nature  of  the  physical  world  and  its
relation to human experience?

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE OBSERVER(cid:213)S
BEING AT REST IN A REFERENCE FRAME

It is unlikely that this experience of  what  is  called  centrifugal  force  is
insignificant.  The experience in situations like the amusement park ride is too
powerful,  and these situations occur too frequently.    What  then  can  it  tell  us
about the nature of the physical world and an individual(cid:213)s relation  to  it?    The
answer  can  be  found  in  that  which  distinguishes  between  my  experience  of
centrifugal  force  and  the  analysis  of  the  observer  who  is  stationary  on  the
ground.

This  distinguishing  feature  concerns  the  different  reference  frames  of
the respective observers.  That is, my reference frame on the ride is  the rotating
cylinder and the reference frame of the stationary observer on the ground is an
inertial reference frame.  But  why  should  these  different  reference  frames  be
responsible for the differing analyses and different experiences of the situation?
For  example, why  can(cid:213)t  I  simply  consider  myself  in  the  stationary  reference
frame  of  the  observer  on  the  ground  and  thus  get  rid  of  the  experience  of
centrifugal force?  It might appear that one is dealing only with simply choosing
one coordinate scheme rather than another from which to describe my motion.
And there are certainly transformation rules for transforming the description of
motion in one reference frame into the description in another.

The reason for the difficulty in achieving this change of reference frame
is the natural inclination to see oneself  as  an  observer  at  rest  in  his  frame  of
reference.    It  is  this  characteristic  of  experience  that  is  the  basis  for
distinguishing the  experiences  and  analyses  of  the  different  observers  of  my
ride  at  the  amusement  park.    As  implied  in  the  above  description  of  my
experience on the ride, the outward directed, centrifugal force is needed by me,
or  another  observer  in  similar  circumstances,  to  counterbalance  the  applied

- 2 -

Being at Rest

centripetal force.   My experience  of  the  counterbalancing  forces  is  associated
with my experience of being at rest.

A  fundamental  aspect  of  the  measurement  of  motion  in  the  physical
world is that the observer involved in this measurement is at rest in some  frame
of reference.  It is a point that is generally not emphasized while the importance
of a reference frame in determining the motion of physical objects may be.   The
reference  frame,  in  part  an  invention  of  the  observer  using  it,  can  itself  be
problematic.  There is no necessity that a particular observer adopt a particular
reference  frame.    Yet,  without  choosing  a  particular  reference  frame,  the
observer(cid:213)s measuring instruments are essentially useless.

But even  more  fundamental,  from  a  psychological  perspective,  is  the
idea of rest  for  the  observer  because  this  rest  is  completely  beyond  physical
analysis.  This rest is not the rest referred to in Newton(cid:213)s first law of motion.
This  being  at  rest  for  an  observer  in  a  reference  frame  is  distinct  from  the
motion or rest of physical objects observed by this individual.  If someone else,
for example, sees me rotating on the amusement park ride,  I nonetheless as an
observer  am  at  rest  in  my  reference  frame.    For  this  other  individual,  the
amusement park ride is rotating at  the  same  speed  as  I  rotate.    Even  if  I  am
aware that I,  as  my  body,  am  rotating  at  a  constant  speed,  as  an  observer  I
consider myself at rest in a reference frame.  I am  fundamentally  at  rest  even
though I may be cognitively convinced that I am in motion.

This last point bears repeating.  There is nothing in the physical world
that serves as the basis for explaining the observer(cid:213)s being at rest for  himself or
herself in a reference frame.  The observer(cid:213)s being at rest in a reference frame is
a psychological characteristic, not an explicitly  physical  one.    The  observer(cid:213)s
being at rest in a reference frame is a characteristic that follows the psyche,  not
the  material  physical  world.    It  does  not,  for  example,  follow  the  physical
object  associated  with  the  observer(cid:213)s  reference  frame.    There  is  nothing
particularly  unique  about  this  physical  object  that  distinguishes  it  from  other
physical objects, except that for the observer it is not moving  relative  to  him.
Its significance in terms of its,  and the  associated  reference  frame(cid:213)s,  being  at
rest is that it is not in motion relative to the observer in the reference frame.  If
the  object  to  which  the  observer(cid:213)s  reference  frame  is  associated  is  put  into
motion relative to him, it is no longer associated with his reference frame as an
anchor,  so  to  speak,  for  this  reference  frame.    Another  suitable  object  is
needed.  Wherever I am, I am fundamentally at rest, even if I conclude that my
body is moving.2

- 3 -

Being at Rest

Special and General Relativity

The significance of the observer(cid:213)s being at rest for himself or herself in
a reference frame is implied in the theories of special and general relativity.  In
special relativity, the relativity of simultaneity is the basis for the other results of
special relativity, and it depends on observers at rest for themselves in inertial
reference frames travelling in uniform rectilinear motion relative to one  another.
It is from their inertial reference frames, in which the observers are at rest,  that
the  measurements  of  time  can  be  taken  to  determine  the  relativity  of
simultaneity.(3,4)

In general relativity, one statement of the principle of equivalence is that
a  uniformly  accelerating  reference  frame  is  equivalent  with  regard  to  the
description of motion to  an  inertial  reference  frame  in  a  gravitational  field  of
uniform intensity.(5)  It is this equivalence that Einstein indicated is the meaning
behind  the  equivalence  of  inertial  mass  in  Newton(cid:213)s  laws  of  motion  and
gravitational  mass  in  Newton(cid:213)s  law  of  gravitation.(6)    The  principle  of
equivalence underlies the general principle of relativity that states that the laws
of physics apply to reference frames whether or not they are inertial ones.   In
outlining the essentials of the general theory of relativity, Einstein discussed a
situation like that of the amusement park ride and posited the importance of the
observer(cid:213)s being at rest in the description of physical phenomena.  He wrote:

Let us  consider a space-time  domain  in  which  no  gravitational
field exists relative to a reference-body K whose  state of motion
has been suitably chosen.   K  is then a Galileian reference-body
as regards the domain considered, and the results of the special
theory of relativity hold relative to K.   Let us  suppose the same
domain  referred  to  a  second  body  of  reference  K¢,  which  is
rotating uniformly with respect to K.   In order to fix our ideas,
we shall imagine K¢  to be in the form of  a  plane  circular  disc,
which rotates uniformly in its own  plane  about  its  centre.    An
observer who is sitting eccentrically on the disc K¢ is sensible of
a  force  which  acts  outwards  in  a  radial  direction,  and  which
would be interpreted as an effect of inertial (centrifugal force) by
an  observer  who  was  at  rest  with  respect  to  the  original
reference-body K.  But the observer on the disc may regard his
disc as a reference-body which is (cid:210)at rest(cid:211); on the  basis  of  the
general principle of relativity he is justified in doing this.   This
force acting on himself, and in fact on all other bodies which are

- 4 -

Being at Rest

at  rest  relative  to  the  disc,  he  regards  as  the  effect  of  a
gravitational field....he is quite in the right when he believes  that
a general law of gravitation can be formulated-a law which not
only explains the motion of the stars correctly, but also the field
of force experienced by himself.(7)

In the above quote, the observer on the disc considers his reference body (i.e.,
the disc), and thus this body(cid:213)s associated reference frame, at rest.  The essential
characteristic of the observer(cid:213)s reference frame is that he or she is at rest in it.
Thus,  in the above example, rather  than  considering  himself  accelerating,  the
observer on the disc considers himself stationary in a gravitational field.  If the
disc  moved  differently  than  did  the  observer,  the  observer  would  need  to
choose a different reference body that would be  associated  with  his  reference
frame, one that was  moving in  the  same  manner  as  himself.    When  Einstein
focused  on  the  rotating  disc  being  a  reference  body  at  rest  for  the  observer
sitting  eccentrically  on  the  disc,  he  essentially  was  concerned  with  this
observer’s  being  at  rest  in  a  reference  frame  for  which  the  disc  was  the
associated reference body.

CONCLUSION

Exploring the experience of centrifugal force has brought to the  fore the
natural inclination to see oneself at rest in his or her frame of  reference.    The
discrepancy  between  the  experience  of  centrifugal  force  and  its  lack  of
fundamental  significance  in  Newton(cid:213)s  laws  of  motion  points  toward  the
importance  of  the  observer  as  a  subject  in  his  or  her  own  reference  frame,
specifically the observer(cid:213)s experience of being at rest in this reference frame.  In
addition, the observer(cid:213)s being at rest for himself or herself is central to special
and general relativity.  As discussed, there is nothing in the physical world that
serves as  the  basis  for  explaining  the  observer(cid:213)s  being  at  rest  in  a  reference
frame.  The observer(cid:213)s being fundamentally at rest as a subject allows for  the
measurement  of  motion  in  the  physical  world.    Thus,  the  measurement  of
motion in the physical world depends on a feature of experience that cannot be
explained in terms of events in the physical world.

1 Email address: dsnyder@earthlink.net.

ENDNOTES

2  An  anecdote  demonstrates  the  very  basic  nature  of  a  person(cid:213)s
experience  of  being  at  rest  in  a  reference  frame  and,  at  the  same  time,  the

- 5 -

Being at Rest

difficulty in accepting this fact.  A few years ago,  I was  driving in a car  with
my eight year old niece about two weeks after she had  taken  her  first  trip  by
airplane.  As we were riding, my niece asked out of the blue,  (cid:210)Why doesn(cid:213)t it
feel like you(cid:213)re moving when you(cid:213)re in an airplane?(cid:211)  She also said,  (cid:210)You get
on the airplane at one place and get off the airplane at  another,  but  you  don(cid:213)t
feel like you(cid:213)ve moved anywhere.(cid:211)  My niece, like the rest of us,  had difficulty
squaring her experience that she was not in motion with her having traveled to a
far off place.  Her experience of not being in motion in the airplane essentially
constituted her being at rest in an inertial frame of reference.

REFERENCES

Halliday, D. and Resnick, R. Physics  (Vol.  1)  (3rd  ed.).  (John  Wiley  &  Sons,  1977),
pp. 104-105.

Cohen, I.B. Newton(cid:213)s discovery of gravity. Sci. Amer., 244(3), 166 (1981).

Einstein, A. On the electrodynamics of moving bodies. In H.  Lorentz, A.  Einstein,  H.
Minkowski,  and H.  Weyl (Eds.),  The  principle of  relativity,  a  collection  of  original
memoirs  on  the  special  and general theories of  relativity  .  (Dover;  1952,  orig.  work
published 1905), pp. 35-69.

Einstein, A. Relativity, the special and the general theory . (Bonanza; 1961, orig.  work
published 1917), pp. 17-54.

Einstein,  A.  The  meaning  of  relativity  (5th  ed.)  (Princeton  University  Press,  1956,
orig. work published 1922), p. 57.

Ref. 5, pp. 57-58.

Ref. 4, pp. 79-80.

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 

7. 

- 6 -

