 Fundamental Radar Properties:
Hidden Variables in Spacetime

Andrew K. Gabriel

Jet Propulsion Laboratory
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, California 91109

 
Abstract 
A derivation of the properties of pulsed radiative imaging systems is presented with examples drawn from 
conventional, synthetic aperture, and interferometric radar. A geometric construction of the space and time 
components of a radar observation yields a simple underlying structural equivalence between many of the 
properties of radar, including resolution, range ambiguity, azimuth aliasing, signal strength, speckle, layover, 
Doppler shifts, obliquity and slant range resolution, finite antenna size, atmospheric delays, and beam and pulse 
limited configurations. The same simple structure is shown to account for many interferometric properties of 
radar - height resolution, image decorrelation, surface velocity detection, and surface deformation measurement. 
What emerges is a simple, unified description of the complex phenomena of radar observations. 
The formulation comes from fundamental physical concepts in relativistic field theory, of which the essential 
elements are presented. In the terminology of physics, radar properties are projections of hidden variables - 
curved worldlines from a broken symmetry in Minkowski spacetime - onto a time-serial receiver.

2

HVFinal.nb

Introduction and Literature Review
The very rich and complex phenomena associated with radar returns are used in a corresponding multitude of 
applications. Earthquake deformations, missile detection, weather prediction, wind measurement, topographic 
mapping, ocean currents, target tracking, submarine detection, aircraft guidance, air control, and planetary 
mapping are only a partial list. Many of these radar properties appear to be unrelated - for example, resolution 
and ambiguity, and are usually treated as separate topics. In this paper, a simple spacetime formulation is applied 
to multiple types of radar observations. Resolution is seen to be a limiting case of range ambiguity; other radar 
phenomena, including speckle, obliquity and slant range corrections, interferometric properties, azimuth ambigu-
ity, signal strength, atmospheric delays, finite antenna corrections, beam and pulse limited configurations, and 
Doppler shifts emerge as different facets of the same simple underlying geometric structure, which is shown to be 
the curvature of the relativistic worldlines associated with the radiation, curvature that itself originates in a simple 
broken symmetry. The very complex properties of radar returns result from the projection of those relatively 
simple higher dimensional ("hidden") variables onto the lower dimensional time-serial receiver. In conventional 
terminology, this projection is much the same idea that the projection (shadow) of the edges of randomly oriented 
three-dimensional cube onto a two-dimensional plane can produce complex shapes even though the higher 
dimensional cube is very simple.

A full discussion of radar, including the SAR concepts, may be found in (1). The usual treatment of temporal 
radar returns and ambiguity involves the Woodward ambiguity function ((2) and citations), but this approach 
deals with coded waveforms, not the geometric properties considered here. Extensive radar calculations that 
involve some combination of space and time variables in the orthodoxy of signal processing may be found in, for 
example (3). One radar paper was found using geometric methods (4), but is a derivation of Doppler related 
waveform design. While time-reversal techniques (below) appear to be common in seismic sounding research, 
searches of various combinations of "time", "reversed", and "radar" produced almost no relevant returns on the 
ISI Web of Science citation search system. Searches for "radar and world line" came up empty, as did searches 
for "radar and hidden variables"; searches for "radar and relativity" produced a scant few references (e.g. (5)), all 
of which dealt with radar as a luminal source in special or general relativity, rather than the imaging properties of 
concern here.

Light Cones and World Lines in Radar
In the theory of special relativity (5), Minkowski spacetime is a fundamental and simple concept. Space becomes 
a four dimensional entity where the extra dimension is time. Scaling this dimension by c, the constant speed of 
light, yields the "timelike" dimension which is measured in units of ct. Any stationary point in Euclidean space 
exists for all time, and thus in spacetime becomes a line, or "worldline" that runs parallel to the ct axis. In the 
simplest case of a two dimensional (x and ct) spacetime, a object moving with constant speed v in the x 
("spacelike") direction has a worldline that is straight but pitched at an angle   to the ct axis where tan   = v/c. 
Similarly, an accelerating object has a curved worldline (for example, a parabola for a constant spacelike accelera-
tion).

The worldlines of radiation have unique properties. Since all radiation moves in vacuum at constant speed c, a 
light ray in two dimensional spacetime has straight worldlines at the two possible angles with the ct axis where 

HVFinal.nb

3

tan   =1 ( = ± /4). In three dimensional spacetime (x,y,ct), light rays originating at some point x,y can be any-
where on a cone with its vertex at (x,y), its axis of symmetry parallel to the ct axis, and its central angle equal to 
2( /4) =  /2. An isotropic radiator emits a spherical wave in Euclidean (x,y,z) space which appears in three 
dimensional (x,y,ct) spacetime as light rays originating at the vertex and propagating uniformly along the cone, 
usually called a "light cone". Fig.1 shows a light cone intersecting the (x,t) plane. Similarly, incoming light 
incident on some point (x,y,z) in space must also be on a light cone with its vertex at that point, but the cone is 
/4). The symme-
rotated by 
try of the construction suggests the notion that reception can be viewed as time-reversed transmission; similarly, 
transmission can be viewed as time-reversed reception. Since nothing can exceed the speed of light, a light cone 
divides spacetime into regions that cannot communicate without violating causality; for this reason it is some-
times called the "causal cone". 

 so the open end faces the -ct direction (the other solution of tan   = 1 where   = 

Radiation always propagates on a radiative worldline; however, in general relativity, spacetime is not rectilinear 
but can become curved, and the worldlines of radiation also become curved. For example, the presence of mass 
changes the local curvature of spacetime, so nearby radiative worldlines are not straight. In conventional terminol-
ogy, light is deflected by the presence of mass; in the most extreme scenario, a black hole so severely warps 
spacetime that light can become trapped. Much of the interesting phenomena in relativistic astrophysics occurs as 
a result of curving worldlines, and it is shown herein that this is also true of much of radar phenomena.

Spacetime Components of a Radar Observation
A simple radar antenna at some height z0 emitting a spherical pulse of radiation of duration  0  produces an 
illumination pattern over flat (planar) ground that begins as a single nadir point (x 0, y 0) at time t0 (cid:1) z0 c , 
expands radially in the (x,y) plane into a circle until time t0  +  0 ; it then becomes a radially propagating annulus 
with an asymptotic spatial radial width of c 0 . The dimensionless functional form of this illuminated area is 
denoted aT (r,t) where r is the radial distance in the x,y plane from the nadir point. Heuristically, the transmitter 
creates an expanding ring-shaped illuminated area or "window" aT (r,t) on the ground. Specifically, for the 
present purposes, aT (r,t) is a function that has a value of unity (except when it is a  -function) when there is 
illumination present at some (r,t) and zero otherwise. In two dimensional spacetime, this window is the intersec-
tion of the light cone originating at the radar with the (x,t) plane; this intersection is the hyperbola aT (x,t) (note 
the single spatial dimension x instead of r; extension to higher dimensions is straightforward). The light cone and 
hyperbola are depicted in Fig1. 

4

HVFinal.nb

Distance
Distance

1
1

0
0

Time

0

0.5

1

-1
-1

1

0.5

Height

0

-0.5

Figure 1. A light cone in Minkowski space originating at some arbitrary height z0  above the x,t plane forms a hyperbola 
where it intersects the plane. Note the plane in the figure contains only one scene spatial dimension, the distance x.

An incoming light cone aR (x,t) looks identical to Fig.1 except that it is rotated by 
direction parallel to the (x, ct) plane . The two hyperbolas of intersection can be identified as the worldlines of 
the transmitter and receiver “windows” as they appear to move in the x direction on the ground. A shift of one 
cone toward the other along the time direction (by an amount called   below) will result in a different circle of 
intersection in the x,z (distance, height) plane, and the hyperbolas in the x,t plane will also intersect if   exceeds 2 
z0 /c, as shown in Fig.3. The locus of points where the two cones intersect represent the areas of spacetime 
common to both aT and aR where causality allows communication to occur between the transmitter and receiver. 
This is shown in Fig.2. 

 around its own vertex in the 

HVFinal.nb

5

-1
-1

0

Time

0.5

Distance
Distance

-0.5
-0.5

0
0

1

0.5
0.5

1
1

1

0.5

Height

0

-0.5

Figure 2. Intersecting light cones of the transmitter and receiver. The cone vertices, at height z0  above the (x,t) 
plane are separated in time by  0 , the pulse length, for like-looking cone pairs and by  , the convolution offset, 
for opposite-looking pairs measured from the outermost vertices. The hyperbolas in the (x,ct) or (distance, time) 
plane in the figure also intersect, forming the image resolution element (rezel) shown as the diamond shape.

Looking in the x,t plane at the intersecting hyperbolas, the simplest one-dimensional case of a very narrow 
radiated pulse is aT (cid:1) (x(t)), where 

x(cid:1)(cid:1)t(cid:2) (cid:2)

(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)
(cid:1)(cid:1)ct(cid:2)2 (cid:3) z0

2(cid:2)                                    Eq.1

X(t), the domain where aT (x,t) and aR (x,t) are nonzero is depicted in Fig.3; the curvature of these worldlines is 
caused by the square root in Eq.1.

6

HVFinal.nb

Figure 3. Along-ground distance of incoming and outgoing radar "window" world lines aT  and aR  for a  -function pulse.

. 
In the (x,ct) plane, the world line of an outgoing or incoming pulse is, in the asymptotic far range, a straight 
diagonal line (at anle  /4 with the ct axis) where the radiation is, in effect, propagating parallel to the ground. The 
world line of a point target at x1  would be a horizontal line; the world line of the receiver and transmitter is the ct 
axis translated to (x = 0, z (cid:1) z0 ). In Fig.3, at some time t1  the transmitted (T) pulse is scattered off the point 
target. The receiver (R) detects only events on its own backward light cone (-t branch of the square root) at some 
time t0  +τ. The first return will occur at t2 = 2(cid:2)z0 /c after transmission (when   

 0).

Conventional (real aperture nonimaging) radar in the following formulation can be considered as the limiting 
case of the preceding where  =0; that is, there is only one target at the nadir point and z0  becomes the target 
range.

Temporal Response of the Receiver
The receiver, in the standard time domain formulation of signal processing, produces an output voltage represent-
ing the convolution of the time-invariant serial receiver impulse response δ(t) with the incoming signal (6), here

                      (cid:3)( ) = 

(cid:2)

(cid:2)(cid:1)t(cid:2)

(cid:2)(cid:1)t (cid:4) (cid:2)

t

(cid:1)

Generalizing to finite pulses, the temporal receiver response is:

 (cid:3)( ) =  (cid:3)(x(t),  ) = 

(cid:1)aT(cid:2)(cid:1)x, t(cid:2) (cid:1)aR(cid:1)x, (cid:1)t (cid:4) (cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:1)

t                       Eq.2

(cid:1)
                                                  

where the spatial aspects of the response (curving of the world lines) are "hidden" in the a(cid:2)  functions. It should 
be noted that while aT  and aR  appear in symmetric roles in Eq.2, they are independent. The transmitter and 

HVFinal.nb

7

receiver temporal characteristics are modelled as identical temporal rect( ) functions below. 

A crucial point is that both aT  and aR  have different shapes (curvatures) at different values of their arguments, 
especially in the near field, thus changing the reception properties (cid:3)( ), without physical changes in the receiver 
and transmitter. As such, they are "hidden variables" in the integrand of (cid:3)( ). The integrand defines the shape 
and size of the spacetime region where the window worldlines a(cid:2)  overlap, or spacetime "channel" (7) which is 
the function 

;

                                        (x,t, ) 

 aT(cid:2)(cid:1)x, t(cid:2)(cid:2)aR(cid:1)x, (cid:1)t (cid:4) (cid:2)(cid:2)

Through the spacetime channel, the transmitter can causally communicate with the receiver, though it will only 
do so in the presence of cooperative scatterers (at x1 in Fig.3). Such scatterers deflect radiation from the outgoing 
(T) to the incoming (R) radiative worldlines both within the spacetime channel aT aR . Uncooperative scatterers 
would include, for example, specular areas that reflect radiation away from the receiver (e.g.deflect radiation into 
worldlines other than the parts of the R light cone that make up aR ). 

Radar Return Phenomena
The many properties of the returns from either a real-aperture, Doppler, or imaging synthetic aperture radar may 
be deduced by applying the preceding formulation to various observation scenarios.

Spherical Pulse Worldlines: rect( ) Function
Far from the antenna, an emitted pulse is approximately spherical. Taking a typical satellite altitude (z0 = 800 

2  (respectively aT (t) and aT (t- 0 ) in 
km), the outer and inner annulus radii 
the above) are shown in Fig.4 as a function of time for an exaggerated pulse width of  0  = z0 /3c. If the region 
between the lines is designated as having value unity, and the region outside is zero, this plot is the aT  for a 
transmitter output window function that is rect(t/ 0 ) on the time axis.

2  and 

(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)
(cid:1)ct(cid:2)2 (cid:4) z0

(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)
c2(cid:1)t (cid:4) 0(cid:2)2 (cid:4)z0

X z0

2.5

1.5

2

1

0.5

4

5

6

7

8

9

Time 0

8

HVFinal.nb

Figure 4. Spherical pulse radii aT (t)  and aT (t (cid:4) 0 ) on the ground as a function  of time for transmitter at 800  km altitude
with  exaggerated pulse length  z0 3c. The  temporal (horizontal) separation  between the lines is  0  at  all ranges x,  approxi-
mately the inverse of the transmitter (or receiver) bandwidth.

In  the  region  where  x  is  comparable  to  z0 ,  there  is  significant  curvature  and  change  in  pulse  width;  at  far  dis-
tances, width is approximately constant at c 0 . This radial width (difference between the two radii in Fig.4) of the
illuminated  region is  presented  in Fig.5; it increases from initial illumination at t0  until  the trailing edge of the
pulse intersects the ground at t0 (cid:5) 0 , then decreases to its asymptotic value of c 0 .

X z0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

2

4

6

8

Time 0(cid:2)

Figure 5. Radial pulse width as a function of time.

Signal Strength
The geometric inverse-square attenuation of the pulse intensity is 1
the rezel is the inverse square of the distance from the transmitter (vertex of the T light cone). Then, for a spa-
tially extended scatterer or "patch" of size greater than a wavelength, the intensity at the the receiver (vertex of 
the R light cone) is 1 (cid:1)2(cid:2) (cid:2)2 , and for a small (Rayleigh) scatterer it is 1
determined by the location of the rezel - the intersection of aT  and aR , which in turn depends on their functional 
shape (curvature)

4 . In either case, the intensity is 

(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)
x2 (cid:5) z0

2  where 

2 . The power at 

 = ct = 

Monostatic Far Range: Radar and SAR Range Resolution
Eq.2 in one dimension (in the far range where the pulse width no longer varies) becomes a single variable form 
a(cid:2) (x-ct). Then, at some arbitrary x0

z0 , Eq.2 becomes

                        (cid:3)( ) 

 

(cid:2)aT(cid:1)x0 (cid:4) ct(cid:2) aR(cid:1)x0 (cid:4) c(cid:1)t (cid:4) 0(cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2)

t

                        

(cid:1)

and the response of a scatterer that is visible (e.g. connects the T and R worldlines) to the receiver is then 
obtained by multiplying the integrand by some target reflectivity 

( x1 , t), for simplicity 

(cid:2)(cid:1)x1(cid:2).

Choosing a unit rect( ) of temporal width  0 and a stationary point target at some far range , 

(x1 ) = constant 

 

, the spacetime channel  (t, ) for a point target at x1  in the far range x1  becomes

HVFinal.nb

9

t (t, ) 

 rect(cid:1)xT(cid:1)t(cid:2) c 0(cid:2) rect(cid:1)xR(cid:1)t(cid:2) c 0(cid:2)

                                             
                                             
where x(cid:2) (t) is given by Eq.1 which in the far range becomes x = ± ct (temporal scaling is implicitly t0 = z0 /c, 
which is independent of  0 ). 
The receiver output is the convolution (cid:3); the integration region is shown in Fig.6. 

(cid:1)x1(cid:2)

X z0

2.5

1.5

2

1

0.5

2

4

6

8

Time 0

Figure 6. Components of the convolution (cid:3) that determine the receiver response of a point target for ERS (z0 =800 km) and 
an exaggerated pulse width z0 /3c =  0 . The transmitter rect( ) window worldlines aT are the two traces rising to the right; 
the receiver rect( ) window worldlines aR  fall to the right. The offset variable   is measured along the time axis as the 
distance between the outermost two traces. The diamond shaped area is the spacetime channel 
is the worldline of a target at some distance x1 .

; the horizontal line 

The integrand is only nonzero in the spacetime channel 
zero only where the target worldline intersects 
spacetime channel. From the diagram, in the far range,

; the full integrand including target  1  is therefore non-

. (cid:3)( ) is thus the length of target wordline segment inside the 

(cid:3)( ) = 

 tri((c )/2c 0 )  

where the spacelike (x) extent of the channel must be 2c 0 . The full width half maximum of this peak is c 0 , the 
usual far range resolution of a pulsed radar. 

Monostatic Near Field: Radar and SAR
Eq.2 is now used to examine the near and intermediate field imaging properties. The outgoing aT  of the transmit-
ter pulse and the incoming aR  of the window of the receiver (worldlines) were shown in different contexts in 
Figs. 3-6. Figs.7, 8, and 9 show them again to indicate graphically the integration area (spacetime channel) of 
(cid:3)( ) for three different  's representing the near, intermediate and far range. As previously, there is a single 
spatial dimension x and a unit rect( ) function pulse, and an exaggerated pulse length  0 = z0 /3c for z0 = 800 km; 
the light area in the plots is the spacetime channel 

.

10

HVFinal.nb

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

3

3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8

4

4.2 4.4

Figure 7. 

0

3

4

5

6

7

Figure 8. 

HVFinal.nb

11

2.8

2.6

2.4

2.2

7.5

8

8.5

9

9.5

10 10.5

Figure 9. 
Figures 7, 8, 9. Horizontal axes are in units of  0 ; vertical axes in units of z0 . Areal overlap of the integration of 
Eq.2 as a function of the offset,  , scaled to show the spacetime channel. Fig.7 is near the origin (x=0) where  =0, 
Fig.8 in the intermediate region where   is a low multiple of t0  and Fig.9 is a closeup of the far range,  (cid:6)(cid:6) t0 . 
Each plot contains a finite-pulse aT  and aR ; the spacetime channel is the light area is where both functions are 
nonzero; the dark areas are where one or the other function is nonzero, but not both; the remaining 'background' 
areas are where both functions are zero. Only the light area contributes to the integral. Fig.9, which is itself a 
limited region of Fig.6 without a target and represents the spacetime region in which most radars are designed to 
operate.

As in Fig.6, the x dimension of the spacetime channel determines the resolution element or "rezel" size, which is 
the spacelike dimension of the light region, the spacetime channel 
 determines the total possible scattering 
way to the case of a long pulse coded waveform radar. The total area of 
strength. If, for example, the scene consists of uniform isotropic (connect any incoming radiation to all outgoing 
worldlines) scatterers, a large spacetime channel (for example at the nadir shown in Fig.7) will produce a large 
receiver output (cid:3). This variation of the signal strength depends only on the spacetime channel properties deter-
mined solely by the height z0  and the T and R approximate bandwidth 1/ 0 . 

. This picture extends in a straightforward 

Fig.10 shows the results of numerical integration of Eq.2, which clearly shows the variation of (cid:3) over a flat scene.

12

HVFinal.nb

(cid:3) (cid:3)0

2.5

1.5

2

1

0.5

10

15

20

25

30

0

Figure 10. Numerical size of spacetime channel (ambiguity) region for uniform scatterers for a monostatic SAR at altitude 
800 km with exaggerated pulsewidth  0 = z0 /3c as a function of separation  . 

In the far range the rezel size is approximately constant, as indicated by the asymptotic behavior of (cid:3)( ), which is 
also the usual operating region for a radar as in Fig.9. 
It is clear that what is usually called "resolution" (the rezel size) can be interpreted as the smallest unresolvable 
ambiguity, although the term is usually used to mean only the far range spacelike value c 0 . Further, the space-
time channel and the related resolution are properties of both the transmitter and receiver, a notion that becomes 
more obvious in bistatic configurations (below). 

Fig.11 indicates how the effect of topography on (cid:3)( ) can be included by applying a rotation to the coordinate 
system. A scene element is taken to be at angle γ.

HVFinal.nb

13

Figure 11. A rotation γ can be viewed as defining a new radar height z0  

 z0 ', which changes the imaging properties.

, changing 

 toward the radar defines a new 

, (cid:3) and the associated rezel size for that scene area. In the case where the 

In the one dimensional case, a part of the scene tipped at some oblique angle 
height above the nadir, say z0 ' as indicated in Fig.11, and a corresponding new t0 ' (cid:1) z0 '/c. Then (cid:3) for that scene 
area (x) is given by the recalculated (with z0 ') curve in Fig.10 ; stated differently, the worldlines a(cid:2) , which 
depend on z0  change with 
scene slope is approximately (within the pulse width c 0 ) perpendicular to the radar look direction, (cid:3) is recalcu-
lated for a new subradar point (e.g. z0 '), producing a large rezel (Fig.7). This situation is usually termed 
"layover", a form of ambiguity characterized by large rezels and correspondingly bright echoes. Topography 
profoundly influences layover; also clear from the foregoing is how layover ambiguity, like resolution, is influ-
enced by both the transmitter and receiver, though it is usually thought of as a property of the transmitter only.
This large rezel that occurs perpendicular to the look direction is a special case of the general fact that spatial 
resolution as a function of look angle 
of 
of 
ing the decreasing part around the vertical line through the peak where 
scenes ( =0 but   changes) produces a changing rezel size as x increases, which is called slant range distortion. 

 is not constant (Figs.7 and 10 make this clear). Resolution as a function 
. Thus (cid:3) as a function 
 is a nonlinear rescaling of the horizontal axis to reflect  0 ' = z0 '/c where z0 ' = z0  cos 
 looks approximately like an inverted cusp constructed by ignoring the increasing part of Fig.10 and reflect-

 =  /2. This same scenario over flat 

Bistatic Far Range
Eq.2 can be applied to bistatic imaging by allowing two different x locations (two different worldlines) for the 
transmitter and the receiver, calculating the corresponding worldlines aT (x1 (t)) and aR (x2 (t- (cid:7)) and performing 
the integration (scatterers are hereafter considered constant and global in the scene). 

A spacecraft at z0(cid:3)T = 800 km is again used for aT (x1 (t)); the receiver is assumed to be at z0(cid:2)R  = 50 km , which 
defines aR (x2 (t- (cid:7)). The transmitter and receiver are assumed, as above, to have a common (cid:1)1/ 0  bandwidth, and 
are also assumed to be at the same x (spacecraft directly over aircraft). For this case, Fig.12 shows the functions 
aT (x1 (t)) and aR (x2 (t- (cid:7)) in analogy to Fig.3.

14

HVFinal.nb

X z0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

9.25

9.5

9.75

10

10.25

10.5

Time 0

Figure 12. Bistatic outgoing pulse worldline aT for transmitter on a spacecraft and time reversed or "incoming" window 
aR for a receiver at a lower altitude for a very short pulse. The two curvatures are different because the receiver height z0  is 
50 km versus 800 km for the transmitter (Eq.1). 

For finite pulses, the spacetime channel or region where the receiver can communicate causally with the transmit-
ter, is thus somewhat different from the monostatic case shown Fig.8; but in the very far range, both worldlines 
must have the same slope, and the intersection area for finite pulses approximates that of Fig.9, so the resolution 
is the same as the monostatic case.

Fig.13 depicts the illumination of the scene of Eq.2 for another bistatic configuration. X is horizontal and y is 
vertical in the page, with the plot scaled differently in x and y. The two windows aT  and aR  are shown in the two 
scene dimensions (light cone intersects (x,y), not (x,t)) in the intermediate region z0(cid:3)R  
transmitter distant from the receiver in both z and x.

 z0(cid:3)T  and with the 

 r 

HVFinal.nb

15

4

2

0

(cid:4)2

(cid:4)4

(cid:4)2

(cid:4)1

0

1

2

Figure 13. Image plane (x,y), distances in meters. (x and y are scaled to z0 ). Finite pulse worldlines aT  and aR  intersec-
tion with the plane (x,y) for a bistatic configuration (either ring can be T or R, with the other then R or T). The 
bistatic subradar points differ, accounting for the spatial offset of the rings. The relative sizes of the rings is 
determined by the offset   (see Fig.2).

The bright (both functions nonzero) areas, for unit pulses indicate that (cid:3) has two branches. Thus, a bistatic range 
rezel may not be simply connected even over a flat scene, it here has two branches, a form of ambiguity. Simi-
lary, a monostatic radar may have multiply connected rezels (ambiguities) over nonflat targets.

Bistatic Ambiguity
An anomalous case of bistatic imaging occurs when the area between two separated antennas is imaged. If both 
the transmitter and receiver are at some altitude z0  and separated by some x, the functions aT(cid:1)x(cid:1)t(cid:2)(cid:2) and 
aR(cid:1)x(cid:1)t (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:2) of Eq.2 are almost identical, but have a spacelike (x) separation as depicted in Fig.14.

16

HVFinal.nb

X z0

0.4

0.2

(cid:4)0.2

(cid:4)0.4

(cid:4)0.6

9.25

9.5

9.75

10

10.25 10.5

Time 0

Figure 14. Bistatic worldlines aT and aR calculated from (1) for the case of imaging of the area between a sepa-
rated transmitter and receiver. The lowest line is aT , here offset in the -x direction by some amount that reflects 
the distance from the transmitter's nadir to the receiver's nadir (lower square root branch is suppressed); the upper 
two connected lines are the two square root branches of aR  (both branches of the intersection of the incoming aR  
light cone with the (x,t) plane). A slight relative shift (change in  ) from what is in the image would create a huge 
spacetime channel (the two lower lines would coincide over a large area). 

Here an interesting thing happens; the lower (-x) branch of the curve aR intersects the area of the scene lying 

 c 0 ) peak of very large magnitude. Interpreting Fig.14, this is 

between two antennas, and can be almost identical to aT. Even in the far range, where the a(cid:2)  functions are 
simple, (cid:3)( ) will have one very narrow (width 
because the receiving worldine aR (t- ) overlaps substantially with the illuminating worldine aT (t); physically the 
outgoing radiation window where aT  on the ground moves in almost the same way as the incoming window aR , 
producing coincident tracks similar to Fig.14. Thus the spacetime channel becomes very large. As a rough 
calculation, if the antennas are separated by x0 , there are approximately x0 c 0  rezels, which, multiplied by the 
far range monostatic value of (cid:3)( ) in Fig.10, yields the approximate value of (cid:3)( ) for this bistatic configuration, a 
number much larger than the equivalent peak monostatic value. The large spatial extent of the integrand in (cid:3)( ) 
indicates poor resolution, that is, returns from large ranges of x only for a very limited range of  , the convolution 
offset..

Accordingly, the rezels between the antennas are huge, resulting in a very bright, short received signal and poor 
resolution. A more conventional explanation is shown in Fig.15, which symbolically depicts the radar scene and 
two ellipsoidal ambiguity surfaces in the (x,z) plane.

HVFinal.nb

17

Altitude (cid:1)length(cid:2)

0.75
0.5
0.25

(cid:4)0.25
(cid:4)0.5
(cid:4)0.75

(cid:4)2

(cid:4)1

1

2

Distance (cid:1)length(cid:2)

Figure 15. Ellipsoidal ambiguity surfaces for bistatic radar in the (x,z) plane. The T and R antennas are the foci of the 
ellipses; the lower horizontal line is the x dimension of the scene (the ground). 

The ellipses are defined by the two antennas located at the foci; the scene is represented by the lower horizontal 
line. The time required for a signal originating at one antenna to reach any point on either ellipse and then be 
received at the other antenna is independent of the location on the ellipse; thus the two points where the outer 
ellipse intersects the ground are ambiguous. If the outer ellipse represents a propagation time  0  later than the 
inner ellipse, any parts of the scene between the two ellipses are in the same rezel and are hence ambiguous. This 
is the physical reason why it is difficult or impossible to image the area between two antennas.

Pulse Limited vs. Beam Limited Systems
In general, “beam limited” and “pulse limited” radiators appear to operate quite differently. The one is radiating 
for times much longer than the dimensions (e.g. z0 ) associated with the observation. The latter, like SAR in the 
range dimension, defines a spatial scale by the pulse width that is, loosely speaking, much smaller than the 
illuminated area. The foregoing formulation can be applied to pulse limited or beam limited systems merely by 
changing pulse length  0  when constructing the functions aT  and aR . Short  0 's that represent small simultaneous scene 
coverage give ambiguities and resolutions that are pulse limited; large ones that produce large coverages yield 
beam limited characteristics. There are intermediate regions with hybrid characteristics for both the transmitter 
and the receiver.

Coherent Phemonena and Interferometry
The foregoing analysis has been, implicitly, scaled to the length z0 . Now it is applied to wavelength-dependent 
phenomena where there is the independent length 

 and corresponding period c/  =  .

Phase and Speckle
Phase is time, usually measured modulo 2  at some carrier angular frequency  0 , and can be viewed as the scale 
of the t axis in Eq.2. In Fig.3, the one dimensional far range depiction of Eq.1, phase can be identified as the 
world line time (t axis) of the receiver measured in units of the carrier frequency. In the colloquy of radar, it is 
implicit that receiver "phase" refers to the far range, even though this is only a limiting case. The measured phase 
value associated with a rezel depends on the occurrence of the sampling event at the receiver - that is, the loca-

18

HVFinal.nb

tion of the receiver window on the time axis. The chosen global synchronization of the sampling, usually desig-
nated  0 , refers to the length of the receiver world line for far range light areas (Fig.9) when the returning pulse is 
temporally centered on the receiver; this is shown symbolically in Fig.16 (a finite antenna or phased array could 
be accounted for by a spacelike addition of worldlines over the antenna surface and a timelike addition over 
postreception phase shifts).

X z0

1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

5

5.5

6

6.5

7

Time 0

Figure 16. Schematic representation of reception; two incoming radiation worldlines aR  framing a flat-scene rezel (e.g. 
separated temporally by the inverse of the transmitter bandwidth) are shown with the model of the receiver temporal aperture. 
The receiver integrates across the interval defined by the same bandwidth as the pulse; the receiver phase associated with the 
indicated rezel is definitionally measured when the receiver is synchronized with and integrating the indicated interval. 

The incoming radiation is measured against the local oscillator in the receiver. Each resulting phasor measure-
ment is then added to (more correctly, integrated with) the other phasors received in the same bandwidth-limited 
window. That coherent sum (integral) yields the output phase of the receiver. In mixed terminology, it is the 
cross-correlation of the receiver response with the worldlines aR (x=0)) of the incoming radiation. 

In reality, a rezel contains many scatterers which result in a random distribution of worldlines and phases. In the 
case that the rezel can be modeled as a collection of differently oriented patches with size greater than a wave-
length (e.g. non-Rayleigh scatterers), the different orientations each correspond to a different z0 ' as shown in 
Fig.11, which in turn implies different worldlines a(cid:2)  and for each patch. The result is that the spacetime channel 
in Fig.9 has a noiselike phase that is a superposition of the multiple (varying curvatures) worldlines, measured 
and added coherently in the timelike (time serial) receiver. The randomness of the incoming worldlines then 
produces a random output phase, usually referred to as speckle, although this terminology is rather imprecise 
since even a single patch, being spatially finite, has slightly varying worldlines associated with it.

While a sampling event will always produce a phase, if the measured rezel is larger (Fig.7) than the far range 
rezel (Fig.9), the measurement represents in a sense an ill-posed interrogation of the receiver; the assumed simple 
conditions of Fig.9 around which phase is defined have been violated. Similarly, in the case of a "multipulse" 
ambiguity, aR  would intersect two or more distinct nonzero aT  regions associated with multiple radar pulse , 
again resulting in a phase that has two or more contributing sources; that is, the receiver would output some 
phase, but it is meaningless in the sense that it does not fit the colloquial definition.

 In spacetime terms, phase is the difference between the time on the world line of the receiver ( ) and the time 

HVFinal.nb

19

measured by a clock (e.g. radiation phase) travelling on the world line of the moving pulse. This is the same time 
difference as that in the twin paradox of special relativity; in both cases a local clock is compared to a moving 
clock which goes to some distant point and returns. The twin paradox states that because of time dilation, a 
moving (twin) clock must return showing an earlier time than the local clock, which implies that the frame of 
reference of one clock is somehow different ("preferred"), which is impossible. The paradox is resolved by 
noting that the moving clock must experience an acceleration to return to the other clock, so it indeed has a 
preferred (noninertial) frame of reference. Scattering, which changes the worldlines of the radiation from aT  to 
aR  plays the role of the "acceleration" that makes one twin noninertial; geometric speckle is the radar expression 
of the twin paradox .

SAR Azimuth Ambiguity

In the simplest case of azimuth (sampling) ambiguity, a target also at height z0 has a small x velocity, and a 
world line that is slightly pitched compared to the world line of the receiver. The receiver only measures time 
from the nearest 2  phase multiple; Nyquist subsampling may disguise a phase change of more than 2 . As 
depicted in Fig.17, this results in the receiver "seeing" the target as if it were on the wrong world line. 

2,
Figure 17. Worldlines associated with azimuth aliasing by receiver. The circles indicate the phase measurements  1,
made at discrete, evenly spaced sampling times. The third measurement is assumed to include a subsampling error of 2 , 
causing the receiver to produce a false target in the image, which can be thought of as a ghost wordline in spacetime. 

3  

In Fig.17, the rightmost incoming aR is assumed to be sampled by a receiver operating at half the Nyquist rate, 
causing a phase error of 2π. The aliased worldline is precisely what appears in a radar image - a false target at a 
location determined by the sampling frequency. In radar terminology it is "on the wrong ambiguity" (3). Subsam-
pling at some arbitrary frequency may produce multiple diffractive ghost worldlines, each corresponding to some 
resonance of the sampling frequency and spectral component of the incoming signal.

20

HVFinal.nb

Interferometric Configurations: 
Repeat Orbit, Cross Track, Along Track, and Deformation
Interferometric radar ( for example (8)), is the limiting case of bistatic radar where the two antennas, T and R, are 
almost colocated, separated by a small distance B  z0  referred to as the baseline. Alternatively, interferometry 
can be performed with repeated observations from an orbital radar, where the spatial difference between the 
orbits is the baseline. 

The integration of Eq.2 for interferometry is represented in analogy to Fig 3 by Fig.18, where the two different 
curve pairs cT1, cR1  and cT2, cR2  represent the two observations (c(cid:2)(cid:2)  refers to the curve pair a(cid:2)(cid:2) (t) and a(cid:2)(cid:2) (t- ).

Figure  18.  Worldline  pairs  for  interferometric  radar.  Each  pair  cT(cid:2)  is  composed  of  aT (t)  and  aT (t- );  cR(cid:2)  is
composed of aR (t) and aR (t- ).

Parallel coflying antennas ("crosstrack" interferometry) are represented in this picture by removing one of the 
upward sloping curve pairs; that is, there are one transmission (cT1 and not cT2 ), then two receptions (cR1 and cR2 ) 
spatially separated by B.

Along track interferometry (9) can be represented by Fig.18 where the curvatures of c(cid:2)1  and c(cid:2)2  are the same. 
The platform velocity (across x, or in the y direction) positions the antennas at the same x separated by the 
timelike interval  across . In the usual application (ocean current measurement), the scene has a rezel moving at 
uniform speed v parallel to x. This translates into a rezel offset of v across , resulting in observations at two 
different times, at two different locations or curvatures of c1(cid:3)x , producing a phase shift from which v can be 
inferred.

Deformation interferometry (10) can be visualized in a straightforward way with a third curve pair c3(cid:2)  and is 
discussed below.

Interferometric Phase, Baselines, Height and Finite Antenna
The curvatures of the worldline pairs c(cid:2)1  and c(cid:2)2  differ slightly in interferometry. This difference comes from the 

HVFinal.nb

21

spacelike (cross track or vertical) separation of the antennas separation, and is the origin of interferometric phase, 
which in Fig.18 is the change in the separation   between the c curves measured along the receiver world line(s). 

 z0 , a change in the length of B can be approximated as a rescaling of the vertical (spacelike) axis in 

In the simplest picture, two antennas are separated in height z by an amount B, the interferometer baseline. 
Picking the "1" pair as the reference, a rezel has height that can be interpreted as a different z0 , a different set of 
curvatures in the c(cid:2)(cid:2)  functions and thus a new (interferometric) phase corresponding to that rezel. Since the 
baseline B 
Fig.18 by the factor 1+(cid:8)B/z0  for the c(cid:2)2  pair. The resulting far range linear divergence between cR1  and the 
rescaled cR2  as x increases is precisely what was seen in (10) which had images of the very flat Imperial Valley 
of California, where there were no fringes due to topography (e.g. z0 is constant).
Any phase effects resulting from a finite antenna size can be treated with the same approach; world lines can be 
constructed from a baseline that now represents the spatial distance between antenna elements. This is in the x 
direction for the one-dimensional case under consideration, but can be generalized to three spatial dimensions 
and may even include timelike shifts to account for propagation delays within the antenna.

Finally, a height shift (deformation) of a particular rezel between observations can also be represented as a 
change in z0 , (cid:8)z0 resulting in an additional curvature change of, say, c(cid:2)3  only (that is, the deformation occurred 
in the 2 3 time period). The required processing step in deformation SAR of phase rescaling (10) approximates 
the removal of the different curvatures by changing the far range slopes of two curves c(cid:2)1  and c(cid:2)2  to match c(cid:2)3 . A 
globally constant phase and a phase shift from the residual curvature changes in c(cid:2)3 caused by the deformation 
∆z0 expresses itself as a phase change (10) in a "double difference interferogram". 

Interferometric Decorrelation
If the two interferometric phase measurements speckle in an uncorrelated manner for any reason for a given rezel, 
interferometric phase differencing breaks down. If the source of the speckle is, for example, layover the world-
lines aT  and aR  become of indeterminate (scene-dependent) curvature and location (Fig.11), and the either phase 
can change rapidly with baseline; the interferometric phase becomes indeterminate, a phenomenon usually called 
“decorrelation”. However, if the baseline is zero, the phases measured by the receiver are still deterministic in the 
sense that they can be reproduced. Interferometric coherence necessitates that two spacetime channels (usually 
shaped like in Fig.9) must overlap almost completely; sufficiency occurs when the sampling events (phases) on 
the receiver worldline represent almost the same sequencing of scene (γ) dependent worldlines which is when 
there is both overlap and an undisturbed scene. Small changes in the spacetime channel, like those produced by 
small baselines, will produce an almost non-noisy phase difference at the receiver, which will then generate high 
SNR interferometric fringes. 

 in Fig.11 for the scatterers within a pixel) that the sequencing of worldlines seen by the receiver 

Large baselines cause decorrelation because they result in spacetime channels so with so much parallax (changes 
in z0  and 
changes to the point of producing uncorrelated output phases. In engineering terminology, the random worldlines 
originating in the spacetime channel overlap (common area) is called common mode noise, which can be elimi-
nated between two observations if the receiver sum (i.e. worldline sequencing on the time axis) does not change 
profoundly. The interfometric SNR can only be unity when there is exact spatial alignment of observations. 

Other sources of decorrelation - multiple pulse ambiguity, topography, and topographic interference fringes in 
double difference interferometry can all be described in the same way, as properties of the spacetime channel, 

22

HVFinal.nb

which gives a general picture of when it is possible to eliminate common mode noise and derive a high SNR 
interferometric phase. 

Surface disruption on scales less than one rezel, can be thought of in this framework as a redistribution of the 
'patches' (asserted above to be the source of non-Rayleigh speckle) and implicitly, the undecipherable scrambling 
of scatterer worldlines. 

Nyquist Rate for Interferometric Fringes
Steep terrain, or equivalently, a large baseline, makes the fringes representing the interferometric phase differ-
ence occur more rapidly than the (spatial) Nyquist rate (one fringe per two rezels) and decorrelation results from 
the consequent subsampling and aliasing. In the picture of Fig.18, the curvature of c(cid:2)1  differs significantly from 
that of c(cid:2)2  because of a large rezel-to-rezel change in z0 , the interferometric phase measured between the two 
intersections can change by more than 
grams.

, just like azimuth ambiguities. This is comonly observed in SAR interfero-

Doppler Shift: Moving Targets and Platform Motion
Radar Doppler shifts are usually associated with a moving target that reflects radiation. In the picture presented 
by Fig.9, the outgoing cT(cid:2)  will have a longer intersection with a target worldline that is pitched with respect to the 
t axis; similar comments apply to cR(cid:2) . Accordingly, the receiver phase changes . Dimensionally, for small v, the 
first order slope change of the light areas must be (1±v/c), resulting in the familiar Doppler multiplier of the 
carrier frequency. Similarcomments apply if the platform is moving and thus has a pitched worldline.

Atmospheric Effects
In the simplest case an atmospheric disturbance consists of a medium, such as water vapor, uniformly covering 
the scene and propagation paths. In the spacetime methodology, this can be represented by a stretching of the 
time axis, since the speed of light c becomes c/n in medium of index of refraction n. More complex scenarios of 
spatially inhomogeneous gases can be dealt with in an obvious way, where the world lines of radiation follow the 
local spacetime geodesic.

Geometric Transformations of the Spacetime Channel
The various experimental configurations described above correspond to simple geometric transformations that 
determine the morphology and orientation of the spacetime channel 
the translation   (Fig.10) or the rotation 
 that defines layover. Atmospheric effects are a time dilation; the two 
bistatic configurations are spatial translations of the T and R light cones. Similarly, coflying interferometry is a 
rotation of the white area of Figure 9 by the angle 
 that defines some baseline; repeat pass interferometry is a 
space translation as well; along track interferometry is a time translation; deformation interferometry is two 
rotations and two time translations. Doppler shifts can be viewed either as a translation or a dilation.

. Resolution or ambiguity is determined by 

Fundamental Physics
Hidden Variables in Relativistic Spacetime
A circle projected onto a plane can appear as a circle, an oval, or a line, depending on the orientation in three 
dimensions. The orientation of the circle is a "hidden variable", which can be inferred in the two-dimensional 
plane but not directly observed. Even simple hidden objects can produce complex behaviors in lower dimen-

HVFinal.nb

23

sional spaces - for example the planar projection of the line segments that constitute a rotating cube.

In the foregoing discussions of radar, the worldlines of the transmitter, receiver, pulses and scatterers were shown 
to account simply for many seemingly unrelated radar phenomena - ambiguity, layover, resolution, layover, 
speckle, obliquity, signal strength, beam and pulse limited configurations, Doppler shifts, finite antenna size, and 
atmospheric delays - even in very different experimental configurations. A simple examination of changes in the 
worldlines aT  and aR  in interferometric configurations was used to explain more known but seemingly unrelated 
properties - interferometric resolution, decorrelation, surface motion, and surface deformation. Many of the 
seemingly unrelated complex phenomena of radar returns are just the projection of simple higher dimensional 
hidden variables - the intersections of the worldlines aT  and aR  - onto the one-dimensional (time serial) 
receiver. 

At a more fundamental level, the curvature of the worldlines a(cid:2)  is what determines many of the complex behav-
iors of radar. This is also what happens in general relativity; radiative worldlines that deviate from the light cone 
are identified with many of the most complex and interesting cosmic phenomena, including, for example, black 
holes. 

The curved worldlines a(cid:2)  themselves result from a broken symmetry - a radar pulse with spherical symmetry 
intersecting a target, resulting in a lower circular symmetry. This broken symmetry is the fundamental cause of 
the complex phenomena observed in radar signals.

Summary and Conclusion
A formalism was developed that describes the properties of radiative imaging systems. Many complex phenom-
ena of radar - resolution, ambiguity, speckle, obliquity, beam and pulse limited configurations, interferometric 
resolution and decorrelation, and Doppler shifts properties were shown to originate in the curvature of the world 
line of the transmitter and receiver pulses, or more abstractly, higher dimensional hidden variables in Minkowski 
space. This explanation, while abstract, is actually quite useful for understanding radar returns and optimizing 
experiments, since it provides both a unified and simple view of disparate phenomena.

Acknowledgements
We wish to acknowledge the support and patience of Paul Rosen, and the interest and encouragement of Giorgio 
Franceschetti.
The research described in this paper was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of 
Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

References
1. Elachi, Charles. Spaceborne Radar Remote Sensing : Applications and Techniques. John Wiley, NY, 1987.
2. Lieb, Elliott. Integral bounds for radar ambiguity functions and Wigner distributions. J. Math. Phys. 31 (3) 
March 1990. p.594-599.
3. Franceschetti, G. and R. Lanari. Synthetic Aperture Radar Processing. CRC Press, Baton Rouge, 1999.
4. Altes, R. and E. Titlebaum. Graphical Derivations of Radar, Sonar, and Communication Signals. IEEE Trans. 
Aerospace and Electronic Systems AES-11, No. 1, Jan. 1975. p. 38-44
5. Taylor, E. and J.A. Wheeler. Spacetime Physics, 2nd Ed. Freeman and Co., New York, 1999.
6. Oppenheim, A.V., R. W. Schafer, J. R. Buck. Discrete Time Signal Processing. Prentice Hall, 1999.

24

HVFinal.nb

7. Gilliam, T. Time Bandits. Handmade Films, London, 1981.
8. Zebker, H.A. and R.M.Goldstein. Topographic mapping from interferometric synthetic aperture radar observa-
tions. J.Geophys.Res., Vol.91, no.B5, 1986 pp. 4993-4999.
9.Goldstein, R. M., T. P. Barnett, and H. A. Zebker. Remote Sensing of Ocean Currents. Science, vol. 246, 
pp.1282-1285, 1989. 
10. Gabriel, A. K., R. M. Goldstein, and H. A. Zebker. Mapping small elevation changes over large areas: 
Differential radar interferometry, J. Geophys. Res. vol. 94, no. B7, pp. 9183-9191, 1989. 

