On the Relationship Between Proximal and Distal Stimuli
and an Example of Its Significance to Physics

DOUGLAS M. SNYDER
LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA

ABSTRACT

The difference between proximal and distal stimuli is discussed and an
example of the significance of  this difference  to  physics  is  pointed  out  in  the
area of quantum teleportation.  In particular, experimental evidence concerning
the relative status of the distal stimulus to the observer points toward the relative
nature  of  spatial  orientation  of  objects.  In  quantum  teleportation,  this  result
indicates that the amount of classical information that  needs to be transmitted to
support the  quantum  transfer  of  information  may  be  greater  than  is  expected
when  the  distal  stimulus  is  assumed,  as  it  ordinarily  is,  to  have  an  absolute
orientation in relation to the observer.

TEXT

In psychology, there is more than one kind of stimulus for the observer.
Here  we  consider  two  kinds  of  stimuli  involved  in  perception  of  the
environment. The distal stimulus corresponds to  what  is  generally  considered
the  (cid:210)actual(cid:211)  object  in  the  environment.  The  proximal  stimulus  is  generally
defined as the pattern of energy impinging on the observer(cid:213)s sensory receptors.
This energy is  associated  with  a  distal  stimulus.  The  observer  depends  most
directly on proximal stimuli, not distal stimuli, in perceiving his world.

For  certain  perceptions,  there  is  little  distinction  between  distal  and
proximal  stimuli.  Consider  for  example,  touch.  For  this  sense,  the  distal
stimulus  responsible  for  the  pattern  of  stimulus  energy  is  created  when  the
object that comes to serve as the distal stimulus is in physical contact with the
observer.  With other senses,  though,  there may be a large distinction between
the distal  and  proximal  stimuli.  For  example,  consider  vision.  In  vision,  the
distal stimulus may be far from the observer and serve as the  basis for stimulus
energy that travels to the observer and that becomes the proximal stimulus when
it  reaches  the  retinas  of  the  observer.  We  assume  that  there  is  a  one-to-one
correspondence between the  proximal  stimulus  and  distal  stimulus,  excepting
for aberrations occurring while the stimulus energy is in route to  the  observer
from the distal stimulus.

- 1 -

On the Relationship

Experiments  [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9]  have  shown  that  this  one-to-one
correspondence  need  not  exist,  at  least  for  vision.  This  work  on  vision  has
shown  that more than  one  proximal  stimulus  can  be  associated  with  a  single
distal stimulus.  These different proximal stimuli are ordinarily  associated  with
distinct and unique distal stimuli.

That there may be more than  one  proximal  stimulus  associated  with  a
single distal stimulus thus affects the nature of the distal stimulus. It cannot be
held that the distal stimulus has a  unique  nature  when  we  cannot  in  principle
distinguish a unique proximal  stimulus  associated  with  it.  It  should  be  noted
that whatever we know of distal stimuli is through proximal stimuli.

In general, it can be stated that if:

1)  there  are  two  different  proximal  stimuli  corresponding  to  one

distal stimulus,

stimuli, and

2)  no  aberrations  are  responsible  for  there  being  two  proximal

3)  each  proximal  stimulus  would  ordinarily  be  associated  with  a

distinct and unique distal stimulus,

there  is  no  way  to  differentiate  between  which  of  the  possible  forms  of  the
distal stimulus, each of would ordinarily be associated in a unique manner with
the different proximal stimuli, is the "actual" one.  Further,  as noted, the distal
stimulus is considered to be  associated  with  the  (cid:210)actual(cid:211)  object  in  the  world.
One can surmise that the (cid:210)actual(cid:211) object in the world then has a possibility of at
least  two  forms,  the  ordinary  process  of  perceiving  an  object  in  the  world
associating a unique distal stimulus with each form.  Actualizing  one  proximal
stimulus,  assuming  a  specific  distal  stimulus  to  be  associated  with  it,  and
assuming a specific form of an object in the world  that  is  the  distal  stimulus,
involve  cognitive  actions  on  the  part  of  the  observer  the  results  of  which
empirical evidence does not support. These results, though, serve to govern our
interactions in the world,  appearing to anchor them  in  a  single  ordered  world
instead  of  multiple  worlds  within  which  it  seems  it  would  be  difficult  to
function.

Perception  involves  coordination  of  input  from  different  senses,
including vision.  Visual perception, for example depends not only on  sensory
input  to  the  eyes;  it  also  depends  on  the  coordination  of  input  from  other
senses.  The  hypothesis  that  there  may  be  more  than  one  proximal  stimulus

- 2 -

On the Relationship

associated  with  a  distal  stimulus  is  not  affected  by  the  coordination  of  input
from different senses  for  perception  in  one  sensory  modality  such  as  vision.
For example, the experiments noted earlier were concerned with the orientation
of the observer(cid:213)s visual field. Though orientation of the visual field is a feature
of  visual  perception,  this  perceptual  result  depends  on  the  coordination  of
information from other sensory modalities such as touch and balance in addition
to information obtained through light impacting the eye.

The result that more than one proximal stimulus can be associated with a
distal stimulus has important consequences for physics where the distal stimuli
and the objects in the world with which they are associated are assumed to be
independent of  the  observer.  For  example,  consider  quantum  teleportation,  a
In  quantum
phenomenon  that  has  received  empirical  support  [10,11]. 
teleportation  it  is  assumed  that  one  might  used  fixed  stars  to  determine  the
orientation of observers(cid:213) spatial  coordinate  systems  at  points  far  distant  from
one another. It is assumed that the distal stimuli represented by the fixed stars
are associated  in  a  one-to-one  manner  with  proximal  stimuli  representing  the
fixed stars at the retinas of the observers or at the measuring instruments used
to gauge the orientation of the fixed stars,  the readings of which can in turn be
sent  to  the  retinas  of  the  observers  via  light.  The  measuring  instruments
themselves become a proxy for the orientation of the fixed stars with regard to
the observer.

The  assumption  that  one  can  rely  on  fixed  stars  for  an  absolute
orientation  of  objects  and  coordinate  systems  in  space  with  regard  to  an
observer though does not hold when the experimental  evidence  from  research
on  orientation  of  the  observer(cid:213)s  visual  field  is  taken  into  account.  In  the
experiments noted, where all incoming light is rotated by some constant degree
or inverted along the horizontal, the observer demonstrates adaptation such that
the visual field is perceived as upright. If there were an objective orientation of
objects in space, how would an observer know it? Essentially, there appears to
be a personal spatial structure used by an observer that in principle need not be
uniform for all observers and which is tied to the orientation of objects in space
for  that  specific  observer  [12].  In  the  case  of  quantum  teleportation,  more
information might be required to align the coordinate systems of observers with
one another than simply determining and communicating the orientation of  the
sender(cid:213)s coordinate system relative to the fixed stars to the  observer  receiving
the teleported information. It is also possible that more than one way of aligning
distant spatial coordinate systems relative to one another may be possible such

- 3 -

On the Relationship

that the same experimental results concerning teleportation may be obtained for
what would ordinarily be considered different relative orientations of the distant
coordinate  systems  from  which  the  teleported  information  originates  and  in
which the teleported information arrives.

REFERENCES

[1]

G. M. Stratton. The Psychological Review, 3, 611 (1896).

[2]  G. M. Stratton. The Psychological Review, 4, 341 (1897).

[3]  G. M. Stratton. The Psychological Review, 4, 463 (1897).

[4]

[5]

[7]

[8]

T.  Erismann.,  I.  Kohler.  Upright  vision 
through  inverting  spectacles  [Film].
University  Park,  Pennsylvania:  PCR:  Films  and  Video  in  the  Behavioral  Sciences
(1953).

T.  Erismann.,  I.  Kohler.  Living  in  a  reversed  world  [Film].  University  Park,
Pennsylvania: PCR: Films and Video in the Behavioral Sciences (1958).

[6] 

I. Kohler. Psychological Issues, 3, 19 and 165 (1964).

N. H. Pronko, N. H., F. W.  Snyder. Vision  with  spatial  inversion  [Film].  University
Park, Pennsylvania: PCR: Films and Video in the Behavioral Sciences (1951).

F.  W.  Snyder, N.  H.  Pronko.  Vision  with  spatial  inversion  (University  of  Witchita
Press, Witchita, Kansas, (1952).

[9]

H. Dolezal. Living in a world transformed. (Academic Press, New York, 1982).

[10] C.  H.  Bennett,  G.  Brassard, C.  Crepeau, R.  Jozsa,  A.  Peres,  W.  K.  Wooters.  Phys.

[11] D. Bouwmeester, J. W. Pan, K.  Mattle,  M.  Eibl,  H.  Weinfurter, A.  Zeilinger.  Nature

Rev. Lett. 70, 1895 (1993).

390, 575 (1997).

[12] D.  M.  Snyder.  On 

the  Positioning 

of  Objects 

in  Space. 

(1998).

(xxx.lanl.gov.abs/physics/9909008,
publish.aps.org/eprint/gateway/eplist/aps1998sep23_002).

- 4 -

