1

Institute for Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences

Seminar Proceedings

Possible correlation between
electromagnetic earth fields and
future earthquakes

Organizing committee:
S.Cht.Mavrodiev, C. Thanassoulas

23-27 July, 2001
Sofia

This  Seminar  Proceeding  was  prepared  from  the  best  available
copy.  Neither  scientific  nor  language  nor  graphic  changes  or
corrections of included contributions was made.

2

ISBN 954-9820-05-X

Possible correlation between electromagnetic earth
fields and future earthquakes

The  support  of  Institute  Administration  for  the  Seminar
and this Proceeding is acknowledged. The attempt of Mr.
Maragos  from  European  Commission  and  some  persons
from  the  Bulgarian  Government  Defense  commission
against  natural  and  antropogenic  incidents  to  sponsor  us
was very inspiriting.

Prepared by S.Cht.Mavrodiev
Institute for Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences
72 Boul. Tzarigradsko shaussee
1784 Sofia, Bulgaria

Director Prof. Dr. J. Stamenov
Tel: +359 2 75 80 32
359 2 7144 647
Fax: 359 2 75 50 19
Telex:  24 368

3

Institute for Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy
Bulgarian Academy of Science
Department "Astrophysical Objects and Environment"

Dear Researchers,

Announcement- Invitation

The Department "Astrophysical Objects and Environment" intends to organize a 3-
day seminar at Sofia, 23-26, July 2001, under the title:

"The possible correlation between electromagnetic earth surface fields and
future local earthquakes".

In the seminar the work done by the Balkan researchers and the ideas for

future investigations of the topic, will be presented and discussed aiming as follows:

A. Establish a regional Balkan monitoring network of the earth's electrical field
targeting to earthquake prediction by utilizing the method presented in web-sites:
http://users.otenet.gr/~thandin/index.htm 
http://www.om2.inrne.bas.bg/geomagflde.htm.

B. Formulate a research project on this topic and discuss the details, possible fund
resources and participants.

C. NGO  "Balkans, Harmonic Existence and Science"

The  general  opinion  is  that  our  countries  face  a  rather  increased  seismic
activity  lately  that  justifies  fostering  the  research  and  possible  applications  on  this
topic.

At this stage of planning it is made clear that no funds are available at all and
the  seminar  participants  are  kindly  asked  to  cover  their  own  expenses  by  their  own
means.  The  hotel  accommodation  will  be  in  the  framework  of  20  US$/day  with
breakfast, the lunch and dinner 10 US$/day. 
We are looking for sponsors.
At  the  present  time  we  would  like  to  know  your  point  of  view  and  your
possible  participation.  If  You  will  come,  please  mail  the  text  of  Your  talk  for  the
Seminar proceedings.  
 
(5.6R 10/06/01). Dr. Thanassoulas, C. : thandin@otenet.gr.

As an example of the electrical field method is the case of Hios, Greece EQ

S. Cht. Mavrodiev  

Director 
INRNE, Bulg. Ac. of Sc., Sofia, Bulgaria

 Prof. Dr. J. Stamenov, 

Organizing Committee:

 
 

Ass. Prof., Dr. S.Cht.Mavrodiev, INRNE, BAS, Bulgaria
Dr. C. Thanassoulas, Greece

4

Program:

Monday, 23 July

Opening

Arriving and accommodation
Lunch

12:00
12:30 -

13:30 

            Prof.Dr.J.Stamenov

S.Cht.Mavrodiev

Opening adress
About the Seminar

14:00 -
14:15

14:15
14:30

Dr. C. Thanassoulas, Earthquake prediction based on electrical signals
recorded on ground surface
Dinner

15:00 -
20:00

18:00

Tuesday, 24 July

Discussion 
B.Rangelov
PREDICTION EXPERIENCE IN BULGARIA

EARTHQUAKE ENVIRONMENT, MONITORING AND
10:00

09:00 -

B. Ranguelov, A. Kies
the seismic station Kroupnik (SW Bulgaria)

Rn  measurements  and  geodynamics  in/around
10:00

11:00

Б.Рангелов The today science and earthquakes predeiction (in Bulgarian)
11:00

10:00

S.Cht.Mavrodiev
gnetic earth surface fields and future local earthquakes

The possible correlation's between electroma-

Lunch
Conclusion resume 
Discussion
Dinner

Wednesday, 25 July

Discussion 
Preliminary Project Version
Lunch

mavrodi@inrne.bas.bg

NGO  "Balkans, Harmonic Existence and Science" 14:00 -
15:00 -
Closing ceremony

11:00 -
12:30 -
15:00 -
18:00 -
20:00

08:00 -
09:00 -
12:30 -

12:00
13:30 
18:00
19:00

09:00
12:00
13:30 

15:00
16:00

A. 

A. 

A. 
B. 

B. 

C. 

5

EARTHQUAKE  ENVIRONMENT,  MONITORING  AND  PREDICTION
EXPERIENCE IN BULGARIA

Boyko Ranguelov, Geophysical Institute - BAS

Earthquake occurrence
The  territory  of  Bulgaria  is  under  regional  general  extension  regime  due  to  the
collision  between  African  and  European  plates.  Most  strong  earthquakes  have  a
normal faulting observed as well on the surface ruptures during the strong earthquake
occurrence  of  the  Earth’s  surface.  Some  of  them  are  combined  with  a  strike-slip
movements,  especially  for  the  shallower  and  not  very  strong  seismic  events.  The
catalogue has been completed since I-st century BC. The catalogue is incomplete and
consists  of  historical  part  (I-st  BC  -  beginning  of  the  20-th  century),  macroseismic
part (end of 19-the century - almost present days) and instrumental part (beginning of
the  20-th  century  to  the  present  days).  The  idea  for  precursory  monitoring  test-site
development started in Bulgaria during early 80-ies, but up to now, due to the lack of
money,  only  some  experimental  methodology  measurements  have  been  executed,
including the  measurements of the earth  electric  potentials,  Rn  measurements  in  the
soil,  air  and  waters  near  Krupnik  seismic  stations  and  some  other  geodynamic
investigations  connected  by  the  extensometer’s  measurements,  GPS  geodetic
monitoring and some underground hydrology research.
The most significant seismic events during the well documented times are as follows:
13th September 1856  - Sofia region, estimated magnitude over 6.5, observed intensity
-  IX  MSK,  coseismic  normal  fault,  boiled  sands,  mineral  spring  appeared,  large
destruction  of  the  buildings,  some  deaths  and  many  injured  reported,  long  lasted
aftershock activity - more than 5 months.
31st March, 1901 - Shabla-Kaliakra region, epicenter in the aquatory of the Black sea
(NE coast), estimated magnitude - 7.1, observed intensity - up to X MSK, a foreshock
(M~4) reported several ours prior the main shock, many coseismic and post-seismic
events reported (landslides, stonefalls, liquefaction, tsunami effects - up to 3 meters,
about  5  years  aftershock  activity).  Many  destructed  houses,  deaths  and  injured
reported.
4th April 1904 - Kresna-Kroupnik region, two very strong shocks in time domain of
about 20 minutes occurred (M=7.2 and M=7.8). Intensities up to X MSK reported. All
coseismic  and  post-seismic  events  observed  and  reported  -  landslides,  stonefalls,
surface  normal  faulting  (the  river  has  been  barraged  and  a  lake  observed),
liquefaction,  spring  appearance,  etc.  Many  deaths  and  injured  reported.  Big
destruction of the houses. Long lasted aftershock sequence - more than 7 years. This
is the most active part of Bulgaria up to now.
16th June 1913 - Gorna Oriahovitza region. Magnitude 7.0, intensity - up to IX degree
MSK.  Large  destruction,  many  deaths  and  injured  reported.  Landslides,  sand  boils,
liquefaction and aftershocks reported. 7th December 1986 a magnitude 5.7 earthquake
occurred at the same region. Large destruction and a few deaths and injured have been
reported.
14th and 18th April 1928 - again two shocks (M=6.8 and 7.0) with IX and X degree
MSK  reported.  Many  liquefactions,  sand  boils,  landslides,  surface  normal  faulting
reported  and  geodetically  measured  (mention 
the  Richter’s  “Elementary
seismology”).  More  than  120  deaths  and  several  hundreds  injured.  More  than  three
years aftershock’s activity.

in 

6

During the last years the Vrancea 1977 (M7.2), Velingrad 1977 (M5.3) and Strazhica
1986 (M 5.7) earthquakes occurred generating light, moderate and huge destruction in
the  respective  macroseismic  areas  and  some  of  them  accompanied  by  victims
(especially  the Vrancea shock) .

Seismic zonation
According  of  the  above  described  seismic  manifestations  as  well  as  the  tectonic,
geological,  geophysical  and  geodetic  information  at  the  end  of  70-ties  and  the
beginning of  80-ies the seismic zoning maps have been created. The general output
are two sets of maps - the expected maximum magnitudes zoning map and the series
of  shakeability maps for the different time periods. The one of 1000 years has been
accepted  as  a  basic  map  for  the  seismic  rules  and  code  in  Bulgaria.  The  maximum
expected  magnitude  for  the  territory  of  Bulgaria  reach  up  to  8.0  in  the  region  of
Kresna-Kroupnik (SW Bulgaria) and around the Kaliakra zone (NE Bulgaria). There
are  no  almost  aseismic  zones  on  the  territory.  To  the  intensities  on  the  1000  years
shakeability map the design coefficients have been attached. Now the seismic code of
Bulgaria is modified according EUROCODE 8. There are a lot of discrepancies in the
border  regions  of  Bulgaria  and  other  countries  about  the  expected  magnitudes  and
seismic intensities. Thus it is clear that the seismic zoning must be improved. This is
due as well to the new and more reliable information obtained during the last years of
investigations.

Seismic monitoring
The  first  modern  seismic  station  has  been  established  in  Sofia  in  1905  (three
component  Ommory-Bosch  instrument)  immediately  after  the  strong  events  (M=7.2
and  7.8)  in  April  1904.  There  is  a  clear  line  that  the  development  of  the
instrumentation  follows  the  occurrence  of  the  strong  events  on  the  territory  of
Bulgaria.  After  the  strong  events  in  April  1928  (M=6.7  and  7.0)  the  leveling
measurements  have  been  executed  and  surface  dislocations  very  well  documented
(cited  by  Ch.  F.  Richter  in  his  book  “Elementary  Seismology”)  the  Wiehert  two
horizontal  component  mechanical  seismograph  (1000  kg)  has  been  installed  (1905).
The service has been located during the years in the different institutions, but always
governmental.  The  further  development  depends  on  the  introduction  of  a  Russian
equipment (after the Second World War) - mainly electromagnetic instruments - SKD
(Kirnos  mid-60-ties)  and  SKM  (short  period  instruments).  The  two  component
mechanical  seismograph  Krumbach  has  been  installed  in  the  early  60-ties  -  in
Dimitrovgrad  station.  At  the  beginning  of  80-ties  the  recent  network  have  been
established (S-13 Teledyne short period velocitygraphs - S13). Now in operation we
have 13 regional analogue stations, 2 local networks with 3 and 4 stations respectively
(one near the NPP and one near the big salt body under exploitation, which is supplied
as well with 4 autonom three component digital accelerographs produced by GeoSIG,
one broadband MEDNET station and one more network near the future second NPP
site  (under  construction).  All  stations  works  in  the  near  real  time,  by  a  telephone
connections  mainly.  The  hypocentres  determinations  are  made  by  the  HYPO73
software.  The  local  magnitude  duration  determination  have  been  made  by  a
normalization  to  Ms.  There  is  no  earthquake  mechanisms  solutions,  moment  tensor
magnitude  or  dynamic  properties  estimations  in  the  routine  practice  of  the  network.
The obtained data have been stored on the smocked paper (for the old instruments),
pen  ink  records  for  the  network  registration  and  photo  paper  for  the  Russian
equipment. Up to now there are not available digital records except the S13 - PDP old

7

computer  with  50  Hz  digitization.  The  strong  motion  network  also  exists  (equipped
with  SMA1,  and  other  analogue  or  digital  instruments)  to  support  the  practical
application  in  the  construction  of  buildings  and  facilities.      It  is  managed  by  the
CLSMSEE-BAS.  Some  of  the  produced  data  has  been  published  several  years  ago.
The present condition of the network is not very good, because of the lack of funding
for  the  maintaining  actions.  Very  often  the  advice  of  the  scientists  are  neglected  by
the governmental institutions and their opinion is not taken into consideration before
the strong earthquake occurrence. After that usually is too late. The nearest task is to
transform all analogue recording stations into digital ones.

Other monitoring data and correlation with earthquakes
During the mid 80-ties a special stochastic model for earthquake prediction  has been
developed  in  Bulgaria.  The  application  of  this  model  for  the  expected  future
earthquakes  gives  some  reasonable  results  in  the  time  domain  of  5-7  years  with  a
successful prediction of about 60% efficiency. The model have been applied for some
prediction  purposes  about  the  Mexican  earthquakes.  Some  success  also  has  been
mentioned, but in the mid-term prediction. The next step of the Bulgarian earthquake
prediction experience was connected with the establishment of the He concentration
measurements in the borehole near Simitly. Here no precursory phenomena have been
observed  but  some  coseismic  correlation  established.  They  have  been  supported  as
well  by  the  extensometer  measurement  in  the  same  area.  Following  the  world
experience  in  the  end  of  the  80-ties  the  earth  electric  field  measurements  started  in
Vitosha Geophysical observatory. Due to the lack of money they have been canceled.
Now the reestablishment of these measurements started in the Geophysical Institute,

8

together  with  the  Institute  of  Space  research.  The  last  established  measurements  are
connected  with  the  Rn  monitoring  in  the  Kroupnik  seismic  station.  No  positive
correlation with the earthquakes is observed.

Recommendations
It  is  important  to  recommend  wide  co-operation  among  the  scientists  of  the  Balkan
Countries  region  for  the  seismological,  building’s  structural,  prevention  and
prediction  research.  The  area  is  under  strong  influence  of  the  earthquakes  and  other
geodynamic  disasters.  The  improvement  of  the  instrumental  networks  connected  by
the  modern  communication  networks  are  necessary  conditions  for  the  successful
development  of  the  region  and  the  seismic  protection  and  prediction  measurements.
We consider that the aims of the seismology, earthquake engineering and the people
protection and prevention is a governmental task and the countries must support them
by funding from different sources.

REFERENCES
1.  Ranguelov B., S. Rizikova, B. Dimitrov., Residual Deformations of the 1928

Plovdiv’s Earthquakes and Determination of New Parameters., Geol. Balcanica,
14.5.1984, pp. 67-72.

2.  Ranguelov B., E. Spassov., The Preparedness and Needs of Education for the

Earthquake Danger in Bulgaria., Bulg. Geoph. J., v. XIII., No 3,  1987, pp. 80-84.
3.  Рангелов Б., Земетръсната опасност в България, НКСПКЗНБАК при МС, изд.

Магента, 2000, ISBN 954-8320-08-8., 159 с. 

4.  Ranguelov B., Calm and Activated Seismic Sources in Bulgaria., Abst. XXIX Gen.

Ass. IASPEI, Tessaloniki, 18-28. Aug. 1997, p.292.

5.  Ranguelov  B., Estimation of the Optimal Equipment Magnification of the

Bulgarian Telemetric System (NOTSSI)., Proc. 17-th Gen. Ass. ESC, Budapest,
1980, pp. 23-26.

6.  Ranguelov B., The Mode of Statistical Distributions of the Earthquake’s

Parameters and Some Applications to Seismic Zonation., Proc. Int. Sem. on
Seismic Zonation, Guangzhou, China, 6-10 Dec. 1987, pp. 235-242. 

7.  Ranguelov B., Induced seismic events near big dams and a salt mine in Bulgaria.,
Proc. Workshop: Geodyn. Hazards associated with big dams., Nov. 10-12, 1997,
European Council., vol.16., Ed. M. Bonatz, Luxembourg. 1998.,p.49-53.
8.  Christoskov L., B. Ranguelov., D. Gospodinov., A Stochastic Model for

Earthquake Prediction., Proc. of Int. Symp. on Eng. Geol. Problems in Seismic
Areas., Bary, v.I, 1986, pp.177-182.

9.  Ralchovski T., I.Djakov, B. Ranguelov., An Experimental Result for the Earth

Electric Potential and the Earthquakes., Compt.Rend.de l’Acad. Bulg., v.39, No
11, 1986, pp.61-63.

10.  Christoskov L., B. Ranguelov., Earthquake Prediction Research in Bulgaria., Sem.
on the Prediction of Earthquakes., EC for Europe- United Nations, 14-18 Nov.
Lisbon, 1988, p.1-6.

11.  Ralchovsky T., L. Komarov, B. Ranguelov, D. Deneva., Earth’s Electric Potential
Variations before Strong Earthquakes., Proc. XXI Gen. Ass. ESC., 23-27 Aug.
1988, S., 1989, p. 452-459. 

12.  Рангелов Б., Стохастический прогноз некоторых вероятностных процессов и

проблема прогнозирования землетрясений., Выч. техника, системы,
управления, вып. 5, 1991, с. 63-68.

9

13.  Ranguelov B., Helium Measurements as Possible Earthquake Precursor in

Bulgaria., Proc. Int. Conf. on Earthquake Prediction: State of the Art, 15-18 Oct.
1991, Strasbourg, pp.258-262.

14.  Ranguelov B., Seismicity and site effects on the Sofia valley district., Proc. I-st

WG meeting, 31 Oct.-3 Nov.1996, Sofia, p.28-31.

15. Ranguelov B., Toteva T., Recent seismicity observed around Sofia city., In. Proc.

3rd WG Meeting, Dec. 2-5, 1998, Sofia, p.7-9.

16.  Ranguelov B., Shanov S., Helium Content and Extensometer Measurements in a
Seismic Active Zone in SW Bulgaria., Proc. I-st Gen. Ass. BPU., 26-28 Sept,
1991, Thessaloniki, pp.37-42.

17. Ranguelov B., The Bulgarian Earthquake Prediction Experience., Proc. XXII Gen.

Ass. ESC, Barcelona, 17-22 Sept.1990, pp. 807-810.

18. Ranguelov B., Seismic Danger Reduction on the Territory of the Bulgaria- Greece

Boundary. Progr. & Abstr. 2nd Congr. HGU, 5-7 May, 1993, Florina.

19. Ranguelov B., Seismic Danger and Related Phenomena in Bulgaria., Bulg. Geoph.

J., v.XIX, No 2, 1993, pp.64-69.

20. Ranguelov B., Geological and related environmental hazards in Bulgaria. Proc. 1-
st European Congress on Reg. Geol. Cartography and Inf. Systems. 13-16 June,
1994, Bologna, p.344. 1996.

21. Matova M., H. Spiridonov, B. Ranguelov, P. Petrov., Major Active Faults in

Bulgaria., Journal of Earthquake Prediction Research, vol.5, No 3, NCSDI, SSB,
Beijing, 1996, p. 436-439.  

22. Ranguelov B., Active seismogenic structures and seismic danger - methodology

and results for Bulgaria., Abstracts book - Natural Disasters, Construction, Safety.,
Conf. Vladivostok’97, 8-12 Sept. 1997., p. 27-28.

23. Ranguelov B., Risk management of natural disasters and ecological catastrophes -
a textbook for distant education., Proc. SEE-3, Tehran, 17-19 May, 1999, vol. II,
p.1081-1083.

24. Ranguelov B., Local people preparedness to a strong earthquake in an active

seismic zone - Sofia case., Proc. 4th WG meeting, Dec. 3-6, Sofia 1999, p. 51-53.
25. Ranguelov B., N. Florova., Scenarios for the disaster loss assessment in Russia and

Bulgaria - a comprehensive study., Intl. Conf. Santiago, Chile - 27-30 April,
1998.p. 97.

26.  Ranguelov B., Risk management of natural disasters and ecological catastrophes -
a case for Bulgaria., Intl. Conf., 27-30 April, 1998, Santiago, Chile, p. 205-206.
27.  Ranguelov B., Local people preparedness to a high active seismic zone., Abst. of
1-st Conf. Advances on Natural hazards mitigation., Athens 3-7 Nov. 1999, p.57-
58.

28.  Ranguelov B., A. Kies., Seismic Station Kroupnik (SW Bulgaria) - a Rn indicator
for geodynamic measurements and environmental hazard., Proc. Conf. 50 years
Institute of Geography., Sofia, 30.11-3.12, 2000, p. 515-521.

29.  Ranguelov B., Geochemical investigations of some seismic active zones in

Bulgaria., In. Rare Gas Geochemistry., Ed. H. Virk, GND Univ.Press, Amritsar,
1997., p. 111-117.

30.  Ranguelov B., S.Rizhikova, T.Toteva., The earthquake (M7.8) source zone
(South-West Bulgaria)., Acad.Publ.House “M.Drinov”., 2001., 279 pp.

10

Rn measurements and geodynamics in/around the seismic station Kroupnik (SW
Bulgaria)

Boyko Ranguelov - Geophysical Institute, BAS, Sofia
Antoine Kies - Centre Universitaire, Luxembourg

Introduction
During the last several years in Kroupnik seismic station located in the most seismic
active  area  in  Southwest  Bulgaria,  continuous  radon  measurements  have  been
performed. The aim of these measurements is to use radon as a tracer gas for general
geodynamical purposes. The radioactive noble gas radon Rn-222 has been monitored
in air, in soil and in some water samples.

The  results  obtained  so  far  have  been  reported  during  several  meetings  in  Bulgaria
and abroad.

Devices for Rn monitoring
For  the  measurements  of  ambient  airborne  radon  concentrations  the  passive  radon
monitor  ALPHAGUARD  is  used.  This  device  is  able  to  measure  continuously,
besides  radon  concentrations  also  the  air  pressure  and  the  air  temperature  at  the
measurement place. Additionally an external thermometer, deposited in a proper place
records the outside temperature. The time sampling interval is one measurement each
hour (sometimes each 10 minutes). 

In a next step the ALPHAGUARD device was located in a more confined place at the
bottom of the instrument room situated in the basement of the station. 
In order to minimise the influence of outside temperature, a one meter borehole was
drilled  at  the  bottom  of  the  instrument  room.  Unfortunately,  water  seeping  into  the
borehole prevented measurements in the borehole so far. 

Radon  in  soil  air  has  been  analysed  at  different  locations  around  the  geophysical
station. Soil-air is sucked out of tubes, hammered in the soil to a depth of 1 meter. The
radon  concentration  is  measured  in  scintillation  cells  (Lucas  cells),  by  the
photomultiplayer. 

Water  samples  have  been  taken  from  the  sources  located  in  Simitly  and  the
surroundings of the Simitly Graben. In Simitly the radon concentration of hot waters
flowing  out  of  two  boreholes  was  measured.  One  borehole  is  situated  close  to  the
bath;  the  other  is  recently  drilled,  located  nearby  across  the  railway  in  a  closed  site
where  the  waters  here  are  used  for  the  vegetable  growing  (orangeries).  The  water
samples were analysed by liquid scintillation, performed in a Sofia laboratory and in
Luxembourg. 

Some experimental measurements have been made in Breznica village on an artesian
mineral water source. High humidity and a water temperature of 60 °C prevented the
use of a classical continuously working radon-in-water monitor. It is planned to install
at this location an appropriate device able to work under those hard conditions.

11

Geodynamic investigations
At the beginning the continuous complex measurements have been established in the
basement  of  the  Kroupnik  seismic  station  [2].  The  registered  concentrations  show
high peaks in radon content, up to 50 kBq/m3 in the air of the instrument room - [3].
The initial purpose of the measurements is the study of a possible influence of local
earthquakes  to  radon  concentrations  in  air  of  confined  underground  locations  or  in
water  of  springs.  A  correlation  between  radon  concentration  and  earthquakes  could
not  been  found  so  far  [5].  One  explanation  to  this  is  the  very  bad  isolation  of  the
measuring  room.  Outside  temperature  changes  induce  an  important  air  exchange  at
the measuring place and thus the radon concentrations are lowered. Radon proves to
be a very sensible tracer gas to tiny variations in the ambient, this explains the great
interest of this gas. At night, when air exchange is minimal, radon exhalation from the
ground  can  reach  rather  high  concentrations  in  a  very  short  time,  showing  a  great
underground radon potential. Thus these results showed that the measurement place is
a most promising site for radon monitoring.

The  air-soil  samples  around  the  station  show  radon  concentrations  ranging  between
15  and  35  kBq/m3,  these  concentrations  are  much  lower  than  the  highest
concentrations measured in or under the basement. An explanation for the high radon
emission  may  be  the  fact  that  the  station  is  located  over  a  big  fault  zone  [4].  It  is
known that usually over faults the radon concentrations in the air are increased due to
the  fact  that  radon  are  carried  along  with  deep  originated  gasses.  Due  to  the  not
isolated basements of the Kroupnik station, radon can migrate freely into the indoor
air.  As  already  noticed  before,  outdoor-indoor  temperature  differences  (actually
differences  in  air  densities)  and  to  a  lesser  extend  air-pressure  are  essential  to
influence  radon  concentrations  and  may  mask  a  possible  influence  of  local
earthquakes  [6].  Radon  as  a  tracer  gas  for  the  geodynamic  investigations  has  been
showed. This is a possible explanation for the high radon emissions in the site. The
complex  interpretation  of  the  data  from  the  radon  measurements  together  with  the
other  geophysical  particularities  show  the  intensive  geodynamics  of  the  Simitly

12

graben and after scientific interpretation a local geodynamic model can be proposed
[1,2,7]. 
The  new  measurements  show  clear  daily  variations  due  to  the  external  temperature
variations with a negative correlation.
Another fact has been recognised - the air pressure changes did not influence strongly
the measured radon concentrations.
A  very  interesting  behaviour  of  the  radon  concentrations  has  been  observed  in  the
confined place below the basement of the instrument room. A sharp and fast increase
is  followed  by  the  sharp  decrease  after  few  hours.  After  that  a  stable  phase  occurs
which lasts 3-4 times longer. If the increasing phase may be explained with the daily
decrease of the temperature and the decrease phase by the diffusion and the dispersion
of the radon in the outer space, the stable phase is more unusual. Something keeps the
low emission stable. The possible explanation may be the accumulation of radon as a
result of the increased outdoor temperature. Then a physical explanation model could
be  summarised.  After  the  nightly  temperature  decrease,  in  the  critical  moment  the
radon transfer pathways are freed and the concentrated radon air is rapidly emitted in
the  surrounding  space.  Due  to  the  not  very  nice  closure  of  the  confined  space  it
dissipates  in  the  space.  Maybe,  during  the  same  time  as  a  result  of  increased
temperature the influx of radon charged air is inhibited and the emission is low, the
concentration is low and the behaviour stable. After that phase the whole cycle starts
again. The model looks simple but needs a further verification.

Recently  a  borehole  with  the  diameter  of  about  8  cm  and  a  depth  of  one  meter  has
been drilled  in  the  confined  space  described  before.  The  upper  30-40  cm  have  been
closed  airtight,  permitting  only  the  passage  of  two  tubes.  By  active  pumping,  each
half-hour the air from the borehole interior is pumped through the tubing system into
a closed chamber of an radon monitor. The preliminary results show fast and very big
variations that seem to be able to confirm the suggested model.

13

The new Rn air measuring device with automatic registration is established now, and
the  new  and  more  reliable  data  is  under  collection.  The  data  will  be  proceeded  in  a
near future, to check again the suggested model of Rn variations. 

Rn as a polluter and geodynamic indicator.
With a half live of 3.8 days, radon is a short lived tracer gas. Radon could originate
from the deep earth’s interior. As an inert gas radon is very easily movable and in a
fracture system can migrate and accumulate to high concentrations. This may explain
the  rather  high  concentrations  measured  in  the  basement  of  the  Kroupnik  station.
Radon  is  a  decay  product  of  radium,  it  is  the  sole  noble  gas  in  the  decay  chain  of
uranium.  Two  short-lived  decay  products  of  radon  are  alpha  emitters  and,  fixed  on
aerosols, are introduced to the respiratory tract. A high concentration of radon in the
ambient air is supposed to be harmful, especially  concerning lung cancer.  There are
recommendations for limiting radon concentrations in indoor air at homes and also in
workplaces,  400 to  1000  Bq/m3  for  homes.  For  workplaces  the  limit  concentrations
depend on the occupation time. As it was mentioned earlier, very high concentrations
have  been  measured  in  the  basement  of  the  station.  So  this  may  be  considered  as  a
dangerous factor, if people were working there for a longer time. Our investigations
show  that  in  the  upper  flats  where  working  and  sleeping  places  are  located,,  the
content of radon was lower than 300 Bq/m3 for the measured period.
An  inset  of  air  circulation  in  the  basement  shows  that  very  rapidly  radon
concentrations are lowered.
So the general advice to the people working there are:
 - Not to stay and work for the long time in the basement.
 - Before entering there to make free air circulation by opening the door, windows and
other air pathways.
-  It  is  good  to  make  a  free  air  circulation  in  the  living  rooms  and  working  offices
frequently as well.
These  simple  advice  can  protect  fully  the  people  from  some  possible  negative
influences of the radon as a radioactive polluter.
Easy effective measures can be performed for the people protection and isolation.

General conclusions
The  Kroupnik  seismic  station  can  be  considered  as  a  good  site  for  continuous  Rn
measurements  for  the  geodynamic  purposes.  The  results  obtained  previously  show
that  for  the  geodynamic  purposes  the  Rn  is  a  good  tracer  gas  and  the  station  is  a
promising site for such research.
The  people  working  and  living  there  can  be  protected  from  the  Radon  polluted
atmosphere  in  the  basement  of  the  station  just  following  the  simple  rules  for  air
circulation.
The continuos measurements in the soil, air and water is recommended to go on and
to  provide  long-lasted  sequences  of  the  values  for  different  interpretations  and
modelling connected with the local and regional geodynamics.

REFERENCES
1. Papadopoulos,  Sp.  Pavlides,  S.Shanov.  The  Kresna-Kroupnik  active  seismogenic
zone  -  a  model  of  a  geodynamic  machine., Proc.  Workshop,  13-17  March,  2000,
Han-sur-Lesse, Belgium, 125-128

14

2. Ranguelov  B.,  A.  Kies,  G.Lamykina.  Kresna-Kroupnik  active  seismogenic  zone
(SW Bulgaria) - a test site for the geodynamic investigations - past, present, future,
Compt. Rend de 87 JLG. 2000, Luxembourg.

3.  Ranguelov, B., A.Kies, T. Toteva., G. Lamykina., Some geodynamic features on
the  Balkans  -  Kresna  seismogenic  zone.,  Compt.  Rend.  JLG  -84th  Session,  Nov.
16-17, 1998, Chateau de Munsbah, GDLuxembourg, p. 35-39. 

4.  Toteva,  T.,  S.  Rizhikova,  B.  Ranguelov.,  Recent  seismicity  of  the  Kresna  source
zone  (1989-98).  Proc.  Symp.  Geodynamic  investigations  connected  with  the
earthquakes of 1904 in Kresna-Kroupnik., Blagoevgrad, 27-28 April, 1999., p. 65-
77. (in Bulgarian)

5.  Ranguelov B., D. Gospodinov, S. Rizhikova, T. Toteva., Kresna seismic zone - a
test  site  for  seismic  potential  research.,  Proc.  SEE-3.,  Tehran,  17-19  May,  1999,
vol.I, p.193-195.

6.  Ranguelov B., A. Kies, T. Toteva, A. Vikulin, D. Gospodinov, G. Lamykina., The
belt seismicity - a geodynamic expression in Kresna-Kroupnik seismogenic zone.,
Book  of  Abstracts,  2nd  Balkan  Geoph.  Congress  and  Exhibition.,  Istanbul,  5  -9
July, 1999, p. 64-65.

7. Ranguelov B., S.Rizhikova, T.Toteva., The earthquake (M7.8) source
zone (South-West Bulgaria)., Acad.Publ.House “M.Drinov”., 2001.,
279 pp.

This work is a result of the co-operation between Geophysical Institute-BAS and Centre Universitaire, Luxembourg.

СЪВРЕМЕННАТА  НАУКА 

ДА  ПРОГНОЗИРА

15

МОЖЕ 
ЗЕМЕТРЕСЕНИЯТА?

ЛИ 

Ст.н.с. д-р Бойко Рангелов
Геофизичен инистут - БАН

Още  от  времето  на  възникването  на  сеизмологията  (науката  за
земетресенията) в древна Гърция, хората са се опитвали да хванат едносричното
- “да” или “не” относно възможността за прогнозиране на земетресенията, като
винаги  се  предпочитали  първото.  За  съжаление  обаче  и  до  ден  днешен
еднозначният  отговор  се  изплъзва,  както  на  учените  занимаващи  се  с
прогнозиранто  на  земетресенията,  така  и  на  всякакви  псевдогадатели,
самодейни  “прогнозисти”  и  други  представители  на  окултната  или
псевдонауката. 

Известно  е,  че  силните  земетресения  са  бедствия  с  тежки  последици
върху  хората  и  направеното  от  тях  и  в  същото  време  се  разразяват  на
неочаквани места и най-вече в съвсем непредсказуемо време. Още в древността,
учените  са  забелязали,  че  след  по-силно  земетресение,  следват  множество  по-
слаби, но в същото време достатъчно силни трусове (наричат се афтершокове),
които  често  предизвикват  повече  разрушения  от  основния  трус.  И  са  давали
рецепти - след силно земетресение, да не се влиза в къщите и храмовете. А това,
всеки ще се съгласи, вече носи елементи на прогноза. 

Всъщност,  сериозният  научен  подход,  свързан  с  изследванията  по
прогнозиране  на  земетресенията,  започва  след  II-та  световна  война.  През  1949
година  тежко  земетресение  разрушава  град  Ашхабад  и  Сталин  нарежда  да
започнат задълбочени изследвания за прогнозиране на земетресенията. Така се
слагат основите на Руската програма, която продължава повече  от  45  години  -
до  отделянето  на  средноазиятските  републики,  като  самостоятелни  държави.
Веднага  след  това,  в  началото  на  50-то  години  и  в  САЩ,  на  известния  разлом
Сан  Андреас,  започва  разполагането  на  апаратура,  която  да  помогне  за
решаването на основния въпрос - кога, къде и колко силно земетресенияе може
да  се  случи  в  Калифорния.  Днес,  там  е  разположен  най-големият  и
скъпоструващ комплекс от апаратура за прогнозиране на земетресения в света.

КАКВО ПРЕЧИ НА ПРОГНОЗАТА?

Всъщност  трите  елемента  на  прогнозата  (  кога,  къде  и  с  каква  сила),
представляват  основния  “препъни  камък”  на  съвременната  наука  за  Земята.  И
нейното  най-голямо  предизвикателство.  Тук  е  мястото  да  се  отбележи,  че  в
резултат  на  дългогодишните  изследвания  на  учените,  днес  е  пределно  ясно,
къде  и  колко  силно  земетресение  може  да  се  очаква.  Основният  проблем  е
свързан с точното време на очакваното бедствие. И тук, нещата трябва да бъдат
разделени.  Съществуват  различни  прогнози  -  в  зависимост  от  времето  което
покриват.  Има  дългосрочна  прогноза  (покрива  време  от  няколко  десетки
години), средносрочна (от няколко десетки - до няколко години), краткосрочна
(няколко  години  -  до  няколко  месеца)  и  оперативна  (от  няколко  дни  или  дори
часове).  Според  съвременната  наука,  при  достатъчно  статистически  данни,
първите два вида прогнози са удачни във вероятностен смисъл. Така например,
американските и руските учени ( по- голяма част от които са привърженици на
хипотезата  за  “сеизмичен  цикъл”,  за  разлика  от    китайците  например,  които
главно  говорят  за  “сеизмичени  епизоди”)  бяха  изчислили  в  началото  на  80-те
години,  че  с  вероятност  90%  в  Калифорния  ще  стане  земетресение  с  магнитуд

16

над 7.0 до края на века. Ако се погледне от тази гледна точка, земетресенията в
Лома  Приета  (М=  7.1),  и  Нортридж  (М=6.9),  могат  да  се  смятат  за  успешно
предсказани.  Това  обаче  с  нищо  не  топли  роднините  на  загиналите  или
собствениците на разрушенните и изгорели къщи. 

Има и други случаи, когато бедствията се разразяват на места където не
са  били  очаквани  -  примерите  са  много:  Спитак  (Армения  1987),  Нефтегорск
(Сахалин, 1995), Кобе (Япония 1995) и др. Хората искат, учените да им кажат,
точен час, място и сила на очакваното бедствие. И по-възможност - по рано. 

Е,  точно  тука,  съвременната  наука  не  може  да  им  помогне,  въпреки
неимоверните  усилия  и  средства,  които  се  отделят  за  това.  А  не  може  да  го
направи поради една много проста причина, наречена от учените

“НЕЕДНОЗНАЧНОСТ НА ПРЕДВЕСТНИЦИТЕ”

 Както вече беше казано, определени мeста с висока локална сеизмичност
(наречени  за  краткост  -  полигони)  се  подлагат  на  детайлни  геодинамични
изследвания  с  най-съвременна  апаратура  -  сеизмометри,  лазерни  далекомери,
измерители  на  аномалиите  на  различни  геофизични  полета  (магнитно,
електрично, 
гравитационно  и  т.н),  измервания  на  подземни  флуиди
(концентрация на радон или други газове с дълбочинен произход, темперетура,
дебит  на подземните води и др.) и други  най-различни  измервания,  достигащи
по някога да парадоксални наблюдения (над вид японски рибки - например, за
които се смята, че излъчват електромагнитни импулси в зависимост от силата на
приближаващото земетресение). Изобщо на съвременната наука са познати над
300  (а  някои  казват  и  500)  различни  аномални  явления,  предхождащи  силните
земетресения  -  наречени  предвестници  и  проявяващи  се  различно  дълго  време
преди земетресението [1]. Е, точно тука е “заровено кучето”. Оказва се, че нито
един  от  тези  предвестници,  не  се  проявява  при  всички!  наблюдавани
земетресения,  и  обратното  -  съществуват  аномалии  в  някои  от  известните
предвестници,  а  земетресение  -  не  става!  А,  защо  това  е  така  -  днес  никой
специалист не може да каже. 

КАКВИ СА ФАКТИТЕ?

Примери за подобни ситуации има достатъчно. През януари 1976 година
в  Китай,  в  областта  около  гр.  Хайченг  започват  де  се  наблюдават  множество,
известни  преди  това  на  учените,  предвестници.  Има  и  масови  излизания  на
влечуги над снега, и издигане на нивото на водата в кладенци и помътняването
й,  и  някои  аномалии  в  земните  елекрични  токове  и  електропроводимоста  на
земята. Тези явления продължават повече от месец. Към началото на февруари,
сеизмичните  станции  в  района  започват  да  регистрират  повишен  брой  слаби
трусове (учените често ги наричат форшокове - на български - предтрусове). По
това време в Китай бушува културната революция, населението е военизирано и
властите решават да организират евакуация на близо милион и половина души
от  града.  Евакуацията  се  осъществява  в  продължение  на  три  дни  и  на  третата
вечер,  земетресение  с  магнитд  около  7.3,  изравнява  със  земята  град  Хайченг.
Загиват едва 50-60 души - такива на които е омръзнало да студуват или не са се
подчинили  на  властите.  Това  е  първият  и  единствен  досега  случай  на
прогнозирано  земетресение  с  осъществена  евакуация  на  населението.  Само
няколко  месеца  по-късно  обаче,  през  юли  край  град  Тангшан,  подобно
земетресение (М=7.8) [2] взема над 500 000 жертви. И за съжаление никой не е
подозирал,  че  подобно  бедствие  приближава.  Това  кара  специалистите  да
смятат,  че  успешната  прогноза  край  Хайченг,  е  по-скоро  плод  на  добро
случайно стечение на обстоятелствата, отколкото научно издържана прогноза.

17

Тук  не  може  да  не  се  спомене  и  другият,  станал  вече  учебникарски
пример, за аномалията край Палмдейл [3]. През 1970 година, новоинсталираната
апаратура в Калифорния край градчето със звучното име, показва много голяма
по  амплитуда  деформационна  аномалия.  По  изчисленията  на  специалистите,
земетресението което може да се очаква трябва да е със сила над 7.0 по скалата
на  Рихтер.  Наблюдават  се  и  други  аномалии  -  в  отношението  на  скоростта  на
напречните и надлъжни сеизмични вълни, увеличава се броят на местните слаби
земетресения,  изобщо  всичко  говори,  че  наближава  страшен  катаклизъм.
Учените  са  напрегнати,  властите  също  не  знаят  да  предприемат  ли  или  не
евакуация. Паниката без прекъсване продължава около 2 седмици. Към края на
този период, едно нищо и никакво земетресение с магнитуд около 4.0 (подобни
земетресения  в  Калифорния  са  ежедневие),  става  недалеч  от  наблюдаваните
аномалии, а те постепенно затихват с времето [4].

Тези  два  най-фрапиращи  примера  са,  за  да  покажат  на  неспециалиста

значението на термина “нееднозначност на предвестниците”.

Поради казаното по-горе, а съществуват и множество подобни примери,
изброяването  на  които  само  би  отнело  място  и  време,  учените  понастоящем
смятат,  че  съвременната  наука  не  може  да  реши  еднозначно  задачата  за
кракосрочното и оперативно прогнозиране.

МЕТОДЪТ ВАН 
Напоследък твърде много нашумя т.н. метод ВАН (по името на неговите
създатели - Варотсос, Алексополус и Номикос - гръцки учени от Университета в
Атина). Същината на този метод се състои в измерване на земните електрични
потенциали  и  в  опита  му  да  ги  свърже  по  амплитуда  и  вид  на  аномалията,  с
времето  и  силата  на  приближаващото  земетресение.  В  това  разбира  се  няма
нищо лошо - подобни измервания са правени в САЩ, Япония, бившия СССР и
даже  в  България.  Лошото  идва  от  претенциите  на  авторите,  че  са  открили
универсален метод за прогнозиране на земетресения. Като доказателства за това
се привеждат примери от изпратени телеграми до правителството на Гърция за
точното  време  (  в  рамките  на  едно  денонощие),  място  и  сила  на  очакваното
земетресение. 

АНАЛИЗЪТ 

на тези телеграми след публикуването им и съдържащата се в тях информация,
проведен от гръцките сеизмолози обаче показа, че тези прогнози са в рамките на
вероятностите  и  най-често  не  съответствуват  по  място  на  очакваните
земетресения. В цяла книга [6] посветена на този въпрос, ясно се вижда, че при
огромното  количество  земетресения  ставащи  в  Гърция,  винаги  може  да  се
намерят  такива,  които  “уж”  съответстуват  на  посочените.  Тук  е  мястото  да  се
каже, че двете най-силни земетресения, едното край Кожани (М=6,3) и в Патра
(М=5,8),  довели  до  жертви  и  множество  разрушения,  изобщо  не  фигурират  в
телеграмите на авторите на ВАН. Скандал избухна и когато беше публикувана
прогноза за очаквано силно земетресение на територията на съседна на Гърция
държава, която доведе до паника сред населението й. 

ПОЛОЖЕНИЕТО У НАС

След  толкова  обстойното  запознаване  със  световната  и  европейска
практика  по  прогнозирането  на  земетресенията,  не  е  зле  да  се  види  и
състоянието  на  този  въпрос  у  нас.  Още  в  началото  на  80-те  години  започват
методически  проучвания.  Появяват  се  спорадични  изследвания  и  резултати
свързани  с  вероятностния  подход  на  средносрочното  и  краткосрочно
прогнозиране.  Изработен  е  вероятностен  модел,  който  “работи”  относително

18

добре за силни ( с магнитуд над 7.0 ) земетресения в района на Егейско море [7].
Малко по-късно започват изследвания по търсене на предвестници - измервания
на радон от източника на Софийската минерална баня, изследвания аналогични
на  метода  ВАН  (с  някои  специфични  модификации)  по  измервания  на  земни
електрични  потенциали  в  сеизмична  обсерватория  “Витоша”,  както  и
измервания  на  концентрацията  на  хелий  в  района  на  Симитли  в  най-активната
сеизмична  зона  на  България  -  Крупнишката  [8].  Там  се  разполагат  и  някои
екстензометрични  прибори  за  измерване  на  движенията  по  разломите  на
местната разломна система. Като резултат от тези опитно-методични работи са
получени  и  някои  интересни  резултати.  Например,  преди  първото  Стражишко
земетресение (месец февруари 1986) са наблюдавани положителни аномалии на
земните  потенциали  в  района  на  СО  “Витоша”  [9],  корелационни  зависимости
между изменениета в концентрацията на хелий и слабата сеизмичност в района
на Крупнишката сеизмична зона
[10]  и  някои  други.  Имаше  и  проект  за
геодинамичен полигон София-Пловдив, но поради липса на средства, тази идея
беше  изоставена.  Сега,  отново  липсата  на  средства  е  обрекла  задачата  за
прогнозиране на земетресенията в България на застой [11].

ИМА ЛИ АЛТЕРНАТИВА ПРОГНОЗИРАНЕТО?

В  последно  време  обаче  се  появяват  и  идеи  отричащи  търсенето  и
разпознаването  на  предвестниците 
за  краткосрочно  прогнозиране  на
земетресенията [12]. Заговори се дори за края на експерименталните полигони,
където  ставаше  това.  Започва  да  доминира  идеята,  че  земетресенията  са
свързани  в  единство  с  общите  закономерности  на  катаклизмите  ставащи  по
цялата планета. Предлага се създаването на обща мониторингова система, която
използувайки  постиженията  на  съвременната  наука  и  техника,  да  обработва  и
анализира  цялостната  информация  за  ставащите  природни  бедствия  по  цялата
Земя  в  реално  време,  със  свръхмощни  суперкомпютри  свързани  в  световна
мрежа.  Основа  за  това  е  хипотезата,  че  всички  аномални  геофизични  явления
(каквито  всъщност  се  явяват  природните  бедствия),  са  взаимно  свързани  и
взаимно  обусловени.  С  помощта  на  всеобщата  система  за  наблюдение,  със
спътниковите  средства  за  глобална  комуникация  и  обмен  на  данни  в  реално
време  и  със  съответния  анализ  се  предполага,  че  по-лесно  ще  бъдe  направено
прогнозирането  на  очакваните  природни  катаклизми.  Дали  тази  идея  ще  се
окаже плодотворна, единствено времето и експериментът ще покажат.

Л И Т Е Р А Т У Р А
1. Asada T., Earthquake Prediction Techniques., Univ. Tokyo Press, 1984.
2. Lu Dajiong., Impending Earthquake Prediction., Nanjing, 1988.
3. Savage J., et al., Accumulation of tectonic strain in California., BSSA, 60, 1970.
4. Rikitake T., Earthquake Prediction., Elsevier, NY, 1976.
5.  Ordono  M.,  Pinotepa-National:  A  Case  of  a  Seismic  Pseudo-Prediction.  In:
Earthquake Prediction, UNESCO, Paris, 1984.
6.  Stavrakakis  G.,  et  al.,  Evaluation  of  the  Correlation  of  SES  with  earthquakes  in
Greece., NOA, Athens, Publ. No 1, 1990.
7. Рангелов Б., Стохастический прогноз некоторых вероятностных процессов и
проблема прогнозирования землетрясений., Выч. техника, системы, управления.
Вып.5, 1995.
8. Ranguelov B., The Bulgarian Earthquake Prediction Experience., Proc. XXII Gen.
Ass. ESC, 17-22 Sept. 1990.

19

9.  Ralchovsky  T.,  I.  Jakov,  B.  Ranguelov.,  An  Experimental  Result  for  the  Earth
Electric Potential and the Earthquakes., Compt.Rend. de l’Acad. Bulg., v.39, No 11,
1986.
10.  Ranguelov  B.,  Helium  measurements  as  possible  earthquake  precursor  in
Bulgaria.  Proc.  Int.  conf.  Earthquake  Prediction:  State-of-the-Art.,  15-18  Oct.
Strasbourg, 1991. 
11.  Ranguelov  B.,  New  Techniques  for  Earthquake  Prediction  approach.,  Program
and Abstracts XXIII Gen. Ass. of the ESC., Prague, 1992.
12. Sadikov D., The New Theory of the Development of the Earth and a Forecast of
the Natural Phenomena., Proc. Conf. “Big Cities and Natural Disaster Mitigation”., 5-
10 Jan., Cairo, 1996. 

Earthquake  prediction  based  on  electrical  signals  recorded  on
ground surface.

20

Dr. Thanassoulas, C. 
Dept. of Geoph. Research, 
Institute of Geology and Mineral Exploration (IGME), 
Greece

e-mail :  thandin@otenet.gr
URL   :  http://users.otenet.gr/~thandin/index.htm

Introduction

During the last one hundred years of instrumental seismology as far as it concerns the
earthquake  prediction  topic  little  has  been  done.  The  main  problem  that  was  faced
during all research efforts was mainly the nonlinear behavior of the earth, the chaotic
conditions met at the seismically active area (fig.1)

STRESS CHARGE MODELS

Figure 1

21

 and therefore the inability to postulate a generally accepted physical model that could
account  for  the  chaotic  state  of  the  focal  area  (Main,  1999).  Moreover  it  has  been
demonstrated  and  presented  in  the  relevant  bibliography  that  earthquakes  can  occur
almost  everywhere  and  at  any  time  so  consequently  these  can  be  studied  only  with
statistical methods. To this end several statistical  methods  have  been  developed  and
tested  over  wellknown  seismically  prone  active  areas  but  the  results  were  only
encouraging.
Aside to the topic of the earthquake prediction the long-term study of the occurrence
of  earthquakes  over  a  wide  regional  area  has  been  used  quite  successfully  for
identifying major tectonic features of the earth.

1.  Preliminary  theoretical  hypothesis  for  explaining  the  correlation  to  future  local

earthquakes.

An earthquake occurs whenever the stress load of the seismically active area exceeds
its fracturing stress level. The main mechanisms producing stress increase are a) the
motion of the lithospheric plates that more or less causes a linear increase of it and b)
the oscillation of the lithosphere due to earth tides (Knopoff 1964, Thanassoulas et al.
2001). This type of mechanism generates an oscillatory type of stress increase so that
it is dependent to the oscillatory mode of the earth tides (12h, 24h, 14days, 6months,
1year periods). This has the effect that the critical stress load conditions required to
trigger an earthquake are met mostly on the maximum amplitudes of the oscillation of
the lithosphere, that is at the corresponding peaks of the earth tides (fig.2).

TOTAL RESULTED STRESS – LOAD

 

Figure 2.

Generally the electrical state of the earth is being described by a function U(Pi) that
incorporates as main parameters Pi the position (X,Y) of the observation site, the time
(t) of observation and any other parameter that can modify its form. This field is being
modified  before  the  occurrence  of  a  strong  earthquake  due  to  the  generation  of

22

electrical fields at the focal area, and consequently by measuring this difference it is
possible to identify the presence of the "anomalous" field.
During the phases of extreme stress load various mechanisms are being activated that
generate  electrical  signals.  The  induction  of  current  at  earth's  surface  (Meyer  and
Teisseyre, 1988) (fig.3).

THEORETICAL MODEL
a. Induction model

Figure 3.

    when  combined  to  resistivity  changes  that  precede  an  earthquake  give  rise  to  an
oscillatory electrical signal that its amplitude increases continuously some days before
the occurrence of an earthquake. After the occurrence of the earthquake its amplitude
decreases  drastically.  Another  mechanism  is  the  activation  of  the  piezoelectric
properties of the  lithosphere (Thanassoulas and Tselentis 1993, Client 1999) due to is
large  content  of  quartzite.  This  mechanism  gives  rise  to  various  electrical  signals
(fig.4)

23

THEORETICAL MODEL
b. Piezoelectric model

Figure 4.

An  oscillatory  one  with  24h  period  is  being  generated  due  to  the  earth  tides
acting  on  the  dynamic  equilibrium-state  of  the  focal  area.  Moreover  due  to  the
specific  characteristics  of  the  of  the  stress  increase  -  piezoelectric  potential
function, a very long period (VLP) signal is being generated closely dependent on
the  first  derivative  in  time  of  this  function.  Shorter  period  signals  are  being
generated  from  second  order  derivatives  of  the  same  function.  It  is  still  well-
known that rock fracturing generates electrical signals (fig.5) 

THEORETICAL MODEL
c.  Rock fracturing model EM generation

24

Figure 5.

due  to  the  fact  that  electrical  charges  at  the  edges  of  fracturing  create  short  period
current pulses. VAN group has presented a mechanism (Varotsos et al. 1984a,b 1990)
that generates piezostimulated currents (fig.6)

THEORETICAL MODEL
d. Piezostimulated currents

Figure 6

 under certain stress load conditions of a rock sample, well before its fracturing takes
place.

25

2.  Apparatus and measurements methodology

The  hardware  used  to  implement  this  method  at  Volos  (Greece)  monitoring  site
(Thanassoulas and Tsatsaragos, 2000) consists of two receiving dipoles (Fig. 7) at NS
and EW direction, and of almost 100 meters length each. 

MONITORING SITE AT VOLOS AREA – CENTRAL GREECE

Figure 7

The  analog  signal  is  split  in  two  parts.  The  first  one  is  low  pass  filtered  at  a  cutoff
period of 5 sec and the second one is band pass filtered at a center frequency of 24h
period  and  cutoff  of  12h.  These  signals  for  both  directions  are  being  sampled  at  a
minute  period  and  converted  into  digital  form  and  stored  in  the  memory  of  a
computer. 
These  recordings  are  being  processed  by  various  techniques  so  that  the  anomalous
signal  is  being  separated.  The  azimuthal  calculation  of  the  electrical  field  intensity
vector  is  being  calculated  for  all  the  signal  length  and  its  azimuthal  distribution  is
being performed and presented on an azimuthal circle. The average value of all these
azimuths  calculated  represents  the  true  predicted  azimuthal  direction  of  the
earthquake to occur.

3.  Results

This method has been a posteriori applied (Thanassoulas 1990, Ifantis et al. 1993) so
far on data provided by VAN group on 1990 and 1993. In the first case (fig.8).

AIGHION (Ms=6R) / KALAMATA (Ms=6.2R)EQs

26

Figure 8

 three large Eqs were used from which the one of Eghion (Greece) was located using
three electrical vectors while for the two remaining only the azimuthal direction was
estimated  due  to  the  fact  that  only  one  monitoring  site  was  available.  In  the  second
case (fig.9a,b)

VOLOS EQ (Ms>6R) 

Figure 9a

VARTHOLOMIO EQ (Ms>6R)

27

Figure 9b

  two  more  large  Eqs  had  been  located  by  triangulating  more  than  three  electrical
vectors  from  corresponding  monitoring  sites.  The  calculated  probability  for  a  by
chance  success  is  being  calculated  as  1/8000  for  the  case  of  three  converging
electrical  vectors,  while  this  probability  decreases  to  1/160000  in  the  case  of  four
converging  electrical  vectors.  Both  cases  for  1990  and  1993  epicentral  area
determinations,  because  of  the  extremely  low  value  of  the  by  chance  probability
calculated indicate the validity of the method.
The same methodology was applied on real data obtained from Volos monitoring site.
In  this  case  only  the  azimuthal  direction  of  the  imminent  earthquake  has  been
calculated  since  only  one  electrical  vector  is  available.  The  following  figures
(fig.10a,b,c)

RHODOS EQ (5.6R) – VLP SIGNAL

28

Figure 10a

RHODOS EQ (5.6R) POLAR DIAGRAM

Figure 10b

29

RHODOS EQ (5.6R)
 AZIMUTHAL DIRECTION OF ELECTRICAL FIELD

Figure 10c

  corresponding  to  VLP  signal,  polar  distribution  of  the  electrical  vector  present  the
results obtained by processing the actual recordings compaired to the true location of
the  corresponding  earthquake  as  it  has  been  determined  by  the  use  of  seismological
methods from the Geodynamic Observatory of Athens Greece.
Moreover the time window of the occurrence of the imminent EQ is being estimated
by studying the earth tide oscillation and determining its daily  - monthly  successive
maxima and minima (fig.11a,b)

DAY WINDOW DETERMINATION

Figure 11a

KONITSA EQ (5.8R)

30

Figure 11b

that  are  precisely  defined  a  priori.  According  to  the  theoretical  models  presented
earlier  concerning  the  increase  of  the  stress  load  of  the  seismically  active  area
consequently  it  is  expected  that  these  predefined  tidal  peak  times  are  the  most
possible times that the imminent earthquake will occur. Finally the magnitude of the
imminent earthquake has to be estimated. This is difficult at the present time since it
is required a rather large regional network to be deployed and for a long period data to
be collected for calibrating the entire network parameters to be used for the magnitude
estimation.

4.  Conclusions

The study of the results, obtained from earlier a posteriori application of the method
on  VAN  data  and  more  over  from  recent  experiments  on  data  obtained  from  Volos
Greece  monitoring  site,  clearly  indicate  that  it  is  possible  to  calculate  the  epicentral
area  of  an  imminent  earthquake  by  identifying  the  anomalous  electrical  signal
generated  at  the  focal  area  and  by  applying  triangulation  techniques  on  the
corresponding electrical field intensity vectors of all monitoring sites.
The evolvement of electrical signals at a certain time indicates that the last phase of
severe  deformation  of  the  crystal  l  lattice  of  the  rock  has  been  reached  and  this
indicates  intrinsically  that  the  time  window  has  been  set  to  a  few  days.  Further
detailed study of the daily, monthly and sometimes  yearly  state  of oscillation of the
earth  tides  provides  very  accurate  information  of  the  most  probable  time  of
occurrence of the imminent earthquake.  

5.  Proposal for regional Balkan Network

31

For  the  implementation  of  a  fully  functional  network  it  is  clear  that  some  more,  at
least  2-3,  monitoring  sites  must  be  installed  widely  spaced  over  the  area  to  be
covered. The latest years an increased seismic activity has been observed especially in
Turkey  and  Greece  and  generally  over  the  Balkan  Peninsula.  Consequently  it  is
considered  of  most  importance  for  this  network  to  be  implemented  as  soon  as
possible.  The  participation  of  the  Balkan  countries  will  facilitate  its  installation  and
will foster the scientific cooperation (on the topic) of the scientific potential of each
one of them. 

6.  References

Clint,  O.  C.,  1999.  Electrical  Potential  Changes  and  Acoustic  Emissions  Generated  by
Fracture and Fluid Flow during Experimental Triaxial Rock Deformation., Ph. D thesis,
Dept. Geol. Sci., Un. Coll. London. Pp.1-237.

Ifantis, A., Tselentis, G., Varotsos, P., Thanassoulas, C. 1993. Long-term variations of the
Earth's  electric  field  preceding  two  earthquakes  in  Greece.  Acta  Geophysica  Polonica,
Vol. XLI, no. 4, p.337-350.

Knopoff, L., 1964. Earth tides as a triggering mechanism  for earthquakes.,  Bull.  Seism.
Soc. Am., Vol. 54, pp. 1865 – 1870.

Main,  I.,  1999.  Is  the  reliable  prediction  of  individual  earthquakes  a  realistic  scientific
goal?, Nature's debate,  www.nature.com/nature/debates/earthquake/

Meyer,  K.,  and  Teisseyre,  R.,  1988.  Electrotelluric  periodic  anomalies  prior  to  large
imminent earthquakes, Acta Geophysica Polonica, Vol. 36, p.309-322.

Thanassoulas,  C.,  1991.  Determination  of  the  epicentral  area  of  three  earthquakes
(Ms>6R) in Greece, based on electrotelluric currents recorded by the VAN network, Acta
Geophysica Polonica,Vol. XXXIX, no.4,p.373-387.

Thanassoulas, C., and Tselentis, G., 1993. Periodic variations in the Earth's electric field
as  earthquake  precursors:  results  from  recent  experiments  in  Greece.  Tectonophysics,
224,p.103-111.

Thanassoulas,  C.,  and  Tsatsaragos,  J.,  2000.  The  earthquakes  of  Izmit,  Turkey  (Ms  =
7.5R,  17-08-99)  and  Athens,  Greece  (Ms  =  5.9R,  07-09-99)  as  being  detected  by
precursory  electrical  signals  (24hr  oscillations)  at  Volos  area,  Central  Greece.,  IGME,
Open File Report A. 3906, pp. 1 – 18.

Thanassoulas,C.,  Tsatsaragos,  J.,  and  Klentos,  V.,  2001.  Determination  of  the  most
probable time of occurrence of a large earthquake within an error of +/- 1 hour in the span
of 2-3 days time period prior to its occurrence.,Opeb file report A. 4338, IGME, Greece.

Varotsos,  P.,  and  Alexopoulos,  K.,  1984a.  Physical  properties  of  the  variations  of  the
electric field of the earth preceding earthquakes - I., Tectonophysics, 110, 73-98.

Varotsos,  P.,  and  Alexopoulos,  K.,  1984b.  Physical  properties  of  the  variation  of  the
electric field of the earth preceding earthquakes - II, Tectonophysics, 110, 99-125.

Varotsos, P., and Lazaridou, M., 1990. Latest aspects on earthquake Prediction in Greece,
based on Seismic Electric Signals, Dept. of Physics, Univ. of Athens.

32

The possible correlation's between electromagnetic earth surface fields and
future local earthquakes
Author: Ass. Prof., Dr. Strachimir Cht. Mavrodiev
Institute: Institute for Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy, Bulg. Acad. of Science

1.  The History remarks

In  the  late  1970-th,  there  was  the  first  precedent  in  known  history  of  our
Civilization,  when  the  World  leaders  followed  the  Science  recommendation  of
"Nuclear  winter  model"  to  start  a  new  Era  without  nuclear,  chemical,  biological,
geological and hydro-meteorological weapons. Now (2001), one can say the "Nuclear
winter model" was the first example of the new "Science for sustainable development
(Harmonic existence)"[1].

At  this  time  started  the  formation  of  International  science  group  from  the  Black
Sea countries, connected with the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, Dubna, which
aim  was  to  formulate  the  Science  recommendation  for  preventing  the  "future"  then
ecological catastrophe of the Black sea ecosystem. In 1991 this work was done more
or less [2].

2.  Introduction

The title of this paper is a part of "Dynamics and correlations of proccesses and
interactions  in  the  Black  sea  ecosystem  in  real  time"  based  on  the  complex
Monitoring  of  phisical  (including  hydro-metheorological  and  geological),  chemical
and biological parameters of the Invironmental.

The  concrete  idea  for  looking  the  correlations  between  the  earthquake  and
elektromagnetic fields was the attempt to explain the fire column in the sea observed
at time of Crime earthquake. Our hypothesis was that the fire column was sediment
methan hydrates, dehydrated because of earthquake pressure wave and fired from the
high ionization (enough high temperature) of air column. From common point of wiev
it seems natural the electric parameters of earth peel to be changed before and in the
time of earthquake.

So, the accuracy measurement of the earth and atmosphere electrical curents and
potential and the geomagnetic field in apropriate space and time scale, the analisys of
the data should have a visible and measured correlations with earthquake processes. 

The  Programs  for  Erthquakes  prediction,  started  after  the  American,  China  and
Armenian grate earthquakes in 1980-th was closed. My opinion for this unsuccess is
that  The  Programs  [3]  dealed  only  with  geological  parameters.  My  believing  is  that
including  of  the  elektromagnetics  fields  parameters  can  give  a  new  live  of  the
earthquake prediction investigations.

In the end of 1999 in the INRNE started the measuring of one geomagnetic field
projection (one sensor) with accuracy less than 1 nT and at every 0.25 s. The sensor
and  elektronics  device  are  "Know-How"  of  JINR,  Dubna  (Boris  Vasiliev).  The
calibration  was  tested  in  Geomagnetic  Station  near  Koprivchtica  town,  Geophysical
Institite, Bulg. Acad. of Science. The solving of nonlinear problem for comparison of
our  dimension  magnetic  field  behaviour  with  the  standart  vector  measured  in
Koprivchtica, gave the Fourrier analysis time 1 minute.

The  two-years  monitoring  shows  the  one  can  see  all  biggest  world  earthquakes
(bigger  than  8R)  and  the  big  and  near  enough  local  (Vranca,  Greace,  Macedonia,
Turkey.) earthquakes.

33

3.  The results.

The  evidence  for  correlation  of  MF  behavior  and  the  time  of  the  earthquake

occurrence has been classified in two categories. 

The first one contains seismic events, in which the earthquake magnitude is bigger
than 8 Richter. The behavior of MF is going to be flat for some time close and after
the earthquake occurrence. From six such cases all over the World from 2001 to date
four of them indicated clearly this distinct behavior, one with doubt and one without
signal.

Year,  Month, Day, Origin time, 
2000 06/04
2000 06/19
2000 11/16
2000 11/17
2001 01/26
2201 06/23

16:28:26
14:44:13
04:54:56
21:01:56
03:16:14
20:33:14

Table 1
Lat,  Long., 
-4.72 102.09
 -14.8  97.44
-3.98 152.17
151.79
-5.5
23.42 70.23
-16.22 -73.60

Depth,  Mag (R)
33 km 8.3 (?)
10
33
33
16
33

8.0(No data)
8.2
8.0
8.0
8.4

The  second  are  for  regional  Balkan  seismic  events  with  Magnitude  above  five
Richter (5R). From 16 such events, 9 of them presented similar behavior as in the first
case,  including  some  variations  of  oscillating  character  with  hours  period.  Seven  of
them have no correlation.

Year,  Month, Day, Origin time, 
2000 04/06
2000 04/21
2000 05/24
2000 05/24
06/13
2000
2001
05/01
2001 05/24
2001 05/29
2001 06/10
2001 06/23

00:10:38
12:23:10
05:40:37
10:01:44
01:43:14
06:00:56
17:34:01
04:43:57
13:11:04
06:52:41

Table 2.
Lat,  Long., 
44.74  26.58
37.84  29.33
36.04  42.01
35.82  42.10
35.15  47.12
35.17  47.50
45.69  26.42
35.41  27.78
38.59  25.63
35.71  29.01

Depth,   Mag (R)
132 km  5.4
  5.5
33
  5.9  
33
  5.2
33
  5.4 (?)
10
  5.1 (?)
33
  5.3 (no)
141
  5.1 (no data)
20
  5.3
33
  5.3
33

Furthermore,  two  more  seismic  events  located  near  the  Sofia  monitoring  site

presented the same behavior, despite their small magnitude:

Sofia,
Vranca, 

2001/04/03 
2001/04/09 

18:20, 2,3 R ;
04:29, 395N 66,89E, Dept 11.4km  Mag. 3.2 R. 

The figures illustrates the usual and earthquake day geomagnetic field projection

behavior:

34

Fig.1 Normal day behavior

35

Fig.2 The flat behavior (in red circle) after the event

36

Fig. 3. The hours and minutes oscillations caused by a local event 

37

4.  Propose for monitoring

The new monitoring sites have to include:

current (Thanassoulas current site);

The  two  components  measurement  (EE2)  of  earth  electric  potential  and

The vector (tree components) Geomagnetic field measurment (GMF3);
One  dimensional  atmospheric  electric  potential  and  current  measurement

(AE1).

When the future epicenter aria is detected from EE2, one has to start in this aria
GMF3, AE1 and other possible geological, geo-chemical and geo-physical parameters
monitoring. The preliminary results permit us to believe it will be possible to measure
the correlation's between the EE2, GMF3, AE1, daily solar wind influence and local
earthquake parameters (time, power and depth) in obviously manner.

For the first part of the Investigation, for my opinion, the best aria is the Augean

Sea, where we need to probe four Sites around the Sea (Volos,  )

If  in  some  time  (2-3  years)  the  predicted  events  will  start  to  take  place  with
probability near to 1, the Balkan region Earthquakes Prediction Monitoring will need
at last 20 Sites.

Nevertheless, now one can say that we have to do The Balkan gravity 3 to 3 map.
The  preliminary  estimation  cost  of  one  Site  is  around  20000  US$,  the  time-
around 6 month. The time for the first part of the Project (Pilot part) is around 1 year.
The total cost, including 3 sites and Laboratory for archiving and analyzing the data,
will be around 100000 US $.

At the end I would like to stress, that the Proposed project have some chance for
success  only  in  the  case  of  united  Balkans  scientists,  governments  and  local
authorities.

References:

[1] The Publications of "Rome club", on "Sustainable existence", Internet

С.Щ.  Мавродиев  и  др.,  “Чисто  и  Мирно  Черно  Море”,  Семинар
[2] 
“Поморие  1988”,  Програмен  колектив  435,  ИЯИЯЕ,  БАН,  София,  Октомври
1988;
 
С.Щ.  Мавродиев  и  др.,  Доклад-  Диагноза  за  Състоянието  на  Бургаския
Залив  с  Научни,  Управленски  и  Бизнес  Препоръки,  Програмен  Колектив  435,
ИЯИЯЕ, БАН, София, 1989,

В.П.Кеоджян, ..., С.Щ.Мавродиев и др., Практическая Екология Морских

Регионов- Черное Море, Стр. 252, Наукова Думка, Киев, Август 1990;

С.Щ.Мавродиев  и  др.,  Динамика  и  Корелации  на  Процеси  и
Взаимодействия  в  Черно  море  в  Реално  Време,  450  стр.,  Програмен  колектив
435, ИЯИЯЕ, БАН, София, Октомври 1990; 

С.Щ.Мавродиев  и  др.,  Информационен  Бюлетин  No  1  на  Сдружение  на
Черноморските  Градове  и  региони  "Чисто  и  Мирно  Черно  Море",  Одеса,
Януари 1991;

С.Щ.Мавродиев, Р. Русев, Фонови Характеристики на Морската среда в
Българската  акватория,  154  стр.,  Програмен  колектив  435,  ИЯИЯЕ,  БАН,
София, Юли 1991;  

С.Щ.Мавродиев,  “Черно  Море-  Състояние,  Перспективи,  Възможни
Решения”,  Национален  семинар  "Екологичната  криза-  същностен  проблем  на
човечеството", София, Май 1994;

38

С.Щ.Мавродиев, "Чисто и Мирно Черно Море- Практическа Екология на

Морето- 1990",105 стр., ЕКОСИ- БС,  Софиа, Януари 1996;

С.Щ.Мавродиев,"Черно  море-  състoяние,перспективи  и
възможни  решения",Постерен  доклад,  БАН,  Национална
изложба  по  екология  и  опазване  на  околната  среда,  София,
Май 1997; 

V.P.Keondjian,  S.Cht.Mavrodiev,  Black  Sea-  Contemporary  Status  and
Possible  Solutions,  International  Conference  on  Ecological  Security  in  Black  Sea
Region,  Black  Sea  Economical  Cooperation  Meeting,  Gelendjik,  Russia,  October
1997;

S.Cht.Mavrodiev,  "Applied  Ecology  of  the  Black  Sea",  ISBN  1-56072-  613-

X, 207 Pages, Nova Science Publishers, Inc., Commack, New York 11725, 1998;

S.Cht.Mavrodiev,  “Black  Sea:  Contemporary  Status,  Perspectives  and
Possible Solutions – The Restoration of the Black Sea Ecosystem”, World Federation
of  Scientists,  Working  Group  on  Water  and  Pollution,  Workshop  on  Monitoring
Black Sea Environmental Conditions, 27 February – 4 March 1999, Erice, Italy, 1999.

[3]  Main,  I.,  1999.  Is  the  reliable  prediction  of  individual  earthquakes  a  realistic
scientific goal?, Nature's debate, www.nature.com/nature/debates/earthquake/

39

PROJECT DESCRIPTION (1st draft)

40

1.  Bibliographical study of the status of the topic of the earthquake

prediction - data bank organization.

2.  Monitored parameters decision

3.  Monitoring sites selection

4.  Monitoring network utilization

5.  Results dissemination 

1.  Computer library  : hardware + internet

2.  -Gravity unified map (grid 3x3 or less) for the contemporary mapping of
the lithospheric deep fracture zones under the monitored regional area.

-  Earth's electrical field variations for the utilization of the
triangulation of the electrical signals caused by large imminent
earthquakes.

-  Earth's- atmospheric electrical vertical field variations over the

detected future epicentral areas by triangulation

-  Geomagnetic field measurements for studying its correlation with

EQ events and the way these Eqs modify the geomagnetic field.

-  Noise sources study that interfere the monitored geophysical fields

(mainly the influence of solar wind)

-  Resistivity distribution in the lithospheric plate.

-  Physical model built up for the establishment of the correlation

between the different physical parameters.

-  Theoretical estimation of the expected anomalous values of the
monitored physical parameters based on the postulated physical model.

41

List of participants

Institute of Geology and Mineral Exploration, Athens

Dr. C.Thanassoulas

From Greece

From Bulgaria

Institute of Geology, Sofia, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences

Prof. DrS. D.Evstatiev
Assoc.Prof. DrS. S.Shanov
Assoc.Prof.,Dr. B.Rangelov

Institute of Sollid State Physics, Sofia, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences

Prof.Dr.S. D.Uzunov

Institute of Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy, Sofia, Bulgarian
Academy of Sciences, www.inrne.bas.bg
Assoc.Prof., Dr. S.Donev
Eng. I.Kalapov
Eng. Ch.Lenev
Assoc.Prof.,Dr. S.Cht.Mavrodiev
Mgr. A. Mishev
Bac. L.Staikov
Prof. DrS. J.Stamenov
Assoc.Prof.,Dr. D.Trifonov
Dr. B.Vachev
Assoc.Prof.,Dr. S.Ushev

