On Thermal Sensation and Entropy

Douglas M. Snyder
Los Angeles, California

The  definition  of  the  temperature  of  a  physical  system  involves  the
entropy,  and  thus  degree  of  disorder,  in  that  system.    Temperature  relates
change in the entropy of a system to change in the energy of  that system.   How
is it that an individual can experience the temperature of objects in the physical
world  when  disordered  processes  are  part  of  the  foundation  of  temperature?
How are disordered processes accounted for in an individual’s  cognition when
this  cognition  is  concerned  with  finding  order  in  the  world?    What  are  the
neurophysiological  concomitants  to  thermal  experience  that  account  for  the
disordered  processes  fundamental  to  temperature?    This  last  question  is  the
subject of this paper.

More precisely, the temperature of a physical system may be defined as
1/T = kB(¶s/¶U)A where T is the temperature given in Kelvin, s is the entropy
of the component system, U  is the energy of the system,  kB is the Boltzmann
constant, and A represents any characteristics of the system other than  energy
that affect the system’s  entropy (Kittel, 1969).   The symbol ¶ indicates partial
differentiation and thus the term (¶s/¶U)A indicates the partial differentiation of
the entropy with respect to the energy, while other characteristics of the system
that affect the entropy are held constant.  Examples of these characteristics are
the number of particles in the system and the volume of the system.   How  can
disordered processes that are central to the temperature of a physical object be
accounted for on a neurophysiological level in thermal sensation?

Perhaps the most famous discussion in modern Western philosophy of
the experience of temperature, and its underlying physiological concomitants, is
given by Locke (1690/1959) in discussing secondary qualities in the perception
of physical objects:

We may be able to give an account how  the same water,  at the
same time, may produce  the  idea  of  cold  by  one  hand  and  of
heat by the other: whereas it is impossible that the same water, if
those ideas were really in it, should at the same time be both hot
and cold.  For,  if we imagine warmth, as it is in our hands,  to
be nothing but a certain sort and degree of motion in the minute
particles  of  our  nerves  or  animal  spirits,  we  may  understand

- 1 -

On Thermal Sensation

how  it is possible that  the  same  water  may,  at  the  same  time,
produce the sensations of heat in one hand and cold in the other;
which yet figure never does,  that never producing the idea of a
square by one hand which has produced the idea of a globe by
another.  But if the sensation of heat and cold be nothing but the
increase or diminution of the motion of the minute parts of our
bodies, caused by the corpuscles of any other body, it is easy to
be understood, that if that motion be greater in one hand than in
the other; if a body be applied to the two hands, which has in its
minute  particles  a  greater  motion  than  in  those  of  one  of  the
hands, and  a less than in those of the other,  it will increase the
motion of the one hand and lessen it in the other; and so  cause
the different sensations of heat and cold that depend thereon. (p.
177)

Locke,  of  course,  did  not  know  statistical  mechanics,  which  was  developed
about  100  years  ago  and  in  which  the  modern  definition  of  temperature  is
rooted.  Locke did not know  that disordered processes essential to temperature
would  need  to  be  accounted  for  in  his  attribution  of  the  experience  of
temperature  to  the  "sort  and  degree  of  motion  in  the  minute  particles  of  our
nerves  or  animal  spirits"  (p.  177).    Locke  thought  that  thermal  sensation  is
based on energy alone in that the sensation of different temperatures is due  to
different amounts of motion at the periphery of the body.

Science has found that thermal sensitivity is mediated  by  a  number  of
different  neuronal  receptors  (Martin  &  Jessel,  1991).    These  receptors  are
dorsal  root  ganglion  neurons  with  cell  bodies  located  near  the  spinal  cord.
Among these receptors are those dedicated to sensing temperatures less than a
person’s  adapted  skin  temperature  (termed  "cold"  receptors),  temperatures
greater than  a  person’s  adapted  skin  temperature  (termed  "warm"  receptors),
receptors that serve to sense significant heat in association with pain (a type of
nociceptor),  and  receptors  that  serve  to  sense  significant  cold  in  association
with pain (also a type of nociceptor).   The  peripheral  terminal  of  all  of  these
neurons is a bare nerve ending.  Cold receptors are activated  in  a  range  from
about  1oC  to  20oC  below  normal  skin  temperature,  approximately  34oC.
Warm receptors are activated in the range of about 32oC to 45oC.  Above about
45oC,  the  discharge  of  warm  receptors  decreases,  and  the  nociceptors
associated with the sensation of heat and pain respond.

-2-

On Thermal Sensation

The characteristic of the warm and cold receptors that is of concern here
is the positive correlation that has been empirically established between human
subjective experience of thermal stimuli and the rate of discharge of the  warm
and cold receptors in monkey over a large part of the range in which they  are
activated (Martin & Jessel,  1991).   (Locke was  correct in apparently deducing
that the experience of warmth and cold is to a significant extent  determined  at
the  periphery.)    And  as  Darian-Smith  (1984)  wrote  in  his  review  article  on
thermal sensation, "cutaneous thermal stimuli  are  presented  with  considerable
fidelity, not only in the peripheral fiber responses but also in the central neural
processes concerned with the subjective response" (p.  908).    Thus,  scientific
evidence  supports  our  personal  experience  that  each  of  us  in  general  has  a
significant capacity to accurately distinguish the temperature of external physical
objects.

Allowing for Locke’s concern regarding the relative character of thermal
scaling in our experience, the  question  remains:  How  does  the  experience  of
temperature of external  physical  objects  occur  when  the  temperature  of  these
objects  in  the  physical  world  involves  fundamentally  disordered  processes?
What  are  the  neurophysiological  concomitants  that  allow  for  the  thermal
sensation of physical objects?  Darian-Smith (1984) wrote in the Handbook of
Physiology that the transductive process that initiates thermoreceptive processes
was  not  well-known  and  that  the  nature  of  the  processing  related  to  thermal
sensation  in  the  central  nervous  system  also  was  not  well-known.    It  is
proposed  that  at  some  level  in  the  neurophysiological  processing  of  thermal
stimuli, the disordered processes fundamental to temperature are accounted for.
There is likely some form of  thermal  equilibrium  rapidly  established  between
thermoreceptors and the  external  environment  local  to  those  thermoreceptors.
Though an  approximation,  the  physical  object  being  sensed  and  the  receptor
attain a state of thermal equilibrium in accordance with the equation describing
thermal equilibrium for two physical systems that together comprise an isolated
physical system:

kB(¶s1/¶U1)A1 = kB(¶s2/¶U2)A2

or

T1 = T2

where the subscript 1  indicates  values  of  quantities  in  one  of  the  component
systems (e.g., the external physical object) and the subscript 2 indicates values
of quantities in the other component system (e.g., the receptor) (Kittel, 1969).

-3-

On Thermal Sensation

Information received at the receptor level in the establishment of thermal
equilibrium is then transmitted accurately to higher level processing stations.  It
is  interesting  that  in  the  neurophysiological  processes  involved  in  thermal
sensation, information that fundamentally relies on disordered processes at the
receptor  level  is  accurately  transmitted  in  the  form  of  ordered  processes  as
action  potentials  along  the  peripheral  neurons  involved  in  thermal  sensation.
Just  as the operation of a furnace may depend on the disordered  processes  of
the sensitive element in the thermostat, so the conduction of the action potentials
in the peripheral neurons and in higher levels of the nervous system related to
thermal sensation may depend as well on the disordered processes involved in
the flow of thermal energy between receptor endings of peripheral neurons and
the physical object being thermally sensed.   This energy flow is approximately
in accordance with the tendency to establish thermal equilibrium for systems in
thermal  contact  which  together  constitute  an  isolated  system.    Indeed,  the
tendency  to  establish  thermal  equilibrium  for  these  systems  is  due  to  the
increase in the entropy of the overall system  that  occurs  when  systems  move
toward thermal equilibrium.

The net energy change in the receptor in contact with the physical object
may be negative.    That  is,  if  the  temperature  of  the  object  is  lower  than  the
temperature of the receptor, energy will flow from the receptor to the physical
object in the establishment of thermal equilibrium.

The  scenario  outlined  should  hold  over  the  temperature  range  where
thermal  sensitivity  is  precise.    That  is  where  thermal  equilibrium  should  be
quickly established between an external process and a thermoreceptor.  Where
the  accuracy  of  thermal  sensitivity  is  substantially  decreased,  one  would  not
expect the rapid establishment of thermal equilibrium between thermoreceptors
and external processes.

References

Darian-Smith,  I.  (1984).  Thermal  sensibility,  sensory  processes,  part  2.  In:  Handbook  of
Physiology (Vol. III)  (Geiger. S. R.,  ed) pp.  879-913.  Bethesda, Maryland: American
Physiological Society.

Kittel, C. (1969). Thermal Physics. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Locke,  J.  (1959).  An  Essay  Concerning Human Understanding (Vol.  1).  New  York:  Dover.

(Original work published 1690)

Martin, J. H., & Jessell, T.  M.  (1991).  Modality coding in  the  somatic  sensory system.  In:
Principles of  Neural Science (3rd ed.) (Kandel, E.,  Schwartz. J.  H.,  &  Jessell,  T.  M.
eds) (pp. 341-352). New York: Elsevier.

-4-

