BEAM  DIAGNOSTICS  SYSTEMS  FOR  THE
NATIONAL  IGNITION  FACILITY
R. D. Demaret, R. D. Boyd, E. S. Bliss, A. J. Gates, J. R. Severyn
LLNL, Livermore, CA 94550, USA

FRAT002

Abstract

The  National  Ignition  Facility  (NIF)  laser  focuses
1.8  megajoules  of  ultraviolet  light  (wavelength  351
nanometers)  from  192  beams  into  a  600-micrometer
-diameter volume. Effective use of this  output  in  target
experiments requires that  the  power output  from  all  of
the  beams  match  within  8%  over  their  entire  20-
nanosecond  waveform.  The  scope  of  NIF  beam
diagnostics systems  necessary to  accomplish  this  task
is  unprecedented  for  laser  facilities.  Each  beamline
contains 110 major optical components distributed  over
a  510-meter  path,  and  diagnostic  tolerances  for  beam
measurement are demanding. Total laser pulse energy is
measured  with  2.8%  precision,  and  the  interbeam
temporal variation of pulse power is  measured with  4%
precision.  These  measurement  goals  are  achieved
through use of approximately  160  sensor packages that
measure the energy at five locations  and power at  three
locations  along  each beamline using  335  photodiodes,
215  calorimeters,  and  36  digitizers.  Successful
operation  of  such  a  system  requires  a  high  level  of
automation of the widely distributed sensors.  Computer
control systems provide the basis for operating the  shot
diagnostics  with  repeatable  accuracy,  assisted  by
operators  who  oversee  system  activities  and  setup,
respond  to  performance  exceptions,  and  complete
calibration and maintenance tasks.

1 INTRODUCTION

For  the  NIF  to  achieve its  performance  goal  of  1.8
Mega-joules of  ultraviolet  light  on  target  requires  that
each  beam  path  is  carefully  controlled  and  accurately
characterized. Each beam will be operated at  up  to  80%

of  its  fluence damage threshold and  still  need  to  meet
the  System  Design  Requirement  (SDR)  of  ≤8%  rms
deviation in  the  power delivered. This  places  stringent
derived  requirements  on  the  energy,  power  temporal
shape,  and  fluence  measurement  systems  deployed  in
the  NIF.  Table  1  lists  the  principal  requirements  for
measurements  of  pulse  energy  and  power,  and
monitoring of the spatial profile of beam fluence.

Table 1: Tolerances for key diagnostics tasks
Beam  Diagnostics  Measurements
Requirements

Measure pulse power of
all beams (power
balance)

Measure pulse energy
at  1.053  and  0.351µm
Measure pulse
temporal  shape  versus
time
Record the  spatial
profile of beam fluence

The  rms  deviation  less  than
8%  of 
the  specified  power
averaged  over  any  2-ns  time
interval  [1].
2.8%

2.8% with ≤ 450psec rise time

2%  fluence  resolution,1/125
of  beam  spatial  resolution

Sensor  packages  and  diagnostics  sensors  complete
the principal diagnostics hardware. Supporting front-end
processors (FEP) and diagnostics electronics capture and
process  the  data.  The  Integrated  Computer  Controls
System  (ICCS)  [2]  will  provide 
for
completing  shot  preparations  with  repeatable  accuracy
on a timely basis.

the  basis 

These  beam  diagnostic  functions  are  accomplished
with  optical-mechanical  and  electronic  components
distributed  along  each  beamline.  Figure  1  identifies
these components and illustrates  the  fact that  the  beam
control  systems  have interfaces with  every  part  of  the
laser.

target alignment sensor

alignment

diagnostics

wavefront

chamber center ref.system

pulse sync system

TSF diagnostics tower

TSF pinhole & alignment tower

CSF tower

deformable mirror

output sensor

input sensor

PAM

3ω
1ω

precision diagnostics

optics inspection system

Figure 1:  Optical,  electronic,  and  mechanical  components  distributed  along  each  beam  perform  beam  diagnostic  functions.
Towers hold components for laser diagnostics functions on eight beams. In the figure, only one beamline is shown for clarity.

2    OPTICAL DIAGNOSTICS SYSTEMS

2.1  Input Sensor Package (ISP)

The input sensor package is  located at  the  beginning
of the  laser chain and at  the  output  of  the  preamplifier
module  (PAM),  Figure  2.  A  charge  coupled  device
(CCD)  camera system  is  used to  capture a  nearfield  or
farfield  image  of  the  pulsed  beam  during  a  shot.  A
temporal sample  of  the  beam is  collected and launched
into a fiberoptic cable to the  power diagnostics  system.
The  energy  in  the  beamline  is  measured  using  an
integrating  sphere  and  collected  by 
the  energy
diagnostic system.  This  energy diagnostic is  calibrated
against an insertable whole beam energy calorimeter.

PAM
REGEN

PAM
SHAPED

PAM
MAIN

Temporal
sample

Camera

PABTS
BEAM

Energy
diode

Figure 2:  The  ISP  schematic  shows  how  the  PAM  beams
are  sampled  for  alignment  and  diagnostics.

2.2  Output Sensor Package (OSP)

The  output  sensor  is  located  below  the  transport
spatial filter at the end of a set of relay optics  as  shown
in  Figure  3.  This  sensor provides diagnostic  functions
for the  full  beamline performance of  a  pair  of  beams.
The diagnostic tasks performed by  the  OSP  completely
the  main  amplifier,
characterize 
the  output  of 
measuring  wavefront,  and 
spatial  and
recording 
temporal  pulse  shapes.  Multiplexing  is  utilized  to
record  the  performance  at  a  reasonable  cost.  Two
nearfield images  are fit  onto  the  1ω  CCD  camera,  so
every beam is imaged every shot.

Energy measurement is  accomplished for each  beam
in  the  relay  optics,  where  a  beam  sample  is  directed
onto a photodiode assembly. A temporal  sample  of  one
beam from every pair of 1ω beams is sent to  the  power
diagnostic  as  described  in  the  Input  Sensor  Package
(ISP).  The  CCD  cameras  image  the  target  plane  by
collecting  light  reflecting  off  of  the  final  focus  lens.
Full-aperture roving  calorimeters, which  consist  of  an
array of  eight  calorimeters  that  can  move  to  intercept
from 1 to 8 of the beams in a bundle,  are located in  the

switchyard and complete the  list  of  diagnostics.  These
calorimeters  are  used  to  calibrate  the  main  amplifier
photodiodes.

Vacuum
windows

Energy
diodes

Output
sensors

Fast
Attenuators

Figure 3: A model of the area under the transport spatial
filter. The main beam samples are relayed to the output sen-
sors. There is one energy diode for each beamline sample.

2.3  3ω  Diagnostic

The 3ω  diagnostics package is  located  at  the  target
chamber  following  the  frequency  conversion  crystals.
The  package  measures  the  energy  in  the  3ω  output
beam with a calorimeter and the  temporal waveform by
directing  a  beam  sample  into  a  3ω  fiberoptic  to  the
power diagnostics  system  as  described in  the  ISP,  see
Figure 4.

Vacuum window

SHG/THG
Final focus lens

Diffractive  sampler

3ω calorimeter

Figure 4: The absorbing glass calorimeter in the FOA gets a
sample of the 3ω energy from an off-axis diffractive splitter.

3  DIAGNOSTICS  MEASUREMENT
SYSTEMS

3.1  Energy  Diagnostics

The  Energy  Diagnostics  system  measures  the  laser
pulsed energy to  2.8%  accuracy using  photodiodes  and
calorimeters at 432 locations  distributed throughout  the
facility.  The  measurement  electronics  need 
to  be
accurate to better than 1.0% over a  dynamic range of  at

least  103.  An  additional  24  calorimeters  are  used  to
calibrate 
the  ISP  and  OSP  photodiodes  online,
minimizing  measurement  errors  induced  by  diagnostic
component  changes.  These  widely  distributed  sensors
are interfaced using  an  Echelon  LonTalk  field bus-
based  embedded  controller  architecture  to  control  the
energy nodes  located  at  the  sensors.  Centrally  located
VME-based PowerPC  FEPs  use  a  commercial  off-the-
(COTS)  VME-based  Echelon  LonTalk
shelf 
interface  to  communicate  with  the  remote  nodes.  To
simplify the design, the sensor power is also  distributed
on the network cable. The  energy nodes  are designed to
minimize  measurement errors  and  include  maintenance
functions  to  calibrate  and  detect  energy  node  failures.
Each LLNL-designed node  has  a  signal  source  used  to
calibrate  and  test  the  node  hardware 
in-situ.  All
calibration data, both  system  and  hardware  specific,  is
stored on the node in nonvolatile memory  to  ensure the
calibration  information  remains  with  the  node.  Once
the  node  is  online  and data is  collected, the  calibration
information  is  used  to  calculate  the  absolute  energy
measured at this location.

3.2  Power  Diagnostics

The  temporal  power  measurement  system  (Power
Diagnostics or  PD)  measures the  pulse  temporal shape
to  2.8%  accuracy using  digital  real-time  oscilloscopes
(digitizers) at  240  locations  distributed  throughout  the
facility.  Meeting  the  measurement  accuracy  requires  a
digitizer with  a  dynamic range ≥3100,  a  record  length
of 22 ns, and a rise-time of ≤450 ps. In addition, an  in-
situ  calibration system  is  used to  periodically  measure
system  performance  for  correction  of  the  waveforms.
The  beam  samples  are  collected  from  the  ISP,  OSP,
and 3ω  diagnostics and transported to  centrally  located
Power Sensor Packages (PSP).  Optically  delaying each
signal  sequentially by  50  ns  using  8-80  meter  cables
and  converting  them  into  electrical  signals  using  a
vacuum  photodiode  in  the  PSP  multiplexes  these
signals.  The  electrical  signals  are  input  into  a  2-to-1
transformer and recorded on  a  digitizer’s  four  channels
operated at different gains, allowing “overlaying” of  the
the
channels 
measurement.  These  samples  are  then  sequentially
recorded  on  the  digitizers  to  reduce  the  cost  of  the
system.  The 36  COTS  digitizers  are  interfaced  to  the
ICCS  using  24  rack-mounted  UltraSPARC  processors
and  COTS  Ethernet  based  GPIB  interfaces.  After  the
FEP  reads  the  captured  channel  waveforms,  they  are
(DSP)
corrected  using  digital  signal  processing 
and
algorithms 

to  correct  amplitude  distortion 

the  dynamic 

to  extend 

range  of 

normalize their bandwidth. Once the  “raw” channel data
is  corrected, the  four channel segments  that  correspond
to  a  single  “beamline”  waveform  are  reconstructed
using DSP algorithms to correct for the  channel timing
skew.  This  beamline data  is  then  transferred  from  the
FEP,  and all  beamline waveforms  are  analyzed  offline
with  the  ener-gy data to  verify the  NIF  power  balance
for the shot.

3.3  Image  Diagnostics

The measurement of the spatial uniformity  of  energy
distribution within the beam is necessary  to  operate the
facility  consistently  at  80%  of  the  optical  components
damage threshold.  This  requires  a  2%  fluence  (energy
per unit  area) measurement resolution  at  1/125  of  the
beam  spatial  resolution.  The  principal  means  for
monitoring  the  spatial  profile  of  the  beams  is  to
capture images on CCD cameras located in  the  ISP  and
OSP  described  above.  These  images  must  then  be
digitized and processed through the ICCS Video FEP  to
determine the extent and locations of significant  fluence
rack-mounted
modulation.  The  video  FEP 
UltraSPARC  processor  and  uses  six  four-channel
COTS  framegrabbers to  capture the  video  images.  All
CCD cameras in the system are  provided power and the
synchronization  signal  by  a  Camera  Interface  Unit
(CIU) located in proximity  to  the  camera. The RS-170
video signal from the camera is returned to the  CIU  and
digitized  by  a  framegrabber  within 
the  FEP.  The
interconnection between a CIU  and the  FEP  is  either a
coaxial  cable  or  multi-mode  fiber  depending  on  the
specific camera location within the NIF.

is  a 

4     S U M M A R Y

The flow-down measurement accuracy for diagnosing
the  NIF  created  challenging  design  requirements  for
these  beam  diagnostics 
a
combination  of  COTS  and LLNL-developed  distributed
systems  combined  with  in-situ  calibration  and  digital
correction, we were able to accomplish these goals.

systems.  Through 

This  work performed under  the  auspices of  the  U.S.

DOE by LLNL under contract No. W-7405-Eng-48.

REFERENCES
[1] L.  J.  Lagin  et  al.,  “The Overview of  the  National
Ignition  Facility  Distributed  Computer  Controls
National
System,” 
Laboratory, Livermore, CA, September 2001.
[2] O.  Jones,  B.  Boyd,  A.  J.  Gates,  and  S.  Glenzer
“Revised  3ω  Measurement  Error  Budget,”  NIF-
0053659, August 31, 2000.

Livermore 

Lawrence 

