TUAP069

THE NIF INTEGRATED TIMING SYSTEM —
DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE

R. A. Lerche, G. W. Coutts, L. J. Lagin, R. A. Nyholm, N. R. Sewall, R. D. Stever, J. D. Wiedwald,
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, PO Box 808 MS L-481, Livermore, CA 94550, USA
J. Larkin, Highland Technology, Inc., 320 Judah St., San Francisco, CA 94122, USA
S. Stein, R. Martin, Timing Solutions Corp., 5335 Sterling Dr, Ste B, Boulder, CO, 80301 USA

Abstract

The National Ignition Facility (NIF) will  contain  the
world’s  most  powerful  laser.  NIF  requires  more  than
1500  precisely  timed  trigger  pulses  to  control  the
timing  of  laser and diagnostic equipment.  The  Integra-
ted  Timing  System  applies  new  concepts  to  generate
and deliver triggers  at  preprogrammed  times  to  equip-
ment  throughout  the  laser  and  target  areas  of  the
facility.  Trigger pulses  during the  last  2  seconds  of  a
shot cycle are required to have a jitter of less than  20  ps
(rms) and a wander of less than 100 ps (max). Also,  the
Timing  System  allows  simultaneous,  independent  use
by multiple clients by partitioning the  system  hardware
into subsets that are controlled via  independent  software
keys.  The  hardware  necessary 
the
Integrated Timing System is commercially available.

implement 

to 

1 INTRODUCTION

The National Ignition Facility (NIF)  will  include the
world’s most powerful  laser (1.8  MJ)  and  a  target irra-
diation  area  where  millimeter-size  targets  containing
isotopes  of  hydrogen  will  be  compressed  and  heated  to
generate a fusion reaction. [1] Synchronization of  NIF’s
192 laser beams and laser and target  diagnostics requires
that ~1500 precisely  timed  trigger pulses  be  distributed
to  equipment throughout the  275,000-square-foot  facil-
ity. The Integrated Timing  System  (ITS),  a  component
of  the  NIF  Integrated  Computer  Control  System
(ICCS) [2], provides these precision trigger signals.

Architecture of the ITS differs significantly  from  that
used  at  most  earlier pulsed laser facilities.  In  previous
facilities,  a  single  optical  or  electrical  pulse  was  dis-
tributed  over  a  tree  structure,  regenerated  and  redis-
tributed  (potentially  several  times)  until  it  eventually
triggered many  preprogrammed  delay  generators.  Such
systems (1) restrict all users to a common,  system-wide
pulse  rate;  (2)  result  in  progressively  increasing  jitter
with  the  addition  of  active  elements;  and  (3)  when
reconfigured, inevitably affect trigger channels where no
change was intended.

The  ITS  uses  fiber-optic  communications  and
network technologies to  distribute  a  time-encoded  data
stream 
then  generates
independently controlled, real-time trigger  pulses  close

throughout 

facility; 

the 

to the device to be triggered.  The NIF  timing  technique
is  an  extension  of  that  used  at  the  OMEGA  laser
facility  [3].  Precision  timing  of  20  to  100  ps  is
achieved during the last 2 seconds of a shot  cycle. Real-
time triggers are needed to synchronize laser oscillators,
flash  lamps,  Pockels  cells,  and 
target
diagnostic 
its  programmable
the  ITS  allows  simultaneous,
timing  capability, 
independent use by multiple clients for  setup  and main-
tenance tasks. This paper describes the  ITS  architecture,
its major components, and system performance.

instruments.  Besides 

laser  and 

2 ITS DESIGN

2.1 Architecture Overview

The  ITS  [4]  consists  of  two  major  functional
elements: a Facility Timing System  (FTS)  and  a  Local
Timing System (LTS). The basic system architecture  is
shown in Figure 1. The FTS is  an  electro-optic system
that generates and distributes  a  time-encoded, serial data
pattern  through  a  fiber-optic  network  to  14  zones
located throughout the NIF.  These zones contain  eight-
channel delay generator (DG) modules that comprise  the
LTS. The DGs  receive and decode the  data patterns and
generate  the  critically  timed  electrical  and  optical
triggers required by NIF hardware.

2.2 Facility Timing System (FTS)

The FTS includes  a  Master Clock,  a  Master  Timing
Transmitter  (MTT),  a  Measurement System  (MS),  and
a  controller  that  are  centrally  located  at  the  Facility
Timing Node, and a Fiber-Optic Distribution Network.

The master clock provides stable  10-MHz  and  1-Hz
signals to the MTT, which synthesizes  the  signals  into
a  standard  communication  frequency  at  155.52-MHz
(SONET OC-3).  The MTT  generates and transmits  the
serial data stream  (SDS)  that  produces the  master  trig-
gers and  precision  clocks  needed  by  the  remote  DGs.
The data  encoded  into  the  SDS  consists  of  internally
generated data (real-time clock,  epochs,  frame  synchro-
nization  pattern (FSP),  CRC,  fill  bits)  and  externally
controlled  data  (trigger  keys).  Data  are  grouped  into
packets  or  frames  (see  Section  2.3).  Data  frame
contents  are  converted  into  a  bi-phase  encoded  SDS

Master
clock

Facility
Timing
Node

Master Timing
Transmitter

Optical
Fanout

Measurement
System

MUX
(16)

Facility  Timing  System

Local  Timing  System

Fiber  Optic
Distribution  Network

Zone 1

32-way
Fanout

Zone 14

32-way
Fanout

Pick-
off

Pick-
off

DG

DG

DG

DG

DG

DG

DG

DG

Zone 1

r
e
l
l
o
r
t
n
o
C

r
e
l
l
o
r
t
n
o
C

Zone 14

Controller
Transmitter

Ethernet

Ethernet

ICCS

Figure 1. Block diagram showing major functional components of the NIF Integrated Timing System.
MUX (multiplexer), DG (8-channel Delay Generator module).

with  a  77.76  Mbit/sec  transfer rate.  Conversion  of  the
SDS  from  an  electrical  signal  to  an  optical  signal
occurs in the  MTT.  The output  data stream  is  split  16
ways  to  provide  identical  SDSs  for  up  to  15  remote
locations and a reference signal for the MS.

The  MS  is  co-located  with  the  MTT.  This  unit
receives a copy of the SDS from each  local  area fan-out
and a reference copy of the data stream  directly from  the
adjacent transmitter. These data streams are multiplexed
to  a  decoder where the  precise time  of  arrival  is  deter-
mined and passed  to  the  controller.  This  provides  the
link  transit  time  between the  MTT  and each local  area
fan-out and allows for time compensation at the DGs.

A  controller  module  provides  the  communication
interface  between  Facility  Timing  Node  hardware  and
the remote  ICCS  computers.  Programs  running  on  the
controller  receive  commands  and  data  from  the  ICCS
computers via  an  Ethernet  connection  and  provide  the
user with necessary control and monitoring of the FTS.
Timing  Solutions  Corporation  provides  the  MTT,
MS,  and  the  controller.  These  units  are  implemented
separately, but use a modular hardware structure.

The Fiber  Optic  Distribution  Network  is  comprised
of  standard  communications  hardware  operating  at
1550 nm.  A  cable containing  two  single-mode optical
fibers  connects  the  optical  fan-out  of  the  MTT  with
each of the remote  zones  of  the  LTS,  which  can  be  up
to 500 meters away. One fiber  delivers the  encoded data
stream as  a  high-level optical  signal  to  the  local  area
fan-outs; the  other fiber  returns  a  low-level  replica  of
the data stream from each local area pick-off to  the  MS
of  the  FTS.  Signals  on  this  return  fiber  verify  link
continuity and permit fiber transit times to  be  measured
and monitored.

In  each local  area,  the  signal  is  optically  split  and

can be delivered to up to 32 DG modules.

2.3 Serial Data Stream (SDS)

The SDS  is  central to  the  design  of  the  ITS.  It  is
formed  in  the  MTT  and  is  used  to  transfer  serially
encoded digital data and a clock signal to local area DGs
(see Figure 2).

The  SDS  is  assembled  from  internal  and  external
data.  It  is  then  transmitted  as  sequential,  contiguous,
fixed-length data frames separated by  a  FSP.  The frame
rate is 24,000  frames  per  second. The SDS  consists  of
static and dynamic data. Static data such as the FSP  and
fill bits (Fb) do not change from frame to frame.

interface  or  directly 

Dynamic data that  may  change  with  each data frame
include  asynchronous  and  synchronous  keys  (AK  and
SK),  epochs  (E),  real-time  clock  (RTC),  and  frame
counter (FC).  Data bits  referred  to  as  “keys”  are  under
user control and change  as  directed. Asynchronous  keys
(2  bits)  are  updated  near  real  time  (within  one  frame)
through  the  control 
through
external connectors. Synchronous  keys  (46  bits)  which
function as DG triggers are updated through  the  control
interface once per second. Synchronous keys are used  to
partition  the  timing  system  among  various  users.
Epochs  (8  bits)  are  periodic  events  that  occur  for  a
single  frame  at  specific rates between 960  and 0.2  Hz.
A single bit  transmitted  at  a  subharmonic  of  the  frame
rate represents each epoch.  RTC  and  FC  data (72  bits)
are  time-dependent  bits  that  are  initialized  through  the
control  interface. Since  each  frame  occurs  at  a  unique
time, at least one bit of this data  will  change  with  each
frame.

Data  are  bi-phase  encoded,  i.e.,  one  data  bit  is
encoded for every two  clock periods. Bi-phase encoding
allows a stable clock whose phase is  nearly independent
of  the  data  to  be  recovered  from  the  SDS  and  also
permits arbitrarily long runs of either “ones” or “zeros”.

Serial data stream from
Master Timing Transmitter

FSP AK SK

E

RT

FC CRC Fb FSP AK

Time

AK SK

E

RT FC

Delay Generator register
bits set by Local FEP

Delay Generator
triggers after
pattern match

Figure  2.  Serial  data stream.  Delay generator is
triggered by first FSP after a data frame match.

2.4 Programmable Delay Generator (DG)

Highland  Technology,  Inc.  manufactures  the  pro-
grammable DG.  Their model V880  has  a  VME  format
with  eight  independent  timing  channels,  one  reference
channel,  and  one  monitor  channels  per  module.  The
monitor channel can be programmed to  monitor  one  of
the eight output channels. DGs having  either optical  or
electrical outputs  are available.  When operated in  local
mode, the unit functions like a conventional  DG.  Three
unique features have been added to these modules:

1.  The  clock  is  recovered  from  the  SDS.  This
provides  a  clock  in  each  DG  whose  frequency  is
common  to  all  DGs  throughout  the  NIF  facility  and
whose  phase  is  fixed to  the  received  data  stream.  The
clock  is  used  for delay countdown and also  serves  as  a
synchronizing edge for triggers.

2.  A  trigger  is  initiated  in  a  DG  channel  when  a
pattern  match  occurs  between a  transmitted  data  frame
and data preprogrammed into the  DG  data register.  This
allows DG channels to be grouped using  key  and epoch
bits. At the same time, users  of  the  other DG  channels
can  operate  independently  by  using  other  keys  and
epochs.  This  is  especially useful  during activation  and
maintenance.

3.  A  successful  pattern match  causes  a  trigger  delay
to  be  initiated upon  the  next  FSP.  Synchronizing  the
trigger to  the  FSP  simplifies  DG  implementation  and
improves  performance  by  eliminating  the  need  for  a
start synchronizer circuit. This  removes  a  major  source
of timing jitter found in many conventional DGs.
long-term  wander 

are
to 
temperature and SDS  power  variation.  The  DGs  have
built-in  compensation for both  temperature and optical
to  meet  NIF
power  variations  that  allow 
performance requirements.

Major  contributors 

them 

3 ITS PERFORMANCE

The ITS has been tested  at  the  component  and  at  the
system  level.  All  hardware was component-level tested
prior  to  performing integrated system  tests.  The  MTT
and MS were evaluated via  extensive acceptance testing
at  the  manufacturer.  The  MS,  however,  was  not
included in initial  integrated system  tests  as  acceptance
tests verified its  stability  to  be  better  than  10  ps  for 5
days.  DGs  were  acceptance  tested  at  the  manufacturer
before shipping to LLNL and system testing.

For  integrated  system  tests,  the  MTT  SDS  was
connected  to  19  V880  DGs  via  fiber  optic  splitters.
Thirty-two outputs from 13 of the DGs  were monitored
using  an  array  of  multiplexed  RF  switches  and  one
precision  Wavecrest  time  interval  meter  (TIM).  Each
DG  was  programmed for a  350-µsecond  delay.  At  10-
minute  intervals,  a  computer  switched  the  RF  MUX
through  the  32  DG  outputs,  thereby  routing  them  to
the “stop” input of the TIM.  For  each  DG  channel,  the
TIM acquired 1000 DG output triggers.  These measure-
ments were reduced to two data values:  an  average delay
time and peak-to-peak jitter of the delay time.

This  measurement  process  was  repeated  every  ten
minutes  for  seven  days  while  the  environmental  con-
ditions and key  DG  module parameters were monitored
and archived. After  seven  days,  the  recorded  data  were
analyzed to determine wander and jitter performance.

Maximum wander over  the  seven-day test  was 52  ps
for  one  channel,  while  the  other  31  channels  had  less
than 32 ps.  Jitter  for all  channels  was <7  ps  rms.  The
integrated system tests demonstrated that the  ITS  meets
its  seven-day wander and short-term  jitter  requirements
of <100 ps (maximum) and <20 ps (rms), respectively.

This  work  is  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the

U.S. DOE by LLNL under contract W-7405-Eng-48.

REFERENCES
[1] E.  Moses  et  al.,  “The  National  Ignition  Facility:
Status  and  Plans  for  Laser  Fusion  and  High-En-
ergy-Density  Experimental  Studies,”  ICALEPCS
2001, San Jose, CA, Nov. 27–30, 2001.

[2] L.  J.  Lagin  et  al.,  “The  Overview  of  National
Ignition  Facility  Distributed  Computer  Control
System,”  ICALEPCS  2001,  San  Jose,  CA,  Nov.
27–30, 2001.

[3] R.  L.  Kremens  et  al.,  “The  OMEGA  electronic
timing  system,”  Rev.  Sci.  Instr.,  68  (1),  pp  943-
946 (1997).

[4] G. W. Coutts  et  al.,  “Design and Implementation
of the Integrated Timing System to be  Used  at  the
National Ignition  Facility,”  31st  Precise Time  and
Time  Interval  Workshop,  Dana  Point,  CA  (Dec
1999).

