WEAP009

Integration of a New Knobbox in the PSI Control

Systems ACS and EPICS

A.C.Mezger, D.Anicic, T.Blumer, I. Jirousek
Paul Scherrer Institute, Switzerland

Abstract

the previous design, and the request,

Operation of the PSI cyclotrons has always relied
heavily on manual control. Tuning of our high intensity
beams for minimum losses is an art still depending on
personal skill. An ergonomically good design of the
knobbox is therefore essential for good operation. The
age of
to
implement the ACS knobbox in the SLS control system
based on EPICS, was an opportunity for a redesign.
The new knobbox is an autonomous node in the system.
It is based on industrial pc104 hardware with LINUX
system. CDEV and ACS-
as
communication provide the interface to the respective
control systems.

operating

the

1 INTRODUCTION
For the operation of the PSI accelerators the Man-
Machine Interface (MMI)
to the power supplies,
motors, etc consists of a panel presenting knobs,
buttons and displays, the so-called knobbox (Fig. 1).
The functionality of this interface has been optimized
for the handling of our accelerators over the last 20
years.
It has the ability to make small increments to a
device through buttons, as well as continuous variation
with knobs. Many other useful functions have been
implemented for keeping the old value when a device is
hooked, setting back this old value as well as the
possibility to set a new value, switching the power
supplies off and a HP-like calculator.

Figure 1: Knobbox MMI

of

this

The

2 HARDWARE EVOLUTION
first

generation

hardware was
implemented through CAMAC modules directly driven
by a PDP control computer. The next generation saw
the hardware controlled by a CAMAC auxiliary crate
controller (ACC, CES 2180) and communicating with
the control computer through the parallel CAMAC
branch [1].

In the early nineties our control system evolved to a
distributed system with front-end and back-end
computers, all connected through an Ethernet network
(Fig. 2).

Figure 2: Control System layout

the results

In this architecture, the front-end computers perform
the data acquisition on the field bus (VME and
to the back-end
CAMAC) and pass
(demanding) computer [2]. To integrate the knobbox
into this architecture, a direct connection to the ACC,
via an Ethernet interface, has been implemented. This
this moment standalone and its
made the crate at
connection to the parallel CAMAC branch was
removed.

3 NEW DEVELOPMENT
The knobbox is a necessary tool for the operation of
our accelerators and cannot be replaced easily in all its
functionality by modern software. Our Operators are
accustomed to it and it is also used in the SLS (Swiss

Light Source) control system. We realized that
the
hardware associated to the knobbox is getting older, is
expensive and furthermore that CAMAC is not always
the preferred solution. We looked therefore for a new
hardware solution where we could keep the same MMI.

Figure 3: Typical module stack for the knobbox

The solution we have adopted uses an industrial
embedded PC/104 system (smartCore-P5, a 266 MHz
Pentium PC) with the necessary IO-cards: Up-Down
Counters for the knobs, digital IO and Ethernet 10/100
(Fig. 3). These PC/104 cards are much smaller than
ISA/PCI-bus cards found in PC's and stack together
which eliminates the need for a motherboard, back
plane, and/or card cage. Power requirements and signal

drive are reduced to meet the needs of an embedded
system. Because PC/104 is essentially a PC with a
different form factor, any popular operating system can
be used for this system. We have chosen LINUX.

been

replaced with

The 10-year-old displays of the original knobbox
have
quarter-VGA electro
luminescent displays, giving the possibility to drive the
two displays through the TFT connector of the PC/104.
The small character display situated in the middle of
our knobbox is driven through the parallel port of the
PC/104. To simplify the handling of the keyboard and
lights we used a field-programmable gate array from
XILINX interfaced to the IO-cards. This layout
is
shown in Fig.4.

4 SOFTWARE IMPLEMENTATION
Because of the new architecture of the knobbox, the
software has had to be completely rewritten (the old
software was written using FORTRAN and was based
is
on CAMAC hardware). The
completely written in C and does its IO through the IO-
ports of the PC/104 system. The software uses X-
WINDOWS for displaying on the "quarter-VGA"
screens. To support these screens the PC/104 BIOS had
to be modified; this was done by the Company that

new software

Figure 4: Knobbox block diagram system.

supplied us the PC/104 system. The data-acquisition is
implemented in the standard way as defined by our
control system, however CDEV (CDEV is a C++
framework for developing portable control applications
developed at Thomas Jefferson Laboratory) has also
been implemented. This extension to the knobbox
allows it to be used directly with any system using
CDEV. This requirement is important in the case of
SLS or even if several control systems have to be
addressed by the knobbox.

For the development of our knobbox, a small laptop
disk, having the Linux system and the necessary
software, was connected to the PC/104. Recently we
changed to a diskless system booted from a server, so
that several knobboxes can be installed with only a
small effort.

Two knobboxes are actually in the test phase and
will soon be installed into our Control room, so that we
can test the knobbox under real conditions.

5 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the following people
for their contributions to the hardware of the upgraded
knobbox: D.Buerki, W.Hugentobler and G.Janser.

6 REFERENCES
[1] The SIN Operator-Console: Functionality and
Performance by A.C.Mezger, T.Blumer, I.Jirousek
and L.Sekolec.
on
Control Systems for Experimental Physics, Villars
sur Ollon, 1987

International Conference

[2] Status report of the PSI accelerator control system.
T.Blumer, D.Anicic,
I.Jirousek, A.Mezger,
L.Sekolec and Z.Sostaric. Nuclear Instruments and
Methods in Physics Research A 352 (1994) 150-
157

