WEAP 041

REPLACEMENT OF MAGNET POWER SUPPLIES, CONTROL AND
FIELD-BUS FOR THE PSI CYCLOTRON ACCELERATORS

D. Anicic, T. Blumer, G. Dzieglewski, G. Janser, I. Jirousek, H. Lutz, A.C. Mezger
PSI, CH-5232 Villigen PSI

Abstract

supplies

Magnet power

in the PSI accelerator
complex with their control and field-bus are old. Some
components are more then 30 years old. To guarantee
further maintenance and to meet the more demanding
specifications for operation with the 2mA beam, they
have to be replaced. The switched power supplies,
developed for SLS, will be used. This implies a major
redesign of part of the accelerator control system,
which is now based on CAMAC, ROAD-C and other in
house developed hardware including the machine
protection system. The modified control for the new
set-up will be based on VME and alternatively
CAMAC, with
the
functionality of the machine protection system.

processors

dedicated

for

1 INTRODUCTION
The everlasting need for renewal of the control
system has hit us again. Power-supplies (PS) are old,
the field-bus is outdated, the Front-End processors are
no longer available and serial CAMAC is not fast
enough. Technology of some of these components goes
back to the early 1970’s. Stability, ripple and mains
rejection of the PS is no longer up to the requirements
imposed by the 2 mA beam. The new PS’s have no
longer an analog interface.

All this implies a new control concept for the PS,
including the KOMBI, a local controller that also acts
as a supervisor to generate Interlock signals, Interlock
being our hardware implemented fast
run permit
system. ROAD-C the field bus used now to control the
PS via the KOMBI is old, in house developed and
without error detection. All I/O in our system is based
on CAMAC, now we intend to add the possibility of
using VME I/O. For
the I/O
bandwidth of the 5 MHz bit serial loop is a too limiting
factor.

some applications

On the other hand the overall system is very good
and flexible to changes. In addition we plan to use the
same control system for the PROSCAN project (the
new biomedical facility at PSI) now under construction.
This is motivation enough for a major upgrade of the
system.

2 MODIFICATION PATH OF SYSTEM
We will extend the control system Ethernet
to
strategic points in the equipment buildings. 100Mbps
optical links with the option to go to 1Gbps and beyond
will be used in conjunction with Switches that support
diagnostic facilities. The addition of front-ends at these
locations then adds the possibility of VME I/O in the
field. Intelligent interface modules to the PS with a
dedicated CPU in VME, will
the old
“KOMBIs” as well as part of the Interlock logic.

replace

This enhancement implies the extension and the port

of the front-end software to a new processor.

3 THE NEW FRONT END

3.1 FEC software upgrade/replacement

In our distributed client-server based Control
System, the Front-End Computers (FEC) act as servers,
providing the I/O for data acquisition and control. The
FECs continuously wait for client requests (Ethernet
802.3, UDP or Unix Message Queues), perform the
requested operations and return status and results.
FECs are configured at boot time with the data related
to Device, Module-handler, Address etc. provided
database. Module-handlers
byour
correspond
components
(modules). Fig.1. shows the FEC software architecture.

configuration
to

electronic

different

Fig.1: CAMAC based FEC software structure

The present system is entirely CAMAC based with
the ROAD-C bus transparently mapped to CAMAC.
Currently we support about one hundred different
modules. We now usually have to implement a new
Module-handler for every new module type. In the

future we intend to make even better use of inheritance
with object-oriented methods.

for

The motivation

the FEC upgrade

and
replacement program is twofold. Firstly, the present HP
rt743 single board VME real-time computers, under the
HP-RT operating system (LynxOS), are almost
ten
years old and will not be supported for a long time
anymore. Secondly, we have new projects based on
VME. The upgrade path has already been chosen. We
will use new VME computers with the LynxOS
operating system. We have ordered Motorola MVME
5100 PowerPC boards and the LynxOS 3.1.0 operating
system.

The FEC software migration path is set up in a few
steps. Initially, the existing software will be ported to
the new platform and operating system, opening the
door for present FEC replacement as needed. For that
purpose we keep the existing VME to CAMAC Serial
Highway Driver. This step has already been done it was
a matter of three weeks for two men. There were no
significant problems beside the compiler influenced
warning messages and the effort off implementing the
CAMAC device driver. We have already redesigned
the original HP-RT driver previously, while porting our
SW to Linux, now we re-ported it back to LynxOS.
This software has to now prove itself in long-term
operational tests. In a second phase we will add the
VME device driver and gradually implement VME
Module-handlers, as they become needed. This will
then provide a mixed CAMAC and VME system.

3.2 The new FEC database extension

The association or mapping between the I/O and the
real device attribute description (e.g. read PS current,
set PS current) is normally configured by the Module-
handler functionality.

To add the support of VME I/O-Modules both the
I/O-Module and the Module-handler mapping part will
be extended in the database. New tables, views and
their
appropriate
procedures have to be created, in order to support the
new requirements.

together with the

relationships

For data entry, new application programs are
developed using the Oracle Forms Developer tool. The
data extraction will use programs written in PRO-C or
Java Stored procedures. These programs then supply
the Front-End computers with the necessary data to
access all connected I/O-Modules. Configuration data
and Device
contains module
Attribute lists. At Front-End boot time the software first
checks for the existence of each I/O-Module and then
creates
the corresponding device attribute model
objects.

identification lists

4 THE NEW PS INTERFACE
The new PS interface is under development
in
cooperation with industry. HYTEC Electronics will
provide a VME IP carrier board (model 8003) with 4
IP-Sites, where they incorporate a Digital Signal
Processor (DSP) to allow for local processing.

Fig.2: Simplified scheme of I/O-Module configuration

All configuration data used by the Front-End
Software is stored in an Oracle Database. The present
version only supports CAMAC or ROAD-C based I/O.
I/O-Modules are organized by their address: identifier
for Front-End, CAMAC Branch, Crate Address in the
loop, slot number, and a channel or substation number.
Channel numbers are used to identify ADC channels.
Substation numbers are used to identify ROAD-C
module address lines.

Fig.3: VME-IP Carrier Board

A CAMAC version will also be produced with a
dual-port memory acting as interface to CAMAC. The
DSP will boot from an internal flash EPROM that can
be loaded through VME/CAMAC or by UART (Fig.3).
The same Carrier board will also be used for the
Interlock logic. Fig.4 shows a structural diagram of PS
boards in connection with the Interlock. The DSP
allows the data presentation and communication to the
Front-end process via memory mapped Registers in its

SRAM memory. The on-board processor controls up to
six PS, connected to the carrier board, three times two
links per IP module are supported. One IP module is
the Interlock functioins. The
used to implement
physical connection to the PS is via transition boards
and uses fiber-optic cables. The DSP provides the PS
supervision to generate Interlocks for current limits,
impedance out of tolerance, etc. Up to six PS may be
combined to form virtual devices.

Fig.4: Function Diagram for PS Control and Interlock

Fig.5 shows an overview of the fiber link controller for
the point-to-point communication with the PS. On the
IP module a XILINX FPGA is used to implement the
required logic functions. The opto-electronics part is
realized on the VME-Transition board. The FPGA
firmware is divided into three logical parts, for two
fiber optic links.

bit). The preamble is a repeated 1 signal for the
duration of 12 bits or longer.
The dual port memory used for communication with the
FEC is realized in the FPGA. It consists of 64 bytes
write-only and of 64 bytes read-only memory for each
link. Both the DSP and the VME-CPU may access the
memory-mapped registers of the IP-board. A write
access will causes the module to send the appropriate
data as a command over the optical fiber link to the
power supply controller. The answer comes back via
the fiber link and will be stored in the corresponding
read register. In addition an interrupt or flag informs
the CPU that new data has arrived.

IN,

four

5 INTERLOCK
The new Interlock module is composed of the VME
carrier board, four IP modules and the transition board
shown in Fig.6. One IP module can serve up to ten
Interlock channels,
two OUT and six
configurable as IN or OUT. All channels are isolated
from the XILINX by opto-couplers. The transition
board supplies the Interlock channels via DC/DC
converters, assuring over-current and over-voltage
protection. The new Interlock will also allow resolving
pre- and post-trigger of Interlock event conditions, this
is required for a refined diagnostic of the causes of an
Interlock. To allow for
the pre- and post-trigger
analysis,
input channels are equipped with time
counters. The same IP Interlock module is also used in
the fourth location of the carrier board for PS control.

Fig.6: Interlock IP module and transition board

CONCLUSIONS
We show an upgrade path to bring our system up to
state of
the art again. Both control systems for
PROSCAN and for our accelerator will mutually profit
from this development.

REFERENCES

Contributions to previous ICALEPCS conferences
by: PSI Accelerator Controls.

Fig.5: Fiber link hardware and protocol

The protocol of the communication link is always
organized in identical blocks (Fig.5). Each block starts
with a preamble, followed by a six-byte frame (a byte
consist of 1 start bit, 8 data bits, 1 parity- and 1 stop

