UPGRADE OF THE PHOTON BEAMLINE CONTROL SYSTEM ON THE
SRS

B.G.Martlew, B.Corker, G.Cox, P.W.Heath, M.T.Heron, A.Oates, W.R.Rawlinson, C.D.Sharp,
CLRC Daresbury Laboratory, Warrington WA4 4AD, UK

WEBT004

Abstract

The  SRS  is  a  2GeV  synchrotron  light  source  with  14
beamlines 
serving  approximately  34  experimental
stations.  Control  of  the  major  elements  of  the  beamlines
(vacuum pumps, gauges, valves and radiation stops) is the
responsibility of the main SRS Control System. As part of
the long-term upgrade plan for the SRS Control System a
large  programme  of  work  has  been  undertaken  to
modernize  beamline  control.  This  work 
included:
development  of  Linux  based  PC  front  end  computers  to
interface to the existing CAMAC I/O system, replacement
of  the  user  interface  by  graphical  synoptic  diagrams
running on Windows NT PCs, development of an ActiveX
control for parameter display/control and a cache server to
reduce  loading  on  the  rest  of  the  control  system.  This
paper describes the major components of  the  project;  the
techniques  used  to  manage  the  new  PCs  and  discusses
some of the problems encountered during development.

1  INTRODUCTION

One  of  the  last  stages  in  upgrading  the  SRS  control
system  to  a  modern,  distributed,  client-server  design  has
been  the  replacement  of  the  experimental  beamline
control system [1,2]. Previously, this consisted of a single
32-bit  minicomputer  interfaced  to  the  plant  via  a  serial
CAMAC  highway  and  4  CAMAC  crates.  The  user
interface was a simple character based application running
on  the  central  minicomputer  with  remote  terminals
connected  through  serial  RS232  lines.  This  arrangement
provided  a  functional  and  flexible  solution  but  the  user
interface in particular was difficult to use and understand.
In  the  upgraded  system  a  Front  End  Computer  (FEC)
directly  controls  each  CAMAC  crate  through  a  Hytec
1330 PC/CAMAC interface1. The FECs are industrial PCs
running  Linux.  They  are  attached  to  the  Control  System
network and handle monitoring and control requests from
remote clients.

Each  experimental  station  has  been  provided  with  a
standard desktop PC running Windows NT. These provide
the  user  interface  through  graphical  applications  that
directly show the physical layout of the beamline together
with real-time analogue and status information.

                                                          
1 http://www.hytec-electronics.co.uk/1330.html

2  NEW DEVELOPMENTS

This system was based on a solution already in use on
several of  the  newer  experimental  stations  [3].  However,
several  changes  were  needed  to  allow  easier  migration
from 
several
developments  were
technical 
improvements 
introduced during the project and new security and system
management issues had to be addressed.

system.  Similarly, 

the  old  control 

and 

2.1  User Interface PCs

Previously, the beamline users had a simple text-based
interface to the control system. This was provided through
dedicated  RS232  serial  lines  and  was  coordinated  by
software  running  on  a  centralized  mini-computer.  It
required  the  user  to  have  a  detailed  understanding  of  the
beamline and had little visual feedback to alert the user to
potential problems on the beamline.

Each  experimental  station  already  had  some  form  of
data  acquisition  computer  so  the  possibility  of  using  this
for control purposes was considered. Unfortunately, there
is  little  standardization  of  these  systems  across  the
experimental  stations  and  this  alternative  would  have
involved  developing  and  supporting  several  different
solutions.  Instead  it  was  decided  to  provide  a  dedicated
desktop  PC  running  Windows  NT  Version  4.0  for  each
station.

2.2  Linux Front End Systems

The  client-server  protocol  currently  used  on  the  SRS
runs  over  UDP/IP  and  has  already  been  implemented  on
MS-DOS,  OS-9  and  Windows  NT.    The  main  server
program, rpcserv, was ported to Linux and device support
for both Borer and Hytec CAMAC stepper motor modules
was  added.  Analogue  input  and  output  device  support
together  with  support  for  the  status  control  and  interlock
monitoring  system  already  existed.  The  support  software
for some devices requires precise delays of the order of a
few  10s  of  microseconds  to  be  generated  in  software.
Initially  problems  were  encountered  due  to  the  multi-
tasking behaviour of Linux. However, careful coding and
use  of  the  round-robin  scheduling  algorithm  eventually
solved this problem.

RedHat  Linux  6.2  provides  a  very  stable  and  versatile
platform for a FEC. At the time of writing some systems
have  been  operational  for  over  6  months  with  no
unscheduled re-boots.

2.3  ActiveX Control

Early in the project an ActiveX control was developed
to  simplify  the  representation  of  control  devices  in
graphical user interface software. This control was written
using  Visual  Basic  6  and 
is  capable  of  handling
communication  with  the  device,  colour-coded  display  of
status,  formatted  display  of  analogue  values,  interlock
warning  messages  and  status  control  (Figure  1).  This
control has also proved to be useful in other projects and
has also been used by the Accelerator Physics group.

Figure 1: ActiveX control dialog box

2.4  Synoptic Control Applications

A  graphical  synoptic  diagram  showing  the  layout  of
relevant  beamline  components  provides  real-time  read-
back and active control for each experimental station.

These  applications  were  developed  using  Visual  Basic
6 and the ActiveX control described in 2.2 above. As well
as  the  status  of  the  local  beamline  components  the
application displays the state of the associated beam port
and  useful  storage  ring  beam  parameters  (Figure  2).  The
displays closely mimic the vacuum flow drawings for the
beamline  and  are  produced  in  co-operation  with  a
beamline  control  engineer.  Online  help  is  available  from
the  application.  A  contract  programmer  was  hired  to  do
the
the  routine  work  of 
applications.

implementing  and 

testing 

Figure 2: A typical synoptic application

2.5 Network upgrade

The  SRS  control  system  utilizes  2  class-C  networks,
one  for  high-reliability  FECs  and  one  for  general  server
and console systems. Fibre optic and twisted-pair cabling
had  to  be  installed  throughout  the  experimental  area  to
provide  suitable  access  points  for  the  user  interface  PCs
and Linux FECs.

2.6 Cache Server

Initial  tests  showed  that  the  load  on  the  main  control
system from 30 or more applications, each requesting port
and  beam  parameters  every  couple  of  seconds,  was
reaching unacceptable levels. To overcome this problem a
cache  server  was  introduced.  This  server  was  prototyped
in Visual Basic using COM objects and subsequently key
components  have  been  coded  in  C++  to  provide  extra
performance and stability.  The cache effectively reduces
the load on the control system by performing a single read
per  parameter  and  serving  the  result  back  to  each
application.  The  refresh  rate  is  configurable  but  is
typically set at 10 seconds.

implementing  a  gateway  server  with  a  simple  socket
based  interfaced.  This  will  use  an  ASCII  protocol  for
sending and returning data to and from the control system.
A security database will limit access to devices based on
the  IP  address  of  the  requesting  host  and  the  parameter
being  accessed.  This  facility  will  allow  much  greater
automation  of 
and
simplification of the beamline user’s task.

the  data  gathering  process 

Also, there are plans to improve the online help system.
At present, only basic operating instructions are available
but  complete  beamline  specific 
fault
diagnosis  instructions  and  operating  procedures  could
easily be added.

information, 

5  CONCLUSIONS

The upgrade of the photon beamline control system was
one of the last steps in replacing obsolete equipment in the
SRS  control  system.  It  has  now  been  completed  and  has
brought  about  a  significant  improvement  in  control
facilities  on  the  experimental  stations.  All  the  changes
were  implemented  during  routine  shutdown  periods  and
no disruption to normal operating time occurred.

Some  of  the  developments  undertaken  for  the  project,
notably  the  Linux  FEC  design  and  the  ActiveX  control
have wider use in the SRS control system and will prove
useful in future projects.

REFERENCES

[1]  B.G.Martlew,M.J.Pugh,W.R.Rawlinson, 

“Planned
Upgrades  to  the  SRS  Control  System”,  EPAC’94,
London, June 1994.

[2]  M.T.Heron,B.G.Martlew,A.Oates,W.R.Rawlinson,
”An  analysis  of  the  SRS  Control  System  Upgrade”,
PCaPAC’00, DESY, Hamburg,  October 2000.

[3]  B.Corker,M.T.Heron,B.G.Martlew,W.R.Rawlinson,
”A New Control System for Beamline 5D on the SRS
at Daresbury”, EPAC’98, Stockholm, June 1998.

2.7  Security

Security is provided by limiting user access to the front
end computers and by controlling the software allowed to
run on the NT workstation.

User  access  is  limited  using  the  NT  workstation  local
policy. A unique user ID is assigned to each experimental
station.  Only  that  user  ID  or  a  system  administrator  is
allowed  to  log  on  locally.  The  unique  ID  logs  on
automatically  when  NT  is  started.  No  network  access  to
the workstation is allowed. The floppy disk and CD ROM
drives  are  disabled  in  the  BIOS,  and  access  to  the  BIOS
protected by password.

Using  an  NT  system  policy  the  allowed  software  for
each  unique  user  ID  is  controlled.  The  allowed  software
consists  of 
that  specific
the  synoptic  control  for 
experimental  area,  and  a  means  of  viewing  the  status  of
any  other  named  parameter  on  the  control  system.  To
prevent users from changing the system configuration, the
desktop  context  menus  (mouse  right  click),  access  to  the
registry, and access to Explorer, are all disabled.

2.8  System Management

Once the accounts are set up and working, there is little
on-going  management  to  perform.  New  accounts  are
created  as  experimental  stations  come  on-line,  and  a
database of machines and user IDs maintained.

Software  updates  required  on  the  local  hard  disk  (for
example the ActiveX control) are done by visiting the PC
and  logging  on  locally,  rather  than  updating  over  the
network.  This  means  that  the  use  of  the  PC  as  an  active
control 
remote
administration.

compromised  by 

is  not 

station 

3  COMMISSIONING

Installation and commissioning of the system had to be
completed without any interruption to routine operation of
the SRS and its experimental stations. This was achieved
by  adopting  a  staged  programme  of  work.  Initially,  a
simple  beamline  with  only  3  experimental  stations  was
transferred  to  the  new  system.  This  allowed  us  to  gain
experience  in  using  and  managing  the  new  software  and
hardware  before  attempting  upgrade  of  further  stations.
We  also  became  familiar  with  the  likely  problems  that
may  occur  during  commissioning.  The  remaining  30
stations  were  upgraded  in  3  stages  over  a  period  of  12
months.

4  FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS

There  is  an  increasing  interest  among  the  beamline
users  for  a  facility  to  integrate  beamline  control  into  the
experimental  control  and  data  acquisition  systems.  This
the  near  future  by
will  probably  be  provided 

in 

