PSN#TUAP016 

DESIGN OF THE MPRI CONTROL SYSTEM 
 
J.C. Collins, M. Ball, B. Broderick, J. Katuin, Wm. Manwaring, N. Schreuder 
IUCF, Bloomington, IN 47408, USA 

 
Abstract 

The  Indiana  University  Cyclotron  Facility  (IUCF)  is 
in  the  process  of  building  the  Midwest  Proton 
Radiation  Institute  (MPRI).  This  involves  refurbishing 
the  200MeV  cyclotron  and  building  new  facilities  for 
the  purpose  of  providing  clinical  treatment  of  human 
cancer tumors. First patients are expected in the Spring 
of  2003.  This  paper  presents 
the  design  and 
implementation  to  date  of  the  controls,  hardware  and 
software,  for  both  accelerator  and  treatment  areas. 
Particular  attention  is  placed  on  issues  of  personnel 
safety  and  control  system  security,  development  of 
inexpensive VMEbus boards with emphasis on the use 
of  MicroChip  PIC  processors,  beam  diagnostics  and 
monitoring and the use of commercial robots and vision 
systems for patient positioning. 

. 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Faced  with  the  end  of  support  for  physics  research 
on  its  200MeV  cyclotron,  IUCF  has  chosen  to pursue 
further  use  of  the  accelerator  for  the  treatment  of 
various  cancer  tumors.  To  this  end,  the  cyclotron 
system  is  being  modified  to  produce  protons  at  the 
single  energy  of  205MeV,  the  cyclotron  experimental 
hall  has  been  cleared  and  a  trunk  beam  line  with 
separate treatment beam lines are being installed.[1] 

Controls for both the cyclotron and all beam lines will 
use an architecture very similar to that used in the most 
recent  IUCF  projects[2].  Two  minicomputers,  one  for 
the cyclotron, one for all treatment beam lines, provide 
the user interface and all related processing. Each uses 
a  PCI-VME  interface  to  communicate  with  a  master 
VMEbus  crate,  which  is  connected  to  geographically 
distributed  crates  via  fiber  optic  bus  extenders.  The 
minicomputers  run  OpenVMS  and  Vsystem.  On/Off 
controls  and  interlocking  are  done  with  PLCs,  using 
centralized processors and distributed I/O modules. 

The full plan calls for three treatment rooms, two of 
which  are  to  hold  gantries.  Each  treatment  room  will 
have  its  own,  independent  room  control  and  dose 
monitoring  computers.  In  all  rooms,  accurate  and 
reproducible patient positioning will be achieved using 
commercial robots. But because robot motion has more 
degrees  of  freedom  than  needed,  an  independent 
computer  vision  system  will  be  used  to  track  and 

interlock  robot  motion.  Finally,  all  patient  treatment 
parameters  will  be  supplied  to  the  various  control 
computers from a medical computer system. 

2 HARDWARE 

2.1 Beam Line Control 

The  cyclotron  and  beam  line  control  computers are 
Compaq  DS10  AlphaStations,  each  with  an  SBS  Bit3 
PCI-VME interface to a 6U VME crate. In turn, this crate 
contains VMIC 5531L modules which connect to remote 
6U and 3U VME crates via fiber optics. 

For DACs and ADCs, the standard debate between 
buying  commercial or designing in-house was decided 
in  favor  of  the  latter  option.  Using  FPGAs  and  out-
sourcing construction allows even a small facility to do 
such a project. This option is not more expensive than 
the  commercial  one  when  requirements  for  good 
galvanic isolation and a high degree of modularity (for 
quick repair) are included. 

In  fact,  we  have  developed  four  single  width  VME 

boards: 

• 

•  DAB  (Data  Acquisition  Board)  -  3U  board 
contains one DAC and six ADC channels. 
SDPM  (Analog  Dual  Port  Memory)  - 6U  board 
connects  to  up  to  eight  PIC  processors,  each 
connected to a serial (e.g., RS-232) device. 
•  ADPM  (Serial  Dual  Port  Memory)  -  6U  board 
connects  to  up  to  eight  PIC  processors,  each 
having four channels of 12-bit ADC.  

•  DIO  (Digital  Input  and  Output)  - 3U board with 
supports  VMEbus 

channels; 

16-bit 

two 
interrupts.  

Interlocked functions using digital I/O are performed 

with an Allen-Bradley PLC and Flex-IO modules. 
2.2  DAB 

All DAB channels are 2’s complement, 16 bits and ± 
10V.  The  analog  section  of  the  board  is  optically 
isolated from the VME power, ground and signal bus. 
The  six  ADC  channels  are  paired  internally,  each  pair 
sharing an external connection. All channels have low-
pass  filters,  but  with  the  response  of  one  (slow) 
channel  in  each  pair  having  greater  attenuation  with 
frequency  than  the  other.  The  slow  channel  will  be 
quiet and used for normal operator displays, while the 

other  is  available  to  diagnostic  software  looking  for 
high frequency components signaling problems. 

2.3  SDPM, ADPM 

These  boards are variants of the same basic design. 
Originally  conceived  to  be  an  inexpensive  interface  to 
devices with slow, serial interfaces, the boards present 
two banks of 1KB to the host computer. While the PIC 
processors  gather  data  and  store  it  in  one  memory 
bank, the host computer can read data from the other. 
Bank  switching  is  under  host  control.  Adding  12-bit, 
2’s  complement  ADCs  to  the  remote  PICs  created  an 
inexpensive  method  of  gathering  slow  analog  data 
close to the beam line.  The RS232 or analog section of 
each  board  is  optically  isolated  from  the  VME  power, 
ground and signal bus.  Figure 1 shows how beam line 
elements  are  connected  to  the  control  system  using 
DAB and ADPM. 

Figure1. Beam Line Element Connection. 
 

 

 

2.3  Timing 

The few timing signals required will be supplied by a 

single sequencer module[3]. Depending on how it is 
configured, the sequencer can provide up to 32 signal 
outputs with 1ìsec resolution or DAC output 
synchronized with timing signals. The latter setup may 
control beam intensity when using multiple treatment 
rooms. 
 

3  SOFTWARE 

3.1 Overview 

The  control  computers  will  run  OpenVMS  and 
Vsystem, a combination IUCF has used for many years. 
Each  treatment  room  control  computers  will  run  a 
version  of  Windows  because  of  the  need  to  run 
commercial  software.  The  dose  monitoring  computer 
will  run  a  small,  realtime  OS  which  has  not  been 
selected  yet.  All  these  computers  will  have  Ethernet 
connections and be separated from the rest of IUCF by 
managed  switches  and  from  the  rest  of  the  world  by 
firewalls. 

3.2 Cyclotron Control 

In December, 2000, the PDP-11/44 which had run the 
cyclotron  since  1985  was  replaced  with  a  DS10.  An 
interface  between  VME  and  the  original  DIO  control 
bus  was  installed  and  about  20%  of  the  control 
hardware  was  replaced  before  the  cyclotrons  were 
brought back into operation using Vsystem in March, 
2001.  We  will  continue  to  replace  portions  of  the  old 
cyclotron controls as time and access permit. 

3.3.Beam Line Control 

Basic  beam  line  control  will  be  based  on  programs 
previously created and tested at IUCF. Major changes 
or additions to that software include: 

• 

2-of-3  Checking  –  As  shown  in  Figure  1,  each 
beam  line  element  will  have  power  supply 
current, load voltage and a temperature corrected 
Hall  probe  magnetic  field  readout.  All  three 
values must be within acceptable ranges before 
operation  is  allowed.  There  will  be  a  procedure 
whereby the operator will be able to specify that 
operation is allowed with one out-of-range value 
for a short, fixed time (until the next maintenance 
period). 

•  Machine  state  restore  –  There  will  be  one 
“golden”  set  of  DAC  and  ADC  values  defining 
proper accelerator and beam line operation. That 
will  be  the  only  set  supported  for  computer 
restoration. 

•  Energy  setup  –  A  degrader  in  each  treatment 
beam  line  will  be  used  to  change  the  fixed 
cyclotron  output  proton  beam  energy  to  that 
desired for a specific treatment. We will set each 
treatment line element by interpolating in a table 
that  beam 
of  empirical  values  and  check 
transmits  through  the  line  as  expected before 
allowing a real treatment to start. 
Security – No remote logins will be permitted for 
the  treatment  room  controllers.  Restrictions  will 

• 

be  placed  on  those  network  nodes  from  which 
users  may  log  into  the  control  system.  All 
controls,  except  a  beam  stop  and  closed  loops, 
will be disabled while a treatment is underway. 

 

4 DIAGNOSTICS 

4.1 Beam Position Monitor (BPM) 

BPMs[4],  non-intercepting transducers that provide 
both position and intensity information, are the primary 
beam  tune-up  and  monitoring  tool.  The  BPM  system 
has four major sections, the pickup, the radio frequency 
(rf)  amplifiers  and  mixers,  the  analog  and  conversion 
section, the analog-to-digital converter (ADC), and the 
software.  They  provide  ±0.2mm  position  resolution 
over  a  ±12mm  area  and  10%  intensity  accuracy  for 
beams  from  10nA  to  2ìA.  Operator  displays  are 
typically a set of bar graphs showing all readouts for a 
single beam line. 

4.2 Harp 

A harp is a multi-wire device which can measure the 
beam  profile  in  one  transverse  plane  using  either 
secondary  emission  electrons  or  ionization (gas harp). 
Our harps will use a wire spacing of 0.5mm and operate 
between 10nA and 2ìA beam current. Harps are usually 
mounted  in  X,Y  pairs  and  operators  are  shown  data 
from both as wave forms. 

4.3 Wire Scanner 

This is a wire helix inserted in the beamline at 45º and 
rotated so as to cross the beam once in each transverse 
plane  on  each  rotation.  Wire  scanner  enable  and 
selection will be done with an in-house built controller 
and multiplexer which enables an operator to select any 
two wire scanners. Operators are shown X,Y results for 
the selected wire scanner(s). 

4.4 Multi-Layer Faraday Cup (MLFC) 

Used 

to  characterize 

the  energy  and  energy 
distribution of the beam, the MLFC consists of a solid 
block  followed  by  insulated  plates[5].  The  set  of 
currents read from the plates can be used to determine 
if  the  beam  energy  properties  are  correct.  The  MLFC 
will  be  able  to  resolve  energy  drifts  >100KeV  and 
energy  spread  changes  >500KeV  using  currents 
between 10 and 500nA. 

 

 

5 PATIENT POSITIONING 

the  proton 

therapy  beam 

For  treatment,  the patient (actually, the tumor) must 
be accurately and reproducibly positioned with respect 
to 
line.  This  will  be 
accomplished using a Motoman UP200 robot and XRC 
controller. This robot provides six degrees of freedom, a 
rated  payload  of  200kg  and  positioning  accuracy  of 
±0.2mm  throughout  its  2446mm  working  envelop.  A 
precalculated  and  tested  (simulated)  robot  job  file 
defining all patient-specific robot motions will be part of 
the patient treatment prescription obtained from medical 
records  when  the  patient  is  identified.  Local,  manual 
control of the robot will be provided through a wireless, 
handheld PC. 

A robot is almost perfect for the patient positioning 
job  except  that  its  motion  has  six  degrees  of  freedom, 
i.e., it is capable of turning the patient upside down. To 
stop  such  undesired  movements,  the  patient  support 
device (bed or chair) will be fitted with an acceleration 
and  tilt  monitoring  system  independent  of  the  robot 
controller.  The  patient  support  device  will  also  have 
special  markers  attached  which  will  be  watched  by  a 
Vicon  460  Vision  System.  The  Vision  System  uses 
infrared  to  track  each  marker  and  report  its  position 
many  times  per  second.  Knowing  the  expected  robot 
path  and  the  fixed  geometry  of  the  room,  we  can 
determine if the robot is doing something unexpected or 
about to hit an object and turn the robot off. 

REFERENCES 
[1]D.  Friesel,  et  al.,  “The  Indiana  University  Midwest 
Proton Radiation Institute”, PAC2001, Chicago, IL, 
June 2001.  

 
[2]J.C. Collins, et al., “The CIS Control System at IUCF”, 

PAC1999, New York, NY, March 1999. 

 
[3]W.  Hunt,  “Cooler  Injector  Synchrotron  Control 
Hardware  at  IUCF”,  PAC1999,  New  York,  NY, 
March 1999. 

 
[4]M.  Ball,  et  al.,  “Beam  Diagnostics  in  the  IU  Cooler 
Injector Synchrotron”, 7th Beam Instru. Workshop, 
Argonne, IL, 1996. 

 
[5]N.  Schreuder,  “The  Development  of  a  Multi-Layer 
Faraday  Cup  to  Characterize  the  NAC  Proton 
Therapy Beam”, PTCOG-XXXII, Upsala, 1999. 

 

