TUAP027

DIAMOND Control System Outline Design

M. T. Heron, A. J. Duggan, B. G. Martlew, A. Oates, P. H. Owens, V. M. Smithers, P. D. Woods
CLRC Daresbury Laboratory, Warrington, Cheshire, WA4 4AD, United Kingdom

Abstract

DIAMOND is a new synchrotron light source currently
being  designed  in  the  UK.  The  control  system  for
DIAMOND  will  be  a  site  wide  monitoring  and  control
system  for  the  accelerators,  beamlines  and  conventional
facilities. Initial work on the control system has selected
EPICS as the basis for the control system design.

The requirements of the control system are presented.
The  technical  solutions  being  considered  to  interface
EPICS  to  the  equipment  being  controlled  are  discussed
together  with  the  requirements  for  configuration  and
management of a large EPICS installation. Options being
installation  and
the  procurement, 
considered 
commissioning of the control system are also presented.

for 

1  INTRODUCTION
DIAMOND  is  a  3rd  generation,  3GeV  synchrotron
light  source  currently  being  designed  in  the  UK.  The
storage  ring  is  based  on  a  24-cell  DBA  lattice  of  about
560m  circumference.  It  uses  a  full  energy  booster
synchrotron and linac for injection. The spectral output is
optimised  for  high  brightness  up 
to  20keV  from
undulators  and  high  flux  up  to  100keV  from  multipole
wigglers.  Initial  construction  includes  seven  photon
beamlines.

The  project  is  currently  in  a  design  and  specification
phase, with build and procurement starting in April 2002
and  operation  scheduled  from  Sept  2006.  Details  of  the
project status are described in [1].

2  CHOICE OF CONTROL SYSTEM

TOOL KIT
Four  options  for  the  control  system  tool  kit  were
reviewed  during  1999:  TACO/TANGO  from  the  ESRF
[2,3], commercial control systems, a development of the
SRS control system[4] and EPICS[5]. The conclusion of
this  was  that  any  one  could  deliver  a  working  control
system[6]. Following on  from  this  a  detailed  analysis  of
control system tool kit requirements showed  that  EPICS
offered  advantages;  in  terms  of  its  application  to  other
accelerator  projects,  a  larger  base  of  developed  drivers
and performance/functionality.

3  CONTROL SYSTEM SCOPE
The defined scope for the control system is: that it will
be  a  site  wide  monitoring  and  control  system  for  the
accelerators,  beamlines  and  conventional  facilities.  The
control  system  will  extend  from  the  interface  of  the
equipment  being  controlled  through  to  the  operator.  It
will  include  all  hardware  and  software  between  these
bounds:  computer 
systems,  networking,  hardware
interfaces and programmable logic controllers. 

The control system will not include any control or data
acquisition  for  the  experimental  stations.    It  further  will
not  include  the  personnel  protection  system,  which  is  a
separate  system  that  will  be  monitored  by  the  control
system.

3.1 Operational Requirements

The  control  system  will  have  to  support  a  facility
operating in excess of 5000 hours per year but with high
control  system  availability  required  at  all  times.  The
facility is  expected to operate for around twenty years.

The  operational  functions  to  be  provided  by  the
control system must include the routine operation of  the
facility by the operator, support for the technical groups
to diagnose equipment and for the physics group to carry
out experiments in characterising the facility.

3.2 Interface Requirements

Considering 

typical  systems  across  each  of 

the
accelerators  and  the  7  beamlines  there  will  be  around
4000  physical  devices  that  will  require  interfacing  into
the  control  system.  The  estimated  numbers  of  interface
types,  not  necessarily  channels,  for  these  devices  is
shown in table 1.

Table 1: Numbers of interface types

Interface type
Analogue
Digital
VME back plane
Video
GPIB
Serial
System Integration

Quantity
1677
1111
73
8
2
2116
8

4  DIAMOND CONTROL SYSTEM 
The DIAMOND control system will adopt the standard
two-layer architecture with workstations as the client and
VME crates as the server. There will be no field bus to a
third layer, but extensive use will be made of a field bus
or serial interfaces from layer two, to the equipment. 

4.1 EPICS Tool Kit

The current development work is using  EPICS  3.13.4
and  VxWorks  5.4,  which 
is  providing  a  stable
environment. The versions of EPICS and VxWorks to be
used  for  the  installed  system  will  be  fixed  later  in  the
design phase.

4.2 Equipment Interface

The interface from the control system to the equipment
will  be  through  VME64X  Input  Output  Controllers
(IOCs). IOCs will be installed for each technical system
e.g. Vacuum and for each geographical area i.e. per cell
on the storage ring, giving a total of around 212 IOCs, as
shown in table  2.  These  will  use  PPC  processor  boards,
Industry  Pack  carriers  and  modules  as  the  principal
interfaces. The preferred interfaces to equipment will be
analogue, digital and serial (RS232, RS422 etc). Support
will also be provided for at least one field bus to interface
PLCs. The choice of field bus is currently undecided but
preference  will  be  for  an  open  standard  field  bus.  Each
IOC will also contain an event receiver for  synchronous
operation  and  accurate  time  stamping  of  data.  This
combination  allows  for  a  high  density  of  IO  from  a
compact  VME  system,  with  most  requirements  being
satisfied  by  four  VME  modules  housed  in  seven  slot
crates.

Table 2: Numbers of IOCs

          IOCs

Main Magnets
Steering Magnets
RF
Vacuum
Diagnostics
Pulsed PSUs
Personnel Safety
Vessel protection
Rad. Monitors
IDs or Motors
Misc
TOTALS

c
a
n
i
L

1
1
1

1

1

5

s
h
t
a
P
 
x
T

1
1

2
2

 
 
 
 
 
 
r
e
t
s
o
o
B

1
1
2
4
4
1

6

13

)
7
(
 
s
L
B

7

2

2
7
2
20

R
S

25
24
5
48
25
1
2
24
2
7
5
168

4.3 Serial Interfaces

The decision has been taken to support the interfacing
of  equipment  through  serial  interfaces.  This  offers
benefits  in  being  able  to  use  commercial  off  the  self
equipment,  reduced  wiring,  better  correlation  with  local
equipment  values,  and 
installation  and
commissioning  times.  It  is  recognised  that  serial  data
processing  will  impose  an  IOC  CPU  overhead  and
supporting  multiple  vendor  specific  protocols  will
impose a development overhead. 

reduced 

4.4 Equipment protection

Equipment  protection  is  included  within  the  control
system  where  required,  with  the  control  system  issuing
hardwired  "permit  to  operate"  signals  to  equipment.
Three  levels  of  protection,  determined  by  assessment  of
damage/cost  caused  by  failure,  are:  High  Integrity,
provided in hardware; Routine Interlocking, provided by
PLCs; Prudent Operational Limits, provided by IOCs.

Global  interlocks  are  required  to  protect  the  storage
ring vessel and dipole magnets. These will be  generated
at  each  control  and  instrumentation  area,  converted  and
sent  via  the  control  system  computer  room  over  the  FO
cables to the RF plant and dipole PSUs respectively.

4.5 Consoles

The consoles will be workstations and for cost reasons
these are likely to be PCs running Linux. There is also a
requirement  to  provide  a  control  interface  to  Win32
based applications.

4.6 Central Servers

Central  servers  will  be  provided  for  development,
applications,  relational  database,  intranet  and  internet,
archiver, alarm management and machine model and IOC
booting.  At each control and instrumentation area there
will be local a boot server for the IOCs. These will be the
primary IOC boot servers to minimise network load from
IOCs  rebooting.  Consideration 
to
standardising all servers on Linux.

is  being  given 

4.7 Applications

The  principal  application  requirements  can  be  met
through the standard EPICS tools, control panels through
Medm,  alarm  management  through  ALH,  archiving
through  Channel  Archiver 
together  with  scripting
languages for rapid application development. 

A  standard  application  for  viewing  and  controlling
channels in a tabular form is planned and an application
for applying settings to a large number of the channels, to
sequence  the  accelerator  from  one  mode  to  another  will
be developed.

Applications  will  interface  to  the  control  system
layer.  This  will
through 
facilitate  the  integration  of  dynamic  control  data  from
Channel Access and persistent data stored in the RDB.

the  CDEV[7]  abstraction 

Soft  records  are  currently  being  used  to  simulate  the
channels  available  in  the  final  control  system  and  so
facilitate early application development. 

IOCs  fully  integrated,  is  being  discussed  with  likely
vendors. 

The majority of IOCs will be procured on a component
basis and integrated in house. The procurement of VME
modules and instrumentation with EPICS device support
is  being  investigated,  with  one  VME  manufacturer
already developing EPICS support to our requirements. 

4.8 Configuration and management

5.2 Commissioning.

Commissioning  is  planned  to  progress  through  the
linac, booster and storage ring. The storage ring cells are
based  on  three  girders,  which  support  the  vessel  and
magnets.  These  will  be  constructed  offline  and  at  this
stage  tested  in  conjunction  with  the  control  system.  By
ensuring each cell of the storage ring is self-contained, as
the technical systems are installed the control system for
that cell can be set to work and commissioned. 

6  CONCLUSION
The  structure  for  the  DIAMOND  control  system  is
now  being  defined.  With  the  control  system  well
specified early on in the project the detail design can be
resolved to ensure a high level of functionality available
for day one commissioning.

7  REFERENCES

[1]  M.W.Poole et al, "The DIAMOND Project: An

Advanced Light Source",PAC2001 Chicago, 2001.

[2]  http://www.esrf.fr/computing/cs/taco/taco.html
[3]  http://www.esrf.fr/computing/cs/tango/tango_basic
       /index.html 
[4]  M. T. Heron, B. G. Martlew, A. Oates and W. R.

Rawlinson, "An analysis of the SRS Control System
upgrade", PCaPAC2000, DESY Hamburg, 2000.

[5]   http://www.aps.anl.gov/epics/php.php
[6]   M.T. Heron, B.G. Martlew, "A Review of Options
for  the  DIAMOND  Control  System",  PAC'99,  New
York April 1999 .

[7]  http://www.jlab.org/cdev/
[8]  http://lansce.lanl.gov/lansce8/epics/dbase/

capfast/caprefv2-1.html
[9]  http://www.sls.psi.ch/controls/

software/VisualDCT/visual_dct_demo.html

Capfast[8]  is  currently  being  used  for  IOC  DB
configuration  but  consideration  is  being  given  as  to
whether Visual DCT[9] offers a greater long-term future.  

A  relational  database  (RDB)  is  planned  to  manage
conventional  control  system  information  together  with
the  control  system  configuration.  All  IOC  DBs  will  be
generated  out  of  the  RDB  so  ensuring  that  there  is  a
central  repository  for  all  control  parameters.    Work
required  to  link  the  EPICS  database  build  process
together with RDB is current being defined.

4.9 Physical structure 

The control system will interface to the other technical
systems at 48 control and instrumentation areas covering
the linac, booster, transfer lines, plant rooms, storage ring
and  beamlines.  For  the  storage  ring  there  will  be  one
control  and 
thereby
ensuring each cell is self-contained.

instrumentation  area  per  cell, 

4.10  Network

A  network  infrastructure  will  connect  the  control
system  computer  room  to  each  of  the  48  control  and
instrumentation areas with single and multi mode fibres.
The  fibre  will  provide  two  computer  networks:  one  for
control  system  and  one  for  other  computer  systems  to
enable  effective  management  of  traffic  on  the  control
system  network.  Each  network  will  use  a  central  switch
in  the  control  system  computer  room  and  the  control
network will have secondary switches at each control and
instrumentation areas. The fibres will further be used for
event distribution, global interlocking and beam position
feedback system

5  CONSTRUCTION
The  detailed  programme  of  work  for  construction
phase of the project is currently being planned with latest
options presented.

5.1 Procurement

The sub system below the IOC, principally PLC based,
will  be  procured  as  design  and  build  contracts  from
conventional  systems  houses.  The  procurement  of
complete  technical  sub  systems,  e.g.  Linac  with  EPICS

