WEAP003

The Evolution of the DELTA Control System

E. Kasel, B. Keil, D. Schirmer, D. Zimoch
Institute for Accelerator Physics and Synchrotron Radiation,
University of Dortmund, Germany

Abstract

Since  January  1999  the  DELTA  control  system  is
changing from a non standard hand-made system to the
standard  Experimental  Physics  and  Industrial  Control
System  (EPICS)  [1].  The  complete  80  MeV  LINAC
and transfer-line, the  asymmetric  5.5  T  multipole  wig-
gler  magnet  (SAW)  and  main  parts  of  the  1.5  GeV
electron storage ring are now under EPICS control.

a 

like 

Ethernet 

network, 

upgrades 

hardware 

fast
Additional 
100baseTX/FX 
Linux-PCs,
PowerPC-IOCs,  and  reengineered  device  I/O-interface
cards have been installed. Moreover, a self-made VME
DSP-board  is  in  the  final  test  phase  to  control  the
booster ramping process. Generic stream device drivers
for  the  IEEE/GPIB  and  CAN  fieldbusses  have  been
developed and are already in use since one year [2].

The number of high level software tools for data ac-
quisition  and  evaluation  as  well  as  for  remote  device
control  and  complex  software  feedbacks  is  increasing
continuously. The availability of a wide variety of inter-
faces  to  the  EPICS  Channel  Access  (CA)  protocol
makes  it  possible  to  include  state  of  the  art  software
platforms  and  architectures  like  the  CORBA  middle-
ware,  Java,  Delphi,  Tcl/Tk  etc.  very  easily.  Further-
more, the integration of complex simulation, design and
modeling  tools  together  with  database  archiving  and
Web-based accelerator monitoring is in progress.

1 INTRODUCTION
During  the  last  years  the  self-made  DELTA  control
system has been replaced by EPICS. The change had to
be done step by step because storage ring operation had
to  be  ensured  during  the  migration.  In  summer  2001
this migration was finished. The  whole  facility,  the  80
MeV  linac,  the  1.5  GeV  booster,  the  storage  ring  and
the  Superconducting  Asymmetric  Wiggler  (SAW),  is
now handled by EPICS.

Combined  with  the  migration  of  the  control  system
exchanges  of  VME  computer  types  (from  Force-  and
Microsys-CPUs  to  Power-PC)  and  upgrade  of  the  in-
ternal  Ethernet  network  to  100  MBit  and  fiber  optics
had been made.

2 REACHING EPICS
The DELTA control system has the usual three level
soft-  and  hardware  structure  consisting  of  fieldbus
systems which are  linked  via  28  VME-IOCs  and  local
network  to  the  front-end  computers  for  high  level  op-
erator interfaces. Altogether, there are 46 computers in
the control network.

Because  many  devices  had  to  be  accessed  by  serial
protocols we developed a  generic  driver  which  can  be
configured  by  an  plain  text  file.  Due  to  the  modular
structure (see fig. 1) of this driver new EPICS records
and  also  new  fieldbus  systems  can  be  applied  easily.
The flexibility of the driver leads to its use for 672  of
the  4767  records  (process  variables  in  EPICS)  in  the
DELTA control system (see table 1).

ai

bo

stringout

waveform

...

records

record interfaces

bus interfaces

bus drivers

Stream Device kernel

protocol files

GPIB

CAN

RS232

...

Figure 1: Structure of Stream Device Driver

HP-Workstations as operator interfaces are replaced
by  Linux-PCs.  At  the  moment,  there  are  still  several
workstations  in  use,  but  mainly  as  display  computers
for programs running on the PCs.

Device Type
Soft Channel
Stream
Delta DSP
CANbus
Delta-FG
Desy CPS
PPIO Chopper
Others
Total

Number of Record
1909
672
561
497
490
244
222
172
4767

Table 1: Records in the Delta Control System

For  the  reengineering  of  the  display  panels  the
EMW-GUI-builder  was  developed  so  that  even  com-
plex  graphical  user  interfaces  (GUI)  can  be  generated
without programming knowledge. The whole front-end
programming  was  done  on  the  basis  of  Tcl/Tk.  Even
extensive  applications  like  beam  based  calibration
(BBC)  routines  and  online  optic  measurements  are
written with this toolkit.

3 ORBIT DRIFT FEEDBACK
On a slow time scale, DELTA shows significant orbit
drifts.  Two  main  reasons  could  be  detected:  thermal
effects  and  field  drifts  of  the  Superconducting  Asym-
metric Wiggler (SAW). Thermal effects are beam cur-
rent related and caused by the heat load from synchro-
tron  radiation.  The  changing  temperature  leads  to  de-
flections  of  the  vacuum  chamber.  This  causes  dis-
placements of the quadrupole magnets [3].

While  the  Superconducting  Asymmetric  Wiggler
(SAW) is operative, its slowly increasing field error is
the dominating reason for orbit drifts. This field error is
caused by different current losses in the three separate
circuits of the SAW [4].

Both  effects  could  be  successfully  suppressed  by  a
EPICS-based  feedback  system  implemented  in  Tcl/Tk
on  a  Linux  PC.  Orbit  correction  is  performed  once  a
second  in  both  planes.  The  machine  operator  can
choose  from  a  variety  of  different  correction  algo-
rithms. All correction methods work on measured beam
response  matrices,  which  have  proved  to  be  a  better
basis than calculated models [5].

Currently implemented methods are:

•  most effective corrector

This chooses the steerer that will minimize the rms
orbit error.

•  most efficient corrector

This  chooses  the  steerer  that  needs  the  smallest
change of steering to correct the rms orbit error.

•  weighted correction

• 

This chooses a steerer that will correct the rms or-
bit  error  while  reducing  the  absolute  steerer
strength.
local bumps
Three consecutive steerers are used to create a lo-
cal  orbit  bump  that  reduces  the  largest  orbit  dis-
placement.

•  SVD (singular value decomposition)

SVD  is  a  numerical  algorithm  to  ‘invert’  non-
square  or  singular  matrices.  Applied  to  the  beam
response matrix, it allows to use all steerers to re-
duce all orbit displacements simultaneously.

The  feedback  system  uses  43  beam  position  moni-
tors, 30 horizontal and 26 vertical steerer magnets. The
range  of  the  steerers  is  ±3.1  mrad  in  the  horizontal
plane and ±1.1 mrad in the vertical  plane.  The  resolu-
tion is 2.4⋅10-4 of the maximum value. Due to the serial
communication interface of the steerers, corrections can
only be done slowly.

A correction rate of once a second has emerged to be
entirely sufficient to stabilize the orbit on  the  required
time scale. Removal of high frequent orbit oscillations
is beyond the intention of this application and needs  a
separate  set  of  fast  steerers  and  faster  hardware  for
acquisition and processing of orbit data.

4 THE BOOSTER DSP NETWORK
The  1.5  GeV  booster  BoDo  is  actually  a  ramped
storage  ring,  with  an  energy  range  of  35  to  1500MeV
and typical ramp cycle times between 2 and 7 seconds,
depending on injection and extraction energy.

In  May  2001,  VME  low  level  software  and  GUIs
were  changed  from  a  self-made  control  system  to
EPICS,  still  using  the  old  hardware:  simple  synchro-
nized  digital  function  generators  VME  boards  (FGs)
with  external  DACs  for  ramped  power  supply  control,
digital  I/O  VME  boards,  and  CANBus  modules  with
digital  or  12  bit  analog  I/O  that  provided  time  stamp
precision  of  about  100ms  and  readout  frequencies  of
some Hz.

Since  October  2001,  all  ramped  booster  magnet
power  supplies  (dipole,  6  quadrupoles,  2  sextupoles,
steerers),  rf  power,  and  all  booster  diagnostics  (beam
position  measurement,  tune  control,  beam  loss  meas-
urement,  power  supply  currents,  ...)  are  handled  by
VME DSP boards developed at DELTA ("DeltaDSP").
New  self-made  standalone  eurocards  with  DC-isolated
temperature-stable  16  bit  ADCs  and  DACs  and  fast
interfaces to  the  DeltaDSP  boards  were  installed,  with
minimum  distance  to  power  supplies  resp.  signal
sources. Up to 8 DAC cards and 128 ADC cards can be
connected  to  each  DSP  board,  with  data  transfer  rates
up  to  32  MByte/s  for  DAC  cards  (16  bit  parallel  bus,
10 m max. cable length) and 10 MBit/s for ADC cards
(serial  daisy  chain,  50  m  max.  cable  length).  All
booster diagnostics data is now available at ADC sam-
ple  rates  between  10  kHz  (BPMs)  and  100  kHz,  with
300 ns time stamp precision.

Each  DeltaDSP  board  has  two  32  bit  floating  point
DSPs  (Analog  Devices  ADSP-21062),  3  MByte  fast
SRAM program memory, up to 64 MByte DRAM data
memory  and  1  MByte  VME  dual  ported  memory.  Ex-
ternal  devices  can  be  connected  to  four  synchronous
serial  interfaces  (32  MBaud  max.)  or  two  CANBus
master  interfaces  (1  MBaud  max.).  Furthermore,  a

general-purpose  flatwire  differential  I/O  port  is  pro-
vided.  Reconfiguration  of  an  FPGA  connected  to  this
port  provides  flexible  high-speed  interfacing  to  differ-
ent accelerator devices like DACs,  DDS  function  gen-
erators  or  switched  power  supplies  with  inputs  for
digital current control via pulse width modulation.

Up  to  255  DeltaDSP  boards  can  be  connected  to  a
multiprocessor  cluster  using  "DeltaNet",  a  novel
FPGA-based 160 MBaud real-time field bus developed
at  DELTA.  DeltaNet  provides  real-time  data  transfer
with  predictable  bandwidth  and  bus  access  time,  soft-
ware-independent  trigger  distribution  and  accelerator-
wide  clock  synchronization  that  tolerates  transmission
errors.  Each  DeltaNet  node  is  connected  to  its  next
neighbour  node  by  one  fiber  optic  cable  (max.  length
2km  node  to  node,  200km  overall).  The  synchronous
hardware  design  allows  future  DeltaBus  implementa-
tions  with  much  higher  baud  rates.  ICs  for  a  1.25
GBaud implementation are already available.

The  DeltaNet  bus  protocol  and  interface  are  com-
pletely implemented in hardware (FPGA), including 32
bit  CRC  checksums  and  state  machines  for  power-up,
bus  arbitration  and  error  handling.  This  solution  pro-
vides  maximum  speed  (1.5  µs  package  routing  time,
independent  of  data  size)  at  minimum  software  over-
head.  Package  transfer  between  DSP  and  DeltaNet
FPGA uses DMA. All DeltaNet nodes receive all data
packages transmitted by all other nodes.

The DSP boards have a generic EPICS driver/device
support, i.e. the same driver/device support is used for
DSP  boards  with  different  firmware  and  FPGA  con-
figurations.

Before  installing  the  DSP  system,  all  parameters  of
the booster ramping process had to be optimized manu-
ally, which usually took many hours. Since the control
system  could  not  provide  most  diagnostics  data  with
sufficient time resolution and precision, reasons for bad
booster performance were hard to detect.

Since  the  DSP  system  makes  all  diagnostics  data
available  to  all  DSP  boards  via  DeltaNet  with  high
speed  and  precision,  it  is  now  possible  to  automatize
machine  operation  by  implementing  intercommunicat-
ing  distributed  real-time  control  loops  up  to  some  10
kHz  bandwidth,  e.g.  fast  orbit  feedback,  digital  power
supply  current  control  and  real-time  tune  and  beam
optics correction [6]. Furthermore, the DSP system can
be adopted for a fast global orbit feedback in the main
storage ring.

5 DEVELOPEMENT OF AN AGENT
SYSTEM
An  agent  system  consists  of  several  independent
programs which can communicate with each other and

which perform their task highly autonomous. The main
advantages  of  an  agent  system  are  the  high  flexibility
and the possibility to add new agents to meet additional
requirements  of  the  system  [7].  Both  features  are
needed in the DELTA accelerator facility: on one hand
easy  handling  and  if  possible  automatic  control  for
routine  operation  is  required,  on  the  other  hand  we
need a flexible toolbox for accelerator experiments.

The  knowledge  base  of  the  planned  agent  system  is
splitted  into  two  parts:  the  actual  machine  values  are
handled  by  EPICS  and  for  the  more  static  data,  like
magnet  positions,  an  Oracle  database  was  installed.
Most  of  the  agents  will  access  at  least  one  of  these
sources.  In  addition,  each  agent  has  the  ability  to  ask
the  other  agents  for  information  via  TCP  socket  con-
nection.

For  example,  the  alarm  handler  can  provide  infor-
mation  about  actual  errors.  The  display-agent  can  ask
for  this  errors  and  determine  the  physical  position  of
the  underlying  hardware  with  the  help  of  the  static
database. This combined information can be  displayed
on a map representing the machine and so the responsi-
ble  technician  can  find  the  faulty  devices  (avoiding
confusion  about  different  naming  conventions  in  the
technical staff and the control system).

 At  the  moment  the  design  requires  six  agents:  a
manager-agent  for  debugging  and  control  of  the  run-
ning  agent  system,  an  alarm  handler  which  can  detect
faults and display errors in natural language,  a status-
agent  for  valuation  and  display  of  the  actual  machine
state,  a  display-agent  to  provide  information  about
hardware positions, help texts, naming conversions and
technical terms, a program  handler  which  supports  the
locating and execution of programs of the control sys-
tem,  and  last  but  not  least  an  expert  system  for  semi-
automatic control of routine operation.

REFERENCES
[1] D. Schirmer, et al., Standardization of the DELTA
the  7th

Control  System,  Proceedings  of 
ICALEPCS 1999, Trieste, Italy

[2] www.delta.uni-dortmund.de/controls/pub/doc
[3] G.  Schmidt  et  al.,  Position  Monitoring  of  Accel-
erator Components as Magnets and Beam Position
Monitors, DIPAC 2001, Grenoble

[4] D.  Schirmer,  et  al.,  First  Experience  with  the  Su-
perconducting Asymmetric Wiggler of the DELTA
Facility, EPAC 2000, Vienna

[5] D. Zimoch, Ph.D. thesis, to be published
[6] B. Keil, Ph.D. thesis, to be published
[7] G. Weiss, Multiagent Systems, MIT Press 1999

