WEAP032 

UPGRADE OF THE CONTROL SYSTEM OF THE IFUNAM´S PELLETRON 

ACCELERATOR 

 
R. Macías, E. Chávez, M. E. Ortiz, K. López, A. Huerta, IFUNAM, A. P. 20-364, México 01000  
M. C. Verde, Instituto de Ingeniería UNAM, México 
 

Abstract 

In 1995 a 9SDH-2 Pelletron from NEC was installed 
at IFUNAM (Instituto de Física, Universidad Nacional 
Autónoma  de  México).  Two  beam  lines  have  been 
operational  since  then  and  two  new  lines  have  been 
built.  In  order  to  perform  the  planned  projects  in  this 
grown  facility,  an  upgrading  of  the  original  manual 
control  system  is  required.  The  proposed  new  control 
system  takes  advantage  of  the  existing  devices  and 
incorporates the electronics needed for the newer beam 
lines.  The  control  software  from  NEC,  has  been 
modified  to  accommodate  the  larger  requirements.  It 
runs  on  the  same  dedicated  computer  but  receives 
commands  from  a  new  installed  host.  Both  computers 
communicate  through  a  local  network  sharing  the 
accelerator  database.  The  new  host  computer  also 
handles  all  parameters  related  to  the  new  lines.  In  the 
future,  the  old  computer  will  be  replaced  in  order  to 
expand  the  possibilities  of  the  system  and  use  a 
friendlier  graphical  interface.  In  this  work  we  present 
the  changes  made  to  the  control  software,  the  new 
acquisition  and  control  devices  installed  and  the 
integration  of  the  old  and  new  systems.  Finally,  the 
beam  control  procedure  based  on  the  analysis  of  the 
beam profile that is under development is also shown. 

it  was  soon  recognized 

 INTRODUCTION 
After  arrival  and  installation  of  the  IFUNAM's 
the  need  for 
pelletron, 
additional  beam  lines.  The  first  two,  those  that 
originally  came  with  the  machine,  are  designed  to  be 
dedicated  to 
  Rutherford  Back  Scattering  (RBS) 
Analysis  and  Ion  Implantation  respectively.  Two  new 
lines  were  proposed,  one  to  be  dedicated  to  Particle 
Induced  X-Ray  Analysis  (PIXE)  and  a  second  for 
Nuclear Reaction Studies and Mass Spectrometry. 

The  original  computer  control  system  must  be 
expanded to be able to handle the new hardware added 
to  the  system.  Two  options  were  envisaged:  build  a 
whole  new  control  system  or  modify  the  existing  one. 
The  former  requires  more  resources  both  in  time, 
money,  skilled  personal  and  deep  knowledge  of  the 
manufacturer's  design.  The  last  one,  less  ambitious, 
takes  advantage  of  the  existing  software  and hardware 
and  is  easier  to  implement.  Additionally,  from  the 

standpoint  of  the  operator,  most  of  the  operations 
remain  unchanged.  We  decided  to  take  this  line  of 
work,  at  least  in  a  first  stage,  keeping  in  mind  that  a 
new system could be built in the future. 

SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
The control system [1] acts primarily as a switchyard 
which takes incoming signals from the accelerator and 
displays  the  parameters  on  the  screen  and  or  meters. 
The operator initiates control of the various parameters. 
The  control  system  software,  developed  using  MS 
Visual Basic for DOS, includes: a) The control system 
program  to  interact  with  the  operator  and  database  to 
provide  control  and  monitoring  of  the  accelerator  and 
b) a number of utilities programs. 

Each component of the accelerator has a unique label 
and  reference  number,  that  may  be  associated  with  a 
process control station address, a special control/read, a 
bypass  or  an  interlock  record.  Each  record  has  two 
separate files or database. One file is for data that does 
not  change  (cs1.db)  and  the  other  is  for  items  that 
change  (cs.db).  These  records hold the information on 
address,  slot,  size,  type,  etc.  for  the  control  system 
program to control and/or monitor all data points in the 
system. 

THE MODIFICATIONS 
A second computer was added (PIII, 128MB RAM, 
hereupon  referred  as  S2),  partly  because  the  original 
program  only  runs  properly  in  its  host  computer 
(Digital 486, 4MB RAM, we will call this S1 from now 
on).  Both  computers  were  connected  through  an 
Ethernet  link  in  such  a  way  that  S2  could  access  the 
working directory of  S1. 

The original program from NEC on S1 was modified 
in  order  to  allow  the  program  running  on  S2  to 
remotely interact with the database in S1.  

The program on S1 remains the only one with direct 
access to the database. The interaction between S1 and 
S2 programs is made through two new files (updrec.db 
and readrec.db), so S2 can request the modification or 
readout of the value of any system parameter. Two new 
procedures were added to the program in S1, to force it 
to act according to the requests from S2. 

In  this  way  the  system  can  be  controlled  from  an 
external computer, which allows an easy way to expand 
the original control system, adding additional software 
in the external computer without any other modification 
of the original one. 

As an example the Fig. 1 shows the front panel of a 
procedure  (written  in  LabVIEW  5.1  from  National 
Instruments  Corp.)  for  updating  any  parameter  of 
acclerator.  The  control  rec  number  identifies  the 
accelerator  parameter  (i.e.  78  means  Injector  Magnet 
Current)  and  pdatareal  is  the  real  value  we  want  to 
update. 
 

 
Figure 1: Front panel of the updating procedure. 

 

ONE ADDITIONAL BEAM LINE 
Here we describe one of the new beam lines added to 

the accelerator: the isotope separator. 

The  45°  port  of  the  switching  magnet  was  selected 
for it. The separator consists mainly of electromagnetic 
devices  for  the  transport  of  the  beam,  together  with 
beam control and diagnostics as shown schematically in 
Fig. 2. 

  These  additional  elements  are  controlled  by  S2 
through FieldPoint modules from National Instruments 
Corp., connected to RS232 port by optical fiber.  

Besides  all  the  components  of  the  new  line,  three 
teslameters model DTM-141 from Group3 Technology 
Ltd.,  were  added  to  the  accelerator  system  to  have  a 
precise  measurement  of  the  magnetic  induction  in  the 
injector, switching and 90° magnets.  

Further expansion of the laboratory: new beam lines 
or  additions  to  the  existing  ones,  can  be  computer 
controlled following the procedures here described. 

 

Figure 2: Isotope Separator on the 45º port. 

BEAM CONTROL AND DIAGNOSIS 
The  accelerator  is  equipped  with  beam  profile 
monitors  model  BPM-80  from NEC at the low energy 
side  and  in  all  of  the  beam  lines.  This  kind  of  device 
allows  continuous  monitoring  of 
intensity 
the 
distribution and the position of the beam [2]. 

Its  working  principle  is  the  collection  of  secondary 
electrons  released  from  a  rotating  wire  that  sweeps 
across  the  beam  twice  in  each  cycle,  at  a  constant 
speed.  The  resulting  signal  (X  and  Y  profiles)  is 
amplified and sent to the control console, together with 
fiducial marks. These marks are time signals generated 
internally  by  the  BPM.  All  these signals are displayed 
on an oscilloscope (see Fig. 3). 

 
Figure 3: Profile with marks as observed on the control 
console oscilloscope. 

 
The machine operator uses the scope image to obtain 
the  desired  characteristics  of  the  requested  beam 
(focusing and position) by looking at the width, height 
and location of the peaks relative to the fiducials. 

Commonly  the  intensity  of  the  beam  is  measured 
through the use of a Faraday Cup (FC). This requires to 
stop  the  beam.  A  new  procedure  is  developed  here  to 
use  the  BPM  signals  to  obtain  information  about  the 
beam  intensity,  with  the  advantage  of  not  having  to 
interrupt it. 

An electronic shaping circuit has been designed. This 
circuit  will  allow  the  acquisition  of  signals  from  two 

BPMs by the S2 computer, equipped with a PCI-6024E 
card from National Instruments Corp. 

 Using  a  3  MeV  proton  beam,  135  profiles  of  the 
kind of Fig. 3 were recorded for different combinations 
of  focus, cathode, extraction and bias voltages. These 
are all the relevant parameters of the SNICS ion source. 
For  each  record  the  beam  current  (Ifc)  was   measured 
with a FC.  

Fig. 4 shows a plot of the measured current (Ifc) and 
a value extracted by the product of the integrals of the 
two  peaks  in  the  profile  (Int(x)  *  Int(y)  *  N).  The 
normalization  factor  N  depends  on  the  beam  species, 
energy, amplifiers gain, etc. 

The  integration  limits  needed  above  are  determined 
mainly  by  the aperture of the slits and BPM as shown 
in Fig. 5. 

Data  from  the  first  45  records  is  shown  in  Fig.  6, 
where  the  calculated  beam  current  from  the  BPM  is 
plotted versus the Ifc. The straight line shows the best 
fit to the data.  

This  behavior  allows  us  to  conclude  that  the  beam 
current  can  be  measured  using  the  BPM,  avoiding  in 
this  way  the  interruption  of  the  beam  and  permitting 
continuous and controlled operation of the experiment. 

 
Figure  4:  Comparison  between  the  measured  and 

calculated beam currents. 

 
One  can  notice  that  both  curves  follow  each  other 
closely  up  to  record  45.  From  this  point  an  important 
deviation appears, which can be explained in terms of a 
displacement  of  the  beam  off  the  center  of  the 
geometrical axes that were no taken into account during 
calculations. 

 
    Figure  5:  BPM, slits and Faraday Cup as located in 
the low energy side of accelerator. 
 

 
 

 

 
Figure  6:  Correlation  between  the  measured  and 

calculated beam currents. 

 
It  is  worth  mentioning  that  the  position  of  the 
fiducial marks on each profile is critical and, in order to 
get  better  results,  they  should  be  accurately  measured 
for every cycle.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The  authors  wish  to  thank  the  IFUNAM’s  Pelletron 
support  personnel,  specially  Francisco  X.  Jaimes, 
without whom this work would not have been possible. 
This work was supported by UNAM through contracts 
DGAPA IN114896 and CONACyT 32262-E 

REFERENCES 
[1]  T. R. Luck, “Instruction Manual for Operation and 
Service of the Small Accelerator Control System”, 
National Electrostatics Corp., Jan. 1993. 

[2]    Instruction  Manual  for  Operation  and  Service  of 
Beam  Profile  Monitor  Model  BPM80”,  National 
Electrostatics Corp., Aug. 1995. 

