PSN# TUAP070 

THE TIMING SYNCHRONIZATION SYSTEM  
AT JEFFERSON LAB* 
 
M. Keesee, R. Dickson, R. Flood, Jefferson Lab,  
12000 Jefferson Ave, Newport News, VA 23606, USA 
V. Lebedev, Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory 
P.O. Box 500, Batavia, IL 60510 
 

thus  becomes  important  for  the  BPM  systems  to  be 
able  to  differentiate  positive  or  negative  crested  data, 
i.e.  the  BPMs  must  maintain synchronization with the 
30 Hz perturbation polarity. 

Prior  to  the  development  of  the  hardware-based 
TSS,  the  implementation  of  the  30  Hz  measurements 
used  a  software  based  synchronization  system.  This 
was an accelerator control system network broadcast to 
inform  the  BPMs  of  the  polarity  of  the  30  Hz  signal. 
This  approach  resulted  in  a  system  sensitivity  to 
network  delays  that  occasionally  caused  the  BPM 
system  to  label  the  data  with  the  wrong  polarity.    It 
therefore  became  apparent  that  a  different  approach 
was needed. 

for 

(TSS) 

Abstract 
This  paper  presents  the  requirements  and  design  of  a 
the 
Timing  Synchronization  System 
Continuous  Electron  Beam  Accelerator  Facility 
(CEBAF) control system at Thomas Jefferson National 
Accelerator  Facility.  A  clock  module  has  been 
designed  which  resides  in  a  VME  crate.  The  clock 
module  can  be  a  communications  master  or  a  slave 
depending  on  its  configuration, which is software and 
jumper selectable. As a master, the clock module sends 
external 
response 
out  messages 
synchronization signal over a serial fiber optic line. As 
a  slave,  it  receives  the  messages  and  interrupts  an 
associated computer in its VME crate. The application 
that  motivated  the  development  of  the  TSS,  the 
Accelerator  30  Hz  Measurement  System,  will  be 
described.    Operational  experience  with  the  Timing 
Synchronization System will also be discussed. 

an 

to 

in 

1 INTRODUCTION 

The  CEBAF  accelerator 

is  a  five  pass  CW 
recirculator, which can reach an energy of 6.067 GeV. 
It consists of a 67 MeV injector, two superconducting 
600 MeV linacs, and 9 arcs of magnets which connect 
the linacs for beam recirculation. See figure 1.  

In  order  to  improve  machine  reproducibility  and 
reduce  beam  tune  time,  the  30  Hz  Measurement 
System  was  developed.  By  means  of  a  small  set  of 
correctors  or  RF  cavities,  a  beam  perturbation  can  be 
induced  at  a  frequency  of  30  Hz.    The  effect  of  this 
perturbation is apparent at any Beam Position Monitor 
(BPM) point in the machine. 

The  BPM  software  was  enhanced  to  detect  beam 
differential displacements resulting from such a 30 Hz 
perturbation  of  lateral  beam  position  or  energy.  For 
beam tuning, AC line synchronized 60 Hz pulsed beam 
is used.  The BPM system performs data acquisition at 
60  Hz synchronized with this pulse. The choice of 30 
Hz 
enables 
synchronization  of  every  other  beam  pulse  to  the 
positive or negative crest of the perturbation signal. It 

perturbation 

frequency 

the 

as 

                                                            
* This work was supported by the U.S. DOE contract No. DE-AC05-84-ER40150 
 

Figure 1. Machine Configuration 

2 SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
The  hardware-based  TSS  uses  one  master  clock 
module  and  multiple  slave  clock  modules  [1].  These 
3U  sized  cards  share  the  VME  bus  with  the  control 
system’s  front  end  Input-Output  Controllers  (IOCs). 
There  are  IOCs  at  many 
the 
accelerator.  The  communication  flow,  from  master  to 
slave  boards,  occurs  over  a  single  fiber  optic  line 
originating  from  the  master.    Each  card  has  a  fiber 
optic  receiver  and  repeating  transmitter.  The  last  card 

locations  around 

in  the  chain  is  connected  back  to  the  master.    This 
enables  the  master  to  perform  a  continuity  test  of  the 
entire  link.  The  frequency  of  the  message  passing  is 
AC line synchronized 60 Hz. 

The  message  from  the  master  to  the  slave  timing 
modules  contains  the  status  and  polarity  of  the  30  Hz 
perturbation  signal  sent  to  the  correctors  or  cavities. 
The BPM system reads this message and performs the 
appropriate measurement calculations. 

Since  the  sole  usage  of  the  fiber  link  is  for  timing 
synchronization  and  there  is  only  one  source  of 
messages,  this  system  guarantees synchronization to a 
time  approximately  equal  to  the  maximum  round  trip 
time  for  a  message.  Worst-case  delay  from  received 
input  to  re-transmitted  output  per  module  is  less  than 
1.5usec. In a complete implementation, with up to 100 
IOCs  participating,  the  total  round  trip  time  will  be 
150usec.  This  eliminates  the  possibility  of  receiving 
incorrect  information  regarding  the  beam  perturbation 
polarity. 

3 TIMING MODULE 
The  purpose  of  the  master  timing  module  is  two-
fold. First, it produces a TTL compatible square wave 
at  30  Hz.  Phase  locked  to  this  signal,  an  HP3314A 
function generator modulates corrector magnets or RF 
cavities  and  provides  the  desired  beam  perturbation. 
Second,  at  each  transition  of  this  square  wave,  the 
master transmits on the fiber link, a message indicating 
the  polarity  of  this  square  wave.  The  slave  timing 
module makes this information available to each BPM 
system. The BPM system, which gathers data at 60 Hz, 
tags the data with the slave supplied polarity. 

The  accelerator  has  its  own  60  Hz  AC  line 
synchronized  global  timing  reference called the Beam 
Sync.    Numerous  data  acquisition  systems  throughout 
the  accelerator,  including  the  BPM  system,  use  this 
signal  for  data  acquisition.  The  master  30  Hz  clock 
module  also  uses  the  Beam  Synch  signal  in  order  to 
maintain phase synchronization with the accelerator.  

In summary, the Beam Sync synchronizes, at 60 Hz, 
the  BPM  system  and  the  master  timing  card.  The 
master  timing  module  outputs  a  Beam  Sync  phase 
locked  30  Hz  TTL  square  wave  to  drive  the  function 
generator and provides phase information (i.e. polarity) 
to the BPMs, via the fiber link of this square wave. 

Upon  reception  of  a  message  from  the  master 
module, the slave module will issue a VME interrupt to 
the  IOC.  The  interrupt  request  level  is  jumper-
selectable,  as  is  the  master  or  slave  status  of  the 
module.  The  interrupt  vector  number  is  software 
programmable  and  is  part  of  the  IOC’s  system 
initialization. 

 

The  clock  module  is  a  24  bit  address,  16-bit  data 
slave  with    D08  vectored-interrupt  capability.  The 
VME  bus  interface,  twelve  8-bit  registers,  and  the 
serial  message  encoding/decoding  are  implemented  in 
a  144-pin  Altera  ACEX  EP1K50 Field Programmable 
Gate Array (FPGA) operating at 20Mhz. The device is 
re-programmable via a front-panel JTAG interface [2].  
Several  diagnostics  have  been  developed  to  ensure 
proper operation of this system. Software in each IOC 
will  detect  the  loss  of  interrupts  from  the  timing 
module if they fail to occur at a 60 Hz rate. This will 
cause the BPM software to issue an alarm invalidating 
30  Hz  reported  data.  A  system  expert  can  further 
diagnose the system by means of self-test software. A 
quick  determination  of  fiber  link  status  may  be 
obtained  by  examining  the  LED  on  the front panel of 
the  timing  module.    This  LED  will  light  if  the  link 
carrier is detected and will blink if messages are being 
received. 

4 30 HZ MEASUREMENT SYSTEM 
The  30  Hz  Measurement  System  was  developed  in 
order  to  improve  machine  reproducibility  and  reduce 
beam tune time. This system makes it possible to track 
the 
and  correct  machine  optics  by  measuring 
differential response generated by perturbations of the 
beam.  

types  of  measurement. 

are  performed  by  changing 

Two  types  of  modulation  devices  are  used  for  two 
  Beam  energy 
different 
perturbations 
the 
accelerating  gradient  of  the  superconducting  cavities. 
Transverse beam modulation is performed by adjusting 
horizontal or vertical air core dipole corrector magnets. 
Both types of modulation can be applied at either at the 
end  of  the  injector  at  an  energy  of  67MeV,  or  at  the 
beginning  of  the  first  arc  at  an  energy  of  667  MeV, 
providing  optics  measurements  of  the  entire  machine 
[3].  An  important  feature  of  the  system  is  that  it  is 
possible  to  induce  the  perturbations  and  make  these 
measurements  not  only  during  accelerator  beam 
tuning, but also during accelerator operations.  This is 
possible because the Fast Feedback system [4] removes 
these small perturbations prior to beam delivery to the 
experiments. 

The  BPM  system  includes  more  than  850  BPMs, 
controlled  by  two  different  types  of  electronics, 
distributed across a network of 30 IOCs. The Switched 
Electrode Electronics (SEE) BPM [5] software uses the 
new  TSS  to  determine  the  30  Hz  modulation  polarity 
and  uses  this  information  in  the  data  acquisition 
calculations.  As  mentioned  earlier,  the  60  Hz  Beam 
synch  triggers  the  data  acquisition.  The  software  then 
calculates the mean value of the beam position and the 
amplitude of the 30 Hz beam motion.  

  

5 PRESENT STATUS AND FUTURE 
PLANS 
To date, timing modules have been installed in nine 
locations  around  the  accelerator.  The  system  has 
recently  come  on-line  and  at  present  is  working  as 
designed.  Future  upgrades  to  the  module’s  FPGA 
firmware and IOC software will allow non BPM IOCs 
to  benefit  from  the  installation  of  this  module. 
Eventually,  all  VME  crates with IOCs (approximately 
100)  will  have  a  clock  module,  with  BPM  systems 
having the highest installation priority.   

In the very near future, two additional functions will 
be  implemented  within  the  Timing  Synchronization 
day 
System.  These 
synchronization and remote system reset capability.  

absolute 

time 

are 

of 

Time  of  day  synchronization  will  be  implemented 
using  a  new  timing  module  message  type  and  using 
network  Ethernet  based  TCP/IP  communication.  The 
new  message  type  will  be  a  time  hack  type  message. 
The approach will be to broadcast, via Ethernet, to all 
IOCs  that  a time hack type timing module message is 
imminent  and  upon  reception  of  this  message,  the 
IOCs  should  synchronize  their  time  of  day  clocks  to 
the  time  specified  in  this  Ethernet  broadcast.  The 
IOC’s on-board timer will maintain the time reference 
between  these  hacks.  This  system  will  allow  time  of 
day synchronization at sub-millisecond level.  

For 

investigated,  along  with 

the  future,  additional  serial-data  encoding 
methods  are  being 
the 
possibility  of  increasing  the  module’s  on-board  clock 
speed,  which  should  reduce  the  per-board  serial  data 
latency to less than 1usec. 
 

 

Since the timing module is a standard VME card, it 
has  access  to  the  VME  bus  System  Reset  line. 
Asserting  this  line  will  cause  the  associated  IOC  to 
reboot  and  all  boards  in  that  crate  to  reset.  A  new 
message  type  will  be  created  to  command  a  timing 
module to assert this reset. All timing modules have a 
jumper-selectable  eight-bit  address  allowing  255 
unique  addresses  (address  0 
is  for  broadcasting 
messages to which all slaves respond). Reset messages 
will  allow  targeting  individual  VME  crates  for  resets. 
By bit mask partitioning of the addresses, it is possible 
to  reset  a  subsystem  of  IOCS.  For example, it will be 
possible to reset all BPM IOCs with a single command. 
At  present,  many  IOCs  are  at  inconvenient  locations 
and  must  be  manually  reset  should  they  crash.  This 
feature will minimize the impact of such a crash. 
 

REFERENCES 
[1]  H.  Areti,  “Synchronization  of  30  Hz  System”, 
http://www.jlab.org/~areti/30Hz_docs/.  
[2]  T.  Allison,  “Versatile  Data  Acquisition  and 
Controls  for  EPICS  Using  VME-Based  FPGAs”, 
ICALEPCS 2001, San Jose, CA, November 2001. 
[3] V. Lebedev, et al., “Linear Optics Correction in the 
CEBAF Accelerator”, Particle Accelerator Conference, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, May, 1997. 
[4] R. Dickson, V. Lebedev, “Fast Feedback System 
for Energy and Beam Stabilization”, ICALEPCS, 
October, 1999. 
[5] T. Powers, “Resolution of SEE BPMs”, 
Proceedings of the Beam Instrumentation Workshop, 
Stanford, CA, May, 1998.

