INJECTION CONTROL SYSTEM OF HLS STORAGE RING

Gongfa Liu, Jingyi Li, Weimin Li, Chuan Li, Kaihong Li, Lei Shang
National Synchrotron Radiation Lab., P. O. Box 6022, Hefei, Anhui 230029, P. R. China

Abstract

The  injection  control  system  of  Hefei  Light  Source
(HLS) storage ring is a subsystem of the upgraded HLS
control  system,  which  is  based  upon  EPICS.  Three
programmable  logic  controllers  (PLCs)  are  used  as
device  controllers,  which  control  one  septum  modulator
and  four  kicker  modulators  of  HLS  storage  ring.  An
Industrial  PC  is  used  as  Input/Output  Controller  (IOC)
and  it  connects  the  PLCs  with  serial  communication
(RS232  mode)  over  fibre.  A  PC  with  Linux  is  used  as
operator interface (OPI), operator application are running
on  it.  The  control  system  was  completed  in  July  2000.
The  commissioning  shows  that  the  control  system  is
reliable and easy operational.

1 INTRODUCTION
HLS is a dedicated synchrotron light source in which
the  electrons  circulate  at  the  energy  of  800Mev  in  the
storage  ring.  As  a  part  of  NSRL  Phase  II  project,  the
injection system is updated, four kicker mode substitutes
logic
three  kicker  mode.  Three  programmable 
for 
controllers (PLCs) are used as device controllers, which
control  one 
four  kicker
septum  modulator  and 
modulators of HLS storage ring. An Industrial PC is used
as  Input/Output  Controller  (IOC)  and  it  connects  the
PLCs  with  serial  communication  (RS232  mode)  over
fiber.  Strong  electromagnetic  interference,  which  is
caused  by  the  big  pulse  current  in  the  modulator,  is
restrained.  A PC with Linux is used as operator interface
(OPI), operator application are running on it. The control
system was completed in July 2000. The commissioning
shows   that  the  control  system  is  reliable  and  easy
operational.

2 HARDWARE CONFIGUREATIONS
The  injection  control  system  of  HLS  storage  ring  is
built  upon  EPICS.  It  is  a  subsystem  of  the  HLS  control
system.  Fig.1  shows  the  structure  of  the  storage  ring
injection control system.

We use a linux PC with a Pentium 

500 CPU as the
OPI.  The  man-machine  interface  shows  on  it.  An  IPC
with a Pentium 
350  CPU  is  used  as  IOC.  In  order  to
provide  high-speed  communication  between  OPIs  and
IOCs,  we  use  100M  Ethernet  at  the  network  level.  An
Intel Pro/100+ Ethernet card was added to the IOC crate
to provide an interface between the IOC and the network.
Three  PLCs  (Omron  C200H)  are  used  as  device
controllers, one for septum  modulator, the other two for
four  kicker  modulators.  Each  PLC  has  an  Optical  Host

Link  Unit.  They  are  connected  in  series  using  optical
fiber cable.  Link Adapter (3G2A9-AL004-(P)E) is used
as  converter  between  RS232  cable  and  optical  fiber
cable.[1]

   

OPI (Linux PC)

100M Ethernet

RS232

IOC (IPC)

Link Adapter

3G2A9-AL004-(P)E

Fiber cable

PLC 1#

Kicker 1,2

PLC 2#

Septum

PLC 3#

Kicker 3,4

Fig.1 Structure of storage ring injection control system.

3 SOFTWARE OVERVIEW

3.1 Software of PLC

We use ladder software package LSS to program. The
following  function  are  achieved:  remote/local  control
choice,  low  voltage  power  on/off,  high  voltage  power
on/off,  reset,  time  delay,  analog  output  set,  input
regulator  motor 
and
control, 
communication with IOC [2].

interlock 

safety 

3.2 Software of IOC

The heart of each IOC is a memory resident database
together  with  various  memory  resident  structures
describing  the  contents  of  the  database.  The  following
record 
Input),
types  are  mainly  used:  ai(Analog 
ao(Analog  Output),  bo(Binary  Output),  MbbiD  (Direct
Multi-bit  Binary 
(Database
Configuration Tool) is used to create a run time database
for the IOC, then the Device Support and Device Drivers
(if necessary) are written for each kind of record [3].

Iutput).  DCT313 

Omron PLC (C200H) provides serial communications
protocol.  The  protocol  has  its  Command/Response
format  and  command  set.  The  user’s  application  must

conform to the protocol.  We write a device support and
device driver under the protocol.

3.3 Software of OPI

We use a  PC  with  Linux as OPI, operator application
are running on it.  We  use  MEDM  to  develop  the  man-
machine interface. Fig.2 is the screen of HLS storage ring
injection control system.

The  operation  sequence  is  as  follow:  turn  on  low
voltage  power;  waiting  for  15  minutes  (for  hyratron-
switch  filament  warm-up);  when  the  ready  lamp  is  on,
turn  on  high  voltage  power  and  trigger  (for  timing
synchronization);  then  set  current  output.  The  high
voltage value and discharge counts are displayed. When
error lamp is on, we can press the button near the error
lamp,  and  the  error  details  are  shown  in  the  relational
screen.
  

Fig. 2 the screen of HLS storage ring injection system

4 CONCLUSION
The injection control  system  of  HLS  storage  ring  is  a
subsystem of the upgraded HLS control system. We have
finished the development of  the  control  system  of  main
magnet power supplies. Due to the good extensibility of
EPICS, the development for HLS  storage  ring  injection
is  easy.  The  control  system  was
control  system 
completed in July  2000. PLC applies industrial standard
and  a  number  of  measures  are 
to  avoid
taken 
communication  error,  so 
the  system  is  reliable.  The
commissioning  shows  that  the  system  is  also  easy
operational.

5 REFERENCES
[1]  Omron  Corp.  "SYSMAC  C-series  Rack  PCs
SYSMAC  WAY-Host  Link  Units”,  SYSTEM
MANUAL,  Cat. No. W143-E1-1.

[2] Lei Shang, et al., “Control of the prototype thyratron-
switch  kicker  modulator  with  programmable  logical
controller”, Atomic Energy Science and Technology,
Vol.34, No.1, Jan. 2000, p84-87.

[3] Martin Kraimer, “EPICS  Input  /  Output  Controller  (IOC)
Application Developer’s Guide”, EPICS Documentation on
http://www.aps.anl.gov/asd/controls/epics/EpicsDocumenta
tion.

