TUAP062 

SNS Vacuum Instrumentation and Control System* 
 
J. Y. Tang†, L. A. Smart and H. C. Hseuh, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY, USA 
P. S. Marroquin, and L. R. Dalesio, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, USA 
S. A. Lewis, C. A. Lionberger, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA 
K. Kishiyama, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA, USA 
D. P. Gurd and M. Hechler, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA 
W. Schneider, Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility, Newport News, VA, USA 
 
 

Abstract 

      The  Spallation  Neutron  Source  (SNS)  vacuum 
instrumentation and control systems are being designed 
at  Lawrence  Berkeley  National  Laboratory  (LBNL), 
Brookhaven  National  Laboratory  (BNL),  Thomas 
Jefferson  National  Accelerator  facility  (TJNAF)  and 
Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory  (LANL).  Each 
participating lab is responsible for a different section of 
the  machine:  LBNL  for  the  Front-End  section,  LANL 
for  the  warm  LINAC  section,  TJNAF  for  the  cold 
LINAC section and BNL for the Ring and transfer line 
sections.  The  vacuum  instrumentation  and  control 
systems  are  scheduled  to  be  installed  and  be  in 
operation at Oak Ridge National Laboratory in 2004 or 
2005.  Although  the  requirements  vary  for  different 
sections of the machine, a collaborative effort has been 
made 
instrumentation 
components  and  the  global  control  system  interfaces. 
This  paper  summarizes  the  design  of  each  sub-section 
of  vacuum  instrumentation  and  control  system  and 
discusses  SNS  standards  for  Ion  Pump  and  Gauge 
controllers,  Programmable  Logic  Controller  (PLC) 
interfaces,  Ladder  Logic  programming  and  the  SNS 
global control system interfaces. 

standardize 

vacuum 

to 

1 SNS VACUUM SYSTEM 

1.1 Vacuum System Requirements 

The  successful  operation  of  SNS is dependent upon 
the reliable operation of the accelerator vacuum system 
in 
the  high  and  ultra-high  vacuum  range  under 
operating conditions. The required vacuum level varies 
over the different accelerator subsystems, i.e. the Front 
End,  Warm  Linac  that  includes  the  Drift  Tube  Linac 
(DTL) 
(CCL), 
and  Coupled  Cavity  Linac 
Superconducting  Linac  (SCL),  and  the  Ring  that 
includes the High-energy Beam Transport (HEBT) line, 

the  accumulator  Ring  and  the  Ring  to  Target  Beam 
Transport  (RTBT) 
line.  The  operational  vacuum 
pressure  level  requirements  have  been  analytically 
determined  [1].  These  levels  are  summarized  as  in 
Table 1.  
 

Front End 

Table 1: SNS Vacuum Level Requirements 
1(cid:1)10-4 to 4x10-7 Torr 
2x10-7 Torr 
5x10-8 Torr 
<1x10-9 Torr 
5x10-8 Torr 
1x10-8 Torr 
1x10-7 Torr 

DTL 
CTL 
SCL 
HEBT 
Ring 
RTBT 

 
Associated  with  the  vacuum  pressure  levels  are  the 
availability  and  reliability  requirements  of  the  vacuum 
subsystems and their components.  

The  subsystems’  design  basis  is  required  to  have  a 
performance  margin  of  2,  i.e.  the  failure  of  any  single 
pumping  element  may  degrade  the  subsystem  pressure 
level, but will not raise it beyond the above listed levels 
where  the  accelerator  operation  is  compromised  or 
terminated. 
1.2 Vacuum Components Standardization 

A  major  consideration  in  the  design  of  vacuum 
instrumentation  and  controls  is  standardization  among 
subsystems  with  the  exception  of  the  Front  End  [2]. 
The  specification  and  operation  modes  of  the  vacuum 
instrumentation  could  be  quite  different  among  these 
machine  areas.  Compromises  are  being  made  in 
specifications to allow for the use of identical or similar 
device.  The  aim  of  standardization 
to  ease 
commissioning,  maintenance  and  upgrade  efforts,  in 
addition 
software 
development  effort,  with  the  added  benefit  of  lower 
cost due to larger quantity procurements. 

simplifying 

control 

the 

to 

is 

* Work performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy 
†   jtang@bnl.gov 
 

1.3  Vacuum System Instrumentation 

Vacuum  system  instrumentation  includes  valves, 
gauges, ion pumps, turbomolecular pumps, and residual 
gas  analyzers.  All  valves  have  +24  Vdc  solenoids and 
have both open and closed limit switch-type indicators. 
Ion pumps will be used to maintain high vacuum in the 
machine. Remote serial communication will be used to 
turn  on/off  the  pump  high  voltage  and  to  read  pump 
current,  pressure,  and  voltage.  Convection-enhanced 
Thermal  Conductivity  Gauges  (TCGs)  will  be  used  to 
monitor  the  low  vacuum  levels  within  the  accelerator, 
from atmosphere to 10-4 Torr. The high vacuum levels 
within  the  accelerator,  10-3  to  10-10  Torr,  will  be 
measured  using  Cold  Cathode  Gauges  (CCGs).  A 
multiple-gauge  controller  will  control  both  CCGs  and 
TCGs.  Both  ion  pump  and  gauge  controllers  provide 
interlock inputs to the vacuum controls. 

Partial  pressure  levels  within  the  accelerator  will  be 
measured  using  residual  gas  analyzers  (RGAs).  The 
RGAs will be used to characterize the residual gases in 
the vacuum to aid in determining the gas source such as 
a water leak, an air leak or component outgassing. 

Turbomolecular pump stations (TMPs) will be used 
to  pump  the  beam  line  from  atmospheric  pressure  to 
high vacuum, or to maintain vacuum in case of a leak. 
Remote  operation  of  the  TMP  will  be  accomplished 
through  remote  control  of  analog  inputs  and  discrete 
inputs and outputs. 

it 

Source/LEBT,  RFQ  and  MEBT.  The  full  system  will 
entail about 500 signals for valves, pumps, and gauges. 
When  initially  designed  in  1998,  SNS-wide  standards 
were  not  yet  defined  [2],  therefore,  low-risk  choices 
with obvious upgrade paths were made: Allen-Bradley 
PLC/5 PLCs using the 1794 Flex-I/O interface family, 
with  both  IOC-to-PLC  and  PLC-to-interface  are 
connected  via  Remote-I/O  ("blue-hose")  at  115kb/s.  
The  PLC  performs  through  its  ladder  logic  the  basic 
validation of signals and the first level of interlocking.  
In  particular, 
the 
idiosyncrasies  of  the  three basic types of high-vacuum 
pumps  (turbo-molecular,  ion,  and  cryogenic).    It  also 
enforces  the  SNS  standard  for  valve  operation  using 
two  normally  open  contacts  for  positive  confirmation. 
More  complex  interlocking  is  performed  in  the  IOC, 
such as turning off pumps and closing valves depending 
on  the  status  of  nearby  gauges  or  related  devices  and 
requiring  valid  status  before  energizing  these  devices.  
The  IOC  logic  (implemented  with  linked  EPICS 
records)  also  enforces  the  inter-system  constraints  on 
the isolation valves.  Special over-rides are provided to 
permit device testing when appropriate. 

smoothes  over  some  of 

2.2 The Warm Linac and the Ring 

The Warm Linac and the Ring vacuum systems share 
instrumentation  and  control 

the 
same  vacuum 
architecture as in Figure 1.  

 2 THE VACUUM I&C SYSTEM 

2.2.1 ControlLogix PLC for Vacuum Interlocks 

2.1 The SNS Front-End 

The SNS Front-End consists of three subsystems: the 

Allen-Bradley  ControlLogix  PLCs  will  be  used  to 
monitor  gauge  and  pump  setpoint  outputs  and  control 
valves. The SNS Project has selected the ControlLogix 

Figure 1. SNS Vacuum Control System Architecture. 

PLC  as 
the  standard  PLC  [3].  Features  of  the 
ControlLogix  system  include  being  able  to  replace 
modules under power and read from all input modules 
the  ControlNet  or 
from  any  processor  within 
EtherNet/IP network. 

The  principal  function  of  the  PLC  is  to  provide 
control  of  the  sector  gate  valves  that  sectionalize  the 
vacuum  systems.  The  valve  control  logic  will  be  fail-
safe.  A  sector  valve  will  close  in  case  of  a)  vacuum 
conditions  deteriorating  to  a  specified  limit,  b)  power 
loss, and c) operator input from the support building or 
remote  terminal.  The  vacuum  PLCs  will  also  provide 
interlock  outputs  to  SNS  subsystems  such  as  the  RF 
System  and  machine  protection  systems,  and  receive 
interlock  inputs  from  subsystems  such  as  the  Target 
System. All vacuum system interlocks will use 24 Vdc 
control  power.  A  vote-to-close  scheme  will  be 
implemented  in  the  PLC  ladder  logic  and  it  has  been 
described in a separated publication [5].  

The  SNS  warm  linac  consists  of  six  DTL tanks and 
four CCL modules. Each DTL tank or CCL module has 
been designed to have its own vacuum control system. 
Total  of  ten  PLCs  will  be  used  for  the  whole  warm 
linac. This design choice was made to allow each tank 
and  module  to  be  vacuum  leak  checked,  conditioned, 
operationally certified, and operated and maintained on 
an  individual  basis.  This  control  system  segregation is 
also  consistent  with  the  DTL  and  CCL  water-cooling 
and  resonance  control  systems  and  assembly  and 
installation plans. 

The control of the HEBT, Ring, and RTBT vacuum 
systems  will  be  implemented  using  a  network  of  four 
PLCs,  based  on  the  vacuum  device  distribution:  one 
each for the HEBT and RTBT subsystems, and two for 
the  Ring  subsystem.  Data  exchange  between  PLCs  is 
accomplished  through  a  real-time,  redundant-media 
ControlNet  network  [6].  The  high-speed, deterministic 
ControlNet  network  is  ideal  for  transmitting  time-
critical vacuum system information and providing real-
time control. 

Each  PLC  in  each  subsystem  will  also  generate 
machine protection system (MPS) beam permit signals 
appropriate  for  the  various  machine  operation  modes. 
Details of the MPS to vacuum system interface are yet 
to be determined. 

2.2.2 The Input/Output Controller 

The  Input/Output  Controller  (IOC) 

is  a  VME 
controller  where  the  control  system  core  resides.  The 
primary function of the IOC is to provide the gateway 
between 
the  global  control  system  and  vacuum 
instrumentation  system.  All  information  for  machine 
operators will be provided via the IOCs. Five IOCs are 
planned,  one  each  for  DTL,  CCL,  HEBT,  Ring,  and 
RTBT vacuum systems. The IOC will reside in a VME 
chassis  located  in  the  same  support  building  as  the 

PLC. The PLC will communicate with the IOC through 
an EtherNet/IP [5]. The IOC will also interface directly 
with vacuum device controllers via RS-485 serial bus. 

2.3 The Superconducting Linac 

The  vacuum  system  for  SNS  superconducting  linac 
consists  of  two  differentially-pumped  pressure  regions 
to  isolate  cryo  vacuum  from  the  warm  linac  vacuum 
and  the  HEBT  vacuum,  eleven  medium  beta  Cryo 
modules,  twelve  high  beta  Cryo modules, and vacuum 
for  a  drift  region  for  future  Cryo  modules.  While  the 
acquisition  of  instrumentation  for  the  subsystem  is 
JLAB’s  responsibility,  LANL  will  be  responsible  for 
the  control  system.  Eight  IOCs  are  planned  for  the 
SCL. 

3 SUMMARY 
The SNS vacuum instrumentation and control system 
is  a  cooperative  endeavor  among  six  DOE  Labs.  A 
major  effort  on  standardization  among  SNS  vacuum 
subsystems  has  been  made  with  the  aim  of  easing 
commissioning,  maintenance  and  upgrade  work.  The 
following areas of standardization have be turned out to 
be successful among the major sections of the machine: 

(cid:2)(cid:3)
Instrumentation components 
(cid:2)(cid:3) Control system architecture 
(cid:2)(cid:3) Naming conventions 

As of now, the Front-End vacuum subsystem has been 
completed  while  the  rest  is  still  under  development, 
with  hardware  procurements  in  progress  for  Warm 
Linac  and  the  Ring  subsystems.  The  collaborative 
effort is still critical to the final success of SNS vacuum 
instrumentation  and  controls  for  commissioning  in 
2005. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  H.  C.  Hseuh,  et  al,  “Design  of 

the  SNS 
Accumulator  Ring  Vacuum  Systems”,  PAC’99, 
New York, p1345, (1999) 

[2]    S.  A.  Lewis,  et  al,  “Status  of  the  Control  System 
for  the  Front-End  of  the  Spallation  Neutron 
Source”, ICALEPCS’01, San Jose, (2001) 

[3]   J. Y. Tang, et al, “A Distributed and Collaborative 
PLC  lab  for  SNS”,  ICALEPCS’99,  Trieste,  Italy, 
p370 (1999) 

[4]   http://www.controlnet.org/ 
[5]   J. Y. Tang, et al, “Design and Development of the 
SNS  Ring  Vacuum  Instrumentation  and  Control 
Systems”, PAC’01, Chicago, (2001) 

[6]   K. U. Kasemir, et al, “interfacing the ControlLogix 
PLC over EtherNet/IP”, ICALEPCS’01, San Jose, 
(2001) 

 

 

