THAP065 

LASER STABILIZATION CONTROLS FOR THE ISAC BEAM              

POLARIZER 
 
R. Nussbaumer, D. Dale, H. Hui, J. Richards, and P. Levy,  
 TRIUMF, Vancouver, BC, V6T 2A3, Canada 
 

The  spectrum  analyzer  output  is  digitized  by  a 
Digital  Storage  Oscilloscope  and  read  via  an  ethernet-
attached  GPIB  interface.  Figure  1  illustrates  the 
arrangement of the principal components of the system. 

Abstract 

The ISAC polarized beam facility uses a Ti:Sapphire 
laser for producing spin-polarized beams of short-lived 
radioactive isotopes, initially 7Li. The laser power and 
spectral  content  must  be 
tightly  controlled  and 
monitored.  The  control  system  to  accomplish  this  task 
uses  techniques  that  combine  operator  interface,  data 
reduction,  and  closed  loop  automation.  The  laser 
stabilization application uses input data acquired from a 
spectrum  analyzer,  in  the  form  of  a  waveform  array 
repetitively 
a  GPIB-interfaced 
from 
oscilloscope.  A  Labview  based  operator  interface 
allows  the  selection  of  features  from  within  the 
waveform,  which  are  then  used  as  the  basis  for  closed 
loop control, in concert with the existing EPICS control 
system  software  and  related  hardware.  Part  of  the 
challenge stems from using input data which are subject 
to  human  interpretation  and  require  distillation  into  a 
hard  numeric  format  suitable  for  use  in  a  control 
system. 

acquired 

1 PREAMBLE 
The  ISAC  radioactive  beam  facility  at  TRIUMF 
produces  spin-polarized  beams  short-lived  exotic  ions.  
An  Argon  laser  is  used  in  an  optical  pumping 
arrangement, exciting a Ti:Sapphire laser. The stability 
of  the  Ti:Sapphire  laser  is  insufficient  to  achieve  the 
degree  of  polarization  needed  by  experiments,  for 
periods  of  more  than  a  few  seconds.    An  external 
control  system  has  been  devised  and  implemented  to 
enhance the stability of the laser. 

The  laser  fundamental  frequency  is  controlled  by  a 
piezo-electric  element,  which  adjusts  the  laser  cavity 
length.    An  etalon  optical  bandpass  filter  controls  the 
laser  output  frequency. 
  The  etalon  passband  is 
controlled  by  changing  the  angle  of  incidence  of  the 
laser light, using a servo motor. These two parts of the 
laser are under control of the stabilization system. 

The laser spectral content is measured by a spectrum 
analyzer which is subject to a slow measurement drift. 
Helium:Neon  laser  light  is  mixed  into  the  Ti:Sapphire 
laser  light  as  a  stable  reference,  to  measure  the  drift.  
Modulating 
input 
the 
compensates for this slow drift. 

analyzer  bias 

spectrum 

Figure  1:  Block  diagram  of  the  Laser  Stabilization 

Control System 

2 DATA 
One  of  the  principal  challenges  in  the  development 
of  the  laser  stabilization  system  is  reliably  extracting 
the features used to control the laser.  

2.1 Jitter 

Jitter  within  the  spectral  content  of  the  Ti:Sapphire 
laser appears as frequency shifts of 15-25 X-axis units 
between  sequential  readings  from  the  DSO.    The 
primary source of this jitter is acoustical noise coupled 
into the laser table. 

2.2 Imprecise Data 

The  general  shape  of  the  waveform  features  is  not 
necessarily  clear  or  distinct  in  nature.    The  baseline 
value of the waveform is arbitrarily set by operators in 
the initial setup, is subject to drift, and contains noise.  
Moreover, features within a single scan of the spectrum 
analyzer  must  be  compared  to  previous  corresponding 

features, in order to determine what changes are slowly 
occurring.    This  differs  from  typical  control  systems, 
where  individual  transducers  produce  distinct  signals, 
the  transducer  is  read  iteratively,  and  no  further 
extraction  of  the  signal  (other  than  scaling,  or  perhaps 
noise filtering) is required. 

2 SOFTWARE 
The  software  component  of  the  laser  stabilization 
system is integrated into the EPICS based ISAC control 
system and consists of a combination of EPICS running 
on  VME  IOCs,  and  a  Sun  Solaris  based  Labview 
application.    Labview  based  software  was  written  to 
provide an interactive operator interface.  Labview was 
chosen primarily for its streamlined access to the GPIB 
interfaced DSO, and because it was already available at 
the onset of the project.  National Instruments provides 
a clean API for accessing GPIB based instruments, that 
is accessible from Labview and from conventional high 
level languages such as C.   

Some  EPICS  Display  Manager  (DM)  operator 
for  passive 

interface  software 
monitoring of the laser waveform and control signals.  

is  used,  mainly 

3 WAVEFORM AQUISITION AND 
ANALYSIS 
Waveforms are acquired as 10-sample bursts of 500 
integer  data  point  waveforms  from  the  DSO,  as  unit-
less data. 

3.1 Simple Filtering   

An initial strategy to cope with the frequency jitter in 
the  Ti:Sapphire  laser  was  to  allow  the  Tektronix  DSO 
to  perform  some  averaging.    While  being  simple  to 
deploy, this approach was found to be ineffective.  The 
DSO averages sample points that are correlated in time, 
resulting in waveshapes that appear to contain multiple 
peaks.    However,  the  intent  was  to  obtain  a  single 
average  X-axis  position  of  the  power  peaks  within  the 
frequency spectrum.   

More appropriate averaging is performed in software 
by  acquiring  multiple  discrete  waveforms  sampled  as 
quickly  as  possible.    Each  of  the  waveforms  is  then 
discretely analyzed, and the positions and amplitudes of 
peaks within the waveforms are extracted. 

3.2 Peak detection 

Analysis  of  the  individual  waveforms  principally 
entails  peak  detection.    A  C  language  subroutine  was 

 
written  to  accomplish  this  task,  taking  peculiarities  of 
the  application 
into  consideration.  The  algorithm 
efficiently distinguishes even small peaks from a slowly 
varying  background  by  using  a  differential  method.  
This  improves  on  the  built-in  Labview  peak  detection 
function,  which  requires  a  data-dependent  threshold 
value at runtime. 
 

 

Figure 2: Five waveforms sampled in close 

succession, showing jitter in peak position along the X 
(frequency) axis 

3.3 Peak Averaging 

Ten waveforms are sampled and peaks are found within 
each  waveform.    The  individual  peaks  within  each 
waveform  are  correlated  with  equivalent  peaks  in  all 
others, yielding a single set of waveform peak positions 
and the corresponding amplitudes.   Figure 2 shows the 
relative  spacing  of  the  peaks  for  five  waveforms 
sampled in fast succession. 

3.4 Peak Tracking 

tracked  and 

In order to control the various stabilizing elements in 
the  system,  peaks  are 
their  x-axis 
movements  are  measured.    Because  there  may  be 
differing numbers of peaks from one overall scan to the 
next,  it  is  necessary  to  correlate  peaks  in  consecutive 
the 
waveforms  with 
previous  scan.    As  new  peaks  emerge  over  time,  they 
must be detected as such. 

the  corresponding  peaks 

in 

Peaks  that  exist  consistently  over  time  must  be 
selectable,  either  automatically,  or  by  a  human 
operator.  Selected peaks are used as the control points 
in the stabilization system. 

4 CONTROL STRATEGY 

4.1 Spectrum Analyzer 

The  spectrum  analyzer  bias 

is  controlled  by 
monitoring  the  He:Ne  reference  peak  position,  with 
respect  to  the  position  at  the  start  time  of  the  closed 
loop control.  The bias voltage is adjusted proportional 
to the X-axis drift. This control action is performed in 
an EPICS subroutine record. 

4.2 Cavity Length Piezo Element 

The laser cavity length stabilization is performed by 
monitoring  the  X-axis  distance  between  the  He:Ne 
reference peak and the one peak selected as the cavity 
length control peak.  When the distance differs from the 
distance  at  the  start  of  closed-loop  control  mode,  a 
corrective  signal  proportional  to  the  drift  is  applied.  
This  control  action 
in  an  EPICS 
subroutine record. 

is  performed 

 

Figure 3: A typical waveform showing the emergence 
of a third Ti:Sapphire peak , to be suppressed by 
modulating the etalon  The He:Ne reference peak is at 
the left of the graph.  

4.3 Etalon 

to  pass. 

The more complex etalon control strategy is modeled 
after the actions of a human operator.  The etalon, as a 
bandpass  filter,  allows  two  or  more  bands  of  laser 
power 
is  optimally 
positioned,  the  two  Ti:Sapphire  peaks  are  about  equal 
in magnitude, and there are no side peaks.  The human 
operator  notices  the  emergence  of  side  peaks  and 
adjusts the control voltage appropriately.  The software 
similarly anticipates the location of the side peaks, and 

the  etalon 

  When 

 
when  peaks  are  detected,  a  suppressive  signal, 
proportional  to  the  amplitude  of  the  side  peak.,  is 
applied.  

Spurious  noise  spikes  are  discriminated  against,  by 
anticipating the location of the side peaks and ignoring 
any  that  appear  but  are  not  within  the  expected  range 
along the X-axis.  When the anticipated location of side 
peaks  would  overlap  the  He:Ne  reference  peak,  a 
warning  message  is  displayed,  to  prompt  the  operator 
to make some manual adjustment. 

5 EVALUATION 
The  system  has  been  successfully  used  to  stabilize 
the  laser  without  user  intervention  for  durations  of 
several hours, and has not been a limiting factor in the 
duration  of  polarized  beam  production. 
  A  few 
deficiencies have, however, been identified. 

The  use  of  high  level  software  like  Labview  is  not 
optimal  for  an  application  that  must  perform  in  a  real 
time control application.  High sample rates cannot be 
achieved,  and  the  non-real  time  host  operating  system 
may  introduce  unacceptable  delays.    There  have  been 
problems  with 
the  GPIB-Enet 
the  reliability  of 
hardware  when  operating  for  the  extended  periods 
required  in  this  application.    It  is  not  understood  from 
where this problem originates. 

The existing combination of the Labview LaserStab 
application  and  EPICS  hosted  subroutine  records  is  a 
sub-optimal  arrangement  from 
the  perspective  of 
software  maintenance.    Of  particular  concern  is  the 
current architecture, which does not allow for multiple 
instances  of 
run 
concurrently  on  multiple  workstations.  Labview 
programming is not well understood by other TRIUMF 
staff,  and  is  not  a  good  fit  with  existing  tools,  such  as 
version control systems. 

the  Labview  application 

to 

6 SUMMARY 
The low frequency drift of the Ti:Sapphire laser and 
its measurement system can be successfully controlled, 
using  primitive  software  control  algorithms.    With 
for  anomalous  conditions, 
proper  consideration 
waveform data can be adequately distilled into discrete 
reference points for closed loop control. 

The  next  step  in  the  evolution  of  the  system  will 
increase the overall bandwidth of the measurement and 
control system to attempt to eliminate higher frequency 
noise.    This  will  require  the  use  of  a  robust  real  time 
operating  system  to  achieve  faster  and  more  accurate 
sampling and control. 

