The Bates Phase and Amplitude Monitoring System 
 
D. Cheever, T. Ferrari, X. Geng, R. Page, T. Zwart 
Bates Linear Accelerator Center, Middleton, MA 01949-1526 
 

 

 

 

I. Introduction. 
 

The  MIT  Bates  LINAC  is  a  1  GeV  electron 
accelerator  used  to  perform  precision  measurements 
of 
the  structure  of  nuclei  and  nucleons.  The 
accelerator is a pulsed RF structure operating at 2856 
MHz.  Twelve  CPI  klystrons  are  situated  along  the 
length  of  the  200  m.  LINAC.    Each  klystron  is 
capable of delivering 6 MW of RF power for 30 us at 
a repetition rate of 600 Hz. Reliable operation of the 
machine  requires  that  the  relative  phase  of  the  12 
klystrons  must  be  maintained  to  better  than  1(cid:176) . 
Similarly,  the  relative  amplitude  stability  of  each 
klystron must be maintained to better than 10^-3.  
 

To  better  meet  these  requirements  we  have 
constructed  a  RF  phase  and  amplitude  monitoring 
(PAM) system. This system samples a small fraction 
of  the  RF  immediately  downstream  of  each  of  the 
twelve  klystrons.  The  complete  system  includes 
several  main  components:    RF  phase  and  amplitude 
detectors,  analog  signal  conditioning,  VME  based 
digitizing  and  EPICS  software  for  monitoring  and 
calibration.  The  functionality  and  performance  of 
each  of  these  system  components  is  described  in 
detail below. 
 
II. Hardware 
 

Each  of  Bates’  6  transmitters  house  a  pair  of 
output  klystrons  and  a  drive  klystron.  These  signals 
to  under  +30dBm  via 
are  available  attenuated 
directional  couplers  on  each  klystron  output  wave-
guide  and  reference  line  taps.  The  RF  signals  are  a 
patched  to  a  chassis  shown  in  figures  1  and  2 
containing  off-the-shelf  2.856  GHz  RF  components 
as  listed  in   the  appendix [1].   The   output  of  these  
 

Reference Line
RF ~20 dBM

Output Klystron
RF ~30dBM

[1]
Splitter

MIT-BATES Transmitter
RF Phase & Amplitude
Detector Chassis

[1]
Splitter

[4]
Phase
Shifter

Mixer

[3]

.
h
c
 
r
e
h
t
o

 

o
T

[2]

r
o
t
c
e
t
e
D
 
e
d
o
i
D
n
i
P

 

shifter in

phase out

amplitude out

 

Figure 1. RF Detection Hardware architecture 

 

 

Figure 2. RF chassis for two Klystrons 

         

Vin ~500mV, 30uS/600Hz

Vout +/- 10VDC

Gate

Reset

Figure 3. Integrating Sample and Hold 

 
devices  is  impedance  matched,  fanned  out,  and 
routed  to  custom  gated  integrators  and  a  custom 
video  matrix  switch.  The  integrators  integrate  and 
hold  a  gated  portion  of  the  pulsed  signals  and  reset 
immediately  before  the  next  gate  pulse,  shown  in 
Figure 3. The integrator outputs are low pass filtered 
at  ~30Hz  creating  –10V  to  10V  ~DC  signals  that 
represents  the  peak  amplitude  or  phase  within  the 
gate and are routed out of the transmitter gallery over 
multi-conductor  twisted  pair  cabling  to  the  3  patch 
rooms  where 
the  non-synchronous  VME  ADC 
digitizes  the  signals.  An  Argonne  Timing  Board  is 
used  to  set  the  relative  timing  of  the  reset  and  gate 
pulses,  triggered  by  each  transmitters  RF  “start” 
pulse. The VME DAC produces the ramping signals 
that shift the phase over 360º via the phase shifter to 
allow the necessary calibration. The pulsed phase and 
amplitude  signals  are  also  routed  to  the  Bates  video 
switch,  enabling  the  control  room  to  examine  the 
signal  for  phase  or  amplitude  ramps  within  a  pulse. 
Shown on the following page as figure 4 is the front 
view  of  the  RF  detector  chassis,  integrators  and 
signal fan-outs. 

Specifications  for  the  hardware  are  long  term 
stability  of  displayed  +/-  0.25º  phase  and  +/-  0.1 
Amps  amplitude.  Not  shown  is  the  VME  crate  that 
houses  the  ADC  and  timing  board.  These  boards 
share  a  crate  with  other  systems  as  is  common.  The 
integrator output is directly patched to the ADC via a 
custom  BNC  to  ribbon  cable  interface  board.  The 
specifications    were    exceeded   with   the  help   of  

 

 

 

 
Figure 4. Front view including integrators 

 
continuous  calibration  and  special 
described in the software section. 
 
III. Software 
 

filtering  as 

The  software  of  the  PAM  systems  is  comprised 
of a database and a sequencer program. The software 
functionality is described as follows.  
 
1. Phase calibration. 
 

Due  to  the  use  of  passive  mixers  gain  errors  in 
the phase signal exist as the amplitude of the klystron 
signal is changed or drifts. To null these errors a full 
360º  phase  sweep  is  performed  at  timed  intervals. 
The  sequencer  program  initiates  a  0  to  10V  DAC 
ramp  that  causes  the  phase  shifter  to  swing  the 
integrated phase signal thru a major part of the ADC 
input. Performing an arcSine with respect to peaks of 
the  resulting  sinusoid  (the  mixer  peaks  when 
differential  phase  of  the  two  inputs  are  0º  and  180º) 
adequately  nulls  all  common  errors  including  RF 
cable  temperature  differences,  chassis  temperature 
drifts, and signal amplitudes. This calibration scheme 
temperature 
eases 
controlling 
run  and  RF 
components. Calibration also extracts the slope of the 

the  complexity  and  cost  of 

the  entire  RF  cable 

phase  shift,  ensuring  that  drift  are  indicated  in  the 
right sign. 
 
2. Zeroing 
 

The  end  user  of  the  PAM  systems  output  is  a 
machine operator. They are interested in drifts from a 
setting  that  earlier  in  the  day  resulted  in  good  beam. 
Therefore they are interested in changes, not absolute 
data.  The  sequencer  program  allows  for  both  phase 
and  amplitude  zeroing.  The  resultant  variables  are 
displayed as both strip charts and bar charts, with the 
former  excellent  at  showing  trends,  and  the  former 
useful as an aid in returning the phase or amplitude of 
an individual Klystron to its  previously known good 
“zeroed”  value.  These  are  shown  below,  and  on  the 
following  page  in  Figure  7.  Note  the  user  has  the 
ability to select specific klystrons for either phase or 
amplitude  zeroing.  Amplitude  zeroing  is  simply  the 
change from the last saved value, while phase zeroing 
causes  the  sequencer  to  proportionally  change  the 
phase shifter voltage until the ADC reads back the 0º 
point in the arcsine. 
 

Figure 5. PAM phase drift display 

 

 

Figure 6. PAM amplitude drift display 

 
3. Glitch handling. 
 

Due to RF noise burst pickups a software glitch 
filter  was  necessary  to  meet  these  specifications  as 
analog  low  pass  filtering  at  the  ADC  and  software 
smoothing proved unable to adequately eliminate the 
error contributed by the RF transients. The glitch  

klystron  rather  than  blindly  re-tuning  the  beam  via 
sequentially re-phasing all operating klystrons.  

in 

 
Over the past year PAM has proved enormously 
useful  for  catching  step  discontinuities 
the 
unregulated high voltage applied to the klystrons, for 
monitoring and correcting phase drift of one or more 
klystrons  and  in  establishing  a  clear  correlation 
between a slow 3(cid:176)  phase drift on all klystrons and the 
performance  of  the  primary  water  cooling  system. 
This PAM information is presented to the operations 
group and accelerator scientists through the usual set 
of  EPICS  tools,  MEDM  strip  charts,  bar  charts  and 
archived  data.  This  information  has  enabled  the 
operations group to much more easily set and restore 
the  phasing  of  the  machine.  It  has  allowed  them  to 
more 
troubleshoot  malfunctioning 
components of the RF system.  
 

effectively 

Future  work  at  Bates  for  RF  PAM  systems  will 
include implementing the EPICS  alarm handler. The 
addition of 11 new digitally controlled phase shifters 
(one  is  already  in  use)  will  allow  automatic  phasing 
of the machine and potentially closed loop control of 
the  RF  phases  for  further  suppression  of  drift  and 
improved machine performance.  
 
V. References 
 
1. RF Detector Chassis Components 
 
[1] Mini-circuits ZAPDQ-4 
[2] Hewlett Packard 8473D  
[3] Mini-circuits ZEM-4300MH   Mixer  
[4] Lorch VP-360-2800  
     Lorch 5BP7-2850/100-S  
     S.M.T. SM22052  
 
 

Phase shifter 
B.P. filter 
Isolator 

Splitter 
Detector diode 

 

 

 

Figure 7. PAM bar chart 

 
filter  is  comprised  of  three  additional  records  in  the 
database, 
two  “calc”  and  an  “ao”.  The  filter 
“histrograms”  in  the  sense  that  it  replaces  the  ADC 
raw  value  with  the  previous  if  it  exceed  a  “glitch” 
threshold,  but  passes  the  value  if  it  is  under  a 
“change”  threshold.  Software  smoothing  (moving 
average,  as  “SMOO”  in  an  “AI”  record)  must  be 
done  in  an  additional  subsequent  “calc”  record.  The 
performance is shown below in Figure 8. The glitches 
are  seen  as  >10  count  events  and  are  never  greater 
than  one  acquisition  long.  The  upper  trace  is  the 
output on\f  the  glitch  filter  with  a  “glitch”  setting  of 
5, and a “change” setting of 3. The smooth line is the 
output  of  the  final  “calc”  record,  with  smoothing  set 
to 9 old values and 1 new value (0.9).  

Figure 8. Glitch handling. 

 

 
IV. Conclusions  
 

The  PAM  system  has  been 

installed  and 
operational over the last 3 ½ years in various forms. 
The current system has proven to have the resolution 
and  stability  to  allow  for  the  accurate  monitoring  of 
phase  and  amplitude  drifts.  Operationally  the  PAM 
system  allows  an  operator  to  re-adjust  either  the 
amplitude  or  phase  of  the  commonly  lone  drifting 

