HOTLink1 Rack Monitor

PSN: THAP047

A.R. Franck, R.W. Goodwin, P.A. Kasley, M.F. Shea
FNAL2, Batavia, IL 60510

Abstract
A  remote  data  acquisition  chassis,  called  a  HOTLink
Rack Monitor, HRM, has been developed for use in the
Fermilab  control  system.  This  chassis  provides  for  64
analog  input  channels,  8  analog  output  channels,  and  8
bytes  of  digital  I/O.  The  interface  to  the  host  VMEbus
crate  is  by  way  of  a  320  MHz  HOTLink  serial
connection  to  a  PMC  mezzanine  module.  With  no
processor  intervention,  all  data  sources  in  the  remote
chassis are read at 100 µsec intervals, timestamped, and
stored in a 2 MB circular buffer on the PMC module. In
operation, the memory always contains the most recent
16k  samples  of  10  kHz  data  from  all  64  analog  input
channels. An expansion module that resides in the HRM
chassis  records  snapshot  data  for  8  analog  channels,
each channel consisting of up to 16k readings, digitized
at  rates  up  to  10  MHz.  Snapshot  data  is  also  returned
and stored in buffers on the PMC module. Because the
HRM  presents  a  memory-mapped  interface  to  the  host,
it  is  independent  of  the  operating  system  and  may  be
used  in  any  system  that  supports  PMC  mezzanine
modules.

1 Introduction

A  new  data  acquisition  chassis  has  been  developed  for
use  in  the  Fermilab  control  system.    The  goal  of  this
device is to collect both slow and fast analog data, along
with  providing  analog  outputs,  digital  input  and  digital
output  data,  and  to  allow  for  future  expansion.    This
device  can  be  located  several  tens  of  meters  from  the
control computer.

2 Design of the HRM

Although  many  of  today’s  accelerator  control  systems
use VMEbus crates and components, it is not clear that
standard  will  continue  to  be  used  in  the  future.    Other
more cost effective platforms, such as PC hardware, are
being  used  in  some  installations.    To  eliminate  the
dependence on the platform used to drive it, the HRM is
structured  as  a  remote  chassis  connected  to  a  PCI
mezzanine card (PMC).  The PMC module can then be
mounted on a PMC carrier card mounted in a VMEbus,
PC chassis, CPCI crate, or other system.

The connection between the HRM chassis and the PMC
module  is  a  commercially  available  high-  speed  serial
protocol  called  HOTLink™,  a  product  of  Cypress
Semiconductor Corp.  This serial link operates at either
160  or  320  Mbits/sec.    The  normal  speed  will  be  320
Mbits/sec  for  installations  where  the  HRM  is  close  to
the control computer; 160 Mbits/sec may be useful if the
HRM chassis is placed farther away.

In  control  applications  at  Fermilab,  analog  signals
typically  fall  into  one  of  two  distinct  categories:  slow
signals and fast signals.  Slow signals include dc levels,
sample  and  hold  amplifier  outputs,  and  slowly  varying
signal sources.  These signals are slow enough that high
input 
impedance  digitizers  may  be  used  without
worrying  about  cable  reflections.    The  HRM  accepts
slow  signals  into  multiplexed  digitizers  that  digitize  all
inputs  each  time  they  are  triggered.  The  HRM  samples
all slow data channels continuously at a rate of 10 kHz–
fast enough to provide information about power supply
ripple, rf amplitude envelopes, etc.

Fast signals typically come from sources that can drive
50-ohm  cable  and  need  termination  to  avoid  distortion
from termination mismatch. These signals are treated as
snapshot data. That is, signals are only digitized when a
trigger occurs, usually to collect specific waveforms at a
preselected  time.    The  HRM  has  an  optional  eight
channel,  14-bit  digitizer 
that  can  record  data  at
selectable  sample  rates  up  to  10  Msamples/sec  over  an
input range of ± 5 V. Each of the eight channels has its
own  14-bit    digitizer  followed  by  a  16K  sample  FIFO.
Signals faster than a few MHz must be looked at using
digital oscilloscopes or special data acquisition boards.

Some applications may need higher resolution snapshot
data.    A  16-bit  100kHz  snapshot  option  board  is  being
developed for these applications.

Like other Fermilab Rack Monitors, the HRM provides
for  64  analog  inputs,  8  analog  outputs  and  8  bytes  of
digital  I/O  signals. 
inputs  are
multiplexed  to  four  Analog  Devices  AD-976,  16-bit,
200 kHz digitizers.  At a repetition rate of 10 kHz, all 64
analog  channels  are  digitized  and  the  data  is  placed  in

  The  64  analog 

                                                
1 HOTLink is a registered trademark of Cypress Semiconductor Corp.
2 Fermilab is operated by Universities Research Association Inc. under Contract No. DE-AC02-76CH03000 with the
United States Department of Energy.

dual  port  RAM  before  being  transmitted  via  HOTLink
to the PMC interface module.  At the same 10 kHz rate,
all 8 bytes of digital I/O, the setting values of the eight
analog  output  D-A  channels,  and  several  other  control
registers are all read and sent to the PMC module.  The
slow  digitizers  have  16-bit  resolution;  the  analog
outputs are derived from 16-bit DACs

The  HRM  chassis  is  controlled  by  an  Analog  Devices
ADSP-2181  Digital  Signal  Processor.    The  chassis
includes  an  analog  board,  a  digital  I/O  board  and  a
the  HOTLink
central  control  board 
transmitter 
the  memory-bus
connection  to  the  analog  and  digital  boards.    The  8-
channel  quick  digitizer  and  additional  future  boards
connect to this same memory bus.

that  contains 
and 

receiver, 

and 

followed  by  4  information  bytes..  The  first  two  bytes
comprise the 16 bit data field. The third and fourth bytes
carry 12 bits of channel number or other address and a
4-bit Type Code that indicates to the receiver the type of
data  contained  in  the  packet.  Two  contiguous  packets
are  used  to  send  32-bit  data,  and  one  bit  of  the
addressing is used to indicate whether the data is the MS
or  LS  word.  Each  packet  stands  on  its  own  –  no  other
context  is  needed  to  determine  how  to  handle  it  at  the
PMC.

These packets are strung together to form a return frame
that  has  recurring  and  non-recurring  parts.  Digital  I/O
and register updates are placed at the front of the frame,
followed by slow-data. These elements are sent in every
100us  frame.  The  remainder  of  the  frame  is  filled  out
with snapshot data.

3 PMC Interface Module

4 Timestamping the data

  Data 

The  control  computer’s  access  to  the  HRM  is  through
the  PMC  module.    This  module  includes  the  PCI
interface  circuitry,  four  MBytes  of  static  RAM,  Altera
programmable  logic  chips,  and  the  HOTLink  transmit
and  receive  circuitry.    From  the  computer  the  HRM
is  sent
appears  as  a  block  of  memory. 
autonomously  from  the  HRM  remote  chassis  to  be
stored in the onboard memory. Slow A-D data is sent to
this  memory  at  100  µs  intervals  and  is  stored  in  two
MBytes  of  circular  buffer.    Digital  I/O  data,  D-A
settings  and  remote  register  data  are  also  sent  to  the
PMC  module  at  100µs  intervals.    When  the  computer
writes data to the register memory space, the same data
is  transmitted  to  the  remote  HRM  chassis.    Similarly,
data  from  optional  boards  placed  in  the  HRM  chassis
will  be  sent  to  the  PMC  module  and  stored  in  its
memory  as  needed  with  no  involvement  from  the
control computer.

The design of the HRM and its associated PMC module
results  in  a  data  acquisition  system  that  requires  very
little involvement from the control computer.  After the
HRM  chassis  is  enabled  by  setting  a  single  bit  in  a
control  register,  analog  and  digital  data  stream  into  the
PMC  RAM  at  100  µs  intervals,  with  no  further
involvement  of  the  control  processor.    D-A  and  digital
output  settings  are  made  by  storing  a  word  or  byte  of
data in the register area of PMC memory.  These digital
settings are made immediately, but there is a latency of
up  to  100  µS  before  confirmation  of  the  success  of  the
setting will be stored in the PMC RAM.  Although slow
analog data may be easily read from PMC memory, the
computer  does  need  to  know  how  to  access  the  most
recent  or  the  particular  range  of  data  stored  in  the
circular buffer.

At  Fermilab,  timing  information  is  sent  to  accelerator
devices  using  the  Tevatron  Clock,  (TCLK),  a  10  MHz
modified  Manchester  clock  encoded  with  8-bit  timing
events.  Wherever timing is needed, TCLK is received,
events  are  decoded  and  delayed  triggers  are  generated
for use by accelerator devices.  To plot analog data from
various  sources  on  the  same  graph,  all  data  must  be
timestamped  to  allow  it  to  be  referenced  to  TCLK.
Front  end  control  computers  receive  TCLK  and  record
the  occurrence  of  encoded  events  by  storing  the  event
number along with the contents of a free-running 32-bit,
1  MHz  counter.  The  HRM  chassis  has  its  own  TCLK
receiver and programmable event decoder.

The HRM chassis captures two types of timestamps. A
slow-data  timestamp  is  captured  from  a  free-running,
32-bit, 1 Mhz counter at the start of each 100us interval.
This  timestamp  precedes  the  slow  data  portion  of  the
return  frame.  A  32-bit  snapshot  timestamp  is  captured
from  the  same  counter  when  a  preselected  clock  event
or  an  external  signal  triggers  a  snapshot  acquisition.
This  snapshot  timestamp  is  returned  to  the  PMC  at  the
very beginning of the snapshot data

The timestamps returned to the PMC module will have
an  offset  from  similar  timestamp  values  measured  by
the  front  end  control  computer,  but  this  offset  can  be
determined  at  each  occurrence  of  the  selected  TCLK
event.  With this offset, the control computer can relate
timestamp  readings  to  TCLK.  Because  the  timestamps
are collected by the hardware and are not dependent on
software  response  times,  timing  of  data  from  a  given
HRM is known to within ±1µs.

5 Data Storage

Each 16 bit word of data sent between the PMC module
and  the  HRM  chassis  is  sent  as  a  5-byte  transmission;
one  byte  of  packet  header  (K28.0  Special  Character)

Table  1  shows  the  memory  map  for  the  PMC  module.
D-A  setting  readbacks,  digital  I/O  data  and  other
register  data  from  the  HRM  are  all  stored  in  fixed

memory  blocks  on  the  PMC  module.    Snapshot  data
from  the  quick  digitizers  are  also  stored  in  known
locations.    Slow  analog  data  storage  is  more  involved
because  it  is  stored  as  64-channel  data  blocks  in  a  2
MByte  circular  buffer.    At  any  given  time,  the  circular
buffer contains 16,000 data sets representing the values
of  all  channels  for  the  past  1.6  seconds.    Old  data  is
overwritten by new data as it is received.

Each  100µs  interval,  the  HRM  transmits  a  32-bit
timestamp  followed  by  the  64-channel  block  of  analog
data values.  The arrival of the timestamp increments a
block  counter  on  the  PMC  module.    The  value  of  this
block  counter  is  then  used  to  form  the  address  of  a
location  in  a  circular  buffer  where  the  timestamps  are
stored.    Slow  analog  data  following  the  timestamp  are
stored in a second circular buffer whose address is also
formed using the block counter value.

In  normal  operation,  the  control  computer  accesses
HRM register data as specific locations in PCI memory
space.  Front end computers keep a data pool of analog
values refreshed at regular intervals, usually 15 Hz.  To
access  the  most  recent  analog  values,  the  control
computer reads the block counter and forms the address
of  the  block  of  data  that  is  currently  or  was  most
recently  filled  with  new  data.    These  values,  or  the
values of the preceding block of data, are copied into the
data pool for use by other programs.

Snapshot data from the fast digitizer board are stored in
a  fixed  256KB  area  of  memory  with  data  from  each
channel  stored  in  a  contiguous  32KB  block.    The  fast
data timestamp is stored in a fixed location.  A counter
on the PMC module increments as fast data is received,
and its value is used to form the address where the data
is to be stored.  It is also used by the front end computer
to determine how much data has been received.

The  fast  digitizer  operates  in  one  of  two  modes,  single
or repetitive.  In the single mode, the front end computer
must arm the digitizers to enable them to respond to the
next  trigger.    The  repetitive  mode  allows  the  fast
digitizers  to  respond  to  each  trigger.    In  this  mode,  the
FIFO is reset and new data is stored whenever a trigger
is received, even if the digitizers were still storing data
from the previous trigger.

Table 1: Memory map for the PMC module
Memory
Space

Range

Slow Data
Option Board Data
Snapshot Data
Snapshot Timestamp
Slow Data Timestamp
Option Bd Timestamp
Remote Registers
Error and Status Reg

Starting
Address
2 MB
$000000
2 MB
$200000
$400000
256 KB
$45FFFC 4 Bytes
64 KB
$460000
64 KB
$470000
8 KB
$480000
1 MB
$500000

Type
Code
0
1
4
5
6
7
C…F
na

6 Packaging

The HRM is a self-powered, 2U, 19 inch rack mounted
chassis.    It  connects  to  its  associated  PMC  module  by
two  twisted  pair  cables  used  for  the  transmit/receive
data path.  The PMC module can be mounted on a PMC
carrier  board  or  on  a  PMC  socket  of  the  front  end
processor  board  when  available.    Within  the  HRM
chassis,  there  is  a  central  board  which  holds  the  DSP,
the HOTLink transmitter and receiver, and interfaces to
the  various  I/O  boards  (digital,  slow  analog,  8-channel
10 MHz quick digitizer board) HOTLink speed is cable
selectable. 
  With  the  HOTLink  operating  at  320
Mbits/sec,  transmission  of  the  slow  analog  data  uses
10µS  of  the  100  µs  frame  time,  which  is  only  10%  of
the capacity of the HOTLink.  For cases where the link
is operating at 160Mbits/sec, the link utilization rises to
20%.

7 Status of the HRM project

At the present time, prototypes of the HRM chassis and
the  PMC  interface  module  have  been  tested  and  are
operational.  A final version of the circuit boards needs
to  be  developed  to  incorporate  the  latest  version  of  the
DSP onto the central board, to implement a fly-by DMA
bus  to  better  accommodate  possible  future  increases  in
serial link speed, and to simplify I/O card mounting and
chassis assembly.  After that is finished, the HRM will
be used for a number of data acquisition tasks within the
Fermilab  controls  department.    It  is  planned  that  this
design  will  be  offered  to  commercial  vendors  to
fabricate and market as a product.

8 Conclusions

The  HRM  provides  a  cost  effective  way  to  interface
accelerator  equipment  to  the  control  system.    From  the
software  standpoint,  the  HRM  requires  very  little
support from the control computer.  Once enabled, data
independently  returns  to  the  PMC  module  where  it
becomes  available  as  values  stored  in  normal  PCI
memory  space.    There  is  no  dependence  on  the
particular  processor  or  operating  system  used  in  the
front  end.    The  DSP  is  self-contained  and  its  software
does  not  require  downloading  by  the  control  computer.
These  features  make  it  easy  to  integrate  the  HRM  into
any control system.  Multiple HRMs can be added to a
single  front  end  computer  simply  by  adding  PMC
interface modules. Future enhancements of the HRM are
possible by designing additional data acquisition boards
and by using the DSP  to preprocess raw data before it is
shipped to the PMC.

