STATUS AND CONTROL REQUIREMENTS OF THE PLANNED HEAVY 
ION TUMOR THERAPY ACCELERATOR FACILITY HICAT 
 
R. Bär, H. Eickhoff, T. Haberer; GSI Darmstadt, Germany 
 

TUAP031 

Abstract 

The  HICAT  project  is  a  Heavy  Ion  accelerator  for 
light ion Cancer Treatment to be built for the clinics in 
Heidelberg, Germany. It consists of a 7 MeV/u linac, a 
compact synchrotron and three treatment places, one of 
them located after a 360 degree gantry beam-line. The 
facility  will  implement  the  intensity  controlled  raster-
scanning technique that was developed and successfully 
demonstrated  at  GSI.  In  order  to  produce  the  beams 
with  the  characteristics  requested  by  the  treatment 
sequencer,  the  accelerator  must  operate  on  a  pulse-to-
pulse  basis  with  different  settings.  This  concept 
imposes  strict  and  challenging  demands  on 
the 
operation  of  the  accelerators  and  hence  the  control 
system  of  the  facility.  The  control  system  should  be 
developed,  installed  and  maintained  by  and  under  the 
complete 
industrial  system 
provider,  using  a  state-of-the-art  system  and  wide-
spread  industrial  components  wherever  possible.  This 
presentation  covers  the  status  of  the  project  and  the 
requirements on the control system. 

responsibility  of  an 

1  HICAT MACHINE LAYOUT 
The  HICAT  accelerator  facility  was  designed  to 
meet  the  medical  requirements  used  for  the  successful 
GSI cancer treatment program. HICAT consists of two 
ECR  ion  sources  with  independent  spectrometer  lines 
to  produce  both  low  LET  ions  (p,  He)  and  high  LET 
ions  (C,  O)  to  cover  the  medical  requirements  and 
allow for fast switching. The beams will be accelerated 
by  a  compact-designed  7 MeV/u  linac  (RFQ  and  IH-
DTL)  and  a  6.5 Tm  synchrotron  for  beam  energies  of 
up  to  430 MeV/u.  In  order  to  meet  the  intensity 
requirements, multi-turn injection will be used for beam 
accumulation.  For  extraction,  the  rf  knock-out  method 
in  combination  with  a  variable  extraction  time  will  be 
implemented.  The  beams  can  be  delivered  to  three 
medical 
two  fixed 
horizontal  beam  lines  and  one  360°  rotating  beam 
transport  system  (isocentric  gantry),  as  well  as  one 
quality assurance/experimental place. 

treatment  areas, 

located  after 

No  passive elements are foreseen to match the dose 
distribution  to  the  individual  tumor  geometry.  Instead, 
all  beam  lines  will  be  equipped  with  horizontal  and 
vertical scanning magnets and beam diagnostic devices 
for  the  intensity  controlled-raster  scanning  technique 

 

that  was  developed  and  successfully  demonstrated 
within the GSI experimental cancer treatment program 
with over 100 patients to date. 

Fig. 1  shows 

the  cross  section  of 

first 
underground  floor  of  the  building  which  houses  the 
accelerator  sections,  the  patient  treatment  areas,  local 
control rooms and various laboratories and offices. For 
a  general  description  of  the  accelerator  complex, 
see [1]. 

the 

2  CONTROL SYSTEM 
For  the  realization  of  the  HICAT  project,  a  close 
cooperation  with  industry  is  necessary.  GSI  has  done 
the  machine  layout  and  worked  out  crucial    technical 
specifications. The development and implementation of 
the  control system will be performed by a commercial 
firm. 

Therefore, the HICAT control system (cs) should be 
delivered  under  a  supply  contract  established  with  an 
industrial  system  provider.  The  full  development  and 
configuration of the system will be the responsibility of 
the  contractor,  who  will  also  perform  commissioning 
and all tests on the site. GSI will advise and supervise 
the commercial contractor during the project. 

The  cs  should  be  based  on  an  industrial  control 
system  (e.g.  commercially  available  SCADA  system) 
which  satisfies  a  number  of  criteria  to  fulfill  the 
specific requirements for the system. At a life cycle of 
20  or  more  years,  quite  reasonable  for  such  a  system, 
the cs must be laid out for long service. Consequently, 
it  is  proposed  to  use  wide-spread  industrial  standards 
and commercial solutions wherever possible. 

The 

cs  must  meet 

the 

following  general 

requirements: 

• 
• 
• 

high reliability 
easy and efficient operation by a small crew 
development and maintenance by industry 

Since  a  reliable  control  system  is  an  indispensable 
element  to  supply  beams  for  medical  practice  the 
system has to respect stringent requirements in terms of 
reliability, safety, maintainability and legal aspects such 
as  the  ones  required  by  regulatory  authorities.  It  must 
meet the following general requirements: 

The  HICAT  cs  runs  the  accelerator  in  a  hospital 
environment.  It  must  be  easy  to  operate  because  daily 

operation of the accelerator is carried out by operators 
who  are  not  necessarily  accelerator  specialists.  The 
control  system’s  functionality  is  determined  by  these 
facts,  together  with  the  controls  demands  of  the 
accelerator facility in itself. 

In  particular,  the  following  major  tasks  have  to  be 

covered by the accelerator cs: 

• 

• 

full control of the accelerator systems to deliver 
and assure a beam with characteristics requested 
by the patients’ treatment plan on a pulse to pulse 
basis 
full control of the patient irradiation treatment with 
prescribed treatment plan and measure compliance 
of treatment 
patients’ protection against wrong treatment 
control of all secondary and infrastructure systems 

• 
• 
•  minimal personal employment for controlling 

The  HICAT  cs  should  be  completely  integrated,  i.e.  a 
single set of standards will be applied to all aspects of 
the  facility.  Although  it  is  not  the  usual  practice  to 
include conventional facility controls in the accelerator 
cs,  experience  shows  that  signals  from  these  systems 
are needed in the control room. 

All systems – accelerators and conventional facilities 
– will be operated and monitored from a single control 
room. In addition there will be treatment control rooms 
for  each  treatment  place  from  where  the  actual 
treatment is controlled and monitored. 

3  TECHNICAL CONTROL 
REQUIREMENTS 
Major  aspects  of  the  control  system  design  are 
influenced  by  the  experiences  of  the  GSI  cancer 
treatment program [2]; the requirements of this facility, 
however, exceeds those of the pilot project. 

Logically,  the  HICAT  cs  will  consist  of  two  major 

integrated parts: 

the accelerator control system – controls the 
accelerator and all auxiliary systems 
control system for the medical treatment (one 
independent system for each treatment place) – 
controls the treatment sequencer and all treatment 
instrumentation 

• 

• 

 

3.1 Process Data 

The  main  characteristics  of  the  HICAT  facility  are 
the  application  of  the  raster-scan  method  with  active 
intensity-,  energy-  and  beam 
in 
combination  with  the  usage  of  an  isocentric  gantry  to 

size-variation 

 

 
match  the  dose  distribution  to  the  individual  tumor 
geometry.  During  the  patient  irradiation  process  the 
treatment  sequencer 
those 
characteristics  required  from  a  library  of  pre-defined 
settings on a pulse-to-pulse basis (Table 1). The task of 
the accelerator control system is to deliver these beams 
as requested. 

requests  beams  with 

Steps 
4 
255 
4 
15 
~36 
4 

Table 1: Process parameters 
Parameter 
ion species (p, He, C, O) 
Beam energy (50–430 MeV/u) 
focus diameter (4–10 mm) 
Intensity level (variation 1 to 10-3) 
gantry angle (angle interpolation) 
Treatment area (beam lines) 

 
In  order  to  achieve  high  operational  reliability  the  cs 
must meet the following requirements: 

• 
• 

• 

• 

use only proven and validated settings, 
protect settings from loss and accidental 
modification, 
inhibit operator's access/interference during 
irradiation, 
avoid networking for settings, provide all beams in 
stand-by on a pulse-to-pulse basis, 

These  requirements  lead  to  a  high  number  of  settings 
(up  to  100,000  per  device)  to  hold  at  the  device 
controller.  Fortunately,  the  settings  of  the  devices  do 
not  depend  on  all  parameters  in  Table  1  at  the  same 
time. Because of the high number of data sets needed, 
manual tuning of the machine is prohibitive. To derive 
data  automatically,  a  “theoretical  model”  of 
the 
accelerator  will  be  used,  allowing  calculation  of  all 
device  data  from  high-level  machine  parameters  and 
applying once measured corrections. 
 
3.2 Timing system 

For  the  entire  accelerator  chain,  including  linac  rf-
structures,  choppers,  bunchers,  and  all  synchrotron 
devices,  a  strict  synchronization  is  required.  Some 
time-critical functions (i.e. triggers, acceleration ramps) 
must  by  synchronized  within  ∆t<1–5 µs  at  the  worst. 
The  cs  must  implement  a  timing  controller  that 
provides a system-wide synchronization for distributed 
devices  with  real-time  performance.  The  system  must 
be  flexible  enough  to  react  on  requests  for  beam 
extraction pauses and aborts. 

3.3 Patient safety 

Safety  is  a  crucial  issue  for  the  cs,  considering  the 
special  task  of  the  facility.  Due  to  the  high  number of 
devices  acting  on  the  beam,  the  accelerator  control 
system cannot guarantee safe operation. Instead, it will 
implement  a  fast  and  fail-safe  beam-abort  system  that 
reliably stops the beam within 200 µs. This is achieved 
by simultaneously triggering a chain of different actions 
using  different  devices  which  are  all,  by  themselves, 
capable  to  prevent  beam  delivery  to  the  treatment 
place. 

The  sophisticated  on-line  beam  diagnostics  of  the 
treatment  sequencer  verifies  the  correctness  of  the 
intensity)  with 
beam  parameters  (position,  focus, 
respect  to  the  treatment  plan.  In  case  of  intolerable 
deviations  to  the  treatment  plan  or  failure  of  critical 
systems,  the  treatment  control  system  triggers  beam-
abort channels to stop the irradiation treatment. 
 
3.4 Scanner system 
For  the  real-time  treatment  sequencer  it  is  foreseen  to 
use  the  existing  state-of-the-art  GSI-system  [3]  and 
adapt it to the new environment. The functions will be 
extended  to  feature  gated  beam  extraction  and  end  of 
extraction ahead of schedule. 

 

4  STATUS AND OUTLOOK 
Currently  all  essential  technical  specifications  and 
requirements for the entire facility including the control 
system are being worked out. 

Following  the  final  approval  by  the  board  of  the 
clinics  by the end of 2001 an ambitious time schedule 
will be established. For the first quarter of 2002 a call 
for  tender  is  scheduled.  Contracts  with  industries  are 
foreseen around middle of 2002. 

According  to  the  current project plan the first beam 
is  scheduled  in  2005  and  the  first  patient  treatments 
in  2006  after  an  extensive 
take  place 
should 
commissioning phase. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  H.  Eickhoff  et.  al.,  “The  Proposed  Dedicated  Ion 
Beam Facility for Cancer Therapy at the Clinic in 
Heidelberg”, EPAC2000, Vienna, June 2000. 
[2]  U. Krause, R. Steiner, “Adaption of a Synchrotron 
Control  System  for  Heavy  Ion  Tumor  Therapy”, 
ICALEPCS ’95, Chicago, USA, 1995. 

[3]  E.  Badura  et.  al.,  “Safety  and  Control  System  for 
the GSI Theray Project”, ICALEPCS  ’97, Beijing, 
China, November 1997. 

 

Figure 1: First underground level of the HICAT facility. 

 

 

