WEAP039 

RHIC Power Supply Ramp Diagnostics* 
 
J. T. Morris, T.S. Clifford, B. Frak, J. Laster, A. Marusic, J. van Zeijts 
BNL, Upton, NY 11973 

 
Abstract 

Reliable  and  reproducible  performance  of 
the  more  than  800  Relativistic  Heavy  Ion 
Collider  (RHIC)  magnet  power  supplies  is 
essential to successful RHIC operation. In order 
to  support  power  supply  commissioning,  a 
system was developed to capture detailed power 
supply  measurements  from  all  the  RHIC  ring 
power  supplies  during  acceleration 
ramps. 
Diagnostic tools were developed to allow experts 
to  assess  ramp  reproducibility  and  rapidly 
identify  problems.  The  system  has  now  become 
a  routine  part  of  RHIC  operations,  with  data 
captured for every acceleration ramp. This paper 
describes 
ramp 
diagnostic  system  and  considers  its  impact  on 
RHIC operations. 
 

the  RHIC  power 

supply 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Ion  Collider 

More  than  800  power  supplies  are  required 
to  operate  the  superconducting  magnets  in  the 
Relativistic  Heavy 
Successful  operation  of  RHIC  depends  on 
reliable  and  reproducible  performance  of  these 
power  supplies  during  acceleration  ramps.  A 
system was developed to capture detailed power 
supply  measurements  from  RHIC  ring  power 
supplies  during  ramps.    Diagnostic  tools  were 
developed to support expert analysis of this ramp 
data.   

The  ramp  data  sets  have  proven  to  be  a 
useful  source  of  information  for  operators  and 
beam  commissioners  as  well.    They  provide  a 
quantitative  measure  of  the  reproducibility  of 
power  supply  performance.    They  are  used  to 
analyze power supply response when new modes 
of  ramping  are  introduced.    The  ramp  data  sets 
are used to identify power supply problems that 
may  go  undetected  by  ordinary  power  supply 
alarm  mechanisms.    Problems  in  the  power 
supply  control  system  may  also  be  detected  by 
analysis of these data sets. 

The  ramp  diagnostic  system  has  now 
become a routine part of RHIC operations. Data 
is  captured  during  every  ramp  and  routinely 
analyzed by control room personnel.   Diagnostic 
tools  have  been  expanded  to  simplify  data 
analysis  and  identify  problems  quickly.    A 

(RHIC).      

{*} Work supported by US Department of Energy 

watching mechanism has also been introduced to 
bring  problems  to  the  immediate  attention  of 
operators.   

 

2 DATA ACQUISITION 

RHIC 

power 

supply 

references 

are 
controlled with Wave Form Generators (WFGs), 
which  deliver  new  values  to  all  of  the  RHIC 
power  supplies  at  a  720Hz  rate.    Multiplexed 
Analog  to  Digital  Converters  (MADCs)  [1] 
provide  measurements  of  a  number  of  power 
supply  parameters 
including  currents  and 
references.    These  MADCs  are  configured  to 
capture data at the same 720Hz rate used by the 
WFGs.  

it 

that 

(REL) 

[3]  so 

Once a second, the 720Hz WFG and MADC 
data  is  read  by  RHIC  Controls  Front  End 
Computers (FECs) [2].   The reading of the data 
is triggered by the 1Hz event on the RHIC Event 
is  precisely 
Link 
synchronized for the WFGs and MADCs for all 
power  supplies.    The  data  is  made  available  for 
live  monitoring  programs  and  stored  in  10 
second  history  buffers  that  are  used  for  post 
mortem  analysis  after  power  supply  quenches.  
The data is also averaged and added to extended 
history  buffers 
ramp 
diagnostics.    In  order  to  accommodate  a  full 
acceleration  ramp,  the  extended  history  buffers 
are  currently  configured  to  hold  260  seconds  of 
30Hz averaged data. 

that  are  used 

for 

At the end of a RHIC acceleration ramp, the 
Sequencer program [4][5] triggers a RHIC Event 
Link  event  to  start  the  process  of  saving  ramp 
data in files.   When power supply FECs see this 
event, they simultaneously halt the accumulation 
of  data  in  their  extended  history  buffers.    A 
console level server process gathers the contents 
of all of these frozen 30Hz history buffers from 
the  FECs  and  stores  the  data  in  a  set  of  SDDS 
files  [6].    When  acquisition  is  complete,  the 
server  process  triggers  another  event  which 
restarts the accumulation of history data. 

The term snapshot has been used to describe 
the  capture  of  similar  data  for  individual  power 
supplies.  The complete set of power supply data 
for  a  RHIC  acceleration  ramp  is  called  a 
snapramp.      The  snapramp  data  set includes all 

of  the  available  signals  for  each  power  supply.  
In order to facilitate rapid analysis of snapramp 
data,  a  compact  version    of  the  snapramp  data 
set is also created.  Three compact ramp data set 
files  are  created  by  1Hz  sampling  of  the  WFG 
setpoints,  the  MADC  measured  current,  and  the 
MADC  measured  reference  from  the  30Hz 
snapramp data sets.    

 

3 POSTRAMP ANALYSIS 

3.1 Viewing data by supply 

Snapramp  data  can  be  viewed  with  the 
PMViewer  tool,  which  is  also  used  to  view 
RHIC  power  supply  post  mortem  data  [7].  
Barshow  is  another  program  that  has  been 
specifically  designed  to  do graphic comparisons 
of  power  supply  waveforms  for  ramp  analysis.  
The  user  of 
the  barshow  program  selects 
individual  power  supplies  for  analysis.    The 
barshow  display  includes  all  available  signals 
from  the  power  supply.    In  addition,  calculated 
difference signals are added to the display. 
 

WEAP039 

 

3.2 Comparing ramp data 

Users of barshow or PMViewer must decide 
which power supplies should be examined.  The 
pscompare  program  is  used  to  do  a  comparison 
of ramp data sets for all power supplies, rapidly 
identifying 
the  power  supplies  that  require 
further examination. The pscompare user selects  
two ramp data sets.  WFG setpoints are typically 
compared  with  MADC  measured  currents  or 
references  from  the  same  ramp.    Corresponding 
data  sets  from  different  ramps  may  also  be 
compared.  For example, measured currents from 
a ramp may be compared with measured currents 
from the preceding ramp. 

 The results of the comparison are presented 
in  a  sorted 
in  Figure  1. 
table  as  shown 
Differences are typically listed as a percentage of 
the full range of operation for that power supply.  
The  power  supply  with  the  largest  difference  is 
listed  at  the  top  of  the  table.    Filtering  options 
allow a   user  to   limit   the   presentation  to  a  

Figure 1: The pscompare application with problem power supply highlighted and graphed.
 
 
 

 

 

 

selected set of power supplies (e.g. all sextupoles 
or all correctors in alcove 9).   For performance 
reasons,  pscompare  comparisons  are  typically 
performed  on  the  compact  1Hz  snapramp  data 
sets.  This has proven to be adequate to identify 
almost all power supply or control problems.  An 
optional  comparison  of  the  full  30Hz  snapramp 
data is available but it is significantly slower. 

As  a  user  clicks  on  power  supply  names  in 
the  sorted  table,  data  for  that  power  supply  is 
presented in the graphics area above the table as 
shown in Figure 3.  The default graphic view is a 
quick  plot  of  1Hz  data  for  the  ramp  data  sets 
being compared.  A user may optionally display 
the  full  30Hz  snapramp  data  for  the  selected 
supply.    This  display  may  optionally  include  all 
available signals from the power supply. 
 

4 ALARMS 

As described above in the Data Acquisition 
section,  RHIC  power  supply  FECs  read  and 
process  WFG  and  MADC  data  once  each 
second.   The data available to the FEC for each 
power  supply  includes  the  current  state  of  the 
power  supply,  the  WFG  setting,  an  MADC 
measure  of  the  power  supply  reference,  and  an 
MADC  measure  of  the  actual  current  in  the 
power  supply.    Software  in  the  FEC  compares 
these values for each power supply that is in an 
ON  state.    If  these  values  differ by more than a 
specified  tolerance,  an  alarm  is  reported  to  the 
RHIC  alarm  screen  in  the  Main  Control  Room.   
During  RHIC  acceleration  ramps,  these  alarms 
may  be  fleeting  as  some  power  supplies  may 
only temporarily fall outside tolerance limits.  At 
the  end  of  each  ramp,  therefore,  the  RHIC 
Sequencer  displays  a  record  of  all  alarm 
conditions that occurred during the ramp. 

 

they  are  expected 

Power  supply  ramp  diagnostics  have  been 
an  essential  tool  during  RHIC  commissioning 
to  be 
and 
important  for  future  RHIC  operations.    The 
emphasis  to  date  has  been  on  identification  of 
problems  by  comparing  measured  currents  with 
expected  values.    Under  more  stable  operating 

to  continue 

conditions, comparison of power supply currents 
with  currents  measured  during  a  designated 
reference ramp will be expected. 

The  data  acquisition  mechanism  is  now 
mature  and  has  been  performing  very  reliably.  
The  system  requires  significant  storage  space 
with 120MB of data in each snapramp data set.  
The  demands  of  this  system  and  the  RHIC  post 
mortem 
forcing  a  significant 
expansion  of  data  storage  capabilities.    Only 
modest changes are expected in data presentation 
tools. 

system  are 

The  alarm  capabilities  require  the  most 
attention.  Alarming  has  been  useful  but  has  not 
realized  its  full  potential.  Tolerances  have  been 
loosely set to accommodate calibration offsets in 
MADC  measured  values.    False  alarms  still  are 
generated due to intermittent measurement errors 
and a failure to properly detect state when power 
supplies trip off.  A concerted effort needs to be 
made  to  correct  calibration  errors,  eliminate  all 
other  sources  of  false  alarms,  and  then  set 
tolerances  to  the  appropriate  levels  for  each 
power supply. 

References  

 

 

 [1] R. Michnoff, “The RHIC General Purpose 
Multiplexed Analog To Digital Converter 
System,” Proc. 1995 IEEE Particle 
Accelerator Conf., Dallas,  p.2229 

[2]  T.S.  Clifford,  “The  Relativistic  Heavy  Ion 
Collider  Control  System”,  ICALEPCS  ’97, 
Beijing, p. 12  

[3] B.R. Oerter, ”Accelerator Timing at the 
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider,” Proc. 
ICALEPCS’99, Trieste, p.191 

[4]  T.  D’Ottavio  “Description  of  the  RHIC 

Sequencer”,  this conference 

[5]  J.  van  Zeijts,  “The  RHIC  Sequencer”,  PAC 

[6] M. Borland, “A Self Describing File Protocol 
for Simulation Integration and Shared 
Postprocessors,” Proc. 1995 IEEE Particle 
Accelerator Conf., Dallas, p.2184 

[7] J.S.Laster, “Post Mortem System – Playback 
of the RHIC Collider”, this conference 

 

5 FUTURE 

2001, p. 703 

 

 

 

