Mind-body interpretation of quantum mechanics1
Raoul Nakhmanson2

The  wave-particle  duality  is  a  mind-body  one.    In  the  real  3D-space  there  exists  only  the
particle,  the  wave  exists  in  its  consciousness.    If  there  are  many  particles,  their  distribution  in
accordance  with  the  wave  function  represents  a  real  wave  in  real  space.    Many  worlds,
Schrödinger cat, etc., exist only as mental constructions.  The “waves of matter” are non-material.
Feynman et al. taught quantum world “is like neither”.  Alas, they forgot living matter.

This  series  of  conferences  is  devoted  to  mysteries,  puzzles  and  paradoxes  in  quantum
mechanics  (QM),  in  this  year  especially  to  quantum  interference  phenomenon.    Therefore  I
begin  with  an  explanation  of  the  so-called  wave-particle  duality,  the  wave  function  and  its
interference,  and  if  the  time  allows  I  will  explain  other  “mysteries”  such  as  entanglement,
quantum randomness and uncertainty, and show  an  experimental feasibility to  go beyond  the
scope of QM.

Following tradition let us consider the two-slit experiment (Fig.1).  Some electrons emitted
from the source  S  reach the registration plane  R  because the screen  SC  has two slits.  In the
plane    R    the  electrons  are  registered  as  particles,  but  their  spatial  distribution  looks  like  an
interference of two coherent waves cut out by the screen  SC  from the initial wave generated
by the source  S . To emphasize is that it is not a many-body effect: The pattern is the same in
the case when the source  S  is so week that not more than one electron flies between  S  and  R
,  and we must conclude there is a “self-interference” of electrons.  Seemingly electrons  (and
other particles) present themselves as well as waves.  Hence the notion “wave-particle duality”.

SC

A

B

S

C

R

A

B

Fig. 1.  Two-slit experiment.  The distributions  A ,  B ,  and  C  correspond to the cases
when the slit  A  only, the slit  B  only, and the slits  A ,  B  both are opened, respectively.

To have the interference pattern we must accept that the “wave of matter” goes through both
slits.  But if we place two detectors behind  the  slits,  only  one  of  them  registers  the  electron,
hence it goes only through one slit.  The other slit at the moment seemingly does not play any
role and can be temporarily closed.  If it is so, the two-slit experiment could be decomposed
into two one-slit experiments which do not possess the interference being observed.  Therefore
we have an apparent conflict, and it is an essence of the “interference mystery”.

                                                          
1 Shortened version of a report in IV Edition Workshop on MPP in QM, 31.08.2001, Gargnano, Italy.
2 Nakhmanson@t-online.de

Nakhmanson    p. 1 of 7

The attempts to solve this paradox went in two guidelines.  The first, so-called “Copenhagen
interpretation” of QM have reduced physical world to “observables”.  Wheeler declared:  “No
elementary phenomenon is a phenomenon until it is a registered (observed) phenomenon.” [1].
In  such  a  frame  it  is  absurd  to  ask  “which  slit  the  electron  has  passed”  if  we  look  at
interference.    The  problem  with  reduction  of  wave  function  had  inspired  here  a  many-world
hypothesis.  The  Copenhagen  interpretation  is  fruitless  and  the  many-world  nightmare  cannot
be accepted by common sense.

The second guideline includes different attempts to complete the mathematical formalism of
QM  with  physical  reality.    Schrödinger  tried  to  see  a  particle  as  a  wave  packet,  de  Broglie
developed  pilot-wave  concept,  Bohm  attributed  to  each  point  of  space  a  realistic  quantum
potential based on the wave function.  All these attempts have no success: they don’t predict
something  new  hence  cannot  be  proved  experimentally,  and  they  have  inner  problems,  e.g.
wave packets disperse, quantum potential has nonlocal links.

But the general and  fatal mistake of these attempts is that they place a wave function into
the real 3D-space.  A wave function does not belong to physical reality.  It is not in the real 3D-
space,  we  cannot  find  and  measure  it  there  directly.    If  you  allow  me  a  pun,  the  “waves  of
matter” are non-material.  Einstein justly called them “Gespensterfelder”.

A wave function is a mental construction in an abstract configuration space.  Nevertheless it
controls the behavior of material objects.  How is it possible?  We don’t know how.  But we
know a really  working  example:    The human consciousness can  control behavior of  material
objects (though we also do not know how).  Following this analogy we must conclude that the
particle  has  some  kind  of  consciousness  controlling  its  behavior,  and  the  wave  function  is  a
product of this consciousness.  The small size of an “elementary” particle must not confuse us:
An object with a size of an elementary particle can accommodate much more Planck cells than
not only the number of neurons in the human brain, but even than the total number of atoms of
all known biological objects.

The  wave-particle  duality  is  a  mind-body  one.    In  the  real  3D-space  there  exists  only  the
particle, the wave exists in its consciousness.  If there are many particles, their distribution in
accordance  with  the  wave  function  represents  a  real  wave  in  real  space.    Many  worlds,
Schrödinger cat, Great Smoky Dragon, etc. exist only as virtual mental constructions.

The  behavior  of  particles  is  purposeful,  which  is  reflected  in  the  teleological  nature  of
physical laws (variation principles).  Interacting particles exchange information.  They need to
have correlated notions about space and time, and in this sense one may speak of the preferred
system like our Greenwich one.  The “holism” of  the  Universe  is  informational in its nature.
The “Internet” of matter  exists  probably  from  the  time  of  Big  Bang.    Therefore  the  particles
have a good impression of surroundings.  One might expect that the civilization of particles has
undergone a long evolution.  It is possible that this civilization is past its prime already, and is
now in the state of stagnation.

The wave function is the strategy of the particle.   Receiving  new  information, the  particle
adjusts  its  strategy,  that  is,  its  wave  function.    This  is  the  so-called  “collapse”  of  the  wave
function.  It occurs not in the real space, as is commonly thought, but in the consciousness of
the particle, that is, locally  and instantaneously  on  the  common-sense  scale.    Contrary  to  the
opinion of von Neumann, Wigner and others, in the general case the human consciousness has
nothing to do with the collapse.

Such  an  interpretation  of  the  wave  function  allows  us  to  explain  all  QM  mysteries,
particularly interference.  In the case of Fig. 1 the particle emitted by source  S  in the direction
of any slit goes through that slit.  But its strategy takes into account a possibility to be emitted
in the direction of another slit.  These two possibilities interfere in the particle’s consciousness
and predict an oscillating distribution in the registration plane  R .  Following this instruction
the particle interacts with the edges of the slit to have corresponding angles of deflection.

Nakhmanson    p. 2 of 7

The wave function only sets the priorities.  Taking them into account the particle makes a

random choice.  Such tactics leads to “impartial” exploration of all alternatives.

Because the least action principle can lead to the wave equation, we may expect interference
of possibilities in purposeful behavior of living beings.  Fifteen years ago I tried to perform a
computer-simulated  two-slit  experiment  with  people  (Fig.  2(a)).    The  “particle”  comes  from
the source S  and moves up.  The person under test can deflect it left and right, particularly can
lead it through one of the slits in the screen SC  and further to the registration plane R .  For
comparison the program has also screens with only left or only right slit.

Fig. 2.  Computer simulation of two-slit experiment with people.

The  space  between  S    and  R    was  defined  as  a  “forest”.    In  the  forest  there  are  random
distributed  hidden  “mushrooms”  which  develop  themselves  only  if  the  particle  touch  them.
The new mushrooms  grow  randomly over the forest while their quantity stays  constant.  The
person  was  motivated  to  pick  the  mushrooms.    After  100  to  200  attempts  the  distribution  of
events over the registration plane R  was displayed (Fig. 2(b)).

To get a stable result in such experiments one needs  good statistics.  It can be one  person
having  stable  characteristics  and  be  tested  repeatedly,  or  many  persons  having  the  same
characteristics.  Both requests correspond to monochromatic flow and are not easy to realize.
Another problem is the density of mushrooms.  Because the collision with a mushroom can be
regarded as identification of the position of a particle and a possible change of its strategy, i.e.
collapse  of  a  wave  function,  such  attempts  were  excluded  from  the  statistics.    Therefore  for
statistics it is better to have no mushrooms at all, that however destroys the motivation.

Although of the first results were promising, the problem with statistics was not solved then.

The experiments were stopped and are continued only now.3

Let us come back to physics.  Two or more particles may have a common strategy. In such a
case their common wave function does not decompose into a product of partial wave functions.
Such “entangled” particles, being separated in space, nevertheless act in a concerted way.

The  information  available  to  the  particle  is  the  knowledge  of  the  past.    For  solving  the
variation problem, the particle must be  able to  predict  what is in  store  for  it.  Prediction is a
necessary attribute of any consciousness.  A consciousness with the faculty of prediction is a
non-mechanical hidden parameter that is possessed by the particles and that was overlooked by
Bell in the formulation of his theorem.

                                                          
3 The modern version of the program can be sent per e-mail on request.

Nakhmanson    p. 3 of 7

A

α

a

S

1

λ
1i
α', β'

2

λ
2i
α', β'

B

β

b

Fig. 3.  Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) experiment

Fig.  3  presents  the  scheme  of  Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen  (EPR)  experiment.    The  source  S
emits two entangled particles  1  and  2  possessing series of hidden parameters  λ1i and  λ2i ,
respectively.  The particles fly in opposite directions and are measured in distant points A  and
B .  The measurers having adjusted conditions  α  and  β , respectively, and give out results  a
and  b .

The proof of Bell’s theorem is based on the next assertion: If Pa is a probability of result a
measured on the particle  1  in the point A  having a condition (e.g. angle of analyzer) α , and
Pb  is  a  probability  of  result  b    measured  on  the  particle  2    in  the  distant  point  B    having  a
condition β , then β  has no influence on the Pa , and vice versa.  Herein Bell and others saw
the  indispensable  requirement  of  local  realism  and  “separability”.    Mathematically  it  can  be
written as

   Pab(λ1i,λ2i,α,β) = Pa(λ1i,α)×Pb(λ2i,β)            (Bell)  ,                        (1)
where  Pab  is the probability of the join result  ab , and  λ1i and  λ2i are hidden parameters of
particles 1  and 2  in an arbitrary local-realistic theory.  Under the influence of Bell’s theorem
and the experiments following it and showing, that for entangled particles the condition (1) is
no  longer  valid,  some  “realists”  reject  locality.    In  this  case  an  instantaneous  action  at  a
distance is possible, and one can write

Pab(λ1i,λ2i,α,β) = Pa(λ1i,α,β)×Pb(λ2i,β,α)       (nonlocality)  .            (2)
In  principle  such  a  relation  permits  a  description  of  any  correlation  between  a  and  b,
particularly  predicted  by  QM  and  observed  in  experiments.    But  if  the  particle  possesses
consciousness, in the frame of local realism the condition (1) is not indispensable.  Instead, one
can write

Pab(λ1i,λ2i,α,β) = Pa(λ1i,α,β´)×Pb(λ2i,β,α´)       (prediction)  ,              (3)
where   α´  and  β´  are the conditions of measurements in points  A  and B , respectively, as
they  can  be  predicted  by  particles  at  the  moment  of  their  parting.    If  the  prediction  is  good
enough,  i.e.,  α´  ≈  α    and    β´  ≈  β  ,  then  (3)  practically  coincides  with  (2)  and  has  all  its
advantages plus locality.  The way for local-realistic description of nature is free.

There  are  two  ways  to  confirm  the  consciousness  of  particles.  The  first  is  to  prevent  the
particles  from  correct  prediction  the  future,  which  should  lead  to  nonstandard  results.    Such
attempts  were  made  by  groups  of  Aspect,  Alley,  and  Zeilinger  [2-4].    The  first  group  used
periodically switching of analysers which was, of course, predictable.  Two other groups used
the “random” switching, but the randomness was borrowed from the object of study itself (i.e.
the quantum world),  which  cannot  be regarded as  reasonable.  Perhaps using  a  good human-
programmed “quasi-random” generator is preferable.

The second way is to affect the particles with information.  Let us illustrate this with some
examples.  In Fig. 4 an impulse of polarized light from source  S  is passed through a “black
box” meaning that the observer-physicist knows what goes in and can measure what goes out,
but does not know what is inside the box.  In the case shown in Fig. 4(a) the light that comes

Nakhmanson    p. 4 of 7

out  of  the  box  can  be  either  deflected  to  the  right  by  a  movable  mirror    M  ,    or  allowed  to
continue its way forward.  Such control of the beam, somewhat like a railway switch, we call
“force control”.

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)

a(   )

S

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)

M

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)

b(   )

S

c(   )

S

∆z
∆t

∆z
∆t

∆z
∆t

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)

Fig. 4.  (a ) - force control,  (b ) and (c ) - informational control .

If  we  place  inside  the  box  a  thick  transparent  glass  plate  on  the  path  of  the  beam  at  the
Brewster  angle  to  the  beam  (as  seen  in  Fig.  4(a)),  we  do  not  introduce  any  absorption  or
reflection, but the physicist can use his instruments to see that:

(1) (owing to the refraction in the plate) the beam going out of the box is parallel displaced

to the right by a distance  ∆z  (as shown in Fig. 4(a));

(2) (owing to the fact that the speed of light in glass is slower than in air, and the path length

is increased) the light will come out of the box with some delay  ∆t .

And this is all that the physicist can find out without looking into the box.

In  Figs.  4(b)  and  4(c)  in  place  of  the  total  reflecting  movable  mirror    M    we  have  fixed
semitransparent  mirrors,  and  the  thick  glass  plate  in  the  box  is  split  into  eight  thin  plates  of
which  two  are  thicker  than  the  rest.    Our  physicist  will  not  notice  any  of  the  changes  made
inside the box, because he will measure the same  ∆z  and  ∆t .  The photons, however, if they
are intelligent and know English and Morse code, will read the following instructions:

• — •     •      • • — •   = REF  (reflect)     in Fig. 4(b) ,
—    • • • •     • — •   = THR  (through)     in Fig. 4(c) ,

and will carry them out by reflecting in Fig. 4(b) or passing through in Fig. 4(c).  Such control
of the beam, like the traffic signs at a crossroad, may be referred to as “informational control”.

Note that carrying out of such “informational” experiments with elementary particles differs
from  anything  that  has  been  done  in  physics  so  far.    And,  of  course,  any  consciousness  can
manifest itself only in a situation having alternative outcomes.

It is possible that the particles actually know all human languages and codes.  But it would
be safer to assume that we are dealing with a totally different civilization that knows nothing

Nakhmanson    p. 5 of 7

about us, so that our first contacts will run into difficulties.  This problem is not new, and has
been  seriously  considered  in  the  framework  of  the  Search  for  Extraterrestrial  Intelligence
project  SETI.    Its  experts  are  inventing  “cosmic”  languages  capable  of  developing
communication from zero to a high semantic level.  At the initial stage one could recommend
trying such universal languages as mathematics and music.  The starting point for identifying
intelligence that may be much unlike ours, and for trying to establish contact with it, should be
some very general property presumable inherent in any kind of intelligence.  A good candidate
for such a role is curiosity.

D23

3

4

S

D24

«
«
«

SI

M

1

2

0

Fig. 5.  Informational experiment with a single ion.  0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 are the energy levels;
D23  and D24  are detectors,  S  is the source  of light,    M   is the  modulator,    SI   is  the
source of information .

Figure  5  shows  the  scheme  of  an  experiment  that  does  not  presume  that  the  particles  are
aware of our culture in any way.  Here a five-level quantum system, e.g., an individual ion in
trap, with one low (0), one high (1), and three intermediate (2,3,4) energy levels is pumped by
intensive radiation inducing the 0→1 transition, so that the ion does not stay in the state 0 but
immediately  is  translated  into  the  state  1  followed  by  metastable  state  2.    From  it,  the  ion
makes a spontaneous transition to the states 3 or 4, and later makes a transition to the state 0
completing  the  cycle.    The  radiation  corresponding  to  some  of  the  transitions    2→3,    2→4,
3→0,    and    4→0    are  detected  (in  Fig.  5  two  detectors  are  shown).    Besides,  there  is  an
informational action on the ion, e.g., by modulation of light coming from the source  S .  The
modulator  M  is controlled by the source of information  SI ,  which, in turn, is connected with
one or more detectors to close the feedback loop.

The feedback works in such a way as to stimulate a channel and  rate of transitions, in the
case of Fig. 5,  the  2→4  and  4→0  transitions.  The source  SI  sends a message, e.g., one line
of a page or a measure of a music, only if it receives a signal from detector  D24 .  Each next
message continues the previous one, i.e., is the next line or the next measure.

If  the  ion  has  a  consciousness  and  is  interested  in  the  information  being  proposed,  it
develops a conditioned reflex and will prefer the  2→4  transition to the  2→3  one.  Besides,
the rates of both  2→4  and  4→0  transitions must increase.  All this can be registered by the
experimenter.  To be sure that the effect is connected with information, one can make a control
experiment to cut off the feedback or/and to use some "trivial" information, etc.

Deviation from the standard transitions may be interpreted as an interest of the ion towards
the information.  Such an interest is thought to be an inherent attribute of each consciousness.
This important result does not even depend on the ability of the ion to decipher information.  It

Nakhmanson    p. 6 of 7

is  sufficient  that  it  is  curious.    It  is  like  people  of  modern  times  were  interested  in  ancient
hieroglyphic symbols long before they learned how to read them.

The  sequence  of  information  offered  for  the  ion  may  be  a  kind  of  a  course  teaching  it  a
language  for  further  dialogue.    To  measure  the  progress  of  learning,  the  experimenter  may
sometimes introduce into informational channel some specific "request”.  For example, one can
"ask" the ion to choose  2→3  transition rather than the  2→4  one. Since the ion, eager not to
shirk  the  lessons,  will  tend  to  prefer  the    2→4    transition,  the  execution  of  this  request  can
easily be detected by an experimenter and will mean that the text was decoded.

However,  the  possibilities  of  an  experiment  typified  in  Fig.  5  are  not  exhausted  by  this.
Purposefully  choosing  the  transitions,  the  ion,  in  its  turn,  can  send  information  to  the
experimenter using "right" and "left" (in Fig. 5) transitions as a binary code.

Something more about presented interpretation of QM can be found in [5] and [6].

References

University Press, 1983),  p. 192

[1] J.A.Wheeler, in “Quantum Theory and Experiment”, (Eds. J.A.Wheeler and W.H.Zurek) (Princeton

[2] A.Aspect, J.Dalibard, and G.Roger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49 1804 (1982)

[3] C.O.Alley et al.,  in Proc. 2nd Int. Symposium on Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Tokyo,

Japan, 1987 (Eds. M..Namiki et al.) (Tokyo: Phys. Soc. Japan, 1987),  p. 36

[4] G.Weihs et al.,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 5039 (1998)

[5] R.Nakhmanson,  in Los Alamos National Laboratory e-arXiv 2000,

http://xxx.lanl.gov/pdf/physics/0004047

[6] R.Nakhmanson,  ibid.,  http://xxx.lanl.gov/pdf/physics/0005042

Nakhmanson    p. 7 of 7

