WEAP017 

EVOLUTION OF THE SPS POWER CONVERTER  
CONTROLS TOWARDS THE LHC ERA  
 
J.C.L. Brazier, Brazier Systems & Consultants Ltd, UK 
A. Dinius, CERN, Geneva, Switzerland, P. Semanaz, B & S International, France 
 
 

Abstract 

I/O 

By  the  end  of  the  nineties,  the  power  converter 
control system (Mugef) of the CERN proton accelerator 
(SPS)  had  undergone  a  complete  modernization.    This 
resulted  in  newly  developed  hardware  for  function 
generation,  measurement  and 
in  a  VME 
environment,  under  the  LynxOS  real-time  operating 
system.    This  has  provided  a  platform  on  which 
extensions can be developed for future operation in the 
Large  Hadron  Collider  (LHC)  era. 
  This  paper 
describes  some  of  these  extensions,  in  particular a fast 
Surveillance  and  Interlock  system  for  monitoring  the 
power  converter  output  currents. 
  This  will  be 
mandatory  for  the  safe  operation  of  the  SPS  transfer 
lines TI2 & TI8 to LHC and for similar applications in 
the  future.    The  strategies  employed  to  cope  with 
various  failure  modes  of  the  power  converters  and  the 
timely activation of the interlock are outlined.  The new 
SPS  controls  infrastructure  now  under  development, 
will give rise to new modes of operation for the Mugef 
systems.    Integration  with  the  proposed  middleware 
must  be  undertaken  in  a  structured  evolution,  while 
retaining compatibility with the current usage. 

1 BACKGROUND 
Magnet circuits in CERN’s SPS are driven by power 
converters.    These  power  converters  are  controlled  by 
equipment known as a Mugef [1] that: 
•  Turns  the  power  converter  on  and  off  and  reads 

back its state. 

•  Using  an  analogue  to  digital  converter  (ADC), 
digitises  the  analogue  voltage  (±10V)  from  the 
every 
transducer 
output 
millisecond. 

(DCCT) 

current 

•  Produces a (±10V) reference voltage for the power 
converter  to  generate  the  magnet  current,  using  a 
digital to analogue converter (DAC). The output of 
the DAC follows a pre-loaded function. 

One  Mugef  crate  can  control  up  to  64  power 
converters  and  connects  to  the  control  system  via  a 
(SL-
proprietary  command/response  middleware 
Equip). 
 

1.1 Mugef Description 

function  generation 

The present Mugef is described in [1].  It consists of 
a VME chassis with a PowerPC-603e.  The controlling 
software  runs  under  the  LynxOS  real  time  operating 
system.  Special  purpose  cards  perform  the  reference 
voltage 
analogue 
acquisition  of  the  reference  output  and  DCCT  output.  
A single card provides on/off/reset and status read-back 
for all the power converters.  A CERN standard timing 
card provides synchronisation and  SPS machine timing 
events.    A  System  Arbiter  Controller  (SAC)  card 
completes the hardware. 

and 

the 

the  hardware 

The  controlling  software  consists  of  a  set  of 
processes  connected  with  message  queues  and  shared 
memory segments.   There is a process controlling each 
of 
(function  handling, 
elements 
acquisition,  status  control,  etc.)  which  includes  the 
hardware  driving,  as  all  the  cards  are  directly  mapped 
into  the  process’  memory.  A  timing  process  translates 
machine  timing  events  into  internal  action  triggers.  
These  are  interpreted  by  an  action  sequencer  that 
maintains  a  list  of  actions  (loading  functions,  doing 
measurements  etc.)    Finally,  there  is  a  process  that 
accepts  commands  from  the  rest  of  the  control  system 
and initiates immediate actions (‘Now’).  This software 
is  general  purpose  and  has  been  ported  to  other 
applications within the SPS control system [2]. 

1.2 Operational Experience 

Some 24 Mugef systems were brought into operation 
in April 1998 and have worked well since.  Reliability 
has been good, with several months between reboots. 

One of the initial design criteria was that the system 
should  be  amenable  to  extensions  and  modifications.  
Several of these have been absorbed successfully, most 
notably,  the  ability  to  accept  dynamic  corrections  to 
reference  output  function  data.    This  was  included  for 
experiments  in  closed-loop  control  of  the  beam  tune 
[3].  This entailed receiving a stream of correction data 
via  UDP  over  a  private  network  from  beam  position 
equipment around the ring.  These presaged the closed-
loop control needed for LHC. 

The  following  chapters  will  detail  two  crucial 
extensions,  namely  a  dynamic  surveillance  system 

(known  as  Channel-64)  and  the  modification  of  the 
controlling  software  to  mate  with  the  proposed  SPS 
control system middleware. 

is 

adequate 

2 CHANNEL-64 
Surveillance of the power converters in operation has 
been,  in  the  most  part,  the  province  of  the  control 
system  application  programs.    These  perform  both 
occasional analogue measurements of the output current 
and repeated requests for power converter status. Whilst 
this 
cases,  particular 
for  many 
circumstances  such  as  beam  ejection  require  rigorous 
testing of the magnet current at the time of ejection, on 
a  cycle-by-cycle  basis.    Here  it  is  necessary  to  ensure 
that all the critical power converters in the transfer line 
are working within their expected tolerance just before 
the  beam  is  extracted.    Implicitly,  this  also  means  that 
the power converter is not in fault and therefore a status 
check is not needed.  If any of the critical tolerances are 
exceeded, then extraction must be prevented, otherwise 
material  damage  to  the  vacuum  chamber  and  magnets 
could occur. 

2.1 Channel-6 Heritage 

The Channel-6 system, (named after the 6th interlock 
chain in the SPS control room), was designed in the mid 
80's,  using  discrete  analogue  electronic  components  to 
provide  the  above  functionality.  A  total  of  18  power 
converters  had  to  be  monitored  in  two  buildings. 
Remote  control  of  the  Channel-6  system  was  done  via 
standard SPS multiplex and associated software.   

The  system  verified 

that  the  monitored  power 
converters  had  reached  their  nominal  current  20  ms 
before the extraction should take place. On a per power 
converter  basis, 
two  comparisons  using  analogue 
comparators were made, just prior to extraction. Using 
the  timing  system  to  trigger  the  process,  the  DCCT 
output  signal  was  compared  with  a  reference  voltage 
supplied  by 
the  Mugef  system.  Any  difference 
exceeding  the  set  tolerance  then  opens  an  interlock 
chain,  thus  disabling  the  extraction  kicker  magnet 
power converter. This prevents extraction of the beam. 

Since  this  hardware  was  reaching  its  end of life and 
the  same  functionality  is  needed  for  the  LHC  transfer 
lines,  the  opportunity  existed  to  provide  the  same 
functionality,  using  an  extension  of  the  Mugef  system.  
Specifically, advantage could be taken of the fact that: 
•  The Mugef could digitally compare the actual ADC 
output  values  with  the  theoretical  function  values, 
rather  than  using  a hardware-synthesized reference 
and analogue comparison. 

 

•  The analogue acquisition memory already contains 
the 

the  milli-second  rate,  prior 

to 

data,  at 
comparison. 

•  A  choice  of  which  combination  of  power 
converters  to  include  is  fully  variable  up  to  all  64 
available. 

•  Different  comparison  algorithms  can  be  used  in 

different circumstances. 

•  The  precision  of  the  comparison  can  be  increased 

from 2% to 0.1% 

These  advantages  lead  to  a  very  cost  effective 
solution,  both  for  upgrading  the  original  Channel-6 
equipment and also for the new transfer lines to LHC. 

the 

taken 

to  ensure 

With any safety/interlock system, great care needs to 
be 
integrity  of  the  system. 
Permissioning  must  be  positive,  ie.  the  system  has  to 
enable the output only after each good comparison. The 
design  must  ensure  that  a  previous GO situation is not 
erroneously  replicated  to  succeeding  cycles.    This  is 
taken  care  of  by  both  software  and  hardware  clearing 
the permission at the start of each machine cycle. 
 

2.3 Hardware Needed. 

No  additional  hardware  is  needed  if  the  power 
converters  monitored  by  the  Channel-64  system  are 
only  sending  a  message  to  the  Central  Alarm  Server 
(CAS) when the set tolerances are not met. However for 
beam  extraction,  some  additional  hardware  is  needed. 
However,  instead  of  adding  an  I/O  board,  the  existing 
SAC  board  is  used  for  performing  the  necessary  I/O 
tasks  for  the  Channel-64  hardware.    Since  the  internal 
memory on the SAC board is not used, a small daughter 
board has been developed to replace the memory chips. 
Outputs are connected via a flat cable to the Channel-64 
display  and  interlock  chain  chassis.  A  maximum  of 
sixteen individual interlock chain chassis can be driven 
from the SAC board. 

2.4 Software Additions 

The  surveillance  is  triggered  by  a  machine  event 
occurring >= 10 mS prior to the required output action.  
Typically, some 3-10 mS of earlier data has been used.  
Using  a  tolerance  table,  pre-loaded  with  allowable 
values for each selected channel, a comparison is made 
with the measured data.  Timing test have revealed that 
the  entire  process  takes  approximately  4  mS for all 64 
channels. 

A  result  bit-mask  is  returned  of  all  the  channels  out 
of tolerance.  This is sent to the hardware in the form of 
go/no-go and the appropriate output is/is-not enabled.  

 

‘Device Server’ in the equipment subscribes to as many 
contracts  as  it  can  implement.  Callback  routines  in  the 
Device Server are activated as part of the contract, for 
example  on  the  addition/removal  of  new  machine 
cycles. 

The new control system and device servers are being 
developed  now  but,  will  have  to  be  implemented  on  a 
phased basis.  During this transition, both the new and 
old models of control will have to co-exist.  To enable 
this,  a  ‘Bridge  Server’  is  being  constructed  which  will 
respond  to  the  new  middleware  calls  and  generate  the 
appropriate SL-Equip calls to the Mugef.  Initially, this 
will  implement  the  ‘state  contract’,  which  allows  a 
power  converter  to  be  turned  on  and  off.    Other 
contracts,  like  ‘settings’  and  ‘cycle’,  will  be  added  in 
due course.   

When  all  the  legacy  applications  have  disappeared, 
the  bridge  can  be  disposed  of  and  its  functionality 
absorbed into the basic structure.  Clearly, this will be a 
major  software  change  (approx.  40%)  entailing  a 
complete rewrite of the Mugef front end.  However, the 
original  design  of  the  Mugef  software  allows  such 
changes  to  be  made  with  relative  ease,  as  previous 
examples have shown. 

4   CONCLUSION 
The  hardware  and  software  employed  in  the  Mugef 
was  designed  from  the  start  to  be  flexible  enough  to 
for  power 
incorporate  changes,  as 
converter  control  evolved.  During  its  lifetime,  the 
whole SPS control system model will also change. This 
paper shows the system fulfilling such requirements and 
rising to the new challenges of the LHC era. 

requirements 

REFERENCES 
[1]  A.H. Dinius et al, “Evolution in Controls Methods 
for  the  SPS  Power  Converters”,  ICALEPCS’95, 
Chicago, Nov. 1995. 

[2] J.C. de Vries, et al, "Real-time and control software 
for the new orbit measurement system of the CERN 
SPS, ICALEPCS'99, Trieste, Nov, 1999. 

[3]  A. Dinius, L. Jensen, P. Semanaz, "Measurement of 
the transfer function of the main SPS Quadrupoles, 
SL-Note-98-047, 20th July 1998 

[4]  A. Dinius,  D. Hundzinger, “Tests préliminaires du 
système "Fast Interlock" pour les lignes de transfert 
TI2 et TI8”, CERN Note, April 2001. 

[5]  M.  Jonker  et  al,  "Upgrading  the  SPS  operational 
software for the LHC era: The SPS-2001 software 
project", ICALEPCS'99, Trieste, Nov. 1999. 

2.4.1 Data Filtering Strategy Routines 

The original Channel-6 system simply averaged over 
time  and  compared  the  result  with  the  tolerance  using 
analog  comparators.    Whilst  this  is  acceptable  with 
stable  ADC  values,  it  will  give  erroneous  results  on  a 
ramp.  In this case, point by point comparison with the 
reference may be better. 

In  certain  cases,  power  converter  ripple  and  noise 
may  be  a  problem.  Simple  averaging  will  mask  the 
noise,  whereas  point  comparisons will not. A variation 
to  the  point  comparison  strategy  is  not  to  allow  single 
spikes to affect the result.  This is accomplished using a 
median  filter.    Ripple  outside  a  given  tolerance  could 
also be detected by yet another data treatment. 

Because  different  strategies  are  valid  in  different 
circumstances,  a  mechanism  has  been  incorporated  to 
allow  different  data 
to  be 
incorporated with the minimum of effort.  

treatment  subroutines 

Preliminary  tests  have  proven  the  validity  of  the 
system  using  the  strategies  outlined  above.    Detailed 
results can be found in [4].  

2.5 Software Only Solutions 

Since  the  software  is  available  on  all  the  Mugef 
systems,  regardless  of  whether  they  have  the  attached 
hardware,  this  becomes  a  useful  tool  for  monitoring 
power converters in operation. To this end, several new 
commands  have  been  added  to  allow  the  surveillance 
results to be logged or read directly. 

2.5.1 Alternative To on/off Status Checking 

In  general,  status  checking  only  confirms  that  the 
required power converters are switched on.  It does not 
confirm that their output current is within tolerance.  By 
comparison the new surveillance provided by Channel-
64  implicitly  provides  all  this  information.    Therefore, 
many application programs could be simplified/speeded 
up  by  augmenting  traditional  status  checking  with  this 
new method.   

3  NEW SPS CONTROL SYSTEM 
The  current  power  converter  application  programs 
interact  with  Mugef  via  an  infrastructure  based  on  the 
SL-Equip  call,  a  simple,  single-user,  synchronous, 
command  response  protocol.    This  may  be  superseded 
in  the  near  future  by  a  new  middleware-based  control 
software,  with  which  the  Mugef  must  necessarily 
integrate. 

This  middleware,  is  part  of  a  project  to  upgrade  of 
the SPS software[5] to turn the SPS into a multi-cycling 
injector  for  LHC.  This works by defining management 
contracts  for  cycle,  settings  and  status  control.    A 

