 
Upgrade of the SDL control system 
 
S.K. Feng, W.S. Graves, Y.N. Tang,  NSLS, BNL, Upton, NY 11973, USA 

WEAP008 

 
Abstract 
                   
    The Source Development Lab (SDL) at BNL consists 
of a 230 MeV electron linac and a 10 m long wiggler for 
short  wavelength  FEL  development.  The  original 
control system [1] was based on the one in use at the 
NSLS.  In 2000 the control system was upgraded to be 
based  on  EPICS  to  facilitate  software  interfaces  for 
extensions at all levels . The FEL began commissioning 
in May 2001.  The upgraded control systems have been 
stable, reliable and easy to operate. An overview of the 
control 
the 
oscilloscope (waveform digitizer) control/display, video 
system/image  processing  and  radiation  monitor/alarms 
will be presented.   

including 

systems, 

linac, 

the 

for 

1 INTRODUCTION 

In  SDL,  the  challenging  physics  requirement  and 
implementations 
different  favorite  approaches  for 
among physicists, users, and programmers initiated the 
upgrade of the control system to be based on EPICS to 
facilitate software interfaces for extensions at all levels.   
As of today, the mixed hardware platforms and software 
tools  of  the  SDL  control  systems  are  integrated 
homogeneously (see Figure 1).  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

The VME IOCs have interfaces to both CAMAC and 
VXI crates, and RS232 devices. The software for an RF 
multiplexor (MUX) and fast VXI waveform digitizers is 
developed  to  measure/record/display  many  voltage 
waveforms.  

 

 

2 IMPLEMENTATION 

2.1  The waveform digitizers 
 

In  the VXI crates,  there  are two  4-channel 1 GS/s  
waveform  digitizers  used  for  general  purpose  data 
acquisition and one 2-channel 5GS/s waveform digitizer 
used for beam position monitor (BPM) processing. The 
VXI waveform digitizer control and display, consisting 
of a MVME2301 PPC/VME-MXI-II/MXI-VXI-II and VXI 
scopes  hardware  and  EPICS  IOC  core  in  low  level 
control, is developed with the medm tool and Cartesian 
plotting to effectively present the  required information 
on the workstation (see Figure 2). 

  The requirement of the SDL application is to refresh 
the  display  of  the  ten  waveforms  simultaneously  on 
the  workstation    at  a  rate  close  to  10HZ  for  each 
channel. The challenge is to overcome the limited data 
transfer capability between the CPU and the waveform 
digitizer,  and  to  transfer  1K  bytes  of  voltage  data  in 
floating point format for each waveform (e.g. 80K bytes 
of  data  for  the  ten  channels)  across  the  network  to 
display on the workstation without compromising  the 
performance requirement. 

Theoretically,  the  data  move  performance  of  the 
VME-MXI-II  and  MXI-VXI-II  pair  tops  8-10  MB/s  at 
single cycles. However, the benchmark of  data move 
between  the  MVME2301  PPC  and  VXI  waveform 
digitizers ranges only 16-30 KB/s at single cycles. That 
limits  the  readouts  of  each  waveform  data  (2K  bytes) 
per  scope  channel    to  be  8-15  HZ  in  the  low  level 
control.   

At an early stage of device driver development with 
EPICS, the ten channels of scopes performed at 2 Hz of 
waveform  display  refresh  rate  when  the  records  were 
scanned  periodically.    After  further  enhancement of 
real-time programming by employing EPICS event scan 
and scope driver interrupts, the ten channels of scopes, 
while  running  simultaneously  under  average  network 
loads,  achieved  an  average  of  10  Hz  of  waveform 
display  refresh  rate  on  two  channels  and  6-7HZ of 
waveform  display  refresh  rate  on  the  other  eight 
channels.  
 

 

produce  light  that  is  imaged  by  Cohu  4910  CCD 
cameras.    The  RS-170  video  signals  are  fed  from 
approximately  60  cameras 
through  video  matrix 
switchers to monitors and a PC based frame grabber for 
image  processing.    The  Matrox  Meteor  II/MC  8  bit 
analog  frame  grabber  is  controlled  by  Matlab  mex  C 
function  calls  and  includes  a  GUI  interface  (figure  3).   
The  frame  grabber  and  analysis  software  can  set  and 
read  EPICS  process  variables  utilizing  an  ActiveX 
interface. 

Figure 2:waveform digitizer control/display demo  

2.2 Linac control systems 

The linac control systems consist of two VME IOCs 
controlled  by  MVME2301  PowerPCs    in  low  level 
control.    Most of the ADCs, DACs and digital I/O for 
the linac are carried using legacy CAMAC equipment. 
Although the VME/CAMAC driver was obtained from 
the community of the EPICS collaborations, the EPICS 
device  support  routines  for  our  CAMAC  equipment 
were  developed  in  house.  Stepper  motors  and  video 
switchers  are  controlled  via  RS232.  Once  device 
support  routines  are  developed,  new  records  of  the 
supported  device  can  be  added  to  the  system  by 
editing the database without the need of changing the 
low level device drivers and support routines, thanks to 
the  object-oriented  structure  of  the  EPICS  layers.  The 
EPICS  save/restore  program  embedded  in  the  IOC 
facilitates the restore of the output parameters  in case 
of  an  IOC reboot.  

The high level linac control is implemented with the 
medm tool of EPICS to provide friendly Graphical User 
Interfaces (GUIs).  Figure 5 shows the main page of the 
linac  GUI  control.  The  motif-based  channel  archiver 
(the  history  program  and  its  graphic  display)  and 
save/restore  programs  for  various control operations, 
which were in use at the NSLS were modified to include 
the  EPICS  channel  access  to  communicate    with  the 
linac  IOCs. 

 

2.3  Video System and Image Processing  
 

The  primary  beam  diagnostics  for  SDL  are  YAG:Ce 
scintillators  that  intercept  the  electron  beam  and 

Figure 3: Matlab GUI  to PC-based frame grabber 

The  frame  grabber  and  associated  Matlab  beam 
analysis  programs  provide  near  real-time  diagnostics 
capability  that  has  been  very  useful  during  the 
commissioning process.  Figure 4 shows an emittance 
measurement  that  is  performed  by  Matlab  function 
calls.  The beam sizes are read from the frame grabber 
and magnet settings are read from the EPICS database.  
These values are then used to calculate the emittance 
and  beam  Twiss  parameters.    This  enables  fast  lattice 
development and optimization of beam parameters. 
 

Figure  4:  Automated  emittance  measurement  using 
Matlab and Epics. 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

     Figure 5: The main page of the SDL control system 

3 WORK IN PROGRESS 

3.1  Radiation monitors/alarm status 

The radiation monitors/alarm status IOC  consists of  
one  MVME2301  PowerPC,  three  5-channel counters, 
digital I/Os and a general utility board for TV message 
display  [2].  The  radiation  monitor  is  required  for 
radiation safety to monitor and display radiation levels 
and alarm status on the TVs.  The system is specified to 
be implemented  to have the same specification as that 
of  the  alarm/radiation  system  which  is  in  use  at  the 
NSLS. The advantages of  using the TV display instead 
of  an  X  window  display  are,  1)  the  information  is  real 
time  independent  of  the  network  status,  and  2)    it   
eliminates  the need of point and click and shuffling the 
screen.  Thus,  there  is  no  need  to  train  users  who  are 
not familiar with X-windows environment.   

We  decided  it  is  worthwhile  to  rewrite  the  same 
specifications  to  be  based  on  EPICS  to  facilitate 
software interfaces for extensions at all levels. 

4 FUTURE PLANS 

For  the  RF  equipment  of  the  current  linac  control 
system, we would like to purchase VME64x IP modules 
of  ADCs  and  DACs,  which  have  built-in filters on the 
modules  to  eliminate  the  noise  that  we  see  in  the 
existing system. 

For  the  image  processing,  we  would  like  to  use  the 
same PC based frame grabber to be controlled under the 
LINUX  operating  system  as  one  of  the  EPICS  IOCs, 
which    facilitates  high  level  GUI  remote controls via a 
workstation. 

 
 

 

 
The workstation for VxWorks development  and high 
level  GUI  control  will  be  replaced  by  a  high-end PC  
running  the LINUX operating system due to  concern  
for  cost and performance. 

5  CONCLUSIONS 
The  SDL  control  systems  have  been  stable,  reliable 
and easy to operate.   We have been able to utilize the 
pre-existing  hardware  to  minimize  costs.  We  benefited 
from  the  object-oriented  structure  of  the  EPICS  layers 
to  reduce  the  efforts  of  maintenance  and  expansions 
without compromising the performance of low  level real 
time control (e.g. the implementations of  the  waveform 
digitizers ).  The upgrade is a satisfactory that we will 
continue  to  develop  and  expand  our  existing  control 
system  to  increase  functionality,  ease  of  use  and 
reliability of the facility. 

6  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

 
The authors would like to extend their thanks to all the 
people  who  have  helped  with    the  integration  of  the 
SDL  control  system.  This  work  performed  under  DOE 
contract DE-AC02-76CH00016. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  W.S.  Graves,  S.K.  Feng,  P.S.  Pearson,  J.D.  Smith, 
“Innovative Aspects of the SDL control System”, 
Proc. PAC97 (Vancouver, 12-16 May 1997). 

 
[2] S. Ramamoorthy,J.D.Smith,“GPLS VME Module: A 
Diagnostic and Display Tool for NSLS Micro Systems”, 
Proc. PAC99(New York City, 29 March – 2 April 1999).

