TUAP030 

USE OF EPICS FOR HIGH-LEVEL CONTROL OF SNS CONVENTIONAL 
FACILITIES [1] 
 
J.K.Munro, Jr., J.E.Cleaves, E.L.Williams, Jr., D.J.Nypaver, ORNL, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA 
K.-U.Kasemir, LANL, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA 
R.D.Meyer, Sverdrup Technologies, Tullahoma, TN 37388, USA 
 
 

Abstract 

the  SNS  conventional 

The  SNS  Project  intends  to  integrate  Conventional 
Facility Controls with its EPICS-based Accelerator and 
Target Control Systems. EPICS will therefore be used 
to  all 
to  provide  distributed  high-level  access 
subsystems  of 
facilities, 
including  cooling  water  towers,  chilled  water,  de-
ionized  water,  HVAC,  waste  processing,  and  power 
monitoring.  EPICS will provide operator displays and 
high-level  control  for  more 
than  1000  process 
variables.    EPICS  support  will  be  provided  by  four 
IOCs  using  PowerPC-based  VMEbus  controllers  .  
Low-level  control  will  be  provided  by  Allen-Bradley 
ControlLogix  PLCs  that  will  communicate  among 
themselves  using  ControlNet  and  with  EPICS  using 
EtherNet/IP  [2].  Both  the  PLC  layer  and  the  EPICS 
layer  will  be  implemented  by  an  industrial  supplier.  
File server support will be Linux-based and Concurrent 
Versions  System  (CVS)  will  be  used  to  manage 
version control, both for EPICS and for PLC program 
and  configuration  files.    All  system  process  variable 
names, hardware, software, and database configuration 
properties  will  be  maintained  in  a  master  Oracle 
database  which  will  be  used  to  generate  and  maintain 
EPICS and PLC databases for the entire project. 

1 INTRODUCTION 
This  paper  describes  the  business  and  technical 
arrangements made by the SNS Project with Sverdrup 
Technologies (SvT) to develop the control systems for 
the  SNS  conventional  facilities  (CF).    EPICS  will  be 
used  to  provide  high-level  control  and  display  of 
information  about  CF  subsystems  to  the  operators; 
commercial  PLC  technology  will  provide  low-level 
control  of  all  CF  hardware.    Primary  CF  subsystems 
include  HVAC,  chilled  water,  de-ionized  water,  air 
handling, waste processing, and power monitoring. 
 
    New  elements  for  this  project  exist  in  both  the 
technical and business areas.  In the technical area the 
Linux  operating  system  is  being  used  to  support  all 
EPICS functions and development tools; the Motorola 
MVME2101  PowerPC  processor  board  is  being  used 
in all I/O controllers (IOCs).  In the business area this 
development  effort  probably  is  the  first  time  all  CF 

control systems are being integrated “up front” into the 
EPICS  control  system  for  a  large  accelerator  facility.  
This  infrastructure  must  be  built  early  to  provide 
support  for  the  major  accelerator  subsystems  as  they 
are  added;  hence,  is  one  of  the  first  major  SNS 
subsystems to be completed and put into operation.  To 
guide  development,  standards  and  guidelines  for 
control  system  software  and  operator  displays  have 
been  prepared,  approved,  and  distributed 
the 
development contractor(s).  As a consequence, the CF 
control  system  development  schedule  has  driven  the 
development of standards and guidelines and selection 
of  hardware  that  will  be  used  for  development  of 
control systems for other SNS subsystems. 
 

to 

The basic plan is for the SvT developers to identify 
all the I/O points required for the CF.  I/O point names 
(following  a  standard  naming  convention)  and 
descriptions  are  entered  into  spreadsheets  from  which 
they  can  be  read  by  scripts  to  generate  tag  name  lists 
used in the PLCs and process variable (PV) names for 
EPICS  databases  which  are  loaded  into  IOCs.    Tag 
names  are  grouped  by  EPICS  record  type  and  packed 
into  data 
transfer  arrays  which  are  used  by  a 
communications driver (EtherNet/IP) [2] to move data 
for the operator displays between the PLCs and IOCs.  
The  SvT  developers  will  write  the  ladder  logic 
programs used by the PLCs for low-level control of the 
hardware, will develop the operator screens needed for 
high-level  control,  and  will  generate  the  EPICS 
databases to be loaded into the IOCs. 

2 BUSINESS ARRANGEMENTS 
All  SNS  CF  control  systems  are  being  developed 
through  fixed  price  contracts  with  SvT,  located  in 
Tullahoma,  TN,  a  few  hours’  drive  from  the  SNS 
Project office in Oak Ridge.  SvT engineers have broad 
experience  in  the  integration  of  highly  technical 
systems.  Contracts have been placed for system (Title 
I) design, detailed (Title II) design, cabinet fabrication 
cabinet 
design, 
fabrication,  software  and  database  development  (both 
EPICS  and  PLC  logic),  loop  testing  after  equipment 
installation,  and  procurement  and  storage  of  sensors 
and control elements.  Cabinet, sensor, control element, 

procurement 

electronics 

and 

 

installation, 

cabling/conduit 
cabling 
termination  will  be  done  via  fixed  price  contract  with 
an installation contractor with expertise in this area. 
 

field 

and 

Having  a  single  integrating  contractor  perform  all 
this  work  eliminates  many  interfaces  and  the  need  to 
pass  information  from  one  contractor  to  another.    It 
also  allows  loading  developed  software  into  cabinet 
equipment and testing the entire system before delivery 
for installation. 

3  PLC APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT 
ENVIRONMENT 
All  PLC  application  development  is  being  done 
using  RS  Logix  5000  on  a  Windows  2000  system  to 
configure  the  hardware  and  write  the  ladder  logic 
control  programs.    All  I/O  point  information  is  being 
maintained  in  Excel  spreadsheets  and  MS  Access 
databases. 
 

Considerable  effort  went  into  the  development  of  a 
standard  naming  convention  for  control  PVs.    The 
results  of  this  effort  have  been  published  in  a  project 
reference  document  [3].    Scripts  have  been  written  to 
use  the  common  signal  naming  syntax  to  read  names 
from  the  I/O  points  database  maintained  in  Excel 
spreadsheets  and  write  files  for  the  PLC  and  EPICS 
databases with PV names constructed according to the 
different  syntax  rules  used  for  tag  names  (PLCs)  and 
the corresponding EPICS database records. 
 

Performance  measurements  made  for  data  transfers 
between  PLCs  and  IOCs  using  the  EtherNet/IP  driver 
[2] showed in dramatic fashion the importance of using 
arrays to transfer data quickly and efficiently.  For this 
reason  a  separate  data  transfer  array  is  used  for  each 
different EPICS record type, e.g., ai, ao, bi, bo, mbbi, 
and mbbo. 

4  EPICS APPLICATION 
DEVELOPMENT ENVIRONMENT 
The computers and software used by SvT were first 
set up in Oak Ridge the way they would be configured 
in Tullahoma for the development work.  All software 
tools  were  installed  and  configured.    An  example 
application was set up and used to check out every step 
of the development sequence, from I/O points listed in 
an  Excel  spreadsheet  to  an  operating  application  on  a 
PLC with data transferred to an EPICS database loaded 
into  an  IOC  using  the  EtherNet/IP  driver,  and  PVs 
displayed on screens built using the Extensible Display 
Manager  (EDM).    This  example  application  was  later 
used in training exercises. 
 

A  minimal  development  environment  sufficient  to 
duplicate the environment set up at SvT was set up in 

Oak Ridge for use in providing technical support to the 
SvT  team.    This  system  is  also  available  for  giving 
demonstrations  at  SNS    program  review  meetings.  
to  operating  systems,  application 
Any  upgrades 
software,  or  development  procedures  are 
first 
implemented and tested on the Oak Ridge environment 
before being installed on the Tullahoma system.  This 
minimizes  impacts  on  the  developers  and  supports 
strong configuration control. 

2.1  Hardware Configuration 

(Pentium 

Seven  workstation  class 

III  Xeon) 
computer  were  purchased  for  programming  the  PLCs 
(4 Windows 2000 systems) and developing the EPICS 
screens and databases (3 Linux systems).   Two Linux 
file servers with 5 disk RAID systems were purchased.  
Identical 
development 
environments  (ADEs  were  set  up  on  them.    A  second 
Ethernet card was installed in the SvT server to permit 
setting  up  the  development environment at Tullahoma 
on a private LAN.  These two servers communicate via 
a T1 line. 

application 

EPICS 

2.2  Software Configuration 

An  SNS  CF  ADE  was  set  up  to  minimize  the 
amount  of  EPICS  system  administration  work  needed 
by  SvT.    The  directory  structure  is  consistent  with 
conventions  used  by  the  scripts,  rules,  and  makefiles 
provided with the official EPICS software distribution 
the 
and  described 
Advanced  Photon  Source  Web  site  at  Argonne 
National Laboratory. 

in  documents  available  from 

 

 

 

2.2  Application Development Process 

The  SvT  development  team  has  already  identified 
the  CF  I/O  points  from  process  and  instrument 
drawings  (P&IDs)  and  has  used  spreadsheets  and  an 
MS Access database to archive and maintain this data.  
Scripts  were  written  to  apply  the  tag  and  EPICS  PV 
naming conventions to this I/O point data to generate a 
set  of  spreadsheets  which  are  used  as  input  to  RS 
Logix  5000  to  generate  tag  names  and  to  scripts  used 
to  build  the  EPICS  database  files  needed  for  the 
operator  displays.    The  tag  names  are  used  in  the 
ladder  logic  programs  which  are  downloaded  into  the 
PLCs.    Data  for  selected  tag  names  are  packed  into 
transfer arrays which an EtherNet/IP driver reads from 
PLC  memory  and  writes  into  the  EPICS  database 
records accessed by the displays. 
 

All  these  sets  of  I/O  points  data  will  eventually  be 
loaded  into  the  SNS  master  Oracle  database  and 
maintained  by  tools  written  for this purpose.  A long-

 

term goal is to automate the process of generating and 
maintaining  the  data  that  must  be  downloaded  to  the 
PLCs  and  IOCs  from  the  master  Oracle  database  so 
that all control system data can be centrally maintained 
and  administratively  controlled.    This  should  also 
allow  IOC  databases  to  be  modified  and  downloaded 
more reliably and IOCs to be rebooted automatically. 
 

Training  of  the  development  team  was  built  around 
the development sequence and processes that would be 
used to generate all parts of the CF control system.  It 
consisted  of  an  abbreviated  version  of  the  standard 
EPICS course, with emphasis on the more limited tool 
set needed to build the CF applications. 

5  CONFIGURATION CONTROL 
During  development  the  SvT  team  will  arrange  for 
configuration  control  of  the  I/O  points  database, 
scripts,  configuration 
files,  PLC  programs,  and 
operator  display  screens.    All  primary  data,  scripts, 
programs,  and  display  screen  files  from  SvT  will 
eventually be archived and maintained in SNS project 
CVS repositories. 

 
Configuration  control  of  all  EPICS  related  software 
is done using the SNS CVS repository  in Oak Ridge.  
New versions of the screen editor and display manager 
EDM  are  used  and  tested  in  Oak  Ridge  before  being 
installed  on  the  file  server  in  Tullahoma.    The  same 
procedure  will  be  followed  for  any  changes  to  EPICS 
base or any of the EPICS extensions obtained from the 
primary repository at Argonne National Laboratory. 

6  CONCLUSIONS 
A number of lessons have been learned in the areas 
of  developing  requirements,  functional  system  design 
documents,  standards,  training,  software  development 
configuration 
environment, 
from 
management, 
experience to date.  This effort is leading the way for a 
significant  amount  of    control  system  application 
development to follow for SNS.  A few highlights will 
be indicated here. 
 

contract  management 

technical 
and 

support, 

Document 

tag  names,  signal  names,  setpoints, 
EPICS  record  parameters,  and  logic  functions  in  a 
 

manner  that  can  be  used  to  test  completed  software 
in  spreadsheet  or  database  applications).  
(e.g., 
Generate as much of this information as possible from 
P&ID  diagrams: 
this  permits  converting  design 
information  in  P&ID  language  to  data  in  formats  that 
tested  by  software 
can  be  used  directly  and 
applications.  The contractor who will develop the CF 
control  systems  should  generate  all 
the  design 
information  before  any  control  system  development 
activities  begin:  this  should  help  to  insure  that  the 
contractor  software  developers  understand  what  must 
be built. 
 

Standards should encompass all aspects of the work, 
should  be  documented  in  a  design  criteria  or  similar 
representative 
document, 
prototypical  examples  and 
their 
features accomplish what is desired/expected. 
 

to  some 
tested 

then  applied 

to  verify 

Choose examples for use in training that can be used 
later in what must be developed.  These examples must 
use  the  standards  and  tools  in  the  same  way  as  the 
product  to  be  delivered.    Set  the  examples  up  in  the 
same ADE (in a “training” directory) that will be used 
for development. 
 

In  preparing  the  ADE,  make  reasonable  efforts  to 
use database application and other tools with which the 
contractor  is  already  familiar.    This  should  speed 
development time and support development of a more 
reliable product. 

 

REFERENCES 
[1]  Work supported by the US Department of Energy 

under contract DE-AC05-00OR22725. 

 
[2]  Kay-Uwe  Kasemir  and  L.R.  Dalesio,  “Interfacing 
the  ControlLogix  PLC  Over  EtherNet/IP” 
ICALEPCS 2001, San Jose, CA 27-30 November 
2001. 

 
[3]  “Systems  Requirement  Document  for  Equipment, 
Device,  and  Signal  Naming,”  SNS  102000000-
SR00001-R00, August 2001. 

