WEAP037 

PLC BASED UPGRADES FOR THE CAMD LINAC AND STORAGE RING 
CONTROL SYSTEM 
 
P. Jines and B. Craft, Center for Advanced Microstructures and Devices, Louisiana State University, 
6980 Jefferson Highway, Baton Rouge, LA 70806, USA 
 
 

Abstract 

Louisiana  State  University  Center  for  Advanced 
Microstructures and Devices (CAMD) began a control 
system upgrade project in early 1997. At the time, the 
storage  ring  was  controlled  by  a  VAX/VMS  system, 
primarily  using  CAMAC  for  I/O.    The  injector  Linac 
was  controlled  by  a  separate  VME/OS/9  system  using 
custom  I/O  components.  The  storage  ring  control 
system  has  been  replaced  with  a  PC/Linux  based 
system,  utilizing  the  existing  CAMAC  subsystem  [1]. 
In  an  effort  to  both  migrate  channels  away  from 
CAMAC,  and  integrate  the  Linac  controls  with  the 
storage  ring  controls,  a  design  for  upgrades  utilizing 
AutomationDirect.com  PLCs  was  presented  [2].  This 
paper  will  discuss  the  detailed  design  for  the  Linac 
PLC  based  control  system,  and  discuss  the  status  of 
PLC upgrades for the Vacuum system, Kicker controls, 
2nd RF system, and utilities monitoring. 

1 INTRODUCTION 
When  the  CAMD  control  system  upgrade  project 
began in early 1997, CAMD was faced with the task of 
integrating  two  separate  control  systems,  with  no 
reliable  communications  method  between  the  two.  
Although CAMD's LINAC and storage ring were both 
procured from Maxwell Laboratories via a single, fixed 
price contract, early in the design phase the Linac was 
subcontracted to CGR-MeV.  

and 

Remote 

At  the  end  of  commissioning,  the  ring's  control 
system  was  a  VAX/VMS  based  system  running  Vista 
Controls  VSystem  software,  utilizing  CAMAC,  GPIB, 
I/O 
Allen-Bradley 
RS232, 
communications.    The  Linac  control  system,  however, 
was  a  VME/OS/9  system  using  custom  I/O  cards.  
While  Maxwell  and  CAMD  had  specified  TCP/IP 
access  to  the  control  system  computer,  subsystem 
acceptance 
type  of 
communications  was  not  possible.    If  the  system  was 
"ping"ed via TCP/IP, the watchdog timers expired, and 
the software interlocks shut down the Linac. 

tests  had  shown 

that 

this 

The  first  control  system  to  be  upgraded  was  the 
storage  ring  control  system.    Initially,  the  VAX  was 
replaced with a PC/Linux based system, preserving all 
  Later  phases  of 
interfaces. 
existing  hardware 

development were focused in two areas.  The first was 
enhancing  the  controls  capability,  including  adding 
additional  control  channels  for  a  superconducting 
wiggler  and  additional  corrector  magnets,  and 
increasing  logging  and  operator  automation.    The 
second area was reducing the dependence on CAMAC 
and  proprietary  Allen-Bradley  protocols,  and  allowing 
remote  data  acquisition.    In  this  effort,  GPIB  and 
RS232/422/485 channels were given remote capability 
using  National  Instruments  GPIB-ENET  and  Comtrol 
Rocketport  Serial  Hub  Si  remote  ethernet  based  hubs.  
For  all  other  upgrades,  CAMD  has  standardized  on 
AutomationDirect.com DL405 series PLCs. 

2 PLC/CONTROL SYSTEM OVERVIEW 

2.1 PLC Types 

The AutomationDirect.com DL405 series PLCs have 
two  different  types  of  base  controllers:  the  DL405 
CPUs  and  the  Ethernet  Base  Controller  (EBC).    The 
DL405  CPUs  provide  traditional  CPU/Ladder  Logic 
type  control  of  the  PLC,  whereas  the  EBC  eliminates 
the CPU, and provides a "pass thru" to allow the PC to 
control the PLC's I/O directly. 

the 

PLC's  memory  without 

In  combination  with  the  DL405  CPU,  the  ethernet 
communications  module  allows  the  PC  to  read  and 
special 
write 
communications  software  in  the  PLC.    This  led  to  the 
idea  of  using  a  "dual-port"  memory  model,  where 
machine status and other parameters are communicated 
between  the  PLC  and  the  control  PC  thru  the  PLC's 
memory.    This  provides  a  system  with  PLC  type 
control, but PC based remote configurability. 
2.2  Control System Integration 

Channel  information  for  CAMD's  control  system  is 
stored  in  a  PostgreSQL  database,  and  is  organized  by 
device type, with device specific parameters as needed.  
As  the  CAMAC  channel  information  is  organized  by 
crate,  slot,  channel  address,  and  channel  type,  this 
seemed a logical approach to organize the PLC channel 
information. 
  For  the  EBC  type  controller,  this 
provided an exact match for the access method that the 

protocol 

communications 

communications library provides.   For the CPU based 
controllers,  additional  abstraction  is  necessary.    The 
DL405  CPU  architecture  provides  a  flexible  memory 
map:  Inputs, outputs, control registers, and timers can 
be accessed directly, or as a "V memory" address.  The 
ethernet 
differentiates 
between  different  I/O  and  memory  types  by  simply 
providing  an  address  and  a  hex  value  for  I/O  or 
memory  type.    By  combining  this  flexibility  with  the 
fact that the DL405 CPU's can provide a fixed starting 
I/O address for each slot (thereby eliminating I/O space 
size  differences  between  a  slot  containing  a  8  channel 
module  and  one  containing  a  64  channel  module),  a 
software mapping can be made between the "crate, slot, 
channel" view and the "V memory" address space.  By 
adding fields to control the "base V memory" address, 
the  PC  code  can  be  written  without  concern  as  to 
whether  it  is  writing  directly  to  I/O,  or  to  a  memory 
location,  indicating  that  the  PLC  CPU  will  handle  the 
I/O itself. 

3 LINAC CONTROL SYSTEM 
UPGRADES 

3.1 Current Linac Configuration and 
Migration Plan 

The current Linac control system is based on a VME 
computer  with  custom  I/O  components.    A  custom 
scanner  card  in  the  VME  crate  using  a  dual-port 
memory map protocol communicates with the I/O cards 
via  a  50-pin  ribbon  cable  using  a  CGR-MeV  in-house 
protocol.    Each  I/O  card  is  homogenous  in  that  all 
digital I/O is a TTL signal, and all analog I/O utilizes a 
0-10V  signal.    Each  card  is  given  its  address  via 
external TTL voltages.  The cards have a ribbon cable 
connector  on  one  side,  and  connect  to  a  3U  Eurocard 
backplane  that  handles  all  incoming  and  outgoing 
control  signals.    This  backplane  then  connects  to  any 
signal specific hardware necessary, such as TTL to 24V 
contact  relays,  voltage  to  frequency  converters,  or 
directly to the devices controlled. 

As all I/O is homogenous at the Eurocard backplane, 
this  is  the  point  at  which  the  conversion  from  the  old 
control system to the new PLC system will take place.  
Special cables have been fabricated to connnect D-shell 
DIN-rail  breakout  boxes  to  the  96-pin  backplane 
connectors.    Using  this  setup,  the  new  control  system 
can be tested, and the Linac can be reverted to the old 
control system simply by removing the adapter cables, 
and reinserting the I/O cards as before. 

 

3.2 PLC Linac Control System Architecture 

The  Linac  control  system  design  utilizes  simple, 
dedicated  purpose  PLCs. 
  Analog  interlocks  and 
associated  digital  permits,  control,  and  interlocks  are 
all  performed  by  separate  PLCs  or  relays.  This allows 
portions  of  the  system  to  be  distributed  and  enhanced 
without affecting the entire system. 

  Most digital Linac interlocks will be performed by 
dry relays.  These will receive control inputs from EBC 
PLCs,  and  permits  from  smarter  CPU  based  PLCs, 
which are responsible for all analog limit checking. 

Temperatures,  power  supply  readbacks,  and  other 
analog signals are monitored by dedicated "analog limit 
checking" PLCs.  Each PLC is responsible for checking 
a group of analog inputs against upper and lower limits 
contained  in  its  memory.    The  readbacks  and  limit 
values are all readable and/or writeable by the operator 
using  the  dual-port  memory  interface.    In  the  event  of 
an out of range indication, a digital output, or “permit”, 
is  turned  off,  which  in  turn  is  monitored  by  interlock 
PLCs  or  relays.    The  faults  are  latched,  and  must  be 
reset by the operator before continuing. 

Digital interlock PLCs and relays are used to monitor 
the  analog  "out  of  range"  faults,  and  well  as  other 
incoming  digital  signals.    These  are  responsible  for 
removing  permits  in  cases  of  low  water  flow,  valve 
closures, power supply out of range conditions, or other 
indicators. 

4 RING CONTROL SYSTEM 
UPGRADES 
In  addition  to  the  Linac  control  system  currently  in 
progress,  CAMD  has  also  upgraded  several  ring 
systems to PLC based systems.  These include Vacuum 
interlocks  and  monitoring,  TSPs,  and  other  digital 
control functions. 

4.1 Vacuum Interlocks and Monitoring 

CAMD  has  recently  upgraded  its  vacuum  system.  
There  are  significantly more Ion pump controllers and 
vacuum  gauge  controllers  than  in  the  older  system.  
The  decision  was  made  to  replace  the  old  control 
system  with  a  combination  EBC/CPU  PLC  system.  
The  system  now  consists  of  one  identical  rack  per 
quadrant,  each  containing  an  EBC  based  PLC.    These 
PLCs  monitor  the  readbacks  for  each  Ion  pump 
controller and vacuum gauge controller in the quadrant.  
Contact closures from the vacuum gauge controllers are 
sent  to  a  CPU  based  PLC,  which  contains  the  ladder 

 

REFERENCES 
[1] B. Craft and P. Jines, 'The GNU Control System at 
CAMD,' Proceedings of the 1997 ICALEPCS, pp. 
194-196, 1997 

[2] P. Jines and B. Craft, 'The GNU Control System at 
CAMD:  Part  Two,'  Proceedings  of  the  1999 
ICALEPCS, pp. 118-120, 1999 

 

logic and digital outputs necessary to close various ring 
valves in cases of high pressure conditions. 

4.2 Titanium Sublimation Controllers 

The  initial  TSP  system  for  the  CAMD  storage  ring 
contained  only  one  sublimation  controller,  had  no 
indication  of  the  success  or  failure  of  the  firing 
operation,  and provided no indication as to how much 
current was applied to each filament.  An upgrade was 
planned  to  provide  one  sublimation  controller  per 
quadrant,  routing  its  output  via  a  PLC  controlled 
multiplexer,  and  to  provide  a  graphical  user  interface 
with  logging  capability  for  the  firing  operation.    For 
this  activity,  unused  digital  output  channels  from  the 
vacuum  system  upgrade's  EBC  PLCs  were  used  to 
control  the  multiplexer.    The  sublimation  controllers' 
RS232  interfaces  were  controlled  using  the  Comtrol 
Rocketport  Serial  Hub  Si  ethernet  hubs.    At  the 
completion of the upgrade, the TSP system now can be 
run in one fourth of the time previously required, has a 
graphical  indication  of  its  activity,  and  has  logging 
capability to monitor the vacuum system's performance. 

4.3 Other PLC Upgrades 

At present, CAMD is attempting to utilize CAMAC 
only for machine ramping functions, and to migrate all 
other  controls  to  PLC  based  systems.    In  this  effort, 
controls 
for  both  a  second  RF  system  being 
commissioned  and  the  existing  RF  system  are  being 
converted  from  CAMAC  to  PLC  control.    Kicker 
controls  have  been  converted  from  an  Allen-Bradley 
PLC5 platform to the AutomationDirect.com platform.  
Monitoring for water plants, critical Linac temperatures 
and  SF6  pressures  are  being  provided  by  EBC  based 
PLCs.  Digital controls for new superconducting power 
supplies  are  being  developed  using  the  EBC  platform.  
Finally,  Ion  Clearing  Electrode  controls  have  been 
converted to PLC based control. 

5 CONCLUSION 
CAMD  has  converted  many  existing  controls  to  the 
AutomationDirect.com  PLC  systems.    A  new  Linac 
control system is being developed using a combination 
of  smart  CPU  based  PLCs  for  interlock  control,  and 
less expensive EBC based control where only pure I/O 
is  needed.    At  the conclusion of the upgrades, CAMD 
expects  to  have  a  consolidated,  inexpensive,  open  and 
supportable system utilizing CAMAC where ramping is 
required,  and  non-proprietary  PLCs  for  most  other 
functions. 

