WEAP013 

THE SNS CRYOGENIC CONTROL SYSTEM:  
EXPERIENCES IN COLLABORATION [1] 
 
W. H. Strong, P. A. Gurd, SNS ORNL, Oak Ridge, TN 37830 USA 
J. D. Creel, B. S. Bevins, TJNAF, Newport News, VA 23606 USA 
 
 

Abstract 

The  cryogenic  system  for  the  Spallation  Neutron 
Source  (SNS)  is  designed  by  Jefferson  Laboratory 
(JLab)  personnel  and  is  based  on  the  existing  JLab 
facility.    Our  task  is  to  use  the  JLab  control  system 
design  [2]  as  much  as  practical  while  remaining 
consistent  with  SNS  control  system  standards.    Some 
aspects  of  the  systems  are  very  similar,  including 
equipment to be controlled, the need for PID loops and 
automatic sequences, and the use of EPICS.  There are 
differences  in  device  naming,  system  hardware,  and 
software tools.  The cryogenic system is the first SNS 
system  to  be  developed  using  SNS  standards.  This 
paper reports on our experiences in integrating the new 
and the old. 

1 PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

The SNS project is a partnership involving six DOE 
national laboratories:  Argonne, Brookhaven, Jefferson, 
Lawrence Berkeley, Los Alamos, and Oak Ridge.  The 
project is described in more detail on the SNS website 
and elsewhere in these proceedings.   [3, 4] 

  Once 

for  operation  of 

The  cryogenic  system  provides  the  refrigeration 
necessary  to  supply  the  2.1(cid:176)   Kelvin  liquid  helium 
the  SNS  accelerator 
required 
superconducting  cavities. 
the  cryogenic 
refrigerator system is placed in service, it is expected to 
run continuously.  Shutting down the cryogenic system 
is  very  expensive  due  to  the  loss  of  beam  time  and 
helium.    Cryogenic  refrigerator  systems  operate  best 
with  a  fairly  constant  load.    There  are  very  few 
independent control loops; a change to any one control 
variable  affects  the  entire  system.    The  Cryogenic 
Control System (CCS) provides the coordinated control 
algorithms  to  support  the  complex  operation  of  the 
cryogenic refrigeration system. 

2 CONTROL SYSTEM OVERVIEW 

The top-level Integrated Control System (ICS) for the 
entire SNS project is based on the Experimental Physics 
and  Industrial  Control  System  (EPICS)  suite  of 
monitoring  and  control  software.    For  the  cryogenic 
systems,  EPICS  provides  the  operator  interface  for 

control  and  monitoring,  alarming  and  archiving  of 
selected  signals,  and  routines  to  analyze  real-time and 
historic data.  All high level control algorithms, control 
loops and automatic sequences reside in EPICS.  EPICS 
routines constantly monitor the state of the cryogenic 
system  and  update  control  outputs  to  keep  the 
refrigerator  system  stable  and  the  load  constant.  
Programmable  Logic  Controllers  (PLC)  are  used  to 
interface  signals  from  sensors  and  actuators  to  the 
EPICS  Input/Output  Controllers  (IOC).    PLCs  perform 
low level interlocks, control loops and sequences.   

3 DESIGN COLLABORATION 

JLab is designing and procuring the cryogenic plant 
and  cryomo dules  including  all  mechanical  equipment, 
instrumentation,  and  control  devices.    The  control 
system at JLab uses EPICS.  The SNS CCS duplicates 
the JLab system as much as practicable.   

The SNS Integrated Control System Group at the Oak 
Ridge  National  Laboratory  (ORNL)  is  producing  the 
CCS from the sensors and actuators up.  This includes 
cables,  signal  conditioning,  PLCs,  VME  based  IOCs, 
boot servers, operator interface workstations, network 
hardware, and all control room equipment. 

Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory  (LANL)  provides 
general  EPICS  support.    LANL  also  provides  the  RF 
control system for the cryomodules and the RF signals 
needed by the CCS for use in heater control. 

 

Figure 1: Collaboration on the SNS Cryogenic System.  

 
Due to advances in hardware and software, there are 
differences  in  the  CCS  implementation  between  JLab 
and  SNS.    JLab  has  used  their  experience  with  an 

operating  cryogenic  system  to  provide  invaluable 
advice  and  guidance  in  the  selection  of  hardware  and 
software components for use by SNS. 

4 HARDWARE 

4.1  Cryogenic Control Room Hardware 

The SNS Control Room will be used for control of all 
accelerator systems.  A small local control room will be 
included  in  the  Central  Helium  Liquefier  building  for 
operation  of  the  cryogenic  system.    It will house the 
PC-based  computer  workstations,  network  hardware, 
and  dedicated  instrumentation  for  efficient  control  of 
the  cryogenic  refrigerator  system.    Two  workstations 
will  be  used  for  operator  interface  functions  and  IOC 
boot  servers.    These  two  machines will run Linux and 
contain  all  source  code  and  libraries  necessary  to 
operate  and  maintain  the  CCS  in  the  event  that  the 
communication  link  to  the  SNS  integrated  control 
system server is lost.  They will be configured such that 
if the primary boot server fails, the backup can assume 
the  role  of  boot  server  with  minimal  operator 
intervention. These machines will provide the resources 
required  for  archiving,  alarming  and  coordination  of 
system  control  among  the  10  cryogenic  system  IOCs.   
Each workstation will have 3 monitors for operator use.   
A third Linux workstation with a single monitor will 
be provided for engineering and software development 
activities.  These workstations will be identical so that 
they are interchangeable.   

A Windows based workstation with a single monitor 
will  be  provided  for  PLC  software  development  and 
maintenance. 

is  functionally  very  similar 

While  the  hardware  is  different,  this  control  room 
configuration 
the 
cryogenic  control  room  at  JLab.    The  design  is  based 
on  the  existing  JLab  cryogenic  control  room  with 
updates  to  incorporate  improvements  suggested  by 
JLab control system experts.  

to 

4.2  Cryogenic Control System Network 

The SNS ICS network is divided into several subnets.  
The CCS subnet is separated from and independent of 
the  remainder  of  the  network.    It  includes  redundant 
central switches and interconnecting fiber optic cables. 
[5]  Experience at JLab determined that separation of the 
CCS  network  from  the  remainder  of  the  network  was 
necessary  to  provide  the  high  availability required of 
the CCS.   

Some  heat  load  parameters  needed  for  optimum 
operation  of  the  refrigerator  system  originate  outside 
the CCS subnet in the Low Level RF (LLRF) subsystem.  
If  communication  with  LLRF  is  lost,  the  CCS  inhibits 

 
beam operation and automatically takes the facility to a 
safe operational state. 

4.3  Signal Interface Hardware 

The  major  differences  between  the  JLab  and  SNS 
CCS  are  in  the  interface  hardware.    VME/VXI  crates 
with a MVME2101 power PC are used for the SNS IOCs.  
Custom utility modules provide crate information such 
as power supply status, crate temperature, etc.  Custom 
timing modules are used to time synchronize all IOCs to 
a  master  clock  so  that  all  data  can  be  time  correlated.   
Some VME input modules are used for special sensors:  
•  Highland  Technology  V460  for  silicon  diode 

cryogenic temperature sensors 

•  Highland  Technology  V550  for  linear  variable 
differential transformer (LVDT) position sensors 
Where possible, SNS uses the VME version of JLab 
CAMAC modules.  Since no VME version of the helium 
liquid 
is  available,  custom  signal 
level  module 
conditioning is required at SNS. 

Allen-Bradley  ControlLogix  PLC  standard  input  and 
output modules are used to interface most sensors and 
actuators that require analog and discrete signals.   

4.4  Local Control Hardware 

Local  control  must  be  provided  for  some  process 
valves  so  that  the  cryogenic  system  can  continue  to 
operate  in  the  event  of  loss  of  an  IOC.    For  the  JLab 
CCS, local control is provided by custom valve control 
modules in the CAMAC crates.  The SNS ICS provides 
Allen-Bradley  PanelView  terminals  directly  connected 
to the PLCs to fulfill this requirement.  The PanelView at 
SNS provides additional capability by displaying many 
of  the  process  parameters  that  would  be  used  in  the 
valve control loops in the IOC.  

5 SOFTWARE 

SNS  global  controls  have  mandated  a  number  of 
software  standards  to  be  used  in  all  components.  
These  include  the  use  of  EPICS,  device  naming 
conventions,  the  use  of  the  Oracle  database  and 
operator screen color conventions. 

5.2 EPICS 

The  use  of  EPICS  makes  available  a  large  body  of 
software  and  support.    Since  JLab  also  uses  EPICS, 
some  JLab  software  such  as  the  LVDT  device  driver 
(used for position measurements) can be used directly.  
Other  software  can  be  substantially copied; the V460 
device driver (used to measure cryogenic temperatures) 
was adapted from the LVDT driver.  The CPID record, 
used  extensively  in  the  CCS,  is  a  part  of  EPICS  base 
created  by  JLab  for  their  control  system.    EPICS 
facilitates  the  SNS  collaboration;  SNS  collaborators  at 

Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory  developed 
the 
Ethernet  Industrial  Protocol  driver  that  provides  the 
communication link between the IOC and the PLC. 

5.3 Device Naming and Databases 

the 

A  common  naming  scheme  is  crucial  to  integrate 
signals  among 
systems  and  collaborating 
laboratories.    SNS  cryogenic  controls  personnel  have 
used a Microsoft Access application as a step toward 
the  development  of  a  project-wide  database.    The 
lessons  learned  in  the  process  of  creating  EPICS 
databases from this application are being incorporated 
into  the  project-wide  ORACLE  technical  database.  
Examples  of  all  cryogenic  system  device  types  have 
been included in the test database.  So far, the records 
created have very few links to other records.  Graphical 
tools  will  be  required  to  create  and  maintain  highly 
involving 
for  example 
linked  databases, 
calculations  or  PID  loops.    Because  many  of  the 
cryogenic  signals  and  calculations  are  adapted  from 
JLab,  test  versions  have  been  created  using the same 
tool that JLab uses, CapFast.  A general SNS solution 
to  this  problem  is  still  required.    Alarms  and  archive 
configuration  files  will  be  produced  from  the  project-
wide database.  In the interim, these must be produced 
from our local database. 

those 

SNS  has  selected  the  Extensible  Display  Manager 
(EDM),  which  is  maintained  at  ORNL.    A  script  was 
created  to  translate  the  JLab  operator  screens,  which 
run under MEDM, into EDM.  After the screens were 
translated,  the  SNS  color  and  font  standards  were 
applied.  The screens were updated to reflect the SNS 
plant  hardware  design  and  incorporate  improvements 
suggested  by  JLab.    Finally,  the  JLab  device  names 
were  replaced  by  the  SNS  standard  device  names.  
Although  the  final  versions  are  substantially different 
from the original JLab screens, this process provided a 
good starting point for much of the operator interface. 
This  process  has  worked  for  the  main  compressor 
screen and first and second stage compressor screens. 
Some  features  have  been  added  to  EDM  for  SNS: 
symbolic colors, symbolic font declarations, undo and a 
striptool widget, as well as widgets to display parts of 
SNS-standard names. 

5.5  Control Algorithms 

Both SNS and JLab use EPICS or routines accessed 
through  EPICS  for  all  high-level  control  loops  and 
 

 
algorithms.    An  example  is  the  cavity  heater  control 
algorithm. 

A  cryogenic  RF  cavity  operates  at  a  constant 
pressure.  Cryogenic refrigerator systems operate best 
with  a  constant  load.    The  flow,  temperature,  and 
pressure  in  the  common  primary  return  line  from  the 
cryogenic  cavities  are  factors  in  the  load.    The  return 
pressure,  which  must  be  held  constant  for  proper  RF 
cavity operation, is closely related to the heat absorbed 
by the helium liquid in each of the 81 superconducting 
cavities and the return flow.  One of the major dynamic 
heat sources is RF loss into the cavity.  When RF to a 
cavity is turned off, power to a resistance heater in the 
cavity is increased to keep the heat load constant.  All 
cavities  share  a  common  return  line,  and  a  change  in 
one cavity affects all other cavities to some extent.  If 
too much total heat is applied, the return pressure will 
increase  and  the  return  flow  will  try  to  increase.    The 
return  flow  control  loop  will  react  to  keep  the  flow 
constant.    Coordination  of  all  heaters  is  required  to 
keep the total heat load and return flow balanced.  An 
algorithm running on the boot server in the cryogenic 
control  room  provides  the  coordination  of  heater 
control  across  all  cavities.    JLab,  LANL,  and  SNS 
personnel are working together to develop this control 
algorithm and provide all required input parameters. 

Collaboration  among  several  partners  over  great 
distances  is  working.    The  SNS  project  benefits  by 
having access to the experience of the personnel at the 
partner laboratories. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  Work supported by the US Department of Energy 

under contract DE-AC05-00OR22725 

[2]  Marie S. Keesee and Brian S. Bevins, "The CEBAF 
Control  System  for  the  CHL",  /Advances  in 
Cryogenic  Engineering/,  Vol.  41,  pp.  649-654, 
Plenum Press, New York, 1996 
[3]  SNS Website   http://www.sns.gov/ 
[4]  Dave  Gurd,  TUDT006  “Management  of  a  Large, 
Distributed Control System Development Project”, 
ICALEPCS 2001 

[5]  Bill  DeVan,  TUAP055  “Plans  for  the  Spallation 
Integrated  Control  System 

Neutron  Source 
Network”, ICALEPCS 2001 

5.4 Display Manager 

6  SUMMARY 

