DISTRIBUTED POWER SUPPLY CONTROL AND MONITORING SYSTEM 
J. M. Nogiec, E. Desavouret, FNAL*, Batavia, IL60510, USA 

 
Abstract 

An extensible power supply control and monitoring 
system  has  been  developed  at  Fermilab’s  Technical 
Division  to  control  and  monitor  power  supplies  of 
various types from within many different applications. 
This  system,  deployed  as  a  network  service,  provides 
uniform  programming  and  user  interfaces  for  various 
types of power supplies, ranging from 20A to 30kA.  

1 SYSTEM ORGANIZATION 
   The  Magnet  Test  Facility  at  Fermilab  uses  many 
different  power  supplies  in  accomplishing  its mission. 
This  variety  requires  the  availability  of  transparent 
access  to  these  power  supplies  for  applications  and 
users alike. To satisfy this requirement, a power supply 
service  has  been  developed  that  allows  for  concurrent 
access  to  a  single  power  supply  by  several  client 
programs.  Only  one  program 
is  granted  control 
capabilities at any given time (other clients may run in 
the  monitoring  mode).  For  example,  several  users  can 
monitor the current changes requested by an automated 
test program. Additionally, the distributed architecture 
of the system allows users and system operators to be 
geographically dispersed (see Fig. 1). 

THAP072 

 
access  operations  that  are  converted  into  request 
messages  and  sent  to  the  power  supply  server.  The 
server  receives  the  request,  unpacks  it,  and  sends  a 
message  to  the  specific  power  supply  controller  that 
performs the actual operation, then waits for the reply 
from the controller and sends the response back to the 
client.  Before  a  client  can  control  the  power  supply  it 
must allocate and lock the control of this device.  
   Supported  server  platforms  include  Solaris  and 
VxWorks,  and  client  platforms  include  VxWorks, 
Solaris, and Java. 

2 RAMP PROFILES 
Accelerator  physics  applications  as  well  as  the 
load  dictate  complex 
the 
inductive  nature  of 
waveforms  of  the  magnet  current.  To  cope  with  this 
requirement the system is equipped with a proprietary 
ramp  definition  language  that  can  be  used  to  define 
sophisticated ramp profiles. 

language  consists  of 

the 

following  six 

 The 
statements: 

• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 

ramp:    ramp  the  current  until  the  destination 
current  is  reached  with  a  given  initial  ramping 
speed and acceleration. 
smooth ramp: execute a parabolic ramp between 
the  starting  and  destination  currents  with  a 
given maximum ramping speed and acceleration 
distance. 
delay: pause for a requested time. 
trigger: issue an external trigger signal, 
repeat:  execute  a  set  of  statements  a  given 
number of times. 
loop:  repeat  a  set  of  statements  until  some 
condition is satisfied. 
 

   A  ramp  profile  program  consists  of  a  sequence  of 
these  statements  and  C-style  comments.  A  simple 
profile  to  ramp  current  up  and  down  using  a  standard 
parabolic profile is shown in Figure 2. 

Figure 1: Architecture of the power control system. 
 
    The system is based on the server-client model. Each 
power supply has a central server that is connected via 
a  dedicated  fiber  optic  link  to  an  embedded  power 
supply  controller [1].   Clients  execute power   control 
 
*Operated  by  the  Universities  Research  Association  under  contract 
with the U.S. Department of Energy 

/* Parabolic ramp profile */  
ramp 0, -20, 0  
repeat 2  
    smooth_ramp 0, 1000, 200, 20  
    trigger  
    smooth_ramp 1000, 0, 200, 20  
    delay 5000  
end 

Figure 2: Parabolic ramp profile. 

 
 A resulting current trace is shown in Figure 3.  

Figure 3: Current trace. 
 
A  more  complicated  profile  to  degauss  magnets  is 
shown in Figure 4.  

/* Degaussing ramp profile */ 

ramp 0, -100, 0  

delay 20  

ramp 1.356, 2.71248, 0.0  

ramp 2.516, 2.31958, 0.0  

ramp 3.378, 1.72298, 0.0  

ramp 3.872, 0.98992, 0.0  

ramp 3.971, 0.19752, 0.0  

ramp 3.684, -0.57524, 0.0  

ramp 3.056, -1.25502, 0.0        

.... 

ramp -0.004,  0.00672, 0.0     

ramp -0.000,  0.00706, 0.0     

Figure 4: Excerpts from a degaussing ramp profile. 
 
Ramp profiles can be previewed before execution with 
help of a graphical simulator (see Fig. 5).   

Figure 5: The simulator showing a degaussing profile. 

 

 
    Successfully  tested  profiles  can  be  loaded  and 
executed  on  the  power  supply  controller  using  either 
the  graphical  user  interface  or  a  dedicated  profile 
loading program. Current traces from the execution of 
ramp profiles can be captured with help of a dedicated 
monitoring program.  

3 API 
   A  C  language  API  that  has  been  developed  for  the 
VxWorks and Unix platforms allows user programs to 
control power supplies. A functionally equivalent Java 
API has also been created. Each of these APIs provides 
the  user  with  over  30  methods  that  allow  applications 
to  specify  protocol  parameters,  load  various  ramp 
segments  into  the  memory  of  the  power  supply 
controller,  control  the  execution  of  ramp  profiles, 
control  the  current  trace  capture  mechanism,  examine 
uploaded  profiles,  read  input  and  output  voltages 
proportional  to  the  drive  signal  and  output  current, 
establish  operation  mode,  and  directly  control  the 
power supply state.  

tracker 

current 

4 SCRIPTING 
Many  specialized  client  programs  have  been 
developed,  including  GUI,  test  systems,  monitoring 
applications, 
application,  R/T 
monitoring  and  control  systems  [3],  and  measurement 
systems  [2][4].  Additionally,  a  set  of  programs 
specifically  designed  for  use  in  scripts  has  been 
provided  for  the  user.  These  programs  allow  for 
ramping  current,  reading  current,  waiting  for  the 
completion  of  the  ramp,  loading  and  executing  ramp 
profiles, examining the status of the power supply and 
controller, waiting on a specific status of the controller 
or power supply, and identifying the power supply. 

5 INTERACTIVE  CONTROL 
The  system  provides  users  with  graphical  user 
interfaces  to  visualize  current  history  (see  Fig.  6), 
power  supply  status  information  (see  Fig.  7),  and  to 
control  power  supplies  from  remote  locations.  These 
interfaces allow for monitoring of other power control 
programs,  charting  of  current  trends,  switching  and 
resetting   power  supplies,    and   taking  control  from 

 

 
•  Uploading current control programs written in a 
specialized  ramp  profile  definition  language  to 
be interpreted by the system. 

•  Scripting using a provided set of programs. 
•  Using supplied GUIs.  

 

   In addition, special programs are available to monitor 
and  log  all  control  requests  being  sent  to  the  service 
and  to  provide  traces  of  current.  Also,  a  graphical 
simulator  is  provided  to  facilitate  testing  of  ramp 
profiles developed by the user. 

The  power  control  and  monitoring  system  has  been 
deployed at Fermilab’s Magnet Test Facility to provide 
access to power supplies of eight different types. This 
system  can  be  easily  extended  by  adding  new  power 
supply types and new client programs. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  S.  Sharonov,  J.M.  Nogiec,  “An  Embedded  Power 
Supply Controller”, PAC’97, Vancouver, 1997. 
[2]  J.M.  Nogiec  et  al,  “A  Flexible  and  Configurable 
System  to  Test  Accelerator  Magnets”,  PAC’01, 
Chicago, 2001. 

[3]  J.M.  Nogiec  et  al,  “A  Distributed  Monitoring  and 
Control System”, PAC’97, Vancouver, 1997. 
[4]  J.W.  Sim  et  al,  “A  Software  System  for 
Measurement  of  Accelerator  Magnets  Using  a 
Relational  Database”,  MT-16,  Tallahassee, 
Florida, 1999. 

 
 
 
 
 

Figure 6: X-Windows power supply control interface. 

 

run-away  applications.  In  addition,  ramp  operations 
that  are  in  progress  can  be  stopped  or  suspended. 
Currently,  the  system  provides  graphical  operator 
consoles for the X-Windows and Java platforms. 

 Figure 7: Power supply status in a Java application. 

6 SUMMARY 
The  presented  power  supply  control  system  allows 
client programs to control and monitor power supplies 
over  the  network. The  system  allows  for  concurrent 
multi-user  access,  with  at  most  one  application  at  a 
time granted controlling capabilities. Users can control 
and  monitor  the  state  of  a  power  supply  as  well  as 
monitor generated current by:  

•  Sending  separate  requests  to  the  service  via 

provided C/C++ and Java APIs.  

