TUAP025 
 

FEL INJECTOR CONTROL SYSTEM ON THE BASE OF EPICS 
 
T.V. Salikova, A.A. Kondakov, G.Ya. Kurkin, A.D. Oreshkov, M.A. Scheglov, A.G. Tribendis 
 Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics, 630090, Novosibirsk, RUSSIA 
 

Abstract 
The  control  system  of  the  1.5  MeV  FEL  injector  is 
built  on  the  base  of  ported  EPICS.  It  uses  low-cost 
hardware: personal computers with the processor Intel 
x86  and  CAMAC  equipment  produced  by  our 
institute.  At  present  time,  the  distributed  control 
system  includes  one  Pentium  at  OPerator  Interface 
(OPI)  level  and  two  IOC  (Input  Output  Controllers) 
under  supervision  of  the  real  time  operating  system 
LynxOS/x86  at  the  low-level.  Each  IOC  is  used  for 
monitoring  of  autonomous  parts  of  the  injector.  The 
first  IOC  operates  the  Radio  Frequency  (RF)  system. 
The second IOC operates the injector equipment. 

 

STATUS OF FEL 

 
The  first  stage  of  the  FEL  (Free  Electron  Laser) 
complex   [1] consists of a 1.5 MeV injector, one-track 
microtron-recuperator  with  accelerating  RF  system, 
and  submillimeter FEL (Fig.1). The particle energy is 
14  MeV.  The  bunch  repetition  rate  is  0.022  to  22.5 
MHz,  and  the  average  current  is  10  to  50  mA.  The 
FEL  produces  radiation  of  1  to  10  kW average power 
and wavelength of 100 to 200 m m. The pulse duration 
is  20  to 100 psec. The first stage of the FEL is to test 
the  recuperation  of  the  beam  power  and  to  obtain  the 
high power terahertz radiation. 

At  present  time,  the  FEL  injector  and  RF  system 
the 

installed  already,  and 

installation  of 

were 
microtron equipment is in progress.  

1
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
8
 
 
 
8
3
0
1
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

contactless tuners of the fundamental-mode frequency, 
which  is  180.4  MHz.  The  fundamental  mode  tuning 
range  is  320 kHz.  Two  Higher-Order  Modes  (HOM) 
tuners  detune  the  HOM  frequencies  while  having 
almost  no  influence  on  the  fundamental  mode.  The 
IOC  of  the  RF  system  controls  operation  of  all  the 
cavities  and  RF  generators.  It  also  can  run  OPI 
functions  for  adjustment  of  the  equipment.  The  RF 
system database includes 481 records. 

 The  injector  IOC  operates  the  electrostatic  gun, 
which  emits  electron  bunches  of  0.1  to  1.5  nsec 
duration  with  0.022  to  22.5  MHz  repetition  rate. 
Power  of  a  bunch  reaches  300kV  at  the  exit  from  the 
gun.  Further,  the  electron  bunch  is  accelerated  in  the 
RF  cavities  up  to  1.5MeV.  The  injector  IOC  controls 
injector  magnetic  system,  which  consists  of 
the 
solenoid 
lenses,  correctors,  pick-ups  and  beam 
transducers.  The  equipment  for  beam  diagnostics  is 
connected  to  the  injector  IOC.  The  injector  system 
database includes upward of 150 records. 
 

FEL INJECTOR AUTOMATION 

 
 By  now  we  have  updated  the  software  of  the  injector 
control system, which had been developed on the base 
of  Windows95  with  the  LabWindows/CVI  tool  kit. 
Two  variants  of  software  for  the  RF  control  system 
have  been  developed: 
first  variant  uses 
LabWindows/CVI,  and  the  second  variant  is  built  on 
the  base  of  EPICS.  The  RF  system  control  program 

the 

  
The  RF  system  contains  one  bunching  cavity,  two 
accelerating  cavities  fed  by  three  generators  of  the 
injector,  and  16  accelerating  cavities  fed  by  two 
generators  of  the  microtron.  The  cavity  has  two 

under  Windows95  executes  a  range  of  technological 
tasks, necessary during the commissioning and service  
 
of  the  equipment,  and  all  functions  of  the  control 
system.  The  EPICS  variant  of  software  executes  only 

functions of the control system and is designed for the 
operation  of  the  RF  system  as  a  part  of  the  FEL 
complex. 

 

 
Fig.2 Main control panel of RF system. 

 
The  FEL  control  system 

is  built  on  personal 
computers with Intel x86 processors under supervision 
of  the  real  time  operating  system  LynxOS,  and 
CAMAC  devices  produced  by  our  institute,  which 
reduces  the  automation  cost.  The  FEL  control  system 
uses  14  record  types  only  and  20  device  support 
routines,  which  were  written  for  optimization  of 
exchange  with the equipment. All exchanges with the 
devices  are  executed  by  a  standard  mechanism,  a 
driver  supporting  synchronous  and  asynchronous 
requests.  

The  CAMAC  bus  has  low  performance:  the  time  of 
full  execution  of  NAF  reaches  16  m sec.  Thus,  control 
over  the  emergency  conditions  is  executed  by  the 

hardware.  That  is  the  history-formed  approach  of  our 
institute  to  solution  of  hard  real  time  problems  via 
creation of special hardware. A set of such devices was 
created for the FEL control system: devices for control 
over  beam  propagation  in  the  injector,  a  gun  driver, 
devices for control of locks of doors of the accelerator 
hall, a driver for monitoring of temperatures, etc. 

At the OPI level, the RF control program (Fig.2) has 
seven  panels 
the  generator 
for  monitoring  of 
parameters of the injector RF system and microtron RF 
system  as  well  as  control  panels  for  monitoring  of 
three injector cavities and sixteen microtron cavities 

The  OPI  program  includes  a  mnemonic  diagram  of 
the injector, where each element is linked with its own 

to  a  mnemonic  element 
subwindow  containing  all  control 

control  panel.  A  click 
generates  a 
information. 
 The  user  has  a  set  of  windows  made  as  a  set  of 
manipulation  panels  with  mnemonic  diagrams.    A 
color  palette  indicates  the  alarm  status.  If  a  device 
fails, then the corresponding element in the mnemonic 
diagram  is  painted  red.  If  a  device  works  without 
errors, then its color is green.  
The  OPI  programs  of  the  RF  system,  gun  and 
magnetic system log all updates of physical parameters 
to the cyclical buffer, which is periodically written to a 
file, which helps in analysis of failures of equipment.  
 

CONCLUSIONS 

 
The  FEL  control  system  uses  the  low-cost  hardware 
made  by  our  institute  for  specific  tasks  of  control 
systems  of  particle  accelerators.  EPICS  guarantees  a 
scalable system, which is important for development of  
the  FEL  control  system.  Performance  of  the  EPICS 
tool  kit  meets  the  requirements  of    hard  real  time 
control. 

 

REFERENCES 

 
[1] 
N.A.  Vinokurov,  “Status  of Novosibirsk high 
power  free  electron  laser”,  Proceedings  of  AFEL-99, 
June  8-10  1999,  Korea  Atomic  Energy  Research 
Institute, Taejon, Korea  pp 7-12. 

