EPICS FOR PDAs 
 
Kenneth Evans, Jr., ANL, Argonne, IL 60439, USA 
 

THAP009 

modifications to EPICS Base do not get automatically 
incorporated  in  the  project  files.  The  intent  is  for  this 
port  to  be  a prototype and to do the port again, based 
on the experience gained, and to use EPICS Base 3.14, 
which has better support for multiple processors. 

Once  the  EPICS  base  modules  are  available,  it  is 
still  necessary  to  write  an  application  in  order  to  use 
them  and  see  if  it  all  works.  This  has  been  done,  and 
screen  shots  of  two  of  the  applications,  ProbeCE  and 
the APS Beam Display, are shown in  Figs. 1 and 2. 

Abstract 
With 

the  advent  of  readily  available  wireless 
communications  and  small  hand-held  computers, 
commonly  known  as  personal  digital  assistants 
(PDAs),  it  is  interesting  to  consider  using  these 
portable  devices  to  access  a  control  system.  We  have 
successfully  ported  the  Experimental  Physics  and 
Industrial Control System (EPICS) to Windows CE 3.0 
(WCE)  for  the  Pocket  PC  (PPC),  and  this  paper 
describes  the  issues  involved.  The  PPC  was  chosen 
because  the  WCE  application  programming  interface 
(API) for the PPC is a subset of the Win32 API, which 
EPICS already supports, and because PPC devices tend 
to have more memory than other PDAs. PDAs provide 
several  ways  to  connect  to  a  network,  using  wired  or 
wireless  Compact  Flash  or  PCMCIA  Ethernet  cards 
and modems. It is the recent advent of readily available 
wireless  networks  that  makes  using  the  portable  PDA 
interesting.  The  status  and  issues  surrounding  the 
various  kinds  of  wireless  systems  available  are 
presented. 

1 INTRODUCTION 
WCE is sufficiently powerful to run EPICS, and it is 
sufficiently  like  Win32  to  make  porting  it  a  feasible 
thing  to  do.  It  is  sufficiently  different  from  Win32, 
however,  to  make  the  porting  nontrivial.  Not  all  of 
EPICS  was  ported  ―  only  the  part,  Channel  Access 
(CA),  that  is  necessary  to  run  client  applications.  The 
port  was  done  by  making  projects  in  Microsoft 
eMbedded  Visual  C++  3  (EVC),  copying  the  existing 
EPICS  files  to  those  projects,  and  modifying  the  files 
inside  the  projects    No  attempt  was  made  to  use  the 
EPICS  build  system.  The  three  necessary  projects  are 
dynamic link libraries for CA and the EPICS common 
library, 
required  executable, 
caRepeater. Parts of libCom that were not needed were 
omitted if problems arose. The version of EPICS Base 
used was 3.13. 

libCom,  plus 

the 

One  of  the  reasons  for  using  EVC  is  that  PPC 
devices use a variety of processors, and the executables 
need to be made for each processor. EVC is set up to 
do  this,  and  the  EPICS  3.13  build  system  is  not. 
Moreover,  this  was  a  prototype  endeavor,  and  it  was 
not deemed feasible to make extensive changes in code 
that must be used for already-supported platforms. The 
that  ongoing 
this  approach 
disadvantage  of 

is 

Figure 1: ProbeCE, a Windows CE application for 
EPICS. You can enter a process variable in any of 
the  areas  to  monitor  it.  You  can  also  change  its
value,  as  has  been  done  in  the  middle  area.  There 
are additional features, not shown. 

2 PROBLEMS 
The  major  problems  in  porting  CA  to  WCE 
involved, as might be expected, features in Win32 that 
are not supported in WCE. 

2.1 Environment 

One  of  the  most  significant  unsupported  features  is 
that  WCE  does  not  have  an  environment  and 
environment  variables,  as  do  most  other  common 
operating  systems.  Consequently,  API  functions  such 
as  getenv()  do  not  exist.  To  get  around  this,    the 
environment  variables  that  CA  uses  are  stored  in  the 
registry and functions such as getenv() were rewritten 

 

Since  the  user  can  set  whatever  user  name  he 
desires,  no  matter  how  it  is  implemented,  he  can 
potentially  get  access  to  items  in  the  control  system 
that  he  was not intended to have just by changing the 
user name to that of a user that does have access. There 
is no authentication of the user name by a password as 
on more secure systems, such as UNIX and Windows 
NT/2000/XP. The security issue, however, is no more 
of a problem than with Windows 95/98/ME, where the 
user can log in with essentially any name he chooses. It 
is  just  more  obvious,  since  the  user  is  required  to 
specify a name in order to use CA, as in Fig. 3. 

The bottom line is that security must be enforced by 
some  other  means  than  by  user  name  alone.  EPICS 
Access  Security  has  the  ability  to  do  this,  though  it 
may be inconvenient and use processor time. 

2.3 Other 

There  were  also  problems  with  other  common 
features that are not supported by WCE. These include 
many  relatively  standard  UNIX-based  functions  such 
as  exit(),  abort(),  many  of  the  time  functions,  and 
functions related to errno, which does not exist. WCE 
only supports Winsock 1.1, whereas CA uses Winsock 
2.0.  There  is  no  console  in  WCE  and  no  support  for 
routines such as printf(). These problems were worked 
around in various ways, which are probably of interest 
only to programmers, and there is insufficient room to 
describe them here. 

3 WIRELESS 
Network adapter cards, both wired and wireless are 
available  for  PPCs.  The  wired  variety  is  more  readily 
available,  but  typically  where  there  is  a  socket  into 
which  to  plug  the  wire,  there  is  also  a  standard-size 
computer nearby. In such a case it is usually easier to 
use  the  larger  computer  with  its  bigger  screen  and 
more powerful operating system. The real incentive to 
use  a  PPC  is  that  it  is  portable  and  easy  to  carry 
around. To maintain this advantage, it needs a wireless 
type network adapter. 

Similarly,  modems  are  available  for  the  PPC.    The 
most  common  type  is  one  that  is  connected  by  a  wire 
to a telephone outlet and can be used to access a dial-
up  network.    It  is  also  possible  to  connect  to  a  cell 
phone  in  several  ways,  then  use  the  cell  phone  to 
connect  wirelessly.    This  has  the  disadvantage  of 
having  to  manage  two  devices,  the  PDA  and  the  cell 
phone, but allows portability. Finally, there are modem 
cards  for  the  PPC  that  allow  it  to  be  used  without 
cables or a cell phone. 

Security  is  an  issue  for  any  type  of  wireless,  since 
the  data  is  transmitted  by  radio  waves,  which  can  be 
readily 
technologies  should 
probably  not  be  considered  secure  in  themselves,  but 

intercepted.  Current 

Figure 2:  APS  Beam  Display,  a  Windows  CE 
application  for  EPICS.  This  application  shows  the 
beam  history  and  other  relevant  information.  It 
updates when the information changes. 

to  access  them  from  the  registry  instead  of  from  the 
environment. 

2.2 User Name 

There is no user name as it exists in other common 
operating  systems,  and  Win32  functions  such  as 
GetUserName() are not supported. To get around this, 
the  user  name,  which  is  an  essential  part  of  CA,  is 
implemented  in  the  registry  in  the  same  way  as 
environment variables. The consequence of this is that 
the  user  name  can  (and  must)  be  set  in  the  same  way 
that  environment  variables  can  be  set.  In  fact,  the 
ProbeCE interface allows the user to set them all in the 
same dialog box, as shown in Fig. 3. 

Figure 3:  A  dialog  box  for  entering  environment 
variables needed by EPICS. The user name is also 
entered  here  and  is  treated  the  same  as  an 
environment variable, possibly a security problem. 
WCE, however, has no authenticated user name.

 

the  expense  of  decreasing 

the  use  of  secure  shells  or  Virtual  Private  Networks 
the  security 
(VPNs)  should  adequately  address 
problem  at 
the  data 
transmission  rate.  The  new  version  of  the  PPC 
operating  system,  Pocket  PC  2002,  includes  a  VPN, 
and VPN clients are available for other VPN protocols. 
Wireless  networks  can  be  loosely  organized  into  
three classes: wide area (WAN), local area (LAN) and 
short  range  or  personal  area  (PAN).  The  following 
describes  some  of  the  popular  current  standards  that 
are relevant to EPICS, but a complete discussion of the 
available  technologies  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this 
paper. 

3.1 WAN 

Cell  phones  are  the  most  common  WAN  wireless 
devices. Several of the available WAN protocols have 
data  capability,  and  some  can  be  used  without 
requiring a cell phone. The advantage of using a WAN 
is  that  you  can  access  the  control  system  from  far 
away,  even  another  city.    A  disadvantage  is  that  the 
WAN  data  protocols  are  usually  slow  compared  to 
wired networks. 

  Cellular Digital Packet Data (CDPD) is one of the 
protocols  for  digital  data  transmission  that  does  not 
require a cell phone. It does not, in fact, support voice 
at  all.  It  uses  a  modem  card  rather  than  a  network 
access  card  and  has  a  maximum  transmission  rate  of 
19.2 Kbps. Several companies provide CDPD services 
for the PPC. CDPD is available in most large cities in 
the  United  States,  but  not  elsewhere.  CDPD  can  be 
used  to  connect  to  an  Internet  services  provider  (ISP) 
that can provide access to the control system. Security 
can  be  provided  by  using  a  VPN.  The  EPICS 
applications  described  above  have  been  successfully 
used with CDPD along with a VPN for security. 

Code  Division  Multiple  Access  (CDMA)  is  a 
protocol  with  a  maximum  transmission  rate  of  14.4 
Kbps. It supports voice and data. 

Global System for Mobile Communication (GSM) is 
a slower, older protocol with transmission rates to 9.6 
Kbps.  It  supports  voice  and  data.    General  Packet 
Radio  Service  (GPRS)  is  an  enhancement  for  GSM 
that  is  widely  available  in  Europe  and  some  United 
States  cities.  It  has  a  maximum  transmission  rate  of 
171 Kbps. 

CDMA  and  GSM/GPRS  cell  phones  can  be 
connected to a PDA to provide wireless connections to 
a  controls  network,  and  there  are  modem  cards 
available,  as  described  above  for  CDPD,  that  do  not 
require a cell phone. 

3.2 LAN 

The  LAN  network  range  indoors  is  on  the  order  of 
100 m, the size of a small building. Outside, the range 

is  1000  m  or  more.  The  prevailing  standard  and 
primary  candidate  of  interest  is  802.11b.  It  has  a 
maximum transmission rate of 11 Mbps, the fastest of 
the  currently  available  technologies.  Networks  and 
network  cards  for  PDAs  are  available.  The  principal 
problem  with  802.11b  is  security.    Using  the  current 
encryption  schemes,  a  sophisticated  eavesdropper  can 
capture  a  small  amount  of  traffic  and  determine  the 
encryption  key  in  less  than  a  hour.  However,  security 
can  be  provided  by  using  a  VPN.  The  EPICS 
applications  described 
run 
successfully on an 802.11b network with and without a 
VPN. 

above  have  been 

 The  next  generation,  802.11a,  should  provide 
speeds to 54 Mbps and better encryption.  It also uses a 
frequency band that is less likely to interfere with other 
wireless  devices  including  cell  phones  and  X10 
devices. 

3.3 PAN 

technology 

A  PAN  network  has  a  range  of  about  10  m.  The 
primary  PAN 
is  Bluetooth  with 
transmission  rates  to  1  Mbps.  The  intended  use  is  for 
vending  machines,  ticket  machines,  etc.,  and  as  a 
replacement  for  cables,  for  example,  to  connect  to  a 
printer. Many companies have committed to Bluetooth, 
but  significant  implementation  is  yet  to  come.  It  is 
probably not useful for a control system, at least for the 
types  of  applications  considered  here.    However, 
eventually  you  may  be  able  to  connect  to  your  cell 
phone without a wire and use that to connect to EPICS. 

4 CONCLUSIONS 
PPCs  provide  a  convenient,  portable  means  of 
accessing a control system. EPICS CA has been ported 
to  PPCs  and  applications  have  been  developed  that 
demonstrate  that  using  a  PPC    to  access  a  control 
system  is  quite  feasible.  Portability  requires  wireless 
network  adapters  or  modems,  and  there  are  several 
available  for  PPCs.  The  wireless  field  is  still  in  an 
early  and  rapidly  changing  state,  but  several  viable 
usable  technologies  exist.  Security  is  a  problem  that 
needs  to  be  carefully  considered,  but  secure  shells  or 
VPNs should provide adequate security, at the expense 
of some loss in data transmission rates. 

5 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The  author  would  like  to  acknowledge  valuable 
discussions  with  Andrew  Johnson,  William  P. 
McDowell,  and  Steven  Shoaf.  This  work  was 
supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of 
Basic Energy Sciences under Contract No. W-31-109-
ENG-38. 

