TUAP026

STATUS OF THE CONTROL SYTEM FOR THE FRONT-END OF THE
SPALLATION NEUTRON SOURCE { }

S. A. Lewis, C. A. Lionberger,
P. T. Cull, LBNL, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

Abstract

(SNS) 

The  Spallation  Neutron  Source 

is  a
partnership between six laboratories. To ensure a truly
integrated control system,  many  standards  have  been
agreed upon, including the use of EPICS as the basic
toolkit. However, unique within the partnership is the
requirement  for  Lawrence  Berkeley  National  Lab,
responsible for constructing the Front End, to operate it
locally before shipping it to the Oak Ridge National
Lab (ORNL) site. Thus, its control system must  be
finished in 2001, well before the SNS completion date
of  2006.  Consequently  many  decisions  regarding
interface hardware,  operator  screen  layout,  equipment
types, and so forth had to be made before the other five
partners had completed their designs. In some cases the
Front-End has defined a standard by default; in others an
upgrade to a new standard is anticipated by ORNL later.
Nearly all Front-End devices have been commissioned
with the EPICS control system. Of the approximately
1500 signals required, about 60% are now under daily
is  based  on
operational  use.  The  control  system 
“standard  architecture”;  however,  it  has  a  field-bus
dominated layout. This paper will discuss some unique
interface  requirements  that  led  to  adding  new  device
families into the EPICS repertoire. It will also describe
the choices and trade-offs made for all major areas.

1 OVERVIEW

The Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) is a 1 MW,
pulsed neutron source being built by six Department of
Energy Labs and scheduled for completion at Oak Ridge
National Lab (ORNL) in 2006. At completion it will
cost  about  $1.4B  and  extend  over  nearly  1  km.
Lawrence  Berkeley  National  Laboratory  (LBNL)  is
tasked with constructing the Front End (FE) at Berkeley
by June, 2002 and then shipping it to ORNL for re-
commissioning. The FE itself is  comprised  of  three
sections: the Source and Low Energy Beam Transport
(LEBT) which produces 50 mA of 65 keV H- suitably
chopped and focussed (using electrostatic devices); the
Radio Frequency Quadrupole (RFQ) which bunches the
beam  with  800  kW  of  402  MHz  RF  and  further
accelerates it  to  2.5  MeV;  and  the  Medium  Energy

Beam Transport, which matches the beam to the Linac
(using  a  magnetic  lattice)  and  includes  diagnostic
devices.  All  three  sections  are  served  by  suitable
vacuum 
turbo-molecular,
pumping, 
cryogenic, and getter-ion types.

employing 

Thus it can be seen that although the FE represents
roughly 3% of the full SNS measured by beam energy
(2.5  MeV),  length  (10  m),  or  cost  ($20M),  it  has
the  FE  control
nearly  the  same  complexity.  For 
system, a similar ratio applies: it will have about 1550
signals (of about 60,000  for  SNS),  cost  $1.5M  (of
about $60M); have one operator console (of 12), and
three I/O controllers (of 150).

When complete, the 1550 signals in the FE control
system  will  come  from  300  devices,  assigned  by
system: Source/LEBT, 250; RFQ, 100; MEBT, 700;
Vacuum, 500.

To  support 

(for  200  devices) 

the  extensive  R&D  program  and
operation of the whole FE, the control system has been
in continuous operation since 1999, with incremental
additions to track the FE itself. As of 1 November, two
of the three I/O controllers (IOCs) are in service, with
about  700  signals 
interfaced,
essentially completing  the  Source,  LEBT,  and  RFQ
systems. In addition to the  required  operator  console
(OPI),  three  temporary  OPIs  have  been  provided  to
allow concurrent but independent operation of the 402
MHz systems, vacuum commissioning, Source/LEBT
testing, and a software development area. An  EPICS
“gateway”  allows  controls  and  management  staff  at
SNS  partner  labs  to  continuously  and  efficiently
monitor active devices, while critical engineering and
technical staff routinely monitor and control devices in
their jurisdiction from their offices or even homes.

2 FRONT-END AND SNS STANDARDS

The SNS has chosen the well-known EPICS toolkit
[1] as the basis for its control system. While assuring
easy integration among the multiple collaborators, this
decision still leaves open many options. Because of the
early start and immediate operational needs of the FE, it
did not adhere  to  all  of  the  final  SNS  standards  as
developed by the collaborating partners [2].

                                                
*  Work Supported by the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract #DE-AC05-00OR22725

2.1  Hardware

IOC.  The  EPICS  Input/Output  Controller  (IOC)
uses 21-slot Wiener™ or 7-slot Dawn™ VME64x or
VXI  crates  with  Motorola™  MVME-2100  series
PowerPC CPUs. FE will conform to the SNS standard
(although  it  has  operated  well  to  date  with  older
MVME-167 68K  series).  SNS  uses  the  VxWorks™
kernel.

PLC.  For  robust  vacuum  service,  a 

layer  of
Programmable  Logic  Controller  (PLC) 
is  placed
between the EPICS IOCs and the hardware  interface.
FE  has  chosen  the  Allen-Bradley™  (A-B)  PLC/5
family, with IOC-to-PLC and PLC-to-I/O both using
the proprietary A-B Remote-I/O (RIO; RS-232 based)
and the 6008 VME Scanner; and the A-B 1794 (Flex-
I/O™) interface modules. FE will not conform to the
SNS standard[3], which stays with the A-B family, but
uses the ControlLogix/5000™ family; Ethernet/IP for
IOC-to-PLC and ControlNet™ for PLC-to-I/O, as well
as CLX/5000 family interface modules.

FE  exclusively  uses  self-contained  vacuum  gauge
units.  FE does not conform to SNS standards, which
require  rack-mounted  electronics  away  from  high
radiation areas.

Power  Supply  I/O.  For  general  electrostatic,
magnetic, RF and other devices, FE has two alternate
specifications  (see  ¶4):  (1)  Group-3,  a  proprietary
system utilizing a serial fiber ring; (2) A-B Flex-I/O
directly driven from A-B 6008 Scanner with RIO. FE
will not conform with the SNS standard[4], which uses
a  BNL-designed  Power  Supply  Controller/Interface
technology.

Motion  Control.  FE  will  use  OMS-58  VME

boards.  FE will conform to SNS standards.

High-Power RF. The temporary interface now in
use will be replaced by a LANL-supplied, VXI-based
unit including full EPICS support, which is the SNS
standard.

2.2  Software

Application  Development  Environment
(ADE). The ADE is an enhancement of the EPICS
application  makefiles with a strong notion of release
management (based heavily on  experience  at  TJNAF
with the CEBAF EPICS system) that recognizes the
common usage of  shared  drivers  across  applications,
and  of  shared  applications  among  many  IOCs.  All
textual file entities are version-controlled using CVS at
a  single  repository  at  the  SNS  ORNL  site.  FE
conforms to the SNS standard.

Operator Screens (HMI).   EPICS offers several
“display manager” client applications. FE conforms to
the  initial  SNS  standard,  dm2k.  However,  a  recent
change to edm will require an upgrade. FE conforms to
use of all other EPICS HMI-level clients such as Knob

Manager, StripTool, Channel Archiver, Backup Restore
Tool,  Probe,  etc. FE initiated a suite of colors, fonts,
navigation  strategy,  layout  and  other  HMI  visual
factors which have become the SNS standard.

Sequencing.  The  EPICS  sequencer  (v  1.9.5)  is
used for all applications which are well modelled as a
Finite State Machine. In particular, it is used for high-
powered  RF  conditioning;  for  RFQ 
temperature-
frequency  controls;  for  remote  oscilloscope  controls;
and is under development for vacuum sequencing.  FE
conforms to the SNS standard.

Naming.    A  naming  system  was  adopted  by  a
working group for controls well before FE construction
started. FE conforms to the SNS standard for systems,
device,  and  signals  (some  late  revisions  will  be
addressed  as an upgrade).

Relational  Database.  FE  uses  structured  text
files  with  extensive  macro-substitution  scripts 
to
expand to the full EPICS configuration from primary
files. FE does not conform to the SNS standard Oracle
relational database to generate the configuration nor to
hold the primary data in tables. Until  an  upgrade  is
performed, no mechanism exists to ensure compliance
with the Naming standard.

3  FIELD-BUS DOMINATED LAYOUT

The FE control system at the level of block diagram
is  a  conventional,  “standard  architecture”  as  used  in
both  general  and  EPICS  contexts;  however,  as  the
choice  of  either  Group-3  or  Flex-I/O  for  all  device
interfaces became pervasive, it became clear that overall
this would be a field-bus dominated layout. That is, no
analog or digital signals are directly wired to or from
the VME modules; (except OMS-58 motor controller
cables); rather, all device signals  are  distributed  over
robust, serial, “daisy-chain” media via a protocol.

Fig 1: Rear rack U-chassis for Group-3.

Thus, there are no cross-connects; no requirement for
low-level  cable  isolation 
in  wire-ways;  and  no
congestion as 700-800 signals converge in  the  racks
housing the VME crates. Instead, outboard units were

fabricated, either as rack-drawers immediately  adjacent
rack-mounted  equipment;  as  U-shaped  chassis
to 
mounted on the rear rack rails (Fig 1); or as enclosed
beam-line mounted boxes (Fig 2). All three types were
heavily re-used, requiring only different wire-lists; and
they all are fully connectorized to allow easy servicing.

with the PLC. Although EPICS has long had a rich
repertoire  of  drivers  for  it,  more  detailed  concurrent
online diagnostics were added based  on  the  favorable
experience with Group-3, and drivers for several newer
1794 family items were added.

4.3 Tektronix™ Scopes

Both low- and high-level support was provided for
the Tektronix TDS200  and  TDS3000  2-  and  4-trace
scope families, using RS-232 and a Janz™ 8-port serial
VME card for the former, and Ethernet for the latter. A
near replica of the scope front panels is available to the
operator.  The  serial  line  units  update  at  about  1
trace/sec,  whereas  the  Ethernet  models  can  achieve
about 25 traces/sec (500-points/trace).

Fig 2: Enclosure for Flex-I/O with connectors.

4  NEW DEVICE TYPES FOR EPICS

4.1 Group- 3

The  Group-3  technology  was  chosen  for  its  easy
isolation of high potentials found in the  Source  and
LEBT areas as well as for noise immunity from the
severe 
transients  expected  due  to  sparking.  The
isolation is a function of the fiber which connects the
individual units on the proprietary serial field bus; the
noise immunity is improved by the liberal inclusion of
typical bypass circuitry. As advised by the vendor, all
due care is still required in external circuitry, grounding,
and shielding practices.

The  Group-3  technology  is  also  used  where  the
specific interface modules are particularly well matched
to the device. The CNA  unit  has  a  combination  of
high-resolution  analog  with  filtering  combined  with
digital signal handling which gives a one-to-one match
with most LEBT and MEBT DC power supplies. The
more configurable CN3 unit is used for motor/encoder
input/output
requirements  or  cases  with  unusual 
combinations.  Driver  software  for  this  new  EPICS
device family was added by FE during the R&D phase,
and  includes  very  detailed,  online,  concurrent  device
diagnostics (Fig 3).

4.2 Allen-Bradley Flex-I/O

Flex-I/O is a moderate-cost, lower-resolution option
for industrial type signals (RFQ and MEBT cooling)
that can share the A-B 6008 scanner and RIO cabling

Fig 3: Diagnostics screen for Group-3 devices.

REFERENCES
[1]    http://www.aps.anl.gov/epics;    also
http://lansce.lanl.gov/lansce8/Epics   

[2] D.P. Gurd, W.R. DeVan, J. Hammonds, S.A.

Lewis, J.D. Smith, “Plans for a Collaboratively
Developed Distributed Control System for the
Spallation Neutron Source”, ICALEPCS’99,
Trieste, October, 1999

[3] J.Y. Tang, L.A. Smart, H.C. Hseuh, W.

Schneider, P.S. Marroquin, K. Kasemir, L.R.
Dalesio, K. Kishiyama, D. Gurd, M. Hechler,
“SNS Vacuum Instrumentation and Control”, this
conference.

[4] S. Peng, J. Smith, R. Lambiase, B. Oerter, “SNS
Standard Power Supply Software”, this conference.

