PSN  #  WEAP063

COMPUTATIONAL MODELING IN SUPPORT OF NATIONAL
IGNITION FACILITY OPERATIONS

M. J. Shaw, R. A. Sacks, C. A. Haynam, and W. H. Williams
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94550, USA

Abstract

Numerical  simulation  of 

the  National  Ignition
Facility  (NIF) laser performance and automated control
of  laser  setup  process  are  crucial  to  the  project’s
success.  These  functions  will  be  performed  by  two
closely  coupled  computer  codes:  the  virtual  beamline
(VBL)  and  the  laser  operations  performance  model
(LPOM).

1 INTRODUCTION

Success  on  many  of  the  NIF  laser’s  missions
depends  on  obtaining  precisely  specified  energy
waveforms  from  each  of  the  192  beams  over  a  wide
variety  of  pulse  lengths  and  temporal  shapes.  The
LPOM  automates  inter-beam  power  balance,  provides
parameter  checking  for  equipment  protection  and
diagnostic  setup,  and  supplies  post-shot  data  analysis
and  archiving  services.  The  LPOM  relies  on  a  NIF
VBL  physics  model  for  fundamental  modeling  of
individual beamline performance.

2 NIF  VIRTUAL  BEAMLINE

the  NIF 

the 
response 

laser  system.  The 

VBL is a natural  consolidation and development of  a
number of previously distinct laser simulation efforts  at
Lawrence Livermore  National  Laboratory  (LLNL).  The
Prop92 [1] extraction and propagation code has been the
mainstay  of  design,  verification,  and  component
selection  for 
joint
LLNL/Commissariat  a  L’Energie  Atomique  pumping
code  AMP  [2]  has  recently  been  extended  to  model
laser  cavity.
thermal  deposition 
throughout 
Thermal/mechanical/optical 
calculations
translate this  heating  into  optical  aberrations  that  can
be  applied  either  deterministically  or  stochastically  to
influence beam intensity statistics and focusability.  The
optical  aberration  effects  of  gas-path  turbulence  are
modeled, and extension to the rest of  the  laser transport
system  has  begun.  Optical  imperfections  in  the  many
components  comprising  each  NIF  beamline  also
influence  beam  propagation.  The  VBL  includes  these
effects either as  measured  metrology  data  or  as  power
spectral density-based simulated phase screens. The NIF
adaptive optic  system  is  critical for controlling  farfield
beam characteristics. Simulation played a  major  role in
design and design-certification of  this  system,  and  this

to 

[3], 

model is included in the VBL. Understanding of  optical
damage has  progressed from  early notions  of  threshold
damage  fluence  through  heuristic  memory  function
treatment  of  pulse-shape  effects 
today’s
emerging  picture  of  stochastically  distributed  damage
initiators  coupled with  thresholded  exponential  growth
[4]  of  existing  damage  spots.  This  model  will  be
included  and  updated  as  understanding  develops.
Conversion of optical energy from 1053-nm  to  351-nm
wavelength  is  required  for  NIF’s  scientific  mission.
Since the efficiency of this conversion is  a  major  factor
in  NIF  energetics, considerable effort has  been  focused
on  understanding  and  modeling  this  process  [5].  The
conversion model  will  be  integrated  into  the  VBL  in
support of the LPOM’s laser-setup mission.

All  facets  of  the  VBL  model  are  under  intense
development.  One  particular  advance  deals  with  the
facility  for  deriving  the  low-power  temporal  shape
required  to  generate  a  specified  high-power  output
shape. For speed,  the  algorithm  in  PROP92  was based
on  a  single-ray,  energetics-only  calculation.  A  new
approach was recently implemented that  uses  multiple
rays and an  improved  iterative  algorithm  to  achieve  a
more  accurate  solution  while  still  holding 
the
computation time to roughly 10% of that needed for the
diffractive  “forward”  calculation.  The  new  method
improves  the  solution  of  the  input  pulse  solver  by
roughly an order of magnitude.

3 LPOM

(ICCS) 

System 

high-level 

The LPOM will be one of the NIF Integrated  Computer
Control 
software
supervisors.  The  primary  role  of  the  LPOM  is  to
automate  the  setup  of  the  192  individual  NIF  laser
beams.  Figure  1  illustrates  LPOM’s  interaction  with
the laser system. LPOM  will  maintain  a  current model
that  includes  the  optical  paths,  configurations,  and
frequency conversion  characteristics  for  each  beam,  as
well  as  a  database  of  diagnostic  measurements,  laser
energy,  and  power  at  various  locations  along  the
beamline.

From  these,  it  will  estimate  the  amplifier gains  and
optical losses. These parameters will be used in VBL to
calculate  the  laser  equipment  set  points  required  to
produce  the  requested  output  laser  pulse.  These  set
points  include  the  initial  energy  and  pulse  shape

produced  in  the  Master  Oscillator  Room  (MOR)  and
various  attenuation  settings  for  waveplates  located  in

the  preamplifier  module  (PAM)  and  the  Preamplifier
Beam Transport System (PABTS).

Figure 1: Laser equipment set points determined by LPOM and the diagnostic signals used for feedback. The LPOM
communicates with the front-end system through a communication agent with the ICCS.

LPOM will also predict the power and energy at  each
of the laser diagnostic locations to aid in  setting  up  the
diagnostics system  (attenuation levels,  temporal range,
etc.)  in  such  a  way  as  to  optimize  the  clarity  of  the
signal. Post-shot, this data is fed back  to  the  LPOM  in
an automated closed-loop fashion  to  provide updates to
the predictive model.

The LPOM  Equipment  Protection  Module  has  two
components.  The first  module,  the  Setup  Assessment
Code,  checks  the  calculated  system  setup  before  the
ICCS Laser Supervisory System implements it.  In  this
role, LPOM will compare its  calculated setpoint  values
against  allowable  ranges  provided  by  offline  VBL
calculations that evaluate the danger of  excessive optics
damage.  The  second  module,  the  Setup  Verification
Module, evaluates actual pulses  generated and measured
during a  series of  low-energy (~1 J)  shots  prior  to  the
countdown of  a  full-system  shot.  Its  role  is  to  verify
that  these low-energy pulses  match  the  expected  pulse
shape and energy. Both modules serve as  administrative
controls  for  equipment  protection;  i.e.,  LPOM  will
alert the  NIF  Shot  Director  of  the  status  of  the  shot
with  respect  to  the  impact  upon  damage-susceptible
elements.

include  algorithms 

The third LPOM  component  is  a  data  analysis  and
archiving module. This module serves two related roles.
First,  it  provides  analytical  tools  required  to  measure
to
system  performance.  These 
calculate  laser  power  balance,  compare  predicted  laser
pulses  to  those  measured,  and  calculate  laser  system
trends.  Results  from  this  module  are  used  both  for
post-run  evaluation  and  for  input  to  future  LPOM
calculations.  Second, it  provides  archiving  of  LPOM-
generated  data,  user  access  to  LPOM  and  its  related
archives,  and  graphical  tools  for  trending  and  data
reporting.

4  CONCEPTUAL  DESIGN

A  conceptual design of  the  LPOM  system  has  been
completed.  Because  of  time  constraints,  it  will  be
implemented  on  a  parallel  architecture,  with  a  single
processor devoted to each beamline. A master CPU will
control the  communication  between LPOM  and ICCS,
laser  setup  and  equipment  protection
coordinate 
calculations,  and  provide  graphical  user 
interfaces
(GUIs) and data analysis tools to users.

Over the past  few months,  a  prototype  or  emulation
of  the  LPOM  laser setup  module  has  been  developed.

The prototype  is  focused on  the  setup  of  NIF’s  main
amplifier section  and was designed to  provide proof  of
principle of  the  laser setup  strategy,  to  test  parameter
optimization  schemes,  and 
to  develop  GUIs.  A
PROP92  calculation with  a  prescribed set  of  amplifier
gains  and  optical  losses  is  used  as  a  surrogate  laser
shot.  A  parameter optimizer  uses  simulated  input  and
output laser diagnostic data (including realistic amounts

of systematic and stochastic  noise)  to  estimate  a  set  of
gains  and losses  that  best  matches  the  simulated  data.
This  set  of  parameters,  along  with  the  Input  Pulse
Solver,  is  used to  generate the  input  pulse  shapes  and
energies  required  for  subsequent  shots.  The  emulator
package is diagrammed in Figure 2.

.   

Desired
Output Pulse

System
Parameters

VBL
Input Pulse 
Solve

Input   Pulse

Model
Parameter
Estimator

Graphical
User
Interface
•  control
•  display

VBL
Simulator
(current)

NIF
Beamline
(future)

Measured Output
Pulse

Measured Output
Pulse

Figure 2: Conceptual design of the LPOM shot setup emulator system. The model parameter estimator consists of
VMCON, using a simplified C++ laser model.

A  nonlinear  parameter  optimization 

package
determines the amplifier gains and optical  losses  of  the
laser  as  a  best  fit  to  archived  diagnostic  data.  The
parameter  adjustment  scheme  is  required  to  accurately
track  variations  in  the  system,  without  introducing
appreciable uncertainties in the laser output. A series of
tests  are  under  way  to  determine  the  most  reliable
operation  strategy.  In 
the
the 
emulator  will  be  extended  to  include  the  entire  laser
system and then to include multiple laser beamlines.

immediate  future, 

5     S U M M A R Y

control 

The LPOM will be an integral part of the NIF  laser’s
supervisory 
setup,
equipment protection,  analysis,  and archiving  services.
It  will  rely  on  the  VBL  for  physics  modeling  of  the
beamline performance and damage risk.

software,  providing 

This  work performed under  the  auspices of  the  U.S.

DOE by LLNL under contract No. W-7405-Eng-48.

REFERENCES
[1] R.  A.  Sacks  et  al.,  1996  ICF  Annual  Report,
Lawrence 
Laboratory,
Livermore  National 
Livermore,  CA,  UCRL-LR-105821-96.  (1996),
pp. 207–213.

[2]  K.  S.  Jancaitis  et  al.,  “A  3-dimensional  ray-trace
model for predicting the  performance of  flashlamp-
pumped  laser  amplifiers,”  Proceedings  of 
the
Second Annual  International  Conference  on  Solid
Inertial
State  Lasers 
Confinement  Fusion,  Paris,  France,  October
20–25, 1996.

for  Application 

to 

[3]  J.  B.  Trenholme,  “Damage  from  Pulses  with
Arbitrary Temporal  Shapes,”  Lawrence  Livermore
National Laboratory, Livermore, CA,  memo  LST-
LMO-94-001 (Ver. 2) L-18179-2 (1995).

[4]  C.  Widmayer,  M.  Runkel,  and  M.  Feit,  “The
Effect of  LAT  Beam Shape,  Energy,  and Pointing
Fluctuations  on  Damage  Initiation  Experiments,”
Lawrence 
Laboratory,
Livermore  National 
Livermore, CA, memo NIF-0064364, April 2001.
[5]  J.  M.  Auerbach et  al.,  1996  ICF  Annual  Report,
Lawrence 
Laboratory,
Livermore  National 
Livermore,  CA,  UCRL-LR-105821-96.  (1996),
pp. 199–206.

