TUAP068 

EPICS Software Development for SNS VME Based Timing and RTDL System* 
 
J. Y. Tang†, H. Hartmann, L. Hoff, T. Kerner, B. Oerter and J. Smith 
 Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY, USA 
P. McGehee and P. Stein, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, USA 

 
Abstract 
The Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) timing and Real 
Time  Data  Link  (RTDL)  systems  are  being  designed 
and  developed  at  Brookhaven  National  Laboratory 
(BNL),  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory  (LANL)  and 
other SNS collaborating labs [1]. The VME-based SNS 
timing  system  is  comprised  of  a  phase  locked  loop 
(PLL) to generate a 120 Hz power line locked clock, a 
master  timing  system  including up to 4 16-event input 
modules  (V101)  and  a  timing  system  encoder  module 
(V123S),  distribution 
to  all  equipment 
locations,  and  a 
timing  system  receiver  module 
(V124S). The VME-based SNS RTDL system includes 
an encoder module (V105), up to 10 8-inputs modules 
(V206) and an RTDL receiver module. The EPICS [2] 
software support for the timing and RTDL master VME 
boards has been developed at BNL while the software 
and hardware of the SNS utility module are undertaken 
at LANL. The software is currently under the beta test 
at the SNS collaborating labs. This paper describes the 
design and the implementation of the software. 

system 

1 INTRODUCTION 
The  design  of  the  SNS  beam  synchronous  timing 

is  based  on 

the  existing  model  for 

system 
the 
Brookhaven  National  Laboratory’s  Relativistic  Heavy 
Ion  Collider  (RHIC).  Adapting  the  RHIC  system  for 
SNS reduces the development time and takes advantage 
of  proven  technology  reducing  the  engineering  risk. 
Modifications  to  the  RHIC  system  to  meet  SNS 
requirements  would  be  minor.  For  the  same  reasons, 
the  most  of  related  RHIC  and  APS  timing  control 
software  has  been  ported  and  re-engineered.  The  SNS 
timing  software  development 
is  currently  being 
developed on the SNS timing system test stand at BNL. 
Its  configuration  is  shown  in  Figure  1.  The  software 
will  be  installed  and  used  for  the  SNS  control  system 
commissioning at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.  

2 SNS TIMING SYSTEM HARDWARE   

2.1 Beam Synchronous Event Encoder System 

The design of SNS beam synchronous event encoder 
is adapted from the RHIC system [3] and it is contained 
in  a  single  VME  chassis  utilizing  five  dedicated  slots, 
one for the V123S module and four for V101 modules. 
The slots are fixed by the dedicated P2 backplane. The 

* Work performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy 
†   jtang@bnl.gov 
 

beam  synchronous  event  link  carrier  varies  around 
16.92  MHz,  derived  from  16  x  the  SNS  ring  LLRF 
frequency.  The  source  of  this  RF  clock  is  created  by 
direct  digital  synthesizer  (DDS)  and  a  power  line 
tracking    (PLL)  VME  board.  The  beam  synchronous 
event  link  is  initiated  and  fanned  out  as  differential 
PECL, and distributed by fiber optics.   

The  purpose  of  the  SNS  beam  synchronous  event 

system is: 

(cid:1)(cid:2) Transmit  the  600  Hz  Line  sync  Event  to 
establish  spill  and  fill  cycle  delineation 
points accurate to 1 ns 

(cid:1)(cid:2) Synchronize the above signals to the 1 MHz 

ring rotation tick 

(cid:1)(cid:2) Synchronize  the  neutron  choppers  to  the 

ring extraction time  

(cid:1)(cid:2) Synchronize 

the 

linac  beam  chopper 
injection  pulse  to  the  accumulator  ring 
phase 

(cid:1)(cid:2) Provide  beam  synchronous  events  to  the 
triggers,  beam  position 

instrumentation 
monitors, and profilers 

(cid:1)(cid:2) Track  variations  in  injection  energy  from 
842 MeV to 1.3 GeV or B field corrections 
requiring rotation frequency adjustments 

2.2  The Beam Synchronous Trigger Module 

 The beam synchronous trigger module (V124S) is a 
general-purpose  VME  bus  controlled  module  and  is 
designed  to  provide  clocks  and  triggers  for  data 
acquisition  systems  and  experiments.  The  V124S 
module  provides  eight  identical  channels  that  can  be 
configured independently and a buffered recovered RF 
Clock output. The design of this module is based on the 
RHIC’s  version  [4].  The  primary  function  of  this 
module is the trigger delay function.  

2.3  SNS Real Time Data Link System 

 The SNS RTDL system is comprised of two module 
types:  the  Encoder  Module  (V105)  and  the  Input 
Module  (V206).  There  is  only  one  V105  module,  but 
many (up to 10) Input Modules. The design of the SNS 
RTDL system is based on the RHIC’s version [5]. The 
RTDL  system  distributes  to  all  locations  around  the 
SNS  machine  parameters  of  general 
to 
accelerator  systems  and  users.  The  RTDL  machine 
parameter  frames  are  transmitted  on  a  serial  self-
clocking  link  using  a  modified  Manchester  code.  The 
transmission  rate  is  10Mb/s  and  about  4.3  us  are 
required  to  transmit  each  parameter  data  frame.  A 
typical application of using the system is to distribute a 
GPS  time  stamp  to  all  the  IOCs  around  the  SNS 
machine. 

interest 

2.4  The Utility Module 

interfaces 

The  SNS  utility  module  is  a  multi-purpose  circuit 
board used to provide an Input/Output Controller (IOC) 
with 
links, 
input/output  capability,  and  chassis  environment 
information. The utility module, designed to reside in a 
VME chassis, occupies one VME board slot. It has the 
following main features and functions: 

to  SNS  event  and  RTDL 

(cid:1)(cid:2) SNS  event  link  decoder  and  event  link 
filter used to generate VME interrupts 
(cid:1)(cid:2) SNS  RTDL  utility  link  receiver  and  data 

frame buffer 

(cid:1)(cid:2) RTDL utility link error monitor 
(cid:1)(cid:2) Status indication for event link, SNS utility 

link and board initialization 
supply, 

(cid:1)(cid:2) Power 

fan 

and 

temperature 

(cid:1)(cid:2)

monitoring for the VME chassis 
Interrupt  generation  from  failed 
power supplies, fans and over temperature 
(cid:1)(cid:2) Remote  reset  of  VME  chassis  via  the 

links, 

RTDL utility link 

(cid:1)(cid:2) VME  interrupts  from  two  external  signal 

sources 

 3 SOFTWARE SUPPORT  

3.1 VxWorks Driver Development 

to 

the  access 

The  VxWorks  drivers  for  the  SNS  timing  hardware 
provide  EPICS  device  support  layer  or  high-level 
application  software 
the  hardware 
registers  and  the  capability  of  the  hardware  module 
configuration.  The  driver  development  strategy  taken 
was Wind River VxWorks driver compliant: top-down 
design and bottom-up implementation and testing. The 
original  RHIC  drivers  were  used  as  template  files  for 
the SNS timing drivers. 
 
bsyncDrv()  –  This  driver  provides  an  interface  to  the 
v123s, the SNS beam-synchronous encoder module and 
the  16-channel  v101  event  code  input  module.  20 
routines  implemented  in  this  driver  are  accessible 
through  the  VxWorks  I/O  system  for  I/O  access  to 
specific 
routine 
implemented  accumulates  input  errors  from  various 
sources. 
 
rtdlDrv() – This driver controls the SNS RTDL system. 
25  routines  implemented  in  this  driver  are  accessible 
through  the  VxWorks  I/O  system  for  controls  of  the 
RTDL  encoder,  v105  module  and  the  input  module, 
v106  via  their  registers.  In  addition  to  the  IOCTL 
routines, the read and write functions of the driver are 
provided for reading or writing from the parameter ID 

interrupt  service 

registers.  The 

table  within  the  encoder  module.  The  interrupts  are 
generated  when  the  encoder  module  does  not  get  a 
response  from  a  particular  input  channel,  as  well  as 
when  no  event  line  carrier  has  been  detected  for  1 us. 
The Parameter ID on the encoder module is read by the 
interrupt  handler  when  a  NO  RESPONSE  interrupt 
occurs  in  order  to  decipher  which  channel  is  at  fault. 
The interrupts are generated on the input module when 
the carrier on the local serial link has not been detected 
for  2  us,  when  a  frame  has  been  received  with  a  data 
integrity (CRC) error, and when a frame error occurs. 
 
bsTrigDrv()  –  This  driver  provides  an  interface  to  the 
v124s  8-channel,  beam-synchronous  trigger  module. 
The  driver  allows  configuring  each  of  the  8-channel 
individually.  38  IOCTL  routines  implemented  in  this 
driver  are  accessible  through  the  I/O  system  for 
configuring the module.  
 
utilityDrv()  –  This  driver  consists  of  read  and  write 
access  to  specific  registers  in  addition  to  handling  of 
three  distinct  interrupt  sources.  With  the  exception  of 
the  RTDL  frames  all  registers  are  accessed  as  8-bit 
quantities. The driver reads error counts and status for 
the  event  and  RTDL 
the  RTDL  frames, 
environmental  parameters  associated  with  the  power 
supply  and  temperature  control,  and  the  hardware 
selected remote reset address. Write access to the utility 
board  allows  control  of  which  event  codes  generate 
local  interrupts,  temperature  high  limit  set  point,  and 
Interrupt  service 
various 
routines  are  attached  to  interrupts  stemming  from  the 
Event  Link,  from 
the  board 
environment, and from external sources. 

the  monitoring  of 

initialization 

functions. 

links, 

3.2 EPICS Device Support Layer 

EPICS  device  support  layer  for  the  SNS  timing 
system  hardware  serves  the  interface  between  the 
VxWorks  drivers  and  EPICS  control  system.  After 
careful  review  of  APS’  timing  system  EPICS  support, 
instead of creating a new set of record types, a group of 
record  templates  with  a  new  set  of  device  support 
routines  has  been  designed  and  implemented  for  the 
SNS  timing  system  EPICS  support.  This  choice  has 
been  found  to  be  more  flexible  for  a  prototyping 
hardware  system  and  easier  for  the  future  EPICS 
upgrading  effort.  Three  major  function  components  of 
the SNS timing system EPICS support are the basic I/O 
time  stamp  support  and 
interface,  synchronized 

 

triggering of EPICS database processing in response to 
event link activity. 

 

this 

time  stamp  support  – 

The  basic  I/O  interface  -  this  provides  a  mapping 
between  the  EPICS  database  records  and  the  device 
driver I/O functions over the board registers. The board 
configuration can be accomplished via EPICS database 
records. 
 
The  synchronized 
is 
accomplished  by  using  the  synchronized  time  stamp 
support  interface  originally  defined at APS and makes 
use  of  three  RTDL  parameters  updated  at  60  Hz  by  a 
RTDL  master.  To  support  this  feature,  the  device 
support  for  the  utility  module  enables  the  interrupt 
generated by the “RTDL Valid” event at initialization.  
 
The  triggering  of  EPICS  database  processing  in 
response to the event link activity - The device support 
layer allows the application developer to define records 
that  will  be  processed  when  a  specific  combination  of 
an event and type of beam pulse profile occurs.  

3  SUMMARY 
Both  hardware  and  software  for  the  SNS  timing 
system  are  currently  in  beta  test  at  the  SNS  partner 
labs.  The  first  application  of  the  software  will  be 
conducted  at  LBNL  for  SNS  Front-End  diagnostic 
system around the end of this year. On-going effort on 
hardware  and  software  will  be  continued  until  the 
commissioning of the SNS at ORNL in 2004 or 2005. 

5 ACKNOWLEGEMENTS 
The authors wish to thank Marty Kraimer of APS for 
the  meaningful  discussions  on  using  record  templates 
vs. creating new record types.  

REFERENCES 
[1]  B.  Oerter,  et  al,  “SNS  Timing  System”, 

ICALEPCS’01, San Jose, (2001) 

[2] L. R. Dalesio, et al., “EPICS”, Nuclear Instruments 
&  Methods  in  Physics  Research  A  352  (1994), 
179-184 

[3] T. Kerner, et al, “V123 Beam Synchronous Encoder 

Module”, PAC’99, New York, (1999) 

[4]  H.  Hartmann,  et  al,  “RHIC  Beam  Synchronous 
Trigger Module”, PAC’99, New York, (1999) 
[5]  H.  Hartmann,  “The  RHIC  Real  Time  Data  Link 
System”,  PAC’97,  Vancouver,  Canada,  (1997)

