TUAP002 

A CONTROL SYSTEM OF THE JOINT-PROJECT ACCELERATOR 
COMPLEX 
 
J. Chiba, H. Fujii, K. Furukawa,  N. Kamikubota, H. Nakagawa, N. Yamamoto,   
High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK), Tsukuba, Japan 305-0801 
  H. Sakaki, H. Yoshikawa, 
 Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute (JAERI), Tokai, Japan 319-1195 
 

Abstract 

 

The  current  status  of  the  control  system  for  a  new 
high intensity proton accelerator, the JAERI-KEK Joint 
Project, is presented.  The Phase 1 of the Joint-Project 
has been approved and recently started its construction 
at JAERI site at Tokai.  The first beam commissioning 
is  scheduled  in  2006.    In  parallel  with  it,  a  60-MeV 
Linac is now being constructed at KEK site at Tsukuba 
for R&D purpose.  

Recently the Project has officially decided to use the 
Experimental  Physics  and  Industrial  Control  System 
(EPICS).    Under  the  EPICS  environment,  we  are 
challenging  to  implement  the  Ethernet/IP  network  for 
all  communication,  even  at  the  level  of  end-point 
controllers which are so far connected via a field bus.  
In order to realize such a system, three new controllers 
(PLCs, WE7000 stations and general-purpose Ethernet 
boards)  are  being  developed.    A  prototype  EPICS 
driver  for  the  PLCs  works  fine  and  is  used  to  control 
the ion-source at the KEK Linac.  

1 THE JOINT-PROJECT 
As  reported  in  the  previous  conference  [1]  the  two 
projects, JHF at KEK and NSP at JAERI, were merged 
and  formed  a  new  project,  the  JAERI-KEK  Joint 
Project.    The  Phase  1  of  the  project  consists  of  three 
accelerator  facilities  (400-MeV  Linac,  3-GeV  Rapid-
cycling  Synchrotron,  and  50-GeV  Synchrotron)  and 
two  experimental  facilities  (Material  and  Life  Science 
Facility  at  3  GeV  and  Nuclear  and  Particle  Physics 
Facility  at  50  GeV).  The  construction  of  the  Phase  1 
will be completed in 2006.  The schedule of the Phase2 
in  which  600-MeV  Super 
is  not  known  yet, 
Conducting 
and  Accelerator  Driven 
Linac 
Transmutation  (ADS)  Experimental  Facility  will  be 
constructed. 

We  are  planning  to  make  a  central  control  system 
with which not only the accelerator but also the beams 
and  targets  in  the  experimental  facilities  can  be 

 

monitored  and  operated 
operational costs including labor. 

in  order 

to  reduce 

the 

In addition to the facilities at Tokai mentioned above, 
we have constructing a 60-Mev Linac at KEK site.  It 
comprises an ion source, a low-energy beam transport 
(LEBT),  3-MeV  RFQ  Linac,  a  medium-energy  beam 
transport  (MEBT),  a  50-MeV  drift-tube  Linac  (DTL), 
and  a  60-MeV  separated  DTL  (SDTL).  The  DTL  and 
SDTL  will  be  transported  and  re-installed  at  Tokai 
after successful beam tests. 

2 DESIGN OF THE CONTROL SYSTEM 

2.1 Introduction 

Before  forming  the  Joint  Project,  the  use  of  the 
EPICS toolkit at the JHF accelerator had been decided 
after intensive discussion among the JHF control group 
members  [1].    Although  there  were  some  complaints 
against the use of EPICS, we recently decided to use it 
in  the  Joint  Project.    Since  the  Joint  JAERI-KEK 
construction  team  have  been  formed  only  a  half  year 
ago,  concrete  rules  needed  for  the  control  system 
design  are  not  determined  yet  except  for  the  use  of 
EPICS.  

In  the  following  subsections,  we  describe  our 
present thought on the control system in 5 components; 
(1) device control, (2) network, (3) operator interface, 
(4) interface to beam simulator and (5) database.   

2.2 Device control 

 In  EPICS,  all  device  controls  are  carried  out 
through  input/output  controllers  (IOCs).    At  present, 
only  VMEs  under  the  vxWorks  operating  system  can 
be  used  as  an  EPICS  IOC.    There  are  many  VME 
modules  are  commercially  available  for  processing 
normal digital and analogue signals.  EPICS drivers are 
already  available 
those  modules.  
for  many  of 
Therefore, we don’t need to worry about devices which 
require  only  those  signals.    However,  there  are  many 
devices which need special treatments. 

 

PLCs are cheap and reliable in a sense that they keep 
running under any trouble in computers or networking, 
and  therefore  it  is  preferable  to  use  PLCs  for  some 
critical  devices  such  as  an  ion-source.    How  PLCs 
make communication with IOCs is one of the issues we 
have to determine early.  Our answers are as follows;  

•  Use 

Ethernet 

TCP/IP.  Among 

PLCs 
commercially  available,  presently  only  FA-M3 
transfers 
PLC  by  Yokogawa  support  data 
protocols  we  required,  we  force  equipment 
groups to use it if they need PLCs. 

ID 

the 

•  Assign  an  identification  number  (ID)  to  each 
PLC.    It  is  dangerous  to  rely  only  on  the  IP 
address.  Before any communication with a PLC 
and  at  any  data  (command)  transfer  to  a  PLC, 
check 
sure  you  are 
to  make 
communicating with an appropriate PLC.   
•  No  individual  commands  for  operation.    Only 
data transfer from/to PLC memory is supported.  
Any  device  operation  should  be  done  though 
contents of memory in a restricted address range. 
•  No direct write to PLC memory.  An IOC sends 
3-word  data  (an  ID,  a  memory  address  and 
content)  to  a  communication  area  in  the  PLC 
memory.    Then,  a  PLC  ladder  program  moves 
the  content  to  an  appropriate  address  after 
checking its ID. 

A prototype of the PLC EPICS driver has been written 
and  successfully  used  for  the  ion-source  operation  at 
the  KEK  60-Mev  Linac,  although  all 
the  rules 
mentioned above are not fully implemented yet in  the 
prototype  driver.    Detailed  description  on  the  device 
driver may be found elsewhere [2]. 

Choice  of  waveform  digitizers  is  another  important 
issue  we  have  to  consider  for  device  control.    As 
reported in the previous conference [3], our choice was 
the  WE7000  measurement  station  by  Yokogawa.    Its 
EPICS driver has been partially completed and tested.  
For  this  station,  TCP/IP  Ethernet  communication 
method is used as same as that for the PLCs.  Detailed 
description is given again in Ref. [2]. 

For  precise  current  control  of  power  supplies,  we 
should  avoid  extending  an  analogue  signal  in  a  long 
distance,  and  instead,  should  use  digital  data  links.  
Since Ethernet network runs all over the area, we chose 
Ethernet for digital data  link  avoiding  another  type  of 
field  buses  so  that  all  of  the  data  communication  is 
unified.    By  doing  so,  we  can  trace  back  all  data 
through  network  which  will  significantly  help  us  for 
operation  diagnostics.    Also  it  reduces  the  number  of 
stock items which may reduce the operational cost.  To 
achieve  the  unified  Ethernet  links,  we  are  developing 
an  Ethernet  interface  board  which  will  be  used 
the  power  supplies  for  quadrupole 
primarily 

in 

 

required 

the  DTL. 

  The  board 

some  devices 

magnets  at 
is  designed 
considering  more  general  uses  and  may  be  embedded 
in other devices. 
However, 

some 
equipment  may  communicate  with  our  control  system 
only  via  a  method  other  than  Ethernet.    For  example, 
most  of  low-price  power  supplies  have  a  GPIB  or 
RS232c interface for remote access.  In such cases, we 
will  use  Ethernet  interface  such  as  a  GPIB  LAN 
gateway for GPIB and a terminal server for RS232c to 
minimize the area covered by field buses. 

for 

2.3 Network 

Redundant  gigabit  Ethernet  with  fiber  optics  linked 
like  as  a  "star"  starting  from  the  central  control  room 
(CCR) to each accelerator (Linac, 3-GeV RCS and 50-
GeV  PS)  and  experimental  facility  is  the  backbone  of 
the control network. From each backbone station, star-
like 100baseFX optical fiber cables extend to network 
switches  over  the  facility.  Most  of  the  network  end 
nodes  such  as  IOCs  are  100baseTX.  Some  nodes  in  a 
high EMI noise levels  such  as  near  klystrons  or  high-
powered pulsed power supplies should be 100baseFX. 

As described in previous subsection, we are going to 
use  Ethernet  links  in  stead  of  other  field  buses.  
Therefore the total number of IP addresses required for 
the control system could easily exceed a few thousands.  
Therefore  it  is  impossible  to  use  a  global  IP  address 
space.  Instead we are going to use a Class B private IP 
address space and use a router to communicate outside 
the network. 

We have not figured out how the network should be 
divided into subnets.  The EPICS channel access (CA) 
protocol requires the network broadcast.  Therefore all 
EPICS  nodes  should  be  in  one  subnet.    Nodes  for 
diagnostic purpose should belong to a different subnet 
because  they  must  be  free  from  the  EPICS  subnet.  
Such  diagnostic  nodes  include  a  communication  port 
of  a  traffic  watcher  (of  course,  it  should  have  also  a 
port in the EPICS subnet to spy network traffic) and an 
IOC’s  CPU  console  (RS232c  through  a  terminal 
server).  Those two types of nodes are in general close 
each  other  in  space,  and  therefore  it  is  better  to 
implement 
to  reduce 
the  virtual-LAN 
cabling and number of network switches. 

technique 

2.4 Operator interface 

We  will  use  one  of  the  standard  EPICS  OPI  tools 
for  the  EPICS  operation,  but  not  specified  yet  which 
one  should  be  used.    Also  there  are  two  choices;  (1) 
OPI applications run directly on a PC Linux or (2) OPI 
applications  run  on  an  X-client  machine  with  an  X-
terminal (or a PC with X-server).  The former choice is 

operations.  The rules on the PLC use mentioned in Sec. 
2 are not implemented yet. 

The  EPICS  system  will  be  used  also  for  the 
operation  of  the  60-MeV  Linac.    At  present,  only  the 
ion-source control which uses a  MA-F3  PLC  is  under 
the EPICS environment. 

The  HP  EPICS  server,  VME  IOCs,  PLCs  and  3 
operators  PC  terminals  form  a  Class  C  network  with 
private IP address.  Operator can access to KEK-LAN 
via  routers  (2  of  freeBSD  PCs).    The  HP  server  also 
has  a  network  port  to  KEK-LAN  through  which  we 
access  to  the  system  from  outside  of  the  accelerator 
building. 

At  JAERI,  an  HP  EPICS  application  server  and 
several  VME  IOCs  are  installed.    A  test  stand  for 
klystron  power  supplies  employs  the  EPICS  system.  
An  EPICS  driver  for  a  VME  pulse  motor  controller 
module is now under development. 

4 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank all members of the 
Joint-Project  team.    They  also  acknowledge  members 
of  the  KEKB  ring  control  group  for  their  advices  and 
suggestions. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  J.  Chiba,  K.  Furukawa,  E.  Kadokura,  N. 
Kamikubota, H. Nakagawa, K. Nigorikawa and Y. 
the  JHF 
Yamamoto,  “A  control  system  of 
accelerator  complex”,  ICALEPICS’99,  Trieste, 
Italy, 1999,  p672. 

[2]  K.  Furukawa,  J.  Chiba,  N.  Kamikubota,  N. 
the  EPICS 
Nakagawa,  “Implementation  of 
software support for network based controllers”, in 
these proceedings. 

[3]  K.  Furukawa,  J.  Chiba,  N.  Kamikubota,  N 
Nakagawa,  “Network  based  EPICS  drivers  for 
PLCs and measurement stations”, ICALEPICS’99, 
Trieste, Italy, 1999, p409 

[4]  http://acc_physics.kek.jp/SAD/sad.html 

(KEKB 

SAD homepage) 

good for network traffic but not  good  for  maintaining 
applications.  The latter is just opposite.  Another type 
of  operator  interface  is  necessary  which  is  related  to 
the issues described in the next subsection. 

2.5 Interface to accelerator simulator 

In  order  to  operate  the  accelerator  stably,  it  is 
important  to  simulate  the  beam  before  parameters  are 
physically  changed. 
  Accelerator  physicists  are 
responsible for developing such a simulation code, but 
control  group  should  help  them  to  include  the  EPICS 
interface and operator interface in the code.  SAD code 
[4] used at the KEKB accelerator is a candidate in the 
Joint-Project.  Since SAD code used at KEKB already 
has  the  graphical  user  interface  (GUI)  and  the  EPICS 
interface,  we  don’t  need  to  worry  so  much  about  the 
interfaces  if  SAD  is  chosen  as  a  simulation  code.  
However, SAD must be significantly modified or new 
simulation  code  should  be  implemented  for  the  Linac 
simulation. If new code is chosen, we have to provide 
the GUI and EPICS interface similarly to the SAD case. 

2.6 Database 

For steady and reliable operations of the accelerator, 
use  of  proper  database  system  is  indispensable.    We 
have  just  started  to  design  various  kinds  of  database 
necessary in our system. 

3 PRESENT     STATUS 
At  KEK,  an  EPICS  application  server  (HP-UX,  HP 
9000  model  D380/2)  and  several  VME  IOCs  (Force 
PowerCore  6750)  have  been  installed  primarily  for 
software developments.  

(10MHz 

Development  of  an  EPICS  device  driver  for  the 
WE7000  measurement  station  (Yokogawa)  is  being 
carried  out.    We  have  so  far  developed  EPICS  device 
support  for  3  WE7000  modules;  WE7111  (100MS/s 
digital  oscilloscope),  WE7121 
function 
generator)  and  WE7271  (4ch  100kS/s  waveform 
digitizer). 
  However, 
  It  works  basically  fine. 
concurrent use with MS Windows applications doesn’t 
work  with  unknown  reasons.    Because  the  WE7000 
have  been  developed  for  MS  Windows  OS,  there  are 
fruitful  applications  available  under  Windows  system.  
Those applications are very useful  for  maintenance  of 
the  WE7000  stations  and  developments  of  EPICS 
applications.    We  must  solve  this  problem  soon 
because 
is 
indispensable. 

the  concurrent  use  with  Windows 

Present version of the EPICS driver for Yokogawa’s 
input/output 

FA-M3  PLC  supports  only  simple 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

