REJUVENATION OF THE CONTROLS OF THE CERN ISOLDE FACILITY 
USING INDUSTRIAL COMPONENTS 
 
J. Allard, O. Jonsson, F. Locci, G. Mornacchi, CERN, Geneva, Switzerland 
 

TUAP034 

Abstract 

In  the  context  of  the  general  consolidation  of  the 
CERN  ISOLDE  facility,  a  project  has  been  started  to 
upgrade  the  ISOLDE  control  system.  We  describe  the 
new 
the 
ISOLDE  control  system,  emphasizing 
systematic  use  of  industrial  components  such  as  PLCs 
and  field  buses,  their  integration  with  the  existing, 
VME  based,  CERN  PS  control  system  and  their 
potential applicability to both existing and new controls 
problems  at  the  CERN  PS  complex.  We  also  discuss 
how to extend a PLC-based solution to the case where 
real-time response is an issue. 

1 INTRODUCTION 
The  On-Line  mass-separator  (ISOLDE)  is  a  facility 
for  the  production  of  pure  low  energy  radioactive  ion 
beams at CERN [1]. A project for its consolidation has 
been started and the upgrade of the control system has 
been identified as one of the urgent jobs. To this end a 
sub-project  has  been  defined  with  the  mandate  to 
consolidate the equipment layer of the ISOLDE control 
system and to integrate this latter with the PS controls 
infrastructure  on  the  time  scale  of  the  ISOLDE  2002 
start-up. The project builds on a previous study for the 
rejuvenation of the ISOLDE control system [2]. 

In this paper we describe the solution devised for the 
ISOLDE control system and report on the status of its 
implementation.  Emphasis  is  put  on  the  application  of 
industrial components. 

2 THE ISOLDE CONTROL SYSTEM 

2.1 The existing ISOLDE control system 

The existing ISOLDE control system [3] is based on 
commodity hardware (PCs), using Microsoft operating 
systems  (DOS  and  WindowsNT)  and  tools  (e.g. 
Access, Excel). The system is layered according to the 
accelerator  controls  “standard  model”:  a  supervisory 
layer,  consisting  of  PCs  running  console  application 
software, and a front-end (or equipment control) layer, 
also  based  on  PCs,  which  interfaces  to  the  equipment 
hardware  and  runs  the  equipment  specific  control 
software.  The  integration  of  the  different  (about  30) 
PCs 
level 
communication  protocol  over  TCP/IP  and  Ethernet. 
The interface to the equipment (e.g. power supplies) is 
not homogeneous but is a combination of old standards, 
such  as  CAMAC,  special  PC  I/O  cards  and  other  ad 
hoc  solutions.  A  detailed  description  of  the  ISOLDE 

realised  with  a 

in-house,  high 

is 

control  system  is  available  in  [4].  Without  discussing 
its technical merits, the old ISOLDE control system is a 
unique  implementation  (no  element  in  common  with 
the  PS  control  system).  It  is  also  technologically 
obsolete  and  its  exploitation  and  maintainability  are  a 
very  serious  concern.  Hence  two  key  features  of  the 
design  of  the  new  ISOLDE  controls:  compatibility 
(with  the  PS  control  system)  and  use  of  industrial 
components (reliable, off-the-shelf technology). 

2.2  The new front-end layer 

A  complete  description  of  the  new  ISOLDE  front-
end  controls  is  available  in  [5].  For  some  ISOLDE 
equipment,  in  particular  the  beam  instrumentation,  the 
equipment control layer will be implemented using the 
the  Device  Stub 
standard  PS  controls  solution: 
Controller  (DSC)  [6].  This  is  a  VME  based  system 
including  a  processor,  running  the  LynxOS  operating 
system, and various VME interface modules for the I/O 
towards the equipment. It is well adapted to buses such 
as GPIB or the MIL1553 standard.  

For  the  rest  of  the  equipment  we  have  devised  a 
solution  based  on  the  conclusions  of  a  previous  study 
industrial 
[2],  which 
components. The main ingredients are: 

systematically 

applies 

•  The Device Stub Controller (DSC): this acts as 
a communication concentrator for the PLCs for 
equipment  whose  control  is  implemented  with 
industrial  components.  The  DSC  connects  a 
PLC based sub-system to the PS control system 
by  translating  the  equipment  control  requests 
(from  the  console  layer)  into  a  simple  control 
protocol  (towards  the  PLC  layer).  The  DSC 
glues 
the 
together  different  environments: 
supervisory  layer,  the  service  infrastructure 
(e.g. the databases) and the control process. 
•  The  Programmable  Logic  Controller  (PLC): 
the task of the control process is delegated to a 
PLC.  One  PLC  is  dedicated  to  a  number  of 
instances  of  equipment  of  the  same  family 
(such  as  a  particular  type  of  a  power  supply), 
and  implements  the  local  control  process  as 
well as maintenance functions. A dedicated PC 
or a simple display module may be installed to 
operate the PLC locally, when offline from the 
control system supervisory layer.  

•  PROFIBUS  [7]:  this  is  the  field  bus  for  the 
standard  industrial  I/O  modules  (e.g.  ADC, 
DAC, etc.) which connects to the equipment on 
either  copper  wires  or  an  optical  fibre  (for 

example in the case of equipment running in a 
high  voltage  environment).    While  this  is  not 
the  case  at  ISOLDE,  a  PLC  controlling  some 
complex  equipment  could  delegate  part  of  the 
control to a hierarchy of PLCs on PROFIBUS. 
•  Ethernet:  it  is  used  as  the  fieldnetwork  to 
connect  the  DSC  to  the  PLCs.  This  choice 
greatly  simplifies  the  connection  of  our  VME 
processor  to  the  PLC.  It  allows  us  to  benefit 
from the general CERN network infrastructure 
and support, and it opens the door to the use of 
e.g.  Web-like  applications.  It  also  lifts  the 
constraints  on 
the 
PROFIBUS limitation to 256 bytes/frame) and 
the 
the 
PROFIBUS mailbox-like protocol). 

communication 

frame  size 

paradigm 

(i.e. 

(i.e. 

the 

•  Protocols:  given  the  selection  of  Siemens 
hardware, we run the RFC1006 [8] protocol on 
top  of  the  Ethernet  fieldnetwork.  We  also  run 
the  Siemens  Fetch/Write  protocol  [9] 
to 
remotely  execute  load/store  operations  in  the 
PLC memory.  

 

In summary, the new control system of the ISOLDE 
facility  includes  two  configurations  for  the  equipment 
control  layer:  one  is  the  standard,  VME  based  DSC, 
while in the second, PLCs with industrial I/O modules 
on PROFIBUS are systematically used. In this latter the 
control process has been migrated from the DSC to the 
PLC; the former plays the role of link to the rest of the 
control  system  and  its  facilities.  The  main  ingredients 
defined  above  are  put  together  in  figure  1,  which 
depicts  the  layout  for  ISOLDE  equipment  controlled 
via industrial components. 

 We  have  designed  and  developed  a  simple  client-
server  protocol, on top of RFC1006, to implement the 
generic communication interface between the DSC and 
the PLC. 

 

 

Figure 1: Generic PLC based control layout. 

 
The  PLC  software 

includes  a  small  generic 
component  that  serves  requests  from  the  DSC  and 
activates  the  relevant  equipment  specific  threads  of 
code.  In  the  spirit  of  keeping  the  PLC  programs  as 
simple  as  possible,  the  state  of  the  equipment  is 
maintained by the DSC, so as to exploit all the facilities 
(such as dynamic data tables) which are available in the 
PS control system. A pictorial view of the organisation 
is shown in figure 2. 

DSC

EM RT

E
t
h
e
r
n
e
t

PLC

To Equipment

Generic Specific

I/O Crate

I/O Bus : (PLC local or PFB)

Figure 2: Organization of the equipment control layer. 

the 

The 

sharp 

between 

boundary 

generic 
(communication)  part  and  the  equipment  specific 
control  process  greatly  simplifies  both  the  task  of  the 
software  developer  and  the  communication  protocol. 
This  latter  is  reduced  to  the  exchange  of  a  data 
structure. 

CERN 

industrial 
recommends  a  number  of 
components standards, products and manufacturers. We 
have  chosen  PROFIBUS  as  the  I/O  field  bus  and 
Siemens  products  for  both  PLCs  and  I/O  modules. 
Depending  on  the  required  performance  and  I/O 
channel density, we have used either the SIMATIC S7-
300  or  the  SIMATIC  S7-400  series  PLCs  and  I/O 
modules.  The  PLC  software  is  developed  using  the 
Pascal-like  SCL  language.  The  choice  of  one  brand 
industrial 
does  not  prevent 
components,  however.  Field  buses  and  field  networks 
allow different components to inter-operate, indeed we 
foresee  to  complement  our  architecture  with  other 
CERN recommended products. 

the  use  of  other 

As  an  example,  take  the  system  for  the  control  of 
~300  power  supplies  for  the  ISOLDE  electrostatic 
lenses. They will be controlled by a SIMATIC S7-400 
PLC based system. We currently estimate that a single 
S7  414-2  PLC  will  be  enough  to  control  the  ~300 
power  supplies.  Industrial  I/O  modules  (ADC,  DAC 
etc.) are accommodated in 3 segments of 4 crates each 
using  the  PLC  extension  bus.  Equipment  specialists 
will use a local display module for local configuration 
and diagnostics as well as to perform local control. 

The  status  of  the  developments  is  well  advanced:  a 
few  sub-systems  will  be  installed  at  ISOLDE  during 
fall, and if successful left in operation. The bulk of the 
new  front-end  layer  will  be  installed  during  the  2001-
2002 winter shutdown. 

in 

3 CONCLUSIONS 
We  have  systematically  used,  where  applicable, 
industrial  components  in  the  design  of  the  new 
ISOLDE  control  system.  The  benefits  of  such  an 
approach  are  extensively  discussed  in  [2],  and  include 
the  design  and  development,  easy 
flexibility 
assembly of off-the-shelf components, and tracking the 
evolution of industry. The approach is well adapted to a 
wide  range  of  equipment:  the  power  supplies,  the 
stepping  motors,  the  gas  system  and  the  vacuum 
system.  For  some  equipment,  in  particular  where  the 
acquisition of a sizeable amount of data is concerned or 
the equipment is interfaced via the GPIB bus, we have 
retained the standard PS controls solution. 

We  have  merged  a  generic  solution  based  on 
industrial  components  with  the  existing  PS  control 
system:  on the one hand we made use of the powerful 
tools  already  available,  while  on  the  other  hand  we 
have  provided  an  additional  building  block  to  the  PS 
control system. Indeed the solution we have devised is 
not  limited  to  ISOLDE.  The  door  is  open  for  its  use 
elsewhere  at 
in  particular  for 
applications  where  the  PS  pulse-to-pulse  modulation 

the  PS  complex, 

 
[6] is not an issue and to the controls of future CERN 
projects such as the LEIR and CTF3 machines. 

The  installation  of  Ethernet  as  a  fieldnetwork  was 
easy and it is very well adapted to a horizontal (device 
oriented)  control  system  (as  opposed  to  a  vertical, 
channel  oriented,  system  where  the  fieldbus  is  better 
suited).  It  is  however  more  expensive,  the  cost  of  the 
Ethernet  being  of  the  same  order  as  the  cost  of  the 
PLC.  

Finally there are two open questions, both related to 
the use of Ethernet as a fieldnetwork. The first concerns 
security: how to regulate the external access to the PLC 
sub-system, in particular if user interfaces based on an 
embedded  Web  server  are  used.  The second is related 
to the use of a PLC sub-system in the PS environment; 
here the issue is deterministic (real-time) behavior, the 
order  of  magnitude  being  a  few  tens  of  milliseconds. 
While the PLC per se is deterministic1, the same is not 
true  for  the  delivery  of  e.g.  timing  signals  over 
Ethernet.  We  propose  to  overcome  the  problem  by 
using  a  structured  deterministic  (i.e.  collision-less) 
Ethernet,  an  issue  where  industry  is  currently  very 
active. 

4 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  acknowledge  the  support  of  the 
controls  group  of  the  CERN  PS  division,  in  particular 
its leader B. Frammery, as well as colleagues from the 
ISOLDE  equipment  groups:  PS/PO,  PS/OP,  PS/BD 
and LHC/VAC. 

REFERENCES 
ISOLDE 
Interaction 129 (2000) 23-42. 

[1] E. Kugler.  The 

facility.  Hyperfine 

[2] O. Jonsson,  F. Locci,  G. Mornacchi.  “ISOLDE 
Front-End Study, Final Report”. CERN int. PS/CO 
Note 2001-009 (Tech.). 

[3] O.C. Jonsson  et  al.  “The  evolution  of  the  ISOLDE 

control system”. NIM B, 126 (1997) 30-34. 

[4] F. Locci. Le système de contrôle ISOLDE et REX”. 

CERN int. PS/CO Note 99-28. 

[5] J. Allard,  O. Jonsson,  F. Locci,  G. Mornacchi. 
“Consolidation  of  the  ISOLDE  controls”.  CERN 
int. PS/CO Note, to be published. 

[6] http://wwwpsco.cern.ch/. 
[7] http://www.profibus.com. 
[8] http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1006.html. 
[9] SIMATIC  CP  1430  TCP  Coupler.  Reference 

Manual. Siemens AG. 

                                                           
1 Provided the PLC is capable of executing the cycle within 
the required time frame. 

 
 
 

 

