WEET001 

DECISION SUPPORT FACILITY FOR THE APS CONTROL SYSTEM* 
 
D. A. Dohan, Advanced Photon Source, ANL, Argonne, IL 60561, USA 
 

Abstract 
The Advanced Photon Source is now in its fifth year of 
routine beam production. The EPICS-based [1] control 
system  has  entered  the  phase  in  its  life  cycle  where 
new  control  algorithms  must  be  implemented  under 
increasingly  stringent  operational  and 
reliability 
requirements.  The sheer volume of the control system 
(~270,000  records,  ~145  VME-based  input-output 
controllers  (IOCs),  and  ~7,000,000  lines  of  EPICS 
ASCII  configuration  code),  presents  a  daunting 
challenge for code maintenance.  

(booted) 

is  extracted 

The  present  work  describes  a  relational  database 
that  provides  an  integrated  view  of  the  interacting 
components  of 
the  entire  APS  control  system, 
including the IOC low-level logic, the physical wiring 
documentation, and high-level client applications. The 
database 
the  same 
operational  CVS  repository  as  that  used  to  load  the 
active  IOCs.  It  provides  site-wide  decision  support 
facilities  to  inspect  and  trace  control  flow  and  to 
identify client (e.g., user interface) programs involved 
at  any  selected  point  in  the  front-end  logic.  The 
relational  database  forms  a  basis  for  generalized 
its 
documentation  of  global  control 
connection  with  both  the  physical  I/O  and  with 
external high-level applications.  

logic  and 

from 

1  INTRODUCTION 
The  Advanced  Photon  Source  facility  has  been  in 
existence  for  about  ten  years,  with  the  past  five  years 
under full beam production.  The facility consists of an 
electron  linac,  followed  by an accumulator ring and a 
synchrotron,  injecting  into  an  1100-m  storage  ring  at 
7 GeV.  There are typically between 20 and 30 parallel 
user  experiments  running  at  any  time.    After   storing 
beam,  the  injector  linac  is  used  for  free-electron laser 
development.  Recently  the  storage  ring  has  switched 
to  top-up  operation,  in  which  beam  is  injected  at  2-
minute  intervals,  keeping  the  circulated  beam  current 
constant  to  within  1%.    In  order  to  allow  FEL 
operation 
top-up  operation,  an 
interleaving  system  is  under  development,  allowing 
rapid  switching  of  the  linac  beam  between  injection 
and FEL operation.  

in  parallel  with 

Concurrent  with  these  ongoing  requests  for  new 

________________ 
*  Work  supported  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy, 
Office  of  Basic  Energy  Sciences  under  Contract No. 
W-31-109-ENG-38. 

beam  capabilities  and  control  features  has  been  an 
increased  emphasis  on  reliable  operation,  both  in 
terms of reducing beam off time (MTTR) and perhaps 
more  importantly,  in  terms  of  reducing  the  frequency 
of  beam  dropout  (MTBF).    Changes  in  the  large 
installed,  operational  code  base  cannot  be  made 
without detailed understanding of the software and the 
behavior of the components of the control system.  

The present paper describes work in progress at the 
APS  to  create  a  facility  to  assist  the  control  systems 
installed, 
application  developer 
operational  control  system.  This  decision  support 
system  utilizes  a  relational  database  approach  to 
capture and query the controls knowledgebase. 

in  analyzing 

the 

2  THE APS CONTROL SOFTWARE 
The  main  backbone  of  the  APS  accelerator  control 
system  [2]  consists  of  a  network  of  145  front-end 
IOCs.  Connected  to  the  IOC  layer  is  a  network  of 
operator  interface  workstations.  Operators  interact 
with 
through 
MEDM  [3]  display  files.  Logging  and  automation 
tasks  are  handled  using  SDDS-  and  Tcl/TK-based 
tools.  At 
the  machine  and  equipment  interface, 
embedded controllers are programmed to provide fixed 
well-defined  functionality  within    limited  control  
subdomains.  

the  accelerator  equipment  mainly 

The  subject  of  this  paper  is  the  middle,  integration 
layer,  which  uses  the  EPICS  real-time  control  system 
software. 

3  PROCESS VARIABLE RELATIONAL 
DATABASE 

3.1 The Relational Schema 

EPICS software is based on the concept of ‘records’ 
–  executable  code  units  that  perform  hardware  I/O.  
Other  types  of  records  (e.g.,  sequence,  calc,  fanout,) 
provide  control  logic  capability.    Each  record  has  a 
well-defined  set  of  ‘fields,’  commonly  referred  to  as 
process  variables  or  PVs.      External  clients  may 
connect  to  these  PVs,  to  read  or  optionally  set  their 
values.  A  particular  type  of  field  is  a  ‘link’  field, 
which  is  used  to  control  the  flow  of  logic  between 
EPICS records. Records relating to a subsystem of the 
accelerator  complex  are  grouped  and  stored  in  text 
files 

known as ‘db files.’  These db files assist the developer 
into 
and  partitioning 
in  organizing 
manageable units of related control software. The IOC 
does  not  retain  knowledge  of  the  source  db  file  from 
which any record is derived.  

software 

To  provide  an  integrated  view  of  the  entire  control 
system  logic,  a  project  was  initiated  to  model  the 
installed  EPICS  control  software  in  a  relational 
schema, using the ORACLE relational database (rdb).  
A  simple  schema  was  adopted,  as  shown  in  entity 
relation diagram of Figure  1. 

Figure 1: EPICS PV entity relation diagram. 

ioc _id 

re cords 

rec _id 
ioc _id 
rec _name 
rec _ty pe 

rec _id 

s yste m  ta ble 

s ys tem_id 
s ys tem 

sys tem_id 

io c_table 

ioc_id 
s ys tem_id 
ioc_name  
location 

fie lds 

rec _id 
ioc _id 
f ile_index 
f ld_name 
f ld_value 

d u pl_fie lds 

rec _id 
ioc _id 
f ile_index 
f ld_name 
f ld_value 
 
 

ioc _id 

d b _files 

f ile_index 
ioc _id 
f ile_path 
s ubs t_str 

ioc _id 
f ile_index 

 

re cord_links 

rec _name 
used_by _f ld_v alue 
used_by _rec 
used_by _rec _name 
used_by _rec _index 
rec _index 
rec _f ld_inf o 

p v_io _r u les 

rule_id 
ioc _id 
rec _id 
link_no  
rac k_no 
lslot 
s ignal 
pv_f or_io 

 
In this schema, the EPICS record and field names are 
treated  as  data  rather  than  as  attributes.  Each  of  the 
fields  defined  in  an  EPICS  db  source  file  becomes  a 
row  in  the  fields  table.  In  the  APS  control  system, 
there  are  ~7,000,000  user  defined  fields.  The  foreign 
key  for  each  entry  in  the  fields  table  references  a 
specific  row  in  the  records  table.  Each  entry  in  the 
records  table  has  a  foreign  key  to  a  specific IOC.  To 
assist in database drill down and access, the IOCs are 

grouped  into  systems  organized  by  accelerator  or  by 
function. 

3.2 Database Loading 

to  an 

is  written  out 

The  file  descriptor  of  each  IOC’s  startup  command 
file  is  stored  in  its  boot  prom.    At  the  APS,  the 
standard boot procedure is modified such that this file 
descriptor 
IOC-specific 
‘bootparams’  file  whenever  an  IOC  reboots.  A  Perl 
script  periodically  checks  the  modification  dates  of 
these  bootparams  files  to  determine  if  any  IOC  has 
rebooted.  On  detection  of  a  reboot,  the  startup  file  is 
parsed to determine the EPICS database definition and 
instance  files  to  be  loaded  into  the  IOC.  The  EPICS 
static  database  access  routines  are  used  to  extract  the 
record  and  field  definitions  from  the  db  files.    The 
script  writes 
the 
respective db file paths in a set of flat files. The script 
determines  if  any  fields  have  been  multiply  defined, 
and  records  this  information  along  with  their  parent 
source filespecs. Although duplicate PVs are legal and 
ignored  by  the  IOC,  their  usage  presents  a  potential 
trap, which may be otherwise difficult to locate.   

information,  along  with 

this 

 

An  ORACLE  server  was  set  up  in  a  stand-
alone  workstation  to  contain  the  EPICS  data.    A 
periodic  task  in this server monitors the directories of 
the  Perl  extraction  files,  and  triggers  a loader process 
whenever  new  flat  files  have  been  created.    The 
ORACLE  tables  are  typically  updated  with  the  new 
IOC information within ~15 min after an IOC reboot.  
As  a  check  of  the  validity  of  the  ORACLE  data,  a 
nightly  task  is  run  in  which  flat  files  are  generated 
from the ORACLE tables and compared with original 
flat  files.  This  round  trip  file  compare  provides  an 
independent check of the validity of the data.  

3.3 User Queries – the pv_search Application 

EPICS database inspection capabilities are provided 
using  the  standard  ORACLE  three-tier  application 
server  architecture.  User  requests,  entered  in  a  Web 
browser,  are  submitted  to  an  ORACLE  application 
server, which formats an SQL query and forwards it to 
the ORACLE server. Users enter optional IOC, db file, 
record  name,  record  type,  field  name,  and  field  type 
selection  criteria.    The  user  then  selects  one  of  the 
records returned by the query to obtain its field detail. 
In  the  detail  display,  EPICS  link-type  fields  are 
displayed as hypertext links. Selecting a link field will 
display the details of the linked record. 

The  record_links  table  in  Figure  1  is  derived  from 
the  PV  database  and  contains  all  instances  of  inter-
record  links  in  the  entire  set  of  IOCs.  This  derived 
table  is  used  to  extract  the  records  linked  to  the 
actively  displayed  record.  This  list  is  displayed  as 
hypertext  links,  allowing  the user to extract the detail 

of the linking record. This powerful feature allows the 
user to bidirectionally explore EPICS logic. 
3.4 MEDM Clients 

At  the  APS,  the  primary  operator  interface  to  the 
accelerator is through the use of MEDM display files. 
These  display  files  are  stored  in  a  single  directory 
structure,  under  CVS  control.    A  Perl  script  was 
written  to  examine  all  the  files  in  this  directory  tree 
and to recursively extract references to EPICS process 
variables.    When  an  EPICS  record  is  displayed  using 
the  pv_search  application,  a  list  of  all  client  MEDM 
screens  that  reference  any  field  in  the  record  is 
displayed.  This identifies to the developer the display 
files that will need to be modified if, for example, the 
record name is changed. 

3.5 Decision Support - Data Mining 

The  powerful  querying  capability  of  SQL  has  been 
used  to  ‘data  mine’  the  process  variable  database  to 
provide a number of decision support queries.   

Orphan  records.  This  query  extracts  all  records 

that: 

• 
• 
• 
• 

have no other PVs linked to it 
do not link to other PVs 
do not connect to hardware 
have  no  client  application  connection 
(MEDM, SDDS logger, etc.) 

 
Records  matching  this  category  are  potentially 
‘orphan’ records, possibly left over from a prior or test 
subsystem.  Since  they  probably  provide  no  useful 
function,  they  are  candidates  for  removal  from  the 
IOC. 

Multiply-defined hardware output records. In the 
EPICS environment, it is legal to define more than one 
record for a single hardware I/O point.  Although this 
feature is occasionally used as a convenience function, 
it  can 
if 
conflicting  logic  attempts  to  write  to  a  single  output 
channel.  Queries have been written to extract and list 
instances of multiple hardware output records. 

to  equipment  behavior  problems 

lead 

Equipment  database.  For  EPICS  records  that  are 
connected  to  external  hardware  I/O,  the  DTYP  fields 
provide  information  related  to  the  hardware  device.  
This feature has been used to query the PV database to 
extract  a  list  of  hardware  devices  in  the  APS  control 
system.    The  query  report  yields  a  total  of  5800 
individual  devices  directly  associated  with  the  APS 
control  system.  This  equipment  inventory  is  used  in 
assisting a hardware spares strategy. 

Wiring  List.  A  project  has  been  initiated  to 
centralize  wiring  list  documentation,  using the Allen-
Bradley equipment as a prototype. Allen-Bradley link, 
 

chassis,  rack,  slot,  and  terminal relational tables have 
been  defined.  A  Web-based  application  allows 
developers  to  modify  and  update  the  ORACLE  tables 
from  any  location  that  has  access  to  a  Web  browser. 
Chassis  and  I/O  card  templates  facilitate  data  entry. 
The  derived  pv_io_rules  table  shown  in  Figure  1 
connects  the  wiring  information  with  the  process 
variable  database.    Display  of the wiring details of an 
I/O  card  also  lists  the  process  variable  connected  to 
each terminal.  This includes multiple PVs assigned to 
a single I/O point discussed above. 

4 DISCUSSION 
Complex and extensive mature systems like the APS 
control system have developed and evolved over years 
of  field  testing.  Documentation  of  the  rationale  for 
coding  decisions  is  often  difficult  to  locate,  or  is 
incomplete  or  missing  entirely.  The  control  source 
code is often the only source of this documentation. A 
centralized  control  software  inspection  capability  has 
proven  to  be  useful  in  this  effort.  The  PV-centric 
ORACLE  relational  database  along  with the querying 
power  of  SQL  has  provided  intuitive  mechanisms  for 
locating  relevant  and  related  hardware  and  code 
documentation. 

Work  in  progress  includes  extending  the  wiring 
database  to  include  all  the  APS  control  hardware.  
This  equipment  ‘connection’  database  will  not  only 
the  hardware  modules  and  ancillary 
catalog  all 
equipment  but  will  also 
indicate  where  each 
component  is  connected  to  the  control  system.  It  will 
be fully integrated with the PV database to allow cross 
queries between hardware and software. 

alarm 

handler, 

including  SNL, 

Work is in progress to extend the PV clients to other 
and 
types, 
SaveCompareRestore.  The  Perl  extraction  scripts  are 
being  expanded  to  parse  the  source  files  (db  and 
startup files) for code documentation at the record, db 
file, and IOC  level. The ultimate goal is to develop a 
central  mechanism  for  creating  and  retrieving control 
system documentation. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  http://www.aps.anl.gov/epics 

has 

extensive 

information on all parts of EPICS. 

[2]  W. P. McDowell et al., “Status and Design of the 
Advanced  Photon  Source  Control  System,”  Proc. 
of  the  1993  Particle  Accelerator  Conference, 
Washington, DC, May 1993, pp. 1960-62, 1993. 
13]  K. Evans Jr., “An Overview of MEDM,” Proc. of 
ICALEPCS ‘99, Trieste, Italy, October 4–8, 1999, 
pp. 466-468, 2000. 

 

