INTEGRATING EXTERNALLY DEVELOPED SYSTEMS FOR SNS LINAC 
COOLING AND VACUUM  
 
P.S. Marroquin, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA 

TUAP063 
 

 
Abstract 

series 

External contractors are developing the local cooling 
and vacuum control systems for the Spallation Neutron 
Source  (SNS)  linac.  Soon  these  systems  will  be 
the  facility-wide  controls  system.  
integrated 
into 
programmable 
Allen-Bradley  Logix5000 
controllers,  populated  with  appropriate  input/output 
modules,  were  selected  as  the  local  controllers.  These 
controllers  will  be  interfaced  to  the  facility-wide 
control  system  via  VME  systems  with  PowerPC 
processors running the Wind River VxWorks operating 
system  and  Experimental  Physics  and  Industrial 
Control System (EPICS) front-end controller software. 
This  paper  describes  the  interface  and  integration 
issues  driven  by  project,  cooling  system  and  vacuum 
system requirements and hardware selections. 

1 INTRODUCTION 
Through  much  of  the  SNS,  programmable  logic 
controllers  (PLC)  will  be  used  for  the  local  controller 
systems.  The  EPICS  input-output  controllers  (IOC) 
provide supervisory control, alarm functions and serve 
as  the  interface  point  for  the  PLC  to  global  controls, 
the  machine  protection  system  and  the  event  link 
system.   

Integration  of  the  local  control  systems  to  EPICS 
require resolution of interface issues preferably during 
design  but  in some cases issues are discovered during 
development and integration. 

This  paper  examines  a  few  of  the  more  significant 
issues identified during design and development of the 
drift tube linac (DTL) and coupled cavity linac (CCL) 
resonance  control  and  cooling  system  (RCCS)  and 
vacuum systems. The issues examined were: 

Interface  between  IOC  and  PLC;  selection  of  a 
communication  protocol,  creating  and 
reaching 
agreement  on  signal  lists,  mapping  process  variables 
(PV)  to  tags,  IOC  issuing  commands  in  the  form  of 
requests, creating and naming tags for transfer to IOC, 
optimizing data transfer between PLC and IOC.  

Serial  based  devices;  use  of  serial  ports  on  PLC 
and/or  IOC,  device  driver  development,  serial  types 
and network layout, distributed control. 

Control  loops  over  Ethernet;  PID  loops  dispersed 

over IOCs and PLCs on non-dedicated networks. 

EPICS  operator  displays  and  controls  vs.  PLC 
displays;  cost,  development  and  maintenance  of  local 

PanelView  displays,  redundant  control  screens  on 
different platforms. 

Alarm  checking  and  management;  the  IOC  as  the 
appropriate  location  for  alarm  checking  functions 
versus the PLC, alarm limit parameter maintenance. 

More  discussion  of  each  of  these  interface  and 
integration issues follow but first a brief background of 
the SNS DTL and CCL RCCS and Vacuum systems.  

2 BRIEF SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
The focus of this paper is on the RCCS and vacuum 

systems of the SNS DTL and CCL linacs.   

The  RCCS  (see  Fig.  1)  keeps  the  DTL  tanks  and 
CCL  cavities  in  resonance  by  removing  the  RF  waste 
heat from the copper cavity structures. 

Figure 1: Resonance Control and Cooling System 
 
Each DTL tank and CCL module has been designed 

to have its own vacuum control system, see Fig. 2.   

Figure 2: Vacuum System 

 
The  Allen  Bradley  ControlLogix  programmable 
the  Rockwell 

controllers  are  programmed  with 
RSLogix5000 ladder code programming toolkit.  

A  network  view  of  the  RCCS  and  Vacuum  System 

IOCs and PLCs are depicted in Fig. 3. 

THAP020,  Interfacing 
EtherNet/IP, K.U. Kasemir, L.R. Dalesio). 

 
the  ControlLogix  PLC  on 

is  another 

PLC  handling  of  binary  command  values  from  the 
IOC 
issue.  The  PLC  receives  IOC 
commands as pulsed inputs to be latched and tested as 
ladder logic inputs.   

3.2 Serial Based Devices 

The requirements and design of the vacuum systems, 
market availability of specific types of instruments and 
collaboration  with  other  SNS  vacuum  system  design 
groups  resulted  in  selection  of  instrument  controllers 
with  serial  communications  as  the  primary  means  for 
configuration, control and monitoring.   

Although  the  goal was to install all I/O and control 
in  the  PLC,  the  IOC  was  chosen  to  host  serial 
instruments.  Serial  ControlLogix  modules,  now 
available, involve IOC and PLC software development 
for  full  functionality.  As  the  serial  devices  are  not 
needed  to  support  interlocks  and  displays  are  not 
needed at the PLC level, the IOC was a better choice. 

Device  driver  and  driver  support  development  is 
required for housing the serial ports in the IOC. Serial 
device support within EPICS is abundant and more of 
a known quantity. 

The control logic within the PLC may require inputs 
from  the  serial  devices  as  well  as  initiate  control  but 
loop time requirements are in the order of seconds for 
which network latency would not cause problems. 

Loss  of  IOC-PLC  communication  requires  PLC 

Serial  network 

ladder logic to be designed to handle such an event. 
layout,  specifically  RS-485, 

is 
currently  in  the  design  stages.  The  physical  locations 
requirements, 
of  device  controllers,  performance 
expected  network 
related 
subsystem functions are important considerations when 
laying out the RS-485 networks. 

load  per  device  and 

3.3 Control Loops over Ethernet 

In  the  RCCS,  it  may  be  necessary  to  distribute  the 
PID  control  loop  across  the  IOC  and  the  PLC.  Mode 
change  from  RF  control  to  temperature  control  also 
swaps out the measured variable and PID parameters. 

Standard  PID  control  software  typically  doesn’t 
handle  this  correctly.  The  PID  software  in  the  IOC 
does.  The  configuration  under  consideration  is  for 
inputs into the PLC, data transferred to the IOC, PID in 
the IOC, control variables to the PLC, the PLC verifies 
control  values  and  issues  control  signals  to  the  final 
control elements.  

Figure 3: Network diagram of RCCS and Vacuum 
components 

3 INTERFACE AND INTEGRATION 
ISSUES 

3.1 Interface Between IOC and PLC 

Two  Control  network  options  were  under 

consideration, ControlNet and EtherNet/IP protocols.  

ControlNet is an open real-time deterministic control 
network  standard. 
(Industrial 
Protocol)  is  an  adaptation  of  ControlNet  onto  TCP/IP 
Ethernet.  

  The  EtherNet/IP 

The  EtherNet/IP  network  was  selected.  The  SNS 
Linac  Controls  group  developed  the  device  driver  to 
use this technology in the IOC. 

The  drawbacks  to  this  configuration  stem  from  the 
foundations  of  Ethernet;  a  multi-node,  peer-to-peer, 
non-deterministic,  collision  detection  and  back-off 
scheme network.  This is not exactly suitable for real-
time control, but it is acceptable when the traffic on a 
segment  is  limited  and  well  known  and  the  loop 
constants are slow. 

The  problems  with  ControlNet  were  that  there  is 
only  one  manufacturer,  the  interface  board  required 
programming  which  would  result  in  programming  the 
PLC,  interface  board  and  IOC  all  with  the  same 
information.  The  programming  of  the  ControlNet 
board  also  requires  a  PC  running  windows  which 
would add yet another architecture to support. 

ControlLogix  manages  memory  locations  as  named 
variables  called  tags  allowing  for  arrays  and  mixed 
type  data  structures  as  well.  Optimum  tag-to-PV 
transfers  require  packing  data  into  500  byte  arrays  as 
often  as  possible.  (see  ICALEPCS  2001  paper 

Several issues arise from this configuration.  One of 
primary  concern  is  the  loop  time  versus  network 
latency.  The  cooling  system  is  considered  a  slow 
process,  in  the  order  of  seconds.  The  network  latency 
has not been quantified to date but is considered a low 
concern. Total latency includes PLC scan time at both 
ends  of  the  cycle  and  data  transfer  to  and  from  and 
IOC scan time. 

Loss  of  communication  between  the  IOC  and  PLC 
must be monitored, on both controllers, with heartbeat 
mechanisms  and  contingency  logic  in  place  to  handle 
such occurrences. 

Loading  of  the  IOC  is  also  an  issue.  In  the  case  of 
the  DTL  RCCS  systems,  one  IOC  supports  the  six 
PLCs.  The  IOC  would  be  executing  six  independent 
PID loops along with the various other IOC functions 
(i.e.  ~1000  PVs,  Channel  Access,  record  scanning, 
etc.). 

3.4 Operator Displays 

The  design  called  for  each  RCCS  and  Vacuum 
control  rack  to  contain  an  Allen-Bradley  PanelView 
display.  The  PanelView  is  an  operator  interface 
Windows  CE  based  computer  with  a  flat  panel 
touchscreen  monitor,  all  in  one  rack-mountable  unit. 
Cost  for  the  PanelViews  range  from  ~$4000  for  the 
1000 model to ~$7000 for the 1000E model (graphics 
capability).  The  PanelView  is  configured  from  a 
Windows  computer  with  specific  Allen-Bradley 
software. Only ControlNet was available until recently, 
Ethernet is now available. 

A cost cutting assessment of the design reduced the 
number  of  PanelViews  by  half.  Later  all  of  the 
subsystem 
eliminated 
PanelViews  were 
requirements versus display capabilities of EPICS were 
examined. 

after 

Development and maintenance costs of the displays 
were  considered  as  well  efforts  being  expended  on 
developing  and  maintaining  similar  and  redundant 
displays on the EPICS systems. 

Early  concerns  over  EPICS  components  not  being 
ready  for  first  installations  of  the  system  were  the 
primary  driver  that  added  the  PanelViews  to  the 
design.  The  EPICS  IOC,  OPI,  channel  databases  and 
operator  screens  were  developed  and  demonstrated 
successfully.  EPICS  IOCs  and  OPIs  will  be  installed 
starting with first delivery. 

 

3.5 Alarm Checking and Management 

To  avoid  duplication  of  alarm  limit  parameter  sets 
and  alarm  checking,  the  IOC  was  chosen  as  the 
location  for  this  function.    The  PLC  will  do  limit 
checking  if  directly  related  to  the  controlled  process 
and for equipment protection.  

PLC  data  is  sent  to  the  IOC  where  they  are  alarm 
checked  and  flagged  if  determined  to  be  in  an  alarm 
condition.    EPICS  clients  detect  the  alarm  conditions 
and  react  accordingly.  The  EPICS  alarm  manager 
centralizes management of alarms across the facility. 

4 CONCLUSION 
This  paper  described  several  significant  interface 
and  integration  issues  that  were  addressed  during 
design  and  integration  of  the  SNS  DTL  and  CCL 
RCCS  and  Vacuum  Systems  to  the  facility-wide 
control  system.  The  criteria  followed  to  make  these 
decisions  include  meet  system  requirements,  provide 
reliable operation, minimize equipment cost, minimize 
development  and  maintenance  efforts.    By  working 
closely with external systems integrators we are able to 
consider  these  issues  from  an  integrated  system 
perspective. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  J. D. Bernardin, et.al., “Spallation Neutron Source 
Drift  Tube  Linac  Vacuum  System  Final  Design 
Report”,  LLNL and LANL, January 12, 2001 
[2]  J. D. Bernardin, et.al., “Spallation Neutron Source 
Coupled  Cavity  Linac  Vacuum  System  Final 
Design  Report”,    LLNL  and  LANL,  January  12, 
2001 

[3]  J. D. Bernardin, et.al., “Spallation Neutron Source 
Drift  Tube  Linac  Water  Cooling  and  Resonance 
Control  System  Final  Design  Report”,    LANL, 
April 4, 2001 

 [4]  J. D. Bernardin, et.al., “Spallation Neutron Source 
Coupled  Cavity  Linac  Water  Cooling  and 
Resonance  Control  System  Final  Design  Report”,  
LANL, October 25, 2001 

 
 

Work  supported  by  the  Office  of  Basic  Energy 
Science,  Office  of  Science  of  the  US  Department  of 
Energy, and by Oak Ridge National Laboratory. 

