TUAI001

THE NATIONAL IGNITION FACILITY: STATUS AND PLANS FOR
LASER FUSION AND HIGH-ENERGY-DENSITY
EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES

E.I. Moses
LLNL, Livermore, CA 94550, USA

Abstract

The  National  Ignition  Facility  (NIF)  currently  under
construction  at  the  University  of  California  Lawrence
Livermore  National  Laboratory  (LLNL)  is  a  192-beam,
1.8-megajoule,  500-terawatt,  351-nm  laser  for  inertial
confinement  fusion  (ICF)  and  high-energy-density
experimental  studies.  NIF  is  being  built  by  the
Department of Energy and the National Nuclear Security
Agency  (NNSA)  to  provide  an  experimental  test  bed  for
the  U.S.  Stockpile  Stewardship  Program  to  ensure  the
country's  nuclear  deterrent  without  underground  nuclear
testing. The experimental program will encompass a wide
range  of  physical  phenomena  from  fusion  energy
production to materials science. Of the roughly 700 shots
available  per  year,  about  10%  will  be  dedicated  to  basic
science research. Laser hardware is modularized into line
replaceable  units  (LRUs)  such  as  deformable  mirrors,
amplifiers,  and  multi-function  sensor  packages  that  are
operated  by  a  distributed  computer  control  system  of
nearly  60,000  control  points.  The  supervisory  control
room  presents  facility-wide  status  and  orchestrates
experiments  using  operating  parameters  predicted  by
physics  models.  A  network  of  several  hundred  front-end
processors (FEPs) implements device control. The object-
oriented  software  system  is  implemented  in  the  Ada  and
Java  languages  and  emphasizes  CORBA  distribution  of
reusable  software  objects.  NIF  is  currently  scheduled  to
provide first light in 2004 and will be completed in 2008.

1 INTRODUCTION

The NIF currently under construction at LLNL will be
a  U.S.  Department  of  Energy  and  NNSA national center
to  study  inertial  confinement  fusion  and  the  physics  of
extreme  energy  densities  and  pressures.  It  will  be  a  vital
element  of  the  NNSA  Stockpile  Stewardship  Program
(SSP),  which  ensures  the  reliability  and  safety  of  U.S.
nuclear  weapons  without  full-scale  underground  nuclear
testing. The SSP will achieve this through a combination
of  above-ground  test  facilities  and  powerful  computer
simulations  using  the  NNSA’s  Accelerated  Scientific
Computing Initiative (ASCI). In NIF, up to 192 extremely
powerful  laser  beams  will  compress  small  fusion  targets

to  conditions  in  which  they  will  ignite  and  burn,
liberating  more  energy  than  is  required  to  initiate  the
fusion reactions. NIF experiments will allow the study
of  physical  processes  at  temperatures  approaching  100
million  K  and  100  billion  times  atmospheric  pressure.
These  conditions  exist  naturally  only  in  the  interior  of
stars and in nuclear weapons explosions.

2 DESCRIPTION OF NIF

The  NIF  is  shown  schematically  in  Figure  1.  NIF
consists  of  four  main  elements:  a  laser  system  and
optical  components;  the  target  chamber  and  its
experimental  systems;  an  environmentally  controlled
building  housing  the  laser  system  and  target  area;  and
an integrated computer control system.

NIF’s  laser  system  features  192  high-power  laser
beams.  Together,  the  laser  beams  will  produce  1.8
million  joules  (approximately  500  trillion  watts  of
power  for  3  nanoseconds)  of  laser  energy  in  the  near-
ultraviolet  (351  nanometer  wavelength).  Currently  the
largest  operating  laser  is  the  Omega  Laser  at  the
University  of  Rochester’s  Laboratory  for  Laser
Energetics.  Omega  consists  of  60  laser  beams
delivering  a  total  of  40  kilojoules  of  energy.  Figure  2
shows  one  of  the  192  laser  beams,  detailing  the  key
technologies that make NIF possible. A NIF laser beam
begins with a very modest nanojoule energy pulse from
the master oscillator, a diode-pumped fiber laser system
that can provide a variety of pulse shapes suitable for a
wide  range  of  experiments,  from  ICF  implosions  to
high-energy  extended  pulses  for  weapons  effects
experiments.  The  master  oscillator  pulse  is  shaped  in
time and smoothed in intensity and then transported to
preamplifier  modules  (PAMs)  for  amplification  and
beam shaping. Each PAM first amplifies the pulse by a
factor  of  one  million  (to  a  millijoule)  and  then  boosts
the  pulse  once  again,  this  time  to  a  maximum  of  22
joules,  by  passing  the  beam  four  times  through  a
flashlamp-pumped  amplifier.  There  are  total  of  48
PAMs  on  NIF,  each  feeding  a  “quad”  of  four  laser
beams.

Figure 1: Schematic view of the National Ignition Facility showing the main elements of the laser system. The 10-meter
diameter target chamber on the right side of the illustration sets the scale for the facility.

From  the  PAM,  the  laser  beam  next  enters  the  main
laser  system,  which  consists  of  two  large  amplifier
units—the  power  amplifier  and  the  main  amplifier.
These  amplifier  systems  are  designed  to  efficiently
amplify  the  nominal  1-joule  input  pulse  from  the  PAM
to the required power and energy, maintaining the input
beam’s  spatial,  spectral,  and  temporal  characteristics.
The  amplifiers,  with  16  glass  slabs  per  beam,  are
arranged with 11 slabs in the main amplifier section and
5  slabs  in  the  power  amplifier  section.  Together  these
amplifiers  provide  99.9%  of  NIF’s  energy.  The
amplifiers use 42-kilogram slabs, 46 cm ×  81  cm  ×  3.4
cm, of neodymium-doped phosphate glass set vertically
on edge at Brewster’s angle to minimize reflective losses
in  the  laser  beam.  The  slabs  are  stacked  four  high  and
two  wide  to  accommodate  a  “bundle”  of  eight  laser
beams (Figure 3).

The  slabs  are  surrounded  by  vertical  arrays  of
flashlamps measuring 180 cm in length. NIF’s 192 laser
beams  require  7600  flashlamps  and  3072  glass  slabs.
Each  flashlamp  is  driven  by  30,000  joules  of  electrical
energy.  The  intense  white  light  from  the  flashlamps
excites  the  neodymium  in  the  laser  slabs  to  provide

optical  gain  at  the  primary  infrared  wavelength  of  the
laser.  Some  of  the  energy  stored  in  the  neodymium  is
released  when  the  laser  beam  passes  through  the  slab.
The  flashlamps  and  amplifier  slabs  will  be  cooled
between  shots  using  nitrogen  gas.  NIF  will  be  able  to
shoot  once  every  8  hours;  however,  a  shot  rate
enhancement program funded by collaborators from the
United Kingdom is working to increase this rate to once
every four hours.

The  NIF  amplifiers  receive  their  power  from  the
Power Conditioning System (PCS), which consists of the
highest  energy  array  of  electrical  capacitors  ever
assembled.  The  system’s  design  is  the  result  of
collaboration  between  Sandia  National  Laboratories  in
Albuquerque, LLNL, and industry. The PCS will occupy
four capacitor bays (Figure 1) adjacent to the laser bays.
Each  PCS  module  has  eight  20-capacitor  modules,
delivering 1.7 megajoules per module, which power the
flashlamps for one beam. The system must deliver over
300  megajoules  of  electrical  energy  to  the  flashlamp
assemblies  in  each  laser  beam.  Recent  tests  on  a
prototype  PCS  and  flashlamp  system  have  been  fired
over 7000 times at a rate of 1200 shots per month.

Figure 2: Schematic representation of a NIF laser beam line highlighting some of the key technology developments.

A key component in the laser chain is a kind of optical
switch  called  a  plasma  electrode  Pockels  cell  (PEPC),
which  allows  the  beam  to  pass  four  times  through  the
main  amplifier  cavity.  This  device  uses  electrically
induced  changes  in  the  refractive  index  of  an  electro-
optic  crystal,  made  of  potassium  dihydrogen  phosphate
(KDP).  When  combined  with  a  polarizer,  the  PEPC
allows  light  to  pass  through  or  reflect  off  the  polarizer.
The  PEPC  will  essentially  trap  the  laser  light  between
two  mirrors  as  it  makes  two  round-trip  passes  through
the  main  amplifier  system  before  being  switched  out  to
continue  its  way  to  the  target  chamber.  The  PEPC
consists  of  thin  KDP  plates  sandwiched  between  two
gas-discharge plasmas that are so tenuous that they have
no  effect  on  the  laser  beam  passing  through  the  cell.
Nonetheless, the plasmas serve as conducting electrodes,
allowing  the  entire  surface  of  the  thin  crystal  plate  to
charge  electrically  in  about  100  nanoseconds  so  the
beam  can  be  switched  efficiently.  Figure  2  shows  a
prototype  4-cell  PEPC  (optical  switch)  that  will  be
stacked  vertically  in  a  single  unit  called  a  line-
replaceable unit (LRU).

All  major  laser  components  are  assembled  in  clean
modules called LRUs. These LRUs contain laser optics,
mirrors,  lenses,  and  hardware  such  as  pinhole  filter
assemblies. All LRUs are designed to be assembled and
installed into NIF’s beampath infrastructure system,  the
exoskeleton  of  NIF,  while  retaining  the  high  level  of
cleanliness  required  for  proper  laser  operation.  LLNL’s
industrial  partner,  Jacobs  Facilities,  Inc.  is  responsible
for  the  installation,  integration,  and  commissioning  of
the  NIF  laser  beampath  infrastructure  in  a  way  that
ensures  that  the  required  cleanliness  levels  are
maintained 
installation  and
the 
commissioning phase of the Project.

throughout 

The NIF target area consists of the 10-meter-diameter
high-vacuum  target  chamber  shown  in  Figure  4.  The
target  chamber  features  a  large  number  of  laser  entry
ports  as  well  as  over  100  ports  for  diagnostic
instrumentation  and  target  insertion.  Each  laser  entry
port allows a quad of four laser beams to be focused to
the  center  of  the  target  chamber  through  a  final  optics
assembly (FOA).

Figure 3. The photograph on the left shows an amplifier used on Beamlet, the scientific prototype of NIF. The illustration
on the right shows the NIF 2 × 4 amplifier in cutaway view.

The  FOA  is  a  precision  optical  assembly containing
beam  smoothing  gratings,  additional  KDP  and
deuterated  KDP  plates  for  second-  and  third-harmonic
generation  to  convert  the  infrared  laser  light  into  the
ultraviolet,  the  final  focus  lens,  debris  shields,  and  a
vacuum  gate  valve  for  each  beam.  The  NIF  target
chamber  and  final  focusing  system  has  been  designed
with maximum flexibility for experimental users. During
initial  operation,  NIF  is  configured  to  operate  in  the
“indirect-drive”  configuration,  which  directs  the  laser
beams  into  two  cones  in  each  of  the  upper  and  lower
hemispheres of the target chamber. This configuration is
optimized  for  illuminating  a  fusion  capsule  mounted
inside a cylindrical hohlraum and using x-rays generated
from  the  hot  walls  of  the  hohlraum  to  implode  the
capsule  indirectly.  NIF  can  also  be  configured  in  a
“direct-drive”  arrangement  of  beams  by  moving  some
quads  of  beams  from  the  upper  and  lower  beam  cones
into  a  more  symmetric  arrangement  of  beams.  Direct-
drive  ignition  requires  better  energy  and  power  balance
between  laser  beams  and  better  beam  smoothing  and

focusing,  but  the  simpler  geometry  makes  direct-drive
inertial confinement fusion more attractive for ultimately
producing a viable power production plant.

3  NIF CONTROL SYSTEMS

The  Integrated  Computer  Control  System  (ICCS)  for
the NIF is a layered architecture of 300 FEP coordinated
by  supervisor  subsystems.  FEP  computers  incorporate
either VxWorks on PowerPC or Solaris on UltraSPARC
processors  that  interface  to  over  45,000  control  points
attached  to  VME-bus  or  PCI-bus  crates  respectively.
Supervisory  computers  use  Solaris  workstations  to
implement  coordination,  database  services,  and  user
interfaces. Typical devices are stepping motors, transient
digitizers,  calorimeters,  and  photodiodes.  The  front-end
implements  an  additional  segment  comprised  of  14,000
control  points  for  industrial  controls  including  vacuum,
argon,  synthetic  air,  and  safety  interlocks  using  Allen-
Bradley  programmable  logic  controllers.  The  computer
network uses Ethernet for control and status signals and
is augmented with asynchronous transfer mode to deliver

video streams from 500 sensor cameras within the laser
to  operator  workstations.  Software  uses  CORBA
distribution  to  define  a  framework  that  incorporates
services for archiving, machine configuration, graphical
user interface, monitoring, event logging, scripting, alert
management, and access control. Software coding uses a
mixed  language  environment  of  object-oriented  Ada95
and  Java.  The  code  is  one-third  complete  at  over  300
thousand source lines.

4  NIF PROJECT STATUS

NIF is currently over four years into its construction.
The  conventional  building  construction  is  nearly
complete.  The  attached  8000-square-foot  Class-100
clean  room  Optics  Assembly  Building  is  undergoing
commissioning  of  LRU  assembly,  handling,  and
transport equipment. Both large laser bays are operating
under  Class-100,000  clean  room  protocols.  Over  1500
tons of beampath infrastructure have been installed in the
laser  bays.  The  NIF  Project  is  entering  the  installation
and commissioning phase. First light, which is defined as
the  first  quad  of  four  laser  beams  focused  to  target
chamber  center,  is  scheduled  for  June  2004.  Full
completion  of  all  192  laser  beams  is  scheduled  for
September  2008.  In  the  time  between  first  light  and
project  completion,  approximately  1500  experiments  in
support  of  the  SSP,  inertial  confinement  fusion,  high-
energy-density  physics,  weapons  effects,  inertial  fusion
energy, and basic science will have been performed.

After  project  completion,  NIF  is  expected  to  provide
approximately  750  shots  per  year  for  a  wide  variety  of
experimental  users.  Recently,  NIF  was  designated  as  a
National  User  Facility  with  the  support  of  the  NNSA
Office  of  Defense  Programs.  A  National  User  Support
Organization  is  being  put  in  place  to  provide  the
necessary  interface  between  the  user  communities  and
the  national  NIF  Program.  The  first  Director  of  NIF  is
Dr.  George  H.  Miller,  from  LLNL,  who  also  serves  as
the Associate Director for NIF Programs at LLNL.

5  CONCLUSIONS

The  National  Ignition  Facility  has  come  a  long  way
since  the  first  DOE  critical  decision  in  January  1993
affirmed the need for NIF and authorized the conceptual
design process. In that time, NIF has met every scientific
and technical challenge and is now in the final stages of
design and construction prior to commencing installation
of the 192 laser beams. By 2004 this unique facility will
be  providing  the  first  glimpses  under  repeatable  and
well-characterized  laboratory  conditions  of  phenomena
heretofore only found in the most extreme environments
imaginable.

Figure 4: NIF’s 10-meter-diameter target chamber
mounted in the target bay and viewed from below.

6  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author would like to express his appreciation for the
many people, institutions, and industrial partners that are
diligently  working  to  provide  the  National  Ignition
Facility for our nation. This work was performed under
the  auspices  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy  by  the
University  of  California,  Lawrence  Livermore  National
Laboratory under contract W-7405-Eng-48.

REFERENCES

For more information on the NIF Project please visit our
web site at http://www.llnl.gov/nif

