TUAP023 

THE SNS RUN PERMIT SYSTEM* 
 
C. Sibley, SNS, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA 
E. Bjorklund, LANSCE, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA 
 

Abstract 

(SNS) 

The  Spallation  Neutron  Source 

is  an 
accelerator-based  neutron  source  being  built  in  Oak 
Ridge,  Tennessee,  by  the  U.S.  Department of Energy. 
The SNS will provide the most intense pulsed neutron 
beams in the world for scientific research and industrial 
development.  The  facility  is  scheduled  for  completion 
in  2006.  The  project  is  a  collaboration  between 
Lawrence  Berkeley  National  Lab,  Argonne  National 
Lab, Los Alamos National Lab, Oak Ridge National Lab, 
Brookhaven National Lab, and Jefferson Lab. The Run 
Permit System (RPS) is a software based system which 
has several key functions critical for safe operation of 
the  machine.  It  coordinates  machine  mode  and  beam 
parameter changes with the timing system, verifies the 
Machine 
hardware 
configuration,  and  provides  an  interface  for  masking 
MPS hardware inputs when necessary.  This paper will 
describe  the  primary  functionality  of  the  Run  Permit 
System  and  the  interface  between  the  Run  Permit 
System, the Machine Protection System, and the timing 
system. 

Protection 

System 

(MPS) 

The SNS Run Permit system is one level in the overall 
SNS  Machine  Protection  System  (MPS).  The  purpose 
of  the  MPS  is  to  protect  equipment  from  being 
damaged  by  the  beam.  It  contains  one  software  level 
(Run  Permit),  and  three  hardware  levels  (Fast  Protect 
Auto-Reset, Fast Protect Latched, and High-QA MPS). 
More  information  on  the  SNS  Machine  Protection 
System can be found in [1,2]. 

The function of the Run Permit portion of the MPS is 
to 1) set up and verify the machine operating mode, 2) 
verify  that  all  the  relevant  equipment  is  operating  and 
within  the  desired  setpoint  ranges  for  the  selected 
machine  mo de,  3)  verify  the  equipment  masks  in  the 
MPS  hardware  for  each  machine  mode,  4)  verify  the 
beam parameters requested are within tolerance for the 
machine  mode,  5)  schedule  user  defined  beam  pulse 
parameters,  and  6)  provide  an  operator  interface  to 
display  the status of the MPS and set software masks 
as appropriate. 

 

                                                                 
* Work supported by U.S. Department of Energy  

1 INTRODUCTION 

 

2 RUN PERMIT MODES 

2.1 Machine, Beam, and Operating Modes 

The  SNS  “Machine  Operating  Mode”  consists  of 
two  parts,  a  “Machine  Mode”  and  a  “Beam  Mode.”   
The Machine Mode determines where the beam  stops 
(Linac Dump, Extraction Dump, Target, etc.).  The Beam 
Mode determines the duration and power of the beam.  
Establishing  a  Machine  Mode  requires  turning  on 
equipment, verifying beam dumps are ready, etc. before 
the  desired  Machine  Mode  can  be  made  up.  
Consequently, the Machine Mode will not change very 
tune-up,  and 
often  under  normal  commissioning, 
operating  conditions.    The  Beam  Mode,  on  the  other 
hand,  can  change  on  a  pulse-to-pulse  basis.    Table  1 
lists  the  Machine  and  Beam  modes  for  SNS.  The 
Machine  mode  and  maximum  beam  power  or  pulse 
width are selected in the control room via a key switch.  
The beam mode can be changed to smaller pulse widths 
from software applications, such as an emittance scan 
or profile measurement application. 

Table 1: SNS Machine and Beam Modes 
Machine Modes  Beam Modes 
Ion Source 
Diagnostic-Plate 
Linac Dump 
Injection Dump 
Ring 
Extraction Dump  Medium Power (200 KW) 
Target 

Diagnostics (10 m sec) 
Diagnostics (50 m sec) 
Diagnostics (100 m sec) 
Full Width (1 msec) 
Low Power (7.5 KW) 

Full Power (2 MW) 

 
The  Operating  Mode  for 

is 

the  machine 

the 
combination  of  Machine  and  Beam  modes.    Note  that 
not  every  Beam  Mode  can  be  applied  to  a  given 
Machine  Mode.  For  example,  when  the  machine  is  in 
“Linac  Dump”  mode,  the  Beam  Mode  may  not exceed 
7.5  KW,  and  only  the  “Target”  Machine  Mode  can 
accommodate  the  “Full  Power”  Beam  Mode.    Table  2 
lists 
the  allowable  Machine  and  Beam  Mode 
combinations. 

 

 
 
 

Table 2: Valid Machine and Beam Mode Combinations 
2 
MW 

50 
msec 

100 
msec 

10 
msec 

200 
KW  

7.5 
KW  

 

1 
mse
c 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 

 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 

 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 

 
 
 
 
 
 
X 

Source  X 
D-Plate  X 
L-Dmp  X 
I-Dmp  X 
Ring   X 
E-Dmp  X 
Target  X 

 

X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 

X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 

2.2  Diagnostic Modes 

The  “Diagnostic”  Beam  Modes  exist  to  limit  the 
integrated current absorbed by intercepting diagnostic 
devices such as wire-scanners or emittance harps. The 
pulse width limits are energy dependant. At lower beam 
energies  damage  to  copper  and  diagnostic  wires  is 
greater so the beam pulse widths are limited to shorter 
values.  This  is  accomplished  by  limiting  the  width  of 
the beam gate.  

Before  an  application  program  can  insert  a  wire 
scanner  (for  example)  into  the  beamline,  it  must  first 
make  a  request  to  the  RPS  for  an  operating  mode 
change.    The  RPS  determines  the  required  operating 
mode based on the device making the request, and the 
current  machine  mode.    It  then  interfaces  with  the 
timing  system  to  set  new  limits  on  the  width  of  the 
beam gate.  Once conditions have been met for the new 
operating mode, the RPS sets the new mode (this is also 
done  through  the  timing  system)  and  signals  the 
application  program  that  it  may  proceed  with  the  wire 
scan.  The operating mode is locked by the RPS until 
the  application  signals  the  wire  scans  are  complete. 
Wire  scanner “Home” signals are inputs into the MPS 
system.  If  a  wire  scan  begins  before  the  appropriate 
diagnostic mode is made up, the MPS will drop beam. 
Once  the  wire  scan  is  complete,  the  RPS  returns  the 
operating mode to its previous value. 

is  given  a  “User_ID”  for  use 

3 RPS USER PULSE SCHEDULING 
Various  beam  pulse  profiles  can  be  requested 
through applications or an EPICS user interface.  Each 
active  profile 
in 
synchronous  data  acquisition  and  for  feed  forward 
lookup tables in the LLRF systems [3]. The User_ID is 
broadcast  over  a  Real  Time  Data  Link  [4].  There  is  a 
limit  of  7  active  profiles  due  to  memory  constraints  in 
the  LLRF  system.  The  integrated  beam  current  in  the 
requested profile is checked against pulse width limits 

 
for diagnostic machine modes.  The integrated power is 
calculated for the requested repetition rate of the pulse 
(and other pulses in the request queue) and placed in 
the queue if the power limitations are within tolerance 
for  the  dump  in  use.  Figure  1  shows  the  operating 
envelopes for various rep rates and diagnostic modes. 

 

Figure 1. Operating envelopes 

3.1 Sequencer 

The  Run  Permit  System  builds  the  sequences  of 
various  pulse  types  and  hands  them  off  to  the  timing 
system.  Each sequence consists of a “Supercycle” for 
the  machine.    This  is  the lowest continuous repetition 
rate  of  interest  to  operations.  Single  shot  pulses  are 
inserted  as  requested  after  pulse  width  verification.  
There is a separate sequence for each power level and 
diagnostic  machine  mode.    The  RPS  only  populates 
sequences   that  are  allowed  in  a  particular  mode  and 
where the mode can change on a pulse-to-pulse basis.  
For  instance,  the  mode  can  always  change  down  in 
power to a diagnostics mode, but can never change to a 
higher power level than set by operator key settings in 
the control room. During the operational phase of SNS, 
diagnostic  pulses  will  be  scheduled  to  calibrate  and 
verify  target  system  diagnostics  and  the  injection 
phase  space  painting  hardware.  A  part  of  the  timing 
system,  the  Time  Line  Verification  Board  monitors the 
event link and records and verifies the events sent out.  
Discrepancies result in a temporary beam fault. 

4 EQUIPMENT MASKING 

4.1  MPS Mode Masking, Software Masks 

The  Operating  Mode  (Machine  plus  Beam  Mode) 
determines what equipment must be operational and at 
the correct set points before beam is allowed.  The MPS 
hardware  contains  a  provision  for  “Mode  Masking,” 
which  selectively  enables  or  disables  inputs  into  the 

4.2  Set Point Monitoring 

 

MPS system based on the Operating Mode.  The mode 
masks  are  originally  derived  from  the  SNS  technical 
database that describes every piece of equipment and 
signal in the SNS [5]. The database records whether or 
not  a  piece  of  equipment  has  an  input  into  the  MPS 
system,  and  if  so,  under  what  Operating  Modes  the 
input is relevant.  Two files of these masks are created, 
one  for  downloading  to  the  IOCs  during  initialization 
and  a  second  used  by  the  Run  Permit  system  for 
verification during running. 

Some of the inputs to the MPS can be masked out in 
software  as  the  need  arises.  Beam  loss  monitors for 
instance, are automatically masked out using software 
masks when an upstream wire is inserted in the beam. 
Faulty equipment not required for a particular running 
scenario  can  be  masked  out  as  long  as  the  MPS 
hardware configuration allows it.  This  allows the Mode 
Masks  to  remain  relatively  stable  and  easily  kept  in 
configuration control.  

During  the  commissioning  stages  of  SNS,  the  set 
points  of  power  supplies  can  be  changed  as  required 
for  various  accelerator  physics  applications,  such  as 
beam-based alignment. This should not matter from the 
machine protection point of view as the average beam 
power will be small and the accelerator components can 
generally take two or more full beam pulses in the event 
of a failure. 

In the operational stages the ability to change power 
supply  set  points  will  be  restricted.    Channel  access 
security  will  be  used  to  prevent  inadvertent  set  point 
changes  or  accidentally  powering  down  a  supply. 
There  are  other  failures  that  can  occur,  power  supply 
regulation  loops  failing,  zero  flux  current  transducers 
failing, or DAC failures in the power supply controller. 
An  EPICS  State  Notation  Language  program  running 
on the IOCs will be monitoring the equipment to detect 
these  types  of  failures.  Although  there  are  other 
systems designed to detect these failures (primarily the 
Beam Loss Monitor System), this adds to the defense 
in depth character of the Machine Protection System. 

The  final  function  of  the  RPS  is  to  provide  an 
operator  interface  to  the  SNS  MPS  system.    Using 
EPICS RPS screens, the operator can view the state of 
the MPS system, see which sections are ready to take 
beam, which sections have MPS faults, and which MPS 
inputs have been bypassed. A fault timeline is provided 
to  determine  where  a  fault  originated.  The  fault  timers 
use  an  “Event  Link”  clock  (approximately  16  MHz)  to 

 
record fault times.  These counters are converted to a 
time  stamp  in  EPICS  using  revolution  frequencies 
distributed  in  the  Real  Time  Data  Link.  In  some  cases 
(where allowed by the hardware configuration) an MPS 
input  may  be  bypassed  in  software  using  the  RPS 
operator  interface  screens.    Equipment  masking  is 
logged in the EPICS Archiver and acknowledged during 
shift changes, or as required by operations. 

6 CONCLUSIONS – CURRENT STATUS 

The MPS is designed for Defense in Depth and the 
RPS is the software layer of that defense.  Hardware is 
used  wherever  a  system  failure  will  cause  a  loss  of 
beam.  Software 
for  equipment  status 
verification, including the configuration of the MPS. 

is  used 

The  RPS  will  be  installed  in  phases  following  the 
installation  of  the  beamline  equipment.  The  present 
installation schedule is shown in Table 3. 

Table 3. Global Controls (GC) Readiness dates. 
Finish 
Activity 
9/20/02 
GC Ready for FE commissioning 
12/4/02 
GC Ready for DTL commissioning 
4/27/04 
GC Ready for CCL commissioning 
8/19/04 
GC Ready for SCL commissioning 
11/8/04 
GC Ready for HEBT-Ring comm.. 
11/15/05 
GC Ready for RTBT-TGT comm. 
11/30/05 
GC Subtask Complete 

 
Although 

installation 
the  commissioning  and 
schedule  shows  completion  in  2005,  the  RPS  needs 
scheduling,  operator 
basic 
to  be 
interface,  and  user  defined  pulse  shapes 
operational for the front end commissioning in 2002. 

functionality,  pulse 

REFERENCES 

[1]  C.Sibley, “SNS Machine Protection System 
VME/PMC Module Design”, Internal 
documentation: 

Machine Protection System”, Internal 
documentation:  

[3]   A. Regan, “System Description of the RF Control 
System for the SNS”, Internal documentation 

[4]   B. Oerter, “Timing System Requirements 
Document”, Internal documentation: 

 [5]  K. Kasemir, “EPICS DB and Oracle”, Internal 

documentation:  

5 OPERATOR INTERFACE 

[2]   C.Sibley, “SNS System Requirements Document for 

