WECT002

THE  WAVEFRONT  CONTROL  SYSTEM  FOR  THE  NATIONAL
IGNITION  FACILITY

Lewis Van Atta, Mark Perez, Richard Zacharias, and William Rivera
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94550, USA

Abstract

light 

The  National  Ignition  Facility  (NIF)  requires  that
pulses from  each of  the  192  laser beams be  positioned
on target with an accuracy of 50 µm  rms.  Beam quality
must be sufficient to focus a  total  of  1.8  MJ  of  0.351-
into  a  600-µm-diameter  volume.  An
µm 
optimally  flat  beam  wavefront  can  achieve 
this
pointing  and  focusing  accuracy.  The  control  system
corrects  wavefront  aberrations  by  performing  closed-
loop compensation during laser alignment to  correct for
gas  density  variations.  Static  compensation  of
flashlamp-induced thermal distortion  is  established just
prior to the laser shot. The control  system  compensates
each laser beam at  10  Hz by  measuring  the  wavefront
with  a  77-lenslet  Hartmann  sensor  and  applying
corrections with  a  39-actuator  deformable  mirror.  The
distributed architecture utilizes SPARC  AXi  computers
running  Solaris  to  perform real-time image  processing
of  sensor  data  and  PowerPC-based  computers  running
VxWorks to  compute mirror commands. A  single  pair
of  SPARC  and  PowerPC  processors  accomplishes
wavefront  control  for  a  group  of  eight  beams.  The
software  design  uses  proven  adaptive  optic  control
algorithms  that  are  implemented  in  a  multi-tasking
the  beam
to  economically  control 
environment 
wavefronts in  parallel. Prototype  tests  have achieved  a
closed-loop residual error of 0.03 waves rms.

1 INTRODUCTION

A  primary  requirement  for  NIF  is  that  each  beam
shall deliver its design energy into  a  600-µm  hohlraum
ICF  target.  The total  design  energy  for  192  beams  is
1.8  megajoules.  A  goal  for the  system  is  that  50%  of
the design energy should be contained within  a  100-µm
focal spot  at  the  target plane.  This  is  about  twice  the
diffraction-limited 80% energy spot size.

To  meet  the  spot  size  requirement  and  goal,  NIF
subsystems are designed to limit  wavefront aberrations.
Optics  have  stringent  specifications  for  rms  surface
gradient, power spectral density and surface  roughness.
Stringent  specifications are also  maintained for  optical
component  mounting.  NIF  systems  are  designed  to
mitigate  the  effects  of 
temperature  and  humidity
variations  and vibrations.  An  active  alignment  system
is  employed  to  point  the  beams  accurately  into  the

target.  Even  with  these  efforts  to  control  wavefront
aberrations,  the  spot  size  requirement  and  goal  could
not be met without a wavefront control system.

2  WAVEFRONT  SYSTEM  DESIGN

A  block  diagram  of  the  NIF  main  laser  optical
system is shown  in  Figure  1,  with  the  NIF  Wavefront
Control  System  components  highlighted.  The  path  of
the  NIF  beam  is  first  summarized  and  then  the
wavefront  control  functions  applied  to  the  NIF  beam
(or the wavefront control beam surrogate) are described.
The NIF  preamplifier  beam  (1.053-µm  wavelength,
called 1ω) enters the main laser chain  near the  focus of
the  transport spatial  filters  (TSF),  directed  away  from
the  target.  The  beam  exits  the  filter  collimated  and
passes through the booster amplifier heading toward the
laser  main  amplifier  cavity.  A  Pockels  cell  is  set  to
allow the beam to enter the cavity, where  it  makes four
passes through  the  main  amplifier  before  the  Pockels
cell  is  switched to  allow  the  beam  to  exit.  The  beam
then  exits  the  cavity,  passes  through  the  booster
amplifier  and  the  TSF,  and  heads  towards  the  target
chamber. The  beam  is  frequency-converted  to  351-nm
wavelength, (called 3ω) at the target chamber.

beam 

bounces 

twice.  This 

Wavefront  control  functions  are  implemented  as
follows. Between shots, a continuous wave  probe beam
is co-aligned with the NIF  beam prior  to  injection  into
the main laser.  The probe beam follows  the  NIF  beam
path.  A  39-actuator  large-aperture  deformable  mirror
(DM) operates at  the  far end of  the  laser  cavity  where
the 
two-bounce
configuration doubles  the  effective  stroke  of  the  DM.
At the  TSF  output,  a  tilted sampling  surface reflects a
small  fraction  of  the  probe  beam  towards  a  pick-off
mirror near the TSF focus that  sends the  sampled beam
through relays to  the  output  sensor.  Within  the  output
sensor,  a  77-lenslet  Hartmann  sensor  measures  the
wavefront. The Hartmann sensor’s video output  is  read
by  a  framegrabber in  the  Wavefront  Control  System’s
Hartmann  front-end  processor  (FEP).  The  Hartmann
processor FEP transmits measured wavefront data to the
mirror  control  FEP,  which  calculates  the  surface
displacements to  be  applied  to  the  DM  to  correct  the
wavefront aberrations in the beam.

Tra nsport Spatial Filter Lens SF4

1 w Sampling Surfac e
(Beamspl itter for
H artman n Sensor)

T ransport S patial Filter (TSF)

To switch yard and 
target chamb er

Cavity Spatial Filter (CSF)

PABT S

Deformable
Mirror

Main Laser
Ampl ifier

LM 1

Mirro r Ac tuator
Com mands

LM 3

Boos ter
Ampl ifier

LM 2

Polarizer

Output Sens or Package:
H artmann Se nsor and 
1w Alignment Ca meras

H artmann Sensor C amera
Video Signal

Mirror Control
FEP

Ethernet Ne twork

Spot C entroid Da ta

H artman n Process or
FEP

500-series racks

Rac ks 2 13/214

Figure 1: Block diagram of the NIF main laser optical system.

2.1 Wavefront System Requirements

There are several functions that the wavefront system
should perform. Required functions  are  to:  (1)  control
the  1ω  output  wavefront  (including  pointing)  of  each
beam in the time  immediately preceding a  laser system
shot,  (2) apply  compensation  for  previously  measured
pump-induced  wavefront  distortion,  (3)  measure  beam
output  wavefront  during  a  laser  system  shot,  and  (4)
control  the  output  wavefront  (excluding  pointing)
during routine system operations between shots.

the 

laser.  The  wavefront  control 

Other  factors  that  influence  the  Wavefront  control
system  requirements  are  expected  system  cost,  and
single-beam  NIF
experience  with  Beamlet, 
prototype 
system
requirements are  shown  in  Table 1.  The  initial  design
has  met  most  requirements  with  the  exception  of
closed-loop  bandwidth.  The  bandwidth  is  processor-
limited,  and  it  is  expected  that  by  the  time  NIF  is
implemented, faster processors will be available to  help
meet  this  requirement  without  major  changes  to  the
software or design architecture.

3 SYSTEM  CALIBRATION  AND
OPERATION

3.1 Control System Calibration

The  wavefront  measuring  system  is  calibrated  by
inserting  a  wavefront reference fiber at  the  focal  point
of the TSF. Since the fiber light  source is  smaller  than
the  TSF  focal spot,  the  spot  pattern  at  the  Hartmann
sensor  when  viewing  the  fiber  reference  beam  is  the

same as the pattern the sensor  would see when viewing
the  probe beam,  if  the  beam  and  all  upstream  system
components  had  diffraction-limited  performance.  The
aberrations  (imperfections  in  the  separations  of  the
lenslet  array  focal  points)  that  are  seen  with  the
reference source inserted are due to the aberrations in the
measuring  system  (sampling  surface,  relay  optics,
itself).  By
output  sensor  optics,  and  the  sensor 
designing  the  control  system  to  use  the  sensor  focal
spot  image  of  the  wavefront  reference  as  the  target
wavefront to which the  system  wavefront is  controlled,
the system  is  being  forced to  generate, as  closely  as  it
is  able,  a  perfect  focal  spot  in  the  TSF.  This  also
implies that all aberrations in  all  the  optics  beyond the
TSF  focus,  including  the  TSF  output 
lens,  are
uncorrected by the baseline wavefront control system.

Table 1: NIF Wavefront Control System Requirements

Requirement
Maximum residual low
frequency  spatial  angle
Maximum  open-loop  time
before a shot
Minimum  closed-loop
bandwidth

Value
20 µradians

1 second

1 Hz
(0.5 Hz
demonstrated)
15 waves at 1ω

Compensation  range  for
simple curvature (double-
pass reflected wavefront)
Order of aberrations
corrected
Measurement accuracy at 1ω 0.1  waves
Lenslet  spacing

≤4th order

≤1/2 of demagnified
actuator  spacing

Next,  the  wavefront  reference  source  is  replaced  by
the  probe  beam,  and  the  wavefront  control  system  is
calibrated  by  an  online  procedure.  Each  of  the  39
actuators is individually poked and pulled relative to  the
best-flat starting  point.  The  offset  for  each  Hartmann
spot is thus related to the displacement of each actuator.
From  this  information,  a  gain  matrix  relating  actuator
movement to Hartmann sensor  focal spot  movement  is
derived.

3.2 Nominal Closed-Loop Operation

Once the calibrations are complete, the loop is  closed
wherein  the  measured  Hartmann  offsets  from 
the
reference positions  are  multiplied  by  the  gain  matrix,
yielding the actuator offsets to control the mirror to  flat
(with  appropriate loop  gain  for  stability).  This  is  the
configuration  used  during  pre-shot  alignment.  After
alignment is complete and the shot sequence has begun,
an additional Hartmann offset file is subtracted from  the
wavefront sensor data prior to being applied to  the  gain
matrix.  These 
the
additional  offsets 
uncorrected prompt pump-induced wavefront aberrations
measured  from  a  previous  shot.  By  subtracting  out
these  offsets,  we  are  setting  the  wavefront  to  the
conjugate  of  the  expected  prompt  aberration  of  the
upcoming  shot.  Thus,  at  shot  time,  the  wavefront  is
flat.

represent 

is 

fed 

The  control  system  operates  with  a  closed-loop
bandwidth  of  up  to  0.5  Hz.  To  achieve  this,  the
wavefront sensor is read at a 10 Hz rate (with  a  goal  of
30  Hz).  The sensor is  read  in  standard  RS-170  video,
is  captured  by  a  DataCell  Snapper  24
which 
framegrabber.  The  digitized  image 
into  a
SPARCengine  Axi  computer  that  calculates  centroids
for all  77  lenslet  spots.  This  information  is  sent  via  a
dedicated  ethernet  line  to  the  Motorola  MVME  2306
controller that  calculates the  offsets of  the  spots  from
their  reference positions.  These offset data are input  to
the  mirror  control  law,  which  calculates  the  required
DM  actuator  displacements.  Each  Hartmann  processor
serves eight  beams,  and  each  mirror  control  processor
serves four DMs.  Each mirror control  chassis  contains
two mirror control processors.

4 SOFTWARE  DESIGN

The  NIF  wavefront  control  system  software  was
designed  using  an  object-oriented  approach.  The  NIF
facility is expected to be  in  operation for 30  years, and
it is reasonable to  expect to  make software or  hardware
changes over that time. By  using  modular hardware and
software  architecture,  the  system  maintainability  is
improved significantly.

to 

The object structure of  the  wavefront control  system
essentially  conforms 
the  generalized  hardware
interfaces  (e.g.  digital  to  analog  conversion,  network
communication,  image  frame  grabbing)  and  major
sensing  and  control  activities  (spot  tracking,  display
building,  and  control  law  processing)  that  take  place.
Abstract interface layers are used to  minimize  the  effect
on  software  of  prospective  hardware  changes.  This
approach  allows  us  to  create  as  many  beams  per
processor  as  the  central  processing  unit  hardware  and
memory will allow.

The real-time tasking design of the wavefront control
software  is  basically  interrupt-driven.  The  interrupt
source  is  the  video  sync  signal  contained  in 
the
Hartmann  sensor  composite  video  captured  by  the
framegrabber. Completion  of  this  and  each  successive
tracking,  display  building,  spot  data
task  (spot 
transmission) sends a signal to start the  next  successive
task.  Similarly,  the  mirror control  processor  waits  for
spot centroid data to  arrive and processes it  in  a  sensor
task  (which  reads  the  data  and  subtracts  the  reference
spot positions to produce the  wavefront error), then  the
mirror  task  is  signaled  to  use  the  wavefront  error  to
compute the mirror control command.

5 RESULTS

In tests with the LLNL wavefront  interferometry lab,
the  wavefront  control  system  has  achieved  30  Hz
operation  for  one  beam  and  a  residual  error  of  0.03
waves  rms  when  controlling  the  wavefront  to  a
reference measured from an optical reference flat.

REFERENCES
[1] R. Zacharias et al., “The National  Ignition  Facility
Wavefront  Control  System,”  Third  International
Conference on  Solid  State  Lasers  for  Application
to  Inertial  Confinement  Fusion,  Monterey,  CA,
June 1998.

This  work performed under  the  auspices of  the  U.S.

DOE by LLNL under contract No. W-7405-Eng-48.

