DATA ACQUISITION AND UESR INTERFACE OF BEAM
INSTRUMENTATION SYSTEM AT SRRC

Jenny Chen, C. J. Wang, C. H. Kuo, K. H. Hu, C. S. Chen, K. T. Hsu, SRRC, Hsinchu, Taiwan

WEAP035

Abstract

Data acquisition systems for the accelerator complex
at  SRRC  composed various  hardware and  software
components.  Beam  signals  are  processed  by  related
processing electronics,  and  connect  to control  system
by various  type of  interfaces in data  acquisition front-
end.  These  front-end include  VME  crates,  personal
computers and instruments bus adapters. Fast Ethernet
connected all  elements together with  control  consoles.
User interface is running on control console. Real-time
data  capture;  display  and alaysis  are  supported  on
control console. Analysis tools based on Matlab scripts
are adopted. Hardware and software implementation of
the  system  will  be  presented.  User interface  supports
are also described.

console 

light  source

1 INTRODUCTION
The  control  system  of  SRRC  is  essential  to  operate
the 
level
efficiently.  The
composed control  console  and  control  server.  Field
level  computer  composed more  than  30 VME  crates
system and  several  PCs  as special  devices.  Both  level
computers  system is  connected  by  a  dedicated  control
fast  Ethernet. Beam instrumentation  system composed
various beam  monitors  and  associated processing
electronics. The  most  important  beam  parameters
include beam  current  monitor  and closed  orbit,  beam
profile, etc. Various software tools are integrated with
the system and provide an efficient way for operation .

2 OUTLINE OF THE CONTROL AND
BEAM INSTRUMENTATION SYSTEM

2.1 SRRC Control System

The  control  systems  are  a  two-level  hierarchy
computer  system  [1].  Upper  layer computers include
two process computer and many workstations and PCs.
Database management, archive and various application
programs  are  executed on  process  computer.  Main
purposes of workstations are used as operation console.
Bottom  layer  computers  are  distributed VME crate
controllers that  are in  charge of the control  and data
acquisition  for  accelerator  equipment.  Both computer
layers  are  connected  by  local  area network.  Software
environment  can  be  divided  into  four  logical  layers.
They  are device  access layer,  network  access  layer,
database layer  and  applications  from  bottom  to  up.

Database plays  a  role  as  data  exchange center  for
applications and subsystem of accelerator system. Most
of the data updated into database ten times per second.
2.2  Beam Instrumentation System

Beam  instrumentation  system  composed  various
monitors  and  supporting electronics.  The system
support  precision intensity  measurement  and  lifetime
calculation.  Orbit  measurement,  synchrotron  radiation
monitor  and  destructive  monitor.  All  devices  are
controlled by  VME  based  local  controller.  Control
console can access these devices through user interface.
Synchrotron  radiation  monitor  is  control  by  a  PC and
connected to  control  system  via  Ethernet. Beam
diagnostic  instrumentation  systems  provide  necessary
electron beam  parameters  for  commissioning,  routine
operations and beam physics studies.

2.3  User Interface

The  Common  Desktop  Environment  (CDE)  is  used
for  user interface  development  It  is  an  integrated
graphical  user  interface  for  SRRC  control  system,
combining  X  Window System,  OSF/Motif, and  the
CDE  technologies.  Motif  GUI  Builder  and  Code
Generator,  UIM/X  GUI  builder  is a  used to  generated
various user interface. It enables software developers to
interactively create, modify, test and generate code for
the  user  interface portion of  their  applications.  To
satisfied  various requirements,  some  application  are
development in LabVIEW based environment. For fast
prototyping,  user can customize  user’s  application  in
Malta  environment.  Control  system  supported  various
database access  MEX  files.  User’s  can  access  the
database directly  in  Matlab.  For
IEEE-488 based
interface,
fast  Ethernet  based  GPIB adapter was
support. And GPIB/2 interface is also included to allow
user access these instruments within Matlab.

3  SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS

3.1 BPM System

The  BPM system  consists  of  57 BPMs  equip  with
switched  electrode  processing  electronics. The  data
acquisition  is  done  by  a  dedicated  VME  crate  equip
with  128  channels 16  bit  ADC  channels. The VME
host  send  raw  data  to  orbit  feedback system  via
reflective  memory.  Averaged data  are  updated to

control  database every  10 times  per  second with
resolution around one micron.

3.2 Orbit Display Utilities

To  provide  better  orbit  observation, a  Motif  based
orbit  display  utility  was  developed.  This  utility
provides  basic  orbit  display  and difference  orbit
display.  Several  display  attributes can be selected  by
users, such as full scale range, persistent display mode
enable/disable,  average  number,  save,  print,  … etc.
Update rate of the display is up to 10 Hz. This is very
useful  for  routine  operation  and various  machine
studies.

3.3 Turn-by-Turn BPM System

To  support  various  beam  physics  studies, several
BPMs  equip with log-ratio  processor for turn-by-turn
beam position measurement. Multi-channel VME form
factor digitizer  with 12-bit  ADC  acquires  turn-by-turn
beam  position.  A server  program  running on  VME
crate  manages  the  data  acquisition  of  beam  position.
Client  program  running  on  control  console  and Motif
based GUI are used for user interface.

3.4 SmartLink System to Acquire Beamline
Data

To acquire data come form remote site, a SmartLink
based  system  was  setup.  The  link  is used  a private
Ethernet as field bus. The Ethernet are connecting to a
PMC  Ethernet  module  installed  on VME host. The
SmartLink  data  acquisition  module  is  used  to  acquire
data  from  beamline  monitor  with  high  resolution,
include photon  flux  (Io)  monitor  and photon  BPM
blades current. Update rate is about 2 time per second
with  20-bit  resolution.  This  slow update  rate  is the
major disadvantage.

3.5 Synchrotron Radiation Monitor Interface

The  synchrotron radiation  monitor

is  used to
measure  beam  profile.  It  consists  an optics  and high
resolution CCD. To acquired profile information, a PC
acquires  the image  from  CCD  camera,  analysis  the
profile and extract profile parameters. The local display
is  also  broadcast  via  facility-wide  machine  status
CATV system.  Server program  running  on  PC serve
the data request form control console. A client program
running  on control  console  can access information  of
this  PC  by  the  help of  LabVIEW program  or Matlab
MEX files running on control console.

3.6 Gap Voltage Modulation Study Support

RF  gap  voltage  modulation  was  adopted to  relieve
the  effect  of  longitudinal  coupled-bunch instability  in
routinely  operation  of  the storage ring  at  SRRC.
to
Systematic  measurements  were  done recently 
investigate  the  mechanism  why  RF  gap voltage
modulation  can do this. The experimental  setup  is
shown as Figure 1. Gap voltage modulation frequency
is about 2fs  (50 kHz). The rolled off frequency of  the
LLRF  gap voltage  regulation loop is  about  7  kHz.  A
function  generator  in VME form  factor generates  the
modulation  sinusoidal  wave.  This  generator integrates
with  control  system  to  satisfy  the  requirement  of
routine  operation.  Frequency  and amplitude  can be
adjusted  on control  console.  Modulation signal  is
injected after loop filter  and added  with  correction
signal in the RF gap voltage regulation loop. HP4396A
spectrum/network  analyzer  observes  beam  spectrum
form BPM sum signal.

RF Gap Voltage Modulation Experiment - Measurement Setup

Amplitude
Modulator

Driver

RF Cavity

499.654 MHz
Master
Oscillator

Distribution

Control Console
(acquired spectrum and analyze the
results in Matlab)

Transmitter

RF Coupler
Gap Voltage Regulation Loop
(unity gain bandwidth ~ 7 kHz)

Amplitude
Detector

Loop Filter

Error
Amplifier

Reference

Sum
Amplifier

VME Crate

 

V
M
E
M
o
d
u
l
e

F
u
n
c
t
i
o
n

G
e
n
e
r
a
t
o
r

Control
Network

Ethernet Switch
Fabric

HP4396A Spectrum Analyzer

GPIB-ENET/100

Ethernet to
GPIB Adapter

D x

D y

Hybrid
Junction

RF Probe

Quadrupole
Oscillation

Dipole
Oscillation

June 2, 2001

Figure 1. Experimental setup for RF gap voltage
modulation study.

National 
controller
Instrument  GPIB/ENET-100
connect  the spectrum  analyzer  to control  network.
Control  console  support  database  accesses  MEX-file
that  allows Matlab  to  read  and  set  the  modulation
parameters. GPIB MEX-file allows Matlab to read and
write the GPIB devices via GPIB/ENET-100 controller.
The  experimental  data  can  be  acquired directly  into
Matlab. The gap voltage modulation is effective due to
the modulation frequency is  far beyond the unity gain
cutoff  frequency  of the gap  voltage  regulation  loop.
Modulation amplitude is about 10 percent of total gap
voltage in  routine operation. Experiments  sequence  is
programmed  by  a  simple  Matlab  script  running on
control console that select frequency scan range as well
as  modulation amplitude.  The spectrum  analyzer  can
select to measure upper or lower sideband either 1fs or
2 fs synchrotron oscillation frequency. Figure 2 shown
the measured result  and  clear show  that  the  instability
is suppressed near 50 kHz.

S
Control
Consoles

Turn-by-Turn
Beam Position

ILC29 VME crate
TTBPM
Data Acquisition

BPM Electronics

Control Network
Switching System

Extraction
Kicker
Timing
Control

Extraction
Kicker
Control

ILC28 VME crate
Timing Control

Roles of the control console
* Fourier analysis of turn-by-turn data
* Fine tune
* Generate correction waveform
* Download waveform to waveform
   generator

Correction
Waveform
Download

ILC27 VME crate
Waveform
Bitbus
Generator
Interface

Extraction
Kicker
Timing
Control

Extraction
Kicker
Control

To DQ, FQ Trim
Power Supply

Figure 3. Tune acquisition and correction system.

(a)

(b)
Figure 4. Tune variation during energy ramping; (a)
before correction, (b) after correction.

4  SUMMARY
Data  acquisition and  user  interface  of SRRC  are
summary in this report. These systems are essential for
the operation of accelerator system for machine tuning,
various feedback,  machine  study,  etc.  The  system  is
evoluted continually with technology advanced.

REFERENCES
[1] Jenny  Chen,  et  al.,  “Virtual  Instrumentation
Interface  for  SRRC  Control  System”,  PAC95,
2256 (1995) and reference therein.

[2] K.  H. Hu, et  al.,  “Turn-by-Turn  BPM  Electronics
Based  on 500  MHz  Log-Ratio  Amplifier”,
Proceeding of PAC99, 2069 (1999).

[3] C.  S. Chen,  et  al.,  “Study  of  the White  Circuit
Tracking Performance in the Booster Synchrotron
of SRRC”,  Proceeding of  PAC2001,  paper
FPAH301.

Figure 2. Typical scan spectrum of RF gap voltage
modulation study.

3.7 Booster Tune Measurement and
Correction System

The electron beam is accelerated form 50 MeV to 1.5
GeV at the booster synchrotron with 50 msec ramping
time. Tune is an important index indicated the tracking
performance  of  the  White  circuit  based power  supply
system.  Tune  information  was  obtained  by  tune
measurement system; it provides the n x and n y during
energy ramping. Tune variation in the energy ramping
are  correlated  to the  tracking  performance  of  three
families  White  circuit.  Optimized  lattice  can  be
obtained by  the help of measured  tune for the  booster
synchrotron  to  get  a  better  working point  for  efficient
operation.  An  application program  was  developed  to
automatic  measure  and to  correct  tune  variation. The
stored beam are excited by extraction kicker to perform
damped  betatron oscillation,  trigger  timing  and field
strength  of  the kicker  is set  properly  as  function  of
beam  energy  to ensure  sufficient  beam  excitation  and
without  kill  the  stored beam.  Beam  motion  signal  are
picked  up by  stripline  and  process by  log-ratio BPM
electronics  [2].  A transient  digitizer  at  VME  crate
records betatron oscillation of the stored beam. A sever
programs  running on  VME  crate  coordinate  the
operations of data acquisition. Client program running
on control consoles is invoked by a Matlab script file to
perform  data  acquisition  and analysis.  Data  analysis
including Fourier  analysis,  peak identification  and
visualization.  The  tune  correction  signal  is generated
and downloads to waveform generator located on VME
crate. Figure 3 shown the system structure of the tune
measurement  and  correction  system  [3].  The  Matlab
script  is  used  to generate  correction  waveform  by  the
measured tune  and measured  sensitivity  matrix
between  tune  and quadrupole  setting. Figure  4 shown
that  the  tune  during ramping  with  and  without
correction.  Tune variation during ramping can be
reduced drastically by this feed-forward correction.

