TUAP015 

THE ADVANCED PHOTON SOURCE INJECTOR TEST STAND CONTROL 
SYSTEM 
 
J.F. Maclean and N.D. Arnold, Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory,  
Argonne, IL USA 
 

Abstract 

The  Advanced  Photon  Source  (APS)  primary  and 
backup  injectors  consist  of  two  thermionic-cathode  rf 
guns. These guns are being upgraded to provide improved 
performance, to improve  ease  of  maintenance,  and to  re-
duce  downtime  required  for  repair  or  replacement  of  a 
failed  injector.  As  part  of  the  process,  an  injector  test 
stand  is  being  prepared.  This  stand  is  effectively  inde-
pendent  of  the  APS  linac  and  will  allow  for  complete 
characterization  and  validation  of  an  injector  prior  to  its 
installation into the APS linac. 

 A  modular  control  system  for  the  test  stand  has  been 
developed  using  standard  APS  control  solutions  with 
EPICS  to  deliver  a  flexible  and  comprehensive  control 
system. The modularity of the system will allow both the 
future  expansion  of  test  stand  functionality  and  the 
evaluation of new control techniques and solutions. 

1 INTRODUCTION 

The Advanced Photon Source (APS) is a third genera-
tion  light  source  that  provides  high  brightness  x-ray 
beams to a user community. The main purpose of the APS 
injector  test  stand  (ITS)  is  to  test  and  characterize  injec-
tors destined for use in the APS. It is anticipated that the 
injectors tested will be of varying designs. These require-
ments  dictate  that  the  control    system  must  be  easily 
adaptable for reconfiguration of the test stand. 

The first task of the test stand is to test and characterize 
replacements for the APS main injectors. Since the provi-
sion  of  replacement  injectors  had  some  urgency  we 
needed to find a way to implement control quickly whilst 
allowing for expansion and reconfiguration at a later date. 
It  was  therefore  decided  to  use  standard  APS  control 
components where possible but not to preclude new solu-
tions  if  they  were  warranted  on  technical,  cost,  or  other 
grounds.  Once  a  functioning  system  was  completed,  it 
was  anticipated that  the  test  stand  would  provide  a  good 
opportunity  to  test  control  solutions  that  are  new  to  the 
APS. It would allow testing in an operational environment 
with the benefit of not impacting the operation of the APS 
its-self. 

2 TEST STAND 

The  test  stand  is  located  in  its  own  shielded  room, 
which is approximately 5.5 m by 3 m in size. The beam-
line is mounted on an optical bench of approximately 3 m 

by  1.2  m.  Items  requiring  control  include  many  of  the 
elements found in the main APS linac:  
•  Injector – the gun under test 
•  Magnets – correctors, quadrupoles, and dipoles 
•  Vacuum equipment – pumps and valves 
•  Beam scraper 
•  Current monitors – transformers and Faraday cups 
•  Video cameras 
•  Galvanometers 
The  beamline  is  described  in  [1],  and  the  main  user 
control screen reproduced in Figure 1 gives an indication 
of the layout of the line. Figure 2 shows the main compo-
nents of the control system. 

3 CONTROL SYSTEM 

3.1 General  

The injector test  stand control  system  uses EPICS  [2], 
which is used for the control system of the APS. One in-
put/output  controller  (IOC)  is  used  to  control  the  ITS. 
This  is  a  Motorola  MVME162  CPU  mounted  in  a  6U 
VME chassis. The chassis is physically located in a room 
adjacent  to  the  test  stand.  The  IOC  is  connected  to  the 
APS  control local  area  network (LAN) via  a  dual redun-
dant  Ethernet  link.  Mounted  in  a  19-inch  rack  with  the 
IOC is other ITS control hardware. This includes: 

•  Video camera driver chassis 
•  Stepper motor drive chassis  
•  Allen-Bradley 1771 chassis 
•  Tektronix TDS7404 oscilloscope 
3.2 Links to the APS Control System 

Although  it  is  to  a  large  extent  independent  from  the 
APS  control  system,  the  ITS  does  depend  upon  it  for  a 
number of facilities. 

•  Control  LAN  and  infrastructure.  The  ITS  IOC  is 
connected to the main APS control LAN and serv-
ers.  This  allows  control,  monitoring,  and  develop-
ment from any workstation on the subnet. 

•  Timing.  A  signal  is  sent  to  the  ITS  IOC  from  the 
APS timing system ten microseconds prior to an rf 
pulse. 

•  Video. The video signal from the ITS is sent to the 
central  APS  video  multiplexor  for  distribution.

 

 

Figure 1. Main ITS control screen, showing main components. 

 

 

•  Interlock. Vacuum or gun cooling faults will cause 

the rf to trip off. 

3.3  Input and Output 

Input  and  output  (IO)  are  done  via  VME  cards  in  the 
IOC  chassis.  EPICS  support  already  existed  for  all  IO 
cards used, and all but one card had previously been used 
at the APS. 

The  one  VME  device  new  to  the  APS,  a  Berkley  Nu-
cleonics  BN950  digital  delay  generator,  provides  a  good 
example of the ITS being used as a test bed for introduc-
ing new equipment. In this case, a message to the EPICS 
“tech-talk”  mailing  list  quickly  revealed  that  EPICS  de-
vice support had already been written at the Berlin Elec-
tron Synchrotron (BESSY). This is an example of a bene-
fit from the EPICS collaboration. 

The main individual elements of the ITS and the inter-

face methods used to control them are: 

•  Magnet  power  supplies.  These  are  controlled  by  a 
standard  APS  power  supply  control  unit  (PSCU) 
that communicates with the IOC over a Bitbus fiber. 
•  Vacuum pumps. These are controlled by a standard 
APS  interface  unit  connected  to  the  IOC  by  Bitbus 
fiber. 

•  Beam  scraper.  Two  scraper  blades  are  driven  by 
stepper motors controlled by an Oregon Micro Sys-

tems OMS58 VME card. Positional feedback is pro-
vided by linear potentiometers read by a 16-bit ana-
log-to-digital converter industry pack module. 
•  Current  monitors.  Four  current  monitors  are  multi-
plexed  into  two  APS  gated  integrator  VME  cards. 
Timing  signals  are  provided  via  the  BN950  delay 
generator.  Spare  multiplexor  channels  are  available 
for future expansion. 

•  Galvanometers.  These  are  GPIB  devices  interfaced 

to the IOC by APS GPIB/Bitbus converters. 

3.4  Databases 

Much  of  an  EPICS-based  control  system  is  typically 
built with databases. The ITS is no exception. Each con-
trolled  hardware  component  has  a  database  associated 
with it. Since most of the hardware components were of a 
type that had previously been used  in the APS linac, da-
tabases  already  existed  for  them.  We  were  thus  able  to 
reuse  software in the  form  of  these  databases.    Many  re-
quired  little  more  than  the  renaming  of  record  instances 
via macro substitution and the changing of some physical 
parameters. 

This  brought  the  usual  benefits  associated  with  soft-
ware reuse in terms of reduced development time, reduced 
debugging  time,  and  improved  reliability  of  the  finished 
product. 

Linac 
Interlock 
PLC 

Linac 
Timing 
System 

APS 
Control 
LAN 

APS Video 
System 

External, APS Systems 

Injector Test Stand Systems 

ITS IOC 

 

Gun Water 
Flow 
Sensors 

Vacuum 
Subsystem 

Scraper 

Power 
Supply 
Controller 

Flag 
Controller 

Galveno-
meters 

Video 
Subsystem 

Beam 
Sensors 

Vacuum 
pump (2) 

Gate Valve 

Power 
Supplies 
(16) 

Flag 
Actuator 

Video 
Cameras (3) 

Stepper 
Motor (2) 

Position 
Sensor(2) 

Fast Current 
Transformer 
(2) 

Faraday 
Cup (2) 

  

Figure 2: Block diagram showing major ITS control system components. 

 
 

3.5  Displays 

5  ACKNOWLDGEMENTS 

The  engineering  control  screens  were  produced  using 
MEDM,  which  is  the  APS  standard  user  interface  tool. 
This was another area that permitted some software reuse. 
Control  screens  for  some  elements,  such  as  the  scraper, 
power  supplies,  and  galvanometers,  were  reused  from 
screens  originally  created  for  use  in  other  areas  of  the 
APS. Configuration of process variable names is achieved 
by passing parameters when launching the screens. 

Many  people  contributed  to  the  ITS  control  system. 
The  authors  would  particularly  like  to  acknowledge  the 
hard  work  and  assistance  of  the  following  people:  Wil-
liam  Berg,  Richard  Koldenhoven,  John  Lewellen,  Josh 
Stein, and Jim Stevens. 

This work is supported by the U.S. Department of En-
ergy, Office of Basic Energy Science, under Contract No. 
W-31-109-ENG-38. 

6  REFERENCES 

[1] J. Lewellen et al. “The Advanced Photon Source In-
jector Test  Stand”  PAC2001, Chicago,  June  2001, 
to be published. 

[2]  http://www.aps.anl.gov/epics 
 

 

4 RESULTS AND FUTURE WORK 

An  effort  was  made  to  integrate  the  control  system  to 
the hardware as soon as the hardware was available. That 
this effort  paid  dividends is  shown  by the  fact  that  beam 
was obtained from the first injector tested on the test stand 
less than two hours after rf energy was applied to it. This 
included  the  time  required  for  “rf  conditioning”  of  the 
injector. In subsequent testing of a second injector, beam 
was  obtained  in  less  than  one  hour  after  applying  rf 
power. 

APS  physicists  were  very  pleased  with  the  ease  with 
which the  control  system  was  brought  into  use. This  can 
largely be attributed to the reuse of software modules and 
the reliability of EPICS. 

Besides tests of new injectors we intend to use the ITS 
for  tests  of  new  control  equipment,  including  a  replace-
ment for the standard APS PSCU. 

