LONG-LIVED  FILAMENTS  IN  FUSION  PLASMAS:
REVIEW  OF  OBSERVATIONS  AND  STATUS  OF
HYPOTHESIS 
OF  MICRODUST-ASSEMBLED
SKELETONS

A.B. Kukushkin and V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov

INF RRC "Kurchatov Institute",
Moscow, 123182, Russia

ABSTRACT

A brief review is given of the progress in studying the long-lived filaments (LLFs) in
fusion plasmas (tokamaks, Z-pinch, plasma focus). The paper reports on (i)  resolving  the
fine structure of LLFs reported in [1], and (ii) verification of the hypothesis [1,2] which
suggested the  LLFs to possess a  microsolid  skeleton  which  might  be  assembled  during
electric  breakdown,  well  before  main  plasma’s  birth,  from  wildly  produced  carbon
nanotubes (or similar  nanostructures  of  other  chemical  elements).  The  recent  proof-of-
concept studies showed the presence of tubular and cartwheel-like structures (i) in various
types of dust deposits in tokamak T-10, in the range ~10 nm to ~10 m m,  (ii)  in  the  high-
resolution visible light images of plasma, in ~100 m m to ~10 cm range, at initial stage of
discharge (e.g., before appearance of discharge electric current) in tokamak, plasma focus
and  vacuum  spark.  The  topological  similarity  of  the  above  structures  (especially,  of  the
cartwheel as a structure of essentially non-hydrodynamic nature), and the observed trend
of assembling bigger tubules from smaller ones (i.e. the self-similarity), allow to draw a
bridge between the microdust skeletons in the dust deposits and the centimeter scale LLFs
in fusion plasmas.

1. 

INTRODUCTION

The present paper gives a brief review of the progress in studying the long-lived
filaments  (LLFs)  in  fusion  plasmas  (tokamaks,  Z-pinch,  plasma  focus)  that  have
been achieved since last Symposium. Here we address the following two main issues.
First, we outline the major phenomenology of LLFs in fusion plasmas (Sec. 2).
First of all, we present the data in which the fine structure of  LLFs  is  resolved  to  a
degree which proves definitely the  tubularity of  LLFs  claimed  in  [1]  on  the  basis  of
the less detailed data. Further, we show a new typical block which is essentially of a
non-hydrodynamic nature,  namely the  cartwheel-like structure,  i.e.  a  ring-shaped

Current Trends in International Fusion Research — Proceedings of the Fourth
Symposium
Edited  by  Charles  D.  Orth,  Emilio  Panarella,  and  Richard  F.  Post.  NRC  Research  Press,
National Research Council of Canada, Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6 Canada, 2001.

A.B.Kukushkin and V.A.Rantsev-Kartinov

structure, with straight radial bonds connecting the ring with either an axle-tree (i.e. a
straight filament) or a massive central point. The cartwheels are located in the edge
cross-section of a tubule or exist as a separate block.

Second, we report on the proof-of-concept studies aimed at verification of the
hypothesis  [1,2]  which  suggested  the  LLFs  to  possess  a  microsolid  skeleton  which
might  be  assembled  during  electric  breakdown,  well  before  major  plasma’s  birth,
from wildly produced carbon nanotubes (or similar  nanostructures of other chemical
elements).  Here,  we  start  with  an  outline  of  major  hypotheses  [1,2]  suggested  for
interpreting  the  phenomenology  [1]  of  LLFs  (Sec.  3)  and  proceed  (Sec.  4)  with
presenting  the  results  of  recent  experiments  (electron  micrography  of  various  types
of dust deposits in  tokamak  T-10,  laser  shadowgraphy  of  initial  stage  of  a  vacuum
spark  discharge)  and  of  analyzing  the  available  databases  from  former  experiments
(high-resolution  visible  light  imaging  of  plasma  at  electric  breakdown  stage  of
discharge  in  tokamak  T-6  and  plasma  focus).  The  presence  of  tubular  and
cartwheel-like  structures  in  the  ranges  ~10  nm  to  ~10  m m  (in  dust  deposits)  and
~100  m m  to  ~10  cm  (in  the  plasma  images),  the  topological  similarity  of  these
structures,  and  the  observed  trend  of  assembling  bigger  tubules  from  smaller  ones
(i.e.  the  self-similarity),  allow  to  draw  a  bridge  between  the  microdust  skeletons  in
the dust deposits and the centimeter scale LLFs in fusion plasmas.

2.  MAJOR PHENOMENOLOGY

Major  phenomenology  of  LLFs  in  fusion  plasmas  may  be  reduced  to  the

following two points.

First, an  anomalously  high  survivability  of  the  filaments,  and  their  networks,

was found in a broad range of laboratory plasmas that included

•  gaseous Z-pinch [1,2,3(a,d),5(b)],
•  tokamaks [3(a,b)],
•  plasma foci [3(d)],
•  laser-produced plasmas [1].

The anomalous survivability means that the filaments of the enhanced (or sometimes
diminished) luminosity possess two significant properties: namely,

(i)  regular  geometric  form  (the  elementary  and  most  interesting  block  appears
to be a straight tubular formation which often possesses a coaxial structure),
(ii)  the  lifetime  is  comparable  with  the  entire  duration  of  the  electric  discharge
(this  appears  to  exceed  the  existing  theoretical  predictions  for  such
formation  in  respective  experimental  conditions  by  at  least  two,  and  more,
orders of magnitude, especially for straight filaments directed perpendicular
to main electric current; cf. Fig. 2 in [1] or Fig. 1 in [2(b)]).

The above properties made it worth to call such structures the  long-lived  filaments
(LLFs) to distinguish them from the widely known phenomenon of a chaotic, short-
lived filamentation.

Second, the  topological similarity of  such  structures  (including  that  of  tubular

structures) was found in a very broad range of

(i)  length scales, from laboratory to cosmic space [1],
(ii)  type  of  plasma  confinement:  namely,  magneto-inertial  (gaseous  Z-pinches
and plasma foci), magnetic (tokamaks), inertial (laser-produced plasmas).

2

Long-Lived Filaments in Fusion Plasmas

Sometimes  the  self-similarity  was  found  (i.e.  the  structure  is  build  up  by  the
topologically similar ones but of smaller, or much smaller, size).

In  what  follows  we  illustrate  the  most  of  above  points  successively  for

tokamaks, Z-pinch and plasma focus.

The  analysis  of  all  available  databases  was  carried  out  with  the  help  of  the
method of multilevel  dynamical  contrasting  (MDC)  [1,4,5(a)]  (sometimes  the  large
scale structuring may be seen without any processing, only a proper magnification of
the image is needed). The reliability of the results is based on the very rich statistics,
considerable similarity of the structures observed in various regimes and facilities, as
well as on the insensitivity to specific way of imaging.

The typical examples for a number of tokamaks (mostly, small ones) are shown
in Figures 1-7. The major parameters of these tokamaks (TM-2, T-4, T-6, T-10) are
as  follows:  major  radius,  R  (m)  =  0.4,  0.9,  0.7,  1.5;  minor  radius,  a  (cm)  =  8,  20,
20, 33; toroidal magnetic field, BT (T) = 2, 4.5, 0.9, 3; total plasma current,  Ip (kA)
= 25, 200, 100, 300; electron temperature in the core,  Te(0) (keV) = 0.6, 3, 0.4, 2;
electron density in the core, ne(0) (1013 cm-3) = 2, 3, 2, 3.

The  pictures  1-7  are  taken  in  the  visible  light  with  the  help  of  a  strick  camera
(Figs. 1-4, 6-8) and a high-speed camera (Fig. 5). Everywhere the  toroidal direction
is the horizontal one. The effective time exposure for the  strick  camera  is  less  than
one  microseconds  (for  the  respective  scheme  of  imaging  see  [6]).  All  the  images
correspond to plasma self-emission, except for Figure 5 where the light emitted by an
injected pellet, managed to illuminate the LLFs in a broad spatial region.

The major features of the structuring are as follows:
(a)  the  length  scale  of  the  regular  structuring  varies  in  a  broad  range,  from
comparable  with  the  minor  radius  of  a  tokamak  to  smallest  resolvable  lengths,  i.e.
less  than  millimeter  scale  (significantly,  the  presence  of  the  large-scale  structures
proves the structuring to be present in a hot plasma interior, see Fig. 7(a));

(b)  the  typical  tubule  seems  to  be  a  cage  assembled  from  (much)  thinner,  long
rectilinear  rigid-body  structures  which  look  like  a  solid  thin-walled  cylinders;  often
the cage takes the form of a few nested cages;

(c)  the  (almost  rectilinear)  tubules  seem  to  form  a  network  which  starts  at  the
farthest  periphery  (cf.  Figs.  1,2)  and  is  assembled  from  the  tubules  of  various
directions  (e.g.,  toroidally  directed  tubules  interconnected  by  those  of  radial  and
poloidal directions);

(d)  a  radial  sectioning  of  the  above  network  is  resolved  which  looks  like  a
distinct  heterogeneity  at  some  magnetic  flux  surface(s)  (such  a  sectioning  has  been
suggested  [5(c)]  to  be  related  to  the  observed  internal  transport  barriers  in
tokamaks).

Similar picture of  LLFs  appears  to  be  found  in  plasma  of  Z-pinch  experiments
described in [4] and experiments on the plasma focus facility [7] (see also [8]). Here,
our  major  attention  was  paid  to  identification  of  straight  filaments  directed  nearly
radially  (see  Figs.  8-11).  The  typical  straight  filament  appears  to  be  a  cylindrical
formation  varying  in  length  from  few  millimeters  up  to  the  radius  (and  even
diameter) of the chamber. Such a filament has an  axisymmetric tubular sheath, with
a  distinct  boundary  and,  often,  a  distinct  inner  cylinder  that  makes  the  entire
formation  very  similar  to  a  coaxial  cable  (see,  e.g.,  central  window  in  Fig.  9,  and
Fig.11 ).

3

A.B.Kukushkin and V.A.Rantsev-Kartinov

Figure  1.  Circular  structures  in  the  limiter  shadow  in
tokamak  T-6  (minor  radius  a  =  20  cm).  Toroidal
direction is horizontal one. The plasma column is seen
as a white band on the top. Positive, image’s height 10
cm. Diameter D of circles is ~1-1.5 cm, diameter d of the
central spot inside circles is ~2-3 mm.

Figure  3.  Long  tubular  filaments  (D  ~1-2.5  cm)  in
tokamak T-4 (a = 20 cm). Toroidal direction is horizontal
one.  Plasma  core  is  on  the  image’s  top.  Negative,
figure’s height 20 cm. (Thick horizontal white band in
the lower part of the figure is a shadow of the reference
wire located outside the chamber.)

Figure  2.  The  lower  half  of  the  plasma  column  in
tokamak T-6 (a = 20 cm). Positive, image’s height 20 cm.
Limiter shadow region is seen on the image’s bottom.
A tubule (D ~ 1 cm, with central spot ~ 2 mm) is seen in
the  window  ‘a’  of  the  enhanced  contrasting.  The
networking of similar tubular formations is seen in the
window ‘b’.

Figure 4. Upper half of plasma column in tokamak TM-2
(a  =  8  cm).  Positive,  image’s  height  6.4  cm.  Toroidal
direction is horizontal one. Tubular  structure  (D  ~  2.5
cm)  with  a  cartwheel  in  the  edge  cross  section.
Diameters of the inner dark circle ~1 cm, and that of a
darker spot inside this circle ~3 mm.

4

Long-Lived Filaments in Fusion Plasmas

Figure 5. Tubular long filaments and cartwheel structures are
seen in the visible light in the far periphery of tokamak T-10 (a
= 33 cm) when illuminated by the carbon pellet emission (the
pellet’s track is outside the image). Negative, image’s height is
~8.5 cm. Diameter of the long thick filament is ~ 3-4 mm. The
windows “a” and “b” and the residual part of the image have
different  levels  of  contrasting  to  show  the  continuity  of
structuring and the fine structure of the cartwheels (see, e.g.,
a  cartwheel  in  the  left  upper  corner  of  window  ‘a’).  The
cartwheel  in  the  window  ‘b’  is  located  in  the  edge  cross-
section of a vertically aligned tubular structure.

Figure 6. A rigid-body cross made of tubular filaments of
diamater ~3-4 mm in tokamak  TM-2  (a  =  8  cm).  Positive,
image’s height 6 cm.

(b)

(a)

Figure 7. The extra-long tubular formation in tokamak  TM-2  (a  =  8  cm)  is  shown  in  Figure  (a)  (positive,  image’s
height 20 cm). The tubule is stretched from the  limiter-shadow  region  at  the  one  side  of  the  plasma  column  (i.e.
outside the plasma column, see window 3) to similar region at its opposite side (dark horizontal band on the top of
the window 1). The windows correspond to different levels (maps) of contrasting of the images, in order to show
the continuity of the structuring. The tubular block seen on the bottom of the window 2 (namely, to the left from
the window 2') is shown in Figure (b). Here, diameters of the tubule and central dark spot are ~2.5 cm and ~1.5 mm,
respectively (image’s height 2.8 cm).

5

A.B.Kukushkin and V.A.Rantsev-Kartinov

Figure 8. Visible light picture (positive) of a layer, 7.5 cm wide and 5 cm thick, located near the axis of a gaseous Z-
pinch in the neck region at time t=+50 ns after major singularity of electric current (the layer is «extracted» by the
optics  collecting  the  light).  The  chamber  is  60  cm  long  and  20  cm  in  diameter,  major  axis  is  directed  vertically,
maximal  current  ~  360  kA,  working  gas  deuterium,  time  exposure  10  ns  (for  other  experimental  conditions  see
[4,5(b)]). The original image is processed with the method of multilevel dynamical contrasting [4,5(a)] with different
maps of contrasting in the central and peripheral windows to show the continuity of the structuring in the regions
of  substantially  different  luminosity.  Dendritic  tubular  filaments  (of  a  diminished  luminosity,  with  respect  to  a
stronger background) in the central section are of diameter d = 0.7 - 1.5 mm, while thick fractal  formations  («dark
filaments») in the neck, in the left and right windows, are of d ~1.2 and 0.5 cm, respectively.

Figure 9. Typical radially-directed filamentary formation in a Z-pinch (major conditions are similar to those of Fig.
8).  Here,  the  axis  of  the  Z-pinch  is  located  at  the  left  edge  of  the  image,  time  t  =+300  ns,  image’s  width  3.5  cm
(positive),  diameter  of  the  ring  at  the  left  edge  of  a  dark  fractal  filament  is  ~3  mm,  and  the  thinnest  resolvable
tubules are few hundreds of microns in diameter.

6

Long-Lived Filaments in Fusion Plasmas

Figure 10. The «stripped» neck of a Z-pinch (major conditions are similar to those of Fig. 8; Z-pinch axis is directed
vertically). Negative, t = 0 ns, time exposure 2 ns; image’s height 1.65 cm. Diameter d of vertical tubules is ~0.3 mm,
while  for  thinner  tubules  of  various  directions,  including  horizontal  ones,  d  ~  0.1-0.2  mm.  Diameter  of  coaxial
tubules seen, e.g., in the right hand side, is ~1 mm. The picture illustrates the presence of a network built up by the
tubular rigid-body filaments which may be hidden in the ambient plasma at implosion and stagnation stages of the
discharge but appear to be stripped by the magnetic field when it pushes the plasma out of the Z-pinch’s neck (it is
such event that leads to a singularity of the total electric current through the Z-pinch).

Figure  11.  Typical  tubular  formation  (of  diameter  ~  0.5  mm)  directed  nearly  perpendicular  to  the  curvilinear
filamentary current sheath at the implosion phase of the discharge in the plasma focus facility [7] of the  Filippov
type (for experimental conditions see also [8]). The image (positive) is a  shadowgram taken from the facility’s top
(laser pulse of 2  ns  duration  passes  up  through  a  hole  in  the  mushroom  anode,  i.e.  the  picture  shows  radial
projection of the tubular formation). Image’s width 2.5 mm.

7

A.B.Kukushkin and V.A.Rantsev-Kartinov

3.  MAJOR HYPOTHESES

The  observed  longevity  of  the  pretty  straight  structures  has  lead  to  the
conclusion  [1,2]  that  the  long-lived  filaments  should  possess  a  microsolid  skeleton.
This  assumes  that  only  the  quantum  long-range  bonds  (like  those  in  a  condensed
matter,  rather  than  the  interactions  in  a  plasma  composed  of  classical  charged
particles)  may  be  responsible  for  the  observed  rigidity  and  survivability  of  LLFs.
Besides, the connectivity of blocks (and the solidification of the structure on certain
length scales) should be formed during electric breakdown stage and, hence, appear
prior to formation of the (main) plasma itself.

The  most  probable  candidate  for  the  major  microscopic  building  blocks  of  the
LLF’s  skeletons  was  indicated,  the  carbon  nanotube  (which  has  for  the  first  time
been observed in 1991 by S.  Iijima [9]) or similar  nanostructures  of  other  chemical
elements.  This  choice  [1,2]  was  determined  by  a  number  of  physical-chemical
properties of carbon  nanotubes  which,  in  combination,  allow  a  new  type  of  electric
breakdown  (not  necessarily  in  a  gas!)  which  is  based  on  the  build-up  of  skeletal
structures from the  microdust, either already present in the discharge  chamber  (due
to  its  deliberate/undeliberate  accumulation  during,  e.g.,  the  «training»  of  the
discharge chamber) or wildly formed during electric breakdown itself.

In  order  to  resolve  major  difficulty  in  the  above  picture,  namely  the
survivability  of  a  condensed  matter  (i.e.  skeletons)  in  a  hot  ambient  plasma,  of
temperatures up to kiloelectronvolt range (in the latter point the situation substantially
differs  from  physics  of  «dusty  plasmas»),  the  microsolid  skeletons  were  suggested
[3(a,c,e)]  to  be  self-protected  from  an  ambient  high-temperature  plasma  by  a  thin
vacuum channels sustained self-consistently around the skeletons by the pressure of
high-frequency  (HF)  electromagnetic  waves, 
the  skeleton-induced
conversion  of  a  small  part  of  the  incoming  «static»  magnetic  field  (poloidal,  in
tokamaks, or  azimuthal,  in  Z-pinches)  into  HF  waves  of  the  TEM  type  (a  «wild
cable»  model  [3(a,c)]).  Thus,  the  wild  cable  model  has  proposed  common,  and
mutually interrelated, qualitative solution to the two problems: namely,

thanks 

to 

(i)  survivability of skeletons, and
(ii)  phenomenon of  nonlocal (non-diffusive, in particular, ballistic) transport of
energy (the latter was observed in last decade in various  tokamaks, see e.g.
the survey [10]).

The wild cable model was shown [3(a,c,d)] to be compatible with the measurements
of  HF  electric  fields  in  tokamak  T-10,  both  inside  [11]  and  outside  [12]  plasma
column, and with similar measurements in a gaseous Z-pinch [13]. According to wild
cable model, the TEM wave which propagates along the skeleton’s straight section in
a vacuum channel around this section may be a source of the intense plasma waves
in  the  ambient  plasma  (therefore,  one  can  extrapolate  the  scaling  law  of  the  TEM
wave amplitude’s spatial distribution from the channels around single straight section
to  the  ambient  plasma).  It  appears  that  the  measured  values  [11,13]  of  the  HF
electric field averaged over space region with many wild cables, correspond to such
amplitudes  of  the  TEM  wave  which  are  sufficient  for  sustaining  the  vacuum
channels of the width coinciding with that of the experimentally visible long straight
sections of skeletons (for the case of a Z-pinch, see Figure 5 in [3(d)] for the radial
profile  of  plasma  density  around  straight  section  of  a  skeleton,  which  is  calculated
from a Poisson equation in the frame of a quasi-hydrodynamics of a plasma in a HF
electric field).

8

Long-Lived Filaments in Fusion Plasmas

4.  VERIFICATION OF HYPOTHESES

For verification of the above hypotheses the following proof-of-concept studies
have  been  carried  out  which  confirm  the  validity  of  the  concept  in  several  key
points. The up-to-date results of these proof-of-concept studies are as follows.

Evidences for tubular structures in the range from several  nanometers to several
micrometers  in  diameter  are  found  in  the  electronic  (transmission  and  scanning)
micrographs  of  various  types  of  dust  deposit  (submicron  and  micron  particles,  and
films, mostly carbon ones) in tokamak T-10 [14] (see Figs. 12-14 taken from [14]).
A «wild» formation of  nanotubular structures (i.e. their presence in the much wider
range  of  experimental  conditions  than  it  was  thought  before)  has  been  predicted  in
[1,2].

A bridge between the  microdust of  nanoscale  size  and  the  long-lived  filaments
in  plasmas  is  drawn  on  the  example  of  the  structure  which  is  essentially  of  non-
hudrodynamic  nature,  namely  the  cartwheel-like  structure  (i.e.  a  ring  with  straight
radial  bonds  on  the  axle).  The  topological  similarity  of  the  cartwheels  in  the  above
dust (namely, cartwheel of ~100  nm total diameter, assembled from tubules of ~10
nm diameter) and in the few centimeters size structures seen in the plasma images in
small tokamaks [3(a,b)], is illustrated with Figures 14 and 15 taken from [14].

The  trend  of  assembling  bigger  tubules  from  smaller  ones  may  be  seen  in
Figures  13  and  14  taken  from  [14].  This  is  compatible  with  hypothesis  [1,2]  which
suggested  tubular  structures  to  be  responsible  for  the  self-similarity  of  LLFs.
Besides,  again  in  agreement  with  [1,2],  it  follows  from  available  data  that  for  all
types of  microdust skeletons of various topology and spatial  dimensionality  (namely
fibers,  spheres,  balls,  dendritic  structures,  etc.),  contrary  to  quasi-continuous
amorphous media, a tubular structure appears to be a key building block.

The  presence  of  skeletons  (tubules  and  cartwheels  of  millimeter-centimeter
size)  at  initial  stage  of  electric  discharge  was  shown  in  various  types  of  discharge:
namely ,

•   at  «dark»  stage  of  discharge  in  a  vacuum  spark  [15]  (electric  current  is  less
than  20%  of  its  maximum,  the  plasma’s  self-emission  is  not  yet  detectable  by  the
high-sensitivity  detectors,  skeletons  are  observed  with  the  help  of  a  laser
shadowgraphy, see Fig. 18);

•   during  electric  breakdown  (i.e.,  before  electric  current  appearance)  in  the
database from tokamak T-6 [16] (visible light imaging with the help of an electronic
optical converter (EOC), see Fig. 16);

•   during  electric  breakdown  in  the  database  from  plasma  focus  (imaging  with

the help of an EOC), see Fig. 19.

The analysis [16] of capabilities of the visible light imaging of  tokamak plasmas
disclosed  an  important  limitation  imposed  by  plasma  rotation.  The  frame  imaging,
with 15 m s time exposure, by an EOC at t ~300  m s before appearance of the plasma
current  revealed  the  presence  of  tubules  and  cartwheels  of  diameters  about  few-
several  centimeters.  Similar  imaging  after  appearance  of  the  plasma  current  didn’t
allow  the  resolution  of  structures:  15  m s  exposure  appeared  to  be  insufficient  for  a
plasma  with  rotation  velocities  certainly  higher  than  those  at  electric  breakdown
stage.  However,  imaging  at  quasi-stationary  stage  of  discharge  in  another  regime  of
EOC’s operation, namely a  strick camera regime, showed similar structures as seen
at  the  «dark»  stage  in  the  framing  regime  (see  Fig.17).  It  follows  that  the  temporal
resolution as high as ~ 1 m s is needed for a rotating tokamak plasma.

9

A.B.Kukushkin and V.A.Rantsev-Kartinov

Figure 12. The transmission electron microscope (TEM) image (magnification 9,000) of a dust deposit at glass filter
fibers. The dust was pumped out from a crimp in the tokamak T-10 chamber. Image’s height 560 nm. Black region on
the top of the figure is the image of a glass filter fiber. A large rod with the signs of the non-uniformity, which is
probably caused by the  inhomogeneity of its tubular sheath, is 370  nm  long  and  of  55  nm  diameter.  This  rod  is
connected with a network of substantially thinner tubules. Diameter of the tubule which enters large rod from the
left, not far from the lower edge of the rod, is ~7  nm.  The  separate  tubules  are  seen  to  the  left  from  the  above
network.

Figure  13.  The  scanning  electron  microscope  (SEM)  image  (magnification  2,000)  of  a  tubular  formation  in  the
surface  layer  of  the  film  deposited  at  the  internal  surface  of  the  T-10  tokamak  chamber.  Image’s  height  15  m m.
Diameters of the tubule and the central spot on the tubule’s edge are ~5 m m and ~1 m m, respectively.

10

Long-Lived Filaments in Fusion Plasmas

Figure 14. The transmission electronic microscope (TEM) image (magnification 34,000) of a part of the dust particle,
of ~1.2 micrometer diameter, extracted from the oil used in the vacuum pumping system of  tokamak T-10. Image’s
height 270 nm. The tubule whose edge with the distinct central rod is seen in the lower left part of the figure, is of
~70 nm diameter and ~140 nm long. Diameter of the slightly inhomogeneous cylinder which is seen on the left side
of the tubule and is a constituent part of the tubule, is ~10  nm.  The  radial  bonds  between  side-on  cylinder  and
central rod are of ~10 nm diameter.

Figure  15.  A  cartwheel  structure  in  the  visible  light  image  (positive)  of  plasma  column  near  the  axis  (directed
horizontally) of tokamak TM-2 (minor radius a = 8 cm). Image’s height 5 cm. Diameters of larger and smaller ring-
shaped structures on a common axle are ~ 2.2 cm and ~ 1 cm, respectively. Diameter of the axle at the cartwheel's
plane is ~ 2 mm. Image is taken in visible light by a strick camera with effective time resolution < 1 m s (original image
is taken from the database [6]).

11

A.B.Kukushkin and V.A.Rantsev-Kartinov

Figure 16. The elliptic image of a cartwheel-like structure (image’s width ~ 2.5 cm,  toroidal direction -  horizontal)
seen in  tokamak T-6  at t ~300  m s  before  appearance  of  the  plasma  electric  current.  The  image  is  taken  by  an
electronic optical converter (EOC) in the framing regime (time exposure 15 m s).

Figure  17.  The  elliptic  image  of  a  ring-shaped  structure  with  a  black  central  spot  which  is  seen  at  the  quasi-
stationary stage of discharge in tokamak T-6. The image is taken in strick camera regime of  EOC’s operation, with
effective time exposure  ~ 1  m s. Image’s width 2.5 cm. Large axis of the ellipse is 2.2. cm. There is also a tubular
structure superimposed on the left part of the above ellipse (the lower edge of this tubule is of 6 mm diameter, and
thick black spot in the center of this edge is of 2 mm size).

12

Long-Lived Filaments in Fusion Plasmas

Figure 18. The tubular and cartwheel structures in a low-inductance vacuum spark (condenser capacitance 12  m F,
voltage bias 10 kV, maximum current ~ 150 kA, period ~ 5 m s, flat cathode with central hole of diameter 3 mm is 2 mm
from a round-shaped edge of a rod anode). The image is taken by a laser shadowgraphy (pulse duration 6 ns, l =337
nm) using  an  electronic  optical  converter  (EOC),  at  initial,  «dark»  stage  when  plasma’s  self  emission  is  not  yet
detectable  by  the  EOC  (at  this  stage  the  electric  current  is  lower  than  20%  of  its  maximum).  The  images  in  the
windows ‘a’ and ‘b’ are processed with a higher level of contrasting. The cartwheels are seen in the window ‘b’
and, as an elliptic structure of larger size, in the left hand side of the image.

Figure 19. The tubular and cartwheel structures which are observed at time 100 ns before appearance of the electric
current in the  plasma  focus  facility  [7]  of  the  Filippov  type  (imaging  with  the  help  of  an  EOC;  positive;  time
exposure 2 ns; image’s width 4.6 cm). The structures are seen on the background of the annular vertical porcelain
insulator whose left edge is seen at the left hand side of the image as a vertical white band (the mushroom-shaped
anode is located upper than image’s top, and the bottom of the cathode chamber is near the image’s bottom).

13

A.B.Kukushkin and V.A.Rantsev-Kartinov

5.

SUMMARY

The  results  of  proof-of-concept  studies  very  briefly  reported  in  Sec.  4  give
support, first of all, to the major point of the hypothesis [1,2], namely the necessity
to  go  beyond  the  frame  of  classical  electrodynamics  in  describing  the  long-range
bonds  in  laboratory  and  cosmic  plasmas.  Here,  we  have  to  refer,  first  of  all,  to  the
phenomenon  of  the  cartwheel-like  structures  that  can  not  be  explained  in  the  frame
of conventional approaches because of

(i)  the  presence  of  cartwheels  in  definitely  «quantum»  media  (namely,  in
condensed  matter  –  specifically,  in  various  dust  deposits),  and  especially,
existence  of  cartwheels  as  separate  solid  blocks  (see  Fig.  14  and  more
examples in [14]);

(ii)  observed conservation of essentially «non-classical» topology of cartwheels
(namely, its incompatibility with the known hydrodynamic or particle beam
structuring) in a broad range of plasma conditions, like e.g. geometry of the
facility, for a wide range of experimental facilities;

(iii)  rich statistics of observations that involve, e.g., practically every well-done
plasma experiment with a proper high-resolution diagnostics and subsequent
processing of plasma images, etc.;

(iv)  insensitivity to specific way of imaging.
Further,  the  verification  analyses  (Sec.4)  give  support  to  the  particular  way
towards quantum long-range structures suggested in [1,2], namely to the key role of
nanotubular blocks (specifically carbon nanotubes or similar  nanostructures of other
chemical  elements)  in  composing  the  fractal  solids  which  take  the  form  of  self-
similar  skeletons.  The  above  self-similarity  allows  to  draw  a  bridge  from  the
nanotubular structuring in dust deposits to the macroscopic, of centimeter range size,
long-lived structures in fusion plasmas.

It is important to note that the picture of potential implications of the hypothesis
[1,2]  outlined  in  the  Summary  of  the  survey  [1]  holds  its  form  both  for  laboratory
and  space.  In  particular,  the  phenomenology  of  observations  of  skeletal  structures
does not contradict the  phenomenology of the existing successful experiments (e.g.,
skeletons  may  be  responsible  for  the  observed  stability  of  many  plasmas  and
respective suppression of numerous instabilities predicted by the theory). Moreover,
one  can  find  new  opportunities  for  resolving  existing  difficulties  in  interpreting  the
current  picture  of  fusion  plasmas  (e.g.,  in  describing  the  observed  phenomena  of
nonlocal transport in plasmas and, probably, achieving a non-empirical description of
the energy lifetime in the present fusion plasmas).

Acknowledgments

The  authors  are  indebted  to  their  colleagues  who  kindly  presented  the  original
databases  from  former  experiments:  namely,  V.M.  Leonov,  S.V.  Mirnov  &  I.B.
Semenov, K.A.  Razumova, and  V.Yu.  Sergeev (from  tokamaks  T-6,  T-4,  TM-2,
and  T-10,  respectively)  for  Figures  1-7;  A.R.  Terentiev  (from  the  plasma  focus
facility [7]) for Figures 11 and 19. We highly appreciate valuable collaboration with
B.N.  Kolbasov &  P.V.  Romanov, A.S.  Savjolov,  and  V.A.  Krupin,  in  the  papers
[14,15,16], respectively.

Our special thanks to V.I. Kogan for his invariable support and encouragement.

14

Long-Lived Filaments in Fusion Plasmas

REFERENCES

1.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  In:  Current  Trends  in  Int.  Fusion
Research:  Review  and  Assessment  (Proc.  3rd  Symposium,  Washington  D.C.,
March 1999), Ed. E. Panarella, NRC Research Press, 2000, Ottawa, Canada, pp.
107-136.

2. A.B. Kukushkin, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov, (a) In: Fusion Energy 1998 (Proc. 17th
IAEA  Fusion  Energy  Conference,  Yokohama,  Japan,  October  1998),  IAEA,
Vienna, 1999, IAEA-CSP-1/P, Vol. 3, pp. 1131-1134; (b) Proc. 26-th Eur. Phys.
Soc.  conf.  on  Plasma  Phys.  and  Contr.  Fusion  (Maastricht,  Netherlands,  June
1999), pp. 873-876 (http://epsppd.epfl.ch/cross/p2087.htm).

3.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  (a)  Proc.  Innovative  Confinement
Concepts  Workshop  ICC-2000  (February  2000,  Lawrence  Berkeley  Lab.,
Berkeley, California, USA), http://icc2000.lbl.gov/proceed.html...; (b) Proc. 27-th
Eur. Phys. Soc.  conf. on Plasma  Phys.  and  Contr.  Fusion  (Budapest,  Hungary,
June 
Ibid.,
http://...P2_028.pdf;  (d)  Ibid.,  http://...P2_051.pdf;  (e)  Rev.  Sci.  Instrum.,  72
(#1, Part II), 506-507 (2001).

http://sgi30.rmki.kfki.hu/EPS2000/P2_029.pdf; 

2000), 

(c) 

4. A.B. Kukushkin, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov, Laser and Part. Beams, 16, 445 (1998).
5. A.B. Kukushkin, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov, Rev. Sci. Instrum., (a) 70, 1387 (1999);

(b) Ibid, p. 1421; (c) Ibid., p.1392.

6. N.D. Vinogradova, K.A.  Razumova, Proc. Conf. Plasma  Phys. and Contr.  Nucl.

Fus. Res. (Culham, U.K., 1965), IAEA, Vienna, 1966, vol. 2, p. 617.

7.  M.M.  Orlov,  A.R.  Terentiev,  V.A.  Khrabrov,  Fizika  Plazmy  (Sov.  J.  Plasma

Phys.) 11, 1268, 1517 (1985).

8.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  A.R.  Terentiev,  Fusion  Technol.,  32,

9. S. Iijima, Nature (London), 354, 56 (1991).
10.  J.D.  Callen,  M.W.  Kissick, Plasma  Phys.  and  Contr.  Fusion,  39,  Suppl.  12B,

83 (1997).

173 (1997).

11.  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  Fizika  Plasmy  (Rep.  Plasma  Phys.),  13,  387  (1987).
V.P.  Gavrilenko, E.A.  Oks,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  Pis’ma  Zh.E.T.F.  (JETP
Lett.) 44, 315 (1987).

12.  V.I.  Poznyak,  et  al  Proc.  1998  ICPP  and  25-th  Eur.  Phys.  Soc.  Conf.  on

Plasma Phys. and Contr. Fusion (1998, Prague), ECA 22C, 607 (1998).

13. E.A. Oks, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov, Zh.E.T.F. (JETP) 79, 99 (1980).
14. B.N. Kolbasov, A.B. Kukushkin, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov, P.V. Romanov, Phys.

Lett. A 269, 363 (2000).

15.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  D.E.  Prokhorovich, P.A.  Sivko,  and
A.S.  Savjolov,  Mat.  2nd  Russian  Symp.  on  Plasma  Diagnostics  (Moscow
Engineering & Phys. Inst., Moscow, 2000) pp. 53-55 (in Russian).

16.  V.A.  Krupin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  A.B.  Kukushkin,  Abstracts  XXVIII
Zvenigorod  Conf.  on  Plasma  Phys.  and  Contr.  Fusion  (Zvenigorod,  Moscow
region, February 2001), p.49.

15

