1

Sporadic Electron Jets from Cathodes 
– The Main Breakdown-Triggering Mechanism
in Gaseous Detectors

C. Iacobaeus, M. Danielsson, P. Fonte, T. Francke, J. Ostling, V. Peskov

main  mechanism  triggering  the  breakdown  in  gaseous
detectors, especially when there is no external radiation?

II.  EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

Our main experimental setup is shown in Fig. 1. It contains a
test  chamber  inside  of  which  various  gaseous  detectors  can
be installed. 

  

Abstract--  We  have  demonstrated  experimentally  that  the
in  most  gaseous
main  breakdown-triggering  mechanism 
detectors, including micropattern gaseous detectors, is sporadic
electron 
the  cathode  surfaces.  Depending  on
conditions,  each  jet  contains  randomly  from  a  few  primary
510 ,  emitted  in  a  time  interval  ranging
  to  milliseconds.  After  the  emission,  these

electrons  up  to 
sµ10.
between 

from 

jets 

primary  electrons  experience  a  full  gas  multiplication  in  the
detector and create spurious pulses. 

The rate of these jets increases with applied voltage and very
sharply at voltages close to the breakdown limit. We found that
in  our  measurements  responsible  for  the
these  jets  are 
breakdown-triggering 
rate  between
counting 
−
2
210

at 
810

and 

any 

mm

mm

Hz

Hz

. 

2

We  demonstrated  on  a  few  detectors  that  an  optimized
cathode-geometry, a high electrode surface quality and a proper
choice  of 
the
performance  characteristics  and  provide  the  highest  possible
gains. 

the  gas  mixture,  considerably 

improve 

I.  INTRODUCTION

I

N  previous  work  [1]  we  have  studied  some  basic
properties  of  various  micropattern  gaseous  detectors.  For
example  the  maximum  achievable  gain  in  single  and  multi-
step  configurations  was  studied,  and  also  the  gain  vs.  rate
characteristics.  We  have  in  the  present  work  focused  the
study on primary reasons of breakdowns: what is actually the

                                                          
Manuscript received November 21, 2001.
C. Iacobaeus is with the Dept. of Medical Radiation Physics, Karolinska
Institutet,  Box  260,  171  76  Stockholm,  Sweden  (telephone:  +46-8-5537
8188, e-mail: christian@radfys.ks.se).

M. Danielsson is with the Dep. of Physics, Royal Institute of Technology,
SCFAB, KTH Particle Physics, 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden (telephone: +46-
8-5537 8181, e-mail: mats.danielsson@mamea.se).

P. Fonte is with the ISEC and LIP, Coimbra University, Coimbra P-3000,

Portugal (e-mail: paulo.fonte@cern.ch).

T.  Francke  is  with  the  Dep.  of  Physics,  Royal  Institute  of  Technology,
SCFAB, KTH Particle Physics, 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden (telephone: +46-
8-5537 8180, e-mail: tom.francke@xcounter.se)

J.  Ostling  is  with  the  Dept.  of  Medical  Radiation  Physics,  Stockholm
University,  Box  260,  171  76  Stockholm,  Sweden  (telephone:  +46-8-5537
8188, e-mail: janina@radfys.ks.se).

V.  Peskov  is  with  the  Dep.  of  Physics,  Royal  Institute  of  Technology,
SCFAB, KTH Particle Physics, 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden (telephone: +46-
8-5537 8182, e-mail: vladimir.peskov@cern.ch).

Fig. 1. A schematic drawing of the experimental setup.
We  have  for  these  studies  chosen  the  most  "popular"/most
often  used,  gaseous  detectors:  The  Single  Wire  Counter
(SWC),  the  Multi  Wire  Proportional  Counter  (MWPC),  the
Micro  Strip  Gaseous  Counter  (MSGC),  the  Parallel  Plate
Avalanche  Chamber  (PPAC),  the  Resistive  Plate  Chamber
(RPC),  the  Micromesh  Gaseous  Detector  (MICROMEGAS)
and the Gas Electron Multiplier (GEM). Schematic drawings
of some of these designs are presented in Fig. 2(a), 2(b), 2(c)
and 2(d). 

Fig. 2(a). A schematic drawing of the SWC.
These  were  carefully  designed  to  minimize,  or  to  possibly
fully  avoid,  contribution  of  spurious  pulses  and  breakdowns
associated with the dielectrics supports in the anode and the
cathode interfaces. The design of the interface in the case of
the  SWC,  the  MWPC,  the  PPAC  and  the  RPC  (made  of

Pestov-glass of 
be seen in Fig. 2(a), 2(b) and 2(c). 

cmΩ1010

 or Si-plates of 

⋅
3102

cmΩ

) can

Fig. 2(b). A schematic drawing of the MWPC.

Fig. 2(c). A schematic drawing of the PPAC/RPC.
In  the  case  of  the  MICROMEGAS,  we  used  an  anode  plate
with  metallic  readout  strips  of  50  mµ -pitch.  This  setup
allows  the  readout  strips  to  be  placed  far  away  from  the
spacers  (Fig.  2(d)),  thus  only  recording  avalanches  in  this
active  area  and  avoiding  the  signals  due  to  possible  micro-
breakdowns across the spacer’s surface.

Fig. 2(d). A schematic drawing of the MICROMEGAS.
The MSGC used in this experiment had a size of 10 cm x 10
cm  and  was  made  of  Desag-glass  with  Cr-strips  of  a  200
mµ -width. They were manufactured at the Photomask Inc. in
USA. 
The GEMs (10 cm x 10 cm) were obtained from CERN and
had a standard design with a hole-diameter of 70  mµ  and a
pitch of 140  mµ . 
We have additionally studied large areas (25 cm x 25 cm and
, described in [2]. 
25 cm x 100 cm) glass-RPC of 

cmΩ1210

Before  installation  in  the  test  chambers,  all  detectors  were
cleaned very carefully by ultrasonic bath in various solvents,
acetone  and  alcohol.  The  final  cleaning  was  also  done
ultrasonically in a soap and distilled water solution, and then
in distilled water only. The tests were performed in different
Ar-, Xe- and Kr-based mixtures with various combinations of
Isobutane,  Freon  (R134),  Freon  +  Isobutane,  Ethane  and
2CO   at  atmospheric  pressure.  The  ratio  of  each  component
was varied widely. 

2

In  studies  at  low  counting  rates  (

<

410

Hz

2

mm

),  the

90

106

  and 

ionization  inside  the  detectors  was  caused  by  x-rays  (x-ray
gun  of  6-30  keV),  betas  (
Sr
)  and  gammas
60
( Co
). UV-light from a mercury lamp was used in order to
create  single  electrons  from  the  cathodes.  The  efficiency  of
the  detectors  for  minimum  ionizing  particles  was  measured
using  cosmic  muons.  They  were  identified  by  coincidence
signals from two scintillators (see Fig. 1). 

Ru

For position measurements, we used a G10 readout plate with
20 metallic strips of 1 cm-pitch attached to the outer surface
of the RPC. In an avalanche mode of operation, signals from
the  RPCs  were  measured  at  low  rates  with  charge  sensitive
amplifiers,  and  at  high  rates  with  current  amplifiers.  In
streamer  mode,  signals  were  directly  monitored  on  the
LeCroy  oscilloscope.  In  the  case  of  measuring  position
resolutions,  signals  from  the  strips  were  simultaneously
storage  LeCroy
monitored  by 
oscilloscopes. 

two-channeled 

seven 

We  additionally  used  PM-tubes  facing  the  windows  of  the
test  chambers  in  some  measurements  in  order  to  detect  the
light  produced  by  avalanches  and  streamers  inside  the
detectors (see Fig. 1). 

In  contrast  to  our  previous  work  [1],  the  measurements  in
)  were  done  with
high  counting  rates  (

mm

Hz

>

2

510

modulated sources. In the case of x–rays, the modulation was
done with a  mechanical  shutter  being  able  to  fully  close  the
beam  at  reaction  time  of  ~0.01  s.  We  also  used  powerful
pulsed  gamma 
the  Racetrack
radiation  produced  by 
accelerator at the Karolinska Hospital (see Fig. 3 and [3]). 

Fig.  3  A  schematic  drawing  of  the  test  chamber  with  a  GEM  inside  for
measurements at the Racetrack.
The  Racetrack  (MM50)  produces  a  scanned  electron  beam
(50  MeV)  hitting  a  target  consisting  of  mainly  Tungsten.
Hence  a  beam  of  photons  with  a  maximum  energy  of  50
MeV  (average  of  20  MeV)  is  produced,  and  the  purpose  of
the  accelerator  is  radiation  treatment  of  cancer  patients.  The
sµ5~
  long  pulses)  with  about  5
radiation  beam  is  pulsed  (
ms  pauses  between  pulses.  The  photon  fluence  rate  during
the 
  or  correspondingly  about

tests  was 

min

1010

photons

mm

s

 during the pulse.

Gy2
⋅2

III.  RESULTS

A.  Weak external radiation (

<

410

Hz

2

mm

) and no

external radiation

As an example, Fig. 4 and 5 show typical dependence of rate
vs. voltage for pulses produced with and without an external
radiation source for the MWPC and the RPC. The number of
radiation-induced pulses typically increases with voltage and
then  reaches  a  plateau.  In  contrast  to  this,  the  rate  of  the
spurious  pulses  always  increases  rapidly  with  the  applied
voltage. This behavior is typical for all detectors tested in this
work. The question we try to address in this work regards the
origin of these pulses.

Fig. 4. Signal amplitude and rates of noise pulses and pulses produced by x-
rays as a function of the voltage measured with the MWPC.

Since the rate of the spurious pulses, and sometimes their
amplitudes, are much higher than the rate and amplitudes of
pulses  due  to  cosmic  radiation  or  natural  radioactivity,  they
are  the  main  triggers  of  breakdown  at  low  intensity  of  the
external  radiation.  This  was  proven  experimentally  by
measuring  spurious  pulses  and  breakdown 
in
coincidence measurements of cosmic muons. As an example,
Fig.  5  shows  the  rate  of  spurious  pulses,  and  these  were
measured using the coincidence technique.

rates 

Fig. 5. The efficiency (1) and the rate of noise pulses (2), (3) vs. the voltage
applied  on  the  RPC  [2].    (2)  and  (3)  correspond  to  measurements  done  in

3

coincidence  and  anti-coincidence  with  the  signals  from  the  scintillators
respectively.

More  detailed  studies  reveal  that  most  of  the  detectors
(except  in  the  case  of  the  GEM),  have  only  two  types  of
spurious  pulses:  one  distributed  randomly  with  time  (at
relatively  low  voltages)  and  the  other  clustered  in  time
(usually at voltages close to breakdown). 

Some  light  was  shed  upon  this  problem  by  experiments
with  PPACs  and  RPCs.  As  an  example  Fig.  6(a),  6(b),  6(c)
and  6(d)  show  an  appearance  of  clustered  spurious  pulses
from the RPC. The upper trace of the oscillogram shows the
pulse from the PM-tube coupled to the scintillator (triggered
on  muons  in  coincidence  with  the  other  scintillator).  The
lower trace shows a pulse due to a muon (directly measured
on the 50 ohm-input of the oscilloscope) from the RPC, and
also afterpulses appearing with an increasing applied voltage.
The  amplitudes  of  these  afterpulses  are  very  randomly
distributed  and  may  be  considerably  larger  than  the  muon
pulses.  Note  that  many  other  authors  have  observed  these
afterpulses [4].

6(a)

6(b)

6(c)

6(d)
Fig. 6. Signals measured in coincidence with cosmic muons (a), (b) and the
noise pulse (c), (d) at various voltages V applied on the RPC [2],  (a) and (c)
at  V=7.6  kV  and  (b)  and  (d)  at  V=8,75  kV.  The  gas  mixture  used  was
Ar/Isobutane/Freon (R134) in the ratio 48/4/48.

The common explanation to the origin of the afterpulses is
that  they  are  due  to  a  photo-effect  caused  by  a  primary
avalanche or a streamer inside the detector [4]. However, our
observations  show  that  grouped  spurious  pulses  have  a
sporadic  delay  that  sometimes  can  be  very  long,  and  this
excludes  the  explanation  based  on  the  photo-effect.  By
comparison of the pulse height spectra of the spurious pulses
with  those  produced  by  single  photo-electrons  (measured
with  detectors  operating  in  proportional  mode),  one  can
conclude  that  the  spurious  pulses,  depending  on  conditions,
may  contain  between  a  few  up  to  a  few  thousands  of
electrons [5].

B.  The role of aging and other types of depositions 
We have found that any depositions on metallic cathodes,
e.g.  polymer  films  due  to  aging  or  dust  particles,  cause  an
increase in the rate of noise pulses. These observations were

independently  confirmed  by  other  authors,  see  for  example
[6].

1)  The "Memory" effect
We  have  discovered  during  these  studies  that  all  tested
detectors  exhibit  what  we  call  a  "memory"  effect.  The
memory effect manifests itself in two ways:

1)  The  value  of  the  safe  operating  voltage  (no  sparking)

should be decreased with an increasing counting rate.

2) After a breakdown, one has to reduce the voltage on the
t∆ ,  to

detector  some  value,  V∆ ,  for  some  period  of  time,
avoid continuos sparking. 

The  first  effect  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  7,  in  which  the  pulse
amplitude vs. voltage for MICROMEGAS is presented. One
can see that at very low rates, the amplitude may correspond
710   electrons  per  avalanche  before  a
to  as  much  as 
breakdown  appears.  However,  even  at  such  relatively  low
rates as 
, the maximum achievable gain drops.

mm

Hz

2

10

Note that each avalanche acts completely independently from
each other at this low rate, since the ion's removal time from
sµ .  Thus  the  detector
the  amplification  gap  is  about  0.1 
somehow "remembers" the action of an avalanche for a time
that  is  an  order  of  magnitude  longer  than  the  ion  removal
time. 

The second effect was the need to considerably lower the
voltage  to  avoid  continuos  sparking  after  a  breakdown.  The
voltage  could  be  restored  only  after  some  period  of  time,
which varied depending on the detector and the gas mixture,
usually from fractions of a second up to a few hours. In rare
cases (especially in mixtures with Isobutane) one had to wait
for a day.

4

charged  up  and  create  an  extremely  high  electric  field,
enough  to  cause  a  field  emission  effect  in  form  of  sporadic
jets  of  electrons,  [7]  and  [8].  One  of  the  most  straight-
forward ways to verify this hypotheses is to "switch off" the
positive  ion  flux  very  fast.  In  this  case,  the  insertions  and
dielectric  layers  will  remain  charged  for  some  time  and  one
can  thus  expect  a  continuation  of  electron  emission  for  this
period of time. We performed measurements with modulated
x-rays and pulsed gamma radiation sources to verify this.

1)  Results with the modulated x-rays source: afterpulses
Fig. 8 shows the rate of spurious pulses after the beam was
blocked for two detectors, the PPAC and the RPC.  One  can
see  that  their  pulse  rate  decay  time  may  reach  between  ten
and a few hundred seconds respectively. Similar results, but
with  different  time  scales  were  obtained  for  all  tested
detectors.  The  shortest  decay  time  (a  few  seconds)  was
observed with a well-cleaned MSGC.

Fig. 8. The rate of the afterpulses for the PPAC (Cu-electrodes) and the RPC
(Si).

2)  Results with pulsed gamma radiation
The response of the GEM, for low voltages applied on its
electrodes  (350  V),  to  a  high  flux  of  gamma  radiation  from
the  Racetrack  accelerator  is  presented  in  Fig.  9.  The  GEM
was 
the
oscilloscope  with  a  50  ohm-input,  without  any  other
restrictive-current resistors. 

these  measurements 

loaded  directly  on 

in 

Fig.  7.  The  maximum  achievable  gain  (6  keV  x-rays)  vs  the  rate  for  the
MICROMEGAS.

C.  Results with modulated x-ray and gamma radiation
One  possible  explanation  of  the  effects  described  above
(noise/spurious pulses and the memory effect) is that they are
due to the Malter-type explosive emission from microscopic
dielectric  insertions  or  thin  dielectric  layers  on  the  cathode
surface  (see  below  for  more  details).  If  there  is  a  flux  of
positive ions to the cathode, these insertions or layers will be

5

Studies  of  breakdown  mechanisms  in  high  vacuum  [7]
reveal  however  that  the  field  emission  could  rather  be  in  a
form  of  busted  electron  emission,  so  called  explosive  field
emission [7]. This emission originates at some points on the
cathode  where  there  are  sharp  tips  or,  even  more  important,
microscopic dielectric insertions. 

The theory of this effect is based on the fact that dielectric
insertions  are  not  ideal  dielectrics  and  contain  a  system  of
low-energy levels. In a high electric field, electrons from the
cathode are able of tunneling to the dielectric insertion where
they  accumulate.  After  some  critical  concentration,  they
suddenly emit to the vacuum in form jets of electrons. 

From  previous  work  [8] 

the  recent
measurements, it looks like a similar phenomenon may occur
in  gaseous  detectors.  Since  the  number  of  primary  electrons
emitted by the jets occasionally can be 
 these jets will

together  with 

⋅ nA

satisfy the Raether limit [8], 

0 10>
).  Thus  at  low  intensity  of
rather  low  gas  gains  (
external  radiation  (at  low  counting  rates)  these  jets  may
dominate in the breakdown-triggering mechanism. 

 electrons, even at

310<

510>

It  is  known  that  at  high  counting  rates,  the  maximum
achievable  gain  dramatically  drops  in  the  presence  of  heavy
ionizing  particles  [11].  From  this  point  of  view,  if  jets
occasionally emit 
 electrons, they are as significant as
heavy  ionizing  particles  and  could  therefore  be  the  main
breakdown-triggering mechanism also at high rates. Jets may
dominate  breakdown  at  any  rate,  thus,  in  the  case  of
extremely  clean  electrodes,  cosmic  and 
radioactive
contamination will also contribute to breakdown, but surface
contamination  gives  in  real  life  the  major  contribution.  This
is  because  it  is  quite  impossible  to  have  surfaces  without
these insertions [7].

510>
8

V.  OPTIMIZATIONS

In real experiments, especially at very high rates typical for
tracking  measurements  or  medical  imaging,  it  is  quite
impossible  to  fully  avoid  sparking.  They  can  originate  from
heavy  ionizing  particles  or  by  jets  described  above.  Some
experiments 
example
MICROMEGAS  [11])  able  to  withstand  some  sparks,  but  it
is  in  this  case  very  important  that  the  detector  recover  very
fast  after  a  spark,  otherwise  the  data  acquisition  could  be
seriously disturbed. 

detectors 

accept 

now 

(for 

In  terms  of  the  definitions  introduced  above,  the  fast
t∆   and  V∆   (see
recovery  corresponds  to  small  values  of 
Section  III.B.1).  These  values  could  be  reduced  using
extremely  clean  surfaces  (no  oxide  layers  or  dust  particles)
and  gases  without  adsorbed  layers,  as  was  demonstrated
t∆
earlier [8]. It is possible to achieve a short recovery time (
in the range of seconds) in 

2CO -based mixtures. 

We also demonstrated in this work that by optimizing the
cathode geometry and the anode-cathode interfaces (see Fig.
2(a),  2(b)  and  2(c)),  having  a  high  electrode  surface  quality
and  choosing  a  proper  gas-mixture  (
2CO -based),  it  is

Fig. 9. The current from the GEM (at 350 V) recorded directly on a 50 ohm-
input  of  the  oscilloscope  when  the  GEM  was  exposed  to  a  pulsed  gamma

radiation, producing 

~

710

counts

2

mm

 on the whole GEM-area.

The  response  of  the  GEM  changed  dramatically  when
higher  voltages  were  applied.  Fig.  10  shows  a  pre-
breakdown-phenomena  in  the  GEM  at  420  V.  Without
current-restrictive  resistors,  a  real  breakdown  is  fatal  and
would  fully  destroy  the  GEM.  The  GEM-pulses  in  Fig.  10,
however,  are  not  real  discharges,  but  jets  of  electrons  after
they  multiplied  in  the  GEM.  At  higher  voltages,  these  jets
cause  real  breakdowns.  Another  interesting  effect  that  was
observed was the current from the GEM increasing with time
(see  Fig.  10)  similar  to  what  was  observed  in  [9].  Such  a
current increase is very typical for the Malter-effect [10].

Fig.  10.  The  same  setup  as  in  Fig.  9,  but  420  V  applied  over  the  GEM
electrodes.

IV.  DISCUSSION

A generally accepted explanation of the Malter-effect is a
charging  up  of  dielectric  films  on  the  metallic  cathode
surface by positive ions. If the dielectric film is thin enough,
the  created  electric  field  may  be  sufficient  to  cause  a  field
emission.  A  classical  field  emission  predicts  an  emission  in
form of single electrons. 

6

possible  to  reach  the  limit  of  the  gas  gain  determined  by  a
general gain vs. rate curve (see [8] for more  details).  At  the
t∆  and  V∆  could be considerably
same time, the values of 
reduced. For example, the values obtained for the RPC, made
of  the  commercially  available  Si  and  being  well  cleaned,
were 10 s and 800 V respectively, when the RPC operated in
a  Xe+20% 2CO   gas-mixture  at  atmospheric  pressure.
However,  after  etching  the  Si-surface  (removal  of  a  thin
oxide layer), the values became 
 and
this dramatically improved the detector performance at  rates
of 

V 200

t 1=∆

=∆

mm

Hz

V

, 

s

2

.

510

VI.  CONCLUSION

We  demonstrated  on  a  few  detectors  that  an  optimized
cathode-geometry,  a  high  electrode  surface  quality  and  a
proper choice of the gas mixture, allows one considerably to
improve  the  performance  characteristics  and  reach  the
highest  possible  gains.  Therefore,  results  of  these  studies
have a great practical importance.

VII.  REFERENCES

[1]  V.  Peskov,  P.  Fonte,  M.  Danielsson,  C.  Iacobaeus,  J.  Ostling,  M.
Walmark  "The  study  and  optimization  of  new  micropattern  gaseous
detectors  for  high  rate  applications"  Presented  at  the  IEEE  Nuc.
Sympos. in Lyon, France, 2000: IEEE TNS (in press)

[2]  C.  Gusatvino,  G.  Mannocchi,  V.  Peskov,  "Some  studies  of

MONOLITH RPCs", MONOLITH Internal  report, June 2001

[3]  C.  Iacobaeus,  A.  Brahme,  M.  Danielsson,  P.  Fonte,  J.  Ostling,  V.
Peskov,  M.  Wallmark,  "A  novel  portal  imaging  device  for  advanced
radiation  therapy”  Presented  at  IEEE  Nuc.  Sympos.  in  Lyon,  France,
IEEE TNS (in press)

[4]  K. Abe, F. Handa, I. Higuchi, Y. Hoshi, N. Kawamura, Y. Mikami et al
"Performance  of  glass  RPC  operated  in  streamer  mode  with  SF6  gas
mixture" Nuclear Instr.and Meth. in Phys. Res. A, 2001 (in press)

[5]  A. Sharma, "High-rate RPCs", report at this Symposium
[6]  G.  Passavela  "First  results  from  an  aging  test  of  a  prototype  RPC  for
LHCb  muon  system"  report  at  the  International  Workshop  on  aging
phenomena  in  gaseous  detectors  in  Hamburg,  Germany,  Oct.  2001
(submitted to Nucl. Instr. in Phys. Res. A)

[7]  R.  Latham,  "High  voltage  vacuum  insulation",  Academic  Press,  New

York, 1995

[8]  P.  Fonte,  V.  Peskov  and  B.  Ramsey  "The  fundamental  limitations  of

high-rate gaseous detectors", IEEE Nucl. Sci. 46 (1999) 312

[9]  Y.  Ivamchenkov,  P.  Fonte,  V.  Peskov,  R.  Ferriera-Marques,  A.
Policarpo, " The high-rate behavior of parallel-.mesh chambers", IEEE
Nucl. Sci. 45 (1998) 258

[10]  C. Padilla, "Aging studies for the outer tracker of HERA-B", report at
the  International  Workshop  on  aging  phenomena  in  gaseous  detectors
in  Hamburg,  Germany,  Oct.  2001  (submitted  to  Nucl.  Instr.  in  Phys.
Res. A)

[11]  Y. Ivanchenkov, P. Fonte, V. Peskov and B. Ramsey "Breakdown limit
studies on high-rate gaseous detectors" Nucl. Instr in Phys. Res. A422
(1999) 300-304

[12]  Y. Giomataris, Private communication

