ACTIVE VIBRATION SUPPRESSION R&D FOR THE NLC 
J. Frisch, L. Hendrickson, T. Himel, A. Seryi, SLAC, Stanford, CA 94025, USA 

 

Abstract 

The  nanometer  scale  beam  sizes  at  the  interaction 
point in linear colliders limit the allowable motion of the 
final focus magnets. We have constructed a prototype 
system  to  investigate  the  use  of  active  vibration 
damping to control magnet motion. Inertial sensors are 
used to measure the position of a test mass, and a DSP 
based  system  provides  feedback  using  electrostatic 
pushers.  Simulation  and  experimental  results  for  the 
control of a mechanically simple system are presented.  

1 STABILIZATION REQUIREMENTS 

The beam size at the interaction point of the NLC is 
approximately  2  X  200  nanometers  (for  1  TeV  CM 
system)  [1,2].    In  order  to  maintain  luminosity,  the 
relative  positions  of  the  beams  at  the  IP  must  be 
stabilized to approximately 1 nanometer. 

Vibration  of  the  final  focus  quadrupoles  is  a 
potentially  serious  source  of  beam  motion  at  the  IP. 
Ground  motion  is  one  of  the  causes  for this vibration. 
in  a  quiet  site  could  be 
While  ground  motion 
sufficiently  small,  the  “cultural”  noise  from  man-made 
sources  may  substantially  change  the  ground  motion 
spectrum. Moreover, noises of the accelerator complex 
itself will contribute to this spectrum. Measurements at 
existing labs, showing 1.5nm of RMS motion above 1Hz 
at  LEP  [3]  and  70nm  at  HERA  [4],  illustrate  the 
magnitude of uncertainty of the initial conditions. 

of 

The NLC is being designed with careful engineering 
issues.  However, 
vibration 
consideration 
stabilization requirements for the final quadrupoles are 
hard  to  predict  until  the  latest  stage  of  design. 
Therefore, rather than to build a stabilization system to 
meet  a  specific  requirement,  work  is  underway  to 
develop  general  stabilization 
to  be 
implemented at the final stage of NLC design. 

technologies 

2 STABILIZATION TECHNOLOGIES 

Beam Based Systems. The interaction of the electron 
and positron beams at the IP causes a beam deflection 
that is related to the beam offset. This allows the offset 
to be measured to a fraction of the spot size at the beam 
rate  of  120Hz.  This  beam  deflection  provides  the  only 
long-term  measure  of  the  relative  positions  of  the 
beams.   

 

 

Figure 1: Simulated effect of beam-beam feedbacks. 
 

the 

For 

A  variety  of  feedback  algorithms  can  be  used  with 
the  beam  –  beam  deflection  data,  with  the  selection 
low  frequency 
trade  off  between 
based  on 
attenuation, and high frequency amplification of noise. 
Figure  1  shows  the  simulated  effects  of  “aggressive” 
and “non-aggressive” beam feedbacks. 
the  non-aggressive 

the  noise 
attenuation  at  1Hz  is  4  times,  while  the  maximum 
amplification  is  1.3  at  10-20Hz.  For  the  aggressive 
feedback,  the  attenuation  at  1Hz  is  400  and  the 
amplification at 50-60Hz is 4 times. Feedback algorithms 
with  intermediate  performance  are  also  possible.  One 
should note that the beam-beam feedback performance 
is ideal, i.e. it does not account for BPM resolution or 
jitter of beam size. 

feedback 

Interferometer 

Very  fast  intra-train beam  –  beam  feedback  is  also 
under  consideration.  This  system  relies  on  sufficient 
bandwidth  and  low  latency  to  allow  operation  within 
the 400 nanoseconds NLC bunch train [5].  
Systems. 

Optical 
interferometers  can  be  used  to  measure  the  distance 
between  the  final  focus  magnets  and  a  fixed  point  or 
points on the ground. These “optical anchor” systems 
were  proposed  in  the  NLC  ZDR    [2]  and  are  being 
developed at the University of British Columbia [6].  

Based 

Inertial Based Systems. Inertial sensors can be used 
to measure the motion of the final quadrupoles relative 
to  the  “fixed  stars”.  At  low  frequencies  the  position 
noise  of  an  inertial  sensor  must  rise  sufficiently  slow 
and a transition to a beam based system must be made.  
A  simple  inertial  vibration  stabilization  system  has 
been  constructed  and  is  being  used  to  test  feedback 
hardware and algorithms.  

3 VIBRATION FEEDBACK TEST 
SYSTEM DESIGN 

Mechanical  Design.  An 

approximately  30kG 
aluminum block is suspended on 6 springs which define 
the 6 solid body degrees of freedom (see Figure 2).  Six 
inertial sensors are used to provide feedback signals; a 
seventh measuring vertical motion is used to evaluate 
the  feedback  performance.  Seven  actuators,  with  two 
operated in parallel, are used to control the motions of 
the block.   

 

 

Figure 2: Drawing of the test system. 
 

There  is  a  trade-off on the support spring stiffness. 
High  stiffness  springs,  which  result  in  high  normal 
mode  frequencies,  provide  relatively  low  amplitude 
motion and good stability in the absence of feedback.  
They  have 
the  disadvantage  of  coupling  high 
frequencies to the supported object, which are difficult 
to control with feedback.  

Low  stiffness  springs  allow  large  amplitude  low 
frequency  motions,  but  attenuate  high  frequencies. 
This  approach  was  chosen  for  the  test  system,  with 
normal mode frequencies in the range of 3-10Hz.  

Actuator  Design.  For  a  system  with  a  low  stiffness 
support, the actuators must also have low stiffness. In 
order  to  close  the  feedback  loop  with  high  gain,  the 
time delay of the actuators must also be short compared 
with other time constants in the system.  While piezo-
electric  actuators  are  commonly  used  for  this  type  of 
application,  it  is  difficult  for  them  to  meet  the  above 
requirements.  

We  chose  pure  electrostatic  actuators.  A  pair  of 
electrodes,  each  5x5cm,  separated  by  approximately  1 
mm,  is  used.  With  a  maximum  voltage  of  1000V,  the 
force  produced  is  approximately  0.01  Newtons  – 
sufficient  to  stabilize  the  mass  motion.  The  response 
time is limited by the high voltage amplifiers (Trek 601C) 
which have a large signal bandwidth  >  8 KHz.  

 

Sensors.  The  test  system  uses  commercial  compact 
geophones  (Geospace  HS-1)  with  a  4.5Hz  resonance 
and 
low  noise  (Analog  Devices  AD624  based) 
amplifiers. The resulting system has a (calculated) noise 
level of ~2nm/Hz1/2 at 1Hz. The geophones are sensitive 
to the velocity of a test magnet inside of a pick-up coil, 
so their sensitivity decreases as 1/f3 below resonance.  
In  the  NLC  the  final  quadrupoles  will  be  mounted 
inside the multi-Tesla detector solenoid, and will require 
non-magnetic  inertial  sensors.    In  addition,  the  noise 
level of the commercial geophones is currently limiting 
the performance of the test system.  

New  capacitive,  non-magnetic  accelerometers  are 
being developed for this project.  Electronics has been 
demonstrated  with  a  sensitivity  of  0.01nm/Hz1/2  [7]. 
Mechanical  design  of  a  sensor  is  underway.  This 
system  is  expected  to  be  a  factor  of  50  lower  noise  at 
1Hz,  and  500  lower  noise  at  0.1Hz  than  the  compact 
geophones currently in use.  

Data  Acquisition  System.  The  data  acquisition 
system is constructed from VME format hardware.  A 16 
bit 250KHz, 8 channel  A-D / D–A card (Pentek 6102)  is 
used  to  interface  with  the  sensors  and  actuators. 
Closed loop feedback is performed with a TMS320C40 
50MHz DSP (Pentek 4284) which interfaces to the A-D / 
D-A using a C40 port. This interface removes the real 
time communication from the VME backplane.  A 68040-
based  crate  controller  (Motorola  MVME167)  running 
VxWorks is used for program loading and non-realtime 
data  communications.  The  system  is  interfaced  to 
Matlab for algorithm development.  

4 TEST SYSTEM ALGORITHM 

Calibration  and  Orthogonalization.  Each  of  the  6 
actuators  is  driven  at  each  of  110  frequencies,  while 
each  of 
is  measured.  The 
measurement  frequencies  include  50  logarithmically 
spaced from 1  - 30Hz, and 10 clustered near each of the 
resonance frequencies. 

the  sensor  outputs 

A 96 parameter fit is then done to the normal mode 
frequencies  and  Qs,  sensor  frequencies  and  Qs, 
actuator  to  mode  couplings,  and  sensor  to  mode 
couplings.    Figure  3  shows  the  quality  of  the  fit.  The 
resulting  fit  is  tested  by  driving  the  combination  of 
actuators  corresponding 
to  a  single  mode,  and 
measuring the corresponding set of sensors. The lack 
of resonant peaks for the other modes indicates that the 
orthogonalization is good (Figure 4).  

Feedback algorithm.  The sensor measurements are 
converted to orthogonal modes. Then six independent 
feedback loops control vibration in each mode.   

 

The  inertial feedback largely eliminates this resonance 
(see Figure 5). 

In  order  to  evaluate  the  performance  of  the  system 
we  can  simulate  the  effect  of  beam-beam feedback on 
the  measured  output  of  the  test  sensor  (lines  with 
symbols  in  Figure  5).  One  can  see  that  in a somewhat 
quieter  place  the  aggressive  beam  feedback  would 
already  satisfy  our  requirements.  The  applicability  of 
the  aggressive  feedback  may  however  be  limited  by 
presence of uncorrelated jitter in the incoming beam.  

Further improvements of the system performance are 
expected  from  optimization  of  the  algorithm  and  in 
particular from new less noisy inertial sensors. 

Figure 3: One of 36 measured calibration curves. The fit 
is shown by green circles. 

   

 

Figure 4: Frequency response of single mode. 
Measurements (symbols) and model. 
 

The measured frequency response and noise spectral 
densities  are  used  as  inputs  to  generate  an  optimal 
feedback.  Note  that  in  the  present  system  expected 
rather  than  measured  noises  are  used,  and  identical 
mode  frequency  responses  are  assumed  in  order  to 
simplify testing. 

The  feedback  can  be  implemented  as  either  state 
space,  or  transfer  function  (ZPK).  State  space  is  more 
numerically  stable,  but  less  computationally  efficient. 
Results described are for state space running at a loop 
speed  of  500Hz    (not  believed  to  be  a  limit  on 
performance) with the gain set to 0.4 times optimal. The 
reduced gain is necessary to avoid instabilities. These 
instabilities are under study, but may be due to actuator 
saturation during system start-up.  

System Performance. The test system performance is 
measured using the test sensor that measures vertical 
motion  of  the  block.  One  should  note  that  the  test 
system  is   located  in  a  fairly  noisy  lab  environment  – 
comparable to the “HERA” site, and that the noise of 
this test sensor becomes significant below ~1Hz.  

The  suspension  of 

the  block  attenuates  high 
frequencies, but introduces a low frequency resonance. 

 
Figure 5: Integrated power spectrum showing 
performance of the test system. 

5 FUTURE PLANS 

The present system is mechanically simple, with the 
solid body normal mode frequencies of the block much 
lower than any internal resonant frequencies. When the 
operation  of  this  system  is  well  understood,  an 
elongated  structure  with  internal  mode  frequencies 
comparable to those of a real final focus magnet will be 
stabilized.  

REFERENCES 
[1] The NLC Design Group, “The Zeroth Order Design 
Report for the Next Linear Collider” SLAC-494 

[2] 2001 Report on the NLC, SLAC-R-571, 2001 
[3] V.Juravlev et al., CERN-SL-93-53, 1993 
[4] C.Montag et al., DESY HERA 95-06, 1995 
[5]  S.  Smith  “Design  of  an  NLC  Intrapulse  Feedback 

System, 2001, SLAC LCC note 0056 
[6] T.Mattison, in SLAC-WP-18, 2001, p. 567 
[7]  R.  Lansom,  “Electronics  Testing  for  Nanometer 
Vibration  Reading  on  the  Next  Linear  Collider 
program. 
summer 
Project”,  EURLF 
www.slac.stanford.edu/grp/th/eurls -sise/1999/ 

intern 

 

