What is the optimal anthropoid primate diet? 

 

Hans Dehmelt 

Department of Physics  

University of Washington  

Seattle, WA 98195  

December 3, 2001 

 

ABSTRACT           Following Socrates’ advice “You should learn all you can from 

those who know. Everyone should watch himself throughout his life, and notice 

and he should regulate them in order to enjoy good health.” Based on  

biological, chemical and physical considerations I have attempted to synthesize 

guide lines for an optimal diet from the vast literature. For an offshoot of the 

primate line it may be wise  not to stray too far from the line’s surprisingly 

uniform predominantly frugi- and herbi-vorous diet that is only lightly 

supplemented by insects, hunted small mammals, eggs, nuts etc. By dry weight 

raw wild fruit contains fats, proteins, carbohydrates, digested and undigested fiber 

in the approximate proportions 5 : 7 : 14 : 17 : 17. The fat component contains 

both essential fatty acids, about 23% linoleic and 16% alpha-linolenic, the latter 

severely lacking in Western diets. The practical problem is how to as best as 

possible, but not religiously, approximate this diet with super-market items. 

1

what sort of meat and drink and what form of exercise suit his constitution 

  Following Socrates’ advice “You should learn all you can from those who know. Everyone should watch himself throughout his life, an

GENERAL 

The current Western diet clearly presents acute problems (1, 2, 3, 4, 5) 

that cry out for answers now. When I am dying from a faulty diet even educated 
guesses now would be much preferable to waiting, for example, for the results 
of double-blind diet studies to convince me that engaging in any activities to 
which evolution has not adapted me is risky business. Likewise, discovering 
previously overlooked physical, chemical and biological connections between 
food-related data appears of great value.  

 

EVOLUTION & MODEL DIET 

 
Adaptation by natural selection of random mutations is an imperfect very 

gradual process requiring very many generations to become effective. How far 
back in time must we go to find the ancient forbears that still were well adapted to 
their slowly changing environment? Changes in the basic body design of an 
established line of large mammals by environmental influences appear  a near-
impossibility. With the accelerating development of more and more tools and 
survival strategies there must have come a point when Homo x’s changes of and to 
the environment outran evolution. It follows that at least since the beginnings of 
agriculture the populations of the industrialized countries can only have become 
more and more poorly adapted to their environment and are suffering the 
consequences. Our closest near-human relatives, chimpanzees, are ripe fruit 
specialists (5, 6); only when that is not available do they fall back on other diets. 
Because of that for simplicity we take the ripe fruit data in Table III of reference 7  
(7, 8) as characterizing the anthropoid  model diet. According to Fig.10 of 
reference 7 chimps feed four times as long on wild fruits and seeds as on leaves  
and pith combined and perhaps 5%  of total feeding time on hunted small 
mammal prey, nuts, eggs, termites, etc. Averaged over annual variations by weight 
the principal ripe wild fruit component of their diet provides about 4.9 part fat 
(lipid), 9.5 parts crude protein (CP), 13.9 parts water soluble carbohydrates (WSC), 
33.6 parts neutral detergent fiber (NDF). The chimps are able to digest the neutral 
detergent fiber (carbohydrate) in part (9, 10) :  ~50% of  NDF are transformed 
into short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) by hindgut fermentation and digested with an 
energy yield presumably similar to WSC. As suggested in references (11, 9) the CP 
value given above  must be reduced to 6.7 parts and the (effective) WSC value 
must  be increased to 30.7 parts. Accordingly, food energy would be derived from 
fat, protein, carbohydrate approximately in the ratio 11 : 6.7 : 30.7 =  455 cal : 280 
cal : 1270 cal for a 2000 calorie diet from 51 g fat, 70 g protein and 320 g 
carbohydrate including digested fiber. Interestingly the175 g intermediate digesta 
SCFA,  mostly acetic, proprionic and butyric acids (10), will have to be neutralized 

2

 

by the potassium and sodium of the food and form neutral soaps. Thus, 
presumably, the resulting soap solution daily will rinse out the hindgut and its 
circulatory system and assist in the emulsification of dietary fat. Surprisingly, this 
diet is very close in composition to that eaten by 3 small monkey species (7) living 
in the same African forest and wild howler monkeys (5) in Panama. The 
predominant fats (5) in the wild foods eaten by the Howler monkeys have been 
studied. They form a liquid mixture of oils and fats containing in various 
combinations 30%  palmitic, 23%  linoleic, 16% alpha linolenic, 15% oleic and 
16% other fatty acids. All percentage values of food components listed are likely to 
be close to optimal for the primate body. Nevertheless, especially in man they 
exhibit great elasticity in the existence modes of Eskimos and starving human 
populations. The mathematical nature of optima suggests that they are uncritical. 
One might guess that over a range of a factor 2 smaller or  larger deviations will not 
do any damage. Factors of 10 are another story. Choosing to go to chimpanzees 
for an appropriate model diet appears much less extreme in the light of the 
presumably much larger genetic difference between chimpanzees and monkeys and 
their nevertheless similar diets. On the contrary, humans should ask themselves 
how wise it is to deviate widely from a diet on which the primate line has flourished 
for many tens of millions of years and produced them.  

THE FAT-WATER PROBLEMATIC 

In the huge cell-state forming the human body the cells generate the energy 

for life by a low-temperature burn of foodstuffs fed to them by the blood 
circulating through nearby capillaries. To feed each individual cell the necessary 
oxygen and bite-sized food stuffs clearly creates terrifying supply and waste 
removal problems. The transport of fats or their components from the gut to the 
cells is made especially difficult as fat and water do not mix while amino acids 
and simple sugars do. The body solves the problem as well as it can in a similar 
way as fat stains in laundry are dissolved by soapy water. It emulsifies the liquid 
fat with the help of amphiphilic molecules that clad in a monolayer tiny < 0.1 
mm-sized droplets of fat. These fragile packages (12) are then able to circulate 
in the blood through arteries, veins and, more or less, the capillaries. Thus, 
especially in regard to fats it appears wise not to deviate too much from the 
ancestral primate diet spelled out above. The respective melting points of the 
acids are: 63, -5, -11, 16 Centigrade. This demonstrates that the primate body 
can handle a fatty acid with a melting point considerably higher than its own 
normal temperature, at least when dissolved in the liquid ones and/or bound in 
oils/fats. Fatty acids with less than 16 or more than 18 carbon chains are 

3

uncommon (range 0 to 7%). Saturated and unsaturated fatty acids are almost 
equally balanced. The low melting points of the unsaturated fatty acids are 
associated  with up to three kinks in their hydrocarbon chains that make it 
difficult for the weak intermolecular forces to form crystals and thus are 
presumably carried over to the fats containing them. The chimp body fat will 
presumably be a liquid mixture of fats and oils composed of various 
combinations of the above fatty acids in similar (13) overall proportions as in 
the diet. For a dietary fat mixture with a much higher melting point and of 
correspondingly higher viscosity on the other hand clogging up of arteries or 
capillaries might result. Mammary gland tissue is doubly challenged by the fat-
water problematic as it has to produce the mother’s milk. A recent study (14) 
shows that the average American gets 27 percent of his total daily energy from 
junk foods and an additional 4 percent from alcoholic beverages. The most 
conspicuous deficiency in his and all Western diets including that recommended 
by the “Food Pyramid” appears to be that of alpha-linolenic acid, one of the two 
fatty acids essential for life and one amply provided in the chimp diet (5). While 
rats can synthesize vitamin C the ancestors of primates lost this ability long ago. 
The vitamin is now “essential” for human life because in the past evolutionary 
history of primates there remained no need for such synthesis. Their arboreal  
environment provided it in abundance and, obviously, primates are very well 
adapted to this environment. In an analogous scenario presumably all animals 
very much earlier lost the ability to synthesize the two fatty acids essential for 
life when about 0.4 billion years ago the multicellular organisms branched into 
the passive dominant plant line and the mobile parasitic animal line of 
negligible biomass while the abundant vegetation continued to provided the 
animal line with ease. That in all this time no mutation was ever able to re-equip 
the animal body with the lost faculty underlines the utmost importance of these 
fatty acids to the primate body. Besides by their essential roles as cell 
constituents much of this importance may be explainable by low melting points 
and high fluidity of the oils built from them that “oil” the circulation by 
dissolving stoppages. By the same token the preponderance of low melting 
point poly-unsaturated fatty acids in cold water fish is unlikely to be an accident. 

CORRECTION EXAMPLES 

 

In a practical approach to an improved diet one might begin by identifying  

the largest, most damaging deviations from the model and then to attempt to loosely 
approximate the model diet with super-market items in the light of  the above 
obvious great elasticity. To the author the sorest spots appear to be wrong dietary 
fat, much too low fiber and too much cane/beet sugar. Average persons having 
lived for decades according to the “Food Guide Pyramid”, the misguided 

4

propaganda promoting hydrogenated fats or possibly on 30% junk food (14) 
might quickly bring the composition of their ~20 kg of body fat in  line with that 
of the primate relatives. As in other mammals their depot fatty acid profile (13) 
is likely to closely resemble that of their diet and contain very little alpha-
linolenic acid (ALA). From the above chimp data (5) one estimates a 16 %  fat 
component of (ALA) as desirable. There is ~60 % ALA in flaxseed oil. Thus, 
quickly gaining the about 3 kg of  the corresponding ALA based body fat 
component might be attempted  – compare reference (15) -, by simultaneously 
consuming with approximately 5 kg of  Flaxseed oil 7 kg of protein and 31 kg 
carbohydrates nearly as intermixed as in the fruits of the Primate diet and as 
much fiber as feasible. Obviously the equivalent ~ (45+28+124) thousand kcal 
will have to be spread over ~100 days  for a total of ~2000 kcal/day and boil 
down to about 50 g flaxseed oil, 70 g protein and 300 g carbohydrates per day. 
In connection with this program the following is of interest: For centuries, 
empirical folk healing arts in Germany have been combating apparent ALA 
deficiency symptoms along similar lines with considerable success with 
flaxseed oil – cottage cheese mixture “wonder cures” (16).  Beginning  with 
Justus von Liebig leading biochemists later demonstrated the synergy of seed 
oils and proteins in the human body. More recently, since the 1950ties Johanna 
Budwig, pharmacologist and practitioner of natural healing arts has published 
early research on polyunsaturated oils (17) and an oil-protein diet cook book 
(15), see also reference (18). In the maintenance diet, after the initial high alpha-
linolenic pulse, one may want to adjust the fatty acid profile to 30% palmitic, 
23% linoleic, 16% alpha linolenic, 15% oleic (and 16% others) and continue to 
attempt to loosely approximate  the model ancestral fat, protein, carbohydrate, 
digested and undigested fiber  5 : 7 : 14 : 17 : 17 weight ratios in wild fruit. 
Unfortunately,  in cultivated fruit, for example a mango, they are very different, 
0.45 : 0.45 : 12 : 1.7 : ~0 grams in 100 g of fruit pulp, and would have to be 
supplemented. Raw vegetables, nuts, eggs, a little wild deer meat, baked 
potatoes (19) and unprocessed oils may do the job. 

 

Nancy Lou Conklin and Kevin Hunt reviewed the manuscript and offered 
valuable comments. Katharine Milton kindly reviewed parts of the MS. My wife 
Diana read the MS and made valuable suggestions. The work was supported in 
part by Boeing  funds.  

                                                                            

  1Holman, Ralph T. (1997) in Handbook of Essential Fatty Acid Biology: Biochemistry, 
Physiology, and Behavioral Neurobiology (Yehuda, S. & Mostofsky, D. eds.) Humana 
Press, Totawa, N.J. pp. 139-182. 

5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
2 Price, Weston A. (c1945) Nutrition and Physical Degeneration (P. B. Hoeber, Inc., 
New York, London) 
3 Rudin, D. O. (1982) The dominant diseases of modernized societies as 
omega-3 essential fatty acid deficiency syndrome Medical Hypotheses 8,17-47 

4  Rudin, D. O. and Felix, C. (1987) The Omega-3 Phenomenon  (Rawson 
Associates, New York) 

5 Milton, K. (1999) Nutritional characteristics of wild Primate foods: Do the 
natural diets of our closest living relatives have lessons for us? Nutrition 15, 
488-498. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 Wrangham, R. W., N. L. Conklin-Brittain, and K. D. Hunt, 1998. Dietary  

response of chimpanzees and cercopithecines to seasonal variation in fruit 

  abundance: 1. Antifeedants. Int. J. Primatol. 19:949-970 

 

7Conklin-Brittain, N. L., R. W. Wrangham, and K. D. Hunt, 1998. Dietary   
response of chimpanzees and cercopithecines to seasonal variation in fruit 
abundance: 11. Nutrients. Int. J. Primatol. 19:971-987.  

8 Wrangham RW, Conklin NL, Chapman CA, et al. (1991)The significance of 
fibrous foods for Kibale Forest chimpanzees Phil Trans Royal Soc Lond  334, 
171-178 

 
   9 K. Milton and M. Demment  (1988) Digestive and passage kinetics of 

chimpanzees fed high and low fiber diets and comparison with human data J 
Nutr 118, 1082-1088 

10 Topping, D. L. & Clifton, M. P. (2001) Short-Chain Fatty Acids and 

HumanColonic Function Physiological Reviews  81, 1031-1064 

 

 

 

6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

 

 

 

 

11 Milton, K & Dintzis, F. (1981) Biotropica 13, 177-181 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  12 H. Ti Tien and Angelica L. Ottova (2001) The lipid bilayer concept and its 
experimental realization: from soap bubbles, kitchen sink, to bilayer lipid 
membranes Journal of Membrane Science 189, 83-117 

  13 Javier S. Perona et al. (2000) Influence of different dietary fats on 

triacylglycerol deposition in rat adipose tissue British Journal of Nutrition 84, 765-
774 

   14 Ashima K Kant (2000) Consumption of energy-dense, nutrient-poor foods 
by adult Americans: nutritional and health implications. American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition 72, 929-936 

   15 Budwig, J. (1994) The oil-protein diet cookbook (Apple Publishing Co., 

Vancouver, BC) 

     

 

 

 

 

 

16 Hell, C. (2000) Natur & Heilen   May  pp. 18-24 

 

 

 

 

17 Biology of fats. V. Paper chromatography of blood lipids, the cancer 

problem and fat research. Kaufmann, H. P. & Budwig, J.  (1952) Fette u. 

Seifen 54, 156-65. (Translation available from CAS) 

18 A. P. Simopoulos and J. Robinson (1999) The Omega Diet  (HarperPerennial) 

19 Hatley T, and J Kappelman (1980): Bears, pigs, and plio-pleistocene 
hominids: a case for the exploitation of belowground food resources Human 
Ecol. 8, 371-387 

7

