FRBT003 

The Bunch Injection Controller for the PEP-II Storage Rings 
 
R. Chestnut, A. Fisher, SLAC, Stanford, CA 94025, USA 

 

.  

 

Abstract 

is 

implemented 

The  PEP-II  storage  rings  at  SLAC  each  have  3492 
’buckets’  into  which  electrons  and  positrons  can  be 
injected into the high- and low-energy rings. Equipment 
to  measure  the  currents  of  all  the  individual  buckets 
was  originally  provided  by  the  Lawrence  Berkeley 
Laboratory  and 
in  VXI-based 
hardware.  Data  from  this  equipment  as  well  as  high 
precision  direct  current  measurement  provide  the  hard 
data for the Bunch Injection Controller. A large number 
of  parameters  determined  by 
injection  design 
considerations  as  well  as set by operators for different 
circumstances are also used by the software algorithms 
to  determine  the  desired  bucket  injection  order  and 
charge quantity for each injection pulse. These requests 
are  then  passed  on  to  the  venerable  SLAC  master 
pattern  generator,  which  provides  beams  for  other 
applications  as  well.  This  highly  visible  and  highly 
successful  system  is  implemented  using  the  EPICS 
toolkit,  and 
the  merged  SLAC 
EPICS/SLC  control  system.  The  Bunch  Injection 
Controller  hardware  is  a  VME-based  EPICS  IOC, 
which  makes  extensive  use  of  shared  memory  for 
communicating  with  the  VXI  measurement  equipment 
and the SLAC master pattern generator. 

fits  well 

into 

1 PEP-II INJECTION REQUIREMENTS 

The individual 3492 “buckets” in each ring circulate 
at a frequency of about 136 kHz, and are separated by 
2.1 nanoseconds. The SLAC Linac can inject into both 
rings  at  30Hz  simultaneously  or  one  ring  at  60Hz. 
There  are  four  “quanta”  or  injection  chunks  selectable 
for  each  individual  injection  request.  The  largest  is 
about  10^10  particles,  corresponding  to  an  increase  in 
current of about 218 microamperes; smaller quanta are 
approximately 2/3 of the next larger.  

The most important constraints on injection are: 
•  Allow arbitrary fill patterns. 
•  Observe  the  bunch  damping  times  of  35ms 
(LER) and 60ms (HER) when considering where 
to inject next.   

•  Fill  each  bucket  to  within  2%  of  the  requested 

amount where possible. 

•  Fill the rings as evenly as possible. 
•  NEVER overfill a bucket. 

 

2 PRE-EXISTING HARDWARE 

2.1 Bunch-by-Bunch Current Monitor 
(BxBCM) 

LBL  was  in  the  process  of  implementing  hardware 
when the injection requirements were under discussion. 
The BxBCM implementation consists of analog down-
converters  (by  Jim  Hinckson)  and  a  set  of  VXI-based 
multiplexers  and  8-bit  fast  ADCs,  controlled  by a PC-
based  slot-0  controller  running  NT  (by  Mike  Chin). 
Each  ring  has  its  own  analog  and  VXI  support.  This 
equipment  digitizes  signals  for  each  bucket  250  times 
each 1/60 second. The NT-based software prepares one 
second  sums  for  each  bucket.  There  is,  additionally, 
control and read-out of attenuations and crate health.  
 

2.2 Direct Current Current Transformer 
(DCCT) 

For  each  ring  the  pre-existing  DCCT  provides  a 
stable voltage derived from the total ring current. These 
voltages are each digitized twice a second by individual 
Keithley 2002 Digital Volt Meters.   

2.3 Master Pattern Generator (MPG) 

The  MPG 

iRMX-based 
is  a  well-established 
machine, which has been running the SLAC beams for 
two  decades.  Since  a  secondary  requirement  foresees 
interleaved  operation  between  PEP-II  injection  and 
other  linac  operations,  the  injection  implementation 
needed to fit seamlessly into the old system. 

 

 

Figure 1: Cartoon of Bunch Injection Controller Interfaces 

3 IMPLEMENTATION 

to 

implement 

We  chose 

the  Bunch  Injection 
Controller  (BIC)  as  an  EPICS  VME-based  IOC  using 
shared  memory  to  communicate  with  the  pre-existing 
computers  and  GPIB  for  the  Kiethley  DVM  readout. 
The first SLAC EPICS project, PEP-II RF control, had 
been  very  successful  and  we  were  enthusiastic  about 
further  use  of  EPICS.  The  BIT-3  shared  memory 
provides access with the lowest degree of coupling and 
fewest  software  and  hardware  changes  to  the  pre-
existing  subsystems.  The  dual-port  RAM  itself  is 
resident  in  the  two  BxBCM  VXI  crates  and  in  the 
SLAC  MPG  so  that  these  systems  continue  to  run 
independently  of  the  BIC,  the  new  system  under 
development.  

3.1 Bunch Current Monitor BIT-3 Interface 

Each  BIT-3  memory  is  partitioned  into  a  small 
control segment, a small diagnostic read-back segment, 
and a large data array segment. Pre- and post-data array 
update  counters  are  used  to  guarantee  that  the  BIC 
reads  consistent  data.  These  counters  also  serve  as  a 
heartbeat. There is no other synchronization. 

3.2 Master Pattern Generator BIT-3 Interface 

The  BIT-3  memory  is  dedicated  to  two  small  ring 
buffers.  One  contains  request  information  written  by 
the BIC for the MPG and the other contains responses 
and  status  from  the  MPG  for  the  BIC.    Both  the  BIC 
and MPG code require no synchronization. 

 

 BIC=> MPG requests 
 

Index  Quantum  Bucket 

Delta Q 

 

 

The Delta Q is actually filled in later, by comparing 
the  stable  bucket  current  before  injection  with  stable 
current after injection. This incremental charge is used 
to  maintain  a  dynamic  calibration  of  the  injection 
quanta.  

MPG => BIC responses 
 
Pulse-ID 

Index 

Status 

 
The  Pulse-ID  in  the  MPG  response  is  used  by 
monitor  code  in  conjunction  with  Pulse-ID-tagged 
Toroid  measurements 
lines  for 
efficiency calculations. 

injection 

the 

in 

3.3 Kiethley DVM GPIB interface 

One GPIB controller serves both the LER and HER 
Digital  Volt  Meters.  The  DCCT 
signals  are 
preprocessed so that 5 Volts corresponds to 10 Ampere 
in the ring. Each DVM is read out at 2 Hz. The dI/dT 
calculations  are  done  in  software  in  lieu  of  reading 
those data from the DVMs as well. This read-out is not 
synchronized to the bucket-by-bucket information. The 
time stamp from the DVM is used only for diagnostics.  

 

 

4 BUNCH CURRENT PROCESSING  

4.1 Hardware Processing 

The signal from the beam pick-off is mixed with an 
RF  carrier  to  form  two  periods  of  an  amplitude 
modulated  (approximate)  sine  wave.  Two  “decimator” 
modules  alternate  between  the  even  and  odd  buckets 
each  turn,  feeding  the  data  into  fast 8-bit ADCs. Each 
of  the  3492  individual  buckets  is  digitized  250  times 

each  1/60  second.  The  data  are  then  copied  from  the 
VXI  module  into  the  Slot-0  Controller  computer 
memory.  After  every  data  accumulation,  the  phase  of 
the incoming signal is shifted 90 degrees.   

4.2 Software Processing 

The  computer  code  accumulates  two  3492  bucket 
arrays, one containing 0 degree data minus 180 degree 
data,  the  other  containing  (90-270)  degree  data.  This 
subtraction removes the background and provides clean 
“sine”  and  “cosine”  phase  data.  Each  second,  after 
taking  15  samples  at  each  phase, 
the  data  are 
transferred  to  the  shared  memory,  where  the  BIC  can 
access the two arrays.  

In  the  BIC,  these  data  are  used  to  generate  the 
amplitudes  and  phases  of  each  bucket.    Since  the 
hardware phase shifter does not shift a true 90 degrees, 
to first order the actual amplitude is given by:   
 

Amplitude=sqrt(S*S+C*C-2*S*C*delta), 

Where  delta  is  the  average  deviation  of  the  phase 
shifter from 90 degrees, S is the “sine” value, and C the 
“cosine”  value.  This  correction  provides  a  wide  flat 
region  where  the  amplitude  is  insensitive  to  the  phase 
setting.  The  value  of  delta  is  calculated  by  measuring 
S, C, and amplitude over a range of phase settings and 
finding a delta that provides the widest flat response. 

These  data  are  then  normalized  to  the  total  ring 
current  and  the  resulting  array  of  microampere  per 
bucket is used in subsequent processing. 

 

 

4.3 Filling Algorithm 

total  desired 

The fill goal is specified by a pattern description and 
the 
ring  current.  Simple  pattern 
descriptions  can  be  typed  directly  into  a  control 
variable, or complex patterns can be entered into a data 
file,  pointed  to  by  the  control  variable.  The  pattern 
“language”  provides  shortcuts  for  specifying  whole 
ranges  of  buckets  and  for  easily  specifying  a  “ramp”, 
where  the  desired  fill  value  increases  smoothly  over  a 
range  of  buckets.  Combining  the  pattern  and  total 
desired  ring  current  creates  an  array  of  desired  bucket 
currents (microampere). 

There  are  four  different  injection  chunks  (quanta) 
available for injection into each ring, each about 2/3 of 
the next larger. These allow for fast bulk injection and 
“fine tuning” near the end. 

To  provide  a  smooth  fill,  intermediate  goals  of  1.2, 
2.2,  etc.  times  the  value  of  the  largest  quanta  are 
generated  in  turn  as  the  previous  intermediate  goal  is 
filled. Only the largest quanta are used in this phase. At 
the  end  of  filling, when using the true goal, all quanta 
are considered. 

A  candidate  bucket  is  checked  to  verify  that  an 
injection  will  not  overfill.  If  a  candidate  qualifies,  a 
request  is  placed  on  the  queue  to  the  Master  Pattern 
Generator  (MPG).  The  next  bucket  considered  is  at 
least  197  buckets  distant,  so  that  the  newly  injected 
bucket has time to damp to the nominal beam size. If a 
candidate  does  not  qualify,  the next adjacent bucket is 
considered.  Each  second  only  sufficient  requests  are 
made to the MPG queue so that the MPG is never idle. 
Right near the end of filling, spacers are often inserted 
in the queue to avoid filling buckets too closely spaced. 
This  approach  is  very  successful  in  filling  empty 
rings, topping off, and in filling with many “drop outs”, 
i.e.  buckets  which  lose  disproportionately  high  current 
due to tune or beam-beam interaction problems. 

4.4 Efficiencies and Calibration 

The four individual injection quanta are dynamically 
calibrated  by  observing  the  change  in  current  for  each 
satisfied injection request. Each measurement is passed 
through an anomalous value filter and used as input for 
a  simple  smoothing  function.  Further,  the  injection 
efficiency  is  calculated  by  comparing  injection  line 
toroid  measurements 
to  measured  bucket  current 
increases,  using  the  MPG  Linac  pulse-id  as  the 
correlator,  as  described  above.  The  numerology 
describing  the  Linac  damping  rings  and  PEP-II  ring 
result in a difference of four buckets for each damping 
ring  turn.  For  a  difference  of  fewer  than  four  buckets, 
the Linac is rephased. Therefore injection efficiency is 
separately  calculated  for  each  bucket  number  modulo 
four. 
 
4.5 Control Interface and Displays 
 
Injection  is  controlled  through  a    standard  EPICS 
Display Manager control interface. Detailed and expert 
panels are available as a tree descending from the main 
panel. There are some standard control room overhead 
displays  of  daily  luminosity  and  currents  as  well  as 
expanded currents and lifetimes for the last twenty and 
two minutes. The most useful for filling, however, is a 
display of actual bucket currents normalized to the goal 
currents.    After  a  successful  fill,  all  visible  points 
cluster near a value of unity. Buckets not represented in 
the  goal  pattern  are  not  visible,  unless  they  actually 
have  some  current,  in  which  case  those  buckets  have 
the  value  1.2,  noticeably  above  the  normal  fill.  Thus 
timing  problems,  resulting in filling the wrong bucket, 
are easily visible. 

 
 
 
 
 

5 EXPERIENCES AND PROBLEMS 

This system was ready at first beam in PEP-II and 
commissioned soon thereafter. Three distinct types of 
problems were noted: 

1)  GPIB malfunction – multiplexing one digital 
voltmeter for both rings caused many 
deadlocks. We now use two digital voltmeters. 
2)  Bad cables – loose or intermittent BIT-3 cables 

caused difficult problems. 

3)  Timing shifts – by far the most frequent 

problem. Evolving diagnostic displays now 
enable quick operational response. 

 
As we have solved problems, the symptoms, diagnostic 
method, and solutions have been added to help pages 
on the web. Operations personnel now routinely 
diagnose complex injection problems on their own. 
 
 

REFERENCES 
[1]  V. Bharadwaj et al., “PEP-II Injection Timing and 
Controls”, SLAC-PUB-7600, Jul 1997. Talk given 
at 17th IEEE Particle Accelerator Conference (PAC 
97), Vancouver, Canada, 12-16 May 1997. 

 
 
[2]  Gregory  A.  Lowe,  “Flexibility  of  the  PEP-II 
Injection Scheme”, SLAC-PEP-II-AP-NOTE-3-94, 
Feb 1994. 

 
[3]  Fieguth,  et  al.,  “Injection  System  for  the  PEP-II 
Asymmetric  B  Factory  at  SLAC”,  SLAC-PUB-
5775,  Mar  1992.  Also  Berlin  1992,  Proceedings, 
EPAC92, vol. 2 pp. 1443-1445, presented at the 3rd 
European  Particle  Accelerator Conference, Berlin, 
Germany, Mar 24-28, 1992. 

 

