 

 

WECI001 

 
ORBIT FEEDBACK USING X-RAY BEAM POSITION MONITORING  
AT THE ADVANCED PHOTON SOURCE 
 
Glenn Decker, Om Singh, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439, USA 
 

Abstract 

The  Advanced  Photon  Source 

(APS)  was 
commissioned  in  1995  as  a  third-generation  x-ray user 
facility.    At  that  time  orbit  control  was  performed 
exclusively  with  broadband  rf  beam  position  monitors 
(BPMs).    Since  then,  emphasis  has  been  placed  on 
incorporating  x-ray  beam  position  monitors  into  the 
orbit  control  algorithms.    This  has  resulted in an order 
of  magnitude  improvement  in  long-term beam stability 
vertically,  using  x-ray  BPMs  (X-BPMs)  on  bending 
magnet  beamlines.    Additional  processing  will  allow 
similar  improvements  horizontally,  once  systematic 
effects associated with variable insertion device (ID) x-
ray beams are properly compensated.  Progress to date 
and upgrade plans will be presented, with an emphasis on 
the details of the required digital signal processing. 

1 INTRODUCTION 

The  APS  is  an  x-ray  synchrotron  radiation  user 
facility based on a 7-GeV electron storage ring.  Highly 
collimated  synchrotron  radiation  x-rays  are  emitted 
from  the  electron  beam  as  it  traverses  bending  magnet 
and  IDs.    A  primary  performance  measure  is  the 
allowable amount of particle beam motion (and thus x-
ray beam motion).   

Table 1: APS Beam Stability Specification 

 

Initial Design Values 
Low Emittance / 
1% Coupling Values 

Horizontal 
(rms) 
17 microns 
12.6 microns / 
900 nanorad. 

Vertical    
(rms) 
4.5 microns 
0.59 microns / 
120 nanorad.  

 

 

is 

indicated. 

Shown in Table 1 are beam stability specifications for 
the APS.  As originally stated in the APS initial design 
circa  1991,  they  are  incomplete  insofar  as  no  explicit 
angular pointing stability specification is given.  Further, 
both  the  initial  values  and  the  present  low-emittance 
values are incomplete since no frequency band or time 
low-emittance  mode  of 
scale 
operation  has  smaller  horizontal  and  vertical  particle 
beam  sizes  in  comparison  to  the  initial  design.    The 
values  in  Table  1  are  generally  understood to apply to 
frequencies up to 30 Hz and down as low as reasonably 
achievable.  Typically, APS users are most interested in 
beam  position  drifts  over  minutes  to  hours,  fill-to-fill 
reproducibility 
run-to-run 
reproducibility  (months).    To get an idea of scale, 100 

hours), 

  The 

and 

(24 

nanoradians  is  the  angle  subtended  by  an  object  1  mm 
high, observed from a distance of 10 kilometers. 

2 SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 

include  360  broadband 

Excellent  descriptions  of  the  APS  orbit  correction 
systems  are  available  in  the  literature  [1,2,3,4].    Key 
rf  BPMs,  48 
elements 
narrowband  rf  BPMs,  38  bending  magnet  x-ray  BPMs 
and  48  ID  x-ray  BPMs.    Data  from  these  monitors  is 
used to control up to 317 combined-function horizontal/ 
vertical  corrector  magnets.    Of  the  317  correctors,  38 
are  mounted  on  thin-walled  vacuum  spool  pieces 
allowing,  in  principle,  correction  bandwidth  up  to  200 
Hz.  The balance of the correctors is otherwise identical, 
but mounted around the standard thick-walled aluminum 
vacuum  chamber.    Eddy  currents  in  the  aluminum limit 
their bandwidth to less than 10 Hz. 

X-ray BPMs are constructed of metallized, chemical-
vapor-deposited (CVD) diamond wafers placed edge on 
to  the  x-ray beam [5].  Photocurrents are measured for 
blades  placed  above  and  below  the  beam  for  bending 
magnet beams and arrayed symmetrically in sets of four 
for collimated ID beams (Figure 1). 

Figure 1. APS insertion device X-BPM geometry. 

A  pair  of  x-ray  BPMs  is  mounted  just  inside  the 
accelerator  enclosure  in  each  beamline  “front  end,” 
connecting  the  accelerator  vacuum  to  the  beamline 
located outside of the enclosure, on the experiment hall 
floor.    Each  x-ray  BPM  is  mounted  on  an  X-Y 
translation  stage  with  resolution  better  than  1  micron 
and better than 10-micron reproducibility.  Software that 
uses  these  translation  stages  for  convenient  device 
calibration  is  in  place.    Two  portable  translation  stage 
IOC  crates  have  been  developed 
for  periodic 
calibrations  and  maintenance.    Data  acquisition  for  the 

 
x-ray  BPM  photocurrent  signals  has  recently  been 
completed for all installed units [1]. 

Data  acquisition  for  the  broadband  rf  BPMs  takes 
place  in  customized  VXI  modules  with  simple  boxcar 
averagers  generating  EPICS  process  variable  (PV) 
values.    A  separate  fiber  optic  communications  link 
provides data to the real-time feedback system residing 
in a nearby VME input/output controller (IOC) crate (21 
total).    For  the  narrowband  rf  and  x-ray  BPMs,  a 
dedicated 32-channel, 16-bit analog-to-digital converter 
(ADC) resides in the local real-time feedback IOC crate.  
Also  included  in  the  real-time feedback crates are two 
Pentek  4284  digital  signal  processing  (DSP)  modules, 
one Pentek 4283 DSP, a VMIC 5588 reflective memory 
module  to  provide  real-time  data  transfer  between 
crates,  a  12-bit ADC for tracking auxiliary BPM status 
information,  and  an  MVME  167  IOC  module  using  a 
Motorola  68040  central  processing  unit  (CPU).    Also 
included is a power supply interface module for the real-
time system. 

Two  of  the  DSPs  in  each  real-time  feedback  crate 
perform the matrix multiplication operations connecting 
up  to  160  broadband  rf  BPM  readbacks  to  two  local 
corrector  power  supplies,  one  horizontal  and  one 
vertical, at a 1.5-kHz rate.  The third DSP is dedicated to 
processing data from the 16-bit ADC.  Functions include 
digital filtering of position signals from the narrow-band 
rf  BPMs,  and  computation  and  filtering  of  position 
signals from raw x-ray BPM blade photocurrent signals.  
Data  is  transferred  to  the  vertical  real-time  feedback 
DSP  and  broadcast  around  the  facility  through  the 
reflective memory network. This same data is deposited 
in dual-port RAM for transfer to the EPICS IOC module.  
Further  filtering  is  performed  in  the  IOC  to  provide 
pretty  well  de-aliased,  approximately  1-Hz  bandwidth 
signals as EPICS process variables. 

A  total  of  21  real-time  feedback  IOC  crates  are 
located around the APS storage ring circumference, all 
connected by the reflective memory network (Figure 2).  
Each of 20 “slave” crates provides coverage for two APS 
sectors.  The twenty-first crate has additional processing 
and  provides  supervisory  and  diagnostic  support, 
including a forty-channel virtual oscilloscope, which can 
monitor  any  of  the  signals  accessible  on  the  reflective 
memory.    This  crate  also  provides  process  variables 
indicating  total  rms  beam  motion  averaged  over  a 
maximum  of  80  locations.    These  values  are  logged 
every 60 seconds and can be compared to the values in 
Table  1  to  verify  compliance  with  beam  stability 
requirements. 

A twenty-second crate has recently been added to the 
reflective  memory  network,  known  as  the  “data  pool” 
IOC.  Its purpose is ultimately to replace the “DC” orbit 
correction  software 
the 
workstation  level  with  a  2.5-second  update  rate.    The 
real-time feedback system is limited in flexibility owing 

that  presently 

runs  at 

to  the  160  by  38  feedback  matrix  size,  and  therefore 
explicitly avoids correcting DC orbit motion by using a 
0.1-Hz high-pass filter.  The workstation-based software 
in  principle  corrects  everything  up  to  this  0.1-Hz 
frequency,  but  in  practice,  a  “dead  band”  at  0.1  Hz  is 
seen.    This  is  very  unfortunate,  since  transient  effects 
caused, for example, by ID gap closures, can persist for 
tens of seconds and have tens of microns in amplitude.  
The transients have been reduced somewhat by sending 
information  from  the  DC  algorithm  to  the  real-time 
system [6]. 

Figure 2. Layout of real-time feedback systems. 

To  remove  the  source  of  the  transient,  an  ID  gap 
feedforward solution for this has been tested using the 
workstation-based software.  Unfortunately, because the 
convergence  time  is  so  slow,  the  generation  of  the 
feedforward lookup tables is extremely time consuming 
in  addition  to  being  subject  to  longer  time  scale 
systematic errors.  By pooling all BPM data in a single 
IOC and running the present workstation-based software 
on that IOC, we hope to be able to speed up the DC orbit 
correction algorithm from 0.4 Hz to 50 or even 100 Hz.  
Feedforward  algorithms  need  not  run  on  this  IOC, 
however  the  elimination  of  the  0.1-Hz  dead  band  is 
essential  to  the  determination  of  lookup  tables  for  the 
dozens  of  IDs 
the  APS  accelerator 
enclosure. 

installed 

in 

3 PERFORMANCE 

to  a 

large  extent  by 

As with any system of this complexity, performance 
is  controlled 
the  system 
configuration.    A  Tcl  application  is  provided  for  this 
purpose,  written  by  the  APS  operations  analysis  group 
[7].    This  tool  allows  for  the  selection  of  arbitrary 
BPMs,  correctors,  and  BPM  weights,  and  allows  for 
different accelerator configurations (e.g., low emittance 
vs. standard quadrupole and sextupole magnet settings).  
The tool uses a singular value decomposition algorithm 
to 
the  BPM/corrector  response  matrix  (if 
possible),  giving  the  option  of  limiting  the  number  of 
eigenvalues.  Once an inverse response matrix (IRM) is 

invert 

 
available,  a  separate  workstation-based  Tcl  application 
called  controllaw  uses  the  IRM  to  perform  the  actual 
orbit  correction. 
  Options  like  update  rate,  gain, 
despiking, etc. are available with this application at run 
time. 

Typical  “flavors”  of  orbit  correction  can  roughly  be 
categorized  as  being  either  global  or  local.    Local 
correction typically involves a high density of steering 
correctors  straddling  an  x-ray  source  point,  allowing 
independent control of displacement and angle, without 
interfering with the steering of nearby beamlines.  While 
allowing  a  high  degree  of  flexibility,  local steering has 
the  disadvantage  of  requiring  relatively  large  corrector 
changes  (Amps)  for  each  unit  of  steering  (microns  or 
microradians).  During normal operation, local steering 
is generally only performed on demand from a particular 
beamline. 

For  standard operation, once local beamline steering 
is  complete,  a  “global”  algorithm  using  many  more 
BPMs than correctors is used.  This has the advantage of 
a  large  corrector  “lever  arm,”  in  addition  to  being 
relatively  insensitive  to  systematic  errors  affecting any 
individual BPM.  In effect, a smooth curve is arrived at 
providing the best fit to the available BPM data.  At the 
APS  generally  two  correctors  are  used  in  each  of  the 
forty  sectors.    For  the  horizontal  plane,  only  rf  BPMs 
in  use  (ID  x-ray  BPMs  await  the 
are  presently 
availability  of  the  data  pool  IOC  and  feedforward).    As 
many BPMs as possible are used.  In the vertical plane, 
the  broadband  rf  BPMs  exhibit  a  hypersensitivity  to 
bunch  fill  pattern  [8]  and  are  not  used  during  top-up 
operation  (injection  every  two  minutes  with  shutters 
open).    Use  of  the  narrow-band  rf  BPMs  and  bending 
magnet  x-ray  BPMs  together  with  two  correctors  per 
sector performs very well for the vertical plane. 

Studies  were  performed  using  the  bending  magnet 
BPMs  in  a  “local”  configuration  during  user  beam 
operation.  For the bending magnet beamline in question, 
only one of the two available x-ray BPMs ws included in 
the  algorithm,  with  an  increased  BPM  weight  in  the 
matrix.    The  second  unit,  not  included,  was  used  to 
monitor  the  performance  independently.    In  this  case, 
stability  was 
the 
broadband rf BPMs straddling the source point, but was 
improved  by  an  order  of  magnitude  in  comparison  to 
operation without x-ray BPMs.  

the  performance  of 

limited  by 

  Using  the  “global”  vertical  corrector  configuration 
(with  as  few  broadband  rf  BPMs  as  possible)  has 
allowed  what  is  most  likely  the  first  true  submicron 
beam stabilization with duration of more than five days.  
Shown  in  Figure  3  are  data  collected  over  a  six-day 
period  from  two  x-ray  BPMs  installed  in  an  APS 
bending  magnet  beamline  front  end.    Shown  on  the 
horizontal  axis  is  the  average  of  the  two  monitor 
readbacks,  while  the  vertical  axis  shows  the  readback 
difference  divided  by  longitudinal  separation  between 

the  two  units.    Thus  the  vertical  axis  gives  the  x-ray 
beam’s pointing angle in the vertical plane.  Figure 3 is 
therefore a phase-space representation of beam stability 
in the frequency band extending from a fraction of a Hz 
down  all  the  way  to  a  five-day  period.    Admittedly,  the 
horizontal axis is artificially small; after all, in this case 
both  units  were  included  in  the  orbit  correction 
algorithm so it is not surprising that a small spread, less 
than  half  a  micron  rms,  is  observed.    Even  if  one  unit 
were  to  have  systematic  errors,  the  algorithm  would 
simply  track  them  in  such  a  way  as  to  minimize  the 
average  of 
is 
compelling,  however,  is  that  the  rms  vertical  pointing 
angle  over  this  five -day period (each day is represented 
by  a  different  color  dot) is 180 nanoradians.  Thus, at a 
distance of 50 meters from the source, down along the 
x-ray beamline, the beam spot was stable to better than 
10 microns rms over this five -day period.  This is pretty 
darn good; I venture to say it is the best in the wo rld. 

two  units’  readbacks. 

  What 

the 

 

 

Figure  3.  Phase-space  representation  of  APS  vertical 
beam position stability over a five -day period.  Different 
colors correspond to separate days. 

4 UPGRADE PLANS 

While  performance  to  date  has  been  excellent  in 
some  areas,  much  remains  to  be  done.   Elimination of 
the  0.1-Hz system dead band described above will take 
the highest priority.  Implementation of the 100-Hz data 
pool  IOC  for  this  purpose  will  allow  further  essential 
upgrades.   

synchrotron 

A  major  effort  has  been  ongoing  for  the  past  two 
years  to  realign  accelerator  girders  in  order  to  reduce 
systematic errors in the ID x-ray BPMs associated with 
stray 
the 
radiation 
photosensitive  blades  [9].    While  this  effort  has  done 
much  to  reduce  background  signals  by  a  factor  of 
between three and ten, it is clear that significant ID gap-
dependent systematic errors remain, on the order of tens 
of microns.  Research toward feedforward algorithms is 

impinging  on 

 
promising,  whereby  a  process  monitors  ID  gaps  and 
writes  corrections  to  local  steering  correctors  as  the 
gap  is  changed  in  such  a  way  as  to  reduce  any  residual 
steering error caused by the ID.  In addition, this same 
process,  or  one  like  it,  could  make  position  offset 
corrections  to  the  ID  x-ray  BPMs  for  that  beamline, 
providing  position  readbacks  that  are  relatively  gap-
independent.      For  this  purpose,  insertion  device  gap 
information  will  be  placed  on  the  reflective  memory 
network, allowing real-time access by e.g., the new data 
pool IOC. 

The present limitation on feedforward is the fact that 
in  order to generate look up tables, one must carefully 
scan  each  of  the  over  22  IDs  in  series,  with  orbit 
correction running.  Early tests show that, using existing 
algorithms,  fully  one  hour  of  machine  studies  time  is 
required for each ID, with only modest improvement, a 
factor of approximately three.  By using the data pool, 
collection  of  feedforward  data  should  take  no  longer 
than the time to configure the system and close the gap 
–  one  minute  vs.  one  hour.    Further,  systematic  drifts 
that  creep  in  during  the very slow measurement will be 
much reduced. 

The  real-time  (1.5-kHz update rate) feedback system 
was completed by 1998 in its present incarnation [4].  It 
uses only the broadband rf BPMs to reduce beam noise 
in the band from 0.1 to 30 Hz.  While new narrow-band 
and  x-ray BPMs have become available since that time, 
they  have  been  used  exclusively  for  DC  orbit  control, 
running on a workstation in the main control room.  This 
circumstance has mainly arisen from a limit in the area 
of applications programming.  While narrow-band and x-
ray  BPM  data  are  available  to  the  1.5-kHz system, the 
emphasis  has  been  put  on  DC  orbit  control,  which  has 
been  a  difficult  and  high-priority  challenge.    Once  the 
insertion  device  x-ray  BPMs  have  been  comfortably 
integrated into  DC orbit control, including the new data 
pool  IOC,  attention  will  turn  back  to  the  1.5-kHz  real-
time  system.    At  present,  orbit  stability  in  the  0.1- to 
30-Hz band is sitting around 1.3 microns rms vertically 
and  2.0  microns  horizontally.    As  can  be  seen  from 
Table 1,  additional  work  in  the  real-time  system  is 
required if true submicron stability is to be realized.  A 
long-range goal is to integrate all available BPM data (rf 
and x-ray) into the fast feedback algorithm. 

5 CONCLUSIONS 

Orbit  correction  technology  at  the  APS  is  at  a  very 
advanced  stage  with  the  advent  of  new  x-ray BPM data 
acquisition and processing.  Long-term vertical pointing 
stability  has  been 
than  100 
improved 
nanoradians rms for times scales from 10 seconds to 24 
 

to  better 

 

hours.    Inclusion  of  all  rf  and  x-ray  BPM  data  on  the 
reflective  memory  network  will  allow  two  orders  of 
magnitude  increase  in  the  DC  feedback  update  rate.  
This, in turn, will make possible feedforward algorithms 
to further eliminate beam motion transients induced by 
insertion device gap changes. 

6 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The  real-time feedback system was conceptualized in 
the early 1990s by Youngjoo Chung.  John Carwardine 
and  Frank  Lenkzsus  corrected  all  the  early  conceptual 
errors and turned it into a working system [4].  Deming 
Shu performed the mechanical design of the x-ray BPMs 
in the tunnel. 

This  work  was  supported  by  the  U.S.  Department  of 
Energy,  Office  of  Basic  Energy  Sciences,  under 
Contract No. W-31-109-ENG-38. 

7 REFERENCES 
[1]  F.  Lenkszus,  “New  X-Ray  BPM  Data  Acquisition 
System for the APS,” PAC’01, Chicago, June 2001, 
to be published. 

[2]   O. Singh, G. Decker, “Operational Experience with 
X-ray  Beam  Position  Monitors  at  the  Advanced 
Photon  Source,”  PAC’01,  Chicago,  June  2001,  to 
be published. 

[3]   G. Decker, “Strategy for Achieving True Submicron 
Orbit Stabilization at the Advance Photon Source,” 
PAC’01, Chicago, June 2001, to be published. 
[4]  J.A.  Carwardine,  F.R.  Lenkszus,  “Real-Time  Orbit 
Feedback at the APS,” AIP Conference Proceedings 
No. 451, p. 125, 1998. 

[5]  D.  Shu  et  al.,  Nucl.  Instrum.  Methods  A  319,  56 

(1992). 

[6]  C.  Schwartz,  L.  Emery,  “Compensating 

the 
Frequency Deadband of the APS Real-Time and DC 
Transverse  Orbit  Correction  Systems,”  PAC’01, 
Chicago, June 2001, to be published. 

[7]  M.  Borland,  “Applications  toolkit  for  accelerator 
control  and  analysis,”  PAC’97,  Vancouver,  BC, 
Canada, pp. 2487-2489, 1998. 

[8]  Y.  Kang,  G.  Decker,  J.  Song,  “Damping  Spurious 
Harmonic  Resonances  in  the  APS  Storage  Ring 
Beam  Chamber,”  PAC’99,  New  York,  pp.  3092-
3094, 1999. 

[9]  G. Decker, O. Singh, “A method for reducing X-ray 
background  signals  from  insertion  device  X-ray 
beam  position  monitors,”  Phys.  Rev.  ST  Accel. 
Beams 2, 112801 (1999). 

