Los Alamos Nuclear Laboratory e-Print Archive
lanl.arXiv.org
Biological Physics
January 23, 2002

AA  CCllaassssiiccaall  PPrroobbaabbiilliissttiicc  CCoommppuutteerr  MMooddeell  ooff  CCoonnsscciioouussnneessss**

By

Stephen Blaha**

                                                
*  Excerpted from the book Cosmos and Consciousness by Stephen Blaha (1stBooks Library, Bloomington, IN, 2000) available from amazon.com and bn.com.
** Associate of the Harvard University Physics Department.

ABSTRACT

We  show  that  human  consciousness  can  be  modeled  as  a  classical  (not
quantum)  probabilistic  computer.  A  quantum  computer  representation  does
not  appear  to  be  indicated  because  no  known  feature  of  consciousness
depends on Planck’s constant h, the telltale sign of quantum phenomena. It is
argued that the facets of consciousness are describable by an object-oriented
design  with  dynamically  defined  classes  and  objects.  A  comparison  to
economic  theory  is  also  made.  We  argue  consciousness  may  also  have
redundant, protective mechanisms.

ii

Copyright © 1998-2002 Stephen Blaha. All rights reserved.

COPYRIGHT NOTICE

This  material  from  the  book  Cosmos  and  Consciousness  is  protected  under  copyright  laws  and  international  copyright
conventions.  No part of this material may be reproduced by any means in any form without express prior written permission.
Excerpts  from  this  material  can  be  made  for  the  purpose  of  review  or  comment  in  journals  and  magazines  as  long  as
appropriate credits are given.

Quantum Probabilistic Grammar, Probabilistic Grammar, Probabilistic Computer Grammar, Quantum Grammar, Continuum
Quantum  Computer,  Polycephalic  Quantum  Computer,  Quantum  Assembly  Language,  Bit-Level  Quantum  Computer
Language,  Quantum  C  Language  are  trademarks  or  registered  trademarks  of  Janus  Associates  Inc.  Scientific  publications
may use these trademarks if they include a statement attributing ownership of the marks to Janus Associates Inc. and attach a
™ superscript to the mark in the text of the document. The statement attributing ownership should say “____ is a trademark
of Janus Associates Inc. ”

iii

CONTENTS

A VIEW OF CONSCIOUSNESS
1
CONSCIOUSNESS: QUANTUM OR CLASSICAL PROBABILISTIC
2
THE PROBLEM OF CONSCIOUSNESS – THE LESSON OF THE CONCH
2
3
THE CURRENT THEORY OF CONSCIOUSNESS
A SIMILARITY BETWEEN THEORIES OF CONSCIOUSNESS AND ECONOMIC
4
THEORY
A PROBABILISTIC COMPUTER (PC) MODEL OF CONSCIOUSNESS
5

This  article  is  an  excerpt  from  the  book  Cosmos  and
Consciousness by this author. It was felt that this material
merited  presentation  as  a  paper  as  well.  The  book  covers
additional topics that may be of interest.

A View of Consciousness
There  are  numerous  views  of  Consciousness.  Some  of  these  views
attempt to make distinctions between consciousness, the mind, and the
brain  (body).  The  mind  is  the  nebulous  thing  we  associate  with
consciousness, feeling and thought. The body – in particular the brain
– is obviously connected to the mind and supports the mind’s activity.
Yet Consciousness seems endowed with miraculous abilities that many
find hard to base entirely on the properties of the brain.

The human brain is in a sense an electromagnetic illusion. The brain is
just as insubstantial as consciousness in reality.

There is a general lack of appreciation of the power of electromagnetic
circuits  to  create  illusions.  We  see  the  brain  as  a  hodge-podge  of
electromagnetic circuitry based on neurons and other brain structures.
We  then  view  the  mind,  and  its  unity,  clarity,  powers  of  logic  and
analysis, and other features composing one great entity.

It is difficult to reconcile the unity of consciousness of the mind with
the  brain  that  implements  it.  Yet  it  is  more  difficult  to  deny  that  the
mind  is  based  entirely  on  the  brain.  Modern  research1  clearly  shows
the  dependence  of  the  properties  of  the  mind  on  the  features  of  the
brain. Consider the effect on the mind of brain diseases or of injuries
to the brain.

Modern  computer  technology  actually  offers  a  very  clear  analogy  to
the  relation  of  Consciousness  and  the  brain.  Consider  a  modern
Personal Computer, a PC. If we open it up we see an ugly hodgepodge

                                                
1  Gerald  M.  Edelman  and  Giulio  Tononi,  A  Universe  of  Consciousness,  (Basic
Books,  New York, 2000). There  are  many  other  excellent  books on  consciousness.
See the references in Edelman and Tononi or search the Web.

of chips and computer circuitry. By only looking at the innards of the
PC we have no concept of what this electronic menagerie can generate.

Then  we  turn  on  the  PC  and  see  the  fabulous  graphics  of  a  modern
computer  operating  system:  lots  of  windows  containing  exciting
graphics. We can manipulate these windows causing them to change,
disappear,  reappear  with  new  content,  and  so  on  using  a  mouse,  the
keyboard or a joystick. We can run captivating multimedia games and
simulations with the click of a mouse or the movement of a joystick.
We  can  access  and  manipulate  external  information  from  around  the
world using the Internet.

Does  the  computer  screen  look  in  any  way  like  the  innards  of  the
computer? Does the unity, sophistication and flexibility of the display
relate  to  the  odd  collection  of  electronics  inside  the  computer?
Obviously not.

Figure.  The ubiquitous PC.

This  example  is  directly  analogous  to  the  relation  of  Consciousness
and the brain. The thoughts, unity and activity of Consciousness (the
“screen”)  have  no  obvious  connection  to  the  details  of  brain  (the
“computer  innards”)  activity.  Yet  the  mind  is  a  construct  of  the
electrical activity in the brain.

1

The Consciousness of the mind is the combined result of the electrical
activity of the brain.

output will appear in the set of outputs with a frequency proportional
to its probability of occurrence.

Consciousness: Quantum or Classical Probabilistic
Our studies of space, time, and matter – the Cosmos – have led us to
nothingness.  Consciousness 
is  also
itself 
nothingness. Both Consciousness and the Cosmos are given shape by
laws.  The 
the
laws  structure 
“nothingness” with features and properties.
In  the  case  of  the  Cosmos  we  have  made  a  case  for  a  Quantum
Computer formulation of the fundamental theories of Physics.

the  “nothingness”  and  provide 

is  not  material.  It 

In  the  case  of  Consciousness  we  propose  that  Consciousness  be  best
viewed within the framework of Classical Probabilistic Computers.

A Classical Probabilistic Computer is a purely classical computer (no
quantum  effects)  that  produces  a  variety  of  different  outputs  from  a
given  input  to  the  computer.  Each  possible  output  has  a  certain
probability  of  occurring.  The  probabilities  are  all  strictly  classical  –
they are not of quantum mechanical origin.

A Classical Probabilistic Computer can be viewed as:

input 

                                   
Classical
Probabilistic
Computer

       

       output

Figure. A Classical Probabilistic Computer produces one output from a
given input. The output is one of a number of possibilities.

If  the  same  program  is  run  over  and  over  again  in  a  Classical
Probabilistic  computer  then  a  variety  of  outputs  will  occur.  Each

2

The  reason  for  suggesting  that  Consciousness  be  modeled  as  a
Classical Probabilistic Computer is based on the following thoughts:

1.  Consciousness appears to be a classical phenomenon. If we
consider the properties of the  mind  there  is  no  convincing
evidence  for  significant  quantum  effects.  Even  if  Science
should  find  isolated  quantum  phenomena  surfacing  in
experiments  on  Consciousness  the  overwhelming  bulk  of
the  phenomena  of  Consciousness  is  still  not  quantum  but
classical in nature.

2.  Conscious  activity  evolves  in  time  through  a  series  of
states.  At  any  given  moment  Consciousness  has  billions
upon billions of states that it can evolve into (see reference
32  for  graphic  descriptions  of  the  time  evolution  of
conscious states). Given this vast number of possible states
we must treat the evolution of consciousness with time as a
statistical probabilistic phenomenon.

So  we  conclude  that  we  must  treat  Consciousness  as  a  classical,
probabilistic phenomena in principle.

The Problem of Consciousness – The Lesson of the Conch
After  determining 
is  classical  physics  and
chemistry and best treated as a statistical probabilistic phenomenon we
confront the overwhelming complexity of Consciousness.

that  Consciousness 

We  also  confront  Nature’s  protective  mechanisms  that  may  obscure
our  understanding  of  Consciousness.  Consider  the  conch  Strombas
gigas.

loud  noise.  When  it  fires  it  causes  the  release  of  neuromodulator
chemicals that appear to influence the resulting neural response to the
event.  The  projecting  value  system  may  be  a  way  of  protecting  the
brain against over-reacting to major disturbing events.

The Current Theory of Consciousness
Realizing the complexity of the phenomena of Consciousness and the
added  complexity  of  protective  mechanisms  that  Nature  might  have
built into the structure of Consciousness it is no surprise that we do not
have a satisfactory Theory of Consciousness.

This  situation  is  not  without  precedent.  Similar  situations  have
occurred  in  the  “hard”  sciences  and  in  the  social  sciences.  For
example,  George  Uhlenbeck,  the  co-discoverer  of  electron  spin  and
one  of  the  outstanding  physicists  of  the  mid-twentieth  century,  spent
many years trying to develop a satisfactory theoretical framework for
understanding Statistical Mechanics from a microscopic point of view.
He  told  this  author  (about  1970)  that  he  felt  he  did  not  succeed.
Uhlenbeck  had  the  advantage  of  a  completely  known  theory  of
microscopic  particles  and  a  well-known  theory  of  the  Statistical
Mechanics of large numbers of particles. Despite these advantages he
was  not  able  to  relate  the  microscopic  theory  with  the  theory  of  the
Statistical  Mechanics  of  a  large  number  of  microscopic  particles.
Relating different levels of theories such as a microscopic theory and a
macroscopic theory is difficult.

The situation of theories of Consciousness and theories of the brain is
much less favorable. We know the overall neuroanatomy (structure) of
the  brain.  We  have  a  pretty  good  idea  of  how  some  features  such  as
vision map to specific brain areas. We have a decent understanding of
brain  neurochemistry.  We  have  a  lot  of  data  on  features  of
Consciousness  and  some  ideas  on  how  these  features  map  to  brain
features.  But  we  do  not  have  a  detailed  understanding  of  the  brain.
And  we  do  not  have  a  complete  understanding  of  Consciousness.  In
particular  we  can  usually  only  make  qualitative  statements  about
Consciousness.  We  don’t  even  know  what  the  relevant  variables  are

Figure. The conch Strombas gigas.

Ninety-nine  per  cent  of  this  giant  pink  conch  is  made  of  a  mineral
called  aragonite  that  is  a  form  of  calcium  carbonate  that  breaks  like
chalk.  Yet  the  shell  of  the  conch  resists  fractures  a  hundred  to  a
thousand  times  better  than  the  mineral  of  which  it  is  formed.  Nature
has  developed  a  microscopic  structure  for  the  conch  that  surrounds
each  aragonite  crystal  in  its  shell  with  a  protein  that  changes  the
toughness of the shell by enabling fractures to spread without breaking
the material. In addition the shell has three layers with the “grain” of
each  layer  perpendicular  to  the  grain  of  adjacent  layers.  This
composite  cross-grained  material  gives  the  conch  shell  extraordinary
strength.

If Nature expended such effort during evolution to protect the humble
conch,  then  what  effort  must  have  been  expended  to  protect  the
workings of the Consciousness of Man?

the  brain  has 

three  main  neuroanatomical
Coincidentally 
arrangements.  First  there  is  the  thalamocortical  system  that  networks
the  thalamus,  the  cortex  and  cortical  regions.  Secondly,  there  is  a
network of long polysynaptic loops that extend between the cortex and
the  cortical  appendages.  Thirdly,  there  is  the  diffuse  network  of
projecting  value  systems  (the  noradrenergic  locus  coeruleus)  that
extends  over  the  entire  brain.  The  projecting  value  systems  network
appears to fire (react) whenever an important event happens such as a

3

for conscious phenomena. Who can say how to quantify emotions such
as fear or anger? We need at least a Richter scale for emotion.

Given this state of affairs a detailed theory of Consciousness similar to
a  theory  of  Physics  or  Chemistry  is  no  where  in  sight.  We  can  only
expect  qualitative  descriptions  and  rules  for  most  phenomena  of
Consciousness.  We  can  only  expect  general  relationships  between
brain activity and phenomena of Consciousness. We can expect certain
specialized  (simple)  phenomena  of  Consciousness  to  be  based  on
detailed brain activity.

A Similarity between Theories of Consciousness and
Economic Theory
The  study  of  Consciousness  is  plagued  by  the  lack  of  a  quantitative
framework  to  describe  phenomena.  We  don’t  know  the  relevant
variables  that  describe  a  phenomenon  of  Consciousness.  We  usually
don’t  know  what  to  measure,  and,  in  the  cases  where  we  do  find
something  to  measure,  we  don’t  know  how  to  measure  it  or  how  to
interpret it or how to relate it to brain activity quantitatively.

This state of affairs is reminiscent of the situation of the Economics of
a  country.  At  the  microscopic  level  we  can  in  principle  trace  every
transaction,  aggregate  all  the  transactions  in  the  country’s  economy
and thus obtain a complete view of the economy. We can also trace the
evolution of the economy in time. However we do not have a detailed
complete quantitative theory of Economics.

As  a  result  we  can  only  make  predictions  based  on  extrapolations  of
trends. If we change the pattern of financial transactions in the country
we cannot unambiguously predict the effects on the economy. We can
only  create  models  based  on  assumptions.  Some  models  are  quite
good.  But  they  are  no  replacement  for  a  complete  theory  of
Economics.

The  modern  theory  of  Economics  was  born  in  the  Eighteenth  and
Nineteenth Centuries in the work of Adam Smith and others. It started
with  general  qualitative  statements  based  on  simple  observations.

4

These  statements  had  some  predictive  power.  Then  in  the  Twentieth
Century  a  host  of  Economists  developed  quantitative  theories  for
economic  phenomena.  Economics  became  semi-quantitative  –  but
there  were  still  many  unanswered  questions.  There  is  still  a  problem
relating the microscopic picture of individual transactions and the “Big
Picture”  view  of  the  economy.  The  predictive  power  of  Economic
Theory is still spotty.

Compare  the  development  of  Economic  Theory  with  the  Theory  of
Consciousness. The microscopic theory is the theory of the brain. The
“Big  Picture”  is  Consciousness.  We  can  only  make  quantitative
statements  about  Consciousness.  Our  microscopic  picture  is  still
incomplete.  Clearly  the  state  the  development  of  Consciousness
Theory  is  comparable  to  the  state  of  Economic  Theory  in  the
Nineteenth  Century.  On  the  positive  side  the  rate  at  which  our
knowledge  of  Consciousness  and  the  brain  is  developing  is  much
faster than the development of Economics.

The development of Economics offers a paradigm for the development
of our understanding of Consciousness.

It also suggests a way of picturing the relation between Consciousness
and the brain. We can view the brain as a vast interconnected network
of  electrical  activity  with  connections  to  the  Consciousness.  We  will
view Consciousness as a separate level that is conceptually unified and
connected by “channels” or communications paths to the brain. This is
a  theoretical  framework  that  reflects  strategies  used  in  economic
analysis.  One  can  view  stock  or  commodity  prices  from  two
perspectives:  one  perspective  views  price  changes  as  reactions  to
external  events;  another  perspective  views  price  changes  from  a
“technical”  perspective  based  on  trends  in  charts  of  historical  price
data.

We  suggest  that  one  should  view  Consciousness  as  a  thing  in  itself
developing  a  self-contained  theory  of  Consciousness  (a  “technical”
approach). This theory can then be related to the underlying dynamics
and processes of the brain.

CONSCIOUSNESS

BRAIN

Figure. Consciousness as a separate conceptual entity.

By  separating  Consciousness  from  the  brain  and  establishing  a
structured interface between the brain and Consciousness one can hope
to develop a provisional model of Consciousness.

A Probabilistic Computer (PC) Model of Consciousness
Although human Consciousness is large and complex it must be finite
since it is derived from the human brain which is finite. We have seen
that  Consciousness  is  overwhelmingly  classical  (not  quantum)  in
nature  and  that  it  must  be  treated  probabilistically  because  of  the
billions upon billions of states of Consciousness.

These  considerations  lead  us  to  suggest  a  Classical  Probabilistic
Computer Model for Consciousness with strict interfaces to the human

brain.  The  human  brain  is  a  source  of  inputs  and  outputs  for  the
computer.

Many writers argue that human Consciousness cannot be described by
a  computer  model  (see  reference  32  for  an  example).  Then  they
sometimes proceed to use a computer model to simulate some feature
of  Consciousness.  Since  human  Consciousness  is  based  on  a  finite
human brain that in principle can be simulated by a sufficiently large
and complex computer it seems reasonable to think that Consciousness
can  be  modeled  on  a  computer  with  appropriate  features  and
capabilities.

Does Consciousness “run” like a computer program? No, a better view
of Consciousness is to view it as a set of capabilities and features that
interconnect to constitute Consciousness. Each of these entities (They
may map to groups of neurons in the brain.) has a set of capabilities or
features.

One can think of each of them as an “object” that has a specific set of
capabilities and features. These objects have a “mini-program” inside
them  that  specifies  their  behavior  and  how  they  hook  up  with  other
objects  to  perform  tasks  and  to  constitute  the  Consciousness.  The
hooks are variable and dynamic.

The time evolution of the Consciousness from state to state is a result
of the execution of these “mini-programs” in a dynamic ever-changing
way. There is no overall program but instead there is an ever changing,
dynamic, unfolding of states of Consciousness in response to external
inputs and based on the previous state of Consciousness plus random
effects within Consciousness.

The  description  of  Consciousness  as  a  collection  of  objects  with
features,  an  internal  “mini-program”  describing  the  object’s  behavior
and  interaction  with  other  objects  can  be  called  an  Object-Oriented
definition.  The  concept  of  Object-Oriented  Programming  is  currently
the preferred way to program amongst computer software developers.
It  meshes  well  with  the  observed  features  of  Consciousness.  One

5

1.  Consciousness  can  marshal  its  resources  to  allocate  more

resources to important tasks that it faces.

2.  Consciousness can be “rewired” to adapt to meet short-term

needs and to meet long-term needs.

 These  features  tell  us  about  the  computer  mechanisms  or  mini-
programs driving the time development of Consciousness (the way in
which a Consciousness evolves from state to state in time).

The first point tells us that a correct Probabilistic Computer model of
Consciousness must be able to dynamically reallocate its resources in
response to inputs.

 The  second  point  tells  us  that  the  mini-programs  that  describe  the
changes in time of the state of Consciousness must be able to change
itself.  The  LISP  programming  language  is  an  example  of  a  language
whose  programs  are  capable  of  changing  themselves  as  they  execute
(evolve).  Another  way  of  implementing  this  feature  at  the  hardware
level is to say the computer can rewire itself to meet new needs. In fact
this process is known to happen in the human brain. Human brains can
rewire  themselves  over  time  if  a  brain  is  damaged  or  in  response  to
stimuli.

These  additional  features  make  the  Probabilistic  Computer  a  suitable
model for Consciousness.

major difference is the dynamic nature of the grouping of neurons in
response to external inputs. The Object-Oriented programming parallel
would be to have class definitions dynamically reforming in response
to the evolution of a program.

   Vision

Hearing

       Smell

Figure. An Object-Oriented view of Consciousness.

fragments 

Thus  Consciousness  does  not  have  a  program  in  the  old  fashioned
sense  of  the  word.  It  has  a  dynamically  changing,  event  driven
program  with  program 
the  parts  of
Consciousness.  These  program  fragments  can  dynamically  link
together in response to events to take Consciousness from one state to
another.  The  pattern  of  linkings  is  driven  by  a  complex  set  of
interconnections  between  the  parts  of  Consciousness.  Dynamic
Linking is the preferred way of creating a computer program (a .EXE
program) in modern computing.

in  each  of 

There  are  two  major  features  of  Consciousness  that  are  of  crucial
importance in defining a computer representation of Consciousness at
this level of discussion:

6

