«WILD CABLES» IN FUSION PLASMAS AND THEIR DIAGNOSTICS  
WITH SPECTRAL LINE STARK BROADENING  
 
A.V. Demura, V.I. Kogan, A.B. Kukushkin, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov 
INF RRC "Kurchatov Institute", Moscow 123182 Russia 
 

 
We  discuss  the  opportunities  of  diagnosing  the  parameters  of  hypothetical  «wild 
cables» in fusion plasmas via analyzing the Stark broadening of hydrogen spectral lines. The 
«wild cables» concept have suggested the observed long-lived skeletal structures in tokamaks 
and  Z-pinches  to  be  caused  by  a  microdust-assembled  skeleton.  We  present  the  results  of 
calculating  the  widths  of  vacuum  channels  produced  by  the  pressure  of  on-skeleton  high-
frequency  (HF)  electromagnetic  waves  of  the  TEM  type,  which  thus  might  protect  the 
skeletons  from  ambient  high-temperature  plasma.  The  values  of  amplitude  of  such  wave 
appear  to  be  compatible  with  the  measurements  of  those  in-plasma  HF  electric  fields  in 
tokamak  T-10  and  a  gaseous  Z-pinch  which  give  observable  Stark  broadening  of  hydrogen 
spectral lines.  
 
1.  
 

INTRODUCTION 

The phenomenon of skeletal structures [1,2] addressed in this paper is a new topic in the 
realm of plasma physics. This topic is being developed on the basis of the widely recognized 
physics of the filaments in laboratory and cosmic plasmas. This physics takes its origin from 
pioneering works by I. Kvartskhava and co-workers [3] and W. Bostick and co-workers [4] -- 
for  laboratory  discharges;  and  H.  Alfvén  [5],  and  his  co-workers  and  followers  --  for  space 
observations  (see,  e.g.,  special  survey  issues  [6]).  The  interpretation  of  filaments,  roughly 
speaking,  may  be  reduced  to  a  sort  of  plasma  instability,  either  hydrodynamic  one  (which 
results  in  the  formation  of  fluid  filaments  of  plasma  density  and/or  temperature,  electric 
current,  etc.)  or  more  intricate  instability  which  should  be  described  in  terms  of  kinetics  of 
particles and electromagnetic fields. At any rate, all conventional approaches to filamentation 
phenomena  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  classical  electrodynamics  is  sufficient  for 
describing  the  long-range  correlations/bonds  in  plasmas  so  that  the  recourse  to  quantum 
physics is needed only for some elementary radiative-collisional processes, like e.g. radiation 
emission  in  atomic  spectral  lines.  This  generic  picture  is  bale  to  treat  the  ensembles  of 
individual filaments and networking of such filaments -- first of all, short-lived, chaotic ones. 
Within  similar  frame,  the  phenomenon  of  the  percolatory  networking  of  non-chaotic,  long-
lived filaments (LLFs) has been suggested on the basis of data from Z-pinch [7,8(b)], plasma 
focus [9], and tokamaks [8(c)]. It was also suggested [7,8] that it is necessary to consider the 
long-lived  filaments  as  a  separate  component  of  plasma  --  the  complimentary  one  to 
conventional, «fluid» component.  

However,  the  view  on  the  filaments  may  go  far  beyond  the  above-mentioned 
conventional  frames.  It  was  suggested  [1,2]  that  only  the  quantum  picture  may  explain  the 
observed the long-range bonds inside the filaments. Within such a general quantum frame, a 
specific model was suggested that an LLF may possess a microsolid skeleton which might be 
assembled during electric breakdown, well before major plasma’s birth, from wildly produced 
carbon nanotubes or similar nanostructures of other chemical elements. 

The results of the subsequent proof-of-concept studies, aimed at verification of the above 
hypothesis  (see  e.g.  [10-12]),  were  based  on  an  analysis  of  a  number  of  databases.  This 
included: 

 

1 

(i)  databases  which  covered  a  broad  range  of  experimental  conditions  in  various  fusion 
plasmas  (Z-pinch,  plasma  focus,  tokamaks  TM-2,  T-4,  T-6,  T-10)  and  allowed,  thanks  to 
diagnostic opportunities, the resolution of the fine structure of LLFs (in particular, tubularity 
of  straight  blocks  of  LLFs,  «networking»  of  straight  blocks  which  builds  up  a skeleton, etc. 
[13(a,b,d)]) at the statistically representative level;  

(ii) electron micrography of various types of dust deposit in tokamak T-10 [14];  
(iii)  laser  shadowgraphy of initial stage of a  vacuum  spark discharge (electric  current is 
less than 20% of its maximum, the plasma’s self-emission is not yet detectable by the high-
sensitivity detectors) [15]; 

(iv)  high-resolution  visible  light  imaging  of  plasma  at  electric  breakdown  stage  of 
discharge in former experiments in plasma focus LV-2 and tokamak T-6 (~100 ns and ~300 
mcs, respectively, before detection of discharge electric current by the Rogovsky coil) [10,16].  
The following three arguments allowed [10,11] to draw a bridge between the skeletons in 

dust deposits and the skeletal structures in plasmas, namely:  

(a) presence of tubular and cartwheel-like structures in the ranges ~10 nm to ~10 µm (in 

dust deposits [14]) and ~100 µm to ~10 cm (in the plasma images [13(a,b,d),15,16]),  

(b) topological identity of these structures,  
(c)  observed  trend  of  assembling  bigger  tubules  from  smaller  ones  (i.e.  the  self-

similarity).  

In  this  paper  we  discuss  the  opportunities  of  diagnosing  the  parameters  of  hypothetical 
«wild cables» in fusion plasmas via analyzing the Stark broadening of hydrogen spectral lines. 
To our mind, the present status of the concept of [1,2], as outlined above, makes it reasonable 
to  start  elaborating  the  details  of  fine  diagnostics  like  that  based  on  resolving  the  Stark 
broadening effects in spectral lines of plasma radiation emission.  

We start (Sec. 2) with recalling the main points of the «wild cables» concept which has 
been suggested [13(a,c,e)] for resolving the major difficulty in the concept [1,2], namely the 
survivability of a condensed matter (i.e. skeletons) in a hot ambient plasma, of temperatures 
up  to  those  in  kiloelectronvolt  range.  The  microsolid  skeletons  were  suggested  to  be  self-
protected from an ambient high-temperature plasma by a thin vacuum channels sustained self-
consistently  around  the  skeletons  by  the  pressure  of  high-frequency  (HF)  electromagnetic 
waves,  thanks  to  the  skeleton-induced  conversion  of  a  small  part  of  the  incoming  «static» 
magnetic field (poloidal, in tokamaks, or azimuthal, in Z-pinches) into HF waves of the TEM 
type (a «wild cable» model [13(a,c)]). Thus, the wild cable model has proposed common, and 
mutually  interrelated,  qualitative  solution  to  the  two  problems:  namely,  (i)  survivability  of 
skeletons, and (ii) phenomenon of nonlocal (non-diffusive, in particular, ballistic) transport of 
energy (the latter was reliably observed in last decade in various tokamaks, see e.g. the survey 
[17]).  

Here, we present the results of calculating the widths of vacuum channels produced by 
the  pressure  of  on-skeleton  high-frequency  (HF)  electromagnetic  waves  of  the  TEM  type, 
which  thus might protect the skeletons from ambient  high-temperature  plasma (Sec. 2). The 
values of amplitude of such wave appear to be compatible with the measurements of those in-
plasma  HF  electric  fields  in  tokamak  T-10  [18,19]  and  a  gaseous  Z-pinch  [21]  which  give 
observable  Stark  broadening  of  hydrogen  spectral  lines.  The  details  of  analyzing  the 
measurements [18,19,21] of Stark broadening of hydrogen spectral lines is given in Sec. 3.  
 

 

2 

 
2.  
 

ABOUT THE CONCEPT OF «WILD CABLES»  

At  this  point,  the  concept  of  wild  cables  [13(a,c)]  treats  quantitatively  only  the  quasi-
stationary  stage  of  wild  cable  network.  However,  the  hypothetical  life  story  has  been 
suggested as well. This included a qualitative picture of electrical breakdown with allowing, in 
particular, for the following issues: (i) probable role of the carbon (or other chemical elements 
capable  of  forming  the  nanotubular  structures)  in  assembling  the  macroscopic  skeletons  of 
future straight sections of observable long-lived filaments in plasma, (ii) conversion of a part 
of  the  incoming  poloidal  magnetic  field into  high-frequency TEM  waves  (ω<ωpe),  including 
the mode conversion in the presence of the above skeletons. Here, we recall major points of 
what the «wild cable» is.  

The wild cable consists of three elements:  
(1) a skeleton which plays a role of an inner rod (this rod serves as a guiding system for 
the high-frequency (HF) electromagnetic (EM) waves propagating along this rod); 

(2) vacuum channel around skeleton which serves as an insulator of the cable;  
(3) ambient plasma which serves as a outer screening conductor in a cylindrical guiding 

system for HF EM waves propagating along inner rod.  

The possible scenario of wild cable operation looks as follows.  
A HF valve at the plasma column surface (at the node of the nearly-standing wave) cuts 
the field lines of the incoming magnetic field (poloidal/azimuthal in tokamaks/Z-pinches) and, 
thus,  forms  the  magnetic  wave  of  H11  type  which  propagates  in  the  vacuum  cavity  around 
straight sections (of observed length Lc) of the skeleton. For the frequency ωcab of this wave, 
one has the following relation which gives an estimate for ωcab and a condition for the quasi-
stationarity of the plasma system:  

 

ω

cab

≈

π

(

/
c L

)

<

ω
pe

.   

cab

 

 

 

(1) 

 
A distinct bump in the spectrum of the EM field measured [20] outside plasma column in 
tokamak  T-10  (of  the wavelength λ of several  centimeters)  coincides  with  prediction of  Eq. 
(1)  for  straight  filaments  seen  [13(a,b)]  in  the  far  periphery  of  plasma  column  T-10.  The 
spectra  of  the  HF  EM  field  in  the  GHz  frequency  range  were  measured  in  [20]  in  the  gap 
between the plasma column and the chamber. They revealed a distinct bump at νC ~ (4-5) 109 
Hz, of the width ~ 2 109 Hz, which always exists in ohmic heating regimes and increases with 
electron  cyclotron  heating  (this  bump  is  a  stable  formation  and  it  moves  to  the  lower 
frequencies and turns into a strong peak only under condition of strong instabilities, especially 
disruption  instability).  This  gives  LC  ≈  3  cm,  in  reasonable  agreement  with  the  visible  light 
data from T-10, where LC ~ 4-5 cm. 

Under condition of Eq. (1), the H11 wave is effectively trapped in the cavity and, due to 
wiring of magnetic field lines around the skeleton, is converted, at least partly, into the wave 
of TEM type. The latter wave possesses a HF azimuthal magnetic field and, respectively, a HF 
, where r is the radial coordinate in a circular 
radial electric field with amplitude  E r U r
/0
cylindrical cable and U0 is an effective voltage bias between the skeleton and the plasma. The 
radial  field  produces  a  force,  the  Miller’s  force  of  the  type  -grad(Ψ)  where  Ψ  is  the  kinetic 
energy  of  charged  particle  oscillation  in  the  field  of  HF  EM  wave.  It  is  this  force  that  is 
capable  of  self-consistently  sustaining  the  vacuum  channel  around  skeleton  and  thus 
protecting  it  from  plasma  particle’s  access.  (It  is  assumed  also  that  the  presence  of  a strong 
static external magnetic field, like in a tokamak, doesn't influence substantially the form of the 

r ( ) ~

 

3 

cavity, even when ωCab << ωBe, ωBe is electron gyrofrequency: the latter requires the amplitude 
E of the HF electric field to have a non-zero component parallel to external magnetic field.) 

The  distribution  of  plasma  density  around  the  inner  wire  can  be  described  by  a  set  of 
equations for the two-temperature quasi-hydrodynamics of plasma in a HF EM field [22,23]. 
Fortunately, prior to direct numeric solving equations [22,23] (whose results are shown below 
in  Figs.  1-4),  it  is  possible  to  evaluate  the  typical  values  of  the  parameters  of  the  problem 
within a simplified approach.  

Under  condition  lE >> rD, where lE is the characteristic length of spatial profile of Er(r) 
and rD is Debye radius, one can neglect the deviation from the quasi-neutrality and arrive at a 
quasi-Boltzmann distribution, see [23]:  

=

n
e

n
e

0

exp(

−

),

Ψ

=

Ψ
+

T

e

T

i

2
r

2
e E
m

e

,
ω    

2
cab

4

 

 

(2) 

 
where ne0 is background density of plasma electrons, and Te and Ti stand for electron and ion 
temperatures,  respectively.  Equation  (2)  obviously  gives  a  condition  for  the  detachment  of 
electrons,  which  limits  the  value  of  U0  from  the  side  of  low  values.  Equation  (2)  is  to  be 
coupled to the condition of applicability of the concept of the Miller force, ρ<< lE (where ρ is 
the amplitude of electron's oscillations in the HF electric field), which limits the U0 from the 
side of high values.  

Also, the HF  electric field in the cables may be related to the observable electric fields. 
Indeed, the wild cables are the strong sources of electrostatic oscillations in plasma, first of all, 
along strong external magnetic field. For the EM waves inside vacuum channels of the wild 
cable  to  be  compatible  with  the  existence  of  strong  nonlinear  waves  in  the ambient  plasma, 
one  may  consider  the  cable's  cavity  as  a  soliton  with  such  a  strong  reduction  of  the 
eigenfrequency  (a  redshift)  that  the  soliton's  velocity  becomes  independent  from  dispersion. 
rough  estimate 
For  W nT/
) ~ {
/
(
W nT

< 1,  where  W E=
1− ω ω

this  gives 

following 

2 16/ π, 

the 

)}.

(

/

 

0

c

pe

And  finally,  at  the  quasi-stationary  stage  of  discharge,  one  may  evaluate  the  spatial 
distribution  of  the  amplitude  Epl  of  the  electric  field  in  plasma  (not  inside  the  wild  cable!), 
regardless of its spectral distribution, by extrapolating the scaling law of the amplitude of the 
TEM  wave  onto  ambient  plasma.  For  the  contribution  of  a  single  cable  to  electric  field 
directed radially with respect to the cable’s axis, one has: 

 

 

E r

pl ( ) ~ (

/
U r
0

).

 

 

 

 

 

 

(3) 

 
The above-mentioned conditions allow identify the domain of possible values of U0. For 
instance,  for  tokamak  case  one  has  the  following  estimates  [13(c)].  For  rCab  ~  1-2  mm  and 
comparable  values  of  minimal  and  maximal  values  of  the  vacuum  channel,  i.e.  (rCab-rrod  )  ~ 
rCab , and <r> ~ 1-3 cm (<r> is the average distance between observed individual cables in the 
region of observation), one has 15 < U0(kV) <50 with, respectively, Er(rCab) > 100 kV/cm.  

An  analysis  of  observations  of  Stark  broadening  of  deuterium  spectral  lines  (and  their 
polarization state) at the periphery of the T-10 tokamak in the region of Te ~ 100 eV, allowed 
[18,19] to estimate the spectral range of HF electric fields (ω ≈ ωpe ~ 1011 Hz), their amplitude 
(Epl  ~  10-20  kV/cm)  and  angular  distribution  (see  below  Sec.  3  for  a  discussion  in  more 
detail).  Therefore,  we  can  compare  the  value  of  Epl  taken  from  [18,19]  with  that  needed  to 
sustain visible (presumably, vacuum) channels in filaments in tokamak T-10.  

 

4 

Figures 1-3 show the results of solving numerically the Poisson equation [23] for arbitrary 
values of ratio (lE/rD). It is seen (Fig. 1) that for U0 ~ 30 kV and plasma parameters typical for 
the periphery of the tokamak, the effective electron density falls down at r ~ 2 mm by seven 
orders  of  magnitude,  with  respect  to  its  background  value,  and  practically  disappears  at 
slightly smaller radii.  

Thus, the reconstruction of effective voltage bias U0 in the cable from measurements of 
HF  electric  field  amplitude  in  plasma  of  tokamak  T-10  [18,19]  and  Z-pinch  [21]  shows 
correlation of the widths (~ 1  mm, in tokamaks,  and 0.1 mm, in Z-pinch) of visible straight 
blocks  (presumably  cables)  with  the  values  of  diameters  of  vacuum  channels  (around 
skeleton) which are calculated from quasi-hydrodynamics of a plasma in a HF electric field.  

Note  also,  that  the  frequency  of  TEM  wave  in  tokamak  T-10  used  in  calculating  the 
profile  of  Fig.  1  agrees  well  with  the  measurements  [20]  of  the  HF  electric  field  spectra 
outside plasma column (they revealed a permanently present, distinct bump at νC ~ (4-5) 109 
Hz, of the width ~ 2 109 Hz, which always exists in ohmic heating regimes and increases with 
electron  cyclotron  heating;  this  gives  LCab  ≈  3  cm  that  is  in  reasonable  agreement  with  the 
visible light data from T-10).  

3.   SPECTRAL  LINE  STARK  BROADENING  IN  PLASMAS  AND  DIAGNOSTICS 

 

OF «WILD CABLES»  
 

In  this  section  we’ll  consider  in  more  details  the  setting  of  theoretical  problem  of 
calculation the emission profile of deuterium atoms under conditions that are characteristic for 
peripheral  tokamak  and  Z-pinch  plasmas.  Also  we  discuss  physical  models  that  allow  to 
reconstruct  the  values  and  frequencies  of  electric  microfields  that  could  be  responsible  for 
observational  spectra.  This  allows  to  reveal  the  correlation  with  corresponding  values  of 
parameters  expected  from  the  «wild  cable»  concept.  From  the  very  beginning  we  have  to 
assume  the  possibility  of  existing  of  oscillating  plasma  electric  fields  acting  on  the  radiator 
and being the characteristic feature of «wild cables» concept [13]. 

The Hamiltonian of a hydrogen-like radiator experiencing dipole interaction with high-
frequency,  E(t),  and  low  frequency,  F, electric fields and stationary  almost uniform  toroidal 
magnetic field  B  has in general the form [24] - [28] 
 

                                  

=
HH

0

−

!!
[
)(
tEd

+

!
!
(
tFF
M

+

)]

!!
µ−
B

,    

 

 

(4) 

 
where  H0    is  Hamiltonian  of  unperturbed radiator, d,  µµµµ are its electric and magnetic dipole 

!
! ×
Bv

e
c

operators accordingly,  FM (t)  is the motional electric field 

 (e is the electron charge, c 

is the velocity of  light) due to finite thermal velocity v of the radiator in the lab frame. It is 
assumed for simplicity that the second order terms with respect to electric and magnetic fields 
are neglected in the above equation.  

It is known that in plasma the total electric microfield is formed by contributions of so 
called individual component, which is due to Coulomb electric fields of plasma particles, and 
collective  component  which  is  due  to  collective  plasma  electric  fields  oscillations  that  are 
characterized by plasma dielectric function [28]. For low density plasmas in tokamakas and Z-
pinch  periphery,  the  contribution  of  individual  component  is  practically  reduced  to  binary 
collisional  broadening  of  levels  by  ions  and  electrons.  Therefore,  the  contribution  from 
collective  microfield  component  appears  to  be  of  relatively  more  importance  making  it  of 
special interest in the context of wild cables concept [13].  

 

5 

Under conventional simplifying assumption of density matrix diagonality the polarized 
profiles of spectral line Iπ,σ(ω) formed in quantum transition from the upper level multiplet of 
Stark sublevels   {i}∈ nupper (with n being the principal quantum number) to the lower level 
multiplet of Stark sublevels {j} ∈ nlow with polarization eππππ,σσσσ, are as follows: 
 

I

σπ
,

ω
)
(

=

1
π

Re

∞

∫∑

i

,

j

0

⋅

dt

exp[

−

i

ω

⋅

<⋅
]

t

!
|
ei
σπ
,

!
d

|)0(

j

<⋅>

!
|
ej
σπ
,

!
td

|)(

i

>

 

 

Av

(5) 

   
where  symbol  <…>Av.  means  the  averaging  over  the  large  canonical  ensemble  (in  which 
averages  over    thermal  velocities  of  perturbing  and  radiating  particles  are  included  as  well), 
eπ,σ  is  the  polarization  vector  of  radiation  parallel  or  perpendicular  to  the  characteristic 
direction of the system, ω  is the radiation circular frequency. It is important from physical and 
methodical point of view that the quantization and polarizations are defined in the lab frame. 

As  is  known,  there  is  no  general  solution of such  a problem  for arbitrary values and 
relative  directions  of  electric  and  magnetic  fields.  The  problem  was  solved  only  for  some 
particular  model  cases  that  are  of  practical  interest  [27].  Below  for  clarity  we  neglect  the 
influence  of  motional  Stark  and  Zeeman  effects,  because  experimental  observations  to  be 
analyzed seem to be not influenced by these effects. 

The  spectra  formed  under  action  of  regular  oscillations  in  the  system  have  as  a  rule 
very  complicated  structure  that  is  especially  difficult  to  interpret.  In  this  case  the  physically 
transparent  solution  is  available  only  in  terms  of  quasi-energy  states.  This  means  that  in 
spectral  diagnostics  one  has  to  use  a  variety  of  observational  methods  to  verify  by  cross-
checks  the  appropriate  explanation.  It  is  the  complexity  of  simultaneous  action  of  several 
mechanisms  equally  influencing  the  profile  of  radiation  that  make  it  conventional  [25], 
starting  from  earlier  papers  on  astrophysical  measurements,  to  consider  the  profiles  of 
radiation of a fixed polarization and the results of subtracting them from each other to give the 
so called differential polarization profile D(ω): 

 

                                                      D(ω) = Iσ(ω)  -  Iπ(ω),  

 

 

 

 

(6) 

 
in  order  to  retrieve  and  identify  the  existence  of  various  types  of  anisotropic oscillating  and 
non-oscillating plasma fields [24-28]. 

It was natural to define ππππ and σσσσ polarization with respect to the direction of magnetic 
field,  that  is  almost  constant  in  peripheral  tokamak  plasmas  under  analysis.  There  are 
interesting  experimental  results  [18,19]  on  the  study  of  Iπ,σ(ω)  profiles  of  Balmer  series  of 
deuterium in the peripheral tokamak plasmas. The observed spectral lines Dα,γ showed that ππππ 
and  σσσσ  polarization  profiles  are  different.  For  example,  the  spectral  line  shapes  for  magnetic 
field B = 1.65 T and ππππ polarization are smooth, while for σσσσ polarization they have peaks with 
separation that exceeds the possible Zeeman splitting [18,19]. For Dβ profiles, spectra for both 
polarizations have a smooth, almost similar behavior [18,19].  

One  of  the  probable  models  that  could  give  consistent  and  non  contradictory 
explanation  of  those  observations  is  based  on  assumptions  of  coexistence  of  a  strong  and 
rapidly  oscillating  regular  plasma  field  ez  E0  cos  ωt  and  almost  quasistatic  field  ex  F  that 
changes  in  time  much  slower  [19,27].  If  the  high  frequency  ω  is  larger  than  precession 
frequency  of  atomic  dipole  moment  in  the  quasistationary  field  ΩF  ~  (3/2)  n2  F  (e  a0/ " ) 
(where a0 is the Bohr radius) or the oscillating field amplitude E0 is large enough so that [(E0 
n e a0/ " )ω]1/2 is larger than  the precession in  the field F (see [27]), then it is reasonable to 

 

6 

construct  the  zero-order  wave  functions  of  the  problem  from  the  wave  functions  of  quasi-
energetic states [27]. This approach is characterized by secular equations averaged over time 
during the period of 2π/ω. This averaging automatically leads to the effective field in the form 
[27] 

Feff. = J0(3 β n/2) F ex ,  

 

 

 

(7) 

 
where  J0(z)  is  Bessel  function  of  zero  order  and  β  =E0  ea0/ "
ω.  Thus,  in  the  case  when  the 
argument of Bessel function coincides with the location of its zero, the effective splitting due 
to  quasistatic  field  F  is  completely  suppressed  by  strongly  oscillating  perpendicular  electric 
field  E0  and  may  serve  to  determine  the  ratio  E0  /ω.  On  the  other  hand,  the  conditions 
considered  correspond  to  dominating  influence  of  regular  oscillating  electric  field  on  the 
radiator,  thus  justifying  the  application  of  the  quasi-energy  approach  [19].  From  the 
assumption  that  the  frequency  ω  ≈  ωce,  where  ωce  is  electron  cyclotron  frequency,  at  field 
value B = 1.65 T, it follows from the value of the first zero of J0(z) in the case of Dβ  that E0 ≈ 
14  kV  .  Using  this  value  it  is  possible  then  to  find  the  effective  fields  for  Dα,γ  polarization 
profiles and estimate the F value basing on the splitting observed in the Dα,γ profiles with  ππππ 
polarization, that gives value around F ≈ 20 kV. 

This  fact  enables  to  explain  the  abnormal  difference  in  the  behavior  of  Dα,γ  in 
comparison  with  Dβ  profiles,  demonstrating  the  complexity  of  development  of  plasma 
oscillations  in  tokamak  periphery  [18,19].  The  values  of  electric  fields  that  match  these 
observations  provide  the  Stark  splitting  strongly  exceeding  the  Doppler  width  and  Zeeman 
splitting [18,19] thus justifying the application of a strongly simplified approach. By the way, 
these  measurements  and  there  model  interpretation  span  the  new  spectroscopic  effect 
consisting  in  the  effective  screening,  by  rapidly  oscillating  electric  field,  of  the  dipole 
interaction of the radiator with quasistationary electric field F [19].  

Similar situation in the sense of generation of plasma oscillations was observed under 
study of some Z-pinch regimes where the spectral profiles observations of peripheral plasmas 
may be again interpreted in terms of strong perturbations of radiator by regular electric fields 
of  plasma  oscillations  [21].  The  study  of  Dα,β,γ  polarization  profiles  revealed,  together  with 
strong dips in the line body, the difference in the values of half-maximum half-width for the 
profiles with different polarization [21]. On the other hand, the mean width value was larger 
than it could follow from the assumption that the main profile is formed due to the action of 
net  quasistatic  electric  field  of  plasma  ions  screened  by  electrons  (individual  plasma 
microfield  component)  [27].  So,  in  distinction  from  the  previous  case,  zero  order  wave 
functions  of  the  problem  in  fact  could  be  formed  by  this  quasistatic  stochastic  anisotropic 
!
microfield  F
  originated  from  low  frequency  plasma  oscillations  with  anisotropic  angular 
distribution.  Hence,  in  the  first  approximation  the  distribution  function  of  quasistatic 
microfield is approximately described by the Rayleigh distribution of stochastic vector [27].  
 

                                         

(
FW

)

 

 

 

(8) 

2/1

====





6
ππππ





2

3
F
2
F
0



exp



−−−−

2

3
F
2
F
0






, 

 
under condition that F0 ≥ 10 e N2/3, where F0  is the mean squared electric field of low 
frequency plasma oscillations, and  N is plasma particle density. The mean level of low 
frequency plasma oscillations is rather high (~ 10-2) with respect to the density of thermal 
energy corresponding to heavy particles NTi (in those conditions Ti ≥Te), where Te  is the 
electron temperature and Ti is the ion temperature measured by laser scattering (it lies in the 

 

7 

range about 30 eV [21]). Assuming the distribution of such total low frequency plasma 
microfield F to be known, the whole profile is formed by ion and electron impact collisional 
broadening of Stark sublevels at a fixed value of F. Weighing this picture with the help of 
!
) gives the observable spectral line shape 
microfield probability distribution function W( F
without contribution of high frequency regular oscillating electric field 

.  

!
0E

The  latter  field, however, strongly interacts with the system of Stark sublevels in the 

vicinity of the following resonances (see [21]): 

 

              

nFea
0

up

up

====

k

"

up

ωωωω

, or 

nFea

ulow

0

low

====

k

"

low

ωωωω

, 

 

(9) 

⋅⋅⋅⋅

3
2

⋅⋅⋅⋅

3
2

 
where Fup,low are values of quasistatic electric microfield that match the resonance conditions 
in  the  multiplet  of  upper  or  lower  level  involved  in  transition  accordingly,  while  kup,low 
designates  the  order  of  resonance  in  the  upper  or  lower  multiplet  of  Stark  sublevels.  The 
positions of these resonances in the profile being located at a frequency detuning determined 
by the equation (see [21]) 
 

                             

⋅⋅⋅⋅

Fea
0

up

,

low

⋅⋅⋅⋅

([
nn
1

−−−−

n

2

)

−−−−

'('
nn
1

−−−−

n

'

2

)]

ωωωω∆∆∆∆⋅⋅⋅⋅====

,  

"

 

(10) 

3
2

 
where the left side describes the Stark shift of the Stark line component with initial parabolic 
quantum  numbers  {n,n1,n2}  and  final  parabolic  quantum  numbers  {n',n'
2}  at  the  electric 
field  value  Fup    or  Flow  that  satisfy  the  resonance  conditions  in  the  upper  or  lower  multiplet 
accordingly, ∆ω=ω-ω0    is the circular frequency detuning from the line center. 

1,n'

Assuming that resonance in the first order kup,low =1 is the most intense, it was possible 
to identify strong dips in the observed profiles of three deuterium Balmer lines emitted from 
Z-pinch plasmas with positions of resonances corresponding to electron plasma frequency ωωωωpe 
[21].  It  is  very  important  that  these  measurements  were  performed  versus  time  of  pinch 
evolution  [21].  Further  examination  of  experimental  profiles  revealed  some  kind  of  the  fine 
structure in the dip’s form. For example, the depth of resonance was so large that the intensity 
of the profile was much  lower in  this  point than  in  the  conventional case,  and  this structure 
0E   can  not  be  considered  to  be  negligible.  Indeed,  dipole 
gave  an  idea  that  the  value  of 
 leads to an additional repulsion of 
interaction of the adjacent Stark sublevels in the field 
levels [21], [27]. This results in the appearance of quasienergy splitting of each Stark sublevel. 
Therefore,  there  was  the  opportunity  to  determine  the  value  of  electric  field  E0    from  the 
measured value  of splitting (between two nearest hills surrounding the resonances) which in 
the  assumed  model  were  proportional  to  E0  [21,27].  The  values  of  electric  fields  that  were 
retrieved on the basis of those diagnostic methods and models were as follows: E0 ≈ 50 ÷80 
kV/cm,  that  exceeded  the  effective  thermal  equilibrium  value,  ≈3  kV/cm  (that  follows  from 
adiabatic impact broadening by plasma ions), almost by an order of magnitude, F0 ≈ 50 kV/cm, 
with  the  limitation  on  the  frequency  range  Ω  <<  3,6  1012  s-1,  which  follows  from  the 
quasistaticity condition.  

!
0E

Thus,  the  used  models  allow  to  give  an  explanation  of,  at  first  glance,  a  strange 
behavior of polarization profiles simultaneously for three observed lines and to determine the 
values  of  anisotropic  electric  fields.  The  frequencies  of  those  electric  fields  could  be 
determined by spectral diagnostics either directly [21] or indirectly [18-19] by means of other 

 

8 

diagnostics.  For  example,  in  the  experiments  with  Z-pinch  plasmas  the  verification  of 
oscillating electric fields frequencies was possible directly by position of resonances [21].  

 

4. CONCLUSIONS  

 
The above analysis shows the Stark diagnostics of hydrogen spectral lines in tokamak and 
Z-pinch  plasmas  to  be  an  efficient  tool  for  determining  not  only  the  electric  field  plasma 
oscillations  in  a  wide  range  of  frequencies  (centimeter  and  millimeter  range  of  vacuum 
wavelengths)  but  also  for  determining  the  parameters  of  localized  sources  of  intense  HF 
waves  associated  with  observed  long-lived  filaments  in  plasmas.  The  latter  pertains  to 
contribution  of  the  so  called  wild  cables.  The  «wild  cables»  concept  [13]  suggested  the 
observed  long-lived  skeletal  structures  in  tokamaks  and  Z-pinches  to  be  caused  by  a 
microdust-assembled  skeleton.  The  results  (Figs.  1-3)  of  calculating  the  widths  of  vacuum 
channels produced by the pressure of on-skeleton high-frequency (HF) electromagnetic waves 
of  the  TEM  type,  which  thus  might  protect  the  skeletons  from  ambient  high-temperature 
plasma,  show  that  the  values  of  amplitude  of  such  wave  appear  to  be  compatible  with  the 
measurements  of those in-plasma HF electric fields in tokamak T-10 and a gaseous Z-pinch 
which  give  observable  Stark  broadening  of  hydrogen  spectral  lines.  Thus,  the  Stark 
diagnostics of hydrogen spectral lines in tokamak and Z-pinch plasmas gives an opportunity to 
probe  indirectly  the  parameters  of  nonlocal  (non-diffusion)  component  of  energy  transport 
which  is  of  substantial  importance  for  the  problem  of  energy  confinement  in  fusion  plasma 
facilities.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.  
The present research is supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant 00-02-
16453).  

 
REFERENCES  
1.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  (a)  In:  Fusion  Energy  1998  (Proc.  17th  IAEA 
Fusion Energy Conference, Yokohama, Japan, October 1998), IAEA, Vienna, 1999, IAEA-
CSP-1/P, Vol. 3, pp. 1131-1134; (b) Proc. 26-th Eur. Phys. Soc. conf. on Plasma Phys. and 
Contr. 
873-876 
Netherlands, 
(http://epsppd.epfl.ch/cross/p2087.htm). 

(Maastricht, 

Fusion 

1999), 

June 

pp. 

2.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  In:  Current  Trends  in  Int.  Fusion  Research: 
Review  and  Assessment  (Proc.  3rd  Symposium,  Washington  D.C.,  March  1999),  Ed.  E. 
Panarella, NRC Research Press, 2000, Ottawa, Canada, pp. 107-135.  

3. I.F. Kvartskhava, et al, Nucl. Fusion, 5, 181 (1965). 
4. W.H. Bostick, Int. J. of Fusion Energy, 1(1), 1 (1977); V. Nardi, W.H. Bostick, J. Feugeas, 
W.  Prior,  Phys.  Rev.,  A22,  2211  (1980);  V.  Nardi,  in  Energy  Storage,  Compression  and 
Switching,  edited  by  V.  Nardi,  H.  Sahlin,  and  W.H.  Bostick  (Plenum,  New  York,  1983), 
Vol. 2, p. 449.  

5. H. Alfvén, Cosmic Plasma (D. Riedel Publ. Co., Dordrecht, Holland, 1981).  
6. IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science, 17, No.2 (1989); 18, No.1 (1990); 20 No.6 (1992). 
7. A.B. Kukushkin, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov, Laser and Part. Beams, 16, 445 (1998).  
8. A.B. Kukushkin, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov, Rev. Sci. Instrum., (a) 70, 1387 (1999); (b) Ibid, 

p. 1421; (c) Ibid., p.1392.  

9.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  A.R.  Terentiev,  Fusion  Technology,  32,  83 
(1997);  A.  B.  Kukushkin,  et.  al.  AIP  Conference  Proceedings  #409  (4th  Dense  Z-Pinch 

 

9 

Conference,  Vancouver,  Canada,  May  1997),  Eds.  N.  R.  Pereira,  J.  Davis,  and  P.  E. 
Pulsifer (AIP Press, New York, 1997), p. 381.  

10.  Kukushkin  A.B.,  Rantsev-Kartinov  V.A.,  In:  Current  Trends  in  Int.  Fusion  Research  - 
Proc. 4-th Symposium (Washington DC, USA, March 2001), Eds. C.D. Orth, E. Panarella, 
and  R.F.  Post.  NRC  Research  Press,  Ottawa,  Canada,  2001  (to  be  published)  (see  also 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/pdf/physics/0112091).  

11. Kukushkin A.B., Rantsev-Kartinov V.A., Bull. Am. Phys. Soc., 2001, v. 46, No. 8, p. 212 
(Program 43rd Annual meeting of APS Division of Plasma Physics, October 29-November 
2 2001, Long Beach, CA, USA, http://www.aps.org/meet/DPP00/baps/..../LO1.010).  

12.  Rantsev-Kartinov  V.A.,  Kukushkin  A.B.,  Similarity  of  skeletal  structures  observed  in 
Ibid.,  p.  295 

electric  discharges. 

and  high-current 

laser-produced  plasmas 
(http://www.aps.org/ meet/DPP00/baps/..../RO2.010).  

13.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  (a)  Proc.  Innovative  Confinement  Concepts 
Workshop  ICC-2000  (2000,  Lawrence  Berkeley  Lab.,  Berkeley,  California,  USA), 
http://icc2000.lbl.gov/proceed.html...;  (b)  Proc.  27-th  Eur.  Phys.  Soc.  conf.  on  Plasma 
Phys. 
2000), 
http://sgi30.rmki.kfki.hu/EPS2000/P2_029.pdf;  (c)  Ibid.,  http://...P2_028.pdf;  (d)  Ibid., 
http://...P2_051.pdf; (e) Rev. Sci. Instrum., 72 (#1, Part II), 506-507 (2001). 

(Budapest, 

Hungary, 

Fusion 

Contr. 

and 

14.  B.N.  Kolbasov,  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  P.V.  Romanov,  Phys.  Lett.  A 

269, 363 (2000); 291, 447 (2001).  

15.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  D.E.  Prokhorovich,  P.A.  Sivko,  and  A.S. 
Savjolov,  Program  XXVIII  Zvenigorod  Conf.  on  Plasma  Phys.  and  Contr.  Fusion 
(Zvenigorod, 
163 
(http://www.fpl.gpi.ru/Zvenigorod/XXVIII/PP/en/03e-Rantsev.doc).  
16.  V.A.  Krupin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  A.B.  Kukushkin, 
(http://www.fpl.gpi.ru/Zvenigorod/XXVIII/MU/en/11e-Rantsev.doc). 

February 

Moscow 

2001),. 

region, 

Ibid., 

p.49. 

p. 

17. J.D. Callen, M.W. Kissick, Plasma Phys. and Contr. Fusion, 39, Suppl. 12B, 173 (1997).  
18. Rantsev-Kartinov V.A., Fiz.. Plaz. (Sov. J. Plasma Phys), 14 (1987) 387.  
19. Gavrilenko V.P., Oks E.A., Rantsev-Kartinov V.A., Pis'ma Zh.Exp.Teor.Fiz. (JETP Lett.), 

44 (1987) 315. 

20. Poznyak V.I., et. al. Proc. 1998 ICPP and 25-th Eur. Phys. Soc. Conf. on Plasma Phys. and 

Contr. Fusion, 1998, Prague, ECA Vol. 22C (1998) p. 607. 

21. Oks E.A., Rantsev-Kartinov V.A., Zh.Exp.Teor.Fiz. (JETP ), 79 (1980) 99. 
22. Gorbunov L.M., Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk (Sov. Phys. Uspekhi), 109 (1973) 631.  
23. Litvak A.G., In: Voprosy Teorii Plazmy (Reviews of Plasma Phys.), vol. 10, p. 164.  
24. I.I. Sobelman, Introduction to Theory of Atomic Spectra, Pergamon Press, 1970. 
25. A.V. Demura, V.S. Lisitsa, Sov. Phys. JETP, vol. 35, 1130-1134 (1972). 
26. A. V. Demura, E.A. Oks, IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science 26, n 4, 1251-1258 

(1998). 

27.  E.A.  Oks,  Plasma  Spectroscopy  with  Quasi-monochromatic  Electric  Fields, 

Energoatomizdat, Moscow, 1990, 238 pp. (in Russian).  

28. A.V. Demura, JETP 83 (1996) 60-72 (Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 110, 114-136 (1996)). 
 

 

10 

Fig.  1.  The  profiles  of  electron  (curve  1)  and  ion  (curve  2)  particle  densities  as  a  function  of
radial  coordinate    in  a  cylindrical  circular  «wild  cable»,  as  calculated  from  the  Poisson
equation  for  a  quasi-hydrodynamics  [23]  of  a  plasma  in  a  HF  electric  field,  with  neglected
value of radius of electron HF oscillations  (Rosc  =  0).  The  values  of  radius  are  taken  in  the
units  Lcab, where  Lcab  is  cable’s  length,  see  Eq.  (1),  the  densities  are  taken  in  the  units  of
background density. The curve 3 is the plasma density in the limit of plasma quasi-neutrality,
and the curve 4 is the curve 1 shifted inward by the local value of  Rosc. The profiles are given
for the case of parameters typical for peripheral  tokamak plasma, namely background plasma
parameters  Ne(0)  =1013  cm-3  ,  Te  =  100  eV  ,  and  the  length  of  typical  straight  sections  of
observed skeletal structures (i.e. hypothetical cable’s length) Lcab = 3 cm. The effective voltage
bias in the wild cable is U = 30 kV.

Fig. 2. Radial profiles of particle densities, similar to Figure 1, for the case of parameters typical
for the far periphery of a gaseous Z-pinch, namely background plasma parameters Ne(0) =1015
cm-3 , Te = 10 eV , and the length of typical straight sections of observed skeletal structures (i.e.
hypothetical cable’s length) Lcab = 1 mm. The effective voltage bias in the wild cable is U = 10
kV.

Fig. 3. Radial profiles of particle densities, similar to Figure 2, for the case of background plasma
parameters  Ne(0)  = 1018 cm-3, Te = 100  eV,  which  are  typical  for  the  core  of  a  high-current
gaseous Z-pinch. The effective voltage bias in the wild cable is U = 30 kV.

