The electromagnetic fields under, on and up Earth surface as earthquakes precursor in
the Balkans and Black Sea regions

Strachimir Chterev Mavrodiev
Sofia, 14 October 2001 
Institute for Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences
Blvd. Tzarigradsko shausee, 72, 1784 Sofia, Bulgaria
E-mail: Mavrodi@inrne.bas.bg

Abstract: It is demonstrate that the analysis of accuracy measurement of geomagnetic

field and the behavior of local tide gravitational potential can serve as a earthquake precursor.

Introduction
The  prediction  of  the  earthquakes’time  (date,  hour,  minute),  epicenter  (region,  depth),
the  amount  of  the  emitted  energy  (Magnitude  in  Rihter  scale),  the  destructive  power  on  the
surface  and  the  danger  from  tsunami,  has  long  and  hard  history.  Very  few  are  the  successful
predictions,  when  the  scientists  and  the  authorities  have  ventured  to  evacuate  the  risk  areas,
saving in this way thousands of lives [1]. 

Up  till  now  the  investigations of  the  earthquakes  nature  and the  scientific  possibilities
for  their  prediction  was  a  research  subject  for  the  geologists  and  geophysicists.  In  the  last
twentieth  century  in  general  the  structure  of  the  Earth,  to  a  certain  extend,  the  history  of  its
formation and the lows of its development became clear. A model of the Earth’s nucleus and its
physical nature still does not exist, although a lot of its properties are known. Also there is not
yet a correct model of the motion of the mantle, which causes the movements of the continental
plaques. The data on the changes in the Earth’s crust before, during and after an earthquake or
vulcano’s  eruption  are  rather  incorrect  and  uncompleted,  both  in  respect  to  the  space
characteristics  on  the surface of the  Earth  crust  and  in  its  depth,  as  well  as  in  time.  The  time
dependence  of  this  data  is  so  stochastic  (accidental),  that  it  is  very  hard  to  deduce  the  useful
information from the noise background, so the geological and geophysical data is not enough to
make reliable predictions of the earthquakes [2]. 

There is no model for the origin and variations of the Earth’s magnetic field, although it
is studied in details on the surface of the Earth, as well, as over it due to the needs of air and
ship  navigation,  the  intercontinental  telephone,  radio  and  TV  –  communications  and  the
systems of management and of the artificial satellites, the systems for strategic rocket defense
[3]. Relatively well known are the daily, monthly (the usual tides) and yearly variations of the
gravitational  potential,  which  depend  on  the  moment’s  positions  of  the  bodies  of  the  Solar
system. [4]. 

The first steps in the investigations of the electric and magnetic properties by means of
extra deep drilling (10 km into the few hundredths kilometers depth of the continental plaques)
and  electromagnetic  measurements  are  already  done,  but  for  only  a  very  small  part  of  the
Earth’s crust [5]. The investigations of the electric currents on and under the Earth’s surface are
only  local  and  sporadic.  The  electromagnetic  properties  of  the  ionosphere  are  well  known
theoretically and experimentally for the radio connections. The theory for the variations of the
electrical potential in the heights of the atmosphere is well developed, but there is not detailed
global data of its daily, monthly and yearly variations. From Franklin’s time a lot is known, in
the  meteorology,  about  the  exchange  of  the  electrical  charges  between  the  Earth  and  its
atmosphere  through  the  thunders  and  lightning  during  the  clouds  forming  and  raining,  but
global data for the vertical currents in the atmosphere is still missing. The state of the radiation
belt of the Earth in the near Cosmic space is well studied theoretically and also there is a global
satellite monitoring of it, as a result the influence of the solar wind is taken into account and the

2

changes  of  the  Earth  atmosphere,  magnetic  field  and  radiation  belt,  which  follow  from  the
eruptions of the Sun may be predicted. [6]. The influence on the meteorological processes of the
wide atmospheric flows, generated by an elementary particle entering in to the atmosphere or
by an atomic nucleus with high or extra high energy is not fully investigated. 

Methodology
Thee building of "Nuclear winter" model, from which follows, that in a world’s nuclear
war the winners would not exist, because a death of the Earth’s ecosystem will follow as result
the end of today’s human civilization, which is in reality the first important result of the birth of
the new complex science-the environmental science. 

This  first  success  of  the  new  science  was  the  reason  for  the  first  precedent  in  history,
when  the  leaders  of  the  world  following  the  recommendations  and  had  agreed  to  stop  the
nuclear rearmament, for a future without arms, wars and violence. The model of the "Nuclear
winter" was created thanks to the new computer and cosmic technologies, and of the impressive
development of the physics, chemistry, biology in the sixties and seventies. 

Here  we  have  to  mention  the  role  of  the  physicist,  chemist  and  biologist  N.  I.
Vernadskiy [7], the theoretical physicist F. Dayson [8] and of the biologist N. M. Sisakyan [9]
for the birth of the environmental science, whose subject is the whole Earth's ecosystem with its
main component - the human civilization. Some people call this science "stable development". I
would prefer the much more exact " harmonic existence" .

The  efforts  of  an  international  group  of  scientists  in  the  heighies  to  create  scientific,
managing, technological and business conditions for the harmonic existence of the Black sea's
ecosystem were a real experience for a practical application of the new science [10]. 

Hypothesis
The hypothesis for possible correlation’s between the earthquakes, the magnetic fields,
the Earth’s horizontal and vertical currents in the atmosphere was born when the historic data
on the Black Sea was systemized. The fire pillars, observed during the Crimean (Кримското)
earthquake in 1927, could be explained with the dehydration of the biogas condense at the time
of the spread out of the earthquakes waves in the sediments and the ignition which follows in
the presence of a high degree of ionization of the atmosphere. Such currents can be measured
for  example  through  a  precise  measurement  of the  Earth's  magnetic  fields.  A  common  model
for the origin of the attendant Earth's currents before, during and after an earthquake does not
exist. Some scientists explain them with the piezoeffect, which generates local changes in the
distribution of the free electric charges in the process when the intensities in the Earth's crust
reach critical values, but there is no experimentally tested theoretical models of this process. 

In  December  1989  started,  a  continuos  measurement  of  a  projection  of  the  Earth's
magnetic field with a detector ( know- how of ОИЯИ, Дубна, Борис Василиев) with absolute
precision less than 1 nano-Tesla at a sampling rate of  2.5 samples per second. Each minute the
mean  value  (TMF),  the  mean  value  of  the  error  (dTMF),  the  mean  square  deviation  from  the
mean  value  (SigTMF)  and  the  mean  square  deviation  from  the  mean  value  of  the  error
(SigdTMF) are evaluated, i.e. in 24 hours 1440 quartets of data are recorded. The choice of the
recorded variables and the time for taking of their average values are obtained (determined) by
the solution of the reverse problem for conforming the data for one projection of the magnetic
field from our device with the standard data for the vector, measured in the geomagnetic station
in Koprivshtiza of the Institute of Geophysics of BAS. The analysis of the data shows, that the
big worlds and all the earthquakes close and strong enough can be "seen", but the interpretation
is not unique. This means that they are recognized after we learn from the Internet that they had
happened.  The  drop  out  of  the  quotation  marks  and  the  change  of  the  verb  recognized  with
predicted  became  possible  after  the  seminar,  which  was  held  from  the  23  till  the  27  of  July  ,
2001 in INRNE - BAS, Sofia [11]. The analysis of the magnetic data on the measurement of the

3

Earth's currents in Volos, Greece and on the behavior of the tides gravitational potential on the
Balkans, presented by Dr. K. Thanasoulas give us a possibility to predict in collaboration the
day and the direction of earthquake near Island of Skiros . Only the direction of the earthquake
was  predicted,  as  Dr.  K.  Tanasoulas  has  only  one  device  for  measurement  of  the  Earth's
currents, but for the evaluation of the earthquakes' epicenter at least two of these are necessary.
The seminar proposed a Program for development and application of this method
and when its usefulness is prooven its application in the Balkans and the region of Black Sea
could be utilized. The choice of the experimental place is obviously the region of the Aegean
Sea,  because  there  two  or  tree  earthquakes  per  day  and  between  10-20  earthquakes  in  a  year
occur  with  Richter’s  Magnitude  bigger  than  4.  The  Program  requires  at  least  three  stationary
devices for measurement of the magnetic field, the horizontal Earth's currents and the vertical
currents  in  the  atmosphere  and  one  mobile  for  measurement  of  the  magnetic  field,  and  the
vertical currents in the atmosphere in the region of the established future epicenter. If there are
oportunities (financial and human resources) a monitoring of all possible other data on physical
parameters,  could  be  recommended.  The  data  for  the  solar  wind,  the  condition  of  the
ionosphere,  the  radiation  belt  of  the  Earth,  the  local  gravitational  anomalies  are  needed  in  at
least  3  km  distances,  the  behavior  of  the  water  resources  and  their  gas  contains,  the  standard
geological  data  for  the  intensities  in  the  Earth's  crust  and  few  other  are  the  obligatory  for
monitoring data. The data is stored in real time in the Center for collecting and analyzing it. The
advanced  modeling  will  answer  the  question  how  unique  and  statistically  reliable  are  the
predictions  of  the  time,  region  and  power  of  earthquake  in  two  years.  The  preliminary
estimations of the value of the hard ware of one facility is around 30000- 40000$, аnd of the
whole complex around 250000$. There are no evaluations of the scientific input, but obviously
the  spectrum  of  the  scientific  qualifications  should  include  theoretical  physics,  geophysics,
geology,  atmospheric  sciences,  geochemistry,  mathematics,  communication  and  computer
technologies and also engineers for creation and exploitation of automated measuring systems
with high relative and absolute precision, and velocity of the measurements up to 1000 Hz and
high  resistance  for  measurements  of  currents,  electrical  potentials,  electrical  resistance,
magnetic fields and many other quantities. 

The  next  picture  is  an  example  of  Dr.  Thanasoulas  for  determination  of  the  direction
towards a future epicenter of earthquake from the measurements of two orthogonal directions of
the Earth’s currents. 

Figure 1.

4

On  the  following  figure  the  behavior  of  the  tide  generating  potential  in  the  region  of
Yambol  ,  Bulgaria  ,  supplied  by  Prof.  А.  Venedikov  from  the  Institute  of  Geophysics,  BAS,
Sofia [4].

Tide generating potential, Bulgaria, Yambol region
Hereafter is the figure for 01.01.2001 – 01.01.2002:

Figure 2.

Results
Figures 3-6 illustrate for the months July, August September and October, 2001, clearly
and  undoubtedly  the  correctness  of  the  title.  On  each  of  them  the  24  hours  behavior  of  the
measured projection of the magnetic field mean per minute is the up curve and its mean value
per day is the dawn curve. On each Figure the dawn curve has a peak or peaks for a few days
periods,  which  is  a  sign  for  a  possible  future  earthquake  or  earthquakes  in  the  region.  The
height  of  the  peak  (the  value  of  the  variation of  the  derivative)  is  directly  proportional  to  the
power  and  inverse  proportional  to  the  distance  to  the  future  epicenter.  It  depends  on  the
geological  structure  (the  isolines  of  the  local  gravitational  anomalies)  of  the  Earth’s  crust
between  the  point  of  measurement  and  the  epicenter.  The  possible  date  of  the  earthquake  is
determined from the next date, on which the Tide gravitational potential given at Figure 2 has a
minimum  (maximum)  for  the  considered  region.  The  probability  for  an  earthquake  is
confirmed, if in the following few days for the 24 hour period, some specific variations or peaks
appear  of  the  magnetic  field  in  contrast  to  its  usual  rather  smooth  behavior  These  signs  are
rather clearly seen on the 24 hours curves of the errors or the errors of the errors. On Fig.7 is
presented a day with a normal 24 hours behavior of the magnetic field and its errors. On Fig.8 is
given an example of 24 hour’s curves, which is a confirmation of the prediction of the date of
the event.

 

 

5

Figure 3.

Figure 4.

6

Figure 5.

Figure 6.

7

Figure 7,

Figure 8.

8

The  recently  published  works  of  scientists  from  the  Moscow  State  Engineering  and
Ethnological Institute about a proved correlation between strong enough earth quakes and the
change in of the density of the electrical charges in the radiation belt of the Earth (electrons and
ionized  atomic  nuclei)  [13],  have  turned  into  experimental  fact  our  hypothesis  about  the
physical correlations between the changes of the electromagnetic fields under, on and over the
Earth’s  surface  and  the  earthquakes.  It  looks  like,  that  a  quasi  –  northern  (in  the  Northern
Hemisphere)  or  quasi  –  southern  (in  the  Southern  Hemisphere)  magnetic  pole  appears  in  the
epicenter  around  the  time  of  an  earthquake.  Until  the  end  of  2001,  Russia  intents  to  send  a
special satellite for “prediction of earthquakes”.

We would like that this work is accepted as a proven possibility of predicting the date of
 the earthquakes. On the Balkans each day a few earthquakes take place and until we are
not able to give theoretical quantitative interpretation of the observed correlations and they are
confirmed statistically, the question will stay open.

Why such a correlation in time, is not observed for the maximum of the tide’s potential
is explained by means of the greater probability for smoothing over the built up inhomogeneous
in the tensor of tension at a lower density.

Why the weaker earthquakes in the region are only seen, but there is no any preliminary

signal for them?

 A more clear answer of this question can be obtained by including in the monitoring the
data  about  the  three  components  of  the  magnetic  field,  the  two  components  of  the  earth’s
currents,  measured  from  two  different  points,  the  vertical  electric  current  and  the  precise
Fourier analysis together with the energetic evaluation of the contribution of the different part
of the spectrum. 

The theory must include the equations of the thermal, electromagnetic and gravitational
state  of  the  Earth  and  its  atmosphere,  the  influence  of  the  solar  winds  and  the  gravitational
interactions in the Solar system. Even, the qualitative formulation of this complicated nonlinear,
as a rule, system of equation looks like a dream for the future.

We would like this work to be considered as an additional argumentation of benefit of

the organizing of the complex investigations and monitoring, proposed on the Seminar [10].

The Author is well aware of his limitations in expertise on the subject, resulting in the
incompleteness of the references and will be very grateful to any one, who will help in filling
up  this  omission.  With  pleasure  I  will  accept  all  the  opinions  aiming  at  a  certain  degree
unambiguous positive or negative answers of the considered problem.

REFERENCES:

1.  T.Asada, "Earthquake prediction techniques", University Tokyo press, 1984,

2.  Dajiong Lu, "Impending Earthquake prediction", Nanjing, 1988

3.  Main Ian, "Is the reliable prediction of individual earthquakes a realistic scientific goal?",

Nature's debate, www.nature.com/nature/debates/earthquake/, 1999 

4.  Н.В.Короновский, "Магнитното поле in геологическото минало of Земята",
Московски държавен университет of името of М.В.Ломоносов, Соровски
образователен журнал, 6, стр 65- 73, 1996,

5.   Б.М.Яновский, "Земния магнетизъм", Издателство of Санкт Петербургския

университет, 592 стр., 1978

9

6.  Venedikov A., Arnoso R., " Program VAV/2000 for Tidal Analysis of Unevenly Spaced

Data with Irregular Drift and Colored Noise", J. Geodetic Society of Japan, vol.47, 1, 281-
286; 2001

7.  Tamura Y., ”A harmonic development of the tide generating potential, Bull. d'Information

Marees Terrestres", 99, 6813- 6855, 1987

8.  А.А.Ковтун, "Електропропроводност of Земята", Санкт- Петербургски държавен

университет, Соровски образователен журнал, 10, стр. 111- 117, 1997,

9.  J.H.Filoux, "North Pacific Magnetotelluric Experiments", J.Geomag.Geoelectr.,Vol.32,

Suppl. 1, P. 33- 44, 1980

10. Space monitoring

12. Фр. Дайсон, не публикувано

11. Николаи Иванoвич Вернадский, "Събрани съчинения", Наука, Москва

13. Нораир Мартиросович Сисакян, Серия "Учени of Русия", "На путях к населенному

Космосу", Наука, Москва, 2001

14. S.CHT. Mavrodiev and др.., “Чисто and Мирно Black Sea”, Семинар “Поморие 1987”,

Програмен колектив 435, ИЯИЯЕ, БАН, Sofia, October 1987;

15. S.CHT.  Mavrodiev  and  др.,  “Чисто  and  Мирно  Black  Sea”,  Семинар  "Поморие  1988”,

Програмен колектив 435, ИЯИЯЕ, БАН, Sofia, 1988;

16. S.CHT.  Mavrodiev  and  др.,  "Доклад-  Диагноза  for  Състоянието  of  Бургаския  Залив  с
Научни,  Управленски  and  Бизнес  Препоръки",  Програмен  Колектив  435,  ИЯИЯЕ,
БАН, Sofia, 1989;

17. В.П.Кеоджян, А.М.Кудин, Ю.В.Терехин,… S.CHT. Mavrodiev and др., "Практическая
Екология Морских Регионов- Черное Море", Стр. 252 , Наукова Думка, Киев, Август
1990;

18. S.CHT. Mavrodiev and др., "Динамика and Корелации of Процеси and Взаимодействия
in Black Sea in Реално Време", 450 стр.,Програмен колектив 435, ИЯИЯЕ, БАН, Sofia,
October 1990; 

19. S.CHT.Mavrodiev  and  др.,  Информационен  Бюлетин  No  1  of  Сдружение  of
Черноморските  Градове  and  региони  "Чисто  and  Мирно  Black  Sea",  Одеса,  Януари
1991;

20. S.CHT.  Mavrodiev,  Р.Русев,  "Фонови  Характеристики  of  Морската  среда 

in
Българската акватория", 154 стр., Програмен колектив 435, ИЯИЯЕ, БАН, Sofia, Юли
1991;

10

21. S.CHT.Mavrodiev,  “Black  Sea-  Състояние,  Перспективи,  Възможни  Решения”,
Национален  семинар  "Екологичната  криза-  същностен  проблем  of  човечеството",
Sofia, Май 1994;

22. S.CHT.Mavrodiev,  "Чисто  and  Мирно  Black  Sea-  Практическа  Екология  of  Морето-

1990",105 стр., ЕКОСИ- БС, Софиа, Януари 1996;

23. S.CHT.Mavrodiev,"Black  Sea-  състoяние,перспективи  and  възможни  решения",
Постерен  доклад,  БАН,  Национална  изложба  по  екология  and  опазване  of  околната
среда, Sofia, Май 1997 

24. V.P.Keondjian, S.Cht.Mavrodiev, "Black Sea- Contemporary Status and Possible Solutions,
International  Conference  on  Ecological  Security  in  Black  Sea  Region",  Black  Sea
Economical Cooperation Meeting, Gelendjik, Russia, October 1997;

25. S.Cht.Mavrodiev, "Applied Ecology of the Black Sea", ISBN 1-56072- 613- X, 207 Pages,

Nova Science Publishers, Inc., Commack, New York 11725, 1998;

26. S.Cht.Mavrodiev, “Black Sea: Contemporary Status, Perspectives and Possible Solutions –
The  Restoration  of  the  Black  Sea  Ecosystem?”,  World  Federation  of  Scientists,  Working
Group  on  Water  and  Pollution,  Workshop  on  Monitoring  Black  Sea  Environmental
Conditions, 27 February– 4 March 1999, Erice, Italy, 1999 

27.  S.Cht.Mavrodiev, C.Thanassoulas, "Possible correlation between electromagnetic earth
fields and future earthquakes", ISBN 954-9820-05-X, Seminar proceedings, 23- 27 July,
2001, INRNE-BAS, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2001,
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/physics/0110012

28. A.M.Galper, S.V.Koldashov, A.M.Murashov, Tu.V.Ozerov, S.A.Voronov, S.Alexandrin,

"High- energy charged particles flux variations in vicinity of Earth as earthquake
precursor", Moscow State Engineering Physics Institutes, pages 7,
http://www.pereplet.ru/pops/quakes/quakes.html, 26 August, 2001,

29. A.M.Гальпер, "Радиационен пояс of Земята", стр. 8, Соровски образователен журнал,

http://science.rambler.ru/db/msg.html?mid=1168269&uri=galper.html, 21 

   August, 2001

30. Н.Вернов, А.Е. Чудаков, Успехи of физическите науки, Т. 70, випуск 3, Стр. 585, 1960

