HOW TO COMMISSION, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN A LARGE FUTURE 
ACCELERATOR COMPLEX FROM FAR REMOTE SITES 

P. Czarapata FNAL, D. Hartill, Cornell; S. Myers, CERN; S. Peggs, BNL; N. Phinney, SLAC;  N. 
Toge, KEK; F. Willeke, DESY; M. Serio, INFN; C. Zhang , IHEP Beijing 

 

 
Abstract 

A study on future large accelerators [1] has considered 
a  facility,  which  is  designed,  built  and  operated  by  a 
worldwide  collaboration  of  equal  partner  institutions, 
and which is remote from most of these institutions. The 
full range of operation was considered including commi-
ssioning,  machine  development,  maintenance,  trouble 
shooting  and  repair.  Experience  from  existing  accele-
rators  confirms  that  most  of  these  activities  are  already 
performed ’remotely’. The large high-energy physics ex-
periments and astronomy projects, already involve inter-
national  collaborations  of  distant  institutions.  Based  on 
this  experience,  the  prospects  for  a  machine  operated 
remotely  from  far  sites  are  encouraging.  Experts  from 
each  laboratory  would  remain  at  their  home  institution 
but  continue  to  participate  in  the  operation  of  the 
machine after construction. Experts are required to be on 
site  only  during  initial  commissioning  and  for  par-
ticularly  difficult  problems.  Repairs  require  an  on-site 
non-expert maintenance crew. Most of the interventions 
can  be  made  without  an  expert  and  many  of  the  rest 
resolved with remote assistance. There appears to be no 
technical  obstacle  to  controlling  an  accelerator  from  a 
distance.  The  major  challenge  is  to  solve  the  complex 
management and communication problems.  

1 INTRODUCTION 
   The  next  generation  of  particle  accelerators  will  be 
major  projects  that  may  require  a  new  mode  of  inter-
national and inter-laboratory collaboration since they are 
too costly to be funded by a single nation and too large 
to be built by a single laboratory. The tremendous tech-
nical challenge of a new facility requires a critical mass 
of  highly  qualified  and  experienced  physicists  and  en-
gineers.    These  experts  are  presently  distributed  among 
the  accelerator  centers  around  the  world  and  it  is  be-
lieved important to maintain and develop this broad base 
of  expertise.  The  successful  accelerator  technology  de-
velopment  of  recent  decades  depended  on  extensive 
exchange of people with complementary technical skills.  
Therefore,  it  is  desirable  that  several  accelerator  labo-
ratories  will  participate  in  any  future  project.  A  con-
sequence  of  a  multi-laboratory  project  is  that  the 
accelerator will be located a considerable distance from 
most  of  the  contributing  institutions  which  design  and 
build it. Shared remote operation is a model that allows 
the experts who designed and built the machine to con-
tinue  to  participate  in  its  operation.  In  order  to  make 
such  a  model  work,  the  collaborating  institutions  must 
have  a  continuing  commitment  to  the  project.  We  dis-

cuss below a model for an international multi-laboratory 
collaboration  to  construct  and  operate  an  accelerator 
facility,  which  attempts  to  meet  this  requirement.  The 
issues for far-remote operation are based on this model.  
   The following questions are addressed: What is required 
for  effective  communication  of  experience,  data,  para-
meters, ideas, that allow for an adequate discussion of the 
problems expected during commissioning, tune-up, failure 
analysis,  and  performance  and  reliability  improvements? 
What  local  staff  is  required  for  operations,  maintenance, 
and  repair?  What  needs  to  be  changed  or  added  to  the 
technical design of the hardware components to allow re-
mote  diagnosis  and  analysis?  Are  the  costs  of  these 
changes  significant?  What  are  the  requirements  on  the 
control  system  data  transmission  speed  or  bandwidth  to 
support 
remote  operation?  Are  presently  available 
communication technologies a limitation requiring further 
research and development? 

the 

operated 

facilities  where 

2 AVAILABLE EXPERIENCE 
   Existing  large  accelerators  such  as LEP and HERA are 
remotely 
controls 
architecture supports ’far-remote’ control. Feedback loops 
that require fast response are implemented locally and do 
not require continuous intervention from the main control 
room  by  operators  or  console  application  software. 
Analog  signals  are  almost  always  digitized  before 
transmission to the control room so that there is no loss of 
information  through  long  cable  runs.  The  enormous 
advances in computing and networking have made digital 
media  the  most  convenient  and  inexpensive  method  for 
transmitting data, even over short distances. 
   The  large  size  of  present  accelerators  and  the  limited 
access  demands  that  interventions  be  well-planned  and 
undertaken  only  after  extensive  remote  diagnostics.  Non-
expert maintenance staff is able to handle most of failures 
and repairs. In difficult cases, they are assisted by experts 
via  telephone  or  via  remote  computer  access  to  the 
components.  Unscheduled  presence  of  experts  on  site  is 
exceptional.  Detailed  reports  and  analysis  from  LEP  and 
HERA that support these conclusions are available [1]. 
   The  commissioning,  operation  and  optimization  of  the 
SLC  is  perhaps  the  most  relevant  experience  for  a future 
linear  collider.  However,  because  the  SLC  was  an  up-
grade  of  the  existing  SLAC  linac,  many  of  the  technical 
components  were  not  modern  enough  to  support  remote  
maintenance  and  troubleshooting.  A  significant  presence 
of  expert  staff  on  site  was  required.  The  control  system 
was  designed  to  allow  consoles  to  be  run  remotely  from 
home  or  office.  With  proper  coordination,  they  could  be 
run  from  other  laboratories.  However,  operators  in  the 

initial  difficulties 

diagnostics.  Whenever 

SLC  control  center  relied  on  many  analog  signals  from 
older  diagnostics  which  were  not  available  remotely.  In 
addition,  although  extensive  feedback  systems  were 
developed  for  the  SLC  to  stabilize  the  beam  parameters 
and  even  optimize  luminosity,  some  tasks  still  required 
frequent operator action with a rather fast response via the 
control links into the control room. This experience might 
seem  discouraging  for 
the  feasibility  of  far-remote 
operations,  but  none  of  these  technical  limitations  are 
fundamental  given  modern 
technology.  The  steady 
increase  in  SLC  performance  was  often  enabled  by  the 
good  data  logging  systems  and  the  possibility  of  offline 
analysis.  Such  analysis  could  have  been  performed  from 
any-where  in  the  world  provided  the  data  were  available 
to  a  strong,  motivated  external  group.  In  fact,  many 
aspects  of  the  SLC  experience  with  feedback,  automated 
procedures and complex analysis are encouraging for far-
remote operation. 
in  commissioning 
   Many  of 
the 
to  have  been  caused  by 
accelerators  are  believed 
insufficient 
comprehensive 
controls and diagnostics have been available in the control 
room at an early stage of accelerator commissioning, they 
have facilitated a rather smooth and quick turn-on, as seen 
at  ESRF  and  PEPII.  There  are  many  more  examples  of 
facilities  with 
initial  diagnostics  where 
progress  was  unsatisfactory.  Any  large  accelerator  must 
have remote troubleshooting capability, simply because of 
the distances involved. The conclusion is that any facility 
with  adequate  diagnostics  and  controls  for  efficient 
operation could also easily be commissioned remotely. 
   Non-accelerator projects also have extensive experience 
with  remote  operation  of complex technical systems with 
restricted  accessibility. The successful operation of space 
experiments  as  well  as  operation  of  distant  telescopes 
demonstrates  that  efficient  remote  operation  is  possible, 
practicable  and  routinely  performed.  In  particular,  many 
observatories are built in rather inhospitable locations and 
operated  with  only  very  little  technical  support  on  site. 
Troubleshooting  and  consultation  with  experts  is  almost 
exclusively  performed  remotely.  The  European  space 
agency  ESO  has  remotely  operated  telescopes  in  Chile 
from a control center in Germany for more than a decade. 
Their  operational  experience  [2]  is  encouraging  but  de-
monstrates that the main difficulties lie in communication 
and  organization  when  handling  exceptional  situations 
and  emergencies.  These  institutions  maintain  a  strong 
presence  of  experts  on  site  despite  the  unfavorable  con-
ditions 
these  problems.  The 
collaborators  on  a  remote  accelerator  project  should 
carefully analyze and learn from the ESO experience.  

to  mitigate 

insufficient 

in  order 

3 MODEL OF REMOTE OPERATION

3.1 General Organization 
   The accelerator is built and operated by a consortium of 
institutes,  laboratories  or  groups  of  laboratories.  Each 
collaborator  is  responsible  for  a  complete  section  of  the 

the 

types 

all  of 

including 

includes  design,  construction, 

subsystems.  This 
machine 
responsibility 
testing, 
commissioning,  participation  in  operations,  planning  and 
execution  of  machine  development,  maintenance, 
diagnosis and repair of faulty components. These machine 
sections are large contiguous parts of the machine such as 
for  example  injectors,  damping  rings,  main  linacs,  beam 
delivery,  for  a  linear  collider.  This  eases  the  design, 
construction,  and  operation  of  the  accelerator,  if  the 
responsibility for large systems is assumed by a group of 
institutions  from  one  region.  To  minimize  the  variety  of 
to  be  operated  and  maintained, 
hardware 
collaborators are also responsible for a particular category 
of hardware spanning several geographic regions. 
   Central management is needed to coordinate the design 
and  construction  of  the  machine  and  later  supervise 
operation  and  maintenance.  Responsibilities  include  the 
overall  layout  of  the  accelerator  with  a  consistent  set  of 
parameters  and  performance  goals.  This  group  ensures 
that  all  components  of  the  accelerator  fit  together  and 
comply  with  the  requirements  for  high  performance  and 
efficient  operation  (definition  of  naming  conventions, 
hardware  standards, 
reliability  requirements,  quality 
control, control system standards and interfaces as well as 
of  the  real-time  and  offline  database).  The  central 
management  coordinates  the  construction  schedule  and  
has  responsibility  for  the  common  infrastructure  (roads, 
buildings  and  tunnels,  power,  water  distribution,  heating 
and  air  conditioning,  cryogenics,  miscellaneous  supplies, 
site-wide  communications  and  networks,  radiation  and 
general safety).  
   Central  management  also  plans  and  coordinates  the 
commissioning,  as  well  as  supervision  and  training  of 
local  maintenance  crews.  A  central  operation  board  (in 
coordination  with  the  experiments)  would  be  responsible 
the  mode  of  operation,  operational  parameters, 
for 
machine  study  periods, 
interventions,  planning  of 
maintenance  periods,  organization  of  machine  operation, 
and training of the operations crews. All remote operation 
crews  would  report  to  the  central  operation  board. 
Regardless  of  where  the  active  control  center  is  located, 
high performance operation of the accelerator will depend 
on a continuous flow of information and input from all of 
the  collaborators.  They  must  maintain  responsibility  for 
the  performance  of  their  components  for  the  entire 
operational lifetime of the machine.  

institutions.  The  operations  crew 

3.2 Machine Operation 
   In  the  multi-laboratory  model,  there  are  several  fully 
functioning control centers capable of operating the entire 
accelerator complex, one at the site and one at each of the 
collaborating 
is 
decentralized  and  can  operate  the  accelerator  from  a  far- 
remote  center.  At  any  given 
the 
accelerator  is  operated  from  only  one  of  these  control 
centers.  The  current  control  center  has  responsibility  for 
all 
including 
commissioning,  routine  operation  for  physics,  machine 
development studies, ongoing diagnosis, and coordination 

time,  however, 

accelerator 

operation 

aspects 

of 

of  maintenance,  repairs  and  interventions.  Control  is 
handed  off  between  centers  at  whatever  intervals  are 
found  to  be  operationally  effective.  Supporting  activities 
may take place at the other locations if authorized by the 
active control center.   

for 

responsible 

collaborators 

3.3 Maintenance 
   The 
the 
remain 
components they have built. They must provide an on-call 
service for remote troubleshooting. The current operations 
crew  works  with  the  appropriate  experts  at  their  home 
institutions  to  diagnose  problems.  It  has  the  authority  to 
respond to failures requiring immediate attention. An on-
site  crew  is  responsible  for  exchanging  and  handling 
failed  components.  Their  responsibilities  include  putting 
components  safely  out  of  operation,  small  repairs, 
disassembling  a  faulty  component  or  module  and 
replacing it by a spare, assisting the remote engineer with 
diagnosis,  shipment  of 
the 
responsible institution for repair, maintenance of a spares 
inventory, putting the component back into operation and 
releasing  the  component  for  remotely  controlled  turn-on 
and setup procedures. Some tasks such as vacuum system 
require 
interventions  or  klystron 
specialized maintenance staff which must be available on 
site  to  provide  rapid  response  time.  Decisions  about 
planned  interventions  must  be  made  by  the  operations 
board 
laboratory 
in  close  collaboration  with 
responsible for the particular part of the machine. 

failed  components 

replacement  will 

the 

to 

3.4 Radiation and other Safety Issues 
   Any  accelerator  can  produce  ionizing  radiation.  Its 
operation  must  be  under  strict  control.  In  addition  to  the 
laws  and  requirements  of  the  host  country  and  its 
overseeing  government  agencies,  there  are  also  the 
internal  rules  of  the  partner  laboratories.  Usually  it  is 
required  that  on-site  staff  be  supervising  beam  operation 
to  guarantee  responsibility  and  accountability  and  permit 
safe  access  to  the  accelerator  housing.  There  are  also 
concerns  about  the  activation  of  high-power  electrical 
devices and other potentially hazardous systems requiring 
interlocks  and  tight  control.  We  believe  that  there  exist 
straightforward  technical  solutions  to  ensure  the  required 
safety  and  security.  The  legal  and  regulatory  issues  are 
more  difficult  and  will  need  careful  investigation.  Most 
to  assume 
likely,  a  near-by 
responsibility  for  radiation  and  other  safety 
issues. 
Similarly,  unusual  events 
like  fires,  floods,  major 
accidents,  breakdown  of  vital  supplies  or  general 
catastrophes  will  require  a  local  crisis  management  team 
available on call to provide an effective on-site response. 
There  must  be  a 
transfer 
responsibility  to  the  local  crisis  management  in  such 
instances.  This  function  could  be  provided  by  nearby 
collaborating institutions.  

laboratory  will  have 

formal  procedure 

to 

Approve 
Advise,,Approve 
Advise
Advise,Approve 
Operations planplan
Operations
Operations plan

Collaborating 
Collaborating 
LabsLabs

Central 
Central 
operation
operation
s s BoardBoard

operations
Plan operations
Plan 
Plan operations

Experiments
Experiments

Optimize Operations
Optimize Operations
Optimize Operations

OffOff--sitesite

experts
experts

Diagnosis
Diagnosis
Diagnosis
setset--upup
set-up

Coordinate interventions
Coordinate interventions
Coordinate interventions

site OperOper--

OffOff--site 
ations center
ations center

operate
operate
operate

Initiate, , 
Initiate
Initiate, 
Authorize 
Authorize 
Authorize 
interventions
interventions
interventions

Trouble 
Trouble 
Trouble 
shooting 
shooting 
shooting 
assistence
assistence
assistence

interventions
interventions
interventions

site Maintenance 
OnOn--site Maintenance 

CrewCrew

Figure 1: Remote Operating Model 

4 REQUIREMENTS FOR FAR-REMOTE 
OPERATION

the  operations  are  handed  over 

4.1 Organizational Requirements 
   Operation  via  a  rotating  control  center  requires  good 
documentation  and  a  mechanism  to  assure  continuity 
when 
to  another 
logbooks  will  be  necessary, 
laboratory.  Electronic 
including  a  comprehensive  log  of  all  commands  and 
events  with  time  stamps,  information  on  the  originator 
and  comments,  with  a  powerful  intelligent  browser  to 
make  the  logged  information  useable  for  analysis.  All 
control  rooms  should  be  close  to  identical  with  a 
minimum  of  local  dialect  and  specialization.    A  compre-
hensive  system  of  tokens  or  permissions  to  coordinate 
between the different control centers is needed. These are 
granted  by  the  operators  in  charge  in  the  current  control 
center.  The  tokens  must  have  sufficient  granularity  to 
allow active remote access to a specific component and to 
regulate  the  level  of  intervention.  Some  organizational 
measures will have to be taken to avoid misunderstanding 
and  loss  of  operation  time.  This  includes  a  more  formal 
use  of  language  with  strictly  and  unambiguously  defined 
elements.  Formal  names  are  required  for  accelerator 
sections, lattice elements, technical components and even 
buildings.  This  means  that  a  comprehensive  dictionary 
has to be written and maintained. 
   In  order  to  keep  all  collaborators  well  informed  and 
involved  and  in  order  to  maintain  active  participation  of 
distant  institutions,  a  special  effort  should  be  made  to 
make  the  control  center  activities  visible  and  transparent 
for  distant  observers,  in  particular  the  current  status  of 
machine  operations.  Monitors  should  be  available  to 
follow  the  operations  progress  and  discussions  in  the 
active  control  center.  They  should  easily  allow  regular 
’visits’ to the control center. All operations meetings (shift 
change,  ad  hoc  meetings  for  troubleshooting,  operation 
summaries, coordination with experiments, etc.) should be 
open 
’face-to-face’ 
communications  can  support  multi-party  conversations, 
including  shared  ’blackboards’  and  computer  windows, 
perhaps  using  virtual  ’rooms’  to  accommodate  specialists 

to  remote  collaborators.  Virtual 

troubleshooting  and 

with  common  interests.  A  permanent  videoconference 
type  of  meeting  may  serve  as  a  model.  We  expect  that 
growing  commercial  interest  in  this  sector  will  promote 
the needed development. 
   To  avoid  having  the  accelerator  teams  cluster  in  local 
groups  with  limited  exchange  of  information,  one  should 
prepare  for  regular  exchange  of  personnel,  for  plenary 
collaboration  meetings,  for  common  operator  training 
across  the  collaboration  and  for  regular  exchange  and 
rotation of leadership roles in the project. 
   A relatively modest staff appears to be required on site 
for  operations,  maintenance  or  repair.  Most  of  the 
activities  of  operation, 
failure 
diagnosis  can  be  performed 
remotely  by  off-site 
personnel.  Extrapolating  from  the  experience  of  existing 
facilities,  expert  intervention  on  site  is  required  in  only 
about  1%  of  the  failures.  If  one  assumes  a  rate  of  2000 
incidents  per  year,  there  should  be  not  more  than  20 
occasions  where  expert  help  has  to  be  available  on  site 
even  without  relying  on  further  improvements  in  remote 
diagnostics,  increased  modularity  and  more  maintenance 
friendly 
from  HERA 
experience,  the  size  of  the  on-site  maintenance  crew  is 
estimated to be about 75 persons for a large future facility. 
the  accelerator,  regular 
For  efficient  operation  of 
maintenance is required in addition to the repair of failed 
components. This work must also be performed by on-site 
staff  that  is  supported  by  a  nearby  laboratory  or  by 
industrial contractors. The collaborator responsible for the 
components  would  plan  and  manage  these  efforts  under 
the  coordination  of  the  operation  board.    A  small 
coordination  team  of  about  ten  would  be  needed  to 
provide  the  necessary  micromanagement.  In  addition, 
there  must  be  staff  on  site  for  security,  for  radiation 
safety,  and  for  maintenance  of  infrastructure,  buildings 
and  roads.  The  number  of  persons  needed  depends  very 
much  on  the  specific  circumstances  of  the  site  and  the 
type of accelerator and it is hard to predict a number. In a 
large  laboratory,  the  staff  for  these  tasks  is  typically  50-
100.  In conclusion, we estimate that a local staff of about 
200 would be required to maintain the facility and assure 
operations.   

future  designs.  Extrapolating 

4.2 Technical Requirements
   The  control  system  must  optimize 
the  flow  of 
information from the hardware to the operations consoles 
to  provide  remote  accessibility  of  the  hardware  from 
remote  sites  without  excessive  data  rates.  The  layered 
approach of modern control systems comfortably supports 
these requirements.  
   The  console  applications  at  the  control  centers  would 
essentially  only  build  up  displays  and  relay  operator 
commands.  These  activities  require  a  slower  data  rate 
commensurate  with  human  response  times,  which  should 
not  be  a  problem  over  any  distance  on  earth.  The 
requirements for console support are well within the reach 
of  existing  technology.  The  most  significant  bandwidth 
demand  is  for  real-time  signals,  which  are  used  for 
continuous monitoring by the operations staff. Most of the 

any 

future 

console 

is  already  available  and 

existing  accelerator  control  systems  use  Ethernet  LAN 
technology  for  data  communications  at  the console level. 
In  present  facilities,  10Mbit/sec  Ethernet  technology  is 
sufficient  to  accommodate  the  required  data  rate  with  an 
overhead of a factor of ten. The technology for ten times 
this  bandwidth 
further 
development can be anticipated. This should be more than 
adequate 
communication 
for 
requirements. 
   The 
intercontinental  data  connections  have  been 
revolutionized  by  the  recent  progress  in  fiber  optics 
systems  providing  data  rates  in  the  multi-Tbit/sec  range, 
or nearly inexhaustible capabilities. Future needs for data 
communications  at  the  particle  laboratories  are  in  the 
range  of  several  Gbit/sec  [3].  They  are  driven  by  the 
exchange  of  experimental  data.  The  need  for  remote 
accelerator  control  is  in  the  order  of  a  few  10Mbit/sec 
which  doesn(cid:146)t  constitute  a  significant  fraction  of  the 
anticipated connectivity. Thus the network is not expected 
to impose any limitation to remote operations. 
   High  performance  accelerators  rely  extensively  on 
automated  procedures  and  closed  loop  control.  These 
functions often require high speed or high bandwidth and 
therefore  would  all  be  implemented  in  the  on-site  layers 
of  the  control  system,  as  would  time-critical  machine 
protection  algorithms,  extensive  data 
logging  and 
execution of routine procedures. 
   The  evolution  of  computer  hardware  and  networks  has 
allowed  a  migration  of  computing  power  from  large 
centralized  systems  to  highly  distributed  systems.  This 
evolution  matches  well 
accelerator 
complexes. Networks with Gigabit speeds and processors 
with  clock  speeds  approaching one GHz have pushed far 
greater  control  autonomy  to  lower  levels  in  the  controls 
architecture.  These  developments  favor  a  ’flat’  (non-
hierarchical)  network  structure  with  intelligent  devices 
that  would  be  directly  accessible  over  the  network.  Such 
devices  essentially  coincide  with  the  current  catchword 
’Network  Appliance’,  and  there  will  be  an  immense 
amount of commercial activity in this direction which will 
be useful for future projects. 
   The  intelligent  device  model  also  implies  that  the 
devices be directly on the network rather than hanging on 
a  field-bus  below  some  other  device.  Traffic  can  be 
localized  in  this  structure  using  ’switches’  which  forward 
packets  only  to  the  port  on  which  the  destination  device 
hangs and whose ’store and forward’ capability essentially 
eliminates Ethernet collisions. 
   On  the  accelerator  site,  the  majority  of  repairs  would 
involve  the  exchange  of  modules.  This  requires  that  all 
components  be  composed  of  modules  of  a  reasonable, 
transportable  size  which  have  relatively  easy  to  restore 
interfaces to the other constituents of the component.   
   On  the  other  hand,  the  requirements  for  the  hardware 
components  of  a  remotely  operated  accelerator  are 
essentially  identical  to  the  requirements  for  any  large 
complex technical facility. The general design criteria are: 
redundancy  of  critical  parts,  if  cost  considerations  allow 
it;  avoidance  of  single  point  failures  and  comprehensive 

the  growing 

assurance 

procedures; 

failure  analysis;  over-engineering  of  critical  components 
to enhance mean time between failure; standardization of 
testing; 
quality 
design 
documentation;  standardization  of  components,  parts  and 
material  wherever  technically  reasonable;  avoidance  of 
large  temperature  gradients  and  thermal  stress;  and 
temperature 
control  of  humidity  and  environmental 
extremes. 
   Specific  features  connected  to  remote  operation  are  
foreseen:  high  modularity  of  the  components  to  ease 
troubleshooting and minimize repair time; more complete 
remote  diagnostics  with  access  to  all  critical  test  and 
measurement  points  necessary  to  reliably  diagnose  any 
failure;  and  provision  for  simultaneous  operation  and 
observation.  If  a  device  is  to  be  fully  diagnosable 
remotely,  it  is  important  that  a  detailed  analysis  of  the 
requirements  be  an  integral part of the conceptual design 
of the component. 
   A  survey  of  engineers  and  designers  in  the  major 
accelerator  laboratories  indicates  that  all  of  these  design 
goals  are  already  incorporated  in  planning  for  future 
accelerators.  Due  to  the  large  number  of  components, 
even with an extremely high mean time between failures, 
one must expect several breakdown events per day. Even 
for  an  accelerator  that  is  integrated  into  an  existing 
laboratory, 
are 
obviously  necessary  to  minimize  downtime.  This  will  be 
one of the crucial technical issues for a large new facility. 
The  mean  time  between  failures  has  to  improve  by  a 
factor of 5-10 compared to existing facilities like HERA. 
This is the real challenge and any additional requirements 
for remote operation are minor by comparison.  
    The  conclusion  is  that  the  major  technical  challenges 
for  the  hardware  of  a  future  accelerator  are  due  to  the 
large  number  of  components  and  the  required  reliability 
and  not  to  the  possibility  of  remote  operation  and 
diagnostics.  The  additional  costs  for  compatibility  with 
remote operation appear negligible. 

remote  diagnostics 

comprehensive 

5. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
   We consider a facility which is remote from most of the 
collaborating institutions, designed, built and operated by 
a  worldwide  collaboration  of  equal  partner  institutions. 
Expert  staff  from  each  laboratory  remains  based  at  its 
home  institution  but  continues  to  participate  in  the 
operation  of  the  machine  after  construction. We consider 
all  operation  activities.  As 
far  as  maintenance, 
troubleshooting  and  repair  is  concerned,  the  experience 
from  existing  laboratories  is  encouraging,  indicating  that 
most  activities  are already performed ’remotely’, or could 
be  with  properly  designed  equipment.  The  experts  are 
only  rarely  required  to  be  physically  present  on  site. 
Repairs require an on-site maintenance crew. Most of the 
interventions  are  made  without  an  expert  or  with  only 
telephone  assistance.  For  a  future  large  accelerator 
facility, we conclude that it should be possible to perform 
most of the tasks remotely. Maintenance, troubleshooting 
and  repair  by  non-experts  do  require  comprehensive 
remote diagnostics, modular design of components, and a 

that 

this  we  conclude 

high  level  of  standardization.  An  accelerator  could  be 
operated  far-remotely.  Modern  control  systems  use  a 
layered  approach,  which  appears  to  be  adequate.  The 
rapid  rate  of  development  of communications technology 
should  easily  support  the  demands  of  future  accelerator 
operation.  Considering 
there 
appears  to  be  no  technical  obstacle  to  far-remote  control 
of an accelerator. 
   Operation of the accelerator is not an easy task. Frontier 
facilities  are  inevitably  pushing  the  limits  of  accelerator 
technology  and  present  unanticipated  difficulties  that 
require intense effort from a dedicated team of experts to 
diagnose  and  solve  each  new  problem.  Past  experience 
has  shown  how  critical  it  is  for  these  experts  to  have 
offices near each other to facilitate exchange of ideas and 
information.  Equally  important  is  contact  between  the 
experimenters and the accelerator physicists, and between 
the  physicists,  engineers  and  operations  staff.  To 
encourage  an  effective 
these 
disparate  groups,  it  will  be  necessary  to  have  a  critical 
mass  of  experts  located  in  at  least  one,  if  not  several,  of 
the laboratories. 
   During  normal  operation,  the  on-site  staff  required 
could be much smaller than are typically at existing large 
laboratories.  A  reliable  number  for  the  minimum  staff 
depends  very  much  on  the  details  of  the  remote  facility 
but experience from large machines indicates that is could 
be  as  small  as  200.  There  would  be  a  much  greater 
number  of  technical  staff  of  all  descriptions  actively 
involved in the accelerator operation remotely. 
   The major challenge of a remote operation model lies in 
solving  the  complex  management  and  communication 
problems. 

interchange  between 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
   The  authors  acknowledge  that  much  of  the  material 
presented  in  this  report  was  supplied  by  Prof.  M.  Huber, 
ESA;  Dr.  M.  Ziebell,  ESO,  M.  Jablonka  and  B.  Aune, 
CEA  Saclay,  G.  Mazitelli,  INFN,  C.  Pirotte,  CERN,  S. 
Herb  and  M.  Clausen,  H.  Freese,  M.  Bieler,  J.P.  Jensen, 
M.  Staak,  F.  Mittag,  W.  Habbe,  M.  Nagl,  and  J.  Eckolt, 
DESY.  

6 REFERENCES 

[1]  P. Czarapata FNAL, D. Hartill, Cornell; S. Myers, 
CERN; S. Peggs, BNL; N. Phinney, SLAC; M. Serio, 
INFN; N. Toge, KEK; F. Willeke, DESY C. Zhang, IHEP 
Beijing: Report of the Inter-Laboratory Task Force on 
Remote Operation, to be published 
[2]  M.Ziebel, ESO,private com., January 2001 
[3]  HEP Nework meeting, Indianapolis, June 2001 
http://lexus.physics.indiana.edu/griphyn/Fermilab_Conne
ctivity 
 
 

