 

2
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
5
1
 
 
 
4
4
0
2
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On Apparent Superluminal Motion in Astrophysical 
Jet Models

Ernst Karl Kunst

Astrophysical  models  developed  to  explain  superluminal  motion  in  beaming
phenomena are shown to be incomplete and the correct kinematical expression
in any case to predict projected velocities slower than the speed of light. The
observed superluminal motions in the plane of the sky are proposed to be real.
  
Key words: Superluminal velocity - astrophysical jet models - simultaneity - distance-
dependent Lorentz transformation

Radio  astronomers  have  known  of  superluminal  velocities  in  extragalactic  radio
sources  for  now  more  than  30  years  (in  the  optical  region  since  some  time).  The
phenomenon  has  been  widely  discussed  and  reviewed  ever  since  [1],  [2].  The
evidence is that rapid superluminal motion is a very common feature among celestial
sources, even in the Milky Way galaxy. From the competing ingenious models that
have been developed to explain the phenomenon within the framework of relativistic
kinematics the one first proposed by Rees has been accepted as the most attractive
theoretical  explanation  [3],  [4].  It  involves  relativistic  motion  of  the  radio  (or  light)
emitting regions in the superluminal sources. The superluminal effect thus arises from
the time delay between the two components, when the angle 1 of the motion to the line
of sight is small. The relativistic motion towards the observer has the additional effect
of enhancing the flux density (Doppler boosting).
If v
is the apparent velocity observed by the observer at the distant point O and v the
space  velocity  of  some  directly  observed  feature,  then  v   and  v  are  apparently
related by the simple formula (see Fig. 2a)

app 

app

(cid:10)(cid:10)

vapp

v sin1

.

cos1

1 (cid:9) v
c

(1)

It  is  clear  that by inserting appropriate values of v and 1 into equation (1) in many
cases  superluminal  velocity  results  and,  thus,  this  phenomenon  apparently  can  be
shown to be an illusionory effect. But it seems that the physial notion underlying the
formula above is much too simple and needs some modification, which eventually will
lead always to projected velocities v  = v sin1 < c.

app

Let us reanalyse the problem from a purely (special) relativistic and kinematical point
of view. For this purpose consider the projection of a “jet” in the plane of the sky to be
caused (in first approximation) by a more or less stable structure of length r between
the  fixed  points  A  (begin)  and  B  (end).  In  the  kinematical  models,  which  lead  to
formula (1), the superluminal phenomenon is presumed to represent a physical motion
from point A to point B almost directly towards the distant observer at O (Fig. 2a). This
implies the point A (begin of the jet) to be at rest with respect to the observer resting

2

at the point O at rest (in view of the involved high relativistic expansion velocities v Y
c  appears  any  relative  motion  between  the  points  A  and  O  negligible,  as  well  as
effects of gravity and rotation).
On the other hand, there always can be introduced an oppositely to r directed counter
jet  pointing  from  point  A  at  rest  to  a  new  point  C  so  that  C¯ A¯ B¯   =  2r.  In  the  over-
simplified geometrical picture leading to equation (1) would the apparent motion of a
physical feature from point A to point C be described by

(cid:10)(cid:10)

v (cid:12)app

v sin1

,

cos1

1 (cid:8)(cid:8) v
c

(2)

app

app

 < v sin1 < v  .  

delivering always v’
Let C¯ A¯ B¯  be normal to the line of sight of the observer at O. Light signals, which are
emitted simultaneously from point A at the very center of this structure towards the
points B and C according to the Einsteinian simultaneity definition in reference [5] and
[6],  would  also  arrive  there  simultaneously  after  time  (cid:12)t  =  r/c,  covering  in  this  time
distance 2r (see Fig. 1). 

If  the  distance to the observer at the point O is denoted d, then the velocity of the
oppositely directed light signals (or particles travelling with about the speed of light)
can due to their simultaneous arrival at the points B and C with respect to the observer
at O be expressed as [(2d + 2r) - 2d]/(2(cid:12)t) = c. It seems that this “natural” projection of
an  extended  structure  in  the  plane  of  the  sky  on  the  grounds  of  the  validity  of  the
Einsteinian simultaneity definition, where light signals need the least possible time (cid:12)t
to measure it from one end to the other so that 2r = 2c(cid:12)t be in any case the basic
requirement for the comparison of measurements. This must also be valid even if only
one jet seems to exist, because, as already mentioned, in any such case a counter jet
can always be introduced.

3

Suppose  a  light  signal  flashing  simultaneously  over  the  whole  length  C¯ A¯ B¯   =  2r
towards the observer who happens to rest at point O. It is clear that also the light rays
from the emitters B and C arrive simultaneously at O and, thus, no time lag between
the arrival times can be observed. 
If now C¯ A¯ B¯  = 2r is inclined to the line of sight at angle 1 (which is the only interesting
case), with point B being the near end with respect to O, then a simultaneous flash of
light towards O would evidently not arrive simultaneously at the observer resting there.
Rather the light from the emitter B would arrive first and the light from emitter C last,
lagging behind time 2r cos1/c, so that the observer at point O will observe the light
flash moving apparently from B to C with velocity c sin1/cos1 in this time (see Fig. 2b).

It is clear that this physical picture also is valid for the “natural” projection above of
light signals (or particles with about this speed) arriving simultaneously at the points
B and C. The light from emitter C also lags behind the light from emitter B by time 
2r cos1/c, as it generally does from any point at distance r’ < r between the points A
and C by time 2r’ cos1/c, compared with the light signal from the respective (counter)
point at distance r’ between points A and B. Hence, the motion of physical features
moving simultaneously with or with about the speed of light from the center point A to
the points B and C, respectively, must be delayed in the direction of point B and sped
up in the opposite direction towards point C by halve this time, i. e. (cid:12)t cos1. This is
evidently  valid  for  any  physical  motion  starting  simultaneously  from  the  point  A
towards the points B and C. These effects cancel exactly and, thus, compensate the
apparent shortening of time by -v cos1/c in the denominator of the right-hand side of
(1) and the delay of the same order of magnitude in (2) so that these equations have
to be corrected to 

vapp

(cid:10)(cid:10) v (cid:12)app

(cid:10)(cid:10)

v sin1

(cid:10)(cid:10)

v sin1

1 (cid:9) v cos1
c

(cid:8)(cid:8) v cos1
c

1 (cid:8)(cid:8) v cos1
c

(cid:9) v cos1
c

(cid:10)(cid:10) v sin1 .

(3)

4

The result (3) is also backed by considering that the points A and O are resting one to
another and, thus, the time interval (cid:12)t  of a physical motion or two counter directed
ones with respect to point A must in any case be measured in both frames of reference
alike, i. e. (cid:12)t  = (cid:12)t . The previous expression becomes in the light of the foregoing to
[(d + r cos1 + r sin1) + (d - r cos1 + r sin1) - 2d]/(2(cid:12)t) = v sin1 (see Fig. 2b). It is clear
that  this  reflects  a  fundamental  property  of  space-time  symmetry  and,  therefore,  is
totally  independent  of  the  accidental  existence  or  visibleness  of  a  counter  jet  or  a
counter directed motion to any moving physical feature in the plane of the sky. 

O

A

A

Our  analysis  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  on  the  grounds  of  Einsteinian  relativistic
kinematics superluminal motion in beaming phenomena at whatever angle to the line
of  sight  of  an  observer  at  Earth  cannot  occur.  Hence  the  observed  superluminal
motions among celestial objects must be of other origin than proposed by the hitherto
discussed astrophysical models. These all have in common that the axiom of special
relativity, that no real physical motion can exeed the speed of light, even holds if vast
cosmological  distances  are  involved  and,  therefore,  contrary  observations  must  be
illusionory effects. But if formula (3) correctly describes every projected velocity v in
the framework of special relativity, even if v Y c and angle 1 Y 0, then the conclusion
is unavoidable that the observed superluminal motions in the sky are real. This has
already  been  proposed  as  a  quintessence  of  a  distance-dependent  Lorentz
transformation [7].

References

  [1] Blandford, R.D., MacKee, C.F. & Rees, M.J., Nature 267, 211 - 216 (1977)
  [2] Cohen, M.H. et al., Nature 268, 405 - 409 (1977)
  [3] Rees, M.J., Nature 211, 468 (1966)
  [4] Rees, M.J., M.N.R.A.S. 135, 345 (1967)
  [5] Einstein, A., Ann. d. Phys. 17, 892 - 895 (1905)
  [6] Einstein, A., Gundzüge d. Relativitätstheorie, 5th ed., Vieweg-Verlag,                 
       Braunschweig 1969, p. 31 
  [7] Kunst, E.K.: Is the Lorentz Transformation Distant-Dependent?                           
       physics/9911022

