Preprint Budker INP 2002-15
Submitted to Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A

Triple GEM operation in compressed He and Kr

A. Bondar, A. Buzulutskov *

, L. Shekhtman, V. Snopkov, A. Vasiljev

Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia

Abstract

We study the performance of the triple GEM (Gas Electron Multiplier) detector in pure noble gases He and Kr
at high pressures, varying from 1 to 15 atm. The operation in these gases is compared to that recently studied in
Ne,  Ar  and  Xe.  It  turned  out  that  light  noble  gases,  He  and  Ne,  have  superior  performance:  the  highest  gain,
approaching  105,  and  the  unusual  gain  dependence  on  pressure.  In  particular,  the  maximum  gain  in  He  and  Ne
does  not  decrease  with  pressure,  in  contrast  to  Ar,  Kr  and  Xe.  These  results  are  of  high  relevance  for
understanding basic mechanisms of electron avalanching in noble gases and for applications in cryogenic particle
detectors, X-ray imaging and neutron detectors.

Keywords: Gas Electron Multipliers; noble gases; high pressures.
PACs: 29.40C; 07.85.F; 34.80.M

1. Introduction

There  is  the  growing  interest  in  developing
gas avalanche detectors capable of operating in
pure  noble  gases  in  a  wide  pressure  range.  On
one  hand,  this  interest  is  induced  by  the
development  of  sealed  gas  photomultipliers
[1,2],  filled  with  pure  noble  gases.  Such  a
the  photocathode
filling 
degradation under avalanche conditions.

should  prevent 

On  the  other  hand,  this  interest  is  motivated
by  recent  suggestions  to  employ  light  noble
liquids He and Ne and heavy noble liquid Xe as
detection media for solar neutrinos [3] and dark

matter  [4],  correspondingly.  A  detector  of
choice  might  be  a  double-phase  device,  where
the ionization produced in liquid by a particle is
detected in a gas phase with the help of the Gas
Electron  Multiplier  (GEM)  [5]  operated  at
cryogenic  temperatures.  GEM-based  detectors
are  particular  promising  for  these  applications
due  to  the  recently  discovered  capability  of
multi-GEM  structures  to  operate  in  pure  noble
gases at high gains [6].

temperatures 

It  should  be  remarked  that  the  operation  at
cryogenic 
atmospheric
pressure  could  be  equivalent  to  that  at  room
temperatures  and  high  pressures.  Indeed,  the
gas  density  is  a  reciprocal  function  of  the

and 

                                                     

*  Corresponding author. Fax: 7-3832-342163. Phone: 7-3832-394833.
Email: buzulu@inp.nsk.su

1

temperature at a given pressure and just the gas
density  is  the  parameter  defining  electron
avalanche  characteristics.  Little 
is  known,
however,  about  GEM  performance  at  high
pressures [7,8] and in particular in compressed
pure  noble  gases.  So  far,  all  investigators
observed that the  maximum  GEM  gain  rapidly
decreased with pressure.

In 

Recently,  we  have  studied  the  operation  of
the triple GEM detector in Ne, Ar and Xe [9] in
the pressure range of 1-10 atm. The interesting
observation was that Ne showed quite different
pressure  dependence  of  gain  characteristics  as
compared to Ar and Xe, indicating that the gas
amplification  mechanism  in  light  noble  gases
may change at high pressures.
this  work,  we 

the
performance  of  the  triple  GEM  detector  in
other  two  noble  gases,  He  and  Kr,  at  high
pressures reaching 15 atm. It is confirmed  that
the  operation  in  light  noble  gases  makes
substantial  difference  to  that  of  heavy  noble
gases: the performance in He and Ne turned out
terms  of  gain-voltage
to  be  superior 
in 
their  dependence  on
characteristics  and 
pressure.  Possible 
such
explanation 
behaviour is presented.

further 

study 

for 

2.  Experimental setup and procedures

The  experimental  setup  and  procedure  were
similar  to  that  used  in  [9]  (see  Fig.1).  Three
GEM  foils  (50  m m  thick  Kapton,  80  m m  hole
diameter at a 140 m m pitch, 28· 28 mm2 active
area)  and  a  printed-circuit-board  (PCB)  anode
were mounted in cascade inside a stainless-steel
vessel.  The  GEMs  were  produced  at  CERN
workshop.  The  drift  gap  (between  the  cathode
and  the  1st  GEM),  transfer  gaps  (between  the
GEMs)  and  induction  gap  (between  the  last
GEM  and  the  anode)  were  3,  1.6  and  1.6  mm,
respectively.  The  detector  was  filled  with  He,
Ne, Ar, Kr or Xe of a purity of 99.99%; it could
safely  operate  at  high  pressures  reaching  15
atm.

Fig.1  Schematic  view  of  a  triple  GEM  detector.  Two
voltage dividers were used, symmetrical and asymmetrical,
with 
increasing  GEM  voltage,
correspondingly.

the  uniform  and 

The  detector  was  irradiated  with  an  X-ray
tube,  with  a  molybdenum  target,  through  a  1
mm  Al  window.  The  voltage  and  current
supplied to the tube were in the range of 20-30
kV and below 60 m A, correspondingly. At these
voltages the tube radiation is  mostly  peaked  at
molybdenum characteristic lines Mo Ka  at 17.4
keV and Mo Kb  at 19.7 keV. In Ne, Ar, Kr and
Xe  the  primary  ionization  in  the  drift  gap  is
produced  by  a  photoelectric  absorption  of  X-
ray photons in gas molecules, while in He it is
produced  by  an  X-ray-induced  secondary
electron emission from the GEM electrode. The
latter  process  will  be  discussed  in  more  detail
in sect. 4.

GEM  electrodes  were  biased 

through  a
resistive  high-voltage  divider,  as  shown  in
Fig.1.  Two  voltage  divider  configurations,
symmetrical and asymmetrical, were used. The
dividers  were  optimized  in  such  a  way  as  to
obtain the maximum gain in an appropriate gas.
In the asymmetrical divider, the voltage across
a  single  GEM  increased  successively,  by  5%,
towards  the  last  GEM.  In  the  symmetrical
divider,  the  voltage  across  each  GEM  was
uniform;  in  addition,  the  voltage  across  the
induction gap was doubled compared to that of
the 
The
symmetrical divider was effective for operation

configuration. 

asymmetrical 

2

in He, while the asymmetrical divider was more
effective in Ar, Kr, and Xe.

In He at 1 atm, typical electric fields were ED
 0.6 kV/cm in the drift gap, ET »
 1.1 kV/cm in
» 2.2  kV/cm  in  the
the  transfer  gaps,  EI 
induction gap; the voltage across a single GEM
(“GEM voltage”) was D VGEM = 150-200 V.  In
Kr  at  1  atm,  the  appropriate  values  were  ED  »
1.0  kV/cm,  ET  »
  1.9  kV/cm,  EI  » 1.9  kV/cm,
D VGEM = 250-350 V.

The  anode  signal  was  recorded  either  in  a
current  or  pulse-counting  mode.  The  anode
current  value  was  always  kept  below  100  nA,
by reducing the X-ray tube intensity, to prevent
charging-up  of  GEM  foils.  The  maximum
attainable gain was defined as that at which no
anode  current  instabilities  (dark  currents  or
discharges) were observed for about 1 min.

In  the  current  mode,  the  gain  value  of  the
triple  GEM  detector  was  defined  as  the  anode
current  normalized  to  the  current  induced  by
primary  ionization  in  the  drift  gap.    The  latter
special
current 
in 
measurements,  where 
the  drift  gap  was
operated in an ionization collection mode.

determined 

was 

In  the  pulse-counting  mode,  the  gain  value
was  determined  with  the  help  of  a  calibrated
charge-sensitive amplifier (with a sensitivity of
6  V/pC):  the  anode  charge  was  divided  by  the
primary ionization charge produced in the drift
gap. The latter charge was calculated using the
data on X-ray absorption in an appropriate gas.

3.  Detector performance in Kr

Fig.2  shows  gain-voltage  characteristics  of
the  triple  GEM  detector  in  Kr,  at  different
pressures,  for  symmetrical  and  asymmetrical
divider  configurations.  One  can  see  that  the
asymmetrical  divider,  with  increasing  GEM
voltage  towards  the  last  GEM,  allows  for
reaching  somewhat  higher  gains  at  high
pressures.

Fig.2 Gain of a triple GEM detector in Kr as a function of
the voltage across the last GEM at different pressures, in a
current  mode.  Two  data  sets  are  shown,  for 
the
symmetrical (solid points) and asymmetrical (open points)
voltage divider.

It  should  be  noticed  that  in  multi-GEM
detectors  using  gas  mixtures  with  molecular
additives, the optimized voltage divider had the
the  GEM  voltage
opposite  direction  of 
increment,  namely  towards  the  1st  GEM  [10].
This is probably because of the specific nature
of  the  discharge  mechanism  in  noble  gases:  in
noble  gases  the  discharges  are  presumably
generated  by  ion  feedbacks  from  the  last  to
preceding  GEMs  [6],  due  to  an  enhanced  ion-
induced electron emission as compared to other
gases  [11].  Decreasing  the  1st  GEM  voltage
would 
emission.  Discharge
phenomena in noble gases will be discussed in
more details elsewhere.

reduce 

this 

 In  general,  gain  behaviour  in  Kr  is  very
similar  to  that  of  Xe  [9]:  the  maximum  gain
does  not  exceed  104,  weakly  depending  on
pressure  below  2  atm;  at  higher  pressures  it
rapidly  drops  down  to  below  10  at  5  atm.
Moreover,  similar  to  Xe,  the  operation  in  Kr
turned  out  to  be  much  more  sensitive  to
discharges,  compared  to  He,  Ne  and  Ar.  All
three  GEMs  could  be  destroyed  after  even  a
few  discharges  when  operating  in  Kr  or  Xe  at
maximum  gains  in  the  pressure  range  of  1-2
atm.

3

»
 
4.  Detector performance in He

In  Ne,  Ar,  Kr  and  Xe  the  primary  ionization
is generated by photoelectrons ejected from gas
molecules  due  to  X-ray  photon  absorption.  In
He,  however,  the  X-ray  absorption  in  gas  is
small
suppressed  due 
absorption  coefficient.  This  was  confirmed  by
the  following  observation:  in  He  the  primary
ionization  current 
the  drift  gap  was
in 
practically independent on pressure, in contrast
to other gases.

to  an  extremely 

Apparently,  the  ionization  in  He  is  produced
by  an  X-ray-induced 
secondary  electron
emission from solid. A typical depth of a solid
from which a secondary electron can be emitted
is  rather  small:  of  the  order  of  10  atomic
monolayers  [12].  Nevertheless  the  estimations
show that this layer is thick enough to provide
the signal. The secondary electrons are emitted
into  the  drift  gap  from  the  copper  GEM
electrode  rather  than  from  aluminium  cathode,
since the photon absorption in Cu is by a factor
of 30 larger than in Al.

of 

ejection 

photoelectrons 

The  absorption  of  characteristic  Mo  Ka   and
Mo Kb  photons in the Cu K-shell would result
in 
having
characteristic  energies  8.5  keV  and  10.7  keV,
which  are  just  the  difference  between  the
photon  and  K-shell  energies.  If  the  rest  of  the
absorbed  energy  escapes  the  detection,  one
would expect to detect two peaks in the energy
distribution.

We 

indeed  observed 

two  peaks  when
operating  in  a  pulsed-counting  mode.  Fig.3
shows the anode pulse-height distribution in He
at  5  atm  at  a  gain  of  9· 103.  The  relative  peak
positions  well  correspond  to  photoelectron
characteristic energies. The more energetic part
of  the  spectrum  is  presumably  produced  via
Auger  process,  when  the  rest  of  the  absorbed
energy  is  released  by  ejection  of  additional
electrons.

Fig.3 Pulse-height distribution of anode signals in He at 5
atm,  at  a  gain  of  9· 103.  Two  peaks  correspond  to
photoelectrons  ejected  from  the  Cu  K-shell  due  to
absorption of Mo Ka  and Mo Kb  characteristic photons.

Fig.4  Anode  signals  in  He  at  10  atm,  at  a  gain  of  8· 103,
detected with a charge-sensitive amplifier.

For  each  peak,  one  can  estimate  a  total
number of ion pairs created in the drift gap, in
He,  and  thus  calculate  the  detector  gain,
dividing the anode charge by this number. It is
interesting  that  the  energy  resolution  in  He,
estimated from the width of the peak, is close to
that  obtained  with  multi-GEM  detectors  in
other, traditional gas mixtures [13]: s  /E »  10%
at 8.5 keV.

The  signal  shape  supports  our  model  for
primary  ionization  production  in  He.  Fig.4
shows  anode  signals  after  a  charge-sensitive

4

techniques,  one  may  conclude  that  they  both
give  similar  results  and  that  the  measurement
uncertainty  of  the  gain  is  within  a  factor  of  2.
The  maximum  gain  in  He  weakly  depends  on
pressure, reaching a value of 105 at 15 atm.

Normally  it  is  expected  that  the  operation
voltage of a gas detector substantially increases
with pressure, following E/p scaling behaviour.
This indeed was observed in heavy noble gases
[9].  However,  this  was  not  the  case  in  He  and
Ne. In He, in the pressure range of 1-7 atm, the
operation  voltage  almost  did  not  grow  with
pressure, increasing by 10% only. Moreover, in
the range of 1-3 atm the operation voltage even
decreased  with  pressure,  at  the  initial  part  of
the gain curve. To our knowledge, such unusual
pressure  dependence  has  never  been  observed
before.  This  behaviour  is  very  similar  to  that
observed in Ne, where the operation voltage did
not vary with pressure above 5 atm [9].

It should be noticed that the slopes of the gain
curves  are  the  same  at  all  pressures,  except  of
the data at 1 atm at the final part of the curve.
The  explanation  is  that  at  1  atm  the  induction
field was so high that it gave rise to a parallel-
plate  amplification  mode  in  the  induction  gap,
in  stronger  gain  dependence  on
resulting 
voltage.  The  commencement  of  the  parallel-
plate  mode  at  1  atm  was  also  indicated  by
transformation  of  the  anode  signals:  the  pulse-
height  distribution  became  exponential.  The
parallel-plate mode was not observed at higher
pressures.

We  checked  the  data  stability,  replacing  the
triple GEM detector for another one and adding
a controlled amount of ambient air to He: of the
order  of  10-4    and    10-6.  This  is  illustrated  in
Fig.7  showing  the  comparison  of  two  sets  of
gain  characteristics.  The  impurity  test  is  of
particular importance, since one should exclude
from  consideration  the  avalanche  mechanism
induced  by  impurities  such  as  Penning  effect.
One can see that data are well reproduced.

amplifier in He at 10 atm at a gain of 8· 103. A
strong  line  in  the  middle  of  the  scale  is
distinctly  seen,  obviously  corresponding  to
escape peaks considered above.

Fig.5 Gain of a triple GEM detector in He as a function of
the  voltage  across  each  GEM  at  different  pressures,  in  a
current mode.

Fig.6 Gain of a triple GEM detector in He as a function of
the  voltage  across  each  GEM  at  different  pressures,  in  a
pulse-counting mode.

Gain-voltage characteristics in He at different
pressures  are  shown  in  Figs.  5  and  6,  in  a
current  and  pulse-counting  mode  respectively.
A  symmetrical  voltage  divider,  with  an
enhanced  induction  field,  was  used  in  these
measurements.  Comparing  two  measurement

5

Fig.7  Data  stability  test  in  He.  Two  sets  of  gain-voltage
characteristics  are  shown  for  two  different  triple  GEM
detectors and different air  impurities,  of  the  order  of  10-4
(open points) and 10-6 (solid points).
 
5.  Discussion

Fig.8 shows the dependence of the maximum
gain of a triple GEM detector on pressure in all
the gases studied. The difference between light
(He, Ne) and heavy (Ar, Kr, Xe) noble gases is
clearly  seen.  Together  with 
the  unusual
behaviour of gain-voltage characteristics in  He
and Ne, this may indicate that a new avalanche
mechanism  arises  at  high  pressures  in  light
noble  gases,  other  than  the  electron  impact
ionization.

We  propose  that  this  mechanism  is  the
associative  ionization  [11].  In  the  associative
ionization,  the  electron  is  produced  in  atomic
collisions  due  to  the  association  of  an  atom
with  an  excited  atom  into  a  molecular  ion:  He
+  He*  ﬁ   He+
2  +  e-.  The  energy  threshold  for
this  reaction  is  lower  than  that  of  impact
ionization.  In  addition,  the  contribution  of  the
associative  ionization  should  increase  with
pressure  faster  than  that  of  impact  ionization,
since  its  reaction  rate  is  proportional  to  the
square of the gas density. The detailed analysis
of experimental results from this point of view
will be presented elsewhere.

Fig.8  Maximum  gain  of  a  triple  GEM  detector  as  a
function of pressure in He, Ne, Ar, Kr and Xe.

parameter 

defining 
in  noble  gases, 

If  to  believe  that  the  gas  density  is  the
principle 
avalanche
the  most
characteristics 
effective  operation  of  the  multi-GEM  detector
would  occur,  at  atmospheric  pressure,  at  the
following temperatures (derived from Fig.8): in
Xe  and  Kr  at  150K,  in  Ar  at  100K,  in  Ne  at
30K  and  in  He  below    20K.  One  can  see  that
these temperatures are close to boiling points of
the appropriate gas, speaking for that the GEMs
could be successfully incorporated into double-
phase cryogenic particle detectors.
 
6.  Conclusions

We have studied the operation properties of a
triple  GEM  detector  in  pure  He,  Kr  and  other
noble gases at high pressures, varying from 1 to
15 atm. Light noble gases, He and Ne, provided
the  highest  gain,
a  superior  performance: 
approaching 
gain
remarkable 
and 
dependence on pressure. The energy resolution
of  the  triple  GEM  detector  in  compressed  He
was  measured  to  be  about  10%  at  8.5  keV,
which is close to that obtained in traditional gas
mixtures.

105, 

In  Ar,  Kr  and  Xe  the  maximum  gain  rapidly
drops  down  for  pressures  exceeding  3  atm.  In
contrast, the maximum gain in He and Ne does

6

matter  search.  We  are  indebted  to  Prof.  W.
Willis  and  Drs.  J.  Dodd  and  M.  Leltchouk,  of
the Columbia University, and Dr. D. Tovey, of
the  Sheffield  University,  for  having  suggested
these directions.

References

1.  A.  Breskin,  A.  Buzulutskov,  R.  Chechik,  E.  Shefer,
B.  K.  Singh,  IEEE  Trans.  Nucl.  Sci.  NS48  (2001)
417

3. 

2.  A. Breskin, A. Buzulutskov, R. Chechik, B. K. Singh,
A.  Bondar,  L.  Shekhtman,  Nucl.  Instr.  Meth.  A  478
(2002) 225.
J.  Dodd,  M.  Leltchouk,  V.  Radeka,  P.  Rehak,  V.
Tcherniatine,  W.  J.  Willis,  Private  communication
and  the  report  on  “The  Nevis  Laboratories  Summer
2000  Education  Workshop”,  BNL  and  Columbia
University (Nevis Laboratories), 2000, unpublished.

4.  D.  Tovey,  Private  communication  and  UK  Dark
Matter  Collaboration  Proposal  on  Galactic  Dark
2000,
Matter 
unpublished.

Sheffield  University, 

Search, 

5.  F. Sauli, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 386 (1997) 531.
6.  A. Buzulutskov, A. Breskin, R. Chechik, G. Garty, F.
Sauli,  L.  Shekhtman,  Nucl.  Instr.  and  Meth.  A  443
(2000) 164, and references therein.

7.  A. Bondar, A. Buzulutskov, F. Sauli, L.  Shekhtman,

Nucl. Instr. and Meth.  A 419 (1998) 418.

8.  F.A.F.  Fraga  et  al.,  CCD  readout  of  GEM  based
neutron detectors, Presented at Vienna Conf. on Instr.
2001,  to  be  published  in  Nucl.  Instr.  and  Meth.  A,
and references therein.

9.  A.  Bondar,  A.  Buzulutskov,  L.  Shekhtman,  Nucl.

Instr. and Meth.  A 481 (2002) 200.

10.   A. Bachmann et al, Discharge studies and prevention
in  the  Gas  Electron  Multiplier  (GEM),  Preprint
CERN-EP/2001-151,  to  be  published  in  Nucl.  Instr.
and Meth. A.

11.  Y.  P.  Raizer,  Gas  Discharge  Physics,  Nauka,

Moscow, 1987 (in Russian).

12.  H. W. Werner, R. P. H. Garten, Rep. Prog. Phys. 47

13.  A. Bressan, A. Buzulutskov, L. Ropelewski, F. Sauli,

L. Shekhtman, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 423 (1999) 119.

14.  A.  Breskin,  Nucl.  Phys.  B  (proc.  suppl)  44  (1995)

(1984) 221.

351.

not  decrease  with  pressure.  In  addition,  gain
characteristics  in  He  and  Ne  have  an  unusual
pressure  dependence:  in  a  wide  pressure  range
the  operation  voltage  does  not  increase  with
pressure; moreover it can even start to decrease
with pressure.

indicate 

this  mechanism 

These  results  may 

that  a  new
avalanche  mechanism  starts  playing  a  role  at
high pressures in light noble gases. We propose
that 
the  associative
ionization: at higher pressures it takes over the
electron  impact  ionization  due  to  stronger
dependence  on  pressure  and  lower  energy
threshold.

is 

The obtained results are of high relevance for
applications  in  cryogenic  detectors  for  solar
neutrino  and  dark  matter  search,  where  the
operation  of  avalanche  detector  in  noble  gases
at high gas densities is needed.

Other  possible  applications  follow  from  the
results  obtained  in  compressed  He:  we  have
actually  demonstrated  the  successful  operation
of a secondary electron emission  detector  with
a  multi-GEM  multiplier.    The  high  gain,  good
energy resolution and insensitivity to the direct
ionization  of  the  gas  by  X-rays  of  such  a
detector  are  very  attractive  for  X-ray  imaging
and  neutron  detection  with  solid  convertors
[14]. Another apparent application is a neutron
detector using He3 at high pressures, where He3
would  act  as  both  a  detecting  and  amplifying
medium. Moreover, the adoption of non-ageing
noble gas as an amplifying medium offers a big
advantage,  since  it  allows  for  operation  in  a
sealed mode.

Further  studies  of  this  technique,  e.g.  GEM
operation  in  pure  noble  gases  at  cryogenic
temperatures,  in  a  gas  and  liquid  phase,  at
pressures  higher  than  20  atm,  etc.,  are  in
course.

Acknowledgements

   This  work  has  been  originally  motivated  by
the  possible  application  in  cryogenic  double-
phase  detectors  for  solar  neutrino  and  dark

7

