April 11, 2002
Am. J. Phys. Manuscript. No. : 11349

Einstein’s gravitational field

Abstract: There exists some confusion, as evidenced in the literature, regarding the
nature the gravitational field in Einstein’s General Theory of Relativity. It is argued
here that this confusion is a result of a change in interpretation of the gravitational
field. Einstein identified the existence of gravity with the inertial motion of
accelerating bodies (i.e. bodies in free-fall) whereas contemporary physicists identify
the existence of gravity with space-time curvature (i.e. tidal forces). The
interpretation of gravity as a curvature in space-time is an interpretation Einstein did
not agree with.

1

Author: Peter M. Brown
786-C Washington Street
Haverhill, MA 01832
e-mail: pmb61@hotmail.com

2

INTRODUCTION

Einstein’s General Theory of Relativity (EGR) has been credited as the
greatest intellectual achievement of the 20th Century. This accomplishment is
reflected in Time Magazine’s December 31, 1999 issue 1, which declares Einstein
the Person of the Century. Indeed, Einstein is often taken as the model of genius
for his work in relativity. It is widely assumed that, according to Einstein’s general
theory of relativity, gravitation is a curvature in space-time. There is a well-
accepted definition of space-time curvature. As stated by Thorne 2

space-time curvature and tidal gravity are the same thing expressed in
different languages, the former in the language of relativity, the later in the
language of Newtonian gravity.

 However one of the main tenants of general relativity is the Principle of

Equivalence: A uniform gravitational field is equivalent to a uniformly accelerating
frame of reference.  This implies that one can create a uniform gravitational field
simply by changing one’s frame of reference from an inertial frame of reference to
an accelerating frame, which is rather difficult idea to accept. A uniform
gravitational field has, by definition, no tidal forces and thus no space-time
curvature. Thus according to the interpretation of gravity as a curvature in space-
time a uniform gravitational field becomes a contradiction in terms (i.e. no tidal
forces where there are tidal forces). This apparent contradiction is obviously quite
confusing and can certainly be misleading. In A brief history of relativity published
in the above mentioned issue of Time, Stephen Hawking writes

I still get two or three letters a week telling me Einstein was wrong.
Nevertheless, the theory of relativity is now completely accepted by the
scientific community, and its predictions have been verified in countless
applications. [...] His idea was that mass and energy would warp space-
time in some manner ... Objects like apples or planets would try to move
on straight lines through space-time, but their paths would appear bent
by a gravitational field because space-time is curved.

Given such a statement by a respected physicists and with a great deal of
experimental data to back up this claim is it reasonable to question this notion of
gravity being a curvature in space-time? Is it reasonable to assume that the bent
path an object takes when moving through a gravitational field is due to the of

3

space-time curvature? Did Einstein actually hold the view that gravity is a
curvature in space-time? At this point let us whet your appetite. No. Einstein
never said nor implied in anyway that gravity is a curvature in space-time. This
apparent disparity is a result of a change of interpretation. However it would be a
great  injustice to imply that there is no relationship between gravity and space-
time curvature.  Curvature plays a very important role in general relativity and its
importance should not be underestimated. However the aforementioned change in
interpretation is most likely the source of various errors in the scientific literature.

The following is, in part, an historical journey through the origins of
general relativity. Our purpose in doing so is to aid in our attempt to certain
problematic areas. The following discussion will be address two different
interpretations of general relativity. Therefore, for reasons of clarity,
Einstein’s vision of general relativity, as defined in The Foundation of the
General Theory of Relativity 3 and other publications, will be referred to as
EGR (Einstein’s General Relativity). General relativity as to it is widely
understood at present 2,4,5,6 will be referred to as MGR (Modern General
Relativity).

In MGR there seems to exists no universally accepted definition of

gravitational field as noted by Misner, Thorne and Wheeler 7

… nowhere has a precise definition of the term “gravitational field” been
given --- nor will one be given.  Many different mathematical entities are
associated with gravitation; the metric, the Riemann curvature tensor, the
curvature scalar … Each of these plays an important role in gravitation
theory, and none is so much more central than the others that it deserves the
name “gravitational field.”

 The mathematical quantity associated with space-time curvature is the
Riemann tensor, also known as the curvature tensor or tidal force tensor. This
tensor, as with any tensor, can be expressed as a matrix. It can be shown that if,
for a given region of space-time, all of the components of the curvature tensor
vanish then that region of space-time is said to be flat. Conversely if a region of
space-time is not flat then it’s said to be curved.

Curvature is said to be a local quantity in that it is possible to detect its
presence in an arbitrarily small region of space in an arbitrarily short amount of
time 8. It is always possible to choose a coordinate system, which is inertial, at
least locally 9. Such a coordinate system is said to be locally flat. Given
experimental limitations one can establish criteria in which tidal effects may be
ignored 10.

4

The main goal of this paper is not to present a new interpretation of gravity.

For pedagogical purposes we review an old one, that of Albert Einstein’s.

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

This section serves as a brief historical overview of the development of the
general theory of relativity and those ideas, which guided Einstein. The main focus
of this section will be on the definition of gravitational field.

(1907) On the Relativity Principle and the Conclusions Drawn
from It
Albert Einstein

Following his landmark paper of 1905 Einstein was, for a few years, unable to

extend what has come to be known as special relativity (i.e. relativity of inertial
frames) to non-inertial frames. As Einstein was later to recall 11

I was dissatisfied with the special theory of relativity, since the theory
was restricted to frames of reference moving with constant velocity relative
to each other and could not be applied to the general motion of a reference
frame. I struggled to remove this restriction and wanted to formulate the
problem in the general case.

Insight towards the solution came late 1907. Einstein, at the request of Johannes
Stark, was writing an article for Jahrbuch der Radioaktivitat und Electronik  12,13.

The breakthrough came suddenly one day.  I was sitting on a chair in my
patent office in Bern.  Suddenly the thought struck me: If a man falls freely,
he would not feel his own weight.  I was taken aback.  This simple thought
experiment made a deep impression on me.  This led me to the theory of
gravity.  I continued my thought: A falling man is accelerated.  Then what he
feels and judges is happening in the accelerated frame of reference.  I decided
to extend the theory of relativity to the reference frame with acceleration.  I
felt that in doing so I could solve the problem of gravity at the same time.  A
falling man does not feel his weight because in his reference frame there is a
new gravitational field, which cancels the gravitational field due to the Earth.
In the accelerated frame of reference, we need a new gravitational field.

This new idea was placed in the fifth section of the Jahrbuch article under

Principle of Relativity and Gravitation where the following argument was
presented

5

We consider two systems S1 and S2 in relative motion.  Let S1 be
accelerated in the direction of its X axis, and let g be the (temporally
constant) magnitude of that acceleration.  S2 shall be at rest, but located in
a homogeneous gravitational field that imparts to all objects an acceleration
-g in the direction of the z-axis.

As far as we know, the physical laws with respect to S1 do not differ
from those with respect to S2; this is based on the fact that all bodies are
equally accelerated in the gravitational field.  At our present state of
experience we have thus no reason to assume that the systems S1 and S2
differ from each other in any respect, and in the discussion that follows,
we shall therefore assume the complete physical equivalence of a
gravitational field and a corresponding acceleration of the reference system.
This assumption extends the principle of relativity to the uniformly
accelerated transnational motion of the reference system.  The heuristic
value of this assumption rests on the fact that it permits the replacement
of a homogeneous gravitational field by a uniformly accelerated reference
system, the later case being to some extent accessible to theoretical
treatment.

As noted earlier this assumption has come to be known as the Equivalence
Principle. It was here that Einstein first stated that clocks slow down in an
accelerating system and gravitational fields. In mathematical terms the relation
between the “time” t of the system, i.e. the time as reckoned by the clock at the
origin of co-ordinates of the accelerated frame, and the “local time” t  of the
system, i.e. the time as reckoned by a clock at z in the accelerated system, was
found to be

t  = (1 + gz/c2)t

<Eq. 1>

where c is the speed of light as measured in an inertial frame. This relation was not
assumed to be valid everywhere or for all magnitudes of acceleration. g was
restricted such that terms of the second or higher power may be neglected and
z restricted as follows

6

This equation holds first of all if t and z lie below certain limits.  It is obvious
that it holds for arbitrarily large t   if the acceleration g is constant with
respect to S, because the relation between t  and t must be linear. <Eq. 1> does
not hold for arbitrarily large z.  From the fact that the choice of coordinate
origin must not affect the relation, one must conclude that, strictly speaking,
equation <Eq. 1> should be replaced by

t  = t e(gz/c2)

Nevertheless, we shall maintain formula <Eq. 1>.

If g is the acceleration due to gravity on earth then relativity sets an upper bound
of approximately 1 light year for z (plenty of elbow room).  this paper the
mathematical statement of the equivalence principal follows as

... equation <Eq. 1> is also applicable to a coordinate system in which a
homogeneous gravitation field is acting.  In that case we have to put F
where F

 is the gravitational potential, so that we obtain

 = gz,

t  = (1 + F

/c2) t     <Eq. 2>

 = gz characterizes a uniform (i.e. homogeneous) gravitational field

The relation F
in Newtonian gravity.  As with any gravitational potential there is an arbitrary
additive constant. This constant is chosen to be zero at the location of the clock
which reads coordinate time. It was here that gravitational redshift was first
postulated

There exists “clocks” that are present at locations of different gravitational
potentials and whose rates can be controlled with great precision; these are
the producers of spectral lines.  It can be concluded from the aforesaid that
the wavelength of light coming from the sun’s surface, which originates
from such a producer, is larger by about one part in two millionth than that
of light produced by the same substance on earth.

In the footnote ‘#’, the equivalence principle was extended to non-uniform
gravitational fields

While assuming that <Eq. 2> holds for an inhomogeneous

gravitational field as well.

7

The last section of the Jahrbuch paper is entitled “The effect of gravitation on

electromagnetic phenomena.”  In that section a similar line of reasoning is
employed to analyze an “electromagnetic process” in an accelerating frame of
reference. The equations contain the factor c(1 + gz/c2), the conclusion reached

These equations too have the same form as the corresponding equations
of the nonaccelerated or gravitation-free space; however, c is here replaced
by the value

c(1 + gz/c2) = c(1 + F

/c2)

From this it follows that those light rays not propagating in the z direction,
are bent by the gravitational field…”

This was Einstein’s first prediction of the gravitational deflection of light.

(1911) On the Influence of Gravitation on the Propagation of
light
Albert Einstein

Although the Equivalence Principle first appeared in the Jahrbuch article it
is sometimes taken to have originated in Einstein’s 1911 paper On the Influence of
Gravitation on the Propagation of light 14. Here the Equivalence Principle takes
the following form

In a homogeneous gravitational field (acceleration of gravity g) let there
be a stationary systems of co-ordinates K, oriented so that the lines of force
of the gravitational field run in the negative direction of the axis of z.  In a
space free of gravitational fields let there be a second system of co-ordinates
K’, moving with uniform acceleration (g) in the positive direction of the z
axis…

Relatively to K, as well as relatively to K’, material points which are not

subjected to the action of other material points, move in keeping with the
equations

d2x/dt 2 = 0, d 2y/dt 2 = 0, d 2z/dt2 = -g

… we arrive at a very satisfactory interpretation of this law of experience; if
we assume that the system K and K’ are physically exactly equivalent, that is,
if we assume that we may just as well regard the system K as being a space free
from gravitational fields, if we then regard K as uniformly accelerated. This
assumption of exact physical equivalence makes it impossible for us to speak
of the absolute acceleration of the system of reference, just as the usual

8

theory of relativity forbids us to talk of the absolute velocity of a system;
and it makes the equal falling of all bodies in a gravitational field a matter of
course.

The paper concludes with the prediction of the deflection of light by the Sun.
However this was not the first time such a prediction was made, nor was it
correct. The gravitational deflection of light was also calculated, but not published,
around 1784 by Henry Cavendish 15 . The first published calculation was almost
20 years later by Johann Georg von Soldner. Einstein’s calculation in 1911 was
.83 seconds of arc. Cavindish and Soldner predicted a deflection of .875 seconds of
arc. As with Cavindish and Soldner, Einstein’s predicted value of the deflection of
light in 1911 was approximately half the correct value.

(1916)  The Foundation of the General Theory of Relativity
Albert Einstein

In the year following the completion and publication of the general theory
of relativity Einstein published the review article The Foundation of the General
Theory of Relativity in 1916 3. The statement

It will be seen from these reflections that in pursuing the general theory

of relativity we shall be led to a theory of gravitation, since we are able to
“produce” a gravitational field merely by changing the system of co-
ordinates.

identifying gravity with non-inertial systems, wholly reflects Einstein’s
interpretation of gravity, the existence of which depends on the observer’s frame
of reference.

Facilitating the development of relativity was a landmark paper by
Minkowski defining the concept of space-time 16. Space-time is a four-
dimensional “space” defined as the union of all possible events where an event is
defined by a place and a time (where and when). Using the notation x0 =  ct, x1 =
x, x2   = y, x3 =  z an event can be written compactly as x = xm  = (x0, x1, x2, x3) =
(ct, x, y, z) where c is the speed of light in a vacuum. If one were to plot an
objects position as a function of time we would have a curve in space-time, the so-
called world-line of the object. An important development, introduced by
Minkowski, is the notion of the space-time interval ds2. For an inertial system, in
the absence of matter, the space-time interval, defined relative to two events
separated in space-time by an infinitesimal distance, is defined as

9

ds2 =  -c2dt2 + dx2 + dy2 + dz 2

<Eq 3>

where the quantity ds2 is a (Lorentz) scalar, i.e. a one component object that
remains unchanged under a coordinate transformation (also referred to as a tensor
of rank one. Also known as an invariant).

If ds2 < 0 the interval, is said to be time like. If ds2 > 0 then the interval is said
to be space like. If ds2 = 0  then the interval is said to be light like. A worldline is
space like, time like or light like according to the value ds2 on the entire worldline.
All particles with non-zero rest mass move on time like worldlines. If the space-
time interval is time like then we can define quantity dt > 0  through the relation
ds2 = -c2dt 2. In this case dt   is referred to as the proper time between the two
events (when the space-time interval is not infinitesimal the proper time between
two events will, in general, depend on the worldline between the two events). It is
the time recorded on a clock, which passes through both events on a given
worldline.  If we define the quantities h
otherwise, then we may write the space-time interval as

 as h 00 = -1, h 11 = h 22 = h 33 = 1, and zero

ds2 = h

b dxa dy b

<Eq 4>

(a,b = 

0, 1, 2, 3) where Einstein’s summation convention is followed: If an index

occurs twice in one term of an expression, once as a subscript and once as a
superscript, it is always to be summed unless stated otherwise. The quantity h
is known as the Minkowski metric (note: The metric is a tensor and as such it is
an object that has a coordinate independent character. However a metric is only
referred to as the Minkowski metric when it has the value h
<Eq 4.> holds in a finite region of space-time then that region is called a
Minkowski space-time.  If we change from the space-time system K(ct, x, y, z) to
a new system K’(ct’, x’, y’, z’) then the space-time interval takes the form

). Physically, when

ds2 = ga ‘b ‘dxa ‘dy b ’

<Eq 5>

where the prime represents the new coordinates, hence the invariant nature of the
space-time interval.  Einstein referred to theses ten space-time functions gb
 = ga
as the fundamental tensor or metric tensor. The Minkowski metric is an example
of a metric tensor. Einstein identifies these quantities as the gravitational field in
the following manner

10

a
b
a
a
b
a
b
a
b
 have the values [h

 assume the constant values [h

 are to be regarded from the physical standpoint as

The case of the ordinary theory of relativity arises out of the case here
considered, if it is possible, by reason of the particular relations of the ga
 in a
finite region, to choose the system of reference in the finite region in such a
n ].  We shall find hereafter
way that the ga
that the choice of such co-ordinates is, in general, not possible for a finite
region. ... the quantities ga
the quantities which describe the gravitational field in relation to the chosen
system of reference. For, if we now assume the special theory of relativity to
apply to a certain four-dimensional region with co-ordinates properly chosen,
then the ga
relatively to this system, with uniform motion in a straight line.  Then if we
introduce new space-time coordinates x0, x 1, x 2, x 3, by means of any
substitution we choose, the ga
but functions of space and time.  At the same time the motion will present
itself in the new coordinates as a curvilinear non-uniform motion, and the law
of this motion will be independent of the nature of the moving particle.  We
shall interpret this motion as a motion under the influence of a gravitational
field.  We thus find the occurrence of a gravitational field connected with a
. So, too, in the general case, when we are no
space-time variability of the ga
longer able by a suitable choice of co-ordinates to apply the special theory of
 describe
relativity to a finite region, we shall hold fast to the view that the ga
the gravitational field.

 in this new system will no longer be constants

n ].  A free material point then moves,

The geodesic equation was then derived by requiring the integral of ds be
stationary between two points P and P’ in space-time. This procedure results in
the equation of motion, also known as the geodesic equation (actually a set of four
equations)

d2xm /dl

2 + G

(dxa /dl)( dxb /dl ) = 0

<Eq. 6>

where l
geodesic. The quantities (gl
a,b

 parameterizes the path. The solution is a path in space-time known as a
 is the partial derivative of gl

 with respect to xb )

 = (1/2) gm

(gl
a,b

 + gl
b,a

 - ga
b,l

)

<Eq. 7>

are the so-called Christoffel symbols or affine connection (more specifically the
Christoffel symbols of the second kind). gm
l gl
= d
b .  Einstein then introduces the Riemann tensor and explains its significance

 is the inverse matrix of gm

, i.e. ga

Ra

 = G

a 

d,g

 - G

a  b

g,d

 + G

 G

 - G

 G

<Eq. 8>

11

b
b
m
b
b
m
b
b
b
m
a
b
a
G
m
a
b
l
n
n
b
a
b
g
d
b
a
m
g
m
b
d
a
b
d
m
b
g
 are constants, then all the Ra

 vanish.  If we choose any new
 referred thereto

The mathematical importance of this tensor is as follows: If the continuum
is of such a nature that there is a co-ordinate system with reference to
which the gm
system of co-ordinates in place of the original ones, the gm
will not be constants, but in consequence of its tensor nature, the
transformed components Ra
the vanishing of the Riemann tensor is a necessary condition that, by
appropriate choice of the system of reference, the g m
our problem this corresponds to the case in which, with a suitable choice
of the system of reference, the special theory of relativity holds good for a
finite region of the continuum.

 will still vanish in the new system.  Thus

 may be constants. In

Although Einstein describes the metric tensor as the quantities which describe the
gravitational field he describes it is the Christoffel symbols which are defined as the
components of the field

 vanish, then the point moves uniformly in a straight line. These

If the G
quantities therefore condition the deviation of the motion from uniformity.
They are the components of the gravitational field

The paper concludes with the correct values of the deflection of light by the

sun by 1.7” of arc, .02” for Jupiter and a prediction of 43” of arc for the
precession of Mercury.

THE GRAVITATIONAL FIELD

Consider an observer at rest with respect to a non-inertial frame of reference.
Such an observer may consider himself at rest in this frame. Objects, which move
in a uniformly as determined by an inertial observer will undergo accelerated
motion as determined by the non-inertial observer. Thus acceleration is an
observer dependant quantity. It is well known that the relation F = ma may be
maintained if inertial forces are introduced. These forces are due to accelerations
that result from the observer’s non-inertial frame of reference. With a few notable
exceptions  17,18  these forces are not considered ‘real’ and as such are referred to
as pseudo or fictitious-forces. The gravitational force is also an inertial force since
gravitational acceleration is observer dependent. This seems to be among the
reasons that Einstein’s interpretation of gravity has been rejected. It is the

12

n
b
g
d
n
b
g
d
n
m
a
b
rejection of the notion that a field either exists or it doesn’t. It is for this reason
that Einstein is said to have shown that gravity is not a force. However the
opposite is true. Einstein’s intention was to show that inertial forces were ‘real’.
That the relation of gravity to inertia was the motivation for general relativity is
expressed in an article Einstein wrote which appeared in the February 17, 1921
issue of Nature  19

Can gravitation and inertia be identical?  This question leads directly to the
General Theory of Relativity.  Is it not possible for me to regard the earth as
free from rotation, if I conceive of the centrifugal force, which acts on all
bodies at rest relatively to the earth, as being a "real" gravitational field of
gravitation, or part of such a field?  If this idea can be carried out, then we
shall have proved in very truth the identity of gravitation and inertia. For the
same property which is regarded as inertia from the point of view of a system
not taking part of the rotation can be interpreted as gravitation when
considered with respect to a system that shares this rotation. According to
Newton, this interpretation is impossible, because in Newton's theory there is
no "real" field of the "Coriolis-field" type.  But perhaps Newton's law of field
could be replaced by another that fits in with the field which holds with
respect to a "rotating" system of co-ordinates?  My conviction of the
identity of inertial and gravitational mass aroused within me the feeling of
absolute confidence in the correctness of this interpretation."

Given that gravity and inertia were interpreted by Einstein to be one in the

same phenomena, what mathematical quantity was associated with the name
gravitational field in EGR? As we have seen above Einstein made two statements
in the 1916 paper which are associated with the term gravitational field

...  the quantities ga
quantities which describe the gravitational field in relation to the chosen
system of reference.

 are to be regarded from the physical standpoint as the

If the G
 vanish, then the point moves uniformly in a straight line. These
quantities therefore condition the deviation of the motion from uniformity.
They are the components of the gravitational field.

However these statements taken together may seem rather confusing. Let us turn
to Newtonian mechanics for an analogy. What mathematical quantity is  given the
name gravitational field in Newtonian gravity?  Let F( r) be the Newtonian
gravitational potential. Define g as

g(r) = -grad F( r)

13

b
m
a
b
Then g(r) = gx(r)i  + gy(r)j + gz(r)k is the acceleration due to gravity at the spatial
location r, where gk  = - (grad F)
can establish the following analogy

k, k = x, y, z . With these relations in mind we

gm

 (cid:243) F

G k

 (cid:243) gk

In weak gravitational fields the equations of motion reduce to Newtonian
equations as they must (let c=1 and “F
respect to xi)

,i” is the partial derivative of F

 with

F = - (1/2)

 (g00 + 1)

d2xk/ds2 = - G k

00 = - F

,k

In Newtonian gravity F
 may be called the gravitational field. Most often it is the
derived object g(r) = -grad F( r) that is called the gravitational field. Tolman would
also refer to the quantities gm
the totality of the gm

 as the gravitational potentials 20. Pauli referred to

 values, i.e. g, as the G-field 21.

If the gravitational field is uniform in a given region of space-time then general
relativity states that the field may be completely transformed away. While this is
true in the special case where tidal forces are absent it is not true in general. In
non-uniform gravitational fields an observer can tell he is in a gravitational field.
Tidal gradients, i.e. space-time curvature, can neither be created nor eliminated by
a change of co-ordinates. Gravitational fields cannot, in general, be replaced by a
state of acceleration of the system in a finite region. Einstein stated this several
times

Of course we cannot replace any arbitrary gravitational field by a state of
motion of the system without a gravitational field, any more than, by a
transformation of relativity, we can transform all points of a medium in any
kind of motion to rest 3.

Now we might easily suppose that the existence of a gravitational field is only
an apparent one. We might also think that, regardless of the kind of
gravitational field which may be present, we could always choose another
reference-body such that no gravitational field exists with reference to it.
This is by no means true for all gravitational fields, but only for those of quite
special form. It is, for instance, impossible to choose a body of reference such

14

n
a
b
n
n
that, as judged from it, the gravitational field of the earth (in its entirety)
vanishes 22.

Space-time regions of finite extent are, in general, not Galilean, so that a
gravitational field cannot be done away with by any choice of co-ordinates in
a finite region 23.

In such cases the field was later to become known as a permanent gravitational
field 24. Permanent gravitational fields are not equivalent to uniformly accelerating
frames of reference.

GRAVITATION AND SPACE-TIME CURVATURE

“Gravity is not a foreign and physical force transmitted through space and
time. It is a manifestation of the curvature of space-time.” That, in a
nutshell, is Einstein’s theory 25.

In a sense this view implicitly defines gravity in MGR. Since gravitational
field is not explicitly defined we turn to the mathematical quantity associated with
space-time curvature, the curvature tensor.  In MGR gravity is defined implicitly
through what Chandrasekhar called the zeroth law of gravitation which states 26.

The condition for the absence of any gravitational field is the vanishing of
the (curvature tensor)

In this sense one can say that gravity is the name MGR gives to space-time
curvature. Implied by this rule is the absolute, observer independent, nature of the
gravitational field. Since the vanishing of the curvature tensor is not dependant on
the coordinate system, the gravitational field, in MGR, either exists or it doesn’t.
What EGR in were called permanent gravitational fields i.e. non-uniform fields,
are now the only gravitational fields in MGR.

At this point we can understand the source of confusion. Since a uniform
gravitational field is defined as a region where the field has no tidal gradients the
zeroth law of gravitation presents a pedagogical problem; Given the zeroth law of
gravitation, the phrase uniform gravitational field is a contradiction in terms.
While the zeroth law of gravitation represents the interpretation of gravity in
MGR it does not reflect Einstein’s interpretation. Nothing in either EGR nor
 is not
MGR prohibits the curvature tensor from vanishing when the metric ga

15

b
constant. I.e. ga
uniform gravitational field.

 „

 h

 does not imply Ra

 = 0. This is exactly the case for the

Although in EGR the field is described by the metric, physically it is motion
and distances that are measured. The quantities G
, determine the deviation of
motion from straight line. Einstein protested when Max von Laue stated that it
was the Riemann tensor that was the only representation of the gravitational field
27.

... what characterizes the existence of a gravitational field from the empirical
standpoint is the non-vanishing of the components of the affine connection],
not the vanishing of the [components of the Riemann tensor]. If one does
not think in such intuitive (anschaulich) ways, one cannot grasp why
something like curvature should have anything at all to do with gravitation.
In any case, no rational person would have hit upon anything otherwise. The
key to the understanding of the equality of gravitational mass and inertial
mass would have been missing.

In light of the above, according to EGR, space-time curvature is a necessary,

but not sufficient, condition for the existence of gravity. It would be more
accurate, in EGR, to say that space-time curvature is a manifestation of gravitation
since Ra
 „
but ga

  0 (space-time curvature) implies ga
 „
 (gravitation)  does not imply Ra

 „
  0 (space-time curvature).

 everywhere (gravitation)

 „

 h

 h

It should also be noted that there are various terms used to describe gravity
which seem quite similar. Such terms a curvature or warp are often used to mean
something other than space-time curvature. The terms time warp and time
curvature have been used to refer to gravitational redshift (i.e. gravitational time
dilation) 28,29. The term curvature has also been used to refer to gravitational
acceleration or to the curved path an object may take 30. These should not be
confused with space-time curvature since they refer to different quantities.

NON-PERMANENT GRAVITATIONAL FIELDS

In order to shed some light on the difference between EGR and MRG it would

be instructive to give a few examples of gravitational fields that have zero space-
time curvature. In this section we consider three such examples.

A very important gravitational field with zero space-time curvature  in general

relativity is the uniform gravitational field.  The gravitational acceleration of an
object ini such a field will be calculated here since there will be occasion to use it
below. The metric for a uniform gravitational field is 31,32,33,34.

16

b
a
b
b
m
n
m
a
b
b
m
n
b
a
b
b
a
b
b
m
n
<Eq. 9>

ds2 = -(1+gz/c2)2d(ct)2 + dx2 + dy2 + dz 2

where - c2/g < z < c2/g. The components of the metric are g00 =  -(1+gz/c2)2, g11 =
g22 = g33 = 1. For a particle with non-zero rest mass the proper acceleration
d2xm /dt 2 can be obtain by parameterizing the geodesic equation with the proper
time, i.e. l

 = t

<Eq. 10>

d2xm /dt 2 + G

(dxa /dt)( dxb /dt ) = 0

To obtain d2z/dt 2 = d2x3/dt 2 we set m
<Eq. 7>.

 = 3 into <Eq. 10> and then substitute into

G 3

 = (1/2) g33(g3a,b

 + g3b,a

 - ga
b,

3) = - (1/2) g33ga

b,

3

since g3a,b
only G 3

 = g3b,a

 = 0. Since the only non-vanishing ga
b,
 is a diagonal, gm

 = (gm

00 remains.  Since gm

)-1 , g33 = 1

3 is g00,3 = -2(g/c2)(1 + gz/c2)

<Eq. 11>

G 3

00 = (g/c2)(1 + gz/c2)

Substituting <Eq. 11> into <Eq. 10> yields

<Eq. 12>

d2z/dt 2 = -

3

00(dt/dt) 2 = - (g/c2)(1 + gz/c2)(dt/dt) 2

(dt/dt) 2 can be obtained from <Eq. 9> by setting - c2dt 2 = ds2 and solving for
(dt/dt) 2 giving

<Eq. 11>

(dt/dt) 2 = [(1+gz/c2)2 - v2/c2] -1

where v2 = vx 2 + vy 2 + vz 2. Substituting <Eq. 11> into <Eq. 12> yields

<Eq. 13>

d2z/dt 2 = - (g/c2)(1 + gz/c2)/[(1+gz/c2)2 - v2/c2]

This expression gives the local acceleration of an object whose velocity is v.
Observers at different positions z in the field system will not measure the same

17

m
a
b
a
b
n
n
n
G
local value of acceleration. Not only will the object’s acceleration depend of
position but also on velocity. This is contrary to what one would normally
assume for a uniform gravitational field. In fact some workers define a uniform
gravitational field according to the relation (assuming v = 0) 35,36.

<Eq. 14>

d2z/dt 2 = - g

However both <Eq. 13> and <Eq. 14> cannot both true.

Another example of a gravitational field with zero space-time curvature is that

of a vacuum domain wall 37,38. A domain wall is two a dimensional structure
characterized by a fixed energy per unit area s
appropriate units) is required in order for s
 to remain constant. The field acts as if
had a negative pressure in the two  directions within the wall. If the wall lies in the
xy-plane then the space-time interval may be written as

. A surface tension equal to s

 (in

<Eq. 15> ds2 = -(1 - g|z|/c2)2d(ct)2 + (1 - g|z|/c2)2e-2k ct(dx2 + dy2) + dz 2

. This coordinate system is that of an observer at z = 0 at rest

where g = 2p Gs
relative to the wall.  An observer will see a test particle undergo a hyperbolic
motion with proper acceleration g away from the wall acceleration. The wall thus
acts like it has a negative active gravitational mass. The curvature tensor for this
gravitational field is Ra

 = 0 everywhere expect inside the wall itself.

Another space-time with zero curvature is that of a straight cosmic string. The

composition of such a string is reminiscent of a domain wall 37,38.  However a
string is a one dimensional object with constant energy per unit length m
. The
magnitude of the string’s tension is also equal to m
 (in appropriate units). The
negative active gravitational mass associated with the tension balances the positive
gravitational mass. The result is the absence of gravitational acceleration. Such a
string exerts no gravitational force on objects in the surrounding space. The space-
time interval for this string is

<Eq. 16>

ds2 = - d(ct)2 + dr2 + (1 - 8Gm )r2dq 2 + dz 2

As mentioned above the gravitational force on objects in the surrounding space is
zero. However string the alters does alter the surrounding space making it non-
Euclidean.  The factor (1 - 8Gm ) implies that a circle at fixed r, z, t has a reduced
circumference given by

18

b
m
n
<Eq. 17>

C = 2p (1 - 4Gm )r

 = 8p Gm

 is missing from the space surrounding the

This indicates that an angle of f
string (See Figure 1). The geometry is non-Euclidean. Vilenken has noted that the
geometry is conical (See Figure 2). Light passing by the string is deflected by an
angle D
to an observer on the other side of the string. The string thus acts as a gravitational
lens. Gravitational lensing is usually discussed in terms of curved space-time.

. An object behind the string will then appear as a double object

 = 4p Gm

In the case of the cosmic string the lensing is a result of the non-Euclidean nature
of the surrounding space 39. Ra
curvature is undefined, even though the metric is well defined everywhere. Only
on the string itself, is Ra
geometry of a cone. The curvature of the surface of a cone is well defined except at
the apex.

 undefined. This can be seen by considering the

 = 0 everywhere except at r = 0, where the

EXAMPLES FROM THE LITERATURE

19

F
b
m
n
b
m
n
In this section we review various instances where the change of interpretation
may have caused some difficulty. The main problem with the change in definition
of gravity is that one expects to find curvature where none should be found. As
stated above the equivalence principle, the basis of general relativity, becomes a
contradiction in terms in modern relativity.

When asserting that gravity is a curvature in space-time one might conclude
that any “true” gravitational field has tidal forces. But what is meant by a “true”
gravitational field?  We have seen above that gravitational effects can be observed
in the absence of tidal gradients. However a uniform gravitational field has no tidal
gradients and can be completely transformed away. A freely falling observer will
not be able to detect the presence of the field. His frame is an inertial one.
Conversely, when the observer changes his system of coordinates he can produce
a uniform gravitational field. In both cases the curvature tensor vanishes. If one
uses the modern definition of gravity then one might expect the curvature tensor
to be non-zero. This can be very confusing and is reflected by a comment made by
Synge 40.

... I have never been able to understand this principle…Does it mean that the
effects of a gravitational field are indistinguishable from the effects of an
observer’s acceleration?  If so, it is false. In Einstein’s theory, either there is
a gravitational field or there is none, according as the Riemann tensor does
not or does vanish. This is an absolute property; it has nothing to do with any
observers world line … The Principle of Equivalence performed the essential
office of midwife at the birth of general relativity, but, as Einstein remarked,
the infant would never have gone beyond its long clothes had it not been for
Minkowski’s concept [of  space-time geometry]. I suggest that the midwife be
buried with appropriate honours and the facts of absolute space-time faced.

A similar example is that of Ray 41.

 Riemann tensor) will not vanish and we will still measure

It is very important to notice that in a freely falling frame we have not
transformed away the gravitational field since the Riemann tensor
(gravitation (cid:219)
relative acceleration …..  The first thing to note about the 1911 version of
the principle of equivalence is that what in 1911 is called a uniform
gravitational field ends up in general relativity not to be a gravitational field
at all – The Riemann tensor is here identically zero. Real gravitational fields
are not uniform since they must fall off as once recedes from gravitating
matter.

Here, too, the presence of gravity is associated with curvature. An observer falling
in a non-uniform gravitational field will be able to detect curvature since tidal

20

forces are not transformed away. However the equivalence principle applies to
uniform fields and was not meant to apply otherwise (it only applies locally).
Contrary to Ray’s assertion a uniform gravitational field can be created from a
finite distribution of mass. For example; Consider a spherical body of uniform
mass density. If a spherical cavity is excavated such that the center of the cavity is
not concentric with the sphere then the field inside will be highly uniform, i.e.
there will be virtually no tidal forces present.

Desloge attempted to prove the equivalence principle wrong with the

following argument 36,

Gravity is a manifestation of the local curvature of space-time and the local
curvature of space-time is a measurable quantity. Hence, observers, regardless
of their motion, can always determine whether or not they are in a
gravitational field by determining whether or not space-time is curved in their
neighborhood. .... In a uniform gravitational field the quantity g(x), the initial
local acceleration of a particle released from rest at x, must have the same
value at all points in the field. If this were not true, the field would not be
uniform.

The metric for a uniform gravitational field then derived based on these
assumptions. The metric which results is then used to calculate the curvature
tensor which does not vanish. However Desloge expects curvature tensor to
vanish

It follows that in a uniform gravitational field space-time is as expected
curved.

What happened? Consider a uniformly accelerating frame of reference. From what
we have seen above, for an object at rest at z = 0, the initial acceleration of an
object falling from rest is –g.  But, as seen in the previous section, an object
initially fixed at z and allowed to fall, the initial acceleration in a local frame of
reference will be -g/(1+gz/c2). The initial acceleration of a freely falling object
decreases as one moves to points high in the field. Deloge’s assertion

the initial local acceleration of a particle released from rest at x, must have
the same value at all points in the field.

is, in reality, an assumption on the nature of a falling object in a uniform
gravitational field. The origin of the problem here is that Deloge is defining a
gravitational field according to the definition that the local acceleration due to

21

gravity is the same at all places in the field. This is reminiscent of the uniform
gravitational field in Newtonian gravity, that the gravitational acceleration is a
constant independent of position. However in Newtonian gravity this is
equivalent to saying that there are no tidal gradients in the field. This definition is
inherent in the way Einstein imagined falling off a roof. In free fall objects at rest
relative to him would remain at rest. So in the relativistic case it’s quite natural to
take as  the definition of the uniform gravitational field as a field with no tidal
forces and thus by definition the Riemann tensor is zero – no space-time
curvature. This definition is consistent with the Equivalence Principle. Thus
Desloge has simply redefined “uniform” in a manner which resulted in a non-
vanishing Riemann tensor. Since this was expected the end result of the presence
of tidal forces was not questioned and thus the starting definition not questioned.
Gravitational redshift is often interpreted as the result of space-time curvature

 g00(r2). This in no way requires Ra

42, 43,44,45.  The argument used to arrive at this conclusion is based on that
proposed by Schild 46 or some variation 47. The validity of this interpretation has
previously been discussed elsewhere in more detail 48. The presence of curvature
is neither a necessary nor sufficient condition for the detection of gravitational
redshift. If a light source is located at r1 and a light detector at r2 and they remain
fixed at thes positions then the necessary and sufficient condition for gravitational
redshift is g00(r1) „
performs this experiment in an enclosed room (in which there is gravitational field
present or in a room which is accelerating uniformly) with no knowledge of the
environment outside (We don’t assume that the room is at rest on the surface of
the Earth) then it would be impossible to tell if there were curvature present. Only
if the light emitter or detector is moved to various locations and seperate readings
taken can one determine whether Ra
 „
 0 or not. However this was not the case
in the classic gravitational redshift experiments performed by Pound and 49. In
fact the first calculation of redshift ever given was that by Einstein in 1907 for an
accelerating frame of reference and hence for a uniform gravitational field. It was
that relationship which was tested by Pound and Rebka.

 0. In fact if one

 „

CONCLUSION

Einstein did not interpret gravity as a curvature of space-time, rather that
space-time curvature is a manifestation of gravity. This is the difference between
EGR and MGR, one that may certainly be confusing. This change in view from
Einstein’s to the modern view perhaps reflects the desire of attributing “real”
quantities as having an absolute existence independent of the observer i.e.  “Either

22

b
m
n
b
m
n
something exists or it doesn’t.” However Einstein showed us a very different way
of looking at reality. In fact Einstein was suspicious of the very idea of “real” 50.

It appears to me that “real” is an empty meaningless category (drawer) whose
immense importance lies only in that I place certain things inside it and not
certain others.

If one wishes to understand the various problems which have arisen one
should a complete understanding of the terms used, how they are used and the
possible misunderstandings that could arise from their use. As Einstein phrased it
51

…, a hypothesis is a statement whose truth is temporarily assumed, whose
meaning is beyond all doubt

Nature fails to behave in a manner that allows definitions that are acceptable to

all. There will at times be disagreement among individuals with opposing views.
Such disagreements will, for the most part, be over the appropriate choice of
words to use and is not relevant to experimental predictions except in that they
influence and direct the creative processes from whence those predictions are
made. Nature has Her own way of doing things regardless of what physicists
believe. Einstein was not unaware of such disagreement 52.

But because the Lord had noticed already before the development of
theoretical physics that He cannot do justice to the opinions of man, He
simply does as He sees fit.

23

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author would like to thank the following people for their advice
and constructive criticism. In no particular order: Edwin F. Taylor, Robert
W. Brehme, Edmund Bertschinger, Hans C. Ohanian, Kip S. Thorne,
Edward Farhi, Alan H. Guth, John Stachel, and A.P. French. Any errors
which may remain are the sole responsibility of the author.

REFERENCES

1 A brief history of time, Stephen Hawking, (Time Magazine, December 31,
1999)

2 Black Holes & Time Warps, Kip S. Thorne, (W.W. Norton, 1994), pp. 111

3 The Foundation of the General Theory of Relativity, Albert Einstein,
Annalen der Physik, 49, (1916), The Principle of Relativity, Dover
Publications, Inc (1952), pp 111-164

4 Gravitation, Misner, Thorne and Wheeler, (W.H. Freeman and Company,
1973)

5 Gravitation and Space-time, Hans C. Ohanian, Remo Ruffini, (W.W. Norton
& Company, 1994)

6 A First Course in General Relativity, Bernard F. Schutz, (Cambridge
University  Press, 1998)

7 Ref 4, pp. 399

8 Ref 4, pp. 53

9 What is the principle of equivalence? Hans C. Ohanian, Am. J. Phys.,
45(10), (1977)

10 Ref 3, pp. 30, box 1.5

24

11 How I created the theory of relativity, Albert Einstein, Translated by
Yoshimasa A. Ono, Physics Today, pp. 45-47 (August 1982)

12 Subtle is the Lord, Abraham Pais, (American Philological Association,
1982), pp. 178

13 On the Relativity Principle and the Conclusions Drawn from It, Albert
Einstein,    Jahrbuch der Radioaktivitat und Electronik 4 (1907) – Re-
Published in three parts.
Am. J. Phys. 45, Part I - (6), June 1977, pp. 512-517; Part II – (9), September
1977, pp. 811-816, Part III - (Gravitational Part) – (10), October 1977, pp.
899-902. This paper addresses only Part III.

14 On the Influence of Gravitation on the Propagation of light, Albert Einstein,
Annalen der Physik, 35, (1911), The Principle of Relativity, (Dover
Publications, Inc 1952), pp. 99-108

15 Henry Cavendish, Johann von Soldner, and the deflection of light, Clifford
M. Will, Am. J. Phys. 56(5), pp. 413-415 (1988)

16 Space and Time, H. Minkowski, Address delivered at the 80th Assembly of
German Natural Scientists and Physicians, at Cologne 21 Sep, 1908. The
Principle of Relativity, (Dover Publications, Inc. 1952), pp. 99-108

17 Newtonian Mechanics, A.P. French, (The MIT Introductory Series, MIT,
1971), pp. 499

18 Cosmological Physics, John A. Peacock, (Cambridge University Press,
1999), pp. 4

19 A Brief Outline of the Development of the Theory of Relativity, Nature, , pp.
783-783, ( February 17, 1921)

20 Relativity, Thermodynamics and Cosmology, Richard C. Tolman, (Oxford at
the Clarendon Press, 1934), pp. 183

21 Theory of Relativity, Wolfgand Pauli, (Permagon Press, 1958), pp.147

25

22 Relativity, The Special and General Theory -15th Edition, Albert Einstein,
(Three Rivers Press, 1959), pp. 176

23 The Meaning of Relativity, Albert Einstein (Princeton Science Library, 1921)
pp. 58

24 Ref 20 pp 175

25 Gravitation and Inertia, Ciufolini and Wheeler, (Princeton University Press,
1995),
pp. 1

26 On the “Derivation” of Einstein’s Field Equations, S. Chandrasekhar, Am.
J. Phys. Vol. 40, 224 (1972)

27 General Relativity and Gravitation, Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on General Relativity and Gravitation, (Stockholm,Cambridge
University Press,  Jul 6-12, 1986), HowEinstein Discovered General
Relativity: A Historical Tale With Some Contemporary Morals, J.J. Stachel

28 Ref 2, pp. 107

30 Ref 22 pp. 83-84

29 Exploring Black Holes, Edwin F. Taylor and John Archibald Wheeler,
(Addison Wesley Longman, 2000), pp. 212

31 Principle of Equivalence, F. Rohrlich, Ann. Phys. 22, pp169-191, (1963)

32 Radiation from a Uniformly Accelerated Charge, David G. Boulware, Ann.
Phys., 124pp.174, (1980)

33 Relativistic solutions to the falling body in a uniform gravitational field, Carl
G. Adler, Robert W. Brehme, Am. J. Phys. 59 (3), March 1991

34 The uniformly accelerated reference frame, J. Dwayne Hamilton, Am. J.
Phys., 46(1), Jan, pp. 83-89 (1978)

26

35 Ref 5, pp. 431

36 Nonequivalence of a uniformly accelerating reference frame and a frame at
rest in a uniform gravitational field, Edward A. Desloge, Am. J. Phys., 57(12),
pp. 1121-1125, 1989

37 Gravitational Field of Vacuum Domain Walls, Alexander Vilenkin, Phys.
Lett. 133B, pp. 177-179 (1983)

38 Gravitational field of vacuum domain walls and strings, Alexander Vilenkin,
Phys. Rev. D, 23(4), pp. 852-857 (1981)

39 Cosmic strings: Gravitation without local curvature, T. M. Helliwell, D. A.
Konkowski, Am. J. Phys. 55(5), pp. 401-407 (1987)

40 Relativity; The General Theory,  J.L. Synge, (North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1971), pp. ix-x.

41 Principle of Equivalence, John R. Ray, Am. J. Phys., 45(4), pp. 401-402
(1977)

42 Ref 3, pp. 187

43 Ref 4, pp. 180

44 Ref 5, pp. 121

45 An Introduction to Relativistic Gravitation, Remi Hakim,  (Cambridge
University Press, 1999), pp. 135

46 Lectures on General Relativity, Alfred Schild, in Relativity Theory and
Astrophysics, American Mathematical Society

47 Ref 3 page 188

48 Does a gravitational redshift necessarily imply space-time curvature?, G.E.
Marsh, C. Nissim-Sabat, Am. J. Phys., 43(3), pp. 266-267 (1975)

27

49 On the weight of photons, R.V. Pound, Soviet Physics Uspekhi, 3(6), pp.
875-880 (1961). See also Apparent weight of photons, R.V. Pound, G.A.
Rebka, Jr., Phys. Rev. Letters, 4(7), pp. 337-341 (1960)

50 Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Edited by J.J. Stachel and Robert
Schulmann (Princeton Univiversity  Press, 1987); Letter to Eduard Study from
Albert Einstein dated Sep 25, 1918

51 Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Edited by J.J. Stachel and Robert
Schulmann (Princeton Univiversity  Press, 1987); Letter to Eduard Study from
Albert Einstein, Sept 25, 1918

52 Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Edited by J.J. Stachel and Robert
Schulmann (Princeton Univiversity  Press, 1987); Letter to Hermann Weyl
from Albert Einstein, June [May] 1918

28

