R.C. Woods

ABSTRACT

1. INTRODUCTION

Comments on “A gravitational shielding based upon ZnS:Ag phosphor”
and “The gravitational mass at the superconducting state”

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2128 Coover Hall,
Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011–3060

This is a discussion of two recent papers by De Aquino [LANL, no. physics/0112081 (2001) and LANL, no.
physics/0201058  (2002)]  that  put  forward  an  explanation  of  observations  of  gravity  shielding  originally
reported by Podkletnov and Nieminen [Physica C 203 441 (1992)].

A number of reports have recently claimed that the weight of test masses can be changed as a result of using
various materials in various configurations and using various excitations. One of the most prominent of these
has been that by  Podkletnov  and  Nieminen  [1];  as  far  as  the  present  author  is  aware,  this  is  the  only  such
paper to have appeared in a peer-reviewed journal.

The  experiment  requires  the  gravitational  field  to  be  measured  above  a  sample  of  the  “high-temperature”
superconductor  YBCO  (i.e.,  YBa2Cu3O7–δ,  superconducting  below  its  critical  temperature  Tc  ~  93K).  The
superconductor (in the form of a multiphase circular disk having a minimum diameter 10cm) must be cooled
below 70K, magnetically rotated at high speed (e.g., 5000 rpm), and simultaneously levitated magnetically
using  two  separate  high  frequency  excitations.  Weight  changes  (in  a  test  mass)  of  the  order  of  1%  were
reported.

The  experimental  results  [1]  appear  to  contradict  conventional  gravitational  theory,  because  they  are
interpreted as evidence of modifications to the gravitational field in a laboratory-based system that – at face
value  –  does  not  require  general  relativity  for  accurate  analysis.  This  experiment  is  therefore  potentially
highly important scientifically because of the enormous technological implications for the design of current
transportation  vehicles  and  handling  methods  for  bulk  materials  if  gravity  modification  (and,  in  particular,
gravitation reduction) were demonstrated to be feasible.

The present author has attempted to replicate some of the conditions specified [2], but so far no comparable
observations indicating gravitational shielding have been made. The conclusions were that the subset of the
Podkletnov and Nieminen [1] conditions examined did not produce gravity modification measurable with the
equipment  used  (which  had  a  resolution  of  the  order  of  ±0.004%).  This  may,  of  course,  only  be  a
confirmation  that  not  all  of  the  prescribed  conditions  have  been  achieved  so  far  and  that  the  current
experiments  could  not  be  expected  to  show  positive  results.  It  remains  an  open  question  whether  gravity
modification can be repeatably observed using the full set of Podkletnov and Nieminen [1] conditions. As far
as the present author is aware, no confirmation or re-observation of the effect has been published in any peer-
reviewed research journal.

Theoretical  objections  to  the  Podkletnov  and  Nieminen  experiment  [1]  have  been  raised  [3,4],  but  other
reports [5,6] suggest a basis of understanding the results. It is these latter reports that are examined here.

2. DISCUSSION

In De Aquino’s earlier paper [5], gravitational screening in general is explained as a consequence of having a
closed surface of zero mass surrounding the masses to be screened. As an example, gravitational screening is
proposed as a result of reducing to zero the mass of electrons in a spherical shell of phosphor material under
certain conditions of irradiation. In Fig. 1 (similar to Fig. 1 of Ref. [5]), even if the gravitational mass of S is
zero then Gauss’s law [7] implies that there will still be gravitational force between A, B, and C. Now, if the
total gravitational mass of S is reduced further to (–mA – mB), then the gravitational field from the assembly
A, B, S averaged over all solid angles will indeed be zero outside S. However, in practice this will be much

1

harder  to  achieve  than  by  merely  affecting  the  electrons  in  S,  because  typically  mA  and  mB  will  be  much
larger than the available electron mass in S. Note also that this does not necessarily mean that A and B have
no gravitational influence outside S; only if the A, B, S assembly also has full spherical symmetry will there
be no gravitational field at any point outside S due to this assembly.

 

S 

A 

B 

C 

Fig. 1. The concept of gravitational shielding (after [5])

Of course, it is still possible in principle that gravitational screening occurs as a direct consequence of having
a closed surface of previously positive mass that has suddenly changed its mass to zero. This would require a
wholesale  revision  of  Gauss’s  law,  previously  regarded  as  fundamental  to  many  branches  of  mathematical
physics. This is because Gauss’s law gives correctly the attraction between A, B, and C in the case where S
has zero mass arising from the limit of a progressively more rarefied fluid surrounding A and B. Gauss’s law
also gives correctly the gravitational attraction between A, B, and C in the usual case where S has a positive
inertial mass (when there is no screening of any kind).

An electrical analogue of this situation is as follows. Electrostatic screening is not produced by zero charge
(e.g. an uncharged insulator) but by an earthed electrical conductor containing large amounts of both positive
and  negative  charges  that  can  separate  freely.  A  charge  inside  the  screening  container  attracts  equal  but
opposite charge on the inside surface of the container, and because it is earthed (i.e., connected electrically to
a large sink of charge, or a capacitor) the repelled charge goes to earth. Therefore, the total charge contained
by the screen (i.e., the sum of that inside it and on its inside surface) is zero.

So, by analogy, the requirements for  complete  gravitational  screening  should  be  that  (a)  both  positive  and
negative  masses  are  available  in  sufficient  quantities  (i.e.,  at  least  as  much  as  the  masses  that  are  to  be
screened), (b) they are both freely mobile, and (c) they are connected to a gravitational sink or capacitor.

Regarding  requirement  (a),  some  negative  mass  may  be  available  in  the  electrons  in  a  phosphor.  Also,
negative  electron  inertial  mass  of  modest  proportion  arises  routinely  in  semiconductors  and  metals  [8].
However, it does not seem likely that the total available from these electrons will be equal to or greater than
any  substantial  positive  masses  inside  the  shield;  the  free-space  rest  mass  of  electrons  is  only  a  tiny  part
(~1/4000th) of the total inertial mass of the shield material. For a substantial negative mass contribution from
the  electrons,  the  magnitude  of  their  mass  must  increase  several  orders  of  magnitude  as  well  as  becoming
negative.

2

Regarding requirement (b), the electrons in a phosphor are not mobile, since it is an insulator. Nor are the
positive  masses  (nuclei)  mobile.  The  electrons  in  a  metal  or  semiconductor  certainly  are  mobile,  but  the
nuclei are also still immobile in a metal or semiconductor (except in the case of molten materials).

Regarding requirement (c), perhaps a suitable gravitational capacitor might be a black hole.

To put this another way, in Fig. 1, if S has a normal positive mass, then the exchange of gravitons between A
and C, and between B and C (as well as between S and C and all the other permutations) is certainly possible.
However, there is no theory advanced [5]  to  explain  why  making  the  electrons  in  S  have  zero  or  negative
mass necessarily prevents this a priori. Although  complete  screening  seems  to  be  difficult  to  achieve,  that
does not preclude the possibility of partial shielding.

The  later  paper  by  De  Aquino  [6]  suggests  a  mechanism  to  explain  the  Podkletnov  and  Nieminen  [1]
shielding observations utilising superconductors. In summary, it is proposed that the mass of the electrons in
a  superconductor  is  reduced  to  zero  and  even  become  negative  under  certain  conditions.  However,  this
mechanism  again  is  at  variance  with  Gauss’s  law.  Only  the  gravitational  or  inertial  mass  of  the
superconductor would be affected (to a tiny extent) by such a mechanism, and in conjunction with Gauss’s
law would not directly explain a Podkletnov-Nieminen-type shielding effect. When a Podkletnov-Nieminen
test  mass  is  hung  above  a  superconductor,  any  change  in  mass  of  the  superconductor  will  have  a  minute
effect on the weight of the test mass (in the ratio of the superconductor mass to the earth’s mass, of course).
For  this  reason,  Gauss’s  law  therefore  would  seem  to  argue  against  the  possibility  that  a  test  mass  might
“float  above”  [6]  the  mercury  superconductor.  A  specific  value  for  conductivity  of  a  superconductor  is
quoted [6], without reference; lower bounds on conductivities in superconductors have been measured and
published, but a specific value for conductivity is unusual as it is generally assumed that the conductivity in a
superconductor is identically zero.

Finally, most of the electrons in the superconductor material are localised orbital electrons that  are  largely
immobile,  so  it  is  not  immediately  clear  how  accurate  it  is  to  treat  the  electrons  essentially  in  the  Drude
approximation. As the electrons make up approximately 1/4000th of the mass of most materials, any change
in the mass of the small fraction of electrons that are mobile will make an even smaller difference to the total
mass of the material.

3. CONCLUSIONS

The  published  explanations  [5,6]  of  the  Podkletnov  and  Nieminen  observations  [1]  are  not  consistent  with
Gauss’s law [7], a widely accepted fundamental law of gravitational interactions. This does not necessarily
disprove or discount the Podkletnov and Nieminen observations; it only suggests that their explanation must
lie elsewhere. The explanation of other unusual results obtained for gravitational interactions not involving
astronomically  massive  bodies  such  as  the  earth  may  lie  in  the  extreme  difficulty  of  making  such
measurements accurately.

4. REFERENCES

[1]  E. Podkletnov & R. Nieminen, Physica C 203 441 (1992)
[2]  R.C. Woods, S.G. Cooke, J. Helme & C.H. Caldwell, Proc. 37th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint

Propulsion Conference, Salt Lake City, paper AIAA 2001–3363 (2001)

[3]  M. de Podesta & M. Bull, Physica C 253 199 (1995)
[4]  C.S. Unnikrishnan, Physica C 266 133 (1996)
[5]  F. De Aquino, LANL, no. physics/0112081 (2001)
[6]  F. De Aquino, LANL, no. physics/0201058 (2002)
[7]  W.H. Hayt & J.A. Buck, “Engineering Electromagnetics”, 6th Ed., McGraw-Hill (2001)
[8]  J. Allison, “Electronic Engineering Semiconductors and Devices”, McGraw-Hill (1990)

RCW:C:PAPERS\GRAV.DOC

3

