CHAOTIC TEMPERATURES VS COEFFICIENTS OF THERMODYNAMIC 
ACTIVITY: THE ADVANTAGE OF THE METHOD OF CHEMICAL DYNAMICS 

 
B. Zilbergleyt 
Bank One, IT Department, Chicago 
E-mail: LIVENT1@MSN.COM 

 

ABSTRACT. 
The article compares traditional coefficients of thermodynamic activity as a parameter related to 
individual  chemical  species  to  newly  introduced  reduced  chaotic  temperatures  as  system 
characteristics,  both  regarding  their  usage  in  thermodynamic  simulation  of  open  chemical 
systems.  Logical  and  mathematical  backgrounds  of  both  approaches  are  discussed.  It  is  shown 
that  usage  of  reduced  chaotic temperatures and the Method of Chemical Dynamics to calculate 
chemical and phase composition in open chemical systems is much less costly, easier to perform 
and potentially leads to better precision. 
 
PROBABILISTIC  MODEL  OF  COMPLEX  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM. 
It  is  well  known  how  easily  the  Guldberg-Waage’s  equation  can  be  derived  from  the 
probabilistic  considerations.  Being  based  on  the  particle  collisions,  typical  for  the  reactions  in 
gases, it states that chance of the reaction to happen is proportional to joint probability P(A) of 
reactant  particles  to  occur  simultaneously  at  the  same  point  of  the  reaction  space.  This 
probability merely equals to product of concentrations of the colliding particles. If multiplied by 
the  rate  constant  it  defines  the  reaction  rate.  When  the  rates  of  the  forward  and  the  reverse 
reactions  are  equal  then  the  state  of  equilibrium  exists.  Less  known  is  the  fact  that  the  above 
derivation  is  valid  only  in  the  case  when  no  one  of  reactants  can  be  consumed  in  any  other 
collision  with  different  outcome  than  A.  Chemical  system  with  only  one  type  of  collision 
represents isolated by the reactants (more traditionally referred to as closed) is a simple chemical 
system: one type of collision – one outcome. 
If more than one type of interactions occur in the system, it becomes complex, and in this case 
we are interested in probability of collision A given that another collision B (for simplicity, only 
B  besides  A)  has  happened.  This  kind  of  a  probability  of  A  is  referred  to  as  conditional 
probability P(A/B). Because collision B has different than A outcome, both collisions compose a 
set of complete and mutually exclusive events, and the value of probability P(A/B) is defined by 
the Bayes’ theorem [1]. It is quite enough for the goal of this paper to state that in general case 
probability  P(A)  does  not  equal  to  probability  P(A/B).  If  only  one  of  reactants  participates  in 
collision B, the ratio  

γ = P(A/B)/P(A)                                                                (1) 
introduces  activity  coefficient  of  that  reactant.  It  is  quite  obvious  that γ< =1. Now  the name  of 
well  known  Law  of  Active  Masses  becomes  more  clear  -  the  value  of  γ defines the fraction  of 
that  reactant  to  participate  in  collision  A.  Activity  coefficients  go  into  the  Guldberg-Waage’s 
equation and then to the equilibrium constant with a product  γ . P(A).  
Thus one can define A and B subsystems of the system under investigation, each of them allow 
only one type of chemical reaction. In a particular case, if collision B is impossible, subsystem A 
turns  to  a  closed  system.  Now  outcome  of  the  collision  A  is  independent  upon  B,  hence  the 
probabilities are equal and γ = 1. This situation defines ideal chemical system.     
This  model,  originally  discussed  on  a  different  context  in  [2],  is  the  most  abstract  and  correct 
way  as  well  to  introduce  the  coefficients  γ currently  known  as  coefficients  of  thermodynamic 
activity.  Though  the  model  can  be  barely  used  for  numeric  calculations,  it  prompts  us  to 
conclude that the value of activity coefficient depends not only on the  collision A itself but also 
–  and  sometimes  essentially  -  upon  other  possible  reactions  with  this  reactant.  Using  other 
words,  coefficient  of  thermodynamic  activity  is  to  a  certain  degree  an  external  to  A 
characteristics of the relevant reaction and depends upon composition of the whole system.  

 

2

With  respect  to  coefficients  of  thermodynamic  activity,  the  constant  equation  for  j-reaction, 
following from the probabilistic approach is 

Kj = Π(akj

νkj)  +  Π(γkj

νkj),                                                                  (2) 
νkj),  where  component activities obviously are akj = γkjxkj. Form  of  the 
or  Kj  =  Π(xkj
constant equation is unchanged - mole fractions of the reaction participants are replaced by their 
activities. Nowadays this equation is the basic tool to calculate chemical and phase composition 
of  open  chemical  systems  in  equilibrium,  at  the  same  time  it  is  supporting  the  illusion  of 
componential  isolation  due  to  holding  the  same  form  of  constant  equation.  Knowledge  of 
thermodynamic activity coefficients is a must for thermodynamic simulation of open systems in 
the current paradigm of chemical thermodynamics.  
 
DYNAMIC   MODEL  OF   COMPLEX  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM. 
This model deals with equilibrium between an open system and its environment (and has nothing 
to  do  with  traditional  description  of  dynamic  equilibrium  on  molecular  level  to  describe 
equilibrium between the forward and the reverse reactions). The initial idea was greatly inspired 
by  d’Alembert’s  principle  [3].  In  classical  mechanics  equilibrium  of  a  mechanical  object  is 
always based on equilibrium of the system of mechanical forces, and d’Alembert’s principle says 
“any state of a moving system may be treated as equilibrium state if active forces, acting against 
the  system,  are  complimented  by  forces  of  inertia”.  Simply speaking, this method turns a  non-
balanced, open system of forces into complete system. Thus one can handle any non-equilibrium 
state  of  mechanical  system  using  equilibrium  methods  to  handle  dynamic  tasks  like  static.  In 
application to objects of chemical thermodynamics, similar principle may be worded as follows: 
any open chemical system (or subsystem of an equilibrium complex system) interacting with its 
environment (or with its compliment to the whole system) may be suggested as equilibrium if its 
state  is  defined  by  complete  set  of  thermodynamic  forces  acting  against  open  system.  This  set 
includes internal and also external thermodynamic force – a force acting against the open system 
from  its  environment.  Using  thermodynamic  affinity  in  its  original meaning as thermodynamic 
force,  this  idea  forms  a  background  of  recently  developed  Method  of  Chemical  Dynamics  [4]. 
One  of  the  most  amazing  and  practically  important  results  of  the  method  is  that  it  offers  an 
alternative  ideology to treat system non-ideality. Basic equation of the method was received in 
form of 

ln [Κj/ Π(ηkj , ∆*j)]  + τ j ∆*j δ*j  = 0,                                             (3) 

where  ηkj  -  thermodynamic  equivalent  of  chemical  transformation,  ∆*j  –  reaction  extent  at  open 
equilibrium, δ*j  - shift of the open equilibrium from “true” equilibrium, δ*j  = 1 - ∆*j, asterisk 
relates  values  to  open  equilibrium,  and  τ  j  –  reduced  chaotic  temperature  (for  detailed 
explanations  see  [4]).  The  last  value  defines  resistance  of  the  open  chemical  system  to  shift 
from true thermodynamic equilibrium, and is the most important parameter of the new theory. 
It was shown in [4] that equation (3) is identical with (2), and in a simple case of one reaction 
participant, which is common for the j-subsystem and any other part of the subsystem, and νkj= 
1, a very interesting relationship takes place 

δ*j = (1/ τj) [(-ln γ kj *)/ ∆* j].          

                                    (4) 
There  is  one  principal  difference  between  coefficient  of  thermodynamic  activity  and  reduced 
chaotic temperature - parameter τ  j is essentially internal to the j-subsystem and doesn’t depend 
upon any other reaction in the entire system. Its value can be easily found and tabulated from the 
stoichiometric  equation  for  any  elemental  chemical  reaction.  For  example,  Table  1  contains 
values of τ  j for reaction A+B=C with initial amounts of species of 1, 1, 0 moles, calculated for 
ηkj = 0.6 (which corresponds to equilibrium constant K= 5.25) and  ∆*j  varying within the range 
(0 …1) by the step of 0.05. 
Fig. 1 shows graphs of the reaction state shift in open equilibrium from true equilibrium against 
shifting force F for several values of ηkj.  
Basic input suggestion to develop the model was existence of a linear relationship between the 
reaction  shift  and  shifting  force  in  the  vicinity  of  true  equilibrium  thus  supposing  also 

 

3

permanence of the relevant graph slope and its inverse value, τ  j, within a certain, close to true 
equilibrium  region.  One  can  see  from  the  table  that,  accounting  general  precision  of 
thermochemical data, the idea very probably will work well up to δj = 0.3 – 0.4, and that was used 
to  make  calculations  in  previous  publications.  On  the  other  hand,  better  precision  can  be 
achieved using tabulated values of τ j in relation with the force or reaction shift up to the values 
of δj ~ 0.6 - 0.8, when the curves turn to horizontal.   
This example gives an idea how easy is to calculate the value of τ j given stoichiometric equation, 
equilibrium constant or standard change of Gibbs’ energy, and initial composition of the reaction 
mixture. 

Table 1. 

Reduced chaotic temperatures for elemental reaction A+B=C, ηkj = 0.6 (K = 5.25). 
 
δj 
0.00 
0.05 
0.10 
0.15 
0.20 
0.25 
0.30 
0.35 
0.40 
0.45 
0.50 
0.55 
0.60 
0.65 
0.70 
0.75 
0.80 
0.85 
0.90 
0.95 
 

F j, kJ/m.cd
0.00 
0.18 
0.38 
0.60 
0.83 
1.10 
1.40 
1.75 
2.15 
2.64 
3.24 
3.98 
4.93 
6.19 
7.92 
10.46 
14.46 
21.54 
36.85 
88.52 

τ j 
 
3.68 
3.81 
3.97 
4.16 
4.39 
4.66 
4.99 
5.39 
5.87 
6.47 
7.23 
8.21 
9.52 
11.32 
13.95 
18.07 
25.34 
40.95 
93.18 

δ

η = 0.6

η = 0.3

η=0.1

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0

5

15

20

10

F

                                           
 

Fig.1.  Reaction shift δ vs. shifting force F, kJ/(m.cd) for elemental reaction A + B = C.          

 

 

4

 
CONCLUSIONS. 
In  suppressing  number  of  cases  coefficients  of  thermodynamic  activity  should  be  determined 
experimentally  –  no  one  even  most  sophisticated  theory  can  follow  their  changes  in  complex 
chemical systems. Their dependence on the system contents and even upon concentration of the 
species they are relevant to makes experiments very costly and time consuming. In the contrary, 
coefficients τj are functions only of the reaction stoichiometry and standard change of Gibbs’ free 
energy.  Method  of  their  determination  is  quite  simple  and  they  can  be  stored  in  tables  for  any 
conceivable stoichiometric equation of elemental chemical reaction. All this provides for a great 
simplicity and stability on behalf of the Method of Chemical Mechanics. 
 
REFERENCES. 
 
1.   M. Hamburg. Statistical analysis for decision making.; HBJ: New York, 1983. 
2.   B. Zilbergleyt. Russian Journal of Physical Chemistry, 1985, 59, 1795-1797 
3.   H.C. Corben, Ph. Stehle. Classical mechanics.; Chapman, London, 1950:  
4.   B. Zilbergleyt. LANL Printed Archives, Chemical Physics,  
     
 
 

       http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0004035, April 19, 2000. 

 

