SLAC-PUB-8971 
Revised 
May, 2002 

 
A Polarized Electron RF Photoinjector Using 
(cid:1)

the Plane-Wave-Transformer (PWT) Design
 

 

J. E. Clendenin, R. E. Kirby 
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, 2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, CA 94025 
 

D. Yu, D. Newsham 
DULY Research Inc., 1912 MacArthur Street, Rancho Palos Verdes, CA 90275 
 

Abstract 

Polarized electron beams are now in routine use in particle accelerators for nuclear 
and high energy physics experiments. These beams are presently produced by dc-biased 
photoelectron sources combined with rf chopping and bunching systems with inherently 
high  transverse  emittances.  Low  emittances  can  be  produced  with  an  rf  gun,  but  the 
vacuum  environment  has  until  now  been  considered  too  harsh  to  support  a  negative 
electron  affinity  GaAs  photocathode.  We  propose  to  significantly  improve  the  vacuum 
conditions  by  adapting  a  PWT  rf  photoinjector  to  achieve  reasonable  cathode  emission 
rates  and  lifetimes.  This  adaptation  can  also  be  combined  with  special  optics  that  will 
result in a flat beam with a normalized rms emittance in the narrow dimension that may 
be as low as 10-8 m. 

 

 

 

 

1 

 
Submitted to Physical Review Special Topics–Accelerators and Beams

                                                 

 

(cid:1)
 Work supported in part by Department of Energy contract DE-AC03-76SF00515 (SLAC) and in part by DOE SBIR grant no. DE-
FG03-96ER82156 (DULY Research Inc.). 

A Polarized Electron RF Photoinjector Using 
(cid:1)

the Plane-Wave-Transformer (PWT) Design
 

 

J. E. Clendenin, R. E. Kirby 
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, 2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, CA 94025 
 

D. Yu, D. Newsham 
DULY Research Inc., 1912 MacArthur Street, Rancho Palos Verdes, CA 90275 
 

Polarized  electron  beams  are  now  in  routine  use  in  particle  accelerators  for  nuclear  and  high  energy 
physics  experiments.  These  beams  are  presently  produced  by  dc-biased  photoelectron  sources  combined 
with rf chopping and bunching systems with inherently high transverse emittances. Low emittances can be 
produced with an rf gun, but the vacuum environment has until now been considered too harsh to support a 
negative electron affinity GaAs photocathode. We propose to significantly improve the vacuum conditions 
by  adapting  a  PWT  rf  photoinjector  to  achieve  reasonable  cathode  emission  rates  and  lifetimes.  This 
adaptation can also be combined with special optics that will result in a flat beam  with a normalized rms 
emittance in the narrow dimension that may be as low as 10-8 m. 

PACS Codes: 29.25.Bx, 29.27.Hj 

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Polarized electron beams are now a principal element of the physics program at a number of 
major  accelerator  centers  including  SLAC,  JLAB,  MIT/Bates,  and  Mainz.  In  addition,  the 
SLC/SLD  demonstrated  that  polarized  electrons  will  be  essential  for  future  electron-
positron colliders. In fact, using  polarized electrons to  measure the left-right asymmetry in 
electron-positron  collisions  at  the  Z0  pole,  the  SLD  has  made  the  single  most  precise 
measurement of 
 to date despite recording significantly fewer events than any of the 
three competing LEP experiments [1]. Today, all polarized electron beams for accelerators 
are  generated  by  dc-biased  electron  guns  that  utilize  GaAs  as  the  photocathode.  The 
relatively  long  pulse(cid:1)on  the  order  of  nanoseconds(cid:1)generated  by  these  sources  is  rf 
chopped  and  bunched  in  the  injector  to  derive  the  desired  pulse  structure,  including 
microbunch  number  and  temporal  width,  to  match  the  accelerator  and  experiment 
requirements. 

sin

(cid:1)2

W

The normalized rms transverse emittance of rf-bunched beams is typically on the order of 
10-4 m. Future colliders such as NLC, JLC, TESLA, and CLIC, require an emittance of ~10-8 
m in at least one plane. The present collider designs achieve this extremely low emittance in 
the vertical plane using an appropriately designed damping ring. RF photocathode guns were 
introduced in 1985 by Fraser, Sheffield, and Gray [2]. Since the photoemitted electrons are 
                                                 

(cid:1)
 Work supported in part by Department of Energy contract DE-AC03-76SF00515 (SLAC) and in part by DOE SBIR grant no. DE-
FG03-96ER82156 (DULY Research Inc.). 

2 

rapidly accelerated to relativistic energies by electric fields that are much higher than used in 
dc guns, the  effects of space charge on emittance growth are minimized. In 1989 Carlsten 
pointed out that since the initial emittance growth in an rf gun is correlated, this growth can 
be  reversed  by  placing  a  solenoidal  field  immediately  after  the  cathode  [3].  An  emittance-
compensated rf photoinjector is normally designed to achieve the minimum emittance at a 
compensation  point  some  distance  beyond  the  solenoid  exit.  Simulations  indicate  that 
emittances as low as 10-6 m for 1 nC of charge per micropulse can be achieved with an rf 
photoinjector for round beams, although the measured values tend to be several times larger 
[4]. 

Today, rf photoinjectors are in widespread use in FELs, in some low-energy linacs such as 
the  Accelerator  Test  Facility  (ATF)  at  BNL,  and  in  a  few  larger  accelerators  such  as  the 
CLIC Test Facility (CTF) at CERN and the TESLA Test  Facility (TTF) at  DESY that are 
designed for R&D for future colliders. 

Rf  photoinjectors  have  been  proposed  as  a  source  of  cw  unpolarized  electron  beams  for 
energy recovery linacs (ERL) [5]. The gun laser required for an ERL may only be feasible if a 
GaAs (visible laser) or CsK2Sb (green) are utilized [6]. In this case the challenge for the PWT 
injector  would  be  to  provide  adequate  cooling.  The  cooling  requirement  is  somewhat  less 
stringent in some versions of electron ion colliders (EIC), which require polarized electrons, 
for which the rf frequency of the cw injector can be quite low [7].    

The  remainder  of  this  paper  is  devoted  to  the  possibility  of  producing  polarized  electron 
beams using an rf gun. 

II. MOTIVATION 

While the emittance that is achieved directly with an rf photoinjector is not low enough to 
eliminate the damping ring for a future collider, it is significantly lower than that produced 
by  rf  bunchers.  Thus  with  an  rf  gun  the  damping  ring  can  be  simpler  and  potentially  less 
expensive. In addition, the whole rf bunching system is eliminated, although a laser system is 
gained. 

Recently  a  technique  for  transforming  a  round  beam  having  an  angular  momentum  into  a 
"flat" beam was proposed by Brinkmann, Derbenev, and Flöttmann [8] based on an optical 
transformation  introduced  earlier  by  Derbenev  [9].  The  necessary  angular  momentum  for 
the  beam  can  be  provided  by  immersing  the  rf  gun  in  a  solenoidal  magnetic  field.  The 
expected  emittance  in  one  plane  is  as  low  as  several  times  10-8  m.  A  proof-of-principle 
experiment to produce a flat beam in this manner has been successfully carried out at FNAL 
[10]. Thus it appears with this optical transformation technique, a beam could be produced 
using an rf photoinjector that would have an emittance low enough to eliminate completely 
the  need  for  a  damping  ring  for  at  least  some  collider  designs  and  in  particular  for  the 
TESLA design. 

Consequently,  since  the  electron  beam  for  a  collider  must  be  polarized,  it  is  now  worth 
looking at the requirements for producing a polarized electron beam using an rf gun. 

 

 

3 

 

 

III. REQUIREMENTS FOR A POLARIZED ELECTRON SOURCE 

The  requirements  for  producing  a  polarized  electron  beam  using  an  rf  gun  have  been 
discussed elsewhere [11] and are summarized below. 

Cathode. Of the various III-V semiconductors that have been used for producing polarized 
electrons,  GaAs  is  the  most  studied.  The  response  time  of  bulk  (typically  300—600  (cid:1)m) 
GaAs photocathodes is known to approach nanoseconds, whereas for low emittance beams, 
the electron bunch in an rf gun should be launched with a bunch length that is <20° of rf 
phase at the cathode, i.e., for S-band <20 ps. The photon absorption depth for GaAs is on 
the order of a micron. Thus electrons promoted into the conduction band deep in the crystal 
will require a finite time to diffuse to the surface (during which time they thermalize to the 
bottom of the conduction band), resulting in bunch durations of nanoseconds even if a very 
short laser pulse is used. The bunch duration can be limited by using a thin cathode epilayer 
or by preventing diffusion electrons from escaping from the surface. Response times as low 
as  a  couple  picoseconds  have  been  observed  for  low-charge  bunches  generated  by  a  sub-
picosecond laser beam impinging on a thin epilayer (<200 nm) of GaAs [12]. 

Activation.  GaAs  photocathodes  must  be  carefully  activated  to  form  a  negative  electron 
affinity (NEA) or nearly NEA surface. Activation requires the deposition of cesium on the 
perfectly clean GaAs surface such that when the quantum efficiency (QE) first peaks there 
will be about a half monolayer (ML, defined as one adatom per surface atom) of surface Cs. 
Immediately  following  the  first  QE  peak,  a  mixture  of  Cs+oxide  is  applied until  a  second 
QE peak is achieved, whereupon the surface thickness of the Cs-oxide is about 1 ML.  For a 
well-activated surface, the oxide generally ends up on the bottom of the added layer, while at 
the  surface  there  is  as  much  as  ½  ML  of  free  Cs.  A  zero  electron  affinity  surface  would 
block emission to vacuum of thermalized electrons that reach the surface from deep in the 
epilayer, thus shortening the bunch duration. Zero or even positive electron affinity surfaces 
might  be  desirable  in  some  cases  to  reduce  the  initial  bunch  duration.  With  the  possible 
exception of some types of field-assisted emission, methods of reducing the electron bunch 
duration result concomitantly in a reduced QE. 

Vacuum. There is now a considerable amount of evidence that the time during which the QE 
of a GaAs photocathode decreases by a factor of 2 will be on the order of days or more only 
if the vacuum in which the cathode is operating is extremely good. It is clear that some gas 
species  are  more  harmful  than  others.  In  general,  any  oxide  with  a  partial  pressure  >10-12 
Torr will be a problem. Some gas species, such as CO2, commonly found in UHV systems 
do not seem to affect the QE at all.  The presence of other species, such as O2 and H2O, 
result  in  an  increasingly  rapid  loss  of  QE  when  their  partial  pressures  increase  above 
~5x10-13 Torr. The QE of a cathode aged in a UHV system can often be restored by adding 
more  cesium  to  the  surface  except in  the case  of contamination  by  H2O. These  issues  are 
summarized in reference [13]. Stainless-steel UHV chambers with residual pressures of 10-11 
Torr, dominated by H2 (which is relatively harmless), can readily be produced. There is much 
less experience with UHV all-copper systems. 

Thin protective coatings have been found to protect some vacuum-sensitive photocathodes 
with very little loss of QE [14]. A similar coating might be found that would protect GaAs. 

4 

High Voltage. To extract the high charge needed for accelerator beams, the cathode must be 
biased at high voltage. Conventional guns use either dc or pulsed voltage.  For these guns, 
the  rate  of  decay  of  the  cathode  QE  has  been  found  to  increase  when  the  average  dark 
current exceeds 100 nA. RF guns rely on the peak rf fields at the cathode surface to extract 
the charge. The rf fields produce dark currents, both internal and external to the rf cavity, 
that can readily destroy the cathode QE [15]. The external dark current (meaning the field-
emitted electrons that exit the cathode rf cavity) in a conventional S-band rf gun can be as 
low  as  1  nC  per  (cid:1)s  of  rf  [16].  It  goes  without  saying  that  rf  breakdowns—which  produce 
extremely  high  currents,  presumably  after  formation  of  a  plasma  source  [17]—must  be 
completely eliminated. 

Ion Bombardment. Molecules from the residual gas in the rf chamber or desorbed by electron 
interception at the walls of the cavity can be ionized by the electron beam, then accelerated 
to the cathode causing serious deterioration to the cathode QE.  This is a now well-known 
phenomenon  for  high  duty-factor  dc  guns  [18].    It  is  not  clear  that  it  will  be  as  serious  a 
problem in an rf gun, where the field direction is rapidly reversing. 

Magnetic  Field.  Polarized  photoelectrons  extracted  from  a  GaAs  cathode  have  their 
polarization vector aligned parallel or anti-parallel to the axis of the excitation laser, which in 
this case is by design the momentum axis of the electron beam. Thus the beam is born with 
longitudinal  polarization,  and  consequently  axial  magnetic  fields  have  no  effect  on  the 
polarization  of  the  electron  beam.  Transverse  magnetic  fields will  cause  the  electron-beam 
polarization vector to precess with respect to the momentum, which does not decrease the 
polarization  if  the  energy  spread  is  very  low.  In  the  latter  case  the  polarization  can  be 
restored  to  longitudinal  if  desired.  However,  in  an  rf  gun,  during  the  emission  of  the 
electrons, there is a transverse rf magnetic field at the surface of the GaAs crystal where the 
relative energy spread of the electrons is high due to the rapidly increasing amplitude of the 
longitudinal rf electric field. Thus some depolarization is expected in an rf gun as the beam 
leaves the crystal surface. These rf fields also penetrate the crystal itself. 

Except for very high-current beams, the cathode for an electron source is normally located 
in a magnetic-field free region to avoid the emittance dilution associated with a longitudinal 
magnetic field [19]. Embedding the cathode in a solenoidal field in order to produce a flat 
beam at the injector exit [8] should not affect the polarization vector of the extracted beam, 
but may have an effect inside the  crystal. The spin direction of conduction-band  electrons 
will  precess  around  an  external  magnetic  field  as  the  electrons  diffuse  toward  the  crystal 
surface,  i.e.,  introduce  some  mixing  of  the  two  adjacent  spin  states,  which  may  result  in  a 
significant  depolarization  somewhat  in  analogy  to  the  well-known  D’yakonov-Perel’  (DP) 
depolarization mechanism [20]. But since an rf gun requires a relatively short bunch length, 
most of the  extracted  electrons will be those  that  are initially  promoted to the  conduction 
band at a distance from the surface shorter than their mean free path (~1000 Ǻ) from where 
they  are  rapidly  accelerated,  parallel  to  the  solenoidal  field,  by  the  rf  electric-field  gradient 
that penetrates the crystal. (At 3 GHz, the skin depth for highly p-doped GaAs is ~50 (cid:1)m 
[21].)  Thus  many  of  the  conduction  band  electrons  enter  the  band  bending  region  (BBR, 
final 100 Ǻ in this case) with a relatively high momentum. The additional accelerating field 
provided in the BBR can be up to 50 MV/m depending on the degree of electron affinity. 
However, even in the absence of external fields, the character of the electron kinetics in the 
BBR is complex and not well understood [22].  For an NEA surface with no external fields, 

 

5 

it is known that there is a high probability that electrons will be trapped in the BBR where 
they lose some energy before emission to vacuum. One can expect some depolarization of 
trapped  electrons  in  the  presence  of  an  external  magnetic  field.  On  the  other  hand,  this 
depolarization effect is expected to be almost completely eliminated if the surface has a zero 
or positive electrons affinity, since the electrons emitted into vacuum are then almost entirely 
“hot” electrons, i.e., electrons that have undergone no collisions. 

IV. THE INTEGRATED PWT PHOTOINJECTOR 

The plane wave transformer (PWT) accelerating structure, first proposed in the 1960s [23], is 
being successfully utilized in the Neptune Laboratory at UCLA as an S-band booster for a 
1.6-cell rf gun [24]. More recently, a version of the PWT S-band structure that incorporates a 
photocathode  has  been  designed  and  built  by  DULY  Research  Inc.,  and  installed  in  the 
PEGASUS Laboratory at UCLA [25]. An X-band version is being studied [26]. 

The PWT design, shown schematically in Fig. 1, is a π-mode, standing-wave, linac structure, 
which differs from the conventional disk-loaded linac design in that the accelerating cells are 
formed by disks that are suspended and cooled by water-carrying rods in a large cylindrical 
tank.  The  plane-wave-transformer  derives  its  name  from  the  fact  that  rf  power  is  coupled 
first into the annular region of the cylindrical tank outside the disk assembly in a TEM-like 
mode, and then coupled to the accelerating cells in a standing-wave, TM-like mode on axis. 
The  cathode  of  the  integrated  photoinjector  is  located  at  one  of  the  end  plates  and  is  an 
integral  component  of  the  photoelectron  linac.  A  compact  magnet  is  used  to  focus  the 
electron  beam  after  its  creation  from  the  photocathode,  to  preserve  the  beam  emittances 
through  the  photoinjector  linac,  and  to  produce  a  moderate-energy  electron  beam  of 
superior quality. Electrons are produced with a laser beam impinging on the photocathode at 
a small angle with respect to the beam axis. 

Main Solenoid

Water Feeds

Vacuum Port

Diagnostic 
Port

Disk
Cooling
Tube

Bucking Coil

7-2001
8611A1

Photocathode

RF Port

Water Jacket

6 

Electron 
Beam

 

 

 

 

 

FIG. 1. Schematic of the DULY S-band integrated PWT photoelectron linac. 

The design parameters of the PEGASUS photoinjector are shown in Table 1. The rf, beam 
dynamics  and  thermal/mechanical  performance  of  the  photoinjector  have  been  simulated 
using 2D and 3D numerical codes (GdfidL, Parmela and COSMOS/M). The rf performance 
has been verified experimentally with full rf power (20 MW) with no breakdown. The design 
accelerating gradient of 33 MV/m of the 10+2/2 cell gun was based on an unloaded Q of 
25000, while the measured Q was about half this value. Possible causes of the Q degradation 
are the multiple braze joints of the support rods and the copper coating of the stainless steel 
tank  of  the  PWT.  Beam  tests  are  scheduled  for  2001  as  the  PEGASUS  laser  system  is 
nearing final completion. The photoinjector will be used to drive an undulator to produce 
infrared radiation. 

TABLE I. S-Band PWT design parameters. 

Charge per Bunch 

Normalized Emittance 

1 nC 
1 (cid:1)m @ 60 MV/m

 

Parameter 

Frequency 

Energy 

Energy Spread 

Bunch Length (rms) 

Rep Rate 

Peak Current 

Linac Length 

Beam Radius 

Peak B Field 

Peak Gradient 

Peak Brightness 

 

 

Value 

2856 MHz 

20 MeV 

<0.1% 

2 ps 

5 Hz 

100 A 

58 cm 

<1mm 

1.8 kG 

60 MV/m 
2(cid:2)1014 A/(m-rad)2 

The  interior  construction  of  the  PWT  linac  is  shown  in  Fig.  2,  while  Fig.  3  shows  the 
exterior of the assembled photoinjector. 

 V. APPLICATION OF PWT DESIGN FOR A POLARIZED ELECTRON SOURCE 

The  PWT  design  for  an  integrated  photoinjector  offers  additional  advantages  over  the 
standard  rf  photoinjector  for  the  purposes  of  producing  a  polarized  electron  beam.  For  a 
peak rf field at the cathode of 60 MV/m (Table 1), simulations indicate the normalized rms 

 

 

7 

emittance for a 1-nC beam from the PWT S-band photoinjector should be about 1(cid:2)10-6 m 
[27],  while  at  least  120  MV/m  is  required  to  achieve  this  same  result  with  the  split 
photoinjector  design  [28].  Positive  fields  on  the  order  of  ~30  MV/m  and  higher  at  the 
surface of a highly p-doped GaAs crystal will induce an inversion layer at the surface, which 
may  allow  field  emission  from  the  GaAs  cathode  itself.  However,  unlike  the  dc-field  case, 
the  formation  of  a  strong  inversion  layer,  which  begins  at  ~60  MV/m,  is  limited  by  the 
inability of the minority carriers (in this case electrons) to keep up with the rf-field variations. 
Nonetheless, it may be necessary to limit even rf fields to below 60 MV/m. 

FIG. 2. Interior view of the S-band PWT accelerating structure. 

7-2001
8611A2

 

 

7-2001
8611A3

8 

 

 

FIG. 3.  Exterior view of the S-band PWT. 

The separation of the tank wall from the accelerating structure in the PWT design allows for 
more and larger vacuum openings with high vacuum conductance that will help in the UHV 
requirement  for  the  polarized  electron  source.  Rather  than  requiring  that  the  pumping 
occurs only through the iris of the disk, the PWT utilizes the large volume between the disks 
as  the  primary  pumping  pathway.  In  addition  to  increased  pumping  efficiencies,  the  large 
tank provides greater stored energy that can be used in a multi-pulse operation. This feature 
of the DULY photoinjector has resulted in a proposed application in CTF3 [29] and as the 
electron gun in an x-ray source based on Compton backscattering [30]. 

Recent discussion of voltage breakdown in accelerating structures [17] has led to the idea 
that the filling time of the accelerating structure can play an important role in the breakdown 
process.  A  longer  filling  time  and  a  shorter  structure,  with  a  wider  bandwidth  (difference 
between  the  0-mode  and  the  operating  mode),  may  mitigate  the  rf  voltage  breakdown 
process.  These features are generally associated with standing wave structures. For the PWT 
structure,  the  separation  between  the  accelerating  structure  and  the  tank  wall  allows  for  a 
wide range of cavity Q values, and hence, a wide range in filling times. 

In the integrated PWT S-band linac, the tank wall and cooling rods were constructed of 
copper-plated stainless steel. As a part of this design, the decrease in the Q of the structure 
was studied as a function of relative degradation of the resistivity of the copper plating on 
these surfaces [31]. Fig. 4 shows the results of this study. A 50% decrease in the value of Q 
would be expected if the wall and rod resistivity increased by an order of magnitude.  

 

 

 

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

)
r
e
p
p
o
c
 
C
H
F
O
 
o
Q
/
o
Q

(
 
o
Q
 
e
v
i
t
a
e
R

l

0

0

7-2001
8611A4

4

8

12

Relative Resistivity (ρ/ρ OFHC Copper)

16

 

FIG. 4. Relative degradation of the Qo value in the DULY S-Band PWT as the resistivity of 
the tank wall and cooling rods is increased. 

9 

 

 

VI. POSSIBLE MODIFICATIONS TO ENHANCE SUITABILITY OF PWT STRUCTURE AS A 
POLARIZED ELECTRON SOURCE 

Material and production quality. The modifications to the existing PWT design that are required 
for  use  as  a  polarized  electron  source  can  be  separated  into  two  categories:  design 
modifications, and material and production-quality improvements. Recent tests indicate that 
to  minimize  dark  current  and  rf  breakdown,  Class  1  OFHC  copper  forged  using  the  hot 
isostatic pressure (HIP) method and single-point diamond machining to a surface roughness 
of 0.05 (cid:1)m or better should be used for fabrication, followed by simple rinsing in ultra-pure 
water [32]. Maintenance of the ultrahigh vacuum (< 10-10 Torr) would probably necessitate 
assembly in a Class 100 or better clean room. 

Vacuum  pumping.  To  better  improve  the  vacuum,  the  tank  wall  can  be  coated  with  a  thin 
(couple micrometers) film of TiZr (or  TiZrV), a recently proposed getter material that can 
be reactivated at relative low temperatures several times after exposure to atmosphere [33], 
which  should  be  adequate  for  a  load-locked  system  (see  below).  External  getter  (NEG) 
pumps have been used successfully to reduce the vacuum in an operating 1.6-cell S-band rf 
gun  by  an  order  of  magnitude  [34]  and  should  be  used  here  as  well.  Recently  the  GaAs 
photocathode of a dc-biased gun was extended into a chamber containing a massive array of 
NEG pump elements [18]. The resulting dramatic increase in pumping speed at the cathode 
significantly improved the gun performance. The thin TiZr films are almost transparent to rf 
[35]. Consequently, as indicated in Fig. 4, the effect of the film on the cavity Q is expected to 
be very small. The maximum electric field at the tank wall is about 56% of the maximum on 
axis  and  located  at  the  center  line  of  a  disk.  Field  emission  related  to  the  coating  can  be 
minimized by carefully applying a very smooth layer. 

Cooling.  Simulations  indicate  that  for  the  present  DULY  S-band  PWT  design,  a  klystron 
power  of  25  MW  at  10  Hz  and  with  a  flow  rate  of  1  liter/min  in  the  disk,  the  thermal 
gradient across the disk is about 0.25ºC, and the cold point on the disk is 1ºC warmer than 
the cooling water. If the repetition rate is increased to 180 Hz, which increases the average 
power by a factor of 18, it will be necessary to increase the flow rate through the disk by a 
factor of 2 (4) to reduce the temperature difference between disk and water to 6 (2) ºC while 
the gradient across the disk will be 4.3ºC independent of flow rate. Additional cooling is not 
expected to be needed due to the added getter material alone.   

PWT dimensions. The flexibility of the dimensions of the PWT design permits modifications 
that  will  enhance  multi-bunch  acceleration  and  vacuum  pumping.  The  former  may 
necessitate  a  shorter  overall  length  for  a  given  rf  power  and  an  enlarged  beam  pipe  to 
minimize  beam  breakup  (BBU)  and  a  larger  rf  power  coupling  for  heavy  beam  loading.  
Increasing the tank radius will not only increase the stored energy and the Q, but will also 
increase  the  conductance,  thus  allowing  more  efficient  vacuum  pumping.  In  addition,  the 
first half-cell can be enlarged to a 0.625-cell, as is now done with separated-function guns, to 
decrease the emittance. 

Load-lock.  Operation  of  the  integrated  PWT  photoinjector  as  a  polarized  electron  source 
requires the use of a GaAs cathode. The current DULY design uses a de-mountable copper 
cathode.  This cathode system was designed for months of stable operation between cathode 

10 

replacements;  however,  it  requires  that  the  entire  photoinjector  be  brought  to  atmosphere 
for  the  replacement,  resulting  in  a  long  operational  down-time  because  of  the  need  to  re-
evacuate  and  bake  the  system  after  the  cathode  replacement.  Regular  replacement  of  the 
GaAs cathode will require a load-lock for inserting and removing cathodes without breaking 
the  gun  vacuum,  since  GaAs,  once  activated,  must  be  maintained  always  in  an  ultra-high 
vacuum. 

The proposed load-lock is shown in Fig. 5 with  a cathode plug (1, the figure) exchange in 
progress.  The entire system consists of a process chamber (not shown) where cathode heat 
cleaning and cesiation are executed  and where new cathodes are first loaded for activation 
prior  to  exchange  in  the  main  load-lock.  The  main  load-lock  is  computer-controlled  for 
remote  withdrawal,  for  touch-up  cesiation  (14),  and  for  re-insertion  of  a  cathode  into  the 
photoinjector.  The cathode transport device (2,5) is a rack-and-pinion gear mechanism.  The 
advantage  of  its  use,  over  bellows-sealed  or  magnetically-coupled  motions,  is  the  ability  to 
sense,  via  appropriate  mechanical  pressure  gauging  on  the  pinion  rotary  motion  the  load 
applied  to  the  cathode  when  the  cathode  is  seated  in  the  injector  (13).    This  capability 
ensures  that  the  rack  (2)  exerts  a  constant  force  on  the  cathode,  thereby  avoiding  an 
operational tune shift. 

FIG. 5. Load-lock system, depicting cathode plug exchange in progress: 1) photocathode 
plug, 2) gun cathode rack, 3) cathode exchange rack, 4) cathode exchange support anvil, 
5) rack and pinion gun loader, 6) motorized drive, 7) to pumping system, 8) gun isolation 
valve, 9) load-lock isolation valve, 10) process/exchange unit isolation valve, 11) quick-
disconnect  flange,  12)  to  process/activation  stations,  13)  to  photoinjector,  14)  cesiation 
unit (channel cesiators, laser window and laser, photocurrent detector). 

 

 

11 

When a cesiation touch-up is required, the cathode is  retracted through the isolation valve 
(8) to a position adjacent to the cesiation unit (14).  The isolation valve is closed remotely for 
safety and a cesiation cycle is performed with a local diode laser and current collector.  The 
valve is  then re-opened and the cathode re-injected into the gun.  A  new cathode requires 
the  complete  removal  of  the  old  through  a  quickly  attached  flange  (11)  using  a  cathode 
exchange unit (12). 

VII. CONCLUSIONS 

RF  guns  can  produce  low  emittance  beams  for  particle  accelerators.  Present  and  future 
accelerators  require  polarized  electron  beams,  but  to  date  polarized  electron  beams  for 
accelerators  have  been  produced  only  with  dc-biased  or  pulsed  guns  utilizing  GaAs 
photocathodes.  Maintaining  emission  from  a  GaAs  cathode  requires  an  extremely  good 
vacuum, which is not available with a standard rf gun. We have shown the PWT design to be 
uniquely adaptable to the production of low-emittance polarized electron beams. The salient 
features  are  better  vacuum  and  lower  rf  fields  for  optimum  emittance.  The  former  is  a 
product of the open structure and versatility of dimensions in the PWT design. The latter is 
primarily  a  feature  of  the  integrated  or  multi-cell  injector  in  which  there  is  no  drift  space 
between the cathode and first associated cells (gun) and the initial accelerating cells (booster). 

                                                 

[1] K. Abe et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5945 (2000); K. Abe et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1162 
(2001). 

[2] J. S. Fraser, R. L. Sheffield, E. R. Gray, in Laser Acceleration of Particles, proceedings of the 
2nd Int. Workshop, Malibu, 1985, edited by C. Joshi, T. Katsouleas, AIP Conf. Proc. 130   (AIP, 
New York, 1985), p. 598; J. S. Fraser, R. L. Sheffield, E. R. Gray, Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. A 
250, 71 (1986). 

[3] B. E. Carlsten, Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. A 285, 313 (1989). 

[4] P. O'Shea, L. Spentzouris, in Advanced Accelerator Concepts, proceedings of the 8th 
Workshop, Baltimore, 1998, edited by W. Lawson, C. Bellamy, D. F. Brosius, AIP Conf. Proc. 
472 (AIP, Woodbury, NY, 1999), p. 212. 

[5] I. Ben-Zvi et al., in Proceedings of the 2001 Particle Accelerator Conference, Chicago, 2001, edited 
by P. Lucas, S. Webber (IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, 2001), p. 350. 

[6] C. Sinclair, “Photocathode and DC Gun Summary,” in Proceedings of the PERL Photocathode 
Gun Workshop, January 20-21, 2001, Report BNL-52624, 
http://nslsweb.nsls.bnl.gov/nsls/org/PERL/GunWorkshop.htm . 

[7] The White Paper: The Electron Ion Collider (February, 2002), 
http://www.phenix.bnl.gov/WWW/publish/abhay/Home_of_EIC/Whitepaper/Final/Fin
alColor02_22_02.pdf . 

 

 

12 

                                                                                                                                                 

[8] R. Brinkmann, Ya. Dervenev, K. Flöttmann, Phys. Rev. ST-AB 4, 053501 (2001), and 
references therein. 

[9] Ya. Derbenev, University of Michigan UM-HE-98-04, 1998 (unpublished). 

[8] I. Bohnet et al., in The XX Int. Linac Conf. Proceedings, Monterey, CA, 2000, edited by A. 
Chao, SLAC-R-561 (Stanford, CA, 2000), p. 122. 

[11] J. Clendenin, in Advanced Accelerator Concepts, proceedings of the 8th Workshop, 
Baltimore, 1998, edited by W. Lawson, C. Bellamy, D. F. Brosius, AIP Conf. Proc. 472 (AIP, 
Woodbury, NY, 1999), p. 142. 

[12] J. Schuler et al., in Spin 2000, proceedings of the 14th International Spin Physics 
Symposium, Osaka, 2000, edited by K. Hatanaka, T. Nakano, K. Imai, H. Ejiri (AIP, Melville, 
NY, 2001), p. 926. 

[13] J. E. Clendenin et al., in Polarized Gas Targets and Polarized Beams, proceedings of the 7th 
International Workshop, University of Illinois, Urbana, 1997, edited by R. J. Holt, M. A. Miller, 
AIP Conf. Proc. 421  (AIP, Woodbury, 1998), p. 250. 

[14] E. Shefer et al., Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. A 433, 502 (1999). 

[15] A. V. Aleksandrov et al, in European Particle Accelerator Conference, proceedings of the 
6th Conference, Stockholm, 1998, edited by S. Myers, L. Liijeby, Ch. Petit-Jean-Genaz, J. Poole, 
K.-G. Rensfelt (IOP Publishing, London, 1998), p. 1450; N. S. Dikansky et al., in proceedings of 
the 7th European Particle Accelerator Conference, Vienna, 2000, p. 1645 (to be published). 

[16] J. F. Schmerge, SLAC, private communication. 

[17] P. B. Wilson, in The XX Int. Linac Conf. Proceedings, Monterey, CA, 2000, edited by A. 
Chao, SLAC-R-561 (Stanford, CA, 2000), p. 618. 

[18] C. Sinclair, in IEEE Particle Accelerator Conference, proceedings of the 18th Conference, 
New York, 1999, edited by A. Luccio, W. MacKay (IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, 1999), p. 65. 

[19] A. C. Paul, V. K. Neil, “High-Current Relativistic Electron Guns,” in Applied Charged 
Particle Optics, Part C: Very-High-Density Beams,  edited by A. Septier (Academic Press, NY, 
1983), p. 162. 

[20] G.E. Pikus and A.N. Titkov, “Spin relaxation under optical orientation in semiconductors,” 
in Optical Orientation, edited by F. Meier and B.P. Zakharchenya (North Holland, Amsterdam, 
1984), p. 87. 

[21] K. Aulenbacher et al., “RF Guns and the Production of Polarized Electrons,” CLIC Note 303 
and NLC-Note 20, 1 May 1996 (unpublished). 

[22] A.V. Subashiev, Yu. A. Mamaev, Yu. P. Yashin, J.E. Clendenin, Phys. Low-Dim. Struct. 
1/2, 1 (1999). 

 

13 

                                                                                                                                                 

[23] V. G. Andreyev et al. in, International Conference on High Energy Accelerators, 
proceedings of the 5th Conference, Frascati, 1965, edited by M. Grilli, (CNEN, Rome, 1966), p. 
634; V. G. Andreev, Zh. Tekh. Fiz. 38, 1306 (1968) [Sov. Phys.-Tech. Phys. 13, 1070 (1969)]. 

[24] R. Zang et al., in IEEE Particle Accelerator Conference, proceedings of the 16th Conference,  
Dallas, 1995 (IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, 1996), p. 1102; S. Anderson et al., in IEEE Particle 
Accelerator Conference, proceedings of the 18th Conference, New York, 1999, edited by A. 
Luccio, W. MacKay (IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, 1999), p. 2006. 

[25] D. Yu et al., in IEEE Particle Accelerator Conference, proceedings of the 17th Conference, 
Vancouver, 1997, edited by M. Comyn, M. K. Craddock, M. Reiser, J. Thomson (IEEE, 
Piscataway, NJ), p. 2802; X. Ding et al., in IEEE Particle Accelerator Conference, proceedings 
of the 18th Conference, New York, 1999, edited by A. Luccio, W. MacKay (IEEE, Piscataway, 
NJ, 1999), p. 2021. 

[26] D. Yu et al., in IEEE Particle Accelerator Conference, proceedings of the 18th Conference, 
New York, 1999, edited by A. Luccio, W. MacKay (IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, 1999), p. 2003; D. 
Newsham et al., in Proceedings of the 2001 Particle Accelerator Conference, Chicago, 2001, 
edited by P. Lucas, S. Webber (IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, 2001), p. 2296. 

[27] J. B. Rosenzweig et al., in IEEE Particle Accelerator Conference, proceedings of the 18th  
Conference, New York, 1999, edited by A. Luccio, W. MacKay (IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, 1999), p. 
2039. 

[28] D. T. Palmer, Ph.D thesis, Stanford University, 1998, p. 41. 

[29] D. Yu et al., in Proceedings of the 2001 Particle Accelerator Conference, Chicago, 2001, 
edited by P. Lucas, S. Webber (IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, 2001), p. 2293. 

[30] F. V. Hartemann et al., Phys. Rev. E 64, 016501 (2001); D. Yu, DULY Research Inc. report 
"A Compton Backscattering X-Ray Source," 1997 (unpublished); D. Yu, DULY Research Inc. 
report  "A Compact X-Ray Source for Protein Crystallography," 2000 (unpublished). 

[28] D. Yu, D. Newsham, J. Zeng, in Advanced Accelerator Concepts, proceedings of the 9th 
Workshop, Sante Fe, 2000, edited by P. L. Colestock, S. Kelly, AIP Conf. Proc. 569 (AIP, 
Melville, NY, 2001), p. 274. 

[32] C. Suzuki et al., Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. A 462, 337 (2001). 

[33] C. Benvenuti, P. Chiggiato, F. Cicoira, Y. L’Aminot, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 16, 148 (1998). 

[34] M. Uesaka, U. Tokyo (Tokai), private communication. 

[35] C. Benvenuti, CERN, private communication. 

 

14 

