New approach for building of unified theory about the Universe and 
some results 

S. Sarg 

E-mail: sarg@helical-structures.org 

Web site: www.helical-structures.org 

The physical models of a successful unified theory about the Universe must operate in different phase of 
matter evolution and different fields of physics. The attempts to build such wide range theory as a bunch of 
theories developed for different fields of physics are not quite successful. The accumulated knowledge from 
experiments  and  observations  leads  to  a  conclusion  that  some  of  the  adopted  postulates  in  the  modern 
physics are not absolutely fundamental, as considered so far. A new approach for building of unified model 
of the Universe suggests resurrection of the principles of causality and logical understanding for any kind of 
physical  phenomena.  It  is  successfully  applied  in  a  new  theory  titled  Basic  Structures  of  Matter,  which 
provides  fundamentals  for  a  unified  theory  about  the  Universe.  The  new  approach  leads  to  different 
physical  models  for  the  elementary  particles  and  the  atoms  and  also  to  a  different  concept  about  the 
Universe. In the same time the suggested models exhibit the same interaction energies as obtained by the 
Quantum mechanics and experiments. The analysis of the physical phenomena from a new point of view 
allows  deeper  understanding  of  the  relations  between  the  basic  physical  attributes:  mass,  energy,  space, 
time, gravitation and inertia. 

Keywords: (unified field theories, zero point energy, light velocity, gravitation, inertia, relativity) 

1.  Problems related to development of successful unified theory about the 
Universe. 

The foundations of the modern physics rely on postulates and rules adopted about 100 years ago. 
Now a real gap exists between the highly abstractive theories about the matter from one side, and 
physical reality from the other. This gap has been in favor of separation of the theoretical physics 
as an independent field. In the beginning of the 20th century the physical science has not been able 
to  provide  logical  explanations  of  some  physical  phenomena,  while  their  mathematical 
interpretations appeared successful. As a result the Quantum Mechanics is born. The principle of 
causality, that is essentially important for the real objectivity, has been replaced by the uncertainty 
principle. Influenced by the successful results from the quantum mechanical models the theoretical 
physics gradually abandoned the physical logic. It was the mathematical logic that took the guiding 
role in the analysis of the  physical phenomena.  The mathematical physics now  dominates in the 
theoretical  vision  about  matter,  space  and  time.  This  approach  led  to  development  of  number  of 
highly abstractive theories in both directions of length scale reference to the Quantum mechanics 
range: into micro and macro cosmos. In the same time attempts are made to interconnect or extend 
the ranges of the existing theories into one universal unified field theory, valid for wide range of 
space and time. Many of the rules adopted in the separate narrow range theories, however, appear 
cross violated in the wider range of space and time. Such approach evidently is not quite successful 
for building of unified theory about the Universe. 

The  most  convincing  achievements  of  the  Quantum  mechanics  are  related  with  the  atomic  and 
molecular  spectra,  because  they  are  validated  by  the  experimental  data.  The  range  of  these 
interactions, however, occupy a small range of the space and time scales in comparison to the vast 
space  and  time  scales  from  micro  to  macro  Cosmos.  The  validation  of  developed  models  for 
interactions  away  from  this  range  is  not  so  effective.  In  the  bottom  range  of  the  scale  the  time 

 

1 

events  are  very  fast  and  the  observations  are  characterized  with  large  statistics  but  deteriorated 
time and space resolution of the interaction event. This is valid for particle physics experiments. In 
the  upper  scale,  the  space  resolution  is  good  but  the  observations  lack  the  track  of  event  time 
development.  This  is  valid  for  cosmological  phenomena.  Presently,  large  number  of  physical 
phenomena  predominantly  in  the  range  of  micro  and  a  macro  cosmos  are  not  satisfactorily 
explained.  

In  the  range  of  macro  cosmos:  The  dipole  shape  of  the  Cosmic  Background  Radiation,  the 
deviation of the Hubble law from linearity for redshift z > 0.8, the Lyman alpha forest, the physics 
of Globular Clusters and the cepheids of second type, the red shift periodicity in the spectrum of 
quasar objects, the large velocities of most of the pulsars and almost zero velocities of others, the 
galactic rotational curves and a dark matter concept, the large energy in the galactic center, a black 
hole emitting radiation (recently discovered), the pillars formation (like in Crab nebulae) and their 
synchrotron  type  of  radiation,  the  God’s  effect  (the  intergalactic  distances  are  increasing  in  any 
radial direction from us), the gamma ray burst phenomena and so on. 

In  the  range  of  micro  cosmos:  a  single  photon  interference  and  polarization,  the  anomalous 
magnetic  moment  of  the  electron,  the  infinities  in  the  Faynman  diagrams,  the  large  masses  of 
bosons and the top quark (larger than the mass of the atom of gold), CPT theorem and its violation, 
parity  violation  in  Beta  decay  of  charge  particles,  impossibility  to  create  a  stable  antihydrogen 
atom for not relativistic velocities.   

 The Quantum mechanics is undoubtly successful theory. At the same time it is so bizarre, from the 
point of view of human logic, that Richard Feynman, a master of quantum calculation said: “no-
body  understand  the  quantum  mechanics”  (how  it  works).  Many  rules  adopted  in  the  quantum 
mechanics  are  not  supported  by  logical  understanding.  Then  a  question  arises:  Do  the  quantum 
mechanical models reflect real physical entities or they are pure mathematical models? If the latter 
option  is  the  case  they  could  not  be  logically  extended  into  both  directions:  the  micro  and  the 
macro cosmos.   

 

2.  The  absolute  validity  of  some  of  the  adopted  postulates  is 
challenged by the accumulated knowledge. 

In recent years number of publications challenging some of the adopted postulates of the modern 
physics  appeared  in  the  peer  review  journals.  They  touch  fundamentally  important  physical 
attributes: the gravitation, the zero point energy, the vacuum properties and the inertia.  

One of the discussed problems is the controversy over the Newton’s gravitational constant. Despite 
it has  been  measured since 1798 (initially  by  Cavendish) its currently known value is  much less 
accurate  than  many  physical  constants.  This  problem  is  investigated  in  many  universities  and 
institutions over the world. The new results measured by different teams also disagree widely. One 
of  the  team  providing  well  informative  website  is  the  Eot-Wash  group  in  the  University  of 
Washington,  Seattle  (http://www.npl.washington.edu/etwash).  Another  international  group  of 
investigators  reports  quite  interesting  experimental  results  in  the  article  “Experimental  evidence 
that the gravitational constant varies with orientations”, by M. L. Gershteyn et al. [1]. In this paper 
the researchers found that the gravitational constant varies significantly with the orientation of the 
masses relative to the system of fixed stars. 

Another  discussed  topic,  related  to  gravitation,  is  the  understanding  of  the  vacuum  and  its 
properties.  The  potential  benefits  could  be  a  new  revolutional  discovery.  The  paper  "Can  the 
2 

 

Vacuum be Engineered for Spaceflight applications?, by H. E. Puthoff [2] has been reported at the 
NASA Breakthrough Propulsion Physics conference, 18 Aug, 1997. The following paragraphs 
are extracted from the paper: 

“With the rise of special relativity which did not require reference to such an underlying substrate, 
Einstein in 1905 effectively banished the ether in favor of the concept that empty space constitutes 
a  true  void.  Ten  years  later,  however,  Einstein’s  own  development  of  the  general  theory  of 
relativity with its concept of curved space and distorted geometry forced him to reverse his stand 
and opt for a richly-endowed plenum, under the new label spacetime metric.” 

 "After  a  one-year  investigation  Forward  finished  his  study  and  submitted  his  report  to  the  Air 
Force,  who  published  it  under  the  title  Mass  Modification  Experiment  Definition  Study.  The 
Abstract reads in part: "...Many researchers see the vacuum as a central ingredient of 21st Century 
physics. Some even believe the vacuum may harness to provide a limitless supply of energy. .... It 
was possible to find an experiment that might be able to prove or disprove that the inertial 
mass of a body can be altered by making changes in the vacuum surrounding the body." 

Another  article  of  H.E.  Puthoff  et  al.  in  the  First  International  Workshop  in  Field  Propulsion  is 
titled: “Engineering the Zero-Point Field and Polarizable Vacuum for Interstellar Flight [3]. 

 

2. 

Advantages of the suggested new approach  

The  presented  historical  overview  and  the  emphasized  problems  are  in  agreement  with  the 
considerations expressed by number of physicists, that the principles of causality, objective reality 
and logical understanding must be resurrected. This means that the physical science must be put on 
logical rails by development of physical models understandable by the human logic and reflecting 
the  reality.  In  the  same  time  the  useful  achievements  of  the  modern  physics  should  not  be 
undermined. The working mathematical models could be used in a way that their results could be 
filtered  by  the  understandable  physical  models.  This  could  be  a  kind  of  a  new  approach  in  the 
contemporary physics. Using this approach a successful unified theory could be built by testing the 
suggested new physical models in different fields of the physics. The analytical algorithm of this 
approach will be distinguished from the existing current approach by the following: 

- 
The  suggested  physical  models  and  basic  laws  must  allow  analysis  at  lowest  level  of 
matter organization in 3 dimensional space and unidirectional time. The space and time parameters 
at this level must be separated.  
- 
different fields of the physics  

The  preserved  physical  logic  and  understanding  will  allow  cross  analysis  between 

- A trend in matter evolution in cosmological scale could be identified 

- The analytical process may lead to closed cycles. In such case an iteration kind of analysis could 
be applied and some hidden parameters and phenomena could be unveiled.  

The  proposed  new  approach  is  successfully  applied  in  the  thesis  Basic  Structures  of  Matter  [4], 
presenting an original concept of unified theory about the Universe.  

 

3 

 4.      Concept  of  BSM  theory  and  conclusions  obtained  by  analysis  of 
experimental data and observations.  

The  suggested  concept  allows  to  obtain  logical  explanations  of  all  kind  of  phenomena  from  the 
micro to macro Cosmos using a three-dimensional space and unidirectional time scale. In the same 
time  it  allows  mathematical  treatment  of  the  investigated  phenomena  in  order  to  express  the 
unveiled  new  physical  parameters  by  the  known  physical  constants.  The  provided  analysis  of 
phenomena from different fields of physics leads to the following conclusions: 

•  The energy is inseparable attribute of the matter. 

•  The vacuum is not a void space, but contains a unique grid structure. This grid structure named 
a Cosmic Lattice (CL) is built by two types of alternatively arranged nodes, each one containing 4 
sub-elementary particles with shape of six sided prisms. These two particles are formed of two not 
mixable types of intrinsic matter substances with different density ratio. They are distinctive also 
by  their  length  ratio  (3:2)  and  by  the  twisting  feature  of  their  internal  structure  -  left  and  right 
handed. Their estimated lengths are in the range of (1 to 10) x 10-20 (m). 
•  Prisms  of  same  matter  substance  are  attracted  in  empty  space  by  Intrinsic  Gravitational  (IG) 
forces inverse proportional to the cube of the distance. 
•  The CL node possesses energy well and freedom for complex spatial oscillations characterized 
by  two  kind  of  proper  frequencies.  Spontaneously  synchronized  CL  nodes  forms  domains  with 
zero point waves equalizing the zero point energy of the vacuum. The dynamical parameters of the 
CL  nodes  included  in  such  domains  are  related  to  the  physical  parameters  permeability  and 
permittivity of the free space. 
•  The structure named a Cosmic Lattice is spread in the visible Universe. So the observable CL 
space  possesses  quantum  features  and  creates  conditions  for  fields:  gravitational,  electric  and 
magnetic. 
•  The quantum features of CL space are responsible for the constant light velocity. 
•  The  photon  is  an  energy-propagating  wave  with  specific  spatial  structure,  boundary  features 
and quantum features provided by the CL space environments. 
• 
space. 
•  The  atomic  particles  are  complex  formation  of  helical  structures  made  of  same  type  prisms 
held  by  IG  forces  and  possessing  denser  internal  lattice  structures.  They  are  formed  in  unique 
process of crystallization in a hidden phase of a home galaxy evolution. 
•  The CL space have three important parameters: Static CL pressure (related with the mass we 
are  familiar  with,  Dynamic  CL  pressure  (related  with  the  Zero  Point  Energy  of  the  CL  space 
(vacuum) an Partial CL pressure (related with inertial properties of the atomic matter in CL space). 
The observable temperature of 2.72 K from the free space is a signature of the Zero Point Energy 
of the CL space. 
•  Every  massive  object  possesses  own  CL  space  extended  beyond  its  surface  and  defining  the 
local conditions of an inertial frame (Special Relativity) and a space curvature (General Relativity. 
Separation  zone  between  two  massive  objects  exists  providing  boundary  of  the  local  CL  spaces. 
The extension of the local CL space is subordinated by the inverse cubic IG law. 
•  The flexible geometry of the CL node allows folding and unfolding with a speed rate of light 
velocity. Moving of lighter object in CL space of heavier one is related with continuous process of 
folding and unfolding of CL nodes. This kind of interaction is included in the inertia of the atomic 
matter  (property  we  are  familiar  with).  The  energy  momentum  carried  by  the  folded  nodes  is 

 The Newton’s gravitation (universal gravitational law) is a propagation of the IG field in CL 

 

4 

related to the parameter  Partial pressure of CL space. The  following derived relation is valid for 
the CL spaces of all connected galaxies in the Universe: 

P PP
/

=S

2
α

1/

−

2
α

                                                                    [Eq. (10.18) of BSM] 

where: PP and PS - are partial and static CL space pressure, respectively and α - is a fine structure 
constant. 

In the BSM concept the Quantum mechanical rules are derivable and the effects of the Special 

•  Every galaxy undergoes through a cosmological galaxy cycle containing a phase of active life 
and  hidden  phases.    In  the  hidden  phases  the  galactic  matter  is  separated  from  the  neighboring 
galactic CL spaces so it is invisible. In this phases the atomic matter is recycled to the level lower 
than  the  prisms.  The  Gamma  Ray  Burst  phenomena  are  related  with  a  collapse  or  a  birth  of  a 
galaxy in a same space of the Universe. 
•  The  fine  structure  constant  originates  in  the  lowest  level  of  matter  organization,  but  its 
signature is propagated up to the atomic and molecular levels. Its signature is also involved in the 
inertial properties of the atomic matter in CL space environments. 
•  The  material  origin  of  the  vacuum  structure  and  the  complex  helical  structures  of  the 
elementary  particles  have  not  been  taken  into  account  in  the  existing  models  of  the  scattering 
experiments. The result is a significant deviation of the calculated dimensions of the stable atomic 
particles from their real physical dimensions. 
•  The Bohr atomic model is a correct mathematical model when assuming that the space is void. 
The real physical model in structured vacuum, however, is completely different. 
• 
and General relativity are understandable. 
•  The Universe is stationary and not homogeneous. The observed red shift of the galaxies is not 
from  a  Doppler  shift,  but  from  accumulation  effect  of  energy  losses  when  the  photons  pass  the 
boundaries between the different galaxy CL spaces. The galaxy CL space differences come from 
small differences in geometrical parameters of molded prisms. The molding process takes place in 
one  of  the  hidden  phases  of  the  galaxy  evolution.  In  this  process  the  total  amount  of  intrinsic 
matter and energy of the galaxy is involved. The prism matter quantity, however, appears always 
the same due to a large histeresis in the intrinsic matter-energy interaction process. 
•  The Cosmic Microwave Background radiation (CMB) is a signature of the Zero Point Energy 
(ZPE) possessed by the CL space, while the experimentally estimated temperature of 2.72 K is a 
CL space background temperature. The spatial (dipole) anisotropy is a result of inertial interactions 
between the atomic matter of our local frame (local CL space) and the home galaxy CL space. In 
Chapter 5 of BSM thesis a theoretical expression for the background temperature is derived, based 
on  the  dynamic  CL  pressure  (carried  by  the  Zero  Point  Waves)  on  the  protons  of  the  hydrogen 
atoms or molecules. 

T

=

2
LhN

A

2

(

PC

R
ν
c
C
RcSRr
2
e

W

c

+

r

p

3

)

µ
e
µ
n

=

.2

676

 K                                  [Eq. (5.8) of BSM] 

where: NA – Avogadro constant, h – Planck constant, 
cν  - Compton frequency, LPC – proton core 
length (LPC = 1.6277 Angstroms, cross-calculated) , RC – Compton radius of electron, re = 8.84E-
15 (m), re and rp – small radii of electron structure derived by cross analysis and related by a ratio  
e r
r
gas constant, 

(same as prisms length ratio), SW = 1 m2 – reference surface in SI system, R – ideal 
(
e µµ
n

 - magnetic moment ratio between electron and neutron (magnetic moment 

2/3=p

)

 

5 

for the neutron is used instead of for proton in order to reflect the neutrality of the atom or 
molecule), c – light velocity used as a factor (for zero point wave interactions)  

•  The mass we are familiar with is an attribute of the atomic level of matter organization in CL 
space  environments.  The  equation  E  =  mc2  reflects  the  energy  obtained  from  destruction  or 
“hiding” of the atomic matter particles. The intrinsic matter could never disappear. 
•  The  intrinsic  gravitation  is  a  kind  of  energy  balance  originated  in  the  lowest  level  of  matter 
organization. 

Fig.  1  illustrates  the  position  of  known  and  unveiled  structures  in  the  length  scale  of  the 
Universe. Fig. 2 shows the period of unveiled cycles related to these structures in the time scale of 
the Universe.  

Fig. 3 illustrates the difference between the new analytical approach applied by the BSM 
theory  and  the  existing  one.  The  broken  gray  line  in  the  existing  so  far  approach  indicates  the 
fields oh physics where the logical understanding fails. The BSM approach is distinguished by two 
principal  features:  (a)  the  logical  understanding  is  fully  preserved;  (b)  a  repeatable  cycle  of  the 
matter evolution is identified.  The latter feature is presented in Fig. 3 as a loop. It allows unveiling 
of some hidden physical phenomena by using an iterative method of logical analysis. 

The  proposed  BSM  concept  is  verified  by  cross  validation  of  the  output  results  of  the 
suggested models  with experimental data  from different fields of the physics. The  unveiled low-
level  structures  of  the  vacuum  and  the  elementary  particles  further  allowed  deciphering  the 
structures of the proton and neutron and their spatial arrangement in the atomic nuclei, as well.  It 
appears  that  the  row  and  column  pattern  of  the  Periodic  table  carry  a  signature  of  the  nuclear 
structure. The electron orbitals are strictly defined by the protons and neutrons arrangement in the 
nucleus. The features of the Hund’s rule and Pauli exclusion principle are also identifiable. So one 
of  the  output  results  of  the  BSM  is  an  illustrative  appendix  titled  Atlas  of  Atomic  Nuclear 
Structures (ANS) [5]. It provides the arrangement of the protons and neutrons in the atomic nuclei 
for elements from Hydrogen to Lawrencium (Z=103). Fig. 4 shows views of the physical models 
of some selected elements.  

The success of the BSM theory for explanation of large diversity of physical phenomena is 

a result of the applied new approach.  

5.  Advantages and potential applications of BSM theory. 

One  of  the  main  advantages  of  the  BSM  theory  is  the  provided  logical  understanding.  All 
suggested  models  are  real  physical  entity  operating  in  three  dimensional  space.  The  interaction 
processes are in unidirectional time scale, so the principle of causality is preserved.  These features 
greatly  facilitate  the  analysis  of  complex  physical  phenomena.  In  this  category  are  included:  the 
effects  of  the  Special  and  General  Relativity,  the  Zero  Point  Energy  of  the  vacuum,  the 
superconductivity, the ferro and dia magnetism, the gravity and the inertia. In chapter 10 of BSM 
the  inertial  properties  of  the  atomic  matter  in  CL  space  are  discussed.  The  Newton’s  law  about 
inertia  (F=ma)  is  understandable  interaction  process.  Relativistic  considerations  for  interstellar 
space travels are discussed. One of the potential applications is presented in a separate article titled 
“New vision about a controllable fusion reaction with efficient energy yield” [6]. 

 

 

6 

References: 

[1]   Mikhail L. Gershteyn et al., Experimental evidence that the gravitational constant varies with 
orientation, (http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0202058). 

 [2].  H.  E.  Puthoff,  Can  the  Vacuum  be  Engineered  for  Spaceflight  applications?,  NASA 
Breakthrough Propulsion Physics conference at Lewis Res. Center, Aug 1997.  

[3].    H.  E.  Puthoff,  S.  R.  Little,  M.  Ibison,  Engineering  the  Zero-Point  Field  and  Polarizable 
Vacuum  for  Interstellar  Flight,  First  International  Workshop  in  Field  Propulsion,  University  of 
Sussex, Brighton, UK, Jan 2001. 

[4].  S.  Sarg,  Basic  Structures  of  Matter  (thesis  on  matter,  space  and  time),  www.helical-
structures.org/, also in the National Library of Canada: 

 http://amicus.nlc-bnc.ca/aaweb/amilogine.htm  (AMICUS Web search by title). 

[5] S. Sarg, Atlas of Atomic Nuclear Structures, 

 www.helical-structures.org/, (also AMICUS Web search by title) 

[6]  S.  Sarg,  New  vision  about  a  controllable  fusion  reaction  with  efficient  energy  yield, 
www.helical-structures.org/Applications file bsm_application_1.pdf. 

Note: The articles [2] and [3] are available in the Web site: www.nidsci.org/articles/articles3.html 

Used  abbreviations:  BSM  –  Basic  Structures  of  Matter  (theory);  CL  –  Cosmic  Lattice,  IG  – 
Intrinsic Gravitation. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

Figures 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

 

 

 

9 

 

 

 Fig. 5. Selected elements from the Atlas of Atomic Nuclear Structures   

 

10 

 

