Robust GPS – SMS Communication Channel  for the AVL System 
 
Joseph Skobla, Andrew Young 
 
The University of West Indies, Physics Department, Kingston, Jamaica 
 
 

 Universal Preprocessing GPS SMS Communication Unit (UPCU) was developed 

as a part of the UWI microtracking system. A GSM cellular Short Messaging Service is 
the main method of delivering  tracking information to the central base station.  

 
The information includes asset ID, longitude, latitude, altitude, speed and 
direction as well as the time the message was sent. The design of the unit is implemented 
as a bi-directional SMS system. Message can be originated either at the mobile unit or at 
the base station. The base station can send a SMS message requesting information from 
the Mobile unit, the unit can also be configured for a different mode of operation from 
the base station. A set of special configuration messages was developed. 

 
The hardware of the mobile unit is made up of three main subsections: the GPS 

receiver, a GSM modem and a preprocessing unit. The preprocessing unit extracts 
specific information from the GPS receiver and uses this it to reconstruct a new message 
with all the necessary asset information. This new message is sent as part of a SMS text 
to the base station using the GSM modem. The base station can send configuration or 
data request messages to the mobile unit. This data is received through the GSM modem. 
Messages receive via the modem are not stored in the SIM memory of the module but is 
sent directly to the serial port of the unit. 

 
The UPCU is a micro-controller based buffering and message extraction system. 
It has two RS232 ports, one is used to receive and send data to the modem and the other 
is used to receive the data from the GPS receiver. The preprocessing unit has a built-in 
timer which is capable of sending navigational information to the base station on each 
timeout of the timer. A SMS message is also sent to the base station when the status 
report button is pressed on the mobile unit. 
 

Tracking information is sent to the central base station where it is processed. The 

UPCU was designed for targeting applications that require tracking information on a 
periodic basis rather than establishing a connection and sending the information 
continuously. The unit is capable of sending information to the base station at a rate of 
approximetly one message per second across a standard data communication channel.  
 

The software can be divided into two sections: the base station interface software 

and the processing unit system software. The base station interface software is used to 
convert the data received at the base station into some format that is compatible with a 
specific application software that uses the data, example mapping or data base software.  

 
 

 
 
 
 
The preprocessing unit system software is the program running on the micro-

controller. The system controls all the interrupt resources, it is also responsible for buffer 
and RS232 resource management.  SMS messages support a maximum of 160 characters.  

 
The nature of SMS messages and its universal implementation across GSM   

( or by another cellular network)  it is ideal for transmitting messages with tracking 
information.  

 
The SMS messages can deliver all the major information needed to provide a 
tracking service not for only vehicles, but unit can be used a component of any remote 
sensing application with a programmable mode of operation.  

 
 
 

