 
 

 

Aging in gaseous photodetectors 

T. Francke, V. Peskov 

Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden 

   This paper describes the present status of the aging studies in various photosensitive 

detectors. New experimental data are presented on aging of trimethilamine (TMA) and 

ethilferrocene (EF) photosensitive vapors as well as on CsI and SbCs photocathodes. A 

new explanation of the CsI photocathodes aging process based on solid –state physics 

   Finally, based on our studies, a general conclusion was made that thin polymer 

depositions on the detector’s cathode due to the aging can provoke breakdowns through 

the Malter-type mechanism (or more precisely- an explosive field emission mechanism).  

 

 

 

Abstract 

theory is given.  

I. Introduction 

   An interest to the photosensitive gaseous detectors appeared after publications  [1,2] in 

which first photosensitive wire chamber were described. These detectors were flushed 

with benzene or tolyene vapors having a relatively low ionization potential. UV photons 

penetrating through a transparent window caused photoionization and this created 

primary photoelectrons, which then triggered avalanches. Nowadays, such types of 

detectors are widely used in many experiments. The reasons of their success are very 

simple: they have quantum efficiency (QE) in the UV region comparable or even higher 

than the best vacuum photomultipliers. At the same time they are position sensitive, 

cheap and simple. Of course they are not free from some drawbacks. One of the 

drawbacks is aging; another is the fact that their spectral sensitivity is limited by the 

ionization potential. The vapors with the lowest ionization potential Ei used so far were: 

TMA (Ei=7.25 eV) [3], EF (Ei=6.08 eV)  [4], TEA (Ei=7.15 eV) [5], TMAE (Ei=5.28 eV) 

[6]. Unfortunately in the last ten years or so there has been no progress in finding new 

vapors with  Ei lower than EF or TMAE and compatible for gaseous detectors. 

This is why an interest arose to an alternative approach –to use solid photocathodes in 

gaseous detectors (see [7] and references therein). The threshold of the spectral 

sensitivity of such detectors is determined by the material work function, which can be 

very low. However such detectors could be competitive with those filled with 

photosensitive vapors only if they are stable in time and if their aging properties are 

satisfactory. 

   One should note that there are much more applications of photosensitive materials 

(vapors and solid photocathodes) that just in detecting UV photons. For example, EF 

vapors were used long time ago for plasma studies in so-called x-ray cluster counters in 

which individual primary electrons produced by x-rays were counted [4,8,9]. This 

approach was further developed by Breskin’s group [10]. TMA, TEA and TMAE are 

widely used [11] for optical readout of gaseous detectors so called light chambers (optical 

readout [12]). Most of the solid photocathodes are also good secondary electron emitters 

and can be used in the detection of charged particles and x-ray photons [13]. The 

successes of all these applications depend very much on good aging properties of the 

materials used.  

   In this paper we will review the present status of aging studies in photosensitive 

detectors. New, yet unpublished results on this subject will be presented as well as a new 

interpretation of the CsI and other solid photocathodes aging. 

   Finally, a general conclusion will be stated that thin polymer depositions on the 

detector’s cathode due to the aging can provoke breakdowns through the Malter-type 

mechanism. 

 

II. What is known about photosensitive materials aging? 

II-1. Photosensitive vapors 

   To update our knowledge the systematic aging studies were done only for wire 

chambers filled with TMAE and TEA vapors (see Fig1). It was found that the aging rate 

depends very much on system cleanness, anode wire diameter and only slightly on the 

composition of the carrier gas. 

   The analysis of polymer products on the anodes and the cathodes of the wire chambers 

were done in the past only in the case of TMAE [14]. It was found that on the anode 

wires the main depositions are not oxidized TMAE, but rather a tertiary amide. It remains 

unclear however, what fragments of TMAE react with oxygen to form tertiary amide. 

There have also been findings of some unidentified heavy organic compounds with 

atomic masses of 202, 110 and 100. On the cathode wires the following depositions were 

found: carbon in a form of graphite and small fractions of amides  (N-C=O), silicone 

[R2SiO]n and amines NR3 (R=C,H) (the silicon probably comes from the oil bubbler). 

The elements ratio was as follows: 

 83%C, 8.2%O, 5,9%N, 2.7%Si.     

   Thus many types of organic species coated the cathode. From the first glance it looks as 

if at least part of the problem comes from contaminations (for example Si). 

   The other important consequence of the aging was the Malter-type effect- a sporadic 

burst of electron emission from the cathode. The role of this effect in the detector’s 

operation will be discussed at the end of this paper. 

II.2 Solid photocathodes 

   Various photocathodes were used for various applications. For example, a wire 

chamber with a CuI photocathode was used successfully for plasma diagnostics [4]. 

However, the most popular today is CsI photocathode [15]. There are two main reasons 

for this: it has high QE (see Fig.2) and allows a short exposure to air, which is very 

convenient in the process of assembling the detector. Unfortunately, the aging data 

published so far are very contradictory  [16]. This great spread of data is probably 

because of the fact that aging depends on cleanness, exposure to air and water vapors and 

other poorly controlled parameters. 

   One should note that the explanation of the CsI aging mechanism is not at all 

satisfactory. Indeed, the present theory is based on an assumption that CsI is dissociated 

under the UV radiation or ion bombardment (see for example [16]): 

hv+CsI (cid:198) Cs++I+e 

A+ +CsI (cid:198) A+CsI+---Cs++I 

This model is certainly correct for CsI molecules. However in the case of the CsI in 

crystalline form, the aging mechanisms are different. To top it all, in most gaseous 

detectors operating at 1atm the positive ions do not have enough energy to dissociate the 

CsI. 

 

 III. Experimental set up for aging tests in ultra clean conditions 

 
 
   The main conclusion, which can be derived from previous studies, is that aging depends 

on the experimental set up cleanness.  In this work we performed aging studies of several 

photosensitive materials, which were used in some our applications: TMA, EF, CsI, SbCs 

in the cleanest possible conditions. 

   One should note that it is very difficult (and expensive) to ensure an extremely clean 

gas system when it is continuously flushed with the gas.  The main problem comes from 

the continuos outgassing of the materials used for the design of the gas system, test 

chamber and the detector itself. It is very difficult and takes a long time to outgas the 

experimental set up operating in a gas-flushing mode. It is much more efficient to outgas 

the set up, when it is pumped and heated to a reasonably high temperature and then use 

the detector in a sealed mode. This is why in this work we chose the later approach. Our 

experience show that if one tries to use the same system (prepared as described above) in 

a gas flushed mode, then it would be more difficult to ensure the same level of cleanness 

as it would be possible with a sealed detector. For example, an additional contamination 

comes from the oil bubbler, which brings Si-based contamination to the system 

 

III-1. Set up for EF and TMA aging studies 

 

   Our experimental set up for the photosensitive vapor aging studied is presented in 

fig.3a. It is basically a station for the production of sealed single-wire counters filled with 

photosensitive vapors. It was extensively used in the past for manufacturing sealed 

detectors for plasma diagnostics. The station includes a single wire counter (SWC) itself, 

a heating and pumping system and a gas system. The cylindrical cathode of the SWC 

(diameter of 15 mm) was made of stainless steel, the anode wire of two different 

diameters (0.05 mm and 0.2 mm) made of molybdenum; the anode-cathode dielectric 

interface made of the glass. The detector had a LiF entrance window diameter of 2 mm. 

Before filling the gas and sealing itself, the SWC was pumped to a vacuum of ~10-6 Torr 

and heated to 150°C for several days. The gas system contained two small glass bottles: 

an empty one and another one filled with a photosensitive liquid (EF or TMA) and a glass 

cylinder with a spectroscopic clean Ar, Kr or Xe (99.999% cleanness level). The EF and 

TMA were chemically cleaned at the Chemical Lab of the Moscow State University (D. 

Lemenovsky lab). In additional, before introducing in to the SWC, the liquids were 

distilled 6-10 times by “cryo” –transfer liquids from one glass bottle to another and 

pumped. 

 

III-2. Set up for CsI and SbCs photocathodes aging studies 

 
   In the past, for the testing of solid photocathodes we used a system that allowed 

performing of the photocathodes aging tests without exposure to air [7]. This was 

achieved by using manipulators, which allowed the photocathodes to be transferred from 

an evaporation system to the test chamber. The test chamber was then flushed by a gas at 

1atm. This allowed us to achieve rather good aging characteristics [7]. However, our 

experience with solid photocathodes shows that the best stability and aging 

characteristics can be achieved only in a compact sealed chamber. This is because in a 

system flushed by a gas or in a continuously pumped system, there is continuous delivery 

and accumulations of impurities on the photocathode surface. This is why in the present 

work we performed aging tests in sealed detectors only [17]. The experimental set up for 

these measurements is presented in Fig.3b.  It contains a sealed detector with a solid 

photocathode, an UV source (a Hg lamp) and a reference detector: a photomultiplier or a 

photodiode monitoring the intensity of the UV radiation. To avoid any aging effect in the 

reference detector the intensity of the UV flux reaching the detector was attenuated by 

several orders of magnitude. 

   To separately check contributions to the aging process the light itself and the action of 

the light together with positive ions bombardments, we performed measurements in 

vacuum and the gas atmosphere with a small multiplication (factor of 5-10). In additional 

some control measurements were done with vacuum and gas filled Hamamatsu 

photodiodes: R1187, R1187 (filled with Ar at pressure 1 atm by a technique described in 

[18]), R414, R250. 

 

III-3 Experimental set-up for the aging studies of CsI secondary electron emitters 

 
   As it was demonstrated in our earlier work [19] a thin gap parallel- plate chamber with 

a secondary electron sensitive layer allows to achieve very good position resolution for x-

rays better than 50 µm in a simple counting mode [19]. This approach may find large -

scale application in a digital imaging technique [20]. However, aging properties of such 

emitter should be demonstrated. In this work we performed some preliminary aging 

studies of the CsI converter under the simultaneous action of x-rays and bombardment of 

positive ions from the gas avalanches. Our set up is shown schematically in Fig.3c. It 

contains a test parallel –plate avalanche chamber (PPAC) with a stainless steel cathode 

coated by the CsI layer, a reference PPAC with the stainless steel cathode but without any 

CsI coating and an X-ray gun (6-30 keV). Both PPACs were flushed by Xe 

(40%)+Kr(49%)+CO2(20%) gas mixture at 1atm.The x-ray flux hit the cathodes of both 

PPACs at shallow angles of about 100. In contrast to our previous studies, in this work we 

used a uniform (not a porous) CsI layer of 0.4 µm thickness. The coating was done at 

CERN (Braem Lab). During the transfer to the test chamber the cathode was exposed to 

air for a few min, but during this exposure the area around the photocathode was 

continuously flushed by Ar. After the installation to the test camber it was pumped and 

heated for 24 hours. Only after that a working mixture was introduced.  

IV. Results 

IV-1. Vapors 

   The results of aging tests obtained with TMA and EF are presented in Fig.1. For 

comparison, on the same figure are presented some published data for TEA and TMAE 

vapors [9]. One can see that the aging properties of EF and TMA are more superior. 

Since TMA and TEA are chemically similar, one can speculate that the difference in 

aging properties is due to the cleanness. 

 

IV-2. CsI and SbCs photocathodes 

   At low accumulated total charges of ~mC/cm2 the results obtained with our sealed 

detectors and Hamamatsu photodiodes were similar: no aging effect was observed at all. 

Tests with Hamamatsu photodiodes were performed to much greater accumulated total 

charge: up to 30mC/cm2. The results are presented in Fig. 4 (CsI) and Fig. 5 (SbCs), 

showing the measured photocurrent as function of irradiation time.  Note that some 

degradation of the QE observed at 10 th day of continuous light illumination was 

reversible: after blocking the light for a day the QE returned to its original value. Note 

also that heating of these photocathodes does not exhibit any QE enhancements. This is 

in contrast to the photocathodes exposed to air [21]. 

   To our knowledge the published results on photocathode aging in sealed detectors are 

very poor (see for example [10,22]) and do not allow any quantitative comparison to be 

preformed with our data. 

IV.3 Aging of the CsI x-rays converter 

   Results of the CsI converter aging test under a combined action of x-rays and avalanche 

are presented in Fig.6. One can see that no loss of x-ray efficiency was observed up to an 

accumulated charge of.0.1mC/cm2. 

V. Discussions 

 
V-1. Aging of gaseous detectors filed with photosensitive vapors 

   The processes, which lead to formation of polymer depositions on the detector’s 

electrodes, are very complicated. Basically, they include a dissociation of gas-mixture 

 

 

 

polyatomic molecules M on fragments F, including ionized (F+) and excited (F∗) 

fragments. Schematically these processes can be illustrated as follows. 

1) Dissociation of molecules by an electron (e) impacts and charge and excitation transfer 

from the atoms A (atoms of noble gases and atoms appearing due to the molecule’s 

dissociation): 

M + e (cid:198) M+ + e 

M + e (cid:198) M∗ + e 

M + A∗ (cid:198) M+,∗+A 

M + A+ (cid:198) M+,∗+ A 

nM + M∗,+ (cid:198) Mn+1

+,.∗ (polymers) 

M+,∗ (cid:198) F1+F2 (and various F+,∗) 

avalanches): 

M+hv (cid:198)  M+ + e 

M+hv (cid:198)  M∗ 

M+,∗ (cid:198) F1+F2 (various F+,∗). 

2) Dissociation due to photons (photons of the detecting light and photons from 

The main result of these processes is the breakage of chemical bonds and the formation 

of molecular fragments and radicals (bond braking leads to formation of radicals). 

These radicals react either with molecules and fragments or with impurities, for example: 

F (or F+,∗)+ Mimpur. (cid:198) polymers.  

They may also recombine to each other. Thus there are many various channels for 

polymer formation. Note, that ionized and excited M (M+,∗) are much more chemically 

active than M. They also have larger cross sections of interactions. 

    Specific reactions for photosensitive vapors TMSi and TMP [23] which leads to 

polymer formation: 

(CH3)4Si + e (cid:198) (CH3)4Si+ (cid:198) (CH3)3Si+ + CH3 

TMP++ nTMP(cid:198) (TMP)+

n+1 

Even this “very simplified” picture of processes looks rather complicated. 

   However, in the case of mixtures with photosensitive vapors Ei vapors< Ei main mixture and  

this circumstance allows to simplify the consideration of processes described above. 

Indeed, through the multistep exchange processes, all excitation and ionization energy 

will finally be transferred to photosensitive molecules mp (which may then further 

dissociate on fragments m1 and m2): 

M+,∗ + mp (cid:198) mp

+,∗ (cid:198) m1

+∗+ m2.  

This was experimentally confirmed by light emission measurements, performed for light 

emission chambers (optical readout mentioned in the introduction) -see fig. 7. As one can 

see, in mixtures of TEA or TMAE with noble gases or noble gases with mixtures of other 

molecular gases [24] only emission bands of TEA or TMAE are present in the spectrum. 

The explanation of this was given in ref. [25]. Thus, in most cases (especially in a low 

electric field) one should consider only the role of fragments of photosensitive vapors in 

aging kinematics. This explains why the aging rate depends only slightly on the carrier 

gas composition, but depends strongly on the nature of the chemical composition of the 

vapors and the presence of impurities with which the fragments m1 and m2 may react. 

One can assume that the thickness of the polymer deposition on anode wires depends on 

the amount of the deposit charge per unit of the anode area. Then for the same total 

charge, deposit per unit of the anode wire length (usual unites in aging results 

presentation [14]) the aging rate should be approximately inversely proportional to the 

anode wire diameter, and this was precisely observed experimentally [14]. 

 

 

V-2. Aging of solid photocathodes 

V-2a. CsI photocathode 

  As mentioned above, the explanation of the CsI aging mechanism presented in [10] is 

not satisfactory at all because it is applicable to CsI molecules (vapor phase) only but not 

to the CsI in solid state phase.  In the case of the ideal CsI crystal the absorption of UV 

photons should lead to the creation of excitons and free electrons in the conduction band 

(see Fig. 8a.). This would not cause any dissociation. 

   However, in reality CsI is not an ideal crystal. It contains cracks, vacancies, intersitials, 

dislocations, chemical impurities, insertions and so on. This creates extra levels 

schematically shown as “A-levels” and “B-levels” in Fig. 8b.  In this picture “A” levels 

are occupied states above the filled band and B levels are unoccupied states below the 

conduction band. As a result electron traps are formed and new levels appear, from which 

the photoemission may occur. Note that CsI photocathode may also may have 

stohametris deviations (contain excess of Cs or Iodine due to, for example, exposure to 

light during evaporation or dissociation in water) and this also creates extra-levels in the 

structure of the energy-bands. 

   Dramatic and irreversible changes occur when the CsI photocathode is exposed to air.  

It’s initial polycrystalic structure cracks to granules [16]. Absorbed water further 

damages the photocathode structure and created a “CsI- water” solution in which Cs and 

Iodine may dissociate. If an aging test is done with a non-monochromatic light then some 

contribution to the photoemission may come from the created level and this will enchains 

the photocurrent. On the other hand, levels can trap free electrons inside the CsI structure 

and this may cause a charging up effect. Thus there are several competing processes, 

which contribute to the measured photocurrent. If the aging test is interrupted (for 

example, the light is blocked) then some relaxation processes may occur [26] and the 

degraded QE can be partially restored. The same restoration effect one can expect with 

photocathode heating. Note that both these predictions based on the solid -stated theory 

[26] were confirmed experimentally [21].   

   Let’s now discuss the possibility of the CsI dissociation by ion impact (see section II-

2).  Although the positive ions from the avalanche do not have enough kinetic energy to 

dissociate the CsI (at least at pressure of 1 atm and an electric field <10 kV/cm see for 

example [27]), they can create insertions and with such a process distract an “ideal” 

crystalline structure. As a results, the photocathode aging characteristics, especially for 

photocathodes exposed to air, may depend quite extensively on the photocathode history: 

cleaness, duration of exposure to air and so on. This may explain a great range of the 

experimental data mentioned above. 

   Thus the simplified model described in the section II-2 does not at all reflect the 

complexity of the aging phenomena. One can therefore speculate that the aging is a result 

of a gradual destruction of the ideal crystalline structure through the creation of defects, 

extra levels, insertions, dissociation in water layers with a possible further dissociation on 

Cs and Iodine atoms. Due to defects electron transfer properties will be diminished and 

the photocathode, layer by layer, shall be destroyed and as a results the QE will drop. 

This model also explains a heating effect- the partial restoration of the QE value due to 

the so -called relaxation effects [26]. All this allows to bring up the suggestion that the 

best aging properties should exhibit photocathodes not exposed to air and our 

experimental data presented in this work exactly supported this assumption.  

V-2b. Aging of photocathodes sensitive to visible light 

 
   Several groups are now able to manufacture gaseous detectors sensitive up to visible 

light. However, there have been earlier observations from Breskin’s group [28] 

suggesting that such photocathodes have very poor aging properties. Our result show that 

aging properties of high quality CsI and SbCs photocathode (prepared for example by 

Hamamatsu) are very good- see Fig 4 and 5. Even when these photocathodes were 

operated in a gas atmosphere, the ion bombardment did not cause any extra problems. A 

review of possible mechanisms involved in this photocathode aging can found elsewhere 

(see for example [22]). In ref. [22] one can also find some discussion concerning the 

possible dependence between the photocathode resistivity and the variation the QE with 

V-2c. Link between the Malter-type effect and breakdowns in gaseous detectors 

   For simplicity, in previous considerations of the photocathode aging, we have neglected 

the role of the deposition on their surfaces due to the gas aging. However, these 

depositions may play an important role. We will mention here only two major effects at 

 

 

 

time. 

this point: 

1) If polymers are formed on the cathode surface, then photoelectrons, created from the 

cathode, should pass this layer before being able to penetrate to the detector. As a result, 

some fractions of the electrons will be lost and thus the measured QE will be decreased.  

2) The depositions (polymer layers or even absorbed layer of gases) can lead to the 

Malter-type effect- a sporadic emission of electrons [29]. One should note that a classical 

theory of the Malter effect suggests a single electron emission [29]. In contrast, however, 

it was recently discovered that this emission of electrons might occur in the form of a 

burst or jets of electrons [30]. This effect is very similar to the well-known “explosive” 

field emission mechanism in vacuum breakdown [31]. Each burst may contain between a 

few and up to 105 electrons emitted in a time interval from a fraction of µs to ms [29,32]. 

This Malter-type effect or more precisely, explosive field emission in turn may lead to 

two other effects: 

breakdowns [29,32]. 

a)  A reduction in the photocathode work function  (as well as an increase of electron 

emission from the photocathode), and therefore  an increase in its measured QE; 

b) Since these electrons receive full multiplication in gaseous detectors they may cause 

   The discussion mentioned above suggests that the gas mixtures in which the 

photodetectors operate should be carefully chosen: they should not make any deposition 

ether due to polymerization or any absorbed layer. Note however, that in practice, even in 

well-selected gas mixtures, it is quite impossible to avoid microscopic dielectric 

insertions on the cathode surface [31]. This may lead to “explosive” field emission. Thus 

this type breakdown triggering mechanism looks as a general one [32]. 

 

 

 

VI. Conclusions  

are very important.  

 
 
   Photosensitive materials may have a lot applications in various fields, but successes of 

these applications depend on their aging characteristics. This is why their aging studies 

   As a results of the work we can suggest that the one of the most important factors in the 

photosensitive vapors aging is the system cleanness. 

   In the case of the solid photocathodes we also found that high quality photocathodes, 

not exposed to air, have excellent aging properties both in vacuum and the gas 

atmosphere. This in turn suggests that ion bombardment does not play any important role 

in the photocathode’s aging.  

   However, polymer depositions and even adsorbed layers when exposed to positive ions 

bombardment may cause the QE degradation and the Malter –type effect. 

Thus we can finally conclude that this Malter –type effect (or “explosive” field emission) 

could be the main breakdown triggering mechanism in any gaseous detectors. This is 

because in practice it is almost impossible to avoid microscopic dielectric insertions or 

adsorbed layers on cathode surfaces. 

References: 

[1] J.Seguinot, T. Ypsilantis, Nucl. Instr. in Phys. Res 142 (1977) 377 
[2] G. Bogomolov, Yu Dubrovski, V. Peskov, Instr. Exp. Tech 21 (1978) 778 
[3] V. Peskov, Inst. Exp. Tech., 23 (1980) 507. 
[4]V. Peskov, Doct. of Science Thesis, Inst. for Physical Problems USSR Acad. of Sci., 
Moscow , 1981 
[5] J. Seguinot,  Preprint CERN-EP-89-92, 1989 
[6] D.F. Anderson, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci NS-32 (1985) 495 

[7] V. Peskov, CERN Yellow Report CERN 97-06, 1997 
[8] G.F. Karabadzhak, V. Peskov, Prib. Tech Exp 3(1982) 191 
[9] G. F. Karabadzhak, V. Peskov, E.R. Podolyak, Nucl. Instr. in Phys. Res 217(1983) 56 
[10] A. Breskin, Nucl. Instr. in Phys. Res A387 (1997) 1  
[11} G. Charpak et al., IEEE Trans Nucl. Sci NS-35 (1988) 483; 
P. Astier et al., IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci NS-36 (1989) 300 
T.Masuda et al., Nucl. Sci. Sympos Conf. Record v.2 (1999) 823 
[12] G.D.Bogomolov, Yu.V.Dubrovske, and V.D. Peskov, Instr. Exp. Tech. 21 (1978) 
639. 
[13] E. Ceron Zebalos et al., Nucl. Instr. in Phys. Res. A392 (1997) 150; 
S. Giunji et al., Nucl. Instr. in Phys. Res. A477 (2002) 8 
[14] J. Va’vra, Nucl. Instr. in Phys. Res. A367 (1995) 353 
J. Va’vra , Nucl. Instr. in Phys. Res A387 (1997) 183 
C.L. Woody, IEEE Trans. Nucl Sci, NS-35 (1988) 493 
[15] G. Chatpak et al., Proceedings of Sympos on Particle Identification at High 
LuminosityHadron Colliders, eds T. Gourlay, J. Morfin , Fermilab , Batavia Il 1989 p295 
G. Charpak et al., Preprint CERN-EP/90-41, 1990 
[16] A. Breskin, Nucl. Instr. in Phys. Res.  A371 (1996) 116  
[17] V. Peskov et al IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci 47 (2000) 1825 
[18] G. Charpaket al., Nucl. Instr. in Phys. Res. A323 (1992) 445 
[19}P. Fonte, V. Peskov, Preprint LIP –2001-06, 2001,Coimbra Univ., Portugal and   
physics/0106017 2001; 
P. Carlson et al., “High-rate RPC’s” report at the  IEEE Nucl. Sci. Sympos, San Diego, 
USA, 2001, CERN-OPEN-2001-076 ;  19 Nov. 2001 
[20] T. Francle et al., Nucl. Instr. in Phys. Res. A471 (2001) 85 
[21] D.F. Anderson et al, Fermilab Technical Memo FNAL-TM-1753 , 1991 
[22] A.H. Sommer “Photosensitive Materials” Willey, New York, 1968 
[23] W. Schmidt, “Liquid state electronics of insulating liquids,” CRC Press, New York, 
1997 
[24] G. Charpak et al., IEEE Trans. Nucl Sci 35 (1988)  483 
[25] V. Peskov et al., Nucl. Instr. in Phys. Res. A277 (1989) 547 
[26] A.J. Dekker, “Solid State Physics”, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1962 
[27] A. Peisert et al., CERN Yellow Report CERN 84-08 ,1984 
[28] A. Breskin,  private communication 
[29] L. Malter, Phys.Rev., 50 (1936) 48; 
G. Charpak et al., Nucl. Instr., 99 (1972) 279 
[30] P. Fonte et al.,  IEEE Trans. Nucl Sci. 46 (1999) 312 
[31] R. Latham “High voltage vacuum insulation”, Academic Press, New York, 1995 
[32] C. Iacobaeus et al., Los Alamos Preprint Physics/0112013 ; 5 Dec 2001.  
 
 

Figure captions 

1,1

1

0,9

0,8

0,7

0,6

0,5

0,4

0,3

)
s
t
i
n
u

 
.
l
e
r
(
 
n
i
a
G

0,01

0,1

1

10

m C/cm

 

Fig.1 Results of aging tests of several photosensitive vapors: TMAE (open diamonds) in 

a not very clean gas chamber [14]; TMAE (open squares and triangles) in a clean gas 

chamber [14]; TEA (open rounds) [14]; EF (filled squares) and TMA (filled rounds)-our 

data obtained with a sealed SWC (anode diameter of 0.05 mm) at gain of~103; EF and 

TMA (filled triangles)-our data obtained with a sealed SWC (anode diameter of 0.2mm), 

operating in a streamer mode (gain of ~108). 

60

50

40

30

20

10

)

%

(
 

E
Q

0
150

TMAE

CsI

EF

160

170

180

190

200

210

220

230

Wavelength (nm)

 

Fig.2 A quantum efficiency of several photosensitive materials 

Fig. 3a Experimental set up for manufacturing sealed single-wire counters 

 

Fig. 3b Experimental set up for photocathodes aging studies 

Fig. 3c Experimental set up for  a solid X-ray converter aging studies 

 

 

)

A
n
(
 
t
n
e
r
r
u
C

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

)

A
n
(
 
t
n
e
r
r
u
C

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

2

4

6

8

10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30

Time (days)

Fig. 4 Results of aging studies of the CsI photocathodes (photocurrent vs. time) 

manufactured by Hamamatsu: for R1187 (open diamonds) and R1187 filled with Ar 

(filled squares). Note that there were breaks in measurements between days 5 and 10, 15 

and 20, 22 and 25, 26 and 27. One can see that during the breaks the QE value was 

partially restored. 

0

10

20

30

40

Time (days)

Fig. 5. Results of aging studies of the SbCs photocathodes manufactured by 

Hamamatsu:R414 (open diamonds) and R250 filled with Ar (filled squares). Note that 

 

 

there were breaks in measurements between days 5 and 10, 15 and 20, 22 and 25, 26 and 

27. One can see that during the breaks the QE value was partially restored. 

I
/
)
I
s
C

(
I

1,5
1,4
1,3
1,2
1,1
1
0,9
0,8
0,7
0,6

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Time (hours)

 

Fig.6 Ratio of two currents (current from the PPAC with the CsI converter divided on the 

current from the PPAC without any converter) vs. time.. During these measurements the 

current value from the PPAC without the CsI converter was with good accuracy about  

0.1µA. After 8 hours  the X-ray flux was blocked for half an hours and then the exposure 

to the X-rays was continued. 

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

)
s
t
i
n
u

 
.

b
r
a
(
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

I

0
260

2

1

3

280

300

320

340

360

Wavelength (nm)

 

Fig. 7 Emission spectra of various gas mixtures filled with TEA vapors at total pressure 

of 1 atm: 

1)  Ar+6%TEA, 2) Kr+6&TEA,3) Xe+6%TEA 

Fig.8 Energy band scheme for an ideal CsI crystal (a) and for the CsI containing various 

 

defects (b) 

 

 

 

