L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

GROWTH PATTERNS of MICROSCOPIC BRAIN TUMORS

Leonard M. Sander1, and Thomas S. Deisboeck2,3

1 Department of Physics and Michigan Center for Theoretical Physics, The University of

Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109.

 2  Complex  Biosystems  Modeling  Laboratory,  Harvard-MIT  (HST)  Athinoula  A.

Martinos  Center  for  Biomedical  Imaging,  HST-Biomedical  Engineering  Center,

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139.

3  Molecular  Neuro-Oncology  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  General  Hospital,  Harvard

Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129.

ABSTRACT

Highly malignant brain tumors such as Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM)

form complex growth patterns in vitro in which invasive cells organize in

tenuous branches. Here, we formulate a chemotaxis model for this sort of

growth. A key element controlling the pattern is homotype attraction, i.e.,

the  tendency  for  invasive  cells  to  follow  pathways  previously  explored.

We  investigate  this  in  two  ways:  we  show  that  there  is  an  intrinsic

instability in the model, which leads to branch formation. We also give a

discrete  description  for  the  expansion  of  the  invasive  zone,  and  a

continuum  model  for  the  nutrient  supply.  The  results  indicate  that  both

strong  heterotype  chemotaxis  and  strong  homotype  chemo-attraction  are

required  for  branch  formation  within  the  invasive  zone.  Our  model  thus

can  give  a  way  to  assess  the  importance  of  the  various  processes,  and  a

way to explore and analyze transitions between different growth regimes.

1

L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

1. Introduction

In certain three-dimensional tissue culture settings, highly malignant human brain tumors

can  form  a  remarkable  growth  pattern,  consisting  of  central  proliferation  and  invasive

spread into the periphery1. In the brain itself, these tumors may grow in a similar way. In

the  initial  stages  the  tumor  grows  more  or  less  symmetrically  until  (presumably)

mechanical  confinement  pressure  increases  to  a  critical  level,  and  an  invasive  phase  is

triggered. In this phase the central multicellular tumor spheroid (MTS) continues to grow,

but  also  there  is  rapid  invasion  of  surrounding  tissue  by  mobile  tumor  cells,  which  are

continually shed by the MTS at several stages. In these stages chains of single cells can

branch  and  extend  around  the  core  in  an  invasive  zone.  It  is  this  rapid  and  extensive

invasion  of  brain  parenchyma  surrounding  the  main  macroscopic  tumor,  which  makes

this terrible disease so difficult to treat 2. This paper will introduce a model that has some

of the salient features of this process.

Some  of  the  features  of  the  growth  and  invasion  have  been  revealed  by  in  vitro

experiments in transparent extracellular matrix gel1: see Figure 1. The branching pattern

surrounding the central core is the invasive zone, which grows with a maximum velocity
of  about  4.5  m m/hr,  which  in  turn  corresponds  well  with  values  obtained  from  in  vivo

experiments3. Our interest here is to try to understand the mechanism for the formation of

the branching structures.

It seems clear that we are dealing here with a growth instability. In fact, there is

considerable qualitative resemblance between the pattern of Figure 1 and the well-known

diffusion-limited  aggregation  (DLA)  pattern4  or  biological  patterns  such  as  those

encountered in nutrient-limited growth of bacteria colonies5. Modeling of a similar kind

has  been  used  for  cancers  other  than  brain  tumors6.  In  these  biological  cases  the  basic

pattern  is  determined  by  enhanced  proliferation  of  tumor  cells  at  well-nourished  tips  of

branches. This leads to unstable growth of the branches exactly as in the classic Mullins-

Sekerka instability of metallurgy7.

However, the biology of brain tumors is different from that of bacteria colonies in

the important respect that the invasive cells are thought to exhibit very little proliferative

activity  8,9. This means, that all (or most) of the new cells are produced at the surface of

the MTS, and then invade the surrounding tissue. Secondary tumors may form at distant

2

L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

sites  (compare  also  with  Deisboeck  et  al.,  1),  yet  the  branch  formation  in  Figure  1  is

supplied from the MTS core, or more accurately from its highly proliferative cell surface

layers  (see  also  next  section).  The  invasive  cells  move  in  response  to  various  chemical

and material gradients in the tissue and, we assume that there is a similar mechanism for

the in vitro assay. That is, their motion is governed by chemotaxis and haptotaxis, though,

in what follows we will neglect haptotaxis.

In our model, we will assume that the growth of the invasive branches is governed

by  two  major  processes:  (i)  Chemotaxis  caused  by  the  gradient  of  (heterotype)  nutrient

concentration. In the experiment, a (non-replenished) nutrient medium is mixed with the

bio-gel, and it is consumed by the growing tumor (see the next section for details). This,

however,  would  merely  lead  to  an  expanding  cloud  of  mobile  cells.  (ii)  Homotype

attraction,  another  form  of  chemotaxis  where  cells  secrete  a  soluble  agent  (paracrine

production) which attracts other cells. There also may be tissue damage by the invading

cells, which gives rise to pathways which other cells can follow more easily.

In  the  next  section  we  give  more  details  about  the  biological  background  of

experiments and concepts. We show, for a simplified continuum model that we can get

branch  formation  from  a  combination  of  heterotype  and  homotype  attraction  (both  are

necessary).  We  then  introduce  a  hybrid  discrete-continuum  model  for  the  tumor

expansion. Our simulation results, in the following section, show that there are regimes of

branch  formation  depending  on  the  strength  of  various  effects,  and  these  are,  in  some

measure,  found  in  the  experiment.  Finally  we  summarize  our  results,  and  point  out

directions for future modeling efforts.

2. Experimental Background

2.1. Experimental Results

We developed an experimental model, which uses multicellular tumor spheroids (MTS 10)

implanted  into  a  3D  extracellular  matrix  (ECM)  gel.  This  sandwich  MTS  assay  is
described  in  detail  in  Deisboeck  et  al.1  In  brief,  we  placed  human  U87MGD EGFR11
multicellular  glioma  spheroids  (˘
  =  500-700  m m;  0.7-1.0  x  104  cells)  in  between  two
layers  of  growth  factor  reduced  (GFR)  matrix,  Matrigel(cid:226)

  (BIOCAT(cid:226)

,  Becton

3

L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

Dickinson,  Franklin  Lakes,  NJ),  which  forms  a  reconstituted  basement  membrane  at

room  temperature.  It  has  been  shown  that  such  basement  membranes  have  distinct

network  structure12.  This  specific  GFR-matrix  variant  contains  less  growth  factor  (e.g.,
EGF, PDGF, TGF-b ) as compared to the full Matrigel, however a similar amount of the

ECM proteins laminin (61%), collagen IV (30%) and entactin (7%). We then mixed this
gel with (serum-free) OPTI-MEM(cid:226)
volume of 200 m
plate (FALCON(cid:226)

l (per well; using a 48-well flat bottom tissue culture treated Multiwell(cid:212)

 to a ratio of 3:1 GFR-M to medium, reaching a total

, Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA)).

As reported previously in Deisboeck et al.1, over 144 hrs, the volumetric growth

followed  decelerating  kinetics  reaching  on  average  0.403  mm3.  During  the  same  period

invasion  increased  significantly  up  to  1.705  mm2  at  the  end  of  the  observation  period.

The  experimental  model  also  showed  a  steep  increase  in  invasive  edge  cell  velocity
reaching  a  peak  of  109  m m/day  at  t  =  96  hrs.  Specific  immunohistochemistry  staining

revealed  an  inverse  relationship  between  MTS  size  and  proliferative  index.  Also,  the

proliferative cells tended to be more densely arranged in the surface layers of the MTS

whereas in the center of the larger MTS cells were less dense with separate lucid areas

and apoptotic nuclei.

Figure  1  depicts  two  microscopic  sample  images  from  tumor  spheroids  at  120

hours  (after  placement  into  the  3D  ECM  gel  (using  the  same  gel  composition  in  both

experiments)). Figure 1a shows “chain-like” invasion patterns, whereas the MTS system

in  Figure  1b  displays  a  more  “disc-like”  invasive  pattern.  Invasion  in  both  MTS

experiments is predominantly 2D because of the design of the experiment1. At this time

point, the average MTS volume was 0.356 mm3 and the average MTS invasion area was

1.394 mm2.

2.2. Modeling Background

Using the methods of the previous section we were able to study the evolving tumor with

its  key  features  of  proliferation  and  invasion  for  up  two  six  to  eight  days  without

replenishing  the  nutrient  supply.  Volumetric  growth  follows  Gompertzian  dynamics13

Tumor  growth  and  invasion  were  closely  related  and  in  fact  showed  evidence  of

feedback1,  (which  we  do  not  treat  in  this  paper.)  We  can  see  in  Figure  1  that  invasive

4

L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

tumor cells often seemed to follow one another forming a chain, previously only shown

for neural precursor cells14. We take this as evidence for homotype attraction of cells for

one  another.  The  biological  correlate  for  the  attractant(s)  is  the  paracrine  production  of
soluble  protein  growth  factors,  e.g.,  TGF-a

  and  HGF/SF  by  tumor  cells  15,16,17.  Mobile

cells would follow each other because of increasing paracrine attraction. There is also the

possibility of smaller mechanical resistance in a preformed channel. Such a mechanism

would lead to a continuous imprinting of (initially random) invasive pathways.

3. Formulation of the Model

3.1. Continuum Modeling

The major features that we want to include in our description of the mobile tumor cells

are  the  following:  cells  are  shed  from  the  MTS  and,  in  the  absence  of  other  forces,

undergo  random  motion,  i.e.  diffusion.  In  continuum  terms,  the  cells  obey  a  diffusion

equation  with  a  diffusion  coefficient,  Dc.  In  addition,  there  is  chemotaxis,  i.e.  directed

active motion along chemical gradients. These effects are described by the usual Keller-

Segel equation 18:

¶ c/¶ t = (cid:209) [Dc(r)(cid:209) c] - (cid:209) [c(cid:209)

(n,r)(cid:209) n] - (cid:209) [ch

h]

(3.1)

Here  c  is  the  concentration  of  mobile  cells,  and  n,  the  concentration  of  nutrient  which
guides  the  motion  of  the  cells.  For  the  chemotaxis  coefficient,  c

,  we  use  the  receptor

law: c = b (r)n2

o /(no

+ n) 2. The characteristic concentration, no, will be discussed further,

below.  Here,  b

  gives  the  scale  of  the  chemotaxis,  i.e.,  the  drift  velocity,  which  a  cell

acquires  in  unit  gradient  of  nutrient.  This  drift  velocity  accounts  for  a  roughly  linear

growth law of the invasive zone. The last term is the homotype attraction mediated by a

factor whose concentration is h, and whose chemotaxis coefficient (taken to be constant
for simplicity) is h

.

In  our  discrete  simulation,  below,  we  will  allow  both  Dc  and  b

  to  depend  on

position. This is to take into account the effect of tissue damage: we simply make it easier
for a cell to move where other cells have previously been by multiplying b
 and Dc by a
dimensionless factor, g 1, which will be a parameter. This is a very crude representation of

5

c
(cid:209)
L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

these effects, but it will allow us to show, in a fairly simple way, how branch formation

occurs in a discrete model.

The boundary condition on c at the surface of the MTS corresponds to generation

of cells as they are shed. As described above, we do not consider proliferation of cells in

the invasive zone, based on experimental evidence 8,9. In this respect our approach differs

sharply from that of Burgess et al. 19 who, instead, write an equation of the form:
(cid:209) c] + gc(co

¶ c / ¶ t = (cid:209) [Dc

- c)

(3.2)

with logistic growth throughout the invasive zone, and no chemotaxis. This equation is of

the  form  of  a  Fisher-Kolmogorov20  equation,  and  has  traveling  front  solutions  with  a

fixed velocity,

coefficient.

v = 2 Dcgco

due to the exponential growth of c. The authors use this equation to compute the diffusion

However, our point of view is quite different. If we adopt an equation of the form

of (3.2), we would have to put the growth term only on the surface of the MTS. We can

see  the  difficulty  with  this  if  we  idealize  the  MTS  as  a  point  source  of  new  cells,  and

write:

¶ c / ¶ t = (cid:209) [Dc

(cid:209) c] + Gd (r)

This equation is not difficult to solve. We get:
t(cid:242)

- 1/2e- r 2 /4 Dt dt

c(r,t) (cid:181)

(

t - r p

/4 D...)

0

where we have written the limit for small r. That is, as in any diffusion problem, contours

of  constant  c  move  according  to  r~t1/2,  not  with  fixed  velocity.  In  order  to  get  a  fixed

velocity we need a chemotaxis (drift) term like the second term in Eq.(3.1).

We also need an equation for the nutrient concentration, n. In the experiments that

we have in mind there are several constituents of the nutrient used, but, for simplicity we

will think about a single species such as glucose. Thus we have simple diffusion with a

large diffusion constant, Dn, and consumption of the nutrient by the mobile cells, and also

by those belonging to the MTS.

¶ n /¶ t = Dn

2n -

(n)c

(3.3)

(3.4)

(3.5)

(3.6)

6

t
»
(cid:209)
a
L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

Here  the  last  term  corresponds  to  consumption  of  nutrient  by  the  cells,  and  a (n),  is  a

function  giving  the  overall  scale  of  nutrient  consumption.  Experiments  with  cultured
brain cancer cells 21 show that a (n) is well represented by:

(3.7)

a (n) = a

o  n/n1    n £ n1
 n>n1

will make this assumption.

where n1 is a characteristic saturation concentration. It is reasonable that n1

 n o, and we

For  the  MTS,  we  assume  the  consumption  is  large,  given  the  large  number  of

highly proliferative cells in the surface layers. In order to avoid complications we set n=0

on  the  surface  of  the  MTS.  Far  from  the  tumor  we  have  a  boundary  condition:  n=n¥ ,

where n¥  is the nutrient concentration introduced at the beginning of the experiment, or,

in the brain, the general supply.

Finally,  we  need  an  equation  for  the  homotype  factor,  h.  We  use  a  diffusion

equation, again, and suppose that this factor is produced by the mobile cells at a rate, l
In order to avoid a large buildup of this factor we assume that it decays at a rate, m

. Thus

.

we have:

¶ h /¶ t = Dh

2h -

m h + l c

(3.8)

where  Dh  is  the  corresponding  diffusion  coefficient.  As  we  will  see,  in  order  to  form

branches, Dh needs to be smaller than Dc.

3.2. Estimate of the Parameters

In order to proceed with a solution of the equations above, we need to know a number of

parameters.  In  this  section  we  will  try  to  use  experimental  numbers  insofar  as  possible

and  we  will  quote  a  number  of  quantities.  These  should  be  regarded  as  order-of-

magnitude estimates for the specific experiment, which we are trying to explain, and still

more so for the situation in vivo where many other effects such as inhomogeneity of the

environment can play an important role. The point of the enterprise is to see whether the

parameters we use in the simulation are reasonable.

We  turn  first  to  Eq.  (3.6).  The  diffusion  coefficient  of  glucose  in  the  brain  is
known to be Dn=6.7 x 10-7 cm2/sec 22. The saturation consumption has been measured, a =

7

a
o
»
(cid:209)
L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

1.6 pg/cell/min  21. Also, n1= 0.2 g/l. Note that this is within a factor of three of n¥  = 0.6
g/l for the experiment1.

We should note that for our purposes Eq. (3.6) may simplified because the time

scale for the diffusion of the nutrient is much faster than that of the cells, thus we may set
¶ n/¶ t = 0, and write the equation in the following form (for n>no):

a 2(cid:209)

2(n/ n¥ ) = [a

oa2 / Dnn¥
Here we have measured  c in terms of the cell volume, W
, n in terms of n¥ , and multiplied
by  the  square  of  a  length  scale  (a  typical  cell  diameter),  a,  which  we  take  to  be  10m m.

](W c)

(3.9)

The dimensionless group in brackets,  g

= a

2

oa 2 / Dnn¥

 turns out to be of order 0.1. It is

a parameter that we need for our simulations.

For Eq. (3.1) we need Dc, the diffusion constant of brain tumor cells in tissue. The
only direct measurement that we know of, by Burgess  et al.19, gives 1.7 x 10-9 cm2/sec.

However,  this  value  depends  on  interpreting  data  according  to  Eq.  (3.2).  We  have

explained above why we cannot accept this value from a tumor biology standpoint. Our

point of view is that the velocity of the edge of the invasive zone, v, depends primarily on

the chemotaxis, and is independent of the random motion of the cells.

We  have  been  unable  to  find  a  direct  measurement  of  the  random  diffusion  of

single  invasive  cells  so  that  we  are  reduced  to  very  crude  estimates.  We  may  state  the
problem as that of finding the ‘jump time’, t , i.e., the time required for a cell to move its
own length in a random walk, t  = a2 /D c. For example, in the experiment of Chicoine et
al.3 a cell in a petri dish takes several hours to perform such a motion, and we may expect

that in the brain, or within the gel medium of our experiment, the time will be longer. As

a complete guess we suppose this time to be of order 10 hours. This amounts to guessing

that Dc ~ 10-12 cm2/sec. We are aware of the weakness of this chain of reasoning.

For the chemotaxis term we have a measurement3 of the maximum drift velocity
of  mobile  cells:  v=4.8  m m/hr  (which  corresponds  very  well  to  the  4.5  m m/hr  measured

after 96 hrs in our 3D MTS assay1). Eq. (3.1) gives the drift velocity as:

v = 1
16

b n¥

[n / n¥ ]

Here the factor 1/16 comes from the receptor law. We may estimate the gradient in which

the  cells  move  by  assuming  that  the  nutrient  recovers  its  full  concentration  in

(3.10)

8

W
W
(cid:209)
L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

approximately the radius of the MTS, about 1mm. Thus  b n¥

 2 x 10-7 cm2/sec. We note

that  this  has  the  units  of  a  diffusion  constant,  so  we  define  our  third  dimensionless
parameter, g

 100.

3 = b n¥ /Dc »

Much less is known about the dynamics of the homotype factor. We note that if a

steady state is attained in Eq. (3.8), the ratio of the concentration of homotype factor, ho,

to  cancer  cells,  co,  is  ho /co
convenient to measure the decay rate, m

= l

/m

4 ,  another  dimensionless  parameter.  It  will  be
, in terms of the jump time, and set g

/a2=

5=Dc

.  We  can  parameterize  the  strength  of  the  chemotaxis  induced  by  h  by  noting  that
6=h ho/Dc is a dimensionless group, which gives the relative importance of the first and
last  terms  on  the  right-hand  side  of  Eq.  (1).  Finally,  we  need  to  know  the  ratio  of
diffusion coefficients, g
7=Dh/Dc. These three parameters are not known, even in order of
magnitude. The same is true of g 1, which characterizes the homotype attraction in another

way.  In  fact,  understanding  the  role  of  these  parameters,  is  the  point  of  our  enterprise

here. We will attempt to deduce them from the pattern itself.

It is disturbing that we have seven parameters in this problem. However, we have

been able to estimate two of them, and, as we will see, the general nature of the patterns

is not terribly sensitive to the others. Also, we suggest that future experiments could be

oriented to finding out more about the homotype factor.

4. Stability Analysis

In order to see whether chains of cells (forming the branches in Figure 1) are likely to be

formed  in  our  model,  we  start  with  a  simplified  two-dimensional  continuum  approach.

Suppose  that  we  consider  a  channel  (a  part  of  the  invasive  zone)  with  cells  supplied  at

concentration co at one end. Cells drift in the x-direction, with drift velocity, u, because of

a fixed gradient of nutrient. The channel has a finite width, L, in the y-direction, and we

use periodic boundary conditions. According to Eq. (3.8) there will be a steady state with
a fixed concentration, ho =g 4 co, of homotype factor. The question we pose is whether this
uniform  steady  state  is  stable.  It  turns  out  not  to  be,  and  the  growth  of  the  instability

shows how branches start to form.

In our stability analysis we write:

c= co( 1+C ) 

h= ho(1+H )

(4.1)

9

»
”
g
m
m
t
g
L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

where C, H, are small deviations from the steady state. We then rewrite linearized forms
of  Eqs.  (3.1),  (3.8)  in  terms  of  these  variables.  Further,  we  set  r=  ar

,  using  a,  the  cell

diameter,  to  rescale  spatial  variables,  and  t=  (a2  /Dc  )T,  scaling  time  by  the  jump  time.

We find:

¶ C /¶ T = (cid:209)

2C -

(au /Dc ) •(cid:209)

r C -

2 H

6

¶ H /¶ T = g

7

2 H -

5(C - H)

(4.2)

(4.3)

In  order  to  fix  our  ideas  we  will  take  a  model  set  of  parameters  as  follows:  g
corresponding  to  slow  decay  of  the  homotype  agent,  and  g
chemotaxis from the homotype agent. The ratio of diffusion coefficients, g

6=5,  i.e.,  moderately  strong

5=.05,

7, needs to be

less  than  unity  for  a  strong  attraction  to  occur,  so  we  take  it  to  be  0.1.  Finally,  we  can

estimate the term au/Dc, from the previous section to be of order 3.

These are linear equations, and we seek a solution of the form:

C, H ~ exp (w T - iQ•r ) 
Here the (dimensionless) growth rate of the instability, w

(4.4)

, plays the role of an eigenvalue,

and  the  wavevector  (in  units  of  1/a),  Q,  controls  the  spatial  variation.  The  dispersion
relation,  w

(Q),  gives  the  growth  of  instabilities  for  various  wavelengths;  positive  w

corresponds to unstable behavior. In Figure 2 we plot the dispersion relation for Q in the

x-direction  and  the  y-direction,  for  the  parameters  quoted  above.  The  same  general

behavior  is  true  over  a  large  range  in  parameter  space,  namely  instability  at  long

wavelength (small Q), and stability at short wavelength.

We  should  note  that  the  instability  in  the  y-direction,  i.e.,  across  the  channel,  is

stronger  than  that  in  the  x-direction.  In  effect,  the  instability  is  advected  by  the  drift

velocity, u. In order to see the effect on an initial perturbation, we suppose that there is a

small deviation from a uniform distribution of cells, and then propagate it forward in time

using Eq. (4.2), (4.3). The equations can be solved exactly using Fourier Transforms, and

this is what we did. The result is shown in Figure 3. The initial cell cluster, on the left, is

carried forward by the drift, and increases in size by robbing material from the rest of the

channel.  This  is  incipient  branch  formation  due  to  the  combination  of  heterotype  and

homotype chemotaxis. Note that both are necessary to form this structure.

10

r
g
(cid:209)
r
(cid:209)
r
g
L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

5. Discrete Simulation Model

5.1. Formulation

In the previous section we showed a linear analysis of the formation of a branch in the

invasive zone. Here we will take a complementary approach and do a discrete simulation.

In this case we represent the homotype factor by an extreme approximation: we assume it

does  not  diffuse  at  all,  so  that  each  cell  leaves  a  ‘trail’  which  other  cells  follow.

Alternately, we could interpret the model as representing the case where each cell carves

a ‘least resistance’ pathway for others to follow.

We work on a 128x128 square lattice, with the lattice constant equal to a, the cell

diameter. We treat the nutrient concentration as a continuous variable and the tumor cells

as  discrete.  For  the  nutrient  we  solve  Eq.  (3.6)  numerically  on  the  lattice.  If  we  write
N = n / n¥

, then Eq. (3.6) becomes:
2N = g

2Cf (N)

where f(N)=N, N <1/3, f=1, otherwise (cf. Eq. (3.7)), D

2 is a second numerical difference,

and  C  is  1  or  0  depending  on  whether  a  cell  occupies  that  lattice  site.  Eq.  (5.1)  is

standard: it is a discrete version of the Helmholtz equation. We have solved it using the

strongly implicit scheme.

For the cells, and represent the various processes by a set of jump probabilities.

Our basic rate is the random walk rate for cells (c.f. the previous section). Each cell can

jump to any empty adjacent site with rate w(0) = 1, unless it is either in a gradient of N, or

if it undergoes homotype attraction. In the former case we put:

w(N) = g

3 (3N +1)

- 2D N  

if D N, the numerical gradient of N in that direction, is positive. The second factor comes

from  the  receptor  law.  For  the  homotype  attraction,  we  keep  track  of  the  places  where

any cell has previously been. If that site has been visited we multiply each jump rate by

1. As the simulation proceeds we pick processes according to their relative jump rates.

Showing that this discrete process reduces to Eq. (3.1) when viewed on large space and

time scales is a standard exercise in stochastic analysis 23. For the MTS we take a disk of

immobile cells and start with about 100 mobile cells around it. In order to speed up the

subsequent calculations we take a somewhat irregular initial distribution of these cells. In

(5.1)

(5.2)

11

D
g
L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

the course of the growth we allow any empty site near the immobile cells to either shed a

new mobile cell, or to grow the MTS, with a certain relative probability. Our intention is

to use this parameter to match the known growth history of the MTS, but we have not yet

done this systematically.

5.2. Results

We show the results of simulation in three regimes in Figure 4 and Figure 5. In all cases

we  started  with  a  tumor  core  of  a  radius  of  20  cells,  and  liberated  100  cells  to  start
invasion. We have taken g

2, the parameter which characterizes consumption of nutrient as

0.3,  in  the  range  we  estimated  above.  The  three  images  are  representative  of  three

regimes for the other two parameters. It will be important in future work to map out the

various parameter regimes in more detail and see to what extent we can understand the

underlying processes. The general scale of the figures can be thought of as being about

1mm, as in the experiment. In Figure 4a we have basically turned off both, chemotaxis
1 =5, g 3 = 5. In this case we have a typical result of diffusion:
and homotype attraction: g
random walks are compact in two dimensions, and the cloud of cells near the MTS does

not  represent  the  invasive  pattern  of  Figure  1.  We  conclude  that  it  takes  strong

chemotaxis (or some equivalent phenomenon) to generate an invasive zone.

In Figure 4b we thus implemented strong chemotaxis, g

3 = 100, in the regime that

we estimated above. We also took g

1 =25, i.e., rather strong homotype attraction. In this

pattern  (Figure  4b)  we  see  a  dispersed  zone  of  invading  cells,  yet  only  a  hint  of  chain

formation. However, this sort of pattern is observed in the experiment (cf. Figure 1b). It

will  be  important  to  revisit  the  experiment  in  a  systematic  manner  to  try  to  understand

how this pattern evolves.

We  find  that  in  order  to  produce  well-defined  chain  structures,  in  Figure  5  (cf.

Figure 1a), we need to introduce very strong homotype attraction, g

1 =250, and also very

strong  heterotype  chemotaxis,  perhaps  a  factor  of  10  larger  than  we  estimated  above.

This  might  indicate  that  chemical  triggers  other  than  only  glucose  might  be  involved.

With regards to the in vitro assay there are numerous candidate substances in the tissue

culture medium as well as in the gel, and many more soluble factors are likely to have an

impact  in  the  real  brain  parenchyma.  We  are  encouraged  however  by  the  fact  that  the

12

L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

model  can  produce  chains  at  all  without  putting  in  an  artificial  device,  which  does  not

correspond to the biology that we understand.

6. SUMMARY

This preliminary study introduces a new computational model, which attempts to clarify

the pattern of highly malignant tumor growth, in particular the origin and structure of the

invasive zone. We have attempted to remain grounded in the biology of the tumor, yet we

have, even in this preliminary study, already revealed a number of interesting features.

The nature of the pattern formation here is quite different from that assumed by

other  authors  for  related  systems  such  as  bacteria  colonies5.  In  that  case,  the  biology  is

different,  in  that  bacteria  reproduce  while  in  motion.  Thus  the  diffusive  instability  that

gives rise to the branching shapes in bacteria colonies, which are very well represented

by  DLA.  Our  case  is  different  despite  the  visual  resemblance  of  the  patterns,  and  the

pattern formation is considerably more subtle. As such, this has model is interesting for

statistical  physics,  quite  apart  from  the  application  we  have  in  mind.  We  should  note,

however, that our discrete simulation method is similar to that of Ben-Jacob et al.  5, and

the diffusive instability is present here, as it is in the bacteria colonies: tumor cells that

are far in advance of the rest of the tumor system consume nutrient, and tend to get even

farther ahead.

Our results persuade us that chemotaxis is a driving force in forming the invasive

zone, and this prediction can be tested. We propose that the invasive zone would slow its

expansion considerably in situations where the main tumor mass is very well-nourished.

The other ingredient in our model, the homotype attraction, is treated in a very schematic

way here. In this form, it does give the qualitative effect that we are looking for, but the

details of the process will need considerable work both in modeling and in understanding

the underlying biological processes.

We  are  aware  that  several  important  features  are  not  yet  included  in  the  model.

For  example,  we  have  made  no  mention  of  haptotaxis.  Haptotaxis  refers  to  enhanced

movement  on  a  solid  permissive  substrate,  e.g.,  the  laminin  and  collagen  fibers  present

within the matrigel used in here, and certainly in vivo. It is noteworthy that glioma tumor

cells  also  produce  extracellular  matrix  proteins  such  as  laminin  24,25,  thus  further

13

L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

imprinting  the  pathway  structure  with  increased  permission  on  paracrine  secreted,  solid

substrates.  As  such,  aside  from  chemotaxis,  haptotaxis  also  contributes  to  the  observed

branching patterns and thus needs to be considered for future work.

We have also completely neglected effects arising from the elasticity of the tissue

surrounding  the  growing  tumor.  A  growing  core  certainly  strains  the  material,  and  this

may affect the migrating cells, though the effect is not trivial since it can be shown that

an expanding sphere in an elastic medium gives rise to a pure shear, i.e., local volumes

are  not  changed,  but  rather  deformed.  We  suspect  that  the  important  elastic  effects  are

non-linear ones - this is quite likely in a gel, and presumably also in brain tissue. Aside

from pure expansion, the mechanical effects of cell traction, i.e., tension, especially in the

ECM-gel used in the experimental assay likely also need to be considered and our own

preliminary  experimental  findings  already  support  this  notion.  Another  effect,  which

should be thought about in this context is the possibility of a kind of local fracture from

the  mobile  cells  enhancing  the  damage  to  the  tissue,  and  favoring  chain  formation.  In

brain  parenchyma,  such  micro-fractures  may  also  lead  to  a  decrease  in  the  tissue

consistency, thus reduce the mechanical confinement surrounding the main tumor mass.

That would allow the tumor to continue its volumetric growth, which in turn would shed

(in total) even more invasive cells. Interestingly, such a feedback pattern has indeed been

observed  in  vitro,  represented  by  the  damped  oscillations  of  the  dynamic  ratio  between

volumetric growth of the MTS and the invasive front1.

In future work we intend to first map out in detail the parameter space for this n

model,  and  to  attempt  to  put  in  the  observed  growth  profile  of  the  MTS.  We  will  then

also study the effects of inhomogeneity of the 3D matrix, which should facilitate spatial

expansion  into  directions  of  least  resistance.  More  specifically,  we  plan  to  map  out  the

response  of  the  formation  of  the  invasive  zone  to  easier  paths  of  motion  (including

haptotaxis).  This  effort  will  also  help  us  determine  more  carefully  the  diffusion

coefficient of brain tumor cells in such 3D heterogeneous biological media.

A better understanding of the processes governing the onset and the dynamics of

multicellular  tumor  invasion  would  be  of  great  significance  for  tumor  biology  research

and an important step towards the development of novel diagnostic tools and innovative

treatment approaches in the future.

14

L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: LMS  would  like  to  thank  Alexei  Tkachenko  and  Gabriel

Weinreich  for  helpful  discussions.  TSD  would  like  to  thank  David  A.  Weitz,  Daniel  S.

Fisher, and Michael E. Berens for fruitful discussions. Support from E. Antonio Chiocca

for  the  Tumor  Complexity  Modeling  Project  is  gratefully  acknowledged.  The  human
malignant glioma cell line U87MGD EGFR was kindly supplied by Webster K. Cavenee

(Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, San Diego, CA).

Figure Captions

Figure  1.  Two  microscopic  images  of  human  U87MGD EGFR  multicellular  tumor

spheroids  (MTS)  at  t  =  120  hours  (after  placement  into  the  3D  ECM  gel  (=  using  the

same  gel  composition  in  both  experiments)).  Figure  1a  shows  chain-like  invasion

patterns, whereas the MTS system in Figure 1b displays a more disc-like invasive pattern.

Invasion  in  both  MTS  experiments  is  predominantly  2D  because  of  the  design  of  the

Sandwich-Assay as described in detail in Deisboeck et al. 1.

Figure  2.  Dispersion  Relation  for  cells  in  a  channel  showing  the  stable  and  unstable

modes for wavevector Q, in units 1/a,  in the x and y directions. We show the growth rate

(in the dimensionless units in the text) as a function of Q.

Figure  3.  Growth  instability  within  a  channel.  The  initial  cell  cluster  on  the  left  grows

into the incipient branch on the right. The axes are in units of a.

Figure  4.  Simulation  results.  For  Figure  4a,  both  chemotaxis  and  homotype  attraction

have  been  turned  off.  The  resulting  random  walks  are  compact  in  two  dimensions,

however  not  representing  the  biological  patterns.  Figure  4b  is  the  result  of  both  strong

chemotaxis  and  strong  homotype  attraction.  The  dispersed  zone  of  invading  cells  with

only a hint of chain formation resembles the experimental patterns observed in Figure 1b.

The general scale of the figures can be thought of as being approximately 1 mm.

15

L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

Figure  5.  Simulation  results.  Very  strong  homotype  attraction  and  very  strong

chemotaxis  result  in  relatively  well-defined  chain-like  structures  as  seen  in  Figure  1a.

(The general scale can again be thought of as being approx. 1 mm).

16

L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

FIGURES

(a) 

Figure1

 (b)

Figure 2

17

L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

Figure 3

Figure 4

(a) 

(b)

18

L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

Figure  5

19

L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

REFERENCES

                                                

1.  Deisboeck T. S., M. E. Berens, A. R. Kansal, S. Torquato, A. O. Stemmer-Rachamimov, and
E. A. Chiocca. Pattern of self-organization in tumour systems: complex growth dynamics in a
novel brain tumour spheroid model. Cell Prolif. 34, 115-134 (2001).

2.  Nazzaro J. M., and E. A. Neuwelt. The role of surgery in the management of supratentorial

intermediate and high-grade astrocytomas in adults. J. Neurosurg. 73, 331-344 (1990).

3.  Chicoine M. R., and D. L. Silbergeld. Assessment of brain tumor cell motility in vivo and in

vitro. J. Neurosurg. 82, 615-622 (1995).

4.  Witten  T.  A.,  and  L.  M.  Sander.  Diffusion-limited  aggregation.  A  kinetic  critical

phenomenon. Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 1400-1403 (1981).

5.  Ben-Jacob  E.,  I.  Cohen,  and  H.  Levine.  Cooperative  self-organization  of  microorganisms.

Advances in Physics 49, 395-554 (2000).

6.  Ferreira  S.  C.,  M.  L.  Martins,  and  M.  J.  Vilela.  Reaction-diffusion  model  for  the  growth  of

avascular tumor. Phys. Rev. E. 65, 021907 (2002).

7.  Mullins W. W., and R. F. Sekerka. Morphological stability of a particle growing by diffusion

or heat flow. J. Appl. Phys. 34, 323 (1963).

8.  Giese A., M. A. Loo, N. Thran, D. Haskett, S. W. Coons, and M. E. Berens. Dichotomy of

astrocytoma migration and proliferation. Int. J. Cancer  67, 275-282 (1996).

9.  Mariani  L.,  C.  Beaudry,  W.  S.  McDonough,  D.  B.  Holzinger,  T.  Demuth,  K.  R.  Ross,  T.
Berens, S. W. Coons, G. Watts, J. M. Trent, J. S. Wei, A. Giese, and M. E. Berens. Glioma
cell motility is associated with reduced transcription of proapoptotic and proliferative genes:
a cDNA microarray analysis. J. Neuro-Onc. 53, 161-176 (2001).

10.  Sutherland  R.  M.  Cell  and  environment  interactions  in  tumor  microregions:  the  multicell

spheroid model. Science 240, 177-184 (1988).

11.  Nagane M., F. Coufal, H. Lin, O. Boegler, W. K. Cavenee, and H.-J. Su Huang.  A common
mutant  epidermal  growth  factor  receptor  confers  enhanced  tumorigenicity  on  human
glioblastoma cells by increasing proliferation and reducing apoptosis. Cancer Res. 56, 5079-
5086 (1996).

12.  Kleinman H. K., M. L. McGarvey, J. R. Hassel, V. L. Star, F. B. Cannon, G. W. Laurie, and
G. R. Martin. Basement membrane complexes with biological activity. Biochem. 25, 312-318
(1986).

13.  Marusic M., Z. Bajzer, J. P. Freyer, and S. Vuk-Pavlovic. Analysis of growth of multicellular

tumour spheroids by mathematical models. Cell Prolif. 27, 73-94 (1994).

14.  Lois  C.,  J.-M.  Garcia-Verdugo,  and  A.  Alvarez-Buylla.  Chain  migration  of  neuronal

precursors. Science 271, 978-981 (1996).

15.  Ekstrand A. J., C. D. James, W. K. Cavenee, B. Seliger, R. F. Pettersson, and V. P. Collins.
Genes  for  epidermal  growth  factor  receptor,  transforming  growth  factor  a
,  and  epidermal
growth  factor  and  their  expression  in  human  gliomas  in  vivo.  Cancer  Res.  51,  2164-2172
(1991).

16.  Koochekpour S., M. Jeffers, S. Rulong, G. Taylor, E. Klineberg, E. A. Hudson, J. H. Resau,
and  G.  F.  Vande  Woude.  Met  and  hepatocyte  growth  factor/scatter  factor  expression  in
human gliomas. Cancer Res. 57, 5391-5398 (1997).

17.  Rosen E. M., J. Laterra, A. Joseph, L. Jin, A. Fuchs, D. Way, M. Witte, M. Weinand, and I.
D. Goldberg. Scatter factor expression and regulation in human glial tumors. Int. J. Cancer
67, 248-255 (1996).

18.  Keller E., and L. Segel. Travelling bands of chemotactic bacteria: a theoretical analysis. J.

Theor. Biol. 30, 235-248 (1971).

20

L.M. Sander, T.S. Deisboeck: Growth Patterns of Microscopic Brain Tumors (06-06-02)

                                                                                                                                                

19.  Burgess P. K., P. M. Kulesa, J. D. Murray, and E. C. Alvord. The interaction of growth rates
and  diffusion  coefficients  in  a  three-dimensional  mathematical  model  of  gliomas.  J.
Neuropath. Exp. Neurol. 56,704-713 (1997).

20.  Murray J. D. Mathematical Biology, (Springer, Berlin, 1993).
21.  Li C. K. N. The glucose distribution in 9L rat brain multicell tumor spheroids and its effect

on cell necrosis. Cancer 50, 2066-2073 (1982).

22.  Jain R. K. Transport of molecules in the tumor interstitium: a review. Cancer Res.  47, 3039-

3051 (1987).

23.  Kampen van N. Stochastic processes in physics and chemistry. (North-Holland, 1996).
24. Enam S. A., M. L. Rosenblum, and K. Evardsen. Role of extracellular matrix in tumor
      invasion: migration of glioma cells along fibronection-positive mesenchymal cell processes.
      Neurosurg. 42, 599-608 (1998).
25. Paulus W., C. Huettner, and J. C. Tonn. Collagens, integrins and the mesenchymal drift in
     glioblastomas: a comparison of biopsy specimens, spheroid and early monolayer cultures. Int.
     J. Cancer 58, 841-846 (1994).

21

