Elements of the System Theory of Time

M. Burgin

Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
405 Hilgard Ave.
Los Angeles, CA 90095
mburgin@math.ucla.edu

Abstract: In the paper, elements of the system theory of time are presented, mathematical

models for time are constructed, and various properties are deduced from the main principles

of  the  system  theory  of  time.  This  theory  is  a  far-reaching  development  of  the  special

relativity  theory.  One  of  the  main  principles  of  the  special  relativity  theory  is  that  two

physical  systems  that  are  moving  relative  to  each  other  have  different  times  and  it  is

necessary to use a correspondence between clocks in these systems to coordinate their times.

Such correspondence is established by means of electromagnetic signals. In accordance with

this principle, it is postulated in the system theory of time that each system has its own time.

In  some  cases,  two  systems  have  the  same  time.  In  other  cases,  times  of  systems  are

coordinated or correlated. However, there are systems in which times are independent from

one another.

Key words: time, system, inner time, external time, scale of time,

1. INTRODUCTION

Functioning and development of any system has temporary aspects.  That is why, as the

Nobel prize winner  Ilya Prigogine  writes (1980), time is one  of the main  concepts  of  the

whole Western civilization. As it is stressed by Fields, Wright, and Harrison (1996), time

dependencies  and  temporal  constraints  are  an  important  aspect  of  action,  and  failure  to

meet them leads to an important class of human errors; many of the errors associated with

safety critical systems have a significant temporal component. Consequently, it is necessary

to have an adequate understanding of time. The conventional approach, which is prevalent

now, assumes that only physical time is real and objective (Levich, 1988). However, there

are  different  kinds  of  time  besides  the  physical  one:  social  (Artemov,  1987)  geological

(Parks and Thrift, 1980), biological (Sutton and Ratey, 1998; Winfree, 1986), physiological

(Winfree,  1986),  psychological 

(Priestley,  1968;  Golovaha  and  Kronik,  1984),

philosophical  (Podoroga,  1993),  astronomical  (Le  Temps,  1968)  time  etc.  (Zwart,  1976;

Burgin, 1997). As writes Norbert Wiener (1961), one of the most famous philosophers of
the  20th  century  Bergson  lays  special  emphasis  on  the  distinction  between  the  reversible

time of physics, in which nothing new happens, and the irreversible time of evolution and

biology, in which there is always something new.

The  problem  of  different  time  scales  is  urgent  for  the  human-computer  interaction.

Development of interaction tools and research in this area made clear that this is a critical

factor  for  improving  quality  and  usability  of  computers  (Hartson  and  Gary,  1992).  A

dynamic  model  of  multi-system  interaction  is  developed  in  (Burgin,  Karplus,  and  Liu,

2001) aiming at the problems of time in the human-computer interaction design.

However,  even  in  physics  two  kinds  of  time  are  considered  (Prigogine,  1980).    In

philosophy, it is possible to speak about various times. Any thought or idea (in philosophy

or  in  art)  always  exists  in  two  kinds  of  time  (Podoroga,  1993).  The  first  kind  of  time  in

philosophy is a reign of a well to a system. But there is another 'individual' time which is

‘living' inside the first one. The second time has its own order and duration, which are not

reducible to the analogous properties of the first time.

Various  authors  considered  the  problem  of  time  from  different  points  of  view.

However,  in  each  case only  a partial perspective  has been  considered.  In  contrast to this,

the system theory of time is aimed at the development of a systemic multifaceted approach

to  time  and  at  elaboration  of  a  mathematical  theory  of  time.  The  conventional  approach

assumes  that  time  is  a  one-dimensional  quantity,  made  up  of  points,  where  each  point  is

associated  with  a  value  (Hartson  and  Gary,  1992).  The  points  are  ordered  along  the

dimension by their values. The common concepts of later and earlier correspond to larger

and  smaller  values  of  time,  respectively.  This  view  of  time  is  compatible  with  the

traditional  psychological,  thermodynamic,  and  cosmic  views  of  time  (Hawking,  1988).

Another approach is based on temporal intervals and denies the standard view of mapping

time  to  points  on  the  real  number  line  (Prigogine,  1980).    Time  intervals  are  primary

objects  of  observation  and  of  learning  by  children.  The  main  distinctions  of  the  system

theory  of  time:  multiplicity  of  time,  non-linearity  in  a  general  case,  and  multiplicity  of

formal representations.

Multiplicity of time means that each system has its own time. Only interaction between

systems makes explicit various relations between times in each of the systems in question.

In  addition  to  this,  processes  going  on  in  the  same  system  may  also  develop  in  different

times.

Non-linearity  of  time  means  that  order  between  time  elements  (points  or  intervals)  is

not necessarily linear. For example, let us consider a cartoon that relates a story that goes

on in 1900 and covers a one year period of time. Then time in this cartoon will be cyclic

because  each  display  of  this  cartoon  repeats  all  events  in  the  same  sequence.  Another

example  is  given  by  two  computer  games,  like  Civilization,  which  are  played  on  two

computers that have no connections. In this case, we cannot say that one event in the first

game happened earlier than another event in the second game. Thus, there is no linear time

for the both games. In nature, biological time scale has topology of a circle (Winfree, 1982;

1983; 1986).

Multiplicity of formal representations means that time may be corresponded to different

formal structures. For example, time is usually represented by a real line (as in physics or

biology), system of intervals on the real line (Allen, 1984), system relations (as in temporal

and  dynamic  logics),  and  natural  numbers  (as  in  theory  of  algorithms  and  theoretical

models of computers: Turing machines, Petri nets, RAM, inductive Turing machines, etc.).

Different kinds of time are represented, systematized and studied in the system theory

of  time  (Burgin,  1992;  1997;  Burgin,  Karplus,  and  Liu,  2001),  elements  of  which  are

presented  below.  It  is  based  on  the  theory  of  named  sets  (triads)  and  general  theory  of

properties.  Other  approaches  to  the  problem  of  time  may  be  analyzed  from  the  point  of

view of the system theory of time.

The  system  theory  of  time  is  developed  in  an  axiomatic  way  as  a  system  of

principles/axioms, from which other properties of time and temporal properties of systems

are derived. Principles describe different kinds of time. However, it is necessary to have in

mind  that  only  some  of  these  principles  are  valid  for  time  in  general.  Other  principles

characterize time in some classes of dynamical systems, in other words, these principles are

true for some systems and false for others.

There are two groups of principles of the system theory of time: ontological principles,

which  represent  inherent  properties  of  time,  and  axiological  principles,  which  are

connected  to  measurement  of  time.  Here,  we  give  only  ontological  principles  build

mathematical models based on these principles, and deduce some properties of time from

these principles.

2. MATHEMATICAL PRELIMINARIES 

To achieve completeness of our exposition, we need some concepts from the theory of

named sets (triads) and theory of abstract properties as our understanding and modeling of

time is based on the concept of a triad (named set) as well as on the methods and apparatus

of the theory of named sets (triads).

At first the structure of a triad was explicated in a general form in mathematics and was

called  “a  named  set"  (Burgin,1990).  This  concept  appeared  in  a  process  of  development

and  unification  of  such  important  mathematical  fields  as  fuzzy  set  theory  and  theory  of

multisets.  Thus  a  new  structure  (which  encompasses  fuzzy  sets  and  multisets)  was

introduced.  It  was  a  named  set  or,  as  it  was  later  called,  a  fundamental  triad  (Burgin,

Definition 1. A fundamental triad has the following structure:

Entity 1                                                 Entity 2                              (1)

connection

correspondence

 

Essence 1                                                       Essence 2                   (2)

Each component of a fundamental triad plays its unique role and has a specific name:

the Entity 1 (Essence 1) is called the support; the Entity 2 (Essence 2) is called the reflector

(or the set of names); and the connection  (correspondence) is called the  reflection (or the

naming relation) of the fundamental triad.

1997a).

 

or

In mathematics theory of fundamental triads is developed as the theory of named sets.

Many  mathematical  structures  are  particular  cases  of  named  sets.  The  most  important  of

such  structures  are  fuzzy  sets  (Zadeh,  1965)  and  multisets  (Aigner,  1979;  Knuth,  1973;

Stanley,  1986)  because  they  are  both  natural  generalizations  of  the  concept  of  a  set  and

have many important applications. Moreover, any ordinary set is, as a matter of fact, some

named set, and namely, a singlenamed set, i.e., such a named set in which all elements have

the  same  name.  Really,  there  are  two  familiar  and  natural  ways  of  constructing  sets:

extentional  and  intentional.  On  the  one  hand,  in  the  extentional  approach,  given  a

multiplicity of objects, some or all of these objects can be conceived together as forming a

set. While doing so, we baptize this set by some name. The simplest name of a set has the

form X or A. Then all elements from the set X have one common name "an element from

X".  This  name  discerns  elements  from  X  and  all  other  entities.  On  the  other  hand,

intentional  method  is  a  construction  of  elements  that  form  the  set.  Than  each  element  in

this  set  is  named,  in  some  sense,  and  its  name  is  the  procedure  (algorithm,  program)  by

which the in question is constructed.

Thus, we see that the fundamental triad X has the form (X, f, I) where X and I are some

essences (entities, may be sets or classes) and f is a correspondence (connection) between X

and I . Then X is the support, I is the reflector or the set of names and f is the reflection or

the naming relation of the fundamental triad X.

It  is  necessary  to  remark  that  many  kinds  of  fundamental  triads  are  essentially

indecomposable,  indissoluble  units.  As  a  consequence,  in  such  fundamental  triads  the

objects X, f, I do not exist independently outside the triad which includes them.

 Another important fundamental triad is connected with the notion of time:

Past - Present - Future

Here,  Past  is  the  support,  Present  is  the  reflection,  and  Future  is  the  reflector  of  this

basic time triad. It is called the fundamental time triad.

There is a similar time triad:

before - now - later

Theory  of  named  sets  makes  it  possible  to  give  an  exact  definition  of  such  a  widely

used notion as 'property' and to develop mathematical theory of properties, which includes

logic as its subtheory (Burgin, 1990a).

Let U be some class (universe) of objects, and M - be an abstract class of partially

ordered sets, i. e., such a class that with any partially ordered set contains all partially

ordered sets which are isomorphic to it.

Definition 2. A property P of objects from some universe U is a named set P = (U, p, L)

where p is a partial function (L-predicate), which is called the evaluation function of the
property P, has U as the domain and some partially ordered set L∈M as the codomain,

which is called the scale of the property P. That is, p is defined in U and takes values in L.

We denote the scale of the property P by Sc(P) = L, the universe of the property P by

Un(P) = U, and the evaluation function of the property P by Ev(P) = p.

The most popular property in logic is 'truth' defined for logical expressions. In classical

logics only one such property as 'truth' with the scale L = {T, F } is considered. In

multivalued logics, initial intervals of the naturals with the natural ordering on them are

used as the scales for this properly. For modal logics, which have only one truth property

that is determined for logical expressions, modalities are expressed by means of modal

operators. Another possibility to express modality is to determine different modal truth

properties: 'the truth', 'the necessary truth', and 'the possible truth'. For modal tense logics

the quantity of such truth properties is much bigger because an individual truth property is

corresponded to any operator.

Let P1 , ... , Pn , P be some properties on the class U with scales L1,  … , Ln , and L,

correspondingly. All these scales belong to M , and a mapping ω:L1 × ... × Ln → L is
defined. Here X×Y denotes the direct product of sets X and Y.

Definition 3. A property P with a scale L is called an n-ary ω-composition of the
properties P1 , ... , Pn , if for any a∈U, we have P(a) = ω (P1(a), ..., Pn (a)), when Pi (a) are

defined for a and for all i= 1, ..., n; and P(a)= *  in other cases.

Here P(a) = *  means that P(a) is undefined.
The ω-composition of the properties is denoted by P = P1 , ... , Pnω .

The main logical operations: conjunction &, disjunction \/, and implication 

, are

examples of ω-compositions of those properties that are determined by propositions. Thus,

we have the &-composition, \/-composition, and 

-composition of logical properties.

Another class of examples is provided try physical laws, which in a lot of cases

describe some equalities for properties of studied systems and phenomena, while these

properties are compositions of other properties. For instance, the law of Newtonian

dynamics F = ma shows that the property of material bodies called “force” is a composition

of the properties “mass" and “acceleration”.

Definition 4. A property P = (U, p, L ) is equivalent to a system Z of properties {Pi =(

U, pi, Li); i∈I} if the validity of the inequality Pi (a) ≠ Pi (b) for some i∈I implies P(a) ≠
P(b) for any a,b ∈ U, and vice versa.

Composition of properties makes possible to prove the following result (cf.
Theorem 1. For any system Z = {Pi =( U, pi, Li); i∈I} of properties, there is a property

P = ( U, p, L) equivalent to Z.

3. INTRODUCTION TO THE SYSTEM THEORY OF TIME

Now, after we have given necessary mathematical preliminaries, we can consider time

and its properties. Here we give only ontological principles of the system theory of time,

which reflect inherent temporal properties of various systems (physical, biological, social,

etc.). Axiological principles, which are dealing with measurement of time, are presented in

(Burgin, 1997).

An important peculiarity of a system approach to time is the emphasis that is made on

the necessity to consider time not as an absolute essence but to relate time to some definite

system. So, let us take some system R and discuss relations between time T and R.

Principle O1. Any system has its own time.

Remark 1. However, time in two different systems may be isomorphic.

When applied to physical systems, Principle O1 implies that in different coordinate

systems time is different and it is necessary to correspond one local time to the other in

order to coordinate events in these systems. Special theory of relativity determines how to

do this coordination. In this sense, the system theory of time is an extension of the special

theory of relativity.

To  derive  other  properties  of  time  from  Principle  O1,  we  apply  system  theory.

According  to  its  principles,  any  system  R  is  not  unique,  if  we  exclude  the  system  of

everything,  which  in  some  sense  is  ill-defined.  Consequently,  there  is  another  system  Q,

which is not included in R. In general, we have the following triad

 interaction

R                                                 Q                              (3)

Principle O1 implies that R has some time TR, Q has some time TQ, and interaction as a

system has some  time TRQ.  If we  consider TR , TQ ,  and TRQ with  respect to R, then we

Theorem 2. Three types of time exist for an arbitrary system R: an internal,

Here, TR is an internal time for R, TQ is an external time for R, and TRQ is a connection

come to the following result.

connection, and external time.

time for R.

Let us give exact definitions

its subsystem functions.

Definition 5. Internal time TR of R is the time, in which the whole system R or some of

Definition 6. External time TeR for R is an internal time of its environment as a system.

From  this  definition,  it  follows  that  an  external  time  for  R  is  an  internal  time  of  any

system that is not included in R.

Definition 7. Connection time TcR for R is the time in which the processes of

interaction of R with its environment go on.

An external time for a system R is the inner time TeR of any system Q, which is not a

subsystem of R. However, the system Q may be unrelated to R. In this case, times in these

systems also look unrelated to R, while by Definition 6 they  are attributed to R. Thus, to

eliminate this difficulty, we introduce a proper external time TpeR .

Definition 8. A proper external time TpeR for a system R is the inner time TQ of any

system Q, which contains R.

A union of two systems may be considered as a system containing both initial systems.

So, we have the following result.

Proposition 1. For any system R, there is a proper external time.

Internal,  or  inner,  time  TIR  is  an  inherent  property  of  the  system  R.  Several  kinds  of

inner times are connected with such a system as a human being. There is biological time,

which is the inner  time  of an individual  when  we consider  this individual as a  biological

(living)  system.  Besides,  researchers  distinguish  physiological  time  if  the  organism  of  a

human  being  is  considered  on  the  level  of  biochemical  (physiological)  process  (Winfree,

1986).  If  we  consider  a  human  being  as  a  biochemical  system,  then  such  a  kind  as  the

biological time is the primary one (Sutton and Ratey, 1998; Winfree, 1986). Psychological

time  appears  on  the  level  of  personality  (Burgin,  1992),  while  the  behavioral  level  of

individual  is  related  to  perception  time,  as  well  as  to  reaction  time  (Bragina  and

Dobrohotova, 1988).

Existence of several inner times in one individual implies that the age of a person is not

a unique number, which is equal to the length of physical time from the birth of this person

to the given moment. This is only the chronological age, which is not the most important

for a human being. Much more important are biological, physiological, and psychological

ages  of  a  person.  Biological  age  reflects  how  the  organism  of  this  person  is  functioning.

Physiological age represents how biochemical reactions are  going in the organism  of this

person. Psychological age reflects how the psyche of this person is functioning.

A source of existence of external time TE is that the system R is not unique – there are

other systems. Time in any of these systems is an external time TeR for R . For example,

any living being B has its internal time. At the same time, B is a part of nature and lives in

physical time, which is external time TE for B.

Connection time TcR is the time in which goes interaction. It exists only for such pairs

of systems, which interact. For example, connection time TcR of a person B with the car,

this person is driving, is neither the internal time of B nor the physical time, which is the

external time for B. Time TC depends on perception and reaction of the person.

Consequently, it might be different for different persons even with the same car.

Existence of three types of time is a peculiarity of both nature and society.  To reflect

and model inner time in physical systems, a mathematical construction was introduced in

(Prigogine,  1980).  Besides,  inner  time  is  discussed  and  utilized  in  the  chronogeography

(Parks and Thrift, 1980), as well as in biology and physiology    (Sutton and Ratey, 1998;

Winfree, 1986). Moreover, experiments demonstrate relative independence of of the inner

biological time from the external physical time  (Winfree, 1982).

 To  reflect  properties  of  different  kinds  of  time,  the  system  theory  utilizes  principles,

which represent the most essential properties. We begin with principles for inner time. The

main principle connects the flow of the inner time in a system with changes going on in this

Principle  OI  1.  Time  TR  in  a  system  R  is  a  labeled/indexed  set  (in  particular,  a

system.

sequence) of changes in R.

For simplicity, we denote TR by T.

Alike idea is suggested by Zwart (1976), who defines time as a sequence of all events.

However,  this  approach  has  several  shortcomings.  First,  the  notion  of  event  is  not

sufficiently exact for a scientific concept. Second, Zwart assumes existence of the absolute

time.  Relativity  theory  invalidated  idea  of  the  absolute  time,  demonstrating  that  even

physical  time  in  different  systems  might  be  different.  According  to  Zwart,  there  is  only

linear time, while, for example, biological time is cyclic.

Definition 9. A property P of R is called an ontological base of time T if changes of P

determine the flow of time T.

That  is,  any  change  of  P  is  implied  by  a  change  of  T  and  any  change  of  T  on  a  unit

element  corresponds  to  an  elementary  change  of  P,  i.e.,  one  unit  adds  to  the  quantity  of

time. An ontological base P of T is denoted by P = Ont (T) and T is called the P-time of the

system R.

In hierarchic systems  on  different  levels  of  hierarchy,  specific  properties  exist,  which

are ontological bases for the corresponding kinds of time.

In general, it is possible to correspond some inner time T of R to any property P of R

taking P as the ontological base of T. But formally, it does not mean that any inner time of

R is of the same kind.

Existence of an ontological base for an inner time is stated in the following principle.

Principle OI 2 (the general ontological principle). For any system R

and any time TR ontological base Ont (TR) exists.

From this principle follows an important consequence: a moment (a unit) of inner time

does not mean a position, in which the system R is in some state, but a point (a unit) at

which a change of R is going on. Only for an external time, we may say that R is in a given

state at some moment.

Nevertheless, a moment (a point, an interval) t of time TR may be corresponded to two

states of R : the source state u and the final state v. As a result, the model of I has the form

of the named set t = (u,ch,v) where ch is the change of R which transforms u into v at the

moment t . Here u=S(t) is the support of t and v = N(t) is the reflector of t. If t is a moment
(a  point)  of  time  TR  ,  then  we  denote  it  by  t  ∈  TR.  So,  the  scale  Sc(TR)  of  the  property

"time,” denoted by the letter T, is a system of named sets, and each interval of the system

Sc(TR) is represented by some named set.

Proposition 2. Representation of intervals by named sets is one-to-one correspondence

if and only if the Sc(T) is a linearly ordered set.

For a physicist (cf., for example, (Einstejn, Lorentz, Weil, and Minkowski, 1923)), time

is something  that is measured by  clocks.  Such  understanding  is  implied  by  the  following

principle.

Principle OI 2c (the constructive ontological principle). TR is a set (a

sequence) of detectable states of some subsystem C of R, which is called the clock for TR .

Studying  and  discussing  physiological  and  biological  times  scientists  introduced  such

term  as  “inner  clocks”  of  an  organism  (Richter,  1968;  Winfree,  1986).  They  relate  these

clocks to circadian rhythms in the brain (Winfree, 1983; Takahashiand Zatz, 1982).

More restricted is the following principle.

Principle OI 2d (the strict ontological principle). Any inner time TR

in a system R is the system of changes of some property P of R.

From  this  principle  (but  not  from  Principle  0I  1),  the  following  property  of  time

follows.

Principle  OI  3  (the reality principle).  Time  TR  in  a  system  R  is  a  real

(binary) property of R, i.e., TR = (U2, it , LT ).

There are different scales of time and of models of time. The most popular scale is the

linear model of time T, in which the scale LT is the space R of all real numbers or its finite

or infinite interval. However, in ancient societies a  cyclic model of time was prevalent in

ancient societies (Kosareva, 1988). As it is written in Ecclesiastes, “That which hath been

is that which shall be.”

There  has  been  also  a  debate  whether  the  scale  LT  of  time  is  continuous  or  discrete.

Although  continuous  time  scale  has  been  always  more  popular,  esoteric  medieval

directions,  as  well  as  some  classical  philosophical  schools  in  India,  preferred  discrete

conception of time (Kosareva, 1988). Now some  theories of quantum  physics also utilize

discrete models of time (Blokhintsev, 1982; Vyaltsev, 1965).

It is interesting to mention that  Eddington suggested  a hypothesis  (cf.  Chernin,  1987)

that time is one-dimensional only in some cosmic neighborhood of the Earth. Time may be

two-dimensional in some very distant domains of the universe.

Any change of a system R is a change of at least one of its properties. So, there is a
system Z = ( Pi; i∈I) of properties Pi such that any change of R is a change of some Pi from

Z. By the theorem 1 there is a property P which is equivalent to the system Z. In particular,

any change of R is a change of P. As a consequence, we have the following result.

Proposition 3. Principle 0I 2a (and thus, Principle 0I 2) follows from Principle OI l.

Principle OI 4 (the dynamic principle). Time T changes only when the base

Ont(T) changes.

In science time connected with changes of the knowledge system is the most important.

It is called the gnostic time and is determined by changes in the knowledge system K of

science. Now there are no means of precise definition of the gnostic time because means of

knowledge measurement and even of its evaluation are not developed enough. But

development of such means will provide a possibility for elaboration of clocks for the

Taking instead of the whole knowledge system of science its subsystem related to some

object field (for example, physics or science of science). We obtain the notion of the field

Principle OI 5 (the exactness principle). If after some changes the value of

Ont(T) is the same as it was before these changes, then the value of time T is also the same

gnostic time.

gnostic time.

as it was before.

Principle OI 6 (the coexactness principle). If after some changes the value

of time T is the same as it was before these changes, then the value of Ont(T) is also the

same as it was before.

Let us consider the external time TeR for a system R. The following principle depicts

connections between internal and external time.

Principle OE 1 (the external ontological principle). There is a

property P of R, which is reduced to TeR and is the ontological base of the internal time TR

in R.

Systems are usually represented in a parametric form. That is, a system R is reflected in

knowledge systems (like theories) by means of a collection of parameters or attributes.

Values of these parameters/attributes give the states of the system R. Any

parametric/attributive representation is a representation by means of properties because

parameters/attributes are some kinds of abstract properties. Moreover, the general theory of

properties makes possible transformation of any symbolic representation of the system R

into an attributive representation (Burgin, 1990a). In it, a collection of properties P(R) is

corresponded to R and values of these properties reflect the states of the system R.

Theorem 1 implies the following result.

Theorem 3. Any parametrical/attributive representation of a system R is equivalent to

a representation of R by means of a single property.

An ontological base Ont(T) may be treated as the state vector (a vector representation)

of R in some state space. It may be formalized in the following manner.

Let T be a time in a system R and VR be a phase space (a state space) for P. We fix

some set Ch ⊆ VR×VR . Elements of set Ch are called changes of states of R.

Definition 10. T =( VR×VR, tm, LT ) where Ont(T) = ( {R}, p, WR ), WR is an image of

a projection pr: VR → WR , and Ch is mapped by pr isomorphically.

Remark 2. In quantum mechanics and in statistical mechanics the set F(VR) is taken

instead of VR for the parametric description of R. That is, a wave function is considered in

quantum mechanics and a density in a phase space in statistical mechanics giving a
description of, a system. In this case T = ( F(VR) ×F(VR ), tm,  LT ).

If LT = {1, 0}, then T is a representation of an operator, which may be denoted by the

same letter T. When this operator satisfies the equality  -i[L, T] = 1 where L is the Liouville

operator, then T is the operator of inner time defined by Prigogine (1980). Thus, the inner

time of Prigogine is also included in the context of the system theory of time.

It is an interesting problem to consider such an operator of inner time for different

fields of science and to compare ft with the ordinary physical time that is used for obtaining

a dynamical picture of science.

Functioning of R is a sequence (in a general case, a partially ordered set) of changes of

states of R. Any change of states is a transition from some state of R to another one.

Then Principle OI 5 states that the system R is in one and the same state in this space if

and only if the corresponding moments of time are also equal.

Proposition 4. The functioning of a system R results at least once in equal states

(relative to all properties of R) if and only if any inner time T of R has a loop.

Let P be a property (or, equivalently, cf. Theorem 1, a system of properties) of R. Then

P = (UR , p, L) where UR is the collection of all states of R, and the scale L is a phase P-

space of R. For example, for a material point x its kinematics space is the ordinary three-

dimensional Euclidean space. An arbitrary phase space of R is denoted by VR .

Definition 11. A property P of R is called complete (with respect to R) if in different

states of R the corresponding values of P are also different.

Definition 12. A property P of R is called dynamically complete if any change of R

determines a change of P.

same system).

Proposition 5. Any complete property P is dynamically complete (with respect to the

Remark 3. The converse is not true. Realty, to any system R it is possible to

correspond a dichotomic property 0 = (U. q, L) with L = (1, 0), and such that 0 changes its

value if it changes its state. Such a property is called a diadic fixer of changes. Any clock is

functioning in a similar way, only the scale of the clock contains more than two elements.

This scale consists of all positions of the hands on the face of the clock.

The considered dichotomic property 0 is dynamically complete but not complete with

respect to R if R has more then two states.

Let H be a set with a binary relation ≤ on it.

Definition 13. An H-trajectory Tr of R is a functional named set Tr = (H, tr, VR ) .

Protocols in networks are examples of H-trajectories. Thus, the system theory of time

provides a theoretical background for many urgent problems of the INTERNET.

Definition 14. An H-trajectory Tr describes functioning of R the relation ≤  represents

transitions of R from one state to another.

Definition 15. An H-trajectory Tr is called T-temporal if for any two different points x

and y from the image of the trajectory mapping tr and x --y imply p(x) and p(y) are

different elements from the scale of the property P = OntR (T).

Proposition 6. For any linear, coherent with T, T-temporal H-trajectory Tr the time T

is linear ordered along Tr.

This reflects one of the most frequent illusions that a sequence of moments of time

determines the order of events. On the contrary, in reality an order of events (of changes)

induces the corresponding order on the scale of time, and thus, determines the direction of

the flow of time.

Reversibility of time is an important property for HCI because if it is possible to reverse

time in interaction, we can correct our mistakes and/or choose a better way of action by

experimentation. Some programs have means for reversibility of time. For example to

reverse time in interaction, they use such operations and commands as “Undo“ or “↺ .”

According to Principle OI 5, this brings the connection time TcR of a system R, which

interacts with the computer, one unit back. Such a system R may be a user or the text

processed by the computer and the program in this case is word processor.

The system theory of time gives some conditions for time reversibility.

Let us assume that Principle 0I 6 is valid.

Proposition 7. Reversibility of inner time T implies iteration of the states of R with

respect to Ont (T).

axioms.

the structure of time.

Remark 3. Properties of reversibility and uniqueness of time depend on ontological

Proposition 8. Uniqueness of all moments of time is equivalent to absence of loops in

Proposition 9. Reversibility of time T implies absence of uniqueness of all moments of

time, i.e. some moments of time T coincide.

Definition 16. A system R is called

a) primitive if it is completely represented by a single one-dimensional property;

b) multidimensional when any property, which completely represents P, is

multidimensional (Burgin, 1990a).

Proposition 10. In a multidimensional system R there are different inner times or,

equivalently, time may be multidimensional, as an abstract property.

Many examples of this situation are demonstrated in (Burgin, 1997) where a complex

natural system is treated as a complex of hierarchical subsystems. Thus, in natural systems

different kinds of time appear. Each kind corresponds to some hierarchical level of the

given system. But, as states Proposition 10, different times may exist even on one

hierarchical level. Relativity theory gives examples for such situations (Einstejn, Lorentz,

Weil, and Minkowski, 1923). If we consider a physical system R consisting of two

subsystems which are moving with a very big velocity in opposite directions.

There is a hypothesis (Winfree, 1986) that an individual has meny different inner

clocks that induce different times in subsystems of the organism.

Moreover, if P = (U, p, L) is a property of a system R, then the following result is valid.

Theorem 4. It is possible to determine some time TP of R for which P = Ont (TP).
Proof To do this, let us take some set E for which a one-to-one correspondence k: L →

E exists. Then TP = (U, tP, E) where tP(u) = k(p(u)). A direct test of principles 012 - 014 and

definitions demonstrates that P = Ont (TP). Theorem is proved.

Any such time T, is called an inner attributive time of R. Existence of different kinds of

time in a single system R makes possible to compare these kinds, and in such a way to

explicate regularities of the functioning of R.

 CONCLUSION

An important problem of time coordination arises from existence of distinct time scales

in different systems. For a system R to interact properly with another system Q, it is

necessary to have a time coordination function tCRQ . This function maps homomorphically

the time TQ in the system Q into the time TR in the system R. Homomorphically means that

tCRQ preserves some chosen structures (at least, the partial order) in the scale of TQ.

The special relativity theory is based on time coordination in physical systems that are

moving relative to each other (Einstejn, Lorentz, Weil, and Minkowski, 1923).

An interesting  and  at  the  same  time  important  example  of  time  coordination  gives  us

people’s estimation of the speed  of  a  moving vehicle.  To  estimate  speed, a  person has to

coordinate  her/his  inner  time  with  time  of  the  environment  in  which  the  vehicle  moves.

Such coordination is achieved by assessing changes in the environment.

Not in all cases, such assessment is correct. For example, scientists observed that when

a person is driving in a fog, she or he perceives that the speed of her/his car is essentially

less than the real speed. However, without fog the same people give correct estimations of

the speed.

The general theory of time suggests an explanation to this phenomenon:

While driving in the fog, a person can see much less changes of the environment than in a

situation when the same person is driving in a good weather. These changes define the time

sensation for this person. According to the general theory of time, less number of changes

implies slower movement of time in the  environment.  Inner  time  of  this  person  stays  the

same and she/he projects this time on the environment. In other words, the person assumes

that the same amount of changes always corresponds to the same time interval. So, when

driving in the fog, it seems that the vehicle, which exists and moves in this external time,

It is important to find properties of time coordination for different systems. It possible

to find some results in this direction related to computers in (Burgin, Karplus, and Liu,

moves slower.

2001).

To conclude, it is necessary to emphasize that the problem of time is a scientific and not

a purely logic-linguistic problem, as think some researchers in this area. Only synthesis of

mathematical modeling, logical reasoning, and scientific observation and experimentation

can explicate the true meaning of time and give an efficient and adequate theory of time.

The correct question is not “What time is?” but “What is the structure, properties and

functions of time?” Science, for example does not asks what matter is but investigates how

physical reality is organized.

1984, pp. 123-154

(in Russian)

(in Russian)

REFERENCES

1.  Aigner, M. Combinatorial Theory, Springer-Verlag, New York/heidelberg/Berlin, 1979

2.  Allen, J.F.  Towards a  general theory of  action and  time. Artificial Intelligence,  v.  23,

3.  Artemov, V.A. Social Time, Nauka, Novosibirsk, 1987  (in Russian)

4.  Blokhintsev, D.I. Space and Time in the Microworld, Nauka, Moscow, 1982

5.  Bragina N.N., Dobrohotova T.A. Functional Asymmetries of People, Moscow, 1988

6.  Burgin, M. Functor Semantics in the Categories of Named Sets, in Rationality,

Reasoning, Communication, Kiev, 1987, pp. 183-198 (in Russian)

7.  Burgin, M. Theory of Named Sets as a Foundational Basis for Mathematics, in

Structures in Mathematical Theories, San Sebastian, 1990. P. 417-420

8.  Burgin, M. S. Abstract Theory of Properties and Sociological Scaling, in “Expert

Evaluation in Sociological Studies,”  Kiev, 1990a, pp. 243-264       (in Russian)

9.  Burgin, M. S. A System Approach to the Concept of Time, Philosophical and

Sociological Thought. - 1992. – No. 8 (in Russian and Ukrainian).

10. Burgin M. Time As a Factor of Science Development, Science and Science of Science,

1997, No. 1/2, pp. 45-59

11. Burgin M. Fundamental Structures of  Knowledge and Information: Achieving an

Absolute,           Kiev, 1997a                      (in Russian)

12. Burgin, M., Karplus, W., and Liu, D. The Problem of Time Scales in Computer

Visualization, in “Computational Science”, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, v.

2074, part II, 2001, pp.728-737

13. Chernin, A.D. Physics of Time, Nauka, Moscow, 1987

14.   Einstejn, A., Lorentz, H.A., Weil, H., and Minkowski, H. The Principle of Relativity,

Dover, 1923

53-56, April 1996.

15. Fields, B., Wright, P., and Harrison, M. Time, tasks and errors. SIGCHI Bulletin, 28, 2,

16. Golovaha, E.I. and Kronik, A.A. The Psychological Time of A Person, Kiev, 1984

17. Hartson,  H.R.  and  Gary,  P.D.  Temporal  aspects  of  tasks  in  the  user  action  notation,

Human-Computer Interaction, v. 7, 1992, pp. 1-45

18. Hawking, S.W. A Brief History of Time. Toronto, Bantam, 1988.

19. Heidegger, M. Zeit und Sein, in Zur Sache des Denkens, Max Niemeyer, Tübingen,

1969

1988     (in Russian)

Vesley P.C.

New York, 1980

pp. 9-12 (in Russian)

Francisco, 1980.

20. Kosareva, L.M. Evolution of the Conception of Time in Science, INION, Moscow,

21. Knuth, D.E.  The Art of Computer  Programming, v. 2, 1969; v.3, 1973, Addison-

22. Le Temps et la Pensee Physique Contemporaine, Dunod, Paris, 1968

23. Levich, A.P. Metabolic Time of Natural Systems, Systems Research, 1988, Moscow,

1989, pp. 304-325 (in Russian)

24. Parks, D.N., Thrift, N.J. Times, Spaces and Places: a Chronogeographical Perspective,

25. Podoroga V.A. A Philosophical Work as an Event, Voprosy Philosophii,1993, No. 3,

26. Priestley, J.B. Man and Time, A Laurel Edition, New York, 1968

27. Prigogine, I.  From being to Becoming: Time and Complexity in Physical Systems, San

28. Richter, C.P. Inherent 24-hour and Lunar Clocks of a Primate – The Squirrel Monkey,

Communications in Behavioral Biology, v.1, 1968, pp. 305-332

29. Stanley, R.P. Enumerative Combinatorics, Wadsworth&Brooks, Monterey, California,

30. Sutton, P. and Ratey, J.J. Beyond the Project: It’s About Time, in Neuroscience of the

Mind on the Centennial of Freud’s Project for Scientific Psychology, Annals of the New

York Academy of Sciences, v. 843, 1998, pp. 179-184

31. Takahashi, J. and Zatz, M. Regulation of Circadian Rhythmicity, Science, v. 217, 1982,

1986

pp. 1104-1110

32. Vyaltsev, A.N. A Discrete Space-Time, Nauka, Moscow, 1965    (in Russian)

33. Wiener, N.  Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in the Animal and the

Machine, 2nd revised and enlarged edition, New York and London: MIT Press and

34. Winfree, A.T. Human Body Clocks and the Timing of Sleep, Nature, v. 297, 1982, pp.

Wiley, New York, London, 1961

23-27

35. Winfree, A.T. The Impact of Circadian Clock on the Timing of Human Sleep,

American Journal of Physiology, v. 245,1983, pp. R497-R504

36. Winfree, A.T. The Timing of Biological Clocks, Scientific American Library, New

37. Zadeh, L.A. Fuzzy Sets as a Basis for a Theory of Possibility, Fuzzy Sets and Systems,

York, 1986

v. 1, 1978, pp. 3-28

38. Zwart P.J. About Time, Amsterdam, 1976

