Ordinary Words with Odd Meanings: The Vocabulary of Introductory Physics and 
its Implications to Learning Physics. 
 
Salomon F. Itza-Ortiz, N. Sanjay Rebello and Dean Zollman 
sitza, srebello, dzollman @phys.ksu.edu 
Kansas State University, Department of Physics, Physics Education Research Group. 
 Manhattan KS, 66506 
 
Manuel Rodriguez-Achach 
achach@mda.cinvestav.mx 
Universidad Autonoma de Yucatan, Fac. de Ingenieria, Ave. Industrias nocontaminantes, 
A.P. 150 Cordemex, Yucatan, Mexico, C.P. 97310 
 

The everyday meaning and usage of several words can differ significantly from their 
meaning and use in physics. Examining these differences may shed some light on 
students’ physics learning difficulties. We surveyed students in a conceptual physics 
course on their use of some words (e.g., force, work) in everyday language, and 
compared this with the use of these words in physics. Before the topics were introduced 
in class, students were asked to construct at least three complete sentences that use each 
of these words. Later, after the topics had been introduced in class, students were asked to 
explain how their use of these words were similar or different from the ways these words 
are used in physics. We will present an analysis of our results, and share our insights 
about the implications for student learning.  
 
PACS: 01.40R, 01.55, 01.90 
 

I. Introduction 

 
In  science  new  words  might  be  “invented”  to  name  or  describe  new  processes, 
discoveries or inventions. However, for the most part, the scientific vocabulary is formed 
from words we use throughout our lives in everyday language.  When we start studying 
science is when we learn new meanings of words we had used before. Sometimes those 
new meanings  might contradict everyday meanings, or seem counterintuitive. We often 
learn  words  in  association  with  objects  and  situations1.    Due  to  these  associations  that 
students  bring  to  class,  they  may  not  interpret  the  physics  meaning  correctly.    This 
misinterpretation of language leads students to confusion that is sometimes classified as 
misconceptions2-6. Thus it is important that students understand the language of physics.  
Research about the semantics used in physics textbooks7-9 and the meaning of words has 
been  done10-12.  The problem seems to go beyond semantics  8.  The linguistic relativity 
hypothesis,  sometimes  referred  as  the  Sapir-Whorf  hypothesis  1  says  that  “we  see  and 
hear and otherwise experience very largely as we do because the language habits of our 
community predispose certain choices of interpretation.”  An upshot of this hypothesis is 
that  language  may  not  determine  thought,  but  it  certainly  may  influence  thought  1.  We 
have to make students conscious of the fact that the words may remain the same, but their 
meanings  are  not  longer  metaphorical  (everyday  meaning)  but  rather  they  have  a 
sophisticated technical meaning (physics meaning). That is, we need to change the way 

 

1 

students  may  “think”  about  words.  In  spite  of  this  close  relationship  between  language 
and thought, most research on the semantics used in physics textbooks7-9 and the meaning 
of  words10-12  has  not  discussed  this  relationship  closely.    This  study  will  address  that 
relationship. 
 

In this paper we present results of research done at Kansas State University and at the 
Universidad Autonoma de Yucatan in Mexico.  We provide insights on the implications 
of the use of everyday language in the learning of physics concepts.  Our main question 
is:  Do  the  differences  in  the  use  of  words  between  everyday  life  and  physics  inhibit 
learning  of  physics?    We  focus  on  three  words  which  are  common  in  any  introductory 
physics  course:  “force”,  “momentum”  and  “impulse”.    The  following  sections  describe 
our research goals, methodology and results. At the end we provide some suggestions to 
help students incorporate the physics meaning of these words into their vocabulary. 
 
 

II. Research Goals and Methodology 

Our goal was to study how students perceive the similarities and differences between 
the  everyday  meanings  and  physics  meanings  of  the  words  “force”,  “momentum”  and 
“impulse”.  We were also interested in studying whether these perceived differences and 
similarities affect the learning of those concepts in physics.  A major portion of the data 
was  collected  at  Kansas  State  University.    Our  research  subjects  were  154  students 
enrolled in “The Physical World I” course taken by non-science majors, mostly juniors, 
who have a wide variety of majors.  “Conceptual Physics” by Paul Hewitt is the text for 
the course.  About 57% of the students had previously taken at least one physics course.  
We also performed part of our study in a foreign language. Through a collaborator at the 
Universidad  Autonoma  de  Yucatan  in  Mexico  we  carried  out  this  component  of  our 
research with native Spanish speakers.  One of our surveys about the word “force” was 
translated to Spanish and applied to 14 first year engineering students.  We would like to 
know  if  in  Spanish,  as  in  English,  the  word  “force”  is  frequently  used  in  everyday 
language as a verb 11,12. 

 
Our research at Kansas State consisted of  in three phases: (1) pre-survey, (2) post-
survey, and (3) interview.  In the pre-survey we asked students to make up three different 
sentences  using  the  word  “force”  or  variant  from  it.    The  term  “force”  had  not  been 
introduced in class at the time of the pre-survey.  Thus, the pre-survey told us how the 
students use the word in their everyday vocabulary.  We sorted out the sentences into four 
classifications according to the usage of the word: Verb Animate (VA), when the word 
force is used as a verb and relates to a subject (person or animal); Verb Inanimate (VI) 
when the word force is used as a verb and relates to an inanimate object; Noun (N) when 
the word force is used as a noun; and Adjective or Adverb (A) when the corresponding 
variant of the word force is used as an adjective or adverb.  The most frequently written 
sentences of each type are shown in Table I.  The post-survey was administered after the 
term “force” was introduced in class.  For this survey, we chose four sentences from the 
list and presented them to the students.  We asked students to explain the similarities and 
dissimilarities between the word “force” as it was used in the given sentence, and as used 

 

 

2 

in  physics.    The  results  from  this  second  survey  were  classified  into  three  categories: 
Category 1 includes students who can explain how the word “force” as used in each of 
the  sentences,  is  both  similar  and  dissimilar  to  the  word  “force”  as  used  in  physics; 
Category 2 includes students who are able to describe these similarities and differences 
for only a few of the given sentences; and Category 3 includes students whose responses 
indicate  they  cannot  explain  these  similarities  and  differences  for  any  of  the  given 
sentences.  The  categorization  of  students’  sentences  was  validated  by  an  independent 
researcher,  and  the  validity  of  the  categorization  was  found  to  be  greater  than  80%.  
Immediately  after  the  second  survey  the  instructor  administered  a  scheduled  class  test 
that evaluated course material that included a discussion of force and other topics.  For 
our  analysis,  we  focused  on  the  score  for  the  questions  relevant  only  to  force.    This 
second  survey  was  translated  to  Spanish  and  applied  to  engineering  students  at 
Universidad  Autonoma  de  Yucatan  in  Mexico.  To  complement  our  research  we  also 
interviewed  14  students  at  the  end  of  the  course  at  Kansas  State  University.    The 
interview  protocol  was  similar  to  the  procedure  followed  on  the  written  surveys.    Each 
student  was  first  asked  to  write  a  sentence  using  the  word  “force”,  then  she  or  he  was 
asked to explain how the meaning of the word “force” as used in their sentence is similar 
and  dissimilar  to  the  word  as  used  in  physics.    Later  they  were  presented  with  a  few 
selected sentences containing the word “force” and asked the same questions. 
 

We  followed  an  identical  survey  protocol  (all  three  stages),  for  the  words 
“momentum” and “impulse.” For the results from the second survey for these words, we 
had only two classifications, Noun (N) and Adjective (A).  The most frequently written 
sentences of each type are shown in Table II.  The interviews on these words followed 
the same protocol as the interview about the word “force.” 
 

III. Results and Discussion 

A.  The word force 
 
59%  of  sentences  on  the  pre-survey  included  the  word  “force”  as  a  verb.    This 
observation is consistent with the fact that the word “force” is most often used as a verb 
in everyday language 11,12.  36% of the students in the second survey were in categories 1 
and  2,  i.e.  they  described  the  similarities  and  differences  between  the  meaning  of  the 
word “force” in the given sentences and its physics meaning. The remaining 64% of the 
students, category 3, are apparently not able to differentiate between the everyday and the 
physics meaning of the word force.  Fig. 1 shows the ogive curves for categories 1, 2 and 
3  on  the  second  survey  vs.  the  students’  test  scores.  The  score  is  based  only  on  the 
questions that pertain to the concept of force.  We see that the ogive for category 1 is the 
lowest, the ogive for category 2 is in the middle and the ogive for category 3 is at the top.  
Thus, Fig. 1 shows that students who can identify and explain the physics meaning of the 
word “force” obtain higher test scores, thereby establishing a link between the linguistic 
ability of students to discern various meanings of the word “force” and their conceptual 
understanding  of  the  concept  of  force,  as  measured  by  the  test.    To  further  probe  our 
results we interviewed 14 students, representatives from each of the three categories.  In 
the  interviews  the  students  first  wrote  two  sentences  using  the  word  “force”  (or  its 
derivative).  They were asked to think aloud about their sentences and describe whether 

 

3 

the ways in which they had used the word “force” were similar or different from the ways 
in which they were used it in everyday life.  All students were able to identify if the way 
they are using the word “force” had an everyday or a physics meaning.  When asked why 
the  word  “force”  in  a  particular  sentence  had  a  physics  meaning  they  responded  by 
stating  that  the  word  relates  to  pushing,  pulling  or  motion.    When  asked  why  the  word 
“force” in their sentence was consistent with its everyday meaning, they said it has to do 
with mental power, power, following rules, not in a physical sense.  Their explanation for 
the physics meaning is consistent with what they were taught in class: that force is “any 
influence that tends to accelerate an object; a push or a pull”.  They also were taught that 
force  equals  mass  times  acceleration.  Only  2  out  of  the  14  students  were  able  to  relate 
force to the mass of the object and/or its acceleration.  In the second part of the interview 
the  students  were  given  four  sentences  and  again  asked  to  identify  the  meaning  of  the 
word  “force”  in  each  sentence.    Again,  all  students  were  able  to  identify  whether  the 
meaning corresponded to everyday life or to physics because they focused on the context 
of the sentence.  However, almost all students were unable to explain how the meaning of 
the word is similar or dissimilar to its meaning in physics.  Only the two students who 
identified  force  with  mass  and/or  acceleration  were  able  to  explain  the  similarities  and 
differences of the meaning of “force” in the sentence with its meaning in physics.  Thus, 
all  students  were  able  to  explain  whether  the  word  “force”  in  the  sentences  has  an 
everyday  or  a  physics  meaning,  but  only  those  who  identified  the  physical  variables 
associated  with  force  were  able  to  explain  how  the  word  “force”  in  the  sentence  was 
similar  and  dissimilar  to  its  use  in  physics.    For  example  when  a  student  was  asked  to 
explain the meaning of the word force in physics he/she said “Force is weight, force of a 
book onto a table; force of a person while pushing a chair across the room.”  When this 
same student was asked to explain the meaning of the word force in the sentence “The 
bulldozer  forced  the  rock  into  the  ditch,”  he/she  said,  “the  bulldozer  has  direct  contact 
onto    [sic]    the  rock,  pushes  the  rock.”  He/She  identified  force  as  a  push,  from  the 
definition  of  force.    Another  student  stated  that,  “Force  causes  movement,  there  are 
forces everywhere, like friction.  Force is mass times acceleration.”  When this student 
was asked to explain the meaning of the word force in the bulldozer sentence he/she said 
“the  bulldozer  moves  the  rock  into  place,  there  is  mass  and  acceleration.”    This  last 
student is using the physical variables involved in force to explain why the word force in 
the sentence has a physics meaning.  He/She is attempting to assimilate the meaning of 
the word.  Thus, those students that relate the word to physical variables are more likely 
to explain the meaning of the word in physics. 
 

We obtained some interesting results from our surveys of undergraduates in Mexico.  
We  found  that  Spanish-speaking  students  in  Mexico  are  very  likely  to  use  the  word 
“fuerza”  (force)  as  a  synonym  for  “poder”  (power)  in  the  sense  of  “ability  to  act  or  to 
produce an effect”, i.e. they use the word “force” as a verb (“forzar”), very similar to the 
way  English-speaking  students  at  Kansas  State  responded  to  the  same  survey.    We 
believe  that  our  results  with  Spanish-speaking  students  are  similar  to  our  results  with 
English-speaking students, because the word “force” as noun, “fuerza” is very similar to 
the word force as a verb, “forzar”; similar to the way the word “force” in English is used 
both as a noun and as a verb.  Then it is possible that in Italian (Forza, Per forzare) we 
would have found the same result.  Applying the survey to native speakers of a language 

 

4 

where  the  noun  and  the  verb  forms  of  the  word  “force”  are  different  we  would  expect 
different results.  For example in German “kraft” is force as a noun, and “erzwingen” is 
force as a verb. The Sapir-Whorf hypothesis  1 could be very well applied here; it is the 
every day language (“force” as a verb) that seems to be more influential on how beginner 
physics students explain the word force in a sentence. 
 
 

B.  The words momentum and impulse 

 
Momentum  and  impulse  were  discussed  in  class,  after  the  topic  of  force.    In  our 
analysis we considered both words together because their physics meanings and usages 
are  closely  related.    80%  of  the  sentences  written  by  the  students  used  the  words 
“momentum” and “impulse” as a noun in the pre-survey.  Again, this is consistent with 
the most common usage of these words in everyday language.  36% of the students from 
categories  1  and  2  of  the  (second)  post-survey  were  able  to  differentiate  between  the 
everyday and the physics meaning of the words and explain the physics meaning. Fig. 2 
shows the ogive curves for categories 1, 2 and 3 on the second survey vs. the students’ 
test  scores  on  questions  pertaining  to  momentum  or  impulse.    Again,  the  ogive  for 
category  1  is  the  lowest  one;  the  ogive  for  category  2  is  in  the  middle  and  finally  the 
ogive for category 3 is at the top.  Thus, students in category 1 score higher on the test 
than  students  in  categories  2  and  3.    The  results  are  very  similar  to  our  results  for  the 
word “force,” therefore reinforcing the link between the linguistic ability of students to 
discern  various  meaning  of  a  word  and  their  conceptual  understanding  of  the  concept 
described by the word.  In the interviews we asked students to write two sentences each 
using the word “momentum” and “impulse.”  12 students interpreted the meaning of the 
word “momentum” in the physics context.  However, only 6 of them related momentum 
to mass and or velocity.  When asked to explain momentum in physics, typical answers 
included term such as the mass of the object, speed, action, motion, build up of energy.  
When  relating  to  an  everyday  meaning,  the  students  said  momentum  has  to  do  with 
feelings, mental action, not physical motion. It is interesting to note that momentum has a 
Latin  root  which  means  “movement”,  then  this  word  by  itself  relates  to  motion.  The 
everyday meaning of the term is quite similar its physics meaning.  It appears that due to 
this similarity, students are more likely to explain the physics meaning of the term.  For 
instance,  when  asked  to  explain  the  meaning  of  the  term  momentum,  one  student  said, 
“When someone is running, he has mass and speed, he is creating momentum.”  Another 
said, “Momentum in physics is, … as something falls speed up.  In a slope gains speed, 
gains momentum.” 

 
For the word “impulse” only one of the students (quoted below) seems to be able to 
explain the meaning of the term impulse as used in physics. The explanations of all of the 
other students corresponded to the everyday meaning of the term.  They said impulse has 
to do with instant action, spontaneity, something you do without thinking about it.  The 
dictionary meaning of the word impulse is a sudden spontaneous inclination or incitement 
to  some  usually  unpremeditated  action.  This  word  is  very  well  embedded  in  students’ 
minds and it is difficult for them to relate it to physics.  In fact the physics meaning of the 
term, product of the force acting and the time duration for which it acts, is quite different 

 

5 

from the everyday meaning.  It appears that this difference makes it difficult for students 
to understand its physics meaning.  From the two students quoted above, who seemed to 
have the scientifically accepted notion about momentum, one of them did not appear to 
have  the  correct  ideas  about  impulse  but  the  other  did.    When  asked  to  explain  the 
meaning of the term impulse, the first student said, “Impulse is something involuntarily, it 
just happens”.  The second student said, “impulse is a force, a push, … not sure.” Both 
students try explaining momentum with examples and relate it to motion.  In the case of 
impulse, the first student describes the everyday meaning, but the second student, albeit 
doubtfully,  appears  to  relate  impulse  to  force.    This  is  the  only  student  who  does  not 
relate impulse to instantaneous actions. Thus the word “momentum” seems more intuitive 
to the students, they might not define it as velocity times mass but they always relate it to 
motion.  The  word  “impulse”  is  not  as  intuitive  to  the  students,  because  its  everyday 
meaning  is  quite  different  from  its  meaning  in  physics.  Again  the  Sapir-Whorf 
hypothesis1 seems to be applicable here since it is the everyday meaning of these words is 
the most influential in students thoughts. 

 

IV Impact on Instruction 

One way the acquisition of knowledge can be conceptualized is through the idea that 
students acquire different understandings of relevant concepts; these coexist and compete 
with previous, perhaps informal understandings13.  We propose the idea that comparing 
everyday and physics meanings of words will help students to assimilate the meaning of 
the  word  in  physics.    When  making  these  comparisons  the  student  can  relate  to  the 
physical variables involved in the physics term, thus this could help students to establish 
connections  between  words  and  to  build  up  their  “physics  vocabulary”.    We  do  not 
believe  the  physics  meaning  of  words  will  take  the  place  of  the  everyday  meaning  but 
rather  they  would  always  coexist.    Students  can  be  asked  to  compare  the  physics  and 
everyday meanings of the words through writing essays in different contexts14.  Many of 
the students in conceptual physics classes, such as humanities majors, have strong writing 
ability,  and  may  find  such  writing  tasks  to  be  quite  enjoyable.    Efforts  to  inculcate 
superior writing skills across the curriculum have been used in several high schools and 
colleges.    The  writing  exercises  described  above  may  have  a  unique  place  in  such  a 
curriculum. 
 

V Conclusions 

We  surveyed  a  physics  class  with  154  non-science  majors  to  study  students’ 
perceptions  of  the  similarities  between  the  everyday  and  physics  meanings  of  three 
commonly used words.  Our findings show that students who can differentiate between 
the everyday and physics meanings of the words, and can explain the physics meaning, 
are more likely to obtain higher test scores.  From interviews we conjecture that students 
who  are  able  to  identify  or  remember  physical  variables  related  to  the  word  are  more 
likely to explain its physics meaning.  We translated and administered one of the surveys 
on the word “force” to Spanish-speaking undergraduates in Mexico.  Our results indicate 
that even in other languages where the word “force” can be used as a verb or as a noun, 
students are more likely to use it in an everyday connotation.  For the other two words 
included in our study, “momentum” and “impulse,” we found that the word “momentum” 

 

 

 

6 

seems more intuitive to the students, they always relate it to motion.  The word impulse is 
not as intuitive to the students; its everyday meaning is quite different from its meaning 
in physics.  Our findings are consistent with the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis. Our results also 
indicate that physics instructors should be more cognizant of the use of language and the 
alternative  meanings  of  physics  terminology  that  their  students  bring  with  them  to  the 
class.  We also propose that instructors can devise special writing assignments that would 
enable students to overcome this linguistic barrier in learning physics. 

 

7 

Acknowledgments 

 
Work in part supported by NSF grant # REC-0087788.  We thank Prof. E. Wright for his 
valuable comments, and Dr. Seunghee Lee for the validation of the results from the 
surveys. 

References 
 
1.  R.J. Sternberg and  T. Ben-Zeer, Complex Cognition, The Psychology of Human 

Thought, (Oxford University Press, New York : 2001) 

 
2.  Arnold B. Arons, A Guide to Introductory Physics Teaching, (John Wiley & Sons, 

New York, 1990) 

3.  D. Clerk and M. Rutherford, “Language as a confounding variable in the 
diagnosis of misconceptions,” Int. J. Sci. Educ. 22, 703 (July 2000). 

4.  Edward F. Redish, “Implications of cognitive studies for teaching physics,” Am. J. 

Phys. 62, 796 (September 1994). 

5.  David Palmer, “The effect of context on students’ reasoning about forces,” Int. J. 

Sci. Educ. 19, 681 (June 1997). 

6.  Nicole M. Gillespie, Andrea A diSessa and Jennifer Sterly, “ The meaning of 
force: investigating students’ changing understanding,” Announcer, 31, 102 
(Winter 2001). 

7.  H. Thomas Williams, “Semantics in teaching introductory physics,” Am. J. Phys. 

67, 670 (August 1999). 

8.  Jerold S. Touger, “The role of language in learning physics: beyond semantics,” 

Am. J. Phys. 68, 306 (April 2000). 

9.  H.T. Williams, “Words about words,” Am. J. Phys. 68, 307 (April 2000). 

10. Jerold S. Touger, “When words fail us,” Phys. Teach. 29, 90 ( Feb 1991). 

11. Daniel F. Styer, “The word force,” Am. J. Phys. 69, 631 (June 2000). 

12. Christina Hart, “If the Sun burns you is that a force? Some definitional 

prerequisites for understanding Newton’s laws,” Phys. Educ. 37, 234 (May 2002). 

13. David P. Maloney, “Conceptual competition in physics learning,” Int. J. Sci. 

Educ. 15, 283 (March 1993). 

14. James H. McGuire, private communication, Web site 

http://www.phy.tulane.edu/~mcguire/ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

 

 

 

 

 

Figures  and Tables  

Figure 1 

Category 1

Category 2

Category 3

 
r
e
p
 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C

y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c

100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

 
r
e
p
 
e
g
n
a
t
e
c
r
e
p
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C

y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c

100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

0

20

40

60

80

100

Score (Force)

 
 
 
 
Figure 2 

Category 1

Category 2

Category 3

0

20

40

60

80

100

Score(momentum-impulse)

 

 

 

9 

 

 
 

 

Table I 
 

Classification 
Verb Animate 
 

Sentence 
“I forced the box into the closet” 
“Jim was forcing the nut on the bold” 

Verb Inanimate  “I forced myself to go to class everyday” 
“My parents forced me to go to college” 
“The force on the ball made it move” 
“The bomb exploded with great force” 
“I was hit by the force of the 18 wheeler” 
“She used a very forceful tone of voice” 

 
Noun 
 
 
Adjective 

 
 
Table II 
 

Sentence 

Classification 
Noun 

 

 

 
 
 
 
Adjective 

“After their touchdown, the other team had the  
momentum” 
“The football player had a lot of momentum when he  
tackled his opponent” 
“Our team gained momentum in the game after  
intercepting the ball” 
“As the car rolled down the hill it gained momentum” 
“An impulse made her change her mind” 
“My first impulse was to kick him” 
“In time of crisis we act on our impulses” 
“My sister is an impulsive shopper” 
 

10 

Captions 
 

 
Figure  1:  Ogive  for  students’  test  scores  on  the  word  “force.”    At  the  80th  percentile 
students in Category 1 have scores below 91, Category 2 score 89 and Category 3 score 
84.  Thus students who can identify and explain the physics meaning of the word “force” 
(Category 1) obtain higher test scores. 
 
Figure 2: Ogive for students’ test scores on the words “momentum” and “impulse.”  At 
the 80th percentile students in Category 1 have scores below 90, Category 2 score 80 and 
Category 3 score 60.  Thus students who can identify and explain the physics meaning of 
the words “momentum” and “impulse” (Category 1) obtain higher test scores. 
 
Table I: Classification of sentences collected from students with the word “force” or a 
derivative from it. The students are more likely to use force as a verb. 
 
Table II: Classification of sentences collected from students with the words “momentum” 
and “impulse.”  The students use these words only as nouns or adjectives. 
 

 

11 

