Making Sense of How Students
Make Sense of Mechanical Waves
Michael C. Wittmann, Richard N. Steinberg, Edward F. Redish
Dept. of Physics, University of Maryland, College Park 20742-4111

In our classroom experiences as teachers, we are

often baffled when students correctly answer ques-
tions in one setting and then can’t answer seemingly
identical questions in another.  Obviously, their un-
derstanding of the material is not as strong as we
would like.  But are we asking the relevant questions
when we come to this conclusion?  Do the students
fundamentally not know the material?  Do they
know it but not recognize appropriate circumstances
in which to use it?  And how should our instruction
and evaluation of their knowledge depend on the an-
swers to these questions?

We have begun to address these questions at the
University of Maryland using the methods and tools
of physics education research.1  Our approach com-
bines the study of student difficulties with physics
with the design of instructional materials and envi-
ronments that help students improve their under-
standing.  This approach can lead to educational en-
vironments that help students overcome their diffi-
culties.2   

We report here on our study of student under-

standing of the physics of mechanical waves.  Under-
standing wave physics is important for making sense
of physical optics, quantum mechanics, and electro-
magnetic radiation.  Previous research has shown that
students have fundamental difficulties with some of
the basic concepts of wave physics.1
Sense Making and Mental Models

To describe and understand our observations of

student reasoning we need a framework and a lan-
guage.  In the University of Maryland Physics Educa-
tion Research Group, we use the idea of mental mod-
els borrowed from the cognitive science and learning
theory literature in order to interpret how students
make sense of physics.3,4  We use the term to mean
the patterns of association and physical analogies
that guide spontaneous responses and reasoning in
unfamiliar situations.  Mental models are less specific
and less rigorous than physical models and are often
not explicitly verbalized or consciously used.

For example, we have found that many students

answering questions dealing with the propagation
speed and superposition of mechanical waves appear
to use a guiding analogy of waves that is reasonably

complete and coherent, but at odds with physical
reality.  We call this the Particle Pulses Mental
Model.  We observe that many students do not think
of the forces and interactions internal to a mechani-
cal waves system as we do in the physical model of
waves when we derive the wave equation or discuss
its physical meaning.  Instead, many students mis-
takenly use analogies with Newtonian particle me-
chanics and ideas of force, energy, and collisions be-
tween objects to describe the physics of waves.
These analogies play an important role in how stu-
dents come to an understanding of wave physics and
how we test and probe their understanding in our
classrooms.

Research Context and Methods

Our investigations were done in the second se-
mester of a three-semester university physics course
at the University of Maryland.  The course includes
three hours of lecture a week, a traditional labora-
tory, and a small group discussion.  Discussion sec-
tions are either traditional TA-led recitations or tu-
torials, a group-learning method developed by the
Physics Education Group at the University of
Washington.5

We use a variety of methods to investigate stu-
dent understanding of physics.  The work in this pa-
per is part of an iterative cycle of research, curricu-
lum development, delivery, and evaluation.  We do
our evaluation using a variety of probes, including
videotaped individual demonstration interviews, pre-
tests (short, ungraded quizzes that accompany tutori-
als), examination questions, and specially designed
diagnostic tests.  In interviews, individual students
answer questions about a simple physical problem in
a context where the researcher has the opportunity
to probe their responses more deeply.  Students who
volunteer for these interviews are typically doing
well in the class.

Student Difficulties with
Mechanical Waves

When beginning their study of waves, students
need to learn two critical physical concepts of the

Published in The Physics Teacher, January 1999

p.1

small amplitude model of mechanical waves in a non-
dispersive, deformable medium:

•  Wave propagation is a medium’s response
to a disturbance.  In the chosen model, the
propagation characteristics depend only on
the medium and not on the nature of the
disturbance.

•  Wave superposition occurs by adding indi-
vidual displacements point by point at any
given time.

Our observations indicate that many students
have difficulties with both of these ideas, and their
difficulties can often be described by a single mental
model.

Wave Propagation

Figure 1 shows a question about wave propaga-
tion speed in two formats: a free response question,
and a multiple-choice, multiple-response (MCMR)
question. The distractors in the MCMR question are
based on answers students commonly give to free re-
sponse and interview questions.  Research-based dis-
tractors in multiple-choice problems have been used
previously, but research has shown that this may only
probe one aspect of student thinking.6  In order to

get a richer response, we give both free response and
MCMR questions.  In both formats, we ask students
to explain their reasoning.  We consider responses
correct that state that only the medium properties
(tension and string mass density) will affect the
speed (answers ‘e’ and ‘g’ in the MCMR question).
After students had all instruction on waves in

the Spring-1996 and Spring-1997 semesters, we
asked the free response question in an interview set-
ting.

We find that students use ideas of force and en-

ergy incorrectly in their reasoning.  Some students
use reasoning based on the force exerted by the hand
to create the pulse.  One student stated, “You flick
[your hand] harder...you put a greater force in your
hand, so it goes faster.”  Some students state that
creating a wave with a larger amplitude takes greater
force and thus the wave will move faster.  Others
state that shaking your hand harder (in interviews,
this was usually accompanied by a quick jerk of the
hand) will “put more force in the wave.”  Another
student used reasoning based on energy to describe
the effect of a change in hand motion.  He stated,
“We could make the initial pulse fast, if you flick
[your hand], you flick it faster... It would put more

Version 1: Free-Response format:  A taut string is
attached to a distant wall.  A pulse moving on the
string towards the wall reaches the wall in time t0 (see
diagram).  How would you decrease the time it takes
for the pulse to reach the wall?  Explain your
reasoning.

Version 2:  Multiple-Choice, Multiple-Response (MCMR) format:
A taut string is attached to a distant wall.  A demonstrator moves her hand to create a
pulse traveling toward the wall (see diagram).  The demonstrator wants to produce a pulse
that takes a longer time to reach the wall.  Which of the actions a k taken by itself will
produce this result?  More than one answer may be correct.  If so, give them all.  Explain
your reasoning.
a. Move her hand more quickly (but still only up and down once by the same amount).
b. Move her hand more slowly (but still only up and down once by the same amount).
c. Move her hand a larger distance but up and down in the same amount of time.
d. Move her hand a smaller distance but up and down in the same amount of time.
e. Use a heavier string of the same length, under the same tension
f. Use a lighter string of the same length, under the same tension
g. Use a string of the same density, but decrease the tension.
h. Use a string of the same density, but increase the tension.
i. Put more force into the wave.
j. Put less force into the wave.
k. None of the above answers will cause the desired effect.

Figure 1:  Wave Propagation Question in both Free Response and Multiple-Choice,
Multiple-Response formats.   Students answered both formats on diagnostic tests.

p.2

energy in.”  This student is failing to distinguish be-
tween the velocity of the hand, which is associated
with the transverse velocity of the string, and the lon-
gitudinal velocity of the pulse along the string.

Students using energy arguments to describe how

they would change the speed of the wavepulse also
often state that pulses of different sizes will move
with different speeds.  One student stated, “Make it
wider, so that it covers more area, which will make it
go faster.”  In follow-up comments, this student ex-
plained that it took more energy to create a larger
pulse, and that the pulse would move faster because it
had more energy.  We have also found that some stu-
dents state that smaller pulses will move faster.  “Ti-
nier, tighter hand movements” will allow the wave to
slip more easily (thus, faster) through the medium.
In the Fall-1997 semester, we asked both ques-
tion formats on diagnostic tests at the beginning of
the semester before all instruction and near the end of
the semester after all instruction on waves had been
completed.  In the beginning of the semester, students
first answered the free response question, turned it in,
and were then handed the MCMR question.  This en-
sured that they did not change their answers on the
free response question as a result of seeing the list of
MCMR options.  During the semester, instruction
consisted of lecture, textbook homework problems,
and tutorials designed to address the issues discussed in
this paper.  Based on preliminary research into student
difficulties with wave propagation, we designed a set of
video-based tutorials that help students visualize
propagating waves.7  These tutorials are designed to
elicit student difficulties, confront students with incor-
rect predictions, and help students resolve any difficul-
ties they have.2b  After all instruction, students an-
swered the free response and MCMR questions in suc-
cessive weeks as a supplement to their weekly pretests
given during lecture.

By comparing student responses on the two
question formats, we can probe the distribution of
ideas used by students to understand the physics of
wave speed and the consistency of student reasoning.
Table I shows how students answered both the free
response and MCMR questions before instruction.
Only those students who answered both types of
questions both before and after instruction are in-
cluded.  Written explanations echo those given dur-
ing interviews.

At the beginning of the semester, very few stu-
dents give only the correct answer, but most of them
include it in their responses.  Almost all of the stu-
dents answer that the hand motion will affect the
wave speed.  The results imply that students do not
think consistently about the physics of wave speed.
Students predominantly use only one explana-

tion when answering the free response question.  The
offered responses on the MCMR question appear to
act as triggers that elicit additional explanations, es-
pecially from students who give the hand motion
response on the free response question.  Of the few
students who answered the free response question
using only correct reasoning, most answered the
MCMR question consistently.  These students seem
to have a robust understanding of the dependence of
wave speed on medium properties.  More than three-
fourths of the students emphasize the incorrect hand
motion response at the beginning of the semester,
though.

Table II shows student responses after they
completed all instruction on waves.  Student per-
formance is somewhat improved, with more students
giving completely correct explanations.  Nearly all
students recognize the correct answer on the MCMR
question and nearly three-fourths give it for the free
response question, but a majority of the class still
believes that changes in hand motion play a role.

Student
responses
on MCMR
question

 Speed changes
due to change in:
only tension and
density
both the medium
and hand motion
the motion of the
hand

7%

1%

1%

Student responses on free response problem
The motion
both the medium
of the hand
and hand motion

only tension
and density

1%

2%

1%

other

1%

2%

60%

10%

11%

3%

Table I: Comparison of student pre-instruction responses on free response and MCMR wave
propagation questions, Fall-1997 (matched data, N=92).  Students answered questions before
all instruction.

p.3

Student
responses
on MCMR
question

 Speed changes
due to change in:
only tension and
density
both the medium
and hand motion
the motion of the
hand

Student responses on free response problem
the motion
both the medium
of the hand
and hand motion

only tension
and density

40%

8%

2%

2%

17%

1%

other

2%

2%

0%

2%

20%

2%

Table II:  Comparison of student post-instruction responses on free response and MCMR wave
propagation questions, Fall-1997 (matched data, N=92).  Students answered questions after all
instruction on waves.

In both the pre and post instruction tables, the

most common off-diagonal elements of the tables
show that students who answer the free response
question using only hand motion explanations are
triggered into additionally giving correct medium
change responses on the MCMR question.  Appar-
ently, they recognize the correct answer, but do not
recall it on their own in a free response question.
Fewer students are triggered in the other direction
from correct medium change explanations on the
free response question to additionally giving the hand
motion response on the MCMR question.  It is note-
worthy that so many of the students answer incor-
rectly even after explicit instruction on the topic.
A summary of the matched MCMR data from
Fall-1997 is shown in Figure 2.  To provide a com-
parison to student performance without specially de-
signed tutorials, we include (unmatched) data from a
MCMR question asked in the Spring-1996 semester
(no free response question was asked then).  These
results illustrate the contrast between pre-instruction,
post-traditional instruction, and post-modified in-
struction student answers.  While there is some im-
provement in student responses, the strength of the
incorrect hand motion response is apparently quite
robust.

Wave Superposition

We have also investigated student understanding
of superposition in the same environment.8  Figure 3
shows a question we asked of 65 students in a pretest
in the Spring-1996 semester.9  In this situation, stu-
dents had traditional lecture instruction on wave su-
perposition before taking the pretest.  A correct re-
sponse to the question shows addition of displace-
ments due to each wavepulse on a point-by-point ba-
sis.  The correct response (with the individual
wavepulse shapes indicated) and the two most com-
mon incorrect responses are shown in Figure 4.

From explanations given by students on the
pretest and in follow-up interviews, we find that
most students do not demonstrate a functional un-
derstanding of superposition (only 5% sketched Fig-
ure 4(a)).  The most common incorrect response,
given by 40% of the students, showed no superposi-
tion unless the peaks of the pulses overlapped (see
Figure 4(b)).  A typical student explanation was that
“the waves only add when the amplitudes meet.”
We have found that students giving this explanation
use the word “amplitude” to describe only the point
of maximum displacement, and they ignore all other
displaced points in their descriptions.

Other students also had difficulty with the proc-

ess of wave addition.  One-fifth of them sketched

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

change medium
  properties
change medium
  and hand motion

change hand motion

Fall-97 Pre: pre
traditional and modified
tutorial instruction,
matched data, N=92.

Spring-96 Trad: post
traditional instruction,
unmatched data, N=116.

Fall-97 Post: post
traditional and modified
tutorial instruction,
matched data, N=92.

Fall-97
Pre

Spring-96
Trad

Fall-97
Post

Figure 2: Comparison of student responses on
the MCMR wave propagation question, Fall-
1997 (matched pre/post tutorial instruction,
N=92) and Spring-1996 (unmatched, post tradi-
tional instruction, N=116).  Students answered
the question on diagnostic tests given before
and after all instruction on waves.

p.4

Wave Superposition Question #1:  Two
wavepulses are traveling toward each other at a speed
of 10 cm/s on a long spring, as shown in the figure
above. Sketch the shape of the spring at time t = 0.6
s.  Explain how you arrived at your answer.

Figure 3:  Wave superposition question
from pretest given after traditional instruction,
Spring-1996, N= 65.  Students had completed
lecture instruction on superposition.

Figure 4(c) and stated that the points of maximum
displacement would add even though they weren’t at
the same location on the string.  This question was
also asked in an interview setting.  One interviewed
student who used the word “amplitude” incorrectly, as
described above, explained, “Because the [bases of
the] waves are on top of each another, the ampli-
tudes add.”

Students giving the described incorrect responses

seem to view superposition as the addition of the
maximum displacement point only and not as the
addition of displacement at all locations.  They do
not have a complete understanding of wavepulses as
extended regions that are displaced from equilibrium.
Instead, they seem to simplify the wavepulse to a
single point.

At the beginning of the Fall-1995 semester, be-
fore all instruction, we asked 182 students a diagnos-
tic test that included the question shown in Figure 5.
A correct response to the question (shown in Fig-
ure 6(a)), given by 55% of the students, shows that
the wavepulses pass through each other.  Superposi-
tion of waves should have no permanent effect on
the two waves.

The most common incorrect answer, shown in

Figure 6(b), was given by one fifth of the students.
One student wrote, “[Part of] the greater wave is
canceled by the smaller one.”  In explanations, stu-
dents implied that they were thinking of this as a
collision.  If we consider two carts of unequal size
moving toward each other at the same speed and col-
liding in a perfectly inelastic collision (imagine Vel-
cro TM holding them together), then the unit of two
carts would continue to move in the direction the
larger was originally moving, but at a slower speed.

1 cm

Point-by-point addition of
displacement (correct) (5%)

(a)

(b)

(c)

No superposition unless
peaks overlap (40%)

Addition of peaks
without overlap (20%)

Figure 4:  Common responses to pretest
question from Spring-1996.
(a) Correct response,
(b) common incorrect response,
(c) common incorrect response.
Individual wavepulse shapes are also shown.
Student responses were given on pretests and
in interviews which followed lecture instruc-
tion on superposition and preceded tutorial
instruction.

One student’s written comment supports this inter-
pretation, “The smaller wave would move to the
right, but at a slower speed.”  These students appear
to be thinking of wavepulses as objects that collide
with each other or cancel one another out.  In other
questions, students sometimes state that same-size
pulses bounce off each other.

The Particle Pulses Mental Model
of Mechanical Waves

To describe student difficulties with waves, we
organize the data in terms of a mental model.  As
described earlier, mental models are the patterns of
associations (i.e. rules, images, maps, or analogies)
used to guide spontaneous reasoning.3  But student
mental models are often incomplete, self-
contradictory, and inconsistent with experimental
data.

When trying to organize student responses to
questions described in the previous section, we see
evidence for what we call the Particle Pulses Mental
Model of waves.  Students using this mental model   

p.5

1 cm

No permanent effect (correct) (55%)

(a)

(b
)

Wave Superposition Question #2:  Two wavepulses
are traveling toward each other at a speed of 10 cm/s on a
long spring, as shown in the figure above. Sketch the shape
of the spring at time t = 1.2 s.  Explain how you arrived at
your answer.

Figure 5:  Wave superposition question from
a diagnostic test given, F95 semester (N= 182
students).  Students had no instruction on
waves when they took this diagnostic.

typically make analogies to mechanical particle-
physics models.  The Particle Pulses Mental Model
involves the incorrect use of force or energy argu-
ments and an inability to look at local characteristics
of the wave.  Though some parts of the Particle
Pulses Mental Model are reminiscent of student
common sense beliefs of mechanics,10 others are
unique to waves.  Table III gives a summary of our
description.  We find that some students have a su-
perposition of mental models with a distribution that
depends on their understanding and the “trigger” of
the question presented.

Students who use the Particle Pulses Mental

Model seem to make an analogy between wave
propagation and throwing a rigid object like a ball.  If
one throws a ball harder, it goes faster.  Many stu-
dents seem to use this analogy to guide their reason-
ing about wave speed; greater force in the hand mo-
tion creates a greater speed.  In interviews, we have
heard many students state that waves exert a force on
the medium through which they travel and push the
medium along like a surfer on a wave.  The “surfer”
description is common when students describe how
sound waves affect air.  In this context, sinusoidal
waves are often described as a succession of pulses,
each exerting a force (or “kick”) in the direction of
wave propagation.

Other students seem to make the ball-toss anal-
ogy when using energy arguments to describe how to
change wave speed.  A ball with a larger kinetic en-
ergy whose mass remains constant moves faster.
Similarly, a pulse with more energy whose size stays
constant must move faster.  The explanation that a
smaller mass will move faster is consistent with this

Waves cancel
permanently (20%)

Figure 6: Common responses to diagnostic
question from F95.  (a) Correct response,
(b) Most common incorrect response.

explanation, too, because a smaller mass, with en-
ergy held constant, has a larger velocity.  Though
students do not explicitly state the analogy between
their descriptions of wave speed and a thrown ball,
their descriptions in interviews are often consistent
with a mental model built on this analogy.

Students often give point-particle descriptions

of wavepulses.  The ball-toss analogy gives an exam-
ple of this reasoning in wave propagation.  Similarly,
in superposition, many students give the response
that the wavepulses do not add until the points of
maximum displacement overlap.  They treat each
wavepulse as a single point and ignore all other
points.  Other students describe the entire wavepulse
as a single point, not ignoring the non-peak dis-
placed points, but lumping all displaced points to-
gether into one.

Many students use a collision-like description of

wave superposition to describe the interaction of
wavepulses.  Superposing wavepulses collide with
each other and either bounce off each other or can-
cel out, depending on the situation.  The remnant
wavepulse possibly moves slower, having lost energy
during the collision.  Here we see a clear example of
the way an incorrectly used mental model plays a
role in student reasoning.  We have not found that
students will explicitly state that the waves act like
colliding carts, but we find that they often give de-
scriptions consistent with the physics of cart colli-
sions.  Because of the similar explanations for the
two situations, we believe students have an associa-
tive pattern that guides their understanding of wave
interactions.

p.6

Newtonian Particle
Model

Particle Pulses
Mental Model

Simplified Wave
Model

A harder throw implies
a faster particle.
Smaller objects are more
easily thrown faster.
An object’s center of mass
is considered when describ-
ing its motion (trajectory).
Objects collide with each
other and their motion
changes

A harder flick of the wrist
implies a faster wavepulse.
Smaller pulses can be
created that move faster.
Only the peak of the wave-
pulse is considered when
describing superposition.
Wavepulses collide with
each other and they cancel
or bounce off each other.

Wave speed depends only on me-
dium response to disturbance.
Size of pulse and manner of wave
creation do not affect wave speed.
It is necessary to consider the en-
tire shape of a wave to describe its
properties (e.g. in superposition).
Waves pass through each other
with no permanent effect.

Table III:  Comparing student responses indicative of the Newtonian particle model,
the Particle Pulses Mental Model, and the simplified wave physics model (in the small angle,
non-dispersive medium approximation).  Many students use elements of several models when
answering questions concerning wave physics.

triggered by the question and situation at hand.
Thus, they may simultaneously have both correct
and incorrect ideas about specific physical situations.
Both as instructors and as physics education re-
searchers, we benefit from an understanding of the
elements of students’ reasoning and the criteria by
which students organize their understanding.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Jeff Saul and Mel
Sabella for their contributions to the research dis-
cussed in this paper.  The research in this paper is
part of a dissertation by Michael Wittmann to be
published by the University of Maryland.  It has been
funded in part by NSF grants DUE#-9455561 and
DUE#-9652877.

Implications for Assessment
and Classroom Practice

We have found great value in using a variety
of question formats to investigate student under-
standing of one topic.  As physics education re-
searchers, we have been able to carry out more
than 40 hours of interviews that give evidence of
both student strengths and weaknesses under-
standing the physics of waves.  As instructors, we
also would like to probe student understanding, but
it is difficult to conduct large numbers of detailed
interviews.  In probing the development of mental
models of mechanical waves, we have used both
free response and MCMR questions to gain insight
into student understanding that we would not oth-
erwise have gained.

Answers to the free response question show

where students are having continuing difficulty
with the material.  However, focusing only on dif-
ficulties gives an incomplete picture of student
understanding.  Answers to the MCMR question
indicate that students use elements of many differ-
ent mental models.  This complements what is
learned from the free response question.  Using
the two techniques together, we have been able to
probe the manner in which students use multiple
models in their reasoning about wave physics.
Classroom instructors could find value in using
both types of questions.

Often in physics, we expect our students to

understand and apply well-defined, coherent mod-
els of physical systems.  But our students often
have a fragmented picture of physics.  They seem
to access their knowledge depending on criteria

p.7

9. For a discussion of the use of asymmetric pulses in

investigations of student understanding of waves, see
A.B. Arons, A Guide to Introductory Physics Teaching
(John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York, 1990) p. 200.

10. I. Halloun and D. Hestenes, “Common sense beliefs in

mechanics” Am. J. Phys. 53 (11), 1056 (1985).

References
1. L.C. McDermott and E.F. Redish, “Resource Letter

on Physics Education Research,” submitted to the
Am. J. Phys.

2. For examples of research and how it can lead to effec-
tive curriculum, see a) E.F. Redish, J.M. Saul, and
R.N. Steinberg, “On the effectiveness of active-
engagement microcomputer-based laboratories,” Am.
J. Phys. 65, 45 (1997),  b) L.C. McDermott, P.S.
Shaffer, and M.D. Somers, “Research as a guide for
teaching introductory mechanics: An illustration in
the context of the Atwood's machine,” Am. J. Phys.
62, 46 (1994), c) R.K. Thornton and D.R. Sokoloff,
“Learning motion concepts using real-time micro-
computer-based laboratory tools,” Am. J. Phys. 58,
858 (1990), and references in these papers.

3. For an overview of the relevance of mental models to

an understanding of physics education, see
E.F. Redish, “Implications of cognitive studies for
teaching physics,” Am. J. Phys. 62, 796 (1994).
(This paper is also available at URL:
http://www.physics.umd.edu/rgroups/ripe/papers/
cogsci.html.)

4. For another example in how mental models are used
to analyze student understanding, see I. Galili, “Stu-
dents’ conceptual change in geometrical optics,” Int.
J. Sci. Educ. 18 (7), 847 (1996) and refs. therein.

5.

a) L.C. McDermott, P.S. Shaffer, and the Physics
Education Group at the University of Washington,
Seattle, Tutorials in Introductory Physics,  (Prentice
Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1998); b) For tutorials
developed by UMd PERG, see ref. 2a and R.N. Ste-
inberg, M.C. Wittmann, and E.F. Redish, “Mathe-
matical Tutorials In Introductory Physics,” Sample
class, in The Changing Role Of Physics Departments
In Modern Universities, AIP Conference Proceedings
399 (AIP, 1997) 1075  (URL:
http://www.physics.umd.edu/rperg/abp/
icupemsc.htm).

6. R.N. Steinberg, and M.S. Sabella, “Performance on

multiple-choice diagnostics and complementary exam
problems,” Phys. Teach. 35, 150 (1997).

7. Our tutorials use pre-recorded videos of propagating
waves, available on the VideoPointTM  CD-ROM (Le-
nox Softworks, Lenox, MA).

8. This work was developed out of our experience im-
plementing University of Washington tutorials (see
ref. 5a) in our local environment.  Several UW tutori-
als address difficulties described in this paper.

p.8

