2
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
6
1
 
 
 
4
6
0
7
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dynamical investigation of macromolecular hybridization bioassays

R. Bittner, M. Wassermeier,

Advalytix AG,Eugen Sänger Str. 53.0, D- 85649 Brunnthal, Germany

Experimentalphysik I, University of Augsburg, D- 86159 Augsburg, Germany

and

A.  Wixforth

Abstract

A  novel  sensoric  technique  for  the  dynamical  in  situ  investigation  of  a

hybridization bio assay is presented, which utilizes a metal bead labeling

method. Therein, hybridization results in an increased metal coverage on

parts of a substrate, where it takes place. Our sensing principle relies on

the  measurement  of  the  radio  frequency  impedance  of  the  hybridization

spots. We propose several examples for sensor devices.

The hybridization of macromolecules like DNA or specific proteins for biochemical, medical

or forensic purposes is usually observed applying fluorescence or radioactive markers. As the

therefore  required  labeling  processes  are  usually  quite  complicated,  invasive,  and  also

expensive,  there  is  a  growing  need  for  detection  of  hybridization  processes  utilizing

standardized,  simple  and  cheap  labeling.  Moreover,  standard  hybridization  assays  usually

only generate so called `end point´ results, i.e. the kinetics of the hybridization process cannot

be studied.

Apart from using fluorescent dyes or radioactive markers, the application of nano-scale gold-

beads for labeling purposes has also been reported upon [1]. On the one hand, the gold-beads

can be used for labeling the sample molecule, which binds specifically to its counterpart on a

micro-array. On the other hand, a two part sandwich assay can be realized, which consists of

a  defined  binding  site  for  the  sample  molecule,  a  labeled  head  group  in  solution,  and  the

sample molecule acting as a specific linker between the both [2,3].

Fig. 1 depicts the idea behind these metal labeling techniques. In the simplest arrangement

e.g.  single  stranded  and  gold-labeled  oligonucleotides  bind  directly  and  specifically  to  the

probe  molecules  having  the  complementary  sequence  (Fig.  1a).  Fig.  1b  illustrates  the

aforementioned  two  step  sandwich  technique.  The  probe  molecules  on  the  chip  surface

provide the complementary sequence for a moiety of the sample molecule, another moiety of

which specifically binds to a third molecule being gold-labeled.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1.: Schematic representation of a gold bead labeling assay for hybridization experiments.
(a): two species assay, with the probe molecules attached to an appropriate substrate and the
sample molecules in solution labeled with gold beads. Hybridization yields a specific binding
of the labeled sample molecules to the probe sites. (b): two step sandwich technique, where
the sample molecules themselves are not labeled. Instead, they partially link to probe sites
attached to the substrate as well as a third species being gold labeled. Thus, also in this case
hybridization yields a gold bead specifically attached to the substrate surface.

A positive hybridization process can than be probed by several experimental techniques,

among of which are micro-gravimetry [4,5,6], cyclo-voltammetry [7,8], and optical methods

like ellipsometry [9,10] or surface plasmon resonances [11,12].

Recently,  a purely electrical method for the detection of a gold labelled hybridization assay

has been reported [13,14]. The two step sandwich technique was applied to mark a positive

hybridization process on a defined spot of a micro array. After hybridization and washing, the

gold-beads attached to the substrate surface were additionally metalized electrochemically (in

this  case  using  Ag)  in  order  to  increase  their  size  until  a  closed  current  path  was  formed

between  two  micro  electrodes.  Positive  hybridization  was  thus  indicated  by  metallic

conductivity between the electrodes. However, also this experiment yields only an end point

result and does not allow to observe the hybridization kinetics.

Here, we propose a novel experimental technique, which allows for the direct observation of

the  hybridization  dynamics  in  DNA  or  protein  bioassays.  Basically,  we  also  rely  on  the

aforementioned  gold  bead  marker  techniques  (cf.  Fig.  1).  However,  in  contrast  to  the

experiments outlined before, we determine the real gold coverage on specific binding sites

directly by means of high-frequency impedance determination of the reaction spot on a micro

array.  This  way,  not  only  end  point  results  are  obtained  but  rather  the  kinetics  of  the

hybridization  process  can  be  monitored  as  well  with  high  accuracy.  An  integrated  micro

fluidic  system  'on  the  chip'  enables  us  to  create  a  sophisticated  sensor  element  for  many

different bioassay applications.

The principle of our experiment is sketched in Fig. 2. The increasing gold surface coverage on

a positive spot is detected by measuring the high frequency (RF) impedance of the sensing

part of the chip. In the simplest case, the active sensor element is an impedance matched pair

or array of high frequency electrodes close to the chip surface. This electrode pair or array

might be part of a RF transmission line. In this case, the transmission and reflection behavior

of the transmission line will strongly depend on the degree of the gold coverage close to the

surface  of  the  electrode  array.  In  detail,  capacitive  coupling  between  the  metal  particles

provides the dominant contribution to the electrical modification of the RF impedance.

 

p 

Fig.  2:  Schematic  sketch  of  an  electrode  structure  for  determination  of  the  RF  impedance
within an hybridization spot. The surface bound gold beads couple primarily capacitively to
the  electrodes.  Hence,  the  RF  impedance  of  the  latter  depends  on  the  degree  of  the  gold
coating upon the active area.  p depicts the finger periodicity of the electrode structure.

The  gold  layer  indicating  a  positive  hybridization  is  at  maximum  a  monolayer  of  gold

particles very close to the sensor surface. Hence, either a special field distribution between the

electrodes or a dominantly surface sensitive measuring scheme is required. A well established

surface  sensitive  method  for  such  a  purpose  is  the  application  of  surface  acoustic  waves

(SAW’s).  SAW’s  are  modes  of  elastic  energy  propagating  along  the  surface  of  a  solid

substrate. If the substrate is piezoelectric, both the excitation as well as the detection of SAW

is  particularly  simple  [15].  Transducers  consisting  of  two  comb-like  interdigitated metal

structures (Fig. 2, right) can be used, which convert an appropriate RF voltage signal into a

surface acoustic wave. The frequency f  of  the  applied  RF  signal  must  meet  the  zero  order

resonance condition

f

=

v

SAW

p

(1)

in  order  to  operate  such  a  so  called  interdigital  transducer  (IDT).  vSAW  denotes  the  SAW

velocity  and  p  is  the  finger  periodicity  of  the  IDT  (see  Fig.  2).  Please  note,  that  there  are

higher order resonance conditions, which are not considered here. SAW’s on piezoelectric

substrates are most favorable for our purpose, i.e. detection of gold labeled macromolecular

hybridization processes. We point out, that SAW’s on piezoelectric substrates can be used to

probe RF impedance changes of the sensor electrodes as depicted in Fig. 2, as well as to probe

the RF impedance of the gold covered surface itself .

We propose a practical example of a very sensitive detector for thin gold layers based on the

well known feature of  SAW’s to be reflected by periodic structures inside the propagation

path  of  the  SAW  (hereafter  simply  referred  to  as  “sound  path”).  In  general,  a  SAW  is

reflected  (and/or  scattered)  by  any  surface  inhomogenity,  which  either  changes  the

mechanical or the electrical boundary conditions for the SAW. In practical application for

reflecting structures, the mechanical boundary conditions are typically changed by etching

appropriately oriented grooves in to the substrate’s surface. In order to change the electrical

boundary conditions periodic arrays of electrically well conducting metal stripes have been

widely  applied.  In  particular  the  latter  case  is  relevant  for  sensoric  applications,  as  the

reflectivity of a metal stripe array strongly depends on its electrical impedance. Fig. 3 depicts

the simplest arrangement for a SAW based hybridization sensor utilizing a metallic reflector

array.  A  SAW  is  generated  by  the  IDT  structure,  which  is  driven  by  a  RF  pulse,  and

propagates to the right until it enters the reflector element REFL. The hybridization spot is

localized atop of the reflector element as indicated by the gray area. We point out, that the

droplet containing probe and marker molecules must to be outside the sound path if Rayleigh

waves are used, since the latter are heavily attenuated by viscous material at the surface due to

mechanical damping of the displacement component in the sagittal plane.

(cid:215)
 

IDT 

REFL 

Fig. 3: Simple representation of a SAW based hybridization sensor. A SAW is generated by
the interdigital transducer (IDT). After reflection at the reflector array (REFL), the SAW can
be analyzed in terms of amplitude and phase at the same transducer. The reflection coefficient
of the reflector array strongly depends on its load impedance, which, in turn, depends on its
gold-bead coverage. The ‚biological’ sampling area (spot) is located outside the sound path,
which enables the application of Rayleigh-type SAW’s.

As described above, the gold beads close to the substrate surface capacitively couple adjacent

fingers  of  the  reflector  array  (see  Fig.  2)  and,  therewith,  change  its  complex  termination

impedance Zload. According to the well known P-matrix formalism , the acoustic reflectivity of

a reflector array carrying a complex termination impedance is given by:

P11(Zload ) = P11

sc +

2

2 (cid:215) P13
+ 1
Zload

P33

(2)

where 

scP11 is  the  short  circuit  acoustic  reflectivity.  For  a  split-finger  reflector  array  it  is

approximately zero. P13 and P33 are the reflector’s P-matrix elements, which depend on its

geometry and the material of the reflector fingers [16,17].

We point out, that also a series of reflector elements as described above may be used in order

to  investigate  the  hybridization  processes  in  a  manifold  of  different  spots  simultaneously.

Each  reflector  array  then  generates  its  own  ‚echo’,  which  can  be  analyzed  selectively.

However, performing the experiment only time resolved as outlined before bears the problem

of multiple echoes from the manifold of reflector elements, the unambiguous separation of

which is difficult. This problem can be overcome, if the experiment is carried out additionally

frequency  resolved  using  some  kind  of  broadband  IDT’s  (e.g.  tapered  structures  [18])  and

reflector elements with different periodicity. A principal scheme of this layout is depicted in

Fig. 4. Thus, the sensor principle we propose is supposed to be applicable for high-throughput

screening purposes as well.

 

TIDT 

REFL 1  REFL 2  REFL 3 

Fig.  4:  Illustration  of  a  SAW  based  hybridization  sensor  for  high-throughput  screening.
SAW’s of different wavelength are generated by means of a broadband interdigital transducer
(here  a  tapered  structure  “TIDT”  is  shown  exemplarily).  After  reflection  at  the  different
reflector  arrays  (REFL  1  to  3),  the  SAW’s  of  different  frequency  can  each  be  analyzed
independently in terms of amplitude and phase at the same transducer.

The simple layouts as depicted in Figs. 3 and 4, however, inherently suffer from the basic

need for time resolution in order to separate the reflected SAW-signals from the RF pulse

used  to  initially  generate  the  SAW,  an  experimental  technique  which  may  become  quite

cumbersome. Therefore, we designed an autocorrelation scheme (Fig. 5), which makes time

resolution redundant:

 

pulsed 
RF source 
~ 

S 

mixer 

low 
pass 
filter 

A1 

a  rA 

(A2) 

a  rA 

IDT-I 

IDT-II 

/2 

REFL 

l
Fig. 5: Illustration of the autocorrelation sensor as described in the text. A1 and A2 are the
primary and the secondary sound path, respectively. The initial SAW propagates only along
A1,  however,  the  reflected  SAW  propagates  along  the  whole  aperture  of  the  reflector
elements,  i.e.  along  A1  as  well  as  along  A2.  Note,  that  IDT-I  and  IDT-II  are  laterally
displaced by l /2 in order to maximize the autocorrelation signal as discussed in the text.

This layout uses two independent interdigital transducers, IDT-I and IDT-II, and a reflector

element. The hybridization sample spot is located outside the sound path as discussed before.

A  RF  signal  is  fed  into  IDT-I  generating  a  surface  acoustic  wave  of  amplitude  A,  which

propagates along the sound path A1 towards the reflector array. At the reflector element with
reflectivity R,  a  part  of  the  incident  SAW  intensity, a RA, is reflected back towards IDT-I.

However, the reflector array is now larger than the aperture of IDT-I  covering not only the

primary sound path A1 but also the secondary sound path A2 and emits over its total aperture.

Accordingly,  also  IDT-II  is  penetrated  by  the  reflected  SAW.  Therefore,  after  the  time  of

flight given by twice of the single length of the sound paths as well as the sound velocity of

the substrate, both transducers, IDT-I and IDT-II, receive a signal, which is proportional to

the reflectivity of the reflector. As discussed before, the latter depends on the load impedance

of the whole reflector array.

The signals received by both IDT’s  can now be mixed homodynely (i.e. be multiplied) by

means  of,  for  instance,  a  double  balanced  mixer.  This  way,  an  output  signal  is  obtained
consisting of two components, the one having the sum frequency (w
other having the difference frequency (w

2=0). The first can be suppressed by a low pass

) and at the

2 =2w

1 + w

1-w

filter  and  eventually  solely  the  DC  component  S of the product of the particular signals is

obtained as actual measurement signal.
Please note, that S depends on the phase difference D

 between the particular input signals

according to:

S = (a

(cid:215) r (cid:215) A)2 cos(D

f ).

(3)

Hence, S can be maximized by displacing IDT-I and IDT-II by, e.g., l /2 laterally with respect

to each other as indicated in Fig. 5.

f
 

input 
RF pulse 

sensor 
response 

I 

I 
I 

I 

X 

I I 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

t 

Fig.  6:  General  response  scheme  in  the  time  domain  as  will  be  obtained  from  the
autocorrelation sensor depicted in Fig. 5. (a) shows the signals occurring at IDT-I. (b) shows
the signals occurring at IDT-II. (c) shows the autocorrelation signal.

Fig. 6 depicts the general response scheme, which will be obtained from an autocorrelation

experiment  as  outlined  before.  The  sensor  response  signals  obtained  from  the  particular

transducers  IDT-I  and  IDT-II  are  indicated  together  with  the  result  of  their  analog

multiplication followed by a low pass filter. The mixer output signal S is only non-zero for the

reflected SAW pulse, as indicated in Fig. 6(c).

The  sensor  system  we  propose  in  this  paper  is  extremely  fast  as  compared  to  the  typical

kinetics of the hybridization process, since the delay-times between the RF input pulse and the

reflected SAW pulse of our  SAW sensors are at the order of microseconds. Thus, our sensor

systems allows for the examination of the kinetics of hybridization process with high time

resolution, which is vitally important for many bio assays. Moreover, in combination with a

SAW based micro fluidic platform [19], very complex and sophisticated bio assays can be

realized on a single chip.

A  manifold  of  different  schemes  for  SAW  based  hybridization  sensors  may  be  taken  into

consideration: For instance, the reflector array of our sensor might serve as a probe head for a

separate, external sensor element, which then may directly be inserted into a micro titer well.

Furthermore,  the  fundamental  concept  of  our  sensor  is  not  restricted  to  SAW  reflectors.

Alternatively, resonator structures may be used, the frequency response and the bandwidth of

which are similarly affected by a capacitive load between the resonator elements. Another

way to realize SAW based sensors utilizing the concepts proposed in this paper arises from

the application of multi-strip couplers, the coupling efficiency of which also depends on the

impedance  of  the  coupler  element.  These  variations  of  the  presented  sensor  concept  are

presently under evaluation in our group.

A different approach to SAW based hybridization sensors arises from the fact that IDTs for

SAW  applications  can  be  tailored  in  terms  of  their  frequency  response.  In  zero  order

approximation, the design of an interdigital transducer (i.e. the finger period, the metallization

ratio, the numbers of the fingers, and the overlap between adjacent fingers  etc.) is coorelated

with  the  frequency  response  of  the  IDT  by  a  simple  Fourier  transformation  [20].  Hence,

capacitive coupling of the IDT fingers via gold beads attached to the substrate’s surface will

transform the information of the status of the hybridization assay from the time domain into

the frequency domain. This approach, too, is presently investigated in our group and details

will be reported elsewhere.

We  point  out  that  our  sensors  may  even  be  operated  wireless,  since  typical  operating

frequencies  for  SAW  devices  are  at  the  order  of  100  MHz  up  to  1  GHz.  For  wireless

operation, an input signal having the operating frequency is sent to the SAW device by means

of a transmitter. Subsequently, after the delay time of the SAW device has passed, the device

will  respond  a  signal  containing  the  desired  information,  which  then  can  be  analyzed  in  a

receiving unit.

uneconomical.

Finally note, that the physically most simple realization of our sensor concept is represented

by  a  direct  determination  of  the  complex  impedance  of  an  IDT  structure  on  an  arbitrary

insulating surface. However, although being physically simple, this direct approach would

require  much  more  sophisticated  measurement  techniques,  which  renders  this  way

In conclusion, we propose a novel sensor concept for the in situ observation of hybridization

bio  assays.  It  is  based  on  a  metal  bead  marker  method  yielding  capacitive  coupling  of

different  electrodes  on  an  appropriate  surface.  Applying  this  principle,  we  have  proposed

various surface-sensitive sensor systems based on acoustic surface wave devices. By means of

an autocorrelation setup, which can be realized ‚on chip’, we were able to design a simple

experiment, which allows the in-situ examination of the kinetics of the hybridization process.

We gratefully acknowledge very useful discussions with C. Gauer, J. Scriba, M. Sickert, and

A. Rathgeber of Advalytix, and financial support of the same company.

[1]

[5]

[4]

[2]
[3]

[6]
[7]
[8]

Shipway  A.  N.,  Katz  E.,  Willner  I.,  ChemPhysChem 1,  18  (2000)  and  references
therein.
Lyon L. A., Musick M. D., Natan M. J., Anal. Chem. 70, 5177 (1998);
Köhler  M.  J.,  Csáki  A.,  Reichert  J.,  Möller  R.,  Straube  W.,  Fritzsche  W.,  Sens.
Actuators B 76, 166 (2001)
Blonder R., Levi S., Tao G., Ben-Dov I., Willner I.,
J. Am Chem. Soc. 119, 10467 (1997);
Ghindilis A. L., Atanasov P. Wilkins M., Wilikins P.,
Biosens. Bioelectron. 13, 113 (1998);
Bardea A., Dragan A., Willner I., Anal. Chim. Acta 385, 33 (1999)
Skládal P., Electroanalysis 9, 737 (1997);
Blonder R., Levi S., Tao G., Ben-Dov I., Willner I.,
J. Am Chem. Soc. 119, 10467 (1997)
Göpel W., Heiduschka P., Biosens. Bioelectron. 10, 853 (1995)
[9]
Schlereth D. D., J. Electroanal. Chem. 464, 198 (1999)
[10]
[11]
Liedberg B. Nylander C., Lundström I., Biosens. Bioelectron. 10, 1 (1995)
[12] Kaganer E., Pogreb R., Davidov D., Willner I., Langmuir 15, 3920 (1999)
[13] Möller R., Cs‡ki A., Köhler M. J.,  Fritzsche W., Langmuir 17, 5426 (2001)
[14]
[15] David P. Morgan “Surface-Wave Devices for Signal Processing” Elsevier 1991
[16] Reindl L., Ruile W., Proc. IEEE Utrason. Symp., 125 (1993)
[17] Reindl L., Scholl G., Ostertag T., Scherr H., Wolff U., Schmidt F., Proc IEEE

Park S.-J., Taton T. A., Mirkin C. A., Science 295, 1503 (2002)

[18]

Transactions on Ultrason., Ferroelect., And Freq. Contr. 45(5), 1281 (1998)
Streibl, M., Wixforth, A., Kotthaus, J.P., Govorov, A.O., Kadow, C. and Gossard,
A.C., Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 4139 (1999)

[19] A. Rathgeber, and A. Wixforth, “Flat fluidics: Liquid handling without walls”,

electronically found at : http://arxiv.org/pdf/physics/0104079

[20] David P. Morgan “Surface Wave Devices for Signal-Processing” Elsevier 1991

