Epistemology mediating conceptual knowledge:
Constraints on data accessible from interviews
Michael C. Wittmann, University of Maine, Orono ME 04469-5709, wittmann@umit.maine.edu
Rachel E. Scherr, University of Maryland, College Park MD 20742-4111, rescherr@physics.umd.edu

A student's epistemological stance (be it knowledge as memorized information, knowledge from
authority, or knowledge as invented stuff) may constrain that student from reasoning in productive
ways while also shaping the inferences a researcher can make about how that student reasons about
a particular phenomenon. We discuss both cases in the context of an individual student interview on
charge flow in wires. In the first part of the interview, her focus on memorized knowledge prevents
the researcher from learning about her detailed reasoning about current. In the second part of the
interview, her focus on constructed knowledge provides the researcher with a picture of her reasoning
about the physical mechanisms of charge flow.

Introduction

Students enter our classes with a set
of  epistemological  tools  regarding  how
they know what they know and why they
believe what they say.1,2,3  The interplay
between expectations and attitudes toward
learning and conceptual reasoning, how-
ever, is not well understood.  In this pa-
per,  we  claim  that  a  student's  epistemo-
logical stance toward a specific topic in
physics  can  mediate  both  the  student's
thinking and what a researcher can see of
the student's thinking.

We describe an interview in which a
student passes through two distinct phases
of reasoning. In the first, her speech re-
flects memorized knowledge and shows
little  evidence  of  conceptual  reasoning
about  the  physics.  In  the  second,  her
speech  reflects  ideas  that  she  develops
herself, and shows much greater evidence
of  conceptual  reasoning.  By  comparing
her  behavior  in  the  two  phases  of  the
interview, we as researchers gain insight
into  both  her  conceptual  reasoning  and
her epistemological stance. We also make
a case for how a student's epistemological
mode in a specific context affects what a
researcher  can  learn  about  a  student's
reasoning.4
An  Interview  on  Current  and
Conductivity

In  a  previous  paper,5,6  one  author
(MCW) and his collaborators described a

set  of  interviews  in  which  junior  and
senior  science  and  engineering  students
were  asked  to  compare  charge  flow  in
different  materials  placed  in  different
environments.  Students  were  given  a
simple  apparatus  (a  battery  with  two
leads)  to  which  they  could  attach  steel
wire, copper wire, rubber bands, wood, or
doped  and  undoped  semiconductors.
Students  also  had  to  consider  how  the
current would change if the circuits were
placed in different temperature environ-
ments.

We expected advanced undergraduate
students  to  recognize  that  current  is  the
flow  of  charged  particles  through  a  cir-
cuit. In the semi-classical atomic model,
the charged particles flow through a semi-
fixed  atomic  lattice;  when  heated,  the
lattice  vibrates,  so  the  particles  have  a
shorter  mean  free  path  and  move  more
slowly,  thus  reducing  the  current  in  a
heated conducting element. We expected
that some students, being electrical engi-
neers, would be able to describe the band
structure  of  materials  and  discuss  con-
ducting and valence bands.

Students  commonly  gave  one  (or
both) of two descriptions during the inter-
views.  The  first  was  the  "electron  pull
description," in which electrons are pulled
off individual atoms before they can flow.
Students  often  used  this  description  to
account for differences between conduc-
tors  and  insulators.  Some  said  current

would be greater in hot wires because the
added energy would make it easier to pull
electrons from atoms. The second was the
"atomic  jump  description,"  in  which
electrons jump from atom to atom, having
to be pulled off again in order to jump to
the  next  atom.  Students  often  used  this
description  to  reason  that  a  battery  was
necessary to keep pulling electrons off the
atoms and thus keep charge flowing.
Conceptual and Epistemological
Issues in a Single Interview

Sarah (an alias) was an excellent ad-
vanced physics student with high grades.
We divide her interview into two distinct
phases.7 In the first phase, her answers are
brief  and  lack  detail.  In  the  second,  she
develops the electron pull description to
account for the effect of temperature on
charge flow. Her epistemological stance
toward answering questions about current
directly affects the inferences that can be
made  when  trying  to  make  sense  of  the
data in the interview.

Phase  1:  Memorized  knowledge
limits access to data

In the first part of the interview, the
interviewer's insight into Sarah's reason-
ing is constrained by her nearly exclusive
use  of  memorized  knowledge  and  the
recitation of ideas from other classes with
no further explanation. The way she de-
scribes the source of and applicability of
her  knowledge  directly  influences  her
responses,  so  that  little  can  be  learned
about  her  conceptual  knowledge.  It  is
unclear, and impossible to know based on
the  data,  if  she  has  a  weak  conceptual
model  of  electrical  current  during  this
phase  of  the  interview,  or  if  there  is
nothing for the interviewer to uncover.

Two interview excerpts illustrate the
manner in which her conceptual reasoning
is  constrained  by  her  epistemological
stance.  In  the  first,  Sarah  has  just  dis-
cussed insulators as being so dense that

electrons cannot pass through them. Then,
the following dialog occurs.

Interviewer:  Take  something  like  Styro-
foam. What's going on with Styrofoam?
What category [conductor or insulator?]
does that fall into?

Sarah: [Insulating]
I:  Okay. Why?
S: Memorized it!
I: Memorized it. Okay. What property of

Styrofoam might lead to that?

S: Back to the little density thing .. I don't

really know.

I: Okay.  It's  pretty  ..  Styrofoam,  I  mean,

it's not terribly dense.

S: Right.  I  don't  really  know.  Something
inhibits  the  electrons  from  moving
quickly.
In this excerpt, Sarah's guiding epis-
temology toward current and charge flow
is clearly stated by her comment, "Memo-
rized  it!"  She  answers  without  giving  a
mechanism,  and  apparently  without
thinking  about  the  mechanism.  Because
her answer is memorized, she "[doesn't]
really know" why electron flow is differ-
ent  in  Styrofoam  than  in  a  metal  wire,
only that it is different. The interviewer
cannot discern what physical mechanism,
if  any,  she  uses  to  distinguish  between
insulators, 
semi-
conductors, 
conductors.

and 

In  a  later  segment  of  the  interview,
the  interviewer  asks  Sarah  to  describe
current in more detail. She has previously
guessed (with no explanation) that wires
at a higher temperature will carry a larger
current than wires at a low temperature. In
the process of explaining (ex post facto)
her reasoning, she talks about free elec-
trons.

I: So why is it that these electrons are free

to move?

S: Well, maybe there are bound electrons
in here [the atomic lattice describing the
wire], and electrons flowing out of the
battery around the loop.

I: Okay. What's 'bound electrons'?

S:  Electrons that are bound to these struc-

I: Again! It could be. Any explanation you

tures [atoms in a lattice]

I:  Okay. What determines if it's bound or

find.

not?

S:  The energy of the structure.
I:  How do you mean?
S:  I have no idea! That's organic chemistry!
Sarah again shows that she depends
on outside knowledge with her reference
to  "organic  chemistry"  as  a  body  of
knowledge that would explain the source
of free and bound electrons. She says, "I
have no idea!" as to the physical mecha-
nism that is in play.

These  two  excerpts  are  consistent
with  her  responses  throughout  most  of
phase 1 of the interview. Sarah presents
her knowledge of electrical conduction as
something memorized, something handed
down  from  authority.  Her  approach  di-
rectly influences the manner in which she
presents her conceptual knowledge to the
interviewer and constrains the inferences
that can be made to observe what, if any-
thing, she knows of electric charge flow.

Phase  2:  Constructed  knowledge
provides insight into reasoning

In the second phase of the interview,
Sarah's answers begin to include explana-
tions  and  evidence  of  knowledge  con-
struction, which suggests that her episte-
mological approach to electrical conduc-
tion has shifted to one of "knowledge as
invented  stuff."2,3  By  showing  how  she
puts together elements of her thinking into
new  ideas,  Sarah  gives  the  interviewer
insight  into  her  reasoning.  Thus,  her
epistemological stance acts as a driver for
the  information  that  the  researcher  is
seeking in this interview.

The second interview excerpt above
ended  with  Sarah  focusing  on  "organic
chemistry"  as  a  source  of  information.
The following dialog came immediately
after:

S: I have no idea! That's organic chemistry!

S: Well,  yeah,  the  electrons  are  bound  to
these molecules, and it takes certain en-
ergies to tear them away.

I: Okay, and so once they are torn away,

then they're free to move?

S: Yep.
I: Okay. What tears them away? What de-

termines that?

S: … seems like it should be an easy ques-
tion .. I assume just the battery … the
power supply.
When the interviewer prompts her to
think of "any explanation you find," the
nature  of  Sarah's  explanations  changes.
From  this  point  forward,  Sarah  invents
ideas based on other pieces of her under-
standing. She brings up a new idea (the
electron pull description, in essence), and
builds a response to what "seems like …
an  easy  question."  Previously,  she  had
spoken  of  "electrons  flowing  out  of  the
battery  around  the  loop,"8  but  now  she
speaks  of  the  battery  "tear[ing]  them
away" from the atomic lattice. Later, the
interviewer  asked  her  to  revisit  her  an-
swers.

I: So when the electron is moving through
[the wire] and the temperature … of the
one wire is much higher than the tem-
perature  of  the  other,  [which  has  the
higher current]?

S: So it's got a higher energy, so it would
be like more electrons can be torn away
from  these  structures,  so  more  current
will flow through the higher temperature
one.

S, later: … Yeah, I guess higher tempera-
ture. I didn't know why I didn't get the
connection  between  the  higher  energy
and the electrons being freed, but that's
what I'm going with.
Sarah's epistemological stance at this
stage  of  the  interview  is  that  creating  a
description  of  the  physics  based  on  her
ideas  is  valuable  and  useful,  and  "that's
what [she's] going with." She commits to
the  description  she  developed,  and  pro-
ceeds to use it in later parts of the inter-

view  to  explain  her  thinking  on  other
topics.  In  the  process,  the  interviewer
gains insight into her reasoning about the
physics:  flowing  electrons  must  be  torn
from the atomic lattice, and it is easier to
tear  electrons  in  high  temperature  wires
from the lattice, creating more current.
Discussion

Sarah's  primary 

epistemological
mode in each different phase of the inter-
view directly affects the level of concep-
tual  reasoning  that  is  visible  in  her  re-
sponses. In phase 1 of the interview, she
focuses on memorized knowledge and the
interviewer is unable to see the possible
quality of her thinking. Her epistemologi-
cal stance toward questions about current
during this part of the interview acts as a
filter. In phase 2, she presents ideas con-
structed from other elements of reasoning,
and  thereby  shows  her  conceptual  rea-
soning in explicit detail.

Because  our  knowledge  of  Sarah’s
conceptual  understanding  is  limited  by
her  epistemological  stance,  we  do  not
know  how  well  she  understands  the
physics  at  any  given  time.  We  do  not
claim  that  she  does  not  understand  the
physics in phase 1, in which she focuses
on  memorized,  outside  knowledge.  In-
stead, we simply cannot see her reasoning
in any detail. We also do not claim that
the reasoning she shows in phase 2 of the
interview  is  new  and  different  from  be-
fore,  only  that  we  are  now  aware  of  it.
Thus,  her  epistemological  stance  may
affect  the  level  of  her  own  conceptual
reasoning,  and  definitely  affects  our
knowledge as researchers of her thinking.
Based on our results, we question the
level of our understanding of individual
demonstration  interviews  as  research
instruments  in  physics  education.  Even
with  in-depth,  open-ended  questioning,
can we be sure of student understanding?
When epistemological stance prevents our
learning more from a student, we should

be aware that we are learning less about
the student's difficulties with the physics
than about their guiding epistemology.
References
1  Edward  F.  Redish,  Jeffery  M.  Saul,  and
Richard N. Steinberg, "Student expectations
in introductory physics," American Journal of
Physics  66,  212-224  (1998).  Available  at
http://www.physics.umd.edu/rgroups/ripe/
perg/papers/redish/expects/expects1.htm
2 Andrew Elby and David Hammer, "On the
Substance of a Sophisticated Epistemology,"
in Issues and Trends, edited by Stephen Nor-
ris (2001). Available at http://www2.physics.
umd.edu/~elby/papers/epist_substance/Substa
nce.html
3 David Hammer, "More than misconceptions:
Multiple perspectives on student knowledge
and  reasoning,  and  an  appropriate  role  for
education  research,"  American  Journal  of
Physics  64,  1316-1325  (1996).  Available  at
http://www2.physics.umd.edu/~davidham/
AJPmultpersp.html
4  A  similar  discussion  from  a  teacher's  per-
spective  can  be  found  in  David  Hammer,
"Epistemological  considerations  in  teaching
introductory physics," Science Education, 79
(4), 393-413 (1995).
5 Michael C. Wittmann, Richard N. Steinberg,
and Edward F. Redish, "Investigating student
understanding of quantum physics: Spontane-
ous models of conductivity," American Jour-
nal of Physics 68, 218-226 (2002). Available
at http:// www.arxiv.org/abs/physics/0207029
6 This work took place while developing the
New  Model  Course  in  Applied  Quantum
Physics,  which 
at
can 
http://physics.umd.edu/perg/qm/qmcourse/
welcome.htm
7  The 
full 
http://perlnet.umephy.maine.edu/data/.
8  This  common  response  is  explained,  for
example, in Lillian C. McDermott and Peter
S. Shaffer, "Research as a guide for curricu-
lum  development:  An  example  from  intro-
ductory  electricity.  Part  I:  Investigation  of
student understanding," American Journal of
Physics 61, 994-1003 (1992).

is  available  at

transcript 

found 

be 

