 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
On the remote interaction of biological objects with identical genetic 
structures 
 
 
Simon Berkovich 

                                                          Dept. of CS 
                                                          The George Washington University 
                                                          Washington, DC 20052 
                                                          USA 
                                                          Phone:   (202)-994-8248 
                                                          Fax:       (202)-994-4875 
                                                          E-mail:   berkov@seas.gwu.edu  

 
                                                   Abstract 
 
The  paper  puts  forward  an  unusual  prediction  that  cultivating  a  clone  can  curtail  the 
lifespan of the clone donor. Neither the arrangement of this suggested empirical study nor 
the  analyses  of  the  anticipated  outcomes  rely  on  the  accompanying  theoretical 
contemplations.  This  prediction  has  come  from  the  interpretation  of  the  genome  as  a 
“barcode”. The genome is considered as an identification label rather than a repository of 
control  information,  so  living  beings  are  portrayed  as  a  community  of  users  on  the 
“Internet  of  the  physical  Universe”.  Thus,  biological  objects  with  identical  DNA 
structures can interfere, and the surmised remote impact appears tangible. The effect of 
clone-donor  interaction  leads  to  a  decisive  Experimentum  Crucis  that  can  reject  the 
common view on the organization of  biological information processing. Exploitation of 
this effect can be potentially dangerous. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords:     biological information processing, genome, clones, organism development,   
                       longevity, antibiotic resistance 
 

 

1 

1.   Introduction 
 
Genome manipulations bring a feeling of unknown prospects. Newly created portions of 
DNA might be able to spread and produce unforeseen consequences in the long run. This 
paper suggests a more dramatic scenario where genetic manipulations may cause a direct 
impact through informational cross-interference. Namely, it is suspected that cultivating a 
clone can curtail the lifespan of the clone donor. 
 
Investigations of the genome have discovered several confusing circumstances. First, the 
amount  of  information  that  is  contained  in  30,000  genes  of  humans  is  very  low  in  an 
absolute  sense,  it  is  less  than  the  amount  of  information  in  a  blurry  picture  taken  by  a 
substandard  digital  camera.  Second,  humans  have  less  genetic  information  in  relative 
sense  with  respect  to  apparently  simpler  biological  objects,  like  rice,  which  contains 
32,000-55,000 genes. Third, nearly all (about 97%) of the genome - “junk DNA” - does 
not  seem  to  contribute  to  biochemical  workings  of  the  cell.  From  the  standpoint  of 
information theory, considering the genome that can hardly store a blurry view of a living 
creature as a “blueprint” for organism development is naïve and inept.  
 
Purposeful behavior requires a continuous influx of control information. Thus, in the first 
place,  the  phenomenon  of  Life  is  very  intensive  information  processing.  Biological 
information  processing  must  comply  with  "the  basic  law  of  requisite  variety",  which  says 
that achieving of appropriate selection "is absolutely dependent on the processing of at least 
that quantity of information. Future work must respect this law, or be marked as futile even 
before it has been started" (Ashby, 1962). According to our suggestion (Berkovich, 1999 
and 2001), the DNA is not a repository of control information but an identification key 
for  an  organism,  like  a  "barcode".  Physico-chemical  processes  are  too  slow  and 
unreliable  to  implement  robust  high-speed  information  processing  for  the  control  of 
living  systems.  With  the  DNA  as  a  key,  biological  objects  have  access  to  richer 
information  processing  facilities  of  the  underlying  infrastructure  of  the  physical  world. 
Thus, the length and composition of DNA structures are not related to the complexity of 
organisms they represent. This observation is well documented but basically ignored.  
 
The  paper  confronts  the  existing  view  on  biological  information  processing  with  the 
hypothesis  on  remote  interaction  of  biological  objects  having  close  DNA  structures.  It 
should  be  emphasized  that  empirical  investigations  of  the  suggested  hypothesis  do  not 
require any specific theoretical backup. Yet the scientific implications of this hypothesis 
are  overwhelming.  The  corresponding  theoretical  constructions  are  outlined  elsewhere 
(see,  in  particular,  Berkovich  (2001)  and  numerous  references  therein).  It  might  not  be 
inspiring  to  get  into  all  these  problems  unless  the  suspected  effect  of  remote  biological 
impact actually materializes.  
 
As a primary test of the surmised interference of biological objects with identical DNA 
structures, Section 2 discusses the possibility of shortening of the lifespan of clone donors 
due to cultivating of their clones. Some notes in Section 3 provide an indirect support to 
this anticipation. Concluding commentaries are given in Section 4.  
 

 

2 

this  construction,  which  employs 

2.   The hypothesis on shortened longevity of clone donors  
 
The rationale for the hypothesis that cultivating clones can shorten the lifespan of clone 
donors is given below. For the empirical utilization of this hypothesis the presented 
theoretical speculations are not essential. 
 
A  zygote  starting  a  new  organism  opens  "an  account"  on  the  "Internet  of  the  physical 
Universe" with the DNA as a key. One part of this account is used in read-only mode for 
the construction of the organism; the other  part is used for  write-once-read-many mode 
for operational control. Different biological objects get distinct "slices" of the information 
processing resources of the Universe corresponding to their DNA determined “accounts”. 
Biological objects share the storage and bandwidth of the informational infrastructure of 
the  physical  world  in  the  Code  Division  Multiple  Access  (CDMA)  mode,  similarly  to 
cellular phone communications. 
 
The “Internet-like” organization with the underlying infrastructure of the physical world 
raises  a  particular  concern  how  zillions  of  biological  objects  avoid  informational  cross-
interference.  The  feasibility  of 
the  CDMA 
communications,  hinges  upon  biological  individuality  of  multi-cellular  organisms  -  the 
distinctiveness of the DNA keys. Multi-cellular organisms acquire this property through 
randomization  in  meiosis  when  pieces  of  paternal  chromosomes  undergo  a  chaotic 
recombination. In the decentralized randomized assignment, chances that the DNA keys 
would come out alike are very low. Such an undesirable possibility is  a malfunction of 
the system. It results in informational cross-talks of multi-cellular organisms, which, for 
example, might show up as extra-sensory perception. However, since appearances of this 
system  malfunction  are  rare  and  sporadic,  observations  of  extra-sensory  perception  are 
non-reproducible and inconclusive.  
 
On the other hand, in the case of clones, biological objects having exactly matching DNA 
are  generated  artificially.  Thus,  nowadays,  due  to  new  facilities  provided  by  cloning 
technology,  the  informational  cross-talks  of  biological  objects  can  be  investigated  in 
repetitive controlled conditions. A newly produced clone, in contrast to a sexually created 
organism,  simply  takes  the  existing  DNA  key  and  enters  the  already  established 
“account” of the donor. Not surprisingly, a clone inherits the “informational” age of the 
donor and undergoes premature aging and early death. Clones often fail to develop into 
normal organisms. But this abnormal development is not because their genetic structure 
is distorted. The genetic structure of clones would be presumed in a good shape as long 
as the clones can produce healthy offsprings. Indeed, the development of a clone is based 
on a partially used up “account” of the donor, while the development of a clone offspring, 
which gets a re-hashed DNA key, starts afresh.  
 
Each  account  has  a  finite  life  cycle  due  to  limited  capacity  to  efficiently  overcome  the 
increase of accumulated information. A clone and its donor, which have a joint “account” 
each, handle more information, so the operational capacity of this account for each user 
will be exhausted in a shorter period of time.  
 

 

3 

+N
2   

+N
4   

+N
3   

)1

)1

)1

 · ρ   +  (

 · ρ2   –  (

 · ρ3   + …  =  [1 – (1 – ρ)N+1] / ρ          (1)  

An operational step of biological control is associated with inputting a certain portion of 
information into the organism’s “account”.  Let us assume that inputs units of a clone and 
its donor have a common part specified by an overlap factor, ρ (0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1). Because of 
this overlapping, a clone and its donor will jointly input into their account (2 – ρ) units of 
information  rather  than  2  units  of  information  if  these  units  of  information  were 
completely different. So, the remaining part of donor’s life as a result of a clone joining 
this account will be cut by a factor (2 – ρ). The longevity of the clone itself will be equal 
to  the  unused  remainder  of  life  of  the  donor  divided  by  (2  –  ρ).  In  the  case  ρ  =  0  (no 
overlap) the longevity of the clone will be half of the unused remainder of donor’s life, in 
the  case  ρ  =  1  (complete  overlap)  the  longevity  of  the  clone  will  be  the  same  as  the 
unused  remainder  of  the  donor’s  life.  The  leftover  duration  of  the  donor’s  life  will  be 
changed correspondingly. 
 
Now, consider a group of N clones from the same donor. Let us also assume that inputs 
of these (N+1) objects overlap pairwise on a common part ρ and further on in a random 
fashion, so triplet overlappings occupy ρ2 part of the input unit, quadruplet overlappings 
occupy  ρ  3,  and  so  on.    Applying  the  principle  of  inclusion  and  exclusion  the  union  of 
input units, U, of all (N+1) objects  –  the donor and N clones  –  can be represented as: 
 
U  =  (N+1)  –  (
 
Thus,  in  a  group  of  a  donor  and  N  clones  the  relative  value,  L,  presenting  the  leftover 
lifespan of the donor and the longevities of the clones as a fraction of the remainder of 
donor’s life, will be the inverse of the expression (1): 
 
                                                 L  =   ρ/[1 – (1 – ρ)N+1]                                                    (2) 
 
In the case ρ = 1 (complete overlap), L = 1 – the lifespans of the donor and the clones are 
not affected. In the case ρ → 0 (no overlap), L → 1/(N+1) – the lifespan of each object is 
cut by the total number of the objects using the same account. 
 
For a one-clone system the remaining part of donor’s life is 1/(2 – ρ). When the number 
of  clones  increases  the  remaining  part  of  donor’s  life  tends  to  ρ.  Evidently,  donors 
lifespans are shortened more when the overlap of clones inputs, ρ, is small.  
 
Recent experiments indicate that cloned animals in fact have a shorter lifespan (Cohen, 
2002).  As  long  as  this  result  is  applied  to  clones  only  it  can  be  furnished  with  many 
different explanations not related to mutual interference. The longevity of clone donors, 
presumably, has not been examined. What could be expected for the longevity of clone 
donors can be roughly estimated from the available data provided that the hypothesis of 
mutual interference is correct. 
 
In the experiments reported in (Cohen, 2002) 10 out 12 cloned mice were dead after 800 
days; for the control animals all but 3 of the 13 were still alive. In the absence of better 
reasons,  we  can  use  linear  extrapolation  to  project  the  regular  lifespan  of  the  control 
animals. So, a conservative estimate for the relation of this regular lifespan to the lifespan 

 

4 

of the clones might be about 3. Thus, we take ρ = 0.3.  This means that for a many-clones 
system  the  lifespan  of  a  donor  should  constitute  about  30%  of  a  regular  remaining 
duration of its life. From this we derive that in one-clone system the lifespan of a donor 
will be shortened only to 1/(2 – 0.3) = 0.6, i.e. the lifespan of a donor with one clone will 
constitute about 60% of its remaining life. So, if the hypothetical effect of shortening the 
lifespan of clone donors actually takes place, its outcome would be quite observable. 
 
 
3.  Related circumstances  
 
The first controlled study of the lifespan of clones (Cohen, 2002) showed that a batch of 
cloned mice all died earlier than their naturally bred cousins.  This fact can be furnished 
with  various  explanations,  but  it  definitely  clears  the  suggested  hypothesis  on  possible 
cross-interference of biological objects with close DNA. In other words, if the effect of 
shortening  of  clones  lifespans  would  not  be  observed,  our  hypothesis  would  be 
questioned.  Furthermore,  the  lifespans  of  clones  should  be  inversely  dependent  on  the 
number  clones  in  the  group  produced  from  a  given  donor.  These  observations  as  a  by-
product  of  regular  investigations  of  clones  can  represent  an  easygoing  version  of  the 
suggested study of mutual influences of clones and donors. 
 
The  idea  of  cross-interference  of  biological  objects  with  close  DNA  is  supported  by  a 
number of indirect evidences. Thus, restricting the extent of biological activities reduces 
the intensity of information control transactions and as a consequence spares the organism’s 
“account”.  This  agrees  with  an  established  fact  that  limitations  in  food  consumption  can 
noticeably increase the longevity of an organism.  The longevity is also affected by the size 
of biological objects: ceteris paribus, smaller  organisms  of  the  same  species  live  longer. 
Besides cloning, biological objects with close DNA structures to a certain degree occur in 
sexual reproduction. Therefore, information interference of the near kin may be involved in 
correlation  of  the  longevity  with  the  performance  of  the  reproduction  system  (Hsin  and 
Kenyon, 1999, Westendorp and Kirkwood, 1998).  
 
Informational cross-interference of organisms with closely matching DNA might be most 
effectual  for  monozygotic  twins,  which  appear  similar  to  clones  in  this  respect.  The 
control  information  for  organism  development  and  for  operational  procedures  may  be 
handled  by  different  subsets  of  chromosomes.  It  was  found  out  that  the  probability  of 
monozygotic twins is an integer power of ½, and this property has been associated with 
non-advancement  of  the  cell  differentiation  counter  at  zygote  division  (Berkovich  and 
Bloom,  1985).  For  humans,  the  probability  of  monozygotic  twins  is  1/256  =  (½)8 
suggesting 
in  regulating  organism 
development.  In  acquiring  their  biological  individuality  mononzygotic  twins  can  rely 
only  on  the  rest  of  the  15  pairs  of  chromosomes.  Thus,  genetic  similarities,  and  hence 
cross-talk capabilities, among twins are higher than among siblings but lower than among 
clones. 
  
In  single  cell  organisms,  like  bacteria,  the  DNA  structures  are  generated  by  mere 
replications,  so  they  are  identical.  Cross-talks  among  such  biological  objects  are  more 

that  8  pairs  of  chromosomes  are 

involved 

 

5 

pronounced and populations of bacteria can create interrelated communicating networks 
(Sonea, 1988). These networks are fixed to the same “account” since new bacteria get the 
same  DNA  keys  as  their  progenitors.  A  particular  “account”  corresponding  to  a  given 
DNA  key  has  limited  operational  capabilities.  Therefore,  to  survive  populations  of 
microorganisms  have  to  undergo  continuous  transformations,  so  that  altered  DNA  keys 
would enable switching from one used up “account” to another. The emergent resistance 
of  bacteria  to  antibiotics  may  reflect  workings  of  such  a  mechanism.  Remarkably, 
observations  (Gilliver  et  al.,  1999)  show  a  buildup  of  resistance  to  antibiotics  in  the 
absence of a traceable exposure. Thus, it is important to examine whether germination of 
drug  resistant  pathogenic  microorganisms  in  a  firmly  isolated  localized  environment  may 
lead to a proliferation of such microorganisms on a global scale. 
 
 
4.   Conclusion 
 
The  most  valuable  instrument  for  the  advancement  of  knowledge  is  an  Experimentum 
Crucis  -  a  crucial  experiment  capable  to  reject  an  existing  theory.  A  good  crucial 
experiment  is  very  rare  since  unusual  outcomes  are  readily  challenged  by  alternative 
explanations.  The  investigation  of  the  longevity  of  clones  has  an  unprecedented 
convincing power – modern science just cannot envision a situation when the lifespan of 
a living being can be curtailed from a remote location without a tangible material contact.  
 
The idea that Life and Mind involve activities beyond the ponderable matter had flourished 
in  the  XIX  century  with  the  development  of  aether  theory.  In  widely  acclaimed  book  of 
1873,  The  Unseen  Universe,  Stewart  and  Tait  wrote:  "We  attempt  to  show  that  we  are 
absolutely  driven  by  scientific  principles  to  acknowledge  the  existence  of  an  Unseen 
Universe, and by scientific analogy to conclude that it is full of life and intelligence - that it 
is in fact a spiritual universe and not a dead one" (cited from (Powers, 1985)). In the XX 
century,  with  elevation  of  relativity  the  idea  of  aether  has  been  abandoned,  although 
"undeservedly"  as  regarded  by  Wilczek  (1999).  The  concept  of  relativity  lends  to  two 
interpretations:  according  to  Einstein  the  absolute  frame  of  reference  does  not  exist, 
according to Lorentz and Poincaré the absolute frame of reference is simply undetectable. 
For practicing physics adhering to either of these interpretations is inconsequential. As to the 
biology,  the  later  interpretation  may  expose  attributes  of  the  infrastructure  of  the  physical 
world for information processing. 
 
Reduced to its essence, the concept of relativity imposes a postulate that everything in the 
world is ultimately determined only by configurations of the material structures involved. 
Rejecting this postulate in conjunction with the phenomenon of Life brings up the idea of 
extracorporeal  organization  of  biological  information  processing.  Living  beings  get 
control information from the infrastructure of the material world creating an Internet-like 
community of users. Figuratively speaking, human brain is a terminal at the "Internet of 
the physical Universe" rather than a stand-alone computer (Berkovich, 1993). From the 
viewpoint of the contemporary methodology of information systems design the Internet-
like organization of biological information processing makes a lot of sense. 
 

 

6 

One  of  the  striking  experiences  revealing  the  separation  of  biological  information 
processing  from  the  material  substrate  comes  from  observations  of  “near  death 
experience”,  which  is  a  reported  recollection  of  impressions  during  a  special  state  of 
consciousness, including such elements as out-of-body experience, pleasant feelings, and 
seeing  a  tunnel,  a  light,  deceased  relatives,  or  a  life  review  (Lommel,  2001).  These 
observations lead to a great commotion: “How could a clear consciousness outside one’s 
body be experienced at the moment that the brain no longer functions during a period of 
clinical death with flat EEG?”  
 
Amidst  theoretical  controversies  surrounding  the  idea  of  extracorporeal  organization  of 
biological  information  processing,  it  would  be  imprudent  to  ignore  the  pragmatic 
perspective  of  this  organization.  By  elaborating  various  cloning  techniques  “biological 
hackers”  on  the  “Internet  of  the  physical  Universe”  can  perpetrate  a  misconduct  of 
“stolen identity”. Thus, developing clones from DNA samples of a  target organism can 
destroy this organism remotely. Following our rough preliminary estimates, cultivating a 
multiplicity of clones may cut the remaining part of donor’s life by about 3 times.   
 
Shortening of the longevity of clone donors is a simple empirical circumstance that can 
be discovered and comprehended independently of the involved theoretical conceptions. 
For  different  species  the  effect  of  remote  biological  impact  develops  in  different  time 
scales. For example, it would take several months to observe the occurrence of shortened 
longevity  for  mice.  As  to  humans,  this  observation  may  take  several  years.  So,  remote 
biological  impact  can  become  operational  before  the  meaning  of  this  situation  is  fully 
realized.  
 
 
5.  Acknowledgement 
 
I greatly appreciate the valuable commentaries by R. Potter and V. Krasnoplosky. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

7 

References 
 
 
Ashby, W. R. (1962). Principles of the self-organizing system. In H.V.Foster and G.W.Zopf  
(editors),  Principles of Self-Organization, Pergamon Press Oxford, pp. 255-278. 
 
Berkovich,  S.  (1993).  On  the  information  processing capabilities of the brain: shifting the  
paradigm. Nanobiology, 2, 99-107.  
 
Berkovich, S. (1999). The meaning of DNA information in the phenomenon of Life,  
The  Centennial  Meeting  of  the  American  Physical  Society,  Atlanta,  GA,  March  1999, 
Bulletin of American Physical Society, 44, No. 1, Part 1, 115. 
(http://www.aps.org/meet/CENT99/vpr/laybc31-02.html and  
http://www.aps.org/apsnews/0699/069905.html) 
 
Berkovich, S.Y. (2001). On the “barcode” functionality of the DNA, or The phenomenon 
of Life in the physical Universe,  Institute for Information Science and Technology, The 
George Washington University, Washington, D.C. 20052, GWU-IIST-2001-01, 55 pages 
(http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0111093) 
 
Berkovich, S.Y. and  Bloom S. (1985). Probability of monozygotic twinning as a    
reflection of the genetic control of cell development, Mechanisms of Ageing and      
Development,  31, 147-154. 
 
Cohen, P. (2002). Live fast, die young. Cloned animals seem destined for an early grave, 
New Scientist, Vol. 173, Vo. 2330, 16 February 2002, 14.  
 
Gilliver, M.A. et al. (1999). Antibiotic resistance found in wild rodents, Nature, 401, 233. 
 
Hsin H. and Kenyon C. (1999). Signals from the reproductive system regulate the 
lifespan of C.elegans. Nature, 399, 362-366.            
 
Lommel,  P.  (2001).  Near-death  experience  in  survivors  of  cardiac  arrest:  a  prospective 
study in the Netherlands. Lancet, 358, 2039-2045. 
 
Powers, J. (1985). Philosophy and the new physics. Methuen & Co, London and New York. 
 
Sonea,  S.  (1988).    The  Global  Organism.  A  New  View  of  Bacteria,  The  Sciences, 
July/August 1988, 38-45.  
 
Westendorp R.G.J. and Kirkwood T.B.L. (1998). Human longevity at the cost of 
reproductive success. Nature, 396, 743-746.  
 
Wilczek, F. (1999).  The Persistence of Ether. Physics Today, January 1999, 11-13. 

 

8 

