 
 
 
Gravity and motion 

A. LOINGER  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Milano  

Via Celoria, 16 -

  20133 Milano, Italy 

 

 

 

Summary.  -

  Several  arguments  concerning  the  relativistic  vexatae  quaestiones  of  the 

gravity field of a point mass and of the wavy gravity fields. 

PACS 04.20 -

  General relativity: fundamental problems and general formalism.  

Introduction 

I give a concise analysis, with essential historical references, of two critical subjects 
of  relativistic  astrophysics:  the  gravity  field  of  a  point  mass  and  the  wavy  gravity 
fields. 
 
First Part: On the gravity field of a point mass  

  The  solution  of  the  problem  of  the  Einsteinian  gravitational  field,  which  is 
  are  spherical  polar 

1.  -
generated  by  a  point  mass  M  at  rest,  is  given    -
coordinates - by the following expression of the spacetime interval [1], [1bis]: 

  if  r,q

,j

(1.1) 

1

ds2 = 

m
2
)(
rf
 GM/c2; G is the gravitational constant and c the speed of light in vacuo; 

m
2
)(
rf

[
rf
)(d

dw 2   ,  

c2dt2 -

)(2 r

]2

1

f

 

 

2 ; f(r) is any regular function of r. 

In the original solution form of the above problem given by Schwarzschild in 

 dj

 dq 2 + sin2q

where: m ”
2 ”
dw
 
1916 [2], the function f(r) is as follows: 
 [

 

 

3

3

 

  ; 

)2( m

f(r) ”

If one chooses simply 
 

r +
(1.2) 
thus    Schwarzschild’s  ds2    holds,  physically  and  mathematically,  in  the  entire 
spacetime, with the only exception of the origin  r =0, seat of the mass M, where we 
have a singularity. 
 
f(r) ”
(1.3) 
one  obtains  the  so-called  standard  form  of  solution,  which  is  usually,  and 
erroneously, named “by Schwarzschild”. It was deduced  ex novo, by integrating the 
Einstein equations, by Hilbert [3], by Droste [4], and by Weyl [5], independently. 
 
by putting in (1.1) 
 
(1.4)  
it holds in the whole spacetime, with the only exception of the origin.   

Another  interesting  form,  first  investigated  by  M.  Brillouin  [6],  is  obtained 

      f(r) ”

 r + 2m ; 

 r  , 

 

 

 

 

 

1

] 31

page 1 of 10 

œ
ß
ø
Œ
º
Ø
-
-
œ
ß
ø
Œ
º
Ø
-
-
LOINGER A. , GRAVITY AND MOTION 

 

the  ds2 

 
On  the  contrary,  the  standard  form  is  physically  valid  only  for  r>2m, 
 
because  within  the  spatial  surface  r=2m  (which  is  a  singular  locus)  the  time  
coordinate  takes  the  role  of  the  radial  coordinate,  and  vice  versa,  the  solution 
becomes  non-static,  and 
its  essential  property  of  physical  
loses 
“appropriateness”, according to the expressive Hilbert’s terminology [3].  Further, I 
emphasize with Nathan Rosen that the radial coordinate of the standard solution has 
been  initially  chosen  in  such  a  way  that  the  area  of spatial surface r=k is given by 
4p k2.  Accordingly,  it  is  difficult  to  admit  that  the  coordinate  r  can transform itself 
into a time coordinate. We ask ourselves: does the restriction r>2m imply a physical 
limitation?  Not at all! Indeed, as the classic Authors knew, the exterior part r>2m of 
the  standard  form  is  diffeomorphic  to  the  Schwarzschild’s  and  Brillouin’s  forms, 
which hold for r>0. One can say that the “globe” r=2m of the standard form shrinks 
into the point r=0 of Schwarzschild’s and Brillouin’s forms, which is a singular point 
with an associate superficial area 4p (2m)2. 
An odd reflection on the “globe” r=2m generated the notion of black hole: it 
 
would not have come forth if the treatises had expounded the forms of Schwarzschild 
or of Brillouin, in lieu of the standard form.  
 
In a review article on the black holes [7], a true manifesto of scientific policy, 
we find some  amazing results, e.g. the following evaluation of the average density of 
)34(
a  black  hole  (sic):  mass  M  divided  by 
;  thus  the 
point  mass  M  is  ideally  distributed  within  the  “globe”  r=2m;  accordingly,  the 
average density of a black hole is inversely proportional to the square of its mass M. 
A  marvellous  consequence:  if  M  is  equal  to  the  mass  M⁄
  of  the  Sun,  the  average 
M⁄
density is 

, the average density is 

, whereas for a mass 

810=M

,  where 

cmg

3
rp
0

GM
2

r ”
0

16

c

2

/

3

cmg1

, i.e. equal to water density. And a black hole of vanishing density has 

an infinitely large mass, and vice versa. 
 
I  remark  that  as  far  back  as  1922  the  competent  scientists  knew  the  right 
interpretation of the standard solution. Indeed, in 1922 a meeting was held at Collège 
de France, which was also attended by Einstein; the physical meaning of the “globe” 
r=2m  was  discussed  and  definitively  clarified.  See  the  lucid  paper  by  Marcel 
Brillouin quoted in [6]. This author shows that it is not permitted to extend the radial 
coordinate  of  Schwarzschild’s  and  Brillouin’s  forms  to  the  negative  values  of  the 
interval  - 2m<r<0,  and  proves  simultaneously  that  the  attribution  of  a  physical 
meaning to the interval  0<r<2m of the standard form is pure nonsense. Furthermore, 
let us recall that in a second fundamental memoir [8], Schwarzschild determined the 
Einsteinian  gravitational  field  generated  by  an  incompressible  fluid  sphere;  now,  if 
one computes the limit of his solution when the sphere contracts into a material point 
of  a  finite mass  M, one finds anew the  Schwarzschildian solution for a  point mass: 
this is another proof of the “physicality” of the origin. Moreover, we remember that a 
fluid  sphere  of  uniform  density  and  given  mass  cannot  have  a  radius  smaller  than 
(9/8)(2m). 
 
Quite  similar  considerations  can  be  made  for  the  gravitational  fields 
generated by an electrically charged particle and by the spinning particle of the well-
known  Kerr’s  solution.  In  regard  to  the  solution  form  -
  non-static  and  “maximally 
extended” -
 of Schwarzschild problem due to Kruskal [9] and Szekeres [10], we can 
declare  its  physical  superfluity,  because  already  the  static  forms  of  Schwarzschild 
and Brillouin, in particular, are “maximally extended”. 

10
3

page 2 of  10 

-
(cid:215)
»
-
(cid:215)
»
LOINGER A. , GRAVITY AND MOTION 

 

I  remark  at 

 
 
Question  concerning  the  continued  gravitational  collapse:  it  is  almost 
evident  that  if  we  bear  in  mind,  e.g.,    Schwarzschild’s  and  Brillouin’s  forms  of 
solution,  no  continued  collapse  can  generate  a  black  hole  -
  and  this  was  just 
Einstein’s  opinion.  (See  also  APPENDIX  A).  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  physically  
clear that the real gravitational collapses cannot continue indefinitely, but end finally 
in    astronomical  objects  of  finite,  relatively  small,    dimensions.  (See  my  article 
“Relativistic  spherical  symmetries”,  http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0107071  (July 
28th, 2001) (misclassified: proper class.: gr-qc)). 
 
the  observational 
last 
astrophysicists  have  always  called  in  question  the  very  notion  of  black  hole.  They 
know  perfectly  that  the  observed  “black  holes”  do  not  coincide  with  the  theoretical 
black holes, but are only large, or enormously large, masses concentrated in relatively 
small volumes.  
 
1bis.  -
Wiley  and  Sons,  New  York,  etc.,  1975  -
2=
m
r
properties: 
i)  A  material  point  falling  into  the  central  body  takes  an  infinite  time  to  reach  the 

 
  p.32  and  foll.)  that  the  singular  surface 
of the standard form of solution to Schwarzschild problem has the following 

  It  can  be  shown  (see  e.g.  P.A.M.  Dirac,  General  Theory  of  Relativity  -

the  most  cautious  among 

that 

critical surface 

r

2=

m

; 

ii) If the above particle is emitting light of a certain frequency and is being observed 
by  someone  at  a  large  value  of  r,  its  light  is  red-shifted  by  a  factor 
21)/21(
rm
.  This  factor  becomes  infinite  as  the  particle  approaches  the 
singular  surface 
.  All  the  physical  processes  on  the  particle  will  be 
observed to be going more and more slowly as it approaches 

m
; 
r
iii)  Let  us  consider  an  observer  travelling  with  the  particle;  it  reaches 

after 
the  lapse  of  a  finite  proper  time  for  the  observer,  who  has  aged  only  a  finite 
2=
amount when he and the particle reach 

2=

2=

2=

m

m

m

; 

r

r

r

2<

m

r

r

m

r
2<

2=
m

iv)  The  spatial  region 

cannot  communicate  with  the  space  for  which 
. Any signal, even a light signal, would take an infinite time to cross the 
m
;  thus  we  cannot  have  a  direct  observational  knowledge  of  the 
. Such a region is called a black hole, because things may fall into 

2>
r
boundary 
region 
it (taking an infinite time by our clocks, to do so), but nothing can come out. -
I  have  reproduced  almost  literally  some  significative  sentences  of  sect.19  of  the 
cited Dirac’s booklet. The proofs of properties  i), ii), iii) are quite rigorous. On the 
contrary,  the  proof  of  property  iv)  rests  on  a  paralogism:  indeed,  if  one  hides  (as 
Dirac  and  many  authors  do)  the  singularity 
in  the  connection  between  the 
coordinates 
,  it  is  possible  to  extend  the 
(where  the  roles  of  r  and  t  are 
transformed  solution  to  the  region 
interchanged!). Then, one can “prove” formally property iv).  

  and  suitable  new  coordinates 

m
),(

tr
),(

2<

2=

m

r

r

 

I  remark  finally  that  properties  i),  ii),  iii)  hold  also  for  Schwarzschild’s  and 
of  the  standard 

Brillouin’s  forms  (e.g.)  if  we  substitute  the  critical  surface 
form with the point 

of the above forms. 

2=

0=r

m

r

In  lieu  of  property  iv),  which  characterizes  the  odd  notion  of  black  hole,  the 
mentioned forms have the following property: any signal which starts from 
will 
take  an  infinite  time  to  reach  any  finite  distance  from  the  origin:  it  seems  that  one 
must be content with a black point. However, the story is not concluded, because it is 
possible  to  show  that  there  exist  infinite,  non-trivial  forms  of  solution  to 
 (see              my 
Schwarzschild  problem which  are regular everywhere for 

0=r

0‡r

page 3 of  10 

-
-
t
r
LOINGER A. , GRAVITY AND MOTION 

 

of 

solutions 

“Regular 

Schwarzschild 

 
article 
problem”, 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0104064  (April  20th,  2001)  (misclassified:  proper 
class.: gr-qc))).  
 
2.  -
  Many  physicists  think  that  the  notion  of  black  hole  is  only  a  relativistic 
generalization of a Newtonian notion, created by Michell (1784) and Laplace (1796). 
Now, as it has been proved by McVittie (see  The Observatory,  78 (1978) 272), this 
idea is based only on “a play of words in expressions such as  the velocity of escape 
or the escape from a body”.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  , 

  , 

2 <

2 =

2
RGM

Let  us  indeed  consider  a  celestial  spherical  body  of  radius  R  and  mass  M. 
According  to  Newtonian  dynamics,  the  velocity  of  escape w  of  a  particle,  which  is 
projected radially outwards from the body’s surface, is given by  
w
 
(2.1)  
If the particle is projected with a velocity u smaller than w, i.e. if 
(2.2) 
2
RGM
u
it  will  arrive  at  a  finite  distance  from  the  celestial  body,  and  then  will  fall  on  its 
surface again. 
 
By  employing  the  Newtonian  corpuscular  theory  of  light,  which  says  that 
light  is  composed  of  corpuscles  obedient  to  Newton’s  law  of  gravitation  and 
wc <  the 
travelling with a given velocity c, Michell and Laplace remarked that if  
light  corpuscles  cannot  go  away  indefinitely  from  the  celestial  body.  Only  if  the 
radius R of the celestial body is such that 
(2.3)  
they can escape from the gravitational attraction exerted by the mass M. Then, if 
cGM
(2.4)  
the light corpuscles will attain to a finite distance D from the celestial body, and an 
observer situated at an intermediate distance between R and D will see the celestial 
body, owing to the light corpuscles which arrive at his eyes. 
 
If only the spherosymmetrical black hole of general relativity existed, it ought 
to  have  the  fundamental  property  that  neither  the  material  particles  nor  the  light 
corpuscles  can  leave  its  surface  (see  sect.1bis).  Therefore  such  an  object  would  be 
invisible to any observer, however near he may be. None of the phenomena observed 
by the experimentalists in the region surrounding a “black hole” of   Michell-Laplace 
is present in the neighbourhood of a black hole of general relativity. 
 
The  imagined  connexion  with  the  Newtonian  formula  (2.3)  comes  forth  in 
this way: if for the determination of the Einsteinian gravitational  field generated by a 
point mass M (Schwarzschild problem) one chooses the standard  form -
 
0r of the 
as Droste, Hilbert  and Weyl (not Schwarzschild) did, the radial coordinate 

 see (1.3) -

cGM
2

R =

R <

  , 

  , 

2

 

 

 

 

2

2

 

 

 

 

points of the space surface 

r = ( 0r  is the “radius of the black hole”) is given by 

2

 

 

 

 

 

  ; 

(2.5)  

cGM
2
this  formula  resembles  the  Newtonian  formula  (2.3),  which  regards  a  velocity  of 
escape  c.  But  eq.(2.3)  implies  obviously  that  all  observers  -
  including  those  at  an 
infinitely  great  distance  from  the  celestial  body  -
  can  see  it.  As  it  is  clear,  the 
“Newtonian black hole” of Michell-Laplace is not a black hole! 
 
The well-known scepticism of McVittie regarding the existence of relativistic 
black holes appears clearly from the final considerations of the cited Note, where he 
emphasizes,  in  particular,  that  there  is  “no  way  of  asserting  through  some  analogy 

0r
r ”
0

page 4 of  10 

LOINGER A. , GRAVITY AND MOTION 

 

  A  question:  why  did  the  standard  form  (Droste-Hilbert-Weyl)  prevail  -

 
with  Newtonian  gravitational  theory  that  a  black  hole  could  be  a  component  of  a 
close  binary  system  or  that  two  black  holes  could  collide.  An  existence  theorem 
would  first  be  needed  to  show  that  Einstein’s  field  equations  contained  solutions 
which described such configurations”. 
 
3.  -
  in  the 
scientific literature -
 over the original form of Schwarzschild?  This is an interesting 
problem for an unprejudiced historian of our science.  Here I limit myself to mention 
three reasons: i) the mathematical deduction of the standard form is simpler than that 
of  Schwarzschild’s  form; ii) the influence implicitly exerted by Hilbert,  the greatest 
mathematician and mathematical physicist of past century; iii) the premature death of 
Schwarzschild, due to a rare illness contracted at the German-Russian front. 
 
4. -
1÷3 published in Los Alamos Archive. 
 
Second Part: On the wavy gravity fields 

 See in [23] a complete list of my papers concerning the subject of previous sects. 

of 

equations 

5. -
 During an epistolary discussion a known relativist wrote to me: “Without gravity 
waves,  one  would  have  to  explain  an  instantaneous  propagation  of  a  change  in  the 
metric over the whole universe simply by changing the distribution of stress or mass 
in a system”. This conviction is quite widespread, but is wrong. It is an incontestable 
fact that the physical non-existence of the gravitational waves is quite consistent with 
the  fundamental  principles  of  relativity  theory:    the  Einsteinian  field  equations  are 
time-symmetrical -
 and therefore  it is perfectly legitimate to discard formal solutions 
which are time-asymmetrical.  Analogously,  Maxwell 
the 
electromagnetic  field  are  time-symmetrical:  the  existence  of  the  electromagnetic 
waves  is  only  a  theoretical  possibility,  not  a  theoretical  necessity:  the  physical 
existence of the e.m. waves is an experimental fact.    
 
6. -
 A question: what is the behaviour of the metric tensor when, e.g., a  supernova 
explodes?  Answer:  A  sufficiently  near  apparatus  would  register  a  variation  of  the 
Einsteinian  gravitational  field  which  would  be  approximately  similar  to  the 
corresponding variation of the Newtonian field. However, no gravitational wave -
 i.e. 
no  physical  entity  endowed  with  a  “life”  independent  of  the  source  -
  would  be 
emitted. 
 
7.  -
  There  is  an  enormous  number  of  papers  concerning  the  gravitational  waves. 
Here I limit myself to quote two manifestos by Schutz [11]; the first of them includes 
an ample bibliography.  
 
Originally,  the  emission  of  gravitational  waves  was  hypothesized  and 
calculated  in  analogy  to  the  electromagnetic  case,  starting  from  the  linear 
approximation of the Einsteinian field equations, whose spatio-temporal substrate is 
“rigid” and coincides simply with Minkowski’s spacetime. This “rigidity” tells us that 
there is a  primary conceptual difference between exact theory and linearized theory, 
which is simply a theory of a  weak gravitational field in a  flat spacetime, having an 
invariant  character  with  respect  to  the  Lorentz  transformations.  Its  formalism 
resembles  the  Minkowskian  formalism  of  Maxwell  theory,  and  -
  under  suitable 
boundary conditions -
 allows the theoretical emission of undulating fields.   Einstein 
did  not  like  this  result  -
  and  for  many  reasons.  In  spite  of  the  innumerable 

page 5 of  10 

LOINGER A. , GRAVITY AND MOTION 

 

 
computations  that  were  performed  since  the  Twenties  of  past  century,  he  doubted 
always about the physical reality of the gravitational radiation. In particular, Einstein 
thought it is likely that only the  time-symmetrical solutions of his field equations can 
represent physical phenomena.  
 
I remark that the usual computations concerning the emission of gravitational 
waves  by  moving  bodies  are  of  a  perturbative  character  and  have  the  linearized 
version of the theory as a first approximation. Accordingly, they  do not yield a true 
existence  theorem.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  possible  to  prove    rigorously  that  no 
motion of point masses can generate gravitational waves [12]. A very simple proof is 
the  following.  Let  us  suppose  that  at  a  given  instant    t  of  its  motion  a  given  point 
mass  M  begins  to  send  forth  a  gravitational  wave  and  let  us  assume  to  know  the 
kinematical characteristics of the motion between  t and 
. It is indisputabile 

t +

dt

that we can reproduce these characteristics in a gravitational motion of mass M in a 
suitable  “external”  gravitational  field,  within  a  time  interval  equal  to  dt , 
conveniently  chosen.  But  in  this  case  the  mass    M  moves  along  a  geodesic  -
  and 
therefore it cannot emit any gravitational radiation: indeed, the geodesic motions are 
“free” motions, they are the perfect analogues of the rectilinear and uniform motions 
of an electric charge of the usual Maxwell-Lorentz theory. Q.e.d.  

Conclusion: since no “mechanism” exists for the generation of gravitational 
waves  (the  restriction  to  motions  of  mass  points  is  conceptually  inessential), all the 
formal solutions of the Einsteinian field equations having an undulatory character do 
not describe physical waves. (See also APPENDIX B1). 

There  are,  however,  other  arguments  which  demonstrate  the  physical  non-
existence  of  the  gravity  radiation.  Consider,  for  instance,  that  in  the exact  itheory a 
gravitational  wave  would  be  an  entity  destitute  of  a  true  energy  and  a  true 
momentum:  consequently  it  cannot  interact  with  any  whatever  apparatus  or  with  an 
e.m. field: otherwise the energy-momentum account would not balance. 
Many years ago, in the end of a paper [13] Pirani proposed to the reader and 
 
to himself the following problem: “Suppose for example that a Schwarzschild particle 
is disturbed from static spherical symmetry by an internal agency, radiates for some 
time, and finally is restored to static spherical symmetry. Is its total mass necessarily 
the  same  as  before?”  We  have  here  a  typical    Scheinproblem:  if  the  gravitational 
radiation existed, it would have only a pseudo (false) energy, therefore the final mass 
would be identical to the initial mass. 

Furthermore,  the  undulatory  character  and  the  propagation  velocity  of  a 
metric tensor depend on the reference system: with a suitable choice of the frame the 
undulatory character disappears,  with a suitable choice of the frame the propagation 
velocity can take any value between zero and the infinite. (In general relativity we do 
not have a class of physically privileged frames of reference …). 
 
8.  -
  Several  authors  have  avoided  intentionally  the  basic  problem  concerning  the 
emission “mechanism” of the gravity waves and have looked for undulating solutions 
of the Einsteinian equations with a mass tensor equal to zero.  Some exact solutions 
and  others  of  a  perturbative  nature  have  been  found. This is not surprising because 
the theory of the characteristics of the Einstein equations (Levi-Civita [14]) yields a 
rigorous  proof  of  the  existence  of  wave  fronts;  of  what  kind  of  waves? 
Electromagnetic  waves,  according  to  Levi-Civita  -
  for  several  reasons,  in  primis 
because  general  relativity  (analogously  to  special  theory)  must  contain  the 
geometrical optics.  

page 6 of  10 

LOINGER A. , GRAVITY AND MOTION 

 

 

Einstein, Møller, Scheidegger [15] and Rosen [16], but particularly Infeld e 
Plebanski  [17]  had  serious  reasons  against  the  physical  existence  of  the  gravity 
waves, see APPENDIX B2.  
 
9.  -
  According  to  a  diffuse  belief,  the  time  decrease  of  the  revolution  period  of  the 
famous binary radiopulsar PSR1913+16 gives an experimental  indirect proof  of the 
physical reality of the gravitational radiation. 
 
Owing to the observational data yielded by the “regular clock” of the pulsar, 
the interesting orbital parameters and the masses of the two stars (regarded as point 
objects)  have  been  perturbatively  computed.  Then,  the  perturbative  quadrupole 
formula  gave  a  decrease  of  the  revolution  period,  which  agreed  very  well  with  the 
observations. 
 
I emphasize the following points. In the  exact theory the quadrupole formula 
loses any meaning because the hypothesized gravity waves do not have a true energy.  
Therefore,  the  true  mechanical  energy  which  is  lost  during  the  revolution  motion 
ought to transform itself into the  pseudo energy of the hypothetical gravity radiation: 
evidently the energy account does not balance. 

Devil’s  advocate  could  object:  if  we  restrict  ourselves  to  the  linear 
approximation  of  general  relativity  (as  the  experimentalists  do),  which  has 
Minkowski  spacetime  as  its  substrate,  the  physical  existence  of  the  gravitational 
waves  is  surely  a  theoretical  possibility.  Answer:  the  energy-momentum  of  such 
gravitational  waves  has  a  tensor  character  only  under  Lorentz  transformations,  not 
under general transformations. Therefore it is always possible to find (and we remain, 
of  course,  in  the  ambit  of  the  linear  approximation)  a  general  frame  for  which  the 
above  energy-momentum  is  equal  to  zero.  But  a  wave  with  no  energy  and  no 
momentum is not a physical object, even if it is formally endowed with a curvature 
tensor different from zero. 

In  the  second  place,  there  are  realistic  explanations  of  the  decrease  of  the 
revolution  period  -
  as  it  is  well  known  to  the  observational  astrophysicists;  for 
instance,  viscous  losses  of  the  pulsar  companion  would  give  a  time  decrease  of  the 
revolution  period  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  of  that  given  by  the  hypothesized 
emission of gravity radiation. 

 or of a given computation -

Finally, the empirical success of a theory -

 is not 
an  absolute  guaranty  for  its  conceptual  adequacy.  Consider  for  instance  the 
Ptolemaic  theory  of  cycles  and  epicycles,  which  explained  rather  well  the  planetary 
orbits  (with  the  only  exception  of  Mercury’s).  As  it  was  emphasized  by  Truesdell 
[19], the heliocentric theory would have been rejected if people of 17th century had 
had the modern computers. 
 
10.  -
sects. 5÷9 published in Los Alamos Archive. 
 

  See  in  [24]  a  complete  list  of  my  papers  concerning  the  subject  of  previous 

 
“Ti par che farrebe male un che volesse 
  mettere sotto sopra il mondo rinversato?” 
        Giordano Bruno 
  

 
APPENDIX A 

All the Great Spirits who created and developed the general relativity (Einstein, Levi-
Civita, Schwarzschild, Hilbert, Weyl, Eddington, Pauli, Fock, …) rejected always the 
very  notion  of  black  hole.  In  1939  Einstein  wrote  a  remarkable  article  [19],  which 

page 7 of  10 

LOINGER A. , GRAVITY AND MOTION 

 

.

r

m

=r

2=

const

 
was efficaciously summarized by Bergmann [20] with the following sentences, where 
the  phrase  “Schwarzschild  singularity”  means  more  solito  (and  improperly!)  the 
 of the standard form of solution to Schwarzschild problem. 
critical surface 
“Einstein    investigated  the  field  of  a  system  of  many  mass  points, each of which is 
moving along a circular path, 
, under the influence of the field created by 
the ensemble. If the axes of the circular paths are assumed to be oriented  at random, 
the whole system or cluster is spherically symmetric. The purpose of the investigation 
was  to  find  out  whether  the  constituent  particles  can  be  concentrated  toward  the 
center  so  strongly  that  the  total  field  exhibits  a  Schwarzschild  singularity.  The 
investigation  showed  that  even  before  the  critical  concentration  of  particles  is 
reached, some of the particles (those on the outside) begin to move with the velocity 
of light, that is, along zero world lines. It is, therefore, impossible to concentrate the 
particles  of  the  cluster  to  such  a  degree  that  the  field  has  a  singularity.  (The 
singularities  connected  with  each  individual  mass  point  are,  of  course,  not 
considered.) 
 
Einstein  chose  this  example  so  that  he  would  not  have  to  consider 
thermodynamical questions, or to introduce a pressure, for the particles of his cluster 
do  not  undergo  collisions,  and  their  individual  paths  are  explicitly  known.  In  this 
respect,  Einstein’s  cluster  has  properties  which  are  nowhere  encountered  in  nature. 
Nevertheless,  it  appears  reasonable  to  believe  that  Einstein’s  result can be extended 
to conglomerations of particles where the motions of the individual particles are not 
artificially restricted as in Einstein’s example.” [20]. 
(N.B. -
 In reality, Einstein [19] employed the so-called isotropic coordinates in lieu 
of the standard coordinates. Of course, the validity of his argument is independent of 
this choice.). 
 
APPENDIX B1 

i) Any particle of a continuous, incoherent “cloud of dust”, characterized by the mass 

tensor 

     (B1.1) 

 

          

T

jk

r=

 ,    

=kj
,(

)3,2,1,0

  , 

j

x
d
ds

k

x
d
ds

where  r
is  the  invariant  mass  density,  describes  a  geodesic  line,  and  therefore 
cannot  emit  gravitational  waves  (see  the  first  paper  quoted  in  [12]).  A  simple 
application: the gravitational motions of the members of solar system.    

ii) A well-known Fermi’s geometrical theorem [21] as generalized by Eisenhart  [22] 
affirms:  For  a  manifold  endowed  with  a  symmetric  connection  it  is  possible  to 
 of 
choose a coordinate system with respect to which the components 

G=

 

(

)

i
jk

i
kj

 

the connection are zero at all points of a curve (or of a portion of it). 
 
system  with  respect 
=kj
,(
jkh ,
portion of it) -

For  a  Riemann-Einstein  spacetime  this  means  that  there  exists  a  coordinate 
the  components 
, of the metric tensor are zero at all points of a curve (or of a 

 in particular, at all points of a time-like world line. 
iii)  Let  us  now  consider  a  continuous  medium  (for  instance,  a  perfect  fluid) 
  be  the  solutions  of 

characterized  by  a  certain  mass  tensor 

the  first  derivatives  of 

to  which 

)3,2,1,0

)(x

jkT ,  and  let 

g jk

Einstein equations 

     (B1.2) 

 

            

R

jk

Rg
jk

-=

T

jk

   

        

1
2

page 8 of  10 

G
k
-
LOINGER A. , GRAVITY AND MOTION 

 

 

 
 
APPENDIX B2 

2

0

3

,

,

)

(

x ”
)(

1
xxxx
,

z ”
)(
of the metric tensor will be equal to some constants for all points of line L. 

corresponding to a generic motion of our medium with respect to a given reference 
. Let us suppose to follow the motion of a given mass 
frame 
element describing a certain world line L. If we refer this motion, from the initial 
time  0t  on, to a Fermi’s reference system 
, the components 
h jk
In other words, the gravitational field on L has been obliterated. Consequently, no 
gravitational wave has been sent forth. Now, line L is quite generic, and therefore 
no  motion  of  the  continuous  medium  can  give  origin  to  a  gravitational 
radiation. 

)(z

z

z

z

z

(

)

,

,

,

0

3

2

1

By means of approximation methods for the treatment of gravitational motions of the 
bodies  Scheidegger  in  1953  [15],  and  Infeld  and  Plebanski  in  1960    [17] arrived at 
negative conclusions about the physical existence of a gravity radiation. 
Scheidegger  showed  that  all  the  computed  radiation  terms  can  be  destroyed 
 
by  suitable  coordinate  transformations.  Infeld  and  Plebanski  showed  that  “…it  is 
hardly  possible  to  connect  any  physical  meaning  with  the  flux  of  energy  and 
momentum  tensor  defined  with  the  help  of  the  pseudo-energy-momentum  tensor. 
Indeed, the radiation can be annihilated by a proper choice of the coordinate system. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  we  use  a  coordinate  system  in  which  the  flux  of  energy  may 
exist,  then  it  can  be  made  whatever  we  like  by  the  addition  of  proper  harmonic 
functions…”. 
 
The  common  conclusion  of  the  arguments  of  Appendices  B1  and  B2,  in 
particular,  is  that  there  is  no  “mechanism”  apt  to  produce  gravitational  waves.  A 
conclusion which is in full accord with Einstein’s ideas and Levi-Civita’s conviction.   
 
 

 

 

 

REFERENCES  

[1]  Cfr.  EDDINGTON  A.S.,  The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Relativity,  Second  Edition 
(Cambridge  University  Press,  Cambridge)  1960,  p.94;  PAULI    W.,  Teoria  della 
Relatività (Boringhieri, Torino) 1958, p.245. 

[1bis] Formula (1.1) holds also for the  exterior part of any spherosymmetrical  distribution 
of  matter  at  rest.  Moreover,  it  holds  also  if  this  distribution  pulsates  rhythmically, 
with any law, keeping the spherical symmetry.   

[2]  SCHWARZSCHILD K., Berl. Ber., (1916) 189; for an English version of this memoir, see 

http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/9905030 (May 12th, 1999).  

[3]  HILBERT  D.,  Gött.  Nachr.,  zweite  Mitteilung,  vorgelegt  am  23.  Dez.  1916;  IDEM, 

Mathem. Annalen,  92 (1924) 1. 

[4]  DROSTE J ., Ned. Acad. Wet., S.A., 19 (1917) 197. 
[5]  WEYL H ., Ann. Phys.  (Leipzig),  54  (1917)  117;  see, in particular, sect.4, and  FLAMM 
L.,  Phys.  Z.,  27  (1916)  448. Flamm and Weyl gave a topological interpretation of the 
standard  form  of  solution  to  Schwarzschild  problem,  which  -
  beginning  from  the 
Sixties of past century -

 provoked blamelessly the birth of the “wormholes”. 

[6]  BRILLOUIN  M., Journ. Phys. Rad., 23 (1923) 43. 
[7]  CELOTTI  A., MILLER J.C. AND SCIAMA D.W., Class. Quantum Grav., 16 (1999) A3. 

The  phrase  “quantum  gravity”  is  the  typical  product  of  a  wishful  thinking:  it 
characterizes indeed only vain efforts to create a rational theory -

 et pour cause! 

[8]  SCHWARZSCHILD K., Berl. Ber., (1916) 424; for an English version of this memoir, see 

http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/9912033 (December 16th, 1999).  

page 9 of  10 

LOINGER A. , GRAVITY AND MOTION 

 
[9]  KRUSKAL M., Phys. Rev., 119 (1960) 1743. 
[10] SZEKERES G., Publ. Mat. Debrecen, 7 (1960) 285. 
[11] SCHUTZ B.F., Class. Quantum Grav., 16 (1999), A131; 

IDEM, http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/gr-qc/0003069 (March 16th, 2000). 

[12] LOINGER A., http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/astro-ph/0003230 (March 16th, 2000); 

and Nuovo Cimento B 115 (2000) 679; 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0106052  (June  17th,  2001)  [misclassified 
(proper classification: gr-qc or astro-ph)]. 

[13] PIRANI F.A.E., Phys. Rev., 105 (1957) 1089. 
[14] LEVI-CIVITA T., Rend. Acc. Lincei, 11 (s.6a) (1930) 3 and 113. 
[15] SCHEIDEGGER A.E., Revs. Mod. Phys., 25 (1953) 451. 
[16] ROSEN N., Gen. Rel. Grav., 10 (1979) 351.  
[17] INFELD  L.  AND  PLEBANSKI  J.,  Motion  and  relativity  (Pergamon  Press,  Oxford,  etc.) 

[18] TRUESDELL  C.,  An  Idiot’s  Fugitive  Essays  on  Science  (Springer-Verlag,  New  York, 

1960, pp. 200 and 201.  

etc.) 1982, p.620 and foll.  

[19] EINSTEIN A., Ann. Math., 40 (1939) 922.  
[20] BERGMANN  P.G.,  Introduction  to  the  Theory  of  Relativity  (Prentice-Hall,  Inc., 

Englewood Cliffs, N.Y.) 1960, p. 204.  

[21] FERMI E., Rend. Acc. Lincei, 311 (1922) 21 and 51; LEVI-CIVITA T., Lezioni di calcolo 
differenziale assoluto (Stock, Roma) 1925, p.190; IDEM, Math. Ann., 97 (1926) 291.  
[22] EISENHART L.P., Non-Riemannian Geometry, (Am. Math. Soc., New York) 1927, p.64. 
[23]  LOINGER A., http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/astro-ph/9801167 (October 11st, 1998); 

http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/gr-qc/9908009 (August 3rd, 1999); 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/gr-qc/991177 (January 5th, 2000); 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/astro-ph/0001453 (January 26th, 2000); 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/gr-qc/0006033 (June 10th, 2000); 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0104064 (April 20th, 2001) -
misclassified (proper classification: gr-qc); 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0107071 (July 28th, 2001) -
(proper classification: gr-qc); 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0109055 (September 21th, 2001) -
misclassified (proper classification: gr-qc). 
 

 

 

 misclassified 

[24] LOINGER A., http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/astro-ph/9810137 (October 8th, 1998); 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/ astro-ph /9904207 (April 20th, 1999); 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/ astro-ph /9906058 (June 3rd, 1999); 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/ gr-qc /9909091 (September 30th, 1999); 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/ astro-ph /9912507 (December 23rd, 1999); 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/ astro-ph /0002267 (February 12th, 2000); 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/ astro-ph /0003230 (March 16th, 2000); 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/gr-qc/0007048 (July 19th, 2000); 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0102011 (February 6th, 2001) -
misclassified (proper classification: gr-qc); 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0105010 (May 3rd, 2001) -
(proper classification: gr-qc); 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0106052 (June 17th, 2001) -
(proper classification: gr-qc). 
 

 

 misclassified 

 misclassified 

 

 

page 10 of  10 

