 

The challenge of listening:  The effect of researcher agenda  
on data collection and interpretation 

Rachel E. Scherr, University of Maryland, College Park MD 20742-4111, rescherr@physics.umd.edu 
Michael C. Wittmann, University of Maine, Orono ME 04469-5709, wittmann@umit.maine.edu 

Even in the relatively favorable circumstances of an individual interview, accurate listening 
requires careful effort.  Our research interests dictate which student statements we attend to 
during the interview, and which we consider to constitute data during later analysis.  Explicit 
consideration of possible research agendas can increase opportunity for productive research.

Introduction 

As researchers and as instructors, we 
face  the  daily  challenge  of  diagnosing 
student ideas by interpreting their written 
or spoken statements.  Individual student 
interviews  are  often  considered the gold 
standard  for  listening  accurately  to  stu-
dent  ideas.    However,  even  in  an  open-
ended,  time-unlimited,  one-on-one  con-
versation, accurate listening requires care-
ful effort.  We can and do ignore student 
statements when our own research agenda 
limits  our  attention.    Explicit  considera-
tion of possible research agendas can in-
crease our awareness of the richness of 
interview data.   

The authors of this paper have multi-
ple  roles  in  what  follows.    One  author 
(MCW)  conducted  the  interview  cited 
here as part of a larger investigation and 
has since, with collaborators, published a 
paper  describing  his  findings.1    The  pri-
mary author (RES) analyzed the interview 
transcript some time later.  In this paper, 
MCW  is  sometimes  referred  to  as  “the 
interviewer,”  and  RES  is  sometimes  re-
ferred to as “the observer.” 

An  Interview  on  Current  and 
Conductivity 

In  a  previous  paper,1 MCW and his 
collaborators described a set of interviews 
in  which  students  were  given  a  simple 
apparatus  (a  battery  with  two  leads)  to 
which they could attach steel wire, copper 
wire,  rubber  bands,  or  wood.    Students 
were asked to describe what happens in 
(e.g.) the steel wire when it is connected 

to the battery terminals. 

Both the physics content and the find-
ings  of  the  interviews  regarding  student 
models  of  electrical  conduction  are  de-
scribed in detail in the cited paper.   Our 
interest here is not in student conceptual 
understanding of current, but in the nego-
tiation  between  the  interviewer  and  the 
subject  as  they  engage  in  the  interview 
task.  For this purpose we cite an excerpt 
from  the  beginning  of  a  representative 
interview  and  pose  the  following  ques-
tions:  How is this interview going so far?  
On what basis do you judge it to be going 
well or poorly?  Does your answer depend 
on  whether  you  are  looking  at  physics 
content knowledge, interactions between 
interviewer  and  student,  or  the  student's 
views about knowledge in this topic area? 

Interviewer:  So here is the set-up .. battery, 
your average battery pack, we've got two 
leads, and let's say that I took a piece of 
stainless steel, and I placed the stainless 
steel into the circuit; I made a circuit out 
of it, right?  So attach one end, attach the 
other end … what happens when you at-
tach both ends? 

Student: The circuit loop is complete, so cur-
rent or electrons will flow out and around 
back in. 

I:  Okay.  What's going on specifically inside 
of  this  piece  right  here?  [indicates steel 
rod] 

S:  Electrons are  also flowing through that, 
depending on the makeup of this, I don't 
know,  assuming  just…steel,  you  said… 
conducting material.  I don't know if that's 
what  you…complete  conductor,  semi-
conductor.  Do you want me to explain in 
more detail…? 

 

I:    Yeah, sure…go into as much detail as you 
can.  Feel free to make any type of draw-
ings along the way that might help you in 
your explanation. 

S:  Okay.  I don't know exactly what happens 
in a resistor, but current is slowed down.  
It slows down…well, I would assume that 
there's  some  kind  of  chemical  property, 
well  I  don't  know  if  it's  a  chemical  prop-
erty, but the oscillating electrons, maybe 
they're not oscillating as much ... 

I:  What  do  you  mean  by  oscillating  elec-

trons? 

S:  Well, that goes back to the first pretest and 
how the electrons move around the wire, I 
think the electrons are oscillating, slowly 
moving around. 

I:  Okay, so…moving around the circuit? 
S:  Yeah, that's right.  Whatever. 
I:    […]    How  are  they  oscillating?    Around 
what?  Can you give me more detail? 
S:  Mmm…not  much!    I  wouldn't  know  if 
they were…well, oscillating perpendicular 
to the flow or parallel…I don't know, are 
they oscillating at all?   

[Interviewer  asks  what  would  be  different if 
the rod were copper.]   
S:  Well, all these things have uh, these are 
different chemicals, and they're each going 
to have their different electrons and pro-
tons, so when the electron moves through, 
maybe there's the attraction and repulsion 
between  this  structure,  where  they're  all 
positive and negative electrons … that's 
stuff I've never thought about before, and 
I'm just making it up as we go along! 
I:  Well, okay!  See, that's not bad…after all 
there's … it's how you come to making it 
up that's interesting also.2   

The  effect  of  observer  agenda 
on data interpretation 

We pose again the questions of inter-
est to us in this analysis:  How is this in-
terview going so far?   On what basis do 
you judge it to be going well (or poorly)? 
The observer (RES) read the entire in-
terview some time after the interview had 
occurred and initially found the excerpted 
portion easy to judge: it was not very in-
teresting.  What was lacking, in her initial 

opinion,  was  information  about  how  the 
student thinks conduction works.  “Sarah” 
(an alias) offers little sense of a physical 
mechanism for current; the ele ctrons just 
‘move  around  the  loop.’    She  refers  to 
‘oscillation,’  but  does  not  say  why  any-
thing is oscillating, or what the oscillation 
has to do with current.  Worse, the inter-
viewer seems to be having some difficulty 
getting her to discuss such details; he asks 
“what she means by oscillating electrons,” 
for example, but her response (“the ele c-
trons  are  oscillating,  slowly  moving 
around,”) is not clarifying. 

Other researchers may agree or dis-
agree with the observer’s initial judgment; 
it  does  not  necessarily  tell  us  the  real 
character of the interview excerpt.  What 
the judgment does tell us is the nature of 
the observer’s interests.  Her automatic 
interest is, apparently, in student concep-
tual  understanding  of  physical  mecha-
nism.  The observer’s interest is only one 
of a number of primary interests that ob-
servers might have (or cultivate).  Below 
we  offer  an  incomplete  list  of  possible 
research agendas. 

1.  Conceptual knowledge of physical 

mechanism 
Does the student know the correct phys-
ics?  Does she have a particular alterna-
tive model? 

2.  Source of knowledge 

Is  the  student’s  knowledge  memorized, 
constructed, experienced with the senses? 

3.  Knowledge construction 

Is the student skilled at it?  How does she 
generate and select among ideas? 

4.  Beliefs about knowledge 

What does her speech reveal about her 
epistemological stance? 

The observer apparently had item 1 
(“Conceptual  knowledge  of  physical 
mechanism”)  as  her  primary  research 
agenda, and since there is relatively little 
information in the excerpt that is relevant 
to that interest, it was reasonable for her 
to judge the interview excerpt as lacking.  

 

An  observer  with  item  2  (“Source  of 
knowledge”)  as  her  research  agenda, 
however, might judge the excerpt to be a 
rich source of information.  For example, 
about halfway through the excerpted por-
tion  the  student  says,  “Well,  that  goes 
back to the first pretest;” she’s drawing on 
issues raised earlier in her physics class.  
Later  she  claims,  “we're trying to go to 
organic chemistry, you know, to draw all 
these funny pictures,” and sketches some-
thing  resembling  a  la ttice structure.  An 
observer interested in item 3, “Knowledge 
construction,”  might  be  especially  inter-
ested in the following sequence somewhat 
later in the interview, in which Sarah ex-
plores an apparently new idea: 

I:  Okay.  If I were to put in a different mate-
rial…rather than steel, I put in copper.  
S:  Different chemical makeup, so it could 

…the electrons could either go faster or 
slower.I: 
Okay, what part of the 
chemical makeup might actually deter-
mine that? 

[…] 
S:  Well, all these things have uh, these are 
different chemicals, and they're each go-
ing to have their different electrons and 
protons, so when the electron moves 
through, maybe there's the attraction and 
repulsion between this structure, where 
they're all positive and negative elec-
trons.An observer whose interests 
were  primarily  epistemological  (item  4) 
would  pay  special  attention when Sarah 
says,  “That’s  stuff  I’ve  never  thought 
about before, and I’m just making it up as 
I go along!” 

We have coded each of Sarah’s turns 
at talk to indicate what sort of information 
they  contain:  information  about  her  con-
the  physical 
ceptual  knowledge  of 
mechanism, 
about  her 
information 
sources  of  knowledge,  and  so  on.3  We 
found  that  within  Sarah’s  first  eighteen 
turns at talk, Sarah made nineteen utter-
ances that were codable according to the 
four categories described.  Of those nine-
teen  utterances,  six  were  relevant  to 
describing a physical mechanism, five to 

scribing  a  physical  mechanism,  five  to 
sources of knowledge, five to knowledge 
construction,  and four to epistemological 
issues.    To  pay  attention  to  only  one  of 
these  four  categories  is  to  fail  to  hear 
much of what the student is saying. 

Our  coding  scheme  is  nontrivial  to 
execute, and we are still examining issues 
of inter-rater reliability (our coding repre-
sents  consensus  after  discussion).    Our 
intention, however, is not to claim that we 
have  definitively  identified the nature of 
each of Sarah’s statements.  Instead, we 
intend  only  to  illustrate  that  different  re-
search agendas can result in very different 
judgments  of  the  interview  excerpt.  In 
particular, an observer’s interests dictate 
which student statements are considered 
to constitute data.  The observer’s initial 
judgment – that the interview excerpt did 
not  contain  much  information  –  reveals 
that she did not initially attend to agendas 
other  than  #1  (conceptual  knowledge of 
physical mechanism).  Her interests acted 
as a “filter” on the data.   

The effect of interviewer agenda 
on data collection 

The observation that an observer’s re-
search agenda may affect data interpreta-
tion  naturally  raises  questions  about  the 
research agenda of the interviewer.  It is 
reasonable to assume that the interviewer 
has a “filter” as well, and that his interpre-
tation  of  student  statements  during  the 
interview shapes the course of the conver-
sation to some extent.  Because research 
agendas are often implicit, it is rarely suf-
ficient to simply ask the interviewer about 
his  intentions.    Instead, we examine the 
transcript for clues to his interests. 

We have coded the first eighteen in-
terviewer  turns  at  talk  to  indicate  what 
sort  of  information  the  interviewer  was 
requesting of the student.  The great ma-
jority of the codable prompts (12/14) are 
for  conceptual  knowledge  of  physical 
mechanism.  For example, the interviewer 

 

asks,  “What  do  you  mean  by  oscillating 
electrons?  …How  are  they  oscillating?  
Around what?”  There are two prompts 
for  knowledge  construction  (e.g.,  “It’s 
how you come to making it up that’s in-
teresting also”), but the interviewer’s pri-
mary interest appears to be in the first of 
the four areas cited above. 

Additional  evidence  for  this  identifi-
cation appears in the published paper de-
scribing these interviews.  In that article, 
the authors represent Sarah in the follow-
ing way: 

 “Sarah first described atomic lattice vibra-
tions  in  a  heated  wire  impeding  electron 
flow, but then changed her response to say 
that the energy, when transferred to elec-
trons, helped the electron flow.” 

The  authors  make  other  comments 
about Sarah that indicate they were also 
paying  attention  to  research  agenda  #3 
(knowledge construction).  However, their 
primary interest appears to lie in Sarah’s 
conceptual  model  for  electrical  conduc-
tion. 

The  effect  of  the  interviewer’s  re-
search agenda on data collection appears 
to be similar to the effect of the observer’s 
agenda on data interpretation:  the inter-
viewer  shows  selective  attention  to  par-
ticular student statements.   Consider, for 
example, the following exchange: 

S:  Okay.  I don't know exactly what happens 
in a resistor, but current is slowed down.  
It slows down…well, I would assume that 
there's  some  kind  of  chemical  property, 
well  I  don't  know  if  it's  a  chemical  prop-
erty, but the oscillating electrons, maybe 
they're not oscillating as much ... 

I:  What  do  you  mean  by  oscillating  elec-

trons? 

Sarah’s statement includes both hints of a 
conceptual model (“oscillating ele ctrons”) 
and information regarding the sources of 
her  knowledge  (“I  don’t  know  exactly 
what  happens…there’s  some  kind  of  a 
chemical  property”).    The  interviewer 

might  make  any  one of several possible 
moves at this point; for example, he might 
ask Sarah what she means by a chemical 
property,  or  whether  it’s  legitimate  to 
speculate about mechanisms one doesn’t 
remember  exactly.    Instead,  though,  he 
asks for more detail about the oscillations.  
His choice of response calls our attention 
to  his  primary  interest  in  the  conceptual 
content of Sarah’s ideas.  And, presuma-
bly, his response calls the student’s atten-
tion  to  his  interests  also,  as  she  and  he 
together negotiate the course of the inter-
view.  His choice of response encourages 
her to provide more conceptual informa-
tion in the future. 

Discussion 

We hope to have shown in this paper 
that hearing all of what students are say-
ing  requires  careful  effort.    We  are  not 
automatically  conscious  of  everything  a 
student  says;  the  “filter”  of  our  own  re-
search  interests  blocks  some  student 
statements.  Such a filter is not inappro-
priate  for  researchers;  specialization  is 
usually  necessary  for  detailed analysis.  
However, to the extent that our research 
agendas are unexamined, they may con-
trol  our  attention  inappropriately.    Con-
scious consideration of possible research 
agendas widens the range of opportunity 
for productive research. 

References 
1  M. C. Wittmann, R. N. Steinberg, and E. F. 
Redish, American Journal of Physics, 70(3) 
(2002).  The quotation about Sarah appears 
on page 223. 

2  The full transcript is available at 

http://perlnet.umephy.maine.edu/data/.   

3  The coding is available at 

http://perlnet.umephy.maine.edu/center/ 
posts/ScherrWittmannPoster.pdf. 

4  For an analysis of the role of epistemology 
in this interview, see M. C. Wittmann and 
R.E. Scherr, “Epistemology mediating con-
ceptual 
at 
http://www.arxiv.org.

knowledge,” 

posted 

