Enhancing science instruction in the elementary schools 

 

Walk into an elementary school classroom and watch the excitement of children learning 

science. Contrast this experience with that of a physics professor standing in front of a sea of 
first-year students in an introductory college physics course. The first group of students is often 
enthusiastic about the subject matter and cares about what the teacher is saying. In contrast, the 
second group consists mostly of students trying to expend the minimum effort needed to achieve 
the maximum possible grade. The college students are often frustrated by the work required and 
resentful of teachers who do not recognize that a high grade is their principal goal.  

What causes the enthusiasm of the first group to dwindle? Is this change an inevitable 

consequence of adolescence? Is it a result of bad teaching? Has this loss of interest been present 
at all times and places, or is it a recent phenomenon that mainly occurs at big state colleges and 
universities? Is it exacerbated by grade inflation and/or over-emphasis on grades? Is the problem 
an ironic consequence of society’s concern about quality teaching, leading to student evaluations 
and “performance standards,” which have had counterproductive effects (pandering, grade 
inflation, teaching-to-the-test)? Is it worse for physics, or science in general, than other 
disciplines? These are difficult questions that lack simple answers. 

Problems with student interest and achievement in American science education have been 

recognized for a long time. One of us (Cole) was in high school when Sputnik was launched, 
precipitating hand-wringing concern about U.S. science education, which resulted in some 
changes in the science curriculum and support. Subsequently, these problems have not gone 
away. For example, recent U.S. student performance in international mathematics and science 
competitions has been disappointing. The most recent (1999) TIMSS-R comparative study of 
eighth grade students’ understanding of math and science found that the average performance of 
students in the U.S. is below the average of students in the 23 countries participating in this 
assessment.1 The overall performance of U.S. students was below that of students from two 
similar immigrant countries, Australia and Canada, but about the same as students in Great 
Britain. Most importantly, our students’ average performance on these science and mathematics 
exams declines (relative to students elsewhere) with grade level. To deal with this problem is a 
serious concern. A National Academy of Sciences report2 affirms that “The challenge [to improve 
science education] extends to everyone within the system. Efforts will be time-consuming, 
expensive, and sometimes uncomfortable. They will also be exhilarating and deeply rewarding. 
There is no more important task before us as a nation.” In particular, this report encourages “… 
scientists and engineers to work with school personnel to initiate and sustain the improvement of 
school science programs.”3 

What can we, as individuals, do? In the following, we discuss some recent collaborative 

activities undertaken by the two of us, a physicist and a science teacher educator, aimed at 
enhancing elementary school science teaching and learning. These activities exemplify the kinds 
of projects that might be useful when synergistic working relationships are established.4  

Our work is an extension of an ongoing partnership between Penn State University and 

the State College Area School District.5 Our collaboration, which we nicknamed the “flight 
team,” consists of two elementary teachers, a curriculum support teacher, a volunteer pilot from 
US Airways, and the two of us. Our goal is to enhance the Air and Aviation unit, which is part of 
the 3rd and 4th grade curriculum in our local schools. We met regularly during the spring of 2001 
and engaged in extensive discussions, aimed at clarifying concepts involved in flight and crafting 
opportunities for children to participate in elements of scientific inquiry. The emphasis on 
meaningful science learning and scientific inquiry is fundamental to contemporary reform efforts 
in science education.6  

Our discussions were a learning experience for all of us. The emphasis on flight concepts 

fit well with our focus on teaching science as inquiry. Given that the physical principles 
governing our world are often counterintuitive, thinking about them raises interesting, testable 

questions. To demonstrate the concept of lift and its application to flight, the teachers on our team 
suggested that a wind tunnel would be a valuable demonstration device. A very talented graduate 
student in physics at Penn State, John Huckans, succeeded in building a wind tunnel at a modest 
cost. The students construct airfoils of their own design and test them in the wind tunnel. They 
can then make changes to their design based on their observations during the initial trials.7 This 
project has provoked much discussion among the participants, which now includes two 
undergraduate students, a physics major and a prospective science teacher, and we have had 
ongoing debates about the importance of the Bernoulli force in really keeping planes in the air. 
Two other projects are underway. One is the production of a video aimed at explaining 
flight principles and practice to students. Video clips from the longer instructional video will be 
available on the project web site, <http://www.ed.psu.edu/pds>. The second project is the 
development of an online tool, Faculty Forum. The Faculty Forum began as a database of unit-
related web sites specific to the local elementary school curriculum. Web sites are added to the 
database by teachers who have reviewed them and/or have used them to enhance the teaching of 
particular units. Teaching tips and other information are included. Although this resource was 
originally targeted at science units that lack useful resources, it has been extended to include web 
sites for other aspects of the elementary curriculum. In addition, two components have been 
added to the Faculty Forum – a library of Technology Enhanced Lessons and an electronic 
bulletin board for teachers to discuss issues and share ideas. 
 
influencing the development of the next generation of teachers. The science educator on the flight 
team, Zembal-Saul, has modified her science methods course for elementary education majors to 
include model lessons adapted from the enhancements to the Air and Aviation unit. Prospective 
teachers experience first-hand what it is like to interact with phenomena associated with flight, 
ask testable questions, collect data, examine their data for patterns, and construct evidence-based 
explanations. In other words, they experience what it is like to learn science concepts by engaging 
in scientific inquiry, which is in stark contrast to the ways in which they report having learned 
science previously. Ultimately, the prospective teachers draw upon what they have learned about 
supporting students’ meaningful science learning and scientific inquiry to design and teach 
inquiry-based science lessons to children.  

Not only have these projects reached local teachers and their children, but they are also 

From this process, the physicist on the flight team, Cole, has learned much about the 

physics of flight; more importantly, he has been reminded of the difficulty of learning new 
concepts and jettisoning old ones. A most rewarding aspect of this activity has been the 
opportunity to meet and learn from other science educators about their challenges, which are 
frequently different and more difficult than those encountered in teaching a university physics 
course. 

By our activities we and others have made small steps toward addressing the problems of 
science education mentioned at the beginning of this editorial. There are many components of this 
process: making science teachers feel comfortable with and enthusiastic about science is one in 
which we are particularly involved. No less important is the need to revise college science 
courses, which is the most direct way that physics faculty can improve the appreciation and 
understanding of science.8 
 
Milton W. Cole (Department of Physics, Eberly College of Science)  
Carla Zembal-Saul (Department of Curriculum and Instruction, College of Education)  
Penn State University  
University Park, PA 16802 
 
 
 

                                                                                                                                                                             
1See the U.S. TIMSS National Research Center at <http://ustimss.msu.edu> for data from 
this and prior studies. 
 
2National Science Education Standards (National Academy Press, 1995), p. 9. 
 
3National Science Education Standards, op cit, p. 245. 
 
4For some other examples, see R. E. Lopez and T. Schultz, “Two revolutions in K-8 
science education,” Phys. Today 54 (#9), 44-xx (2001), available at 
<http://www.physicstoday.org/pt/vol-54/iss-9/p44.html>.  
 
5See <http://www.ed.psu.edu/pds>. 
 
6The National Science Education Standards, http://books.nap.edu/html/nses/html/. See in 
particular, p. 2. 
 
7J. H. Huckans, N. A. Kurz, D. C. Walker, C. Zembal-Saul, M. W. Cole, K. Mitchell, and 
D. S. Reed, “Wind tunnel design and implementation in the elementary school 
classroom,” to be submitted to Science and Children. 
 
8The projects in which we have been involved would not have been successful without a 
supporting environment. We have benefited greatly from our colleagues (students and 
faculty) on campus. The Superintendent of State College Schools and Penn State 
administrators have provided crucial moral, intellectual, and financial support. In 
addition, our project has received grants from the Kellogg Foundation Leadership for 
Institutional Change Initiative and the New York State Section of the American Physical 
Society (which has been very kind to extend its support to neighboring states). 

