5. Microarray analysis techniques: SVD and PCA 
 

1

Chapter  5 

Microarray analysis techniques: 
Singular value decomposition and principal component analysis 
To appear in Understanding and Using Microarray Analysis Techniques: A Practical 
Guide. D.P. Berrar, W. Dubitzky, M. Granzow, eds. LANL LA-UR-02-4001 

Michael E. Wall1,2, Andreas Rechtsteiner1,3, Luis M. Rocha1,  
1Computer and Computational Sciences Division and 2Bioscience Division, Mail Stop B256, Los Alamos National 
Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico, 87545 USA, e-mail: {mewall, rocha}@lanl.gov  
3Systems Science Ph.D. Program, Portland State University, Post Office Box 751, Portland, Oregon 97207 USA, e-mail: 
andreas@sysc.pdx.edu  

Abstract:  This chapter describes gene expression analysis by Singular Value Decomposition 
(SVD), emphasizing initial characterization of the data. We describe SVD methods 
for visualization of gene expression data, representation of the data using a smaller 
number of variables, and detection of patterns in noisy gene expression data. In 
addition, we describe the precise relation between SVD analysis and Principal 
Component Analysis (PCA) when PCA is calculated using the covariance matrix, 
enabling our descriptions to apply equally well to either method. Our aim is to 
provide definitions, interpretations, examples, and references that will serve as 
resources for understanding and extending the application of SVD and PCA to gene 
expression analysis.  

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

One of the  challenges of  bioinformatics is to  develop effective ways to analyze global gene 
expression  data.  A  rigorous  approach  to  gene  expression  analysis  must  involve  an  up-front 
characterization of the structure of the data. In addition to a broader utility in analysis methods, 
singular  value  decomposition  (SVD)  and  principal  component  analysis  (PCA)  can  be  valuable 
tools in obtaining such a characterization.  SVD and PCA are common techniques for analysis of 
multivariate data, and gene expression data are well suited to analysis using SVD/PCA. A single 
microarray1 experiment can generate measurements for thousands, or even tens of thousands of 
genes. Present experiments typically consist of less than ten assays, but can consist of hundreds 
(Hughes et al., 2000). Gene expression data are currently rather noisy, and SVD can detect and 
extract small signals from noisy data.  

The  goal  of  this  chapter  is  to  provide  precise  explanations  of  the  use  of  SVD  and  PCA  for 
gene expression analysis, illustrating methods using simple examples. We describe SVD methods 
for  visualization  of  gene  expression  data,  representation  of  the  data  using  a  smaller  number  of 
variables,  and  detection  of  patterns  in  noisy  gene  expression  data.  In  addition,  we  describe  the 

1 

2 
 

Chapter 5

mathematical  relation  between  SVD  analysis  and  Principal  Component  Analysis  (PCA)  when 
PCA is calculated using the covariance matrix, enabling our descriptions to apply equally well to 
either method. Our aims are 1) to provide descriptions and examples of the application of SVD 
methods and interpretation of their results; 2) to establish a foundation for understanding previous 
applications of SVD to gene expression analysis; and 3) to provide interpretations and references 
to related work that may inspire new advances.  

In section 1, the SVD is defined, with associations to other methods described. A summary of 
previous  applications  is  presented  in  order  to  suggest  directions  for  SVD  analysis  of  gene 
expression  data.  In  section 2  we  discuss  applications  of  SVD  to  gene  expression  analysis, 
including specific methods for SVD-based visualization of gene expression data, and use of SVD 
in  detection  of  weak  expression  patterns.  Some  examples  are  given  of  previous  applications  of 
SVD to analysis of gene expression data. Our discussion in section 3 gives some general advice 
on the use of SVD analysis on gene expression data, and includes references to specific published 
SVD-based methods for gene expression analysis. Finally, in section 4, we provide information 
on some available resources and further reading.  

1.1 

Mathematical definition of the SVD2  

Let X denote an m × n matrix of real-valued data and rank3 r, where without loss of generality 
m ≥ n, and therefore r ≤ n. In the case of microarray data, xij is the expression level of the ith gene 
in the jth assay. The elements of the ith row of X form the n-dimensional vector gi, which we refer 
to as the transcriptional response of the ith gene. Alternatively, the elements of the jth column of X 
form the m-dimensional vector aj, which we refer to as the expression profile of the jth assay.  

The equation for singular value decomposition of X is the following: 

X =

TUSV

, 

(5.1) 

where U is an m × n matrix, S is an  n × n diagonal matrix, and VT is also an n × n matrix. The 
columns  of  U  are  called  the  left  singular  vectors,  {uk},  and  form  an  orthonormal  basis  for  the 
assay  expression  profiles,  so  that  ui·uj  =  1  for  i  =  j,  and  ui·uj  =  0  otherwise.  The  rows  of  VT 
contain  the  elements  of  the  right  singular  vectors,  {vk},  and  form  an  orthonormal  basis  for  the 
gene transcriptional responses. The elements of S are only nonzero on the diagonal, and are called 
the  singular  values.  Thus,  S = diag(s1,...,sn).  Furthermore,  sk > 0  for  1 ≤ k ≤ r,  and  si = 0  for 
(r+1) ≤ k ≤ n.  By  convention,  the  ordering  of  the  singular  vectors  is  determined  by  high-to-low 
sorting of singular values, with the highest singular value in the upper left index of the S matrix. 
Note  that  for  a  square,  symmetric  matrix  X,  singular  value  decomposition  is  equivalent  to 
diagonalization, or solution of the eigenvalue problem.  
  One important result of the SVD of X is that 

X

l

l

( ) ∑
=

=
1

k

u

s
kk

Tv
k

 

(5.2) 

is  the  closest  rank-l  matrix  to  X.  The  term  “closest”  means  that  X(l)  minimizes  the  sum  of  the 
squares of the difference of the elements of X and X(l), ∑ij|xij – x(l)

ij|2. 

One way to calculate the SVD is to first calculate VT and S by diagonalizing XTX: 

5. Microarray analysis techniques: SVD and PCA 
 

and then to calculate U as follows: 

T
XX

=

T2

VVS

, 

 U

= XVS

1−

, 

(5.3) 

(5.4) 

3

where  the  (r+1),...,n  columns  of  V  for  which  sk = 0  are  ignored  in  the  matrix  multiplication  of 
Equation 5.4. Choices for the remaining n-r singular vectors in V or U may be calculated using 
the  Gram-Schmidt  orthogonalization  process  or  some  other  extension  method.  In  practice  there 
are several methods for calculating the SVD that are of higher accuracy and speed. Section 4 lists 
some references on the mathematics and computation of SVD.  

Relation to principal component analysis. There is a direct relation between PCA and SVD in 
the  case  where  principal  components  are  calculated  from  the  covariance  matrix4.  If  one 
T is proportional to the 
conditions the data matrix X by centering5 each column, then XTX = Σigigi
covariance  matrix  of  the  variables  of  gi  (i.e.,  the  covariance  matrix  of  the  assays6).  By 
Equation 5.3,  diagonalization  of  XTX  yields  VT,  which  also  yields  the  principal  components  of 
{gi}.  So,  the  right  singular  vectors  {vk}  are  the  same  as  the  principal  components  of  {gi}.  The 
2, which are proportional to the variances of the principal 
eigenvalues of XTX are equivalent to sk
components.  The  matrix  US  then  contains  the  principal  component  scores,  which  are  the 
coordinates of the genes in the space of principal components. 

If instead each row of X is centered, XXT = Σjajaj

T is proportional to the covariance matrix of 
the variables of aj (i.e. the covariance matrix of the genes7). In this case, the left singular vectors 
2  are  again  proportional  to  the 
{uk}  are  the  same  as  the  principal  components  of  {aj}.  The  sk
variances  of  the  principal  components.  The  matrix  SVT  again  contains  the  principal  component 
scores, which are the coordinates of the assays in the space of principal components.  

Relation to Fourier analysis. Application of SVD in data analysis has similarities to Fourier 
analysis. As is the case with SVD, Fourier analysis involves expansion of the original data in an 
orthogonal basis:  

The connection with SVD can be explicitly illustrated by normalizing8 the vector {ei2πjk/m} and 

x
ij

∑=

ec
ik

2πi

/
mjk

 

k

(5.5) 

by naming it v'k: 

=

x
ij

∑

k

vb
ik

'

jk

=

∑

k

'
vsu

'

'

ik

k

jk

 

(5.6) 

which  generates  the  matrix  equation  X = U'S'V'T,  similar  to  Equation 5.1.  Unlike  the  SVD, 
however, even though the {v'k} are an orthonormal basis, the {u'k} are not in general orthogonal. 
Nevertheless this demonstrates how the SVD is similar to a Fourier transform, where the vectors 
{vk}  are  determined  in  a  very  specific  way  from  the  data  using  Equation 5.1,  rather  than  being 
given at the outset as for the Fourier transform. Similar to low-pass filtering in Fourier analysis, 
later  we  will  describe  how  SVD  analysis  permits  filtering  by  concentrating  on  those  singular 
vectors that have the highest singular values. 

3 

4 
 

1.2 

Illustrative applications 

Chapter 5

SVD  and  PCA  have  found  wide-ranging  applications.  Here  we  describe  several  that  may 

suggest potential ways that we can think about applications in gene expression analysis.  

Image  processing  and  compression.  The  property  of  SVD  to  provide  the  closest  rank-l 
approximation for a matrix X (Equation 5.2) can be used in image processing for compression and 
noise reduction, a very common application of SVD. By setting the small singular values to zero, 
we can obtain matrix approximations whose rank equals the number of remaining singular values 
T  is called a principal image. Very good approximations can 
(see Equation 5.2). Each term ukskvk
often be obtained using only a small number of terms (Richards, 1993). SVD is applied in similar 
ways to signal processing problems (Deprettere, 1988). 

Immunology. One way to capture global prototypical immune response patterns is to use PCA 
on  data  obtained  from  measuring  antigen-specific  IgM  (dominant  antibody  in  primary  immune 
responses) and IgC (dominant antibody in secondary immune responses) immunoglobulins using 
ELISA assays. Fesel and Coutinho (Fesel and Coutinho, 1998) measured IgM and IgC responses 
in  Lewis  and  Fischer  rats  before  and  at  three  time  points  after  immunization  with  myelin basic 
protein  (MBP)  in  complete  Freud's  adjuvant  (CFA),  which  is  known  to  provoke  experimental 
allergic  encephalomeyelitis  (EAE).  They  discovered  distinct  and  mutually 
independent 
components  of  IgM  reaction  repertoires,  and  identified  a  small  number  of  strain-specific 
prototypical regulatory responses.  

Molecular dynamics. PCA and SVD analysis methods have been developed for characterizing 
protein  molecular  dynamics  trajectories  (Garcia,  1992;  Romo  et  al.,  1995).  In  a  study  of 
myoglobin, Romo et al. used molecular dynamics methods to obtain atomic positions of all atoms 
sampled  during  the  course  of  a  simulation.  The  higher  principal  components  of  the  dynamics 
were  found  to  correspond  to  large-scale  motions  of  the  protein.  Visualization  of  the  first  three 
principal components revealed an interesting type of trajectory that was described as resembling 
beads on a string, and revealed a visibly sparse sampling of the configuration space. 

Small-angle scattering. SVD has been used to detect and characterize structural intermediates 
in  biomolecular  small-angle  scattering  experiments  (Chen  et  al.,  1996).  This  study  provides  a 
good  illustration  of  how  SVD  can  be  used  to  extract  biologically  meaningful  signals  from  the 
data.  Small-angle  scattering  data  were  obtained  from  partially  unfolded  solutions  of  lysozyme, 
each  consisting  of  a  different  mix  of  folded,  collapsed  and  unfolded  states.    The  data  for  each 
sample  was  in  the  form  of  intensity  values  sampled  at  on  the  order  of  100  different  scattering 
angles.  UV  spectroscopy  was  used  to  determine  the  relative  amounts  of  folded,  collapsed  and 
unfolded lysozyme in each sample. SVD was used in combination with the spectroscopic data to 
extract  a  scattering  curve  for  the  collapsed  state  of  the  lysozyme,  a  structural  intermediate  that 
was not observed in isolation.  

Information  Retrieval.  SVD  became  very  useful  in  Information  Retrieval  (IR)  to  deal  with 
linguistic ambiguity issues. IR works by producing the documents most associated with a set of 
keywords in a query. Keywords, however, necessarily contain much synonymy (several keywords 
refer to the same concept) and polysemy (the same keyword can refer to several concepts). For 
instance,  if  the  query  keyword  is  "feline",  traditional  IR  methods  will  not  retrieve  documents 
using  the  word  "cat"  –  a  problem  of  synonymy.  Likewise,  if  the  query  keyword  is  "java", 
documents on the topic of Java as a computer language, Java as an Island in Indonesia, and Java 
as  a  coffee  bean  will  all  be  retrieved  –  a  problem  of  polysemy.  A  technique  known  Latent 
Semantic  Indexing  (LSI)  (Berry  et  al.,  1995)  addresses  these  problems  by  calculating  the  best 
rank-l  approximation  of  the  keyword-document  matrix  using  its  SVD.  This  produces  a  lower 

5. Microarray analysis techniques: SVD and PCA 
 

5

dimensional space of singular vectors that are called eigen-keywords and eigen-documents. Each 
eigen-keyword can be associated with several keywords as well as particular senses of keywords. 
In the synonymy example above,  "cat" and "feline" would therefore be strongly correlated with 
the same eigen-keyterm. Similarly, documents using "Java" as a computer language tend to use 
many of the same keywords, but not many of the keywords used by documents describing "Java" 
as  coffee  or  Indonesia.  Thus,  in  the  space  of  singular  vectors,  each  of  these  senses  of  "java"  is 
associated with distinct eigen-keywords.  

2. 

SVD ANALYSIS OF GENE EXPRESSION DATA 

As  we  mention  in  the  introduction,  gene  expression  data  are  well  suited  to  analysis  using 
SVD/PCA.  In  this  section  we  provide  examples  of  SVD-based  analysis  methods  as  applied  to 
gene  expression  analysis.  Before  illustrating  specific  techniques,  we  will  discuss  ways  of 
interpreting  the  SVD  in  the  context  of  gene  expression  data.  This  interpretation  and  the 
accompanying nomenclature will serve as a foundation for understanding the methods described 
later.  

A natural question for a biologist to ask is: “What is the biological significance of the SVD?” 
There is, of course, no general answer to this question, as it depends on the specific application. 
We  can,  however,  consider  classes  of  experiments  and  provide  them  as  a  guide  for  individual 
cases. For this purpose we define two broad classes of applications under which most studies will 
fall: systems  biology applications, and diagnostic applications (see below). In both cases, the n 
columns of the gene expression data matrix X correspond to assays, and the m rows correspond to 
the genes. The SVD of X produces two orthonormal bases, one defined by right singular vectors 
and the other by left singular vectors. Referring to the definitions in section 1.1, the right singular 
vectors span the space of the gene transcriptional responses {gi} and the left singular vectors span 
the space of the assay expression profiles {aj}. Following the convention of (Alter et al., 2000), 
we refer to the left singular vectors {uk} as eigenassays and to the right singular vectors {vk} as 
eigengenes9. We sometimes refer to an eigengene or eigenassay generically as a singular vector, 
or,  by  analogy  with  PCA,  as  a  component.  Eigengenes,  eigenassays  and  other  definitions  and 
nomenclature in this section are depicted in Figure 5.1. 

In systems biology applications, we generally wish to understand relations among genes. The 
signal  of  interest  in  this  case  is  the  gene  transcriptional  response  gi.  By  Equation 5.1,  the  SVD 
equation for gi is  

=

g

i

r

∑

=
1

k

su
ik

k

,v
k

i

,...,1:

m

 

(5.7) 

which  is  a  linear  combination  of  the  eigengenes  {vk}.  The  ith  row  of  U,  g'i  (see  Figure 5.1), 
contains the coordinates of the ith gene in the coordinate system (basis) of the scaled eigengenes, 
skvk.  If  r < n,  the  transcriptional  responses  of  the  genes  may  be  captured  with  fewer  variables 
using  g'i  rather  than  gi.  This  property  of  the  SVD  is  sometimes  referred  to  as  dimensionality 
reduction.  In  order  to  reconstruct  the  original  data,  however,  we  still  need  access  to  the 
eigengenes,  which  are  n-dimensional  vectors.  Note  that  due  to  the  presence  of  noise  in  the 
measurements,  r = n  in  any  real  gene  expression  analysis  application,  though  the  last  singular 
values in S may be very close to zero and thus irrelevant. 

5 

6 
 

Chapter 5

In diagnostic applications, we may wish to classify tissue samples from individuals with and 
without a disease. Referring to the definitions in section 1.1, the signal of interest in this case is 
the assay expression profile aj. By Equation 5.1, the SVD equation for aj is 

=

 

a

j

r

∑

=

1

k

sv
jk

k

,u
k

j

,...,1:

n

 

(5.8) 

which is a linear combination of the eigenassays {uk}. The jth column of VT, a'j (see Figure 5.1), 
contains the coordinates of the jth assay in the coordinate system (basis) of the scaled eigenassays, 
skuk.  By  using  the  vector  a'j,  the  expression  profiles  of  the  assays  may  be  captured  by  r  ≤  n 
variables,  which  is  always  fewer  than  the  m  variables  in  the  vector  aj.  So,  in  contrast  to  gene 
transcriptional responses, SVD can generally reduce the number of variables used to represent the 
assay  expression  profiles.  Similar  to  the  case  for  genes,  however,  in  order  to  reconstruct  the 
original data, we need access to the eigenassays, which are m-dimensional vectors. 

 

Figure 5.1. Graphical depiction of SVD of a matrix X, annotated with notations adopted in this chapter. 

Indeed, analysis of the spectrum formed by the singular values sk can lead to the determination 
that fewer than n components capture the essential features in the data, a topic discussed below in 
section 2.1.1.  In  the  literature  the  number  of  components  that  results  from  such  an  analysis  is 
sometimes  associated  with  the  number  of  underlying  biological  processes  that  give  rise  to  the 
patterns  in  the  data.  It  is  then  of  interest  to  ascribe  biological  meaning  to  the  significant 
eigenassays (in the case of diagnostic applications), or eigengenes (in the case of systems biology 
applications).    Even  though  each  component  on  its  own  may  not  necessarily  be  biologically 
meaningful, SVD can aid in the search for biologically meaningful signals (see, e.g., small-angle 
scattering in section 1.2).  

In the context of describing scatter plots in section 2.1.2, we discuss the application of SVD to 
the  problem  of  grouping  genes  by  transcriptional  response,  and  grouping  assays  by  expression 
profile.  This  discussion  will  also  touch  on  the  topic  of  searching  for  biologically  meaningful 
signals. When the data are noisy, it may not be possible to resolve gene groups, but it still may be 

5. Microarray analysis techniques: SVD and PCA 
 

7

of  interest  to  detect  underlying  gene  expression  patterns;  this  is  a  case  where  the  utility  of  the 
SVD  distinguishes  itself  with  respect  to  other  gene  expression  analysis  methods  (section 2.2). 
Finally  we  discuss  some  published  examples  of  gene  expression  analysis  using  SVD,  and  a 
couple of SVD-based gene grouping methods (section 2.3). 

2.1 

Visualization of the SVD 

Visualization is central to understanding the results of application of SVD to gene expression 
data. For example, Figure 5.2 illustrates plots that are derived from applying SVD to Cho et al.’s 
budding yeast cell-cycle data set (Cho et al., 1998). In the experiment, roughly 6,200 yeast genes 
were monitored for 17 time points taken at ten-minute intervals. To perform the SVD, we have 
pre-processed the data by replacing each measurement with its logarithm, and normalizing each 
gene’s transcriptional response to have zero mean and unit standard deviation. In addition, a serial 
correlation test (Kanji, 1993) was applied to filter out ~3,200 genes that showed primarily random 
fluctuations.  The  plots  reveal  interesting  patterns  in  the  data  that  we  may  wish  to  investigate 
further:  a  levelling  off  of  the  relative  variance  after  the  first  five  components  (Figure 5.2a);  a 
pattern in the first eigengene primarily resembling a steady decrease, or decay (Figure 5.2b); and 
patterns with cyclic structure in the second and third eigengenes (Figure 5.2c,d). 

Figure 5.2. Visualization of the SVD of cell cycle data. Plots of relative variance (a); and the first (b), second (c) and 
third (d) eigengenes are shown. The methods of visualization employed in each panel are described in section 2.1. 
These data inspired our choice of the sine and exponential patterns for the synthetic data of section 2.1. 

To  aid  our  discussion  of  visualization,  we  use  a  synthetic  time  series  data  set  with  14 
sequential expression level assays (columns of X) of 2,000 genes (rows of X). Use of a synthetic 

 

7 

8 
 

Chapter 5

data set enables us to provide simple illustrations that can serve as a foundation for understanding 
the more complex patterns that arise in real gene expression data. Genes in our data set have one 
of three kinds of transcriptional response, inspired by experimentally observed patterns in the Cho 
et  al.  cell-cycle  data:  1)  noise  (1,600  genes);  2)  noisy  sine  pattern  (200  genes);  or  3)  noisy 
exponential pattern (200 genes).  Noise for all three groups of genes was modelled by sampling 
from  a normal distribution with zero mean and standard deviation 0.5. The sine pattern has the 
functional  form  asin(2πt/140),  and  the  exponential  pattern  the  form  be-t/100,  where  a  is  sampled 
uniformly over the interval (1.5,3), b is sampled uniformly over (4,8), t is the time (in minutes) 
associated  with  each  assay,  and  time  points  are  sampled  every  ten  minutes  beginning  at  t = 0.  
Each  gene’s  transcriptional  response  was  centered  to  have  a  mean  of  zero.  Figure 5.3  depicts 
genes of type 2) and 3).  

Figure 5.3. Gene transcriptional responses from the synthetic data set. Overlays of a) five noisy sine wave genes and b) 
five noisy exponential genes.  

 

2.1.1 

Visualization of the matrices S, V T and U 

2(∑isi

Singular  value  spectrum.  The  diagonal  values  of  S  (i.e.,  sk)  make  up  the  singular  value 
spectrum,  which  is  easily  visualized  in  a  one-dimensional  plot.  The  height  of  any  one  singular 
value is indicative of its importance in explaining the data. More specifically, the square of each 
singular  value  is  proportional  to  the  variance  explained  by  each  singular  vector.  The  relative 
2)-1  are  often  plotted  (Figure 5.4a;  see  also  Figure 5.2).    Cattell  has  referred  to 
variances  sk
these kinds of plots as scree plots (Cattell, 1966) and proposed to use them as a graphical method 
to  decide  on  the  significant  components.  If  the  original  variables  are  linear  combinations  of  a 
smaller number of underlying variables, combined with some low-level noise, the plot will tend 
to  drop  sharply  for  the  singular  values  associated  with  the  underlying  variables  and  then  much 
more  slowly  for  the  remaining  singular  values.  Singular  vectors  (in  our  case  eigenassays  and 
eigengenes) whose singular values plot to the right of such an “elbow” are ignored because they 
are  assumed  to  be  mainly  due  to  noise.  For  our  synthetic  data  set,  the  spectrum  begins  with  a 
sharp  decrease,  and  levels  off  after  the  second  component,  which  is  indicative  of  the  two 
underlying  signals  in  the  data  (Figure 5.4a).  Other  heuristic  approaches  for  deciding  on  the 
significant  components  have  been  proposed.  One  approach  is  to  ignore  components  beyond 

5. Microarray analysis techniques: SVD and PCA 
 

9

where the cumulative relative variance or singular value becomes larger than a certain threshold, 
usually  defined  upon  the  dimensionality  of  the  data.  For  our  example  data  set,  the  first  two 
singular  vectors  explain  about  64%  of  the  total  variance  in  the  data  (Figure 5.4a).  Everitt  and 
Dunn propose an alternate approach based on comparing the relative variance of each component 
to  0.7/n  (Everitt  and  Dunn,  2001).  For  our  example  data  set  this  threshold  is  (0.7/14) = 0.05, 
which selects the first two singular vectors as significant. Notice that if we re-construct the matrix 
X  by  using  only  the  first  two  singular  vectors,  we  would  obtain  X(2)  (the  best  rank-2 
approximation of X), which would account for 64% of the variance in the data. 

Eigengenes. When assays correspond to samplings of an ordinal or continuous variable (e.g., 
time;  radiation  dose;  toxin  concentration),  a  plot  of  the  elements  of  the  eigengenes  {vk}  may 
reveal  recognizable  patterns.  In  our  example,  the  first  two  eigengenes  show  an  obvious  cyclic 
structure (Figure 5.4b,c; see also Figure 5.2). Neither eigengene is exactly like the underlying sine 
or  exponential  pattern;  each  such  pattern,  however,  is  closely  approximated  by  a  linear 
combination  of  the  eigengenes.  Sine  wave  and  exponential  patterns  cannot  simultaneously  be 
right singular vectors, as they are not orthogonal. This illustrates the point that, although the most 
significant  eigengenes  may  not  be  biologically  meaningful  in  and  of  themselves,  they  may  be 
linearly combined to form biologically meaningful signals.  

Figure 5.4. Visualization of the SVD of the synthetic data matrix. a) Singular value spectrum in a relative variance plot. 
The first two singular values account for 64% of the variance.  The first (b), second (c), and third (d) eigengenes are 
plotted vs. time (assays) in the remaining panels. The third eigengene lacks the obvious cyclic structure of the first and 
second.   

When assays correspond to discrete experimental conditions (e.g., mutational varieties; tissue 
types;  distinct  individuals),  visualization  schemes  are  similar  to  those  described  below  for 

 

9 

10 
 

Chapter 5

eigenassays. When the jth element of eigengene k is of large-magnitude, the jth assay is understood 
to contribute relatively strongly to the variance of eigenassay k, a property that may be used for 
associating a group of assays.  

Eigenassays.    Alter  et  al.  have  visualized  eigenassays  {uk}  resulting  from  SVD  analysis  of 
cell-cycle data (Alter et al., 2000) by adapting a previously developed color-coding scheme  for 
visualization of gene expression data matrices (Eisen et al., 1998). Individual elements of U are 
displayed as rectangular pixels in an image, and color-coded using green for negative values, and 
red for positive values, the intensity being correlated with the magnitude. The rows of matrix U 
can be sorted using correlation to the eigengenes. In Alter et al.’s study, this scheme sorted the 
genes by the phase of their periodic pattern. The information communicated in such visualization 
bears  some  similarity  to  visualization  using  scatter  plots,  with  the  advantage  that  the  table-like 
display enables gene labels to be displayed along with the eigenassays, and the disadvantage that 
differences among the genes can only be visualized in one dimension. 

2.1.2 

Scatter plots 

Visualization of structure in high-dimensional data requires display of the data in a one-, two-, 
or three-dimensional subspace. SVD identifies subspaces that capture most of the variance in the 
data. Even though our discussion here is about visualization in subspaces obtained by SVD, the 
illustrated visualization techniques are general and can in most cases be applied for visualization 
in other subspaces (see section 4 for techniques that use other criteria for subspace selection). 

For  gene  expression  analysis  applications,  we  may  want  to  classify  samples  in  a  diagnostic 
study, or classify genes in a systems biology study. Projection of data into SVD subspaces  and 
visualization with scatter plots can reveal structures in the data that may be used for classification. 
Here  we  discuss  the  visualization  of  features  that  may  help  to  distinguish  gene  groups  by 
transcriptional  response.  Analogous  methods  are  used  to  distinguish  groups  of  assays  by 
expression  profile.  We  discuss  two  different  sources  of  gene  “coordinates”  for  scatter  plots: 
projections of the transcriptional response onto eigengenes, and correlations of the transcriptional 
response with eigengenes. 

Projection  and  correlation  scatter  plots.  Projection  scatter  plot  coordinates  qik  for 
transcriptional response gi projected on eigengene vk are calculated as qik = gi·vk. The SVD of X 
readily allows computation of these coordinates using the equation XV = US, so that qik = (US)ik. 
The  projection  of  gene  transcriptional  responses  from  our  example  data  onto  the  first  two 
eigengenes  reveals  the  a  priori  structure  in  the  data  (Figure 5.5a).  The  groups  of  the  200  sine 
wave  genes  (bottom  right  cluster),  and  the  200  exponential  decay  genes  (top  right  cluster)  are 
clearly separated from each other and from the 1,600 pure noise genes, which cluster about the 
origin.   

Correlation scatter plots may be obtained by calculating the Pearson correlation coefficient of 

each gene’s transcriptional response with the eigengenes:  

ikr

=

δδδδ
g
v
k

g

v

⋅

i

i

k

−
1

−
1

 

(5.9) 

where rik denotes the correlation coefficient of the transcriptional response gi with eigengene vk; 
δgi is the mean-centered gi, the elements of which are {xij - <xij>j}i, and δvk is the mean-centered 
vk, the elements of which are {vjk - <vjk>j}k. The normalization leads to –1 ≤ rik ≤ 1. Note that if 
each gi is pre-processed to have zero mean and unit variance, it follows that the correlation scatter 
plot is equivalent to the projection scatter plot (gi = δgi implies vk = δvk; and |δgi|-1 = |δvk|-1 = 1). 

5. Microarray analysis techniques: SVD and PCA 
 

11

In the projection scatter plot, genes with a relatively high-magnitude coordinate on the k-axis 
contribute  relatively  strongly  to  the  variance  of  the  kth  eigengene  in  the  data  set.  The  farther  a 
gene  lies  away  from  the  origin,  the  stronger  the  contribution  of  that  gene  is  to  the  variance 
accounted  for  by  the  subspace.  In  the  correlation  scatter  plot,  genes  with  a  relatively  high-
magnitude  coordinate  on  the  k-axis  have  transcriptional  responses  that  are  relatively  highly 
correlated with the kth eigengene.  

Due  to  the  normalization  in  correlation  scatter  plots,  genes  with  similar  patterns  in  their 
transcriptional  responses,  but  with  different  amplitudes,  can  appear  to  cluster  more  tightly  in  a 
correlation  scatter  plot  than  in  a  projection  scatter  plot.  Genes  that  correlate  well  with  the 
eigengenes lie near the perimeter, a property that can be used in algorithms that seek to identify 
interesting genes. At the same time, low-amplitude noise genes can appear to be magnified in a 
correlation  scatter  plot.  For  our  example  data,  the  sine  wave  and  exponential  gene  clusters  are 
relatively  tightened,  the  scatter  of  the  noise  genes  appears  to  be  increased,  and  the  separation 
between  signal  and  noise  genes  is  decreased  for  the  correlation  vs.  the  projection  scatter  plot 
(Figure 5.5).  

 

Figure 5.5. SVD scatter plots. Genes from our synthetic example data set are displayed in a) a projection scatter plot; 
and b) a correlation scatter plot. The bottom right cluster corresponds to sine wave genes, and the top right cluster 
corresponds to exponential decay genes. The cluster of genes around the origin corresponds to the noise-only genes.  

The projection scatter plot (Figure 5.5a) illustrates how SVD may be used to aid in detection 
of biologically meaningful signals. In this case, the position (q1, q2) of any cluster center10 may be 
used to construct the cluster’s transcriptional response g from the right singular vectors:  

=

g

v
q
11

+

v
q
22

 

(5.10) 

If  the  first  and  second  singular  vectors  are  biologically  meaningful  in  and  of  themselves,  the 
cluster centers will lie directly on the axes of the plot. For our synthetic data, the first and second 
singular vectors are combined to approximately generate the sine wave and exponential patterns. 

11 

12 
 

Chapter 5

SVD  and  related  methods  are  particularly  valuable  analysis  methods  when  the  distribution  of 
genes is more complicated than the simple distributions in our example data: for instance, SVD 
has been used to characterize ring-like distributions of genes such as are observed in scatter plots 
of cell-cycle gene expression data (Alter et al., 2000; Holter et al., 2000) (see section 2.3). 

Scatter plots of assays. Assays can be visualized in scatter plots using methods analogous to 
those  used  for  genes.  Coordinates  for  projection  scatter  plots  are  obtained  by  taking  the  dot 
products aj·uk of expression profiles on eigenassays, and coordinates for correlation scatter plots 
are obtained by calculating the Pearson correlation coefficient δaj·δuk|δaj|-1|δuk|-1. Such plots are 
useful  for  visualizing  diagnostic  data,  e.g.,  distinguishing  groups  of  individuals  according  to 
expression profiles. Alter et al. used such a technique to visualize cell-cycle assays (Alter et al., 
2000), and were able to associate individual assays with different phases of the cell cycle.  
 

2.2 

Detection of weak expression patterns 

As  noise  levels  in  the  data  increase,  it  is  increasingly  difficult  to  obtain  separation  of  gene 
groups in scatter plots. In such cases SVD may still be able to detect weak patterns in the data that 
may  be  associated  with  biological  effects.  In  this  respect  SVD  and  related  methods  provide 
information that is unique among commonly used analysis methods. 

Figure 5.6. SVD-based detection of weak signals. a) A plot of the first eigengene shows the structure of the weak sine 
wave signal that contributes to the transcriptional response for half of the genes. b) The second eigengene resembles 
noise. c) A relative variance plot for the first six singular values shows an elbow after the first singular value. d) The 
signal and noise genes are not separated in an eigengene scatter plot of 150 of the signal genes, and 150 of the noise-
only genes.  

 

5. Microarray analysis techniques: SVD and PCA 
 

13

Here  we  will  use  an  example  to  illustrate  the  ability  of  SVD  to  detect  patterns  in  gene 
transcriptional  response  even  though  the  individual  genes  may  not  clearly  separate  in  a  scatter 
plot.  A  data  matrix  was  generated  using  two  kinds  of  transcriptional  response:  1,000  genes 
exhibiting  a  sine  pattern,  sin(2πt/140),  with  added  noise  sampled  from  a  normal  distribution  of 
zero  mean  and  standard  deviation  1.5;  and  1,000  genes  with  just  noise  sampled  from  the  same 
distribution.  Upon  application  of  SVD,  we  find  that  the  first  eigengene  shows  a  coherent  sine 
pattern (Figure 5.6a). The second eigengene is dominated by high-frequency components that can 
only come from the noise (Figure 5.6b), and the singular value spectrum has an elbow after the 
first  singular  value  (Figure 5.6c),  suggesting  (as  we  know  a  priori)  that  there  is  only  one 
interesting  signal  in  the  data.  Even  though  the  SVD  detected  the  cyclic  pattern  in  the  first 
eigengene (Figure 5.6a), the sine wave and noise-only genes are not clearly separated in the SVD 
eigengene projection scatter plot (Figure 5.6d). 

2.3 

Examples from the literature 

Cell-cycle gene expression data display strikingly simple patterns when analyzed using SVD. 
Here we discuss two different studies that, despite having used different pre-processing methods, 
have produced similar results (Alter et al., 2000; Holter et al., 2000). Both studies found cyclic 
patterns for the first two eigengenes, and, in two-dimensional correlation scatter plots, previously 
identified  cell  cycle  genes  tended  to  plot  towards  the  perimeter  of  a  disc.  Alter  et  al.  used 
information in SVD correlation scatter plots to obtain a result that 641 of the 784 cell-cycle genes 
identified  in  (Spellman  et  al.,  1998)  are  associated  with  the  first  two  eigengenes.  Holter  et  al. 
displayed  previously  identified  cell-cycle  gene  clusters  in  scatter  plots,  revealing  that  cell-cycle 
genes  were  relatively  uniformly  distributed  in  a  ring-like  feature  around  the  perimeter,  leading 
Holter et al. to suggest that cell-cycle gene regulation may be a more continuous process than had 
been implied by the previous application of clustering algorithms. 

Raychaudhuri et al.’s study of yeast sporulation time series data (Raychaudhuri et al., 2000) is 
an  early  example  of  application  of  PCA  to  microarray  analysis.  In  this  study,  over  90%  of  the 
variance  in  the  data  was  explained  by  the  first  two  components  of  the  PCA. The  first  principal 
component contained a strong steady-state signal. Projection scatter plots were used in an attempt 
to  visualize  previously  identified  gene groups,  and  to  look  for  structures  in  the  data  that  would 
indicate  separation  of  genes  into  groups.  No  clear  structures  were  visible  that  indicated  any 
separation of genes in scatter plots. Holter et al.’s more recent SVD analysis of yeast sporulation 
data  (Holter  et  al.,  2000)  made  use  of  a  different  pre-processing  scheme  from  that  of 
Raychaudhuri  et  al.  The  crucial  difference  is  that  the  rows  and  columns  of  X  in  Holter  et  al.’s 
study  were  iteratively  centered  and  normalized.  In  Holter  et  al.’s  analysis,  the  first  two 
eigengenes were found to account for over 60% of the variance for yeast sporulation data. The 
first  two  eigengenes  were  significantly  different  from  those  of  Raychaudhuri  et  al.,  with  no 
steady-state signal, and, most notably, structure indicating separation of gene groups was visible 
in the data. Below we discuss the discrepancy between these analyses of yeast sporulation data.  

3. 

DISCUSSION 

Selection of an appropriate pre-processing method is critical, and comparisons of results using 
different  methods  must  always  take  the  pre-processing  into  account.  By  inspecting  the  SVD  of 
data,  one  can  potentially  evaluate  different  pre-processing  choices  by  gaining  insight  into,  e.g., 

13 

14 
 

Chapter 5

separability  in  scatter  plots.  The  utility  of  SVD  itself,  however,  depends  on  the  choice  of  pre-
processing, as the apparent discrepancy between the sporulation analyses described in section 2.3 
illustrates.  While  structure  was  revealed  in  yeast  sporulation  data  using  the  SVD  on  centered, 
normalized data  (Holter et al., 2000), structure was not visible using SVD on the original data 
(Raychaudhuri  et  al.,  2000),  where  the  first  component  accounted  for  the  steady-state  gene 
expression levels. There are no hard rules to be applied, but in general the decision of how to pre-
process  the  data  should  be  made  based  on  the  statistics  of  the  data,  what  questions  are  being 
asked,  and  what  methods  are  being  used  to  reveal  information  about  those  questions.  As  an 
example,  performing  a  centering  of  gene  transcriptional  responses  for  time  series  data  is  often 
sensible because we are typically more interested in how a gene’s transcriptional response varies 
over time than we are in its steady-state expression level. 

An important capability distinguishing SVD and related methods from other analysis methods 
is the ability to detect weak signals in the data. Even when the structure of the data does not allow 
separation  of  data  points,  causing  clustering  algorithms  to  fail,  it  may  be  possible  to  detect 
biologically  meaningful  patterns.  In  section 2.2  we  have  given  an  example  of  this  phenomenon 
using synthetic data. As an example of practical use of this kind of SVD-based analysis, it may be 
possible  to  detect  whether  the  expression  profile  of  a  tissue  culture  changes  in  response  to 
radiation dose, even when it is not possible to detect which specific genes change their expression 
in response to radiation dose. 

SVD allows us to obtain the true dimensionality of our data, which is the rank r of matrix X. 
As the number of genes m is generally (at least presently) greater than the number of assays n, the 
matrix  VT  generally  yields  a  representation  of  the  assay  expression  profiles  using  a  reduced 
number of variables. When r < n, the matrix U yields a representation of the gene transcriptional 
responses using a reduced number of variables. Although this property of the SVD is commonly 
referred  to  as  dimensionality  reduction,  we  note  that  any  reconstruction  of  the  original  data 
requires  generation  of  an  m × n  matrix,  and  thus  requires  a  mapping  that  involves  all  of  the 
original  dimensions.  Given  the  noise  present  in  real  data,  in  practice  the  rank  of  matrix  X  will 
always be n, leading to no dimensionality reduction for the gene transcriptional responses. It may 
be  possible  to  detect  the  “true”  rank  r  by  ignoring  selected  components,  thereby  reducing  the 
number of variables required to represent the gene transcriptional responses. As discussed above, 
existing SVD-based  methods for pre-processing based on this kind of feature selection must be 
used with caution. 

Current  thoughts  about  use  of  SVD/PCA  for  gene  expression  analysis  often  include 
application of SVD as pre-processing for clustering. Clustering algorithms can be applied using, 
e.g.,  the  coordinates  calculated  for  scatter  plots  instead  of  the  original  data  points.  Yeung  and 
Ruzzo  have  characterized  the  effectiveness  of  gene  clustering  both  with  and  without  pre-
processing using PCA (Yeung and Ruzzo, 2001). The pre-processing consisted of using PCA to 
select  only  the  highest-variance  principal  components,  thereby  choosing  a  reduced  number  of 
variables for each gene’s transcriptional response. The reduced variable sets were used as inputs 
to clustering algorithms. Better performance was observed without pre-processing for the tested 
algorithms and the data used, and the authors generally recommend against using PCA as a pre-
processing  step  for  clustering.  The  sole  focus  on  gene  clustering,  however,  in  addition  to  the 
narrow scope of the tested algorithms and data, limit the implications of the results of this study. 
For  example,  when  grouping  assays  is  of  interest,  using  {Sa'j}  instead  of  {aj}  (see  section 2; 
Figure 5.1) enables use of a significantly reduced number of variables (r vs. m) that account for 
all of the structure in the distribution of assays. Use of the reduced variable set for clustering must 

5. Microarray analysis techniques: SVD and PCA 
 

15

therefore result in not only decreased compute time, but also clusters of equal or higher quality. 
Thus the results in (Yeung and Ruzzo, 2001) for gene clustering do not apply to assay clustering. 
In  section 2.3  we  discuss  how,  rather  than  separating  into  well-defined  groups,  cell-cycle 
genes tend to be more continuously distributed in SVD projections. For instance, when plotting 
the  correlations  of  genes  with  the  first  two  right  singular  vectors,  cell-cycle  genes  appear  to  be 
relatively  uniformly  distributed  about  a  ring.  This  structure  suggests  that,  rather  than  using  a 
classification  method  that  groups  genes  according  to  their  co-location  in  the  neighborhood  of  a 
point (e.g., k-means clustering), one should choose a classification method appropriate for dealing 
with  ring-like  distributions.  Previous  cell-cycle  analyses  therefore  illustrate  the  fact  that  one 
important use of SVD is to aid in selection of appropriate classification methods by investigation 
of the dimensionality of the data.  

In this chapter we have concentrated on conveying a general understanding of the application 
of  SVD  analysis  to  gene  expression  data.  Here  we  briefly  mention  several  specific  SVD-based 
methods  that  have  been  published  for  use  in  gene  expression  analysis.  For  gene  grouping,  the 
gene shaving algorithm (Hastie et al., 2000) and SVDMAN (Wall et al., 2001) are available. An 
important  feature  to  note  about  both  gene  shaving  and  SVDMAN  is  that  each  gene  may  be  a 
member of more than one group. For evaluation of data, SVDMAN uses SVD-based interpolation 
of  deleted  data  to  detect  sampling  problems  when  the  assays  correspond  to  a  sampling  of  an 
ordinal  or  continuous  variable  (e.g.,  time  series  data).  A  program  called  SVDimpute 
(Troyanskaya et al., 2001) implements an SVD-based algorithm for imputing missing values in 
gene  expression  data.  Holter  et  al.  have  developed  an  SVD-based  method  for  analysis  of  time 
series expression data (Holter et al., 2001). The algorithm estimates a time translation matrix that 
describes evolution of the expression data in a linear model. Yeung et al. have also made use of 
SVD in a method for reverse engineering linearly coupled models of gene networks (Yeung et al., 
2002). 

It  is  important  to  note  that  application  of  SVD  and  PCA  to  gene  expression  analysis  is 
relatively recent, and that methods are currently evolving. Presently, gene expression analysis in 
general tends to consist of iterative applications of interactively performed analysis methods. The 
detailed  path  of  any  given  analysis  depends  on  what  specific  scientific  questions  are  being 
addressed. As new inventions emerge, and further techniques and insights are obtained from other 
disciplines, we mark progress towards the goal of an integrated, theoretically sound approach to 
gene expression analysis. 

4. 

FURTHER READING AND RESOURCES 

The book (Jolliffe, 1986) is a fairly comprehensive reference on PCA (a new edition is meant 
to  appear  in  summer  of  2002);  it  gives  interpretations  of  PCA  and  provides  many  example 
applications, with connections to and distinctions from other techniques such as correspondence 
analysis and factor analysis. For more details on the mathematics and computation of SVD, good 
references  are  (Golub  and  Van  Loan,  1996),  (Strang,  1998),  (Berry,  1992),  and  (Jessup  and 
Sorensen, 1994). SVDPACKC has been developed to compute the SVD algorithm (Berry et al., 
following  URL’s: 
1993).  Some  web 
http://www.cs.ut.ee/~toomas_l/linalg/;  http://www.lapeth.ethz.ch/~david/diss/node10.html;  and 
http://www.stanford.edu/class/cs205/notes/book/book.html.  SVD  is  used  in  the  solution  of 
unconstrained  linear  least  squares  problems,  matrix  rank  estimation,  and  canonical  correlation 
analysis (Berry, 1992). 

resources  on  SVD 

found 

the 

are 

at 

15 

16 
 

Chapter 5

Applications of PCA and/or SVD to gene expression data have been published in (Alter et al., 
2000; Holter et al., 2000; Holter et al., 2001; Raychaudhuri et al., 2000; Troyanskaya et al., 2001; 
Yeung and Ruzzo, 2001; Yeung et al., 2002). In addition, SVDMAN (Wall et al., 2001) and gene 
shaving  (Hastie  et  al.,  2000)  are  published  SVD-based  grouping  algorithms;  SVDMAN  is  free 
software available at http://home.lanl.gov/svdman. Knudsen illustrates some of the uses of PCA 
for visualization of gene expression data (Knudsen, 2002).  

Everitt, Landau and Leese (Everitt et al., 2001) present PCA as a special case  of Projection 
Pursuit  (Friedman  and  Tukey,  1974).  Projection  Pursuit,  which  in  general  attempts  to  find  an 
“interesting  projection”  for  the  data,  is  also  related  to  Independent  Component  Analysis  (ICA) 
(Hyvärinen,  1999).  ICA  attempts  to  find  a  linear  transformation  (non-linear  generalizations  are 
possible)  of  the  data  so  that  the  derived  components  are  as  statistically  independent  from  each 
other  as  possible.  Hyvärinen  discusses  ICA  and  how  it  relates  to  PCA  and  Projection  Pursuit 
(Hyvärinen, 1999). Liebermeister has applied ICA to gene expression data (Liebermeister, 2002).  
Other  techniques  that  are  related  to  PCA  and  SVD  for  visualization  of  data  are 
Multidimensional  Scaling  (Borg  and  Groenen,  1997)  and  Self-Organizing  Maps  (SOM) 
(Kohonen,  2001).  Both  of  these  techniques  use  non-linear  mappings  of  the  data  to  find  lower-
dimensional representations. SOM’s have been applied to gene expression data in (Tamayo et al., 
1999).  There are also non-linear generalizations of PCA (Jolliffe, 1986; Scholkopf et al., 1996).  

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We  gratefully  acknowledge  Raphael  Gottardo  and  Kevin  Vixie  for  critically  reading  the 
manuscript. The writing of this chapter was performed within the auspices of the Department of 
Energy (DOE) under contract to the University of California, and was supported by Laboratory-
Directed Research and Development at Los Alamos National Laboratory. 
                                                     
 
1 For simplicity, we use the term microarray to refer to all varieties of global gene expression technologies. 
2  Complete  understanding  of  the  material  in  this  chapter  requires  a  basic  understanding  of  linear  algebra.  We  find 
mathematical  definitions  to  be  the  only  antidote  to  the  many  confusions  that  can  arise  in  discussion  of  SVD  and 
PCA.  

3 The rank of a matrix is the number of linearly independent rows or columns. 
4 The covariance between variables x and y is C(x,y) = (N-1)-1Σi(xi-<x>)(yi-<y>), where N is the # of observations, and 

i=1,…,N. Elements of the covariance matrix for a set of variables {z(k)} are given by cij = C(z(i),z(j)). 

5 A centered vector is one with zero mean value for the elements. 
6 Note that (XTX)ij = ai·aj 
7 Note that (XXT)ij = gi·gj 
8 A normalized vector is one with unit length.  
9 This notation is similar to that used in (Alter et al., 2000), save that we use the term eigenassay instead of eigenarray. 
10 A cluster center is the average position of the points in a cluster. 

REFERENCES 

Alter O., Brown P.O., Botstein D. Singular value decomposition for genome-wide expression data processing and 

modeling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000; 97:10101-06. 

Berry M.W. Large-scale sparse singular value computations. International Journal of Supercomputer Applications 

Berry M.W., Do T., Obrien G.W., Krishna V., Varadhan S., SVDPACKC: Version 1.0 User's Guide. Knoxville: 

1992; 6:13-49. 

University of Tennessee, 1993. 

5. Microarray analysis techniques: SVD and PCA 
 

17

                                                                                                                                                              
Berry M.W., Dumais S.T., Obrien G.W. Using linear algebra for intelligent information-retrieval. Siam Review 1995; 

37:573-95. 

1996; 261:658-71. 

Borg I., Groenen P., Modern Multidimensional Scaling: Theory and Applications. New York: Springer Verlag, 1997. 
Cattell R.B. The scree test for the number of factors. Multivariate Behavioral Research 1966; 1:245-76. 
Chen L., Hodgson K.O., Doniach S. A lysozyme folding intermediate revealed by solution X-ray scattering. J Mol Biol 

Cho R.J., Campbell M.J., Winzeler E.A., Steinmetz L., Conway A., Wodicka L., Wolfsberg T.G., Gabrielian A.E., 

Landsman D., Lockhart D.J., Davis R.W. A genome-wide transcriptional analysis of the mitotic cell cycle. Mol Cell 
1998; 2:65-73. 

Deprettere F., SVD and Signal Processing: Algorithms, Analysis and Applications. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science 

Eisen M.B., Spellman P.T., Brown P.O., Botstein D. Cluster analysis and display of genome-wide expression patterns. 

Publishers, 1988. 

Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998; 95:14863-68. 

Everitt B.S., Dunn G., Applied Multivariate Data Analysis. London: Arnold, 2001. 
Everitt S.E., Landau S., Leese M., Cluster Analysis. London: Arnold, 2001. 
Fesel C., Coutinho A. Dynamics of serum IgM autoreactive repertoires following immunization: strain specificity, 

inheritance and association with autoimmune disease susceptibility. Eur J Immunol 1998; 28:3616-29. 
Friedman J.H., Tukey J.W. A projection pursuit algorithm for exploratory data analysis. IEEE Transactions on 

Computers 1974; 23:881-89. 

Garcia A.E. Large-Amplitude Nonlinear Motions in Proteins. Phys Rev Lett 1992; 68:2696-99. 
Golub G., Van Loan C., Matrix Computations. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ Press, 1996. 
Hastie T., Tibshirani R., Eisen M.B., Alizadeh A., Levy R., Staudt L., Chan W.C., Botstein D., Brown P. 'Gene 

shaving' as a method for identifying distinct sets of genes with similar expression patterns. Genome Biol 2000; 
1:research0003.1-03.21. 

Holter N.S., Mitra M., Maritan A., Cieplak M., Banavar J.R., Fedoroff N.V. Fundamental patterns underlying gene 

expression profiles: simplicity from complexity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000; 97:8409-14. 

Holter N.S., Maritan A., Cieplak M., Fedoroff N.V., Banavar J.R. Dynamic modeling of gene expression data. Proc 

Natl Acad Sci USA 2001; 98:1693-98. 

Hughes T.R., Marton M.J., Jones A.R., Roberts C.J., Stoughton R., Armour C.D., Bennett H.A., Coffey E., Dai H., He 
Y.D., Kidd M.J., King A.M., Meyer M.R., Slade D., Lum P.Y., Stepaniants S.B., Shoemaker D.D., Gachotte D., 
Chakraburtty K., Simon J., Bard M., Friend S.H. Functional discovery via a compendium of expression profiles. 
Cell 2000; 102:109-26. 

Hyvärinen A. Survey on Independent Component Analysis. Neural Computing Surveys 1999; 2:94-128. 
Jessup E.R., Sorensen D.C. A parallel algorithm for computing the singular-value decomposition of a matrix. Siam 

Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications 1994; 15:530-48. 
Jolliffe I.T., Principal Component Analysis. New York: Springer, 1986. 
Kanji G.K., 100 Statistical Tests. New Delhi: Sage, 1993. 
Knudsen S., A Biologist's Guide to Analysis of DNA Microarray Data. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2002. 
Kohonen T., Self-Organizing Maps. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2001. 
Liebermeister W. Linear modes of gene expression determined by independent component analysis. Bioinformatics 

2002; 18:51-60. 

Raychaudhuri S., Stuart J.M., Altman R.B. Principal components analysis to summarize microarray experiments: 

application to sporulation time series. Pac Symp Biocomput 2000:455-66. 

Richards J.A., Remote Sensing Digital Image Analysis. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1993. 
Romo T.D., Clarage J.B., Sorensen D.C., Phillips G.N., Jr. Automatic identification of discrete substates in proteins: 
singular value decomposition analysis of time-averaged crystallographic refinements. Proteins 1995; 22:311-21. 
Scholkopf B., Smola A.J., Muller K.-R., "Nonlinear component analysis as a kernel eigenvalue problem," technical 

report. Tuebingen: Max-Planck-Institut fur biologische Kybernetik, 1996. 

Spellman P.T., Sherlock G., Zhang M.Q., Iyer V.R., Anders K., Eisen M.B., Brown P.O., Botstein D., Futcher B. 

Comprehensive identification of cell cycle-regulated genes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae by microarray 
hybridization. Mol Biol Cell 1998; 9:3273-97. 

Strang G., Introduction to Linear Algebra. Wellesley, MA: Wellesley Cambridge Press, 1998. 
Tamayo P., Slonim D., Mesirov J., Zhu Q., Kitareewan S., Dmitrovsky E., Lander E.S., Golub T.R. Interpreting 

patterns of gene expression with self-organizing maps: methods and application to hematopoietic differentiation. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999; 96:2907-12. 

17 

18 
 

Chapter 5

                                                                                                                                                              
Troyanskaya O., Cantor M., Sherlock G., Brown P., Hastie T., Tibshirani R., Botstein D., Altman R.B. Missing value 

estimation methods for DNA microarrays. Bioinformatics 2001; 17:520-25. 

Wall M.E., Dyck P.A., Brettin T.S. SVDMAN -- singular value decomposition analysis of microarray data. 

Yeung K.Y., Ruzzo W.L. Principal component analysis for clustering gene expression data. Bioinformatics 2001; 

Bioinformatics 2001; 17:566-68. 

17:763-74. 

Yeung M.K., Tegner J., Collins J.J. Reverse engineering gene networks using singular value decomposition and robust 

regression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002; 99:6163-68. 

