2
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
2
1
 
 
 
0
5
0
9
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

New investigations of the porous dielectric detectors *

 

M. P. Lorikyan 
 

 
 
Yerevan Physics Institute,  
Brothers Alikhanian str. 2,  
Yerevan, 375036 Armenia 
Tel/Fax: (3741) 34 28 38 
E-mail:  lorikyan@moon.yerphi.am 
 
 
 

  lorikyan@star.yerphi.am 

Abstract 

 
The results of the study of the multiwire porous dielectric detector and microstrip 
porous  dielectric  detector  filled  with  porous  CsI  are  presented.  Detectors  were 
exposed to a -particles with energy of 5.46 MeV and X-rays with energy of 5.9 keV 
and  operated  with  a  constant  applied  voltage.  It  is  found  that  right  after  thermal 
deposition of the porous CsI layer the detector’s performance is unstable, it  has poor 
spatial resolution. However in a course of time the performance becomes stable and it 
acquires high spatial resolution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
*  The work is supported by the International Science and Technology Center  
    
 

 

1

Introduction 

 
The functioning of the porous dielectric detector is based on the phenomenon of 
the drift and multiplication of electrons in the porous media under the action of the 
external electric field. In a case when the drift and multiplication of electrons (EDM) 
occur  under  action  of  internal  electric  fields,  the  emission  of  the  electrons  into 
vacuum  (Anomalous  Secondary  Electron  Emission  -  Malter  effect)  [1,  2]  is  inertial 
and  non  controllable  and  the  secondary  electron  emission  coefficient  for relativistic 
single  particles  d anom  »
  1    [3,  4].  This  phenomenon  has  not  found  application  for 
radiation  registration.  In  1970-s  intensive  researches  of  drift  and  multiplication  of 
electrons  in  porous  dielectrics  and  their  emission  in  vacuum  under  influence  of  an 
external electric field were carried out in the Yerevan Physical Institute. The idea was 
in the following: Malter effect arises and it proceeds under the action of fields of the 
large  surface  and  space  charges,  therefore  EDM  process  is  non  controllable  and 
inertial. In an external electric field, if the emitter is irradiated by a not intensive beam 
of  particles,  these  charges  do  not  arise,  therefore  was  anticipated,  that  processes  of 
drift  and  multiplication  of  electrons  will  be  non  inertial  and  governable  by  the 
external  electric  field,  and  that  d   for  relativistic  particles  will  considerably  exceed 
d anom.  The  use  of  external  field  made  it  possible  to  investigate  the  drift  and 
multiplication  of  electrons  in  porous  dielectrics  (EDM  in  PDs)  for  thick  layers  of 
porous dielectrics [5-10]. Researches have shown, that EDM in PDs and the electron 
emission in vacuum under influence of an external electric field are non inertial and 
controllable,  and  that  the  secondary  electron  emission  coefficient  for  minimally  – 
ionizing single particles reaches d cont = 250 [6]. Then it was shown, that in case of a -
particles  with  energy  of  »
  5.46  MeV,  d con  reaches  several  thousands  [9].  Later  the 
secondary electron emission in porous dielectrics placed in the external electric field 
was investigated by C.Chianelli, et al. [11] and R.Cheehab et al. [12], who confirmed 
that  this phenomenon indeed is non inertial and controllable and that the secondary 
electron emission factor for high energy particles is large. 

In  1978  the  same  Yerevan  group  developed  and  investigated  porous  multiwire 
detectors  (MWPDD)  [13-18].  In  these  investigations  it  was  found,  that  when  the 
MWPDD was working in the DC mode, it was unstable and the efficiency of particle 
registration  dropped  to  very  low  values  in  less  than  one  hour.  To  stabilize  the 
performance  of  porous  dielectric  detectors,  periodically  after  a  short  operating  time 
(several  milliseconds)  the  applied  voltage  was  turned  off,  then  a  working  pulse  of 
inverse polarity was applied on the detector, i.e. these detectors maintained a stable 
performance in a pulsed mode of operation [19-21]. In the pulsed operation mode the 
coordinate  resolution  of  these  detectors  is  125  m m  [18,  22].  The  time  resolution  of 
MWPDD  is  60  ps  [23]b  and  detection  efficiency  of  minimally-ionizing  particles  is 
100%  [24].  More  full  information  on  problem  of  porous  detectors  is  given  in 
reference [25].  

 

2

 The  preliminary  results  of  investigation  of  a  porous  microstrip  detector  are 
presented  in  [25].  Later  Lorikyan  continued  these  investigations  [26,  27]  and  has 
shown, that porous detectors operation in the continuous DC mode is also stable.  

Qualitatively, the mechanism of the EDM in porous dielectric media under the 
action  of  an  external  electric  field  can  be  represented  in  the  following  manner:  the 
primary particle knocks out electrons from valence band of material pore walls into a 
conduction  band.  The  holes  remain  in  the  valence  band.  In  the  conduction  band 
electrons with energies higher than the electron affinity c
 of the pore surfaces escape 
from the pore walls and are accelerated in the pores by the external electric field. The 
accelerated  electrons  induce  in  the  low  depths  of  pore  walls  the  same  processes  as 
initial  particles.  These  processes  repeat  in  the  second,  third,  etc.  generations  of 
electrons.  When  in  each  act  of  electron  collision  with  pore  walls  the  secondary 
electron emission factor d  > 1, an avalanche multiplication of electrons (holes) in the 
porous medium may take place. The process of EDM and avalanche of electrons are 
schematically shown in Fig. 1. Electrons and holes move in opposite directions and 
during the increase of the distance between them a charge is induced on electrodes. 
This charge is proportional to a potentials difference between points, which they have 
reached.  The  value  of  c
  in  the  dielectrics  is  sufficiently  high  and  thermal  electrons 
cannot take part in the emission process, therefore the initiation of cascade processes 
of  the  electron  multiplication  is  practically  impossible.  So,  the  high  electron 
multiplication  factor  observed  in  porous  dielectrics  is  possibly  explained  by  the 
decrease  of  c
,  as  in  the  case  of  the  P-type  semiconductors,  where  the  electric  field 
decreases the c
 to negative values if the surface is covered by monoatomic layer of Cs 
or  Cs2O  [28].  In  our  case  the  Cs  atoms  are  created  by  the  dissociation  of  CsI 
molecules.  When  c
  decreases, the  thickness  of  the  layer  (escape depth) from which 
electrons  reach  the  surface  and  escape  into vacuum increases [28]. All these effects 
provide  a  high  factor  of  secondary  electron  emission  from  pore  walls.  However 
numerous defects in the crystalline structure exist on the surfaces and in the walls of 
porous  dielectrics.  These  defects  are  charge  carrier  capturing  centers  and  lead  to  a 
formation of a large space and surface charges. The direction of the electric field of 
the latter is opposite to that of the external field, that is why the speed of the electron 
drift and the electrons multiplication factor decrease. Because of that, the loss of the 
charge carriers increases and also their scattering on the walls is more intensive, thus 
the  time  stability,  the  spatial  and  time  resolutions  become  poor.  So,  detectors  with 
dielectric working media having a notable density of charge carrier capturing centers 
will  have  a  poor  spatial,  energy  and  time  resolutions  and  unstable  performance. 
Beside  this  kind  of  traps,  there  exist  also  impurity  traps,  that  is  why  the  working 
medium purity is very crucial for normal operation of porous detectors [29].  

In  recent  works  [24,  25]  the  multiwire  porous  dielectric  detectors  (PDD)  were  
prepared by paying more attention to the cleanness of the technology. Detectors were 
investigated  in  the  DC  mode.  It  was  found  that,  some  hours  after  manufacturing  of 
porous CsI layer the performance of porous detectors was unstable and it had a low 

 

3

spatial  sensitivity.  Thus  inside  the  porous  CsI  and  on  the  surfaces  of  its  walls  the 
densities  of  the  surface  and  spatial  charges  were  possibly  rather  large.  But  in  due 
course  of  time  detectors  acquire  stability  and  a high  coordinate resolution  and  high 
particles detection efficiency. After that PDDs maintained stable performance and had 
high  counting  characteristics,  which  did  not  change  even  after  being  turned  off  for 
long time. This means, that the densities of the surface and spatial charges in porous 
CsI have dropped drastically and also the number of charge carrier capturing centers 
decreased  significantly  and  the  influence  of  polarization  effects  on  the  drift  and 
multiplication of the electrons became insignificant. 

In  this  paper  the  results  of  the  study  of  the  MWPDD  and MSPDD,  filled  with 
porous CsI, are presented. Detectors are exposed to a -particles of energy of 5.46 MeV 
and  X-rays  of  energy  of  5.9  keV.  These  detectors  were  placed  after  assembly  in 
ambient  Ar  inside  the  vacuum  chamber  which  was  then    pumped  out  to  »
  103 
Torr.  Investigations  of  detectors  started  one  hour  after  their  putting  in  the  vacuum 
chamber.  All  these  procedures  and  measurements  are  made  at  room  temperature  »
 
180C. The time stability, spatial resolution and radiation registration efficiency were 
measured in DC mode. 

  7  ·

For  quick  testing  of the  spatial  sensitivity  of  the  detectors  and  determining the 
upper  limit  of  the  spatial  resolution,  which  is  restricted  by  the  transverse  sizes  of 
electron  shower  Z  the  the  following  method  was  used:  without  collimation  of  the 
sources and  with a constant registration threshold Vthr, in the same experimental run 
both  the  number  of  particles  (N(I))  detected  only  by  one  anode  wire  (strip)  (or 
corresponding efficiency of registration of particles h (I)) and the number of particles 
(N(C)),  which  are  detected  simultaneously  by  the  two  adjacent  anode  wires (strips) 
(or probability of registration of such events h (C)), were measured.  It is evident that 
the  ratio  N(I)  /  N(С)  =  Ss  (spatial  sensitivity  of  porous  layer)  defines  the  spatial 
resolution  of  detector.  When  the  width  of the electron shower is much smaller than 
the distance between the adjacent anode wires, each particle is detected in general by 
only one anode wire (strip) and Ss >> 1. In the opposite case the particles are detected 
in general simultaneously by two adjacent anode wires (strips) and Ss £  1. When the 
h (I) = 1 and Ss >> 1, the coordinate resolution of detector 

)32/(b

.  

=

s

x

The  purity  of  CsI  used  in  manufacturing  the  detectors  was  99.99  %.  The  fast 
current  amplifiers  with  a  rise  time  of  1.5  ns,  250  - W
  input  impedance,  and  the 
conversion ratio of 30 mV/m A were used for the amplification of detector’s pulses. In 
the  intervals  between  measurements  of  each  point,  the  detectors  were  exposed  to 
radiation and a voltage was applied to them, however in experiment lasting for many 
days the detector was switched off on weekends and also for 16 hours at nights. In all 
cases, measurement errors (not indicated in figures) are only statistical. The intrinsic 
noises of detectors and amplifier were »

 0.1-0.2 s-1.  

 
 

 

4

 
1. Description of porous detectors  
 
The schematic view of MWPDD is shown in Fig. 2. The 25 m m diameter anode 
wires  are  made  of  gilded  tungsten  and  are  spaced  at  b  =  0.25 mm.  The  cathode  is 
made of 60 m m Al foil. The porous CsI layer is prepared by thermal deposition in an 
Ar atmosphere [30] at a pressure of p = 3 Torr. Initially a CsI layer was sputtered onto 
the  cathode,  afterwards,  the  frame  with  the  anode wires is mounted on the cathode. 
The detectors had gap of 0.5 mm.  

In the case of detection of a -particles a porous CsI layer just after deposition had 
a thickness of 0.82 mm and a density of r /r 0 = 0.35 %, where r 0 is a CsI monocrystal 
density.  The  sensitive  area  of  this  detector  was  22.5  ·
  22.5  mm2.  a -particles  with 
intensity  of  476 min-1cm-2 pass to the porous medium through the gaps between the 
anode wires.  

In  the  case  of  detection  of  X-rays  a  porous  CsI  layer  of  MWPDD  just  after 
  0.05  mm and  a  density  of  r /r 0 =  0.67  %. The 
 25 mm2. X-rays of intensity of 630 min-

deposition  had  a  thickness  of  0.75  –
sensitive area of this MWPDD was of 25 ·
1cm-2 were entering onto the porous CsI through the Al foil cathode.  

The  schematic  view  of  MSPDD  is  given  in  Fig.  3.  Golden  strips  were 
lithographically  deposited  onto  the  glass-ceramic  plate.  The  width  of  strips  was  20 
m m. The distance between their centers was 100 m m, and the gap between the strips 
and  the  cathode  electrode  was  0.5  mm.  The  cathode  was  made  of  0.7  transparency 
micromesh. The sensitive area was of 22 ·
 22 mm2. Immediately after the deposition 
the thickness and the density r /r 0 of porous CsI layer were 0.84 –
 0.05 mm and 0.37 
%  respectively.  Initially  CsI  layer  was  sputtered  onto  the  plate  with  microstrips. 
Afterwards,  the  cathode  was  mounted  in  such  a  manner  that  the  porous  layer 
compacted  from  the  thickness  of  0.84  mm  tо 0.5 mm, i.e. the porous CsI layer was 
compacted 1.7 times. a -particles of intensity of 630 min-1cm-2 were falling from the 
side of the micromesh.   

 
2. Experimental results. 
 
2.1. Investigation of the Multiwire porous dielectric detector (MWPDD). 
 
Figure  4  shows  the  dependences  of  the  number  of  detected  a -particles,  Na (I) 
(squares) and  Na (C) (triangles), on the voltage U. The intensity of a -particle was 676 
min-1cm-2. Measurements were performed in one hour after assembling the MWPDD. 
One can see, that Na (I) in the beginning grows up to Na (I) »
 300 (the efficiency of 
registration h
a (I) = 0.1), but then decreases. Na (C) also grows, but reaches a plateau 
of  Na (C)  =  2400  (probability  of  registration  of  each  particles  by  the  two  adjacent 
anode wires h
a (C) = 0.86). For small U the spatial sensitivity Ss is close to unity but 

 

5

with increasing U it decreases and in the region of the plateau of Na (C)  Ss << 1.  So, 
the  spatial  resolution  of  the  detector  is  worse  than  the  anode-wire  spacing  250  m m. 
The  MWPDD’s  time  stability,  determined  immediately  after  these  measurements 
were completed, is given in Fig. 5. From it is clear that Na (I) and Na (C) in 30 minutes 
drop from Na (C) = 2200 practically to zero, i.e. the detector performance is unstable. 
Thus the density of defects in the crystalline structure of the porous layer is very high.  
After  completion  of  these  measurements  the  MWPDD  was  switched  off  and 
measurements were resumed in 19 hours. The U-dependences of Na (I) (squares) and 
Na (C) (triangles) are shown in Fig.6.  

Comparing Fig. 4 and Fig. 6 we see that first  the working voltage U is the latter 
case has shifted by ~
 150 V to the right, second Na (I) in difference from the previous 
case increases rapidly and reaches a plateau for Na (I) = 2900, while Na (C) for a low 
U is very small and increases insignificantly for U-s below the one, corresponding to 
the plateau of Na (I), and in the plateau region is only 6 % of Na (I), i.e., in the region 
of  the  working  voltage  Ss  >>  1.  Thus  in  course  of  time  the  MWPDD’s  working 
voltage increases, the detector acquires high spatial sensitivity and a spatial resolution 
becomes s =72 m m since h

a (I) = 1.  

Results  of  measurements  of  the  time-stability  of  Na (I)  and  Na (C)  observed 
immediately after obtaining previous results are shown in Fig. 7. It is easy to see the 
detector performance is stable. 

The time stability of the detection efficiencies of a -particles h

a (I) (squares) and 
probability  of  the  simultaneous  registration  of  the  same  a -particles by two adjacent 
anode wires h
a (C) = Na (C) / N0a  (triangles) of this MWPDD for 130 days are given in 
Fig.  8.  One can  clearly  see  that h
a (I)  during  all  that  time  with high  accuracy  had a 
constant  value,  while  the  h
a (С)  drops  steeply    on  the  124-th  day.  Note  that  on  the 
second day of measurements of the time stability U = 963 V, and on 130-th day had 
grown to 1100 V. The MWPDD was switched off every day for 16 hours, from 47-th 
to  56-th  day  and  always  in  weekends.  Also  we  have  observed,  that  a  switched  off 
detector,  which  remained  in  the  vacuum  chamber  for  3  months,  had  the  same 
characteristics as before that. Thus, the counting characteristics of MWPDD’s did not 
change also if they were switched off for a long time.  

The results of investigation of the time-stability of MWPDD exposed to X-rays 
in the period from the 3-rd day to the 17-th day are shown in Fig. 9. The detection 
efficiency  of  the  X-quantum  by  only  one  anode  wire  h x(I)  and  probability  of  its 
registration simultaneously by two adjacent wires h x(C) = Nx(C) / N0x are marked by 
squares and triangles, respectively. One can see, that within the experimental errors 
h x(I)  remains  constant  during  all  that  time  while  h x(C)  decreases  for  about  three 
times. Thus the performance of MWPDD in the case of X-rays, when the energy loss 
is  1000  times  less  than  in  case  of  a -particles,  is  also  stable  and  it  has  high  spatial 
resolution s x. 

 

 

6

2.2.  Investigation of the microstrip porous dielectric detector (MSPDD).  
 
The results of the study of the MSPDD are shown on Figs. 10, 11 and 12. The 
time stability functions of the detection efficiencies of a -particles by only one anode 
a (I)  (squares)  and  probability  of  simultaneous  registration  of  the  same  a -
strip  h
particles  by  two  adjacent  strips  h
a (C)  =  Na (C)  /  N0a   (triangles)  of  this  MSPDD are 
given in Fig. 10. These data were obtained in 72 hours after MSPDD’s assembly. The 
intensity  of  a -particles  was  336  min-1cm-2.  One  can  see,  that  both  h
a (C) 
decrease monotonously in time. Ss »
 
60 at the completion. Later on the stability of the MSPDD improved from day to day. 
From  Fig.  11,  where  the  results  of  the  similar  measurements  performed  on  the  8-th 
day after MSPDD’s assembly are presented, one can deduce, that, contrary to the 4-th 
day,  the  performance  on  the  8-th  day  is  stable.  MSPDD  has  a  high  registration 
efficiency and high spatial resolution s

 8 at the beginning of the measurements and Ss »

 = 29 m m since Ss »

a (I)  and  h

 7.  

The time stability measurements of the detection efficiencies of a -particles h

a (I) 
(squares) and h
a (C) = Na (C) / N0a  (triangles) for 36 days of MSPDD’s operation are 
presented on Fig. 12. It is clear, that during first 8 days both h
a (C) increase 
and are constant afterwards. The reasons for the increase of h
a (C) are not 
clear to us. Such changes in the particle registration efficiencies were not observed in 
the case of MWPDD-s. Possibly these changes in the case of MWPDD are due to the 
charging  of  the  microstrip’s  dielectric  substrate  surface.  Thus  the  microstrip  porous 
dielectric detector has a spatial resolution better than –

a (I) and h
a (I) and h

 50 m m. 

 

3. Discussion 

 
The observed phenomena that the porous detectors right after thermal deposition 
of  CsI  layer  are  unstable  and  have  no  spatial  sensitivity  and  establishment  in  the 
course of time of a stability, spatial sensitivity and high detection efficiency possibly 
are due to a quantitative and qualitative changes in the structure of crystals in the pore 
walls. It is possible that right after the CsI layer deposition, the structure of CsI pore 
walls  have  large  density  of  bulk  and  surface  defects  in  crystals  and  the  electron 
affinity  c
    of  the  pore  surfaces  is  high.  These  defects  are  charge-carrier  trapping 
centers and form high space and surface charges. The electric fields of these charges 
suppress  the  process  of  electron  drift  and  multiplication.  Possibly  in  the  course  of 

 

7

