 

 

 

 

Comment on "Gain-assisted Superluminal Light Propagation" 

Harry I. Ringermacher 
General Electric Research Center, Schenectady, NY 12301 
 
Lawrence R. Mead  
Dept. of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southern Mississippi 

             

      Hattiesburg, MS  39406-5046 

Abstract. -  Wang, Kuzmich and Dogariu, in their 20 July, 2000, Nature article, describe an experiment ostensibly 
measuring superluminal speeds of 310c via a few percent shift in time of an optical pulse undergoing anomalous 
dispersion in a pumped medium. This paper seems to have become part of the “superluminal lore” and is often 
referenced as a profound example of superluminality. We have closely examined the article and find serious flaws 
that need to be addressed. 

 
Keywords:  superluminal, anomalous dispersion 
 

     Wang,  Kuzmich  and  Dogariu,  in  their  20  July,  2000,  Nature  article[1],  describe  an  experiment 
ostensibly measuring superluminal speeds of 310C via a 3.35% shift in time of an “ almost no change in 
pulse  shape”  optical  pulse.    Putting  aside  their  detailed  theoretical  exposition  of  anomalous  dispersion, 
which is undoubtedly correct, we are left with asking some rather simple questions:  What are they actually 
measuring?  What is the interpretation of what they measure? Unfortunately, their experiment leaves open 
many questions. "Almost" is not good enough when measuring 3% effects.  Although they emphasize that 
they  used  low  intensity  laser  probe  pulses  to  minimize  saturation  effects,  they  do  not  include  a  standard 
linearity evaluation covering their optical regime.  We have to take their word on this.  A 3% pulse shape 
distortion, measured any number of ways, could account for their superluminality. For example, we note 
that  the  resonant  pulse  has  wiggles  on  top  receding  into  the  trailing  edge.  That  undoubtedly  affects  the 
moments of the waveform and therefore the location of leading and trailing edges.  This signal distortion 
was not even addressed. What was presented is even more enigmatic.  They claim, in Fig. 4 showing the 
actual  pulse  waveform,  that  the  62  ns  shift  in  the  leading  edge  between  resonant  and  reference  pulses  is 
equal to the shift in the trailing edge. Were that true, it would vindicate the no distortion claim. But their 
insets to the figure clearly show, even to the “untrained eye”, that they are not equal and roughly vary by 
perhaps a factor of two on average. Indeed, it is not even stated if they took an average. Furthermore, the 
entry of the leading and trailing edges into the base of the waveform appear to be more consistent with that 
produced  by  a  distortion  rather  than  a  simple  shift  in  time  as  can  be  demonstrated  by  a  theoretical 
calculation of a 3% shift for a "near Gaussian" pulse. 
 
     Even more disturbing is their defense of the Nature data on their internet site [2] using what is clearly 
different data.  In particular, the pulse, appearing in the internet data to be pure Gaussian with no wiggles, 
is not the same as the pulse presented in Nature. The wavefront edge insets on the website now appear to be 
ideal  with  equal  leading  and  trailing  time  shifts  of  the  Gaussian pulses.  We  do  not  know whether  this  is 
what  they  should  have  seen  or  what  they  did  see  and  did  not  publish.  A  deeper  understanding  and 
exposition of effects of anomalous dispersion on waveform shape might have helped, but in principle is not 
essential – a better experiment and analysis is.  A shorter pulse that could be fully contained within the 6-
cm  cavity,  for  example,  would  have  produced  clearer  results.  Stating  that  causality  is  not  violated  by  a 
pulse leaving the cavity before entering doesn't help either. 
 
1. 

L.J. Wang, A. Kuzmich and A. Dogariu, Gain-assisted superluminal light propagation. Nature 406, 
277-279 (2000) 

2. www.neci.nj.nec.com/homepages/lwan/gas.htm  
 

