 
EVALUATION OF AN IMPULSE GRAVITY 
GENERATOR BASED BEAMED PROPULSION 
CONCEPT 
 
 
Chris Y. Taylor  ∗
Jupiter Research Corp. 
Houston, TX 
chrisytaylor@yahoo.com
 
 
Giovanni Modanese 
University of Bolzano – Industrial Engineering 
Via Sernesi 1 
39100 Bolzano, Italy 
giovanni.modanese@unibz.it 
 
California Institute for Physics and Astrophysics 
336 Cambridge Ave. 
Palo Alto, CA  94306 

 

ABSTRACT 

 
Recent experiments on anomalous forces involving 
high critical temperature superconductors by  
Podkletnov and Modanese have demonstrated an 
experimental apparatus apparently capable of 
generating a beam of radiation that acts on interposed 
objects as a repulsive force field. This beam is able to 
penetrate bulk material and imparts a force that is 
proportional to the mass of the target and independent 
of the target composition. Because of the similarity of 
these beam properties to gravitational effects and the 
possibility that the mechanism of its generation may be 
related to gravitation, this apparatus has been dubbed an 
"impulse gravity generator." Unlike gravitation, 
however, this beam has clear-cut boundaries and does 
not appear to diverge over the distance tested thus far 
(approximately 1 km).  A beam of radiation or particles 
with the properties described for the impulse gravity 
generator would appear to be an excellent candidate for 
use in beamed spacecraft propulsion.  Besides the usual 
benefits of beamed propulsion, it would not need sails 
or other special spacecraft components to function, 
could safely provide high accelerations to delicate 
components, and might operate at higher efficiencies 
than other beamed propulsion concepts.  This paper 
analyzes the suitability of a beamed propulsion concept 
having properties consistent with the impulse gravity 

                                                 
∗ Member, AIAA 
Copyright 2002 by Chris Y. Taylor and 
 
Giovanni Modanese.  Published by the American 
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. with 
permission. 

generator described by Podkletnov et al. The use of this 
propulsion concept for orbital maneuver, Earth-to-orbit, 
interplanetary, and interstellar applications based on 
presently available experimental results and theory is 
considered, and areas for future research needed to 
better characterize this phenomenon are discussed.  
 

INTRODUCTION

 

 
A conventional rocket must carry its engine, energy 
source, and reaction mass along with it.  Beamed 
propulsion concepts seek to do away with one or more 
of these items on the spacecraft and replace them with a 
beam of radiation or matter, which is sent to the 
spacecraft from a transmitter that remains near the 
launch site.  Eliminating these systems, their 
subsystems, and associated structure from the 
spacecraft reduces the amount of energy needed to 
propel the spacecraft to its destination.  Because 
portions of the spacecraft’s propulsion system are left at 
the launch site, they do not have to be built to the same 
exacting and expensive standards as the rest of the 
spacecraft.  In addition, the transmitter components can 
be accessed relatively easily if repairs need to be made 
to them during flight; a feat that is often impossible 
with conventional rocket based spacecraft propulsion 
components.  For missions with long acceleration times 
it may even be possible to upgrade the transmitter 
components during the flight.  Also, because the 
transmitter remains behind after the initial mission is 
over it may be reused for future missions; becoming 
more like part of a space access infrastructure than just 
a spacecraft subsystem.  Previously described beamed 
propulsion concepts include using a laser beam to heat 
rocket reaction mass,1 pushing lightsail spacecraft with 
lasers2 or masers,3,4 and transferring momentum to 
spacecraft with a stream of high-speed pellets.5  With 
all its advantages, beamed propulsion is likely to 
become an increasingly useful strategy for mankind’s 
further exploration and exploitation of outer space. 
 
Recent experiments on anomalous forces involving 
high critical temperature superconductors by  
Podkletnov and Modanese have demonstrated an 
experimental apparatus apparently capable of 
generating a beam of radiation that acts on interposed 
objects as a repulsive force field. This beam is able to 
penetrate bulk material and imparts a force proportional 
to the mass of the target and independent of the target 
composition. Because of the similarity of these beam 
properties to gravitational effects, and the possibility 
that the mechanism of its generation may be related to 
gravitation, this apparatus has been dubbed an "impulse 
gravity generator."  This paper analyzes the suitability 
of a beamed propulsion concept using a transmitter that 
has properties consistent with the impulse gravity 

 
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

generator described by Podkletnov et al.  First, 
background information on Podkletnov’s experiments 
and Modanese’s theoretical explanation of the 
phenomenon will be provided.  The general suitability 
of this phenomenon for beamed propulsion will be 
discussed with some conclusions on the likely 
characteristics of such a propulsion system.  Following 
the description of general system characteristics, the 
concept is further illustrated by describing how it might 
be used in specific applications.  Example applications 
analyzed in this paper include interstellar missions, 
interplanetary missions, Earth-to-orbit launch, and 
orbital maneuver of spacecraft near Earth.  Finally, this 
paper highlights specific areas where further scientific 
research is needed to permit better analysis of impulse 
gravity generator based beamed propulsion, and to pave 
the way for its possible use in future spacecraft designs.   
 
The technology behind the impulse gravity generator is 
not as mature and the theoretical model not as fully 
developed as most other beamed propulsion concepts, 
such as lasers, masers, and particle beams.  Because of 
this lack of development, there are sometimes 
ambiguities in what the behavior of a mature impulse 
gravity generator beamed propulsion system would be.  
In situations where a lack of experimental results 
creates such ambiguities, educated assumptions will be 
made based upon the current theoretical explanations 
for the phenomenon developed by Modanese, 
frequently accompanied by a description of the effect 
on system behavior if the technology develops in a 
different way than predicted by current theory. 
 

BACKGROUND

 

6

2

3

 
Impulse Gravity Generator Experiments 
In their paper “Impulse Gravity Generator Based on 
Charged Y Ba  Cu  O  Superconductor with 
7-y
Composite Crystal structure”, Dr. Evgeny Podkletnov 
and Dr. Giovanni Modanese describe a series of 
experiments involving an apparatus capable of exerting 
a brief repulsive force on small movable objects at a 
distance.   This apparatus is composed of a high-T  
c
superconductor electrode from which a brief, high 
voltage electrical discharge is sent to a second 
electrode.  This electrical discharge from the 
superconducting electrode is accompanied by the 
emission of a beam of anomalous forces that propagate 
in the same direction as the electrical discharge.   
 
The anomalous beam generated by this apparatus has a 
diameter approximately the same as the 
superconducting emitter.  The beam exhibits no 
detectible spread for distances of at least 1.2 km using 
measuring devices accurate to +/- 2 mm.  
Measurements beyond 1.2 km have not been made.   

 
Dr. Podkletnov utilized target masses suspended in a 
pendulum arrangement within evacuated glass cylinders 
to measure the strength of the anomalous beam.  The 
force exerted on the target masses increases with 
increasing discharge voltage.  For any given voltage, 
the force on the targets is proportional to the mass of 
the target.  Target composition and cross sectional area 
had no detectible effect on the force imparted by the 
beam.  The beam propagates through different types of 
intervening material, including structural walls and 
electromagnetic shielding, without any noticeable 
attenuation in the force it exerts on the targets.  The 
target masses used in the detector pendulums ranged 
from 10 to 50 grams.  Target materials included metal, 
glass, wood, and rubber.  Pendulum lengths of both 0.8 
and 0.5 meters were used in the tests. At the maximum 
voltage reported, pendulum displacements of 5.6 inches 
(0.14 m) horizontally and 0.5 inches (.01 m) vertically 
where consistently measured for the target masses, 
representing on the order of 10-3 Joules of potential 
energy.  Approximately 105 Joules of electricity are 
consumed in one test run at this setting.  Assuming the 
beam duration is approximately the same as that of the 
electrical discharge at the superconductor, such 
deflections would indicate a target acceleration of 
approximately 1000 gees (9810 m/s2) for approximately 
10-4 seconds.  Since publication of these results, 
additional tests with target masses of up to 10 kg have 
been conducted with similar results.7  Based on this 
information, the efficiency of the impulse gravity 
generator in these tests can be estimated to be at least 
10-5 (0.001 %). 
 
Many of the characteristics of the anomalous beam 
generated by this apparatus are suggestive of a 
gravitational nature, such as: 

•  Force exerted on the target is proportional to 

the target’s mass 

•  Force exerted on the target is independent of 

the target’s composition 
•  Beam penetrates bulk material 
•  Beam penetrates electromagnetic shielding 

Based on its apparent gravitational nature, this 
anomalous beam has been dubbed a “gravity impulse” 
and will be referred to as such in this paper.  Devices 
emitting this gravity impulse beam will be referred to as 
“impulse gravity generators.”  
 
Impulse Gravity Generator Theory 
A brief analysis of the gravity impulse beam was 
6
published by Podkletnov and Modanese in 2001.   The 
starting point of this model is the concept of anomalous 
dipolar quantum fluctuations induced by the Cooper 
pairs condensate (see Appendix A). These fluctuations 
locally increase the gravitational vacuum polarizability 

 
2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

8,9

 this increase 

to observable levels. In the weak gravitational shielding 
effect observed earlier by Pokletnov,
was obtained in static or quasi-static form.  In the 
impulse gravity generator, the critical conditions in the 
quantum condensate, necessary for the anomalous 
coupling between the gravitational field and the Cooper 
pairs, are produced only for a short time at the 
discharge. Therefore, it is natural to expect that in this 
case the formation of virtual dipoles be accompanied by 
the emission of virtual dipolar radiation with 
frequencies of the same order of the frequencies present 
in the discharge.  A beam of virtual gravitons, whose 
momentum originates from that of the Cooper pairs of 
the discharge, is emitted in such a way that the beam 
direction is defined by momentum conservation. When 
the gravitons hit a target, they give rise to the observed 
impulsive forces. 
 
It is hard to explain the observed features of this field 
and its propagation without resorting to the use of 
virtual radiation.  The abnormal character of the 
observed radiation beam is readily apparent.  It 
propagates through brick walls and metal plates without 
noticeable reduction in the beam’s effect on the target 
masses.  This is not, however, due to a weak coupling 
with matter, as is evidenced by the beam’s effect on the 
targets.  Furthermore, this beam conveys an impulse 
which is not related to usual momentum energy 
relationship for radiation, E = cp.  Referring to the 
impulse gravity beam as “radiation” is therefore 
unsuitable, and one could possibly envisage it as an 
unknown quasi-static force field.  In this way one could 
explain why an impulse is transmitted to the test masses 
and no shields are effective in stopping the effect of the 
beam.  
 
The force appears to act upon several objects 
independently one from the other. For instance, if two 
pendulums are placed one behind the other along the 
beam, they move in the same way. This is just what 
would happen for a regular gravitational force produced 
by a source: it would act upon several objects without 
interference, the total reaction force on the source 
depending of course on how many and how massive 
"targets" are present.  It is hard, however, to understand 
how such a field could be so well focused.  There are 
no solutions of the classical field equations that allow 
for such a narrow and clear-cut force beam. Still, 
classically there exist wave-like solutions of the field 
equations.  These solutions, however, cannot give such 
a beam either, and furthermore gravitational waves are 
quadrupolar and cannot exert any net force upon a 
target. 
 
In quantum theory, any force is explained at a 
fundamental level as due to the exchange of virtual 

mediating particles. Technically, the expression for the 
interaction potential energy as the result of an exchange 
of virtual particles has been known for a long time in 
electrodynamics and in the gauge theories of weak and 
strong interactions. The corresponding formula for 
gravitation was given by Modanese,10 where the static 
interaction potential of two gravitational sources is 
expressed as an integral of the graviton propagator over 
momenta and energies. It is also possible to prove that 
the main contribution to the integral comes from 
momenta and energies related by the equality E<<cp, 
which corresponds quite well to what has been 
observed in the experiment but differs from the energy-
momentum relation for free massless particles which 
can propagate to infinite distance independently from 
the existence of a target. In this formula also appear, 
besides the integral over momenta and energies of the 
exchanged particles, factors corresponding to the two 
masses. This means that the flow of exchanged virtual 
gravitons does not have an "absolute" intensity, but is 
instead proportional to the source mass and to the target 
mass at the same time!  Such a picture clearly differs 
from what one imagines in the case of a real flux of 
particles emitted from a source and absorbed by a 
target. 
 
In addition to the strangeness of the field configuration 
as already discussed, the force is repulsive. This is not 
explainable in the classical realm either. From the 
quantum point of view, what matters in a scattering 
between two particles mediated by a third virtual 
particle (the simplest example is the scattering 
electron/proton, mediated by a virtual photon) is the 
exchanged energy-momentum. This is so true, that the 
signs of the electric charges, in the example above, do 
not affect the differential cross section. An electron 
bounces against a proton exactly the same way a 
positron would. This describes an elementary process 
where one single virtual particle is exchanged in a very 
short time interval.  The static force is the opposite 
limit; many virtual particles are exchanged, in a 
continuous way, and in the time limit from - infinity to 
+ infinity. The phenomenon underlying the impulse 
gravity generator represents a sort of intermediate case, 
because we are supposing that many gravitons are 
exchanged, but still with the features of a scattering or 
similar. 
 
If the effect is gravitational, then the acceleration of a 
test mass should not depend on its mass or initial 
velocity, which causes an additional conceptual 
difficulty concerning power limitations.  The power 
imparted to an accelerated spacecraft, or any other 
object, is given by the equation: 
 

 
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

Pspacecraft =

mav

 

 

(1) 

where a is the acceleration of the spacecraft, m is the 
mass of the object, v is the velocity of the spacecraft, 
and Pspacecraft is the power added to the spacecraft in the 
form of increasing kinetic energy.  If the mass or 
velocity of the target is too high, then the amount of 
power needed to maintain the expected acceleration 
will exceed the power available in the beam.  If 
insufficient power is available in the beam to produce 
the expected acceleration for the target mass, then 
either the effect violates the equivalence principle, or 
more likely the concept of field breaks down when 
energy required exceeds that available (in the sense that 
there will be a back-reaction on the source).  It may be 
possible that an impulse gravity beam operating in such 
a power-limited fashion might provide the expected 
amount of acceleration, but do so only to a portion of 
the mass in the beam path.  The occurrence of such a 
condition in a spacecraft undergoing high acceleration 
in an impulse gravity beamed propulsion system could 
lead to very large internal stresses in the unaccelerated 
portion of the spacecraft and possible damage to or loss 
of the spacecraft.   
 
If the impulse gravity beam is a phenomenon based on 
virtual particles flowing between the emitter and 
massive objects in the beam path, then the percentage 
of the beam’s available energy imparted to a target may 
be dependent only on the mass of the target, with no 
dependence on the percentage of the beam path the 
target occupies.  In such a case, a target that fills only a 
small percentage of the beam’s cross sectional area 
might still convert most, or all, of the beam’s available 
power into acceleration.  This is clearly different than 
what occurs with a beam composed of real radiation or 
particles, which fill the beam and can be described as 
having a power per of beam cross sectional area.  So far 
impulse gravity experiments have not shown the force 
imparted on the target to have any dependence on the 
percentage of the beam the target occupies or the 
amount of target mass per unit of beam cross sectional 
area.  These results could be interpreted to mean that 
there is no relationship between the force on the target 
and target cross section, or that the experimental trials 
were all conducted at or below the amount of energy 
available in the beam section occupied by the target 
mass.  Either conclusion will have significant, though 
different, implications for impulse gravity beamed 
propulsion practicality.  If the former is true, then 
impulse gravity beam transmitters with long effective 
ranges could more easily be constructed, because large 
beam diameters resulting from beam divergence or 
deliberately created to compensate for pointing errors 

will not require a corresponding increase in beam 
power to compensate for the portion of the beam that 
“misses” the target.  If the latter is the case, then it 
would suggest that the experimental trials thus far have 
still not approached the power per unit cross sectional 
area available in the current impulse gravity generator 
designs, and the current impulse gravity generator 
efficiencies are much higher than the low-end estimate 
made from existing data. 
 
There is also the problem of how to explain the 
coherence in the beam.  It resembles the coherence of a 
laser beam, even though in this case the beam is 
probably only virtual in the sense that its existence is 
limited in time and it does not have an absolute 
intensity.  A strict analogy with lasers is impossible 
because the resonating cavity is missing.  Lasers and 
masers, however, are only a particular example of 
systems that exhibit so-called self-organized behavior. 
These are systems made of a large numbers of particles, 
which evolve in time not strictly individually, but with 
coordinated dynamics. This in turn is possible due to a 
form of interaction-communication between the 
particles, which allows them to synchronize their 
actions.  The general conditions necessary for the self-
organized behavior to occur, are believed to be the 
following11: 
 

1.  a very large number of 
particles/atoms/emitters 

2.  an indirect interaction between them (in lasers 
this is the stimulated emission, favored by the 
presence of mirrors of the resonant cavity) 

3.  an energetic supply from the outside 
4.  a suitable geometric arrangement of the 

systems, which "suggests" a definite way of 
organization 

5.  a restless activity of the system in the sense of 
exploring all its possible configurations 
through random fluctuations 

 
The impulse gravity generator satisfies conditions 1, 3, 
4 and condition 5 may be satisfied by the possible 
presence of enhanced gravitational fluctuations. It is not 
yet clear what portion of the impulse gravity generator 
might satisfy condition 2. 
 
If the impulse gravity beam propagates in air, some 
energy should be depleted from it as it propagates.  At 
standard temperature and pressure, the energy lost to air 
from the beam generated by Dr. Podkletnov’s 
experimental impulse gravity generator should be on 
the order of 10-3 J/m.  The velocity shear between the 
air in the path of the impulse and surrounding 
atmosphere should, in principal, lead to noticeable air 
turbulence after the pulse. While extensive studies of 

 
4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

the behavior of the air in the impulse gravity beam have 
not been conducted, observations of the air in the beam 
path with smoke show that only brief forward and back 
movement of the particles occurs.  There is no 
significant airflow, as the impulse is very short, and 
there is no turbulence and no vortex phenomena.  From 
the theoretical point of view, the action of the beam on 
air is not easy to describe.  One can regard air as an 
elastic medium with pressure etc., or one can consider 
scattering of radiation by the single molecules, and it is 
impossible at this stage to tell which model is best. If 
we assume, as done above, that the impulse is not a 
classical gravitational field, but a beam of virtual 
gravitons with E<<pc, then it is possible to predict a 
small interaction with air.  When one of these gravitons 
hits a gas molecule, it cannot be absorbed. In fact, the 
total energy and momentum must be conserved in the 
collision, but this is impossible because the relation 
E=p2/2mmolecule would have to hold after absorption.  On 
the contrary, if a graviton hits a molecule of a solid the 
energy can be immediately redistributed to the whole 
body, so that after absorption E=p2/2msolid, which is 
much smaller.  In technical terms, within a solid 
graviton absorption occurs “in an external field”, while 
in a gas it is an elementary process forbidden by 
energy-momentum conservation.  All this implies that 
the interaction of the gravity impulse may be dependent 
on the state of the matter in the beam path. 
 
Impulse Gravity Beam Propulsion 
The impulse gravity beam apparently has many 
characteristics that make it very attractive for use in 
beamed propulsion.  One of the most obvious is that its 
effects are independent of target composition.  Typical 
beamed propulsion concepts require some portion of 
the spacecraft be specially designed to capture the 
energy or momentum of the beam and convert it into 
propulsion.  Clever design can reduce the mass penalty 
for such components by having them serve dual 
functions, like using a lightsail as part of a sensor or 
communication system, but not eliminate it completely.  
The impulse gravity beam can be used to accelerate a 
spacecraft without using any propulsion specific 
components onboard the spacecraft; the beam interacts 
directly with the mass comprising the spacecraft 
payload, structure, and systems.  The elimination of any 
beamed propulsion components on the spacecraft can 
provide a substantial mass savings and a higher payload 
mass fraction for spacecraft designed with impulse 
gravity beamed propulsion in mind.  Because impulse 
gravity beamed propulsion does not require any system 
specific components on the spacecraft, it can be easily 
incorporated into existing spacecraft designs and even 
used with spacecraft that have already been launched.  
Impulse gravity beamed propulsion could also be 

applied to completely inert and/or non-cooperative 
targets, such as asteroids or debris. 
 
Beamed propulsion systems that require spacecraft 
components to assist in propulsion have acceleration 
limits imposed by those components, such as the sail 
thermal limit for laser pushed lightsails.  By eliminating 
the need for such spacecraft components, the impulse 
gravity beamed propulsion concept also eliminates any 
limitations they may impose on acceleration.  Because 
the impulse gravity beam penetrates bulk material and 
seems to act independently of target composition, it will 
uniformly accelerate all spacecraft components in the 
beam path.  Even at high accelerations, the spacecraft 
components would not experience any internal stresses; 
a spacecraft being propelled by an impulse gravity 
beam would behave as though it were in freefall.  
Uniform acceleration of all spacecraft components 
means that even delicate payloads might safely undergo 
very high accelerations.  Elimination of internal stresses 
caused by high acceleration of the spacecraft would 
also allow considerable structural mass savings.  A 
spacecraft propelled by an impulse gravity beam might 
be little more than a collection of parts flying in close 
formation.  The previously mentioned evidence 
regarding beam absorption in air and the possibility that 
the beam’s effects might be state dependent suggests 
potential limitations to this benefit. 
 
Accelerations of test masses at approximately 1000 
gees of acceleration have been reported so far6 and it is 
reasonable to assume that higher accelerations will be 
possible in the future.  The benefit of high acceleration, 
beyond the obvious reduction in trip time, is to reduce 
the amount of time needed to achieve cruise speed.  A 
shorter acceleration time means that there will be less 
problems arising from the need to compensate for the 
motion of the transmitter.  For transmitters in planetary 
orbits, short acceleration times relative to the orbital 
period opens up more options in what orbits may be 
selected, since the transmitter no longer needs an 
unobscured line of sight to the spacecraft for the 
complete orbit.  Short acceleration times might even 
allow transmitters to be placed on rotating celestial 
bodies, such as the Earth or the Moon, which could ease 
problems of both constructing the transmitter and 
managing the reaction force on the transmitter caused 
by the beam.   
 
High spacecraft acceleration also reduces the distance 
required for the spacecraft to accelerate to its cruise 
speed.  The reduction in acceleration distance for the 
spacecraft also means a reduction in the distance over 
which the beam must be sent.  This eases the problem 
common to beamed propulsion concepts of making sure 

 
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

the spacecraft stays within the beam over the entire 
acceleration distance.   
 
It is fortunate that the impulse gravity generator is 
capable high accelerations, and therefore short 
acceleration distances, because it may have a short 
effective range when compared with other beamed 
propulsion concepts.  Unlike beams of electromagnetic 
radiation, there is no known method of focusing or 
steering the impulse gravity beam once it is generated.  
Considering the theorized nature of the beam, such 
manipulation may be impossible.  If this is the case, 
then beam quality, beam pointing accuracy, and beam 
jitter can only be controlled at the emitter.  If the 
impulse gravity beam does have a short range relative 
to other beamed propulsion concepts then it may still be 
an effective propulsion method by using high power 
transmitters to accelerate the spacecraft to cruising 
speed in a short distance and/or a relay arrangement of 
multiple transmitters strung out along the spacecraft’s 
acceleration path. 
 
There are several possible impulse gravity beam 
developments that could allow the construction of 
impulse gravity generators with operational ranges of 
interplanetary, or even interstellar, distances.  Even if 
the beam divergence, jitter, and pointing accuracy can 
only be controlled at the emitter, that does not pose a 
range problem as long as the emitter conditions can be 
controlled accurately enough.  If, as discussed earlier, 
the momentum delivered to the spacecraft is not limited 
by the percentage of the beam cross sectional area it 
occupies then beam divergence may not be a significant 
problem and poor pointing accuracy can be 
compensated for by increasing the beam diameter 
without needing to worry about increasing the total 
beam power to compensate for the portion of the beam 
that “misses” the spacecraft.  Even if increasing beam 
diameter does require increasing power consumption, 
using a large diameter beam may still be an acceptable 
solution if power costs are sufficiently low and/or 
overall system efficiency is sufficiently high that the 
total cost is still competitive with other propulsion 
concepts.  For cases where the target spacecraft starts 
out near the transmitter, a low pointing accuracy may 
be acceptable if the beam jitter can be kept low enough 
that the spacecraft can maneuver itself to stay inside the 
beam path.  Lastly, methods may be developed that 
allow impulse gravity beams to be focused and diverted 
with the same ease that laser, maser, and particle beams 
are controlled.  Increasing the effective range of the 
impulse gravity beam makes it a more attractive 
propulsion concept because it allows spacecraft to be 
accelerated to cruise speeds with lower transmitter 
power levels and it allows the beam to be used in 

applications where the target’s initial position is not in 
the vicinity of the transmitter. 
 
The power required to accelerate a mass increases 
linearly with the velocity of that mass, as described in 
equation 1.  It is obvious from this equation that an 
impulse gravity beam providing a constant power and 
acceleration, or a pulsed impulse gravity generator 
providing a constant average power and average 
acceleration, to a spacecraft of constant mass must 
operate at increasing efficiency as the spacecraft’s 
velocity increases.  At some point, however, the power 
required to maintain this constant acceleration of the 
spacecraft will exactly match the amount of power 
available to the impulse gravity beam.  Below this 
transition point the excess power supplied to the 
transmitter is not transferred to the target spacecraft and 
does not provide any propulsion benefit.  Above this 
transition point the force being applied by the beam 
must decrease as the velocity increases or else the 
power supplied to the target as increasing kinetic 
energy would exceed the power available to the beam. 
 
The power consumed by an impulse gravity beamed 
propulsion system can be described by the equation: 
 

P
transmitte
r

η=

system

P
spacecraft

 

spacecraft

transmitter

 is the power consumed by the 

where P
transmitter, P
 is the increase in spacecraft kinetic 
energy per unit time, and η  is the overall efficiency 
system
of the beamed propulsion system.  Overall system 
efficiency can be defined by the relation: 
 

η =

system ηη
b

t

 

(2) 

(3) 

t

where η is the efficiency with which power consumed 
by the transmitter can be converted into power in the 
impulse gravity beam, and η is the efficiency with 
b
which power available to the impulse gravity beam can 
be converted to an increase in kinetic energy of the 
target at the operating acceleration and target 
conditions.  The value of all of these efficiencies for 
current impulse gravity generator designs is unknown.   
The only experimentally available information on the 
efficiency of an impulse gravity beam generator is data 
collected on the effect of the beam on stationary targets 
suspended in a pendulum arrangement.   The efficiency 
figure given above of “at least 10-5 (0.001 %)” is the 
highest system efficiency demonstrated experimentally.  
There is no evidence available for what contributions 
transmitter efficiency (η ) and beam coupling 

t

 
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

∗

b

efficiency (η ) make to the overall efficiency.   As 
mentioned previously, the beam coupling efficiency 
increases as the power needed to accelerate the test 
mass increases up to some limit, which has yet to be 
reached experimentally.  Because the limits of the 
current generator designs have not been reached with 
current test masses, the efficiency attainable by current 
designs may be much higher than this lower limit 
indicates.  Considering the theorized nature of the 
impulse gravity beam, it seems likely that under ideal 
conditions up to 100% of the energy available to the 
beam could be converted into spacecraft kinetic energy.  
This is in considerable contrast to beamed propulsion 
concepts based on electromagnetic radiation, where 
even in ideal circumstances only a small fraction of the 
beam’s power goes toward increasing the momentum of 
the target spacecraft.  While no experimental tests of 
the impulse gravity generator have been conducted on 
targets moving at high speed, the theorized nature of the 
impulse gravity beam suggests that with the proper 
transmitter power and acceleration settings efficient 
beam coupling could be obtained at any spacecraft 
velocity.  This is also significantly different from most 
other beamed propulsion concepts, which achieve their 
best efficiencies only for certain velocity ranges 
(laser/maser pushed sails are most efficient at high 
spacecraft velocities, and pellet stream momentum 
transfer is most efficient at low spacecraft velocities).  
The transmitter efficiency (η ) of current impulse 
gravity generators is very inefficient; much of the 
energy consumed in the generator is lost as waste heat, 
light, and noise.  It is likely that less than 1% of the 
energy consumed by the impulse gravity generator is 
available to the impulse gravity beam.  Despite these 
low transmitter efficiencies, the high beam coupling 
efficiency allows even the current impulse gravity 
generator to achieve a system efficiency that is 
competitive with other beamed propulsion concepts.  

t

                                                 
∗ Describing system efficiency as a function of 
transmitter efficiency and beam coupling efficiency 
would seem to suggest that the beam has some 
“absolute” intensity which is a function of transmitter 
power and transmitter efficiency, however current 
theory (as previously explained) describes the beam as 
consisting of a flow of virtual gravitons whose 
magnitude is dependent on both the transmitter and the 
target simultaneously and is no greater than the target 
mass(es) can absorb.  Even though it is convenient in 
equation 3 to divide the system inefficiency into 
transmitter related losses (ηt) and target related losses 
(ηb) for the purposes of describing the source of power 
losses, care must be taken when attempting to apply 
that division to the actual transmitter/target behavior, as 
could be done with a real flux of particles. 

For the target masses and initial velocities reported so 
far, the impulse gravity beam achieves system 
efficiencies thousands of times higher than a 
theoretically perfect laser pushed lightsail system.   It is 
reasonable to expect that as the technology matures past 
the experimental stage the efficiency of the impulse 
gravity beam generation process will be improved.  
Considering that most of the systems inefficiency is in 
the beam generation process, such gains would also 
lead to corresponding improvements to overall system 
efficiency. 
 

*

APPLICATIONS 

 
General
 
While a spacecraft using impulse gravity beamed 
propulsion does not need any beamed propulsion 
specific components, there are certain characteristics 
likely to be common in spacecraft specifically designed 
to use this propulsion method.  The exact nature of 
these design characteristics will depend on impulse 
gravity beam system properties that have not yet fully 
been characterized.  One design characteristic that 
impulse gravity beamed propelled spacecraft will not 
have is a sail or other specialized beam collection 
device.  Such spacecraft would, therefore, have much 
fewer design restrictions imposed on them by the 
propulsion system than are ordinarily required by more 
conventional beamed propulsion concepts. 
 
If the impulse gravity beam has a definite energy per 
unit of beam cross sectional area and the maximum 
amount of power that can be applied to the target 
spacecraft is limited by the amount of the beam cross 
sectional area that is occupied by the spacecraft, then 
the spacecraft will likely be designed to present as even 
of a mass distribution across the spacecraft profile as 
possible, when viewed from the point-of-view of the 
transmitter.  This is because the transmitter will likely 
need to generate a beam with sufficient power to 
penetrate and propel even the densest portion of the 
spacecraft, in order to minimize internal stresses in the 
spacecraft due to differential propulsion being applied 
to different components.  With such beam 
characteristics, it is desirable to have the spacecraft 
occupy as much of the beam path as possible; this will 
likely result in a roughly cylindrical shaped spacecraft 
that presents a circular profile to the transmitter.  The 
specific diameter of the profile that the spacecraft 
presents to the beam source will depend on the beam 
divergence, pointing accuracy, and/or beam jitter of the 

                                                 
* Assuming a sail of negligible mass and perfect 
reflectivity, with the laser acting perpendicular to the 
sail and parallel to the direction of travel. 

 
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

impulse gravity beam, as well as the mission design 
requirements of the spacecraft. 
 
If the percentage of the beam power that can be applied 
to the target spacecraft is not dependent on the percent 
of the beam cross section that the spacecraft occupies 
then the mass distribution of the spacecraft components 
is irrelevant to its suitability for impulse gravity beamed 
propulsion.  Such beam characteristics would likely 
also result in a very large beam diameter relative to the 
size of the spacecraft because there would be no need to 
reduce the amount of beam “missing” the spacecraft 
and having a larger beam size would ease beam-
pointing requirements for the transmitter.  In this case, 
the need to present a circular profile to the transmitter 
would also be reduced because the irregularities of the 
spacecraft’s profile would be smaller relative to the size 
of the beam diameter and the likelihood of a protrusion 
on the spacecraft leaving the beam path would be 
greatly reduced.  With such beam characteristics, 
impulse gravity beamed spacecraft layout would more 
closely resemble conventionally propelled spacecraft 
designs than it would resemble other beamed 
propulsion spacecraft designs. 
 
Just as the exact details of impulse gravity beam 
propelled spacecraft cannot yet be determined with 
existing information, there are many unknowns in what 
the exact characteristics of a mature impulse gravity 
beamed propulsion transmitter design will be.  Existing 
impulse gravity generator technology only generates the 
impulse gravity beam for a very short period of time, on 
the order of 10-4 seconds.  For a practical propulsion 
system, the transmitter will need to greatly increase the 
amount of time it provides propulsion to the target 
spacecraft.  This increase might be achieved with the 
development of an impulse gravity generator that is 
able to operate in a steady state condition.  If such a 
generator cannot be built, then pulsing one or more 
generators at a high frequency could still achieve a high 
average acceleration of the target spacecraft, even 
though each individual pulse may be of short duration. 
 
Current impulse gravity beam emitters are made from a 
disk of high-temperature superconductor approximately 
100 mm in diameter, and generate a beam diameter of 
the same size.  Larger diameter emitters are possible.  
The emitter size needed for an impulse gravity beamed 
propulsion transmitter would depend on the amount of 
divergence in the beam and the distance between the 
transmitter and the target spacecraft.  It would be very 
beneficial if a method could be found to control the 
impulse gravity beam divergence so that the optimum 
beam diameter could be maintained regardless of 
spacecraft distance.  Another way to vary beam 
diameter could be to vary the emitter diameter.  One 

way to accomplish this might be to construct a large 
emitter from several smaller emitters in close 
proximity.  Beam size (and even shape) could be altered 
by using different combinations of the small emitters 
elements.  This design could have the additional benefit 
of allowing the beam strength to vary across the width 
of the beam by applying different voltages to the 
individual emitter elements. 
 
Equation 1 suggests that in order for an impulse gravity 
generator to maintain constant acceleration on a target 
spacecraft with the least amount of wasted beam power, 
it would be necessary to continually increase the power 
available to the impulse gravity beam so that it was 
always at, or just above, the power level needed to keep 
accelerating the target spacecraft.  It is likely that in a 
real beamed propulsion system, the transmitter would 
have a maximum power it could operate at as a result of 
power production, storage, or control limitations.  To 
achieve cruise speed for the target spacecraft in as short 
an acceleration distance as possible with such a power 
limited transmitter, it would be necessary to operate at 
maximum transmitter power and maximum efficiency 
possible.  Accomplishing this would require varying the 
spacecraft’s acceleration through the acceleration 
process, starting with a high acceleration and reducing 
the acceleration provided as the target spacecraft’s 
speed increased, in order to maintain the system at or 
just above the transition point.   
 
Interstellar 
Beamed propulsion is commonly proposed for 
interstellar missions because the very large spacecraft 
velocities needed to carry out the mission in a 
reasonable amount of time are very difficult to obtain 
with the rocket based propulsion systems commonly 
used for missions to nearer destinations.   
 
Many beamed propulsion systems have the advantage 
that they can also be used to decelerate the spacecraft 
when it approaches the target system to allow 
12
rendezvous missions.
gravity based beamed propulsion system, however, 
would be useful for performing such remote spacecraft 
decelerations.  Most remote beamed propulsion 
decelerations rely on reflecting the beam back at the 
payload section of the spacecraft from a sacrificial 
reflector that is ejected from the rest of the spacecraft, 
but currently there is no known way to reflect an 
impulse gravity beam and given the nature of the 
phenomenon such manipulation may be impossible.  An 
impulse gravity beam that imparted a momentum 
change toward the emitter instead of away from it 
might be used to pull on the spacecraft for deceleration, 
however there is no current evidence that an attractive 
impulse gravity beam can be constructed.  Another 

  It seems unlikely that impulse 

 
8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

13

possible way in which an impulse gravity beam could 
be used to decelerate an interstellar spacecraft would be 
to use some other force, such as interactions with local 
magnetic fields  to allow the spacecraft to circle 
around behind the target star system until it is moving 
toward the transmitter so that the spacecraft could be 
decelerated with an unreflected, repulsive impulse 
gravity beam.  For any of these methods to work, the 
impulse gravity beam propulsion system would need to 
have an effective range long enough to reach interstellar 
distances. It is not yet known if such long range is 
achievable.  If a rendezvous interstellar mission is 
desired, then a spacecraft launched with impulse gravity 
based beamed propulsion may need to rely on some 
other technology to provide spacecraft deceleration.  
Considering the potential difficulty that an interstellar 
rendezvous mission may pose for impulse gravity 
beamed propulsion technology, a flyby mission with no 
spacecraft deceleration was chosen as the sample 
interstellar mission to be analyzed by this paper. 
 
Because of the high spacecraft velocities that must be 
achieved, and the correspondingly large amounts of 
energy that need to be expended to achieve those 
velocities, the reduction of spacecraft mass will likely 
be a very important factor in planning future interstellar 
missions.  Determining the optimum spacecraft mass 
for any real future interstellar mission will require 
considerable engineering analysis to balance to the 
desire for low mission cost with the need to achieve 
results that could not be accomplished with less 
ambitious methods, such as SETI or highly advanced 
space based observatories.  In order to achieve the best 
results with a minimum of spacecraft mass, future 
interstellar missions may rely heavily on 
nanotechnology  or utilization of in-situ resources .  
Without the necessary information to perform such a 
detailed analysis, an educated guess of 1 metric ton was 
chosen for the spacecraft mass of the sample flyby 
interstellar mission.  A payload mass of 1 metric ton is 
a common assumption in other interstellar propulsion 
papers, so it should allow easy comparison between this 
and other papers describing alternative propulsion 
methods for interstellar missions 
 
Like spacecraft mass, the determination of spacecraft 
cruising speed for an interstellar probe would likely be 
the result of complex, mission specific trade studies.  
For the purpose of this example, a cruising speed of 
0.11c (3.3x107 m/s) was chosen.  This speed will just 
allow a flyby mission to Alpha Centauri, the nearest 
star system, 4.3 ly (4x1016 m) away to be accomplished 
within the fifty-year professional career that can be 

15

14

expected for humans.∗  Exact mission time will depend 
on the length of the acceleration phase, with a minimum 
average acceleration of 0.0076 gees (0.075 m/s2) 
required to achieve the assumed 50-year mission 
requirement.  A cruise speed of 0.11c is commonly 
used as the assumed minimum acceptable for an 
interstellar mission, so it should allow easy comparison 
between this and other papers describing alternative 
propulsion methods for interstellar missions. 
 
The kinetic energy contained in a 1 MT spacecraft 
17
traveling at a cruising velocity of 0.11c is 5.49x10  J.  
The power required to accelerate this spacecraft to its 
cruising velocity will depend on the efficiency of the 
propulsion system and the amount of time (and 
therefore distance) required for the acceleration.  This 
relationship can be described by the equation: 
 

η

E

system

spacecraft

P
ave

=

 

t

(4) 

ave

system

 is the total kinetic energy 

where P  is the average power consumption of the 
propulsion system, η  is the overall efficiency of the 
propulsion system, E
spacecraft
increase of the spacecraft needed for it to attain its 
cruising speed, and t is the amount of time for which 
the spacecraft is being accelerated.  Given the amount 
of resources and technological development needed to 
attempt an interstellar mission, it is reasonable to 
assume that one will not be attempted in the near future.  
By the time interstellar missions do become 
economically and politically feasible, it is likely that 
several orders of magnitude improvements can be made 
in impulse gravity generator efficiencies, ideally giving 
overall efficiencies of at least .01 (1%).  The effective 
range of the impulse gravity beam transmitter will 
likely influence the choice of spacecraft acceleration 
time heavily.  Acceleration time does not need to be 
limited by transmitter range, however, because multiple 
short-range transmitters could be used in a relay-like 
fashion to allow longer acceleration distances and 
therefore increase the acceleration time of the 
spacecraft.   
 
The trade off between transmitter power and 
acceleration distance for an interstellar mission will 

                                                 
∗ Changes in life expectancy or professional habits by 
the time an interstellar mission is feasible may make 
this career length assumption invalid, however it will 
still probably be desirable to avoid launching an 
interstellar probe until mission times of approximately 
50 years can be achieved in order to reduce the chance 
of the first, slow probe being beaten to its destination 
by a later, faster probe. 

 
9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

likely be a complex problem whose solution is highly 
dependent on the characteristics of a mature impulse 
gravity beamed propulsion system that we do not 
currently have the ability to predict.  Figure 1 shows the 
average system power needed to accelerate the 
previously mentioned example interstellar flyby 
spacecraft to its cruise speed of  0.11c for a wide 
variety of possible system efficiencies and acceleration 

distances.  The y-axis on the left side of the graph gives 
the power consumption of the transmitter system per 
kilogram of spacecraft mass, while the y-axis on the 
right side of the graph shows total power consumption 
for the 1 MT example spacecraft.  To give a sense of 
scale for the power figures given, the average global 
power consumption for 1997  and the power generated 
by a Saturn V first stage are also indicated.  

16

Figure 1: Average Power Consumption vs. System Efficiency for Impulse Gravity Beamed Propulsion of Spacecraft 
to 0.11c 

 

 

 

Line 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

Description 
1,000 gees 
Earth to Mars 
Earth to Neptune 
1000 AU 
50 year mission 

Acceleration 
Distance (m) 
5.6E+10 
3.8E+11 
4.7E+12 
1.5E+14 
7.3E+15 

Ave. Acceleration 
(gees) 
1000 
147 
12 
.37 
.0076 

Acceleration 
Time (s) 
3364 
22884 
281,793 
9.1E+6 
4.4E+8 

Acceleration 
Time (days) 
0.04 
0.26 
3.26 
105 
5100 

Table 1: Acceleration Time for Selected Distances for a 0.11c Spacecraft

 
10
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

 

Figure 2: Transmitter ∆V vs. Transmitter/Spacecraft Mass Ratio for a 0.11c spacecraft final velocity 
 

∗

Table 1 gives the acceleration time and distance for the 
different power consumption lines graphed in Figure 1.  
Power consumption curves are included in figure 1 for 
transmitters with sufficient range to reach from Earth to 
both Mars and Neptune (the outermost major planet ).  
The usefulness of an impulse gravity beam system able 
to affect spacecraft orbiting neighboring planets could 
motivate the development of a transmitter with such 
interplanetary range, even before it was needed for 
interstellar propulsion.  
 
Judging from the information shown in Figure 1 and 
Table 1, acceleration on the order of 100 gees over a 
distance on the order of 4x10  meters (roughly the 
maximum distance from the Earth to Mars) looks like 
an attractive possible operating regime for launching 
early interstellar spacecraft missions.  As will be 
discussed later, there are compelling reasons to build an 
impulse gravity beam transmitter near or on Earth 
capable of effectively propelling spacecraft at this 

11

                                                 
∗ our sincerest apologies to Pluto 

distance.  If the target star system was approximately 
along the ecliptic plane, then the spacecraft launch 
could be scheduled so that a second impulse gravity 
transmitter located near Mars (constructed, perhaps, as 
part of an Earth-Mars space transportation 
infrastructure) could assist in accelerating the 
spacecraft.  As Table 1 shows, the acceleration time for 
a spacecraft being propelled in such a manner is 
approximately ¼ of a day, suggesting that it might be 
possible to schedule the spacecraft launch so that it is 
nighttime in one or more of the regions sponsoring the 
mission.  That way, an impulse gravity generator on or 
near Earth might be able to receive some or all of its 
power from “off peak demand” electrical power from 
the region’s electrical power grid.  While Figure 1 
illustrates that even at high system efficiencies, the 
world does not generate enough power to launch the 
example interstellar mission using excess generation 
capacity, presumably global power production capacity 
will have increased greatly by the time such a mission 
is being seriously considered. 
 

 
11
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

The energy expended in a propulsion system is intended 
to provide a velocity change to the target spacecraft, 
however Newton’s second law of motion indicates that 
the beam transmitter will experience a back reaction 
that will also cause it undergo a velocity change in the 
direction opposite that of the spacecraft’s, as described 
by the equation: 
 

vmvm
∆

=∆
t

s

t

s

 

(5) 

t

t

s

s

where m  is the mass of the transmitting object, ∆v  is 
the velocity change of the transmitting object, m  is the 
mass of the target spacecraft, ∆v  is the velocity change 
of the target spacecraft, and assuming that the objects 
are not affected by any other significant forces such as 
solar wind, maneuvering thrusters, or gravitational 
attraction to an orbited body.  Figure 2 shows the 
transmitter velocity change that will be experienced by 
a single transmitter propelling the example 1 MT 
interstellar spacecraft to a velocity of 0.11c, as a 
function of transmitter/spacecraft mass ratio.  While the 
transmitter and associated power handling/generation 
equipment is likely to be much heavier than the 
launched spacecraft, the back reaction on a space-based 
transmitter is still significant and needs to be taken into 
account.  For beamed propulsion concepts that operate 
at low accelerations over long periods of time, the 
problem of managing this back-reaction may be solved 
by using solar pressure or unbalanced gravitational 
forces to offset the reaction forces.  Because the 
impulse gravity generator is likely to operate at higher 
accelerations, such methods of counterbalancing the 
reaction force may not be applicable or may require 
long delays between launches to reposition the 
transmitter.  The back reaction problem might be 
solved, or at least greatly reduced, by scheduling 
spacecraft launches in separate directions so that the 
back reaction of one launch helps to cancel out the 
effects of the previous launch.  If the transmitter can be 
considered disposable, then it may be unnecessary to 
even worry about managing the velocity change caused 
by spacecraft launches, and the transmitter might be 
simply abandoned after it has been accelerated away 
from any useful locations.   
 
If the transmitter is in orbit around a celestial body, and 
the acceleration time is short relative to the orbital 
period, then the back reaction might be used to stop and 
then reverse the direction of the transmitter’s orbit.  In 
this way, the transmitter can remain in a useful location 
even with a fairly large change in velocity.  A 
transmitter propelling the sample 1 MT interstellar 
probe would need to have a mass on the order of 1000 
MT to be able to perform such an orbital reversing 
maneuver while in most Earth orbits. 

 
The velocity imparted on a transmitter due to back 
reaction forces might be reduced considerably by 
making the transmitter very massive.  This may be 
necessary simply because of the large power 
requirements interstellar launches would require.  The 
transmitter could also be made more massive by 
anchoring it to a large celestial body.  To illustrate that 
even a large asteroid is sufficient to almost eliminate 
transmitter velocity changes figure 2 indicates the 
transmitter/spacecraft mass ratio that would be achieved 
by a transmitter anchored to the asteroid 433 Eros 
pushing a spacecraft with a mass of 1 MT.  Besides 
asteroids, other likely locations for anchoring such a 
transmitter might be on Mercury (if the transmitter is 
solar powered), the Moon, or even the Earth.  Because a 
transmitter located on Earth would have to operate 
through the atmosphere, whether or not an Earth-based 
transmitter would be practical would depend heavily on 
how low atmospheric losses to beam power would be 
and how much advantage would be achieved by having 
ready access to Earth’s infrastructure.  Transmitters 
located on Earth, or any other rotating bodies, will 
likely be limited to high power missions with short 
acceleration times, because of the limited time which 
the transmitter could keep the spacecraft in its field of 
view. 
 
Interplanetary 
Interplanetary spacecraft require a considerable velocity 
change to travel from Earth to their destination.  This 
velocity increase is currently provided by conventional 
rocket boosters at great expense. Using beamed 
propulsion to provide some or all of the velocity needed 
for interplanetary spacecraft might allow more difficult 
or more frequent missions to be accomplished with 
greater economy.  If the Earth-to-orbit impulse gravity 
beamed propulsion system described in the next section 
can be constructed then it may be possible to utilize the 
same system to push the spacecraft past Earth escape 
velocity and put it on an interplanetary trajectory.  
Alternatively, a conventional launch system might be 
used to place the spacecraft in a low-Earth parking 
orbit, and a space-based impulse gravity beamed 
propulsion transmitter used to accelerate the spacecraft 
from the parking orbit onto its interplanetary departure 
trajectory. 
 
Using an impulse gravity transmitter to accelerate a 1 
MT spacecraft from a 230 km altitude parking orbit 
above Earth by 21.7 km/s would put it on an 
interplanetary departure trajectory with a hyperbolic 
excess velocity of 27.4 km/s,  and would require 
approximately 2.4x10  J of energy to be imparted to 
                                                 
∗ This corresponds to a C3 of 750km2/s2.   

11

∗

 
12
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

the spacecraft in the form of kinetic energy.  This 
considerable spacecraft velocity would permit a wide 
range of ambitious interplanetary science missions.  
The same amount of kinetic energy increase would 
accelerate a 25 MT spacecraft by 4.3 km/s, providing a 
hyperbolic excess velocity of 5.1 km/s if started from 
the same 230 km altitude parking orbit.  If the impulse 
gravity beam can be safely used to propel manned 
spacecraft, then this 25 MT mission profile would be 
very useful for propelling manned crew transfer 
vehicles to Mars.  Figure 3 shows the average impulse 
gravity transmitter power requirements for both of these 
interplanetary mission types as a function of system 
efficiency for several different acceleration times.  

systems might also be used in these sample 
applications, but would have greater problems in 
tracking the target spacecraft and maintaining line of 
sight if the transmitter were on Earth or in Earth orbit. 
 
Figure 4 shows the back reaction force on the 
transmitter as a function of transmitter mass for the two 
example interplanetary missions discussed above.  For 
transmitters that are built on the Earth, the Moon, or 
some other convenient celestial body, the transmitter 
velocity resulting from the back reaction on the 
transmitter for these interplanetary missions is 
negligible.   
 

 

Figure 3: Power Required vs. System Efficiency and 
Acceleration Time for a 1MT spacecraft accelerated by 
21.7 km/s or a 25MT spacecraft accelerated by 4.3 km/s 
 

  

Acceleration Time 

Average Acceleration (gees) 

(s) 
1 
10 
100 
1000 
10000 

(hrs) 
0.0003 
0.0028 
0.028 
0.28 
2.8 

Line 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Table 2: Average Acceleration for Spacecraft Velocity 
Increases of 4.3km/s and 21.7 km/s 

 by 21.7km/s 
2217 
221.7 
22.17 
2.22 
0.22 

 by 4.3km/s 
438 
43.8 
4.38 
0.438 
0.044 

 
The power generated by a Saturn V first stage is also 
shown in figure 3 for comparison.  Table 2 shows the 
required average acceleration for the different 
acceleration times graphed in figure 3.  The very short 
acceleration times for some of the lines in figure 3 
suggest that a high power interplanetary impulse 
gravity beamed propulsion system might be powered by 
energy accumulated in storage devices, such as 
flywheels or capacitors, and released quickly.  Low 
power, long acceleration time impulse gravity beam 

 

 

Figure 4: Transmitter Velocity vs. Transmitter Mass for 
Sample Interplanetary Missions 
 

For an impulse gravity transmitter in Earth orbit, 
however, the velocity imparted to the transmitter can be 
quite significant.  If the orbiting transmitter platform 
has a mass of 500 MT, then it would experience a 
velocity change of 217 m/s and 43 m/s for the 25 MT 
and 1 MT sample spacecraft missions, respectively.  
Presumably, any such transmitter would be designed as 
a reusable piece of space infrastructure and would need 
to have this velocity change corrected in order to 
remain in its design orbit.  If the transmitter velocity 
change must be made with conventional means, such as 
the consumption of rocket fuel brought up from Earth, 
then it seems unlikely that there would be much 
advantage to this propulsion system as a means of 
launching interplanetary spacecraft.  In that case, the 
need for conventional propulsion has not been 
eliminated, it has only been moved to another portion of 
the system.  If a more economical method can be used 
to correct the orbital velocity of an impulse gravity 
transmitter platform, such as the use of an 
electrodynamic tether system, then an orbiting 
transmitter may still be a viable method of providing 

 
13
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

propulsion to interplanetary spacecraft during the Earth 
departure portion of their mission. 
 
Perhaps the most useful interplanetary application of an 
impulse gravity beamed propulsion system would come 
after the interplanetary spacecraft arrived at its 
destination planet.  If a system can be constructed with 
an effective range long enough to reach from Earth to 
spacecraft orbiting other planets in the solar system, 
then beamed propulsion could be used to provide some 
of the velocity change needed for those spacecraft to 
make orbital maneuvers at their destination planet.  
Using impulse gravity beamed propulsion in this 
manner could reduce the amount of propellant that the 
spacecraft must carry for its maneuvering thrusters, or 
allow longer mission times with the same amount of 
propellant.  It would be very useful if the system could 
help decelerate a spacecraft upon its arrival at a 
destination planet to permit planetary orbital insertion 
without expending a large amount of propellant or 
requiring an aerobraking maneuver.  Unfortunately, it 
may not be possible to accomplish this with an impulse 
gravity beamed propulsion system, for the same reasons 
that it may not be possible to use it for decelerating 
interstellar spacecraft.   
 
 

 

5a: circularization 
 

5b: departure 

Figure 5:  Maneuvering of Interplanetary Spacecraft 
Using an Impulse Gravity Beam from Earth 

 
Figure 5a shows, however, how the system might be 
used to help circularize a spacecraft’s orbit after orbital 
insertion at the destination planet has been 
accomplished.  In addition to helping the spacecraft 
change its orbit at a destination planet, an impulse 
gravity beamed propulsion system with interplanetary 
range would be able to push a spacecraft out of orbit of 
the destination planet and on to an interplanetary 
transfer trajectory for a follow-on destination, as shown 
in figure 5b.  Using this method, a spacecraft could 
conduct a tour of several planets with long loiter times 
at each destination. 
 

Earth to Orbit 
The high cost of launching payloads into orbit with 
current systems is a considerable impediment to further 
exploration and exploitation of space resources.  Using 
beamed propulsion to put payloads into Earth orbit has 
been proposed by numerous previous technical 
papers,17,18 but has yet to be accomplished in practice.  
It is unknown at this time if an impulse gravity based 
Earth-to-orbit propulsion system can be economically 
competitive with other launch concepts, but there is no 
current evidence that it cannot be.  If an impulse gravity 
beamed propulsion transmitter and tracking system is 
constructed on Earth then it might also be used for more 
applications than just putting payloads in orbit.  An 
Earth-based impulse gravity transmitter could be used 
as a component in any of the other three propulsion 
applications described in this paper, even including 
interstellar missions.  Possible inefficiency due to 
atmosphere effects, pointing accuracy and field of view 
limitations resulting from the Earth’s rotation, and/or 
political considerations may hamper the use of ground 
based impulse gravity beamed propulsion transmitters 
for any application.  On the other hand, low 
construction and operating costs due to easy access to 
Earth’s infrastructure combined with a stable platform 
to manage back reaction forces may make ground based 
transmitters an attractive option even if they suffer 
some technical limitations relative to space based 
transmitters.  Ironically, this means that some of the 
power providing propulsion for our most ambitious 
future space projects may be generated at coal burning 
power plants operating on pre-World War 2 
technologies 
 
One of the problems with using an exclusively ground 
based impulse gravity beamed propulsion system for 
launching payloads into orbit is that the payload can 
only be accelerated directly away from the beam 
transmitter.  While getting both the altitude and velocity 
needed for orbit with such constraints is difficult, it is 
not impossible. In his paper “Trajectory Simulation for 
Laser Launching” J.T. Kare describes how this could be 
accomplished by launching the payload “on a sub-
orbital path and allowing it to coast until it has a 
downward velocity,”  and then applying a second 
acceleration phase to the payload with either the 
original transmitter, or a second transmitter further 
downrange.  These trajectories are shown in Figure 6. 
 

19

 
14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

suggested in the “Impulse Gravity Generator Theory” 
subsection, the intervening air does not absorb the 
impulse gravity beam as effectively as solid objects it 
could still be an important factor in beam power 
requirements because the mass of intervening air is so 
large relative to the payload masses. 
 

 

 

Figure 6: Methods for Launching a Payload Into Orbit 
With the Thrust Constrained Along the Transmitter-
19
Payload Axis  

 
One of the most obvious differences between the Earth-
to-orbit application and previously discussed impulse 
gravity beamed propulsion concepts is the presence of a 
large amount of intervening matter between the 
transmitter and target in the form of the Earth’s 
atmosphere.  The exact amount of air between a ground 
based impulse gravity generator and a target being 
launched into (or beyond) Earth orbit is dependent on 
the diameter of the impulse gravity beam, altitude of the 
target, the altitude of the transmitter, angle of the 
beam’s travel through the atmosphere, and even local 
weather conditions.  Figure 7 shows the approximate 
mass of air that would exist in a beam fired straight up 
through the atmosphere from sea level.  This figure 
gives some sense of scale for how much intervening air 
may exist between the transmitter and target spacecraft 
in an Earth-to-Orbit beamed propulsion system. 
 
To have a beam diameter sufficient to encompass the 
entire target spacecraft throughout the launch trajectory 
using a constant diameter beam would likely require at 
least a 100 inch (2.54 m) beam diameter for typical 
medium sized (<5 MT) payloads and a 250 inch (6.35 
m) beam diameter for typical large ( 30 MT) payloads.  
It can be seen from figure 7 that with these beam 
diameter and payload assumptions, the mass of 
intervening air between the transmitter and target in the 
later portions of an Earth-to-orbit launch can be an 
order of magnitude greater than the mass of the target 
payload.  If the intervening air absorbs the energy of the 
impulse gravity beam as effectively as the matter 
comprising the target payload, then the mass of the air 
in the beam path will be the dominant factor in beam 
power requirements for such a system.  Even if, as 

≅

 

Figure 7: Air in a Cylindrical Vertical Column 
Extending from Sea Level to Space vs. Cylinder 
Diameter 

 
There are several possible ways that the amount of air 
in the beam path between the transmitter and target 
might be reduced.  One way to accomplish this would 
be to reduce the beam diameter.  Beam diameter could 
be reduced while still remaining large enough to 
contain the entire target payload by increasing the 
pointing accuracy of the beam and/or decreasing the 
diameter of the payload as seen by beam.  Target 
diameter could be reduced either by increasing the 
packing density of the payload, or by having a target 
with a large fineness ratio and keeping the long axis of 
it pointed toward the transmitter. In the later portions of 
the launch trajectory where the target payload is at a 
relatively large distance from the transmitter, a small 
diameter transmitter combined with the proper beam 
divergence could allow the beam diameter to remain 
small in the lower, dense sections of the atmosphere 
while still being large enough at the higher altitudes to 
allow the entire target to remain within the beam.  A 
beam fired straight upward with an initial diameter of 
0.01 m and a divergence of 2 arc-seconds would only 
have a beam diameter of 0.21 m by the time it exits the 
troposphere (11,000 m altitude) but would have spread 
to a diameter of 6.7 m at an altitude of 230 km. 
 
Using a beam that intersects only a portion of the target 
payload could also reduce the beam diameter.  A beam 
that intersects only part of the target would cause it to 

 
15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

experience additional internal stresses arising from the 
differences between the acceleration provided by the 
beam on matter in the beam path and the normal 
gravitational forces applied to matter outside the beam.  
This might not be a problem when launching bulk 
material but it could damage sensitive spacecraft 
components.  Directing a small diameter beam to one or 
more inert target masses that are then connected to the 
payload by a load carrying structure might allow 
delicate payloads to be propelled by a small diameter 
beam without suffering damage from internal stresses.   
 
 Another method of reducing the amount of air between 
the transmitter and target would be to put the 
transmitter at the top of a mountain, as is currently done 
with many astronomical observatories, to get it above 
as much of the atmosphere as possible even before the 
launch occurs.  
 
The specific energy required to send a payload to a 230 
km altitude orbit using a “perfect” 100% efficient 
launch system is approximately 3.2 x 106 J/kg.  The 
specific energy required for a real launch system to 
place a payload in orbit can described by the equation: 

εηε =

launch

real

theoretica
l

 

(6) 

real

system

launch

 is the specific energy 

where ε  is the specific energy consumed by the real 
launch system, η  is the overall efficiency of the 
launch
launch system, and ε
thoretical
increase in the payload or the amount of energy 
required per unit mass of payload for a “perfect” 100% 
efficient launch system.  The term η  in equation 6 
will be smaller than the term η  used in equation 3, 
because in addition to including the inefficiency in the 
impulse gravity beamed propulsion system, η  also 
considers inefficiencies arising from other parts of the 
launch process, such as air friction, trajectory related 
losses, and intervening matter in the beam path.  Since 
the form of energy used to power an impulse gravity 
beam based Earth-to-orbit launch system would come 
from electricity, the energy cost per unit mass of 
payload can be calculated by multiplying ε  by the 
price of electricity.  Figure 8 shows both the energy 
required and energy cost per kilogram for an impulse 
gravity beam based Earth-to-orbit launch system as a 
function of overall launch system efficiency assuming 
an electricity cost of $1.4 x 10-8 per Joule (5¢/kw*h). 
 

launch

real

 

Figure 8:Energy and Energy Related Cost to Launch 
1kg into a 230km Orbit vs. Launch System Efficiency 
 
It can be seen from Figure 8 that to achieve an energy 
cost of $220/kg ($100/lb) with the assumptions given 
above would require a launch system efficiency of 
approximately 0.002 (0.2%).  With the current 
information about impulse gravity beam behavior, it is 
impossible to predict how soon such efficiencies will be 
attainable. 
 
Low energy cost for a launch system does not 
necessarily mean a low overall launch cost; after all, 
fuel cost is only a small portion of the Space Shuttle’s 
launch cost.  To be able to launch payloads cheaply to 
low Earth orbit, a system also needs features such as a 
high degree of reusability, low capital cost, and low 
labor and overhead costs.  While the economics of an 
impulse gravity beam based Earth-to-orbit launch 
system cannot by quantified at this time, it would 
appear to have many qualities indicative of low cost 
operations.  With the possible exception of an 
aerodynamic shell to cover the payload, nothing in the 
launch system would be expendable.  Critical 
propulsion components will remain on the ground, 
allowing them to be made to less exacting weight and 
space requirements, and also permitting easy inspection 
and repair.  Because the payload does not need to be 
attached to the top of large containers of energetic fuels 
and oxidizers, as with a conventional rocket based 
launch system, it may be possible to recover the 
payload intact in the event of a launch system 
malfunction, reducing launch related insurance costs for 
expensive payloads and decreasing the political 
resistance to launching hazardous materials.  Some of 
these benefits are common to other beamed propulsion 
Earth-to-orbit systems, not just ones based on impulse 
gravity beams. 
 

 
16
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

in a constellation of spacecraft with orbital altitudes 
higher than the expected target spacecraft.  Figure 9 
shows how an arrangement of three ground based and 
one space based transmitter could be used to provide 
propulsion in any direction to a target spacecraft 
between them.  If an attractive impulse gravity beam 
transmitter could be developed, then the space-based 
transmitters could be eliminated without reducing the 
omnidirectional capability of the network, however 
there is no current evidence that an attractive impulse 
gravity beam can be constructed. 
 

All of the impulse gravity beamed propulsion 
applications described in this paper lend themselves to 
being combined with other propulsion systems and the 
Earth-to-orbit application is no exception.  Even if a 
purely impulse gravity based Earth-to-orbit system is 
not competitive, it may be practical as part of a hybrid 
launch system using a mixture of beamed propulsion 
and more conventional propulsion.  For example, space 
based or Earth based impulse gravity transmitters might 
act as an upper stage that could provide propulsion 
and/or circularize the orbit of gun launched payloads, 
eliminating the need for the gun launched shells to have 
internal propulsion and guidance systems.  A large 
short range impulse gravity transmitter built into a 
launch pad might be used to assist the first stage 
propulsion of large launch vehicles with low thrust to 
weight ratios, reducing the amount of time it takes such 
vehicles to clear the launch tower and/or reducing the 
need for strap-on boosters.  A launch pad based impulse 
gravity system might also be an enabling technology for 
fully reusable single-stage-to-orbit launch vehicles by 
helping provide the propulsion needed for an otherwise 
marginally powered design to safely reach orbit, 
lowering the amount of technical innovation that must 
be incorporated into the launch vehicle itself. 
 
Orbital Maneuver near Earth 
A beamed propulsion system based on an impulse 
gravity beam would be especially useful for orbital 
maneuver and orbit raising of Earth orbiting satellites 
because it would require no specialized propulsion 
components on the target spacecraft.  No additional 
mass would need to be added to new spacecraft designs 
to take advantage of such a system; it could be used on 
existing spacecraft without requiring them to undergo 
any modification and on non-cooperative targets like 
space debris or ‘dead’ satellites.  Unlike the 
interplanetary orbital maneuver application described 
previously, a combination of ground and space based 
transmitters could allow target spacecraft to be 
propelled in any direction needed.  This impulse gravity 
transmitter network could completely eliminate the 
need for the target spacecraft to use its own onboard 
propulsion system.  If high enough beam accuracy and 
control could be achieved, it may even be possible to 
use the system to apply a torque to the spacecraft with a 
pair of impulse gravity beams directed at different 
portions of the target spacecraft from opposing 
directions in order to allow the target spacecraft to 
desaturate its reaction wheels without using onboard 
propulsion or pointing systems. 
 
In order to construct a system of impulse gravity based 
beamed propulsion transmitters that could provide 
orbital maneuver propulsion to spacecraft in Earth orbit, 
it would be necessary to place some of the transmitters 

 
Figure 9: Four Impulse Gravity Beamed Propulsion 
Transmitters Able to Propel Target Spacecraft in Any 
Direction (not to scale) 

 
Back reaction on the transmitter from the impulse 
gravity beam will require the space-based transmitters 
to use conventional spacecraft propulsion to balance the 
back reaction and maintain their orbits when the 
transmitter is in use.  An impulse gravity beamed 
propulsion network for satellite orbital maneuvering 
that contains space-based transmitters does not, 
therefore, completely eliminate the need for 
conventional spacecraft propulsion, it merely transfers 
that burden from the target spacecraft to the transmitter 
spacecraft.   
 
Despite the need for the transmitter spacecraft to use 
more conventional propulsion to balance back reaction 
forces, there may still be a net gain achieved by 
building and operating an impulse gravity beamed 

 
17
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

based transmitter would also be useful in deorbiting old 
satellites and space debris. 
 
Even if the space-based transmitter portion of the 
network was not practical, a partial network composed 
only of ground-based transmitters could still assist 
spacecraft in conducting orbital maneuvers and reduce 
the amount of fuel consumed by the target spacecraft.  
A ground-based network would also be useful in 
helping satellites to avoid collisions with space debris 
by moving the debris to a less hazardous orbit.  The 
most potentially profitable use that a ground-based 
impulse gravity beamed propulsion network could be 
put to would likely be to boost satellites from low-
Earth-orbits to geostationary orbits.  The exact size of 
the market for low-Earth-orbit to geostationary orbit 
orbital transfer is unknown, but figure 10 shows the 
potential gross revenue for likely ranges of price and 
launch volume over the next couple of decades.  
Assuming that a fee of approximately $1000/kg 
($454/lb) of satellite mass (significantly less than 
current low-Earth-orbit to geostationary orbit costs ) 
could be charged and annual launch rates of 
geostationary satellites were on the order of 100,000 
kg/year (consistent with currently projected rates for the 
next decade ), then approximately $100,000,000 per 
year of gross revenue could be expected from this 
service.   

21

20

propulsion network to provide propulsion for spacecraft 
and other objects near Earth.  If the system efficiency is 
sufficiently high and the geometry of the target satellite 
and the transmitters can be arranged so that the ground 
based transmitters provide most of the propulsion 
needed, then the amount of fuel it consumes could be 
less than the fuel that would have been consumed by 
the target spacecraft.   Because they could be designed 
as specialized “tugboat” spacecraft, the space-based 
transmitters could be designed to incorporate the most 
efficient maneuvering thrusters available, allowing 
them to minimize fuel consumption.  Depending on 
system efficiency, it might be cheaper to install high 
efficiency thrusters on just a few purpose built 
transmitter spacecraft that could provide propulsion to 
many others than it would be to install equivalently 
efficient thrusters on many different regular spacecraft.  
Because they would be optimized for propulsion duties 
the space-based transmitters might also be designed to 
be refueled on-orbit, or to simply be built with very 
large fuel tanks and then disposed of when empty.  The 
transmitter spacecraft might even make use of other 
propellantless propulsion methods, such as tethers.  
 
There are some types of satellites, such as Earth 
observation platforms, that require frequent 
repositioning and whose useful life is limited by the 
amount of onboard fuel.  If these satellites could be 
repositioned with a beamed propulsion network instead 
of consuming onboard fuel then their useful life might 
be increased considerably, possibly resulting in an 
overall cost savings if the value of the target satellites is 
high relative to the cost of the beamed propulsion 
network.  Even if there is no overall cost savings due to 
reduced fuel use the system may still be beneficial for 
use with satellites mounting delicate components that 
could be damaged by exhaust gasses from onboard 
thrusters.    
 
If the availability of a beamed propulsion network 
could reduce the cost of conducting orbital maneuvers 
then it might allow new strategies for satellite use.  
“Roving satellites” that undergo considerable orbital 
changes to provide temporary increases in regional 
capacities might become common, such as weather 
satellites that could be moved to better track emerging 
storms as they develop or communication satellites that 
could be moved to provide temporary increases in 
bandwidth during high profile events.  It might also 
allow future satellite constellations to fill holes caused 
by satellite outages quickly and cheaply by having a 
smaller number of spare satellites stored on orbit that 
could undergo very large orbital changes with the 
assistance of the beamed propulsion network to reach 
any point in the constellation they are needed.  A space-

 

Figure 10: Potential Gross Revenue from Boosting 
Satellites from LEO to GEO vs. Mass Boosted and 
Price per kg 

 
Capital and operating costs for the proposed network of 
ground-based transmitters is unknown. Considering the 
large potential value of the orbit boosting, collision 
prevention, satellite disposal, and orbital maneuver 
assistance services that such a network could provide it 
seems likely, however, that if the technology can be 
developed then the construction of a ground-based 
impulse gravity beamed propulsion network for near 
Earth use could be economically justifiable.  Addition 

 
18
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

impulse gravity based beamed propulsion 
systems. 

Conclusions 

 
Impulse gravity generators having the characteristics 
described by Podkletnov and Modanese6 have 
considerable potential for use in a number of beamed 
propulsion applications. These applications range from 
near term commercial uses such as boosting satellites 
from low-Earth-orbit to geostationary orbit, to far term 
exploratory missions to neighboring stars.   Likely 
advantages of an impulse gravity based beamed 
propulsion system include:  

•  Lack of a need for specialized propulsion 

components onboard the spacecraft (or other 
object) being propelled. 

•  Relatively high efficiency for a beamed 
propulsion system at any target  velocity 

•  Low operating cost 
•  Ability to propel spacecraft at high 

acceleration while producing little or no 
internal stresses 

Disadvantages to impulse gravity beamed propulsion 
may include: 

•  Poor accuracy, possibly resulting in short 

•  Not well suited to providing remote spacecraft 

operational range 

deceleration 

•  Propulsion can only be provided in one 

direction, constrained along the transmitter-
target axis 

Unfortunately, the technology and theoretical models 
dealing with impulse gravity beams are still in the early 
stages of development.  A great deal of further study is 
required to determine if and how the promise of 
impulse gravity beamed propulsion can be realized.   

of space-based transmitters would expand the 
capabilities of the network even further.  Success of 
impulse gravity based beamed propulsion for near Earth 
orbital maneuver could pave the way for its use in the 
more ambitious applications previously discussed. 
 

 
 

Topics Needing Further Study 

 
The previous examples demonstrate that an impulse 
gravity generator based beamed propulsion system 
could be an extremely useful tool in the exploration and 
exploitation of outer space.  Unfortunately, our 
understanding of impulse gravity beams is not 
sufficiently developed at this time to allow us to predict 
the exact characteristics of a mature propulsion system 
based on them.  In order to determine whether or not 
the vast potential of impulse gravity based beamed 
propulsion systems can actually be realized, more 
empirical data must be collected experimentally, more 
complete theoretical models must be developed, and 
related technologies must be refined.  Some of the areas 
of research that need further study are: 

•  More accurate measurements of impulse 

gravity beam divergence over long distances 
•  Determining if and/or how beam divergence 

can be controlled 

•  Determining if and/or how steady state 
impulse gravity beams can be generated 
•  Measuring beam absorption in and effect on 

air and other fluids 

•  Determining theoretical limits of and practical 

ways to improve system efficiency 

•  Developing ways to decrease cost and improve 

operation of impulse gravity generators 
•  Experimental determination of the effect of 
beam exposure to delicate cargo, including 
biological specimens 

•  Understanding system behavior under beam 
power limited conditions due to massive 
and/or fast target masses 

•  Determining if beam cross sectional area 
occupied by the target effects energy 
absorption from the beam (i.e. Can the beam 
be characterized as having an energy per unit 
of beam cross sectional area?) 

•  Determining theoretical limits of and practical 
ways to improve beam pointing accuracy 
and/or decrease jitter. 

•  Determining if and/or how an impulse gravity 
beam could be focused, reflected, or otherwise 
manipulated 

•  Developing quantitative empirical and 
theoretical models that would allow 
conceptual design, sizing, and costing of future 

 
19
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

YBCO 
1.4⋅10  -7
1.6⋅10-9 (a-b 
direction) 
2.4⋅10-10 (c 
direction) 
3.5⋅1027 
106 
106 (a-b direction) 
108 (c direction) 

minima or in regions with strong gradients, we can 
suppose that |L| is of the same magnitude order as L . 2
 
 
λ (m) 
ξ (m) 

Pb 
3.9⋅10  -8
8.2⋅10-8 

 

 

9.3⋅1027 
104 
104 
 

np (m-3) 
L1 (J m-3) 
L2 (J m-3) 
 
 
Magnitude orders of the lagrangian densities L1 and L2 
for a type I superconductor (Pb) and for a type II 
superconductor (YBCO), computed according to the 
equation above. Also listed are the values of the London 
length λ and the coherence length ξ at T=0 [Waldram] 
and the average pairs density np, computed from λ by 
the relation np =me/(2µ0e2λ2). For YBCO, the values of 
ξ along the a-b direction and the c direction are given 
separately, and so the corresponding values of L2; np is 
the density in the a-b planes, computed with the 
effective mass m*=4.5me. 
 
[VacNew] G. Modanese, “Local contribution of a 
quantum condensate to the vacuum energy density”, 
LANL Physics Preprint Server, preprint gr-qc/0107073. 
 
[Tilley] D.R. Tilley and J. Tilley, “Superfluidity and 
superconductivity”, IoP, Bristol, 1990. 
 
[Waldram] J. Waldram, “Superconductivity of metals 
and cuprates”, IoP, London, 1996. 
 
[VacNew] G. Modanese, “Local contribution of a 
quantum condensate to the vacuum energy density”, 
LANL Physics Preprint Server, preprint gr-qc/0107073. 
 
[Tilley] D.R. Tilley and J. Tilley, “Superfluidity and 
superconductivity”, IoP, Bristol, 1990. 
 
[Waldram] J. Waldram, “Superconductivity of metals 
and cuprates”, IoP, London, 1996. 

APPENDIX A: amplitude of the anomalous 
gravitational fluctuations in superconductors 
(see “Impulse Gravity Generator Theory” subsection) 

 
The amplitude of the anomalous fluctuations [VacNew] 
is proportional to 
π8/Λ−
G

, where L is the 

L

3

-2

-50

8/

Gπ

110~
−

 J/m  in SI units. However, Λ is 

lagrangian of the Cooper pairs wave function 
(Ginzburg-Landau lagrangian) and Λ is the background 
value of the vacuum energy density at the scale of 
interest (~ 10-8 cm). At cosmological scale Λ is known 
to be negative and of the order of 10  cm , so that 
Λ
probably scale-dependent, and increases at small 
distances (see [VacNew]). 
 
We have shown  that L can be expressed in a simple 
form, in which the magnetic field does not appear 
explicitly, as a function of the Cooper pairs density 
only: 

L

−=

1
m
2

[
h

2

(
∇

)
ρ

2

+

2

2
−∇
ρρ

m

4
βρ

h

]

 

h

m

)22
e

)(2 xρ

2
2/(
µβ
0

. It is straightforward to check 

where m is the pair mass, the density of Cooper pairs is 
and β is linked to the value of the 
equal to 
Ginzburg-Landau parameter κ=λ/ξ by the relation 
2
κ =
that the sign of L is positive for two types of 
configurations: 
 
For constant solutions of the Ginzburg-Landau 
(1) 
equation in the absence of  external field, which implies 
x =)(2ρ
corresponding constant lagrangian density is 

, being  n  the average pairs density. The 

pn

p

L
1

1
β=
2

pn

2

. 

For regions of the superconductor where 

. It is straightforward to check that these are 

 is negative and greater, in absolute value, than 

 
(2) 
ρρ 2∇
2)
( ρ∇
regions located around local density maximums, or 
more generally lines and surfaces where the first partial 
derivatives of ρ are zero and the second derivatives are 
negative or null. The lagrangian density at a maximum 

|. If the maximum is sharp, L  can be 
"
|
ρρ

2

is 

2

h~2L
2
m

1

much larger than L . Configurations of  this kind are 
characteristic of solutions of the Ginzburg-Landau 
equation with strong magnetic flux penetration [Tilley]. 
 
In all other configurations, L is negative. Some 
numerical estimates are given in Table 1, where the 
gradients are taken to be of the order of ρ/ξ. At local 

 
20
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

 
                                                                           
17 Kantrowitz, A. “Propulsion to Orbit by Ground 
Based Lasers,” Astronautics and Aeronautics, May 
1972. pp. 74-76. 
18 Meyer, T.R., Pryor, W.R., McKay, C.P., and 
McKenna, P.M. “Laser Elevator: Momentum Transfer 
Using an Optical Resonator,” Journal of Spacecraft 
and Rockets, Vol 39. No. 2, pp. 258-266, 2002 
19 Kare, J.T., “Trajectory Simulation for Laser 
Launching,” Proceedings SDIO/DARPA Workshop on 
Laser Propulsion, Vol. 2, CONF-860778, Lawrence 
Livermore National Labs, Livermore, CA, 1987 
20 Isakowitz S. J. et. al., International Reference Guide 
to Space Launch Systems, 3rd ed., AIAA, 1999  
21 2002 Commercial Space Transportation Forcasts, 
Federal Aviation Administration & Commercial Space 
Transportation Advisory Committee, May 2002 

 
                                                 
1 Keefer, D., Elkins, R., Peters, C., “Laser Thermal 
Propulsion,” Orbit Raising and Maneuvering 
Propulsion: Research Status and Needs, Progress in 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, vol. 89, AIAA, 1984. 
2 Forward, R. L., “Roundtrip Interstellar Travel Using 
Laser-Pushed Lightsails,” J. Spacecraft and Rockets, 
Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 187-195, 1984. 
3 Forward, R. L., “Starwisp: An Ultra-Light Interstellar 
Probe,” J. Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 22, No. 3, pp. 
345-350, 1985. 
4 Landis, G. A., “Microwave Interstellar Sail: Starwisp 
Revisited,” AIAA Paper AIAA-2000-3337, Presented 
at the10th NASA/AIAA Advanced Space Propulsion 
Workshop, April 5-8 2000, Huntsville, AL. 
5
 Singer, C.E., “Interstellar Propulsion Using a Pellet 
Stream for Momentum Transfer,” J. British 
Interplanetary Soc., Vol. 33, pp. 107-115, 1980. 
6 Podkletnov, E. and Modanese, E. “Impulse Gravity 
Generator Based on Charged Y Ba2 Cu3 O7-y 
Superconductor with Composite Crystal structure.” 
LANL Physics Preprint Server, preprint 
physics/0108005, August 2001 
7 personal correspondence with Dr. E. Podkletnov 
8 Podkletnov, E and Nieminen, R. “A Possibility of 
Gravitational Force Shielding by Bulk Y Ba2 Cu3 O7-y 
Superconductors”, Physica C 203, 441 (1992)  
9 Podkletnov, E. “Weak Gravitational Shielding 
Properties of Composite Bulk Y Ba2 Cu3 O7-y 
Superconductor Below 70 K Under EM Field”, LANL 
Physics Preprint Server, preprint cond-mat/9701074, 
January 1997. 
10 G. Modanese, “Potential energy in quantum gravity”, 
Nucl. Phys. B 434 (1995) 697. 
11 R. Serra, G. Zanarini, M. Andretta and Compiani M., 
Introduction to the Physics of Complex Systems. The 
Mesoscopic Approach to Fluctuations, Non Linearity 
and Self-Organization, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1986. 
12 Forward, R. L., “Feasibility of Interstellar Travel: A 
review,” Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, 
Vol. 39, pp. 379-384, 1986. 
13 Forward, R. L., “Zero Thrust Velocity Vector Control 
for Interstellar Probes: Lorentz Force Navigation and 
Circling,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 2 No. 5, pp. 885-889, 
1964. 
14 Tough, A., “Small Smart Interstellar Probes,” 
Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, Vol. 52, 
pp. 286-289, 1999 
15 Freitas, R. A., “A Self-Reproducing Interstellar 
Probe,” Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, 
Vol. 33, pp. 251-264, 1980. 
16 World Resources 2000-2001, World Resources 
Institute, 2001, www.wri.org 

 
21
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

