 
Investigation of high voltage discharges in low pressure gases 
through large ceramic superconducting electrodes 

 

1

2
Evgeny Podkletnov , Giovanni Modanese  
 
1Moscow Chemical Scientific Research Center 
113452 Moscow – Russia 
E-mail: epodkletnov@hotmail.com 
 
University of Bolzano 
Logistics and Production Engineering 
Via Sernesi 1, 39100 Bolzano - Italy 
E-mail: giovanni.modanese@unibz.it 

2

 
Abstract:  A  device  has  been  built  and  tested,  in  which  a  ceramic  superconducting  cathode  and  a 
copper anode cause electrical discharges in low pressure gases, at temperatures between 50 and 70 K. 
The  electrodes  are  connected  to  a  capacitors  array  charged  up  to  2000  kV;  peak  currents  are  of  the 
order of 104 A. The cathode has the diameter of 10 cm and is fabricated by OCMTG technology. In 
discharges  at  voltage  above  500  kV  two  new  phenomena  were  observed,  probably  related  to  each 
other. First, the discharge does not look like a spark, but is a flat, glowing discharge, which originates 
from the whole surface of the superconducting electrode. Furthermore, a radiation pulse is emitted at 
the  discharge,  which  propagates  orthogonally  to  the  cathode,  towards  the  anode  and  beyond  it,  in  a 
collimated beam, apparently without any attenuation. The radiation pulse carries an energy of 10-3 J at 
least. The features and the nature of this radiation have been investigated by several means, still it was 
not  possible  to  identify  it;  we  can  only  exclude  that  it  is  electromagnetic  radiation  or  any  other 
radiation with energy-momentum relationship E=cp. 
 
PACS. 74.72-h – High-Tc cuprates 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Recent  developments  of  the  OCMTG  technology  (oxygen  controlled  melt  texture  growth) 
made  possible  to  manufacture  large  elements  of  high  quality  ceramic  superconductors  with 
pre-definite  crystal  structure.  This  fabrication  technique  requires  careful  control  of  all  the 
stages  of  the  sintering  and  crystal  growth  process,  but  offers  in  return  several  different 
opportunities,  either  for  construction  of  novel  electrical-magnetic  devices,  or  for 
improvements in the performance of conventional devices. For instance, YBCO coatings and 
bulk YBCO elements have been employed in several applications to passive bearings [1] and 
in  MHD  generators  ([2]  and  ref.s).  The  apparatus  described  in  this  paper  represents  the 
improved  version  of  a  series  of  Van  de  Graaf  generators  modified  by  the  application  of  a 
YBCO  coating  to one  of the (spherical or toroidal) electrodes. These were used to organize 
high voltage discharges in rarefied gases, varying the gas composition and pressure, as well as 
temperature, electrodes distance, containment magnetic field etc.  

The motivation for this work originated in part from some articles by Tonouchi et al. 
[3,4].  They  investigated  the  behavior  of  ceramic  superconducting  films  subjected  to  high 
frequency  perturbations  which  led  to  non-equilibrium,  dissipative  situations.  In  certain 
conditions,  emission  of  a  peculiar  electromagnetic  radiation  was  also  observed,  whose 
features are determined by those of microscopic antennas carved in the ceramic films. In our 
apparatus  an  emission  from  the  superconducting  electrode  was  observed,  too.  It  does  not 
appear, however, to be of electromagnetic nature. Our electrodes being made of well oriented 

bulk crystals, we believe that the features of this radiation are essentially determined by the 
lattice parameters of the material. 

The experimental apparatus is described in Section 2. Section 3 contains the results of 
the measurements and Section 4 a discussion of these results. In Section 5 a hint to a possible 
theoretical explanation is given. Section 6 comprises our conclusions and outlook. 
 
2. Experimental 
 
2.1 General description of the installation 
 
The experimental set-up consists of a discharge chamber and an electric  block with a Marx 
high  voltage  generator  that  is  able  to  create  a  voltage  up  to  2000  kV.  The  scheme  of  the 
discharge chamber is presented in Fig.1 (top view). The chamber has the form of a cylinder 
with the diameter of about 1 m and the length of 1.5 m and is made of 3 sections of tubes of 
silica  quartz,  thus  allowing  to  observe  the  shape,  the  trajectory  and  the  colour  of  the 
discharge.  The  discharge  is  organized  between  the  superconducting  ceramic  emitter  and  a 
target electrode. The superconducting emitter has the shape of a disk with round corners and 
consists of two layers (see Section 2.2). The non-superconducting part of the emitter is fixed 
to  a  copper  cryostat  using  metal  indium  or  Wood's  metal,  the  superconducting  part  of  the 
emitter faces the target electrode. The target is a copper disk with the diameter of 100 mm and 
the thickness of 15 mm. The design permits to create high vacuum inside the chamber or to 
fill the whole volume with any gas. The distance between the electrodes can vary from 0.15 to 
0.40 m in order to find the optimum length for each type of the emitter. The chamber has a 
connecting section with flanges which allows to change the emitter easily. 

The discharge can be concentrated on a smaller target area using a big solenoid with 
the diameter of 1.05 m that is wound around the chamber using copper wire with the diameter 
of 0.5 cm. The length of this coil is about 0.3 m and there are several axial layers, so that the 
thickness  of  the  wounding  is  about  10  cm.  The  magnetic  flux  density  is  0.9  T.  A  small 
solenoid is also wound around the emitter (Fig. 1) so that some magnetic flux can be trapped 
inside the emitter when it is cooled down below the critical temperature. 

The refrigeration system for the superconducting emitter provides a sufficient amount 
of  liquid  nitrogen  or  liquid  helium  for  the  long-term  operation  and  the  losses  of  gas  due  to 
evaporation  are  minimized  because  of  the  high  vacuum  inside  the  chamber.  The 
superconducting electrode during the discharge is kept at the temperature between 40 and 80 
K. The temperature of the superconductor is measured using a standard thermocouple for low 
temperature measurements. 

A photodiode is placed on the transparent wall of the chamber and is connected to an 

oscilloscope, in order to provide information on the light parameters of the discharge. 

A precise measurement of the voltage of the discharge is achieved using a capacitive 
sensor that is connected to an oscilloscope with a memory option as shown in the upper part 
of  Fig.1.  Electrical  current  measurements  are  carried  out  using  a  Rogowski  belt,  which  is  a 
single  loop  of  a  coaxial  cable  placed  around  the  target  electrode  and  connected  to  the 
oscilloscope. 
            Our high voltage Marx generator (as shown in Fig.2) consists of twenty capacitors (25 
nF each) connected in parallel and charged to a voltage up to 50-100 kV using a high voltage 
transformer  and  a  diode  bridge.  The  capacitors  are  separated  by  resistive  elements  of  about 
100  kΩ.  The  scheme  allows  to  charge  the  capacitors  up  to  the  needed  voltage  and  then  to 
change  the  connection  from  a  parallel  to  a  serial  one.  The  required  voltage  is  achieved  by 
changing  the  length  of  the  air  gap  between  the  contact  spheres  C  and  D.  A  syncro  pulse  is 
then sent to the contacts C and D which causes an overall discharge and serial connection of 

x

3

2

2

3

7-y

7-y

1 x

the  capacitors  and  provides  a  powerful  impulse  up  to  2  MV  which  is  sent  to  the  discharge 
chamber.  
          In order to protect the environment and the computer network from static electricity and 
powerful  electromagnetic  pulses,  the  chamber  is  shielded  by  a  Faraday  cage  with  the  cell 
dimensions of 2.0 × 2.0 cm and a rubber-plastic film material absorbing ultra high frequency 
(UHF) radiation. 
 
2.2 Superconducting emitter, fabrication methods 
 
The superconducting emitter has the shape of a disk with the diameter of 80-120 mm and the 
thickness of 7-15 mm. This disk consists of two layers: a superconducting layer with chemical 
composition Y Ba Cu O  (containing small amounts of Ce and Ag) and a layer with chemical 
composition Y - Re Ba Cu O , where Re represents Ce, Pr, Sm, Pm, Tb or other rare earth 
elements. This second layer is not superconducting in the temperature range of interest. The 
materials  of  both  layers  were  synthesized  using  a  solid  state  reaction  under  low  oxygen 
pressure (stage 1), then the powder was subjected to a melt texture growth (MTG) procedure 
(stage 2). Dense material after MTG was crushed, ground and put through sieves in order to 
separate  the  particles  with  the  required  size.  A  bi-layered  disk  was  prepared  by  powder 
compaction in a stainless steel die and sintering using seeded oxygen controlled melt texture 
growth (OCMTG) (stage 3). After mechanical treatment the ceramic emitter was attached to 
the  surface  of  the  cooling  tank  in  the  discharge  chamber  using  Indium  based  alloy.  Let  us 
describe the three fabrication stages in greater detail. 
 
Stage 1 - Micron-size powders of Y2O3 and CuO, BaCO3 were mixed in alcohol for 2 hours, 
then  dried  and  put  in  zirconia  boats  in  a  tube  furnace  for  heat  treatment.  The  mixture  of 
powders  was  heated  to  830°  C  and  kept  at  this  temperature  for  8  hours  at  oxygen  partial 
pressure  of  2.7  ⋅  102  Pa  (or  2-4  mBar)  according  to  [5,6].  The  material  of  the  normal 
conducting layer was sintered in a similar way. 
 
Stage 2 - Micron-size powder of Y Ba2Cu3Ox was pressed into pellets using a metal die and 
low  pressure.  The  pellets  were  heated  in  air  to  1050°  C  (100°  C  per  hour),  then  cooled  to 
1010°  C  (10°  C  per  hour),  then  cooled  to  960°  C  (2°  C  per  hour),  then  cooled  to  room 
temperature (100° C per hour) according to a standard MTG technique [7,8]. The quantity of 
211  phase  during  heating  was  considerably  reduced  and  the  temperature  was  changed 
correspondingly.  ReBa2Cu3O   was  also  prepared  using  MTG,  but  the  temperature  was 
slightly changed according to the properties of the corresponding rare earth oxide. 
 
Stage  3  -  Bulk  material  after  MTG  processing  was  crushed  and  ground  in  a  ball  mill.  The 
particles  with  the  size  less  than  30 µm  were  used  for  both  layers  of  the  ceramic  disk.  The 
particles  were  mixed  with  polyvinyl  alcohol  binder.  The  material  of  the  first  layer  was  put 
into a die, flattened and then the material of the second layer was placed over it. The disk was 
formed using a pressure of 50 MPa. The single crystal seeds of Sm123 (about 1 mm ) were 
placed on the surface of the bi-layered disk so that the distance between them was about 15 
mm and the disk was subjected to a OCMTG [9,10] treatment in 1% oxygen atmosphere. The 
growth kinetics of YBCO superconductor were controlled during isothermal melt texturing. A 
modified  melt  texturing  process  was  applied,  where  instead  of  slow  cooling  following 
melting,  isothermal  hold  was  employed  in  the  temperature  range  where  the  growth  is 
isotropic. By this modification, the time required to texture the disk was reduced to 7 hours 
which  is  about  10  times  faster  than  a  typical  slow  cooling  melt  texturing  process.  The 
crystallization  depth  was  controlled  by  applying  the  corresponding  temperature  and  time 
parameters. Cubic Sm123 seeds were obtained using the nucleation and growth procedure as 

7-x

3 

described in [11,12]. A thin layer of the material was removed from the top surface of the disk 
to a depth of 0.3 mm and the edges of the upper surface were rounded using diamond tools. 

 
X-ray  crystal  lattice  parameters,  transition  temperature,  electrical  conductivity  and 
critical  current  density  were  measured  for  both  layers  of  various  emitters  using  standard 
techniques. 
 
2.3 Organization of the discharge and measurements of the effect 
 
The discharge chamber is evacuated to 1.0 Pa using first a rotary pump and then a cryogenic 
pump. When this level of vacuum is reached, liquid nitrogen is pumped into a tank inside the 
chamber  that  contacts  the  superconducting  emitter.  Simultaneously  a  current  is  sent  to  the 
solenoid  that  is  wound  around  the  emitter,  in  order  to  create  a  magnetic  flux  inside  the 
superconducting  ceramic  disk.  When  the  temperature  of  the  disk  falls  below  the  transition 
temperature (usually 90 K) the solenoid is switched off. The experiment can be carried out at 
liquid  nitrogen  temperatures  or  at  liquid  helium  temperatures.  If  lower  temperatures  are 
required, the tank is filled with liquid helium and in that case the temperature of the emitter 
reaches 40-50 K. 

The high voltage pulse generator is switched on and the capacitors are charged to the 
required voltage. It takes about 120 s to charge the capacitors. A syncro pulse is sent to a pair 
of small metal spheres marked as C and D in Fig. 2. A discharge with voltage up to 2000 kV 
occurs between the emitter and the target. Half a second before the discharge, a short pulse of 
direct current is sent for 1 s to the big solenoid that is wound around the chamber, in order to 
concentrate  the  discharge  on  the  target.  This  pulse  lasts  for  only  1  s  not  to  cause  the 
overheating of the big solenoid. 

The  anomalous  radiation  emitted  is  measured  along  the  projection  of  the  axis  line 
which connects the center of the emitter with the center of the target. Laser pointers were used 
to  define  the  projection  of  the  axis  line  and  impulse  sensitive  devices  were  situated  at  the 
distance of 6 m and 150 m from the installation (in another building across the area). 

Normal  pendulums  were  used  to  measure  the  radiation  pulses  coming  from  the 
emitter. The pendulums consisted of spheres of different materials hanging on cotton strings 
inside glass cylinders under vacuum. One end of the string was fixed to the upper cap of the 
cylinder, the other one was connected to a sphere. The spheres had typically a diameter from 
10 to 25 mm and had a small pointer in the bottom part. A ruler was placed in the bottom part 
of the cylinder, 2 mm lower than the pointer. The length of the string was typically 800 mm. 
The  deflection  was  observed  visually  using  a  ruler  inside  the  cylinder;    in  fact,  there  are 
significant variations in the amplitude of the impulse for repeated discharges (Section 3), so 
the visual observation does not substantially affects precision.  
          Various materials were used as spheres in the pendulum: metal, glass, ceramics, wood, 
rubber, plastic. The tests were carried out when the installation was covered with a Faraday 
cage  and  UHF  radiation  absorbing  material  and  also  without  them.  The  installation  was 
separated  from  the  impulse  measuring  devices  situated  6  m  away  by  a  brick  wall  of  0.3  m 
thickness  and  a  list  of  steel  with  the  dimensions  1  m  ×  1.2  m  ×  0.025  m.  The  measuring 
systems  that  were  situated  150  m  away  were  additionally  shielded  by  brick  walls  of  0.8  m 
thickness. 

In order to define some other characteristics of the impulse - in particular its frequency 
spectrum  -  a  condenser  microphone  was  placed  along  the  impact  line  just  after  the  glass 
cylinders.  The  microphone  was  placed  in  a  plastic  spherical  box  filled  with  porous  rubber. 
The  microphone  was  first  oriented  with  a  membrane  facing  the  direction  of  the  discharge, 
then it was turned 22.5 degrees to the left, then 45 degrees to the left, then 67.5 degrees and 

finally 90 degrees. Several discharges were recorded in all these positions at equal discharge 
voltage. The coincidence with the discharge was only observed visually. 
 
3. Results 
 
The discharge at room temperature in the voltage range from 100 kV to 2000 kV was similar 
to  a  discharge  between  metal  electrodes  and  consisted  of  a  single  spark.  When  the 
superconductor was cooled down below the transition temperature, the shape of the discharge 
changed in such a way that it did not form a direct spark between the two electrodes, but the 
sparks  appeared  from  many  points  on  the  superconducting  emitter  and  then  moved  to  the 
target (positive) electrode. When the voltage was increased to 500 kV the front of the moving 
discharge became flat with the diameter corresponding to that of the emitter. This flat glowing 
discharge separated from the emitter and moved to the target electrode with great speed. For 
maximum distance between the emitter and the target (about 1 m) it is possible to see the flat 
glowing  sparkle  that  jumps  from  the  emitter  to  the  target.  When  the  distance  is  reduced  to 
0.25 m the time of the discharge as defined by the photo diode is between 10-5 and 10-4 s. The 
peak value of the current at the discharge for the maximum voltage (2 ⋅ 106 V ) is of the order 
of 104 A. 

Given  the  low  pressure  and  the  high  applied  voltage,  emission  of  X-rays  from  the 
metallic  electrode  cannot  be  excluded,  but  the  short  duration  of  the  discharge  makes  their 
detection  difficult.  Use  of  a  Geiger  counter  and  of  X-rays  sensitive  photographic  plates  did 
not yield any clear signature of X-rays. 

It  was  found  that  high  voltages  discharges  organized  through  the  superconducting 
emitter  kept  at  the  temperature  of  50-70  K  were  accompanied  by  a  very  short  pulse  of 
radiation coming from the superconductor and propagating along the axis line connecting the 
center  of  the  emitter  and  the  center  of  the  target  electrode  in  the  same  direction  as  the 
discharge. The radiation appeared to penetrate through different bodies without any noticeable 
loss of energy. It acted on small interposed mobile objects like a repulsive force field, with a 
force proportional to the mass of the objects.  

In order to investigate the interaction of this radiation with various materials, several 
tests  were  carried  out,  with  pendulums  and  microphones,  as  described  in  the  experimental 
part.  The  correlation  between  the  discharge  voltage  and  the  corresponding  horizontal 
deflection  of  the  pendulum  as  measured  for  two  different  emitters  is  shown  in  Fig.  3.  Each 
value of ∆l in the figure represents the average figure calculated from 12 discharges. A rubber 
sphere with the weight of 18.5 g was used as material of the pendulum. 

Both emitters, N. 1 and N. 2, were manufactured using the same OCMTG technology, 
but the thickness of the superconducting layer was equal to 4 mm for the emitter N. 1 and 8 
mm  for  the  emitter  N.  2.  Emitter  N.  2  could  be  magnetized  to  a  much  higher  value.  The 
thickness of the normal conducting layer has a smaller influence on the force of the impulse, 
but  for  better  results  the  thickness  should  be  bigger  than  5  mm.  As  a  check,  conventional 
emitter materials were also used, such as copper, aluminium, steel, chromites. They gave no 
unusual effects. 

It  was  found  that  the  force  of  the  impact  on  pendulums  made  of  different  materials 
does not depend on the material but is only proportional to the mass of the sample. Pendulums 
of  different  mass  demonstrated  equal  deflection  at  constant  voltage.  This  was  proved  by  a 
large number of measurements using spherical samples of  different mass and diameter. The 
range  of  the  employed  test  masses  was  between  10  and  50  g.  The  pendulum  bobs  did  not 
show  any  signs  of  heating  after  repeated  pulses.  It  was  also  found  that  there  exist  certain 
deviations in the force of the impulse within the area of the projection of the emitter. These 
deviations  (up  to  12-15%  max)  were  found  to  be  connected  with  the  inhomogenities  of  the 
emitter  material  and  various  imperfections  of  the  crystal  structure  of  the  ceramic 

superconductor,  and  with  the  thickness  of  the  interface  between  the  superconducting  and 
normal conducting layers. 

Measurements of the impulse taken at close distance (3-6 m) from the installation and 
at the distance of 150 m gave identical results, within the experimental errors. As the points of 
measurements were separated by a thick brick wall and by air, it is possible to admit that the 
impulse was not absorbed by the media, or the losses were negligible. The force “beam” does 
not appear to diverge and its borders are clear-cut. The beam size was detected by means of 
colour filled paper that gives the imprints under the action of small pressure, similar to those 
commercially available (for instance from Sensor Products, East Hanover). 

We  did  not  notice  any  recoil  on  the  apparatus  after  the  discharges,  however  precise 

measurements with strain gauges or similar were not done. 
          The  bi-layered  emitters  used  in  this  experiment  had  a  structure  typical  for  multiple-
domain levitators with well crystallized and oriented grains of the superconducting layer. The 
superconducting  layer  consisted  of  YBa Cu O   orthorhombic  superconductor  with  lattice 
parameters a = 3.89 Å, b = 11.69 Å, c = 3.82 Å. The addition of small amounts of CeO  led to 
an  improvement  in  the  magnetic  flux  pinning  properties  of  the  Y123  compound.  The 
superconducting  layer  had  a  maximum  trapped  field  of  0.5  T  at  77  K  and  a  critical  current 
density in excess of 5 ⋅ 10  A/cm  . The transition temperature varied from 87 to 90 K with a 
transition  width  of  about  2  degrees.  The  normal  conducting  layer  had  crystal  lattice 
parameters close to those of the superconductor: a = 3.88 Å, b = 11.79 Å, c = 3.82 Å. Both 
layers demonstrated high electrical conductivity (over 1.5 Sm ) at room temperature and the 
Y Re Ba Cu3O  layer was a normal conductor above 20 K. 

7-y

-1

2

3

2

4

2

1-x

x

7-y

2

The presence of trapped magnetic flux in the emitter was found to lead to an increase 
in  the  impulse  strength  of  approximately  the  25%.  Therefore,  at  recent  stages  of  the 
experiment the solenoid was replaced by a powerful permanent NdFeB magnet (the maximum 
energy  product  value  of  50  MGOe)  with  a  diameter  corresponding  to  the  diameter  of  the 
emitter and a thickness of 20 mm. This disk-shaped magnet was attached with one surface to 
the cooling tank and with another surface to the ceramic emitter. The dependence of the effect 
on the temperature (in the range between 50 and 70 K) and on the duration of the high voltage 
pulse was not significant. 

The  response  recorded  by  the  microphone  has  the  typical  behavior  of  an  ideal  pulse 
filtered by the impulse response of a physical low pass system with a bandwidth of about 16 
kHz, attributed to the microphone (Fig. 4). In spite of the filtering, the relative energy of the 
pulses can be measured as a function of the angle of the normal to the diaphragm with respect 
to the axis of propagation of the force. Relative pulse amplitude with energies averaged over 
four pulses per angle are shown in Fig. 5 and are in agreement with a possible manifestation 
of  a  vector  force  acting  directly  on  the  membrane.  No  signal  has  been  detected  outside  the 
impact region. 

If the radiation beam propagates in air, some energy should be depleted from it as it 
propagates.  If  air  molecules  are  accelerated  exactly  like  the  pendulums,  at  standard 
temperature and pressure the energy lost to air from the beam should be on the order of 10-3 
J/m. The velocity shear between the air in the path of the impulse and surrounding atmosphere 
should, in principal, lead to noticeable air turbulence after the pulse. While extensive studies 
of the behavior of the air in the radiation beam have not been conducted, observations of the 
air  in  the  beam  path  with  smoke  show  that  only  brief  forward  and  back  movement  of  the 
particles occurs.  There is no significant airflow, as the impulse is very short, and there is no 
turbulence and no vortex phenomena.   
 
 
 
 

4. Discussion 
 
The  features  of  discharges  obtained  with  large  superconducting  emitters  above  500  kV,  as 
described  in  Section  3,  appear  to  be  unique  and  very  interesting.  The  occurrence  of  the 
observed “flat” discharge could be explained as follows. The fabrication method described in 
Section  2,  in  particular  when  OCTMG  is  employed,  gives  the  emitter  a  special  crystal 
structure, with high-conductivity ab planes mostly parallel to the surface. (We recall that the 
penetration depth λ of YBCO is larger in the c direction than in the ab direction; typically one 
has  λab~135  nm  and  λc~890  nm  [13].)  This  makes  the  surface  of  the  emitter,  to  a  high 
accuracy,  a  surface  of  constant  electric  potential.  In  usual  spark  discharges  in  a  neutral 
gaseous  medium  the  dielectric  is  first  “broken”  at  some  point  near  an  electrode  where  the 
electric field is strong enough to generate cascade ionization. With our large superconducting 
electrode, the field at the electrode’s surface is extremely uniform and a flat discharge starts 
only when its strength exceeds everywhere the value necessary for ionization. 

At the discharge, the supercurrent flows through the emitter in the c crystal direction, 
except at grain boundaries or at other defect points where the material is non-isotropic. It is 
known that conduction in the c direction takes place only through a sort of tunneling between 
the ab planes. This does not affects the overall conduction rate, however, which is essentially 
limited by the normal layer of the emitter. The role of this normal layer is not clear yet. If it is 
absent,  the  discharges  tend  to  be  less  regular  and  the  anomalous  radiation  is  much  weaker. 
This might happen because in that case there is a direct metal-superconductor junction, while 
the normal layer of the emitter as described in Section 2 has the same crystal structure of the 
superconducting  layer  (and  is  itself  superconducting  below  20  K).  A  second  peculiar  SN 
junction is that between the external surface of the emitter and the gas. From the theoretical 
point of view, these junctions can be described by Ginzburg-Landau models without specific 
reference  to  the  microscopic  theory.  A  typical  time  scale  for  the  time-dependent  Ginzburg-
Landau equation in YBCO is of the order of 10-8 s [14], much smaller than the discharge time. 
This suggests that a quasi-stationary approximation could be adequate in our case. 

Let us estimate the current density j and the average velocity v of the superconducting 
charge carriers during the discharge. Taking an emitter area of 100 cm2 and I=104 A, one finds 
j=108 A/m2. For a carriers density of ~ 3⋅1027 m-3 [13] we have v~10-3 m/s. This implies that in 
the  discharge  time  the  superconducting  charge  carriers  move  on  the  average  by  ∆x~10   m, 
going through ~1000 ab crystal planes. 

-7

6

The electrostatic energy stored in the capacitors of the Marx generator at the maximum 
voltage of 2000 kV is of the order of 10  J. It is difficult to tell how much of this energy is 
emitted  during  the  discharge  as  anomalous  radiation  or  in  the  form  of  electromagnetic 
radiation  of  various  frequencies,  and  how  much  is dissipated  as heat.  In general one should 
expect that some parts of the apparatus tend to heat up after repeated discharges. In practice, 
massive copper constituents are present, refrigerated by liquid helium. It was observed that if 
the  discharges  follow  every  two  minutes  (the  charging  time)  the  evaporation  of  helium  is 
higher. This does not influence much the temperature of the emitter. 

Let  us  summarize  the  features  of  the  observed  anomalous  non-electromagnetic  radiation 

(see Section 3). 
 

 

1.  It propagates in a well-collimated beam, with clean borders, having the same width as 

the superconducting emitter. The beam is emitted orthogonally to the electrode. 

2.  The  radiation  appears  to  propagate  through  brick  walls  and  metal  plates  without 
noticeable absorption, but this is not due to a weak coupling with matter, because the 
radiation  acts  with  significant  strength  on  the  test  masses  free  to  move.  The 
electromagnetic shielding obtained with thick metal plates, the Faraday cage and UHF 

absorbing  panels  cannot  be  regarded  as  perfect;  however,  it  is  quite  clear  in  our 
opinion  that  any  residual  electromagnetic  radiation  cannot  be  responsible  for  the 
observed impulse transfer to the targets (see also Point 3 below). 

3.  This radiation conveys an impulse which is certainly not related to the carried energy 
by the usual dispersion relation E=cp. One can in fact estimate, considering the data 
for  the  18.5  grams  pendulum,  that  the  kinetic  energy  associated  to  the  observed 
displacement is of the order of 10-4 J and the momentum is of the order of 10  kg m/s. 
If  this  momentum  had  to  be  imparted  to  the  pendulum  by  radiation  pressure,  the 
energy  needed  in  the  beam  would  exceed  the  total  energy  available  in  the  discharge 
(~10  J max). Moreover, the radiation energy in excess would heat up the pendulum 
(unless one admits perfect reflection, which seems however very unlikely). 

-3

6

4.  The radiation acts upon targets of any composition, with a force proportional to their 
mass and apparently independent from their cross-section. The proportionality to mass 
is confirmed only within the reproducibility of the discharge process; the casual error 
(standard  deviation  of  the  single  data)  is  between  5  and  7%.  Further  variations 
originate from inhomogeneities in the beam due to structural defects in the emitter (up 
to 12%). This implies that the force could be in fact not proportional to mass, but to 
some other quantity closely enough related to it, like for instance the baryonic number.  

 

 

 

The choice of simple pendulums as detectors may appear rough and old-fashioned, but it 
does offer several advantages. Results with pendulums are straightforward and unambiguous, 
and  precise  enough  in  our  case,  given  the  casual  variations  already  present  in  the  beam 
intensity. Moreover, the use of pendulums allowed to check directly the independence of the 
anomalous  force  on  composition  and  mass  of  the  targets.  This  was  not  possible  with  the 
microphone  (or  with  piezoelectric  detectors  which  can  be  used  if  measurements  at  higher 
frequencies  are  needed).  Every  precaution  was  taken  to  reduce  any  influence  on  the 
pendulums by accidental acoustical or mechanical vibrations much below the magnitude order 
of the observed effect. 

In  order  to  estimate  the  strength  of  the  force  impulse,  suppose  that  l  is  the  length  of  a 
detection pendulum and g is the local gravitational acceleration. Let d be the half-amplitude of 
the oscillation. Let t be the duration of the impulse, and a its strength. a has the dimensions of 
an acceleration (m/s2) and can be compared with g. One easily computes that the product of 
the strength of the impulse by its duration is at=√(2gl(1-√(1-(d/l)2))). If d<<l, this formula can 
be  simplified,  and  we  have  approximately  at~d√(g/l)d=2πd/T,  where  T  is  the  period  of  the 
pendulum. With the data of Fig. 3, taking t=10-4 s, one finds a~103 g. 

A  possible  “gravitational”  interpretation  of  the  observed  radiation  is  suggested  by  the 
proportionality  of  the  force  to  the  target  mass,  but  is  in  strong  contrast  with  the  usual 
relationship  between  any  gravitational  field  and  its  source.  According  to  Einstein  equations 
and  General  Relativity,  only  the  matter-energy  content  of  the  source  determines  the 
gravitational  field  generated  by  it,  not  its  particular  state  (like,  for  instance,  presence  or 
absence of superconductivity). In our case, even in the presence of vigorous discharges, the 
energy-momentum  content  of  the  apparatus  is  far  too  small,  from  the  gravitational  point  of 
view, to generate observable effects. 

As remarked above (Point 3), the “dispersion relation” ratio E/p of this radiation is very 
unusual. The denomination “radiation” is actually unsuitable, and one could possibly envisage 
an  unknown  quasi-static  force  field.  In  this  way  one  could  explain  why  an  impulse  is 
transmitted to the test masses. It is hard, however, to understand how such a field could be so 
well focused. This configuration cannot satisfy any known static field equation. 

In  a  recent  theoretical  work  [15]  G.  Fontana  hypothesized  that  SN  junctions  involving 
cuprates  could  under  certain  conditions  emit  gravitational  radiation.  This  is  possible,  in 
principle, because the pairs in cuprate superconductors are believed to be bound in a d-state, 
with  angular  momentum  2,  and  gravitons  also  have  spin  2.  The  emission  amplitude  is 
however very small if computed through standard perturbation theory. Furthermore, it should 
be  recalled  that  gravitational  radiation  is  quadrupolar  and  cannot  exert  any  net  force  on  a 
target.  The  strength  and  the  features  of  the  observed  radiation  also  seem  to  exclude  any 
explanation based on gravitomagnetism or torsion in standard form [16], although some non-
orthodox proposals in the literature suggest that these phenomena could be more relevant than 
generally believed [17]. 

An  interpretation  of  the  observed  radiation  in  terms  of  gravitational  fields  leads  to  a 
conceptual difficulty if very massive targets are considered. Suppose to place on the trajectory 
of the beam a very massive pendulum. If the effect is gravitational, then the acceleration of a 
test mass should not depend on its mass. However, it is clear that in order to give this mass the 
same  oscillation  amplitude  of  the  small  masses  employed  in  the  experiment,  a  huge  energy 
amount is necessary, which cannot be provided by the device. Therefore the effect seems to 
violate  the  equivalence  principle.  Considering  the  back-reaction  is  probably  necessary, 
namely the fact that the test mass exerts a reaction on the source of the impulse. This reaction 
is negligible as long as we use small test masses. Actually, the problem here is the inadequacy 
of  the  field  concept  in  the  presence  of  back-reaction  –  a  problem  that  to  our  knowledge  is 
usually absent in gravitation, due to the large size and mass of any relevant field source. 

In  view  of  the  discussion  above,  and  being  forced  to  exclude  any  conventional 
explanations, we concluded that the observed radiation could be an anomalous vacuum effect. 
An effect, therefore, of quantum origin, and for some reason abnormally strong. We envisage 
an  analogous  of  the  Casimir  effect,  where  small  forces  between  uncharged  metal  plates  are 
observed, which are due to a local inohomogeneity of electromagnetic vacuum fluctuations. 
There would be, of course, two important differences with respect to the Casimir effect: (1) 
not electromagnetic, but gravitational fluctuations would be involved, since in our experiment 
the  forces  appear  to  be  independent  from  the  targets  composition;  (2)  the  situation  is  not 
static, but dynamic, with short transients involved. 

In the next Section we expand these ideas; the approach is still inevitably speculative and 
qualitative,  as  a  full  theoretical  model  has  a  long  way  to  go  and  further  experimental 
measurements are needed (see the Conclusions Section). 
 
5. The gravitational vacuum hypothesis 
 
The  starting  point  of  this  conjecture  is  the  concept  of  anomalous  gravitational  dipolar 
quantum  fluctuations  [18]  induced  by  the  pairs  condensate  (see  Section  5.1).  These 
fluctuations  locally  increase  the  gravitational  vacuum  polarizability  to  observable  levels.  In 
the  weak  gravitational  shielding  effect  we  investigated  earlier  [19,20,21],  this  increase  was 
obtained in static or quasi-static form. In the present apparatus, the critical conditions in the 
quantum  condensate,  necessary  for  the  anomalous  coupling  between  the  gravitational  field 
and  the  pairs,  are  produced  only  for  a  short  time  at  the  discharge.  Therefore,  it  is  not 
surprising that in this case the formation of virtual dipoles be accompanied by the emission of 
virtual dipolar radiation with frequencies of the same order of the frequencies present in the 
discharge.  A beam of virtual gravitons, whose momentum originates from that of the pairs of 
the  discharge,  is  emitted  in  such  a  way  that  the  beam  direction  is  defined  by  momentum 
conservation. When the gravitons hit a target, they give rise to the observed impulsive forces. 
In  order  to  explain  the  features  of  the  observed  anomalous  radiation  and  its 
propagation,  one  therefore  resorts  to  the  use  of  the  “virtual  radiation”  concept.  In  quantum 
theory,  any  force  is  explained  at  a  fundamental  level  as  due  to  the  exchange  of  virtual 

mediating  particles.  Technically,  the  expression  for  the  interaction  potential  energy  as  the 
result of an exchange of virtual particles has been known for a long time in electrodynamics 
and  in  the  gauge  theories  of  weak  and  strong  interactions.  The  corresponding  formula  for 
gravitation  was  given  in  [22],  where  the  static  interaction  potential  of  two  gravitational 
sources is expressed as an integral of the graviton propagator over momenta and energies. It is 
also  possible  to  prove  that  the  main  contribution  to  the  integral  comes  from  momenta  and 
energies  related  by  the  equality  E<<cp,  which  corresponds  quite  well  to  what  has  been 
observed in the experiment but differs from the energy-momentum relation for free massless 
particles which can propagate to infinite distance independently from the existence of a target. 
In this formula also appear, besides the integral over momenta and energies of the exchanged 
particles,  factors  corresponding  to  the  two  masses.  This  means  that  the  flow  of  exchanged 
virtual  gravitons  does  not  have  an  “absolute”  intensity,  but  is  instead  proportional  to  the 
source mass and to the target mass at the same time!  Such a picture clearly differs from what 
one imagines in the case of a real flux of particles emitted from a source and absorbed by a 
target. 

In addition to the strangeness of the field configuration as already discussed, the force 
acting on the proof masses is repulsive. This is not explainable in the classical gravitational 
theory,  either.  From  the  quantum  point  of  view,  what  matters  in  a  scattering  between  two 
particles  mediated  by  a  third  virtual  particle  (the  simplest  example  is  the  scattering 
electron/proton, mediated by a virtual photon) is the exchanged energy-momentum. This is so 
true, that the signs of the electric charges, in the example above, do not affect the differential 
cross section. An electron bounces against a proton exactly the same way a positron would. 
This describes an elementary process where one single virtual particle is exchanged in a very 
short time interval. The static force is the opposite limit; many virtual particles are exchanged, 
in  a  continuous  way,  and  in  the  time  limit  from  -  infinity  to  +  infinity.  The  phenomenon 
underlying  the  observed  anomalous  radiation  would  represent  a  sort  of  intermediate  case, 
because we are supposing that many gravitons are exchanged, but still with the features of a 
scattering or similar. 

There is also the problem of how to explain the coherence in the beam.  It resembles 
the coherence of a free electron laser beam (compare the Conclusions Section), even though 
in this case the beam is probably only virtual in the sense that its existence is limited in time 
and  it  does  not  have  an  absolute  intensity.  An  analogy  with  optical  lasers  is  impossible 
because the resonating cavity is missing.  
 
5.1 Amplitude of the anomalous gravitational fluctuations in superconductors 
 
The amplitude of the anomalous fluctuations [23] is proportional to 

, where L is 

π8/Λ−
G

L

the  lagrangian  of  the  pairs  wave  function  (Ginzburg-Landau  lagrangian)  and  Λ  is  the 
background  value  of  the  vacuum  energy  density  at  the  scale  of  interest  (~10-7  cm).  At 
cosmological  scale  Λ  is  known  to  be  negative  and  of  the  order  of  10-50  cm-2,  so  that 
 J/m3 in SI units. However, Λ is probably scale-dependent, and increases at small 
110~
−
Λ
distances (see [23]). 

Gπ

8/

We have shown  that L can be expressed in a simple form, in which the magnetic field 

does not appear explicitly, as a function of the pairs density only: 
]4
βρ

2
−∇
ρρ

−=

)
ρ

(
∇

m

L

+

 

2

2

2

h

1
m
2

[
h

where m is the pair mass, the density of pairs is equal to 
the Ginzburg-Landau parameter κ=λ/ξ by the relation 
2
κ
to check that the sign of L is positive for two types of configurations: 
 

)(2 xρ
2m β=

2/(

ehµ

0

and β is linked to the value of 
. It is straightforward 

22

)

(1) For constant solutions of the Ginzburg-Landau equation in the absence of  external field, 
  the  average  pairs  density.  The  corresponding  constant 
which  implies 

,  being 

x =)(2ρ

pn

lagrangian density is 

L =
1

2

. 

pnβ

pn
1
2

2)
( ρ∇

 
 is negative and greater, in absolute value, 
(2) For regions of the superconductor where 
. It is straightforward to check that these are regions located around local density 
than 
maximums,  or  more  generally  lines  and  surfaces  where  the  first  partial  derivatives  of  ρ  are 
zero and the second derivatives are negative or null. The lagrangian density at a maximum is 
|. If the maximum is sharp, L  can be much larger than L . Configurations of  this 
"
|
ρρ

ρρ 2∇

2

1

2

~2L

h
2
m

kind  are  characteristic  of  solutions  of  the  Ginzburg-Landau  equation  with  strong  magnetic 
flux penetration [24]. 
 

Pb 
3.9⋅10  -8
8.2⋅10  -8
 
9.3⋅10  27
10  4
10  4
 

YBCO 
1.4⋅10-7 
-9
1.6⋅10  (a-b direction) 
2.4⋅10-10 (c direction) 
3.5⋅10  27
10  6
6 
10 (a-b direction) 
108 (c direction) 

In all other configurations, L is negative. Some numerical estimates are given in Table 
1, where the gradients are taken to be of the order of ρ/ξ. At local minima or in regions with 
strong gradients, we can suppose that |L| is of the same magnitude order as L2. In the absence, 
however,  of  any  reliable  experimental  or  theoretical  estimates  for  the  value  of  Λ  at  short 
scales, it is not possible yet to compare Λ/8πG with the above values of L in order to estimate 
the  amplitude  of  the  anomalous  gravitational  fluctuations.  The  converse  would  actually  be 
possible:  from  the  observed  anomalies,  admitted  they  are  of  gravitational  origin,  one  can 
estimate the background value of the vacuum energy density. 
 
 
λ (m) 
ξ (m) 
 
-3
n  (m ) 
p
L1 (J m-3) 
-3
L  (J m ) 
2
 
 
Table 1 - Magnitude orders of the lagrangian densities L and L  for a type I superconductor (Pb) and 
for a type II superconductor (YBCO), computed according to the equation above. Also listed are the 
values of the London length λ and the coherence length ξ at T=0 [13] and the average pairs density 
n ,  computed  from  λ  by  the  relation  n   =m /(2µe λ).  For  YBCO,  the  values  of  ξ  along  the  a-b 
0
direction  and  the  c  direction  are  given  separately,  and  so  the  corresponding  values  of  L ;  n   is  the 
density in the a-b planes, computed with the effective mass m*=4.5m . 
 
6. Conclusions 
 
The  occurrence  of  the  observed  flat  discharges  is  related  to  the  crystal  structure  of  the 
superconducting cathode. Since the high-conductivity ab planes are parallel to the surface, the 
electric field at this surface is extremely uniform. During the discharges intense supercurrents 
flow  through  the  cathode  in  the  c  crystal  direction.  The  superconducting  charge  carriers 
“leap” by tunnelling through 10  or more ab planes in the discharge time. Due to macroscopic 
quantization,  their  wave  functions  keep  a  coherent  phase  in  the  motion.  The  non-
electromagnetic radiation emitted in this process seems in fact to be spatially coherent and its 
wavelength is probably connected to the lattice spacing of the YBCO crystals. 

2 2

1 

3

p

p

p

2

2

e

e

Much  remains  to  be  investigated  about  these  phenomena,  both  on  the  experimental 

and the theoretical side. We just list here the main unsettled issues: 
 

1.  The propagation velocity of the emitted anomalous radiation is still unknown. This can 
be measured by placing two identical detectors A and B along the beam, at a known 
distance from each other (for instance, the maximum observed distance, AB=150 m). 
If the beam propagates with the speed of light, then the detection delay will be of the 
order of 10  s. This can be observed by comparing the signals of the two detectors as 
seen at the middle point between A and B. Then for a check one can exchange A with 
B. The method requires that the detectors have a temporal resolution better than 10  s. 
This is not the case of our microphone: the start of the oscillation can be marked with 
an uncertainty of 10  s at least (compare Fig. 4). 

-6

-4

-6

2.  Frequency  and  wavelength  of  the  radiation  are  still  unknown,  too.  The  frequency 
could  possibly  be  measured  (if  it  is  below  ~100  kHz)  employing  a  piezoelectric 
transducer instead of the microphone. 

3.  On the theoretical side, a more complete characterization of the gravitational dipolar 

fluctuations is needed. 

4.  In order to relate the amplitude of the dipolar fluctuations to the pairs density and its 
derivatives, one needs a reliable estimate of the “background” vacuum energy density 
Λ at the scale of ~10  cm. 

-7

 
Acknowledgment 
 
We are grateful to G. Fontana and C.Y. Taylor for useful discussions. 
 
 
References 
 
[1]  H.  Takaichi,  Melt-Processed  High-Temperature  Superconductors,  ed.  M.  Murakami, 
World  Scientific,  London,  320  (1990).  J.  R.  Hull  and  R.  B.  Poeppel,  HTS  Materials,  Bulk 
Proc. and Bulk Appl., World Scientific, Singapore, 484 (1992).  
 
[2]  K.K.  Lvovich,  Hysteresis  Electrical  Motors  with  bulk  melt-textured  YBCO,  Materials 
Science  &  Engineering  B53  1998,  pp.  216-219.  Y.  J.  Yu  et  al.,  A  Superconducting  Magnet 
System for MHD Propulsion Research, IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity Vol. 
7, No. 2, June 1997.  
 
[3]  M.  Tonouchi,  M.  Tani,  Z.  Wang,  K.  Sakai,  N.  Wada,  M.  Hangyo,  Novel  Terahertz 
Radiation from Flux-Trapped YBCO thin Films Excited by Femtosecond Laser Pulses, Jpn. J. 
Appl. Phys. Vol. 36 (1997) pp. L93-L95.  
 
[4] M. Hangyo, S. Tomozawa, Y. Murakami, M. Tonouchi, M. Tani, Z. Wang, K. Sakai, S. 
Nakashima,  Terahertz  radiation  from  superconducting  YBCO  thin  films  excited  by 
femtosecond optical pulses, Appl. Phys. Lett. 69 (14), (1996), pp. 2122-2124 
 
[5]  U.  Balachandran,  R.B.  Poeppel,  J.E.  Emerson,  S.A.  Johnson,  M.T.  Lanagan,  C.A. 
Youngdahl,  Donglu  Shi,  K.C.  Goretta,  N.G.  Eror,  Synthesis  of  Phase-Pure  Orthorhombic 
YBa2Cu O  under Low Oxygen Pressure, Materials Letters 8 (1989) 454-456.  
 
[6]  T.B.  Lindemer,  F.A.  Washburn,  C.S.  MacDougall,  O.B.  Cavin,  Synthesis  of  Y-Ba-Cu-O 
superconductors in subatmospheric oxygen, Physica C 174 (1991) 135-143. 

3

x

y

x

2

3

3

 
[7] M. Murakami, Processing of bulk YBaCuO, Supercond. Sci. Technol. vol. 5, pp 185-203,  
1992. 
 
[8]  S.  Nariki,  N.  Sakai  and  M.  Murakami,  Fabrication  of  large  melt-textured  Gd-Ba-Cu-O 
superconductor  with  Ag  addition,  Physica  C:  Superconductivity,  341-348  (1-4)  (2000)  pp. 
2409-2412.  
 
[9]  M.  Muralidhar,  S.  Koishikawa,  M.R.  Koblischka  and  M.  Murakami,  Study  of 
superconducting  properties  of  OCMG  processed  (Nd,  Eu,  Gd)-Ba-Cu-O  with  Pr  doping, 
Physica C: Superconductivity, 314 (3-4) (1999) pp. 277-284. 
 
[10]  S.I.  Yoo,  N.  Sakai,  T.  Higuchi  and  M.  Murakami,  Melt  processing  for  obtaining 
NdBa Cu O  superconductors with high Tc and large Jc, Appl. Phys. Lett. 65 (1994) pp. 633-
635. 
 
[11] V.R. Todt, X.F. Zhang and D.J. Miller, Nucleation and growth of single- and multiple-
domain  YBa2Cu O   Levitators:  Influence  of  Seed  Crystallofraphy,  IEEE  Trans.  on  Appl. 
Super., vol. 7(2), pp. 1801-1804, June 1997. 
 
[12]  Chan-Joong  Kim,  Young  A.  Jee,  Gye-Won  Hong,  Tae-Hyun  Sung,  Young-Hee  Han, 
Sang-Chul Han, Sang-Joon Kim, W. Bieger, G. Fuchs, Effects of the seed dimension on the 
top  surface  growth  mode  and  the  magnetic  properties  of  top-seeded  melt  growth  processed 
YBCO superconductors, Physica C 331 (2000) pp. 274-284. 
 
[13] J. Waldram, Superconductivity of metals and cuprates, IoP, London, 1996. 
 
[14]  G.A.  Ummarino,  Possible  alterations  of  the  gravitational  field  in  a  superconductor, 
report cond-mat/0010399. 
 
[15]  G.  Fontana,  A  possibility  of  emission  of  high  frequency  gravitational  radiation  from 
junctions  between  d-wave  and  s-wave  superconductors, 
report  cond-mat/9812070; 
Gravitational radiation and its application to space travel, in CP504, Space Technology and 
Applications International Forum-2000, edited by M.S. El-Genk, AiP, p. 1085. 
 
[16]  I.  Ciufolini  and  J.  Wheeler,  Gravitation  and  Inertia,  Princeton  Series  in  Physics, 
Princeton  university  press,  1995,  Cap.  6.  S.  M.  Carroll  and  G.  B.  Field,  Consequences  of 
propagating torsion in connection-dynamic theories of gravity, Phys. Rev. D 50 (1994) 3867. 
 
[17] Ning Li and D. Torr, Effects of a gravitomagnetic field on pure superconductors, Phys. 
Rev. D 43 (1991) 457; Gravitational effects on the magnetic attenuation of superconductors, 
Phys. Rev. B 64 (1992) 5489. A. Ye. Akimov and V. Ya. Tarasenko, Models of polarization 
states of the physical vacuum and torsion fields, Izd. Vuzov. Fizika, 1992, Nov. 3, pp. 13-23. 
 
[18]  G.  Modanese,  Virtual  dipoles  and  large  fluctuations  in  quantum  gravity,  Phys.  Lett.  B 
460 (1999) 276; Large “dipolar” fluctuations in quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 588 (2000) 
419-435; Paradox of virtual dipoles in the Einstein action, Phys. Rev. D 62 (2000) 087502. 
 
[19] E. Podkletnov and R. Nieminen, A Possibility of Gravitational Force Shielding by Bulk  
YBa2Cu3O7-x Superconductor, Physica C Vol. 203 p. 441 (1992). 
 

in  an  electromagnetic 

[20]  N.  Li,  D.  Noever,  T.  Robertson,  R.  Koczor  and  W.  Brantley,  Static  Test  for  a 
Gravitational Force Coupled to Type II YBCO Superconductors, Physica C 281, 260-267. 
 
[21]  G.  Modanese,  Theoretical  analysis  of  a  reported  weak  gravitational  shielding  effect, 
Europhys.  Lett.  35  (1996)  413-418.  M.  Agop,  C.  Gh.  Buzea  and  P.  Nica,  Gravitational 
shielding 
field.  Local  gravitoelectromagnetic  effects  on  a 
superconductor, Physica C: Superconductivity, 339 (2) (2000) pp. 120-128. 
 
[22] G. Modanese, Potential energy in quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 434 (1995) 697. 
 
[23] G. Modanese, Local contribution of a quantum condensate to the vacuum energy density, 
LANL Physics Preprint Server, preprint gr-qc/0107073. 
 
[24] D.R. Tilley and J. Tilley, Superfluidity and superconductivity, IoP, Bristol, 1990. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure Captions 
 
Fig. 1 - Discharge chamber.  
 
Fig. 2 - General scheme of an Arkadjev-Marx high-voltage pulse generator. In our case the 
polarity is inverted.  
 
Fig. 3 - Correlation between the voltage discharge and the horizontal deflection of the 
pendulum. 
 
Fig. 4 - Impulse recorded by the microphone at a 67 degrees impact angle. Time scale is          
sampling period at fs = 44.1 kHz. There is a 50 Hz noise due to power grid. The signal is 
unfiltered. 
 
Fig. 5 - Relative impulse strength versus impact angle. 
 

Fig. 1 

 

Fig. 2 
 

 

Fig. 3 
 
 
 

 
Fig. 4 
 

 

 

 
Fig. 5 

 

