The basis of discontinuous motion 

 
Rui Qi 
Institute of Electronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences 
17 Zhongguancun Rd., Beijing, China 

E-mail: rg@mail.ie.ac.cn 

 
 
We show that the instant motion of particle should be essentially discontinuous and random. This 
gives the logical basis of discontinuous motion. Since what quantum mechanics describes is the 

discontinuous motion of particles, this may also answer the question ‘why the quantum?’ 

 

 

now.   

1 Introduction 

When  most  people  talk  about  motion,  they  only  refer  to  continuous  motion,  and  its 

uniqueness is taken for granted absolutely but unconsciously. But to our surprise, as to whether 

continuous  motion is the only possible and real motion, no one has given a definite answer up to 

In classical mechanics,  continuous  motion is undoubtedly the leading actor. But in quantum 

mechanics, continuous  motion is rejected by the orthodox interpretation from stem to stern. Then 

why  did  people  never  guess  that  what  quantum  mechanics  describes  is  another  different  motion 

from  continuous  motion?  As  we  think,  this  answer  is  more  direct  and  natural,  since  classical 

mechanics  describes  continuous  motion,  then  correspondingly  quantum  mechanics,  which  is 
different  from  classical  mechanics,  may  describe  another  kind  of  motion.  Recently  (  Gao  Shan 

[2000a]; Gao Shan [2001] ), a theory of discontinuous motion of particles is presented. It is shown 

that  such  motion  can  be  naturally  described  by the wave function in quantum mechanics, and the 

simplest  nonrelativistic  evolution  equation  of  such  motion  is  just  the  Schrödinger  equation.  This 

strongly implies what quantum mechanics describes is discontinuous motion of particles. But why 
is  the  motion of particle essentially discontinuous? This need to be further explained. If we can 

find  the  logical  basis  of  discontinuous  motion,  we  may  also  answer  the  question  ‘why  the 

quantum?’ 

In  this  paper,  we  will  address  the  above  problem.  After  giving  a  deep  logical analysis about 

motion, we show that the motion of object should be essentially discontinuous and random. This 
gives  the  logical  basis  of  discontinuous  motion.  We  further  denote  that  the  evolution  law  of  the 

discontinuous  motion  can  appear,  and  when  considering  gravity  it  will  finally  bring  about  the 
appearance of continuous motion and Newton’s laws in the macroscopic world.   

2 The objects can move spontaneously 

As we know, the object can move or change its position when there is not any outer cause 

such as outer force. This is an experiential fact, for example, when you kick a ball, it can move 

freely afterwards. This fact is well summarized in Newton’s first law. Besides, there are also other 

similar  phenomena  in  the  microscopic  world,  for  example,  the  emission  of  alpha  particles  by 

radioactive  isotopes  happens  without  outer  cause,  or  we  can  say,  the  alpha  particles  can 

spontaneously move out from the radioactive isotopes.   

On  the  other  hand,  there  may  exist  some  deep  reasons  for  this  counterintuitive  fact. One 
reason is that if the object can’t spontaneously move, then the whole world will hold still. As we 

have known from modern physics, the interaction or force between particles is transferred by the 

other  particles.  Now  if  the  particle  can’t  move  in a spontaneous way, or it can only move when 

there is an outer force, then on the one hand, the particle can’t move without outer force, on the 

other hand, the outer force can’t exist without the moving particles, which transfer the force. Thus 
all  particles will be motionless, and all forces will not exist. In one word, the whole world will be 

in a deadly still state.   

The direct inference of this conclusion may be that the world will not exist either. Since there 

is  no  motion  and  interaction,  the  properties  of  particle,  which  closely  relates  to  motion  and 

interaction, will disappear, and the particle devoid of any properties will not exist either. Then the 
world  also  disappears,  and  nothing  exists I .  Thus  it  seems  that  the  objects  must  move 
spontaneously in order to exist. 

We can define the spontaneous motion of object as the nature or activity of object. Then such 

nature may be taken as the inner cause for the spontaneous motion of object. Since the nature of 

spontaneous motion of object doesn’t change all the while, this kind of inner cause is independent 
of time and concrete motion processes.   

3 How do the objects move spontaneously  

The  object  can  move  spontaneously,  then  how  does  it  move  spontaneously?  This  is  a  very 

interesting and important problem. In the following, we will find the instant moving way of the 
object. 

Since the activity of object or the only cause resulting in the spontaneous motion of object is 

irrelevant  to  time  and  concrete  motion  processes,  there  is  no  cause  to  determine  how  the  object 

moves  spontaneously  in  space  and  time.  This  means  that  there  is  no  cause  to  determine  the 

concrete  instant  motion  of  the  object,  i.e.  the  object  is  neither  determined  to  move  in  one  special 
way,  nor  determined  to  move  in  the  other  special  way.  Thus  the  object  can  only  move  in  a 

completely  random  way,  or  we  can  say,  the  instant  motion  of  object  must  be  essentially 

discontinuous everywhere. As we can see, the reason why the object moves in a random way is 

just  because  there  isn’t  any  cause  to  determine  a  special  regular  moving  way. In short, the object 

must move, but it doesn’t know how to move, so it can only move in a random and discontinuous 
way.   

The  above  conclusion  is  also  justifiable  from  a  mathematical  point  of  views  (  Gao  Shan 

[2000a]; Gao Shan [2001] ). As we know, the motion state of an object in continuous space-time is 

the infinitesimal interval state, not the instantaneous state. Then the motion state of the object is a 
point set in space-timeII, but which type of point set is it? According to the mathematical analysis 
of  point  setIII,  the  natural  assumption  in  logic  is  that  it  is  a  general  dense  point  set  in  space-time, 

                                                 
I An attractive idea is that the situation in which nothing exists may be logically inconsistent, and can’t exist. Then 
we can interpret the above counterintuitive fact in a complete logical way. 
II Here the point in the point set represents the mass center of the object at one instant. 
III As we know, the point set theory has been deeply studied since the beginning of the 20th century. Nowadays we 
can grasp it more easily. According to this theory, we know that the general point set is dense point set, whose 
basic property is the measure of the point set. While the continuous point set is one kind of special dense point set, 
and its basic property is the length of the point set. As an example, as to the point set in two-dimensional 

since we have no a priori reason to assume a special form, say a continuous point set. Thus during 
the  infinitesimal  interval  near  any  instant  the  object  will  always  move  in  a  random  and 

discontinuous way.   

One big obstacle to understand the above conclusion is that people usually think that there 

exist some laws, say Newton’s first law, to determine the existence of a special moving way. Here 

we will further argue that there doesn’t exist such laws at all. Firstly, all laws referring to the time 

interval, including the infinitesimal time interval, can’t determine such moving way. The reason is 

very  simple,  since  these  laws  refers  to  the  time-interval motion state of objects, and they are all 
based on the supposed moving way of objects during the time interval, for example, Newton’s first 

law presupposes the existence of continuous moving way.  But in the above discussions, what we 

consider  is  the  instant  motion,  not  the  time-interval state and its evolution, and what we need to 

find  is  just  the  moving  way  within  the  time  interval.  Secondly,  physical  laws  only  consider  the 
time-interval  motion  state of objects. This can be easily seen from the mathematical quantities  dt 
and dx which appear everywhere in physics. Furthermore, present physics doesn’t analyze the way 
of  instant  motion,  it  only  supposes  the  way  of  instant  motion,  for  example,  classical  physics 

presupposes that the instant motion is continuous.   

Now  as  an  example,  let’s  see  why  the  instant  motion  is  not  continuous.  Since  what  we 

analyze is the instant motion, the velocity, which is defined on the time interval, doesn’t exist yet, 
and  Newton’s first law can’t help either. Then the free object has no velocity to hold, and it really 

doesn’t  know  which  direction  to  move  along.  Thus  the  object  can’t  move  in  a  continuous  way, 

since continuous motion requires a definite direction, for example,  in  one-dimensional situation, 

the object must select a preferred direction, right or left to move continuously.   

4 The confirmation of discontinuous motion 

It seems very strange that the objects move in a discontinuous and random way. But where to 

find such weird displays? In fact, they exist everywhere in the microscopic world. As one example 

let’s have a look at the well-known double-slit experiment.   

In the experiment,  the single particle such as photon is emitted from the source one after the 
other,  and  then  passes  through  the  two  slits  to  arrive  at  the  screen.  In  this  way,  when  a  large 

number of particles reach the screen, they form the double-slit interference pattern. 

Now  we  will  demonstrate  that  this  experiment  clearly  reveals  that  the  motion  of  particle  is 

discontinuous. If the motion of particle is continuous, then the particle can only pass through one 

of the two slits, and it is not influenced by the other slit in each experiment. Thus it is evident that 
the  double-slit interference pattern will be the same as the direct mixture of two  one-slit patterns, 

each of which is formed by opening each of the two slits, since the passing process of each particle 

in double-slit experiment is exactly the same as that in one of the two one-slit experiments. But all 

known experiments show that there exist obvious differences between the interference patterns of 

the  above  two  situations.  Thus  the  motion  of  particle  can’t  be  continuous,  and  must  be 
discontinuous, especially, the particle  must pass through both  slits during passing through the two 

slits.  This  is  an  inevitable  logical  conclusion  inferred  from  the  observed  double-slit interference 
pattern if we assume the only existence of particlesI. But can we directly confirm this conclusion 

                                                                                                                                            
space-time, the general situation is the dense point set, while the continuous curve is one kind of extremely special 
dense point set. Surely it is a wonder that so many points bind together to form one continuous curve by order-in 
fact, the probability for its natural formation is zero. 
I Here Bohm’s hidden variables theory doesn’t influence the conclusion, in which there are two kinds of existence, 

in experiments? The answer is definitely yes ( Gao Shan [2000a], Gao Shan [2000b] ). 

As we know, the usual position measurement will destroy the double-slit interference pattern, 

and  can’t measure the real state of the particle passing through the two slits. Thus in order to find 
and  confirm  the  objective  discontinuous  motion  picture  of  the  particle  passing  through  the  two 

slits, we need a new kind of measurement. Fortunately, such measurement method has been found 

several years ago (Aharonov, Y. and Vaidman, L. [1993]; Aharonov, Y. Anandan, J and Vaidman, 

L.  [1993]  ),  and  its  name  is  protective  measurement.  According  to  the  principles  of  protective 

measurement, since we know the state of the particle beforehand in double-slit experiment, we can 
protectively measure the objective motion state of the particle when it passes through the two slits. 

At the same time, the state of the particle will not be destroyed after such protective measurement, 

and  the  interference  pattern  will  not  be  destroyed  either.  The  results  of  such  protective 

measurement  will  confirm  that  the  particle  passes  through  both  slits,  which  indicates  that  the 

motion of particle is indeed discontinuous. 

5 The appearance of laws and continuous motion 

Even through the instant motion of particle is essentially discontinuous and random, the laws 

can appear for the interval motion state ( Gao Shan [2000a]; Gao Shan [2001] ). Here we simply 

introduce  the  main  results.  As  we  have  known,  the  motion  state  of  a  particle  in  continuous 
space-time is the infinitesimal interval state. Then as to the discontinuous motion, the motion state 

of  particle  is  a  dense  point  set  in  space-time,  which  mathematical  description  is  the  position 

measure  density 

txr
),(

  and  position  measure  flux  density 

txj
),(

.  It  can  be  further 

demonstrated that its simplest nonrelativistic evolution equation is just the  Schrödinger equation in 
quantum mechanics, in which the wave function is the very mathematical complex composed of 

txr
),(

  and 

txj
),(

.  Furthermore,  it  can  be  also  shown  that,  when  considering  gravity, 

space-time  will  be  essentially  discrete,  and  the  discontinuous  motion  in  discrete  space-time may 

naturally result  in the stochastic collapse process of the wave function. This collapse will finally 
bring about the appearance of continuous motion and Newton’s laws in the macroscopic world.   

6 Conclusions 

We solve the problem how the free objects move spontaneously. It  is shown that the instant 

motion of objects should be essentially discontinuous and random, while the continuous motion in 
the macroscopic world is only apparent. This gives the logical basis of. discontinuous motion, and 

may answer the question ‘why the quantum?’ 

 

References 

Gao  Shan.  [2000a]:  Quantum  Motion  and  Superluminal  Communication,  Beijing,  Chinese  B&T 

Gao  Shan.  [2000b]:  ‘We  can  know  more 

in  double-slit  experiment’,  LANL  e-print 

Publishing House. 

physics/0001002. 

                                                                                                                                            
one is the particle, the other is the wave function.   

Gao  Shan.  [2001]:  ‘From  quantum  motion  to  classical  motion-seeking  the  lost  reality’,  Physics 

Essays, Vol.14, No.1, March 2001 (2001). 

Aharonov, Y. and Vaidman, L. [1993]: ‘Measurement of the Schrödinger Wave of a Single 
Particle’, Phys. Lett. A, 178, pp.38-42. 

Aharonov, Y. Anandan, J and Vaidman, L. [1993]: ‘Meaning of the wave function’, Phys. Rev. A, 

47, pp.4616-4626. 

