XrdML, a new way to store (and exchange) X-ray powder
diffraction measurement data

Transparent and open – these keywords describe the new approach that we
(PANalytical) adopt with our new data platform for the X’Pert XRD software. Based
on the universal format for structured documents and data XML (eXtended Markup
Language), this approach will give any user complete control over his XRD
measurement data.

Traditionally, XRD measurement data were stored in binary files. Although this
saved valuable disk space, it allowed only limited possibilities for analysis. In 1997
PANalytical introduced the current X'Pert software, which stored the measurement
data in a database. This allows for a wide range of pre-programmed features for
analysis and processing. With the introduction of the XRDML data platform,
PANalytical takes this development a step further, giving users complete access to
their measurement results.

In the new XRDML data platform, ASCII format XRD measurement data are stored
in XML based files (.XRDML files) that contain all measurement data as well as all
information required to reproduce the data, including the instrument type and
settings.

The data are written in accordance with the XML schema, which is described at the
website www.xrdml.com upon release of the package. The information contained
in the schema gives users the possibility to develop tailor-made programs to
process their measurement data in any way they need. The new software platform
allows users of XRD systems to share their measurements with others, such as
colleagues, fellow researchers, or authorities. All they need is a standard Internet
browser to view the measurement data. Sharing XRD results has never been
easier; the user is not limited by proprietary formats. Since the applicable XML
schema includes all information about the measurement and the equipment used,
the XRDML platform allows complete trace ability of results. This trace ability of
results, in principle, is an important condition for compliance with FDA Part 11,
which is particularly important for the pharmaceutical industry The XrdML approach
also allows for a seamless integration with the Windows Explorer (with tool tip
information, viewing, conversion and reporting tools and thumbnail views of the
diffractograms!). Furthermore the user can create own style sheets to generate
reports just the way he wants them.

Example of Thumbnail view of XRD measurements in the Windows Explorer.

About XML
XML (Extensible Markup Language) is a universal format for structured documents
and data, somewhat similar to HTML. It is an industry standard controlled by the
World Wide Web Consortium (www.w3c.org), and supported by well-known
software makers with a wide and growing range of software tools and utilities.

XML uses 'tags' and 'attributes' to delimit and describe pieces of data in an ASCII
readable text file. XML 'schemas' expresses shared vocabularies and allow
machines to carry out rules made by people. They provide a means for defining
and validating the structure, content and semantics of XML documents. XML is
license-free, and allows users to build their own application. The large and growing
industry support means that users are never tied to a single vendor.

Layout of the XrdML Measurement Schema (shown in XML Spy ©)

1)  Root level view:

2)  Detailed design of Incident Beam Path and X-ray Mirror:

3)  Detailed design of Diffracted Beam Path and Detector:

4)  Detailed design of Scan and Non Ambient Data Points:

5)  Detailed design of ordinary Data Points:

Example of an XrdML file (shown in XML Spy ©)

1)  Overview of complete Measurement:

2) Detailed view of Scan and Data Points:

