Optics and Spectroscopy, Vol. 92, No. 1, 2002, pp. 20–26. Translated from Optika i Spektroskopiya, Vol. 92, No. 1, 2002, pp. 25–32.
Original Russian Text Copyright © 2002 by Astakhov, Baranov.

MOLECULAR 
SPECTROSCOPY

Simulation of Time-Resolved Vibronic Spectra
and the Possibility of Analyzing Molecules 
with Similar Spectral Properties
S. A. Astakhov and V. I. Baranov
Institute of Geochemistry and Analytical Chemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 117975 Russia
e-mail: baranov@geokhi.ru
Received March 23, 2001

Abstract—The possibility of using time-resolved vibronic spectroscopy for spectral analysis of mixtures of
chemical compounds with similar optical properties, when traditional methods (based on stedy-state spectra)
are inefﬁcient, is demonstrated by using the method of computer simulation. The analysis is carried out by the
example of molecules of a series of polyenes (butadiene, hexadiene, octatetraene, decapentaene, and decatet-
raene), their various cis- and trans-rotational isomers, and phenyl-substituted polyenes. Ranges of relative con-
centrations of molecules similar in their spectral properties, where reliable interpretation of time-resolved spec-
tra of mixtures and both qualitative and quantitative analyses are possible, are determined. The use of computer
simulation methods for optimizing full-scale experiments in femtosecond spectroscopy is shown to hold much
promise. © 2002 MAIK “Nauka/Interperiodica”.

INTRODUCTION

The use of experimental facilities for recording ﬁne-
structure absorption and ﬂuorescence spectra with high
(picosecond  and  femtosecond)  temporal  resolution  is
one of the promising lines of development of modern
vibronic  spectroscopy  [1,  2].  Interpretation  of  new
experimental  results  with  the  aim  of  extracting  infor-
mation on molecular properties requires the construc-
tion of corresponding theoretical models of molecules,
the  development  of  methods  for  direct  calculation  of
time-resolved spectra, and the execution of numerical
experiments.

The  possibility  of  simulating  the  time-resolved
vibronic spectra of polyatomic molecules was analyzed
in  [3].  A  method  for  calculating  such  spectra  using
molecular models described by parameters, which are
not  directly  related  to  any  particular  spectral  experi-
ment (potential surfaces of ground and excited states in
natural  coordinates),  was  suggested  [3].  In  addition,
software  for  personal  computers  allowing  fast  (real
time) calculations of time-resolved spectra to be carried
out for complicated molecules containing several tens
of atoms as well as for their mixtures and including the
construction  of  complete  three-dimensional  spectral
curves as well as for their various sections on the fre-
quency and time scales was developed [3]. An approved
semi-empirical method ensuring a quantitative predic-
tion of vibronic spectra with a high accuracy (frequency
and  intensity  errors  for  the  most  typical  fundamental
lines are ∆ω ≤ 20–30 cm–1 and ∆I ≤ 15–20%, respec-
tively)  is  used  for  calculating  the  parameters  of  adia-
batic potential surfaces in excited states [4–8]. 

It  is  known  that  the  structure  of  ordinary  (without
time resolution) absorption and ﬂuorescence spectra of
a number of molecules (for instance, polyenes, phenyl-
and diphenylpolyenes), their stereoisomers, and substi-
tuted forms (for instance, cis-, trans-isomers, deutero-,
methyl-, and phenyl-substituted) often have a very sim-
ilar form (see, for instance, data in [4, 5, 7, 9–15]). Dif-
ferences  in  the  intensities  of  the  main  vibronic  lines
(~10%) are comparable with the accuracy of their cal-
culation. Therefore, interpretation and analysis of such
spectra  and,  more  importantly,  identiﬁcation  of  com-
pounds  (particularly  in  the  case  of  mixtures)  on  the
basis of spectral data is extremely complicated, which
signiﬁcantly  restricts  the  possibility  of  using  spectral
methods for solving problems of analytical chemistry
and photochemistry (in particular, photoisomerization
processes [16]).

It was shown that the use of time-resolved vibronic
spectra makes it possible to pose and to solve problems
of  qualitative  and  quantitative  analyses  of  complex
compounds  with  similar  spectral  properties  without
using standards [17, 18]. For instance, for comparable
 <
intensities of the main lines of spectra (0.1 < 
10) of a two-component mixture, concentrations can be
determined with conﬁdence for a wide range of values
(on the order of 1–110%) if their time dependences dif-
fer by a factor of 3 [18].

/
Ii' I j''

It  is  interesting  to  study  the  possibility  of  using
time-resolved vibronic spectroscopy in molecular mod-
eling and the solution of spectrochemical problems for
various  isomeric  and  substituted  forms  of  complex
compounds  by  methods  of  computer  simulation

0030-400X/02/9201-

0020

$22.00 © 2002 MAIK “Nauka/Interperiodica”

SIMULATION  OF  TIME-RESOLVED VIBRONIC  SPECTRA 

21

(numerical experiment). The execution of these numer-
ical experiments is very important because, on the one
hand,  it  allows  us  to  develop  computational  methods
and to determine their potentials more clearly. On the
other hand, the execution of a full-scale spectral exper-
iment is rather laborious and requires preliminary anal-
ysis and simulation.

Molecules of a series of polyenes and their phenyl-
substituted forms were used as the objects of this anal-
ysis because their spectral properties and the structure
of excited states are of interest in their own right, in par-
ticular, in photochemistry (see, for instance, [9, 10, 16])
and are well reproduced by developed theoretical meth-
ods [5, 6, 8, 14, 15].

METHOD  FOR  CALCULATING  THE  SPECTRA

For simulating the time-dependent vibronic spectra
of  polyenes,  their  phenyl-  and  methyl-substituted
forms, and various cis- and trans-isomers, we used the
method  suggested  and  described  in  detail  in  [3].  The
principle of the method is as follows.

A molecule is assumed to be excited by a short laser-
radiation pulse much shorter in duration than the char-
acteristic  relaxation  time  of  excited  states.  Once  an
absorption  event  comes  to  an  end  (the  start  of  time
counting), the time dependence of the intensity of each
spectral line at the frequency ω
ij is proportional to the
probability wij of the corresponding vibronic transition
from the state i to the state j and to the population of the
initial level ni

Iij

(

ω

ij t,

)

=

(cid:1)ω

ijwijni t( ).
(ω
ij

Time-resolved  spectra  Iij

,  t)  were  calculated
ignoring nonradiative transitions; therefore, the quanti-
ties  wij  representing  probabilities  of  optical  vibronic
transitions in this case were determined by the paramet-
ric method with the use of molecular models and frag-
ments from the special data bank [4, 5]. The calculation
was carried out in the Franck–Condon approximation
for all vibronic transitions between lower states up to
the  ﬁfth  electron-excited  state.  Vibrational  quantum
numbers took values up to vmax = 3 because the result
did not change signiﬁcantly for vmax > 3. Not only over-
tones were taken into account, but composite vibrations
as well. 

Time  dependences  of  the  populations  ni

(t)  of
vibronic levels were found as the solutions to the corre-
sponding system of rate equations

dni
-------
dt

N

∑+

j

1+=
i

=

–

wini

w jin j,

i

=

,
1 2 … N,

,

,

(1)

i 1–∑

  = 

  +  wi0  are  total  probabilities  of
where  wi
transitions from the ith state to all lower lying excited
states and the ground (wi0) state.

wij

1=

j

OPTICS AND  SPECTROSCOPY      Vol.  92      No.  1      2002

By virtue of a high dimensionality of system (1) (up
to N ~ 30000 in this case) and a wide range of values of
wi  (in  particular,  degenerate,  wi =  wk),  the  numerical
method developed in [3] was used for its solution.

To make the analysis illustrative and to compare the
spectral  data  obtained,  we  presented  the  simulation
results for two-component mixtures of molecules under
study and in the form of three-dimensional spectral sur-
faces and their various sections in the time and the fre-
quency axes.

RESULTS  OF  NUMERICAL  EXPERIMENTS
Simulation  was  carried  out  for  butadiene,  hexadi-
ene, octatetraene (OT), decapentaene, and decatetraene
molecules,  their  various  cis-  and  trans-rotational  iso-
mers, and phenyl-substituted derivatives. Consider the
results obtained by using a number of typical examples.
Ordinary  (stationary)  ﬂuorescence  spectra  of  rota-
tional isomers of polyenes, as noted above, differ little,
mainly  in  the  intensity  of  the  line  ~1200  cm–1  corre-
sponding to the vibration of single C–C bonds. This is
conﬁrmed, in particular, by the results of ab initio cal-
culations [19]. For instance, such spectra for two rota-
tional  isomers  of  octatetraene  are  shown  in  Fig.  1a.
Although identiﬁcation of each isomeric form from the
spectrum  is  basically  possible  (for  instance,  progres-
sion in the vibration of frequency 1200 cm–1 for trans-
octatetraene  is  approximately  twice  as  intense  as  for
cis-octatetraene;  lines  of  the  ﬁrst  components  of  this
progression  are  marked  by  asterisks  in  Fig.  1a),  this
identiﬁcation can be strongly hampered by such factors
as  signiﬁcant  broadening  of  spectrum  lines  and  their
superposition, low spectral resolution, and the presence
of  impurities  (other  isomeric  forms  can  act  as  such
impurities),  [10,  11]  all  the  more  so  since  the  total
intensity of the components ~1200 and ~1600 cm–1 var-
ies by much less, ~10% (here and below, the intensity
of the 0–0 transition is taken as 100%). Since energies
of pure electron transitions of these isomers are close to
each  other  (34300  and  36200  cm–1),  spectra  of  both
isomeric forms in the mixture will be superimposed in
the case of their simultaneous emission, and the assign-
ment  of  lines  of  stationary  experimental  spectrum  to
each isomer turns out to be a difﬁcult problem even for
ﬁne-structure spectra.

Time-resolved  ﬂuorescence  spectra  of  these  mole-
cules turn out to be fundamentally different because the
decay times of spectral lines of cis- and trans-isomers
differ signiﬁcantly (for instance, 130 and 50 ps for cis-
and  trans-octatetraene,  respectively).  Three-dimen-
sional spectrum of a mixture of cis- and trans-octatet-
raene and its sections at various instants of time is pre-
sented in Fig. 2 as an example. It is clearly seen that the
spectrum structure signiﬁcantly changes with time and
the lines belonging to the spectra of different isomeric
forms  of  molecules  are  easily  identiﬁed  (the  most
intense lines of those belonging to the trans-form are

22

ASTAKHOV,  BARANOV

(a)

marked by asterisks in Fig. 2). As shown in [18], this
great difference in time dependences allows the spectra
of various components of the mixture to be reliably sep-
arated  and  qualitative  and  quantitative  analyses  to  be
carried out in a very wide range of relative concentra-
tions (from Ccis-OT/Ctrans-OT = 0.45 to Ccis-OT/Ctrans-OT =
45 in this case).

Henceforth, no greater than a tenfold difference in
the intensities of the ﬁrst and the second components of
the mixture spectrum at the initial instant of time (0.1 <
I1(0)/I2(0)  <  10)  and  the  requirement  that  their  ratio
should change by no less than a factor of e during the
time of spectrum observation comparable with the life-
times of electron-excited states are taken as necessary
conditions for this interpretation for estimating the con-
centration ranges. The ﬁrst requirement corresponds to
the appearance of vibronic lines of both components in
the  mixture  spectrum  observed.  The  second  require-
ment corresponds to a signiﬁcant variation of their rel-
ative intensities needed for interpretation (see [18] for
more detail).

Energies of pure electron transitions in isomers dif-
fer insigniﬁcantly as a rule, by one or two vibrational
quanta  (~ 2000  cm–1  for  cis-  and  trans-octatetraene).
However, in the case of simultaneous excitation of mol-
ecules in the mixture by a pulse with a small spectral
width, different vibration sublevels of isomers become
populated. For instance, the spectrum in Fig. 2 corre-
sponds to initial excitation of a pure electron state of
trans-octatetraene and 10 vibrational sublevels of cis-
octatetraene  corresponding  to  totally  symmetrical
vibrations  with  frequencies  0  cm–1  <  ω  <  2000  cm–1.
This  leads  to  another  noticeable  distinction  in  isomer
spectra; speciﬁcally, lines with frequencies greater than
the frequency of the pure electron transition are present
in the spectrum of cis-octatetraene, which is a distinc-
tive feature of this component in the mixture spectrum
along with the time dependence.

Similar results were obtained for other molecules of
the polyene series. For example, the difference between
the intensities of lines of stationary spectra of various
isomeric forms of butadiene does not exceed 20% and
time dependences of their spectra differ by a factor of
3,  which  ensures  their  reliable  interpretation  in  the
range of relative concentrations from 1 to 110%. As the
molecular  size  increases,  spectral  effects  associated
with  isomerization  become  smaller  as  a  rule.  This  is
caused by a decrease in the relative effect of local vari-
ations of the molecular structure (modes of vibrations
and electron density) on the probabilities and the tran-
sition energies. This is manifested particularly well in
diphenyl-substituted polyenes.

Thus,  stationary  spectra  of  rotational  isomers  of
diphenyloctatetraene  (DO)  differ  only  in  details,
namely, in the presence of low-intensity lines with rel-
ative intensities comparable with the accuracy of their
calculation  (≤10%,  Fig.  1b).  Although  the  type  of
isomerization here is the same as in the case of octatet-

OPTICS AND  SPECTROSCOPY      Vol.  92      No.  1      2002

*

*

34

30
ω × 10–3, cm–1

(b)

30

26
ω × 10–3, cm–1

(c)

33

29
ω × 10–3, cm–1

 S0) of mod-
Fig. 1. Stationary ﬂuorescence spectra (S1 
els of rotational isomers of (a) octatetraene, (b) diphenyloc-
tatetraene, and (c) phenyl-substituted butadiene.

SIMULATION  OF  TIME-RESOLVED VIBRONIC  SPECTRA 

23

I, arb. units

I,  arb. units

I, arb. units

34

ω × 10–

3, c

m–

1

30

0

100
t,  p s

Fig. 2. Calculated time-resolved ﬂuorescence spectra of a mixture of rotational isomers of octatetraene.

30
34
ω × 10–3, cm–1

I, arb. units

+

200

+

150

30

ω × 10–

28
3, c

m–

1

75
t,  p s

0

30
ω × 10–3, cm–1

28

Fig. 3. Calculated time-resolved ﬂuorescence spectra of a mixture of rotational isomers of diphenyloctatetraene.

raene considered above, there are no active lines in the
spectra whose intensities differ signiﬁcantly for the two
given  isomers.  Simulation  of  time-resolved  spectra
showed that calculated characteristics of the ﬁrst elec-
tron-excited  states  and  transitions  from  them  to  the
ground  states  are  relatively  close  for  cis-  and  trans-

diphenyloctatetraene (the lifetimes are 90 and 60 ps, the
oscillator strengths are 1.5 and 2.2, and the energies are
29600 and 30500 cm–1, respectively) and the spectrum
of a mixture of isomers excited to these states (Fig. 3)
consists of two strongly overlapping components with
similar  temporal  dependences.  Even  in  this  situation,

OPTICS AND  SPECTROSCOPY      Vol.  92      No.  1      2002

24

ASTAKHOV,  BARANOV

E × 10–3, cm–1

I, arb. units

7

.

2

2400

200

490

460

1

.

3

1

.

3

9

.

3

60

90

S5

S4

S1

cis

trans

7
0
0

.

0

2

.

0

5

.

1

1

.

0

2

.

2

trans

S5 

S0

S5 

S4

cis

trans

cis

trans

cis

S4 

S1

S1 

S0

40

30

20

10

0

cis

(a)

S0

trans

1000

2000

t, ps

(b)

Fig. 4. (a) Energy level diagram and (b) time dependences of ﬂuorescence intensities of models of isomers of a diphenyloctatetraene
molecule. Transition oscillator strengths and level lifetimes in picoseconds are presented in the diagram.

lines can be assigned to individual components of the
mixture and the presence of each isomeric form in the
mixture can be determined although with a lower accu-
racy, i.e., in a smaller range of possible relative concen-
trations (Ccis-DO/Ctrans-DO = 0.2–20).

Results of computer simulation showed that the efﬁ-
ciency of analysis can be signiﬁcantly improved by a
somewhat different arrangement of the experiment. The
calculations  show  that  the  lifetimes  of  lower  excited
states of diphenyloctatetraene differ relatively slightly,
by a factor of ~1.5, whereas highly excited states are
more  sensitive  to  variations  in  the  electron  structure
associated  with  isomerization.  This  is  clearly  seen
(Fig. 4a) from differences between oscillator strengths
of the transitions and lifetimes of the levels (2–5 times
for the states S4 and S5) whereas their energies coincide
to  an  accuracy  on  the  order  of  the  energy  of  a  vibra-
tional  quantum.  Therefore,  isomers  will  emit  in  the
same  frequency  regions  in  transitions  from  highly-
excited electron states (the vibrational structures of the
spectra will overlap) but time dependences of the inten-
sities of their lines will be radically different. This pro-
vides conditions for spectral analysis and determination
of the composition of mixtures of these isomers from
time-resolved spectra recorded in a wide spectral range
(0 cm–1 < ω < 50 000 cm–1). Time dependences of the
intensities of 0–0 components for the most intense elec-
tron transitions that can be recorded in the case of exci-
tation of the ﬁfth electron state S5 of rotational isomers

of  diphenyloctatetraene  are  shown  in  Fig.  4b.  It  is
clearly seen that time dependences in this excitation are
heavily different not only for the spectra corresponding
to  transitions  from  highly  excited  states  (S5 
  S0,
 S4, and S4 
S5 
 S1) but also for the spectrum of
S1 
 S0. These  distinctions  are  approximately  three
times larger than the case of excitation to the state S1,
while the range of possible relative concentrations Ccis-
DO/Ctrans-DO increases up to 2.5–250, i.e., approximately
tenfold.

Similar data were obtained for other molecules con-
sidered. This feature is due to a signiﬁcantly higher sen-
sitivity of high electron-excited states to isomer restruc-
turing as compared to lower states and demonstrates a
higher  analytical  efﬁciency  of  methods  of  time-
resolved spectroscopy in the case of excitation to higher
electron states.

The  presence  of  substituents  of  various  types  in  a
molecule  is  represented  in  the  spectra  in  varying
degrees.  For  instance,  the  substitution  effect  can  be
detected reasonably well in the comparison of station-
ary  spectra  of  diphenylbutadiene  and  butadiene  [5]
(lines 1200 and 1600 cm–1 in the spectra of substituted
molecules  are  approximately  10–40%  less  intense),
diphenyloctatetraene 
(Fig.  1b),  and  octatetraene
(Fig. 1a) (the difference between the intensities of the
main lines is ~20% for cis- and trans-forms). However,
these  differences  for  methyl-substituted  octatetraene
(decatetraene)  in  conventional  spectra  are  5–10%,

OPTICS AND  SPECTROSCOPY      Vol.  92      No.  1      2002

SIMULATION  OF  TIME-RESOLVED VIBRONIC  SPECTRA 

25

I, arb. units

I, arb. units

+

200

32

ω × 10–

30
3, c

m–

1

100
t,  p s

0

32
ω × 10–3, cm–1

30

Fig. 5. Calculated time-resolved ﬂuorescence spectra of a mixture of rotational isomers of phenyl-substituted butadiene.

which is comparable with the accuracy of calculation of
the intensities, and do not allow reliable identiﬁcation.
Calculated parameters of time dependences of octatet-
raene and decatetraene spectra for transitions from the
lower electron-excited state are also close to each other
(50  and  55  ps).  Nevertheless,  estimates  made  in  [18]
show that a conﬁdent quantitative analysis can be made
in this case as well but for a longer time of spectrum
observation, on the order of 500 ps. Note that the pres-
ence of a difference between the time dependences can
be detected in a much shorter time and that this addi-
tional information allows quantitative identiﬁcation of
the presence of mixture components.

The use of time-resolved spectra can be rather efﬁ-
cient also in the case when it is necessary to identify
molecules with different locations of substituents and it
is difﬁcult to identify them from ordinary spectra. For
example, calculated stationary ﬂuorescence spectra of
cis- and trans-substituted butadiene (Fig. 1c) are difﬁ-
cult to distinguish (the difference is no larger than 10%)
and the difference between the energies of pure electron
transitions  is  too  small  to  be  determined  (33400  and
33000  cm–1).  The  similarity  of  the  spectra  is  caused
ﬁrst of all by the fact that these molecules differ only in
the location of substituents (phenyl rings) whereas their
polyene chains are the same. As for the spectrum struc-
ture (line frequencies and intensities), it is determined
by  the  difference  between  parameters  of  molecular
models  (lengths  of  bonds  and  force  constants)  of  the
lower excited and the ground states. Calculations show
that variations in the electron density resulting from the
transition to the ﬁrst excited state of diphenylpolyenes

OPTICS AND  SPECTROSCOPY      Vol.  92      No.  1      2002

(and diphenylbutadiene in particular) occur mainly in
the  polyene  part  of  molecules  and,  correspondingly,
distinctions for bonds in the polyene parts are 2–3 times
greater than in phenyl rings. Therefore, ordinary spec-
tra of phenyl-substituted butadiene with identical poly-
ene chains are practically independent of the locations
of substituents.

Simulation  of  the  three-dimensional  spectra  of  a
mixture  of  substituted  butadiene  (Fig.  5)  showed  that
molecules with different locations of phenyl rings can
be  identiﬁed  from  time  dependences  of  ﬂuorescence
line  intensities,  which  are  different.  Lifetimes  of  the
lower excited states are 120 and 80 ps for substituents
in cis- and trans-locations. In spite of the fact that spec-
tra of components strongly overlap, lines with different
decay rates can be identiﬁed using sections of the pro-
ﬁle of the mixture spectrum. As in the case of isomers
of  diphenyloctatetraene  considered  above,  differences
in  time  dependences  of  components  of  the  mixture
spectrum  will  be  heavier  if  molecules  are  excited  to
high-lying electron states.

CONCLUSIONS

Three-dimensional  spectra  of  isomers  and  substi-
tuted molecules in this work are calculated with the use
of  molecular  models  with  parameters  obtained  previ-
ously  from  the  comparison  of  their  stationary  spectra
with experiment. We also used the approximation con-
sisting  in  neglect  of  nonradiative  transitions  (vibra-
tional  relaxation,  internal  conversion  and  intersystem
crossing),  transitions  between  isomers,  and  electron–

26

ASTAKHOV,  BARANOV

vibration  interaction.  All  these  factors,  which  often
play  an  important  role  in  femtosecond  spectroscopy,
can  noticeably  affect  the  form  of  the  spectrum  both
qualitatively (multiexponential time dependences) and
quantitatively.  However,  by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  the
isomers considered and the substituted molecules have
similar structures, we can reasonably expect a similar
inﬂuence of the effects neglected in this analysis on the
quantities  responsible  for  the  shape  of  time-resolved
spectra (transition probabilities and energies). Thus, for
instance,  the  lifetime  of  the  lower  electron  state  of
trans-diphenylbutadiene is estimated from experimen-
tal data [20] as 345 ps (80 ps in the calculation). The
disagreement  can  be  associated,  for  instance,  with
vibronic interaction (neglected in the Franck–Condon
model  used)  between  a  given  electron  state  of  the  Bu
symmetry with another closely-lying state of Ag sym-
metry, from which the transition to the ground state is
forbidden. The result of this interaction is governed by
the  relative  location  of  energy  levels  and  oscillator
strengths  of  the  transitions,  which  differ  little  for  the
rotational isomers and substituted molecules compared.
Therefore, the quantitative estimates of temporal char-
acteristics obtained can experience signiﬁcant changes
as  we  pass  to  more  accurate  models,  but  the  pattern
obtained  does  not  radically  change  and  includes  the
possibility  for  conﬁdent  interpretation  as  revealed  in
numerical  experiments  and  estimates  of  relative  con-
centrations of mixture components.

The  results  obtained  demonstrate  the  efﬁciency  of
methods  of  time-resolved  spectroscopy  in  spectral
analysis  of  chemical  compounds  with  similar  optical
properties  when  traditional  methods  (stationary  spec-
tra)  are  inefﬁcient.  For  improving  the  reliability  and
accuracy of the results obtained in computer simulation
the molecular models and approximations used should
be reﬁned, including the solution of inverse problems.
These studies are presently being carried out. In partic-
ular,  methods  for  calculating  nonradiative  transition
probabilities,  ways  and  probabilities  of  interisomer
conversions and chemical reactions [21–25] are being
studied.  In  combination  with  modern  potentials  of
spectral experiments with femtosecond time resolution
(including the case of interisomer restructuring [2]) this
makes active application of software for simulating the
three-dimensional spectra of complex molecules devel-
oped here highly promising in qualitative and quantita-
tive analysis.

The  technique  of  femtosecond  spectroscopy  is
rather  complicated  in  itself  and  the  production  of
dynamic spectra is far from elementary, particularly if
it is aimed at solving particular analytical problems for
complex molecules. Therefore, the possibility for rea-
sonable planning of such experiments and their initial
execution  under  optimum  conditions  adequate  to  the
particular  problem  solved  are  extremely  important.
This  can  be  made  only  by  using  a  numerical  experi-
ment.  The  study  carried  out  showed  that  modern

achievements of theoretical optical spectroscopy can be
safely used as the basis for performing large-scale com-
puter simulation with the aim of optimizing the perfor-
mance of natural experiments.

REFERENCES

1. A. H. Zewail, Adv. Chem. Phys. 101, 892 (1997).
2. S. A. Antipin, A. N. Petrukhin, F. E. Gostev, et al., Chem.

Phys. Lett. 331, 378 (2000).

3. S. A. Astakhov  and V.  I.  Baranov,  Opt.  Spektrosk.  90,

237 (2001) [Opt. Spectrosc. 90, 199 (2001)].

4. L. A. Gribov, V. I. Baranov, and D. Yu. Zelentsov, Elec-
tronic-Vibrational  Spectra  of  Polyatomic  Molecules.
Theory and Methods of Computation (Nauka, Moscow,
1997).

5. V. I. Baranov, L. A. Gribov, V. O. Djenjer, and D. Yu. Ze-

lent’sov, J. Mol. Struct. 407, 177 (1997).

6. V. I. Baranov and A. N. Solov’ev, Zh. Strukt. Khim. 40,

7. V. I. Baranov and A. N. Solov’ev, Zh. Strukt. Khim. 41,

242 (1999).

369 (2000).

8. V.  I.  Baranov  and A.  N.  Solov’ev,  Opt.  Spektrosk.  90,

221 (2001) [Opt. Spectrosc. 90, 183 (2001)].

9. W. G. Bouwman, A. C. Jones, D. Phillips, et al., J. Phys.

Chem. 94, 7429 (1990).

10. D.  G.  Leopold,  R.  D.  Pendley,  J.  L.  Roebber, et  al.,  J.

Chem. Phys. 81, 4210 (1984).

11. R. J. Hemley, A. C. Lasaga, V. Vaida, and M. Karplus, J.

Phys. Chem. 92, 945 (1988).

12. S.  Yamamoto,  K.  Okuyama,  N.  Mikami,  and  M.  Ito,

Chem. Phys. Lett. 125, 1 (1986).

13. J. Saltiel, Y. Zhang, and D. F. Sears, Jr., J. Phys. Chem.

A 101, 7053 (1997).

14. V.  I.  Baranov,  Opt.  Spektrosk.  88,  216  (2000)  [Opt.

Spectrosc. 88, 182 (2000)].

15. V. I. Baranov, Zh. Prikl. Spektrosk. 67, 148 (2000).
16. J. A.  Syage,  P.  M.  Felker,  and A.  H.  Zewail,  J.  Chem.

Phys. 81, 4685 (1984).

17. L. A. Gribov, V. I. Baranov, and S. A. Astakhov, Dokl.

Akad. Nauk 374, 493 (2000).

18. S. A. Astakhov, V. I. Baranov, and L. A. Gribov, Zh. Anal.

Khim. 56, 703 (2001).

19. F. Zerbetto and M. Z. Zgierski, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 4822

20. S.  M.  Bachilo,  C. W.  Spangler,  and  T.  Gillbro,  Chem.

Phys. Lett. 283, 235 (1998).

21. V. I. Baranov and L. A. Gribov, Zh. Prikl. Spektrosk. 67,

22. L. A. Gribov and I. V. Maslov, J. Mol. Struct. 521, 107

23. L. A. Gribov and I. V. Maslov, Zh. Fiz. Khim. 74, 441

(1993).

289 (2000).

(2000).

(2000).

24. L. A. Gribov, Zh. Fiz. Khim. 75, 83 (2001).
25. L. A. Gribov, Zh. Fiz. Khim. 75, 290 (2001).

Translated by A. Mozharovskiœ

OPTICS AND  SPECTROSCOPY      Vol.  92      No.  1      2002

