MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL NOISE IN THE PVLAS
EXPERIMENT

M. Bregant1, G.Cantatore1, S.Carusotto2, G. Di Domenico3, F. Della Valle1, U.Gastaldi4,
E. Milotti5, G.Petrucci6, E.Polacco2, G.Ruoso4, E.Zavattini1, G.Zavattini3

1 Università di Trieste and INFN-Sezione di Trieste, Italy
2 Università di Pisa and INFN-Sezione di Pisa, Italy
3 Università di Ferrara and INFN-Sezione di Ferrara, Italy
4 INFN-Laboratori Nazionali di Legnaro, Italy
5 Università di Udine and INFN-Sezione di Trieste, Italy
6 CERN, Geneva, Switzerland

ABSTRACT. PVLAS is an experiment which aims at the direct detection of photon-field scattering:
it  employs  optical  methods  and  a  large  rotating  superconducting  magnet,  and  its  large,  compact
structure is affected by both mechanical and electrical noises. This paper introduces briefly the data
analysis  methods  used  in  the  experiment  and  summarizes  the  mechanical  and  electrical  noise
situation.

INTRODUCTION

Almost seventy years ago, Heisenberg, Euler and Weisskopf [1,2] predicted that
photons may be scattered by a static electric or magnetic field. This is a straighforward
prediction  of  Quantum  Electrodynamics  [3],  and  it  is  believed  that  such  scattering
processes,  and  the  associated  photon  splitting  processes,  play  an  important  role  in
astrophysical environments, such as on the surfaces of pulsars and magnetars, or in the
weak but very extended galactic magnetic fields, but until now this has never been directly
verified in the laboratory. The PVLAS experiment aims at the direct detection of photon-
field scattering, and in addition it may also be used to detect low-mass pseudoscalar or
scalar particles with two-photon interactions, like the DFSZ axions (see [4] for the theory
and [5] for an experimental review). PVLAS employs optical methods and a large rotating
superconducting  magnet  [6]:  infrared  photons  are  injected  into  a  Fabry-Perot
interferometer and as they bounce back and forth in the magnetic field region between the
interferometer  mirrors,  they  may  occasionally  interact  with  the  magnetic  field.  The
interaction is polarization-dependent and the vacuum between the interferometer mirrors
behaves as a uniaxial birefringent medium. The light exiting the interferometer is analyzed
by a polarizing prism and a tiny signal is picked up by a low noise photodiode. The large,
compact structure of the PVLAS experiment is affected by both mechanical and electrical
noises. This paper introduces briefly the data analysis methods employed in the experiment
and summarizes the mechanical and electrical noise situation.

THE QED VACUUM

It is well known that the vacuum of Quantum Field Theory (QFT) is seething with
virtual particle pairs that spring into existence and annihilate each other all the time. The
charged  particle  pairs  may  be  viewed  either  as  electric  or  as  magnetic  dipoles,  and  the
QED vacuum acts as a polarizable medium. Since photons moving in this QED vacuum

interact with the virtual particle pairs, the photon propagator is modified by the presence of
the particle pairs, and photons may be scattered by other photons or by an external field.

The interaction Lagrangian was first introduced by Euler and Heisenberg [1] and by
Weisskopf [2], and it has been formalized in the context of modern QED by Schwinger [7],
who calculated the following effective interaction Lagrangian

L = −

F
4π

−

1
8π2

∞∫

0

ds
s2

)
(
exp −m 2s

 
es(
 
 

)2 L −1−

es(

)2 F

2
3

 
 
,
 

   (1)

where m is the electron mass, e is the elementary charge (and   h = c = 1) and L, F and G are
defined by the expressions

L = iG

[
(
cosh es 2 F + iG
[
(
cosh es 2 F + iG

)

)

]1/ 2
]1/ 2

{
{

(

{
} + cosh es 2 F − iG
[
]1/ 2
)
{
} − cosh es 2 F − iG
]1/ 2
[
)

(

}
} ,

and

F =

(
B2 − E2

); G = B ⋅ E.

1
2

   (2)

    (3)

(the  equivalent  diagrammatic  perturbative  expansion  is  shown  in  Figure  1).  The  scalar
term containing F in expression (1) is just the classical Lagrangian of the EM field, but
there  is  a  novel  pseudoscalar  term  G  as well: this means that when a magnetic field is
present, the QED vacuum is characterized by the direction of the magnetic field, and it
becomes birefringent. This birefringence is actually quite small: in a dipolar field B the
QED  vacuum  becomes  a  uniaxial  birefringent  medium  with  a  difference  between  the
refractive indexes

(
∆n = n|| − n⊥ ≈ 4 ⋅10−24 Tesla−2

) B0

2 sin2θ,

 (4)

(θ is the angle between the external magnetic field and the electric field of the linearly
polarized light) so that linearly polarized light propagating in this medium acquires a small
ellipticity

Ψ =

L∆n ≈ 12.5 ⋅10−24 Tesla−2

2 sin2θ

   (5)

π
λ

(

 
) L
 
 
λ

 
 B0
 

(L is the path length inside the birefringent medium, and λ is the wavelength of light) and
thus,  even  with  the  intense  fields  achievable  with  the  present  superconducting  magnet
technology, the difference (4) remains exceedingly small, and for this reason the light-field
interaction has long remained undetected.

+

+

+ ...

FIGURE  1. The diagrammatic perturbative expansion equivalent to the EHW result and to the Schwinger
Lagrangian (1) (the crosses denote interactions with the external field and the permutations of the vertices are
implicitly assumed).

0°

Polarizer

Optical cavity

45°

PEM

90°
Analyzer

Photodiode

LASER

Magnetic field region

Main oscillator

DAQ
Computer

DAQ
electronics

FIGURE 2. Schematic layout of the PVLAS experiment. Infrared light is emitted by an infrared Nd-YAG
laser, and it is polarized by a Glan prism. The laser beam travels through a magnetic field region where it
picks up a small ellipticity, then through a photoelastic modulator (PEM). or through a stress optic modulator
(SOM) which introduces an additional ellipticity modulation at high frequency, and finally through another
Glan prism which acts as a polarization analyzer, before being detected by the a low-noise photodiode.

THE PVLAS EXPERIMENT

The PVLAS experiment is a second-generation experiment, which follows a
series of preliminary tests carried out at CERN in the early 1980’s [6] and the experiment
LAS  at  Brookhaven  [5,8];  it  is  located  in  Legnaro,  near  Padua  (Italy)  in  one  of  the
laboratories  of  the  italian  National  Institute  for  Nuclear  Physics  (INFN)  [9].  The
experimental apparatus is basically a very sensitive ellipsometer which should detect the
tiny ellipticity (5) picked up by a beam of linearly polarized light as it travels through an
intense magnetic (dipole) field, and it is shown schematically in Figure 2. The effect is
modulated by rotating the dipole magnet at about 0.3 rotations/s, so that the ellipticity is

(
Ψ = Ψ0 sin2ωM t = 12.5 ⋅10−24 Tesla−2

 
) L
 
 
λ

 
 B0
 

2 sin2ωM t

(6)

(

) ≈ 2 radians ⋅ s−1. This is a very low frequency and any signal at
where  ωM ≈ 2π⋅ 0.3 Hz
such a low frequency is usually drowned in the 1/f noise background. Moreover the final
photodiode is a square-law detector and one would thus detect an even smaller signal ( Ψ2
instead of  Ψ). For these reasons an optical modulator introduces an additional, controlled,
ellipticity at much higher frequency (we have used both a photoelastic modulator [10] at
about 20 KHz and a stress-elastic modulator [11] at about 500 Hz): this has the combined
advantage  of  shifting  the  sought-after  effect  near  the  modulator  frequency  and  of
linearizing  the  photodiode  response.  The  main  Fourier  components  in  the  photodiode
signal are listed in Table 1, where Γ is the static birefringence introduced by the optical
components,  θM   is  the  phase  of  the  magnetic  field  (with  respect  to  a  time  marker)  and
)   is  the  ellipticity  introduced  by  the  modulator.  Since  the  ellipticity
η0 cos ωPEM t + θPEM
signal depends linearly on the path-length L and quadratically on the field intensity B, it is
very important to achieve the highest possible field and the longest possible path-length:
we  use  a  one-meter-long  superconducting  dipole  magnet  designed  and  tested  to  reach
8.8 T (though we use it only up to 6.6 T), and we increase the path-length with a Fabry-
Perot resonator. The superconducting magnet is wound with Nb-Ti wire and requires LHe
cooling  and  therefore  a  large  cryostat  which  must  rotate  with  the  magnet:  a  schematic
layout  of  the  cryostat  is  shown  in  Figure  3.  Figure  4  shows  the  magnet  when  it  was
lowered in the cryostat.

(

TABLE 1.  The main Fourier components in the photodiode signal.

angular frequency

normalized power

phase

0
ωM
2ωM
ωP E M
ωPEM ± ωM
2ωP E M

2 2

σ2 + Γ 2 + η0
2ΓΨ0
2 2
Ψ0
2Γη0
η0Ψ0
2 2
η0

θM
2θM
θP E M
θPEM ± θM
2θP E M

The  Fabry-Perot  resonator  is  more  than  6  m  long,  and  is  thus  longer  than  the
cryostat: with it we have reached a very high finesse (~ 105) and a record Q-value (~ 1012)
(achieved with an accurate stabilization of the Nd-YAG LASER frequency by means of
the Pound-Drever technique [12], see ref. [13] for a discussion): a complete optical layout
is shown in Figure 5, and the overall mechanical layout with the rotating cryostat and the
optical tables is shown in Figure 6. Figures 7 and 8 show the support structures before and
after completion.

Roots pump
group (1000 m3/h at 10 mbar)

Helium
recovery

Gas flow
regulation valves

4000A

He I  4.2K

S

Helium
vapours

He II 1.8K

Current leads

J.-T. Expansion
        valve

Heat exchanger
        1.8K

Liquid He
dewar

Removable
transfer line

heat shields
three way
valve

Emergency
cold valve

Fiber
Glass
Epoxy

8T dipole
 magnet

Centering
devices

Vacuum
insulating gap

FIGURE 3. Schematic layout of the PVLAS
cryostat.

FIGURE 4. The magnet and the upper heat-
shields being lowered in the cryostat.

L

T

CM

2

RT

CM1

PDE

SF

W2

AP

PEM

MM
2

MM1

PP

W1

Vertical
vacuum
chamber

DM

PDR

L

OI

P

FC

z

λ/2

M2

M

1

L1

y

x

FIGURE  5.  Detailed  optical  layout.  Legend:
OI: Optical Isolator; P,PP,AP Polarizer prisms:
LR,LT:Lenses;  PDR,PDE  Photodiodes;  FC:
Faraday  Cell;  λ/2  :  Half  wave  plate;  L1:
Matching  lens;  M1,M2:  steering  mirrors
W1,W2:  Windows  MM1,MM2  Tilting  stages;
CM1,CM2: Cavity mirrors: RT: Rotating Table;
DM:  Dipole  magnet;  PEM  PhotoElastic
Modulator; SF: Spatial Filter.

vacuum
enclosure

upper
optical
bench

light
path

rotating
table

magnet and
cryostat

lower
optical
bench

FIGURE  6.  The  overall  mechanical  layout.
The  experimental  apparatus  sits  in  a  hole  dug
in an experimental hall in Legnaro; the vertical
structure that supports the optics (lower optical
table  plus  Fabry-Perot  cavity  plus  upper
optical table) is made of granite, and it rests on
an isolation raft at the bottom of the hole; the
raft  is  a  single  block  of  reinforced  concrete
supported  by  the  underlying  sand  bed,  and
mechanically  decoupled  from  the  outer  walls
of the hole. The rotating cryostat that holds the
magnet  is  also  decoupled  from  the  support
structure  and  it  sits  on  a  concrete  bridge  that
joins two sides of the hole.

FIGURE  7.  The  experimental  apparatus
during  construction:  the  rotating  table  is
clearly visible under the cryostat, and only the
lower part of granite structure is complete, the
lower  and  the  upper  optical  tables  are  still
missing.

FIGURE  8.  The  experimental  apparatus  after
completion  (August  2000):  the  cryostat  is
nearly  invisible  behind  the  granite  columns
that  support  the  upper  optical  table.  The  table
itself is screened by a plastic hut that protects it
from  dirt  and  environmental  noise.  The  outer
structure made of light tubing is mechanically
decoupled  from  the  granite  columns  and  is
needed to access the apparatus.

NOISE SOURCES AND SYSTEMATIC EFFECTS

As  we  have  seen  in  the  previous  section  the  heart  of  the  apparatus  is  a  high-Q
Fabry-Perot resonator: the resonator is 6.4 m long and is partially contained in long quartz
tube with a internal diameter of about 24 mm. This tube resides in an axial hole in the
cryostat, and both the tube and the mirror may be subjected to environmental vibrations,
both  seismic  and  acoustical.  In  addition,  the  ellipticity  modulator  may  also  pick  up
enviromental  noise  (an  unstable  beam  position  on  the  modulator  translates  into  an
additional  random  ellipticity  modulation  because  of  nonuniformities  of  the  modulator
substrate).  Several  sources  may  contribute  to  a  diffuse  noise  background:  the  vacuum
pumps, the rotating table, cars on a nearby road, etc. Many of these sources have a fairly
well  defined  operating  frequency,  but  may  be  spread  on  a  comparatively  large  spectral
region  because  of  nonlinear  couplings.  Random  disturbances  with  a  flat  or  nearly  flat
spectrum are undesirable because they drown in background noise the Fourier components
given in table 1, especially the information-carrying sidebands, but systematic effects are
even  more  dangerous,  because  they  produce  fake  spectral  peaks  which  are  not  easy  to
disentagle  from  the  real  physical  effect.  Apart  from  the  obvious  and  easily  controlled
electrical cross-talk signals, there are unfortunately several such systematic effects due to
the  coupling  between  the  rotating  magnetic  field  and  many  optical,  electrical  and
mechanical components in the apparatus. A very partial list of systematics includes:

1. mechanical effects

- generic mirror motion (due to parasitic mechanical coupling to rotating table)
- piezoelectricity in conductors (deformed by acoustical or mechanical effects)

2. magneto-mechanical effects

- ferromagnetic coupling with supporting structures
- magnetostriction in supporting structures

3. electromagnetic effects

- direct induction in conductors
- direct induction in acquisition electronics
- Faraday and Cotton-Mouton effects in gases or glass

DATA ACQUISITION AND ANALYSIS

Data are collected from several sensors using 16-bit (and in the near future 24-bit)
ADC’s, and special care is devoted to the main photodiode that detects the light signal
from the cavity. The acquisition is performed at low frequency (about 10 Hz) in a self-
triggered mode (tick marks on the rotating table trigger the acquisition apparatus and allow
a perfect synchronization with the the physical effect) and at high frequency (8200 Hz, but
may be as low as 4100 Hz or as fast as 90 KHz) in a free-running mode (an internal clock
in  the  acquisition  computer  triggers  data  acquisition  at  a  frequency  above  the  Nyquist
frequency  for  the  ellipticity  modulator):  all  the  signals  are  written  to  disk  for  offline
analysis. Online monitoring is provided by a few spectrum analyzers. The low frequency
signals also require demodulating lock-in amplifiers to remove the modulator frequency.
Figure 9 shows an example of a real physical signal (Cotton-Mouton effect in nitrogen, see
for  instance  ref  [14])  read  out  with  the  low-frequency  data  acquisition,  and  Figure  10
shows  the  corresponding  power  spectral  density.  Figures  11  and  12  show  the  power
spectral density obtained with the high-frequency data acquisition system: a comparison
between the low-frequency and the high-frequency data may eventually help to detect the
sources of random noise and systematic effects.

Number of table turns

FIGURE  9. Initial portion of the main signal taken in run 353 (november 2001). In this case the cavity was not
empty  but  contained  nitrogen  with  a  pressure  of  0.0052  mbar,  and  the  magnet  current  was  I  =  859  A,
corresponding to a field intensity B = 3.28 T. The horizontal scale is in units of table turns, while the vertical scale
is in Volt at the ADC input (the combined transimpedance amplification factor before the ADC is 1010 V/A so that
the photocurrent is of the order of 10-11-10-10 A). The signal shown here displays a real physical effect, the Cotton-
Mouton effect in nitrogen, which is a few orders of magnitude greater than the QED effect in vacuum, and is used
to calibrate and check the apparatus.

frequency
FIGURE  10.  Power  spectral  density  of  the  signal  shown  in  Figure  9:  amplitude  (dBVrms)  vs.  frequency
(turns-1).  Four  peaks  emerge  from  a  mostly  flat  background,  corresponding  to  the  first,  second,  third  and
fourth harmonic of the magnet rotation frequency: at present we can only extract physical information from
the second harmonic.

frequency (KHz)
FIGURE  11.  Power  spectral  density  of  the  photodiode  signal  obtained  with  the  high  frequency  data
acquisition  ADC  (modulator  frequency  =  506  Hz,  sampling  frequency  =  4100  Hz,  transimpedance
amplification  =  107  V/A):  amplitude  (dBVrms)  vs.  frequency  (Hz).  In  addition  to  some  of  the  Fourier
components listed in table 1 there are many other peaks outside the band of interest. This is an overall view
and the interesting frequency range is compressed in a single channel around 0.5 KHz.

frequency (Hz)
FIGURE 12. Expanded view of the power spectral density near the stress-optic modulator frequency peak at
506  Hz.  This  spectrum  has  been  obtained  with  220  samples,  and  the  resolution  is  about  4  mHz.  The  four
sidebands visible in Figure 10 stand out very clearly near the peak of the modulator signal. The sidebands are
not  exactly  symmetrical  about  the  modulator  peak:  this  may  indicate  an  unwanted  phase  modulation  from
some still unidentified magnetomechanical effect.   

B (Tesla)
FIGURE  13. Measured  ellipticity  vs.  B
(Tesla)  in  vacuum.  Notice  the  linear  growth
after  3  T:  we  believe  that  as  the  saturation
value  is  reached,  the  iron  cannot  contain  the
field in the iron yoke, and that this influences
some  electrical  or  optical  element  in  the
apparatus. This hypothesis is further supported
by  numerical  magnetic  field  calculations.  We
have not yet identified the sensitive elements.

FUTURE PERSPECTIVES

B (Tesla)

FIGURE 
14. Measured  LASER  beam
displacement  (mmRMS)  vs  B  (Tesla)  at  twice
the  magnet  rotation  frequency  (this  is  the
frequency  at  which  we  measure  ellipticity).
Notice  that  the  RMS  beam  displacement
behaves  like  the  ellipticity  in  fig.  13:  this
provides  further  support  to  the  hypothesis
discussed in Figure 13.

Like all high-precision experiments, PVLAS is very challenging, and must solve
problems  due  to  systematic  effects  and  noise  in  order  to  measure  the  minute  QED
birefringence. Now we believe that we are on the verge of understanding how the magnetic
field couples with our apparatus: Figures 13 and 14 show that the systematic signal that we
observe is probably due to the influence of the magnetic field that escapes from the magnet
yoke when the iron saturates. This means that a proper screening of the magnetic field
should cure the apparatus and improve both our measurement sensibility and remove most
systematics. If this is correct, then we shall soon be able not only to give tight limits to the
axion mass [4,5], and measure accurately the Cotton-Mouton constants of several gases at
low pressure [14], but also to observe the long-sought QED effect.

REFERENCES

1.  Heisenberg, W., and Euler, H., Z. Phys. 38, 714 (1936).
2.  Weisskopf, V.S., Mat.-Fys. Medd. K. Dan. Vidensk. Selsk. 14, 1 (1936)
3.  Adler, S. L., Ann.Phys. 67, 599 (1971).
4.  Maiani, L., Petronzio, E., Zavattini, E., Phys. Lett. 175B, 359 (1986).
5.  Cameron, R., et al., Phys. Rev. D47, 3707 (1993).
6.  Iacopini, E., and Zavattini, E., Phys. Lett. 85B, 151 (1979);

Iacopini, E., Smith, B., Stefanini, G., and Zavattini, E., Nuovo Cim. 61B, 21 (1981).

7.  Schwinger, J., Phys Rev. 82, 664 (1951).
8.  Semertzidis, Y., et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 2988 (1990).
9.  http://www.lnl.infn.it
10. http://www.hindspem.com
11. F. Brandi et al., Meas. Sci. Technol. 12, 1503 (2001).
12. Drever, R. W. P., et al., Appl. Phys. B: Photophys. Laser Chem. 31, 97 (1983).
13. De Riva, A.M., et al., Rev. Sci. Instr. 67, 2680 (1996).
14. Rizzo, C. et al., Intern. Rev. Phys. Chem. 16, 81 (1997).

