CARPS: An integrated proposal and data collection system 
Keith Brister, The University of Chicago 
 
Abstract: Modern scripting languages and database tools combined provide a new framework for 
developing beam-line control and data management software. The CARPS system supports data collection 
by storing low level beam-line control commands in a database and playing these commands back to 
collect data sets. This system is combined with proposal and data management tools for support of both 
local and remote users. 

 

Introduction 
 
Beamline control software has traditionally operated independently of the rest of the 
beamline support such as the proposal review and scheduling software.  This is a natural 
outcome of the fact that beamline scientists have been responsible for the operation of the 
beamline while the administrative support personnel have been responsible for the 
proposal review and scheduling administration.  Progress in both beamline controls and 
beamline administration has been along the lines of  making electronic versions of dials 
and paper forms, respectively. 
 
The CARPS project, described here, brings together the beamline controls and the 
beamline administration by integrating the operational and administrative databases using 
freely available software packages.  It was developed to liberate the beamline personnel 
from as many routine tasks as possible.  
 
The capabilities of the current system are: 
 
1) Proposal submission 
2) Proposals review 
3) Scheduling 
4) Trip administration (who and what is coming when) 
5) Remote collaboration and data collection 
6) Data archiving and retrieval 
 
The proposal tools developed to date are based on use of one facility but it would be 
possible to extend this approach to others as the code is freely available (currently at 
carps.sourceforge.net). 
 
  

The Old Model 
The administration and control of beamlines has changed little in concept over the past 
twenty years or so.  In the beginning adjustments were made by hand in a time 
consuming manor, especially considering that the scientists could not actually touch the 
instruments while the x-rays were present.  Naturally, motors were installed on crucial 

adjustments and the remote control of at least part of the beamline made possible.  Simple 
(yet powerful) programs were developed that provided more than just beamline 
adjustments: plotting and state archiving were added first with coordinated motions of 
several motors soon following.  In concept, the programs used to control scientific 
experiments have become automated versions what had been done by hand. 
 
Likewise, the administration of the early facilities rapidly advanced to formal paper based 
proposal systems in order to make the best scientific use of scarce resources.  The 
explosion of internet has moved many of these systems to the web, but for the most part 
proposals are handled in a way that differs little from what could have been done by the 
Phoenicians with clay tablets, albeit faster. 
 

The New Model 
Over the past ten years or so a number of general programming tools have become freely 
available to manage information.  These are, of course, databases and modern computer 
languages such as JAVA, PERL, PHP, and Python.  An important characteristic of these 
languages is that the expertise to use them is more generally available than the knowledge 
of the systems used for beamline controls developed during the 80's and 90's.  This has 
been appreciated by others and new beamline control software is being  written in these 
new languages (see the other presentations in this session, for example). 
 
If experiments were performed in isolation from other experiments and were completely 
self contained, there would be no need to go further.  The existing beamline control 
programs and the existing proposal systems already do the job they were built for.  But 
this is not the case: projects involve groups of people (some remote) and involve access 
to the data after the experiment is completed.  Often several trips to several facilities are 
needed to bring a project to fruition 
 
Combining the operational databases (beamline controls) and the administrative 
databases (proposals and user program  information) has some interesting advantages: 
User authentication used for proposal submission and beamtime planning can now be 
used for remote data collection and collaboration.  Project information used to 
communicate the experimental needs to the facility is now available at data collection 
time to help organize the experiment.  By linking to the scheduling database, the code can 
tell which group may have access to the beamline controls. 
 

The BioCARS Implementation 
Since 1998 BioCARS has used an on- line proposal system.  Presently this system uses 
MySQL as the database manager, apache as the web server, PHP as the scripting 
language, and RedHat/LINUX on a DELL server.  Figure 1 shows a simplified version 
schema currently used.  The table dbUserTable contains access information for a given 
research group or for a staff member. 

RefereeTable

AddressTable

dbUserTable

UserTable

SampleTable

MaterialTable

EquipmentTable

ProposalTable

TripTable

ReviewTable

ProposalETTable

ProposalSTTable

ProposalMTTable

TripUTable

TripSTable

TripCTable

TripETable

TripPTable

 

Figure 1.  Simplified schema for the proposal/trip portion of the 
CARPS system.  The left hand tables link reviews to referees and 
proposals, proposals to the experimental team, samples, and 
chemicals, and trips to the experimental team, samples, chemicals, 
equipment, and proposals.  Tables from the operational database 
(not shown) also link to the trip table. 

There are several features of this schema that differ from other proposal implementations: 
1)  The system attempts to track information by research group, not by individuals.  
Research groups decide for themselves how to access the system; some share the 
access information among all the members, having the individuals enter 
information.  Others designate one person to enter all the information. 

2)  The login process involves three pieces of information: the group name, the group 
password, and the group's access key.  The group name and password are chosen 
by the group to suit themselves while the access key (currently a 16 character 
random string), is chosen by the proposal system.  An automated email sends a 
URL containing the access key which is subsequently stored as a cookie. 
3)  All information is persistent: groups can use information previously entered to 

generate a new proposal or a new trip. 

 
The access key warrants a little explanation.  Often groups share passwords and login 
information so that everyone associated with the group knows this information.   When 
someone leaves the group they take this information with them.  The access key, 
essentially a second password, makes it that much more difficult for someone no longer 
associated with the group to gain access to currently project details.  It is a simple matter 
to change the access key without have to change the password. 
 
The web front end main page gives user groups access to the following areas: 
 

1)  People associated with the group 

2)  Samples entered by the group 
3)  Chemicals entered by the group 
4)  Specialized equipment used by the group 
5)  Proposals 
6)  Trips 
7)  Publications 

 
Staff members may have some of these addition areas available, depending on their role: 

1)  Schedule 
2)  Operational items, such as detector location and the type of experiment 

configured at a station 

3)  Access to other user group areas 
4)  Proposal preparation 
5)  List of users (Contact list) 
6)  Bulk e- mail with "mail- merge" features 
7)  Scheduling tools 
8)  Referee administration (contact information for reviewers) 
9)  Review administration (manage the review system) 
10) Edit publication information 
11) Generate "boiler-plate" information for the funding agency 

 
 

The Trip 
All the sample preparation, proposal submission, and scheduling leads up to a trip to the 
facility.  The "trip page" assembles all the details needed.  The user and/or staff member 
selects from the lists of people, samples, chemicals, equipment, and proposals those that 
are relevant to this particular visit to the facility.  This is where arrival, lodging, sample 
and chemical quantities are entered.  This is also where access to data archives is given 
and where the access to remote collaboration and data collection tools are to be found. 
 

Database approach to data collection 
The traditional model for beamline controls involves the low- level beamline controls and 
a higher level user interface.  There two ways to implement this:  The first is that the low-
level beamline controls has all the logic to run the experiment and the user interface 
provides the "window dressing".  EPICS with MEDM is one example of this.  The 
second is where the low- level beamline controls are slaved to a user interface that itself 
contains the logic to run the experiment.  The various area detector manufactures provide 
interfaces that act in this way. 
 
The database approach implemented at BioCARS follows the second method: low level 
beamline control commands generated by a user interface are stored in a database and 
played back by a translator, called here the sequence engine.  Figure 2 shows a schematic 
of how this works for exposing diffraction images (frames). 

User Interface

Frame DB

Frame 1
Frame 2
Frame 3
Frame 4
…

Status DB

Sequence Engine

Beamline Controls

 

Figure 2.  Schematic of the user interface-database-
beamline controls interaction.  The low level 
instructions for exposing each frame are generated by 
the user interface and played back by the sequence 
engine. 

 
 
The advantage of this method, besides that of being linked to the proposal/trip database, 
is that the user interface is independent of both the beamline controls and the database.  
Any program capable of communication with the database can be used to manufacture a 
user interface.  Multiple user interfaces may be in use simultaneously.  For example, PHP 
is used in this implementation to generate sequences and show the status remotely while 
Python is used to show the status of the running experiment locally. 
 
Programmers wanting to use this system do no t need to learn the details of the 
communication protocol used to talk to the beamline controls; they only need concern 
themselves with communication with the database and this is well documented for most 
languages likely to be used. 
 

Future possibilities 
 
The present system has been used to collect monochromatic and MAD data as well as 
both static and time-resolved Laue data at BioCARS (APS Sector 14).  In addition, a 
standalone system has been set up and has been used to collect high-pressure powder 
diffraction data at GSECARS (APS Sector 13) as well as high-pressure single-crystal 
diffraction data at ChemMatCARS (APS Sector 15).  Although each of these facilities 
uses EPICS as the low- level beamline controls, the only part of the system that cares is 
the sequence engine.  The sequence engine itself is not a major project at all; sequence 
engines for other low- level beamline control systems should not be difficult to write. 
 
In fact, the sequence engine does not need to be limited to communications with 
beamline control systems.  There would be an advantage to linking to data analysis 
packages to at least start up the analysis of the data. 

 
 Likewise, the database does not need to be limited to use by the facility.  Users could 
bring to the facility their own interface to the experiment.  This interface could be 
integrated with the user's research database allowing management of data collected at 
several beamlines for the same project. 
 
In an effort to facilitate others in using this package, the project has been moved to 
carps.sourceforge.net under the Gnu Public License (GPL).  
 

