Dynamically Multivalued, Not Unitary or Stochastic, Operation
of Real Quantum, Classical and Hybrid Micro-Machines

A.P. KIRILYUK*
Institute of Metal Physics, Kiev, Ukraine 03142

2
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
5
1
 
 
 
1
7
0
1
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT. Any real interaction process produces many equally possible, but mutually incompatible
system versions, or realisations, giving rise to the omnipresent, purely dynamic randomness (chaoticity)

and universally defined complexity (sections 3-4). Since quantum behaviour dynamically emerges as the

lowest level of unreduced world complexity (sections 4.6-7, 5.3), quantum interaction randomness can

only be relatively strong (explicit), which reveals the causal origin of quantum indeterminacy (sections

4.6.1, 5.3(A)) and true quantum chaos (sections 4.6.2, 5.2.1, 6), but rigorously excludes a possibility of

unitary quantum computation, even in the ‘ideal’, noiseless system (sections 5-7). Any real computation is

an internally chaotic (multivalued) process of system complexity development realised in different regimes

at various complexity levels (sections 7.1-2). The unitary quantum machines, including their postulated

‘magic’, cannot be realised as such because their dynamically single-valued scheme is incompatible with

the irreducibly high dynamic randomness at quantum complexity levels (sections 4.5-7, 5.1, 5.2.2, 7.1-2)

and should be replaced by the explicitly chaotic, intrinsically creative machines already realised in living

organisms and providing their quite different, realistic kind of magic. The related concepts of reality-

based, complex-dynamical nanotechnology, biotechnology, and intelligence are outlined, together with the

ensuing change in research strategy and content (sections 7.3, 8). The unreduced, dynamically multivalued

solution of the quantum (and classical) many-body problem reveals the true, complex-dynamical basis of

solid-state dynamics, including the origin and internal dynamics of macroscopic quantum states (section

5.3(C)).  The  critical,  ‘end-of-science’  state  of  the  conventional,  unitary  knowledge  is  also  causally
explained and the rigorously substantiated way to positive problem solution is specified within the same,
universal concept of complexity (section 9).

*Address for correspondence: A.P. Kirilyuk, Post Box 115, Kiev-30, Ukraine 01030.
  E-mail: kiril@metfiz.freenet.kiev.ua

ABBREVIATIONS
used in the text

EP  for  Effective Potential (introduced in section 3.2, p. 33)

SOC  for  Self-Organised Criticality (introduced in section 4.5.1, p. 57)

2

CONTENTS

1. Introduction   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

2.

Impossibility of unitary quantum computation:
Qualitative considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(i) Non-creative character of unitary dynamics vs real computation nature and demands  . . . . . .

(ii) Contradiction between unitary description of quantum devices and quantum postulates . . . . .

(iii) Contradiction between unitary computation and entropy growth law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(iv) Contradiction between quantum computer coherence and its irreducible structure  . . . . . . . .

(v) Transition from quantum computation to classical and back . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.

Dynamic origin of randomness in a noiseless system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1. Generalised many-body problem and micro-machine dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2. Universally nonperturbative problem solution by the unreduced effective potential method . .

3.3. Dynamically multivalued interaction result as the universal origin of randomness

and a priori probability values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.

Universal dynamic complexity, its properties, and manifestations
in  micro-system  dynamics     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.1. Universal concept of complexity and chaoticity by the dynamic redundance paradigm  . . . .

4.2. Dynamic entanglement, causal wavefunction,

and the internal structure of real interaction processes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3. Omnipresent dynamic instability, essential nonlinearity,

generalised dynamical collapse, physical space, time, and quantization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.4. Probabilistic dynamic fractality, interactive adaptability,

and universal complexity development  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.5. Generic types of system behaviour as particular cases

of the dynamically multivalued interaction process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.5.1. Dynamically multivalued self-organisation and control of chaos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.5.2. Uniform (global) chaos, its universal criterion and physical origin . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.6. Causally complete description of quantum-mechanical behaviour

as the lowest level of unreduced dynamic complexity of the world . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.6.1. The dynamic origin of elementary particles, their properties and wave-particle duality
4.6.2. Complex-dynamical particle interaction, genuine quantum chaos,

and quantum measurement dynamics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.7. Interaction complexity development and dynamic origin of classical behaviour

in noiseless micro-systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

9
11
15
18
20
22

26
26
32

35

42
42

44

48

52

56
56
60

65
65

67

71

(continued on the next page)

3

5. Dynamically multivalued computation by real quantum and hybrid machines . . .
5.1. The myth of unitary quantum computation: its formal origin and impossibility of realisation .

5.2. Dynamically chaotic (multivalued) operation of real micro-machines: general principle,

universal properties and particular features  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.2.1. Time-periodic perturbation of a bound quantum motion: Complex dynamics

of an elementary interaction act . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.2.2. Fundamental properties and causally derived general principle

of real quantum machine operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3. Complex-dynamical reality behind the mystified abstractions of the official unitarity . . . . . .
(A) Quantum coherence, ‘decoherence’, randomness, chaos, density matrix . . . . . . . . . . .
(B) Quantum entanglement, nonlocality/‘correlations’, ‘teleportation’,

reduction/measurement, duality/complementarity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(C) Classicality, macroscopic quantum states, complex solid state dynamics . . . . . . . . . . .

6. Genuine quantum chaos and its consistent transition

to the true dynamical randomness in classical mechanics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133

7. Computation as a complexity development process:

The physical information theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.1. Dynamical information as a form of dynamic complexity, its unceasing

transformation into dynamical entropy, and the universal symmetry of complexity . . . . . . .

7.2. Computation as complexity conservation by transformation of information into entropy

and its particular features at the level of micro-machine dynamics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7.3. Universal direction of system evolution, causal interpretation of intelligence,

and transition to creative computation/production processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8. Dynamically multivalued, not unitary or stochastic, micro-machines

as the real basis for the next technological revolution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 187

9. ‘Human’ implications of the quantum computation story:

Unitary calculations and show-business kind of ‘science’ vs
real problem solution within intrinsically creative knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193

References   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 213

Page

80
80

92

92

100
116
118

120
126

147

147

175

180

__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Il me paraît plus naturel et plus conforme aux idées qui ont toujours
heureusement orienté la recherche scientifique de supposer
que les transitions quantiques pourront un jour être interprétées,
peut-être à l'aide de moyens analytiques dont nous ne disposons pas encore,
comme  des  processus  très  rapides,  mais  en  principe  descriptibles
en  termes  d'espace  et  de  temps,  analogues  à  ces  passages  brusques
d'un cycle limite à un autre que l'on rencontre très fréquemment
dans l'étude des phénomènes mécaniques et électromagnétiques non linéaires.

Louis de Broglie, Les idées qui me guident dans mes recherches (1965) [381]

__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

4

1.  Introduction

The end of a big enough stage of evolution of any complex system is characterised by critically

sharp instabilities marking the ‘last breath’ of the disappearing regime and possible beginning of transition

to a qualitatively new level of development. This universal expression of the ‘generalised phase transition’

[1] in the complex system dynamics is readily observed for the whole variety of real world phenomena,

from a brightly blinking and then forever fading light source (a lamp or a star) to the modern ‘sudden’

revival of activity in the fundamental ‘new physics’ as if repeating the excitement of its birth period a

hundred years ago (see e. g. [2-4] and the references therein). Concentrating especially around ‘quantum’

phenomena  (though  they  are  often  arbitrary  extended  to  any  weird-looking,  ‘mysterious’  things  and

ideas), this latest ‘advance’ of ‘quantum computation’, ‘quantum teleportation’, ‘entanglement’ and other

announced ‘quantum miracles’ produces much promise of ‘fantastic’, extraordinary new possibilities, but

uses only the old, always unresolved quantum ‘mysteries’ and ‘paradoxes’, without any qualitatively new

concept and deeper (more consistent) understanding of the unreduced physical reality behind them and

therefore  provides,  alas,  just  another  characteristic  example  of  the  clearly  visible  “end”  [5]  of  the

conventional fundamental science involving the “ironic”, explicitly speculative and imitative ‘play of

words’  within  any  its  stylish  ‘innovation’  without  novelty  (the  conventional  ‘science  of  complexity’

providing another relevant example) [1,6,7]. In this respect the ‘quantum magicians’ resemble too closely

any ordinary swift-handed jugglers (the latter being in average much more honest), since both pretend to

obtain something ‘very interesting’ from virtually nothing, without any realistic, causal creation of the

promised new properties and new understanding.

At the same time the causally complete, i. e. devoid of any physical ‘mysteries’ and mathematical

ambiguities,  totally  consistent  and  realistic  understanding  of  micro-world  phenomena  and  objects

inevitably becomes the more and more indispensable with growing real advance of practical technology

that cannot rely any more upon its conventional, purely empirical way of development. In this work we

propose the unreduced analysis of real micro-object behaviour which involves both the qualitatively new,
rigorously  derived  and  reality-based  concept  of  (universal)  dynamic  complexity of any  unreduced
interaction process, and the clear explanation of the fundamental, unavoidable failure of the conventional
science approaches to theoretical description of such artificial or natural systems as ‘quantum computers’
or any other micro-devices and ‘nanomachines’. To avoid confusion, note that we shall use the prefix
‘micro-’ as a generalised designation of all ‘sufficiently small’ structures, where the quantum effects, or
other explicit manifestations of the unreduced dynamic complexity, become important, so that our ‘micro-
machines’, for example, include both ‘nanomachines’ and their microscale assemblies, etc.

We show that any elementary interaction process leading to a nontrivial change of real system state

and indispensable for its useful operation is characterised by the purely dynamic uncertainty emerging in

the form of dynamically multivalued, or redundant, interaction result [1-4,8-13] already in a totally closed

micro-, or macro-, system protected from any ‘environment’ and related speculative ‘decoherence’. The

5

difference between micro- and macro- system scale is that the relative  magnitude  of  this  irreducible

dynamic uncertainty tends to be larger for smaller systems and becomes indeed irreducibly large for the

ultimately small, essentially quantum systems (which provides the causal explanation for the famous

‘quantum indeterminacy’ [1-4,10-13] and reveals the source of true quantum chaos [1,8,9]). It follows,

correspondingly, that the dynamically single-valued, or unitary, always essentially perturbative analysis of

the  conventional  quantum  (and  classical)  theory,  including  all  its  ‘post-modern’  modifications  and

‘interpretations’,  leads  to  basically  wrong  predictions  that  cannot  describe  real  system  operation  in

principle,  irrespective  of  the  evoked  non-universal,  easily  adjustable  factors,  such  as  environmental

influences  or  control/correction  procedures.  Since  the  unreduced  dynamic  complexity of real system

behaviour is consistently determined by the total number of rigorously derived, incompatible versions, or

realisations, of emerging system configuration in real, physical space and equals to zero for the unrealistic

case of only one system realisation, exclusively considered by the conventional science [1], the whole

approach and ‘paradigm’ of the latter are basically limited to that artificially over-simplified, perturbational

reduction of complex-dynamical reality down to its effectively one-dimensional projection characterised by

the zero value of the genuine, unreduced complexity (the latter should be distinguished from its abstract,

postulated imitations by ‘quantum/computational complexity’, information, entropy, etc., all of them

referring to the same unitary projection of reality).

Whereas  the  obtained  conclusions  are  universally  applicable  to  any  real  system  (interaction

process), the case of microscopic, ‘quantum’ systems corresponds to the lowest sublevels of the world

complexity, where any ‘control of chaos’, always using lower complexity levels to produce the desired

change of higher-complexity dynamics in the direction of external regularity (unitarity), cannot be efficient

in principle [1,3,4]. Another illusion within the idea of unitary quantum devices comes from the apparent

unitarity of the standard quantum mechanics, but this attitude does not want to take into account the fact

that the nonunitary, complex-dynamical (multivalued) character of the actual quantum dynamics is trickily

hidden  in  the  ‘inexplicable’  postulates  of  the  standard  theory,  thus  providing  their  unique  causal

explanation and totally realistic solution of the canonical ‘quantum mysteries’. The unreduced analysis of

the underlying interaction processes in the universal science of complexity [1-4,9-13] gives rise to the

causally complete, essentially nonunitary and nonlinear extension of quantum mechanics devoid of any
para-scientific ‘mysteries’ and therefore suitable for efficient practical applications. On the contrary, it is
difficult  to  expect  that  any  theory  so  much  relying  on  the  ‘mystique’  as  the  conventional  quantum
mechanics, can ever be useful in close practical applications, where all those ‘unexplainable’ details do
matter and contribute directly to the main expected results.

Interaction between microscopic entities with essentially quantum behaviour refers basically to the
field  of  quantum  chaos.  The  conventional  quantum  chaos  theory,  being  an  integral  part  of  the
conventional, unitary science paradigm, falls totally within its dynamically single-valued approach and
therefore cannot find its own main subject, the true randomness of purely dynamical origin, being obliged

to replace it with various, always inconsistent imitations, such as postulated, abstract ‘signs’ of statistically

averaged randomness as if appearing ‘indirectly’, not in real system behaviour (that remains perfectly

regular within its unitary imitation), but rather as ‘energy level ergodicity’, ‘phase-space intermittency’,

6

‘random matrix’ properties, etc. In this respect, the conventional quantum chaos theory basically repeats

the imitations of the equally single-valued, and thus unitary, theory of classical chaos and other related

branches of the scholar ‘science of complexity’ (like various ‘turbulence scenarios’ in abstract spaces or

postulated geometrical constructions of the ‘catastrophe theory’). However, similar to the case of ‘chaos

control’,  those  axiomatic  imitations  of  the  true  origin  of  randomness  may  seem  indeed  to  be  more

consistent  in  the  world  of  macroscopic,  classical  phenomena,  since  at  the  corresponding,  higher

complexity levels one has much more possibilities to ‘approximately’ maintain the desired property, be it

either regularity or randomness, with the help of lower, more elementary levels of complex dynamics

(which are absent for the case of lowest-level, quantum systems). Thus, randomness is ‘obtained’ in the

conventional description of classical chaos as a result of its postulated ‘exponential’ amplification from a

‘small’ form, ‘discreetly’ borrowed from the outside of the system (‘random initial conditions’, ‘influence

of the environment’, etc.). The resulting inconsistency becomes explicitly evident at the lowest, i. e.

‘quantum’ levels of complexity, where it cannot be hidden any more behind some ‘small influence’ effects

(although such attempts exist), since any real change is relatively big and unpredictable in essentially

quantum dynamics, already according to the standard quantum postulates, causally explained now by the

unreduced complex dynamics of the underlying interaction process [1-4,8-13].

The basic absence of the ‘ultimate’, purely dynamic origin of randomness in any dynamically

single-valued  approach  of  the  conventional  science,  whether  referring  or  not  to  an  imitation  of

‘complexity’, can interfere only ‘positively’ with the possibility and properties of the unitary quantum

computation, irrespective of any plays of words around ‘quantum ergodicity’ and ‘energy level mixing’

that have recently been advanced within the unitary quantum chaos description as explanation of ‘possible’

inefficiency  of  quantum  computers  [14].  By  contrast,  the  dynamic  multivaluedness  concept  of  the

universal science of complexity proves the impossibility of large-scale unitary quantum computation

exactly in the same way as it provides the purely dynamic origin of the true randomness at the level of

interacting quantum objects [1,8,9] (the ‘true’ quantum chaos), or any other level of world dynamics [1-4,

10-13]. Whereas unitary description of quantum devices vainly tries to simulate creation of new entities in

any unreduced interaction process, the unitary quantum chaos theory fails to explain its genuine dynamical

randomness which is indeed inherent to any real entity emergence in the interaction development process.
Therefore, both these ‘branches’ of the same, basically limited unitary projection of reality lead to similar,
qualitatively  wrong  results,  as  we  shall  show  in  detail  below  (see  also  [1,3,4]).  Dealing  with  the
perspectives of real micro-device development, it is especially important to totally escape that technically
sophisticated, but basically trivial, effectively one-dimensional hierarchy of unitary imitations of the
essentially nonunitary reality.

In  return,  the  unreduced,  dynamically  multivalued  description  and  related  causally  complete
understanding of micro-system interaction processes provide unlimited possibilities for their practical
creation  and  control,  in  both  ‘physical’  and  ‘biological’  applications,  as  well  as  the  inseparable

entanglement  of  the  two,  just  inherent  in  the  unreduced  concept  of  dynamic  complexity  [1].  The

dynamically  multivalued,  irreducibly  chaotic behaviour of real micro-objects, considered as a basic

‘obstacle’ within the unitary approach and way of thinking in general, in reality opens the way to the new

7

kind of machinery and technology with qualitatively extended possibilities met until now only within

natural living structures (such as intrinsic, interactive adaptability, the capacity for autonomous progressive

development, etc.). Practical realisation of these possibilities necessitates, however, the decisive transition

from the dynamically single-valued imitations of the canonical ‘quantum mysteriology’ to the causally

complete understanding of real system dynamics within the dynamic redundance paradigm and related

universal  concept  of  dynamic  complexity.  In  this  paper  we  shall  briefly  review,  further  develop  and

specify the details of this causally complete description of real micro-device dynamics within the dynamic

redundance paradigm, as well as the perspectives of its practical application (see also [1,3,4,8,9]). These

results clearly demonstrate, in particular, the big conceptual and practical difference between our truly

dynamic, intrinsic origin of randomness inherent in any real system and the ‘stochastic’ kind of irregularity

which is mechanistically, artificially added to a basically regular dynamics in the unitary science and gives

rise to single-valued imitations of ‘chaotic’ or ‘probabilistic’ effects in micro-system behaviour. Those

purely abstract imitations of dynamic randomness within the dynamically single-valued picture of the

conventional science may include technically and terminologically very sophisticated constructions of the

unitary ‘science of complexity’, such as ‘unstable periodic orbits’ or ‘multistability’, but those imitative

plays of words do not change the essential, fundamental difference between the unreduced, dynamically

multivalued interaction process and over-simplified, effectively one-dimensional projection of its observed

results onto mechanistically fixed and disrupted abstract ‘spaces’ of the conventional unitarity.

It  is  also  important  that  the  same  transition  to  the  universally  nonperturbative  method  of  the

dynamic redundance paradigm provides the causally complete version of the whole quantum mechanics,

including reality-based and rigorously derived solution of all its canonical ‘mysteries’, ‘paradoxes’ and

‘contradictions’, as well as intrinsic unification with the causally extended ‘relativity’ and ‘unified field

theory’ [1-4,11-13] qualitatively exceeding the most optimistic expectations of the unitary science. Indeed,

it would be difficult to expect highly efficient applications from a kind of fundamental knowledge that

suffers itself from a whole series of deepest contradictions and separations actually reducing it to a sort of

‘magic’, or ‘para-science’, as it is the case of the micro-world picture within conventional ‘theoretical’ and

‘mathematical’ physics, where one cannot present any consistent and realistic, at least general description

of the simplest real-world entities, the elementary particles and their ‘intrinsic’ properties, which actually
give rise to all higher-level entities and properties of the world. For the evident reason mentioned above,
the illusive,  purely  empirical  ‘control’  and  ‘understanding’  of  the  macroscopic  levels  of  complexity
performed by the conventional, dynamically single-valued science, fail explicitly and totally at the lowest
complexity levels which were empirically revealed as the ‘new physics’ a century ago just in relation to
those difficulties [2-4], but only now become fully, practically accessible to the modern technology (the
same is actually true for the highest complexity levels [1]). It shows why the crucial, qualitative extension
to  the  universal  science  of  complexity,  being  evidently  necessary  for  the  truly  scientific,  conscious
understanding of the otherwise totally ‘mysterious’ micro-world behaviour, actually reveals itself as being

equally indispensable for the causally complete, adequate description of the real macro-world phenomena,

where  the  explicit  manifestations  of  the  unreduced  dynamic  complexity  also  quickly  come  to  the

foreground of development of the technically powerful, but intellectually blind civilisation which, being

8

potentially  conscious, remains practically  unaware, dark-minded, and therefore inevitably malicious,

within  the  exhausted  one-dimensional  projection  of  the  dominating,  unitary  level  of  knowledge  and

corresponding ‘calculative’ way of thinking (cf. the “shadows of the mind” image of the conventional

science proposed by a prominent ‘mathematical’ physicist [15] or a similar “veiled reality” concept [16]).

An interesting, qualitative novelty of the emerging field of micro-devices, nanomachines, etc. is that it

explicitly, directly unifies those very diverse levels and properties of the real world that could yet be

artificially separated into their single-valued projections within the ‘usual’, relatively ‘simple’ applications

the conventional science, but now the intrinsically unified manifestations of the unreduced, multivalued

dynamics of the real world re-enter from its lowest levels and enforce the irreversible transition to the

unreduced dynamic complexity in the whole body of human knowledge.

2.  Impossibility  of  unitary  quantum  computation:
Qualitative  considerations

The truly dynamical, causally consistent and omnipresent source of randomness at various levels,

from the fundamental quantum indeterminacy [1-4,10-13], higher-sublevel quantum chaos and quantum

measurement dynamics [1,3,4,8-10] to unpredictability of detailed conscious brain activity and all its

results  [1],  is  provided  simply  by  the  truly  rigorous,  universally  non-perturbative  analysis  of  the

underlying interaction processes, revealing the phenomenon of system splitting into many incompatible

versions, or realisations, which are completely destroyed and projected into a single, ‘averaged’ realisation

by  the  invariably  perturbative  interaction  reduction  of  the  conventional  science.  However,  before

considering  the  details  of  the  unreduced  analysis  (sections  3-7)  and  its  applications  to  micro-device

dynamics (sections 5-8), it would be expedient to consider first more general, already qualitatively evident

difficulties of the idea of unitary,  dynamically  single-valued  quantum  computers  (and  other  micro-

machines)  revealing  its  basic  contradictions  even  within  the  narrow  framework  of  the  conventional

quantum mechanics (remaining multiply confirmed by experiment), which clearly shows the necessity for

some qualitatively extended, causally complete kind of description of real quantum system dynamics to be

efficiently used for practical purposes.

The theory of unitary quantum computation [17-89] has quickly grown during the last period to the
major branch of the conventional quantum mechanics including the first versions of the idea by P. Benioff
[17] and R. Feynman [18]; its further intensive development in various directions and aspects (see e. g.
reviews  and  textbooks  [19,20,23,25,28,30,31,33-41]);  first  apparent  experimental  realisations  (see
[37,38] and references in other latest reviews) remaining, however, basically limited (see sections 5-7);
‘standardisation’  in  scholar  courses  [34,36,40]  and  encyclopaedia  articles  [39];  practically  unlimited
generalisation to ‘unconventional’ quantum computing devices [42], ‘linear-optic devices’ [43], ‘quantum-
like systems’ [44], ‘computation using teleportation’ [32] and even ‘ground state quantum computation’

[45]; extensions to other ‘quantum machines’, ‘automata’, and ‘robots’ (e. g. [26,27]); unitary ‘quantum

memory’ design [47-49]; ‘exciting’, ‘hot-issue’ popularisation in scientific media [19,20,25,30,33,35];

pronounced tendency towards as if practically oriented, but always characteristically ‘exotic’ aspects of

9

‘quantum  information’,  such  as  ‘quantum  programming’  [50]  or  ‘quantum  internet’  [51,52];  related

applications  to  ‘quantum  communication’,  ‘quantum  cryptography’  and  other  ‘quantum  gambling’

[20,28,30,33-37,39-41,53-57] (we shall not analyse these in detail considering them as a part of ‘quantum

computation’); extensions to ‘(quantum) complexity’ within either its simulation by ‘noncomputability’

[58,77,81] and ‘Kolmogorov/computation complexity’ [59-61] issues, or a general approach relating

quantum  computation  to  the  whole  universe  dynamics  [62,63],  or  expected  involvement/use  of

hypothetical ‘nonlinear quantum evolution’ [64] and conventional (quantum and classical) chaos [65-67],

or ‘quantum games’ referring to evolution [55,56] and market economy [57] (that necessarily acquire

‘quantum’ flavour), or ‘quantum brain dynamics’ [68-71] (all those ‘complexity’ manifestations being

specifically  described  within  the  unitary  dynamics  framework);  and  finally,  the  ‘deepest’  group  of

connections to ‘foundational’ issues of quantum mechanics [72-76] (preserving, however, all its canonical

‘mysteries’ in their primal state) and the very meaning of ‘logic’/‘truth’ and laws of this world [77,78].

In general, the explosive proliferation of the unitary ‘quantum informatics’ can be compared only to

that of a world-wide epidemic, so that the remaining limited expressions of doubt [79-88] sound rather

weakly (and more like reference to only ‘practical’ and thus, in principle, ‘resolvable’ problems), even
despite the occasional, but explicit acknowledgement of their validity by many ‘quantum magicians’.*)
Thus quantum information processing has entered as a major, highly ‘advanced’ and top-fashion discipline

in  the  most  prestigious  universities,  physical  institutes,  and  ‘solid’  professional  journals,  despite  the

evident, explicitly emphasised air of ‘quantum mystification’ and characteristic ‘post-modern’, para-

scientific  and  senseless  plays  of  words  around  ‘quantum  teleportation’,  ‘quantum  entanglement’,

‘Schrödinger-cat  states’,  etc.  that  serve  not to resolve, but to preserve  and  amplify  the  irreducible

‘mystique’ of the canonical quantum theory. It is now implied that ‘quantum computers’ can provide the

incredible,  fantastic increase of computational possibilities just due to the fact that they are based on

‘inexplicable’, ‘quantum’ magic, whereas any system with causally explainable, ‘banal’ dynamics can

realise only ‘ordinary’, basically limited performance, even though it may be quantitatively sufficient for

solution of some ‘uninteresting’, low level, ‘computable’ tasks. Needless to say, it is precisely the ‘magic’

part of ‘rigorous’ and ‘exact’ science that obtains ever growing support and attention of the most educated

and elitary parts of the ‘developed’ society, its governing ‘decision makers’ and the attached ‘high priests
of science’ (see also section 9).

However, the extraordinary resistance of quantum mysteries to all the enormous efforts of their
solution, including extremely elaborated computational and experimental tools of modern science, may
leave just a trace of unpleasant feeling that the whole fuss of unitary ‘quantum magic’ and its promised
‘miraculous’ applications can be but another artificial mystification, gigantically amplified by the modern
unlimited power of money and media-made publicity and in reality result simply from the subjective

*) The true weakness of the existing arguments both for and against quantum computers is in their dynamically single-valued,
unitary basis, so that the opponents of quantum computation can rely at maximum only on the standard quantum postulates
which do provoke some doubts (see item (ii) below), but still cannot help to find the consistent problem solution because of
the intrinsic, irreducible ‘mystique’ of the unitary theory (sections 4.6-7 and 5.3 provide a general description of the causally
complete, dynamically multivalued extension of quantum mechanics involved with the new, positive solution of the quantum
computation problem).

10

absence of ‘normal’, logically consistent knowledge about the true origin of ‘quantum’ phenomena. This

‘unorthodox’ attitude towards ‘officially supported’ manipulations around ‘quantum mysteries’ can strike

especially those who preserve intrinsic attachment to the ‘old-fashioned’ principle that actually provided all

the successes of the ‘developed’ civilisation: ‘first understand, then use’. However, the essential, new

feature of the last, ‘post-developed’ stage is that now the necessary quality of understanding objectively

exceeds  all  the  possibilities  of  the  canonical,  basically  empirical,  ‘postulated’  knowledge  of  the

conventional science which should therefore give place to the truly consistent, totally first-principles and

causally complete picture of reality within a superior kind of knowledge. Before describing the major lines

of such qualitatively extended kind of description of elementary dynamical processes hidden behind the

externally ‘mysterious’ behaviour of quantum systems and deriving the conclusions for operation of real

‘quantum’ devices, one should properly specify the rather evident doubts emerging already within the

conventional, unitary theory of quantum systems. Note that the ‘doubts’ described below have quite

fundamental, irreducible origin, despite their ‘qualitative’ expression and absence of a ‘good’ solution

within the unitary theory itself. Therefore, leaving the detailed presentation of the complete solution to the

next sections, we include here some comments and general ideas hinting on the actual source of difficulties

and way of their elimination.

(i) Non-creative character of unitary dynamics vs real computation nature and demands. Every real

process is realised as a sharply inhomogeneous sequence of discrete events. This empirically based idea of

the conventional science has been especially emphasised within recent pronounced advance of the ‘science

of complexity’, even though its conventional, scholar version always fails to give the truly consistent,

rigorously derived description of ‘events’ and their natural ‘emergence’ (see [1] for more details and

references). In any case, the basic role of ‘events’, those sharply inhomogeneous changes of system state

is evident for any ‘computation’, or ‘information processing’, since it deals, by definition, just with those

highly  discrete  ‘portions  of  information’,  or  ‘bits’,  and  their  equally  discrete  transformations,  even

irrespective of their exact meaning and physical realisation. In other words, some physically tangible and

relatively large change (event) should necessary happen in each elementary interaction act within a useful

computing  system  (where  the  particular  case  of  external  ‘absence  of  change’  is  possible,  but  cannot

dominate  and  practically  always  hides  within  it  some  internal,  externally  ‘invisible’  or  transient
change/event).  By  contrast,  every  unitary  evolution  inherent  in  the  canonical  mathematical  basis  of
quantum  mechanics  (and  in  ‘mathematical  physics’  in  general)  means  that  no  event,  nothing  truly
‘inhomogeneous’ can ever happen within it (‘unitary’ means ‘qualitatively homogeneous’). Therefore, the
fundamental contradiction between unitary theoretical schemes of ‘quantum information processing’ and
nonunitary character of any real computation process is evident: unitary quantum computation tries to
obtain ‘something from nothing’, which is directly related to its suspiciously priceless, ‘miraculously’
increased efficiency with respect to classical, allegedly nonunitary computation.

The same contradiction can be expressed as explicit violation of the ‘energy degradation principle’,

or (generalised) ‘second law of thermodynamics’, by the unitary computation: any system, or ‘machine’,

producing a measurable, non-zero change (like actual computation) should also produce a finite, and

11

strongly limited from below, amount of ‘waste’/‘chaos’, or ‘dissipation’/‘losses’, or ‘heat energy’ which

result, whatever its particular manifestation is, cannot be compatible with the unitary quantum evolution.

This ‘something-from-nothing’ problem is the main defect of the conventional quantum computation

theory underlying its other contradictions described below.

The conventional scheme of quantum computation tries to overcome this contradiction by one or

another ‘combination’ of the unitary evolution and nonunitary ‘measurement’ (or ‘decoherent interaction’)

stages  presented  as  a  sort  of  ‘punctuated  unitarity’  (see  e.  g.  [62,89]).  In  that  way  the  conventional

quantum  computation  theory  tries  to  reproduce  the  corresponding  structure  of  the  standard  quantum

mechanics  itself,  where  the  unitarity  of  the  ‘main’  dynamics  is  trickily  entangled  with  the  explicitly

nonunitary ‘quantum measurement’ processes, though this ‘connection’ and its components remain quite

‘mysterious’ and are imposed only formally by the canonical ‘quantum postulates’. It is evident, however,

that the unitarity of the total computation scheme will be violated by the unavoidable ‘measurement’ stages,

which invalidates, though in an unpredictable and ‘unexplainable’ way, the conclusions based on the

unitary system dynamics. The difference from the simplest dynamical systems considered within the

canonical, unitary quantum mechanics is that any realistic quantum computation process should include

much more involved, dynamically emerging configurations of the participating systems with interaction

which  belong  to  a  higher  sublevel  of  (complex)  quantum  dynamics  and  cannot  be  considered  only

‘statistically’: all the ‘dynamical’ details hidden in the ‘statistical’ postulates that describe the standard,

‘averaged’ quantum dynamics do matter at this higher sublevel of quantum microsystem dynamics. It is

only the unreduced, dynamically multivalued description of the true quantum chaos [1,9] that can provide

the causally complete, detailed picture of the irreducibly probabilistic quantum computation dynamics

(sections 3-6).

In terms of the mathematical analysis of interaction processes within quantum computing systems,

the  problem  is  reduced  to  the  necessity  to  obtain  the  unreduced,  provably  complete  solution  of  the

Schrödinger  equation  for  the  quantum  system  wavefunction  (as  opposed  to  a  much  less  consistent,

incorrectly used density matrix formalism, see [1,4]). In any case, one needs to solve a dynamic equation

(partial differential equation of at least second order) containing practically arbitrary, strong interaction

between multiple system components. The standard theory is not only incapable to provide the unreduced
solution for this type of problem, but cannot even predict what it could be like: any nontrivial interaction is
‘nonintegrable’,  or  ‘nonseparable’,  in  the  conventional  theory,  which  means  here  that  its  result  is
absolutely unknown, even qualitatively or approximately. This certainly refers to the rigorous description
of any real problem of quantum computation. What the conventional quantum theory invariably tries to do
is to replace the unknown true, unreduced solution with a heavily reduced version of perturbation theory
corresponding  to  the  assumed  weak  interaction  influence  (which  cannot  produce  any  essential
change/event by definition). The difficulties arising from such unjustified simplification are quite serious
even in the case of relatively simple systems of the standard quantum mechanics: the axiomatically fixed

‘mysteries’ of quantum behaviour and inevitable empiricism, mechanistic adjustment of assumed structure

parameters to experimental results. It is evident that such ‘methods’ of the canonical ‘exact’ science

become totally senseless for much more involved interaction processes of quantum computation: the

12

diversity of possible results (system configurations) cannot be covered by ‘postulates’, and one cannot

even  approximately  guess  what  are  the  parameters/configurations  to  be  adjusted.  The  truly  ‘exact’,

causally complete solution becomes indispensable at this higher sublevel of dynamics, and it is provided

by the universally nonperturbative analysis of the unreduced science of complexity called quantum field

mechanics  at  these  lowest  complexity  levels  [1-4,9-13].  The  unreduced  problem  solution  contains  a

qualitative  novelty  with  respect  to  the  perturbation  theory  results,  the  dynamic  redundance  and

entanglement phenomena that change the very character of dynamics, providing its essential nonlinearity,

nonunitarity, purely dynamical, ultimate and universal origin and meaning of randomness (probability), a

priori determined probability values, dynamically emerging new entities/configurations (creativity), and

show thus what the problem ‘nonintegrability’/‘nonseparability’ actually means. Since the conventional,

unitary  theory  of  quantum  computation  is  reduced  instead  to  infinitely  diverse  regrouping  of  linear

superpositions of the inevitably perturbative solutions, all the essential, qualitatively important details of

the real computation dynamics are definitely lost including, in particular, emergence and transformation

processes  of  the  main  computation  elements,  discretely  structured,  inhomogeneous  physical  units  of

information, bits, or ‘quantum bits (qubits)’ in this case.

This fundamental property of the unitary theory of quantum computation/interaction can also be

described as its basically non-dynamical (non-interactional) character which is evident within any its

presentation (see references in the beginning of this section) always reduced to an over-simplified, linear

and abstract scheme of intuitively guessed and arbitrary assumed interaction results, whereas the consistent

solution of the unreduced dynamical equations is not even tried. Such unconditional reduction looks

especially  strange  taking  into  account  the  simultaneous  explicit  acknowledgement  by  many  leading

‘quantum computer engineers’ of the irreducible involvement of ‘nonlinearity’ and ‘(dynamic) complexity’

in quantum computation process (see e. g. [62,64-67,81]). It seems that when one needs to emphasize a

(general) relation to the popular ‘complexity issues’ one readily underlines this aspect, but when one needs

to provide particular results of the dynamically complex computation process, one finds it more convenient

to return to the ‘old good’ linear scheme of the standard quantum mechanics as if ‘forgetting’ about all the

‘conceptual’ novelties brought about by the essential nonlinearity. We emphasize that the latter should

evidently appear even for the case of a totally linear underlying formalism (like the usual Schrödinger
equation), due to the dynamically emerging nonlinearity of the interaction process itself just providing the
‘computation’ as such. Here again one can see how the expected ‘magic’ advantages of the quantum
computation are ‘obtained’ in a too easy, ‘no-cost’ way: when either essentially ‘quantum’ features (like
‘linear superposition of states’), or ‘dynamic complexity’ properties (like physical creation of ‘bits’) are
needed by the theory, they are exclusively and intuitively assumed in the respective moments, but then
equally easily dismissed at other moments, whereas in reality all of those contradictory and ‘mysterious’
properties of quantum and complex dynamics are permanently present and intrinsically ‘mixed’ within any
real interaction process. This is but a particular, though probably the most convincing, example of the

fundamental  insufficiency  of  the  conventional  science  ideas  on  both  quanticity  and  dynamic

complexity/nonlinearity which can be intrinsically unified, in their causally extended versions, only within

the unreduced concept of dynamic complexity [1-4,9-13].

13

In this connection, it is important to note the fundamental difference between this concept of

dynamic complexity/chaos, based on the intrinsic, purely dynamic (internal) phenomenon of dynamic

redundance/entanglement,  and  various  conventional  estimates  of  externally  imposed  influence  of

‘decoherence’ [90-92] or other stochastic ‘randomness’ effects and related ‘quantum chaos’ [14,65-67] of

the unitary (dynamically single-valued) evolution on the quantum computer operation. In particular, we

show that real, truly chaotic (dynamically multivalued) micro-devices of any type can never correctly

operate  as  unitary  machines,  even  in  the  absence  of  any  external  influence  (i.  e.  apart  from  any

‘decoherence’ and stochastic ‘chaoticity’ effects), but can instead produce a useful, and even ‘fantastically

efficient’, result of another origin just due to their complex-dynamical operation that should be described,

however, by the unreduced, universally non-perturbative theory of real interaction processes (section 3).

The unreduced dynamic complexity involvement in any interaction process shows also that all

hopes of the unitary approach to compensate appearing ‘deviations’ from the desired unitary evolution

through ‘error correction’ (software) [92-99] or ‘dynamical (chaos) control’ (hardware) [14,100-107] are

vain. Indeed, any change-bringing interaction leads to intrinsically probabilistic (partially unpredictable),

quantized structure creation, and since the step of quantization of a system or any its ‘correcting’ part is

fixed and relatively big at the quantum level of complexity (see item (ii)), no any ‘correcting’/‘controlling’

procedure can influence the quantum system dynamics in a desirable way, without creating some other,

undesired  and  relatively  big  changes.  One  could  probably  relatively  (but  not  arbitrarily)  reduce

probabilistic scatter of one variable at the expense of other one(s), but this does not solve the problem and

may  not  be  readily  permissible  for  a  generic  system  configuration  (usually  only  very  modest

‘deformations’ of the system ‘phase space’ can be acceptable without destruction of the main computation

dynamics), while the unitary, dynamically single-valued theory cannot even approximately describe the

real result of any such ‘intervention’, from either outside or inside of the quantum computer core. This is

because the conventional theory cannot (and actually does not try to) provide the complete, nonperturbative

solution to the main dynamic equation describing many-body system with interaction. Instead of this, the

unitary  ‘control’  and  ‘correction’  schemes  tend  to  manipulate  with  mechanistically  fixed,  postulated

mathematical structures (‘algebras’ etc.) supposed to represent the result of system dynamics, but being in

reality its over-simplified caricature (effectively one-dimensional projection [1-4,11-13], see section 3).

Note also that the existing ‘experimental demonstrations’ of quantum information processing (see
e.  g.  [38,97,107,108])  do  not  really  contradict  to  the  fundamental  impossibility  of  unitary  quantum
computation following from the causally complete analysis of the quantum field mechanics. None of those
experiments  can  be  considered  as  approaching  a  full  scale  quantum  computation,  and  their  actual
realisation  and  precision  are  such  that  they  can  well  represent  nonunitary  processes,  considered  as
‘approximately unitary’. They can be compared to experiments with some imperfect elements of the
ordinary, classical computer performing separate elementary operations, like multiplication of two small
numbers,  with  a  precision  within,  say,  10  %  and  said  therefore  to  be  ‘promising’  for  the  full-scale

calculation. The essential feature of the quantum computer case is that its elements are already as perfect as

they can be, basically, and they can be further ‘controlled’ only by the elements of the same, ‘quantum’

level of precision limited to the multiply verified quantum postulates. A purely external resemblance

14

between real processes and their unitary imitation can be better for quasi-classical situations and other

‘more controllable’, ordered, or ‘self-organised’ regimes of quantum dynamics (section 4.5.1) [1,9], but

in such cases one deviates from an ‘essentially quantum’ regime, thus losing the expected ‘advantages’ of

the  unitary  quantum  computation  (whereas  quantum  uncertainty  and  coherence  break-up  due  to  the

intrinsic multivaluedness cannot be arbitrarily reduced even in those relatively ‘regular’ cases). Therefore,

approximate ‘self-organisation’ of quantum dynamics is not impossible, but it can never even approach to

the ‘ideal precision’ of the deterministic, ‘coherent’ dynamics which is absolutely necessary for the correct

realisation of unitary computation scheme and its characteristic ‘advantages’. Quite another, explicitly

nonunitary (dynamically multivalued) regime of real quantum device operation can indeed be useful and

efficient in applications, but it should be described within the unreduced, universally nonperturbative

interaction analysis of the quantum field mechanics [1-4,9-11] which will be specified below, starting

from section 3.

(ii) Contradiction between unitary description of quantum devices and quantum postulates. The

truly  consistent,  or  ‘causally  complete’,  description  of  quantum  behaviour  within  the  quantum  field

mechanics [1-4,9-13] shows that in reality the formally unitary scheme of the standard quantum mechanics

masks its general intrinsic nonunitarity (the genuine dynamical randomness, not noisy ‘decoherence’) that

manifests  itself  through  the  conventional  ‘quantum  postulates’,  their  ‘mysterious’  and  ‘unprovable’

character  representing  just  the  unavoidable  payment  for  the  artificial,  dynamically  single-valued

simplification of the real, always dynamically multivalued processes within their unitary scheme of the

standard theory. The severely limited and purely abstract logic of the standard scheme can be relatively

‘successful’ only for simple enough systems, where one can empirically fix a small number of individual,

qualitatively specific events and emerging system configurations and then treat them ‘collectively’, i. e.

statistically, using the necessary number of adjustable ‘free parameters’ (like potential shapes, energy level

positions and widths). Any really ‘computing’, practically efficient, many-body quantum system with

interaction certainly falls outside of this narrow framework for the evident reasons outlined above (see item

(i)). Therefore, even if one does not want to advance towards the causally complete understanding of

quantum behaviour before proposing a real quantum computer scheme (which seems to be a strangely

superficial approach by itself), one can see, nevertheless, several evident contradictions between the
fundamental,  multiply  verified  quantum  postulates  and  the  expected/desired  properties  of  such  more
complicated, but still allegedly unitary quantum system.

The intrinsic ‘indeterminacy’, or ‘probabilistic character’, of any quantum dynamics strictly implies
a basically indeterministic, probabilistically distributed result of any generic interaction process, even in the
absence of external ‘noise’. This creates immediately a fundamental problem for the conventional, digital
computation (like factoring and other arithmetical operations with numbers), since not only some ‘final’
result of a computational chain, but also that of each intermediate, elementary operation will contain an

irreducible indeterminacy that cannot be arbitrary diminished, according to the ‘probability postulate’. All

the ‘unitary fantasies’ of the conventional quantum programmers are wrong in this respect, since they

suppose,  explicitly  or  implicitly,  a  qualitatively  small,  perturbative,  ‘integrable’  influence  of  the

15

interactions involved which therefore cannot produce a qualitatively new structure and thus any elementary

computation result, even though they may give an illusion of relative regularity. Once the universally

nonperturbative, unreduced analysis of the quantum field mechanics is applied to obtain the complete

problem solution (section 3), the genuine dynamic randomness (i. e. true quantum chaos [9]) inevitably
emerges in the form of dynamic multivaluedness („
result. It should be noted that here one deals with a manifestation of the fundamental dynamic uncertainty

 unitary ‘decoherence’) of every elementary interaction

at a higher sublevel of (complex) interaction dynamics with respect to the most fundamental quantum

indeterminacy existing even for a ‘free’ particle (in the form of its ‘quantum beat’ dynamics) [1-4,11-13].

However, the two sublevels of dynamic uncertainty are dynamically related to each other and actually

unified within the unreduced science of complexity, while the total and unconditional omission of the

higher sublevel uncertainty does not seem to be consistent even without knowing the causal origin of the

fundamental quantum indeterminacy.

The  problem  with  quantum  probabilism  exists  even  if  it  can  appear  only  during  the  ‘final’

measurement  process  of  the  postulated  unitary  computation  result.  The  conventional  quantum

programmers are quite aware of the problem (cf. e. g. [109]), but they prefer to concentrate on the unitary

imitation of the ‘internal’ system interactions (reduced to mechanistic manipulation with various linear

superposition  versions)  while  counting  upon  something  like  ‘multiple  runs  of  the  same  calculation

process’ as a solution of the ‘probability problem’. It is evident, however, that the ‘fantastic’ efficiency of

quantum computation can be arbitrarily reduced in that way (showing once more that nothing can be

obtained  for  free  in  this  world!),  and  what  is  even  more  important,  the  actual  degree  of  the  ‘final

measurement’ uncertainty cannot be properly estimated without the complete, nonperturbative problem

solution which is inaccessible to the conventional, unitary approach.

The probability postulate of the standard quantum mechanics is complemented by a group of

duality-measurement-reduction  postulates  endowed  with  a  large  ambiguity,  but  still  entering  in

contradiction with the unitary computation scheme. Thus, the famous ‘wave-particle duality’ implies that

particles/waves participating in an interaction (e. g. computation) process show a dynamically driven

alternation of both their states (i. e. localised ‘particle’ and extended ‘wave’), somehow regulated by a

‘quantum measurement’ involving ‘wave reduction’ to the ‘particle’ state. Although the conventional
theory leaves a large space for speculations about the exact origin, reality and structure of all those states
and  transitions  between  them  [15,16]  (contrary  to  the  quantum  field  mechanics  eliminating  all  the
ambiguities [1-4]), it becomes clear that dealing exclusively with wave-like, linear type of behaviour
(expressed,  in  addition,  exclusively  by  postulated  ‘configurations’  and  abstract  ‘state  vectors’  from
simplified mathematical ‘spaces’), while artificially pushing the equally important corpuscular state and
reduction process to the ‘outside’ of the assumed unitary evolution, as it is done in the conventional
quantum  computation  description,  cannot  be  consistent  in  principle.  Not  only  the  well-known,
provocatively irresolvable ‘mysteries’ of quantum duality and measurement remain in their untouched,

‘para-scientific’ state, but the unitary quantum programmers insist on their right to arbitrary manipulate

with them by using or neglecting each ‘mystery’ when it is respectively needed or not for a ‘promising’

guess promotion. The resulting ‘would-be’ mode of the bankrupt unitary theory is a mixture of a science

16

fiction caricature and deliberately fraudulent, ‘post-modern’ play of words in the style of ‘ironic’ science

[5] (section 9).

Another entity that should be postulated during formulation of any quantum-mechanical problem is

system ‘configuration’ forming eventually the ‘configuration space’ in which the system evolves according

to  the  main  dynamical  equation  (basically  Schrödinger  equation).  There  is  no  general  receipt  in  the

standard  theory  about  possible  configurations  and  their  space  for  each  particular  system,  but  the

conventional quantum mechanics dealing with the simplest systems resolves this difficulty in a semi-

empirical or intuitive way, so that in most cases the configurational space can simply be ‘guessed’ with a

reasonable degree of realism. However, for more involved, and especially ‘dynamically creative’ quantum

systems, including efficient quantum computers, such approach may lead to serious mistakes and in any

case loses any reliability. Indeed, it can be practically impossible to ‘guess’ real configurations for a many-

body  quantum  system  with  unreduced,  creative  interactions,  which  stops  the  unitary  description  of

quantum computation at the very beginning (apart from some unpredictably unrealistic approximations,

actually  used  in  the  existing  unitary  imitations  of  quantum  dynamics).  The  problem  can  instead  be

regularly and universally resolved within the unreduced science of complexity that just gives explicit

expressions for the emerging system configurations as an integral part of the complex-dynamic interaction

process development [1-4,9-13], as we shall demonstrate below (section 3).

One of the main quantum postulates related to the very emergence of quantum mechanics 100 years

ago [3] and determining its name, is the fundamental discreteness of all occurring dynamical processes
described  by  the  absolutely  universal  value  of  Planck's  constant,  h  =  6,6262·10-27  erg·s.  Since  the
information treated by a computer is also discretely structured in bits, it seems to be evident that the

physical realisation of information unit in an essentially quantum computer, or ‘qubit’, is determined by

the  same  universal  Planck's  constant,  which  implies  also  much  more  profound  relations  between

‘information’, (quantized) mechanical action and dynamic complexity, within its unreduced concept [1].

Surprisingly,  however,  this  inevitable  and  physically  transparent  relation  between  Planck's  constant

(quantum discreteness) and extremely widely used qubit concept somehow escapes the attention of unitary

quantum information theory, including its ‘reality-based critics’ and studies of ‘physical realisation’ of

‘quantum information’ (see e. g. [35,38,39,80,110-113]), as if ‘quantum computing’ could exist apart
from ‘quantum computer’, which is a real, essentially quantum system performing the computation, a
process that should necessarily be quantized by h, as any other one. A closer examination may reveal the
origin of such ‘strange’ omission of quantization in the conventional quantum computing theory: explicit
acknowledgement  of  the  qubit  emergence  in  physical  quantization  determined  by  Planck's  constant
necessarily  implies  acknowledgement  of  other  related  consequences  of  real quantum dynamics that
contradict to the idea of unitary computation (such as quantum indeterminacy and wave-particle duality
mentioned above). In this sense, the characteristic ‘ignorance’, or rather intentional neglect, by the official
‘quantum computer science’ of the direct qubit-h relation is another manifestation of its abstract-linear,

‘anti-dynamical’ approach (see item (i)) that indeed actually considers ‘quantum computing’ apart from any

‘quantum  computers’,  even  the  abstract  ones  determined  exclusively  by  the  conventional  quantum

postulates. The scholar theory of quantum computation becomes thus a branch of pure mathematics [39]

17

(and a conceptually trivial one, since it deals with something as simple as ‘Hilbert space geometry’ or

elementary ‘combinatorial analysis’), but at the same time it continues to insist intensively, and with a

spectacular financial success, on its direct relation to creation of real quantum devices. This ‘contradictory’

state, as well as its ‘strangely’ persisting support, is not specific for the scholar quantum computation, but

is the inevitable result of the taken dead-end direction of the ‘new physics’ development in the twentieth

century, known as ‘mathematical physics’ and unfortunately dominating over the whole physical theory

(cf. [114]), despite the ensuing absence of solutions to any real, nontrivial problem (see also section 9).

The involvement of h-determined physical quantization in any quantum system dynamics is related

also to the ideas of ‘error correction’ and dynamical (chaos) control in quantum computers [14,92-107] as

the means to compensate all externally or internally induced ‘deviations’ of real quantum dynamics from

the  desired  unitary  scheme  (see  also  item  (i)).  Indeed,  any  interaction/action  in  quantum  system  is

quantized into probabilistically appearing results, according to the main postulates, and therefore any

imposed change, whatever its origin is, can be neither arbitrarily small, nor deterministic (cf. the canonical

‘uncertainty relations’). This means that, especially for a more complicated many-body structure of the

full-scale quantum device, one cannot hope to be able to really eliminate unpredictable ‘errors’ without

creating yet bigger and less predictable ones. Again it seems strange that unitary quantum programming

does not take into account the evident difference (or actually even any qualitative difference) between

quantum and classical levels of dynamics when they try to directly extend the methods of classical ‘control

theory’ to quantum systems. At higher-complexity levels of classical systems the control actions can be

performed with the help of relatively fine-grained (and ‘self-organised’) lower-level dynamics, so that their

unavoidable small fluctuations can be of minor importance. But for quantum dynamics the ‘fluctuations’ of

controlling  interactions  are  always  as  big  as  any  result  of  the  ‘controlled’  interaction  dynamics,  just

because of the quantization postulate. At the lowest, quantum level of world dynamics there can be no

basic difference between ‘noisy fluctuations’ of an ‘influence’ on a system and the intrinsic, ‘quantum’

fluctuations of the system dynamics: this is the basis of the well-known quantum system ‘sensitivity to

external influences’ appearing e. g. through multiply verified ‘uncertainty relations’ and causally explained

in the quantum field mechanics by the intrinsic dynamic instability of the underlying interaction process

(starting from essential, dynamic nonlinearity and ending with irreducible dynamic chaoticity) [1-4,11-13].

(iii) Contradiction between unitary computation and entropy growth law. Without entering here in
the  detailed  rigour  of  possible  generalisations  of  the  entropy  growth  law,  or  ‘second  law  of
thermodynamics’ (see section 7), we can accept its following apparently irreducible general formulation: if
a system (device) is designed to produce some ordering action, then this ordering can never be the single
result  of  the  system  operation  (a  larger  disorder  appearance  in  the  system  and/or  its  environment  is
implied, so that the ‘net’ effect is definitely an increase of disorder or ‘generalised entropy’). If one accepts
also that any computation is a sort of ordering action (i. e. simply a meaningful action producing some real

results),  then  it  follows  that  unitary  quantum  computation  certainly  contradicts  this  very  general

formulation  of  the  second  law.  One  cannot  find  this  contradiction  for  the  classical,  macroscopic

computers,  since  for  any  computation  process  there  can  be  many  even  very  rough,  thermal  effects

18

(contributing eventually to the heat flow from computer to the environment and thus ‘ensuring’ the second

law), let alone various more subtle, but also unavoidable disorders in computation dynamics which appear

explicitly e. g. when the computer suddenly stalls (gets to a ‘hangup’ state). As explained above (see item

(ii)),  all  such  disordering  fluctuations  in  classical  computers  can  be  decreased  to  relatively  small

magnitudes with the help of many available fine-grained, lower levels of (complex) dynamics, which are

absent, by definition, for essentially quantum computer dynamics.

A particular case of this contradiction between unitary quantum computation and impossibility of

‘purely useful’ result (net increase of order) encompasses various widely discussed schemes of unitary, or

‘coherent’, or ‘(purely) quantum’ control, or ‘error correction’ of quantum computation systems or any

other  quantum  devices  often  evoked  as  the  means  to  suppress  possible  disordering  deviations  of  the

quantum system dynamics (often designated as ‘decoherence’) from its ‘normal’, unitary (totally regular)

evolution  [92-107].  Whatever  is  the  origin  and  the  way  of  increase  of  this  announced  ‘quantum

robustness’ of computation dynamics, it should always involve real interactions leading to ‘positive’,

order-increasing result which actually cannot be attained within the (unitary) quantum dynamics itself,

since it occurs at the lowest sublevels of (complex) world dynamics and therefore does not contain the

necessary separate ‘sink’ for the excessive, compensating disorder. If we take the refrigerator analogy as a

canonical example of the second law realisation, we can say that dealing with purely quantum dynamics

one can never close the refrigerator door, and any effort to decrease, or ‘control’, the ‘inside’ temperature

is useless, already because there can be no good separation between the ‘inside’ and the ‘outside’ (the

needed minimal structure is always too complex for the lowest, quantum levels of dynamics/complexity).

One  could  suppose  also  that  the  second  law  demand  could  be  satisfied  during  the  ‘final

measurement’  stage  of  the  reversible  unitary  computation,  but  this  would  mean  that  this  quantum

measurement process should introduce chaotic uncertainty that exceeds and thus totally destroys any order

attained during unitary computation stages, making it useless. In reality, even such distinct separation into

stages of ‘pure’ unitary computation and ‘dirty’ quantum measurement cannot be possible because of the

same entropy growth principle, but applied now to the sequence of stages. Moreover, the unitary stage,

considered  separately,  should  necessary  produce  irreducible,  and  relatively  large,  randomness,  if  it

involves any state-changing interaction process (which is necessary for every real computation). The
dynamic multivaluedness of any real interaction results [1-4,9-13] (section 3) simply specifies the detailed
(and universal) mechanism of this inevitable randomness creation.

Note also that the generalised second law is correctly satisfied in the case of ordinary quantum
dynamics which is opposite with respect to the above classical computer case: it is precisely the irreducible
‘quantum indeterminacy’ which, though remaining ‘mysterious’ by origin, is really observed and provides
the  elementary  ‘support’  for  the  generalised  second  law  at  the  corresponding  levels  of  dynamics.
However, the unitary quantum computation as such is devoid of any indeterminacy: the basic quantum
uncertainty is silently expelled either to lower sublevel of dynamics of individual participating quantum

objects, or to some ‘final’ measurement process, external for the unitary computation itself. Therefore, the

violation of the ‘quantum uncertainty’ postulate by the unitary quantum devices, discussed above (item

(ii)), can be considered as another expression of the present contradiction to the generalised second law.

19

This contradiction between the necessary dynamical randomness and the persisting regularity of

unitary science can be consistently resolved only if one finds the detailed, and purely dynamic, mechanism

of uncertainty (or ‘disorder’) emergence at the level of interacting quantum objects (which are elementary

‘components’ of a quantum computer/device, including its interaction with the ‘environment’) that should

be added to the fundamental quantum indeterminacy at the lowest sublevel of component dynamics. This is

actually done within the causally complete theory [1,9] of (Hamiltonian) quantum chaos revealing the

strictly dynamic, internal system randomness (sections 3, 6), contrary to any version of the conventional,

unitary  ‘quantum  chaos’  description  that  either  denies  the  genuine  randomness,  or  tries  to  trickily

‘postulate’ or insert it from the outside (e. g. [14]). In addition, the same dynamic redundance mechanism

that gives the genuine quantum chaoticity provides the causal, totally dynamic and realistic origin of the

fundamental quantum indeterminacy at the lowest sublevel of world dynamics (e. g. for free elementary

particles) [1-4,11-13], which is an important closure of the theory, while the unitary imitation of dynamic

randomness by the externally driven, ambiguous ‘decoherence’ [90-92] cannot be consistent with respect

to its unambiguous attribution to one or another sublevel of quantum dynamics (whose true origin also

remains  ‘mysterious’).  Finally,  the  consistent  description  of  the  ‘quantum  measurement’  process  is

obtained [1,10] as a slightly dissipative version of the unreduced quantum chaos dynamics at the same

sublevel of interacting quantum objects. We obtain thus a consistent, internally unified, ‘dynamically

multivalued’ extension of the conventional unitary, ‘dynamically single-valued’ projection of real quantum

dynamics, applicable at all its involved sublevels (this extension continues in the same fashion for classical

and all the highest levels of complexity [1], which is also an essential conceptual argument in favour of

this description, even if one concentrates on quantum levels of reality).

It is a surprising fact, to be added to other ‘surprising omissions’ of the conventional theory of

quantum computation, that its evident contradiction to the second law remains ‘invisible’ not only to the

‘main’, explicitly linear approach, but actually also to ‘physically oriented’ studies involving doubts in

feasibility of the purely coherent scheme, inquiries into ‘physical nature of information’, emphasis on

‘nonlinearity’ and ‘complexity’ of quantum computation, and definition of ‘limits of system control’

related to entropy and second law [58-62,79-81,113,115] (which can strangely coexist with coherent

control schemes [100]). This basic and ‘unlimited’ deficiency of conventional analysis reflects its inability
to obtain clearly specified relation between ‘dynamics’ and ‘thermodynamics’, i. e. the inevitable absence
of consistent ‘foundations of thermodynamics’ within the scholar, dynamically single-valued theory of
both quantum and classical behaviour (contrary to the dynamically multivalued theory [1]).

(iv) Contradiction between quantum computer coherence and its irreducible structure. The above
dynamic  randomness  deficiency  within  the  unitary  quantum  evolution  reflects  its  insufficiently  rich
temporal structure. A complementary aspect of this contradiction consists, naturally, in insufficient spatial
richness (i. e. inhomogeneity) of the coherent state of a hypothetical unitary quantum device. Indeed, the

unbroken ‘quantum coherence’ of the unitary device implies that the whole many-body, many-element

structure of a full-scale quantum computer is in a ‘macroscopic’ (or at least ‘spatially extended’) quantum

state, similar to that of a superconducting, or superfluid system, or Bose-condensate. But it is a well-

20

known fact that the spatial structure of the coherent component of any such system is always rather simple

and ‘symmetric’, it can hardly contain any arbitrary, large and asymmetric density variations of well-

defined (though interacting) structural elements. In other words, it is ‘either structure, or coherence’, but
not both simultaneously,*) which specifies another aspect of fundamental impossibility to have unitary
quantum computer as a material, ‘hard-ware’ device (and not just a numerical simulation scheme). In this

connection one should note that the existing ‘experimental confirmations’ of unitary quantum computation

(e. g. [38,97,107,108]) are nothing but its basically limited imitation, where one need not have either true

coherence, or the involved structure of the full scale device, or rigorously confirmed temporal stability of a

larger, realistic computational process.

The basic spatio-temporal ‘simplicity’ of coherent quantum states and their unitary evolution,

observed e. g. in real ‘macroscopic quantum states’, is indeed a universal property that can be consistently

explained within the unreduced concept of dynamic complexity [1-4]: what is called ‘essentially quantum’

(coherent) behaviour and actually simply postulated in the conventional science appears to be an unreduced

interaction process limited to several lowest sublevels of the universal hierarchy of dynamic complexity of

the world, and this low  dynamic  complexity  cannot  produce  more  involved/asymmetric  spatial  and

temporal  structures  by  definition.  The  same  argument  shows,  by  the  way  (see  also  below),  why  any

quantum computation cannot reproduce any higher-level, including any ‘classical’, system dynamics in

principle,  contrary  to  what  is  often  presented  as  a  ‘proven’  property  of  universal  computing  in  the

conventional (unitary) theory of quantum computation (‘universal quantum computers/simulators’ etc.).

The  ultimate,  but  actually  correct,  expression  of  coherent  structure  of  the  unitary  quantum

computation is ‘quantum computation in the ground state’ [45]. Indeed, any truly coherent quantum state

is the ground, lowest state of a system, whereas any excited system state is always chaotic [1,9], and thus

not totally coherent (though it can be only slightly irregular). Since the ground system state is the least

structured one (because of its lowest complexity [1,9]), we arrive at another formulation of the above

contradiction between coherence (unitarity) and structure: computation in the ground state, i. e. actually

any  unitary  computation,  is  impossible  because  of  the  ultimate  poorness  of  its  spatial  and  temporal

structure. Whereas the unreduced complexity concept provides the causally complete substantiation for this

statement, it should seem to be basically valid even within the standard quantum mechanics.

A similar objection should provoke fundamental doubts in feasibility of any ‘quantum memory’
[47-49] within a unitary device: any ‘memorisation’ act is realised as a basically irreversible transition to
another,  stable  and  inhomogeneous  enough,  system  state,  which  cannot  be  compatible  with  unitary
dynamics.  Any  state  of  a  coherent  quantum  system  cannot  be  so  isolated  as  necessary  to  prevent
spontaneous and unpredictable system transitions to it and back, while any excited system state is both
unstable and incoherent.

*) This basic incompatibility can be viewed as manifestation of the famous quantum ‘complementarity’, which remains a real
property despite the air of ambiguity and ‘mystery’ around it in the conventional quantum mechanics (disappearing within the
causally  complete  understanding  of  complementarity  in  the  quantum  field  mechanics  [1]  as  a  standard  property  of  any
complex, dynamically redundant interaction process). The structure-coherence complementarity is more directly related to such
well-known  manifestations  of  quantum  complementarity  as  wave-particle  duality  and  coordinate-momentum  uncertainty
relation that force one to choose between well-structured, localised, ‘particle-like’ system state and its loosely structured,
delocalised, undular state.

21

Although  coherent,  ground  state  of  the  unitary  quantum  system  cannot  contain  sufficiently

inhomogeneous spatial structure, it does have some simple (symmetric) structure and an ‘internal life’

(temporal structure) within it. This internal dynamics consists in permanent chaotic transitions between

hierarchically organised individual and collective states of system elements which appear externally as a

slightly inhomogeneous, statistically averaged ‘mixture’, or ‘ground state’ as such [1]. This dynamically

chaotic,  and  therefore  only  partially  coherent,  mixture  of  the  many-body  system  states  within  its

‘embedding’ meta-state (see also section 5.3) is imitated, within the unitary theory, by the notorious

‘quantum entanglement’ of superimposed states of a linear system/evolution and the related ‘teleportation’,

imitating spontaneous transitions between internal system states and supposed to realise (unitary) quantum

computation (e. g. [116]). However, unitarity is incompatible with the irreducibly chaotic internal structure

of a real ‘coherent quantum computer’ (persisting even in the total absence of external influences), while

its basic simplicity prevents any useful output emergence.

(v) Transition  from  quantum  computation  to  classical  and  back.  Although  the  link  between

quantum and classical behaviour expressed by the ‘quantum measurement’ procedure remains obscure and

subject to ambiguous speculations within all ‘officially permitted’, unitary versions of quantum mechanics,

one cannot avoid its explicit involvement in quantum computation, already because the latter supposes

eventual production of a humanly readable, ‘classically’ structured result of essentially quantum process,

similar to experimental observation of any quantum effect. However, the difference of quantum-classical

transition for more complicated, computing machinery from that for canonical quantum systems with the

simplest, empirically known and globally fixed configurations is that ‘essentially quantum’ (including

‘semiclassical’) and totally ‘classical’ types of behaviour and configuration may be not so well separated

from  each  other  for  more  intricate  processes  as  it  is  postulated  in  the  textbook  version  of  ‘quantum

measurement’ for the simplest systems (remaining, however, quite ‘mysterious’ and thus only partially,

indirectly ‘confirmed’ experimentally, even for that case). In particular, as mentioned above (item (i)), any

computing system is a creative system with changing, dynamically  emerging configuration, which is

especially important for quantum systems whose ‘soft’ (dualistic) structure and intrinsic ‘vulnerability’

(sensitivity) are fixed as well-confirmed facts in the main quantum postulates. Therefore one cannot be

sure to be able to guess ‘semi-empirically’ the dynamically evolving configuration of the computing
quantum  system  (which  would  mean,  in  particular,  to  guess  the  ‘quantum  calculation’  result  before
obtaining it). As a matter of fact, a classical configuration can dynamically and ‘unpredictably’ emerge, at
least transiently, during ‘coherent’ quantum computation, thus immediately destroying its coherence and
the whole ‘architecture’ of the unitary, linear-wave imitation of real interaction dynamics. In the case of a
full-scale version of computing micro-device with nontrivially structured units, this nonunitary ‘dynamical
reduction’ of quantum computer elements to a classical configuration will inevitably intervene in the middle
of expected ‘coherent’ computation, and not only during the unavoidable ‘final measurement’ stage, also

remaining the evident ‘weak point’ of the unitary quantum computer (see item (ii)).

The  situation  can  be  fully  clarified  only  within  the  causally  complete  picture  of  ‘quantum

measurement’  obtained  within  the  dynamic  multivaluedness  paradigm  [1-4,10].  It  appears  that  any

22

nontrivial,  change-bringing  interaction  process  (necessarily  occurring  in  the  course  of  ‘quantum

computation’) breaks down ‘quantum coherence’ in the form of either (Hamiltonian) ‘quantum chaos’

[1,9],  for  a  closed  system  (vanishingly  small  dissipativity),  or  ‘quantum  measurement’  [1,10],  for  a

slightly dissipative, open system. In the latter case, the occurring excitation of dissipative (‘open’) degrees

of freedom is accompanied by the physically real, highly nonlinear (catastrophic) system localisation (or

‘collapse’, or ‘reduction’) around the dynamically (and probabilistically) chosen ‘centre’ of the excitation

event, which is equivalent to a transient emergence of classical (localised, or ‘particle-like’) state. This

classical state becomes more stable with growing ‘bounding force’ of interaction, and when it is sufficient

for a stable bound state formation, the true classicality emerges in the form of elementary bound system

(like atom). Therefore some classicality is always present as a part of almost any interaction process

involving real excitation of interacting elements, even though usually it lasts for a very short time, being

quickly replaced by the reverse self-amplified expansion of the system to a delocalised, undular state.

However, the system coherence, or unitarity, is lost in principle, in any such ‘measurement’ event, as well

as during the complementary, ‘quantum chaos’ mode of interaction development (but in this latter case the

system does not need to pass by a spatial localisation phase).

The conclusion following from both this causally complete analysis of the quantum field mechanics

and the above qualitative analysis within the conventional quantum theory is that in reality one may have

not ‘purely quantum’, but only ‘hybrid’, ‘quantum-and-classical’ computer, or any large enough device,

irrespective  of  any  external  or  internal  ‘noise’  exploited  in  speculative  theories  of  ‘decoherence’  or

(conventional, unitary) ‘quantum chaos’. An important element of ‘quantum computer’ (and part of the

quantum computation process) that should necessarily involve irreducible dissipativity and more stable,

classical state formation is (quantum) computer memory (and memorisation/erasure/reading processes)

which  is,  therefore,  rather  a  classical,  than  quantum  part  of  a  ‘quantum’  device,  contrary  to  the

conventional theory [47-49] trying to preserve its unitary imitation of reality even for such evidently

nonunitary  function  as  memory  (cf.  item  (iv)).  Some  other,  usually  very  short,  stages  of  quantum

computation can preserve their ‘non-classical’, delocalised character, while still being subject to another

inevitable source of decoherence, (genuine) quantum chaos [1,9]. Therefore, a real ‘quantum’ computation

process in the whole can be described as a fine dynamic entanglement between short stages of (rare)
undular  coherent,  undular  chaotic,  and  classical  (always  internally  chaotic)  dynamics  that  can  be
consistently  analysed  only  within  the  unified  description  of  fundamental  dynamic  multivaluedness
(sections  3-7)  changing  completely  the  very  character  of  ‘computation’  and  confirming  the  basic
insufficiency of the unitary, dynamically single-valued imitation of reality. In particular, the spatial and
temporal  sequence  of  those  chaotic  ‘classical’  and  ‘quantum’  phases  of  computation  dynamics  is
dynamically chaotic itself because of the same intrinsic ‘undecidability’ of the unreduced, multivalued
interaction processes.

It can be useful to consider the quantum-classical transition within a computing system in the

reverse order, i. e. starting from an ordinary, classical (and quasi-regular) computer and decreasing its

elements down to characteristic ‘quantum’ sizes. This is the situation which is much more practically

important than futuristic quantum experimentation with the ‘original’ quantum computers, since that kind

23

of transition to quantum limit is going to happen soon to actually produced computers with further increase

of element density within their microchips. It is easy to see, already within a qualitative consideration, that

what will practically emerge in a real device with ‘subquantum’ sizes of at least some of its elements is the

explicitly multivalued, chaotic, quantum-and-classical (hybrid) dynamics described above, rather than any

version of unitary quantum computation. Indeed, it is clear that the emergence of quantum effects with

decreasing  element  sizes  will  produce  some  ‘smearing’  of  the  normally  quite  ‘distinct’  classical

computation  dynamics,  this  ‘quantum  blur’  including  both  ‘undular’  and  ‘probabilistic’  aspects  of

quantum behaviour which are intrinsically connected among them, according to the standard postulates.

The resulting computer ‘errors’ will appear first with a relatively small probability, but it will progressively

grow with diminishing element size, until the computer dynamics will become totally ‘indistinct’, that is

chaotic (and ‘hybrid’), irrespective of the ‘wiring’ or ‘soft-ware’ details. Now, the unitary theory of ‘pure’

quantum  computation  implies  that  one  should  have,  instead  of  this,  a  certain  internal  ‘ordering’,

regularisation of the emerging quantum dynamics that should be comparable, as noted above (item (iv)), to

a sudden ‘phase transition’ analogous to a ‘(generalised) Bose-condensation’, or a ‘superconducting’

phase appearance. Apart from structural problems involved with such peculiar states (item (iv)), their

origin, mechanism, and degree of generality remain subject to strong doubt, which shows again that the

intrinsic dynamic multivaluedness of the essentially quantum dynamics, hidden behind the ‘quantum

mysteries’ of its standard, dynamically single-valued description, will necessary appear in the explicit form

for more involved, higher-level interactions within a quantum-size computing structure. In particular, the

influence of any quantum effects upon any microstructure dynamics can be correctly analysed only within

the unreduced, dynamically multivalued theory (section 3), while any perturbative ‘cutting’ of essential

dynamical links in the name of questionable ‘simplicity’ of ‘exact’, unitary solutions will produce a

qualitatively big, ‘fatal’ deviation from reality.

It is also clear that the real, intrinsically chaotic and ‘hybrid’ dynamics of a computing quantum

system is closer to ‘analog’ computation, or ‘simulation’, than to the ‘digital’ operation mode of the

ordinary, regular computers. Contrary to various versions of (‘fantastically’ fast) operation with numbers

considered by the unitary theory of quantum computation (e. g. [23,117]), it is difficult to imagine how

the chaotic, dynamically multivalued interaction process within a real quantum device could preserve the
regularity of a digital simulation of reality. And since the reality itself is universally chaotic, rather than
regular [1], and is certainly ‘analog’, rather than ‘digital’, there is no sense to insist on its unnatural, digital
simulation, incorrectly realised within a regular quantum computer (actually unrealistic). In this sense, the
real quantum computer will be much closer by the character of its operation to the brain dynamics [1,4],
though the latter belongs to a much higher level of dynamic complexity (contrary to what is implied by its
existing  reduction  to  the  unitary  quantum  dynamics  [68-71]).  Those  ‘natural’,  intrinsically  chaotic
‘computers’ are efficient in operation with unreduced ‘images’ of chaotic reality, but inefficient (for the
same reason) in operation with digital, artificially regularised (and thus strongly simplified) representation

of reality. In the ‘digital’ computer case the ‘result’, a number, is basically separated from the real system

dynamics actually producing it, whereas in the dynamically multivalued, unreduced mode of ‘chaotic

analog’ computers one has an intrinsic unification between the complex computation dynamics and the

24

result which is simply a (multivalued) momentary image of that unreduced dynamics. This explains the

qualitative difference between description/understanding of digital/unitary and ‘natural’/complex-dynamical

devices,  the  latter  necessitating  the  use  of  the  unreduced,  dynamically  multivalued  (nonunitary)

description, even for an approximate representation. The difference is applicable also to the case of the

proposed formally analog mode of ‘simulation’ of quantum (or classical) dynamics by a unitary quantum

computer [24,25,29,31]: the dynamics of the latter remains basically unitary, regular, dynamically single-

valued (including the false ‘quantum chaos’ simulation [65-67]), and therefore it is ‘infinitely far’ from

any real, dynamically multivalued system behaviour, contrary to the claimed ‘universality’ of such unitary

‘quantum simulators’ [25]. Moreover, the universal science of complexity clearly shows [1] that any

purely quantum, even dynamically chaotic, device could not correctly simulate any higher-level dynamics,

starting already from the simplest classical systems because the latter emerge dynamically from quantum

systems as a higher level of dynamic complexity [1-4,11-13] (the simulation can be better performed, at

least for certain cases, with the help of slightly dissipative, ‘hybrid’ microcomputers). This fundamentally

substantiated and transparent conclusion of the unreduced science of complexity totally escapes the unitary

theory, since it cannot consistently describe the complex-dynamical relation between quantum and classical

behaviour, as well as the unreduced, dynamically multivalued origin of either of them (cf. [118]).

Note finally that the described long series of evident, basic contradictions, items (i)-(v), in the

conventional science of (unitary) quantum computation and closely related scholar quantum mechanics

(including all its modern ‘versions’ and ‘interpretations’) is a characteristic sign of the deep impasse in the

canonical, purely ‘mathematical’ (abstract) approach in fundamental physics, marking the ‘sudden’ fall

from  the  previously  triumphantly  announced  (but  actually  deceitful  and  misleading)  ‘unreasonable

efficiency of mathematics in natural sciences’ to the really unreasonable agglomeration of vain and fruitless

abstractions and related arbitrary guesses about a possible ‘mathematical basis of reality’ (see also section

9). Thus, ‘feeling’ the more and more clearly that something very serious is missing in its simplified

imitation of reality, the unitary quantum theory, instead of looking for the truly consistent, qualitatively

new solution, tries to ‘repaint’ its façade and compensate the absent elementary causality/realism by

artificial, ever more speculative, abstract and inconsistent additions within the same, unitary (dynamically

single-valued) projection of real system dynamics, such as multiple versions of ‘quantum histories’ (or
‘path integrals’), ambiguous ‘decoherence’ of ‘state vectors’ due to varying ‘external influences’, or
mechanistic  fixation  (postulation)  of  the  observed  multiple  ‘quantum  potentialities’  in  various
‘multiverse’/‘many-worlds’ interpretations of the same, linear and abstract, imitation of ‘quantum reality’,
only amplifying its para-scientific ‘mysteries’. The conventional, unitary theory of ‘quantum computation’
(similar to ‘quantum field theory’ and ‘cosmology’) forms a ‘point of concentration’ of those evident
blunders of externally ‘solid’, ‘rigorously proven’ and ‘well-established’ scholar theory dominated by
‘mathematical physics’, where its futility is only emphasised by the exponentially growing pressure of

meaningless, ‘post-modern’ plays of words taking the form of esoteric, as if ‘very special’, terminology

that hides, in reality, the absence of elementary consistency. Without going into the detailed structure of

the ‘quantum’ linguistic exercises, it is enough to recall the infinite flux of all those ‘extremely’ quantum

25

‘teleportations’, ‘entanglements’, ‘distillations’, ‘holographies’, ‘tomographies’, ‘Schrödinger-cat states’,

‘Bell/EPR states/nonlocality’, and many other ‘new’ and ‘quantum’ terms which are actually devoid of any

realistic, causal meaning, but describe, in a highly speculative and deliberately perverted form, exactly the

same ‘inexplicable’, but empirically ‘well-established’ knowledge as the canonical quantum postulates. In

addition, similar ‘interpretations’ that can, by their construction, ‘explain’ and ‘justify’ everything are

created in each branch of ‘mathematical’ physics and then arbitrarily superimposed upon each other, like e.

g. conventional theories of quantum mechanics and ‘complexity’ in unitary quantum computation, which

gives the really intractable mixture of verbal decorations covering the underlying deficiency and rough

mistakes, but dominating in the most ‘ambitious’ and ‘solid’ scientific establishments. While this peculiar

‘quality’ of fundamental science content is a sign of its modern profound ‘bifurcation’ (section 9) [1], the

described situation in micro-device description and understanding is ripe for a definite clarification and

transition to a superior level of understanding, especially in view of the quickly growing potentialities of

practical application. The causally complete description of unreduced interaction dynamics is presented in

the next section, in the form of generalised theory of ‘true’ dynamical chaos (purely dynamic randomness

in quantum and classical systems with interaction [1,9,10], see also sections 4.6.2, 5.2.1, 6), with the

following application to real ‘quantum computers’ and other micro-machine dynamics (sections 5-8).

3.  Dynamic  origin  of  randomness  in  a  noiseless  system

3.1.  Generalised  many-body  problem  and  micro-machine  dynamics

Consider a system of N interacting elements, or subsystems, each of them possessing a perfectly

known internal dynamics, in the absence of interaction with other elements. Although we intend to apply

the results to description of quantum computing systems or other micro-systems, we do not impose any

limitations at the beginning and shall specify ‘quantum’ or ‘computational’ properties later, at the suitable

moments. Therefore, we are actually dealing with the general case of the ‘many-body problem’, i. e. we

consider arbitrary (real) system of interacting ‘bodies’ (or ‘elements’) and want to obtain the general,

unreduced (and in particular nonperturbative) solution to this problem. Not only such solution is unknown

to the canonical science, but it cannot even predict what this solution can be like, i. e. what can be a
qualitative, expected result, or structure, of arbitrary interaction process (apart from the implied common-
sense response: “everything can happen”!). As pointed out above, in the case of quantum computation one
cannot  avoid  the  unreduced  many-body  problem  solution,  since  any  perturbative,  ‘exact-solution’
approach of the conventional theory cannot describe just the most important, properly ‘computational’
system  function  consisting  in  purely  dynamical  (‘creative’)  emergence  of  qualitatively  new  system
configurations (‘calculation results’) for actually arbitrary interactions that correspond to various possible
‘calculations’ (or ‘simulations’) by the maximally ‘universal’ computing system.

We generalise various particular equations describing the compound system behaviour to what we

call the (system) ‘existence equation’, a basic dynamical relation that actually does nothing more, in its

starting form, than simple statement of the problem conditions, i. e. it expresses the fact of unreduced,

26

‘nonseparable’ interaction between the system components or, in other words, it describes the system

existence (in its starting composition) by stating that its given interacting components form a ‘single

whole’.  For  a  quantum  system,  the  Schrödinger  equation  is  normally  implied  behind  the  existence

equation, but one does not need to be limited to it from the beginning, within our universal analysis. The

system existence equation can be presented thus in the following universal form:

{(cid:229)

k

 [hk(qk) + (cid:229)

l „ k

 Vkl(qk,ql)] }Y (Q) = EY (Q) ,                                     (1)

where hk(qk) is the ‘generalised Hamiltonian’ for the k-th system component in its ‘free’, ‘integrable’ state
(in  the  absence  of  interaction),  qk  denotes  the  degree(s)  of  freedom  of  the  (free)  k-th  component,
Vkl(qk,ql) is the ‘interaction potential’ between the k-th and l-th components, Y (Q) is the system ‘state
function’,  i.  e.  the  function  characterising  completely  the  compound  system  state/configuration  and

depending, in a ‘nonseparable’ way, on all the participating degrees of freedom (brought about by the
interacting components), so that Q ”
 {q0,q1,...,qN} by definition, E is the value, or ‘eigenvalue’, of the
quantity  expressed  by  the  ‘generalised  Hamiltonian’  in  the  compound  system  state  Y (Q),  and  the
summations  are  performed  over  all  system  components  numbered  from  k,l = 0 till k,l = N (the total

number of interacting entities). As shown in the universal science of complexity [1], any correct equation

can be considered as a particular case of the single universal equation expressing the generalised Hamilton
formalism  (see  section  7.1),  and  therefore  hk(qk)  can  indeed  be  described  as  particular  forms  of  the
generalised Hamiltonian (which is a realistic extension of the conventional ‘operator’). However, one does

not need to insist on this particular interpretation from the beginning. A suitable form of the ‘generalised

Hamiltonian’ should represent an exhaustive characteristic of the system, which means actually that it

should  express  a  form  of  the  unreduced  dynamic  complexity,  such  as  (extended)  mechanical  action,

energy, momentum, and space structure [1] (this statement is self-consistently confirmed by the results of

the unreduced interaction analysis, sections 4.1, 7.1).

It  is  clear  that  eq.  (1)  describes  also  the  general  many-body  problem.  In  particular,  it  is  not

restricted by its ‘quantum’ or ‘mechanical’ version, and refers, in general, to an arbitrary interaction

between arbitrary (given) entities. The pairwise interaction potential in eq. (1) is not a limitation either,
since the unreduced  development  of  this  ‘elementary’  interaction  process  can  give  rise  to  any  more
complicated combinations of nonseparable interacting entities (section 4). In particular, they can form a
hierarchy of interaction levels, such as internal atomic electron interactions, interactions between different
atoms, their various agglomerates (like molecules), etc., but all those possibilities are included in the
universal formulation and following solution of eq. (1). Moreover, we shall see that this ‘many-body’
interaction can be reduced itself to a yet simpler case of interaction between two (structured) entities
leading to the main, universally applicable formalism of the unreduced science of complexity [1-4,9-13].

Several particular cases of eq. (1) are worthy of mentioning at the very beginning, especially taking

into account the case of quantum (computing) devices considered in this paper. The properly ‘quantum’

problem  character  appears  formally  through  the  form  of  at  least  some  of  the  ‘free-component’
Hamiltonians  hk(qk).  Thus,  those  of  them  which  represent  localised  ‘elements’  of  the  device  can  be

27

generally  considered  as  particular  cases  of  a  ‘potential-well’  system  configuration  (with  the  known,

complete set of ‘eigen-solutions’):

hk(qk) = - 

h2
2m

¶ 2
¶ qk2 + Uk(qk) ,                                                       (2)
  

 is Planck's constant, introducing the ‘quantum’ problem scale, m is the ‘working’ particle

where h = h/2p
(usually electron) mass (or its suitable ‘effective’ version), qk is the vector of spatial coordinates, Uk(qk) is
a binding potential well with discrete (known) energy levels, and the operator of eq. (2) is supposed to act

upon the system wavefunction (in general, a dynamically discrete version of the partial derivative can be

implied in the complex-dynamical extension of the kinetic energy ‘operator’, section 7.1 [1,11-13]). The

Hamiltonians  of  eq.  (2)  can  represent  ‘atom-like’  elements  of  a  quantum  device,  such  as  real  atoms

(molecules) or their artificial imitations like ‘quantum dots’ or ‘heterostructures’. In the case of other type

of elements, including (generalised) spins or photons, the respective ‘free-element’ Hamiltonian has other

well-known  expressions  and  solutions  containing  the  signatures  of  the  corresponding,  quantum  or
classical, scale of the system structure.

It can often be useful to separate explicitly one of the participating degrees of freedom, say q0 ”

 x ,

from other variables qk (k = 1,...,N), after which eq. (1) takes the following (equivalent) form

{h0(x ) + (cid:229)

 [hk(qk) + Vk0(qk,x ) + (cid:229)

k

l „ k

 Vkl(qk,ql)] }Y (Q,x ) = EY (Q,x ) ,                  (3)

where the summations start from k,l = 1, and Q ”
 {q1,...,qN}. This form of the starting existing equation
corresponds to situation where the separated variable x  (or group of several of them, in general) describes
the really existing ‘common’ (extended) degree(s) of freedom, like position coordinate(s) varying along

inhomogeneous system structure that contains its ‘elements’ and ‘connections’. A simpler form of eq. (3)

can  be  pertinent  in  the  case  of  vanishingly  small  direct  interaction  between  the  ‘localised’  elements
(Vkl(qk,ql) = 0), each of them interacting only with the ‘common’ degrees of freedom (x ):

{h0(x ) + (cid:229)

k

 [hk(qk) + Vk0(qk,x )]}Y (Q,x ) = EY (Q,x ) ,                               (4)

The simplest nontrivial case of eqs. (1), (3), (4) arises when we consider only two interacting
entities  and  degrees  of  freedom,  say  q0 and q1,  corresponding,  for  example,  to  an  element  (atom)
interacting with the surrounding radiation field or, in general, to an elementary interaction act between any
two entities (like any elementary action of a computer ‘gate’) within the encompassing, more complicated
interaction/computation process:

or

[h0(q0) + V01(q0,q1) + h1(q1)]Y (q0,q1) = EY (q0,q1) ,                                 (5a)

[he(q) + Veg(q,x ) + hg(x )]Y (q,x ) = EY (q,x ) ,                                       (5b)

in different notations (q0 ”
‘canonical’ version from the universal science of complexity and its various applications [1-4,9-13]. As

 q), in which form the existence equation corresponds exactly to its

 x , q1 ”

28

we shall see later, the unreduced interaction results are essentially the same for the ‘many-body’ and ‘two-

body’ cases (eqs. (1) and (5), respectively), which means that it is the unreduced interaction development

itself that introduces all the essential, ‘nonperturbative’ properties, rather than the number of interaction

components and other details determining particular manifestations of those general properties.

Now let us proceed in the unreduced interaction description using its most general, ‘many-body’

expression,  eqs.  (1),  (3).  According  to  the  problem  conditions,  the  system  constituents  are  perfectly

known entities, which means that one knows the complete sets of their eigen-solutions (in the absence of
interaction), {e nk,j knk(qk)}:

hk(qk)j knk(qk) = e nk

j knk(qk) ,                                                       (6)

where {j knk(qk)} are the eigenfunctions and {e nk} the corresponding eigenvalues of the ‘free-element’
Hamiltonian hk(qk), forming the complete set of solutions/functions. In the case of binding potential well,
eq. (2), the lower-state (most important) eigenfunctions are represented by a set of well-localised functions
which can often be approximated by the d -function (or d -like functions) centred at the element position,
while the corresponding eigenvalues form a discrete set of energy levels. Note that if the eigen-solutions of

a component are not ‘perfectly known’, this means that one deals with an ‘incorrectly posed problem’. In

this case one should first descend one level lower in the system description and obtain the complete picture

of the internal, generally also complex, element dynamics (or choose another, indeed ‘perfectly known’,

system composition).

Since one can be interested eventually in the state of ‘structural’ degrees of freedom summarising,

in particular, the elementary ‘calculations’, it would be expedient to express the problem in terms of their
variables. This can be done by expanding the total system state-function Y (q0,q1,...,qN) over the complete
sets of eigenfunctions {j knk(qk)} for the ‘functional’ degrees of freedom (q1,...,qN) ”
 Q describing the
‘internal dynamics’ of the ‘operating’ (computing) system elements (see eq. (6)), which leaves one with
functions depending only on the selected ‘structural’ (‘distributed’) degrees of freedom q0 ”

 x :

Y (q0,q1,...,qN) ”

 Y (Q,x ) = 

 y n(q0)j

1n1(q1)j

2n2(q2)...j

NnN(qN) ”

 y n(x )F n(Q) ,       (7)

n  ”

 (n1,n2,...,nN)

 (cid:229)

n

 j

1n1(q1)j

2n2(q2)...j

 (n1,n2,...,nN) ”

where the summation is performed over all possible combinations of eigenstates n ”
 {nk}
and we have designated F n(Q) ”
NnN(qN) for brevity. It will be convenient, in most
cases,  to  interpret  the  variables  x   as  (generalised)  common  coordinates  of  the  system  configuration
(element distribution), so that y n(x ) from eq. (7) characterises the (eventually probabilistic) coordinate
distribution of the n-th internal state of the elements, similar to corresponding electron wavefunction
representations in solid state theory. The system of equations for {y n(x )} is obtained from eq. (3) after
substitution of expansion of eq. (7), multiplication by F *
n (Q) and integration over all variables Q (taking
into account the orthonormality of the eigenfunctions {j knk(qk)}):
h0(x )y n(x ) + (cid:229)

k l ]y n´(x ) = h ny n(x ) ,                                  (8)
 Vnn´

k 0 (x ) + (cid:229)

 [Vnn´

k,n´

l „ k

29

(cid:229)
where

h n ”

 E - e n ,   e n ”

e nk ,                                                      (9)

 (cid:229)

k

(10)

(15)

Vnn´
k l  ”

 

dQ F *

n (Q)Vkl(qk,ql)F n¢ (Q) =

 

W

Q

= ( (cid:213)

d ngng´) (cid:242)

g  „

 k,l

 

W

q

dqkdqlj *
knk

(qk)j *
lnl

(ql)Vkl(qk,ql)j knk´(qk)j

lnl´(ql) ,

Vnn´
k 0 (x ) ”

 

dQ F *

n (Q)Vk0(qk,x )F n¢ (Q) = ((cid:213)

(qk)Vk0(qk,x )j knk´(qk) .        (11)

d ngng´) (cid:242)

dqkj *
knk

g „

 k

 

W

q

 

W

Q

It would be convenient to separate, in eqs. (8), the terms with n = n´, corresponding to the ‘mean-

field approximation’:

Hn(x )y n(x ) + (cid:229)

n´ „

 n

Vnn´(x )y n´(x ) = h ny n(x ) ,                                        (12)

Hn(x ) = h0(x ) + Vnn(x ) ,                                                        (13)

Vnn´(x ) = (cid:229)

k 0 (x ) + (cid:229)

 [Vnn´

k

l „ k

k l  ]  .                                              (14)
 Vnn´

where Hn(x ) is the mean-field Hamiltonian. Taking into account the expressions of eqs. (10), (11), we can
present the mean-field interaction potential, Vnn(x ), in the following form:

Vnn(x ) = (cid:229)

 [Vnk(x ) + (cid:229)

 Vnknl

 ] ,

k

l „ k

 Vnk(x ) = 

dqk ‰

j knk(qk)‰ 2Vk0(qk,x ) ,   Vnknl

  = 

dqkdql‰

j knk(qk)‰ 2‰

j

lnl(ql)‰ 2Vkl(qk,ql) ,

 

W

q

 

W

q

which demonstrates explicitly the origin of averaging in the ‘mean’ interaction structure. Note also that due
to the pairwise interaction character in the initial existence equation leading to d -symbols appearance in
eqs. (10), (11), the summation over n´ in eqs. (12) will contain only the corresponding sums over nk´ and
nl´. However, we shall not show it explicitly, so that eqs. (12) apply formally to any kind of the initial
many-body interaction. It is important that the obtained problem formulation in terms of the system of
equations for the functions, y n(x ), describing all possible interactions between the ‘normal modes’ of the
system components remains valid not only for the main case of quantum-mechanical system considered
here, but also for any system with interaction, where the above canonical expressions for quantum ‘scalar

products’ and ‘matrix elements’ should be replaced by the corresponding expressions for that particular

system  which  should  always  exist  for  the  correctly  formulated  problem  (including  perfectly  known

dynamics of the system components and their given interaction within the system).

30

(cid:242)
(cid:242)
(cid:242)
(cid:242)
In view of this universality, it is not surprising that the obtained many-body problem formulation,

eqs.  (12),  is  mathematically  equivalent  to  the  one  for  the  unreduced  interaction  between  only  two

(structured) entities, eqs. (5), taken as the basis for the universal science of complexity and its various

applications [1-4]. Indeed, it is sufficient to consider that indexes n, n´ in eqs. (12) number the ‘normal
modes’ of one of the two interacting components (corresponding to the generalised Hamiltonian he(q) in
eq. (5b)) in order to interpret eqs. (12) in terms of this simplest case of unreduced interaction process. On

the other hand, one can easily imagine that the normal modes of each of the two interacting entities are

subdivided into arbitrary groups of ‘subentities’, so that one obtains the general case of the many-body

problem. The key point here is that ‘everything interacts with everything’, within any real, unrestricted

interaction process, so that the formulation of the problem of mutually interacting ‘entities’, and their

‘modes’, remains always the same, while the particular ‘mode’ grouping in ‘entities’ and their numbering

change for each individual case, reflecting the initial system configuration or other convenient choice. One

important aspect of this equivalence is that all the essential, qualitatively important effects of the unreduced

interaction that will be revealed below in the general solution for the arbitrary many-body problem should

emerge already in the unreduced interaction between two entities, which implies that the irreducible

dynamic randomness and nonunitarity of the system evolution (see below, sections 3.3, 4.1) characterise

already  each  interaction  act,  determining  operation  of  an  elementary  computer  ‘gate’,  and  then

hierarchically re-emerge in interaction cycles involving all higher levels of dynamics and the computing

system in the whole.

This universal hierarchy of the universal properties of unreduced interaction processes has also a

more general sense: it provides the totally adequate, ‘exact’ representation of the real world structure, from

its most fundamental entities (elementary particles and fields) to the most elaborated dynamical systems

(living and conscious beings) [1], where each lower-level interaction results provide the ‘interaction

components’ for the next higher level. In the case of quantum devices, this dynamically emerging, and

consistently derived, hierarchy of interaction processes has at least two more direct implications. The first

one involves the causally understood classical behaviour that naturally emerges from complex quantum

dynamics  as  a  higher  complexity  level  determined  approximately  by  the  elementary  bound  system

formation (sections 4.7, 5.3) [1-4,11-13], which permits us to naturally include those dynamical quantum-
classical  transitions  into  description  within  the  same  approach  and  formalism.  The  second  direct
manifestation of the universal hierarchy of complexity involves the complementary dynamic relation of
quantum computation to the underlying (complex) interaction dynamics at the lowest quantum sublevels
(internal elementary particles dynamics) providing the causally complete explanation of the canonical
‘quantum  mysteries’  (sections  4.6,  5.3)  [1-4,9-13]  and  thus  preventing  their  arbitrary,  incorrect  and
speculative ‘use’ in the unitary imitation of real, dynamically multivalued dynamics of quantum devices.

Before advancing towards the solution of eqs. (12), note that the above formalism does not contain
any explicit dependence on time, which would correspond to a basically closed system that actually

‘generates’ its essential temporal changes by passing from one its emerging state-‘realisation’ to another

(sections 4.3, 7.1) [1-4,12,13]. In the case of a computing system, this would correspond to computer

dynamics considered in between the input and output operations involving time-dependent connections to

31

the exterior world. One can also include the (classical) input/output systems into the system, using analysis

universality mentioned above, which seems to be reasonable taking into account the ‘sensitive’ dependence

of quantum/complex system dynamics on ‘external’ influences and may not permit the definite separation

between the ‘computer’ itself and the first, immediate input/output structures. Thus, a quantum computer,

or ‘intelligent sensor’, used in practice for a micro-structure/environment monitoring at the level of single

atomic/molecular species and respective ‘quantum’ events, will certainly constitute an ‘indivisible whole’

with the medium/process it controls, so that the usual division between ‘production’, its ‘control’, and

related ‘computation’ disappears in principle, transforming the ‘quantum computation’ process into a

qualitatively new kind of adventure closely related to its dynamically multivalued (chaotic) character (see

also section 7.3). This sort of dynamical disappearance and reappearance of time in system description is

partially imitated by the transition between ‘time-dependent’ and ‘time-independent’ approaches in the

usual quantum mechanics, considered to be generally equivalent and used, in particular, in scattering

theory (see e. g. [119]). However, as we discussed above (section 2), the correct description of quantum

computation is possible only through the extension of the conventional unitary projection to the causally

complete, dynamically multivalued picture leading to the intrinsic time emergence as a result of time-

independent interaction development [1]. This does not prevent one from including the explicit time

dependence into the same formalism in cases where the corresponding separation from the (changing)
outside world dynamics is possible. In such cases one or several variables qk (k ‡
equation, eqs. (1), (3), will represent explicit dependence on time, t, entering through the corresponding

 0) in the initial existence

interaction potential dependence and reflecting e. g. the input/output processes. The right-hand side of the

Y

existence equation is proportional to the time derivative of the state-function (for example, it equals to
/¶ t) for the time-dependent Schrödinger equation). When, however, we perform, according to eq.
ih(¶
(7), expansion over eigenfunctions of the corresponding operator, like simple harmonics of the Fourrier

integral/series for the time derivative, we recover the above systems of equations, eqs. (8), (12), where the
respective  eigenvalues,  e nk, e n, E, and h n  (see  eq.  (9)),  will  be  proportional  to  frequencies  of  those
temporal harmonical components (cf. refs. [1,9] and section 5.2). Some of the variables qk are therefore
replaced by time, and the resulting system of equations preserves the same general form representing the

usual ‘Fourier analysis’ of a time-dependent problem (other suitable system of time-dependent eigen-
solutions can also be used).

3.2.  Universally  nonperturbative  problem  solution
by  the  unreduced  effective  potential  method

We proceed with the analysis of the system of equations, eqs. (12), describing the unreduced
interactions between all elementary modes of the many-body system (numbered by n,n´), by separating the
partial state-function, y n(x ), for one of the modes and trying to express the problem in terms of equation
for this function alone. In many cases it will be convenient, for example, to choose the system ‘ground

state’ (the state with the lowest energy and dynamic complexity [1-4,11-13]) as this separated system
0(x ) and suppose, correspondingly,
mode, and we shall designate it, without limitation on generality, as y

32

 0 below. Separating the equation for y

that n,n´ „
equations in the following form:

0(x ) in eqs. (12), we can rewrite the main system of

H0(x )y

0(x ) + (cid:229)

V0n(x )y n(x ) = hy

n

0(x ) ,                                      (16a)

Hn(x )y n(x ) + (cid:229)

n´ „

 n

Vnn´(x )y n´(x ) = h ny n(x ) - Vn0(x )y

0(x ) ,                         (16b)

where we have designated h  ”

 h

0.

Keeping in mind the exact analogy of the main system of equations, eqs. (12), (16), with the basic

analysis and particular cases of the universal science of complexity, mentioned above, we can proceed by
expressing  y n(x )  through  y
0(x )  from  eqs.  (16b)  with  the  help  of  the  Green  functions  for  the
‘homogeneous’ parts of those equations and then substituting the result into eq. (16a) [1-4,9-13]. The

mentioned  Green  functions  are  obtained  for  the  ‘truncated’,  or  ‘auxiliary’,  system  of  equations,  not
containing the terms with y

0(x ) on their right-hand side, contrary to the full form of eqs. (16b):

Hn(x )y n(x ) + (cid:229)

n´ „

 n

Vnn´(x )y n´(x ) = h ny n(x ) .                                      (17)

The Green function for the equation for y n(x ) from this system is given by the standard expression:

Gn(x ,x ¢ ) = (cid:229)

n i(x ¢ )

ni(x )y 0*
y 0
h 0
ni - h n

 

i

 ,                                                  (18)

where {y 0

ni(x )} and {h 0

ni} are the complete sets of eigenfunctions and eigenvalues, respectively, for the
truncated system of equations, eqs. (17). The well-known property of the Green function thus defined is
that  the  solution  of  the  full  equation  for  y n(x )  from  the  system  (16)  can  be  expressed  through  the
‘inhomogeneous’ term on the right (containing y

0(x )) with the help of Gn(x ,x ¢ ):

y n(x ) = - 

dx ¢ Gn(x ,x ¢ )Vn0(x ¢ )y

0(x ¢ ) ,                                            (19)

 

W

x

x  is the domain of the function under integral. The direct substitution of this expression into eqs.

where W
(16b) confirms that y n(x ) defined by eq. (19) is a solution of the unreduced system of equations.

Now if we substitute this expression for y n(x ) through y

0(x ) into eq. (16a), we obtain a formally
0(x )  that  inevitably  involves,  however,  the  (unknown)  eigen-solutions  of  the

‘closed’  equation  for  y
truncated system of equations:

h0(x )y

0(x ) + Veff(x ;h )y

0(x ) = hy

0(x ) ,                                            (20)

where the operator of the effective (interaction) potential (EP), Veff(x ;h ), is given by

33

(cid:242)
Veff(x ;h ) = V00(x ) + V^ (x ;h ) ,  V^ (x ;h )y

0(x ) = 

dx ¢ V(x ,x ¢ ;h )y

0(x ¢ ) ,                    (21a)

 

W

x

V(x ,x ¢ ;h ) ”

 (cid:229)

 
n,i

V 0n(x )y 0

 

ni(x )Vn0(x ¢ )y 0*
ni - e n 0
 - h 0

n i(x ¢ )

h

 ,  e n0 ”

 e n - e

0 .                       (21b)

and we have used the definitions of eqs. (9) and (13). The obtained ‘effective existence equation’ for the

quantum many-body system, eq. (20), can be considered as an extended ‘mean-field formulation’ of the
problem, where EP Veff(x ;h ), eqs. (21), plays the role of the exact ‘mean field’ produced by other system
modes, which leads to its nonlinear dependence on the eigenvalues to be found, h , and the unknown
eigen-solutions of the truncated problem, {y 0
ni}. The latter dependence means that the problem is
reduced to solution of a similar, but simpler problem, while the effective problem formulation itself, eqs.

ni(x ),h 0

(20)-(21),  expresses  the  remaining,  essential  part  of  the  unreduced  system  dynamics  through  the

mentioned interaction dependence on the problem eigenvalues, absent in the initial problem formulation.

Since the effective existence equation, eq. (20), is an equation for a single function depending on

one  variable,  it  can  be  solved  (provided  we  have  a  suitable  approximation  for  the  auxiliary  system
0i(x )}, and eigenvalues, {h i}, should then be
solutions, see below, section 4.4). Its eigenfunctions, {y
substituted into eqs. (19) to obtain other state-function components:

y ni(x ) = g^

ni(x )y

0i(x ) ”

 

 dx ¢ gni(x ,x ¢ )y

W

 

x

0i(x ¢ ),   gni(x ,x ¢ ) = Vn0(x ¢ )(cid:229)

ni¢ (x )y 0*
y 0
i - h 0

ni¢ (x ¢ )
n i ¢  - e n 0  

 

h

 ,      (22)

 
i¢

after which the total system state-function Y (q0,q1,...,qN) = Y (Q,x ), eq. (7), is obtained as

Y (Q,x ) = (cid:229)

 

i

0(Q) + (cid:229)

F

c i   º

F n(Q)g^

ni(x )  y
 ß

n

0i(x ),                                   (23)

where the coefficients ci should be found from the state-function matching conditions at the boundary
(and/or time moment) where the driving interaction vanishes, Vk0(qk,x ), Vkl(qk,ql) = 0 (see eqs. (1), (2)-
(5)), so that the system has a well-known configuration. The state-function of eq. (23) provides thus the
‘general  solution’  for  the  many-body  problem  in  terms  of  eigen-solutions  of  the  effective  dynamic
(existence) equation rigorously derived from the starting existence equation, eqs. (1), (2)-(5) (taking the
form of the corresponding Schrödinger equation for the quantum system of interacting entities). The main
observed quantity represented by the (generalised) system density, r (Q,x ), is obtained then from the total
state-function as its squared modulus, r (Q,x ) = |Y (Q,x )|2
 (for ‘quantum’ and other ‘wave-like’ levels of
complexity),  or  as  the  state-function  itself,  r (Q,x ) = Y (Q,x )  (for  ‘classical’,  ‘particle-like’  levels  of
complexity) [1].

34

(cid:242)
(cid:242)
Œ
Ø
œ
ø
The presented problem ‘solution’ is nothing but its another formulation, since to obtain it explicitly

one needs to know the solutions of the auxiliary system of equations, eqs. (17), which is only slightly

simpler, than the full system of equations, eqs. (12), (16). However, this new problem formulation in

terms of the effective dynamic equation, eqs. (20)-(21), has a nontrivial significance, since it does reveal a

qualitative novelty introduced into system dynamics by the unreduced interaction development and hidden

in the starting, ‘general’ problem formulation, eqs. (1), (2)-(5), (12), (16). This fundamental feature, the

dynamic redundance, or multivaluedness, phenomenon [1-4,8-13], is expressed by the self-consistent,

nonlinear EP dependence on the eigenvalues to be found, eqs. (21), reflecting the unreduced interaction

development and considered in detail below. It is interesting to note that the EP method and its expressions

similar to those obtained above are well-known in scattering theory and its various applications, including

solid state theory [120,121], under the name of optical, or effective, potential method. However, the

fundamental meaning of the unreduced EP dependence on the eigenvalues remains undiscovered, and the

related general problem solution is replaced by perturbative approximations to EP that reduce interaction

influence  to  trivial  ‘small  corrections’  for  the  observed  quantities  and  thus  ‘kill’  any  complexity

manifestations,  including  the  feedback  EP  dependence  on  eigenvalues.  In  particular,  such  is  the

conventional mean-field approximation widely applied in various versions of the many-body problem,

where the exact ‘mean field’ of the unreduced EP, possessing the intrinsic structure-creating properties

(sections 4.2, 4.3, 7.1), is simplified down to interaction values averaged over fixed state-functions for

absent, or simplified, interaction. This basic deficiency of the canonical, invariably perturbative, theory

and approach gives the false unitarity, i. e. uniformity, of the resulting system evolution and underlies, in

particular, illusive possibility of unitary quantum device operation (in the low-noise limit).

3.3.  Dynamically  multivalued  interaction  result
as  the  universal  origin  of  randomness  and  a  priori  probability  values

If now we consider the properties of the unreduced EP solutions, eqs. (20)-(21), it will not be

difficult to see [1,2,8-13] that the presence of the multi-branch EP dependence on the eigenvalue to be
found, h , leads to multiplication, or dynamical splitting, of eigen-solutions of eq. (20), and thus of the
whole problem, with respect to their ‘normal’ quantity, implied by the ordinary problem formulation (e. g.
eqs. (1), (2)-(5), (12), (16)). Indeed, if Nx  is the number of eigen-solutions of eq. (20) for a generic,
ordinary  potential  that  (hypothetically)  does  not  depend  on  h  (such as V00(x ),  the  first  term  in  the
unreduced EP expression, eq. (21a)), then the total solution number for the unreduced, h -dependent EP of
eqs. (21), Nqx , should be at least as great as Nqx  = Nx Neff, where Neff is the number of terms in the sum
over n and i in the unreduced EP expression, eq. (21b). This follows from the fact that each such term
increases the maximum power of the characteristic equation for eigenvalues, h , by Nx  and, equivalently,
adds another series of branches of potential dependence on h  in the graphical representation of the same
equation, providing separate solutions by their intersection with the linear dependence on h  determined by
the right-hand side of eq. (20). It is clear also that Neff = Nx Nq, where Nx  and Nq are the numbers of
terms  in  summation  over  i and n  in  eq.  (21b)  which  are  determined,  respectively,  by  the  number  of

35

solutions for y n(x ) of the auxiliary system of equations, eqs. (17) (generally equal to that for y
0(x ) found
from the first equation of the same total system, eqs. (16)), and the number of eigen-solutions for the free,

non-interacting system elements (see eqs. (6), (9)).

In the obtained total number of solutions for the unreduced EP formalism, Nqx  = (Nx )2Nq, each
corresponding  subset  of  Nx Nq  solutions  reflects  a  ‘normal’  solution  multiplication  in  the  system  of
equations  with  respect  to  solution  number,  Nx  (or Nq),  for  a  single  equation,  due  to  appearance  of
additional degrees of freedom. It is clear from the above interpretation of x  as system element coordinates
(see eq. (7)) that in general Nx  = N, the number of system elements, and therefore the ‘normal’ number of

system solutions, NNq, is simply equal to the number of all individual element states times the number of
(interacting)  elements,  which  seems  as  natural  as  any  ordinary  perturbative  ‘state  splitting’  effect.
However, further multiplication of this ‘normal’ solution number by Nx  cannot be explained by any such

‘evident’ reasons or eliminated as a particular, spurious effect. Therefore, we see that the unreduced
interaction development leads to emergence of a redundant number of eigen-solutions forming Nx  sets of

complete  ‘normal’  solutions,  each  of  them  providing  the  exhaustive  system  state  description  (this

algebraically derived conclusion is confirmed by the geometric analysis of the same characteristic equation,

see refs. [1,9,10]).

Despite its nontrivial character, the dynamic redundance (or multivaluedness) phenomenon should

not look as unnatural or too specific, but rather standard, inevitable manifestation of the unrestricted

dynamics of (any) real interaction, though it is invariably omitted by the canonical theory. Indeed, already
a rough estimate shows that if we have N (= Nx ) interacting system elements with Nq states/modes per
element (which corresponds to NNq of ‘normally’ splitted states), then the unreduced interaction between
the modes (‘everything interacts with everything’) gives NNq states per element, or N2Nq for the total
number of states. However, the physical reality, including individual element capacities, does not change

after the interaction is turned on, which means that each element, and the system in the whole, is forced to

carry  an  excessive,  N-fold  redundant  number  of  its  states  in  the  normal  regime  of  fully  developed

interaction. By comparison, any conventional, perturbative description, such as various canonical ‘mean-
field’ approximations, will always give Nq states per element (or NNq ‘splitted’ states in the total) as a
result of elements interaction with the single mean field artificially replacing many (N) influences of
individual elements, which reveals the elementary, obvious origin of severe, fundamental deficiency of the
canonical, dynamically single-valued imitations of the natural interaction dynamics within the unitary
theory. Most curious is the fact that those unitary approaches recognise quite readily the evident limitations
of  their  perturbative  schemes  (impossibility  to  obtain  the  general  problem  solution,  divergence  of
perturbation series), but after that they implicitly yield to a naive, unjustified ‘hope’ that the unreduced,
real problem solution is a certain ‘continuous’, purely quantitative refinement of the unitary scheme,
preserving at least its ‘main’, qualitative features.*)

*) This kind of mechanistic ‘intuition’ leads eventually to the widely imposed belief in ‘unreasonable’, but actually only
illusory, ‘effectiveness of [unitary] mathematics in natural sciences’ that finally turns out to be indeed unreasonable and gives
rise to persisting ‘mysteries’ and inevitable impasse of the canonical fundamental physics (see also [1] and section 9). A
related  another  example  of  this  illusory  ‘efficiency’  of  the  conventional  ‘mathematical  physics’,  hiding  a  huge  and  real
deficiency,  is  provided  by  the  conventional  ‘uniqueness  theorems’  for  the  main  dynamical  equations  that  enter  in  direct
36

In  reality,  the  new  quality,  dynamical  multivaluedness,  does  appear  after  transition  from

perturbative imitations to the unreduced interaction analysis. The latter shows, in particular, that each of

the redundant solutions describes a complete, normal state of the compound system, and therefore can be

called  system  realisation, i. e. its really existing version. It is obtained by the unreduced EP method

presented above, eqs. (20)-(23), in the form of the corresponding set of eigen-solutions of the effective

existence equation, eqs. (20)-(21), which is substituted then into the expression for the total system state-
function, eqs. (22)-(23). We shall attach index r to values referring to r-th system realisation (1 £
 Nx ),
so  that  the  complete  set  of  eigen-solutions  for  the  EP  equation,  eq.  (20),  can  now  be  presented  as
{y
i  },  which  describes,  for  variable  r and i,  the  whole  redundant  set  of  eigen-
solutions and, for each fixed r and variable i, the (ordinary) ‘complete’ set of eigen-solutions forming the

i} = {y r

0i(x ),h r

0i(x ),h

 r £

r-th realisation. All the explicitly obtained system realisations have ‘equal rights’ for their appearance

driven  by  the  same  interaction,  but  at  the  same  time,  being  (locally)  complete,  they  are  mutually

incompatible and therefore can appear only ‘one by one’. This leads us to the rigorously substantiated

conclusion that the compound system of interacting elements can exist only as the process of permanent

change  of  its  realisations,  dynamically  driven  by  the  main  interaction  itself  and  performed  in  the

dynamically,  or  causally,  random  order.  This  dynamic,  causal  randomness  of  system  realisation

emergence originates in the dynamic redundance phenomenon and means that any of the equally probable,

explicitly obtained system realisations should appear, with the corresponding probability, but cannot be

stable with respect to other realisation emergence driven by the same, nonseparable interaction process.

The dynamic multivaluedness of (any) unreduced interaction process provides thus the universal,

purely dynamic, and omnipresent origin and meaning of randomness in the world, at all its levels, from

quantum  systems  to  classical  and  higher-level  objects  [1],  which  is  very  different  from  the  formal,

empirically based, ‘intuitive’ introduction of randomness in any field of the conventional, unitary science,

including all its imitations of ‘dynamical chaos’ and ‘complexity’. In particular, the dynamic redundance

and causal randomness emerge even in the total absence of ‘noise’ or ‘dissipation’ and for any real, even

simplest and totally closed, system configuration. At the level of quantum systems with interaction (like

‘quantum computer’ or other quantum machine), causal randomness takes the form of the true quantum

chaos  (i.  e.  truly  random  quantum  system  evolution,  as  opposed  to  the  ‘intricate  regularity’  of  the

contradiction with the above dynamic multivaluedness of the unreduced solution of the same equations. The origin of this
fatal ‘mistake’ of the conventional theory can be easily revealed in the form of a characteristic vicious circle in the underlying
logic: the ‘desired’ property, such as uniqueness (single-valuedness), is first silently assumed in the problem formulation (in
this case by assuming the potential function single-valuedness) and then as if ‘rigorously derived’, or ‘proved’, by simple
rearrangement of the problem expression. One always obtains therefore exactly what one inserts from the beginning, within
that kind of ‘unreasonably efficient’, but still evident trickery, which is a manifestation of the fundamental fruitlessness of the
whole  conventional,  unitary  science,  as  it  was  acutely  emphasised  by  H.  Bergson  yet  at  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth
century (see section 9). One vicious circle inevitably gives rise to the whole growing family of similar logical tricks of the
unitary  science,  so  that  one  is  obliged,  for  example,  to  artificially  insert  the  fundamentally  absent  randomness  into
conventional, dynamically single-valued chaos theory (section 6) or formally postulate the unceasing flow and irreversibility
of time (cf. section 4.3), as well as all other natural properties of the unreduced dynamic complexity (section 4),  for the
whole range of various observed systems and patterns of behaviour. The underlying deficiency of the ‘uniqueness theorems’
clearly shows up e. g. as invariable perturbation series divergence and other problems of the same origin appearing at any
attempt to explicitly obtain that ‘unique’ solution. However, the ‘unique’ and ‘chosen’ status of the conventional science,
definitely putting itself beyond any critics, leads to the infinite persistence of all those evident blunders, and thus the related
‘irresolvable’ problems and ‘mysteries’, in all most prestigious courses of the ‘omnipotent’ scholar science (cf. section 9) [1].

37

conventional quantum chaos concept) [9] and causal ‘quantum measurement (reduction)’ process [10]

which avoid the inconsistency and ‘mysteries’ of their conventional versions (see also sections 4.6, 4.7,

5.3, and 6 for more details).

Mathematically the derived dynamic multivaluedness and randomness of the unreduced problem
solution can be expressed by presenting the measured system density, r (Q,x ), as the special, causally, or
dynamically, probabilistic sum of the corresponding densities for individual realisations, {r r(Q,x )}:

N´

r (Q,x ) = (cid:229)

r =1

r r(Q,x ) ,                                                         (24)

where the sum is performed over the total number, N´

,  of  the  actually  emerging  (observed)  system

realisations numbered by r (as follows from the above analysis, in general N´
interacting system elements), and the sign ¯
meaning of the sum described above. The latter implies that (i) each explicitly  obtained  realisation,
represented by its density r r(Q,x ) in eq. (24), appears in a causally random order among other system
realisations, (ii) realisation change process for a given system can never stop because it is permanently

 serves to designate the special, dynamically probabilistic

 = Nx  = N, the number of

maintained  by  the  main,  driving  system  interactions  and  constitutes  the  very  essence of any system

existence (in the causally obtained space and time, section 4.3), and (iii) the transitions between normal,

regular system realisations are performed through a special transient state (also obtained as a particular

system realisation among causally complete set of solutions of the effective existence equation) which

dynamically binds those regular realisations into the single whole of (complex) system dynamics and can

be  specified  as  the  causal,  unified  extension  of  the  conventional  wavefunction,  density  matrix,  and

distribution function concepts (section 4.2) [1,4,12,13]. The density, state-function, and EP for the r-th
realisation are obtained by substituting the corresponding eigenvalues, h r
0i(x ),  for

i , and eigenfunctions, y r

their general versions in the respective formulas, eqs. (21)-(23):

r r(Q,x ) = |Y

r (Q,x )|2 ,  Y

F n(Q)g^r

ni(x ) y r
 ß

0i(x ) ,            (25a)

ni(x ) = g^r
y r

ni(x )y r

0i(x ) = (cid:242)

 dx ¢ gr

ni(x ,x ¢ )y r

0i(x ¢ ),  gr

ni¢ (x )Vn0(x ¢ )y 0*
y 0
i - h 0
h r
ni¢  - e n 0

ni¢ (x ¢ )

 ,       (25b)

r (Q,x ) = (cid:229)

 

i

0(Q) + (cid:229)

F

cr
i 

 º

ni(x ,x ¢ ) = (cid:229)

n

 
i¢

W

 

x

0i(x ) + (cid:229)

Veff(x ;h r

i)y r

0i(x ) = V00(x )y r

V0n(x )y 0

ni¢ (x )  ı
W

 

x

 dx ¢ y 0*

ni¢ (x ¢ )Vn0(x ¢ )y r

0i(x ¢ )

i - h 0
h r

n i ¢  - e n 0 

 .       (25c)

 
n,i¢

 

38

¯
Œ
Ø
œ
ø
(cid:243)
Each system realisation is physically represented by, and observed as, the ‘normal’, inevitable

interaction process product, or result, providing an observed system configuration. We just show that

there  are  always many  such  incompatible  realisations  (interaction  results  or  elementary  system

configurations),  and  therefore  they  are  forced  to  permanently  replace  one  another  with  an  average

frequency  which  is  usually  comparable  to  (but  somewhat  lower  than)  lowest  characteristic  system

frequencies  within  each  realisation,  since  the  realisation  change  process  is  governed  by  the  same

interaction that gives rise to the internal realisation dynamics. The multiplicity of realisations and their

resulting change can be more or less visible externally, depending upon greater or smaller difference

between the corresponding system configurations, which gives rise to two limiting cases of dynamic

complexity, (global, or uniform) dynamical ‘chaos’ and ‘self-organisation’ (or ‘self-organised criticality’),

respectively (section 4.5).

Consider a general case of quantum machine represented, for example, by a spatial arrangement of

interacting ‘elements’, each of them possessing its own internal dynamics (in the absence of interaction),
as  described  by  eqs.  (6).  Then  the  state-function  y n(x ),  defined  by  eq.  (7),  can  describe  the  spatial
distribution of the n-th system state (including, in principle, those of all elements), and the r-th realisation
for all {y n(x )} can correspond to the obtained r-th version of (dynamically correlated) spatial distributions
for all states taking the form, for example, of n-th state localisation around r-th system element or another,

dynamically emerging kind of centre (other, e. g. delocalised, types of particular realisation configuration

can also emerge, of course, for various system interactions). It is not difficult to see the r-th EP realisation,

eq. (25c), will dynamically produce a confining potential well for the n-th state just around the r-th element

(centre) corresponding to actually obtained concentration of the r-th realisation state-function, eqs. (25a,b)

[1,10,11] (see also section 4.3). Now, causally random transitions between realisations will correspond to

dynamically chaotic, ‘spontaneous’ jumps of system states (represented e. g. by its considered n-th state)

between various possible centres of localisation, correlated for different states and centres, as described by

our unreduced  general solution of eqs. (24), (25). This causally  complete,  dynamically  probabilistic

general solution and its interpretation provide also the detailed, causally complete understanding for the

generic many-body system dynamics that can be useful especially in certain interesting cases of larger

quantum system behaviour, such as atomic Bose-condensation and other highly ‘collective’, macroscopic
quantum  phenomena  in  condensed  matter  including  superconductivity  and  superfluidity,  that  remain
‘mysterious’ and basically ‘nonintegrable’ within the conventional theory (see section 5.3(C)).

It is important to emphasize that the causally probabilistic sum of eq. (24) means not only that the
emergence  of  each  system  realisation  occurs  in  the  dynamically  probabilistic  fashion,  but  also  that
realisations unceasingly replace one another, in the causally random order, under the influence of the
same,  driving  interaction  between  system  elements  Vkl(qk,ql),  eq.  (1),  that  forms  each  realisation
structure, so that the universal and unique way of (any) system existence is a dynamically random process
specified by the above results. It should be clearly distinguished from the widely spread imitations of the

unitary ‘science of complexity’ and ‘chaos theory’ (such as ‘unstable periodic orbits’ or ‘multistability’

concepts) which, being unable to provide the truly dynamic origin and structure of randomness within

their dynamically single-valued projection of reality, replace them with a formally inserted, postulated

39

randomness,  or  stochasticity,  of  equally  formally  introduced,  purely  abstract  ‘states’.  In  the  case  of

quantum system, or ‘machine’, the dynamically probabilistic sum of eq. (24) can be considered as the

causally complete, essential extension of the formally introduced, abstract, and basically deficient ‘density

matrix’ concept from the conventional quantum theory. Contrary to the conventional density matrix,

defined through purely mathematical, formally postulated elements from abstract (and linear) ‘spaces’, our

dynamically probabilistic system density is a physically real quantity subject to an interaction-driven,

permanent and chaotic change. Similar to those stochastic imitations of randomness from the conventional

complexity theory, the canonical density matrix is nothing but a formal mathematical model describing a

certain, arbitrarily guessed and postulated ‘statistical mixture’ of observed, but remaining unspecified,

‘pure states’. Either dynamic origin of these states, or chaotic, interaction-driven transitions between them

fall definitely outside the framework of unitary, artificially inserted ‘stochasticity’.

Another important feature of the obtained general solution, eq. (24), is that the changing system

realisations always remain dynamically joined together by a physically real transitional state, forming a

special, intermediate system realisation that provides the causally complete extension of the conventional

wavefunction and related ‘Born's probability rule’ (as well as various abstract ‘distribution functions’

from the unitary stochasticity concept, including the density matrix, see section 4.2). The involved internal

structure of the unreduced general solution is a consistently derived result of the interaction process

dynamics described by the Schrödinger equation, eqs. (1)-(5) (which is also rigorously derived from

lower-level interaction dynamics [1,4,11-13], section 7.1), and therefore the fundamental origin of system

density randomness, hidden behind formally postulated and ambiguous ‘decoherence’ (or ‘trajectory

divergence’)  of  the  conventional  theory,  is  in  the  purely  dynamic,  strictly  internal  and  universal

phenomenon  of  interaction-induced  system  splitting  into  many  incompatible  realisations.  It  can  be

compared to arbitrary postulation of mysterious ‘transformation’ of an ill-defined ‘coherent’ wavefunction

into ‘incoherent’ mixture of the conventional density matrix ‘magically’ induced by some ill-defined (and

evidently quite variable) external ‘noise’, which creates, in particular, vicious circles characteristic of the

unitary science (cf. the footnote above in this section, p. 36-37): the postulated, external randomness is the

source of ‘obtained’, but also unspecified density matrix randomness, or ‘decoherence’ of abstract space

‘vectors’,  while  the  accompanying,  equally  postulated  wavefunction  reduction  is  ‘confirmed’  by  the
resulting density matrix ‘localisation’. Correspondingly, the widely used conventional equations for the
density matrix can at best provide extremely simplified, incorrect, regular imitations of the dynamically
random realisation change process. The correct equation for the dynamically probabilistic system density
distribution takes the form of the extended, generally nonlinear Schrödinger equation for the generalised
system wavefunction (or distribution function) of the corresponding complexity sublevel determining the
realisation probability distribution (section 7.1) [1,4], and this equation should also be solved with the
help of the same unreduced EP method leading to the new dynamic redundance and randomness, and so
on.  The  fundamental  deficiency  of  the  conventional  density  matrix  approach  reflects  the  basic

inconsistency of the unitary description of quantum computer dynamics often using this approach, since

both are based on the perturbational, single-valued projection of real system dynamics.

40

In accordance with the dynamic origin of randomness in the unreduced interaction development,

the causally probabilistic sum over realisations of eq. (24) is accompanied by the dynamically defined

probability concept and causally derived, a priori values of probabilities of the causally specified events of

realisation emergence. Indeed, it becomes clear from the obtained unreduced solution of eq. (24) that all
 is the
elementary, primary realisations have identical probabilities of emergence, equal to 1/N´

, where N´

total realisation number (generally equal to Nx  = N, the number of interacting units or system elements).

However, in the majority of practical cases these elementary realisations are distributed inhomogeneously

(because of the initial system inhomogeneity), and one often measures actually dense groups of elementary

realisations  containing  their  different  numbers  and  forming  the  really  observed,  compound  system
‘realisations’. Therefore, in the general case the probability of r-th realisation emergence, a r, is determined
by the number, Nr, of elementary realisations it contains:

a r(Nr) = 

Nr
N ´

 

   (Nr = 1,...,N´ ) ,      (cid:229)

r

a r  = 1 .                                    (26)

These realisation probabilities are determined eventually by the dynamical boundary/initial conditions of
the  interaction  process,  and  therefore  are  related  to  the  coefficients,  cr
i  ,  in  the  total  state-function
i |2
expression, eqs. (25a): |cr
 is proportional to a r, with the coefficient that is less important and determines
only various internal eigen-state contributions within the r-th realisation [1,10-13]. The distribution of

system realisation probabilities thus specified is related also, by the generalised ‘Born's probability rule’,

to the system ‘generalised wavefunction’, or distribution function, from the higher sublevel of complexity

that just describes ‘averaged’ system dynamics during its transition between realisations and satisfies the
generalised Schrödinger equation (section 7.1) [1,4] (it can be useful for a r calculation in the case of large
numbers of different realisation groups).

Note that the inhomogeneous distribution of realisation probabilities of eq. (26), as well as the

detailed  internal  structure,  or  texture,  of  each  particular  realisation,  eqs.  (25),  provide  the  way  for

dynamical  and  irreducibly  probabilistic  ‘self-organisation’  (structure  formation)  of  real  system

configuration in the universal science of complexity [1] (see also section 4.5.1). The dynamic redundance

phenomenon  realises  thus  the  unique  way  of  intrinsic  and  ‘harmonious’  mixture  of  regularity  and
randomness, order and diversity, function and probability within the same natural system structure, as
opposed  to  their  mechanistic  insertion  and  ‘superposition’  in  the  unitary,  dynamically  single-valued
imitations of complexity (including the conventional, dynamically single-valued ‘self-organisation’).

As  follows  from  eqs.  (24),  (26),  the  expectation,  averaged  value  of  the  observed  density  r  is

obtained as

r ex(Q,x ) = (cid:229)

n´

r =1

a rr r(Q,x ) ,                                                    (27)

where r enumerates the actually observed (generally compound) system realisations with causal emergence
probabilities a r determined by eqs. (26) and n´

 is the observed realisation number.

41

It is important to emphasize the extended meaning of probability emergence in eqs. (24)-(27)

related to its explicit dynamic origin and derivation. In particular, these relations, contrary to conventional

versions of probability/randomness, have a well-defined sense and can be rigorously specified not only for

long enough observation over the system, including many individual events (each of them now being

rigorously defined as individual realisation emergence), but also for any small number of events, each

individual  event,  or  even  expectation  of  future  events  in  their  total  absence  (a  priori  probability

determination from the first principles). This rigorous, causally complete definition of future expectation

value  and  probability  of  a  system  configuration  or  measured  quantity,  as  well  as  of  the  emerging

configuration (event) itself, irrespective of the observed number of events, is a qualitative advance of the

universal science of complexity with respect to the canonical unitarity (dynamically single-valued science),

with its well-known and inevitable confusion about the fundamental origin of randomness and related
definition of probability.*)

4.  Universal  dynamic  complexity,  its  properties,
and  manifestations  in  micro-system  dynamics

4.1.  Universal  concept  of  complexity  and  chaoticity
by  the  dynamic  redundance  paradigm

The above first-principles derivation of the dynamic probability concept and values is only one

manifestation of the essential extension with respect to the scholar theories of ‘complexity’, ‘chaos’, and

probability obtained in our approach due to the consistent dynamical, unreduced analysis of the driving

interaction  processes.  Since  the  conventional  theories  always  use  the  perturbative,  reductive,  ‘exact-

solution’ analysis of interaction, they inevitably get the same, dynamically single-valued, mechanistically

fixed projection of reality devoid of any intrinsic randomness, creation and development. In order to

compensate this evident deficiency with respect to their promise and observed real system behaviour, the

scholar studies on complexity, quite similar to other, ‘non-complex’ approaches of the conventional,

unitary science they pretend to transcend, insert the missing multiplicity, randomness, irreversibility, and

other readily observed properties artificially, by defining and postulating the ‘corresponding’, but actually
fatally simplified, purely mathematical ‘models’ of the missing degrees of freedom, supposed to reproduce
the lacking complexity features.

In the absence of truly dynamic, reality-based, universal and clearly specified origin of complex
behaviour, the formally imposed mathematical rules and symbols can provide only an over-simplified,
practically useless (or even dangerously misleading) imitation of natural system properties, confirming

*) One should emphasize, in particular, the essential difference between the dynamic probability and randomness in the system
behaviour  thus  obtained,  eqs.  (20)-(27),  and  mechanistic,  rigidly  fixed  version  of  ‘probabilistic’,  or  ‘indeterministic’,
properties  introduced  sometimes  in  the  conventional  quantum  computation  schemes  which  try  then  to  get  rid  of  that
uncertainty  and  move  towards  a  quasi-deterministic  calculation  result.  However,  even  the  smallest  dynamic  probability,
inevitably  intervening  in  a  developed  interaction  process,  will  necessarily  destroy  the  artificial  correlations  between
mechanistic  probabilities  and  revive  the  true,  unpredictable  randomness  of  the  result  (unless  the  quantum  system  is
dynamically transformed into a classical, less uncertain configuration, deprived, however, of all ‘advantages’ of ‘quantum’
computation, see also section 7.2).

42

once more the fundamental limitation of the canonical, unitary science already known from its ‘non-

complex’  system  description  and  speculatively  ‘rejected’  for  its  ‘reductive’  character  by  the  scholar

‘science  of  complexity’  which  is  actually  based  on  the  same  unitarity  (dynamic  single-valuedness)

paradigm.  Such  is  the  conventional  concept  of  chaos  based  on  ‘exponentially  diverging’  trajectories

(incorrectly extended perturbation theory result [1]) which are supposed to ‘amplify’ the unexplained,

externally introduced randomness, or ‘noise’; or that of ‘multiple attractors’ (‘multistability’), or ‘unstable

periodic orbits’, coexisting in an abstract space artificially composed from continuous system trajectories

(all the ‘attractors’ and ‘unstable trajectories’ of the canonical science of complexity are postulated, rather

than consistently derived, starting from computer simulation results or simple ‘mathematical intuition’); or

that of ‘self-organisation’, or ‘synergetics’, operating with ‘exact’, perturbative and dynamically single-

valued type of solutions; or that of (ordinary) ‘fractals’ obtained from a mathematical recursive process

containing no intrinsic randomness, interaction dynamics and real system matter at all; or other irreducibly

separated concepts of the unitary science of complexity showing evident inconsistency and inability to

provide even a clear definition for at least the main quantities, like complexity itself, (true) randomness and

chaos (further details can be found in refs. [1,5,6]). It is important to keep in mind the essential difference

between this mechanistic, basically incorrect simulations of complexity by the official unitarity and the

reality-based, consistently derived and intrinsically unified concept of complexity and chaos within the

dynamic  redundance  paradigm,  especially  when  such  ‘sensitive’  applications  as  quantum  interaction

dynamics are involved. In that way one can avoid the ‘strange’ combination of general ‘complexity talk’

and explicit unitarity domination that occurs unfortunately just in the conventional theory of quantum

information processing, despite the well-known, fundamental deficiencies of the conventional ‘science of

complexity’ (see also section 7). A clear manifestation of the imitative character of both conventional

‘complexity’ (or ‘chaos’) and its ‘applications’ in the conventional quantum computation appears in the

fact that all those theories and approaches try eventually to get rid of the true complexity and chaoticity (i.

e. avoid any deviation from unitarity) and reduce the system behaviour and description to the explicitly

predictable, effectively one-dimensional, ‘exact-solution’ type with the zero value of genuine dynamic

complexity (we leave apart yet more ambiguous, ‘post-modern’, purely verbal ‘interpretations’ of pseudo-

philosophical or computer-assisted empiricism densely entangled with the conventional theory of quantum
computation, see sections 5, 7, 9).

Our universally applicable definition of the unreduced dynamic complexity of a (real) system (of
interacting entities) is based on the main, consistently derived property of dynamic multivaluedness of the
emerging system realisations. Dynamic complexity, C, can be defined [1-4,9-13] by any growing function
 (section 3.3), or the related rate of their change, equal to zero for
of the number of system realisations N´

the (unrealistic) case of only one realisation, just exclusively considered in the conventional science,
 > 0, C(1) = 0, where the
including all its imitations of complexity. Mathematically, C = C(N´ ), dC/dN´

realisations and their actually observed number (usually at the current complexity level) are determined by

the unreduced system interaction dynamics, in agreement with the generalised, nonperturbative EP method

(sections  3,  4,  5)  [1,9,11,13].  Note  in  this  connection,  that  any  formal,  postulated  ‘counting’  of  the

observed structure elements, often used for ‘intuitive’ complexity definition in scholar theories, cannot

43

replace the number of incompatible system realisations obtained by consistent analysis of its unreduced

interaction, since it is the internal dynamic origin and connection between realisations that are important for

any nontrivial manifestation of complexity. One can also be easily mistaken by formally counting observed

structure elements, since the unreduced interaction development gives rise to the whole hierarchy of

dynamically multivalued objects (the unreduced dynamical fractal, section 4.4), and one should clearly

understand which structure elements should be taken into account at the current (considered) level of

complexity.  At  the  same  time,  each  realisation  has  its  own  internal  structure  that  forms,  however,  a

dynamically single whole, one irreducible complexity element (at the respective level of complexity).
Therefore quantities proportional to ln(N´ ) (generalised dynamical entropy), or to ¶ N´
/¶ t (generalised
/¶ x (generalised momentum) [1-4,9-13] constitute correct measures of complexity
energy-mass), or to ¶ N´
, is explicitly obtained together with realisations themselves
only if the (observable) realisation number, N´

and the relevant time and space structure, in the unreduced analysis of the driving interaction process.

As follows from the above dynamic randomness concept, the dynamic complexity thus defined

expresses simultaneously the property of (dynamic) chaoticity present, to some degree, within any real

dynamical system (as well as its non-zero dynamic complexity), as opposed to mechanistic division of the

world into ‘complex’ and ‘non-complex’, ‘chaotic’ and ‘regular’ systems, behaviours, and their parts,

within the conventional ‘science of complexity’. For example, the genuine dynamic randomness has been

revealed, within the dynamic redundance paradigm, in the behaviour of essentially quantum systems with

interaction [1,8-10] having direct relation to the quantum computer case and described by the above

formalism if the Schrödinger equation is used as the starting existence equation, eq. (1) (see also section

5.2.1). One obtains, in that way, simultaneous resolution of the intrinsic inconsistency of the canonical

‘quantum chaos’ theory opposed to (the true) randomness emergence in quantum dynamics (see section 6

for more details). The unreduced dynamical chaos becomes therefore another, synonymous expression of

the unreduced dynamic complexity of a system (interaction process) emphasising the property of (genuine)

dynamical randomness inherent in any real, complex entity. This does not prevent the intrinsic randomness

from  being  dynamically  ‘squeezed’,  confined  to  an  externally  quasi-regular  structure,  in  the  ‘self-

organisation’ regime of the unreduced complexity/chaos [1] (highly inhomogeneous realisation probability

distribution in eq. (27)), as opposed to the conventional, basically regular version of ‘self-organisation’
containing only one, averaged ‘realisation’ and excluding the complementary manifestation of the same
dynamic complexity, true randomness (see also section 4.5.1).

4.2.  Dynamic  entanglement,  causal  wavefunction,
and  the  internal  structure  of  real  interaction  processes

Several other important properties of the unreduced dynamic complexity are inseparably related to
the above dynamic redundance (causal randomness) phenomenon, thus confirming the nontrivial, unifying

and  universal  meaning  of  the  dynamically  derived  interaction  complexity.  Most  important  is  the

phenomenon  called  dynamic  entanglement  of  interacting  entities  [1-4,10-13]  and  consisting  in  the

physically real, dynamically driven entanglement (mixing, intertwining) of the interacting entities as they

44

are represented by all their elementary modes. We deal here with the causally specified, extended meaning

of the unreduced, ‘nonseparable’ character of the real interaction process and its result, where ‘everything

interacts with everything’ and therefore the emerging ‘fine mixture’ of the interaction components within

the system cannot be artificially separated, or represented as a ‘simple sum of system parts’ (the last

property  is  often  quoted,  but  never  specified,  in  the  canonical  ‘science  of  complexity’  and  ‘system

theory’). Dynamic entanglement is expressed mathematically by the sums of products of eigen-functions
for individual modes of interacting components, depending on one of x  and Q variables, in the expression
for  the  total  system  state-function,  eqs.  (23),  (25).  However,  contrary  to  the  canonical,  mechanistic

version of ‘quantum entanglement’, these ‘cross-products’ of the component eigenfunction also contain

irreducible and dynamically meaningful, resonant factors just reflecting the interaction-driven, essentially

nonlinear (section 4.3) origin of the real entanglement phenomenon unifying it with the accompanying

properties  of  causal  randomness,  essential  nonlinearity,  dynamic  instability,  fractality,  and  reduction

(catastrophic dynamical collapse, or squeezing) of the system configuration towards that of each current

realisation (see sections 4.2-4.4 for further details). The ‘natural’, dynamic origin of this entanglement, as

well as its nonperturbative, nonlinear character can be seen explicitly from eqs. (23), (25) based on the

eigen-solutions of the main dynamic equation, in its effective form, eq. (20). The direct relation with the

dynamic redundance phenomenon becomes thus also evident.

Taking  into  account  the  simple  physical  origin  of  dynamic  multivaluedness  mentioned  above

(section 3.3), we can describe the essence of any real, unreduced interaction process as dynamically

redundant entanglement (of the interacting components) meaning that as interacting entities and their modes
are driven to intertwine with one another, one inevitably obtains the redundant number (Nx  = N = N´ ) of

possible versions (detailed configurations, or realisations) of this entanglement, which leads to unceasing

dynamical change of entanglement realisations within the system, constituting the essence (and the sense)

of system existence, the unreduced internal ‘life’ of its ‘organism’ (including all levels of the emerging

dynamical fractal, see section 4.4). The realisation change can only happen through the reverse process of

transient disentanglement of the last realisation structure followed by re-entanglement into the next, equally
probable realisation ‘selected’ by the system at random among N´

 possible versions of entanglement.

During the realisation change process, constituting the true content of each real interaction, the
system needs thus to pass each time though a particular state, where the interaction components become
transiently disentangled and thus recover their quasi-free state existing, hypothetically, in the degenerated
‘system’ state with ‘separated’ components, i. e. in the absence of interaction between them. This special
transient state of the system, called its ‘main’, or intermediate, realisation [1,4,11-13], is given by the
same  unreduced  version  of  the  effective  existence  equation,  eq.  (20),  in  addition  to  other,  ‘regular’
 = Nx  = N, and each of them forms a
realisations that we have been counting before (their number is N´

‘genuine’, characteristic system configuration with ‘strong’, irreducible interaction, where the system
components are tightly intertwined, or ‘entangled’). Indeed, it is easily seen from eqs. (20)-(21) that the
highest power of the characteristic equation for h , determining the maximal number of solutions, Nmax, is
given by Nmax = Nx (Neff + 1) = Nqx  + Nx , where Neff = Nx Nq and Nqx  = Nx Neff = (Nx )2Nq = N´ Nx Nq
is the redundant solution number considered above (see section 3.3), originating from the EP dependence

45

on h  (that contributes the value of Neff = Nx Nq to the maximal power of h  in the characteristic equation),
and giving rise to emergence of N´
 = Nx  ‘regular’ realisations (each of them contains the locally complete
number, Neff = Nx Nq, of elementary eigen-solutions). However, the really complete number, Nmax, of
elementary solutions (and maximal h  power) includes, in addition to those Nqx  ‘regularly redundant’,
  regular  realisations,  a  supplementary  set  of  Nx   solutions
mutually  equivalent  solutions  giving  N´
appearing due to the presence of h  also in the right-hand side of eq. (20), at its ‘normal’ place occurring in
any  conventional  form  of  the  existence  equation.  As  it  is  especially  clearly  seen  in  the  graphical

representation of the characteristic equation for eq. (20) (we do not show it here for brevity, see [1,9,10]),

these additional solutions are characterised by small values of the essential EP part described by the
nonlocal operator V^ (x ;h )  in  eqs.  (21),  so  that  for  them  Veff(x ;h ) @
 V 00(x )  and  the  effective  system
dynamics is described rather exactly by the first-order mean-field approximation corresponding to the

practically free, though maybe ‘renormalised’, motion of non-interacting system components. Therefore

these particular solutions form a special, intermediate, system realisation that just corresponds to chaotic
system jumps between the regular realisations implementing the essential, ‘strong’ part of the interaction

process and representing its full-scale, properly entangled, ‘nonseparable’ results. This specific, transient

and quasi-free character of the intermediate realisation dynamics is confirmed by the exceptionally low
number of elementary solutions it contains, Nx  instead of Nx Nq for the regular realisations, which reflects
the effectively absent interaction-entanglement. At the same time the system in the intermediate realisation

moves in the mean field obtained by interaction averaging over all the (localised) component states, which

points to the delocalised configuration of the system in this transitional realisation. It is not difficult to see

also that it corresponds approximately to the single, averaged realisation exclusively taken into account in

the conventional, dynamically single-valued, perturbative interaction analysis (that's why we also refer to

the intermediate realisation as the ‘main’ system realisation), which explains both limited correlations of

the averaged unitary projection with reality and its irreducible faults formally expressed by perturbative

expansion divergence and physically reflecting the neglected, but inevitably occurring emergence of many

regular, internally entangled realisations. The unreduced interaction picture of the universal science of

complexity considerably extends this effectively one-dimensional projection of the canonical theory by

revealing the true role of its unique solution as that of only transitional, chaotically fluctuating system state
during its jumps between the ‘normal’, ‘strong’ results of interaction development represented by regular
realisations  that  have  localised  configuration  and  contain  ‘seriously’,  inseparably  entangled  system
components.

With this character of system motion in the main realisation, it is not difficult to understand that it
provides the causal, totally realistic extension of the conventional wavefunction notion which can be
generalised to any interaction process and thus any level of (complex) world dynamics. The fundamental
quantum-mechanical wavefunction itself is obtained as the intermediate realisation at the lowest level of
interactions in the world, that of the two coupled primordial protofields (represented by two physically

real, electromagnetic and gravitational, media), which gives rise to the ‘embedding’ space and time,

elementary particles/fields, and all their ‘intrinsic’ properties, such as ‘quantum’ duality, relativistic motion

dynamics, inertial/gravitational mass-energy, electric charge, spin, and the four unified ‘fundamental
46

interaction forces’ (all these features emerge dynamically, as intrinsically unified, physically real results of

unreduced  interaction  development)  [1-4,11-13].  In  this  work  we  apply  the  same  analysis  to  higher

sublevels of complexity corresponding to interaction between elementary particles/fields thus formed and

their emerging simplest agglomerates. At these sublevels of complexity we obtain the true quantum chaos

(described basically by the same causally probabilistic realisation change process, eqs. (24)-(27)) [1,8,9],

causally  complete  picture  of  quantum  measurement/reduction  for  slightly  dissipative  (open)  systems

[1,10],  and  the  dynamic  emergence  of  classical  (essentially  localised)  systems  [1-4,12,13].  The

generalised wavefunction always corresponds to causally random system jumps between its configurations

in regular realisations, and provides, for the mentioned sublevels of ‘quantum’ dynamics, the causally

complete  extension  and  modification  of  the  canonical  ‘density  matrix’  postulated,  together  with  its

formalism, as a simplified, purely mathematical entity and having no realistic interpretation (similar to the

conventional wavefunction at the lowest complexity level).

We can see now that the consistently obtained wavefunction, or distribution function, at those

higher sublevels of quantum dynamics is given not by the system density itself in the regular realisations,
{r r(Q,x )}, but rather by the probability distribution of those (permanently changing) realisations. The
latter  is  directly  determined  by  the  generalised  wavefunction,  according  to  the  generalised  Born's

probability rule, while the wavefunction satisfies the universal, generally nonlinear Schrödinger equation

(section  7.1)  [1,4].  The  detailed  form  of  this  equation  depends  on  the  particular  system  considered

(although a small number of standard forms can be sufficient for any real system description), and we

shall not further develop here this aspect of the universal formalism of the unreduced theory of complexity

[1,4]. It becomes quite evident, however, that the standard density matrix formalism gives only a fatally

simplified, single-valued and incorrect imitation of the real quantum system dynamics and therefore cannot

provide any reliable, or even qualitatively correct, result in description of any quantum device (or a natural

‘micro-machine’), which should be compared to its extensive use in the canonical theory of quantum

computation (see references from section 2) and other modern applications of the scholar quantum theory

to  various  versions  of  quantum  many-body  problem.  It  is  important  to  emphasize  that  the  causally

extended wavefunction of the universal science of complexity has not only its ‘central’, probabilistic

interpretation  (which  is  now  dynamically  derived  by  the  unreduced  interaction  analysis),  but  also  a
tangible, physically real (causal) meaning of the unified, quasi-free system state during its chaotic jumps
between realisations. All these unique properties of the generalised wavefunction (distribution function),
explicitly  derived  and  causally  understood  within  the  dynamic  multivaluedness  paradigm,  clearly
demonstrate the essential difference of the universal concept of complexity from its various imitations in
the canonical science, where such quantity cannot even appear (i. e. be realistically interpreted or even
related  to  the  underlying  complex  interaction  dynamics,  like  it  happens  in  the  canonical  quantum
mechanics, where it is simply postulated empirically).

It is important to emphasize, in connection to the above concepts of dynamic entanglement and

generalised causal wavefunction, that the notion of ‘quantum entanglement’, extensively used in the

conventional,  unitary  theory  of  quantum  computation  as  one  of  its  basic  ideas,  is  different  from  the

physically real entanglement of interacting components not only by its purely abstract, mechanistically

47

fixed  and  therefore  ‘mysterious’  origin  (including  that  of  the  canonical  ‘wavefunction’  or  ‘density

matrix’), but also by its limitation to a much more narrow class of phenomena, where some interaction

may at best be only implied behind the postulated character of its results. As noted above, our approach

leads to the causally complete, realistic extension of ‘quantum entanglement’, where one can clearly see the

mechanism and result of the interaction-driven entanglement between the system components and related

chaotic change of its multiple realisations (see also section 5.3).

4.3.  Omnipresent  dynamic  instability,  essential  nonlinearity,
generalised  dynamical  collapse,  physical  space,  time,  and  quantization

We have shown that the reality-based approach of the universal science of complexity and its

applications at lower complexity levels, designated as quantum field mechanics, provide a physically

transparent picture of the origin of dynamically redundant multivaluedness of any unreduced interaction

process, where ‘everything interacts with everything’. The detailed mechanism of gradual emergence of

unstable, permanently changing system realisations can also be traced in the unreduced problem solutions,

eqs. (20)-(27). Namely, the obtained ‘effective’, essentially nonlinear formulation of the problem, eqs.

(20)-(21), shows that any real, even externally ‘linear’ and ‘simple’ interaction process (cf. eqs. (1)-(5)) is

characterised by the irreducible, omnipresent dynamic instability which naturally emerges with interaction

process  development  in  the  form  of  dynamical  feedback  loops  of  interaction  described  by  the  self-
consistent  EP  dependence  on  the  eigen-solutions  to  be  found  (h , y n(x )),  eqs.  (21).  Such  (positive)
feedback existence leads to system instability with respect to its self-amplified collapse (reduction, or

squeezing) towards a ‘spontaneously’ (dynamically) emerging and randomly chosen configuration, or

‘realisation’, when any small fluctuation of a ‘free’, delocalised system state in the direction of one of

(future) realisations leads, in agreement with eqs. (25), to self-consistent formation of the EP ‘seed’ that

tends to increase the fluctuation it results from, which leads to further growth of EP, and so on, until the

fully developed EP well and the corresponding realisation it confines are formed in this self-amplifying,

avalanche-like process, or ‘collapse’ of the system (it is limited eventually by ‘reaction’ forces always

contained  within  a  physically  real  interaction  between  system  components).  The  process  looks  like
effective ‘self-interaction’ in a quasi-homogeneous system which leads to ‘spontaneous’ violation of
homogeneity and ‘catastrophic’, essentially nonlinear structure formation.*)

In that way one obtains the well specified, dynamically based, and universal origin and definition
of nonlinearity due to the interaction feedback loops formation revealed due to the ‘effective’ formulation
of the unreduced problem, eqs. (20)-(25) and remaining hidden within its ordinary, starting formulation

*) This ‘dynamical self-interaction’, consistently derived from the ordinary, simple interaction between several entities should
be distinguished from its imitation in the conventional theories by the direct, mathematically postulated ‘self-interaction’ of a
single entity (e. g. a field) and related ill-defined ‘nonlinearity’, whose dynamical origin, mechanism, and detailed structure
remain unknown, and together with them the unreduced results of interaction development, such as dynamic redundance,
entanglement,  and  fractality  (see  below).  The  same  refers  to  ‘feedback’  connections  between  the  interacting  entities  or
processes which are artificially, explicitly inserted into postulated ‘models’ of the conventional ‘science of complexity’ in
their ‘ready-made’, non-dynamical, and therefore simplified, form that does not reveal the main property of creativity of the
natural interaction processes (see also below).

48

(see e. g. eqs. (1)-(5)). We call this universal mechanism, and process, of dynamic instability of any

interaction process the essential, or dynamic, nonlinearity, in order to distinguish it from the ill-defined,

mechanistic ‘nonlinearity’ of the conventional, unitary science (and its version of ’complexity’) which is

usually inserted into perturbative, dynamically single-valued analysis artificially, through a particular,

more ‘uneven’ functional dependence of an equation term, etc. Any such ordinary ‘nonlinearity’ looks

quite linear in our approach, since it gives rise to the dynamically single-valued, perturbative reduction of

the real system behaviour, even though it can modify the ‘zero-order approximation’ and provide an

externally  ‘curved’  and  mechanically  ‘intricate’  (but  always  artificially  inserted)  imitation  of  the

dynamically emerging, internally multivalued structure of real entities (a characteristic example is provided

by the canonical solitons, being exact, single-valued solutions of the formally ‘nonlinear’ equations).

The unambiguously defined, essential nonlinearity is a property of the unreduced development of

any interaction process that leads inevitably (through dynamic instability) to the fundamental dynamic

multivaluedness of interaction results and can be considered therefore as the universal mechanism of

dynamic redundance and causal randomness. It is easy to see from the above physical picture of each

realisation formation by the self-amplifying, avalanche-like development of the omnipresent interaction

instability that the ‘essential’ nonlinearity, due to its purely dynamic origin, is indeed qualitatively ‘more

nonlinear’ and ‘obtrusive’ (unavoidable), than any its unitary imitation. It becomes clear also why  and

how  the  essential  nonlinearity  and  related  dynamic  instability,  causal  randomness  and  autonomous

structure  formation  are  invariably  and  totally  ‘killed’  by  perturbative  interaction  reduction  in  the

conventional theory: the latter, including its mechanistic imitation of nonlinearity, just cuts the essential

dynamical links within the interaction development (including reduction of EP dependence on the eigen-

solutions) and tends to inconsistently ‘jump’ immediately to its observed results postulated with the help of

mechanistic  ‘models’,  after  which  nothing  ‘interesting’  can  happen  to  the  system  with  effectively

destroyed interaction. Unfortunately, but not surprisingly, it is just such false, mechanistic ‘nonlinearity’

(and similar one-dimensional ‘complexity’) that is used invariably in the conventional, unitary theory of

quantum computation (see e. g. [43,58,60,62,64,81]), with the fatal consequences for its relation to real

physical systems (see also sections 5-7).

This dynamically ‘orchestrated’ formation of structure of each of the system realisations is directly
reflected in the obtained state-function and EP expressions for individual realisations, eqs. (25): one can
see that the expressions for both state-function and EP for a given realisation contain essentially the same
singular terms combining resonant denominators with ‘cutting’ integrals in the numerators which express
mathematically the self-consistent, and physically real, system ‘collapse’, i. e. its catastrophic dynamical
squeeze,  towards  this  particular  realisation  [1,10-13].  This  transient  ‘reduction’  of  the  system
configuration  to  that  of  its  currently  taken  realisation  can  be  considered  as  a  result  of  the  dynamic
entanglement phenomenon (section 4.2): the more the system components entangle with each other, the
more is their mutual attraction, and vice versa, which gives the dynamic instability of any real interaction

process and resulting system collapse towards its current realisation. The whole process is replayed in the

reverse direction during the following phase of dynamic disentanglement, when the last system realisation

is catastrophically destroyed by attraction towards other possible configurations and centres of reduction,

49

passing first by the intermediate realisation (generalised wavefunction), after which the next realisation of

dynamic entanglement emerges (it is always described by the same expressions of eqs. (21), (23), (25) but

with the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions corresponding to the new, currently formed realisation). The

observed, real system structure always consists thus of many internal ‘sub-structures’ corresponding to

individual realisations that permanently replace one another in a dynamically random order, even when this

change  cannot  be  explicitly  seen  within  the  observed  system  configuration.  Such  is  the  essential,

qualitative  extension  of  the  conventional  ‘self-organisation’  (structure  formation)  description  in  the

universal science of complexity (see also section 4.5.1).

Since we did not explicitly introduce spatial and temporal inhomogeneities created by the emerging

realisations, it becomes clear also that the realisation formation and change process provides the detailed,

purely dynamic mechanism of emergence, and the causal meaning itself, of physically real space and time

of the corresponding level of complexity: space structure is dynamically ‘woven’ from the dynamically

entangled  interaction  participants,  especially  within  the  emerging  inhomogeneities  of  regular  system

realisations (connected by the ‘shuttle’ of intermediate realisation, or generalised wavefunction), whereas

the unceasing, dynamically random, and qualitatively ‘strong’ realisation change creates the permanently

advancing, intrinsically irreversible sequence of well-defined events constituting the perceived ‘flow of

time’ that measures itself by the essentially nonlinear ‘pendulum’ of changing system realisations. The

real, complex-dynamical time is thus naturally, dynamically irreversible by its very origin inseparably

related to the causal randomness emergence, whereas space is dynamically discrete, or ‘quantized’ (see

also below in this section). It becomes evident also that, in contrast to the conventional fundamental

physics  (and  especially  its  ‘relativity’  version),  the  real  space  thus  obtained  is  a  physically  tangible,

‘material’ entity just determining the perceived ‘texture’ of reality, while time, being equally real, is not a

material entity, since it characterises a real action (realisation change) within an object, rather than the

object  matter  itself.  It  is  clear  then  that  a  direct  mixture  between  space  and  time  within  a  single,

mechanistically fixed (though conveniently ‘deformed’) ‘space-time manifold’, constituting one of the

corner-stones of the conventional relativity and cosmology, has no physical sense and can be considered

only as a technical tool of questionable validity and universality [1-4,12,13].

In correspondence with the hierarchical structure of complex interaction processes, the physically
real space and time are also organised in a hierarchical sequence of levels, where the most fundamental,
‘embedding’ space and time (causal extension of the respective ‘Newtonian’ concepts) result from the
same lowest level of interactions, the protofield interaction process, that gives rise to elementary particles,
fields, and all their intrinsic properties [1-4,11-13]. The natural units of the dynamically emerging space,
determining its quantization and dynamic origin, are given by configurations of emerging realisations and
their closely spaced, ‘self-organised’ groups described, respectively, by the eigenvalue spacing within
individual realisations (the intrinsic system ‘size’) and probability and eigenvalue distribution for different
realisation groups (characteristic size of the average dynamic tendency, such as the de Broglie wavelength

[1,2,12,13]). The natural unit of time is determined, of course, by the rate (‘frequency’, characterising

‘intensity’)  of  realisation  change  process,  while  its  relation  to  the  units  of  space  gives  the  essential,

observed system ‘dynamics’, in the form of generalised ‘dispersion relations’. The practically useful

50

measures  of  dynamical  space  and  time  can  be  quantitatively  specified  with  the  help  of  the  extended

mechanical action representing a natural universal (integral) measure of complexity and information

[1,3,12,13], but we shall not develop these details here (see section 7.1).

The essential nonlinearity and dynamic instability within any real system with interaction result in a

natural system auto-squeeze (or reduction, or collapse) towards the realisation it actually takes which

cannot be separated from the dynamic entanglement of the interacting system components. The gradually

entangling system components, forming eventually the dynamically fractal internal structure of each

emerging realisation (section 4.4), are the more attracted to each other, the more they are inter-mixed, and

the reverse, which evidently leads to the dynamic instability considered above and the resulting realisation

structure formation. We deal here with the holistic process of unreduced interaction development leading to

quasi-periodic system ‘fall’ into one of its realisation, accompanied by generalised, essentially nonlinear

configurational squeezing and component entanglement and followed by the reverse disentanglement and

extension towards a quasi-free state of the generalised wavefunction until it ‘collapses’ again into the next

realisation, and so on. An important consequence of this holistic dynamics, and a universal property of

unreduced complexity, is the fundamental dynamical discreteness, or (generalised) quantization, of the

realisation  formation  and  change  process.  It  results,  basically,  from  the  very  unreduced  character  of

driving interaction, where ‘everything interacts with everything’ and therefore arbitrary, ‘infinitesimal’

changes cannot be fixed, even transiently (like realisations), since they will immediately produce other

displacements of the system components, and so on, until the avalanche-like development of a randomly

initiated  tendency  arrives  at  the  completely  formed  system  realisation  (which  is  also  ‘stable’  only

transiently, with respect to near-by, yet less stable configurations).

As can be seen from the unreduced problem solution, eqs. (20)-(25), the resulting finite difference

between the emerging structural elements (realisations) is determined by the driving interaction itself and

therefore should be clearly distinguished from the simplified, mechanistically imposed and arbitrarily

structured ‘discreteness’ often used in the conventional, dynamically single-valued theory and always

present in its dominating, computer-assisted version. Such artificially inserted discreteness can rather be

considered as an additional periodic influence arbitrarily introduced into the studied system and leading to

the corresponding, more or less chaotic, system modification [1,9].

Another difference of the natural dynamical discreteness (quantization) from the conventional,
‘mathematical’ discretization is that the former, contrary to the latter, contains within it unbroken dynamic
and  structural  continuity:  the  dynamic  discreteness  is  rather  a  manifestation  of  high,  ‘essential’
inhomogeneity of the real interaction process closely related to the essential nonlinearity and expressing its
causally specified nonunitarity. The internal continuity of the unreduced complex dynamics is directly
expressed by the generalised system wavefunction (section 4.2) which just ‘joins together’ the discretised
system  realisations  by  implementing  system  transitions  between  them.  It  is  not  surprising  that  the
dynamical discreteness of the unreduced complex dynamics provides the causally complete explanation for

the micro-world quantization [1,3], including the physical origin and universality of Planck's constant and

discrete character of all fundamental structures and properties which are only axiomatically fixed and

remain  ‘mysterious’  within  the  conventional  quantum  mechanics  and  related  theories.  Since  the

51

dynamically emerging structure of physically real, tangible space and non-material, but equally real time is

determined, as mentioned above, by realisation parameters, it becomes clear that all the above conclusions

about the dynamically discrete, but internally continuous structure of the underlying interaction process

refer also to the causal space and time of the universal science of complexity (section 7.1) [1-4,11-13].

The  same  group  of  inter-connected,  dynamically  emerging  properties,  including  dynamic

entanglement, generalised quantization and essential nonlinearity, constitutes the direct expression of the

crucial property of creativity of unreduced (complex) interaction dynamics. The multivalued dynamic

entanglement reveals the internal ‘content’, or ‘fabric’, of any real structure, while the explicitly obtained

discreteness of the emerging objects is a necessary attribute of any real creation, including the mentioned

internal continuity and unceasing (self-developing) character (see also the next section).

4.4.  Probabilistic  dynamic  fractality,  interactive  adaptability,
and  universal  complexity  development

One can express the main result of our analysis by saying that the basic origin of the well-known

(and now rigorously substantiated) divergence of typical perturbation theory expansion in the conventional

interaction analysis is the existence of the omnipresent ‘singularity’ of system ‘branching’ into multiple

realisations,  persisting  however  at  any  ‘point’  (moment)  of  system  evolution.  The  ‘convergence’  of

perturbative expansions can be as if reconstituted in our theory, but only at the expense of explicitly

obtained  dynamic  multivaluedness  that  can  be  considered,  in  this  sense,  as  the  universal  result  of

consistent ‘summation’ of perturbative expansions introducing, however, the qualitative novelty, dynamic

redundance, in the whole system mode d'existence and thus providing any real system evolution with the

nonunitary, uneven, jump-like, essentially nonlinear and dynamically chaotic character. Once this major

result of unreduced interaction development is explicitly established, one can safely use various suitable

approximations for secondary, minor details of the process that determine fine structural features becoming

eventually smaller than the practical measurement resolution (at the current level of dynamics). This
conclusion concerns, first of all, the auxiliary system solutions, {y 0
ni} (eqs. (17)), entering the EP
and state-function expressions, eqs. (21)-(23), (25). Taking into account the ‘averaged’ influence of these
finer details on the principal emerging structure of redundant realisations, one can try to use, for example,
one of the simplest mean-field approximations for the truncated system of equations, eqs. (17), in which
case it splits into separate equations:

ni(x ),h 0

[h0(x ) + Vn(x )]y n(x ) = h ny n(x ) ,                                                 (28)

where the mean-field potential, Vn(x ), changes approximately between two its limiting values,

and

Vn(x ) = Vnn(x )                                                               (29a)

Vnn´(x ) .                                                         (29b)

Vn(x ) = (cid:229)

n´

52

Various other approximations to the mean-field potential can be suitable for different particular systems.

The obtained perturbative solutions of the auxiliary system of equations are qualitatively close to the
simplest separable dynamics for the Hamiltonian H0(x ) = h0(x ) + V00(x ) which can be found from the
effective existence equation, eq. (20), by neglecting the most important, ‘complexity-bringing’ part of the

unreduced EP, eqs. (21). However, now its essential influence at the current complexity level is already

taken into account in the dynamically redundant structure of the general solution, eqs. (23)-(25), and one

can use the approximations of eqs. (28), (29) for choosing a quantitatively correct form of the dynamically

multivalued solution, without the risk to make a big, qualitative mistake (like that of the unitary reduction).

This does not mean that one cannot proceed in obtaining the detailed, exact expressions for the fine

structure formation of the unreduced interaction process by applying the same, unreduced EP method to

finding the ‘effective’ auxiliary solution expression through yet more truncated system of equations, and

so on, until one is left with only one, integrable equation. At each level of this hierarchical solution one

obtains the dynamical splitting into redundant, and therefore chaotically changing realisations, but the

relative magnitude of splitting diminishes towards finer structural scales. The obtained hierarchical system

of randomly changing realisations of ever finer scale forms what we call the dynamical  fractal of the

problem.  It  provides  an  essential  extension  of  the  canonical  fractals  [122-126],  including  ‘quantum

fractals’  [127,128],  which  are  not  obtained  as  a  result  of  a  real  interaction  development  and

correspondingly  do  not  possess  the  key  properties  of  dynamic  multivaluedness  and  related  causal

randomness and dynamic entanglement (at any level of fractal branching). The canonical fractals represent

therefore a dynamically single-valued, unitary imitation of the natural, dynamically multivalued fractality

that actually incorporates any kind of real structure and not only some particular, ‘fractal-looking’ and

‘scale-invariant’ structures.

The irreducibly probabilistic character of real fractals, exactly reproduced in our approach, means

that  they  behave  as  ‘living  creatures’  performing  permanent  interaction-driven  chaotic  (but  not

‘stochastically’ random) search of the best way of further interaction development with the help of their

unceasingly moving, dynamically changing and splitting ‘branches’. Such kind of behaviour, directly

obtained in our approach, provides the unique, totally consistent explanation for various properties of

natural structure formation processes, such as dynamic adaptability, meaning that the probability density of
structure development is determined by the local intensity of interaction processes, due to the ‘generalised
Born's probability rule’ [1,10-13].

In  addition,  the  unreduced  dynamical  fractal  is  explicitly  ‘made  of’  a  tangible  spatial  ‘flesh’
probabilistically changing in real time and emerging together with it as a result of dynamic entanglement
between interaction components, occurring at each level of branching, quite similar to the first level
considered  above  (section  4.2)  and  contrary  to  the  canonical  fractals  represented  just  by  abstract
mathematical ‘functions’ without any ‘material quality’, or ‘texture’. Note that finer levels of fractal
dynamic entanglement contribute, in a self-consistent manner, to the development of its lower, coarse-

grained levels and the reverse, which is reflected in the basic nonseparability of the problem equations

acquiring now the direct physical meaning that involves also system's essential nonlinearity, dynamic

instability and reduction (collapse) to the current realisation (section 4.3). One obtains thus the unified,

53

dynamically fractal and probabilistic, adaptable and self-developing hierarchy of structure formation by

dynamic entanglement and realisation emergence.

We shall not reproduce here the results of EP method application (cf. sections 3.2, 3.3) to the

truncated system of equations, eqs. (17), because here we are interested mainly in the general character of

the problem solution thus obtained. It can be summarised by the same causally probabilistic sum over

explicitly obtained system realisations which was derived above for the first level of dynamical splitting,

eq. (24), but should in general include summation over all levels of dynamic fractality:

Nƒ

N´

j

r (Q,x ) = (cid:229)

 (cid:229)

j = 1

r =1

r jr(Q,x ) ,                                                  (30)

 ”

where the external summation (index j) is performed over levels of fractal hierarchy until the finite or some
desired level number Nƒ is attained, and r jr(Q,x ) is the measured (generalised) density of the system in its
1r(Q,x ) and
r-th realisation at the j-th level of the hierarchy containing N´
 N´ 1 for the case of one-level splitting, eq. (24)). The ‘levels’ of the fractal are not rigidly fixed or
N´
clearly separated, either by their origin or method of derivation; they may correspond to consecutive orders
of truncation of the ‘auxiliary’ system of equation. Realisation densities r jr(Q,x ) are accompanied by the
respective  probabilities,  a
jr,  obtained  similar  to  those  for  the  first  level  of  fractality  (see  eqs.  (26)).
Correspondingly, the expression for the expectation value of r (Q,x ), eq. (27), is directly generalised to
the whole fractal structure:

j realisations (so that r r(Q,x ) ”

 r

Nƒ

N´

j

r ex(Q,x ) = (cid:229)

 (cid:229)

j = 1

r =1

a jrr jr(Q,x )  .                                               (31)

Finally, the integral measure of the total dynamic complexity is determined, according to rules established

above (section 4.1), by the total realisation number, N

tot
:

j

 = (cid:229)

tot

N

N´

j ,                                                             (32)

where  N´

j is the measurable realisation number at the j-th level of fractality. It should be taken into
account, however, that usually one deals with observable realisations from a limited number of levels, and
summation in eq. (32) should involve only relevant levels of fractality.

It is important to remember also that the dynamic fractal under study is obtained from a particular
level of interactions from the whole hierarchy of complex dynamics of the world and therefore represents,
with  all  the  intricacy  of  its  own  hierarchy  of  levels,  only  a  small  part  of  that  universal  hierarchy  of
complexity. At the same time the dynamical fractal emerging in the development of an interaction process
is indispensable for further transformation of these results into structures from other complexity levels. It

is  not  difficult  to  see  that  finer  branches  of  the  dynamical  fractal  play  the  role  of  the  higher-level

‘interaction’ between more ‘tangible’, ‘coarse-grained’ products of interaction of the current complexity

level made up by relatively ‘thick’, lower-level branches of the dynamical fractal. This self-developing

54

¯
´
´
hierarchy of system dynamics forms the transparent, realistic basis of the complexity development (or

transformation) process making the true sense of any system evolution and providing the unified, causally

complete extension of the first and second ‘laws of thermodynamics’ (conservation of energy and growth

of entropy) now universally applicable to any system, in the form of universal law of conservation and

transformation, or symmetry, of complexity [1] (see section 7.1 for the details). The underlying property

of autonomous system development, or creativity, is another expression of the interactive probabilistic

adaptability described above.

Of course, the difference between the two parts of the dynamical fractal is not quite distinct, and

one of the consequences is the equivalence between potential energy and mass, simply postulated in the

canonical  relativity,  but  now  causally  explained  in  the  quantum  field  mechanics  and  applicable  to

dynamical processes at any level of complexity [1,11-13]. The finely splitted, chaotically moving fractal

web of a given interaction process creates also its links to lower complexity levels and ensures ‘interaction’

between  the  current  system  realisation  and  its  other,  potential  realisations,  maintaining  thus  the

permanency of realisation change process. In particular, the finer parts of the unreduced fractal, due to

their inbred chaoticity, play the role of intrinsic system ‘noise’, which is a necessary component of its

irreducible instability/change and should only be imposed from the outside in the conventional imitations

of complexity, thus completely neglecting the omnipresent origin of the internal, multi-scale chaoticity

provided by dynamic multivaluedness of the externally totally regular (closed) interaction process.

One should not be deceived, therefore, by the apparent simplicity of the expression of eq. (30) for

the general problem solution, since we have seen above how many intricate details are contained only

within  a  single  level  of  fractality  (sections  3.3-4.3).  However,  all  those  details  can  be  obtained,  in

principle, and completely understood by the unreduced analysis of interaction process described above,

and the resulting dynamically probabilistic fractal just demonstrates explicitly the full complexity of the

complete many-body problem solution. It is important to emphasize, in particular, that although eqs. (30),

(31)  contain  summation  over  multiple  scales  and  realisations,  which  implies  a  number  of  practical

approximations, they basically describe the real system structure, contrary to perturbative expansions of

the unitary theory that makes a qualitative mistake from the beginning, so that any larger, ‘more exact’

summation does not approach one to reality. Dynamically probabilistic summation over multiple levels of
fractal  hierarchy  in  eqs.  (30),  (31)  corresponds  to  real  existence  of  those  levels  (hierarchical  system
structure), and taking into account each subsequent level considerably increases the result accuracy.*) We
deal here with the genuine, unreduced complexity of natural interaction processes, giving the observed
diversity and intricacy of the world in their truly ‘exact’, unreduced version which also shows what one
can ever obtain, or expect, ‘in general’ within the unreduced solution of any problem.

The properly developed general solution of the many-body problem, eqs. (20)-(27), (30)-(31),
contains thus the multilevel hierarchy of dynamically emerging and permanently, chaotically moving
(changing) system realisations unified in the single complex dynamics by the corresponding hierarchy of

*) Thus, the extended mean-field, integrable approximation of the unreduced EP formalism (section 3.2) can correspond to
local two-body interactions which are split then into a hierarchy of three-body, four-body, and further many-body interactions
giving eventually the complete problem solution in the form of eqs. (30), (31).

55

generalised wavefunctions (or distribution functions). By its dynamically redundant, entangled, multilevel

(fractal), and emerging (self-developing) character, this causally complete problem solution provides, in

particular, the consistent meaning of ‘nonintegrability’ and ‘nonseparability’ notions remaining uncertain

within any canonical constructions because of their fundamental dynamic single-valuedness. We see that it

is still possible to obtain the causally complete, adequate description of any system behaviour, but only at

the expense of qualitatively new properties listed above and transforming dramatically the very notion of

system  existence,  from  its  fixed  one-dimensional  projection  in  the  conventional  science  to  the  self-

developing, ‘living’ dynamical fractal in the universal science of complexity. One can then neglect those

parts of the obtained unreduced complexity which are of less interest for a particular study, but it is

important that such omission, its meaning and consequences, can now be totally understood and justified,

as opposed to the effectively blind, ‘trial-and-error’ approach of the unitary science, often presented under

the deceitful cover of ‘theory verified by experiment’ and inevitably becoming inefficient for systems with

explicitly complex behaviour. The most meaningful, qualitatively important system properties, dynamic

redundance and entanglement, will always be present, directly or indirectly, in the causally complete

understanding of system behaviour, contrary to their unavoidable lack in the unitary science projection.

4.5.  Generic  types  of  system  behaviour  as  particular  cases
of  the  dynamically  multivalued  interaction  process

4.5.1.  Dynamically  multivalued  self-organisation  and  control  of  chaos

The unlimited universality of the dynamic multivaluedness concept is its intrinsic advantage which

manifests itself not only in the unrestricted applicability of the approach and its results to any kind of

system, but also in the actual reproduction of the same dynamical splitting and entanglement mechanism at

all explicitly emerging levels of the dynamical fractal for a given system and universal hierarchy of

complexity in general. Therefore, despite the high intricacy of the full problem solution, containing all

levels of the dynamical fractal (section 4.4), one can obtain the main, most important and universally

appearing properties already from the ‘principal’ part of the general solution, eqs. (20)-(27), describing the

first level of dynamic fractality.

One of such universal properties of irreducibly complex, dynamically multivalued behaviour is
related to existence of its two limiting, and characteristic, regimes containing between them all possible
kinds of behaviour that will actually appear for a particular system in the corresponding, well-defined
intervals of its parameter values. One of these universal limiting regimes of multivalued dynamics emerges
when the resonance between the internal motion frequencies of the system elements not related to the
compound system structure (see eqs. (6), section 3.1) and those introduced by the driving interaction
between elements (system structure as such) is absent, so that, for example (see also eqs. (16), (17), (20),
h n  are  the  separations  between
i << D
(21),  section  3.2),  D
neighbouring eigenvalues h 0
e  is the eigenvalue separation
x , w q are the (characteristic) frequencies of
for structure-independent element spectra, eqs. (6), and w

ni with respect to changing i and n respectively, D

x  << w q,  where  D

e , or w

h n ~ D

i, D

h

h

56

structure-dependent  and  structure-independent  (internal)  motions,  respectively,  proportional  to  the
h n.  In  this  case  we  can  neglect,  to  a  reasonable
corresponding  eigenvalue  separations  D
approximation, the h 0
ni dependence on i in the denominators of EP expression, eq. (21b), after which the
potential becomes local, due to the property of completeness of the eigenfunction set {y 0

i and D

h

ni(x )}:

V(x ,x ¢ ;h ) = d (x  - x ¢ ) (cid:229)

 , Veff(x ;h ) = V00(x ) + (cid:229)

|V0n(x )|2
 - h 0

n i - e n 0 

 

h

 
n

|V0n(x )|2
 - h 0

n i - e n 0 

 

h

 ,       (33)

 
n

where h 0
ni does not actually depend on i, designating here the value averaged over different i, and we
considered  the  driving  interaction  to  be  Hermitian,  so  that  |V0n(x )|2  stands  for  V0n(x )Vn0(x )  in  the
numerator. Correspondingly, the state-function expressions, eqs. (22), (23), take the form:

y ni(x ) = 

Vn0(x ¢ )y
i - h 0

0i(x )
ni¢  - e n 0

h

  ,                                                        (34a)

Y (Q,x ) = (cid:229)

0(Q) + (cid:229)

c i  

F

 º

 
i

F n(Q)Vn0(x ¢ )
i - h 0
ni¢  - e n 0

h

 ß

 

n

y

0i(x ) .                           (34b)

The number of eigen-solutions of the effective existence equation, eq. (20), with the local EP from
eq. (33) is reduced to its ordinary, non-redundant value, Nx Nq, because of disappearance of summation
over i introducing higher eigenvalue power in the characteristic equation. It seems that we return to the

unitary description with only one system realisation. In reality, however, eq. (33) is only an approximate

expression of the exact EP, eqs. (21), and although it is a generally correct approximation, its difference

with the exact expression hides important qualitative property, the dynamic redundance. Indeed, if we do

not simplify the original EP expression, eqs. (21), then we obtain additional, though quantitatively small,

splitting of eigenvalues endowing the system with the new quality, internal chaotic change of redundant

realisations. It is clear that in the considered limiting case realisations are very similar and ‘densely packed’
within the single, ‘enveloping’ (averaged) realisation of the approximate description and therefore may
remain unobservable individually (though they will contribute to quantities like ‘energy level width’ which
are explained usually in terms of ‘stochastic’ approach, with its extrinsic randomness insertion). The small
splitting into permanently changing realisations can be demonstrated in eq. (33) if we use in it real values
of h 0
ni, slightly differing for different i, and consider, correspondingly, that the ‘infinitely narrow’ d -
  slightly  diverging  components  with  a  finite  width,  reflecting  slightly
function  is  split  into  Nx  = N´

different EP configurations for individual realisations. We call this limiting case dynamic (extended) self-
organisation, or self-organised  criticality  (SOC), since it is not difficult to see [1] that it provides the

unified, dynamically multivalued (and thus always intrinsically chaotic) extension of the conventional

notions of both self-organisation (or ‘synergetics’, or structure formation) [129,130] and SOC [131] (the

multivalued extension of the latter case includes, of course, more explicit manifestations of the dynamically

57

Œ
Œ
Ø
œ
œ
ø
probabilistic  fractality  of  the  unreduced  complexity  structure,  section  4.4).  Whereas  the  usual  self-

organisation looks for some dynamically single-valued approximation to the external system ‘envelope’,

eq. (33), the conventional SOC applies a ‘statistical’ (often computer-assisted), but also basically single-

valued description to a particular, simplified ‘model’, so that the internal, dynamically probabilistic ‘life’ of

any ‘self-organised’ system (i. e. realisation emergence and chaotic change around the average observed

pattern) remains totally hidden behind those formally postulated, unjustified unitary approximations to the

corresponding  real  interaction  process  (which  leads,  in  particular,  to  intrinsic  incompatibility  of  the

canonical self-organisation/SOC with chaos [132-134]). The unceasing transitions between realisations

within any ‘self-organised’ structure, either more or less externally static, provide the universal, purely

dynamic and first-principles origin of those permanent ‘fluctuations’ around the ‘equilibrium’ system

shape (e. g. average sand-pile slope) that constitute the empirically observed, and then simply postulated,

basis  of  the  conventional  SOC  concept  missing,  however,  the  key,  essentially  nonunitary  system

properties and their direct, analytically substantiated emergence from the driving interaction.

On  the  other  hand,  the  obtained  regime  of  unreduced,  dynamically  multivalued  SOC  can  be

considered as the causal extension of another application of the conventional ‘science of complexity’,

known as ‘control of chaos’ [135] and implying a possibility of transformation of a chaotic dynamical

regime into a regular one (or another chaotic, but predetermined, desired dynamical behaviour). Since our

multivalued SOC describes a universal way of a more distinct shape emergence in the corresponding limit

of any  interaction  process  (including  the  ‘controlling’  influences  and  schemes),  it  comprises  this

application and unifies all separated conventional cases of (speculatively) ‘controlled’ or ‘synchronised’

dynamics in one description showing, in particular, that the absolute system control, suggested by the

dynamically single-valued projection of the canonical theories and oriented towards elimination of random

deviations from the desired, usually regular dynamics, is impossible in principle, for any kind of system

(cf. [136,137]). Any system ‘control’ or ‘monitoring’ can lead it therefore only from one intrinsically

chaotic regime to another, where the transition itself is also subjected to irreducible, though dynamically

changeable, randomness. This conclusion has especially important consequences for lowest, essentially

quantum levels of micro-system dynamics, since here one cannot have very large difference between the

participating energy quanta or frequencies (see the above analysis in this section) and a pronounced SOC
regime cannot appear in principle, which implies a very low efficiency of the conventional ‘control’. Note
that all cases of ‘dynamic synchronisation’ and ‘chaos control’, separated between them and from ‘self-
organisation’ or ‘SOC’ within their perturbative imitations in the conventional theory, are extended and
naturally unified within the single limiting regime of chaotic (dynamically multivalued) SOC which is
intrinsically unified, in its turn, with other cases of unreduced complex dynamics (see the next section) by
the universal formalism of effective dynamical functions, eqs. (20)-(31).

The unreduced, dynamically multivalued SOC regime is universally obtained thus as the limit of
closely resembling and weakly separated system realisations, so that their unceasing change creates only

small  variations  of  the  average,  externally  observed  system  configuration  and  can  therefore  remain

unnoticed, despite the dramatic internal transformation of the system involved in the realisation change

process (this picture of the internal system dynamics is confirmed by the geometric analysis of the effective

58

existence equation in the SOC limit [1,9,10] which is not reproduced here). The eigenvalues (and thus also

eigenfunctions)  constituting  the  ‘self-organised’  system  states  (or  its  actually  observed,  ‘compound’

realisations) are well separated among them in the SOC regime [1,9,10], forming compact groups of

eigen-solutions that constitute respective realisation dynamics (this can be directly seen from eq. (21b) for
h n). Note that in a general case one may have almost any number, NSOC, of ‘self-organised’,
h i << D
pseudo-regular system configurations (1 £
 NSOC < Nx , but usually NSOC << Nx  and includes just several
essentially different system configurations), with more frequent chaotic transitions between elementary

realisations  within  each  configuration  and  relatively  rare  system  jumps  between  different  ‘regular’

configurations (actually forming ‘compound realisations’ of a next, thus emerging complexity sublevel).

In terms of the above frequency conditions, we can say that we obtain indeed the ‘enslavement’ of

the high-frequency part of system configuration by its low-frequency part, where the former conforms

adiabatically to the latter, but contrary to the canonical ‘synergetics’ [129] actually equivalent to the

standard ‘motion in a rapidly oscillating field’ [138], this ‘control-of-chaos’ regime of a real system

dynamics  [1]  always  involves  permanent  chaotic  change  of  its  slightly  different  modes  within  the

observed, externally almost regular pattern (as well as less frequent, but equally inevitable and chaotic
switch between several realisations of the latter, if NSOC > 1). Thus, in the case of interacting elements of a
quantum machine, the dynamically multivalued SOC regime means that not only the energy levels of

individual element dynamics are slightly splitted due to the interaction between elements (as the canonical,
perturbative analysis would suggest), but also that there is in general Nx  = N versions (realisations) of this

splitting, each of them corresponding to a particular version of individual and collective element dynamics.

It is especially important that whereas each individual realisation, irrespective of its internal involvement,

represents a coherent, unitary system evolution, different realisations are not (totally) coherent among

them,  and  their  unavoidable  and  dynamically  random  change  constitutes  the  irreducible,  and  purely

dynamic (internal), source of true chaoticity, nonunitarity, and temporal  irreversibility (non-stop and

inimitable character) of the system evolution, irrespective of the proximity between realisations (quasi-

regularity  of  external  system  configurations).  In  other  words,  although  quantitatively  the  additional

splitting into different realisations can be small for the SOC type of dynamics, it always introduces the

qualitatively new, essential property of dynamical randomness, or chaoticity, or nonunitarity, into the
system evolution providing thus a really intrinsic, irreducible source of (substantial) errors for any unitary
operation scheme.

This purely dynamic source of errors has nothing to do with its simulations by either ambiguous
‘quantum decoherence’ [90-92], or canonical ‘quantum chaos’ [14] (see also section 6), since both of
them do not propose any internal source (and meaning) of randomness and should rely therefore on the
external, arbitrarily varying source of ‘stochasticity’, or ‘noise’, introducing randomness artificially, ‘by
hand’  (even  when  the  source  of  ‘noise’  is  physically  placed  within  the  system).  This  is  a  crucially
important  difference  because  the  extrinsic  noise  can  be,  in  principle,  reduced  by  creating  less  noisy

conditions of system operation (like decreasing temperature or eliminating imperfections in the system

structure), or else by using computational schemes that can separate useful signal from noise (usually at

the expense of a much longer calculation multiply repeating the same algorithm, then comparing the

59

D
results, etc.) [92-107]. The truly intrinsic randomness produced by dynamic redundance of any elementary

interaction process will not decrease even in ideal, noiseless conditions and can only grow in ‘error-

correcting’  procedures  involving  many  new  interactions.  This  means  that  the  possibility  of  a  totally

‘coherent’,  or  ‘nondestructive’  control  of  quantum  dynamics  assumed  by  the  conventional  theory  of

quantum computation is but an illusion caused by the evident neglect of real interaction dynamics replaced

by its perturbative, unitary ‘model’, without any particular consideration of the details.

Being derived by a universal analysis, these conclusions about irreducible nonunitarity remain true

for both quantum and classical device, but in the latter case each ‘self-organised’ structure element contains

many smaller constituents (like atoms) subjected to noisy influences directly and independently, which

makes the probability of their simultaneous macroscopic ‘fluctuation’ in one direction, leading to a fault,

vanishingly (exponentially) small, contrary to the essentially quantum machine which operates, according

to definition, just with the smallest, indivisible units, where useful ‘quantum bits’, ‘noisy influences’,

‘controlling actions’, and chaotic realisation change are all of the same order of magnitude determined by

Planck's  constant.  This  means  also  that  the  pronounced  SOC  regime  of  the  unreduced  interaction

dynamics, giving a well-defined shape of the emerging system configuration, can hardly be compatible

with the essentially quantum dynamics providing all the expected advantages of quantum computation.

Any nontrivial, well-defined, long-living patterns, including those necessary for the memory function, can

emerge only starting from a semiclassical, and usually fully classical, regime which is causally explained

itself, in the quantum field mechanics, as a (multivalued) SOC type of state (see also sections 4.7, 5.3) [1-

4,11-13]. In addition, the true, dynamic randomness of real interaction processes is always densely mixed

with regularity, by its very origin, which makes the essence of the unreduced dynamical chaos concept

(see  section  4.1).  This  property,  expressed  formally  by  the  inhomogeneous  realisation  probability

distribution, eq. (26), and fractal internal configuration of each particular realisation, eqs. (30), (31), can

make inapplicable the canonical idea of useful signal ‘filtration’ which is based on the assumption about

‘purely random’ noise mechanistically added to the signal.

4.5.2.  Uniform  (global)  chaos,  its  universal  criterion  and  physical  origin

 D

h i »

The second limiting case of complex (multivalued) dynamics, opposite by its character to the above
SOC  regime,  emerges  when  the  internal  element  dynamics  and  interaction-induced  motion  enter  in
resonance, so that their characteristic energy level separations and frequencies are close enough to each
 w q. As can be seen from the unreduced EP expression, eq. (21b), in this
other: D
case the eigenvalues forming individual realisations become intermingled and therefore the corresponding
realisation  configurations,  determined  by  eigenvalue  separations,  can  change  considerably  and
unpredictably from one realisation to another, which leads to absence of any distinct system ‘shape’ in the
process of permanent realisation change. No reduction of the general EP and state-function expressions,

e , or w

h n ~ D

x  »

analogous  to  eqs.  (33),  (34),  can  be  found  in  this  case,  which  means  that  individual  realisation

contributions to the general system behaviour are comparable among them and confirms the absence of any

60

global  ‘dynamical  order’  in  the  emerging  system  pattern.  In  other  words,  realisation  probability
distribution is a rather homogeneous one (tending in the limit to equal probabilities, a r = 1/N´ ), so that
sufficiently  differing  realisations  emerge  in  a  random  sequence  and  with  comparable  probabilities.

Therefore this limiting case of the unreduced complex dynamics is called uniform chaos and corresponds
to the regime of ‘global’ (intense) chaoticity considered for particular systems [1,8,9].*) As pointed out in
the preceding section, any essentially quantum system with interaction, including canonical quantum

computer,  should find itself just in this regime of complex dynamics demonstrating the possibility, and

meaning, of the true quantum chaos/randomness [1,8-13], as opposed to its absence and inconsistent

imitations  in  the  canonical  quantum  chaos  concept  (see  section  6).  The  implication  for  the  quantum

computer theory is evident: any unitary description of a full scale quantum computation is totally, basically

incorrect, while any really existing micro-machine or device operating at the quantum level can only be

described as dynamically multivalued, truly chaotic system (any unitary, stochastic imitation of ‘quantum

chaoticity’ [14] is clearly as deficient as straightforward regularity of ‘pure’ unitary evolution). In addition,

any intricate enough, quantum or classical, micro-machine with sufficiently fine structure and complicated

function  should  contain  many  strongly  interacting  and  close  enough  frequencies,  so  that  multiple

resonances among them are practically inevitable and thus the true, uniform, global chaos for at least a part

of essential operation stages.

A distinctive property of our description of the two opposite regimes of unreduced interaction

dynamics,  the  externally  ‘regular’  (but  internally  multivalued)  SOC  and  ‘totally’  irregular,  uniform

chaoticity, is its universality, so that both cases are consistently derived within the unified analysis and

correspond  to  different  parameters  of  basically  the  same  picture  of  multiple,  incompatible  system

realisations replacing one another in a dynamically random order. This means that any other, intermediate

regime  of  unreduced  interaction  dynamics  can  also  be  derived  and  understood  as  more  or  less

homogeneous distribution of realisation parameters (including especially dynamic probabilities of their

emergence), which is quite different from the situation in the canonical, dynamically single-valued ‘science

of complexity’ (let alone conventional ‘quantum chaos’), where various allegedly ‘unified’ cases and

properties, such as conventional ‘self-organisation’ (synergetics), ‘chaos’, ‘self-organised criticality’,

‘adaptability’,  and  ‘fractality’,  remain  actually  separated  and  often  incompatible,  in  addition  to  the
imitative, basically deficient character of each property (which is clearly expressed by the absence of
unified and consistent definition of the underlying concept of dynamic complexity itself [1,5-7], cf. section
4.1). The continuous, causally understood transition between dynamically multivalued self-organisation
(external ‘regularity’) and uniform chaos (explicit randomness) revealed within the dynamic redundance
paradigm can be explicitly observed for those systems which allow for their parameter change in a wide
enough range covering both limiting regimes, without destruction of the system as a whole. In practice,

*)  Note  the  fundamental  difference  between  this  dynamically  multivalued,  ‘truly  random’  chaos  and  its  conventional
imitations at either quantum or classical level, where randomness as such is either absent or introduced ‘by hand’, as external
‘noise’ (sometimes together with its postulated and totally regular ‘amplification’), without any specification of its ultimate,
dynamical origin. It turns out eventually that any conventional ‘chaos’ is reduced to a regular, though apparently ‘intricate’
motion with a finite, but very long, practically infinite period, which is not surprising taking into account the effectively
one-dimensional (dynamically single-valued) character of the ‘models’ and analysis used (see section 6 for details).

61

the natural evolution of a complex enough dynamical system is governed not by artificial ‘parameter’

variation (analysed within simplified system ‘models’), but rather by the universal dynamic symmetry of

complexity (including its development) that guides system evolution through an ‘optimal’ sequence of

roughly alternating regimes of quasi-regular SOC and global chaos [1] (see also sections 4.4, 4.7, 7).

In any case, a more definite transition from a global dynamical ‘order’ providing a discernible

system shape/configuration (SOC regime) to the global chaos of virtual, changing ‘shapes’ (uniform chaos

regime) is determined by the universal criterion of resonance between the characteristic internal dynamics

of system components and its interaction-driven, inter-element motion:

k  ”

 

h i
h n

w
w q

  @

  = 

 1 ,                                                          (35)

e , w q, were defined above
where the parameters of inter- and intra-element dynamics, D
(section 4.5.1), and we have introduced the parameter of (system) chaoticity, k , equal to their ratio and
determining  the  (approximate)  ‘point’  of  ‘order-chaos’  transition.*) Correspondingly, for k  << 1 one
obtains, as we have seen above, the dynamically multivalued SOC regime with decreasing external signs

x  and D

h n ~ D

h i, w

of probabilistic realisation change within the system. One could also define the parameter of (system)
regularity, r ”

 1/k , with the evident meaning opposite to that of k .

It is not difficult to see that if k  grows substantially over unity, k  >> 1, one should obtain again a
generally ordered system state, where now the low-frequency intra-element motion ‘enslaves’ the quick

inter-element  (structural)  dynamics  and  determines  the  observed  system  configuration.  In  practice,

however, a system with ‘interesting’ dynamics can more rarely possess this kind of symmetry between the
two components of its dynamics, and the case k  >> 1 will usually correspond to some trivial kind of
order, like a uniform energy-level shift (e. g. quasi-ballistic element motion). Loosely speaking, the limit
of k  << 1 refers to relatively ‘weak’ effects of interaction when the resulting system configuration is still
determined by some (more rigid) elements from the initial configuration, while at k  >> 1 one deals, in
general (for a strong enough interaction), with a ‘destroyed’ initial system, which may be of little interest

(although this case is also correctly described by our universal analysis, it is probably better to choose the

‘complementary’ system configuration as the starting point of unreduced interaction analysis, cf. section
5.2.1). Therefore the most interesting events happen when k   grows from its small values (k  << 1) to one,
and around this point a rather abrupt change from a remaining order to the global chaos occurs in the form
of ‘generalised phase transition’ [1]. The reverse transition ‘chaos-order’, occurring with decreasing k
around the same point, k  »
 1, corresponds to explicit appearance of the universally defined ‘structure
formation’, i. e. causal, natural (purely dynamic, autonomous, interaction-driven) creation (emergence) of
qualitatively new ‘entities’ forming a new (sub)level of complexity as a result of unreduced, dynamically
multivalued interaction development (including dynamic entanglement of lower level components).

*) It is not difficult to express w
q through the system element parameters, and
thus k  through the relevant system parameters for each particular system (see e. g. [1,8,9] and section 5.2.1). Specific features
of each particular system can also be taken into account, such as the existence of several characteristic values of w
q, and
k  for more complicated systems (interaction processes).

x  through the specific interaction parameters, w

x , w

62

D
D
x
This  general  picture  of  continuous  (but  uneven)  transition  between  (relative)  order  and  chaos

contains also other interesting details that can only be mentioned here, such as step-like partial transitions
x , or k  »
between order and randomness around higher-order resonances (w q »
 1/n, n = 2,3,...) with
the complete ‘inversion’ of the system structure in the main resonance point (w q »
 w
the global chaos explosion [1]. Such description can be considered, in the whole, as a causally complete,

 1) through

x , or k  »

 nw

universal (including quantum) extension of the canonical, essentially perturbative KAM theory dealing

only with small chaoticity values and establishing conditions for the absence of any essential change in the

given, initial system configuration (in agreement with the general character of the unitary science).

On the other hand, the unreduced interaction analysis gives the universal, nonperturbative picture

of the phenomenon of resonance which has been extensively mentioned and analysed in both ‘regular’ and

‘chaotic’  (or  ‘statistical’)  versions  of  conventional  mechanics,  but  could  not  be  provided,  within  the

dynamically single-valued approach, with a causally complete description showing its unreduced effect

and role in chaoticity and dynamic complexity due to the universally emerging phenomenon of dynamic

redundance (multivaluedness) of the internally entangled, ‘resonant’ system realisations. Thus, the popular

criteria of ‘overlapping resonances’ or ‘positive Lyapunov exponents’ for the global chaos onset in the

conventional theory of classical chaos [139-145] appear to be erroneous by both their definition of ‘chaos’

(‘rapid’, but regular and actually incorrect law of ‘exponential amplification’ of postulated, ill-defined

‘randomness’ of external ‘noise’) and artificial complication of chaos criterion which in reality is directly

determined by the resonance itself representing the very fact of unreduced interaction within the system.

The developed, ‘global’, or ‘uniform’ chaos is the main, final and inevitable result of resonance between

various parts of system dynamics, which happens always in certain its parts, but involves the whole

system dynamics when the resonance/chaos condition, eq. (35), is fulfilled for principal, characteristic

frequencies of ‘perturbation’ and free-element dynamics. Thus, every resonance is internally chaotic, and

every chaotic behaviour is the direct result of real, dynamically multivalued resonance.

This result provides a physically transparent explanation for the origin of the uniform (global)

chaos, the most pronounced form of dynamically random behaviour. The resonance criterion of uniform

chaos onset, eq. (35), implies that in this case the interaction partners with equal ‘forces’ (or dynamical

‘sizes’) of their characteristic modes collide, and the dynamic instability produced by this almost equal
partners encounter takes the form of omnipresent and relatively big changes between the redundant system
configurations  (realisations).  In  other  words,  the  resonant  ‘equality’  of  the  interacting  modes  leads
inevitably to the locally ‘coarse-grained’, and therefore globally shapeless, ‘very irregular’ type of chaotic
dynamics. In the opposite case, where the system is far from the main internal resonances, its ‘larger’,
lower-frequency components naturally ‘encompass’ (or ‘enslave’) ‘smaller’, higher-frequency modes, and
we obtain a SOC type of behaviour (see the previous section) with a rather distinct shape determined
roughly by larger components. The irreducible dynamic instability of the mode encounter arises in this
case as well (due to inevitable higher-order resonances between relatively ‘marginal’ mode frequencies)

and leads to dynamic redundance and internal chaoticity, but now it is a relatively ‘fine-grained’, ‘hidden’

chaos involving random rearrangements of only internal, high-frequency modes covered by a relatively

inert (though still slightly chaotic) ‘envelope’ of low-frequency components.

63

It is important to emphasize the difference between the resonance-driven true chaoticity of any

unreduced  interaction  process  and  unitary  imitation  of  the  dynamic  redundance  phenomenon  in  the

conventional ‘science of complexity’ by such concepts as ‘multistability’ and ‘unstable periodic orbits’

representing  formal  variations  (though  separated  among  them)  of  a  more  general  idea  of  multiple

‘coexisting attractors’ of certain, special systems usually analysed in the form of unrealistically deformed,

symbolical ‘models’ and distinguished from other, ‘regular’ and ‘non-complex’ systems. Those purely

abstract,  postulated  constructions  of  the  unitary  science  are  not  obtained  by  analytical  solution  of

dynamical equations, but instead are inserted artificially as an attempt to account for the empirically

observed chaotic change of system states (in natural experiments or computer simulations). Since the

perturbative, dynamically single-valued ‘approximation’ of the conventional science cannot provide any

source of true  randomness  in  principle,  the  scholar  theory  of  ‘complexity’  inserts  additional,  purely

mathematical ‘dimensions’ and simply places there, ‘according to definition’, a contradictory, poorly

defined imitation of the ‘necessary’, additional system states (which are actually absent in the effectively

one-dimensional projection of real system dynamics). However, even apart from the incorrect, arbitrary

logic of such manipulations with purely abstract, postulated symbols and rules, one obtains in that way

multiple system states, or ‘attractors’, in the form of system trajectory ‘shapes’ coexisting in those abstract

spaces (e. g. ‘phase spaces’), so that the (closed) system can remain in each of them for a long (or even

infinite) time, as opposed to our incompatible system realisations which are analytically, consistently

derived from unreduced dynamical equations as equally possible elements of real, thus emerging space of

the corresponding level, so that the system needs to permanently change them in fundamentally random, or

‘non-computable’, sequence thus defined (together with the real, dynamically obtained space and time).

Returning to the case of essentially  quantum  system  with  many  interacting  components,  it  is

important to emphasize once more that one always deals here with conditions close enough to the uniform,

pronounced  chaoticity,  eq.  (35).  Indeed,  in  the  opposite  case  the  essential  difference  between  the

characteristic frequencies in the system dynamics is necessary for the SOC configuration emergence, but

such difference implies realisation of at least semiclassical conditions in the system, in contradiction to the

demand of its ‘essentially’ quantum character. In addition, it will be very difficult to impede the natural

transformation of such quasi-classicality in a relatively complicated system with interaction into full
classicality which can form an inherent part of operation of the dynamically multivalued machine (see
sections 7.2, 8), but cannot participate in the unitary quantum machine dynamics. Finally, even those parts
of ‘essentially quantum’ dynamics, where the emergence of SOC type (e. g. semiclassical) dynamics is
possible, will inevitably contain, as we have seen, the irreducible dynamic randomness also destroying the
unitary quantum evolution, even in the ideal, zero-noise and ‘fault-tolerant’ system configuration.

64

4.6.  Causally  complete  description  of  quantum-mechanical  behaviour
as  the  lowest  level  of  unreduced  dynamic  complexity  of  the  world

4.6.1.  The  dynamic  origin  of  elementary  particles,
their  properties  and  wave-particle  duality

Every real many-body system, and especially a more complicated ‘machine’ producing diverse

enough  results  (like  ‘universal  quantum  computation’),  will  certainly  possess  complex,  multivalued

dynamics that forms at least several (or even many) related levels and sublevels. They naturally emerge in

the unreduced interaction process development described above, where the more ‘coarse-grained’ parts of

the growing dynamical fractal represent the new level of ‘interacting system elements’, while its fine-

structured ‘foliage’ constitutes the physical basis for ‘interaction’ between the elements. Each (sub)level of

complexity  can  contain,  in  principle,  the  dynamic  regimes  of  both  types  described  above,  SOC  and

uniform chaos, as well as their combination or intermediate cases. However, the naturally emerging levels

of growing complexity tend to alternate between the two limiting cases, so that a predominantly ‘chaotic’

level of complexity gives rise to the emerging higher level of ‘self-organised’ structures that interact and

form the next sublevel of a uniformly chaotic behaviour, and so on. Although this sequence of alternating

relative ‘chaos’ and ‘order’ is rather irregular itself and may contain various deviations and ‘mixed’

regimes, its existence as a tendency is essential for maintaining the dynamic, autonomous creativity of

natural  interaction  processes  and  the  related  diversity  of  the  created  forms.  It  is  important  that  the

dominating type of behaviour from a lower complexity level does not simply disappear in favour of the

opposite behaviour at the emerging higher level, but takes a new, ‘compact’ form hidden within the entities

of the new level and playing the crucial role in their very existence. It is impossible to understand and

control the operation of a ‘quantum’, explicitly complex-dynamical (multivalued) machine without a well-

specified picture of such multi-level hierarchy of creative interaction dynamics. The unreduced science of

complexity,  including  quantum  field  mechanics,  provides  the  universal  framework  of  this  natural

complexity development [1-4,9-13] that can then be easily specified for each particular system (see also

sections 4.4, 7.1).

The approximate sequential transformation between (dynamically multivalued) order and chaos in
the  interaction  complexity  development  can  be  traced  starting  from  the  lowest,  properly  ‘quantum’,
sublevels of world dynamics, where the consistent description of progressively emerging entities [1-4,9-
13] provides the causally complete solution of the canonical quantum ‘mysteries’ concentrated just around
‘impossible’  combination  of  randomness  and  order,  as  well  as  other  related  pairs  of  ‘incompatible’
properties  (cf.  the  ‘principle  of  complementarity’  proposed  by  Niels  Bohr),  such  as  nonlocality  and
locality (including ‘wave-particle duality’), or continuity and discreteness.

The very first level of world dynamics, designated as ‘isolated elementary particles and fields’,
emerges explicitly from the attractive interaction between two physically real, homogeneous (practically

structureless) ‘protofields’, one of them having the electromagnetic (e/m) nature that shows up eventually

as  e/m  basis  of  the  observed  entities  and  another  one  being  of  a  less  transparent,  explicitly  hidden

gravitational origin (it gives rise to the universal gravitation, now causally explained). Application of our

65

universal analysis of interaction shows [1-4,11-13] that this simplest possible starting configuration is

inevitable as such (i. e. it cannot be further simplified) and, on the other hand, it can and does actually

produce (we show how exactly) all the observed elementary entities endowed with all their intrinsic,

‘quantum’,  and  ‘relativistic’  properties  which  are  now  causally,  realistically  derived  and  explained,

without any para-scientific mystification, abstraction, and irreducible separations of the conventional

‘quantum mechanics’, ‘field theory’, ‘relativity’, etc. (see also section 5.3). This is possible simply due to

the unreduced, non-perturbative analysis of this first level of the protofield interaction dynamics giving,

quite similar to the above results, eqs. (20)-(27), the essentially nonlinear formation and unceasing change

of multiple, incompatible, dynamically unstable system realisations, each of them taking the form, in this

case, of the locally highly squeezed state of the protofields homogeneously attracted to each other in the
initial system configuration.*) Whereas this dynamically squeezed state of the ‘entangled’ protofields
forms  the  observed  ‘corpuscular’,  localised  state  of  the  elementary  field-particle  thus  obtained,  its

transitional, ‘disentangled’ state during chaotic jumps between the localised realisations constitutes the

realistic  extension  of  both  quantum  mechanical  ‘wavefunction’  (automatically  provided  with  the

probabilistic, and now dynamically based, interpretation) and ‘undular’, wave-like, nonlocal state of the

same object, thus ensuring the causally complete explanation for the ‘wave-particle duality’ as a standard

manifestation of the unreduced (multivalued) interaction dynamics (cf. the above analysis in sections 3, 4).

Since we deal here with the very first level of any structure emergence in the initially homogeneous
h n (describing here
system of interacting protofields, the characteristic eigenvalue separations, D
h n,
h i »
spatial dimensions of the emerging protofield inhomogeneities), are of the same magnitude, D
giving  the  regime  of  uniform  chaos,  eq.  (35),  with  maximally  irregular  distribution  of  realisation

h i and D

 D

probabilities  (for  the  field-particle  at  rest),  which  could  be  expected  because  of  the  uniform  initial

configuration of the system. This true, dynamical randomness hidden ‘within’ the elementary particle

plays an indispensable role as the current-level manifestation of the unreduced dynamic complexity and

accounts for the intrinsic, universal property of mass, rigorously defined as temporal rate of realisation

change,  being  thus  naturally  ‘equivalent’  to  extended,  complex-dynamical  energy,  and  unifying  its

(relativistic) inertial and gravitational aspects [1-4,11-13]. We deal therefore with a basically ‘chaotic’

(irregular, distributed) type of behaviour at this first level of the world complexity, where it is represented
mainly by the unceasing process of quantum beat constituting the essence of each (massive) elementary

*) The revealed dynamically multivalued origin of ‘quantum strangeness’ shows also why one cannot obtain a realistic and
consistent picture of the fundamental physical reality within the conventional, dynamically single-valued theory, in principle,
irrespective of the efforts applied. The single-valued, effectively one-dimensional (or even zero-dimensional, point-like) and
static projection of the multivalued, intrinsically creative reality, determining the ‘method’ of the canonical science as such,
can only produce an abstract, grotesquely simplified, and irreducibly ruptured image of real world dynamics, which may have
relatively heavier or easier consequences for various particular systems depending on the more or less explicit and numerous
manifestations of the unreduced dynamic complexity in their observed behaviour. Whereas in the case of simplest quantum
systems the standard manifestations of complexity can still be hidden behind the unexplainable ‘postulates’ and para-scientific
‘mysteries’, comfortably tolerated by the ‘rigorous’ scholar science for almost a century [1-4], the modern direct applications
of the theory to much more involved, explicitly  creative  (e.  g.  computing)  systems,  evoked  by  the  developing  empirical
technology, cannot be realised within the same simplification in principle, since the number of the necessary ‘postulates’ and
their ‘mysteries’ quickly diverges, together with the number of possible system versions and states (i. e. actually its unreduced
dynamic complexity, just determined, as we have seen in section 4.1, by the number of such explicitly obtained ‘states’, or
realisations).

66

particle and consisting of periodic cycles of protofield reduction-extension around randomly chosen,

neighbouring  centres.  At  the  same  time,  the  minimum  regularity  is  present  even  within  such  highly

irregular dynamics, in the form of individual realisation configuration, determining the characteristic

particle  ‘size’  and  ‘shape’,  the  causally  understood  property  of  spin,  and  temporal  synchronisation

between realisation change processes (or ‘quantum beats’) for different field-particles accounting for the

discreteness and universality of elementary electric change (now causally explained as intrinsic property of

particle dynamics), as well as exactly two opposite values (‘signs’) of its ‘kind’ [1,11-13]. Note that

different species of (massive) particles correspond to different EP amplitudes in our description, and

therefore the observed diversity of elementary particles can be explained as a result of the same, universal

kind of dynamical splitting into multiple realisations in the system of two interacting protofields. The

number (four) and intrinsically , dynamically unified origin of the fundamental interaction forces between

particles obtain a transparent, causally complete explanation within the same physical picture [2-4,11-13].

4.6.2.  Complex-dynamical  particle  interaction,  genuine  quantum  chaos,
and  quantum  measurement  dynamics

The next sublevel of the world complexity appears, according to our general picture, when the

entities of the first level, the isolated field-particles, start interacting among them through the mentioned

inter-particle  forces  which  emerge  dynamically  as  a  less  dense,  ‘fractal’  part  of  the  same  protofield

perturbation that constitutes particles themselves in its denser parts and appears as a result of homogeneous

protofield attraction. The four fundamental interactions among particles can therefore be described as

higher-order ‘remnants’ of the same basic protofield attraction whose main, zero-order part is transformed

into (massive) elementary particles themselves represented by the respective quantum beat processes that

account, in particular, for the major property of mass-energy [1-4,11-13]. This ‘allocation’ of a smaller

part of the current level interaction to the emerging higher sublevel, in the form of a fine-grained part of the

dynamical fractal, continues through all progressively appearing levels of (complex) world dynamics, so

that all the existing structures and processes, including the most advanced, ‘anthropic’ ones, are explicitly

obtained as progressively unfolding, integral parts of the single interaction process between two world-
forming protofields, the same one that gives the elementary particles of the very first level of complexity.
This intrinsically unified world dynamics is rigorously described by the universal law of transformation
and conservation, or symmetry, of complexity [1] just expressing the progressive transformation of the
potential  (informational)  form  of  complexity  at  the  beginning  of  interaction  process  to  the  form  of
complexity-entropy describing the interaction results (see also section 7.1). In particular, the Schrödinger
and Dirac equations for the emerging field-particles of the first sublevel of complexity can be consistently
derived and also generalised to all higher levels of complexity, together with the causally explained
wavefunction and its probabilistic interpretation (‘Born's rule’) [1,4,11-13], as opposed to artificial and

‘puzzling’  postulation  of  all  those  laws  for  the  single,  quantum  level  of  world  dynamics  in  the

conventional theory, where it remains mysteriously and irreducibly separated from higher-level, ‘classical’

dynamics (the latter being equally postulated, though in an intuitively more ‘natural’ way).

67

The entities emerging at the second (sub)level of complexity are moving particles and elementary

bound states of particles, like atoms. Contrary to the ambiguous, intuitive empiricism of the conventional

science, the phenomenon  and  state  of  motion itself can now be rigorously  defined as a state with the

unreduced dynamic complexity value (measured by mass-energy) that exceeds its minimum possible value

for the given system, which is always well-defined, finite (for massive systems) and determines its state of

rest. It is not difficult to show that both any unbound motion and bound state emerge as partially ordered,

SOC type of spatial  structure, where the chaotic quantum-beat pulsation of the individual particles is

‘packed’ within a regular ‘envelope’. The simplest example of such regular structure induced by global

motion is the famous ‘de Broglie wave’ of a particle, now causally derived and totally understood as

another standard feature of the unreduced complex dynamics, in agreement with original expectation of

Louis de Broglie and by contrast to the conventional mystification by Niels Bohr and his followers (see
[1,2,12,13]  for  further  details  and  references).*) This partial  spatial  order  in  the  internal  dynamical
structure of ‘quantum’ objects, always containing a truly random component, accounts, in particular, for

the property of ‘quantum’ coherence, much referred to in the canonical theory of quantum computers, but

without any clear idea of its real physical origin. Since the relative proportion of order and randomness in

the unreduced complex dynamics depends, as shown above, on the particular interaction parameters, one

may have, at this higher sublevel of ‘quantum’ complexity, various situations, changing between global

chaos  and  multivalued  self-organisation,  even  though  the  sublevel  as  a  whole  emerges  rather  as  a

somewhat more ordered structure from the uniformly chaotic lowest sublevel of ‘free’ particles. The large

diversity of results of complex-dynamical interaction between elementary particles and their simplest

agglomerates can be classified, nevertheless, into a small number of qualitatively different cases, the most

important and practically relevant among them being (genuine) quantum chaos [1,8,9], dynamic quantum

measurement (including ‘wave reduction’) [1,10], and complex-dynamical emergence of classical, truly

localised (trajectorial) type of behaviour [1-4,12,13]. While the first two interaction results (quantum

chaos and measurement) are obtained as particular manifestations of the uniform chaos regime (section

*) It is important to emphasize, in this connection, the essential difference of both our explicitly complex-dynamical quantum
field  mechanics  and  the  original  de  Broglie  approach,  designated  by  him  as  the  ‘double  solution’  and  including,  though
implicitly, the unreduced dynamic complexity, from the so-called ‘Bohmian mechanics’ first introduced by de Broglie himself
(under the name of ‘pilot-wave interpretation’) as a technically convenient, but fatally simplified version of the full double
solution (1927), but then ‘rediscovered’ by David Bohm (1952) and now extensively imposed as the ‘causal de Broglie-Bohm
interpretation’  of  quantum  mechanics.  The  pilot-wave  interpretation,  or  Bohmian  mechanics,  is  indeed  only  another
interpretation  of  basically  the  same,  formally  postulated  and  contradictory  scheme  of  the  standard  quantum  mechanics,
obtained from the canonical form of the Schrödinger equation by a simple, identical replacement of variables followed by a
pure ‘philosophy’ which provides only ‘plausible’, or maybe even ‘attractive’, assumptions, but not their consistent, causally
complete substantiation (which should inevitably contain a conceptual, qualitative novelty in its rigorous basis). As a result,
the  main  ‘mysteries’  and  ‘irresolvable’  problems  of  the  conventional  quantum  mechanics  remain  unsolved,  sometimes
changing only their formulation. Thus, the physical origin of the ‘particle’ itself allegedly ‘guided’ by the ‘attached’ wave
remains totally mysterious within this ‘causal (realistic)’ approach, together with the nature of the ‘wave’, its ‘link’ to the
‘guided’ particle, and the observed permanent transformation between wave and particle (rather than their simple coexistence).
There  is  no  any  underlying,  developing  interaction  in  the  Bohmian  mechanics,  and  thus  no  essential  nonlinearity  and
dynamical randomness (i. e. intrinsic chaoticity or ‘indeterminacy’): it is a unitary, dynamically single-valued theory, quite
similar to other officially permitted ‘interpretations’. Correspondingly, it is actually formulated in terms of the same kind of
purely  abstract,  mathematical  entities  which  give  only  an  illusion  (though  partially  justified  as  such) of being closer to
reality.  Other  consistently  derived  correlations  of  the  complex-dynamical  picture,  such  as  causal  relativity  and  gravity
intrinsically  unified  with  quantum  behaviour,  together  with  space  and  time,  mass-energy,  and  the  four  ‘fundamental
interactions’  [1-4,11-13],  cannot  even  be  formulated  within  the  narrow  unitary  framework  of  Bohmian  or  any  other
‘interpretation’ of the standard quantum postulates.

68

4.5.2), the genuine classicality emerges in the form of typical SOC structures (section 4.5.1) actually

represented by the simplest bound systems (such as atoms).

Quantum  chaos  emerges  even  in  the  noiseless,  strictly  conservative  (Hamiltonian)  quantum

dynamics when an elementary, quantum system (like particle in a symmetric, ‘integrable’ potential) with a

regular  type  of  dynamics  is  subjected  to  additional  perturbation  (time-dependent  or  static)  with  a
 w q, in agreement with
x  close to that of the internal system dynamics, w q: w
characteristic frequency w
eq. (35). This shows, in particular, that genuine quantum chaos is at the origin of all ordinary ‘resonant

x  @

excitation’  phenomena  (e.  g.  in  atoms)  and  ‘excited  states’  dynamics,  which  leads  to  a  considerably

extended understanding of the detailed dynamics of such ‘standard’ quantum systems forming the new,

explicitly ‘chaotic’ and totally causal framework of the whole conventional ‘quantum mechanics’ of

systems with interaction [1,9]. The extended, dynamically multivalued quantum theory includes also

causal  complex-dynamical  explanation  of  the  quantum  tunneling  effect  and  particle  energy  level

discreteness representing two canonical ‘quantum mysteries’ in the standard interpretation.

As mentioned above (section 4.5.2), the case of unreduced quantum chaos is of special importance

for any essentially quantum machine, since it provides truly ‘quantum’ and uniquely efficient way of its

productive operation (involving change of state), which means that any essentially quantum machine can

usefully operate only in a highly chaotic regime, excluding any unitarity. The same conclusion remains

basically valid for partially ordered (SOC) regimes whose internal chaoticity will still create irreducible,

and ‘fatal’, errors during ‘massive’ machine operation (even in the total absence of noisy, ‘decohering’

influences) with respect to the assumed ideal regularity of unitary evolution.

The quantum measurement case is different from the quantum chaos situation only by the presence

of small enough system dissipativity related to its small enough, ‘non-destructive’, but non-vanishing

openness towards the exterior, ‘macroscopic’ world. Note that this small dissipativity, appearing through

some ‘excitable’ degrees of freedom, does not play any ‘decoherence’ role inducing chaos itself. The true

chaoticity appears, in the form of multiple incompatible realisations, in the course of the same unreduced

and fundamentally conservative interaction process involving the given, ‘measured’ quantum system and

another, ‘measuring’, but also quantum, system (like the excited detector atom) which is related, however,

to a hierarchy of larger systems through amplified excitation processes. The ‘dissipative’ function of the
latter is reduced to transient ‘measured’ system binding to the ‘measuring’ system for a long enough time
(during which initial excitation act really occurs). The normally extended quantum beat process of the
measured system (like a projectile interacting elastically with multiple slits) becomes transiently confined to
a close vicinity of the occurring excitation event (situated in one of the slits) thus necessarily losing its
distributed, undular properties for a time period exceeding a characteristic interaction time (after that the
normal, extended quantum beat is reconstituted, but the measured undular effects, such as interference
between wave scattering by different slits, cannot happen any more). It is clear, therefore, that the real
spatial ‘reduction’ (squeeze) of the normal measured system behaviour does happen during quantum

measurement, as well as subsequent system extension to its unperturbed dynamics, which constitutes the

causally complete picture of ‘wavefunction collapse’ remaining unrealistic and ‘mysterious’ within the

conventional quantum theory and any its scholar modifications (see refs. [1,10] for the details).

69

It is important that the dynamical collapse process thus understood does not need any modification

of the standard Schrödinger equation like it is done in various unitary ‘theories of explicit collapse’ (or a

yet more inconsistent use of arbitrarily postulated equations for various unitary imitations of probabilistic

‘distribution function’ for a quantum system, such as density matrix). Indeed, it is the ‘ordinary’, but now

consistently derived and causally (realistically) interpreted Schrödinger equation that results from the

dynamically multivalued quantum beat process including unceasing cycles of real system ‘collapse’ to one

of  its  realisations  and  subsequent  extension.  Those  ‘background’,  fundamental  reduction  events  of  a

measured quantum system, constituting the essence of its existence, simply ‘conform’ dynamically to

next-level interactions during the process of measurement, but remain basically unaltered and usually

determine the discrete set of possible quantum measurement results.

In other terms, the slight dissipativity of the quantum measurement configuration, concentrated

around certain location, simply chooses, by ‘creating preference’ (higher probability), a small part of

possible  system  realisations,  concentrated  around  that  location,  thus  temporally  ‘disabling’  other

realisations and related quantum nonlocality. At the same time, the ‘measuring’ excitation can choose in

that  way  only  among  already  existing  system  realisations,  determined  by  its  main,  non-dissipative

interaction dynamics. The criterion of resonance, and thus maximal chaoticity, eq. (35), is automatically

fulfilled in the essential stage of quantum measurement (dynamical choice of realisations), since the

efficient measuring system should have a substructure in its spectrum that closely resembles the measured
 w q), which does not prevent it from having other parts of the spectrum,
interaction spectrum (hence w
x  << w q (k  << 1), which are responsible for subsequent pseudo-classical localisation (multivalued
with w
SOC regime).

x  @

Applying this general picture to quantum machine operation, one should take into account the fact

that any useful operation involves omnipresent events of quantum measurement, since it occurs practically

at every essential energy exchange between elements changing their states through excitation, which again

demonstrates a totally illusive character of the unitary description of real functional, multi-component

quantum systems with interaction. Actually the normal operation of a quantum machine consists of a set of

‘sequential’ and ‘parallel’ events of quantum chaos (for nondissipative, elastic interactions) and quantum

measurement  (for  dissipative  interactions),  each  of  them  introducing  essential,  true,  dynamical  and
irreducible  randomness  which  disables  any  unitary  scheme  of  quantum  dynamics,  but  opens  quite
interesting possibilities for the unreduced system dynamics actually already realised and successfully used
by natural micro-systems (see sections 7.2,7.3, 8).

70

4.7.  Interaction  complexity  development
and  dynamic  origin  of  classical  behaviour  in  noiseless  micro-systems

The classical type of behaviour is a special case of partially ordered, SOC type of regime realised

by the universal mechanism of dynamic multivaluedness (section 4.5.1) in elementary bound systems (like

atoms) and then persisting in larger agglomerates of elementary particles. The fundamentally dynamic,

universal and physically transparent origin of this truly (permanently) localised behaviour, appearing

already for microscopic, but bound configurations of several (at least two) particles in the absence of any

external ‘decoherence’, is due to the same phenomenon of dynamic redundance that accounts for nonlocal

behaviour  of  a  free  particle  at  the  lowest  complexity  sublevel.  Indeed,  each  of  the  bound  particles

preserves the dynamically random (probabilistic) character of its quantum-beat jumps, since the largest part

of the fundamental protofield interaction (accounting for the particle rest mass) is always preserved. At the

same time, the probability of jumps separating the bound particles by more than the (small) average system

size quickly (exponentially) drops with growing separation. The only possibility for the elementary bound

system  to  perform  a  nonlocal  chaotic  wandering  as  a  whole  (as  it  happens  to  its  free  ‘quantum’

components)  could  be  realised  if  the  components  could  perform  many random jumps in almost one

direction.  But  since  each  of  them  is  independently  random  (being  driven  by  the  strong  protofield

interaction), the probability of a large sequence of such highly correlated jumps is extremely low.

Therefore the bound system, in the irregular, ‘distributed’ part of its dynamics, exhibits only small

random jerks while remaining almost at one place as a whole because each of the bound components tries

to ‘pull’ its partners in a randomly chosen direction of its current jump, which gives vanishing average

result  (this  irregular  part  has,  of  course,  its  regular  ‘envelope’  of  bound  motion,  but  it  plays  only

secondary role in the mechanism of classicality emergence). This kind of behaviour represents a sort of

‘dynamical’, strictly internal ‘Brownian motion’, as opposed to its usual, stochastic, externally driven

x /w q »

 Ux /mqc2 << 1 (where Ux  »

version. It can be rigorously described by the universal theory and criterion of dynamically multivalued
SOC/chaos  emergence,  eq.  (35),  since  the  quantum  beat  frequency  of  each  component,  w q, is much
greater than any bound motion frequency w
x , so that k  = w
x  is the
binding energy and mqc2 = hw q is the total mass-energy of a component), and one deals with a pronounced
case of dynamically multivalued SOC. Thus, in the case of hydrogen atom w
x  coincides with Bohr's
frequency (the reciprocal to the atomic unit of time), while mq is the electron mass, and we obtain k  = a 2,
where a  »
 1/137 is the fine structure constant, which further extends its complex-dynamical interpretation
as  the  reciprocal  of  the  total  realisation  number  for  the  electron  [1]  and  explains  why  and  how  the
smallness of a  ensures the basic stability of the atomic structure of matter. It becomes also clear that
elementary  classical  system  localisation  may  disappear  only  in  a  hypothetical  case  of  ‘relativistic’
interaction,  for  which  the  binding  energy  is  as  high  as  the  mass-energy,  Ux  ~ mqc2,  but  the  system
components themselves can be qualitatively transformed by such strong interaction, and with them maybe

 hw

the system (however, the elementary hadrons and nuclei provide examples of such kind of ‘internally

relativistic’, and still externally stable system, whose quantum behaviour may have thus a nontrivial

explanation and structure alternating chaotically with varying periods of classical localisation).

71

It is interesting that the same explanation and estimate apply also for quite another, essentially

quantum state from the same sublevel of complexity, that of a uniformly moving elementary particle,
where Ux  in the above estimate should be understood as the ‘regular’ part of the total particle energy, Ux  =
mqv2 (v is the particle velocity) [1,2,12,13], so that k  = v2/c2, and dynamically ordered structure of the
moving quantum particle (represented by its de Broglie wave) can be destroyed in favour of a more
randomly structured entity only for relativistic velocities, v »
become increasingly probable (this emerging irregular regime of the relativistic field-particle dynamics can

 c, where particle transformation processes

correspond, at least partially, to classical, rather than quantum behaviour [3]). This universal validity of

the same picture of both globally chaotic and quasi-regular dynamical regimes and their quantitative

description, eqs. (20)-(27), (33)-(35), for different situations and sublevels of complexity responsible for

the  explicit  emergence  of  the  most  fundamental  entities  and  properties  of  the  world  demonstrates

convincingly the universality of the dynamic redundance paradigm that continues at all higher complexity

levels [1], which is to be compared with the efficiency of the conventional ‘science of complexity’ that

should restart its ‘unified’ analysis for every new case and level of ‘macroscopic’ complexity and cannot

propose any consistent involvement of complexity in the fundamental, microscopic levels of the really,

observably unified world dynamics.

Returning to the practically important case of classicality emergence as the ‘generalised phase

transition’  [1]  to  a  higher,  than  purely  quantum,  level  of  complexity,  coinciding  approximately  with

elementary bound system formation, we should emphasize once more the universality and purely dynamic

origin of this mechanism and the related meaning itself of the property of classicality, which does not

depend now on any changing ‘environment’ or external ‘noise’, contrary to the officially accepted idea of

‘decoherence’  as  the  origin  of  classicality  [92,146-149],  containing  much  other  ambiguity,  evident

inconsistency and unfortunately widely used in such applications as quantum computation. Thus, it applies

to abstract space ‘vectors’ which are supposed to be ‘perturbed’ by quite real influences. The problem is

‘resolved’  by  resorting  to  various  special,  arbitrarily  postulated,  ‘suitable’  equations  for  a  kind  of

‘distribution function’ (e. g. ‘density matrix’) with an equally postulated meaning that should replace the

basic wavefunction because of ill-defined ‘decoherence’ which then is indeed ‘obtained’ within such

vicious-circle kind of theory contradicting, in addition, the well-established Schrödinger formalism. The
‘classical’ behaviour thus ‘explained’ is also understood in a correspondingly peculiar way, not as a
causally obtained, persistent and internal localisation of a real system, but rather as a formal ‘selection’ of a
small number of particular quantum states (in a purely abstract ‘space’), having ‘classical’ behaviour due
to ambiguous ‘predictability sieve’ (classicality is interpreted thus rather as an inevitable illusion of the
observer, in that ‘post-modern’ kind of science, where everything is finally reduced to an illusion). It
remains finally unclear what a mathematical ‘decoherence’ of purely abstract entities could mean in terms
of real entities evolution, why it should matter for certain real micro-system dynamics, but not for other,
often much larger quantum systems preserving their quanticity in the same ‘noisy environment’, and why,

in  general,  that  ‘quantum  decoherence’  is  so  different  from  proportionally  diminished  dynamics  of

macroscopic, classical wave, or particle, perturbed by a macroscopic noise. In return, it becomes clear that

‘decoherence’, similar to other ‘post-modern interpretations’ of quantum mechanics, such as various

72

‘quantum histories’ approaches, is reduced to nothing but a tricky, speculative reformulation of the old,

well-known  ‘quantum  mysteries’  remaining  unsolved and deliberately hidden behind ‘very special’,

artificially inserted terminology and abstract, meaningless, postulated mathematics.

A practical consequence for quantum machine description is that ‘decoherence’ theory applications

result  inevitably  in  a  demand  for  a  ‘pure  enough’,  low-noise  environment,  where  a  unitary  quantum

computer could remain as ‘coherent’ as other known ‘essentially quantum’ systems, at least with the help

of a ‘fault-tolerant’ quantum programming [92-107]. We have seen, however, that the truly fundamental,

and thus necessarily internal (dynamic), origin of classicality constitutes also the universal origin of the

true, intrinsic randomness within every quantum and classical state and in the world dynamics in general,

so that any real, productive operation, including calculation, cannot be realised as a unitary process in

principle, irrespective of the technical ‘tricks’ applied. Note that noisy environment can, of course, exert

additional influence on quantum and classical state dynamics and in particular modify, in certain cases and

to a certain degree, classical behaviour emergence, but even in the absence of any such external noise one

always has the major, dynamic, omnipresent and unavoidable source of strong randomness and the above-

specified realistic classicality, which provides the ‘main effect’ in the form of dynamic redundance of any

real interaction. This comparison illustrates the fundamental, and practically important, difference between

the unitary, dynamically single-valued imitation and dynamically multivalued description of reality in

general: the unreduced interaction analysis of the latter approach gives the unified dynamical origin of both

regularity and randomness, which appear as one, indivisible, chaotic process of probabilistic realisation

change  with  dynamically  varying  parameters,  while  the  single-valued  projection  of  reality  can  only

postulate its unitary, absolutely regular imitation and is forced therefore to mechanistically superimpose

upon it some equally unexplained, external ‘noise’, ‘predictability sieve’, etc., in order to account for the

observed dynamical, changing, but inseparable mixture of order and randomness (this unitary science

‘method’ is used also by the conventional, dynamically single-valued ‘science of complexity’, despite all

its ‘dynamical’ and ‘nonlinear’ terminology, cf. sections 4.1, 4.5.2 and ref. [1]).

As  concerns  recently  reported  and  apparently  ‘successful’  experimental  demonstrations  of

extremely simplified versions of conventional ‘quantum computation’, it may finally appear that they

actually reproduce, at a small scale, the visible unitarity of macroscopic, classical computers due to a
relatively large number of participating units/states which realise a ‘semi-classical’ operation and classical
measurement procedures at the expense of some relatively small ‘inaccuracy’, as if ‘acceptable’ for these
‘first demonstrations’ (we leave apart a possibility of direct errors, or ‘loopholes’, known to happen in
such rather sophisticated experiments and their result interpretation). Those ‘small deviations’ are not
acceptable,  however,  in  a  full-scale  unitary  computation  and  cannot  be  decreased,  while  all  the
‘semiclassical’ concessions should be abandoned for the full realisation of the promised quantum computer
advantages, which can only increase the ‘small errors’. As a result, one does not see any larger-scale
demonstration  of  unitary  quantum  computation,  despite  the  confirmed  high  possibilities  of  modern

experimental  techniques  in  quantum  physics  and  sufficiently  old  age  of  ‘miraculous’  theoretical

expectations  for  unitary  computers.  Note,  by  the  way,  that  the  origin  of  irreducible  ‘imperfections’

observed  in  real  quantum  (including  optical)  devices  and  ‘generally’  attributed  to  that  ambiguous

73

‘decoherence’ (see e. g. [79]) will often be reduced just to the dynamic redundance of the ‘main’, driving

interaction  processes  (apart  from  cases  of  direct  noisy  influences).  The  persisting  uncertainties  with

practical realisation of unitary quantum computation, as well as hidden doubts about its possibility in

principle, can explain a ‘strange’ and growing tendency in last-time publications on quantum information

processing towards ‘purely theoretic (mathematical)’ development of this computation scheme which has

grown up exclusively due to its theoretically ‘proven’ and widely publicised advantages in practical

applications (such as ‘miraculous’ efficiency and unlimited universality).

Another experimental effect contradicting the official decoherence theory and confirming our

mechanism of dynamic classicality emergence is the existence of quantum, undular behaviour for rather

large systems, such as various ‘quantum condensates’ (superfluidity, superconductivity, gaseous atomic

Bose-condensates) and diffraction of big atomic agglomerates/molecules (see [3,12] for further details and

references),  which  should  normally  have  a  classical  type  of  dynamics.  This  ‘return’  of  quanticity  in

certain, rather exotic, cases of a next level of interaction between elementary classical systems looks

absurd within the decoherence theory (since there is always more of decoherence in a larger system), but

can be naturally explained in the quantum field mechanics. Indeed, in our theory classicality is obtained as

a purely dynamic result of the main (binding) system interaction, and therefore another interaction with a

suitable magnitude, to which the system thus formed participates, can modify, at least partially, the result

of the first interaction and provoke, in particular, the ‘magic’ reappearance of undular effects. Due to the

property  of  intrinsic  dynamic  instability  of  any  complex  dynamics  described  above  and  appearing

especially during unceasing system ‘jumps’ between its realisations, the former ‘classical’ system (e. g.

atom or molecule) does not need to be destroyed in order to reproduce the essentially quantum behaviour

of its components. It is sufficient for the (small) ‘classical’ system dynamics to enter in proper resonance

condition (cf. eq. (35)) with another such system or external ‘interaction potential’, and the quantum

jumps of its components can become correlated ‘in the direction of force’ (for the period of essential

interaction),  thus  cancelling  the  above  dynamical  cause  of  classical  localisation.  Such  more  special

interaction configuration becomes less and less probable with growing number of participants (system

mass) and therefore the ‘quantum revivals’ become the more and more exotic for ever larger systems,

demonstrating the dynamically  fractal structure of the border between quantum (lower) and classical
(higher) levels of complexity characteristic for all structures and borders produced by the real, unreduced
complexity development (the dynamically fractal ‘density distribution’ of a border is often imitated in the
unitary science by the statistically averaged ‘asymptotic limit’, including in particular the conventional
‘(semi)classical limit’) [1,12,13]. The dynamically fractal character of the quantum-classical boundary
confirmed experimentally for various system kinds provides, therefore, an additional support for the direct
involvement  of  unreduced  complexity  (dynamic  multivaluedness)  in  quantum  behaviour,  classical
dynamics, and the transition between them, further amplifying thus the existing noncontradictory system
of other correlations within the quantum field mechanics (see e. g. section 3 in ref. [3]).

The  dynamical,  interaction-driven  switches  from  quantum  to  classical  behaviour  and  back,

occurring  at  neighbouring  sublevels  of  micro-system  dynamics,  should  naturally  happen  within  any

nontrivial micro-machine operation, determining the links between its lowest, essentially quantum levels

74

and the surrounding macroscopic, purely classical world. The above unified picture of complex interaction

dynamics shows that one cannot, and actually should not, avoid such part quantum, part classical, or

‘hybrid’,  character  of  micro-machine  dynamics,  contrary  to  the  unitary  theory  illusions,  where  the

calculation as such is performed exclusively by (unrealistically) ‘coherent’ quantum dynamics which is

mechanistically separated from its unavoidable final transformation into a classical, practically accessible

output. We have seen above that in reality the essential nonunitarity is present at every stage and interaction

act  of  micro-machine  operation,  and  simply  takes  different  forms  for  the  characteristic  cases  of

Hamiltonian  (but  truly  random)  quantum  chaos  (representing  the  realistic  extension  of  unitary

‘computation’ as such), slightly dissipative quantum measurement (causally complete extension of the

canonical version), and the SOC regimes of emerging semi-classicality and classicality, where all types of

behaviour appear dynamically and therefore inseparably mixed in a unified complex dynamics outlined

above. It is the unreduced complex dynamics itself that properly attributes the ‘roles’ and ‘functions’ to

different regimes that arise (probabilistically) just there where they are necessary (it is the universal

property of dynamic adaptability of the multivalued dynamics [1], see also section 4.4). Thus, the strongly

chaotic and distributed regime of quantum chaos (sections 4.6.2, 5.2.1, 6) performs the main work of

efficient change of system states in the course of its complexity development (section 7), while quantum

measurement  ‘collects’  the  ‘ripe’  results  of  this  development  and  progressively  transfers  them  into

macroscopically useful states of multivalued classicality forming the directly readable ‘output’.

Note in this connection that the above complex-dynamical pictures of real quantum measurement

and classical state dynamics show that the key stage of quantum measurement process can be considered

as a ‘transient’, ‘half-made’ classical state which is later transformed into fully classical states of other

instrument components by further interaction development within the instrument [1-4,10-13]. This result

provides the causally complete explanation for the instrument ‘classicality’ emphasised in the conventional

theory, but remaining inconsistent (we show, in particular, what the exact physical meaning of classicality

is and how it dynamically emerges in purely quantum instrument components, starting from its noiseless

interaction with the measured quantum object). On the other hand, the ‘coherent’, ‘essentially quantum’

dynamics of the lowest level of complexity exists mainly within elementary components of a quantum

machine (with some occasional appearances at a higher sublevel of interaction results) and also has the
multivalued, chaotic internal structure which, however, can be better ‘synchronised’ and hidden within the
observed ‘coherent’ envelopes at this exceptional, lowest complexity level.

Another  indispensable  role  of  the  dynamic  classicality  and  quantum  measurement  in  the  real
quantum machine operation is related to the function of memory. The unreduced interaction analysis of the
universal science of complexity confirms the evident conclusion, almost deliberately neglected by the
unitary computation theory, that any memory, including both memorisation and storage, can be realised as
such only by the strongly irreversible, and thus certainly nonunitary, dynamics [1]. The above detailed
description of the characteristic results of a complex interaction process shows that any reasonably stable,

useful memory (including memorisation, storage, and retrieval) can be realised in the form of a well-

defined SOC type of states, and thus actually as classical states, for a long-term memory and SOC-type (e.

g. excited) quantum states for a short-term memory (indeed, every ‘object’ stored in memory is a ‘bound’

75

state, by definition, and our dynamical picture of classicality, and SOC in general, only provides this

general notion with a well-specified meaning). In other words, any memory can only be based on a rather

well-defined (distinct and stable enough) structure, already because memory stores, by definition, definite

structures and even imposes them during retrieval. This evident property of memory is in contradiction
with  the  uncontrolled  uncertainty  of  the  essentially  quantum  system.*)  These  fundamental,  and  now
dynamically  substantiated,  properties  of  memory  demonstrate  the  unavoidable  way  of  unreduced

classicality and quantum measurement emergence in the dynamics of a quantum machine with memory,

and also show how far from reality and the simplest consistency the conventional quantum computation

theory can go in its attempt of artificial memory insertion into the unitary quantum evolution.

Actually the whole dynamically multivalued picture of real micro-system dynamics, basically

unpredictable in detail and therefore creative, but also dynamically probabilistic and therefore rigorously

described,  leads  to  quite  another  understanding  of  the  essence  and  purpose  of  natural  and  artificial

machines performing both ‘calculation’ and ‘production’ within the same, internally ‘liberated’ (adaptable)

dynamical process (see also sections 5, 7, 8). The unitary schemes of conventional quantum computation

cannot reproduce the most essential features of real system dynamics and its results even approximately;

by avoiding the real interaction complexity within their invariably perturbative analysis, they so to speak

‘throw  away  the  baby  with  the  water’  and  neglect  just  the  unreduced  calculation  result  emergence,

replacing it with a grotesquely simplified, dynamically single-valued, unchangeable projection. The same

refers to various artificial, a posteriori modifications of the canonical unitary scheme, trying as if to take

into account ‘real system dynamics’, ‘influence of noise’, or ‘quantum measurement’, but remaining

hopelessly abstract, perturbative and dynamically single-valued. Indeed, instead of finding the unreduced

solution of the dynamical equations describing the underlying dynamical process, the majority of ‘quantum

programming’ schemes operate with the assumed results of abstract, and actually unrealistic, unitary

evolution by constructing various ‘suitable’ linear compositions of symbolical ‘state vectors’, but when an

essential  stage  of  creation  or  transformation  of  those  ‘quantum  bits’  intervenes,  they  just  rely  on  an

arbitrary postulate about its results always equivalent to a perturbative, evidently incorrect approximation

(we have seen above, in sections 3.2-3.3, 4.2, 4.4, why the perturbative expansions, including those for

the unitary evolution operator, are qualitatively different from reality and what will be the result of the
unreduced, nonperturbative analysis, see also section 5.1 below).

Note also that the ‘probabilistic’, or ‘indeterministic’ elements or stages sometimes introduced into
unitary quantum computation schemes are quite different from the dynamically probabilistic effects of the
unreduced  interaction:  the  former  are  characterised  by  rigidly  fixed  probabilities  which  are  actually

*) As shown above, the unitary control of unitary quantum dynamics [100,105,106] is but another, vicious-circle illusion of
the perturbative approach closed within its own, evident limitations, since any real, and in particular ‘controlling’ (change-
inducing), interaction gives rise to the irreducible dynamic redundance and randomness, which leads to a relatively large
uncertainty at the lowest, quantum levels of dynamics. However, even if one assumes that purely quantum control can be
efficient, then it follows that for memorising some distinct enough, and in particular classically localised, state structure the
‘essentially quantum’ memory should reproduce classical configuration, which reveals a contradiction. The rigorous analysis
of the unreduced science of complexity confirms the fundamental origin of this contradiction, since it shows that everything
‘classical’ emerges from ‘quantum’ as a higher level of the well-defined dynamic complexity, and therefore no purely quantum
system can exhaustively reproduce a classically complex behaviour without violating the unified complexity conservation law
(see also below, sections 5.2.2, 7.1, 7.2).

76

eliminated from the process of computation as such, which ensures its ‘miraculous’ efficiency, irrespective

of the mechanistically added, stochastic randomness. Even without the detailed dynamic analysis it is not

difficult to see, however, that a small deviation in the expected value of thus introduced probability, which

cannot be avoided in practice, will ruin the whole scheme by creating the dynamically ‘jumping’ and

therefore uncontrollable randomness, with fatal consequences for the massive unitary calculations. The

false, mechanistic ‘indeterminism’ is therefore nothing but another manifestation of the general ‘method’

of artificial randomness insertion into the regular unitary dynamics, basically similar to ‘quantum chaos’

imitations [14] (see also section 6) and other cases of such stochastic, non-dynamical and inconsistent,

introduction of the empirically observed randomness. By contrast, the real, dynamically multivalued

micro-machines, including their successfully operating natural versions, obtain their main advantages just

from the omnipresent dynamic chaoticity which uniquely ensures the true miracle of creation (of interaction

results), at the expense of some unavoidable, but rather positive uncertainty (see also sections 7, 8). Thus,

irregularity of the emerging natural micro- and macro-structures, including those of living organisms, is a

sign of their higher, rather than lower, dynamical symmetry (the universal symmetry of complexity [1])

underlying their real possibilities (like self-reproduction and very large, dynamic, and creative adaptability)

which exceed qualitatively the illusive efficiency of ‘regularly symmetric’ products of unitary thinking,

even though there is always an appreciable probability of failure of every complex-dynamical function

(sections 7-9).

In a similar way, the property of dynamic entanglement of the unreduced interaction process,

accompanying its dynamic multivaluedness (section 4.2), is fundamentally different from the unitary

‘quantum  entanglement’,  by  both  irreducible  universality  of  the  former  and  unrealistic,  and  even

‘mystical’, interpretation of the latter. While the dynamic entanglement involves real, fractally structured,

inseparable,  and  permanently  changing  mixing  between  the  interaction  components,  constituting  the

essence of the chaotic realisation change, the conventional quantum entanglement, concerning exclusively

interaction between several quantum particles, implies a mechanistically fixed, non-dynamical, purely

mathematical and separable (linear) combination of ‘state vectors’, closely related to the ‘exact-solution’

logic  of  the  unitary  paradigm  (see  section  5.3).  It  is  the  illusive  regularity  of  the  mystical  ‘quantum

entanglement’  that  determines  much  of  the  expected  ‘magic’  properties  of  conventional  quantum
computation, and it is the probabilistic fractality and inseparability of real, essentially nonlinear dynamic
entanglement that replaces the impossible ‘free’ advantages by quite real magic of distributed complex-
dynamical creation.

Taking into account the above necessarily brief, but basically complete description of the realistic,
unreduced system evolution obtained by the rigorous solution of the underlying many-body problem, eqs.
(20)-(31), we can see now what a huge, practically significant and genuinely complex dynamical hierarchy
of  events  filled  with  numerous  links  and  conceptually  specific  phenomena  is  irreversibly  lost  in  the
conventional theory in exchange for a deceptive ‘unreasonable efficiency’ of the perturbative unitary

imitation. Its actual inefficiency appears through the basic fact of nonunitarity of any real micro-machine

operation, including the unavoidable dynamical randomness of any single event of a real interaction

process. Whereas this fundamentally substantiated conclusion completely devaluates the conventional,

77

unitary  science  of  ‘quantum  computing’  (as  well  as  equally  unitary  imitations  of  ‘quantum  chaos’,

‘randomness’ and ‘complexity’, see also section 6), it opens up much wider prospects for micro-machine

creation as explicitly chaotic, dynamically multivalued devices with qualitatively larger possibilities which

are already  realised  in  all  natural  ‘micro-machines’  (or  ‘nanostructures’)  determining  operation  and

development of the natural physical, chemical and living systems, from the simplest molecules and surface

structures to viruses and genetic code dynamics. The evidently ‘hybrid’, ‘quantum-and-classical’ origin

and chaotic dynamics of those natural micro-machines provide an important general agreement with the

obtained rigorous solution of the (quantum or classical) many-body problem, its dynamical properties and

universality, whereas the empirically well-known results of the natural micro-machine dynamics confirm

the  practically  unlimited  possibilities  of  such  unreduced  complex  dynamics.  The  properties  of  the

unreduced complexity, consistently obtained within the dynamic redundance paradigm [1-4,9-13] and

briefly  described  above  (sections  4.1-4.5),  such  as  dynamic  adaptability,  dynamic  fractality  (self-

development), and intrinsic unification between regularity and randomness, actually explain the observed

properties of real interaction processes, remaining fundamentally inaccessible to the unitary approach,

which shows that the desired reproduction of all the possibilities of unreduced complexity in artificial (and

modified natural) micro-machines can be a realistic task, but only if one uses the unreduced, dynamically

multivalued description of all the interactions involved and the corresponding conceptual extension of the

approach applied with respect to the conventional, unitary thinking dominated by the purely ‘calculative’,

one-dimensional logic (see also sections 7-9).

An additional, and very important, confirmation of the validity of the proposed extended approach

comes from the fact that it provides the unique, totally consistent, realistic and intrinsically unified picture

of the whole micro- and macro-world dynamics involving rigorous and physically transparent solutions of

the known fundamental problems [1-4,9-13] mentioned above (section 4.6) and remaining irresolvable

within  the  conventional,  unitary  science,  despite  all  the  ‘post-modern’  plays  of  words  in  its  official

sources.  This  property  of  the  unreduced,  complex-dynamical  (multivalued)  description  of  the  world

reflects its intrinsically cosmological character: every entity, law, or property can only be explicitly and

causally derived from lower-level entities, in exact correspondence with their real emergence (creation)

processes, as opposed to positivistic, purely mechanistic ‘registration’ of the empirical observation results
in  the  conventional  science  and  its  version  of  ‘cosmology’  containing  nothing  but  effectively  one-
dimensional, unrealistic ‘photograph’ of already existing, basically unchanged, and fatally simplified
entities and their properties (including the formally postulated dependence on abstract time-parameter, cf.
sections  4.3,  7.1).  It  is  important  that  the  complex-dynamical,  explicitly  creative  cosmology  of  the
universal science of complexity comprises within its unified picture the dynamically multivalued processes
of emergence of all existing entities (including their unreduced properties and evolution laws), starting
from  the  elementary  field-particles,  physical  space,  and  time  themselves,  and  up  to  structures  and
phenomena from the highest perceived complexity levels, such as human consciousness and all products

of its activity (classified as ‘inexact’, explicitly subjective knowledge within the conventional, unitary

science).

78

In  that  way,  the  characteristic  ‘irresolvable’  problems  from  the  fundamental  levels  of  the

conventional cosmology, such as the problems of time, the wavefunction of the universe, classical world

emergence and evolution, structure creation and the law of energy degradation, are naturally solved from

the beginning [1-4,11-13], together with similar problems from higher complexity levels, such as life

emergence and evolution. The first stages of the real, physical universe evolution are naturally obtained

thus as explicit emergence of the first complexity levels of the world, where the purely ‘geometric’ accent

and totally abstract, zero-complexity picture of the conventional ‘general relativity’ and related ‘Big-Bang’

cosmology (including all its ‘modified’, ‘post-modern’ versions) look as explicitly wrong, really over-
simplified imitations of reality.*) The link between the fundamental world structure (quantum cosmology),
quantum computation, and other related applications of quantum mechanics has been extensively (and

speculatively) exploited within the unitary theory of quantum information tending to present the world as a

gigantic  unitary  computer  (see  e.  g.  [62,63,74,75,76]  and  section  7  for  more  details).  However,  the

obtained causally complete results of the quantum field mechanics permit us to state now that the universe

is rather the process of unceasing creation distributed in the permanently evolving space and time and

qualitatively different from the unitary ‘calculation’ schemes, at all levels of complexity (cf. section 9). The

unreduced, physically real information represented by the extended action and generalised potential energy

is qualitatively transformed, in the course of those creative interaction processes, into the dual complexity

form, generalised dynamical entropy (section 7.1) [1], as opposed to mechanistic ‘reading’ of a ‘ready-

made’,  given  ‘world  programme’  expressed  in  terms  of  purely  abstract,  dimensionless  ‘bits’  in  the

conventional  theory.  The  real,  irreducibly  multivalued  micro-machine  operation,  as  well  as  any

computation process, represent therefore particular manifestations of the intrinsically unified, universally

expressed and uniquely directed symmetry  of  complexity, this conclusion and the underlying causally

complete picture having important practical consequences for further technological, social and intellectual

development (sections 7-9).

*) It is not difficult to see, in particular, that the recently re-established ‘brain-world’ schemes from the official field theory
and cosmology represent but a unitary, purely abstract, and formally imposed imitation of the physically real and unified
system of two interacting protofields from the quantum field mechanics. This system is the simplest possible, and therefore
inevitable, case of ‘world-wide’ interaction that does not contain a priori any observed structure. The latter, starting from the
elementary field-particles is consistently and progressively derived, in full compliance with observations (including realistic
resolution of the canonical ‘quantum mysteries’, causal, intrinsic relativity, dynamically unified and explained fundamental
interactions, etc.). By contrast, the same structures, in their strongly reduced, abstract and contradictory version (including the
‘necessary’  number  of  pre-existing,  abstract  ‘dimensions’),  are  artificially  inserted  (postulated)  in  any  field-theoretical
imitation of reality, together with a long series of ‘fundamental principles’ and other abstract rules describing their behaviour.
Such are the conventional, microscopic ‘strings’ and ‘branes’, whose redundant number of versions, separation from reality
and between them, and inconsistent interference with, or mechanistic ‘extension’ to, the macroscopic ‘world brane’ only
confirm the fundamental, irreducible limits of the unitary, dynamically single-valued imitation of reality.

79

5.  Dynamically  multivalued  computation
by  real  quantum  and  hybrid  machines

5.1.  The  myth  of  unitary  quantum  computation:
its  formal  origin  and  impossibility  of  realisation

The above rigorous analysis and solution of the generalised many-body problem (sections 3, 4) has

revealed  the  fundamental  origin  of  the  irreducible  dynamic  randomness  and  consistently  defined

complexity in any real system (interaction process) thus confirming the basic deficiency of the unitary

quantum  computation,  as  it  was  outlined  in  section  2  in  terms  of  more  general,  qualitative  (but  still

fundamental) arguments. Now we can provide a more specific and complete application of the obtained

unreduced, complex-dynamical interaction description to the problem of computation by sufficiently

simple structures containing essentially quantum elements or dynamical regimes. What we mean here by

‘computation’ is the real micro-system dynamics and its results, specified in our approach as a set of

dynamically interconnected system realisations (section 3.3), rather than formal manipulation with abstract

symbols or mathematical ‘bits’ artificially attached to a simplified unitary ‘model’. A more general theory

of real computation, including its fundamental definition and related criteria, is given in section 7.

We begin with a summary of the exact, rigorously specified meaning and origin of unitarity of the

conventional  quantum  computation,  including  its  impossibility  in  real  systems  and  related  illusive,

‘magically  high’  efficiency.  As  rigorously  shown  above  (see  especially  sections  4.5-7),  any  system

evolution, determined by the unreduced development of the driving interaction within the system, contains

the intrinsic, irreducible and omnipresent randomness of purely dynamic origin designated as dynamic

redundance phenomenon, i. e. permanent system jumps between its different, but equally real states, or

realisations, taken by the system in a causally random, chaotic order. It is clear that this genuine and

inevitable randomness, occurring within any real, even elementary, interaction process, excludes any

unitarity in principle. In particular, the dynamically chaotic change of realisations provides the intrinsic

source of irreversibility and the unceasing, irreversible flow of the physically specified time [1,11-13] (see

also sections 4.3, 7.1), which agrees with the observed reality properties and diverges from the intrinsic

reversibility of unitary evolution. Moreover, our analysis reveals the exact origin and meaning of the
unitary model of natural processes, constituting the basis of the conventional fundamental physics: it
corresponds to incorrect, perturbative reduction of the system dynamics to only one, arbitrarily ‘averaged’
or empirically adjusted, realisation, whereas all other realisations, extremely numerous and diverse in any
real case, as well as chaotic transitions between them, are totally neglected or inconsistently imitated by
‘stochastic’ effects of external ‘noisy influences’ upon the single realisation, which does not change the
basic,  dynamic  single-valuedness,  and  thus  unitarity,  of  those  reduced,  ‘exact’  solutions  of  the
conventional approach.

The transient motion of a real system in each of its realisation is indeed approximately unitary (if

one neglects other levels of the fractally structured complexity within each realisation, cf. section 4.4), but

it  is  always  interrupted  soon  enough  by  a  chaotic  jump  into  another,  randomly  chosen  realisation

occurring,  in  addition,  through  a  rapid  transition  to  a  qualitatively  different,  delocalised  state  of  the

80

intermediate realisation constituting the generalised, causal system wavefunction, or distribution function

(section 4.2). The system evolution in the whole, representing also the universal internal structure of any

interaction  process,  consists  therefore  from  such  small  ‘pieces’  of  ‘under-developed’  (approximate)

unitarity separated by explicitly nonunitary (but dynamically continuous) jumps, so that the quasi-unitary

evolution within any single realisation can barely have enough time to fully develop (stabilise) itself before
it is interrupted by a next irregular jump.*) It is important here that the highly nonuniform, essentially
nonlinear jumps, involving system transformation between ‘localised’ and ‘delocalised’ states (generalised

dynamical ‘collapse’/entanglement and extension/disentanglement), are consistently derived as natural

results of the same interaction that forms each pseudo-unitary (regular) realisation structure, and therefore

they cannot be neglected with respect to those quasi-unitary components, as it is done in the conventional

approach by inconsistent extension of its perturbation theory approximation.

The unitary model imitation of reality may seem to be closer to observations for one limiting case of

the dynamically multivalued behaviour, the generalised, multivalued SOC (self-organised criticality),

where the system realisations closely resemble each other and therefore their (relatively frequent) change

can remain unnoticed (section 4.5.1). However, as pointed out in the above sections, this regime has little

chance of appearance just within the essentially quantum interaction dynamics which can be causally

understood (section 4.6) rather as the opposite limiting case of complex behaviour, the uniform chaos

regime (section 4.5.2), characterised by relatively big difference between realisations and visible, large

manifestations  of  ‘quantum’  jumps  between  them.  The  standard,  analytically  derived  properties  of

dynamically multivalued behaviour in the uniform, or ‘global’, chaos regime provide the causally complete

explanation for the specific, ‘quantum’ features of elementary micro-system dynamics, such as ‘quantum

uncertainty’  and  ‘indeterminacy’  and  discreteness  (quantization)  universally  determined  by  Planck's

constant [1-4,11-13] (see also section 5.3), which are invariably endowed with a mystical air of ‘veiled

reality’  [16]  (or  ‘shadows  of  the  mind’  [15])  in  the  unitary  quantum  theory  based  upon  the  same,

dynamically single-valued and necessarily abstract model of the world (it imposes indeed an artificial

limitation, or ‘veil’, upon the genuine, dynamically multivalued, interactional and living world content,

consistently ‘unveiled’ in the quantum field mechanics once the evident simplification of the perturbative

approach  is  abandoned).  Even  when  a  particular,  delocalised  version  of  self-organised  multivalued
structure, such as physically real de Broglie wave [1,2,11-13], appears in the quantum dynamics, giving
rise  to  the  causally  explained  property  of  quantum  coherence  (section  5.3),  it  involves  a  very  small
dynamic proportion of regularity that cannot be actually controlled by interaction with other objects, since
it arises from the very first level of interaction between the primordial protofields giving rise to every
perceivable entity of this world.

It is only at a higher complexity level of classical behaviour, starting approximately with the
elementary  bound  state  formation  (such  as  atoms),  that  the  (externally)  more  ordered  behaviour  and
distinct, actually controllable structures of the SOC regime first appear in interaction between essentially

*) This picture provides the causally complete, dynamically specified and universally applicable version of the popular idea of
‘punctuated equilibrium’ obtained in various forms and fields of science as formal generalisation of empirical observations
clearly demonstrating the qualitatively uneven character of natural development that remains fundamentally mysterious within
any conventional, unitary interpretation.

81

quantum,  uniformly  chaotic  components  (section  4.7).  Therefore  the  conventional,  unitary  theory  of

quantum computation, including all its ‘quantum control’ schemes and mathematical fight against fictitious

‘decoherence’, ignores both the real, complex-dynamical (multivalued) content of the essentially quantum

behaviour and the inevitable emergence and utility of classical elements within the inseparably unified,

self-developing  micro-system  dynamics  (as  it  happens  in  all  natural  ‘nanomachines’,  starting  from

functional molecules). The dynamical ‘phase transition’ from the clearly step-wise, ‘yes-or-no’ type of

essentially quantum behaviour to more continuous, ‘fine-grained’ motions of classical type, allowing for

their efficient (precise) control, is a necessary and common element of any practically useful micro-

machine operation.

The finite irreducible increments of time, D

t, and space, D x, in a regime of quantum, explicitly
irregular and uneven dynamics are expressed through the fundamental, universally fixed increment of
action, D A, known as Planck's constant, |D A| = h [1-4,12,13]. The quantized action element describes, in
the extended interpretation of the universal science of complexity (see also sections 7.1, 7.2), the internally

nonlinear, step-wise qualitative transformation of the unreduced dynamic (integral) complexity during one

elementary cycle of system evolution including its reduction to the current realisation and the following

transition to the next realisation. The lowest, properly ‘quantum’ levels of complexity differ from higher
levels by the universally fixed value of this complexity-action quantum (negative by sign), D A = - h
(whereas at higher levels the complexity transformation quanta |D A| >> h are not strictly fixed and can
vary, usually around several characteristic values of action). The elementary complexity change appears as

emerging space structure element, and therefore it is proportional to both space and time increments with

the coefficients known as energy, E, (with the negative sign) and momentum, p:

D A = -ED

t + pD x .                                                           (36a)

This relation is known from classical mechanics, but it acquires a universal and physically meaningful,

essentially nonlinear interpretation in the unreduced science of complexity (see also section 7.1).

Now, if we are interested only in the full temporal increment of action for a quantum system (so
that D x = 0 in eq. (36a)), this fundamental relation, reflecting the underlying complex dynamics, takes a
familiar form, simply postulated in the conventional quantum mechanics, starting from the pioneering
work of Max Planck on the black-body radiation (see [3] for the detailed story and references):

e   = hn  ,                                                                  (36b)

e  is the corresponding energy change (equal e. g. to the discrete energy-level separation), h = -D A
t is the frequency of the process in

where D
is the mentioned universal increment of complexity-action, and n  = 1/D
question (equal e. g. to the frequency of radiation exciting the transition between the neighbouring energy
levels, cf. the resonant condition and mechanism of global chaos, eq. (35)). It is important to understand
that because of the complex-dynamical discreteness of the underlying interaction process (section 4.3) the

elementary ‘step’ of the quantum system evolution described by eqs. (36) cannot be further subdivided

into smaller parts or physically ‘traced’ in its continuous development, contrary to what is often done

within mathematical theory of unitary quantum computation, conventional quantum chaos and related

82

D
‘fine’ experimentation schemes, in contradiction with even the standard quantization postulate of the

conventional quantum mechanics.

The  dynamically  inhomogeneous  evolution  of  any  real  quantum  system  is  simulated,  in  the

conventional theory and its applications to quantum computation, by the unitary ‘evolution operator’, U,

having the standard, exponential form for the time-independent (conservative) system:

U = e- 

i
h Ht

 ,                                                                  (37)

where H is the system Hamiltonian (operator), and in the general case of time-dependent Hamiltonian the
term Ht/h in this expression should be replaced by a certain (unknown) Hermitian operator. Although it is
supposed that H has a generically discrete essential spectrum, according to the standard quantization

postulates the action of the unitary evolution operator smoothly depending on time, eq. (37), upon the

system wavefunction (or ‘density matrix’, in the corresponding formalism) will contain a superposition of

smoothly varying, regular functions that differs dramatically from the highly uneven, intermittent and

permanently, chaotically changing mixture of transient quasi-unitary realisations and probabilistic jumps

between them described above for the unreduced, real-system evolution. This comparison demonstrates

the essential difference between the postulated, dynamically single-valued projection of the conventional

theory, which is apparently ‘successfully verified’ only in the case of simplest, quasi-regular (separable,

or integrable) problems, and the underlying real, dynamically multivalued evolution that determines any

quantum system behaviour, but shows especially pronounced, irreducible deviations from the unitary

imitation for more complicated, ‘nonintegrable’ (or ‘nonseparable’) problems.

Indeed,  the  standard  evolution  operator  expression  of  eq.  (37)  is  obtained  by  the  postulated

extension  of  a  result  valid  only  for  the  exact,  eigenvalue  problem  solution  on  which  the  operator  is

supposed to act. This is equivalent to the unjustified, and actually incorrect, extension of a perturbation

theory result, that can be obtained in the ‘closed’ form of ‘exact’ solution, to the arbitrary, ‘nonintegrable’

problem case, whereas the same conventional theory cannot say at all what should actually ‘happen’ to

such ‘nonseparable’ system (it tends to assume that there should be ‘some’ solution, generally similar to

the assumed perturbative one). Our unreduced interaction analysis shows that contrary to superficial hopes

of the canonical theory, something very special does happen to any ‘nonseparable’, and thus actually any
real, system once one avoids any fatal reduction of perturbational approach. The real ‘evolution operator’,
even if it could have sense, cannot have the form of a smooth, exponential, or trigonometric, or any other
‘analytic’ function of time (like that of eq. (37) with an arbitrary anti-Hermitian operator in the exponent),
since  its  unreduced  action  on  any  real-system  state  would  immediately  produce  hierarchical  system
splitting into incompatible realisations, which automatically kills the assumed unitarity because of the
related dynamical randomness, nonlinear jumps between realisations, etc.

Extensive  applications  of  the  basically  incorrect  construction  of  unitary  evolution  operator  to
quantum  computation  problem  (and  other  cases  of  many-body  problem)  contain  further  incorrect

approximations reduced to the same kind of unjustified extension of perturbative analysis results. Since for

any nontrivial, nonintegrable problem the action of the formal evolution operator cannot be obtained in a

‘closed’, analytical form (which is equivalent to problem integration), the applications using this formalism

83

are forced to resort to a perturbation theory approximation, equivalent to the assumed smallness of the

exponent determined by the characteristic action value expressed in units of Planck's constant. However,

already  the  canonical  ‘quantization  postulate’  (causally  derived  and  extended  in  the  quantum  field

mechanics  as  a  standard  property  of  the  underlying  complex  dynamics  [1-4,12,13])  shows  that  this

quantity can take only integer values and cannot therefore be smaller than one by absolute value.

In the case of quantum computation theory, the ‘necessary’ perturbative smallness is often obtained

by artificial subdivision of time, and thus evolution, into small enough intervals, after which the expansion

of  the  assumed  exponential  function  within  each  interval  transforms  the  problem  into  an  effectively

integrable  one,  permitting  various  manipulations  with  the  unitary  evolution  operator  in  the  limit  of

infinitely small time intervals. The obtained results are said then to be valid for the unreduced system

evolution. It is clear, already from a general point of view, that the problem decomposition into solvable

subproblems cannot be as trivial as that, and the committed error is hidden in the assumed possibility of

formal, arbitrary division of time (evolution), which is related also to the mechanistic, ‘parametric’ role of

time in the unitary paradigm that does not see its genuine, dynamical origin just related to the complex-

dynamical discreteness, or ‘quantization’, of a real interaction process [1-4,11-13] (section 4.3).

As we have seen above, in reality the system evolution cannot be represented as mechanistic

addition (sequence) of practically independent small increments. It is composed of naturally emerging,

inhomogeneous cycles, where each cycle is relatively big in the case of essentially quantum dynamics and

combines system transient motion in a current realisation with its chaotic transition from a previous (or to

the next) realisation, thus determining both causal, dynamic quantization of motion and relatively big one-

step advance of the real, physical time of this level actually counted just by those cyclical events of

dynamical reduction to and extension from a current realisation. In terms of the formal time division into

increasingly  small  intervals,  this  means  that  the  evolution  within  each  subsequent  interval  is  not

independent of the previous intervals: consecutive (artificial) intervals gradually ‘accumulate’ potentialities

for the system chaotic transition to another realisation, and at certain ‘moment’ (within certain interval) the

system  starts  leaving  its  current  realisation  and  taking  the  next,  randomly  chosen  one,  in  a

‘catastrophically’ uneven, self-amplifying way which is a qualitative violation of the assumed unitarity,

since it cannot be described by smooth, unitary ‘small increments’ even within the chosen ‘small interval’
of time. Therefore the formal time division into small intervals, introducing a version of perturbation
theory,  does  not  have  sense  for  real,  intrinsically  non-perturbative  quantum  system  dynamics:  any
smallness  will  always  be  broken  and  overridden  by  self-amplifying,  essentially  nonlinear  reduction-
extension cycles of the dynamically multivalued interaction development.

The  only  type  of  time  intervals  which  is  pertinent  to  real  quantum  dynamics  is  given  by  the
unreduced, essentially nonlinear version of that dynamics itself, in the form of duration of unbroken
realisation change cycles obtained from the causally derived version of the ‘uncertainty relation’ [1], ED
t
= h, just describing the cycle result, eqs. (36). Since this time interval corresponds to modulus 1 of the

exponential function argument in the expression for the unitary evolution operator, it becomes clear that

any its perturbative, linear expansion and all related conclusions are irrelevant to real quantum dynamics.

Moreover,  as  noted  above,  the  exponential  evolution  operator,  eq.  (37),  represents  itself  a  basically

84

incorrect imitation of reality justified by inconsistent extension of its integrable models. The real temporal

change  of  a  system  during  one  complex-dynamical  cycle  of  realisation  switch  is  determined  by  an
externally linear relation for its complexity-action, D A = -ED

t (see eq. (36a)), or

A = A0 - E(t - t0) = A0  Ł

1 - 

                                                     (38)
 ł

E t  
A 0

(for t0 = 0), expressing the result of the underlying essentially nonlinear, chaotic system ‘jump’ between
realisations. Similar linear dependences can be obtained for other quantities characterising one quantum

evolution step, including the wavefunction [1,4,12,13] (see also section 7.1). The expression in brackets

in eq. (38) could be considered, within a perturbative approach, as a linear approximation to exponential

(or trigonometric) dependence of eq. (37) that could be conveniently used for imitation of any system

development or ‘magic’ calculative power (see below), as it is actually done in the unitary theory. The

truth, however, is that there is no any exponential function at all behind the step-wise, pseudo-linear

system  advances  described  by  eqs.  (36),  (38)  or  similar  expressions  for  other  quantities.  Once  the
argument of the assumed exponential function attains a value around unity (at ED
t = h), after which the
exponential function differs essentially from a linear dependence and just ‘becomes itself’, the system

performs an abrupt ‘jump’ to the next realisation, and the pseudo-linear stage of eq. (38) restarts with a

new system configuration (localisation centre).

The unitary quantum theory performs thus a doubly incorrect manipulation when it extends its

perturbative, effectively linear models to the exponential form of the general evolution operator and then

again approximates the latter with perturbative, linear expansions for arbitrary conditions. In reality, there

is only the pseudo-linear time dependence (generalised to other power-law dependences for a sequence of

many chaotic jumps between realisations) and it is valid only for the dynamically quantized, unbroken

cycles  of  multivalued  evolution.  A  more  rapid  system  change  does  occur,  but  within  a  qualitatively

different part of its interaction development, the chaotic jumps between realisations separating the above

pseudo-linear steps, where the effective system evolution is even much more rapid, than predicted by

exponential dependence of eq. (37). In the case of isolated elementary field-particle or its simple enough

interaction  the  pseudo-linear  advances  correspond  to  the  localised,  corpuscular  state  (and  very  short

‘trajectory’) of the particle, while the delocalised chaotic jumps form the physically real, dynamically
probabilistic  wave  field  of  the  causally  understood  wavefunction  Y
,  thus  providing  the  demystified
explanation of the wave-particle duality (section 4.6.1) [1-4,11-13]. The very uneven alternation between
these  two  qualitatively  different  parts  of  any  real  interaction  process  is  imitated  by  the  ‘smoothing’,
‘coherent’ exponential dependence of the unitary evolution operator (similar to other appearances of the
false exponential dependence [1], see also section 6), so that the false exponential, quicker than linear
(real) growth during one evolutionary stage (within each realisation) is supposed to be ‘compensated’ by
its slower than real rate of change during system jumps between realisations. However, this extremely
superficial, arbitrarily assumed ‘compensation’ cannot be satisfactory and leads to strong qualitative and

quantitative deficiencies, such as the total loss of omnipresent, truly dynamical chaos (including the

fundamental quantum indeterminacy, ‘quantum chaos’ itself, and probabilistic ‘quantum measurement’).

85

(cid:230)
(cid:246)
It  is  clear  now  that  the  real  (quantum)  system  evolution  can  be  represented  (here  only

schematically) not by a simplified, analytical time dependence of the conventional evolution operator, eq.

(37), but rather by a highly nonuniform sequence of two qualitatively different stages:

...   Ł

1 - 

E 1(t  - t 1)
A 1

   ›
 ł

1 - 

  Ł

E 2(t  - t 2)
A 2

   ›
 ł

 ...  Ł

1 - 

E n(t  - tn)
An

   ›
 ł

 ... ,         (39)

 designates schematically the ‘wavefunctional’ stage of chaotic jumps between the ‘regular’

where Y
realisations,  the  arrows  around  it  express  the  qualitative  change  occurring  in  the  system  during  the
extension/reduction process of each jump, and the values of En, An can, in general, be equal or different
for  different  pseudo-linear  stages.  The  evolution  in  the  whole  can  be  described  by  the  generalised

Schrödinger equation corresponding to the canonical form for the lowest levels of quantum dynamics

(without any external, artificially introduced ‘stochasticity’), but it should be provided with the unreduced,

dynamically multivalued solution, eqs. (20)-(31), just giving the nonunitary system evolution expressed
by eq. (39) and leading to higher complexity levels. Note that the characteristic action change, D A, during
one complete evolutionary cycle, determining the related increments of time and space, equals to -h for the
lowest  complexity  sublevels  (so  that  An = nh for any n  in  eq.  (39))  and  remains  close  to  it  for  any
‘essentially quantum’ (delocalised) dynamics, but then starts gradually varying with further complexity

growth (‘semi-classical’ dynamics) until a more serious change occurs with the first classical configuration
appearance (section 4.7), after which the direct relation between D A and h is lost, as well as universality
(single-valuedness) of the elementary action increment. Nevertheless, the discreteness of D A, its well-
specified  dynamical  origin  and  ‘evolutionary’  consequences  described  above  are  preserved  at  any

complexity level.

Finally, the difference between the exponential, unitary imitation of the quantum system evolution,

eq. (37), and its real, dynamically multivalued content, eq. (39), demonstrates the origin of the expected,

but actually illusive, ‘exponentially high’ efficiency of the conventional quantum computation, constituting

the  basis  of  increased  popularity  of  quantum  information  processing  in  the  last  years.  Indeed,  the

inevitable moments of ‘quantum measurement’, arbitrarily (and inconsistently) ‘incorporated’ into the

usual scheme of unitary quantum computation correspond to anti-Hermitian parts (imaginary effective

potential) of the Hamiltonian in the argument of the exponential evolutionary operator, eq. (37). Inserting
the explicit Hamiltonian decomposition into Hermitian and anti-Hermitian parts, H = Re(H) + iIm(H), into
eq. (37), we obtain the exponentially growing or decaying factor within the evolutionary operator (actually
appearing in measurements through its observable matrix elements):

U = e

Im(H)t

h  e -  

i
h Re(H)t

 .                                                        (40)

While Im(H) < 0 for the ordinary dissipation effects (see e. g. [121]), which corresponds to the normal
decay of the coherent processes intensity, the coherent computation dynamics can contain also some

spurious, effectively amplified components with Im(H) > 0, giving eventually the exponentially growing

computation efficiency. This effective amplification is due to the self-amplifying growth of the dynamical

system ‘volume’, i. e. essential openness of the computation dynamics, where ever larger number of

86

(cid:230)
(cid:246)
Y
ﬂ
(cid:230)
(cid:246)
Y
ﬂ
(cid:230)
(cid:246)
Y
ﬂ
system eigenstates is involved in the computation process (whereas any given dynamical volume can

produce only decaying computation intensity). The exponential growth within the unitary system evolution

reflects the self-amplifying propagation of its development by the conventional mechanism of unitary

‘quantum entanglement’ of the system components, ‘pinpointed’ by the ‘quantum measurement’ elements

(which realise, in particular, the quantum computer ‘input’ and ‘output’). Any quantitative estimate of the

quantum computer efficiency will be proportional to matrix elements of the ‘measured’ unitary evolution

operator, eq. (40), containing the exponentially large factors of the above origin, which demonstrates once

again the nature of the ‘magic’, exponentially large efficiency of quantum information processing that

constitutes its main expected advantage.

It  is  important  that  the  real,  nonunitary  quantum  system  evolution  following  the  random,

inhomogeneous sequence of stages of eq. (39) is incompatible with such coherent growth mechanism of

exponentially  high  efficiency.  Indeed,  even  replacement  of  the  chaotic  jump  phases  by  simple

multiplication of linear stages in eq. (39) gives a power-law, rather than exponential, dependence. The

‘magic’, exponentially high efficiency can indeed be obtained in the real, dynamically multivalued system,

but with the help of a quite different, incoherent mechanism involving dynamical randomness and self-

developing fractality of the unreduced complex dynamics (sections 7, 8). The alleged exponentially large

efficiency of unitary quantum computation seems to be directly related thus to the (false) exponential

dependence in the expression for the unitary evolution operator.

Based on the found qualitative difference of the real quantum system dynamics from its unitary

imitation, we can understand now why this strangely gratuitous advantages of quantum computation

cannot be realised in principle, even in the ideally perfect system, devoid of any hypothetical, noise-

induced ‘decoherence’. The real evolution of a compound quantum system, even in the absence of any

external ‘noise’, consists in a truly irregular, highly nonuniform sequence of jumps between incompatible

system realisations, eq. (39), which cannot, therefore, be coherent or produce anything like the unitary,

smooth time dependence of eq. (37). The deviations from coherent, ordered development are especially

high  just  in  the  case  of  essentially  quantum  dynamics  (section  4.6),  whereas  the  emergence  of

semiclassical  and  classical  elements  in  the  interaction  development  is  described  by  partially

coherent/ordered, but always dynamically probabilistic sequence of realisations (see also section 5.3). It is
important also that in any full-scale, practically useful quantum machine, realising a large number of
elementary interactions with irreducible dynamic uncertainty within each of them, one will actually have
quickly  accumulating,  exponentially  growing  randomness,  which  will  be  added  to  the  fundamental
‘quantum uncertainty’ from the lowest sublevel of quantum complexity (section 4.6) and would reduce to
zero any ‘exponential efficiency’ of unitary (regular) computation, even if the latter could exist. In this
sense,  one  should  interpret  exponentially  growing  factor  in  eq.  (40)  for  a  real,  full-scale  quantum
computer rather as an unpredictably growing, fundamentally uncontrollable uncertainty incompatible with
any useful application of such unitary imitation of the real, multivalued dynamics of quantum computation.

The real quantum system dynamics is much closer to a random-walk process that exhibits, in

average, a power-law dependence on time, with occasional very rapid transitions to higher complexity

(sub)levels that form a quite different kind of ‘magic’ efficiency resembling a ‘sudden’ idea or unifying

87

comprehension breakthrough in the process of human thinking. This another kind of efficiency of natural

‘micro-machines’  and  ‘computers’  of  the  neural  network  type  (generalised  ‘brains’)  is  based  on  the

fundamental property of creativity of real, multivalued interaction dynamics (sections 4.3, 4.4), so that the

integrated  result  of  the  multi-component,  probabilistically  fractal  hierarchy  of  natural  interaction

development emerges ‘suddenly’, in a single self-amplifying jump, thus largely compensating in one

‘moment of truth’ all visible ‘losses’ of the chaotic search process. By contrast, the unitary ‘evolution

operator’, eq. (37), similar to any dynamically single-valued, perturbative imitation of reality cannot create

anything new at all, including any expected result of a computation process. Whereas in many existing

applications of the conventional quantum theory to relatively simple systems the interaction results are

known (measured) empirically and are then somehow adjusted within an artificially composed, postulated

‘model’, the full-scale computation process, as well as other explicitly creative cases of more complicated

quantum interactions with basically unpredictable results cannot be treated in that way in principle, thus

clearly showing the limits of the unitary, dynamically single-valued paradigm of the conventional science.

The ‘exponentially rapid’ growth of the unitary evolution result explaining its expected ‘magic’

efficiency,  eq.  (40),  clearly  appears  now  as  a  basically  incorrect  imitation  of  the  natural,  nonunitary

(uneven and unpredictable in detail) process of dynamical fractal growth (section 4.4). On the other hand,

the relatively efficient control of a usual, classical computer dynamics, reducing it to a highly ordered (but

never  totally  regular!)  case  of  the  multivalued  SOC  type  of  behaviour  opposed  to  any  such  kind  of

‘extended’ growth, cannot be applied to the inevitably coarse-grained structure of the essentially quantum

dynamics, as it is incorrectly, mechanistically done within the conventional quantum computation theory.

In any case, the quasi-regular classical computer dynamics appears to be absolutely inefficient with respect

to any higher-complexity, e. g. biological, system dynamics or brain ‘computation’ process, which gives

rise to the idea of neural-network kind of macroscopic computer. What our unreduced interaction analysis

shows is that for essentially quantum system dynamics of relatively low complexity levels, including

partially classical (hybrid) configurations, one can have only such kind of explicitly chaotic, irregularly

‘ordered’ dynamics and dynamically chaotic (multivalued) type of ‘computation’, fundamentally different
from any unitary, dynamically single-valued model (see also sections 7.3, 8).*) Hence, any real micro-
machine  dynamics  cannot  be  understood,  even  approximately,  within  the  conventional,  dynamically
single-valued theory and should be described within the unreduced, dynamically multivalued interaction
analysis [1-4, 9-13] (see sections 3, 4 for the general theory with selected applications and section 5.2 for
more detailed results for quantum computing systems).

*)  Note,  in  particular,  that  any  kind  of  conventional  ‘chaos’  and  ‘complexity’,  giving  rise  to  the  corresponding  idea  of
‘chaotic’, or ‘probabilistic’, or ‘stochastic’ computation, can neither adequately describe the real micro-machine dynamics,
since  those  conventional  theories  provide  themselves  only  dynamically  single-valued,  mechanistic  imitation  of
chaoticity/complexity trying to reproduce its given results, but not the unreduced, dynamical mechanism of their emergence in
the progressive interaction process development (which forms the genuine, universally defined content of the first-principles
analysis). See sections 6-8 below for further development of this important difference of our reality-based dynamic complexity
from its abstract, unitary imitations within the conventional science paradigm.

88

We  finish  this  section  with  a  summary  of  characteristic,  most  important  deficiencies  of  the

conventional, dynamically single-valued (unitary) concept of quantum information processing, outlined in

section 2 only with the help of fundamental principles of the unitary science itself and now confirmed and

specified by comparison with the unreduced, dynamically multivalued interaction analysis and the resulting

causally complete many-body problem solution (sections 3, 4) [1-4,9-13]:

• The conventional concept and theory of quantum computation actually uses only the simplified,

linear  part  of  the  canonical  quantum  mechanics,  leaving  aside  the  evidently  nonlinear  effects  of  the

underlying detailed dynamics which are taken into account by certain standard postulates about probability

involvement,  quantum  measurement  and  apparent  wavefunction  ‘reduction’.  Whereas  the  simplest

quantum systems with the explicitly observed interaction results can be (approximately) described using

those  ‘mysterious’  postulates  and  a  number  of  adjustable  parameters,  more  involved  behaviour  of

‘computing’  quantum  systems  with  dynamically  changing  configuration  and  unknown  (in  principle,

arbitrary) result needs the well-specified, causally complete understanding of the detailed interaction

development  in  the  many-body  quantum  system  performing  information  processing.  Any  arbitrary

manipulation with linear compositions of abstract ‘state vectors’ in the conventional theory, where the

interaction result emergence is ‘described’ by a symbolical ‘arrow’ with a formally attributed, postulated

output or by an equally poorly substantiated equation for an abstract density matrix (distribution function),

cannot reproduce in principle the unreduced interaction dynamics that includes qualitatively specific effects

of dynamically random (multivalued), physically real entanglement between the interacting degrees of

freedom. Any ‘stochastic’ effects of external ‘noise’ and related abstract ‘decoherence’ or false ‘quantum

chaos’ of the conventional mathematical ‘models’ of a quantum computing system have nothing to do with

the internal dynamical randomness of any real, even totally isolated, system with interaction, completely

devaluing its unitary imitation and the derived results.

• Any real computation is a structure creation process necessarily involving essential, intrinsic

irreversibility, uncertainty and nonunitarity that cannot be properly taken into account by the conventional,

basically unitary (dynamically single-valued) theory. The latter cannot consistently describe just the most

important part of computation dynamics, its desired result emergence, represented by a new, dynamically

created system configuration. Any reference to a poorly understood ‘quantum measurement’ from the
evidently incomplete standard quantum mechanics cannot solve the problem, since any real measurement
process constitutes an integral part of the interaction development within the ‘computing’ quantum system.
The unreduced interaction analysis shows that it is the causally complete picture of quantum measurement
and classical behaviour emergence that can be obtained within the universally nonperturbative description
of a quantum computer (or any machine) dynamics, giving simultaneously the dynamically complex
(multivalued) result of ‘computation’. It follows, in particular, that any useful ‘quantum’ machine should
contain dynamically emerging classical elements (configurations) making it rather a ‘hybrid’, quantum-
and-classical system, in agreement with the natural micro-machine operation. An indispensable part of a

computing micro-machine dynamics is its memory whose useful operation can only be based on a strongly

nonunitary,  irreversible,  and  actually  classical,  behaviour,  as  opposed  to  the  qualitatively  incorrect

imitations of memory by unitary dynamics within the conventional theory of quantum computation.

89

• The realistic, causally complete theory of quantum measurement within the dynamic redundance

paradigm presents it as a particular case of the unreduced, dynamically multivalued interaction process in a

quantum system which possesses a small dissipativity (openness to the exterior world). Therefore the

notorious quantum uncertainty and discreteness of quantum measurement, as well as the accompanying

wavefunction (quantum system) ‘reduction’ or ‘collapse’, simply postulated and remaining ‘mysterious’

(highly contradictory) within the conventional theory, emerge as standard manifestations of dynamically

chaotic (multivalued) behaviour at the quantum (lowest) complexity levels. The true quantum chaos,

involving the genuine, well-defined randomness, is obtained as essentially the same phenomenon, but

observed in the case of nondissipative, Hamiltonian dynamics. Both dissipative (quantum measurement)

and nondissipative (Hamiltonian quantum chaos) manifestations of the intrinsic dynamic randomness at the

lowest (quantum) complexity levels provide the unified, realistic clarification and causal extension of the

obscure  conventional  theory  ideas  around  unpredictability,  undecidability  and  non-computability  in

quantum  mechanics  (and  beyond).  Considered  against  this  background,  the  idea  of  unitary  quantum

computation (including unitary memory function) shows explicitly its fundamental deficiency: quantum

computation, as well as any real interaction process in a quantum system, is always a particular case of the

unreduced quantum chaos, involving true randomness (nonunitarity) of purely dynamic (internal) origin.

• Because of the dynamic redundance phenomenon inherent in any real interaction, even in the total

absence of noise, any real system cannot produce the regular, 100-percent-probability result. Schemes of

‘chaos control’ within the computing system, involving additional interactions, can decrease the dynamic

uncertainty to a sufficiently low level only for macroscopic computers, operating at higher complexity

levels. At the lowest, essentially quantum levels of system complexity, any control scheme cannot be

efficient, as it is clearly implied already by the universal, irreducible discreteness (and related uncertainty)

of quantum dynamics expressed by universal Planck's constant which determines the unchangeable and

relatively big action increment in any quantum process. Therefore the arithmetically ‘exact’, conventional

computation type cannot be realised by an essentially quantum computer. On the other hand, the analogue

‘simulation’ of one quantum system by another cannot be useful in view of reproduction of the same

problems  within  the  computing  system,  including  the  irreducible,  and  relatively  big,  dynamical

randomness. Such simulation of the real interaction dynamics, contrary to its incorrect unitary imitation,
cannot be ‘universal’, since the unreduced dynamic complexity always produces an ‘individually specific’
result. Instead of laborious production of an approximate quantum copy of each simulated system, it
seems to be much more reasonable to use the universally applicable, causally complete analytic description
of the unreduced system dynamics in the universal science of complexity assisted by calculations on a
classical computer, where maximum efficiency is ensured by hierarchical organisation of the complex-
dynamical  problem  solution.  In  any  case,  according  to  the  universal  complexity  conservation  law,  a
computer can properly simulate the dynamics of a system with the unreduced dynamic complexity not
exceeding that of its own dynamics (which is the statement of the ‘complexity correspondence principle’).

In particular, any essentially quantum computation cannot correctly reproduce any classical behaviour

(including  its  characteristic  property  of  permanent  system  localisation),  since  the  latter  dynamically

emerges from quantum interaction development as the next, higher complexity level.

90

• In summary, the widely acclaimed ‘universality’ of unitary quantum computation, as well as its

related ‘magic’ (cost-free) efficiency, enter in fundamental contradiction with the demand for its ‘physical

realisation’, after which the growing development of ‘purely theoretic’ aspect of quantum computation

becomes completely senseless, especially taking into account its intrinsic subordination to the standard

quantum  theory  and  its  officially  permitted,  unitary  ‘interpretations’  reduced  inevitably  to  mere

speculation, as opposed to the causally complete, explicit solution of the persisting ‘quantum mysteries’.

The  proposed  ‘small-scale’  experimental  ‘realisations’  of  unitary  quantum  computation  (see  e.  g.

[38,97,107,108]) represent in reality but imperfect imitations of the expected properties which cannot be

extended to the full scale realisation in principle, as the long enough development of the field clearly

confirms.  The  reason  is  the  intrinsic,  fundamental  dynamic  multivaluedness  (randomness)  of  any

unreduced interaction process, and not some practical, ‘technical’ type of difficulties with micro-device

fabrication or protection from imitative ‘decoherence’ induced by undesirable, external influences. The

purely speculative, deceitful origin of the conventional ‘quantum computation’ becomes evident here: one

can always figuratively describe many of involved quantum processes with excitation and de-excitation of

a complicated system energy levels as a discretely structured ‘computation process’ with unlimited, in

principle, sophistication, where, for example, an excited system state corresponds to 1 and the ground

state to 0, thus forming a ‘quantum bit’, but what does it actually change in our understanding of either

quantum system dynamics or efficient computation processes? A similar kind of physically meaningless,

trivial calculation can be found within attempts to find the ‘ultimate computing power’ of a piece of matter,

or even the universe as a whole, by simply dividing its total, unstructured energy by Planck's constant or

its total equilibrium entropy by the Boltzmann constant [150,151], which is evidently nothing more than a

mere play of words around trivially (and incorrectly) identified combinations of abstract symbols (see also

section 7.1). Quantum effects as such appear inevitably with decreasing size of real computer elements and

will result in irreducible deterioration of the conventional, ‘digital’ (regular) computation mode, with

possible subsequent transition to the qualitatively different, dynamically multivalued type of behaviour

which  can  be  useful,  but  necessitates  the  unreduced,  complex-dynamical  interaction  description  and

understanding that involves new, essentially different computation purpose and criteria of result validity

based on the causally complete concept of dynamic complexity (sections 7, 8).

• In general, instead of ‘calculation’ and ‘simulation’ of one micro-system dynamics with the help
of another one, it appears to be much more useful to create productive micro-systems with the desired
properties that can be properly adjusted with the help of the unreduced, dynamically multivalued approach
of the universal science of complexity. These real micro-machines, similar to the existing natural ones
which  control,  in  particular,  the  phenomenon  of  life,  will  combine  and  entangle  in  one  dynamically
multivalued, unreduced complexity development process the features of both (extended) ‘computation’ and
‘production’ which are mechanistically, artificially separated only within the basically limited unitary
approach of the existing mode of science and technology. This well-substantiated new concept of micro-

machine  design  includes  serious  clarification  and  modification  of  the  growing  direction  of

‘nanotechnology’  (section  8),  also  essentially  based  until  now  on  the  fundamental  limitations  of  the

mechanistic, unitary approach.

91

• The conventional, unitary concept of quantum computation, as well as its evident and strangely

persisting deficiencies, can be properly understood as a part of the much larger paradigm of the whole

canonical science based on the same dynamically single-valued (unitary), perturbative approach closely

related  to  the  fundamentally  abstract,  imitative  and  ‘symbolical’,  character  of  the  resulting  unitary

knowledge, as it is most completely expressed in the idea of ‘mathematical physics’ born of the irreducible

‘mysteries’ of the ‘new physics’ at the beginning of the twentieth century. While the dynamically single-

valued imitation of reality shows, in various fields of science, multiple and evident deviations from the

observed  total  picture,  it  provides,  like  any  low-dimensional  projection,  a  superficial  mechanistic

‘simplicity’ opening the way for an illusive, but quick ‘success’ in certain, simplest applications that allow

for straightforward ‘postulation’ of the (few) remaining ‘mysteries’ without their solution and actually give

rise to the popular myth of “unreasonable efficiency of mathematics in natural sciences”. However, as

technology advances in its essentially empirical development, at a certain moment, actually just attained

today in various fields of knowledge, it touches and starts essentially involving the full scale of unreduced

dynamic complexity of the respective systems, after which the mathematically ‘guessed’ and ‘postulated’,

abstract kind of one-dimensional ‘truth’ becomes ‘suddenly’ absolutely inefficient and even unreasonably

dangerous, so that any progressive, creative development of science and its applications is not possible

any more without a decisive transition to the totally realistic, truly ‘exact’, causally complete understanding

that  actually  involves  the  conceptually  big,  ‘revolutionary’  knowledge  extension  to  the  unreduced,

dynamically multivalued and intrinsically unified image of reality at any its level.

5.2.  Dynamically  chaotic  (multivalued)  operation  of  real  micro-machines:
general  principle,  universal  properties  and  particular  features

5.2.1.  Time-periodic  perturbation  of  a  bound  quantum  motion:
Complex  dynamics  of  an  elementary  interaction  act

We devote this section to application of the general effective potential (EP) formalism of section 3

to the particular case of a microscopic, ‘quantum’ element interaction with a time-dependent, periodic

perturbation that constitutes a generic elementary stage of interaction process within a multi-component
quantum  machine  of  arbitrary  final  purpose.  The  perturbation,  treated  here  as  a  non-small  one,  i.  e.
without any perturbation-theory simplifications, can describe radiation coming from the outside (and thus
realising the system ‘input’/‘output’) or a signal transmitted from other machine elements which can
eventually produce the quantized change of the element state constituting the smallest indivisible step in the
machine  operation.  Note  from  the  beginning  that  in  view  of  the  absolute  universality  of  the  basic
formalism of the unreduced science of complexity (section 3.1) [1] this particular interaction and the
results of its development obtained below have a rather general meaning that includes, for example, any

‘quantum-like’ (e. g. optical) system operation [44], coordinate-dependent (rather than time-dependent), as

well as non-periodic, perturbation, etc.

92

The quantum element dynamics modified by the time-dependent perturbation is described by the
, which is a temporal version of the

time-dependent Schrödinger equation for the system wavefunction Y
simplest particular case of eq. (1) given by eq. (5b) (section 3.1), with the unperturbed Hamiltonian V0(r)
of the kind of eq. (2) corresponding to particle (e. g. electron) motion in a potential well:

ih 

Y
¶ t

 = - 

h2
2m

  

¶ 2Y
¶ r2  + [V0(r) + V(r,t)]Y (r,t) ,                                      (41)

where r is the three-, two-, or one-dimensional particle position vector (depending on the effective system
dimensionality), V0(r) is a separable (regular) motion potential of the binding type (i. e. a deep enough
potential well), and V(r,t) is the time-periodic perturbation potential.*) The real quantum machine element
described by eq. (41) can be represented by electron bound in an atom, or molecule, or so-called ‘quantum
dot’, or other kind of natural or artificial binding potential V0(r) formed by the prefabricated element
structure. The function V0(r) can also be periodic and describe a space-periodic potential, i. e. a lattice of
potential wells, such as crystal lattice or various artificial periodic structures (‘superlattices’). In this case
the energy eigenvalues for V0(r) used below are split into ‘energy zones’, but this modification does not
introduce any essential change in our description (cf. refs. [8,9]).

The total interaction potential in eq. (41) can be considered as a single time-periodic, binding

potential that can be represented as a Fourier series:

U(r,t) ”

 V0(r) + V(r,t) = 

Vn(r)exp(iw

n = ¥

n = - ¥

p nt) = V0(r) +  (cid:229)

Vn(r)exp(iw
  0

n  „

p nt) ,           (42)

p   is  the  perturbation  frequency,  n  takes  only  integer  values,  and  we  have  actually  included,

where  w
according to the accepted convention, the time-averaged component of the perturbation potential (i. e. its
zero-order Fourier component) into the unperturbed potential V0(r) (which does not limit the generality of
our analysis and corresponds to a coordinate-independent value of the time-averaged perturbation potential
or other its configuration that does not change integrability of the problem with V0(r)). Since the Fourier
series harmonics, exp(iw
p nt), play the role of the known eigenfunctions of the ‘decoupled’ perturbing
radiation dynamics (so that the time variable t effectively replaces variable q in our general analysis, cf.
eqs. (5b), (6)), we expand the system wavefunction into a similar Fourier series (cf. eq. (7)):

Y (r,t) = exp(-iEt/h) 
 º

y

y n(r)exp(iw

p nt)   ,                                (43)

 ß

0(r) + (cid:229)

n

*) A more general case, where the unperturbed motion in the potential well V0(r) is a nonseparable (chaotic) one can also be
considered  within  our  universal  approach.  In  this  case  we  first  choose  an  integrable  (e.  g.  one-dimensional  or  centre-
symmetric) component of V0(r) as the zero-order, regular-motion potential and obtain the dynamically multivalued solution
for the unreduced potential well V0(r) in terms of our general EP (section 3). In this sense, the ‘unperturbed’ potential V0(r)
in eq. (41) should generally be considered as already an effective, nonlocal and multivalued, potential accounting for the
chaotic  motion  in  the  stationary  potential  well.  In  the  general  case,  therefore,  V0(r)  is  not  necessarily  a  regular-motion
potential, but a potential for which we know the complete solution (maybe a multivalued, chaotic one) of the corresponding
(stationary) Schrödinger equation, which is the essential information used below. However, we shall not explicitly introduce
such additional complication here, in order to concentrate our attention on the unreduced influence of the main, time-dependent
perturbation V(r,t).

93

¶
(cid:229)
Œ
Ø
œ
ø
where E is the energy eigenvalue to be found and n takes only non-zero integer values (also everywhere
below). Substituting expressions (42), (43) into eq. (41), multiplying it by exp(-iw
p nt), and integrating
over t within one perturbation period (Tp  = 2p /w
0(r) + (cid:229)

p ), we get a system of equations for {y

0(r) ,                                           (44a)

V-n(r)y n(r) = hy

0(r),y n(r)}:

H0(r)y
H0(r)y n(r) + (cid:229)

n´ „

 n

n

where n, n´ „

 0,

Vn - n´(r)y n´(r) = h ny n(r) - Vn(r)y

0(r) ,                             (44b)

h n = E - hw

p n ,   h  ”

 h

0 = E ,                                                     (45)

H0(r) = - 

h2
2m

  

¶ 2
¶ r2 + V0(r) .                                                       (46)

3.2), where the variable x  is replaced by r, e n (eq. (9)) by hw
and  h0(r) = - 

It is clear that the system of equations (44) coincides with its universal prototype, eqs. (16) (section
 V0(r)),
¶ 2
¶ r2  (see eq. (13)). This coincidence demonstrates the important general similarity,
mentioned  before,  between  the  complicated  (arbitrary)  many-body  interaction  and  the  elementary

p n, Hn(r) = H0(r) (because Vnn(r) ”

h2
2m

   

interaction act (provided that both of them are considered in the unreduced version), as well as equivalence

between the time-dependent and time-independent problem formulation (section 3.1). This fact clearly

shows also that any other particular case or problem formulation (see e. g. eqs. (3)-(5) in section 3.1) is

reduced to the same its universal expression in terms of the known eigen-solutions for the lower-level

dynamics  of  non-interacting  system  components,  after  which  we  can  follow  the  general  way  of  its

integration revealing the dynamic redundance phenomenon and inherent complexity (sections 3, 4).

We can, therefore, apply the same method of ‘generalised separation of variables by substitution’

that  was  used  in  our  universal  analysis  (section  3.2)  and  has  led  to  the  ‘effective’  expression  of  the

unreduced problem, eqs. (20)-(23). We do not reproduce here the detailed derivation (section 3.2) and

limit ourselves to the final results which can also be directly obtained by the above change of notations.

The main system of equations, eqs. (44), and thus the unreduced problem itself, eq. (41), is equivalent to
the following effective Schrödinger equation for y
0(r):

h2
2m  

¶ 2y
¶ r2   + Veff(r;h )y

0

- 

0(r) = hy

0(r) ,                                             (47)

where the operator of the effective (interaction) potential (EP), Veff(r;h ), is given by

Veff(r;h ) = V0(r) + V^ (r;h ) ,  V^ (r;h )y

0(r) = 

dr¢ V(r,r¢ ;h )y

0(r¢ ) ,                       (48a)

V(r,r¢ ;h ) = (cid:229)

 

W r

V-n(r)y 0
h

ni(r)Vn(r¢ )y 0*
n i(r¢ )
ni - hw
 - h 0
p n

 

 
n,i

94

 ,                                      (48b)

(cid:242)
and {y 0

ni(x ),h 0

ni} is the complete set of eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of the auxiliary, truncated system

of equations (cf. eqs. (17)):

H0(r)y n(r) + (cid:229)

n´ „

 n

Vn - n´(r)y n´(r) = h ny n(r) .                                       (49)

Thus, we have formally ‘excluded’ time from the problem formulation and replaced the time-

dependent perturbation potential in the initial Schrödinger equation, eq. (41), by the ‘effective’, time-

independent potential which, however, incorporates the unreduced perturbation influence entering through

its frequency-dependent, dynamically entangled components and related nonlinear dependence on the

eigen-solutions to be found. In order to complete the problem solution, one should now find the eigen-
0i(r)}, and eigen-values, {h i}, of the effective Schrödinger equation, eqs. (47)-(48), which
functions, {y
is possible to do due to integrability of the time-independent problem and existence of sufficiently good

approximations for the auxiliary problem solutions (see section 4.4). After expressing other wavefunction
components, y n(r), through the found solutions for y
0(r) (cf. eq. (22)), the total system wavefunction is
obtained, according to eq. (43), in the following form:

Y (r,t) = (cid:229)

ci exp(-iEit/h)  º

 

1 + (cid:229)

n

 exp(iw

p nt)g^

ni(r) y
 ß

i
 h i and the action of the integral operator g^

where according to eq. (45) Ei ”

y ni(r) = g^

ni(r)y

0i(r) ”

 

 dr¢ gni(r,r¢ )y

 

W r

0i(r¢ ),   gni(r,r¢ ) = Vn0(r¢ )(cid:229)

0i(r) ,                        (50)

ni(r) is given by (cf. eq. (22)):

ni¢ (r¢ )

ni¢ (r)y 0*
y 0
ni¢  - h w

i - h 0

p n  

 

h

  .     (51)

 
i¢

Similar to the general case (section 3.3), the most significant feature of the obtained problem

solution  is  the  redundant  number  of  eigen-solutions  of  the  effective  Schrödinger  equation  with  the

unreduced EP, eqs. (47)-(48), which is mathematically due to the EP dependence on the eigenvalues to be
found,  h  ”
 E,  and  leads  to  the  main  property  of  dynamic  multivaluedness  related  to  the  dynamic
entanglement, intrinsic chaoticity and dynamic complexity. The detailed argumentation is given in sections
3 and 4 and remains practically without change for this particular case which actually describes also the
‘standard’ situation for appearance of the phenomenon of (genuine) quantum chaos [1,8,9]. The result can
 (r,t)|2, giving the general
be summarised by the expression for the measured system density, r (r,t) = |Y
problem solution in the form of dynamically probabilistic sum over the explicitly obtained, incompatible
system realisations numbered by index r (cf. eq. (24)):

where  N´

  is  the  total  realisation  number  (actually  determined  by  the  number  of  essential  Fourier

r r(r,t) ,                                                         (52)

N´

r (r,t) = (cid:229)

r = 1

95

Œ
Ø
œ
ø
(cid:242)
¯
components of the perturbation potential, cf. section 3.3), and the individual realisation densities, r r(r,t),
are obtained from the above wavefunction and EP expressions with the eigenvalues forming the respective

realisations (see eqs. (25)). Realisation probabilities and expectation value of the system density are given

by eqs. (26) and (27) with the evident change of notations.

The  dynamically  probabilistic  sum  of  eq.  (52)  expresses  the  main  property  of  the  considered

system distinguishing it from the unitary imitations used in the conventional quantum mechanics in general

and  in  quantum  computation  theory  in  particular.  Namely,  the  unreduced,  dynamically  multivalued

solution  shows  that  the  simple  quantum  system  of  a  bound  particle  subjected  to  the  time-periodic

perturbation follows the explicitly nonunitary evolution (in the absence of any noise) consisting in the

permanent change of its redundant states/realisations in the truly chaotic, dynamically probabilistic order,

each  of  them  corresponding  to  its  own  EP  that  can  differ  considerably  from  the  unperturbed  system
potential, V0(r). The system does spend a finite time, of the order of a period of realisation formation, in
any its current realisation having a roughly unitary dynamics (at the current level of complexity) which is
expressed  by  the  obtained  solution  for  the  wavefunction,  eqs.  (50)-(51),  with  the  eigenvalues

corresponding to this particular realisation. However, this pseudo-unitary evolution is quickly interrupted

by irregular system ‘jump’ into another, generally similar, realisation but with different EP parameters,

eigenvalues, and other measured characteristics. It is important that these jumps between chaotically

chosen  realisations,  passing  by  the  special  ‘intermediate  realisation’,  qualitatively  different  by  its

configuration from the ordinary, ‘regular’ realisations (section 4.2), can never stop, since they are driven

exclusively by the same interaction that determines the structure of each individual realisation (i. e. the

observed system configuration), which also demonstrates the fundamental difference of our results from

the unitary imitations of quantum (and classical) chaos, uncertainty, and classicality emergence with the

help of postulated ‘decoherence’ by the artificially introduced external ‘noise’ (though any real external

perturbation can, of course, additionally influence the system when it is sufficiently strong).

This consistently derived result means, practically, that the full-scale quantum computation in the

unitary,  regular  mode  is  impossible  in  principle, being fatally destroyed already at the level of each

elementary, noiseless interaction act in the computing system, and any noise-reduction and dynamical

‘chaos-control’ measures cannot eliminate the underlying, purely dynamic uncertainty (which is similar in
its origin to the fundamental quantum indeterminacy at the level of single particle dynamics [1-4,9-13]).
The  real,  complex-dynamical  realisation  change  by  the  system,  driven  by  the  main,  totally  regular
interaction, provides also the causally complete extension of the abstract uncertainty imitation by the
conventional density matrix concept and similar postulated constructions extensively used, in particular, in
the  unitary  quantum  computation  theory.  The  unreduced  interaction  description  gives  instead  the
dynamically probabilistic realisation sum of eq. (52) and the corresponding intermediate (main) realisation
playing  the  role  of  the  generalised  wavefunction  (or  distribution  function)  that  describes  realisation
probability distribution at various emerging levels of dynamics (section 4.2) and obeys the generalised

Schrödinger equation [1,4] (see also section 7.1).

The described causally complete picture of irreducibly chaotic (multivalued) behaviour of a simple

quantum system under the influence of a regular external perturbation is quite universal and allows for the
96

detailed understanding of the mechanism and ‘internal dynamics’ of ‘quantum transitions’ in general

described in the conventional quantum mechanics with the help of standard ‘postulates’ that only fix the

formal,  empirically  ‘guessed’  rules  for  possible  initial  and  final  states  of  the  system  and  the  related

‘transition probabilities’, while leaving the underlying system dynamics within the ‘officially permitted’

quantum ‘mystery’. The obtained causally complete problem solution, eqs. (47)-(52) (eqs. (20)-(31) in the

general case), shows that even simplest and regular interaction produces deep qualitative changes in the

system configuration and evolution. Instead of a straightforward, internally smooth unitary ‘propagation’

in an abstract ‘state space’ of the same initial configuration, as it is prescribed by the canonical quantum

(and  classical)  ‘postulates’,  we  have  a  dramatic  change  of  the  potential  and  system  configuration

themselves which are split into multiple components with different parameters and fractally structured,

unceasing system transitions between them during which the system is transiently ‘decomposed’ and then

again ‘recomposed’ into its new configuration explicitly created by the interaction process (through the

‘dynamic entanglement’ of the system components, section 4.2). If a group of system realisations thus

formed constitutes a compact entity with relatively small difference between realisations within the group

(with respect to other realisations and their groups), then the new, ‘excited’ system state and configuration

emerges at a finite, ‘quantized’ distance from the initial, ‘ground’ state and other possible states. It is

important that the detailed, fractally structured and dynamically probabilistic internal structure of such

‘quantum transitions’ (occurring also at any higher, ‘classical’ levels of complexity [1]) can be completely

described  and  understood,  without  any  ‘mysteries’,  within  the  proposed  unreduced  formalism  (see

sections 4.1-4, while we leave for future work further refinement of these results for particular systems).

In  a  similar  fashion,  another  quantum  phenomenon  known  as  ‘quantum  tunneling’  and  also

remaining ‘mysterious’ within the conventional unitary scheme, obtains its causally complete interpretation

as fractally structured, dynamically probabilistic (adaptable) ‘wandering’ of the emerging (many-body)

system  configurations  within  the  dynamical,  EP  ‘barrier’  to  motion,  occurring  through  its  transient,

fractally structured decrease for certain realisations [1,9] (which describes actually the self-consistent,

dynamically multivalued ‘percolation’ of the system ‘within itself’, in the real space of its emerging

configurations, differing qualitatively from its various unitary imitations by ‘chaotic tunnelling’ in the

‘phase space’, or another abstract ‘space’, in the conventional chaos theory, see e. g. [152]-[154] and the
references  therein).  Here  again,  the  obtained  universal  description  within  the  dynamic  redundance
paradigm  provides  the  necessary  basis  and  fundamental  mechanism  for  the  causally  complete
understanding  of  complex-dynamical  reality  behind  the  official  ‘mystery’  of  the  quantum  tunnelling
phenomenon,  whereas  further  specification  of  the  details  should  constitute  a  part  of  the  intrinsically
complete, dynamically multivalued ‘remake’ of the conventional quantum mechanics.

These explicitly obtained manifestations of the unreduced, multivalued dynamics of real interaction
processes  reveal  their  true  character  as  a  hierarchically  structured  sequence  of  unceasing  ‘quantum
transitions’ of various scales and with probabilistically determined results that form the average, observed

system ‘tunneling’ (understood in the most general sense) in the universally defined direction of growth of

the unreduced dynamic complexity-entropy at the expense of diminishing complexity-information [1] (see

also sections 4.4, 4.7, and 7.1). Any internal system ‘wiring’, exchange of ‘commands’, ‘memorisation’,

97

and ‘calculation’ are mainly produced dynamically and intermixed among them into the single, dynamically

multivalued (and thus everywhere probabilistic) interaction development process guided ‘automatically’ by

the  unreduced  complexity  development.  External  ‘control’  of  the  process  is  possible,  but  only  as

modification of the informational dynamic complexity (encoded in interaction ‘potential energy’), which is

performed at certain, ‘critical’ points and moments of time and have nothing to do with the conventional

idea of ‘regularising’, basically unitary, and therefore unrealistic, control that would correspond to the

decreasing complexity-entropy (see also sections 2(iii), 7, 8). The dynamically multivalued results of even

the simplest, externally absolutely regular interaction process considered above in this section show quite

clearly that in the case of a realistically involved quantum micro-machine, starting already from a single

multi-atom molecule, it is the detailed, dynamically emerging configurations, their probabilities, and

unreduced development which are important for the adequate, practically efficient understanding and

control  of  the  quantum  machine  operation  (let  alone  construction).  This  means  that  the  canonical,

‘postulated’ and ‘mysterious’ quantum mechanics is absolutely insufficient for this more complicated

application (since it cannot predict even possible system states, let alone their probabilities and internal

system  dynamics),  and  the  unreduced,  conceptually  extended  analysis  of  the  universal  science  of

complexity becomes indispensable.

It  would  also  be  interesting  to  specify,  for  the  simplest  particular  case  of  this  section,  the

manifestations of the two universal limiting regimes of multivalued dynamics, uniform (global) chaos and

multivalued SOC (self-organisation), as they were described in section 4.5. Since in the simplest case we

consider here the role of the variable q is played by time t and the corresponding ‘interacting entity’ (or

system ‘degree of freedom’) is reduced to the time-periodic perturbation (e. g. a radiation field), the
‘internal’, or ‘structure-independent’ system frequency w q is given by the perturbation frequency w
p ,
while the ‘structure-dependent’ frequency w
x  corresponds to characteristic energy-level separation, D E, in
the unperturbed potential well V0(r): w
x  = D E/h. The ‘resonant’ condition for the uniform (global) chaos
onset, eq. (35), corresponds then, as it should be expected, to the resonance between the perturbation and

system-structure potential:

k  ”

 

h i
h n

  = 

D E
hw

  @

 1 .                                                         (53)

The opposite regime of multivalued SOC is obtained at small values of the chaoticity parameter, k  << 1, or
w
p  >> D E/h. The (generalised) ‘phase transition’ from this externally regular regime to the explicitly
irregular case of uniform chaos occurs, with growing k  (decreasing w
p ),  around  the  main  resonance
condition,  w
p  = D E/h, being preceded by a series of less dramatic, partial transitions to chaos around
higher-order resonance conditions, w
p  = nD E/h, n = 2, 3, ... (section 4.5.2) [1]. At very low frequencies,
p  << D E/h (k  >> 1), we obtain another case of SOC which is, however, less interesting in this context
w

(see section 4.5.2).

Physically, the obtained results mean that at very high perturbation frequencies (w

p  >> D E/h) the
system can perform only relatively small, high-frequency deviations from its unperturbed motion, even

though they are internally chaotic (dynamically multivalued), contrary to predictions of the conventional

98

D
D
p
self-organisation/SOC [129-131] or ‘motion in a rapidly oscillating field’ [138] (see also section 4.5.1).

The EP, eq. (48), is approximately reduced in this case to a local potential (cf. eq. (33)):

Veff(r;h ) = V00(r) + (cid:229)

 

|Vn(r)|2
ni - h w

h

 - h 0

  @
p n  

 V00(r) + 

1
(hw

 
n

 (cid:229)

p )2

 

n >  0

|Vn(r)|2(h 0

 

-ni - 2h )

ni + h 0
n2

 ,  (54)

where the last (least exact) approximation corresponds to the ordinary, dynamically single-valued analysis

(perturbation  theory).  However,  if  the  perturbation  frequency  (or  other  related  system  parameter)
approaches the resonance condition, w
p  = D E/h, the deviations are quickly amplified to relatively large
magnitudes and so is their internal chaoticity that becomes thus explicitly evident, giving the regime of

‘global’ (uniform) chaos. Similar, but less important, local growth of chaotic fluctuations is observed
around higher-order resonance conditions, w
p  = nD E/h, n ‡
 2, while the decay of pronounced chaoticity at
the other side of the main resonance, at w
p  < D E/h,  should  also  have  more  or  less  distinct  step-wise
character, with abrupt behaviour changes occurring around higher-order resonances at w
 2.

p  = D E/nh, n ‡

This  transition  from  global  regularity  to  global  chaos  is  well  known  from  the  classical  chaos

theory, but could not be properly obtained in the conventional quantum chaos theory [139-145,155],

simply  because  there  can  be  no  true  dynamical  randomness  in  the  unitary  (single-valued)  quantum

dynamics. Now we see how this transition, as well as the unreduced dynamical chaos in general, naturally

emerges in our dynamically multivalued description of the essentially quantum problem. It is not difficult

to see that the obtained point of this transition satisfies the correspondence principle between quantum and
classical dynamics*) [1,8,9] (i. e. it gives the respective transition between regularity and chaos for the
corresponding classical system under the straightforward limit h ﬁ
 0), resolving the main problem of the
canonical chaos theory, where this quantum-classical correspondence is absent, together with any true

randomness  (see  section  6  for  more  details).  These  properties  of  the  true,  dynamically  multivalued

quantum chaos disclose the abuse of various existing imitations of dynamic randomness in quantum

systems in general and quantum machines in particular, reduced most often to replacement of the intrinsic,

explicitly derived system randomness by its postulated ‘penetration’ into the system from an indefinite

outside source (see also below, section 5.2.2).

As far as quantum machine operation is involved, the regime of uniform chaos in the dynamics of
its elementary step is especially important as the standard, dominating regime of the essentially quantum
dynamics. Indeed, if we have considerably different characteristic frequencies/energies, as it is necessary
for the regime of multivalued SOC, we deal with at least semi-classical dynamics that will tend to the fully
classical  (predominantly  localised)  behaviour  with  growing  frequency/energy  ratio.  The  latter  case

 0, to the classical oscillation frequency in the unperturbed potential, w

*) Indeed, since D E/h tends, at h ﬁ
x , it is evident that
the criterion of eq. (53) can be presented in an explicitly classical form, w
x , which already shows a basic agreement
with the correspondence principle. Moreover, the detailed comparison with ‘standard’ models from the classical chaos theory
shows [1,8,9] that the ‘classical’ chaos criterion of eq. (53), obtained quantum-mechanically, coincides with the corresponding
results obtained in the framework of classical mechanics. Even more, the classical chaos description within the conventional,
also dynamically single-valued, theory contains itself essential deficiencies (including the absence of true, internal system
randomness) and should be replaced by the dynamically multivalued analysis at the level of classical mechanics which is a
version of our universal formalism (sections 3, 4) [1].

p  @

 w

99

corresponds just to the qualitatively more distinct, ‘classical’ structure emergence, where slowly changing,

‘self-organised’  external  form  contains  within  it  many  slightly  different,  incompatible  system

configurations that quickly replace each other in a random order (sections 4.5.1, 4.7). By contrast, the

essentially quantum, fully ‘dualistic’ behaviour is nothing else than the uniform (global) chaos regime

whose  existence  already  in  the  unperturbed,  as  well  as  perturbed,  dynamics  of  individual  quantum

machine element, eq. (41), is determined by the universal criterion of eq. (53) (cf. section 4.6.1). The

latter actually describes the causally complete, complex-dynamical internal mechanism of the well-known

main property of quantum behaviour, simply postulated in the conventional theory, i. e. quantization itself
of any quantum system dynamics determined by the universal action quantum h [1,3], so that w
p  = D E/h
in  our  case  (recall  the  corresponding  delta-functions  occurrence  in  the  conventional  expressions  for
transition probabilities), k  = 1, and chaoticity is global (or coarse-grained, or uniform). Correspondingly,
any  ‘quantum  control  of  quantum  dynamics’  cannot  eliminate  this  strong  chaoticity  without  being

transformed  into  classical,  SOC  type  of  dynamics  already  during  every  elementary  interaction  act,

occurring even in the most ‘pure’, totally ‘coherent’ conditions, which demonstrates once more the basic

deficiency  of  the  respective  results  of  the  unitary  quantum  theory  [90-107]  and  its  understanding  of

randomness/uncertainty. Any real system dynamics permanently ‘decoheres’ by itself, in any its single

step,  due  to  the  very  essence  of  the  unreduced  “inter-action”  process;  the  truly  quantum  behaviour

involves, by definition, a relatively large degree of this internal randomness.

A much more distinct regime of self-organised, ‘classical’ behaviour allows, in principle, for an

efficient control, but then one deals with classical machines which do not possess any ‘magic’, cost-free

efficiency of the unitary type. One can also express this result in terms of characteristic ‘distance between

(elementary)  realisations’,  or  (primary)  ‘realisation  spacing’,  measured  by  the  corresponding  EP

differences and expressing the chaotic ‘uncertainty’ (smearing) of the system configuration (in terms of

characteristic energy parameters) [1,9]. It is easy to see from eqs. (21), (33), (48), (54) that this realisation
spacing, D Veff, is generally of the order of (D E)2/hw
p  << D E in the multivalued SOC regime and of the
order of D E (energy level spacing in the absence of interaction) in the uniform chaos (essentially quantum)
regime (i. e. D Veff »

 k D E in every case), which is another expression of the above conclusions.

5.2.2.  Fundamental  properties  and  causally  derived  general  principle
of  real  quantum  machine  operation

Based  on  the  obtained  causally  complete  description  of  the  elementary  interaction  act  in  the
quantum  machine  operation,  we  can  now  summarise  the  ensuing  fundamental  properties  and  related
principles of the real quantum machine dynamics which reproduce and specify the universal results for the
general case of complex (multivalued) dynamics of many-body interaction system (sections 3, 4). The
major property is, of course, the unreduced  dynamic  complexity, or chaoticity,  itself,  understood  as

unceasing, internally inhomogeneous and causally probabilistic process of system realisation formation

and change that naturally occurs, as we have seen in the previous section (see eqs. (47)-(52)), already in

any elementary act of quantum-mechanical interaction, eq. (41), within a larger micro-machine dynamics

100

(sections 3, 4). The explicit derivation of the multiple, incompatible results (realisations) of unreduced

interaction  process  in  our  approach  provides  the  consistent,  dynamically  justified  definition  of

randomness/probability and related notions (see also below), which should be clearly distinguished from

various postulated, a priori defined versions of the same notions in the conventional science, giving rise to

what we designate as ‘stochastic’ (or ‘statistical’) version of the unitary theory widely used, in particular,

for introduction of ‘probabilistic’ and ‘chaotic’ elements in the dynamically single-valued description of

quantum computation. It is important to emphasize that the universally defined, unreduced complexity

based on the physically real, dynamically derived phenomena of dynamic redundance and entanglement

naturally unifies, causally (realistically) extends and consistently specifies various related concepts which

are often intuitively (and ambiguously) introduced within the non-dynamical, unitary and abstract theories

around quantum behaviour speculatively endowed with informational/computational ‘interpretation’.

One of such ‘information-theoretical’ and ‘quantum-informational’ properties is non-computability

attributed, in various ways, to any ‘interesting’ (and correspondingly ‘sophisticated’) dynamics/behaviour,

including for example [15] the unified origin of ‘mysterious’ quantum postulates, consciousness, and

(quantum) gravity. The conventional non-computability concept tries to formalise mathematically the vague

idea of ultimately random, ‘unpredictable’, ‘undecidable’, or ‘inimitable’ sequence of patterns (states) in

the system behaviour, but fails (and does not actually try) to explicitly, consistently derive these properties

from  a  ‘simple’  initial  configuration  of  the  system,  where  these  properties  would  not  be  already

present/inserted  in  an  explicit,  trivial  fashion.  By  contrast,  our  results  for  both  simplest  and  general

interaction cases (sections 5.2.1 and 3.3/4.1 respectively) just explicitly show the detailed dynamical

origin and mechanism of ‘non-computability’ which simultaneously clarify the meaning of this notion

itself appearing to be yet another expression of our unreduced dynamic complexity and chaoticity. Indeed,

the ‘ultimate’ uncertainty and ‘undecidability’ in the redundant realisation choice, now dynamically derived

in the unreduced EP method [1-4,8-13] (sections 3, 4) and expressed by the dynamically  probabilistic

realisation sum of the general system solution, eqs. (24)-(27), (47)-(52), just causally specify the implied

meaning of ‘non-computability’, with all its possible nuances and aspects (including randomness). It is

easy to see that all the ambiguities, abstraction and incompleteness of the conventional imitations are

eliminated in this dynamically derived property of the unreduced interaction dynamics. As far as quantum
computation is involved, we show, in terms of this well-specified, dynamic non-computability, that any
quantum machine dynamics (section 3), and even any its elementary step (section 5.2.1), is always non-
computable itself, because of omnipresent, interaction-driven system splitting into many incompatible
realisations, which is another expression of impossibility of the ordinary, digital and unitary, modes of
computation by quantum devices (cf. e. g. [27,78,117] as expression of the opposite conclusion of the
unitary theory).

Since natural interaction processes develop discrete, progressively emerging levels of complex
behaviour,  starting  from  the  multivalued  quantum  dynamics  [1]  (sections  4.4-4.7),  the  fundamental

dynamic non-computability and its mechanism will be independently reproduced at each level (instead of

being only directly ‘inherited’ from lower levels). One obtains thus the multilevel hierarchy of non-

computable, or complex, or chaotic (in a well-defined sense) world dynamics, which explains the ‘non-

101

computable  character  of  conscious  thought’  at  the  highest  complexity  levels  [1,4],  as  well  as  non-

computability of any other level of world dynamics, without its direct reduction to manifestations of

ambiguous ‘quantum weirdness’ (cf. [15,68-71]). Instead, it is this ‘quantum non-computability’ and

‘quantum mysteries’ (intrinsically unified with the dynamical origin of gravity) which obtain their causally

complete, and actually universal, explanation within the dynamic redundance paradigm. In particular, the

most fundamental aspects of quantum mechanics, related to the dualistic behaviour of elementary particles

and  their  very  origin,  naturally  unified  with  the  origin  of  gravitation,  space,  time,  mass  and  other

‘intrinsic’  particle  properties,  are  consistently  explained  as  the  lowest  sublevel  of  ‘non-computable’,

dynamically multivalued interaction between two primordial, effectively structureless protofields [1-4,11-

13], the sublevel of complexity that precedes the one of interacting quantum entities within a quantum

machine considered here. These dynamical relations between neighbouring levels of non-computable

(multivalued) behaviour produce just the necessary, neither mechanistically reduced, nor inconsistently

mystified, hierarchy of world dynamics explaining its nontrivial, inimitable, undecidable, self-developing,

and sometimes externally ‘mysterious’ character.

Talking about the well-defined, dynamically multivalued complexity, chaoticity, entanglement, etc.

of the real quantum machine behaviour, we should emphasize the basic distinction of these unreduced,

dynamically derived concepts from their dynamically single-valued, unitary imitations in the conventional

theory that do not reveal the essence of the unreduced interaction complexity, but only speculatively,

artificially muddle the situation which is already rather ambiguous because of the persisting ‘ordinary’

quantum mystification. Such are the unitary imitations of (quantum) ‘complexity’, ‘chaos’, ‘randomness’,

entropy, information (as well as related ‘foundational’ approaches in quantum mechanics) which are

extensively used in ‘quantum information theory’ (see e. g. [14,53,59-67,72,73,81,110,118,156-174], in

addition to general reviews on quantum information theory cited in section 2). It is not necessary to enter

into technical details of each particular imitation in order to see their general, fundamental deficiency: all

those  ‘quantum’  and  ‘dynamical’  versions  of  randomness,  chaoticity,  complexity,  entropy,  and

information are not obtained as a result of unreduced interaction development, but are postulated instead in

the abstract form of ‘ready-made’, already existing, and intuitively ‘plausible’ manifestation, or ‘sign’, of

the corresponding property/phenomenon, which is actually equivalent to the unitary, dynamically single-
valued, perturbative description leading to evident contradictions. Thus, ‘randomness’ and ‘complexity’
are often defined by formally introduced ‘correlations’ among elements in a given set, where the minimal
correlations are identified with maximal unpredictability and thus randomness. The unreduced, dynamical
origin and the ensuing most important relations between elements remain, however, undiscovered within
such mechanistic definition. The interconnected, and most often confused, values of complexity, entropy,
and information are defined in the unitary approach by analogy with the postulates of classical statistical
mechanics, where the classical (probability) distribution function is replaced by the quantum density
matrix, being itself a postulated and basically deficient construction (see also sections 3.3, 4.2). In that

way one can obtain arbitrary values of ‘quantum complexity’ or ‘quantum entropy’ with ill-defined, purely

abstract  meaning,  depending  on  the  particular  approximation  used.  A  non-zero  ‘complexity’  is  thus

typically attributed to the effectively one-dimensional (dynamically single-valued, or unique) problem

102

solution, whereas the reality-based, unreduced complexity always implies a dynamically multivalued, and

thus truly chaotic, solution (section 4.1). Indeed, as noted in many places above (see e. g. section 2(i)),

the very problem of the conventional, unitary quantum computation is that its true dynamic complexity is

zero, whereas any real computational process needs positive, and actually quite big, dynamic complexity

(see also section 7 for more details). That's why the extensive speculations around ‘quantum complexity’

(or ‘entropy’, or ‘information’) within the conventional ‘quantum information theory’ provide especially

transparent examples of the absolutely irrelevant, qualitatively deficient content of unitary, dynamically

single-valued and abstract imitations of the dynamically multivalued reality in the conventional theory.

The same kind of deficiency is inherent in the dynamically single-valued imitations of ‘quantum

chaos’ in quantum machines [14,65-67,156-166]. The unreduced, dynamically multivalued interaction

description  clearly  shows  why  the  dynamically  single-valued  theory  cannot  find  any  true  source  of

randomness in principle and corresponds to the zero value of the genuine dynamic complexity (section

4.1). At the lowest, essentially quantum levels of world dynamics this absence of any truly dynamic

randomness in the conventional quantum mechanics becomes especially evident (see e. g. [155]), since

here it cannot be so easily hidden behind imitations like ‘exponentially diverging trajectories’ used at

higher, ‘classical’ (macroscopic) levels of dynamics, where ‘randomness’ can be ‘quietly’ inserted as a

lower-level ‘noise’ or ‘uncertainty in initial conditions’ (see also section 6). This difficulty does not stop,

however, the most pertinacious imitators and they do find the ‘genuine’ and ‘dynamical’ quantum chaos

where other single-valued approaches have discovered only proven regularity. In reality, randomness is

introduced of course only mechanistically, through a ‘noise’ within the system that can be somehow

‘amplified’ by an obscure, actually postulated mechanism and give chaos where it is expected to exist by

correspondence to the respective classical system. As a result, one obtains a very peculiar mixture of

contradictions,  where  the  conclusion  about  possibility  of  stable  (unitary)  quantum  computation  also

chaotically changes from one article to another (probably depending on ‘noisy influences’ at much higher

levels of interaction) and where the ‘post-modern’ play of words, so characteristic of today's official

science, attains one of its highest peaks, so that, for example, ‘ergodicity in energy level distribution’ is

arbitrarily mixed with ergodicity and randomness in the real, configurational system behaviour itself, etc.

The  ‘rigour’  of  this  ‘ironic’  science  is  ‘confirmed’  by  ‘pictures’  produced  in  elaborate  computer
simulations within arbitrarily simplified, purely abstract ‘models’ with numerous adjustable ‘parameters’
(so that in practice it is rather useless to verify their correctness). The totally consistent results of our
dynamically multivalued analysis of the real system dynamics reveal the origin of the above ambiguities of
the conventional ‘quantum chaos’ theories (i. e. their perturbative single-valuedness) and thus show why
there is no sense to plunge into more details of those fundamentally erroneous imitations of reality.

In connection to this difference between genuine and imitative complexity/chaoticity, one can
mention the qualitative difference between our objections against unitary dynamics of real computing
(quantum) systems and other existing doubts in the conventional quantum computation [79-88]. The latter

are based rather on ‘practical’ impossibility of realisation of a possible ‘in principle’ theoretical solution

(obtained always within the same, unconditionally accepted unitary paradigm), which is attributed most

often  to  the  destroying  influence  of  (external)  noise  supposed  to  be  relatively  strong  for  ‘sensitive’

103

quantum dynamics of ‘very small’ objects. Whereas this ‘technical’ kind of difficulty can always be

eliminated, in one way or another (indeed, due to the fundamental discreteness of quantum dynamics the

omnipresent noise does not prevent the observed existence of truly coherent quantum dynamics), we show

explicitly that even the most ideal case of strictly ‘Hamiltonian’ (non-dissipative) dynamics is characterised

by the universal, purely dynamical, and therefore irreducible source of true randomness (section 3.3),

appearing already at every elementary interaction act within quantum machine dynamics (section 5.2.1).

Moreover, it becomes evident that being the ultimate source of randomness as such, the intrinsic

chaoticity of real system dynamics also governs the behaviour of any ‘open’, ‘noisy’ and ‘dissipative’

system (including e. g. the situation of ‘quantum measurement’ [1,10]) and provides both the ultimate

origin of any ‘noise’ and dynamically random result of its further development/amplification at higher

complexity  levels.  This  dynamic  origin  of  any  ‘noise’,  which  otherwise  needs  to  be  directly  and

inconsistently ‘postulated’ in the conventional theory, is especially important and irreducible just for the

essentially quantum dynamics, since it is confined to a few lowest sublevels of complexity, where no

‘other’ influence can come ‘from below’, from an indefinite, fine-grained reservoir of ‘practically’ non-

computable dynamics (in other words, the smallest possible ‘grain’ of real world dynamics is always

given by Planck's constant, whether it describes a conventionally defined ‘noise’ or the ‘main’ system

dynamics). This is another demonstration of the profound deficiency of the conventional, ‘stochastic’

approaches  to  randomness  and  chaoticity  in  quantum  systems  becoming  evident  already  by  correct

application of the standard quantum postulates.

The genuine dynamic randomness of real quantum system behaviour is closely related, by its very

origin, to another manifestation of the unreduced dynamic complexity, the dynamically multivalued,

interaction-driven,  probabilistic  entanglement,  or  simply  dynamic  entanglement, between the system

components. One should emphasize the essential difference of this physically real, fractally structured, and

permanently changing, probabilistic ‘mixture’ between the interacting entities from its mechanistic, purely

abstract and especially actively mystified imitation known as ‘quantum entanglement’ in the conventional

quantum theory and unitary quantum computation (see e. g. [83,110,118,172-176], as well as general

references on quantum computation from section 2), where it is even used as the key argument in favour

of the expected ‘fantastically high’ efficiency of quantum computation process. As it is clearly seen from
our explicitly obtained general solution of the unreduced interaction (or ‘many-body’) problem for both
general and particular cases, eqs. (20)-(25) and (47)-(52) respectively, the real entanglement in a quantum
system has a directly visible dynamical, interactional origin, so that the explicit ‘mixture’ of the component
wavefunctions for different entities and eigen-states in a single expression for the total wavefunction is
always obtained as their interaction-driven, physically real, and unceasing recomposition, assisted by the
corresponding EP structure formation. Thus, the dynamic entanglement between interacting degrees of
freedom Q and x  in the general case, eq. (25a), contains the initial interaction potential and eigenvalues
(eq. (25b)) determined self-consistently by solution of the Schrödinger equation with EP (eqs. (20), (25c))

that includes the whole process of the unreduced interaction development and in particular real dynamical

collapse/reduction to the current realisation configuration (see also sections 4.2, 4.3).

104

As follows already from evident qualitative arguments confirmed by the rigorous analysis (section

3.3),  this  real  dynamical  mixture  of  interacting  components  can  only  emerge  in  a  large  number  of

incompatible, but equally possible versions (realisations), which leads to their unceasing change in the

dynamically  random  order,  eqs.  (24),  (52),  giving  rise  in  particular  to  the  true  quantum  chaos  and

probabilistic quantum measurement [1,9,10]. Each system realisation corresponds therefore to a particular,

causally determined version of dynamical entanglement between its components which are forced by the

main, driving interaction to permanently entangle, disentangle, and re-entangle into unceasingly emerging

and replaced realisations, this intense internal life of the system constituting the essence of its existence as

such,  as  opposed  to  ‘general’  definitions  and  mechanistic  imitations  of  the  conventional  science  or

‘systems  theory’.  Correspondingly,  the  real  ‘quantum  entanglement’  also  represents  the  intense,

physically real ‘internal life’ of a quantum system remaining completely beyond the ‘very averaged’ and

purely abstract conventional description and consisting in unceasing sequence of interaction-driven system

collapses to probabilistically chosen possible states (realisations) alternating with transient disentanglement

phases during system transitions between realisations. It is this causally probabilistic internal structure of

(quantum) entanglement, or interaction, process that explains the real, demystified, but complex-dynamical

origin of ‘quantum entanglement’ and ‘linear superposition’ postulates of the standard quantum mechanics

(see also section 5.3) and reveals the illusive basis of ‘magic’ efficiency of unitary quantum computation

as being due to the fundamentally incorrect, dynamically single-valued (perturbative) imitation of real

interaction processes. The necessity for the system to take many incompatible, ‘incoherent’ realisations

will immediately destroy the false exponential ‘inflation’ of the single realisation in the unitary projection

of reality (see also section 5.1), but the same phenomenon of irreducible dynamical chaos can play a

constructive role which leads indeed to the greatly increased efficiency, though for a qualitatively different,

multivalued (chaotic) kind of micro-machine dynamics, actually always realised in natural, living systems

operation (sections 7.3, 8).

An  inherent  aspect  of  the  dynamic  entanglement  concept  is  represented  by  the  property  of

autonomous creativity of complex-dynamical interaction process (sections 4.3-4) and related solution of

the ‘problem of configuration space’ in quantum mechanics. Namely, it is by way of interaction-driven,

physically real entanglement between the interacting quantum system components that the new entities,
constituting  the  computation/interaction  process  result,  autonomously,  dynamically  emerge in the
essentially nonlinear process of system reduction/squeeze (section 4.3) towards its consecutive realisations
that actually form physically real configurations of (quantum) system (see eqs. (22)-(23), (25a,b), (50)-
(51)) and thus the basis of physically real space structure of the corresponding complexity level. These
resulting system configurations, especially important for understanding/control of real quantum machine
dynamics, cannot be obtained in the conventional theory using only their postulated, imitative forms which
are artificially inserted into formal expressions describing ‘quantum entanglement’ and other abstract
‘elements’ of unitary quantum evolution. The dynamically emerging ‘mixture’ of the interacting degrees of
freedom, such as Q and x  in eqs. (25) for the general interaction case, actually describe the tangible
‘texture’ of the emerging interaction product which determines its specific ‘quality’ as that of a ‘new’ and

‘holistic’  entity.  This  physically  real  creativity  of  the  complex-dynamical  quantum  mechanics  is

105

inseparably related, as we have seen, to the irreducible, dynamic unpredictability of creation/entanglement

results that can, however, be causally described in terms of the dynamically determined probabilities of the

emerging system configurations/realisations (sections 3.3, 4.4, 5.2.1).

It is clear that chaotically changing configurations of a real quantum machine, obtained through the

described process of dynamically multivalued entanglement, possess the intrinsic inimitability, leading to

the general non-universality, or ‘non-fungibility’, of both the detailed structure and total ‘level’ of quantum

computation  dynamics.  This  property  of  real  quantum  behaviour  agrees  well  with  standard  quantum

postulates and corrects the corresponding erroneous expectations of the unitary quantum computation

theory,  often  referred  to  as  its  universality  or  ‘fungibility’  (see  e.  g.  [21,25,32,46,103,177-181])  and

implying the permanent, exact self-reproduction, (quasi-) regularity of the unitary quantum evolution.

Note the essential difference between this one-dimensional ‘universality’ of the unitary imitation of reality

and unrestricted universality of the general principles and formalism of the unreduced complex dynamics

(sections 3,4) [1]: the truly universal description of the unreduced system complexity and well-defined

direction of its general evolution (growth of complexity-entropy, section 7) reveals the fundamental origin

of the omnipresent non-universality (non-repetitiveness) of the detailed real system dynamics. Contrary to

the unified diversity of the unreduced complex dynamics, the ‘universality’ of the unitary evolution is

physically senseless: it is close to the mathematically universal linear decomposition of a function into a

series/integral over a (complete) set of ‘standard’ functions (such as Fourier transform). The conventional

theory of universal quantum computation is reduced thus to infinite play with various versions of such
abstract, linear expansion of mathematical functions over sets of other functions.*)

The difference between that mechanistic universality of abstract unitary expansions and unified

diversity of real quantum dynamics is conceptually close to the difference between the purely ‘digital’

mode of computing (including ‘simulation’) that encodes everything what happens in (almost) exact

numbers and the ‘analogue’, or ‘dynamical’ (interactional), mode of natural micro-machine operation,

where the resulting configurations are simply obtained and compared directly, such as they are (including

their inevitable irregularities). It is evident that the conventional, unitary quantum computation, despite any

occurring ‘general’ speculation about ‘complexity’ and ‘probability’, tends actually and inevitably to the

digital, ‘exact-number’ mode and the inherent ‘linear’ (sequential and abstract) logic (see e. g. [27,117]),
which is closely related to the effectively one-dimensional logic of ‘exact solutions’ of the underlying
dynamic single-valuedness paradigm (unitarity). By contrast, the dynamically unpredictable behaviour of
real quantum, classical, and hybrid systems with interaction, where the emerging entangled configurations
and their probabilities are directly determined by the interaction details, can be described and efficiently
used only as analogue, ‘creative’, rather than simply ‘calculative’, kind of operation.

*) In a broader sense, the same refers to the whole ‘new’, or ‘mathematical’, physics and modern ‘exact’ science in general [1]:
in accord with Bergson's sentence, it does not reveal any really new, qualitatively extended phenomena, properties, or entities,
but  provides  instead  a  series  of  technically  new  reformulations,  or  ‘interpretations’,  of  the  same,  ultimately  reduced,
effectively  one-dimensional  (zero-complexity)  ‘model’  of  reality  which  correspond  to  various  point-like  or  line-like
projections of a multi-dimensional structure observed from different aspects, but always reduced completely to its current zero-
complexity projection (see also section 9). A simple, mechanical translation from one ordinary language to another, revealing
no new meaning by definition, provides certainly an example of much more complicated and sensible work of that kind.
106

The self-amplifying character of a real interaction process (equivalent to its universal dynamic

instability) leads to the dynamically  discrete, or  quantized,  structure  of  interaction  dynamics,  which

provides the causally complete, totally realistic explanation for the origin of ‘quantization’, ‘wavefunction

collapse’,  Planck's  constant,  and  its  universality  at  the  lowest  sublevels  of  complex  world  dynamics

(sections 4.3, 4.6) [1,3,12,13]. Since the internal structure of the quantized interaction ‘steps’ is formed

by the dynamically probabilistic (multivalued) entanglement of the interacting entities, it becomes clear

why causal quantization is inseparably related to the true randomness/probability: each quantized system

‘jump’ can be performed in many equally real, but incompatible ways (directions), which determines the

fundamental  unpredictability  and  ‘undecidability’  of  the  actual  system  choice  (equivalent  to  ‘non-

computability’ of quantum dynamics, as we have seen above in this section). If one deals with ‘essentially

quantum’ system dynamics, confined to the lowest complexity sublevels, then one has, by definition, the

situation of ‘coarse-grained’ and strongly (or globally, or uniformly) chaotic case of complex dynamics

(section 4.5.2): at the lowest level of complex world dynamics, the discrete transitions between system

realisations cannot be further subdivided into smaller steps by any real experiment within this world, while

the ‘distance’ between realisations, or the size of the jump between them, is relatively big (comparable

with the average realisation size itself). This general property of quantum dynamics was also confirmed for

the particular case of typical elementary interaction act within quantum machine dynamics (section 5.2.1).

These  causally  derived,  totally  realistic  and  demystified  properties  of  unreduced  quantum

interaction mean that the abstract ‘quantum bit’ of the conventional theory of quantum computation is

determined in reality by the same universal quantum of action, Planck's constant h, that underlies other

basic  features  of  quantum  behaviour  and  that  any  practical  incarnation  of  such  causally  extended,

physically real ‘qubit’ will always contain the irreducible dynamic uncertainty (‘quantum indeterminacy’)

remaining  relatively  big  for  the  essentially  quantum  dynamics.  Both  these  properties  of  unreduced

quantum interactions, quantization and randomness, determine the essential, qualitative difference of real

quantum machine operation from its unitary imitation (cf. e. g. [182]), which can explain why they are so

‘strangely’, but conveniently ‘overlooked’ by the conventional theory, in the evident contradiction to the

standard  quantum  postulates  themselves  (see  also  section  2(ii)).  Indeed,  although  the  real,  complex-

dynamical ‘quantum bit’ thus obtained possesses the fixed ‘information content’, equal to h (see also
section 7), it appears to be extremely ‘volatile’ by its particular configuration (e. g. spatial location), which
evidently puts an end to any hope for practical, full-scale realisation of any unitary, regular (reversible)
quantum computer, as well as to the very idea of such kind of operation of a real quantum machine.*)

The physical reality and transparency of origin of this complex-dynamic elementary ‘bit’, and
actual step, of quantum machine operation, always determined by h, shows also that the existing vague

*)  The  high  dynamic  uncertainty  of  the  real  ‘qubit’  can  be  expressed  as  the  problem  of  ‘irreducibility  of  n-ary  quantum
information’ [183], where already the standard quantum scheme implies that any ‘n-dimensional quantum state’ (emerging in a
generic interaction process) cannot be separated into binary components, i. e. ‘qubits’, without ‘undesirable features’ (such as
the irreducible dynamic/quantum uncertainty). As our analysis shows, the quantum interaction uncertainty is present in its
results in any case, even before any additional ‘quantum measurement’ is performed, and for the full dimensionality of the
emerging system configuration, which means in particular that any purely mathematical transition to ‘n-dimensional’ unitary
description [183] cannot solve the problem. The same argumentation is valid with respect to a similar problem of separability
of (generic) quantum entanglement (see also section 5.3).

107

hopes of the unitary theory to obtain a cost-free, reversible quantum computation scheme by means of

some ill-defined ‘non-destructive measurement’ or a ghostly ‘nonlocality’ (‘quantum teleportation’ etc.)

using especially some ‘eluding’, massless entities, like photons, are absolutely vain, irrespective of the

details determining only the exact manifestation of the unitary imitation deficiency. The dynamically

discrete  and  probabilistic  nature  of  real  structure  (‘quantum  bit’)  emergence  will  always  appear  in

irreducible interaction processes that determine the quantum machine operation. It is not difficult to see

also that the relatively strong manifestation of dynamical randomness and discreteness in the essentially

quantum dynamics (which is a particular case of the uniform chaos regime, section 4.5.2), underlies the

correspondingly  strong,  pronounced  character  of  the  specific  features  of  complex  quantum  machine

dynamics considered above, such as its intrinsic creativity, irreversible direction and non-universality.

Finally, with growing interaction scale/complexity the dynamic formation of classical (bound)

configurations within quantum machine becomes inevitable (and necessary for a useful device); such states

emerge as more regular, SOC type of dynamical entities/regimes (section 4.5.1) possessing the internal,

experimentally detectable fine-grained structure with the smallest grain size of the order of h (section 4.7).

In this sense, any real, useful ‘quantum’ machine is rather a hybrid, ‘quantum-and-classical’ device; its

characterisation as ‘quantum’ object means that it contains not only classical, but also essentially quantum,

strongly chaotic elements in its functional, operationally important dynamics.

The outlined universal properties of real quantum machine operation are unified by the underlying

concept of unreduced dynamic complexity (section 4.1) and can therefore be considered as particular

manifestations of a general  principle  governing  the  emergence  and  evolution  of  any  real  (complex)

structure, the universal law of conservation and transformation of complexity, or (dynamical) symmetry of

complexity [1] (see also section 7 for more details). Indeed, since the unreduced quantum interaction

dynamics is always represented by a globally chaotic regime and thus cannot be regularly ‘controlled’ (i. e.

transformed into a globally ‘self-organised’ regime), it should possess its own, ‘incorporated’ guiding rule

that determines the observed operation of natural atomic, molecular, and living systems involving structure

creation and development (where the eventual transition from quantum to classical type of dynamics also

occurs  ‘from  the  inside’,  through  the  natural  system  development).  The  universal  symmetry  of

complexity, constituting an integral part of the unreduced concept of complexity [1], just expresses that
intrinsic ‘programme’ (and its progressive realisation) within any real system, actually provided at the
beginning of system existence in the form of its main, driving interactions represented by their initial,
‘potential-energy’ configuration (it does enter in our starting ‘existence equations’, eqs. (1)-(5), (41)).
This initial, ‘hidden’, ‘latent’, or ‘folded’, form of dynamic complexity, called dynamical information,
undergoes the unceasing process of transformation into the complementary, ‘explicit’, ‘apparent’, or
‘unfolded’, form of dynamic complexity, called dynamical entropy (it extends the ordinary, equilibrium
entropy to any kind of process or phenomenon), which constitutes the true, complex-dynamical essence of

any system evolution. The total, strictly positive (and usually large) quantity of dynamic complexity does

not change during its permanent transformation from the hidden form of (ever diminishing) dynamical

information into the explicit form of (ever growing) dynamical entropy, which expresses the universal

108

dynamical symmetry (conservation and transformation) of complexity extending and unifying all the

conventional conservation laws and other postulated fundamental ‘principles’ of the canonical science

(including  the  generalised  first  and  second  laws  of  thermodynamics,  i.  e.  the  principles  of  energy

conservation and degradation) [1].

Since this complexity development process constitutes the sense of any interaction (and thus any

system existence), exactly expressed by progressive emergence of changing realisations and their levels

(‘levels  of  complexity’),  we  see  that  the  symmetry  of  complexity,  understood  as  its  conserving

transformation  from  conceived  (potential)  information  into  tangible  (realised)  entropy,  expresses  the

universal guiding line, or irreversible direction (orientation), of natural system evolution. Since any real

system has a finite initial stock of dynamical information, its essential existence, or generalised complex-

dynamical life, can continue only until the complete transformation of information into entropy, after

which the system cannot change any more, while remaining itself, and thus cannot exist as such and falls

into the state of generalised dynamical equilibrium, or complex-dynamical death, characterised by a local
maximum of uniform, highly irregular kind of chaoticity.*)

Being  applicable  to  any  system  dynamics,  this  unified  law  of  evolution  is  especially  useful,

however,  in  the  case  of  such  ‘indistinct’  and  ‘uncontrollable’  systems  as  quantum  micro-machines,

including their eventual dynamical transition to classical configurations of growing scale. Indeed, in that

case the driving interactions, in their initial, ‘potential’ form, make the only possible ‘programme’ of

quantum machine operation, with its dynamically probabilistic behaviour at any single step, while the

global  system  evolution  does  have  a  well-defined  general  direction,  the  one  of  growing  complexity-

entropy and diminishing complexity-information, which ensures the conservation of their sum, the total

dynamic complexity. Therefore any unitary, regular-step, one-dimensional (sequential) programming (and

theory) of quantum machines has no sense at all (other than well-paid, but basically incorrect speculations

and mathematical exercises), whereas the unreduced interaction analysis by the universally nonperturbative

EP  method  just  gives  us  the  dynamically  determined,  really  emerging  system  realisations  and  their

respective probabilities (sections 3, 4, 5.2.1). The step-wise progressive emergence of complexity levels,

including  the  important  transition  to  classical  behaviour,  realises  the  universal  direction  of  system

development towards the growing complexity-entropy, which is the unique, and practically meaningful,
guiding line for creation and control of ‘truly small’, quantum machines, or ‘nanomachines’, used for
various purposes (sections 7, 8). This ‘dynamically parallel’ programming (and information processing) is
also applicable, of course, to any systems with explicitly chaotic dynamics and differs substantially from

*) For example, the stage of maximal, ‘developed’ democracy in any civilisation evolution represents but a particular case of
this kind of generalised system equilibrium, or death, after which the system (civilisation in this case) can only either totally
disappear as such (by the naturally emerging processes of self-destruction), or perform a ‘revolutionary’ (quick and ‘global’
enough) transition to a superior, qualitatively different level of complexity, where the transformation of information into
entropy will restart again, in a new way and with a new force (‘élan vital’). The straightforward application of these results,
totally  confirmed  by  all  previous  civilisations  history,  to  the  modern  stage  of  global  civilisation  development  is  of  vital
practical importance [1] and should quickly and definitely replace the dominating interplay of selfish, extremely short-sighted
group  ‘interests’  implemented  by  the  ruling  unitary  system  ‘priests’  in  the  form  of  low-level,  political  and  apologetic,
‘games’  (manipulation)  with  the  dangerously  paralysed  ‘mass  consciousness’  which  tend  to  present  the  ‘democratic’
civilisation  decay  and  evident,  fundamentally  inevitable  impasse  as  its  desirable,  ‘progressive’  evolution  and  the  ‘best
possible’ way of further development.

109

its unitary imitation by the conventional ‘parallel computing’, which is nothing more than a practically

convenient version of sequential computing split up artificially into simultaneously performed, but totally

disrupted pieces.

Note also the persisting and inevitable confusions of the conventional theory around the notions of

complexity, entropy, and information related to its dynamically single-valued reduction of real interactions.

Thus the conventional ‘information’ referring to operation of real computing devices corresponds rather to

our generalised entropy, while the ‘true’, dynamical information is an equally tangible quantity, but related

rather to the conventional ‘potential energy’ of the driving interaction, as opposed to purely mathematical

expressions  for  an  arbitrary  mixture  of  ‘complexity-entropy-information’  in  terms  of  abstract-space

elements (such as quantum ‘state vectors’) or empirically ‘counted’ states in the conventional theories (see

section 7 for more details). The unreduced, complex-dynamical information and entropy, changing in any

elementary act of real interaction, without any artificially imposed ‘environmental’ influences, are basically

dimensional quantities (which reflects their physically real origin) directly related to (extended) action or its

derivatives (such as energy and momentum) and naturally measured in the corresponding units [1]. This

explains why the universal unit of information/entropy content in the unreduced ‘quantum bit’ (appearing

in the essentially quantum part of computing system dynamics) is given by Planck's constant, h, contrary

to artificial units and ambiguous realisation of the conventional qubits in the unitary imitation of quantum

interaction processes  leading to the value of (abstract) information content in one quantum bit that varies

as a function of changing results of system interaction with its unknown ‘environment’ [182].

The ambiguous ‘environment’ appears inevitably in the unitary theory as a (forced) imitation of

irreversibility (entropy growth) in the otherwise reversible unitary dynamics of the whole system (quantum

computer + environment). However, the ‘irreversibility’ (and related entropy, information, complexity,

etc.)  thus  inserted  from  the  outside  have  a  fictitious,  tricky  character  close  to  the  corresponding

introduction of the concept of entropy in classical (and quantum) thermodynamics, where the necessary

‘uncertainty’ in the system behaviour can only be obtained as a practical ‘lack/impossibility of knowledge’

about ‘too complicated’ configuration of the ‘environment’ (playing the role of thermodynamical ‘heat

bath’, or ‘thermostat’), rather than any true, unreduced randomness that should have only purely dynamic

origin, without any ‘help’ from the external ‘noise’. Such true randomness, originally and causally derived
within the dynamic redundance paradigm, is the only way to avoid contradictions inevitably appearing e.
g.  in  ‘quantum  thermodynamics’  relying  on  imitative  randomness,  or  ‘stochasticity’  (cf.  [184-186]).
That's why the artificially inserted ‘redundancy’ of dynamically single-valued interaction between the
‘system’ and the ‘environment’ [182] is but a unitary, inconsistent imitation of our dynamical redundance
(the latter being derived for the isolated, nondissipative computing system itself) and simply describes
different hypothetical (and quite mutually compatible) excitations/changes in the ‘environment’ produced
by its interaction with the system which does not reveal any intrinsic randomness. The imitative character
of  the  conventional  ‘quantum  entropy’  (e.  g.  ‘von  Neumann  entropy’  expressed  through  the  density

matrix)  is  in  the  fact  that  it  grows  only  for  the  system  (coupled  to  the  environment),  but  remains

unchanged for the combined ‘meta-system’ including both the system and the environment, which leads to

the mentioned contradictions with apparently universal thermodynamical principles [184-186] resembling

110

those  inherent  in  conventional  interpretations  of  emergence  of  living  systems  and  other  ‘strongly
nonequilibrium’ structures at macroscopically levels of reality (cf. [1]).*) The universally derived dynamic
multivaluedness of any real interaction at any complexity level (sections 3, 4) provides the missing source

of purely dynamic randomness within any kind of structure and thus the totally consistent, and actually

unique, solution to all the thermodynamical and dynamical problems (including also that of quantum

chaos, sections 4.6.2, 5.2.1, 6).

Another practically important consequence of the universal symmetry of complexity is the principle

of complexity correspondence which states, in its application to computational processes, that any closed

computing system cannot correctly simulate the behaviour of systems with higher than its own values of

total dynamic complexity. In other words, the correct simulation is possible only if the full dynamic

complexity of the simulating system exceeds that of the simulated system/behaviour. In view of the above

general theory of computation in terms of complexity transformation, the complexity correspondence

principle emerges by the direct application of the complexity conservation law to computing system that

evidently cannot attain complexity levels higher than its internal complexity determined by all driving

interactions (and thus it cannot reproduce any ‘finer’ structural/dynamical details of the simulated system

with  higher  complexity).  The  correspondence  of  complexity  is  especially  important  for  quantum

computing systems, since they are confined to lowest complexity levels and therefore cannot correctly

simulate higher-complexity systems that constitute the majority of practically important phenomena.

Since  classical  behaviour  emerges  from  essentially  quantum  behaviour  as  a  definitely  higher

complexity  level  (section  4.7)  [1,12,13],  it  follows  that  any  purely  quantum  system  cannot  correctly

simulate any classical, quasi-regular or explicitly chaotic, system, contrary to the results from a great

variety of papers on conventional quantum computation ‘showing’ the opposite. As elementary classical

states are usually formed starting from the simplest bound states (like atoms), it appears that even the really

small, and practically important, realm of atoms and molecules is already beyond the possibilities of any

quantum simulation. It is evident, in particular, that any essentially quantum dynamics cannot correctly

reproduce the main property of permanent localisation of a classical system configuration without losing its

quantum (delocalised) character.

This our result actually demonstrates once more the hopeless illusiveness of the major underlying
motivation of the conventional quantum computation theory developed as a ‘qualitatively more efficient’
way to calculate a large majority of various real, mainly macroscopic and classical, regimes of dynamical
system behaviour. Indeed, the ‘digital’, ‘exact-number’ regime of a quantum computer is impossible

*) Many other references on the ‘quantum thermodynamics paradoxes’ within the unitary science paradigm can be found on the
web site of a recent international conference dedicated to the problem (First International Conference on Quantum Limits to
the Second Law, San Diego, California, 2002), http://www.sandiego.edu/secondlaw2002/. Note that as follows already from
the conference title, the underlying conventional science results seem to imply a violation of the ordinary second law for
quantum systems, which is not surprising taking into account the intrinsic deficiency of the unitary, dynamically single-
valued description used that actually cannot explain any ‘thermodynamical’ behaviour in principle, including its application at
the level of ‘usual’, macroscopic systems with classical dynamics (they simply permit for easier manipulations using their
much higher complexity and its diverse manifestations, while the problem remains basically unsolved). In reality, as we have
seen,  it  is  the  unitary  quantum  (as  well  as  classical)  mechanics  that  should  be  considerably  extended  to  its  unreduced,
dynamically multivalued version, after which all the ‘thermodynamical’ (as well as ‘quantum’ and ‘relativistic’) ‘paradoxes’
disappear, being replaced by inevitable, natural manifestations of the unreduced dynamic complexity of any system dynamics.

111

because of the strong, ‘global’ chaoticity of the essentially quantum dynamics (sections 4.5.2, 4.6.2,

5.2.1), while its ‘analogue’, direct-simulation possibilities are strictly limited to quantum systems with

lower dynamic complexity. We obtain thus another, fundamentally substantiated objection against the

announced and ‘rigorously proven’ property of universality of unitary quantum computation, completing

the arguments developed above in this section and showing that unitary quantum computation is simply

impossible  as  such.  Now  we  see  that  not  only  unreal,  unitary,  but  also  any  real,  irreducibly  chaotic

quantum dynamics cannot properly simulate any classical behaviour (thus, the main property of classical

behaviour, its permanent localisation, can hardly be reproduced by the irreducibly delocalised dynamics of

essentially  quantum  system).  As  noted  above,  any  real,  practically  useful  (i.  e.  complicated  enough)

‘quantum machine’ will always eventually perform (local) dynamical transitions into classical type of state,

and it is in that way that such real, hybrid micro-machines will be able to approach the features of the

classical  world,  as  it  actually  happens  to  natural  micro-machines,  including  those  that  determine

‘simulation’  processes  in  the  brain  (the  complexity  correspondence  principle  provides  thus  another

fundamental objection against all theories of essentially quantum basis of high enough, ‘global’ levels of

brain dynamics [68-71]).

The  outlined  general  limitations  to  purely  quantum  computation  imposed  by  the  complexity

correspondence principle can be specified for several particular situations. One of them concerns the

problem of ‘quantum memory’ supposed to participate in operation of the conventional quantum computer

[47-49] (see also sections 2(iv,v), 4.5.1, 4.7). It becomes clear now that even if quantum memory could

exist, it could ‘memorise’ at maximum structures from lower, essentially quantum complexity sublevels,

which means, taking into account the globally chaotic type of essentially quantum behaviour, a direct

reproduction of the corresponding uniform regime of dynamical chaos (section 4.5.1), having apparently

no practical sense. As any function of memory is a complex-dynamical (multivalued) effect in principle

[1], the idea of unitary quantum memory is totally erroneous because of the zero value of the unreduced

dynamic complexity for any unitary dynamics. And since any practically useful memory should have the

properties  of  the  (multivalued)  SOC  type  of  state  with  ‘distinct’  enough  dynamical  configuration,  it

becomes clear that even real, nonunitary but globally chaotic quantum dynamics cannot realise a useful

memory, and the latter can actually start with classical, bound state emergence in quantum interaction
dynamics (section 4.7). Such states appear inevitably in any realistically complicated micro-machine, and
therefore the natural development of real, complex-dynamical ‘quantum’ interaction within a properly
structured machine leads to production of those more ‘fixed’ and localised, classical configurations playing
actually the function of ‘memory’ (that can be explicitly specified as such or not). It is important to note the
essential difference of such kind of ‘distributed’, ‘dynamical’ (emergent) memory, inseparably mixed with
‘calculations’ and most probably dominating in natural neuro-systems, from the pseudo-unitary, totally
regular and ‘separated’ image of memory borrowed from the architecture of usual modern computers (for
those macroscopic devices, the inevitable memory chaoticity and dissipativity remain often hidden within

large enough hierarchy of participating complexity levels).

Similar applications of the complexity correspondence principle concern various other intuitive

‘projections’ of higher-level notions and phenomena onto quantum dynamics and the reverse (see e. g.

112

[52,55-57,62,63,68-71,187-190]) which become increasingly popular in the conventional theory after the

full-scale  advent  of  quantum  information  processing  (indeed,  if  ‘universal’  quantum  computers  can

simulate,  in  principle,  any  process,  then  why  can't  one  use  possible  results  of  this  simulation  as  the

corresponding ‘quantum’ version/explanation of the simulated higher-level process/phenomenon?). The

complex-dynamical  basis  of  any  real  interaction  and  its  results  shows,  however,  that  the  naturally

emerging hierarchy of unreduced dynamic complexity cannot be ‘inverted’ so that higher complexity levels

would be somehow ‘reproduced’ at its lower levels. In particular, any quantum process, real or simulated,

cannot reproduce just the essential, key properties of higher-level phenomena (classical, biological, social,

financial,  etc.).  As  for  the  unitary  quantum  schemes  invariably  used  in  the  conventional  theory  for

‘quantum’ reproduction of higher-level dynamics, they look especially absurd, since the unitary, zero-

complexity  quantum  mechanics  cannot  properly  explain  even  the  real,  complex-dynamical  quantum

phenomena themselves, using instead empirically based ‘postulates’ for the mystified ‘substantiation’ of

its dynamically single-valued imitation of reality. Note that despite the intense ‘post-modern’ plays of

words in ‘quantum generalisations’ of higher-level notions, the problem cannot be reduced to the choice of

terminology,  since  the  difference  between  various  complexity  levels  is  now  properly  explained  and

rigorously specified in the unreduced science of complexity (see sections 4.1, 4.7). We deal here with a

deeper, physical meaning of the unreduced dynamic complexity: its values corresponding to a certain ‘level

of complexity’ directly account for a specific, tangible ‘quality’ and ‘diversity of properties’ of entities

from that particular complexity level which are well determined by the dynamic entanglement and dynamic

redundance phenomena just constituting the real entities emergence. Therefore formal projection of higher-

level notions to lower-level dynamics (which is actually described, in addition, by its effectively one-

dimensional projection) is strongly, qualitatively incorrect in principle, irrespective of the details. By

contrast, it is not impossible, in principle, to find some manifestations of properties from lower levels (e.

g. ‘quantum-like’ properties) in certain patterns of higher-level system behaviour (confined to that, higher-

complexity level), but such analogy implies the use of the adequate formalism containing the causally

derived (dynamically emerging) features of the corresponding complexity level (it should be provided, in

particular,  with  the  unreduced,  dynamically  multivalued  interpretation  and  solutions),  instead  of  the

reverse, unjustified (postulated) ‘lowering’ of higher-level entities/phenomena down to quantum level
(utterly simplified by its unitary description).

A number of ‘hyper-simplified’ schemes within the unitary quantum computation theory itself can
be mentioned as more explicit demonstration of its basic deficiency. These include such hypothetical
possibilities as ‘ground state quantum computation’ [45] and various ‘nonlocal’, ‘instantaneous’, and
‘interaction-free’ applications of ‘quantum teleportation’ and other ‘quantum mysteries’ (e. g. [191]). Note
that in a way these are the most ‘consistent’ realisations of the unitary quantum computation idea just
pushing it to the extreme of its most ‘pure’ form and thus demonstrating its true essence. It is clear, for
example, that if ever the unitary quantum computation could be realised, it should form a sort of (relative)

‘ground state’ with (almost) uniformly chaotic internal dynamics which actually constitutes the physically

real, causally substantiated structure of any real ground state or the state of rest (as opposed to a more

ordered state of motion) [1,9,12,13]. However, the problem is that such globally chaotic, highly irregular

113

state cannot simulate any more complex, SOC type of structure in principle, so that practically it could

simulate only itself and similar, structurally trivial states of matter. This consequence of the complexity

correspondence principle is generally applicable also to other ‘ultimate’ cases of quantum computation

which  are  different  from  its  ‘generic’  case  only  in  their  more  explicit  demonstration  of  the  existing

fundamental deficiencies.

A similar kind of abstract over-simplification of reality within the unitary quantum computation

initiative is demonstrated by estimates of the ‘ultimate computing power’ of the real, tangible universe or

any its finite portion [150,151]. The maximum (but really attainable) speed of computation (in operations

per  second)  by  the  actual  universe,  considered  as  a  unitary  quantum  computer  [62],  is  obtained,  for

example, by simple dimensional division of its total energy by Planck's constant, while the universe's total

informational capacity, or ‘memory space’, is given by its total equilibrium-state entropy divided by

Boltzmann's constant [150]. By analogy to the above ‘ground-state computation’ and in agreement with

the complexity correspondence principle, it is clear, however, that the assumed equilibrium, or uniform-

chaos  state  (section  4.5.2),  which  has,  of  course,  nothing  to  do  with  the  real,  highly  nonequilibrium

universe  structure,  cannot  reproduce  anything  more  complex  and  structurally  distinct,  than  its  own

ultimately randomised configuration, irrespective of the detailed ‘computation’ dynamics (see also section
7.1). It is true that by dividing e. g. the energy of a free electromagnetic wave by h one obtains a quantity
with the dimension of frequency, but does it really mean that the freely propagating, linear wave can

actually ‘compute’ something (or even ‘everything’, according to [150]), with the number of operations

per second equal to its frequency?

Popular references to e. g. ‘complex adaptive systems’ dominating in the universe [62] shows that

the adherents to this, indeed ‘ultimate’ imitation of reality can well understand the difference, actually more

than obvious, between the true universe content and the globally chaotic, hypothetical state of its total

equilibrium  (which  is  practically  never  totally  realised  even  in  any  limited  part  of  a  real,  structure-

producing universe). Taking into account the huge and evident, ‘premeditated’ contradictions of such

‘unlimited’, truly apocalyptic simplification of reality by the officially honoured unitary science, it is

difficult not to acknowledge not only its totally ‘ironic’, ‘post-modern’, speculative content [5-7], but also

practically fraudulent, explicitly parasitic practice, taking especially pronounced forms just in the case of
‘quantum computation’ and other similar ‘applications’ of the conventional, the more and more abstract
and mystified, quantum theory and ‘new physics’ in general (see also section 9). In the meanwhile, the
most  powerful  supercomputers,  using  the  most  advanced  abstract  theories  and  their  most  efficient
algorithmic realisations produced by armies of carefully chosen scribes from hundreds of prestigious
laboratories,  cannot  reproduce,  during  many  hours  of  work,  the  shortest  moment  of  existence  of  the
smallest  observable  objects  of  the  universe,  its  elementary  particles,  taken  in  their  physically  real,
unreduced version. On the other hand, the totally realistic, complex-dynamical content of the electron and
other elementary particles, causally explaining their physical nature and all the ‘mystical’ peculiarities of

their unified, ‘quantum’ and ‘relativistic’ behaviour, can be reproduced even by a ‘hand-made’ analytical

theory, if one uses the consistent, logically correct and physically transparent description [1-4,11-13],

which  is  possible  simply  due  to  the  non-perturbative,  honest,  causally  complete  analysis  of  a

114

configurationally  simple,  but  unreduced  interaction  process.  The  same  dramatic,  ‘non-computable’

difference  between  the  unitary,  dynamically  single-valued,  and  unreduced,  dynamically  multivalued

descriptions of natural entities continues for all higher levels of complexity, including quantum chaos and

measurement  [1,9,10]  (=  real  ‘quantum  computation’),  classical  behaviour  emergence,  many-body

problems, living system dynamics, consciousness and all aspects of civilisation dynamics [1-4]. The

system of close inter-connections, permeating the whole hierarchy of complexity and adequately described

by the universal science of complexity [1], becomes only more evident by the easily made comparison

between the results of both approaches and their respective practical support (at the presently dominating

level of consciousness).

The physically real version of ‘quantum information’, being liberated from artificially mystified

deviations of its conventional, unitary version, appears thus as a chaotic, dynamically multivalued and

naturally quantized evolution of the corresponding physical system which is different from the ordinary,

‘classical’ (macroscopic) and regular realisation of information processing just by the strongly irregular,

‘globally  chaotic’  dynamical  regime  of  any  essentially  quantum  machine.  The  irreducible  dynamic

randomness,  as  well  as  the  related  quantization  and  ‘nonlocality’  (now  causally  explained),  of  the

essentially quantum dynamics are due eventually to the ultimately low (but strictly positive!) values of the

unreduced  dynamic  complexity  of  purely  quantum  systems  which  cannot  therefore  reproduce,  by

‘simulation’  or  ‘calculation’,  any  higher-complexity  dynamics  starting  already  from  the  elementary

classical (permanently localised) systems like atoms. This specific regime of information processing,

consistently understood and described only with the help of unreduced, dynamically multivalued theory,

can be present also at the level of classical (both micro- and macro-) dynamics of special, ‘chaotic’ types of

computing  system,  but  for  systems  containing  essentially  quantum  operational  elements  this  kind  of

strongly irregular dynamics is inevitable, in full agreement with the well-known fundamental properties of

quantum behaviour. The usefulness of such chaotic quantum, classical and hybrid machines is proved by

their successfully working natural versions (determining and causally explaining e. g. the behaviour of all

living systems and their elementary ‘units’). However, the practical, detailed understanding and reliable

control of natural complex-dynamical machines, as well as creation of their useful artificial versions,

becoming  critically  important  today,  definitely  necessitate  the  unreduced,  non-simplified  description
provided  actually  by  the  dynamic  redundance  paradigm  and  qualitatively  exceeding  the  results  of
effectively one-dimensional imitations within all possible unitary approaches of the conventional science.

Note in this connection that the appearing merely speculative, empirically based observations about
the eventual ‘quantum’ origin of any natural, ‘complex’ machine, followed by the conventional type of
dynamically single-valued, abstract, mystified, and arbitrarily postulated symbolism (see e. g. [62,192-
195])  represent  only  decadent,  inconsistently  deformed  versions  of  the  basically  unchanged  unitary
approach, with all its irreducible deficiencies. The vain desire to obtain ‘something from nothing’ by any
means, a qualitatively new, superior property from just another, as if successfully ‘guessed’, but totally

speculative ‘postulate’ or imposed abstract ‘principle’, has already rendered so many bad ‘services’ to the

conventional science (including the characteristic case of unitary quantum computation), and now that the

unreduced dynamic complexity of the world is practically subjected to the critically deep, purely empirical,

115

and therefore largely destructive modification at all scales and levels, one should be especially careful with

the illusive ‘unreasonable efficiency’ of extremely superficial, over-simplified ‘calculations’ of both purely

mathematical and purely egoistic origin that tend ‘strangely’ (but not unexpectedly) to be unified within

one kind of ‘tricky’ thinking becoming critically dangerous right now by its unjust and compromising

domination of the whole scientific knowledge (section 9).

Finally, it is important to emphasize once more that the fundamentally substantiated, well-specified

and practically important conclusions about operation of real quantum micro-machines summarised in this

section demonstrate the usefulness of the underlying causally complete extension of quantum mechanics

called  ‘quantum  field  mechanics’  and  constituting  itself  an  application  of  the  universal  science  of

complexity based on the dynamic redundance paradigm to systems from the lowest complexity levels [1-

4,9-13]. The real quantum computation theory emerges, in particular, as application and development of

the causally complete, dynamically multivalued theory of quantum chaos and quantum measurement

[1,9,10] (see also section 6) revealing the irreducible and omnipresent, purely dynamic origin of true

randomness in any real process of quantum interaction. The obtained results not only show why the

conventional, unitary theory of quantum information processing, quantum chaos, and quantum mechanics

in general is basically deficient, but provide the causally complete, complex-dynamical theory of any

quantum machine operation that reveals qualitatively new directions of their practical creation, in accord

with the obtained physically and mathematically consistent picture of already existing, natural system

dynamics  (see  also  sections  7.3,  8).  These  are  also  the  properties  of  other  realised  and  outlined

applications of the quantum field mechanics (see e. g. section 3 of ref. [3]) and the universal science of

complexity in general [1,4] which support the causal completeness of its intrinsically unified description of

the world dynamics, in contrast to the persisting ruptures and contradictions of the simplified, dynamically

single-valued projection of reality maintained by the conventional paradigm of ‘mathematical physics’ type

that shows only further, dramatically growing, and now critically large separation from the real world

dynamics, starting already at its lowest levels.

5.3.  Complex-dynamical  reality  behind  the  mystified  abstractions
of  the  official  unitarity

Application of the universal concept of complexity within the dynamic redundance paradigm to the
lowest complexity levels, called here quantum field mechanics, allows for the explicit, totally consistent
and  reality-based  derivation  of  all  the  peculiar  features  of  quantum  behaviour  from  the  unreduced
interaction process analysis (section 4) [1-4,9-13]. Since the conventional, dynamically single-valued
theory continues to impose its artificially mystified abstractions, especially within the unitary theory of
quantum information processing, we shall briefly resume, in this section, the true, totally realistic and

causally complete meaning of the corresponding ‘quantum’ notions, based on their complex-dynamical

origin and actually extending the realistic approach of Louis de Broglie, the true founder of quantum (or

‘undular’)  mechanics  (see  ref.  [2]  for  the  details  and  references).  Any  quantum  ‘computing’  system

116

necessarily represents a sufficiently involved system of interacting entities, where not only the postulated

‘averaged’,  externally  observed,  but  the  detailed  (though  maybe  hidden  and  probabilistic)  behaviour

becomes  practically  important,  contrary  to  the  case  of  more  simple,  elementary  quantum  systems

dominating  in  the  conventional  theory  applications,  where  the  problem  of  the  true,  reality-based

understanding of the formally postulated results could most often be transfered to the realm of ‘purely

theoretical’,  ‘interpretational’  or  ‘philosophical’  studies  (see  e.  g.  [15,16]).  However,  despite  the

dominating superficial illusions, the resulting glaring inconsistencies of the official fundamental science

could remain outside the truly important applications only until the deep enough advance of the empirically

based technology into the structure of matter, and the modern story of quantum computation (and other

‘microscopic’ applications, see sections 7.3, 8, 9) only confirms once more the well-known fact that any

obvious  lie  in  basic  issues,  especially  when  it  is  ‘generally  accepted’  and  seems  to  be  ‘practically

unimportant’, hides and prepares a major future failure and essential loss of opportunities.

The real world structure starts, according to the quantum field mechanics [1-4,11-13], from the

simplest possible system of interacting entities, the two physically real, initially homogeneous fields, or

‘protofields’, uniformly attracted to each other with a force which is sufficiently high to produce a large

(local) deformation of at least one of the fields. One of the protofields has an electromagnetic (e/m) nature

and gives rise, after being perturbed by the other protofield influence, to the directly observable e/m

entities  and  effects,  while  the  other  field  is  called  gravitational  protofield,  or  medium,  since  it  is

responsible for the universal gravitation, even though its ‘matter’ cannot be perceived as directly as that of

the e/m protofield (the gravitational protofield content should actually be represented by a viscous and

dense  enough  ‘quark  matter’,  whose  detailed  structure  is  less  important  for  the  observed  results  of

protofield interaction).

The unreduced interaction analysis of the universal science of complexity (actually reproduced in

sections 3, 4 for the general case of many-body problem) shows that already such simple initial system

configuration  leads,  for  generic  interaction  parameters,  to  emergence  of  randomly  distributed  local

structures, each of them having the form of essentially nonlinear, dynamically multivalued protofield

pulsation called quantum beat and constituting the essence of the simplest (massive) elementary particle,

such as the electron [1-4,11-13]. Each massive elementary particle is represented thus by a complex-
dynamical process of quantum beat in the system of two coupled protofields, consisting in unceasing
periodic cycles of self-amplified (essentially nonlinear) dynamical protofield squeeze (or reduction, or
collapse)  and  the  reverse  transient  extension  to  a  quasi-free  protofield  state,  where  the  positions  of
consecutive centres of reduction appear in a dynamically random order from the total set of their equally
possible values that form ‘realisations’ of this particular system and give rise to the living, physically real
structure of the fundamental, ‘embedding’ space of the universe. The unceasing chaotic change of the
emerging inhomogeneous structures (reduction centres) constitutes the naturally irreversible ‘flow’ of
events thus defined, or physically real, fundamental time of the world, further ‘modulated’ (together with

space) at higher complexity levels by their respective realisation change processes (sections 4.3, 7.1).

The elementary particles thus formed (section 4.6.1) enter in the next level of interaction among

them through the two protofields they share, which explains the nature and number of the two long-range

117

fundamental  interactions,  the  e/m  and  gravitational  interactions.*)  This  level  of  complex-dynamical
interaction  development  gives  rise  to  the  phenomena  of  quantum  chaos,  quantum  measurement  and

elementary bound system formation (like atoms), the latter actually constituting the simplest structures

from a higher-complexity, classical (permanently localised) type of behaviour (sections 4.6.2, 4.7). This

universal hierarchy of complexity levels continues its natural development in the same fashion, up to the

highest known levels (represented by consciousness and all its products) [1,4], but we shall now limit

ourselves to the lowest levels of complexity (up to the simplest classical structures) that actually form the

world of ‘quantum’ phenomena and see how the universal, standard properties of complex, multivalued

dynamics give rise to the characteristic features of quantum behaviour, remaining unexplained (postulated)

and ‘mysterious’ [15,16] in the framework of dynamically single-valued, unitary, zero-complexity world

projection that constitutes the conventional quantum mechanics (including all its modern ‘interpretations’

and ‘modifications’). We shall see once more that after being realistically and causally explained as

manifestations of dynamically multivalued behaviour, the ‘magic’ properties of quantum systems cannot

be considered as the basis for the equally ‘magic’, cost-free gain in computer efficiency predicted by the

unitary, totally regular imitation of quantum dynamics. The unitary theory, in any its version, is not

suitable at all for description of a real quantum machine operation and provides its qualitatively erroneous

picture  (cf.  section  5.1),  while  the  dynamically  multivalued,  causally  complete  analysis  of  quantum

interaction processes explains a quite different, omnipresent kind of magic of natural micro-machine

operation (sections 7.3, 8).

(A) Quantum coherence, ‘decoherence’, randomness, chaos, density matrix. As shown in previous

sections, the abstract and artificially imposed ‘quantum decoherence’ of abstract ‘state vectors’ attributed in

the conventional theory to the influence of ill-defined external ‘noise’ is nothing but unitary imitation of the

totally internal phenomenon of dynamic multivaluedness and related randomness in the (spatial) sequence

of system realisations, appearing as absence of their ‘coherence’. However, one should also understand

the true, physically real origin of ‘quantum (undular) coherence’ of particles and their ensembles, showing

itself in many observable effects of wave interference for simple enough quantum systems. It appears that

both quantum coherence and dynamic ‘decoherence’ (randomness) are present, in variable proportion, in

*) This living, complex-dynamical, and naturally unified world construction of the quantum field mechanics [1-4,11-13] is
imitated in the conventional, unitary science by various versions of recently appeared ‘brane-world’ model. Without going
here into details of the latter, note however that it has all the characteristic limitations of a unitary projection, including the
purely abstract and formally imposed (postulated) origin of arbitrary number of introduced entities (such as ‘dimensions’,
fields, interactions, particles, and formal ‘rules’ of their description) replacing the intrinsic creativity of dynamic redundance
and entanglement in the unreduced interaction analysis, which leads to numerous contradictions, unlimited multiplicity of
‘suitable’ models and predicted (but never observed) new entities, fundamentally unclear physical origin of the main structures,
their emergence, evolution, and properties. The whole set of such modern versions, or ‘scenarios’, of the conventional ‘field
theory’  and  cosmology  form  a  strange  agglomeration  of  abstract  symbols  artificially  subjected  to  arbitrary  number  of
‘suitably’ adjusted abstract rules and supposed thus to ‘explain’ the real structure of real world, from which the abstract picture
of the canonical science obviously continues to deviate, both basically and practically, including already the most important,
qualitative physical properties, such as explicit dynamical emergence of entities, wave-particle duality, dynamic indeterminacy
and uncertainty at various levels of behaviour, omnipresent and strong ‘violations’ of all the predicted ‘simple’ symmetries,
natural unification of different fundamental interactions and ‘principles’ within real objects, etc. The situation in the canonical
fundamental physics is the same as it would be in the field of graphical arts if we had there only works of extremely abstract
painting representing real life by simple sets of separated dots and lines, but obligatory for buying from their authors by the
state in practically unlimited quantities and for the prices determined by the authors themselves and their interested agents.
118

every  quantum  system  behaviour,  and  can  be  interpreted  as  average  (probabilistic)  order  in  system

realisation sequence and its complementary, purely irregular component, respectively [1-4,11-13]. The

cases of dynamically multivalued SOC (section 4.5.1) and uniform chaos (section 4.5.2) represent the

extreme limits of this general, partially ordered coexistence of order and randomness tending, respectively,
to almost total regularity and maximal disorder, where the former is characterised by narrow, d -like and
the latter by quasi-uniform, flat distribution of realisation probabilities.

While the general coexistence of order and randomness, or partial coherence, is inherent (section

4.1) in the very nature of the unreduced dynamical chaos/complexity concept (contrary to conventional

imitations of chaoticity), the mentioned limiting cases of dominating SOC (coherence) or global chaos

(incoherence) tend to alternate hierarchically in the progressively emerging levels of complex-dynamical

interaction processes and resulting entities. Thus, the canonical diffraction patterns produced by many

individual  quantum  particles  contain  within  their  regular  (coherent)  undular  shapes  the  irregular

distribution of particle reduction centres that can be observed experimentally (see e. g. [196]), in full

agreement with the dynamically multivalued content of the field-particle process (whereas the ‘Bohmian

mechanics’ cannot consistently explain this wave-particle duality, including especially the unavoidable

wave transformation into particle and back, as well as dynamically random distribution of particles within

the wave field). The irreducible ‘coherence’ of an elementary particle ‘with itself’ is related also to the

holistic, indivisible nature of that complex-dynamical object emerging at the lowest complexity level as a

dynamically multivalued structure, unified by its physically real wavefunction (sections 4.2, 4.6.1) that

just provides the well-specified, causal incarnation of the field-particle coherence. At higher quantum

sublevels of complexity, involving interactions between at least several particles, the number of possible

system  configurations  (realisations)  grow  dramatically  and  maintenance  of  high  coherence  becomes

difficult, which gives rise to the (genuine) quantum chaos phenomenon (sections 4.6.2, 6) and proves

practical impossibility of unitary quantum computation that would need the ideal coherence of the isolated

particle behaviour. The degree of coherence (order) within any quantum system state/behaviour can be

quantitatively characterised by any measure of inhomogeneity of the dynamically determined (spatial)

distribution of system realisation probabilities which is given, in particular, by the generalised system

wavefunction (or its squared modulus) extending the conventional wavefunction, density matrix and
distribution function concepts (section 4.2). It is important to emphasize that the real, and always existing,
‘decoherence’ of a quantum system has a totally internal, purely dynamical origin determined by the
driving  system  interaction  itself  and  takes  the  form  of  dynamically  random  (probabilistic)  order  of
realisation emergence, whereas the system coherence, also always present in its dynamics, is an equally
emergent  property  appearing  in  the  form  of  a  partial  order/inhomogeneity  in  realisation  probability
distribution. The related system properties, its dynamic complexity, ‘non-computability’ of behaviour, etc.
(sections 4.1, 5.2.2) are always determined by the total set of incompatible, dynamically obtained and
therefore permanently changing system realisations and their respective probabilities (a separate, detailed

discussion of the exact physical meaning of information and entropy as two dual forms of the unreduced

dynamic complexity, as well as their imitations in the conventional theory, can be found in section 7).

119

This  dynamically  determined,  interaction-driven  coexistence  of  intrinsic  randomness  and

probabilistic  order  (coherence)  is  the  unique  property  of  our  unreduced,  dynamically  multivalued

description  of  the  configurationally  regular  interaction  process  and  can  only  be  very  inconsistently

simulated by formally introduced, external ‘quantum randomness’, such as that of Nelson's statistical

interpretation [197] of quantum mechanics (see e. g. [198-206] for only a limited selection of recent papers

devoted to this kind of approach). Apart from arbitrary insertion of entities and rules, usual for the unitary,

‘mathematical’ physics, this approach has its own internal inconsistencies actually reduced to another

formulation of the standard ‘quantum mysteries’ which originate exclusively from the dynamic single-

valuedness that underlies all official theories and permitted interpretations. Similar to so many other

versions of unitary approach (involving e. g. all ‘zero-point field’ theories, conventional ‘decoherence’,

quantum gravity and field theories), randomness is introduced here ‘stochastically’, i. e. formally, from

the  outside,  and  not  as  a  dynamical  result  of  the  internal,  a  priori  absolutely  regular  interaction

development.  Unfortunately,  any  ‘hidden  variables’  kind  of  approach,  already  looking  quite

‘revolutionary’ within the heavily reduced framework of the conventional science, is always understood,

in addition, in the mechanistically simplified sense of a direct influence upon quantum system of some

‘hidden’ medium which, according to its introduction, accumulates and conveniently ‘buries forever’ all

the  existing  ‘mysteries’  of  quantum  behaviour.  The  most  consistent  (and  almost  never  referred  to)

approach of this series is the original de Broglie's theory of ‘internal particle thermodynamics’ [207-209]

constituting an integral part of his ‘nonlinear wave mechanics’ (see [1,2] for further references): while the

origin of the ‘subquantum medium’ and its randomness remain unclear, the quantum ‘particle’ itself is

outlined as a dynamically emerging and physically real entity, naturally related to the accompanying wave.

Note  also  the  essential  difference  of  the  consistently  derived,  totally  realistic  phenomenon  of

dynamic multivaluedness, explaining dualistic  field-particle transformations and their randomness, from

the conventional science substitute in the form of postulated and abstract many-worlds, or ‘multiverse’,

interpretations (especially popular in the unitary quantum computation theory): the detailed, essentially

nonlinear  mechanism  of  dynamic  redundance  (sections  3.3,  4.2)  shows  how  the  system  can  change

qualitatively its state and autonomously ‘choose’ between multiple, dynamically emerging possibilities for

its current configuration without leaving the physically real space of the single, dynamically emerging and
self-developing (‘living’) universe. It is easy to see that the underlying mathematically and physically
complete (i. e. truly ‘exact’ and ‘general’) solution to the unreduced interaction problem resolves thus,
simply due to its consistency crudely violated in the unitary theory, bundles of inter-related ‘mysteries’
from the conventional quantum mechanics, relativity, field theory, and cosmology [1-4,11-13].

(B) Quantum entanglement, nonlocality/‘correlations’, ‘teleportation’, reduction/measurement,
duality/complementarity. The unreduced, interaction-driven, physically real entanglement of quantum
system components results only from the interaction development itself and has the permanently changing,

causally probabilistic internal structure determined by the dynamic redundance phenomenon (section 4.2).

This complex-dynamical entanglement is a totally realistic and universal phenomenon occurring within any

unreduced interaction process; its peculiarities for quantum systems are determined by their lowest position

120

in the unified hierarchy of complexity, so that one cannot observe the fine-grained, quasi-continuous

structure of the occurring processes, which leads, in particular, to the canonical mystification of quantum

properties.  The  unambiguous  interactional,  complex-dynamical  origin  of  quantum  entanglement  is

demonstrated, in particular, by the explicit entanglement expression in the obtained general solution for the

many-body system wavefunction (or generalised distribution function), eqs. (24)-(25), (50)-(52). We see

from those expressions that the interacting degrees of freedom are indeed physically, directly entangled

among them, but this real quantum entanglement has the explicit origin in the driving interaction, which

leads also to its dynamically probabilistic (section 3.3) and dynamically fractal (section 4.4) structure. It is

the dynamically probabilistic structure of real, always multivalued entanglement of interacting entities,

rather  than  arbitrarily  varying  ‘decohering’  influence  of  the  environment,  that  makes  impossible  in

principle the real existence of any essentially quantum machine with unitary, or even approximately

unitary, dynamics (sections 5.1, 5.2), as well as any particular application (e. g. [210]) of the unitary,

fictitious ‘entanglement’ from the conventional theory.

Another,  related  expression  of  the  complex-dynamical,  interactional  origin  of  real  quantum

entanglement is provided by the accompanying formulas for EP realisations, eqs. (25c), (48), showing

that during each cycle of permanently changing entanglement the system performs the real dynamical

squeeze, collapse, or ‘quantum reduction’ to the internally entangled configuration of the forming current

realisation. The resulting, entangled system existence is impossible, therefore, without the transient phases

of  disentanglement,  alternating  with  entanglement-reduction,  during  which  the  quasi-free  system

components ‘liberate’ and rearrange their compound configuration to start the next entanglement-reduction

phase directed towards the next, probabilistically ‘selected’ realisation. This peculiar transient state of

quasi-free, undular existence of quantum system components, common for all its ‘regular’, entangled

realisations, just forms the causally extended version of the (generalised) wavefunction (section 4.2)

resolving all the ‘mysteries’ of its conventional version [1,4,11-13].

It becomes clear, in particular, that the conventional paradoxes of linear ‘quantum superposition’ of

states and (interacting) objects are resolved by the internal complex dynamics within each such ‘linear

superposition’, where the total quantum system described by the superposition wavefunction performs the

unceasing cycles of reduction-extension towards the constituent (superposed) ‘eigen-states’ describing in
reality system realisations, with the frequencies of their appearance determined exactly by the respective,
dynamically  derived  realisation  probabilities  (section  3.3).  The  permanent,  dynamically  dualistic
transitions between the quasi-linear, weak-interaction state of wavefunction and essentially nonlinear, but
largely hidden phase of entanglement-squeeze (strong effective interaction) explain all the ‘mysterious’
manifestations of quantum duality, or ‘complementarity’ (see also the end of this item), including the
peculiar  coexistence  of  external  linearity  of  the  Schrödinger  equation  with  the  apparently  nonlinear,
corpuscular and probabilistic, properties of real quantum objects, which gives rise to the causally complete
derivation and dynamical interpretation of the quantization rules and uncertainty relations [1,4,12,13] (the

coexistence  of  physically  real  linear  and  nonlinear  aspects  of  quantum  dynamics  was  proposed  and

defended by Louis de Broglie, see [1,2]).

121

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  our  universal  expression  of  dynamic  entanglement,  eqs.  (25),

represents the generalised form and dynamical origin of all its particular cases (such as general linear

superposition, explicit component entanglement in a many-body system, etc.), whereas the conventional

entanglement expressions hide the dynamical details revealed by the unreduced description behind the

corresponding general ‘coefficients’ and ‘eigenfunctions’ obtained for each particular case by formal (and

strongly simplified) postulation of directly observable, irreducibly ‘coarse-grained’ quantum structures

(see item (C) below for the case of macroscopic and classically amplified superpositions). The mystery of

quantum entanglement phenomenon, first highlighted by Schrödinger [175], obtains thus its consistent,

physically realistic, and conceptually nontrivial solution, explaining also the long problem stagnation

within the unitary approach. The extended, complex-dynamical version of entanglement is much larger

than its canonical version not only because the former has universal origin and manifestations appearing at

any  higher  level  of  complex  dynamics,  but  also  because  already  at  the  quantum  level  the  causal

entanglement phenomenon describes real, essentially nonlinear dynamical structure of any system or

emerging entity, rather than exclusively a postulated linear combination of many-particle states with

interchanged  individual  particle  eigenstates  (e.  g.  positions)  implied  by  the  conventional  version  of

quantum  entanglement  and  forming  a  part  of  the  official  ‘quantum  mystery’.  The  canonical  case  of

quantum entanglement can be causally interpreted now as real and permanent system jumps between its

different realisations with interchanged particle positions, similar to analogous causal interpretation of any

other ‘linear’ superposition of quantum states describing only the external ‘envelope’ of unceasing, highly

nonlinear, explicitly described quantum jumps between those states. Such complex-dynamical, interaction-

driven interchanges permanently occur in any essentially quantum many-body system, involving the

complete hierarchy of various possible versions of its configuration (see also section (C)) and thus largely

exceeding the simplest canonical spin-flip case in a two-particle entangled system, which explains, in

particular,  the  origin  (and  insufficiency)  of  the  ‘symmetrization’  or  ‘antisymmetrization’  procedures

postulated for such system wavefunctions by the conventional theory.

The same unified picture of unreduced complex dynamics and its formal expressions contain the

causally clarified properties of ‘quantum nonlocality’ and ‘quantum correlations’ which appear to be more

directly related to the mentioned ‘wavefunctional’ phase of disentanglement in quantum system dynamics.
Any quantum (and actually any real, complex) system is always partially ‘delocalised’ because (i) it spends
a part of its life in the delocalised state of wavefunction (or ‘intermediate realisation’) and (ii) due to the
property of dynamic redundance, the system performs chaotic wandering in the localised, ‘corpuscular’
state  of  regular  realisation,  these  two  qualitatively  different  kinds  of  state  (and  manifestations  of
nonlocality) being related by the causally extended ‘Born's probability rule’ [1-4, 10-13] (the system tends
to collapse towards the realisation localised around higher wavefunction magnitude, and the reverse).

The situation of ‘quantum correlations’ usually refers to a particular case of quantum superposition
in a many-body system, where different superposed states correspond to an ‘interchange’ of eigenvalues,

such as positions or spin directions, between different system components (usually elementary particles or

atoms). While the system components remain in direct, close enough contact/interaction among them, the

‘correlations’ between the properties of their observed configurations in each superposed state follow from

122

the mentioned cyclic transitions of the whole system from one its configuration into another (generalised

‘quantum beat’ process) permanently occurring, it should be emphasised, within the system dynamics

itself, apart from any ‘measurement’ from the outside that can only ‘catch’ a current phase of that internal

system dynamics (one can also say that the unreduced interaction process permanently ‘measures itself’,

passing unceasingly by all its possible, dynamically quantized and probabilistically selected states, or

realisations). However, even after an arbitrary large separation between individual system components

(always  preceded  by  a  stage  of  direct  contact  in  that  kind  of  setting)  the  correlations  between  their

configurations will persist due to the persistence of the unstoppable quantum-beat pulsation within each

component which is driven basically by the fundamental, unchangeable protofield interaction and tends

therefore  to  preserve  its  temporal  phase  just  at  the  lowest,  quantum  level  of  complexity,  where  any

spontaneous, or ‘dissipative’, modification of a (quasi-free) system is impossible [1]. The latter property

is  generally  lost  at  higher  complexity  levels  allowing  for  system  modification  through  lower-level

dynamics (dissipativity), which explains that ‘mysterious’ peculiarity of quantum behaviour (but only if

one takes into account the quantum beat process, playing the role of internal particle clock ‘synchronised’

by initial interactional entanglement with those of other participating particles). We shall not give here the

evident formal expressions of the described properties, easily obtained as particular cases of our general

expressions, eqs. (25).

It is clear that such causally explained quantum correlations and nonlocality need not involve any

‘infinitely fast signal transmission’ and similar mystifications originating from total ignorance by the

conventional theory of the underlying complex interaction dynamics. Further theoretical and experimental

refinement of the proposed picture is possible, including e. g. experimental tracing and control of the

outlined processes of random walk of a system among its realisations, where even faster-than-light jumps

between individual realisations are not excluded, in principle (though they remain an exotic assumption),

since they do not automatically lead to the superluminal propagation of the observed averaged, random

walk of the system. Note, however, that such kind of experimentation at the ultimately low complexity

levels  will  always  involve  much  ambiguity,  simply  because  all  our  ‘instruments’  and  measurement

processes also make part of this world and are therefore fundamentally limited from below by dynamics of

the same, quantum levels of complexity. This basic limitation, usually neglected by the conventional
science because of its formal and abstract character, refers to any kind of ‘fine’ experimentation with
elementary quantum systems consuming lots of resources and oriented to ‘experimental confirmation’ (or
rejection)  of  fundamental  quantum  theory  ‘interpretations’.  Specific  manifestations  of  dynamic
multivaluedness  and  entanglement  at  the  level  of  highest  quantum  and  lowest  classical  sublevels,
determining real quantum machine dynamics and predicted by the quantum field mechanics (sections 3-5),
can be better suited for ‘experimental verification’ and will certainly be much more useful practically, since
they will constitute an integral part of real quantum machine development and control.

We have seen above that the internal, driving quantum system interaction leads to permanent ‘self-

measurement’ of the system appearing as unceasing events of its localisation towards the constituent

‘eigen-states’ (alternating with reverse delocalisation events). The ‘quantum measurement’ process is the

next higher level of such complex-dynamical interaction, this time between the whole system and another,

123

also quantum, system constituting eventually a part of a larger, macroscopic and classical device. The two

levels of interaction are closely related, so that quantum measurement, being generally a weaker interaction

process,  is  reduced  to  ‘catching’  the  measured  (and  ‘self-measuring’)  quantum  system  in  one  of  its

internal, permanently probabilistically changing eigen-states. The specific feature of quantum measurement

[1,10], distinguishing it from a similar process of (genuine) quantum chaos that occurs around the same

sublevel of complexity (sections 4.6.2, 6) [1,9], is a relatively small, but finite dissipativity of interaction

between the measured system and the instrument elements, which serves both to open the way to further

amplification of measurement result towards higher (macroscopic) complexity levels (item (C)), and to

choose the relevant basis of actually measured eigen-states among many other possible ones (this preferred

basis, or ‘representation’, of the measured system wavefunction is often reduced to possible values of

coordinate/position of the system localisation centre which forms thus the actually measured quantity).

Transient dynamical localisation of the externally measured quantum system is similar by its mechanism to

the lower-sublevel localisation of the self-measured system in the process of its generalised quantum beat

(which always continues ‘within’ any quantum measurement event), but is quantitatively larger in its

spatial and temporal extension and resembles actually a transient formation of a classical, permanently

localised kind of state (section 4.7, item (C)). This causally specified, physically real ‘wavefunction

reduction’ during ‘quantum measurement’ emerges as a temporary ‘bound state’ of the measured quantum

system and the participating (quantum) element of the measuring instrument, confined to its characteristic

size (which explains the involvement of postulated ‘instrument classicality’ in the conventional theory of

quantum measurement), but then quickly decays into the normal, ‘extended’ process of internal quantum

beat of the measured system (in general, with the new wavefunction parameters) and strongly, irreversibly

changed state of the corresponding instrument (detector) element(s), with its classical ‘indicator’ degrees

of freedom showing the measured system eigenvalue (if the instrument is properly tuned).

The  obtained  physically  transparent  picture  of  quantum  nonlocality,  its  manifestations  and

limitation by localisation (measurement) processes permits one also to understand both the real basis and

inconsistent speculations behind various related, often deliberately ‘mystified’ notions of the conventional

theory which appear with growing intensity especially within the unitary fantasy of quantum information

processing. One of the ‘central’ ideas of this kind is the notorious ‘quantum teleportation’ (of quantum
states)  which  not  only  constitutes  the  key  element  in  many  proposed  operation  schemes  of  quantum
circuitry, but embodies the core of the whole quantum computation idea, with its magic and cost-free
power to transfer real information and then why not real system states. Many other ‘quantum miracles’
born in the unitary science delirium, such as momentary quantum ‘action at a distance’, ‘nondestructive
measurements’, underground ‘correlations’, and easily added ‘waves of consciousness’, have certainly
much to do with the sweet dream of quantum teleportation. In the causally complete, complex-dynamical
picture of quantum interaction dynamics a sort of small-scale ‘teleportation’ (one could call it so) happens
actually during each real ‘quantum jump’ of the system, i. e. its transition from one localised realisation to

the  next  one,  usually  very  close  spatially  to  the  previous  realisation.  In  the  special  case  of  spatially

extended, ‘macroscopic’ quantum state (see item (C) below) consisting from many entangled individual

elements, a collective ‘teleportation’ of simple enough structures at higher distances can be ‘automatically’

124

realised by the same mechanism, including many small-scale, coherent ‘quantum jumps’. Finally, similar

to the nonlocal ‘quantum correlations’ transmitted, in principle, over arbitrary large distances (in ‘clean’

enough conditions), a simple quantum ‘state’ understood only as its main parameter(s) (e. g. a given spin

direction of particle of a certain species), but not as the individual carrier of those quantities, can evidently

be ‘transmitted’ in the form of ‘correlations’ themselves. Therefore ‘quantum teleportation’ is a mere play

of words, another way to describe the same, well-known ‘quantum mysteries’ remaining unexplained

within conventional theory and acquiring causally complete interpretation in the quantum field mechanics.

It is important that the realistically interpreted quantum ‘nonlocality’ and ‘teleportation’, for any their

particular cases and ‘schemes’, always involve at least simplest, but real interaction processes and are

therefore subject to their dynamic randomness (sections 3.3, 5.2.1), which means that there can be no

‘pure’, unitary, totally coherent ‘teleportation’, but only probabilistically determined, partially regular

‘transmission’, coherence, ‘correlations’, and quantum state reproduction at a distance, even in the total

absence of any ‘noise’ different from the main, driving interaction processes (this conclusion agrees,

contrary to the unitary ‘miracles’, with the standard quantum postulates, cf. section 2 and refs. [86,87]).

Note also the related inconsistent confusion, within the conventional theory, between essentially

different cases of massless (photons) and massive (electrons) particle dynamics, or those of quasi-free

propagation, elastic interaction and dissipative (de)excitation processes. This characteristic and tricky

‘entanglement’ within the scholar theory itself, based on its total and ‘officially permitted’ ignorance of the

real, physical origin of elementary particles and their detailed dynamics, is often used for ambiguous

‘experimental demonstrations’ of ‘really performed’ elements of unitary quantum computation, where the

undesirable ‘small deviations’ and theoretical difficulties, conveniently left ‘for future studies’, describe in

reality the irreducible obstacle to realisation of any full-scale version of the unitary quantum computation.

Note  finally  that  the  inseparable  and  irreducible  mixture  of  nonlocal  (undular)  and  local

(corpuscular) system properties in its complex (multivalued) internal dynamics provides the causally

complete extension of the famous feature of wave-particle duality in the essentially quantum type of

behaviour. We see now that quantum systems behave ‘dualistically’ not because they are inexplicably

‘weird’ in principle, but rather because they actually and permanently change their current state between

(generalised) localisation around different regular realisation configurations and extended state of the
common intermediate (or main, or transitional) realisation constituting the physically real version of the
wavefunction.  This  complex-dynamical,  interaction-driven  duality  of  a  real  quantum  system  has  the
intrinsically probabilistic, nonunitary (and essentially nonlinear) character, which makes impossible its use
in practical realisation of the conventional, unitary schemes of quantum devices. The universal character of
the complex-dynamical mechanism of quantum duality provides its direct extension to any level of the
world dynamics [1-4,11-13], where ‘corpuscular’ states are generalised as respective object ‘shape’ and
trajectory (‘localised’ system configurations) and the ‘undular’ state becomes (extended) ‘distribution
function’ (formed by delocalised system transitions between the quasi-regular configurations/trajectories).

This universal, physically real duality of complex dynamics of any interaction process, having many

particular manifestations [1], causally extends and explains the origin of the idea of ‘complementarity’ of

Niels Bohr, even though his intuitively directed attempts to endow complementarity with the status of a

125

universal principle of nature could inevitably have only ill-defined, obscure basis within the framework of

unitary (single-valued) science paradigm.

(C) Classicality, macroscopic quantum states, complex solid state dynamics. As shown before

(section  4.7)  [1-4,12,13],  the  classical,  permanently  localised  type  of  behaviour  emerges  from  the

dualistic, quantum behaviour as the next higher level of developing interaction complexity represented by

the simplest bound states, such as the hydrogen atom, which means that classical state emergence can be

described as a generalised, complex-dynamical, internally driven ‘phase transition’ in a few-component

(quantum) system with interaction. It is important that quasi-permanent localisation of bound states of

quantum particles originates not in any ‘decoherence’ processes initiated from the outside, but in the

unreduced,  complex  dynamics  of  the  bound  state  itself  and  specifically  in  the  dynamically  random

(multivalued) character of the individual quantum beat processes within each bound system component.

Since each component tries to perform its unceasing quantum jumps in random directions, the resulting

mutual ‘hits’ of the bound particles almost compensate each other, and the probability of a large enough

series of independent random jumps of the components in one direction, necessary for the ‘quantum

nonlocality’ of the whole system, is extremely (exponentially) low. This probability can become much

larger, however, if such bound system, classically localised in its isolated state, enters in a suitably chosen

interaction process because in this case the quantum beat oscillations of system elements, giving rise to

their quantum jumps, can form a spatially (loosely) ordered, or ‘coherent’, structure, so that the correlated

jumps of system components in one direction are greatly facilitated by the global-motion, regular, and

often resonant correlations between the individual quantum beat processes. It is this kind of quantum beat

dynamics that gives rise to the causally complete version of the ‘quantum entanglement/superposition’

situation in many-body systems (see item (B)), where the neighbouring particles exchange their positions

in resonance with their (spatially coherent) quantum beat pulsation. As a result, a spatially extended,

macroscopic quantum state can form as a partially spatially ordered system of many-particle quantum beat,

which can be described as an essentially nonlinear, many-particle ‘standing wave’ in the system of two

interacting  protofields,  forming  the  ‘quantum  condensate’  of  individual  particles  that  ‘freely’  and

coherently jump and exchange their places in resonance to each other.

It is this kind of dynamically chaotic, essentially nonlinear, partially spatially ordered (coherent)
and internally entangled system of quantum beat processes that constitutes the physically real structure of
all  ‘macroscopic  quantum  states’  involving  Bose-Einstein  condensation,  such  as  superconducting,
superfluid states and (e. g. atomic) Bose-Einstein condensates (cf. [211]). In the case of atomic Bose-
Einstein condensates this essentially nonlinear standing wave can also be called ‘gaseous solid’ because it
unifies certain spatial order with the properties of a (quantum) gas, where atoms quasi-freely wander on a
rather loose ‘lattice’. We obtain thus a more specific justification for classification of this popular, Nobel
prize-winning  system  [212]  as  a  ‘novel  phase  of  matter’,  where  we  can  see  now  (contrary  to  the

conventional description) the exact, complex-dynamical origin of the particular new order (symmetry) that

appears in this qualitatively new phase of interacting atoms. We can also clearly understand the physical,

dynamical origin of that ‘mysterious’ quantum affinity between identical Bose particles which is simply

126

postulated in the conventional science and then described within a formal statistical theory: the latter is but

an external, averaged expression of the underlying spatial coherence (SOC) of the dynamically multivalued

quantum beat processes for individual  particles.  The  conventional,  unitary  theories  of  many-particle

quantum states always provide such ‘collectively averaged’ (or ‘statistical’), ultimately simplified and

abstract, empirically ‘guessed’ kind of description that does not take into account the detailed complex

dynamics of the interacting, coherent quantum beat processes of individual particles and their partially,

probabilistically ordered spatial arrangement (thus, interaction is basically excluded from the conventional,

purely statistical/averaged and formal description of Bose-Einstein condensation or sometimes tentatively

included in terms of ‘mysterious’ quantum effects and arbitrarily postulated equations for an ‘averaged’

system wavefunction).

That is the reason why conventional theories can approximately account only for the simplest cases

and  properties,  but  in  cases  of  more  involved  many-body  interactions,  such  as  the  high-temperature

superconductivity, they ‘suddenly’ become inefficient and give contradictory, ambiguous results, despite

really  huge  quantities  of  efforts  applied  (see  e.  g.  [213]).  The  unreduced,  dynamically  multivalued

interaction  analysis  provides  the  unique  possibility  of  correct  description  of  those  more  explicit

manifestations of the underlying complex behaviour (so that the hierarchically structured and totally

consistent ‘theory of everything’ [214] is still possible, but outside the limits of the conventional dynamic
single-valuedness, and actually takes the form of the universal science of complexity [1]).*) To realise this
possibility in full detail, one needs only to apply the universal many-body problem solution (section 3) to

each particular case. While the detailed analysis of each application of the universal complex-dynamical

solution deserves a separate investigation, it becomes clear why no essential progress in the description of

those more involved, ‘nonseparable’ problems in the modern many-body/solid-state theory can ever be

achieved  within  the  conventional,  dynamically  single-valued  (unitary)  approach,  irrespective  of  its

particular version details and the quantity of efforts applied. The necessity of the ensuing conceptually big,

well-substantiated change in the whole solid-state physics development represents an important result in

itself naturally giving rise to a large diversity of results for particular systems and applications.

As noted above, the situation of full-scale quantum micro-machine (including quantum computer)

actually represents a generalisation of quasi-macroscopic quantum system, where the distributed dynamic
emergence of a classical kind of state (and thus definite interruption of quantum coherence) is necessary
for the useful machine operation. This shows, in particular, that practical applications of atomic Bose-
Einstein condensates, often ‘generally’ implied behind their peculiar properties, are fundamentally limited,

*) The novelty of the unreduced, complex-dynamical (multivalued) solutions to solid-state problems with respect to their
solutions in the framework of conventional theory can be illustrated by the extended description of ‘quasi-particles’ in the
dynamically multivalued theory: they are represented by an internally chaotic regime of multivalued SOC (section 4.5.1),
which means that any real ‘quasi-particle’ has its ‘private’, probabilistically determined ‘life’ in the form of a dynamically
fractal,  self-developing  hierarchy  of  unceasingly  changed  realisations  and  their  common  transient  state,  or  (generalised)
wavefunction. Such unreduced, complex-dynamical quasi-particles can only be obtained beyond the limits of perturbation
theory  (invariably  used  in  the  canonical  theory),  which  allows  for  the  consistent  and  reality-based  description  of  their
emergence and any ‘strong’ interaction effects giving rise to new effects and entities from a higher sublevel of complexity. All
the main limitations of the conventional unitarity, becoming now explicitly evident for those more involved applications of
the solid-state theory, are due to the fact that it always deals with the perturbatively simplified, effectively one-dimensional,
and often directly postulated ‘envelopes’ of real, dynamically multivalued structures, such as particles, quasi-particles, and
their arbitrary agglomerates (see also section 8).

127

besides  their  inevitable  fragility,  by  extremely  low  dynamic  complexity  of  any  essentially  quantum

behaviour  excluding  any  involved  enough  (localised)  structure  emergence  necessary  for  any  useful

quantum  machine  operation,  such  as  computation  process  (cf.  [215]).  In  this  sense,  the  externally

‘impressive’ quantum mysteriology of the official science, in both its theoretical and experimental aspects,

is  definitely  and  inevitably  condemned  to  failure,  as  far  as  sensible  systems  and  useful  practical

applications  are  involved,  while  any  qualitative  future  advance  can  only  be  performed,  for  the  same

reason, with the dynamically multivalued, nonunitary, hybrid micro-machines already extensively realised

in nature (see also section 8).

Note also that real macroscopic, many-body quantum states can exhibit many global realisations

(even for each particular system) which differ among them by the degree of probabilistic spatial order that

can contain various (in general discretely structured, quantized) proportions of local ‘defects’ (like voids of

various size) in its roughly regular spatial structure. The ‘quantum transitions’ between such various

degrees  of  order/randomness  in  the  microscopic  spatial  structure  of  the  corresponding  ‘lattice’  of

interacting  quantum  beat  processes  should  have  a  peculiar,  rather  ‘abrupt’  (catastrophic)  character

(compared with order-disorder transitions in classical, incoherent many-body systems) which can be

properly described only within the unreduced, dynamically multivalued interaction analysis (cf. [216]).

The important underlying property of the unreduced structure of a large-scale quantum state is the non-

vanishing, dynamically meaningful interaction between its components that just gives rise to its peculiar

features,  such  as  ‘revival’  of  quantum  properties  for  ‘condensates’  of  relatively  heavy,  individually

classical  entities  (atoms  and  molecules),  whereas  the  conventional  theory  is  based  on  inconsistently

postulated quantum properties of such extended states (including ‘Bose-Einstein condensation’) consisting

of  allegedly  non-interacting,  quasi-free  components,  which  inevitably  leads  to  another  series  of

‘irresolvable’ problems at the attempt to take into account the internal condensate interactions [213,214].

Even without the detailed analysis, it is clear that the proposed exact, dynamically derived picture

of  macroscopic  quantum  states  can  explain  many  observed  properties  of  atomic  Bose  condensates,

complex superconductors and other similar systems, starting from the true, irreducibly complex-dynamical

(multivalued)  nature  of  such  ‘peculiar’  states  of  many-body  quantum  system.  The  experimentally

observed, very diverse manifestations of that ‘peculiarity’, remaining obscure and disrupted within the
conventional theory, obtain now a unified and consistent explanation as explicitly appearing, but standard
properties of the unreduced dynamic complexity which are present, though maybe in a more hidden form,
in any many-body system, despite their complete omission in the unitary approach leading it to the obvious
impasse.  One  example  is  provided  by  the  recently  observed  ‘quantum  entanglement’  between  two
macroscopically large, many-atom states [217] which can now be understood microscopically, in detail
revealing, in particular, the origin of macroscopically ordered (coherent) entanglement of the atom-scale
quantum beat processes in the system of individually classical, ‘heavy’ atoms (while being considered
within the conventional, unitary theory, the same situation contains a whole hierarchy of ‘mysteries’).

Similar  examples  are  provided  by  various  macroscopic  quantum  states  of  the  ‘Schrödinger  cat’  (or

‘quantum cat’) type, meaning that they contain a linear, coherent superposition of several macroscopic

‘eigen-states’  with  explicitly  different,  macroscopic  measured  characteristics  (see  e.  g.  [218,219]).

128

Whereas the conventional theory ‘mysteries’ are only amplified in proportion to the quantum state size (in

particular, all ‘decoherence’-based approaches fail by their nature), the above picture of the quantum

properties revival for macroscopic ensembles of interacting particles clearly explains, similar to the case of

microscopic quantum superpositions, the complex-dynamical, interactional origin of such macroscopic

linear combination as unceasing system transitions between the constituent ‘resonant’ realisations which

can be traced down to the corresponding transitions in the local motions of neighbouring constituent

elements (atoms, molecules, quasi-particles, etc.).

Note once more that the dynamically random, globally chaotic character of internal structure of any

such essentially quantum macroscopic state can allow for only very simple, quasi-uniform kind of spatial

structure (like an imperfect lattice) and is not compatible with any unitary or even chaotic, but totally

quantum, scheme of (practically useful) computation/creation process. This fundamentally substantiated

conclusion of the causally complete theory of many-body quantum interaction shows that the vague and

general promises of a vast variety of ‘magic’ future applications, accompanying recent experimental boom

in the field, are largely and evidently exaggerated, in contrast to the elementary limits imposed already by

the well-established principles of the standard theory (see section 2). What those ‘fine’ and ‘quantum’

experiments  actually  demonstrate  is  the  high  fragility  and  esoteric  conditions  of  existence  of  the

‘promising’ states involved (especially when they are obtained from heavier particles like atoms), which

only confirms their intrinsic dynamic instability predicted by the dynamically multivalued description of

their real physical origin.

As concerns the original Schrödinger cat paradox itself [175] and the related quantum measurement

process, it contains essentially the causal complex-dynamic mechanism of the classical or ‘reduced’ state

emergence (section 4.7, items (B) and (C) above), but in its simple, irreversible version, i. e. without the

following  return  of  the  measured/classical  element  to  quantum  type  of  behaviour  that  takes  place  in

macroscopically large quantum systems (including ‘Schrödinger-cat states’) due to a specially arranged,

low-noise interaction between elements, as described above. Any slightly dissipative interaction process

between two (or more) essentially quantum systems, actually constituting the ‘quantum measurement’

situation, leads to formation of a transiently localised (dynamically squeezed, or ‘reduced’), pseudo-

classical configuration of ‘bound’ quantum beats of interacting systems. Therefore the delocalised and
‘coherent’, or ‘essentially quantum’, ‘linear’ mixture of elementary constituent state-realisations of the
‘measured’ system is destroyed already at this first stage of the real measurement process that does not
need any postulated and ill-defined ‘classicality’ (»
 macroscopic size) of the other, ‘measuring’ quantum
system. The transiently localised, ‘reduced’ configuration of the interacting couple of measured system(s)
and quantum instrument element(s) quickly decays and the measured quantum system takes its ‘normal’,
delocalised configuration (though generally changed in details), but certain essential moments of extended
wave interaction (leading to diffraction in a double-slit experiment, etc.) are lost during the ‘reduction’
stage, while the irreducibly changed, excited state of the measuring instrument element can be further

amplified during its avalanche-like transfer to higher complexity levels, occurring due to the mentioned

small dissipativity of the element (i. e. its slightly open, leaky dynamics appearing as ability to be actually

129

excited and transmit this small initial excitation through a hierarchy of further interactions).*) It is that well-
defined, dynamical, small, but finite ‘leak’ of interaction development to higher (macroscopic) complexity

levels  which  is  necessary  for  the  actual,  experimentally  feasible  measurement  of  quantum  system

characteristics by the real measuring instrument that needs thus to be fully classical in those its final, output

structures (such as macroscopic, truly classical ‘indicator’/‘pointer’), as opposed to its sensory, input

elements that should necessarily participate in a purely quantum interaction process.

Note the essential difference of this dissipative, but well structured aspect of classicality emergence

in the causally explained quantum measurement process from any ill-defined and abstract ‘decoherence’ of

the (purely mathematical) wavefunction that still needs postulation of unexplained instrument ‘classicality’

as its ‘big mass’ introducing ‘much noise’ and thus somehow eventually destroying ‘quantum coherence’

(cf.  [220]).  In  this  latter  interpretation  the  ‘cat’  from  Schrödinger's  paradox  needs  simply  to  be

macroscopically big in order to reduce the probability of ‘quantum superposition’ of several states to

negligibly small levels (e. g. [219]), but this explanation cannot consistently account for existence of

various macroscopic quantum effects and states (including coherent superpositions of the Schrödinger cat

type), on one hand, and readily observed emergence of classicality in microscopic, atom-scale interactions,

on  the  other  hand.  In  reality,  as  we  have  seen  above,  the  quantum  wave  ‘reduction’  (physically  real

dynamic localisation) and related transient classicality emerge already at the first, ‘essentially quantum’

stage of quantum measurement, which momentarily ‘kills’ not the ‘cat’ itself, but the possibility for it (or

even for any its small part) to be in a quantum ‘coexistence’ of several states. After that the obtained,

already essentially classical (quasi-single-valued) result of ‘eigenvalue’ measurement of the essentially

quantum measured system is simply stabilised by its amplification to higher complexity levels permitting

one to actually register its irreversibly determined value (‘cat dead’ or ‘cat alive’), while the original,

measured quantum system returns to its ‘normal’, delocalised state of quantum beat between various

possible eigenvalues. In a similar way, the simplest classical, permanently localised states appear already

at a very small scale, together with the elementary bound systems, e. g. atoms (which does not prevent

them from possibility of quantum properties revival in a suitably chosen interaction process involving

quantum beat resonances, see items (B), (C) above and section 4.7).

It is also important to emphasize the essential difference of our dynamically derived, truly first-
principles theory of quantum system collapse and measurement from any kind of postulated, artificially
imposed stochasticity of quantum systems in the unitary theory, existing in a large variety of formulations
and often also called ‘dynamical’ collapse, (continuous) measurement, etc., which gives an illusion of a
dynamically derived effect (like e. g. various versions of ‘intrinsic decoherence’ [221-225]). The problem
of any such description is in the inevitably ensuing modification of the standard, extensively confirmed
quantum  formalism  even  in  its  properly  dynamical,  a  priori  linear  part,  whereas  in  our  approach  we
explicitly derive the Schrödinger equation, in its usual, externally linear form, starting from the reality-
based description of the dynamically multivalued (chaotic) quantum beat process [1,4,12,13], whose

*) Note that avalanche-like amplification of the primal quantum measurement result is necessary only in the case of real
registration of the measured system characteristics (‘eigenvalues’), involving macroscopic final indicator, while ‘quantum
measurement process’ in general refers to the first, elementary stage of wavefunction collapse that commonly occurs in real
micro-systems and accounts, in particular, for interference pattern destruction in ‘quantum diffraction’ experiments [1,10].
130

essential, though hidden, nonlinearity provides the causally complete explanation for the ‘mysterious’

postulated ‘additions’ to the linear standard scheme, and we continue in the same fashion at higher levels

of quantum/classical complexity (sections 4.6, 4.7, 7.1), where the dynamic randomness (redundance)

and the related generalised Schrödinger equation are independently derived at each level within basically

the same, universal mechanism, instead of their postulated, artificial ‘extension’ from other levels in the
canonical, stochastic unitarity.*) Being artificially imposed upon quantum system dynamics, the ‘intrinsic’
decoherence/stochasticity  of  the  unitary  approach  will  inevitably  violate  the  standard,  extensively

confirmed (though unexplained) rules and will always need introduction of its (postulated) source, thus

simply displacing the same, unsolved problem to hypothetical (and always ambiguous) ‘deeper’ levels of

reality (this kind of trickery is a typical and inherent manifestation of the unitary science deficiency [1]).

Note that the true quantum chaos (see sections 4.6.2, 6) is close by its level of emergence and

dynamically multivalued mechanism to quantum measurement process, but happens in the actual absence

of  (suitable)  dissipativity,  so  that  the  interacting  quantum  systems,  instead  of  being  transiently  (and

irreversibly) localised around one of possible centres of reduction (realisations), take successively and in a

dynamically random order all possible (usually spatially delocalised) realisations. Combination of the true

quantum chaos with quantum measurement (dynamically ‘embedded’ in it) is possible and naturally occurs

in real quantum machine dynamics, where each of the interaction processes and their combination are

described  by  the  universal  EP  formalism  (sections  3,  5.2.1)  [1,9,10].  Note  also  the  fundamental

difference between the unreduced dynamic complexity of the real, dynamically multivalued interaction

processes,  used  here  for  explanation  of  quantum  system  behaviour,  and  the  appearing  imitations  of

quantum (and classical) complexity (e. g. [225-229]) actually reduced, despite the intense terminology of

‘novelty’, to the conventional, dynamically single-valued ‘science of complexity’ that replaces dynamic

randomness by mechanistically inserted ‘stochasticity’ etc. (see also [4]).

The basically incomplete (unitary) and totally abstract interpretation in the conventional quantum

mechanics of the above realistic, complex-dynamical picture of unreduced quantum system behaviour

(items (A)-(C)) shows especially clearly its inevitable deficiency just in the quickly growing field of

quantum theory applications to more complicated, man-made, modified and controlled micro-systems,

where  the  fundamental  limitations  of  the  canonical  single-valued  imitation  of  reality  are  ‘suddenly’
transformed from the ‘unreasonable efficiency’ of the evidently contradictory ‘postulates’ to the absolutely
senseless  and  openly  fraudulent  system  of  arbitrary  guesses  and  purely  mathematical  fantasies.  One
characteristic sign of this ‘ironic’ [5] and show-business kind of science, directly related to the present
discussion  of  the  essence  of  ‘quantum’  behaviour,  is  the  infinitely  ‘inventive’  play  of  ‘puzzling’,

*) The essential, interaction-driven nonlinearity emerges dynamically at the sublevels of complexity both below and above the
formally linear Schrödinger dynamics. The lower-sublevel nonlinearity behind the usual Schrödinger equation is hidden in the
phenomena  like  wave-particle  duality  (i.  e.  corpuscular  behaviour  of  the  same  ‘wave’)  and  its  irreducibly  probabilistic
manifestation (‘Born's probability rule’) which remain ‘mysterious’ within the conventional scheme and are formally imposed
by the standard ‘quantum postulates’. The higher-sublevel nonlinearity appears in the form of true quantum chaos (section 6)
[1,9]  and  causal  quantum  measurement  (section  4.6.2)  [1,10]  which  demonstrate  the  unreduced,  complex-dynamical
development of the externally ‘linear’ interaction in a configurationally simple quantum system described by the standard
Schrödinger equation (which is provided now with the unreduced, universally nonperturbative solution).

131

‘quantum’  words  without  sense  intermixed  with  equally  vain  speculations  of  ‘post-modern’  kind  of

‘philosophy’ (see also section 9). It is impossible to miss the avalanche-like flux of all those quantum

‘games’,  ‘entanglements’,  ‘distillations’,  ‘nonlocalities’,  ‘teleportations’,  ‘tomographies’,  ‘internets’,

‘contexts’, logics, ‘impossible’ states and ‘magic’ properties, arbitrary endowed with a desired fantastic

meaning,  penetrating  into  all  the  ‘solid’  printed  sources  of  the  official  science,  its  most  prestigious

departments and popular branches, but contradicting already the standard postulates (cf. section 2) and the

common sense itself (the latter fact is considered, apparently, as a decisive advantage of the applied

‘quantum mysteriology’, permitting its swift-handed promoters and the ‘friendly’ scientific bureaucracy to

scrounge  more  money  from  the  unaware,  hypnotised  ‘public’).  This  latest,  ‘information-oriented’

generation of unitary quantum speculation is added to and combined with previous, equally unlimited lies

of abstract quantum-mechanical ‘interpretations’, including various versions of quantum ‘histories’, ‘many

worlds’ (or ‘multiverse’), ‘decoherence’ (‘superselection of pointer states’ and ‘predictability sieve’), etc.

(see also section 9), which leads to a completely intractable and misleading mixture of useless, abstract,

esoteric ‘narratives’ only obscuring still more the naturally ‘veiled’ reality and suppressing, by their

artificially amplified noise, any attempt of truly consistent and realistic problem solution. Being often over-

charged with technically sophisticated, tricky mathematical symbolism, the pseudo-scientific post-modern

abstraction  rarely  deals  with  the  unreduced  system  dynamics,  often  replacing  its  most  essential,

‘nonintegrable’ parts with formal ‘arrows’ pointing to a ‘guessed’/postulated result that expresses usually

the evidently incorrect extension of a perturbation theory approximation. We could disprove and mention

here only the most frequent, obvious and dangerously noisy verbal exercises (deceitful ‘narratives’) of the

conventional  unitarity,  with  the  hope  that  the  proposed  causally  complete  picture  of  the  unreduced,

multivalued dynamics behind ‘quantum mysteries’ can clearly show the universal way out of the science-

killing impasse of the blind math-physical cabala. It is evident that the latter cannot actually go any further,

than the canonical ‘interpretations’ of the standard quantum formalism proposed already at the time of its

creation, but tries simply to ‘redescribe’ it in a philosophically large variety of fictions, which can only

repel potential and serious science participants and supporters (and actually does so), but never lead to real

problem solution. The inflating mega-joke of unitary quantum information and other officially promised

‘miracles’ of the unitary science becomes now too banal even for a banal ‘post-modern’ show.

In conclusion of this brief summary of our causal description of the main ‘peculiarities’ of quantum
behaviour  as  manifestations  of  the  corresponding  universal  properties  of  the  unreduced  complex
(multivalued)  dynamics,  items  (A)-(C),  note  that  one  general  feature  underlying  their  proposed,
intrinsically unified and totally realistic description is the physically unified initial world configuration in
the form of two physically real (‘material’), interacting protofields [1-4,11-13] that eventually gives rise,
after consistent analysis of the interaction process development, to such features of quantum behaviour as
quantum  coherence,  nonlocality,  dynamic  duality  (complementarity),  classicality  emergence,  etc.,  in
addition to the causally complete explanation, within the same picture, of the intrinsic, universal properties

of  quantum  entities,  such  as  mass  (in  the  dynamic  unity  of  its  inertial,  relativistic  and  gravitational

manifestations), electric charge, spin, number and origin of the fundamental interaction forces, etc. This

totally realistic and naturally, dynamically unified picture of all the main observed properties of the micro-

132

world behaviour, additionally amplified by their consistent macroscopic extension [1], provides in itself a

strong argument in favour of the quantum field mechanics and universal science of complexity in general,

which can be compared with the persisting ‘quantum mysteries’ of the conventional science able, at best,

to arrange for a limited number of separated and artificially adjusted ‘experimental confirmations’. It

becomes  clear,  therefore,  that  further  practical  work  with  micro-machine  control  and  design  can  be

successful only within the unreduced, dynamically multivalued description of reality.

6.  Genuine  quantum  chaos  and  its  consistent  transition
to  the  true  dynamical  randomness  in  classical  mechanics

Since any quantum machine dynamics is essentially based on non-dissipative interaction of the

machine elements among them and with the external systems, it is clear that one deals here with the same

general situation as in the quantum chaos problem considering similar cases of arbitrary, nonintegrable

quantum interactions, even though a real quantum machine can include eventually many integrated systems

with simple enough configurations considered within usual quantum chaos studies. The results of our

analysis of both general (sections 3, 4) and particular (section 5.2.1) cases of interaction within a generic

quantum machine confirm this similarity with the quantum chaos problem because they actually provide its

general  solution,  eqs.  (20)-(27),  (47)-(52),  that  reveals  the  intrinsic,  purely  dynamic  source  of  true

randomness  in  any  real  quantum  system  in  the  form  of  dynamically  redundant  number  of  mutually

incompatible elementary solutions, or system realisations, eqs. (24), (52). Whereas in terms of quantum

machine theory the obtained solution demonstrates fundamental deficiency of the conventional, unitary

description  of  a  quantum  system  and  reveals  the  principles  of  unreduced,  dynamically  multivalued

operation  of  any  real  machine,  in  the  case  of  quantum  chaos  problem  we  obtain  the  source,  and  the

meaning  itself,  of  the  true,  purely  dynamic  randomness  in  a  Hamiltonian  quantum  (and  eventually

classical)  system  which  is  absent  in  the  canonical  quantum  chaos  theory,  in  contradiction  with  the

correspondence principle and dynamical, logical necessity for the true randomness existence at the very

basis of complex, self-developing world structure. The most transparent relation to the quantum chaos is

provided by our analysis of an elementary case of quantum interaction, represented by a time-periodic
perturbation of a bound motion (section 5.2.1), which is also one of the few standard formulations of the
quantum chaos problem considered previously within the same approach [1,8,9]. The obtained quantum
chaos criterion, eq. (53), has a universal meaning and ensures the conceptually important correspondence
with the respective criterion of classical chaos (see below).

The  extended  work  on  quantum  chaos  description  within  the  conventional  quantum  theory
[127,144,155,156,161-164,230-294] results mainly in the fundamentally substantiated absence of any
true, intrinsic randomness in a (closed) quantum system dynamics that would be definitely chaotic for its
classical analogue [155,230-257], which constitutes a major contradiction, but is not really surprising in

view of the basic unitarity (dynamic single-valuedness) of the underlying conventional quantum theory.

Correspondingly,  the  study  of  specifically  ‘involved’,  but  fundamentally  regular,  zero-complexity

quantum dynamics of such ‘apparently chaotic’ quantum Hamiltonians (any real system belongs to this

133

class)  leads  to  the  concept  of  ‘quantum  chaology’  [235]  or  ‘pseudo-chaos’  [236,247-250]  including

actually  all  the  conventional  quantum  (and  eventually  classical)  ‘chaos’  and  represented  by  some

‘sophisticated’, but regular, quantum (and classical) dynamics showing certain, more or less universal,

‘signatures’ (or ‘signs’) of that ‘involved regularity’ or related peculiarities of tricky mathematical objects

like zeta-functions [231,233,234,237-240,254-257] (these manifestations of regular ‘chaoticity’ actually

make part of a general phenomenon of external ‘signatures’ of basically absent ‘chaos’, and ‘complexity’

in the whole, in the conventional, dynamically single-valued ‘science of complexity’, see [1]).

The  absence  of  any  true  randomness  in  ‘chaotic’  quantum  systems,  confirmed  by  ‘rigorous’

unitary  analysis  and  apparently  by  the  fundamental  quantum  postulates  themselves,  leaves  a  clear

impression of confusion which can only amplify the existing doubts about consistency (or ‘completeness’)

of the standard quantum mechanics (see e. g. [230]). As we have seen above (section 4.6), it is the latter

that should indeed be extended to the dynamically multivalued (nonunitary) theory [1,9,10-13] which

naturally  includes  the  irreducible  and  universal  source  of  true,  purely  dynamic  randomness  without

introducing  any  change  in  the  basic  Schrödinger  formalism  or  ‘borrowing’  randomness  from  the

environment. The canonical science does not dare to change its mechanistic, zero-complexity ‘foundation’

and tries therefore to resolve the evident contradiction around the absent true chaoticity in a way usual for

the ‘mathematical’ physics, i. e. by a number of mathematical tricks replacing the missing unreduced,

dynamically multivalued solution of the ‘nonintegrable’ equations and ‘showing’ either that chaos (and

actually any irregularity) means, also in classical physics, something else than straightforward randomness

(e. g. a sort of externally sophisticated regularity) [230-261,281-287], or that real chaoticity still exists,

also in quantum systems, if one looks at them ‘at a different angle’ (but always within the same, unitary

paradigm)  [156,262-280,288-294].  Neither  of  such  imitative  ‘solutions’  and  their  existing  arbitrary

‘mixtures’ can, however, provide true consistency, and finally the whole problem is transformed into

infinite series of mathematical games, verbal definitions and pseudo-philosophical speculations, with the

harmful practical consequences for such critical applications as quantum computers and nanotechnology

(sections 7, 8). The artificial, useless intricacy of the unitary imitations of complexity attains a particularly

high degree in such field as quantum chaos becoming an ‘irresolvable’, obscure problem in itself (it is

objectively difficult to simply get through the misleading and ever growing agglomeration of vain technical
exercises), which demonstrates the direct harmful influence of the conceptually dead unitary paradigm
upon the scientific knowledge development in the whole (section 9).

The interpretation of quantum and classical chaos in terms of ‘involved regularity’ starts already in
the  main  quantum  chaos  theory  and  the  ensuing  concepts  of  quantum  chaology  and  pseudochaos
[155,235,236,245-251]. The fundamental absence of quantum chaos is matched here with the presence of
its classical analogue by playing with various time scales at which the behaviour of a Hamiltonian system
‘appears’ to be ‘irregular’ (whereas randomness as such remains without any unambiguous definition and
source). It is stated [247-250] that at very short times of quantum, quasi-classical system evolution, t < tr ~
l -1 ln(I/h) (where l  is the Lyapunov exponent of chaotic dynamics of the corresponding classical system,
I is the characteristic action value, and tr is called the random, or Ehrenfest, time scale), the quantum
chaotic  system  will  manifest  the  ‘apparent’  motion  instability  due  to  the  pseudo-classical  effect  of

134

‘exponentially diverging trajectories’ (or wave packets, in the quantum system) that can be distinguished
only until the critical spread of quantum wave packets makes them unresolvable at t ~ tr.*) In the limit of
classical system the ratio I/h goes to infinity and with it tr, which is interpreted as the correct quantum-
classical correspondence, since we obtain in this limit the trajectories that ‘diverge exponentially’ at any

time, giving apparently a chaotic classical system. It is easy to see, however, that one obtains in that way

not  a  truly  chaotic,  but  only  ‘pseudo-chaotic’,  basically  regular  classical  system  without  any  true
randomness. Indeed, for any value of I/h, one finds a regular, quasiperiodic quantum motion at t >> tr. In
other words, one obtains an imitation of chaoticity by a long-period, but actually regular motion that

‘practically’ never repeats itself and still shows no true randomness.

It is important to note that the conventional concept of classical chaos itself, used here for quantum

chaos interpretation and considered to be endowed with a source of true dynamical randomness (see e. g.

[139-145]), is reduced in reality to just that kind of simulated chaoticity taking the form of ‘intricate’

regularity (as it is especially explicitly seen in the famous ‘period doubling scenario’ containing in its

‘chaotic’  region  only  the  ‘infinitely  long  period’  of  regular  motion,  but  not  any  direct,  local  motion

randomness). In this sense one obtains indeed a ‘quantum-classical correspondence’ in the conventional

chaos theory, namely the correspondence between unitary, incorrect imitations of complexity/chaoticity by

the  conventional,  dynamically  single-valued  reductions  of  quantum  and  classical  dynamics.  The

falsification  is  inherent  in  the  divergent-trajectories  criterion  itself:  randomness  as  such  is  actually

introduced through the ‘unknown’ deviations in initial conditions (without indication of any its dynamical

source  and  meaning),  whereas  the  exponential  law  of  neighbouring  trajectories/states  divergence

represents a totally regular function, supposed to ‘amplify’ the externally introduced, ill-defined, and

postulated randomness.

Now, this ‘exponential amplification’ is but an elementary mathematical trickery, in both official

quantum and classical chaos theories. The main description of local motion instability, giving the notorious

‘Lyapunov  exponents’  that  permeate  the  whole  conventional  ‘science  of  complexity’,  is  based  on

perturbative, local linearisation of the allegedly ‘nonlinear’ system dynamics which is valid only within a

small spatio-temporal domain of its standard application limited just by the value unity of the obtained
exponential function argument (i. e. at l t < 1 in the case of temporal evolution). However, the main
‘result’ of the classical chaos theory is obtained, starting from this perturbative expansion, just far outside
the region of its validity, where (e. g. at l t >> 1) the exponential function can only ‘become itself’ and
show clear deviations from a power-law behaviour that would not give the necessary, sufficiently high
‘randomness amplification’.

In the above ‘quantum-classical correspondence’ of the conventional chaos theory a tricky ‘logic’ is
used even more than once: first, by inconsistent introduction of the classical, false exponential divergence
and Lyapunov exponent into purely quantum evolution and, second, by extension of the false result,

*) Note that already this formal use of results obtained for classical chaotic systems in the description of purely quantum,
though quasi-classical, evolution does not seem rigorous. This ‘method’ of silent, formal extension of classical chaos results
to quantum dynamics in order to ‘derive’ then its ‘chaoticity’ and ‘correspondence’ to classical dynamics becomes common in
the conventional quantum chaos theory (see below), whereas the same, ‘exact’ science cannot even properly explain what the
essentially quantum and classical types of behaviour actually are, how the latter emerges from the former and vice versa.
135

obtained in the limit tr ﬁ
, to ‘any time’ t (whereas in reality at t > tr one obtains the unitary quantum
regularity). The latter circumstance is especially evident and leads to the contradictory conclusion that “the

 ¥

phenomenon of the “true” (classical-like) dynamical chaos, strictly speaking, does not exist in nature”

[248].  As  we  have  seen  above  (sections  3.3,  4.1),  the  true  chaos  does  exist,  both  in  nature  and  its

unreduced,  realistic  description  within  the  dynamically  multivalued  interaction  analysis,  whereas  its

pathological absence in the unitary imitation of the conventional science is the inevitable consequence of its

dynamically single-valued reduction of reality [1,8,9]. In general, it is evident, even in the framework of

the conventional science, that a unitary system evolution, ultimately smoothened and non-creative as it is,

cannot contain any source of the true, dynamical randomness in principle, and this is the single and

ultimate origin of all those ‘irresolvable difficulties’, ‘fundamental contradictions’, and ‘mysteries‘ of the

conventional quantum chaos, quantum mechanics and other fields and applications of the unitary science

where the omnipresent manifestations of unreduced dynamic complexity simply become more explicit.

Actually the same kind of improper extension of local perturbative expansion is used in many other
‘basic’ cases of the conventional science for production of false exponential dependence [1] (e. g. in the

conventional cosmology or unitary evolution operator expression in quantum and classical mechanics)

which appears to be very convenient, because of its very ‘extendible’ variation, for unitary imitation of the

absent change/emergence and randomness provided, in reality, by the ‘abrupt’, faster-than-exponential,

dynamically probabilistic creation and destruction of incompatible system realisations (see sections 3.3,

4.1). This universal ‘method of mathematical physics’ starts with a quite general equation of the form df/dt

= L(f,t,...) (where L can be any function of its arguments), then produces formal perturbative expansion

of the function on the right into powers of f, and taking into account only the term with the first power of

f, incorrectly extends the ensuing ‘exponential’ solution beyond the range of the starting expansion validity

(where the assumed ‘exponential’ dependence remains in reality but a linear or other power-law function).

It is no coincidence that one and the same ‘method’ of false exponential dependence thus defined is used in

the unitary science first to derive its incorrect, exponential-function expression for the ‘evolution operator’

and then to justify the related ‘magic’ properties and ‘strange’ results, such as exponential efficiency of

(unitary) quantum computers (see section 5.1) and the conventional chaos concept based on ‘exponentially

high sensitivity to perturbations’ (see also below). This means, in particular, that the highly publicised
‘butterfly effect’ in the conventional chaos paradigm and its ‘rigorous’ expression in terms of Lyapunov
exponents [141-145] provide a basically wrong image of the origin and character of real motion instability.
This  is  not  really  surprising,  since  we  deal  here  with  the  situation  where  the  results  of  linear,  local
instability analysis are boldly applied to characterisation of global behaviour of nonlinear systems, without
any serious justification of that ‘spontaneous’ extension. As our universally nonperturbative analysis of
the unreduced interaction process shows, any real system evolution is strongly, permanently and globally
unstable and consists in very abrupt, ‘faster-than-exponential’ and frequent enough change of system
realisations, where both each realisation dynamics and realisation change process are driven by the same,

‘main’ interaction between the system components, so that the exponential dependence cannot develop

either within individual realisations, or between them, or even in the average system change determined by

the readily observed power-law dependences [1] (see also section 5.1).

136

Returning to quantum pseudo-chaology and its play with temporal scales in order to obtain an

imitation of correspondence between quantum and classical ‘chaos’, one should mention another time
a
scale, tR ~ w -1 (I/h)
 (where w  is a characteristic motion frequency and a  is a model-dependent exponent of
the order unity), called relaxation, or diffusive, or Heisenberg time scale [247-250]. It is a period during
which (i. e. at t < tR) the quantum system evolution shows a diffusion-like behaviour coinciding, but only
in average, i. e. by its statistical properties, with the corresponding classical chaos. Since usually tR >> tr,
this  statistically  averaged  imitation  of  classical  chaos  persists  much  longer,  than  the  above  detailed
quantum replica of classical instability at t < tr. However, such apparent quantum chaotic ‘diffusion’ ends
up, or ‘localises’, after t ~ tR, and the inevitable regularity of the unitary quantum evolution appears
explicitly  in  the  ‘chaotic’  system  dynamics.  The  ambiguity  of  such  ‘pseudo-chaotic’,  but  in  reality

absolutely regular ‘diffusion’ demonstrates once more the imitative ‘power’ of the conventional theory of
dynamical systems. Transition to the classical limit, I/h ﬁ
, reproduces the situation with the same
transition for the random time scale tr: though formally tR ﬁ
 0, for each finite I/h there are times,
t > tR (though maybe very large), for which quantum and classical behaviour differ not only in detail (since
t > tR >> tr), but also statistically (in average), while even at t < tR the quasi-classical quantum dynamics
tends rather to a regular imitation of ‘diffusive’ manifestations of dynamical chaos (which may also be the

 ¥
 at h ﬁ

 ¥

case for the purely classical, but always dynamically single-valued, theory of dynamical ‘chaoticity’).

As the above analysis of the unreduced system evolution shows, in reality the system will tend to

perform dynamically random transitions between its incompatible, but equally feasible realisations (in the
real,  ‘coordinate’,  or  configuration,  space)  with  the  average  time  period,  D
t,  of  the  order  of  the
characteristic  period  of  motion  within  each  realisation,  D
t << tr << tR, and the true
quantum (and classical) chaos is established as quickly as the system dynamics itself, without waiting long

-1, so that D

t ~ w

enough for a sufficiently large ‘divergence of trajectories’, asymptotic regime establishment, etc., as it
should  always  be  the  case  for  any  fundamental  system  property,  such  as  chaoticity,*) and we obtain
another clear demonstration of the qualitative difference between the real world dynamics, adequately

represented  by  the  dynamically  multivalued  EP  formalism,  and  its  unitary  imitation  (including  the

canonical theories of ‘ergodicity’, ‘mixing’, ‘entropy’, etc. in classical mechanics and statistical physics).

In summary, the most pertinent, purely dynamic, ‘direct’ approach to evolution of Hamiltonian
quantum systems with few interacting entities that show (imitative) ‘chaotic’ behaviour in their classical
versions reveals, within its unitary, perturbatively reduced analysis, no true, or even imitative, chaoticity
(dynamical randomness) in quantum systems, but predicts instead persisting deviations of their behaviour
from the corresponding classical system, even in the quasi-classical range of parameters [231-257], thus
confirming most honest (and actually rather pessimistic) estimates by the conventional quantum theory of
its own completeness [230] (see also [1]). This fundamental inconsistency of the conventional quantum
mechanics is accompanied by a large series of ‘smaller’, but equally irreducible defects of its application to
‘chaotic’ dynamics. Thus, it remains unclear why one should look for dynamic randomness in quantum

*) In the semiclassical and classical systems the difference between realisations can be relatively small in the SOC regime of
multivalued  dynamics,  but  this  does  not  eliminate  its  intrinsic  chaoticity,  even  if  the  latter  does  not  appear  explicitly  in
observations (cf. sections 4.5-4.7).

137

behaviour, or even its pseudo-chaotic ‘signatures’, only in the limiting, semi-classical regime of quantum

dynamics. Whereas the latter could, in principle, provide some necessary ‘hints’ on quantum chaoticity by

analogy with its classical version, the quantum chaos phenomenon in the whole, for any its content,

should refer to arbitrary, but especially essentially quantum regimes of Hamiltonian chaos, which is not

the case for the conventional theory. In the attempt to reveal the non-existing unitary quantum chaoticity

and its correspondence with classical chaos, the standard theory performs the more and more serious

deviations from consistency and wishfully inserts results of the classical phase-space analysis (often

doubtful in itself) into quantum chaos description (see e. g. [152-154,258-264]), where the statistical

properties of dynamical system behaviour (‘ergodicity’ etc.) become tacitly and strangely intermixed with

those of its spectral characteristics (in contradiction to the main results of the same quantum chaology).

Another serious drawback of the conventional theory appears as inevitable involvement of time, and in

particular infinitely large time, in the definition of chaoticity (and related notions, such as ‘ergodicity’,

‘mixing’, etc.), both in quantum and classical dynamics (and the correspondence between the two, as we

have seen above). Similar to the previous (and actually any other) limitation of the conventional chaos

description, this one is the inevitable result of the fundamental absence of any true randomness in the

dynamically single-valued imitation of real interaction processes, which leads to invention of various

substitutes with the help of mathematical trickery of unattainable or ‘complicated’ limits, etc.

In addition, practically all results in the conventional theory of quantum (as well as classical) chaos

are obtained for extremely simplified, schematic ‘models’ of real dynamical systems, represented most

often by so called ‘maps’ which are purely abstract recurrence relations only imitating dynamical system

evolution by an over-simplified mathematical ‘game’ that does not correspond at all, even approximately,

to any real system behaviour. Besides their artificially reduced dimensionality (often it is just one ‘spatial’

dimension  plus  time)  and  extremely  simplified  interaction  models  used,  chaotic  maps  show  serious

deviation from reality by their formal, non-dynamical discretisation, which is especially important in the

case of quantum dynamics, where the natural, complex-dynamical quantization has a relatively big and

well-defined ‘step’ size determined by Planck's constant (sections 4.3, 4.6, 7.1). The apparent ‘chaoticity’

in such kind of totally artificial, ultimately simplified and non-realistic ‘dynamical systems’ is often

estimated or ‘confirmed’ with the (essential) help of computer simulations (i. e. ‘numerical experiments’),
being finally reduced to an involved regularity of purely mathematical objects, like canonical fractals or
particular number distributions (see also below), which has nothing to do with real, interaction-driven
chaoticity and fractality of a generic dynamical system (sections 4.1, 4.4). When such, already ultimately
deformed ‘model’ of reality is analysed, in addition, in the framework of strongly reduced unitary scheme
of  quantum  evolution  (representing  but  another  example  of  the  above  ‘method’  of  false  exponential
functions, see also section 5.1), then one can only ask what is the arbitrary deviation from reality and
consistency  which  is  not  used  in  such  imitation  readily  subjected,  nevertheless,  to  ‘successful’
experimental verification (this is another demonstration of the ‘unlimited’ general possibilities of this

‘decisive’ argument of the official science). By contrast, our results for quantum chaos are obtained as the

unreduced (dynamically multivalued) solution of the exact (Schrödinger) dynamical equation describing a

real,  non-simplified  interaction  process  (sections  3,  5.2.1),  which  leads  to  revelation  of  the  explicit,

138

omnipresent source of true, purely dynamic chaoticity in essentially quantum systems, naturally passing to
its unreduced classical counterpart in the ordinary semiclassical limit (h ﬁ

 0) [1,8,9].

Putting aside the helpless task of finding any true chaoticity in the unitary wavefunction dynamics,

other approaches try to evade the unpleasant situation by using other, ‘secondary’ versions of quantum

formalism that deal with directly observable quantities, such as various ‘distribution functions’ [265-269]

(which should give one the impression of being ‘closer’ to classical mechanics with its apparently ‘well

established’ chaoticity). The basically incomplete character of any such formulation of quantum mechanics

with respect to not only realistic approach, but also the conventional Schrödinger scheme, makes it even

easier to mechanically insert the missing randomness, thus replacing its dynamical origin with an artificial

stochasticity (as a result of ‘coarse-grained’ distribution, ‘irreducible density matrix representation’, and

other  mathematically  decorated  tricks).  In  any  case,  the  obtained  quantum  ‘chaos’  and  its  classical

‘correspondence’ enter in the evident contradiction with the opposite result (‘pseudo-chaoticity’) of the

Schrödinger evolution analysis in quantum chaology [230-264], which does not lead, however, to any

noticeable confusion and thus falls within a permitted degree of ‘consistency’ of the official theory.

The same actually refers to another, related way to find a ‘true’ quantum chaoticity by analysing

sensitivity of quantum evolution to small perturbations of the Hamiltonian or similar effects of ‘quantum

decoherence’  [164,270-280].  It  is  argued,  within  this  approach,  that  if  the  absence  of  trajectories  in

quantum mechanics makes impossible the analysis of ‘sensitivity to initial conditions’ of the classical

chaos theory, it is still possible to consider quantum dynamics sensitivity to Hamiltonian (interaction)

variation, after which the ‘exponentially high’ sensitivity of quantum chaotic systems to Hamiltonian

perturbations  is  readily  obtained  as  a  hint  on  the  ‘true’  quantum  chaos  and  its  (previously  absent)

correspondence with the classical chaos. However, the formerly established, and actually undeniable,

absence of chaoticity in the unitary quantum evolution, including any its ‘perturbed’ version, should not

depend  on  the  way  of  system  analysis.  Indeed,  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  any  attempt  of  motion

instability introduction through ‘sensitivity to perturbations’, in both quantum and classical chaos theory,

is reduced eventually to the evident fraud of ‘false exponential dependence’ described above (i. e. incorrect

extension of perturbative expansion validity domain), while in reality the unitary (dynamically single-

valued) system evolution always remains stable in the whole (regular), as it should be expected. The
omnipresent dynamic instability and true randomness of unreduced, dynamically multivalued interaction
processes are incompatible with exponential or any other smooth ‘sensitivity to perturbations’, since they
originate in the fundamentally nonunitary (qualitatively nonuniform) character of the main, internal system
dynamics itself (sections 3-5) which cannot be even approximately imitated by artificial introduction of
non-existing ‘exponential divergence’ and other similar ‘tools’ of the unitary theory.

The inevitable regularity reappearance in the conventional quantum chaology naturally degrades
towards ultimately mechanistic, non-dynamical reduction of ‘chaotic’ quantum (and classical) behaviour to
a ‘visibly’, externally ‘intricate’, but internally totally regular behaviour of purely mathematical entities

[170,281-287], like various number distributions in their natural sets (irrational numbers, prime numbers,

etc.) or very ‘uneven’ (but actually regular) sequence of steps in various simple recurrence relations

(including the widely used ‘random number generators’). This tendency towards ‘chaos without chaos’,

139

‘predictable randomness’, and ‘regular complexity’, obtained as an ‘exact solution’, can be clearly traced

in the very basis of the conventional, dynamically single-valued science and in particular its approach to

quantum and classical chaoticity. It shows also exact correlation with a much wider tradition of the official

science mechanicism, taking the form of ‘mathematical physics’ (cf. [114]) and trying to reduce reality to

purely  mathematical,  exact  and  fixed  (‘eternal’)  laws,  remaining  ‘ideal’  and  simple,  devoid  of  any

imperfect ‘flesh and blood’, with their uncontrollable and living complexity. If the observed inimitability

of natural structures is eventually determined by an ‘arithmetical chaos’, then there is no surprise that such

‘arithmetical world’ of ‘exact solutions’ not only can be universally simulated on a unitary quantum

computer [21,24,25,46], but represents itself such a computer and results of its operation [62,63,150].

Everything  in  such  mechanistic  world  obtains  a  special,  cabalistic  meaning  determined  by  a  regular

sequence of digits (or other abstract symbols), including space and time, ‘chaos’, ‘complexity’, and thus

eventually consciousness and intelligence itself (cf. section 9).

A tacit mixture of the arithmetic ‘chaoticity’ and the above ‘sensitivity-to-perturbation’ kind of

imitation is applied to generate a ‘new’ notion of quantum chaoticity in larger, many-body quantum

systems [156,288-290], and it is this kind of approach which is extensively used in the analysis of unitary

quantum computer dynamics and assumes, of course, the existence of special, ‘decohering’ interactions as

the necessary source of (ill-defined) randomness [14,157-160]. In that way, the most complicated case of

dynamical chaos in the quantum many-body system, directly related to the expected practical application, is

considered in the mainstream research by combining the maximum number of erroneous concepts and

ambiguous play of words. The real many-body system is replaced by an ultimately simplified ‘model’ that

appears to be totally misleading even for a small number of interacting entities in a non-dissipative system.

Since even such over-simplified problem cannot be solved within the dynamically single-valued approach,

computer simulations inevitably involving uncontrollable additional simplifications are heavily applied,

which  makes  the  situation  yet  more  obscure  and  actually  helps  to  hide  the  evident  deficiency  of  the

underlying imitation (cf. [158]). The false ‘chaoticity’ is actually introduced from the outside, through

ambiguous ‘random’ influences, with the ‘original’ conclusion that a strong enough external noise can

destroy  the  system  dynamics  when  the  noise  magnitude  is  comparable  to  that  of  the  characteristic

parameters of intrinsic system dynamics. This kind of ‘dynamical chaos’ is actually indistinguishable from
the postulated randomness of the artificially imposed noise, while the statistical properties of the spectral
characteristics are arbitrary confused with the signs of randomness in the dynamical system behaviour.
Moreover, the underlying imitative concept of ‘hypersensitivity to perturbations’, actually represented by
‘residual’ interactions in the quantum computing system, is evidently inconsistent from the beginning: one
can thus consider any part of a useful, ‘computing’ interaction within the machine as perturbation and
arrive at the conclusion that it will generically show ‘exponential (strong enough) growth’ and destroy the
very computation process it is supposed to create (provided it is ‘rigorously shown’ that a generally
comparable, or smaller, ‘residual’ interaction can do it).

As a result, the conclusions of this ‘quantum chaos’ analysis concerning the feasibility of unitary

quantum computation vary chaotically themselves [14,157-160,164] from reaffirmation of ‘exponentially

high’ efficiency of unitary quantum computers to prediction of very serious practical difficulties of their

140

realisation.*) We deal here with multiple, superimposed imitations of the unitary theory: the non-existing
‘chaos’ of a quantum computing system is ‘adjusted’ so as to demonstrate its ability to simulate the equally

false  quantum  and  classical  conventional  ‘chaoticity’  (where  the  supposed  ‘universal’  simulation  of

classical chaos contradicts also to the fundamental ‘complexity correspondence principle’, see sections

5.2.2 and 7.1-2). The possibility of ‘inverting time arrow in macroscopic systems’ with the help of unitary

quantum computer [158], revealed in that way with the help of simplistic model simulation on an ordinary

computer, provides a concentrated demonstration of the genuine ‘power’ of officially dominating unitary

imitations  of  chaoticity  in  any  kind  of  system  (as  well  as  the  corresponding  quality  of  the  ‘well-

established’ and ‘peer-reviewed’ truth of the conventional science in general).

The ultimate inconsistency of the fundamental and applied theory of many-body quantum systems

within the dynamically single-valued approach is the unavoidable consequence of its basic limitations. As

the unreduced interaction analysis shows (section 3), the intrinsic, dynamical randomness emerges in any

real, even totally noiseless (non-dissipative) system of interacting elements (section 3.3) and even within a

single elementary interaction act (section 5.2.1), which not only makes impossible practical realisation of a

useful (large-scale) unitary quantum computation, but also shows that any real computation/production

process cannot have, and be described by, a unitary, single-valued dynamics/evolution in principle (see

also section 7). It appears also that a positive issue from this impasse exists (contrary to the difficulties

predicted by the conventional theories of quantum chaos/decoherence) and consists in development of the

dynamically multivalued (complex-dynamical, truly chaotic) quantum machines (sections 5.2.2, 7.3, 8)

that will necessarily involve, however, a combination of dynamically emerging quantum and classical

(localised)  states/elements  and  can  be  described,  even  approximately,  only  within  the  universally

nonperturbative, dynamically multivalued analysis of the universal science of complexity [1-4,9,10],

which makes any conventional, unitary theory of quantum computation/production absolutely useless and

practically harmful (as it is clearly demonstrated by the conventional theory of quantum chaos and its

application to quantum computation analysis).

Note finally that some other versions of the dynamically single-valued theory of quantum (and

classical) chaoticity exist and continue to appear (see e. g. [291-294]), but as the above analyses and

examples clearly show, they cannot step out of the basic limits of the unitary theory and reveal any true,
dynamical randomness which is just situated definitely beyond those limits and takes the universal form of
unreduced, dynamically multivalued evolution of any real, noiseless interaction process. This conclusion
involves also various computer estimates and simulations in the field of quantum chaos, since they use
themselves simplified, unitary models of real interaction processes, while in order to reproduce adequately
the dynamically multivalued character of real system dynamics, one should explicitly take it into account in
the detailed scheme of computer simulation (which can also increase dramatically its efficiency [1], even
without illusive ‘miracles’ of unitary quantum computation).

*) That specific kind of ‘rigour’ and ‘consistency’ of results is actually characteristic of the whole quantum information theory
and modern fundamental science in general, which is directly related to the fatal limitation of the underlying, artificially
imposed unitary approach and the corresponding perverted organisation of the official science (see section 9).

141

Returning now to the unreduced, dynamically multivalued theory of quantum chaos (section 5.2.1)

and its universal criterion, eq. (53), we note first the different, frequency-resonance character of this

criterion, as compared to conventional quantum (and classical) chaos criteria, always essentially involving

the direct magnitude of the driving interaction [139-145,231,245-250]. In our approach the omnipresent

chaoticity attains its maximum simply at resonance between essential components of system dynamics,

where  chaos  becomes  ‘global’,  or  uniform  (see  eq.  (35)  for  the  general  case),  irrespective  of  the

interaction amplitude, while the conventional theory emphasises the role of the latter, i. e. in the unitary

approach chaoticity ‘naturally’ appears to be stronger for stronger ‘perturbation’ of a regular background

motion. It is this qualitative feature of our theory that simplifies correspondence between quantum and

classical chaoticity: the quantum ratio of quantized energy increments, eqs. (35), (53), naturally passes to
classical frequency ratio as h ﬁ
 0, and also physically quantum resonance condition of global chaos has
the same meaning as the respective classical condition (at the corresponding, higher complexity level),

which is the natural consequence of our universal description of chaoticity/complexity.

The resonant criterion of maximal chaoticity has a transparent meaning in terms of our qualitative

interpretation of the dynamic multivaluedness (section 3.3): the large number of incompatible entangled

combinations  of  ‘everything  with  everything’  (system  realisations)  within  the  unreduced  interaction

dynamics that gives rise to its chaoticity is present always, but the dynamically random realisation change

process has the most pronounced, explicit form just at resonance between the interacting eigen-modes,

since it gives the maximum of equally important and sufficiently (equally) different system configurations

(realisations).  By  contrast,  the  association  of  classical  and  quantum  parameters  in  the  conventional

chaoticity criteria cannot be put into such transparent ‘proportionality’ and universality just because of the

improper occurrence of interaction magnitude, which is due, in its turn, to the basic deficiency of the

unitary concept of chaoticity itself, where (false) randomness is introduced artificially and silently in a

‘small’ form of a ‘noise’ and should therefore be inflated, or amplified, by a direct interaction force to the

scale of global chaos.

Note also the physical transparency and technical simplicity of our resonant criterion of global

chaoticity, eqs. (35), (53), as compared to much more involved interpretations of the unitary chaos theory

(including e. g. the ambiguous condition of ‘overlapping resonances’ in the classical chaos theory [139-
142]; it is clear from the above that at the global chaos onset the ‘resonance width’ can only coincide with
the ‘separation between resonances’). We can clearly see now that the ‘well-known’ and ‘elementary’
phenomenon of resonance itself, with its canonical, ‘catastrophically amplified’ behaviour, forms the
natural, universal basis for emergence of global chaos regime and the phenomenon of true, dynamical
chaos in general (including the complementary regime of multivalued SOC structures, if the resonance is
‘out of tune’), provided the unreduced, dynamically multivalued analysis of the driving interaction is
performed  (which  is  not  the  case  for  the  conventional  theory  of  resonance  phenomena  and  various
speculations around the ‘role of resonance’ in the official, unitary ‘science of complexity’).

The interaction magnitude still can indirectly appear in a reformulation of our resonant chaos

criterion, if we notice that practically any real part (element) of the system with interaction has a range of

many  ‘eigen-frequencies’,  and  it  is  an  ‘average’  or  ‘effective’  frequencies  (or  level  spacings)  of  the

142

interacting parts that enter the global chaos condition, eqs. (35), (53). The existence of more than one

eigen-mode  frequency  for  an  element  is  a  result  of  the  element  nonlinearity  (here  understood  in  the

ordinary, ‘non-dynamical’ sense), i. e. the difference of the internal element potential from the quadratic

coordinate dependence of the harmonical oscillator potential (which gives the single oscillation frequency).

The real element nonlinearity leads to a decrease of its eigen-frequency (energy level spacing) for higher

x , in the elementary (quantum) chaos criterion, eq. (53), by the effective frequency, w eff

(excited) energy levels with respect to the lowest (ground state) value. One can characterise this zero-order
nonlinearity (of the system element) by replacing the single element frequency, w
x , or level spacing D E =
 = w
hw
x /l0  (or
effective level spacing D Eeff = D E/l0), where l0 > 1 is a measure of the zero-order potential nonlinearity
(the uneven ‘steepness’ of the potential well) and w
x  is the harmonical-approximation frequency, obtained
for the lowest bound states. It is clear that l0 can also be expressed through the effective value, Veff
0 , of the
zero-order potential, l0 = Veff
0 is close to the ground-state energy. In a similar fashion, the
p , of the (nonharmonic) driving interaction should be replaced by the effective frequency w eff
frequency, w
= w
characterising nonlinearity of its temporal dependence: l1 = Veff
can now be rewritten as

1 , of the driving interaction potential,
1. The global chaos criterion of eq. (53)

p /l1, where l1 can be expressed through the effective value, Veff

0,  where  V0

0 /V0

1 /V0

k  = 

D Eeff
hw eff

  = 

D El1
hw
p l0

w
 = 
w

x l1
p l0

 = 

w
w

 

Veff
1
 
Veff
0

V0
0
V 0
1

 @

 1 .                                         (55)

Note that the appearance of the potential values here does not change the basically resonant, force-

independent  character  of  our  main  chaos  criterion,  eqs.  (35),  (53),  providing  instead  just  another  its

mathematical expression. In this form, however, the rigorously derived criterion of global quantum chaos,

eq. (55), practically coincides, up to notations, with the classical chaos criterion from the conventional
theory [139-142] (our resonance parameter k  is equivalent to the ‘resonance overlap parameter’ from the
classical chaos theory, whereas a related parameter K = k 2 is also used in the quantum and classical chaos
description, see also [1,9]). This natural quantum-classical correspondence is the intrinsic property of our

universal analysis and the ensuing general criterion of uniform chaoticity as a characteristic limiting regime
of complex (multivalued) dynamics (section 4.5.2).*)

By contrast, the conventional criterion of classical chaos [139-142] is obtained for a very special,
unrealistically simplified ‘model’ (the ‘standard map’), under a number of additional approximations and

*)  If  one  actually  considers  the  corresponding,  periodically  perturbed  classical  system,  then  the  criterion  of  its  global
chaoticity can and should, of course, be obtained from the classical equations of motion. However, due to the unrestricted
universality of our analysis within the unreduced EP method (section 3), one can be sure that the result, given by eq. (35) for
the general case, will be the same as the one obtained by the direct semiclassical transition in the purely quantum-mechanical
solution, demonstrated by eqs. (53), (55). We see here two general aspects of universality, the ‘absolute’, direct universality of
the main results, such as the dynamic multivaluedness/entanglement phenomenon and the related criteria of global chaos/SOC
regimes (section 4.5), and their detailed correspondence between the neighbouring levels of complexity (such as quantum and
classical dynamics), explicitly realising the unbroken ‘reductionist’ programme (i. e. consistent derivation of a higher-level
phenomenon/property from its lower-level components). The latter is possible in the universal science of complexity [1] due
to its unreduced interaction analysis describing explicit emergence of (dynamically multivalued) new entities (sections 3.3,
4.1-4.3, 4.7, 5.2.2) and impossible in the conventional science because its dynamically single-valued imitation can never
reproduce the creative interaction (emergence) process, which shows how the well-known, but unexplained failure of the
‘principle of reduction’ in the conventional science is clarified and repaired in its complex-dynamical (multivalued) extension.

143

x
p
p
x
p
unproved assumptions which can be ‘convincingly confirmed’ only by (largely adjustable) computer

simulations.  Most  important  is  the  fact  that  a  consistent  criterion  and  the  very  notion  of  dynamic

randomness  cannot  be  unambiguously  introduced  in  the  conventional  theory  because  of  its  single-

valuedness and are finally replaced by a number of imitations of the ‘arithmetical chaoticity’ type described

above.  As  for  the  quantum  chaos  phenomenon  and  criterion,  they  both  are  actually  absent  in  the

conventional theory, since classical imitations of chaoticity cannot be extended to quantum mechanics even

as imitations because of a more explicit appearance of the unreduced, dynamically multivalued complexity

at those lowest levels of world dynamics. At the same time, it is the single criterion of eqs. (35), (53), (55)

that gives, within the unreduced interaction analysis, both physically transparent (resonance) criterion of

the global chaos onset in any quantum , including essentially quantum, system dynamics and its classical

version (directly or in the straightforward semiclassical limit).

Moreover, a related criterion, k  << 1 (and k  >> 1), determines, within the same theory, emergence
of the complementary limiting regime of multivalued ‘self-organisation’, or SOC, in quantum, classical, or

any arbitrary system (sections 4.5.1, 4.6, 4.7, 5.2.1), thus unifying all the separated, and often mutually

opposed,  imitations  of  the  conventional  theory  of  ‘complexity’  (‘chaos’,  ‘self-organisation’,  ‘self-

organised criticality’, ‘adaptability’, ‘phase transitions’, etc.) within a single, extended, and well-defined

concept of universal dynamic complexity [1] (sections 3, 4), where every structure is explicitly obtained

(emerges) as a ‘confined chaoticity’, while the omnipresent, and true, dynamical randomness is always

‘entangled’ with a degree of regularity (appearing through the structure of individual realisations and their

probability  distribution).  The  resulting  crucial  extension  of  the  conventional  theory  demonstrates

convincingly the advantages of the unreduced, dynamically multivalued description of reality over its

single-valued, perturbative projections in the canonical science.

Other known features of chaotic behaviour, such as ‘stochastic layer’ in the regime of global

regularity, fractal structure of system dynamics and its properties, and ‘signatures of (quantum) chaos’,

can be obtained [1,9] within the same method of unreduced EP (sections 3, 4, 5.2.1) and demonstrate the
same kind of ‘natural’ quantum-classical correspondence (at h ﬁ
 0) as the one demonstrated above for the
global chaos criterion.

The existence of true chaoticity of the same, universal origin (dynamic multivaluedness) in any,
even quasi-regular (SOC) regime of system dynamics follows directly and naturally from our theory, in
the form of the above, well-specified coexistence of randomness and regularity. It is the remnant true
chaoticity in the regime of multivalued self-organisation, at k  << 1 or k  >> 1 (section 4.5), that appears in
the form of ‘stochastic layers’ in the conventional theory of classical chaos [142]. However, ‘stochasticity’
in the latter is reduced inevitably to ambiguous, perturbative imitation of ‘exponentially amplified’ external
randomness or ‘involved regularity’ (e. g. ‘mixing’), completely separated from explicit emergence of
structures (incompatible with the perturbative analysis used) or even from its imitation in the conventional
‘science of self-organisation’ (synergetics, self-organised criticality) which forms a separate group of

approaches (see e. g. [129-131]) without any natural place for randomness [132-134]. The conventional

theory of stochastic layers (or ‘weak chaoticity’) is necessarily limited also to classical systems, whereas

our universal analysis reveals the same phenomenon in quantum (though usually semiclassical) systems,

144

with its natural transition to classical stochastic layer at h ﬁ
of the chaotic SOC dynamics, note that the graphical analysis of the unreduced EP equations, eqs. (20)-
(21),  (47)-(48),  shows  [1]  that  in  the  limit  of  low-frequency  perturbation  (k  >> 1) the magnitude of
chaotic  fluctuations  of  the  changing  realisation  properties,  or  ‘stochastic  layer  width’,  is  directly

 0. Without going here into the detailed theory

determined by the adiabatically induced shift of realisation parameters and therefore proportional to a small
power of 1/k , while for the high-frequency perturbation (k  << 1) the differences between chaotically
changing realisations decay exponentially as a function of 1/k , in agreement with the corresponding results
of the classical chaos theory [142] (but obtaining now a qualitatively extended meaning mentioned above).

The  remnant  stochasticity  of  the  multivalued  SOC  regimes  can  be  considered  as  a  particular

manifestation of the unreduced, dynamically multivalued fractality (section 4.4) that has also many other

features (note again that the conventional, non-dynamic fractality [122-128], with its mechanistic ‘scale

invariance’, is totally separated from both the conventional self-organisation/SOC and classical ‘stochastic

layer’ studies, despite its evident general relation to the latter). All the properties of quantum (and classical)
systems with various degrees of dynamical randomness, including observed eigenvalues and density

distributions, should possess dynamically fractal structure, which implies, according to the unreduced EP

analysis (section 4.4), the unceasing, dynamically probabilistic system change at each level of fractal

hierarchy, leading to the autonomous dynamic adaptability of real interaction processes [1]. Contrary to

this naturally appearing, intrinsic fractality of unreduced quantum interaction, the conventional theory of

quantum chaos tends to arbitrarily confuse fractal structure of the quantum system with that of its classical

limit (see e. g. [154,260]), where fractality is also inserted artificially and in the reduced, dynamically

single-valued version, excluding permanent probabilistic variation.

A major manifestation of the unreduced dynamic fractality, especially important just for quantum

systems, is that it serves as a universal causal, complex-dynamical mechanism of the phenomenon of

quantum tunneling [1] (that can now be generalised to any higher complexity level). Indeed, already the

general structure of the universal EP solution to a many-body interaction problem shows that any real

potential barrier has actually an ‘effective’, dynamical origin, and its observed smooth, average shape

hides within it permanent chaotic and fractally structured potential variations that lead to finite barrier

‘transparency’ with respect to a confined entity. Contrary to the ‘mysterious’ origin of tunneling in the
standard quantum mechanics, this complex-dynamical penetration ‘within’ the barrier occurs by quite real
motions of gradual chaotic ‘percolation’ realising a particular case of the universal dynamic adaptability
mechanism mentioned above and introduced in section 4.4. One should also distinguish this dynamically
multivalued  mechanism  of  tunneling  in  real,  configurational  space  (where  possible  system
configurations/realisations are clearly determined themselves within the same theory) from the so-called
‘chaotic tunneling’ or ‘chaos-assisted tunneling’ of the conventional, dynamically single-valued theory of
chaos [152-154] which is analysed in abstract (phase) spaces and represents either a play of words, or
another unitary imitation of the unreduced, dynamically probabilistic tunneling in natural processes.

Finally, the ‘signatures of quantum chaos’, such as specific statistical properties of chaotic system

energy spectra or ‘quantum scars’ in the system density distribution, replacing the absent true chaoticity in

the  conventional  ‘quantum  chaology’  [155,231-235],  can  also  be  provided  with  possible  complex-

145

dynamical interpretation [1]. Thus, the tendency to ‘energy level repulsion’ in the presence of chaos can be

related, in terms of the unreduced EP approach, to the appearance of a finite, perturbation-induced energy
distance in the system spectrum, described by terms like e n0 and hw
p n in the denominators of the EP
expressions, eqs. (21b) and (48b) respectively. Quantum ‘scars’ in the probability density distribution are

likely to be due to close, and ‘entangled’, separations between energy levels of different realisations,

appearing  especially  around  resonances  of  various  orders  which  are  conveniently  described  by  the

geometry of the dynamically multivalued ‘tori’ of the ‘extended KAM picture’ (section 4.5.2) and the

graphical version of the EP equation solution [1].

Note that being a technically simple, basically analytical and physically transparent theory, our

approach to quantum chaos analysis readily finds applications to real, unreduced quantum systems and

processes represented in the theory as they are, contrary to over-simplified models (like ‘maps’) from the

unitary theory. Besides the quantum computation dynamics considered in this work, we can mention a

group  of  proposed  applications  to  energetic  particle  scattering  in  crystals  [8],  where  a  number  of

interesting and easily observable effects is predicted, in compliance with the already existing experimental

data, for various cases of swift particle scattering, including channeling and electron microscopy.

In this section we have emphasised that the unreduced, dynamically multivalued solution to the

problem  of  interaction  in  any  real  quantum  system  provides  the  universal  source  of  the  true,  purely

dynamic randomness, or (extended) quantum chaos [1,8,9], naturally passing to the true classical chaos in

the ordinary quasi-classical limit and absent in the conventional, dynamically single-valued (unitary) theory

of quantum chaos. This fundamental difference is especially important in theory applications to description

of more complicated cases of quantum interaction, such as quantum information processing (quantum

computers)  and  quantum  machines  in  general.  It  becomes  clear,  in  particular,  that  because  of  the

irreducible quantum randomness within any real interaction process, the conventional, unitary scheme of

quantum computation cannot be realised in principle (in a practically useful version), even in the total

absence of ‘decohering’ interactions or noise and irrespective of the ‘error correcting’ tools or other

‘protective’ mechanisms applied. The realistic, dynamically multivalued version of quantum machinery

needs the unreduced description (exemplified by the universal EP formalism, sections 3, 4, 5.2.1) and the

ensuing, qualitatively new purposes, criteria, and strategy (sections 5.2.2, 7.3, 8).

146

7.  Computation  as  a  complexity  development  process:
The  physical  information  theory

7.1.  Dynamical  information  as  a  form  of  dynamic  complexity,
its  unceasing  transformation  into  dynamical  entropy,
and  the  universal  symmetry  of  complexity

The universally nonperturbative analysis of the arbitrary, many-body system (interaction process)

within the unreduced EP method of the universal science of complexity (sections 3, 4) [1] describes

explicit emergence of qualitatively new entities made up by multiple, permanently and probabilistically

changing,  quantized  versions  of  entanglement  of  the  interacting  system  components,  or  system

‘realisations’. One and the same system is described, on one hand, by the starting dynamical equations

expressing the ‘conditions of the problem’ at the beginning of interaction process and generalised as the

‘system existence equation’, eqs. (1)-(5) (section 3.1), and on the other hand, by the resulting dynamically

probabilistic sum over system realisations, eqs. (24)-(25) (section 3.3), provided with the dynamically, a

priori determined values of realisation probabilities, eqs. (26), and expressing the unceasing process of

realisation  change  in  a  dynamically  random  order,  as  a  result  of  the  same  interaction  process.  The

qualitative difference between the initial and final system configurations is evident and provides the explicit

expression of creativity of any real interaction process leading to new entities emergence and absent in the

dynamically single-valued (unitary) imitations of the conventional science for which there is no qualitative,

explicitly obtained difference between the ‘beginning’ and the ‘end’, and thus no unreduced event, no real

change (the latter can only be postulated and described by a mechanistically simplified imitation). Now

having explicitly obtained the events of change which clearly demonstrate system development from the

beginning to the result of the driving interaction process, how can we conveniently, universally describe

the course and direction of that real, qualitative development?

The multiplicity of the explicitly obtained, dynamically related and probabilistically changing

system realisations expresses the universally defined dynamic complexity of the final system state (section

4.1): a consistent measure of the unreduced system complexity, C, is provided by any growing, positively
, of its (observed) realisations, or their rate of change, equal to
defined function of the total number, N´
zero for the (actually unrealistic) case of only one system realisation (for example, C = C0lnN´ ). Since the
number of system realisations (as well as the related distribution of their probabilities) is the dynamically, a
priori determined quantity (the maximum realisation number is determined, in particular, by the number of
interacting modes/degrees of freedom, see section 3.3), it is clear that the total system complexity, C,
cannot quantitatively change and should remain constant during the driving interaction development from
the initial to the final system configuration. What evidently changes is not the quantity, but the qualitative
form of dynamic complexity: whereas in the final system state we have explicitly emerging, fully created
(and changing) system realisations, at the beginning the interacting system components possess only a

potential for realisation creation, even though this potentiality takes an equally real, ‘material’ form of

(generalised) ‘potential energy’.

147

Due to the explicitly specified system change in the course of its driving interaction development,

we have the right to introduce the corresponding two qualitatively different forms of complexity, one of

them describing the form of the quantitatively  permanent  total  system  complexity,  C, at the start of

interaction process and called dynamical information (or simply information), I, and another one referring

to the same system complexity at the end of the driving interaction development, describing its results and

called dynamical entropy (or simply entropy), S. Both dynamical information and entropy (as well as the

total dynamic complexity) thus introduced have absolutely universal meaning and application, determined

by  the  unreduced,  multivalued  dynamics  of  the  real  interaction  process  or  system  and  therefore

qualitatively different from the corresponding imitations of the conventional (dynamically single-valued)

science, including various branches of the scholar ‘science of complexity’. In particular, all the three forms

of the unreduced complexity are basically positive, C, I, S, > 0, and the conserved total complexity equals

to the sum of information and entropy:

Since the total complexity remains unchanged (for a closed system), we have the following expression of

this universal  law  of  complexity  conservation  (applicable  to  all  its  manifestations  and  measures  in

C = I + S  = const > 0.                                                        (56a)

particular phenomena):

D S = -D I  > 0,                                                               (56b)

where the increments of information and entropy refer to any given stage (period) of system evolution.

The last condition in eq. (56b) means that the permanency of the sum in eq. (56a) is actually maintained by

the  unceasing  and  unavoidable  transformation  of  complexity  from  the  permanently  diminishing

information I to the increasing entropy S, driven by the main interaction itself.

It is extremely important that one obtains, in that way, the universal expression of the direction and

meaning/content  of  any  system  evolution  (interaction  development).  At  the  beginning  of  interaction

development  one  has  S = 0 and C = I, so that the total (positive) system complexity is present in the

‘folded’,  or  ‘latent’  (‘hidden’)  form  of  dynamical  information  (or  generalised  potential  energy).  The

system (interaction process) development consists in the unceasing, interaction-driven decrease of I that

should  be  compensated  by  the  equal  increase  of  S, in accord with the conservation, or symmetry, of
complexity. This interaction development process, or generalised system ‘life’ [1], is finite and continues
until (effective) information stock drops practically to zero, while entropy attains its (local) maximum, so
that C = S. This means that the system complexity C, remaining unchanged in quantity, is now totally
transformed  into  its  explicit,  or  unfolded,  form  of  dynamical  entropy.  One  can  also  describe  this
transformation as the development (or unfolding, or extension) of the system (interaction) potentiality,
represented e. g. by its potential energy and providing the causally specified version of the Bergsonian
‘élan vital’, into its final (spatial) structure. It is this final stage of system development that is described by
the dynamically probabilistic change of system realisations, eqs. (24)-(25), together with their dynamically

random fractal structure (section 4.4). It is also the generalised state of equilibrium, or system ‘death’: the

system still possesses the full hierarchy of realisation change processes, but this hierarchy cannot develop

its new levels any more and will therefore soon degrade into processes with much lower complexity.

148

One obtains thus an essential extension of the conventional ‘entropy growth law’ (known also, in a

reduced formulation, as ‘second law of thermodynamics’), eliminating all its difficulties and naturally

unifying it with the ‘first law of thermodynamics’, or ‘energy conservation law’ (where energy is now

extended  to  any  measure  of  dynamic  complexity):  it  is  the  universal  conservation,  or  symmetry, of

(unreduced) dynamic complexity that determines any system (and world) evolution/development, while

this symmetry can be realised only through the permanent, omnipresent, interaction-driven, and therefore

unavoidable  transformation  of  the  qualitative  form  of  conserved  complexity  from  (diminishing)

information  to  (growing)  entropy.  It  is  very  important  that  the  omnipresent  growth  of  the  extended,

dynamical entropy accompanies not only processes of evident decay/disordering, but also creation of any

inhomogeneous, externally ordered structure, since every such structure, according to our results for the

multivalued SOC regime of complex dynamics (section 4.5.1), is actually represented by the dynamically

random transitions between similar enough, but different realisations, densely packed within the observed

regular,  or  even  static,  external  shape  (representing  the  average  system  realisation).  Hence,  in  the

unreduced science of complexity the (extended) ‘law of entropy growth’, ‘law of information decrease’,

and ‘law of complexity conservation’ suppose and involve each other, since they describe one and the

same development, and the unique way of existence, of any real system, process, or phenomenon that can

be described as the universal dynamical symmetry of complexity.

It can also be shown [1] that this universal symmetry of complexity is the unified and ‘ultimate’,

totally  realistic  extension  of  all  the  postulated  ‘conservation  laws’  (such  as  conservation  of  energy,

momentum, or electrical charge) and ‘principles’ (such as all ‘variational’ principles or ‘principle of

relativity’)  of  the  conventional  science  and  is  therefore  uniquely  confirmed  by  the  whole  body  of

observations  supporting  all the  (correct)  fundamental  laws  known  in  the  conventional  science,  but

remaining irreducibly separated within its invariable unitary approach. Moreover, the universal symmetry

of complexity, in its unreduced form, can be provided, contrary to the postulated conservation laws of the

unitary  science,  with  a  solid  theoretical  foundation  using  the  fact  that  violation  of  the  complexity

conservation  could  only  be  compatible  with  existence  of  highly  irregular,  non-dynamically  chaotic

structures, where unpredictable, ‘virtual’ emergence of an ephemeral inhomogeneity does not originate in

any  underlying  interaction,  but  appears  without  any  meaningful,  causal  reason,  just  ‘by  itself’  (the
conventional science idea of ‘vacuum fluctuations’ in the form of ‘virtual particles’ is close to that kind of
randomness  and  therefore  clearly  contradicts  to  the  complexity  conservation  law  [1]).  It  is  evident,
therefore, that any kind of existence of anything ‘real’ in a widest possible sense, i. e. perceptible and
interacting (producing sensible consequences) at least ‘in principle’, cannot be realised without strict
validity of the unreduced complexity conservation law (its ‘small’ violation will inevitably propagate to the
whole system dynamics and lead to the same result as a ‘big’ one, similar to the ‘sensitivity’ of chaotic
dynamics or gas escape through a small leak in an arbitrarily big container).

It is not surprising that the universal symmetry of complexity constitutes simultaneously the unified

evolution law obtained in the form of universal Hamilton-Lagrange-Schrödinger formalism (two related

equations reproduced below in this section) [1] that not only generalises all possible, already known

(correct) and yet unknown dynamical equations for particular systems from any complexity level, but also

149

considerably extends each of them by providing its causally complete, dynamically multivalued (and

eventually fractal) solution, eqs. (24)-(31), instead of the conventional ‘unique’, dynamically single-

valued (perturbative and effectively zero- or one-dimensional) imitation of solution basically different and

separated from the unreduced reality it is supposed to describe ‘rigorously’ and ‘exactly’ (let alone the

absence in the unitary science of any objective, repeatable and clearly expressed laws describing higher-

complexity system behaviour).

A particular corollary of the complexity conservation law is especially important for the theory of

complex-dynamical, including quantum and computing, machines. It is called complexity correspondence

law  (also  rule,  or  principle)  and  states  that  a  system  with  a  given  total  complexity  cannot  correctly

reproduce, ‘compute’ or ‘simulate’ in any sense, a dynamic system behaviour with greater unreduced

complexity (cf. section 5.2.2). Indeed, if the unreduced complexity is characterised by the total number of

incompatible, different realisations inevitably taken by the system (or the equivalent rate of their change),

then a greater system/behaviour complexity will necessarily contain some really new elements which are

absent in its lower-complexity imitation. Since complexity usually emerges in the form of holistic ‘levels’,

each  of  them  containing  ‘exponentially  many’  new  realisations  that  provide  a  ‘qualitatively  new’

behaviour, a lower-level system will typically miss something ‘essential’ in its imitation of a higher-

complexity behaviour. The limiting case of such deficiency is provided by nothing else than the whole

body of the dynamically single-valued knowledge of the conventional, unitary science (including its

versions of ‘complexity’) that tries to imitate the extremely high multivaluedness of the real world (where
one of the simplest basic blocks, the free electron, contains around 103 permanently changing realisations
[1]) with the help of a single, unchanged realisation equivalent to exactly zero value of the unreduced

dynamic complexity (section 4.1), including all the imitations of the conventional ‘science of complexity’

(see [1] for more details).

Since the zero-dimensional projection of the conventional science does not see the true, irreducible

character of the difference between systems from different complexity levels (they all are reduced to

artificially, smoothly ‘moving’ and dimensionless ‘points’ from abstract, postulated ‘spaces’), it is not

surprising that the scholar theory tries to inconsistently imitate and arbitrarily mix dynamical behaviours

from absolutely different complexity levels: quantum behaviour is supposed, for example, to reproduce
classical dynamics [158,189,190], including that of the whole universe [62,150], or economical system
behaviour [57,187], or (generalised) biological evolution [56,74], or even conscious brain operation [15,
68-71]. It is interesting to note that all such qualitatively incorrect, eclectic mixtures of different complexity
levels in the conventional science constitute the recently appeared and very intensely promoted, ‘advanced-
study’ concept of unitary ‘interdisciplinarity’ (or ‘cross-disciplinarity’, or ‘trans-disciplinarity’).

In  the  theory  of  (unitary)  quantum  computation  this  evident  violation  of  the  complexity
correspondence principle (and the directly related symmetry of complexity) takes the form of the concept
of ‘universality’ of quantum computation pretending to be able to reproduce any process/phenomenon, but

especially those more complicated cases, where the conventional, classical computers fail [21,25,46,58,

64,67,81,103,157,158,177-181].  As  shown  above  (section  5),  the  conventional,  unitary  quantum

computers cannot correctly reproduce any, even quantum system dynamics (quite similar to the underlying

150

unitary  paradigm  of  the  conventional  quantum  mechanics).  But  even  real,  dynamically  multivalued

(chaotic) quantum systems could at best correctly reproduce the behaviour of other quantum systems with

the same or lower complexity, but never any higher-level, classical behaviour, starting already from the

simplest  bound  systems,  like  atoms  (section  4.7).  Moreover,  it  appears  that  such  purely  quantum

simulation of purely quantum behaviour can hardly be realised in practice and in addition does not seem to

have any sense with respect to more realistic, hybrid (and explicitly chaotic) systems with the dynamically
emergent classical behaviour (sections 5.2.2, 7.2-3, 8).*)

Before outlining the exact dynamical expression of the universal evolution law, it would be not out

of place to emphasize the essential differences of the universal concepts of dynamical information and

entropy introduced above from their multiple imitations in the conventional science especially abundant and

confusing within the conventional ‘quantum information theory’ and related mystified ‘interpretations’ of

the ‘quantum weirdness’. Note, first of all, that what is usually meant by ‘information’ in the conventional

science (including the official ‘science of complexity’ and ‘quantum information processing’) corresponds

rather to a simplified, unitary version of our dynamical entropy, whereas our dynamical information has

no analogues in the conventional science, including its ‘theory of information’, and corresponds rather to

extended  version  of  ‘potential  (interaction)  energy’,  being  actually  represented  by  the  (generalised)

mechanical action and its derivatives (see below). Indeed, any real representation of information ‘bits’,

either ‘classical’ or ‘quantum’, deals with the fully developed structure of material carriers of those abstract

bits. Therefore if one thinks of the physical theory of information, one should not forget that any really

registered/processed ‘quantity of information’ is actually represented by entropy (in its generalised version

of dynamical complexity-entropy). The conventional theory cannot discern between information and

entropy because of its invariably single-valued, one-state structure that does not accept any real change,

transformation between qualitatively different states of the same system. Since the existence of such

changes in many dynamical processes is empirically evident, the conventional science starts an infinite

series of imitations around entropy, complexity, information, and randomness arbitrarily confusing them

with one another (for example, by defining information or complexity as entropy with the negative sign, or

‘negentropy’), inserting randomness, its arbitrary measures and related entropy/information/complexity in

an artificial, external, and formal way, etc. [53,59-62,72,73,81,110,115,129,130,150,169,170,174,182,
183,270,272,274,295-336].

Moreover,  if  we  take  the  conventional  version  of  each  of  those  concepts,  even  apart  from  its
ambiguous relations to (actually absent) other forms of complexity, we find fundamental differences with
respect  to  the  corresponding  unreduced,  dynamically  derived  versions  of  the  universal  science  of

*)  Note  that  the  complexity  correspondence  principle  does  not  exclude  certain,  limited  resemblance  between  patterns  of
behaviour from different complexity levels. Moreover, such very general ‘repetition’ of dynamical patterns follows from the
‘holographic’  property  of  the  fractal  structure  of  the  world  complexity  meaning  that  the  universality  of  the  dynamical
complexity mechanism (sections 3, 4) leads to a general (but not detailed!) ‘resemblance’ between emerging structures and
their dynamical regimes which irregularly and roughly ‘repeat’ themselves in the sequence of emerging complexity levels
(sections 4.5-7) [1]. In any case, a lower-complexity behaviour can at best only roughly reproduce the features of higher-
complexity dynamics, similar to a small portion of a hologram that reproduces the whole image, but with a poor quality. It is
probably  this,  holographic  property  of  the  unreduced  dynamic  complexity  that  is  actually  implied  behind  the  arbitrary
‘interdisciplinary’ generalisations within the zero-complexity world projection of the unitary science that leads inevitably to
incorrectly ‘extended’, identical similarity between different complexity levels starting from a few generally ‘similar’ features.

151

complexity. In our description we first explicitly obtain the multiple, incompatible, but dynamically related

system realisations which are forced to permanently replace each other by the action of the same, driving

interaction that creates the explicitly obtained structure of each individual realisation and then transiently

disentangles it into the common state of the wavefunction, or intermediate realisation (section 4.2), during

system transition to the next realisation. Only after having explicitly derived this dynamically entangled,

unified,  but  permanently  internally  changing,  ‘living’  construction  of  the  system  dynamics,  can  one

‘count’ the explicitly emerging, individually specified and a priori defined system realisations and be sure

that all the relevant ‘units’, in their unreduced configurations, and only them, are taken into account.

Instead of all this involved internal structure of unreduced complexity, constituting the main sense of

system dynamics and its development, the conventional science simply postulates various ‘reasonable’,

purely formal (mathematical) expressions for probability, entropy, information, or complexity based on

counting arbitrary, ill defined,  abstract ‘units’, ‘states’, or ‘events’ expressed by identical ‘bits’ and

supposed to be eventually accessible through experimental observations (which become unrealistically

complicated,  including  their  computer  versions,  starting  already  from  the  case  of  several  interacting

bodies). Such ‘arithmetical’ complexity, entropy, information, and probability are quite close conceptually

to the ‘arithmetical’ kind of conventional ‘dynamical’ chaos [281-286] mentioned above (section 6) and are

not really more sensible, than the underlying simple enumeration of observation results with the help of

natural number sequence (1, 2, 3, ...) or any other formal, always effectively one-dimensional set of

simplified, homogeneous symbols and artificial rules applied to them.

It is not surprising, therefore, that the conventional definitions of information (arbitrarily confused

with  entropy  and  complexity)  are  completely  devoid  of  the  main  quality  one  would  expect  from  a

reasonable notion of information, its irreducible meaning, or information content. They just compute and

recompute different mathematical quantities defined in a formal way on fundamentally senseless, one-

dimensional mathematical strings (see e. g. [169,170, 295,299,300,305,309-312,314,331,334-336]), but

cannot consistently define, in terms of information, the elementary difference between any two simplest,

but meaningful notions, or ‘qualities’, from the ‘ordinary life’, which constitutes another ‘mystery’ of the

‘exact’ conventional science, the mystery of (real, meaningful) information, or knowledge content (see

below), that persists despite all the technically ‘elaborated’ (and highly speculative) studies within the
conventional, dynamically single-valued paradigm around ‘physical’ theory of (classical and quantum)
information (see e. g. [37,80,113,150,300-306,310,321,330-336]).#)

It is clear from the above that the irreducible, and actually causally complete, content, or meaning,
of  real,  implemented  information  (represented  in  practice  by  complexity  in  the  form  of  entropy)  is
described  just  by  the  unreduced  dynamics  of  multivalued  entanglement-disentanglement  process,
constituting the true essence of any real interaction (section 4.2). When we count the explicitly obtained
realisations we know, in our approach, the rigorously defined qualitative characteristics of the units we
count, including the detailed internal structure of realisations accounting for their ‘material’ quality, or

#) The conventional science tries to look for a formal solution of the mystery of meaningful information by defining various
forms of ‘conditional’, ‘mutual’, ‘joint’ entropy/information, etc. (see e. g. [300,301,309,310,335]), but it is evident that
such kind of ‘solution’ cannot advance further than just a reformulation of the same problem, remaining always ‘irresolvable’
within the unitary paradigm.

152

texture, in the form of dynamically entangled system components, and the dynamical, probabilistically

fluctuating fractal structure, both within and outside the realisations. It is that tangible, individually specific

(inimitable), permanently changing, but intrinsically unified, externally irregular/asymmetric, and at the

same time highly dynamically ordered, fractally tender construction that determines the unreduced structure

of the real, physical and human, ‘information (knowledge) content’, including the finest details of its

always somewhat uncertain and changing meaning, within both elementary notions or ‘messages’ and the

whole body of knowledge. All those properties are rigorously derived within our mathematical description

of the unreduced interaction results (sections 3, 4) constituting a particular level of complexity-entropy.

In that way one obtains also the rigorous definition of knowledge itself, without any reference to its

‘carrier’, type, or particular way of production: knowledge is represented by the unreduced  dynamic

complexity of the cognising system, in the form of tangible dynamical  entropy  (as  opposed  to  one-

dimensional  and  ambiguous  conventional  ‘information’  expressed  in  abstract,  dimensionless  ‘bits’),

including  its  detailed,  dynamically  multivalued  (multi-dimensional),  fractal  structure  and  dynamic

uncertainty, as they are explicitly derived in our approach (it becomes clear that a real cognising system

should  possess  a  high  enough  minimum  complexity)  [1].  As  concerns  the  process  of  cognition

(acquisition of knowledge), it is actually represented by the above universal transformation of dynamical

information  (hidden  complexity)  into  the  explicit  (unfolded)  form  of  entropy,  or  knowledge,  of  the

cognising (learning) systems, driven by their interaction with the ‘objects’ of cognition that involves also
their internal interaction processes.*) It follows that knowledge is represented by a tangible, ‘material’,
spatial (and fractal) dynamical structure subjected to the unceasing realisation change of the unreduced

dynamic complexity, rather than a fixed set of abstract symbols and rules, as it is often imposed by the

conventional  science,  in  agreement  with  its  mechanistic,  dynamically  single-valued  paradigm.  The

unreduced, complex-dynamical knowledge possesses the unlimited universality and exact definition of

completeness, so that being applied at the level of human civilisation complexity, it naturally comprises

and unifies all kind of knowledge, such as all ‘exact’, ‘natural’, ‘humanitarian’ sciences, ‘arts’ and various

practical  skills,  whereas  they  remain  irreducibly  separated  into  small  unrelated  pieces  within  the

conventional,  unitary  and  ill-defined,  kind  of  knowledge  (corresponding  to  the  unitary  concept  of

information). On the other hand, the dynamical information, being a qualitatively different (but equally
real) form of complexity, as compared to entropy/knowledge, plays rather the role of a necessary ‘élan’, or

*)  Already  this  rather  general,  but  fundamentally  substantiated,  concept  of  knowledge  and  cognition  leads  to  practically
important conclusions and implies, in particular, that the maximum attainable knowledge for an individual, a civilisation
(group, society), or any other cognising system is predetermined by the complexity (in the form of information in this case)
of the world being cognised, cognising subject, and intensity/depth of interaction between the two (depending critically on
their  internal  interactions,  especially  those  between  the  elements  of  the  cognising  subject),  even  before  the  process  of
cognition has started. If, however, the complexity of the object of cognition (e. g. the world in the whole) and intensity of its
interaction  with  the  cognising  subject  remain  approximately  fixed  (as  it  often  happens  in  reality)  then  the  key  quantity
determining the finally attainable quantity of knowledge and the related system ability to induce the world complexity-entropy
growth, or system intelligence [1], is the total cognising system complexity initially present in the hidden form of dynamical
information and not subjected to change during various system interactions. It is therefore not the mechanistic sum of various
acquired information, or ‘erudition’, and neither the abilities to increase it that determine the practically important intelligence
of the cognising system, but rather its total, unreduced dynamic complexity mainly given at the system birth and then only
changing  its  form  from  the  hidden  information  to  the  explicit  entropy  in  the  process  of  cognition.  These  empirically
confirmed conclusions are now rigorously derived within a fundamentally substantiated and mathematically exact theory which
is not limited in its further detailed applications to intelligent systems of any complexity and origin (see also section 7.3).
153

‘desire’/predisposition,  for  acquisition  of  knowledge,  often  imitated  within  various  para-scientific,

‘philosophical’  or  ‘spiritual’,  concepts  around  ‘teleology’  and  ‘vitalism’  [1].  The  true,  dynamical

information is therefore something that one ‘does not know yet’, but it is a definite, real potentiality to

know always involving, however, an irreducible dynamic uncertainty of the detailed result, whereas the

dynamical entropy-knowledge describes just a particular result of this potentiality realisation (possessing

its own internal uncertainties). This dualistic relation between the two fundamental forms of unreduced

complexity, information and entropy, is the same at every level of complexity, but one can meaningfully

describe  it  in  terms  of  knowledge  and  its  acquisition  process  for  high  enough  levels  of  complexity

containing autonomous enough systems with sufficiently stable memory functions etc. [1].

It  is  clear  from  the  above  analysis  that  everything  one  observes,  measures  and  ‘processes’,

including ‘information’, is actually represented by a form of our universal dynamical entropy, as it should

be expected taking into account the physically ‘realistic’, tangible, and ‘unfolded’ character of this form of

complexity  equivalent  to  the  generalised  space  structure  (whereas  its  folded  form,  the  dynamical

information, is involved in the internal dynamics of emergence of those observable structures and relates

more  closely  to  the  entity  of  time,  see  below).  In  this  connection  it  is  important  to  understand  the

advantages of the extended entropy concept within the dynamic redundance paradigm with respect to its

imitation  within  the  conventional,  dynamically  single-valued  (unitary)  science.  Thus,  the  extended

entropy, together with the unified dynamical equation it satisfies [1] (see below), is explicitly derived from

the  unreduced  interaction  dynamics  of  any,  ‘nonequilibrium’  state  (including  the  case  of  causally

understood  quantum  systems),  upon  which  the  physical  meaning  itself  of  ‘nonequilibrium’  and

‘equilibrium’ states, as well as the unceasing system evolution from the former to the latter, is causally

specified in the form of the above universal law of conservation and transformation of complexity. In

particular, the absolute (total) equilibrium, or generalised complex-dynamical death, of any system (even

the one consisting from just a few interacting bodies) is universally derived as the state of totally developed

complexity, where the dynamical information (generalised potential energy) is totally transformed into

entropy (generalised kinetic/thermal energy) attaining thus its absolute maximum for this system. In a

similar way, a partial equilibrium state is attained by the system at the end of a given complexity level

development, after which a new highly nonequilibrium state can emerge in the form of the next complexity
level (provided the system is not at the end of its complexity development, where the last, most complex
partial equilibrium coincides with the absolute equilibrium).

This causally substantiated definition of equilibrium in terms of the system dynamics itself, without
evoking any ambiguous exchange with the environment (‘thermal bath’) and related abstract postulates, is
important  especially  in  cases  where  conventional  ‘interaction  with  environment’  becomes  explicitly
contradictory,  for  example  in  cosmology,  where  the  ‘system’  is  the  whole  universe  with  unknown
‘boundaries’ and ill-defined ‘exterior world’, or in quantum mechanics, where any system interactions
lead to either no change at all, or a relatively big, step-wise change. One can compare the totally consistent

and  universal  concept  of  dynamical  entropy  from  the  unreduced  science  of  complexity  [1]  with  the

situation in the conventional science, where even the simplest notion of equilibrium is simply postulated in

purely  abstract  terms,  so  that  the  fundamental  origin  of  the  ‘thermodynamical  arrow  of  time’  (the

154

irreversible  tendency  towards  equilibrium)  remains  unclear,  whereas  generic,  nonequilibrium  states,

necessary for any process ever to occur, are inconsistently described in terms of (postulated) ‘local’ or

‘pseudo-’ equilibrium dynamics, again not revealing the fundamental, physical origin of nonequilibrium

state and its tendency towards equilibrium (note that these issues of the ‘old’, classical physics are not

clarified by the latest results of the conventional ‘science of complexity’, despite the evident involvement

of dynamic complexity in these phenomena).

Another major advantage of the extended concept of (dynamical) entropy with respect to its unitary

imitation  is  related  to  the  intrinsic,  probabilistic  entanglement  between  order/regularity  and

disorder/randomness within a generic system state of the multivalued SOC type (section 4.5.1), which

means that the emergence/existence of any, even quite externally ‘regular’ structure or dynamic behaviour

is expressed by a definite growth of entropy, rather than its decrease postulated in the conventional science

that inconsistently attributes emergence of structures to ‘virtual’, local violations of the entropy growth law

or to ‘openness’ of the structure-forming system supposed, following Schrödinger [337], to ‘consume the

negative entropy’ from the ‘environment’ (whereas an elementary estimate easily reveals the evident
quantitative inconsistency of this assumption).*) Not only the universality and true origin of the entropy
growth law are thus established within the unreduced concept of complexity, but this ‘asymmetrical’

principle of growth/maximum appears now rather as intrinsic mechanism of maintenance of the universal

dynamical  symmetry  of  complexity,  due  to  the  existence  of  the  dual,  ‘opposite’  complexity  form  of

dynamical information (absent in the unitary science) whose decrease compensates exactly the increase of

entropy, thus leaving their sum, the total dynamic complexity, always constant (if all interactions and

complexity sources are properly taken into account). Therefore the universal symmetry of complexity,

obtained as the unique principle of existence/development of the world and any its part, can actually be

maintained only by permanent, unavoidable transformation of the qualitative form of complexity, from the

folded  (latent)  form  of  dynamical  information  (potential  energy)  to  the  unfolded  (explicit)  form  of

dynamical entropy (spatial structure).

*) Thus, in the canonical case considered by Schrödinger a living organism acquires its dynamical order, or negentropy, by
consuming the ordered environment (mostly as food) or, equivalently, renders its ‘excessive’ entropy to the environment
(basically quite similar to a man-made machine like refrigerator). It is evident, however, that the amount of complexity, or
‘dynamical order’, of the organism is much greater than that of the food (or any other resources) it consumes. This fact
constitutes  even  one  of  the  main  principles  of  living  matter  existence:  fabricate  complex  structures  from  much  simpler
components.  Most  evident  manifestations  of  this  principle  include  production  of  very  complex,  living  forms  from  non-
organic substances by plants and generation of higher brain activities, such as conscious thought, by sufficiently developed
animal  species  that  physically  consume  only  pieces  of  biologic,  but  much  less  complex,  matter.  On  the  other  hand,  the
negentropy consumption concept refers only to ‘wide open’ processes, while many systems producing very complex order
within them are practically closed to any noticeable influx of a suitable ‘food’ (e. g. a planetary system evolving up to life
emergence  on  one  of  the  planets),  which  clearly  designates  the  limits  of  the  unitary  imitation  of  reality  within  the
conventional science. In fact, the main part, or even the totality, of the developing complex structure of both open and closed
systems  does  not  come  from  the  outside,  but  is  encoded  from  the  beginning  in  the  internal  dynamical  information,  or
generalised  ‘potential  energy’  of  internal  system's  interactions  (which  just  determine  its  specific  nature).  The  dynamical
information realisation in the case of living organism is evident: it is the system  of  interactions of the organism's genome
that determines almost entirely the resulting organism complexity. Note the essential difference of this result with respect to
the corresponding postulates of the conventional, unitary genetics considering genome only as a one-dimensional, weakly
interacting, quasi-regular ‘list of instructions’ that closely resembles an ordinary computer programme, in contradiction with
the evident and huge gap in complexity and autonomy between such computers and living systems.

155

One  may  also  note  the  fact  that  in  the  case  of  our  unified  evolution  law  its  formulations  as

conservation or symmetry of complexity mean the same, whereas every classical conservation law of a

particular quantity (always being a measure of unreduced complexity) is different, and usually derived,

from the corresponding postulated, formal symmetry of an underlying abstract entity (this transition from

symmetry to conservation is known as Noether's theorem). Thus, the momentum and energy conservation

laws do not result, in our description, from system invariance with respect to spatial and temporal shifts,

respectively (as it is the case in the canonical science), but rather both momentum (energy) conservation

and space (time) uniformity are manifestations of the same symmetry/conservation of dynamic complexity

of the considered system, which reflects the specific, ‘emergent’ character of the universal science of

complexity (absent in the conventional science), i. e. the fact that every entity, including space, time,

momentum, and energy, is explicitly obtained, in accord to its actual emergence, as a result of unreduced

interaction development, just expressed by that unified (evolution) law, the symmetry of complexity.

The obtained intrinsic, dynamic ‘entanglement’ between causally derived randomness of unceasing

realisation change and order of their average envelope, expressed by the extended entropy growth law,

confirms once more that ‘complexity’ and ‘chaoticity’ mean actually the same, within their unreduced,

dynamically multivalued description (section 4.1), and more complicated, involved, elaborated spatial

structures, associated with growing complexity (emergence), contain in them also proportionally more of

chaoticity, randomness, dynamical disorder (expressed by dynamical entropy growth), contrary to the

opposite  conclusions  of  the  conventional,  dynamically  single-valued  science,  leading  to  so  many

irresolvable ‘paradoxes’ in the official thermodynamics, understanding of temporal change/evolution,

quantum  mechanics,  life  sciences,  etc.  (see  also  sections  7.3,  8).  As  concerns  particular  quantitative

measures of complexity, entropy, and information, expressing the universal symmetry/transformation of

complexity in various its particular manifestations, they can take correspondingly diverse forms, but

usually  differing  between  them  only  by  a  constant  factor.  Thus,  if  integral  measures  of  complexity

characterise its development through the dynamics of the total (effective) number of realisations, or action,

its differential measures describe the same processes in terms of temporal rate of realisation change, or

(relativistic) energy, and spatial rate of realisation change, or (generalised) momentum, equivalent (actually

proportional) to the integral measures [1] (see below for more details).

The notion of dynamical information is characterised by still greater differences, than entropy, with
respect to any conventional imitations already because, as explained above, the canonical ‘information’ is
always reduced in reality to dynamical entropy, whereas our unreduced, dynamical information cannot
exist in the unitary theory with its basic absence of qualitative change/transformation and can be considered
as the complex-dynamical, essentially  nonlinear extension of the conventional ‘potential energy’ and
‘action’ (see below) which, however, are never recognised in the conventional theory as forms of clearly
defined information. It is not surprising that our unreduced information is directly related to the universal
dynamical  origin  of  randomness  revealed  by  the  unreduced  concept  of  complexity:  it  is  the  causal,

interaction-driven development of the a priori totally regular and relatively poorly structured initial system

configuration, containing dynamical information usually in the form of ‘potential energy of interaction’

(see e. g. eqs. (1)-(5)), that gives the dynamically multivalued/redundant general solution necessarily

156

involving  causally  random  realisation  change  (eqs.  (24)-(25))  which  just  expresses  the  result  of

information transformation into entropy. It is clear that any postulated, mechanistically inserted kind of

randomness, or ‘stochasticity’, of the unitary quantum information theory (e. g. [109,338]) has actually

nothing to do with that fundamental connection between the unreduced interaction development and

inevitable dynamic randomness of any real information implementation in the form of dynamical entropy.

In a similar way, it becomes clear that various unitary-theory speculations about the ‘(thermodynamical)

cost’ of ‘real’/‘physical’ information (e. g. [80,113,300-304]) cannot actually reflect real system operation

already because the difference between unreduced information and entropy cannot be seen within the

single-valued  imitation  of  dynamics,  whereas  application  of  the  conventional  ‘equilibrium’

thermodynamics and the related mechanistic uncertainty of ‘noise’ have little to do with the true, dynamical

origin of randomness in the essentially nonequilibrium process of information transformation into entropy.

Contrary  to  some  very  selective  and  limited  ‘principles’  of  the  unitary  computation  theory  around

‘thermodynamical cost’, we have shown in our unreduced interaction process description (sections 3-6)

that any real, practically useful ‘operation’ within a ‘computation process’ has the strictly positive cost of

increasing dynamic uncertainty that can be expressed, as we have seen above in this section, as a growth

of dynamic entropy at the expense of corresponding decrease of dynamical information, ensuring the exact

conservation (symmetry) of the total dynamic complexity (= information + entropy).

The dynamically multivalued concept of information and its transformation into entropy in the

course of any interaction, process, motion (all of them realising universal complexity development) is

therefore much larger than the conventional idea about (abstract) information ‘bits’ starting from an ill-

defined ‘incomplete knowledge’ whose mechanistic, meaningless ‘completion’ independent of the content

is described by an acquired quantity of thus formally defined (postulated) ‘information’. The origin of this

conventional imitation of information becomes clear now: in the absence of the true, dynamically defined

change in its dynamically single-valued (unitary) projection of reality, the conventional science tries to

imitate the actually ‘felt’ process of novelty acquisition in a system by a formal division of the already

existing,  unchanged  elements  into  ‘already  known’  and  ‘yet  unknown’  ones,  while  the  postulated,

mechanistic growth of the number of the former at the expense of the latter is presented as ‘information

growth’. Since nothing really new (rather than existing, but ‘previously ignored’) can appear in system
dynamics, according to the unitary science results, it tends, instead of acknowledgement of this evident
deficiency  (cf.  [339]),  to  its  presentation  as  fundamental  and  universal  ‘law  of  conservation  of
information’,  especially  in  relation  to  recent  propagation  of  ideas  around  information  and  quantum
computation (see e. g. [327,333,335]). In reality, as shown in our unreduced, dynamically multivalued
interaction analysis, a qualitative change is omnipresent and described just by inevitable, unceasing, and
universal information decrease (rather than its acquisition/growth or ‘conservation’) compensated by the
equal growth of dynamical entropy, even for the processes of external order  (structure) emergence in a
closed system (such processes are, in fact, denied by the conventional theory, but permanently happen in

nature). As concerns the subjectively felt growth of intuitively defined ‘knowledge’ about previously

existing, but subjectively ‘unknown’ entities (reduced in the conventional theory to abstract ‘bits’ of one-

dimensional information) it is also correctly described by the dynamical entropy growth of the cognising

157

system which is usually smaller, however, than the entropy growth associated to those entities emergence

itself. Therefore we deal here not with a simple difference in verbal definitions (terminology) around

information/entropy, but with a fundamental, qualitatively big difference between the real, dynamically

multivalued and creative world dynamics (adequately described in the universal science of complexity) and

its reduced, mechanistically fixed imitation within the dynamically single-valued paradigm of the whole

conventional science (including the usual ‘science of complexity’, ‘theory of systems’, ‘cybernetics’, and

‘information theory’) that does not contain any real, qualitative change in principle.

It is important to note also that finer fractal parts of the unreduced interaction results (section 4.4)

represent the physically  real,  causally  specified,  dynamically  multivalued  potential  energy and thus

dynamical information for the next  (higher) level(s) of complexity development (provided there was

enough of dynamical information in the initial complexity stock of the system in question), which shows

how the two dual forms of dynamic complexity alternate their dominance of system behaviour at the

consecutive levels of its developing complexity. In fact, it is this alternating, interaction-driven emergence

of fractally structured dynamical, or ‘physical’, information (or causally specified ‘potential energy’) from

the ‘nonintegrable’ parts of the current-level  spatial  structure  (dynamical  entropy)  and the ‘reverse’

transformation of this physical, tangible information into the next-level entropy (spatial structure) that

provides the causally complete understanding of the fundamental property of autonomous creation (self-

development) of system structure from the lower-level, previously existing dynamical information, which

is directly related to the problem ‘nonintegrability’/‘nonseparability’ (see section 4.4) and absent in the

conventional theory in principle (being replaced with various ‘proto-scientific’ speculations and plays of

words, such as ‘becoming’, ‘self-organisation’, ‘emergence of meaning’, ‘autonomous agents’, ‘adjacent

possible’, ‘autopoïesis’, etc.). That is the unreduced essence of the notion of physical information which

indeed reveals itself as being a tangible, ‘material’ entity, a part of the developing system, its ‘living

body’,  represented  by  the  probabilistic  dynamical  fractal  and  possessing  intrinsic,  causally  defined

(dynamical) ‘fertility’ with respect to ‘unfolded’ (spatial) structure production by its interaction-driven

transformation into entropy. Needless to say, the underlying explicit, causally complete, dynamically

multivalued, fractally structured problem solution (sections 3.2-3, 4.4) [1] is very far from the abstract

guesses, ‘arithmetical’ imitations, and related vain (but extremely intense) speculations of the conventional
science about information, its ‘physical’ content (“information is physical”) and role in both classical and
quantum  applications  (e.  g.  [61,62,72,73-75,80,81,110,113,115,150,169,170,174,182,183,272,274,
299-311,316,319,322-336]).

It would be especially important to emphasize that within this new, unreduced understanding of the
universal  science  of  complexity  the  dynamical  information  (including  its  lowest,  quantum  levels)  is
obtained as a well-specified, integral and tangible part of the system and its dynamic complexity and
constitutes thus an intrinsic, major system property showing its (permanently changing) potentiality for
creative development (thus also generalising the conventional, formally introduced ‘potential energy’ from

classical mechanics). This feature of the unreduced information should be compared to the conventional,

mechanistic information as if consisting of a special, ‘mathematical matter’ of ‘pure bits’ which is basically

detached from, and exists independent of, any tangible system structure (contrary, for example, to the

158

conventional energy) and is often endowed therefore, directly or indirectly, with the mystical quality of an

‘informational aether’ which is ‘distributed throughout space’ as a sort of ‘primal’, supernatural ‘tissue’,

or ‘programme’, of the world that determines the observed, tangible structures by way of mysterious (and

most certainly ‘quantum’!) influences. Such ‘informal’ attitudes of the official, ‘objective’ and ‘exact’,

science  are  quite  clearly  implied  behind  the  famous  ‘it  from  bit’  hypothesis  [316]  and  its  further

development intending to say that ‘it’, or ‘material world/structure’, somehow emerges, and is therefore to

be derived, from ‘bit’, or ‘pure information’ (exclusively coherent, of course, with a ‘pure thought’ of a

‘chosen’ community of ‘mathematical’ sages). In reality, as we have seen, the dynamical information

(generalised potential energy) is a quite ‘material’, tangible entity (which does not prevent the existence of

other, much higher, actually imperceptible levels of both information and entropy [1]), and it is due to its

well-specified physical origin that the unreduced information is directly transformed into a more ‘visible’,

‘unfolded’, actually observed structure of space, or dynamical entropy of a higher emerging level of

complexity which gives rise, in its turn, to the next level of dynamical information (potential energy), and

so on. The purely dynamic uncertainty is intrinsically involved in the dynamic information structure, the

process of its transformation into entropy, and the emerging results which form, in addition, the hierarchy

of qualitatively different  levels of complexity, and therefore the regular, identical and abstract ‘bits’ of the

conventional information concept, extensively used in modern (or rather ‘post-modern’) physics, provide

but a very rough approximation of reality which is not more exact than its description through enumeration

of existing entities by integer number series (which is a good illustration of the true, ‘ultimate’ motivation

of the canonical, ‘mathematical’ physics: reduce the world to numbers and science to counting). The

essential difference of real interaction processes from their unitary imitations is that the former cannot

perform merely an abstract ‘calculation’ process, as it is implied behind the conventional ‘computation’

idea, but always involve also irreducible, explicit creation, or ‘production’, of new entities (less visible,

but present, in the case of usual computers), which changes completely the sense and strategy of practical

applications of quantum (and explicitly chaotic classical) computation processes (sections 7.2, 7.3, 8).

Whereas our universal notion of dynamical information is applicable at both classical and quantum

levels  of  complexity,  the  conventional  mysteries  of  information,  arbitrarily  confused  with  equally

inconsistent imitations of entropy and complexity, become increasingly obscure within its applications to
quantum systems, especially popular in relation to unitary quantum computation (see e. g. [61-63,72,73-
75,110,150,167,169,174,182,183,301,316-333]). The ill-defined ‘informational’ properties are attributed
here to everything including the already highly mystified and misunderstood conventional notions of
wavefunction, density matrix, ‘quantum entanglement’, ‘teleportation’, ‘nonlocality’ (‘Bell inequalities’),
‘quantum bit’, ‘subquantum matter’, etc. (see also section 5.3). The extreme simplification of the unitary,
effectively one-dimensional projection of the real, multivalued dynamics and its evident contradiction to
observations  inevitably  lead  thus  to  another  extremity,  that  of  unlimited  ‘fantasy’  around  ‘quantum
information’. As becomes clear from our unreduced interaction process analysis, the causally complete,

physically real versions of both quantum system dynamics and its information/entropy/complexity result

from the same, complex-dynamical (multivalued) picture of interaction development described by the

universal symmetry of complexity (at its lowest, ‘quantum’ sublevels). The specific features of dynamical

159

information (and entropy) at the quantum levels of complex world dynamics are reduced mainly to the

well-defined, dynamically fixed quantum of dynamical information (action) change, equal to Planck's

constant h, as will be specified below (whereas the same information at the classical levels of dynamics is

transformed into entropy in various portions of action determined by characteristic ‘periods’ of a particular

system behaviour), and also to very low stability of the physical realisation of a bit within any essentially

quantum dynamics representing a particular case of the uniform (global) chaos regime (sections 4.5-7, 5,

6). This causally complete, truly realistic understanding of the physical information transformation at the

quantum levels of dynamics shows fundamental impossibility of the unitary quantum machine realisation

(related to the unitary imitation of information) and also puts an end to various tricky, artificially mystified

‘narratives’ of the ‘post-modern’ official abstraction around ‘informational interpretation of quantum

mechanics’, representation of the whole world or its arbitrary parts as a (unitary) quantum computer

(information processing machine), ‘it-from-bit’ speculations, ‘quantum networks’, ‘spin networks’, etc.,

creation of the direct link between quantum behaviour, living cell dynamics, brain activity, consciousness,

gravitation, and ... actually any arbitrary, mystified imitation of reality by the unitary science, all of it

being  thoroughly  maintained  and  published,  despite  the  glaring  inconsistency,  in  the  best  sources  of

‘exact’ unitary science with the help of quite real, ‘classical’ networks of educated swindlers.

A meaningful illustration of the difference between the unitary imitation of quantum and classical

information and its unreduced, complex-dynamical version can be obtained from elementary analysis of

the unitary estimates of the ‘computational capacity of the universe’ or any its material part [150]. These

estimates are based on the formal attribution of the capacity to compute (in bits per unit time) with the
maximum speed of the order of E/h to any ‘piece’ of mass-energy E, whereas the ultimate capacity of
matter to register/memorise is expressed through its equilibrium, conventional entropy (divided by the
Boltzmann constant kB and ln2) in a state with “maximal entropy”, when “all matter is converted into
radiation”.  As  follows  from  the  above,  the  unreduced,  dynamical  entropy,  determining  the  memory

capacity of a real system, need not attain its absolute maximum in the equilibrium, highly disordered state

(of  ‘uniform  chaos’)  and,  moreover,  the  system  should  be  in  a  qualitatively  different,  highly

nonequilibrium  and  well-structured  state  (of  ‘multivalued  SOC’)  in  order  to  be  able  to  register  the

information with a reasonable efficiency/stability. The total system complexity-entropy (transformed from
the complexity-information in the course of information registration) will be determined by the total
number of realisations which need not coincide with the number of fixed identical system ‘units’.

Consider, for example, a small part of the ‘universe capacity’ represented by a single human brain.
In the simplest approach, registering structures are composed from synaptic links, and if there are of the
order of 104 links for each of 1010 neurones, then the total number of the memory system elements, N, is
not smaller than 1012 to 1014 (taking into account possible differences between neurones, but also the
existence  of  other  possible  links  and  memory  elements).  Now,  the  key  point  is  that  the  complex-

dynamical,  nonequilibrium  interaction  processes  between  N elements can produce up to N!  different

combinations of elements, or operative system ‘realisations’, where each combination can encode, or

register, a ‘bit’ of information (let us accept here this reduced designation of our complex-dynamical

160

realisation). Therefore the ‘ultimate’ brain memory capacity is of the order of N! ~ (cid:214)
‘ 2p N (N/e)N,  which
for the lowest estimate of N = 1012 gives the capacity of not less than (1012)! >> (3.4 · 10 11)1012 >>
101013 >>> 101012. This number is so much greater than not only one-dimensional unitary estimate of the
‘ultimate universe capacity’ (of the order of 1090 bits [150]), but also any reasonable numbers concerning
mechanistic,  ‘linear’  universe  structure,  that  it  is  clear  that  any  possible  uncertainty  in  the  model  or

parameter values cannot change the qualitative result: a single brain memory capacity exceeds by an actual

infinity anything ever imagined by the conventional unitarity for the whole universe, and the real brain

operation is limited not by its maximum formal capacity, but rather by practical impossibility (and absence
of necessity, at least today) of dealing with such huge volumes of information.*)

It is important that the above ‘miraculously’ high memory capacity is obtained not by means of

some obscure ‘quantum magic’, but simply due to the unreduced complexity of the real, ‘classical’, but

multivalued and creative system dynamics (considered in a simplified, minimal version for this quick

estimate), and therefore the same kind of increase will be obtained, of course, for any other explicitly
chaotic, dynamically multivalued ‘computing’ system (the maximal increase will always be much greater

for systems with higher complexity and thus, for example, for classical systems it will be greater than for
lower-level,  quantum  ones).#)  In  addition,  the  same,  causally  complete  and  universal  picture  of
multivalued interaction dynamics explains the canonical quantum ‘miracles’ themselves (sections 4.6, 4.7)

[1-4,11-13], but similar to higher complexity levels, the ‘magic’ efficiency of the real quantum dynamics

has a real cost in the form of its fundamental dynamic uncertainty (which is especially and irreducibly high

at those lowest, quantum complexity levels).

We obtain thus indeed ‘exponentially high efficiency’ of any real, quantum or classical, explicitly

multivalued  (complex)  system  dynamics  with  respect  to  its  unitary  imitation  simply  due  to  the

exponentially large growth of the number of state-realisations, actually (and autonomously) taken by the

system.  In  the  case  of  pseudo-regular,  SOC  type  of  dynamics  of  ordinary  modern  computers  this

multitude of practically indistinguishable (in that case) realisations is effectively ‘hidden’ within each

system  element,  or  physical  ‘bit’,  remaining  thus  sufficiently  stable,  but  in  the  case  of  explicitly

multivalued, considerably irregular ‘computer’, such as any quantum computer or classical brain, those

multiple, hierarchically branching realisations are effectively ‘deployed’ by the driving system interactions
up to their individual distinguishability, so that the total system element number N ‘jumps’ to the argument

*) Note in passing, however, that the obtained ‘incredibly high’ capacity of the real, complex-dynamical brain operation
shows also that the system possesses a new, superior quality, rather than simply quantitatively increased performance. This
‘new quality’ can be associated with the property of consciousness which is obtained in the detailed, dynamically multivalued
picture of brain dynamics as an emergent property accompanying the dynamical appearance of the corresponding, high enough
level of the same, universally defined hierarchy of complexity [1,4] (see also section 7.3).
#) Consider, as an additional confirmation, a slightly different estimate of the number of brain operational units that takes
into account only combinations of directly connected links between neurones. If each of n = 1010 neurones has L = 104 links
to  other  neurones,  then  possible  (different)  link  combinations  form  a  series  of  connected  hierarchical  ‘generations’  of
consecutive neurones, with the number of combinations in the last, n-th generation growing as Ln (which is much greater
than the total number of links, N = nL £
 1014). The total number of connected links combinations from all generations is
then obtained as LL2L3...Ln = L(1+2+3+...n) = Ln(n+1)/2 >>> 102.1020 for the above parameter values. Even if there is an over-
estimate  because  of  the  inevitable  links  repetition,  we  basically  obtain  the  same  exponential  growth  of  the  number  of
operational states (or memory cells), with the exponent determined by the system element (neurone connection) number.
161

‘
‘
position  of  the  exponential  function  determining  the  total  number  of  actually  taken,  distinct  state-

realisations.  It  is  also  clear  why  this  dynamically  multivalued  ‘information  decompression’  with

‘exponentially high efficiency’ is obtained not for nothing (as it seems to be the case in the unitary theory

of quantum computation), but in exchange for the irreducible and essential dynamic uncertainty of the

system dynamics, which alters completely the purposes and principles of construction of such complex-

dynamical ‘computer’ (see sections 7.3, 8). The latter kind of machine, realised in various natural systems

with  high  enough  dynamic  complexity  (including  eventually  the  whole  universe),  uses  the  above

multivalued,  exponentially  efficient  and  ‘automatic’  (purely  dynamical)  ‘decompression’  of  its  own

information  processing  for  ‘adaptable’  and  common  solution  of  the  conventional  ‘difficult’  and

‘irresolvable’ problems, usually formalised under the unitary, effectively one-dimensional notions of ‘NP-

complete’, ‘non-computable’, or ‘non-decidable’ problems, these notions themselves being a huge (one-

dimensional) simplification, or ‘compression’, of the now clearly specified, dynamically multivalued

origin of all the unitary ‘difficulties’.

A similar, qualitative difference appears between the unitary and complex-dynamical estimates of

the speed (power) of computation. Whereas the mechanistic, physically ill-justified estimate (conceptually
reproduced  also  within  the  conventional  science  of  neural  networks)  gives  the  number  of  10120 of
‘ultimate’,  ‘quantum’  operations  for  the  whole  universe  during  its  whole  history  [150],  the  modest

frequency of switch of each element state in the brain of the order of 10 or even 1 Hz gives the maximum
number of elementary changes (or operations) of not less than 101013 per second (it is again clear that a real
brain uses but a small fraction of this maximum capacity which considerably exceeds, nevertheless, the

parameters of any existing, or even ever possible, computation device or scheme of the conventional,

unitary type). The detailed, purely dynamical, ‘emergent’, interaction-driven origin of the state-realisation

multitude of a real system is especially important for the correct understanding of this exponentially high

speed of complexity development, appearing as complex-dynamical, or chaotic, parallelism, or dynamic

adaptability (section 4.4), of the explicitly multivalued interaction process that occurs within the same,

fixed number of ‘processing units’ due to their chaotic realisation change, as opposed to the conventional

concept of ‘parallel information processing’ always reduced to mechanistic multiplication of operational,

simultaneously working units. It is the unreduced, complex-dynamical parallelism of brain operation that
explains  its  crucial  differences  from  any  conventional  ‘super-computer’  and  makes  unnecessary  any
additional assumption about obscure ‘quantum consciousness’ mechanisms allegedly hidden at a deep sub-
neurone level and explaining the ‘miraculous’ power of the conscious brain operation (e. g. [15,68-71]).

Note also that though being quantitatively simplified, our estimate of the real, multivalued complex
dynamics refers to actual computing system, like the brain, while the unitary estimate of the computation
speed by E/h does not reflect any feasible computation dynamics and actually crudely violates the law of
entropy growth, complexity correspondence principle, and thus the complexity conservation law in general
(see above in this section). Thus, the quantum beat process within every single electron produces indeed
of the order of 1020  reduction-extension  cycles  and  associated  chaotic  spatial  jumps  per  second  (an
estimate for the quantum beat frequency, n
0 = m0c2/h, where m0 is the electron rest mass) [1-4,11-13], but
considering seriously any such elementary free-electron life-cycle as an operation of any (let alone unitary)

162

‘computation  process’  by  the  universe  is  but  a  misleading  play  of  words  (even  if  the  associated

‘information’ could be used, the electron would need to be transformed into e/m radiation, which makes

the estimate senseless). Moreover, when one passes from the indivisible natural entities like elementary

particles to their various agglomerates, constituting the actual universe structure, then the total energy of

every agglomerate and their ensemble reflects only the number (per unit time) of chaotic and chaotically

added  quantum  beat  jumps  of  all  elements,  or  system  inertial  (and  gravitational)  mass,  but  not  any

computationally sensible changes, or ‘operations’, at all, even for any ‘ultimate’, imaginary computation

process (the number of computationally useful operations is determined only by suitable, higher-level

interactions within the system, preserving its basic structure). Therefore the tremendous under-estimation

of the real system computation capacities within the unitary imitation contains, in addition, a fundamentally

incorrect over-estimation of the mechanistic computation capacities of any ‘piece of energy’ formally
divided by h and any ‘piece of entropy’ formally divided by kB (in both cases one deals actually with states
close to the ‘uniform chaos’, or ‘equilibrium’, regime of essentially quantum dynamics and therefore

possessing the lowest possible actual computation capacities because of their least distinct/stable structure

for  the  given  entities).  The  obtained  qualitatively  big  difference  between  the  unitary  and  complex-

dynamical (multivalued) estimates of the real system capacities is a good illustration of the advantages of

development of the explicitly chaotic (dynamically multivalued) kind of micro-machines, as compared to

their pseudo-unitary existing versions and illusive unitary quantum schemes (see sections 7.3, 8).

Now,  in  order  to  obtain  the  adequate  mathematical  expression  of  the  above  universal  law  of

complexity conservation and transformation, eqs. (56), taking into account all the mentioned properties of

the unreduced entropy and information, we need first to determine the suitable physical quantity for

dynamical  information  and  entropy  representation  (as  discussed  above,  information  expression  in

dimensionless ‘bits’, as well as entropy expression in the conventional ‘thermal’, equilibrium-state units,

does not reflect the real interaction/computation processes). The physical transformation of information

into entropy, appearing as interaction/computation process, takes the form of emergence and change of

incompatible system realisations, where each realisation configuration is the causal expression of the

generalised, but physically real, observed space ‘point’ of the corresponding complexity level, while the

neighbouring  realisation  separation  gives  the  dynamically  discrete  (quantized)  element,  or  unit,  or
increment of that dynamically obtained, or ‘emergent’, space (section 4.3) [1,11-13]. Specifically, the
size, D x, of these natural space elements, determining the dynamical structure and thus properties of the
really perceived, physical space (at each given level of complexity), is obtained in our universal analysis as
the separation between the ‘centres of reduction’ of neighbouring realisations, determined, as can be seen
from the explicit expressions for the realisation configurations, eqs. (25) (section 3.3), by the difference,
h r
i , between the corresponding eigenvalues of the effective dynamical equation, eqs. (20), that can be
estimated, in its turn, by the eigenvalue separation of the auxiliary equations, eqs. (17), approximated by

an  averaged,  or  ‘mean-field’,  interaction,  eqs.  (28),  (29)  (section  4.4).  Keeping  in  mind  this  well-

specified link between the quantized space structure and the underlying essentially nonlinear, dynamically

multivalued interaction process, all that we need to retain for our present purpose is that a given complexity

163

D
level emerges in the form of spatial structure determined by its element(s), D x, which result, and can be
causally derived in our approach, from the unreduced interaction dynamics. The second universal form of
dynamical complexity appears as the time period, D
t, of the realisation change process determining the
(irreversible) flow of the emergent time (at a given complexity level) which characterises the ‘intensity’

(temporal rate) of emergence of space elements (section 4.3) [1,11-13], so that the temporal rate of the
emerging structure propagation, or velocity, v, of thus rigorously defined system motion (section 4.6.2),
is given (for the simplest motion case) by the ratio of the emerging space and time elements, v = D x/D

t.

It is clear from the above analysis of complexity transformation process that the emerging spatial
t, characterise the unfolded,

structure elements, D x, and their averaged (global) period of emergence, D
explicit form of the driving interaction complexity, or dynamical entropy S. Since the emergent space and

time  are  quantized  (section  4.3)  [1],  the  same  refers  to  the  complexity  transformation  and  all  its

‘participants’,  i.  e.  dynamical  entropy,  information,  and  total  complexity.  It  becomes  clear  that,  in

agreement with eqs. (56), the interaction complexity is transformed from the ‘hidden’ (folded) form of
information into the observed form of entropy (space structure) in discrete ‘quanta’, where the emergence
of each element of space structure, D x, during the time period of D
t realises the dynamically discrete
entropy increase by D S from the equal, but ‘disappearing’ quantum of dynamical information, D I = - D S,
while the total complexity C remains quantitatively unchanged, D C = 0 (but it experiences the quantized
qualitative transformation). Contrary to the general expression of complexity conservation law, eq. (56b),

here the quantized changes of information and entropy are fixed by the interaction dynamics and directly
related to the underlying quanta, D x and D
t, of the two main manifestations of the emerging complexity. In
view of the fundamental character of the participating quantities, this relation can only take the form of
proportionality  between  D I or D S and both D x and D
t,  which  means  physically  that  the  complexity
transformation,  D I ﬁ
 D S, is realised and observed as nothing else than the time-dependent structure
emergence. Since, however, the emerging complexity increments, D x and D
t, characterise directly the
corresponding change of the dynamical entropy D S, it is more pertinent to express the dynamics of the
complexity  transformation/conservation  (or  interaction  development)  as  a  relation  of  proportionality
between the dynamical information quantum D I and space and time quanta D x and D

t:

D I = -E D

t + p D x ,                                                           (57a)

where -E  and p are coefficients (the negative sign before the positive E expresses the ‘natural’, but actually
conventional, condition that time permanently grows with always decreasing information). This complex-
dynamical relation is immediately recognised, however, as a similar expression for the increment of
mechanical action, A, known from classical mechanics (eventually extended to quantum mechanics),

where our universal description should be valid.

We obtain thus an important generalisation of the quantity (function) of action and its meaning
which  shows  that  action  can  be  universally  interpreted  as  the  most  natural  integral  measure  of  the

dynamical information determined by the underlying essentially nonlinear, dynamically multivalued and

entangled process of interaction (taken at the very beginning of its development). This actual, realistically

founded meaning of action cannot be revealed and remains totally unknown in the conventional, unitary

164

science, where action, similar to other quantities, is introduced as an abstract value by means of formal

postulates. Now the basic expression of the disappearing complexity-information increment through the

emerging complexity-entropy (space and time) increments, eq. (57a), takes the familiar, but universally

extended form,

D A = -E D

t + p D x ,                                                           (57b)

where E and p have the meaning of generalised (total) energy and momentum, respectively, while all the

increments are finite and determined by the complex interaction dynamics (cf. section 4.3). The related

expressions for energy and momentum generalise their well-known expressions as partial derivatives of

action to the case of finite increments:

E = - 

 (cid:239) x = const ,                                                            (58)

p = 

t = const .                                                             (59)

D A
t

D A
D x

 (cid:239)

Note that x here and below can generally be understood as vector, with the ensuing vectorial meaning of

the obtained quantities and expressions. The last equations show that energy and momentum represent the

universal differential measures of dynamic complexity-entropy, generally equivalent and directly related to

action as integral complexity measure. The differential form of the dynamical information transformation,

eq. (57), can also be written as

L = p v -E ,                                                                 (60a)

where the system Lagrangian, L, is defined as the discrete analogue of the total time derivative of action:

L = 

  .                                                                    (61)

D A
t

It is also easy to understand that the lowest, essentially quantum levels of world dynamics are

characterised by the unique, fixed value of the dynamic information quantum equal to Planck's constant,
|D A| = h, and transformed, in the course of interaction development, into the equal quantum of dynamical
entropy (represented by the emerging space structure in the form of de Broglie wavelength, see below).
This uniqueness and universality of the action quantum are due to the lowest position of the quantum
complexity level in the hierarchy of the world dynamics, so that the fundamental interaction between the
primordial protofields, as well as its results, cannot be further subdivided within this world (contrary to
higher complexity levels, where the action-information quanta are not uniquely fixed) [1,3,12,13]. On the
other hand, we see that the extended, dynamical ‘quantum information’, contrary to its speculative unitary
imitation, is naturally and universally quantized and measured in units of h, in accord with the underlying
quantum  dynamics,  while  preserving  the  totally  realistic  physical  meaning  of  ‘potential’,  always

diminishing form of the interaction complexity (equivalent, in the differential expression, to the generalised

potential energy). The quantum versions of the basic relations of eqs. (58), (59) have the well-known

form (not understood, however, in its real meaning, within the conventional quantum mechanics):

165

D
D
E = hn  ,                                                                     (62)

p = 

 = hk  , or l  = 

 ,                                                          (63)

h
l

h
p

where n  = 1/(D
t)|x = const is the internal, quantum-beat frequency of transitions between realisations of the
essentially  quantum  system,  l   =  (D x)|t =  const  is  its  de  Broglie  wavelength,  and  k  =  1/l   is  the
corresponding ‘wave vector’ (in that way one obtains, in particular, the realistic interpretation of the de

Broglie wave as the emerging, complex-dynamical space structure of a quantum object) [1-4,12,13].

Both the simplest, quantum-mechanical and general manifestations of the complexity development

law,  eqs.  (57)-(63),  show  that  the  interaction-driven  transformation  of  dynamical  information  into

entropy, constituting the physical essence of any ‘information processing’, is indistinguishable from a

structure  emergence  process,  where  the  appearing  structures  realise  the  final  complexity  form  of

(dynamical) entropy, but are usually taken in the unitary science paradigm as empirical expressions of

dimensionless  ‘bits’  of  subjectively  defined  and  arbitrarily  measured  ‘information’.  The  universal

expression of the complexity conservation and transformation law, determining both structure emergence

and  information  processing,  is  obtained  from  the  differential  form  of  the  universal  symmetry  of

complexity, eq. (56b), and the above energy definition as a universal measure of dynamical complexity,
eq. (58). Dividing eq. (56b), expressed in units of action, by D

t at x = const, we get

D A
t

D A
D x

 (cid:239)

 Ł

 ł

 (cid:239) x = const + H 

x , 

t =  const, t   = 0 ,                                       (64)

where the Hamiltonian, H = H(x,p,t),  considered  as  a  function  of  emerging  space  configuration  (or
‘generalised coordinate’) x, momentum p = (D A/D x)|t = const, and time t, just expresses the implemented,
entropy-like form of differential complexity, H = (D S/D
t)|x = const (S is expressed in units of action here).
In agreement with eq. (60a), the Hamiltonian can also be expressed through the system Lagrangian that

depends canonically on coordinate, time, and velocity (rather than momentum):

H = pv -L .                                                                 (60b)

The obtained eq. (64) is the universal extension of the Hamilton-Jacobi equation known from
classical mechanics (e. g. [138]), but now valid for any, always complex-dynamical process of structure
creation and dynamical information transformation into entropy [1]. Among the essential differences of the
extended version, eq. (64), from the conventional Hamilton-Jacobi equation we emphasize the causally
complete, complex-dynamical interpretation of action, based on the unreduced analysis of the underlying
essentially nonlinear, dynamically multivalued interaction (sections 3, 4) and including the emergent
quantization of all participating quantities. It is important also that the solution of eq. (64) or any its
equivalent  form  (see  below)  is  to  be  found  by  the  same  unreduced,  universal  analysis  which  leads

inevitably to the dynamically multivalued entanglement at a new, emerging level of structure expressed by

the causally probabilistic general solution, eq. (24) (section 3.3), and describing fundamentally uncertain,

but also permanently developing, creative process of complex-dynamical ‘computation’ (sections 7.3, 8).

166

D
(cid:231)
(cid:230)
(cid:247)
(cid:246)
As explained above, the universal conservation (symmetry) of complexity has two inseparable

aspects. One of them is the permanence itself of the total, unreduced dynamic complexity that can only be

attained through equal by modulus, but opposite in sign changes of dynamical information and dynamical

entropy, realising thus the exact transformation between these two forms of complexity just directly

expressed by eq. (64). The second aspect concerns the unreduced interaction mechanism underlying this

universal evolution law, i. e. the dynamically multivalued entanglement between the interacting system

components (section 4), which consistently explains why the number of chaotically changing realisations,

and thus complexity-entropy, can only grow in any real (interaction) process. One has here the causal,

rigorously derived and physically transparent mechanism of the inevitable complexity development and its

irreversible, well-defined direction from diminishing information to growing entropy that can be formally

expressed by the following condition added to eq. (64):

or

D A
t

 (cid:239) x = const < 0,                                                          (65a)

E, H 

x , 

 Ł

D A
D x

 (cid:239)

 ł

t =  const, t   > 0  .                                              (65b)

We see that the generalised entropy growth law can be universally expressed as positive definitness of the

generalised Hamiltonian or total energy-mass, eq. (65b), which provides a new insight into this ‘well-

established’ (but poorly understood) law of fundamental physics. The ‘natural’ condition of positive value

of the ordinary, ‘relativistic’ energy-mass of a particle or body obtains now a rigorous foundation that

reveals the internally chaotic, multivalued interaction dynamics as the universal origin of mass [1-4,11-13]

which, among other important consequences, makes unnecessary any resource-consuming search for an

artificially  invented,  mechanistic  source  of  mass  in  the  form  of  an  additional  entity  (‘Higgs

particles/fields’). Moreover, both the causal definition of energy, intrinsically equivalent to mass, and the

condition of its positivity as the universal expression of the generalised entropy growth are automatically

extended now to any system and complexity level. We emphasize that this latter condition, eqs. (65), is

rigorously  and  universally  justified  by  the  multivalued  interaction  dynamics  (sections  3,  4),  as  it  is
explained above. The resulting natural unification of the extended energy conservation and entropy growth
laws within the universal symmetry of complexity obtains now its convenient formal expression in eqs.
(64), (65) revealing the true, qualitatively extended meaning of the ‘well-known’ quantities and relations
mechanistically postulated in the conventional science.

The dynamical expression of the universal entropy growth law by eq. (65a) can also be interpreted,
in agreement with ‘intuitive’, empirically based postulates of the conventional science, as unambiguous,
consistently derived direction of the causal time flow, or ‘time arrow’: time unceasingly grows, or any
system  inevitably  evolves,  only  in  the  direction  of  decreasing  dynamical  information  and  increasing

entropy, corresponding to both visible structure degradation and creation, which means that complex-

dynamical (multivalued) transformation of the folded, informational complexity form into its explicit form

of entropy is the single possible, omnipresent way of existence of anything. It is remarkable also that this

167

D
(cid:231)
(cid:230)
(cid:247)
(cid:246)
apparent asymmetry of the time flow, absolutely necessary for any real entity existence and development,

constitutes itself a part of the encompassing universal symmetry of complexity, eq. (64), so that the true

origin and purpose of the ‘asymmetric’ direction of time is but expression and preservation of that global

symmetry of complexity. The unified evolution law of eqs. (64), (65) implies that it is the Hamiltonian

function that actually provides the exact ‘entropy growth rate’ expressed by the action time derivative with

the negative sign and physically determined by the specifically, locally configured balance of the universal

symmetry  of  complexity  (the  dynamic  information  ‘wants’  to  be  unfolded  into  new  entropy,  but  the

already existing structures ‘resist’), rather than by any skewed ‘principle of extremum’ helplessly sought

for by the unitary theory of complexity and dynamical systems (see also the end of this section). The

suitable expression for the Hamiltonian results from the same multivalued dynamics analysis, involving

derivation of the generalised dispersion relation (see refs. [1,2,12,13] for further details).

If the system is in a state of global motion (p „

 0), then the condition of eq. (65b) can be further

specified. Indeed, the system Lagrangian, equal to the total time derivative of action, eq. (61), expresses

the temporal rate of action change ‘in the moving frame’ of the global system motion and should be

negative, L < 0, as follows from the generalised entropy growth law. This means, according to eqs. (60),

that

E, H 

x , 

 Ł

D A
D x

 (cid:239)

 ł

t =  const, t   > pv > 0  .                                           (65c)

Since the energy pv here expresses the energy of global system motion (see also [1-3,12,13]), the latter
condition means simply that practically any real system (interaction process) possesses, in addition to this

global motion part, a positive component of the total energy corresponding to the rest energy-mass and

given by the temporal rate of action change (with the negative sign) in the process of irregular system

wandering,  or  ‘random  walk’,  around  its  averaged,  global  motion.  In  other  words,  this  means  that,

irrespective of its state of motion, the system preserves its minimum, intrinsic identity in the ‘rest frame’,

expressed by the finite, positive complexity (multivalued chaoticity) in the form of its rest energy-mass.
Since E > E0 = m0c2, where E0 is the rest energy of the globally moving system with the total energy E,
and p = mv for a large enough class of motions [1-3,12,13], it becomes clear that the condition of eq.
(65c), expressing the generalised entropy growth law, is equivalent to the basic relativistic limitation v < c,
which reveals the deep complex-dynamical origin of relativistic effects [1,12,13] simply postulated in the
form of abstract ‘principles’ and rules in the canonical interpretation.

The relation between the dynamical entropy growth law and causally extended relativity can be

further developed, if we rewrite eq. (60a), using eqs. (58) and (61), as

D A
t

D A
t

  = 

 (cid:239) x = const + pv ,                                                      (60c)

which is none other than the standard expression of the total derivative through partial derivatives (see also
eq.  (59)).  Taking  into  account  the  fact  that  D A = - |D A| < 0, while n
t)|x =  const  are
realisation change frequencies determining the ‘velocity of time flow’ in the ‘moving frame’ with respect to

t, n  = 1/(D

0 = 1/D

itself  (‘intrinsic’  time  flow)  and  in  the  ‘rest  frame’  respectively,  we  see  that  the  observed  time  flow

168

(cid:231)
(cid:230)
(cid:247)
(cid:246)
D
D
causally (dynamically) slows down in the ‘moving frame’ with respect to the ‘rest frame’ (i. e. the intrinsic

time of the globally moving interaction processes goes slower than the one for processes globally at rest)

because in a globally moving ‘frame’ (interaction process) a proportion, growing with the global motion

velocity, of the purely random energy reservoir of rest energy-mass is inevitably spent for the global

system motion [1,2,12,13], in addition to its purely regular component (‘one cannot obtain a useful result

without some losses’):

n

0 = n  - 

pv
|D A|

v
  = n  - 
l

  = n  - n gl , n

0 < n  ,                                          (65d)

where n gl = v/l  is the average frequency of system realisation change within the global (averaged) system
motion and l  = |D A|/p  is the emerging characteristic length of the global motion. For the lowest, quantum
levels of complexity, |D A| = h is Planck's constant and l  = h/p is the de Broglie wavelength (revealing
thus  its  causal  origin  [1,2]).  This  relation  can  be  further  transformed  [1,2,12,13]  into  the  standard

expression  of  the  effect  of  ‘relativistic  time  retardation’  that  now  obtains,  however,  a  considerably
extended, causally substantiated (realistic) and complex-dynamical meaning which naturally unifies not

only quantum and relativistic effects, but also the dynamical entropy growth law within a single, universal

symmetry of unreduced dynamic complexity (in particular, the relativity effects, including those of the

extended general relativity, are obtained, as in eq. (65d), for arbitrary systems and levels of complexity,

If  the  system  is  isolated,  so  that  its  energy  E = - (D A/D

t)|x =  const  remains  constant,  then  the
universal complexity transformation law, eq. (64), takes a reduced form that does not contain explicit

time and space [1]).

dependence on time:

H 

x , 

 Ł

D A
D x

 (cid:239)

 ł

t =  const  = E .                                                     (66)

Note, however, that contrary to the conventional science version of this equation, the real physical time,

determined by the unceasing change of explicitly obtained realisations, reappears in the general solution of

eq. (66), in agreement with eq. (58) applied at the new sublevel of complexity, where it can be written as

t  = - 

 ,                                                                (67a)

D A
|D V|

|D V| being the EP difference between the neighbouring realisations found from eq. (66) (see eq. (25c)) and
D A the corresponding action (complexity) increment. The total discrete time flow at the corresponding
complexity level consists from the individual time increments (D

t)i:

t - t0 = (cid:229)

 (D

i

t)i = - (cid:229)

 

D Ai
|D V|i

 

i

  .                                                (67b)

It can be seen from here that the fractal structure of realisations (section 4.4) determines, through |D V|i and
D Ai, the fractal structure of time flow.

169

(cid:231)
(cid:230)
(cid:247)
(cid:246)
D
The universal evolution equation of a newly created structure, eq. (64), is formulated in terms of

action-complexity  change  between  ‘localised’  system  states,  each  of  them  corresponding  to  a  fully

developed realisation. However, the system also spends a part of its time in transitions between those

regular realisations occurring through a specific, intermediate realisation-state of quasi-free, disentangled

and delocalised system components, forming the physically real system ‘wavefunction’, or ‘distribution

function’ (section 4.2) [1,4,11-13]. Therefore the ‘localised’ type of description of eq. (64) should be

completed  by  the  related  dual,  ‘delocalised’  equation  for  the  generalised  wavefunction  (distribution
function) Y (x,t) describing system behaviour in its qualitatively different state during transition between
the regular (localised) realisations. The system in the state of wavefunction as if transiently returns to its

state at the beginning of its interaction process, when the system complexity (at the current level) had the

form of dynamical information, contrary to its transformation into the dynamic entropy in the developed-

interaction state of regular realisation.

Since the integral complexity measures (number of system realisations) multiply for the adjacent
sublevels, the total complexity of the realisation change process, or ‘wave action’ AY , can be presented as

the product of its wavefunction (lower sublevel, or dynamical information) and action expressing actually

developed complexity form of the well-structured realisations (higher sublevel, or dynamical entropy),
AY  = AY
  [1,4,11-13]. The total system complexity estimated by the logarithm of realisation number takes
thus the proper form of the sum of information and entropy. It is advisable then to consider the change of

the wave action during one cycle of reduction-extension (consecutive realisation change) of the considered

interaction process. Since the total system complexity remains unchanged and physically the system

returns, after a cycle, to its previous state, the wave action increment equals to zero:

or

[1,4,12,13]).

D AY  = AD

Y

 + Y

D A = 0 ,                                                    (68a)

D A = -A0 

Y

Y

 

 ,                                                             (68b)

where A0 is the characteristic action value of the emerging realisation dynamics (it may include also a
numerical coefficient accounting for the undular nature of the wavefunction, for certain complexity levels

The obtained relation, eq. (68b), is the generalised, causal quantization relation for any complex
(multivalued) dynamics taking the form of the standard, but now causally explained ‘quantization rules’ at
the  level  of  quantum-mechanical  behaviour  (consistently  derived  as  quantum  beat  dynamics  in  our
approach, section 4.6.1). The realistic physical meaning of the quantization relation of eqs. (68) is that it
describes  the  cycle  of  the  real,  qualitative  system  transformation  from  the  ‘extended’,  disentangled,
‘informational’ form of the generalised wavefunction to the localised, entangled, entropy-like (structural,
or spatial) form of a regular realisation and back, which is the elementary cycle of consecutive realisation
change  in  the  multivalued  interaction  dynamics.  This  physically  real  system  transformation  during

realisation change is replaced in the conventional, dynamically single-valued quantum mechanics and field

theory by formally postulated quantization rules and related abstract ‘operators of creation and annihilation’

170

D
of postulated (and ill-defined) localised states, or ‘particles’, obtained as if from nothing, which is the

unitary,  linear  imitation  of  the  dynamically  multivalued  entanglement  and  disentanglement  of  the

unreduced, essentially nonlinear interaction process (sections 3, 4) [1], whereas the conventional ‘science

of complexity’ or ‘information theory’, operating at higher complexity levels, cannot use this simplified

construction of the unitary quantum theory and therefore do not consider any explicit object appearance

and disappearance in the course of interaction at all.

The dual, wavefunctional form of the universal complexity transformation law, eq. (64), is now

obtained  by  substitution  of  the  causal  quantization  rule,  eq.  (68b),  into  eq.  (64),  which  gives  the

generalised Schrödinger equation (extending its causal derivation for quantum complexity levels to any

higher level of complexity [1,4,12,13]):

Y

t

 (cid:239) x = const +  ^H  

x ,  

 (cid:239)

t =  const, t 

 Ł

D x

Y

 ł

  = 0 ,                                      (69)

where the ‘operator’ form, ^H, of the system Hamiltonian is obtained from the ordinary Hamiltonian of eq.
(64) with the help of the above quantization rule, eq. (68b), followed by multiplication by Y
 (we have also
included the constant factor 1/A0 in the new Hamiltonian definition). As a result, the operator Hamiltonian
is a function of the discrete analogue, (D
/D x)|t = const, of the partial derivative operator from the standard
quantum mechanics (¶ /¶ x), causally originating now from the generalised momentum definition of eq.
(59) in combination with the dynamical quantization of eqs. (68). Similar to the conventional quantization,

higher powers of this operator correspond to higher derivatives (rather than to higher powers of the first

derivative), which can be explained by the properties of the underlying reduction-extension (realisation

change) process, together with the proper ‘order’ of operators (where every real ‘annihilation’ of an entity

can only follow, but not precede, its creation) [1]. The usual, quasi-continuous form of the universal

Schrödinger equation (and the corresponding form of the generalised Hamilton-Jacobi equation for action)

can be justified in cases of sufficiently ‘fine-grained’ (quasi-uniform) structure of the emerging entities

flux on the real (observed) scale of the problem:

Y
¶ t  +  ^H    Ł

x ,  

¶ x ,  t  

 ł

Y

  = 0 .                                                   (70)

The two dually related forms of the universal complex-dynamical evolution equation, eqs. (64),
(68)-(70), describing (together with the accompanying relations of eqs. (58), (59), (65)-(67)) the way of
existence  and  development  of  any  system  with  interaction,  can  be  called  the  universal  Hamilton-
Schrödinger formalism of the unreduced science of complexity, where the universal method of finding the
causally complete, dynamically multivalued problem solution (sections 3, 4) at each naturally emerging
complexity level is actually included in the problem formulation. In particular, we can see now that the
accepted quite general form of the initial problem expression (see eqs. (1)-(5) from section 3.1) also

corresponds to the universal Hamilton-Schrödinger equation with the explicitly designated interaction

potential, even though we did not make any such assumption at the beginning of our analysis.

171

D
D
(cid:231)
(cid:230)
(cid:247)
(cid:246)
D
¶
(cid:230)
(cid:246)
¶
As  mentioned  above,  the  universal  symmetry  of  complexity,  representing  the  generalised

expression of the unreduced development of any interaction process, naturally constitutes the unified,

causal extension of all the conventional ‘fundamental principles’ and ‘conservation laws’. For this reason,

the  universal  evolution  equations,  eqs.  (64),  (69),  being  the  unified  mathematical  expression  of  the

universal symmetry of complexity, should represent the single dynamical equation of the universal science

of  complexity  which  is  the  unified,  causally  explained  extension  of  all  correct  equations  of  the

conventional science (usually accepted by way of only empirically justified, formal postulation of an

abstract mathematical relation). Whereas the detailed confirmation of this statement may come from various

comparisons of our unified equations with the known fundamental constructions of the conventional

science, the formal correspondence of the universal Hamilton-Schrödinger formalism with practically any

correct, ‘linear’ or ‘nonlinear’, dynamical equation can be directly seen from eqs. (64) and (69). Thus, if

we use the following expansion of the Hamiltonian into power series of its arguments:

¶ A

¶ x  , t   = (cid:229)

 ł

H  Ł

x, 

 

m,n

hmn(x,t )[A(x)]m

n

¶ A
¶ x

 ł

 Ł

  ,                                     (71)

where  hmn(x,t )  are  the  known  expansion  coefficients,  then  the  generalised  Hamilton-Jacobi  and
Schrödinger equations will take the form

 + (cid:229)

¶ A
¶ t

 

m,n

hmn(x,t )[A(x)]m

n

¶ A
¶ x

 ł

 Ł

 = 0                                            (72)

and

 + (cid:229)

Y
¶ t

 

n> 0,m

hmn(x,t )[Y (x)]m 

hm0(x,t )[Y (x)]m + 1

 = 0  ,                       (73)

¶ nY

¶ xn  + (cid:229)

m

respectively. It is not difficult to see that the majority of model ‘evolution equations’, ‘master equations’,

equations for ‘order parameter’, ‘nonlinear’, ‘wave’ equations and other fundamental dynamical equations

from  the  conventional  science  (see  e.  g.  [340])  which  have  poor  physical  explanations  and  remain

separated within it, can now be directly classified as particular cases of eqs. (72), (73) provided with a
well-specified, realistic interpretation; others can be transformed into a suitable form.

An  equivalent,  ‘Lagrangian’  formulation  of  the  complex  interaction  dynamics,  extending  the
corresponding Lagrange method from the classical (dynamically single-valued) mechanics [138], can be
obtained by discrete integration of the Lagrangian definition of eq. (61), giving the expression for the
integral action-complexity:

A(x,t) = 

t´  ,                                                         (74)

where the sum is taken over all consecutive realisation-trajectories (or real ‘paths’) ´
initial realisation ´

 between certain
in and the current realisation-trajectory ´ curr(x,t) determining the current configuration,

´ curr(x,t)
L´

´

 = ´

in

172

(cid:230)
(cid:246)
(cid:230)
(cid:246)
(cid:230)
(cid:246)
¶
(cid:229)
D
or generalised position, of the system. We obtain the causal substantiation and extension of the canonical

‘least action principle’, unifying it with the extended ‘entropy growth law’ and ‘energy/mass conservation
law’ into the universal symmetry of complexity. Indeed, the causally extended action A(x,t) of eq. (74)

permanently decreases in the course of system jumps between its realisations along averaged trajectory

because action is the expression of dynamical information decreasing at the expense of growing dynamical

entropy, in order to ensure conservation of their sum, the total dynamic complexity (represented, for

example,  by  the  total  energy  of  a  closed  system).  Moreover,  system  jumps  along  trajectory  occur

probabilistically,  and  therefore  the  real  trajectory  is  unceasingly  and  chaotically  ‘shifted’  within  its

averaged, smeared trace, which provides causal, realistic extension for the idea of ‘virtual’ (imaginary)

trajectories  used  in  the  formulation  of  the  classical  least  action  principle  [138].  It  is  the  symmetry

(conservation) of complexity that determines real, chaotic trajectory fluctuations in the real interaction

processes, as opposed to the usual formal, inexplicable minimisation of the abstract action function with

respect to imaginary, infinitesimal trajectory variation around its allegedly ‘real’, but unrealistically smooth

and ‘infinitely thin’, version.

Note  that  the  extended  version  of  Lagrangian  approach  is  formally  as  universal  as  the  above

Hamilton-Schrödinger formalism, and actually they constitute together related aspects/formulations of the

unified description of complex (multivalued) system dynamics that can be called the universal Hamilton-

Lagrange-Schrödinger formalism. However, the Lagrangian version of this unified formalism is oriented

to systems with more localised, not too smeared trajectory/configuration (SOC type of complex dynamics,

section 4.5.1), while the Hamilton-Schrödinger description is more convenient in the case of strongly

chaotic, ‘distributed’ kind of complex dynamics (uniform chaos regime, section 4.5.2), which explains, in

particular, why we do not develop here, in the study of essentially distributed system behaviour, the least

action principle up to the differential form of dynamical equations (the so-called Lagrange equations, such

as  Newton's  second  law,  which  replace  the  Hamilton-Jacobi  equation  from  the  ‘nonlocal’  problem

formulation). Here again, we obtain the causally complete, realistic explanation of the difference between

the canonical approaches of Hamilton and Lagrange in terms of the underlying multivalued dynamics that

naturally remains hidden within the conventional, dynamically single-valued science approach.

The ‘wavefunctional’ version of the Lagrangian approach also exists and takes the form of the
modified and generalised, complex-dynamical version of the conventional ‘Feynman path integrals’ [1]. It
is  obtained  by  using  the  causal  quantization  rule,  eq.  (68b),  in  the  above  expression  for  the  action-
complexity,  eq.  (74),  which  gives  the  following  relation  between  the  generalised  wavefunction
(distribution function) as a distributed system feature and localised system jumps between realisations
expressed by its Lagrangian and the intrinsic time increments:

Y (x,t) = - 

Y
0
A 0

  

´ curr(x,t)

´

 = ´

in

D A´   = - 

Y
0
A 0

  

´ curr(x,t)
L´

´

 = ´

in

t´   ,                                     (75)

where Y
0 and A0 are characteristic values. Note the essential difference from the exponential function
under summation (integral) in the canonical path integrals and related methods of ‘mathematical physics’,

173

(cid:229)
(cid:229)
D
which is a particular manifestation of the ‘false exponential dependence’ phenomenon in the unitary

science  (cf.  sections  5.1,  6)  [1],  resulting  from  the  incorrect  extension  of  a  perturbation  theory

approximation beyond the limits of its validity, whereas in reality one deals with a linear or close power-

law dependence (which is none other than the integral version of the universal quantization rule of the

unreduced interaction dynamics, eqs. (68)). Other differences from the unitary version are the dynamically

discrete (quantized), rather than quasi-continuous or formally discrete, structure and physically real, rather

than ‘virtual’ and abstract, character of the actual system wandering among different ‘paths’ (realisations).

The unitary version refers, by definition, to a single realisation, which explains its deficiency.

We shall not further develop here the details of the extended Lagrange version, eqs. (74), (75), of

the universal formalism of the unreduced science of complexity because in this paper we consider the

applications, such as essentially quantum machines, where system dynamics is basically nonlocal and

uniformly chaotic, so that the Hamilton-Schrödinger version, eqs. (64)-(73), of the universal formalism

usually  appears  to  be  more  convenient.  Let  us  emphasize  once  more  that  the  unity  of  all  the  related

expressions  of  the  universal  complexity  development  law  comes  from  the  underlying  symmetry  of

complexity,  maintained  dynamically  within  any  system  (interaction  process)  by  the  unceasing

transformation of dynamical information into entropy, eqs. (56). Dynamical discreteness (quantization,

uncertainty) and causal randomness (indeterminacy) are universal and unavoidable features of any real

system (interaction process), but their relative magnitude and character vary considerably for different

complexity levels. At the lowest, quantum levels of dynamics we have universally determined quantization
(the complexity/information/entropy quantum D A is always equal to h, Planck's constant) with relatively
big  quanta  and  strong  (uniform/global)  chaoticity,  while  most  simple  (externally  ‘regular’)  cases  of

classical behaviour correspond to non-universal and relatively small magnitudes of both quantization and

chaoticity.

The universal symmetry of complexity, substantiated and quantified in this section, should be

distinguished from various recent attempts, always performed within the unchanged, unitary science

paradigm (postulated, dynamically single-valued and abstract imitations of multivalued reality), to guess a

new, additional ‘principle of nature’ that could explain the behaviour of special, ‘complex’ or ‘far-from-

equilibrium’  systems,  desirably  in  terms  of  most  popular  substitutes,  such  as  unitary  (arithmetical)
‘information’ or ‘complexity’. Apart from the false ‘information conservation law’ invented in that way (e.
g. [327,333,335]) and already discussed above in this section, we can mention various versions of equally
illusive ‘fourth law of thermodynamics’ that vary arbitrarily between the ‘law of fastest possible entropy
(complexity) growth’ in nonequilibrium systems, including fastest possible free-space invasion by greedy
‘autonomous agents’ [336], and the opposite laws of ‘informational entropy’/complexity decrease as a
result of system ‘self-organisation’ [299,341] or its ‘slowest possible growth’ [342-344], or else obscure
‘laws of chaos’ [130,226,241,266] based on a ‘plausible’ philosophy, but actually formally postulated for
abstract  (and  very  limited)  mathematical  ‘models’,  etc.  (see  also  [345,346]  as  recent  examples  of

conventional science limitations in the subject). As already noted above, in reality the system always

transforms qualitatively (from dynamical information into entropy) its quantitatively unchanged complexity

174

in an optimal, rather than extreme, way determined mathematically by the Hamiltonian function (see

especially  eqs.  (64),  (65))  and  realising  a  sort  of  probabilistic  balance  (=  symmetry!)  between  the

generalised potential of dynamical information, as if trying to unfold ‘as quickly as possible’ under the

driving interaction influence, and the generalised inertia of dynamical entropy of already existing/created

structures, as if resisting ‘as much as they can’ to further novelties (the effects of finite compressibility,

friction, ‘dissipativity’, etc. within the same interaction process).

Contrary to the unitary guesses, always inconsistently ‘skewed’ and incomplete, the unreduced,

really universal and totally realistic law of nature, the dynamical symmetry of complexity, eqs. (56)-(75),

is consistently derived within the nonperturbative, multivalued interaction analysis (sections 3-5) and is

actually equivalent to the unified, unreduced description of any system dynamics, i. e. any real world

dynamics is the omnipresent symmetry, and not only ‘is described by’, or follows from, a formal ‘law of

symmetry’. Instead of inserting artificial entities and new ‘principles’, actually always inconsistently

modifying the well-established, canonical laws, the symmetry of complexity just takes into account the

dynamic  multivaluedness  of  really  existing  system  realisations  and  thus  provides  the  truly  causal

explanation for the ‘established’ laws of the conventional science, but now liberated from the inevitable

contradictions and defects of their unitary versions. In the following sections we show in more detail how

the obtained essential advance in understanding of fundamental evolution laws leads to qualitative change

in the direction and efficiency of practical problem solution.

7.2.  Computation  as  complexity  conservation
by  transformation  of  information  into  entropy
and  its  particular  features  at  the  level  of  micro-machine  dynamics

Any computation or ‘information processing’ is physically realised as a series of interactions and

can therefore be described in terms of the universal symmetry (conservation) of complexity maintained by

transformation of dynamical information into entropy (section 7.1). It is important to understand that it is

the latter form of dynamic complexity, the dynamical entropy, that represents physical, always intrinsically

random (dynamically multivalued) implementation of ‘bits’ of the conventional, abstract ‘information’,
whereas our dynamical information is the ‘hidden’, potential state of dynamic complexity at the very
beginning of the corresponding interaction process, generalising the conventional ‘potential energy’. This
nontrivial internal structure of any computation reveals its meaning and character as unceasing series of
hierarchically ordered qualitative changes, or events (cf. section 2(i)), causally random in their spatial
order and irreversible in time, in contrast to the conventional, unitary picture of computation (information
processing) showing it as a reversible and nondissipative, in principle, manipulation with totally controlled
(regular) carriers of abstract, pre-existing ‘bits’ of the canonical, senseless ‘information’. This unitary
imitation of computation includes various ‘physical’ theories of information pretending to be especially

close  to  reality  (e.  g.  [37,80,113,150,300-306,310,321,330-336]),  but  actually  reduced  to  ambiguous

speculations around the same, unitary and abstract theory involving various ‘mind games’, ‘gedanken

experiments’, and unrealistic, meaningless assumptions (such as ‘infinitely slow’ information processing).

175

The unitary theory of information and computation is certainly inspired by operation of the usual,

classical and apparently regular, computers. In terms of the unreduced, complex-dynamical (multivalued)

theory  of  computation,  this  case  corresponds  to  the  self-organisation  limiting  regime  of  multivalued

dynamics  (section  4.5.1),  which  explains  the  visible  regularity  of  usual  computers,  but  leaves  the

irreducible place for the internal randomness and irreversibility. These latter properties appear in the form

of thermal dissipation (usually having a rather low, but finite, limited from below level) and occasional

‘malfunction’, such as unexpected ‘halt’ or ‘cycling’ (in addition to ‘algorithmic’ instabilities, such as

catastrophic error accumulation processes). Note that it is the dynamically multivalued, composite structure

of every physical ‘bit’ realisation in the conventional computer that determines both its (small) intrinsic

randomness  and relative stability with respect to various small (e. g. thermal) perturbations and thus
ensures the almost unitary (regular) mode of its operation.*) Therefore the detailed analysis of conceptual
and experimental structure of the usual computer operation shows that its apparent ‘unitarity’ is basically

illusive, even though this illusion does have a rational basis. Another essential part of this illusion is

related to the fact that many explicitly complex (dynamically multivalued), creative actions indispensable

for actual, useful operation of a usual computer, including its ‘programming’, control and elimination of

dynamical  halts  at  all  levels,  are  ‘tacitly’  inserted  by  the  effectively  strong  interaction  with  another,

explicitly chaotic (multivalued) ‘computing system’, the human brain (see also below).

Each dimensionless ‘bit’ of the abstract unitary ‘information’ is physically realised in the usual

computer as a multivalued dynamical regime (interaction process) of the SOC type characterised by certain
finite, classically large value (or ‘quantum’) of complexity-action, D A >> h, needed to change, with a high
enough  probability,  the  global bit state (i. e. to change ‘0’ to ‘1’ or the contrary) with the help of an

‘external’, higher-level interaction. The classical bit state in the usual, pseudo-unitary computer is highly

(but not infinitely!) stable due to its physical composition of many sufficiently independent, lower-level

components  (subsystems)  with  dynamically  random  behaviour,  such  as  atoms,  which  reduces  the

probability of their simultaneous random (‘spontaneous’) ‘switch’/motion in one direction to exponentially
small values.#) This mechanism of the (relative) classical computer stability is quite similar, and even
directly related to, the mechanism of dynamic formation of elementary classical, localised state in the form

of a bound state of two quantum particles (sections 4.7, 5.3(C)). If, however, the interaction between
different classical bit states becomes comparable with the characteristic external influence necessary for the
individual bit switch, then the quasi-uniform chaos regime (section 4.5.2) reappears at the level of global
system  dynamics  and  one  obtains  a  qualitatively  different,  explicitly  chaotic  (multivalued)  type  of
‘computation’ by a classical system, actually realised in neural networks (see below).

*) In other words, if you want to obtain the maximum possible, almost total regularity, you should accept a small intrinsic
irregularity constituting the very mechanism of, and the inevitable payment for, that almost complete regularity. This rather
natural consequence of the entropy growth law is somehow ‘lost’ in the conventional theory of systems, computation and
control which assumes a major possibility of totally ‘coherent’, regular processes, where one may deal only with external
irregularities that can be reduced to any desired level by monitoring system interaction with the environment.
#) Under the simplest assumption, the negative argument of the exponential function here is proportional to the number of
subunits to the power around unity. A more complicated structure of interactions between elements, their association in a
hierarchy of groups can lead to other particular forms of the exponential smallness in question. However, the main feature of
interest remains unchanged: the negative argument of the exponential function is large by its absolute value for large number
of elements, and drops to order unity (thus eliminating the exponent) when the number of elements falls down to one.

176

In  that  way  the  intrinsic  nonunitarity  of  any  computation  becomes  more  evident  in  cases  of

explicitly complex (multivalued) dynamics of the computing system, such as any essentially quantum

dynamics  (quantum  computers)  or  explicitly  chaotic  classical  dynamics  (brain,  neural  networks).  In

particular, the specific properties of quantum computation and information processing are determined by

the characteristic features of the corresponding complexity levels (section 5). As a result, one obtains such

unique  properties  of  quantum  computation  as  the  universally  fixed  and  relatively  big  value  of  the

dynamical information quantum (or real ‘quantum bit’), equal to Planck's constant h, or the irreducible and

relatively big magnitude of dynamical randomness at any step of quantum system dynamics that can be

reduced and partially ‘controlled’ only after transition to the next, superior level of complexity known as

classical (permanently localised) dynamics (section 7.1), contrary to the basically wrong, mechanistically

applied unitary-science idea of ‘quantum control of quantum systems’ [90-107].

It is evident that these particular features and limitations of the real quantum system dynamics are

related to its causally complete description as the lowest levels of complex world dynamics, so that the

natural diversity of the intrinsically multivalued dynamics is reduced to its absolute minimum at the level of

essentially quantum behaviour (which also explains its peculiar, apparently ‘exotic’ properties). This result

can  be  extended  to  a  universally  applicable  consequence  of  the  complexity  conservation  law  called

complexity correspondence principle (see also sections 5.2.2, 7.1) [1]. It states that any system cannot

correctly simulate/reproduce the behaviour of any other system whose unreduced dynamic complexity is

greater  than  the  same  quantity  for  the  simulating  system,  or  in  other  words,  the  (effective)  dynamic
complexity of the (correct) simulator should be greater than the simulated system/behaviour complexity.(cid:176) )
Any violation of this rule enters in direct contradiction with the universally confirmed and rigorously

substantiated complexity conservation law (section 7.1). The relative error of imperfect, low-complexity

simulation of a higher-complexity behaviour is determined by the relative complexity difference between

the two systems.

The  most  evident  manifestation  of  the  complexity  correspondence  principle  just  refers  to

possibilities of real quantum computation in simulation of other system behaviour. Namely, it is rigorously

proved now that any essentially quantum system/behaviour could properly simulate only other essentially

quantum behaviour (with lower complexity), but definitely not any higher-level behaviour, starting already
from  elementary  classical  systems.  According  to  the  above  estimate,  the  relative  error  in  quantum
simulation of classical behaviour will be close to unity, which has a transparent physical interpretation: the
essentially quantum behaviour is qualitatively different from classical behaviour by definition, since
quantum behaviour is irreducibly nonlocal and coarse-grained, while an elementary classical system is
permanently localised (around its classical trajectory) and fine-grained. In other words, the irreducible

(cid:176) ) Taking into account the real dynamics of the computation process, one can advance even a stronger version of the same
principle stating that in practice the effective complexity of a correct computation process should be at least one complexity
level higher than the simulated system complexity. It is a consequence of the generalised entropy growth law stating that one
can never avoid having a finite quantity of useless work and wasted resources. In the case of computation, one needs to have
some ‘auxiliary’ actions (like energy dissipation or intermediate result memorisation) that do not directly contribute to the
reproduction of the simulated system properties, but are necessary for realisation of the computation process. This amplified
version of the complexity correspondence rule implies, for example, that one can simulate an essentially quantum behaviour
starting only from quantum-and-classical (or hybrid), rather than purely quantum computation level (see also below).

177

quantum nonlocality prevents any reproduction of classical trajectory localisation (which is a manifestation

of a considerably higher complexity of classical behaviour, contrary to what one could imagine within the
unitary approach and its mechanistic ‘intuition’).*)

This fundamentally substantiated and realistically explained result of the universal science of

complexity shows that the opposite statement of the unitary theory of quantum computation, insisting upon

‘universality’ of (unitary) quantum computation (see e. g. [21,25,46,58,64,67,103,157,158,177-181]), is

strictly wrong. The evident falsification of reality by the conventional theory of quantum computation turns

out to be especially grotesque taking into account its extremely simplified, zero-complexity (unitary)

approach which represents the fatal and artificial reduction to zero of already relatively low, but definitely

non-zero and absolutely high complexity of real quantum dynamics. In addition, the conventional quantum

computers  are  supposed  by  their  proponents  to  be  uniquely  efficient  in  solution  of  just  particularly

complicated, ‘non-computable’ problems, ‘unbreakable’ by ordinary, classical computers (which actually
possess much higher complexity than any quantum computer).#) As concerns the announced ‘successful
experimental realisations’ of conventional quantum computation, their details clearly show that they can

well be sufficiently ‘inexact’ to account for the irreducible quantum errors, but those unavoidable errors

are incorrectly presented as acceptable, ‘technical’ deficiency of ‘first’, imperfect attempts that can be

eliminated in subsequent, more involved versions. We have seen, however, that any quantum dynamics is

irreducibly ‘coarse-grained’ and random, including any possible methods of its ‘quantum control’ (this

conclusion  agrees,  by  the  way,  with  the  standard  quantum  postulates,  contrary  to  the  conventional

schemes of unitary quantum computation, see also section 2(ii)).

It is evident that the same complexity correspondence principle refers to any kind of machine (not

only ‘computers’) at any complexity level. If we apply it to arbitrary quantum machines, we immediately

come  to  the  conclusion  that  in  order  to  be  useful  for  our  real,  higher-complexity,  macroscopic  and

‘classical’ needs, quantum machines should necessarily include some essential classical elements, naturally

entangled with their essentially quantum parts. This ‘quantum-classical entanglement’ takes the form of

dynamic emergence of classical behaviour from purely quantum dynamics, being a particular case of the

*) Note that any abstract, ‘arithmetical’ calculations can also be classified as ‘classical’ type of dynamics because of their
intrinsic regularity (localisation).
#) Note that already from a general point of view the idea that unitary quantum computers (or any other computers) can solve
‘non-computable’ problems only due to their ‘exponentially high’ power looks as a basically incorrect one. Indeed, all the
obscure notions of the conventional science around ‘non-computability’, ‘nonintegrability’, and related properties show in any
case that these are manifestations of a fundamentally and qualitatively different character of the problems in question, with
respect to ‘ordinary’, much more simple, ‘computable’ or ‘integrable’ problems. It is difficult to expect therefore that such
fundamental obstacle can be surmounted just by highly (‘exponentially’) increased computation power. In order to master a
qualitatively more complicated range of problems, one should certainly introduce a qualitative, conceptual novelty in the
approach  to  their  solution  (analytical  or  numerical)  which  should  correspondingly  describe  qualitatively  new,  extended
properties  of  reality  actually  accounting  for  the  ‘non-computability’,  ‘nonintegrability’,  or  ‘non-decidability’  of  its
fundamentally simplified representation in the non-extended approach. The dynamic multivaluedness paradigm confirms this
general conclusion and specifies the conceptual novelty hidden behind the conventional ‘non-computability’ and the other
‘difficulties’ as the dynamically  multivalued,  self-developing  entanglement  of  the  interacting  entities  within  any  system,
behaviour,  or  phenomenon  (sections  3-5).  It  is  the  unreduced  dynamic  complexity  of  a  problem  (and  the  real  system  it
describes) that constitutes the true, universal and causal, origin of all the ‘irresolvable’ difficulties of the unitary problem
reduction.  The  effective  complexity  correspondence  between  a  problem  and  the  totality  of  tools  applied  for  its  solution
(including the explicitly man-made, ‘analytical’ parts) also becomes thus universally and transparently justified by the ensuing
complexity  correspondence  principle  which  states  that  the  computation  process  complexity  should  exceed  that  of  the
computed system/behaviour.

178

next complexity level emergence in the course of autonomous complexity development process (section

7.1)  [1]  and  usually  occurring  as  formation  of  elementary  bound  state  of  several  quantum  systems

(sections  4.7,  5.3(C)).  The  intermediate,  transient  phases  of  this  irreducibly  complex-dynamical

(multivalued) transformation constitute, where they can appear, the process of ‘quantum measurement’,

now obtaining its causally complete interpretation [1,10]. The resulting system, consisting from at least

two  big  neighbouring  (groups  of)  complexity  levels,  can  be  called  quantum-and-classical,  or  hybrid

machine, irrespective of its detailed origin and function (natural, artificial, computer, generator, etc.).

Taking into account the physical structure of real material objects, we can conclude now that all the

existing structures, including living systems, operate, at their several lowest (microscopic) complexity

levels, as such hybrid machines whose irreducibly complex-dynamical (multivalued) functioning, revealed

within our unreduced interaction analysis, explains the observed unique properties of nature in general and

living organisms in particular, including their quasi-autonomous evolution and the emergent property of

intelligence  [1].  We  can  see  also  the  objective  reason  for  the  fundamental  impossibility  of  causal

understanding of natural micro-machine dynamics and any its property within the dynamically single-

valued, perturbative approximation of the conventional science (including the scholar solid-state physics,

chemistry, biology, medicine, etc.).

This actually unavoidable transition to classicality in the dynamics of any real, practically useful

‘quantum’ machine (including quantum computers) means that essentially quantum dynamics can exist

only as an integral part of a real quantum machine that will necessarily contain also essential classical

parts/stages, naturally emerging as various bound states of initially purely quantum (unbound) components

by the complex-dynamical, totally realistic interaction mechanism of (generalised) ‘quantum measurement’

[1,10] (which has nothing to do with the artificially inserted, abstract ‘decoherence’ of the conventional

theory, see sections 4.7, 5.3(C)). Therefore the real, natural or artificial, quantum machines are essentially

hybrid  devices  in  their  internal  dynamics,  which  is  quite  different  from  the  conventional  theory

expectations  with  respect  to  ‘natural’  possibility  of  essentially  quantum  machines  (also  at  higher,

macroscopic levels like e. g. in the ‘quantum brain/consciousness’ hypothesis), where the emergence of

classicality can be ‘somehow’ added as a result of ‘quantum measurement’ performed rather outside of the

proper system dynamics and remaining characteristically ‘mysterious’ in detail.

It is important also to emphasize the essential difference between this clearly specified, dynamically
multivalued character of irreducible complexity manifestations in micro-machine dynamics and various
‘guesses’ about complexity ghosts, or ‘signs’, within the unitary quantum theory (e. g. [192-195,345-
352]), based rather on empirical intuition about natural ‘quantum machines’, but actually using unitary and
highly speculative imitations of ‘complexity’ that remain fundamentally incompatible with any unreduced
complexity manifestations in natural micro-systems (section 7.1). All those unitary imitations of explicitly
complex-dynamical, irregular and diverse micro-systems, including ‘quantum neural networks’ [192,193,
347-349], ‘synthetic’ and ‘smart’ quantum structures [194,195, 348], ‘quantum biocomputers’ [352,353]

and unifying quantum ‘biologic’ principles [354], demonstrate especially grotesque, surrealistic contrast

between the general promises and particular results of the unitary, ‘exact’ science paradigm, revealing the

sheer contradiction with its own ‘criteria of truth’ and the elementary consistency demand.

179

7.3.  Universal  direction  of  system  evolution,
causal  interpretation  of  intelligence,
and  transition  to  creative  computation/production  processes

The described qualitatively new properties of real quantum machines, based on the explicitly

chaotic (dynamically multivalued) character of the driving interaction processes, change completely the

meaning itself of micro-machine operation and related concepts of their creation, use and control. As

shown above, the unitary, regular control assumed in the conventional theory is fundamentally impossible.

On  the  other  hand,  the  unreduced  complex  dynamics  has  its  own,  natural  law  and  ‘direction’  of

development corresponding, according to the universal symmetry of complexity, to the permanent growth

of complexity-entropy at the expense of the equal decrease of dynamical complexity-information (section

7.1). The unavoidable emergence of classical behaviour within the essentially quantum dynamics (in the

form of elementary bound states) is an example of such natural complexity development within the real

micro-machine.  The  details  of  complexity  development  process  depend  on  the  system  interactions

(including outside influences), in agreement with the universal formalism of the unreduced science of

complexity  (sections  3,  4,  7.1).  Therefore  the  regular  ‘programming’  and  control  of  the  unitary,

conventional machines is replaced for any explicitly complex-dynamical (multivalued) machine, including

all quantum (hybrid) machines, by the universal criterion of optimal (or desired) complexity-entropy

growth realised through the proper modification of the system interactions which should be considered,

however, only in their unreduced, dynamically multivalued (essentially nonunitary) version. One always

obtains, for that kind of machine, the explicitly coarse-grained, dynamically random system evolution,

unpredictable in details and irreversible. In return, the system possesses its own intrinsic creativity (the

capacity for self-development, or dynamic adaptability) and related exponentially high efficiency of real,

‘incoherent’, dynamically multivalued evolution (see section 7.1 for detailed estimates).

This superior efficiency of creation by unreduced complexity development with respect to its quasi-

unitary reduction within the ordinary, regular machines is the evident result of the main feature of dynamic

multivaluedness itself, explicitly appearing at the truly chaotic stages of natural interaction processes and

adding many supplementary, real and dynamically created state-possibilities to the single realisation of the
unitary operation scheme. Since the developing interaction complexity naturally forms the multitude of its
dynamically related levels with many realisations at each of them, we obtain indeed exponentially many
realisation-possibilities for the explicitly complex system instead of only one ‘linear’ realisation of the
n, where Ntot is the total number of system realisation-states, N1 is the
quasi-regular machine: Ntot = N1
average number (‘geometrical mean’) of realisations at each level, and n is the number of levels. It is
important that hierarchical complexity levels develop the fractal structure of their realisations dynamically,
i. e. in correspondence, guaranteed by interactive multivaluedness, with already existing structures (this is
the property of interactive, or dynamic, adaptability, section 4.4), so that the system develops its structure

in  the  direction  of  the  ‘right  solution’  by  actually  performing  only  a  ‘linearly’  small  part  of  all  the

exponentially large number of complex-dynamical ‘operations’ (probabilistic realisation switch), which

provides  the  complex-dynamical  extension  of  the  conventional,  unitary  ‘parallelism’  in  the  machine

180

(especially  computer)  operation,  necessarily  based  on  proportional,  mechanistic  addition, or (linear)

superposition, of individual unit powers. One should not forget also that deeper-level realisation switches

occur at progressively (exponentially) decreasing time scales which are determined by the corresponding
n realisations is
interaction splitting itself, eqs. (67), so that the whole exponentially large hierarchy of N1
‘processed’ by the system ‘in the same time’ (comparable with the duration of a higher level realisation

switch), which reveals another aspect of extended, dynamically multivalued parallelism of unreduced

dynamics.  Due  to  the  hierarchical,  dynamically  determined  structure  of  the  unreduced  interaction

complexity, the ‘computing’ power contributions from whole separate levels (rather then single units of

one level) are thus multiplied (rather than added), which gives the exponentially high efficiency of properly

oriented multivalued dynamics for both quantum and classical degrees of freedom, without any ‘quantum’

or other ‘miracles’ from the conventional theory (see also section 7.1).

Correspondingly, the result of any explicitly chaotic machine operation, including that of real

quantum (hybrid) machines and neural networks (brain), cannot be reduced to any unitary ‘calculation’ or

‘information processing’ expressed in purely abstract ‘numbers’. It always contains really emerging,

tangible, and unpredictable in detail (asymmetric) structures consisting from permanently changing system

realisations and constituting ‘material products’ of system operation, with their inimitable properties and

internal complex-dynamical ‘life’ (section 7.1). The underlying complexity development process can be

described as an intrinsic, inseparable mixture of the essentially inexact ‘calculation’ of the necessary

parameters of the ‘adaptable production line’ and the production (creation) itself subjected to the same

uncertainty  in  the  details  (but  not  in  the  general  direction  of  the  process,  determined  by  irreversible

complexity unfolding). Therefore the purpose and strategy of construction and complex-dynamical control

of real micro-machines (and other explicitly chaotic machines and processes) is quite different from the

mechanistic unitary ‘instructions’ directing the system along the regular, shortest trajectory towards the

desired, exactly predetermined state. We do not need any more to mechanistically and senselessly separate

the processes of unitary calculation with questionable efficiency and the following production stage, but

can concentrate on the final purpose of production within a single process, leaving to the complex machine

dynamics itself to choose the optimal way to the final goal in accord with the universal symmetry of

complexity (usually this way will be extremely involved in detail, dynamically fractal, probabilistic, and
therefore ‘non-computable’ for the unitary machine and approach).#) Not only despite the multiple ‘errors’
the explicitly chaotic computing system can correctly and efficiently unfold its hidden complexity and thus
‘solve the problem’, but also only due to the intrinsically random, dynamically driven deviations can it
possess the superior capacity of creation, inaccessible for any ordinary, regular machine and including
such features as autonomous structure development according to the inherent ‘purpose’, ‘desire’, or ‘élan’
(the ‘free will’ property) and ability to understand (intelligence, consciousness).

#) Note that even the operation of the usual, classical and quasi-unitary computers can be considered as a limiting, degenerate
case of the multivalued dynamics which approaches closely enough to the limiting case of SOC regime (section 4.5.1) with
very dense realisation distribution within each emerging quasi-regular structure. The high enough (though never complete)
regularity and predetermined parameters of macroscopic structures within the usual computer allow for their interpretation in
terms  of  abstract,  dimensionless  ‘bits’.  The  situation  changes,  however,  in  cases  of  unavoidable  ‘halts’  or  ‘non-
computable’/‘irresolvable’ problems, where each conventional computer at each particular state behaves specifically and
unpredictably, suddenly revealing the unreduced, though indeed largely hidden, complexity of its ‘computation’ dynamics.
181

The  ordinary,  unitary  ‘programming’  of  a  fixed  structure  and  regular  instruction  list  for  the

conventional computer is replaced, for the explicitly multivalued (including quantum) machines, by (1) the

proper choice of initial interaction configuration, determining the stock of system complexity, in the form

of dynamic information, to be developed into the final form of dynamic entropy/structure (the complex-

dynamical ‘hardware’, or ‘device configuration’), and (2) additional control (complexity introduction) in

some key, ‘turning’ points of interaction development that can be realised with the help of analytical

description and causal understanding of the universal science of complexity (sections 3-5, 7.1) assisted,

where necessary, by computer calculations on a usual, classical and quasi-unitary computer working

within the unreduced complexity description (the complex-dynamical ‘software’, or ‘user programming’).

It  is  important  that  both  the  detailed  process  development  and  its  general  direction/purpose  will  be

determined  by  the  single,  universal  criterion  of  explicit  complexity  development  (optimal  growth  of

dynamical  entropy).  As  follows  from  this  criterion,  the  complex-dynamical  (multivalued)  processes

determine  the  operation  of  any  machine,  including  conventional,  quasi-regular  machines/computers.

Indeed,  programming  of  ordinary  devices  should  always  be  done  by  programmers  with  explicitly

complex, multivalued dynamics (actually represented by human brain operation) which remains ‘in the

background’  in  that  case,  but  is  indispensable  just  because  it  introduces  the  necessary  complexity.

Therefore the realisation of both (generalised) hardware and software for any real machine/computer is

based  on  essentially  complex-dynamical,  multivalued  interaction  processes,  but  in  the  case  of

conventional, externally ‘regular’ machines the unreduced complexity manifestations remain more hidden

within the detailed computation process or its human preparation dynamics. Note that the unitary approach

in general and especially its application to computation process description are based on the opposite

picture, where not only the ‘small’, but inevitable deviations from regularity of the ordinary, quasi-unitary

machines/systems are neglected, but also the relatively high and obviously irreducible irregularity of

explicitly chaotic computation dynamics (both quantum and classical) is deliberately replaced by a unitary

imitation, usually in the form of external, artificially inserted ‘stochasticity’ subjected to regular ‘control’

procedures.

The described complex-dynamical ‘autonomy’ of explicitly chaotic machine dynamics that chooses

itself the ‘best’ way to the final goal of total complexity unfolding (with a finite risk of local ‘impasses’)
has the property of elementary ‘understanding’ by the system of its own dynamics and purposes, inherent
in the system, as opposed to the completely ‘stupid’, senseless and mechanistic character of any quasi-
unitary, regular machine operation (and any unitary construction/scheme in general) which should be
totally administered from the outside, through the imposed deterministic ‘program’. This actually brings us
to the causally complete, objective interpretation of the property of intelligence and consciousness in the
universal  science  of  complexity  [1,4].  Intelligence  can  be  consistently  defined  as  the  total  dynamic
complexity of a sufficiently autonomous system from a high enough level of complexity (entering thus in

the category of intelligent, or cognitive, systems) [1], which gives automatically the universal quantitative,

dynamically derived measure of intelligence. The universal symmetry of complexity shows immediately

(see section 7.1) that intelligence is a quantitatively conserved, but internally, qualitatively developing

182

system property (during its finite lifetime), with its unceasingly and irreversibly growing part of wisdom

(knowledge) equal to the system dynamical  entropy  and  diminishing  part  of  cleverness  (keenness,

eagerness to know) expressed quantitatively by dynamical information.

Note that in the usual case of a reasonably open cognitive system one can include the effective

‘environment’ into the system while applying the above definition of its intelligence. However, the system

intelligence  is  always  basically  determined  by  its  internal  (total)  complexity  fixed  at  birth  (system

emergence), while the necessary interaction with the environment plays rather the role of a necessary

‘trigger’, or ‘catalyst’, of development that can introduce only small direct changes to the total system

complexity (even though relative variations of the current level of dynamical entropy-wisdom at first stages

of development can be greater). In fact, this property of cognitive system, i. e. relative independence of its

intelligence from the environment, constitutes an integral part of its definition, specifying the demand for a

‘high enough’ level of its complexity [1]. These conclusions of the universal science of complexity enter in

fundamental contradiction with a recently proposed concept of intelligence representing the best results of

the conventional, unitary science of complexity and based on the popular method of computer simulations

with  a  group  of  competing  ‘agents’  [355].  It  is  concluded  that  intelligence  is  ‘inseparable’  from  the

environment  and  totally  determined  by  system  (or  ‘agent’)  interaction  with  it,  being  defined  by  an

‘operational’, rather than analytical, criterion of ‘victory’ of a ‘more intelligent’ agent in a market-like

competition, obtained as a result of its more successful cheating on its less ‘advanced’ colleagues and

depending essentially on various, generally random external factors [355]. As a matter of fact, the contrast

between the two approaches is not surprising at all and only reflects the corresponding difference between

the unreduced (dynamically multivalued) and imitative (unitary) versions of complexity, thus confirming

the former. Indeed, the effectively one-dimensional, zero-complexity, mechanistic ‘agents’ from any

unitary version of ‘complexity’ are always totally dependent upon ‘undirected’, random environmental

fluctuations just because of ultimately low, zero value of their true, unreduced complexity, this situation

being quite similar to various mechanistic imitations of ‘complexity’ and ‘chaoticity’ in the unitary science

(see e. g. section 6). Note, however, that when such higher-level notions as intelligence intervene in the

ordinary play of words of the unitary ‘science of complexity’, a deeper, ‘human’ preferences and qualities

become more evident and come out of their usually hidden (but always existing) ‘background’ within a
formally ‘objective’, but actually quite intelligent (in the desired sense) scientific study (see also section 9).
It is not surprising that such environment-dependent cheating, ‘minority games’, or any other
unitary imitation of intelligence cannot afford any reasonable definition of consciousness representing a
superior level of intelligence. By contrast, the universal science of complexity is not limited ‘from above’
and therefore the causally complete concept of consciousness is naturally obtained as the same, unreduced
dynamic  complexity (of an autonomous, cognitive system), but starting from a still much higher (than
simple intelligence) level of complexity [1], encompassing system interactions with, and knowledge about,
a  much  larger,  ‘embedding’  reality  (the  ‘world’,  or  ‘universe’).  Due  to  the  hierarchical,  ‘emergent’

structure of unreduced complexity (section 7.1), this means that consciousness includes (developing)

intelligence and that a system can be quite intelligent, but not really conscious (or ‘human’) which only

confirms, of course, the empirical observations and certain intuitive expectations. In a similar way, the

183

real, complex-dynamical consciousness (contrary to its unitary imitations) includes itself a whole hierarchy

of  smaller  and  bigger  levels  appearing  through  the  actually  accessible  scale  of  unreduced  reality

comprehension which is limited from below (by the maximal purely practical, local, ‘animal’ intelligence),

but need not be limited from above.

Consciousness  realisation  within  the  human  brain  (providing  its  unique  known  case)  can  be

described in more detail in the universal science of complexity by application of its unified approach to the

unreduced electro-chemical interactions between and within the brain cells, which leads to the generalised

Schrödinger equation as a result of causal quantization procedure (see eqs. (68)-(73) from section 7.1),
where the generalised wavefunction Y
 describes now the real, fractally structured electro-chemical wave
field  of  intelligence/consciousness,  or  brainfunction  [1,4].  The  complex-dynamical  reductions,  or

‘collapses’,  of  the  brainfunction,  occurring  by  the  universal  mechanism  of  essential  nonlinearity

development (sections 4.2-3) at the corresponding, macroscopic level of electro-chemical interaction in the

brain, appear in the form of ‘suddenly’ emerging ‘impressions’, ‘thoughts’, and ‘ideas’. As always, the

dynamically multivalued, fractal and probabilistic entanglement of the interaction components (eqs. (20)-

(31))  constitutes  the  key  feature  of  the  complex-dynamical  system  description,  distinguishing  it

qualitatively from any formal imitations of the unitary science around fundamental understanding of brain

operation ‘complexity’ and providing, in particular, the essential properties of conscious brain operation

which remain basically, causally ‘inexplicable’ within the unitary approach [7].

These results can evidently have a multitude of constructively oriented, creative applications in

various branches of ‘brain science’, including especially the use of the obtained causally complete, unified

understanding of real brain operation for creation of artificial intelligent and now even conscious systems.

We also obtain a rigorous proof of fundamental  impossibility  of  these  problems  solution  within  the

conventional, unitary approach, which is confirmed by the existing results (see e. g. [5,7]) and points to

the necessity and particular, well specified direction of a qualitative change in strategic research orientation.

In connection to quantum machine problem, it becomes evident, in particular, that any ‘quantum’ concept

of consciousness (see e. g. [15,68-71]) is basically wrong, while any essentially quantum machine cannot

be ‘smart’ (cf. [194,195,351]), i. e. possess properties from higher, classical levels of complexity. Both

conclusions directly follow from the complexity correspondence principle, being itself a manifestation of
the universal symmetry of complexity and stating that a (computing) system cannot simulate/reproduce any
behaviour with the unreduced dynamic complexity higher than its own complexity (see sections 7.1, 7.2,
5.2.2). Since causally explained quantum behaviour is limited to lowest complexity levels (section 4.6), a
quantum dynamics could at best reproduce another quantum behaviour with the same or lower complexity.
The  qualitative  difference  between  explicitly  complex-dynamical  (multivalued)  operation  of
intelligent/conscious systems and conventional, quasi-unitary ‘computation’ becomes thus clearly and
rigorously  specified  within  the  dynamic  redundance  paradigm  and  the  ensuing  universal  concept  of
complexity  [1],  which  reveals,  in  particular,  the  deeply  erroneous,  totally  unrealistic  nature  of  the

conventional science illusions about ‘quantum’ and other unitary versions of artificial ‘thinking machines’

that could reproduce, at least partially, the essential properties of natural intelligence (see also section 8). It

is also important that the obtained guidelines for development of a qualitatively new, essentially chaotic

184

(multivalued) kind of machines and technology have the universal meaning with possible applications to

various levels of machine/system dynamics and different types of systems: quantum (hybrid) and classical,

micro-  and  macro-,  ‘computing’  (simulating)  and  producing,  ‘thinking’  and  ‘practically  realising’,

‘individual’ and ‘social’, etc.

The main, essential feature of this new kind of machines, also present in natural systems, but

thoroughly  eliminated  from  the  conventional,  unitary  theory  and  technology,  is  the  omnipresent,

autonomous creation of new entities (structures and dynamical regimes), with the unavoidable payment for

this capacity in the form of irreducible, and relatively large, dynamic uncertainty in the detailed parameters

of  the  ‘products’  and  their  creation  process.  The  created  new  entities  form  the  emerging  system

configurations described in the universal science of complexity by system realisations, with their well-

defined, entangled and fractal, internal structure and a priori probability distributions (see e. g. eqs. (24)-

(27)). By contrast, the unitary science, intrinsically opposed to the natural system creativity, cannot find

the unreduced, nonperturbative problem solution and is limited therefore to semi-empirical postulation

(guessing) of the emerging system configuration and its properties, which cannot be efficient in the case of

any explicitly complex dynamics (cf. e. g. the problem of ‘configurational space’ and other canonical

‘mysteries’ in the conventional quantum mechanics [1-4]).

The  unavoidable  dynamic  randomness  of  explicitly  complex  dynamics  appears  not  as  a

shortcoming, but rather as an advantage at this superior level of science and technology and can actually be

regulated in a necessary way (but not eliminated!) with the help of the universal formalism and general

results of the new science of complexity (sections 3-5) [1]. It is interesting to note, in particular, that

essentially quantum stages of real, chaotic micro-machines do not critically depend on various external,

‘noisy’ or parasitic influences, just because of their already present genuine, purely internal chaoticity

(multivaluedness),  as  opposed  to  the  fatal  role  of  ‘decoherence’  for  the  unitary  quantum  computer

dynamics (including unitary imitations of ‘quantum chaos’) related to the absolute, and therefore infinitely

vulnerable, regularity of unitary dynamics (so that the assumed ‘decohering’ influences should eventually

produce a ‘chaotic’, though ill-defined, state of unitary machine, in contradiction to its postulated principle

of action, cf. refs. [14,157-160] and section 6).

Another characteristic feature of the new old machinery with ‘living’ dynamics is that various
levels, scales and regimes of dynamics, remaining separated within the unitary operation, tend now to be
dynamically, ‘naturally’ unified within a single system that autonomously evolves and switches between
them, realising the optimal complexity development (from dynamical information to entropy) in accord
with the imposed initial system/interaction configuration. Thus, as we noted many times in previous
sections, the lowest, essentially quantum levels of machine operation cannot solve any sensible, useful
task without producing dynamically elementary classical (bound and localised) states that can be directly
transmitted to user or further evolve, within the same system or ‘dynamical factory’, into states from still
higher  complexity  levels  (as  it  permanently  happens  within  every  living  organism  or  ecosystem).

Therefore the essentially quantum stages of a useful ‘quantum’ machine operation can actually exist only

within a hybrid, ‘quantum-and-classical’ machine, where both quantum and classical stages, as well as

their  dynamical  links  are  important,  contrary  to  the  case  of  ‘purely’  classical  machines,  where  the

185

underlying quantum dynamics may well remain hidden and unimportant because their essential operation

(complexity development) starts from classical complexity levels.

Another unifying tendency joins inseparably within a single complex-dynamical process what is

called ‘computation’ and ‘production’ in the unitary technology. Indeed, we have shown above (sections

5.2.2, 7.1, 7.2) that the canonical, regular, unitary ‘calculation’ is impossible within any real quantum or

other explicitly chaotic system, whereas its actual dynamics does consist in unceasing production, or

creation, of new structures and dynamical regimes. The necessary ‘computation’ of their optimal sequence

and parameter adjustment is naturally incorporated into the same complex, multi-level, fractal dynamics,

which  simultaneously  constitutes  the  essence  of  autonomous,  complex-dynamical,  nonunitary

(probabilistic) system ‘(self-) control’. Correspondingly, the conventional, unitary, ‘straightforward’ and

regular control is never possible in its pure form, even for quasi-unitary (SOC) kind of dynamics, and

becomes practically senseless in the case of explicitly chaotic machines. The omnipresent and evident

examples of the ‘mixed’, ‘computation-and-production’ kind of operation are provided by many natural

micro- and macro-machines, such as a single living cell or the global brain dynamics, the latter case clearly

demonstrating  the  ‘mixed’  character  of  intelligence/consciousness  that  unifies  such  functions  as

‘calculation’, ‘memorisation’, creation, and rearrangement of results into one, inseparable interaction

process, in sharp contrast to conventional, quasi-unitary computers.

It is important that the outlined qualitative specificity of the explicitly complex-dynamical machines

obtains  a  causally  complete,  reality-based  explanation  within  the  dynamic  redundance  paradigm,  as

opposed  to  purely  empirical,  intuitive  guesses,  pseudo-philosophical  speculations  and  post-modern,

‘fashionable’ and ‘advanced’ plays of words by self-chosen ‘priests’ of the unitary science, so abundantly

appearing  in  the  last  time  in  the  most  ‘solid’,  professional  and  popular  science  sources.  Since  the

empirically based technology development has definitely brought civilisation, just at the present particular

moment  of  its  development,  to  direct  practical  exploration  of  those  ‘explicitly  complex-dynamical’

(chaotic) regimes of behaviour (such as ‘quantum limit’ in micro-electronics, or brain dynamics, or genetic

manipulations,  or  the  planetary  ecology  and  development  levels),  we  can  state  that  a  ‘sustainable’,

definitely and provably progressive future development of science and technology (and thus life in the

whole)  can  only  be  realised  by  passing,  starting  from  now,  through  the  profound  transition  to  the
described ‘creative computation/production processes’ in practically any kind of activity. In the next
section we specify the essential details of this qualitative transition concerning especially micro-machines
and  taking  into  account  some  recently  advanced  ‘initiatives’  of  the  unitary  science  (such  as
‘nanotechnology’) that remains actually unchanged in the intrinsic limitations of its basic, dynamically
single-valued and mechanistic approach, but often tries to dress them in the fashionable clothes of ‘new
paradigms’.

186

8.  Dynamically  multivalued,  not  unitary  or  stochastic,  micro-machines
as  the  real  basis  for  the  next  technological  revolution

Although applications of the conventional quantum mechanics to micro-system description have

been concentrated, in the last time, on ‘quantum computers’ as a real quantum machine prototype, it is not

difficult to see that other branches of applied science and technology quickly converge to similar types of

ultimately  small  structures  representing  just  another  kind  or  aspect  of  micro-system  composed  of

essentially quantum (i. e. explicitly multivalued) elements. One can refer, for example, to the extremely

actively promoted and rather smeared group of concepts unified under the new term of ‘nanotechnology’

and studying possibilities of creation of various ‘nanomachines’ and ‘nanostructures’ [356-359] based on

the original concept by Richard Feynman [360]. Whereas many objects and structures with characteristic

element sizes of nanometer scale (~10-100 Å), encompassing just a few typical interatomic distances in a

condensed  phase  of  matter,  can  now  be  really  produced  and  studied  in  detail  (up  to  a  single  atom

manipulation), the central, widely announced and ‘truly fantastic’ ambition of the nanotechnology concept

[356,357] goes much farther and apparently encounters a strong barrier of practical realisation: it deals

with creation of active, productive machines conceived as nanoscale copies of ordinary, macroscopic

mechanisms with a similar range of involved, locally complete dynamical functions, as opposed to only

passively used, static ‘(nano-) structures’.

Yet another direction of ‘spontaneous’ quantum machine emergence today comes from molecular

biology, including especially practical genetics and related micro-system analysis (see e. g. ref. [361] on

this subject discussed here in its conceptual, rather than technical, aspects). This tendency towards natural,

already  existing  nanomachine  understanding  and  control  could,  of  course,  be  expected  and  makes

progressively its way among more artificial approaches (while retaining the usual limitations of the unitary

science, see the end of section 7.2 for a discussion and references). It is important to emphasize that both

artificial and natural micro-machine studies are performed inevitably within the same over-simplified,

dynamically single-valued (unitary) approach of the conventional science, meaning that ‘machines’ and

systems of any origin and size are always basically interpreted in the extremely mechanistic sense of a

totally  regular,  ‘clock-work’  kind  of  effectively  one-dimensional,  sequentially  acting  mechanism
(including  the  artificially  inserted,  non-dynamical,  external  ‘randomness’,  ‘chaoticity’  and  ‘multi-
stability’/‘parallelism’), exactly as it happens within the conventional version of a particular kind of micro-
machines, quantum computers (see e. g. refs. [362-364] for recent presentations of the field and sections
2, 5, 7 for detailed discussions and references). This conclusion and the underlying causally complete
picture of complex (multivalued) dynamics of any real micro-system (sections 3-7) remain totally valid for
and applicable to the conventional genetic studies and related living cell (organism) dynamics which follow
the same reduced, unitary, sequential logic of mechanistic, conventional, predetermined and non-creative
‘programming’  deprived  of  any  unreduced,  strong  interaction  effects,  despite  much  of  ‘general’

speculations about ‘complexity’ understood as a loosely interpreted ‘intricacy’ and the evident qualitative

difference of living and biological ‘machines’ from any man-made device, including the multiple, well-

known ‘enigma’ around emergence, evolution and essential dynamics of life.

187

Since our approach and its results are intrinsically universal (sections 3, 4), we shall concentrate

our  present  discussion  of  practical  micro-technology  strategy  on  the  most  popular  and  ‘hot’  idea  of

nanomachines  (nanotechnology),  while  noting  that  all  the  main  conclusions  and  their  fundamental

substantiation are equally well and directly applicable to other micro-technology directions (including its

biological branches) and have already been outlined and practically specified in previous sections for the
case  of  quantum  computers.*)  It  is  important  to  emphasize,  in  this  connection,  that  the  unitary
nanotechnology ideas also have their underlying, more ‘fundamental’ (though completely erroneous) basis

in the conventional, unitary theory development, starting from the corner-stone formulation of the idea by

Feynman [360] (it is actually only repeated with variations in the modern ‘practical nanotechnology’
approach [356-359]),#) then passing by the quantum technology/revolution branch [362-365], and up to
post-modern,  pseudo-philosophical  speculations  around  ‘quantum  brain’,  ‘quantum  consciousness’,

‘quantum self’, ‘quantum society’, etc. [366,367] (see also [15,68-71,350]). It is not difficult to see that

those unlimited ‘quantum’ fantasies of unitary approach are closely related to a yet more general, deeply

mechanistic way of destruction of real-world complexity in favour of ‘spiritual machines’ persistently

promoted within certain, well-defined direction of thinking which is hardly distinguishable from one-

dimensional imitations it tries to impose (see e. g. [368] and further discussion in section 9).

Returning  to  the  situation  in  the  conventional  nanotechnology  [356-359],  based  on  such

‘revolutionary’ ideas as ‘nanorobots’, ‘molecular motors’, or ‘atomic assemblers’, we note the relation

with our general results (sections 3, 4, 7) applied above mainly to quantum computers (sections 5, 7), but

actually valid for any kind of real micro-machine. It has been rigorously shown, in particular, that any

essentially  quantum  behaviour  (inevitably  determining  major  stages  of  nanomachine  dynamics)  is

characterised by causally derived and relatively large (‘global’) dynamical randomness and discreteness

(‘quantization’)  due  to  the  dynamically  multivalued  entanglement  between  the  interacting  system

components. These irreducible manifestations of the true quantum chaos (section 6) destroy all the key

assumptions of the conventional nanotechnology concept, such as unitary design, ‘programming’ and

*) It may be worthy of noting that the prefix ‘micro-’ (‘machine’, ‘technology’, etc.) in our present terminology actually
includes all ‘small’ structures and scales (such as ‘nanostructures’) for which the unreduced dynamic complexity appears in
explicitly nonunitary (dynamically multivalued) forms, including essentially quantum, hybrid, and explicitly chaotic classical
types of behaviour.
#) It is interesting to note that the conventional nanotechnology idea comes thus from the same, widely advertised ‘genius of
theoretical physics’, R.P. Feynman, who was at the origin of the unitary quantum computer idea [18] evoking eventually all
(post-) modern ‘quantum miracles’ (on paper) and quantum mystification (real). These two extraordinary ‘successes’ of the
unitary thinking are not occasional and just continue the series of previous ‘breakthroughs’ promoted with the invariably high
intensity  of  praise.  Thus,  ‘Feynman  path  integrals’  originate  from  improper  extension  of  the  perturbation  theory  results
beyond the region of its validity (which leads to the ‘false exponential dependence’ [1], see also the end of section 7.1), while
they do not resolve any of the canonical ‘quantum mysteries’ and remain totally within its purely abstract formulation in
terms of mathematical ‘spaces’ of ‘state vectors’ (the same is actually true for path integral applications beyond quantum
theory).  Finally,  ‘Feynman's  diagrams’,  probably  the  most  popular  ‘achievement’  from  the  same  series,  are  nothing  but
‘figurative’  and  largely  ‘intuitive’  (subjective)  representation  of  the  perturbation  theory  results,  preserving  all  its  ‘fatal’
limitations, such as omnipresent divergence and inability to describe any truly ‘interesting’, qualitative novelty, whereas the
‘intuitive’  construction  of  such  ‘tools’  as  diagrams  certainly  opens  much  larger  space  for  unjustified  extension  of  result
validity, play with ‘free parameters’ and vain, ‘philosophical’ speculations. The illusions of unitary quantum computation and
deceptive abundance of “room at the bottom” [360] (today's ‘nanotechnology’) represent therefore just a small (and let's hope
final) part of a long-lasting flux of losses generated by only one, disproportionally boosted and unreasonably canonised ‘high
priest’ of unitary thinking whose influence largely dominates until now over its well-organised troops remaining ‘brainwashed
by Feynman’ [369], even more than they can imagine (see also section 9).

188

‘control’ of a basically regular, sequential (i. e. unitary) machine function realised according to the desired

pattern that should be predictable in any its essential detail. The real micro-machine dynamics has a

qualitatively different character described by the hierarchical, creative and unpredictable in detail (explicitly

multivalued) process of complexity development (section 7) which can be represented mathematically by

the dynamically probabilistic fractal [1] (section 4.4), inaccessible to any unitary imitation. Note that this

conclusion remains valid with respect to classical elementary stages of nanomachine dynamics because

they are also characterised, due to the main concept of ‘ultimate smallness’, by the intrinsically coarse-
grained structure, where the universal action quantum D A = h of the essentially quantum dynamics is
replaced  by  a  non-universal,  but  relatively  big  action  quantum  D A = D xD p, D x and D p  being  the
characteristic minimal increments of element (e. g. atom) position and momentum.

One may note also that the naïve fantasies of the conventional nanotechnology concept trying to

directly, mechanistically endow the micro-machine dynamics with the properties of ordinary, macroscopic

mechanisms  are  fundamentally  deficient  because  they  represent  explicit  violation  of  the  universal

complexity correspondence principle and the underlying symmetry of complexity (sections 5.2.2, 7.1,

7.2) which state that a lower-complexity, e. g. quantum or simplest classical, system cannot reproduce a

higher-complexity,  ‘macroscopic’  behaviour  in  principle,  since  the  difference  between  the  two  just

determines the essential difference between the conserved complexity levels. A loosely formulated version

of  the  complexity  correspondence  principle  implies  that  the  number  of  ‘useful  things’,  or  actions,  a

mechanism can produce is roughly proportional to the height of its complexity level within the total

hierarchy of complexity and thus also, in average, to the characteristic length scale at that level because

those things or actions are represented by system realisations whose number determines the unreduced

dynamic complexity of the system (section 4.1). Therefore the ultimately small systems, nanostructures

and nanomachines, can be useful only in producing the simplest, elementary operations which usually

need then to be directly utilised and amplified within the connected hierarchy of larger structures with

growing  complexity,  as  it  actually  occurs  in  all  natural,  biological  microsystems  exemplified  by  the

hierarchy of cell structure and dynamics.

This  means,  in  other  words,  that  the  ultimately  small  parts  of  a  machine  or  device  cannot  in

principle be as autonomous as usual, macroscopic constructions, contrary to the main ‘motivating’ ideas of
the conventional nanotechnology [356-360]. The underlying unitary approach statement [360] is therefore
basically  wrong,  and  the  ‘room  at  the  bottom’  is  strictly  limited  by  the  relatively  low  maximum
complexity, and thus diversity of functions, it can contain, which is a typical limitation to illusive unitary
‘miracles’ imposed by the realistic, complex-dynamical (multivalued) analysis of unreduced interaction
processes (see sections 5, 7 for similar conclusions for quantum computers). Indeed, complexity can be
most  consistently  measured  in  the  units  of  generalised  action  (section  7.1),  so  that  the  characteristic
complexity value is proportional to the characteristic system size and momentum (see above), where the
latter is limited by the characteristic binding (interaction) energy in the system (i. e. by the condition for the

system to remain intact as such).

One should note here that the comparison should be made between the respective system dynamics

regimes that can be closer either to the global chaos (section 4.5.2), like it occurs in the case of living

189

micro-system  dynamics,  or  to  the  multivalued  SOC  (section  4.5.1),  as  it  is  the  case  of  the  ordinary

macroscopic machinery (including, of course, the conventional ‘microprocessors’ and other formally

‘small’  units).  The  explicitly  chaotic  dynamics  can  produce  complex  enough  effects  already  at  the

nanoscale  size  of  elementary  cell  structures,  but  it  absolutely  needs  the  unreduced,  dynamically

multivalued analysis for its adequate description and control. The unitary approach of the conventional

nanotechnology refers to the pseudo-regular, SOC type of device, and it is this kind of structure that needs

much higher complexity level to show a sufficiently involved (and externally regular) behaviour.

Now one can clearly see the objective, unavoidable origin of the ‘fatal’ reality simplification within

the conventional nanotechnology concept: it is the dynamic single-valuedness of the whole unitary science

approach which artificially neglects, within its invariably perturbative analysis, the possibility of any

serious, qualitative change (i. e. explicit emergence of a new entity) as a major result of arbitrary, generic

interaction process, necessarily involving the irreducible, intrinsic randomness. That's why our objection

against the conventional nanotechnology idea exceeds considerably any particular, technical details or

formal, postulated ‘principles’ of the conventional, unitary science used as main arguments both for and

against nanotechnological fantasies in the existing professional and popular discussions (see [356-359]

and references therein).

But much more important is the fact that our causally complete analysis provides the universally

applicable, objectively correct (consistent and realistic) problem solution that should be used to replace the

over-simplified mechanistic approach of the unitary science and show explicitly the qualitatively  new

direction of nanotechnology development based on the totally causal, realistic understanding of the detailed

nanomachine dynamics. The artificial nanostructure dynamics is not fundamentally different, within this

causally complete description, from the natural nanomachine operation: both can be objectively described

as living  machines, which means that the objective  purpose,  and  inevitable  result,  of  the  underlying

interaction development is the system complexity development, from the ‘folded’ form of dynamical

information (generalised potential energy) to the explicit form of dynamical entropy (generalised kinetic or

thermal energy). This complexity transformation describes explicit, dynamically probabilistic emergence of

new  entities and levels of complexity, impossible in any version of the unitary approach in principle.

Therefore  the  illusion  of  ‘exact’  unitary  programming/design  of  the  conventional  nanotechnology  is
replaced  by  the  explicit  creation  design  and  control  with  the  help  of  the  unreduced,  dynamically
multivalued analysis of the universal science of complexity [1] (sections 3-7) which implies a ‘mild’
control and ‘approximate‘ kind of change introduced rather at certain, key points of intrinsically unstable
interaction dynamics. This qualitatively new, complex-dynamical system construction and monitoring is
governed by the universal criterion of optimal complexity development (section 7) realised by hidden
complexity introduction in the form of properly modified interaction potential (system configuration). By
contrast, the unitary, ‘totalitarian’ control of the conventional approach directly contradicts the property of
system creativity and actually totally suppresses it (with the exception of rarely occurring and undesirable

machine failures).

It is evident that the described general picture and detailed mechanism of real micro-machine

dynamics change completely the strategic directions, purposes and accents in practical micro-technology

190

development.  One  line  of  this  development  is  based  on  the  permanently  growing  miniaturisation  of

microstructure elements that approach today the ‘quantum limit’ (usually attained just within the nanometer

size scale), where essentially quantum effects become unavoidable. Our results show (sections 5, 6) that

the pseudo-unitary character of conventional, classical micro-machine (being in reality a multivalued SOC

regime, section 4.5.1), cannot be preserved in the quantum domain and will inevitably be replaced by the

qualitatively different, essentially chaotic (explicitly multivalued) behaviour, contrary to the conventional

science illusions about possibility of unitary quantum interaction dynamics. This means, practically, that

one can preserve approximate unitarity (regularity) of the conventional machines only above the ‘quantum
limit’ (i. e. without any essentially quantum element operation),*) or else one should pass to a quite new,
explicitly complex-dynamical (multivalued) type of micro-machine that can be properly described only

within the unreduced, dynamically multivalued approach and formalism (sections 3, 4) and will contain

both essentially quantum elements and the dynamically emerging classical, chaotic or pseudo-regular,

behaviour.

Note  in  this  connection  that  although  classical  behaviour,  contrary  to  essentially  quantum

interaction dynamics, can take the form of a pseudo-regular, ‘self-organised’ type of dynamics (section

4.5.1),  the  tendency  towards  the  true,  intrinsic  chaoticity  increases  with  decreasing  size  of  classical

structures. This result follows directly from the physical origin of the unreduced SOC regime, where the

‘regular’, embedding shape is provided by a higher-level, generally much larger structure, which cannot

be fitted within very small element/system construction. One can see also that the purpose of preserving

maximal  regularity  (pseudo-unitarity)  is  not  only  fundamentally  unattainable  for  ultimately  small,

nanoscale  micro-machines,  but  should  not  constitute  the  main  goal  of  the  future  nanotechnology

development which can enter into the stage of practically unlimited creation just by stepping outside of the

unitary thinking limits underlying actually the whole conventional technology. We argue that it is this ‘shift

of  paradigm’  from  the  unitary  to  explicitly  multivalued,  ‘living’  machines  that  determines  the  truly

revolutionary  status  and  wide  perspectives  of  the  nanomachine  creation  and  control  within  a  clearly

understood, intrinsic unification between more ‘artificial’ branches of nanotechnology and more ‘natural’

biotechnology fields.

Moreover, that kind of new progress does not need to be limited to microscopic structures and
machines (where it becomes practically inevitable as we have seen), but can and should be extended to the
total human technology in the widest possible sense including not only ‘machines’ as such, but also living
and thinking systems (sections 7.1, 7.3), man's interaction with ‘natural environment’, social processes,
‘psychological’  levels  of  complexity,  etc.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  one  obtains  thus  a  unique
opportunity for positive solution of the existing ‘global’, ‘irresolvable’ problems within a unified new way

*) Note that it is this way of successful, but empirically based (technological) miniaturisation of working machine elements
above  the  quanticity  and  chaoticity  thresholds  which  constitutes  the  actual  source  of  promotion  of  the  conventional
nanotechnology  initiative,  rather  than  any  its  ‘futuristic’,  and  actually  wrong,  fantasies.  However,  there  is  nothing
conceptually or scientifically (fundamentally) new in that kind of ‘initiative’ which simply tends to say that all those already
existing micro-structures have been really useful and therefore one should continue to develop them. One deals here with the
invariably repeated way of the exhausted unitary paradigm to prove its importance and ask for huge extra support by making
reference to purely empirical advance of technology that actually has nothing to do with the abstract manipulations of the
conventional unitarity (see also section 9).

191

of the whole civilisation development towards qualitatively higher complexity levels which can only be

based  on  the  unreduced  complexity  development  [1]  and  should  replace  the  currently  dominating

‘industrial’  level  and  related  unitary  thinking  that  quickly  degrade  to  ultimate  ‘singularity’  of  over-

simplified, ‘machine-like’, effectively one-dimensional living and thinking representing actually only

inevitable and now close collapse of that kind of civilisation.

It is important to emphasize once more that the outlined bright perspectives of the unreduced,

complex-dynamical version of nanotechnology (and eventually any other technology) are totally due to its

fundamental difference from the conventional, unitary version and the existing ‘objections’ against it

always remaining within the same, unrealistic, artificially reduced doctrine of unitary thinking (see e. g;

[356-359]) and leaving no place for a realistic and consistent solution of the arising problems. The same

refers to various appearing substitutes for the unreduced dynamic complexity, causally complete quantum

effects and other explicit manifestations of dynamic multivaluedness of real interaction processes, those

substitutes pretending to bring a ‘true novelty’ and ‘new understanding’, but actually remaining within the

same,  dynamically  single-valued  paradigm  of  the  conventional  science  and  only  playing  with  its

unavoidable ‘mysteries’ as if allowing for every poorly substantiated fantasy in their interpretation (see

sections 5-7 for more detailed discussions and references). In particular, the dynamically derived, and thus

causally defined randomness of the dynamic redundance paradigm (see e. g. section 4.1) is replaced in the

unitary science, including official ‘science of complexity’, by external, artificially inserted (postulated)

‘stochasticity’,  ‘probability’,  associated  ‘stochastic  equations’,  etc.  The  ensuing  concepts  of  ‘chaos’,

‘complexity’ or ‘multistability’ and related ideas about ‘chaotic computers’, ‘control of chaos’ in various

kinds of machines, and any other ‘applications’ of mechanistic ‘stochasticity’ can only introduce further

confusion in the already quite ‘mystified’ conventional science (see also section 6) and lead inevitably to
technological impasses and real danger at the attempt of their serious introduction into practice.*)

It is important therefore to develop the emerging new, indeed very powerful practical technologies

exclusively on the basis of the unreduced, truly ‘exact’ understanding of real interaction processes and use

the ensuing qualitatively new concepts, such as the dynamic multivaluedness paradigm, as a guiding line

for  further  empirical  studies.  Such  totally  consistent derivation of general  direction and methods of

applied, technological research is the true, practically indispensable role of the fundamental science,
dangerously missing today in its fruitless unitary version that becomes the more and more detached from
reality and artificially mystified in its ‘theoretical’ branch, or else remains totally dependent upon chaotic
jerks of the blind technological empiricism at its quite different, ‘experimental’ approach.

*) It is sufficient to recall the failure of ‘controlled’ nuclear fusion and ‘fifth generation computers’ (or ‘thinking machines’),
‘irresolvable’ and dangerously growing environmental and social problems, clearly felt, but actually unopposed dangers of
biotechnological manipulations, among many other ‘big’ problems and related ‘mega-projects’ of the conventional science, all
of them being unified by the unreduced complexity manifestations and insurmountable, now clearly explained resistance to the
unitary science approach, despite really fantastic quantities of efforts, publicity and financial resources being helplessly wasted
for their accomplishment (see ref. [1] for more details). The characteristic lie-theft cycle of the conventional fundamental
science, starting from mega-money obtained with a reference to previous successes of empirical technology (which is a lie)
and ending with a silently buried mega-failure (which is a theft), continue to reproduce itself (e. g. within the conventional
nanotechnology initiative [356-360]) due to the deeply rooted deficiency of the unitary thinking and organisation of that kind
of knowledge which in reality is much less irreplaceable, than it tends to state in its ‘public relations’ discussions (see also
section 9).

192

9.  ‘Human’  implications  of  the  quantum  computation  story:
Unitary  calculations  and  show-business  kind  of  ‘science’  v s
real  problem  solution  within  intrinsically  creative knowledge

_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by
their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles?
Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt
tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree
that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into
fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.

Matthew 7:15-20

_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

We have shown, in previous sections, that the consistent analysis of the unreduced interaction

processes  in  any  quantum,  classical  and  hybrid  computer  or  other  machine  reveals  a  great  deal  of

complexity that can now be rigorously and universally defined within the emerging new paradigm of

dynamic multivaluedness (redundance) reflecting the totality of really occurring phenomena. It becomes

clear also that the conventional, unitary theory is reduced, in any its particular version or application, to a

huge, fatal simplification of real interaction processes, where the multiplicity of permanently changing,

incompatible system realisations is replaced by only one, ‘averaged’ realisation corresponding to the zero

value of unreduced dynamic complexity and leaving no place for any qualitative change, or ‘event’ of new

entity emergence, and thus for the related useful result expression. Nevertheless, the unitary theory of

quantum computation, information, and other quantum-mechanical applications, as well as dynamically

single-valued description of ‘complexity’ and ‘chaoticity’, continue their prosperous development in

practically all ‘prestigious’ and ‘solid’ establishments of the official science, including teaching courses

and research in ‘top’ universities, as well as powerful state-supported ‘initiatives’ with invariable ‘deep

hints’ on the expected ‘top secret’ and ‘strategic’ applications (now often provided with a mystical aura of
‘quantum’ magic), whereas any attempt of a realistic description of the same processes is thoroughly
excluded from any ‘peer-reviewed’, i. e. subjectively controlled, publication of official science, let alone
financial support from ‘solvent’ public or private sources.

The accumulated contradictions between real situation in science and its official practice are so big,
evident, and stagnating that their persistence cannot be explained only by the effectively totalitarian,
‘plutocratic’ kind of practical organisation of science (to be discussed below), but should also involve
deeper,  mind-related  aspects  which  become  thus  inseparably  entangled  with  the  practical  research
development and results and actually step forward as the factor of main importance, exceeding now the

usual dominance of ‘practical needs’, as it can especially clearly be seen just for the case of quantum

computation and related subjects. Of course, the existence of a connection between the dominating ‘state of

mind’ and progress in science and technology is not new or surprising: in a very general and loosely

193

interpreted sense one can describe all human activity as ‘machines producing other machines/structures’,

where the quality of the products is certainly determined by that of the producers. However, the modern

critical stage of empirical technology and industrial society development capable, for the first time, to

practically, essentially influence and transform the ‘natural’ world complexity within its whole range of

scales, pushes this eternal relation to the boiling point of a ‘generalised phase transition’ [1], where the

existing ‘directions of thinking’ and fundamental approaches are intensely ‘self-organised’, on a highly

chaotic background, into much more distinct and very divergent, differently oriented entities, while the

whole system instability is so high that objective or even occasional domination of one or another tendency

can easily lead to extremely serious changes varying between fatal, catastrophic degradation and explosive

development into a superior level of living.

Returning  to  the  quantum  computation  story,  we  note  that  although  the  unreduced,  complex-

dynamical (multivalued) description of the underlying interaction processes involves important conceptual

novelty (called here ‘dynamic redundance paradigm’ [1]), it does not involve extremely complicated

mathematical methods and results and emerges inevitably and ‘naturally’, if only one avoids to fall into the

evident sin of ultimate reality simplification within a version of ‘perturbation theory’ just killing all the

essential, ‘nonintegrable’ and ‘nonlinear’, links of the considered interaction process. Correspondingly,

the dynamic multivaluedness phenomenon, as well as its universal presence in any unreduced interaction

process, has a physically transparent, qualitative interpretation (see section 3.3) confirming its inevitability

and omnipresence in terms of really simple explanation which, however, continue to be strangely ‘missed’

and deliberately ignored by the conventional science. On the other hand, the idea of unitary quantum (or

any other) machines enters in a direct and evident contradiction with so many basic, well-established and

multiply confirmed laws of the same conventional science (see section 2) that their strange coexistence and

financially prosperous development within the same science leave at least an ‘ironic’ impression (cf. [5-7])

of the officially maintained doctrine of ‘rigorous’, ‘objective’, and ‘honest’ character of such kind of

knowledge (always evoked in justification of its large financial support from the common sources).

The mental, content-related reason for those ‘unlimited’ contradictions within the conventional

science can be better understood just for the case of quantum, explicitly complex-dynamical computers,

since their analysis inevitably involves higher-level concepts and leads to the causal theory of intelligence
and consciousness (section 7). It would be difficult to imagine such counter-productive, massive, and
evidently inconsistent obsession by the fundamentally wrong concept of unitary dynamics if that very
unitarity was not inherent to certain kind of intelligence and direction of thinking that became dominant in
science soon after the ‘new physics’ breakthrough which was actually performed at the beginning of the
twentieth century by the last classical realists (see refs. [2-4]) immediately and very actively replaced,
however, by abstract formalists and mystery-makers, or ‘mathematical’ physicists, for whom that unitary,
‘calculative’ thinking and closely related obscurantism were just as natural and exciting as the ‘complex-
dynamical’, ‘creative’ thinking has always been and remains for the minority of ‘physical’ physicists (one

should, of course, distinguish the genuine realism and creation, oriented towards objective, consistent

truth, from their numerous imitations within abstract unitary ‘models’ and inconsistent fantasies). What the

story  of  quantum  computation  clearly  shows  is  that  one  should  not  (and  actually  cannot)  avoid  the

194

adequate understanding of those objectively existing, practically important differences in thinking and

levels of consciousness, since they are inseparably entangled with the resulting knowledge content and

play the key role in its development, especially at the current critical stage of revolutionary change.

Another characteristic manifestation of intrinsically mechanistic, low-complexity, unitary tendency

in thinking takes the form of ‘computer physics’ (or ‘computer science’ in general) practically dominating

today's development of many most prosperous and ambitious fields of fundamental science and implying

that the progress in reality understanding can be basically obtained by computer simulations alone which

use only simplest, conceptually trivial input data. This ‘new kind of science’ tends to have really universal

ambitions  (e.  g.  [311,370])  and,  ironically,  pretends  to  dominate  the  unitary  ‘science  of  complexity’

[371], despite the evident contradiction between the mechanistic, basically trivial character of the usual

computer operation and the unreduced complexity of higher-level natural, e. g. living and intelligent,

systems. That the ‘strange’ persistence of those contradictions in the official science should necessarily

have deeply lying mental roots is confirmed by appearing insights into that kind of intelligence performed

within most developed approaches of the unitary science itself. Thus, a recent computer simulation of

interaction processes in the medium of ‘intelligent’ agents with pronounced ‘market’ talents [355] arrives

at a peculiar conclusion that their intelligence, and by a deeply rooted interpolation any intelligence (natural

or artificial), has a purely ‘social’, external origin, without any essentially inbred, intrinsic basis, since it

can be attributed mainly to each agent interaction with the exterior environment, based in addition upon

ultimately ‘calculative’, self-seeking, but also mechanistically randomised (stochastic) type of behaviour. It

is  evident  that  such  specific,  externally  driven  and  thus  inevitably  parasitic  kind  of  ‘intelligence’  is

objectively opposed to intelligence interpretation in terms of the unreduced (dynamically multivalued)

complexity [1] (see section 7.3), but shows, on the contrary, perfect correspondence with the dynamically

single-valued, zero-complexity content of the unitary science imitations.

__________________________________________________________________________________________________________

L'essence des explications mécaniques est en effet de considérer
l'avenir et le passé comme calculables en fonction du présent,
et de prétendre ainsi que tout est donné. Dans cette hypothèse,
passé, présent et avenir seraient visibles d'un seul coup pour
une intelligence surhumaine, capable d'effectuer le calcul.

H. Bergson, L'évolution créatrice (1907) [339]

__________________________________________________________________________________________________________

The unitary (dynamically single-valued) theory of quantum computation and the underlying concept
of mathematical physics in general are thus evident manifestations of unitary thinking which cannot be
strictly  unitary,  of  course,  but  still  definitely  tends  to  zero-complexity,  simplified,  mechanistic
‘calculations’, either in abstract mathematical constructions, or in computer simulations that apply great
speed of calculations to over-simplified ‘models’, or even in practical matters of research organisation and

practice.  That  tendency  towards  technically  involved,  but  effectively  one-dimensional  projection  of

dynamically multivalued reality explains the ‘strange’ persistence, during the last hundred years, of evident

inconsistencies in the whole body of ‘exact’ modern science, as well as the resulting ‘end of science’ [5],

195

of that kind of science, to be exact (indeed, a zero-complexity world has no place for any development in

principle, cf. section 7.1). The natural or acquired adherence to zero-complexity, point-like world ‘model’

favours its simplistic reduction to a sequence of ‘pure’ numbers (symbols, geometrical constructions)

detached from any other, ‘subjective’, ‘qualitative’, material content and equivalent to an ‘ideal’, regular

and sequential (unitary) computer programme and results of its realisation qualified as ‘information’ (see

section 7.1). However, the unreduced, physical reality — ensuring, by the way, everyday existence of

any,  even  most  ‘abstract-mind’  mathematical  physicists  —  does  not  want  to  enter  into  the  narrow

framework  of  mechanistic  unitarity,  which  explains  the  evident  inefficiency  of  the  unitary  theory

applications to phenomena involving explicit manifestations of complexity, such as essentially quantum

behaviour  or  higher-complexity  systems  showing  pronounced  tendency  towards  involved  structure

creation. This leads the externally dominant, but internally bankrupt unitary thinking to inevitable payment

for its ultimate destruction of complexity, in the form of vain and confusing multiplication of artificial,

abstract entities (in the attempt to replace the dynamic multiplicity of real world structures) and the related

mutually incompatible ‘theories’ absolutely separated from reality, as well as intentional, unjustified

mystification of the unexplained and actually missing world dynamics (which is especially clearly seen in

the case of notorious ‘quantum mysteries’ and ‘paradoxes’, cf. section 5.3).

It is important to emphasize that the conventional, ‘mathematical’ physics, and unitary science in

general, is not more mathematically  consistent,  or  ‘exact’,  than  other  possible  kinds  of  knowledge,

contrary to what is implied by the conventional science paradigm itself and especially by the self-seeking,

deceitful propaganda of the unitary science merits. In fact, as it is clearly shown within the unreduced

interaction analysis of the universal science of complexity [1] (sections 3-5), the dynamically single-valued

imitation of multivalued reality in the conventional science, including its most mathematically ‘heavy’

branches and ‘complexity’ versions, corresponds to maximal possible inconsistency of mathematical

presentation of reality: the unitary science always deals with the minimum possible number of realisations

by considering only one, averaged, and actually arbitrarily deformed system realisation that replaces the

multilevel, fractally structured, and ‘living’ multiplicity of permanently changing realisations of any real

system. The persisting fundamental problems of the conventional science and its strange dependence on

the  officially  accepted  ‘mysteries’  result  just  from  that  ultimate  mathematical  inconsistency of its
dynamically single-valued approximation of reality (one can recall the long series of ‘rigorously’ proved,
but actually totally wrong, ‘uniqueness theorems’ of the conventional science as a characteristic example of
fundamental, evident inconsistency, now revealed and causally explained in the universal science of
complexity [1], see also a footnote in section 3.3, p. 36-37).

We see that the difference between the conventional, dynamically single-valued and unreduced
descriptions of reality is not in the choice of mathematical tools used (basic tools remain the same and are
quite simple), but rather in the way they are used in each case. The unitary science of the twentieth century
has silently transformed mathematics from a simple, though indispensable, technical tool, evidently blind

as  such,  into  the  unique  and  absolute  purpose  of  any  fundamental  research.  This  quick,  artificial

promotion of mathematics from a ‘servant’ to the ‘queen’ of sciences has not been useful, however, for

either science, or mathematics, since while science is artificially put into a state of conceptual stagnation,

196

its technical tool, remaining inevitably blind and simple as it is by its nature, takes now a myriad of

ambiguous,  arbitrarily  produced,  and  perverted  forms  in  the  vain  hope  to  guess  by  chance  only  the

external shape of nature's real complexity. One obtains thus the well-known ‘uncertainty’ of modern

mathematics reduced in practice to unlimited cabalistic delirium.

As  for  the  officially  alleged  ‘great  successes’  and  ‘unreasonable  efficiency’  of  the  standard,

‘mathematical’ physics, they can always be simulated by introduction of the necessary number of artificial,

abstract entities and rules and their adjustment to the ‘experimental data’, but without any consistent,

causally complete understanding of the true, physical world structure and explanation of the inevitably

emerging para-scientific ‘mysteries’ and ‘strange’ postulates which are arbitrarily excluded from the main

criterion  of  truth  of  the  unitary  science  (correspondence  between  theory  and  observation).  What  is

‘successful’ therefore in the unitary science farce is the tricky ‘marketing’ and ‘management’ of its ‘public

relations’ using real advances of empirical, intellectually blind technology (applied science) for hiding the

disastrous failure of the fundamental knowledge and justify its growing, unconditional financial support.

Remaining restricted by its zero-dimensional image of reality, the conventional unitarity tends to

arbitrarily ‘guessed’ and artificially fixed (postulated) imitations, or ‘models’, of natural system properties

‘existing’ only in abstract ‘sets’ or ‘spaces’, where the purely mathematical ‘elements’ and ‘dimensions’,

absent in physical reality, serve as exclusively symbolical, conventional ‘notations’ for real, empirically

observed entities, so that ‘correspondence between theory and experiment’ in separate, subjectively chosen

points is artificially arranged from the beginning, by the postulated choice of spuriously redundant (rather

than dynamically redundant!) abstract entities. The growing number of ‘justifiable’ unitary ‘models’ also

obtains its explanation: the number of single-valued models is determined by system realisation number

(actually huge) and thus its unreduced complexity (which explains, in particular, the a priori failure of

unitary science methods at higher complexity levels [1]). The conventional fundamental science considers,

however, such grotesque caricature of reality and its mechanistically adjusted, provocatively incomplete

‘agreement with experiment’ as ‘perfect understanding of reality’, often equipped with such epithets as

‘first principles’, ‘causality’, ‘realism’, or ‘new paradigm’ and provided correspondingly with all possible
and impossible technical investments,*) personal profits and honours (despite the stagnating ‘irresolvable’
problems and scandalous ‘mysteries’), which only confirms a quite specific, internally over-simplified,
but externally, practically infinitely tricky character of the underlying unitary ‘intelligence’.

*) Recall e. g. astronomical spending on a search for doubtful, and most probably nonexistent, gravitational waves and other
‘cosmological’  experimentation  in  favour  of  over-simplified,  subjectively  assumed  ‘models’,  as  well  as  so  many  other
‘exotic’, unnecessary experiments in confirmation of blind assumptions of today's ‘post-modern’, purely speculative and
occult version of unitary science, oriented to nowhere from the beginning, but selfishly promoted under general slogans like
‘search for truth’ or using atavistic beliefs in simple, ‘material’ irrationality or ‘supernatural’ physics from the part of unitary
system governors (recall the generously sponsored ‘antigravity’ research within the ‘zero-point field’ theory of the ‘respectful’
unitary  science,  among  so  many  other  similar  ‘initiatives’,  especially  in  the  high-energy  physics,  actually  nourished  by
‘secret’ hopes for another source of a ‘super-power’ that could permit ‘anyone’ who controls it to conquer and rule the world
without any progress of intellectual or spiritual capacities). While the latter hope seems, but only seems, to be supported by
the superficial ‘dominance’ of the ‘nuclear club’ members in the world affairs, their evident inability to solve any of the
serious real problems, so dangerously accumulating today (including those in the content and organisation of fundamental
science) clearly demonstrates that the true human ‘power’ providing the unique source of real progress can only be based on
the totally consistent understanding of reality situated far beyond the limits of blind semi-empirical ‘tricks’ of the unitary
thinking. The ‘developed’ unitary science of today can only use the standard features of the unreduced complexity, looking
‘mysterious’ within its own, artificial limitations, for self-seeking speculations and deceitful promotion of its ‘magic’ power.

197

Moreover,  being  eventually  poisoned  by  its  own  myth  of  a  ‘proven’  success,  the  dominating

unitarity becomes really mad and tends to claim that it is those grotesquely simplified, deadly fixed and

disrupted  constructions  of  the  conventional  symbolism  and  its  abstract  ‘spaces’  with  the  ‘necessary’

elements and ‘desired’ number of dimensions which constitute the fundamentally genuine, ‘mathematical’

reality, whereas the ‘ordinary’, observed and measured world entities are only a sort of its ‘envelope’, or a

‘secondary’, superficial reality somehow ‘spanning’, or mechanistically ‘moving through’, a ‘manifold’ of

those unchangeable, ‘ideal’ (but now, in fact, arbitrarily deformed and perverted!) Platonic constructions

(see e. g. [372-377]). Any interaction development, expressed by the mathematical procedure of consistent

equation solution (or result derivation), let alone its dynamically random, probabilistic version, remains a

much too complex, impossible action for that kind of unitary madness, actually just expressing the true

essence of the whole conventional, dynamically single-valued theory with maximal transparency that

avoids any artificial and irrelevant appeals to ‘realism’ performed sometimes within certain versions of the

same unitary symbolism. Needless to say, it is just those extreme branches of the unlimited unitary cabala

that dominate absolutely in the departments, centres, and laboratories of theoretical physics throughout the

world. Insisting on the primacy of their abstract, ‘pure’ constructions, the masters of unitarity ‘suddenly’

become surprisingly practical and particularly attached to the rough, material world, demonstrating truly

professional  use  of  some  of  its  most  dirty  practices,  once  the  problem  of  financial  support  for  their

‘disinterested’ research is involved. The grotesquely inflated, impertinent, and crazy pretensions of the

unitary thinking champions hide only perverted emptiness of spirit and mediocrity of thought.

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Tandis que, par la force même des choses, s'appesantit sur la recherche
et sur l'enseignement scientifiques le poids des structures administratives,
des préoccupations financières et la lourde armature des réglementations
et des planifications, il est plus indispensable que jamais de préserver la
liberté de l'esprit scientifique, la libre initiative des chercheurs originaux
parce qu'elles ont toujours été et seront sans doute toujours les sources les
plus  fécondes  des  grands  progrès  de  la  Science.

Louis de Broglie, Nécessité de la liberté dans la recherche

scientifique (1962) [381]

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

The remedy to the mortal diseases of the stagnating unitary science is clearly specified by the
realistic  world  picture  of  the  universal  science  of  complexity  [1]:  one  should  definitely  abandon  the
artificial, subjectively imposed limitations of unitary thinking and apply the mathematically and physically
complete, unreduced description of natural phenomena inevitably involving a qualitative, conceptual
knowledge extension, that of the omnipresent dynamic multivaluedness. On this way one immediately
encounters, however, the concrete wall of quite specific internal organisation of unitary science, hidden
behind externally ‘democratic’, ‘open’ façade and closely related to the above limitations of its content.

Since the body of unitary knowledge is formed from various equally incorrect, one-dimensional (zero-

complexity) projections of dynamically multivalued reality, separated both from each other and from the

objective,  observed  world  structure,  its  actual  organisation  follows  the  same  route  and  inevitably

198

degenerates into effectively totalitarian rule of several competing clans of self-designated ‘sages’ forming

veritable ‘scientific’ mafias and subjectively ‘chosen’ due to their ‘best’ internal organisation (realised

through unlimited favouritism) and ‘proximity’ to the ruling powers and money sources (usually equally

corrupt and forming the same kind of structure at the whole society scale, irrespective of the external,

‘embedding’ regimes and ideologies). Any ‘success’ in that kind of science organisation is determined in

reality not by the officially announced ‘search for truth’, i. e. most consistent understanding of the real

world behaviour, but by correspondence of the proposed results to the subjectively dominating unitary

imitation of reality usually originating from, and therefore supported by, a local or global ‘high priest’

(mafia boss) of the unitary science.

The universal concept of complexity can be directly applied to science (and society) organisation

itself and such application shows immediately that the unitary science content and its dominating, also

quasi-unitary organisation type are objectively unified by the fundamental tendency of artificially imposed

simplification of the natural dynamic complexity. Such relation between form and content of unitary

knowledge  is  not  occasional  and  can  be  considered  as  manifestation  of  the  general  ‘complexity

correspondence principle’ applied above (sections 5.2.2, 7.1-2) to micro-machine operation and being

itself a corollary of the universal symmetry of complexity. This causally derived principle shows also that

any further progress in the knowledge content (towards the unreduced complexity of the real world),

apparently indispensable for further existence of fundamental science as such, needs a higher-complexity

system of science organisation that should progressively replace the rigid totalitarian structures of the

unitary knowledge organisation [1] (see also the end of this section).

It  is  clear  from  the  above  relation  between  unitary  imitations  of  truth  and  its  unreduced,

dynamically  multivalued  content  exactly  reflecting  the  real  world  structure  that  the  latter  kind  of

knowledge, based on the causally complete, intrinsically consistent understanding of reality, just have the

minimal, practically vanishing chances to be accepted, or even simply ‘taken into account’, by the corrupt

unitary hierarchy that cannot, on the other hand, realise any true progress of knowledge, so badly needed

today,  and  thus  forms  a  deadly  fixed  jam  on  the  route  of  progress.  In  the  evident  absence  of  truly

consistent  problem  solutions,  and  thus  any  real  progress,  the  official  science  naturally  degrades  to

thoroughly decorated, ‘elegant’ lies serving exclusively for subjective, unmerited ambitions satisfaction of
their authors and having nothing to do with the officially proclaimed science goal of ‘search for truth’. In
fact, the massively supported, dominating lie of the unitary imitation of reality acts right against the
unreduced truth and any honest attempt to find it.

It is not surprising that the arbitrary deviations in the unitary science content are accompanied by
equally impressive spectrum of all possible versions of bad practice in its organisation and functioning,
such as using the notorious ‘peer-review’ system for efficient and extremely strict prevention of support
and publication in ‘recognised’ printed sources of any professional, but ‘free’ result, obtained beyond
subjective interests of the governing scientific mafias, or ‘elites’, especially if it contains an evident ‘grain

of truth’ able to disprove the ‘officially accepted’ doctrine and thus presents a potential menace to high

positions of its officially ‘prominent’ authors. In that way a special, governing caste is formed and put into

a position of uncontrolled and unjust dominance, where it has the exclusive ‘right to kill’ or to publish

199

anything it wants, combined with the unlimited access to unpublished results of those who are actually

deprived from any real possibility of publication in ‘official’ sources supported, by the way, by public

money. In this general climate of scientific criminality and intellectual, if not criminal, fraud the ‘usual’

moral, unofficially maintained rules and ‘good manners’ in research, such as reference to previously

published, or even unpublished, work by other authors on the same subject, correct authorship, or proper

respect for junior colleagues and their rights, become quite unusual and practically extinct. As a result of

all those disgusting ‘minority games’, the real quality of ‘solid’, generously supported publications of the

official science is often indistinguishable from a parascientific delirium, including all kind of unitary

imitations around occasionally appearing sound, realistic ideas which, however, cannot be accepted for
publication themselves, in their original version by a ‘rigorous’ peer-review selection procedure.&)

One obtains thus an ‘ironic’, post-modern science choice between the absence of any really useful,

new results (in which case the paper can be published) and the absence of publications in ‘recognised’

printed sources (i. e. the true novelty is permitted only if it can be ignored). Although this situation is

established now under the cover of ‘developed’, ‘Western’ democracy, it practically realises the purpose

of the ‘totalitarian’, i. e. simply more open, version of unitary organisation existing, for example, in the

communist Soviet Union, where the obligatory official permission for an open publication delivered and

personally  signed by an openly  gathered  peer-review  panel  of  chief  scientists  was  concluded  with  a

notorious  phrase:  “This  paper  can  be  published  in  the  open  source  because  it  does  not  contain  any

essential, new result”. One needs only to compare the modern content of any of the most prestigious

physical journals, especially taken per unit volume, with that of the same journal but edited several tens of

years before in order to see the striking resemblance between the purpose of ‘totalitarian’ and the result of

‘democratic’ peer-review version, i. e. the dominating mediocrity of the essential content.

Although the true origin of the evil, the unitary way of thinking, is now clearly visible behind the

official establishment cover, one cannot help wondering at the speed and degree of degradation of the

whole ‘enterprise’ of the conventional science which takes especially big scale just in the most prosperous

parts of the modern ‘technological paradise’, where the scientific activity profits from quite comfortable

conditions, elitary social status and increased public care. Whereas much smaller deviations in economic

life of the same countries are still treated as a serious crime or at least ‘misconduct’ and usually punished
or at least ‘followed’, the evident forgery and well-known moral debauchery in the official fundamental

&) In that way one obtains the ‘sustainable’ vicious circle of lie, theft, and perversion of the ‘developed’ unitary system of
knowledge and power, where a previous, ‘well-established’ lie is used for justification of a new theft and perversion producing
the ‘next generation’ of officially supported lie, and so on. And when finally the deviation from reality and harmful practical
consequences become too big and create a catastrophic system crisis, those who have thoroughly developed the devastation
present themselves rather as its ‘innocent victims’ and after having ‘severely denounced’ and ‘exemplary’ punished some
formal ‘top clerks’ (or clergy) of the compromised system, enthusiastically give rise to its new version involving new vicious
circles of lie. In science the start of the ‘developed unitarity’ domination, with its characteristic lie-theft cycle, can be clearly
traced  down  to  some  ‘new  physics’  interpretations  at  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  century,  where  e.  g.  an  especially
‘prodigious’  amateur  scientist  quickly  became  an  official  ‘genius’  by  producing  and  surprisingly  easily  publishing  a
conveniently  formalised,  but  also  fatally  simplified  compilation  of  the  ideas  of  other,  much  deeper  thinking  scientists,
without any reference to their work (the practice considered as unacceptable, severe deviation before that new ‘liberation’
which revealed quite soon its other aspects and consequences). Being initiated in that way, the ‘new physics’ development
proceeded  in  the  same  direction  and  has  inevitably  attained  the  ‘end-of-science’  situation  of  today,  including  the  over-
simplified, trickily ‘arranged’ content and unlimited, criminal deviations in practical organisation.

200

science can only be mildly criticised in special, ‘intellectual’ sources practically limited just to ‘closed’

circles of the ‘averted’ participants of the process, while they continue to profit from ever growing material

support from public sources, most prestigious prizes, and practically unlimited dissemination of their
bankrupt imitations in the press and all educational establishments.(cid:176) ) It follows that what is considered as a
serious,  unacceptable  deviation  within  the  ‘classical’  set  of  values  becomes  a  common,  practically

acceptable behaviour in the system dominated by the unitary thinking and its intrinsic adherents.

The modern mafia-like mode of unitary science organisation is the inevitable consequence of its

split, decaying content and therefore both have emerged, not occasionally, immediately after the definite

‘crash’ of the ‘perfect’, classical version of the same unitary science at the beginning of the twentieth

century known for its destructive tendencies in all spheres of life. Whereas the true, fundamental origin of

that scientific revolution was just the beginning of the end of visible, but actually superficial ‘successes’ of

the  unitary  approach  of  the  classical  epoch  (known  as  ‘Newtonian  science’)  and  the  advent  of  the

unreduced, multivalued complexity manifestations (in the form of quantum behaviour, relativistic effects,

chaoticity,  etc.,  see  [1-4]),  the  emerging  ‘new  physics’  doctrine  has  failed  completely  to  reveal  the

underlying complex interaction dynamics and has actually reproduced the unitary, dynamically single-

valued approach of the classical physics, but now inevitably in its explicitly incomplete, contradictory and

therefore  mystified  (irrational),  abstract,  and  ‘paradoxical’  (internally  frustrated)  version  strangely

resembling most occult branches of medieval mysticism (such as the notorious cabala), but promoted

‘paradoxically’ under the brand name of ‘mathematical physics’ pretending to be especially ‘exact’ (i. e.

‘objective’) and ‘rigorous’ (i. e. ‘consistent’). Contrary to the self-conceited statement of the modern

official science, the ‘new’ physics (e. g. [378]) represented by the canonical postulated, abstract and

irreducibly separated theories of quantum behaviour, relativity, and chaos (‘statistical physics’) cannot be

considered as a natural extension of the classical, Newtonian science, since it has multiplied (considerably)

the number of mysteries, rather than consistent explanations (solutions) of the old and new puzzles, and

this is clearly because it remained completely within the same qualitative concept as the classical physics

(cid:176) ) This situation in science shows, by the way, that the so-called ‘(developed) democracy’, often presented as ‘at least a
reasonable (or the best possible) guarantee’ against the worst, the authoritarian, unconditional domination of rulers at power,
not only does not provide any such guarantee, but actually represents itself but a more elaborated, hidden, and therefore much
more dangerous version just of that absolute, ‘infinitely’ unfair and unreasonable domination of a group of tricky ‘usurpers’ of
power against which this same democracy should provide the ‘best’ cure. Indeed, any most ‘democratic’ system of unitary
power, with all its official ‘hierarchy’ of absolutely dominating establishment constitutes evidently just the most ‘developed’,
i. e. decadent and hypocritical, version of the same, unitary kind of social structure [1], where the explicit, ‘honest’ oppression
rule of a ‘naïve’, ‘non-democratic’ unitarity is simply replaced by a more involved, but actually not less strict domination of
‘bosses’  with  unconditionally  high  possibilities  (though  they  may  not  directly  coincide  with  the  officially  proclaimed,
formally  changeable  ‘governors’,  being  hidden  instead  within  an  intricate  enough  system  of  monetary  and  political
manipulation). It should not be surprising that, as both history and today's reality invariably confirm, the ‘democratic’ version
of  unitarity  actually  serves  only  as  a  transient,  precursory  stage  for  the  inevitable  following  advent  of  its  another  open,
natural, and therefore more stable, authoritarian version (one can compare the total historical duration and real creation results
of ‘democratic’ and ‘authoritarian’ phases within all known, unitary civilisations). Transition to the qualitatively different,
nonunitary, intrinsically creative (progressive) kind of social structure and way of development becomes possible, and even
irreplaceable, today [1], but it has nothing to do with any version of the conventional, unitary ‘democracy’ that provides only
mechanistic,  formal  imitations of ‘liberty’, ‘equality’ and ‘progress’ used actually for suppression of the real, unreduced
version emergence (including any superficial 'liberalisation’ of the decadent unitary power which always leads in reality to the
opposite result, i. e. establishment of a particularly ‘hard’, totalitarian version of unitary rule becoming unavoidable in the
atmosphere of omnipresent chaoticity resulting inevitably from the unitary ‘liberalisation’).

201

(now  causally  specified  as  dynamic  single-valuedness,  or  unitarity),  but  has  been  vainly  applied  to
explicitly multivalued, empirically obtained manifestations of the unreduced complexity of nature.*)

The century of destruction, with its world wars, atomic horrors, ideological oppositions, mass

media, mass production, and mass extinction, created a quite prolific ground for the most prosperous

growth and unjust domination of the fruitless unitary substitutes, using the new, ‘collective’ modes of

their own promotion within various political versions of unitarity deadly ill with the same disease, ‘social

AIDS’, hitting and paralysing first just the central ‘units of control’ (it is not difficult to see that all those

destructive social phenomena and related tendencies of moral degradation always originate themselves

from the same simplified, unitary kind of thinking that further uses them for the unfair promotion of its

one-dimensional imitations, in science and elsewhere). The resulting ‘feast of destruction’ has, however, a

naturally limited life cycle and can continue only until the destruction is complete and one is left with a total

chaos  of  low-level  dynamics  of  decay.  At  that  point,  just  attained  around  the  recently  celebrated

‘millennium border’, the futility of the conventional fundamental science becomes especially evident on the

background of the purely empirical technology and applied science successes, in spite of the desperate, but

less and less convincing efforts of the bankrupt unitary science to attribute the latter to its own (actually

non-existing)  advances.  The  difference  between  the  two  is  clearly  illustrated,  for  example,  by  the

persisting contrast between quickly advancing practical development and applications of the ordinary,

classical  and  regular,  computers  and  exclusively  academic  ‘successes’  of  the  conventional  quantum

computers, despite all their promised ‘miracles’ and high quantity of efforts applied during the last twenty

years. In the meanwhile, the ‘liberated’ and technically super-powerful, but intellectually blind technology

modifies today (and inevitably destroys) the full range of natural complexity, without any idea about its

true content and consequences of its change becoming therefore objectively dangerous on the global scale,

whereas the unitary science remains enslaved by the militant empiricism and cannot help in principle.

The ensuing justified and critically growing ‘public distrust of science’ is one of the worst practical

consequences of the unitary science separation from reality, even not so much because of the underlying

intuitive (but actually justified) fear of the unpredictable technology results, but because of the clearly

perceived, real and persisting absence of understanding of those results, arbitrarily extended to ‘science’ in

general, by not only any ‘lay’, but also quite highly educated people (including, in fact, professional
scientists themselves). Whereas the usual ‘political trick’ of the dominating science elite consists in infinite

*)  An  important  nuance  should,  however,  be  added  to  the  snapshot  of  the  ‘revolutionary’  epoch.  It  appears  that  the  key
discoveries of the new physics themselves, constituting its main content and remaining unchanged during a century, such as
Planckian quantization of radiation processes (Planck's constant), de Broglie wave of a massive particle, Schrödinger equation,
Lorentz transformations of space-time, and first insight into dynamical system complexity by Poincaré, have been performed
by convinced realists strongly oriented towards ‘objective’, absolute and universal kind of truth (see e. g. [2-4] and further
references therein). However, those solitary giants of the ending classical epoch were extremely quickly replaced, together with
their ‘old-fashioned’ values and ‘too long’ search for the unreduced, consistent truth, by well-organised, collectively acting and
thinking groups of swift-handed parvenus of the new, ‘revolutionary’ wave and characteristically ‘prodigious’ flavour who
used the confusion of the transitional period and the justified ‘thinking pause’ of realistic scientists in face of the discovered
qualitatively new phenomena in order to promote their unmerited domination by ‘quick and easy’ kind of answers to all ‘big’
questions, inevitably involving that grotesque mixture of abstract mathematics, postulated mysteries, unlimited relativism,
shameless fraud and dirty politics which actually dominated the whole physics of the twentieth century, despite the long and
vigorous opposition to it from the defeated ‘giants’ [2-4]. It is the modern ‘end of science’, in all its aspects, which realises
the unavoidable payment for that kind of ‘progress’.

202

(and unjustified) complaining about the low quality/intensity of science teaching and popularisation,

presented as the main origin of the dramatic fall of younger generation interest in science, we clearly see

now that the true, objectively specified source of the conventional science esoterism is hidden deeply in its

essential content and is the same one as that which separates it from reality it pretends to describe, while

making  it  instead  obscure  and  abstract:  this  source  of  failure  is  the  fatally  reduced,  scientifically

incomplete, dynamically single-valued image of reality inherent in the conventional science approach. A

‘lay’ person (but actually also any ‘educated professional’ with a normally ‘human’, nonunitary kind of

intelligence) can well understand and be interested in both the observed reality as it is and its unreduced,

complex-dynamical  and  hence  realistic  picture  within  the  causally  complete  kind  of  knowledge

(exemplified by the universal science of complexity), but the same person (as well as any  ‘education

system’) cannot be responsible for the intrinsic limitations of the heavily, artificially reduced unitary

science content just giving rise to all the ‘bad consequences’ and creating the obscure and abstract, really

repulsive flavour of that particular, very special kind of knowledge (and associated way of thinking). In

other words, ‘unreduced complexity’, ‘realism’, and ‘understandability’ (attractiveness) of knowledge

mean the same, upon which we obtain the scientifically rigorous, exact interpretation of those ‘vague’

notions  around  social  impact  of  science,  as  well  as  a  clearly  specified,  fundamental  reason  for  the

growing, and thus totally justified, public ‘distrust’ of the unitary kind of science (which is still massively

imposed as the unique possible kind of scientific knowledge, including its reduced, ugly and inefficient,

versions of ‘complexity’).

Therefore,  instead  of  spending  lots  of  public  money  on  the  vain  publicity  campaigns  for  the

conceptually dead unitary science, totally enslaved by the pure, blind empiricism, it is time for the whole

‘establishment’ to acknowledge the evident facts and start listening to those propositions of change which

involve true, explicitly demonstrated solutions to fundamental and practical problems (including science

organisation itself). It is not by low-level popularisation of a ‘physics of beer froth’, or fraudulent play of

words  around  ‘quantum  teleportation’,  or  with  the  help  of  artificially  forced,  massive  promotion  of
‘elegant’ lies of the unitary imitations of reality(cid:176) ) that one can hope to regain the motivated public interest in
and trust of science, but rather by explicitly proposing the new, realistic, transparent, and unified kind of

knowledge  whose  feasibility  is  proven  de  facto  within  the  dynamic  redundance  paradigm  by  actual
demonstration of its fundamental basis and numerous applications to real problem solutions at various
levels of complexity [1-4] (including the case of micro-machine dynamics analysed here in more detail).

In direct relation to ‘public understanding of science’ is the popular ‘intellectual’ talk about the ‘two
cultures’, where the first, ‘artistic’ culture is represented by the humanities in the university courses and
the second, ‘technical’ culture originates in the ‘exact sciences’. The growing rupture between the two

(cid:176) ) Note, in particular, the massive introduction of such ‘interdisciplinary’ subjects and even scientific degrees as ‘public
understanding of science’ into study programmes of many ‘leading’ universities, which means that the farther unitary science
is  from  real,  fundamental  problem  solution,  the  more  public  money  is  spent  by  its  decadent  hierarchy  for  large-scale
propaganda of its ever more obscure and abstract speculations. It is evident that such ‘practical measures’ as if ‘in favour of
science’ can only give the opposite, negative result, since as recent experience convincingly shows, in reality one cannot
deeply influence anybody's consciousness by force, and the unaware ‘general public’ vigorously attacked by the militant
unitary scientism can only externally yield to the official pressures, but intrinsically will be only more turned away from
support and understanding of such kind of knowledge, dangerously associating it with science in general, with any kind of
ordered, not purely empirical knowledge.

203

cultures was emphasised by C.P. Snow [379] and then permanently discussed, mostly from practical

points of view, up to recent attempts to unify the splitted whole within a superficial ‘third culture’ (see e.

g. [380]) always representing, however, only perverted variations of mechanistic ‘interdisciplinarity’ and

cumulative ‘erudition’. We can see now that what was intuitively characterised as ‘technical’ culture,

whose understanding is difficult for people with ‘artistic’ kind of thinking, corresponds to a rigorously

specified simplification of reality by unitary thinking, i. e. artificial reduction of the real, dynamically

multivalued world complexity to zero complexity value of only one, fixed realisation, starting already from

the most fundamental, ‘physical’ entities which not only are ‘difficult to understand’, but actually could

not exist in the zero-complexity version attributed to them by the unitary science. It is quite natural,

however, that the difference between the unitary reduction of reality and its observed manifestations

generally grows with the unreduced dynamic complexity and becomes practically unacceptable starting

from  high  enough  complexity  levels  which  just  determine  the  objective  meaning  of  conventional

knowledge division into ‘exact (fundamental) sciences’ (lowest complexity levels), ‘natural sciences’

(medium to high complexity), and ‘humanities’, or ‘liberal arts’ (highest complexity levels) [1]. One

should also take into account the fact that the first, ‘artistic’ culture deals with the unreduced dynamic

complexity only until it remains at a purely empirical, ‘subjective’ level. Once it tries, however, to impose

a ‘science-like’ order upon its objects of interest, i. e. to understand them, it immediately falls into the

same  deadly  sin  of  unitary  thinking,  i.  e.  complexity  reduction,  appearing  in  the  form  of  simplified

‘classification schemes’ and other fixed, abstract constructions. Therefore in reality there can be only one,

universal  kind  of  intrinsically  complete  and  permanently  developing  knowledge  and  culture  (or

understanding) that inseparably unifies within it the qualitatively extended versions of the conventional

‘sciences’ and ‘arts’, where the ‘non-quantifiable’ notions of the latter can be explicitly and consistently

quantified, while the ‘mathematical’ ideas from the former can be expressed in qualitative, physically

transparent terms of really existing entities, without losing any ‘scientific’ rigour [1].

It is not surprising that in the persisting ‘contradictory’ situation in science the ongoing discussions

of the ontological and organisational problems of its unitary version (though silently and incorrectly

considered as the unique general kind of scientific knowledge) acquire increasingly intense and public

character (e. g. [5-7,381-410]) thus actually confirming the essential doubts [339] in the conventional
science validity that appeared together with the ‘new physics’ (and rightfully rejected the latter as a really
new paradigm). However, the situation does not seem to show any sign of positive change and it is not
difficult to see why: any, even most vigorous criticism of the existing system of knowledge cannot induce
a constructive change without a clear, realistic alternative for that kind of knowledge being designated at
least in its main lines. The existing propositions involve inevitably only fruitless, ill-specified generalities
(like the recent tendency for mechanistic ‘interdisciplinarity’), or else amelioration of details or external
aspects (‘façade repainting’) of the existing system, without any real, deep and well-specified change of

the content and form of the fundamental knowledge system that can alone induce the necessary qualitative

transition in practical, socially large role of knowledge. Indeed, the majority of the ‘official’ (published)

criticism of the unitary science is produced by its well-placed adepts and demonstrates nothing but various

204

attempts to save the existing system by modifying only its details, including especially reinforcement of

one's own position within it (which closely resembles the case of Soviet ‘perestroyka’ or else a modern
‘enlightened’ bureaucrat complaining about ‘too much of bureaucracy’ in his work).*) Moreover, criticism
of conventional science without clear designation of its really different, extended version often produces a

mechanistic  opposition  reaction  of  the  unitary  ‘priests’  in  power  who  take  the  role  of  ‘shamans  of

scientism’ [408] and tend to present that criticism as an attack against any kind of scientific, properly

ordered  (‘objective’)  knowledge,  or  ‘anti-science’  movement,  favouring,  according  to  them,  the

development  of  disordered,  anarchical  state  of  knowledge  (see  e.  g.  [409]),  whereas  in  reality  the

observed ‘chaos in science’ is the direct result of the artificial, huge limitation inherent in its very special

(though unfairly dominating) version, the unitary science. This blind and deadlock opposition can only

amplify the existing crisis, leading already to destructive ‘science wars’ which cannot produce any positive

result in principle.

In the meanwhile, further decadence of the content and organisation of the unitary science gives

rise to its ever more odious, grotesque forms which, however, continue to be mechanistically maintained,

‘despite  everything’,  within  the  officially  adopted  system.  Thus,  the  self-seeking  promotion  of  the

senseless  and  contradictory  abstractions  in  professional  and  popular  sources  of  information  borrows

increasingly its methods from the show-business kind of activity of a corrupt monetary system, where

what really matters is not the actual content of a result, but rather its ‘appreciation’ by easily manipulated

crowds of intellectually paralysed ‘lay public’ and conformist ‘professional critics’ chosen, of course,

from the same milieu of interested ‘priests’ and their ‘clans’ that governs the estimated ‘research’ and

strongly defends its absolute right to subjectively decide who tells the truth worthy of support (see e. g.

[411]). “How to sell science better” is the major problem and purpose of the unitary science ‘paradigm’

that actually and openly dominates in its most ‘advanced’ structures, determining their real activity.

Today's  system  of  public  money  distribution  for  science  support  deliberately,  and  often  even

officially, favours not the explicit solution of real, fundamental or practical, problems, but rather creation

of highly centralised, effectively authoritarian ‘networks’ of scientists around various unitary imitations,

actually forming self-seeking clans, where these ‘networks’ themselves are considered as the main result

of ‘scientific’ activity [412] (including the generous payment for the pleasures of ‘networking’ process

*) Note, in particular, the ambiguous role of various ‘commissions on ethics in science’, related discussions and ‘subjects of
study’ inserted recently at various levels of the official science establishment and supposed to provide ‘ultimate’, higher-order
solutions to various particular problems of potentially dangerous science applications or incorrect practices within science
itself. It remains unclear, however, how such kind of purely ‘moralistic’, non-professional intervention can resolve a difficulty
originating from fundamental deficiency of the well-specified, professional science, without introducing a major qualitative
change in that science content and organisation. The illusion that it can only increases the existing flaws and dangers of the
unitary  science  trying  to  preserve  in  that  way  its  basic  structure  intact.  Which  ‘ethical  commission’  would  decide,  for
example,  that  the  whole  content  of  the  unitary  quantum  chaos,  quantum  computation  and  information  theories,  richly
decorated  with  all  kind  of  fictitious  ‘teleportations’  and  supported  by  many  most  ‘prominent’  scientists  in  ‘prestigious’
institutions for many years, is but a huge scientific fraud full of evident lies and elementary contradictions, such as direct,
unexplained deviations from the fundamental, well-established, and recognised laws of the same science (see e. g. section 2)?
And even if it would one day, then why shouldn't the same decision be taken with respect to exactly the same situation in
such  equally  ‘elitary’,  but  totally  corrupt  fields  as  modern  ‘quantum  field  theory’  and  related  official  ‘cosmology’  and
‘relativity’? In the meanwhile, the false ‘ethical’ zeal around real dangers of the unitary science is actually used by all kind of
parasitic ‘scientologists’, having nothing to do with the scientific creation itself, for grabbing their share in the pie of public
spending on science actually controlled by their equally blind and corrupt ‘colleagues’ from the ‘political sector’ of the same
unitary system ‘elite’.

205

from ‘public’ money sources which are actually alienated from the public and its true interests by the

destructive, unitary system of governance and its selfish ‘elites’). One always gets exactly what one really

wants to obtain, and therefore it is no wonder that after having spent many billions of dollars, every year

after year, just for the development of parasitic, fruitless clans, one gets just the mafia-like structure of

European science which finds itself, however, ‘strangely’ behind other ‘developed’ (also corrupt) science

structures in the essential, properly scientific results always including only real problem solutions which

actually need only a small portion of the vainly wasted treasure for their most detailed elaboration.

A ‘successful’, but in reality wrong and fruitless, theory, ‘concept’, or ‘approach’ thus imposed in

the ugly arrangement of selfish ‘political’ interests between the clans is then intensely advertised and

popularised for sell on the world-wide scale with the help of totally subordinate media and money sources

relying essentially on the virtual absence of any truly critical, motivated attitudes within a ‘developed’

industrial society, with its ‘post-modern’ (parasitic and indifferent) life style of a banal show that has been

gradually invading its ‘mass-consciousness’ state with the help of the same, only formally ‘free’ media

and really interested, but selfish governing structures. How many publicity noise, highest distinctions and

prestigious  prizes  were  associated  only  in  more  recent  times  with  all  those  useless,  inconsistent  and

imitative ‘renormalisation groups’, ‘diagrams’, ‘path integrals’, ‘quantum field theories’, ‘(quantum)

cosmologies’, ‘cybernetics’, ‘artificial intelligence’ promises, ‘general systems theories’, ‘complexities’,

‘chaoticities’, ‘time arrows’, and many other ‘breakthrough concepts’ and ‘advanced study’ paradigms

(cf.  [1,5-7]),  but  the  fundamental  problems  involved  remain  unsolved  and  the  related  contradictions

accumulate, while the announced ‘prodigious’ theories, being in reality but extremely superficial fakes and

deliberately  intricate  plays  with  adjustable  symbols,  rules,  and  parameters,  permanently  replace  one

another and then silently disappear, after having vainly consumed the desired quantities of public money

for selfish pleasures of the ‘happy few’ from ‘scientific elites’ and ‘educated community’.

Now one can clearly “know them by their fruits”, but using their unbalanced power, the “false

prophets” of the unitary science continue to transform the temple of knowledge into “a den of thieves” and

lead the whole society to a catastrophic version of the ‘end of science’, so that a deliberate, professional

sabotage of science development could not be more efficient, than the ‘amateur’ action of the unitary

approach  promoters.  The  destroyed,  ultimately  perverted  intellectual  landscapes  and  critically  high,
justified public distrust of that kind of science are the main results of the unitary thinking domination with
unlimited ‘glory and power’ during the twentieth century. The same, well-known story helplessly and
grotesquely repeats itself like a phrase from a spoiled record: again and again “a corrupt tree bringeth forth
evil fruit”, and the crazy, catastrophically growing obsession with the idea that the crude force of unitary
system power and money ‘can do everything’ leads inevitably to the proportionally terrible disaster, as it
was clearly demonstrated many times only during the last hundred years of modern history. There is no
other choice within the unitary kind of thinking and organisation: being intrinsically limited to the cage of
its  ultimately  low  complexity,  the  unitary  system  inevitably  and  painfully  alternates  between  the

‘totalitarian’,  more  or  less  open,  domination  by  authoritarian  ‘clans’  and  ‘democratic’,  more  or  less

deceitful, but completely fruitless and auto-destructive state of ‘global chaos’. However, contrary to its

own,  self-protective  mythology,  the  unitary  system,  including  all  its  versions  and  their  inevitably

206

destructive dogmata, is not the unique, and certainly not the ‘best possible’, way of real world existence

and development (see the end of this section).

The super-authoritarian, self-seeking structure of the official science operation, badly hidden now

behind its ‘democratic’ discourse, can have only one, easily predictable orientation and result. Particular

speculations and justifications of evidently false imitations of reality take, on the contrary, a practically

infinite variety of most exotic forms and colours. It is enough to have a look at the main directions and

examples of recent ‘interpretations’ of quantum mechanics or metamorphoses in the officially supported

‘quantum field theory’ and ‘cosmology’ to see that there indeed ‘everything is possible’ (on paper), every

kind of deviation, inconsistency, or sudden change of opinions depending simply on the last cry of a

purely subjective, ‘post-modern’ vogue promoted by a privileged ‘priest’ and his clan or recast of the

haphazard distribution of ‘experimentally measured’ (but in reality subjectively interpreted and arbitrarily
fitted) parameters of a postulated, but inconsistent ‘model’.(cid:176) ) The muddy flux of unitary imitations of
reality of the ‘post-modern’ age includes also permanently appearing pretentious versions of completely

‘new kind of science’, ‘third culture’, ‘spiritually upgraded’ or ‘ethically controlled’, ‘interdisciplinary’

science and other ‘edge’ ideas from specially ‘chosen’ minds, ‘most complex and sophisticated’ by their
own definition&) and therefore supported by equally ‘prodigious’ market dealers, often claiming their
‘strong’ opposition to the conventional knowledge, but proposing, in fact, just another set of postulated,

abstract entities and simplified deviations from truth, quite falling within the same, unitary way of thinking

and its practical consequences (this ‘false prophet’ phenomenon is characteristic of any ‘epoch of change’,
or ‘generalised phase transition’, in science and society [1]).#) In view of their evident inconsistency, the

(cid:176) ) In connection to quantum computation story one can recall, for example, an especially ‘prodigious’ version of ‘multiverse’
interpretation of quantum mechanics, where the multiple ‘possibilities’ of quantum behaviour are ‘obtained’ by postulation of
an artificial, mechanistic dissection of the abstract Hilbert space of states, or ‘multiverse’, into ‘slices’ corresponding to those
individual possibilities, or ‘universes’, the whole ‘process’ being arbitrarily equipped with a word-play label of ‘information
flow’ [74,75]. Another particularly ‘prodigious’ speculation considers the whole universe evolution as operation of a unitary
(sequential  and  regular)  computer  [150],  after  a  very  intense  talk  about  ‘complexity’  in  quantum  computation  under  the
auspices of the most ‘advanced’ complexity studies in the Santa Fe Institute [62] (see also section 7.1). The ‘informational’
[72,73,317,319,330], ‘consistent-histories’ [329,413-415], ‘decoherence’ [92,146-149,182,224,225,274,414,415], and various
other ‘interpretations’ of quantum mechanics (e. g. [15,16,74,75,77,194,195,197-206,416-429]) contribute to infinite series
of vain post-modern ‘narratives’ chaotically flickering around the same, persisting ‘mysteries’ of the standard theory [2-4,15,
16,430,431] and involve also the expensive, ‘super-fine’ experiments, where plays of words and related logical ‘loopholes’
(discovered, of course, only after the ‘seminal paper’ publication) are accompanied by plays with devices and numbers around
basically deficient unitary ‘models’, but the results obtained never clarify anything in reality understanding (see e. g. [432-
435]). The underlying pretensions of the ‘advanced’ unitary science to ‘ultimate reality’ understanding (e. g. [436]) only
emphasize its imitative content and truly ‘unlimited’ organisational possibilities (where for example some main participants
can vigorously deny the very idea of ultimate reality and unified understanding in favour of different ‘discussion clubs’ [411],
while an existing consistent version of unified reality description cannot have any chance to be even considered as such
without being subjectively ‘promoted’ by one of the leading ‘clubs’).
&) For a particular illustration of the true content and ‘flavour’ of that kind of activity, see e. g. a short account by J. Mejias,
“Which universe would you like?”, originally published in Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (28 August 2000, No. 199, p. 33)
and reproduced in English translation at http://www.edge.org/documents/press/faz_8.28.02.e.html, as well as many other
materials from the same web site (see also refs. [150,368,380]).
#) Those particularly ‘unlimited’ fantasies of the unitary theory, clearly revealing its badly hidden internal dissatisfaction and
evident contradictions, are often based on arbitrary, postulated ‘mixture’ between different complexity levels. Thus in many
cases related to ‘quantum information’ concept and mentioned in this work, a ‘quantum’ type of behaviour and formalism are
directly attributed to higher complexity levels or, on the contrary, higher complexity manifestations, such as consciousness,
are used for a ‘radical’ explanation of the canonical quantum mysteries (see e. g. [15,68-71,77,187,189,190,192-195,350,354,
366,367,419,421,422,437-442]).  This  kind  of  approach  directly  contradicts  to  the  complexity  correspondence  principle
(section  7.2)  supported  eventually  by  all  well-established  conservation  laws  and  therefore  could  be  easily  avoided  upon
elementary application of the unreduced science of complexity [1-4].

207

post-modern ‘narratives’ of the decaying unitarity are generally justified by the purpose of ‘free’, ‘artistic’

creation as if approaching science to a desirable ‘interdisciplinary’ state bordering on a futuristic art.

However, when they fight for an effectively unconditional support for their ‘art works’ from the part of

unaware public/sponsors, the unitary ‘artists’ forget about the ‘practical aesthetics’ of artistic creation and

‘suddenly’  change  their  decorative  “sheep's  clothing”  to  the  real  habits  of  “ravening  wolves”,  thus

confirming once again the ancient wisdom.

The  ultimate  subjectivity,  abstraction,  and  fruitlessness  of  content  of  modern  official,  unitary

science, as well as ‘Jesuitical’ methods of its practical organisation, actually throw it back to the level of

medieval, Pre-Cartesian scholasticism, i. e. infinite and vain interpretation of the officially fixed, pre-

established (and therefore fantastically incorrect) ‘truth’, which effectively cancels, rather than extends, all

the really great achievements and values of realistic, classical physics based on the ideas of Renaissance.

The unlimited, grotesquely disproportional idolisation and related politicisation of knowledge are the

accompanying human, ‘social’ components of the ‘developed’, scholastically fixed unitarity, where what

really and exclusively matters is not the announced higher-level search for an ‘objective’, independent truth

showing what is right, but a low-level fight of selfish, ‘personalised’ interests aiming to show who is

bigger (since it is his, privately owned ‘interpretation of truth’ that will be recognised by the corrupt

system as the official, currently absolute truth, irrespective of all those ‘living natures’ and ‘unreduced

realities’!). Vain, artificially mystified symbolism and intentional, tricky obscurity are the main, clearly

visible properties of the most ‘advanced’ branches of ‘exact’ unitary science which closely resembles now,

by both its content and ‘methods’ of intrinsic adherents, such forms of knowledge as medieval alchemy,
occult cabala, notorious astrology, and other esoteric ‘metaphysics’.*) The effective, real darkness of the
modern ‘scientific’ age is deeply lurking behind the external bright cover of the illusive technological

‘enlightenment’,  which  is  the  inevitable  final  stage  of  the  destructive  ‘new  science’  influence  on

knowledge, starting from its ‘triumphant’ appearance at the nineteenth century fall.

*) Referring to a deeply rooted link between the unitary kind of thinking and irreducible mystique in the official science base,
we  can  cite  a  well-known  statement  of  Albert  Einstein,  the  father  of  the  canonical  ‘new  physics’:  “The  most  profound
emotion we can experience is the sensation of the mystical. It is the sower of all true science.” Indeed, although Einstein
produced a famous ‘attack’ against the irrational ‘enigmas’ of quantum mechanics canonised by another great mysteriologist,
Niels Bohr, those ‘friendly’ objections did not contain any hint on a positive, causal solution. Moreover, Einstein's main
contribution to the ‘new physics’, his interpretation of the Lorentz relations between space-time and motion, or canonical
‘special  relativity’,  as  well  as  gravity  inclusion  within  his  ‘general  relativity’  scheme,  rely  totally  on  postulated  formal
‘principles’  and  ‘adjusted’  (guessed)  mathematical  relations,  without  any  causal  understanding  of  the  occurring  physical
processes within the tangible reality (such realistic understanding of ‘relativistic’ effects, intrinsically unified with the causally
complete picture of ‘quantum’ behaviour, can be obtained only taking into account the unreduced complex dynamics of the
underlying interaction processes [1-4,11-13]). As a result, one reaps in today's scholar science as one has sown, with that kind
of sower, including relativity and gravity that remain causally unexplained (i. e. ‘mysterious’) and irreducibly separated from
equally mysterious quantum mechanics, within their canonical, unitary versions. The fruitless and endless fantasies of the
modern, purely abstract field theory are also a direct result of this Einsteinian approach which he vainly tried to develop
himself in his later years. It is clear, however, that any  consistent world image can only be totally  realistic (describe the
physically  real,  rather  than  purely  mathematical,  constructions  and  their  real  change)  and  intrinsically  unified from the
beginning, irrespective of the details (so that ‘space’, ‘time’, ‘particles’, ‘fields’, their properties, ‘quantum behaviour’, and
‘relativity’ are explicitly obtained all together, in exact correspondence with the real universe evolution [1-4,11-13]). Any
other ‘attempts’, including handicapped formal adjustment between a system of mathematical postulates and specially chosen,
point-like measurements (the intrinsic ‘criterion of truth’ within the ‘mathematical physics’ kind of fraud), should be rejected
as definitely insufficient. It is the ‘evident’, ‘natural’ character of this attitude that is disputed by the unitary thinking deeply
concentrated instead on abstract (rather than realistic) fundamental  origin of things and their respective ‘understanding’,
including ‘mystical’, frustrating separations in both reality and scientific knowledge about it.

208

Although ‘human dimensions’ of the unitary thinking adherents do not seem to allow for any

positive  issue  from  the  modern  crisis  of  the  conventional  fundamental  science,  it  is  the  nonunitary,

multivalued  dynamics  of  the  real  world  itself  that  puts  rigid  bounds  to  further  domination  of  zero-

complexity imitations of reality. The quickly growing difficulties are clearly visible now and range from

the glaring rupture between canonical science abstractions and public interest to real practical dangers

created by intellectually blind, but empirically powerful technology manipulations within the ‘developed’

unitary society based on profits. It is but another manifestation of our universal principle of complexity

correspondence  (section  7)  applied  this  time  at  the  level  of  complex  civilisation  dynamics  itself:  a

civilisation able to modify its full complexity scale empirically cannot afford the ‘luxury’ of remaining

around the zero-complexity level intellectually, in its conscious, scientific understanding of the modified

reality. Further persistence of the current way, as if ‘violating’ the symmetry of complexity, will inevitably

and  very  soon  result  in  a  catastrophic  (self-)  destruction  of  the  quantitatively  ‘powerful’,  but  stupid

species,  as  it  happened  many  times  in  ancient  and  recent  history.  The  importance  of  the  dynamic

redundance paradigm and related concept of complexity, applied in this work to description of real micro-

machine dynamics, is that not only it specifies the fundamental, irreducible origin of the conventional

theory difficulties, but also shows the clear and fundamentally substantiated issue from the resulting

impasse through the truly novel, conceptual, but also quite natural, extension of the dynamically single-

valued (point-like), unnatural projection of the conventional science to the dynamically multivalued,

intrinsically complete picture of unreduced, living reality. It is also important that this crucial extension is

obtained not by artificial postulation of another series of additional, abstract entities (the only possible kind

of ‘novelty’ in the unitary science), but by the truly consistent, nonperturbative analysis of the canonical,

configurationally  simple  dynamical  equations,  which  uses  a  causally  extended,  but  technically

straightforward version of the same mathematical tools that seem to be so much appreciated by the tricky

adherents of unitarity (in reality, they roughly and inconsistently cut them at the most essential stages in

favour of deceptive simplicity of the postulated mechanistic imitations and vain, pseudo-philosophical

speculations). In other words, it is enough to be simply honest (consistent) while using the (elementary)

mathematical tools in order to avoid conventional science cheating on public confidence.

Whereas the strategically important applications of the obtained micro-machine theory are specified
above (sections 7.3, 8), it is also essential that the method used and the emerging causally complete world
picture include any kind of system and level of complexity, which confirms the particular results obtained
and opens the way for their multiple extension to other applications (see e. g. sections 6, 7.1, 7.3, 8), up
to the highest, man-related levels of complexity (intelligence, consciousness, society transformation)
usually only empirically studied in the humanities, but now consistently derived from lower complexity
levels and causally understood within the truly ‘exact’, intrinsically complete theory [1] realising thus the
ultimate goal of science. The modern ‘critical’ state of the world shows that the intense use of these already
obtained results of the unreduced science of complexity in order to realise the necessary positive changes at

superior complexity levels is urgently needed and irreplaceable (see also below). The general concept and

its applications, resolving bundles of fundamental problems which otherwise helplessly stagnate within the

unitary  science  approach,  are  described  in  publications  made  widely  accessible  through  the  physical

209

preprint  Archives  (arXiv.org)  [1-4,8-13],*) so that their further ignoring or reduced, unitary imitation
would reflect only the ultimately corrupt character of the existing system of knowledge.

_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Toutefois leur façon de philosopher est fort commode, pour ceux
qui n'ont que des esprits fort mediocres: car l'obscurité des
distinctions, et des principes dont ils se servent, est cause qu'ils
peuvent parler de toutes choses aussy hardiment que s'ils les
sçavoient, et soustenir tout ce qu'ils en disent contre les plus
subtils et les plus habiles, sans qu'on ait moyen de les convaincre:
En quoy ils me semblent pareils a un aveugle, qui pour se battre
sans desavantage contre un qui voit, l'auroit fait venir dans les
fonds de quelque cave fort obscure: Et je puis dire que ceux cy
ont interest que je m'abstiene de publier les principes de la
Philosophie dont je me sers, car estans tres simples et tres
evidens, comme ils sont, je ferois quasi le mesme en les publiant,
que si j'ouvrois quelques fenestres, et faisois entrer du jour dans
cete cave où ils sont descendus pour se battre.
René Descartes, Discours de la Méthode (1637) [443]
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

A qualitative, deep change is necessary in science. Whereas this conclusion is often accepted as a

‘general wish’, we provide the fundamentally substantiated and causally specified version of that change

avoiding thus any subjective illusions and random deviations. The proposed new, truly universal concept

of complexity, really derived from the objectively minimal assumptions (‘first principles’), shows what

exactly and why is wrong in the conventional science content and organisation and how exactly and why

should that form of knowledge be extended to its unreduced, totally realistic and intrinsically complete

version. We rigorously prove thus and practically confirm by the explicitly obtained problem solutions that

the latter kind of knowledge exists and can be realised, which is not evident at all within the perverted

realm of unitary thinking. We prove not only the necessity, but also reality of science change involving

eventually the equally necessary and now objectively specified transformation of the whole society and
way of living [1], which is another indispensable aspect of any realistic change of knowledge system that
modifies the leading way of thinking. It is the fundamental, qualitatively big, and well-specified transition
from the unitary science content and organisation to their ultimately extended versions of the unreduced
science of complexity which leads to the realistic, intrinsically progressive (or ‘sustainable’) version of
‘society based on knowledge’: the ‘knowledge’ on which the future, prosperous and sustainable, society
can only be based is not the unitary ‘science’, or ‘culture’, or ‘religion’ of today, nor their mechanistic,
‘interdisciplinary’ superposition, but rather dynamically multivalued, intrinsically unified and creative
extension called here universal science of complexity (including its extended organisational structure).

*) Note, for example, the consistent solution of the quantum chaos [1,8,9] and quantum measurement [1,10] problems (see
also section 6), together with many other ones from the same group of fundamental levels of reality (see e. g. section 3 in ref.
[3]), as well as readily emerging solutions to particular problems from various fields (e. g. [8] and section 5.3(C)).

210

One should be clearly aware of a qualitatively big scale of the change which cannot be smaller in

principle as it is practically confirmed by the fact that all smaller, quantitative, ‘horizontal’ changes have

already been tried and the result is the continuing, catastrophically spiralling degradation of fundamental

knowledge that cannot be hidden anymore behind the ‘solid’ façade of its bureaucratic governance and

technically powerful equipment. Therefore any proposed ‘amelioration’ of the existing science structure,

including pretentiously ‘radical’ switch between various ‘modes’ of its realisation (e. g. [397-399]), is

simply irrelevant with respect to the emerging problem scale. In reality one deals today not with the choice

among one or another version of a ‘trade agreement’ between an ‘elitary’ scientific community and the

‘lay’ society, actually reduced to finding more efficient schemes of cheating money out of the unaware

‘public’ for the useless or eventually dangerous ‘research’, but with the deepest possible change in the

essential content of the scientific knowledge itself, inevitably involving the corresponding, equally deep

change in its organisation and understanding by the large public.

The new science content will be dominated by causally  complete  solutions to real  problems,

fundamental or practical, clearly specified as full sets of system realisations at all the essential complexity

levels (sections 3, 4, 7.1), which is equivalent to establishment of the absolutely  consistent  system  of

correlations within the whole, internally entangled, ‘theoretic-and-experimental’ structure of knowledge

(as opposed to never-ending ‘search’ for an ill-defined solution to unrealistically simplified, abstract

‘models’  of  reality  within  the  unitary  science,  accompanied  with  its  equally  endless  and  useless

justification of the persisting contradictions). This criterion of truth expresses the universally realised

general purpose of (new) science in the form of unceasing (though maybe uneven) development of the

unreduced  dynamic  complexity  of  civilisation  (including  its  increasing  interaction  with  ‘natural

environment’) by the optimal growth of its generalised complexity-entropy at the expense of complexity-

information (section 7), as opposed to the zero-complexity content of the now dominating unitary thinking

and the resulting degradation (purely destructive end of complexity development). The ensuing practical

usefulness of the fundamental knowledge is inseparable from its cognitive role (‘curiosity satisfaction’)

and centred now around its steering role in the civilisation complexity development (determined by levels

of individual consciousness), where it can provably obtain the whole spectrum of existing possibilities, or

‘ways of development’, and show which way of empirical technology development should be chosen
among other existing ones, so as to optimise the creative complexity development (as it is exemplified by
the above results for micro-machine dynamics, sections 5, 7, 8), instead of the dominating conventional
science practice of using the already obtained results of purely empirical technology development for
justification of further financial investment into its useless plays with unrealistic unitary models of those
‘practically important’ phenomena (while the blind, complexity-destroying technology becomes indeed
increasingly dangerous, despite the equally blind ‘protective’ efforts and ‘ethical’ commissions).

Although science content extension to its unreduced, dynamically multivalued version could, in
principle, be performed, or at least started, within its existing organisational structure, it is clear that the

truly new kind of science, including practically unlimited creativity and causally complete, universal

understanding of unreduced reality (as it is outlined by the universal science of complexity [1]), can only

be built within the corresponding new kind of organisational  structure that can be described as open,

211

unreduced  interaction  between  many  independent, explicitly creative and permanently  developing

enterprises based on definite (causally complete) problem solution by individual modes of intellectual work

and direct links to ‘lay’, massive consumers and supporters of knowledge (see ref. [1] for more details).

The self-developing, explicitly creative, and totally open structure includes both properly ‘scientific’ units

and ‘organisational’, ‘management’ elements of the same,  ‘independent’  kind which are dynamically

entangled in their intrinsically  creative activity (contrary to any unitary science organisation), so that

‘organisational’ units contribute constructively not only to ‘promotion’/realisation of fruitful ideas, but also

to their essential content (and the reverse). The transition from unitary to complex-dynamical kind of

organisation can be compared to a transition from the ‘command’ to ‘free-market’ economy, but where the

essential change involves not only properly ‘professional’ (‘economic’ or ‘scientific’) aspects, but also the

global system structure/dynamics itself, changing its unitary, rigidly fixed, industrial ‘governance’ for the

unlimited, free, intrinsically creative complexity development of the driving interaction processes.

As a result, the universal science of complexity and its new, also explicitly complex-dynamical,

creative structure provide a qualitatively higher efficiency with respect to the unitary science structure

which actually acts against any essential novelty and suppresses the opening possibilities for real, causally

complete problem solutions (cf. [382]). Whereas the unitary system tries (in vain) to compensate this

inbred deficiency by high quantities of invested resources, the unreduced complexity development solves

the problem by the intrinsically high quality of its creation, where the massive, but artificially limited and

therefore fruitless ‘search’ of the unitary science does not appear in principle (apart from occasional, rare

exceptions that replace exceptionally rare breakthroughs of unreduced creativity in the unitary science

dynamics),  and  therefore  a  much  higher  quality  of  results  is  obtained  now  by  using  much  smaller

quantities of resources. The false, imitative ‘miracles’ of the unitary science discussed above in relation to

‘quantum information’ concept are thus replaced by the real, causally understood miracle of unreduced,

complex-dynamical creation in both studied system behaviour (like multivalued micro-machine dynamics)

and internal science dynamics itself, extending and generalising previous similar transitions, such as that

from illusive miracles of alchemy to the efficiency of modern chemical and nuclear processes or that from

obscure magic of cabala to the power of computer-assisted creation.

Although the difference of the new science structure from its conventional, unitary version can only
be qualitatively big in the domains where the change has already occurred, the new kind of structure can
proliferate progressively within the existing system forming a fractal, finely structured pattern of the ‘new
phase’  (i.  e.  it  is  the  ‘generalised  phase  transition’  [1]  of  a  higher  ‘order’),  which  greatly  facilitates
practical introduction of the new structure. Since the unreduced complexity is involved in any aspect of
this change and the resulting superior level of knowledge (and civilisation in the whole), we call this
emerging, mainly intellectual (rather than ‘social’) transition revolution of complexity, emphasising thus its
qualitative  novelty  with  respect  to  the  ending  unitary  system  and  its  own  imitations  of  change.  The
transition  from  the  unrealistic  unitary  scheme  of  conventional  quantum  computation  to  the  causally

complete understanding and unlimited creation of real, dynamically multivalued and self-developing,

‘living’ micro-machines of every possible kind and application, described in more detail in this work,

represents just one particular manifestation of that universal revolution of complexity [1].

212

References

[1]  A.P. Kirilyuk, Universal Concept of Complexity by the Dynamic Redundance  Paradigm:

Causal Randomness, Complete Wave Mechanics, and the Ultimate Unification of Knowledge
(Naukova Dumka, Kiev, 1997), 550 p., in English. For a non-technical review see also:
e-print physics/9806002 at http://arXiv.org.

[2]  A.P. Kirilyuk, “75 Years of Matter Wave: Louis de Broglie and Renaissance of the Causally

Complete Knowledge”, e-print quant-ph/9911107 at http://arXiv.org.

[3]  A.P. Kirilyuk, “100 Years of Quanta: Complex-Dynamical Origin of Planck's Constant and

Causally Complete Extension of Quantum Mechanics”, e-print quant-ph/0012069.

[4]  A.P. Kirilyuk, “75 Years of the Wavefunction: Complex-Dynamical Extension of the Original Wave
Realism and the Universal Schrödinger Equation”, e-print quant-ph/0101129 at http://arXiv.org.

[5]  J. Horgan, The End of Science. Facing the Limits of Knowledge in the Twilight

of the Scientific Age (Addison-Wesley, Helix, 1996).

[6]  J. Horgan, “From Complexity to Perplexity”, Scientific American, June (1995) 74.

[7]  J. Horgan, The Undiscovered Mind: How the Human Brain Defies Replication, Medication,

and Explanation (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, New York, 1999).

[8]  A.P. Kirilyuk, “Theory of charged particle scattering in crystals by the generalised optical potential

method”, Nucl. Instr. Meth. B69 (1992) 200.

[9]  A.P. Kirilyuk, “Quantum chaos and fundamental multivaluedness of dynamical functions”,

Annales de la Fondation Louis de Broglie 21 (1996) 455.

A.P. Kirilyuk, “Quantum mechanics with chaos: correspondence principle, measurement
and complexity”, Preprint IMP 95-1, Kiev, 1995, 116 p., e-print chao-dyn/9510013.

A.P. Kirilyuk, “Causal Wave Mechanics and the Advent of Complexity.
I. Dynamic multivaluedness”, e-print quant-ph/9511034 at http://arXiv.org.

A.P. Kirilyuk, “Causal Wave Mechanics and the Advent of Complexity. II. Dynamic uncertainty
in quantum systems and the correspondence principle”, e-print quant-ph/9511035.

A.P. Kirilyuk, “Causal Wave Mechanics and the Advent of Complexity. III. Universal structure
of complexity”, e-print quant-ph/9511036 at http://arXiv.org.

[10]  A.P. Kirilyuk, “Causal Wave Mechanics and the Advent of Complexity. IV. Dynamical origin
of quantum indeterminacy and wave reduction”, e-print quant-ph/9511037 at http://arXiv.org;
A.P. Kirilyuk, “Causal Wave Mechanics and the Advent of Complexity.
V. Quantum field mechanics”, e-print quant-ph/9511038.
A.P. Kirilyuk, “New concept of dynamic complexity in quantum mechanics and beyond”,
e-print quant-ph/9805078.

[11]  A.P. Kirilyuk, “Double Solution with Chaos: Dynamic Redundance and Causal Wave-Particle

Duality”, e-print quant-ph/9902015 at http://arXiv.org.

[12]  A.P. Kirilyuk, “Double Solution with Chaos: Completion of de Broglie's Nonlinear Wave

Mechanics and its Intrinsic Unification with the Causally Extended Relativity”,
e-print quant-ph/9902016 at http://arXiv.org.

[13]  A.P. Kirilyuk, “Universal gravitation as a complex-dynamical process, renormalised Planckian
units, and the spectrum of elementary particles”, e-print gr-qc/9906077 at http://arXiv.org.

213

[14]  B. Georgeot and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Quantum Chaos Border for Quantum Computing”,

Phys. Rev. E 62 (2000) 3504. E-print quant-ph/9909074 at http://arXiv.org.

B. Georgeot and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Emergence of Quantum Chaos in the Quantum Computer
Core and How to Manage It”, Phys. Rev. E 62 (2000) 6366. E-print quant-ph/0005015.

D.L. Shepelyansky, “Quantum Chaos & Quantum Computers”, e-print quant-ph/0005015
at http://arXiv.org. Lecture at Nobel symposium on “Quantum chaos”, June 2000, Sweden.

G. Benenti, G. Casati and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Emergence of Fermi-Dirac Thermalization in the
Quantum Computer Core”, e-print quant-ph/0009084 at http://arXiv.org.

G. Benenti, G. Casati, S. Montangero, and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Eigenstates of Operating Quantum
Computer: Hypersensitivity to Static Imperfections”, e-print quant-ph/0112132 at http://arXiv.org.

[15]  R. Penrose, Shadows of the Mind (Oxford University Press, New York, 1994).

[16]  B. d'Espagnat, Le Réel Voilé (Fayard, Paris, 1994).

B. d'Espagnat, “Quantum Theory: A Pointer to an Independent Reality”, e-print quant-ph/9802046.

[17]  P. Benioff, “The computer as a physical system: a microscopic quantum mechanical model

of computers as represented by Turing machines”, J. Stat. Phys. 22 (1980) 563.

P. Benioff, “Quantum mechanical Hamiltonian models of Turing machines that dissipate no energy”,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 48 (1982) 1581.

P. Benioff, Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 480 (1986) 475.

[18]  R.P. Feynman, “Simulating Physics with Computers”, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21 (1982) 467.

R.P. Feynman, “Quantum mechanical computers”, Found. Phys. 16 (1986) 507.

[19]  D.P. DiVincenzo, “Quantum Computation”, Science 270 (1995) 255.

[20]  C.H. Bennett, “Quantum Information and Computation”, Physics Today, October (1995) 24.

[21]  S. Lloyd, “Almost Any Quantum Logic Gate is Universal”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995) 346.

[22]  A. Barenco, C.H. Bennett, R. Cleve, D.P. DiVincenzo, N. Margolus, P. Shor, T. Sleator,

J.A. Smolin, and H. Weinfurter, “Elementary gates for quantum computation”,
Phys. Rev. A 52 (1995) 3457.

[23]  A. Ekert and R. Jozsa, “Shor's Quantum Algorithm for Factorising Numbers”,

Rev. Mod. Phys. 68 (1996) 733.

[24]  S. Wiesner, “Simulations of Many-Body Quantum Systems by a Quantum Computer”,

e-print quant-ph/9603028 at http://arXiv.org.

[25]  S. Lloyd, “Universal Quantum Simulators”, Science 273 (1996) 1073.

D.S. Abrams and S. Lloyd, “Simulation of Many-Body Fermi Systems on a Universal Quantum
Computer”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 (1997) 2586. E-print quant-ph/9703054 at http://arXiv.org.

[26]  M.P. Ciamarra, “Quantum reversibility and a new model of quantum automaton”,

e-print quant-ph/0102104 at http://arXiv.org.

[27]  P. Benioff, “Models of Quantum Turing Machines”, Fortsch. Phys. 46 (1998) 423.

E-print quant-ph/9708054 at http://arXiv.org.
P. Benioff, “Quantum Robots and Quantum Computers”, e-print quant-ph/9706012.
P. Benioff, “Quantum Robots and Environments”, Phys. Rev. A 58 (1998) 893.
E-print quant-ph/9802067 at http://arXiv.org.
P. Benioff, “Space Searches with a Quantum Robot”, e-print quant-ph/0003006 at http://arXiv.org.

[28]  A. Steane, “Quantum Computing”, e-print quant-ph/9708022. Rep. Progr. Phys. 61 (1998) 117.

[29]  B.M. Boghosian and W. Taylor IV, “Simulating Quantum Mechanics on a Quantum Computer”,

e-print quant-ph/9701019 at http://arXiv.org. Physica D 120 (1998) 30.

[30]  Physics World 11(3), March (1998), special issue on Quantum Information.

214

[31]  S.S. Somaroo, C.H. Tseng, T.F. Havel, R. Laflame, D.G. Cory, “Quantum Simulations

on a Quantum Computer”, e-print quant-ph/9905045 at http://arXiv.org.

[32]  D. Gottesman and I.L. Chuang, “Demonstrating the viability of universal quantum computation

using teleportation and single-qubit operations”, Nature 402 (1999) 390.

[33]  N. Cerf and N. Gisin, “Les promesses de l'information quantique”, La Recherche,

No. 327 (Janvier 2000) 46.

[34]  J. Gruska, Quantum Computing (McGraw-Hill, London, 1999).

[35]  C.H. Bennett and D.P. DiVincenzo, “Quantum information and computation”,

Nature 404 (2000) 247.

[36]  M.A. Nielsen and I.L. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information

(Cambridge University Press, 2000).

M.A. Nielsen, “Quantum information theory”, e-print quant-ph/0011036 at http://arXiv.org.

[37]  The Physics of Quantum Information, edited by D. Bouwmeester, A. Ekert, and A. Zeilinger

(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2000).

[38]  Fort. Phys. 48 (2000) 767-1138. Special issue: Experimental proposals for quantum computation.

D.P. DiVincenzo, “The Physical Implementation of Quantum Computation”,
e-print quant-ph/0002077 at http://arXiv.org.

[39]  E.H. Knill and M.A. Nielsen, “Theory of Quantum Computation”, e-print quant-ph/0010057
at http://arXiv.org. Accepted for Supplement III, Encyclopaedia of Mathematics (2001).

E.H. Knill and M.A. Nielsen, “Quantum Information Processing”, e-print quant-ph/0010058
at http://arXiv.org. Accepted for Supplement III, Encyclopaedia of Mathematics (2001).

[40]  R.F. Werner, “Quantum Information Theory — an Invitation”, e-print quant-ph/0101061.

[41]  A. Cabello, “Bibliographic guide to the foundations of quantum mechanics and quantum

information”, e-print quant-ph/0012089 at http://arXiv.org.

[42]  S. Lloyd, “Unconventional Quantum Computing Devices”, e-print quant-ph/0003151

at http://arXiv.org. In: Unconventional Models of Computation, eds. C.S. Calude, J. Casti &
M.J. Dinneen (Springer, Singapor, 1998).

A.Yu. Kitaev, “Fault-tolerant quantum computation by anyons”, e-print quant-ph/9707021.

S. Bravyi and A. Kitaev, “Fermionic quantum computation”, e-print quant-ph/0003137.

S. Lloyd, “Quantum computation with abelian anyons”, e-print quant-ph/0004010.

M.S. Shahriar, P.R. Hemmer, S. Lloyd, J.A. Bowers, and A.E. Craig, “Solid State Quantum
Computing Using Spectral Holes”, e-print quant-ph/0007074 at http://arXiv.org.

S. Lloyd, “Hybrid quantum computing”, e-print quant-ph/0008057 at http://arXiv.org.

[43]  E. Knill, R. Laflamme, and G.J. Milburn, “A scheme for efficient quantum computation with linear

optics”, Nature 409 (2001) 46. E-print quant-ph/0006088 at http://arXiv.org.

[44]  M.A. Man'ko, V.I. Man'ko, and R. V. Mendes, “Quantum computation by quantum-like systems”,

e-print quant-ph/0104023 at http://arXiv.org. Phys. Lett. A 288 (2001) 132.
[45]  A. Mizel, M.W. Mitchell, and M.L. Cohen, “Ground State Quantum Computation”,

e-print quant-ph/9908035 at http://arXiv.org.

[46]  D. Bacon, J. Kempe, D.A. Lidar, K.B. Whaley, and D.P. DiVincenzo, “Encoded Universality

in Physical Implimentations of a Quantum Computer”, e-print quant-ph/0102140 at http://arXiv.org.
J. Kempe, D. Bacon, D.P. DiVincenzo, and K.B. Whaley, “Encoded Universality from a Single
Physical Interaction”, e-print quant-ph/0112013 at http://arXiv.org. Quantum Information and
Computation 1 (Special Issue) (2001) 33.

[47]  C.A. Trugenberger, “Probabilistic Quantum Memories”, e-print quant-ph/0012100.

215

[48]  S. Bandyopadhyay, “Prospects for a Quantum Dynamic Random Access Memory (Q-DRAM)”,

e-print quant-ph/0101058 at http://arXiv.org.

T.T. Wu and M.L. Yu, “Quantum memory: Write, read and reset”, e-print quant-ph/0208137.

[49]  A.D. Greentree, S.G. Schirmer, and A.I. Solomon, “Robust quantum memory via quantum

control”, e-print quant-ph/0103118 at http://arXiv.org.

[50]  S. Bettelli, L. Serafini, and T. Calarco, “Toward an architecture for quantum programming”,

e-print cs.PL/0103009 at http://arXiv.org.

[51]  S. Lloyd, M.S. Shahriar, and P.R. Hemmer, “Teleportation and the quantum internet”,

e-print quant-ph/0003147 at http://arXiv.org.

[52]  T.A. Brun, “A quantum web page”, e-print quant-ph/0102046 at http://arXiv.org.

[53]  G. Brassard, “Quantum Communication Complexity (A Survey)”, e-print quant-ph/0101005.

[54]  L. Goldenberg, L. Vaidman, and S. Wiesner, “Quantum Gambling”,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (1999) 3356.

[55]  D.A. Meyer, “Quantum Strategies”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (1999) 1052. E-print quant-ph/9804010.

J. Eisert, M. Wilkens, and M. Lewenstein, “Quantum Games and Quantum Strategies”,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999) 3077. E-print quant-ph/9806088 at http://arXiv.org.

J. Eisert and M. Wilkens, “Quantum Games”, quant-ph/0004076. J. Mod. Opt. 47 (2000) 2543.

S.C. Benjamin and P.M. Hayden, “Multi-Player Quantum Games”,
Phys. Rev. A 64 (2001) 030301. E-print quant-ph/0007038 at http://arXiv.org.

S.J. van Enk and R. Pike, “Classical Rules in Quantum Games”, e-print quant-ph/0203133.
Phys. Rev. A 66 (2002) 024306.

A.P. Flitney and D. Abbott, “An introduction to quantum game theory”, e-print quant-ph/0208069.

A.P. Flitney and D. Abbott, “A semi-quantum version of the game of Life”, quant-ph/0208149.

C.F. Lee and N. Johnson, “Let the quantum games begin”, Physics World, October (2002) 25.

[56]  A. Iqbal and A.H. Toor, “Evolutionary Stable Strategies in Quantum Games”,
Phys. Lett. A 280 (2001) 249. E-print quant-ph/0007100 at http://arXiv.org.

A. Iqbal and A.H. Toor, “Darwinism in quantum systems?”, e-print quant-ph/0103085.

R. Kay, N.F. Johnson, and S.C. Benjamin, “Evolutionary quantum game”,
J. Phys. A 34 (2001) L547. E-print quant-ph/0102008 at http://arXiv.org.

C.F. Lee and N. Johnson, “Theory of Quantum Games”, e-print quant-ph/0207012.

A. Iqbal, “Quantum games with a multi-slit electron diffraction setup”, e-print quant-ph/0207078.

[57]  E.W. Piotrowski and J. Sladkowski, “Quantum Market Games”, e-print quant-ph/0104006.

Physica A 312 (2002) 208.
E.W. Piotrowski and J. Sladkowski, “Quantum English Auctions”, e-print quant-ph/0108017.
E.W. Piotrowski and J. Sladkowski, “Quantum-like approach to financial risk: quantum
anthropic principle”, e-print quant-ph/0110046 at http://arXiv.org. See also quant-ph/0201045.
E.W. Piotrowski and J. Sladkowski, “Quantum bargaining games”, Physica A 308 (2002) 391.
E-print quant-ph/0106140 at http://arXiv.org.
E.W. Piotrowski and J. Sladkowski, “Quantum diffusion of prices and profits”,
E-print cond-mat/0207132 at http://arXiv.org.
M. Schaden, “Quantum Finance”, e-print physics/0203006 at http://arXiv.org.

R.V. Mendes, “Quantum games and social norms.The quantum ultimatum game”,
e-print quant-ph/0208167 at http://arXiv.org.

216

[58]  S. Lloyd, “Quantum-Mechanical Computers and Uncomputability”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (1993) 943.

[59]  L. Fortnow and J.D. Rogers, “Complexity limitations on quantum computation”,

e-print cs.CC/9811023 at http://arXiv.org.

[60]  R. Cleve, “An Introduction to Quantum Complexity Theory”, e-print quant-ph/9906111

at http://arXiv.org.

[61]  P. Vitányi, “Three Approaches to the Quantitative Definition of Information in an Individual Pure

Quantum State”, e-print quant-ph/9907035 at http://arXiv.org.

[62]  S. Lloyd, “Universe as quantum computer”, Complexity 3 (1997) 32.

Also: e-print quant-ph/9912088 at http://arXiv.org.

[63]  P.A. Zizzi, “The Early Universe as a Quantum Growing Network”,

e-print gr-qc/0103002 at http://arXiv.org.

P.A. Zizzi, “Ultimate Internets”, e-print gr-qc/0110122 at http://arXiv.org.

[64]  D.S. Abrams and S. Lloyd, “Nonlinear quantum mechanics implies polynomial-time solution

for NP-complete and #P problems”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998) 3992.
E-print quant-ph/9801041 at http://arXiv.org.

[65]  R. Schack, “Using a quantum computer to investigate quantum chaos”,

Phys. Rev. A 57 (1998) 1634.

T.A. Brun and R. Schack, “Realizing the quantum baker's map on an NMR quantum computer”,
Phys. Rev. A 59 (1999) 2649. E-print quant-ph/9807050 at http://arXiv.org.

[66]  I. Kim and G. Mahler, “Quantum chaos in quantum Turing machines”,

e-print quant-ph/9910068 at http://arXiv.org.

[67]  M. Ohya and I.V. Volovich, “Quantum Computing, NP-complete Problems and Chaotic

Dynamics”, e-print quant-ph/9912100 at http://arXiv.org.

[68]  S. Hameroff and R. Penrose, “Orchestrated reduction of quantum coherence in brain microtubules:

A model for consciousness”, In: Proceedings of the Workshop “Biophysical Aspects of Coherence”
(1995), Neural Network World 5 (1995) 793.

S. Hagan, S.R. Hameroff, and J.A. Tuszynski, “Quantum Computation in Brain Microtubules?
Decoherence and Biological Feasibility”, e-print quant-ph/0005025 at http://arXiv.org.

S. Hameroff, “Quantum computation in brain microtubules? The Penrose-Hameroff "Orch OR"
model of consciousness”, http://www.consciousness.arizona.edu/hameroff/royal2.html.

[69]  A. Mershin, D.V. Nanopoulos, and E.M.C. Skoulakis, “Quantum Brain?”,

e-print quant-ph/0007088 at http://arXiv.org.

[70]  E. Alfinito and G. Vitiello, “Dissipation and memory domains in the quantum model of brain”,

e-print quant-ph/0006065 at http://arXiv.org.
E. Alfinito and G. Vitiello, “The dissipative quantum model of brain: how do memory localize
in correlated neuronal domains”, e-print quant-ph/0006066 at http://arXiv.org.

[71]  H. Hu and M. Wu, “Spin-Mediated Consciousness Theory: Possible Roles of Oxygen Unpaired
Electronic Spins and Neural Membrane Nuclear Spin Ensemble in Memory and Consciousness”,
e-print quant-ph/0208068 at http://arXiv.org.

[72]  A. Zeilinger, “A foundational principle for quantum mechanics”, Found. Phys. 29 (1999) 631.
[73]  K. Svozil, “The information interpretation of quantum mechanics”,

e-print quant-ph/0006033 at http://arXiv.org.

[74]  D. Deutsch, The Fabric of Reality (Penguin Press, London, 1997).

[75]  D. Deutsch, “The Structure of the Multiverse”, e-print quant-ph/0104033 at http://arXiv.org.

[76]  A.M. Steane, “A quantum computer only needs one universe”,

e-print quant-ph/0003084 at http://arXiv.org.

217

[77]  D. Deutsch, A. Ekert, and R. Lupacchini, “Machines, Logic and Quantum Physics”,

e-print math.HO/9911150 at http://arXiv.org.

[78]  P. Benioff, “A Simple Example of Definitions of Truth, Validity, Consistency, and Completeness

in Quantum Mechanics”, Phys. Rev. A 59 (1999) 4223. E-print quant-ph/9811055.

P. Benioff, “Use of Mathematical Logical Concepts in Quantum Mechanics: An Example”,
e-print quant-ph/0106153 at http://arXiv.org. J. Phys. A 35 (2002) 5843.

[79]  S. Haroche and J.-M. Raimond, “Quantum Computing: Dream or Nightmare?”,

Physics Today, August (1996) 51.

[80]  R. Landauer, “The physical nature of information”, Phys. Lett. A 217 (1996) 188.

R. Landauer, “Information is physical”, Physics Today 44, May (1991) 23.

[81]  M.A. Nielsen, “Computable Functions, Quantum Measurements, and Quantum Dynamics”,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 (1997) 2915.

M.A. Nielsen, “Quantum information science as an approach to complex quantum systems”,
e-print quant-ph/0208078 at http://arXiv.org. See also quant-ph/0210005.

M.A. Nielsen, C.M. Dawson, J.L. Dodd, A. Gilchrist, D. Mortimer, T.J. Osborne, M.J. Bremner,
A.W. Harrow & A. Hines, “Quantum dynamics as a physical resource”, e-print quant-ph/0208077.

[82]  G. ’t Hooft, “Quantum Gravity as a Dissipative Deterministic System”, Class. Quant. Grav. 16

(1999) 3263. E-print gr-qc/9903084 at http://arXiv.org.

G. ’t Hooft, “Determinism and Dissipation in Quantum Gravity”, e-print hep-th/0003005.

[83]  G. Vidal and J.I. Cirac, “Irreversibility in asymptotic manipulations of entanglement”,
e-print quant-ph/0102036 at http://arXiv.org. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (2001) 5803.

[84]  H. De Raedt, K. Michielsen, A. Hams, S. Miyashita, and K. Saito, “Programming Physical
Realisations of Quantum Computers”, e-print quant-ph/0104085 at http://arXiv.org.

[85]  G. Brassard, N. Lütkenhaus, T. Mor, and B.C. Sanders, “Limitations on Practical Quantum

Cryptography”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 1330.

[86]  G. Adenier, “Representation of Joint Measurement in Quantum Mechanics:

A Refutation of Quantum Teleportation”, e-print quant-ph/0105031 at http://arXiv.org.

D. Tommasini, “A single quantum cannot be teleported”, e-print quant-ph/0210060.

[87]  S. Kak, “Are Quantum Computing Models Realistic?”, e-print quant-ph/0110040 at http://arXiv.org.

S. Kak, “Uncertainty In Quantum Computation”, e-print quant-ph/0206006 at http://arXiv.org.

S. Kak, “Can Qubit Errors Be Corrected?”, e-print quant-ph/0206144 at http://arXiv.org.

S. Kak, “From Many to One: On Starting a Quantum Computation”, e-print quant-ph/0010109.
S. Kak, “On Initializing Quantum Registers and Quantum Gates”, e-print quant-ph/9805002.
Foundations of Physics 29 (1999) 267.

[88]  M.I. Dyakonov, “Quantum computing: a view from the enemy camp”, e-print cond-mat/0110326.
[89]  G. Castagnoli and D. Monti, “The Non-mechanistic Character of Quantum Computation”,

e-print quant-ph/9811039 at http://arXiv.org.

[90]  W.G. Unruh, “Maintaining coherence in quantum computers”, Phys. Rev. A 51 (1995) 992.
[91]  I.L. Chuang, R. Laflamme, P.W. Shor, and W.H. Zurek, “Quantum Computers, Factoring, and

Decoherence”, Science 270 (1995) 1633.

[92]  J.P. Paz and W.H. Zurek, “Environment-Induced Decoherence and the Transition From Quantum

to Classical”, in Coherent Matter Waves. Les Houches Session LXXII, eds. R. Kaiser,
C. Westbrook, and F. David (Springer, Berlin, 2001), p. 533. E-print quant-ph/0010011.

J.P. Paz, “Protecting the quantum world”, Nature 412 (2001) 869.

218

[93]  P.W. Shor, “Scheme for reducing decoherence in quantum computer memory”,

Phys. Rev. A 52 (1995)  R2493.

A.R. Calderbank and P.W. Shor, “Good quantum error-correcting codes exist”,
Phys. Rev. A 54 (1996) 1098.

[94]  A. Steane, “Multiple particle interference and quantum error correction”,

Proc. Roy. Soc. London, Ser. A 452 (1996) 2551.

A.M. Steane, “Overhead and noise threshold of fault-tolerant quantum error correction”,
e-print quant-ph/0207119 at http://arXiv.org.

[95]  E. Knill and R. Laflamme, “A theory of quantum error correcting codes”,

Phys. Rev. A 55 (1997) 900.

E. Knill, R. Laflamme, and L. Viola, “Theory of Quantum Error Correction for General Noise”,
e-print quant-ph/9908066 at http://arXiv.org.

E. Knill, R. Laflamme, A. Ashikhmin, H. Barnum, L. Viola, and W.H. Zurek, “Introduction
to Quantum Error Correction”, e-print quant-ph/0207170 at http://arXiv.org.

[96]  C.H. Bennett, D.P. DiVincenzo, J.A. Smolin, and W.K. Wootters, “Mixed state entanglement

and quantum error-correcting codes”, Phys. Rev. A 54 (1996) 3824.

[97]  D.G. Cory, M.D. Price, W. Maas, E. Knill, R. Laflamme, W.H. Zurek, T.F. Havel, and

S.S. Somaroo, “Experimental Quantum Error Correction”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998) 2152.

[98]  J. Preskill, “Battling Decoherence: The Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computer”,

[99]  P. Zanardi, “Stabilizing Quantum Information”, e-print quant-ph/9910016 at http://arXiv.org.

Physics Today, June (1999) 24.

Phys. Rev. A 63 (2001) 12301.

P. Zanardi, “Stabilization of Quantum Information: A Unified Dynamical-Algebraic Approach”,
e-print quant-ph/0203008 at http://arXiv.org.

P. Zanardi and S. Lloyd, “Topological protection and noiseless subsystems”,
e-print quant-ph/0208132 at http://arXiv.org.

[100] S. Lloyd, “Quantum controllers for quantum systems”, e-print quant-ph/9703042.

[101] L. Viola and S. Lloyd, “Dynamical suppression of decoherence in two-state quantum systems”,

e-print quant-ph/9803057 at http://arXiv.org. Phys. Rev. A 58 (1998) 2733.

[102] L. Viola, E. Knill, and S. Lloyd, “Dynamical Decoupling of Open Quantum Systems”,
e-print quant-ph/9809071 at http://arXiv.org. Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (1999) 2417.

L. Viola, S. Lloyd, and E. Knill, “Universal Control of Decoupled Quantum Systems”,
e-print quant-ph/9906094 at http://arXiv.org. Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999) 4888.

L. Viola, E. Knill, and S. Lloyd, ”Dynamical Generation of Noiseless Quantum Subsystems”
e-print quant-ph/0002072 at http://arXiv.org.
S. Lloyd and L. Viola, “Control of open quantum system dynamics”, e-print quant-ph/0008101.

[103] D.A. Lidar, I.L. Chuang, and K.B. Whaley, “Decoherence-free subspaces for quantum

computation”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998) 2594. E-print quant-ph/9807004 at http://arXiv.org.
D. Bacon, D.A. Lidar, and K.B. Whaley, “Robustness of decoherence-free subspaces
for quantum computation”, Phys. Rev. A 60 (1999) 1944. E-print quant-ph/9902041.
D. Bacon, J. Kempe, D.A. Lidar, and K.B. Whaley, “Universal Fault-Tolerant Quantum
Computation on Decoherence-Free Subspaces”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 1758.
E-print quant-ph/9909058 at http://arXiv.org.

M.S. Byrd and D.A. Lidar, “Combined encoding, recoupling, and decoupling solution to problems
of decoherence and design in solid-state quantum computing”, e-print quant-ph/0112054.

L.-A. Wu and D.A. Lidar, “Creating Decoherence-Free Subspaces”, e-print quant-ph/0112144.

219

[104] A. Beige, D. Braun, B. Tregenna, and P.L. Knight, “Quantum Computing Using Dissipation

to Remain in a Decoherence-Free Subspace”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 1762.

[105] A.C. Doherty, S. Habib, K. Jacobs, H. Mabuchi, and S.M. Tan, “Quantum feedback control

and classical control theory”, e-print quant-ph/9912107 at http://arXiv.org.

A. Doherty, J. Doyle, H. Mabuchi, K. Jacobs, and S. Habib, “Robust control in the quantum
domain”, e-print quant-ph/0105018 at http://arXiv.org. Proceedings of the 39th IEEE Conference
on Decision and Control (2000), p. 949.

[106] S.G. Schirmer, H. Fu, and A.I. Solomon, “Complete controllability of quantum systems”,

e-print quant-ph/0010031 at http://arXiv.org.

H. Fu, S.G. Schirmer, and A.I. Solomon, “Complete controllability of finite-level quantum
systems”, e-print quant-ph/0102017 at http://arXiv.org. Journ. Phys. A 34 (2001) 1679.

A.I. Solomon and S.G. Schirmer, “Limitations on Quantum Control”, e-print quant-ph/0110030.

S.G. Schirmer, A.I. Solomon, and J.V. Leahy, “Degrees of controllability for quantum systems
and application to atomic systems”, J. Phys. A 35 (2002) 4125. E-print quant-ph/0108114.

[107] R.J. Nelson, Y. Weinstein, D. Cory, and S. Lloyd, “Experimental Demonstration of Fully

Coherent Quantum Feedback”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 3045.
Y.S. Weinstein, S. Lloyd, J. Emerson, and D.G. Cory, “Experimental Implementation
of the Quantum Baker's Map”, e-print quant-ph/0201064. Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (2002) 157902.

[108] I.L. Chuang, N. Gershenfeld, and M. Kubinec, “Experimental Implementation of Fast Quantum

Searching”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 (1998) 3408.

L.M.K. Vandersypen, M. Steffen, G. Breyta, C.S. Yannoni, M.H. Sherwood, and I.L. Chuang,
“Experimental realization of Shor's quantum factoring algorithm using nuclear magnetic
resonance”, Nature 414 (2001) 883.

[109] S.M. Maurer, T. Hogg, and B.A. Huberman, “Portfolios of Quantum Algorithms”,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 (2001) 257901. E-print quant-ph/0105071 at http://arXiv.org.

[110] N.J. Cerf and C. Adami, “Information theory of quantum entanglement and measurement”,

Physica D 120 (1998) 62.

[111] L. Viola, E. Knill, and R. Laflamme, “Constructing Qubits in Physical Systems”,

e-print quant-ph/0101090 at http://arXiv.org.

[112] D.F.V. James, P.G. Kwiat, W.J. Munro, and A.G. White, “On the Measurement of Qubits”,

e-print quant-ph/0103121 at http://arXiv.org.

[113] M.B. Plenio and V. Vitelli, “The physics of forgetting: Landauer's erasure principle

and information theory”, Contemporary Physics 42 (2001) 25. E-print quant-ph/0103108.

[114] G. Chapline, “Is theoretical physics the same thing as mathematics?”, Phys. Rep. 315 (1999) 95.
[115] H. Touchette and S. Lloyd, “Information-Theoretic Limits of Control”,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 (2000) 1156.
H. Touchette and S. Lloyd, “Information-Theoretic Approach to the Study of Control Systems”,
e-print physics/0104007 at http://arXiv.org.

[116] G. Brassard, S.L. Braunstein, and R. Cleve, “Teleportation as a quantum computation”,

Physica D 120 (1998) 43.

[117] P. Benioff, “The Representation of Natural Numbers in Quantum Mechanics”,

e-print quant-ph/0003063 at http://arXiv.org.
P. Benioff, “The Representation of Numbers by States in Quantum Mechanics”,
e-print quant-ph/0009124 at http://arXiv.org.
P. Benioff, “The Representation of Numbers in Quantum Mechanics”, e-print quant-ph/0103078.
P. Benioff, “Efficient Implementation and the Product State Representation of Numbers”,
e-print quant-ph/0104061 at http://arXiv.org.

220

[118] D. Aharonov, “A Quantum to Classical Phase Transition in Noisy Quantum Computers”,

e-print quant-ph/9910081 at http://arXiv.org.

[119] R.G. Newton, Scattering Theory of Waves and Particles (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1967).

[120] N.F. Mott & H.S.W. Massey, The Theory of Atomic Collisions (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1965).

[121] P.H. Dederichs, “Dynamical Diffraction Theory by Optical Potential Methods”, Solid State Physics:

Advances in Research and Applications, ed. by H. Ehrenreich, F. Seitz, and D. Turnbull
(Academic Press, New York) 27 (1972) 136.

[122] B. Mandelbrot, The Fractal Geometry of Nature (Freeman, San Francisco, 1982).

[123] J. Feder, Fractals (Plenum Press, New York, 1988).

[124] H.-O. Peintgen, H. Jürgens, and D. Saupe, Chaos and Fractals. New Frontiers of Science

(Springer-Verlag, New York, 1992).

[125] T. Nakayama, K. Yakubo, and R.L. Orbach, “Dynamical properties of fractal networks: scaling,

numerical simulations, and physical realisations”, Rev. Mod. Phys. 66 (1994) 381.

[126] R. Blumenfeld and B.B. Mandelbrot, “Lévy dusts, Mittag-Leffler statistics, mass fractal lacunarity,

and perceived dimension”, Phys. Rev. E 56 (1997) 112.

[127] M.V. Berry, “Quantum fractals in boxes”, J. Phys. A 29 (1996) 6617.

[128] D. Wójcik, I. Bialynicki-Birula, and K. Zyczkowski, “Time Evolution of Quantum Fractals”,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 5022.

[129] H. Haken, Rev. Mod. Phys. 47 (1975) 67.

H. Haken, Synergetics. An Introduction, 3rd ed. (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1983).

H. Haken, Advanced Synergetics (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1983).

H. Haken, Information and Self-Organisation: A Macroscopic Approach to Complex Systems
(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1988).

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Nonlinear Complex Systems, eds. H. Haken and A. Mikhailov
(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1993).

H. Haken, Physica D 97 (1996) 95.

[130] I. Prigogine and I. Stengers, Order out of Chaos (Heinemann, London, 1984).

G. Nicolis and I. Prigogine, Exploring Complexity (Freeman, San Francisco, 1989).

G. Nicolis, “Physics of far-from-equilibrium systems and self-organisation”, in The New Physics,
ed. P. Davies (Cambridge University Press, 1989).

[131] P. Bak, How Nature Works: The Science of Self-Organised Criticality (Copernicus/Springer, 1996).

[132] A. Csilling, I.M. Jánosi, G. Pásztor, and I. Scheuring, Phys. Pev. E 50 (1994) 1083.
[133] S.L. Perke and J.M. Carlson , Phys. Rev. E 50 (1994) 236.
[134] M. de Sousa Vieira and A.J. Lichtenberg, Phys. Rev. E 53 (1996) 1441.
[135] S. Boccaletti, C. Grebogi, Y.-C. Lai, H. Mancini, and D. Maza, “The Control of Chaos:

Theory and Applications”, Phys. Rep. 329 (2000) 103.

[136] R.L. Viana and C. Grebogi, “Unstable dimension variability and synchronization of chaotic
systems”, Phys. Rev. E 62 (2000) 462. E-print chao-dyn/9911027 at http://arXiv.org.
[137] W. van der Water and J. de Weger, “Failure of chaos control”, Phys. Rev. E 62 (2000) 6398.
[138] L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, Mechanics (Nauka, Moscow, 1988). Forth Russian edition.

[139] B.V. Chirikov, At. Energ. 6 (1959) 630.

English translation: J. Nucl. Energy Part C: Plasma Phys. 1 (1960) 253.

B.V. Chirikov, Phys. Rep. 52 (1979) 263.

221

[140] D.F. Escande, Phys. Rep. 121 (1985) 165.

[141] A.J. Lichtenbegr and M.A. Lieberman, Regular and Stochastic Motion

(Springer-Verlag, New York, 1983).

[142] G.M. Zaslavsky, Chaos in Dynamical Systems (Harwood Academic Publishers, London, 1985).

Russian edition: Nauka, Moscow, 1984.

G.M. Zaslavsky, R.Z. Sagdeev, D.A. Usikov, and A.A. Chernikov, Weak Chaos and
Quasi-Regular Patterns (Cambridge University Press, 1991).
Russian edition: Nauka, Moscow, 1991.

[143] H.G. Schuster, Deterministic Chaos (Physik-Verlag, Weinheim, 1984).

[144] M.C. Gutzwiller, Chaos in Classical and Quantum Mechanics (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1990).

[145] E. Ott, Chaos in Dynamical Systems (Cambridge University Press, 1993).

[146] W.H. Zurek, “Environment-induced super-selection rules”, Phys. Rev. D 26 (1982) 1862.

[147] E. Joos and H.D. Zeh, “The emergence of classical properties through the interaction with

the environment”, Z. Phys. B 59 (1985) 229.

H.D. Zeh, “What is Achieved by Decoherence”, e-print quant-ph/9610014 at http://arXiv.org.

[148] W.H. Zurek, “Decoherence and the transition from quantum to classical”,

Phys. Today 44 (1991) 36.

W.H. Zurek, “Decoherence, Einselection, and the Existential Interpretation (the Rough Guide)”,
Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 356 (1998) 1793.

J.P. Paz and W.H. Zurek, “Quantum limit of decoherence: Environment induced superselection
of energy eigenstates”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (1999) 5181. E-print quant-ph/9811026.

W. H. Zurek, “Decoherence, einselection, and the quantum origin of the classical”,
e-print quant-ph/0105127 at http://arXiv.org.

[149] D. Guilini, E. Joos, C. Kiefer, J. Kupsch, L.-O. Stamatescu, and H. D. Zeh, Decoherence
and the Appearance of a Classical World in Quantum Theory (Springer, Berlin, 1996).

[150] S. Lloyd, “Ultimate physical limits to computation”, e-print quant-ph/9908043 at http://arXiv.org.
Nature 406 (2000) 1047. Also: “Seth Lloyd — How fast, how small, and how powerful?:
Moore's law and the ultimate laptop”, http://www.edge.org/3rd_culture/lloyd/lloyd_index.html.

S. Lloyd, “Computational capacity of the Universe”, e-print quant-ph/0110141 at http://arXiv.org.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 (2002) 237901.

[151] Y.J. Ng, “From computation to black holes and space-time foam”,

e-print gr-qc/0006105 at http://arXiv.org. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (2001) 2946.

[152] S. Tomsovic, “Tunneling and Chaos”, e-print nlin.CD/0008031 at http://arXiv.org.

S. Tomsovic and D. Ullmo, “Chaos-assisted tunneling”, Phys. Rev. E 50 (1994) 145.
[153] T. Onishi, A. Shudo, K.S. Ikeda, and K. Takahashi, “Tunneling mechanism due to Chaos

in a Complex Phase Space”, e-print nlin.CD/0105067 at http://arXiv.org.
A. Shudo and K.S. Ikeda, “Complex Classical Trajectories and Chaotic Tunneling”,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 74 (1995) 682.

[154] T. Giesel, G. Radons, and J. Rubner, “Kolmogorov-Arnol’d-Moser Barriers in the Quantum

Dynamics of Chaotic Systems”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57 (1986) 2883.

[155] Chaos and Quantum Physics , ed. M.-J. Giannoni, A. Voros, and J. Zinn-Justin

(North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1991).

[156] Ph. Jacquod and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Emergence of Quantum Chaos in Finite Interacting Fermi

Systems”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 (1997) 1837.

222

[157] P. H. Song and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Quantum Computing of Quantum Chaos and Imperfection
Effects”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (2001) 2162. E-print quant-ph/0009005 at http://arXiv.org.

B. Georgeot and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Exponential Gain in Quantum Computing of Quantum Chaos
and Localization”, e-print quant-ph/0010005 at http://arXiv.org. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (2001) 2890.

G. Benenti, G. Casati, S. Montangero, and D. Shepelyansky, “Dynamical localization simulated
on a few qubits quantum computer”, e-print quant-ph/0210052 at http://arXiv.org.

[158] B. Georgeot and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Quantum Computing of Classical Chaos:

Smile of the Arnold-Schrödinger Cat”, e-print quant-ph/0101004 at http://arXiv.org. Also:
“Stable Quantum Computation of Unstable Classical Chaos”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (2001) 5393.

B. Georgeot and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Efficient quantum computing insensitive to phase errors”,
e-print quant-ph/0102082 at http://arXiv.org.

B. Georgeot and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Quantum computer inverting time arrow for macroscopic
systems”, e-print quant-ph/0105149 at http://arXiv.org.

G. Benenti, G. Casati, S. Montangero, and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Efficient Quantum Computing
of Complex Dynamics”, e-print quant-ph/0107036. Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 (2001) 227901.

C. Zalka, “Comment on “Stable Quantum Computation of Unstable Classical Chaos””,
e-print quant-ph/0110019 at http://arXiv.org.

L. Diosi, “Comment on “Stable Quantum Computation of Unstable Classical Chaos””,
e-print quant-ph/0110026 at http://arXiv.org.

B. Georgeot and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Efficient quantum computation of high harmonics
of the Liouville density distribution”, e-print quant-ph/0110142 at http://arXiv.org.

A. Maassen van den Brink, “Comments on ‘Stable Quantum Computation of Unstable Classical
Chaos’, ‘Efficient Quantum Computing Insensitive to Phase Errors’, and ‘Quantum Computer
Inverting Time Arrow for Macroscopic Systems’”, e-print quant-ph/0112006 at http://arXiv.org.

A.D. Chepelianskii and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Schrödinger cat animated on a quantum computer”,
e-print quant-ph/0202113 at http://arXiv.org.

M. Terraneo, B. Georgeot, and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Strange attractor simulated on a quantum
computer”, e-print quant-ph/0203062 at http://arXiv.org.

[159] D. Braun, “Quantum Chaos and Quantum Algorithms”, e-print quant-ph/0110037, http://arXiv.org.

[160] G.P. Berman, F. Borgonovi, F.M. Izrailev, and V.I. Tsifrinovich, “Avoiding Quantum Chaos

in Quantum Computation”, e-print quant-ph/0012106 at http://arXiv.org.

G.P. Berman, F. Borgonovi, F.M. Izrailev, and V.I. Tsifrinovich, “Onset of Chaos in a Model
of Quantum Computation”, e-print quant-ph/0103009 at http://arXiv.org.

G.P. Berman, F. Borgonovi, F.M. Izrailev, and V.I. Tsifrinovich, “Delocalization border and
onset of chaos in a model of quantum computation”, e-print quant-ph/0104086 at http://arXiv.org.
G.P. Berman, F. Borgonovi, G. Celardo, F.M. Izrailev, and D.I. Kamenev, “Dynamical fidelity
of a solid-state quantum computation”, e-print quant-ph/0206158 at http://arXiv.org.
[161] V.V. Flambaum and F.M. Izrailev, “Unconventional decay law for excited states in closed

many-body systems”, e-print quant-ph/0102088 at http://arXiv.org.
Phys. Rev. E 64 (2001) 026124.

[162] J. Gong and P. Brumer, “Coherent Control of Quantum Chaotic Diffusion”,

e-print quant-ph/0012150 at http://arXiv.org. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (2001) 1741.

[163] A.R.R. Carvalho, P. Milman, R.L. de Matos Filho, and L. Davidovich, “Decoherence, Pointer
Engineering, and Quantum State Protection”, e-print quant-ph/0009024 at http://arXiv.org.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (2001) 4988.

223

[164] T. Prosen, “On general relation between quantum ergodicity and fidelity of quantum dynamics:
from integrable to ergodic and mixing motion in kicked Ising chain”, e-print quant-ph/0106149.
T. Prosen and M. ˘Znidari˘c, “Can quantum chaos enhance stability of quantum computation?”,
e-print quant-ph/0106150 at http://arXiv.org. J. Phys. A 34 (2001) L681.
T. Prosen and M. ˘Znidari˘c, “Stability of quantum motion and correlation decay”,
e-print nlin.CD/0111014 at http://arXiv.org. J. Phys. A 35 (2002) 1455.

T. Prosen and T.H. Seligman, “Decoherence of spin echoes”,
e-print nlin.CD/0201038 at http://arXiv.org. J. Phys. A 35 (2002) 4707.

[165] S. Mancini, D. Vitali, R. Bonifacio, and P. Tombesi, “Stochastic control of quantum coherence”,

e-print quant-ph/0108011 at http://arXiv.org.

[166] V. Scarani, M. Ziman, P. Stelmachovic, N. Gisin, and V. Buzek, “Thermalizing Quantum

Machines: Dissipation and Entanglement”, e-print quant-ph/0110088 at http://arXiv.org.

[167] Y.Aharonov and J. Anandan, “Meaning of the Density Matrix”,

e-print quant-ph/9803018 at http://arXiv.org.

[168] J.F. Traub, “A Continuous Model of Computation”, e-print physics/0106045 at http://arXiv.org.

[169] P. Gacs, “Quantum Algorithmic Entropy”, e-print quant-ph/0011046 at http://arXiv.org.

Physics Today, May (1999) 39.

J. Phys. A 34 (2001) 6859.

[170] P. Gacs, J. Tromp, and P. Vitanyi, “Algorithmic Statistics”,

e-print math.PR/0006233 at http://arXiv.org. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 47 (2001) 2443.

P. Vitányi, “Randomness”, e-print math.PR/0110086 at http://arXiv.org.

P. Vitanyi, “Meaningful Information”, e-print cs.CC/0111053 at http://arXiv.org.

M. Li, J. Tromp, and P. Vitanyi, “Sharpening Occam's Razor”, e-print cs.LG/0201005.

[171] H. Buhrman, J. Tromp, and P. Vitanyi, “Time and space bounds for reversible simulation”,

J. Phys. A 34 (2001) 6821.

[172] C.H. Bennett, P.W. Shor, J.A. Smolin, and A.V. Thapliyal, “Entanglement-assisted capacity of

a quantum channel and the reverse Shannon theorem”, e-print quant-ph/0106052 at http://arXiv.org.

C.H. Bennett, G. Brassard, S. Popescu, B. Schumacher, J.A. Smolin, and W.K. Wootters,
“Purification of Noisy Entanglement and Faithful Teleportation via Noisy Channels”,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 76 (1996) 722.

C.H. Bennett, A. Harrow, D.W. Leung, and J.A. Smolin, “On the capacities of bipartite
Hamiltonians and unitary gates”, e-print quant-ph/0205057 at http://arXiv.org.

[173] A.S. Holevo, “On entanglement-assisted classical capacity”,

e-print quant-ph/0106075 at http://arXiv.org.

[174] C. Brukner, M. Zukowski, and A. Zeilinger, “The essence of entanglement”,

e-print quant-ph/0106119 at http://arXiv.org.
T. Jennewein, G. Weihs, J.-W. Pan, and A. Zeilinger, “Experimental Nonlocality Proof
of Quantum Teleportation and Entanglement Swapping”, e-print quant-ph/0201134.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 (2002) 017903.

[175] E. Schrödinger, “Die gegenwärtige Situation in der Quantenmechanik”,

Naturwissenschaften 23 (1935) 807, 823, 844. English translation: Proc. Am. Phil. Soc.
124 (1980) 323; Quantum Theory and Measurement, eds. J.A. Wheeler and W.H. Zurek
(Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1983), p. 152; http://www.emr.hibu.no/lars/eng/cat.

[176] G. Ghirardi, L.Marinatto, and T. Weber, “Entanglement and Properties of Composite Quantum

Systems: a Conceptual and Mathematical Analysis”, e-print quant-ph/0109017 at http://arXiv.org.

G. Ghirardi and L. Marinatto, “Entanglement and Properties”, e-print quant-ph/0206021.

224

[177] M. Hillery, V. Buzek, and M. Ziman, “Probabilistic implementation of universal quantum

processors”, e-print quant-ph/0106088 at http://arXiv.org.

[178] M.A. Nielsen, “Universal quantum computation using only projective measurement, quantum
memory, and preparation of the |0æ  state”, e-print quant-ph/0108020 at http://arXiv.org.
[179] P. Wocjan, M. Rötteler, D. Janzing, and T. Beth, “Universal Simulation of Hamiltonians Using

a Finite Set of Control Operations”, e-print quant-ph/0109063 at http://arXiv.org.

[180] M.A. Nielsen, M.J. Bremner, J.L. Dodd, A.M. Childs, and C.M. Dawson, “Universal simulation

of Hamiltonian dynamics for qudits”, e-print quant-ph/0109064 at http://arXiv.org.

J.L. Dodd, M.A. Nielsen, M.J. Bremner, and R.T. Thew, “Universal quantum computation
and simulation using any entangling Hamiltonian and local unitaries”,
e-print quant-ph/0106064 at http://arXiv.org.

[181] Yu. Ozhigov and L. Fedichkin, “Quantum Computer with Fixed Interaction is Universal”,

e-print quant-ph/0202030 at http://arXiv.org.

[182] W.H. Zurek, “Einselection and decoherence from an information theory perspective”,
Annalen der Physik 9 (2000) 855. E-print quant-ph/0011039 at http://arXiv.org.

[183] K. Svozil, “Irreducibility of n-ary quantum information”,

e-print quant-ph/0111113 at http://arXiv.org.

K. Svozil, “n-ary quantum information defined by state partitions”,
e-print quant-ph/0205031 at http://arXiv.org.

[184] K.H. Hoffmann, “Quantum thermodynamics”, Annalen der Physik 10 (2000) 79.

[185] V. Capek, “Zeroth and Second Laws of Thermodynamics Simultaneously Questioned

in the Quantum Microworld”, e-print cond-mat/0012056 at http://arXiv.org.
European Physical Journal B 25 (2002) 101.

V. Capek and J. Bok, “Stationary flows in quantum dissipative closed circuits as a challenge
to thermodynamics”, e-print physics/0110018 at http://arXiv.org.
V.  ˘Cápek and J. Bok, “Violation of the second law of thermodynamics in the quantum microworld”,
Physica A 290 (2001) 379.
V.  ˘Cápek and D.P. Sheehan, “Quantum mechanical model of a plasma system: a challenge
to the second law of thermodynamics”, Physica A 304 (2002) 461.

[186] A.E. Allahverdyan and Th.M. Nieuwenhuizen, “Extraction of work from a single thermal bath

in the quantum regime”, e-print cond-mat/0006404 at http://arXiv.org.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 1799.

Th.M. Nieuwenhuizen and A.E. Allahverdyan, “Statistical thermodynamics of quantum Brownian
motion: Birth of perpetuum mobile of the second kind”, e-print cond-mat/0011389.
A.E. Allahverdyan and Th.M. Nieuwenhuizen, “Invalidity of the Landauer inequality
for information erasure in the quantum regime”, e-print cond-mat/0206052 at http://arXiv.org.

[187] O. Choustova, “Pilot wave quantum model for the stock market”,

e-print quant-ph/0109122 at http://arXiv.org.

[188] A.F. Abouraddy, B.E.A. Saleh, A.V. Sergienko, and M.C. Teich, “Quantum Holography”,

e-print quant-ph/0110075 at http://arXiv.org.
L.A. Lugiato, A. Gatti, and E. Brambilla, “Quantum imaging”,
e-print quant-ph/0203046 at http://arXiv.org.

[189] R. Somma, G. Ortiz, J.E. Gubernatis, E. Knill, and R. Laflamme, “Simulating Physical
Phenomena by Quantum Networks”, e-print quant-ph/0108146 at http://arXiv.org.

[190] D.A. Meyer, “Quantum computing classical physics”, e-print quant-ph/0111069 at http://arXiv.org.

D.A. Meyer, “Physical quantum algorithms”, Comput. Phys. Comm. 146 (2002) 295.

225

[191] C. Brukner, J. Pan, C. Simon, G. Weihs, and A. Zeilinger, “Probabilistic Instantaneous Quantum

Computation”, e-print quant-ph/0109022 at http://arXiv.org.

[192] M.V. Altaisky, “Quantum neural network”, e-print quant-ph/0107012 at http://arXiv.org.

M.V. Altaisky, “On some algebraic problems arising in quantum mechanical description
of biological systems”, e-print quant-ph/0110043 at http://arXiv.org.

[193] A.A. Ezhov, “Role of interference and entanglement in quantum neural processing”,

e-print quant-ph/0112082 at http://arXiv.org.

[194] S.M. Hitchcock, “’Photosynthetic’ Quantum Computers?”, e-print quant-ph/0108087.

S.M. Hitchcock, “Time and Information, The Origins of ’Time’ from Information Flow In Causal
Networks and Complex Systems”, e-print quant-ph/0111025 at http://arXiv.org.

[195] R.T. Cahill, “Smart Nanostructures and Synthetic Quantum Systems”, e-print quant-ph/0111026.

R.T. Cahill, “Synthetic Quantum Systems”, e-print physics/0209064 at http://arXiv.org.
Smart Materials and Structures 11 (2002) 699.

R.T. Cahill and C.M. Klinger, “Bootstrap Universe from Self-Referential Noise”,
e-print gr-qc/9708013 at http://arXiv.org.

[196] P.R. Holland, The Quantum Theory of Motion (Cambridge University Press, 1995).

[197] E. Nelson, “Derivation of the Schrödinger Equation from Newtonian Mechanics”,

First edition: (1993).

Phys. Rev. 150 (1966) 1079.

E. Nelson, Dynamical Theories of Brownian Motion (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1967).

E. Nelson, Quantum Fluctuations (Princeton University Press, Princeton,1985).

[198] I. Stein, “The Nonstructure of Physical Reality: The Source of Special Relativity and Quantum

Mechanics”, Physics Essays 1 (1988) 155.

I. Stein, “Quantum Mechanics and the Special Theory of Relativity from a Random Walk”,
Physics Essays 3 (1990) 66.

[199] G.N. Ord and A.S. Deakin, “Random walks, continuum limits, and Schrödinger's equation”,

Phys. Rev. A 54 (1996) 3772.

G.N. Ord, “Fractal Space-Time and the Statistical Mechanics of Random Walks”,
Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 7 (1996) 821.

G.N. Ord and J.A. Gualtieri, “A realistic setting for Feynman paths”,
Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 14 (2002) 929.

[200] J.G. Gilson, “Stochastic Simulation of The Three Dimensional Quantum Vacuum”,

e-print quant-ph/0112047 at http://arXiv.org.

[201] G. Kaniadakis, “Statistical Origin of Quantum Mechanics”, e-print quant-ph/0112049.

Physica A 307 (2002) 172.

[202] M. Davidson, “The origin of the algebra of quantum operators in the stochastic formulation

of quantum mechanics”, e-print quant-ph/0112099. Letters in Mathematical Physics 3 (1979) 367.
M. Davidson, “A model for the stochastic origins of Schrödinger's equation”,
e-print quant-ph/0112157 at http://arXiv.org. J. Math. Phys. 20 (1979) 1865.

[203] L. Smolin, “Matrix models as non-local hidden variables theories”, e-print hep-th/0201031.
[204] G. Groessing, “Quantum Cybernetics: A New Perspective for Nelson's Stochastic Theory,
Nonlocality, and the Klein-Gordon Equation”, e-print quant-ph/0201035 at http://arXiv.org.

[205] C. Castro, J. Mahecha, and B. Rodriguez, “Nonlinear QM as a fractal Brownian motion
with complex diffusion constant”, e-print quant-ph/0202026 at http://arXiv.org.

[206] R. Czopnik and P. Garbaczewski, “Quantum Potential and Random Phase-Space Dynamics”,

e-print quant-ph/0203018 at http://arXiv.org.

226

[207] L. de Broglie, “Sur la thermodynamique du corpuscule isolé”, C.R. Acad. Sc. 253 (1961) 1078.

L. de Broglie, “Quelques conséquences de la thermodynamique de la particule isolée”,
C.R. Acad. Sc. 255 (1962) 1052.

[208] L. de Broglie, La thermodynamique de la particule isolée (thermodynamique cachée des particules)

(Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1964)

[209] L. de Broglie, “Le mouvement brownien d'une particule dans son onde”,

C.R. Acad. Sc. (série B) 264 (1967) 1041.

[210] S. Lloyd, “The power of entangled quantum channels”, e-print quant-ph/0112034.

[211] C. Simon, “Natural Entanglement in Bose-Einstein Condensates”, e-print quant-ph/0110114.

A. Sørensen, L.-M. Duan, J.I. Cirac, and P. Zoller, “Many-particle entanglement
with Bose-Einstein condensates”, Nature 409 (2001) 63.

[212] Ph. Ball, “Cool atoms make physics prize matter”, Nature 413 (2001) 554.

“New State of Matter Revealed: Bose-Einstein Condensate”, The 2001 Nobel Prize in Physics,
http://www.nobel.se/physics/laureates/2001.

W. Ketterle, “Bose-Einstein condensation in dilute atomic gases: atomic physics meets condensed
matter physics”, Physica B 280 (2000) 11.

J.R. Anglin & W. Ketterle, “Bose-Einstein condensation of atomic gases”, Nature 416 (2002) 211.

[213] R.W. Hill, C. Proust, L. Taillefer, P. Fournier, and R.L. Greene, “Breakdown of Fermi-liquid

theory in a copper-oxide superconductor”, Nature 414 (2001) 711.

K.M. Lang, V. Madhavan, J.E. Hoffman, E.W. Hudson, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, & J.C. Davis,
“Imaging the granular structure of high-Tc superconductivity in underdoped Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+d ”,
Nature 415 (2002) 412.

[214] R.B. Laughlin & D. Pines, “The Theory of Everything”, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97 (2000) 28.

[215] C. Monroe, “Quantum information processing with atoms and photons”, Nature 416 (2002) 238.

[216] E.A. Donley, N.R. Claussen, S.L. Cornish, J.L. Roberts, E.A. Cornell, and C.E. Wieman,
“Dynamics of collapsing and exploding Bose-Einstein condensates”, Nature 412 (2001) 295.

M. Greiner, O. Mandel, T.W. Hänsch, and I. Bloch, “Collapse and revival of the matter wave
field of a Bose-Einstein condensate”, Nature 419 (2002) 51.

[217] B. Julsgaard, A. Kozhekin, and E.S. Polzik, “Experimental long-lived entanglement

of two macroscopic objects”, Nature 413 (2001) 400.

[218] J.R. Friedman, V. Patel, W. Chen, S.K. Tolpygo, and J.E. Lukens, “Quantum superposition

of distinct macroscopic states”, Nature 406 (2001) 43.

[219] S. Haroche, “Entanglement, Decoherence and the Quantum/Classical Boundary”,

Physics Today, July (1998) 36.

[220] S.L. Adler, “Why Decoherence has not Solved the Measurement Problem:

A Response to P.W. Anderson”, e-print quant-ph/0112095 at http://arXiv.org.

[221] G.J. Milburn, “Intrinsic decoherence in quantum mechanics”, Phys. Rev. A 44 (1991) 5401.

H. Moya-Cessa, V. Buzek, M.S. Kim, and P.L. Knight, “Intrinsic decoherence in the atom-field
interaction”, Phys. Rev. A 48 (1993) 3900.

[222] N.A. Zidan, M. Abdel-Aty, and A.F. Obada, “Influence of intrinsic decoherence on entanglement
degree in the atom-field coupling system”, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 13 (2002) 1421.

[223] D. Braun, F. Haake, and W.T. Strunz, “Universality of Decoherence”,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (2001) 2913.

W.T. Strunz, F. Haake, and D. Braun, “Universality of decoherence in the macroworld”,
e-print quant-ph/0204129 at http://arXiv.org.

227

[224] Z.P. Karkuszewski, C. Jarzynski, and W.H. Zurek, “Quantum Chaotic Environments, the

Butterfly Effect, and Decoherence”, e-print quant-ph/0111002. Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (2002) 170405.

R.A. Jalabert and H.M. Pastawski, “Environment-Independent Decoherence Rate in Classically
Chaotic Systems”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (2001) 2490. E-print cond-mat/0010094 at http://arXiv.org.

[225] W.H. Zurek, “Sub-Planck structure in phase space and its relevance for quantum decoherence”,

Nature 412 (2001) 712. E-print quant-ph/0201118 at http://arXiv.org.

A. Albrecht, “Quantum ripples in chaos”, Nature 412 (2001) 687.

A. Jordan and M. Srednicki, “Sub-Planck Structure, Decoherence, and Many-Body Environments”,
 e-print quant-ph/0112139 at http://arXiv.org.

[226] I. Prigogine, La fin des certitudes. Temps, chaos et les lois de la nature (Éditions Odile Jacob,

Paris, 1996, 1998).

T.Y. Petrosky and I. Prigogine, “Laws and events: The dynamical basis of self-organisation”,
Can. J. Phys. 68 (1990) 670.

T. Petrosky & I. Prigogine, “Thermodynamic limit, Hilbert space and breaking of time symmetry”,
Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 11 (2000) 373.

I. Antoniou, I. Prigogine, V. Sadovnichii, and S.A. Shkarin, “Time operator for diffusion”,
Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 11 (2000) 465.

[227] P. Cvitanovi´c, “Chaotic field theory: a sketch”, Physica A 288 (2000) 61.

 E-print nlin.CD/0001034 at http://arXiv.org.

[228] C. Beck, “Chaotic strings and standard model parameters”,

e-print hep-th/0105152 at http://arXiv.org.

[229] J.S. Nicolis, G. Nicolis, & C. Nicolis, “Nonlinear dynamics and the two-slit delayed experiment”,

Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 12 (2001) 407.

[230] J. Ford, in Directions in Chaos, ed. Hao Bai-lin (World Scientific, Singapore, 1987),

Vol. 1, p. 1; ibid., p. 129.

J. Ford, G. Mantica, & G. H. Ristow, “The Arnol’d cat: Failure of the correspondence principle?”,
Physica D 50 (1991) 493.

J. Ford and M. Ilg, “Eigenfunctions, eigenvalues, and time evolution of finite, bounded, undriven,
quantum systems are not chaotic”, Phys. Rev. A 45 (1992) 6165.

J. Ford and G. Mantica, “Does quantum mechanics obey the correspondence principle?
Is it complete?”, Am. J. Phys. 60 (1992) 1086.

[231] B. Eckhardt, “Quantum Mechanics of Classically Non-integrable Systems”,

Phys. Rep. 163 (1988) 205.

[232] G. Casati, I. Guarneri, and D. Shepelyansky, “Classical Chaos, Quantum Localization

and Fluctuations: A Unified View”, Physica A 163 (1990) 205.

[233] F. Haake, Quantum Signatures of Chaos (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1991).
[234] O. Bohigas, in Chaos and Quantum Physics , ed. M.-J. Giannoni, A. Voros, and J. Zinn-Justin

(North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1991).

[235] M.V. Berry, “Some quantum-to-classical asymptotics”, in Chaos and Quantum Physics ,

ed. M.-J. Giannoni, A. Voros, and J. Zinn-Justin (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1991), p. 251.
M.V. Berry, “Quantum Chaology”, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 413 (1987) 183.
M. Berry, “Quantum Chaology, Not Quantum Chaos”, Physica Scripta 40 (1989) 335.

[236] B.V. Chirikov, “Time-dependent Quantum Systems”, in Chaos and Quantum Physics ,

ed. M.-J. Giannoni, A. Voros, and J. Zinn-Justin (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1991), p. 443.

B.V. Chirikov, F.M. Izrailev, and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Quantum Chaos: Localization
vs Ergodicity”, Physica D 33 (1988) 77.

228

[237] M.V. Berry and J.P. Keating, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 437 (1992) 151.

[238] E.B. Bogomolny, “Semiclassical quantization of multidimensional systems”,

Nonlinearity 5 (1992) 805.

E.B. Bogomolny, “On dynamical zeta function”, Chaos 2 (1992) 5.

[239] O. Bohigas, S. Tomsovic, and D. Ullmo, Phys. Rep. 223 (1993) 45.

[240] R. Aurich, J. Bolte, and F. Steiner, “Universal Signatures of Quantum Chaos”,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 73 (1994) 1356.

[241] I. Prigogine, “Dissipative processes in quantum theory”, Phys. Rep. 219 (1992) 93.

[242]Quantum Chaos - Quantum Measurement, NATO AS1 Series C. Math. Phys. Sci. 357,

ed. P. Cvitanovich, I.C. Percival, and A. Wirzba (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1992).

Quantum Chaos, Quantum Measurement, ed. H.A. Cerdeira, R. Ramaswamy, M.C. Gutzwiller,
and G. Casati (World Scientific, Singapore, 1991).

[243] K. Nakamura, Quantum Chaos — A New Paradigm of Nonlinear Dynamics

(Cambridge University Press, 1993).

[244] Quantum and Chaos: How Incompatible ? Proceedings of the 5th Yukawa International Seminar,

ed. K. Ikeda, Progr. Theor. Phys. Suppl. No. 116 (1994).

[245] Quantum Chaos: Between Order and Disorder, eds. G. Casati and B. Chirikov

(Cambridge University Press, 1995).

[246] G. Casati and B.V. Chirikov, “Comment on “Decoherence, Chaos, and the Second Law””,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995) 350.

[247] G. Casati and B.V. Chirikov, “Quantum chaos: unexpected complexity”, Physica D 86 (1995) 220.

[248] G. Casati, “Quantum chaos”, Chaos 6 (1996) 391.

[249] B.V. Chirikov, “Linear and Nonlinear Dynamical Chaos”, Preprint Budker INP 95-100

(Novosibirsk, 1995). E-print chao-dyn/9705003 at http://arXiv.org.

B.V. Chirikov, “Pseudochaos in Statistical Physics”, Preprint of the Budker Institute of Nuclear
Physics, Budker INP 95-99 (Novosibirsk, 1995). E-print chao-dyn/9705004 at http://arXiv.org.

[250] B.V. Chirikov and F. Vivaldi, “An algorithmic view of pseudochaos”, Physica D 129 (1999) 223.

[251] R.F. Fox and T.C. Elston, “Chaos and the quantum-classical correspondence in the kicked

pendulum”, Phys. Rev. A 49 (1994) 3683.

[252] M. Tegmark, “Does the Universe in Fact Contain Almost No Information?”,

Found. Phys. Lett. 9 (1996) 25.

[253] W.-M. Zhang and D. H. Feng, “Quantum nonintegrability in finite systems”,

Phys. Rep. 252 (1995) 1.

[254] T. Prozen, “Quantum surface of section method: eigenstates and unitary quantum Poincaré

evolution”, Physica D 91 (1996) 244.

[255] A.V. Andreev, O. Agam, B.D. Simons, and B.L. Altshuler, “Quantum Chaos, Irreversible
Classical Dynamics, and Random Matrix Theory”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76 (1996) 3947.
E-print cond-mat/9601001 at http://arXiv.org.
O. Agam, A.V. Andreev, and B.L. Altshuler, “Relations Between Quantum and Classical Spectral
Determinants (Zeta-Functions)”, e-print cond-mat/9602131 at http://arXiv.org.
A.V. Andreev, B.D. Simons, O. Agam, and B.L. Altshuler, “Semiclassical Field Theory Approach
to Quantum Chaos”, e-print cond-mat/9605204 at http://arXiv.org. Nucl. Phys. B 482 (1996) 536.

[256] Y.V. Fyodorov, O.A. Chubykalo, F.M. Izrailev, & G. Casati, “Wigner Random Banded Matrices
with Sparse Structure: Local Spectral Density of States”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76 (1996) 1603.

229

[257] T. Kottos & D. Cohen, “Failure of random matrix theory to correctly describe quantum dynamics”,

e-print cond-mat/0105274 at http://arXiv.org.

[258] F. Borgonovi, “Localization in Discontinuous Quantum Systems”,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 (1998) 4653.

[259] G. Casati and T. Prosen, “The quantum mechanics of chaotic billiards”, Physica D 131 (1999) 293.

G. Casati and T. Prosen, “Quantum localization and cantori in the stadium billiard”,
Phys. Rev. E 59 (1999) R2516.

G. Casati and T. Prosen, “The triangle map: a model of quantum chaos”, e-print nlin.CD/0009030.
T. Prosen and M. ˘Znidari˘c, “Anomalous diffusion and dynamical localization in a parabolic map”,
e-print nlin.CD/0103001 at http://arXiv.org.

[260] G. Casati, G. Maspero, and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Quantum fractal eigenstates”,

Physica D 131 (1999) 311.

G. Casati, G. Maspero, and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Quantum Poincaré Recurrences”,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (1999) 524.

B.V. Chirikov and D.L. Shepelyansky, “Asymptotic Statistics of Poincaré Recurrences
in Hamiltonian Systems with Divided Phase Space”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (1999) 528.

G. Casati, “Quantum relaxation and Poincaré recurrences”, Physica A 288 (2000) 49.

G. Benenti, G. Casati, I. Guarneri, and M. Terraneo, “Quantum Fractal Fluctuations”,
e-print cond-mat/0104450 at http://arXiv.org.

[261] D.A. Wisniacki, F. Borondo, E. Vergini, and R.M. Benito, “Localization properties of groups

of eigenstates in chaotic systems”, e-print nlin.CD/0103031 at http://arXiv.org.

[262] V.Ya. Demikhovskii, F.M. Izrailev, and A.I. Malyshev, “Manifestation of the Arnol’d Diffusion

in Quantum Systems”, e-print quant-ph/0109147 at http://arXiv.org.

[263] R. Ketzmerick, L. Hufnagel, F. Steinbach, and M. Weiss, “New Class of Eigenstates

in Generic Hamiltonian Systems”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 1214.

[264] G.A. Luna-Acosta, J.A. Méndez-Bermúdez, and F.M. Izrailev, “Periodic Chaotic Billiards:

Quantum-Classical Correspondence in Energy Space”, e-print cond-mat/0105108, http://arXiv.org.
Phys. Rev. E 64 (2001) 036206.

G.A. Luna-Acosta, J.A. Méndez-Bermúdez, and F.M. Izrailev, “Quantum-classical correspondence
for local density of states and eigenfunctions of a chaotic periodic billiard”,
e-print nlin.CD/0002044 at http://arXiv.org. Phys. Lett. A 274 (2000) 192.

[265] J. Wilkie and P. Brumer, “Quantum-Classical Correspondence via Liouville Dynamics:

I. Integrable Systems and the Chaotic Spectral Decomposition”, e-print chao-dyn/9608013.

J. Wilkie and P. Brumer, “Quantum-Classical Correspondence via Liouville Dynamics:
II. Correspondence for Chaotic Hamiltonian Systems”, e-print chao-dyn/9608014.
[266] G. Ordóñez, T. Petrosky, E.Karpov, and I. Prigogine, “Explicit construction of a time

superoperator for quantum unstable systems”, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 12 (2001) 2591.

[267] J. Weber, F. Haake, P.A. Braun, C. Manderfeld, and P.  ˘Seba, “Resonances

of the Frobenius-Perron Operator for a Hamiltonian Map with a Mixed Phase Space”,
e-print nlin.CD/0105047 at http://arXiv.org. J. Phys. A 34 (2001) 7195.
J. Weber, F. Haake, and P.  ˘Seba, “Frobenius-Perron Resonances for Maps with a Mixed Phase
Space”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 3620. E-print nlin.CD/0001013 at http://arXiv.org.
C. Manderfeld, J. Weber, and F. Haake, “Classical versus quantum time evolution
of (quasi-) probability densities at limited phase-space resolution”, J. Phys. A 34 (2001) 9893.
E-print nlin.CD/0107020 at http://arXiv.org.

230

[268] A. Sugita and H. Aiba, “The second moment of Husimi distribution as a definition of complexity

of quantum states”, e-print nlin.CD/0106012 at http://arXiv.org.

A. Sugita, “Second moment of generalised Husimi distribution and complexity of many-body
quantum states”, e-print nlin.CD/0112139 at http://arXiv.org.

[269] A. Jordan and M. Srednicki, “The Approach to Ergodicity in the Quantum Baker's Map”,

e-print nlin.CD/0108024 at http://arXiv.org.

[270] M.H. Partovi, “Entropic formulation of chaos for quantum dynamics”,

Phys. Lett. A 151 (1990) 389.

[271] A. Peres, in Quantum Chaos, Quantum Measurement, ed. H.A. Cerdeira, R. Ramaswamy,

M.C. Gutzwiller, and G. Casati (World Scientific, Singapore, 1991), p. 73.

A. Peres, Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1993).

[272] R. Schack, G.M. D’Ariano, and C.M. Caves, “Hypersensitivity to perturbation in the quantum

kicked top”, Phys. Rev. E 50 (1994) 972.

R. Schack and C.M. Caves, “Information-theoretic characterization of quantum chaos”,
Phys. Rev. E 53 (1996) 3257.

[273] K. Shiokawa and B.L. Hu, “Decoherence, delocalization, and irreversibility in quantum chaotic

systems”, Phys. Rev. E 52 (1995) 2497.

[274] W.H. Zurek and J.P. Paz, “Decoherence, Chaos, and the Second Law”,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 72 (1994) 2508; Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995) 351.

W.H. Zurek and J.P. Paz, “Quantum chaos: a decoherent definition”, Physica D 83 (1995) 300.

W.H. Zurek, “Decoherence, chaos, quantum-classical correspondence, and the algorithmic arrow
of time”, Phys. Scripta T76 (1998) 186; Acta Phys. Polon. B 29 (1998) 3689.
E-print quant-ph/9802054 at http://arXiv.org.

S. Habib, K. Shizume, and W.H. Zurek, “Decoherence, Chaos, and the Correspondence
Principle”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 (1998) 4361. E-print quant-ph/9803042 at http://arXiv.org.

Z.P.Karkuszewski, J. Zakrzewski, and W.H. Zurek, “Breakdown of correspondence in chaotic
systems: Ehrenfest versus localization times”, e-print nlin.CD/0012048 at http://arXiv.org.

[275] R.A. Jalabert and H.M. Pastawski, “Environment-Independent Decoherence Rate in Classically

Chaotic Systems”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (2001) 2490. E-print cond-mat/0010094 at http://arXiv.org.

F.M. Cucchietti, H.M. Pastawski, and D.A. Wisniacki, “Sensitivity of the Loschmidt Echo
as a monitor of dynamical Quantum Chaos”, e-print cond-mat/0102135 at http://arXiv.org.

D.A. Wisniacki, E.G. Vergini, H.M. Pastawski, and F.M. Cucchietti, “Sensitivity to perturbations
in a quantum chaotic billiard”, e-print nlin.CD/0111051 at http://arXiv.org.

F.M. Cucchietti, C.H. Lewenkopf, E.R. Mucciolo, H.M. Pastawski, and R.O. Vallejos,
“Measuring the Lyapunov exponent using quantum mechanics”, e-print nlin.CD/0112015.
D.A. Wisniacki and D. Cohen, “Quantum irreversibility, perturbation independent decay, and
the parametric theory of the local density of states”, e-print quant-ph/0111125 at http://arXiv.org.
[276] V.I. Man'ko and R. Vilela Mendes, “Quantum sensitive dependence”, e-print quant-ph/0205148.
V.I. Man'ko and R. Vilela Mendes, “Lyapunov exponent in quantum mechanics. A phase-space
approach”, e-print quant-ph/0002049 at http://arXiv.org. Physica D 145 (2000) 330.

[277] Ph. Jacquod, P.G. Silvestrov, and C.W.J. Beenakker, “Golden rule decay versus Lyapunov decay

of the quantum Loschmidt echo”, Phys. Rev. E 64 (2001) 055203(R). E-print nlin.CD/0107044.
P.G. Silvestrov, J. Tworzydlo, and C.W.J. Beenakker, “Hypersensitivity to perturbations
of quantum-chaotic wave-packet dynamics”, e-print nlin.CD/0207002 at http://arXiv.org.

[278] T. Bhattacharya, S. Habib, K. Jacobs, and K. Shizume, “Strange happenings at the quantum-
classical boundary: The delta-kicked rotor”, e-print quant-ph/0105086 at http://arXiv.org.

231

[279] N.R. Cerruti and S. Tomsovic, “Sensitivity of Wave Field Evolution and Manifold Stability

in Chaotic Systems”, e-print nlin.CD/0108016 at http://arXiv.org.

[280] G. Benenti and G. Casati, “Sensitivity of Quantum Motion for Classically Chaotic Systems”,

e-print quant-ph/0112060 at http://arXiv.org.

[281] E.B. Bogomolny, B. Georgeot, M.-J. Giannoni, and C. Schmit, “Arithmetical Chaos”,

Phys. Rep. 291 (1997) 219.

[282] J.A. González, L.I. Reyes, and L.E. Guerrero, “Exact solutions to chaotic and stochastic systems”,

e-print nlin.CD/0101049 at http://arXiv.org.

J.A. González, L.I. Reyes, J.J. Suárez, L.E. Guerrero, and G. Gutiérrez, “A mechanism
for randomness”, e-print nlin.CD/0202022 at http://arXiv.org.

[283] T. Kottos and U. Smilansky, “Quantum Chaos on Graphs”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 (1997) 4794.

B. Gutkin and U. Smilansky, “Can One Hear the Shape of a Graph?”, e-print nlin.CD/0105020.

[284] S.R. Jain, B. Gremaud, and A. Khare, “Quantum Expression of Classical Chaos”,

e-print nlin.CD/0107051 at http://arXiv.org.

[285] R. Blümel, Yu. Dabaghian, and R.V. Jensen, “One-dimensional quantum chaos:

Explicitly solvable cases”, e-print quant-ph/0107092. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 (2002) 044101.

Yu. Dabaghian, R.V. Jensen, and R. Blümel, “Integrability in 1D Quantum Chaos”,
e-print quant-ph/0209042 at http://arXiv.org.

[286] M. Azam, “Dynamics of the Subsets of Natural Numbers: A Nursery Rhyme of Chaos”,

e-print nlin.CD/0108055 at http://arXiv.org.

[287] O. Bohigas, P. Leboeuf, and M.-J. Sanchez, “Spectral spacing correlations for chaotic

and disordered systems”, e-print nlin.CD/0012049, http://arXiv.org. Found. Phys. 31 (2001) 489.

[288] S. Åberg, “Onset of Chaos in Rapidly Rotating Nuclei”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 (1990) 3119.

[289] V.V. Flambaum and F.M. Izrailev, “Distribution of occupation numbers in finite Fermi-systems

and role of interaction in chaos and thermalization”, Phys. Rev. E 55 (1997) R13.
e-print cond-mat/9610178 at http://arXiv.org.

V.V. Flambaum and F.M. Izrailev, “Statistical Theory of Finite Fermi-Systems Based on the
Structure of Chaotic Eigenstates”, Phys. Rev. E 56 (1997) 5144. E-print cond-mat/9707016.

V.V. Flambaum and F.M. Izrailev, “Entropy production and wave packet dynamics in the Fock
space of closed chaotic many-body systems”, e-print quant-ph/0103129 at http://arXiv.org.

F. Borgonovi, G.Celardo, F.M. Izrailev, and G. Casati, “A semiquantal approach to finite
systems of interacting particles, e-print nlin.CD/0106036 at http://arXiv.org.

V.V. Flambaum and F.M. Izrailev, “Time dependence of occupation numbers and thermalization
time in closed chaotic many-body systems”, e-print quant-ph/0108109 at http://arXiv.org.

[290] I.V. Gornyi and A.D. Mirlin, “From quantum disorder to quantum chaos”,

e-print cond-mat/0107552 at http://arXiv.org.

[291] L.A. Caron, H. Jirari, H. Kröger, X.Q. Luo, G. Melkonyan, and K.J.M. Moriarty, “Quantum

chaos at finite temperature”, Phys. Lett. A 288 (2001) 145.

[292] V.E. Bunakov, I.B. Ivanov, and R.B. Panin, “The critical perturbation parameter estimate
for the transition from regularity to chaos in quantum systems”, e-print quant-ph/0105082.
V.E. Bunakov and I.B. Ivanov, “The measure of chaoticity in stationary quantum systems”,
J. Phys. A 35 (2002) 1907.
I.B. Ivanov, “Unpredictability of wave function's evolution in nonintegrable quantum systems”,
e-print quant-ph/0203019 at http://arXiv.org.

[293] V.I. Kuvshinov and A.V. Kuzmin, “Heading towards chaos criterion for quantum field systems”,

e-print nlin.CD/0111003 at http://arXiv.org.

232

[294] K. Inoue, M. Ohya, and I.V. Volovich, “Semiclassical Properties and Chaos Degree
for the Quantum Baker's Map”, e-print quant-ph/0110135 at http://arXiv.org.

Y.S. Weinstein, S. Lloyd, and C. Tsallis, “The Edge of Quantum Chaos”,
e-print cond-mat/0206039 at http://arXiv.org.

J. Emerson, Y.S. Weinstein, S. Lloyd, and D. Cory, “Fidelity Decay as an Efficient Indicator
of Quantum Chaos”, e-print quant-ph/0207099 at http://arXiv.org.

T.A. Brun, H.A. Carteret, and A. Ambainis, “The quantum to classical transition for random
walks”, e-print quant-ph/0208195 at http://arXiv.org.

S.M. Soskin, O.M. Yevtushenko, and R. Mannella, “Drastic facilitation of the onset of global chaos
in a Hamiltonian system due to an extremum in eigenfrequency vs energy”,
e-print nlin.CD/0206002 at http://arXiv.org.

P. Bracken, P. Góra, and A. Boyarsky, “A minimum principle for chaotic dynamical systems”,
Physica D 166 (2002) 63.

G. Blum, S.Snutzmann, and U. Smilansky, “Nodal Domain Statistics: A Criterion for Quantum
Chaos”, Phys. Rev. Lett.88 (2002) 114101.

[295] C.E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication”, Bell Syst. Tech. J. 27 (1948) 379, 623;

reproduced at http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/ms/what/shannonday/paper.html.

[296] N. Wiener, Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine
(MIT Press and John Wiley & Sons, New York – London, 1961). First edition: 1948.

[297] L. Brillouin, Science and Information Theory (Academic Press, New York, 1956).

L. Brillouin, Scientific Uncertainty and Information (Academic Press, New York, 1964).

[298] J.S. Nicolis, Dynamics of Hierarchical Systems: An Evolutionary Approach

[299] H. Haken, Information and Self-Organisation: A Macroscopic Approach to Complex Systems

(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986).

(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1988).

[300] W.H. Zurek, “Algorithmic randomness and physical entropy”, Phys. Rev. A 40 (1989) 4731.

W.H. Zurek, “Thermodynamic cost of computation, algorithmic complexity
and the information metric”, Nature 341 (1989) 119.

W.H. Zurek, “Algorithmic randomness, physical entropy, measurement,
and the Demon of Choice”, e-print quant-ph/9807007 at http://arXiv.org.

[301] H. Ollivier and W.H. Zurek, “Quantum Discord: A Measure of the Quantumness of Correlations”,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 (2002) 017901.
W.H. Zurek, “Quantum Discord and Maxwell's Demons”, e-print quant-ph/0202123.

[302] J. Bub, “Maxwell's demon and the thermodynamics of computation”, e-print quant-ph/0203017.

Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 32 (2001) 569.
C.H. Bennett, “Notes on Landauer's principle, Reversible Computation and Maxwell's Demon”,
e-print physics/0210005 at http://arXiv.org.

[303] R. Landauer, “Dissipation and noise immunity in computation and communication”,

Nature 335 (1988) 779.

[304] C.H. Bennett, “Universal computation and physical dynamics”, Physica D 86 (1995) 268.
[305] Complexity, Entropy and the Physics of Information, ed. by W. Zurek (Addison-Wesley,

Redwood City, 1990).

[306] B.B. Kadomtsev, “Dynamics and Information”, Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk 164 (1994) 449.

[307] M.N. Izakov, “Self-organisation and information on planets and in ecosystems”,

Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk 167 (1997) 1087.

[308] C.D. Van Siclen, “Information entropy of complex structures”, Phys. Rev. E 56 (1997) 5211.

233

[309] C.R. Shalizi and J.P. Crutchfield, “Computational Mechanics: Pattern and Prediction,

Structure and Simplicity”, e-print cond-mat/9907176 at http://arXiv.org.

[310] C. Adami and N.J. Cerf, “Physical complexity of symbolic sequences”, Physica D 137 (2000) 62.

E-print adap-org/9605002 at http://arXiv.org.

[311] J. Schmidhuber, “Algorithmic Theories of Everything”, e-print quant-ph/0011122.

J. Schmidhuber, “A Computer Scientist's View of Life, the Universe, and Everything”,
e-print quant-ph/9904050 at http://arXiv.org.

[312] G.J. Chaitin, “A Century of Controversy over the Foundations of Mathematics II”,

e-print nlin.CD/0004007 at http://arXiv.org.

G.J. Chaitin, “A Century of Controversy over the Foundations of Mathematics”,
e-print nlin.CD/9909001 at http://arXiv.org.

[313] A. Ostruszka, P. Pakonski, W. Slomczynski, and K. Zyczkowski, “Dynamical entropy for systems

with stochastic perturbation”, Phys. Rev. E 62 (2000) 2018.

[314] G. Boffetta, M. Cencini, M. Falcioni, and A. Vulpiani, “Predictability: a way to characterize
complexity”, Phys. Rep. 356 (2002) 367. E-print nlin.CD/0101029 at http://arXiv.org.

[315] C. Tsallis, “Entropic nonextensivity: a possible measure of complexity”,

Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 13 (2002) 371.

[316] J. Wheeler, in Complexity, Entropy and the Physics of Information, ed. by W. Zurek

(Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, 1990), p. 3.

[317] C.A. Fuchs, “Quantum Foundations in the Light of Quantum Information”,

e-print quant-ph/0106166 at http://arXiv.org.

C.A. Fuchs, “Quantum Mechanics as Quantum Information (and only a little more)”,
e-print quant-ph/0205039 at http://arXiv.org.

[318] A. Galindo and M.A. Martin-Delgado, “Information and Computation:

Classical and Quantum Aspect”, e-print quant-ph/0112105 at http://arXiv.org.

[319] C. Brukner and A. Zeilinger, “Conceptual Inadequacy of the Shannon Information

in Quantum Measurements”, Phys. Rev. A 63 (2001) 022113. E-print quant-ph/0006087.

M.J.W. Hall, “Comment on “Conceptual Inadequacy of Shannon Information...” by C. Brukner
and A. Zeilinger”, e-print quant-ph/0007116 at http://arXiv.org.

C. Brukner and A. Zeilinger, “Quantum Measurement and Shannon Information,
A Reply to M.J.W. Hall”, e-print quant-ph/0008091 at http://arXiv.org.

C.G. Timpson, “On the Supposed Conceptual Inadequacy of the Shannon Information”,
e-print quant-ph/0112178 at http://arXiv.org.

S. Rai, J. Rai, and A. Zeilinger, “Comparison of Entropies in the Light of Separability”,
e-print quant-ph/0209159 at http://arXiv.org.

[320] S.E. Massen, Ch.C. Moustakidis, and C.P. Panos, “Universal property of the information entropy

in fermionic and bosonic systems”, e-print quant-ph/0201102 at http://arXiv.org.

[321] I. Devetak and A.E. Staples, “The union of physics and information”, e-print quant-ph/0112166.
[322] R. Alicki, “Information-theoretical meaning of quantum dynamical entropy”,

e-print quant-ph/0201012 at http://arXiv.org.

[323] M. Keyl, “Fundamentals of Quantum Information Theory”, e-print quant-ph/0202122.

Physics Reports 369 (2002) 431.

[324] I.V. Volovich, “Quantum Information in Space and Time”, e-print quant-ph/0108073.

I.V. Volovich, “Towards Quantum Information Theory in Space and Time”,
e-print quant-ph/0203030 at http://arXiv.org.

I.V. Volovich, “Quantum Information and Spacetime Structure”, e-print quant-ph/0207050.

234

[325] J.B. Hartle, “Spacetime Information”, Phys. Rev. D 51 (1995) 1800. E-print gr-qc/9409005.

[326] T.D. Kieu, “Computing the Noncomputable”, e-print quant-ph/0203034 at http://arXiv.org.

T.D. Kieu, “Quantum Principles and Mathematical Computability”, e-print quant-ph/0205093.

[327] R. Horodecki, M. Horodecki, and P. Horodecki, “Balance of information in bipartite quantum-
communication systems: Entanglement-energy analogy”, Phys. Rev. A 63 (2001) 022310.

J. Oppenheim, K. Horodecki, M. Horodecki, P. Horodecki, and R. Horodecki, “A new type
of complementarity between quantum and classical information”, e-print quant-ph/0207025.

M. Horodecki, K. Horodecki, P. Horodecki, R. Horodecki, J. Oppenheim, A. Sen, & U. Sen,
“Information as a resource in distributed quantum systems”, e-print quant-ph/0207168.

J. Oppenheim, M. Horodecki, and R. Horodecki, “Are there phase transitions in information
space?”, e-print quant-ph/0207169 at http://arXiv.org.

[328] M. Koashi and N. Imoto, “Quantum information is incompressible without errors”,

e-print quant-ph/0203045 at http://arXiv.org.

[329] A. Valentini, “Subquantum Information and Computation”, e-print quant-ph/0203049.

[330] R.B. Griffiths, “The Nature and Location of Quantum Information”, e-print quant-ph/0203058.
[331] R. Duvenhage, “The Nature of Information in Quantum Mechanics”, e-print quant-ph/0203070.

[332] C.S. Calude, “Incompleteness, Complexity, Randomness and Beyond”, e-print quant-ph/0111118.

C. S. Calude and B. Pavlov, “Coins, Quantum Measurements, and Turing's Barrier”,
e-print quant-ph/0112087 at http://arXiv.org.

[333] S.M. Hitchcock, “Is There a ‘Conservation of Information Law’ for the Universe?”,

e-print gr-qc/0108010 at http://arXiv.org.

[334] D.R. Brooks and E.O. Wiley, Evolution as Entropy (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1988).

[335] W. Dembski, Intelligent Design. The bridge between science and technology

First edition: 1986.

(InterVarsity Press, 1999).

W. Dembski, The Design Inference: Eliminating Chance through Small Probabilities
(Cambridge University Press, 1998).

W. Dembski, No Free Lunch: Why Specified Complexity Cannot be Purchased without Intelligence
(Rowman & Littlefield, 2001).

[336] S. Kauffman, Investigations (Oxford University Press, 2000).

[337] E. Schrödinger, What is Life? The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell

(Cambridge University Press, 1944).

[338] G. Cattaneo, M.L. Dalla Chiara, R. Giuntini, and R. Leporini, “An unsharp logic from quantum

computation”, e-print quant-ph/0201013 at http://arXiv.org.

[339] H. Bergson, L'Évolution Créatrice (Félix Alcan, Paris, 1907).

English translation: Creative Evolution (Macmillan, London, 1911).

[340] M.C. Cross and P.C. Hohenberg, “Pattern formation outside of equilibrium”,

Rev. Mod. Phys. 65 (1993) 851.

[341] Y.L. Klimontovich, “S-Theorem”, Z. Phys. B 66 (1987) 125.

Yu. L. Klimontovich, “Relative ordering criteria in open systems”,
Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk 166 (1996) 1231.

[342] P. Glansdorf and I. Prigogine, Thermodynamic Theory of Structure, Stability and Fluctuations

(John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1971).

I. Prigogine, Étude thermodynamique des phénomènes irreversibles
(Dunod, Paris et Desoer, Liège, 1947).

235

[343] A. Babloyantz, Molecules, dynamics and life (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1986).

[344] J.R. Dorfman, P.Gaspard, and T. Gilbert, “Entropy production of diffusion in spatially periodic

deterministic systems”, e-print nlin.CD/0203046 at http://arXiv.org.

[345] X. Calbet and R. Lopez-Ruiz, “Tendency to Maximum Complexity in a Non-Equilibrium Isolated

System”, Phys. Rev. E 63 (2001) 066116. E-print nlin.CD/0205022 at http://arXiv.org.

R. Lopez-Ruiz, “Complexity in Some Physical Systems”, Int. Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos
11 (2001) 2669. E-print nlin.AO/0205021 at http://arXiv.org.

R. Lopez-Ruiz, H. Mancini, and X. Calbet, “A Statistical Measure of Complexity”,
Phys. Lett. A 209 (1995) 321. E-print nlin.CD/0205033 at http://arXiv.org.

[346] G. Hu, Z. Zheng, L. Yang, and W. Kang, “Thermodynamical second law in irreversible processes

of chaotic few-body systems”, Phys. Rev. E 64 (2001) 045102.

[347] S. Gupta and R.K.P. Zia, “Quantum Neural Networks”, e-print quant-ph/0201144.

[348] F. Shafee, “Semiclassical Neural Network”, e-print quant-ph/0202015 at http://arXiv.org.

F. Shafee, “Entangled Quantum Networks”, e-print quant-ph/0203010 at http://arXiv.org.

[349] E.C. Behrman, V. Chandrashekar, Z.Wang, C.K. Belur, J.E. Steck, and S.R. Skinner,
“A Quantum Neural Network Computes Entanglement”, e-print quant-ph/0202131.

[350] N.E. Mavromatos, A. Mershin, and D.V. Nanopoulos, “QED-Cavity model of microtubules

implies dissipationless energy transfer and biological quantum teleportation”,
e-print quant-ph/0204021 at http://arXiv.org.

[351] T. Hogg and J.G. Chase, “Quantum Smart Matter”, e-print quant-ph/9611021 at http://arXiv.org.

[352] Y. Benenson, T. Paz-Elizur, R. Adar, E. Keinan, Z. Livneh, and E. Shapiro, “Programmable
and autonomous computing machine made of biomolecules”, Nature 414 (2001) 430.

[353] R.S. Braich, N. Chelyapov, C.Johnson, P.W.K. Rothemund, and L. Adleman,

“Solution of a 20-Variable 3-SAT Problem on a DNA Computer”, Science 296 (2002) 499.

[354] L.H. Kauffman, “Biologic”, e-print quant-ph/0204007 at http://arXiv.org.

[355] J. Wakeling and P. Bak, “Intelligent systems in the context of surrounding environment”,

Phys. Rev. E 64 (2001) 051920. E-print nlin.AO/0201046 at http://arXiv.org.

[356] K.E. Drexler, Nanosystems: Molecular Machinery, Manufacturing, and Computation

(John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1992).

K.E. Drexler, Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology
(Anchor Press/Doubleday, New York, 1986).

[357] The detailed references to many nanotechnology sources can be found at the web sites of
Foresight Institute, http://www.foresight.org/NanoRev/index.html, and Zyvex company,
http://www.zyvex.com/nano/.

[358] Popular reviews and professional discussions on nanotechnology can be found in a number
of articles in Scientific American accessible from a special Nanotechnology web page,
http://www.sciam.com/nanotech. See for example:
G. Stix, “Little Big Science”, Scientific American 285, September (2001),
http://www.sciam.com/2001/0901issue/0901stix.html.
K.E. Drexler, “Machine-Phase Nanotechnology”, ibid.,
http://www.sciam.com/2001/0901issue/0901drexler.html.
G.M. Whitesides, “The Once and Future Nanomachine”, ibid.,
http://www.sciam.com/2001/0901issue/0901whitesides.html.

[359] A broad and ambitious research programme on nanotechnology, the National Nanotechnology

Initiative, is established and generously supported by the US Government, see http://nano.gov.

236

[360] R. P. Feynman, “There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom”, Engineering and Science

(California Institute of Technology), February 1960, p. 22.
Reproduced at http://www.zyvex.com/nanotech/feynman.html.

[361] L. Papp, S. Bumble, F. Friedler, and L.T. Fan, “Characteristics of Molecular-biological Systems

and Process-network Synthesis”, e-print physics/0203024 at http://arXiv.org.

[362] C. Adami and J.P. Dowling, “Quantum Computation — The Ultimate Frontier”,

e-print quant-ph/0202039 at http://arXiv.org.

L. Fortnow, “Theory of Quantum Computing and Communication”, e-print quant-ph/0203074.

J. Yepez, “Quantum computation for physical modeling”, Comput. Phys. Comm. 146 (2002) 277.

[363] E. Knill, R. Laflamme, H. Barnum, D. Dalvit, J. Dziarmaga, J. Gubernatis, L. Gurvits, G. Ortiz,

L. Viola, and W.H. Zurek, “Introduction to Quantum Information Processing”,
e-print quant-ph/0207171 at http://arXiv.org.

R. Laflamme, E. Knill, D.G. Cory, E.M. Fortunato, T. Havel, C. Miquel, R. Martinez,
C. Negrevergne, G. Ortiz, M.A. Pravia, Y. Sharf, S. Sinha, R. Somma, and L. Viola,
“Introduction to NMR Quantum Information Processing”, e-print quant-ph/0207172.

[364] D. Grundler, “Spintronics”, Physics World, April (2002) 39.

D.D. Awschalom, M.E. Flatté, and N. Samarth, “Spintronics”, Scientific American, June (2002).
http://www.sciam.com/2002/0602issue/0602awschalom.html.

[365] G.J. Milburn, Schrödinger's Machines: The Quantum Technology Reshaping Everyday Life

(W.H. Freeman & Co, 1997).

G.I.Milburn and P. Davies, The Feynman Processor: Quantum Entanglement and the Computing
Revolution (Perseus Pr, 1999).

G.P. Dowling and G.J. Milburn, “Quantum Technology: The Second Quantum Revolution”,
e-print quant-ph/0206091 at http://arXiv.org.

[366] D. Zohar and I.N. Marshall, Quantum Self: Human Nature and Consciousness Defined

by the New Physics (Quill, 1991).

D. Zohar and I. Marshall, The Quantum Society: Mind, Physics, and a New Social Vision
(Quill, 1995).

[367] J. Satinover, The Quantum Brain: The Search for Freedom and the Next Generation of Man

(John Wiley, 2001).

[368] R. Kurzweil, The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed Human Intelligence

(Penguin USA, 2000). See also: “The Singularity: A Talk with Ray Kurzweil”,
http:// www.edge.org/3rd_culture/kurzweil_singularity/kurzweil_singularity_index.html.

[369] P.W. Anderson, “Brainwashed by Feynman?”, Physics Today 53, February (2000) 11.
[370] S. Wolfram, A New Kind of Science (Wolfram Media, Champaign, 2002).
[371] “Computation in Physics and Biological Systems”, Santa Fe Institute Research Focus Area,

http://www.santafe.edu/sfi/research/focus/compPhysics/index.html.
M. Gell-Mann and J. Crutchfield, “Computation in Physical and Biological Systems.
Measures of Complexity”, Santa Fe Institute Research Project,
http://www.santafe.edu/sfi/research/focus/compPhysics/projects/measuringComplexity.html.
See also ref. [309] for a conceptual example.

[372] A. Connes, “La réalité mathématique archaïque”, La Recherche, No. 332 (Juin 2000) 109.
[373] J. B. Barbour, The End of Time: The Next Revolution in Physics (Oxford University Press, 2001).

[374] B. Greene, The Elegant Universe: Superstrings, Hidden Dimensions, and the Quest

for the Ultimate Theory (Vintage Books, 2000). First edition: 1999.

237

[375] C. Rovelli and L. Smolin, “Spin Networks and Quantum Gravity”, Phys. Rev. D 52 (1995) 5743.

E-print gr-qc/9505006 at http://arXiv.org.
F. Markopoulou and L. Smolin, “Causal evolution of spin networks”,
Nucl. Phys. B 508 (1997) 409. E-print gr-qc/9702025 at http://arXiv.org.
F. Markopoulou and L. Smolin, “Quantum geometry with intrinsic local causality”,
Phys. Rev. D 58 (1998) 084032. E-print gr-qc/9712067 at http://arXiv.org.
L. Smolin, “Strings as perturbations of evolving spin-networks”,
Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 88 (2000) 103. E-print hep-th/9801022 at http://arXiv.org.
L. Smolin, “A holographic formulation of quantum general relativity”,
Phys. Rev. D 61 (2000) 084007. E-print hep-th/9808191 at http://arXiv.org.
Y. Ling and L. Smolin, “Supersymmetric Spin Networks and Quantum Supergravity”,
Phys. Rev. D 61 (2000) 044008. E-print hep-th/9904016 at http://arXiv.org.
F. Markopoulou and L. Smolin, “Holography in a quantum spacetime”, e-print hep-th/9910146.
L. Smolin, “The cubic matrix model and a duality between strings and loops”,
e-print hep-th/0006137 at http://arXiv.org.
Y. Ling and L. Smolin, “Holographic Formulation of Quantum Supergravity”,
Phys. Rev. D 63 (2001) 064010. E-print hep-th/0009018 at http://arXiv.org.
L. Smolin, “The exceptional Jordan algebra and the matrix string”, e-print hep-th/0104050.

[376] C. Rovelli, “Covariant hamiltonian formalism for field theory: symplectic structure

and Hamilton-Jacobi equation on the space G”, e-print gr-qc/0207043 at http://arXiv.org.

[377] R. Aldrovandi and A.L. Barbosa, “Spacetime algebraic skeleton”, e-print gr-qc/0207044.

[378] The New Physics, ed. P. Davies (Cambridge University Press, 1989).

[379] C.P. Snow, The Two Cultures (Cambridge University Press, 1993). First edition: 1959.

[380] J. Brockman, The Third Culture: Beyond the Scientific Revolution (Touchstone Books, 1996).

J. Brockman, “The Third Culture”, http://www.edge.org/3rd_culture/index.html.

J. Brockman, “The New Humanists”,
http://www.edge.org/3rd_culture/brockman/brockman_index.html.

[381] L. de Broglie, “Nécessité de la liberté dans la recherche scientifique”,

In Certitudes et Incertitudes de la Science (Albin Michel, Paris, 1966). Original edition: 1962.

L. de Broglie, “Les idées qui me guident dans mes recherches”,
In Certitudes et Incertitudes de la Science (Albin Michel, Paris, 1966). Original edition: 1965.

[382] T. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago University Press, 1970).

First edition: 1962.

[383] G.Lochak, Louis de Broglie. Un prince de la science (Flammarion, Paris, 1992).
[384] J. Maddox, “Restoring good manners in research”, Nature 376 (1995) 113.
J. Maddox, “The prevalent distrust of science”, Nature 378 (1995) 435.

[385] J. Ziman, “Is science losing its objectivity?”, Nature 382 (1996) 751.
[386] A. Sangalli, “They burn heretics, don't they?”, New Scientist, 6 April (1996) 47.
[387] The Flight from Science and Reason, eds. P.R. Gross,  N. Levitt, and M.W. Lewis (New York

Academy of Sciences, 1996). Also: Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, vol. 775.

[388] D. Braben, “The repressive regime of peer-review bureaucracy?”,

 Physics World, November (1996) 13.

[389] Y. Farge, “Pour davantage d'éthique dans le monde de la recherche”,

Science Tribune, October 1996, http://www.tribunes.com/tribune/art96/farg.htm.

238

[390] A.A. Berezin, “Hampering the progress of science by peer review and by the ‘selective’ funding

system”, Science Tribune, December 1996, http://www.tribunes.com/tribune/art96/bere.htm.

[391] J. Bricmont, “Le relativisme alimente le courant irrationnel”, La Recherche, No. 298, mai (1997) 82.

[392] P.A. Lawrence and M. Locke, “A man for our season”, Nature 386 (1997) 757.

[393] J. de Rosnay, “Du pasteur au passeur”, Le Monde de l'Education, de la Culture et de la Formation,

No. 245, fevrier (1997) 20.

[394] O. Postel-Vinay, “La recherche menacée d'asphyxie”, Le Monde de l'Education, de la Culture

et de la Formation, No. 245, fevrier (1997) 47.

O. Postel-Vinay, “La défaite de la science française”, La Recherche, No. 352, avril (2002) 60.

O. Postel-Vinay, “L'avenir de la science française”, La Recherche, No. 353, mai (2002) 66.

[395] A. Sokal and J. Bricmont, Impostures intellectuelles (Odile Jacob, Paris, 1997).

[396] C. Wennerås and A. Wold, “Nepotism and sexism in peer-review”, Nature 387 (1997) 341.

[397] S. Fuller, The Governance of Science: Ideology and the Future of the Open Society

(Open Society Press, Buckingham, 1999).

S. Fuller, Thomas Kuhn: A Philosophical History for Our Times
(University of Chicago Press, 2000).

[398] M. Gibbons, “Science's new social contract with society”, Nature 402 Supp (1999) C81.

[399] H. Nowotny, P. Scott, and M. Gibbons, Rethinking Science: Knowledge and the Public

in an Age of Uncertainty (Polity Press, 2001).

[400] D.S. Greenberg, Science, Money, and Politics: Political Triumph and Ethical Erosion

(University of Chicago Press, 2001).

[401] C. Chiesa and L. Pacifico, “Patronage lies at the heart of Italy's academic problems”,

Nature 414 (2001) 581.

[402] M. Lopez-Corredoira, “What is research?”, e-print physics/0201012. Ciencia Digital 8 (2000).

[403] P.A. Lawrence, “Rank injustice”, Nature 415 (2002) 835.

[404] G. Brumfiel, “Misconduct in physics: Time to wise up?”, Nature 418 (2002) 120.

“Reputations at risk”, Editorial, Physics World, August (2002).

[405] K. Svozil, “Censorship and the peer review system”, e-print physics/0208046 at http://arXiv.org.

[406] E. Check, “Sitting in judgement”, Nature 419 (2002) 332.

[407] M. Shermer, “The Physicist and the Abalone Diver”, Scientific American, September (2002),

Skeptic, September 16 (2002), http://www.sciam.com.

[408] M. Shermer, “The Shamans of Scientism”, Scientific American, June (2002),

Skeptic, May 13 (2002),http://www.sciam.com.

[409] S. Weinberg, Facing Up: Science and Its Cultural Adversaries (Harvard University Press, 2001).
[410] S. Nagel, “Physics in Crisis”, FermiNews 25, No. 14, August 30 (2002),

http://www.fnal.gov/pub/ferminews/ferminews02-08-30/p1.html.
Also: Physics Today 55, September (2000) 55.
P. Rodgers, “Hanging together”, Physics World, October (2002), Editorial.

[411] L. Smolin, “Response to ‘The New Humanists’ by J. Brockman”,
http://www.edge.org/discourse/humanists/smolin.humanists.html.

[412] See e. g. the official European Commission's research website including the rules for the

forthcoming Sixth Framework Programme, http://europa.eu.int/comm/research/fp6/index_en.html.

239

[413] R.B. Griffiths, J. Stat. Phys. 36 (1984) 219.

R.B. Griffiths, “Review of R. Omnes, The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics”,
e-print quant-ph/9505008 at http://arXiv.org.

R.B. Griffiths, “Consistent Quantum Reasoning”, e-print quant-ph/9505009 at http://arXiv.org.

R.B. Griffiths, “Consistent Histories and Quantum Reasoning”, e-print quant-ph/9606004.

R.B. Griffiths, “Choice of Consistent Family, and Quantum Incompatibility”,
Phys. Rev. A 57 (1998) 1604. E-print quant-ph/9708028 at http://arXiv.org.

R.B. Griffiths, “Consistent Resolution of Some Relativistic Quantum Paradoxes”,
e-print quant-ph/0207015 at http://arXiv.org.

R.B. Griffiths, “Probabilities and Quantum Reality: Are There Correlata?”,
e-print quant-ph/0209116 at http://arXiv.org.

[414] M. Gell-Mann and J.B. Hartle, “Classical Equations for Quantum Systems”,

E-print gr-qc/9210010 at http://arXiv.org. Phys. Rev. D 47 (1993) 3345.

M. Gell-Mann and J.B. Hartle, “Equivalent Sets of Histories and Multiple Quasiclassical Realms”,
E-print gr-qc/9404013 at http://arXiv.org.

M. Gell-Mann and J.B. Hartle, “Strong Decoherence”, e-print gr-qc/9509054 at http://arXiv.org.

J.B. Hartle, “Bohmian Histories and Decoherent Histories”, e-print quant-ph/0209104.

[415] R. Omnès, The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics (Princeton University Press, 1994).

R. Omnes, “Decoherence: An Irreversible Process”, e-print quant-ph/0106006 at http://arXiv.org.

[416] A. Shimony, “Conceptual foundations of quantum mechanics”, in The New Physics, ed. P. Davies

(Cambridge University Press, 1989).

[417] M. Tegmark, “The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics: Many Worlds or Many Words?”,

Fortschr. Phys. 46 (1998) 855. Reproduced at http://www.hep.upenn.edu/~max/everett.ps.

[418] M. Tegmark and J.A. Wheeler, “100 Years of the Quantum”, Scientific American,

February (2001) 68. E-print quant-ph/0101077 at http://arXiv.org.

[419] H.D. Zeh, “The Problem of Conscious Observation in Quantum Mechanical Description”,
Found. Phys. Lett. 13 (2000) 221. E-print quant-ph/9908084 at http://arXiv.org.

[420] H.D. Zeh, “The Wave Function: It or Bit?”, e-print quant-ph/0204088 at http://arXiv.org.

Contribution to the Ultimate Reality conference and book, see ref. [436].

[421] D. Aerts, “Foundations of quantum physics: a general realistic and operational approach”,
Int. J. Theor. Phys. 38 (1999) 289. E-print quant-ph/0105109 at http://arXiv.org.

D. Aerts, “The hidden measurement formalism: what can be explained and where quantum
paradoxes remain”, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 37 (1998) 291. E-print quant-ph/0105126.
D. Aerts, “Quantum Structures: An Attempt to Explain the Origin of their Appearance in Nature”,
Int. J. Theor. Phys. 34 (1995) 1165. E-print quant-ph/0111071 at http://arXiv.org.
B. Coecke, D.J. Moore, and S. Smets, “Logic of Dynamics & Dynamics of Logic;
Some Paradigm Examples”, e-print math.LO/0106059 at http://arXiv.org.
L. Gabora and D. Aerts, “Contextualizing Concepts using a Mathematical Generalization
of the Quantum Formalism”, e-print quant-ph/0205161 at http://arXiv.org.
D. Aerts, “Being and Change: Foundations of a Realistic Operational Formalism”,
e-print quant-ph/0205164 at http://arXiv.org.
D. Aerts, “Reality and Probability: Introducing a New Type of Probability Calculus”,
e-print quant-ph/0205165 at http://arXiv.org.
S. Abramsky and B. Coecke, “Physical Traces: Quantum vs. Classical Information Processing”,
e-print quant-ph/0207057 at http://arXiv.org.

240

[422] A. Khrennikov, “Classical and quantum mechanics on information spaces with applications

to cognitive, psychological, social and anomalous phenomena”, Found. Phys. 29 (1999) 1065.
E-print quant-ph/0003016 at http://arXiv.org.

A. Khrennikov, “‘Quantum probabilities’ as context depending probabilities”,
e-print quant-ph/0106073 at http://arXiv.org.

A. Khrennikov, “Interference of probabilities and number field structure of quantum models”,
e-print quant-ph/0107135 at http://arXiv.org.

A. Khrennikov, “Quantum-like formalism for cognitive measurements”,
e-print quant-ph/0111006 at http://arXiv.org.

A. Khrennikov and J. Summhammer, “Dialogue on Classical and Quantum between
mathematician and experimenter”, e-print quant-ph/0111130 at http://arXiv.org.

A. Khrennikov, “Växjö Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics”, e-print quant-ph/0202107.

A. Khrennikov and Ya. Volovich, “Discrete Time Leads to Quantum-Like Interference
of Deterministic Particles”, e-print quant-ph/0203009 at http://arXiv.org.

A. Khrennikov and E. Loubenets, “On relations between probabilities under quantum
and classical measurements”, e-print quant-ph/0204001 at http://arXiv.org.
A. Khrennikov, “Fundamental Principle for Quantum Theory”, e-print quant-ph/0204008.

C.A. Fuchs, “The Anti-Växjö Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics”, e-print quant-ph/0204146.

A. Khrennikov, “On the cognitive experiments to test quantum-like behaviour of mind”,
e-print quant-ph/0205092 at http://arXiv.org.

A. Bulinski and A. Khrennikov, “Nonclassical Total Probability Formula and Quantum
Interference of Probabilities”, e-print quant-ph/0206030 at http://arXiv.org.

[423] Foundations of Probability and Physics, Proceedings of the Conference Växjö-2000 (Sweden),

ed. A. Khrennikov (WSP, Singapore, 2001).
See also http://www.msi.vxu.se/aktuellt/konferens/foundations.html.

A. Khrennikov, “Foundations of Probability and Physics, Round Table”,
e-print quant-ph/0101085 at http://arXiv.org.
See also http://www.msi.vxu.se/aktuellt/konferens/Roundtable.html.

Quantum Theory: reconsideration of foundations, International Conference, Växjö 2001,
http://www.msi.vxu.se/aktuellt/konferens/quantumtheory.html.

Foundations of probability and physics 2, International Conference, Växjö 2002,
http://www.msi.vxu.se/aktuellt/konferens/foundations2.html.

[424] K.A. Kirkpatrick, ““Quantal” behaviour in classical probability”, e-print quant-ph/0106072.

[425] C. Anastopoulos, “Quantum processes on phase space”, e-print quant-ph/0205132.

C. Anastopoulos, “Quantum theory without Hilbert spaces”, e-print quant-ph/0008126.
C. Anastopoulos, “Quantum vs stochastic processes and the role of complex numbers”,
e-print gr-qc/0208031 at http://arXiv.org.

[426] V.E. Shemi-zadeh, “To Physical Foundation of Quantum Mechanics”, e-print quant-ph/0206195.
[427] T. Dass, “Towards an Autonomous Formalism for Quantum Mechanics”,

e-print quant-ph/0207104 at http://arXiv.org.

[428] V.P. Belavkin, “Quantum Causality, Stochastics, Trajectories and Information”,
e-print quant-ph/0208087 at http://arXiv.org. Rep. Prog. Phys. 65 (2002) 353.

[429] J.B. Hartle, “The State of the Universe”, e-print gr-qc/0209046 at http://arXiv.org.

J.B. Hartle, “Theories of Everything and Hawking's Wave Function of the Universe”,
e-print gr-qc/0209047 at http://arXiv.org.

241

[430] M. Paty, “Are quantum systems physical objects with physical properties?”,

Eur. J. Phys. 20 (1999) 373.

[431] F. Laloë, “Do we really understand quantum mechanics? Strange correlations, paradoxes,

and theorems”, Am. J. Phys. 69 (2001) 655. E-print quant-ph/0209123 at http://arXiv.org.

[432] K. Hess and W. Philipp, “A possible loophole in the theorem of Bell”,

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98 (2001) 14224.

K. Hess and W. Philipp, “Bell's theorem and the problem of decidability between the views
of Einstein and Bohr”, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98 (2001) 14228.

W.C.Myrvold, “A Loophole in Bell's Theorem? Parameter Dependence in the Hess-Philipp
Model”, e-print quant-ph/0205032 at http://arXiv.org.

R.D. Gill, G. Weihs, A. Zeilinger, and M. Zukowski, “No time loophole in Bell's theorem;
the Hess-Philipp model is non-local”,  e-print quant-ph/0208187 at http://arXiv.org.

[433] D. Collins, N. Gisin, N. Linden, S. Massar, and S. Popescu, “Bell Inequalities for Arbitrary

High-Dimensional Systems”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 (2002) 040404.

[434] A. Kent, “Locality and causality revisited”, e-print quant-ph/0202064 at http://arXiv.org.

A. Kent, “Causal Quantum Theory and the Collapse Locality Loophole”, e-print quant-ph/0204104.

A. Kent, “Nonlinearity without Superluminality”, e-print quant-ph/0204106.

[435] A. Khrennikov, “Event-independence, collective-independence, EPR-Bohm experiment and

and incompleteness of quantum mechanics”, e-print quant-ph/0205081.

[436] The Ultimate Reality, research initiative of the John Templeton Foundation,

http://www.templeton.org/Physics_home.asp, including the conference in honor of J.A. Wheeler,
http://www.metanexus.org/ultimate_reality/static.htm,
the associated mail list, http://listserv.metanexus.net/metanexus/archives/wheeler.html,
and the forthcoming book of the invited contributions.

[437] H. P. Stapp, “Values and the Quantum Conception of Man”,

e-print quant-ph/9506035 at http://arXiv.org.

H. P. Stapp, “Chance, Choice, and Consciousness: The Role of Mind in the Quantum Brain”,
e-print quant-ph/9511029 at http://arXiv.org.

H. P. Stapp, “Decoherence, Quantum Zeno Effect, and the Efficacy of Mental Effort”,
e-print quant-ph/0003065 at http://arXiv.org.

H. P. Stapp, “Quantum theory and the role of mind in nature”,
e-print quant-ph/0103043 at http://arXiv.org.

[438] D.V. Juriev, “Quantum String Field Psychophysics of Nastroenie”,  e-print physics/0105066.

[439] R.E. Zimmermann, “Beyond the Physics of Logic: Aspects of Transcendental Materialism

or URAM in a Modern View”, e-print physics/0105094 at http://arXiv.org.
[440] K.K. Yee, “Introduction to Spin & Lattice Models in the Social Sciences”,

e-print nlin.AO/0106028 at http://arXiv.org.

[441] M.K. Samal, “Speculations on a Unified Theory of Matter and Mind”,

e-print physics/0111035 at http://arXiv.org.

[442] I. Vakarchuk, “Schrödinger's Cat and the Problem of Two Cultures”, e-print quant-ph/0205147.
[443] R. Descartes, Discours de la Méthode. Plus: La Dioptrique, les Météores et la Géometrie

(Fayard, Paris, 1987). First edition: (1637).

242

