Title: On the concept of (cid:147)efficiency loophole(cid:148) and rejection of local realism  

Comments: 7 pages, 2 figure. For any comments contact <<mr_mahdavi@hotmail.com>>        

 \\ 

\\   

Author: M. R. Mahdavi 

Subj-class: quant-ph; physics 

In this paper I shall demonstrate that an analysis of the concept of (cid:147)efficiency loophole(cid:148) leads 

to the conclusion that any type of charge carried by an elementary particle must be distributed 

on  the  surface  of  a  non-spherical  object.  As  a  result  I  shall  show  that;  for  example,  the 

electrostatic  field  of  an  electron  as  seen  by  an  observer,  must  be  in  the  form  of  quantized 

superluminal  pulses.  Therefore,  (cid:147)efficiency  loophole(cid:148)  cannot  be  used  in  support  of  local 

realistic  models.  In  view  of  the  available  experimental  results  we  conclude  that  a  local 

realistic interpretation of quantum mechanics has now been empirically refuted. However, it 

can be shown that the inferred superluminal signals do not necessarily contradict the facts of 

Lorentz transformations and only introduce a weak non-locality into the laws of nature. For 

this  reason  we  make  a  preliminary  investigation  about  a  possible  connection  between 

quantum  mechanics  and  non-spherical  charge  distributions.  We  conclude  that  this  idea 

deserves  to  be  further  investigated  and  its  validity  or  otherwise  can  be  verified 

experimentally.  

\\    

  

  

      Aspect(cid:146)s [1] and similar Bell-type experiments carried out since 1982 seemingly provide 

overwhelming support in favour of the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics [2]. 

However,  the  proponents  of  local  realistic  models  have  managed  to  challenge  the 

interpretations  of  the  experimental  results,  partly  by  questioning  the  validity  of  the  basic 

assumptions and processing of the experimental data [3], and partly by advancing the concept 

of (cid:147)efficiency loophole(cid:148) [4,5]. In a recent work [6] Larsson has shown that by utilizing this 

concept  a  local  realistic  model  can  mimic  the  quantum  probabilities,  and  that  a  sort  of 

unification  between  the  Copenhagen  and  Bohm  interpretations  of  quantum  mechanics  can 

also be achieved. 

      The concept of (cid:147)efficiency loophole(cid:148) is based on the proposition that aside from random 

errors  the  detection  efficiency  is  also  a  manifestation  of  a  hidden  physical  property  of  the 

particles being detected. Thus, for example, a particle may arrive at the detector but because 

of the hidden property it may not be detected. The result of a measurement, say, on the spin of 

a particle will now yield not two, but one of the three results, –ħ/2 and no results. 

 

1 

      

 

   

 

 

 

 

     A  fundamental  examination,  however,  will  show  that  (cid:147)efficiency  loophole(cid:148)  is  a 

problematic concept that immediately leads to problems and contradictions that can in no way 

be  resolved  within  the  framework  of  present  day  physics.  This  was  to  be  expected,  since  a 

hidden variable theory presupposes an underlying physics of whose particles, fields, or laws 

of motion we are totally ignorant. In the present note we shall not consider any of the serious 

problems  that  ensue  from  the  above  concept;  rather,  we  wish  to  show  that,  in  any  event,  it 

cannot be used in advocating a local realistic model, and shall briefly consider its efficacy in 

regards to a non-local realistic interpretation of quantum mechanics.     

      Consider a detector specifically designed to register the arrival of an electron at a point in 

space by measuring its electrostatic field (we could use a gravity or a magnetic detector but 

the conclusions would be the same). If because of the hidden physical property the arrival of 

the electron is not registered it then follows that for a time period all electrostatic interactions 

between  the  electron  and  the  constituent  particles  of  the  detector  were  terminated.  This  (cid:147)no 

interaction(cid:148) situation can arise in the following way. 

        The  (cid:147)no  interaction(cid:148)  situation  can  arise  only  if  the  electrostatic  field  of  the  electron  is 

essentially  non-isotropic,  or  in  another  word,  if  the  electronic  charge  is  not  uniformly 

distributed  on  the  surface  of  a  spherical  object.  However,  since  all  evidence  point  to  an 

isotropic electrostatic field for the electron, one will now be forced to further speculate that: it 

must be as a result of the internal motion (motions) of the electron, as evidenced by its spin, 

that  on  the  average  one  observes  an  isotropic  electrostatic  field.  Let  us  now  consider  the 

implications  of  this  possibility.  For  the  purpose  of  the  present  discussion  it  will  not  be 

necessary  to  speculate  on  the  form  of  the  charge  distribution.  Therefore,  we  will  merely 

assume that a certain amount of charge (cid:150)qe is distributed on a portion βA of a sphere whose 

surface area is equal to A. Therefore, if the electron lacked any type of internal motion then, 

one could only view its electrostatic field from direction lying inside a solid angle dΩ = 2πβ. 

Clearly, in order that a non-spherical charge distribution may have a significant affect on the 

outcome of experiments the value of β must be much less than one.   

       Now  suppose  that  we  wish  to  measure  the  electrostatic  field  of  an  electron  with  a  fine 

instrument  whose  response  time  is  less  than  a  certain  amount  ∆ta.  Because  of  the  internal 

motion of the electron its electrostatic field will come within the view of the instrument for a  

2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

E 

 
                                              ∆ta                                                                E = (1+β-1)Ea 
 

                                                                ∆t

′
 = (1+β 

(cid:150)1

)∆ta 

                                                                     Fig.1 

t

 

 

time  period  ∆ta  and  a  field  intensity  E  =  (1+β-1  )Ea  will  be  registered  (  as 

schematically shown in Fig.1). After this the electrostatic field of the electron will be lost 

from the view of the instrument for a time period ∆t′ = (1+β 

)∆ta until such time as when 

(cid:150)1

the  spin  of  the  electron  once  again  brings  its  electrostatic  field  within  the  view  of  the 

instrument.  Clearly,  Ea  the  average  field  intensity  as  measured  by  a  coarse  instrument,  as 

normally is the case, will be equal to Ea = E/(1+β-1). 

      Next, consider that in the classical conception of things the electrostatic field of a charge 

is  in  the  form  of  continuous  lines  issuing  radially  from  it  and  that  the  speed  of  travel  of 

electrostatic  signals  through  space  has  to  be  assumed  to  be  equal  to  that  of  light.  Now,  our 

analysis has shown that, what in classical physics is considered as a continuous field line, in 

reality  (if  (cid:147)efficiency  loophole(cid:148)  is  a  valid  concept)  is  a  train  of  electric  pulses  traveling 

through  space.  Clearly,  a  train  of  such  pulses  would  imitate  the  classical  field  and  Lorentz 

transformations would retain their form- only as time-averaged transformations- if the speed 
of travel of each pulse were equal to C = (1+β(cid:150)1)c. Thus, when we observe the electrostatic 
field  of  an  electron  we  first  receive  a  pulse  that  travels  with  the  speed  of  C  =  (1+β-1)c. 

However,  the  next  pulse,  as  it  were,  lingers  on  for  a  time  period  ∆t′=  (1+β(cid:150)1)∆ta  before 

starting its travel through space. Hence the average speed comes out as being equal to c. 

      Now it will be seen that so long as an electron moves with a uniform velocity we cannot 

be aware of the existence of the superluminal signals. However, when an electron is subjected 

to an external field, its state, for example its spin, will be altered. The information about the 

3 

altered  state  of  the  electron  will  now  be  conveyed  to  a  distant  point  via  the  agency  of  the 

superluminal  signals.  Thus,  our  analysis  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  (cid:147)efficiency  loophole(cid:148) 

cannot be advanced in supporting a local realistic interpretation of quantum mechanics. The 

question  now  arises:  (cid:147)should  we  dismiss  the  idea  of  (cid:147)efficiency  loophole(cid:148)  and  the  inferred 

non-spherical  charge  distribution  altogether?(cid:148)  In  order  to  answer  this  question  we  carry  out 
the following preliminary analysis1.     

       As  forerunners  to  part  of  our  arguments  we  mention  some  ideas  that  have  already 

appeared  in  connection  with  stochastic  theories  of  quantum  mechanics.  In  the  Bohm  theory 

[7,8]  it  is  assumed  that  a  particle  undergoes  some  sort  of  Brownian  motion.  This  motion  is 

assumed to arise as a result of fluctuations in the ψ field. Thus for example, a segment of a 

linear motion of an electron is in fact the average result of a number of random motions. In a 

paper  on  the  stochastic  origin  of  the  Schr(cid:246)dinger(cid:146)s  equation,  Davidson  [9]  attributes  the 

peculiar  and  non-classical  features  of  quantum  mechanics  as  being  inherent  in  a  statistical 

description  of  the  radiative  reaction  force.  In  that  paper  Davidson  also  mentions  the 

possibility that the ~2.7 K background microwave radiation may be the cause of the statistical 

variations  in  radiative  reaction  force.  Since  the  Bohm  theory  yields  the  same  results  as 

ordinary quantum mechanics we may argue that the assumption about the Brownian motion 

of  an  elementary  particle  is  a  correct  one,  and  adopting  Davidson(cid:146)s  suggestion  we  may  say 

that there is observational evidence in support of Bohm(cid:146)s idea.  

         

       Now imagine an instant of time when an electron is moving along a straight line and we 

expect  to  see  its  electrostatic  field  shortly  after.  If  as  a  result  of  interaction  with  the 

background radiation the electron changes its course of motion, then the coming into view of 

its electrostatic field might be delayed (equally it might be advanced). Thus, there is always a 

probability that a sequence of such random changes in the direction of motion of the electron 

may result in an inordinate lengthening of the time period ∆t′= (1+β

)∆ta during which time 

(cid:150)1

the electron is lost from ones view. As a concrete example of this effect consider an electron, 

having insufficient energy to climb out of a potential well. Despite the adverse condition there 

is still a probability that the combination of the internal motion of the electron plus a sequence 

of non-classical trajectories will allow the electron to move along a trajectory, along which it 

fails to (cid:147)see(cid:148) the electric potential. As a result it may now tunnel out of the potential well.   

      Next, consider that if we were to observe an electron over macroscopic distances, then at 

those instances that our instrument registers the position of the electron, the registering arises 

                                                 
1 . The idea of a non-spherical charge distribution will be taken up in a subsequent paper where we  
     will support it with almost conclusive evidence.  

 

 

4 

as a result of physical interactions. In this situation we have the particle aspect of the electron. 

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  example  just  cited,  quantum  tunneling  arose  because  for  some 

period of time electrostatic interactions between the elementary particles were terminated. In 

this  situation  the  particle  aspect  is  missing  from  the  picture,  and  the  de  Broglie  waves, 

whatever their nature, determine the course of motion of the particle.   

      If there is any truth to the above conclusion we may now advance the following general 

principle.  A  stable  quantum  system,  e.  g.,  an  atom  or  a  nucleus,  can  be  obtained  only  if all 

physical interactions between the constituent particles of the system are terminated. Thus, all 

the particles of the quantum system are essentially free and the problem of acceleration and 

emission of electromagnetic radiation no longer arise. 

      According  to  our  analysis  there  is  an  inherent  indeterminacy,  consequent  upon  the  very 

physical  make-up  of  elementary  particles,  which  precludes  the  possibility  of  carrying  out 

precise measurement. In certain situations, as in the example of quantum tunneling, the time 

period  of  this  inherent  indeterminacy  is  inordinately  increased.  In  such  situations  the 

description  of  a  particle  or  a  quantum  system  can  only  be  given  in  terms  of  a  probability 

theory,  and  strictly  speaking,  one  cannot  beforehand  predict  the  precise  outcome  of  an 

experiment.  The  state  of  an elementary particle or quantum system is revealed only when a 

measurement has been carried out and the measurement has yielded a definite result.  

      Also,  according  to  the  above  analysis  an  inherent  indeterminacy  is  the  root-cause  of 

quantum mechanics. Hence, we should not be surprised if, as in the case of Larsson(cid:146)s work 

[6], the inclusion of an inherent indeterminacy into a local realistic model would yield results, 

mimicking the quantum mechanical probabilities. 

      In  conclusion  we  may  say  that  the  concept  of  (cid:147)efficiency  loophole(cid:148)  fails in its intended 

purpose. Consequently, in view of the results obtained in Bell-type experiments we may say 

that local realism has been empirically refuted. However, seeing that the superluminal signals 

do  not  contradict  the  facts  of  Lorentz  transformations  and  that  the  implied  non-spherical 

charge  distribution  may  allow  us  to  understand  quantum  effects  in  terms  of  an  inherent 

indeterminacy,  we  propose  that  it  is  a  concept  that  deserves  to  be  investigated  further.  A 

search  for  superluminal  electrostatic  signals  may  well  be  the  quickest  way,  not  only  for 

settling the issue of the interpretation of quantum mechanics, but also as the first practical step 

towards  the  development  of  sub-quantum  theory.  However,  before  embarking  on  such  an 

experiment, the experimenter would like to know at least the approximate value of the speed 

of the superluminal pulses. In regards to this we make the following observations. 

  

 

 

5 

     The  factor  α

=  (1+β

)  is  dimensionless  and  from  the  preceding  discussions  it  is 

-1 

-1

apparent that there is no reason for it to appear in the equations of physics at the macroscopic 

level.  On  the  other  hand  this  is  a  factor  that  is  representative  of  a  physical  attribute  of 

elementary particles and is a measure of the intermittent interactions between particles at the 
-1

quantum  level.  Intuitively,  we  may  expect  α

  to  make  its  appearance  in  equations  at  the 

quantum  level.  Now,  we  indeed  do  have  a  dimensionless  constant,  namely,  α  the  fine-

structure constant, which makes its first appearance in the equations of physics at the atomic 

level.  On  this  basis  we  tentatively  suggest  that  the  speed  of  travel  of  superluminal  signals 

through  space  is  C  ~137c  and  suggest  the  following  experiment  as  a  way  of  verifying  the 

validity or otherwise of the idea of non-spherical charge distribution. 

    An electron beam is chopped so as to produce an electron pulse moving with velocity vx in  

                                                     + 

Electron 
Pulse 

Vx 

Collimator 

A

B

C 

Detector 

 

 

Fig. 2 

the X-direction (Fig. 2). The electron pulse passes the point A; midway between two metallic 

balls that at a later time will constitute the poles of an electric dipole. When the electron pulse 

reaches  the  point  B  a  voltage  V  is  impressed  between  the  two  balls.  Now,  assume  that 

electrostatic signals travel, as imagined in the classical case, with the velocity c. We place the 

collimator at a point C so that the time for the electrostatic field to travel from A to C will be 

greater  than  the  time  required  for  the  electron  pulse  to  travel  from  B  to  C.  In  this  case  the 

electron  pulse  will  not  be  subjected  to  the  dipole  field.  Therefore,  it  will  not  suffer  a 

deflection and after passing through the collimator will arrive at the detector. 

     

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

     On the other hand if the electrostatic field is in the form of superluminal pulses then, with 

suitable values for v, V, and d (the size of the orifice in the collimator), the electron pulse will 

suffer a deflection and will not arrive at the detector. 

     In principle this set-up can be used for measuring the velocity of the superluminal pulses 

by increasing the distance AB until the point is reached where the electron pulse eventually 

arrives at the detector. The speed of the superluminal pulses is then obtained from the relation 

                                                   
                                                        C  = (AB/BC). c                                                    (3) 
                                                                  

References: 

  [1]. Aspect, A., Grangier, P., and Roger, G., Phys. Rev. Lett., 49 (1982) 91. 

  [2]. Home, D., and Selleri, F., Rev. Nuovo Cimento, 14 (1991) No. 9. 

  [3]. Sulcs, S., Oppy, G., and Gilbert, B. C., Found. Phys. Lett., 13 (2000) 521. 

  [4]. Fine, A., Synthese, 50 (1982) 279.   

  [5]. Szabo, L. E., Found. Phys., 30 (2000) 1891. 

  [6]. Larsson, J.-¯., Found. Phys., 13 (2000) 477. 

  [7]. Bohm, D. Phys. Rev. 85 (1952) 166.    

  [8]. Bohm, D. Phys. Rev. 85 (1952) 180.  

  [9]. Davidson, M., quant-ph/0112157 (2001).   

   

 

7 

