SLAC-PUB-9581 
November 2002 

Polarized photocathodes make the grade * 

Jym Clendenin and Takashi Maruyama 

Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, 2575 Sand Hill Rd., Menlo Park, CA 94025 

Abstract 

Future linear colliders will require high levels of performance from their electron sources. 
A  group  at  SLAC  has  recently  tested  a  structure  that  substantially  exceeds  current 
collider polarized electron source pulse-profile requirements. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Published in CERN Courier 42 (September 2002), p 19. 

                                                 
*Work supported by Department of Energy contract DE–AC03–76SF00515. 

1 

Polarized photocathodes make the grade 

Author: Jym Clendenin and Takashi Maruyama, SLAC 

Future linear colliders will require high levels of performance from their electron sources. 
A  group  at  SLAC  has  recently  tested  a  structure  that  substantially  exceeds  current 
collider polarized electron source pulse-profile requirements. 

 
 
A polarized electron source for future electron-positron linear colliders must have at least 
80% polarization and high operational efficiency. The source must also meet the collider 
pulse profile requirements (charge, charge distribution and repetition rate). Recent results 
from the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC) have demonstrated for the first time 
that the profile required for a high-polarization beam can be produced. 
 
Since  the  introduction  in  1978  of  semiconductor  photocathodes  for  accelerator 
applications,  there  has  been  significant  progress  in  improving  their  performance. 
Currently,  all  polarized  electron  sources  used  for  accelerated  beams  share  several 
the  use  of  negative-electron-affinity  semiconductor 
common  design  features  – 
photocathodes  excited  by  a  laser  matched  to  the  semiconductor  band  gap,  the  cathode 
biased at between –60 and –120 kV DC, and a carefully designed vacuum system. While 
the earliest polarizations achieved were much less than 50%, several accelerator centers, 
including Jefferson Lab, MIT Bates and SLAC in the US, along with Bonn and Mainz in 
Germany, now routinely achieve polarizations of around 80%.  Source  efficiencies  have 
shown similar dramatic improvement. The Stanford Linear Collider (SLC) achieved more 
than  95%  overall  availability  of  the  polarized  beam  across  nearly  seven  years  of 
continuous  operation.  These  achievements  clearly  point  to  the  viability  of  polarized 
beams for future colliders.  
 
Peak  currents  of  up  to  10  A  were  routinely  produced  in  1991  in  the  SLC  Gun  Test 
Laboratory by using the 2 ns pulse from a doubled Nd:YAG laser to fully illuminate the 
14 mm diameter active area of a GaAs photocathode.  However, when the photocathode 
gun was moved to the linac injector, where a high-peak-energy pulsed laser was available 
that could be tuned to the band gap energy as required for high polarization, the current 
extracted from the cathode was found to saturate at much less than 5 A unless the cathode 
quantum efficiency (QE) was very high.   
 
The  SLC  required  a  source  pulse  structure  of  about  8  nC  in  each  of  two  bunches 
separated  by  some  60  ns  at  a  maximum  repetition  rate  of  120  Hz.  These  requirements 
were met by doubling the cathode area and by using a vacuum load-lock to insure a high 
QE  when  installing  newly  activated  cathodes.  In  contrast,  designs  for  the  Next  Linear 
Collider and Japan Linear Collider, being pursued by SLAC and the KEK laboratory in 
Japan, call for a train of 190 microbunches separated by 1.4 ns, with each bunch having a 
2.2 nC charge at the source, for a total of 420 nC for the 266 ns macropulse. This is about 
25  times  the  SLC  maximum  charge.  Both  the  macrobunch  and  microbunch  current 
requirements for CERN’s CLIC concept are somewhat higher, while the 337 ns spacing 

 

 

 

2 

between microbunches insures that charge will not be a limitation for the TESLA collider 
being spearheaded by Germany’s DESY laboratory.  
 
The  limitation  in  peak  current  density,  which  has  become  known  as  the  surface  charge 
limit (SCL), proved difficult to overcome.  Simply designing a semiconductor structure 
with  a  high  quantum  yield  was  not  a  solution  because  the  polarization  tended  to  vary 
inversely with the maximum yield.  
 
Gradient doping 
 
As early as 1992, a group from KEK, Nagoya University and the NEC company designed 
a  GaAs-AlGaAs  superlattice  with  a  thin,  very-highly-doped  surface  layer  and  a  lower 
density  doping  in  the  remaining  active  layer  –  a  technique  called  gradient  doping.  The 
very  high  doping  aids  the  recombination  of  the  minority  carriers  trapped  at  the  surface 
that  increase  the  surface  barrier  in  proportion  to  the  arrival  rate  of  photoexcited 
conduction band (CB) electrons. Because CB electrons depolarize as they diffuse to the 
surface of heavily doped materials, the highly doped layer must be very thin, typically no 
more  than  a  few  nanometers.  When  tested  at  Nagoya  and  SLAC,  this  cathode  design 
yielded promising results in which a charge of 32 nC in a 2 ns bunch was extracted from 
a 14 mm diameter area, limited by the space charge limit of the 120 kV gun at SLAC. 
 
In  1998  a  group  from  KEK,  Nagoya,  NEC  and  Osaka  University  applied  the  gradient-
doping technique to a strained InGaAs-AlGaAs superlattice structure.  They retained 73% 
polarization  while  demonstrating  the  absence  of  the  SCL  in  a  string  of  four  12  ns 
microbunches, spaced 25 ns apart, up to the 20 nC space charge limit of the 70 kV gun. 
In  a  more  recent  experiment  using  a  gradient-doped  GaAs-GaAsP  superlattice,  they 
extracted 1 nC for each of a pair of 0.7 ns bunches separated by 2.8 ns without any sign 
of the SCL, before reaching the space charge limit of the 50 kV gun. The polarization and 
QE  were  80  and  0.4%  respectively.  Other  groups,  notably  at  Stanford  University,  St. 
Petersburg  Technical  University  and  the  Institute  for  Semiconductor  Physics  at 
Novosibirsk, have also made significant contributions to solving the SCL problem. 
 
A group at SLAC has recently applied the gradient-doping technique to a single strained-
layer  GaAs-GaAsP  structure  with  results  that  substantially  exceed  current  collider 
requirements. These results both complement and extend the 1998 Japanese results. The 
highly  doped  surface  layer  was  estimated  to  be  10  nm  thick.  To  compensate  for  an 
increase  in  the  bandgap  that  resulted  from  the  increased  dopant  concentration,  5% 
phosphorus (P)  was  added to the active layer  and  the  percentage of P  in the base  layer 
was increased to maintain the desired degree of lattice strain at the interface.  Adding P in 
the active layer shifts the bandgap by about 50 meV towards the blue, reaching 1.55 eV 
(800 nm).   In combination with the reduction of the surface barrier, this ensured a high 
QE of about 0.3% at the polarization peak.  This is similar to the QE of the standard SLC 
strained GaAs-GaAsP cathodes.  
 
Two  laser  systems  were  used  to  determine  the  peak  charge.  A  flashlamp-pumped 
Ti:sapphire  (flash-Ti)  system  provided  flat  pulses  up  to  several  hundred  nanoseconds 

 

3 

long with a maximum energy of about 2 (cid:1)J/ns.  In addition, up to 20 (cid:1)J in a 4 ns pulse 
was  available  from  a  Q-switched,  cavity-dumped,  YAG-pumped  Ti:sapphire  (YAG-Ti) 
laser. With the flash-Ti  alone, the  charge increased  linearly  with the laser energy up  to 
the maximum available laser energy. Because of the finite relaxation time of the SCL, a 
flat pulse is a much more stringent test of the SCL than if it contained a microstructure. 
The  peak  charge  per  unit  time  (see  graph)  is  only  slightly  lower  than  the  NLC 
requirement for each microbunch when assuming a 0.5 ns full bunch-width. By extending 
the  laser  pulse  to  370  ns,  a  charge  of  1280  nC  was  extracted,  far  exceeding  the  NLC 
macropulse requirement.  
 
To determine if the peak charge required for a microbunch would be charge-limited, the 
YAG-Ti  laser  pulse  was  superimposed  on  the  flash-Ti  pulse.  The  resulting  charge 
increment was consistent with the charge obtained using the YAG-Ti alone. The charge 
increment  was  independent  of  the  relative  temporal  positions  of  the  two  laser  pulses 
indicating  that  the  massive  total  charge  of  an  NLC,  JLC  or  CLIC  macropulse  will  not 
inhibit the peak charge required for each microbunch. The maximum charge produced by 
the YAG-Ti alone was 37 nC, which is more than 15 times the NLC requirement for a 
single microbunch.  
 
To  increase  the  charge  density  the  laser  spot  on  the  cathode  was  reduced  to  14  mm, 
below which the bunch is space-charge-limited for the maximum laser energy. Again, the 
charge increased linearly with the laser energy. The linearity remained when the quantum 
yield was allowed to decrease although, of course, the maximum charge also decreased. 
Thus  it  is  clear  that  if  sufficient  laser  energy  is  available,  the  linearity  of  the  charge 
increase will be maintained for total charge and peak charge per unit time when using the 
new SLAC cathode design and will exceed NLC, JLC, and CLIC requirements. 
 
The new SLAC cathode was used in the polarized source for a recent high-energy physics 
experiment  requiring  80  nC  at  the  source  in  a  300  ns  pulse.  The  improved  charge 
performance provided the headroom necessary for temporal shaping of the laser pulse to 
allow adequate compensation for energy beam loading effects in the 50 GeV linac. The 
polarization measured at 50 GeV confirmed the greater than 80% polarization measured 
in the source development laboratory at 120 keV. 
 
The international effort to improve polarized photocathodes will continue. For instance, 
tests  for  the  surface  charge  limit  at  the  very  high  current  densities  required  by  low-
emittance guns have yet to be performed. On a broader front, the superlattice structure — 
in part because of the large number of parameters that the designer can vary — appears to 
be the best candidate for achieving a significantly higher polarization while maintaining a 
QE above 0.1%. 
 
Further reading 
 
T. Abe et al. (American Linear Collider Working Group) 2001 Linear Collider Physics 
Resource Book for Snowmass 2001 (hep-ex/0106055-8 at http://www.arxiv.org/ ). 
 

 

4 

T. Maruyama et al. 2002 A very-high-charge, high-polarization gradient-doped strained 
GaAs photocathode (SLAC-PUB-9133) accepted for publication in  Nucl. Instrum. Meth. 
A. 
 
K. Togawa et al. 1998 Surface charge limit in NEA superlattice photocathodes of 
polarized electron source Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A414 431. 
 
 
 

The configuration for SLAC’s photocathode experiment. 

 

 
A photocathode crystal before (left) and after mounting in the crystal holder of the SLAC polarized 
electron source.

 

5 

 
 
 

 

 

6 

The high-gradient GaAs-GaAsP cathode structure, thickness and dopant density that was used for SLAC’s 
polarized photoca ode experiment. 
th
 

 

The charge in the electron bunch measured at the electron source as a function of laser energy using a 100 
ns  pulse  with  no  microstructure:  (a)  QE  of  0.31%  and  fully  illuminated  cathode  diameter  of  20  mm;  (b) 
0.25% and 14 mm; (c) SLC cathode shown for comparison: 300 ns pulse with QE of about 0.2% (at 10 nC) 
and 20 mm diameter. 

 

\ 
 
 

 

