Teaching with Physlets:  Examples from Optics 

Teaching with Physlets®: Examples from Optics 
Melissa Dancy, Wolfgang Christian and Mario Belloni 
Davidson College 
 
Abstract:  Physlets are scriptable Java applets that can be used for physics instruction.  In 
this article we discuss the pedagogical foundations of Physlet use and provide a sample of 
Physlet-based exercises that could be used to teach optics. 
 
Published in The Physics Teacher, November 2002, pp. 494-499. 
 
 
Research on problem solving1,2,3,4 indicates that students often approach typical end of 
chapter problems with little regard to the conceptual underpinnings of the problem.  They 
direct most of their efforts at finding a formula that contains the variables given in the 
problem statement.  A number of strategies5,6,7,8,9 have been suggested to help students 
develop a more expert-like approach toward problem solving.  These strategies generally 
guide the student through various steps of solving a problem in an effort to help them 
learn to conceptualize and define a problem before attempting to plug in numbers.  
Another approach is to give students alternative problems that discourage novice 
problem-solving approaches.  For example, context-rich problems10 are phrased in terms 
of a story, often give students more information than is necessary, and do not explicitly 
state the variable to be solved for.  Another example of alternative problems is estimation 
problems,11 which are understated, requiring the student to bring his or her own 
information to the problem.  We use Physlets to create alternative problems that we 
believe can help students to better develop their problem solving ability and deepen their 
conceptual understanding. 
   
The Pedagogy of Physlets 
A Physlet® is a scriptable Java applet developed at Davidson College.  There are 
currently 24 Physlets that have been used by various instructors to script thousands of 
problems and questions.  These problems and questions provide almost complete 
coverage for introductory physics,12 as well as topics from upper-level courses such as 
quantum mechanics.13  Once a Physlet problem is scripted it is easily delivered over the 
World Wide Web on an html page.  More details about creating Physlet problems, setting 
up an html page to deliver the problem, and a collection of ready to run problems, can be 
found in the Physlets book14 or on the Physlets website.15   
 
An example of a seemingly straight-forward Physlet-based problem is shown below in 
Figure 1.  In this particular problem students see the applet as shown in the figure and are 
told, “A point source is located to the left of a mirror.  You can drag this point source to 
any position.  Position is given in centimeters.  Find the focal length of the mirror.” 
 

 

 

1

Teaching with Physlets:  Examples from Optics 

 

 
Figure 1:  Find the focal length of the mirror.  Mouse coordinates are given in the yellow 
box. 
 
Notice that students are not given any variables.  They must determine what information 
is relevant to answer the question (Where does an incoming parallel ray cross the 
principal axis?) and then interact with the Physlet to get that information (in this case, at 
x = 2.4 cm).  They can then use this information to solve the problem.  The student must 
also find the location of the mirror to determine the focal length.  A “plug-n-chug” 
approach will not be effective in this problem as there is nothing to “plug” until some 
conceptualization of the problem has been done.  It is also important to note that while 
the problem contains no overt “givens”, it provides the means to access a plethora of 
information, most of which is unnecessary for the solution.  Just as with real-world 
problems, the students must decide how to focus their efforts and what information to 
ignore. 
 
Now, you may argue that the Physlet is unnecessary.  After all, the problem can be asked 
and solved with just a picture and a ruler.   But such an argument misses an important 
point.  Students can not interact with a static picture.  We have seen the benefit of 
interactivity in three very specific ways:  the ability of the students to be creative, the 
learning opportunities provided, and the likelihood of students demonstrating 
misconceptions. 
 
In the above example a solution was suggested based on finding where a parallel ray 
crossed the principal axis.  If a static picture was all students had to work with, then the 
above solution would be the only method available.  However, when working with the 
Physlet, students have the freedom to look at the problem from alternative angles.  If a 
class is presented with this problem it is likely that a portion of the class will obtain a 
correct answer by moving the source along the principal axis to the point where all rays 
leaving the source are reflected parallel, thereby identifying the focal point.  There are 
also other methods a student could use to obtain a correct answer.  Physlet problems 
allow for creativity on the part of the student that is difficult to replicate in a paper-based 
problem. 
 
We have also found Physlet-based problems to be a benefit to students because of the 
increased visualization.  In the above example students did not need to move the source, 

 

2

Teaching with Physlets:  Examples from Optics 

but they could (and, in fact, virtually all of them will).  As they interact with the applet 
they are seeing the effect of their actions.  This allows for learning to take place that is 
somewhat separate from the solving of a specific problem.   
 
The Physlet problem is often superior to a paper-based problem because the ability to 
interact with the applet gives students many different tracks to follow and hence 
improves assessment.  For example, a portion of students encountering the problem 
discussed above will arrange the source in some version of what is shown in Figure 2.  
 

 

 
Figure 2:  A point source on the principal axis with rays converging at x = 0.62 cm. 
 
The students will then declare that x = 0.62 cm is the focal point since the rays converge 
at this point.  However, these students are incorrect because x = 0.62 cm is not where 
parallel rays would converge which is how a focal point is defined.  Had the students 
been given a traditional problem that did not allow them to interact, this misconception 
would not have been so apparent.  It should also be noted that students with this 
misunderstanding could easily dispel it themselves by noting that the point of 
convergence changed as the point source was moved.  Since the location of the focal 
point is constant this should help them to refine their understanding.   
 
We believe Physlet-based problems offer advantages over paper-based problems even 
when the Physlet is not integral to solving the problem.  However, the dynamic and 
interactive nature of Physlet-based problems allows for the creation of problems that 
could not be asked using paper alone.  Research4,16 indicates that the greatest benefit of 
Physlet-based problems and questions will come when interacting with the Physlet is 
essential to the solution. 
 
Further Examples from Optics 
 
What is Behind the Curtain?  
We have developed a number of problems where students are given a source (point, 
infinite beam, or object) and a region hidden from view.  They are asked to determine 
what optical element is behind the curtain.  In the example shown in Figure 3, students 
are shown four such regions, asked to identify what is behind each curtain, and then 

 

3

Teaching with Physlets:  Examples from Optics 

asked to rank the objects in terms of their focal lengths.17  Students can move and resize 
the sources. 
 
In this particular problem, different types of sources are used so that students must utilize 
their understanding of each.  For Curtain A, students must change the location of the 
object and note that the image is always on the same side of the mystery element as the 
object.  At this point it is reasonable for the students to guess that a diverging lens is 
behind the screen.  Further manipulation of the location and height of the object confirms 
this assertion.  For Curtain B, students need to note that the element has no effect on the 
light.  There is nothing behind Curtain B.  Curtains C and D both contain converging 
lenses which students could deduce by observing the direction incoming rays are bent.   
 

 
Figure 3:  a) What is behind each curtain?  b) Rank the objects in terms of their focal 
lengths from smallest to greatest. 
 
In order to rank the focal lengths of the mystery objects, students must first recognize that 
the focal length of the diverging lens is negative and that it is positive for the two 
converging lenses.  This makes it unnecessary to calculate the actual focal length of the 
diverging lens, though it could easily be done by noting the locations of the object and 
image and using the lens equation.  The focal lengths of the two converging lenses can be 
compared by noting where parallel rays converge.   
 
This type of problem can be used to probe students’ understanding of geometrical optics.  
It is easily modifiable, resulting in an almost limitless number of similar problems that 
could be created and tailored to a specific classroom.   
 
 
 

 

 

4

Teaching with Physlets:  Examples from Optics 

 
Figure 4:  Is the eye represented in the above applet normal, nearsighted or farsighted? 
What power eyeglasses should be used for normal vision (can see far away objects with 
eyes relaxed, and also focus on an object at x=2.0, in arbitrary units). 
 
A Model of the Eye 
Students are usually motivated by problems they see as relevant to their everyday lives.  
Our students found the Physlet problem shown in Figure 4, relating to the eye and 
corrective lenses, to be exciting and relevant, and claimed it helped them to visualize the 
functioning of the eye.  In this question, students are asked to check vision and prescribe 
eyeglasses.  Students can add near or far sources of light and see the interaction with the 
eye.  They can use the slider at the bottom of the applet to change the focal length of the 
lens system of the eye to simulate the eye’s ability to accommodate.  The eye is not 
shown to scale and units are arbitrary because the actual scale is too small to allow the 
functioning of the eye to be noticeable.   
 
In order to answer the question, students must determine if a far and/or near object can be 
focused on the back of the retina. (Figures 5a, 5b, and 5c)  In this case the person can 
focus on near objects but not far objects so he/she is nearsighted.  Then, a lens simulating 
eyeglasses must be inserted to determine the type of lens and its focal length. (Figure 5d)  
Students can then verify that near objects can still be seen with the eyeglasses on.  
 
In order to answer this question correctly, students must have a strong conceptual 
understanding of the operation of lenses, especially as that operation relates to the optical 
system of the eye.  Students who have this understanding can easily answer this question.  
Students who have misunderstandings will find it difficult to answer the question.  We 
used this question on an exam and found it to be beneficial for assessing student 
understanding. 
 
 
 

 

 

5

Teaching with Physlets:  Examples from Optics 

Figure 5a:  Light from very far away is focused in 
front of the retina.   

Figure 5b:  The eye can not accommodate to focus 
the light at the back of the retina. 

Figure 5c:  A source at the near point can be 
focused at the back of the retina. 

 

Figure 5d:  Eyeglasses with a diverging lens of 
focal length= -4.5 (arbitrary units) can be used to 
focus light from a far away source at the back of 
retina. 
 

 
 
Index of Refraction 
Another type of question that can be asked involves the index of refraction.  In this 
particular example, shown in Figure 6, students are presented with an applet that displays 
a point source and a lens.  The index of refraction of the medium surrounding the lens can 
be changed.  As the index of refraction is changed, the color of the background varies as 
a visual clue to the index change.  Students are then asked to find the index of refraction 
of the lens.  In order to determine the index of refraction of the lens, students can change 
the index of refraction of the medium surrounding the lens until the light passing through 
the lens is unaffected.  At that point, the index of refraction of the lens must be the same 
as the index of refraction of the surrounding medium. 
 
Although this is a fairly easy problem for students, the process of solving the problem can 
help students to develop their understandings of refraction and lens operation.  The 
problem reinforces the idea that lenses work by means of a different index of refraction 
from the surrounding medium.  It can also be used to help students see that a 
“converging” lens is only converging if placed in a medium where the index of refraction 
of the medium is less than that of the lens.  A glass lens in air will be converging, but if 
the same glass lens is placed in a medium of higher index of refraction it will act as a 
diverging lens.  These issues are important for developing a conceptual understanding of 
lenses but are often glossed over in traditional instruction. 
 
 

 

6

Teaching with Physlets:  Examples from Optics 

Figure 6a:  What is the index of refraction of the 
lens? 

Figure 6b: When the index of refraction of the 
surrounding medium is 1.8, light is unaffected as 
it passes through the lens. 

 
 
Ripple Tank Simulation 
The last example of an optics-based Physlet is not a problem but rather a simulation that 
can be used as a traditional ripple tank.  Unlike a physical ripple tank, the applet creates 
no mess and can be made accessible to students outside of class.  The interface of this 
demonstration is shown in Figure 7.   
 

 
Figure 7:  An applet to demonstrate interference effects. 
 
The demonstration can be used in class or as an out of class tool for students to play with 
as they construct their understandings.  It can also be used to construct a number of 
related problems. 
 

 

 

7

Teaching with Physlets:  Examples from Optics 

The applet allows the user to create any number of wave sources, put them at any 
location, and specify their amplitude and phase.  The wavelengths of all the sources must 
be the same, but can be set to a desired value.  When the applet plays, waves can be seen 
moving away from the sources, just as with a ripple tank. 
 
A number of questions can be derived from this applet regarding interference effects.  For 
example, we use the ripple tank demonstration to create an interference pattern and then 
ask the students to determine the relative phase of the sources based on the pattern 
generated.  Alternatively, students could be asked to determine the separation of sources 
in terms of the wavelength of light by considering the pattern generated.  Students often 
have tremendous difficulty connecting interference effects with a difference in path 
length.18  The ripple tank can be used to give them practice in analyzing interference 
effects separate from the double slit experiment, whose results they often memorize and 
apply without understanding. 
 
Obtaining the Problems 
All of the problems mentioned in this article, as well as many other resources, are 
available on the Physlet resources site.19  The examples in this paper can be found in the 
link to “Davidson Optics” under collections.  In addition, many other Physlet problems 
and questions are found on the general Physlet website and on the CD that accompanies 
the previously mentioned Physlets book.  Once the problems are obtained they must be 
properly set up to run.  Instructions for how to do this can be found on the Physlet 
website and/or in the Physlets book.  Although the Physlet name is a registered 
trademark, Physlets and Physlet problems can be used without charge for non-
commercial use. 
 
We are currently developing an extensive collection of ready-to-run Physlet-based 
problems and questions covering all topics in introductory physics.  We expect this 
collection, which will include the problems discussed above, to be available in the 
“Physlet Workbook” from Prentice Hall by August 2003. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The Physlet project has been generously supported by NSF (DUE-9752365 and DUE-
0126439).  We could also like to thank Ken Krebs for allowing us to field-test some of 
the problems, and Larry Cain and Aaron Titus for their helpful feedback.  Also, the 
Davidson College physics department has provided much support and encouragement to 
the Physlet project. 
 
                                                 
1 M. T. H. Chi, P. S. Feltovich, and R. Glaser, “Categorization and Representation of Physics Problems by 
Experts and Novices,” Cognitive Science.  5, 121-152 (1981). 
2 J. Larkin, J. McDermott, D. P. Simon, and H. A. Simon, “Expert and Novice Performance in Solving 
Physics Problems, Science, 208, 1335-1342 (1980). 
3 A. Van Heuvelen, “Learning to Think Like a Physicist:  A Review of Research-Based Instructional 
Strategies,” American Journal of Physics, 59, 891-897 (1991). 
4 A. Titus, “Integrating Video and Animation with Physics Problem Solving Exercises on the World Wide 
Web.” Doctoral Dissertation, 1998. 

 

8

Teaching with Physlets:  Examples from Optics 

                                                                                                                                                 
5 G. Polya, How to Solve It, 2nd ed. (Doubleday, Garden City, NY, 1957). 
6 W. Leonard, R. Dufresne, and  J. Mestre, “Using Qualitative Problem-Solving Strategies to Highlight the 
Role of Conceptual Knowledge in Solving Problems,” American Journal of Physics, 64, 1495-1503 (1996). 
7 R. Serway and R. Beichner, Physics for Scientists and Engineers, 5th ed. (Saunders, Philadelphia, 2000), 
p. 47. 
8 F. Reif, J. H. Larkin, and G. C. Brackett, “Teaching General Learning and Problem-Solving Skills,” 
American Journal of Physics, 44, 212-217 (1976). 
9 A. Van Heuvelen, “Overview, Case Study Physics,” American Journal of Physics, 59, 898-907 (1991). 
10 P. Heller, R. Keith, and S. Anderson, “Teaching Problem Solving Through Cooperative Grouping.  Part 
1:  Group Versus Individual Problem Solving.” Journal of Physics, 60, 627-636 (1992). 
11 Estimation problems are also known as Fermi problems.  A large collection is maintained by the PER 
group at the University of Maryland.  http://www.physics.umd.edu/rgroups/ripe/perg/fermi.html 
12 S. W. Bonham, J. S. Risley, and W. Christian, “Using Physlets to Teach Electrostatics,” The Physics 
Teacher, 37, 276-280 (1999). 
13 M. Belloni, L. Cain, and W. Christian, “Using Just-In-Time Teaching and Physlets in Quantum 
Mechanics,” talk given at American Association of Physics Teachers, Rochester NY, 2001. 
14 W. Christian, and M. Belloni, Physlets: Teaching Physics with Interactive Curricular Material,  
(Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2001). 
15 http://webphysics.davidson.edu/Applets/Applets.html  Maintained by the Davidson College physics 
department. 
16 M. Dancy, “Investigating Animations for Assessment with an Animated Version of the Force Concept 
Inventory.” Doctoral Dissertation, 2000. 
17 T. L. O’Kuma, D. P. Maloney, and C. J. Hieggelke, Ranking Task Exercises in Physics, (Prentice Hall, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2000). 
18 K. Wosilait, P. Heron, P. Shaffer, and L. McDermott, “Addressing Student Difficulties in Applying a 
Wave Model to the Interference and Diffraction of Light,” American Journal of Physics Supplement, 67, 
S5-S15, (1999). 
19 http://webphysics.davidson.edu/physlet_resources/ 
 
 
 

 

9

