 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

ENTROPY AND ESCHATOLOGY: A COMMENT ON  
KUTROVÁTZ'S PAPER HEAT DEATH IN ANCIENT AND 
MODERN THERMODYNAMICS 

Milan M. Ćirković 

Astronomical Observatory Belgrade 
 Volgina 7, 11160 Belgrade, SERBIA, Yugoslavia 
 
e-mail: arioch@eunet.yu 

 

 

 

ENTROPY AND ESCHATOLOGY: A COMMENT ON  
KUTROVÁTZ'S PAPER HEAT DEATH IN ANCIENT AND MODERN 
THERMODYNAMICS  

Abstract. Recent intriguing discussion of heat death by Kutrovátz is critically examined. It is 

shown that there exists another way of answering the heat death puzzle, already present in the 

ancient philosophical tradition. This alternative route relies not only on the final duration of 

time (which has been re-discovered in modern times), but also on the notion of observational 

self-selection, which has received wide publicity in the last several decades under the title of 

the anthropic principle(s). We comment here on some further deficiencies of the account of 

Kutrovátz.  Although  the  questions  Kutrovátz  raises  are  important  and  welcome,  there  are 

several  errors  in  his  treatment  of  cosmology  which  marr  his  account  of  the  entire  topic.  In 

addition, the nascent discipline of physical eschatology holds promise of answering the basic 

explanatory  task  concerning  the  future  evolution  of  the  universe  without  appealing  to 

metaphysics. This is a completely novel feature in the history of science, in contradistinction 

to the historical examples discussed by Kutrovátz. 

   

 

1. Introduction 

The problem of  heat  death—and  the  general issue of  the thermodynamical  temporal 

asymmetry—is  one  of  the  long-standing  and  ever-inspiring  topics  in  the  history  of 

human philosophical and scientific thought, comparable to Zeno's paradoxes on space 

and  motion  or  the  Hicetas-Berkeley-Mach  puzzle  of  the  origin  of  inertia  of  matter. 

Recent discussion of the topic by Kutrovátz (2001) in this Journal is indicative of the 

great  surge  of  interest  in  physical,  philosophical  as  well  as  the  historical  aspects  of 

this and related themes (for some other recent discourses, see Price 1996, 2002; Lieb 

and Yngvason 1999; Albert 2000; Uffink 2001; Uffink and Brown 2001). It brings (i) 

a  very  welcome  appraisal  of  the  state  of  the  problem  in  by  far  the  most  influential 

ancient physical theory—Aristotelian physics—and (ii) unearths some of the valuable 

comparison  between  that  state  of  affairs  and  the  situation  in  modern  cosmological 

thought.  However,  its  treatment  is  incomplete  in  several  important  points,  and 

contains—especially  it  the  latter  part—some  (widely  spread)  misconceptions  and 

mispresentations. 

1

Our  goal  in  this  note  is,  therefore,  to  correct  some  omissions  in  Kutrovátz's 

manuscript, as well as to suggest generalizations of its conclusion in the light of the 

nascent astrophysical discipline of physical eschatology. This seems an excellent case 

study  for  emphasizing  the  degree  our  cosmological  knowledge  is  determined  by  the 

underlying information flow. In addition, we point out another, surprisingly modern, 

answer to the heat death puzzle which existed in the antiquity, in a tradition different 

from the Aristotelian one. We begin with the latter topic. 

 

 

 

 

2. Alternative answer to the heat death problem 

In contradistinction to the Aristotelian “prime movent” which is eternally co-present 

with the world, the modern evolutionary idea that the universe is of finite age and is 

currently unwinding as a consequence of finite amount of primordial motion was also 

present  in  antiquity,  even  prominent  in  some  circles.  Unfortunately,  those  were  the 

circles  of  philosophers  of  nature  who  were  either  agnostics  or  open  atheists,  and 

therefore  were  carefully  supressed  and  neglected  in  subsequent  centuries.  The 

elements  of  such  a  worldview  were  present  in  cosmologies  of  Anaximandros, 

Empedocles,  Anaxagoras  and  Democritus,  as  well  as  in  some  later  epigones.  We 

mention here briefly some of these ideas. 

In  the  very  first  chapter  of  the  immortal  history  of  Thucydides,  there  is  a 

famous  statement  that  before  his  time—i.e.  about  450  BC—nothing  of  importance 

(συ  µεγαλα  γευεσθαι)  had  happened  in  history.  This  startling  statement  has  been 

correctly  called  “outrageous”  by  Oswald  Spengler,  and  used  to  demonstrate  the 

essentially  mythological  character  of  the  ancient  Greek  historiography  (Spengler 

1918;  see  also  Cornford  1965).  It  may  indeed  be  outrageous  from  the  modern 

perspective,  but  it  does  motivate  a  set  of  deeper  questions,  ultimately  dealing  with 

cosmology. The fact that Thucydides did not know (or did not care to know) previous 

historical  events  does  not  change  the  essential  perception  of  finiteness  of  human 

history  inseparable  from  the  Greek  thought.  This  property  starkly  conflicts  with  the 

notion of an eternal continuously existent world, as it was presented in both modern 

and ancient cultures. Obviously, it is irrelevant which exact starting point we choose 

for unfolding historical events. In any case, the number of these events is finite, and 

2

the time span considered small even compared to the specific astronomical timescales 

(some of which, like the precession period of equinoxes, were known in the classical 

antiquity, as is clear from the discussion in Timaeus), not to mention anything about a 

past  temporal  infinity.  Although  there  was  no  scientific  archaeology  in  the  ancient 

world, it was as natural then as it is now to expect hypothetical previous civilizations 

inhabiting Oikumene to leave some traces—in fact, an infinite number of traces for an 

eternally  existent  Oikumene!  There  are  indications  that  pre-Socratic  thinkers  have 

been aware of the incompatibility of this “Thucydidean” finiteness of historical past 

with the eternal nature of the world. We have already mentioned the solution (periodic 

singular  states)  proposed  by  Empedocles  himself.  Even  earlier,  in  the  fragmentary 

accounts  of  the  cosmology  of  Anaximandros,  one  may  note  that  he  proposed  an 

evolutionary origin of humankind in some finite moment in the past, parallel with his 

basic  postulate  of  separation  of  different  worlds  from  apeiron  and  their  subsequent 
returning  to  it.1  In  Anaxagoras’  worldview,  there  is  a  famous  tension  between  the 

eternity  of  the  world’s  constituents  and  the  finite  duration  of  movement  (and, 

therefore,  relational  time)  in  the  world.  In  the  same  time,  it  seems  certain  that 

Anaxagoras, together with Anaximandros and Empedocles, was an early proponent of 

the evolutionary view, at least regarding the origin of humankind (Guthrie 1969).    

Finally, an almost modern formulation of the anthropic argument for the finite 

past has been made in Roman times by Lucretius, who in Book V of his famous poem 

De Rerum Natura wrote the following intriguing verses: 

    

Besides all this,  

If there had been no origin-in-birth  

Of lands and sky, and they had ever been  

The everlasting, why, ere Theban war  

                                                 
1 This is clear, for instance, from the fragment A 10 in Diels (1983), preserved by Plutarch, in which it 
is explicitly asserted that formation and destruction of many worlds occurs within the global temporal 
infinity.  In  the  continuation  of  the  very  same  excerpt  from  Stromateis,  an  evolutionary  doctrine  is 
attributed to Anaximandros: “...Farther he says that at the beginning man was generated from all sorts 
of  animals,  since  all  the  rest  can  quickly  get  food  for  themselves,  but  man  alone  requires  careful 
feeding  for  a  long  time;  such  a  being  at  the  beginning  could  not  have  preserved  his  existence.” 
(Fairbanks 1898) Hyppolites quotes Anaximandros as emphasizing the nature of apeiron as eternal (B 
2), obviously in opposition to mankind, which has a fixed beginning in time. Even more intriguing is 
the doctrine ascribed to Anaximandros by Cicero: “It was the opinion of Anaximandros that gods have 
a beginning, at long intervals rising and setting, and that they are the innumerable worlds. But who of 
us  can  think  of  god  except  as  immortal?”  Did  he  have  in  mind  essentially  what  we  today  in  SETI-
related discussions denote as supercivilizations (e.g. Barrow & Tipler 1986)? 
 

3

And obsequies of Troy, have other bards  

Not also chanted other high affairs?  

Whither have sunk so oft so many deeds  

Of heroes? Why do those deeds live no more,  

Ingrafted in eternal monuments  

Of glory? Verily, I guess, because  

The Sun is new, and of a recent date  

The nature of our universe, and had  
Not long ago its own exordium.2 

 

 

For highly scientific-minded Lucretius, the shortness of human history is very strange 

on  the  face  of  hypothesis  of  the  eternal  existence  of  the  world.  Although  the 

references to “eternal monuments” and “other bards” may sound naive, it is clear that 

he had in mind any form of transmission of information from the past to the present; 

and an infinite amount of information from an infinite past. His empirical assessment 

of the surrounding world clearly shows the absence of such information. Therefore, an 

explanation is needed. The simplest explanation, as Lucretius was highly aware, is to 

treat the argument as reductio ad absurdum of the starting hypothesis (eternal nature 

of the world) and to assume that the world is of finite—and relatively small—age.  

The depth of Lucretius' thought in this passage is almost amazing, especially 

when the historical blindness of subsequent generations to this same argumentation is 

taken  into  account.  The  Lucretius'  argument  applies  to  the  classical  Newtonian 

universe  of  infinite  age,  as  well  as  to  modern  stationary  alternatives  to  the 

evolutionary  cosmology  (like  the  classical  steady-state  theory).  It  emphasizes  the 

technological  nature  of  possible  evidence  (“ingrafted  in…  monuments”).  This  is 

exactly  what  modern  cosmologists  Davies  and  Tipler  have  had  in  mind  when 

constructing the anthropic argument in order to refute the eternal cosmologies of our 

epoch. Lucretius' monuments play essentially the same role as Tipler's von Neumann 

probes sent by advanced intelligent communities (Tipler 1982). Their absence testifies 

on the finite past.  

We conclude that a rather modern idea of the (relatively) recent origin of the 

universe and its “running down” has been present in classical antiquity. Of course, it 

did never attain the attention and considerations accorded to the Aristotelian picture, 

4

but  it  has  been  present  nevertheless,  testifying  upon  the  high  degree  of  scientific 

sophistication  of  the  ancient  world.  It  has  been  resurrected  in  its  modern  form,  for 

instance,  in  the  famous  debate  on  the  thermodynamical  recurrence  between 

Boltzmann and Zermelo (cf. Steckline 1983), which is the first instance scientific (in 

the  modern  sense)  cosmological  speculations  appeared  in  a  respected  peer-reviewed 

research  journal.  In  the  course  of  XX  century,  it  has  been  incorporated  into  the 

standard cosmological lore, in particular after the victory of evolutionary models over 

their  steady-state  rival  in  the  “great  battle”  of  1950s  and  1960s  (Kragh  1996).  It  is 

exactly this lore we now turn to.  

 

 

 

 

 

3. Modern cosmology and some errors in Kutrovátz's account 

In  this  Section  we  list  and  briefly  consider  several  important  astrophysical  points 

missing in Kutrovátz's account of the modern answer to the heat death puzzle. These 

considerations  will  certainly  help  in  highlighting  the  entire  scope  of  the  problem 

whose important aspects, we wholeheartedly agree with Kutrovátz, are still open.  

3.1. Gravitational field as the major source of entropy 

The  basic  missing  part  in  Kutrovátz's  toy  model  of  the  entropy  evolution  of  the 

universe  is  gravitational  entropy.  It  has  very  slowly  dawned  of  physicists  and 

cosmologists  that,  apart  from  the  thermodynamical  entropy,  gravitational  field  may 

store a huge quantity of the internal degrees of freedom, thus having potentially huge 

entropy in itself. This has been realized in the black hole context in early 1970s, with 

the  revolutionary  studies  of  Bekenstein  (1973)  and  Hawking  (1974).  Bekenstein-

Hawking formula gives us a hold on the entropy of gravitational field of a black hole, 

and  there  certainly  are  ways  of  discerning  gravitational  entropy  in  other  cases, 

although they are still highly speculative (being dependent, of course, on the structure 

of correct quantum theory of gravitation!). Introducing gravitational entropy enables 

solving several important puzzles in astrophysics and cosmology (e.g. Penrose 1989). 

The most important of them is the state of thermodynamical equilibrium of very early 

                                                                                                                                            
2 In translation of William E. Leonard, available via WWW Project Gutenberg (Lucretius 1997). 
 

5

cosmological epochs, as discerned from the high isotropy of the cosmological black-

body radiation. If the classical thermodynamical entropy is all there is, how then could 

anything occur in the universe after the epoch of recombination at redshift z ~ 1500? 

We would naively expect plasma to simply reach complete equilibrium and remain in 

such  state  forever.  Instead,  gravitational  clumping  acted  to  reduce  thermodynamical 

entropy  at  the  expense  of  gravitational  entropy  which  greatly  increased  during  the 

process of cosmological structure formation. And cosmological structure formation, in 

turn, enabled all the wealth of subsequent physical, chemical and biological processes 

we  are  now  dealing  with  in  sciences;  it  is,  among  other  things,  the  cause  of  our 

appearance on Earth as intelligent observers. 

 

 

 

3.2. Thermodynamical capacities of gravitating systems 

When Kutrovátz writes that “we can see here that the internal energy is not constant 

because  it  is  tranformed  into  the  energy  of  the  gravitational  field:  this  is  a  peculiar 

feature  of  the  universe  as  a  thermodynamic  system”,  he  is  only  partially  correct. 

While  this  undoubtedly  holds  true  for  the  universe,  it  is  also  true  for  many  other 

astrophysical systems, notably stars and galaxies. In fact, it is true for any system that 

is held together by a long-range force like gravity. Suppose that we add energy to a 

star (say by a giant laser beam), and then wait some time for the relaxation processes 

to occur. We shall notice that its size has increased and its temperature will actually 

decrease (familiar example of the negative heat capacity).  

This  may  seem  irrelevant  for  the  particular  cosmological  case.  However,  the 

conclusion  often  drawn  from  the  same  property  when  applied  to  the  Hubble 

expansion, namely that the Hubble expansion is the cause of the entropy gradient (i.e. 

that  expansion  creates  new  extropy),  is  wrong.  This  point  has  been  the  focus  of  a 

fierce  controversy  raging  in  1960s  and  70s,  beginning  with  the  classical  study  of 

Thomas Gold (1962; see also Davies 1974; Layzer 1976). The idea was to explain the 

departure  from  thermodynamical  equilibrium  assuming  that  the  universal  expansion 

creates  new  states  for  new  configurations  of  matter,  so  that  the  entropy  of  matter 

begins  to  lag  more  and  more  behind  the  maximal  entropy  possible.  Ingenious  as  it 

was, this idea has been abandoned since for several reasons, the main being that the 

“special” low entropy nature of the initial Big Bang singularity is so exceptional (as 

6

calculable  in  principle  from  Boltzmann  formula 

S

=

ln
Wk

;  see  Penrose  1989)  that 

the  amount  of  subsequent  expansion  produces  almost  negligible  effect.  In  other 

words,  we  still  need  to  explain  the  very  low  initial  gravitational  entropy,  whose 

subsequent  increase  more  than  offset  the  apparent  (thermodynamical)  entropy 

decrease after the recombination epoch.  

3.3. Open vs. closed universes and cosmological constant 

In  several  places  in  Kutrovátz  (2001)  the  confusion  of  open/closed  vs.  ever-

expanding/recollapsing  is  perpetuated.  This  has  become  very  widespread  as  a 

consequence  of  general  neglect  (in  particular  in  textbooks)  of  models  with 

cosmological constant (or any other form of “dark energy”) in the approximate 1930-

1990 period. Today, after the spectacular results of recent cosmological observations 

of  distant  supernovae,  as  well  as  of  anisotropies  of  the  microwave  background 

radiation,  we  are  in  much  better  position.  For  a  nicely  written  summary  of  the 

situation at present see Krauss and Turner (1999).  

Let us summarize some cosmological basics. Ω is the ratio of physical density 

of  all  matter  fields  to  the  so-called  critical  density  necessary  for  universe  to  stop 

current  expansion  and  recollapse  toward  Big  Crunch.  In  the  misleading  textbook 

discourse which Kutrovátz uncritically accepts, Ω ≤ 1 universes will expand forever, 

while Ω > 1 universes will recollapse. This strictly applies only to the case of matter 

fields  possessing  “regular”  equation  of  state;  in  the  presence  of  vacuum  energy, 

indicated by recent cosmological supernovae experiments, the situation becomes more 

complicated.  There,  we  can  write 

ΛΩ+Ω=Ω
m

, 

ΛΩ   being  the  contribution  of  dark 

energy.  Now,  even  Ω  >  1  (=  topologically  closed)  universes  may  expand  forever, 

under  the  condition  that  the  sign  of  dark  energy  is  positive  (corresponding  to  the 

repulsive  effective  force).  This  will  occur  for  any 

1≤Ω m

,  and  if 

1>Ω m

  for  (e.g. 

Carroll, Press and Turner 1992) 

Ω≥Ω Λ

4

m



cos








1
3



arccos


1

Ω−
Ω

m

m


+


3

.

 


4
π

3








7

 

 

 

 

 

 

Thus we have a degeneracy in relationship of topological properties (open vs. closed) 

and 

its  dynamical 

future 

(ever-expanding  vs. 

recollapsing).  With  positive 

cosmological constant (which seems realistic; e.g. Perlmutter et al. 1999; Riess et al. 

2001;  Tucci,  Contaldo  &  Bonometto  2001)  topologically  closed  universe  may  also 

expand forever, especially if its contribution is so large as indicated by observations 

(ΩΛ ≈ 0.7). We have no observational way of determining whether the real universe is 

open or closed, since—and especially if one believes in inflationary models—the total 

cosmological density is Ω = 1 ± ε, ε being of the order of 10-5. However, we may be 

virtually  certain  that  the  universe,  no  matter  its  topological  properties,  will  expand 

forever.  

3.4. Extropy in open universes and the definition of the heat death  

If the definition of heat death is—as classically always assumed—the state of reached 

maximal entropy of a closed physical system, than the issue whether heat death will 

occur in an ever-expanding universe is not trivial or obvious. Although entropy may 

increase forever, this does not mean it will reach maximal value, if that maximal value 

can  recede  indefinitely.  In  fact,  it  seems  that  for  the  classical  Einstein-de  Sitter 

universe (matter-dominated universe with Ω = Ωm = 1) exactly that is the case: in one 

of  the  first  studies  of  cosmological  future  (appropriately  entitled  “Entropy  in  an 

Expanding Universe”), Frautschi (1982) wrote: 

 

It  is  apparent...  that  the  entropy  in  a  causal  region  falls  steadily  further 

behind  max  S  during  most  of  the  cosmic  history.  S/Smax  does  increase 

temporarily during the period of stellar and galactic black hole formation. 

Life  as  we  know  it  develops  during  the  same  period,  utilizing  the  much 

smaller,  but  conveniently  arranged  entropy  generation  on  a  planet  or 

planets  situated  near  nucleosynthesizing  stars.  ...the  expanding  universe 

does  “die”  in  the  sense  that  the  entropy  in  a  comoving  volume 

asymptotically approaches a constant limit. 

 

 

 

This is not heat death as classically understood (e.g. Eddington 1931). In the similar 

vein, Adams and Laughlin (1997) in the comprehensive study of almost all aspects of 

physical eschatology notice that 
 

8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Thus far in this paper, we have shown that entropy can be generated (and 

hence  work  can  be  done)  up  to  cosmological  decades  η  ∼  100. 

[Cosmological decades are defined as epochs of time t = 10η years] ...The 

formation  of  larger  and  larger  black  holes,  can  continue  as  long  as  the 

universe remains spatially flat and the density perturbations that enter the 

horizon are not overly large. The inflationary universe scenario provides a 

mechanism  to  achieve  this  state  of  affairs,  at  least  up  to  some  future 

epoch... Thus the nature of the universe in the far future η » 100 may be 

determined by the physics of the early universe (in particular, inflation) at 

the cosmological decade η ∼ –45. 

But  it  is  not  necessary  to  enter  into  wealth  of  technical  details  of  these  and  related 

studies  here;  it  is  enough  to  point  out  that  there  already  exists  a  sizeable  volume  of 

scientific  literature  on  the  entropy  production  in  the  cosmological  future—literature  

Kutrovátz unfortunately ignores. 

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  realistic  models  with  the  positive  cosmological 

constant,  heat  death  may  be  operationally  defined  as  the  state  of  reached  maximal 

entropy within the event horizon. In this case the assertion of Kutrovátz that the heat 

death is inescapable is correct.  

4. Discussion: physical eschatology and open systems 

Physical eschatology is a rather young branch of astrophysics, dealing with the future 

fate  of  astrophysical  objects,  as  well  as  the  universe  itself.  Landmark  studies  in 

physical  eschatology  are  those  of  Rees  (1969),  Dyson  (1979),  Tipler  (1986)  and 

Adams  and  Laughlin  (1997).  Some  relevant  issues  have  been  discussed  in  the 

monograph  of  Barrow  and  Tipler  (1986),  as  well  as  several  popular-level  books 

(Islam 1983; Davies 1994; Adams and Laughlin 1999). Since the distinction between 

knowledge  in  classical  cosmology  and  physical  eschatology  depends  on  the 

distinction  between  past  and  future,  several  issues  in  the  physics  and  philosophy  of 

time are relevant to the assessment of eschatological results and vice versa.  

9

 

At  a  first  glance,  it  seems  that—in  contradistinction  to  most  other  physical 

disciplines—physical  eschatology  is  at  least  fortunate  enough  to  deal  with  the 

exemplary closed system: the universe itself. But there is one crucial sense in which 

physical eschatology is—contrary to this impression—a study of open systems. This 

is  nicely  manifested  in  the  discussion  of  heat  death  of  the  universe.  A  necessary 

ingredient  in  most  serious  discussions  of  physical  eschatology  is  presence  of  living 

and intelligent systems in future of the universe (which ex hypothesi did not exist in 

its past). Dyson has been the first to boldly spell it out in 1979: 

 

It is impossible to calculate in detail the long-range future of the universe 

without  including  the  effects  of  life  and  intelligence.  It  is  impossible  to 

calculate the capabilities of life and intelligence without touching, at least 

peripherally, philosophical questions. If we are to examine how intelligent 

life may be able to guide the physical development of the universe for its 

own purposes, we cannot altogether avoid considering what the values and 

purposes of intelligent life may be. But as soon as we mention the words 

value and purpose, we run into one of the most firmly entrenched taboos 

of twentieth-century science. 

Future  of  universes  containing  life  and  intelligence  is  essentially  different  from  the 

future of universes devoid of such forms of complex organization of matter; as well as 

different  from  the  past  of  the  same  universes  in  which  complexity  was  lower.  In  a 

similar  vein,  John  A.  Wheeler  wrote  in  a  beautiful  paper  on  the  relationship  of 

quantum mechanics and cosmology (Wheeler 1988): 

Minuscule though the part is today that such acts of observer-participancy 

play in the scheme of things, there are billions of years to come. There are 

billions  upon  billions  of  living  places  yet  to  be  inhabited.  The  coming 

explosion of life opens the door to an all-encompassing role for observer-

participancy: to build, in time to come, no minor part of what we call its 

past—our past, present and future—but this whole vast world. 

Taking into account intentional actions of intelligent beings transforms this field into 

a  study  of  systems  open  to  the  interaction  with  such  advanced  noospheres 

10

 

 

 

 

(particularly in light of our virtually complete ignorance of the physics of conscience 

and intelligence at present). The pioneering study of Dyson quoted above presents an 

excellent example (although it may be wrong in quantitative details; see Krauss and 

Starkman  2000)  of  such  a  research:  in  it  Dyson  envisages  a  way  for  advanced 

intelligent  communities  to  avoid  heat  death  via  ingenious  methods  of  energy 

conservation  and  information  flow  optimization.  Dyson's  work  provoked  a  lot  of 

subsequent research activity. Although we cannot enter into this discussion here, the 

general  moral  that  future  of  the  universe,  including  the  possible  heat  death,  has 

recently  entered  the  physical—instead  of  metaphysical—domain  seems  inescapable. 

This stands in a stark contrast to the course of thinking about the cosmological future 

in  previous  epochs  which  Kutrovátz  describes,  and  heralds  a  completely  new  era  in 

our understanding of the universe.  

Acknowledgements. The author wishes to acknowledge Prof. Branislav Nikolić and 

Vesna Milošević-Zdjelar for their kind help in finding several key references. Special 

thanks  are  owed  to  Nataša  Bulut  for  her  invaluable  inspiration  and  wholehearted 

Adams, F. C. and Laughlin, G. 1997, Reviews of Modern Physics 69, 337. 

Adams, F. C. and Laughlin, G. The Five Ages of the Universe (The Free Press, New 

York, 1999). 

Albert, D. 2000, Time and Chance (Harvard University Press, Cambridge). 

Barrow, J. D. and Tipler, F. J. 1986, The Anthropic Cosmological Principle (Oxford 

University Press, New York). 

Bekenstein, J. D. 1973, Physical Review D 7, 2333. 

Carroll, S. M., Press, W. H. and Turner, E. L. 1992, Annual Review of Astronomy and 

Cornford, F. 1965, Thucydides Mythistoricus (Greenwood Press Publishers, New 

Astrophysics 30, 499. 

York). 

Davies, P. C. W. 1974, The Physics of Time Asymmetry (University of California  

11

support. 

References 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Press, Berkeley). 

Davies, P. C. W. 1994, The Last Three Minutes (Basic Books, New York). 

Diels, H. 1983, Presocratic Fragments (Naprijed, Zagreb). 

Dyson, F. J. 1979, Reviews of Modern Physics 51, 447. 

Eddington, A. S. 1931, Nature, 127, 447. 

Fairbanks, A. 1898, The First Philosophers of Greece (K. Paul, Trench & Trubner, 

London).  

Frautschi, S. 1982, Science 217, 593. 

Gold, T. 1962, American Journal of Physics 30, 403. 

Guthrie, W. K. C. 1969, A History of Greek Philosophy II (Cambridge University 

Press,   London). 

Hawking, S. W. 1974, Nature 248, 30. 

Cambridge). 

Islam, J. N. 1983, The Ultimate Fate of the Universe (Cambridge University Press,

Kragh, H. 1996, Cosmology and Controversy (Princeton University Press, Princeton). 

Krauss, L. M. and Turner, 1999, General Relativity and Gravitation 31, 1453. 

Krauss, L. M. and Starkman, G. D. 2000, Astrophysical Journal 531, 22. 

Kutrovátz, G. 2001, Open Systems & Information Dynamics 8, 349. 

Layzer, D. 1976, Astrophysical Journal 206, 559. 

Lieb, E. and Yngvason, J. 1999, Physics Reports 310, 1. 

Lucretius 1997, On the Nature of Things (translated by William E. Leonard, e-text 

version, Project Gutenberg, Urbana).  

Penrose, R. 1989, The Emperor's New Mind (Oxford University Press, Oxford). 

Perlmutter, S. et al. 1999, Astrophysical Journal 517, 565. 

Price, H. 1996, Time's Arrow and Archimedes' Point (Oxford University Press,  

Price, H. 2002, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 53, pp. 83-119. 

Rees, M. J. 1969, The Observatory 89, 193. 

Riess, A. et al. 2001, Astrophysical Journal 560, 49. 

Spengler, O. 1918, Decline of the West (1996 edition by Alfred A. Knopf Publisher,  

Oxford). 

New York). 

Steckline, V. S. 1983, American Journal of Physics 51, 894.  

Tipler, F. J. 1982, The Observatory 102, 36. 

12

Tipler, F. J. 1986, International Journal for Theoretical Physics 25, 617. 

Tucci, M., Contaldo, A. and Bonometto, S. 2001, Astrophysical Journal 562, 583. 

Uffink, J. 2001, Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 32B, 305-394. 

Uffink, J. and H. Brown 2001, Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 

 

32B, 525-538. 

Wheeler, J. A. 1988, IBM Journal of Research and Development 32, 4. 

 

13

