On a sub-quantum mechanical interpretation of the Dirac theory 

 

 

 

 

M. R. Mahdavi 

629 Shariati Ave., Tehran, Iran 

e-mail: Mahdavi@hotmail.com 

 

 

 

 

 

In this paper we will attempt to show that the Dirac theory lends itself to an interpretation in 

terms of a unified sub-quantum mechanical field theory where, the fundamental force fields 

are weak electric and weak magnetic fields. We present an electron model based on some of 

the predictions of the Dirac theory and justify our arguments by showing that the model not 

only yields the correct value for the g-factor but also gives us the very small correction to the 

magnetic moment as obtained in the renormalization programme of quantum electrodynamics. 

The model also allows us to give a new meaning to the negative energy state of an electron. 

The  general  outlines  of  the  unified  field  theory  are  given  and  the  connection  between 

fluctuations  at  the  Planck  and  Compton  scales  is  presented  in  terms  of  concrete  physical 

events. 

1. Introduction  

 

      The  development  of  a  true  sub-quantum  mechanical  theory,  namely,  a  theory  that  goes 

beyond  a  mere  interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics,  requires  three  stages  of  development. 

First,  one  has  to  form  in  ones  mind  an  overall  picture,  albeit  a  vague  one,  of  sub-quantum 

mechanical physics. Second, one has to discover the nature of the hidden parameters; partly 

as a result of the exigencies of the problems that one is faced with, and partly from inferences 

drawn from theory and observational results. Third, having found the physical make-up of the 

sub-quantum particles, one should then develop the fundamentals of sub-quantum mechanics 

and  present  a  more  detailed  and  acceptable  picture.  In  particular  one  should  resolve  the 

problems that one came across in the first and second parts of this programme, but due to a 

lack of knowledge had to conveniently side step. 

     The aim of the present paper is to carry out the first and to some extent the second part of 

the  above  programme.  In  a  previous  paper  [1]  we  demonstrated  that  the  unspecified  hidden 

1 

physical property, advocated by the proponents of local realistic models [2-4], amounts to a 

non-spherical electric charge distribution for the electron. The aims of that paper were; (1) to 

demonstrate  that  the  concept  of  (cid:147)efficiency  loophole(cid:148)  cannot  be  advocated  in  support  of  a 

local realistic interpretation of quantum mechanics, since a non-spherical charge distribution 

automatically  requires  alongside  it  superluminal  signalling,  and,  (2)  to  briefly  consider  the 

efficacy of non-spherical charge distribution in a non-local realistic interpretation of quantum 

mechanics.  There  we  concluded  that  a  non-spherical  charge  distribution  might  be  the  root-

cause of quantum mechanics and that, it is an idea that deserves to be further investigated.  

     In  the  present  paper  we  wish  to  advance  the  idea  that  the  Dirac  theory  [5],  not  only 

predicts a non-spherical charge distribution for the electron, but that if one takes the view that 

all  its  predictions  are  essentially  correct,  then  one  would  be  forced  to  move  into  a  sub-

quantum  mechanical  theory.  We  justify  our  arguments by deriving the correct value for the 

magnetic  moment  of  the  electron,  and  more  importantly  by  getting  the  correct  value  of  the 

second order correction to it.   

                                                                  
  
                                            
 2. Review of the Dirac theory and background to the present paper 

      The followings are most of the immediate predictions that appear in the Dirac theory of 

The eigenvalues of a component of the velocity operator are equal to –1. 

The components of velocity operator do not commute with one another. 

III. 

A component of velocity is composed of two parts, a constant part corresponding 

to velocity as it appears in the classical momentum relation, and an oscillatory part 

2
whose frequency of oscillation is equal to νr =2mc

/h.   

IV. 

A position coordinate is also composed of a constant and an oscillatory part. The 

oscillatory  part  is  imaginary,  and  the  amplitude  of  oscillations  is  of  the  order  of 

ħ/2mc. 

V. 

VI. 

rotation through 4π. 

There are two wave functions for each of the energy states of the electron. 

The state vector is double-valued in ordinary 3-space and returns to itself after a 

VII.      In an external magnetic field the electron behaves as if it had a magnetic moment 

of magnitude (cid:181)e = qeħ/2m. In contrast to the classical situation the g-factor has the 

abnormal value of 2.   

the electron:  

      

     

I. 

II. 

 

2 

VIII.      In an external electric field the electron behaves as if it had an imaginary electric 

moment pim = iqeħ/2mc. 

        

     Of the above, prediction I stands in apparent conflict with the special theory of relativity, 

since it implies that a measurement of the instantaneous velocity of the electron is certain to 

lead  the  results  –c.  However,  by  invoking  the  uncertainty  principle,  Dirac  showed  that  this 

conflict might be resolved. 

       Predictions III and IV seem natural in a quantum mechanical theory, since they associate 

oscillations  with  the  motion  of  the  electron,  as  was  originally  postulated  by  de  Broglie. 

However, it seems odd that the frequency of oscillations is twice as large as the one proposed 

by de Broglie. Also the position coordinate is non-Hermitian. It has been argued [6] that this 

is symptomatic of a non-commutative geometry.   

      In terms of classical concepts predictions VI and VII are unnatural, but must be accepted 

as being correct, since they are in keeping with the observational results.    

       Predictions  II  and  V  have  been  attributed  to  an  inadequacy  of  the  Dirac  theory  [7]  in 

representing  a  true  physical  picture  of  the  electron  since;  II  means  that  if  one  measures  a 

component  of  velocity  in  a  given  direction  one  cannot  at  the  same  time  obtain  any 

information  about  the  components  of  velocity  in  other  directions,  while  V  amounts  to  a 

redundancy  in  the  number  of  the  wave  functions  necessary  to describe each energy state of 

the electron.   

       Finally,  VIII  has  been  dismissed  altogether  on  the  grounds  that  an  imaginary  electric 

moment cannot correspond to a real physical entity. 

      We now adopt the view that the Dirac theory is a very accurate theory, representative of 

an  overall  average  of  a  number  of  phenomena  that  collectively  manifest  themselves  as  the 

particle, the electron. In the present paper, except for V and VIII, we shall make use of these 

predictions and shall present an electron theory based on them. In a subsequent paper we shall 

show that V and VIII are also correct predictions. 

 3. An electron model based on the Dirac theory     

       We propose the following model of the electron as a way of explaining the non-

commuting character of the components of the velocity operator. We assume that the 

Coulomb charge of the electron is in the form of an annular band of radius d and thickness 

t, with β being the angle subtended by t at the centre of the annular band (Fig. 1). 

            

       

 

 

 

3 

                                     

β 

  d 

vi 

n 

t 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

  

 

  

  

    

                                                                                   Fig. 1 

      If as shown in Fig. 1, the electron were to be set into motion, in such a way that vi the 

velocity vector coincided with n, a normal vector to the plane bisecting the band into two 

equal annular bands, then the electrostatic field of the electron will come into ones view for a 

short period of time, only when the direction of ones view is almost transverse to the direction 

of vi.        

       Next,  consider  that  the  electron  has  an  intrinsic  angular  momentum  of  magnitude  ħ/2. 

Since in the Dirac theory a position coordinate has a constant and an oscillatory part we argue 

that,  in  the  case  of  the  electron  at  rest,  the  electron  undergoes  some  sort  of  an  oscillatory 

motion  along  a  closed  trajectory,  for  example  a  circle,  and  attribute  the  intrinsic  angular 

momentum to such a motion. Thus, tentatively, we let the annular shaped charge to move in 

circular motion, with vi parallel to n as in Fig.1. 

       Now, if one were to observe the electron from any point in space, save from points on the 

polar axis, one would observe the electrostatic field of the electron for short periods of time 

when  the  vector  velocity  is  almost  perpendicular  to  ones  direction  of  view.  This  model, 

however, will not yield an isotropic field for the electron, since if the point of observation is 

on  the  polar  axis  then  one  would  be  enabled  to  see  the  electrostatic  field  at  all  times.  We 

overcome this problem by means of prediction VI. Thus as before we let the electron move in 

circular orbit, but in addition allow j the angular momentum vector or to precess about 

 

4 

the z-axis at an angle of inclination θ ≥ β at a recessional frequency equal to 1/2ωr where, 

ωr is the rotational frequency. Thus in Fig. 2, if at an instant of time the electron is at the   

position A in space then, after a rotation  

through 2π it will move to the new position 

B. It will now take another full cycle of  

rotational motion before it returns back  

combined rotational and precessional  

motions at the indicated frequencies  

to its original position in space. The                                                   

z 

j

θ

ensure that the frequencies and the durations                                          

of observations would be the same from 

all points of observation in space.                                                                Fig. 2 

Thus on the average the electrostatic field of the electron attains an isotropic form.  

     As explained in [1], under normal circumstances the electrostatic field of the electron will 

now  be  in  the  form  of  superluminal  pulses  of  time  duration  ∆t,  arriving  at  the  point  of 

observation with the C = (1+β

). c and at intervals of ∆t’ = (1+β

). ∆t. Thus  

-1

-1

A

 B 

                                                   α = ∆t/ ∆t’ = 1/(1+β

)                                                  (1)                                          

-1

is the ratio of the period time durations when the electron comes into ones view or disappears 

from it. In [1] we also argued that α might be equal to the fine-structure constant       

                                                       α =  (qe

)/ 4πε0 cħ                                                       (2) 

2

We now adopt the view that this is indeed the case and, with a view to future developments 
assume that the electronic charge is distributed on an annular band of radius d and thickness t 

with t/d = α (ignoring the small difference we have put α = β). Therefore, the charge density 

on the band is                                                                                            

                                                    σ
                                                                        
Thus, viewed from the directions along which one can see the electron(cid:146)s charge one would 

                                                            (3)                                           

-
 =  qe/ 2παd

2

see an electrostatic field as if emanating from a charge 

                                                         -Q = -2α

qe                                                          (4) 

-1

      In the course of coming discussions it will soon become apparent that an electron is the 

manifestation of a number of phenomena. Therefore, we should make a distinction between 

the electron and its particle part. For this reason we shall refer to the particle part of the 

electron as the electrino.   

                                                                                                                                                                          

4. The instantaneous velocity of the electrino  

 

5 

 

        In order that we may be consistent in our interpretation of the Dirac theory we have no 

choice  but  to  accept  that,  prediction  I  in  fact  means  that  the  instantaneous  velocity  of  the 

electrino, and not the electron itself, is equal to –c. If this view is correct we must then show 

why it is that the motion of the electrino with the velocity of light is not in conflict with the 

special theory of relativity. Two problems that require immediate attention are the followings.   

      First,  if  a  particle  of  a  finite  inertial  mass  were  to  move  with  the  velocity  of  light,  then 

according to the special theory of relativity its mass would attain an infinite value. From this 

we  conclude  that  the  electrino  in  essence  is  a  zero  mass  particle,  i.  e.,  a  tachyon.  Next 

consider that the tachyon cannot of its own volition, as depicted in Fig. 1, move in a circular 
orbit. Thus, a force field ψ* of electron(cid:146)s own making must act on the tachyon and constrain it 

to move in circular motion. Therefore, when the electron is subjected to an external force, the 
ψ*-field  will  oppose  the  motion  of  the  tachyon.  In  this  way  the  initially  zero-mass  particle 

shows resistance to motion and as a result has acquired the attribute of inertial mass, which 

we will equate to m the observed mass of the electron. 

      Second,  a  tachyon  cannot  carry  ordinary  electric  or  magnetic  charges.  For,  if  it  were  to 

have a charge then its electrostatic field in directions transverse to the direction of its motion 

would attain infinite value. Therefore, any charges initially carried by a tachyon must be of 

the weak type, i. e., the field lines of a charge on the tachyon are confined to its immediate 

vicinity and as it were are in the form of permanent attachments to it. We are now forced to 

the conclusion that the Coulomb charge is not an intrinsic physical attribute of the electron, 

but that it is created when the tachyon is captured into the electronic motion. That Coulomb 

charge  is  not  an  intrinsic  physical  attribute  of  an  elementary  particle  is  already  indicated  in 

quantum electrodynamics where a creation operator, for example, creates an electron together 

with its Coulomb field and destroys a positron together with its Coulomb field. 

       An  additional  problem  now  comes  to  ones  mind.  What  laws  govern  the  motion  of  the 

electrino? We will assume that the motion of the electrino is in accordance with the laws of 

classical physics. In particular we note that in classical physics the motion of a charge gives 

rise  to  an  induced  magnetic  field.  Here,  we  are  at  the  stage  that  the  charge  is  just  created. 

However,  we  shall  assume  that  there  is  a  magnetic  field  associated  with  the  motion  of  the 

electrino, exactly as given by the classical relation for induced magnetic fields except that, the 

Lorentz transformations do not apply to the motion of the electrino or its electric or magnetic 

5. Discontinuous motion         

fields.      

         

  

 

6 

      Although we have postulated that a magnetic field is associated with the moving electrino, 

nonetheless, no essential change has taken place from the classical situation and our model of 

the electron still yields the classically incorrect value for the g-factor. In order that we may 

get the correct g-factor we need to modify our electron model in two steps. The first step is to 

make the motion of the electrino discontinuous in the true sense of the word.     

      Schematically we represent the events in two dimensions in the manner shown in Fig. 3. 

In the first instance and as the result of action of the creation operator, a tachyon is captured 

into an electronic orbit at point A, and after having been converted into an electrino, moves  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B 

A 

c

ae 

C 

D 

                                                                                Fig. 3 

along a circle of radius ae, again via the agency of the creation operator. We now make the 

following assumption and will justify it later on in section 7. We assume that an electrino thus 

created has only a brief lifetime. That is, we assume that the first electrino after a short period 

of time corresponding to motion with the velocity c along an arc length ∆s = AB 

                                                           ∆s = αae                                                            (5)   

once again becomes a free particle and falls back into the vacuum. In keeping with prediction 

IV we let the radius of circular motion to be equal to                                                         

                                                       ae =  ħ/2mc                                                          (6)     

2
Now the frequency of motion is equal to ν = 2mc

/h as in prediction IV, and assuming that the 

acquired mass of the electrino is equal to m, the inertial mass of the electron, then the value of 

angular momentum attains the correct value of ħ/2. 

       Next,  consider  that  if  the  first  electrino  has  a  finite  lifetime  then,  at  the  instant  that  it 

reverts back into the vacuum, another electrino must be created at a nearby point in space and 

forced to move along an arc length as given by eq. 5 This is mandatory in order that we do 

not violate the law of charge conservation. This situation can come about if a field identical to 

the  original  creation  operator  emanates  from  the  first  electrino.  Considering  the  fields 

7 

associated with an electron it is reasonable to assume the ψ*-field is in fact an electromagnetic 
one since the gravitational field is too weak for the considered task. Clearly, the ψ*-field must 

have three components in three mutually perpendicular directions rθz, and these components 

must  act  on  some  hidden  physical  attributes  of  the  tachyon  in  order  that  it  can  be  kept  in 

circular orbit.  

     Now,  since  electromagnetic  fields  travel  away  from  their  source  along  straight  lines  we 

may  expect  that  the  second  electrino  will  be  created  at  a  point  C  (Fig.  3)  and  subsequently 

will  move  over  an  arc  length  CD  =  ∆s.  However,  although  the  idea  is  essentially  correct, 

nevertheless,  it  needs  to  be  somewhat  modified,  since  this  model  cannot  overcome  the 

problem mentioned at the beginning of this section.  

6. The hidden space warp, the g-factor, and a new spin  

   
        If a new electrino is always created at a distance of 2ae from the source of the ψ*-field it 

then follows that at (Ei, Bi), the components of the electric and magnetic fields in the ψ*-field, 

must attain certain values (Ei0, Bi0) at this distance. Now, as before we let the first electrino 

moves  along  an  arc  ∆sa  of  a  circle  of  radius  ae.  The  ψ*-field  emanating  from  this  electrino 

(schematically represented as a ray in the figure) when it was the point A moves inward with 

velocity  C'  =  α

c,  not  along  a  diameter  but  at  a  small  inclinaton  to  it  (Fig.  4).  Having 

-1

travelled a distance ≈ ae the ψ*-field is close to the centre of the circle. We now  

B 

A 

ψ* ψ* 

ae ae 

 

Fig. 4 

assume that at the centre of the circle there is a space warp, resembling a black hole, and that 
the ψ*-field arrives at a point very near to the black hole horizon. Here, we emphasize that the 

space warp is not due to the presence of a particle; rather, it is a local alteration in the space-

metric that must continually be replenished, otherwise it will simply fade away (see sect.8). 

Now, a number of the electric and magnetic field lines, for example those closest to the black 

8 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

hole horizon, are drawn towards the black hole. As a result the direction of the travel of the 
ψ*-field  is  now  altered,  and  having  looped  around  the  black  hole  it  starts  to  move  radially 

outwards and after having travelled a further distance equal to ae it creates a new electrino at 
point  B.  This  sequence  of  events  is  repeated  for  all  ψ*-fields  emitted  during  each  point  of 

motion of the first electrino. The net result is that the arc length over which the next electrino 

moves is projected not onto a diametrically opposite position, but rather, onto a position near 

the  previous  arc  length.  Thus  the  arc  lengths  over  which  successive  electrinos  move 

correspond to a single arc length moving with a velocity C' over a circle of radius ae.  

     Now,  in  order  that  the  measured  charge  and  the  magnetic  moment  of  the  electron  may 

have their correct values (cid:150)qe and qeħ/2m, respectively, we must put the value of C' at 

                                                           C' = π(1+ α/2π)c                                                   (7)  

The  choice  of  the  value  for  C'  was  made  from  the  following  considerations.  If  we  put  C' 

equal to πc then, in appearance an electrino and also an arc length move with a velocity 2c 

along a diameter to the diametrically opposite position. In the case of the electron at rest, this 

means that if we observe (or do not observe) an electrino moving over a full arc length then 

we  are  certain  to  observe  (or  not  to  observe)  it  moving  over  a  full  arc  at  the  diametrically 

opposite position. For this reason we must choose a value for C' such that; for all observers, 

the  sum  of  the  observable  arc  lengths  ∆sa  and  ∆sb,  at  two  diametrically  opposite  positions, 

would always add up to αae, for example, ∆sa = (1- ε)αae and ∆sb = εαae where ε takes on any 

values within the range 0 to 1. The additional velocity ∆c = (α/2π)c in eq. 7  were put in for 

this purpose and  this value of the C' ensures that the ratio ∆t/∆t′ will always have the correct 

value α/2 for all observers  

moves over the arc 

     The net result of all this for the case ε << α, is depicted in Fig. 5. The electrino appears and 

 

 

  

 

 

 

                        ∆sb = εαae                                                                           ∆sa = (1- ε)αae        

2ae 

2c 

2c 

Fig. 5 

 length  ∆sa  =  (1-  ε)αae.  In  appearance  it  moves  with  a  velocity  2c  to  the  diametrically 

opposite  position  where  it  moves  over  an  arc  length  ∆sb  =  εαae  and  subsequently  with  the 

same  velocity  back  to  its  original  position.  Thus,  in  this  two-dimensional  picture,  the 

9 

appearance time of an electrino is equal to ∆t ≈ αae/c while its disappearance time is equal to 

∆t′  ≈  4ae/2c.  Therefore  the  ratio  (∆t/∆t′)  is  equal  to  α/2  and  since,  when  the  electrino  is 

observed it presents a charge of -2α

qe, it follows that the average charge of the electron will 

-1

be equal to -qe. Now the frequency of motion of the charge is ν ≈ 2c (1+ α/2π)/4ae, the value 

of the current is i ≈ ν 2α

qe, and the area enclosed by the electrino current is equal to A ≈ 

-1

. Therefore the value of the magnetic moment of the (cid:147)circulating(cid:148) electrino is equal to  

                                                  (cid:181)e ≈ [2c(1+α/2π)/(4ae)](2α

qe)(αae

)                              (8)   

-1

2

Inserting for the value of ae from eq. 6 into eq. 8 we obtain a value for the magnetic moment 

2

α(ae)

equal to 

                                                         (cid:181)e ≈ (qeħ/2m)[1+(α/2π)]                                           (9) 

 Thus, we not only have got the correct value for the magnetic moment but have also got the 

correction ∆(cid:181)e = (qeħ/2m)(α/2π) as also predicted by renormalization theory.  

        In the three-dimensional case events will proceed more or less in the same way except 

that,  as  depicted  in  Fig.  1,  the  electrino  after  one  cycle  of  rotation  does  not  return  to  its 

original position, e. g., its z-coordinate oscillates between the values z0 –dz with dz ~ αz0. 

        From  the  preceding  discussion  it  will  be  seen  that  two  spins  are  required  for  a  correct 

description  of  the  electron.  There  is  a  ‰-spin  associated  with  the  rotational  motion  of  the 

electrino. In addition there is a spin s’, which arises purely as a result of the presence of a local 
space-time  curvature.  In  the  above  treatment  (Fig.  4)  we  arbitrarily  allowed  the  ψ*-field  to 

approach  the  black  hole  horizon  from  left  side.  Thus  for  a  spin-up  electron  s’  will  have  the 
same direction as the angular momentum vector. On the other hand, had we let the ψ*-field 

approach the black hole horizon from the right side then in appearance nothing would have 

changed, but the direction of s’ would have been reversed. However, there is nothing here to 

tell us the s’ state of the electron. 

7. The hidden “positron” 

      Dirac explained the negative energy state of the electron in terms of his hole- theory. His 

explanation  was  seemingly  justified  by  the  discovery  of  the  positron.  However,  we  take  a 

different view about the negative energy state. 

      Consider  that  we  have  the  ψ*-field  that  in  appearance  continually  bounces  from  one 

electrino to another. In effect it is a packet of electromagnetic field trapped inside the electron 

 

 

 

10 

and in a later paper we will show that it is in fact an electromagnetic mesic field. However, in 

so far as the effect that it produces it corresponds to an electrostatic field due to a charge +qe 

always at the position where the electrino is situated. Thus, if we were to force an electrino to 

move  into  circular  motion  as  a  result  of  the  presence  of  a  positive  charge  +qx  then  the 

following relation must hold  

2
                                                      (mc

-1

/ae) = (2α

qe. qx) /(4πε0)(2ae)

                       (10) 

2

which on simplifying reduces to 

                                                                            qx =  qe                                                 (11) 

            

 7. The outlines of the sub-quantum unified field theory.  

        Now we may ask, if a tachyon can only carry weak type of electric or magnetic charges 

then,  how  its  long  range  fields  are  created?  We  believe  that  Michael  Faraday  supplied  the 

answer to this question a long time ago. Faraday considered space to be filled by tiny dipoles 

and  envisaged  that  electric  fields  are  conveyed  from  one  point  to  another  in  space  by  a 

process  of  polarization.  It  was  on  the  basis  of  Faraday(cid:146)s  ideas  that  Maxwell  introduced  the 

concept of displacement current and constructed his electromagnetic theory [8]  

        How Faraday(cid:146)s idea can be translated into practical terms will be discussed in a separate 

paper.  Here,  we  wish  to  consider  in  general  terms  a  few  points  that  follow  from  this  idea. 

First, consider the electrino at a point in its circular motion. It has a certain amount of weak 

electric  charge  (and  possibly  weak  magnetic  one)  and  the  field  lines  from  this  weak  charge 

penetrate a limited distance d into space. Thus, plausibly we may expect the weak charge to 

polarize some of the tiny dipoles within the range of its weak field. At this instance we have a 

number  of  filaments  of  polarized  dipoles  emanating  from  the  weak  charge.  Obviously,  the 

tiny  dipoles  must  show  resistance  to  a  turning  force  and  after  the  weak  charge  has  moved 

away from this region of space they should relax back to their original orientations in space, 

as otherwise the transmission of signals through space would proceed with infinite velocity. 

Now we have to assume that the first filament of polarized dipoles, before the dipoles relax 

back to their initial equilibrium positions, will in turn polarize another filament of dipoles and 

that in this way and in effect a filament of polarized dipoles will move with a finite velocity 

through space. 

n
      Second, an important point here is that the weak field must fall-off with distance as 1/r

, 

with n itself being an increasing function of r, so that at a distance of r = d the value of the 

field  falls  to  zero.  In  other  words  there  is  a  sharp  gradient  in  the  weak  field. 

 

 

 

11 

Therefore,  what  the  weak  field  does  is,  in addition to polarizing the tiny dipoles, to 

pull them towards it. Clearly, the physical properties of space around the weak charge 

are now altered. In particular if before the introduction of the weak charge in a given 

region of space the average distance between the tiny dipoles were equal to d0, it will 

now  be  reduced  to  d0(1-δ).  Here  we  have  an  alteration  in  the  physical  property  of  space, 

reminiscent of Einstein(cid:146)s theory of gravitation. If this is indeed how gravity is created then it 

means that the electromagnetic field, wherever it goes in space, brings with it the gravitational 

field. 

     Third,  we  have  filled  space  with  dipoles  that  show  resistance  to  a  turning  force.  Thus, 

space  itself  has  some  sort  of inertia. This means that there is a large amount of unobserved 

mass inside our universe. Note that the fact that space itself has inertia in no way means that, 

a body moving through space will gradually loses its momentum. For, the motion of a body is 

determined  by  the  path  of  the  ψ*-fields  and  in  reality  there  is  no  motion  corresponding  to 

motion as in the classical situation.  
        Next  consider  that  a  ψ*-field  always  lifts  a  tachyon  out  of  the  vacuum  and  converts  it 

into  an  electrino,  always  at  a  distance  of  2ae  from  its  source.  Thus,  it  is  a  short-range  field 

whose attractive quality is manifested only at a certain distance. Thus, in one respect at least 
the ψ*-field resembles the strong field. Should further investigation show that the ψ*-field is 

in every respect identical to the strong field we then will have a unified field theory where the 

fundamental  force  field  of  nature  is  the  weak  electromagnetic  field  and  gravitational, 

electromagnetic, and the strong fields are merely different manifestations of the weak fields. 

8. The connection between phenomena at the Planck and Compton scales 

    Previously  the  question  arose  (cid:147)why  should  electrinos  move  over  arc  lengths  all  exactly 

equal to αae?(cid:148). In order that we may answer this question let us look at the black hole. It is in 

reality a space warp that, if left to its own, would fade away in a short time. Thus, it needs to 

be continually replenished. A gravitational field originating from the electrino itself can only 

do this replenishment. Now, the only thing that emanates from the electrino and reaches the 
position of the black hole is the ψ*-field. Therefore, even in the absence of the above outlined 
the unified field theory, we would have been forced to assume that the ψ*-field, an essentially 

electromagnetic  field,  does  the  job  of  replenishment.  This  can  only  be  done  if  the 

electromagnetic field has always an associated gravitational field. 

      Next, consider that the space warp must correspond to a particle having a constant mass. 

Now,  with  a  fixed  arc  length  αae  we  always  have  a  certain  number  of  filaments  of  electric 

 

 

 

12 

field circulating around the centre of the circle. If the arc length is less than αae the number of 

the circulating filaments, and in consequence the mass of the black hole, is reduced and the 

black hole will start to evaporate. On the other hand if the arc length is increased beyond αae 

then  the  number  of  the  circulating  field  line  filaments,  and  in  consequence  the  mass  of  the 

black  hole,  is  increased.  As  a  result  the  filaments,  which  previously  were  circulating  at  the 

black  hole  horizon  will  now  be  drawn  inside  the  black  hole.  The  field  lines  will  now  be 

trapped  inside  the  black  hole  up  till  the  time  that  it  starts  to  evaporate,  but  we  are  in  no 

position to state what might happen afterwards. Thus, there is fine balance between what is 

going on at the Compton scale and the disparately smaller scale of the black hole. These bring 

us now to the subject of quantum gravity. 

       In  this  paper  we  were  forced  by  necessity  to  combine  gravity  and  an  electron  model 

based on the Dirac theory in order to get the correct value of the g-factor. For some times now 

Quantum Gravity [9,10] has been the subject of a good deal of theoretical research and there 

is  already  some  evidence  showing  that  there  might  be  a  close  connection  between  quantum 

mechanics and gravitation [Cf. ref.11 and refs. therein]. Let us now take one particular aspect 

of a black hole that is of particular relevance to the present discussion. In quantum gravity the 

minimum scale length is the Planck length 

3
                                                       lp =  (ħG/c

)

1/2

 ~ 10

-33 

cm                               (12) 

Associated with lp is the Planck mass mp ~ 10

gm, which corresponds to a black hole whose 

Schawrzchild  radius  is  equal  to  lp.  Now,  such  a  black  hole  would  evaporate  via  the 

-5

-42 

Beckenstein  radiation  in  a  time  ~  10

seconds.  This  time  scale for black hole radiation is 

more  than  twenty  orders  of  magnitude  smaller  than  time  scales  at  the  Compton  scale  of 

elementary  particles.  It  is  now  evident  that  at  the  start  we  cannot  put  an  electrino  in  an 

electronic  orbit  and hope to replenish the evaporating black hole. Therefore, the connection 

between  the  black  hole  and  the  electrinos  can  be  maintained,  if  at  the  instant  that  the  first 

electrino  appears,  there  are  n  filaments  of  field  lines  strung  together;  extending  from  the 

position  of  the first electrino to the position of the black hole, and after looping around the 

black hole, extend partly in space towards the point that the next electrino is due to appear. 

Only  in  this  way  the  fluctuations  at  the  Planck  scale  can  be  causally  connected  to  the 

oscillations at the Compton scale. In regards to this connection at the two disparate scales we 

draw the attention of the reader to a recent paper by Sidharth [12]. There, Sidharth considers 

and  offers  an  explanation  for  the  curious  fact  that  in  Quantum  Gravity  and  Quantum  Super 

String  theories  the  scale  length  is  the  Planck  scale,  whereas  in  the  physical  world  the  scale 

length is the Compton scale of the elementary particles.                

 

13 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 9. Conclusions 

     In conclusion we may say that the fact that we were able to derive the correct value for the 

g-factor and at the same time obtain the small correction to the magnetic moment goes a long 

way  in  supporting  our  contention  that  the  Dirac  theory  can  be  explained  in  terms  of  a  sub-

quantum mechanical theory. In regards to the unified field theory, in general terms we made a 

connection between the four known forces of nature, but clearly it needs to be worked out in 

more details. Altogether, we may claim that our sub-quantum theory reproduces some aspects 

of the quantum theory and also removes the conceptual difficulty that one has in regards to 

the negative energy state of the electron.    

  References: 

  [1]. Mahdavi, M. R., physics/0211102 (2002).    

  [2]. Fine, A., Synthese, 50 (1982) 279.   

  [3]. Szabo, L. E., Found. Phys., 30 (2000) 1891. 

  [4]. Larsson, J.-¯., Found. Phys., 13 (2000) 477. 

  [5]. P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, (Oxford Univ. press, 1958) 261.  

  [6]. Sidharth, B. G., physics/0203079 (2002).     

  [7]. Schweber, S. S., Relativistic Quantum Field Theory, (Harper&Row, 1964) 91.   

  [8]. Maxwell, J. C., A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, vol. II (Dover, 1954) 431 

  [9]. Hawking, S., Commun. Math. Phys. 43 (1975) 199.  

  [10]. Horowitz, G. T., gr-qc/0011089 (2000).  

  [11]. Matone, M., hep-th/0005274 (2002).  

  [12]. Sidharth, B. G., physics/0208045 (2002)   

                                    

14 

