Electron Impact Ionization Close to the Threshold: Classical Calculations

Submitted to Journal of Physics B

1 Consorzio RFX-Associazione Euratom-Enea sulla Fusione, Corso Stati Uniti 4, 35127 Padova,

F Sattin1# and K Katsonis2&

2 Laboratoire de Physique des Gaz et des Plasmas, Universitè Paris XI, 91405 Orsay, France

Italy

Abstract

In this paper we present Classical Trajectory Monte Carlo (CTMC) calculations for single

and multiple electron ionization of Argon atoms and ions in the threshold region. We are
able to recover the Wannier exponents a

 for the power-law behavior of the cross section

  versus  excess  energy:  the  exact  value  of  the  exponent  as  well  as  the  existence  of  its

saturation for multiple ionization appear to be related to how the total binding energy is

shared between target electrons.

PACS: 34.80.Dp, 34.80.Kw, 34.10.+x

                                                  
# sattin@igi.pd.cnr.it
& konstantinos.katsonis@lpgp.u-psud.fr

1

s
A  detailed  modelization  of  atomic  processes  involving  rare  gas  atoms  is  needed

for  characterization  of  low-temperature  plasmas  such  as  those  encountered,  e.g.,  in  the

scrape-off  layer  of  magnetic  fusion  devices  and  in  plasma  thrusters  for  astrophysical

applications.  Depending  on  the  plasma  conditions  and  on  the  accuracy  sought,  even  a

zero-dimension  modeling  of  such  plasmas  necessitates  the  formulation  of  a  full

collisional-radiative  model  or  one  of  its  simplifications  (coronal-radiative  or  even  a

coronal  model).  In  so  doing,  among  the  numerous  needed  data,  electron  collision

ionization  rate  coefficients  are  of  paramount  importance  whenever  we  are  interested  to

mostly ionizing plasmas (Drawin and Katsonis 1981, Janev and Katsonis 1987).

This  paper  presents  a  theoretical  study  of  the  single  and  multiple  electron  ionization  of

Argon in several ionization stages at impact energy close to the threshold. It is intended

as  a  part  of  a  broader  study  aimed  to  produce  ionization  cross  sections  over  a  larger

energy  range,  suitable  for  the  computation  of  rate  coefficients  (Katsonis  et  al.  2002a,

2003);  however  we  think  that  this  investigation  deserves  an  interest  per  se.  In  fact,  the

threshold  breakup  of  complex  systems  into  several  charged  components  has  been  a

subject  of  interest  at  least  since  the  paper  by  Wannier  introducing  its  famous  threshold

law  s

D E

  (Wannier  1953)  based  on  analytical  considerations  on  the  three-body

problem;  work  on  two-body  threshold  breakup  goes  back  till  Wigner  (1948).  Many

theoretical  and  experimental  studies  have  appeared  since  then,  trying  to  validate  or

improve  that  law.  Basically,  it  has  been  confirmed,  but  research  still  focuses  on  the
precise evaluation of exponent a

.  An updated bibliography can be found in Gstir et al.

(2002).

In  this  work  we  shall  compute  ionization  cross  sections  by  direct  numerical

integration  of  the  equations  of  motion  for  a  few-body  atomic  system  consisting  of  one

projectile  electron,  n  target  electrons  initially  bound  to  one  nucleus,  and  the  remaining

electronic  cloud  after  the  removal  of  the  n  electrons  together  with  the  atomic  nucleus.

This procedure constitutes the basis of the well-known CTMC method, widely applied to

the  study  of  collisions  between  heavy  particles  (Abrines  and  Percival  1966a,b).  The

CTMC  method  has  been  applied  also  to  collisions  involving  light  projectiles,  although

with some concern dictated by the neglecting of quantum mechanical features, thought to

2

(cid:181)
a
be important in this case (Schultz et al. 1992). However, Wannier studies (see also Rost

1994)  suggest  that  the  main  features  of  the  ionization  process,  even  near  the  threshold

energy,  are  still  retained  by  limiting  to  the  classical  picture  in  accordance  with  the

extension  of  the  CTMC  application  to  low  energies  as  discussed  in  Katsonis  and

Varvoglis (1995).

The  analytical  approach,  adopted  by  Wannier  and  followers,  allows  to  have  a  physical

insight of the dynamics of the process, but it does involve several approximations, so as
to  make  one  wonder  how  much  accurate  is  the  quantitative  estimate  of  a

.  The  present

numerical  approach  is  elucidating  this  point,  since  the  equations  solved  here  are  exact.
Further  to  preliminary  investigations  corroborating  the  Wannier  a
ionization  (Katsonis  et  al.  2002b),  we  address  here  the  question  of  the  value  of  a

  value  for  simple

  for

multiple ionization, which is still a matter of discussion (see Gstir et al. 2002).

The precise estimate of threshold laws is more than of academic interest: quite recently,

Pattard and Rost (1999) suggested that most ionization cross sections can be interpolated

with fair accuracy by a simple analytical parameterization, whose form is simply taken as

the  product  of  a  low-energy  part  (given  by  the  Wannier  law)  and  a  high-energy  one,
given  by  a  modified  Born  law  where  the  logarithm  is  discarded  (thus,  s

  1/E).  It  is

  (cid:181)

outside  the  scope  of  the  present  paper  to  explain  how  the  logarithmic  term  must  be

recovered  for  high  energies,  hence  we  refer  the  reader  to  Katsonis et  al.    (2002a).  One

can adapt the scaling function to any particular process by simply assigning the value of a

few parameters: in the form given by Pattard and Rost these parameters are the value of

the  maximum  of  the  cross  section  and  the  energy  at  which  this  maximum  occurs.

Reducing  the  computation  of  the  cross  section  over  the  whole  energy  range  to  the

estimating  only  of  these  parameters  would  be,  of  course,  a  major  improvement  in  the

cases  where  a  large  amount  of  these  data  is  needed.  Most  recently,  a  numerical  two

parameter  formula  based  on  the  Wannier  threshold  and  in  accordance  with  the  Born

approximation has been devised (Katsonis et al. 2003).

It  is  well  known  that  the  CTMC  method  does  not  handle  easily  multi-electron

systems,  since  electron-electron  interactions  cannot  be  treated  satisfactorily  within  the

classical  framework.  Nevertheless,  the  independent  electron  approximation  is  usually

3

done,  in  which  the  target  electrons  interact  with  the  nucleus  and  the  projectile,  but  not

between them. Here we are interested to energies near the threshold, where we will resort

to  this  approximation.  For  Argon,  as  well  as  for  other  heavy  rare  gas  elements,  this

appears to be not too crude an approximation (Katsonis et al. 2002a).

The bound electron position and velocity are initialized according to the microcanonical

distribution.  The  number  of  target  electrons  varies  with  the  number  of  ionizations;  thus

we  have  initialized  one  electron  when  we  wished  to  study  single  ionization,  two  for

double  ionization,  etc....  The  results  must  then  be  multiplied  by  the  number  of  active

electrons  to  obtain  absolute  cross  sections.  The  mass  of  Argon  nucleus  is  so  large  in

comparison with those of the light particles that it stays practically motionless during the

scattering.  Its  equations  of  motions  are  therefore  not  solved.  In  the  CTMC  method  the

probability  for  the  occurrence  of  a  process  is  identified  with  the  fraction  of  useful

trajectories.  This  fraction  is  a  decreasing  function  of  the  number  of  simultaneous

ionizations,  of  the  nuclear  charge  and  of  the  projectile  velocity;  therefore,  the  least

probable  processes  need  a  huge  number  of  runs.  In  this  work  we  do  not  carry  on  an

investigation  of  all  ionization  processes,  and  present  only  results  for  single  and  double

ionization.  An  extended  set  of  investigations  was  carried  on  at  higher  velocities,

including  triple  ionization  and  charge  states  up  to  Neon-like  Ar8+.  Its  results  will  be

presented elsewhere (Katsonis et al. 2003).

An interesting point is raised in connection with the choice of the binding energy of the

electrons:  let  Vn  be  the  total  energy  needed  for  ionizing  n  electrons.  Two  choices  are

possible: the former is to give the first electron a binding energy V1, the second V2 - V1

and so on. This means that one has both tightly and weakly bound electrons. The second

choice treats instead all electrons on equal footing and assigns a binding energy Vn/n to

each of them. It has been pointed out previously (Katsonis et al. 2002a) that whenever the

valence electrons are part of the same configuration the latter option is prevailing, being

closer  to  some  theoretical  models  of  ionization  based  on  statistical  distribution  of

projectile  energy.  Both  options  have  been  investigated  here.  Ionization  potentials  were

taken from (Moore 1949); they can also be found in table 2 of Gstir et al. (2002).

Threshold  laws  are,  by  definition,  valid  only  over  small  energy  ranges.  This  is  not  a

problem  for  analytical  calculations,  where  the  limit  to  zero  can  always  be  taken,  but

4

raises a serious question for numerical or experimental work. The papers of Rost (1994),

Koslowski et al.  (1987), and Gstir et al.  (2002) have shown that a safe choice for the

width of the threshold region is 1 < E/Vn < 1.1~1.2.

There  is  presently  little  controversy  about  threshold  exponents  for  the  single

ionization  process:  Wannier  theory  predicts  a

  =  1.127  for  neutral  atoms,  slowly

decreasing towards 1 for highly charged ions. Recent experiments (Gstir et al. 2002) tend

to  give  a  slightly  larger  value,  closer  to  1.2.  In  figure  1  we  plot  our  results  for  single

ionization  of  Ar0  and  Ar5+.  Both  curves  can  be  nicely  fitted  with  a  power  law:  the

exponents  are  reproduced  within  the  plots  and  well  agree  with  Wannier  exponents  (the
Wannier exponent for single ionization from Ar5+ is a

 ~ 1.017). The error bars on these

exponents as given by the fitting routine are rather small, but there is a larger uncertainty

due  to  the  precise  definition  of  the  threshold  region  (see  the  discussion  in  the  previous

paragraph). It is interesting to notice about this, that Ar5+ seems to have a larger threshold

region  than  Ar0:  if  we  should  include  higher  energy  points  in  the  Ar0  fit,  the  computed

exponent  would  decrease  noticeably  (around  1.11  by  increasing  the  range  up  to  E/V  =
1.2). On the contrary, a

 does not vary appreciably if we skip the last point in the fitting of

Ar5+.

Double ionization is a more debated argument. Classical phase space arguments predict
)n ,  with  n  (>  1)  number  of  ejected  electrons:  see  the  half-page  paper

that  s

D E(

(Wannier  1955),  the  statistical  approach  of  Russek  (1963),  or  Koslowski  et  al.  (1987).

Experiments suggest that this law is valid for double ionization, but is increasingly less

satisfied  with  the  number  of  ionizations,  the  correct  exponent  being  lesser  than  n

(Koslowski et al. 1987, Gstir et al. 2002). Actually, there appears to be a saturation for n
> 3~4. A value a

 < n is predicted by (Lebius et al. 1989, 1991). On the other hand, values

even larger than  n have been predicted by some other models (Klar and Schlecht 1976,

Grujic 1983).

In figure 2 we show our results for double ionization of Ar0, together with the power-law

fitting. It is remarkable how the two different choices for the initial electron distribution
affect the results. When the electrons are treated all as equal, the a

 = n law is recovered

rather nicely.  On the other hand, when they are assigned different ionization potentials,

5

(cid:181)
the  single-ionization  law  is  found  with  a  good  approximation.  This  result  admits  a

straightforward interpretation, provided the two electrons have fairly different ionization

potentials:  the  double  ionization  process  is  divided  into  two  successive  independent

single  collisions.  In  the  former,  the  projectile  knocks  off  the  least  bound  electron.  This

happens with a high probability, since ionization probability increases with velocity and

the projectile has not yet lost its energy. The actual frequency is therefore regulated by

the  least  probable  process  -  the  inner  shell  ionization  -,  which  follows  the  single-

ionization power law. Indeed, we suggest that this mechanism is perhaps responsible for
the  saturation  of  a

  at  triple  or  higher  ionization,  albeit  this  must  not  be  considered  a

rigorous demonstration, rather a working hypothesis to be possibly confirmed by further

more refined analysis.

Our  CTMC  calculations  confirm  once  more  what  has  been  stated  in  the  past,

namely that the threshold electron impact process can be adequately described within a

purely classical framework. As for multiple ionization, it is shown that they can support
the prediction by the simplest phase space arguments, namely a

 ~ n. This will be useful

for  the  prosecution  of  this  work,  i.e.  the  fitting  of  numerical  cross  sections  with  the

analytical function by Pattard and Rost (1999).

6

References

Abrines R and Percival I C 1966a Proc Phys Soc 88 861

Abrines R and Percival I C 1966b Proc Phys Soc 88 873

Drawin  H  W  and  Katsonis  K  (eds)  1981  Phys  Scr 23  topical  issue  on  "IAEA  Techical

Committee Meeting on Atomic and Molecular Data for Fusion"

Grujic P 1983 J Phys B: At Mol Phys 16 2567

Gstir B et al  2002 J Phys B: At Mol Opt Phys 35 2993

Janev R K and Katsonis K 1987 Nucl Fus  27 1493

Katsonis  K,  Dimitriou  K  and  Siskos  A  2002a  presented  at  the  11th  Conference  on  the

Physics of Highly Charged Ions (Caen)

Katsonis K, Siskos A, Cukier M, Gombert M-M, Humbert D 2002b presented at the 3rd

Intern.  Conf.  on  “Atomic  and  Molecular  Data  and  their  Applications”

(Gatlinburg, Tennesse)

Katsonis K, Sattin F, Dimitriou K, Siskos A 2003 in preparation

Katsonis K and Varvoglis H 1995 J Phys B: At Mol Phys 28 L483

Klar H and Schlecht W 1976 J Phys B: At Mol Phys 10 1699

Koslowski H R, Binder J, Huber B A and Wiesemann K 1987 J Phys B: At Mol Phys 20

Lebius  H,  Huber  B  A,  Koslowski  H  R  and  Wiesemann  K  1989  Jour  Physique  (C1)  50

Lebius H, Koslowski H R, Wiesemann K and Huber B A 1991 Ann Phys (Leipzig) 48

5903

399

103

Moore C H 1949 Atomic Energy Levels (National Bureau of Standards, USA) vol 1

Pattard T and Rost J-M 1999 Phys Scr T80 295

Rost J-M 1994 Phys Rev Lett 72 1998

Russek A 1963 Phys Rev 132 246

Wannier G H 1953 Phys Rev 90 817

Wannier G H 1955 Phys Rev 100 1180

Wigner E P 1948 Phys Rev 73 1002

Schultz D R, Meng L and Olson R E 1992 J Phys B: At Mol Phys  25 4601

7

Figures

Fig.  1.  Single  ionization  of  Argon  (in  arbitrary  units)  versus  normalized  excess  energy.  Top,
ionization of Ar I; bottom, ionization of Ar VI. Fitting power-law curves are also shown.

8

Fig.  2.  Double  ionization  of  neutral  Argon  (in  arbitrary  units)  versus  normalized  excess  energy.
Top,  both  electrons  have  the  same  energy,  equal  to  half  the  total  ionization  potential  V.  Bottom,
the    two  target  electrons  are  given  different  ionization  potentials.  Fitting  power-law  curves  are
also shown.

9

