1

The Interplanetary Magnetic Field and Solar Wind Driven

Magnetospheric Reconfiguration

Eugene Savov

Central Laboratory of Solar-Terrestrial Influences, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences
Acad. G. Bonchev Str., Block 3, Sofia 1113, Bulgaria
E-mail: eugenesavov@mail.orbitel.bg

Abstract:  The  magnetic  disturbances  are  associated  with  electric  currents  as  it  is  well  checked  at

laboratory  room  scales  and  described  by  the  Maxwell’s  equations  of  electromagnetic  field.  The

analysis  of  spacecraft  observations  for  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  failed  to  provide  a  self-

consistent 

three-dimensional  picture  of 

the  solar  wind-magnetosphere  dynamo  generated

magnetospheric  and  ionospheric  current  systems.  The  proposed  solar  wind  and  the  interplanetary

magnetic  field  (IMF)  driven  reconfiguration  of  the  earth’s  magnetosphere  directly  accounts  for  the

observed  magnetic  disturbances.  So  role  of  the  magnetospheric  currents  in  creation  of  the  magnetic

disturbances is reconsidered in accordance with some poorly understood observations. A quantitative

agreement with observations is demonstrated and a laboratory experiment to test the suggested model

of the solar wind/IMF-magnetosphere interaction is described.

PACS:  94.30.-d,  94.30.Ch

magnetic storms and substorms.

Key  words:  solar  wind,  interplanetary  magnetic  field,  magnetosphere,  magnetic  disturbances,

The  solar  wind  and  interplanetary  magnetic  field  (IMF)  produced  geomagnetic  disturbances  are

believed to originate from electric currents flowing in the earth’s ionosphere and magnetosphere. The

lack of carries for the field-aligned current system (Sugiura and Potemra, 1976; Hoffman et al., 1985)

and the ring current (Roeder et al., 1996), the net current between the ionosphere and magnetosphere

(Sugiura and Potemra, 1976), the uncertain three-dimensional (3D) penetration of the magnetopause

boundary  (Siscoe,  1987;  Lundin,  1988;  Heikkila,  1990)  and  generation  and  closure  of  the

magnetospheric  currents  (Akasofu,  1984;  Haerendel,  1990),  all  these  deep  problems  require

introduction  of  new  models  for  explanation  of  the  ambient  space  phenomena.  The  magnetic

reconnection (Dungey, 1961) is the basic paradigm of modern understanding of energy and momentum

transfer  into  the  solar  wind/IMF-magnetosphere  system  (e.g.,  Crooker,  1979;  Kan,  1988;  Nishida,

1988,  1989;  Birn  et  al.,  1997,  2001).  The  magnetic  reconnection  associated  3D  magnetospheric

circulation  between  the  dayside  magnetopause  and  the  magnetospheric  tail  runs  into  a  topological

crisis  (Kennel  et  al.,  1989).  This  confusing  situation  is  mended  by  smaller  scale  reconnection

processes, called percolation reconnection (Kennel et al., 1989; Galeev et al., 1986). The small-scale

processes are unlikely to maintain the self-consistency of the much larger scale one that accounts for

the  global  magnetospheric  convection.  The  threshold  strength  of  the  prolonged  southward  IMF

necessary  to  deepen  the  magnetic  storm  (Russell  et  al.,  1974)  implies  global  character  of  the  solar

wind/IMF-magnetosphere  interaction,  which  is  difficult  to  discuss  in  local  reconnection  terms.  The

2

global nature of this interaction is captured in the proposed magnetic tearing, which simply accounts

for  the  puzzling  storm-substorm  relationship  (Savov,  1998).  Here  the  magnetic  tearing  will  be

discussed as a self-similar and so self-consistent magnetic reconfiguration.

The  transverse  magnetic  disturbances  coincide  with  the  visual  aurora  (e.g.,  Kawasaki  and  Rostoker,

1979).  Large-scale  (>  0.5°)  transverse  magnetic  perturbations,  considered  as  region  1  and  region  2

field-aligned currents, encircle the geomagnetic pole (Iijima and Potemra, 1976). The region 1 current

is  poleward  from  the  region  2,  both  currents  change  direction  in  each  magnetic  local  time  and  the

dayside of region 1 persists for very low (Kp=0) geomagnetic activity (Iijima and Potemra, 1976). The

oval  pattern  of  the  associated  large-scale  transverse  magnetic  disturbance  and  aurora  expands

(contracts)  after  southward  (northward)  IMF  turning  (Bythrow  et  al.,  1984;  Nakai  et  al.,  1986).  The

auroral oval expands about 10 times faster after southward IMF turning than it contracts when the IMF

becomes northward (Nakai et al., 1986).

The  region  1  and  region  2  field-aligned  currents  close  in  ionospheric  areas  having  different

conductivities  due  to  the  local  time  dependence  of  the  solar  UV  ionisation.  Then  what  keeps  the

expanding  and  contracting  oval  pattern  of  field-aligned  currents  stable.  The  pattern  spreads  over  all

local  times,  suggesting  different  ionospheric  loads  for  the  solar  wind-magnetosphere  dynamo.  What

does maintain the oval pattern of these expanding and contracting, having opposite directions and so

mutually repelling, region 1 and region 2 field-aligned current sheets? Why is the expansion faster than

contraction? The 3D closure and generation of the field-aligned  currents  is  hard  to  understand.  Why

does the region 1 current system persist at the dayside during very low geomagnetic activity?

McDiarmid  et  al.  (1978)  reported    “striking  similarity”  between  dawn-dusk  transpolar  profiles  of

magnetic  disturbances  and  electric  fields.  They  considered  the  high  latitude  tilts  of  the  main  field

relative to its unperturbed direction. McDiarmid et al. (1978) found that the sunward or antisunward

direction of the tilt is the same as the direction of the ionospheric convection obtained from the electric

field  measurements.  They  explained  their  findings  in  terms  of  magnetic  line  “foot  dragging”  in  the

conducting  ionosphere  during  steady  state  magnetospheric  convection  between 

the  dayside

magnetopause  and  the  magnetospheric  tail.  Sugiura  (1984)  discovered  very  high  correlation  (0.78  ÷

0.99) between found to be orthogonal magnetic perturbation field and electric field in the field-aligned

current  region.  The  works  other  authors  also  indicate  closely  associated  high  latitude  magnetic

disturbances, electric fields and plasma convection (e.g., Potemra et al., 1984).

To understand the solar wind/IMF-magnetosphere interaction we  consider  first  two  coupling  sources

of magnetic field (Fig. 1) and then the solar wind is added (Fig. 2). Figure 1 shows magnetic attraction

which corresponds to southward IMF-magnetosphere coupling (Savov, 1998). The external field (e.g.,

the IMF) enters the internal one (e.g., the magnetosphere) through its northern polar region. So during

southward  IMF  (magnetic  attraction)  the  magnetic  configuration  expands  and  repels  the  impinging

3

solar  at  inner  L-shells,  thus  creating  the  solar  wind  precipitation  and  the  associated  auroral  oval  at

lower  latitudes  for  larger  periods  of  stronger  southward  IMF.  The  expansion  of  the  magnetospheric

configuration  produces  the  main  phase  Dst  negative  excursion  at  middle  and  low  latitudes  (Savov,

1998). Tailward spreading contractions in the expanded configuration create the near midnight and the

near  earth  substorm  expansion  onsets  (Savov,  1998,  2002).  The  solar  wind  bends  the  configuration

downstream so creating the magnetotail, whose field lines tilt downstream across the polar cap (Fig. 2).

Equatorward from the polar cap the magnetospheric field is likely to bend upstream due to its sheared

3D spiral structure (Savov, 2002, p. 127). The upstream tilted field, equatorward from the downstream

tilted field of the magnetotail, accounts for the observed oval pattern of large-scale transverse magnetic

disturbances, which are usually considered as region 1 and region 2 field-aligned current systems. The

large-scale transverse magnetic disturbances, when added to the nearly vertical main field in the polar

region,  indicate  existence  of  upstream  tilt  belt.  The  field-aligned  current  systems  and  the  enormous

difficulties associated with their 3D generation, closure and electric current carriers identification are

given a secondary role by the proposed origin of the large-scale transverse magnetic disturbances from

magnetic field tilts, which are opposite to the downstream tilted field of the magnetotail. The proposed

magnetic  reconfiguration  accounts  for  most  of  the  magnetic  disturbances  leaving  a  smaller  part  for

magnetospheric currents in accordance with a number of poorly understood observations (e.g., Sugiura

and Potemra, 1976; Hoffman et al., 1985; Savov, 1990; Roeder et al., 1996) that show 10 to 2 times

larger magnetic disturbances than what the identified electric current carriers can provide.

The  tiltward  ionospheric  convection,  i.e.,  the  E×B  plasma  drift,  (McDiarmid  et  al.,  1978),  the  high

correlation  (0.78 ÷ 0.99) between the found to be orthogonal electric fields and magnetic disturbances

in the field-aligned region and also the similarity between the vector plots of the convection and the

magnetic disturbances, the convection and the disturbance fields look parallel or antiparallel (Sugiura,

1984),  all  these  suggest  a  common  mechanism  for  generation  of  the  magnetic  disturbances,  electric

fields and plasma drifts. The configuration of the magnetosphere in the absence of the solar wind and

the IMF forcings is called unperturbed. The shape of the magnetosphere is created from solar wind and

IMF generated reconfiguration lines that continuously tug the main field lines from their unperturbed

direction.  The  reconfiguration  lines  generate  electric  fields  and  drive  the  ionospheric  convection

tiltward  (Savov,  2002,  p.  139),  thus  creating  the  closely  associated  magnetic  disturbances,  electric

fields and ionospheric convection.

Figures  1  and  2  show  the  solar  wind  and  IMF  driven  magnetospheric  reconfiguration,  which  simply

produces  the  transverse  magnetic  disturbances.  The  main  field  self-similarly  and  so  self-consistently

reconfigures  due  to  the  applied  stresses  (the  solar  wind  and  the  IMF).  In  this  way  it  tilts  from  its

unperturbed  direction  and  so  creates  the  oval  pattern  of  large-scale  transverse  magnetic  disturbances

and auroral precipitation. The southward (northward) IMF and the earth’s magnetosphere couple like

two attracting (repelling) sources of magnetic field (Savov, 1998), so creating the observed expansion

(contraction)  of  the  auroral  oval  and  the  associated  oval  pattern  of  large-scale  transverse  magnetic

4

disturbances, which are likely to originate from upstream main field tilts, appearing equatorward from

the downstream tilted field of the magnetotail. The ionospheric roots of the magnetotail field lines are

tilted downstream and so the magnetospheric field lines around those of the tail will tilt upstream, in

accordance  with  the  obtained  from  Iijima  and  Potemra  (1976)  oval  pattern  of  large-scale  transverse

magnetic  disturbances,  surrounding  the  northern  geomagnetic  pole  at  ionospheric  altitudes.  The

spacecraft obtained large-scale transverse magnetic disturbances (e.g., Fig. 4 of Zanetti et al., 1984),

when added to the nearly vertical undisturbed field of the polar region, indicate downstream tilts across

the both polar caps (the areas in which the northern and southern parts (lobes) of the magnetotail are

rooted) and opposite (upstream) tilts around them. It is shown that the ionosphere convects tiltward in

accordance  with  the  expansion  and  contraction  of  the  magnetosphere,  and  the  northward  IMF

produced contraction (Fig. 3) accounts for the observed high latitude near noon sunward convection,

due to the sunward main field tilt in the local noon sector of the contracted configuration (Savov, 2002,

p. 147).

The IMF enters in the northern dayside cusp region and expands the magnetic configuration as shown

in  Figure  1.  The  puzzling  findings  that  magnetic  substorms  weaken  rather  than  enhance  magnetic

storm  (Iyemori  and  Rao,  1996)  and  the  main  phase  Dst  decrease  “well  before”  the  first  main  phase

substorm  expansion  onset  (McPherron,  1997)  are  directly  explained  with  the  IMF  driven  expansion

and  contraction  of  the  magnetic  configuration  (Savov,  1998).  The  magnetic  substorm  expansion  is

viewed as an outward (tailward) spreading contraction in the southward IMF expanded configuration.

This explains the poorly understood near earth source of the substorm expansion onset,  indicated  by

the onset initiation with the brightening of the most equatorward auroral arc. The absence of magnetic

activities in the magnetotail before the auroral onset suggests substorm activity beginning first near the

Earth and later in the mid-tail (Lui et al., 2000).

The  persistence  of  the  expanded  configuration  will  account  for  the  observed  longer  time  of  auroral

oval  contraction  after  northward  IMF  turning  than  its  expansion  after  southward  IMF  reversal.  The

direct  southward  (the  indirect  northward)  IMF  entry  through  the  northern  dayside  cusp  region  will

create  faster  expansion  (slower  contraction)  of  the  magnetic  configuration  and  the  auroral  oval.  The

multiscale  expansions  and  contractions  of  the  magnetosphere  create  magnetic  storms  and  substorms

(Savov,  1998).  The  proposed  model  of  the  solar  wind/IMF  –  magnetosphere  interaction  can  be

experimentally  tested  as  described  in  Fig.  4.  The  model  predicts  that  the  field,  which  simulates  the

IMF, will expand (contract) the simulated magnetosphere and artificial auroral oval during attraction

(repulsion) between the two magnetic coils (Fig.4). The expansion will be faster than the contraction.

The average distance to the dayside magnetopause is about 10 Earth radii (10 RE). The IMF enters the

magnetosphere through its northern dayside cusp region (Savov, 1998). Then the entering southward

IMF is nearly perpendicular to a surface encircled by a contour a having radius of about 10 RE. The

flux  of  the  southward  IMF  Bz=−5  nT  component  through  this  surface  is  five  times  larger  than  the

5

magnetic flux produced from field having strength 100 nT through a contour having a radius of 1 RE.

The  latter  magnetic  flux  will  create  the  global  low  latitude  depression  of  the  geomagnetic  field,

corresponding  to  a  magnetic  storm  of  magnitude  Dst=−100  nT.  Hence  the  southward  IMF  flux  entry

could expand the magnetospheric configuration as shown in Fig. 1 and thus to account directly for the

storm-time Dst negative excursion of the geomagnetic field.

The  quantitative  assessment  of  the  magnetic  storm  associated  southward  IMF  flux  entry  into  the

magnetosphere  is  in  agreement  with  observations,  thus  confirming  the  proposed  magnetic

reconfiguration.    The  magnetosphere  expands  (contracts)  for  southward  (northward)  IMF  so

accounting for the expansion (contraction) of the auroral oval and the coincident oval pattern of large-

scale  transverse  magnetic  disturbances  and  also  for  the  creation  of  magnetic  storms  and  substorms

(Figs. 1-3).  The electrically charged particles enter the disturbed regions of the magnetosphere and so

create  the  field-aligned  and  ring  currents.  Hence  the  magnetospheric  currents  and  the  magnetic

disturbances  they  generate  turn  to  be  secondary  to  the  proposed  magnetic  reconfiguration  created

magnetic  disturbances  (Figs.  1,2).  Then  the  magnetic  disturbances  generated  from  these  currents  are

likely to be smaller than their source the initial magnetic disturbances created from the solar wind and

the IMF driven global magnetic reconfiguration (Figs. 1,2). In this way the poorly understood and so

usually  neglected  observations  of  lack  of  current  carriers  for  the  field-aligned  and  the  ring  currents

(Sugiura and Potemra, 1976; Hoffman et al., 1985; Savov, 1990; Roeder et al., 1996) are explained.

The unusually long growth phase of an isolated magnetic substorm, preceded by a period of a steady

northward  IMF  (Lui  et  al.,  1998),  is  explained  with  northward  IMF  produced  contraction  of  the

magnetospheric configuration (Fig. 3). It will take more time for the southward IMF to expand (Figs. 1

and  2)  the  more  contracted  configuration,  created  by  a  long  period  of  steady  northward  IMF.    This

explains  the  observed  puzzling  longer  growth  phase  of  the  isolated  substorm.  The  southward  IMF

expands the magnetosphere, thus creating the growth phase of the substorm, then a partial contraction

in the magnetotail generates the substorm expansion. The longer period of southward IMF generates

the main phase of magnetic storm (Kamide et al., 1977; Gonzalez and Tsurutani, 1987) on which the

strongest substorms will be imposed as greater partial tailward spreading contractions in the expanding

and so less stable configuration (Savov, 1998).

The solar wind and the IMF driven magnetospheric reconfiguration (Figs. 1,2) accounts directly for the

general picture of the solar wind/IMF-magnetosphere interaction and some poorly understood aspects

of  magnetic  storm-substorm  relationship  and  confusing  observations.  The  generated  magnetic

reconfiguration lines are likely to create the observed closely associated magnetic disturbances, electric

fields, plasma convection, precipitation and upflows.

6

REFERENCES

Akasofu,  S.-I.,  The  magnetospheric  currents:  An  introduction.  -  In:  Magnetospheric  Currents,
Geophys. Monogr. Ser., 28, T.A. Potemra, ed., AGU, Washington, D.C., 1984, 29-48.
Birn,  J.,  M.  Hesse,  and  K.  Schindler,  Theory  of  magnetic  reconnection  in  three  dimensions.  -  Adv.

Space Res., 19, No.12, 1997, pp. 1763-1771.

Birn, J., J. F. Drake, M. A. Shay, B. N. Rogers, R. E. Denton, M. Hesse, M. Kuznetsova, Z. W. Ma, A.
Bhattacharjee, A. Otto, and P. L. Pritchett, Geospace environment modeling (GEM) magnetic
reconnection challenge. - Journal of Geophysical Research, 106, 2001, 3715-3719.
Bythrow,  P.F.,  T.A.  Potemra  and  L.J.  Zanetti,  Variation  of  the  auroral  Birkeland  current  pattern
associated  with  the  north-south  component  of  the  IMF.  -  In:  Magnetospheric  Currents,
Geophys. Monogr. Ser., 28, T.A. Potemra, ed., AGU, Washington, D.C., 1984, pp. 131-136.

Crooker, N. U., Dayside merging and the cusp geometry. - Journal of Geophysical Research, 84, 1979,

951-959.

Egeland, A., Kristian Birkeland: The man and the scientists. - In: Magnetospheric Currents, Geophys.

Monogr. Ser., 28, T.A. Potemra, ed., AGU, Washington, D.C., 1984, pp. 1-16.

Galeev,  A.A.,  M.M.  Kuznetsova  and  L.M.  Zelenyi,  Magnetopause  stability  threshold  for  patchy

reconnection. - Space Sci. Rev., 44, 1986, 1-41.

Gonzalez, W. D., and B. T. Tsurutani, Criteria of interplanetary parameters causing intense magnetic

storms (Dst< − 100 nT). - Planet. Space Sci., 35, 1987, 1101-1109.

Haerendel,  G.,  Field-aligned  currents  in  the  Earth's  magnetosphere.  -  In:  Physics  of  Magnetic  Flux
Ropes,  Geophys.  Monogr.  Ser.,  58,  C.T.  Russell,  E.R.  Priest,  and  L.C.  Lee,  eds.,  AGU,
Washington, D.C., 1990, pp. 539-553.

Heikkila, W.J., Magnetic reconnection, merging and viscous interaction in the magnetosphere. - Space

Sci. Rev., 53, 1990, 1-44.

Hoffman, R.A., M. Sugiura, and N.C. Maynard, Current carriers for the field-aligned current system. -

Adv. Space Res., 5, No.4, 1985, pp. 109-126.

Iijima, T., and T.A. Potemra, The amplitude distribution of the field-aligned currents at northern high

latitudes observed by Triad. - J. Geophys. Res., 81, 1976, 2165-2174.

Iyemori, T., and D. R. K. Rao, Decay of the Dst field of geomagnetic disturbance after substorm onset
and its implication to storm-substorm relation. - Ann. Geophys., 14, 1996, 608-618.
Kamide,  Y.,  P.  D.  Perrault,  S.  -I.  Akasofu,  and  J.  D.  Winninggham,  Dependence  of  substorm
occurrence probability on the interplanetary magnetic field and on the size of the auroral oval.
- J. Geophys. Res., 82, 1977, 5521-5527.

Kan, J.R., A theory of patchy and intermittent reconnections for magnetospheric flux transfer events. -

J. Geophys. Res., 93, 1988, 5613-5623.

Kawasaki, K., and G. Rostoker, Auroral motions and magnetic variations associated with the onset of

auroral substorms. - J. Geophys. Res., 84, 1979, 7113-7122.

Kennel,  C.F.,  F.V.  Coroniti,  S.L.  Moses,  and  L.M.  Zelenyi,  Dynamics  of  Mars'  magnetosphere.  -

Geophys. Res. Lett., 16, 1989, No.8, 915-918.

Lui,  A.  T.  Y.,  D.  J.  Williams,  R.  W.  McEntire,  S.  Ohtani,  L.  J.  Zanetti,  W.  A.  Bristow,  R.  A.
Greenwald, P. T. Newell, S. P. Christon, T. Mukai, K. Tsuruda, T. Yamamoto, S. Kokubun,
H.  Matsumoto,  H.  Kojima,  T.  Murata,  D.  H.  Fairfield,  R.  P.  Lepping,  J.  C.  Samson,  G.
Rostorker, G. D. Reeves, A. L. Rodger, and H. J. Singer, Multipoint study of a substorm on
Februray 9, 1995. - J. Geophys. Res., 103, 1998, 17,333-17,343.

Lui, A. T. Y., K. Liou, P. T. Newell, C. -I. Meng, S. Ohtani, R. W. McEntire, N. J. Fox, R. P. Lepping,
W.  R.  Paterson,  J.  B.  Sigwarth,  L.  A.  Frank,  S.  Kokubun,  G.  K.  Parks,  T.  Moretto,  and  K.
Yumoto,  Conjunction  of  tail  satellites  for  substorm  study:  ISTP  event  of  1997  January  2.  -
Geophys. Res. Lett., 27, 2000, 1831-1834.

Lundin,  R.,  On  the  magnetospheric  boundary  layer  and  solar  wind  energy  transfer  into  the

magnetosphere. - Space Sci. Rev., 48, 1988, 263-320.

McDiarmid,  I.  B.,  J.  R.  Burrows,  and  M.  D.  Wilson,  Comparison  of  magnetic  field  perturbations  at
high  latitudes  with  charged  particles  and  IMF  measurements.  -  J.  Geophys.  Res.  83,  1978,
681-688.

McPherron, R. L., The role of substorms in the generation of magnetic storms. - In: Magnetic Storms,
Geophysical Monograph, 98, B. T. Tsurutani, W. D. Gonzalez, Y. Kamide, and J. K. Arballo,
eds., AGU, Washington, D. C., 1997, 131-147.

7

Nakai, H., Y. Kamide, D.A. Hardy, and M.S. Gussenhoven, Time scales of expansion and contraction

of the auroral oval. - J. Geophys. Res., 91, 1986, 4437-4450.

Nishida, A., Critical issues in the solar wind magnetosphere coupling and magnetotail dynamics. - In:
STEP,  proceedings  of  SCOSTEP  SYMPOSIUM,  the  XXVII  COSPAR  MEETING,  Helsinki,
Finland, July 23, 1988, J.G. Roederer, ed., SCOSTEP Secretariat, University of Illinois, 1406
W. Green Street, Urbana, Illinois, 61801, USA, 1988, pp. 31-51.

Nishida, A., Can random reconnection on the magnetopause produce the low latitude boundary layer? -

Geophysical Research Letters, 16, 1989, 227-230.

Potemra,  T.  A.,  L.  J.  Zanetti,  P.  F.  Bythrow,  A.  T.  Y.  Lui,  and  T.  Iijima,  By-dependent  convection
patterns during northward interplanetary magnetic field. - J. Geophys. Res., 89, 1984, 9753-
9760.

Roeder, J.L., J.F. Fennell, M.W. Chen, M. Schulz, M. Grande, and S. Livi, CRRES observations of the
composition of the ring-current ion populations. - Adv. Space. Res., 17, No.10, 1996, pp. 17-
24.

Russell, C.T., R.L. McPherron, and R.K. Burton, On the cause of geomagnetic storms. - J. Geophys.

Res., 79, 1974, 1105-1109.

Savov,  E.,  Small-scale  field-aligned  currents  in  the  winter  cusp  region  under  quiet  geomagnetic

conditions. – Compt. rend. Acad. bulg. Sciences, 43, No. 6, 1990.

Savov, E., On the magnetic storm-substorm relationship. - Bulg. Geophys. J., 24, Nos. 3/4, 1998, pp.

39-49.

Savov, E., Theory of Interaction the Simplest Explanation of Everything. - Geones Books, 2002.
Siscoe,  G.L.,  The  magnetospheric  boundary.  -  In:  Physics  of  Space  Plasmas,  SPI  Conference
Proceedings  and  Reprint  Series,  7,  T.  Chang,  G.B.  Crew  and  J.R.  Jasperse,  eds.,  Scientific
Publishers, Inc., Cambridge, MA, 1987, pp. 3-78.

Sugiura M., and T.A. Potemra, A net field aligned current observed by Triad. - J. Geophys. Res., 81,

1976, 2155-2164.

Sugiura, M., A fundamental magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling mode involving field-aligned currents

as deduced from DE-2 observations. - Geophys. Res. Lett., 11, 1984, 877-880.

Zanetti,  L  .J.,  W.  Baumjohann,  T.  A.  Potemra,  and  P.  F.  Bythrow,  Three-dimensional  Birkeland-
ionospheric  current  system,  determined  from  MAGSAT.  -  In:  Magnetospheric  Currents,
Geophysical  Monograph,  28,  T.  A.  Potemra,  ed.,  AGU,  Washington,  D.  C.,  1984,  pp.  123-
130.

FIGURE CAPTIONS

Fig. 1. The magnetic lines of force enter the northern magnetic pole and exit from the southern pole of

every  magnetic  configuration  (the  thick  line  arrows).  Two  sources  of  magnetic  field  meet  their

opposite poles. The external field, e.g. the southward IMF, enters directly the magnetic configuration

through  its  northern  polar  region.  Then  the  configuration  expands  as  its  reconfiguration  lines  move

poleward (the dashed arrows) and tear near the magnetic equator (the dashed curve). The field of the

expanded  configuration  strengthens  poleward  and  weakens  equatorward,  thus  accounting  for  the

8

general  picture  of  the  solar  wing/IMF-magnetosphere  interaction  and  the  puzzling  magnetic  storm-

substorm  relationship.  The  solar  wind  is  repelled  at  inner  (outer)  lines  in  the  expanded  (contracted)

configuration, thus creating expanding (contracting) auroral oval, larger (smaller) magnetotail and   Dst

decrease  (increase)  and  also  high  (low)  latitude  increase  (decrease)  of  the  strength  of  the  vertical

geomagnetic  field  component  near  the  auroral  region.  The  magnetic  configuration  reconfigures  self-

similarly  and  so  self-consistently  by  expansions  and  contractions,  which  depending  on  their  scales

create magnetic storms and substorms.

Fig. 2. The impinging solar wind (SW) creates the downstream tilted lines of the magnetotail and the

upstream tilt belt equatorward from them, consisting of upstream tilted main field lines. The solar wind

particles are repelled at inner lines in the more expanded configuration and so the magnetotail becomes

larger and the boundaries of the auroral precipitation shift equatorward. The upstream tilt belt and the

auroral  oval  move  equatorward  with  the  expansion  of  the  magnetosphere  during  southward  IMF

because then the magnetotail becomes larger (Fig. 1). The increase of the magnetospheric expansion

during a longer period of stronger southward IMF (Fig. 1) will produce directly the beginning of the

magnetic storm main phase Dst decrease before the first main phase substorm expansion onset. Later,

in  agreement  with  the  poorly  understood  observations  of  Iyemori  and  Rao  (1996),  substorms  as

tailward  spreading  contractions  in  the  magnetosphere,  will  decrease  the  global  magnetospheric

expansion  and  thus  weaken  the  magnetic  storm.  The  decrease  of  magnetic  configuration  expansion

after northward IMF turning will lead to upstream tilt belt and auroral oval contraction, and also to the

observed Dst increase during the recovery phase of the magnetic storm.

Fig. 3. The external field, e.g., the northward IMF, enters indirectly through the northern polar region

of  the  magnetic  configuration  and  winds  up  3D  spirally  into  it.  The  configuration  contracts,  thus

9

repelling the solar wind at outer lines (the dashed curve), so creating the observed greater distance to

the dayside magnetopause and the contraction of the auroral oval after northward IMF turning. More

The  configuration  becomes  more  contracted  during  a  longer  period  of  a  stronger  northward  IMF.

Afterwards it will take more time for the southward IMF to expand this configuration and so a longer

growth phase for an isolated substorm will be produced in agreement with the puzzling observations of

Lui et al. (1998).

Figure. 4. Experimental test for the proposed magnetospheric reconfiguration to the IMF and the

impinging solar wind. Electrons shown by the three arrows impinge on the magnetic configuration B),

generated by the magnetic coil A), which is inserted into the sphere C) that is coated with a fluorescent

paint. The magnetic poles of the field created from the coil A) are put on one straight line with the

magnetic poles of the field generated from the secondary coil D), which is connected to a circuit

containing rheostat R) and the direct current source U). The velocity of the electrons is parallel to the

equatorial plane of the magnetic field configuration B), produced by the coil A). The field from the

magnetic coil D) simulates the interplanetary magnetic field, whose crucial importance for the

geomagnetic phenomena was not known when the famous Birkeland terrella experiment (e.g.,

Egeland, 1984) was performed at the end of nineteenth century. The suggested magnetic

reconfiguration (Figs. 1-3) predicts that the obtained artificial auroral oval should expand (contract)

when the magnetic configurations generated by the two coils meet their opposite (same) magnetic

poles.

