 
 
 
PARIS BETA 
 
Study of Requirements and Mission Definition for 
Bistatic Altimetry 
 
Starlab, Astrium, CLS, GMV, IEEC, Ifremer 
ESA/ESTEC Contract No. 15083/01/NL/MM 
 
 
 

 
Mesoscale Ocean Altimetry Requirements 
and Impact of GPS-R measurements for 
Ocean Mesoscale Circulation Mapping 
 
 
Technical Note Extract from the PARIS-BETA ESTEC/ESA Study 
ESTEC Technical Officer: Pierluigi Silvestrin 
 
Written by 
P.Y. Le Traon and G. Dibarboure (CLS), G. Ruffini (Starlab), 
E. Cardellach (IEEC) 
  
Contact: Giulio@starlab-bcn.com  
 
Originally Produced 
January 2001 
Released, Dec 2002 

EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY REPORT 
CONTRACT REPORT 
The work described in this report was done under ESA contract. 
Responsibility for the contents resides in the author or organisation that prepared it. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
1  Introduction: the PARIS BETA study ....................................................... 3 
2  What did we learn from altimetry?.......................................................... 4 
3  Requirements for sea level measurements............................................... 7 
4  Review of on-going and planned altimetric missions ................................ 14 
5  GPS-R Impact Study: Introduction ....................................................... 16 
6  Simulation of the GPS sampling and noise characteristics ........................ 16 
7  Methods ........................................................................................... 18 
8  Results ............................................................................................. 20 
9  Formal mapping errors ....................................................................... 25 
10  Conclusions .................................................................................... 28 
11  References ..................................................................................... 29 
 
 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  2 

 
1  Introduction: the PARIS BETA study 
 
PARIS-Beta, a Starlab lead ESA project with Astrium, CLS, GMV, IEEC, Ifremer as 
sub-contractors  (2001-2002),  is  part  of  the  ongoing  European  (ESA)  effort  to 
demonstrate  the  potential  for  a  novel  class  of  Earth  Observation  measurements 
based  on  GNSS-R.  GNSS-R  is  a  highly  innovative  EO  technology,  which  can 
provide  on  a  long-term  basis  much  needed  and  unique  data  products  with 
excellent coverage and resolution and at low cost. The underlying principle of this 
technology is the use of reflected signals originating from sources of opportunity 
to  infer  properties  of  the  ocean  or  other  reflecting  surfaces.  GNSS-R  is  a  multi-
static  radar  system  in  which  only  the  receivers  need  to  be  deployed---the 
emitters already operating for other purposes. 
 
In the framework of the PARIS Beta project, fundamental milestones have been 
reached  for  the  definition  of  future  GNSS-R  (Global  Navigation  Satellite  System 
signal  Reflections)  altimetry  missions  (the  PARIS  concept).  The  most  important 
one  is  the  confirmation  of  the  significant  impact  that  GNSS-R  data  can  have  on 
mesoscale oceanography, as we discuss here. 
 
PARIS-Beta has performed a feasibility analysis of spaceborne GNSS-R altimetry. 
GNSS-R  altimetry  (PARIS)  hinges  on  the  availability  of  code  and  phase  pseudo-
range  measurements  from  both  direct  and  reflected  GNSS  signals  (the  first 
provide  the  foundation  for  GNSS  navigation).  The  project  sought  to  carefully 
define the user requirements and confront them with technology limitations. This 
process included a careful analysis of technology feasibility, simulation of GNSS-
R altimetric data, algorithm development and impact studies both through simple 
averaging  of  the  data  and  through  assimilation  into  an  advanced  mesoscale 
ocean  circulation  model--both  with  very  encouraging  results.  The  study  also 
included preliminary mission analysis, instrument concept and ground processing 
work  packages.  An  important  achievement  of  the  study  has  been  the 
development of a (raw data) Level 0 (ocean surface) GNSS-R simulator and the 
development  of  a  signal  processor  for  GNSS-R  space  applications,  enabling  the 
study of the characteristics of the reflected signal. This project has also benefited 
(and vice versa) from the results of the parallel project OPPSCAT 2, dedicated to 
understanding GNSS-R reflectometry applications 
 
Sea level measurements are an essential component of a global ocean observing 
system.  They  are  also  crucial  for  most  of  the  operational  applications  of 
oceanography  (e.g.  offshore  and  coastal  applications,  marine  safety,  Navies 
applications).    Sea  level  measurements  as  derived  from  GPS  signals  may 
complement  the  existing  of  future  systems  based  on  satellite  altimetry 
(TOPEX/POSEIDON,  ERS-1/2  and  later  on  Jason-1  and  ENVISAT).    They  can,  in 
particular, significantly improve the space/time sampling of the ocean, which will 
allow  a  better  description  of  the  ocean  mesoscale  circulation.  This  is  crucial  for 
the operational applications of oceanography as well as for a better description of 
the ocean for climate studies. 
 
In this report, we first briefly review the contribution of satellite altimetry to the 
mesoscale  oceanography.  We  then  summarise  recent  results  obtained  on  the 
mapping  capabilities  of  existing  and  future  altimeter  missions.  From  these 
analyses,  refined  requirements  for  mesoscale  ocean  altimetry  (in  terms  of 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  3 

space/time  sampling  and  accuracy)  are  derived.  A  review  of  on-going  and 
planned  altimetric  missions  is  then  performed  and  we  analyse  how  these 
configurations match the user requirements. Then we will describe the simulation 
approach and impact analysis of GPS-R data. 
 
 
2  What did we learn from altimetry? 
 
Satellite  altimetry  has  made  a  unique  contribution 
to  observing  and 
understanding mesoscale variability (see Le Traon and Morrow, 2000 for a recent 
review).  Altimeter  data  analyses  have  provided,  for  the  first  time,  a  global 
description of the eddy energy and its seasonal/interannual variations. The time 
and  space  scales  of  the  mesoscale  circulation  have  been  characterized.  The 
eddy/mean  flow  interactions  have  also  been  mapped  and  provide  an  important 
ingredient  for  understanding  the  western  boundary  current  and  ACC  dynamics. 
Satellite  altimetry  has  also  allowed  a  synoptic  mapping  of  large  eddies  (e.g. 
Agulhas  eddies)  which  is  useful  to  better  understand  the  role  of  eddies  in 
transporting  mass,  heat,  salt  and  nutrients.  All  these  studies  provide  a  good 
means of testing and validating models and theories. 
 
Most of these studies have used GEOSAT, T/P or ERS altimeter data separately.  
The  contribution  of  the  merging  of  T/P  and  ERS  is,  however,  well  illustrated  by 
Ducet  et  al.  (2000)  and  Ducet  and  Le  Traon  (2001).    The  sea  level  and  the 
velocity  fields  were  mapped  globally;  this  yielded  a  characterization  of the Eddy 
Kinetic  Energy  (EKE),  anisotropy  and  eddy  mean  flow  interactions  with  a 
resolution never achieved before (see figures 1 and 2). 

 
Figure  1:  Rms  of  sea  level  variations  derived  from  the  combination  of  T/P  and 
ERS-1/2  over  a  5  year  period  (Ducet  et  al.,  2000).    The  map  presents  a  very 
detailed  description  presumably  never  before  achieved  at  a  global  scale.  Units 
are cm. 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  4 

 
Figure 2: Eddy Kinetic Energy derived from the combination of T/P and ERS-1/2 
over  a  5  year  period  (Ducet  et  al.,  2000).  Units  are  cm2/s2.  (ranging  from  0-
300). 

 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  5 

 
Figure  3:  Formal  sea  level  mapping  error  (in  percentage  of  signal  variance)  for 
T/P,  ERS  and  the  combination  of  T/P  and  ERS  (Ducet  et  al.,  2000).  Realistic 
space  and  time  scales  of  mesoscale  variability  are  taken  into  account  in  the 
calculation. [scale ranges from 0-50]. 

 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  6 

 
Ducet et al. (2000) showed that the sea level can be mapped with an accuracy of 
about 10-20% of the signal variance (see figure 3) and the velocity field with an 
accuracy  varying  from  20%  to  40%  of  the  signal  variance  from  low  to  high 
latitudes. These results were derived from the comparison of maps (and mapping 
errors)  derived  from  T/P  and  ERS  alone  and  from  the  comparison  with  WOCE 
drifter data (see Ducet et al., 2000 for a detailed discussion). They are consistent 
with those derived from formal error analyses (see below). 
 
 
 
3  Requirements for sea level measurements   
 
3.1  Main requirements for climate and mesoscale applications 
 
The usually agreed main requirement for future altimeter missions is that at least 
two  (and  preferably  three)  altimeter  missions  with  one  very  precise  long-term 
altimeter  system  are  needed  (e.g.  Koblinsky  et  al.,  1992).  The  long-term 
altimeter  system  is  supposed  to  provide  the  low  frequency  and  large  scale 
climatic  signals  and  to  provide  a  reference  for  the  other  altimeter  missions.    It 
requires a series of very precise (centimetre level) and inter-calibrated missions.  
TOPEX/POSEIDON  and  later  on  the  Jason  series  have  been  designed  to  meet 
these  objectives.  The  role  of  the  other  missions  is  to  provide  the  higher 
wavenumbers  and  frequencies  and,  in  particular,  the  mesoscale  signal,  which 
cannot  be  well  observed  with  a  single  altimeter  mission.  This  does  not  require 
precise altimeter systems as most of the altimetric errors (in particular the orbit 
error)  are  at  long  wavelengths  and  they  do  not  impact  significantly  the 
mesoscale signal.  
 
Such  a  requirement  for  future  altimeter  missions  is  partly  based  on  several 
studies on the sampling characteristics of single and multiple altimeter missions.  
Le  Traon  and  Dibarboure  (1999)  (hereafter  LD99)  and  Le  Traon  et  al.  (2001) 
(hereafter  LDD01)  have,  in  particular,  quantified  the  contribution  of  single  and 
multiple  altimeter  missions  for  the  mapping  of  mesoscale  variability.      In  the 
following  section,  we  summarise  the  main  findings  of  these  studies  as  well  as 
some  new  results  we  obtained  more  recently.  These  studies  are  then  used  to 
provide refined requirements for mesoscale applications.   
 
 
3.2  Summary of LDD99 and LDD01 studies 
 
LD99 have quantified the mesoscale mapping capability when combining various 
existing or future altimeter missions in terms of sea level anomaly (SLA) (figure 
4) and zonal (U) and meridional (V) velocity.  Their main results are as follows: 
 
•  The GEOSAT (or GEOSAT Follow On) 17-day orbit provides the best sea level 
and  velocity  mapping 
for  the  single-satellite  case.  The  T/P+Jason-1 
(interleaved  T/P  -  Jason-1  tandem  orbit  scenario)  provides  the  best  mapping 
for  the  two-satellite  case.  There  is  only  minor  improvement,  however,  with 
respect to the T/P+ERS (or Jason-1+ENVISAT) scenario.   

 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  7 

•  There  is  a  large  improvement  in  sea  level  mapping  when  two  satellites  are 
included.  For  example,  compared  to  T/P  alone,  the  combination  of  T/P  and 
ERS  has  a  mean  mapping  error  reduced  by  a  factor  of  4  and  a  standard 
deviation reduced by a factor of  5.    

   
•  The velocity field mapping is more demanding in terms of sampling. The U and 
V  mean  mapping  errors  are  two  to  four  times  larger  than  the  SLA  mapping 
error.  Only  a  combination  of  three  satellites  can  provide  a  velocity  field 
mapping error below 10% of the signal variance.    

Mean error

Standard deviation

 

22

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

T/P

GEOSAT

ERS

 T/P ERS

T/P JASON

T/P
GEOSAT

T/P ERS
GEOSAT

T/P ERS
JASON

T/P ERS
GEOSAT
JASON

Figure  4  :  Mean  and  standard  deviation  of  Sea  Level  Anomaly  (SLA)  mapping 
error  for  single  and  multiple  altimeter  missions.    Units  are  in  %  of  signal 
variance.  The  calculation  assumes  a  space  scale  of  150  km,  a  time  scale  of  15 
days and a noise/signal ratio of 2%.  
 
The  LD99  study  was  extended  by  LDD01  who  analysed  the  sea  level  mapping 
capabilities  of  multiple  altimeters  using  the  Los  Alamos  North  Atlantic  high-
resolution  model  (Smith  et  al.,  2000).  Los  Alamos  Model  (hereafter  LAM) 
represents  the  mesoscale  variability  quite  well  and  offered  a  unique  opportunity 
for assessing the mapping capability of multiple altimeter missions.    
 
LDD01  have  shown  that  sea  level  mapping  errors  were  larger  than  the  ones 
derived  from  LD99  formal  error  analysis  (by  a  factor  of  1.5  to  2).  This  was 
mainly due to high frequency signals.  In areas with large mesoscale variability, 
these signals represent 5 to 10% of the total sea level variance (figure 5a) (see 
also  Minster  and  Gennero,  1995)  and  are  associated  with  high  wavenumbers.  
They account for 15 to 20 % of the total velocity variance (figure 5b). In shallow 
and high latitude regions, these high frequency signals account for up to 30-40% 
of  the  total  sea  level  and  velocity  variance;  there,  part  of  these  signals 
correspond to large scale barotropic motions.  

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5a: Contribution of high frequency signals (periods < 20 days) to the total 
sea level variance for the Los Alamos simulation.  
 
 

 
Figure 5b: Contribution of high frequency signals (periods < 20 days) to the total 
zonal velocity variance for the Los Alamos simulation. [scale ranges from 0-0.5]. 

 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  9 

U 
29 / 10.9 

the  mapping  errors  on 

for  all  analysed  configurations 

H 
8 / 4.9 
6.5 / 2.6  23 / 6.9 
4.8 / 1.9  20.2 / 5.6 
4.3 / 1.7  18.9 / 5.1 

LDD01  study  was  recently  extended  to  the  analysis  of  velocity  field  mapping 
capabilities. We also analysed “optimised” three and four satellites configurations 
(three  and  four  interleaved  Jason-1).  To  better  analyse  the  impact  of  the  high 
frequency  signals  on  the  sea  level  and  velocity  mapping,  we  systematically 
the 
computed 
instantaneous fields (as in LDD01) and on 10-day averaged fields. For the latter, 
the  estimated  fields  were  compared  to  the  model  fields  filtered  using  a  Loess 
filter  with  a  cut-off  period  of  16  days  (which  chiefly  corresponds  to  a  10-day 
average).    Results  for  the  T/P+ERS  configuration  are  shown  on  figures  6a  (sea 
level) and 6b (zonal velocity). Results for the different configurations in the Gulf 
Stream area are summarised in table 1. 
 
 
 
T/P + ERS (Jason-1 + ENVISAT) 
T/P+ERS+Jason-1 
Three interleaved Jason-1 
Four interleaved Jason-1 
 
Table  1:  Sea  Level  (H),  zonal  (U)  and  meridional  (V)  velocity  mean  mapping 
error over the Gulf Stream area (34°N-39°N – 70°W-60°W) as derived from the 
simulation using the Los Alamos model fields. Errors expressed in percentage of 
the  total  sea  level  and  velocity  variance  are  given  both  for  “instantaneous”  and 
10-day average signal mapping. 
 
 
 
Compared  to  T/P+ERS,  a  three  or  four  “optimised”  satellite  configuration  will 
allow  a  large  improvement  in  the  description  of  mesoscale  variability.  However, 
to  achieve  a  mapping  accuracy  of  the  total  velocity  field  better  than  15-20%  of 
the  signal  variance,  one  needs  to  resolve  the  high  frequency  and  high 
wavenumber  signals.    This  will  require  a  much  denser  space  and  time  sampling 
(better than 100 km and 10 days). The aliasing of the high frequency signals is 
also  an  important  issue;  thus,  even  if  these  signals  cannot  be  resolved,  one 
needs  to  take  into  account  their  impact  on  lower  frequencies/wavenumbers.  
Note  that  the  large-scale  high  frequency  barotropic  signals  (e.g.  Tierney  et  al., 
2000)  are  likely  to  be  well  resolved  by  an  “optimised”  three  or  four  satellite 
configuration. 
 

V 
40 / 15.4 
29 / 9.7 
21.9 / 6.5 
20.8 / 5.4 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  6a  :  Rms  sea  level  for  the  Los  Alamos  Model  simulation  (upper  figures). 
Rms sea level mapping error for T/P+ERS (lower figures). Left panel corresponds 
to  instantaneous  signal  mapping  error.  Right  panel  corresponds  to  10-day 
average signal mapping error. Units are cm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  6b  :  Rms  zonal  velocity  for  the  Los  Alamos  Model  simulation  (upper 
figures).  Rms  zonal  velocity  mapping  error  for  T/P+ERS  (lower  figures).  Left 
panel correspond to instantaneous signal mapping error. Right panel correspond 
to 10-day average signal mapping error. Units are cm/s. [scale from 0-80]. 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  11 

3.3  Refined requirements for mesoscale applications   
 
From these studies, we can derive refined the following refined requirements for 
mesoscale applications:  
 
1.  The  minimum  requirement  will  be  to  continue  flying  a  two-satellite 
configuration  (after  Jason-1  and  ENVISAT).    It  provides  already  a  good 
representation  of  the  mesoscale  variability  (sea  level  mapping  errors  of  the 
order  of  10%  of  the  signal  variance).    It  cannot  provide,  however,  a 
sufficiently  accurate  estimation  of  the  velocity  field  (e.g.  below  10%  of  the 
signal  variance)  and  will  not  allow  us  to  track  small  eddies  (e.g.  diameter 
below 100 km).  

2.  This  can  be  significantly 

improved  with  an  optimised  three-satellite 
configuration.  Compared  to  Jason-1  and  ENVISAT  (or  T/P+ERS),  such  a 
configuration  should  allow  a  reduction  of  sea  level  and  velocity  mapping 
errors by a factor of about 2 to 3.  It is also likely to partly resolve the large-
scale high frequency barotropic motions.  

3.  To  further  improve  the  mapping  (which  would  be  needed  for  some  of  the 
envisioned scientific and operational applications – see section 3.5), we need 
to  resolve  the  high  frequency  and  high  wavenumber  signals,  i.e.  sample  the 
ocean  with  a  time  sampling  below  10  days  and  100  km.  This  is  likely  to 
require  constellation  of  up  to  six  satellites  and/or  use  different  concepts  for 
satellite altimetry.  

  
This  analysis  only  deals  with  sampling  requirements.  As  far  as  measurement 
errors are concerned, the following requirements can be made:  
 
1.  Assuming  the  Jason  series  continue  to  provide  a  long-term  reference,  the 
additional  measurement  systems  do  not  have  to  provide  very  precise 
measurements.    Results  derived  from  these  systems  will  not  be  sensitive  to 
long wavelengths errors (wavelengths > 1000-2000 km) if the Jason satellites 
are used to constrain the large-scale (climatic) signals.  

2.  Typical amplitude of mesoscale signal is 4 to 8 cm rms in the open ocean and 
20 to 40 cm rms in the high eddy energy regions (see figure 1, noting that in 
low eddy energy regions the mesoscale variability accounts for approximately 
half  of  the  total  sea  level  variability  signal).    A  3  cm  measurement  noise  is 
thus  satisfactory  but  a  smaller  noise  will  allow  a  better  estimation  of  the 
velocity  fields  (i.e.,  sea  level  gradients)  and  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  eddy 
structure.  A  larger  measurement  noise  will  still  be  useful,  however,  for 
mesoscale applications.  .  For a single observation with a noise variance of  ε2, 
the relative mapping error (in %) at the observation location is equal to 100(1- 
Var/(Var+ ε2))  where  Var  is  the  signal  variance.  For  example,  in  low  eddy 
energy regions, an observation with a 6 cm rms measurement noise will yield 
a  relative  mapping  error  of  50%  in  low  eddy  energy  regions  and  4%  in  high 
eddy  energy  regions. Given that the mapping errors with T/P or Jason-1 can 
reach  up  to  70%  of  the  signal  variance  between  tracks,  such  an  observation 
will  provide  a  useful  additional  information  everywhere  if  the  Jason  series  is 
not  complemented  by  other  satellites.  With  Jason-1  and  ENVISAT,  the 
mapping  error  will  be  always  below  20%  of  the  signal  variance  but  the 
additional  information  will  still  very  significantly  reduce  the  mapping  error  in 
high eddy energy regions.  

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  12 

 
For  GPS  signals,  we  will  also  have  to  deal  with  geoid  errors,  as  measurements 
will  not  be  obtained  along  exact  repeat  tracks.    This  additional  source  of  error 
has  to  be  carefully  quantified  (taking  into  account  the  improvement  of  geoid 
models  due  to  altimetry  and  the  CHAMP/GRACE/GOCE  gravimetric  missions).  
Other sources of errors will also have to be precisely quantified (e.g. propagation 
effects).  Of  particular  importance  is  to  establish  the  error  spectrum  and,  in 
particular, the degree of error correlation between individual measurements.  
 
 
3.4  The role of data assimilation 
 
One should note that the best use of high resolution altimetry data will be when 
they are assimilated with in-situ and other remote sensing data into global eddy 
resolving  models  (GODAE)  (and  nested  shelf/coastal  models).    This  will  open  a 
large  range  of  scientific  and  operational  applications  (see  section  3.5).  Data 
assimilation  is  a  powerful  means  for  a  dynamic  interpolation  of  data  and  may 
alter the spatial and temporal requirements (e.g. using a model forecast as an a 
priori  knowledge  instead  of  Climatology).    Demonstrating  the  value  of  data 
assimilation  is  the  central  objective  of  GODAE,  the  Global  Ocean  Data 
Assimilation  Experiment  (Smith  and  Lefebvre,  1997;  Le  Traon  et  al.,  1999).  
Providing general requirements from a data assimilation perspective is, however, 
today  a  very  difficult  issue.    Results  are  not  always  consistent  and  are  highly 
dependant  on  the  data  assimilation  method  and  the  model  used  to  assess  the 
contribution  of  altimeter  data.  Although  data  assimilation  techniques  should  be 
ultimately  used  to  determine  the  impact  of  altimeter  data,  they  are  not  mature 
enough (at least for global eddy resolving models) to provide sufficiently general 
requirements.   
 

the  model  contribution  as  a  dynamic 

The  requirements  presented  in  the  previous  sections  thus  do  not  take  into 
account 
interpolator  of  spare 
measurements.    They  take,  however,  into  account  an  a  priori  knowledge  of  the 
space  and  time  scales  of  the  mesoscale  variability  as  well  as  the  noise 
characteristics. They can be considered as a robust estimation of the contribution 
of the data themselves.  
 
 
3.5  Contribution of high resolution altimetry 
 
Despite all the progress made in the last decade, there is still much to learn from 
altimeter  data  for  mesoscale  variability  studies.    Investigations  that  could  be 
carried out include:  
 
•  More detailed comparisons of altimetry (including comparison of higher order 
statistics such as frequency/wavenumber spectra and Reynolds stresses) with 
eddy resolving models.   

•  Regional  characterization  of  the  3D  frequency/wavenumber  of  sea  level  (and 
velocity)  and  relation  with  forcings  and  dynamics.  Relation  with  turbulence 
theories.  

•  Better characterization of seasonal/interannual variations in eddy energy and 

relation with forcings (mean current instabilities, winds)  

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  13 

•  Phenomenological    (global)  characterization  of  eddies  (eddy  census) :  size, 

rotation, diameter, life time, propagation….Relation with theories and models.    

•  Detailed  dynamical  structure  of  eddies.    Estimation  of  the  vorticity  field  (in 
and out of the eddy), divergence and deformation fields. Use in synergy with 
high  resolution  SST  and  Ocean  Colour  images.  Estimation  of  vertical 
circulation and biogeochemical coupling.  

•  Relation and interaction between eddies and Rossby waves. 
•  Eddy heat fluxes (in combination with SST remote sensing data). Contribution 

•  Eddy  mean  flow  interaction.  Role  of  eddies  on  the  general  circulation  and 

to the total heat fluxes.   

climate.  

    
All these studies will benefit from higher space and time resolution. In particular, 
the  phenomenological  and  dynamical  characterisation  of  eddies  and  the  eddy 
mean flow interaction studies will require a much higher resolution than the one 
we have today (i.e. with two satellites).    
 
Finally  note  that  a  higher  space  and  time  resolution  will  allow  a  much  more 
precise  estimation  of  the  velocity  field  that  will  be  of  great  importance  for  most 
of  the  operational  applications  of  satellite  altimetry  (offshore,  fisheries,  marine 
safety,…).  
 
 
4  Review of on-going and planned altimetric missions 
 
Table  2  below  shows  the  existing  and  future  (i.e.  almost  decided)  altimetric 
missions  (courtesy  A.  Ratier).    As  can  be  seen,  the  post-Jason-1  scenario  is  far 
from  being  satisfactory,  as  a  follow  on  mission  for  ENVISAT  is  not  yet  planned.  
The minimum requirement for mesoscale oceanography is not yet guaranteed. In 
addition as explained above, there is much to learn on mesoscale oceanography 
with  a  better  space/time  sampling.  This  opens  up  interesting  perspective  for 
potential  new  systems  (such  as  GPS  altimetry)  if  the  sampling  and  noise 
characteristics  are  satisfactory.    This  will  be  analysed  in  the  second  part  of  this 
study where the techniques used by LD99 and LDD01 (formal error analysis and 
simulations  with  the  Los  Alamos  model)  will  be  applied  to  quantify  the 
contribution of GPS signals.  
 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  14 

 
Table 2 : Planning of existing and future altimeter missions (courtesy A. Ratier). 
 

 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  15 

 
5   GPS-R Impact Study: Introduction 
 
In this section, the contribution of GPS altimetry for the mapping of ocean mesoscale 
circulation is quantified using the Los Alamos North Atlantic model. The Los Alamos 
model  is  known  to  represent  the  mesoscale  variability  quite  well  and  is  very  well 
suited  to  simulate  the  contribution  of  sea  level  measurements  (Le  Traon  et  al., 
2001).    Model  sea  level  fields  are  sub  sampled  to  simulate  the  typical  space/time 
sampling of GPS altimeter systems.  A realistic measurement noise is added to these 
simulated measurements. We then evaluate how these simulated measurements can 
be  used  to  reconstruct  the  initial  model  reference  fields  depending  on  the  different 
regions  and  dynamical  regimes.    This  is  achieved  using  a  space/time  objective 
mapping  technique  that  takes 
into  account  the  GPS  measurement  noise 
characteristics  and  an  a  priori  information  on  the  space  and  time  scales  of  ocean 
signals.  Formal  sea  level  mapping  errors  (see  Le  Traon  and  Dibarboure,  1999)  are 
also analysed as they provide an estimation of mapping errors that depend only on 
sampling, noise and ocean signal characteristics.   

  

6   Simulation  of 
characteristics 

the  GPS  sampling  and  noise 

 
 
A  typical  space/time  sampling  of  multi-beam  GPS  altimetry  was  used.  It 
corresponds to the GPS reflections at the Earth surface from the September 15, 
2001 GPS constellation that would be received by a single LEO satellite in a 500 
km polar orbit. Given the chosen LEO orbit, this sampling repeats approximately 
every  three  days.  For  this  simulation,  we  only  selected  the  best  six  reflections 
(six beam limitation). Figure 1a shows the corresponding sampling over a 3-day 
period  over  the  whole  North  Atlantic.  Colours  correspond  to  different  incident 
angles.   
 
The measurement errors εGPS for 1 second sampling were taken as:  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

εGPS = 30 cm /(2 cos θ)     
 

 
where  θ  is  the  incidence  angle  (i.e.,  θ  =  0  for  nadir  observations).  This 
corresponds to a PETREL-like mission (with a multi-beam upgrade), i.e. a 500 km 
orbit, antenna gain of 25-28 dB, no dual polarization, complex sampling and one 
bit quantization. In practice, to reduce the number of data points in the mapping 
procedure, a 3-second sampling was used (i.e. approximately every 21 km along 
the pseudo-tracks) and the errors given in (1) were divided by √3.  These errors 
are  represented  on  Figure  1b.    This  yields,  for  example,  an  error  of  12  cm  rms 
for a 45° incidence angle.  
  
 
 
 
 
 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  16 

 
a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  1  :  3-day  sampling  of  the  North  Atlantic  from  one  LEO  GPS  receiver  (6 
beams) and the September 15, 2001 GPS constellation with incidence angle (a) and 
errors for 3-second averages associated to the incident angle (b). Units are degree 
(from 0 to 90) (a) and cm [from 0 to 30] (b). 

 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  17 

7  Methods 
 
The  Los  Alamos  model  (LAM)  sea  level  outputs  were  first  transformed  into  sea 
level  anomaly  data  by  removing  a  three-year  mean  (1993-1995).  They  were 
then  sub-sampled  to  obtain  simulated  GPS  signals  along  the  tracks  shown  on 
figure 1.  A random noise depending on incident angle (see equation 1) was then 
added  to  the  simulated  SLA  data.  Simulated  Jason-1  and  ENVISAT  data  were 
also obtained by sub-sampling the model fields along TOPEX/POSEIDON and ERS 
tracks and assuming a 2 cm rms noise for 1-second average.   
 
The  simulated  data  sets  were  then  used  to  reconstruct  the  SLA  gridded  fields 
using a space-time sub-optimal interpolation method.  The method is detailed in 
Ducet et al. (2000) and Le Traon et al. (2001). It uses the following space (zero 
crossing  of  correlation  function,  ZC)  and  time  (e-folding  time,  ET)  correlation 
scales :  
 

ZC    =  50  +  250  (

)  km  where  Lat  stands  for  latitude,  in 

900
2Lat +  

900

degrees. 

ET = 15 days 

 
These  scales  are  intended  to  represent  typical  space  and  time  scales  of  SLA  as 
they can be observed from altimetry.  The signal mapping (contrary to the formal 
error  estimation)  is  not  much  sensitive,  in  any  case,  to  these  a  priori  choices 
when the constraint from the data is strong.  The estimations are performed on a 
regular grid of 1/10° x 1/10°. For a given grid point, all the observations such as 
(d/ZC)2  +  (T/ET)2  <  1  are  taken  into  account  (d  is  the  distance  between  the 
observation  and  the  grid  point  and  T  is  the  time  difference  between  the 
observation  and  grid  point  date).    Comparison  of  the  reconstructed  fields  with 
the reference model fields (resampled on the regular 1/10° x 1/10° grid) allows 
an  estimation  of  the  sea  level  and  velocity  mapping  error.  The  velocity  errors 
(and  velocity  reference  fields)  were  derived  from  the  sea  level  gradients  (finite 
centred  differences)  through  the  geostrophic  approximation.    In  practice,  the 
comparison was made over a 6-month period (1993) with maps calculated every 
9  days,  i.e.  we  compared  a  total  of  20  maps.  The  calculations  were  done  on  a 
large  area  from  20°N  to  60°N  and  75°W  to  10°W,  i.e.  covering  the  full  North 
Atlantic. 
 
In  addition  to  conventional  altimeter  configurations  with  one  (Jason-1  and 
ENVISAT)  and  two  satellites  (Jason-1+ENVISAT),  a  GPS  only  configuration 
(simulation  1)  and  a  GPS+Jason-1+ENVISAT  configuration  (simulation  2)  were 
analysed.    Simulation  1  allows  us  to  analyze  the  contribution  of  GPS  altimetry 
alone  while  simulation  2  allows  us  to  analyze  the  complementary  of  GPS 
altimetry  with  the  existing  and  future  conventional  altimeter  missions.      It  is, 
indeed, likely that in the coming decade the ocean will be observed at least with 
two  conventional  altimeters  as  it  was  with  TOPEX/POSEIDON  and  ERS-1/2  and 
will be soon with Jason-1 and ENVISAT.    
 
To illustrate the methodology, we show on figure 2a the LAM sea level anomaly 
for  a  given  day.  Figures  2b  and  2c  show  the  corresponding  mapping  errors  for 
the  GPS  and  GPS  +  Jason-1  +  ENVISAT  configurations.    One  can  note  that  the 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  18 

GPS configuration is able to capture the main energetic mesoscale signals. In low 
eddy  energy  regions,  the  errors  are  relatively  larger  because  the  measurement 
noise is much larger than the signal.  There, the mapping errors are close to 100 
%  of  the  signal  variance,  i.e.  no  useful  information  is  brought.    Note,  however, 
that  as  the  noise  level  is  taken  into  account  in  the  analysis,  errors  are  of  a  few 
cm rms only, i.e. part of the noise is filtered out in the mapping procedure (when 
the noise to signal ratio is very large, the estimated field will be close to zero).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  19 

Figure 2a and 2b:  Los Alamos model sea level anomaly field for a given day (a).  
Corresponding  mapping  error  for  the  GPS  configuration  (b).  Scale  from  –20  to 
18.4 cm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  2c:  Corresponding  mapping  error 
configuration.  Units are cm. Scale from –20 to 18.4 cm. 
 
8  Results 
 
 
Mapping  errors  depend  on  many  factors:  sampling  characteristics,  amplitude, 
space  and  time  scales  of  mesoscale  ocean  signals,  relative  energy  of  high 
frequency  signals  and  measurement  noise.  All  these  characteristics  vary 
geographically.  As  a  result,  the  mapping  errors  show  large  and  complex 
geographical variations.  The main effect is, of course, related to the variations in 
eddy energy. To partly remove this effect, the quadratic relative sea level, zonal 
and  meridional  velocity  mapping  errors  (i.e.  the  ratio  of  the  mapping  error 
variance over the ocean signal variance) were also calculated.   
 
Table  1  summarizes  the  results  obtained  for  regions  where  the  rms  sea  level 
variability  is  larger  than  15  cm  rms.  This  allows  us  to  analyze  the  mapping 
capabilities  for  regions  whose  dynamics  are  dominated  by  mesoscale  variability. 
These  are  the  regions  where  we  expect  a  significant  contribution  of  GPS 
altimetry.    

the  GPS+Jason-1+Envisat 

for 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  20 

 

 

Jason-1 

ENVISAT 

GPS 

Jason-1+ENVISAT 

H 

22.1 

12.1 

8.4 

12.6 

GPS+Jason-1+ENVISAT  4.7 

U 

44.1 

34.5 

26.6 

31.1 

20.8 

V 

55.0 

45.1 

33.8 

39.9 

26.4 

 
Table  1:  Sea  Level  (H),  zonal  (U)  and  meridional  (V)  velocity,  all  in  (%).  mean 
mapping  errors  for  regions  with  rms  sea  level  variability  larger  than  15  cm.  
Errors expressed in percentage of the total sea level and velocity variance. 
 

These  results  show  that  in  regions  with  large  mesoscale  variability  GPS  is 
performing better than Jason-1 and almost as well as ENVISAT.  The combination 
of GPS with Jason-1 and ENVISAT should also improve the sea level mapping by 
a factor of about two and the velocity mapping by almost 33%.   
 
This is mainly due to the dense sampling (and, in particular, the high frequency 
sampling) offered by GPS.  In the simulated sampling we used, there are about 6 
measurement  points  every  second,  i.e.  6  times  more  than  for  a  conventional 
altimeter.  The GPS measurement noise variance is, of course, much larger than 
for a conventional altimeter (by a factor of up to 60) but, in high eddy variability 
regions, it remains smaller than the signal variance. An observation with a 10 cm 
rms measurement noise yields a relative mapping error of about 10% in the Gulf 
Stream  area  (where  the  rms  sea  level  variability  is  larger  than  30  cm).    This  is 
smaller  than  the  mapping  error  obtained  from  ENVISAT  and  equivalent  to  the 
mapping error obtained from the combination of Jason-1 and ENVISAT.    
 
Figures  3  and  4  show  the  rms  sea  level  mapping  errors  for  simulations  1  and  2 
respectively.    Figure  3  is  clearly  related  to  the  sampling  characteristics  of  GPS 
(see figure 1a). Errors are large when there is a poor sampling (e.g. near 63°W 
and between 30°N and 40°N). They are also relatively large in low eddy energy 
regions.    This  is  much  improved  when  GPS  data  are  merged  with  Jason-1  and 
ENVISAT.  

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  21 

 
Figures  3  and  4:  Rms  sea  level  mapping  error  for  GPS    (upper  figure), 
GPS+Jason-1+ ENVISAT (lower figure). Scale from –20 to 18.4 cm. 
 
 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  22 

 
Figures 5 and  6 : Rms sea level mapping error for ENVISAT (upper figure) and 
Jason-1+ ENVISAT (lower figure).  Units are cm.  
 
 
 
 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  23 

 

 
 
Figures 7 and  8 : rms ENVISAT sea level mapping error over rms GPS sea level 
mapping  error  (upper  figure,  scale  from  0  to  2.1).  Rms  Jason-1+ENVISAT  sea 
level  mapping  error  over  rms  GPS+Jason-1  +  ENVISAT  sea  level  mapping  error 
(lower figure, scale from 0 to 2.0).  

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  24 

Figures  3  and  4  can  be  compared  with  sea  level  mapping  errors  from  one 
altimeter  (ERS  or  ENVISAT)  (figure  5)  and  from  the  combination  of  two 
conventional altimeters (T/P and ERS or Jason-1 and ENVISAT) (figure 6).   As in 
table  1,  these  results  illustrate  the  contribution  of  GPS  altimetry.  In  large  eddy 
variability regions and well-sampled regions, GPS is performing much better than 
Jason-1 and ENVISAT alone and as well as Jason-1+ENVISAT.    
 
 
To  quantify,  the  contribution  of  GPS  altimetry,  the  ratio  between  the  ENVISAT 
and  GPS  mapping  error  variance  (figure  7)  and  the  Jason-1+ENVISAT  and 
GPS+Jason-1+ENVISAT  (figure  8)  were  also  calculated.  Compared  to  ENVISAT, 
in  the  Gulf  Stream  region  and  in  well-sampled  regions,  the  GPS  mapping  error 
variance are divided by a factor of up to 4.  Compared to Jason-1+ENVISAT, the 
combination  of  GPS,  Jason-1  and  ENVISAT  should  also  allow  a  reduction  of  the 
mapping error variance by a factor of up to four (mainly in between the Jason-1 
tracks where the mapping from the combination of Jason-1 and ENVISAT is less 
accurate and in regions well sampled by GPS). 
 
 
9  Formal mapping errors 
 
The  formal  mapping  errors  (expressed  in  percentage  of  signal  variance)  were 
also  derived  from  these  analyses.  These  errors  only  depend  on  sampling,  noise 
and  signal  characteristics  and  do  not  depend  on  model  fields.    They  provide  a 
robust  estimation  of  the  mapping  capabilities  that  only  depend  on  our  choice  of 
signal covariance functions. Figures 9 and 10 show the sea level formal mapping 
errors for simulations 1 and 2 respectively.  The ratio between the ENVISAT and 
GPS  formal  mapping  error  variance  (figure  11)  and  the  Jason-1  +ENVISAT  and 
GPS+Jason-1+ENVISAT  (figure  12)  are  also shown.  Results are consistent with 
those  discussed  in  section  4.    In  high  eddy  energy  regions  and  well  sampled 
regions, GPS and GPS+Jason-1 +ENVISAT are generally performing much better 
than ENVISAT and Jason-1+ENVISAT respectively  (mapping error variances are 
divided by a factor of up to 4).   

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  25 

   
Figures  9  and  10:  Formal  sea  level  mapping  error  for  GPS  (upper  figure),  and 
GPS+Jason-1 + ENVISAT (lower figure). Units are percentage of signal variance, 
scale from 0 to 100. 
 
 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  26 

 
 
Figures  11  and  12    :  ENVISAT  formal  mapping  error  variance  over  GPS  formal 
mapping  error  variance  (upper  figure).  Jason-1+ENVISAT  formal  mapping  error 
variance  over  GPS+Jason-1+ENVISAT  formal  mapping  error  variance  (lower 
figure). Scale from 0 to 4. 
 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  27 

10  Conclusions 
 

As we have seen, a single PETREL-like mission (with a multi-beam capability) should 
have a very significant impact on the mapping of the mesoscale variability. According 
to the chosen error budget, it should allow us the map the mesoscale variability in 
high  eddy  variability  regions  almost  as  well  as  ENVISAT.  In  well-sampled  regions, 
the mapping should be as well as the one derived from the combination of Jason-1 
and ENVISAT.   

Moreover,  the  combination  of  GPS  with  Jason-1  and  ENVISAT  will  improve  the  sea 
level mapping derived from the combination of Jason-1 and ENVISAT by a factor of 
about 2.  In well-sampled regions, the improvement could reach up to a factor of 4.  

Although  there  are  other  sources  of  errors  that  should  be  taken  into  account  (e.g. 
propagation  effects,  orbit,  geoid),  this  is  already  a  very  encouraging  result.  The 
dense  and  high  frequency  sampling  offered  by  multi-beam  GPS  altimetry  is  thus 
likely to compensate for the large noise level (15 to 20 cm for 1 second-average) (in 
large eddy variability regions).   

Note  finally  that  the  study  only  considered  GPS  satellites  and  a  six-beam  system; 
results  should  significantly  improve  when  both  GPS  and  Galileo  satellites  are  used 
and when more beams are used.  

 
 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  28 

 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 

11 References 
 
• 

Ducet,  N.,  P.Y.  Le  Traon  and  G.  Reverdin,  2000.    Global  high  resolution 
mapping  of  ocean  circulation  from  the  combination  of  T/P  and  ERS-1/2.  J. 
Geophys. Res., 105, 19,477-19,498. 
Ducet,  N.,  and  P.Y.  Le  Traon,  2001.    A  comparison  of  surface  eddy  kinetic 
energy  and  Renolds  stresses  in  the  Gulf  Stream  and  the  Kuroshio  current 
systems from merged T/P and ERS-1/2 altimetric data. J. Geophys. Res.  (in 
press). 
Koblinsky,  C.J.,  P.  Gaspar  and  G.  Lagerloef,  1992.  The  future  of  spaceborne 
altimetry  :  Oceans  and  climate  change,  Joint  oceanographic  institutions 
incorporated, Washington, D.C., 75 pp. 
Le  Traon,  P.Y.  and  R.  Morrow,  2000.    Ocean  currents  and  mesoscale  eddies, 
in  Satellite  Altimetry  and  Earth  Sciences.  Editors  L.  L.  Fu  and  A.  Cazenave.  
Academic Press. 
Le Traon, P.Y. and G. Dibarboure, 1999. Mesoscale mapping capabilities from 
multiple altimeter missions. J. Atm. Ocean. Tech., 16, 1208-1223.  
Le Traon, P.Y., Dibarboure, G., and N. Ducet, 2001. Use of a high resolution 
model  to  analyze  the  mapping  capabilities  of  multiple  altimeter  missions.  J. 
Atm. Ocean. Tech. (in press).  
Le Traon, P.-Y.,  M. Rienecker, N. Smith, P. Bahurel, M. Bell, H. Hurlburt, and 
P. Dandin, Operational Oceanography and Prediction – a GODAE Perspective, 
OceanObs 99 Conference, San Raphael, France. 
Ducet,  N.,  P.-Y.  Le  Traon,  and  G.  Reverdin,  2000:  Global  high  resolution 
mapping of ocean circulation from TOPEX/Poseidon and ERS-1/2. J. Geophys. 
Res., 105, 19477-19498. 
Le  Traon,  P.-Y.  and  G.  Dibarboure,  1999:  Mesoscale  mapping  capabilities  of 
multiple-satellite  altimeter  missions.  J.  Atmos.  Oceanic  Technol.,  16,  1208-
1223. 
Le Traon, P.-Y., G. Dibarboure, and N. Ducet, 2001: Use of a High-Resolution 
Model  to  Analyze  the  Mapping  Capabilities  of  Multiple-Altimeter  Missions.  J. 
Atmos. Oceanic Technol., 18, 1277-1288. 
Minster,  J.F.,  and  Gennero,  M.C.  1995.  High-frequency  variability  of  western 
boundary  currents  using  ERS-1  three-day  repeat  altimeter  data.  J.  Geophys. 
Res. 100, 22,603-22,612. 

•  Smith,  R.D.,  Maltrud,  M.E.,  Bryan,  F.O.,  and  Hecht,  M.W.  2000.  Numerical 
simulation of the North Atlantic ocean at 1/10°. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 30, 1532-
1561. 

•  Smith,  N,  and  Lefebvre  M.,  1997.  The  Global  Ocean  Data  Assimilation 
Experiment  (GODAE).    Monitoring  the  oceans  in  the  2000s  :  an  integrated 
approach, International Symposium, Biarritz, October 15-17 1997. 

•  Tierney,  C.,  J.  Wahr,  F.  Bryan  and  V.  Zlotnicki,  2000:  Short-period  oceanic 
circulation; implication for satellite altimetry, Geophys. Res. Lett. ., 27, 1255-
1258. 

Technical Note Extract from the Paris-Beta ESTEC/ESA Study                                                    Page  29 

