AUTOREGULATION OF THE TOTAL NUMBER OF CELLS IN CULTURE 

A. A. Kozlov 

Biological Faculty, Tbilisi State University, Tbilisi, 380043 Georgia 

E-mail: alekskoz@rambler.ru 

Key words: cell division, regulatory mechanisms, unicellulars culture. 

 

Initial hypothesis 

According  to  the  universally  accepted  concept  of  the  development  of  life  on  the  Earth, 

multicellular  organisms  initially  emerged  as  a  result  of  either  the  union  of  identical  unicellular 

organisms  with  the  following  functional  differentiation, or the  union  of  symbionts,  in  which  there 

already  was  a  certain  simple  functional  separation.  However,  in  either  case  the  progenitors  of 

multicellular  organisms  were  ensembles,  communities  of  unicellular  organisms.  For  a  certain 

number of unicellular organisms to be treated as an ensemble, there must be some interconnection 

between its members. Colonies of mechanically connected unicellular organisms were a later, more 

advanced stage; here, unicellular organisms living separately are considered. Such interconnection 

must, in particular, limit from above the total numbers of the members of the ensemble, because an 

excessive  increase  in  these  numbers  could  disturb  the  connections  between  members  of  the 

ensemble  to  the  extent  of  its  destruction.  In  addition,  too  large  numbers  of  members  in  the 

ensemble could lead to nutrient depletion in its habitat. 

One can assume that such interconnection between unicellular organisms was evolutionarily 

developed and genetically fixed.  

I  assumed  that  modern  unicellular  organisms  retain  such  an  ability  to  regulate  their  total 

numbers. The validity of this assumption was tested in experiments, whose results are presented 

in this paper. 

3
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
9
2
 
 
 
2
7
0
1
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1 

Objects of investigation were infusoria Colpoda sp. and, in some experiments, Paramecia 

Object and method 

sp. Infusorial cultures were grown in a hay decoction (2 g of dry sweet clover Melilotus officinalis 

per  liter  of  ordinary  water)  at  room  temperature  (22-24°C)  and  ambient  illumination  in 

cylindrical glass vessels of different sizes. 

In  each  experiment,  once  every  day  at  the  same  time  (12  noon)  the  average  cell 

concentrations  in  all  the  experimental  vessels  were  measured  and  plotted  against  time.  The 

nutrient medium was neither replaced nor refreshed. 

Results 

In the first set of experiments, infusoria Colpoda sp. cultures were grown  in three  vessels of 

volume V1 = 30 cm3 each and three vessels of volume V2 = 3 cm3 each. A total of five experiments 

were performed. Figure 1 presents the results of the second experiment of this test run. 

 n, cm-3
3000

2000

1000

0

2

1

 0                     5                    10                

t, days

 

Fig. 1. Cell concentrations n in the volumes V1 (1) and V2 (2) in the second experiment 
 

Let us note three important features of the curves in Fig. 1, which will be discussed below.  

(1) The  cell  concentration  in the  volume  V1  increases and attains a  maximum, whereupon  it 

rapidly decrease by (30.0±4.1)% per day. Later, the decrease in the concentration abruptly slows 

2 

down  and  then  is  (8.6±1.2)%  per  day.  The  behavior of  the  cell  concentration  in the  volume V2  is 

similar but much less pronounced. 

(2)  In  the  phase  of  the  slow  decrease  in  the  cell  density  (let  us  call  it  the  "quasi-stationary" 

phase), the ratio between the cell concentrations in the volumes V2 and V1 is almost constant and is 

3.9 ± 0.3. 

on Fig. 2) 

(3)  In  the  first  several  days  of  the  cell  development,  the  cell  concentration  in  the  larger 

volumes rises more rapidly than that in the smaller volumes. 

The results of the other four experiments were qualitatively identical. 

The second experiment had a continuation. On the 12th day of cultivation, the cell suspensions 

in the three  vessels of  volume V1 were thoroughly stirred, and the suspension from one of these 

vessels was used to fill in three vessels of volume V2. (Moments of transfusion are marked by arrows 

n, cm-3

4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0

V3

V2

V1

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

t, days     

 

Fig. 2 Changes in cell concentrations n after their transfusion from vessel V1 to vessels V2, and 
then from vessel V2 to vessel V3 as function of time t. Moments of transfusion are marked by 
arrows 
 

As one can see  from  Fig.  2, the cell  concentrations in the new vessels of volume V2 began to 

rapidly increase at once, and on the eighth day, the increase in the concentration ended with the quasi-

3 

stationary phase. 

V3 = 0.9 cm3.  

A similar procedure was next performed with a culture grown in three vessels of volume V2. 

By that time, the infusoria Colpoda sp. concentration was (488±52)cm-3. The cell suspensions in the 

three vessels were thoroughly stirred, and the contents were transfused into three vessels of volume 

As one can see from Fig. 2, like after the first transfusion, cell concentrations in vessels of 

volume V3 began to rapidly increase. 

However, a further (after the fourth day) increase was most likely to be due to the decrease in 

the cell suspension volume (0.9 cm3) because of sampling for finding the cell concentration. Three 

samples of a volume of 0.02 cm3 each per one experimental point were taken, because of which the 

cell suspension volume by the end of the experiment decreased down to 0.54 cm3. 

The results of these experiments suggested the following. 

(4)  A  decrease  in  the  cultivation  volume  accompanied  by  a  proportional  decrease  in  the 

numbers of cells in this volume causes a wave of cell division. 

In the next experiment, infusoria Colpoda sp. were cultivated in ten vessels of volume V2 = 3 

cm3 each.  Once  the  cells  reached  the  quasi-stationary  phase, the  contents of these  vessels  were 

transfused  into a single vessel of volume V1 = 30 cm3. Figure 3 illustrates the change in the cell 

concentration as a function of time elapsed from the transfer of the cell suspension. 

0

2

4

6

8
t, days

10

 

Fig. 3 Cell concentration n as a function of time t elapsed from the transfer of the cell suspension 
(see text) 

n, cm-3
2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0

4 

Note that, after an insignificant increase on the fourth day, the cell concentration started to drop 

rapidly (by 27% per day). 

This suggests the following. 

(5)  An  increase  in  the  cultivation  volume  accompanied  by  a  proportional  increase  in  the 

numbers of cells in this volume abruptly decreases the cell concentration. 

The  results  of  these  experiments  are  indicative  of  the  fact  that,  in  a  culture  of  unicellular 

organisms,  there  is  a  certain  mechanism  that  regulates  the  cell  concentration,  depending  on  the 

cultivation volume. 

One can assume that this mechanism tries to keep the constancy of the total numbers of the 

cells  in  this  culture  even  after  a  change  in  the  cell  suspension  volume.  The  validity  of  this 

assumption was checked in the following experiment. 

Infusoria Colpoda sp. were cultivated in three vessels of volume V9 = 6 cm3 each. On the 

40th  day  of  cultivation,  the  suspensions  of  cells  in  the  quasi-stationary  phase  of  their 

development (the average numbers of the cells in each of the three vessels were 3500 ± 468) were 

thoroughly stirred, whereupon much of the cell suspension was removed to leave only 0.9 cm3 of 

the  suspension  in  each  vessel.  At  that  moment,  in  each  of  the  three  vessels,  the  average  cell 

concentration  was  (583±78)cm-3,  and  the  average  numbers  of  the  cells  were  525±70.  Figure  4 

shows a further change in the total numbers of the cells in these vessels. 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

 

N

4000
3000
2000
1000
0

1

2

3

4

5

6
t, days

 

Fig. 4 Total numbers N of cells in the volumes 0.9 cm3 as a function of time t elapsed from the 
removal of much of the cell suspension (see text) 
 

As one can see from Fig. 4, the total numbers of the cells in the suspensions of the volume 

0.9  cm3  each  reaches  86%  of  the  initial  total  numbers  of  the  cells  in  the  suspensions  of  the 

volume 6 cm3 each. This resembles the regenerative growth of an organ after its partial resection 

in multicellular organisms. 

Thus, the results of this experiment confirmed the assumption that, in a culture of unicellular 

organisms, there is a mechanism regulating the total numbers of cells so that these numbers can be 

maintained  approximately  constant  even  if  the  cultivation  volume  is  changed  (at  least  within  a 

certain range of volumes). 

Let  us  go  back  to  Fig.  1.  A  decrease  in  the  cell  concentration  after  the  culture  reaches  its 

maximal  development  is  generally  accepted to  be  because  of  nutrient  depletion  in  its  habitat  and 

habitat pollution with  metabolic products. This explanation was tested in an experiment on a stock 

infusoria Colpoda sp. culture, which was maintained in the exponential growth phase by daily dilution 

with  a  fresh  nutrient  medium.  Beginning  with  the  phase  of  the  rapid  decrease  in  the  cell 

concentration  in the test culture in  volume V1, a suspension sample of about 0.3 cm3  in  volume 

was  taken  (to  weaken  the  effect  of  sampling,  several  cell  suspensions  of  volume  V1  were  used). 

From the sample,  all  infusoria  were  removed  with  a  micropipette  (all  other  means  of  removing 

6 

cells from a medium, e.g., filtration, centrifugation, heating, etc., could un-predictably change the 

composition of the nutrient medium). Into this, cell-free, already used nutrient medium, infusoria 

from  the  stock  culture  were  transferred.  Such  a  procedure  was  performed  once  every  three  days 

until  that  time,  when  the  culture  in  volume  V1  was  already  in  the  quasi-stationary  phase.  In  a 

reference  experiment,  infusoria  were  transferred  into  a  fresh  nutrient  medium.  In  either  used  or 

fresh medium, infusoria developed virtually identically. 

On the possible physical channel of connection between cells 

Since a substantial part of the experimental data obtained cannot be explained by any chemical 

mechanism,  I  assumed  that  there  is  a  physical  coupling  channel  between  cells,  which  runs  or 

terminates one regulatory program or another. In particular, along this coupling channel, each cell 

must receive information on the total numbers of cells in the cultivation volume. 

It is known that any cell emits electromagnetic radiation  in a certain spectral region [1, 2]. 

There  is  also  evidence  that  cells  emit  acoustic  radiation  [3,  4].  These  types  of  radiation  can,  in 

principle, carry  information on the total  numbers of cells  in the cultivation  volume. I assumed that, 

when  the  radiation  flux  emitted  by  all  the  cells  in  the  cultivation  volume  attains  a  certain  critical 

value, the cell division ceases. Let us consider this assumption in greater detail. 

Let in a vessel with a liquid nutrient medium there is a homogeneous suspension of cells. Let 

each cell is an isotropic source of radiation (electromagnetic or sound). Then the average density 

of radiation in volume will be proportional to number of sources (i.e. - to volume) and inversely 

proportional to its square of a surface (due to losses of radiation through a surface). If the form of 

cylindrical  volume slightly differs  from sphere (2R »

  H), the average density of radiation inside 

volume will be equal to: 

                                                       y

 = knV/S,                                                       1) 

7 

where k - factor of proportionality determining radiating ability of each cell, n - concentration 

of cells in volume, V and S - volume and the square of its surface accordingly. Having substituted 

values V and S for cylindrical volume, we will obtain: 

                                                  y

 = knRH/2(R+H),                                                2) 

where R and H - radius and height of volume accordingly. 

If our assumption is fair, critical density of radiation at which cell division stops, in the big 

volumes  will  be  achieved  at  smaller  concentration  of  cells,  than  in  small.  We  shall  take  two 

cylindrical  volumes  with  different  sizes  V1  and  v2  with  radiuses  R  and  r  and  heights  H  and  h. 

(Bigger letters concern to the greater volume sizes).  

Then y

1 = kn1RH/2(R+H) and y

2 = kn2rh/2(r+h) - average density of radiation inside these 

volumes. As it is supposed, that cell division stops in these different volumes at identical average 

density  of  radiation  in  them,  from  a  condition  y

1  =  y

2  it  is  possible  to  find  the  attitude  the  of 

concentration of cells in these volumes in quasi-stationary phase: 

                                                        n1/n2 = RH(r+h)/rh(R+H)                                                 3) 

The table compares the ratios between the concentrations of the cells in the quasi-stationary 

phase in different volumes as calculated by expression 3) and found experimentally. 

Comparison of the concentrations of the cells in quasi-stationary phase for the different volumes 

calculated by the formula 3) with the concentrations defined experimentally. 

Volume 

(Object) 

R 
(сm) 

H 
(сm) 

V1(Colpoda) 

V2(Colpoda) 

1.6 

0.5 

V4(Colpoda) 

0.35 

3.7 

3.8 

2.0 

V 
(сm3) 

30.0 

3.0 

0.8 

(S/L) 

2 - 1 

 

4 - 5 

Comparison 

nS/nL 

nS/nL 

(calc.) 

(experiment) 

3.9 –

 0.3 

 

2.5 

 

3.2 

Table 

 

8 

V5(Colpoda) 

V6(Colpoda) 

V1(Paramecia) 

4.0 

2.0 

3.7 

19.6 

19.2 

30.0 

V7(Paramecia) 

5.0 

100.0 

V8(Paramecia) 

1.5 

3.0 

1.25 

1.75 

1.6 

2.5 

0.8 

 

4 - 6 

1 - 7 

8 - 1 

8 - 7 

 

3.1 

1.5 

2.2 

3.2 

 

1.6 –

  0.5 

2.5 –

 0.8 

4.0 –

 1.1 

 

volumes accordingly. 

The  note to the  table:  in  columns  5,  6  and  7  indexes  S  and  L  concern  to  smaller  and  big 

Proposed explanations of experimental data 

The  proposed  physical  regulation  mechanism  is  most  likely  to  affect  the  cell  membrane 

complex. This complex can be regarded as a cooperative system with two stable conformational 

states and one unstable conformational state. At the first stable state, the cell arrives immediately 

after  the  cell  division  is  completed.  A  transition  to  the  second  stable  state  requires  a  starting 

energy of about 5 eV [1, 6]. This energy triggers the generalized conformational rearrangement of 

the cell membrane complex, owing to which the cell becomes capable of advancing further along 

the  cell  division  cycle.  When  the  cell  is  in  the  first  stable  state,  the  radiation  regulating  the 

numbers of cells can bring it into the third state, in which the cell leaves the cycle. However, this 

state is so unstable that even local temperature fluctuations return the cell to the first stable state. 

Yet, when the radiation flux density attains its critical value as the overall number of the cells in 

the culture increases, the cell has no time to return to the stable state. However, vigorous shaking 

can probably take a portion of the cells out of this unstable state for a while. 

The  considered  mechanism  of  regulating  the  numbers  of  cells  in  a  culture  (colony)  is 

necessary  for  heterotrophs,  because  an  excessive  increase  in  their  numbers  is  fraught  with 

nutrient depletion in their habitat. For photosynthesizing cells, such regulation is unnecessary. It 

is not improbable that this is the cause of the fact that multicellular animals, retaining the ability 

9 

to regulate the numbers of their cells, grow up to certain sizes, and their organs in regeneration (if 

any)  are  restored  to  their  initial  sizes.  Conversely,  plants,  not  having  such  regulation,  grow 

virtually throughout their life and are incapable of regenerating in the generally accepted sense. One 

can  assume  that,  in  a  culture  of  unicellular  plants,  there  are  no  phase  of  a  rapid  decrease  in  the 

concentration and no difference between the concentrations of cells in the quasi-stationary phase in 

different volumes. 

below. 

Explanations of five experimental facts marked in figures in the text of article are presented 

According  to  our  hypothesis,  with  growth  of  number  of  cells  in  volume  the  density  of  a 

stream  of  radiation  grows.  At  achievement  of  that  density  of  a  stream  which  corresponds  to 

concentration of cells to the beginning of quasi-stationary phase, the gradual removing of a part 

of cells from a cycle began, and in part of them most likely the apopthose mechanism is switched 

on  [5.]  (it  is  necessary  to  note,  that  in  the  literature  we  have  not  found  the  data  on  the 

phenomenon  of  apopthose  in  monocellulars.  It  is  possible,  that  this  method  of  destruction  of 

"superfluous" cells as the mechanism of management of number of community has arisen at the 

earliest stages of evolution as well). 

Approximately  to  the  middle  of  the  second  day  of  development  of  culture  there  is  a 

deviation  from  exponential  growth  that  is  shown  in  apparent  increase  of  the  average  period  of 

cell division. For some period of time two competing processes work: division of a part of cells 

which  have  not  left  yet  a  cycle,  and  a  removing  of  cells  from  a  cycle  with  compulsory 

destruction of a part from them. And the second process grasps the increasing number of cells. It 

results in approach of a phase of fast recession of concentration. When decreasing concentration 

of  cells  reaches  that  level  to  which  the  critical  value  of  density  of  radiation  corresponds, 

compulsory destruction of cells stops and culture moves to quasi-stationary phase. Reduction of 

concentration of cells in quasi-stationary phase most likely occurs due to natural destruction of 

10 

cells, which average time of life is a number of days. Thus:  

(1) fast recession of concentration of cells after achievement of a maximum of development 

of culture is caused not by an exhaustion of nutrients, but by switching on of the mechanism of 

regulation of number of cells; 

(2)  critical  density  of  radiation  in  the  big  volumes  is  reached  at  smaller  concentration  of 

cells than  in small  volumes. Therefore  in quasi-stationary phase concentration of cells  in small 

volumes exceeds concentration of cells in the big volumes; 

(3) according to A.G. Gurwitsch [1], radiation of dividing cells is capable to start division of 

other cells located close enough. Inside cultivation volume the density of this radiation, as shown 

previously, is proportional to the sizes of volume. Therefore, in the big volumes at early stages 

of development of culture concentration of cells grows faster, than in small; 

(4) when we reduce cultivation  volume  in quasi-stationary phase, keeping  in  it the  former 

concentration of cells, the density of  a  stream of  radiation decreases, the  block  is  switched off 

from cells and they  start to divide until their concentration does not become  sufficient  for new 

switching on of the block; 

cells is switched on again.  

(5) during the increase of cultivation volume in quasi-stationary phase with preservation of 

former concentration of cells, in a some period of time the mechanism destroying "superfluous" 

1. Gurwitsch, A.G. and Gurwitsch, L.D., Vvedenie v uchenie o mitogeneze (Introduction to the 

Concept of Mitogenesis),  //  Moscow: Akad. Med. Nauk SSSR, 1948. 

2.  Tarusov,  B.N.  and  Zhuravlev,  A.I.,  Biolyuminestsentsiya  (Bioluminescence),  //  Moscow: 

Nauka, 1965. 

3. Perel'man, M.E. and Rubinshtein, G.M.,  // Byull. Akad. Nauk. Gruz. SSR, 1982, vol.107, N 

References  

11 

2, pp. 393-396. 

Moscow, 1999, p. 37. 

4. Passechnik, V.I., // Abstr. 2nd Internal. Alexander Gurwitsch Conference, September 6-10. 

5. Fraser,A. and Evan,G.,// Cell, 1996, vol. 85, pp. 781-784. 

6. Kozlov, A.A., // Radiobiologiya, 1987, vol. 27, N6, pp. 756-760. 

12 

