 
 
 
GEOMETRY OF TIME AND DIMENSIONALITY OF SPACE 
 

 
M. SANIGA 
International Solvay Institutes for Physics and Chemistry, ULB,  
Campus Plaine, CP–231, Blvd du Triomphe, 1050 Brussels, Belgium 
& 
Astronomical Institute of the Slovak Academy of Sciences, 
05960 Tatranská Lomnica, Slovak Republic  
 
 
 

Introduction 

1. 
 
It  goes  without  saying  that  a  profound  mystery  lies  behind  the  conventional  notions  of 
space and time. Thus, for example, the fact that there are three macroscopic dimensions of 
space  was  rigorously  proved  as  early  as  the  great  Ptolemy  some  thousand  years  ago,  yet 
contemporary science is still lacking any deeper and theoretically well-founded insight into 
the origin of this puzzling number. Deeper than the enigma of (the dimensionality of) space 
seems  to  be  that  of  (the  nature  of)  time.  Here,  there  even  exists  a  sharp  contradiction 
between  the  way  we  perceive  time  and  what  modern  physical  theories  tell  us  about  the 
concept. To our senses, time appears to (cid:147)flow,(cid:148) (cid:147)pass,(cid:148) proceed inexorably from the past 
through (the unique moment of) the present into the future (cid:150) the fact commonly known as 
the  arrow  of  time.  Yet,  almost  all  the  fundamental  equations  of  physics  are  strictly  time-
reversible  and,  in  addition,  they  do  not  leave  any  proper  place  for  the  concept  of  the 
present,  the  (cid:147)now.(cid:148)  This  failure  of  current  physical  theories  to  properly  account  for  the 
observed  macroscopic  dimensionality  of  space  and  the  intricate  nature  of  time  is,  in  our 
opinion, asking for a serious revision of the generally adopted physical paradigms about the 
concepts  in  question.  We  think  that  there  is  a  strong  need for the representation of space 
and  time  that  is  more  adherent  to  our  perceptions  and  which  includes,  in  particular,  the 
irreversibility of change. 
    Modern theoretical physics has entered the territory of scientific inquiry that lies so far 
from ordinary experience that there exists no rigorous observational/ experimental guide to 
be followed. The only means physicists have at hand to navigate through this region is mere 
appeal  of  abstract  and  often  counter-intuitive  mathematical  principles.  Yet,  sticking  to 
mathematical beauty alone may not necessarily be a proper path leading to a discovery of 
new, more fundamental physical laws. For the history of science, and physics in particular, 
teaches us a very important lesson that novel, revolutionary ideas and paradigm shifts were 
almost  always  preceded  and  accompanied  by  new  evidence  from  observations  and 
experiments  that  had  accumulated  over  particular  periods.  So  why  not  to  listen  to  this 
lesson again? This is precisely the strategy we adopted some fifteen years ago, soon after 
we  became  familiar  with  a  fascinating  and  extremely  thought-provoking  topic  of 
psychopathology of space and time (cid:150) the latter being a generic term for all (cid:147)peculiar,(cid:148) or 
(cid:147)abnormal,(cid:148)  perceptions  of  space  and  time  as  invariably  reported  by  people  suffering 
serious  mental  psychoses  as  well  as  by  other  subjects  experiencing  so-called  (cid:147)altered(cid:148) 

 

2

states of consciousness [1(cid:150)14]. Over the years, a vast body of literature has accumulated on 
the topic (see references in [21(cid:150)23]) so that there can already be seen a definite pattern in 
the qualitative structure of these pathological space-time constructs. Already in the normal 
state  of  health  there  are,  every  now  and  then,  aberrations  of  subjective  time  such  as 
acceleration  or  deceleration  of  the  lapse  of  time.  Under  severe  mental  disturbances  these 
anomalies/peculiarities  become  more  pronounced.  The  flux  of  time  may  even  cease 
completely  (the  sensations  usually  described  as  (cid:147)time  standing  still,(cid:148)  or  (cid:147)suspended,(cid:148) 
(cid:147)arrested(cid:148) time), or expand without limit (the feelings of (cid:147)everlasting now,(cid:148) (cid:147)eternity(cid:148)). In 
some  cases,  time(cid:146)s  flow  may  be  experienced  as  discontinuous,  fragmented  or  even 
reversing its direction. Finally, in most extreme cases, time as a dimension is transcended, 
or  simply  non-existent  ((cid:147)atemporal,(cid:148)  (cid:147)timeless(cid:148)  states).  The  sense  of  space  is  likewise 
powerfully  affected.  Space  can  appear  (cid:147)amplified(cid:148)  or  (cid:147)compressed,(cid:148)  (cid:147)condensed(cid:148)  or 
(cid:147)rarefied,(cid:148)  or  even  changing  its  dimensionality;  it  can,  for  example,  become  just  two 
dimensional ((cid:147)flat(cid:148)), acquire another dimensions, or be simply reduced to a dimensionless 
point in consciousness.  
    Obviously,  it  would  be  an  utterly  hopeless  task  if  we  tried  to  explain  these  fascinating 
space-time  constructs  in  terms  of  physics.  Hence,  a  conceptually  new  framework  is 
required to handle these phenomena. Some years ago we put forward a theory that seems to 
be very promising in this respect [15(cid:150)23]. This pencil theory was originally motivated by 
and  aimed  at  a  deeper  insight  into  the  puzzling  discrepancy  between  perceptional  and 
physical aspects of time. Yet, we soon realized that it also has an important bearing on the 
problem of the dimensionality of space. Namely, we found out that there seems to exist an 
intricate relation between our sense of time and the observed number of spatial dimensions 
[15,17,21,22]. Mathematically, this property is substantiated by the fact that we treat time 
and space from the very beginning as standing on topologically different footings. As for 
their  (cid:147)outer(cid:148)  appearance,  both  the  types  of  dimension  are  identical,  being  regarded  as 
pencils,  i.e.  linear,  single-infinite  aggregates  of  constituting  elements.  It  is  their  (cid:147)inner(cid:148) 
structure  where  the  difference  comes  in:  the  constituting  element  ((cid:147)point(cid:148))  of  a  spatial 
dimension is a line, whereas that of the time dimension is a (proper) conic.  
    The algebraic geometrical setting of our debut theory was a projective plane. The theory 
acquired a qualitatively new standing when we raised the dimensionality of the setting by 
one, i.e. moved into a projective space, and identified the pencils in question with those of 
the  fundamental  configurations  of  certain  Cremona  transformations  [24(cid:150)26].  The  3+1 
macroscopic  dimensionality  of  space-time  was  demonstrated  to  uniquely  follow  from  the 
structure of the so-called quadro-cubic Cremona transformations (cid:150) the simplest non-trivial, 
non-symmetrical  Cremona  transformations  in  a  projective  space  of  three  dimensions 
[24,25]. In addition, these transformations were also found to fix the type of the pencil of 
fundamental  conics,  i.e.  the  geometry  of  the  time  dimension,  and  to  provide  us  with  a 
promising  conceptual  basis  for  eventual  reconciliation  between  two  extreme  views  of 
space-time, viz. physical and psychological.  
    The  paper  gives  a  succinct  exposition  of  this  generalized  theory.  After  introducing  its 
fundamental  postulates  and  highlighting  essentials  of  space  Cremona  transformations,  we 
review  basic  properties  of  the  corresponding  (cid:147)Cremonian(cid:148)  space-times,  stressing 
particularly  those  items  where  the  departure  from  generally  accepted  views/paradigms  is 
substantial.  The  presentation  is  rather  non-technical,  with  the  hope  of  being  accessible  to 
scientists  of  various  disciplines  and  diverse  mathematical  background.  The  reader  who 
wishes  to  go  deeper  into  the  mathematical  formalism  employed  is  referred  to  our  papers 
[17,24,25]. 

 

3

2.  Cremonian (Pencil-)Space-Times 
 
Let  us  consider  two  distinct,  incident  lines  in  a  projective  space.  These  define  a  unique 
plane (they both share) and a unique point (their intersection).1 The two lines define also a 
unique  pencil  of  lines,  i.e.  the  linear,  single-infinite  set  of  lines  lying  in  the  plane  and 
passing  through  the  point.  It  is  our  first  fundamental  postulate  that  each  of  the  observed 
dimensions of space is isomorphic to a pencil of lines [15(cid:150)17].  Next, let us take a plane 
and  two  distinct  conics  lying  in  it.  These  define  a  unique pencil  of  conics, i.e. the linear, 
single-parametrical  aggregate  of  conics  confined  to  the  plane  and  passing  through  the 
points  shared  by  the  two  conics  (called  the  base  points  of  the  pencil).  Our  second  basic 
postulate is that the structure of the time dimension is identical to that of a specific pencil of 
conics,  each  proper  conic  standing  for  a  single  event  [15(cid:150)17].  As  any  two  coplanar  lines 
have always one, and only one, point in common, there exists only one projective type of a 
pencil  of  lines.  A  different  situation  is  encountered  in  the  case  of  conics(cid:146)  pencils  as  two 
different  conics  situated  in  the  same  (projective)  plane  have  four  points  in  common,  of 
which  some  (or  all)  may  coincide,  or  be  pair-wise  imaginary:  in  the  case  where  all  the 
points are real we find as many as five projectively distinct types of pencil of conics (cid:150) as 
illustrated  in  Figure  1.  So,  in  our  pencil-approach  space  has  a  simpler  (less  complex) 
structure than time (cid:150) a feature conforming nicely to our sensual perception. 

Figure 1.  The five projectively distinct types of pencil of conics in the case where all the base points are real: a (cid:150) 
all the four points distinct; b (cid:150) two points distinct, one double; c (cid:150) two distinct points, each of multiplicity two; d (cid:150) 
one single and one triple point;  e (cid:150) one point of multiplicity four. 

 
    Clearly, any pencil of lines may serve as a potential spatial dimension and, similarly, any 
pencil of conics can be taken to represent the time dimension. Our pencil space-time is thus 
originally  infinite-dimensional  and  lacking  any  definite  link  between  time  and  space.  We 
therefore need a mechanism that would, on the one side, break this symmetry down to what 

 

                                                      
1 The terminology, symbols and notation used here are the same as in [17] and [24]. 

 

 

4

 

we  really  observe  and,  on  the  other,  induce  a  unique  coupling  between  the  two  kinds  of 
dimension. It is here where Cremona transformations are invoked to do the job [24(cid:150)26]. 
    A space Cremona transformation is a one-to-one (birational) correspondence between the 
points  of  two  projective  spaces  [24,27,28].  The  transformation  is  determined  in  all 
essentials  by  giving,  in  either  space,  a  homaloidal  web  of  surfaces,  i.e.  a  linear,  triple-
infinite  family  of  rational  surfaces  of  which  any  three  members  have  only  one  free 
(variable) intersection; these homaloidal surfaces are mapped by the transformation into the 
planes of the other space. The character of a homaloidal web is completely specified by the 
properties of its base configuration, that is, by the set of points that are common to every 
member of the web. A base point is an exceptional element of the web in the sense that it 
makes  the  equations  of  the  corresponding  Cremona  transformation  illusory.  Its  image 
(homologue) in the other space is thus not a single point, but a locus, either a curve or a 
surface,  called  the  fundamental  element;  it  is  the  totality  of  these,  the  fundamental 
configuration, whose structure turns out to be of paramount importance. 
    To clarify and substantiate the point just made, let us have a look at the structure of such 
a configuration for the simplest among asymmetrical space Cremona transformations (cid:150) the 
transformation generated, in one of the spaces, by a homaloidal web of quadratic surfaces 
B, and three distinct, non-collinear 
(quadrics) whose base manifold consists of a real line, ℒ
real  points Bk (k=1,2,3), none being incident with the line in question [24,27,28]. It is an 
utterly amazing thing to see that this fundamental configuration comprises just three pencils 
B and centered at the points Bk, and just one 
of lines, viz. the ones located in the planes Bkℒ
pencil of conics, that situated in the plane B1B2B3 and having for the base points the three 
B meets the plane in question (cid:150) as depicted in 
points Bk and the point L at which the line ℒ
Figure 2, left.  
 

Figure 2.  A schematic sketch of (the relation between) the structure of the fundamental configuration of the 
homaloidal web of quadrics featuring a real base line and three distinct real base points (left) and that of the base 
configuration of the associated web of ruled cubic surfaces (right). The symbols and notation are given in the text. 

 

5

  
    So, there can be nothing more natural than assuming that the space-time as perceived by 
our senses has the structure of the above described fundamental configuration: since once 
adopting this tenet, we have a nice explanation not only why it features four macroscopic 
dimensions (four “fundamental” pencils), but also why three of them (spatial, generated by 
pencils  of  lines)  are  of  a  qualitatively  different  nature  than  the  remaining  one  (time, 
represented by a pencil of conics) [24]. However, it is not only the right number of macro-
dimensions and their correct (cid:147)ratio(cid:148) that stem naturally from this picture. It is also a definite 
coupling between spatial dimensions and time, as envisaged above. For the vertices of the 
three  fundamental  lines(cid:146)  pencils  (Bk)  not  only  define  the  plane  of  location  of  the 
fundamental conics, but, together with the point L, they also uniquely specify the type of 
their  pencil,  i.e.  the  extrinsic  geometry  of  the  time  dimension.  As  this  coupling  between 
time and space represents a considerable departure from that based on relativity theory, we 
shall  examine  it  in  more  detail  later  on,  when  the  reader  is  more  acquainted  with  the 
approach. 
    The picture just outlined is obviously only one side of the coin for we cannot ignore the 
role  played  by  the  image  of  the  fundamental  configuration  in  the  second  ((cid:147)primed(cid:148)) 
projective  space,  i.e.  by  the  base  configuration  of  the  associated  homaloidal  web  of 
surfaces. As shown in detail in [24,27,28], this inverse homaloidal web consists of surfaces 
of  the  third  degree  (cubics).  The  cubics  are  ruled,  i.e.  each  contains  a  single-infinity  of 
lines,  and  have  in  common  four  lines:  three  of  them,  ℒ׳k  (k=1,2,3),  are  mutually  skew 
(disjoint), whereas the fourth one, ℒ׳D, is incident with each of the three (cid:150) as portrayed in 
Figure  2,  right.2  Not  only  does  the  line  ℒ׳D  stand  apart  from  the  lines  ℒ׳k,  being  their 
common  transversal,  but  it  also  differs  from  them  in  another  crucial  aspect:  it  is  singular 
(double)  for  every  cubic  of  the  web,  whilst  the  other  three  lines  are  ordinary  (simple). 
Although not pronounced to such a degree as in the fundamental configuration, a three-to-
one  splitting  is  thus  inherent  also  in  the  structure  of  the  base  system  of  the  inverse  web. 
That this must be so is not difficult to understand because (as also elucidated in Figure 2) 
B  correspond  to  the  points  of  the  lines  ℒ׳k, 
the  fundamental  lines  of  the  pencils  in  Bkℒ
respectively,  and  the  fundamental  conics  in  the  plane  B1B2B3  answer  to  the  points  of  the 
remaining line, ℒ׳D [24,27,28]. We must therefore regard the base configuration of the web 
of cubics as another viable representation of space-time, in no way less prominent than the 
previous  one.  Our  daring  hypothesis  is  that  this  configuration  underlies  qualitatively  the 
physical  conception  of  space-time  [24].  A  principal  justification  for  such  a  claim  goes  as 
follows. From a general relativist(cid:146)s point of view, there is no distinction between time and 
space as far as their internal structure is concerned; the only difference between the two is 
embodied  in  the  (Lorentz)  signature  of  the  metric  tensor  on  the  underlying  differentiable 
manifold. And this is indeed very similar to what our (cid:147)base(cid:148) space-time exhibits, as all the 
four dimensions are there represented by lines; yet, the time coordinate, represented by ℒ׳D, 
has  apparently  a  different  standing  than  the  three  dimensions  of  space,  generated  by  the 
lines ℒ׳k, k=1,2,3. 
    We  have  thus  found  two  non-equivalent,  yet robust on their own, Cremonian views of 
the  macroscopic  spatio-temporal  fabric  [24].  One,  based  on  the  properties  of  the 
fundamental  configuration  of  the  specific  homaloidal  web  of  quadrics  (Figure  2,  left),  is 

                                                      
2 The four lines lie on a unique quadric (represented in Figure 2 as a hyperboloid of one sheet). 

 

 

6

 

characterized  by  a  more  pronounced  difference  between  the  spatial  dimensions  and  time 
and,  therefore,  more  appropriate  when  dealing  with  space-time  as  imprinted  in  our 
consciousness  (the  (cid:147)subjective(cid:148)  view).  The  other,  grounded  in  the  structure  of  the  base 
configuration  of  the  associated  web  of  cubics  (Figure  2,  right),  features  a  less  marked 
distinction  between  the  spatial  dimensions  and  time  and  is,  so,  more  akin  to  the  physical 
picture of space-time (the (cid:147)objective(cid:148) view). The two representations are intricately linked 
to each other, the link being mediated by the particular type of Cremona transformation, the 
one that sends the quadrics of the web in question into the planes of the other space. This 
transformation is algebraically elegant and geometrically simple [24,27,28], and may thus 
offer extraordinary promise for being an important initial stepping-stone towards bridging 
the gap between two crucial, but so far so poorly reconciled, fields of the scientific inquiry, 
viz. physics and psychology.     
    After demonstrating that the correct macroscopic dimensionality (4) and signature (3+1) 
of  the  Universe  are  both  crucial  characteristics  of  our  Cremonian  space-times,  we  now 
proceed, as promised, to have a closer look at how the three spatial pencil-dimensions are 
coupled to the time pencil-coordinate. The best way to illustrate this point is to return to the 
generic  homaloidal  web  of  quadrics  and  see  what  happens  if,  for  example,  one  of  the 
B  until  the  two  get  ultimately 
isolated  base  points,  say  B3,  approaches  the  base  line  ℒ
incident. As shown in detail in [25], the resulting fundamental configuration still comprises 
three distinct pencils of lines and a single pencil of conics: however, one of the pencils of 
B (that centered at the point B3, and henceforth called 
lines now incorporates the base line ℒ
(cid:147)extraordinary(cid:148)), and stands thus slightly apart from the other two ((cid:147)ordinary(cid:148)), which do 
not (cid:150) see Figure 3, left.  In the other space, this asymmetry answers to the fact that two of 
the three simple base lines (ℒ׳1 and ℒ׳2) meet each other, while the third one (ℒ׳3) is skew 
with either (cid:150) see Figure 3, right.  
 

Figure 3. An illustrative sketch of the fundamental configuration of a homaloidal web of quadrics sharing a real 
base line and three isolated base points of which one (B3) falls on the line in question (left) and the base 
configuration of the inverse homaloidal web of cubics (right). The symbols are identical to those of the previous 
figure. 

 

7

    The corresponding Cremonian space-times thus both exhibit an intriguing (cid:147)anisotropy(cid:148)  
among the spatial dimensions, where one dimension has a slightly different footing than the 
other two. It is, however, the (cid:147)fundamental(cid:148) ((cid:147)subjective(cid:148)) representation where this spatial 
anisotropy  has  not  only  a  more  pronounced  character,  but  is  also  accompanied  by  a 
qualitative change in the extrinsic geometry of the time dimension: for, as easily discernible 
from  the  comparison  of  the  left-hand  sides  of  Figures  2  and  3,  the  pencil  of fundamental 
conics  in  the  generic  case  is  of  the  type  (cid:147)a(cid:148)  of  Figure  1,  whereas  that  in  this  particular 
degenerate case is of the type (cid:147)b(cid:148) (as B3≡L here). 
   A brief inspection of some other degenerate cases [27,29] reveals further subtleties of this 
fascinating relation. Thus, the same type of time dimension  ((cid:147)b(cid:148)) is found also in the case 
B; space now featuring only two dimensions, 
when two of the base points coalesce, not on ℒ
both  being  ordinary.  The  (cid:147)c(cid:148)  type  of  time  coordinate  is  encountered  if  one  of  the  base 
B  and  the  other  two  coincide,  off  the  latter;  space  again  endowed  with  a 
points  lies  on  ℒ
couple  of  dimensions  (cid:150)  one  ordinary,  one  extraordinary.  The  dimensionality  of  space  is 
further  reduced  if  all  the  three  base  points  merge,  the  single  spatial  coordinate  being 
ordinary  or  extraordinary  and  time  converted  into  the  type  (cid:147)d(cid:148)  or  (cid:147)e(cid:148)  according  as  the 
B, respectively. The time dimension can even disappear, as 
merger lies off or on the line ℒ
B; space, remarkably, retains here its three 
in the case when two of the base points fall on ℒ
dimensions, of which two are extraordinary.3 These examples suffice to see that a profound 
connection  between  the  global  structure  of  time  dimension  and  the  number,  as  well  as 
individual character, of spatial coordinates is an essential element of the structure of our 
Cremonian  pencil-space-times.  It  is  this  property  that  finds  its  most  distinguished  and 
almost ubiquitous manifestations in the already-mentioned realm of the psychopathology of 
time and space [1(cid:150)14,21(cid:150)23]. However, from what we found above it stems that this must 
also be a feature pertaining to the structure of the physical universe, although in this case its 
traits  are  obviously  of  a  much  subtler  nature,  being  essentially  embodied  in  a  possible 
delicate non-equivalence among the spatial dimensions themselves (compare the right-hand 
sides  of  Figures  2  and  3).  And  although  so  far  successfully  evading  any  experimental, 
observational  evidence,  this  fact  deserves  at  least  serious  theoretical  attention,  especially 
given recent trends in quests for a (cid:147)theory of everything(cid:148) [30]. For in addition to invoking 
compactified  extra  dimensions  of  space  to  get  a  sufficiently  extended  setting  for  the 
ultimate unification of all the known types of interaction, we think it is worth revisiting and 
having  a  fresh  look  at  (the  relation  among)  their  three  classical,  infinitely-stretched-out 
relatives, available to our senses.    
    The final task that remains to be done concerns the intrinsic structure of the pencil time 
dimension. This structure has to conform to our experience of time as consisting of three 
qualitatively different kinds of event, viz. the past, present and future. Yet, our pencil-time 
is so far homogeneous, because all proper conics are projectively equivalent. We therefore 
need to (cid:147)de-homogenize(cid:148) the pencil to yield the structure required. In light of the strategy 
pursued in our planar model [15(cid:150)23], one of the simplest ways of doing so is to select, in 
the unprimed projective space, one line, ℒ*, and attach to it a special status. It is an easy 
exercise  to  see  that  if  this  line  is  in  a  general  position,  it  will  cut  each  of  the  four 
(cid:147)fundamental(cid:148)  planes  in  a  point  which  does  not  coincide  with  any  of  the  base  points  Bk  

                                                      
3 The interested reader may try to extend this analysis to all the remaining degenerate cases, whose complete list 
and basic group-geometrical description can be found in [29]. 

 

8

B  as  well.  Hence,  the  line  ℒ*  will  be  incident  with  a  unique  line 
(k=1,2,3)  and  lies  off  ℒ
B  (k=1,2,3)  and  a  unique,  in  general 
from  each  of  the  three  (cid:147)fundamental(cid:148)  pencils  in  Bkℒ
proper,  conic  of  the  (cid:147)fundamental(cid:148)  pencil  in  the  plane  B1B2B3  (cid:150)  as  depicted  in  Figure  4.  
But as for the pencil of fundamental conics, and so time, there is indeed more than meets 
the eye. For the point at which ℒ* meets the plane in question separates the proper conics 
of the pencil into two disjoint, qualitatively distinct families. One family consists of those 
conics for which this point is external ((cid:147)ex-conics(cid:148)), while the other family comprises the 
conics having this point in their interior ((cid:147)in-conics(cid:148)); the two sets are separated from each 
other  by  a  unique  proper  conic,  the  one  that  incorporates  the  point  (the  (cid:147)on-conic(cid:148)  (cid:150)  the 
conic drawn bold in Figure 4). This structure is seen to be perfectly compatible with what 
Nature  offers  to  our  senses  after  we  identify  the  ex-conics  with  the  past  events,  the  in-
conics  with  the  events  of  the  future,  and  the  unique  on-conic  with  the  moment  of  the 
present, the (cid:147)now.(cid:148) It is evident that nothing similar takes place inside a(ny) pencil of lines, 
because there are no such notions as external and/or internal for a point with respect to a 
line. So, our spatial pencil-dimensions retain their (cid:147)homogeneity,(cid:148) as observed.  
 

 

Figure 4. A generic line of the projective space, ℒ*, is incident with three unique, mutually skew, fundamental 
lines (one from each pencil) and a unique fundamental conic (all the four objects drawn bold). 

 
    It is important here to realize that it is only after introducing this standing-out line when 
the  distinction  between  time  and  space  acquires  its  desirable,  observed  form.  A  natural 
question emerges: what is the meaning of this special line? We think that the existence of 
such a line may simply be understood as a possible representation of the observer. It then 
follows  that  if  there  is  no  observer,  there  is  no  (cid:147)here(cid:148)  and  there  is  no  present,  past  and 
future either. The converse, however, is not true! That is, there do exist observers that are 
not  (fully)  localized  in  space  and  whose  time  dimension  exhibits  a  completely  different 
internal structure. As the attentive reader may already have noticed, this has to correspond 
to the cases where the line ℒ* has a particular position with respect to the points Bk and/or 

 

9

B, or lies completely in one of the (cid:147)fundamental(cid:148) planes. To illustrate the point, 
the line ℒ
let us consider the case where ℒ* passes via one of the base points, say B1, being skew with 
B and not lying in the plane B1B2B3. It is clear that in this case every fundamental conic is 
ℒ
the  on-conic;  so,  for  this  particular  observer  there  exists  no  past/future,  all  the  events 
pertaining solely to the present! Moreover, as B1 is the vertex of the pencil of fundamental 
B, this observer will also find himself/herself to be infinitely-
lines located in the plane B1ℒ
stretched-out  along  the  corresponding  spatial  dimension!  Astonishing?  Or,  rather,  weird? 
Yes, but even more so that this and plenty of even more bizarre, whimsical experiences of 
space  and  time  are  so  often  found  in  the  narratives  of  people  who  find  themselves  in  a 
profoundly altered state of consciousness and try to share their uncanny experiences with 
others  [1(cid:150)14,21(cid:150)23].  To  provide  the  reader  with  a  sense  of  what  such  a  (cid:147)strange(cid:148)  space-
time experience looks like, we introduce the following fascinating account [31]: 
 
I woke up in a whole different world in which the puzzle of the world was solved extremely easily in the form of a 
different space. I was amazed at the wonder of this different space and this amazement concealed my judgement, 
this space is totally distinct from the one we all know. It had different dimensions, everything contained everything 
else. I was this space and this space was  me. The outer space was a part of this space, I was in the outer space and 
the outer space was in me... 
    Anyway, I didn(cid:146)t experience time, time of the outer space and eons until the second phase of this dream. In the 
cosmic  flow  of  time  you  saw  worlds  coming  to  existence,  blooming  like  flowers,  actually  existing  and  then 
disappearing. It was an endless game. If you looked back into the past, you saw eons, if you looked forward into 
the future there were eons stretching into the eternity and this eternity was contained in the point of the present. 
One was situated in a state of being in which the (cid:147)will-be(cid:148) and the (cid:147)vanishing(cid:148) were already included, and this 
(cid:147)being(cid:148) was my consciousness. It contained it all... 
 
 
3.  Conclusion 
 
Current  science  is  most  adept  in  addressing  problems  that  require  technique  rather  than 
insight.  Yet,  when  addressing  the  fundamental  issues  of  the  structure  of  space-time,  it  is 
rather insight that matters.  The above-outlined theory of Cremonian space-time(s) seems to 
provide us with both, which is one of its strongest points. It not only offers us a feasible 
explanation why the Universe features three spatial and one temporal dimension, but also 
indicates unsuspected intricacies of the coupling between the two. Moreover, it also sheds 
fresh  light  on  how  the  physical  view  of  space-time  and  its  experiential  counterpart  can 
possibly  be  interconnected.  These  properties  alone  are  enough  to  realize  that  the  theory 
deserves further serious exploration. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This  work  was  supported  by  the  NATO  Advanced  Research  Fellowship,  distributed  and 
administered by the Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique, Belgium, and, in part, by 
the  NATO  Collaborative  Linkage  Grant  PST.CLG.976850.  I  would  like  to  thank  Mr.  P. 
Bend(cid:237)k  for  careful  drawing  of  the  figures.  I  am  also  grateful  to  my  friends  Prof.  Mark 
Stuckey (Elizabethtown College) for a careful proofreading of the paper and Dr. Rosolino 
Buccheri (IFCAI, Palermo) for valuable comments. 
 
 

 

10

References 
 
1.    Jaspers, K. (1923) Allgemeine Psychopathologie, Springer, Berlin.   
2.    Minkowski, E. (1933) Le Temps Vécu – Études Phénoménologiques et Psychopathologiques, Gauthier, Paris. 
3.    Binswanger, L. (1933) Das Raumproblem in der Psychopathologie, Zeit. ges. Neurol. Psychiat. 145, 598(cid:150)648. 
4.    Israeli, N. (1932) The psychopathology of time, Psychol. Rev. 39, 486. 
5.    Schilder, P. (1936) Psychopathology of time, J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 83, 530(cid:150)546. 
6.    Schilder, P. (1936) Psychoanalyse des Raumes, Imago 22, 61(cid:150)80. 
7.    Scheller, H. (1957) Das Problem des Raumes in der Psychopathologie, Studium Generale 10, 563(cid:150)574. 
8.    Fischer, F. (1929) Zeitstruktur und Schizophrenie, Zeit. ges. Neurol. Psychiat. 121, 544(cid:150)574. 
9.    Fischer, F.  (1930)  Raum-Zeit-Struktur  und  Denkst(cid:246)rung  in  der  Schizophrenie, Zeit. ges. Neurol. Psychiat. 

10.  Melges, E.T. (1982) Time and the Inner Future: A Temporal Approach to Psychiatric Disorders, John Wiley 

11.  Hartocollis,  P.  (1983)  Time  and  Timelessness,  or  the  Varieties  of  Temporal  Experience,  International 

124, 241(cid:150)256. 

& Sons, New York. 

Universities Press, New York. 

12.  Tellenbach, H. (1956) Die Raumlichkeit der Melancholischen: I. Mitteilung, Nervenarzt 27, 12(cid:150)18. 
13.  Tellenbach, H. (1956) Die Raumlichkeit der Melancholischen: II. Mitteilung, Nervenarzt 27, 289(cid:150)298. 
14.  Lehmann, H.E. (1967) Time and psychopathology, Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 138, 798(cid:150)821. 
15.  Saniga, M. (1996) Arrow of time and spatial dimensions, in K. Sato, T. Suginohara, and N. Sugiyama (eds.), 
Cosmological  Constant  and  the  Evolution  of  the  Universe,  Universal  Academy  Press  Inc.,  Tokyo,  pp.  283(cid:150)
284. 

16.  Saniga, M. (1996) On the transmutation and annihilation of pencil-generated space-time dimensions, in W.G. 
Tifft and W.J. Cocke (eds.), Mathematical Models of Time and Their Application to Physics and Cosmology, 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, pp. 283(cid:150)290. 

17.  Saniga, M. (1998) Pencils of conics: a means towards a deeper understanding of the arrow of time?, Chaos, 

Solitons & Fractals 9, 1071(cid:150)1086. 

18.  Saniga, M. (1998) Time arrows over ground fields of an uneven characteristic, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 9, 

19.  Saniga, M. (1998) Temporal dimension over Galois fields of characteristic two, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 9, 

1087(cid:150)1093. 

1095(cid:150)1104. 

20.  Saniga,  M.  (1998)  On  a  remarkable  relation  between  future  and  past  over  quadratic  Galois  fields,  Chaos,  

Solitons & Fractals 9, 1769(cid:150)1771. 

21.  Saniga,  M.  (1998)  Unveiling  the  nature  of  time:  altered  states  of  consciousness  and  pencil-generated  

space-times, International Journal of Transdisciplinary Studies 2, 8(cid:150)17. 

22.  Saniga,  M.  (1999)  Geometry  of  psycho(patho)logical  space-times:  a  clue  to  resolving  the  enigma  of  time?, 

Noetic Journal 2, 265(cid:150)273. 

23.  Saniga, M. (2000) Algebraic geometry: a tool for resolving the enigma of time?, in R. Buccheri, V. Di Gesø  
and  M.  Saniga  (eds.),  Studies  on  the  Structure  of  Time:  From  Physics  to  Psycho(patho)logy,  Kluwer 
Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York, pp. 137(cid:150)166. 

24.  Saniga,  M.  (2001)  Cremona  transformations  and  the  conundrum  of  dimensionality  and  signature  of  macro-

spacetime, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 12, 2127(cid:150)2142. 

25.  Saniga,  M.  (2002)  On  (cid:147)spatially  anisotropic(cid:148)  pencil-space-times  associated  with  a  quadro-cubic  Cremona  

transformation, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 13, 807(cid:150)814. 

26.  Saniga, M. (2002) Quadro-quartic Cremona transformations and four-dimensional pencil-space-times with the 

reverse signature, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 13, 797(cid:150)805. 

27.  Cremona, L. (1871) Sulle trasformazioni razionali nello spazio, Ann. Mat. Pura Appl. II(5), 131(cid:150)162. 
28.  Hudson, H.P. (1927) Cremona Transformations in Plane and Space, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
29.  Pan, I., Ronga, F., and Vust, T. (2001) Birational quadratic transformations of the three dimensional complex 

projective space, Annales de l’Institut Fourier 51, 1153(cid:150)1187. 

30.  Kaku, M. (1999) Introduction to Superstrings and M-theory, Springer, New York. 
31.  Huber, G. (1955) Akasa, der Mystische Raum, Origo Verlag, Z(cid:252)rich, p. 46. 
 
 
 
 
 

