1

Optical Tests of Nanoengineered Liquid Mirrors

2
Hélène Yockell-Lelièvre

1
, Ermanno  F. Borra

2
,  Anna Ritcey

,

 Lande Vieira da Silva Jr

1

.

Centre d'Optique, Photonique et Lasers, Université Laval, Québec, Qc, Canada G1K 7P4.

Their email adresses are: borra@phy.ulaval.ca, Anna.Ritcey@chm.ulaval.ca,

lvidasil@phy.ulaval.ca, hyockell@chm.ulaval.ca

(SEND ALL EDITORIAL CORRESPONDANCE TO: E.F. BORRA)

OCSIS: 000.3110, 240.6700,  260.3910, 350.1260

1 Département de Physique, Genie Physique et Optique

2 Département de Chimie.

2

Abstract

We describe a new technology  for the fabrication of inexpensive high-quality mirrors.

We begin by chemically producing a large number of metallic nanoparticles coated with

organic ligands. The particles are then spread on a liquid substrate where they self-

assemble to give optical quality reflective surfaces. Since liquid surfaces can be modified

with a variety of means (e.g. rotation, electromagnetic fields), this opens the possibility

of making a new class of versatile and inexpensive optical elements that can have

complex shapes which can  be modified within short time scales. Interferometric

measurements show optical quality surfaces. We have obtained reflectivity curves that

show 80% peak reflectivities.We are confident that we can improve the reflectivity

curves, for theoretical models predict higher values. We expect that nanoengineered

liquid mirrors should be useful for scientific and engineering applications. The

technology is interesting for large optics, such as large rotating parabolic mirrors,

because of its low cost. Furthermore, because the surfaces of ferrofluids can be shaped

with magnetic fields, one can generate complex, time varying surfaces difficult to make

with conventional techniques.

1.  Introduction

Liquid surfaces follow equipotential surfaces so that a reflective liquid makes a mirror

that has the shape of the equipotentials. Liquid mirrors therefore offer new possibilities

3

for the fabrication of unique optical elements. For example, the fact that the surface of a

liquid rotating in a gravitational field takes the shape of a parabola has been used to make

large inexpensive parabolic mirrors. For a given diameter, the cost of a diffraction limited

mercury liquid mirror is almost two orders of magnitudes lower than the cost of a glass

mirror, making it very competitive for some applications. The technology is young but its

quality and robustness have been documented in the laboratory1,2 as well as in

observatory settings3,4,5 .  However, liquid metals have several inconveniences (e.g. high-

density, toxicity, etc..) so that it would be advantageous to replace them with other

liquids having better characteristics. Furthermore, liquid surfaces can be shaped with

other means than rotation. For example, the surfaces of ferrofluids can be shaped with

magnetic fields 6. Unfortunately, mercury and some gallium alloys 7 are the only metals

that are liquid at room temperature so that we have  a limited range of parameters (e.g.

magnetic susceptibilities) to work with if restricted to liquid metals.

To extend the range of useful liquids and the range of available parameters, such

as magnetic susceptibility, we have begun a research program that endeavors to find

techniques that allow the deposition of high-reflectivity metallic surfaces on  liquids. In a

recent paper8 we have discussed the characteristics of Metal Liquid Like Films

(MELLFs) trapped at the interface between two liquids. MELLFs were originally

developed by chemists to study the characteristics of the chemicals that coat the metallic

grains. Realizing their potential use in optical applications, we have started a research

program to investigate their optical properties and refine the chemical techniques for

optical applications.

In this article, we describe the basic technology (section 2) and discuss the optical

characteristics of  MELLFs deposited at the top surface of a liquid (section 3). The

4

spreading of the reflecting layer at the top surface represents a significant improvement

as compared to our previous mirrors in which the nanoparticles were assembled at the

interface between two liquids.  In the present configuration,  the reflective nanoparticle

coating is the first surface encountered by the incoming electromagnetic wave.

2.  Preparation of silver particles and deposition of reflective

films on liquids

Stable interfacial suspensions of silver nanoparticles have been described in the literature

and are frequently referred to as Metal Liquid-Like Films, or MELLFs9,10. These unique

systems combine the optical properties of metals with the fluidity of a liquid suspension

and are therefore well adapted to applications in the field of liquid optics.  The

fabrication of a MELLF involves the creation of silver nanoparticles, generally by

chemical reduction of a silver salt in aqueous solution, and the subsequent coating of the

particles with a strong metal-bonding organic molecule, a ligand. When coated, the

particles are no longer stable in the aqueous phase and spontaneously assemble at the

water-organic interface.

The MELLFs investigated in the present study were prepared in the following way:

Silver nanoparticles were first prepared by the chemical reduction by citrate of silver

nitrate in aqueous solution following a known procedure11. Two different preparations

were considered: in one case the temperature was maintained precisely at 100oC, whereas

in the other the temperature was less well controlled and slightly lower (around 95oC).

The silver nitrate solution was brought to a boil (100 oC) before the addition of the

reducing agent.  In the case of more precise temperature control, the citrate solution was

also heated to boiling before its addition, thus permitting the temperature to be

5

maintained at 100oC throughtout the reduction process.  In the second preparation

method, a room temperature citrate solution was added to the silver nitrate solution,

resulting in a temporary drop in the temperature. The resulting aqueous suspension of

metallic particles was then vigorously shaken for 5 minutes together with a solution of

either 1,10-phenanthroline, 2,9-dimethyl-1,10-phenanthroline or 2,2-dipyridyl in 1,2-

dichloroethane. This step provokes the spontaneous formation of a concentrated fluid

phase of particles at the interface between the two liquids.  Finally, the concentrated

interfacial suspension of particles was collected by removal of the excess aqueous and

organic phases, washed  and poured onto a water surface.  At this point, the residual 1,2-

dichloroathane in the MELLF evaporates, leaving a thin dried film of ligand-coated

nanoparticles.  Although this film is not truly liquid-like, it is able to withstand small

deformations without breaking.

It must be noted that, although the work reported below refers only to mirrors spread

on pure water, certain characteristics of the liquid support (e. g. viscosity or magnetic

susceptibility) can be easily varied by the introduction of suitable additives in the water

(e.g. water-soluble polymers or colloidal particles). More complete details of the

chemical preparation and characterization of the MELLFs will appear elsewhere.

The shape and size of the particles obtained from the two different preparations  are

shown in the transmission electron microscope (TEM) images in Fig. 1. Keeping a

constant temperature of 100 degrees Celsius predominantly produces spherical particles

having variable diameters of a few 10 nm. If we reduce the temperature by a few degrees

during reduction, we produce elongated particles of the order of 100 nm.  Obviously, we

have some measure of control of the size and shapes of the particles by controlling the

temperature during the first few minutes of the chemical reduction  that produces them .

6

3.  Optical tests of nanoengineered mirrors

3.1 Interferometry

The Laval liquid mirror laboratory is presently carrying out work to develop large

rotating parabolic liquid mirrors that use metal coated liquids as well as magnetically

deformable adaptive mirrors made of coated ferrofluids 6 . Most of this work is in

progress and will be reported elsewhere at later times.  Because the aim of the present

article is to introduce the basic concept and coating technology, we shall only discuss flat

water-based mirrors. We have made and tested several flat liquid mirrors. We have

carried out  interferometric tests at a wavelength of 632.8 nm with a Fizeau

interferometer made by the Zygo corporation (model GPI-XP).

Fig. 2a  shows an interferogram obtained by measuring a 6.5 cm diameter sample of

one of our dried MELLF surfaces. The lateral resolution on the surface of the liquid was

0.1 cm. The fringes can be compared to those obtained, in the same conditions, by

measuring a λ/20 glass mirror (Fig. 2b). We can readily see that the surfaces have

comparable qualities. This is to be expected since the surface of a liquid follows an

equipotential surface to a very high precision, as shown by the work on mercury liquid

mirrors1 . On the other hand, there are particular problems that can arise with the coating

technology. For example, large surfaces can be marred by a few bubbles, as well as a few

scar-like defects caused by evaporating water drops that leave solid residues. The

fractions of the surfaces affected are not large ( of the order of a few percents) and we are

presently developing techniques to minimize these defects.

Obviously, interferometry does not provide information about the surface roughness

over distances smaller than the resolution of the interferometer. Scattered light

7

measurements will  be made to quantify the scattering,  but results are not available at

this time. Atomic Force Microscope analyses of  samples deposited on glass indicate root

mean square (RMS) surface deviations  of the order of 20 nm. Although glass mirrors can

have smoother surfaces, this value corresponds to about λ/20 at 500 nm and predicts little

scattered light.  On the other hand, some scattered light can also be caused by clumps of

coalesced particles. As discussed below, our reflectivity and transmission curves show

that this is particularly a problem if we use a small concentration of  the protective

ligands. The curves give some indications of the importance of scattered light since the

lost energy is due to a combination of scattered light and absorbed light.

3.2 Reflectance and transmittance curves

We  measured  the  reflectivity  and  transmission  curves  of  several  of  our  samples  as  a

function  of  wavelength  with  a  spectrophotometer  (Varian  model  Cary  500  Scan).  The

reflectivity  curves  were  normalized  by  comparing  them  to  the  curves  obtained  on  a

sample  of  clean  mercury.  While  the  reflectivity  curves  shown  are  measured  on  the

reflective liquid, the transmission curves are measured on samples deposited on a glass

microscope slide.  The sample is transferred from the water surface simply by sliding the

glass under the surface and then lifting it horizontally to remove a section of the MELLF.

A  freshly  deposited  dried  MELLF  rests  on  top  of  the  thin  layer  of  water  that  wets  the

slide.  This  layer  evaporates  within  a  few  minutes,  leaving  a  dried  film  on  the  glass.

Transmission  measurements  were  carried  out  on  both  water-deposited  and  glass-

deposited samples, and no significant differences were found. The reflectivity curves for

a typical dried MELLFs is shown in Fig. 3 (curve a).  Maximum reflectivities of the order

of  80%  are  obtained  near  700  nm.    Lower  reflectivity  is  observed  at  both  higher  and

8

lower  wavelengths.    The  reflectivity  losses  can  be  attributed  to  dissipative  absorption,

scattering and the fact that the reflective layer is relatively thin and transmits some of the

light. We have used the transmission curves to evaluate the percentage of light lost to the

different  factors.  The  difference  between  the  reflectivity  and  transmission  curves  is

plotted in Fig. 3 (curve b) indicates that transmission alone is not responsible for the loss.

There  obviously  is,  in  addition,  a  combination  of  scattering  and  dissipative  absorption.

At shorter wavelengths, important losses due to the surface plasmon absorption near 320

nm  are  evident.    above  700  nm  transmission  increases  with  increasing  wavelength,

varying from about 10% at 500nm to 30% at 1200 nm.

The reflectivity curves give information on the physical characteristics of the reflecting

layers and useful indications of what is needed to improve the optical properties of the

films. For example, Fig. 4 illustrates the influence of the size and shape of the particles,

showing results for samples prepared from the two different preparations of colloidal

particles,  formed by reduction at either boiling or slightly lower temperature. Though

they are quantitatively different the reflectivity curves exhibit similar tendencies. Both

show that the lowest reflectivity value is in the plasmon frequency for bulk silver at ~320

nm. In the visible region of the spectrum there is a peak in the reflectivity at ~500 nm

followed by a slight decrease which gives it a hunchback profile. The values then

increase to their highest value ~800 nm to decrease monotonically with increasing

wavelength. These are the typical features we see in the spectra of all of our MELLFs.

The three ligands that we have tested (1,10-phenanthroline, 2,9-dimethyl-1,10-

phenanthroline and 2,2-dipyridyl ) had a relatively small effect on the form of the

reflectivity curves. However, considering the limited number of ligands tested, and their

obvious structural similarities, we cannot make definitive statements regarding the

9

importance of the chemical composition of the ligands. We are currently investigating a

variety of additional ligands.

We find that reflectivity decreases if we lower the concentration of ligands.

Presumably this increases the amount of scattered light since too little ligand may leave

unprotected areas on the silver grains that clump together to give large irregularly-shaped

aggregates that scatter light.

3.3 Model of reflectance properties

To understand the shape of our reflectivity curves and to try and find ways to improve

them, we use the theoretical framework described by 12. They developed a model, which

they called the TKF approximation, to describe the optical behavior of  composite

systems made of particles embedded in a dielectric. It corrects the bulk optical constants

of a metal for the particle size13 and for the volume fraction (filling factor)  of the

particles in the matrix14. It uses the corrected values with the Fresnel equations to

calculate the reflectivity of the system. Whenever the particle size is comparable to or

smaller than that of the mean free path of the  conduction electrons in the bulk material (

linf ), we need to  correct the  dielectric constants of the system. This must be so because

the collisions of these electrons with the particle surfaces lower the effective mean free

path leading to an increase in the collision frequency. This is the classical approach. The

new dielectric constant is  then a function of the incident light frequency and of the radius

of the particle 13.

Let τ = 3.7 × 10-14 seconds  be the collision time (relaxation time) for bulk silver

at 273 K . The mean free path of the conduction electrons  in the bulk material is then

given by linf  = vf  τ . One obtains linf = 52 nm with  the fermi velocity vf  = 1.4 × 106  m/s .

10

The value for  linf  is different if the collision  bulk frequency, which is  given by ωo =

(τ)-1 , changes.  If particle sizes are comparable to or smaller than   linf   the collision time

τ changes. The new collision time is a function of the radius of the particle13  and is

given by τcorr = R / vf.  Finally, if the collision time changes, so does the  collision

frequency  which  is then  corrected for the particle size 13 to give  ωc(R) = ωo + (τcorr)-1    

and  ωc(R) = ωo + (vf  / R).  The change in the collision frequency affects the optical

constants. For silver, the real part of the optical constant (n) is inversely proportional to

the radius of the particle. The imaginary part (k) remains basically the same except for

the plasmon region of the spectra. The TKF model predicts that reflectivity will decrease

for smaller particle radius in the  400 – 600 nm region of the spectra. Changes in the

particle size do not change the reflectivity from 700 nm on. Further discussion is given in

reference 13 . Note however that our experimental curves in Fig. 2 disagree with this last

statement. On the other hand, the disagreement may partially be due to differences

between the model and our samples, as discussed in the next section.

The correction of the optical constants for variations in the filling factor , defined

as the volume ratio of the sum of the metallic particles to the total volume of the matrix

and particles, is taken into account using the expressions given by Torquato 14. He

considers multipolar electromagnetic interactions between  spherical particles, which

increase with the high filling factor: the higher the filling factor, the higher the electrical

conductivity and the higher  the reflectivity. This can be understood by the increase of

clusters of particles15 resulting on an increased electrical conductivity.

Unfortunately, there is an upper limit to the filling factor; partly because the particles

are wrapped up in a thin layer of  ligand (about 1 nm thick) and partly because of the

11

geometrical limit to the packing of  particles that are not orthorombic (e.g. boxes). The

filling factor therefore depends on the shapes and distributions of the particles. For

example, the maximum filling factor value for a random close packing of spheres that

have the same diameters  would be ~ 63% 16. It may be possible to increase the filling

factor by mixing spheres of different sizes. Torquato 14 gives a three point parameter that

varies with the filling factor for each different  spatial arrangement like simple cubic,

face centered cubic among others, allowing us to consider these different packings in the

TKF model calculations.

3.4 Comparison of reflectivity data to models

Reflectivity curves computed with the TKF model show the effect of the sizes of the

particles (assuming spheres) as a function of diameters for a filling factor of 55% in Fig.

5. Theory predicts that reflectivity increases from 1nm to 30 nm diameters, while there is

little size effect for spherical particles larger than  30 nm.  However, we see that the

experimental reflectivity curves in Fig. 4 are significantly affected by the sizes and

shapes of the particles. The discrepancy may be due to inadequacies of the TKF theory or

to the fact that the theory assumes smooth spherical particles all having the same radii,

while the electron microscope images show that the particles are not spherical and have

different sizes (Fig. 1).  Fig. 6 shows reflectivity curves for particles having diameters of

20 nm and three different filling factors. We used Torquato’s14 values for randomly

distributed spheres. Figure 5 shows that reflectivities longward of 650 nm can be greatly

improved by increasing the filling factor. It must be noted that hard spheres having the

same diameter cannot give filling factors higher than 74%, so that the 95% curve is

misleading for such a situation. On the other hand, a filling factor larger than 75% may

12

be obtained by using a distribution of diameters, since the smaller spheres will fill the

regions in between the larger spheres.

Notwithstanding the disagreements mentioned in the preceding discussion, the

TKF model points the way to improve the reflectivity of our liquids. Fig. 6 shows that the

major improvements will come by increasing the filling factor.

4.  Conclusions.

This article uses a novel chemical technique that coats the air-water interface with a

reflective layer of self-assembling metallic nanoparticles. We have succeeded in coating

the top surface of water with a layer of silver grains coated with a ligand. This is a

significant improvement over results presented in earlier work8 which trapped the

reflecting layer at the interface between two liquids since  now the reflecting layer coats

the first surface seen by light. Interferometry shows that the coated surfaces have good

optical qualities. Reflectivity measurements show peak values of the order of 80%,

comparable to the reflectivity of mercury (about 80%). Reflectivity is lower than the

reflectivity of silver or aluminum coated glass but one must consider that, in practice,

coated glass mirrors are seldom recoated, hence degrade with time as they get covered

with dust and dirt. This is particularly true for telescope mirrors used in astronomy, the

space and atmospheric sciences which are exposed unprotected to the elements. On the

other hand, our reflecting layers are easy to generate and inexpensive so that they could

be refreshed often. The 80% peak reflectivity was obtained effortlessly and we are

confident that reflectivities can be improved with additional work currently in progress.

Experimental and theoretical curves based on the TKF model are in qualitative

agreement but disagree in the details. We can probably “hand-wave”  the differences by

13

invoking “real-world” differences between our results and the TKF calculations. The

TKF model assumes smooth spherical particles having the same diameters.  In our case,

the electron microscope images (Fig 1) show that the particles can be elongated, are not

smooth, and have different radii. Furthermore, our particles tend to clump together, so

that we do not have any of the idealized distributions assumed in the computations.

Finally there is a loss due to scattering by large aggregates of particles that we cannot

evaluate at this time. Still, the models should be useful to show the ways to increase

reflectivity. They suggest that we should increase the filling factor to improve

reflectivity.

We expect that nanoengineered liquid mirrors should be useful for scientific and

engineering applications. The technology is interesting for large optics, such as large

parabolic mirrors, because of its low cost. Consider that the mirror basically consists of a

1-mm thick layer of liquid coated with a 150 nm thick layer of nanoparticles. A 10-m

diameter mirror would thus weigh of the order of 100 kg. Because the cost of the mirror

and supporting hardware (e.g. container and bearing) depends on the weight of the

mirror, it should be quite inexpensive (of the order of a few tens of thousands of dollars).

The costs of the chemical involved are negligible and the process not overly demanding

of human time. The cost of an astronomical observatory would then be totally dominated

by the cost of the building and the instrumentation. For all essential purposes one would

get the mirror for free. Note also that, while mercury mirrors cannot be tilted, thus

limiting their usefulness, rotating mirrors that use viscous liquids can be tilted8 .  Coated

ferrofluids6 are especially interesting for practical applications because they promise to

make versatile low-cost mirrors. Because the surfaces of these mirrors can be shaped

14

with magnetic fields, one can generate complex, time varying surfaces difficult to make

with conventional techniques.

This is a very young technology and there is a significant quantity of work to be

done before it reaches the performance and robustness expected for practical

applications. We are presently working to improve it. Recently, we have developed a

technique to coat the surface of oils with MELLFs, to be reported elsewhere.  We are also

investigating the use of other metals (e.g. gold and aluminum). The work carried out so

far has been relatively simple and we have reached several milestones with relative ease,

boding well for the future.

AKNOWLEDGEMENTS.

This research has been supported by grants to E. Borra and A. Ritcey from the Natural

Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. and The Canadian Institute for

Photonics Innovation.  Lande Vieira da Silva Junior is financially supported by a

scholarship from  the ‘ Conselho Brasileiro de Desenvolvimento Científico e

Tecnológico’, CNPq – Brasil.

15

REFERENCES .

1.  1. L.  Girard, and E.F. Borra, “Optical tests of a 2.5-m diameter liquid mirror II:

Behavior under external perturbations and scattered light measurements,” Appl. Opt.

36, 25, 6278-6288 (1997).

2.  G. Tremblay and E. F. Borra,” Optical Tests of a 3.7-m diameter liquid mirror:

behavior under external perturbations, “ Appli. Opt. 39, 5651-5662 (2000).

3.  R. J. Sica, S. Sargoytchev,  E.F. Borra,  L. Girard, S. Argall, C.T. Sarrow,  & S. Flatt,

"Lidar measurements taken with a large aperture liquid  mirror:1.The Rayleigh-

scatter system," Appl. Opt., 34, 6925-6936 ( 1995).

4.  P. Hickson, and M. Mulrooney, ”University of British Columbia-NASA Multi-

Narrowband Survey. I. Description and photometric properties of the survey,”

Astrophys. J. Suppl. 115, 35-42 (1998).

5.  R. Cabanac, E.F. Borra, and M. Beauchemin, “ A search for peculiar objects with the

NASA orbital debris observatory 3-m liquid mirror Telescope,” Astrophys. J. 509,

309-323, (1998).

6.  P. R. Laird, E.F. Borra, Anna Ritcey, Hélène Yockell-Lelièvre, Nathalie Robitaille,

Vincent Bérubé “Applications of magnetically shaped liquid optical surfaces ,” Proc.

of SPIE   4833, to be published ( 2002).

7.  E.F. Borra,G. Tremblay,Y. Huot  and J. Gauvin,  “Gallium liquid mirrors: basic

technology, optical-shop tests and observations,”  Pub. Astr. Soc. Pac.,  109, 319-325

8.   E. F. Borra, A. M. Ritcey and  E.  Artigau, “Floating mirrors,” Astrophys. J.  Letters,

(1997).

516, L115-L118 (1999).

16

9.  D. Yogev and S. Efrima, “Novel silver metal like films,” J. Phys. Chem. 92, 5754-

5760 (1988).

10. K.C Gordon, J.J. McGarvey and K.P. Taylor, “Enhanced-Raman scattering from

liquid metal films,” J. Phys. Chem.  93, 6814-6817 (1989).

11. P.C. Lee and D. Meisel,”Adsorption and surface-enhanced Raman of dyes in silver

and gold sols,” J. Phys. Chem. 86, 3391-3395 (1982).

12. I. W Farbman, O.Levi and S. Efrima, “Optical response of concentrated colloids of

coinage metal in the near-ultraviolet, visible and infrared regions,” J Chem Phys. 96,

6477-6485 (1992).

13. U. Kreibig and C.V. Fragstein “The Limitation of electron mean free path in small

silver particles,” Z. Physik  224, 307-323 (1969).

14. S. Torquato,  “The electrical conductivity of two-phase disordered   composite

media,”  J. Appl. Phys.  58, 15, 3790 - 3797 (1985).

15. U. Kreibig “Optical Absorption of small metallic films,”  Surface Science 156,  678-

700 (1985).

16. S. Torquato, T.M. Truskett and  P.G.Debenedetti.; ‘Is random close packing of

spheres well defined?’’ Phys. Rev. Letters 84, 2064-2067 (2000).

17

FIGURE CAPTIONS.

Figure 1 : Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of MELLF samples prepared

from a silver colloid reduced at constant boiling temperature (100oC, a) and slightly

lower (95oC, b) temperatures.

Figure  2 : Interferograms of a clean optically flat mirror (a) and of a 6.5 cm diameter

MELLF sample dried at the water-air interface (b). We can readily see that the surfaces

have comparable qualities.

Figure 3 : Reflected light (a) and “lost” light (100 - Reflected - Transmitted),

corresponding to scattered and absorbed light (b), measured on a dried MELLF sample

prepared from a colloid reduced at 100oC.

Figure 4: Reflected light as a function of wavelength measured on dried MELLF samples

prepared from silver colloids reduced at 100oC (1) and 95oC (2).

Figure 5: Theoretical reflectivity curves calculated with the TKF model. They show the

effect of the sizes of spherical particles (assuming spheres) for a filling factor of 55%.

Figure 6: Reflectivity curves calculated with the TKF model corresponding to filling

factors of  55%, 75% and 95% and assuming 20-nm radius spherical silver particles. We

used Torquato’s values for randomly distributed spheres.

18

19

100 nm

100 nm

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 1

20

a)

b)

FIGURE 2

21

%

 
t
h
g
L

i

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

(a)

(b)

FIGURE  3

250

750

1250

1750

Wavelength (nm)

22

(a)

(b)

%
 
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
e
l
f
e
R

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

FIGURE 4

200

700

1200

1700

W avelength (nm )

23

)

%

(
 
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
e
l
f
e
R

100

80

60

40

20

0

5nm
1nm
10nm
30nm
50nm
100nm

0

200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400

   Wavelength (nm)

FIGURE 5

24

100

80

60

40

20

)

%

(
 
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
e
l
f
e
R

0

0

FIGURE 6

fil55
fil65
fil75
fil95

500

1000
   Wavelength (nm)

1500

2000

