 

 

SPALLATION NEUTRON SOURCE AND OTHER HIGH INTENSITY 
PROTON SOURCES* 

WEIREN CHOU 

Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory 
P.O. Box 500  
Batavia, IL 60510, USA 
E-mail: chou@fnal.gov 

This lecture is an introduction to the design of a spallation neutron source and 
other  high  intensity  proton  sources.  It  discusses  two  different  approaches: 
linac-based  and  synchrotron-based.  The  requirements  and  design  concepts  of 
each approach are presented. The advantages and disadvantages are compared. 
A brief review of existing machines and those under construction and proposed 
is also given. An R&D program is included in an appendix. 

1. 

Introduction  

1.1.   What is a Spallation Neutron Source? 

A spallation neutron source is an accelerator-based facility that produces pulsed 
neutron beams by bombarding a target with intense proton beams. 

Intense neutrons can also be obtained from nuclear reactors. However, the 
international  nuclear  non-proliferation  treaty  prohibits  civilian  use  of  highly 
enriched uranium U235. It is a showstopper of any high efficiency reactor-based 
new neutron sources, which would require the use of 93% U235. (This explains 
why  the  original  proposal  of  a  reactor-based  Advanced  Neutron  Source  at  the 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory in the U.S. was rejected. It was replaced by the 
accelerator-based Spallation Neutron Source, or SNS, project.)  

A reactor-based neutron source produces steady higher flux neutron beams, 
whereas an accelerator-based one produces pulsed lower flux neutron beams. So 
the  trade-off  is  high  flux  vs.  time  structure  of  the  neutron  beams.  This  course 
will teach accelerator-based neutron sources.  

An accelerator-based neutron source consists of five parts: 

1)  Accelerators 
2)  Targets 
3)  Beam lines 

                                                           
* This work is supported by the Universities Research Association, Inc., under contract 
No. DE-AC02-76CH03000 with the U.S. Department of Energy. 

1 

2

 

4)  Detectors 
5)  Civil construction 

A project proposal includes 1) through 5), plus a cost estimate, a schedule 
and  environment,  safety  and  health  (ES&H)  considerations.  This  course  will 
teach part 1) only, although part 2) is closely related to 1) and a critical item in 
the design of a spallation neutron source. 

1.2.  Parameter Choice of a Spallation Neutron Source 

The  requirements  of  neutron  beams  for  neutron  scattering  experiments  are  as 
follows: 

•  Neutron energy: low, about a few milli electron volts. 
•  Neutron pulse: sharp, about 1 µs. 
•  Pulse repetition rate: 10-60 Hz. 

When an intense proton beam strikes on a target (made of carbon or heavy 
metal),  neutrons  are  produced  via  spallation.  The  production  rate  is  roughly 
proportional to the power deposited on the target. 

Proton  energies  between  1  and  5  GeV  prove  optimal  for  neutron 

production. At 1 GeV, each incident proton generates 20-30 neutrons.  

The  beam  power  P  is  the  product  of  beam  energy  E,  beam  intensity  N 

(number of protons per pulse) and repetition rate f:  
 

P (MW) = 1.6 × 10-16 × E (GeV) × N × f (Hz) 

  (1) 

 
Typical parameters of a modern high power spallation neutron source are:  

•  P ~ 1 MW 
•  E ~ 1 GeV 
•  N ~ 1 × 1014  
f ~ 10-60 Hz 
• 

1.3.  Linac-based vs. Synchrotron-based Spallation Neutron Source 

There  are  two  approaches  to  an  accelerator-based  spallation  neutron  source: 
linac-based and synchrotron-based.  

A  linac-based  spallation  neutron  source  has  a  full-energy  linac  and  an 

accumulator ring. It works as follows: 

•  A heavy-duty ion source generates high intensity H- beams. 
•  A linac accelerates H- pulses of ~1 ms length to ~1 GeV. 
•  These  H-  particles  are  injected  into  an  accumulator  via  a  charge 
exchange process, in which the electrons are stripped by a foil and 
dumped, and the H+ (proton) particles stay in the ring. 

 

3

•  This  injection  process  takes  many  (several  hundreds  to  a  few 

thousands) turns. 

•  The  accumulated  protons  are  then  extracted  from  the  ring  in  a 

single turn onto a target. The pulse length is about 1 µs. 

•  This process repeats 10-60 times every second. 

A synchrotron-based spallation neutron source has a lower energy linac and 

a rapid cycling synchrotron. It works differently. 

•  A heavy-duty ion source generates high intensity H- beams. 
•  A  linac  accelerates  H-  pulses  of  ~1  ms  length  to  a  fraction  of  a 

GeV. 

•  These  H-  particles  are  injected  into  a  synchrotron  via  the  same 

charge exchange process. 

•  This injection process takes many (several hundreds) turns. 
•  The H+ (proton) beam is accelerated in the synchrotron to 1 GeV 
or  higher  and  then  extracted  in  a  single  turn  onto  a  target.  The 
pulse length is about 1 µs. 

•  This process repeats 10-60 times every second. 

Compared  with  a  linac-based  spallation  neutron  source,  a  synchrotron-

based one has the following advantages: 

•  For  the  same  beam  power,  it  would  cost  less,  because  proton 

synchrotrons are usually less expensive than proton linacs. 

•  For  the  same  beam  power,  it  would  have  lower  beam  intensity, 

because the beam energy could be higher. 

•  Because the injected linac beam has lower power, the stripping foil 
is easier. Also, larger beam loss at injection could be tolerated. 
•  A  major  problem  in  a  high  intensity  accumulator  ring  (a  DC 
machine)  is  the  e-p  instability.  However,  this  has  never  been 
observed in any synchrotron (an AC machine) during ramp. 
The  disadvantages  of  a  synchrotron-based  spallation  neutron  source 

include: 

(accumulators). 

•  AC  machines  (synchrotrons)  are  more  difficult  to  build  than  DC 
is 
machines 
challenging, e.g., large aperture AC magnets, rapid cycling power 
supplies, field tracking during the cycle, eddy current effects in the 
coil and beam pipe, high power tunable RF system, etc. 

the  hardware 

In  particular, 

•  AC machines are also more difficult to operate than DC machines. 

Therefore, the reliability is lower. 

One  needs  to  consider  all  these  factors  when  deciding  which  approach  to 

take for a spallation neutron source.  

 

 

 

4

 

1.4.  Spallation Neutron Source vs. Other High Intensity Proton Sources  

Spallation  neutron  sources  are  an  important  type  of  high  intensity  proton 
sources.  However,  a  high  intensity  proton  source  may  find  many  other 
applications. For example: 

•  To generate high intensity secondary particles for high-energy physics 
experiments, e.g., antiprotons (Tevatron p-pbar collider), muons (AGS, 
JHF),  neutrinos  (K2K,  MiniBooNE,  NuMI,  JHF),  kaons  (CKM, 
KAMI, JHF), ions (ISOLDE), etc. 

•  To generate neutrino superbeams as the first stage to a neutrino factory 
and  a  muon  collider.  (Such  a  high  intensity  proton  source  is  called  a 
Proton Driver.) 

•  Nuclear waste transmutation (JHF, CONCERT). 
•  Energy amplifier (CERN). 
•  Proton radiography (AHF). 
The  design  concept  learned  from  this  course  can  readily  be  applied  to  the 

design of other high intensity proton sources.  

2.  High Intensity Proton Sources: Existing, Under Construction, and 

Proposed 

There  are  a  number  of  high  intensity  proton  sources  operating  at  various 
laboratories over the world. There are presently two large construction projects: 
the SNS at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in the U.S., and the JHF at the 
KEK/JAERI  in  Japan.  Each  has  a  construction  budget  of  about  1.3  billion  US 
dollars  and  is  scheduled  to  start  operation  around  2005-2006.  There  are  also 
numerous proposals for Proton Drivers and other high intensity proton sources. 
Table 1 is a summary based on a survey conducted during the Snowmass 2001 
Workshop. 1 

Among the existing machines, the highest beam power from a synchrotron 
is  160  kW  at  the  ISIS  at  Rutherford  Appleton  Laboratory  in  England.  The 
highest beam power from an accumulator is 64 kW at the PSR at Los Alamos 
National Laboratory in the U.S. 

The  SNS  is  a  linac-based  spallation  neutron  source.  The  design  beam 
energy is 1 GeV, beam power 1.4 MW. The JHF is a synchrotron-based facility. 
It has a 400 MeV linac, a 3 GeV rapid cycling synchrotron with a beam power 
of  1  MW,  and  a  50  GeV  slow  ramp  synchrotron  with  a  beam  power  of  0.75 
MW. 

Several  proposals  of  proton  drivers  have  been  documented  and  can  be 

found in Ref. [2]-[4]. 

 

5

Table 1. High intensity proton sources: existing, under construction, and proposed 
(Snowmass 2001 survey) 
 

Machine 

Existing: 
RAL ISIS 
BNL AGS 
LANL PSR 
ANL IPNS 
Fermilab Booster (*) 
Fermilab MI 
CERN SPS  
Under Construction: 
ORNL SNS 
JHF 50 GeV 
JHF 3 GeV 

Flux 
(1013 /pulse) 
 
2.5 
7 
2.5 
0.3 
0.5 
3 
4.8 
 
14 
32 
8 

Rep Rate 
(Hz) 
 
50 
0.5 
20 
30 
7.5 
0.54 
0.17 
 
60 
0.3 
25 

Proton Driver  
Proposals: 
Fermilab 8 GeV 
Fermilab 16 GeV 
Fermilab MI Upgrade 
BNL Phase I 
BNL Phase II 
CERN SPL 
RAL 15 GeV (**) 
RAL 5 GeV (**) 
Other Proposals: 
Europe ESS (**) 
Europe CONCERT 
LANL AAA 
LANL AHF 
KOMAC 
CSNS/Beijing 

 
 
2.5 
10 
15 
10 
20 
23 
6.6 
10 
 
46.8 
234 
- 
3 
- 
1.56 
† 1 year = 1 × 107 seconds. 
 (*) Including planned improvements. 
(**) Based on 2-ring design. 

 
 
15 
15 
0.65 
2.5 
5 
50 
25 
50 
 
50 
50 
CW 
0.04 
CW 
25 

Flux† 
(1020 /year) 
 
125 
3.5 
50 
9 
3.8 
1.6 
0.8 

 

 

 

840 
10 
200 

 
38 
150 
9.8 
25 
100 
1100 
165 
500 

2340 
12000 
62500 
0.03 
12500 
39 

Energy 
(GeV) 
 
0.8 
24 
0.8 
0.45 
8 
120 
400 

 

 

 

1 
50 
3 

 
8 
16 
120 
24 
24 
2.2 
15 
5 

Power 
(MW) 
 
0.16 
0.13 
0.064 
0.0065 
0.05 
0.3 
0.5 

1.4 
0.75 
1 

 
0.5 
4 
1.9 
1 
4 
4 
4 
4 

 

 

 

1.334 
1.334 
1 
50 
1 
1.6 

5 
25 
100 
0.003 
20 
0.1 

3.  Design Concept of a Linac-based Spallation Neutron Source 

A linac-based spallation neutron source has three major accelerator components: 

We will discuss the design concept of each component in the following sections. 

•  Linac front end 
•  Linac (full energy) 
•  Accumulator 

 

 

 

6

 

3.1.  Linac Front End 

3.1.1.  H- source  

The linac front end consists of an ion (H-) source, a pre-accelerator (Cockcroft-
Walton or RFQ), a low energy beam transport (LEBT), and a chopper. 

H-  ions  have  almost  been  universally  adopted  for  multi-turn  injection  from  a 
linac to an accumulator ring. These ions are generated in an H- source. There are 
several  different  types:  surface-plasma  source  (magnetron),  semi-planatron, 
surface-plasma  source  with  Penning  discharge  (Dudnikov-type  source),  RF 
volume  source,  etc.  This  is  a  highly  specialized  field.  There  are  regular 
conferences  and  workshops  devoted  to  this  topic.    The  main  challenges  are  to 
provide ion beams with high brightness (i.e., high intensity and low emittance) 
and to operate at high duty factor with a reasonable lifetime. 

3.1.2.  Cockcroft-Walton and RFQ  

The kinetic energy of the H- particles from an ion source is about a few tens of 
keV. These particles are accelerated by a pre-accelerator, which can be either a 
Cockcroft-Walton or RFQ.  The former has been in use for many years and has 
a  maximum  energy  of  about  750  keV.  In  a  number  of  laboratories  it  has  been 
replaced  by  the  latter,  which  is  a  common  choice  of  new  accelerators.  This  is 
because an RFQ has higher energy (several MeV) and a much smaller physical 
size.    Its  beam  has  higher  brightness  and  is  bunched.  (The  Cockcroft-Walton 
needs a buncher.) The design issues of an RFQ include high beam current, high 
efficiency, small emittance dilution, and higher order mode (HOM) suppression. 

3.1.3.  LEBT  

When  an  RFQ  is  used,  one  needs  a  low  energy  beam  transport  (LEBT)  as  a 
matching section between the ion source and the RFQ. It consists of lenses that 
focus  the  beam  from  the  ion  source,  which  is  relatively  large  in  radius  and 
divergence. The LEBT also usually contains source diagnostics and provides the 
differential vacuum pumping between the source and the RFQ. 

3.1.4.  Chopper  

The purpose of a chopper is to chop the beam so that it can properly fit into the 
RF bucket structure in an accumulator. This would greatly reduce the injection 
loss  caused  by  RF  capture.  The  requirements  of  a  chopper  are:  short  rise-  and 
fall-time (10-20 ns), short physical length (to reduce space charge effects), and a 

 

7

flat top and a flat bottom in the field waveform (to reduce energy spread in the 
beam).  

There are several different types of choppers: 

•  Transverse  deflector:  This  is  a  traveling  wave  structure.  It  has 
short  rise-  and  fall-time.  The  shortcoming  is  its  physical  size 
(about  1-meter  long).  It  is  used  at  the  Los  Alamos  National 
Laboratory and the Brookhaven National Laboratory. 

•  Electric deflector: This is a split-electrode structure for deflecting 
the  beam  right  after  the  LEBT.  It  was  built  at  the  Lawrence 
Berkeley  National  Laboratory  and  will  be  installed  in  the  linac 
front end of the SNS project. 5 

•  Beam transformer (energy chopper): This is a new type of chopper 
and  is  based  on  the  fact  that  an  RFQ  has  a  rather  small  energy 
window.  A  pulsed  beam  transformer  that  provides  10%  energy 
modulation  to  the  beam  in  front  of  an  RFQ  can  effectively  chop 
the  beam.  It  has  short  rise-  and  fall-time  and  a  short  physical 
length  (about  10  cm).  A  prototype  has  been  built  by  a  KEK-
Fermilab  team  and  is  installed  at  the  HIMAC  in  Japan  for  beam 
testing. 6 

3.2.  Linac 

The linac is the main accelerator. Its function is to accelerate the H- beam to full 
energy  (~  1  GeV)  before  injection  into  the  accumulator.  Because  the  particle 
velocity changes over a wide range during the acceleration (β = 0.046 at 1 MeV, 
β  = 0.875 at 1 GeV), the linac is partitioned to several parts. Each part uses a 
different design to best match the corresponding β values. 

3.2.1.  Low energy part (below 100 MeV, β < 0.4) 

Drift  tube  linac  (DTL)  is  a  common  choice  of  this  part.  It  is  a  matured 
technology and has been used in every proton linac over the world. A potential 
concern  is  that  some  vacuum  tubes  used  to  drive  the  RF  cavities  could  have 
supply problem because the vendors may terminate their production.  
 
called spoke cavity) for low β acceleration. 

There  is  also  an  effort  to  develop  superconducting  RF  cavities  (the  so-

3.2.2.  Medium energy part (100 MeV - 1 GeV, 0.4 < β < 0.9) 

This  is  the  bulk  part  of  the  linac.  There  are  two  design  choices.  One  is  room 
temperature coupled-cell linac (CCL), another superconducting (SC) linac.  

 

 

 

8

 

 
The CCL is a matured technology and has been used in all existing linacs 
(e.g.,  Fermilab,  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory,  Brookhaven  National 
Laboratory,  etc.).  The  highest  energy  using  this  technology  reaches  800  MeV 
(LANSCE  at  Los  Alamos).  However, the new project SNS has decided to use 
an SC linac for good reason. 
SC linacs have been proved reliable and efficient in electron machines (e.g., 
 
LEP and CEBAF). But still, it is a challenge for employment in proton machines 
when  operating in short pulse mode and accelerating particles with different β 
values.  In  the  past  decade,  SC  linac  technology  has  been  making  good  and 
steady progress. 7 Compared with a room temperature linac, an SC linac has the 
following advantages: 

•  Higher accelerating gradient. 
•  Larger aperture (which is particularly important for high intensity 

beams). 

•  Lower operation cost. 
•  Lower capital cost if higher energy is required. (There is an energy 
threshold above which an SC linac becomes more economical.) 

In  addition  to  the  SNS,  CERN  and  KEK  are  also  planning  to  use  an  SC 

linac in their future machines (SPL and JHF Stage 2 linac, respectively).  

Among various challenges to an SC linac, a crucial one is the RF control. 
The allowable phase error (< 0.5°) and amplitude error (< 0.5%) are demanding. 
One  needs  to  investigate  the  choice  of  RF  source  (number  of  cavities  per 
klystron),  redundancy  (off-normal  operation  with  missing  cavities),  feedback 
and feedforward technique.  

3.2.3.  High energy part (above 1 GeV, β > 0.9) 

In  this  range,  particles  travel  at  a  velocity  near  that  of  the  light  and  behave 
similar to electrons. An SC linac is an obvious and probably also the only choice 
from  economical  considerations.  Several  new  high-energy  proton 
linac 
proposals  (2.2  GeV  at  CERN,  3  GeV  at Los Alamos, and 8 GeV at Fermilab) 
have all picked this design. 

3.3.  Accumulator 

As the name indicates, an accumulator is a ring that accumulates many turns of 
injected particles and ejects them in a single turn. The purpose is to convert long 
beam pulses (~ 1 ms) to short beam pulses (~ 1 µs) for experiments. It is a DC 
machine. Its hardware is more or less straightforward (a main advantage of the 

 

9

accumulator approach). But this by no means implies an "easy" machine. On the 
contrary, there are a number of challenges due to high beam power. 

3.3.1.  Beam loss control 

This is the most challenging problem. For a 1 MW beam power, 1% beam loss 
would  give  10  kW,  which  already  exceeds  the  full  beam  power  on  the  targets 
for  most  of  the  existing  physics  experiments.  Therefore,  allowable  beam  loss 
must be much lower than 1%.  
There are two types of beam loss: controllable and uncontrollable. One uses 
 
specially designed collimators and dumps to collect the former so that the loss 
can  be  localized.  The  uncontrollable  beam  loss  would  spread  over  the  entire 
machine and must be kept very low. The rule of thumb is that it must be below 1 
W/m  in  order  to  make  hands-on  maintenance  possible.  For  a  100-meter 
machine,  1  W/m  gives  the  total  uncontrollable  beam  loss  of  100  W,  which  is 
0.01% of the total beam power. This is a goal not impossible but very difficult. 
 
In the PSR at Los Alamos, which is a 64 kW accumulator, the total beam 
loss is a fraction of a percent. Most of them are unstripped H0 and H- particles, 
which are collected by special beam dumps. 

3.3.2.  Collimators and remote handling 

Collimators are a critical part of an accumulator. They are used to localize the 
beam loss and leave a majority part of the machine "clean."   
  Modern  collimators  use  a  2-stage  design.  The  primary  collimator  scatters 
the  halo  particles;  the  secondary  collimator  (which  can  be  more  than  one) 
collects  them.  There  is  one  set  of  collimators  in  each  transverse  plane. 
Longitudinal  collimators  are  also  used,  which  are  placed  in  high  dispersion 
regions. The design efficiency of collimators is 95% or higher. 
The area near the collimators is very "hot" (highly radioactive). One must 
 
use  remote  handling  for  maintenance  in  this  area.  Robot  arms  and  cranes  are 
often  employed.  This  should  be  an  integral  part  in  the  machine  design. 
Invaluable  experiences  can  be  learned  from  LANSCE (Los Alamos, U.S.) and 
PSI  (Switzerland).  These  machines  have  been  handling  MW  beams  for  years 
and have designed several remote-handling systems that work reliably. 8 

3.3.3.  H- injection 

This  is  another  difficult  part  of  the  design  and  has  many  technical  issues 
involved.   

 

 

 

10

 

•  The  stripping  foil  (usually  made  of  carbon)  must  stand  for  high 
temperature  and  large  shock  waves.  It  must  also  have  high  stripping 
efficiency and a reasonable lifetime. 

•  The  stripped  electrons  and  unstripped  H0  and  H-  particles  must  be 

collected. 

•  During  the  many-turn  (hundreds  to  thousands)  injection,  the  orbit 
bump needs to "paint" the particles in the phase space so that a uniform 
distribution  can  be  obtained.  This  would  reduce  the  space  charge 
effect.  The  orbit  bump  also needs to minimize the average number of 
hits per particle on the foil. 

•  The  beam  emittance  dilution  due  to  Coulomb  scattering  from  the  foil 

•  There are proposals from the KEK and Los Alamos for laser stripping. 

should be kept under control. 

The R&D is being pursued.  

The  main  requirement  is  multiple  long  straight  sections,  which  are  used  for, 
respectively, injection, extraction, RF and collimation. 

3.3.4.  Lattice 

3.3.5. e-p instability 

This  is  a  main  beam  dynamics  problem  in  an  accumulator.  In  the  PSR  at  Los 
Alamos,  e-p  instability  is  the  bottleneck  limiting  the  beam  power.  When  the 
beam  intensity  reaches  a  threshold,  rapid  beam  oscillations  (usually  in  one 
transverse plane) occur that leads to fast beam loss. This instability is believed 
to be caused by electrons trapped in the proton bunch gap. These electrons come 
mainly from secondary yield. When a primary electron hits the wall, secondary 
electrons  are  generated,  which  are  accelerated  by  the  proton  beam  and  hit  the 
opposite side of the wall, generating more electrons, so on and so forth, causing 
an avalanche.  
 
This  so-called  electron  cloud  effect  (ECE)  has  also  been  seen  in  electron 
storage  rings,  in  particular  in  the  two  B-factories:  PEP-II  and  KEK-B.  These 
two  machines  effectively  used  solenoids  to  suppress  this  effect.  However, 
solenoids or clearing electrodes appear to be less useful in the PSR. (This is a 
puzzle  to  be  resolved.)  Instead,  the  following  measures  have  been  found 
effective in raising the instability threshold in the PSR: beam scrubbing (which 
conditions  the  wall),  inductive  inserts  (which  make  the  proton  bunch  gap 
cleaner), and sextupoles (which couple the motion in the two transverse planes 
and stabilize the oscillation in one plane). 

 

11

 

This is an active research field. 9 

3.3.6.  Hardware 

The  challenge  is  the  magnet,  which  must  have  large  aperture  in  order  to 
accommodate large beam size and beam halo. Good field quality is necessary to 
ensure large dynamic aperture.  
 
diagnostics, are relatively straightforward. 

Other  technical  systems,  including  power  supplies,  RF,  vacuum  and 

4.  Design Concept of a Synchrotron-based Spallation Neutron Source 

A synchrotron-based spallation neutron source also has three major accelerator 
components: 

•  Linac front end 
•  Linac (lower energy) 
•  Synchrotron 

The  designs  of  the  linac  front  end  and  the  linac  are  similar  to  that  of  a  linac-
based spallation neutron source. However, a synchrotron design is very different 
from  an  accumulator.  Therefore,  we  will  focus  on  the  synchrotron  in  this 
section. 

4.1.  Lattice 

There  are  two  basic  requirements  on  the  design:  a  transition-free  lattice,  and 
several  dispersion-free  straight  sections.  For  high  intensity  operation  in  proton 
synchrotrons,  transition  crossing  is  often  a  major  cause  of  beam  loss  and 
emittance blowup. One should avoid it in the first place. Dispersion in the RF, 
which is placed in one or more straight sections, may lead to synchro-betatron 
coupling resonance and should also be avoided. 
 
For a medium energy synchrotron (above ~ 6 GeV), regular FODO lattices 
(in which γt ∝ √R, γt the lattice transition γ, R the machine radius) are ruled out 
because  they  would  use  too  many  cells  to  achieve  a  high  γt.  Otherwise  a 
transition  crossing  is  inevitable  when  the  γ  of  the  beam  approaches  γt  during 
ramp. There are several lattices that can give either a high or an imaginary γt so 
that  a  transition  crossing  would  not  occur.  For  example,  (a)  a  flexible 
momentum  compaction  (FMC)  lattice,  which  has  a  singlet  3-cell  modular 
structure  with  a  missing  or  short  dipole  in  the  mid-cell;  (b)  a  doublet  3-cell 
modular structure with a missing or short dipole in the mid-cell. Figure 1 is an 
example of (b), which is designed for a new 8 GeV synchrotron at Fermilab. 

 

 

 

12

 

 The choice of phase advance per module is of critical importance in this type 
of lattice. There are two reasons. (i) The chromaticity sextupoles are placed in 
the mid-cell, where the beta-function peaks and available space exists. In order 
to  cancel  the  higher  order  effects  of  these  sextupoles,  they  need  to  be  paired 
properly. (ii) The phase advance per arc in the horizontal plane must be multiple 
of  2π  in  order  to  get  zero  dispersion  in  the  straights  without  using  dispersion 
suppressors  (which  are  space  consuming).  Other  requirements  in  the  lattice 
design include: ample space for correctors (steering magnets, trim quadrupoles, 
chromaticity  and  harmonic  sextupoles,  etc.),  ample  space  for  diagnostics,  low 
beta  and  dispersion  functions  (to  make  the  beam  size  small),  large  dynamic 
aperture  (to  accommodate  beam  halo),  and  large  momentum  acceptance  (to 
allow for bunch compression when necessary). 

ReesGarren Racetrack Rbend Lattice, No Trims
SUN SunOS 5.X version 8.21/0

β x

β y

Dx

)

m

(

β

03/05/02  16.53.47

)

m

(

Dx

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.0

5.

10.

15.

20.

25.

30.

35.

δ E/p 0c = 0 .

Table name = TWISS

40.

s (m)

 

Figure 1. Lattice module of the Fermilab new 8 GeV synchrotron design. Each 
module  has  three  doublet  cells.  The  dipole  in  the  mid-cell  is  short.  The  phase 
advance per module is 0.8 and 0.6 in the h- and v-plane, respectively. There are 
five modules in each arc. 

4.2.  Space Charge 

Amongst various beam physics issues, the space charge is a major concern. It is 
often the bottleneck limiting the beam intensity in an intense proton source, in 
particular, in a synchrotron, because the injection energy is low. 
 
 

A useful scaling factor is the Laslett tune shift  

  (2) 

25.0

22.5

20.0

17.5

15.0

12.5

10.0

7.5

5.0

2.5

0.0

 

 

13

∆ν = - (3r/2) × (N/ εN) × (1/βγ2) × Bf  

 
in which r is the classical proton radius (1.535 × 10-18 m), N the total number of 
protons,  εN  the  normalized  95%  transverse  emittance,  β  and  γ  the  relativistic 
factors,  and  Bf    the  bunching  factor  (ratio  between  peak  and  average  beam 
current). It shows the space charge effect is most severe at injection because βγ2 
takes  the  minimum  value.  The  situation  becomes  worse  for  high-intensity 
machines  not  only  because  the  intensity  is  high  but  also  because  the  injection 
time  is  long.  Numerical  simulation  is  the  main  tool  to  study  this  effect.  A 
number  of  1-D,  2-D  and  3-D  codes  have  been  or  are  being  written  at  many 
institutions.  An  example  is  shown  in  Figure  2.  These  codes  are  particularly 
useful to the design of the injection orbit bump current waveform for achieving 
uniform  particle  distribution  in  the  beam,  reducing  emittance  dilution  and 
minimizing average number of hits per particle on the stripping foil during the 
phase space painting process. Several other measures, e.g., tune ramp, inductive 
inserts,  quadrupole  mode  damper  and  electron  beam  compensation  are  under 
investigation for possible cures of the space charge effects. 
 

Figure  2.  Space  charge  simulation  using  Track2D  (by  C.  Prior).  It  shows  the 
particle  distribution  after  45  turns  injection  in  the  Fermilab  new  8  GeV 
synchrotron with (left) and without (right) the space charge effect.  

 

4.3.  Other Beam Dynamics Issues 

In  addition  to  the  space  charge,  there  are  several  other  beam  dynamics  issues 
that need to be studied concerning an intense proton source. 

•  Electron cloud effect (ECE). This has been discussed in Section 3.3.5. 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that,  by  far  all  reported  ECE  is  either  in  DC 
machines  (accumulators  and  storage  rings)  or  AC  machines  in  DC 

 

 

 

14

 

operation (i.e., on flat top or flat bottom). No ECE has been seen in AC 
machines during ramp. Does this imply that AC machines are immune 
to  ECE?  If  true,  this  would  be  an  important  advantage  of  the 
synchrotron  approach.  However, 
is  solely  an  empirical 
observation. Lack of a reliable theory for understanding and analyzing 
the ECE is a loophole that urgently needs to be filled.   

this 

•  Microwave instability of bunched beam below transition. Because the 
machine  will  always  operate  below  transition,  the  negative  mass 
instability  due  to  space  charge  would  not  occur.  Would  then  this 
machine be immune to the microwave instability? 

•  Tune split. A split between the horizontal and vertical tunes is required 
in  order  to  avoid  the  strong  resonance  2νx  -  2νy  =  0  that  could  be 
excited by the space charge. However, it is not clear how big the split 
needs  to  be.  Does  it  have  to  be  an  integer?  Or  would  a  half-integer 
suffice? 

4.4.  Beam Loss, Collimation and Remote Handling 

This part is similar to that for accumulators as discussed in Sections 3.3.1 and 
3.3.2.  There  is,  however,  an  important  difference.  Because  the  injected  linac 
beam power is low (e.g., 6% of the full beam power if the acceleration range of 
the synchrotron is 16), higher beam loss at injection (which usually accounts for 
most of the total loss) can be tolerated. This is an advantage of the synchrotron 
approach. 

4.5.  Slow Extraction 

In  addition  to  one-turn  extraction,  synchrotrons  are  also  used  for  experiments 
that  require  slow  extraction  (many  turns).  A  critical  issue  is  the  efficiency. 
Although the efficiency of one-turn fast extraction can exceed 99%, it is much 
lower for multi-turn slow extractions. At high-intensity operation, the beam loss 
in  existing  machines  during  slow  spill  is  usually  around  4-5%.  This  is  not 
acceptable  for  the  next  generation  of  high-intensity  machines,  in  which  the 
beam power will be 1 MW or higher and one percent loss would mean 10 kW or 
higher. This is a serious problem in the case of KAMI and CKM at the Fermilab 
Main  Injector,  and  kaon  and  nuclear  physics  programs  at  the  JHF.  A  recent 
ICFA mini-workshop was devoted to this topic. 10 

 

15

4.6.  Hardware 

4.6.1.  Magnets  

Magnets  are  one  of  the  most  expensive  technical  systems  of  a  synchrotron.  A 
critical  parameter  in  the  magnet  design  is  the  vertical  aperture  of  the  main 
bending magnets. The magnet cost is essentially proportional to the aperture.   It 
should be large enough to accommodate a full size beam including its halo. The 
following criterion can be used in design:  
 

A = {3 εN × βmax /βγ}1/2  +  Dmax × ∆p/p  +  c.o.d. 

  (3) 

in which A is the half aperture, εN the normalized 95% beam emittance,  βmax the 
maximum  beta-function,  Dmax  the  maximum  dispersion,  ∆p/p    the  relative 
momentum  spread,  c.o.d.  the  closed  orbit  distortion.  The  parameter  3  is  the 
estimated size of the beam halo relative to the beam size.  
 
Because  this  is  an  AC  machine,  field  tracking  between  the  dipoles  and 
quadrupoles  at  high  field  is  an  important  issue.  Trim  quads  or  trim  coils  are 
needed. The peak dipole field should not exceed 1.5 Tesla. The peak quadrupole 
gradient is limited by the saturation at the pole root (not pole tip). 
 
 The choice of the coil turn number per pole is a tradeoff between the coil 
AC loss and voltage-to-ground. The former requires the use of many small size 
coils,  whereas  the  latter  requires  the  opposite,  namely,  small  number  of  turns. 
There are two ways to compromise. One is to employ stranded conductor coils, 
as  shown  in  Figure  3,  which  was  adopted  in  the  JHF  3  GeV  ring  design. 
Another is to connect several coils in parallel at the magnet ends, as done in the 
ISIS.    The  ratio  of  the  AC  vs.  DC  coil  loss  should  be  kept  around  2-3.  The 
voltage-to-ground should not exceed a few KV.  
 
The  aperture  and  good  field  region  should  include  a  rectangular  area 
(instead of an elliptical area). This is because there will be a significant number 
of particles residing in the corners of the rectangle.  

 

 

 

 

 

16

 

 

 

Figure 3. Stranded conductor coil for reducing coil AC loss. 

 

4.6.2.  Power supplies  

This  is  another  expensive  technical  system.  There  are  several  choices  for  the 
power  supplies  in  a  rapid  cycling  machine.  (1)  A  single  harmonic  resonant 
system,  e.g.,  the  Fermilab  Booster  which  resonates  at  15  Hz.  (2)  A  dual-
harmonic  resonant  system,  e.g.,  the  Fermilab  new  8  GeV  synchrotron  which 
uses a 15 Hz component plus a 12.5% 30 Hz component as shown below: 11  
 

I(t) = I0 - I cos(2πft) + 0.125 I sin(4πft) 

  (4) 

in which f = 15 Hz, I0 and I are two constants determined by the injection and 
peak  current.  The  advantage  of  this  system  is  that  the  peak  value  of  dB/dt  is 
decreased by 25%, which leads to a saving of the peak RF power by the same 
amount.  (3)  A  programmable  ramp  system,  e.g.,  the  AGS  Booster  and  AGS. 
Although this is a most versatile system (e.g., allowing for a front porch and a 
flat top), it is also most expensive.  

4.6.3.  RF  

The RF system is demanding, because it must deliver a large amount of power 
to  the  beam  in  a  short  period.  In  addition,  it  must  be  tunable,  because  the 
particle revolution frequency increases during acceleration. Cavities with ferrite 
tuners have been in use for decades. Recently the development of the Finemet 
cavities at the KEK has aroused strong interest at many laboratories. Thanks to a 
US-Japan  collaboration,  Fermilab  has  built  a  7.5  MHz,  15  kV  Finemet  cavity 
and  installed  it  in  the  Main  Injector  for  bunch  coalescing.  12  The  main 

17

advantages  of  the  Finemet  cores  are  high  accelerating  gradient  and  wide 
bandwidth.  The  former  is  especially  important  for  high  intensity  small  size 
rings, in which space is precious. The main concern, however, is its high power 
consumption. For example, the Fermilab Finemet cavity needs a 200 kW power 
amplifier  to  drive  it.  New  types  of  magnetic  alloys  are  under  investigation  for 
performance improvement.  

4.6.4.  Vacuum  

Vacuum  pipe  for  a  rapid  cycling  machine  is  probably  one  of  the  most 
challenging  items.  Ceramic  pipe  with  a  metallic  cage  inside  has  been 
successfully employed at the ISIS. However, this is a costly solution, because it 
occupies  a  significant  portion  of  the  magnet  aperture.  Assuming  the  ceramic 
wall and the cage need a 1-in vertical space, a 4-in aperture magnet would have 
to  increase  its  vertical  gap  by  25%  to  5-in  in  order  to  accommodate  this  pipe. 
This  would  directly  be  translated  to  a  25%  increase  in  the  magnet  and  power 
supply costs, equivalent to tens of millions dollars. 
Thin metallic pipe is an alternative. However, it must be very thin (several 
 
mils)  in  order  to  minimize  the  eddy  current  effects  (pipe  heating  and  induced 
magnetic  field).  Such  a  thin  pipe  is  mechanically  unstable  under  vacuum. 
Several  designs  have  been  tried  to  enhance  its  stability,  including  ceramic 
shields, metallic ribs and spiral lining. Prototyping of the first two designs did 
not  work  well.  The  third  one  looks  promising  and  is  currently  under 
investigation. 13 
Another alternative is that the magnets employ external vacuum skins like 
 
those in the Fermilab Booster. Perforated metallic liners are used in the magnet 
gap to provide a low-impedance environment for the beam. 

4.6.5.  Diagnostics 

In  addition  to  the  conventional  diagnostics  for  measuring  beam  position,  tune, 
profile,  intensity  and  loss,  intense  proton  sources  have  several  specific 
requirements.  A  system  that  can  diagnose  beam  parameters  during  multi-turn 
injection  is  highly  desirable.  The  method  for  fast,  accurate  non-invasive  tune 
measurement is being developed. A circulating beam profile monitor covering a 
large dynamic range with turn-by-turn speed will be crucial for studying beam 
halo.  (A  similar  instrument  has  been  developed  for  the  linac  beam  halo 
experiment at Los Alamos.  7) There was also an ICFA mini-workshop devoted 
to this topic. 14 

 

 

 

18

 

4.7.  New Ideas 

In  the  past  several  years,  there  are  a  number  of  new  or  revitalized  ideas 
proposed to the high intensity proton source study. Here are a few examples:  

4.7.1.  Inductive inserts  

They  are  made  of  ferrite  rings  and  also  can  have  bias  current  for  impedance 
tuning. Their inductive impedance would fully or partially compensate the space 
charge  impedance,  which  is  capacitive.  The  first  successful  experiment  was  at 
the  PSR.  15  Two  ferrite  modules  made  by  Fermilab  have  been  installed  in  the 
ring.  They  help  increase  the  e-p  instability  threshold,  which  is  a  major 
bottleneck  of  that  machine.  Another  experiment  is  going  on  at  the  Fermilab 
Booster. 

4.7.2.  Induction synchrotron  

This  is  a  longitudinally  separated  function  machine.  In  other  words,  the 
longitudinal  focusing  and  acceleration  are  carried  out  by  two  separate  RF 
systems.  The  former  uses  barrier  RF  buckets,  the  latter  a  constant  RF  voltage 
curve. One useful feature of this type of machine is tunable bunch lengths.  So 
the so-called superbunch acceleration could be possible. Because a superbunch 
is similar to a debunched beam, the peak beam current is low. Thus, the space 
charge effect can be reduced and beam intensity increased. 

4.7.3.  Barrier RF stacking  

The application of Finemet and other magnetic alloys makes it possible to build 
broadband barrier RF cavities with high voltage (~10 kV or higher). They can 
be  used  to  stack  beams  in  the  longitudinal  phase  space.  This  is  particularly 
useful when the beam intensity of a synchrotron is limited by its injector (e.g., 
the  intensity  of  the  Fermilab  Main  Injector  is  limited  by  the  Booster).  
Compared to the slip stacking, an advantage of barrier RF stacking is the greatly 
reduced beam loading effects due to a lower peak beam current. 16,17  

4.7.4.  Fixed field alternating gradient (FFAG) accelerator  

Although  MURA  first  proposed  this  idea  about  40  years  ago,  it  was  almost 
forgotten.  Only  the  recent  activities  at  the  KEK  brought  it  back  to  the  world's 
attention. KEK has successfully built a 1 MeV Proof-of-Principle (PoP) proton 
FFAG  and  is  building  a  150  MeV  one.  18  FFAG  is  an  ideal  machine  for  high 
intensity  beams.  Its  repetition  rate  can  be  much  higher  than  a  rapid  cycling 
synchrotron (in the range of kHz). One problem of the FFAG, however, is that it 

 

19

is  difficult  (if  not  impossible)  to  fit  it  into  an  existing  accelerator  complex, 
which usually consists of a linac and a cascade of synchrotrons.  

4.7.5.  Repetition rate increase in existing synchrotrons  

This is a brute force approach but can be appealing because it is straightforward. 
For example, the Brookhaven National Laboratory has a proposal for increasing 
the  AGS  repetition  rate  from  0.5  Hz  to  2.5  Hz.  19  The Fermilab Main Injector 
upgrade also includes a rep rate increase (from 0.53 Hz to 0.65 Hz). 20   

5.  Design Concept of a Proton Driver 

5.1.   Differences between a Proton Driver and a Spallation Neutron 

Source  

A proton driver is a high intensity proton source. It can be used as a spallation 
neutron  source.  But  it  can  do  more.  It  can  generate  neutrino  superbeams  and 
other high intensity secondary particles (muons, kaons, pions, antiprotons, etc.) 
for high-energy physics experiments. It can also be used as the first stage of a 
neutrino factory and a muon collider.  
 
neutron source. 

There  are  two  main  differences  between  a  proton  driver  and  a  spallation 

•  The  beam  energy  of  a  proton  driver  is  higher.  A  commonly  used 
production  target  is  carbon.  For  a  carbon  target,  the  π-  cross-
section  is  much  lower  than  π+  when  the  proton  beam  energy  is 
below 4 GeV. Therefore, for polarized muon experiments, a proton 
driver  must  be  4  GeV  or  higher.  Furthermore,  for  neutrino 
oscillation experiments, a proton source with tunable energy in the 
range of several GeV up to about 100 GeV is preferred. 

•  The bunch length of a proton driver is shorter. The pion yield (i.e., 
number  of  pions  per  unit  proton  beam  power)  has  a  strong 
dependence on the proton bunch length. This is the only parameter 
that  we  have  control  to  minimize  the  6-D  phase  space  volume  of 
the  pions.  Moreover,  to  obtain  highly  polarized  pion  beams  also 
requires short proton bunch length. The typical bunch length in a 
proton driver is a few ns (instead of µs as in a spallation neutron 
source). 

 

 

 

20

 

5.2.  How to Achieve Higher Energies 

In  a  synchrotron-based  design,  this  is  not  difficult.  The  energy  covers  a  wide 
range:  from  as  low  as  3  GeV  (JHF,  1  MW)  to  as  high  as  120  GeV  (Fermilab 
Main Injector upgrade, 2 MW).  
 
In  a  linac-based  design,  however,  this  is  severely  limited  by  the  cost. The 
existing highest energy proton linac is the LANSCE (0.8 GeV) at Los Alamos. 
The SNS linac under construction at Oak Ridge is 1 GeV. There are proposals 
for 2.2 GeV (CERN), 3 GeV (Los Alamos) and 8 GeV (Fermilab) proton linacs. 
But none of these has become a construction project. 

5.3.  How to Obtain Short Bunch Lengths 

In a synchrotron-based design, the bunch length is determined by the RF bucket 
length, i.e., by the RF frequency. A short bunch length implies the use of a high 
frequency  RF  system.  However,  sometimes  there  are  good  reasons  to  use  low 
frequency  RF  (e.g.,  to  limit  the  number  of  bunches).  In  this  case,  a  bunch 
rotation technique can be used for compressing the bunch length. 
 
It  should  be  pointed  out  that  there  is  a  new  beam  dynamics  problem 
associated  with  bunch  rotation,  namely,  the  path  length  dependence  on 
momentum  spread  ∆p/p  and  space  charge  tune  shift  ∆ν.  This  is  especially 
important  for  proton  drivers,  in  which  due  to  large  momentum  spread  (a  few 
percent) and large tune shift (a few tenth), the dependence of the path length ∆L 
on  ∆p/p  and  ∆ν  can  no  longer  be  ignored.  In  other  words,  the  momentum 
compaction  factor  α  =    (∆L/L)  /  (∆p/p)  cannot  be  treated  as  a  constant  during 
bunch  rotation.  It  is  dependent  upon  the  momentum  and  amplitude  of  each 
particle. This will result in a longer bunch after rotation. Simulation study must 
take this effect into account. 
 
In  a  linac-based  design,  a  compressor  ring  (separate  from  an  accumulator 
ring)  will  be  needed  in  order  to  provide  the  required  bunch  length  and  bunch 
structure. 

6.  Summary 

Two recent major spin-offs from high-energy accelerators are synchrotron light 
sources  and  high  intensity  proton  sources.  Both  have  found  wide-range 
applications  in  the  field  of  basic  sciences  (e.g.,  material  science,  molecular 
biology, chemistry, etc.) as well as in industrial research and development (e.g., 
chip  technology,  nano  technology,  medical  and  pharmaceutical  research,  etc.). 
Spallation neutron source is an important type of the latter.  

There are two approaches to a spallation neutron source. One is linac-based, 
another synchrotron-based. Each approach has its pros and cons. The PSR at the 

 

21

Los Alamos National Laboratory and the SNS project at the Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory  belong  to  the  former,  while  the  ISIS  at  the  Rutherford  Appleton 
Laboratory  and  the  JHF  project  at  the  KEK/JAERI  represent  the  latter.  (Note 
that the JHF is a multi-purpose facility unlike the SNS, which serves solely as a 
neutron source.) 

There  are  close  connections  between  the  design  of  a  spallation  neutron 
source  and  a  proton  driver.  The  latter  is  a  strong  contender  for  a  near  term 
construction  project  in  the  high-energy  physics  field  in  the  U.S.,  Europe  and 
Japan. The studies of the two types of machines benefit each other. 
 
The work on high intensity proton sources has been a dynamic field in the 
accelerator  world.  There  are  numerous  challenging  problems  as  well  as  great 
expectations. Out of the world's three large accelerator projects currently under 
construction  -  LHC,  SNS  and  JHF  -  two  are  high  intensity  proton  sources. 
Several  more  have  appeared  on  the  horizon.  We'd  like  to  encourage  young 
people to join this field and bring with them their energy, enthusiasm and fresh 
ideas. 

The  author  would  like  to  express  his  gratitude  to  the  3rd  OCPA  International 
Accelerator  School  for  the  invitation  to  give  a  lecture  and  for  the  hospitality 
during his stay in Singapore.  

Acknowledgements 

Appendix A 

There have been numerous conferences and workshops on high intensity proton 
sources sponsored by the Beam Dynamics Panel of the International Committee 
for Future Accelerators (ICFA). For example, there are a series of ICFA mini-
workshops  on  various  specific  topics,  including  transition  crossing,  particle 
losses,  RF,  beam  loading,  transverse  and  longitudinal  emittance  measurement 
and preservation, injection and extraction, beam halo and scraping, two-stream 
instability, diagnostics and space charge simulations. These mini-workshops can 
be  found  on  the  web  http://www-bd.fnal.gov/icfa/workshops/workshops.html. 
Paper proceedings are also available from the workshop organizers. 
 
There  was  an  ICFA-HB2002  workshop  in  April  2002  at  Fermilab,  which 
covered  almost  all  the  aspects  concerning  high  intensity  proton  sources.  The 
web address is http://www-bd.fnal.gov/HB2002/. 

 

 

 

 
There  was  an  ECLOUD'02  workshop  also  in April 2002 at CERN for the 
study of electron cloud effect. The proceedings and presentations are posted at 
http://wwwslap.cern.ch/collective/ecloud02/. 
 
2002 at the KEK. The web address is http://conference.kek.jp/RPIA2002/. 

An international workshop on induction accelerators took place in October 

22

 

Appendix B 

In  July  2001,  about  1,200  physicists  over  the  world  gathered  at  Snowmass, 
Colorado,  USA,  for  three  weeks  to  discuss  the  future  of  high-energy  physics.  
One specific topic was high intensity proton sources. A detailed 26-point R&D 
program was crafted. This program is directly related to the spallation neutron 
source  work.  The  Executive  Summary  is  attached,  which  can  be  used  as 
guidance for planning future R&D. The full context can be found on the web: 
http://www-bd.fnal.gov/icfa/snowmass/. 
  
Executive Summary of Snowmass2001 on High Intensity Proton Sources 
 

The US high-energy physics program needs an intense proton source (a 1-4 
MW Proton Driver) by the end of this decade. This machine will serve multiple 
purposes:  (i)  a  stand-alone  facility  that  will  provide  neutrino  superbeams  and 
other high intensity secondary beams such as kaons, muons, neutrons, and anti-
protons  (cf.  E1  and  E5  group  reports);  (ii)  the  first  stage  of  a  neutrino  factory 
(cf. M1 group report); (iii) a high brightness source for a VLHC (cf. M4 group 
report).  

Based  on  present  accelerator 

technology  and  project  construction 
experience, it is both feasible and cost-effective to construct a 1-4 MW Proton 
Driver. There are two PD design studies, one at FNAL and the other at the BNL. 
Both  are  designed  for  1  MW  proton  beams  at  a  cost  of  about  US$200M 
(excluding  contingency  and  overhead)  and  upgradeable  to  4  MW.  An 
international  collaboration  between  FNAL,  BNL  and  KEK  on  high  intensity 
proton  facilities  addresses  a  number  of  key  design  issues.  The  sc  cavity, 
cryogenics, and RF controls developed for the SNS can be directly adopted to 
save  R&D  efforts,  cost,  and  schedule.  PD  studies  are  also  actively  pursued  at 
Europe and Japan. 

There are no showstoppers towards the construction of such a high intensity 
facility.  Key  research  and  development  items  are  listed  below  ({}  indicates 
present  status).  Category  A  indicates  items  that  are  not  only  needed  for  future 
machines but also useful for the improvement of existing machine performance; 

 

23

category  B  indicates  items  crucial  for  future  machines  and/or  currently 
underway. 
 
1)  H- source: Development goals - current 60–70 mA {35 mA}, duty cycle 6–
12% {6%}, emittance 0.2 π mm-mrad rms normalized, lifetime > 2 months 
{20 days}. (A) 

2)  LEBT chopper: To achieve rise time < 10 ns {50 ns}. (B) 
3)  Study  of  4-rod  RFQ  at  400  MHz,  100  mA,  99%  efficiency,  HOM 

suppressed. (B) 

4)  MEBT chopper: To achieve rise time < 2 ns {10 ns}. (B) 
5)  Chopped beam dump: To perform material study & engineering design for 

dumped beam power > 10 kW. (A) 

6)  Funneling:  To  perform  (i)  one-leg  experiment  at  the  RAL  by  2006  with 
goal one-leg current 57 mA; (ii) deflector cavity design for CONCERT. (all 
B) 

7)  Linac RF control: To develop (i) high performance HV modulator for long 
pulsed  (>1ms)  and  CW  operation;  (ii)  high  efficiency  RF  sources  (IOT, 
multi-beam klystron). (all A) 

8)  Linac sc RF control: Goal - to achieve control of RF phase error < 0.5° and 
amplitude error <0.5% {presently 1°, 1% for warm linac}. (i) To investigate 
the  choice  of  RF  source  (number  of  cavity  per  RF  source,  use  of  high-
power source); (A) (ii) to perform redundancy study for high reliability; (B) 
(iii)  to  develop  high  performance  RF  control  (feedback  and  feedforward) 
during  normal  operation,  tuning  phases  and  off-normal operation (missing 
cavity), including piezo-electric fast feedforward. (A) 

9)  Space charge: (i) Comparison of simulation code ORBIT with machine data 
at  FNAL  Booster  and  BNL  Booster;  (ii)  to  perform  3D  ring  code  bench 
marking  including  machine  errors,  impedance,  and  space  charge  (ORNL, 
BNL, SciDAC, PPPL). (all A) 

10)  Linac  diagnostics:  To  develop  (i)  non-invasive  (laser  wire,  ionization, 
for  H-;(ii)  on-line 
fluorescent-based)  beam  profile  measurement 
measurement  of  beam  energy  and  energy  spread  using  time-of-flight 
method;  (iii)  halo  monitor  especially  in  sc  environment;  (iv)  longitudinal 
bunch shape monitor. (all A) 

11)  SC RF linac: (i) High gradients for intermediate beta (0.5 – 0.8) cavity; (A) 

(ii) Spoke cavity for low beta (0.17 – 0.34). (B) 

12)  Transport lines: To develop (i) high efficiency collimation systems; (A) (ii) 
profile  monitor  and  halo  measurement;  (A)  (iii)  energy  stabilization  by 
HEBT RF cavity using feedforward to compensate phase-jitter. (B) 

13)  Halo: (i) To continue LEDA experiment on linac halo and comparison with 
simulation;  (ii)  to  start  halo  measurement  in  rings  and  comparison  with 
simulation. (all B) 

 

 

 

24

 

14)  Ring  lattice:  To  study  higher  order  dependence  of  transition  energy  on 
momentum spread and tune spread, including space charge effects. (B) 
15)  Injection  and  extraction:  (i)  Development  of  improved  foil  (lifetime, 
efficiency,  support);  (A)  (ii)  experiment  on  the  dependence  of  H0  excited 
states  lifetime  on  magnetic  field  and  beam  energy;  (B)  (iii)  efficiency  of 
slow extraction systems. (A) 

16)  Electron  cloud:  (i)  Measurements  and  simulations  of  the  electron  cloud 
generation  (comparison  of  the  measurements  at  CERN  and  SLAC  on  the 
interaction  of  few  eV  electrons  with  accelerator  surfaces,  investigation  of 
angular  dependence  of  SEY,  machine  and  beam  parameter  dependence); 
(A) (ii) determination of electron density in the beam by measuring the tune 
shift along the bunch train; (A) (iii) theory for bunched beam instability that 
reliably  predicts 
thresholds  and  growth  rates;  (A)  (iv) 
investigation  of  surface  treatment  and  conditioning;  (A)  (v)  study  of  fast, 
wide-band, active damping system at the frequency range of 50–800 MHz. 
(B) 

instability 

17)  Ring  beam  loss,  collimation,  protection:  (i)  Code  benchmarking  & 
validation  (STRUCT,  K2,  ORBIT);  (A)  (ii)  engineering  design  of 
collimator and beam dump; (A) (iii) experimental study of the efficiency of 
beam-in-gap  cleaning;  (A)  (iv)  bent  crystal  collimator  experiment  in  the 
RHIC; (B) (v) collimation with resonance extraction. (B) 

18)  Ring  diagnostics:  (i)  Whole  area  of  diagnosing  beam  parameters  during 
multi-turn  injection;  (ii)  circulating  beam  profile  monitor  over  large 
dynamic  range  with  turn-by-turn  speed;  (iii)  fast,  accurate  non-invasive 
tune measurement. (all A) 

19)  Ring  RF:  To  develop  (i)  low  frequency  (~5  MHz),  high  gradient  (~1 
MV/m) burst mode RF systems; (B) (ii) high gradient (50-100 kV/m), low 
frequency (several MHz) RF system with 50-60% duty cycle; (B) (iii) high-
voltage  (>100  kV)  barrier  bucket  system;  (B)  (iv)  transient  beam  loading 
compensation systems (e.g. for low-Q MA cavity). (A) 

20)  Ring magnets: (i) To develop stranded conductor coil; (ii) to study voltage-
to-ground  electrical  insulation;  (iii)  to  study  dipole/quadrupole  tracking 
error correction. (all B) 

21)  Ring  power  supplies:  To  develop  (i)  dual-harmonic  resonant  power 

supplies; (ii) cost effective programmable power supplies. (all B) 

22)  Kicker:  (i)  Development  of  stacked  MOSFET  modulator  for  DARHT  and 
AHF  to  achieve  rise/fall  time  <10-20  ns;  (B)  (ii)  impedance  reduction  of 
lumped ferrite kicker for SNS. (A) 

23)  Instability & impedance: (i) To establish approaches for improved estimates 
of  thresholds  of  fast  instabilities,  both  transverse  and  longitudinal 
(including space charge and electron cloud effects); (ii) to place currently-
used models such as the broadband resonator and distributed impedance on 
a  firmer  theoretical  basis;  (iii)  impedance  measurement  based  on  coherent 
tune  shifts  vs.  beam  intensity,  and  instability  growth  rate vs.  chromaticity, 

 

25

including that for flat vacuum chambers; (iv) to develop new technology in 
feedback implementation. (all B) 

24)  FFAG:  (i)  3-D  modeling  of  magnetic  fields  and  optimization  of  magnet 
profiles;  (ii)  wide-band  RF  systems;  (iii)  transient  phase  shift  in  high 
frequency RF structures; (iv) application of sc magnets. (all B) 

25)  Inductive  inserts:  (i)  Experiments  at  the  FNAL  Booster  &  JHF3;  (A)  (ii) 
programmable  inductive  inserts;  (B)  (iii)  development  of  inductive  inserts 
which have large inductive impedance and very small resistive impedance; 
(B) (iv) theoretical analysis. (B) 

26)  Induction synchrotron: (i) Study of beam stability; (ii) development of high 

impedance, low loss magnetic cores. (all B) 

References 

1.  The Snowmass 2001 Workshop web site: http://www.snowmass2001.org/. 
2.  W.  Chou,  C.  Ankenbrandt,  and  E.  Malamud,  editors,  "The  Proton  Driver 

Design Study," FERMILAB-TM-2136 (December 2000). 

3.  G.W. Foster, W. Chou, and E. Malamud, editors, "Proton Driver Study II," 

FERMILAB-TM-2169 (May 2002).  

4.  M.  Vretenar,  editor,  "Conceptual  Design  of  the  SPL,  a  High-Power 
Superconducting H- Linac at CERN," CERN 2000-012 (December 2000). 
J. Staples et al., Proc. 1999 PAC (New York, USA), p. 1961. 

5. 
6.  W. Chou et al., “Design and Measurements of a Pulsed Beam Transformer 
as a Chopper,” KEK Report 98-10 (September 1998); W. Chou et al., Proc. 
1999 PAC (New York, USA), p. 565; Y. Shirakabe et al., Proc. 2000 EPAC 
(Vienna, Austria), p. 2468. 

7.  T.P. Wangler, "Linac Based Proton Drivers," AIP Conference Proc. 642, p. 

8.  E.  Wagner,  "Remote  Handling  and  Shielding  at  PSI,"  AIP  Conference 

43 (2002). 

Proc. 642, p. 265 (2002). 

9.  For references see http://wwwslap.cern.ch/collective/ecloud02/. 
10.  The 10th ICFA Mini-Workshop on Slow Extraction, October 15-17, 2002, 
Brookhaven  National  Laboratory,  USA. The proceedings can be found on 
the web:  http://www.agsrhichome.bnl.gov/ICFA2002/. 

11.  Chapter 5 of Ref. 3. 
12.  D. Wildman et al., Proc. 2001 PAC (Chicago, USA), p. 882. 
13.  Z.  Tang,  "A  New  Kind  of  Vacuum Tube for Proton Driver," FERMILAB-

TM-2188 (September 2002). 

14.  The 11th ICFA Mini-Workshop on Diagnostics, October 21-23, 2002, Oak 
Ridge  National  Laboratory,  USA.  The  proceedings  can  be  found  on  the 
web:  http://www.sns.gov/icfa/. 

15.  M.A. Plum et al., Phys. Rev. ST-AB 2, 064210 (June 1999). 

 

 

 

26

 

(2002). 

16.  K. Koba and J. Steimel, "Slip Stacking," AIP Conference Proc. 642, p. 223 

17.  K.Y. Ng, "Doubling Main Injector Beam Intensity using RF Barriers," AIP 

Conference Proc. 642, p. 226 (2002). 

18.  Y. Mori, "Progress on FFAG Accelerators at KEK," ICFA Beam Dynamics 

Newsletter, No. 29, p. 20 (December 2002). 

19.  W.T.  Weng  and  T.  Roser,  "The  AGS  High  Power  Upgrade  Plan,"  AIP 

Conference Proc. 642, p. 56 (2002). 

20.  Chapter 13 of Ref. 3. 
 

 

