3
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
0
3
 
 
 
5
7
0
1
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Treatment of skin deseases in humans by a new method 

Kozlov A.A. 

Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Tbilisi State University. 

E-mail: alekskoz@rambler.ru 

Key words: skin covers, treatment of pathological processes, boric acid. 

The  original  method  of  treatment  of  various  pathological  processes  in  human  skin 

covers  is  described.  The  method  has  a  brightly  expressed  differential  action:  destroying 

pathologic cells it does not render any influence on healthy cells. The examples of application 

of a method for treatment of some kinds of skin pathologies are given.  

While  pathological  process  develops  in  organism  the  immune  system  "turns  on"  to 

resist it. If the immune system is suppressed or the rate of pathology development is too high, 

the organism can not cope with it. It is possible to help the immune system by slowing down 

the rate of duplication of pathological cells.  

In our former researches [1,2] it was shown, that the cell capable to proliferation, can 

divide only having received energy about 5 eV, transferred to it in one act. The basic role in 

this transfer is played with the photons of the appropriate power range formed in substance by 

a  natural  radiating background  (nonequilibrium  radiation).  If  into  the  water  environment  of 

cells the substances increasing probability of non-radiation dissipation of energy of excitation 

of  molecules  is  inserted  the  number  of  the  photons  providing  start  of  cell  division  will 

decrease therefore the number of divided cells for the given time interval will decrease also. 

Such  substances,  in  particular,  are:  iodine,  furaldehyde,  alum,  boric,  salicylic  and 

acetylsalicylic acids etc. 

In  that  the  given  phenomenon  takes  place  we  were  convinced  of  experiments  with 

infusorians 

(Colpoda 

sp. 

 

and  Paramecia 

sp.) 

[3]. 

Insertion 

of 

alum 

(Al2(SO4)3(cid:215) K2SO4(cid:215) 24H2O) with concentration of 6ЛЁ10-7 лю into a nutrient medium where the 

 

1

 

culture  of  infusorians  developed,  increased  the  average  period  of  division  of  infusorians 

Paramecia sp for ~

 3.5 hours at the average period of division in the control of ~

 11 hours. 

Similar results were received with a boric acid (H3BO3). 

After  checking of  this principle of  cells division rate delay  in laboratory  conditions,  

the  method  was  tested on  treatment  of  some  diseases  of  human  skin  covers,  which  are not 

carrying a system character. 

As a substance, which is slowing down the rate of cell division, we used boric acid, 

which is also a good antiseptic. The pregnant solution of boric acid was applied to the best 

efficiency of influence. It was reached by imposing the wadded tampon, plentifully moistened 

by water, on which was rendered a gruel from boric acid on the struck area. From above the 

tampon was blocked by polythene. A bandage or court plaster fixed all this. After ending a 

procedure the rests of an acid were washed off by water. The number of seances of exposition 

and their duration can vary over a wide range. Usually two or three expositions of about 4-8 

hours are enough. 

The  descriptions  of  3  from  more  than  30  cases  of  practical  use  of  this  method  on 

volunteers  are  given below.  In  total  there  were 8 different kinds of pathologies, the part  of 

which was not diagnosed. The sex and age of the patients, description of disease, number of 

expositions  and  their  duration  are  given.  In  the  rest  cases  a  complete  recovery  was  also 

observed.  No by-effects and relapses were detected.  

1.  M-55.  Ring-shaped  inflammation  of  a  mole  (5  mm  in  diameter)  on  forearm.  1 

exposition,  4 hours.  In  one  week the  mole  has  disappeared.  No  traces  were  detected  on  its 

2. M-45.  A  formation on  a  skin  in area of a sural  muscle. Round,  light pink.  Edges 

precise, equal.  Does not  act  above skin.  Border was  felt  to  the  touch.  No  pain,  rarely  itch. 

After washing - smallest peeling. The initial size was 1.5 - 2 cm in a diameter. In 1.5 months 

2

place. 

 

it  has  increased  up  to  4  -  5  cm.  No  fungus  or  other  pathogenic  microflora  was  revealed. 

Consultation of the dermatologists has not put  an unequivocal diagnosis.  

Under the initiative of the patient (a physician himself) the continuous exposition has 

been carried out within one week. Each day the tampon was moistened with water. After an 

exposition no trace of formation was revealed. No traces of influence on healthy skin. 

3.  M-60.  Fungous  defeat  of  fingers  and  toenails  of  both  legs.  Duration  of  disease  - 

several years. Permanent itch between fingers. Medicamental treatment was carried out for a 

long time, periodically daily - to prevent itch. No positive result was obtained.  

After the first exposition (8 hours) itch has stopped and had not been renewed since. 

For influence on toenail 2 additional expositions (after steaming out) for 8 hours were carried 

out. In 2 months a healthy toenail began to grow. 

The preliminary studies showed also that cancer (early stages) can also be positively 

affected by this method. 

The  most  important  result  of  the  described  method  of  treatment  (a  priori,  not 

expected), on our sight, is that fact, that the pregnant solution of boric acid, as it has appeared, 

destroying  the pathologically changed cells, render absolutely no influence on healthy cells 

of  skin.  We  are  inclined  to  attribute  this  phenomenon  to  different  permeability  of  cells 

The recommendation: treatment of purulent inflammations previously wound to clear 

1. A.A.Kozlov. On the  mechanism of  the  stimulatory action of  penetrating radiation 

on biological objects. // Radiobiologia, 1987, 27, 6, 756-760. 

Reference: 

3

membranes. 

of from pus. 

 

 

2. A.A.Kozlov. Natural radiation background and cell division. // Radiobiologia, 1991, 

31, 4, 581-584. 

1998, Tbilisi. 

3.  A.A.Kozlov.  About  some  opportunities  of  regulation  the  cells  division  rates  by 

physical  mechanisms.  Experiment.  Theory.  Practice.  //  Thesis  of  the  dissertation  on 

competition of a scientific degree of the doctor of physical and mathematical sciences, TSU, 

 

4

