      A note on the nature of de Broglie waves 

M. R. Mahdavi 

e-mail: mr_mahdavi@hotmail.com 

 

 

      In this note we will first argue that there is evidence in supporting the view that de 

Broglie  waves  have  a  gravitational  origin.  In  view  of  the  extreme  weakness  of  the 

gravitational field, however, this seems to be an unlikely proposition. We consider the 

problem of the atom in the light of a proposed electron theory [physics/0212013] and 

show that in this theory an insignificant perturbation in the gravitational field might in 

effect be amplified by astonishingly large orders of magnitudes. On this basis we then 

propose a realistic model of an atom where the electron continually tunnels through 

the electrostatic field of the proton and the de Broglie waves take on the role of the 

missing electrostatic interactions. Although the discussion is a qualitative one, and as 

such may not be considered as being conclusive, never the less, we believe that on the 

evidence  presented  here  the  possibility  of  a  gravitational  origin  for  the  de  Broglie 

waves must be seriously considered. 

   

      Since the time Newton formulated his Mechanics, the mass of a body has, in one 

way  or  another,  confronted  physicist  with  insurmountable  problems.  Newton  was 

puzzled  by  the  equality  of  inertial  and  gravitational  masses.  Much  later  another 

problem  arose  when  Lorentz  introduced  his  electron  theory  [1],  namely,  the  self-

energy of a point electron came out as infinite. With the advent of quantum mechanics 

it  was  thought  that  the  problem  of  the  self-  energy  of  the  electron  might  at  last  be 

resolved.  But,  as  early  as  1929  it  became  clear  that  in  quantum  mechanics  the  self-

energy of the electron would be infinite as well [2]. The problem of the infinities in 

quantum  mechanics  was  never  solved  in  a  satisfactory  manner;  rather,  it  was 

sidestepped by a procedure that has come to be known as renormalization [3]. A basic 

assumption in the renormalization procedure is that what is important is the measured 

mass  of  the  electron  me,  and  not  M  =  (me  +  mel)  the  sum  of  its  inertial  and 

electromagnetic mass. 

      Renormalization finds its justification in removing the infinities and in predicting 

the  very  precise  correction  to  the  magnetic  moment  of  the  electron.  However,  one 

may  ask  what  might  be  the  underlying  reasons  for  its  assumptions,  in  particular  the 

one made about the electron mass. We argue that in quantum mechanics it is the de 

1 

Broglie waves that determine the trajectory along which an electron moves. Now, if 

de  Broglie  waves  have  a  gravitational  origin  then  it  follows  that  an  electron(cid:146)s  own 

gravitational  field  determines  the  trajectory  of  its  motion.  Since  the  motion  of  a 

particle  in  a  gravitational  field  is  not  dependent  on  its  mass  it  then  follows  that  the 

value of M = (me + mel) is of no consequence. Thus, the inertial mass of an electron 

arises  purely  as  a  result  of  its  being  constrained  to  move  along  a  guiding  path, 

determined  by  its  own  gravitational  field.  An  immediate  consequence  of  this  is  that 

me the inertial mass ought to be directly related to mg the gravitational charge of the 

electron. Hence, in this short argument one may discern an underlying reason for the 

equality of inertial and gravitational masses. 

      However, in view of the extreme weakness of the gravitational field, one cannot 

help but to have very serious doubts about the above proposition. Therefore, one has 

to show how in an atom for example, the insignificant gravitational fields may cause 

an  electron  to  move  in  atomic  (cid:147)orbit(cid:148).  The  discussion  here  will  be  based  on  the 

electron  theory  proposed  previously  [4]  and  a  possibility  that  we  considered  in 

another paper [5]. In the following discussion we will adopt the terminology used in 

reference 4. 

     In [5] we showed that a non-spherical distribution of the electronic charge plus a 

sort  of  Brownian  motion  could  result  in  situations  where  an  electron  and  a  nucleus 

would fail to see each other(cid:146)s electrostatic fields. In that event both particles can be 

considered as free ones as they do not undergo accelerations in each other(cid:146)s potential 

field.  The  Brownian  motion,  however,  cannot  be  a  purely  random  motion  of  an 

external origin as was to some extent suggested in that paper. For, there is an equal 

probability  that  such  a  random  motion,  which  enables  the  two  particles  to  tunnel 

through each other(cid:146)s electrostatic field, will also enable them to interact continuously 

with  each  other.  Therefore,  the  random  motion  must  be  due  to  events  having  to  do 

with the internal events of the quantum system in which the electron is situated. 

      In [4] we further developed the basic ideas presented in [5] and offered an electron 

model  where  the  particle  part  of  the  electron,  called  the  electrino,  was  periodically 

created  and  destroyed.  However,  in  appearance  the  electrino  moved  in  a  circular 

motion.  Obviously,  the  rapid  oscillations  of  electrino  would  set  up  gravitational 

waves, and in the case of the electron at rest, a standing wave would appear around 

the  electron.  Now  if  we  assume  that  quark  models  are  constructed  on  the  same 

principles as that of the electron, then at any instant an electron in an atom would be 

 

2 

subjected to the insignificant waves emanating from the nucleus plus the remnants of 

waves  created  by  itself  at  earlier  times.  These  insignificant  waves  must  now  and  in 

effect  take  on  the  role  of  the  electrostatic  interactions  between  the  electron  and  the 

nucleus, which as required by the theory [5], must disappear from the scene.      

        Consider an electron moving towards a proton at an impact parameter d. Due to 

its  spin  and  the  annular  shaped  charge  the  electrino  will  interact  intermittently  with 

the  proton  and  it  will  radiate  energy.  Along  its  trajectory  it  will  reach  a  point  A  as 

shown in Fig. 1. At this point the orientation of the annular shaped charge in space is 

To the 
nucleus 

d

Fig. 1 

A 

θ > α 

such that it is not subjected to the electrostatic field of the proton (in this figure we are 

looking  at  the  annulus  from  an  edge  wise  direction).    In  order  that  an  atom  may  be 

formed we now require that, from hereon the electron will move in such a way that its 

electrino will always fail to (cid:147)see(cid:148) the electrostatic field of the proton. To see how this 

may come about we once again look at the interior of the electron. 

        In  Fig.  2  the  trajectory of  a ψ*-field emanating from an electrino at point A is 

shown.  This  ψ*-field  is  supposed  to  create  a  new  electrino,  after  having  looped 

around a black hole (see the addendum) at the centre of the circle, at point B at the 

instant that the first election(cid:146)s life-time comes to an end. The trajectory shown for the 

ψ*-field, however, is for a smooth space. That is in travelling from A to the vicinity of  

B

D 

A

ψ* ψ* 

C 

ae ae 

 

Fig. 2 

3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

the black hole near the centre of the circle, it will not pass any region where, there is 

an  alteration  in  the  space  metric.  Failing  this, a slight change  in  the  space metric  at 

any  point  along  the  direction  of  the  travel  of  the  ψ*-field  will  bring  about  an 

imperceptible  change  in  its  direction  of  travel.  Thus,  consider  that  roughly  the 
dimensions of the black hole is ~ 10-33

cm. Therefore, an insignificant change in the 

direction of motion of the ψ*-field, say, of the order of much less than 10

-20 radians 

relative  to  the  direction  of  its  undisturbed  motion  will  bring  it  nearer  to  or  further 

away from the edge of the black hole. Obviously the angle through which the ψ*-field 

loops  around  the  black  hole  will  critically  depend  on  the  distance  of  its  nearest 

approach  to  the  black  hole  horizon.  The  return  part  of  the  ψ*-field(cid:146)s  trajectory  will 

now be disproportionately altered. Thus a closer or more distant approach to the space 

warp horizon will result, for example, in new trajectories AOC or AOD, respectively. 

Thus a change in position of the order of 10

 at the Planck scale may result in a change 

-33

of the order 10

cm at the Compton scale. In this way the electron, at any instant that it 

-13 

might be on the verge of (cid:147)seeing(cid:148) the electrostatic field of the proton may dodge the 

electrostatic field by jumping to a new position in space. 

      In  quantum  mechanics  in  the  case  of  an  atom  one  writes  down  Schr(cid:246)dinger(cid:146)s 

equation and inserts the electrostatic potential in it. Having done this the solutions are 

obtained  and  they  are  interpreted  as  probability  amplitudes.  Something  of  a 

mysterious nature seems to have happened here. At the start we have electromagnetic 

interactions,  but  these  seem  to  disappear  once  we  have  obtained  a  stationary  state. 

Indeed,  if  we  were  to  summarise  the  solutions  of  the  Schr(cid:246)dinger  equation  in  one 

simple sentence we would say that, (cid:147)a stable stationary state of an atom is obtained if 

the  value  of  the  electric  moment  for  the  atom  at  all  times  is  equal  to  zero(cid:148).  With 

spherically  shaped  charges  this  is  impossible.  However,  it  becomes  possible  if  the 

elemental charges have annular forms and de Broglie waves are real physical waves, 

which in the effect that they produce can directly imitate the electrostatic interactions. 

Addenda: 

  

 

 

 

4 

      In [4] we emphasized that the black hole is not a black hole in the ordinary sense 

of  the  word  and  it  only  amounts  to  a  temporary  and  local  alteration  in  the  metrical 

structure  of  space.  We  did  not  mention  that  such  a  black  hole  does  not  have  long-

range  gravitational  field  associated  with  it,  which  might  have  confused  the  reader, 

mainly  because  this  assertion,  on  the  face  of  it,  means  that  there  two  types  of 

gravitational fields. This is not the case and we will come back to this point in a future 

     In [4] we also hastily proposed that the black hole replenishment must be through 

the agency of the ψ*-field. This is obviously a mistake. The replenishment at any time 

can  only  be  done  by  the  remnants  of  space  oscillations  set  up  at  earlier  times  and 

arriving in phase at the centre of the electron.   

paper. 

    

References: 

[1]. Lorentz, H. A., The theory of electrons, Teubner (1916). 

[2]. Heisenberg, W. and Pauli, W., Zeits. Für Phys., 56 (1929) 1. 

[3]. Dyson, F. J., phys. Rev. 75 (1949) 486 and 1736. 

[4]. Mahdavi, M. R., physics/0211102 (2002).  

[5]. Mahdavi, M. R., physics/0212013 (2002).  

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

  

 

5 

