GEOMETRY  OF  PSYCHOLOGICAL  TIME* 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
METOD  SANIGA 
International Solvay Institutes for Physics and Chemistry,  
Free University of Brussels (ULB), Campus Plaine, CP–231, Blvd du Triomphe,  
1050 Brussels, Belgium 
& 
Astronomical Institute of the Slovak Academy of Sciences, 
05960 Tatranská Lomnica, Slovak Republic 

 

Abstract: The paper reviews the most illustrative cases of the “peculiar/anomalous” experiences of time 
(and, to a lesser extent, also space) and discusses a simple algebraic geometrical model accounting for the 
most pronounced of them. 

Keywords: psychopathology of time – pencils of conics – algebraic geometry 

 

 

1. Introduction 

One  of  the  most  striking  and  persistent  symptoms  of  so-called  “altered”  states  of 
consciousness  is,  as  we  shall  soon  demonstrate,  distortions  in  the  perceptions  of  time 
and  space.  Time  is  frequently  reported  as  flowing  faster  or  slower,  expanded  or 
contracted,  and  may  even  be  experienced  as  being  severely  discontinuous 
(“fragmented”).  In  extreme  cases,  it  can  stop  completely  or  expand  unlimitedly.  The 
sense  of  space  is  likewise  powerfully  affected.  Space  can  appear  amplified  or 
compressed,  condensed  or  rarefied,  or  even  changing  its  dimensionality;  it  can,  for 
example,  become  just  two-dimensional  (“flat”),  acquire  another  dimensions,  or  be 
reduced to a dimensionless point in consciousness.  

    As  yet,  there  exists  no  mathematically  rigorous  and  conceptually  sound  framework 
that would provide us with satisfactory explanations of these phenomena. Physics itself, 
although being the most sophisticated scientific discipline in describing the “objective” 
world, is not even able to account for the ordinary perception of time, let alone its other, 
more  pronounced  “peculiarities”  mentioned  above.  Nor  does  it  offer  a  plausible  and 
convincing interpretation of the observed macroscopic dimensionality of space – giving 
more  conceptual  challenges  than satisfactory answers. It was, among  other things, this 
failure  of  current  paradigms  to  accommodate  a  vast  reservoir  of  the  phenomena 
described  above  that  originally  motivated our search for  a rigorous and self-consistent 
scheme,  and  which  ultimately  led  into  what  we  call  the  theory  of  pencil-generated 
space-times [1–9]. 

The  aim  of  this  contribution  is  to  demonstrate  that  this  theory  represents  a  cogent 
starting point for a deeper understanding of the altered states of consciousness in their 
temporo-spatial aspects. It is shown, in particular, that the three most abundant groups 
of  “pathological”  perceptions  of  time,  namely  the  feeling  of  timelessness  (“eternity”), 
time  standing  still,  as  well  as  the  experience  of  the  dominating  past,  can  well  be 
modelled  by  singular  (space-)time  configurations  represented  by  a  specific  pencil  of 

                                                      
* To appear in the proceedings of the international symposium The Direction of Time: The Role of Reversibility / Irreversibility in 
the Study of Nature, edited by S. Albeverio and Ph. Blanchard, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2003. 

 

1

conics. Being speculative, the paper is also offered to stimulate further research into the 
possible  links  between  mathematics  and  physics  on  the  one  side,  and  psychology, 
psychiatry and philosophy on the other. 

 

 

 

2. Examples of Psychopathology of Time 

2.1. Near-Death Experiences   

A  typical  near-death  experience  (NDE)  occurs  if  a  person  is  exposed  suddenly  to  the 
threat of death but then survives and reports such phenomena as floating out of his/her  
body,  moving  rapidly  through  dark,  empty  space,  having  the  life  review,  and  
encountering a brilliant white light. Out of these four consecutive phases it is the third 
one,  the  life  review,  which  is  of  concern  here.  The  following  extract  is  taken  from  a 
famous book by R. Moody [10]:1 

 
“After all this banging and going through this long, dark place, all of my childhood thoughts, my whole 
entire life was there at the end of this tunnel, just flashing in front of me. It was not exactly in terms of 
pictures,  more in the form of thoughts, I guess. It was just all there at once, I mean, not one thing at a 
time, blinking on and off, but it was everything, everything at one time...” 
 
However,  it  is  not  only  the  past  but  –  weird  as  it  may  sound  –  also  the  future  that  a 
subject experiencing an NDE can have access to. The first to draw attention to this fact 
seems to have been K. Ring [11]:  
 
“...the material I have collected that bears upon a remarkable and previously scarcely noted precognitive 
feature  of  the  NDE  I  have  called  the  personal  flashforward  (PF).  If  these  experiences  are  what  they 
purport to be, they not only have extremely profound implications for our understanding of the nature of 
time but also possibly for the future of our planet...  
    Personal flashforwards usually occur within the context of an assessment of one’s life during an NDE 
(i.e.  during  a  life  review  and  preview),  although    occasionally  the  PF  is  experienced  as  a  subsequent 
vision.  When  it  takes  place  while  the  individual  is  undergoing  an  NDE,  it  is  typically  described  as  an 
image vision of the future. It is as though the individual sees something of the whole trajectory of his life, 
not just past events...  The understanding I have of these PFs is that to the NDEr they represent events of a 
conditional future – i.e., if he chooses to return to life,  then these events will ensue...” 
 
A more impressive description of this fascinating phenomenon is borrowed from [12], 
based on Atwater’s personal experience: 
 
“This time, I moved, not my environment, and I moved rapidly… My speed accelerated until I noticed a 
wide but thin-edged expanse of bright light ahead, like a “parting” in space or a “lip,” with a brightness so 
brilliant it was beyond light yet I could look upon it without pain or discomfort… The closer I came the 
larger the parting in space appeared until… I was absorbed by it as if engulfed by a force field… 
    Further  movement  on  my  part  ceased  because  of  the  shock  of  what  happened  next.  Before  me  there 
loomed  two  gigantic,  impossibly  huge  masses  spinning  at  great  speed,  looking  for  all  the  world  like 
cyclones. One was inverted over the other, forming an hourglass shape, but where the spouts should have 
touched there was instead incredible rays of power shooting out in all directions… I stared at the spectacle 
before me in disbelief… 
    As  I  stared,  I  came  to  recognize  my  former  Phyllis  self  in  the  midupperleft  of  the top cyclone. Even 
though  only a speck, I could see my Phyllis clearly, and superimposed over her were all her past lives 
and all her future lives happening at the same time in the same place as her present life. Everything was 
happening at once! Around Phyllis was everyone else she had known and around them many others... The 

                                                      
1  In  this  and  all  the  subsequent  excerpts/quotations,  italics  are  used  to  emphasize  those  parts  of  the 
narratives  that  most  directly  relate  to  the  topic  of  the  section.  They  are  introduced  by  the  author  of  the 
present paper, not the author(s) of the paper/book quoted. 

2

 

same  phenomenon  was  happening  to  each  and  all.  Past,  present,  and  future  were  not  separated  but, 
instead, interpenetrated like a multiple hologram combined with its own reflection. 
    The only physical movement anyone or anything made was to contract and expand. There was no up or 
down, right or left, forward or backward. There was only in and out, like breathing, like the universe and 
all creation were breathing – inhale/exhale, contraction/expansion, in/out, off/on.” 
 
2.2. Drug-Induced States 

 

One  of  the  most  pronounced  “distortions”  in  perception  of  time  and  space  is 
encountered  in  the  extraordinary  states  induced  by  the  use  of  drugs.  The  following 
extract, taken from [13], illustrates this in detail: 
 
“...This  and  all  other  changes  in  my  dreams  were  accompanied  by  deep-seated  anxiety  and  funeral 
melancholy,  such  as  are  wholly  incommunicable  by  words.  I  seemed  every  night  to  descend  –  not 
metaphorically,  but  literally  to  descend  –  into  chasms  and  sunless  abysses,  depths  below  depths,  from  
which it seemed hopeless that I could ever re-ascend. Nor did I, by waking, feel that I had re-ascended. 
Why should I dwell upon this? For indeed the state of gloom which attended these gorgeous spectacles... 
cannot be approached by words. 
    The  sense  of  space,  and  in  the  end  the  sense  of  time,  were  both  powerfully  affected.  Buildings,   
landscapes,  etc.,  were  exhibited  in  proportions  so  vast  as  the  bodily  eye  is  not  fitted  to  receive.  Space 
swelled, and was amplified to an extent of unutterable and self-repeating infinity. This disturbed me much 
less than the vast expansion of time. Sometimes I seemed to have lived for seventy or a hundred years in  
one night; nay, sometimes had feelings representative of a duration far beyond the limits of any human  
experience...”  
 
Here, one should notice that the “amplification” of space is often reported hand in hand 
with  the  “expansion”  of  time.  Even  a  more dramatic and profound departure  from the 
“consensus reality,” induced by LSD, is depicted in [14]:  
 
“... I found myself in a rather unusual state of mind; I felt a mixture of serenity and bliss... It was a world 
where  miracles  were  possible,  acceptable  and  understandable.  I  was  preoccupied  with  the  problems  of  
time and space and the insoluble paradoxes of infinity and eternity that baffle our reason in the usual state 
of consciousness. I could not understand how I could have let myself be “brain-washed” into accepting the  
simple-minded  concept  of  one-dimensional  time  and  three-dimensional  space  as  being  mandatory  and 
existing in objective reality. It appeared to me rather obvious that there are no limits in the realm of spirit  
and that time and space are arbitrary constructs of the mind. Any number of spaces with different orders  
of  infinities  could  be  deliberatery  created  and  experienced.  A  single  second  and  eternity  seemed  to  be 
freely  interchangeable.  I  thought  about  higher  mathematics  and  saw  deep  parallels  between  various  
mathematical concepts and altered  states of consciousness...” 
 
This  description  clearly  indicates  that  the  mind  is  not  confined  to  the  limits  of 
conventional  space  and  time,  and  what  we  perceive  in  our  “normal”  state  of 
consciousness is only a tiny fraction of the  world  we  all  have  potential  access  to.  The 
following  experience  of  “disordered,”  “chaotic”  time  [15],  induced  by  the  drug  called 
mescaline, dovetails nicely with the above statement: 
 
 “For half an hour nothing happened. Then I began feeling sick; and various nerves and muscles started 
twitching unpleasantly. Then, as this wore off, my body became more or less anaesthetized, and I became 
‘de-personalized’, i.e., I felt completely detached from my body and the world… 
    This experience alone would have fully justified the entire experiment for me…, but at about 1.30 all 
interest  in  these  visual  phenomena was abruptly swept aside when I found that  time was behaving even 
more strangely than color. Though perfectly rational and wide-awake… I was not experiencing events in 
the normal sequence of time. I was experiencing the events of 3.30 before the events of 3.0; the events of 
2.0 after the events of 2.45, and so on. Several events I experienced with an equal degree of reality more 
than once. I am not suggesting, of course, that the events of 3.30 happened before the events of 3.0, or 
that any event happened more than once. All I am saying is that I experienced them, not in the familiar 
sequence of clock time, but in a different, apparently capricious sequence which was outside my control. 

 

3

     By ‘I’ in this context I mean, of course, my disembodied self, and by ‘experienced’ I mean learned by a 
special  kind  of  awareness  which  seemed  to  comprehend  yet  be  different  from  seeing,  hearing,  etc.…  I 
count this experience, which occurred when, as I say, I was wide awake and intelligent, sitting in my own 
armchair at home, as the most astounding and thought-provoking of my life…” 
 
The  final  experience  we  introduce  in  this  section,  induced  and  sustained  by  smoking 
salvia  divinorum,  seems  to  feature  elements  of  time  travel,  or  existing  in  separate 
realities simultaneously [16]: 
 
“… the salvia started to overtake me. Suddenly, I was unsure of where I was and, more specifically, when 
I was. I wasn't sure if I was sitting on the floor in my new apartment or on the couch of my old one the 
previous week. It felt as if I were in both places at once, smoking salvia. I felt I became unstuck in time. It 
seemed I was existing simultaneously in the past week’s trip, the current moment, and thousands of other 
times,  both  in  the  future  and  the  past.  Not  only  other  times  of  my  life,  but  of  other's  lives  as  well,  all 
existing as a four dimensional hyperbeing linked through salvia. My vision had a very "edged" aspect, as 
if everything had an extra dimension. While I was laying on the floor with eyes closed, "time tripping", I 
didn't exactly see anything, but I had a definite sense of being in numerous places, a sort of mental map… 
    In all of my experiences, I get the impression that I am "bringing back" only a small portion of what I 
am experiencing. The sensations come at a breakneck pace, and it is difficult to even hang on, much less 
pay  attention  to  what  is  actually  going  on.  All  of  my  experiences  seem  to  have  a  somewhat  consistent 
aspect. They feel very real, in a strange way…” 
 
Note  a  striking  resemblance  between  this  experience  and Atwater’s  NDE described in 
the previous section. 
 

2.3. Mental Psychoses 

 

 
 

This is the domain where much is still unsettled and uncertain and which thus provides 
an  invaluable  source  for  scientific  imagination,  as  we  strive  to  decipher  the  laws  of 
Nature. In the accounts sampled below we shall recognise at least four distinct types of 
anomalous temporal patterns reported by mentally ill patients.  
    The first type is what the majority of psychotics refer to as “time standing still.” Some 
spectacular examples are found in a paper by H. Tellenbach [17], namely [17; p. 13]: 
 
 “I sure do notice the passing of time but couldn't experience it. I know that tomorrow will be another day 
again  but  don't  feel  it  approaching.  I  can  estimate  the  past  in  terms  of  years  but  I  don't  have  any 
connection to it anymore. The time standstill is infinite, I live in a constant eternity. I see the clocks turn 
but for me time does not flow... Everything lies in one line, there are no differences of depth anymore... 
Everything is like a firm plane…” 
 
and [ibid; p. 14]: 
 
“Everything  is very different in my case, time is passing very slowly. Nights last so long, one hour is as 
long as usually a whole day...” Sometimes time had totally stood still, it would have been horrifying. Even 
space  had  changed:  “Everything  is  so  empty  and  dark,  everything  is  so  far  away  from  me...  I  don't  see 
space as usual, I see everything as if it were just a background. It all seems to me like a wall, everything is 
flat. Everything presses down, everything looks away from me and laughs...” 
 
It  is  worth  noticing  that  when  time  comes  to  a  stillstand,  perceived  space  loses  one 
dimension, becoming only two-dimensional. We shall see later that this feature finds a 
very nice explanation in our model. A slightly more detailed description of this temporal 
mode  is  given  in  a  very  readable  paper  by  Muscatello  and  Giovanardi  Rossi  [18;  p. 
784]: 
 
“Time is standing still for me, I believe. It is perhaps only a few moments that I have been so bad. I look at 
a clock and I have the impression, if I look at it again, that an enormous period of time has passed, as if 

4

 

hours would have passed instead only a few minutes. It seems to me that a duration of time is enormous. 
Time does not pass any longer, I look at the clock but its hands are always at the same position, they no 
longer move, they no longer go on; then I check if the clock came to a halt, I see that it works, but the 
hands are standing still. I do not think about my past, I remember it but I do not think about it too much. 
When I am so bad, I never think about my past. Nothing enters my mind, nothing... I did not manage to 
think  about  anything.  I did  not  manage  to  see  anything  in  my  future.  The  present  does  not  exist  for  me 
when I am so bad... the past does not exist, the future does not exist.” 
 
    The second type of temporal psychosis is what one may well call the dominating past. 
A couple of examples below, both by schizophrenics, give detailed accounts of it. The 
first  narrative  makes  explicit  how  the  temporal  is  devoid  of  the  notions  of  both  the 
future and the present [19; p. 563]:   
 
“I stop still, I am being thrown back into the past by words that are being said in the hall. But this all is 
self evident, it must be that way! There is no present anymore, there is only this stated being related to the 
past, which is more than a feeling, it goes through and through. There are all sorts of plans against me in 
the air of this hall. But I don't listen to them, I let my mind rest so that it doesn't corrode... Is there any 
future at all? Before, the future existed for me but now it is shrinking more and more. The past is so very 
obtrusive, it throws itself over me; it pulls me back...  By this I want to say that there is no future and I am 
thrown back...  Strange thoughts enter my mind and drive me off into the past...” 
 
The other account seems to even question the very nature of time [ibid.; p. 561]:  
 
“It pulls me back, well, where to? To where it comes from, there, where it was before. It enters the past. It 
is that kind of a feeling as if you had to fall back. This is the disappearing, the vanishing of things. Time  
slips into the past, the walls are fallen apart. Everything was so solid before. It is as if it were so close to 
be grabbed, as if you had to pull it back again: Is that time? Shifted way back!” 
 
   The  third  characteristic  type  of  distorted  temporal  dimension  a  psychotic  often 
encounters  is  the  sensation  of  time  flowing  backward.  Of  all  the  psycho-time-related 
references we have seen, no account draws a portrait of the essential properties of this 
mode better than that found in [19; p. 556]: 
 
“Yesterday  at  noon,  when  the  meal  was  being  served,  I  looked  at  the  clock:  why  did  no  one  else?  But 
there was something strange about it. For the clock did not help me any more and did not have anything to 
say  to  me  any  more.  How  was  I  going  to  relate  to  the  clock?  I  felt  as  if  I  had  been  put  back,  as  if 
something of the past returned, so to speak, toward me, as if I were going on a journey. It was as if at 
11:30 a.m. it was 11:00 a.m. again, but not only time repeated itself again, but all that had happened for 
me during that time as well. In fact, all of this is much too profound for me to express. In the middle of all 
this something happened which did not seem to belong here. Suddenly, it was not only 11:00 a.m. again, 
but a time which passed a long time before was there and there inside – have I already told you about a 
nut in a great, hard shell? It was like that again: in the middle of time I was coming from the past towards 
myself. It was dreadful. I told myself that perhaps the clock had been set back, the orderlies wanted to play 
a  stupid  trick  with  the  clock.  I  tried  to  envisage  time  as  usual,  but  I  could  not  do  it;  and  then  came  a 
feeling of horrible expectation that I could be sucked up into the past, or that the past would overcome me 
and flow over me. It was disquieting that someone could play with time like that, somewhat daemonic...” 
 
A psychotic patient of Laing [20] gives a very brief and concise description: 
 
“...  I  got  the  impression  that  time  was  flowing  backward;  I felt  that  time  proceeded  in  the  opposite 
direction,  I had  just  this  extraordinary  sensation,  indeed...  the  most  important  sensation  at  that  moment 
was,  time  in  the  opposite  direction...  The  perception  was  so  real  that  I looked  at  a clock  and,  I do  not 
know how, I had the impression that the clock confirmed this feeling, although I was not able to discern 
the motion of its hands...” 
 
A strikingly similar portrayal of time-reversal is also provided by a depressive patient of 
Kloos [21; p. 237]: 
 

 

5

“As I suddenly broke down I had this feeling inside me that time had completely flown away. After those 
three weeks in a sick-camp, I had this feeling that the clock hands run idle, that they do not have any hold. 
This  was  my  sudden  feeling.  I did  not  find,  so  to  speak,  any  hold  of  a clock  and  of  life  anymore, 
I experienced  a dreadful  psychological  breakdown.  I do  not  know  the  reason  why  I especially  became 
conscious of the clock. At the same time, I had this feeling that the clock hands run backward... There is 
only one piece left, so to speak, and that stands still. I could not believe that time really did advance, and 
that is why I thought that the clock hands did not have any hold and ran idle... As I worked and worked 
again,  and  worried  and  did  not  manage  anything,  I simply  had  this  feeling  that  everything  around  us 
(including us) goes back… In my sickness I simply did not come along and then I had this delusion inside 
me  that  time  runs  backward...  I  did  not  know  what  was  what  anymore,  and  I always  thought  that I was 
losing my mind. I always thought that the clock hands run the wrong way round, that they are without 
any meaning. I just stood-up in the sick-camp and looked at the clock – and it came to me then at once: 
well, what is this, time runs the wrong way round?!… I saw, of course, that the hands moved forward, 
but, as I could not believe it, I kept thinking that in reality the clock runs backward...” 
 
    The  final  type  of  temporal  psychosis  can  be  termed  the  extended  present,  and  is 
described nicely in [22; pp. 104–107]:   
 
“The  patient  elevates  herself  above  normal  boundaries  of  time  without  totally  surmounting  them.  The  
distinction  of  the  present  and  the  future  is  not  cancelled  out  as  the  patient  still  speaks  about  both 
dimensions,  yet  the  line  between  the  actual  present  and  the  only  maybe-possible  and  unreal  future  
becomes  swaying  and  possible  to  cross.  Both  dimensions  incapsulate  and  overlap  each  other  without  a 
steady transition. The future fuses with the present and vice versa and experiencing acquires a flickering  
twilight character which is radically distinguished from how a healthy person anticipates the future in day-
dreams and the like... The edge between the present and the past is swaying as well. At the same time and 
in a totally different way, the past is included in and fuses with the events of the present as well as usually 
the  present  is  part  of  the  past.  There  is  a  kind  of  condensation  of  time;  the  present  is  not  distinguished  
amidst the continuous, steady flow of the past any more, but at the same time the present is not filled with 
something  past as it usually is with normal people; in this case it overlaps... 
    The  three  temporal  levels  of  past,  present  and  future  therefore  seemed  to  overlap  in  the  psychotic  
experience  of  the  patient  in  an  extremely  peculiar  simultaneousness  without  really  invalidating  the 
distinction of past, present and future.” 
 

 

2.4. Mystical States 
 
In the last example the present loses its “point-like” nature and starts to expand into both 
the future and the past. If this expansion is not limited, the experiencer will eventually 
attain the state of the all-containing present (“eternity”), when he/she is able to see all 
events simultaneously, as in the following remarkably vivid narrative [23]: 
 
“…I get up and walk to the kitchen, thinking about what a timeless experience would be like. I direct my 
attention to everything that is happening at the present moment – what is happening here, locally, inside of 
me and near me, but non-locally as well, at ever increasing distances from me. I am imagining everything 
that  is  going  on  in  a  slice  of  the  present  –  throughout  the  country,  the  planet,  the  universe.  It's  all 
happening  at  once.  I  begin  to  collapse  time,  expanding  the  slice  of  the  present,  filling  it  with what has 
occurred in the immediate "past." I call my attention to what I just did and experienced, what led up to 
this moment, locally, but keep these events within a slowly expanding present moment. The present slice 
of time slowly enlarges, encompassing, still holding, what has gone just before, locally, but increasingly 
non-locally as well.  By now, I am standing near the kitchen sink. The present moment continues to grow, 
expand. Now it expands into the "future" as well. Events are gradually piling up in this increasingly larger 
moment. What began as a thin, moving slice of time, is becoming thicker and thicker, increasingly filled 
with events from the "present,""past," and "future." The moving window of the present becomes wider and 
wider, and moves increasingly outwardly in two temporal directions at once.  It is as though things are 
piling up in an ever-widening present. The "now" is becoming very thick and crowded! "Past" events do 
not  fall  away  and  cease  to  be;  rather,  they  continue  and  occupy  this  ever-widening  present.  "Future" 
events already are, and they, too, are filling this increasingly thick and full present moment. The moment 
continues to grow, expand, fill, until it contains all things, all events.  It is so full, so crowded, so thick, 

6

 

that  everything  begins  to  blend  together.  Distinctions blur. Boundaries melt away. Everything becomes 
increasingly  homogeneous,  like  an  infinite  expanse  of  gelatine.  My  own  boundaries  dissolve.  My 
individuality melts away. The moment is so full that there no longer are separate things. There is no-thing 
here. There are no distinctions. A very strong emotion overtakes me. Tears of wonder-joy fill my eyes.  
This is a profoundly moving experience. Somehow, I have moved away from the sink and am now several 
feet away, facing in the opposite direction, standing near the dining room table. I am out of time and in an 
eternal  present.    In  this  present  is  everything  and  no-thing.  I,  myself,  am  no  longer  here.  Images  fade 
away. Words and thoughts fade away. Awareness remains, but it is a different sort of awareness. Since 
distinctions  have  vanished,  there  is  nothing  to  know  and  no  one  to  do  the  knowing.  "I"  am  no  longer 
localized, but no longer "conscious" in the usual sense. There is no-thing to be witnessed, and yet there is 
still a witnesser. The experience begins to fade. I am "myself" again. I am profoundly moved. I feel awe 
and great gratitude for this experience with which I have been blessed…” 
 
A somewhat bizarre, yet more scholary report of an almost identical psycho-space-time 
pattern is found in [24]. Although the author almost exclusively focuses on the spatial 
fabric  of  existence  throughout  the  book,  it  is  undoubtedly  the  temporal  aspect  of  this 
particular experience that is most fascinating:  
 
“I woke up in a whole different world in which the puzzle of the world was solved extremely easily in a  
form  of  a  different  space.  I  was  amazed  at  the  wonder  of  this  different  space  and  this  amazement  
concealed  my  judgement,  this  space  is  totally  distinct  from  the  one  we  all  know.  It  had  different 
dimensions, everything contained everything else. I was this space and this space was me. The outer space 
was part of this space, I was in the outer space and the outer space was in me...  
    Anyway,  I  didn't  experience  time,  time  of  the  outer  space  and  aeons  until  the  second  phase  of  this 
dream. In the cosmic flow of time you saw worlds coming into existence, blooming like flowers, actually 
existing and then disappearing. It was an endless game. If you looked back into the past, you saw aeons,  
if  you looked  forward into the future there were aeons stretching into the eternity, and this eternity was  
contained in the point of the present. One was situated in a state of being in which the “will-be” and the 
“vanishing”  were  already  included,  and  this  “being”  was  my  consciousness.  It  contained  it  all.  This 
“being-contained” was presented very vividly in a geometric way in form of circles of different size which  
again were all part of a unity since all of the circles formed exactly one circle. The biggest circle was part 
of the smallest one and vice versa. As far as the differences of size are concerned, I could not give any 
accurate information later on...” 
 
Note a striking similarity between this experience and the experience of Grof’s subject  
(Sec. 2.2); in particular, both the subjects speak about the puzzling equivalence between 
the eternity and the moment of the present. This seems to be a very important property 
of a mystical state, for it is also mentioned by such famous mystics as St. Thomas and  
Meister  Eckhart,  and  even  by  the  great  Dante  Alighieri,  as  pointed  out  by  Ananda 
Coomaraswamy [25; p. 110]:  
 
“[St. Thomas:] Eternity is called “whole” not because it has parts, but because it is wanting in nothing... 
The  expression  “simultaneously  whole”  is  used  to  remove  the  idea  of  time,  and  the  word  “perfect”  to   
exclude the now of time... The now that stands still is said to make eternity...” 
 
[ibid; p. 117]: 
 
“[Meister  Eckhart:]  God  is  creating  the  whole  world  now,  this  instant  (“nu  alzemale”)...  He  makes  the  
world and all things in this present Now (“gegenwuertig nu”)...” 
 
[ibid; pp. 120–121]: 
 
“Dante, when he is speaking of Eternity, makes many references to this “essential point” or “moment.” All 
times are present to it (“il punto a cui tutti li tempi son presenti,” Paradiso 17.17); there every where and 
every when are focused (“dove s’appunta ogni ubi ed ogni quando,” Paradiso  29.12)... In it alone is every 
part there where it ever was, for it is not in space, nor hath it poles (“in quella sola è ogni parte là ove 
sempr’era, perché non è in loco, e non s’impola”)... Whereby it thus doth steal from thy sight (22.64).”     

 

7

 
3. An Outline of the Algebraic Geometrical Model of Time Dimension 
 
In  what  follows  we  shall  introduce  the  basic  features  of  a  simple  geometrical  model 
capable  of  mimicking  remarkably  well  some  of  the  most  pronounced  pathologies  of 
time and space we highlighted in the preceding section. The presentation will be rather 
illustrative,  so  as  to  be  accessible  to  scholars  of  various  disciplines  and  diverse 
mathematical  backgrounds.  The  reader  wishing  to  go  further  into  the  details  of  the 
mathematical formalism is referred to our papers [3–5,8].  
    The  model  in  question  is  based  on  a  specific  pencil  (i.e.  a  linear,  single  parametric 
aggregate) of conics in the real projective plane and its structure is illustrated in Fig. 1. 
We see that all the conics touch each other in two different points, B1 and B2, and the 
corresponding two common tangent lines meet  at the point S. This pencil of conics  is 
taken to  generate  the  time dimension, where each conic  represents a single event.  The 
pencil, as it stands, is homogeneous in the sense that every conic has the same footing in 
it. Yet, from what we have just seen it is obvious that the intrinsic structure of subjective 
time is far from being homogeneous, being, in fact, endowed with three different kinds 
of  event,  namely  the  past,  present  and  future.  Hence,  the  pencil  has  to  be  “de-
homogenized” in order to yield the structure required. 

 

Figure 1. 

 

    This  can  be  done  fairly  easily  if,  for  example,  we  select  in  the  plane  one  line  (the 
broken line in Fig. 1) and attach to it a special status. It is clear that if this distinguished 
line is in a general position, it does not pass via any of the points B1, B2, and S. Under 
such an assumption, the conics of the pencil are seen to form, as far as the intersection 
properties are concerned, two distinct domains with respect to this line (see Fig. 1, left). 
One domain comprises those conics that have no intersection with the line (these conics 
are located  in the dotted area and we shall call them “non-cutters”), whereas the other 
domain features the conics cut by the line in two distinct points (they are located in the 
shaded area and called “cutters”). These two domains are separated from each other by a 
unique single conic (drawn bold in Fig. 1) which has the broken line for its tangent (this 
conic will be referred to as the “toucher”). This is really a very remarkable pattern for it 
is  seen  to  reproduce  strikingly  well,  at  least  at  the  qualitative  level,  our  ordinary 
perception of time once we postulate that the cutters represent the past events, the non-

8

 

cutters the moments of the future, and that the unique toucher stands for the present, the 
now [1–9]. 
    As for a spatial dimension, this will be modelled by a pencil of lines, i.e. by all the 
lines  that  pass  through  a  given  point  (called  the  vertex  of  the  pencil).  Here  the  given 
point means any point which our broken line shares with each of the lines B1B2,   B1S, 
and  B2S,  defined  by  the  pencil  of  conics.  From  Fig.  1,  right,  it  is  evident  that  for  a 
general position of the broken line there are just three specific pencils of lines (depicted 
in Fig. 1, right, as three half-filled circles). And there are just three spatial dimensions 
(x1, x2 and x3) we perceive in our “normal/ordinary” state of consciousness! The model 
is  thus  characterized  by  an  intricate connection  between  the intrinsic structure  of time 
and the number/multiplicity of macroscopic spatial dimensions [2,3,8]. 
    In order to make this link visible to the eye, let us start moving the broken line from 
its  original,  generic  position  of  Fig.  1  towards  the  point  S  in  such  a  way  that  it  is 
eventually  incident  with  the  latter  –  as  shown  in  Fig.  2.  As  it  can  easily  be  discerned 
from this figure, in this limiting case the toucher disappears and we find only the cutters 
(shaded  area)  and  non-cutters  (dotted  area).  In  other  words,  our  time  dimension  now 
lacks the moment of the present, being endowed with the past and future events only. As 
it  is  intuitively  obvious  that  out  of  the  three  temporal  levels,  i.e.  the  past,  present and 
future, it is the present that seems to be fully  “responsible”  for what we experience as 
the “flow/passage” of time, its absence in the above-mentioned arrow implies that such 
time does not pass, it stands still. From Fig. 2 it can further be discerned that this partial 
“collapse”  of  the  generic  arrow  of  time  is  accompanied  by  a  3(cid:1)2  reduction  in  the 
dimensionality  of  space,  because  two  of  its  coordinates  (x1  and  x2)  merge  with  each 
other and form a single coordinate. This configuration thus bears a striking similarity to 
the space-time construct that a couple of Tellenbach’s melancholic patients were trying 
to describe (see the first two excerpts in Sec. 2.3)!  

Figure 2. 

 

 

9

    Another kind of “degenerate” temporal arrow emerges when the broken line hits one 
of the points B1, B2, but does not incorporate the point S – the mode depicted in Fig. 3. 
It is obvious that the line selected  in  this way is  a  secant to every conic of  the pencil, 
which  means  that  the  corresponding  time  dimension  features  exclusively  the  region  of 
the  past  –  that  is,  it  is  identical  with  the  dominating  past  mode  of  F.  Fischer’s 
schizophrenic patients (see the fourth and fifth excerpts in Sec. 2.3). Note that there is 
again the 3(cid:1)2 drop in the number of space dimensions. 

Figure 3. 

   The  third,  and  the  last  fundamental  mode  associated  with  this  particular  pencil  of 
conics, is characterized by the broken line coinciding with one of the common tangent 
lines, B1S or B2S – as shown in Fig. 4. In this case, every point of the broken line is the 
vertex  of  the  pencil  of  lines  representing  a  spatial  coordinate,  thus  space  becomes 
infinitely dimensional (which is illustrated in Fig. 4 by two lines running parallel to the 
line B1S resp. B2S). On the other hand, the broken line is now tangent to every conic of 
the  pencil,  i.e.  all  the  conics  are  its  touchers;  the  corresponding  time  dimension  thus 
consists solely of the events of the present, and represents thus nothing but what in the 
previous section was referred to as the “eternity.” We see that this (kind of) space-time 
configuration  possesses  all  the  basic  attributes  of  the  space-time  of  mystics  (see  Sec. 
2.4), as described by Huber’s narrative.   

 

 

 

10

 

Figure 4. 

    The attentive reader may ask, “What kinds of (space-)time configurations do we find 
if we consider other types of a pencil of conics residing in the real projective plane?” As 
there exist as many as nine different types of these [3], we do find some new temporal 
patterns not exhibited by the previously discussed pencil. Thus, for example, we arrive 
at internally “contorted” forms of the time dimension, such as the one composed of two 
distinct  domains  of  the  past  and  two  distinct  moments  of  the  present,  but  only  one 
region of the future; or that endowed with two different domains of the past separated 
from  each  other  by  a  single  moment  of  the  present  [3].  In  both  the  cases,  the 
corresponding psychopathological counterparts have yet to be discovered.  
    A whole new class of temporal structures is revealed if we relax the assumption that 
the  projective  plane  is  real  and  consider  also  projective  planes  defined  over  other 
ground fields [4–6,8]. Thus, for example, we find that if the ground field is algebraically 
closed, the corresponding time dimension is always devoid of the concept of the future, 
irrespectively of both the type of pencil employed and the position of the distinguished 
(broken) line [4]. Even more intriguing is the case of so-called Galois (or finite) fields: 
here, the time dimension  consists  of finite numbers of events only, lacks any ordering 
(compare with  the experience of “disordered” time of Sec. 2.2) and may even become 
transmuted  into  (indistinguishable  from)  a  spatial  dimension  if  these  fields  are  of 
characteristic two [5,6].  
    Finally, a very promising generalization of the above-discussed rudimentary model is 
achieved if the constraint of the linearity of the aggregate of conics is also removed. A 
simple, quadratic set of conics put forward in [9] not only reproduces all the key features 
of the linear model, but it also leads to what we termed the arrow-within-arrow patterns 
– the structures accounting, for example, for experiences of time flowing backward (see 
Sec. 2.3). As we do not have additional space here to discuss these and other intriguing 
cases  in  further mathematical detail, the  interested  reader  is referred  to  our papers [2–
6,8,9].      
 
 
4. Conclusion 

 

The findings and results just described provide us with strong evidence that not only are 
the manifestations of mental or psychological time so diverse and unusual that they fail 
to conform to the generally adopted picture of the macroscopic physical world, but there 
also exists a unique mathematical framework which, at least qualitatively, underlies and 
unifies  their  seemingly  bizarre  properties.  Hence,  any  attempt  to  disregard  these 
psychopathological  temporal  constructs  as  pure  hallucinatory  phenomena  would 
simultaneously cast a doubtful eye on the very role of mathematics in our understanding 
of  Nature.  To  the  contrary,  it  is  just  mathematics  (algebraic  projective  geometry  here) 
that plainly tells us that it is far more natural to expect all these “unusual” perceptions of 
time to be simply as real as our ordinary (“normal”) one. We are, however, fully aware 
that  this  point  of  view  is  very  likely  to  meet  with  scepticism,  and  even  with  fierce 
opposition, from the side of ‘hard-line’ instructional scientists. Most such scientists will 
probably  object  to  the  anecdotal  character  inherent  in  describing  the  variety  of  time’s 
multifaceted  phenomena.  However,  this  inevitable  anecdotal  feature  is  necessary  for 
research on the qualitative aspects of time – research which profits both psychology and 
physics. As very well argued by Shallis [26; p. 153]: 
 

 

11

“Quality  and  quantity  are  somewhat  like  the  ingredients  of  descriptive  and  instructional  science, 
respectively. Because the two approaches are so different the sorts of evidence employed in each will also 
differ.  Whereas  the  instructional  approach  requires,  indeed  demands,  rigorous,  quantitative  and 
reproducible  evidence,  the  descriptive  attitude,  which  often  deals  with  the  unique  and  individual,  is 
mainly  anecdotal.  This  does  not  mean  it  is  uncritical  or  sloppy,  but  in  trying  to  find  the  whole  truth 
everything  must  be  taken  into  account.  If  some  evidence  turns  out  to  be  false,  that  too  is  part  of  the 
picture. In instructional science anecdotal evidence, even if true, can be dismissed as unquantifiable and 
impossible  to  assess.  The  techniques  of  instructional  science  cannot  handle  individual  experience  or 
admit to the quality of time. Descriptive science can…” 
 
We  are  firmly  convinced  that  anything  that  shows  a  definite  mathematical  structure, 
whatever bizarre and counter-intuitive it may appear, deserves effort and ingenuity to be 
thoroughly explored and examined, all the more that [ibid, pp. 153–4]: 
 
“…the fact that the experience of time is not quantifiable puts it into arena of human perceptions that are 
at  once  richer  and  more  meaningful  than  are  those  things  that  are  merely  quantifiable…  The  lack  of 
quantification  of  temporal  experiences  is  not  something  that  should  stand  them  in  low  stead,  to  be 
dismissed as nothing more than fleeting perceptions or as merely anecdotal; rather that lack should be 
seen as their strength. It is because the experience of time is not quantifiable and not subject to numerical 
comparison that makes it something of quality, something containing the essence of being…” 
 

Acknowledgements 

 

 

I am very grateful to Mr. Pavol Bendík for painstaking drawing of the figures. I would 
like to express my cordial thanks to Miss Daniela Veverková and Mr. Peter Hahman for 
translating  into  English  all  the  excerpts  taken  from  journals  written  in  German.  My 
warm  thanks  are  due  also  to  Dr.  Rosolino  Buccheri  (IASFC,  Palermo)  for  the 
corresponding translation of a couple of excerpts in Italian. I am also indebted to Prof. 
Mark Stuckey (Elizabethtown College) for a careful proofreading of the paper. Last, but 
not  least,  I  wish  to  express  my  gratitude  to  my  wife  for  her  continuous  support  and 
encouragement  of  my  work.  This  work  was  supported  in  part  by  the  NATO 
Collaborative  Linkage  Grant  PST.CLG.976850,  the  NATO  Advanced  Research 
Fellowship  distributed  and  administered  by  the  Fonds  National  de  la  Recherche 
Scientifique, Belgium, and the 2001–2003 Joint Research Project of the Italian Research 
Council and the Slovak Academy of Sciences “The Subjective Time and its Underlying 
Mathematical Structure.” 
 
References 

1.    Saniga, M. (1996) Arrow of time and spatial dimensions, in K. Sato, T. Suginohara, and N.  
       Sugiyama  (eds.), Cosmological Constant and the Evolution of the Universe, Universal   
       Academy Press Inc., Tokyo, pp. 283–284. 
2.    Saniga, M. (1996) On the transmutation and annihilation of pencil-generated space-time  
       dimensions,  in W.G. Tifft and W.J. Cocke (eds.), Mathematical Models of Time and Their  
       Application to Physics and Cosmology, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, pp. 283–290. 
3.    Saniga, M. (1998) Pencils of conics: a means towards a deeper understanding of the arrow of time?,  
       Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 9, 1071–1086. 
4.    Saniga, M. (1998) Time arrows over ground fields of an uneven characteristic, Chaos, Solitons &  
       Fractals 9, 1087–1093. 
5.    Saniga, M. (1998) Temporal dimension over Galois fields of characteristic two, Chaos, Solitons &  
       Fractals 9, 1095–1104. 
6.    Saniga, M. (1998) On a remarkable relation between future and past over quadratic Galois fields,  
       Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 9, 1769–1771. 
7.    Saniga, M. (1998) Unveiling the nature of time: altered states of consciousness and pencil-generated  

12

 

       space-times, International Journal of Transdisciplinary Studies 2, 8–17. 
8.    Saniga, M. (1999) Geometry of psycho(patho)logical space-times: a clue to resolving the enigma of    
        time?, Noetic Journal 2, 265–273. 
9.    Saniga, M. (2000) Algebraic geometry: a tool for resolving the enigma of time?, in R. Buccheri, V.  
       Di Gesù and M. Saniga (eds.), Studies on the Structure of Time: From Physics to  
       Psycho(patho)logy,  Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York, pp. 137–166. 
10.  Moody, R. (1975) Life After Life, Mockingbird Books, Atlanta, pp. 69–70. 
11.  Ring, K. (1984) Heading Towards Omega, W. Morrow & Company Inc., New York, p. 183. 
12.  Atwater, P.M.H. (1988) Coming Back to Life. The After-Effects of the Near-Death Experience,  
       Dodd,  Mead and Company, New York, Chapter 2. 
13.  Quincey, T. (1967) Confessions  of  an  English  Opium-Eater, Dent, London, pp. 281–282. 
14.  Grof, S. (1976) Realms of the Human Unconscious. Observations from LSD Research, E. P. Dutton   
       & Company Inc., New York, p. 187. 
15.  Ebin, D. (ed.) (1961) The Drug Experience, Orion Press, New York, p. 295. 
16.  An anonymous account posted at http://leda.lycaeum.org/Trips/Simultaneous_Lives.5627.shtml. 
17.  Tellenbach, H. (1956) Die Raumlichkeit der Melancholischen. I. Mitteilung, Nervenarzt 27, 12–18. 
18.  Muscatello, C.F. and Giovanardi Rossi, P. (1967) Perdita della visione mentale e patologia   
       dell’esperienza temporale, Giorn. Psichiatr. Neuropatol. 95, 765–788. 
19.  Fischer, F. (1929) Zeitstruktur und Schizophrenie, Zeitschr. ges. Neurol. Psychiat. 121, 544–574.  
20.  Laing, R.D. (1968) La Politica dell’Esperienza, Feltrinelli, Milano, p. 148. 
21.  Kloos, G. (1938) Störungen des Zeiterlebens in der endogenen Depression, Nervenarzt 11, 225–244. 
22.  Ciompi, L. (1961) Über abnormes Zeiterleben bei einer Schizophrenen, Psychiat. Neurol. Basel   

142, 100–121.  

23.  Braud, W.G. (1995) An experience of timelessness, Exceptional Human Experience 13(1), 64–66. 
24.  Huber, G. (1955) Akasa, der Mystische Raum, Origo-Verlag, Zürich, pp. 45–46. 
25.  Coomaraswamy, A.K. (1947) Time and Eternity, Atribus Asiae Publishers, Ascona. 
26.  Shallis, M. (1982) On Time. An Investigation into Scientific Knowledge and Human Experience,   
       Burnett Books, New York. 

 

13

