Superconducting Power Generation
Mario Rabinowitz
Armor Research, lrainbow@stanford.edu

 715 Lakemead Way, Redwood City, CA 94062-3922

Abstract

The superconducting ac generator has the greatest potential for large-scale

commercial application of superconductivity that can benefit the public.  Electric power

is a vital ingredient of modern society, and generation may be considered to be the vital

ingredient of a power system.  This articles gives background, and an insight into the

physics and engineering of superconducting power generation.

Introduction

With respect to the electric power industry, the superconducting ac generator has

the greatest potential for large-scale commercial application of superconductivity.  Such

a machine should be able to convert mechanical energy to electric energy more

efficiently and with greater economy of weight and volume than any other method.

These advantages can be accrued at a scale of 1200 MVA output, with the added

potential of operation at transmission line voltage, and greater system stability.  In the

past, a great deal of R & D was done in this area, but the present industry trend to

smaller machines has decreased this effort.  Though the advantages diminish at the

much smaller scale of 250 MVA. such machines still offer interesting possibilities.

  The overall reliability of five 250 MVA generators can be expected to be greater

than of one 1200 MVA generator.  The loss of one 250 MVA machine clearly has much

less impact than the loss of one 1200 MVA machine.  The advantage of reliability may

outweigh the advantage of economy of scale to which large conventional machines are

limited.  Nevertheless, I believe that the advantages (as we shall see) of a 1200 MVA

superconducting generators can be so much greater and so manifest, that at least for

replacement purposes they would be  seriously considered by utilities.  “Build it and

-1-

they will use it” applies here since enlightened utilities do take advantage of products

that are clearly demonstrated to be superior..        

Although quite different in their functions, generators and electric motors are

essentially the same machine operated in inverse modes.  A generator converts

mechanical energy to electrical, and when the process is reversed it operates as a motor.

There is a companion article in this issue on superconducting motors.  Superconducting

synchronous generators with a superconducting adjustable field rotor keep power

losses to a minimum since the field in the stator is phase-locked in synchronism with

the rotating rotor field.  The high magnetic flux density produced by a superconducting

rotor field winding permits a great reduction in the amount of iron required in both the

rotor and stator.  As we shall see, this reduction introduces degrees of freedom not

previously possible in generator or motor design.  

This paper is written to help us better perceive the technological potential of new

developments.  Let us start by gaining a simple understanding of the nature of

superconductivity with both its promise and limitations.

Nature of Superconducting Power Losses

A superconductor at low or high temperature may be thought of as composed of

two variable interpenetrating fluids.  One fluid consists of normal conducting electrons.

The other fluid consists of superconducting electron pairs.  As the transition

temperature is approached, the electrons all become normal.  As the temperature

approaches 0 K (absolute zero), all the free electrons become superconducting.  This is

like a parallel  circuit with two branches.  The superconducting electrons are

represented by the branch with pure inductance and no resistance.  The branch that

represents the normal electrons has both inductance and resistance.

 

For dc, the current divides inversely proportional to the resistance of each

branch.  Thus the current goes solely through the superconducting branch without

power loss, since there is no current in the normal (resistive) branch.  For ac, the current

-2-

divides inversely proportional to the impedance of each branch.  Since the

superconducting branch has inductive reactance, current flows in both branches with

power loss in the resistive branch.  This fundamental loss is always present.

Fortunately the fundamental loss is relatively small and generally negligible.

However, there are other losses such as hysteresis and fluxoid motion power losses

which may not be negligible.  The power loss is relatively small in the dc rotor, as it is

shielded from time varying fields from the ac stator.  As explained in the introductory

article in this issue, there are also maximum limits on current density and magnetic

field even for dc.   The large time varying fields at the stator result in hysteretic ac

superconducting  power losses that are presently too large to allow replacement of the

copper in the stator coils with superconductor.  However, this may change as ac losses

are reduced, operating temperature is increased, and actual refrigeration efficiency is

improved.

In superconducting technology applications, the devil lies in a myriad of details

that require attention.  For example, Parker and Krefta [1] point out that an important

factor in the design of a superconducting rotor  as well as any superconducting magnet

is the interface electrical resistance between normal metals, or between a normal metal

and a superconductor.  For example, the interface resistance between the Al stabilizer

and the Cu matrix of a filamentary superconductor as used in a rotor is very important

to achieve stability.  Under time varying fields as when the rotor field is ramping up or

down, the interface resistance between the copper matrix and the superconducting

filaments in magnet cables and ac transmission lines is an important factor in

determining matrix losses.  Parker and Krefta’s analysis shows that there is an intrinsic

magneto-resistance of cryogenic joints due to Hall currents.

Historical Perspective

The earliest work on superconducting generators was done in the U. S. in 1964 -

1966 in which an alternator was successfully demonstrated by Stekly, Woodson et al [2]

-3-

using a fixed superconducting field coil, and a rotating normal armature with slip ring

connections.  The first rotating superconductor field coil was shown to be practical in

1971 by an MIT group. [3]  Within a few years, R & D on similar superconducting

synchronous machines was being conducted around the world.

In 1977, as manager in charge of superconducting projects at EPRI, I initiated two

competing superconducting generator programs at Westinghouse and General Electric.

Two objectives of these programs were to develop a detailed design of a 300 MVA

superconducting generator, and a less detailed conceptual design of a 1200 MVA unit.  I

felt that it was important to look at a high enough power level to be meaningful for

utility applications, and to have two independent and competitive projects.  These were

both successfully completed.

In 1994, the U.S. Department of Energy funded General Electric to design a 100

MVA HTS synchronous generator and build a full-scale HTS racetrack coil using

BSCCO or TBCCO.  The  BSCCO coil achieved fields high enough for use in a generator

with BSCCO supplied by Intermagnetics General Corp.

In 1988, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) initiated the

Super GM (Engineering Research Association for Superconductivity  Generation

Equipment and Materials) project, a collaboration of about a score of companies in

Japan with a combined annual budget of about $50 million.   One of their goals was to

build and test three 70 MW superconducting ac generators using NbTi low temperature

superconductor cooled by liquid helium.  This was achieved in 1997 with three different

rotors designed respectively for high stability, high critical current density, and low ac

loss. [4]  To my knowledge these are the largest superconducting generators built to

date.  These rotors have the capability of replacement of the NbTi with HTS material.

Superconducting Generators

There  are  at  least  four  ways  in  which  superconducting  generators  can

substantially improve electric power systems:

-4-

   #1.  They could greatly reduce both capital and operating costs.

   #2.  They have the potential for high voltage operation thus eliminating the step up

transformer; and thus they could also make dc economically competitive over    

considerably shorter distances than at present.

   #3.  They would increase grid stability.

   #4.  They could be used for var generation.

Let us see how these advantages can be accrued.

Voltage is induced and power is produced as the magnetic field lines of a

rotating rotor periodically cut the stator windings.    A conventional generator with iron

teeth has a magnetic field of ≈ 1 T (10,000 Gauss) at its inside surface.  This may be

understood from the fact that the conductor slot width ~ tooth width, since iron

saturates at ≈ 2 T. So a conventional generator operates between the limits of field

saturation at the rotor and at the stator.  Superconducting rotor fields ≈ 5 T (50,000

Gauss) greatly exceed the saturation field of iron.  Thus iron can largely be eliminated

in the stator (armature) and be replaced by copper for an increased density of ampere-

turns induced by the rotating field.  This concomitantly reduces insulation

requirements.

Both changes allow for better use of space and materials.  When grounded iron is

removed from the stator windings, less insulation is needed between adjacent bars.

Although full interphase insulation is still needed between end-winding groups. the

reorganized windings and insulation (made possible by the absence of the stator’s iron

teeth) permit reduced insulation stress and, in turn, higher voltage operation.   This

presents the potential for  the development of a high voltage superconducting generator

which could entirely eliminate the step-up transformer to the transmission line.

Because a superconducting generator is a compact object, the refrigeration

requirement is not a dominant factor as it is in a  superconducting transmission line.

For machines bigger than 100 MVA,  even at low temperature operation, the

-5-

refrigeration requirement is a small part of the overall losses even with the big gain in

refrigeration efficiency at 77 K operation.  Nevertheless, higher temperature operation

would be desirable from the aspect of increased reliability, simplicity, and tolerance to

temperature rises.   Although operation at higher temperatures would be an advantage,

the use of low temperature superconductors is quite adequate.

Despite being much improved relative to their inception, high temperature

superconductors still have problems of greater brittleness and lower critical current

density than do low temperature superconductors.  One possible way to get around

these problems is with a stored field rotor in which the magnetic field is trapped in the

superconductor with high fidelity to an original pattern field. [5]  As long as the

superconductor is kept below the transition temperature for the given trapped field, the

superconductor performs like a very high field permanent magnet.  A stored field rotor

would also eliminate many of the problems associated with winding a superconducting

coil, and losses due to wire motion (slip) in the coil.

Although the actual cost of an ac generator is relatively insignificant compared

with the cost of a power plant, it may be considered to be the pivotal element of the plant.

Conventional generators are ≈ 99 % efficient.  An increase of 0.5% to a 99.5 % efficiency,

made possible by superconducting generators, is equivalent to a much more impressive

sounding 50 % reduction in losses.  But the power plant leveraging is much greater than

this since the generator dominates not only the electrical aspects of the power station, but

strongly impacts the overall capital costs of the plant as indicated by items #1 and #2.

The efficiency improvement is leveraged by a factor of ≈ 100 since the ratio of the capital

cost/kW of a power plant are ≈  100 times higher than that of a generator.  Since

superconducting generators are significantly smaller than conventional generators, there

are substantial further savings in construction, financing, and operating costs.  Figure 1

and Table 1 make a comparison between conventional and possible superconducting

1200 MVA generators.  The reason that superconducting generators are significantly

-6-

smaller than conventional ones of the same power output is because the power density of

a generator is approximately proportional to the square of the magnetic excitation field,
∝ (5T/2T)2 ≈ 6.

The  potential  for  increased  ac  system  stability  afforded  by  a  superconducting

generator is also of great importance as noted in item #3.  When a system (generator-

grid-load) is perturbed electrically or mechanically, the resulting transient is oscillatory.

If the oscillations damp out to the original or a new steady-state operating condition,

the  system  is  stable.    Otherwise  the  system  is  unstable.    In  general,  the  lower  the

generator reactances, the greater the stability.  The per-unit synchronous reactance of a

superconducting  generator  is  about  1/4  that  of  a  conventional  generator  of  similar

rating.  This results in an increased steady-state stability limit of the superconducting

machine by as much as a factor of four when the transmission line reactance is relatively

small.

A superconducting generator can also be operated as a synchronous condenser

to adjust the reactance of a line, i.e. var generation as mentioned in item #4.  Static var

generators introduce harmonics into the system unless there is sufficient filtering.   A

superconducting  synchronous condenser would not introduce harmonics at all.

Natural and Artificial Limits

Traditionally,  both  in  generation  and  in  transmission,  electric  utilities  have

pursued  economies  of  scale  with  large  power  plants  in  increasing  efficiencies  and  in

reducing capital and operating costs.  However, both natural and artificial constraints

limit such expansion. A limit for conventional generators is about 1500 MVA.   This is

roughly a shipping limit for 4-pole machines, and somewhat of a natural limit for 2-pole
machines since rotor rigidity is essentially proportional to r2/  l 3,  where  r  is  the  rotor
radius and   l  is the rotor length.  Even if r were not already limited by centrifugal force,

it would be seriously limited by transport facilities.  So a given rotor stiffness cannot be
maintained  simply  by  increasing  r  faster  than  l   is  increased.    As  l   is  increased  to

-7-

increase the power output, the natural frequency is decreased and with it a decrease in

the  first  critical  speed  and  an  increase  in  the  number  of  critical  speeds.    Thus  more

stringent and sophisticated balancing is required.  For an end supported rotor, flexure

and vibrations severely limit the length, and the rotor must continually be rotated to

avoid sag.

Thus, machine size is ultimately limited by balancing or shipping capability.

When these limits are reached, new technological breakthroughs such as the

superconducting generator can result in new greater limits, or to new ways of doing

business.

Discovery and Commercialization

Many advanced technology races for the electric power industry are being run all

over the world in both  basic research and for commercialization.  In the field of

superconductivity, experimental and theoretical efforts have been aimed at achieving a

fundamental understanding of new high temperature superconductors (as well as the

old low temperature) superconductors that will lead to improved materials in terms of

higher transition temperatures, higher critical current densities, lower alternating

power

losses. better mechanical properties, fabricability, etc.

In the race for fundamental knowledge, the United States has traditionally been

at the forefront of scientific discoveries.  However the race for commercialization has

not always been so successful.  For advanced technologies like high temperature

superconductivity, we need to avoid the same loss of leadership that has befallen

manufacturers of electric power industry apparatus (e.g., circuit breakers, transformers,

and high power semiconductors); and on a broader scale the electronic and

microelectronics industry (televisions, stereos, VCR’s, etc.).

Conclusion

-8-

A well-designed superconducting generator can represent a beautiful

optimization between competing and often conflicting electrical, economic, thermal,

reliability, and mechanical requirements. [6]  Basically thermal performance improves

as the operating temperature is increased, and electrical performance is decreased.

Electrical system stability and power density is increased at the expense of mechanical

strength and vibration tolerance.  The increased complexity of the advanced technology

is not allowed to compromise reliability.  Keeping capital costs down, compromises

everything.

 

The emergence of a technology is a function of both its potential and of resources

put into its development.  In simple terms, the superconducting generator leads in

potential because of its small surface to volume ratio i.e. it is relatively compact; and

because the superconductor is operated in the dc mode.  With respect to power loss,

the superconducting ac transmission line is limited due to a very large superconducting

surface to volume ratio, and hence large refrigeration losses, as well as relatively high

power losses because it is operated in the ac mode.  

Because the USA is a free and open society with respect to the sharing of

scientific knowledge and  to the exchange of ideas, some say we are more vulnerable in

the marketplace.  However, when we are united by common goals and coordinated

implementation, the diverse interests of industry, federal laboratories, and universities

can meet the nation’s needs in scientific research as well as protecting our position in

commercialization.

Even though the advantages of higher efficiency, reduced size and weight, lower

capital cost, and greater stability may be realized in an ac superconducting generator,

these advantages could easily be outweighed by one factor -- reliability.  If it is less

reliable than a conventional machine, even a few days more outage per year could well

tilt the balance against it.  It is a more complicated and more delicate machine than its

rugged counterpart.  In fact, part of its beauty stems from its achievement without

-9-

recourse to brute force.  It has the potential of being a solution where the past answers

of more and larger are no longer adequate.

References

June 1997.

[1]  J. H. Parker, Jr. and M. P. Krefta, “The Intrinsic Magneto-Resistance of Cryogenic

Joints,”  IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity,   Vol. 7, Part 1, pages 820-823,

[2]  Z.J.J. Stekly, H.H. Woodson, A.M. Hatch, L.O. Hoppie, and E. Halas. IEEE

Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems   Vol. 85, p. 274 (1966).

[3]  P. Thullen, J.C. Dudley, D.L. Green, J.L. Smith, H.H. Woodson, IEEE Transactions on

Power Apparatus and Systems   Vol. 90, p. 611 (1971).

[4]  K. Ueda, T. Ageta, and S. Nakayama, “Super-GM and Other Superconductivity

Projects in Japanese Electric Power Sector,” IEEE Transactions on Applied

Superconductivity,   Vol. 7, pages 245-251, June 1997.

[5]  M. Rabinowitz, “Stored Field Superconducting Electrical Machine and Method,”

    US Patent No. 4,176,291 (1979).

[6]  M. Rabinowitz, “Cryogenic Power Generation,” Cryogenics Vol. 17, 319-330 (1977).

Table 1.  Comparison of Conventional and Possible Superconducting

1200 MVA Generators

Property

Superconducting Generator      Conventional Generator

Phase-to-Phase Voltage

     26 to 500 kV

             26 kV

Line Current

      27 to 1.4 kA

  27 kV

Active Length

2.5 to 3.5 m (8 to 11.5 ft)

    6 to 7 m (20 to 25 ft )

Total Length

10 to 12 m (33 to 39 ft)

    17 to 20 m (55 to 65 ft)

Stator Outer Diameter

2.6 m (8.5 ft)

Rotor Diameter

  1 m (3 ft)

2.7 m (8.9 ft)

  1 m (3 ft)

-10-

Rotor Length

   4 m (13 ft)

        8 to 10 m (26 to 33 ft)

Field Exciter Power

     6 kW

        5000 kW

Generator Weight

160 to 300 ton

    600 to 700 ton

Total Losses 

        5 to 7 MW

     10 to 15 MW

Field Strength

                     5 Tesla

        2 Tesla

-11-

