- 1 -

EXAMINATION  OF WAVE-PARTICLE DUALITY
VIA TWO-SLIT INTERFERENCE

Mario Rabinowitz
Armor Research, lrainbow@stanford.edu

 715 Lakemead Way, Redwood City, CA 94062-3922

Abstract

The  wave-particle  duality  is  the  main  point  of  demarcation  between  quantum

and classical physics, and is the quintessential mystery of quantum mechanics.  Young's

two-slit  interference  experiment  is  the  arch  prototype  of  actual  and  gedanken

experiments used as a testing ground of this duality.  Quantum mechanics predicts that

any  detector  capable  of  determining  the  path  taken  by  a  particle  through  one  or  the

other of a two-slit plate will destroy the interference pattern.  We will examine both the

experimental  and  theoretical  attempts  to  test  this  assertion,  including  a  new  kind  of

experiment,  and  to  grasp  the  underlying  truth  behind  this  mystery  from  the  earliest

days to the present.  Where positions differ, the views of both sides are presented  in a

balanced approach.

1.  Introduction

PACS Nos.:  03.65.Bz, 42.25.Hz, 3.65.-w, 01.65.+g, 01.70.+w.

Little could Newton and Huygens foresee that their eighteenth century debate

about whether light is particle-like or wave-like1  would foreshadow a debate about the

wave-particle  duality  of  both  light  and  matter  that  is  still  being  waged.    Little  did

Newton,  Huygens,  Young,  and  their  contemporaries  know  that  the  1802  victory  of

Thomas Young's two-slit interference experiment2 in favor of the wave nature of light

was only a virtual victory, and that his two-slit experiment in a myriad of variations

would  be  the  paradigm  to  this  day  for  illustration  and  consideration  of  the  issues

related to the wave-particle duality.

- 2 -

Though  in  retrospect  he  may  not  have  liked  it,  Einstein  was  reponsible  for

initiating the wave-particle duality in 1905 by associating the concept of an indivisible

particle, the photon, with the well-established wave nature of light.3  He assigned the
discrete energy hν,  to  a  photon  (h  is  Planck's  constant,  and  ν is  the  frequency  of  the

light) to explain the photoelectric effect for which he was awarded the Nobel prize in

1921.      Einstein  described  light3  as  "consisting  of  a  finite  number  of  energy  quanta

which are  localized at points in space, which move without dividing, and which can

only be produced and absorbed as complete units."  This view has remained unchanged

since its inception.   In 1923, de Broglie inverted the concept to associate a wave with

particles.4  The paradigm shift for all this started in 1900, when Planck explained the

blackbody radiation curve in terms of harmonic oscillators which could absorb or emit
energy only in discrete units hν.5

Ever since the beginnings of quantum mechanics, the wave-particle duality has

captured the imagination of physicists.  It took only four years after Einstein explained

the photoelectric effect by quantization of light for the first single-photon interference

experiment  to  be  performed.    Taylor  did  it  in  1909  with  a  flame  light  source,  a

diffraction  grating  and  a  photographic  plate.6    Taylor  achieved  the  penultimate

(considering  delayed  choice  or  quantum  erasure  to  be  the  ultimate)    double-slit

experiment,  in  which  particles  are  directed  one  at  a  time  at  a  grating.    These  single

particles are each diffracted in passing through the slit(s). Each particle produces one

displaced spot on a screen opposite the slits; and with the collection of a large number

of particles an interference pattern emerges.  The term luminescent screen shall be used

herein  for  anything  capable  of  single  particle  detection  such  as  an  array  of

photomultipliers.

2.  Two-Slit Interference Gedanken Experiments

2.1  Einstein-Bohr debates

- 3 -

In one of the first of the epoch-making debates between Albert Einstein and Neils

Bohr, the two-slit experiment was a pivotal point of contention at the 1927 fifth Solvay

Congress  in  Brussels.7  Three  versions  of  the  two-slit  recoil  gedanken  (thought)

experiment  are  attributed  to  Einstein.    In  one  of  them,  he  pointed  out  that  when  a

photon  is  diffracted  to  the  right  of  the  interference  maximum,  it  imparts  a  greater

momentum transfer to the slit plate if it goes through the left slit than if it goes through

the right slit because it acquires a larger transverse momentum in going through the left

slit.  Thus, in principle, by observing the recoil of the slit plate, one may determine the

traversed  slit.    However,  Bohr8  showed  that  for  such  an  observation  to  leave  the

interference pattern undisturbed, the uncertainty principle would have to be violated

for the slit plate.  Otherwise the recoiled slit plate would move so much each time that

the  interference  pattern  would  be  washed  out.    Let  us  look  in  detail  at  Bohr's

arguments.

2.1.1  Two-Slit Plate Recoil

Bohr's contention goes roughly as follows.  Consider the second maximum to the
right of and spaced a distance ∆x from the central maximum.  Particles detected on the
  rp  depending on which slit they
screen at this position have different momenta     lp  and 
came from  because of  the greater angle of deflection from the left slit than the right slit.

The difference of the x components of momentum is

∆px

≈ h
∆x

.

(If this is not clear, it will become clear after the more rigorous and lengthy derivation
which  follows  immediately.    Equation  (1)  corresponds  to  Eq.  (16)  with  ∆x  =  λD/s.)

Therefore the momentum transfer to the slit plate must be measured more accurately

than  the  expression  of  Eq.  (1)  to  determine  the  slit  of  passage.    The  requires  the

(1)

(2)

measured error
< ∆px
δpx
 

≈ h
∆x

.

The uncertainty of measuring the impact spot must be less than half the fringe

- 4 -

spacing

δx < (fringe spacing) / 2 = ∆x / 2.
  

Multiplying Eqs. (2) and (3) together, yields

 = h / 2.






δx < h
∆x

∆x
2

δpx
  

This appears to beat the uncertainty principle

δpx
    

δx ≥ h / 4π = h / 2











by a factor of 2π.  So let us look at this a little more carefully.

The  magnitude  of  the  (transverse)  x  component  of  momentum    of  a  particle

coming from the right slit is





xrp = p
  

sine of

deflection angle


 = h
λ


x − s / 2
(
D2 + x − s / 2

[

]1/2

)2

≈ h
λ




x − s / 2
D


 ,






where λ= h/p is the de Broglie wave length.  Somewhat as shown in the lower half of

Fig.1,  s  is  the  separation  of  the  slits,  D  is  the  distance  from  the  slit  plate  to  the

interference screen, and x is the position of the spot on the screen measured from the

In order to determine which slit the particle traversed, we must be able to measure the

center line.  Similarly for a particle from the left slit

xlp = h
λ

x + s / 2
(
D2 + x + s / 2

[

]1/2

)2

≈ h
λ




x + s / 2
D


 .






momentum of the slit plate with an uncertainty
xlp

xp <

xrp


 .

≈ h
λ




−

s
D

∆
    

compared to the criteria used for Eq. (3):

∆x < (fringe spacing) / 2π = λD / (2πs).
  

xp ∆x< h

λ










s
D

λD
2πs




= h.

∆
    

Let  us  tighten  up  the  requirement  on  our  ability  to  discriminate  interference  fringes

From Eqs. (8) and (9), we require the product of the measurement uncertainties to be

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

- 5 -

Again,  this  appears  to  barely  comply  with  the  uncertainty  principle  by  a  factor  of  2,

though it is a little too close for comfort (cf. last sentence of Section 2.1.3).

2.1.2  Single-Slit Source Plate Recoil

Another version is recalled by Bohr  in which Einstein suggests detection of the

momentum  transfer    to  a  single-slit  plate    between  the  light  source  and  the  two-slit
plate, with a similar violation of the uncertainty principle.7  Bohr9 argued that if   ω is

the angle between the single slit and the two slits, for the conjectured paths of a particle

through the left or right slits, the difference of momentum transfer in these two cases is


∆p ≈ pω ≈ h

λ








 ,

s
D

(11)

(12)

where D is the distance from the single-slit plate to the two-slit plate, and also from the

two-slit plate to the interference screen.  Bohr points out that the same result will also

ensue if the two-slit plate is not midway between the single-slit plate and the screen.

The uncertainty principle requires an uncertainty in position of  the single-slit plate

∆x >





h
2∆p


 =





hλD
2hs




=




DD
2s




causing  the  same  uncertainty  in  the  position  of  the  fringes.    Since  this  is  also

approximately the fringe separation 

λD
s



  


 , Bohr argued that no interference effect can

appear.  Since  ∆x is a factor of 4π smaller than the fringe separation, it seems possible

that  something  resembling  an  interference  pattern  could  survive,  were  it  not  for  the

proviso of the last sentence of Section 2.1.3.

Bohr9 recalls, "but, in spite of all divergencies of approach and opinion, a most

humorous spirit animated the discussions.  On his side, Einstein mockingly asked us

whether  we  could  really  believe  that...'ob  der  liebe  Gott  wurfelt'  [does  God  play

dice?].... I remember also how at the peak of the discussion Ehrenfest, in his affectionate

manner  of  teasing  his  friends,  jokingly  hinted  at  the  apparent  similarity  between

Einstein's attitude and that of the opponents of relativity theory; but instantly Ehrenfest

added  that  he  would  not  be  able  to  find  relief  in  his  own  mind  before  concord  with

- 6 -

Einstein was reached."

2.1.3  Interference Screen Recoil

An  equally  ill-fated  third  version    has  Einstein  proposing  that  the  lateral  kick

imparted by a photon to the interference screen could be used to determine which slit

the  photon  traversed  as  it  went  to  the  screen.    To  record  the  interference  fringes,  the

luminescent screen location must be fixed within a lateral displacement

∆x < (fringe spacing) / 2π = λD / (2πs),
  

where s is the slit spacing, D is the distance of the source from the slit-plate. The  x axis

lies on the geodesic joining the two slits on the slit plate, and the y axis is on the center

line  from  the  source  to  the  slit  plate.    Although    Fig.  1  is  intended  to  illustrate  a

different,  new  kind  of  experiment,  the  lower  portion  can  be  helpful  in  indicating  the

geometry here, which is common to all the two-slit interference experiments.

 

If the particle comes to the center of the central maximum from the left slit, its

where  i,  j, and k  are  the  unit  vectors  in  the  x,  y,  and  z  directions.    If  it  comes  to  the

momentum is
r
p = pxli + pylj + pzlk = p
l





s
2D


 i + pylj + pzlk ,


central maximum from the right slit




= −pxri + pyrj + pzrk = −p

r
pr
      

s
2D


 i + pyrj + pzrk .


To  ascertain  the  slit  through  which  the  particle  came,  one  must  determine  the

transverse momentum imparted to the screen by distinguishing between the particle's

momentum  if it comes from the left or right slit, i.e. the x components of momentum
zrp , but
rp .  Eqs.  (14)  and  (15)    imply  that  in  order  to  discriminate,  the

must be distinguishable.  It is not necessary to assume that      ylp =
only  that       lp =
measurement of the x component of the screen momentum, it must be made with an

yrp , and zlp =

(13)

(14)

(15)

- 7 -

uncertainty  less  than  the  difference  between  these  two  possible  x  components  of

momentum of the particle





 = h
λ


< p

s
D





s
D


 .


∆px
  

(16)

(17)

The  quantity  on  the  right  hardly  changes  if  we  consider  a  side  maximum  of  the

interference pattern rather than the center of the central maximum as can be seen from

Eqs. (6), (7) and (8).  From Eqs. (13) and (16)






 = h

2π


∆x < h
λ

λD
2πs

∆px

= h,

s
D












which misses violating the uncertainty principle by a factor of 2.

Since the details of the interaction of the particle with the screen are not

included,  i.e.  whether  the  particle  is  absorbed  or  partially  reflected  at  the  point  of

impact, the inherent uncertainty of the screen position due to thermal motion, etc., one

may consider that the uncertainty principle is violated for the screen in all the above

cases in trying to obtain simultaneously both particle and wave information.

2.2  Feynman's impossibility illustration

In  discussing  the  wave-particle  duality  in  connection  with  the  two-slit

interference  experiment,  Richard  Feynman1 0   said,  "We  choose  to  examine  a

phenomenon which is impossible, absolutely  impossible, to explain in any classical way,

and  which  has  in  it  the  heart  of  quantum  mechanics.    In  reality,  it  contains  the  only

mystery."  To illustrate this point, he presented a gedanken experiment in which a light

is placed behind the slit plate between the two slits.   Feynman argues that an electron

shot at the slit plate will scatter light in the vicinity of the hole through which it passed,

i.  e.  nearer  that  hole  than  the  other.10    He  points  out  that  for  a  sufficiently  small

wavelength of light to make this distinction, the electron would be scattered too much

to produce an interference pattern.  For a sufficiently soft photon that would not disturb

the interference pattern, its wavelength would be too long to discriminate from which

slit the electron came.

- 8 -

2.3 Wooters and Zurek inaccurate determinaion

Wooters  and  Zurek11  propose  to  modify  the  double-slit  experiment  in  such  a

way that "one can retain a surprisingly strong interference pattern by not insisting on a

100%  reliable  determination  of  the  slit  through  which  each  photon  passes."    They

separately make measurements of momentum and position of the single-slit plate (as in

the  Einstein-Bohr  debate  of  Section  2.1.2)  and  ask  the  question:    "Does  our  choice  of

what  to  measure  affect  the  total  interference  pattern?    Do  we  not  violate  the

complementarity principle by measuring both the fringes and the kick?"  In addition to

analyzing their version of this Einstein gedanken experiment, they propose a multiplate

double-slit interference experiment which they think can be done in practice to illustrate

their theoretical findings and the possibility of "delayed choice."

They divide up the ensemble of measurements into subensembles depending on

which kind of measurement they made.  They find that although the partial interference

patterns depend on the kind of measurement performed, the total interference pattern

related to the total ensemble of measurements and hence the sum of the interference

patterns  is  always  the  same.    Their  momentum  measurements  of  the  single-slit  plate

result  in  "smeared  out    but  centered  "  partial  interference  patterns.    The  position

measurement  of  the  single-slit  plate  yields  "perfect  but shifted    partial  interference

patterns."    They  conclude,  "The  more  clearly  we  wish  to  observe  the  wave  nature  of

light, the more information we must give up about its particle properties."

They  point  out  a  similarity  to  the  Einstein-Rosen-Podolsky12  paradox  in  that

their measurement on the single-slit plate can be made after the photon has interacted

with it.  They ponder this delayed choice option they present, in asking: "How does the

photon know in which partial interference pattern to fall?  How can it know what we

decided to measure when it is already separated from the plate by a large distance?"

We  all  would  like  to  know  the  answers  to  these  questions.    As  presented  these

experiments  are  gedanken  (thought)  experiments  that  are  consistent  within  the

- 9 -

framework  of  quantum  mechanics.    Further  deliberation  is  needed  to  determine  this

consistency within the framework of nature.

2.4  Dominance of complementarity over the uncertainty principle?

Scully et al13 argue that although prohibition of the simultaneous observation of

wave and particle behavior is often enforced by the uncertainty principle's momentum-

position  relation,  this  complementarity  of  wave  and  particle  properties  is  more  basic

and  may  also  be  enforced  by  other  mechanisms.  They  point  out  that  although

complementarity is usually associated with the wave particle duality of matter, it is a

much more general quantum mechanical concept.  For them in a dynamical system, for

each  degree  of  freedom  there  are  pairs  of  complementary  observables  where  precise

measurement  of  one  makes  the  outcome  of  a  measurement  of  the  other  completely

unpredictable.  Thus they put complementarity at a more fundamental level than the

uncertainty principle, including the canonically conjugate variables of  the  uncertainty

principle  as  a  subset.      They  say  that  "the  actual  mechanisms  that  enforce

complementarity vary from one experimental situation to another."  In their examples

they  allow  one  enforcer  to  be  the  momentum-position  relation  of  the  uncertainty

principle.   This appears to be an inconsistency in their point of view, since one may

expect the enforcers of complementarity to be more fundamental than complementarity.

Nevertheless, in the realm of the wave-particle duality Scully et al contend that

complementarity may be at work even when the uncertainty principle is not. They base

this  contention  on  intriguing  gedanken  experiments with  atom  interferometers  using

new modern  quantum optic detectors.  They say, "we find that the interference fringes

disappear  once  we  have  which-path  information,  but  we  conclude  that  this

disappearance  originates  in  correlations  between  the  measuring  apparatus  and  the

systems  being  observed.    The  principle  of  complementarity  is  manifest  although  the

position-momentum relation plays no role."

- 10 -

In  their  astutely  proposed  experiments,  their  detectors  are  two  micromaser

cavities in front of each slit of the traditional two-slit interference experiment.  They can

determine the path of an atom through one micromaser cavity or the other in front of

the two slits, because an atom in passing through a cavity will make a transition from

an excited state to a lower state because of the interaction with the photons in the cavity.

For them the wave function consists of two components in which the first is affected by

a  weak  attractive  potential,  and  the  second  to  an  equally  weak  repulsive  potential.

These potentials affect the internal atomic transition accompanied by the emission of a

photon. There is no net momentum transfer to the atom during its interaction with the

cavity fields, as the atom regains its same  initial momentum after traversing the cavity.

This  suggested  experiment  would  be  so  delicate  that  one  would  not  expect  the

interference  pattern  to  be  disturbed.    Yet    surprisingly,    they  expect  the  interference

pattern to be destroyed if they make an observation on which  cavity the atom passed

through.  More amazingly, in a suggested variation of this proposed experiment they

claim that the interference effects could either be destroyed or restored by manipulating

the  cavities  long  after  the  atoms  have  passed.    Such  "quantum  erasure"  claims  are

closely related to the "delayed choice" claims of others.

 

Two  clarifications  of  their  quantum  erasure  and  quantum  optical  tests  of

complementarity need to be made.  Both in this paper,13 and in a recent popularized

version in Scientific American,14 unless one reads these articles very carefully one is left

with  the  impression  that  these  experiments  have  already  been  done.    Reading  their

prior  papers,15-19  one  finds  that  these  experiments  have  yet  to  be  done.    Even  with

careful reading of these papers,13, 14 not the least hint is given of a number of scientific

papers  with  opposing  views,  and  one  is  left  with  the  impression  that  their  views  on

complementarity  and  quantum  erasure  are  completely  accepted  by  the  scientific

community.  As we shall see in the next and other following sections, they have been

challenged  by  their  colleagues  on  the  simpler  claim  that  complementarity  is  an

- 11 -

independent  pillar  of  quantum  mechanics,  rather  than  merely  a  consequence  of  the

uncertainty principle.  Quantum erasure may also be challenged.

2.5  Dominance of the uncertainty principle over complementarity?

2.5.1  Storey, Tan, Collett, and Walls

Although quantum mechanics declares that any detector capable of determining

the  path  taken  by  a  particle  in  a  double  slit  experiment  will  destroy  the  interference

pattern because of the complementarity principle, the physical mechanism is not given

by which the interference is destroyed.  Storey et al20 disagree with Scully et al13-19 who

suggested  that  complementarity  must  be  accepted  as  an  independent  component  of

quantum mechanics.  Storey et al argue that complementarity is simply a consequence

of the uncertainty principle, and that the Scully et al scheme is in principle no different

than the Einstein recoiling slit.

Storey et al's paper is directed at showing that for these suggested experiments

"the loss of interference from a double slit in the presence of a welcher Weg  [which path]

detector  is  physically  caused  by  momentum  kicks,  the  magnitude  of  which  are

determined by the uncertainty principle."  Thus they conclude that in their proffered

experiment, Scully and his colleagues overlooked the successive momentum transfers

due to the recurring emission and absorption of photons by an atom in going through a

given cavity.  For Storey et al, this is what wipes out the interference fringes.  Earlier

Tan and Walls21 came to the same conclusion in 1993 in arguing against Scully et al.

2.5.2 Bhandari

            By  reversing  the  usual  approach,    Bhandari22  deduces  the  presence  of  a

geometric phase from the assumption that the interference fringes must disappear as a

result of the "which path" determination in a two-slit experiment.  (Berry23 discovered

the geometric phase in the context of the adiabatic evolution of quantum systems.  This

was generalized to non-adiabatic evolution by Aharanov and Anandan.24)  Bhandari

starts  with  the  hypothesis  that  the  destruction  of  the  interference  pattern  is  due  to  a

- 12 -

randomization  of  the  phase  of  the  interfering  waves  as  a  result  of  the  "which  path"

determination.    In  looking  for  the  source  of  the  random  phase,  he  finds  it  to  be  a

geometric phase. An inversion of Bhandari's argument would seem to imply that if a

geometric phase is not present then the "which path"  determination was not made.

 He considers a variation of the Einstein slit-plate recoil gedanken experiment.  A

right-hand circularly polarized beam of light is split by a beam splitter into two beams,

each  of  which  passes  through  a  half-wave  plate  (HWP),  which  are  then  recombined

after travelling separate paths.  In passing through the HWP, each photon reverses its

helicity  (its  spin  angular  momentum),  and  in  the  process  imparts  a  net  angular

momentum 2  h  to the HWP.  Determination of this angular momentum change of the

HWP  by  detectors  in  front  of  each  of  the  two  slits  would  provide  the  "which  path"

information.

Bhandari concludes that the interference pattern is lost for a similar reason to that

in  the  Einstein-Bohr7  debate,  and  that  the  geometric  phase  is  responsible  for  losing

angular momentum information (which could otherwise determine the path) when the

interference pattern is retained.  Bhandari  further concludes that there is no difference

in  principle  between  the  gedanken  experiment  of  Einstein  and  the  proposed

experiments of Scully et al13-19 to detect a photon emitted by an atom passing through a

maser cavity.  He says, "(1)  Einstein's experiment and the one proposed in this paper

are exactly similar except for the replacement of the conjugate variables x [position] and
p [momentum] in Einstein's proposal with the variables ϕ [angle] and Lz  [component of

the angular momentum of the HWP in the direction of the beam axis] in the present

one.  (2) The [gedanken] experiment of Scully and Walther17 is exactly similar to our
proposed experiment except for the replacement of the conjugate variables Lz and ϕ in
the latter with the pair N, Θ in the former, where N stands for the number of energy

quanta  and  Θ  for  the  phase  of  the  oscillating  cavity  mode."    He  shows  that  the

- 13 -

uncertainty relation in his proposed experiment,      

∆Lz

∆φ ≥ h / 2 , plays the same role as

the uncertainty relation   

∆N∆Θ ≥ 1/ 2 in the proposed experiments of Sculley et al13-19.

2.6  Wheeler's delayed choice

The  distinguished  physicist  John  Archibald  Wheeler25  restructured  the  third

version in Section 2.1 of the Einstein detection scheme so that optical discrimination of

the  interference  pattern  is  detected  rather  than  photon  momentum  transfer.    In

Wheeler's  proposed  experiment,  the  experimenter  may  exercise  his  discretion  of

whether  to  determine  which  slit  the  photon  chose,  or  to  build  up  the  interference

pattern -- after the photon went through the slit.  In Wheeler's words: "But the essential

new point is the timing of the choices -- between observing a two-slit effect and a one-slit

one -- until after the single quantum of energy in question has already  passed through

the screen....Then let the general lesson of this apparent time inversion be drawn:  'No

phenomenon is a phenomenon  until it is an observed phenomenon.'  In other words, it

is  not  a  paradox  that  we  choose  what  shall    have  happened  after  'it  has  already

happened.'  It has not really happened, it is not a phenomenon, until it is an observed

phenomenon."

Wheeler  describes  a  two-slit  interference  experiment  in  which  the  choice  of

measuring the direction of the particle or its wavelike nature at the screen is made after

the particle has been detected.  He places an interference screen at the focal plane of a

lens  at  a  distance  L  from  the  slits,  where  a  Fraunhofer  pattern  can  be  observed.    If

instead, one wants to determine a given photon's trajectory, the screen is turned aside

and the photon activates one photomultipier or another. Wheeler goes on to say, "To be

forced  to  choose  between  complementary  modes  of  observation  is  familiar,  but  it  is

unfamiliar to make this choice after the relevant interaction has already come to an end.

Moreover, one can assert this 'voice in what should have happened, after it appears to

already have happened' in illustrations of complementarity other than the double slit,

by suitable modification of the idealized apparatus."

- 14 -

  Wheeler  also  presents  delayed  choice  variations  of  other  classic  gedanken

quantum experiments.  His version of the gamma ray microscope of Heisenberg26  and
Bohr8  is  illuminating.    A  lens  of  angular  opening    ε,  brings  to  a  focus  light  of
wavelength    λ within  an  uncertainty  in  position    

∆x ~ λ / 2πε = D / ε .    The  photon

scattered into the lens gives the electron a lateral kick, with momentum uncertainty





∆p ~
    

photon

angular opening

momentum

of the lens










 ~





h
D




ε.

This is in accord with the uncertainty principle.  However, Wheeler points out that here

also a delayed choice would determine whether we observe the particle or wave nature

of light.  "However, the uncertainty in the lateral kick can be reduced to a very small

fraction of ... [the above value] by placing a sufficiently great collection of sufficiently

small photodetectors at a little distance above the lens.  Whichever one of them goes off

signals the direction of the scattered photon and thus the momentum imparted to the

electron."    Wheeler  then  goes  on  to  add  the  feature  and  puzzling  consequences  of

delayed choice by deciding which set of photodetectors to activate "after the lens has

already    finished  transmitting  the  photon."      Needless  to  say,  such  results  would  be

bewildering to most people.

2.7 Necromancy of quantum mechanics?

In  contrast  to  Wheeler,  the  distinguished  physicist  Edwin  Jaynes27  has

presciently pointed out "that present quantum theory not only does not use -- it does

not even dare to mention -- the notion of a 'real physical situation.'  Defenders of the

theory say that this notion is philosophically naive, a throwback to outmoded ways of

thinking, and that recognition of this constitutes deep new wisdom about the nature of

human knowledge.  I say that it constitutes a violent irrationality, that somewhere in

this  theory  the  distinction  between  reality  and  our  knowledge  of  reality  has  become

lost, and the result has more the character of medieval necromancy than of science.  It

has  been  my  hope  that  quantum  optics,  with  its  vast  new  technological  capability,

might be able to provide the experimental clue that will show us how to resolve these

- 15 -

contradictions."      The  strict  definition  of  necromancy  is  devination  by  pretended

communication with the spirits of the dead. The most generous view of Jaynes' use of

this word is that the philosophy of quantum mechanics is akin to sorcery.

Jaynes uses a number of examples to support his view.  He points out that one of

the most enduring incorrect beliefs about quantum electrodynamics is that it endows

light  by  means  of  the  photon  to  wipe  out  the  interference  effects  of  classical

electromagnetic theory.  In 1954, an experiment was proposed28 to observe interference

between Zeeman components of a spectral line. This possibility was denied by quantum

theorists because as Jaynes points out satirically, "as everybody knows, 'a given photon

interferes  only  with  itself.'    Yet  the  photoelectric  klystron  worked,  the  beats

[interference] were seen, and an important lesson was learned about the meaning and

correct  application  of  quantum  theory."      However,  the  lesson  was  soon  lost.    An

experiment was proposed29  to measure stellar diameters by interference measurements

involving fourth order spatial correlation functions of the field.  Again the possibility of

the effect was denied by eminent theorists.  Yet the experiment worked as predicted by

classical  electromagnetic  theory.    But  the  lesson  was  lost  again.    In  the  early  1960's,

shortly  after  the  invention  of  the  laser,  theorists  said  "that  it  is  fundamentally

impossible  to  observe  beats  between  independently  running  lasers  --a  given  photon

interferes only with itself.  Jaynes notes that the beats appeared on schedule -- just as

classical electromagnetic theory predicted.

It  is  not  that  Jaynes  is  opposed  to  quantum  theory  in  general,  or  quantum

electrodynamics  in  particular.    His  opposition  seems  more  to  be  concerned  with  the

improper interpretation and application of quantum theory.

2.7  Non-locality of a single photon

Following the earlier lead of Tan, Walls and Collett,30 and Oliver and Stroud,31

Hardy32 proposes an experiment to demonstrate the non-locality (wave-like nature) of a

single  photon  in  which  it  appears  to  be  in  two  places  at  the  same  time.    He  even

- 16 -

presents such a persuasive argument that this leads to a contradiction that "one might

be tempted to think that quantum mechanics must be wrong."  However, he goes on to

show that there is an implicit assumption of locality in this argument, and without this

assumption there is no contradiction.   This proposed non-locality experiment illustrates

the  contrafactual  nature  of  quantum  mechanics,  in  that  the  possibility  of  following  a

path has essentially the same effect as if the path were actually taken.

Hardy  points  out  that  "as  early  as  1927  ...  [at  the  Fifth  Solvay  Conference7],

Einstein  presented  the  collapse  of  a  single  particle  wave  packet  to  a  near  position

eigenstate as a paradigm for nonlocality in quantum mechanics (indeed one might even

say that he anticipated the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen12 argument in the context of this

example)."   It is clear that the original concerns of Einstein in 1927 about the nonlocality

of a single particle in quantum mechanics are indeed justified by both theoretical and

experimental findings.33-35

Hardy  addresses  the  question  of  whether  this  nonlocality  is  also  true  of  other

particles  or  just  restricted  to  photons  as  in  his  derivation.    His  answer  is  that  an

analogous proof "could be constructed for any type of particle for which it is possible to

prepare a direct superposition of that particle with the vacuum.  However, for a vast

range of types of particles there are superselection rules that prohibit just exactly this,

and  nonlocality  with  single  particles  of  this  type  could  not  be  observed."    This  may

support the view that the notion of particle for a photon may be quite different than for

most other particles, though photons sometimes exhibit particle-like properties.  Yet as

in so many other instances, it would not be surprising if the wave-particle duality in all

its manifestations holds across the board for light and all particles alike.

3.  Two-Slit Experiments Without the Slits

3.1  Interference of light scattered from two atoms

Eichman et al36 scatter light of 0.194µ wavelength from two 198Hg+ ions trapped

by Doppler laser cooling at separations of 3.7, 4.3, and 5.4µ.  The Hg ions are the analog

- 17 -

of the slits in the Young's two-slit interference experiment.  Light, both elastically and

inelastically, scattered from the two ions produces an interference pattern.   Quantum

mechanics  predicts  that    interference  must  result  in  the  scattered  light  when  it  is  not

possible  at  each  collision  to  determine  which  ion  scattered  the  photon.    When  the

spectator atom is distinguished from the scattering atom, thus determining the photon

path, the interference pattern is lost.

They contend that by exploiting the atom's internal level structure they showed

that  determination  of  the  scattered  photon's  trajectory  obliterates  the  interference

pattern, without violation of the position-momentum uncertainty relation.  For them, it

would  be  incumbent  for  those  who  would  not  agree,  to  prove  that  the  enforcer  of

complementarity in this case is the uncertainty principle.  In any case the result of their

extraordinary experiment appears incontrovertible.

They obtain a particle-like behavior when they determine the photon trajectory,

which begins at the source, intersects one of the atoms, and continues to the detector

without  producing  an  interference  pattern.    When  they  don't  determine  the  photon

path, they obtain a wavelike behavior producing a typical two-slit diffraction pattern.

They use polarization-sensitive detection of the scattered photons to switch on either

the wave-like or the particle-like character of the scattered photon.

3.2  Interference for two atoms radiating a single photon

P. Grangier et al37 present experimental evidence for a modulation in the time-
resolved atomic fluorescence light following the photodissociation  of Ca2  molecules.

They  conclude  that  "This  modulation  is  due  to  an  interference  effect  involving  two

atoms  recoiling  in  opposite  directions,  while  only  one  photon  is  emitted.  ...  This

experiment is thus analogous to a single-photon Young's [double] slit experiment, in

which  the  'slits'  (the  atoms)  are  moving."    They  point  out  that  one  might  hope  to

determine  the  photon  trajectory  by  observing  the  momentum  of  each  atom  after  the

- 18 -

photon is detected.  This would lead to knowing which atom (slit) was the emitter since
it received the extra momentum hν/c from the fluorescence photon.

The relevant quantity is the difference of momenta of the two atoms, measured
with an uncertainty less than hν/c.  However if the momentum uncertainty is less than

hν/c, the uncertainty principle implies that the uncertainty in the relative position of

the two atoms must be greater than λ, causing the interference effect to be lost.  They

conclude that in their experiment, the initial dispersion of the relative position of the
atoms is very small compared to λ, while the momenta difference dispersion is greater

than hν/c for the atoms with recoil velocity of ≈ 500 m/sec, so that there is no way to

know  "which atom emitted the photon".

4.  A New Kind of Experiment

All  the  founders  of  quantum  theory  were  at  the  fifth  Solvay  Congress,  from

Planck, Einstein, and Bohr to de Broglie, Heisenberg, Schrodinger, and Dirac, to witness

debates which continued into the next Congress.   As Rosenfeld38 relates, "At the sixth

Solvay  Conference,  in  1930,  Einstein  thought  he  had  found  a  counterexample  to  the

uncertainty  principle.    It  was  quite  a  shock  for  Bohr  ...  he  did  not  see  the  solution  at

once.    During  the  whole  evening  he  was  extremely  unhappy,  going  from  one  to  the

other and trying to persuade them that it couldn't be true, that it would be the end of

physics  if  Einstein  were  right;  but  he  couldn't  produce  any  refutation.    I  shall  never

forget  the  vision  of  the  two  antagonists  leaving  the  club  [of  the  Fondation

Universitaire]:  Einstein a tall majestic figure, walking quietly with a somewhat ironical

smile,  and  Bohr  trotting  near  him,  very  excited....  The  next  morning  came  Bohr's

triumph."

  

The case against determination of both concurrent trajectory and wave properties

of a particle has appeared so strong that ever since the Einstein-Bohr debate at the fifth

Solvay  Congress  of  1927  on  the  Einstein  recoil  experiment,7-9  no  new  gedanken  or

experimental challenges have arisen.   Instead the theoretical and experimental efforts

- 19 -

have  been  directed  at  further  confirmation  of  the  established  view.    The  present

situation is not at all reminiscent of the lively Einstein-Bohr debates.  In the hope of both

gaining new insight into a vitally important issue, and of reviving the spirit of the old

debates,  we  have  proposed  a  novel  gedanken  experiment  that  does  not  violate  the

uncertainty  principle,  in  which  manifestly  the  traversed  slit  can  be  apprpximately

determined by inference without disturbing the slit plate, the particle, the interference

screen,  or  destroying  the  interference  pattern.39    We  are  well-aware  that  previous

attempts to unravel the wave-particle duality have always been shown to have some

fatal  flaw.    Yet,  it  was  widely  thought  that  tunneling  could  only  be  understood

quantum mechanically until we showed that not only is there classical tunneling, but

that it can be closely related to quantum tunneling.40

Let us start with an emission source of particle pairs, much the same as in the

Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen12 gedanken  experiment  and  as  modified  by  Bohm41.    The

source is on the center line axis of symmetry between a screen A and a double-slit plate,

followed by a screen B, as shown in Figure 1.  The source here is either point-like, i.e.

small compared with the other dimensions of the apparatus, or an extended source that

emits  symmetrically  with  respect  to  its  center.    An  extended  source  is  shown  (from

which the particle-pair trajectories are in line with the source center) to illustrate that

this yields the same results as a point-like source. The distance from the source to the
slit  plate  DB   is  >>  λ ,  the  wavelength  associated  with  the  particle,  so  that  an

approximately plane wave is achieved.

Assume  that  a  quasi-stationary  source  emits  a  pair  of  particles  in  opposite

directions by conservation of momentum,  in which ideally the source had or gains little

or no momentum perpendicular to the particles' trajectory.  When this is not realized in

practice,  a  partial  correction  can  be  computed  taking  into  account  the  observed

transverse  component  of  momentum  of  the  source.    The  source  may  emit  a  pair  of

photons resulting from a radiative cascade of  Ca as in the experimental realization of

- 20 -

the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen-Bohm (EPRB) gedanken experiment by Aspect et al , and
in its modifications.33,34,35   The  2-γ decays produced by ground-state quasi-stationary

positronium annihilation could also be used in principle.  The ideal process may be pair

creation with equal and opposite momentum (such as an electron-positron pair) since it

has the advantage of avoiding any quantum-mechanical ambiguities related to the use

of identical particles.  In the case of positronium the source radius is about 1 Å, and for

a  Ca  atom  about  2  Å.    Accumulative  interference  patterns  for  one-particle-at-a-time

emission  has  been    verified  for  particles  such  as  photons,  electrons,  atoms,  and

neutrons.6,42,43  In  any  case,  two  particles,  A  and  B,  are  created  in  the  source  region

simultaneously with approximately equal and opposite momentum.  Thus particles B

are fired one at a time at the slit plate by repeating the emission process over and over.

As  will  be  demonstrated,  triangulation  between  the  spot  hit  by  particle  A  on

screen A, the source and a slit, classically determines whether particle B entered a given

slit, or no slit at all.  Figure 1 represents both point-like sources and extended sources

where the particle-pair is emitted symmetrically with respect to the source center.  As

shown in Figure 1,  if the spot on screen A is in the particle acceptance region to the

right of the axis of symmetry, particle B entered the left slit; and vice versa.  Observation

of the spot hit by particle A permits determination of the trajectory of particle B.  If the

spot  on  screen  A  is  not  in  the  particle  acceptance  region,    then  it  could  not  have

classically gone through either slit. Most classically allowed trajectories will miss both

slits.    Particle  A  carries  mirror-image  information  of  particle  B's  trajectory  to  the  slit

plate.

4.1  Ratiocination

In  the  interference  region,  the  wave  function  for  one-particle  experiments,  the

center-of-mass motion of particle B to the screen B is the sum of two terms due to the

two slits

Ψ(R, θ) = 1
2

ψ (R, θ) +

[

ψ (R, θ)],

2

1

(18)

- 21 -

where  R  is  the  radial  distance  to  any  point  on  screen  B  as  measured  from  the  center
point  between  the  two  slits,  and  θ is  the  polar  angle.  The  probability  density  of  a

succession of particles B hitting the screen is

[

ψ

1

ΨΨ* = 1
2
  

2 + ψ

2 + ψ

2

*ψ
1

2

+ ψ

ψ

1

],

*
2

where the interference pattern is due to the cross-terms
*
2

] = 2 I1I2
(

)1/2 cos φ,

*ψ
1

+ ψ

[

ψ

2

1

ψ
  

(19)

(20)

where  I1 is the intensity of the wave from hole 1 when hole 2 is blocked off, I2 is the
intensity  of  the  wave  from  hole  2  when  hole  1  is  blocked  off,  and ϕ is  the  phase

difference between the two waves.  The interference pattern, i.e. these cross-terms, are

not affected by measurement of the spot position of the twin particle A on screen A if

particles A and B do not interfere with each other quantum mechanically or otherwise

on their journeys to their respective screens.  It may be possible to accomplish this using

dissimilar particles A and B.

Because  of  quantum  mechanical  entanglement,  the  two-particle  case  is  more

complicated.  In the Dirac bra-ket notation, the state of the two-particle system can be
],  where  the  lower  case  b  in  the  state-vector

written 

al

[

A br B

+ ar A bl

B

ψ = 1
    
2

bracket denotes the path (flight direction) taken by particle B either toward the left slit,
subscript   l, or the right slit, subscript r; and similarly for the paths a  l and ar for particle

A to screen A.

Unlike the Einstein recoil determination,7-9 violation of the uncertainty principle

can be avoided.  Our screens and slit plates may be arbitrarily massive and rigid, so that

negligible motion is imparted by momentum transfer of particle A.  In addition, screen

A  may  be  put  so  far  from  the  source  that  particle  B  interacts  with  the  slit  plate  and
screen B long before particle A impinges upon screen A.  Thus neither ψ1 nor  ψ

2 can be

affected  as  the  spot  on  screen  B  is  determined  well  in  advance  of  any  momentum

transfer by particle A on screen A in a massive, rigid system.  Future considerations will

focus  on  how  much  tolerance  may  be  allowed  for  differences  in  momentum  of  the

- 22 -

particle  pair;  and  extended  sources  which  emit  the  particles  asymmetrically  with

respect to the source center.  There is a coherence length constraint which limits the size

of the source region so that the interference pattern is not lost due to phase differences

between  the  particles  as  they  are  sequentially  emitted.  In  an  actual  experiment,  this

probably can be met by using laser beam confining and/or laser cooling together with

ion traps.44  Experimentally, for widely separated slits compared to the wavelength of

the incident particle, the interference fringes may be difficult to distinguish.  In this case

sophisticated techniques could be used such as a time-varying shielded magnetic field

to periodically vary the interference pattern via the Aharonov-Bohm effect.

The logic of our slit determination is as follows.  Due to the uncertainty principle,

a spot hit by particle A on screen A projects down to the slit plate as a virtual beam, so

that a point on screen A does not translate to a point on the slit plate, but rather as a

small area.  It will next be shown that the beam spread can be very small compared to

the slit width.  Figure 1 depicts the case of a very narrow spread of the virtual beam
which the analysis justifies.  When the spread is a bit bigger yielding a larger γ
R region
R, then particle B either misses or enters the

than shown, if particle A hits the region  γ

right slit, and thus does not at all go through the left slit.  If particle B registers on screen

B, then it must have gone through the right slit, since it cannot have classically gone

through  the  left  slit.    A  similar  consideration  applies  for  spots  perpendicular  to  the

plane  shown,  where  the  particle  appears  on  screen  B  and  could  not  have  classically

gone through a particular slit, so it must have gone through the opposite slit.  If particle
A hits the region δ
R, then particle B totally misses to the right of the right slit,  and if a

spot  still  registers  on  screen  B  we  have  learned  a  lot  that  has  previously  not  been
L    and δ
known.    The  inverse  holds  for  the    γ
L  regions.    If  particle  A  hits  the  central
region α, then particle B  has missed both slits hitting the region s between them; but a

spot  may  still  register  on  screen  B.    By  keeping  track  of  the  spots  and  their  possible

- 23 -

origin,  we  may  determine  if  all  the  particles,  none,  or  only  subsets  produce  an

interference pattern.

4.2  Compliance with the uncertainty principle

Let  us  consider  a  quasi-stationary  source  that  emits  a  particle-pair  with  an
uncertainty  δx  in  the  lateral  x-direction  parallel  to  the  slit-plate,  where  δx  may  be

considered    to  be  the  diameter  of  the  source  region  in  Figure  1.    The  uncertainty

principle gives the uncertainty in lateral momentum of the emitted particles as

where h is Planck's constant.  The lateral displacement of particle B at the slit plate is

δpx

≥ h

4πδx

,





δpx
py


 DB,


=

∆sx
  

where py is the component of momentum perpendicular to the slit plate, and DB is the

distance from the center of the source to screen B.

   To a good approximation
= p ≈ py ,

h
λ
  

where λ is the de Broglie wavelength of particle B.  

(21)

(22)

(23)

Thus there is a virtual beam from each spot on screen A to the slit plate.  The
beam  width  at  the  slit  plate  may  even  be  less  than  the  variable  ∆sx,  but  it  is  never
greater than δx + 2∆sx.  Figure 2 illustrates the latter case.   We want the beam spread at
the slit plate from a given spot on screen A, as determined by the projection of δx and

the momentum uncertainty, in bringing particle B to the slit plate to be small compared

with the slit separation

s > δx + 2∆sx

(24)

where s is the distance between the nearest edges of the slits.

Substituting eqs. (21) - (23) in (24), we obtain the quadratic equation
(δx)2 − sδx +

< 0, 

(25)

λDB
2π

whose solution is

(26)

(26)

- 24 -


δx < s 1

2


  

± 1





2 1 − 2λDB
πs2





1/2






.

πs2
2DB

 .

λ <
  

The uncertainty principle is violated if the second term of eq. (26) becomes imaginary.

This is easily avoided, and our requirements are readily met if

There is no great problem in meeting the condition given by eq. (10) to avoid a violation
of the uncertainty principle.  However, λ should not be made too small, as this would

cause the interference fringes to be too close together to distinguish them.  In principle,

not only can we make the spread of the virtual beam less than the width between slits,

we can make it much, much less than their separation.

Superficially it may seem that our experiment is equivalent to the single-slit plate

experiment of Einstein analyzed in Section 2.1.2.  However, there are some important

differences.    When  the  single-slit  plate  is  held  rigidly,  and  an  interference  pattern

results, it is like our source.  A momentum transfer measurement is not made on our

source  to  determine  particle  B's  trajectory,  as  must  be  done  with  the  plate  to  obtain

trajectory information.  This is how violation of the uncertainty principle is avoided.  In

fact, we need measure neither momentum, nor velocity, but only position and direction.

Furthermore, in any of the gedanken experiments of Section 2, the distance from the

two-slit  plate  to  the  interference  screen  enters  into  both  the  kick  and  the  wave

determinations  to  inextricably  lead  to  a  violation  of  the  uncertainty  principle.    Our

experiment  avoids  this.    Finally,  our  measurements  need  only  be  precise  on  a  scale

small    compared  with  the  slit  separation.    Because  the  other  experiments  rely  on  the

momentum  recoil  measurement  of  the  single-slit  plate,  the  double-slit  plate,  or  the

screen,  they  unavoidably  involve  the  much  smaller  scale  of  the  separation  of  the

interference fringes.

- 25 -

The analysis in this section justifies that a very narrow virtual beam (as shown in

Fig. 1) is possible which can yield the particle position quite accurately.  Future work

will consider the ramifications of a broad virtual beam, which may only be realizable in

practice. The collision of particle A with screen A will result in highly localized spots.

To  illustrate  correlations  between  particles  A  and  B,  let  us  consider  collisions  in  the

plane of the figure.  If these spots form in the designated Particle Acceptance Regions of
width γ
L,  the classical trajectory of particle B enters one of the slits.  If particle A
R,  particle B  should go through the right slit.  If  particle A hits region γ
L,

hits region γ

R and γ

particle  B  should  go  through  the  left  slit.    By  triangulation  between  the  spot  hit  by

particle A on screen A and the center of the source, an approximate determination can

be made of the trajectory taken by particle B.

For determination of emissions that miss the slits, the slit plate itself could be a

luminescent  screen.    This  alone  would  not  yield  trajectory  information,  if  done

independently  of  our  experiment,  in  the  event  that  particle  B  were  acted  upon  by  a

quantum  potential  causing  its  flight  path  to  deviate  from  a  straight  line,  or  by

conventional  quantum  mechanics.    However,  a  luminescent  slit  plate  in  conjunction

with  our  two-particle  determination  could  indeed  detect  the  action  of  a  quantum

potential or other non-classical effects if the spot on the slit plate were not diametrically

opposite  the  source  and  the  spot  on  screen  A,  in  deviating  significantly  from  its

classically expected position.  Making the entire slit plate a detector, greatly adds to the

information that can be gleaned from our two-particle, two-slit experiment.  If a spot on

the slit plate is significantly not in line with a spot on screen A and the source region,

then either particle B, or particle A, or both did not follow straight line trajectories.

  Motion  of  particles  A  and  B  in  opposite  directions  by  conservation  of

momentum,  together  with  no  loss  of  information  carried  by  particle  A  about  both

particles,  makes  possible  classical  determination  of  no  slit,  or  which  slit  particle  B

entered.    This  is  the  same  stratagem  used  by  EPR  to  circumvent  the  uncertainty

- 26 -

principle to get information about a particle from a measurement made on a partner

with which it is perfectly correlated.  Determination of which slit can be made either

before, at the same instant, or after particle B goes through a slit, depending on the ratio
DA/DB.    Non-classically,  non-straight  line,  pathological  trajectories  in  free  space  are

also possible, but they have much smaller probabilities than straight line trajectories.

As such they may obfuscate only a small portion of the measurements.  We think that

our  gedanken  experiment  is  not  only  doable  in  principle,    but  can  actually  be  done.

Experiment  will  decide  whether  or  not  the  interference  pattern  is  destroyed  in  our

5.  Theoretical Attempts to Resolve Wave-Particle Duality

"which path" determination.

5.1  Bohm's hidden variables

In Bohm's quantum mechanical theory, there is no wave-particle duality.45  For

Bohm, the particles shot at the slit-plate have definite trajectories, and each particle goes

through only one slit or the other.  In this theory as excellently presented by Holland46,

the interference pattern results from the interaction of each particle with the quantum

potential determined by its own wave function and the presence of the two slits.

If there is a kink in the armor of quantum mechanics, the experiment of Section 4

can shed light on whether the conventional quantum mechanical view, or Bohm's view

is closer to physical reality.  The aspect of this experiment in which a luminescent slit

plate is used to achieve triangulation between a spot on the plate, the source, and screen

A, will shed light on whether the trajectories approaching the slit plate are non-classical,

i.e. non-straightline.

5.2  Prosser, and Wesley's Poynting vector particle guidance

In 1976 Prosser made a ground-breaking suggestion that, at least for the case of

light,  the  underlying  causal  reality  for  the  formation  of  interference  and  diffraction

patterns is the energy flow given by the Poynting vector.47  He presented diagrams of

the energy flow by a semi-infinite plate with a straight edge, and through two finite-

- 27 -

width slits in a slit plate.  His solutions appear limited to highly conducting thin plates.

Because his illustration was with rather large slits compared to their separation, and the

flow is shown only near one of the slits, the figure does not make a convincing case that

it can yield the characteristic two-slit interference pattern.

In  Prosser's  next  paper,  also  of  1976,  he  describes  "wave  packets"  to  represent

particles  that,  while  filling  all  space,  could  act  as  localized  point  particles  in  certain

situations.4 8     He  suggests  a  two-slit  experiment  in  which  the  slits  are  opened

sequentially  to  test  his  ideas.    He  discusses  the  wave-particle  duality  and  concludes

with a new interpretation of the double slit experiment in which photons which pass

through the left slit always arrive in the left part of the screen, and no photons go into

this area via the right slit; and vice versa.  He then compares his interpretation with the

Copenhagen interpretation.

In 1984 Wesley49 independently formulated a similar theoretical concept of the

role of the Poynting vector in two-slit interference.   Wesley gave due credit to Prosser,

and referenced his two papers.  He pointed out that smaller slits with wider separation

would more clearly show the flow needed to explain two-slit interference.  His Fig. 1

clearly shows this, and is remarkably like Fig. 3.1, p. 33 in the recent Bohm and Hiley

book.45  Although they do not mention this similarity, they do reference Prosser and

Wesley (p. 269) and do refer to P&W's particle and energy flux suggestions (p. 234).45   

Wesley  associates  particle  density  and  flux  with  the  classical  wave  energy

density and flux.  Wesley is critical of both quantum theory and of the superposition

principle.    He  notes  that  "a  principle  that  provides  predictions  does  not  necessarily

imply  causality.  Just  as  one  can  predict  the  rising  of  the  sun  from  the  rooster's  crow

does  not  mean  that  the  rooster  causes  the  sun  to  rise."    He  concludes  that  "the

superposition  principle  is  merely  a  mathematical  convenience  devoid  of  any  direct

physical or causal significance."

- 28 -

Wesley49  argues  that  the  quantum  potential  (such  as  that  of  de  Broglie,  and

Bohm)  is  a  strictly  "fictitious  potential"  with  no  informational  content  not  already

present  in  the  particle's  motion.    For  him,  "It  merely  offers  an  alternate  method  for

representing  the  particle  motion.  ...  Once  a  particle  is  placed  in  positions  with  zero

velocity, it remains fixed at these positions for all time."  He goes on to point out that

this  is  reminiscent  of  the  Bohm  theory  where  all  bound  particles  are  motionless.    He

concludes: "Although the classical wave-particle problem is resolved here by showing

how point particle motion can yield 'wave' behavior exactly, it does not really allow one

to say that particles are actually involved."  For him the underlying reality could be a

wave or a flux of particles.

Prosser explicitly states that his solution is for perfectly conducting thin plates.

This is only implicit in Wesley's analysis.  Their approach would take on much more

significance if their results could be generalized to plates made of any material.  Even

then, there would still be a huge gap explaining interference effects for neutral particles

such as neutrons and atoms.

5.3  Davidson's wave-particle duality origin in radiation reaction

In  1979  Mark  Davidson50  (MD)  developed  a  model  in  which  the  radiation

reaction force (RRF) is responsible for the stochastic (statistical) origin of Schrodinger's

equation. The inspiration for stochastic models stems from the Einstein-Bohr debates of

the 1920's and 1930's over the interpretation of quantum mechanics.  He points out that

in  Bohr's  interpretation  (which  is  the  more  widely  accepted),  "given  a  physical  state,

then there is a state vector of some Hilbert space which describes this state completely,

but  only  statistical  properties  about  the  physical  system  can  be  deduced  from  this

presumed complete description."  MD argues that Bohm's hidden variable theory and

most  others  require  nonclassical  forces  (a  quantum  mechanical  potential)  to  be

consistent with Schrodinger's equation which makes them unconvincing.

- 29 -

MD provides a classical explanation of the quantum potential, and the basis for

the non-locality of quantum  theory by means of the radiation reaction force (RRF).  He

says, "The quantum mechanical potential implies an unusual force, which acts on the

particle,  but  which  depends  on  the  statistical  properties  of  an  ensemble  of  particle

trajectories. ... Indeed, it is this extra potential term which leads to quantum interference

effects,  and  the  difficulty  of  describing  quantum  interference  in  terms  of  classical

statistical theories has been forcefully stated by Feynman [cf. ref. 51]. ... Preacceleration

associated  with  this  radiative  reactive  force  was  not  considered  by  Feynman  in  his

arguments."

It is well known that there is a strange aspect to the theory of the RRF in that for

a brief period of time it violates causality.  Because the RRF is proportional to the time

rate  of  acceleration  of  the  charged  particle,  i.e.  the  dynamical  equations  of  motion

require  a  solution  of  a  third  order  differential  equation,  it  is  possible  for  the  charged

particle to accelerate for a very short time before a force is applied.  The acceleration at

any particular time depends on the force to be applied for all future time weighted by a

rapidly decaying exponential.  There is a typo-graphical error in MD's paper in which
he gives this preacceleration time to be ≈ 10-22 sec for an electron.  The correct value is

6.26  x  10-24 sec ≈ 10-23 sec.  It is hard to see physically how this extremely short time

translates into very long times associated with "delayed choice" and "quantum erasure"

thought experiments, except that MD does derive the Schrodinger equation using it and

random fluctuations.

For  MD  the  preacceleration  helps  to  explain  the  nonlocal  nature  of  hidden

variable models of quantum mechanics.  What is troubling is that the preacceleration

itself  may  be  unphysical  and  a  deficit  of  the  present  formulation  of  the  radiation

reaction  force.    So  using  it  to  justify  what  appears  to  be  an  even  more  unphysical

situation in quantum theory may be a non-sequitur.  The fact that the RRF applies only

to charged particles is also troubling.  MD believes that this is not a difficulty, as many

- 30 -

if  not  all  known  finite  mass  neutral  particles  can  be  thought  to  be  bound  states  of

charged particles.

5.4  Marmet's  relativistic waveless  and  photonless two-slit interference

Marmet52 uses an original if not peculiar invocation of relativity theory to obtain

interference  without  either  waves  or  photons.    He  says,  "The  wave  or  photon

interpretations  are  not  only  useless,  they  are  not  compatible  with  physical  reality.

Waves  are  simply  the  relativistically  distorted  appearance  of  relativistic  coupling

between  two  atoms  exchanging  energy."    For  him  there  is  an  ultimate  relativistic

contraction between the source, the slit-plate, and the screen in the rest frame of a signal

going  at  the  velocity  of  light  in  vacuum,  c.    Thus  he  claims  to    achieve  contact

interaction between these three entities.  This is difficult to comprehend since it does not

occur  in  the  rest  frame  of  the  apparatus,  and  he  does  not  transform  back  to  the  rest

frame.  The remainder is also perplexing, but less difficult.  For him,  the interference

pattern is simply the in-phase and out-of-phase interactions between the oscillators in

the source and the oscillators in the screen (the detector) as mitigated by the two slits in

close  analogy  to  the  classical  approach  to  explaining  interference.    Thus  he  has  the

disturbance simultaneously at both slits, as would be the case for a wave.

Marmet's  explanation  runs  into  difficulty  if  the  light  goes  through  a  medium

which  slows  its  velocity  down  considerably,  v  <<  c.    Then  dimensions  would  not

contract sufficiently for contact interaction.  The same difficulty would be encountered

in explaining two-slit interference for particles with mass such as electrons, neutrons,

and  atoms.    Hence,  Marmet  may  no  longer  be  able  to  dispense  with  the  concept  of

wave, while still keeping the concept of phase.

His relativistic contraction to zero length also buys him a simple explanation of

the "collapse of the wave function."  In traditional quantum theory, when the quantum

wave  interacts  with  the  screen,  the  wave  function  collapses  instantaneously  with

infinite velocity to the detected spot on the screen;  no clear explanation is given of how

- 31 -

this physically occurs.  Marmet's explanation is "Since in frame c [moving with velocity

c]  the  volume  is  zero,  ...  [collapse  of  the  wave  function]  can  be  instantaneous,

everywhere in that zero volume."  Needless to say, there are two problems with thîs

explanation.  One is that the collapse occurs even when the carrier velocity (be it wave

or particle) << c and hence the volume >> 0.  The other is that even when the velocity is

c,  after  emerging  from  a  slit  the  velocity  vector  is  not  necessarily  parallel  to  the  axis

between the slit plate and screen.

There are times even at low velocities, when only relativity can explain otherwise

paradoxical phenomena such as the Coulomb and Lorentz force interactions between

charged particles in different frames, but it is not obvious that the wave-particle duality

in  two-slit  interference  is  one  of  these  paradoxes.      There  is,  however,  one  aspect  of

Marmet's conjectures that is taken up by others.  This is that the wave nature of light is

only a reflection of the oscillatory nature of the source of radiation, in a deeper sense

than that the source produces the disturbance.  It is neither explained by Marmet nor

the others how, if this is the case, the oscillation of the radiation persists even after it is

decoupled from the source -- even after the source is annihilated.

5.4  Suppes and Acacio de Barros photon trajectories

In 1993 and 1994, Suppes and Acacio de Barros (S&AB) took a different approach

in  their  attempt  to  resolve  the  wave-particle  duality.53,54  They  claim  that  their

probabilistic  particle  approach  requires  no  separate  concept  of  wave  to  obtain

interference.    Yet  in  having  their  expectation  density  inherit  the  periodic  wave

properties    of    the    oscillating    source,  this  idea  is  very  similar  to,  if  not  the  same  as

Marmet's.52    Their  concept  is  also  quite  close  to  the  prior  ideas  of  Prosser47,48  and

Wesley49, except that they additionally assume that their absorber or photodetector also

behaves  periodically.    They    differ  a  little  with  P&W  in  having  their  photons  follow

linear  trajectories  except  for  local  interaction  with  matter.    As  in  the  case  of  Marmet

- 32 -

(discussed  above),  it  is  not  clear  how  S&AB  would  explain  free-space  oscillation  of

radiation decoupled from its source.

Where they really differ with P&W, is that they invoke interference "locally" at

the points of absorption by endowing the photons with two states which can either add

or cancel.  In essence they have two kinds of photons.  For S&AB,54 "Because only the

net  excess  of  positive  or  negative  photons  is  observable,  it  is  appropriate  to  call  the

postive and negative photons  virtual  and thus not necessarily individually observable.

Although  our  concept  of  virtual  photon  is  not  the  same  as  that  of  QED,  we  expect

common features to be present in our subsequent extension of the present work."

In  their  1993  paper,53  S&AB  develop  a  random  walk  approach  to  interference

claiming  that  standard  wave  concepts  can  come  from  purely  random  particle  walks.

They conclude that individual photons cannot simultaneously traverse both slits, but

only a "distribution and its distribution domain."  Their 1994 paper goes much further,54

and comes to the same conclusion that an individual photon can never go through both

slits at the same time.

6.  Conclusion

According  to  quantum  theory,  slit  plate  momentum  transfer  detection  is

incompatible  with  the  formation  of  an  interference  pattern.    However,  this  leaves

quantum  mechanics  in  a  quandary.    If  a  photon  goes  through  both  slits  at  the  same

time, there is little or no momentum transfer to the slit plate compared with a photon

traversing  only  one  slit.    Thus  even  separate  detection  of  the  momentum  transfers

(which  destroy  the  interference  pattern  and  imply  one-slit  traversal),  and  the

interference  pattern  (which  presumably  does  not  permit  detection  of  the  momentum

transfers and implies two-slit traversal) are logically contradictory.   One might think

that Einstein lost the interference pattern debates.  However, at the very least, he won a

moral triumph here (as in the EPR paradox despite an experimental victory by quantum

- 33 -

mechanics)    because  he  succeeded  in  showing  the  strangeness  and  seeming

inconsistency of quantum mechanics is.

 

It  is  extraordinary  from  a  particle  point  of  view  that  more  photons  reach  the

screen when one slit is closed than when both slits are open.  It is amazing that within

quantum  theory,  the  proposition  that  a  particle  either  went  through  one  hole  or  the

other  hole  is    contextually  meaningless  unless  we  also  specify  how  this  is  to  be

determined.  When an interference pattern is built up one particle at a time,  we must

reject the hypothesis that the pattern is due to an interaction between particles -- at least

in real time.  Suppes and Acacio de Barros54 notwithstanding, their virtual photon may

have to wait a very long time before interacting with another virtual photon.  A purely

wave interpretation seems equally unreasonable since individual photons interact only

in very localized spots on the screen.  Now we also have delayed choice and quantum

erasure thought experiments where the present is allowed to influence the past.   As

mind-boggling as it may seem, one may wonder if hidden deep within the viscera of

quantum theory is the sanction to allow time to run both forward and backward.  For

all these things to be right, the world is not only an uncanny place,  it is stranger than

we can (or may want to) imagine.

According to Bohr55:  "What really matters is the unambiguous description of its

[nature's]  behaviour,  which  is  what  we  observe.    The  question  as  to  whether  the

machine  really    feels,  or  whether  it  merely  looks  as  though  it  did,  is  absolutely  as

meaningless as to ask whether light is in 'reality' waves  or particles.  We must never

forget that 'reality' too is a human word just like 'wave' or 'consciousness.'  Our task is

to learn to use these words correctly -- that is unambiguously and consistently."

What  better  response  than  that  of  Einstein,56 "There is no doubt that quantum

mechanics has seized hold of a beautiful element of truth, and that it will be a test stone

for  any  future  theoretical  basis,  just  as  electrostatics  is  deducible  from  the  Maxwell

equations of the electromagnetic field or as thermodynamics is deducible from classical

- 34 -

mechanics.  However, I do not believe that quantum mechanics will be the starting point

in the search for this basis, just as, vice versa, one could not go from thermodynamics

(resp. statistical mechanics) to the foundations of mechanics."

It took over half a century since the beginnings of quantum theory, until it was

shown  in  great  generality  and  detailed  analysis  by  Glauber,57,58  why  it  allows

interference to be seen in photoelectric type experiments.  Until then, and perhaps still,

most  physicists  have  incorrectly  thought  that  it  is  impossible  to  observe  the  wave

nature (interference effects) of photons in photoelectric currents.  As Jaynes has pointed

out,27  unfortunately this lesson has to be relearned periodically because of entrenched

biases  against  it.    It  is  all  too  easy  to  accept  the  underlying  assumptions  and

interpretations of quantum theory -- as unintuitive as they may be -- because quantum

mechanics does present a very successful computational edifice.

Acknowledgments

References

I  wish  to  express  my  gratititude  to  my  esteemed  colleagues  Arthur  Cohn  and

Mark Davidson for helpful discussions, and to Victor Lohr  for his help with the figures.

1.  I.  Newton, Opticks, or  Treatise of Relections, Refractions, Inflections and Colours of Light,

4th edn. London, 1730 (Dover, New York, 1952).

2.  T. Young, Philosophical Transactions ,  Royal Soc. London , 91, 12 and 387 (1802).

3.  A. Einstein, Annalen der Physik, 17, 132 (1905).

4.  L. de Broglie, C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris 177, 517 (1923).

5. M. Planck, Verh. D. Phys. Ges. 2, 237 (1900).

6.  G. I. Taylor , Proc. Cam. Phil. Soc. 15, 114 (1909).

7.  Institut International de Physique Solvay, Rapport et discussions  du 5 Conseil p.253, 

Paris (1928).

8.  M. Jammer, The Philosophy of  Quantum Mechanics  (Wiley, New York p. 109, 1974).

- 35 -

9.  N. Bohr, in Albert Einstein:  Philosopher-Scientist, edited by P. A. Schilpp (Library  of 

Living Philosophers, Evanston  1949).

10.  R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, Lectures on Physics, Vol. I p. 37-2, 37-7 

and Vol. III p. 1-1, 1-6 (Addison-Wesley.  Reading, Mass. 1965b).

11.  W. K. Wootters and W.H. Zurek, Phys. Rev. D 19, 473 (1979).

12.  A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935).

13.  M.O. Scully, B.-G. Englert, and H. Walther, Nature  351, 111 (1991).

14.  B.-G. Englert, M.O. Scully, and H. Walther, Scientific American   271, 86 ( Dec. 1994).

15.  B.-G. Englert, and M.O. Scully in New Frontiers in Quantum Electrodyanamics and 

Quantum  Optics  (edited by A. O Barut, Plenum, NY 1990).

16.  B.-G. Englert, J. Schwinger, and M.O. Scully in New Frontiers in Quantum 

Electrodyanamics and Quantum  Optics  (edited by A. O Barut, Plenum, NY 1990).

17.  M.O. Scully, and H. Walther, Phys. Rev.  A 39, 5229 (1989).

18.  M.O. Scully, B.-G. Englert, and J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev.  A 40, 1775 (1989).

19.  M.O. Scully, and K. Druhl, Phys. Rev.  A 25, 2208 (1982).

20.  P. Storey, S. Tan, M. Collett, and D. Walls, Nature  367, 626 (1994).

21.  S. M. Tan and D. F. Walls, Phys. Rev.  A 47, 4663 (1993).

22.   R. Bhandari, Phys. Rev. Lett.  69, 3720 (1992).

23.  M. V. Berry,  Proc. Royal Soc. London  A 392, 45 (1984).

24.  Y. Aharonov and J. Anandan, Phys. Rev. Lett.  58, 1593 (1987).

25.  J. A. Wheeler, in Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Theory  (edited by A. R. 

Marlow, Academic Press, NY p. 9, 1978).

26,  W.  Heisenberg, The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory  (Univ. Chicago, 1930).

27.  E. Jaynes in Foundations of  Radiation Theory and Quantum Electrodynamics , (edited by

A. O. Barut,  Plenum, New York 1980).

28.  A. T. Forrester, R. A. Gudmundsen, and P. O. Johnson, Phys. Rev.  99, 1691 (1955).

29.  R. Hanbury Brown and R. Q. Twiss, Nature  178, 1447 (1956).

- 36 -

30.  S. M. Tan, D. F. Walls and M. J. Collett, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 252 (1991).

31.  B. J. Oliver and C. Stroud Jr., Phys. Lett. A 135, 407 (1989).

32.  Lucien Hardy, Phys. Rev. Lett.  73, 2279 (1994).

33.  A.  Aspect, P. Grangier, and G. Roger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 91 (1982).

34.  A.  Aspect, J. Dalibard, and G. Roger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1804 (1982).

35.  T. E. Kiess, Y. H. Shih, A. V. Sergienko, and C. O. Alley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 3893 (1993).

36.  U. Eichman, J.C. Berquist, J.J. Bollinger, J.M. Gilligan, W.M. Itano, D. J. Wineland, 

and M.G. Raizen, Phys. Rev. Lett.  70, 2359 (1993).

37.  P. Grangier, A. Aspect, and J. Vigue, Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 418 (1985).

38.  L. Rosenfeld, Fundamental Problems in Elementary Particle Physics p.232, Proc. of 

the Fourteenth Solvay Conf.  (Interscience, NY 1968)

39.  A. Cohn and M. Rabinowitz, to be published.

40.  A. Cohn and M. Rabinowitz, Intl. J. Theoretical Phys.  29, 215 (1990).

41.  D. J. Bohm, Quantum Theory   (Prentice-Hall, New Jersey p. 611, 1951).

42.  A. Zeilinger, R. Gahler, C.G. Shull, W. Treimer, and W. Mampe, Rev. Mod. Phys.  60, 

1067 (1988).

43.  G. Badurek, H. Rauch, and D. Tuppinger, Phys. Rev.  A 34, 2600 (1986).

44.  W. D. Phillips and H. J. Metcalf, Scientific American   256, 50 ( March 1967).

45.  D. J. Bohm and B. J. Hiley, The Undivided Universe  (Routledge, London 1993).

46.  P. R. Holland,  Quantum Theory of Motion  (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1993).

47.  R. D. Prosser, Intl. J. Theoretical Phys.  15, 169 (1976).

48.   R. D. Prosser, Intl. J. Theoretical Phys.  15, 181 (1976).

49.  J. P. Wesley, Found. Phys.  14, 155 (1984).

50.  M. Davidson, J. Math. Phys.  20, 1865 (1979).

51.  R. P. Feynman,  in The Second Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and 

Probability  (Univ. Ca. Press, Berkeley, 1951).

52.  P. Marmet, Absurdities in Modern Physics: A Solution  (Nordir, Ottawa 1993).

- 37 -

53.  P. Suppes and J. Acacio de Barros, Intl. J. Theoretical Phys.  33, 179 (1994).

54.  P. Suppes and J. Acacio de Barros, Found. Phys. Lett.  7, 501 (1994).

55.  J. Kalchar in Neils Bohr;  His Life and Work as Seen by His Friends and Colleagues  (ed. S.

Rozental , North Holland, Amsterdam 1967).

56.  A. Peterson, Quantum Physics and the Philosophical Tradition  (MIT Press, Camb., MA 1968).

57.  R. Glauber, Phys. Rev.   131, 2766 (1963).

58. R. Glauber, in Quantum Optics and Electronics  (ed. by DeWitt et al, Gordon & Breach, NY 1964

Fig. 1.  Two-slit interference experiment in which a particle's  trajectory is determined 

by a partner particle emitted from the source in the opposite direction. Shown are
the interference pattern and trajectories (shaded regions) which go through each 
slit as determined by spots in each of the particle acceptance regions on screen A.

Fig. 2. Diagram used for the analysis that the uncertainty principle is not violated in 
having a virtual beam of width fS (f is a number < 1), where S is the slit 
separation.  If the spot on screen A is far to the side of the center line,
fS < ∆x + 2∆S, and may even be less than ∆S.

