BMC Evolutionary Biology

BioMed Central

Research article
Compensatory mutations cause excess of antagonistic epistasis in 
RNA secondary structure folding
Claus O Wilke*1, Richard E Lenski2 and Christoph Adami1,3

Open Access

Address: 1Digital Life Laboratory 136–93, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena CA, 91125, USA, 2Center for Biological Modeling, and 
Center for Microbial Ecology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA and 3Jet Propulsion Laboratory 126–347, California 
Institute of Technology, Pasadena CA 91109, USA

Email: Claus O Wilke* - wilke@caltech.edu; Richard E Lenski - lenski@msu.edu; Christoph Adami - adami@caltech.edu
* Corresponding author    

Published: 5 February 2003

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3:3

Received: 18 December 2002
Accepted: 5 February 2003

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/3

© 2003 Wilke et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all 
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

RNA secondary structure foldingsynergistic epistasisantagonistic epistasiscompensatory mutations

Background: The rate at which fitness declines as an organism's genome accumulates random
mutations is an important variable in several evolutionary theories. At an intuitive level, it might
seem natural that random mutations should tend to interact synergistically, such that the rate of
mean fitness decline accelerates as the number of random mutations is increased. However, in a
number of recent studies, a prevalence of antagonistic epistasis (the tendency of multiple mutations
to have a mitigating rather than reinforcing effect) has been observed.

Results: We studied in silico the net amount and form of epistatic interactions in RNA secondary
structure folding by measuring the fraction of neutral mutants as a function of mutational distance
d. We found a clear prevalence of antagonistic epistasis in RNA secondary structure folding. By
relating the fraction of neutral mutants at distance d to the average neutrality at distance d, we
showed that this prevalence derives from the existence of many compensatory mutations at larger
mutational distances.

Conclusions: Our findings imply that the average direction of epistasis in simple fitness landscapes
is directly related to the density with which fitness peaks are distributed in these landscapes.

Background
Epistatic  interactions  between  mutations  in  different
genes, or different sites within the same gene, can substan-
tially influence the dynamics of evolving populations. Al-
though  adaptation  by  natural  selection  depends  on
occasional  beneficial  mutations,  in  fact  most  mutations
are neutral or deleterious. Therefore, if mutations are ran-
domly added to an organism's genome (as opposed to in-
corporated  by  natural  selection),  then  fitness  tends  to
decline with mutation number. Mutations whose effects
are independent of one another are termed multiplicative.
If mutations interact so that their combined effect on fit-

ness is greater than expected from their individual effects,
then epistasis is said to be synergistic. For deleterious mu-
tations, synergistic epistasis means that the decline in av-
erage  fitness  accelerates  as  more  random  mutations  are
added (such epistasis is termed negative by Phillips et al.
[1]). By contrast, if deleterious mutations interact so that
their combined effect is smaller than expected under the
multiplicative model, then epistasis is called antagonistic
(or positive in the terminology of Phillips et al.). Antago-
nistic epistasis therefore implies unexpected robustness to
the effects of multiple deleterious mutations [2].

Page 1 of 14
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/3

The predicted effects of these various types of mutational
interactions on population dynamics are well studied (for
reviews, see [3–5]), but in most models the types of inter-
actions are ad hoc because it is not known how well the
assumed  interactions  reflect  reality.  In  particular,  the
question of what kinds of interactions are typical, and un-
der what conditions, is addressed only rarely.

Recent work has shown that epistatic interactions can be
interpreted  as  curvature  in  the  fitness  surface  [6],  which
implies that geometry imposes limitations on the types of
epistasis  that  can  be  observed  for  any  given  genotype.
Closely related to this geometric approach is the realiza-
tion that epistasis must be studied with respect to a partic-
ular  reference  sequence  [7–11],  and  that  the  forms  of
epistatic  interactions  change  when  the  reference  is
changed. Wilke and Adami [11] proposed that inhomoge-
neities in the distribution of genotypes give rise to direc-
tional  epistasis  (directional  epistasis  is  the  net  epistasis
averaged over many pairs of mutations) among deleteri-
ous  mutations,  and  that  the sign  of  directional epistasis
provides information about the density gradient of high-
fitness sequences within a cluster. Hence, evolutionary hy-
potheses that depend crucially on the sign of epistasis, in-
cluding 
evolution  of
recombination [12–15] and on the speed of mutation ac-
cumulation in asexual populations [16–18], will also de-
pend on the density distribution of fit genotypes, and on
the  topology  of  those  regions  of  genotype  space  into
which populations move under the pressures of mutation
and selection.

theories  on 

certain 

the 

The argument relating directional epistasis to the distribu-
tion  of  high-fitness  sequences  within  a  cluster  of  fit  se-
quences goes as follows (Figure 1). Consider a sequence
that lies near the center of a dense cluster of high-fitness se-
quences.  Such  a  sequence  is  surrounded  by  many  other
high-fitness genotypes, and the average harm done by a
single  mutation  is  therefore  relatively  low.  But  as  more
random mutations are added, high-fitness genotypes be-
come less common, and the average harm of multiple mu-
tations is stronger than what the effect of single mutations
indicated. This increasingly harmful effect of mutations at
greater distances away from the original sequence corre-
sponds to synergistic epistasis. By contrast, if a sequence is
located at the periphery of a high-fitness cluster, or in a re-
gion  of  low  density  of  high-fitness  sequences,  then  this
synergistic tendency  is  lessened,  and  we  might  even  ob-
serve antagonistic epistasis for this sequence. One predic-
tion of this hypothesis of density inhomogeneities is that
the average fitness effect of single mutations must be cor-
related with the strength and direction of epistatic interac-
tions at larger mutational distances. This prediction was
confirmed in RNA secondary structure folding and in dig-

ital  organisms  [11].  A  similar  effect  was  observed  for
quantitative trait loci in mice [19].

While the hypothesis of Wilke and Adami [11] explains
some of the variation within the observed range of epistat-
ic interactions, it fails to predict whether we should always
expect an excess of synergistic epistasis, or whether antag-
onistic interactions might dominate in certain situations.
Recent experiments indicate that synergistic and antago-
nistic interactions are both common when pairs of muta-
tions  are  considered,  but  that,  overall,  the  two  types  of
interactions either roughly cancel each other out or per-
haps even produce an excess of antagonistic interactions
[20–29]. Only one study of this type reported an excess of
synergistic  interactions  [30].  Moreover,  two  simple  sys-
tems  with  computational  landscapes,  self-replicating
computer programs [2] and RNA secondary structure fold-
ing  [11],  both  exhibited  a  clear  excess  of  antagonistic
interactions.

What factors may explain a tendency toward antagonism?
Here  are  four  possible  explanations,  and  there  may  be
others:

1. Biased recovery: In some experimental systems, it is dif-
ficult to isolate genotypes with very low fitness, including
non-viable ones. By allowing random mutations to accu-
mulate only in surviving lineages, a researcher may inad-
vertently bound mean fitness away from zero, and thereby
bias  the  shape  of  the  fitness  function  versus  mutation
number from synergy toward antagonism.

2. Multiple hits: To the extent that multiple mutations hit
the  same  gene  or  pathway,  subsequent  mutations  will
more likely be neutral than initial ones, because the same
function cannot be destroyed twice. In effect, one muta-
tion may convert one or more genes into pseudo-genes, or
junk DNA, in which subsequent mutations have no fur-
ther harmful effect.

3. Intrinsic or evolved form of interaction: The dynamics
of metabolic pathways and gene regulation might be in-
herently  structured  to  produce  more  antagonistic  than
synergistic interactions. Even if there is no necessary bio-
chemical  tendency  in  this  direction,  it  is  possible  that
pathways  and  their  regulation  have  evolved  to  promote
such interactions. While this explanation is vague, a fail-
ure to identify any other explanation for observed patterns
of mutational interaction would suggest a closer examina-
tion of models of metabolic pathways and gene regulation
with this issue in mind.

4.  Compensatory  mutation:  Consider a  genotype that  is
on a peak (or plateau) in a fitness landscape, such that all
mutations are either deleterious or neutral. As one moves

Page 2 of 14
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/3

A: synergistic epistasis

)
d
(
w
 
g
o

l

)
d
(
w
 
g
o

l

d

d

B: antagonistic epistasis

A

B

Figure 1
Relationship between the distribution of high-fitness sequences and directional epistasis, according to Wilke and Adami [11]. 
The drawing on the left visualizes genotype space, with the small filled circles representing high-fitness genotypes. A and B are 
two particular reference sequences, and the concentric rings around A and B indicate the mutants that are a fixed Hamming 
distance away from either A or B. In the case of A, the average fitness w(d) of the sequences at Hamming distance d from A 
decays faster at higher d than at lower d, and therefore A shows synergistic epistasis. In the case of B, the decay of w(d) slows 
down as d increases, and hence B shows antagonistic epistasis.

away  from  this  genotype  by  adding  mutations,  imagine
that  the  ratio  of  deleterious  to  neutral  mutations  stays
constant, as does the average effect of a deleterious muta-
tion. But as the distance away from this peak increases, a
portion of the mutant distribution may move into the vi-
cinity of one or more other fitness peaks, separated from
the original one by a valley of deleterious mutations. Mu-
tations that lead out of the valley onto a new fitness peak
are, of course, beneficial mutations. If a mutation is bene-
ficial because it restores some previously existing structure
or function, then we can call it a compensatory mutation.
If the frequency of compensatory mutations increases as
one moves out from the original peak, this effect will slow
down the decay of mean fitness with increasing mutation-
al  distance,  even  without  selection  for  compensatory
mutations.

In this paper, we focus on a fairly simple system (RNA sec-
ondary structure folding), which avoids the first explana-

tion above because of complete information, and avoids
the second and third explanations because there is only a
single gene with dichotomous fitness (0 or 1) in the sys-
tem. Thus, we can focus on whether, and to what extent,
compensatory mutations that precisely restore the previ-
ously existing folding structure contribute to an excess of
antagonistic interactions.

In order to analyze the topology and structure of fitness
landscapes, and assess their effect on epistasis, we need a
system where each sequence in a well-defined space is as-
signed a unique fitness that is independent of the frequen-
cy of other genotypes in the population. RNA secondary
structure  folding  is  a  well-studied  model  system.  In  this
system, the secondary structure of an RNA molecule is tak-
en as a predictor of the fitness of the underlying sequence
[31–36]. RNA folding has the advantage that all genotypes
can be separated naturally into only two classes, the viable
ones  (those  that  fold  into  a  particular  target  structure)

Page 3 of 14
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/3

with fitness 1, and the non-viable ones (those that fail to
fold into that exact structure), which are assigned fitness
0.  Such  a  classification  permits  a  precise  mathematical
analysis, while at the same time many important proper-
ties  of  high-dimensional  fitness  landscapes  are  retained
[37]. The set of all viable sequences can be decomposed
into smaller sets called neutral networks [38,39]. Two vi-
able sequences belong to the same neutral network if one
sequence can be transformed into the other through a se-
ries of single point mutations, without passing through a
sequence with lower fitness along the way. If no such se-
ries of mutations exists, then the two viable sequences be-
long to different neutral networks.

As discussed in previous publications [2,11,25], the aver-
age fitness w(d) at a Hamming distance d from a particular
reference  sequence  can  be  used  for  studying  directional
epistasis in a large number of genotypes. The value of w(d)
is obtained by averaging over the individual fitnesses of all
sequences  that  can  be  obtained  from  the  reference  se-
quence by introducing d mutations. By definition, w(0) is
the fitness of the reference sequence, and we have always
w(0) = 1. The value of w(1) is given by 1 minus the mean
effect  of  single  mutations  and,  in  general,  the  value  of
w(d) is given by 1 minus the mean effect of d mutations.
Moreover, since we assume in this study that all individu-
al fitnesses are either 0 or 1, w(d) corresponds also to the
fraction of viable sequences at distance d from the refer-
ence sequence. We will make use of this property repeat-
edly throughout this paper.

We expect that w(d) decreases roughly exponentially as d
increases,  for  the  following  reason.  If  the  sequences  are
sufficiently long that any back mutations can be neglect-
ed, then genotype space can be visualized as a tree (Fig. 2).
If the number of neutral neighbors (the neutrality, ν) of
all  viable  sequences  is  approximately  the  same,  and  the
fraction of neutral mutations of a viable sequence is on av-
erage much larger than the probability that a completely
random sequence is viable, then w(d + 1) can be approxi-
mated by [ν/(Lκ-L)]w(d), where L is sequence length and
κ denotes the number of different bases that can occur (κ
= 4 for RNA). Thus, we can write w(d) = exp(-α d) with α
= 1 - ν/(Lκ-L). The condition that the fraction of neutral
mutants ν/(Lκ-L) is much larger than the total fraction of
viable mutants among all possible sequences is crucial for
the  exponential  decay  of  w(d).  Consider  by  contrast  the
Russian Roulette model by Gavrilets and Gravner [40], in
which all sequences are randomly assigned a fitness value
of either 0 or 1. The total fraction p of viable sequences in
this model is equal to the expected fraction of neutral mu-
tants of any sequence with fitness 1, and w(d) ≈ p for d >
0 in this model.

In the general case, ν is not constant. If ν changes system-
atically  with  increasing  d,  then  w(d)  will  decay  slightly
faster or slower than a perfect exponential. We incorporate
this by writing [2]

w(d) = exp(-αdβ). 

 (1)

The  parameter  β  represents  the  deviation  from  the  expo-
nential  expectation.  Because  an  exact  exponential  decay
means that the average effect of a new mutation is inde-
pendent of how many mutations have accumulated previ-
ously,  β  is  a  measure  of  the  net  effect  of  epistatic
interactions. In the following, we refer to this net effect as
directional epistasis, and to β as the epistasis parameter. β
> 1 corresponds to synergistic epistasis, whereas β < 1 cor-
responds to antagonistic interactions.

Consider  the  fitness  landscape  depicted  in  Figure  2,  in
which circles represent viable sequences while crosses are
non-viable  ones.  This  particular  landscape  contains  two
separate  neutral  networks,  of  which  one  (indicated  by
bold solid lines) is connected to the reference sequence at
distance d = 0. At d = 2 in the upper branch, a compensa-
tory  mutation  leads  onto  a  second  neutral  network
(shown as bold dashed lines). For such "fitness trees" an-
chored at particular reference sequences, we can measure
both  the  decline  in  average  fitness  with  mutational  dis-
tance, w(d), as well as the change in the average neutrality
as we increase d. The average neutrality at distance d sim-
ply  reflects  the  connectedness  of  the  neutral  network  at
that distance. Average neutrality at mutational distance d
is defined as the average number of neutral neighbors of a
sequence that is separated by d mutations from the refer-
ence sequence and that is part of the neutral network un-
der  investigation.  As  per  the  arguments  by  Wilke  and
Adami [11], we expect the connectedness to decrease with
d as we move away from a reference sequence in the center
of a high-fitness cluster. By contrast, we expect connected-
ness to increase (or at least decrease more slowly) if the
reference sequence is on the fringe of such a cluster. Figure
3  shows  w(d)  and  average  neutrality  for  examples  of
"fringe" and "center" reference sequences. The fringe se-
quence  (Fig.  3a)  has  strongly  antagonistic  net  epistasis,
and  neutrality  increases  with  distance.  By  contrast,  the
center sequence (Fig. 3b) shows a slightly synergistic ten-
dency and declining neutrality with distance. This associ-
ation agrees with our expectation that more antagonistic
curves  w(d)  are  caused  by  an  increase  in  the  density  of
neutral sequences with d, whereas more synergistic curves
result from a corresponding decline.

Results
For  100  randomly  chosen  RNA  sequences  of  length  L  =
76,  we  measured  both  the  fraction  of  neutral  mutants
w(d)  as  well  as  the  average  neutrality  of  neighbors  of

Page 4 of 14
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/3

d=0

d=1

d=2

d=3

d=4

.
 
.
 
.

.
 
.
 
.

.
 
.
 
.

.
 
.
 
.

.
 
.
 
.

.
 
.
 
.

.
 
.
 
.

Figure 2
Schematic drawing of a fitness landscape. Circles represent viable sequences, and crosses represent non-viable ones. The 
sequence at d = 0 serves as the reference sequence. It has two viable and a number of non-viable mutational neighbors. The 
viable mutants have further viable and non-viable mutational neighbors, and so on. All viable mutants on the lower branch form 
a single neutral network. On the upper branch, a new neutral network emerges at a mutational distance d = 3 from the refer-
ence sequence.

Page 5 of 14
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/3

Figure 3
Function w(d) (left panel) and average neutrality (right panel) at distance d, for two reference sequences. Points are measure-
ments, and lines represent best fits [function exp(- α dβ) for w(d), and function md + n for average neutrality]. (a): A case of 
strongly antagonistic epistasis (β = 0.688), which is associated with increasing neutrality with d (right panel). (b): A more syner-
gistic case (β = 1.017), and a corresponding decline in neutrality with d.

neutral mutants as a function of the distance d. We deter-
mined α and β from fitting exp(-αdβ) to w(d). Moreover,
we performed a linear regression on the average neutrality
to quantify the change in neutrality with distance from the
reference  sequence,  for  each  of  the  random  sequences
serving as a reference. Among the 100 reference sequences
that we studied, the change in neutrality was sufficiently
linear to make the slope m  an excellent indicator of the
general trend (increasing or decreasing neutrality with dis-
tance d), even if the true relationship was not always pre-
cisely linear.

the distributions of m and β differ in an important respect.
The  values  of  m  are  distributed  roughly  symmetrically
around zero, meaning that the average neutrality increases
as often as it decreases with distance from the reference se-
quence. The epistasis parameter β, on the other hand, lies
almost entirely below unity. Even when the average neu-
trality  decays  quickly  as  one  moves  away  from  the
reference sequence, the corresponding value of β indicates
at most a very slight tendency toward synergistic epistasis.
This is precisely the pattern of excess antagonistic epistasis
that demands an explanation.

Figure  4  shows  this  measured  slope  m  versus  the  fitted
epistasis  parameter  β  for  each  of  the  100  reference  se-
quences.  The  two  quantities  are  very  strongly  correlated
(correlation coefficient r = -0.960, p < 0.0001). However,

If compensatory mutations were responsible for the shift
of β to values below one, then by adjusting the function
w(d) to remove their contribution we should find a distri-
bution of β symmetrical around one. As described in the

Page 6 of 14
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/3

Figure 4
Correlation between the average change in neutrality, m, and the epistasis parameter, β, for 100 reference RNA sequences. 
The negative correlation is highly significant (r = -0.960, p < 0.0001).

Methods  section,  it  is  possible  to  separate  the  contribu-
tion  to  w(d)  of  neutral  mutations  that  lie  on  the  same
network wneut(d) from the contribution wcomp(d) that re-
flects compensatory mutations from neighboring neutral
networks  onto  the  reference  network.  Figure  5  shows
w(d), wneut(d) and wcomp(d), estimated using method M2,
for a typical example. The contribution of wneut(d) to w(d)
dwindles  as  the  mutational  distance  d  increases,  while
wcomp(d) becomes increasingly dominant. In other words,
at  large  distances  d,  most  of  the  viable  sequences  arise
through compensatory mutations.

After  partitioning  the  contributions  of  wneut(d)  and
wcomp(d) for all 100 functions w(d), we determined α and
β for the functions wneut(d) in the same way as was done
for w(d). The functions wneut(d) can be thought of as the

decay functions without "contamination" by compensa-
tory mutations. Thus, the differences in α and β for w(d)
and  wneut(d)  must  be  ascribed  to  compensatory  muta-
tions. Figure 6 shows α versus β for both w(d), shown as
triangles, and wneut(d), calculated by method M2, shown
as circles. The removal of compensatory mutations causes
a pronounced upward shift of β toward more synergistic
epistasis. The average decay parameter α is  largely unaf-
fected. For w(d), average <β> = 0.893 ± 0.006 (standard er-
ror  of  the  mean),  while  for  wneut(d)  the  average  <β>  =
0.983 ± 0.004 by  M2 or 1.046 ± 0.005 by M1. Figure 7
shows that the removal of compensatory mutations yields
a  distribution  of  β  that  is  approximately  symmetric
around one, in contrast to the pronounced excess of an-
tagonistic epistasis (β < 1) when compensatory mutations
are included.

Page 7 of 14
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/3

Figure 5
Functions w(d) (■
connect the points to guide the eye.

), wneut(d) ((cid:1)), and wcomp(d) (*), calculated using method M2, for a representative sequence. The lines merely 

Discussion
The  correlation  between  average  mutational  effects  (α)
and directional epistasis (β) described by Wilke and Ada-
mi [11] implies that whether a reference sequence shows
synergistic or antagonistic epistasis depends on whether it
lies  near  the  center  of  a  dense  cluster  of  high-fitness  se-
quences in genetic space, or on the fringes of such a clus-
ter.  Hansen  and  Wagner  [10]  independently  suggested
that the relative frequency of synergistic and antagonistic
interactions depends on the distance of the genotype in
question from the optimum, and thus from the center of
the cluster.

In this study, we demonstrated a very strong correlation
between  β,  which  governs  the  net  direction  of  epistasis,
and  the  mean  change  in  neutrality  per  added  mutation
away from the reference sequence, m (Fig. 4). This corre-

lation  is  fully  consistent  with  the  hypothesis  that
directional epistasis depends on the location of the refer-
ence  sequence  relative  to  other  high-fitness  genotypes.
Yet, this correlation does not explain the overall prepon-
derance of antagonistic epistasis observed in two compu-
tational  systems  [2,11],  nor  the  absence  of  overall
synergistic epistasis in most biological systems that have
been carefully studied in this regard. Although we found
wide variation in the epistasis parameter for RNA second-
ary structure folding (Fig. 4), 98 of 100 reference sequenc-
es showed an excess of antagonistic epistasis (β < 1) and
only 2 exhibited more synergism (β > 1). We demonstrat-
ed that this overall excess of antagonistic interactions re-
sults from compensatory mutations (Figs. 5, 6, 7), which
are evidently important for the shape of the fitness func-
tion whether or not a sequence is in the middle of a dense
cluster.

Page 8 of 14
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/3

Figure 6
Epistasis parameter β and decay parameter α for 100 reference RNA sequences, plotted separately for the full fitness function 
w(d) (triangles) and for the purely neutral contribution wneut(d) (circles, method M2).

The trajectory for mean fitness as random mutations accu-
mulate is generally one of decay because many more mu-
tations  are  deleterious  than  are  beneficial.  The  decay
function is therefore sometimes loosely discussed as if it
depended  only  on  deleterious  mutations  (or  only
deleterious and neutral mutations). This focus on declin-
ing  fitness  tends  to  ignore  compensatory  mutations  be-
cause  they  are  beneficial,  albeit  conditionally.  But
compensatory  mutations  cannot  be  ignored  if  their  fre-
quency varies systematically in genetic space. In particu-
lar, if compensatory mutations are an increasing fraction
of  all  viable  mutations  as  the  distribution  moves  away
from a local fitness peak, then they will affect the shape of
the decay function (Fig. 5) and the resulting epistasis pa-
rameter (Figs. 6, 7).

In the present paper, we have used the term "compensato-
ry mutation" for all mutations that are not on the main
neutral network, irrespective of their distance to this net-
work. This  is a  broad  definition of compensatory muta-
tions,  because it encompasses not only those  mutations
that directly counteract a particular deleterious mutation,
but also mutations that establish a new neutral network
far away from the main network. The latter type of muta-
tions could also be called advantageous mutations. Here,
we have lumped both types together, because in this way
the  presentation  of  our  results  is  less  cluttered,  and  the
mathematics of separating w(d) into the various contribu-
tions  is  easier  to  follow,  than  if  we  were  distinguishing
three  different  types  of  mutations.  An  additional  argu-
ment for calling all these mutations compensatory is that
they can produce a fitness gain only in association with
one  or  more  mutations  that  would  otherwise  be

Page 9 of 14
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/3

measured 
adjusted (M1) 
adjusted (M2) 

20

15

10

5

)
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
 
n
i
(
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f

0
0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

1.1

1.2

epistasis parameter  β 

Figure 7
Frequency distribution of the epistasis parameter β for measured w(d) and for wneut(d), the latter obtained using two different 
methods (M1 and M2) to remove the effect of compensatory mutations on w(d). Both methods shift the distribution such that 
it is roughly centered around 1, in contrast to the strong bias toward antagonism (β < 1) when compensatory mutations are 
included.

deleterious, that is, none of the mutations that could be
termed advantageous is accessible directly from the main
neutral  network.  On  the  other  hand,  our  definition  ex-
cludes mutations that restore a genotype to the main neu-
tral network (even mutations that are not reversions in the
strict  sense).  Again,  we  chose  this  definition  for  mathe-
matical precision and clarity. The definition is not as im-
portant  as  the  substantive  conclusion:  The  fact  that  it  is
possible to restore a previously existing structure by many
non-trivial mutational pathways is sufficient to cause pro-
nounced antagonistic directional epistasis.

A  high  abundance  of  compensatory  mutations  implies
considerable  flexibility  in  the  genotype-phenotype  map,
such that fit phenotypes can be found widely distributed
in genotype space. For the case of RNA secondary structure
folding, this property of the genotype-phenotype map has
been demonstrated analytically using graph theory [41],

and  it  has  been  verified  in  extensive  numerical  simula-
tions  [42,43].  Random  graph  theory  predicts  that  RNA
secondary structures can be classified into common struc-
tures, which can be found almost anywhere in sequence
space, and rare structures. Only a very small number of se-
quences fold into any given rare structure. The common
structures satisfy the shape-covering theorem, which states
that within any sphere of a certain radius r, at least one se-
quence  can  be  found  that  folds  into  a  given  common
structure.  Since  we  have  chosen  the  reference  sequences
randomly in our analysis, we can safely assume that the
majority of the sequences that we have studied fold into a
common structure, and that therefore the shape-covering
theorem applies. For sequences of length L = 76, we have
r ≥ 10 (Table 3 in Ref. [41]). That means that any common
structure can be found at least once within a distance of
approximately 10–12 mutations from any arbitrarily cho-
sen sequence. In other words, even in the empty regions

Page 10 of 14
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/3

of sequence space, at least one out of 106–107 sequences
will  be  viable.  A  second  prediction  from  random  graph
theory  is  that  the  common  structures  should  percolate
through sequence space. Percolation means that it is pos-
sible to find two sequences with almost no sequence iden-
tity  which  fold  into  the  same  structure,  and  which  are
connected by a  path of mutant sequences  that also fold
into the same structure. However, this percolation proper-
ty  holds  only  if  the  exchange  of  both  bases  of  a  pair  in
paired regions of the secondary structure is considered as
a single-mutation event, which runs counter to the stand-
ard biological meaning of mutation. Most of these double
mutations  will  be  classified  as  compensatory  mutations
according to our definition (because each individual mu-
tation of such pairs will most likely destroy the secondary
structure), and therefore a single neutral path according to
random graph theory will appear as several independent
paths linked together by compensatory mutations in our
analysis. This fact, combined with the shape-covering the-
orem  which  we  discussed  previously,  is  probably  the
source  of  the  large  number  of  compensatory  mutations
that we observe.

A major difference between the fitness landscapes we have
studied here and more natural fitness landscapes is that
we restricted fitness values to either one or zero, whereas
in nature fitness is certainly not a binary variable. Two se-
quences that fold into the same structure may bind to a re-
ceptor  with  different  efficiencies,  and  a  sequence  that
folds into a slightly different  structure may  also bind to
the receptor, albeit less efficiently. We chose here binary
fitness  values  for  mathematical  simplicity  and  clarity  in
our analysis. With a continuous fitness scale, apart from
neutral  and  inviable  sequences,  we  would  have  to  keep
track of slightly and strongly deleterious as well as advan-
tageous sequences, and would consequently need a much
more  elaborate  mathematical  procedure  to  account  for
the contributions from these different fitness classes. Nev-
ertheless, it would certainly be desirable to address in a fu-
ture  study  the  effect  of  compensatory  mutations  on
epistatic interactions in a system with a continuous fitness
scale,  for  example  with  a  fitness  measure  similar  to  the
one used by Ancel and Fontana [44] or, alternatively, us-
ing digital organisms [2].

The present study does not exclude the possibility that an-
tagonistic epistasis in some systems could be caused by ef-
fects other than compensatory mutations. However, our
findings  do  indicate  that  compensatory  mutations  can
play a major role in producing antagonistic epistasis and
thus slowing the decay in mean fitness under random mu-
tation accumulation. Moreover, in the present study, only
mutations that re-created exactly the same RNA folding as
the wild-type were deemed compensatory, while in nature
even a modified secondary structure may have a tertiary

structure that is sufficiently close to the wild-type that no
fitness loss is incurred [45], which means that compensa-
tory  mutations  in  natural  RNA  structures  may  be  even
more  frequent  that  in  our  computational  model.  Com-
pensatory  mutations  have  been  reported  for  rRNA  [46],
tRNA [47], and mRNA [48] structures, and it is certainly
not  surprising  that  we  should  find  a  high  frequency  of
compensatory mutations in the present study. What is im-
portant and novel in this study is that we have explained
the overall excess of antagonistic epistasis by these com-
pensatory  mutations.  This  connection  suggests  that  evi-
dence for one of these phenomena may provide evidence
for the other in more complicated systems.

In  the  remaining  paragraphs,  we  discuss  to  what  extent
our results can be applied to systems other than RNA sec-
ondary structure folding. We begin with proteins. Several
studies of protein folding in silico indicate that widespread
neutral  networks  exist,  comparable  to  the  situation  for
RNA  sequences  [39,49,50].  Moreover,  decay  functions
similar to the function w(d) studied here have been meas-
ured in vitro  [51,52] by making fitness a binary variable
(e.g.,  a  protein  binds  to  a  receptor  or  not)  and  then
screening  libraries  of  sequences  with  varying  average
numbers of mutations for the relevant property. These ex-
periments found that average fitness initially decayed ex-
ponentially  with  increasing  mutations,  but  the  rate  of
decay tended to decelerate at higher mutation numbers.
This deceleration may be attributed to suppressor muta-
tions that stabilize parts of the protein against further mu-
tations [53], which in essence is a form of compensation.
For  example,  the  M182T  mutation  in  β-lactamase  com-
pensates for locally destabilizing mutations in a loop near
the active site [54,55]. Unfortunately, no study has yet in-
vestigated  explicitly  the  decay  function  of  proteins  that
carry such a suppressor mutation. Therefore, it is unclear
whether the decelerating decay rates seen by Suzuki et al.
[51]  and  by  Daugherty  et  al.  [52]  are  a  consequence  of
compensatory suppressor mutations or, alternatively, in-
dicate that the reference sequences happened to be locat-
ed outside a dense cluster of fit sequences.

Using  whole  bacteria  and  viruses,  several  studies  have
sought to measure the mutational decay function for fit-
ness  and  the  overall  direction  of  epistatic  interactions
[25–28,56]. Only one of these studies found net synergis-
tic  interactions  [56].  Several  other  studies  with  bacteria
and viruses have documented widespread compensatory
mutations [57–59], although these studies all used selec-
tion to find compensatory mutations rather than directly
estimating  their  frequency.  Taken  together,  these  two
types of studies are largely consistent with the main con-
clusions of the present paper, that synergistic interactions
do not generally dominate the fitness function and com-
pensatory  mutations  are  common.  Moreover,  in  two  of

Page 11 of 14
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/3

the studies on compensation, it was shown that the com-
pensatory mutations had occurred outside the gene that
was debilitated [58,59]. Therefore, the observed patterns
of epistasis and compensation do  not  merely  reflect  the
robustness  of  individual  RNA  and  protein  molecules  to
multiple mutations (as described above), but must indi-
cate more general features of their genomes.

Of  course,  it  is  possible  that  more  complex  patterns  of
gene regulation in eukaryotes [60] might predispose them
to  synergistic  effects  between  mutations.  In  fact,  studies
on  fruitflies  [30,61]  and  a  unicellular  alga  [20]  (but  see
[24])  reported  net  synergistic  epistasis,  which  might  re-
flect fitness landscapes in which peaks are few and far be-
tween.  But  other  studies  with  eukaryotes,  including
nematodes [27] and fungi [22,29], found no tendency to-
ward synergistic epistasis. Hence, the overall direction of
epistasis for fitness, and the possible role of compensatory
mutations  in  pushing  toward  net  antagonistic  epistasis
among  random  mutations,  will  require  more  study  in
higher organisms. Finally, Zuckerkandl [62] recently pro-
posed that complex regulatory networks may often evolve
via  a  process  of  drift  decay  followed  by  selection  for
compensatory mutations. Such an interplay would com-
plicate the overall pattern of directional epistasis relative
to regulatory complexity.

Methods
We predicted RNA secondary structure using the Vienna
RNA package, version 1.3.1, with the default set-up [31].
We used 100 randomly chosen RNA sequences of length
L = 76 as reference sequences, by randomly drawing bases
A, G, C, and U from a uniform distribution in which each
base  has  a  probability 0.25  of  being  drawn  at  any  posi-
tion. For each reference sequence, we determined its sec-
ondary  structure,  and  measured  the  fraction  of  mutant
sequences at Hamming distances d = 1,2,...,8 that folded
into the same structure, by calculating the secondary struc-
ture of up to 106 mutant sequences at each Hamming dis-
tance.  We  used  the  fraction  of  neutral  mutants  at
Hamming distance d as the function w(d) for the particu-
lar reference sequence. (The fraction of neutral mutants at
distance d is equivalent to w(d) under the assumption that
mutant sequences which fold into the same structure as
the reference sequence have fitness 1, and all other mu-
tants  have  fitness  0.)  In  addition,  to  distinguish  neutral
from compensatory mutations, we recorded at each Ham-
ming distance d, for all viable sequences as well as a ran-
dom  sample  of  up  to  1,000  non-viable  sequences,  the
average  number  of  viable  sequences  after  an  additional
one-step mutation. In the following analyses, we denote
the average fraction of viable sequences that are one mu-
tation  away  from  a  viable  sequence  at  distance  d  as
xneut(d). Similarly, we denote as xcomp(d) the average frac-

tion of viable sequences that are one mutation away from
a non-viable sequence at distance d.

As in Ref. [11], we fitted functions exp(-αdβ) to the meas-
ured w(d), in order to obtain a two-parameter description
of the average effect of single mutations, α, and the direc-
tional epistasis, β. We also fitted functions md + n to the
average neutrality as a function of d, in order to identify
whether neutrality was increasing or decreasing with mu-
tational distance d.

We used two methods to separate w(d) into contributions
from  viable  sequences  that  lie  on  the  same  neutral  net-
work  as  the  reference  sequence  at  d  =  0  [wneut(d)],  and
from viable sequences that lie on other neutral networks
[wcomp(d)].

The first method, M1, uses the information contained in
both  xneut(d)  and  xcomp(d).  As  explained  below,  this
method tends to overestimate the contribution of wcomp
(d). Let γ (d) = wneut(d)/ [wneut(d) + wcomp(d)], which is
the fraction of viable sequences belonging to the reference
neutral network at distance d. Then, wneut(d) is simply giv-
en by

wneut(d+1) = γ (d) w(d) xneut(d). 

 (2)

Estimating wcomp(d) is more complicated. First, we must
take into account sequences contributing to w(d) that are
not part of the neutral network of the reference sequence.
This contribution is given by [1 - γ (d)]w(d)xneut(d). We
must then obtain the contribution of additional compen-
satory mutations at distance d + 1. These are given by 1 -
w(d), the number of non-viable sequences at distance d,
multiplied by the probability with which these non-via-
bles  turn  into  viable  sequences  after  a  single  mutation,
xcomp(d). Hence, we arrive at

wcomp(d  +  1)  =  [1  -  γ  (d)]  w(d)  xneut(d)  +  [1  -  w(d)]
xcomp(d). 

 (3)

With  relations  (2)  and  (3),  we  can  recursively  calculate
wneut(d)  and  wcomp(d)  for  all  d  for  which  w(d),  xneut(d)
and xcomp(d) are known.

In general, we expect w(d) ≈ wneut(d) + wcomp(d). Howev-
er, method M1 has the problem that some of the muta-
tions counted in xcomp(d) may actually lead back onto the
network of the reference sequence rather than onto a sep-
arate neutral network. (While this can be seen as a sort of
compensatory  mutation,  it  is  not  the  kind  investigated
here.)  Such  sequences  would  then  be  counted  twice,  so
that in reality w(d) <wneut(d) + wcomp(d).

Page 12 of 14
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/3

To avoid this double-counting, method M2 uses instead
of (3) the expression

References
1.

wcomp(d + 1) = w(d + 1) - wneut(d + 1). 

 (4)

In  this  case,  the  quantity  xcomp(d)  drops  out,  which  in-
sures that wneut(d) + wcomp(d) is always identical to w(d).
M2 does not suffer from double counting viable sequenc-
es, but it uses less information than M1 and depends on
an additional assumption. In particular, M2 assumes that
the viable sequences at distance d that belong to the neu-
tral  network  of  the  reference  sequence  have  the  same
neutrality  as  those  that  do  not  belong  to  that  network.
Given these considerations, it seems prudent to use both
M1 and M2 rather than rely entirely on either one.

Both methods M1 and M2 are based on the assumption
that the fitness landscape can be represented as a tree, and
that  back  mutations  can  be  neglected.  With  a  sequence
length of L = 76, only one out of 228 possible mutations
is a back mutation, and therefore the neglect of back mu-
tations is justified. The representation of the fitness land-
scape  as  a  tree  is  potentially  more  problematic,  because
there may exist several paths from the reference sequence
to a particular sequence at mutational distance d, whereas
the  tree  approximation  assumes  that  there  is  only  one
such  path.  For  example,  consider  the  wild  type  aa,  with
neutral mutants aA, Aa, and AA, Then, at mutational dis-
tance one, there are two neutral mutants (aA and Aa), and
at distance two, there is only one (AA). The tree approxi-
mation counts the mutant at distance two twice, once as a
mutant  of  aA,  and  once  as  a mutant  of  Aa.  This  double
counting  means  that  our  methods  have  the  tendency  to
overestimate  wneut(d).  This  overestimation,  however,  is
not problematic in the context of the present paper, be-
cause – as we emphasized in the results – our main con-
clusions are based on the large contribution of wcomp(d)
to  w(d).  A  correction  for  the  overestimation  of  wneut(d)
would increase the contribution of wcomp(d), and would
therefore make our conclusions even stronger.

Authors' contributions
COW  was  responsible  for  the  RNA  folding  simulations
and the data analysis. All authors contributed substantial-
ly to the design of the study and the writing of the manu-
script.  All  authors  read  and  approved 
final
manuscript.

the 

Acknowledgements
We thank Charles Ofria and Michael D. Stern for stimulating discussions, 
and Sergey Gavrilets for constructive criticism on an earlier version of this 
work. This research was supported by the National Science Foundation 
under Contract No. DEB-9981397. Part of this work was carried out at the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a con-
tract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

Phillips P, Otto S and Whitlock M Beyond the average: the evo-
lutionary importance of gene interactions and variability of
epistatic effects. In: Epistasis and the Evolutionary Process (Edited by:
Wolf J, Brodie E, Wade M) Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press 2000, 20-
38
Lenski RE, Ofria C, Collier TC and Adami C Genome complexity,
robustness and genetic interactions in digital organisms. Na-
ture 1999, 400:661-664

3. Whitlock MC, Phillips PC, Moore FB-G and Tonsor SJ Multiple fit-
ness peaks and epistasis. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 1995, 26:601-629
Fenster  CB,  Galloway  LF  and  Chao  L  Epistasis  and  its  conse-
quences for the evolution of natural populations. Trends Ecol
Evol 1997, 12:282-286

4.

5. Wolf J, Brodie E, Wade M and editors Epistasis and the Evolution-

ary Process. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press 2000, 
Rice SH The evolution of canalization and the breaking of von
Baer's  law:  modeling  the  evolution  of  development  with
epistasis. Evolution 1998, 52:647-656
Zhivotovsky LA and Gavrilets S Quantitative variability and mul-
tilocus  polymorphism  under  epistatic  selection.  Theor  Popul
Biol 1992, 42:254-283
Gavrilets S and de Jong G Pleiotropic models of polygenic vari-
ation,  stabilizing  selection,  and  epistasis.  Genetics  1993,
134:609-625
Hansen  TF  and  Wagner  GP  Modeling  genetic  architecture:  a
multilinear  theory  of  gene  interaction.  Theor  Pop  Biol  2001,
59:61-86

2.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10. Hansen TF and Wagner GP Epistasis and the mutation load: a
measurement-theoretical  approach.  Genetics  2001,  158:477-
485

11. Wilke CO and Adami C Interaction between directional epista-
sis  and  average  mutational  effects.  Proc  R  Soc  Lond  B  2001,
268:1469-1474

12. Kondrashov AS Selection against harmful mutations in large
sexual  and  asexual  populations.  Genet  Res  (Cambridge)  1982,
40:325-332

13. Kondrashov  AS  Deleterious  mutations  and  the  evolution  of

sexual reproduction. Nature 1988, 336:435-440

14. Charlesworth B Mutation-selection balance and the evolution-
ary advantage of sex and recombination. Genet Res (Cambridge)
1990, 55:199-221

15. Otto SP and Feldman MW Deleterious mutations, variable epi-
static interactions, and the evolution of recombination. Theor
Popul Biol 1997, 51:134-137

16. Crow JF and Kimura M Efficiency of truncation selection. Proc

Natl Acad Sci USA 1978, 76:396-399

17. Kondrashov AS Muller's ratchet under epistatic selection. Ge-

netics 1994, 136:1469-1473

18. Colato A and Fontanari JF Soluble model for the accumulation
of  mutations  in  asexual  populations.  Phys  Rev  Lett  2001,
87:238102

21.

20.

19. Wagner  GP,  Laubichler  MD  and  Bagheri-Chaichian  H  Genetic
measurement theory  of  epistatic  effects.  Genetica 1998,  102/
103:569-580
de Visser JAGM, Hoekstra RF and van den Ende H The effect of sex
and deleterious mutations on fitness in Chlamydomonas. Proc
Roy Soc London B 1996, 263:193-200
de Visser JAGM, Hoekstra RF and van den Ende H An experimen-
tal  test  for  synergistic  epistasis  and  its  application  to
Chlamydomonas. Genetics 1997, 145:815-819
de Visser JAGM, Hoekstra RF and van den Ende H Test of interac-
tion between genetic markers that affect fitness in Aspergillus
niger. Evolution 1997, 51:1499-1505
de Visser JAGM and Hoekstra RF Synergistic epistasis between
loci  affecting  fitness:  evidence  in  plants  and  fungi.  Genet  Res
(Cambridge) 1998, 71:39-49

23.

22.

25.

24. West  SA,  Peters  AD  and  Barton  NH  Testing  for  epistasis  be-
tween deleterious mutations. Genetics 1998, 149:435-444
Elena SF and Lenski RE Test of synergistic interactions among
deleterious mutations in bacteria. Nature 1997, 390:395-398
Elena SF Little evidence for synergism among deleterious mu-
tations in a nonsegmented RNA virus. J Mol Evol 1999, 49:703-
707

26.

Page 13 of 14
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/3

27.

28.

Peters AD and Keightley PD A test for epistasis among induced
mutations  in  Caenorhabditis  elegans.  Genetics  2000,  156:1635-
1647
de la Peña M, Elena SF and Moya A Effect of deleterious muta-
tion-accumulation on the fitness of RNA bacteriophage MS2.
Evolution 2000, 54:686-691

29. Wloch  DM,  Borts  RH  and  Korona  R  Epistatic  interactions  of
spontaneous  mutations  in  haploid  strains  of  the  yeast  Sac-
charomyces cerevisiae. J Evol Biol 2001, 14:310-316

30. Whitlock MC and Bourguet D Factors affecting the genetic load
in  Drosophila:  synergistic  epistasis  and  correlations  among
fitness components. Evolution 2000, 54:1654-1660

32.

31. Hofacker  IL,  Fontana  W,  Stadler  PF,  Bonhoeffer  S,  Tacker  M  and
Schuster  P  Fast  folding  and  comparison  of  RNA  secondary
structures. Monatshefte für Chemie 1994, 125:167-188
Fontana W and Schuster P Continuity in evolution: on the na-
ture of transitions. Science 1998, 280:1451-1455
Schuster P and Fontana W Chance and necessity in evolution:
lessons from RNA. Physica D 1999, 133:427-452
van Nimwegen E, Crutchfield JP and Huynen M Neutral evolution
of mutational robustness. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:9716-
9720

34.

33.

35. Higgs  PG  RNA  secondary  structure:  physical  and  computa-

tional aspects. Quart Rev Biophys 2000, 33:199-253

36. Wilke CO Selection for fitness versus selection for robustness
in  RNA  secondary  structure  folding.  Evolution  2001,  55:2412-
2420

37. Gavrilets  S  Evolution  and  speciation  on  holey  adaptive

landscapes. Trends Ecol Evol 1997, 12:307-312

38. Huynen MA, Stadler PF and Fontana W Smoothness within rug-
gedness: the role of neutrality in adaptation. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1996, 93:397-401

39. Bornberg-Bauer E How are model protein structures distribut-
ed in sequence space? Biophysics Journal 1997, 73:2393-2403
40. Gavrilets S and Gravner J Percolation on the fitness hypercube
and the evolution of reproductive isolation. J Theor Biol 1997,
184:51-64

41. Reidys C, Stadler PF and Schuster P Generic properties of combi-
natory  maps:  neutral  networks  of  RNA  secondary
structures. Bull Math Biol 1997, 59:339-397

42. Grüner W, Giegerich R, Strothmann D, Reidys C, Weber J, Hofacker
IL, Stadler PF and Schuster P Analysis of RNA sequence struc-
ture maps by exhaustive enumeration I: Neutral networks.
Monatshefte für Chemie 1996, 127:355-374

43. Grüner W, Giegerich R, Strothmann D, Reidys C, Weber J, Hofacker
IL, Stadler PF and Schuster P Analysis of RNA sequence struc-
ture maps by exhaustive enumeration II: Structures of neu-
tral networks and shape space covering. Monatshefte für Chemie
1996, 127:375-389

44. Ancel LW and Fontana W Plasticity, evolvability, and modular-

45.

46.

ity in RNA. J Exp Zool (Mol Dev Evol) 2000, 288:242-283
Steinberg S and Cedergren R Structural compensation in atypi-
cal mitochondrial tRNAs. Nature Struct Biol 1994, 1:507-510
Springer MS, Hollar LJ and Burk A Compensatory substitutions
and  the  evolution  of  the  mitochondrial  12S  rRNA  gene  in
mammals. Mol Biol Evol 1995, 12:1138-1150

47. Hou Y-M and Schimmel P Functional compensation of a recog-
nition-defective  transfer  RNA  by  a  distal  base  pair
substitution. Biochemistry 1992, 31:10310-10314
Stephan W and Kirby DA RNA folding in Drosophila shows a dis-
tance  effect  for  compensatory  fitness  interactions.  Genetics
1993, 135:97-103

48.

49. Bastolla  U,  Roman  HE  and  Vendruscolo  M  Neutral  evolution  of
space  and

model  proteins:  diffusion 
overdispersion. J Theor Biol 1999, 200:49-64

sequence 

in 

50. Taverna DM and Goldstein RA Why are proteins so robust to

51.

site mutations? J Mol Biol 2002, 315:479-484
Suzuki M, Christians FC, Kim B, Skandalis A, Black ME and Loeb LA
Tolerance of different proteins for amino acid diversity. Mo-
lecular Diversity 1996, 2:111-118

52. Daugherty PS, Chen G, Iverson BL and Georgiou G Quantitative
analysis  of  the  effect  of  the  mutation  frequency  on  the
affinity maturation of single chain Fv antibodies. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2000, 97:2029-2034

53. Voigt CA, Mayo SL, Wang Z-G and Arnold F Directing the evolv-
able: utilizing robustness in in vitro evolution. In: Robustness (Ed-
ited by: Jen E) 

55.

54. Huang W and Palzkill T A natural polymorphism in β-lactamase
is a global suppressor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997, 94:8801-8806
Sideraki V, Huang W, Palzkill T and Gilbert HF A secondary drug
resistance  mutation  of  TEM-1  β-lactamase  that  suppresses
misfolding and aggregation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:283-
288

56. Chao  L  Evolution  of  sex  in  RNA  viruses.  J  Theor  Biol  1988,

133:99-112

57. Burch CL and Chao L Evolution by small steps and rugged land-

scapes in the RNA virus Φ6. Genetics 1999, 151:921-927

58. Moore FB-G, Rozen DE and Lenski RE Pervasive compensatory
adaptation in Escherichia coli. Proc R Soc Lond B 2000, 267:515-
522

59. Rokyta  D,  Badgett  MR,  Molineux  IJ  and  Bull  JJ  Experimental  ge-
nomic  evolution:  extensive  compensation  for  loss  of  DNA
ligase activity in a virus. Mol Biol Evol 2002, 19:230-238

60. Davidson EH Genomic Regulatory Systems. San Diego, CA, Aca-

demic Press 2001, 

61. Mukai T The genetic structure of natural populations of Dro-
sophila  melanogaster.  VII. Synergistic  interaction  of  sponta-
neous  mutant  polygenes  controlling  viability.  Genetics  1969,
61:749-761

62. Zuckerkandl E Intrinsically driven changes in gene interaction
complexity. I. Growth of regulatory complexes and increase
in number of genes. J Mol Evol 2001, 53:539-554

Publish with BioMed Central   and  every 
scientist can read your work  free of charge

"BioMed Central will be  the most  significant development for 
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."

Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:

available free of charge to the entire biomedical community

peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance

cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central 

yours  — you keep the copyright

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

BioMedcentral

Page 14 of 14
(page number not for citation purposes)

