3
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
9
2
 
 
 
1
2
1
3
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A. A. Kozlov 
 
ON PHYSICAL NATURE OF RADIATION REGULATING QUANTITY OF CELLS 
IN POPULATION  
 
Laboratory of Development Biology, Department of Biology, Tbilisi State University, 01043, 
Tbilisi, Georgia  
E-mail: <alekskoz@rambler.ru> 
 
 
 

Keywords: unicellular culture, mechanisms of regulation, UV radiation.  
 
 

Our  previous  experiments  have  shown  that  a  certain  physical  radiation  restricts  the 
quantity of cells (infusoria) in developing culture “from above”.  Given report describes the 
series  of  experiments  which  enabled  to  determine  the  nature  of  this  phenomenon.  Occurred 
that this radiation belongs to UV spectral region with the wave range (200-290) nm.  

Defined  has  been  influence  of  concentration  of  nutrient  medium  on  dynamics  of 
development  of  unicellular  culture  conditioned  by  different  transparency  of  different 
concentration nutrient medium to the UV radiation.  
 

As  reported  in  [1,2],  total  quantity  of  cells  (infusoria)  in  the  culture  is  regulated  by 

radiation originating from these cells, however, the nature if this radiation remains unclear.  

In  principle  the  mentioned  regulating  radiation  may  have  either  electromagnetic  or 
sound nature. At that, this radiation is to be outside the spectrum (electromagnetic and sound) 
which  naturally  exists  in  environment;  otherwise,  the  signal/noise  ratio  will  be  low  for 
reliable  isolation  of  desired  signal.  Besides,  radiation  energy  must  be  enough  for 
implementing  the    regulatory  function.  Therefore,  we  assumed  that  sound  radiation  of  the 
cells and their electromagnetic radiation in far infrared area are not likely to trigger observed 
effect.  

 
 
Materials and methods 

 

For  the  first  series  of  experiments,  in  order  to  define  the  region  of  electromagnetic 
spectrum  able  to  exert    regulatory  function  in  the  cells  of  the  culture  the  vessels    made  of 
plexiglas  divided  into  three  sections  have  been  used.  Compartment  A  (volume  5  cm3)  was 
separated  from  compartment  B  (volume  150  cm3)  with  5  mkm  thick  fluoroplastic  film, 
whereas compartment C (volume 5 cm3) and compartment B were separated with 1 mm thick  
plexiglas  plate  –  see  Chamber  1  (Figure  1a).  In  the  second  series  the  plates  were  replaced 
with 1 mm thick quarts cuvette A with two matted opposite facets and 1 mm thick plexiglas 
cuvette C.  Operational volumes of the cuvettes are 5 cm3
, volume of compartment B – 150 
cm3 – see Chamber 2 (Figure 1b). 

Tightness of fluoroplastic film has been checked using luminescent dye thripaphlavine 
solution. The transmission spectrum of the fluoroplastic film, quarts and plexiglas are given in 
Figure 2.  
 

1 

A

C

B

A

C

B

Figure 1a.                                                         Figure 1b. 
Chamber 1.                                                       Chamber 2. 

.  

I (%)

80

60

40

20

0
200

1

2

250

300
 (nm)

350

400

 

 
Figure 2.    Transmission spectrum of  quarts, fluoroplast and plexiglas  
curve 1- quarts, curve 2 - fluoroplast,  curve 3 - plexiglas 

As given in Figure 2, one millimeter thick plexiglas cuts off the spectral region with l

 
 290 nm. In this area transmission of the 5 mkm thick fluoroplast film changes from 47% to 

13%,  for the quarts cuvette   reduces from 90% to 84%. 

In  all  of  the  three  compartments  (or  cuvettes)  nutrient  medium  (hay  broth)  with 
infusoria  Colpoda  or  Paramecia  with  similar  initial  concentration  of  cells  at  the  stage  of 
exponential growth has been poured in. In 12-16 days, when the culture enters into the quasi-
permanent phase  of development, concentration of the cells in the mentioned compartments 
has been measured.     
 

 
Results and discussion 

In  all  experiments  small  concentration  of  cells  in  quasi-stationary  phase  has  been 

observed in compartment C, as it has been expected to be in the small volumes [1,2].  
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

3

2 

l
£
Average concentration of infusoria Colpoda in compartment  C in this phase is in the 
order of 103 cm-3, whereas for infusoria Paramecia the value is about 50 сm-3. At the same 
time  it  should  be  mentioned  that  these  values  vary  from  test  to  test.    Therefore,  for  the 
clearness  of  quantitative  results  in  each  case,  irrespective  to  the  species  of  infusoria, 
concentration  of cells in compartment C was recognized as 1, while concentrations in other 
compartments  has  been  expressed  as  fraction  of  1.  Figure  3  shows  results  of  the  series  of 
experiments. 
 

        1                                    2                                     3                        

   A       B        C                A       B       C                 A       B       C           
 

Figure 3.    Relative concentration of cells in quasi-stationary phase of development 
according to the series of experiments. 
Vessel 1 –(Figure 1а), Colpoda,  5 mkm fluoroplastic film partition (5 experiments). 
Vessel 2 - (Figure 1а), Paramecia, 5 mkm fluoroplastic film partition (2 experiments). 
Vessel 3 - (Figure 1б), Paramecia, 1 mm quarts cuvette (3 experiments). 
А, В and С – concentration of cells in the mentioned compartments and cuvettes. 

As given in the figure above, qualitatively the situation in all of the cases is identical, 
as for the qualitative difference  - it is rather slight, so all the results can be combined into one 
histogram which as given in Figure 4. 
 

          А                             В                             С

 

 
Figure 4.    Relative concentrations of cells in quasi-stationary phase in volumes A, B 
and C averaged by all series  

In the article [1,2] assumption is made that the factor regulating the upper quantity of 
the  cells  in  the  culture  is  a  certain  radiation  generated  by  the  cells  themselves  when  a 

3 

 
 

 
 

volumetric  density  reaches  a critical value after which no subsequent cell division happens. 
Average volumetric density of this radiation is directly proportional to the volume where the 
cells are cultivated and inversely proportional to the surface area through which the radiation 
is  lost.    Therefore,  critical  density  of  radiation  “switching  off”  the  cell  division  in  smaller 
volumes is attained at higher concentration of cells than in larges volumes. 

Figure 4 shows that the lowest concentration is observed in compartment B as it has 
been expected for the larger volumes. In the similar size compartments and cuvettes A and C 
concentration of cells is different: average concentration of cells in compartment C versus that 
in compartment A makes СС/СА = 1.95– 0.17. Ultraviolet constituent does not get from C to B 
compartment since it can not penetrate the plexiglas barrier. Therefore, concentration of cells 
in  this  compartment  is  similar  to  that  which  should  be  observed  in  smaller  compartments 
(СС/СВ  =  2.80– 0.32).  At  the  same  time,  a  certain  portion  of  UV  constituent  gets  from 
compartment B into A where it sums up with cells radiationю Because of that, critical density 
of  the  flow  of  regulating  radiation  in  this  volume  is  achieved  at  lower  concentration  of  the 
cells: СА/СВ = 1.50– 0.16. 

The following control has been performed: similar concentration of Paramecia culture 
were  placed  in  compartments  A  and  C,  compartment  B  was  filled  up  with  pure  nutrient 
medium.    The  test  was  performed  three  times  and  revealed  that  average  ratio  of  cell’s 
concentration makes: СА/СС = 1.06– 0.09. This means that the difference in concentration of 
cells  in  A  and  C  compartments,  when  B  is  filled  up  with  infusoria  culture,  is  due  to  the 
penetration of UV constituent of the cells radiation through the fluiriplastic membrane or the 
quarts cuvette. 

Thus, we can assert that radiation, regulating quantity of cells in infusoria culture, is 
of  electromagnetic  nature  and  belongs  to  the  UV  spectral  region  between  290  and  200  nm. 
Wave lengths below 200nm are strongly absorbed by nutrition medium, so their participation 
in the process is less likely. 

After the mentioned results were obtained it was assumed advisable to check how the 
nutrition medium of different optical density changes dynamics of development of the culture. 
In order to examine that nutrition mediums with two different concentrations were selected. 
As  the  first  medium  a  broth  -  5  g  of  dry  Melilotus  officinalis  per  one  liter  of  water  (this 
concentration  has  been  assumed  as  100%)  had  been  prepared:  The  second  nutrient  medium 
was  made  by  four  fold  dilution  of  this  broth  (25%  solution).  The  measured  transmission 
through 10mm medium stratum is shown in Figure 5. The chart presents transmission in per 
cents versus wave length in nm. 
 

220

270

370

320

l  (нм)

 

 
Figure 5.    Transmission spectra for nutrition media of different concentration 
Curve 1 – concentrated medium (100%), curve 2 – diluted nutrition medium (25%). 

The  figure  shows  that  even  in  the  short  wave  part  of  presented  spectra  nutrient 
medium is rather  transparent. On these two  media  placed in cylindrical vessels by 50 ml in 

I (%)
100

80

60

40

20

0

2

1

4 

each  (three  vessels  per  one  medium)  infusoria    Colpoda  has  been  cultivated.  Average 
concentration versus time is plotted in Figure 6.  
 
 

C (см-3)
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0

С (см-3)
60000

2

9

3

7

1

11

13

1

 

2

5
с  у  т  к  и

40000

20000

 
 
1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15
10
с  у  т  к  и
 
 
Figure 6.    Average concentration of cells versus time for different nutrition medium  
Curve 1 – concentrated medium, curve 2 - diluted. For comparison, in the right upper 
corner embedded is concentration of cells versus time in two different capacity vessels 
[1].  Curve 1  corresponds to 30 cm3, curve 2 – for 3 сm3  chambers. 

30

20

25

0

5

0

 

After these results were obtained we have got a possibility to make some conclusions.  

As mentioned in [1,2], at initial stage of development of the cultures in different size 
(volume)  vessels  that  in  the  larger  volume  developes  faster.  This  phenomenon  has  been 
explained  by  induced  triggering  of  cell  division  since  the  density  of  inducing  radiation  in 
larger  vessels  is  higher  than  in  the  smaller  ones.  Figure  6  shows,  that  at  the  early  phase  of 
development of the culture in identical size chambers development in the chamber with lower 
concentration  of  nutrition  medium  goes  faster.  The  effect  can be explained  by the  fact,  that 
UV  photons,  triggering  cells  division  in  concentrated  nutrition  medium  absorb  at  smaller 
distances.   

Besides, the figure shows, that in the chambers with concentrated medium maximum 
concentration  of  the  cells  is  higher  than  that  observed  in  the  chambers  with  diluted  broth 
whereas if the concentration of medium is identical concentration of cells occurs to be higher 
in the larger vessels (see embedded chart, Figure 6). The reason for that is the same: photons 
regulating quantity of cells in the culture belong to the UV spectral region, thus, in order to 
reach this density of irradiation required for realization of this function, concentration of cells 
in larger volumes and in concentrated medium must be higher than in the lower  concentration 
medium. Conclusion can be made that photons triggering cells division (wave length 250nm) 
and  photons,  regulating  quantity  of  cells  in  the  culture  have  energy  of  the  same  order  of 
magnitude (or are even similar).. 

 

 
 

 

 

Thus,  “dark  or  superweak  chemiluminescence”  of  cells  the  study  of  which  has  been 
initiated by A.G.Gurvich and his school and continued in the 60’ies (for example see [3]) has 
no  effect  on  staring  of  cells  division  process  [4,5]  but  is  the  factor  restricting  maximum 

Conclusion  

 
 

5 

quantity  of    cells,  i.e.  radiation  is  not  merely  a  byproduct  of  cells  metabolism,  but  has 
significant biological function. 
 
 

References  

 
1. A.A.Kozlov. About the physical mechanism of self-control of number of cells in a 
population. // Biophysics (Biophisika), (2001), 46, 5, 879-884 (in Russian) 
2. A.A.Kozlov. Autoregulation of the total number of cells in culture // 
http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0301072 
3. G.M.Barenbojm, A.N.Domanskij, K.K.Turoverov. "Luminescence of  Biopolymers and 
Cells" // (1966), M:, "Nauka",  233 p (in Russian) 
4.  A.A.Gurwitsch,  L.D.  Gurwitsch.  Introduction  in  Mitogenesis  Teaching.  //  М:,  by  AMS                    
USSR, 1948, 114 p (in Russian). 
5. A.A.Kozlov. About a role of ionizing and electromagnetic radiations in regulation of speed 
of cells division. // The author's Abstract of the dissertation on competition of a scientific 
degree of the candidate of physical and mathematical sciences (1975), TSU (Tbilisi State 
University), Tbilisi. 

6 

