 
 
Degeneracy in the genetic code and the theory of quadratic 
forms. 
 
 
 
 
Jean-Luc Jestin 

UnitØ de Chimie Organique, DØpartement de Biologie Structurale et Chimie, Institut Pasteur 

28 rue du Dr. Roux, 75724 Paris cedex 15, France 

 
 
Why is the genetic code the way it is? The most successful theory states that the codon 
assignments minimise the effects of errors arising in primordial living systems1-5. Here a 

transversion  is  reported  that  leaves  invariant  degeneracy  in  the  genetic  code.  A  model 

was  established  to  address  the  question:  How  should  sets  of  synonymous  codons  be 

chosen to minimise the deleterious effects of non synonymous substitutions? It is shown 

that the arithmetic theory of quadratic forms provides the framework for degeneracy in 

the genetic code.  

Let  us  consider  the  general  case  of  a  degenerate  code  of  n  codons  that  are  k-bases  long, 
(b1b2(cid:133)bk). The degeneracy pattern is such that there are  ω sets of synonymous codons. The 

average  number  S  of  non-synonymous  substitutions  over  the  entire  coding  sequence  of  the 

replicating  system  can  be  written  as  a  function  of  the  number  of  non-synonymous 

substitutions for each set a of synonymous codons: 

ω

Σ Sa = S

a=1
 

(1)

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2

Let  us  formulate  the  number  of  non-synonymous  substitutions  Sa  for  a  set  of  synonymous 

codons a as a function of the number of substitutions of any codon i into any codon j. It is the 

sum  over  all  synonymous  codons  of  the  number  of  mutations  to  any  codon  that  does  not 

belong to the set of synonymous codons: 

 
~
Xa M ya = Sa
 

(2)

M is the nxn matrix with coefficients mij, which are the number of substitutions of codon i into 

codon j (mij = 0 for i = j). This general formalism takes into account the fact that the fidelity of 

nucleic acid polymerases is highly dependent on sequence context. xa is the vector (x1, x2(cid:133), xn) 

with xi = 1 if codon i belongs to the set a of synonymous codons or otherwise xi = 0; the symbol 

~ on a vector indicates its transpose, 1 is the n-tuple (1, 1,(cid:133), 1), ya the vector (y1, y2(cid:133), yn) and 

ya  =  1  -  xa.  tRNA-mis-aminoacylation  which  alters  the  number  of  non-synonymous 

substitutions, can be further taken into account as factors correcting xa and ya. For each codon i 

belonging to the set a of synonymous codons, mis-translation by this mechanism is equivalent 
to setting xi = αi with αi taken as a rational close to 1, higher than 1 and varying with codon  i 
belonging to the set a of synonymous codons; otherwise αi = 0 for codon i not belonging to the 

set a of synonymous codons. Furthermore, the substitution of codon i of the set a into the non-

synonymous codon j combined with an appropriate tRNA-mis-aminoacylation is equivalent to 
a correct translation of codon i and therefore not counted as a non-synonymous substitution: βj 
is introduced as a rational close to 1, smaller than 1 and varying with codon j such that yj = βj 

or otherwise yi = 0 if codon i belongs to the set a. The left part of equation (2) is a quadratic 
form, whose 2nx2n  matrix  is symmetric6. The quadratic  form  is considered over the set Q of 

rational numbers. 

For two quadratic  forms to be equivalent over Q,  it is  necessary and sufficient that they are 
equivalent over each Qp and over R=Q∞.(6) So as to be independent of the vector basis chosen 

(including the order of the n codons), the class of equivalent quadratic forms associated to the 

set  a  of  synonymous  codons  is  further  considered.  A  class  of  quadratic  forms  over  Qp  is 

defined by its invariants, which are respectively the rank, the determinant d which is part of 

the quotient group Q*p/Q*p

2 and the Hasse invariant ε which equals –1.(6)  

 

 

 

 

 

3

The degeneracy pattern of the genetic code can then be mapped to the invariants of the set of 

classes  of  quadratic  forms  of  dimension  n  ≥  3  over  Qp  (Figs.  1  and  2).  The  invariants 

characterise the sets of synonymous codons. The set of 64 codons can be divided into a set of 

32 codons noted group (IV) whose third base does not have to be specified so as to define an 

amino acid. For the other 32 codons, noted group (II), three bases have to be specified so as to 

define  unambiguously  an  amino  acid  or  a  stop  signal.  Rumer  observed  that  there  exists  a 

unique symmetry exchanging group (IV) into group (II) which substitutes G into T, T into G, 
C  into  A  or  A  into  C  and  which  applies  to  all  codon  bases7.  Another  unique  symmetry 

described here exchanges each group into itself by substitution of G into C, C into G, A into T 

or  T  into  A  applied  to  the  first  codon  base  (Fig.  2.1).  It  is  also  clear  for  the  vertebrate 

mitochondrial genetic code that a transition applied to the third codon base is a synonymous 

mutation (Fig. 2.2). Given a codon assigned to a group, the three symmetries define a set of 

three  codons  whose  group  assignments  are  then  predicted.  The  three  symmetries  are 

associated to all three types of base substitutions, transitions and transversions. For p≠2, there 

are 8 classes of quadratic forms over Qp (cf. group (IV)) and for p=2 there are 16 classes (cf. 
group (II)). The Hasse invariant ε which equals –1, can be associated to the unique symmetry 

exchanging  each  group  into  itself.  The  determinant  has  4  representatives  for  p≠2  (cf.  group 

(IV)) and 8 representatives  for p=2 (cf. group (II)). The determinant belongs to the quotient 
2 which can be considered for p≠2 as a two dimensional vector space over the 

group Q*p/Q*p

field F2 of two elements (cf. group (IV) for which two bases have to be defined) and for p=2 

as a three dimensional  vector space over F2 (cf. group (II) for which three  bases  have to be 

defined). 

 

In  this  model,  the  four  bases  are  associated  to  the  two  elements  of  the  field  F2  for  both 

conditions p=2 and p≠2. This model confirms that three base codons are sufficient. It puts also 
an upper limit to the number ω of synonymous codon sets present in the genetic code of 24 = 

16  +  8.  Twenty  amino  acids  belong  to  the  standard  set  of  amino  acids,  as  one  set  of 

synonymous codons is attributed to the stop signal and as the three amino acids encoded by 

six codons in the standard genetic code Leu, Arg and Ser are considered each as two sets of 

synonymous  codons,  one  belonging  to  group  (IV)  and  one  belonging  to  group  (II).  The 

number of amino acids coded within the genetic code varies among the various known genetic 
codes:  their  diversity  has  been  described  by  evolutionary  models8-9  and  can  be  created 
experimentally10.  It  is  often  associated  to  start  and  to  stop  signals  whose  codon  assignment 
was observed to optimise the tolerance of polymerase-induced frameshift mutations11.  

4

Minimisation  of  non-synonymous  substitutions  might  be  sufficient  to  define  the  assignment 

of amino acids to given groups of codons. 

In conclusion, the theory of quadratic forms provides the algebraic framework to define sets 

of synonymous codons together with the relations between these sets, as found in the quasi-

universal degeneracy pattern of the genetic code. 

Sonneborn T. M. in Evolving genes and proteins (eds V. Bryson, V. & Vogel, H. J.) 

377-397 (Academic Press, New York, 1965). 

2. 

Goldberg A. L., Wittes R. E. Genetic code: aspects of organization Science 153, 420-

3. 

Maynard-Smith  J.  &  Szathmary  E.,  The  major  transitions  in  evolution  (Freeman, 

4. 

Freeland S. J. et al. Early fixation of an optimal genetic code Mol. Biol. Evol. 17, 511-

424 (1966). 

Oxford, 1995). 

518 (2000). 

5.  

Eigen M. Selforganization of matter and the evolution of biological macromolecules. 

Naturwiss. 58, 465-523 (1971). 

Serre, J. P. A course in arithmetic (Springer, New York, 1973). 

Shcherbak,  V.  I.  Rumer’s  rule  and  transformation  in  the  context  of  the  co-operative 

symmetry of the genetic code J. Theor. Biol. 139, 271-276 (1989). 

8. 

Jukes  T.  H.  &  Osawa  S.  Evolutionary  changes  in  the  genetic  code  Comp.  Biochem. 

Physiol. 106B, 489-494 (1993). 

9. 

Ninio, J. The revised genetic code Orig. Life Evol. Biosphere 20, 167-171 (1990). 

10.  D(cid:246)ring, V. et al. Enlarging the amino acid set of Escherichia coli by infiltration of the 

valine coding pathway Science 292, 501-504 (2001). 

11. 

Jestin,  J.  L.  &  Kempf,  A.  Chain-termination  codons  and  polymerase-induced 

frameshift mutations FEBS Letters 419, 153-156 (1997). 

 
 
 
 
References. 
 
 
1. 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

6. 

7. 

5

 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements. 
 
The author is greatly indebted to A. Kempf, G. Christol, F. Guichard, F. Courtes, Y. Benoist, 

S. Wain-Hobson and V. Shcherbak  for discussions and  for criticisms. The author thanks the 

Ecole Normale SupØrieure for library facilities.  

Correspondence. 

It should be addressed to the author (e-mail: jjestin@pasteur.fr). 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure legends. 
 
 
Figure 1.  
p  is  a  prime  number,  Qp  the  field  of  p-adic  rational  numbers,  ε  the  Hasse  symbol,  d  the 

determinant, F2 the field of two elements. 

Group (IV) contains all codons for which the third codon base (N) does not have to be defined to 

specify an amino acid. Group(II) contains the other 32 codons. N = A,T,G or C; Y = T or C; R = A 

Figure 2.1.  

or G.  

Figure 2.2.  

A hyphen indicates a stop signal. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

6

 

 
 

 
 
Figure 1. The classification of quadratic forms of dimension n≥3 over Qp 
 
For p≠2, they are 8 classes of quadratic forms. Their invariants are: 

2 which has 4 representatives 

 

 
 
For p=2, they are 16 classes of quadratic forms. Their invariants are: 

and which can be considered as a 2-dimensional vector space over F2 

 

and which can be considered as a 3-dimensional vector space over F2 

2 which has 8 representatives 

ε = – 1 
d in Q*p/Qp
 

ε = – 1 
d in Q*p/Qp
 

Figure 2.  Two representations of the genetic code(cid:146)s degeneracy pattern 

2.1. A representation of the transformations conserving or exchanging the 
degeneracy pattern 
 

Group (IV)

G

C

G

C

A T

G C

G

C

C

T

Transversions (GC/AT)
applied to the first codon base

N

Transversions (GT/AC)
applied to all three codon bases

Group (II)

T

A

T

A

C G

T

A

T

A

A

G

Y/R

Y/R

Y/R

Y/R

Y/RY/R

Y/R

Y/R

Transitions (GA/CT)
applied to the third codon base

 
 
2.2. A representation of the vertebrate mitochondrial genetic code 
 
 
Gly 
 
GGG 
GGA 
GGC 
GGT 
 

/   CCG      ACG   /   TCG  
    CCA      ACA       TCA  
    CCC      ACC       TCC  
    CCT      ACT       TCT  

/  CGG  
   CGA  
   CGC  
   CGT  

GCG 
GCA 
GCC 
GCT 

Ala       Pro 

Thr       Ser  

GTG    /   CTG 
GTA        CTA 
GTC        CTC 
GTT        CTT 

    Leu 

   Arg  

Val 

 

Phe\Leu   Ile\Met  Tyr\-     Asn\Lys  His\Gln   Asp\Glu  Cys\Trp    Ser\-  
 
TTT\TTG / ATT\ATG  TAT\TAG / AAT\AAG  CAT\CAG / GAT\GAG  TGT\TGG  / AGT\AGG 
TTC TTA   ATC ATA  TAC TAA   AAC AAA  CAC CAA   GAC GAA  TGC TGA    AGC AGA 

     

