Data Acquisition Systems and Computing Infrastructure of the IBR-2 
Complex: Present and Near Future

A.S.Kirilov, F.V.Levchanovski, V.I.Prikhodko

Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, 141980 Dubna, Moscow reg., Russia

 1.Introduction

In the period 2003-2009 in the Frank Laboratory of Neutron Physics, JINR, the total
modernization    of  the  IBR-2  pulsed  reactor,  which  is  mainly  used  for  investigations  in
condensed matter physics using thermal neutron scattering will be carried out (it is planned
to  replace  the  movable  and  stationary    reflectors  and  reactor  jacket,  to  conduct  fuel
reloading,  to  update  the  automated  system  for  measurement    and  control  of  the  reactor
parameters,  etc).  The  main  aims  of  the  IBR-2  modernization    are  to  improve  the  reactor
parameters and to increase the nuclear safety and reliability of the reactor. In the mentioned
period  the  development  of  new  instruments  and  modernization  of  the  existing  neutron
spectrometers are planned as well. In this connection in FLNP the 7-years program of the
development of DAQ system and computing infrastructure  was worked out.

The  main  problems  in  building  new  DAQ  systems  for  neutron  spectrometers  are
reliability,  cost,  time  of  development  and  commissioning  and  rapid  system  adaptation.
Adaptability  is  of  key  importance  since  it  gives  the  flexibility  to  meet  unknown  future
needs.

Since in multi-layer architecture of DAQ systems the only part, which can be easily
modified  is  software,  it  is  necessary  to  begin  the  digital  signal  processing  as  early  as
possible. It was precisely this approach  that was  used when designing unified VME DAQ
systems now in service at the IBR-2 spectrometers.

     2.VME  data acquisition and control systems 

During the last years practically on all the IBR-2 spectrometers the measuring and
control  systems  were  changed  over  to  a  new  generation  of  electronics,  computers  and
software on the basis of VME systems and workstations integrated into the FLNP local area
network [1].

Data acquisition systems

All  digital  electronics  is  placed  in  VME  crates,  equipped  with  standard  purchased
modules  (processor  E17  with  a  memory  module,  disk  subsystems,  input/output  registers,
ADC/DAC  module,  network  interface,  RS232  serial  ports)  as  well  as  with  modules
developed in FLNP, which are specific for neutron time-of-flight experiments. The digital
systems  for  registering  and  accumulating  data  from  different  detectors  of  the  instruments
represent  a  unified  set  of  identical  (from  the  viewpoint  of  hardware)  modules  limited  in
type  but  functionally  complete.  The  systems  realize  distinction  in  parameters,  functional
capabilities,  encoding,  correction  and  preliminary  data  processing  procedures,  that  are
specific  to  each  spectrometer  on  the  level  of  microprograms,  electronic  tables,  switches,
etc.

For  any  IBR-2  spectrometer  the  data  acquisition  and  accumulation  system  is
equipped with the following basic modules (Fig.1): interface modules of position-sensitive
detectors,  module  for  encoding  the  point  detector  number,  processor  module,  histogram
memory and RTOF-analyzer.

The  main  part  of    DAQ  system  is  located  in  the  processor  module  (based  on  the
high-performance  DSP  ‘C40)  which  is  responsible  for  ping-pong  data  buffering  for  each

1

cycle  of  the  reactor,  data  format  transformations,  calculating  neutron  position  codes  in
linear  and  two-coordinate  position-sensitive  detectors,  computing  neutron  TOF  correction
(time focusing), calculating addresses for the histogram memory, as well as for controlling
the  parameters  of  the  reactor  and  spectrometer,  different  fault  conditions  and  executing
commands of the VME system.

Instrument and sample environment control systems

Fig. 1. Data acquisition architecture.

In  the  specified  spectrometers  a  rich  variety  of  equipment  for  positioning  samples
and detectors (goniometers, rotary platforms, step motors), and for changing conditions on
a  sample  (temperature,  pressure,  magnetic  field,  etc.)  is  used.  Control  systems  of  this
equipment are also unified and consist of the following subsystems:

−  Control systems for executive mechanisms (step motors, etc.);
−  Regulation systems based on the Euroterm, LTC or DRC regulators (temperature);
−  Systems for acquisition of analog parameters from sensors of various types;
−  Systems for controlling logical parameters.

2

Software

On  all  the  spectrometers  the  standard  software  SONIX  [2]  developed  in  FLNP  is
used.  The  SONIX  programs  are  run  by  the  VME  processor  in  the  real  time  operating
system  OS-9.  The  SONIX  has  a  modular  structure  and  includes  the  following  functional
blocks:

Name
Join
Tofa
Unipa
Motor
Temp
Graph
Vsp
MAX

Module function

Script interpreter
DAQ control
Control over a neutron beam and sample environment parameters 
Control over goniometers and other step-motor driven devices 
Control over furnaces/refrigerators 
Visualization protocol (temperature, etc.)
Visualization of one-dimensional spectra (on-line and off-line)
On-line visualization programs (1D, 2D)

The  tasks  specified  in  the  table  are  configured  according  to  the  requirements  of
concrete  spectrometers.  The  OpenG2  programs  based  on  the  PV-WAVE  commercial
package  are  adapted  for  visualization  of  spectra  from  one  and  two-coordinate  detectors.
These programs provide preliminary processing, analysis and visualization of experimental
data.

As noted above, the electronics and software of data acquisition and control systems
are  chosen  from  a  set  of  unified  electronic    and  program  modules,  depending  on  the
equipment  composition  of  spectrometers,  type  and  number  of  detectors,  and  the  required
parameters  (number  and  width  of  time  channels,  delays  relative  to  the  reactor  startup,
temperature  range,  etc.)  are  programmed  or  set  at  the  level  of  blocks  (DSP)  or  SONIX
program modules.

During  the  experiment,  data  (spectra)  are  accumulated  in  histogram  memory,
written  on  a  disk  of  a  VME-computer  and  are  transferred  to  the  SUN-cluster  for
preliminary processing and visualization. The control over the experiment can be exercised
from any computer of the FLNP local network.

Using the same principle, DAQ systems for future spectrometers and experiments at

Development of DAQ and control systems

the modernized  IBR-2 reactor, will be designed.

The main directions of these works:

•  Integration of PCs into the structure of VME DAQ systems. 
•  Integration of  PCs into separate measurement and control subsystems and creation of

PC mini-farms for controlling spectrometers and data processing.

•  Development  of  new,  specific  for  neutron  experiments,  electronic  modules  with
improved  characteristics  with    due  regards  to  natural  progress  in  designing  and
manufacturing of electronic components. This will make it possible:
—  to  increase the counting rate of DAQ systems up to 107-108 events/s;
—  to extend the histogram memory volume up to tens of G bytes ;
—  to improve the accuracy of measurements and to increase the number of registered and

controlled parameters;

—  to use more sophisticated algorithms for correcting and processing data, etc.
•  Galvanic isolation of detector electronics.
•  Reduction of the number of our own developments and orientation to a wide application

of  industrial standards and systems, as well as commercial software products.

3

•  Application of new technologies for designing DAQ systems, primarily mezzanine and

network technologies.

At present, works are carried out in all specified directions, two of them will be considered
in more detail.

Use of VME-PCI adapters

Though  even  now  VME  systems  operate    successfully,  moral  aging  of  computers
(processor module E17 based on Motorola 68040 processor) and slow development of the
OS-9  operating  system  call  for  modernization  of  the  existing  systems.  This  is  especially
true for the spectrometers with position-sensitive detectors, where data flow is an order of
magnitude  higher.  Unfortunately,  the  replacement  of  VME  processor  blocks  by  modern
analogues  also  demands  the  upgrading  and  software  development  tools,  which  is  very
expensive in the aggregate. 

The approach that has been accepted in a number of Institutes makes it possible to
achieve  new  quality  and  find  a  cheaper  direction  for  the  future  modernization.  The  main
idea of this solution consists in replacing the VME processor block by an external computer
(PC  or  others)  connected  to  the  VME  crate  using  VME-PCI  adapter.  Upon  this
manipulation,  the  VME  crate  from  an  independent  computer  is  turned  into  a  complex
controller,  control  over  which  is  completely  transferred  to  the  external  computer.  This
approach  allows  one  to  retain  already  created  hardware  blocks  in  the  VME  standard,
though  it  requires  the  renewal  of  software.  If  a  PC  with  Windows  operating  system  is
chosen as an external computer, the difficulties connected with the replacement of software
are  significantly  minimized,  and  the  user  has  the  possibility  to  work  in  habitual,  friendly
environment, rich in various useful software products. 

The change of the software platform will also permit us to develop significantly the
Sonix software complex, which was hampered by a limited number of means available in
the  Laboratory  for  developing  software  in  the  OS-9  environment.  The  use  of  Windows
instead of OS-9 will make it possible:

•  to remove a barrier between data processing programs on the basis of PV-WAVE, IDL

packages and control systems of spectrometers;

•  to give rise to wide introduction of modern data formats (Nexus, XML, etc.);
•  to apply the advanced programming technologies;
•  to facilitate the inclusion of programs for primary data processing into the structure of
spectrometer software, which were developed by physicists for PC or borrowed in other
neutron centers.

For the centralized storage of experimental data from the IBR-2 spectrometers it is
proposed to organize a special server based on a powerful computer on the Intel platform
with disk RAID-array. Files with all measured data will be automatically transferred to this
server  from  control  computers  of  the  spectrometers.  The  server  is  intended  for  long-term
storage  of  spectra  and  to  provide  shared  access  to  them,  including  from  outside  the
Laboratory.  The  server  also  can  be  used  to  publish  periodically  updated  information  on
current state of measurements at the spectrometers in WWW.

For  organization  of  remote  control  over  measurements  and  remote  access  to  the
spectrometers  via  Internet,  the  scheme  used  as  the  basis  for  the  BARNS  system  [3]
operating in ILL, and for the IBR-2 monitoring systems [4] available in FLNP, is proposed.
On  the  dedicated  computer  a  special-purpose  web-server  is  installed,  which  provides
periodically  updated  information  on  the  state  of  measurements  in  Internet.  By  users’

4

request this server contacts the file server and generates a web page with the spectrum of
interest and/or state of measurement on a concrete spectrometer.

The  first  experience  in  using  the  VME-PCI  adapter  (Model  617  by  the  SBS  firm)
[5] was gained on the NERA-PR spectrometer. This system of alternative control that was
in  service  for  three  last  cycles  of  the  IBR-2  in  2002  demonstrated  high  stability.  In  the
future similar works will be carried out for other spectrometers as well.

Integration of PC into detector system

In  cooperation  with  HMI,  Berlin,  a  new  version  of  the  unified  TDC/DSP  DAQ
block for acquisition and accumulation of data from position-sensitive detectors (multiwire
proportional chamber with delay line data readout), was developed and manufactured (Fig.
2). It comprises 8-channel TDC of F1 type (Acam), FIFOs of different types, CPLDs, 256
Mbyte histogram memory and DSP TMS 320C6711. In the block, the determination of X/Y
coordinates of the event (by signals from both ends of the delay lines) and neutron time of
flight  from  the  reactor  start  to  the  moment  of  detection,  is  executed;  for  the  methodical
purposes  the  amplitude  of  signals  is  measured  as  well.  Two  main  operating  modes  are
provided:  histogram  (on-line  sorting  of  data  and  building  of  spectra)  and  "list"
(accumulation  of  raw  data  with  subsequent  off-line  processing).  It  is  also  possible  to
simultaneously accumulate histograms (for experiment control) and to write raw data. The
TDC/DSP block has a PCI-interface and is installed directly in the case of PC. At present,
the  adjustment  of  electronics  and  debugging  of  microprograms  (DSP)  of  the  block  are
under way.

Fig. 2. TDC/DSP block with PCI interface.

For this block the architecture was developed and the debugging of the prototype of
the  program  driver  was  carried  out.  The  driver  provides  interaction  between  the  program
modules of the low (DSP) and following (PC) levels for several variants of basic software
packages: C++, PV-WAVE, ROOT.

The software should be realized as a complex of independent program modules that
includes  a  set  of  programs  for  the  DSP  processor,  which  can  be  loaded  directly  into  the
program memory of the block, program driver of the TDS/DSP block, program modules of
intermediate  layer  and  program  applications  providing  a  full  set  of  functions  to  control
operation of the block, to read and visualize the accumulated data.

5

Thus,  the  detector  system  is  created,  which  will  include  the  detector,  detector
electronics,  registration  and  data  accumulation  subsystem,  PC  and  software.  In  essence  it
will  be  complete  autonomous  elements  of  spectrometers  that  are  built  in  any  experiment
control system.

     3. FLNP information and computing infrastructure

Now the FLNP LAN is characterized by the following parameters: 

−  number of nodes  > 500
−  data transfer rate – up to 100 Mbit/s (via optical and twisted pair cables)
−  number  of  workstations  and  servers  –  20  (including  SUN  Sparc,  Ultra  SUN  Sparc,

Enterprise 3000)

−  services – WWW, e-mail, databases, general purpose software, etc.

A  historically  established  star-like  communication  structure  (8  buildings  within  a
radius of 1 km) and the absence of intellectual control devices do not make it possible to
distribute  flows  between  users  in  an  optimal  way.  In  addition,  the  transition  of  the
experiments conducted with the FLNP facilities to a distributed model of data storage and
processing  also  increases  load  on  LAN.  The  possibility  of  experiment  control  imposes
much  stricter  requirements  to  such  network  parameters  as  package  transportation  time
and percent of losses.

In  2001,  a  long-term  project  of  modernization  of  infrastructure  of  LAN  basic
segments and key elements was developed. At the first stage of the project (2001-2003) in
LAN  the  router  of  information  flows  CISCO  8510  (with  interfaces  for  optical
communication lines between buildings and twisted pairs to connect SUN-cluster servers)
was  put  into  operation.  In  all  buildings  high-speed  switches  Catalist  29XX  (CISCO)  for
communication with the network central segment were installed (Fig. 3).

Fig. 3. Current topology of the central core of the FLNP LAN.

6

The fulfillment of the specified works made it possible:

—  to  increase  real  throughput  of  the  network  by  50-60  %  without  changing  physical

interfaces;

—  to provide mechanisms of control, analysis and filtration of the network traffic;
—  to extend address space (at present, up to 4000 IP-addresses);
—  to  organize  virtual  subnetworks  for  groups  of  users  (or  spectrometers)  irrespective  of

their geographical location (in 2002, four subnetworks were created);

—  to  provide  a  guaranteed  passband  for  the  most  important  network  applications  (for

example, for concrete spectrometers).

The  main  objective  of  further  LCN  development  is  to  design  a  fully  redundant  high-
speed core by installing second router 85XX. The availability ot two routing switches and
duplicated trunk communication channels will permit a gradual changeover to the Gigabit
Ethernet technology. In addition, there will be a possibility of automatic load distribution
over the communication channels on the basis of traffic classification. In case of failure of
the  network  core  components,  the  data  transfer  will  be  resumed  in  a  few  seconds.  The
failure-resistance  in  this  network  structure  will  be  provided:  on  physical  level  –  by  the
availability  of  no  less  than  two  connection  from  each  node;  on  logical  level  –  by  using
protocols, which make it possible to re-direct data flows if the connection fails.

References:

[1]. Proceeding of DANEF’97, pp. 153-162, JINR, E10-97-272, Dubna, 1997
[2]. Proceeding of DANEF-2000, pp. 206-211, JINR, E10-2001-11, Dubna, 2001
[3]. http://barns.ill.ft
[4]. http://nfdfn.jinr.ru/flnph/ibr-2/ibr2_monitoring.html
[5]. http://arXiv.org/abs/cs.HC/0210014

7

