B0.8-C3.2-D3.6-0002-02
 
 
 
 

CHARGED GRAINS IN SATURN'S F-RING: INTERACTION WITH 
SATURN'S MAGNETIC FIELD 
 
 
L. S. Matthews and T. W. Hyde 
 
Center for Astrophysics, Space Physics, and Engineering Research 
Baylor University, P.O. Box 97310, Waco, Texas 76798-7310, USA 
 
 
ABSTRACT 

 
Saturn's  dynamic  F-Ring  still  presents  a  challenge  for understanding  and  explaining  the  kinematic  processes  that 
lead to the changing structure visible in our observations of this ring.  This study examines the effect of Saturn's 
magnetic field on the dynamics of micron-sized grains that may become electrically charged due to interaction with 
plasma in Saturn's rigidly corotating magnetosphere.  The numerical model calculates the dynamics of charged dust 
grains  and  includes  forces  due  to  Saturn's  gravitational  field,  the  plasma  polarization  electric  field,  a  third  order 
harmonic expansion of Saturn's magnetic field, and the F Ring's Shepherding moons, Prometheus and Pandora.  
 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 

Nearly a quarter of a century ago, man obtained his first clear pictures of one of the jewels of the solar system.  
Voyagers 1 and 2 sent back dramatic high-resolution images of Saturn's moons and ring system revealing surprises 
such as the density waves and spokes in Saturn's B Ring. One of the most intriguing puzzles, though, was Saturn's 
dynamic and ever changing F Ring, first discovered by Pioneer 11 (Gehrels et al., 1980). While Voyager 1 images 
showed three distinct ringlets with the outer two displaying a kinked and braided appearance (Smith et al., 1981), 
Voyager 2 images showed a much more regular structure with four separate, non-intersecting strands (Smith et al., 
1982).  Both  Voyager  1  and  Voyager  2  detected  brighter  clumps  within  the  rings  with  a  temporal  dependence 
ranging from days to months (Showalter, 1997).  

Several studies attempted to explain these unique features through gravitational interactions with the F Ring's 
shepherding moons or imbedded moonlets, while others looked at the possible interactions between charged grains 
and Saturn's magnetosphere.  Twenty years later, as we await the arrival of Cassini, the latest probe sent to Saturn, 
the factors governing the dynamics of the F ring are still unclear. 

Detailed photometric studies of the data collected by the Voyager probes indicated that the F Ring consisted of 
a 1 km core of centimeter-sized particles, with an envelope of micron and sub-micron material extending inward 
approximately  50  km  (Showalter  et  al.,  1992).  The  Hubble  Space  Telescope  was  able  to  glean  additional 
information  from  a  stellar  occultation  during  Saturn's  ring  plane  crossing  in  1995.    The  data  from  this  study 
corroborated the evidence for the existence of a core with an interior envelope, but suggested that the majority of 
the material was 10 µm or larger with a lower cutoff in size of 0.3-0.5 µm.  Additionally, an upper limit for the 
amount of submicron material was set at 28% (Bosh et al., 2002).  It has since been postulated that the difference in 
the two data sets may be due to temporal variations in the ring structure. 

The F Ring lies within the inner part of Saturn's magnetosphere, which contains plasma that rigidly corotates 
with  the  planet  (Grün  et  al.,  1984),  and  thus  the  dust  in  Saturn's  F  Ring  can  become  charged.    Since  the  plasma 
parameters in the vicinity of the F Ring are poorly constrained, the magnitude of the charge on the dust grains is not 
well known.  Estimates of the charge on micron and submicron grains within the F Ring have ranged from less than 
one  electron  (Showalter  and  Burns,  1982)  to  q  =  C(–38  V)  (Mendis  et  al.,  1982),  where  C  ≈  4πεoae-a/λD  is  the 
capacitance  of  a  spherical  grain  of  radius  a  immersed  in  a  plasma  with  Debye  length  λD  (Whipple  et  al.,  1985).  

Charged  grains'  orbits  will  be  perturbed  by  the  planetary  magnetic  field  with  the  magnitude  of  this  perturbation 
depending  primarily  on  the  grain's  charge-to-mass  ratio.  In  addition,  the  gravitational  interaction  of  a  nearby 
satellite  with  a  narrow  ring  produces  a  wave  downstream  of  the  moon.    Eccentricities  in  the  orbit  of  either  the 
satellite or the ring can produce azimuthal clumping, having a spatial periodicity initially equal to the wavelength 
due to the perturbing satellite (Kolvoord et al., 1990).  The purpose of this study is to examine the interaction of 
weakly charged grains with Saturn's magnetic field and the F Ring's shepherding moons, Prometheus and Pandora.  
Complications not addressed in this study are the inclination of the F Ring and satellite orbits, collisional damping 
between  ring  particles,  collective  effects  of  the  charged  grains  and  plasma,  and  the  effect  of  moonlets  imbedded 
within the ring. 

 

NUMERICAL MODEL 
 
Box_Tree Code 

The numerical code employed in this study, box_tree, has been used to model a variety of systems consisting 
of both charged and uncharged grains in ring systems (Richardson, 1993, 1994), protoplanetary clouds (Richardson, 
1995,  Swint  et  al.,  2002),  and  laboratory  dusty  plasmas  (Vasut  and  Hyde,  2001,  Qiao  and  Hyde,  2003).    It  is  a 
combination  of  a  box  code,  which  specifies  the  boundary  conditions  and  allows  the  equations  of  motion  to  be 
linearized, and a tree code, which allows a rapid calculation of interparticle forces.  The code has been modified to 
include a spherical harmonic expansion model of Saturn's magnetic field as well as the gravitational potentials of 
the F Ring's shepherding moons, Prometheus and Pandora. 
 
Saturn's Magnetic Field 

The magnetic field around a planet can be regarded as the sum of the contributions from the planetary dynamo 
(internal  sources)  and  the  exterior  plasma  sheet  produced  by  the  interaction  of  the  solar  wind  with  the  planetary 
magnetic  field  (Connerney,  1993).  Generally,  for  points  to  the  interior  of  the  plasma  sheet,  this  contribution  is 
negligible when compared to the field due to internal sources and may be disregarded.  

The  magnetic  field  can  thus  be  calculated  at  any  given  point  using  a  spherical  harmonic  expansion  model 
where the magnetic field is defined as the gradient of a scalar potential. The coefficients in the spherical harmonic 
expansion  are  determined  by  best  fits  to  experimental  data  from  in  situ  measurements  made  by  Pioneer  11  and 
Voyagers 1 and 2. A number of researchers have presented various best-fit models; the most accurate of these for 
Saturn's magnetic field is the Z3 model (zonal harmonic of degree 3), an axisymmetric octupole with the rotational 
and magnetic axes aligned to within 0.1º (Connerney, 1993).  This is the model employed by this study. 
 
Shepherding Satellites 

The effect of the shepherding satellite is included as an external gravitational potential in the rotating frame.  
The  center  of  the  box  containing  the  ring  particles  is  on  a  circular  orbit,  by  construction.    Thus,  the  combined 
eccentricities of the ring and satellites (Bosh et al., 2002; McGhee et al., 2001) are mapped back to the satellites 
alone, following the procedure of Showalter and Burns (1982). 

An "eccentric displacement vector" E is defined with polar coordinates (ae, ω) where a is the maximum radial 
displacement  out-of-round  for  a  given  body,  e  is  the  eccentricity,  and  ω is  the  longitude  of  the  pericenter.    Any 
ring/satellite configuration can thus be described by a0, a1, E0, and E1, where the subscripts zero and one refer to the 
ring and satellite, respectively.  The effect of the satellite on the ring depends on E1 – E0.  By choosing to set E0' = 
0 and E1' = E1 – E0, all of the eccentricity can be assigned to the satellite.  The effect of the "primed" satellite on a 
circular ring is essentially the same as that of the unprimed scenario, in which both the satellite and the ring have 
eccentric orbits.  The reference longitude for the satellite's eccentricity is set at run time, so that the position of the 
satellite can be varied from closest approach to furthest approach as it passes the center of the box. 

 

Boundary Conditions 

The box_tree code makes use of periodic boundary conditions.  In the general case, ghost boxes surround the 
central box and particles that are near a boundary interact with ghost particles in the neighboring box.  As a particle 
leaves the central box, it is replaced by its ghost particle entering from the opposite side, keeping the total number 
of particles in the simulation constant (Richardson, 1993).   These boundary conditions were modified slightly to 
take advantage of special properties of the narrow F Ring. The box size was chosen to be much greater than the 
radial  width  and  vertical  thickness  of  the  ring.    Thus  particles  are  only  able  to  leave  the  box  in  the  azimuthal 
direction, requiring only two ghost boxes (Figure 1).  Because the box is a non-inertial, rotating frame, particles that 

are  displaced  inward  toward  Saturn  (-x  direction)  have  a  positive  azimuthal  drift  (in  the  +y  direction)  while 
particles displaced outward (+x direction) have a negative azimuthal drift.   

Since Prometheus, the inner shepherding satellite, leads the box, particles that are displaced inward and travel 
faster than the mean motion of the box will spend more time in its vicinity.  Likewise slower particles will spend 
more  time  in  the  vicinity  of  Pandora,  the  outer  satellite.    This  effect  was  modeled  by  tracking  the  number  of 
azimuthal boundary crossings, n, for each particle. The number of boundary crossings times the length of the box, 
nL, is added to the azimuthal position of the grain, and this adjusted position is used in calculating the grain-satellite 
separation and the gravitational force due to the satellite. The grain's unadjusted position within the box is used in 
calculating the effect of the azimuthally symmetric magnetic field. 
 
Equations of Motion 

P 

Rb 

Ω k 
 

S 

y 

A 

 

B 

L 

x 

 

 
Fig. 1. Boundary conditions in the rotating coordinate 
system.    As  particle  A  crosses  the  boundary  of  the 
central box, it is replaced by its ghost particle, B.  The 
position at B is used to calculate the force due to the 
azimuthally symmetric magnetic field. The position at 
A,  or  the  number  of  boundary  crossings  n  times  the 
box  length  L,  is  used  in  determining  the  distance 
between the particle and the shepherding satellite, S.

The  acceleration  of  a  charged  grain  in  a 
planetary magnetic field, B, and gravitational field is  

R
&&

=

(

BRE
&

+

×

)

−

R

φ∇−

  

(1) 

q
m

GM

p

3

R

 
where Mp is the mass of the planet, R is the distance 
from the center of the planet to the grain, and q and m 
are  the  grain's  charge  in  coulombs  and  mass  in 
kilograms, respectively. The grain-grain gravitational 
and electrostatic interactions are included in the -∇φ 
term, and are calculated by the tree code. The electric 
field, E = -(Ωp × R) × B(R), results from the relative 
motion  of  the  ring  particles  with  respect  to  the 
magnetic field corotating with the angular velocity of 
the planet, Ωp. 

zˆkΩ=kΩ

The equations of motion can be linearized in the 
box  frame,  which  is  rotating  about  the  planet  with 
 with magnitude 
constant angular velocity 
3).  Rb is the distance from the center 
Ωk = sqrt(GM/Rb
of the box to the planet center and M is the mass of 
the  central  planet.    Using  the  fact  that  Rb  >>  r,  the 
position of the particle within the box, the equations 
of  motion  can  be  linearized  by  expanding  about 
R = Rb(1 + r/Rb) and are given by 
 

 

 

Fx
=
&&
x

+

xyΩ2xΩ3
&&

+

+

&

m

, 

2
k

2
k

Fy
=
&&
y

−

2
yxΩ2
&
&&
k

+

m

, 

 

zΩFz
−
&&
z

=

+

z
&&

m

 

2
k

(2) 

 
 is the sum of the gravitational and electrostatic forces per unit mass due to all other particles and 

φ−∇=F

where 
the accelerations due to the magnetic field in each dimension are given by 

=x m
&&

−

B)RΩ
zx

p

+

By
&

z

−

Bz
&

k

]y

, 

 

[
(Ω

q
m

=

q
m

[
Bz
&

x

−

Bx
&

]z

, 

z
&&

m

=

(Ω

k

−

B)RΩ

x

p

x

+

Bx
&

y

−

By
&

.  

 

 

(3) 

[
−

q
m

m

y
&&
]x

 

 

 
NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS 
 
Epicyclic Motion 

The theory of the motion of charged dust grains within a rigidly corotating magnetosphere was developed by 
Mendis  et  al.  (1982)  and  termed  "gravitoelectrodynamics"  (GED).    The  motion  of  the  charged  grain  due  to 
interactions  with the  magnetosphere is treated as a  perturbation to the Keplerian orbit.  Highly symmetric dipole 

fields, such as Saturn’s, produce a perturbation which  may be described as  an elliptical gyration about a guiding 
center  moving  on  a  circular  orbit  with  angular  velocity  ΩG.    The  ratio  of  the  minor  to  major  axis  of  the  ellipse 
depends on the charge-to-mass ratio of the grains, approaching ½ as q/m → 0 and unity as q/m increases. The radial 
components of the magnetic field also produce oscillations out of the plane (Xu and Houpis, 1985). 

The individual orbits of weakly charged grains with varying charge-to-mass ratios were tracked to determine 
the magnitude of the perturbation caused by Saturn's magnetic field.  Each grain was given an initial zero velocity 
at the center of a 200 km box, centered at the mean orbital distance of the F Ring, and orbiting the planet at the 
mean Keplerian speed of the F Ring, Ωk = 1.168 × 10-4 rad/s.  The subsequent motion of the grains was tracked for 
several orbital periods without the gravitational interactions of the shepherding moons. 

The radial excursion of a charged grain from its initial position within the ring scales directly with its charge-
to-mass ratio.  The resulting orbits, adjusted for the motion of the guiding center, are shown in Figure 2 for grains 
with  charge-to-mass  ratios  ±  0.01  C/kg  to  ±  0.04  C/kg.  As  can  be  seen,  grains  with  |q/m|  =  0.01  C/kg  have  a 
maximum radial excursion of about 10 km, while that for grains with |q/m| = 0.04 C/kg is greater than 60 km.  Both 
the Voyager and HST data indicate that the radial width of the F Ring envelope is 50 km (Showalter et al., 1992; 
Bosh et al., 2002).  Requiring that charged grains be confined to the envelope thus sets a maximum |q/m| = 0.03 
C/kg for grains in this region.  Another striking feature of the envelope is that it is displaced inward from the F Ring 
core.  If  the  postulate  is  true  that  submicron  and  micron-sized  grains  produced  in  the  core  are  the  source  of  the 
material  in  the  F  Ring  envelope,  these  grains  must  be  negatively  charged,  as  only  negatively  charged  grains  are 
swept inward by Saturn's magnetic field. The magnitude of the out-of-plane oscillation is on the order of 3 km for a 
grain with q/m = ±0.04 (Figure 3).  This is in good agreement with the ring thickness range of 2-5 km derived from 
stellar occultation data  (Bosh et al., 2002). 

Effects of Shepherding Moons 

The  gravitational  perturbations  of  the  shepherding  moons  were  investigated  for  a  population  of  5000  grains 
within a 2800 km box. This is equivalent to modeling an entire ring with 1.5 × 106 grains. The grain radii ranged 
from 0.5 µm to 10.0 µm and followed a power law distribution with q = 3.5. Grains were initially established on 
stable orbits within the 50 km F Ring envelope without perturbations from shepherding moons.  The charged grains 
had epicyclic orbits about a guiding center while uncharged grains had local Keplerian orbits.  Estimates of plasma 
temperature and density in the F Ring range from 10 eV < kTe < 100 eV (Grün et al., 1984) and 10 cm-3 < no < 
100 cm-3  (Mendis  and  Rosenberg,  1996),  respectively.    For  this  study,  the  plasma  temperature  and  density  were 
assumed to be constant across the width of the box.  Using the values kTe = 20 eV, no = 100 cm-3, and dust density 
Nd = 30 cm-3 (Mendis and Rosenberg, 1996), calculated grain charges yield q/m = -3.8 × 10-6 C/kg for amax and  

 

 
 

Fig.  2.    Epicyclic  orbits  of  charged  grains  over  10 
orbital periods.  The x-axis is the radial offset relative 
to the center of the F Ring.  Azimuthal positions are 
adjusted  for  the  mean  motion  of  the  guiding  center. 
The  size  of  an  epicycle  depends  on  a  particle's 
charge-to-mass ratio, as indicated by the labels. 

  

 
Fig. 3.  Vertical motion of charged grains during 100 
orbital periods about Saturn.  Grains initially centered 
in the F Ring core undergo simple harmonic motion in 
the direction normal to the equatorial plane due to the 
northward  offset  of  Saturn's  dipolar  field.  Labels 
indicate the charge-to-mass ratio of a grain. 

q/m = -0.03 C/kg for amin (Barge, 2002).  It should be noted that grain charges vary only slightly for kTe < 25 eV 
and as a result the relative dust to plasma density ratio has a relatively small effect on the qualitative results of this 
study (Barge, 2002).   

Ring interactions were modeled with Prometheus and Pandora passing the box both singly and simultaneously. 
The data from multiple consecutive boxes was concatenated to form a larger ring section.  The adjusted azimuthal 
positions were used in plotting the ring configuration with overlapping data from individual boxes.  

The ring configurations before and after passage of Prometheus are shown in Figure 4 for both charged and 
uncharged grains.  In all three cases with uncharged grains, the passing moon(s) excited waves in the ring as shown 
in previous models (e.g. Showalter et al. (1992)) with the grains remaining in phase across the entire size range.  
However a distinct phase difference evolves for charged grains with the larger charged grains (a ≥ 3.0 µm) having 
very similar orbits to uncharged grains.  The smaller charged grains (a < 1.0 µm) were more strongly affected by 
the  inner  satellite  than  the larger  grains.    As  a  result,  a  clear  difference  can  be  seen  between  the  behavior  of  the 
charged and uncharged grains. 

The  resulting  grain  positions  for  an  extended  run  with  both  Prometheus  and  Pandora  is  shown  in  Figure  5. 
During the simulation, each satellite made three passes of the ring section, with the two moons first passing the ring 
section during the time interval of 1.0 × 105 to 1.7 × 105 s. The larger grains with low charge-to-mass ratios clearly 
show periodic clumping with spacing on the order of 10,000 km, which is analogous to structure observed in the 
Voyager data (Kolvoord et al., 1990).  The smaller grains, while exhibiting the waves produced by interaction with 
the shepherding satellites, do not form distinct clumps. 

CONCLUSIONS 

 

 

It has been shown that even weakly charged grains significantly affect the dynamics of the F Ring.  Sub-micron 
grains that obtain a small (negative) charge are swept inward from the core by Saturn's magnetic field.  A maximum 
charge-to-mass ratio |q/m| = 0.03 C/kg has been established for grains with stable orbits within the F Ring envelope. 
This is easily attainable for even low plasma densities in the F Ring; for example, a charge of one electron on a 
0.1µm ice grain will yield this value.  Gravitational interactions with the shepherding moons are also affected by 
the presence of charged grains. The different size populations exhibit phase differences in the wavy orbits imposed 
by  the  shepherding  moons,  with  these  phase  differences  perhaps  playing  a  role  in  the  formation  of  the  braids 
observed in the ring. Further separation based on size is also observed in the formation of clumps, which consist 
mainly  of  the  larger  grains  while  the  smaller  grains  are  dispersed  evenly  about  the  ring.  While  this  work  is 
preliminary, it does point to possible interesting macroscopic effects. The difference in size populations mentioned 
above may be detectable in the Voyager optical depth data taken at different wavelengths and should also be seen in 
the  data  gathered  by  several  of  the  instruments  on  the  Cassini  mission  which  will  reach  Saturn  in  2004. 
  

  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

Fig. 4. Ring configuration for interaction with Prometheus.  Grains with r < 1.0 µm are blue, 1.0 µm ≤ a < 3.0 µm are 
red, and a ≥ 3.0 µm are green.  The initial configuration of the ring is shown in (a).  Uncharged grains remain in 
phase (b), while a phase difference is visible for charged grains between the different size populations (c). 

 

 

 

Future work in this area will include additions to the 
code, such as angular momentum and energy transfer 
between  the  shepherding moons  and  ring.  A parallel 
version  of  the  code  is  under  development  that  will 
allow  data  for  higher  dust  densities  to  be  compared 
with optical depth data.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
Barge, L. A., private communication, 2002. 
Bosh,  A.  S.,  C.  B.  Olkin,  R.  G.  French,  and  P.  D. 
Nicholson,  Saturn's  F  Ring:  Kinematics  and 
particle  sizes  from  stellar  occultation  studies, 
Icarus, 157, 57-75, 2002. 

Connerney, J. P., Magnetic fields of the outer planets, 

J. Geophys. Res., 98, 18659-18679, 1993. 

Grün,  E.,  G.  E.  Morfill,  and  D.  A.  Mendis,  Dust-
magnetospheric  interactions,  in  Planetary  Rings, 
edited  by  R.  Greenberg  and  A.  Brahic,  pp.  275-
332,  Univ.  of  Arizona  Press,  Tucson,  AZ,  USA, 
1984. 

Fig.  5.    Ring  configuration  (a)  after  Prometheus  and 
Pandora's first pass and (b) after completion of three 
passes by each moon. The number of orbits refers to 
the motion of the box about Saturn.  
  

Gehrels, T., L. R. Baker, E. Beshore, et al., Imaging photopolarimeter on Pioneer Saturn, Science, 207, 434, 1980. 
Kolvoord, R. A., J. A Burns, and M. R. Showalter, Periodic features in Saturn's F ring: evidence for nearby 

moonlets, Nature, 345, 695-697, 1990. 

McGhee, C. A., P. D. Nicholson, R. G. French, and K. J. Hall, HST Observations of Saturnian satellites during the 

1995 ring plane crossings, Icarus, 152, 282-315, 2001. 

Mendis, D. A., H. L. F. Houpis, and J. R. Hill, The gravito-electrodynamics of charged dust in planetary 

magnetospheres, J. Geophys. Res., 87(A5), 3449-3455, 1982. 

Mendis, D. A., and M. Rosenberg, Cosmic dusty plasma, Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys., 32, 419-463, 1996.  
Qiao, K., and T. W. Hyde, Dispersion relations for thermally excited waves in plasma crystals, in press, J Phys A, 

2003. 

2002. 

1985. 

Richardson, D. C., A new tree code method for simulation of planetesimal dynamics, MNRAS, 261, 396-414, 1993. 
Richardson, D. C., Tree code simulations of planetary rings, MNRAS, 269, 493-511, 1994. 
Richardson, D. C., A self-consistent numerical treatment of fractal aggregate dynamics, Icarus, 115, 320-335, 1995. 
Showalter, M. R., Dynamics of clumps in Saturn’s F ring, Bull. Amer. Astronom. Soc., 29th DPS Mtg, 17.04, 1997. 
Showalter, M. R., and J.A. Burns, A numerical study of Saturn's F-Ring, Icarus, 52, 526-544, 1982. 
Showalter, M. R., J. B. Pollack, M. E. Ockert, L. R. Doyle, and J. B. Dalton, A photometric study of Saturn’s F 

Smith, B. A., L. Soderblom, R. F. Beebe, et al., Encounter with Saturn - Voyager 1 imaging science results, 

Smith, B. A., L. Soderblom, R. M. Batson, et al., A new look at the Saturn system - The Voyager 2 images, 

Ring, Icarus, 100, 394-411, 1992. 

Science, 212, 163-191, 1981. 

Science, 215, 504-537, 1982. 

Swint, G. S., and T. W. Hyde, Chondrule melting using resizing Box_tree code, Adv. Space Res., 29, 1311-1314, 

Vasut, J. A., and T. W. Hyde, Computer simulations of coulomb crystallization in a dusty plasma, IEEE 

Transactions on Plasma Sciences, 29, 231-237, 2001. 

Whipple, E. C., T. G. Northrop, and D. A. Mendis, The electrostatics of a dusty plasma, J. Geophys. Res, 90, 7405, 

Xu, R.-L., and H. L. F. Houpis, The stability of the Oscillation Motion of Charged Grains in the Saturnian Ring 

System, J. Geophys. Res., 90(A2), 1375-1382, 1985. 

 
E-mail addresses:  Lorin_Matthews@baylor.edu, Truell_Hyde@baylor.edu 
Manuscript received 19 October 2002; revised 26 February 2003; accepted 

