 

 

 

 

 

 

  

- 1 - 

IN MEMORY OF JULIAN SCHWINGER  
Mario Rabinowitz 
Armor Research   

 715 Lakemead Way, Redwood City, CA 94062-3922 

Mario715@earthlink.net 

Although he was the recipient of a Nobel Prize and despite the greatness of his 

accomplishments,  Julian  Schwinger  is  almost  an  unsung  hero  of  our  age  .    He  is 

relatively  unknown  to  the  general  population,  even  though  in  the  physics  community 

he was a renowned theoretician and teacher of physics.  He shared the 1965 Nobel Prize 

in physics with Richard P. Feynman and Shin'ichiro Tomonaga for their development of 

Quantum Electrodynamics (QED).  Of these three extraordinary physicists, and even of 

all  the  physicists  that  worked  on  QED,  his  work  was  the  most  rigorous  and 

mathematically exacting.   

      

 

Schwinger  received  his  Bachelor  of  Arts  degree  from  Columbia  University  in 

1936 at the age of 18, where his phenomenal skills in physics were quickly recognized 

by  his  professors.    He  went  on  to  get  his  PhD  in  physics  in  record  short  time  at 

Columbia at the age of 21.  His genius was clearly recognized by the elite members of 

the physics community.  Even before he received his doctorate, he co-authored a paper 

with Edward Teller; and such other notable physicists as Enrico Fermi and Hans Bethe 

also collaborated with him.   

Because  of  his  early  achievement  and  recognition,  it  may  seem  that  it  was  all 

smooth sailing through college for this prodigy, but it was not.  He came close to failing 

undergraduate chemistry at Columbia,  and it  is  rumored that he almost  didn't  get his 

doctorate since he didn't want to be encumbered by having to pass the tough reading 

exam  in  German.    Because  of  his  exceptional  ability  in  physics,  this  requirement  was 

waived.  Actually, if it weren't for his mentor and patron, Nobel Laureate I. I. Rabi, he 

might not even have earned his bachelor's degree. 

In  1934,  at  the  age  of  16,  Schwinger  entered  the  City  College  of  New  York.    At 

City  College,  he  greatly  impressed  Professor  Mark  Zemansky,  by  correctly  working 

every  problem  in  Zemansky's  Heat  and  Thermodynamics  book.  Apocryphal  stories 

abound that he rarely attended classes, and never finished a lab experiment -- after all, 

he  didn't  set  out  to  become  an  experimentalist.    What  is  certain  is  that  with  the 

- 2 - 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

exception of a few professors who recognized his genius and supported him, Schwinger 

was  in  administrative  trouble.      Rabi  came  to  the  rescue,  and  got  him  transferred  to 

Columbia  University.    Before  getting  his  bachelor's  degree,  he  essentially  finished  the 

research that was to become his doctoral thesis.   

Mainly  self-educated,  he  wrote  his  first  paper  in  1934  which  was  published  by 

the time he was 17.  It was "On the  Interaction of Several  Electrons,"  remotely related 

in content to his Nobel Prize work on QED which  crystallized 14 years later. His first 

really  important  paper  was  published  in  Physical  Review  in  1937,  just  before  his 

nineteenth birthday, on the scattering of neutrons by magnetic materials.  I think he was 

the first to suggest scattering of neutrons from ortho- and para-hydrogen to determine 

the neutron spin. 

His first teaching position was  at Purdue University from 1941 to 1943, where he 

went  from  instructor  to  assistant  professor.    He  is  still  fondly  remembered  there. 

Purdue  recently  gave  him  an  honorary  doctorate.    The  old-timers  still  recall  how  he 

kept his automobile clean and shiny, polishing it almost daily.  He may not have been 

able  to  afford  a  Cadillac  then,  but  a  shiny  Cadillac  and  immaculate  attire  became  his 

hallmark.   

From  Purdue,  Schwinger  went  on  to  the  Radiation  Lab  at  MIT.    Here  he 

published some of the finest work on synchrotron radiation.  His work there on radar 

from 1943 to 1945  was important to the US  in winning the Second World War.  By this 

time  his  work  was  well  known  to  an  even  larger  segment  of  the  physics  community, 

and  he  accepted  a  position  as  Associate  Professor  at  Harvard  University  in  1945.    He 

was promoted to full professor two years later at age 29.  

It is said that his class lectures verged on perfection and were delivered without 

ever looking at his notes. His lectures on nuclear physics were attended by students and 

faculty  alike  from  both  Harvard  and  MIT.    Herbert  Goldstein,  professor  of  physics  at 

Harvard and author of one of the foremost texts on classical mechanics, acknowledged 

his debt to Schwinger.  Schwinger joined the faculty of the UCLA physics department in 

1972 as University Professor, and maintained his affiliation there beyond his retirement.  

To Schwinger's great credit, he nurtured over 70 PhD students among whom were three 

Nobel Laureates: Ben Mottelson (physics, 1975), Sheldon Glashow (physics, 1979), and 

Walter  Gilbert  (chemistry,  1980).    To  my  knowledge,  this  is  the  largest  number  of 

- 3 - 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

doctoral  students,  as  well  as  the  largest  number  of  Nobel  Prize  winners,  that  any  one 

professor has ever fostered. He not only did great science himself, but also inspired his 

students. 

Like James Clerk Maxwell,  Schwinger was unusually honest in his publications, 

even  pointing  out  mistakes  he  had  previously  made.    He  freely  gave  seminal  ideas  to 

others which led to highly significant results and even the Nobel Prize without asking 

for credit.   He suggested to Sheldon Glashow that the weak and electromagnetic forces 

might  be  unified  into  the  electroweak  force.    He  suggested  to  Timothy  Boyer  that  the 

Casimir force might explain what holds an electron together.  His most recent interests 

were cold fusion and sonoluminescence.    

Schwinger was a  pioneering  theorist in cold fusion.  He felt that the bias of the 

physics community against cold fusion was based on inferences from hot fusion that are 

not valid in this new regime.  He argued that the defense of cold fusion can be simply 

stated, "The circumstances of cold fusion are not those of hot fusion."  He first submitted 

the results of his theoretical analysis of cold fusion to journals of the American Physical 

Society.  He received such harsh treatment in the denial of publication of this work that 

as a symbolic gesture, he resigned his membership from the American Physical Society.  

This was no small step for someone who had been a leading member for over 50 years.  

In doing so he said, "The pressure for conformity is enormous.  I have experienced it in 

editors'  rejection  of  submitted  papers,  based  on  venomous  criticism  of  anonymous 

referees.    The  replacement  of  impartial  reviewing  by  censorship  will  be  the  death  of 

science." 

(1990). 

Undaunted,  Schwinger  did  publish  papers  on  cold  fusion  in  other  forums.  He 

was the sole author of the following 8 papers on this subject:  

1.  "Nuclear Energy in an Atomic Lattice," Proceedings  of the  First Annual Conference on 

Cold Fusion   (Salt Lake City) pp. 130 - 136, March 28 -31 (1990). 

2.  "Nuclear Energy in an Atomic Lattice.1," Zeitschrift fur Physik D  15, pp. 221-225 

3.  "Cold Fusion: A Hypothesis," Zeitschrift fur Naturforschung  45a, p. 756 (1990).  

4.    "Cold  Fusion:    Does  It  Have  a  Future?"    in  Evolutional  Trends  of  Physical  Sciences.  

Germany: Springer Verlag 1991. (From a talk delivered in Tokyo, 1990) 

 
5.    "Phonon  Representations,"    Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences    87,  pp. 

6983 - 6984 (1990). 

- 4 - 

6.    "Phonon  Dynamics,"    Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences    87,  pp.  8370  - 

7.  "Nuclear Energy in an Atomic Lattice - Causal Order,"  Progress in Theoretical Physics 

8372 (1990). 

85,  pp. 711 - 712 (1991).   

8.    "Cold  Fusion  Theory:    A  Brief  History  of  Mine,"    Fourth  International  Conference  on 

Cold Fusion  (Maui, 1993) ICCF-4 Transactions of Fusion Technology  pp. ? - ? (1994). 

He also presented a colloquium at  MIT and the University of Pennsylvania entitled, "A 

Progress Report:  Energy Transfer in Cold Fusion and Sonoluminescence." 

When  I  first  read  Schwinger's  papers  on  cold  fusion,  I  thought  that  I may have 

spotted some errors in them.  So I wrote him a letter on September 24, 1990, respectfully 

raising a couple of questions.  I did not hear from him directly, but did speak with his 

devoted wife, Clarise.  Because of my great admiration for Professor Schwinger, in co-

authoring two reviews of cold fusion (International Journal of Theoretical Physics 33, 

pp. 617 - 670, 1994; and in Trans. Fusion Technol. 26, 3 (1994)) I felt badly about writing 

a critical review of his work.  I wrote, "We hope that Schwinger will address the issues 

raised and clarify the situation."  In hopes that he would resolve the questions that we 

raised,  I  again  wrote  to  him  in  early  1994  sending  him  a  copy  of  our  paper.    Perhaps 

because  he  was  ill,  he  neither  responded  privately  nor  publicly.    It  would  not  have 

troubled me if he had proven me wrong.     

I was profoundly saddened when I learned that he passed away on July 16, 1994.  

He was one of my heroes.  Even though I did not know him personally, I feel a personal 

loss as well as a loss to the world of one of the greatest minds of our time. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

