Improved Power System of the Future  
Mario Rabinowitz 
Armor Research,  715 Lakemead Way, Redwood City, CA 94062-3922 
Mario715@earthlink.net 

- 1 - 

Abstract 

This paper is intended to provide an insight into  physics and engineering that 

can modernize electric power systems.  Topics covered are Flexible ac transmission 

systems (FACTS), Custom Power, Greatly improved Capacitors, Electrical Insulation, 

Distribution Cables, Improved Polymeric Insulation, Underground Vault Explosions, 

Fault Location, Smart Cables, Neutral and Ground, Corrosion and Protection, 

Conventional Transformers, Compact Transformers, Ferroresonance, and Solid State 

Transformers.  
 

FACTS   

Just the plain FACTS 
 

Flexible ac transmission systems (FACTS) is a new up-grade technology that can 

increase the use-capacity of existing transmission and distribution assets, as well as 

change the impedance of lines in affecting how power is routed along these lines.  

Although similar narrower concepts like the Static Var Compensator (SVC) were 

already in existence, the broader FACTS concept was developed by EPRI.  FACTS was 

made possible by the advances in recent years of power electronics, utility-dedicated 

software and microcomputers, and fiber optic transmitters which permit signals and 

readings to be sent to or from high voltage levels.  An essential ingredient in FACTS is 

the rapid and precise switching in and out of large capacitor banks.  This is made 

possible by advances in solid state switches such as thyristors that makes them orders 

of magnitude faster, more precise, and more reliable than their mechanical switching 

counterparts, and also far superior to their gas discharge counterparts.  Switching by 

thyristor-constituted systems can (within limits) control phase angle, impedance, 

voltage, and current in ways that would otherwise not be possible with mechanical 

breakers and switches. This is a major new development in the way utilities can 

increase line load so that the issue of new lines and new access laws need not be 

broached.  For high power, the thyristor power loss in the forward direction is not 

negligible.  However, wide-bandgap semiconductors may alleviate this.  Scoping 

studies indicate the costs and cost savings achievable through FACTS.  Two such 

studies are available as EPRI reports EL-6943 volumes 1 and 2;  and another resource is 

the Proceedings of FACTS conferences, report TR100504. 

-1- 

 

 

 

Let us look at a few ways in which FACTS can operate.  Switching capacitor 

banks in series into overhead delivery lines reduces the impedance of the lines.  This 

process is intuitive as capacitive reactance simply subtracts from inductive reactance in 

a series circuit, decreasing the overall circuit impedance.  An inductor can be switched 

in from the line to ground to suppress voltage surges.  Less intuitive is the way a static 

var compensator operates to raise the voltage of an overhead line when drops in voltage 

threaten stability.  Here a thyristor switches in a capacitor from the delivery line to 

ground.  One might expect this shunt reactance to further reduce the line voltage.  

However, the proper application of a shunt capacitor in parallel with the line can 

increase the power factor and consequently increase the voltage  (reduce the voltage 

drop between the source and the load).  This is usually limited to about an average 20 %  

increase, though 50% may be possible in some cases.  When delivery line voltages drop 

to more than 80% of normal, a new type of shunt using a gate turn-off (GTO) thyristor 

does much better.  This system connects a dc capacitor that delivers accurately timed 

pulses of voltage to the delivery line to bring it back to its correct operating level.    

 

FACTS  can alter the impedance of a line and influence the routing of power 

within a system and between systems, thus giving practicality to the concept of a 

national grid.  In this use, it will be necessary to have a coordinated operation of FACTS 

devices.  As this application grows and becomes complex, the coordination will have to 

be so fast and precise that it will have to be computer controlled.  Presently, power flow 

over dc lines is controlled by power electronics since both voltage and current are 

determined by the rectifier and inverter stations at the two ends of the line.  When a dc 

line is embedded in an ac grid, the stability of the ac grid is enhanced by providing 

damping action at the converter controls.  FACTS can also supply suitable damping to 

stabilize an ac grid.  Harmonics that are deleterious both to customers and the utility's 

turbo-generation system can be significantly reduced by FACTS. 

FACTS operating systems 
 

Now, let's see what operating systems have employed FACTS. In 1991, AEP 

tested thyristor switching of a series capacitor bank on a 345 kV line in West Virginia.  

Subsequently, WAPA installed a similar system on a 230 kV line in Arizona which 

increased power transfer from 300 to 400 MW. The world's first large-scale FACTS was 

put into service on the BPA 500 kV, 2500 MW line in Oregon in 1993.  It is a thyristor-

controlled series capacitor (TCSC) system.   In 1995, TVA incorporated GTO thyristor 

modules capable of controlling 100 MW, which can interrupt current at any point in the 

ac cycle.  However, many utilities are taking a conservative approach in waiting for 

- 2 - 

-2- 

 

 

 

 

solid state devices to become more cost-competitive and proven in the field at high 

voltage and high power levels for long periods of time before committing to the large 

capital investment associated with FACTS.   

Custom Power 
 

The next 20 years will present both technical and business opportunity 

challenges to utilities in their distribution of electrical energy.  The evolving nature of 

distribution system operations and end-use equipment performance presents a mixed 

bag of tasks that will need to be well-executed for utilities to succeed in the new highly 

competitive marketplace.  Customers are demanding a more complex as well as more 

attractive set of products from utilities.  Concurrently, the changing industry 

environment places the returns to shareholders at risk.   Electrical utilities will be aided 

in meeting both their customer needs for custom power and their own need to be 

fiscally successful by appropriate software packages.  Distribution business strategies 

are as much a part of custom power delivery as are the technical devices needed to 

produce and deliver custom power.  

A growing number of loads are sensitive to customers' critical processes, which 

have costly consequences if disturbed by either poor power quality or (even worse) 

power interruption. It is estimated that power quality problems cost U.S. industry $26 

billion per year (cf. to Section  on Energy Storage, etc.).  Exacerbating this problem are 

an increasing number of loads which produce interfering noise on the power system.  

Regulators have already radically changed the business environment for the sale of 

electricity.  They may soon do so again by imposing penalties with respect to power 

quality and reliability.    

The expanded use of power electronic controls and equipment (e. g., in customer 

automation equipment) brings both desirable and detrimental aspects with it.  On the 

positive side, it can result in productivity improvement.  However, it also brings with it  

large inductive overvoltages which can also cause power quality problems for both 

customers and utilities.  Similarly, the high efficiency motors, adjustable speed drives , 

and high efficiency lighting with electronic ballasts that are gaining popularity also 

contribute to increased power quality problems.   

In response to this, a mission was embarked upon  to develop a new class of 

solid state devices which will be ready in the near future to enhance power system 

operation by ameliorating aberrations in power quality.  Power electronic components 

are used to switch power on or off in a matter of microseconds.  A single phase 

disturbance on a 3-phase system can be alleviated by quickly transferring power from 

- 3 - 

-3- 

 

 

 

 

 

 

the undisturbed phases to  the perturbed phase.  Power can also be transferred to 

energy storage apparatus for later use in case the system is upset.  By themselves, static 

var generators may introduce harmonics into the system.  Proper filtering can alleviate 

this, or a superconducting generator (cf. Section on ...Superconducting Generators) 

operated as a synchronous condenser would not introduce harmonics at all. 

Greatly improved capacitors 
 

New fast and high power solid state switching devices are at the heart of FACTS 

and make it possible.  The workhorses of FACTS are the capacitors.  The older kraft 

paper capacitors have been replaced with improved all-film cross-linked polypropylene 

capacitors. Because they represent a significant capital investment which also leverages 

real estate and expensive isolated high voltage platform cost due to their large size, 

some consideration should be given to developing greatly improved, lower cost, higher 

power density capacitors.  Since capacitors can be traced back to the Leyden jar in 1745, 

one might think that they are so well developed by now that there is little room for 

improvement.  Until recently, this view would have been correct.  However, exciting 

new developments at the Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) hold out the 

promise that capacitively stored energy density can be increased by more than a factor 

of a 100.  LANL has made small PZT (lead zirconium titanate) capacitors that store 36.7 
J/cm3.  This is 183 times higher energy density than conventional capacitors which 
typically store about 0.2 J/cm3.  They found no degradation in this performance after 
subjecting a PZT capacitor to 100 million cycles at 1000 Hz.   

It is likely that the exceptional performance of these small PZT capacitors will 

decrease as they are made larger and made to handle high voltages.  Nevertheless, even 

if this factor of 183 decreases to just a factor of 10 increase in power density and a factor 

of 2 less cost relative to a comparable conventional high power capacitor, this may 

translate into a significant cost reduction for FACTS.  A large savings may also be 

possible where ordinary power line series compensation capacitors are employed.  

Electrical Insulation 
 

A good insulator (dielectric) must meet two primary requirements:  It must have 

an electrical resistivity and a dielectric strength sufficiently high for a given application.  

Secondary requirements relate to thermal and mechanical properties.  Occasionally, 

tertiary requirements relating to dielectric loss and dielectric constant must also be 

observed.  For power systems, it is essential that the needed properties not deteriorate 

in a given environment and desired lifetime.  The delivery of electrical power depends 

critically upon the performance of electrical insulation.   

- 4 - 

-4- 

 

 

 

 

Any insulator with an operational dielectric strength of 100 to 300 V/mil (40 to 

120 kV/cm) may be considered good.  Many insulators listed with a dielectric strength 

more than an order of magnitude  higher than this, are ordinarily stressed at these 

lower values in practical operation for two reasons.   One is that the dielectric strength 

tends to fall off with thickness (more so for some materials than others).  The other is 

that imperfections in the form of voids, cracks, filamentary defects, and so forth  occur 

whenever long lengths and thick sections of insulating materials are manufactured.  

Dielectric strength is a measure of the electric stress on or through a dielectric.  It 

deteriorates with the ingress of water and with elevated temperature. 

Whenever two dielectrics are in series in an electric field, the electric stress E is 

 
higher in the medium of lower dielectric constant  κ by the inverse ratio of dielectric 
constants:  E2/E1 = κ
generally has a dielectric constant of 1, by a factor of 2 to 3 than it is in the insulator.  

2.  Therefore,  the electric field is higher in a defect, which 

/κ

1

Thus the greatest stress is placed on the weakest link.  Furthermore as is evident from 

Table 1, the dielectric strength is much less in the defect than in the insulator.  The 

defects or voids fill up with a self-destructive plasma that increases their size and 

exacerbates the effect.  Schemes such as oil impregnation are used when possible to fill 

the defects to increase both their dielectric constant and their dielectric strength.  

Table 1.  Properties of Various Insulators 

Insulator     Dielectric Strength   Diel. Const.  Tensile strength 
 

 

 

 

Flammability 

       (103V/mil) 
8 - 16   

 

Lexan  

Kaptan H 

Kel-F   

Mylar  

Parylene 

 

 

 

4 - 16   

Polyethylene 1 - 17   

Teflon  

1 - 7 

 

3 - 8  

2 - 6 

6 - 10   

 

 

 

 

 

3 

 

 

 

3 

2 

2 

    (103lb/in2) 
 
8 

 

 

 

20 

4-6 

4-5 

22 

5 

10 

 

 

 

 

 

 

yes 

yes 

no 

yes 

very low 

 

3 

2-3 

2-3 

 

 

 

self-extinguishing 

self-extinguishing 

0.1 

Air (1 atm. 1mm) 
1 
Note: Flammability is not for arcing byproducts. 103V/mil = 4 x 105V/cm.   103lb/in2 = 6.9 MPa. 
 

no 

0 

 

 

 

 

One theoretical limit of dielectric strength may be reached when the phonon 

generation rate due to electron acceleration and collisions exceeds the ability of the 

insulator to conduct heat away.  The dielectric would then fail by disintegrating.  Other  

mechanisms can lead to lower limits.   However, because of defects, it is as if the whole 

- 5 - 

-5- 

 

 

 

 

 

burden is placed on the component least able to handle it, and this generally results in the 

lowest limit.  It will be difficult to achieve large (order of magnitude) gains in dielectric 

strength in the near future, because of the difficulty in making large insulating sections 

defect free.  Even if insulators could be made defect free initially, at ordinary 

temperatures defects will appear spontaneously.  Perfect crystals do not exist above 

cryogenic temperatures because the minimization of the free energy implies that a crystal 

must have entropy associated with lattice imperfections.  So at non-cryogenic 

temperatures, defects will be generated to minimize the free energy.  Artificial gains can 

be achieved by reducing the margin of safety in operating closer to the dielectric strength 

limit, using thinner insulation, and compromising the longevity of the insulator. 

Distribution Cables 
Extruded cables 
   

Extruded dielectric cables using aluminum or copper conductors are the 

mainstay of distribution systems. They have the advantage of eliminating the need for 

insulating fluids like oil which have the potential for unfavorable impact when they 

leak into the environment.  There was a trend for them to come into more extensive use 

in transmission systems with the development of such cables at 138 and 230 kV,  until 

the relatively recent introduction of paper-polypropylene-paper oil static cables for use 

in the 115 to 345 kV range.  Research on extruded dielectric cables was directed at 

increasing their ratings to 345 kV, because compared to low-pressure oil-filled (LPOF) 

and high-pressure oil-filled (HPOF) cables using oil-impregnated cellulose tape 

insulation, extruded cables offer lower cost and are easier to install and maintain.  

However, difficulties in making splices has curtailed their introduction at the higher 

voltage levels, but this has not  been a problem at the lower distribution voltages.  

Properly manufactured extruded insulation has advantages for use as the dielectric in 

low temperature cables since this avoids intensification of the electric field in the lower 

dielectric constant cryogen that is present in lapped tape insulation. [1, 2]    

 

Of the three dielectrics that are commonly used, cross-linked polyethylene (XLPE) 

has a higher dielectric strength than ethylene propylene rubber, and XLPE is preferred 

over polyethylene because of polyethylene's lower softening point.  Ethylene propylene 

rubber is sometimes preferred because of its greater flexibility in colder climates.   Water 

treeing in particular, and electrical treeing in general is still a problem.  New materials 

retardant to water treeing are being studied, as well as watertight cable design.  Cables 

impregnated with silicone or other additives seem to better withstand treeing.  One  
project is studying the addition of pressurized SF6 to fill cables that are already full of 

- 6 - 

-6- 

 

 

 

trees, and thus extend their useful lifetimes. (Interestingly when pressurized, the 

breakdown characteristics of these cables are more like a gas than a solid indicating that 

this may be a fruitful approach.)  There is an incipient problem with underground vault 

explosions whose source is presently unknown. One possible solution is to develop 

insulations of generically different types as discussed in the next section.    

Improved Polymeric Insulation 
 

Significant introduction of new materials into power cables has not taken place 

since the development of polyethylene and polypropylene/paper cables.  Is this 

because, by serendipity, we found the best dielectrics a quarter of a century ago and can 

hardly improve on them?   This is not a derisive comment, as this often happens, as 

with barium titanate with a superhigh dielectric constant and remarkable ferroelectric 

properties.  Or more likely, is it because it does not pay for a manufacturer to develop 

and introduce a new product into a stable market that will compete with his already 

successful product?   

 

Improved insulation with higher dielectric strength would lead to thinner walled 

cables with a twofold benefit.  The thinner wall would permit retrofitting existing cable 

ducts to hold higher ampacity cables as the conductor diameter could then be increased.  

Additionally, the thinner insulation would make the cables more flexible and easier to 

pull through the ducts.  However, there is also a down side to thinner walls.  The higher 

dielectric strength permits the same voltage drop across a thinner wall, but the 

concomitantly higher electric field may give rise to faster growth of deleterious water 

and electrical trees unless the material itself is somehow more resistant to such growth.  

 

Possible polymers that look promising as extruded cable are TPX (4-

methyllpentene-1), Aurem (Polyimide), and SPS (Syndiotactic Polystyrene). An 

alternative approach uses these and non-thermoplastic polymers in a laminar film  

form.  PQ-100 (Polyquinoline) or Isaryl 25 can also be used in laminar form.  To 

improve the dielectric properties, cross-linkable silicone or 1, 4-polybutadiene based 

resin can be used to permeate the cable and fill the voids.  All these materials should be 

tested for electrical, mechanical, and combustion properties, as well as 

manufacturability.  After narrowing the list to the most promising contestants, 

accelerated aging tests need to be conducted to determine their dielectric longevity.  

Finally the manufactured cost of the material will likely have to be less than $10/lb with 

a resulting distribution cable capital cost as low as $1 to $2/foot ($5000 to $10,000/mi). .  

While the dielectric properties of the extant materials will probably not improve a great 

deal, their manufactured cost may drop.  We are always shooting at a moving target as 

illustrated in Table 2. 

- 7 - 

-7- 

 

 

- 8 - 

  

 

Table 2.  Target operating properties  

 

•  Dielectric Strength    

•  Dielectric Constant   

•  Loss tangent   

 

•    Operating Temperature   

 

 

 

 

>  6000 V/mil = 24 x 105V/cm.  
<  3.5 
<  10-3 
> 130 oC 

 

The dielectric constant needs to be low for 3 reasons.  One is to minimize the 

electric field amplification in voids.  Another is to keep the dielectric power loss low, 

which is proportional to the product of dielectric constant and loss tangent.  The third is 

to keep the cable capacitance low, and minimize wasteful charging currents.  Although 

it is difficult to compare dielectric data from different sources possibly using different 

test conditions, meeting these 4 target operating properties in a new material could lead 

to a 25% increase in ampacity.   

Underground vault explosions 
 

It is crucially important to find and correct the cause of underground vault 

explosions where access is provided for the distribution and transmission cables.  These 

occur often enough to be a serious problem, but are not yet pandemic.  This needs to be 

ameliorated before it becomes widespread.  It is known that in the presence of arcing, 

large hydrocarbons break down into small  hydocarbons, and that small hydrocarbons 

are explosive.  Possibly due to bad splices, arcing of insulations like polyethelene and 
polypropylene may produce acetylene (C2H2), methane (CH4), ethylene (C2H4),  
propylene (C3H6), etc.  Such gases can cause explosions in confined areas.  If this turns 
out to be the cause, this will greatly curtail underground power delivery of the near 

future until splices are sufficiently improved, or proper dielectrics for splices that are 

free of hydrocarbons are developed; or in the worst case scenario, a new insulation for 

the entire cable may have to be developed that is hydrocarbon-free such as teflon 

[carbon and fluorine], Kapton [carbon and nitrogen], Kel-F [carbon, fluorine, and 

chlorine], etc. (cf. Table 1).  

Attacking the underground explosion problem 
 

Unexpected and unknown explosive, combustible, toxic and other hazardous 

gases and particles can be introduced or released from a number of disparate sources in 

electric power delivery applications.  It has been very difficult if not virtually 

impossible to determine which gases and/or particles caused a fire or explosion after 

-8- 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

the event, as the gases have been ignited and dispersed.  For example, in underground 

distribution networks, violent explosions have occurred in access areas, splice boxes, 
and underground vaults under manhole covers.[3. 4]  In one unfortunate instance, a 
woman was killed who was driving near the scene of an explosion. 

Explosive, combustible, and other hazardous liquids, gases and particles can be  

released in a variety of ways.  These gases are sometimes generated by electrical arcing 

decomposition, hydrolysis, or thermal decomposition of materials.  These explosions 

can be prevented by precluding the precombustion culprit gases from building up and 

reaching a critical level as well as understanding their cause.  The underground 

explosion problem is being attacked in the following ways:     

  1.  Prevention of the buildup of vapors and particles so that the concentration stays  

   below the threshold for explosion. 

   made explosives e.g. by terrorists,  .   

  2.  Determination if the explosion was accidental, from natural sources, or due to man-   

  3. Determination of culprit gases, preferably before an explosion, but also after an  

   explosion.  If the culprit gases could be identified, this would be the first step in  

   the avoidance of such onerous occurrences .   

 

Until  these  approaches  are  adequately  developed,  methods  of  buttressing  the 

vaults, etc. to lessen the effects of such explosions are being implemented.    

Fault location  
 

 

Fault location in complex urban distribution systems is presently a difficult, time- 

consuming, labor-intensive activity.  One of the widely used methods involves a 

capacitor discharge through the cables with utility personnel periodically positioned with 

headphone sensors listening for the noise associated with arcing in the cable.  This is 

known as the Thumper/Acoustic method.  In order to be able to detect the acoustic signal 

from an arc, the applied voltage and current are so large that they may cause additional 

damage to the cable.  Another method is the Earth Gradient method. A voltage source is 

applied across a cable, and an attempt is made to detect the leakage current to ground at 

the fault location by measuring voltage gradient differences in the earth.  This method 

has locale limitations, as well as problems related to spurious sources of voltage gradient. 

A Fast Fault Finder is expectedto identify failed cable sections on underground 

distribution circuits with no taps, so they can be quickly isolated.  It uses transients 

created by the fault itself to locate the fault electronically.  Possibly by the judicious 

addition of high- frequency surge filters at junctures during cable installation, the Fast 

Fault Finder may be able to operate on even fairly complex circuits. If this is successful, 

because of its relatively low cost, it will probably be the method of choice for finding the 

- 9 - 

-9- 

 

 

 

 

- 10 - 

location of faults in the future.  For systems with wyes and tees, including networks,  

new methods are being developed for fault location involving very precise timing of 

electronic signals.  

The high impedance fault detector is commercially available from GE, and will 

detect dangerous faults that were previously not possible to detect.  It is mainly 

installed at substations, and can be used for both underground and overhead lines.  

Building on this technology, an overcurrent, ground, and adaptive relay function will 

be added, as well as low current, low voltage fault detection.   

Smart Cables 
 

Transmission and distribution (T & D) cables ultimately fail for various reasons 

including deterioration of insulation, overcurrents etc.  Fault locators will help in 

detecting the location of a fault in the cable network after it has occurred in the sense of 

being a fully mature fault.   It would be desirable, though more difficult, to determine 

where the fault will occur before it fully matures so that preventative action can be taken. 

Properly designed smart cables with built-in microscopic sensors should be able 

to permit locating an incipient fault before it happens, and even more easily locating the 

fault after it has occurred.  There may be enough changes in physical parameters to 

permit electronic determination that there is an incipient fault, and to locate it precisely. 

This would permit repair during routine maintenance. Although  technical feasibility 

needs to be established, economic feasibility will determine whether smart cables 

become part of the power delivery system of the future.  This will entail determining 

the economic value of taking remedial action before a fault has occurred, and thus 

avoiding the costs associated with down-time, locating the fault, and after the fault 

repair or replacement of the cable.  It may well be that smart cables will find a niche in 

those circuits where power  quality is at a premium.  
 
 
Neutral and Ground, Corrosion and Protection 
 

Previously,  utilities'  electrical  copper  neutral  and  ground  wires  were  usually 

connected to and thus protected by someone else's buried steel piping, etc.  This was no 

cause for concern in the past, as the corrosion of the steel was so slow that it could be 

ignored and occurred at someone else's expense.    

However  now  that  such  steel  grounding  is  not  readily  available,  the    utility's  own 

electrical copper is vulnerable to corrosion because of ac voltages on the neutral, and soil 

 

 

 

 

 

 

-10- 

- 11 - 

variations.  The electrolysis of the copper can be avoided by preventing transport of copper 

ions, and/or by preventing the exposure of the copper and formation of copper ions.   

Without  cathodic  protection,  copper  corrosion  may  result  in  electrical  shock 

hazards  to  utility  personnel  as  well  as  the  public;  and  serious  property  damage 

including loss of costly electrical equipment.  In the future, increased public awareness 

and  litigation  will  accelerate  the  need  for  mitigation  measures.    Because  of  the 

increasing trend toward undergrounding distribution cables, cathodic protection will be 

a requirement rather than an option in the future.   

Transformers 

Conventional transformers 
 

Conventional power transformers have efficiencies that can exceed 98%, and 

generally have a track record of high reliability.  While 98% efficiency is good, the 2% 

loss is primarily associated with core excitation losses which are present whether the 

transformer is loaded or not.  The amorphous core steel transformer is an improvement 

on conventional transformers, which reduces no-load losses on distribution 

transformers by 60-70%, i.e. the efficiency can be increased to over 99% with the 24-

hour/day core losses being cut more than a factor of 2.   

There have been problems with large high-voltage transformers that require 

flowing oil to provide insulation and adequate cooling.  In these transformers, oil flows 

through the windings to enhance heat transfer and at the same time assist the integrity 

of the electrical insulation. The oil flow transports electrical charge analogously to the 

operation of a Van de Graaff generator in which charge is carried by an insulating belt 

from ground to a high voltage terminal.  In the transformer, accumulation of charge 

builds up the voltage which can exceed the dielectric strength of the insulation.  The 

ensuing arc can lead to catastrophic failure of the transformer.   

Two techniques can ameliorate this so-called static electrification problem.  One 

is to increase the conductivity of the oil so that the charge leakage rate is high enough to 

prevent charge buildup.  The limitation of this is that the dielectric strength of the oil is 

concomitantly reduced.  The other technique is to place an additive such as 1,2,3 

Benzotriazole (BTA) in the oil which reduces the electrification buildup of charge 

density .  However,  the BTA also decreases the oil conductivity thus decreasing charge 

leakage.  New developments using combinations of additives show great promise in 

solving the transformer oil flow electrification problem.  Thus less charge is removed at 

the oil-solid interface, and sufficiently high dielectric strength is maintained.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

-11- 

- 12 - 

Solid encasement of transformer windings has always had the appeal of 

replacing flammable, explosive, and possibly toxic liquids like PCB.  PCB 

(polychlorinated biphenyl) was classified as a highly toxic, non-biodegradable pollutant 

under Title 40 of the federal regulations code.  Presently, alternate liquids are more 

costly and more flammable than PCB.  This makes it all the more desirable to look at the 

possibilities for solid fillers.  Solid encasement has had limited success.   However, it 

encounters a twofold problem since it must serve the dual purpose of providing both 

insulation and cooling.  From an insulation point of view, it must be void free for the 

same reason as discussed for cable insulation because the electric field is enhanced 

inside voids by the inverse ratio of dielectric constants.  From a cooling point of view, 

thermal conductivity is much less for  insulators than for conductors because phonon 

transport of heat is much less than electron transport at ordinary temperatures.  

However at cryogenic temperatures, phonon thermal conductivity in dielectrics can 

exceed that due to electrons and be adequately high.  Hence for a cryogenic 

transformer, one may well reconsider the use of solid encasement.  There is an 

interesting possibility that the Peltier effect can be incorporated for cooling in solid 

encasement, and other transformer insulation systems.   

Compact transformers 
 

A clear need and incentive exists to increase the power density in both 

transmission and distribution level transformers.  The former are so large that cooling is 

a substantial problem.  At the distribution level, there is a need to carry more power, 

and yet still fit the transformers in the existing limited underground vault space.  The  

turns ratio of the primary and secondary windings establishes the voltage step-up or 

step-down characteristic of the power transformer.  A single winding is sometimes used 

in a configuration referred to as an auto-transformer.  The voltage ratio can be varied by 

a sliding contactor making electro-mechanical contact with the single winding.  The 

fundamental principle upon which all transformers are based is that the induced 
voltage, V, equals the time rate of change of flux, dφ/dt.  Or equivalently, the induced 
voltage equals the inductance times the time rate of change of current, L dI/dt.   

 

Two basic engineering concepts are immediately apparent from this.  One is that 

at higher frequencies the power density goes up (but not without disadvantage).  Thus 
transformers can be smaller since one can operate with less flux to get the same dφ/dt. 
An example of this is the choice of 400 Hz frequency in airliners.  However, this has its 

drawbacks as increasing the frequency increases the transformer impedance and losses 

(especially the core losses and leakage flux), inadvertently decreasing the power 

transmitted.  The transformer reactance and hence the reactance voltage drop is directly 

 

 

 

-12- 

- 13 - 

proportional to the frequency.  The hysteresis loss in the core is proportional to the 

frequency, and the core eddy current loss is proportional to the square of the frequency. 

The other engineering concept, whose pursuit may be more fruitful, is that the power 

density can be increased by increasing the flux density.  In a conventional transformer, 

laminated iron is used to concentrate the flux by lowering the reluctance of the magnetic 

circuit.  However the maximum flux density, B, is limited to between 10,000 and 20,000 
Gauss (1 to 2 Tesla) due to the saturation field of iron.  The saturation field, Bsat, is where 
the permeability  of the core drops precipitously and the core can no longer concentrate the 

flux. To reduce the size and cost of a transformer, transformers are designed to have the 

peak field not too far below the saturation field of the core so that the required flux can be 

retained by a minimum of core material.  As we shall next see, this can be a problem.   

The sun emits ionized particles into space on both a steady and a transient basis 

 
by means of what is called the solar wind.  The steady interaction of the solar wind with 

the earth's ionosphere and geomagnetic field has no harmful effect on electric power 

networks.  A much stronger and potentially adverse transient condition results from 

sunspot activity when the blast wave from a solar flare hits the earth's magnetosphere.    

Such geomagnetic storms induce offset current components in long east-west lines at 
northern latitudes, which can lead to core saturation and transformer damage as Bsat is 
exceeded.  Such electrical system problems occur about every eleven years during the 

peak of the sunspot cycle.  The effects are exacerbated if the ground is poorly 

conducting in the vicinity of the network, causing more current to flow through the 

grounded conductors.  To minimize these adverse geomagnetic effects, it is preferable 
not to have the peak field too close to Bsat of the transformer core, which is antithetical 
to compaction i.e. making a transformer more compact. 

 
Cryogenics presents one interesting route to compaction.  Iron increases its 
saturation field from 2 T at 300 K to only 2.2 T at 0 K.  Iron-cobalt (Fe0.65Co0.35), which 
is a strongly ferromagnetic material, increases its Bsat to only 2.5 T at 0 K.  Fortunately 
there is not a correlation between the Curie temperature, TCurie, at which a material 
stops being ferromagnetic, and Bsat.  Iron and Fe0.65Co0.35 have relatively high Curie 
temperatures of 1043 K and 1240 K.  As Table 3 illustrates, materials with considerably 
lower TCurie can have considerably higher Bsat. 
 
Cu, Al, or perhaps even hyperconducting Be as the conductor, should be considered.   

Using dysprosium, Dy, at ~ 77 K as the core material, together with cryoresistive 

The potential for achieving approximately a factor of 2 size reduction and higher power 

density in the conductor, as well as possibly even lower losses is worth looking into.  

 

 

 

-13- 

- 14 - 

Some of the material costs look prohibitively high at present.  What is not known is 

whether these costs can be substantially reduced if the market for these materials 

becomes considerably larger. 

Material  

      Dy  

      Ho  

      Er   

      Tb  

       Gd 
Fe0.65Co0.35 
      Fe   
      Co  

      Ni   

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

Table 3.  Ferromagnetic Materials 
 
Bsat, Tesla (at 0 K) 
 
3.8 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

3.7 

3.3 

 
1.8 

 

 
 

 

 

 

3.4 

2.8 
2.5 

2.2 
 

0.64 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

TCurie, K 

     87 

     20 

   219 

     20 

           286 - 293 
 

  1240 

   1043 

 
   1390 

     630 

 

 

The potential for a superconducting transformer at 77 K does not look nearly as 

great.  The reason for this is that the large ac power losses in large fields coupled with a 

refrigeration inefficiency of 8 to 10 W/W appear prohibitive. The core could be 

eliminated with very large fields which exceed the saturation field of any known 

material.  In principle, this could be achieved with a superconducting, hyperconducting, 

or  possibly cryoresistive material.  However, such an air core transformer would have a 

very large fringing field.  This would likely not be acceptable for many practical reasons 

such as inducing losses in nearby conducting materials as well as the concern for 

biological effects of electromagnetic fields.  Containing the field with a high permeability 
casing at sufficiently large distances that B < Bsat is antithetical to size and cost reduction.  
Ferroresonance 
 

Ferroresonance  is  a  complex  electrical  problem  that  is  generally  encountered 

only in distribution transformers  because of single phase operation to which  the large 

transmission  level  transformers  are  not  subjected.    Modern  low-loss  transformers  are 

much more susceptible to ferroresonance.  Ferroresonance is related to the fact that the 

resonance voltage across an inductor and capacitor in a series RLC circuit can be greater 

than the source voltage.   Overvoltages due to ferroresonance run as high as 125 to 146%  

of the rated value.  Such overvoltages can cause failure of the transformers themselves, 
auxiliary  equipment,  and  even  customer  appliances  and  electronic  equipment.  

Ferroresonance can lead to more than one response for the same switching conditions in 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

-14- 

- 15 - 

a  given  circuit,  much  like  chaotic  phenomena.    The  circuit  may  jump  erratically  from 

one non-sinusoidal mode to another.      

One way of averting  ferroresonance is to use only 3-pole switches to connect or 

disconnect  the  distribution  transformer  from  the  circuit.    Another  way  is  to  use  only 

triplex  transformers  with  grounded-wye  primary  windings.    A  third  way  is  to  use  3 

single phase transformers with grounded-wye primary windings.  Another option that 

may  be  realized  in  the  power  delivery  system  of  the  future  is  to  utilize  solid  state 

distribution transformers as discussed in the next section. 

10.4  Solid State Transformer (SST) 
 

In 1980 Bowers et al [5] described a solid state transformer (SST) with step-down 

and step-up capabilities. It used pulse width modulation to achieve ac voltage 

regulation without the need for large inductors.  At present, below kV voltages, solid 

state transformers based on  bi-directional switchmode technology (using the L dI/dt 

principle discussed earlier) efficiently transform voltages, and can also perform voltage 

and current waveshaping.  They can be more compact, have improved thermal 

management, and be insensitive to dc current components such as the troublesome ones 

from geomagnetic storms.  However at higher voltages, the power losses are presently 

prohibitively high by roughly an order of magnitude, making them impractical at this 

time for most distribution and transmission applications.  The higher the voltage, the 

greater the power loss.  There does not seem to be any reason in principle that further 

developments can't ameliorate the excessive voltage drop in the forward direction that 

now is encountered when the solid state switches have to withstand greater than kV 

voltages in the back direction.  

 

The  solid  state  transformer  can  be  viewed  as  an  outgrowth  of  the  ac  chopper 

voltage converter in which segments of the 60 Hz sinusoidal wave were chopped out so 

that each 8.33 msec half-wave was broken up into several remaining segments of a little 

over  a  msec  each  in  duration.    This  switching  wave  form  resulted  in  low  frequency 

voltage harmonics.  Presently, the quantum series resonant converter (QSRC) mode of 

operation  replaces  each  8.33  msec  half-wave  with  about  a  dozen  high  frequency  half-

waves  whose  amplitudes  model  the  amplitude  of  the  60  Hz  wave.    The  envelope  of 

these  ~  720  Hz  waves  exceeds  the  60  Hz  wave  a  little  so  that  the  power  delivered  is 

comparable.  The QSRC eliminates low frequency harmonics.   

An  ideal  bi-directional  switching  system  may  allow  the  SST  to  approach  95% 

efficiency,  independent  of  load  conditions.    If  the  presently  large  power  loss  at  high 

voltage could be reduced, the SST may offer some attractive advantages.  Its initial-cost 

economic viability cannot be judged because solid state transformers are not being mass 

 

 

 

 

-15- 

produced on a large enough scale as yet.  Furthermore, its reliability and performance 

during  highly  stressful  transient  conditions  such  as  fault  currents,  short  circuits,  and 

overloads  have  not  been  sufficiently  determined.  Although  the  early  1980's  work 

originated in the U.S., most of the present work is being done outside the U.S.   

References 
1.  G.Bahder and M. Rabinowitz, U.S. Patent No. 4,397,807 (1983).   

2.  G.Bahder, M. Rabinowitz, and M. Sosnowski, Cryogenics 23, 95 (1983).  

3.  B. Koch, Y. Carpentier, IEEE Trans. Power Delivery 7, 1425 (1992). 

4.  San Francisco Chronicle 7-10-94 and 8-2-94. 

5.  J.C. Bowers, S.J. Garrett, H.A. Nienhaus, and J.L. Brooks, PESC '80, 253 (1980).  

 

 

 

 

- 16 - 

 

-16- 

