14.04.03  17:20  REZ: Cosmological Selection

1

Cosmological Natural Selection Revisited
Some Remarks on the Conceptual Conundrum and Possible Alleys

Rainer E. Zimmermann
IAG Philosophische Grundlagenprobleme,
Fachbereich 1 der Universität,
Nora-Platiel-Str.1, D – 34127 Kassel /
Clare Hall, UK – Cambridge CB3 9AL 1/
Lehrgebiet Philosophie,
Fachbereich 13 AW, Fachhochschule,
Lothstr. 34, D – 80335 Muenchen2
e-mail: pd00108@mail.lrz-muenchen.de

Abstract

Following the selection metaphor as introduced by Lee Smolin in his 1997 book
with respect to a possible model of the reproduction of Universes, this model is
being re-constructed utilizing the strict analogical form of the metaphor chosen.
It is asked then for the genotypal level associated with the primarily phenotypal
model, and it is asked in particular where the information processing mechanism
of that cosmological sort of selection could actually be found. It is argued that
massive  black  holes  in  the  centres  of  galaxies  may  play  this  important  role.
Some consequences on black holes in general are discussed then pointing to the
necessity to actually revisit the concepts of virtual and actual black holes also.

1. Introduction

Following the book publication by Lee Smolin [1], I have discussed his model
of  cosmological  natural  selection  twice  elsewhere  ([2],  [3]),  pointing  to  a
number  of  inconsistencies  of  the  model  and  possible  variants  which  may  be
helpful  in  solving  one  or  the  other  problem  with  it.  After  these  preliminary
discussions  we  are  now  capable  of  re-formulating  Smolin’s  conception  in  a
generalized way by means of applying directly the somewhat corrected version
of  the  analogy  between  physics  and  biology  actually  being  put  forward.  The
advantage  is  to  concretely  establish  selection  as  an  intrinsically  universal
principle  indeed.  The  Universe  in  the  facon  de  parler  of  Smolin’s  is  then
nothing but the individual sample whose type is the analogue of the phenotype.
Hence, we shift from the concept of selection to what we call superselection in
order  to  point  to  the  fact  that  the  principle  invoked  here  acts  upon  networks
(populations) of  Universes  which have  to be  classified  according  to  their  type.
                                                          
1 Permanent addresses.
2 Present address.

14.04.03  17:20  REZ: Cosmological Selection

2

The latter is being defined in the sense of the excess productivity of black holes
actually  achieved,  and  is  a  measure  therefore  for  the  possible  number  of
„offspring“  of  Universes  which  may  be  eventually  produced.  We  have  thus  a
population  of  Universes  which  can be stratified into  sub-populations  reflecting
the various  phenotypes.  (The  question  as  to  whether  a  population  may  contain
Universes which are not space-times, simply due to epistemological reasons, we
leave  aside  for  the  time  being.  [4])  These  phenotypes  are  involved  in
competition  among  each  other.  Superselection  acts  thus  onto  these  phenotypes
according  to  the  environmental  structure  in  which  the  sub-populations
participate.  Hence,  what  we  need  is  the  equivalent  of  an  environment,  some
intercosmic mediator.
But let us first have a look onto the interior „ecology“ of a single Universe: A
generic  Universe  consists  of  a  hierarchic  structure  of  galaxies  (supercluster,
cluster,  local  groups,  individual  samples  of  galaxies).  It  is  indeed  the  stellar
ecology  of  galaxies  which  explicitly  determines  the  production  rate  of  black
holes. Hence, also a galaxy can be visualized as an analogue to local ecosystems
containing  populations  of  phenotypes.  In  this  case  the  types  are  stellar  types
plus a mediator which is given in terms of the interstellar matter. The Universe
appears  thus  as  a  hierarchically  organized  population  of  populations  of  local
ecosystems. But if the stellar type (described by the spectral class of stars) is a
local version of a phenotype, what is then the associated genotype?
Remember that biology is essentially organized in terms of three structural and
functional  levels  which  we  can  call  the  molecular,  cellular,  and  organismic
levels, respectively. The last one is directly associated with the phenotype. The
molecular  level  coincides  with  the  level  for  which  this  expression  has  been
introduced in the first place, namely the chemical level. So what is the cellular
level? This would be exactly that level on which the „cosmogenetic“ coding is
being stored, in a place which would be the equivalent of a cell nucleus.
A  short  intermediate  remark  to  the  utilization  of  Smolin’s  selection  metaphor:
Indeed,  at  the  occasion  of  a  short  discussion  of  the  topic  some  time  ago  [5],
Smolin  has  not  shown  much  enthusiasm  when  being  confronted  with  the
arguments unfolded above. Instead, he seemed to be pointing to the fact that this
metaphor chosen by him  would only  be  applicable in a  somewhat  limited  way
and  could  not  directly  be  transferred  to  a  physical  terminology.  But  here  we
have  to  object  that  the  metaphor  is  apperently  of  some  use  after  all.  However,
this  being  the  case,  it  has  to  be  developed  with  all  its  consequences.  And  the
latter are to be examined carefully with a view to their consistency. If they turn
out  ot  be  inconsistent,  the  principle  has  to  be  given  up.  But  there  cannot  be  a
mere semi-metaphor in sufficiently general terms. Hence, a complete discussion
of the principle introduced is what is being asked for.

14.04.03  17:20  REZ: Cosmological Selection

3

2. A First Ansatz

Hence,  what  we  do  is  to  start  in  a  straightforward  manner  from  the  original
analogy  which  is  itself  referring  to  the  organismic  structure  of  organization  as
known  from  biology:  Therefore,  phenotypes  are  types  of  organisms  which  are
themselves structured in a molecular way and constituted on that molecular level
by means of the respective genotype. It is important here to remember oncemore
that we will not expect that we actually deal with explicitly biological quantities
after  all,  but  that  instead  we  will  have  to  deal  with  physical  quantities  only.
Insofar the metaphor stays nothing but a metaphor. On the other hand, we know
of  course,  that  biological  systems  are  again  nothing  but  chemical  and  thus
complex  physical  systems  themselves.  Hence,  we  can  legitimately  argue  to
found the further analogy onto the relative orders of magnitudes being actually
involved: The individual body of human beings e.g. represents a sample of the
human phenotype and thus constitutes the organism on the macroscopic level in
terms of biological aspects. Let us say that the human body contains some 102
organs, which are composed of different sorts of webs (according to the various
fields  of  sensory  perceptions,  food  processing,  motion,  reproduction,  and  so
forth). With roughly 1014 cells per organism this comes  to  about  1012  cells per
organ. (The molecular mass of human cells is at about 1015.) Hence, the ratio of
the  „highest“  to  the  „lowest“  level  of  organization  is  about  1010  or  1012,
according to whether one refers to the organs or the whole organism.
On the other hand, the Universe contains about 1011 galaxies of which each for
itself contains 1011 stars on the average. The  galaxies  are  organized  in  clusters
and  superclusters  with  about  106  and  109  galaxies,  respectively.  Hence,  it  is
intuitively  clear,  within  the  chosen  analogy,  to  actually  identify  the  level  of
superclusters with the level of organs, and the level of galaxies with the level of
cells. The „scalelessly“ mediated orders of magnitude among clusters refer then
to  the  levels  of  different  biological  webs.  Note  that  in  biology,  organs  are
usually  not  only  classified  according  to  their  structure,  but  also  according  to
their  function.  That  is,  organs  have  a  specific  function  within  the  whole
organism. Moreover, there must be a fine tuning of functions among each other,
because any malfunction has to be compensated for a while for not endangering
the organism altogether. In the long run, any malfunction will put the organism
at  a  decisive  risk.  Nothing  else  is  the  case  with  the  physical  functions  of  the
constituents of the Universe.
If now galaxies are the equivalent of cells, what would be formally equivalent to
the  nucleus  of  a  cell?  The  point  is  that  the  biological  analogy  can  be  carried
quite far in the case of galaxies, because like cells they indeed perform specific
functions  of  some  „metabolism“  and  can  therefore  be  visualized  as  regulatory
systems. (This is in fact what we also claim when speaking about body cells of
an  organism.)  The  sort  of  metabolism  mentioned  here  is  however  one  of  a
cosmic  exchange  of  matter,  where  the  important  things  happen  in  places  we

14.04.03  17:20  REZ: Cosmological Selection

4

cannot observe very well: in the dark spaces in between spiral arms of galaxies.
Because this is where stars are being „cooked“ which „cook“ themselves other
matter  then  and  so  forth.  It  is  from  then  on  that  they  become  visible  to  us.
Hence,  the  complete  galaxy  gains  the  connotation  of  a  self-organizing
(massively parallel) computational system, very much like the biological cell.
The cells utilize the information which is contained in the genetic structure and
is actually stored in the cell’s nucleus, and produce proteins from it. The DNA is
very  much like  a hard  disk,  while  the  proteins  are  a sort of  RAM.  [6]  We  can
claim  something  similar  with  respect  to  the  galaxy,  provided  we  think  of  its
„nucleus“ also as a comparable system  for  storing and  processing  information.
Indeed,  there  is  a  literal  nucleus  to  most  galaxies  which  is  represented  by  a
central massive black hole. In other words: It is such a black hole which would
be the adequate place to „store the laws of nature in some symbolical manner“
as Smolin is himself asking for. (He  actually  disputes  the possibility  of  such  a
storing  of  symbolical  information  though.  But  that  is  a  point  where  doubts
should be in order.) Obviously, the next question is how the relevant information
could be stored in black holes. Unfortunately, the interior of black holes is not
well-known  until  now.  [7]  However,  massive  black  holes  in  the  centres  of
galaxies  as  they  have  gained  renewed  relevance  since  the  beginning  of  2000
when  the  Chandra  satellite  observatory  did  its  first  impressive  series  of  X-ray
photos, could well be visualized as that „gates towards a new physics“ as Martin
Rees  has  introduced  them  recently.  [8]  The  characteristic  „careers“  of  black
holes have been studied in detail some time ago by Kip Thorne among  others.
[9] Many aspects recovered here correspond nicely to what Smolin proposes in
his approach.
These aspects by the way imply also the absence of the fundamental categories
of  space  and  time  which  we  have  discussed  elsewhere.  [10]  Thorne  e.g.
compares them within the context of a black hole with a piece of wood soaked
with  water  coming  into  a  fire.  Time  (the  water)  evaporates  and  the  remaining
space (dry wood) becomes ashes (Wheeler’s quantum foam). [11] And indeed,
within  this  physics  of  the  quantum  foam  we  should  look  for  the  analogy  of
(cosmic) nucleotides. Not in the foam itself (because the storing of information
should not be subject to random fluctuations), but as its first product. The latter
might turn out as spin networks in fact. [12] Hence, the clarifying of the analogy
is closely related to the problem of developing a TOE.
The  same  is  actually  true  for  what  we  can  visualize  as  „intercellulary“  space:
The  respective  region  in  between  the  galaxies  carrying  the  reserves  for  the
latter’s  metabolistic  functions is typically  visualized  as  an  almost  perfect  void.
But even if this should be true, there is still gravitation. Also within galaxies, the
patterns of interstellar matter recently observed could be understood as resulting
from  exterior  „environmental“  inputs  establishing  explicit  forms  of  harmony.
[13]

14.04.03  17:20  REZ: Cosmological Selection

5

3. Computational Aspects

But  there  is  still  another  point:  The  internal  structure  of  the  Universe  alone
cannot  be  decisive  for  superselection,  because  we  deal  with  populations  of
Universes in the first place. That we can retrace the basic structure of selection
also  within  the  individual  sample  and  all  of  its  substructures  is  only  an
epiphenomenon of the underlying model’s scale independence (which is actually
a necessary condition for our evolutionary principle in order to adapt it to self-
organized  criticality  in  the  sense  of  the  Santa  Fe  school).  Hence,  we  have  to
differ between internal selection in the sense of Smolin (within a given Universe
subject to its stellar ecology) on the one hand, and external selection of types of
Universes (superselection) on the other hand. Obviously, the one has to be fitted
to the other. In fact, what we can do is actually to visualize internal selection as
a  projection  (more  precisely:  a  projected  image)  of  superselection.  In  other
words: The biological selection proper shows up then as a mere differentiation
of superselection projected onto the planetary ecology. This would indeed shed
some light on the question of possible earth-like planets.
But  if  so,  the  remaining  question  is  for  the  „cosmic  mediator“  already
mentioned. It would define the background of Universes on which populations
unfold. Hence, it could be visualized as that environment whose structure gives
the initial drive for the competition of phenotypes in the first place, because it is
only  a  finite  environment,  one  with  restricted  ressources,  in  other  words:  a
physically  deficient  environment,  on  which  selection  can  be  sufficiently
founded. It may be worthwile to  look  for  this  mediating background  (which is
not  a  geometrical  background  as  we  know  it,  because  we  are  talking  about  a
region which is beyond Universes, and thus beyond space and time) in the loops
of loop quantum gravity itself. In a first instance, the concept of spin networks is
relevant  here.  The  problem  is  that  we  have  to  permanently  think  „in  terms  of
space and time“  so  that  we  cannot  abstract  from  these  fundamental  categories,
even if talking about their factual absence. As I have discussed elsewhere [14],
spin networks can be visualized as the boundary of space-time, and as such they
are also the (epistemological) boundary of substance. [15] But the point is that
there is no real transition from the one (the world) to the other (substance) and
viceversa  across  that  boundary,  because  substance  is  always  everywhere  (thus
non-locally) underlying the world which we can observe, but  which  is  nothing
but a back-projection of substance (which we cannot observe). The question is
whether seen under this ontological perspective, it is useful to think of physics
as  the  foundation  of  biology  all  the  time,  while  not  thinking  of  the  viceversa:
that  also  biology  would  have  something  to  contribute  to  the  foundation  of
physics  in  turn.  This  may  be  so  because  after  all,  physical  theories  are  being
produced  by  biological  living  beings  according  to  what  the  latter  can  actually
perceive.  This  perception  however,  together  with  the  thinking  applied  to  it,  is
primarily  biologically  constituted.  Recently,  Louis  Kauffman  has  oncemore

14.04.03  17:20  REZ: Cosmological Selection

6

reminded on this point and tried to describe a relationship between biology and
logic which might be of a specific systematical meaning for what we have said
here.  [16]  Again,  there  is  another  parallel  to  the  conception  of  visualizing  the
Universe altogether as an emergent computational system which in the case of
biology differs from the computers as we know them only in the fact that it is
software and hardware at the same time.

4. Black Holes

But  the  essential  problem  with  black  holes  is  as  to  their  eventually  becoming
„quantum“: Originally, the programme was quite straighforward. If a star with a
certain  minimal  mass  underwent  gravitational  collapse,  then  sooner  or  later  a
horizon  would  form  defining  the  black  hole‘s  boundary.  And  the  work
concentrated  on  describing  horizon  properties.  The  actual  vicinity  of  the
singularity  was  then  cut  out  from  both  the  space-time  manifold  and  from  the
discussion,  respectively.  That  was  what  we  learned  as  students  when  reading
one  of  our  three  bibles  at  the  time.  [17]  Things  became  more  complicated
however  when  Hawking,  Bekenstein  and  others  started  to  discuss  quantum
aspects  of  black  holes.  From  the  beginning  on,  the  suspicion  emerged  that
classical  concepts  would  be  carried  over  to  quantum  situations  without  being
really justified. Not that this would have been something new when dealing with
quantum  physics  (indeed  it  actually  established  a  great  deal  of  distinction  for
those  who  worked  in  „classical“  field  theories  when  visualizing  the  whole
Schroedinger  programme  as  some  kind  of  elaborate  guessing  according  to
concepts of classical physics). But in the case of black holes it seemed somehow
to  go  too  far.  All  of  this  despite  some  very  attractive  aspects  of  the  new
conceptions such as Bekenstein’s idea of treating black holes as an analogue to
atoms in pre-quantum physics and so forth. However, with the advent of black
hole  thermodynamics  and  in  particular  with  the  treating  of  the  horizon  as  a
material membrane in the sense of Thorne, things became very interesting, and
one  was  somewhat  distracted  from  the  quantum  problems  lurking  underneath.
As it turns out now, the very terminology utilized when talking about quantum
black  holes  is  covering  most  of  the  problems  which  still  have  remained.  Take
the example of the celebrated Planck mass which serves as a criterion of talking
about  a  domain  where  all  relevant  forces  actually  meet  [18]:  It  is  the  frequent
changing of the systems of units involved what is diverting from the fact that it
is not the Planck mass which is relevant at the Planck level, but instead it is the
dimensions involved which are relevant. In other words: If you have a piece of
matter with roughly 10-8 kg of mass, then you do not have normally any problem
with quantum fields or quantum gravity as to that – because it is only when you
compress this mass to the small Planck length dimensions that it would become
theoretically relevant. So it is the volume rather than the mass which is important
after all. Obviously, when dealing with stellar black holes, you are not dealing

14.04.03  17:20  REZ: Cosmological Selection

7

with any Planck mass whatsoever, by the very definition above. In fact, we are
talking  of  several  solar  masses.  And  the  mass  remains  conserved.  What  is
changing  while  the  star  performs  a  gravitational  collapse,  is  the  mass  density
which  is  enormously  increasing  because  the  available  volume  is  decreasing.
(And this tells you something about the characteristic gravitation involved which
points  towards  tidal  forces  rather  than  to  anything  else  –  which  also  tells
something  about  the  entropy  change  being  involved  and  explains  why  a  black
hole is not really a time-inverted white hole.)
We  know  in  the  meantime  from  the  seminal  paper  of  Rovelli  and  Smolin  and
from other papers dealing with its consequences [19] that the volume (as well as
the area) of space has to be visualized as a discrete and thus quantized entity. In
fact, in case of the volume the quantization is not quite as forward as in the case
3 as should be
of the area, but we notice that the spectrum runs proportional to lP
expected. This insight has resulted in a number of consequences in the field of
quantum information lately. [20] Hence, with respect to what we would like to
have in the case of black holes when thinking of what we discussed above, the
explicit  coupling  of  gravitation,  thermodynamics,  and  quantum  information  is
very promising after all. Alas, there remains the unsatisfactory situation that the
transition of black hole from the classical into the quantum domain is far from
clear.  The  quantization  of  area  and  volume  of  space  mentioned  above  gives
some  operational  rules  as  to  dealing  with  the  computation  of  quantities  at  the
Planck level. But the important problem here is the following: While undergoing
collapse  each  black  hole  will  necessarily  come  into  the  quantum  domain  by
means of its permanently shrinking volume. And then the question will be how
collapse is actually being halted at the Planck length, because the true zero-point
of length cannot be reached due to the convention of declaring the Planck length
to  the  minimum  length  which  could  be  possibly  attained.  Hence,  we  would
conclude that there are no objects with a length which is smaller than the Planck
length.  But  note  that  a  black  hole  arriving  at  the  Planck  length  by  means  of
gravitational collapse will not have any Planck mass then! In fact, the mass will
be  much  larger  than  that  which  means  that  the  Compton  length  is  actually
undefined, because it would be smaller than the Planck length for such cases. In
other  words:  while  the  black  hole  is  entering  quantum  dimensions,  it  does  not
behave like a quantum particle at all. If we cannot ascribe a Compton length to
it, then it is not subject to Heisenberg’s uncertainty relationship!
In fact, it is quite clear why this should be the case: The reason for this is that
within the region of the Compton length, the length scale goes as 1/m, while for
the macroscopic region (where the Schwazschild length is of relevance) it goes
as m.  This is indeed due to the onset of  Heisenberg’s uncertainty  relation.  But
the  question  remains  why  collapsing  black  holes  do  not  seem  to  be  subject  to
this transition. On the other hand, postulating virtual black holes which are being
created by means of spontaneous fluctuations out of the vacuum does not really
help here, because then the question remains whether it is legitimate at all to call
such objects black holes if they have not undergone any gravitational collapse.

14.04.03  17:20  REZ: Cosmological Selection

8

As  it  turns  out,  there  are  basically  two  desiderata:  One  of  explicitly
demonstrating  the  transition  from  a  classical  volume  to  a  quantum  volume
displaying  the  relevant  effects  such  a  transition  would  have  for  an  object
undergoing  gravitational  collapse,  and  another  one  of  explicitly  studying  the
relationship  of  length  scales  at  the  Planck  scale  proper  as  well  as  defining  the
state  of  an  object  whose  Compton  length  is  smaller  than  its  Schwarzschild
length, in order to be able to decide whether this could really be called a black
hole or not. A first step towards approaching this  problem  is  a  recent paper of
Paola Zizzi [21]. Further work with  more  technical  explications  is  in progress.
[22] Hence, it is likely to find the information processing mechanism discussed
above within the interior of black holes. In the end it is this mechanism on which
the concept of cosmological selection is actually founded. But it does not suffice
to elaborate further on quantum mechanical details of black holes without being
able  to  say  something  about  the  transition  from  classical  to  quantum  states
during gravitational collapse and without clarifying the nature of black-hole like
objects at the Planck scale in more detail.

For helpful discussions while in Cambridge I thank John Baez, Julian Barbour,
Chris  Isham,  Lou  Kauffman,  Mary  Hesse,  and  Lee  Smolin.  For  more  recent
discussions I thank Paola Zizzi.

Acknowledgements

References

[1] L. Smolin: The Life of the Cosmos. Oxford University Press, 1997.
[2] R.E.Zimmermann: The Klymene Principle. Kassel University Press, 1999. –
also under: http://www.ernst-bloch.net/akt/mitbei/klymene,zip.
[3] R.E.Zimmermann: System des Transzendentalen Materialismus. Mentis,
Paderborn, in press (2003).
[4] R.E.Zimmermann: Loops and Knots as Topoi of  Substance. Spinoza
Revisited. In: http://www.arXiv.org/pdf/gr-qc/0004077 v2. – See also: Spinoza in Context:
A Holistic Approach in Modern Terms, in: E. Martikainen (ed.), Infinity,
Causality, and Determinism, Cosmological Enterprises and their Preconditions,
Finish Academy of  Sciences Colloquium. Lang, Frankfurt a.M. etc., 2002, 165-
186.
[5] Discussion with Lee Smolin at the occasion of the conference „Key Tests for
Cosmogenic Theories“, Newton Institute, Cambridge (UK), 6.-9.12.1999.
[6] Cf. T. Siegfried: The Bit and the Pendulum. From Quantum Computing to M
Theory – The New Physics of Information. Wiley, New York etc., 2000. Note in
particular chapter 5: The Computational Cell. (95-113)

14.04.03  17:20  REZ: Cosmological Selection

9

[7] A long time ago I have worked myself on the interior story of black holes
before changing into other fields. In the meantime, I noticed that presently, there
is (as far as I can see) only one group engaged in this topic, namely that of
Werner Israel in Canada. And the insight gained recently is not very much
impressing, to say the least. Cf. A. Bonanno et al.: Structure of the Spherical
Black Hole Interior, http://www.arXiv.org/pdf/gr-qc/9411050. (I cannot find more recent
works.)
[8] M. Rees: Before the Beginning. Our Universe and others. Simon & Schuster,
London, 1997. In particular chapter 5: Black Holes: Gateways to New Physics.
[9] K. S. Thorne: Gekrümmter Raum und verbogene Zeit. [The Einstein Legacy.
Quoted here according to the German edition.] Droemer-Knaur, München, 1994
(1993), 524, 545. As to wormholes cf. 556.
[10] Cf. note [4]. – See also more recently R.E.Zimmermann: Recent
Conceptual Consequences of Loop Quantum Gravity. Part III: Postcript On
Time, http://www.arXiv.org/pdf/physics/0108026 .
[11] Thorne, op.cit., 544.
[12] R.E.Zimmermann: Recent Conceptual Consequences of Loop Quantum
Gravity, Part I: Foundational Aspects, http://www.arXiv.org/pdf/physics/0107061 .
[13] Smolin, op. cit., 132. – Cf. more recently: Nature 394 (1998), 524 (when S.
Battersby is talking on B. G. Elmegreen et al. in Ap.J.Lett. 503 (1998), 119-
122).
[14] Cf. note [12].
[15] Cf. notes [3], [4].
[16] L. H. Kauffman: Biologic. http://www.arXiv.org/pdf/quant-ph/0204007 v2.
[17] Namely the books of Hawking and Ellis, of Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler,
and of Weinberg, respectively.
[18] J.C.Baez: Higher-dimensional algebra and Planck-scale physics, in: C.
Callender and N. Huggett (eds.), Physics Meets Philosophy at the Planck
Length, Cambridge University Press, 2001, 177-195.
[19] C.Rovelli, L.Smolin: Discreteness of Area and Volume in Quantum
Gravity. http://www.arXiv.org/pdf/gr-qc/9411005 and J.Lewandowski: Volume and
Quantizations. http://www.arXiv.org/pdf/gr-qc/9602035 as well as A.Ashtekar,
J.Lewandowski: Quantum Theory of Geometry I: Area Operators,
http://www.arXiv.org/pdf/gr-qc/9602046 and: Quantum Theory of Geometry II: Volume
Operators, http://www.arXiv.org/pdf/gr-qc/9711031.
[20] P.A.Zizzi: Holography, Quantum Geometry, and Quantum Information
Theory, http://www.arXiv.org/pdf/gr-qc/9907063 (also in Entropy 2 (2000), 39 sqq.), id:
Quantum Computation Toward Quantum Gravity, http://www.arXiv.org/pdf/gr-qc/0008049
(also in J. GRG 33 (2001), 1305 sqq.), id: The Early Universe as a Quantum
Growing Network, http://www.arXiv.org/pdf/gr-qc/0103002 , id: Ultimate Internets,
http://www.arXiv.org/pdf/gr-qc/0110122.
[21] P.A.Zizzi: Spacetime at the Planck Scale: The Quantum Computer View.
http://www.arXiv.org/pdf/gr-qc/0304032.

14.04.03  17:20  REZ: Cosmological Selection

10

[22] P.A.Zizzi, R.E.Zimmermann: Virtuality & Actuality of Black Holes.
forhcoming.

