 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Power Delivery of the Future  
Mario Rabinowitz 
Armor Research,  715 Lakemead Way, Redwood City, CA 94062-3922 
Mario715@earthlink.net 

-1- 

Abstract 

This paper is written to provide an insight into the physics and engineering that 

go into power delivery of the future.  Topics covered are Fault Current Limiters (FCL) 

including Superconducting FCL and Emission Limited FCL; Lightning and Restoration 

Preparedness; Compressed-Gas-Insulated Delivery; Evaporative Cooling  Delivery; 

Advanced Delivery Technologies Requiring Big Breakthroughs such as Conducting 

Polymers, Electron-Beam Delivery, Microwave Delivery, and Laser-Beam Delivery. 
 

Fault Current Limiters (FCL) 
General  

As power systems have grown, the need has developed for a fault current limiter 

(FCL)  to  keep  potentially  excessive  fault  currents  within  the  ratings  of  existing 

equipment  such  as  circuit  breakers  and  transformers.    Small  FCL  (some  using  little 

explosive  cartridges  for  fast  response  to  a  fault  condition)  have  been  developed  with 

reset times of the order of a minute.   

In 1974,  a consensus of electric utilities listed the need for a FCL as a top priority 

R  &  D  item.    Almost  all  of  the  devices  that  were  considered  20  years  ago  were  either 

technically  or  economically  unsuccessful.    Such  devices  fell  into  two  broad  categories.  

In  the  first  category,  a  tuned  LC  circuit  in  which  the  inductive  reactance,  is  used  in 

series in a power line to give a low impedance at the power frequency.  When a fault 

(i.e.  a  short  circuit)  occurs,  a  switch  shorts  out  the  capacitor  (C),  and  the  inductive 

reactance limits the current.  The disadvantages of this approach include large size, big 

capital cost, and high operating costs. 

In the second category, an impedance in parallel with a normally closed bypass 

switch is placed in series in the power line.  When a fault is sensed, the bypass switch is 

opened  and  the  current  is  transferred  to  the  current  limiting  impedance.    The 

approaches tried have included unstable vacuum arcs controlled by a magnetic field or 

other high arcing voltage circuit breakers in parallel with resistors; switches in parallel 

with  fuses  in  parallel  with  resistors;  and  driving  superconductors  into  their  resistive 

normal state.  Some of the many disadvantages are related to the difficulty in switching, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

-2- 

and  slow  reaction  time  because  of  the  time  required  for  sensing  and  switching 

operations.   

Some solid state diodes have very low conductivity with rapid current saturation 

at  low  voltage  when  operated  in  the  reverse  bias  mode.    Putting  two  such  diodes  in 

opposing  back-to-back  direction,  in  series,  gives  practical  current  limitation  for  low 

voltages.    However,  they  are  not  yet  practical  for  power  applications  for  tens  of 

kilovolts.  

Superconducting FCL 

Exciting  new  developments  in  fault  current  limiters  using  high  temperature 

superconductors (HTS) show promise for use in future power delivery.  In one design, a 

superconducting shield surrounds and shields an iron core from the magnetic field of a 

normal coil so that the core looks like an air core.  The normal coil is in series with the 

power line.  The superconducting shield is driven normal when there is a fault, greatly 

increasing the coil's inductive reactance by the permeability of the iron core.   

In  another  approach  referred  to  as  a  differential-mode  fault  limiter,  the  FCL 

consists of a normal primary high voltage coil coupled to an HTS secondary coil.  The 

fault current only passes through the normal coil which  is in series with the power line.  

The  primary  coil  is  linked  to  the  superconducting  coil  electromagnetically.    The  HTS 

stays  in  the  superconducting  state  during  a  fault.    When  a  fault  current  appears,  the 

inductive coupling between the two coils increases the inductance of the primary by a 

factor  of  60.    Thus  superconducting  fault  current  limiters  that  not  only  protect  the 

system but also ease the burden on circuit breakers are a definite possibility. 

 
Emission Limited FCL 

 
A novel FCL design for which two patents have been granted, relates to emission 
limited fault current limiters [1, 2].  The FCL controls the current thermionically, by cold 
cathode  emission,  or  with  plasma  devices.    The  common  feature  is  that  the  current  is 

limited  by  controlling  a  series  emission  process. 

  The  apparatus  can  operate 

independently  of  a  fault  current  sensor,  and  limit  a  fault  current  automatically  by  the 

physics of its operation.    
  

 

The apparatus is in series in the circuit in conjunction with a cathode from which 

electrons  emanate,  and  which  at  a  predetermined  current  level  becomes  emission 

-3- 

 

  

 

 

 

limited.  This yields a saturation current between the cathode and anode independent of 

the voltage across the device, thus limiting the current.  In a thermionic emitter, it is the 

temperature  of  the  cathode  which  determines  the  saturation  or  emission  limit  of  the 

current.  

The  physics  of  operation  is  straightforward.    Even  though  as  the  voltage 

increases, the electrons go at a higher velocity as they traverse the gap, the current does 

not increase.  This is because as electron speed increases, the volume number density of 

the  electrons  decreases  inversely  proportional  to  the  speed,  thus  keeping  the  current 

constant.    Such  devices  have  potential  in  the  distribution  system.    Cesium  plasma 

triodes  should  also  be  considered  in  this  connection  as  FCL  or  power  switches.    The 

electron  current  that  passes  into  the  grid-anode  region  may  be  emission  limited  from 

the cathode, space charge limited from the cathode, or grid limited from the cathode. 

Lightning and Restoration Preparedness 
 

The  National  Lightning  Detection  Network  (NLDN)  developed  and  now 

sponsored  by  EPRI  can  aid  in  the  scheduling  of  restoration  preparedness  of  a  system 

before  a major  storm by providing lead  time for allocation of resources such as repair 

crew  scheduling  and  dispatch.    Potential  storm  severity  can  be  assessed  leading  to  a 

more efficient use of manpower.  During the storm it can determine areas of potential 

heavy damage.  After the storm it can aid in dispatching restoration personnel.  

In  lightning-prone  areas,  lightning  is  the  largest  cause  of  power  failures 

accounting for about half of the outages, and costing utilities about $100 million to $200 

million  per  year  just  to  replace  damaged  equipment.    Although  individual  lightning 

strikes usually do not cause severe damage, their combined annual effect is disastrous.  

There  are  roughly  15  million  strikes  per    year  in  the  U.S.,  killing  several  hundred 

people.  Worldwide more people are killed or injured each year by  lightning than by 

tornadoes,  floods,  and  hurricanes  combined.    Lightning  has  also  caused  forest  fires, 

extensive property damage, serious nuclear power plant malfunction, and disruption of 

the navigational devices on commercial airliners and spacae rockets.  About 65 % of all 

kinds of equipment damage during thunderstorms is directly caused by lightning.  

 

Lightning  is  made  up  of  one  or  more  separate  strokes,  which  are  intermittent 

partial discharges.  Peak currents greater than 500,000 A have been directly measured.  

Currents measured at the ground can rise to 20,000 A in less than a microsecond, with a 
maximum time rate of change of current ~ 1011A/sec.   Lightning  creates electric fields 
in the discharge region greater than 106 V/m, with power levels ~ 1012 W , and energy    

 

-4- 

dissipation between 109 and 1010 Joules.  The potential of charged clouds that produce 
lightning can be as high as a billion volts.  The current channel has a sharp temperature 

rise due to the rapid energy input.  This causes the channel to expand with supersonic 

speed in times less than 10 microseconds, producing the roughly cylindrical shock wave 

which produces thunder.  The channel temperature, as measured spectroscopically by 

Doppler  broadening  is  about  30,000  K.    By  all  standards,  lightning  is  quite  a  violent 

phenomenon with which the utility sytem has to cope regularly. 

 

Lightning transients can propagate along transmission lines at almost the speed 

of light, with circuit-limited rise times of about a microsecond to peak voltages  as high 
as  millions  of  volts,  with  a  maximum  rate  of  rise  of  ~  1012  Volts/sec.    For  example,  a 
lightning strike on the 110-kV line of the Arkansas Power & Light Company reached a 

peak  voltage  of  5  million  volts  within  2  microseconds  as  measured  by  their 

oscillograph.    Such  direct  lightning  strikes  can  produce  the  most  severe  effects.    The 
high current density ~ 103 A/cm2 in a stroke delivers a high power density to the strike 
point  resulting  in  demolished  structures  such  as  exploded  timber,  molten  metal,  and 

charred insulation. 

 

Electromagnetic  field  data  generated  by  lightning  strikes  is  detected  by  105 

NLDN sensors.  This data is relayed to the Network Control Center  (NCC) in Tucson, 

which  computes  and  transmits  the  magnitude,  time,  and  position  of  the  strikes.  

Operators of this network can pinpoint the location and magnitude of individual strikes 

by  measuring  the  direction  and  time  of  the  electromagnetic  pulses  given  off  by 

lightning.    Subscribers  receive  this  data  within  seconds  of  the  strike  time,  and  the 

lightning activity is shown on regional maps.  Time is measured with great precision to 

within microseconds.  This can translate to potential location precision within a fraction 

of a mile given by longitude and latitude.  Magnitude is given as a rough estimate of the 

peak stroke current in kA which relates to the protection needed by a given line.  The 

distribution  of  peak  currents  and  density  of  strikes  are  important  in  power  system  

design.       

 

Timing, directional, and lightning strength sensors provide input to the NLDN.   

Signal  strength,  azimuth,  polarity,  and  time  data  are  obtained  for  the  first  stroke, 

combined with the number of additional strokes.  Information from 105 sensors is time-

correlated.  When enough sensors detect a given stroke, a location can be determined by 

the  X.25  processor.    For  real-time  users,  stroke  information  is  pictorialized  into  flash 
information superimposed on a map on a computer screen.  This information can also 

be downloaded as transcribed data.   

-5- 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Thus lightning fault analysis and location system software provide utilities with 

a  workstation  tool  enabling  them  to  determine  the  simultaneous  occurrence  of  a 

lightning event and either a fault, momentary, or other power disturbance.  It is able to 

locate the event to within 500 m.  In case of a fault, use of a modern fault finder could 

increase  the  resolution  to  within  5  m.    This  will  facilitate  real-time  fault  location.  This 

system  can  also  be  used  for  retrospective  analysis  of  line  performance  in  lightning 

storms,  and  determine  which  lines  or  line  sections  need  upgrade.    This  approach  will 

minimize  utility  upgrade  investment  costs.  The  combination  of  the  Network  for 

restoration  preparedness  and  the  workstation  for  disturbance  location  and  time 

performance analysis should be a vital part of future power system strategy and tactics. 

Compressed-Gas-Insulated Delivery 
 

Although no new major developments are needed for compressed-gas-insulated 

(CGI)  transmission lines, and they were first introduced into service in 1971, CGI lines 

remain a system of the future.  To date, relatively few CGI systems have been installed, 

and  these  have  been  mainly  in  substation  getaways.    The  main  insulation  is  sulfur 
hexafluoride  (SF6) gas, at about 4 atmospheres (400 kPa) pressure.  A hollow Al inner 
conductor is periodically supported by solid insulators from a concentric Al sheath.  
 

Cleanliness and absence of contaminants are very important in maintaining high 

dielectric  strength  in  CGI  systems.  In  addition  to  highly  polishing  the  conductor,  and 

assembly under very clean conditions, electrostatic particle traps are provided near the 

solid insulators to catch and hold any particulate matter which may be left over or form 

in the lines.  Both the degree of installation cleanliness and efficacy of the particle traps 

have reached a level that results in high integrity of the insulation.   

The majority of existing CGI lines have been under a third of a mile in length, at 

voltages  ranging  from  145  kV  to  550  kV.    An  800  kV  prototype  system  has  been 

developed,  and  work  was  done  on  a  1200  kV  CGI  system.    In  the  U.S.,  Westinghouse 

pursued  a  rigid  system,  and  ITE-Gould  offered  either  a  rigid  or  flexible  system  using 

corrugated Al.  CGI systems were more actively pursued in Japan.   

One of the arcing by-products of SF6 is S2F10 ( equivalently SF5) which is one of 
the  most  poisonous  gases  known.    It  seems  not  to  be  a  concern  of  the  EPA,  possibly 

because  it  is  very  reactive  and  the  small  amounts  formed  quickly  combine  with  other 

compounds in the environment to become non-hazardous.  The EPA is looking into the 

-6- 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

question of banning the use of  SF6 as a possible contributor to ozone depletion,   With 
respect  to  the  greenhouse  effect,  the  mass  ratio  of  SF6  production  to  that  of  CO2  from 
coal is  ~ 0.1 %.  If  such a ban goes into effect, one may rule out not only CGI delivery, 
but  it  will  also  impact  on  SF6  substations  and  SF6  circuit  breakers.  Fluorocarbons, 
previously used as coolants in refrigerators, were banned in the U.S. as contributors to 

depletion of the atmosphere's ozone layer.  It is important to anticipate EPA actions in 

this domain. 

Evaporative Cooling  Delivery 
 

Within  the  context  of  conventional  technology,  evaporative  cooling  delivery 

offers some attractive possibilities.  The main objective is to increase the cooling rate at 

the inner conductor, where it is most needed.  Another objective is to cool the conductor 

by  a  method  that  requires  the  least  flow  rate,  viscous  loss,  and  pressure  drop  of  the 

coolant.    This  may  be  achieved  by  the  use  of  liquids  having  a  high  latent  heat  of 

evaporation.    This  would  allow  large  cooling  rates  with  relatively  small  mass  flow  of 

coolant, and hence relatively small hydrodynamic losses. 
 

The  drawback  of  evaporative  cooled  lines  is  that  they  do  not  increase  power  

delivery  capability  by  a  reduction  of  power  losses,  but  rather  increase  it  by  more 

efficiently removing the power losses from the conductor to keep it from overheating.  

Thus increased power density is attainable, but at the price of increased power losses. 

Advanced Delivery Technologies Requiring Big Breakthroughs 
Conducting Polymers (CP) 

A  metal  easily  conducts  electricity  because  a  significant  fraction  of  its  electrons 

move  freely  from  atom  to  atom  with  long  mean  free  paths  between  collisions.    A 

number of organic polymers, in which the outer orbital shells overlap extensively, can 

be made to mimic a metal.  In essence they are somewhat like a metal.  These polymers 

are  generally  quasi-one-dimensional  in  that  they  are  composed  of  fine  molecular 

filaments  or  fibrils,  which  thread  the  solid  together  much like a woven fabric  or rope.  

Along the axes of the threads, the conductivity is high.  It is correspondingly low in any 

non-axial direction. 

Conducting polymers (CP) are basically large energy gap, quasi-one-dimensional 

semiconductors.    The  quasi-one-dimensional  or  chain  nature  results  in  many  unusual 

-7- 

 

 

 

 

properties,  such  as  spinless  current  carriers.  These  polymers  can  be  made  highly 

conducting,  even  metallic  by  the  addition  of  suitable  (usually  nonmetallic)  impurities.  

With proper doping, these polymer crystals act like synthetic metals.  Because of their 

reasonably  high  conductivities,  low  weight  densities,  and  high  tensile  strength,  the 

specific  (normalized)  conductivity  of  these  materials  exceeds  that  of  copper  and  

aluminum.    Among  such  polymers  are  polyacetylene,  polyparaphenylene  sulfide, 

anthrone  polymers,  and  polypyrrole.    Many  questions  regarding  their  chemical 

stability,  electrical,  thermal,  mechanical,  flammability,  toxicity  and  other  properties 

must  be  answered  before  such  esoteric  materials  can  be  used  for  the  transmission  of 

electricity.  Foremost among these questions is the one pertaining to chemical stability.  

Despite being one of the first CPs, having a very high doped electrical conductivity, and 

very  nonlinear  optical  properties,  polyacetylene  in  both  the  cis  and  trans  phases 

remains largely  a laboratory  curiosity  because it is unstable in air.  The toxic dopants, 

such as iodide compounds and arsenic pentafluoride, tend to leach out of the polymers.  

Without the dopants the polymers lose their high conductivity.   

Recent  attention  has  been  focused  on  the  optical  properties  of  conducting 

polymers because some of these polymers, notably polyphenylene vinylene (PPV) have 

shown  promise  as  light-emitting  diodes  and,  extrapolating  from  there,  flat  panel 

displays for computers, etc.  Polythiophene is a more stable molecule that finds uses in 

solar  cells  and  thin  film  transistors.    PITN  is  a  polythiophene  derivative  that  is  quite 

transparent  in  its  highly  conductive  state  suggesting  use  as  a  transparent  electrode, 

and/or  in  solar  cells.    Polyaniline's  absorption  of  electromagnetic  radiation  can  be 

controlled by changing its doping level and local structure.  The DAD molecule can act 

as an optical molecular switch that is light intensity dependent with switching speeds ~ 
10-12 sec.   Polyquinoline  molecules have very high thermal stability and may be used 
in  xerography  as  photoconductors.    New  developments  in  the  CP  arena  may  well 

enhance the outlook for their use as a conductor in cables.  Even if they are not used as 

the  main  conductor,  they  may  have  application  as  the  low  conductivity  cable  sheath 

which  is  presently  made  of  carbon  particle  impregnated  polymer  such  as  cross-linked 

polyethylene.                                   

Electron-Beam Delivery (EBD) 
 

Two patents filed by Nicholas Christofilos [3,4] in 1950 and 1956 form the basis 

of electron-beam delivery (EBD).  This is a method of electric power delivery in which 

electricity is transmitted in kinetic form by a magnetically focused electron beam in an 

-8- 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

evacuated  pipe.    While  the  beam  is  in  transit,  this  is  the  closest  thing  to  room  temperature 

superconductivity  known  to  man.    However,  the  return  path  is  in  the  pipe  wall  which  is 

just an ordinary conductor, so only half the line has the advantage of having virtually 

no resistance.   

The  advantage  of  electron-beam  delivery  is  not  in  its  efficiency,  as  the  total 

power  losses  may  be  as  large  or  larger  than  in  a  conventional  line.    EBD  may  have  a 

capital  cost  advantage  at  very  high  power  levels  ≥  10,000  MVA  since  high-voltage 

insulation  is  not  required  over  most  of  the  line.   Basically magnetic  shielding  replaces 

electrical shielding (insulation), as the beam is transmitted at ground potential.  

Electrons are injected from a cathode which is at a large negative potential with 

respect to a virtual anode at ground potential.  They are focused through a hole in the 

center  of  the  virtual  anode  and  drift  at  a  high  velocity  inside  an  evacuated  spiral 

quadrupole  focused  delivery  tube.    The  quadrupole  focusing  facilitates  bending  the 

electron  beam  around  corners.  The  kinetic  energy  of  the  electrons  is  recovered  at  the 

collection end where they enter a retarding electric field as they slow down and finally 

come to rest.  Thus the electron kinetic energy is converted to potential energy when the 

electrons are collected on the true anode, and is available to do work on the load.  

One problem with EBT is that even a narrow energy spread in the electron beam 

can translate into large losses at the collector.  Maintenance of the needed high vacuum 
pressure of less than 10-7 Torr will not be easy.  Another problem is that if the electron  
beam  is  diverted  and  strikes  the  vessel  wall,  it  will  burn  a  hole  through  not  only  the 

tube but any obstacles in its way. 

On the other hand, focusing of the electrons is not as difficult as it may seem.  In 

a  symmetrical  configuration,  the  electrostatic  force  of  repulsion  of  the  electrons  is 

largely  canceled  by  their  self-magnetic  field  as  the  velocity  of  the  electron  beam 

approaches  the  speed  of  light.    In  electron-positron  storage  rings  which  are  similar  to 

electron-beam delivery, the circulating electron bunches have an average power of 200 

MW and travel more than a billion miles in just 1 1/2 hours of storage. 

 
Microwave Delivery 

 

In 1897 Nikola Tesla applied for (and was granted) a patent in which he claimed 

that he had invented, and experimentally demonstrated, an advanced form of wireless 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
 

-9- 

electric power delivery through the earth and the atmosphere for collection at a distant 

point.    To  this  day  no  one  has  been  able  to demonstrate  this invention.   Although the 

microwave delivery of high power through air sounds a little like Tesla's old dream, the 

similarity ends with the absence of wires or waveguides.   

The  efficiency  of  generating,  transmitting,  and  receiving  microwave  power  

appears  to  be  significantly  less  than  by  conventional  means.    At  frequencies  above  10 

MHz,  there  is  a  problem  of  significant  beam  power  absorption  by  water  vapor  and 

oxygen.  The sensitivity to water vapor makes  microwave delivery vulnerable to rain, 

snow,  and  ice.    Hence  the  power  capacity  and  power  losses  would  be  quite  weather-

dependent.    This  problem  could  be  circumvented  by  transmitting  microwave  power 

inside large cylinders.  However, this would greatly add to a highly expensive system 

which is already burdened by costly and inefficient equipment for conversion from 60 

Hz to microwave frequencies and back again to 60 Hz.   

Much  interest  was  generated  in  the  last  decade  in  the  free-space  microwave 

delivery of power to Earth from an orbiting solar satellite.  On top of the power losses 

and  high  capital  and  operating  costs,  such  a  free-space  system  has  the  grave 

disadvantage  that  it  may  be  a  danger  to  humans  and  animals  that  get  in  or  near  the 

beam. 

 
Laser-Beam Delivery 

Someday  in  the  far  future,  we  may  have  laser-beam  power  delivery.    It  would 

have  a  clear  advantage  over  ordinary  power  delivery  in  that  no  electrical  insulation 

would be required.  It would have a clear advantage over electron-beam delivery in that 

no magnetic insulation would be required.  With two such outstanding advantages, we 

may well ask:  Where's the rub?    

The major disadvantage of laser-beam power delivery is in the conversion from 

electric  power  to  light  (electromagnetic  radiation)  and  back  again.    This  process  is 
presently so inefficient that less than 10-4 of the energy would be available to the load.  
Even if the light itself were delivered directly to the recipient for illumination purposes, 

the efficiency is presently too low to be practical.  However, solid state devices for direct 
conversion  may  someday  change  these  prospects.    We  may  then  consider  high  power 

laser  beams  in  evacuated  vessels  for  transmission,  and  fiber  optic  bundles  for 

-10- 

distribution.  The next level of concern will be how to avoid burning holes through the 

containing vessels. 

References 
[1] E.J. Britt, G.O. Fitzpatrick, L.K. Hansen, and M. Rabinowitz, U.S. Pat. 4,396,865 (1983) 

[2]  M. Rabinowitz and W. H. Esselman, U.S. Pat. 4,594,630 (1986).   

[3]  N.C. Christofilos, U.S. Patent 2,736,799 (1956)  

[4]  N.C. Christofilos, U.S. Patent 2,953,750 (1960).   

 

 

