Role of the dielectric constant of ferroelectric ceramic in enhancing the ionic

conductivity of a polymer electrolyte composite

Pramod Kumar Singha* and Amreesh Chandrab

(a)  Department of  Physics, Banaras Hindu University,Varanasi-221005, India

E mail: singhpk71@rediffmail.com

(b)  School  of  Materials  Science  and  Technology,  Institute  of  Technology,  Banaras  Hindu

University, Varanasi-221005, India

      E mail :  rishu_chandra@yahoo.com

Abstract

           The dispersal of high dielectric constant ferroelectric ceramic material Bao.7Sro.3TiO3  (Tc≈

300C) and Ba0.88Sr0.12TiO3 (Tc≈ 900C) in an ion conducting polymer electrolyte (PEO: NH4I) is

reported  to  result  in  an  increase  in  the  room  temperature  ionic  conductivity  by  two  orders  of

magnitude. The conductivity enhancement “peaks” as we approach the dielectric phase transition

of the dispersed  ferroelectric material where the ε changes from ~ 2000 to 4000. This establishes

the  role  of  dielectric  constant  of  the  dispersoid  in  enhancing  the  ionic  conductivity  of  the

polymeric composites.

Ion  conducting  polymers,  obtained  by  polar  polymer-salt  complexation  are  becoming

increasingly important because of their application in solid state polymer batteries and fuel cells.

One  class  of  polymer  electrolytes  which  are  widely  studied  is  the  "polymer-salt  complex"  in

which  a  dissociable  salt  is  complexed  with  a  polar  polymer  (like  polyethylene  oxide

PEO;polypropylene  oxide  PPO  etc  ).  Many  good  lithium  ion  conducting  polymer  electrolytes

have been developed 1-4 by complexing polar polymers (say PEO) with lithium salts like lithium

perchlorate, lithium triflate, lithium tetrafluoroborate (LiBF4) etc. Apart from Li+-ion conducting

polymers,  good  proton  (H+)  ion  conducting  polymer  electrolytes  have  also  been  obtained  by

complexing ammonium salts 5-7 with polar polymers. To enhance the ionic conductivity, various

approaches which have been pursued are to: (a) change the type of complexing polymer (b) use

polymers with different chain lengths (c) use different complexing salts (d) modify the degree of

crystallinity  by  the  use  of  plasticizers  and  copolymerisation  (e)  form  “composites”  by  the

dispersal  of  neutral/chemically  inert  fillers.  Forming  "composites"  by  the  dispersal  of  ceramic

fillers  is  a  very  promising  approach  as  it  can  enhance  the  conductivity  as  well  as  provide

mechanical strength to the polymeric film. The mechanism of conductivity enhancement has been

extensively  studied  8-10  for  crystalline  -crystalline  composites.  The  two  important  mechanisms

suggested for the conductivity enhancement of these composites are: (a) Adsorption-Desorption

model  of  Maier8  who  proposed  that  the  ionic  charge  carrier  concentration  at  the  interface

increases in  the composites  and (b) Percolation  model  due  to  Bunde  et  al10  who  introduced  the

idea of the presence of a high conductivity path at the interface which develops connectivity or

“percolation” at a certain composition threshold of the dispersoid. The situation in the case of the

polymer composites is more complicated because the dispersal of a “filler” changes the polymeric

structure/morphology.  Some  of  the  important  additional  factors  to  be  considered  for  the

polymeric composites are:

(i)change in glass transition temperature (Tg) and melting temperature of the polymer (Tm)

(ii)change in the degree of crystallinity

(iii)size  of  the  dispersoid  particle  because  the  interface  contact  area  changes  inversely  as  the

radius  of  the  particle  (1/r)  since  the  surface  to  volume  ratio  is  approximately  proportional  to

(l/r).

(iv) nature of the dispersoid which may be acidic or alkaline or amphoteric.

     We show in this paper that the dielectric constant of the dispersoid is also a controlling factor.

To  fulfil  our  motivation  and  to  establish  unambiguously  the  role  of  dielectric  constant  of  the

dispersoid in modifying the ionic conductivity of the polymer electrolyte, we have designed the

composite for our study such that it avoids the confusion arising out of the factors listed above as

explained later in this paper.

The  dielectric  constant  of  the  dispersoid  is  expected  to  change  the  ion  transport  in  the  polymer

electrolyte  since  its  presence  modifies  the  local  electric  field  distribution  inside  the  polymeric

composite ionic matrix. In the presence of dispersed “ferroelectric” particles of dielectric constant

higher than that of the basic polymer electrolyte ionic matrix, the electric field lines get modified

such that the field would be higher “near the interface” of the polymer  due to the high dielectric

constant dispersoid (i.e., ferroelectric). This can have either of the following two effects:

(a) the “effective” conductivity due to the movement of the mobile ions, near the interface may

increase, as the effective local field for the same applied potential is higher, or

(b)  the  dissociation  of  the  complexed  salt11  in  the  polymer  near  the  interface  may  increase

resulting  in  an  increase  in  the  number  of  free  mobile  charge  carriers  ‘n’  (and  hence

enhancement  of  the  net  conductivity)  since  n=noexp(-U/2εkT);  where  U  is  the  dissociation

energy.

In general, the high dielectric constant of the dispersoid may enhance n or effective µ or

both resulting in an increase in the overall conductivity.

For  experimentally  verifying  the  above  statements,  a  possible  experiment  could  be  to

choose  “different  dispersoid  materials  with  widely  different  dielectric  constants”.  An  argument

against this is that the resulting effect in the conductivity enhancement would not only be due to

the  dielectric  constant  but  also  will  be  the  combined  effect  of  the  factors  (i)  to  (iv)  discussed

above  in  an  earlier  paragraph.  All  the  factors  (including  dielectric  constant)  are  not  mutually

exclusive and hence it is experimentally difficult to “unambiguously  establish” the role of each

separately. This constraint forces us not to change the type of dispersoid. Yet our requirement is

to create a condition of measurement such that the dielectric constant “changes significantly”. To

obtain these conditions, we chose a  “ferroelectric  material”  as  dispersoid  with  “dielectric  phase

transition”  in  a  temperature  range  over  which  the  changes  in  the  conductivity  of  polymer

electrolyte  can  be  easily  measured.  The  polymer  electrolyte  chosen  by  us  is  PEO:NH4I  (80:20

wt% )7 in which a modified BaTiO3ferroelectric ceramic (Bal-xSrxTiO3) is dispersed. It has been

earlier found12 that by changing x, the dielectric phase transition temperature changes and can be

so adjusted that it falls in the desired temperature range in which the conductivity can be easily

measured.  The  choice  of  ‘x’  (and  corresponding  transition  temperature)  of  the  dispersoid  is

"crucial" to our experiment since PEO has Tm~ 60°C above which the film becomes amorphous

and  the  conductivity  rises  suddenly.  We  have  chosen  two  values  of  'x',  viz.,  x=0.30  with  Tc  ~

300C which is lower than the Tm of PEO and x=0.12 with Tc ~ 90°C which is above the Tm of

PEO.

The Sr2+ modified BaTiO3 ferroelectric ceramic, abbreviated as BST, was prepared using a

novel semi-chemical route12. Fine powders of BST is obtained by crushing the sintered pellets in

agate  pistle-mortar  and  then  sieving  it  by  using  a  400  mesh  sieve.  Before  dispersing  this  in

polymer,  a  highly  viscous  solution  of  the  complexed  polymer  electrolyte  is  first  obtained.  The

PEO was dissolved in methanol to which 20 wt % of NH4I was added and stirred at 40°C by a

magnetic stirrer for 4 -5 hours. Then, the fine powder of BST(3wt%) was added and again stirred

thoroughly  till  the  solution  became  highly  viscous.  This  viscous  solution  was  poured  in  a

polypropylene  petri  dish  and  solution  casted  films  were  obtained  after  thoroughly  drying  in  air

followed by vacuum drying. Our earlier studies on the composition dependence of this composite

has  shown11  that  the  composite  with  3  wt%  of  BST  has  highest  conductivity  and  so  this

composite  was  chosen  for  the  present  work.  The  bulk  conductivity  was  evaluated  by  complex

impedance spectroscopy13,14  technique using Hioki Hi Tester model 3520 in the frequency range

40 Hz-100 KHz. The dielectric constant was measured using Hioki Hi Tester 3532.

The  values  of  the  dielectric  constant  of  BST  at  different  temperatures  for  x=0.30  and

x=0.12  are  shown  as  “inset”  of  Figures  1  and  2.  The  dielectric  constant  for  x=0.30  sample  is

nearly  2000  at  the  low  temperature  end  i.e.,  <  20oC.  It  suddenly  peaks  to  a  value  of  4000  at  ~

30oC and then decreases again to 2000 or lower. For the case of BST with x=0.12, we observe a

similar change in the dielectric constant at its transition temperature Tc ~ 90°C.

The  σ  Vs.  1/T  plot  for  (PEO:NH4I)+  3  wt%  Bal-X  SrxTiO3  is  shown  in  Figure  1  for  the

polymeric composite with dispersoid having x=0.30 with Tc =30°C. We see that the conductivity

increases  as  we  approach  Tc≈30oC  where  the  dielectric  constant  peaks.  Above  30oC,  the

conductivity again reaches its normal value as the dielectric constant becomes nearly equal to its

value before the transition temperature Tc. The conductivity then shoots up sharply at ~ 50-55°C

as  we  approach  the  Tm  value  of  the  polymer  PEO.  This  increase  in  the  conductivity  at  Tm  is  a

general observation and has been assigned to the high amorphicity beyond Tm.

For the polymer samples containing BST ferroelectric dispersoid with x=0.12; Tc~90°C,

the  change  in  the  conductivity  in  the  30°  -  40oC  range  is  not  seen  (see  Fig.  2)  since  in  this

temperature  range the values of the dielectric constant  does  not  change  much.  However,  we  do

see a small hump in the values of σ as we pass through the dielectric phase transition of the BST

ceramic (with Tc ~90oC). This change in the conductivity is not as clearly seen as that in Fig. 1

because beyond Tm the conductivity of the base polymer electrolyte itself is large and the changes

in σ introduced by the dispersoid BST are masked.

In brief, we have conclusively shown that in  polymer electrolyte-  ceramic composites, the high

dielectric constant of the dispersed ferroelectric ceramics has a definite role in the enhancement

of the conductivity of the composite, possibly as a result of the high effective electric field at the

dispersed-polymer interfaces.

Acknowledgement

We  thank  Professor  S.  Chandra  for  valuable  guidance  and  advice.  One  of  us  (PKS)  thanks

C.S.I.R. (Govt. of India) for  the award  of  Senior Research  Fellowship  under  Emeritus  Scientist

project of Professor S. Chandra.

1  (a)  F.M.  Gray  “Solid  Polymer  Electrolytes-Fundamental  and  Technological  Applications”,

References

VCH Pub., UK (1991).

   (b)  J.R.  MacCallum  and  C.A.  Vincent  (Eds.)  “Polymer  Electrolyte  Reviews  1&2”,  Elsevier,

London and NewYork. (1987,1989).

2 F. Croce, G.B. Appetecchi, L. Persi, B. Scrosati, Nature, 394, 456, (1998).

3 P. Mustarelli, E. Quartarone, C. Tomasi, A. Magistris, Solid State Ionics, 135, 81 (2000).

4 Q. Li, N. Imanishi, Y. Takeda, A. Hirano and O. Yamamoto, Ionics, 8, 79 (2002).

5 S.A. Hashmi, A. Kumar, K.K. Maurya, S. Chandra, J. Phys.D Appl Phys., 23,1307(1990).

6 P.K Singh, S. Chandra and A. Chandra, J. Mat. Sci. Lett., 21, 1393 (2002).

7 K.K Maurya, N. Srivastava, S.A Hashmi and S. Chandra,  J. Mat. Sci., 27, 6357 (1992).

8 J. Maier in “Superionic Solids and Solid Electrolytes-Recent Trends” edited by A.L. Laskar and

S .Chandra, Academic press, New York (1989) p.137.

9 J. Maier, Prog. Solid St. Chem., 23, 171 (1995).

10 A. Bunde, W. Dietrich and E. Roman, Solid State Ionics, 18/19, 14 (1986).

11 P.K Singh and Amreesh Chandra, National Academy Sci. Lett., 25 (2002).

12 V.S Tiwari, N. Singh and D. Pandey, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 7, 1441 (1995).

13  S.  Chandra    “Superionic  Solids-Principles  and  applications”,  North  –Holland,  Amsterdam,

(1981)

14 J.E. Bauerle, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 30, 2657 (1969).

Figure captions

of 1 KHz.

FIG. 1. Temperature dependence of conductivity for (PEO:NH4I)+ 3 wt% Ba0.70 Sr0.30TiO3. The

inset shows the temperature dependence of the dielectric constant of BST at a frequency

FIG.  2.  Temperature  dependence  of  conductivity  for  (PEO:NH4I)+  3  wt%  Ba0.88  Sr0.12TiO3

sample. The inset shows the values of the dielectric constant of the dispersed BST material at a

frequency of 1 KHz.

Fig.1

Fig. 2

