EXCITATION OF A FUNNEL-SHAPE OPTICAL NEAR FIELD BY
THE LAGUARRE-GAUSSIAN DOUGHNUT BEAM
S. M. IftiquarA, Haruhiko ItoA,B, Akifumi TakamizawaB and Motoichi OhtsuA,B
A ERATO Localized Photon Project, Japan Science and Technology Corporation,
687-1-17/4F Tsuruma, Tokyo 194-0004, Japan. E-mail: iftiquar@ohtsu.jst.go.jp
B Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
4259 Nagatsuta, Kanagawa 226-8502, Japan

For the precise control of atoms beyond the diffraction limit, we consider the use of optical near
fields localized in a nanometer region [1]. In this case, high-density cold atoms are required for
effective interaction with the nanometric optical near fields. To this end, we are  developing an
atom funnel, which makes a cold atomic beam from laser-cooled atoms [2]. The atom funnel is
composed  of  an  inverse  triangular-pyramidal  hollow  prism  with  a  200-microns  exit  hole.  The
optical near field produced on the inner-wall surface by a doughnut-shaped light beam reflects
and  cools  atoms  falling  from  a  magneto-optical  trap  and  collects  them  at  the  bottom  under  a
blue-detuning  condition.  The  doughnut  beam  with  a  power  of  more  than  500  mW  and  a
diameter of  more than 4 mm are required for efficient funneling of Rb atoms. In addition,  the
dark centre of 200 microns is needed for avoidance of the spontaneous-emission heating [3]. In
this paper, we report the generation of the optical near field using the Laguarre-Gaussian beam
with a doughnut mode [4]. Figure 1 shows a cross-sectional image of a doughnut beam with a
power of 0.5 W produced from a Gaussian one by means of interference [4] of spherical waves.
The beam diameter is 5 mm,  while the hollow diameter is  about  250  microns.  The  method  of
Gouy  phase  difference  used  here  has  several  advantages,  compared  to  the  conventional  ones
such as holography. First, the conversion efficiency is up to 50 %. Second, the diameter of the
dark centre is variable and can be made below 100 microns. Thanks to these advantages, we can
make the special doughnut beam with a large bright ring and a small dark centre. Moreover, it is
possible  to  keep  the  hollow  region  over  a  long  distance  of  more  than  200  cm.  Since  the
doughnut beam has an angular moment to the propagation direction, the atoms see the radiation
pressure toward the same direction. Consequently, the atoms coming out of the exit hole can be
confined  by  the  transverse  dipole  force  and  guided  by  the  longitudinal  spontaneous  force
through  the  doughnut  beam  to  an  arbitrary  point.  Figure  2  shows  the  intensity  profile  of  the
optical near field (evanescent field) produced on a surface by the doughnut beam shown in Fig.
1. The peak intensity is estimated to be more than 5 W/cm2. Assuming this optical near field, we
can show that laser-cooled Rb atom of more than 50 % are converted to an atomic beam with a
mean kinetic energy of about 100 microkelvin in terms of temperature. In this case, the atomic
flux is estimated to be 1013 atom/s cm2, which satisfies our conditions [3].

References
[1]  Near-Field  Nano/Atom
Optics 
and  Technology,
edited  by  M.  Ohtsu,  Chap.
11(Springer, Tokyo,1998)
[2]  H.  Ito,  et  al.  Phys.  Rev.

A56 (1997) pp. 712

[3]  A.  Takamizawa,  et  al.
CLEO/PR2001 pp. I-512
[4]  S.  M.  Iftiquar,  et  al.
Postdeadline  paper,  CLEO/
Pacific  Rim  2001,  WJPD1-
5, pp. 34.

of 

image 

Figure 1
a
CCD 
beam
doughnut 
converted 
a
Gaussuan  beam  by  the
interference method.

from 

Figure 2

Cross-sectional 
intensity
profile  of  an  optical  near
field  produced  by 
the
doughnut beam

