3
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
8
2
 
 
 
9
1
1
5
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Universal Dynamic Complexity as Extended
Dynamic Fractality: Causally Complete
Understanding of Living Systems Emergence
and Operation*

A.P. Kirilyuk
Institute of Metal Physics, Kiev-142, Ukraine 03142
e-mail: kiril@metfiz.freenet.kiev.ua

Summary. The unreduced description of any real system with interaction reveals natural emergence of
multiple,  incompatible  system  versions,  or  realisations,  formed  by  dynamic  entanglement  of  the
interacting system components and forced to permanently replace each other in a causally random order,
which  permits  one  to  define  and  calculate  the  a  priori  probabilities  of  their  emergence,  their  internal
structure,  and  the  unreduced  system  complexity.  The  dynamically  redundant  and  internally  entangled
realisations  form  the  hierarchical,  dynamically  probabilistic  and  self-developing  structure  of  any  real
system  called  extended  dynamical  fractal.  Contrary  to  the  conventional  fractality,  it  gives  the  exact
representation  of  any  kind  of  structure/behaviour,  including  the  specific  living  system  properties,  and
therefore  provides,  starting  from  a  high  enough  level  of  its  complexity,  the  causally  complete
understanding of the phenomenon of life and qualitatively new applications in biology and medicine.

1 Introduction

The  observed  forms  of  many  real,  and  especially  living,  objects  cannot  be
consistently described in terms of the classical geometry elements, such as lines, spheres
or polyhedrons, but should instead be explained as ‘infinitely’ fine structured, irregular
and ‘arborescent’ (multi-scale) constructions. This fundamental conclusion qualitatively
changing the millennia-old ideas of the mathematical presentation of reality underlies the
decades-old  concept  of  fractality  (see  e.  g.  [1-5])  and  marks  the  end  of  apparently
prosperous development of the canonical science.

However,  as  it  often  happens  at  the  beginning  of  a  revolutionary  change,  the
appearing new knowledge inherits, in its starting version, some basic limitations of the
previous level. The original notion of fractal, having already become ‘canonical’ itself and
found  versatile  applications,  deals  rather  with  formal,  mathematical  imitation  of  the
external form of certain real structures, trying to reproduce their apparently ‘self-similar’
repetition within a limited range of scales and leaving aside the real mechanism of their
autonomous, dynamic emergence, as well as the origin of the whole, unified diversity of
forms,  including  the  apparently  ‘non-fractal’  ones.  Indeed,  it  is  clear  that  abstract
algorithms used in computer simulations of growing fractals are quite different from any
real dynamics by their ‘external’, ‘man-made’ origin involving huge simplification of the
unreduced interactions governing the natural structure emergence.

As a result, the canonical, ‘mathematical’ fractals, despite many visible correlations
with their natural counterparts, show fundamental and ‘fatal’ deviations from the essential
properties  of  the  latter,  such  as  the  totally  autonomous  and  dynamically  continuous
(though quite uneven) emergence from qualitatively different interacting components, the

*Report  presented  at  the  Third  International  Symposium  “Fractals  2000  in  Biology  and  Medecine”
(Ascona, 8-11 March 2000), http://www.tinet.ch/cerfim/fractals2000, and published in the proceedings:
Fractals in Biology and Medicine, Vol. III, ed. by G.A. Losa, D. Merlini, T.F. Nonnenmacher, and E.R.
Weibel (Birkhäuser, Basel, 2002), p. 271-284.

2

‘true’, dynamic randomness (unpredictability) in almost any detail of a natural structure,
and global, irregular intermittency of ‘apparently fractal’ and ‘apparently non-fractal’,
‘classical’ forms emerging within dynamically unified development of the underlying
interaction  processes  (like  different  structures/organs  within  a  living  organism,
civilisation, or cosmic space). The latter property of the natural structures means that in
reality they do not possess scale invariance, apart from an approximate self-similarity
existing within certain, fixed group of neighbouring scales and unpredictably passing into
quite different type of structure that does not show any self-similarity within the respective
group of scales. Besides many evident examples of particular structures, like those cited
above, this definitely refers to the ultimately big, ‘global’ type of meta-structure like a
living organism (considered now at all levels of its dynamics), the planet ecosystem, or
the whole universe that should most probably emerge, at least within the majority of the
scales involved, by a dynamically continuous development of the naturally incorporated
interaction  processes  giving  thus  the  single,  unified  dynamical  fractal  of  the  ‘global’
system that includes the whole diversity of its structures.

The non-dynamical, ‘kinematic’ or ‘geometric’, nature of the canonical fractals
determines not only their fundamental difference from the real prototypes, but also the
actual absence of the common basis between the ‘fractal’ presentation of reality and other
views on the same reality obtained within various, also basically limited and separated
among  them,  concepts  of  the  canonical  ‘science  of  complexity’  (such  as  ‘dynamical
chaos’, ‘self-organisation’, ‘adaptability’), despite many occasional links between them
(cf. [6]). A related basic deficiency of the usual fractality, and ‘science of complexity’ in
general, is that its approach to higher-level, living systems is basically detached from
explanation of the world dynamics at other, lower levels that determine, for example, the
operation of microscopic physical and chemical constituents of a living organism (some of
them  are  even  not  considered  as  complex  systems  and  fractals  within  the  canonical
‘science  of  complexity’).  Since  in  addition  the  scholar  science  presentation  of  that,
relatively  ‘simple’  kind  of  systems  is  characterised  itself  by  the  fundamental
incompleteness and persisting difficulties with causal understanding of reality (‘quantum
mysteries’ etc.), it becomes clear that the causally complete, fundamentally consistent
description  of  the  resulting,  much  more  complex  biological  systems,  imposed  by  the
modern stage of development, is possible only within essential, qualitative extension of
the canonical science paradigm.

It is especially important to have the unreduced, dynamically based understanding of
fractality when it is related to living organisms, since they are just characterised by the
explicit, even externally ‘strong’ manifestations of the full-scale autonomous creativity
(‘spontaneous’ emergence of structures, permanent autonomous motion at all levels, and
‘desire’ of change, ‘élan vital’), dynamical randomness, unified diversity (wholeness),
extremely large adaptability, ‘individuality’, etc. Indeed, it is clear that any canonical,
mathematically or numerically simulated fractal that does not possess all those essential
properties  in  their  unreduced  version  cannot  reproduce  the  major  system  property  of
‘being alive’, after which any its partial, external similarity to an artificially fixed form of
the real organism can only be useful for lower-level, ‘mechanical’ and empirically based
applications, but not for the intrinsically complete understanding and monitoring of life
becoming  absolutely  indispensable  at  the  modern  stage  of  quantitatively  powerful
technology development. In practice, the canonical fractality operates with statistically
averaged, external (geometro-kinematic) characterisation of the observed structures and
their numerical simulations (like ‘fractal dimensions’ etc.) [1-5], whereas it is a variously
confirmed  fact  that  all  most  specific  features  of  living  forms,  and  the  essence  of  the
phenomenon of life as such, are determined just by non-statistical, individually specified,
‘inimitable’ structures and types of behaviour.

In this paper we present the causally complete extension of the notion of fractality
totally adequate with respect to real (including living) systems it describes and obtained
within the new, universal concept of dynamic complexity based on the phenomenon of

3

dynamic multivaluedness (redundance) of any interaction process [7]. Using these results
we  show  (section  2)  that  such  extended  dynamical  fractals  reproduce  exactly  the
mentioned essential properties of real (living) systems and therefore provide the correct
and universal representation of any local or ‘global’ structure, including its apparently
‘non-fractal’  parts  (in  terms  of  canonical  fractality).  This  means  that  the  unreduced
dynamical fractal is none other than the exact structure of the hierarchy of complexity
representing the whole world dynamics and taken at any its particular location or group of
levels, where living systems (in the ordinary sense) start from certain, high enough level
of that unified, fractal hierarchy of dynamic complexity of the universe [7]. This inbred
universality  and  unreduced  realism  of  the  extended  fractality  open  unrestricted,
qualitatively  new  possibilities  for  various  practical  problem  solution  in  biology  and
medicine outlined in section 3.

2  Universal  dynamic  fractality  within  the  dynamic  redundance  paradigm
and the properties of life

We start with a rather evident, and actually well substantiated, argument that any real
system  can  exist  and  possess  its  properties  only  due  to  the  interaction  between  its
elementary  constituents  (coming  eventually  from  lower  levels  of  the  same,  unified
hierarchy of world complexity [7]). It is equally obvious that all real interactions are
‘unreduced’  in  the  sense  that  within  a  system  ‘everything  interacts  with  everything’.
However, since such unreduced interaction does not allow for a closed, ‘exact’ solution,
the  canonical  science,  including  all  approaches  of  the  conventional  ‘science  of
complexity’, invariably resorts to essential truncation of self-developing interaction links
within a version of ‘perturbation theory’ transforming the problem into a ‘separable’, or
‘integrable’ one (possessing an exact solution), but simultaneously killing just those non-
trivial properties of the natural interaction that determine the emergence and development
of  the  real  system.  It  is  especially  evident  that  the  unreduced,  self-developing  and
dynamically  unpredictable  fractality  cannot  be  obtained  as  a  ‘closed’  solution  of  a
‘separable’ problem.

Therefore we try to analyse the arbitrary interaction process within a real system
without  any  simplification,  which  leads,  as  we  shall  see,  to  the  discovery  of  its
qualitatively  new  properties,  such  as  dynamic  randomness,  fractality  and  intrinsic
creativity. We can only briefly illustrate here the rigorous analysis of the universal science
of complexity [7] that starts with a quite general mathematical representation of a system
with interaction by its ‘existence equation’ simply fixing the fact of interaction. Consider
for simplicity and without loss of generality interaction between two real entities, Q and X
(they can be subdivided into any number of independent constituents), characterised by
the degrees of freedom q and x . In course of interaction the component degrees of freedom
inseparably entangle among them and produce a compound system state described by the
state-function, Y (q,x ), which satisfies the following existence equation simply describing
the conditions of the problem:

[hQ(q) + hX (x ) + V(q,x )]Y (q,x ) = EY (q,x ) ,                              (1)

where  the  ‘generalised  Hamiltonians’  hQ(q)  and  hX (x )  describe  the  ‘free’  state  of
interacting entities ‘before’ the beginning of interaction (they can be represented by any
actually measured function, being a form of ‘dynamic complexity’ defined below, but can
always  be  interpreted  as  Hamiltonians  in  the  universal  formalism  [7]),  V(q,x ) is the
generalised ‘interaction potential’ bringing inseparability of entanglement to the system,
and E is the ‘eigenvalue’, corresponding to the chosen ‘Hamiltonians’ and expressing the
measured property value for the whole compound system.

4

Instead of trying to artificially (‘approximately’) separate the irreducibly entangled
interacting  entities  by  developing  a  version  of  ‘perturbation  theory’  (conventional
approach), we can trace the real interaction development by recurrently expressing one of
the  entities  (say  q) through the other one (x ),  using  eq.  (1),  and  thus  reformulate  the
existence  equation  in  terms  of  only  one  entity  (x ),  while  the  other  entity  (system
components)  will  actually  be  present  in  the  total  solution  reflecting  the  recurrent
development of interaction links (component entanglement). We thus obtain the effective
existence  equation first used for physical problems solution [8,9] and generalising the
well-known ‘optical’, or effective, potential method:

[hX (x ) + Veff(x ;h )]y

0(x ) = hy

0(x ) ,                                    (2)

where the operator of the effective (interaction) potential (EP), Veff(x ;h ), is given by

^
Veff(x ;h ) = V00(x ) + V

^
(x ;h ), V

(x ;h )y

0(x ) = 

dx ¢ V(x ,x ¢ ;h )y

0(x ¢ ) ,             (3a)

W

 

x

V(x ,x ¢ ;h ) ”

 (cid:229)

 
n,i

V 0n(x )y 0
h

ni(x )Vn0(x ¢ )y 0*
 - h 0
n i -  e n 0 

 

n i(x ¢ )

 , e n0 ”

 e n - e

0 ,                (3b)

Vnn¢ (x ) ”

dq f *

n (q)V(q,x )f n¢ (q) ,                                    (3c)

 

 ı
W q

 

e n and f n(q) are the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions for the non-interacting entity/object Q
describing  its  elementary  dynamical  ‘modes’  or  (physical)  ‘points’,  h  ”
 E - e
0 is the
eigenvalue of the unreduced problem to be found, {y 0
ni} are the complete
sets of eigenfunctions and eigenvalues for an ‘auxiliary’ system of equations,

ni(x )}  and  {h 0

[hX (x ) + Vnn(x )]y n(x ) + (cid:229)

n¢

„ n

Vnn¢ (x )y n¢ (x ) = h ny n(x ) , h n ”

 E - e n ,           (4)

that  just  describes  the  ‘outlet’  to  further  development  of  inseparable  (nonintegrable)
interaction process, and summations are performed over n,n´ „

 0.

The total solution of eq. (1) is expressed as

Y (q,x ) = (cid:229)

0(q) + (cid:229)

f

c i   º

 f n(q)g^

ni(x ) y
 ß

n

0i(x ) ,                      (5a)

 

i

0i(x ¢ ) , gni(x ,x ¢ ) = (cid:229)

g^
ni(x )y

0i(x ) = (cid:242)

dx ¢ gni(x ,x ¢ )y

W

 

x

ni¢ (x )Vn0(x ¢ )y 0*
y 0
i - h 0
ni¢  - e n 0
h

 

ni¢ (x ¢ )

 ,  (5b)

 
i¢

0i(x )}, and eigenvalues, {h i}, are found from the effective
where the eigenfunctions, {y
existence equation, eqs. (2)-(3), and coefficients ci should be determined from solution
matching on the boundary where V(q,x ) = 0. The measured generalised system density,
r (q,x ),  is  given  either  by  the  state-function  itself,  r (q,x ) = Y (q,x ),  or  by  its  simple
function like squared modulus, r (q,x ) = ‰

Y (q,x )‰ 2.

(cid:242)
(cid:243)
Œ
Ø
œ
ø
5

The ‘effective’ formulation of a problem, eqs. (2)-(5), is formally equivalent to its
initial  expression,  eq.  (1),  but  now  it  permits  one  to  explicitly  reveal  the  universal
mechanism of the essential nonlinearity development within any unreduced interaction
process (which may seem externally linear, in the initial formulation of eq. (1)). Namely,
the essential nonlinearity enters through the EP dependence, eqs. (3), on the eigenvalues
to be found, h , which does not reflect any a priori  presumed,  artificially  inserted  and
arbitrary defined ‘nonlinearity’ of the potential configuration or its relation to the state-
function,  but  emerges  dynamically,  in  course  of  the  natural  interaction  development
always involving, in its unreduced version, the autonomous interaction loop formation
(‘everything interacts with everything’ and through everything with itself) just adequately
described by the recurrent EP formalism.

The essential, dynamic nonlinearity is eliminated in the perturbative, ‘separating’
approach of the canonical science that tries to ‘simplify’ the exact expressions of eqs. (3)-
(5) by totally reducing the EP dependence on the unknown eigenvalues and eigenfunctions
and obtains indeed an ‘exact’, closed solution, but only in the form of small, perturbative
additions to the zeroth order problem (obtained, for example, if Veff(x ;h ) = V00(x ) in eq.
(3a)). After that the conventional science often inserts an artificial, but also integrable
‘nonlinearity’ which in reality is equivalent, in terms of the real, dynamical nonlinearity, to
another essentially  linear problem that corresponds to ‘renormalisation’ of the ‘free’,
separated  system  state  expressed  now  through  other,  as  if  ‘nonlinear’,  but  in  reality
always ‘exact’ (integrable), eigen-modes.

If now we preserve the essential nonlinearity of the unreduced EP formalism, eqs.
(2)-(5), then it appears that the solution to a problem can still be found, but it possesses
qualitatively new properties, providing the described system behaviour with the intrinsic,
dynamical randomness and self-developing, unreduced fractality. Indeed, it is not difficult
to see [7-9] that the nonlinear appearance of the eigenvalue to be found, h , in the EP
expression, eqs. (3), leads to excessive number of eigen-solutions (with respect to their
ordinary  ‘complete’  set)  found  from  the  characteristic  equation,  since  the  additional
dependence on h  increases its highest power in that equation. If Nx  is the number of terms
in the sum over i in eq. (3b), actually equal to the number of eigen-modes (or ‘points’) of
the object/entity X
 participating in the interaction, then one obtains the Nx -fold redundance
of  the  eigen-solutions  of  the  effective  existence  equation,  eq.  (2),  where  each  of  the
redundant solutions is as complete as any ordinary solution and exhaustively describes a
state  of  the  system.  Since  all  these  solutions,  representing  different  ‘versions’  of  the
system and therefore called system realisations, are absolutely equal in their ‘right’ to
appear in observations, the system is forced to permanently ‘jump’ from one realisation to
another, each time passing by a special ‘intermediate’ state/realisation and ‘choosing’ each
next ‘regular’ realisation from their full set in a causally random fashion. This means that
every smallest, even infinitesimal (or ‘fractal’) fluctuation of the system in the intermediate
state  towards  a  particular    realisation  is  dynamically  self-amplified  and  the  system
undergoes  a  catastrophic  ‘collapse’,  or  ‘reduction’,  to  this  realisation,  after  which  it
returns to the intermediate realisation and the cycle repeats with a new, causally random
realisation  choice.  This  unceasingly repeated dynamical  reduction of the system to a
randomly  chosen  realisation  and  the  reverse  dynamic  extension  to  the  common
(delocalised) intermediate realisation are consistently described by the above equations of
the unreduced EP formalism [7]. Thus, it can be seen from expression of eq. (5b) for the
state-function  that  the  latter  is  concentrated  (dynamically  squeezed)  just  around  that
configuration/point, where the corresponding EP well is dynamically formed, according to
eq. (3b), for that particular realisation.

We  call  the  revealed  multitude  of  incompatible  (redundant)  realisations  of  an
arbitrary system with interaction dynamic multivaluedness (redundance) phenomenon and
show that it is the key feature of the universal  dynamic  complexity of any real system
(interaction process), where dynamic complexity as such can be consistently defined as
any growing function of the total number of system realisations, or the related rate of their

6

change, equal to zero for the unrealistic limiting case of only one system realisation [7,9].
It is that, artificial projection of the dynamically multivalued reality onto single, ‘averaged’
solution-realisation  that  is  exclusively  studied  in  the  canonical  science,  including  the
conventional  ‘science  of  complexity’,  which  provides  the  dynamically  single-valued,
effectively  one-dimensional,  and  therefore  regular  (fixed),  imitation  of  the  ‘living’,
dynamically probabilistic realisation change process.

Being  rigorously  derived  from  the  unreduced  analysis  of  a  generic  interaction
process,  the  dynamic  redundance  phenomenon  has  also  a  transparent  physical
interpretation: the unreduced interaction between two entities with N elements each gives
N2 versions of their dynamical ‘contacts’ (‘everything interacts with everything’), while
the number of ‘places’ in reality for the interaction products is the same as that for the free
interaction  participants,  and  equals  N, which gives N-fold  redundance  of  interaction
products.  The  resulting  causal  randomness  of  realisation  change  process  can  be
mathematically expressed in the form of extended, now really complete general solution of
a problem obtained as the causally probabilistic sum of the measured system densities, r r
(q,x ), for all realisations:

N´

r (q,x ) = (cid:229)

r = 1

r r(q,x ) ,                                             (6)

 (£

i,y r
0i(x )}, and the sign ¯

where the sum is performed over the total number N´
 Nx ) of the actually observed
(discerned) system realisations, the generalised system density for the r-th realisation r r
(q,x )  is  obtained  from  the  system  state-function  expression,  eqs.  (5),  with  the
corresponding eigen-solution set for this realisation, {h r
0i(x )}, found from eqs. (2)-(3)
and substituted for their general notation {h i,y
 serves to designate
the special, dynamically probabilistic meaning of the sum. This implies, in particular, that
the probability, a r, for the r-th realisation emergence can now be determined a priori
(theoretically), by the unreduced analysis of system dynamics that explicitly derives the
complete  set  of  incompatible  events/realisations.  Since  all  the  emerging  solution-
realisations have absolutely equal ‘status’ of really existing system states forced to emerge
by the driving interaction, it is evident that a r = 1/Nx  for any individual, ‘elementary’
realisation  and  a r = N r/N ´
  for  a  ‘composite’  realisation  containing  within  it  N r
experimentally unresolved elementary realisations. Correspondingly, one can discern two
characteristic, opposite cases of dynamically multivalued (complex) behaviour determining
the whole diversity of observed patterns between them [7]: the regime of uniform chaos is
characterised by sufficiently different realisations with approximately equal probabilities
(very irregular, distributed kind of behaviour), whereas the regime of (multivalued) self-
organisation, or self-organised  criticality  (SOC), emerges when one has a number of
groups of sufficiently similar realisations (within each group) and quite inhomogeneous
distribution of realisation probabilities (externally distinct, though always intrinsically
probabilistic, structures). In any case, the expectation value of generalised system density,
r ex(q,x ), measured as average over a large number of equivalent events is obtained as
r ex(q,x ) = (cid:229)

a rr r(q,x ) ,                                           (7)

N´

r = 1

with the dynamically, a priori determined, probabilities {a r} (they are actually related to
the coefficients ci in the state-function expression, eq. (5a), found from dynamic solution
‘matching’ in the intermediate realisation phase between each two successive regular
realisations [7,9]). Note, however, that in the general case described by eq. (6) one can
determine from the first principles unpredictable system variations and their probabilities
also for rare, individual events of realisation emergence.

¯
7

Another  key  feature  of  unreduced  interaction  complexity  inseparably  related  to
causal randomness of realisation change is the autonomous, dynamic entanglement of the
interacting entities within each realisation. In the above physical picture of the dynamic
redundance phenomenon we have N redundant versions (realisations) of physically real
entanglement,  or  ‘engagement’,  between  the  elements  (modes,  points)  of  interacting
entities realising their particular dynamical ‘mixing’ within the emerging compound entity
of the thus formed new ‘level of complexity’ of the world. This dynamic entanglement
specifying,  together  with  the  probabilistic  realisation  change,  the  real  sense  of  the
‘interaction process’ is described by the products of functions of q and x  in the state-
function (density) expression, eq. (5a), and is reflected also in EP formalism expressions
containing matrix elements Vnn¢ (x ), eq. (3c). Dynamic entanglement is an aspect of the
intrinsic dynamic instability of any real interaction described by its essential nonlinearity
and  leading  to  unceasing  series  of  catastrophic  system  collapses  (reductions)  to  its
consecutively emerging realisations. During each collapse event the interacting entities
increasingly interpenetrate in an avalanche-type, self-amplifying ‘fall’ until a transient
‘equilibrium’  of  the  completely  formed  realisation  is  attained,  and  then  the  opposite,
equally self-accelerating dynamic disentanglement phase begins returning the system to the
disentangled, ‘quasi-free’ state of the intermediate realisation immediately followed by
another  dynamic  entanglement-collapse  towards  configuration  of  the  next,  randomly
chosen realisation, and so on.

ni,y 0

It  is  at  this  point  that  the  extended  dynamic  fractality  naturally  emerges  as
unavoidable continuation of the dynamic entanglement at progressively finer scales due to
the ‘inseparable’ character of the interaction process (now also in a well-specified physical
sense) reflected in the essential use of the unknown eigen-solutions, {h 0
ni(x )}, of the
auxiliary system of equations, eqs. (4), in the main state-function and EP expressions of
the ‘effective’ formalism. Since the essential nonperturbative manifestations of unreduced
interaction, the dynamic redundance and entanglement, are already revealed and exactly
taken into account by the particular structure of the EP formalism, we can use a suitable
approximation (e. g. of a ‘mean-field’ type) to find a closed expression for these eigen-
solutions from eqs. (4) [7-9], as far as manifestations of this particular level of complex
dynamics are involved. However, there is always a link to finer levels of the same system
dynamics,  and  these  can  be  obtained  by  using  the  same  EP  analysis  for  unreduced
solution of the auxiliary system, eqs. (4). We thus obtain the same dynamic redundance
(causal  randomness)  and  entanglement  phenomena,  but  now  on  that  new,  finer  scale
which, in its turn, is dynamically related to still finer levels of dynamical splitting and
entanglement (we do not explicitly cite here the corresponding equations obtained similarly
to  those  of  the  above  formalism  [7]).  The  dynamically  fractal,  arborescent  internal
structure of the unreduced interaction process emerges thus as a (theoretically) infinite,
internally continuous, but quite uneven (dynamically discrete, or ‘quantized’), sequence of
ever finer levels (scales) of probabilistically changing realisations, each of them containing
the unceasing processes of dynamic entanglement/disentanglement of interacting entities at
its own level and all finer levels. This quite involved and ‘living’, everywhere pulsating
hierarchy of real interaction dynamics is quite different from its over-simplified, single-
valued  (averaged),  rigidly  fixed  projection  onto  one-dimensional  presentation  of  the
conventional  perturbative  analysis  and  expresses  the  fact  that  the  resulting  extended
dynamical fractal can be described as really complete general  solution to an arbitrary
problem (of any system dynamics).

The  qualitatively  extended  character  of  this  causally  complete  structure  of  real
dynamical  fractal,  consistently  derived  from  the  unreduced  interaction  analysis,  with
respect to the canonical fractality is obvious and reduced to the following main features:
unceasing, causally probabilistic motion of emerging ‘branches’ (representing, in general,
denser groups of similar elementary realisations); their well specified physical ‘texture’
(material ‘quality’) obtained from the (multilevel) dynamic entanglement of interacting

8

entities; and the dynamically determined, permanent self-development of the unreduced
fractality. It is this latter property and its direct relation to the preceding ones (dynamically
redundant entanglement) that determine the intrinsically ‘living’ character of the extended
dynamical fractal and are especially important for its biomedical applications (section 3).
In  particular,  since  dynamical  splitting  into  growing  branches/realisations  is  driven
exclusively  by  the  probabilistically  emerging  interaction  configurations,  the  detailed
appearing structure takes the ‘final’ form that automatically fits in with the ‘environment’
and within itself: this is the extended, dynamic  adaptability of real complex systems,
including  living  organisms  (and  their  evolution),  only  mechanistically,  inconsistently
simulated  within  the  artificially  imposed  schemes  of  the  conventional,  single-valued
science and ‘complexity’ concepts. The sequence of levels of real fractal branching is
subjected to the same dynamic unpredictability of details as splitting into incompatible
realisations  (and  their  groups)  at  each  level  of  fractality,  which  can  give  the  (always
partially broken) regularity of the canonical fractal ‘scale symmetry’ only within a limited,
occasionally  occurring  group  of  scales  (they  correspond  to  a  denser  group  of  similar
system realisations within the ‘self-organisation’ regime of multivalued dynamics, defined
above). This means also that the unreduced fractal naturally, dynamically produces all
types of structures/objects and behaviours, including the apparently ‘non-fractal’, ‘solid’
ones.  As  for  the  internal  structure  of  fractal  branches  described  by  the  probabilistic
dynamic entanglement of interacting entities in the unreduced science of complexity, it is
clear that conventional simulations usually do not even try to analyse it because of their
basically external, non-dynamical approach.

The self-maintained, locally unrestricted growth of the extended dynamical fractal as
a result of development of any system with interaction can be described by the universal
law of conservation, or symmetry, of complexity which is realised through the unceasing
dynamic transformation between two basic forms of dynamic complexity, the dynamic
information  and  (generalised)  dynamic  entropy  [7].  Both  dynamic  information  and
entropy  are  expressed  through  the  same,  suitable  measure  of  complexity  (always
eventually related to system realisations number or rate of their change, see above), but
(physically  real)  information  represents  the  stock  of  system  complexity  in  a
‘hidden’/latent, or ‘folded’, form at the beginning of interaction process (it is a generalised
‘potential energy’ of interaction), while the dynamic entropy is the explicit, ‘unfolded’
form of the same complexity characterising the final result of interaction development (at a
current level), such as the generalised ‘kinetic/thermal energy’ of the appeared object or its
‘structural complexity’. Therefore the system dynamic information, I, always decreases in
course  of  system  interaction  development  (dynamical  fractal  emergence),  while  the
dynamic entropy, S, always increases, but since the increase of S is simply the result of
the transformation of I, their sum, the total system complexity C, remains unchanged: C =
I + S = const, D S = - D I. In this way, the universal conservation/symmetry of complexity
provides also the universal system evolution law that can be specified in the form of the
universal Hamilton-Lagrange and Schrödinger equations causally related within the single
unified formalism and taking the form of any known (correct) equation or underlying
conservation law (or any other basic ‘principle’ empirically postulated in the canonical
science), in the corresponding particular situation [7].

These rigorously derived results of the universal science of complexity permit us to
avoid the unpleasant ‘bias’ and inconsistency of the canonical ‘law of entropy growth’ by
presenting the generalised dynamical entropy growth as an inevitable consequence of
conservation  or  symmetry  of  complexity  (which,  in  addition,  is  consistently
substantiated).  This  is  related  also  to  the  fact  that  the  dynamical  entropy  growth  is
associated not only with some visible degradation (‘growth of disorder’), as it is implied
by its canonical concept, but accompanies every process, including the emergence of
apparently ‘ordered’ structures (e. g. living organisms) inconsistently interpreted by the
canonical science as (actually arbitrary large) ‘fluctuations’ on the background of ‘general
degradation’.  This  difference  can  be  understood  in  terms  of  the  dynamic  redundance

9

phenomenon:  any  real structure, however ‘ordered’ or ‘static’ it may seem, is always
maintained due to the dynamically  random (causally probabilistic) order of different
realisation unceasingly changing within it, even though those realisations can be quite
similar (but never identical) to each other. It is clear why this causal randomness, and the
related  internal  ‘disorder’,  cannot  be  obtained  within  any  dynamically  single-valued,
conventional form of knowledge.

The  universal  symmetry  of  complexity  is  quite  different  from  any  ‘exact’,
‘superposition’  symmetry,  postulated  in  the  canonical  science,  by  its  dynamical,
‘emergent’ origin and character. The latter leads, on one hand, to the above universal
evolution law, including its causally understood ‘sense’ (irreversible direction) of growing
complexity-entropy  (decreasing  complexity-information).  On  the  other  hand,  for  any
given, already formed structure the symmetry of complexity means the dynamic symmetry
between all system realisations (that never stop to replace each other) which necessarily
show  some,  generally  quite  large  and  always  partially  irregular,  variations  in  their
configuration.  Therefore  the  universal  symmetry  of  complexity  is  always  naturally
‘broken’,  in  full  accord  with  observations  and  in  contrast  to  the  invariably  ‘regular’
symmetries of the dynamically single-valued science obliged to introduce (postulate) the
notion of ‘broken symmetry’ artificially, in order to account for the observed ‘asymmetric
world’. This fundamental difference between complex-dynamical and mechanistic concept
of symmetry manifests itself also in the difference between the basically exact ‘scale
symmetry’ (self-similarity) of the canonical fractal and the symmetry of complexity of the
extended  dynamical  fractal  that  rather  excludes  any  exact  regularity  in  the  scale
transformation  result  (since  it  would  give  unrealistically  simple,  zero-complexity
structure).  Only  the  dynamically  multivalued  science  can  state  that,  and  consistently
explain why, any living organism, with all its apparent irregularity, is indeed much more
symmetric (= dynamically complex), than visibly regular (or irregular) ‘inanimate’, lower-
level objects.

The extremely large diversity of extended dynamical fractals unifying and naturally
producing  both  ‘fuzzy’  and  ‘solid’  type  of  structures  is  vitally  important  for  the
autonomous, self-sufficient character of complexity development, since it becomes clear
that the emerging ‘solid’ branches of the dynamical fractal (realising the above regime of
‘multivalued SOC’) play the role of ‘interacting entities’ for next (higher) level(s) of
developing complexity, while the ‘infinitely’ fine ‘foliage’ (varying between SOC and
‘uniform chaos’ regimes) serves as their (tangible) ‘interaction’ as such determining the
next portion of dynamical information (‘potential energy’) to be transformed into dynamic
entropy at that, higher level of complexity unfolding.

3 Creative control of life with the help of extended dynamic fractality

It is reasonable to start any fundamental concept application to living systems with
the consistent definition, within this concept, of the phenomenon of life as such, including
all  its  distinctive  features.  We  have  shown  above  that  the  main  properties  of  the
unreduced,  dynamically  multivalued  fractality  reproduce  exactly  living  organism
behaviour. Therefore we can define life as the unreduced dynamic complexity (obtained
by the dynamic redundance paradigm), starting from certain, high enough level of its
naturally emerging hierarchy. It is also clear now why any attempt to understand the
phenomenon  of  life  within  the  dynamically  single-valued  paradigm  of  the  canonical
science  (including  the  conventional  ‘science  of  complexity’  and  related  numerical
simulations) cannot be consistent in principle.

In particular, we can see the origin of fundamental deficiency in the definition of life
in terms of physics proposed by E. Schrödinger [10] and considering a living organism as
a ‘deviation’ from the conventional law of entropy growth that can appear because the
organism is an ‘open system’ that can actively ‘take’ (mainly ‘eat up’) the necessary

10

‘order’,  or  ‘negative  entropy’,  from  the  ‘environment’.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  such
definition cannot be consistent already because, at least for higher organisms, the whole
‘negative  entropy’  consumed  from  the  environment  is  much  lower  than  the  obtained
organism complexity (thus, the complex brain dynamics reproduces with high enough
accuracy the unreduced complexity of a ‘large’ environment that considerably exceeds the
amount of the consumed nutrition, let alone individual psycho-physiological reactions,
emotions,  conscious  thinking,  etc.).  The  extended,  complex-dynamical  definition  of
entropy  and  related  law  of  conservation-transformation  of  complexity  show  that  the
organism  contains  the  main  part  of  its  complexity,  in  the  latent  form  of  dynamical
information, already at the beginning of its life and then the information only unfolds itself
into explicit form of dynamical entropy, which does not contradict (in contrast to the
conventional entropy concept) the high dynamical order of the living organism, since it is
but highly inhomogeneous distribution of probabilities of realisations replacing each other
in a causally random order. The dynamic information is evidently ‘hidden’ within the
genome,  while  the  matter/energy  exchange  with  the  environment,  being  a  necessary
component of the organism development, accounts for a smaller part of the resulting
complexity-entropy (it is sufficient to compare the amounts of products consumed e. g. by
conscious and various non-conscious organisms and their respective complexity levels).
The  period  of  life  of  any  individual  organism  can  be  described  as  progressive
transformation  of  its  dynamical  information  (from  the  genome)  into  the  dynamical
complexity-entropy of the adult (and then old) organism, which determines the particular
(always finite) duration and ‘sense’ (or ‘character’) of any individual life, including the
necessary interaction with the environment also driven by the main I ﬁ
 S transformation
process.  This  complex-dynamical  definition  of  life  provides  the  evident  causal
interpretation for the ‘teleological’ (‘reasonable’) type of behaviour characteristic of living
organisms, where the (latent) stock of dynamical information is the causally complete
version of the famous ‘élan vital’ [11] giving rise to artificially mystified speculations
about ‘life force’ within the dynamically single-valued approach.

We can proceed with applications of the extended concept of fractal complexity in
biology and medicine by describing a universal way of practical realisation of the dynamic
redundance paradigm for causally complete solution of particular problems based on the
fundamental results of section 2. It should generally include the following stages that may
use more formalised (mathematical) or more qualitative (but equally well substantiated)
form of the universal science of complexity always preserving, however, its irreducible
causal content:

(1) find the key, ‘driving’ interactions and interacting entities at the current level(s),
including both ‘natural’ objects and ‘artificial’ means of their modification
(in continuous dynamic connection to lower levels of complexity);

(2) perform the unreduced interaction analysis that should give the complete set

of incompatible, chaotically changing system realisations, including their structure
and probabilities (dynamic entanglement and multivaluedness), as well as their
fractal hierarchy, where necessary;

(3) identify the realisations with the emerging entities and regimes of behaviour;
(4) verify (e. g. by problem variation) the found realisation set for completeness;
(5) establish dynamic connection to higher levels of system complexity and

the unreduced complex dynamics of the environment; if necessary, return to (1).

We emphasize that this sequence of stages applies not only to purely theoretical analysis,
but also to empirical, semi-empirical, computer investigations and all their combinations.

Among general biological applications of the extended fractality/complexity we can
mention the theory of quasi-autonomous, dynamically creative evolution and causally
complete genetics. The biological (natural) evolution can be understood now as a case of
universal  complexity  unfolding  process  (multi-level  transformation  of  dynamic
information into entropy), which permits one to consistently explain, taking into account

11

the unreduced complexity properties, such ‘difficult’ features of evolution as its very
uneven  and  irregular  character  showing  permanent  dynamic  interplay  of  order  and
randomness. Whereas any conventional, single-valued approach, including the classical
Darwinism and all its modern modifications, can explain only selection among ready,
though  varying,  forms,  but  not  their  natural  emergence,  the  unreduced  science  of
complexity provides the universal mechanism of creation of qualitatively new forms (see
section 2) and thus explains the direction and sense of evolution as progressively growing
(dynamically  unfolding)  complexity-entropy  of  the  whole  biosphere,  while  particular
correspondence between the new species and the ‘environment’ (‘survival of the fittest’)
need not be very exact or regular and should rather be considered as a natural consequence
of the above general ‘purpose’. The fractal hierarchy of feedback loops of the unreduced
interaction  governing  new  form  creation  points  also  to  a  causal  extension  of  the
Lamarckian approach to evolution specified as reverse influence of the level of (now
objectively  determined)  dynamic  complexity  attained  by  the  organism  (including  its
interaction with the environment) on the dynamic information (structure) of its genome
(further theoretic and experimental research is needed for understanding of the details).

Causally  complete  genetics  is  obtained  as  a  complex-dynamical  (multivalued)
extension of the conventional genetics always using a perturbative, single-valued approach
and treating genetic information and its transformation into living structures as a one-
dimensional,  dynamically  regular  line-program  of  the  ordinary  computer  (‘Turing
machine’). It is clear that the genetic machine operation is determined by the natural,
‘unreduced’  interactions  (in  the  sense  specified  above)  leading  to  emergence  of
dynamically  multivalued,  causally  probabilistic  forms  and  having  nothing  to  do  with
single-valued  mechanistic  ‘copying’  and  ‘sequencing’  implied  and  performed  by  the
canonical genetics. It is important to note that the continuing application of just that huge
simplification of the real interaction complexity in intense, technically powerful genetic
experimentation  can,  and  inevitably  does,  lead  to  practically  dangerous,  catastrophic
consequences of blind manipulations with intrinsically unpredictable system. In order to
obtain  truly  progressive,  intrinsically  safe  and  constructive  development  in  this,  and
various other, fields with direct, profound modification of irreducibly complex systems
allowed for by the attained high level of empirical technology, the level of fundamental
knowledge should correspond to the unreduced complexity of the real system (as it is
presented  by  the  universal  general  solution  of  a  problem  in  the  form  of  extended
dynamical fractal described above).

Medical applications of the unreduced fractal complexity are based on the causally
complete understanding of living organism dynamics provided by the extended concept of
fractality/complexity and lead to the new stage of integral  medicine allowing for the
creative control/extension of the multivalued organism dynamics guided by the universal
criterion of progress of the unreduced science of complexity, i. e. most complete, optimal
transformation of complexity-information into complexity-entropy. This approach permits
one to escape from the modern impasse of mechanistic empiricism in medicine when a
‘complex-dynamical’, conscious doctor tries to cure an irreducibly complex, inimitable
organism with the help of non-complex, over-simplified, standard means: such single-
valued imitation of the highly multivalued dynamics is reduced to superficial suppression
of  external  signs  of  illness  (‘treatment  of  symptoms’),  instead  of  correcting  the  real,
complex-dynamical origin of the disease (‘treatment of the disease’). It is also evident that
application of the conventional ‘science of complexity’, falling within the same essentially
perturbative paradigm of dynamic single-valuedness (‘exact solutions’) and thus only
imitating (or ‘modelling’) separated external manifestations of complexity, cannot really
change the situation. In the integral medicine approach the causally complete pattern of the
extended fractal of organism dynamics is explicitly known and consciously modified
using the basic property of essential nonlinearity/instability of the multivalued dynamics,
which provides the universal ‘natural’ cure unifying, at a superior level, the advantages of
‘technological’ and ‘traditional’ tendencies in medicine [7]. Some specific results of this

12

intrinsically creative medicine can take the form of individual multi-dimensional (fractal
and  changing)  ‘chart’  of  organism  state  as  a  universal  tool  for  absolute,  in  principle,
personal  health  control,  or  unreduced,  complex-dynamical  (re)construction  of  living
tissues/organisms through the natural growth of the corresponding extended dynamical
fractal,  or  preparation  of  ‘living’  medicaments  having  the  unreduced  dynamic  fractal
structure and full complexity of living objects, etc. In each particular application one can
use the same, universal approach of the unreduced science of complexity (see items (1)-
(5) in this section), which provides the fundamental advantage of the unified, naturally
developing understanding of various levels and aspects of organism dynamics and allows
for  natural  inclusion  into  consideration  of  other  (e.  g.  ‘psychological’,  ‘social’,  or
‘ecological’) levels of complexity where necessary. In particular, such unified, causally
complete understanding permits one to overcome the impasses of the canonical medicine
in treatment of ‘really difficult’ (and often dangerously ‘emerging’) diseases, such as
cancer or AIDS, that simply involve the irreducible complexity levels inaccessible to the
conventional  empiricism  and  dynamically  single-valued  analysis,  irrespective  of  the
quantitative power of the instruments used. The qualitatively growing technological power
of  civilisation  necessitates  in  itself  the  corresponding  up-grade  of  the  conceptual
understanding, in order to transform the real danger of modern blind, but critically deep
experimentation into unlimited possibilities of the causally complete knowledge.

References

[1] Mandelbrot  B.  The  Fractal  Geometry  of  Nature,  Freeman,  San  Francisco

[2]
[3]

(1982).
Feder J. Fractals, Plenum Press, New York (1988).
Peintgen H.-O., Jürgens H., and Saupe D. Chaos and Fractals. New Frontiers
of Science, Springer-Verlag, New York (1992).

[4] Nakayama T.,  Yakubo K., and Orbach R.L. Dynamical properties of fractal
networks: scaling, numerical simulations, and physical realisations. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 66: 381-443 (1994).

[5] Blumenfeld  R.,  and  Mandelbrot  B.B.  Lévy  dusts,  Mittag-Leffler  statistics,
mass fractal lacunarity, and perceived dimension. Phys. Rev. E 56: 112-118
(1997).

[6] Horgan  J.  From  complexity  to  perplexity.  Scientific  American,  June:  74-79

(1995).

[7] Kirilyuk A.P. Universal Concept of Complexity by the Dynamic Redundance
Paradigm: Causal Randomness, Complete Wave Mechanics, and the Ultimate
Unification of Knowledge, Naukova Dumka, Kiev (1997). For a non-technical
review see also: e-print physics/9806002 at http://arXiv.org.
Kirilyuk A.P. Dynamically Multivalued, Not Unitary or Stochastic, Operation
of Real Quantum, Classical and Hybrid Micro-Machines.
E-print physics/0211071 at http://arXiv.org.

[8] Kirilyuk  A.P.  Theory  of  charged  particle  scattering  in  crystals  by  the
generalised optical potential method. Nuclear Instruments & Methods B69: 200-
231 (1992).

[9] Kirilyuk A.P. Quantum chaos and fundamental multivaluedness of dynamical
functions. Annales de la Fondation Louis de Broglie 21: 455-480 (1996).
See also e-prints quant-ph/9511034-38 at http://arXiv.org.

[10] Schrödinger  E.  What  is  Life?  The  Physical  Aspect  of  the  Living  Cell,

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1944).

[11] Bergson H. L'Évolution Créatrice, Félix Alcan, Paris (1907).

