YBCO Transition Edge Sensors Used For Very
Low Noise Thermal Control

B. Guillet, D. Robbes, L. Méchin

ASC 2002 (Applied Superconductivity Conference), Houston, TX USA (Août 2002): Oral contribution

to be published in IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. June 2003

(cid:1)

Abstract—In electrically substituted radiometers, the ultra low noise control of the temperature is required. In this framework, we
present results dedicated to the temperature regulation of copper plates, 3 cm diameter and 1 mm thick, using YBa2Cu3O7-(cid:1) (YBCO)
transition edge sensors (TES). One of the  TES was used as the active thermometer of the temperature control  unit,  whereas  the  two
others measured the plate temperature behavior. Two heating resistors were wound along a spiral pattern, just underneath the copper
plate,  to  minimize  the  heating  delay.  The  correlation  between  the  two  TES  was  clearly  highlighted  by  applying  a  small  heat
perturbation through the second distributed resistor, the path of which closely follows that of the main resistor. Calibrated temperature
oscillations of 30 µK rms @ 10mHz together with spectral analysis were measured and a temperature resolution in the range of a few
µK rms was achieved.

Index Terms—Radiometry, Thermal control, Thermistors

I.  INTRODUCTION

M

ANY sensitive instruments have their low frequency performances improved provided that some of their key parts or sub-
systems  benefit  of  low  noise  temperature  control.  It  is  particularly  true  in  the  field  of  metrological  instruments.  A  good
example is that of absorbing cavities used in absolute radiometers where the temperature fluctuations are a strong limiting factor
[1],  [2].  The  same  limiting  factor  also  arises  in  more  popular  applications  of  microbolometers  such  that  of  infrared  imaging
systems [3]. On another hand, progress towards wide band absolute thermometers, with mK accuracy, also needs very efficient
but convenient control of the sample holder. A temperature resolution well below the mK has to be reached in that case.

We present here a work dedicated to the temperature control of copper plates, 3 cm diameter and 1 mm thick, which is a first
step towards an electrical substitution radiometer (ESR) in our laboratory. The paper is arranged as follows: section II gives an
analysis of the rules that have led to the design of the sample holder. The third section gives an overview of electronics, both the
read-out and the control units. Section IV is devoted to the results we have got using this assembly, fully tested YBCO transition
edge sensors.

II.  SAMPLE HOLDER

A.  Design
Many parameters  are  of  importance  to  design  a  temperature  controlled  system,  even  in  the  case  of  small  copper  or  sapphire
pieces  coupled  to  small  cryocooler  heads  receiving  cryogenic  chip  mounts  for  various  sensing  purposes.  The  list  of  the  main
parameters is reported in Table I. It is adequate for quasi first order thermal systems. The numerical values of Table I are those of
our system. Numerous links exist between these parameters, some of which must be specified at the beginning of the design. The
heating  power  PH  must  be  consistent  with  the  evacuated  power  of  the  cooling  system.  PH  is  also  related  to  the  output  voltage
applied  to  the  heating  resistor  RH1.  Since  the  typical  values  of  RH1  range  from  10  to  50  (cid:1),  it  follows  that,  for  a  low  noise
operation, PH may reach a few tens of Watts. A low noise operation at this level means that standard low noise analog IC circuits
and  components  must  be  used,  (cid:2)12  V  battery  powered,  with  maximum  output  currents  lower  than  a  few  Amps.  From  the
maximum available heating power and the needed value for the maximum temperature variation (cid:1)Tmax, the thermal conductance
Gt  is  deduced  as  their  ratio.  After  these  first  parameters  are  fixed,  the  thermal  capacitance  Ct  and  the  time  constant  (cid:2)  can  be
evaluated, provided that additional restrictions are introduced. Our sample holder is designed for an operating temperature above
the liquid nitrogen temperature (77 K). At this elementary level of the design, the variations of some parameters of the sample
holder model with the temperature are not introduced.

B. Guillet, D. Robbes  and L. Méchin are with the Institut des Sciences de la Matière et du Rayonnement, GREYC UMR 6072, Caen, F-14050 FRANCE
( 33-2-31-45-26-95; fax: 33-2-31-45-26-98; e-mail: bguillet@ greyc.ismra.fr).

TABLE I
SAMPLE HOLDER THERMAL CHARACTERISTICS

Symbol

Designation

Ct
Gt
(cid:1)
T0
T
(cid:2)T
(cid:2)Tmax
RH1,2
PH
(cid:1)d

Thermal capacitance
Thermal link between Ct and heat sink
Time constant
Temperature of the heat sink
Temperature of the sample holder
Temperature variation
Maximal temperature variation
Heater electrical resistance
Heating power
Time delay

Numerical value

7.7 J/K
77 mW/K
100 s
77.4 K
80 – 130 K
10 – 20 K
(cid:1) 50 K
30 (cid:2)
Up to a few Watts
0.4 s

Moreover, the sample holder mass must be higher than the small system it will support (the cavity of a radiometer for example)
in order to act as a heat sink. One point is extremely important, for the minimization of the temperature fluctuations around the
working temperature value using a servo-loop: it is related to the inherent time delay (cid:2)d between the heat production inside RH and
the measurement of the related temperature variations by the thermometer in the loop. From the basis of servo loop theory, it is
well known that the larger the open loop gain is, the better the rejection of heat perturbation is, provided that the Nyquist criterion
is respected with a sufficient margin. For a first order system, this gain becomes finite as soon as  a  finite  delay  exists  and  the
maximal gain value is related to the separation, in time domain, between the time constant and the delay. Furthermore, the time
constant cannot be made infinitely large, and the design must be very careful with respect to the minimisation of the delay. As
usual,  pure  delays  are  associated  to  propagation  phenomena’s,  which  is  heat  diffusion  in  our  case.  After  choosing  a  high
diffusivity  D  material,  minimising  (cid:2)d  implies  the  distribution  of  the  heat  production  just  under  the  usable  area  of  the  sample
holder. Indeed, (cid:2)d scales with the ratio l2/D where l is the length separating the front of the sample holder from the outset of the
heat production. However, it cannot be made arbitrary short: it must be stiff enough to secure mechanical rigidity.

We  also  included  two  sub-systems  designated  to  a  proper  identification  and  characterisation  of  the  low  noise  system.  It
represents an important part of the system design. The first part is a second heating resistor RH2, that is very well balanced and
intertwined with the first one RH1. It is used to introduced very well calibrated heat perturbations through the thermal system, both
in open or closed configurations. The design is such that the Joule heatings through RH1 or RH2 are nearly identical. This allows a
very convenient way to identify the system, because sinusoidal heat perturbations at twice the applied voltage frequency across
RH2 may be applied, due to the squaring  from the Joule’s Law. The second subsystem, very efficient for a proper characterisation
of the temperature,  consists of a pair of two auxiliary independent thermometers, having a very high sensitivity and monitored
simultaneously. The coherence between the records lead to an improved system identification of the temperature fluctuations of
the  sample  holder.  Finally,  the  ratio  between  the  amplitude  of  the  detected  temperature  variations  that  result  from  the  heat
perturbation in the open and closed loop configurations gives a proper characterisation of the servo-loop efficiency.

B.  Fabrication
The  sample  holder  we  built  using  the  previous  rules  is  schematically  drawn  in  Fig.  1.  The  associated  parameter  values  are
listed in Table I. The usable area has a diameter of about 3 cm, and a ring made using standard printed circuit board allows easy
electrical connections. The heating resistor RH1 and RH2 were made using  constantan  wires,  intertwined,  wound  and  glued  in  a
spiral digged at the rear of the copper plate. The thermal insulation from the copper head of the cooler is made using an other disk
of printed circuit, 1.27 mm thick, glued to the previous copper plate and a final one, clamped to the cold finger. All the system is
in vacuum, surrounded by a 77 K radiation shield. The thermometers are three high temperature coefficient (TCR) resistors made
using  200 nm thick high quality YBa2Cu3O7-(cid:1) film deposited on a strontium titanate substrate by pulsed laser deposition. They
are  patterned  in  strips  (600  µm  long  and  40  µm  width)  with  four  Au  contacts.  The  total  area  of  each  thermometer  is  1 mm2.
Alternatively, a industrial standard platinum resistor IPRT is mounted.

Fig. 1.  Cut view of the sample holder. The important sub-systems are the
use  of  two  identical  intertwined  heating  resistors,  and  the  use  of  two
independent, out of loop, thermometers.

III.  ELECTRONICS
The read-out electronics was developed in our laboratory, especially designed for 10 – 100 (cid:1) thermistors, biased using highly
stable square wave currents at 1 kHz and 1 mA amplitude. It has been fully tested at 300 K, showing that our system exhibits a
temperature resolution of 25 µKrms in a bandwidth of 1 Hz and over a 2000 s measuring time. These results were obtained using
IPRT sensor. Tested using resistors having a very low TCR, the electronic noise floor has been characterised in the time and the
frequency domains. Made using standard low noise circuits, the voltage (white) noise, referred at the input, is 2 nV/(cid:3)Hz, little
dependent on the Johnson noise of the thermistor (< 100 (cid:1) at 300 K). The excess low frequency noise is ranging between 1.8/(cid:3)f
(nV/(cid:3)Hz)  and  3.2/(cid:3)f (nV/(cid:3)Hz).  Dividing  the  previous  voltage  noise  spectrum  by  the  thermistance  responsivity  (product
RIbxTCR) leads to the noise equivalent  temperature  (NET)  of  the  system  for  an  ideal  (i.e.  without  excess  noise)  thermistor  R,
working under a bias current Ib. If we introduce the TCR of YBa2Cu3O7-(cid:1) TES sensors that exhibit values of the order of 1 K-1
and up to 4 K-1
 in the literature [4], one finds limiting NET values associated to our electronic read-out, lying between 5 to 20 nK,
at 1 mA bias and for frequencies above a few Hz. 

From the measured basic parameters GT, CT and delay (cid:2)d,  a PSPICE [5] model of the overall system was built,  including  a
standard analog PID  controller  to  close  the  servo-loop.  The  parameters  of  the  PID  were  then  calculated  in  order  to  match  the
conditions discussed in the previous section, and the final circuit was designed using standard methods in electronic design.

IV.  RESULTS

As pointed out in section two, a strategy is done to conveniently demonstrate the low noise properties of the sample holder.
It is associated to the use of the well balanced heating resistor RH2 and the use of two independent, out of loop, thermometers
together with the in loop one.  Fig. 2  is  a  plot  of  the  R  versus  T  characteristics  of  the  YBCO  thermometers  together  with  their
derivative  ;  it  shows  very  little  dispersion,  compatible  with  the  experiments  to  be  done  with  a  high  sensitivity  along  the
superconducting transition. A TCR of about 1 K-1 is easily deduced from the Fig. 2 plots.

transition  of 

  Superconducting 

Fig.  2. 
three
YBa2Cu3O7-(cid:1) strips used in the experiments at 1 mA bias
(filled  symbols).  The  strips  are  600  µm  long,  40  µm
wide  and  200  nm  thick  on  a  SrTiO3  substrate.  Also
shown  is  the  derivative  with  respect  to  temperature
(closed symbols).

the 

The plots of Fig. 3 show the effect of a sinusoidal excitation in the auxiliary resistor RH2 that induces a heat perturbation in the
thermal circuit at twice the frequency of the applied perturbing voltage. The frequency doubling appears very clearly, together
with  the  very  similar  responses  of  the  two  independent  thermometers.  From  such  sets  of  measurements  in  closed  loop,  we
deduced the efficiency of the heat perturbation rejection to be 400 at dc, in a flat bandwidth of about 50 mHz. Our system making
good use of liquid nitrogen at ambient pressure as the coolant, we know that any pressure  drift over the liquid nitrogen bath will
be  reflected  as  a  temperature  drift  at  the  cold  head,  due  to  the  Clapeyron’s  law.  The  conversion  rate  is  83  µK/Pa  [6]  and  the
atmospheric pressure drift and fluctuations may reach 1 Pa/s on windy days. This means that we are expecting temperature drifts
as high as 80 µK/s on open loop and  about 200 nK/s using the servo mode. The plots of Fig. 4 clearly show a temperature drift of
100 nK/s during the 900 s measuring time. This value is within a factor 2 below the expected one, for windy days,  but  at  this
level, we had not monitored the pressure to accurately check this prediction. This indicate that a pressure control above the liquid
nitrogen bath would probably improve the very low frequency system performances. Superimposed to the low frequency

Fig.  3.    Curve  (a):  sine  wave  voltage  applied  to  the
heating resistor RH2 Curve (b) is the in loop thermometer
response and  curve  (c,  d),  referred  to  the  right  axis,  are
the  out  of  loop  thermometers  responses.  Note  the
frequency  doubling,  between  the  voltage  excitation  and
the temperature evolution.

Fig. 4.  Plots of two coherent responses of the observing
thermometers.  It  shows  a  temperature  oscillation  of
about  30  µKp,  superimposed  to  a  temperature  drift  of
about 100 nK/s.

drift in Fig. 4 is a temperature oscillation, 30 µKp, at a frequency of 10 mHz. It is associated to a  small  heat  perturbation  at  a
frequency of 5 mHz in the resistor RH2. These plots clearly show the ability of the thermometer pair to follow very small and very
low  temperature  variations.  Suppressing  the  heat  excitation  shows  the  temperature  drift  and  small  differences  between  the
observing  thermometers.  It  is  plotted  in  Fig.  5.  Again  the  rate  of  the  temperature  drift  is  of  the  order  of  100 nK/s  and  some
fluctuations around the mean drift value appear still correlated. They are in the range of 10-20 µKpp. The difference between the
two thermometer indications has also been plotted, it shows a maximum value of (cid:2) 6 µK, with a standard deviation of 2.8 µKrms
calculated in this 400 s measuring time. These values are much higher than those expected from the known noise of the detecting
electronic (see section III). The clear identification of the origin of both the coherent part of the fluctuations around the mean drift
and the non coherent part observed in the difference is still under investigation. We nevertheless have preliminary elements that
indicate  that  the  coherent  deviation  around  the  mean  drift  reflects  true  temperature  variations  of  the  liquid  nitrogen  bath,
efficiently  rejected  by  the  servo-loop.  Some  other  elements  indicate  that  the  non  coherent  fluctuations  around  the  mean  drift
appear rather associated to a large excess noise at very low frequency in the YBa2Cu3O7-(cid:1) film operated at the resistive transition.

Fig. 5.  Free response of the observing thermometers in the locked
loop  mode,  referred  by  the  left  scale.  The  maximum  difference
between  the  thermometers  reaches  (cid:3)  6 (cid:1)K  (right  axis)  with  a
standard deviation of 2.8 µKrms.

V.  CONCLUSION

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

REFERENCES

We  have  focused  our  work  on  the  use  of  YBa2Cu3O7-(cid:1)  TES  sensors.  A  standard  deviation  of  2.8  µKrms  was  achieved.  The
sensors can be use as well above their resistive transition, similar to platinum resistors. Although not characterized in this regime,
we expect performances in the range of 25 to 30 µKrms as done for IPRT. The question of going below the temperature of the
transition  was  also  addressed  a  few  years  ago  [6],  but,  without  the  pair  of  independent  observing  thermometers.  Our  knowing
using such critical current sensors, is that it is much more difficult to design a low noise read-out electronics because of their low
source impedance, however performances in the range of 1 to 10 µKrms should be feasible as well.

We  acknowledge  Mr  Poirier  for  carefully  shaping  the  copper  pieces  of  our  sample  holder,  N.  Chéenne  for  giving  the  first

YBa2Cu3O7-(cid:1) thermometers, and S. Lebargy for electronics.

[1]  J.P. Rice and Z. M. Zhang, “Liquid-Nitrogen-Cooled high-Tc electrical substitution as a broadband IR transfer standard”, NIST Tech. Rep. 1414, 1996.
[2]  J.P. Rice, S.R. Lorentz, R.U. Datla, L.R. Vale, D.A. Rudman, M. Lam Chok Sing and D. Robbes, “Active cavity absolute radiometer based on high  Tc

[3]  Gilbert Gaussorgues, in “La thermographie infrarouge: principes technologies applications,”    4th  ed.  Ed.    New  York,  Londres  Paris:  TEC&DOC,  pp.

superconductors,” Metrologia, 35(4), pp. 289-293, 1998. 

570-580, 1999.

[4]  D. G. McDonald, R. J. Phelan, L. R. Vale, R. H. Ono and D. A. Rudman, “Passivation, Transition Width, and Noise for YBCO Bolometers on Silicon”,

IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., vol.  9(2), pp. 4471-4474, June 1999.

[5]  Circuit simulation logiciel (see for details http://www.orcad.com/products/pspice)
[6]  M. Lam Chok Sing, E. Lesquey, C. Dolabdjian and D. Robbes, “A high stability temperature controller based on a high Tc sensor,” IEEE Trans. Appl.

Supercond., vol. 7(2), pp. 3087-3090, June 1997.

