 

 
Two-Dimensional Magnetic Resonance Tomographic Microscopy using 
Ferromagnetic Probes 
 

Mladen Barbic(a) and Axel Scherer 
Applied Physics Department and Electrical Engineering Department M/S 200-36 
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125 
 

We introduce the concept of computerized tomographic microscopy in magnetic resonance imaging using 
the magnetic fields and field gradients from a ferromagnetic probe. We investigate a configuration where a 
two-dimensional  sample  is  under  the  influence  of  a  large  static  polarizing  field,  a  small  perpendicular 
radio-frequency field, and a magnetic field from a ferromagnetic sphere. We demonstrate that, despite the 
non-uniform  and  non-linear  nature  of  the  fields  from  a  microscopic  magnetic  sphere,  the  concepts  of 
computerized tomography can be applied to obtain proper image reconstruction from the original spectral 
data  by  sequentially  varying  the  relative  sample-sphere  angular  orientation.  The  analysis  shows  that  the 
recent proposal for atomic resolution magnetic resonance imaging of discrete periodic crystal lattice planes 
using  ferromagnetic  probes  can  also  be  extended  to two-dimensional  imaging  of  non-crystalline  samples 
with resolution ranging from micrometer to Angstrom scales. 

 

Keywords: magnetic resonance imaging, magnetic resonance microscopy, magnetic resonance force microscopy, 
computerized tomography, scanning probe microscopy 
 
(a) mladen@caltech.edu

INTRODUCTION 

Magnetic  resonance  imaging  [1,2]  (MRI)  has 
advanced  at  a  rapid  pace  since  initial  proposals  and 
demonstrations  in  1973  [3,4],  with  applications  in 
medical  imaging  attracting  the  most  attention  [5,6]. 
Advances  in  magnetic  resonance  microscopy  [7]  have 
also  been  significant  [8],  recently  reaching 
two-
dimensional  (2D)  imaging  resolution  of  1µm  [9]. 
Improvements  in  conventional  inductive  methods  of 
magnetic resonance detection [10,11] and application of 
imaging  gradients  have  generally  been  used  to  achieve 
such advances. Although the possibilities of Angstrom-
scale resolution were pondered in the early days of MRI  
[4,12], the ultimate goal of achieving atomic resolution 
has remained elusive. In 1991, an alternative method of 
applying  the  imaging  gradients  and  detecting  magnetic 
resonance,  Magnetic  Resonance  Force  Microscopy 
(MRFM)  [13]  was  proposed,  with  the  ultimate  goal  of 
single  spin  sensitivity  and  three-dimensional  (3D) 
imaging  capability.  The  technique  relies  on  the  atomic 
scale imaging gradients from the microscopic magnetic 
particle  mounted  on  a  micro-machined  mechanical 
cantilever  for  the  appropriate  detection  sensitivity 
required  for  3D  single  spin  imaging  [14].  Successful 
MRFM  demonstrations  were  reported  for  the  cases  of 
electron spin [15], nuclear spin [16], and ferromagnetic 
[17]  resonance  systems.  MRFM  research  has  benefited 
from  the  low  temperature  implementations  of  the 
instrument  [18],  and  rapid  advances  in  the  fabrication 
techniques  for  incorporating  smaller  magnetic  particles 
[19, 20], and more sensitive mechanical resonators [21]. 
However, reported MRFM imaging resolution of ~1µm 
[22,23]  remains  at  the  level  of  inductive  detection  in 
conventional MRI.  

 

1

relaxes 

various 

fields  and 

challenging 

sample-detector 

We  recently  introduced  a  complementary  atomic 
resolution magnetic resonance imaging method [24] that 
significantly 
technical 
the 
requirements  of  single  spin  detection  by  imaging 
discrete ordered crystal lattice planes where many spins 
coherently contribute to the magnetic resonance signal. 
This  approach  closely  resembles  the  initial  magnetic 
resonance  imaging  proposal  [4,12]  in  which  linear 
magnetic  field  gradients  are  used  to  selectively  excite 
magnetic  resonance  in  different  atomic  lattice  planes 
and  produce  “diffraction”-like  effects.  However,  our 
this  original  proposal  by 
approach  differs  from 
field 
introducing  non-linear  magnetic 
gradients from a ferromagnetic sphere to achieve atomic 
resonance  “diffraction”.  We 
resolution  magnetic 
investigated 
coupling 
mechanisms [25] and showed that the realization of the 
long-desired  atomic  resolution  magnetic  resonance 
“diffraction” of crystals is well within reach of available 
experimental  techniques.  In  this  article,  we  present  a 
method  that  extends  the  use  of  imaging  gradient 
magnetic  fields  from  ferromagnetic  probes  to  two-
dimensional  magnetic  resonance  microscopy  of  non-
crystalline disordered samples. We show that despite the 
non-uniform  and  non-linear  nature  of  the  fields  from  a 
the  concepts  of 
microscopic  magnetic 
computerized  tomography  can  be  applied  to  obtain 
proper  image  reconstruction  from  the  original  spectral 
data  by  sequentially varying the relative sample-sphere 
angular  orientation.  We  first  review  the  concept  of 
atomic  resolution  magnetic  resonance  “diffraction”  of 
ordered  crystals  using  the  fields  from  a  ferromagnetic 
sphere  in  order  to  set  the  stage  for  extending  the 
technique  to  2-D  magnetic  resonance  tomographic 
microscopy of non-crystalline samples. 

sphere, 

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING OF 
DISCRETE CRYSTAL LATTICE PLANES 

Previously  described  model  of  atomic  resolution 
magnetic  resonance  imaging  of  crystal  lattice  planes 
[24,25]  relies  on  placing  a  ferromagnetic  sphere  in 
proximity  of  the  surface  of  a  crystal.  A  Cobalt  sphere, 
r0=50nm in radius, has a magnetization per unit volume 
of  1,500  emu/cm3.  The  simple  cubic  lattice  crystal  is 
assumed  to  have  a  unit  cell size of a0=3 Angstroms. A 
large  DC  magnetic  field  B0  is  applied  parallel  to  the 
sample surface in the z-direction, polarizing the spins of 
the atomic lattice as well as saturating the magnetization 
of  the  ferromagnetic  sphere.  A  small  radio  frequency 
field B1 is applied perpendicular to the large polarizing 
DC  magnetic  field  B0.  The  magnetic  field  from  the 
ferromagnetic  sphere  at  point  r  in  the  sample  has  the 
tr
following azimuthally symme ic dipolar form: 
(cid:71)
(cid:71) (cid:71) (cid:71)
n m n m
3 (
⋅
(cid:71)
3
r

(cid:71) (cid:71)
( )
B r

(1) 

−

=

)

 

where n is the unit vector that points from the center of 
the ferromagnetic sphere to the crystal site location, and 
m  is  the  magnetic  moment  vector  of  the  sphere.  Since 
the  external  DC  polarizing  magnetic  field  B0  is 
considered  to  be  much  larger  than  the  field  from  the 
ferromagnetic  sphere,  only  the  z-component  of  the 
is 
magnetic  field  from 
included  when  considering  the  resonant  spins  of  the 
atomic lattice [7,24-26]: 

the  ferromagnetic  sphere 

(2)  

(cid:71)
B r
( )
Z

=

M
(cid:71)
r

0
3

(3cos

θ

−

1)

2

 

where θ is the angle between the z-axis and the distance 
vector  r,  and  M0  is  the  magnitude  of  the  saturation 
magnetic moment of the ferromagnetic sphere. Figure 1 
shows  the  contours  of  constant  values  of  the  z-
component  of  the  magnetic  field  from  the  sphere,  BZ, 
that have the azimuthally symmetric form around the z-
axis.  

in 

In  the  absence  of  the  ferromagnetic  sphere,  the 
discrete  nuclear  spin  sites 
the  crystal  would 
experience  the  same  externally  applied  field  B0  and 
therefore  meet  the  magnetic  resonance  condition  at  the 
same magnetic resonance frequency ωR. However, close 
to  the  ferromagnetic  sphere,  a  large  magnetic  field 
gradient penetrates into the crystal, and only certain spin 
sites of the lattice satisfy the correct magnetic resonance 
conditions  at  any  given  magnetic  field  and  frequency 
values.  In  the  initial  model  [24,25],  a  numerical 
summation  was  computed  to  construct  a  histogram  of 
the number of resonant spin sites in the sample within a 
1-Gauss wide shell of constant BZ. This value of the bin 
width  was  selected  since  the  linewidth  broadening  in 
solids is on the order of 1 Gauss [26]. Distinct spectral 
peaks  were  discovered  in  the  number  of  resonant  spin 

 

2

 

sites  with  respect  to  the  applied  magnetic  field  in  the 
negative  value  range,  and  Figure  2  reproduces  the 
magnetic  resonance  spectra  between  the  field  range  of 
B0–1000  Gauss  and  B0-500  Gauss  for  the  three  cases: 
(a) semi-infinite crystal, (b) 100-unit-cell thick film, and 
(c) 100-by-100-by-100 atoms crystallite, with the insets 
of  the  figures  indicating  the  sample-sphere  relative 
positions. 

 

 
FIG.  1.  Azimuthally  symmetric  contours  of  constant  value  of  the  z-
component of the magnetic field BZ from a ferromagnetic sphere. The 
spins  of  the  sample  laying  on  the  same  contour  have  the  same 
magnetic  resonance  frequency.  For  a  100nm  diameter  Cobalt  sphere, 
the magnetic field gradients are sufficiently large that discrete nature 
of the spins of the sample needs to be taken into account. 
 

The  appearance  of  spectral  peaks  was  explained 
using  the  3D  plots  of  the  resonant  spins  under  the 
influence  of  the  polarizing  magnetic  field  B0  and  the 
magnetic  field  from  a  ferromagnetic  sphere  [24,25]. 
Figure  3  shows  three  such  representation  plots  for 
crystal  lattice  spin  sites  that  are  in  resonance  at  the 
magnetic  field  value  of  B0–625  Gauss,  the  location  of 
one of the sharp resonant peaks in the spectra of Figure 
2. Only the positive values for the y-axis are plotted for 
clarity. At this magnetic field value, sections of the shell 
of  constant  BZ  perpendicular  to  the  crystal  surface 
intersect the crystal lattice so that a large number of spin 
sites  from  the  lattice  plane  at  the  top  and  bottom 
sections  of  the  resonant  shell  satisfy  the  resonance 
condition.  The  bands  of  the  resonant  atoms  from  the 
crystal lattice planes are clearly visible, and the resonant 
ring  bands  like  these  at  the  distinct  magnetic  field 
values  are  responsible  for  the  sharp  peaks  in  the 
magnetic 
is 
emphasized  that  the  appearance  of  the  sharp  magnetic 
resonance  spectral  peaks  was  only  made  possible  by 
incorporating  into  the  model  the  discrete  nature  of  the 
atomic  lattice  sites,  since  magnetic  resonance  of  a 
continuous  medium  would  result  in  the  monotonic 
spectrum. 

resonance  spectra  of  Figure  2. 

It 

 

 

 

FIG.  2.  Magnetic  resonance  spectra  for  crystalline  samples  next  to  a 
100nm  diameter  Cobalt  ferromagnetic  sphere  for  (a)  semi-infinite 
crystal, (b) Thin film 100-unit-cells in thickness, and (c) 100-by-100-
by-100 atoms crystallite. Reduction of sample size results in increased 
spectral peak contrast. 
 
TOMOGRAPHIC MAGNETIC RESONANCE 
IMAGING USING FERROMAGNETIC PROBES 

Following  the  description  of  imaging  of  crystal 
lattice  planes  using  ferromagnetic  probes,  the  main 
question  remains  as  to  whether  the  technique  can  be 
extended  to  the  imaging  of  non-crystalline  samples. 
Inspection  of  the  3D  images  of  Figure  3,  showing  the 
resonant spin sites at a particular value of the magnetic 
field  for  crystalline  samples  with  different  dimensions, 
reveals  particular  features  that  open  the  possibility  of 
extending the technique to tomographic imaging of non-
crystalline samples. It is apparent from the spectrum of 
Figure  2(a)  and  the  3D  image  of  Figure  3(a)  that  the 
sharp  spectral  peaks  for  the  semi-infinite  crystal  come 
from the very narrow regions of the sample, while there 
is  a  large  background  signal  from  other  resonant  spin 
sites  that  are  intersected  by  the  1-Gauss  thick  shell  of 
constant BZ. 

 

3

 

 
FIG.  3.  Three-dimensional  plot  of  the  spins  in  the  crystal  lattice  that 
are resonant at the magnetic field value of B0-625 Gauss, the location 
of  one  of  the  sharp  spectral  peaks  of  Figure  2.  Dark  bands  of  spins 
from  the  crystal  lattice  planes  perpendicular  to  the  magnetic  field 
direction are responsible for the sharp spectral peaks. For semi-infinite 
crystal in (a) there is a large background signal that is diminished for 
the thin crystalline film in (b) since there are no resonant spins beyond 
the  100th  cell  in  the  x-direction.  The  background  signal  is  further 
minimized for the case of a small crystallite in (c). Discrete nature of 
the  spins  in  the  crystal  lattice  is  a  required  for  the  observation  of 
magnetic resonance spectral peaks. 
  

the  spectral  contrast 

For  the  thin  film  with  100-unit-cell  thickness  of 
Figure  2(b) 
is  significantly 
increased.  The  resonant  peaks  occur  at  the  same 
location  as  for  the  semi-infinite  crystal  of  Figure  2(a), 
but they lack the large background signal because there 
are  no  atoms  intersected  by  the  resonant  shell  beyond 
the 100th unit cell along the x-direction, as shown in the 
Figure 3(b). There is still a background signal in Figure 
2(b) from the spins that are not part of the crystal lattice 
planes  of  interest,  but  their  effect  on  the  spectrum 
contrast is significantly reduced. The background signal 
from  the  spins  away  from  the  crystal  lattice  planes  of 
interest  are  further  minimized  for  the  case  of the small 
crystallite shown in Figures 2(c) and 3(c). 

is 

the 

the 

that 

idea  of 

introduce 

structures 

cantilever 

lateral  dimensions  smaller 

By  pursuing this line of argument that the spectral 
contrast is increased by the reduction of the sample size, 
we 
tomographic  magnetic 
resonance  imaging  of  two-dimensional  samples  with 
sizes of ~ 1/10 the size of the ferromagnetic sphere and 
positioned  as  shown  in  Figure  4(a).  The  sample  can 
represent  either  a  small  molecule  or  protein  ~10nm  in 
size  underneath  a  100nm  diameter  ferromagnetic 
sphere, or a biological cell ~10µm in size under a sphere 
100µm  in  diameter.  The  use  of  the  sphere  model  and 
these sphere dimensions is reasonable, as ferromagnetic 
spheres  in  this  size  range  have  been  successfully 
fabricated [27-30], and have already been integrated as 
for  unrelated 
probes  on 
applications [31,32]. By magnifying the side view of the 
model  arrangement,  as  shown  in  Figure  4(b),  it  is 
observed 
intersected  by 
sample 
approximately perpendicular lines of constant BZ along 
the x-direction. A second view is shown in Figure 4(c) 
where the front view of the configuration of Figure 4(a) 
is  shown.  By  taking  into  consideration the large radius 
of  curvature  of  the  azimuthally  symmetric  intersecting 
contours  of  constant  BZ  (shown  in  Figure  4(a)),  it  is 
apparent that the sample is intersected by approximately 
parallel  lines  of  constant  BZ  along  the  y-direction. 
Therefore,  for  an  approximately  flat  two-dimensional 
the 
sample  with 
ferromagnetic  sphere  size,  the  magnetic  resonance 
spectra  will  be  the  one-dimensional  projections  of  the 
spin  density  along  the  z-axis.  However,  as  Figure  4(c) 
shows,  the  lines  of  constant  BZ  are  not  equally  spaced 
along  the  z-axis,  since  the  magnetic  field  is  not  linear 
along the z-axis. Nevertheless, since the magnetic field 
is  well  defined  in  the  sample  region  (equation  2),  this 
non-linearity  can  be  compensated 
the 
computerized tomographic image reconstruction. 
that 

resonance 
spectrum  of  the  sample  in  the  configuration  shown  in 
Figure  4  is  a  one-dimensional  projection  of  the  spin 
density  along  the  z-axis  leads  to  the  possibility  of 
performing a high resolution computerized tomographic 
reconstruction  imaging.  Imaging  of  samples  through 
projections  [33]  has  been  an  important  concept  ever 
since the discovery of x-rays [34], and has been used in 
the  gravitational  theory  [35]  and  radio  astronomy  [36] 
before  becoming  widespread  through  computerized 
tomography [37] in x-ray [38], electron [39], and optical 
[40] imaging, among others. Computerized tomographic 
image  reconstruction  algorithms  are  well  known  [41-
43], and here we apply similar principles to the case of 
magnetic  resonance  tomographic  microscopy  using 
ferromagnetic  spheres.  By  sequentially  varying  the 
angle of the sample as shown in Figure 4(c) around the 
axis  shown  in  Figure  4(b)  one  can  obtain  many 
projections  required  for  computerized  tomographic 
reconstruction. 

the  magnetic 

realization 

than 

The 

for 

in 

 

4

 

 

 

FIG. 4. For the case of a sample small compared to the ferromagnetic 
sphere and positioned as shown in (a), the contours of constant BZ are 
approximately  perpendicular  to  the  sample  along  the  x-direction,  as 
magnified in (b). Due to the relatively large radius of curvature of the 
azimuthally  symmetric  contours,  the  sample  is  intersected  by  the 
parallel  contours  along  the  y  direction  as  shown  in  (c).  This 
configuration  is  suitable  for  application  of  computerized  tomography 
methods for image reconstruction. 

the 

that 

We  note 

image  reconstruction  from 
projections in magnetic resonance dates back to the first 
report  of  spin  distribution  imaging  [3],  and  is  still 
performed  in  the  technique  of  Stray  Field  Magnetic 
Resonance  Imaging  (STRAFI)  [44]  where  constant 
magnetic  field  gradients,  on  the  order  of  60T/m,  from 
superconducting  magnets  are  used.  We  demonstrate 
here that the ultra-high gradient fields from microscopic 
ferromagnetic  probes,  as  used  in  Magnetic  Resonance 
Force  Microscopy  [14]  (~5x106T/m  for  a  100nm 
diameter  Cobalt  sphere),  could  also  be  utilized  for 
tomographic  imaging  of  non-crystalline  samples  with 
resolution reaching Angstrom levels. 

Figure 5 shows the schematic representation of the 
configuration  with  the  parameters  used  in  the  image 
reconstruction  process  indicated.  In  the  conventional 
computerized  tomography  [39],  uniformly  separated 
parallel  rays  are  used  to  obtain  an  image  projection 
along an axis, and the one-dimensional Radon transform 
of the sample density function ρ(y, z) is formed: 
∫

P q
( )
φ

z ds  

y
( , )

(3) 

ρ

=

( , )
φ

q line

(3) 

By  obtaining  a  multiple  of  one-dimensional  Radon 
transforms 
image 
reconstruction  is  performed  by  the  Fourier  transform 
filtered 
parallel 
projections [7]: 

back-projection 

at  different 

angles  ф, 

algorithm 

for 

(4)

ρ

y z
( , )

=

P q e
( )
φ

⋅

i

2
π

kq

π

∫

0







+∞ +∞



−∞ −∞

∫

∫


dq k e



−

i

2
π

kq



dk d




φ

 

This  reconstruction  process  involves  calculation  of  the 
Fourier  transform  of  the  Radon  transform  (innermost 
bracketed term), multiplication by a ramp function |k| in 
conjugate  space  followed  by  an  inverse  transformation 
(outer  bracketed  term),  and  finally  integration  over  all 
angles  for  the  completion  of  the  image  reconstruction 
(outermost integration term) [7].  

In  this  article,  a  two  dimensional  phantom  is 
simulated  with  equally  separated  9-by-9  array  of  spins 
in the y-z plane. We initially assume that the points are 
individual  proton  nuclear  spins  separated  by  5 
Angstroms, each having a Lorentzian resonant response 
with  a  10-Gauss  linewidth.  In  the  Cartesian  coordinate 
system,  the  z-component  of  the  magnetic  field  from  a 
ferromagnetic sphere (equation 2) has the form: 

 

(5)  

B x y z
( ,
, )

=

Z

M z
(2
0
2
x
(
+

2

y

x
−
2
+

2

z

2

y
−
2 5/ 2
)

)

 

 
The  center  of  the  phantom  array  is  placed  next  to  the 
sphere  as  shown  in  Figure  4,  so  that  the  contours  of 
constant  BZ  of  equation 
(5)  are  approximately 
perpendicular  to  the  phantom  along  the  x-axis,  and 

 

5

 

parallel to the phantom along the y-axis. This location is 
determined by the condition that:  
B
∂
Z
y
∂

B
∂
Z
x
∂

(6) 

=

=

0

 

and it was previously shown that at this location [25]: 
(7) 

4 2
z

=

+

x

y

 

2

2

 

 

 
FIG.  5.  Configuration  and  parameters  used  for  conventional 
computerized tomography. Parallel incident beam is partially absorbed 
by  the  sample,  and  the  projection  is  recorded  along  the  axis  q.  By 
recording  such  projections  at  many  angles  Φ,  reconstruction  of  the 
image  can  be  obtained  by  using  computerized  back  projection 
algorithms. 
 
Therefore,  when  the  sample  is  centered  on  the  y-axis 
(y0=0),  as  shown  in  Figure  4(c),  the  phantom  is 
positioned along the z-axis as shown in Figure 4(a-b) at 
the z0 value of: 

(8) 

2
r
0

2
z=
04

 

Figures  6(b)-(c)  show  the  spectrum  of  this  system 
of  spins  under  the  influence  of  the  large  polarizing 
magnetic  field  and  the  field  from  the  ferromagnetic 
sphere  for  two  imaging  angles,  0-degrees  and  45-
degrees,  respectively.  There  are  several  observations 
with respect to Figure 6 that are pertinent to the image 
reconstruction  process.  It  is  immediately  apparent  that 
the  projection  along  a  single  angle  is  not  an  ideal 
projection as described by Equation (3), but is modified 
by two distorting factors. The first is that the projection 
in  tomographic  magnetic  resonance  microscopy  of  a 
single spin is a convolution of the point projection with 
the  Lorentzian  lineshape  L(q)  along  the  projection  line 
q: 

(9) 

R q
( )
φ

=

P q L q q dq
φ

( ') (

−

')

'

  

∫

( , )
φ

q line

The  second,  and  more  serious  distortion  is  the  non-
linearity of the projection due to the non-linear variation 

of  the  magnetic  field  along  the  z-axis.  As  already 
mentioned,  in  the  present  configuration,  shown  in 
Figure 4, the one-dimensional Radon transforms are not 
obtained  by  the  uniformly  separated  parallel  rays  of 
constant BZ, but by the contours that have an increasing 
the  z-direction,  as  Figure  4(c) 
separation  along 
illustrates. 

 

Figure  7(a)  shows  the  projection  at  45  degrees 
superimposed  by  the  ideal  projection  that  one  would 
wish to observe where the response of a spin is a delta-
function.  As  opposed  to  detecting  a  series  of  equally 
spaced  delta  functions  whose  heights  represent  the 
number of spins along a projection line, the image is a 
series  of  Lorentzian  lineshapes  that  are  not  evenly 
spaced  and  therefore  do  not  represent  a  true  sample 
projection.  
 

 

 

FIG.  7.  (a)  Projection  at  45  degrees  compared  to  the  ideal  delta-
function  linear  response.  (b)  Reconstruction  from  90  projections at 2 
degrees  apart  without  linearization  and  de-convolution.  Non-linear 
distortions are pronounced at the image edges. 
 
However, despite this distortion, if image reconstruction 
is  performed  by  the  Fourier  transform  filtered  back-
projection algorithm for parallel projections of equation 
(4),  one  obtains  a  reasonable  reconstruction  of  the 
sample  spin  density,  as  Figure  7(b)  shows.  The  image 
was  reconstructed  from  90  simulated  projections  at  2 
degrees  apart.  The  image  is  mostly  distorted  on  the 
edges  of  the  sample  where  the  non-linearity  most 
significantly effects the projection. In addition, since the 
projection of a single spin is not an ideal delta-function 
projection,  but  is  a  projection  convoluted  by  the 
Lorentzian  lineshape  (equation  9),  the  contrast  in  the 
image  is  also  reduced  as  compared  to  the  original 
phantom. 

 

linewidth  magnetic  resonance  response.  Under 

 
FIG.  6.  The  simulated  phantom  consist  of  a  regular  array  of  9-by-9 
spins  separated  by  5  Angstroms  each  having  a  10-Gauss  wide 
Lorentzian 
the 
influence  of  the  large  polarizing  field  and  the  field  from  a 
ferromagnetic  sphere,  the  magnetic  resonance  spectrum  at  two 
respective angles of 0 and 45 degrees are shown. The spectra exhibit a 
Lorenzian-shape-convoluted  projections  and  distortions  due  to  non-
linear variation of the magnetic field from the sphere. 

 

6

 

projections  at  2  degrees  apart  is  shown  in  Figure  9(b) 
where  excellent  reconstruction  of  the  original  image  is 
observed.  

Since  the  magnetic  field  component  (5)  used  for 
magnetic  resonance  imaging  in  this  model  is  well 
known,  it  is  simple  to  correct  for  the  non-linear 
projection  distortion  prior  to  the  initial  step  in  the 
Fourier  transform  filtered  back-projection  algorithm. 
The  resulting  linearized  representative  projection  at  an 
angle of 45 degrees and the full reconstruction from 90 
simulated  projections  at  2  degrees  apart  are  shown  in 
Figures 8(a) and 8(b), respectively. 

 

 
FIG. 9. (a) Linearized and de-convolved projection at 45 degrees, and 
(b)  excellent  image  reconstruction  from  90  projections  at  2  degrees 
apart. 
 

Of  course,  the  intent  of  this  article  is  to  introduce 
the idea that the two-dimensional tomographic imaging 
can be performed on samples that are different from the 
regular ordered arrays of spins. We demonstrate that for 
the simulated image in Figure 10 where the name of the 
home  institution  of  the  authors  is  shown.  In  this  case, 
the  projections  of  the  sample  will  not  have  regular 
periodic  features  as  presented  so  far.  Nevertheless,  the 
presented  tomographic  magnetic  resonance  imaging 
method  is  designed  to  successfully  reconstruct  the 
sufficient  number  of 
original 
projections  is  obtained.  Figures  10(a)-(c)  show  the 
computed 
improved 
reconstructions, 
respectively,  where  90  simulated 
projections at 2 degrees apart are used. Figure 10(a) is a 
direct 
(4)  without 
performing  the  de-convolution  and  linearization  of 
projections.  As  previously  described,  the  image  has 
significant distortions on the edges due to the non-linear 
distortion of projections. Image 10(b) is a reconstruction 
of  linearized  projections  that  have  not  been  de-
convolved from the Lorentzian lineshape, and improved 

reconstruction  using  equation 

three  successively 

image,  provided 

images  of 

 

 
FIG. 8. (a) Linearized projection at 45 degrees compared to the ideal 
linearized  and  de-convolved  projection.  (b)  Reconstruction  from  90 
linearized  projections  at  2  degrees  apart  results  in  a  satisfactory 
reconstructed image with non-linear distortions eliminated. 
 

original 

image 
the 

The  computed 
of 

is  now  a  very  good 
reconstruction 
phantom.  The 
reconstructed  image  still  has  worse  contrast  than  the 
original  due  to  the  Lorentzian  lineshape  convolution 
effect. However, if the single spin response is known, as 
we  assume  here  for  the  Lorentzian  response  for  the 
single  spin  magnetic  resonance,  it  is  still  possible  to 
further  improve  the  image  reconstruction  by:  (a)  first 
de-convolving  each  projection  from  the  Lorentzian 
lineshape, then (b) perform the linearization, and finally 
transform  filtered  back-
(c)  perform 
projection  by  using 
for  parallel 
projections  of  equation  (4)  to  obtain  the  final  image. 
This  de-convolved  and  linearized  projection  at  a 
representative  angle  of  45  degrees  is  shown  in  Figure 
9(a),  and  the  final  computed  image  from  90  simulated 

the  algorithm 

the  Fourier 

 

7

Image  10(c) 

is  a 
is  observed. 
reconstruction 
reconstruction 
that  uses  both  de-convolution  and 
linearization  of  projections  before  the  final  computed 
reconstruction  using  equation 
(4),  and  excellent 
reconstruction  of  the  image  as  well  as  the  contrast  are 
observed. 
 

 

axis 

sample 

their 
alternative  sample-sphere  configurations  and 
respective 
for 
required 
rotation 
computerized  tomographic  image  reconstruction.  In  all 
four cases, the contours of constant BZ are perpendicular 
to the sample, but vary slightly in the intersecting radius 
of  curvature.  Which  relative  sample-sphere  orientation 
is chosen will depend on the specific experimental and 
space 
the 
ferromagnetic  probe,  detector,  RF  coils,  and  polarizing 
magnet configurations. Detailed analysis of the effect of 
different  configurations  on  the  resolution,  sensitivity, 
linearity,  and  sample-detector  coupling,  as  well  as  the 
potential  of  extending 
three-
dimensional computerized tomographic imaging will be 
presented elsewhere. 

that  might  depend  on 

requirements 

technique 

the 

to 

 

 
FIG.  11.  Several  relative  ferromagnetic  sphere-sample  configurations 
where the contours of constant BZ are perpendicular to the sample and 
therefore  allow  application  of  computerized  tomography  techniques 
for image reconstruction in magnetic resonance microscopy.  

 

 
CONCLUSION 

from  other 

imaging  using  ferromagnetic  probes 

We  conclude  the  article  by  emphasizing  that  the 
technique  of  two-dimensional  tomographic  magnetic 
resonance 
is 
distinctly  different 
scanning  probe 
that  achieve  surface  atomic  resolution 
techniques 
imaging,  such  as  scanning  tunneling  microscopy  [45], 
atomic  force  microscopy  [46],  spin polarized tunneling 
microscopy 
tunneling 
microscopy  [48,49].  In  those  methods,  the  images  are 
obtained  by  raster  scanning  an  atomically  sharp  probe 
over  a  two  dimensional  surface  of  the  sample,  and  at 
each pixel of the image a measured parameter such as a 
tunneling  current  or  atomic  force  is  displayed.  In  the 
tomographic 
two-dimensional  magnetic 
reconstruction microscopy, the ferromagnetic probe has 
no  physical  atomic  scale  features  to  directly  achieve 

[47],  and 

resonance 

resonance 

spin 

 

FIG. 10. Image reconstruction of a non-periodic array of spins. In (a) 
image is reproduced without linearization and de-convolution, and in 
(b)  linearization  of  projections  removes  non-linear  distortions,  while 
in  (c)  de-convolution  and  linearization  reproduce  the  image  with 
excellent contrast. 

 
So far in the article the entire premise has been that 
the sample is located at the position where the contours 
of constant BZ are perpendicular to the sample surface, 
and positioned with respect to the ferromagnetic sphere 
as  shown  in  Figure  4.  In  Figure  11,  we  show  several 

 

8

 

atomic resolution, but rather provides the magnetic field 
gradients that are sufficiently large to atomically resolve 
magnetic  resonance  of  individual  spins  along  only  one 
direction.  The  technique  does  not  rely  on  a  point-by-
point data acquisition for two-dimensional imaging, but 
rather is conducted by sequential angular rotation of the 
sample  with  respect  to  the  ferromagnetic  probe  and 
external  field  around  a  prescribed  axis.  At  a  single 
angular  orientation  and  magnetic  field  value  many 
magnetically  resonant  spins  of  the  sample  are  detected 

simultaneously,  but  as  we  demonstrated,  by  recording 
such  a  multi-spin  signal  at  many  angular  orientations 
and  magnetic  field  values,  it  is  possible  to  reconstruct 
the  two-dimensional  image  representation  using  the 
methods of computerized tomography.  

 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This work was supported by the Army Research Office 
grant  DAAD  19-00-1-0392,  and  the  Air  Force  Office 
for Scientific Research grant F49620-01-1-0497. 

REFERENCES: 
1. 

P. Mansfield and P. G. Morris NMR Imaging in Biomedicine 
Academic Press, London (1982). 

2.  C-N  Chen  and  D.  I.  Hoult  Biomedical  Magnetic  Resonance 

3. 
4. 

Technology Adam Hilger, Bristol (1989). 
P. C. Lauterbur, Nature (London) 242, 190 (1973). 
P. Mansfield and P. K. Grannell, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 
6, L422 (1973). 

6. 

5.  M.  T.  Vlaardingerbroek  and  J.  A.  den  Boer  Magnetic 
Resonance  Imaging  –  Theory and Practice, Springer-Verlag, 
New York (2003). 
F.  W.  Wehrli,  Prog.  Nucl.  Magn.  Reson.  Spectrosc.  28,  87 
(1995). 
P.  T.  Callaghan,  Principles  of  Nuclear  Magnetic  Resonance 
Microscopy, Oxford University Press, New York (1991). 
J. Aguayo, S. Blackband, J. Schoeniger, M. Mattingly, and M. 
Hintermann, Nature (London) 322, 190 (1986). 
S. C. Lee et al., J. Magn. Reson. 150, 207 (2001). 

9. 
10.  D.  I.  Hoult  and  R.  E.  Richards,  J.  Magn.  Reson.  24,  71 

8. 

7. 

31.  M. A. Lantz, S. P. Jarvis, and H. Tokumoto Appl. Phys. Lett. 

78, 383 (2001). 

32.  D.  R.  Baselt,  G.  U.  Lee,  K.  M.  Hansen,  L.  A.  Chrisey,  R.  J. 

Colton, Proc. IEEE 85, 672 (1997). 

33.  S.  Webb  From  the  watching  of  shadows:  the  origins  of 
radiological tomography Adam Hilger, New York (1990). 

34.  W. C. Röntgen, Nature (London) 53, 274 (1896). 
35.  J. Radon Ber. Verh. Sachs. Akad. Wiss. 69, 262 (1917). 
36.  R. N. Bracewell Austral. J. Phys. 9, 198 (1956). 
37.  A. Cormack J. Appl. Phys. 34, 2722 (1963). 
38.  G. Hounsfield British J. Radiol. 46 1016 (1973). 
39.  D.  J.  de  Rosier  and  A.  Klug,  Nature  (London)  217  130 

(1968). 

40.  D.E. Kuhl and R.Q. Edwards, Radiol. 80, 653 (1963). 
41.  G.  T.  Herman  Image  Reconstruction 
Academic Press, New York (1980). 

from  Projections 

42.  F.  Natterer  The  Mathematics  of  Computerized  Tomography 

John Wiley & Sons, New York (1986). 

43.  A.  C.  Kak  and  M.  Slaney  Principles  of  Computerized 

Tomographic Imaging SIAM, Philadelphia (2001). 

11.  D.  I.  Hoult  and  P.  C.  Lauterbur,  J.  Magn.  Reson.  34,  425 

44.  P.  J.  McDonald  and  B  Newling  Rep.  Prog.  Phys.  61,  1441 

12.  P.  Mansfield  and  P.  K.  Grannell,  Phys.  Rev.  B  12,  3618 

45.  G. Binning, H. Rohrer, C. Gerber, and E. Weibel, Phys. Rev. 

13.  J. A. Sidles, Appl. Phys. Lett. 58, 2854 (1991). 
14.  J. A. Sidles, J. L. Garbini, K. J. Bruland, D. Rugar, O. Zuger, 
S. Hoen, and C. S. Yannoni, Rev. Mod. Phys. 67, 249 (1995). 
15.  D.  Rugar,  C.  S.  Yannoni,  and  J.  A.  Sidles,  Nature  (London) 

360, 563 (1992). 

46.  G.  Binning,  C.  F. Quate, and C. Gerber, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 

47.  R.  Wiesendanger,  H.  J.  Guntherodt,  G.  Guntherodt,  R.  J. 

Gambino, and R. Ruf, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 247 (1990). 

48.  Y.  Manassen,  R.  J.  Hamers,  J.  E.  Demuth,  and  Jr.  A.  J. 

16.  D.  Rugar,  O.  Zuger,  S.  Hoen,  C.  S.  Yannoni,  H.  –M.  Vieth, 

Castellano, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 2531 (1989). 

and R. D. Kendrick, Science 264, 1560 (1994). 

49.  C.  Durkan  and  M.  E.  Welland,  Appl.  Phys.  Lett.  80,  458 

17.  Z.  Zhang,  P. C. Hammel, and P. E. Wigen, Appl. Phys. Lett. 

(2002). 

(1998).  

Lett. 49, 57 (1982). 

930 (1986). 

(1976). 

(1979). 

(1975). 

68, 2005 (1996). 

18.  K.  Wago,  O.  Zuger,  R.  Kendrick,  C.  S.  Yannoni,  and  D. 

Rugar J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 14, 1197 (1996). 

19.  K.  J.  Bruland,  W.  M.  Dougherty,  J.  L.  Garbini,  J.  A.  Sidles, 

and S. H. Chao, Appl. Phys. Lett. 73, 3159 (1998). 

20.  B. C. Stipe, H. J. Mamin, T. D. Stowe, T. W. Kenny, and D. 

Rugar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 2874 (2001). 

21.  T.  D.  Stowe,  K.  Yasumura,  T.  W.  Kenny,  D.  Botkin,  K. 
Wago, and D. Rugar, Appl. Phys. Lett. 71, 288 (1997). 
22.  O. Zuger and D. Rugar, Appl. Phys. Lett. 63, 2496 (1993). 
23.  O. Zuger, S. T. Hoen, C. S. Yannoni, and D. Rugar, J. Appl. 

Phys. 79, 1881 (1996). 

24.  M. Barbic J. Appl. Phys. 91, 9987 (2002). 
25.  M. Barbic and A. Scherer J. Appl. Phys. 92, 7345 (2002). 
26.  C.  P.  Slichter,  Principles  of  Magnetic  Resonance,  Springer-

Verlag, New York (1996).  

27.  C.  Petit,  A.  Taleb,  and  M.  P.  Pileni  Adv.  Mater.  10,  259 

28.  S.  Sun,  C.  B.  Murray,  D.  Weller,  L.  Folks,  and  A.  Moser 

29.  A.  F.  Puntes,  K.  M.  Krishnan,  and  A.  P.  Alivisatos  Science 

(1998). 

Science 287, 1989 (2000). 

291, 2115 (2001). 

30.  T. Hyeon, S. S. Lee, J. Park, Y. Chung, and H. B. Na J. Am. 

Chem. Soc. 123, 12798 (2001). 

 

9

