DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

1/39

What is Osmosis? Explanation and Understanding of a
Physical Phenomenon

Abstract. Although osmosis is a familiar phenomenon, and of pivotal importance in natural
systems, it is seldom explained how it might work on the molecular level (if treated at all in physics
text books). The standard treatment of osmosis in thermodynamics employs the concept of the
chemical potential and does not give any clues how the process "really" works. On the other hand
one may also encounter conflicting qualitative and molecular explanations of osmosis. We use the
case of osmosis in the present paper to elucidate different ways to "explain" and "understand"
physical phenomena. The role of qualitative understanding of physical phenomena is emphasized.
However, as the case of osmosis demonstrates, there may be a big gap between the abstract
macroscopic theory and molecular conceptions of the mechanism. 

Keywords. Osmosis, osmotic pressure, entropy, free energy, virial theorem.

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

2/39

Table of Contents

1. Introduction .......................................................................................................................2
2. Potential energy .................................................................................................................5
3. Osmotic pressure................................................................................................................6
4. Pressure and the virial theorem .........................................................................................7
5. Mechanistic theories ........................................................................................................10
5.1."Solute bombardment theory" .......................................................................................10
5.2. Surface theory................................................................................................................11
5.3. Solute attraction theory..................................................................................................12
5.4. "Water thirst theory"......................................................................................................12
5.5. Water concentration-diffusion theory............................................................................13
5.6 Obstruction mechanism..................................................................................................15
6. Some consequences..........................................................................................................15
7. Historical note..................................................................................................................17
8. Thermodynamic explanation............................................................................................18
8.1 Thermodynamic explanation - second version...............................................................21
8.2 Thermodynamic explanation - the "classical version"...................................................22
9. Statistical mechanics........................................................................................................24
10. Effective potential..........................................................................................................27
Conclusion............................................................................................................................27
Appendix A. Demonstration of the virial theorem...............................................................27
Appendix B. Reverse osmotic experiment...........................................................................29
Appendix C. Non-equilibrium thermodynamics..................................................................30
Readings ..............................................................................................................................36

Of course, we all know what osmosis is. It is about membranes and concentration differences that
makes water (considered in most cases) flow against
the solute concentration gradient, a
phenomenon which is typically explained in terms of the "osmotic pressure" given by the classical
van't Hoff formula (1885),

1. Introduction 

(1)

Π=kT c

This relates "osmotic pressure" Πfor a solute to its concentration c, the number of solute particles
per unit volume, when c is "small" (k is the Boltzmann constant and T the absolute temperature).
(That c is "small"; i.e., we have a dilute solution, means that it is much smaller than the concentra-
tion of the solvent.) The formlula (1) predicts a 25 atm pressure for a solute concentration of 1 mole
per liter (= 1M) at 20° C.

The traditional derivation of (1) is based on the use of the chemical potential. Now I believe that
only a few exceptional students, when exposed to the traditional treatment, may get a grasp of what
is "really" taking place in an osmotic process on the molecular level. A phrase like "the decrease of
the chemical potential lowers the pressure" does perhaps not help the student to intuit a physical
explanation of the process. Probably there will be left lingering a notion of some mystic "osmotic
force" that pushes the molecules around. Thermodynamics provides very effective theoretical
methods, but sometimes drawing results from manipulating the thermodynamic potentials may seem

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

3/39

more like magic (to me anyway) than giving a physical explanation for the phenomenon
considered1. Basically, thermodynamics predicts the osmotic effect but does not "explain" it.
Furthermore, classical thermodynamics deals with equilibrium states, not with the transition from
one state to another.

The continental philosophical tradition has distinguished two basic modes of comprehending things:
understanding (Verstehen) versus explanation (Erklären) (for an interesting account see von Wright
1971). Thus, "understanding" has been associated with humanistic inquires where one tries to
understand motives and reasons, whereas explanations has been regarded as typical for the natural
sciences looking only for cause and effect relations. Still, I think many physicists are also striving
for an "understanding" of their subject matter; few are content with just formal deductions. In this
case understanding is a question of relating the phenomenon to basic physical principles and
models, or something that is already familiar from experience.     

Two dimensions of a scientific field of inquiry can also associated with the syntax part and
semantic part of a theory. The syntax part consists basically of the formal symbols, rules and
"axioms", which as such is "empty" and gains meaning only through its semantic part which
the
interprets the symbols and provides models that realizes the abstract formalism. Now,
"explanation" of osmosis given strictly in terms of the chemical potentials can be considered to be
largely syntactical (consisting mainly of formal manipulations) and may as such provide little cues
to the meaning of it. Neither does the thermodynamical derivation explain the osmotic effect in the
sense of giving a causal chain showing how the effect is obtained.

Osmosis will be used here to illustrate the case where we have explanations and understandings of a
phenomenon on different levels and of different kinds. We may have an explanation on the
microscopic or macroscopic level; we might try to explain what happens in terms of molecular
interactions, or only by giving an abstract mathematical derivation in terms of "thermodynamic
potentials" that do not necessarily convey any idea of how the actual process takes place. Of course,
it is the very abstract and general nature of thermodynamics that makes its methods so powerful,
but in the end we have also to try to understand the "mechanism" on the molecular level.2 Such
considerations may suggest new effects not apparent given the general thermodynamic treatment.
This consideration is also of pedagogical interest because relying only on abstract mathematical
demonstrations enhances the danger that students memorizes formulas without gaining proper
insight into the physics involved. Not least the growing interest in nanotechnology and soft matter
physics will require some molecular considerations of the physical phenomena in an early stage of
the teaching. Finally, when explaining physical issues to the public (popularizing science) we also
need illuminating "pictures" of the physical mechanism. One could try to make it a rule to give a
good verbal or "pictorial" physical explanation of a phenomenon before presenting the mathematical

1 For instance del Castillo (1997) acknowledges that despite the phenomenon of osmosis has been known for over 160
years its physical meaning remains obscure and that there is still no accepted theory of osmotic flow: "Por otra parte,
a pesar de que el fenómeno de la ósmosis tiene 160 años de haber sido descubierto, su significado físico aún
permanece oculto .... A partir de muy pocas observaciones se ha querido descubrir ese significado oculto,
involucrando un enorme esfuerzo de comprensión intelectual, pero la idea verdadera no ha cobrado forma racional y
actualmente no hay una teoría que explique y describa el flujo osmótico; aunque por el momento existe una teoría
predictiva que ha hecho posible su aplicación práctica." 

2 Barrow (1966 p. 643) states, after having presented the standard thermodynamical account for osmosis: "The

expressions for the osmotic pressure derived in this section will apply as long as a membrane is available that will
pass solvent and will not pass solute. The process by which it accomplishes this is immaterial". Indeed, as long as
only the equilibrium states are of concern such an abstract description of the membrane may suffice, but as soon as
we start to e.g. query about timescales of the process (does it take years to reach equilibrium?) the details of the
mechanism become important.

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

4/39

formulation. Having an intuitive understanding of the mechanism will certainly also make the
mathematical presentation easier to grasp. Not an uncommon situation is that we work out detailed
and complicated solutions to problems but if asked we would not be able guess in which direction
the process would proceed (the problem of getting the sign right - familiar?). 

However, when we move to advanced theories like quantum field theory this approach may no
longer be feasible (we may though presume that physicists working in the field employ various
"pictures" of the processes in order to facilitate their understanding), but at this stage the student is
much on his/er own already anyway. On the other hand it may be thought that such abstract inquires
could be badly in need of good "pictures" to help intuit the content and give guidelines for further
progress. I guess that one reason that some researchers are more successful than others in their field
of study may be that they are guided by simple but effective "vernacular" models3 and intuitions
how things "really" work; we could perhaps speak of a certain sort of an intimate relationship where
the researcher learns to interpret the cues given by Nature. The informal and personal nature of these
"imageries" may make them difficult to pass over to a new generation of students, but at least there
could more emphasis on developing an "intuitive" grasp and qualitative understanding of
phenomena and their underlying theory. One way is it to train the ability to make rough back-on-
the-envelope estimates of various quantities before attempting to give "complete" solutions to
problems. 

The discussion of osmosis shows that sometimes the verbal explanations may become somewhat
muddled, e.g. due to unclear terminology, whence it may be impossible to assess how well the
"explanation" accounts for the facts. The osmosis case also illustrates the phenomenon of a popular
explanation - the "diffusion theory" -  which is promulgated despite the lack of theoretical support.

As should be clear, what is said here is by no means a plea against abstract methods; on the
contrary, I think that the abstract methods can be put to a more efficient use if we have a good
qualitative understanding of the problem and its basic assumptions. As is also well known,
"intuition" can sometimes lead astray; so, we need both to check each one another. Furthermore, it
is not our suggestion that "understanding" necessarily requires a "mechanical model" for the
phenomenon. E.g. contrived mechanical models of electromagnetic fields would hardly be of any
use, pedagogical or otherwise4. Rather we would like to make a link to the honoured tradition of
Gedanken-experiments where simplified models are devised such as to emphasize the essential
elements behind a phenomenon. 

3 One could also contemplate to model processes using macroscopic mechanical models. E.g. Janáček and Siegler
(2000) present, with some reservations, a macroscopic toy modell for osmosis which they have tested in practice.
4 As is perhaps well known J Maxwell did indeed develop a "mechanical" model of the electromagnetic fields and

waves as an aid in his comprehension of the subject. As he explained in a letter to Kelvin 1855 he tried to understand
the subject "by the aid of any notions I could screw into my head". The modern theoretical understanding of
electromagnetism is linked to the concept of the gauge field. Gauge theory provides a structural framework for
understanding the mathematical form the theory takes. However, when a sicence is young we need sorts of
Gedanken-experiments in order to probe the meaning of the constructs. Thus, much of the early discussion on the
foundation of quantum mechanics was formulated using Gedanken-experiments (many of which have been realized
in the laboratory since then). E.g. there was a debate on whether Heisenberg's  use of the microscope  Gedanken-
experiment misrepresented the meaning of the momentum-position uncertainty relation.

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

5/39

Classical mechanics is largely based on using point-particle models and solving Newton's equation

2. Potential energy 

(1)

mi (cid:3)xi

=F i

for each particle i knowing the force Fi acting on it. If we know the forces acting on the particles
we can solve (in principle) the problem; this has become the "paradigm" of what it means to
"explain" things in science. When we have a large number of particles we have to simplify the
problem. If the particles form a "solid body" we can reduce the problem to one just involving the
center of mass motion or rotations of the body. For deformable bodies and for fluids it is assumed
that we can describe the motions using e.g. vector fields. We will discuss a simple problem which
will later bring us to the osmosis problem. We have an U-shaped tube filled with water (see the
figure). When the system is in equilibrium we assume that the water levels in both arms are on the
same level x1. Suppose then we have a situation where the water level on the right side has risen
above the equilibrium level by h, and correspondingly been lowered by h on the left side. Now we
expect the water to flow so that the original equilibrium state will be restored. (We know there is
friction so that the system cannot go on oscillating around the equilibrium for ever.) A traditional
approach would be to calculate the potential energy U of the system and determine its minimum
which is expected to correspond to the equilibrium state of the system. Though this is quite a formal
procedure it may provide a vivid picture of the system striving to reach the bottom of the potential
well. Thus, in our case, if we assume that   h<x1
(cid:5)x0
  we can disregard the potential energy of the
water below x0 because it does not change in the process. If the cross sectional area of the tube is
taken to be A we get for the potential energy of the water masses above x0:

(2)

U = 1
2

ρ g A(x0

(cid:5)h)2(cid:9) 1
2

ρ g A(x0

(cid:9)h)2=ρ g A(x0

2(cid:9)h2)

where ρis the density of water and g is the acceleration of gravity. Expression (2) is obtained by
summing the potential energy contributions m g (x - x0) of every "particle" above the reference level
x0. As we can see from (2) that U indeed has a minimum at h = 0. If M denotes the total mass of all
the water we can also write the dynamic version (Newton's equation)

(3)

M (cid:3)h=(cid:5)

(cid:5)γ (cid:12)h=(cid:5)2 ρ g A h(cid:5)γ (cid:12)h

∂U
∂ h

where we have introduced a frictional term
asymptotically.  Again, the stationary equilibrium 

γ (cid:12)h
(cid:12)h=0  is reached for h = 0. 

which makes the system come to rest

Now, we can agree that the previous account gives a quite satisfactory solution to the problem as far
as the assemblage of water molecules can be treated as constituting a macroscopic fluid with
"frozen" degrees of freedom (here we only used one degree of freedom symbolized by the height h).
Still we might be interested to know what happens on the molecular level. What makes the water
molecules preferably flow in one direction instead of the other? Naturally, at this stage we do not
ask for a detailed calculation of the forces and movements but for a qualitative understanding of the
process at the molecular level not provided by the "potential formulation". Since water in this case

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

6/39

can be regarded incompressible we know there must be strong repulsive forces between the water
molecules when they come "too close". Thus to a certain approximation we may view the water
molecules as impenetrable balls of a radius given by half of the typical minimum distance between 

h

x1

x0

M

h

Figure 1

two water molecules. With the water level risen at the right side we may expect on the average that
a water "ball" on the right side experiences a higher "pressure" than a "ball" on the left side on the
same level. The "balls" on the right side has to support a greater mass of water above them than the
"balls" on the left side (on the same level) from which we conclude that the molecules will be
pushed to the left and thus restore the equilibrium state. One could elaborate this story, but this is
enough to make an interesting comparison with the osmotic case. 

3. Osmotic pressure

Suppose we now insert a membrane M separating the U-tube in two sym-metrical halves as shown
in the picture. Furthermore, we assume that water can freely pass through the membrane whereas
molecules of the solute S cannot pass through it. We might e.g. imagine that the membrane contains
holes small enough to let water molecules pass but too small for the solute molecules to pass (see
the next figure)5.

5 Biological membranes may have pores of diameter as small as 2 Å.  

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

7/39

Figure 2

Thus, suppose that in the initial state the water levels are equal on both sides. Then we add a small
amount of a solute to the right side and the water level is seen to start to rise - why? An important
point is that osmosis is a colligative property: it does not depend on the specific nature of the solute
(such as the exact size of the solute molecules), only on its concentration.

If you look into a traditional physical chemistry text you have to cover a quite a bit of ground to get
the story. First you have to lay down the basics of thermodynamics, then you have to give an
account of the Gibbs function and introduce the chemical potentials and finally apply these concepts
to the problem at hand in order to derive (1), and in the end you will perhaps have no clue what
really takes place. Also, the abstract theory may be consistent with a number of different, and even
conflicting, molecular descriptions of the mechanism. The basic fact, however, is that the system is
able to convert heat (the system is in thermal contact with the surrounding) into mechanical energy
(water rising). The question is about the details of this perfomance.

4. Pressure and the virial theorem 

Before we proceed to discuss osmosis we have to discuss the concept of pressure. For gases the
pressure at the boundary is easily understood as the result of molecules hitting the wall of the vessel.
For an ideal gas the pressure is independent of the mass of the molecules and depends only on the
average kinetic energy of the molecules which is given as kT/2 per degree of freedom. For liquids
we still have the same average kinetic energy per molecule, but the pressure (at the boundary) is
much less than what one would obtain according to the ideal gas law. If the water exerted the same
pressure as an ideal gas its pressure at room temperature and normal density would be around 1200
atmospheres. It is natural to assume that it is the attraction between the molecules which reduces the
pressure. This is elegantly demonstrated mathematically by the virial theorem, which is a simple

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

8/39

consequence of elementary mechanics6 (derivation in the appendix),

(1)

pV = 2
3

〈 E kin 〉(cid:9) 1

6〈∑

i,j

⋅(r i

F i,j

(cid:5)r j)〉

〈E kin 〉

Here
denotes the time average of kinetic energy, and Fij is the force by which the
molecule at rj acts on the molecule at ri. We obtain the ideal gas formula for noninteracting
molecules (zero force) which have an average kinetic energy 3kT/2. For attractive forces between
the molecules the last term on the rhs becomes negative and the pressure is correspondingly reduced
compared to the ideal gas case. Thus, the interaction term on the rhs may be viewed as a "negative
pressure"7 contribution canceling part of the kinetic pressure contribution due to thermal motion. If
we increase the external pressure the last term on the rhs becomes less negative since the forces
become more repulsive in order to hinder the molecules to collapse into each other. 

Fij

ri - rj

ri

rj

Figure 3

Consider, for simplicity, the zero gravity case where water is contained in a volume and forms a
spherical mass in equilibrium with the vapour. 

Figure 4

If we apply the virial theorem to the spherical mass of water the pressure on the lhs in (1) will refer
to the vapour pressure. For room temperatures this is quite small; a larger part of the kinetic
pressure is thus canceled by the ww-interaction term on the rhs. What happens if we add a solute to

6 See e.g. Goldstein (1980 §3-4). A somewhat more detailed account can be found in Landsberg (1990 §18.2).
7 This terminology makes sense since the force is attractive instead of repulsive.

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

9/39

the water, say by a concentration corresponding to an osmotic pressure of 10 atmospheres? If we
assume the solute molecules do not interact, then we may conclude, by applying the virial theorem
to the solute molecules, that it is the water which "cancels" the extra 10 atmosphere pressure.
Indeed, writing psolute for the solute pressure etc, and s for the positions of the solute molecules, we
get the for the solute virial equation,

(2)

psolute V = 2
3

〈 E kin

solute〉(cid:9) 1

3〈∑

n

(w)⋅s n〉
F n

(F(w) stands for the total force of the water molecules acting on the solute molecule at sn.) For a
nonvolatile solute we may expect that the solute does not escape from the solution and the pressure
on the rhs side may be put equal to zero. In the present case it means that the ws-interaction term on
the rhs is equal to "-10 atm". Similarly we get for the water in the solution

(3)

psolvent V = 2
3

〈 E kin

solvent〉(cid:9) 1

3〈∑

i

(s)⋅r i〉(cid:9)1
F i

6〈∑

i,j

F i,j

⋅(r i

(cid:5)r j)〉

(F(s)
i is the force by which all the solute molecules act on the water molecule at ri.) For homogenic
distributions of the water molecules and the solute molecules in the volume we can argue that the
ws-interaction term is of the same magnitude but of opposite sign compared to the value of the ws-
term in the solute equation. Thus, in the present case we get in the solvent equation a "+10 atm"
contribution in addition to the ww-interaction. Therefore, compared with the pure solvent case, the
ww-term in the solution case has to cancel another "10 atm" which means that the water in the
solution has negative pressure contribution "10 atm" below the value for a pure solvent. Pure water
and the water in the solution are then essentially in different energetic states8. Connecting pure
water and the solution using a semipermeable membrane creates an effective pressure difference
between pure water and the water in the solution which amounts to the "osmotic pressure" given by
. It could be put like this: pressure exerted by the water molecules on one

solute〉

π

〈 E kin

osm V = 2
3

another in the solution is less (due to the solute intervention) than in pure water and this makes it
possible for pure water to force itself into the solution till the ww-pressure difference is canceled9. 

When later reading the paper by Lorentz (1892) I found his explanation to be much in the line with
the presentation above though he uses very little mathematics and does not directly refer to the virial
theorem10. I consider e.g. his equ (3) (Lorentz 1892) to be more or less a rendering of the virial
theorem.

8 This provides a kinetic background for the thermodynamic analysis of osmosis in terms of the "chemical potential".
9 Patlak (www1) offers a nice Java-simulation where the water-solute inteaction is modelled such that 3 water

molecules stick to every solute molecule. Of course this is a great oversimplification and also the captions may
suggest that water concentration difference is the motive power of osmotic flow. In another version [Patlak www2] is
more explicit about the role of the water-solute interaction as a reardation effect: "In other words, the chemical
activity of water is inversely proportional to solute concentration! Understanding this 'retarding' effect of solute on
solvent is the key to understanding osmosis."

10 Lorentz (1892) is indeed trying to make sense of osmosis directly in terms of molecular kinetics and without using

involved mathematics. As Lorentz explains in the beginning of his paper: "Les lois relatives à la pression osmotique
d'une solution étendue et aux phénomènes qui a'y rattachent sont si simples, qu'on est naturellement conduit à essayer
de les déduire directement de la théorie cinétique, sans se servir de la thermodynamique". Sommerfeld (1952) after
presenting the standard thermodynamic treatment of osmosis, and conceding to its "paradoxical" result, mentions
indeed that H A Lorentz has provided a kinetic explanation. Prof. Claus Montonen (Helsinki univ.) pointed out the
reference Lorentz (1892) to me, which is most likely the one that Sommerfeld was alluding to.

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

10/39

This broad explanation of osmosis using the virial theorem seems also closely related to the Hulett-
Hammel-Scholander theory (HHS for short here11) among the various explanations offered in the
litterature. HHS water tension can be interpreted as the ww-interaction term in the virial equation.
The basic tenet of the HHS theory - that pure water under external pressure p, and solvent water
under external pressure p + πosm, are in equivalent
thermodynamical states – makes sense
considering the virial equation for the solvent water. Indeed, in the case discussed, if the external
pressure for the solution is increased by "10 atm" then water has to respond such that the ww-term
also increases by "10 atm". It thus reaches the same level as for the pure solvent whence the ww-
pressure is the same for pure solvent as for the pressurized non pure solvent.

One obvious observation is that osmotic pressure can do work since it can e.g. raise water. An
osmotic system can be likened with a heat engine which converts the heat of the environment (heat
bath) into work. Indeed, the heat is transferred to the thermal motion of the solute molecules and the
water molecules which are responsible for the pressure.

It is of interest in connection with the above method to discuss the case of a gas instead of a liquid
solvent. As an example we may have CO2 and a mixture of H2 and CO2, which are separated by a
rubber membrane that is permeable only to CO2. In this case, if we assume we can neglect the
interactions between the gas molecules, we may expect that CO2 will distribute itself so that at
equilibrium there will be equal concentrations on both sides of the membrane. The mixture though
will have a higher pressure because of the additional partial pressure by the hydrogen gas. In
contrast to the liquid case, the pressure increase is not in this case due to the influx of the permeant
through the membrane; the pressure would persist without the membrane. We also recognize that
we might have cases that are somewhere between these extreme cases where "osmotic pressure" is
due to both partial pressure and an influx.

5. Mechanistic theories 

It seems that despite mechanical explanations for osmosis abound12, the clarification that can be
obtained applying the virial theorem has been generally overlooked. Still these various proposed
mechanisms are of interest, since the virial theorem does not detail the exact mechanism, only what
it will accomplish if satisfying some general conditions. Also, a detailed mechanical picture may
suggest where to look for deviations from the ideal case which is the basis of the van't Hoff formula.
We will therefore take a look at a selection of mechanisms for osmosis that have been proposed or
that we invent here for illustrative purposes. 

5.1."Solute bombardment theory" 

A "classical proof" of equ (1) employs a setup with a movable membrane. This time the tube is
filled completely with water and sealed at both ends. When we add an impermeant solute to the
right side of the system it is no longer in equilibrium since the solute molecules is supposed to
"push" the membrane to the left. In order to maintain equilibrium an opposing force corresponding

11 In a letter Hammel suggests the theory be stated as the "Hulett-Dixon-Herzfeld-Duclaux-Myselfs-Scholander-

Hammel" theory in recognition of the main contributors; so, consider HHS a convenient abreviation. 

12 Weiss (1996 p. 226) refers to a study by Guell (1991) which lists no less than 14 different proposed mechanisms for

osmosis.

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

11/39

to the osmotic pressure has to be applied to the membrane. If we just add a solute to a bottle of
water no pressure build up takes place, something this bombardment theory cannot explain. It is
only when we try to separate the solute and the water using a semipermeable membrane that an
effective "osmotic pressure" is felt13. The osmotic pressure of such a solution calculated using (1)
(taking into account that NaCl dissociates into ions in water; i.e., the ion concentration is twice the
given NaCl-concentration) at 27° C becomes around 7.4 atmospheres. The bombardment theory
would make sense for gases if we may imagine that there is some sort of a lid put over the
"solution". Thus, the theory may be applicable in a case where the solute interacts very weakly with
the solvent. Clearly the similarity of the van't Hoff equation (1-1) has suggested to many versions of
the bombardment theory. As Barrow (1966 p. 643) remarks:

"This similarity of the expression to the ideal gas law led van't Hoff and others to
some not very fruitful ideas that view the osmotic pressure as arising from a
molecular bombardment process."

One point though is that ideas can be fruitful despite being wrong - e.g. the bombardment theory
does suggest the correct formula (1-1) and the explanation also holds in the case of gasous mixtures.

5.2. Surface theory

Since water is free too pass through the membrane we may expect the same concentration of water
molecules per unit volume on each side, so that the hydrostatic pressure exerted by the water
molecules on both sides will be the same at the beginning. However, on the right side we have the
additional bounces from the solute molecules. These molecules will try to escape via the water
surface. As they hit the water molecules in the surface layer they will get a kick upward and drag
with them neighbouring water molecules. Therefore we might expect a net force on the water
molecules that makes water flow to the right till the force is balanced by the weight of the risen
water. Since the solute is of low concentration we may assume there is no interaction between them
in the solution, and can thus be regarded as an ideal gas when it comes to calculate the pressure
exerted by the solute molecules. Thus applying the "gas law" pV = nkT (n = number of solute
particles) to this case we obtain the equation (1) for the "osmotic pressure".
In fact, this "theory"
has some similarities with one that has over the years been advanced by H T Hammel ("water
tension theory", 197614) in that it presupposes a cohesion, and there appears to be an obvious way to
test it. Indeed, according to the proposed mechanism, if we inject the solute (e.g. dropping a crystal
of the solute) near the surface we should see the osmotic effect commence earlier than when
injecting it near the membrane. An experiment by Mauro (1979) has been cited as showing the
opposite to be the fact; thus, it looks as if we should search for the "osmotic mechanism" at the

13 It may be pointed out that Frazer and coworkers measured osmotic pressure up to 273 atmospheres in their

experiments 1916-1921.

14 This theory goes back to Hulett (1903). Hammel is a strong supporter of the water tension theory as indicated by the

following testimony: "I have had engraved on my gravestone the following declaration: ‘A physiologist who
measured xylem and phloem sap pressures in trees; who embraced Hulett’s theory of osmosis and who recognized
the diffusion of bicarbonate ions as the principal osmotic effect in Starling’s hypothesis.’ When Scholander and I
finished our monograph on ‘Osmosis and Tensile Solvent’ in 1976, I said to him, ‘Pete, you will never know the day
when our ideas about osmosis become widely accepted.’ Twenty-five years later, I repeat the same statement, now
applied to myself. I feel obliged, therefore, to engrave our views in granite." ("News From Senior Physiologists",
www.the-aps.org/publications/journals/tphys/2001html/October01/srphys.htm .) Indeed, though more than 100 years
of research, the mechanism of the ascent of sap in plants cannot be said to be fully understood yet - see e.g. Tyree
(1997).

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

12/39

membrane. Hammel's theory, though, makes sense if we link the concept of "negative pressure"
with the water-solute interaction that cancels the kinetic pressure of the solute as described in the
discussion of the virial theorem above. 

5.3. Solute attraction theory

Suppose there is an attractive force between the solute molecules and water molecules. Thus, when
the solute is near a pore it can "suck" in water from the pore into the solution. This suction explains
the "negative pressure" felt by water and which forces it to flow to the solution side. A weaker
interaction may be thought to be compensated by a less impeded flow of the solute molecules and
thus the water molecules it drags with it. Also closely related to this theory is the "water thirst" idea
by Gerald Pollack.

5.4. "Water thirst theory"

This idea is based on the hydration phenomenon. The solute molecule is thought to be surrounded
by layers of water molecules that attract further water molecules. In Pollack's own words15: "If all
hydrophilic or charged solutes attract comparably large water layers, effectively they have enormous
'thirst'. Now, put these solutes in a chamber surrounded by a semipermeable membrane, with water
alone on the other side of the membrane. If there is not enough water in the solute-containing
chamber to satisfy the molecular thirst, water will be drawn from the neighboring container. That's
it. The force of osmosis is one of hydration, and the water needs to be supplied from anywhere it is
available." 

Related to the "solute attraction theory" and "thirst theory" is a modell in which the membrane is
described as a potential φ acting only on the solute. Joos presents an argument in (Joos 1986) based
on this idea whose basic elements also figure in (Villars & Benedek 1974) and (Guell 1991).
Suppose the membrane is given as the plane x = 0 and that the solution is on the side x > 0. Joos
argues that as the solute is repelled by the membrane "viscosity causes some of the solvent to be
dragged along ... The liquid thus streaming away from the membrane is replaced by fresh solvent
which passes through the membrane, for no barrier exists as far as the solvent is concerned. The
solvent streams in until the pressure excess equals the osmotic pressure." One assumes thus that two
balancing forces are acting on the solute: the potential φand a pressure p (this will be criticized
below). Joos assumes further that at the equilibrium the solute density (particles per unit volume)
follows the Boltzmann distribution

The potential is +∞ at x = 0 and drops to 0 as x increases. Equating the hydrostatic volume force and
the membrane repulsion one obtains

(1)

(cid:2)

φ (x )
k T

c(x)=c∞ e

(2)

(cid:5)

∂ p
∂ x

=(cid:5)c

∂φ
∂ x

Combining (2) with (1) it follows that

15 Personal communication (email 11. Dec 2002).

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

13/39

(3)

∂ p
∂ x

=(cid:5)k T

∂ c
∂ x

Integrating (3) from x = 0 to +∞ we obtain the van't Hoff formula in the dilute limit if p(0) - p(+∞)
is interpreted as the osmotic pressure πosm . Equ (1) can be justified by assuming a stationary state
where the total flow of solute, which is a sum of one part due to the membrane repulsion and one
part due to diffusion, is zero16,

(4)

0=J solute

=(cid:5) 1

γ c

∂φ
∂ x

(cid:5) kT
γ

∂ c
∂ x

(5)

J solvent

=α J solute

(cid:9)L(π

osm

(cid:5)∆ p)

If we reckon with the Joos' drag effect then the water flow into the solution side could be expected
to be described by an equation of the form (the quantities are evaluated close to the membrane)

The first term on the rhs describes the flow of water induced by the "solute drag", the second term
(which can be argued for on the basis of the virial theorem - see above) describes the flow due to
osmotic pressure and the hydrostatic pressure difference ∆p over the membrane (L is a parameter
which describes how well the membrane "conducts" water). From this it is apparent that the "drag
term" is not necessary for explaining the osmotic flow. Indeed, we may assume that the solute flow
drops to zero since no new solute enters the solution. The stationary state Jsolvent = 0 of (5) is thus
given by ∆p = πosm. Looking back we realize that Joos has given no arguments supporting the
assumption behind equ (2). Clearly, there is no need to assume a "pressure force" balancing the flow
of the solute since we may suppose that we have a redistribution of the solute till the state (1) is
achieved. However, it is possible to formulate an approach based on flow equations of the form (5).
is done in theories17 which employ the theory of non-equilibrium
This is exactly what
thermodynamics18 developed by Lars Onsager (1903-1976) leading to the so called Kedem-
Katchalsky equations. Still, as a phenomenological theory the Onsager-theory does not reveal the
mechanism of the process (see the Appendix).

5.5. Water concentration-diffusion theory

One of the most popular "folklore theories" of osmosis assumes that water flows to the solution side
via "diffusion"19 driven by the difference in the concentration of water molecules which is supposed
to be lower in the solution than in the pure water. The following quotation from a chemistry text
can be taken as representativ for this "theory":

16 The force of friction is asumed to be  (cid:1)γ (cid:3)x  with the friction coefficient  γ related to the diffusion constant D

by   D=kT ⁄ γ  ("Einstein-relation").

17 See e.g. Janáček and Siegler (2000).
18 For a classic textbook on the subject see Groor and Mazur (1984). Sommerfeld (1952) contains a clear and concise
introduction to irreversible thermodyanmics in section 21. The theory has been adapted for biophysical applications
by A Katchalsky and P F Curran in Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics in Biophysics (Harvard UP 1965). The
Kedem-Katchalsky equations are also discussed by Weiss (1996 § 5.5).

19 "Selfdiffusion" is a name used for this. 

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

14/39

"Water molecules can pass through the membranes in either direction, and they do.
But because the concentration of water molecules is greater in the pure water than in
the solution, there is a net flow from the pure water into the solution."20

Another text presents the idea in a little more detail: 

"Water molecules are continually colliding with the membrane from both sides.
However, the rate of collision is somewhat less on the solution side (right) than on
the pure water side (left) because the concentration of water molecules in a solution
is less than their concentration in pure water (...) Since there are more collisions from
the left to than from the right, more water molecules pass through from left to right
than from right to left."21

A popular text on physiology states that:

"Because dissolved solute molecules occupy space that would otherwise be taken up
by watermolecules,
the water
concentration. As a result, water molecules tend to diffuse across a membrane toward
the solution containing the higher solute concentration, because this movement is
down the concentration gradient for water."22

the solute concentration,

the higher

the lower

Wolfe (2001) gives a somewhat more sophisticated argument, involving also the Boltzmann factor,
but still the water concentration difference is seen as the primary mover: 

"Hydraulic equilibrium is achieved when the lower concentration of water in the high
pressure side is balanced by the higher pressure and therefore higher energy pV on
that side". 

The concentration difference may however be considered as a secondary factor for the osmotic
process for liquids23. Apparently, the concentration-diffusion theories of osmosis stay around
because they appeal to imaging the liquid as a gas, which of course cannot square with all the facts
about liquids as was made evident in the section on the virial theorem. For instance, consider a
closed bottle half filled with water at room temperature. If we follow the lead of the concentration-
fiffusion theory we would expect water to flow into the empty (save vapour) half of the bottle since
water concentration is much smaller there. Naturally, this does not happen because of the interaction
between the water molecules. Another problem with the conentration-diffusion theory is that the
osmotic flow is generally observed to be convective rather than diffusive. Indeed, diffusive flow is
due to random motions and is quite different from a forced flow due to a pressure difference. A
further argument against concentration-diffusion theory (i.e. water concentration gradient as a
motive power) is that we have solute effects related to osmosis such as lowering of the freezing
point, and the rise of the boiling point, which apparently have little to do with diffusion but are
related to the solute-solvent interaction. The question of water transport through the membrane itself

20 Petrucci et al. (2002 p. 554).
21 Brescia et al. (1975 p. 186-7).
22 Martini (2001 p. 73).
23 There is of course a small variation in water concentration e.g. due compressibility; an increase of external pressure
from 1 atm to 10 atm (20° C) increases water density by a factor of 1.00046. Also, as pointed out by Hammel
(2002), for some solutions, like NaF dissolved in water, the water concentration (molecules per unit volume) may in
fact be higher than for pure water.

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

15/39

is a different issue. E.g. for very small pores we can no longer describe the transport as a Poiseuille
flow. Indeed, as small pores approaches a 1-dimensional system the traditional concept of diffusion
looses its meaning.

5.6 Obstruction mechanism

Conisidering the sieve modell of the membrane one might hypothestize that osmotic effect arises
from the mechanical obstruction to water flow from the solution due to the presence of the solute
molecules. This mehcanical modell is e.g. found in Atkins and Beran (1992 p. 432):

"The [osmotic] flow occurs because the solvent molecules can pass readly through
the membrane from the pure solvent into the solution, but the presence of the solute
molecules blocks the return of some solvent molecules from the solution into the
pure solvent. As a result, the flow from pure solvent into the solution is faster than
the return flow."

This explanation makes certainly sense, yet it cannot be the essence of osmosis. Consider the case24
of a membrane made of a palladium foil which is permeable for H2 but not for N2 and other gases. It
seems that the membrane functions as a catalyst; it does not let through H2 directly but decomposes
it into atoms that can pass through the membrane and runite on the other side. Moreover, the
obstruction modell directly contradicts the case with gases since here we obtain equal
concentrations of the permeant on both sides, the "osmotic pressure" resulting from the extra partial
pressure of the non-permeant gas.

6. Some consequences

One very important application of the osmotic effect involves the living cells. Since the (animal)
cell wall is not believed to be able to withstand25 a significant pressure difference the cell must
regulate the intracellular particle concentration so as to match the outside concentration, otherwise
the cell either fatally bursts or dries out and shrinks. This explains why it is not advisable to drink
e.g. distilled water ("hypotonic" fluid). An "isotonic" solution is obtained by adding about 0.15
mol/L NaCl to water. This corresponds to the intra- and extracellular concentrations for most
vertebrates. In diabetics dehydration due to excessive glucose level in the blood stream (while the
body tries to get rid of the excess glucose water follows with it) can cause a serious state called
hyperosmolar coma. This high osmolarity of blood can damage the cells and may be letal if
rehydration is not quickly administered26. Dehydration also occures when sweating. Sweat is a
hypotonic solution so that in sweating the salt concentration of the extracellular fluid (ECF)
increases. Thus the popular custom to take salt pills when exercising have no physiological basis
and no apparent benefits have been demonstrated. "Body reserves of electrolytes are sufficient to
tolerate extended periods of strenous activity, and problems with Na+ balance are extremely
unlikely exept during ultramarathons or other activities that involve maximal exertion for more than
6 hours", as pointed out by Martini (2001 p. 994). From the evolutionary point of view it could be
argued that individuals who loose too much Na+ during exertion would have been disadvantaged

24 Discussed e.g. by Barrow (1966 p. 643).
25 Plant cells however may have strong walls and osmosis plays here an important role for the turgocity (rigidity) of the

plant. 

26 In physiology one uses also the expression "oncotic pressure" meaning "colloid osmotic pressure of body fluids".

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

16/39

(salt was not readly available in prehistoric times) and the genetic pool has therefore drifted toward
a more sustainable physiology in this respect. Martini also makes the remark that sport beverages
may in fact cause cramps, diarrhea and other problems if they have a too high sugar concentration
(over 10 g/dl).

The picture of the "sieve"-membrane above immediately also suggests the reverse osmotic (RO)
effect: If we e.g. use a piston on the right side to exert an extra pressure above the atmospheric +
osmotic pressure water will flow to the left leaving the solutes behind on the right side; thus we can
get cleaned water on the left. A practical application of this is the desalination and purification of
water and to concentrate apple juice. The purification method using reverse osmosis is also being
referred to as hyperfiltration. Hammel (2002) describes an experiment where one removes water
from the pure water side in the osmometer such that the increased hydrostatic pressure difference
overcomes the osmotic pressure and the water starts to flow from the solution; i.e. we get reverse
osmosis. An important effect in this case is that the solute which flows with the water stops at the
membrane and a solute concentration builds up there. The solute drag brakes the water flow with a
force that may be many times greater than the flow resistance offered by the membrane (see further
Appendix B). Practical hyperfiltration devices are constructed27 such that the solution flows parallel
to the membrane and carries away solute that otherwise would accumulate at the membrane.

Another consequence of adding the solute to water is that the boiling point increases. This can
understood in terms of a reduction of the vapour pressure. If we consider (see e.g. Ma 1985 p. 326)
the arrangement28 of figure 3 where we have a closed O-tube, we realize that the water vapor
pressure on the left side (pure water) must be greater than on the right side (solution) by an amount
equivalent29 to the hydrostatic pressure of a column of vapour of the height 2h; i.e.,

If we assume that the vapour satisfies the ideal gas law we can write the above result as

∆ p vapour

⋅
=(cid:5) posmosis

ρ
vapour
ρ

water

  

∆ p vapour
p vapour

=(cid:5)

csolute
c water

Thus, adding a solute to water decreases the vapour pressure in proportion to the solute concentra-
tion - a result discovered empirically by Raoult in 1886 and which is often used the other way
around in order to derived the van't Hoff formula (1-1).   

27 For some practical and theoretical details about RO see e.g. Lachish (www2003) and EPA (1996).
28 Variation of a Gedankenexperiment used e.g. by Hulett.
29 This argument assumes that that the solute cannot leave the solution; i.e. it is nonvolatile.

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

17/39

h

x1

x0

M

h

Figure 5

7. Historical note

A paper by Robert Boyle (1627-91) (Boyle 1682) could be one of the first studies of osmosis. Still,
as the "father" of osmosis one may regard René Dutrochet (1776 - 1847) who studied osmosis
(1828) using animal bladders (Dutrochet seems also to be the one who introduced the word osmosis
in this context - greek for "push"). The botanists Wilhelm Pfeffer (1845 - 1920) and Hugo de Vries
studied osmosis in plant cells. Pfeffer's classical setup (fig. 4) consisted of water (W), a glucose
solution (S), and a semipermeable membrane (M) (the vessel containing the solute was made of
nonglazed porcelain lined with ferro-cyan-copper CuFe(CN)6 which made it permeable for water
but not for glucose). van't Hoff (1852 - 1911) derived the formula (1) in 1885 using thermodynamic
arguments30. 

30 Already back then osmosis became surrounded by disputes which at one time prompted van't Hoff to make the

remark (1892): "Again we have the basically pointless question: What exerts osmotic pressure? Really, as already
emphasized, I am concerned in the end only with its magnitude; since it has proved to be equal to the gas pressure
one tends to think that it comes about by a similar mechanism as with gases. Let he, however, who is led down the
false path by this rather quit worrying about the mechanism." (Quoted by Weiss (1996 p 185). A livley discussion of
the topic has taken place in the pages of American Journal of Physiology, vol.  237, in 1979.

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

18/39

S

M

W

Figure 6

8. Thermodynamic explanation

We also wish to give an explanation of the osmotic pressure that uses the thermodynamic concepts
but what we believe in a more transparent manner. First we might follow the lead by which we
arrived at the potential U in (2). It seems we only have to add the potential energy due to the solute.
Apparently this would not predict the osmotic effect. As a comparison, minimizing the gravitational
potential for a gas in a container we would predict that the molecules would lie dead flat on the
bottom of the container. Well, this could be true in the exceptional case of a temperature of absolute
zero. Normally temperature does not enter problems in mechanics but here is it apparent that it must
play some role. The molecules do not grind to halt; in the collisions the gain and loss of energy
averages to zero. We can no longer treat the solute or the gas as being fully characterized only by
their gravitational potential energy. In thermodynamics this is expressed by the statement that we no
longer have to minimize the potential energy U but the combination

(1)

F=U (cid:5)T S

usually referred to as "free energy". Here U stands generally for "internal energy", T for the absolute
temperature and S is entropy. How can it be justified to replace U by F? We realize that for the
solute at low concentration the pressure exerted by its molecules bouncing on and off greatly
exceeds its "hydrostatic pressure" which is due to its weight alone. So one way out to proceed is to
treat the solute in the "thermodynamic regime". A basic postulate of thermodynamics is that
equilibrium is reached when the total entropy is a maximum. In special cases this can be translated
into the requirement that the free energy F be a minimum at the equilibrium. Therefore, free energy
adds nothing new in content besides the entropy function, it is just a convenient way of determining
the state of maximum total entropy under certain special conditions (constant volume processes).
Indeed, let S denote the entropy of a system, Se that of the surrounding, and Stot the total entropy.
Suppose the system is in thermal contact with the surrounding. According to the 1st law of
thermodynamics heat transferred from the surrounding to the system (with internal energy U,
pressure p, volume V) is given by   

(2)

∆Q=∆U (cid:9) p∆V

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

19/39

Since the heat (2) is flowing from the surrounding (causing no irreversible changes in the
environment) its change in entropy will be, according to the thermodynamic definition of entropy,

(3)

∆ S e=

(cid:5)∆Q
T

=(cid:5)

∆U (cid:9) p∆V
T

(4)

∆ S tot=∆ S (cid:9)∆ S e≥0

Now, according to the 2nd law of thermodynamics the total entropy cannot decrease,

Thus, for a system at constant pressure and temperature this is the same as

(5)

(6)

∆G≤0 with
G=U (cid:9) pV (cid:5)TS (Gibbs energy)

∆ F≤0 with
F=U (cid:5)TS (free energy)

and for a system at constant volume and temperature we get

How to apply these concepts to the present problem? If we expect the total volume to remain
unchanged we may use the free energy F in this case. The entropy of the water does not change
when shifting its position in a constant gravitational field (entropy is only a function of the
thermodynamic variables, such as pressure and the temperature). Here the free energy of water
contributes thus only with the gravitational potential energy part U to (1). Since we are considering
the process to be isothermal, the internal energy of the solute may be taken as constant and does not
affect the minimization problem. It remains to compute the entropy S of the solute. Suppose the
volume occupied by the solvent is V, and the solute can be treated as a gas in a volume V in the
sense that the solute molecules do not interact, then for its entropy we can use the expression for the
ideal gas

(7)

S =S 0

(cid:9)k n ln (V )

(8)

S =k ln (W )

where S0 is a term not dependent on V and n is the number of solute molecules. Alternatively we
could start with Boltzmann's definition of entropy,

where W is the "thermodynamic probability" of the (macro)state; that is, the number of microstates
consistent with the given macrostate. When the volume available for the n particles of the solute
increases from V0 to V it may be argued that the number of microstates (the temperature staying the 

same) for the given macrostate increases with a factor of ( V

)n

V 0

from which we can again

obtain the expression (7). Of course, if we use (8) we have to show how it relates to the
thermodynamic definition of entropy used in (3). Next we can express the volume V as

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

20/39

and if we suppose Ah/V0 << 1 and use
disregarding unimportant constant terms, the free energy to be

ln (1(cid:9)x)≈ x

for small x, then we finally may set,

We find that h = 0 is no longer a minimum for F. Instead it assumes minimum at a value for which

The "pressure" ∆p corresponds to the hydrostatic pressure exerted by a mass of water of height 2h.
The new equilibrium state can now be interpreted as caused by the "osmotic pressure" exerted by
the solute. It could be argued that this result is already contained in the "ideal gas" assumption (7) so
that the next steps add nothing new to what we already knew form the ideal gas law. However, the
method can be generalized so as to incorporate corrections to the ideal gas assumption. One of the
simplest forms of corrections is taking into account the finite volume of the solute molecules. This
will affect the entropy factor S in (1). Indeed, calculating (7) we have to replace the factor

V (h)=V 0

(cid:9) A h

(9)

F=ρ A g h2(cid:5)T k A h

n
V 0

(10)

∆ p=ρ 2 h g=k T( n

)

V 0

( V

V 0

)n

 in W by

(11)

W = ∏

(cid:1)i v)
i=n (cid:1)1( V (cid:1)i v

V 0

i=0

where v is the volume excluded by one single molecule of the solute. Thus, the first solute molecule
added to the solvent can occupy a space V, the 2nd one can occupy a space V - v and so on. If the
ratio v/V is very small we get from (11) an approximate correction factor, 

1(cid:5) v
V

n (cid:1)1

∑

i=0

i(cid:9) v
V 0

n (cid:1)1

∑

i=0

i≈1(cid:5) v
2V

n2(cid:9) v
2V 0

n2

which changes the entropy by an amount

k ln(1(cid:5) v

2V

n2(cid:9) v
2V 0

n2)≈(cid:5)k

v
2V

n2(cid:9)k

v
2V 0

n2

(12)

(13)

(14)

Thus we get a second order correction to the "osmotic pressure" (10) given by

∆ p=k T{ n

V 0

(cid:9) v

V)2}
2( n

In thermodynamic terms the "explanation" of the osmosis is that by adding a solute a new state of
maximum total entropy is reached by water flowing into the solute side; the decrease in the total

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

21/39

entropy due the heat flowing from the surrounding to the system (heat is "concentrated") is offset by
an increase of configurational entropy of the solute. Using the thermodynamic free energy F this
means that the osmotic equilibrium minimizes F for the water-membrane-solution-system.

8.1 Thermodynamic explanation - second version

It might be of interest to look at a bit different version of the thermodynamic argument. Suppose
now that we have a pure solvent on side (1) and a solution on side (2) of semipermeable membrane.
Pressure p2 > p1 such that the system is in equilibrium.

 p2 

 p1 

v

Figure 7

If a small volume v of water is transferred from side 1 to side 2 while the pressures p1 and p2 are
kept constant, then at equilibrium the Gibbs function G = U + pV - TS should remain constant too.
The change in G is written as

0=∆G=∆U (cid:9)v∆ p(cid:5)T ∆ S

(1)

Here 

(2)

∆U =U 2

v(cid:5)U 1

v

(3)

∆ S =n k

=k c v

v
V 2

is the difference between the changes in internal energy when adding the a small volume v of water
to side 2 resp. side 1 at constant pressures; similarly for ∆S. Finally we have written ∆p = p2 - p1. As
in the previous section we assume that the main contribution to ∆S comes from the diluting of the
solute (see equ (8-7)), this gives us 

where n is the number of solute molecules in volume V2 and c is the solute concentration.
Apparently we are led again to the van't Hoff formula if we may assume that ∆U = 0 in (1). We can
reason that the concentration of water molecules on both sides at equilibrium are related by the
Boltzmann factor (according to the microcanonical ensemble interpretation),

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

22/39

(4)

(5)

(cid:1)

∆ u
kT

=e

c1
c2

∆ u=

∆U
ρ∆V

  

where ∆u is the internal energy difference (2) calculated per molecule,

(ρis the water concentration). Thus, ∆u ≈ 0 if we assume that c1 ≈ c2 at equilibrium. This contrasts
with "diffusion theory" which would assume that at equilibrium we would have a concentration
gradient counterbalancing the hydrostatic pressure difference.

8.2 Thermodynamic explanation - the "classical version"

The usual treatment of the omsotic effect in thermodynamics text uses the concept of the chemical
potential. The chemical potential is introduced in order to be able to handle systems with a varying
number of particles. Thus, the 1st law of thermodynamics is rephrased as

(1)

dU =(cid:5) pdV (cid:9)TdS (cid:9)∑

µ

i dN i

i

The last term takes into account that the internal energy of the system may change because dNi
particles of species #i are added or removed (while volume V and entropy S remain constant). This
energy µi per particle #i is called its chemical potential. If we combine (1) with the definition G =
U + pV - TS of the Gibbs energy G we obtain for its differential,

(2)

dG=V dp(cid:5)S dT (cid:9)∑

µ

i dN i

i

Consider now the same situation as in section 8.1. At equilibrium a small volume of water is
transferred from side 1 to side 2. The overall pressure and temperature are unchanged (dp = 0, dT =
0), so we obtain from (2),

0=dG=dN (µ(2 )(cid:5)µ(1 ))

(3)

µ(2)=µ(1)

that is (upper index refers to which side of the membrane the water is on),

At equilibrium the chemical potential of water is the same on both sides of the membrane. This may
seem quite "obvious" (though no mechanism is indicated), since if there were a difference in the
chemical potential, water would spontaneously flow to the side with the smaller chemical potential
as it would "pay off" energetically. Now, the chemical potential function of the water on the
solution side differs from that of pure water due to two reasons: the higher pressure, and the
presence of the solute. These two factors counteract such that the value of the chemical potential
remains unchanged. We can thus write (3) as 

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

23/39

The change in the chemical potential for relatively small changes in the pressure can be deduced
using the relation 

(4)

µ( p,1)=µ( p(cid:9)∆ p, α)

where α denotes the relative concentration of water,

α=

cwater
(cid:9)csolute

cwater

(5)

(6)

(7)

µ=

∂G
∂ N

from which we get

∂µ
∂ p

=

∂2 G
∂ p∂ N

=

∂2G
∂ N ∂ p

=

∂V
∂ N

=v

noting that  V =

∂G
∂ p
Thus, we may use the approximation

(8)

µ( p(cid:9)∆ p)≈µ( p)(cid:9)v∆ p

S =(cid:5)k ∑

N i ln (α

i

)

i

(9)

where

(10)

α

=

i

N i

∑

N j

j

 which also follows from (2). In (7) v denotes the volume per water molecule.

Then, how does the chemical potential depend on the relative water concentration (5)? The
traditional argument is based on assumption that we can use the ideal gas approximation for how
the chemical potential varies with concentration. If we mix gases the mixing entropy is given by

 
is the relative concentration of species #i. Equ (9) describes the increase of entropy due to the
increased total volume for the molecules to move in and can be derived using equ (8-7). As the
expression does not depend neither on the pressure nor on the temperature it is argued that it can
also be applied to the case of liquid (and even solid) mixtures. Using this approximation the
chemical potential can then be written generally as

(11)

µ=∑

µ

i

i

( p,T )(cid:9)k T ∑

N i ln (α

i

)

i

Using (11) we get for the change in the chemical potential due to the addition of dN water
molecules to the solution 

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

24/39

d µ=k T dN ln (α)=k T dN ln (1(cid:5)β)≈(cid:5)k T dN β

(12)

where

(13)

β=

N solute

N solute

(cid:9)N water

is assumed to be small.

Combining this with (4) and (8) gives

(14)

v∆ p≈ k T

N solute

N water

(cid:9)N solute

Since31 v(Nwater + Nsolute) is about equal to the volume V of the solution in the dilute case we arrive
again at the van't Hoff formula for the osmotic pressure Π = ∆p.

9. Statistical mechanics

Statistical mechanics provides a perspective on a level intermediary between thermodynamics and
"molecular dynamics". Statistical mechanics is cognizant about
the forms of the interactions
between the molecules but does not try to solve the problem of describing the motions of individual
molecules. In the previous section we already introduced some elements of statistical mechanics
when using the Boltzmann formula (8.8). It is interesting to see how a more careful statistical
mechanical treatment of the osmosis compares with the previous accounts. We may start with the
"postulate" that for equilibrium the probability pi of a system, in contact with a thermal reservoir of
temperature T, of being in a state i# with energy Ei is proportional to the Boltzmann factor,

S =(cid:5)k ∑

pi ln ( pi)=〈(cid:5)k ln ( p)〉

i

(cid:1)

E i
k T

∝ e

pi

The entropy S

(1)

(2)

(3)

and the internal (mean) energy U

U =∑

E i pi

=〈 E 〉

i

can32 then be expressed by writing

31 The following assumption is equivalent to the assumption in 8.1 that water concentrations in terms of water

molecules per unit volume are the same in pure water and the solution at equilibrium.

32 We use above the notation 

〈(...)〉

 here for the average  

〈 x〉=∑

pi xi

i

 .

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

25/39

=e

(cid:1)β E i
pi
Z (β)
Z (β)=∑

i

β= 1
k T

(cid:1)β E i
e

U =(cid:5)

∂ ln (Z)
∂ β

S =k β U (cid:9)k ln (Z)

F=(cid:5) 1

β ln (Z)

(cid:1)β F

Z=e

(4)

as

(5)

and

(6)

(7)

Thus, from the definition of the free energy  F  (8.1) we get

The energy of the water-solute system may be written as33

(8)

H =H 0

(cid:9)H 1

where H0 contains the water energy part, and H1 contains the solute energy and the solute-water
interaction energy. Thus we obtain in this case

(9)

(cid:1)β F=Z=∑
e

(cid:1)β H 0
e

(r )(cid:1)β H 1

(r, s )=∑

r, s

(∑

r

(e

s

(cid:1)β H 0

(r )(cid:1)β H 1

(r, s )))

where r = (r1, ...., rN) refers to the positions for the water molecules, and s similarly to the positions
of the solute molecules. We neglect the kinetic energy part because we will be only interested in the
dependence on (solution) volume V. Because we assume a low concentration for the solute we may
assume there are no interactions between the solute molecules; i.e., we can neglect the solute-solute
potential in (9).  The parenthesis on the lhs of (9) can be written as

(10) ∑

(e

β H 0

(r )(cid:1)β H 1

r

∑
(r, s ))=Z 0
⋅

r

(e

(cid:1)β H 0

(r )(cid:1)β H 1

(r, s ))

Z 0

=e

(cid:1)β F 0〈e

(cid:1)β H 1

(r, s )〉

where   

33 The following exposition parallels Ma (1985 ch. 18).

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

26/39

(11)

=∑

Z 0

r

(cid:1)β H 0
e

(r )=e

(cid:1)β F 0

is the state sum for water, and the averaging <(...)> in the last term is the average over the water
states. We suppose this average is approximately independent of the distribution s of the solute
molecules and set
(12) ∑

(r, s )=e

(cid:1)β H 1
e

(cid:1)βW

r

where W  describes the effect of the solute-water interaction which depends on the temperature only,
not on the (solution) volume V. Then, finally, taking the sum in (9) over all the configurations s of
the solute molecules leads to the equation

(13)

(cid:1)β F=e
e

(cid:1)β F 0

n!)
(cid:1)β W(V n

We have introduced the combinatorial factor n! here though it is of no consequence in this case34.
Thus, we obtain for the free energy

We have thus again a term   - n k T ln(V)  which gives the "osmotic pressure" formula e.g. using35

If we also add the gravitational potential part, then for the minimum of the free energy we obtain,

(14)

F=F 0

(cid:9)W –

(n ln (V )(cid:5)n ln (n)(cid:9)n)

1
β

∂V)
p=(cid:5)( ∂ F

T

(15)

(16)

∂V )
0=(∂ F grav

T

∂V)
(cid:9)( ∂ F

T

= phydrostat

(cid:5) posmos

    

Though this last statistical mechanical presentation of the osmotic effect does not give a "picture"
how the process works it does make clear the assumptions that are needed for obtaining a valid
approximation. For example, the strength of the water-solute does not play any significant role for
the final expression (but it is important when finding the molecular mechanism for osmosis in each
particular case). Indeed, from the intuitive point of view, if we had a very strong interaction between
solute and water, then the water molecules hooked on to a solute molecule could be considered as
part of the solute molecule.

34 For a system of n identical particles this factor ensures that the entropy (12) becomes extensive when n becomes

large; i.e., the entropy of a combined system, S(A×B) will be equal to S(A) +  S(B). 

35 This follows from  dF = d(U- TS) = dU – S dT – T dS = dU – S dT – (dU + p dV) = - S dT – p dV .

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

27/39

10. Effective potential

The previous statistical treatment, though, may give a clue about how the osmosis works. The idea
is to reverse the order of summation in equ (9.9). Summing over the solute molecule configurations
we define an effective potential correction Ueff  for water (solvent) by,

(1)

(cid:1)β U eff
e

(r )=∑

(cid:1)β H 1
e

(r , s )

s

 

(2)

U eff (r 1, ..., r N )

That is, by "integrating out" the solute contribution, the effect of the solute becomes expressed as a
modification of the water potential function by an effective potential term,

where ri are the positions of the water molcules. Thus we have a potential difference between
solvent water and pure water and this must be related to the "osmotic pressure".

Conclusion

We have seen that the thermodynamic theory of osmosis relies only on the functional descritpion of
the membrane (permeant for the solute and "invisible" for the solvent [water]), not on its
mechanism and how the "nuts and bolts" of the membrane are constituted. Many of the
"explanations" for osmosis try to explain osmosis in terms of a single mechanism, such as diffusion
due to a presumed water-concentration gradient. None of the mehcnisms considered seem as such to
be instrumental in making the osmosis happen. In our view, any mechanical description of osmosis
has to go back to the very concept of pressure and its explication in terms of the virial theorem. This
vindcates that solvent-water and pure water are indeed in different states and explains why pure
water may flow into the solution. We suggest that the solute-retardation mechanism (section 4)
could be used when looking for a simple but true explanation of osmosis in the textbooks when one
wants to go beyond the thermostatic account. One important point in this context is to contrast the
two cases of liquids on the one hand, and gases on the other hand. When the solute in the solvent is
compared with the "ideal gas" it is only with respect to the fact that the solute molecules in a dilute
solution do not interact noticeably. It is this circumstance which leads to the ideal-gas-like formula
(1-1) for osmotic pressure. In thermodynamics this is a reflection of the fact that the chemical
potential has the same form for liquids and gases. The virial theorem on the other hand derives the
formula from the fact that there must be a solute-water interaction that cancels the gas-pressure that
the otherwise free solute molecules would exert.

Appendix A. Demonstration of the virial theorem

Consider particles that are restricted to a volume V. We are interested in the time average of the
expression (the quantity  ∑

⋅pi was called the "virial" by Clausius)
r i

i

(1)

d

dt(∑

i

⋅pi)=∑
r i

i

⋅pi
(cid:3)r i

(cid:4)∑

⋅(cid:3)pi
r i

=2 E kin

(cid:4)∑

⋅F i
r i

i

i

The sums are over all the particles, with locations denoted by ri, and momenta by pi, and on which
act the forces Fi. Since the particles are bounded by the finite volume V the time average of the lhs

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

28/39

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

will approach zero,

  〈 d

dt(∑

i

⋅pi)〉=limT → ∞

r i

1
T

T d
dt(∑
∫

i

0

⋅pi)dt →0
r i

since   ∑

⋅pi
r i

i

   remains bounded. It follows that ("virial theorem")

0=2〈 E kin 〉(cid:4)〈∑

⋅F i〉
r i

i

In the last term the forces can be divided into two parts: the interparticle forces and the forces by
which the walls of the vessel act upon the particles (and observed macroscopically as "pressure"),
 

∑

i

⋅F i
r i

=∑

r k

⋅F k

( particle )(cid:4)∑

(wall )

r j

⋅F j

k

j

For the last term we obtain, taking the time average and going to the continuous limit,

  〈∑

j

r j

⋅F j

wall〉=∫

∂ V

r⋅d F
dA

(wall )

dA=(cid:5) p ∫

r⋅d A=(cid:5) p∫

∇⋅r dV =(cid:5)3 pV

∂ V

V

where the pressure p is defined as the average force per unit area of the wall. Inserting this result
back into the expression of the virial theorem we get,

3 pV =2〈 E kin 〉(cid:4)〈∑

r k

⋅F k

( part )〉

k

The last term on the rhs can finally be put on the form

〈∑

k

r k

⋅F k

( part )〉= 1

2〈∑

j,k

( part )⋅(r j

F j,k

(cid:5)r k )〉

where  F j,k

( part )

 is the force by which the particle at rk acts upon the particle at rj.

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

29/39

dF(wall)

Figure 8

If we assume that the particles are distributed isotropically, such that the probability density
ρ(2)(r 1, r 2)  that a particle is found at r1 and another particle at r2, is of the form

(8)

ρ(2)(r 1, r 2)=ρ2 g(|r 1

(cid:5)r 2|)  

where ρ is the density, and that the interaction is independent of direction, then the virial theorem
can be expressed as

(9)

p=ρ kT (cid:5)ρ2 2π
3

∞ ∂ u
∫
∂ r

0

g (r) r 3 dr

Here u(r) is the interaction potential and we have also used the equipartition theorem for setting the
average kinetic energy to kT/2 per (translational) degree of freedom.

Appendix B. Reverse osmotic experiment

Hammel (2002) describes an interesting experiment where one first uses an osmometer with pure
water on both sides in order to determine the hydraulic conductivity of the membrane. In the next
experiment one adds the solute Dextran to one side and observes the ensuing osmotic flow. When
the system has reached equilibrium (which corresponded to 10 cm water level difference), one
removes part of the water from the pure water side which causes the water to start to flow in the
reverse direction. It is found that the reverse flow is much smaller than the "forward" flow, the
absolute total pressure difference, |hydrostatic pressure - osmotic pressure|, being the same. An
obvious explanation for this seems to be that in the reverse flow the solute molecules are stopped at
the membrane and thus exert a drag on the water. This drag can be simply estimated using the
Einstein relation 

(1)

D= kT
γ

which relates the diffusion constant D of the solute to the friction constant γ of the solute molecule
in water. Suppose water is flowing with velocity v and that a proportion α of the n solute molecules
have been stopped. Then their total drag force  f  per unit volume exerted on the water will be

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

(3)

h0

>h1

(cid:4)

osm

π
ρ g

h0

α=

(t)

(0)(cid:5)h0
(0)
h0

(4)

(5)

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

30/39

(2)

f =

α n γ v
V

=

α n k T v
DV

=

α Π

D

v

where Π is the osmotic pressure given by the van't Hoff formula. For the forward flow an initial
flow velocity of v ∼ 4.8 cm/hr was reported. Assuming a diffusion constant of the order of 10-10 m2/s
we obtain for the factor  Πv/D ∼ 108 N/m3 using Π = 10 cmH2O. We realize that the solute can exert
a considerable drag on the water during reverse flow which may in fact be much larger than the flow
resistance offered by the membrane. We obtain a very simple modell of the reverse flow if we
assume the distribution of the solute to be uniform. Furthermore, the water level on the solution side
is denoted h0 and on the pure water side h1. For reverse flow we have the condition

Now make a further simplifying assumption that at time t
participating in braking the water flow is

the fraction of solute molecules

If the total mass of the liquid is m ( = ρ A l ) we can make the ansatz

(t)=(cid:5)(1(cid:5)

m (cid:16)h0

(t)

(0))π

h0
h0

osm
D

(0)

(cid:17)h0

(t)(cid:5) A ρ
L

(cid:17)h0

(t)(cid:5) A ρ g (2 h0

(cid:5)l)(cid:4) A( h0

h0

(0)

(t))π

(0)

osm

Here A is the cross-section of the tube, l is the total length of the part of the tube filled with water,
and L is the hydrodynamic resistance of the membrane. The first term on the rhs describes the the
solute drag, the second term is due to the membrane resistance, the third terms is due to the
hydraulic pressure, and finally the last term is from the osmotic pressure taking into consideration
that the solute concentration will increase as the volume A h0 decreases. The lhs can generally be put
to zero since accelerations can be assumed to die out quickly. Viscosity is neglected above (easy to
add though) as it can be assumed that it is eclipsed by the membrane hydraulic resistance and the
solute drag. The equ (5) makes of course no sense when h0(t) becomes very small because then the
dilute solution assumption of the van't Hoff formula breaks down. The challenge is to develop a
more detailed theory that can model
the non-homogenous
distribution of the solute and describe how the "osmotic pressure" is affected in the non-
homogenous case.  

the solute-membrane interaction,

Appendix C. Non-equilibrium thermodynamics

In the previous thermodynamic treatments of the osmotic effect we have studied global equilibrium
states; that is, maximum entropy states (thermo-dynamics as thermo-statics). We clearly also need a
theory about how these equilibrium states are reached via intermediary states as well as the time
scales involved. Non-equilibrium thermodynamics does not offer a full dynamical picture of the
phenomena but still goes a bit further than equilibrium thermodynamics. For osmosis it e.g.

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

31/39

prediccts a coupling between the solvent and the solute flow when the reflection coefficient is less
than 1. The general theory uses balance equations and phenomenological laws in order to study
small deviations from the equilibrium states. Consider as a simple example an iron bar that at a
certain time has a non-uniform temperature distribution T. Left to itself the temperature of the iron
bar will
level out and reach a thermodynamic equilibrium state characterized by a uniform
temperature. J Fourier proposed that the change of the temperature T can be described by a
differential equation (1-dimensional case): 

with internal thermal energy u (per unit mass) given by (c is the heat capacity per unit mass)

As we have introduced a local internal energy function u, we might also propose a local entropy
function s (entropy per unit mass). The idea is that locally the system may be assumed to be in
equilibrium and that it is therefore possible to define entropy locally even for a non-equilibrium
system. Thus, employing local entropy s, and if we neglect the small volume changes, the change in
entropy ds will be related to the change in internal energy du by du = Tds, and (2) can be written as
an entropy balance equation (Sommerfeld 1952 p. 148),

This follows from an energy conservation equation

∂T
∂ t

=κ

∂2 T
∂ x2

∂(ρ u)
∂ t

(cid:4)∇⋅W =0

(3)

du=c dT

and the heat flow given by

(4)

W =(cid:5)λ ∇ T

∂(ρ s)
∂ t

(cid:4)∇⋅(W

T )=(cid:5) 1

T 2 W⋅∇ T

In the equation (5) we can interpret 

W
T

as the entropy flow and 

(cid:5) 1
T 2 W⋅∇ T =

λ
T 2

|∇ T|2

(1)

(2)

(5)

(6)

(7)

as the source of entropy (local entropy production) which is apparently non-negative illustrating the
law of increasing entropy for irreversible processes (spreading of the thermal energy in this case).
The kind of reasoning leading to (5) can be generalized to cases involving e.g. hydrodynamic and

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

32/39

electrochemical processes (Glansdorff and Prigogine 1971; Groot and Mazur 1986). The general
starting point is the Gibbs equation (where we have added a term including ziFΦ accounting for the
energy of a charge with valence zi in a potential Φ, F = Faraday constant)

together with mass conservation, energy conservation, momentum conservation, the equations of
motion, and macroscopic phenomenological relations similar to the heat flow equation (4). One thus
arrives at generalizations of the entropy balance equation (5)

TdS =dU (cid:4) p dV (cid:5)∑

(µ

(cid:4) z i F Φ)dni

i

i

(8)

(9)

∂(ρ s)
∂ t

(cid:4)∇⋅(ΘΘΘΘ)=σ

Here θθθθ stands for the entropy flow, and σ stands for the entropy source which generally may be
expressed as

where Jk are named the thermodynamic currents and Xk the thermodynamic forces. In the case (5)
we have for instance

(10)

σ =∑

J k X k

k

(11)

J =W
T
X =(cid:5) 1
T

∇ T

(12)

=∑

J k

Lkj X j

j

(13)

L jk

=±Lkj

If we consider a process that is close to the equilibrium (where X = 0) it might be assumed that the
currents can be expressed as linear functions of the forces X,

Equation (4) is an explicit example of (12), in the simple case of heat flow, with L = λ (heat
conductivity). In principle one could calculate the coefficients L from the molecular theory36 but
usually one is happy to know them from experimental data. Also it turns out that sometimes
knowing part of the coefficients one can predict other ones, since Onsager has proved the Onsager
reciprocal relations (for a demonstration see e.g. Landau and Lifshitz 1980 § 12037),

36 This problem can be related to linear response theory and the Kubo-relations derived by R Kubo (J Phys Soc

(Japan) 12, 1957, 570). Another type of approach to calcluate the transport coefficients is based on Boltzmann's
kinetic equations (see e.g. Reed and Gubbins 1973 § 12-8). The Boltzmann equations and their Enskog
approximations are also discussed by Groot and Mazur (1984 ch. IX).

37 Finnish readers may consult the textbook by Arponen J and Honkonen J: Statistinen Fysiikka (3. ed. Liimes 2000) §
14.3. The result (13) follows from studying fluctuations near the equilibrium and taking into account the microscopic
causality principle. For a mathematical discussion of the Onsager relations based on the theory of stochastic
processes and the Fokker-Planck equations see Gardiner (2002 § 5.3.5).

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

33/39

The minus sign applies when the corresponding equations of motions for the forces involved are not
time-symmetric (thus the minus sign applies e.g. for magnetic force). We might try to apply the
above concepts to the osmotic flow through a membrane, considered as an irreversible process
driven by a chemical potential difference (∆µ)p,T (thermodynamic force -(∆µ)p,T/T) and a hydraulic
pressure difference ∆p (thermodynamic force -∆p/T) over the membrane. After some algebra
footwork and bookkeeping, and assuming a stationary flow (no accelerations), one obtains for the
total entropy production (Groot and Mazur 1982 p. 435)38

(14)

=∫

σ

tot

σ dV =(cid:5) j1

V

1)
(∆µ
T

T, p

(cid:5) j2

T, p

(cid:5) jv

2)
(∆µ
T

∆ p
T

=(cid:5) ˜j1

1)
(∆µ
T

T, p

(cid:5) jv

∆ p
T

We may take component 1 to refer to the solvent, and the component 2 to refer to the solute. The
last equality is obtained by using the Gibbs-Duhem relation

(15) ∑ ξ

k (∆µ

k )

=0

p,T

and defining "volume flow" by

(16)

=v1 j1

(cid:4)v2 j2

jv

and the "diffusion current" by

(17)

˜j1

= j1

(cid:5)

j2

.

ξ
ξ

1

2

What are the dissipative mechanisms accounting for the entropy production (14)? The pressure term
can be associated with flow resistance (viscosity). The chemical potential term is associated with a
concentration difference

(18)

(∆µ

1)

p , T

∆ξ

=µ

1

∆ξ
1

11

≈(∂µ

∂ξ

)

1

1

p , T

This concentration difference is not directly connected with a diffusion of the solvent through the
membrane to the solute side, since, despite that we have a lower mass fraction ξ1 of the solvent on
the solute side, the concentration of the solvent in terms of solvent molecules per unit volume can in
some cases be higher on the solute side than on the solvent side. Furthermore, the flow through the
membrane may be in the form of a poiseuille flow in a narrow channel. The chemical potential term
is rather associated with the mixing entropy as the additional solvent dilutes the solute. 

It seems we have not yet learned anything new about the phenomenon of osmosis. However, we
may use the ansatz (12):

38 In the equations below the chemical potential is to be understood as epxressed not per mole but per molar mass. The
currents j1 and j2 have then the he unit mass/ time and the specific volumes v1 and v2 have the unit volume/mass. 

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

34/39

(19)

˜j1

=(cid:5)L11

p,T

(cid:5)L1v

=(cid:5)Lv1

jv

p,T

(cid:5)Lvv

1)
(∆µ
T
1)
(∆µ
T

∆ p
T
∆ p
T

The coefficients Lij characterize the membrane and its interactions with the solvent and the solute,
such as the hydraulic resistance. We define the reflection coefficient a by 

(20)

a=v1

=u1

˜j1
jv

(cid:5)i2
i1
(cid:4)u2 i2
u1 i1

≈

i1

(cid:5)i2
i1

where we have introduced (m is the total mass)

k m   (volume of species k)

(21)

uk

ik

=vk
ξ
jk
k m

ξ

=

     (specific current, mass per mass and time of species k)

The approximate equality in (20) is valid for dilute solutions (u2 << u1). If the membrane is
completely impermeable to the solute (i2 = 0) we obtain a = 1, and if the membrane is indifferent to
the solute as well as to the solvent we have i1 = i2 and we get a = 0. Next consider two cases. First,
suppose we have a stationary state with jv = 0, this yields according to (18)

This defines the osmotic pressure ∆p which has to be applied in order to stop the flow. Secondly,
consider the case where the flow is only due to a pressure difference ∆p (∆ξ1 = 0); that is, a
hydraulic flow, then we obtain from (18) and (20)

Using the Onsager relation L1v = Lv1 we obtain from (23), (22) and (20),

If a = 1; that is, if the membrane is completely impermeable to the solute, then equ (24) will reduce
to the usual van't Hoff formula if we use the ideal gas approximation for the chemical potential (8.2-
11). From this we see that the reflection coefficient describes the proportion by which the real
osmotic pressure differs from the van't Hoff pressure, 

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

(22)

∆ p
∆ξ

1

=(cid:5)µ

11

Lv1
Lvv

(23)

(24)

˜j1
jv

=

L1v
Lvv

= a
v1

∆ p
∆ξ

1

=(cid:5)

µ

11
v1

a

(25)

Π=a⋅Π

vH

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

35/39

Thus, using (23) we can write the first equation in (19) as

(26)

=

jv

Lvv
T

(a Π

vH

(cid:5)∆ p)

The flow is proportional to the effective pressure difference, and the coefficient Lvv/T can therefore
be identified with the hydraulic resistance of the membrane. Solving (19) for the solute current and
expressing it in terms of volume flow (26) and ∆c2 we obtain

(27)

j2(v2

(cid:4)v1

ξ
ξ

1

2

)=(1(cid:5)a) jv

(cid:4)( v1

2 L11

(cid:5)Lvv a2
T v1

)(∂µ

∂ c2

1

)

p , T

∆ c2

The second factor on lhs is in fact equal to 1/ρ2 where ρ2 is the density of the solute (mass per unit
volume). Hence we can finally write (27) as

(28)

=(1(cid:5)a) ρ

2 jv

(cid:4)P ∆ c2

j2

where P is defined by

(29)

P=ρ

2( v1

2 L11

(cid:5)Lvv a2
T v1

)(∂µ

∂ c2

1

)

p , T

(30)

=L(a Π
= ¯ρ
2

jv
j2

(cid:5)∆ p)

vH

(1(cid:5)a) jv

(cid:4)P ∆ c2

(31)

  ¯ρ
2

=

(2)

2

ρ

2

(1)(cid:4)ρ
2

The equations (26) and (28) are similar to the Kedem-Katchalsky equations39 which can be written
(Weiss 1996 p. 303) as

Here L is the hydraulic conductivity, P is the permeability of the membrane, and

is the mean solute density in the membrane (taken as the average of solute density at either sides of
the membrane). These equations can be easily extended to the multi-solute case by introducing
reflection coefficients ak and permeability coefficients Pk for each species. The physical implication
of the Onsager relation is that it predicts the coupling (first term on the rhs in the second equation in
(30)) between the solute flow and the solvent flow. For a < 1 the volume flow carries with it also
solutes through the membrane. As described in § 5.4 Joos too suggested sort of a coupling between
the solute flow and the solvent flow but this was to be effective also for the case a = 1.

39 Kedem O and Katchalsky A (Biochim. Biophys. Acta 27, 1958, 229 - 256).

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

36/39

Acknowledgments

I am indebted to prof. Claus Montonen for finding the paper by Lorentz (1892) and sending me a
copy. He also pointed out (and sent me a copy) that the later editions of Joos (1986) have a section
on a kinetic theory for osmosis (this section is missing in the 1. edition). Prof. K Siegler was kind to
send me a copy of the paper by Janáček and Siegler (2000). Prof. Gerald Pollack's witty remarks
have forced me to think things over again which helped me to find some errors in my previous
arguments. I am thankful to prof. Ted Hammel for a stimulating correspondence and providing me
with a selection of his papers, photos and a preprint of his ms.

Readings 

(Note: Additional comments on older sources quipped from online antiquarian catalogues: see e.g.
www.zvab.com. The highlighted items were not available at the time of writing.)   

1. Atkins P W and Beran J A: General Chemistry. 2. ed. Scientific American Books 1992.
2. Barrow G M: Physical Chemistry. 2. ed. McGraw-Hill 1966.
3. Bloch E: Théorie Cinétique des Gaz. Collection Armand Colin 1921.
4. Boyle, R: Tentamen Porologicum sive ad Porositatem corporum tum animalium, tum Solidorum,

Deregendam. London, Smith 1684.40 

5. Brescia F et al.: Fundamentals of Chemistry. 3. ed. Academic Press 1975.
6. del Castillo L P: El Fenómeno Mágico de la Osmosis. Fondo de Cultura Económico 1997. ("La
Ciencia para Todos" es una colección coordinada editorialmente por Marco Antonio Pulido y
María del Carmen Farías. http:// lectura.ilce.edu.mx:3000/ sites/ciencia/volumen1/ ciencia2/ 16/
htm/fenomeno.htm).

7. Chang R: Physical Chemistry with Applications to Biological Sciences. 2. ed. MacMillan Publ.

Co. 1981. 

8. Curry M R, Shachar-Hill B and Hill A E: "Single water channels of aquaporin-1 do not obey the

Kedem-Katchalsky equations". The Journal of Membrane Biology 181, 115 – 123 (2001).

9. de Donder Th: L'Affinité. Gauthier-Villars 1936.
10.Dutrochet Henri: Mémoires pour servir à l'histoire anatomique et physiologique des végétaux et

des animaux.... 2 Vols. + Atlas. Paris & London: J.-B. Baillière, 1837.41 

11.Dworecki K, Kostołowicz T, Mrówczyński St. and Wasik S: "Time evolution of near membrane

layers". The European Physical Journal E 3, 389 – 394 (2000).

12.Emch G and Liu C: The Logic of Thermostatistical Physics. Springer 2002.
13.Gardiner C W: Handbook of Stochastic Methods for Physics, Chemistry and the Natural

Sciences. 3. ed. Springer 2002.

14.Glansdorff P and Prigogine I: Thermodyncamic Theory of Structure, Stability and Fluctuations.

40 "Of signal interest, for it marks the beginning of the study of osmotic pressure..." (Fulton 150 ).
41 "The final results of Dutrochet's thirty years of research into plant and animal physiology, replacing a series of
earlier papers that he considered 'null and void'. Dutrochet's most important contribution was the discovery of
osmosis, to which he gave its name; he was the first to investigate the phenomenon systematically, and to recognize
its fundamental significance in living organisms. He recognized that only plant cells containing green matter were
capable of absorbing carbon dioxide, and was the first to detect the production of heat in both a plant and an insect
muscle during activity" (Norman 673).

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

37/39

Wiley 1971.

15.Goldstein H: Classical Mechanics. 2. ed. Addison-Wesley 1980.
16.Groot de S R and Mazur P: Non-Equilibrium Thermodynamics. Dover 1986.
17.Guell D C: The Physical Mechanism of Osmosis and Osmotic Pressure: A Hydrodynamic
thesis, Department of

Theory for Calculating The Osmotic Reflection Coefficient. (Ph.D.
Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 1991.)

18.Guell D C and Brenner H: "Physical Mechanism of Membrane Osmotic Phenomena". Ind. Eng.

Chem. Res. 35 (9); 3004-3014 (1996). 

19.Hamburger H J: Osmotischer Druck und Ionenlehre in den medicinischen Wissenschaften.
Zugleich Lehrbuch physikalisch-chemischer Methoden. In 3 Bänden. Wiesbaden, J.F. Bergmann,
1902-04.42 

20.Hammel  H T and Scholander P F: Osmosis and Tensile Solvent. Springer 1976. 
21.Hammel H T: "Evolving ideas about osmosis and capillary fluid exchange". FASEB J. 13: 213-

22.Hammel H T: "How solutes alter water in aqueous solutions". J. Phys. Chem. 98: 4196-4204

23.Hammel H T: "Explaining osmosis; altered solvent concentration or altered solvent tension?".

(Submitted to J of Chemical Education 2002.)

24.Hill T L: An Introduction to Statistical Thermodynamics. Addison-Wesley 1960.
25.Hulett G: "Beziehung zwischen negativem Druck und osmotischem Druck". Z. Phys. Chem. 42:

231 (1999).

(1994).

353-368 (1903).

26.Janáček K and Siegler K: "Osmosis: Membranes impermeable and permeable for solutes,
mechanism of osmosis across porous membranes." Physiological Research 49: 191-195 (2000).
27.Joos G: Theoretical Phyiscs. Blackie & Son Ltd. (3. ed. Dover 1986. 1. ed. in 1932 in German.) 
28.Kargol M: "Mechanistic approach to membrane mass transport processes (mini review)".

Cellular & Molecular Biology Letters 7, 983 – 993 (2002).

29.Kostołowicz T: "Greens function for a system with thin membrane". Physical Review E 54 (4)

30.Kostołowicz T: "Continuous versus discrete descritption of the transport in a membrane system".

3639 – 3642 (1996) .

Physica A 248, 44 – 56 (1998).

31.Kjellander R: Vad är Drivkraften i Molekylernas Värld. En Molekyär Introduktion Till Termo-
dynamik. Studentlitteratur 2002. (What is the motive power in the world of molecules? A
molecular introduction to thermodynamics. In Swedish.)

32.Lachish U: "Opitmizing the efficiency of reverse osmotic seawater desalination". http://

42 "Includes an account of all the methods of determining osmotic pressure" (Garrison- M.). "Hartog J. Hamburger
(1859-1924) was one of Donder's students, and became an assistant to Donders before assuming the chair of
physiology at the University of Groningen in 1901. Hamburger's physico-chemical investigations covered topics
such as permeability, hemolysis, and phagocytosis in which he made some notable contributions. Fascinated by van't
Hoff's epochal work on osmotic pressure, he was the first to try to assess its significance for medicine and eventually
published his findings in this comprehensive, three-volume work which includes an account of all methods of
determining osmotic pressure. In the course of these studies, he disovered that bicarbotane and chloride ions could
be exchanged across the cell membranes. Dr. chem. et med. H.J. Hamburger war Prof. der Physiol. an der
Reichsuniversität Groningen, wo er eine bedeutende Schule gründete und 1911 ein neues, glänzend ausgestattetes
Institut schuf.
'Hamburger, der bedeutendste physiolog. chemiker Hollands, förderte mit einer grossen Zahl
grundlegender Untersuchungen, insb. auf physikal.-chem. Gebiete, sein Fach (Permeabilität der Zellen, Kalzium-
Ionen bei der Phagozytose, Hämolyse, stereoisomere Zuckerarten, Vagus- und Sympathikusstoffe)' (Hirsch).
Bedeutend für die Physiologie wurden u.a. seine Untersuchungen über das Verhalten roter Blutkörperchen in
Salzlösungen verschiedener Konzentrationen, die Bestimmung der Physiologischen Salzlösung beim Frosch = 0,64%
NaCl, Reistenzprüfung der Erythrozyten (1.Bd., S.378) und ferner seine Versuche über die Permeabilität tierischer
Zellen gegenüber Salzlösungen. Garrison-M. 725; Hirsch Nz. 571; Astrup & Severinghaus, History of Blood Gases,
p.161ff."

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

38/39

urila.tripod.com/Seawater.htm (accessed 15.1.2003).

33.Landau L D and Lifshitz E M: Statistical Physics. 3. ed. part 1. Pergamon Press 1980.
34.Landsberg P T: Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics. Dover 1990.
35.Lewis G N: "The osmotic pressure of concentrated solutions, and the laws of perfect solution".

Journal of the American Chemical Society 30: 668-683 (1908).

36.Lorentz H A: "Sur la théorie moléculaire des dissolutions diluées". Archives néerlandaises, vol.
25 (1892) p. 107. (Reprinted in Abhandlungen über Theoretische Physik, Erster Band, B.G.
Teubner, Leipzig u. Berlin 1907. p. 175-191.)

37.Ma S K: Statistical Mechanics. World Scientific 1985.
38.Martini F H: Fundamentals of Anatomy and Physiology. 5. ed. Prentice Hall 2001.
39.Mauro A: "Forum on osmosis III: Comments on Hammel and Scholander's solvent tension
theory and its application to phenomenon of osmotic flow". Am. J. Physiol., 237:R110-R113
(1979). 

40.Patlak J: Body Fluids. www1 Java-Simulation of osmosis at <http://physioweb.med.uvm.edu/

bodyfluids/osmosis.htm >  (accessed 30. Dec 2002). 

41.Patlak J: Body Fluids. www2 < http://physioweb.med.uvm.edu/diffusion/OsmPages1.htm > .
42.Petrucci R H, Harwood W S and Herring F G: General Chemistry. 8. ed. Prentice Hall 2002.
43.Pfeffer, W: Osmotic Investigations, Studies on Cell Mechanics. Van Nostrand Reinhold 1985.
Translation of 1877 Leipzig edition. Translated with introduction by G.R. Kepner and Ed. J.
Stadelmann.

44.Reed T M and Gubbins K E: Applied Statistical Mechanics. Thermodynamic and Transport

45.EPA: "Reverse osmosis process". Capsule Report, EPA/625/R-96/009 (USA Environmental

Properties of Fluids. McGraw-Hill 1973.

Protection Agency) September 1996.

46.Sommerfeld A: Thermodynamik und Statistik. Dietrich'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung 1952.
47.van't Hoff J H: "Die Rolle der osmotischen Druckes in der Analogie zwischen Lösungen und

Gasen". Z. Phys. Chem. 1: 481-508 (1887). 

48.van't Hoff J H: "Zur Theorie der Lösungen". Z. Phys. Chem. 9: 477 (1892).  
49.van't Hoff J H: Lois de l'équilibre chimique dans l'état dilué, gazeux ou dissous. Mémoire
presenté à l'Académie Roy. des Sciences de Suède le 14 Octobre 1885. Stockholm: Kungl. Bok-
tryckeriet, P. A. Norstedt & Söner, 1886. Kungl. Svenska Vetenskaps-Akademiens Handlingar,
Vol. 21, no. 17.43 

50.Tyree M T: "The cohesion-tension theory of sap ascent: current controversies". Journal of

Experimental Botany. Vol. 48 (315): 1753-1765 (1997).

51.Weiss T F: Cellular Biophysics (Volume 1: Transport). MIT Press 1996.
52.Villars F M H, Benedek G B: Physics with Illustrative Examples from Medicine and Biology

(Vol. 2. Statistical Physics). Addison-Wesley 1974. 

53.Wolfe J: "Cellular thermodynamics". (Encyclopedia of Life Sciences. Macmillan Reference Ltd,

43 This separate printing also contains: Van't Hoff, "Une propriété générale de la matière diluée" (pp. 42-49) and
"Conditions électriques de l'équilibre chimique" (pp. 50-58). Garrison-Morton 706: "Van't Hoff stated that osmotic
pressure is proportional to the concentration if the temperature remains invariable, and proportional to the absolute
temperature if the concentration remains invariable." "To the analogy that exits between gases and solutions van't
Hoff gave the general expression pV=iRT.. In "Lois de l'équilibre chimique dans l'état dilué, gazeux ou dissous"
(1886) van't Hoff showed that for many substances the value of i was one, thus validating the relation pV=RT for
osmotic pressure. It then became possible to calculate the osmotic pressure of a dissolved substance from its
chemical formula and, conversely, the molecular weight of a substance from the osmotic pressure. In "Conditions
électriques de l'équilibre chimique" (1886), van't Hoff gave a fundamental relation between the chemical equilibrium
constant and the electromotive force (free energy) of a chemical process: ln K = -E/2T, in which K is the chemical
equilibrium constant, E is the electromotive force of a reversible galvanic cell, and T is the absolute temperature"
(D.S.B. 13: 579).

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

DRAFT document osmosis.sdw

5/5/03

39/39

2001.)

54.Vries H de: Untersuchungen über die mechanischen Ursachen der Zellstreckung, ausgehend von
der Einwirkung von Salzlösungen auf den Turgor wachsender Pflanzenzellen. (I. Beschreibung
einer Methode zur Aufhebung des Turgors in Pflanzenzellen. II. Ueber die Beziehung zwischen
Turgor und Längenwachsthum.) Leipzig, Wilhelm Engelmann, 1877.44 

55.von Wright G H: Explanation and Understanding. Routledge & Kegan Paul 1971. (Also publ. in

German as Erklären und Verstehen. Atheneum 1974.)

44 "Marking the year 1877 was De Vries's paper entitled Untersuchungen it was a very valuable contribution to our
knowledge of the subject. It contained a number of determinations of relative osmotic values of the different
substances which are constituents of the cell sap, in the course of which De Vries established a general relationship
between molecular weight and osmotic pressure. He also investigated the phenomenon to which he gave the name of
plasmolysis, and showed how it can be applied to ascertain the osmotic pressure of various substances and
solutions." (Green, J.R.: History of Botany, 1860-1900, pp. 253-254.)

Frank Borg ( borgbros@netti.fi ). Jyväskylä University, Chydenius Institute, PB 567, FIN-67101 Karleby.

