 

 

Twisting Rolls. 
Heuristic Model and 3D Numerical Simulation of Vortex Patterns 

 

 

 

Safieddine Bouali
University of Tunis, Institut Supérieur de Gestion
41, rue de la Liberté, 2000 Le Bardo, Tunisia
 
Safieddine.Bouali@isg.rnu.tn

 

(June 2003) 

We connect  an appropriate  feedback  loop  (i.e.  the twist process)  to  a model of  2D  vertical  eddy  of 
airflow which unfolds a wide  range of vorticity behavior. Computational fluid dynamics of the twisted 
roll display a class of long lifespan 3D vortices. On the one hand, the  infinitely stable columnar vortex 
simulated  describes  waterspouts   and  tornadoes  with  extended  lifetime.  On  the  other  hand,  a  light 
modification of the  retroaction exhibits a singular topology of the  vortex since the  flux moves on to a 
torus  with  wind  up surface  (spiralling  curvature).  This  phenomenology  have  strong  similarities  to 
tropical cyclones.  Besides, we detect the  proto-cyclone  structure  when  the  control  parameter  of  the 
retroaction is very low.  
Moreover,  we  investigate  the  outcome  of  the  twisting  process  vertically  shifted.  This modelisation 
leads to the simulation of simultaneous vortices similar to the severe tornadoes among which one looks 
like  the  microbrust.  The  dependency  of  initial  conditions  and  parameters  are  associated  to  this other 
class of 3D vortices with short lifespan. 
Our heuristic dynamical systems lay the foundations of a comprehensive modelisation of vortices since 
it joins numerical simulations and theory. 

 
 

 

 

Abstract:  

 

 

 

 
1. Introduction 

The exploration of the vortex genesis constitutes topics and aims of a wide literature in several fields of physical 
researchs  (Atmospheric  and  Oceanic  Sciences,  Geophysics,  Astrophysics,  Superconductivity,  Mathematical 
Physics,  Nonlinear  Physics...).  However,  the  prominent  contributions  to  the  vorticity  patterns  analysis  [see 
Saffman, 1992; Chorin, 1994 and Benkadda &  Zaslavsky, 1998] apply the standard tools of fluid mechanics. 
Atmospheric sciences [Bengtsson & Lighthill, 1982; Pedlosky, 1987; Peixoto & Oort, 1992] for example use fluid 
dynamics models (Newton, Euler and  Navier-Stokes equations, boussinesq’s approximation...)  its variables and 
parameters (viscosity, compressibility, Rossby and Reynolds numbers,...) to vortex studies. 
Our research is focused on the  computational fluid  dynamic s of  vortices and whirlwinds in the small, meso and 
large-scale atmospheres. Nevertheless, we select from  the fluid characteristics only  those kinematics which are 
well  modelised  by  autonomous  systems  of  ordinary  differential  equations  (O.D.E.)  in  the  Euclidian  plane  or 
space. 
Our paper considers the feedback loops modifying the 2D roll system – rotating convection or eddy- the spring of 
the  vortex  genesis.  Indeed,  this  phenomenon  appears  as  an  outcome  of  a retroactive (and  intricate) connection 
between the three dimensions of the fluid flow. 
In previous papers [Bouali, 1999 & 2002], we explored the results of this methodology into a periodic system. It 
establishes a full feedback linkage and leads to the formulation of  a new system. The retroactive loop injects anti-
equilibria  excitation  which  have  shown  the  power  of  this  “endogenous” forcing  thereby  building  an  utterly 
different dynamics. One would expect a similar behavior in the present contribution.  
In  Sec.  2,  we  propose  a  nonlinear  2D  model  as  a  dynamical  analogue of any  (vertical) eddy and  introduce its 
characteristics. 
In Sec. 3, we connect appropriate retroactive linkages to the 2D model determined by the state variables of the roll 
itself. We identify the axisymmetric vorticity patterns and analyse briefly the general stability of the new systems.  
Our modelisation is based on an heuristic approach of the vortex genesis as it is a tool to explore the findings of 
the feedback linkages. In this direction, we examine, in Sec. 4, the numerical outcome of two embedded linkages 
into our basic 2D model of roll.  

 

1 

Our  main  objective  is  the  universal  modelisation of  vorticity  in  physical  fields  but  we  kept  the  atmospheric 
observations (tornadoes, hurricanes...) as our fundamental reference of vortex structures.    
Our  modelisation  is  largely  a  qualitative  application  of  nonlinear  fluid  mechanics  and  the  results  for  vortical 
patterns are qualitative to a large extend. 
Eventually,  we  point  chiefly  at  the  next  steps  of  this  framework  in  sec.  5.  We  notice  that  the  systems are 
numerically integrated using the 5th order Runge-Kutta method with 10-5 unit time. 
 
2. The 2D numerical analogue of a roll 
 
The first step of our vortex modelisation requires the choice of a convection roll formula. The governing equation 
of  the  2D  periodic  motion  should  emulate  the  pure  kinematic  properties  of  a  rotating  thermal  convection 
[Emanuel, 1994]  or an eddy created by (directionally or speed) wind shear.  
We define the system of two ordinary differential equations: 
 

dx/dt = - x (a  –  b y  )   
 
dy/dt =   y (c  –  x² ) 

 
 

 

 

 

where x and y are the coordinates of one air parcel in the vertical plane and a, b and c positive parameters.. We use 
in this work the Euclidian system  XY, so that  the vertical axis is  Y and  X the horizontal  direction. Our set of two 
first-order coupled equations constitutes a mathematical analogue of a generic vertical roll of fluid and estimates the 
velocity of the flux. Our 2D dynamical system is derived from the Gause equation [see Appendix].  
The first item of the horizontal velocity, i.e. – ax, represents the fluid friction. The second one, i.e. bxy, indicates the 
nonlinear diffusion of the flux. Besides, it accelerates the motion for the high levels of Y. 
On the other hand, the first item of the vertical velocity, i.e. cy, stands for the diffusion and the second  one: -x²y is 
the acute nonlinear braking of the flow reinforced when the flow is far from the origin x = 0. Both velocities are not 
identical over the roll and no symmetry of the upward and downward fluxes  is found since the fall of  the flow is 
accelerated by the low pressure of weak altitudes. Besides, the rotor created by wind shear have a strong downward 
motion since the gravity injects better diffusion to the air parcels. 
Associated  with  the  fluid  mechanics,  the  three  parameters  allow  strong  plasticity  of  the  roll  sketch.  Indeed, the 
variation of a and c parameters  imply a scale  modification of the roll, while  arising b the orbit  is stretched  in the 
vertical direction.  
In fact, the eddy is provided with a wide spectrum of morphological plasticity allowing to the path a conformation 
ability  to the  numerous  constraints  (orographic  topography...).  The  dynamics  replace  the  solid  wall boundaries 
conditions used in many convection researchs.   
The numerical computation gives a clockwise periodic orbit (Fig. 1) for initial conditions in the X+Y+-plane. 

Fig. 1. The roll sketch.  
P1 (a, b, c) = (0.05, 0.6, 0.1) and Initial Conditions IC (x0, y0) = (0.1, 0.1). 

 

 

-

Nonetheless, for several initial conditions, the orbits are concentric and centred around a stable equilibrium. For the 
parameters P1 (a, b, c),  the stable solution is S1 (x,  y) ˜   (c 0.5, a/b). Moreover, with a symmetric  initial conditions, 
Y+-plane , the roll follows a counterclockwise periodic orbit with  identical characteristics of concentric 
i.e. in the X 
orbits around another stable solution S2 (x, y) ˜  ( - c 0.5, a/b). Eventually, for the trivial solution S0 (x, y) = (0, 0) the 
two real eigenvalues are opposite and it is a saddle-node.  
For  realistic  flows,  it  is  to  note  that  there  are  some  example  which  do  not  fall  in  our  dynamical  system  but  our 
objective is building a stylised framework with simple but exemplary model of rotational fluid.   

 

2 

This paper  explores the  outcome  of  the  advection  feedback  which  inserts  the  twist  process  onto  the  vertical  roll 
according the Z-axis. 
 
3. The class of long lifespan vortices 
 
Explaining  the  ability  of  fluid  dynamics  to  display  persistent  vortex  organisations  remains  an  exciting  field  of 
research and a challenging topic .  
We investigate the outcome of  the twist process applied to the vertical eddy according the advection  channel. It is 
assumed that the  feedback function connecting the numerical roll with additional (and linear) ordinary differential 
equation founds a new 3D system. 
Firstly, we explore numerically the flow patterns when the equation governing the advection flow (z-equation) has a 
simplest definition.  
Secondly, a system with modified  twist equation  is investigated. In both cases, we  attempt to detect similarities  of 
the simulated and idealised dynamics of our heuristic approach with the vortical structures described in the literature 
of atmospheric sciences. 
 
3.1. Elementary vortex dynamics 
 
We connect to the roll formula an additional equation leading to a 3D system with advection linkage: 

 
dx/dt = - x ( a – b y ) +  s z 
dy/dt =   y ( c –  x² ) 
dz/dt = - d x 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
where  XZ  is  the  horizontal  plane  (or  ground  level).  The  z-equation  determined  by  the  state  variable  x  of the 
previous 2D model itself indicates the inertia term  of the advection flux and d stands for  its braked horizontal 
velocity. This feedback loop controlle d by the s parameter founds a new system.  
With positive parameters P2 (a, b, c, d, s), the  real part of an eigenvalue is negative. It is  adequate to qualify the 
instability of the trivial solution S0 ( x, y, z) = (0, 0, 0). However, computations are required to qualify the patterns 
of dynamics.   
The simulations display a columnar vortex at the hub of an annulus torus (fig. 2) with upright whirlwind from the 
initial conditions. At the top, the flux moves downwards over the torus then follows a convergent spiral on to the 
XY-plane but before  reaching the equilibrium  it arises in a second whirlwind along a different  path in the same 
funnel. The twisted roll builds a closed domain where the inflow-outflow flux constitues the boundaries of the 
annulus torus.  
In  accordance  with  these  simulations  “...a  strong  radial  inflow  near  the  surface  in  tornadic  vortices  [...] 
approaches the central axis of the vortex, the radial inflow separates from the surface, turns upward, and flows 
up and out of the vortex core ” [Nolan & Farrel, 1999, p. 1283].  
 

(a) External view of the annulus torus  

 

 

(b) Inside the torus 

 
Fig. 2. Waterspout-like vortex 
P2 (a, b, c, d, s) = (0.2, 0.6, 0.1, 10, 0.5) and IC (x0, y0, z0) = (0.1, 0.01, 0.01). The surface level inflow spirals 
toward the axis of the torus, it swirls upwards and constitutes the outflow at the apex of this long lifespan vortex. 

 

 

3 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 2.1. Axisymmetric tornado-like dynamics 
P2.1 (a, b, c, d, s) = ( 0.2, 0.6, 0.2, 10, 0.5  ) and IC (x0, y0, z0) = (0.1, 0.01, 0.01). A small modification of a 
parameter widens the columnar vortex. 

 

We notice  the non-stop numerical computations  since the iterates do not converge to a null state and  testify the 
long lifespan of these vortices. The kinematics of the twisted convection produce an incessant stable vorticity and 
its robust dynamics may be broken only by a modification of the 3D system itself.  
If this is the case, then it will be clear that dynamical lock -in, i.e. eddy twisted by an advection flow, plays a major 
role in the vorticity genesis. The whirlwinds depicted reproduce well enough the phenomenology  of spray vortex 
(waterspouts) reported in the literature [Gordon & Purcell, 1978; Brady & Szoke, 1989; Simpson et al., 1991; Lin, 
92] and the long lifetime tornadoes (Fig. 2.1).  
Otherwise,  stable  and  singular  whirlwinds  [Wood,  1992]  occur  when strong  rotational  thermal  convection  is 
associated  with  light  wind.  These  particular  extended  lifespan vortices  are  well  described  by  our  twisting  roll 
perspective. We derive from this dynamical setting of fluxes a version with modified retroactive loop suited also 
to an heuristic approach. 
 
3.2. Vortex on to a wind up surface 
 
We explore the characteristics of the new 3D system:  

dx/dt = - x ( a – b y ) +  s z 
 
dy/dt =   y ( c –   x² ) 
 
dz/dt = - d ( x + y ) 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

when the feedback is composed of a linear sum of the XY coordinates. It leads us to the detection of the unstable 
steady  state  S0  (x,  y,  z)  =  (0,  0,  0)  since  the  determinant  of  the  Jacobean  is  positive  with  a  set  of  positive 
parameters P3 (a, b, c, d, s).The nontrivial solution S1 (x, y, z) = (-c 0.5, c 0.5,  c 0.5 (b.c 0.5  - a)/s) is also unstable , but 
we reject the second solution S2 since the coordinate of Y is negative. 
In order to study the dynamics of the system,  it plotted  a Poincaré map  (Fig. 3.a) monitoring the impacts of the 
trajectory of flow with a vertical plane cutting the centre of the annulus torus. Contrarily to the previous torus, it is 
not a closed and hermetic domain. The trajectory moves on to a  rolling up (and spiralling) surface which builds 
the  torus  itself  (Fig.  3.b).  In  spite  of  its  basic  formulation,  a  more  intricated  topology  of  the  trajectory  path is 
produced.  Indeed,  the  first  whirl  rushes  in  the  vertical  direction  and  the  same  flux  designs  the  second  and 
concentric  eyewall (Fig. 3.c), then the hidden third, fourth...eyewalls.  
The overlapped swirling flows  are the vortex and the upward and downward winds build the  wrapped curvature 
of the torus.  From the initial conditions, the whirlwind flow arises in the eyewall (  it is the first eyewall !) then 
sinks following a gradient trajectory over the peripheral side of the torus and repeat its dynamics inside the torus 
itself. Eventually, the flux will be trapped into a stable orbit. This horizontal roll (Fig. 3.d) crosses the two points 
in the centres of the  two spirals in the discrete two-dimensional map. The model dives  the flux  into an infinitely 
(in the sense of numerical studies) fixed structure. 

 

4 

This representation  does not contradict the  studies of hurricane structure  [Lilly, 1986;  Bartels & Maddox, 1991; 
Montgomery & Farrel, 1993] with explicit confirmation of the non-unique eyewall  [NOAA, 1999].  
 

(a) Poincaré map of the torus  

 

 

 

 

(b) Torus split  

 

   

 

   (c) The overlapped whirlwinds 

 

 

 

(d) The final periodic motion 

 

Fig. 3. Wind up vortex.  
P3 (a, b, c, d, s ) = (0.05, 0.6, 0.1, 10, 0.5) and IC (x0, y0, z0) = ( 0.1, 0.01, 0.01) 

 

Moreover, the vorticity stretching of the hurricanes is determined previously by the extension of the roll shape in 
the 2D vertical plane. The eddy size appears as a variable in the track of atmospheric vortices since the vertically 
compressed roll  will  modify  the  aerodynamics  of  the  expected  annulus  torus  and  will  be  insensible  to  the 
prevalent wind.  

Fig. 3.1. (a) and (b) two horizontal views of the Proto-Cyclone. 
P3.1 (a, b, c, d, s) = ( 0.05, 0.6, 0.1, 10, 10 -8 ) and IC (x0, y0, z0) = (0.1, 0.01, 0.01). 

 

 

 

 

5 

 
Besides, the numerical computations predicts a singular pattern of the fluid mass representing the precursor state 
immediately  preceding  the  cyclonic  vortex.  This  proto -cyclone  structure  (Fig  3.1)  occurs  when  the  control 
parameter  of  the  retroaction  is  very  low  (s  =  10  -8).  In  this  case,  the  airflow  builds two  solenoidal  rolls  with 
clockwise and anticlockwise paths. This simulation suggests that this pattern state seems to be an immature stage 
of the cyclone between  the tropical wave disturbance in the atlantic  observed prior the cyclone warning and the 
fully developed hurricane structure. 
In this section, all the simulations have an infinite horizon and the above description of the long lifespan vortex 
indicates the conservation of the phase space volume. The present computational framework leads our heuristic 
approach of the fluid dynamics  to the next numerical  experiments when the vortex patterns  vanish after a  finite 
number of iterates. Indeed, we define and link a supplemental retroaction to the twist process. 
 
4. The class of short lifespan vortices 

 

Our perspective is heuristic since the modelisation serves as a tool to know the outcome of sophisticated linkages 
into the 2D roll. In order to understand the powerful generation of this twist process, it is enlightening to examine 
the  effect  of  two  embedded feedbacks.  This  amendment  modif ies the  previous  model  as  we  connect another 
feedback loop to the first retroaction. Now, the flux is governed by this extended model: 

dx/dt  = -  x ( a – b y ) + s z   
dy/dt  =    y ( c  –  x² )  
 
dz/dt  = -  d x +  v w 
dw/dt = -  f y 

 

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

which contains an additional control parameter v allowing the fine-tuning of the  w-variable. A new 4D system is 
built  and  the  fourth  dimension  performs  a  vertical  shift  distorting  the  twist  process  itself  according  to  the  f 
parameter.  
A brief general stability exhibits two stable equilibria. For the parameters P 4 (a, b, c, d, v, f, s), the first solution is 
S1 ( x, y, z, w) = (c 0.5, 0, a.c 0.5/s, d.c 0.5/v) and the second solution is S2 ( x, y, z, w) = (-c 0.5, 0, -a.c 0.5/s, -d.c 0.5/v). 
Several vortical patterns associated to a strong Sensitive Dependency on Initial Conditions (SDIC)  appear from 
the  numerical  explorations.  Indeed,  simultaneous  vortic es  are  simulated  (Fig. 4)  among  which one  is  provided 
with high swirling speed displays the bursts phenomena reported earlier [Fujita, 1981; Forbes & Wakimoto, 1983; 
Hooze, 1993]. This tiny suction vortex (Fig. 4b) gushes from the ground and  follows a faster  ballistic motion  in 
the decaying stage of the simulated system which stops after a small  number  of  iterates. It testifies the lifespan 
brevity of this second class of 3D vortices.  
Obviously,  our  numerical  simulations  look  like  the  severe  tornadoes  [Rasmussen  et al., 1994]  and  the  smaller 
sucking whirls called micro- and downbursts phenomena.  

(a) The mono-column vortex with ballistic swirl. 
   
     IC(x0, y0, z0, w0)= (0.01, 0.01, 0.01, 0)  
 

 (b) The ballistic swirl (zoom). 

 
      IC(x0, y0, z0, w0)= (0.01, 0.01, 0.01, 0) 

Fig. 4. The Sensitive Dependency on Initial Conditions (SDIC) 

P4 (a, b, c, d, v, f, s) = ( 0.05, 0.6, 0.1, 5, 0.05, 1, 0.5 ) 

 

 

 

6 

    (c) The two-column vortex with ballistic swirl.  

IC(x0, y0, z0, w0)= (0.1, 0.01, 0.01, 0). 

 

 
 

(d) Vortex abortion. 

 
    IC(x0, y0, z0, w0)= (0.1, 0, 0, 0). 

 

 
Fig. 4 (continued) 

 
Indeed, when the tornado as “a violent rotating column of air in contact with the ground”, literature (and chase 
teams news!) describes also multiples main funnels in tornado dynamics [Gall, 1985; Church et al., 1993]. Figure 
4c shows a vortex pair with the smaller ballistic  swirl. 
Moreover, a small modification of the initial conditions (Fig. 4d) projects the  flow to a convergent spiral  at the 
ground  level  and  all  vortices  abort.  Nonetheless,  a  gust  can  change  these  IC  and  one  or  more  vortices  occurs, 
refuting permanently the concept of reliable forecasts. 
Besides,  with  P5.a  set  of  parameters,  the  patterns  can  have  the  main  features  of  the  previous  figure  since the 
outcome of the simulation  is a four-columnar dynamics with the tiny ballistic  swirl  (Fig. 5a). On the other hand, 
with the P5.b set of values, the dynamics can be utterly different: a vortex with serpentine shape appears alone and 
the  motion  converges  to  one  of  the  two  precedent  stable  solutions  S1  or  S2.  This  characteristic   testifies  the 
Sensitive Dependency on Parameters (S.D.P.). 

 

 

7 

 

 

 
(a)  The four-column vortex dynamics   
 

                  with ballistic swirl (left).  
P5.a (a, b, c, d, v, f, s) = ( 0.2, 0.6, 0.2, 10, 0.05, 1, 0.5  ) 

 
 

   (b) Vortex with serpentine shape. 
 
P5.b (a, b, c, d, v, f, s) = ( 0.2, 0.6, 0.1, 10, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5  ) 

 
Fig 5. The sensitive Dependency on Parameters (SDP) 

IC(x0, y0, z0, w0 )= (0.1, 0.01, 0.01, 0) 

 
Short  lifetime  cycle ,  asymmetry  and unpredictability  are the  highlights  of  this  second  class  of  vortices  whose 
phase space volume is dissipative.  
Thus,  an  additional  advection  linkage  provides  our  dynamical  system  with  an  explanatory  proof  of 
tornadogenesis. By answering the following question: what is the outcome of distorded atmospheric rolls?, our 
research fills the gap between the 2D patterns and the 3D vortex structures. 

 

Our heuristic dynamical system lays the foundation of an unified modelisation of vortices which associates theory 
and Direct Numerical Simulation in a new perspective. 
 
5. Concluding remarks 
 
Written to  simulate the atmospheric vortices, our  modelisation is based  on a purely kinematic  approach. For our 
analysis,  the  roll  formula  is  simplified  significantly  since  we  do  not  need  the  explicit  values  of  the  fluid 
parameters. We select a modified  Gause’ oscillator  as a first and sufficient step to  emulate the 2D motion  of a 
vertical  eddy.  We  connect  to  this  model  of  gyre  a  feedback  loop  in  its  orthogonal  axis  which  constitutes  the 
advection direction leading to a computational simulation and visualisation.  
The several systems studied are derived exclusively from a single modelisation with  basic and sophisticated twist 
processes since nullifying v disconnect the vertical shift and yields the first class of vortices. In a future paper, we 
will vary both s and  v parameters for assesing the  bifurcation diagram of  the  twist  processes and its  transition 
regimes. 
In  an  effort  to  investigate  the  vorticity  mechanism  we  have  carried  out  a  variety  of  linkages.  Our approach  is 
heuristic seeing that fulfilling three  embedded feedback  into  the  model (a supplemental  contortion  of  the  twist 
process with an horizontal shift) did not yield new vortex patterns. 
This rapid communication  is a computed-assisted proof of occuring vortices from a twisted  rotational fluid and 
provides a preliminary estimate  of the general stability of the systems  studied. However, the full model (sec. 4) 
deserves  a  deep  analysis  of  its  nonlinearity  with  special  emphasis  on the  chaotic  dynamics  of  short  lifespan 
vortices since we detect SDIC and SDP.  
Eventually,  deriving  our  2D  model  of  gyre  from  Euler  or  Navier-Stokes  equations  is  also  a  next  step  of  this 
exploration but our theoretical choice is justified since the numerically simulated vortices are realistic !  
Governed  by  a  low  dimensional  system  our  perspective  constitutes,  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  a 
comprehensive modelisation of the kinematics of atmospheric vortices without violations of the fluid dynamics 
laws. 
This research can be transposed to fields close to the atmospheric sciences, for example hydrodynamics when the 
roll  is  the  Rayleigh-Bénard  convection.  Also  this  approach  can  be  transposed  to  astrophysical  sciences  and 
enables the study of interstellar vortices when the gyre is created by a gravitational field. 
This framework, which is just at its preliminary stage, can develop a new vortex experiments in order to establish 
a more definite relationship between the present theoretical perspective and experimental observations. Thus, this 
research  will  be  provided  with  an  unquestionable  proof when  real  experiments  create   the  patterns  numerically 
depicted in a new apparatus (for example, wind tunnel forming a T with a rotating chamber...). We works to this 
plan. 
 

Appendix 
 
Reduced systems of Navier-Stokes or Euler  equations are often the central paradigm of rotational fluids studies. 
For  the  present  modelisation,  we  introduce  a  dynamical  equivalent  as  a  convenient  approximation  of  real 
aerologic  motion  of  eddy  or  rotating  thermal  convection  without  loss  of  (kinematic)  generality.  However,  the 
choice of a numerical analogue does not substitute the real equations governing the fluid dynamics. 
Indeed, we choose to focus on one of the 2D oscillators, namely the Gause model (1934): 
 

dx/dt =   x g(x)  –  y p(x)   
 
dy/dt = - c y  + y q(x) 

 
 

 

 

 

describing the density of prey and predator species, i.e. x and y variables, in a confined biosystem. G, p and q are 
functions and c is a positive parameter. The Gause model is the generalized version [Ridane, 1988; Braun, 1993] 
of the  Lotka-Volterra equation (1931), an eminent zoological oscillator  where g(x)= a, p(x) = bx and q(x) =  dx  
with  a,  b  and  d  positive  parameters.  In  comparison  of  this  oscillator,  we  convert  the  signs  and  superimpose a 
supplemental nonlinearity, i.e. q(x) = x ², to found our ODE model.  
This  singular  methodology  in  the  fluid  dynamics  science  is  chosen  to  emulate  numerically  the  dynamical 
properties of the fully developed eddy flux by solving a very small set of equations.  
 
 
 
 

 

8 

 
References 

 

Bartels  D.  L.  &  Maddox  R.  A.  (1991),  Midlevel  Cyclonic  Vortices  Generated  by  Mesoscale  Convective 
Systems, Monthly Weather Review, 119, 1, 104-117. 
Bengtsson L. & Lighthill J. (1982, eds.) Intense Atmospheric Vortices, Springer-Verlag, New York. 
Benkadda S.  &  Zaslavsky G. (1998, eds.),  Chaos, Kinetics and Nonlinear Dynamics in Fluids and Plasmas. 
Springer.  
Bouali S. (1999), Feedback Loop in Extended van der Pol’s Equation Applied to an Economic Model of Cycles, 
Int. J. of Bifurcation and Chaos, 9, 4, 745-756. 
Bouali S. (2002), The Hunt Hypothesis and the Dividend Policy of the Firm. The Chaotic Motion of the Profits, 
e-print arXiv: nlin.CD/0206032. 
Brady R. & Szoke E. J. (1989), A Case study of Nonmesocyclone Tornado Development in Northeast Colorado: 
Similarities to Waterspout Formation, Monthly Weather Review, 117, 843-856. 
Braun M . (1993), Differential equations and their applications. Springer-Verlag, 4th Edition. 
Chorin A. J. (1994), Vorticity and Turbulence, Springer-verlag, New York. 
Church C., Burgess D., Doswell C  &  Davies-Jones R.  (1993,  eds.),  The  Tornado:  Its  Structure,  Dynamics, 
Prediction and Hazards, American Geophysical Union. 
Drazin P. G. & Reid W. H. (1981), Hydrodynamic Stability. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Emanuel K. A. (1994), Atmospheric Convection, Oxford University Press. 
Forbes G.S.  & Wakimoto R. M. (1983), A concentrated outbreak of tornadoes, downbursts, and microbursts, 
and implications regarding vortex classifications, Monthly Weather Review, 111, 12, 220-235. 
Fujita T. T. (1981), Tornadoes and  downbursts in the contex of generalized planetary scales,  J. of Atmospheric 
Sciences, 38, 1511-1534. 
Gall  R.  L.,  (1985),  Linear  Dynamics  of  the  multiple -vortex  phenomenon  on  tornadoes,  J.  of  Atmospheric 
Sciences, 42, 761-772. 
Gause G. H. (1934), The Struggle for existence. Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore. 
Gordon  J.  H.  &  Purcell  D.  (1978),  Life  cycle  of  the  Union  City,  Oklahoma,  tornado  and  comparison  with 
waterspouts, Monthly Weather Review, 106, 1, 3-11. 
Hooze Jr. R. A. (1993), Clouds Dynamics, Academic Press. 
Lilly D. K. (1986), The structure, energetics and propagation of rotative convective storms. Part II: Helicity  and 
storm stabilization, J. of Atmospheric Sciences, 43, 126-140. 
Lin S.-J. (1992), Contour Dynamics of Tornado-like Vortices, J. of Atmospheric Sciences, 49, 8, 1745-1756. 
Lotka  A.  (1920),  Undamped  oscillations  derived  from  the  law  of  mass  action,  Edinburgh  and  Dublin 
Philosophical Magazine, 3, 65-80. 
Montgomery M. T. & Farrel B. F. (1993), Tropical Cyclone Formation, J. of Atmospheric Sciences, 50, 2, 285-
310. 
National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration  (1999),  Hurricane  Basics.  Online  document, 
www.noaa.gov, USA. 
Nolan D. S.  & Farrell B. F.  (1999),  Generalized Stability Analyses of Asymmetric Disturbances in One- and 
Two-Celled Vortices Maintained by Radial Inflow, J. of Atmospheric Sciences, 56, 2, 1282-1307. 
Peixoto J. P. & Oort A. H. (1992),  Physics of climate, Springer-Verlag, New York. 
Pedlosky J. (1987), Geophysical fluid dynamics, Springer-verlag, New York. 
Rasmussen E. N., Straka J. M., Davies-Jones R., Doswell III C. A., Carr F. H., Eilts M. D. & MacGorman 
D. R. (1994), Verification of the Origins of Rotation  in Tornadoes: VORTEX, Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 75, 995-
1006. 
Ridane R.  (1988),  Economie,  Biologie  et  Ecologie.  Essais  de  modélisation  dynamique  comparée.  Thèse de 
Doctorat d’Etat, FSEG, University of Tunis. 
Saffman P. G. (1992), Vortex Dynamics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Simpson J., Roff G., Morton B. R., Labas K., Dietachmeyer G., McCumber M.  & Penc R . (1991) A Great 
Salt Lake Waterspout, Monthly Weather Review, 119, 12, 2741-2770. 
Volterra V. (1931), Leçons sur la théorie mathématique de la lutte pour la vie. Gauthier-Villars, Paris. 
Wood V. T. (1992), Wirlwind Formation at a Burning Oil Supertanker in the Gulf of Mexico,  Monthly Weather 
Review, 120, 371-372. 

 

 

9 

