 

 

The Gasdynamics First Problem Solution - 
The Gas Stream Parameters, Structures, Metering Characteristics for Pipe, Nozzle 
 
S.L. Arsenjev, I.B. Lozovitski1, Y.P. Sirik 

Physical-Technical Group 
Dobroljubova street 2, 29, Pavlograd, Dnepropetrovsk region, 51400 Ukraine 

The development of the classical physics fundamentals with usage of experience of 
the experimental and computational-analytical investigations has allowed to create 
the valid conception of a fluid motion. The multidisciplinary approach on a new ba-
sis has allowed to ensure the physical adequacy to a mathematical model of the gas 
flow with allowance for essential nonlinearity of change of the gas stream main pa-
rameters  and  the  metering  characteristics  of  the  flow  elements  of  the  type:  pipe, 
pipeline, convergent nozzle and also with allowance for the evolutional character of 
the gas flow structure before a setting, in the itself flow element and in jet flowing 
out from one. The example of the valid solution of the direct and inverse problems 
about a gas flow through the flow element is given for the first time. The results of 
the solution by amount, kind and precision of the obtained information are an ex-
ample of the satisfactory solution of the gas dynamics problem. 
PACS:  05.65.+в;  07.05.Tp;  47.10.+g;  47.27.Wg;  47.40.-x;  47.32.Ff;  47.40.Dc; 
47.40.Hg; 47.40.Ki; 47.60.+i 

 
Introduction 
 
In June 2000 the “VeriGas” computer program was created. For the first time the program is 
physically adequately reproducing the gas stream dynamics in the flow systems and elements: 
pipe, pipelines, mouthpieces, nozzles etc. This is the first and key achievement on the way of 
practical application of the such general physical conception theses that is allowing to construct 
the physically adequate mathematical model of the states and processes in the gas and liquid me-
diums and deformable body from the unified positions constituting the basis of a new stage of 
the physics development in contrast to basis of the analogous purpose well-known software 
products. 

Side by side with traditional physics which is containing the items of information on the Nature 
separate laws and specific theories and here called the Physics-I, it is created the fundamentals of 
the physics that allows to describe the phenomena dynamics in the Nature and engineering by 
means of conjugation of the separate laws into such integral information structure which is 
rightly and precisely reproducing the state and motion parameters of the contact-interacting real 
mediums and bodies. This is the Physics-II. Accordingly: 
-  The Physics-I is primary science that is detecting and accumulating the Nature separate laws 
and conceiving the separate specific theories; 
-  The Physics-II is the second science that is conceiving the modern working conception of the 
Nature structure as an integral dynamic system possessing the generality to the diversity of sepa-
rate phenomena, laws. 
Such approach quite corresponds to the Aristotle and Newton guidelines: at first to gather the 
facts, and then to search for causes of the general. The detection and accumulation of the Nature 
separate laws is going on and will be going on practically endlessly. However a presence of this 
process and its results in itself ensures only the necessary but not sufficient condition for crea-

                                                 
1 Phone: (38 05632) 38892, 40596 
E-mail: loz@inbox.ru 

2

tion of the physically adequate model of phenomenon, process. The traditional attempts of de-
scription of the real gas, liquid and deformable body state and motion by means of unification of 
the separate physical laws with the help of mathematics is so unsuccessful during the last about 
250 years just because of non-compliance with the second condition. 

As to possibility of creation of the dynamics mathematical model of real phenomenon, process 
that it is possible only after creation of its general physical conception. Namely the conception 
x-
allows to determine the necessary volume of the separate physical laws in its mathematical e
pression and the way of its conjugation into such the integral information structure which has 
generality to multitude of real variations of phenomena and processes and at the same time one 
ensures the true and exact estimations of the state and motion parameters of the material medi-
ums and bodies in every specific case. Such information structure is only one and one is found 
and applied with the help of the Physical Ensemble method. The harmonious composing of a 
Physics-I and a Physics-II with the help of the Physical Ensemble method is only way out of the 
protracted crisis state in the scientific-engineering knowledge field. Just the United Physics is 
the full value knowledge and at the same time the technological instrument that is allowing to 
avoid the traditional mathematical scholasticism on the one hand and to exclude the industrial 
experiment or essentially to decrease its scales on the other hand already today. The develop-
ment of the United Physics and software on its basis will be determining a pace and a scale of 
the modern society progress both within the next few years and in the remote perspective.  

The unsatisfactory state of modern conceptions about the fluid motion despite of the unprece-
dented scales of the publications in this field can be demonstrated on an example of a problem 
about the gas stream motion in the pipe. The pipe is the most simple flow element. The gas is 
medium with the simplest structure. The simplest formulation on gas flow through the pipe − 
motion with friction without heat exchange. 

The results of the solution of this gasdynamics problem obtained by computational experiment 
founded on the new physical concept and new mathematical model are submitted in the given 
work for the first time. The distinctive feature of the new approach is that as a result of the solu-
tion of a problem we gain the information on structures of the gas stream motion according to 
the effective pressure drops and also the state and motion parameters of the gas stream and a me-
tering characteristic of the flow element. 

The results of solution are an evidence of the complicated evolutional change of the motion 
structures of the gas stream under the pressure drop change, of essential nonlinearity of change 
of the state and motion parameters of the gas stream and of essential nonlinearity of the metering 
characteristic of the simple flow elements. Some separate elements of the physical concept of the 
gas flow through the flow elements and mathematical model on its basis have been given in pa-
pers of authors [1−7]. 
 
General formulation 
 
The simplest formulation on a gas flow through the flow element of the pipe type presupposes a 
presence of two half-spaces, filled by gas of the identical composition and communicated by the 
pipe flow element. Air under the normal technical temperature 288 K is selected as gas. 
The right half-space is a zone of a normal technical absolute pressure ph = 104 kgf/m2. The left 
half-space is a zone of the high absolute pressure p0 > ph . Thus, the gas flow is directed from left 
to right. Geometrical parameters of the pipe: caliber (interior diameter) D (is mentioned below in 
the appropriate sections of the given paper), the medial relative roughness of the pipe wall 
D =∆
low in the appropriate sections of the given paper). 
 

, relative length of the pipe is measured in its calibers 

 (is mentioned be-

0273

DL

L =

0.

 

 

3

According to the simplest formulation, we suppose the gas flow in the flow element by one-
dimensional, stationary and without heat exchange. The friction coefficient (factor) is deter-
mined by means of the Colebrook’s diagram. 
The problem solution envisions the determination of the state and motion parameters of the gas 
flow and also distinctive geometrical and dynamical parameters in three zones: before the pipe - 
the inflow zone, stream in the pipe and also stream after the pipe − the outflow zone. The indi-
cated three zones form the general dynamic structure of the flow, which one ensures the physical 
correctness of the gas flow analysis through the flow element or system. The results of computa-
tional experiment adduced in the given work do not contain the analysis of processes, connected 
with the normal and oblique shock waves as these processes are well enough described in the 
educational and methodical literature. 
 
Computational experiment results 
 
1. The evolution of the gas flow structures in the General Dynamic Structure of the flow  
The introduction of concept of the General Dynamic Structure of the flow envisions the analysis 
of the gas flow from its origin and transformation into a stream before inlet into the flow element 
(pipe), then the analysis of motion of the gas stream in the flow element and at last, analysis of 
the gas flow in jet after one’s outlet out of the flow element to the ambient gas medium (atmos-
phere). 
The pipe with the interior diameter D = 134 mm and the relative length 
 is utilized 
in this series of computations. The remaining requirements correspond to the «General formula-
tion» section. The pipe with 
tures of the gas flow through the pipe can be demonstrated just in it. The consecutive computa-
tional experiment has allowed to determine 15 theoretically possible structures of the gas flow; 
13 out of its (from the second up to the fourteenth) are adduced on fig. 1 at the consecutive in-
crease of the pressure drop. 

 is selected because almost all theoretically possible struc-

= DL

9=L

9=

L

Nomenclature of the gas stream structures on fig. 1: 
a 
b 
c 
d 
e 
fos 
fsb 
fsbk 
fspk 
gen 

high pressure gas half-space – motionless gas; 
inlet zone – acceleration of gas; 
low pressure gas half-space – motionless gas; 
mass flow dispersion zone – multi-jet motion of gas, braking of the gas jet; 
mass flow cone – outflow zone with quasi-permanent parameters; 
stream with the oblique shock waves in the pipe; 
subsonic stream in the pipe; 
subsonic laminar kernel of stream in the pipe; 
supersonic laminar kernel of stream in the pipe; 
vortex sublayer of stream at entrance to the pipe – zone of separation of the stream kernel 
from the entrance walls of pipe; 
vortex sublayer of stream in the pipe – zone of separation of the stream kernel from the 
pipe wall; 
jet with oblique shock waves; 
expanded subsonic part of jet; 
transonic superlayer of the jet supersonic part; 
expanded supersonic part of jet; 

jos 
jsb 
jsl 
 
jsp
M=1  Mach number equal to local sonic velocity; 
NSW  normal shock wave. 

gf 

Within the framework of the adopted nomenclature, the total (a+b+c+d+e+f) is a legend of the 
general dynamic structure of the flow for the flow element of the type: pipe, nozzle. Other sym-

 

 

4

the gas stream motion in the pipe is going on without acceleration; such the hydraulic pattern 

bols mean the transition structures of the gas flow, which ones arise and are replaced by the oth-
ers at change of the pressure drop. 
One of features of the pipe with relative length equal to 9 calibers is that one is much shorter of 
the entry length. Therefore transition of the gas stream to the turbulent regime does not happen 
in it under any pressure drop. The boundary layer thickness accounts enough a small share of the 
section radius of the pipe. The exposition of structures of the gas stream is built on the basis of 
exposition of the general dynamic structure of the flow with the detailed description of the each 
zone features. 
The first structure (∆p ≅ 6×10-3 kgf/m2): 
the inflow zone has the shape of a half-sphere in this case according to the Elementary 
− 
Wave Theory of the Fluid Motion; this zone consists from the near and far fields of radiation 
of the waves by an inflow face of the pipe; the origin of the gas flow and its intensification up to 
the quantity of the corresponding velocity of the inlet into the pipe, happens as a result of inter-
action of the overpressure potential  p∆  and the wavefronts of the hemispherical shape closed to 
the wall of the left half-space and running in the opposite direction to the gas flow;  
− 
of the gas flow is conditioned by small intensity of friction of the stream with the pipe wall and 
accordingly by the small heat generation; in result, the gas flow in the pipe is not accompanied 
by expansion and happens with the constant average velocity on all pipe length; at the same 
time, the interaction of a gas stream with the pipe wall leads to the development of the wall 
boundary layer in which the flow velocity is varied from zero up to rated quantity in the thin 
wall layer; 
the gas jet effusing from the pipe, interacts contactly with the motionless ambient gas me-
− 
dium (atmosphere); the feature of the jet at outlet of the pipe is that the velocity of the surface 
layers of the jet is incremented from zero (as it was in the pipe) up to a quantity equal to the par-
axial velocity under action of the viscosity forces in jet; the acceleration distance of the surface 
layers of jet is commensurable to one’s diameter and the jet maintains delineations of the pipe on 
this length; the increase of velocity of the surface layers of jet leads to smoothing of the velocity 
profile in the jet on the one hand and intensifies interaction of the jet with the ambient atmos-
phere on the other hand; the intensification of this interaction leads to buckling of the contacting 
layers of the jet and atmosphere with formation of the ring vortex structures; these structures dif-
fuse the mass flow rate of jet in the ambient air as the result of loss of own stability of the ring 
structures and formation of the isotropic turbulence cloud; the visualization of such jet is given 
on fig. 117 in an album [8]. 
The second structure (∆p ≅ (0.3…1.85)×104 kgf/m2): 
− 
− 
the local sound velocity; the acceleration of the stream along the pipe is stipulated by the heat 
release at friction of a stream about the pipe wall - this is the so-called frictional self-acceleration 
of the gas stream; 
the gas jet effusing out of the pipe is implanted to the ambient air with formation of the so-
− 
called mass flow cone; diameter of this cone base is equal to diameter of the pipe end, medial 
height is equal ~ 4.5 diameters of one’s base; the average pressure in volume of the mass flow 
cone is equal to pressure of the ambient air, at the same time, the pressure in this zone "е" (see 
fig. 1) has oscillatory character according to the Elementary Wave Theory of the Fluid Motion 
and the amplitude value of this pressure periodically exceeds pressure of the ambient air; as a 
result the mass flow cone periodically pulsewise throws out quantums of the gas flow rate in the 
kind of mini-jets through its lateral surface into the ambient air; the quantums of the gas flow 
rate are implanted in the ambient air, owing to a presence of radial velocity and carry away the 
ambient air in the jet motion direction, owing to a presence of the longitudinal transportation ve-

the inflow zone in the pipe is look-alike to the inflow zone of the first structure; 
the gas stream motion in the pipe is going on with acceleration up to velocity not exceeding 

 

 

5

the inflow zone in the pipe is look-alike to the inflow zone of the first structure; 
the gas stream motion is going on with acceleration up to the local sound velocity in the pipe 

locity; this is the mass flow dispersion zone “d”; the interaction of quantums of the flow rate 
with the ambient air is terminated by formation of the isotropic turbulence cloud. 
 
The third structure (∆p ≅ 1.88×104 kgf/m2): 
− 
− 
end section; 
the gas jet effusing out of the pipe is formed by the oblique shock waves with the high fre-
− 
quency and is terminated by the mass flow cone and mass flow dispersion zone, likewise the sec-
ond structure of the jet; the hitting range of this structure jet is much more, than in the first and 
second structures. 
The fourth structure (∆p ≅ 1.9×104 kgf/m2): 
the inflow zone in the pipe is look-alike to the inflow zone of the first structure; 
− 
the gas stream motion in the pipe is accompanied by appearance of the stream kernel sepa-
− 
rated from the pipe wall on all its length excepting the inlet section; the relative velocity M=1 is 
reached before the pipe outlet section and promptly shifts to inlet of pipe under small increase of 
the pressure drop; the nature of the gas flow in the kernel is rather close to isentropic; the nature 
of the wall sublayer is hydrodynamic down to vortical; the thickness of this hydrodynamic 
sublayer is small according to the computational results and is incremented from zero in inlet 
section of the pipe up to maximum at M=1, and then is diminished to the outlet section of the 
pipe but not up to zero; 
the gas jet effusing out of pipe is look-alike to 3 structure in basic; the difference consists 
− 
only that the step of the oblique shock waves is a little bit more and the jet kernel is surrounded 
out of door by the transonic superlayer. 
The fifth structure (∆p ≅ 2.4×104 kgf/m2): 
− 
− 
of the pipe; the hydrodynamic sublayer is shortened, its thickness is little incremented to the 
M=1 section; the kernel of stream in limits of the sublayer length accelerates up to the super-
sonic velocity; therefore the stream motion is penetrated by system of the oblique shock waves 
on the remaining part of the pipe; 
− 
terminated by the mass flow cone and the dispersion zone. 
The sixth structure (∆p ≅ 2.8×104 kgf/m2): 
− 
the last by sizes and intensity of acceleration of gas to the inlet section of the pipe; 
the gas stream in the pipe reaches the relative velocity M=1 in the one’s inflow section; the 
− 
normal shock wave arises in this section and the further motion of a subsonic gas stream in the 
pipe happens with the frictional self-acceleration but remains subsonic; 
the gas jet effusing out of pipe is look-alike the second structure. 
− 
The seventh structure (∆p ≅ 3.1×104 kgf/m2): 
− 
− 
pipe  and the entrance part of pipe with formation of the entrance hydrodynamic vortical 
sublayer; the stream kernel accelerates to the supersonic velocity in boundaries of this sublayer 
and then the gas stream motion is penetrated by system of the oblique shock waves on the re-
maining part of the pipe;  
− 
and is terminated by the mass flow cone and the dispersion zone of the flow rate. 

the inflow zone in the pipe is look-alike to the inflow zone of the first structure; 
the gas stream motion in the pipe is accompanied by bias of section M=1 to the inlet section 

the inflow zone in the pipe maintains the spherical shape; 
the gas stream motion is accompanied by its separation from the wall before inlet into the 

the gas jet effusing out of the pipe is formed by the oblique shock waves deceleration stream 

the gas jet effusing out of the pipe is penetrated by system of the oblique shock waves and is 

the inflow zone in the pipe is look-alike to the inflow zone of the first structure, but exceeds 

 

 

6

the gas jet effusing out of the pipe is formed by the oblique shock waves and is terminated by 

 
The eighth structure (∆p ≅ 5.5×104 kgf/m2): 
this motion structure is look-alike the previous but the separation zone of the stream kernel from 
the inlet into the pipe reaches the maximum size. 
The ninth structure (∆p ≅ 9×104 kgf/m2): 
this structure of the motion is quite look-alike to the seventh structures. 
The tenth structure (∆p ≅ 10×104 kgf/m2): 
this structure of the motion is quite look-alike to the sixth structures. 
The eleventh structure (∆p ≅ 12×104 kgf/m2): 
this structure of the motion is quite look-alike to the fifth structures. 
The twelfth structure (∆p ≅ (12…38)×104 kgf/m2): 
the inflow zone in the pipe is look-alike to the inflow zone of the third structure; 
− 
the gas stream motion in the pipe is accompanied by the flow separation in limits of the pipe 
− 
length with formation of the stream kernel and the vortical hydrodynamic sublayer closed to the 
pipe wall; the nature of the gas flow in the kernel is rather close to isentropic; the stream con-
tinuously accelerates to the supersonic velocity on all pipe length; the M=1 section is shifted to 
the downstream as the pressure drop is increased;  
− 
the mass flow cone and the dispersion zone of the flow rate. 
The thirteenth structure (∆p ≅ (39…109)×104 kgf/m2): 
the inflow zone in the pipe is look-alike to the inflow zone of the third structure; 
− 
the gas stream motion in the pipe is accompanied by the exit of the separation zone (of the 
− 
wall sublayer) out of limits of the pipe outlet section; the M=1 section is slowly shifted to the 
pipe outlet section as the pressure drop is increased; 
− 
by the transonic superlayer. 
The fourteenth structure (∆p ≅ 111×104 kgf/m2): 
− 
trasted to previous structures; 
− 
mained  appreciably subsonic in the pipe limits;  
the gas jet effusing out of the pipe contains the expanded part consisting of a transonic and 
− 
supersonic zones and transonic superlayer enveloping the expanded part of the jet according to 
computation; this expanded part of the jet is terminated by the mass flow cone and the dispersion 
zone of the flow rate; the interaction of the transonic superlayer with the expanded part of the jet 
results in overexpansion and shortening the last; in result, the pair of the oblique shock waves: 
compression and expansion arises between an overexpanded part of the jet and its mass flow 
cone.  
The fifteenth structure (∆p ≅ 120×104 kgf/m2): 
This motion structure differs from the previous that between the expanded part of the jet and its 
mass flow cone the system of the several oblique shock waves can be placed. 

the gas jet effusing out of the pipe is formed by the oblique shock waves and is surrounded 

the inflow zone in the pipe maintains the hemispherical shape and has the least size as con-

the gas stream motion in the pipe is going on with frictional self-acceleration but is  re-

The described fifteen structures of the gas flow through the flow element of the pipe type with  
L=9D length are the actual and for other types of the flow element are the possible. The example 
of partial realization of the possible motion structures is adduced in the third section of the given 
work. 

 

 

 

7

The experimental research of structures of the gas flow through the pipes and the convergent 
nozzles is bound with the certain technical difficulties, therefore only separate examples of the 
visualizations of the flows and its diagrammatic representation can be found in the special litera-
ture. For example, the results of rendition of the steam outflow through the convergent nozzle 
with the circular profile are submitted on fig. 11-15 in J.H.Keenan’s book [
. The mentioned 
images match to the fourteenth and fifteenth structures of the gas stream motion rotined on fig. 1 
and circumscribed above in this our paper. 

10

]

The flow schemes of the gas stream in an outlet section of pipe and the smoothly convergent 
nozzle built by results of an experimental research in Moscow Energy Research Institute and 
Central Boiler-Turbine Research Institute are presented on fig. 7-9 and 8-2 in E.M.Deich’s book 
[11
]
. These schemes confirm a presence of the gas stream kernel and hydrodynamic sublayer in 
the pipe and the smoothly convergent nozzle. Moreover, the scheme on fig. 7-9 shows that the 
critical section of stream (M=1) is inside of pipe, instead of one’s outlet section. The analogous 
feature is rotined on fig. 8-2. 

VeriGas-program, designed by the authors, allows to determine structure of the gas stream mo-
tion in the pipes of any length. In particular, the pipe by relative length L/D = 93 is remarkable 
by that the fourteenth structure of the motion are implemented at once after the second structure, 
by-passing ten intermediate structures from the third to the thirteenth under monotonic rise of 
pressure p0 . 
 
2. Flow characteristics of pipes and the circular profile and conical converged nozzles 
The determination of the flow rate of the pipes and also two types of the convergent nozzles is 
realized within the framework of the «General formulation» section. Thus the diameter of pipes 
is adopted D = 10 mm = 10-2 m. The computation of the metering characteristic of pipes is real-
ized in a gamut of its relative length (D/L) from 0.6 up to 10,000. The results of determination of 
the mass flow rate of the pipes and the convergent nozzles are submitted on fig. 2−8. Relative 
length of the pipe is indicated on each diagram, for example, diagrams of the flow rate for the 
pipes with relative length 0.6; 1; 1.8; 2 are given on fig. 2. 

The characteristic feature of the flow rate of pipes and the convergent nozzles consists in a pres-
ence of the initial nonlinear segment and abrupt transition to the linear characteristic. This abrupt 
transition matches to the beginning of the fourteenth structure of the gas flow (see fig. 1) through 
the flow element. The metering characteristic of the convergent nozzle with circular profile (see 
fig. 4) allows to explain an abnormal case circumscribed in E.M.Tseyrov’s work [9]. The author 
of this work has calculated the pressure change in vessel at its emptying through the convergent 
nozzle of the circular profile and has accepted the discharge coefficient 
1=µ . The calculation is 
realized by the author under condition of the isentropic outflow that is disregarding of any 
losses. Then the author of the above mentioned work has conducted an experiment by emptying 
of tank under initial pressure of air 16×104 kgf/m2 into atmosphere and has plotted the calcula-
tion and experimental pressure - time of the emptying diagrams.  The curves of the diagram in-
dicate, that the actual emptying of the tank in a gamut from initial pressure  16×104  up to  ~   
8×104 kgf/m2 was going on much faster, than calculated on an ideal adiabat.  The curve CIRC0.6 
on fig. 4 indicates that the mass flow rate matches to the fourteenth structure of the gas flow 
through the given flow element in a gamut of pressure from 16×104 up to 8×104 kgf/m2  and es-
sentially exceeds the isentropic mass flow rate. The flow rate drops (almost twice) under the 
pressure drop smaller  
8×104 kgf/m2  and then is non-linearly descended under further diminution of the pressure drop. 
Such character of change of the flow rate allows also to understand, according to fig. 4, why the 
curve of the actual emptying on the Tseyrov's diagram demonstrates essential diminution of the 
flow rate as contrasted to by isentropic calculation under the tank pressure below 8×104 kgf/m2 . 

 

 

8

Some diagrams on fig. 6−8 have "downfalls". Ones is explained by transition of flow from a 
laminar to turbulent regime and back under monotonic rise of pressure on inlet into the pipe. 

The diagrams on fig. 7, 8 show that the flow rate curve becomes practically horizontal when the 
relative pipe length is 105D and more. It is evidence, that increase in the flow rate for lengthy 
pipes including the gas pipelines can be reached in basic by increase in its diameter. 
 
3. The solution of the inverse problem of gasdynamics 
The inverse problems can also be solved with the help of the VeriGas program created on the 
basis of the new qualitative approach and the evolutional mathematical model. For example, the 
results of the photograph images of four structures of the air jet motion from the convergent axi-
symmetric nozzle under the supercritical pressure drops are submitted on fig. 8-30 in the above 
mentioned book [11]. We give the task to ascertain the geometrical parameters of the nozzle, to 
determine the state and motion parameters of the gas flow and the metering characteristic of this 
nozzle. Values of relative pressure of air at outflow into atmosphere: ph/p0 = 0.51; 0.412; 0.267; 
0.05 are given on evocative fig. 8-30 [11]. Assuming  ph = 104 kgf/m2, we gain the value p0 for 
each of four offered cases: 2.029×104 , 2.43×104 , 3.74×104  и 20×104  kgf/m2. 

We realize the searching for the shape of the flow element of the convergent axisymmetric noz-
zle by a cut-and-try method. For the beginning, let's assume the circular profile of the nozzle 
with the diameter of the outlet section D = 10 mm and relative length L/D = 0.6 . Such nozzle in 
hydraulics has the least resistance. The result of determination of the metering characteristic of 
this nozzle is given on fig. 4. According to this diagram, the fourteenth outflow structure arises 
under  
p0 = 8×104  kgf/m2, that is much earlier than in the problem requirement. 
Now we assume that the convergent nozzle has the conical form and we shall search for the noz-
zle profile angle to its axis by series computations. As a result of computations, we have discov-
ered that the fourteenth outflow structure arises under  p0 = 20×104  kgf/m2  for the convergent 
conical nozzle with the profile angle 16.15 circular degrees and the 1.2D relative length. 

We determine the air state and motion parameters for nozzle with the retrieved shape and sizes 
under the above mentioned pressure drops. The results of computation are given on fig. 9−13. 
Thus the a, b, c, d points on the fig. 9 diagram match to above predetermined quantities of pres-
sure p0. The graph of the sound velocity is indicated by a dashed line on the diagrams of the gas 
stream velocity on fig 10−13. The comparison of the results of computation with the offered re-
sults displays the complete quantitative and qualitative correspondence. 

 
Discussion of results 
 
The results of the direct and inverse computations of gas stream in the flow elements of the type: 
pipe, nozzle adduced in this work, are evidence of the regularity of the qualitative physical con-
ceptions, founded on the comprehensive approach to exposition of the fluid motion within the 
United Physics framework. These results confirm also the regularity of the mathematical model 
build-up of the gas flow which one detects the specific structures of the gas flow and reflects 
their evolutional nature even at one-dimensional formulation, thanks to the Physical Ensemble 
method. As the whole given work represents by itself the first physically adequate and mathe-
matically precise solution of the fundamental problem of gasdynamics and uncloses a perspec-
tive to solution of the more complex and generally problems about the fluid motion. In particu-
lar, the authors successfully tested efficiency of the problem solution about the gas stream mo-
tion in pipes and the complex flow systems, including the stationary and nonstationary heat ex-
change. 

 

 

9

The results of the solution of the inverse problem presented on fig. 9−13 in third section of the 
given paper, are an example of representation of the gasdynamics computation results of the 
flow element, system. Any incompleteness of results as contrasted to this example will be evi-
dence of the unsatisfactory solution.  
 
Final remarks 
 
This  work  is  executed  initiatively  and  independently  by  the  scientists  of  Physical-Technical 
Group within the framework of development of subject «Fluid Motion Physics». 
This work is made not disgracing of elderly and eminent contemporaries for, but increasing of 
the great precursors inheritance and teaching of new generation of creators for. 

 

[1] S.L. Arsenjev, I.B. Lozovitski, Y.P. Sirik, “The boundary and continual transfer phenomena 
in fluids and flows,” http://arXiv.org/physics/0304017, 2003 

[2] S.L. Arsenjev, I.B. Lozovitski, Y.P. Sirik, “The laminar flow instability criterion and turbu-
lence in pipe,” http://arXiv.org/physics/0303071, 2003 

[3] S.L. Arsenjev, I.B. Lozovitski, Y.P. Sirik, “The gas equation for stream,” 
http://arXiv.org/physics/0303018, 2003 

[4] S.L. Arsenjev, I.B. Lozovitski, Y.P. Sirik, “The flowing system gasdynamics. Part 4: Influ-
ence of the incident flow velocity on the outflow velocity out of flowing element,” 
http://arXiv.org/physics/0302083, 2003 

[5] S.L. Arsenjev, I.B. Lozovitski, Y.P. Sirik, “The flowing system gasdynamics. Part 3: Saint-
Venant –Wantzel’s formula modern form,” http://arXiv.org/physics/0302038, 2003  

[6] S.L. Arsenjev, I.B. Lozovitski, Y.P. Sirik, “The flowing system gasdynamics. Part 2: Euler’s 
momentum conservation equation solution,” http://arXiv.org/physics/0302020, 2003  

[7] S.L. Arsenjev, I.B. Lozovitski, Y.P. Sirik, “The flowing system gasdynamics. Part 1: On 
static head in the pipe flowing element,” http://arXiv.org/physics/0301070 , 2003 

[8]  M.  Van  Dyke,  An  Album  of  Fluid  Motion,  Transl.  from  Engl.  into  Rus.,  MIR  Publishing, 
Moscow, 184, 1986. 

[9] E.M. Tseyrov, The questions of gas dynamics of air switches, Transactions of the All-Union 
Electrotechnical Institute. Num. 60, Energy Publishing, Moscow − Leningrad, p.15-17, 1956. 

[10] J.H. Keenan, Thermodynamics, J.Wiley&Sons Inc. NY, Chapmen & Hall, London, Transl. 
from Engl. into Rus., Energy Publishing, Moscow-Leningrad, 280, 1963. 

[11] E.M.Deich, Engineering Gasdynamics, Energy Publishing, Moscow, 592, 1974. 

 

 

 

 

10

 

 

 

11

 

 

 

12

 

 

 

13

 

 

 

14

 

 

 

15

 

 

 

16

 

 

 

17

 

 

 

18

 

