Proceedings of the International Symposium on Tropospheric Profiling, Needs and Technologies,

Leipzig, Germany, September 14th-20th, 2003

Surrogate cloud fields with measured cloud properties

Victor Venema, Susanne Crewell, Clemens Simmer

E-mail: Victor.Venema@uni-bonn.de, phone: +49 (0)228 735185, fax: +49 (0)228 735188

Meteorological Institute Bonn University, Auf dem Hügel 20, 53121 Bonn, Germany

ABSTRACT

This paper describes two new methods to generate 2D and 3D cloud fields based on 1D and 2D ground based profiler meas-

urements. These cloud fields share desired statistical properties with real cloud fields. As they, however, are similar but not

the same as real clouds, we call them surrogate clouds. One important advantage of the new methods is that the amplitude

distribution of cloud liquid water is also exactly determined by the measurement: The surrogate clouds made with the classi-

cal methods such as the Fourier method and the Bounded Cascade method are Gaussian and 'log-normal-like', respectively.

Our first new method iteratively creates a time series with a measured amplitude distribution and power spectrum. Our sec-

ond method uses an evolutionary search algorithm to generate cloud fields with practically arbitrary constraints. These

clouds will be used to study the relation between radiation and cloud structure.

Keywords: Cloud structure, surrogate cloud fields, cloud measurements.

INTRODUCTION

To perform 3D-radiative transfer calculations we need 3-dimensional cloud fields. However, measurements only provide 1D

or 2D statistics. The typical solution to such a problem is to use the measurements to validate a (cloud) model, and use the

model output for the (radiative transfer) calculations. However, it is extremely difficult to obtain cloud fields that have spe-

a)

b)

c)

d)

e)

Figure 1. a) Microwave radi-
ometer LWP measurement.
b) Iterative Fourier surrogate
of the same measurement. c)
The amplitude/ (LWP) distri-
bution of a and b. d) Power
spectrum of a (offset 40 dB)
and b. e) 2D iterative Fourier
surrogate of LWP, based on
the measurement, assuming
isotropy.

Bounded Cascade time series

100

200

300

700

800

900 1000

400
500
Time or space

600

Surrogate of Bounded Cascade

C
W
L

r
o
P
W
L

C
W
L

r
o
P
W
L

102

101

100

99

98

102

101

100

99

98

cific properties using a cloud model. One can al-

ready be satisfied if the model produces a cloud

with about the same average Liquid Water Path

(LWP) and average cloud height as the ones which

have been observed.

In this paper, we will introduce two methods that

are able to produce surrogate cloud fields out of

'sparse' measurements without using a model.

These fields correspond closely to the measure-

ments. However, you do need a statistical descrip-

tion that is appropriate to your question. Our goal

is to generate surrogate cloud fields that are based

on combined radar-lidar boundary statistics, mi-

crowave radiometer cloud water data, and IR radi-

ometer cloud cover information.

ITERATIVE SURROGATES

Iterative Fourier surrogates were developed by

Schreiber and Schmitz (1996, 2000) for a totally

different purpose for use in the non-linear time

series analysis. This method is able to produce

cloud fields with the amplitude distribution and

power spectrum of a measured time series. From a

measured time series, sn (with n time or space),

with N values, the power spectrum (

2

kS ; with k

wave number) is calculated,

2 (cid:255)=

S

k

es
n

p
2

i

/
Nkn

2

n

(1),

100

200

300

700

800

900 1000

400
500
Time or space

600

Figure 2. a) A surrogate time series made with the non-linear
Bounded Cascade (BC) method. b) An iterative Fourier surro-
gate with the same amplitude distribution and power spec-
trum.

and a sorted list is stored of the values of sn. The algorithm starts with a random shuffle of the data points. Then an iterative

process starts in which first the Fourier coefficients are adjusted and second the amplitudes. To achieve the desired power

spectrum the Fourier transform of the iterate time series is calculated and its squared coefficients are replace by those from

the original time series. The phases are kept unaltered. After this step the amplitudes will no longer be the same. Therefore in

the second step the amplitudes are adjusted by sorting its values and replacing them by the original sorted list of all values.

This procedure has to be repeated a few times until the quality is sufficient. The 1D surrogate (fig. 1) shows that the conver-

gence is close to perfect. The 2D surrogate is the wanted end-product, in this case. The 2D-Fourier-coefficients were calcu-

lated assuming isotropy: If one integrates over all 2D coefficients with

=

k

2
k
1

+

k

2
2

one gets the 1D-coefficient for k. A next

step would be to generate the full 3D LWC fields using LWC-profile time series (Löhnert and Crewell , 2002).

Schreiber and Schmitz (2000) show that it is also possible to iterate two time series simultaneously (additionally taking into

account their cross power spectrum). This could be interesting to make cloud fields using LWP and cloud top statistics si-

multaneously; including cloud top is important for cloud remote sensing applications. Maybe it could even work to include

cloud base information as a third time series and then combine these three 2D fields with the measured average LWC profile

to get a 3D surrogate cloud field.

This Fourier method does have its limitations. Figure 2a shows a time series made with the Bounded Cascade (BC) method

(Cahalan, 1994) and an iterative Fourier surrogate (2b) with the same amplitude distribution and power spectrum. One can

see that the two structures are similar, but not fully the same. The original BC time series shows large jumps, which are typi-

cal; these jumps are not present in its surrogate. This illustrates that the amplitude distribution and the power spectrum do

not fully describe structure in case the time series was "made" with non-linear methods. As the dynamics of cloud is known

to be non-linear, additional measures (next to the power spectrum or the autocorrelation function) may be necessary to de-

scribe their structure.

SEARCH SURROGATES

The most general way to generate a cloud field is to search for a field that has the wanted cloud properties out of the set of

all possible fields. Such a surrogate cloud field can have any (statistical) property. For this paper we made surrogate clouds

using one point and two point statistics of LWP, LWC, cloud top and base height and the number of layers. As search algo-

rithm we have used an evolutionary algorithm (Mitchell, 1996, Goldberg, 1989). Due to the badly behaved cost function,

you need a very robust global search algorithm.

The idea and vocabulary of evolutionary algorithms derives from the natural evolution of species. The most important dif-

ference from other search methods is that evolutionary algorithms work on a set (population) of solutions, in our case 40 to

200 clouds. From each of these clouds the fitness function (similar to a cost function) is calculated, and the best clouds have

a better chance to reproduce. During reproduction the clouds are mutated to introduce new diversity.

To calculate the overall fitness of a cloud, the fitness functions of the various cloud properties have to be combined into one

number. We do this by normalizing the fitness functions to zero median and unit maximum prior to combining them to one

overall fitness value. This normalization is chosen as the fitness functions often have strong negative outliers.

At the moment we are still testing the method. As test input we use statistics derived from a cloud measured with the Delft

Atmospheric Research Radar. Within these cloud boundaries a linear LWC profile was assumed. From this cloud we are

making surrogates that correspond to the measurements with regard to: the histograms of cloud top and base height, LWP,

LWC and the number of cloud layers, furthermore, the power spectra of cloud top and base height, LWP and number of lay-

ers, as well as (as second measure of structure) the length of the cloud top and base height, LWP and LWC (vertical and

horizontal). The length is defined as the sum of the absolute difference between all neighbor pixels or columns. The noisy

power spectrum has to be lightly smoothed to get convergence. To calculate the cloud (64x64 pixels) in figure 3, took 22

hours on a desktop PC, with the search algorithm written in IDL. The surrogate corresponds very well to all the mentioned

statistical parameters, except for the structure measures for the number of cloud layers (its power spectrum and length). To

make a three dimensional cloud is a trivial, but calculation intensive extension. We are working on a faster parallelized C++

version to make this step. As the number of clouds that the algorithm has to calculate is about a linear function of the number

of pixels, it is relatively unproblematic to make larger cloud fields.

The iterative Fourier method is able to generate realistic looking cloud fields. In the future, we want to find ways to get real-

CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK

istic 3D-LWC fields with this method (to

study radiative fluxes) and to make multiple

time series (with their cross-spectra), e.g.

LWP and cloud top height. This iterative

method does have its limitations. Such a

method based on Fourier spectra is not able to

handle zero or more than one value at a certain

time. Therefore, the cloud top height time se-

ries can not have a gap in the cloud or two

cloudy parts in one column. A three dimen-

sional LWC field will not necessarily produce

the right cloud boundary (e.g. cloud top) sta-

tistics. Furthermore, in power spectrum may

not be all the information about cloud struc-

ture that we need for radiative transfer prob-

lems.

The search algorithm is a much more general

method to generate surrogate cloud fields. It

can handle (almost?) any statistical or non-

statistical cloud property, at the price of being

very calculation intensive. An interesting non-

statistical cloud property we would like to try

Figure 3. The cloud at the top was used to derive the statistics for
the cloud shown below. The search starts at low resolution and fol-
lowing the arrow, increases its resolution each step by a factor of 2.

e)

is, e.g., to search for a cloud field where the clouds are located at the same position as indicated by an airborne imager. In

stead of the noisy power spectrum we would like to use the autocorrelation function in future, which could handle cloud

gaps. Alternatively, one could use the coefficients of the box counting method (normally used to calculate the fractal dimen-

sion) to describe the structure of the cloud boundaries.

To get an idea of the quality of both kinds of surrogate clouds, we want to take a set of template clouds (from an LES model)

and make a surrogate cloud from each template. The difference in the radiative properties between the cloud pairs indicates

the accuracy of surrogates with these statistical properties.

REFERENCES

Cahalan, R.F. Bounded cascade clouds: albedo and effective thickness. Nonlinear Proc. Geophys. 1, pp. 156-176, 1994.

Goldberg, D.E. Genetic algorithms in search, optimization, and machine learning. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass, ISBN:

0-201-15767-5, 1989

Mitchell, M. An introduction to genetic algorithms. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. ISBN 0-262-13316-4, 1996.

Löhnert U, and S. Crewell. Profiling cloud liquid by combination of multi-channel ground-based passive microwave and

cloud radar measurements, Workshop on COST Action 720: "Integrated Ground-Based Remote Sensing Stations for

Atmospheric Profiling", L'Aquila, Italy, June 18-21, 2002, Symposium Proceedings, 2002.

Thomas Schreiber, Andreas Schmitz, Improved surrogate data for nonlinearity tests. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, pp. 635-638, 1996.

Schreiber T, and A. Schmitz. Surrogate time series. Physica D, 142, pp. 346-382, 2000.

