 
 

CHEP03, La Jolla, California, March 24-28, 2003 

1 

Real-time Control System Prototype for Mechanical and Optical 
Systems based on Parallel Computing Techniques 

F. Acernese1,2, F. Barone2,3, R. De Rosa1,2, R. Esposito2, P. Mastroserio2, L. Milano1,2, S. Pardi1, 
K.Qipiani2, F. Silvestri1, G. Spadaccini1,2 
1Università di Napoli “Federico II”, Dipartimento di Scienze Fisiche, 80126 Napoli, Italy 
2INFN – Sezione di Napoli, 80126 Napoli, Italy 
3Università di Salerno, Dipartimento di Scienze Farmaceutiche, 84084 Salerno, Italy 

Real-time control systems often require dedicated hardware and software, including real-time operating systems, while many 
systems  are  available  for  off-line  computing,  mainly  based  on  standard  system  units  (PCs),  standard  network  connections 
(Ethernet), standard operating systems (Linux) and software independent from the particular architecture of the single unit. In 
order to try to get the advantages of both the technologies, we built an hybrid control system prototype using network based 
parallel computing architecture within real-time control system. In this paper we describe the architecture of the implemented 
system, the preliminary tests we performed for its characterization and the architecture of the control system we used for the 
real-time control tests. 

 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

The  design  of  a  digital  control  system  for  a  specific 
application  requires  the  definition  of  the  three  main 
quantities:  the  control  band,  the  signal  dynamics,  the 
computing power. 

The control band is related both to the response speed of 
the control system and to the digital noise introduced in the 
data  according  to  the  sampling  frequency  [1].  Such 
requirements  are  often  not  too  difficult  to  be  satisfied  for 
many  classes  of  control  problems.  In  particular,  in  the 
control  of  mechanical  systems,  a  large  variety  of  possible 
standards  and  low  cost  technologies,  both  hardware  and 
software,  are  available.  Their  final  choice  depends 
generally on the definition of the other two parameters, that 
are  the  signal  dynamics  and  the  computing  power.  As  an 
example,  a  digital  system  for 
the  control  of  slow 
mechanical systems (10 Hz control band) can be not at all 
expensive  if  its  architecture  is  based  on  a  standard 
commercial  Pc  system  with  a  free  operating  system  like 
Linux.  

On the other hand, in the case of digital control systems 
for  the  mechanical  control  of  superattenuators  for  the 
locking  of  interferometric  detectors  of  gravitational  waves 
(10 Hz control band), the sampling rate must be quite large 
(10  kHz)  in  order  to  satisfy  the  requirement  on  the 
sensitivity of the system [2]. In the latter case, although still 
standard architectures are available, they are no more cheap 
and  it  is  necessary  to  use  real-time  operating  systems  like 
VxWorks and LynxOS. 

The acquisition section is also problem since the number 
of  bits  of  the  ADC  and  DAC  is  relevant  both  for  the 
definition  of  the  dynamics  and  of  the  sensitivity  of  the 
control  system  [1].  Very  often  the  dynamic  range  of  the 
acquisition,  and,  therefore,  the  number  of  the  ADC  and 
DAC  bits,  largely  limits  the  acquisition  frequency  and 
hence the control band. 

Finally, the computing power may be a very demanding 
requirement.  In  fact,  although  the  number  of  input  and 
output  channel  may  be  quite  small,  the  control  algorithm, 
like  in  the  case  of  adaptive  control  algorithms,  neural 

 
TUGP003 

network based algorithms, optimization algorithms. A clear 
example  is  provided  by  adaptive  optics  control  systems, 
whose control bands are of the order of 1 kHz, but with a 
number  of  input  and  output  control  channels  quite  large. 
The control of this system, although from a technical point 
of  view  well  within  the  ADC  and  DAC  technological 
limits, often requires very large computing powers [3]. 

As  it  is  well  known  the  implementation  of  a  digital 
control  system  requires  the  definition  of  the  requirements, 
the design of the architecture of the system and the choice 
of the hardware and the software. If the components are not 
available on the market, then it is necessary to develop ad 
hoc  ones,  generally  not  standard,  not  modular,  often  very 
expensive and difficult to maintain. 

According to what said above, it may be of interest to try 
to find alternative solutions satisfying the requirements, but 
still  standard,  supported  by  the  industry  also  in  the  
developments and test phase, and, possibly, modular.  

In 

the  available 

the  following  section  we  will  show  how  we 
implemented  a  digital  control  system  using  hybrid 
technology  and 
configurations,  using 
demonstrating  the  validity  of  an  hybrid  approach  to  the 
control  of  a  suspended  mass,  part  of  the  suspended 
Michelson interferometer developed in Napoli for the R&D 
the  development  of 
on  digital  control  systems  for 
gravitational waves interferometric detectors [4]. 

2.  CONTROL SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 

The  architecture  of  the  digital  control  system  of  the 
suspended  Michelson  Interferometer  is  based  on the VME 
standard (hardware). The operating system of all the VME 
CPUs  is  LynxOS,  while  all  the  software  is  written  in 
standard  C  language.  Within  this  digital  control  system 
architecture, we organized all the experimental tests on the 
hybrid digital control system architecture for the control of 
a suspension of one of the end mirrors. 

 

2.1.  The Mechanical System 

As it is possible to see from Fig.1, the end mirror of the 
two-stage  seismic 

is  suspended 

Interferometer 

to  a 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CHEP03, La Jolla, California, March 24-28, 2003 

2 

attenuator  which  simulate,  in  principle,  the  dynamics  of  a 
system with a marionetta and a test mass of the last stage of 
an interferometer for gravitational wave detection. 

Our  control  tests  were  performed  on  the  control  section 
devoted to the alignment control section of the suspension 
last stage (Fig.2). 

2.2.  The Digital System 

The  control  system  of  the  original  interferometer  digital 
control  for  the  end  mirror  suspension  consists  of  a  VME 
CPU (VMPC4a from Cetia - CPU board with PowerPC 604 
at  200  MHz,  64  MB  RAM)  running  the  operating  system 
LynxOS  and  equipped  with  two  10  Mbit  Ethernet  links, 
interfaced  to  a  12bit  ADC-DAC  mod.  VDAD  from  PEP 
Modular Computers. 

Within  this  system  we  integrated  our  Computer  Farm 
implemented  for  the  development  of  off-line  parallel  data 
analysis  of  gravitational  waves  from  coalescing  binaries. 
The  farm  consists  of  8  APPRO  2114Xi  with  Pentium  IV 
2.4 GHz and of 12 SuperMicro 6010H with Pentium III 1 
GHz  (see  Fig.3).  The  operating  system  installed  on  the 
Napoli  farm  is  Linux  RedHat  7.3,  kernel  2.4.20,  with  the 
OpenMosix  extensions.  This  farms  is  also  included  within 
the  GRID  geographical  network.  In  fact,  each  node  of  the 
farm is configured as a dual-boot system and can operate as 
a “grid-element” when needed. 

 

Fig.1 End Mirror Suspension 
 
The  first  attenuation stage (marionetta) is an aluminium 
cube  (14  cm  side)  barycentrically  suspended  with  a  steel 
wire  of  0.2  mm  diameter,  while  the  mirror  is  mounted  on 
the inner face of a cylindrical aluminium test mass (14 cm 
diameter,  6  cm  heigth)  suspended  to  the  marionetta  with 
four steel wires of 0.2 mm diameter. 

 

 

 

Fig.3 Napoli Computer Farm 
 
Actually,  in  digital  control  systems  the  control  is 
obtained by simply acquiring data at a sampling period (or 
equivalently  at  a  sampling  frequency)  generally  ten  times 
the  control  band.  Therefore,  once  that  the  sampling 
frequency  is  chosen,  the  control  band  of  the  system  is 

 

Fig.2 Control System of the last stage  

 
TUGP003 

CHEP03, La Jolla, California, March 24-28, 2003 

3 

 
 
defined  together  with  the  maximum  delay  with  which  the 
acquired data (from ADC) must be presented at the output 
(DAC)  after  being  processed  for  the  generation  of  the 
control signal. 

As  a  consequence,  the  most  stringent  requirement  is  to 
keep  very  stable  and  synchronous  the  sampling  frequency 
(ADC  frequency)  and  the  conversion  frequency  (DAC 
frequency).  The  only 
the 
computation of the correction signal (control signal) is that 
it lasts always less than sampling period. 

requirement  concerning 

Therefore,  from  the  control  theory  point  of  view,  every 
asynchronous system may be considered synchronous if its 
response  time,  although  changing  in  time,  is  always  less 
than the sampling time. In our case this time is the sum of 
twice the data transfer time, TDT, and of the computing time, 
Tc. 

The  hybrid  architecture  we  have  designed  for  the 
automatic control of the suspended interferometer is shown 
in  Fig.4.  The  link  between  the  farm  (Linux)  and  real-time 
(LynxOS)  architecture  is  made  through  the  Ethernet 
network.  

3.1.  Data Transfer Time 

The first test we performed was the most important one, 
that is the data transfer between two PCs connected through 
a point-to-point Ethernet link.  

In  our  case  the  test  was  performed  using  three  different 
test  protocols:  the  TCP/IP,  the  GAMMA  (Genoa  Active 
Message  Machine)  and  the  M-VIA  (Virtual  Interface 
Architecture). The results are shown in Table 1. 

 

Protocol 
TCP/IP (eepro 100) 
TCP/IP (Gigabit) 
Gamma (eepro 100) 
M-VIA (DEC) 

Max Time Delay
55 us 
28 us 
33 us 
23 us 

 
Table.1 Results of the Latency Tests 

 
These results, although still provisional demonstrate that 
the  data  transfer  time, DTT ,  already  allows  the  control 
system  to  sustain  a  sampling  frequency  of  some  tents  of 
kHz.  This  value  does  not  depend  on  the  amplitude  of  the 
data  transferred  in  our  applications.  In  fact,  assuming,  for 
example,  a  digital  control  system  with  100  inputs  and 
output  channels,  each  one  sampled  with  24  bit  ADC,  then 
the  amplitude  of  each  data  block  transferred  with  a  single 
packet is only 300 byte, that has practically no influence on 
the global data transfer time. 

Test  on  the  full  farm  are  still  in  progress,  both  on  the 
possible  parallel  and  serial  computation  configurations 
obtainable with its internal nodes. 

3.2.  Computing Power Time 

The second test was related instead to the connection of 
the  computing  power  available  and  the  computing  power 
time,  TC,  that  is  the  measurement  of  the  time  required  for 
performing  the  computing  operation  for  the  generation  of 
the control signal according to a control model to be sent to 
the actuators. This test was performed with one of the farm  
APPRO  2114Xi,  whose  performance  was  evaluated  to  be 
about  4  Gflops,  according  to  the  Pallas  Benchmark.  This 
result  simply  means,  that  in  order  to  sustain  a  10  kHz 
sampling  rate,  then  the  maximum  rate  of  floating  point 
operations  must  be  less  than  105  Flops.  This  number  of 
operations is well within the number of operations required 
by  all  the  classical  control  algorithms  for  this  class  of 
problems  and  therefore  the  control  system  appears  to  be 
perfectly feasible.  

 

4.  MECHANICAL CONTROL RESULTS 

In  order  to  check  the  experimental  feasibility  of  this 
approach  we  applied  the  basic  architecture  previously 
described  to  the  alignment  control  of  a  suspended  mass, 
replacing the existing classical real-time digital control. 

The connection of an APPRO 2114Xi of the farm trough 
a dedicated point-to-point connection allowed us to sustain 
a  control  sampling  frequency  of  2.5  kHz  for  the  above 

 

Fig.4  Hybrid Architecture for the Automatic Control of 
the Suspended Interferometer 
 

3.  TEST 

In  order  to  check  the  experimental  feasibility  of  this 
architecture  we  organized  some  preliminary 
to 
evaluate  the  two  quantities  that  put  an  upper  limit  to  the 
control system band: 

tests 

• 
• 

data transfer time, TDT  
computing power time, TC. 

 
TUGP003 

 

 

 

CHEP03, La Jolla, California, March 24-28, 2003 

4 

 

 

described  digital  control  system  actual  configuration.  The 
main difference between the original and the hybrid control 
system is that now it is available a large computing power 
and,  therefore,  more  refined  control  algorithms  can  be 
easily implemented and tested. 

The limitation in the sampling frequency to only 2.5 kHz 
is due to the data transfer time, that can be largely increased 
once  that  the  VME  CPU  boards  will  be  provided  with  a 
GigaEthernet connection. This upgrade will be tested in the 
next months.  

5.  CONCLUSIONS 

We  experimentally  demonstrated  that  using  standard 
hardware and software we were able to implement a control 
system  for  the  alignment  of  a  suspended  mass  with  a 
sampling  frequency  of  2.5  kHz,  using  a  computing  power 
provided  by  a  Pc  master  node  of  the  farm  external  to  the 
real-time control system. 

These tests are very promising and encouraging in view 
of  the  extension  of  the  computing  power  with  the  full 
 

inclusion  of  the  internal  nodes  of  the  farm  and  to  the 
upgrade of the VME CPU boards with GigaEthernet links. 

Finally,  it  is  very  important  to  underline  that  the 
integration  of  such  different  techniques  will  make  the 
control system more versatile and modular.  

References 

[1] 

F.  Barone,  L.  Di  Fiore,  L.  Milano,  G.  Russo,  1994, 
Meas. Sci. & Tecnol., 6, 1187. 

of 

[3] 

the 

large 

Italian-French 

[2]  C.  Bradaschia  et  al.,  “The  VIRGO  Project,  Final 
base  
Design 
interferometric  antenna  of  gravitational  wave 
detection”,  Proposal    to  INFN    Italy  and  CNRS  
France, 1989, 1992, 1995. 
J.  Baker,  F.  Barone,  E.  Calloni,  R.  De  Rosa,  L.  Di 
Fiore,  L.  Milano,  S.  Restaino,  2002,  Class.  Quant. 
Grav., 19, 1813. 
F.  Barone,  E.  Calloni,  L.  Di  Fiore,  A.  Grado,  L. 
Milano,  G.  Russo,  1996,  Rev.  Sci.  Instrum.,  67, 
4353.  

[4] 

 
TUGP003 

