 
 
The FLUKA code: present applications and future developments 

CHEP03, March 24-28, 2003, La Jolla, California (USA) 

1 

A. Fassò, A. Ferrari, S. Roesler  
CERN 

J. Ranft 
Siegen 

P.R. Sala  
ETHZ 

F. Ballarini, A. Ottolenghi, D. Scannicchio  
Pavia 

M. Carboni, M. Pelliccioni, R. Villari 
LNF 

V. Andersen, A. Empl, K. Lee, L. Pinsky  
Houston University 

G. Battistoni, M. Campanella, F. Cerutti, L.De Biaggi, E. Gadioli, M.V. Garzelli 
Milano 

T.N. Wilson, N. Zapp 
NASA/JSC 
 
The  main  features  of  the  FLUKA  Monte  Carlo  code,  which  can  deal  with  transport  and  interaction  of  electromagnetic  and  hadronic 
particles,  are  summarised.  The  physical  models  embedded  in  FLUKA  are  mentioned,  as  well  as  examples  of  benchmarking  against 
experimental data. A short history of the code is provided and the following examples of applications are discussed in detail: prediction of 
calorimetric  performances,  atmospheric  neutrino  flux  calculations,  dosimetry  in  atmosphere  and  radiobiology  applications,  including 
hadrontherapy  and  space  radiation  protection.  Finally  a  few  lines  are  dedicated  to  the  FLUKA  server,  from  which  the  code  can  be 
downloaded. 
 

 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

FLUKA  is  a  Monte  Carlo  code  able  to  simulate 
transport and interaction of electromagnetic and hadronic 
particles in any target material over a wide energy range 
[1-4].  It  is  a  multi-purpose,  multi-particle  code  that  can 
be  applied  in  many  different  fields.  Particular  attention 
has been devoted to following the various components of 
the  hadronic  and  electromagnetic  cascades.  Thus  the 
code  characteristics  at  intermediate  energies  make  it 
particularly reliable in treating problems in the fields of 
radiotherapy and radiation protection. 

As in most simulation codes that adopt a “condensed-
history”  approach,  in  FLUKA  “continuous”  processes 
such  as  energy  loss  and  angular  deflections  due  to 
Coulomb  interactions  and  “discrete”  (or  “explicit”) 
processes  (delta-ray  production,  nuclear  interactions, 
decays,  bremsstrahlung  and  photon  interaction)  are 
treated  separately.  A  detailed  description  of  the  models 
implemented  in  FLUKA  can  be  found  elsewhere  [1-3], 
and only the main features will be summarized herein. 

Energy  loss  by  charged  particles  is  described  on  the 
basis  of  the  Bethe  theory,  supplemented  with  average 
ionisation  potentials,  density  and  shell  corrections 
according  to  ICRU  publications  no.  37  and  49  [5].  The 
description  of  multiple  Coulomb  scattering  relies  on 
Moliere’s 
theory.  A  detailed  algorithm  has  been 
developed  to  simulate  the  path  curvature  effects.  The 
production  of  delta-rays  is  described  explicitly  above  a 
 
MOMT004 

(INC), 

cascades 

user-defined  threshold  (e.g.  10  keV  for  radiobiology 
applications), below which a continuous energy loss with 
statistical  fluctuations  is  assumed.  Concerning  anelastic 
nuclear  interactions  at  intermediate  energies,  FLUKA 
uses 
to 
the  PEANUT  (Pre-Equilibrium  Approach 
NUclear  Thermalisation)  model,  which  consists  of 
intranuclear 
pre-equilibrium, 
evaporation and de-excitation. In case of light nuclei, for 
which the evaporation model is not very significant, the 
Fermi  break-up  model  has  been 
implemented.  At 
energies  above  5  GeV/n,  a  model  based  on  the  Dual 
Parton Model (DPM) is used. 
The  current  version  of 

the  code  can  simulate 
electromagnetic  and  µ  interactions  up  to  100  TeV, 
neutron  interaction  and  transport  down  to  thermal 
energies (multigroup below 20 MeV) and hadron-hadron 
and hadron-nucleus interactions up to 100 TeV. Nucleus-
nucleus interactions, previously available above 5 GeV/n 
only  (up 
to  10,000  TeV/n),  have  been  recently 
implemented  also  down  to  ≈100  MeV/n  by  coupling 
the  Relativistic  Quantum  Molecular 
FLUKA 
Dynamics code RQMD-2.4 [6]. 

to 

FLUKA  can  treat  both  combinatorial  geometry  and 
voxel  geometry, and an interface to GEANT4 geometry 
is  also  available.  Presently  the  code  is  maintained  for 
various  platforms  with  Unix  Interface:  Linux,  Compaq-
Unix, HP-Ux and Sun-Solaris. 

The  validity  of  the  physical  models  implemented  in 
FLUKA  has  been  benchmarked  against  a  variety  of 

 

2 

 

CHEP03, March 2003, La Jolla, California (USA) 

experimental  data  over  a  wide  energy  range,  from 
accelerator  data  to  cosmic  ray  showers  in  the  Earth 
amount  of 
atmosphere. 
benchmarking against muon, hadron and electron data in 
atmosphere [7-9] has confirmed the accuracy of FLUKA 
hadronic interaction models.  

In  particular, 

a  vast 

FLUKA  is  widely  used  for  studies  related  both  to 
basic research and to applications in radiation protection 
and dosimetry, radiobiology (including radiotherapy) and 
cosmic ray calculations. Two recent, important examples 
of  calculation  related  to  cosmic  rays  are  the  calculation 
of atmospheric neutrino fluxes [10] and the evaluation of 
aircraft exposure [9,11]. A modified version of the code 
has  been  purposely  developed  for  radiobiological 
studies,  mainly  for  applications  in  hadrontherapy  and 
space  radiation  protection.  More  specifically,  results  of 
track  structure  simulations  at  the  nanometre  level  have 
been  integrated  on-line  in  FLUKA,  thus  allowing 
calculation  of  "biological"  doses  (see  below).  The 
the 
integration  method 
characterisation of therapeutic proton beams [12,13] and 
to  the  calculation  of  organ  doses  in  case  of  exposure  to 
the  Solar  Particle  Event  component  of  space  radiation 
[14,15].  The  latter  has  been  performed  by  coupling  the 
a 
anthropomorphic 
code  with 
mathematical model and a voxel model. 

phantoms, 

applied 

been 

two 

has 

to 

2.  A SHORT HISTORY OF FLUKA 

The FLUKA code started being developed in 1962 by 
J. Ranft and H. Geibel, who initiated the code for hadron 
beams.  The  name  FLUKA 
(from  FLUktuierende 
KAscade)  came  eight  years  later,  since  at  that  time  the 
code was mainly used for applications concerning event-
to-event  fluctuations  in  calorimetry.  Between  1970  and 
1987 the development of the code was carried out in the 
framework  of  a  collaboration  between  CERN  and  the 
groups  of  Leipzig  and  Helsinki.  That  version  was 
essentially for shielding calculations.  

Since 1989 FLUKA is being  developed  within INFN 
(National Institute of Nuclear Physics) with the personal 
collaboration of A. Fassò (CERN) and J. Ranft (Leipzig). 
One  of  the  main  aims  is  developing  an  all-purpose, 
general  code  with  new  physics  models.  Presently  very 
little was left of the 1987 version.  

In  1990  MCNPX  officially  started  using  FLUKA  for 
its  high  energy  part.  In  1993  FLUKA  was  interfaced  to 
GEANT3 (for the hadronic part only). This interface did 
not  follow  the  subsequent  FLUKA  developments  and  it 
is therefore now obsolete.  

Since 2002 FLUKA is an INFN project, with the main 
aim  of  providing  a  better  diffusion  of  the  code  and 
stimulating  all  those  studies  that  can  be  of  interest  for 
applied  research,  with  focus  on  dosimetry,  medical 
physics  and,  more  generally,  radiobiology.  The  INFN 
project  is  carried  on  in  strict  collaboration  with  CERN 
and  the  University  of  Houston.  Further  information  can 
be found in the FLUKA web site (http://www.fluka.org). 

 
MOMT004 
 

Finally  it  is  worth  mentioning  that  in  2003  a  joint 
INFN-CERN  project  was  initiated,  with  the  aim  of 
developing,  maintaining  and  distributing  the  FLUKA 
code. 

3.  APPLICATIONS OF FLUKA 

3.1.  High Energy Applications 

Within the framework of high-energy physics studies, 
FLUKA  was  applied  to  the  prediction  of  calorimetric 
performances [16]. More specifically, the pion resolution 
expected  for  the  ICARUS  detector  was  calculated,  and 
predictions  relative  to  the  ATLAS  calorimeter  set-up 
were compared to experimental data.  

The ICARUS collaboration has developed a technique 
based on the fact that ionisation electrons can drift over 
long distances within a volume of purified liquid Argon 
under  a  strong  electric  field,  that  allows  obtaining  high 
quality  3-D  imaging.  Since  the  medium  appears  as  a 
completely homogeneous volume with very high readout 
granularity,  the  event  visualisation  and  the  local  charge 
deposition  density  allow  one  to  distinguish  between  the 
electromagnetic  and  the  hadronic  component  of  a 
shower,  as  well  as 
to  approximately  correct  for 
recombination effects. By assuming that each elementary 
cell contains only one crossing track, the recombination 
effect can be unfolded using the collected charge and the 
cell  width  to  construct  the  observed  dQ/dx,  and  solving 
the  recombination  expression  for  the  "actual"  dE/dx.  In 
order  to  reconstruct  the  energy,  assuming  that  the 
electromagnetic  contribution  Qem  can  be  distinguished 
from the hadronic contribution Qhad, the total energy E of 
a shower can be calculated as E=w(Qem + αQhad), where 
α  is  the  compensation  factor.  On  these  bases,  the 
expected  hadronic  resolution  for  pions  in  the  ICANOE 
detector  was  calculated  under  different  conditions  (with 
and  without  TMG  doping,  with 
and  without 
compensation, with and without quench corrections) and 
compared  with  the  one  that  would  be  obtained  with  no 
recombination effect. 
The  ATLAS 

hadronic 
electromagnetic 
calorimeter  have  been  tested  with  π,  µ  and  electron 
beams  from  10  to  300  GeV/c.  The  experimental  set  up 
was reproduced with FLUKA and the simulation results 
were compared with π and µ data, by applying the same 
cuts as in the experiments.  Charge collection and signal 
quenching were simulated, whereas electronic noise and 
photo-statistics  were 
included  a  posteriori.  Proton 
contamination  in  the  pion  beam  was  also  taken  into 
account.  The  results  obtained  with  FLUKA  were 
calibrated 
further 
normalisation.  The  visible  energy  E0  was  reconstructed 
with the "benchmark" technique:  

in  electron  scale  without  any 

and 

E0=Eem + aQhad + b|Eem3 a Qhad1|1/2 + cEem
All  parameters  were  fixed  to  minimise  σ/E0  at  300 
GeV. The parameter values predicted with FLUKA were 

2  

CHEP03, March 24-28, 2003, La Jolla, California (USA) 

3 

 
 
in very good agreement with the measured ones, and the 
non-compensation  as  a  function  of  energy  was  well 
reproduced.  The  fractional  energy  resolution  was  also 
calculated.  Although  the  constant  and  noise  terms  were 
slightly  underestimated,  the  sampling  term  was  well 
reproduced.  

3.2.  Cosmic Ray Applications 

FLUKA  has  been  successfully  applied  in  cosmic  ray 
physics  for  the  analysis  of  experimental  data  and  the 
calculation  of  secondary  particle  fluxes  in  atmosphere. 
Among  the  various  pieces  of  work  it  is  worth  while 
mentioning  the  first  successful  3-D  calculation  of 
atmospheric neutrino fluxes [17]. This task was initiated 
in the framework of the ICARUS [18] and MACRO [19] 
experiments at the INFN Gran Sasso laboratories.  

overall geometrical description of the 3-D setup are well 
under  control  [8].  The  same  work  showed  that  also  the 
fluxes  of  secondary  e+e-  measured  at  high  altitude  are 
well reproduced. The second is the good reproduction of 
muon data in atmosphere as measured by the CAPRICE 
experiment  [21],  both  at  ground  level  and  at  different 
floating  altitudes:  see  ref.  [7]  for  the  relevant  plots  and 
numbers.  The  agreement  shown  by 
the  FLUKA 
simulation  for  muons  of  both  charges  gives  confidence 
on  the  predictions  of  FLUKA  for  the  parent  mesons  of 
muons  (mostly  pions).  This  work  complements  the 
previously  mentioned  studies,  oriented  to  the  validation 
of the model in terms of particle yields. 

The  shower  simulations  in  atmosphere  with  FLUKA 
were compared also to the most recent hadron spectra at 
different  latitudes  and  altitudes,  obtaining  remarkable 
agreement, as for example in the case of the hadron flux 
measured  with 
the  KASCADE 
the  calorimeter  of 
experiment  [22].  Thanks  to  these  results,  the  hadronic 
part of FLUKA will be interfaced to the CORSIKA code 
[23] (widely used in high energy cosmic ray physics) as 
an  alternative  to  GHEISHA  for  the  interactions  below 
100 GeV. Concerning future developments, the inclusion 
of  the  DPMJET  model  for  ion  interaction  at  high 
energies  will  also  allow  to  fully  simulate  cosmic  ray 
interactions  up  to  1020  –  1021  eV.  As  a  complement  to 
this topic, we also can quote valuable simulations of the 
features  of  extensive  air  showers  [24]  and  also  of  the 
muon transport in the rock [25], which was an important 
step  for  the  data  analysis  of  underground  experiments 
like  MACRO,  also  to  understand  the  local  hadron 
production  by  muon  in  the  underground  environment 
thus  allowing  a  reliable  study  of  neutron 
[26], 
background  for  experiments  searching  for  rare  events 
and dark matter. 

The  results  described  above  provided  a  starting  basis 
for  applications  related  to  dosimetry  in  atmosphere, 
which will be described in the next section. 

3.3.  Dosimetry in atmosphere 

into 

Cosmic 

radiation  penetrating 

the  Earth's 
atmosphere  produces  a  very  complex  environment.  The 
largest  fraction  of  radiation  encountered  by  commercial 
jet  aircrafts  is  the  secondary  radiation  produced  when 
galactic  cosmic  rays  interact  with  the  nuclei  of  the  air 
constituents. Events caused by sporadic eruptions of the 
Sun chromosphere will occasionally result in unforeseen 
additional  contribution  to  the  radiation  field  (solar 
flares). According to the ICRP Publication 60 [27] and to 
the  national  laws  incorporating  the  new  European 
Directive  (96/29/Euratom),  the  exposure  of  air  crews  to 
cosmic radiation in jet aircrafts should be considered as 
an  occupational  exposure.  For  air  crew  whose  annual 
dose falls in the range 1-6 mSv individual dose estimates 
should  be  required.  For  flights  below  15  km  such 
estimates may be carried out using appropriate computer 
programs.  Particles  penetrating  the  atmosphere  generate 
a cascade consisting of the hadronic, the electron-photon 

 

 
 
Figure  1:  Calculated  atmospheric  muon  neutrino  plus 
antineutrino  flux,  angle  averaged  over  the  lower  Earth 
hemisphere  as  a  function  of  neutrino  energy.  The 
FLUKA calculation is compared to other models. 

 
One  of  the  main  merits  of  this  work  was  the 
stimulation  of  a  deep  check  of  the  quality  of  hadronic 
physics  modeling  and  of  its  impact  in  this  line  of 
phenomenological research. In connection to the topic of 
atmospheric  neutrino  fluxes,  the  FLUKA  interaction 
model  has  been  used  also  for  other  secondary  particles 
produced  in  atmosphere  by  cosmic  rays,  which  can  be 
used as a further cross check of the validity of the model. 
At least two remarkable results can be quoted. The first 
is the reproduction of the primary proton flux features as 
a function of geomagnetic latitude as measured by AMS 
[20], which showed that the geomagnetic effects and the 

 
MOMT004 

4 

 

CHEP03, March 2003, La Jolla, California (USA) 

and the muonic component. The intensities of the various 
components  are  predictable  with  the  exceptions  of  rare 
solar  events.  Dose  rates  vary  with  the  depth  in  the 
atmosphere, the geomagnetic latitude and, less markedly, 
with the phase of the solar cycle.  

To  determine  a  simple  procedure  for  a  realistic  dose 
assessment  at  aviation  altitudes,  calculations  of 
atmospheric  showers  initiated  by  galactic  cosmic  rays 
were carried out using FLUKA. Primary spectra used as 
inputs  in  the  calculations  corresponded  to  values  of  the 
deceleration  potential  Φ  of  465  and  1440  MV. 
Simulations  were  carried  out  for  several  values  of 
vertical  cut-off,  RV,  from  0.4  GV  to  17.6  GV.  Further 
calculations  were  performed  for  Φ  values  of  600,  800, 
1000  and  1200  MV,  but  only  for  vertical  cut-off  of  0.4 
isotropically 
and  3.0  GV.  Primary  particles  were 
generated at the top of the atmosphere with geomagnetic 
modulated  spectra.  The 
the  various 
components produced in air were determined at different 
depths  in  atmosphere  and  at  different  geomagnetic 
latitudes. The details can be found in [28,29]. 

fluences  of 

The  quantities  of  interest  in  radiological  protection, 
that is effective dose and ambient dose equivalent, were 
obtained  by  folding  the  calculated  particle  spectra  with 
appropriate  sets  of  conversion  coefficients  [30].  The 
geometrical conditions of irradiation were assumed to be 
isotropic.  As  an  example,  figure  2  shows  the  ambient 
dose  equivalent  rate  at  various  altitudes,  together  with 
the  contributions  of  the  individual  secondary  particles. 
Although  calculations  are  associated  with 
large 
uncertainties,  which  comes  from  different  sources 
(primary spectra, application of the superposition model 
etc.),  a  generally  satisfactory  agreement  was  found 
between the present calculation results and experimental 
data or results of other calculations. 

 

Simple  equations,  relating  the  effective  dose  to  the 
various  parameters  involved  (latitude,  altitude  and  solar 
cycle),  have  been  proposed  at  civil  aviation  altitudes 
[29,31]. The  use  of  the  proposed  equations  for  air  crew 
dose assessment requires information about flight routes 
and  altitude  profiles.  The  key  point  of  such  a  practical 
evaluation  method  is  the  fact  that  even  those  who  have 
not  access  to  sophisticated  computer  codes  should  be 
able to work out individual dose assessments.  

It is worth being noted that the proposed equations, as 
well  as  the  results  of  other  computer  codes,  do  not 
include  the  unpredictable  contributions  of  solar  particle 
events, as well as the effects due to the additional layers 
of  the  aircraft  structures.  In  order  to  evaluate  the 
influence of the aircraft  structures on the dose values,  a 
simplified geometry of an Airbus-340 was arranged. The 
model  is  constituted  by  144  FLUKA  regions  and  it 
includes  11  different  materials  to  describe  fuselage 
structure, fuel, passengers and cargo. The geometry was 
the  modification  of  some 
adjusted 
parameters (i.e. number of passengers, load etc.). Figure 
3  shows  a  view  of  the  transversal  and  longitudinal 
sections of the aircraft. 

to  allow  for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Sketch of the transversal and longitudinal 
sections of an Airbus-340 simulated with FLUKA. 

3.4.  Radiobiology Applications 

3.4.1.  Biophysical  characterisation  of 
therapeutic hadron beams 

ions) 

 
Tumor  treatment  with  hadrons  (mainly  protons,  but 
also  Carbon 
is  becoming  more  and  more 
widespread,  and  more  than  30,000  patients  have  been 
treated up to now. This is mainly due to the hadron beam 
capability  of  delivering  most  of  the  dose  within  a 
localized region called "Bragg peak", which allows for a 
better conformation of the dose distribution to the target 

Figure  2:  Ambient  dose  equivalent  rate  at  various 
altitudes.  The  contributions  of  various 
individual 
secondary particles are also shown. 

 
MOMT004 
 

CHEP03, March 24-28, 2003, La Jolla, California (USA) 

5 

 
 
volume.  However,  there  is  still  a  strong  need  for  an 
improved  characterisation  of  therapeutic  hadron  beams, 
both from a physical point of view and from a biological 
one.  In  particular  the  role  of  nuclear  reaction  products, 
which  can  have  higher  biological  effectiveness  with 
respect to the primary particles, needs to be evaluated at 
a quantitative level. Furthermore, average quantities such 
as  absorbed  dose,  LET  (Linear  Energy  Transfer)  and 
RBE (Relative Biological Effectiveness) do not take into 
account  the  stochastic  aspects  of  energy  deposition  in 
matter.  There  is  therefore  a  strong  need  for  the 
identification of new parameters able to provide a direct 
correlation  between  radiation  track  structure  at  the 
nanometre level and radiobiological effects. Clustered – 
and  thus  severe  –  DNA  damage  has  been  suggested  to 
play  a  fundamental  role  in  the  induction  of  cell  death 
[32],  as  well  as  other  endpoints  such  as  chromosome 
aberrations  [33],  which  are  correlated  both  with  cell 
radiotharapy)  and  with  cell 
death 
radiation 
conversion 
protection). In a previous work [34], “Complex Lesions” 
(CL)  have  been  defined  as  “at  least  2  breaks  in  each  of 
the  two  DNA  strands  within  30  base-pairs”.  CL  yields 
per  unit  dose  and  DNA  mass  have  been  calculated  for 
different radiation types and energies by coupling a DNA 
model  to  an  “event-by-event”  code  describing  energy 
deposition at the nanometre level.  

in 
to  malignancy 

(important 

(important 

in 

the 

the  apparatus  was 

integration  method  was  applied 

Since  event-by-event  simulations  at  a  tissue/organ 
times,  an 
level  would  require  unreasonable  CPU 
alternative  approach  was  adopted,  consisting  of 
integrating  CL  yields  in  the  condensed-history  FLUKA 
code.  This  allowed  us  to  calculate  not  only  depth-dose 
profiles, but also distributions of the average  number of 
CL/cell,  a  quantity  that  we  called  “biological”  dose.  In 
particular 
to 
characterize  the  72  MeV  proton  beam  used  for  the 
treatment  of  ocular  tumors  at  the  Paul  Sherrer  Institute, 
Switzerland  [12].  Ad  hoc  experiments  for  comparison 
were carried out at PSI: the therapeutic apparatus was set 
up  in  order  to  obtain  a  fully  Spread-Out  Bragg  Peak 
(SOBP) in a perspex phantom and the depth-dose profile 
was  measured,  as  well  as  survival  of  cells  irradiated  in 
vitro at different depths. In the simulations, the geometry 
of 
reproduced.  The 
modulation of the beam, obtained at PSI with Aluminum 
profiles mounted on a rotating wheel, was simulated with 
a dynamical approach consisting of random mapping of a 
single  profile  along  the  beam  axis.  This  allowed  us  to 
obtain a simulated Spread-Out Bragg Peak with a single 
run  of 
the  program.  The  depth-dose  distribution 
calculated  with  FLUKA  was  found  to  be  in  excellent 
agreement  with  that  measured  at PSI. The  contributions 
of 
the  various  beam  components  were  calculated 
separately.  The  secondary  hadron  component  accounted 
for less than 4% in most of the SOBP, and disappeared in 
its  distal  part.  In  contrast  with  the  physical  dose,  which 
was  roughly  constant  with  depth  throughout  the  SOBP, 
the  calculated  profile  of  the  "biological"  dose  (i.e. 
average  number  of  CL/cell)  showed  a  sharp  increase  at 
 
MOMT004 

faithfully 

the  distal  part  of  the  SOBP,  due  to  the  presence  of 
protons  with  low  energy  and  thus  high  biological 
effectiveness.  Furthermore,  nuclear  reaction  products 
were found to play a more relevant role, reaching values 
around 12% in the proximal part of the SOBP. Excellent 
agreement was also found by comparing the (calculated) 
ratio between proton-induced CL and X-ray-induced CL 
to  the  (measured)  ratio  between  proton-induced  lethal 
lesions  and  X-ray-induced  lethal  lesions.  The  RBE  was 
found to be 1.2 along most of the SOBP (except for the 
increase  in  the  the  distal  part),  consistent  with  the 
constant  value  of  1.1  used  in  therapeutic  practice  with 
proton beams.  

Similar results were found by generalising the method 
described  above  to  the  characterisation  of  a  160  MeV 
proton  beam,  modulated  in  order  to  obtain  a  typical 
SOBP  suitable  for  the  treatment  of  deep  solid  tumours 
[13].  The  calculated  depth-dose  profile  in  water  was 
found to be constant along the SOBP. Secondary hadrons 
accounted for ≈6% of the total dose at the beginning of 
the plateau, ≈3% in most of the SOBP and disappeared at 
the distal part of the SOBP. By contrast, the distribution 
of "biological" dose showed a sharp increase at the distal 
part of the peak and a higher role of secondary  hadrons 
(≈20%  at  the  beginning  of  the  plateau  and  ≈15%  in  the 
SOBP). A RBE of ≈1.2 was found both along the plateau 
and  in  most  of  the  SOBP,  with  a  sharp  increase  in  the 
distal  part  of  the  peak  due  to  low  energy  protons.  That 
the  RBE  was  constant  can  be  explained  by  taking  into 
account  that  the  slowing  down  of  protons,  which  gives 
rise to high-LET particles, is balanced by the progressive 
decrease  in  the  imporance  of  secondary  hadrons  along 
the plateau and the SOBP. 

 
 

3.4.2 Space Radiation Protection 
 

Missions onboard the International Space Station and 
a possible mission to Mars, which is in NASA's plans for 
the  first  half  of  our  century,  would  imply  exposure  to 
high-energy  protons  and  heavier  ions  constituting  the 
spectra  of  Galactic  Cosmic  Rays  and  Solar  Particle 
Events.  While  GCR  are  always  present  and  are 
characterised  by  a  maximum  fluence  rate  of  4  particles 
cm-2 s-1, SPE are sporadic and unpredictable events with 
fluences  up  1010  particles/cm2  within  a  few  hours  or 
days.  In  both  cases  there  is  a  strong  need  for  shielding 
optimisation,  a  problem  that  can  be  approached  with 
transport  codes  possibly  coupled  with  human  body 
models.  In  contrast  with  GCR,  for  which  ions  heavier 
than  protons  provide  a  fundamental  contribution  to  the 
equivalent dose, the proton component of SPE accounts 
for  ≈90%  not  only  of  the  physical  dose  but  also  of  the 
equivalent dose, and particles other than protons can be 
neglected in  most cases. In this context, distributions of 
physical,  equivalent  and  biological  dose  (in  Gy,  Sv  and 
CL/cell, respectively) in the various organs of the human 
body were calculated by coupling the FLUKA code with 

 

6 

 

CHEP03, March 2003, La Jolla, California (USA) 

two  anthropomorphic  phantoms  [15].  The  first  one  is  a 
mathematical  model  in  which  the  various  organs  are 
described with combinatorial geometry [35], whereas the 
second one is a "voxel" model described by more than 2 
million  voxels  derived  from  total  body  CT  data  of  a 
leukaemia  patient  [36].  No  significant  difference  was 
found  between  the  dose  values  calculated  with  the  two 
phantoms.  The  phantoms  were 
into  an 
Aluminium box representing  the  shielding  structure and 
were  irradiated  from  an  isotropically-emitting  sphere  of 
2 m radius, external with respect to the phantom and the 
box. The thickness of the box was fixed at 1 and 2 g/cm2 
(nominal spacesuit), 5 g/cm2 (nominal spacecraft) and 10 
and 20 g/cm2 (storm shelter to be used in case of SPE).  

inscribed 

Irradiation was performed with the proton component 
of the two most intense SPE of the last 50 years, that is 
the October 1989 event and the August 1972 event. The 
latter has been estimated to be lethal  for an unprotected 
crew on the Moon surface. The contributions of primary 
protons and secondary hadrons (including ions) produced 
in  nuclear  interactions  with  the  shield  and  the  human 
body  were  calculated  separately.  All  types  of  dose 
(physical,  equivalent  and  biological)  were  found  to 
decrease  with  increasing  shielding  and  the  highest  dose 
values  were  found  for  the  skin.  With  the  lowest 
shielding,  the  skin  was  found  to  receive  2.4  Gy,  3.5  Sv 
and  1.5  CL/cell  for  the  1989  event,  and  7  Gy,  11.5  Sv 
and  4.4  CL/cell  for  the  1972  event,  which  was  more 
effective  due  to  the  higher  fluence  in  the  energy  range 
20-200 MeV. While for the 1989 event 5 g/cm2 Al were 
sufficient  to  respect  the  NCRP  limits  for  30  days 
missions  in  Low  Earth  Orbit  (1.5  Gy-Eq  for  skin  and  1 
Gy-Eq for eye lenses, [37]), for the 1972 event 10 g/cm2 
were  needed.  The  contribution  of  secondary  hadrons  to 
the physical dose was found to be smaller than 10% for 
all  organs/tissues  and  for  all  the  considered  values  of 
shielding thickness, except for some internal organs such 
as  liver.  As  a  general  trend,  the  relative  contribution  of 
secondary  particles  was  higher  for  internal  organs  with 
respect  to  skin  and  lenses,  and  increased  with  shielding 
thickness for a given organ or tissue. Similar trends (dose 
and  higher 
decrease  with 
contribution of secondaries for the internal organs) were 
found  for 
the  biological  dose.  However,  from  a 
quantitative point of view the role of nuclear interaction 
products  was  found to be  higher  for the biological dose 
the  physical  dose.  The  highest 
with 
contributions were found for internal organs behind large 
shielding  (e.g.  30%  contribution  for  liver  behind  10 
g/cm2 Al shielding in case of the 1989 event). 

increasing 

shielding 

respect 

to 

The  role  of  nuclear  reaction  products  is  expected  to 
become more important at higher energies and/or higher 
Z  values.  A  preliminary 
test  performed  with  a 
monochromatic  high-energy  proton  beam  (500  MeV) 
confirmed this hypothesis, showing that the contributions 
of  secondary  hadrons  to  the  biological  dose  was  even 
larger  than  that  of  primary  protons  [14].  The  scenario 
will become even more complex when we will simulate 
 
MOMT004 
 

the exposure to GCR spectra, for which heavier ions up 
to  Fe  play  a  relevant  role.  The  simulation  of  GCR 
exposure,  as  well  as  the  characterization  of  therapeutic 
ion beams (tipically Carbon), is now possible due to the 
recent  implementation  in  FLUKA  of  nucleus-nucleus 
interactions below 5 GeV/n [4]. 

4.  THE FLUKA SERVER 

A  major  goal  of  the  INFN  FLUKA  project  is  the 
dissemination  of  FLUKA  and  its  evolution  towards  a 
better documented and relatively user-friendly code. For 
this purpose a fluka.org dominion was created, installing 
a server that is supported by the Italian scientific network 
(GARR) using the INFN network structure. By accessing 
the  web  server  (http://www.fluka.org)  it  is  possible  to 
the  FLUKA  code  upon  registration.  At 
download 
present, the users can access the FLUKA library, the user 
routine  sources,  the  cross  section  data  files  (in  binary 
form) and the essential scripts and tools for compilation, 
run  and  analysis,  for  RedHat  Linux  and  different  Unix 
platforms.  In  the  future,  according  to  the  milestones  of 
the  INFN  project  and  also  to  a  recent  CERN-INFN 
agreement  for  the  development  of  FLUKA,  the  full 
source code will be accessible, under a suitable licensing 
scheme  that  is  under  study.  The  FLUKA  web  page  is 
also  providing  access  to  the  present  version  of  the 
manual,  which  is  still  in  evolution  towards  an  html 
format, together with the possibility of having it as a pdf 
file. Furthermore, the web page is now used to provide a 
number  of  documented  examples  (evolving  in  time) 
which  help 
the  practical 
utilisation  of  FLUKA,  paying  attention  to  the  user 
requests received so far. 

to  understand 

the  users 

A  FLUKA  discussion  list  is  also  served  and  its 
archive  is  accessible  from  the  web  page,  in  order  to 
provide  a  FAQ  service.  FLUKA  history  and  references 
are  also  available.  A  series  of  FLUKA  instruction 
courses is under study, with the possibility of providing, 
again  through  the  web  server,  video  recordings  of  the 
main lectures. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was partially supported by the EC (contract 
no. FIGH-CT1999-00005, 'Low Dose Risk Models') and 
by  the  Italian  Space  Agency  (contract  no.  I/R/320/02, 
'Influence  of  the  shielding  on  the  space  radiation 
biological effectiveness'). 

References 

[1]  A.  Fassò,  A.  Ferrari,  J.  Ranft,  P.R.  Sala, 
"FLUKA:  Status  and  Prospective  for  Hadronic 
Applications",  Proceedings  of  the  MonteCarlo 
2000 Conference, Lisbon, October 23-26 2000, 
edited by A. Kling, F. Barao, M. Nakagawa, L. 
Tavora  and  P.  Vaz,  pp.  955-960,  Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 2001. 

CHEP03, March 24-28, 2003, La Jolla, California (USA) 

7 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

in 

transport 

FLUKA: 

[2]  A.  Fassò,  A.  Ferrari,  P.R.  Sala,  "Electron-
Status", 
photon 
Proceedings 
2000 
Conference, Lisbon, October 23-26 2000, edited 
by A. Kling, F. Barao, M. Nakagawa, L. Tavora 
and  P.  Vaz,  pp.  159-164,  Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin, 2001. 

the  MonteCarlo 

of 

[3]  A.  Ferrari,  P.R.  Sala,  "Nuclear  reactions  in 
Monte Carlo codes", Radiat. Protec. Dosim. 99, 
29-38, 2002. 

[4]  V.  Andersen,  F.  Ballarini,  G.  Battistoni,  M. 
Campanella,  M.  Carboni,  F.  Cerutti,  A.  Empl, 
A. Fassò, A. Ferrari, E. Gadioli, M.V. Garzelli, 
K.  Lee,  A.  Ottolenghi,  M.  Pelliccioni,  L.S. 
Pinsky,  J.  Ranft,  S.  Roesler,  P.R.  Sala,  T.L. 
Wilson, 
space 
applications: recent developments", Adv. Space 
Res., in press, 2003. 

"The  FLUKA 

code 

for 

[5]  International  Commission  of  Radiation  Units 
and Measurements, ICRU Report no. 37 (1984) 
and ICRU Report no. 49 (1993), edited by M.J. 
Berger  and  S.M.  Seltzer,  National  Bureau  of 
Standards, Report NBSIR 82-2550-A, 1983. 

[6]  H.  Sorge,  H.  Stocker,  W.  Greiner,  "Poincaré 
Invariant  Hamiltonian  Dynamics:  modelling 
multi-hadronic  interactions  in  a  phase  space 
approach", Ann. of Phys. 192, 266-306, 1989. 

[7]  G.  Battistoni,  A.  Ferrari,  T.  Montaruli,  P.R. 
Sala,  "Comparison  of  the  FLUKA  calculations 
with  CAPRICE94 
in 
atmosphere",  Astropart.  Phys.  17,  477-488, 
2002. 

on  muons 

data 

[8]  P.  Zuccon,  B.  Bertucci,  B.  Alpat  et  al.,  "A 
MonteCarlo  simulation  of  the  interaction  of 
cosmic  rays  with  the  atmosphere",  Report 
CERN-OPEN-2001-068, 2001. 

[9]  S.  Roesler,  W.  Heinrigh  H.  Schraube,  "Monte 
Carlo  calculation  of  the  radiation  field  at 
aircraft  altitudes",  Radiat.  Protec.  Dosim.  98, 
367-388, 2002. 

[10] G.  Battistoni,  A.  Ferrari,  P.  Lipari,  T. 
Montaruli,  P.R.  Sala,  T.  Rancati,  "A  3-
Dimensional  calculation  of  the  atmospheric 
neutrino  fluxes",  Astropart.  Phys.  12,  315-333, 
2000. 

[11] A.  Ferrari,  M.  Pelliccioni,  T.  Rancati, 
the  Radiation  Environment 
"Calculation  of 
Caused  by  Galactic  Cosmic  Rays 
for 
Determining  Air  Crew  Exposure",  Radiat. 
Protec. Dosim. 93, 101-114, 2001. 

 
MOMT004 

 

 

 

 

 
[12] M.  Biaggi,  F.  Ballarini,  W.  Burkard,  E.  Egger, 
A.  Ferrari,  A.  Ottolenghi,  "Physical  and 
biophysical characteristics of a fully modulated 
72  MeV 
therapeutic  proton  beam:  model 
predictions and experimental data", Nucl. Instr. 
Meth. B 159, 89-100, 1999. 

[13] M.  Biaggi,  F.  Ballarini,  W.  Burkard,  E.  Egger, 
A.  Ferrari,  A.  Ottolenghi,  D.  Scannicchio, 
"Applications  and  possible  generalisations  of  a 
the  OPTIS  facility,  for 
method 
analysing 
radiobiological 
properties  of  therapeutic  proton  beams",  Phys. 
Medica 17, 63-66, 2001. 

tested  at 

physical 

and 

[14] F.  Ballarini,  M.  Biaggi,  A.  Ferrari,  A. 
Ottolenghi,  M.  Pelliccioni,  D.  Scannicchio, 
"Modelling 
influence  of  shielding  on 
physical and biological organ doses", J. Radiat. 
Res. 43, 99-102, 2002. 

the 

 
[15]  F.  Ballarini,  M.  Biaggi,  L.  De  Biaggi,  A. 
Ferrari,  A.  Ottolenghi,  A.  Panzarasa,  H.G. 
Paretzke,  M.  Pelliccioni,  P.  Sala,  D. 
Scannicchio,  M.  Zankl,  "Role  of  shielding  in 
modulating the effects of Solar Particle Events: 
Monte  Carlo  calculation  of  physical  and 
organs", 
different 
in 
dose 
“biological” 
submitted to Adv. Space Res., 2003. 

[16]  A.  Ferrari,  P.R.  Sala,  "Physics  processes  in 
hadronic  showers",  Frascati  Physics  Series, 
2001. 

[17] G.  Battistoni,  A.  Ferrari,  T.  Montaruli,  P.R. 

Sala, Astropart. Phys. 19, 269, 2003. 

[18] P.  Cennini  et  al.  (ICARUS  coll.)  ICARUS  II, 
Experiment proposal Vol. I \& II, LNGS-94/99-
I\&II. 

[19] M.  Ambrosio,  R.  Antolini,  A.  Baldini  et  al. 
(MACRO  Coll.),  Phys.  Lett.  B434,  451,  hep-
ex/9807005, 1998. 

[20] J.  Alcaraz,  B.  Alpat,  G.  Ambrosi  et  al.  (AMS 
Collaboration), "Cosmic Protons", Phys. Lett. B 
490, 27, 2000. 

[21] M.  Boezio,  P.  Carlson,  T.  Francke  et  al. 
(CAPRICE  Collaboration),  Phys.  Rev.  D62 
032007, 2000. 

[22] H.  Kornmayer,  H.H.  Mielke,  J.  Engler,  J. 
Knapp, Journ. Phys. G21, 439-450, 1995. 
[23] D.  Heck,  G.  Schatz,  T.  Thouw,  J.  Knapp,  J.N. 
Capdevielle, 
6019 
Report 
(Forshungszentrum  Karlsruhe),  http://www-
ik.fzk.de/~heck/corsika 

FZKA 

[24] G. Battistoni, A. Ferrari, M. Carboni, V. Patera, 

Astoparticle Physics 9 277, 1998. 

 

8 

CHEP03, March 2003, La Jolla, California (USA) 

 
[25] G.  Battistoni,  A.  Ferrari,  C.  Forti,  E. 
Scapparone,  Nucl.  Instr.  &  Meth.  A394  136, 
1997. 

[26] G.  Battistoni,  A.  Ferrari,  E.  Scapparone,  Nucl. 

Phys. Proc. Suppl. 70, 480, 1999. 

[27] International  Commission  on  Radiological 
Protection,  "1990  Recommendations  of  the 
International  Commission  on  Radiological 
Protection",  ICRP  Publication  60,  Annals  of 
ICRP 21(1-3), 1991. 

the  Quantities  Used 

[28] A. Ferrari, M. Pelliccioni, T. Rancati, "The Role 
of 
in  Radiological 
Protection  for  the  Assessment  of  the  Exposure 
to  Cosmic  Radiation",  Radiat.  Protec.  Dosim. 
83(3), 199-210, 1999. 

[29] A.  Ferrari,  M.  Pelliccioni,  T.  Rancati, 
"Calculation  of  the  Radiation  Environment 
for 
Caused  by  Galactic  Cosmic  Rays 
Determining  Air  Crew  Exposure",  Radiat. 
Protec. Dosim. 93, 101-114, 2001. 

[30] M.  Pelliccioni,  "Overview  of  Fluence-to-
Effective  Dose  and  Fluence-to-Ambient  Dose 
Equivalent  Conversion  Coefficients  for  High-
Energy Radiation Calculated Using the FLUKA 
Code",  Radiat.  Protec.  Dosim.  88,  279-298, 
2000. 

[31] A.  Ferrari,  M.  Pelliccioni,  T.  Rancati,  "A 
Method  Applicable  to  Effective  Dose  Rate 

Estimates  for  Aircrew  Dosimetry",  Radiat. 
Protec. Dosim. 96, 219-222, 2001. 

[32] Ottolenghi,  F.  Monforti,  M.  Merzagora,  "A 
Monte Carlo calculation of cell inactivation by 
light  ions",  Int.  J.  Radiat.  Biol.  72,  505-513, 
1997. 

[33] F.  Ballarini,  A.  Ottolenghi,  "Chromosome 
aberrations as biomarkers of radiation exposure: 
modelling basic mechanisms", Adv. Space Res. 
31(6), 1557, 2003. 

[34] A.  Ottolenghi,  M.  Merzagora,  L.  Tallone,  M. 
Durante,  H.G.  Paretzke,  W.E.  Wilson,  "The 
quality  of  DNA  double-strand  breaks:  a  Monte 
Carlo  simulation  of  the  end-structure  of  strand 
breaks  produced  by  protons  and  alpha 
particles",  Radiat.  Environ.  Biophys.  34,  239-
244, 1995. 

[35] M. Pelliccioni, M. Pillon, "Comparison between 
anthropomorphic  mathematical  phantoms  using 
MCNP  and  FLUKA  codes",  Radiat.  Protec. 
Dosim. 67, 253-256, 1996. 

[36] M. Zankl, A. Wittmann, "The adult male voxel 
model  "Golem"  segmented  from  whole-body 
CT  patient  data",  Radiat.  Environ.  Biophys  40, 
153-162, 2001. 

[37] National  Council  on  Radiation  Protection  and 
Measurements,  "Recommendations  of  Dose 
Limits for Low Earth Orbit", NCRP Report 132, 
edited by NCRP, Bethesda, MD., 2000. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
MOMT004 
 

