The Flex-Pendulum -- Basis for an Improved Timepiece
 
Randall D. Peters
Department of Physics
Mercer University
Macon, Georgia

ABSTRACT
A compound pendulum of simple geometry was built from a lightweight rod to which a pair of
masses are clamped, one above and the other below the axis of rotation. By making the position
of the upper mass variable, it was found that the characteristics of this pendulum can be altered
dramatically.  A theoretical model of the instrument is presented, which is in reasonable
agreement with experimental observations.  From the model it is shown that isochronism of the
flex-pendulum can be significantly greater than that of the simple pendulum

INTRODUCTION

It is well known, that early in the history of the pendulum, Huygens invented a method to

reduce the effect on the period, due to the nonlinear influence of gravitational restoration.  In his
technique, the length of the pendulum was made to be a function of position, by means of
cycloidal constraints.  

The present studies show that the motion of a compound pendulum can be significantly

influenced by nonlinearity associated with elastic flexure.  Although the model presented was
first used to describe energy dissipation [1], it also predicts interesting non-dissipative behavior.
For example, improved isochronism can be realized by carefully tailoring the flexure of the rod.  

Photographs and a detailed description of the instrument and its sensor are provided in

SYSTEM

[2]. 

Theoretical Model

The pendulum was modelled as two point masses separated from each other on a

massless rod by a  distance 2L, as shown in Fig. 1. 

Figure 1.  Illustration of flexure in the compound pendulum.

With the center of mass located a distance ∆L below the geometric center of the instrument, the
equation of motion is

θ
&&
1

+

1(

+

sin)

θ

1

−

1(

−

sin)

θ

2

=

0

 

.

(1)

g
2
L

L
∆
L

g
2
L

L
∆
L

where 

θ

2

=

ηθ
+
1

    
    
,
η

=

c

(
θ

cos

δ

−

1

sin

δ

   ,  )

ω

=

g

.

(2)

θ
&
1
ω

L
∆
2
L

Here, the constant c, which is quintessential to present arguments, is related to the elastic
constants of the rod supporting the masses.  The angular frequency specified in Eq. 2 is valid for c
= 1, in the limit as the maximum value of θ1 << 1; i.e., small amplitudes of the motion.  As first
developed in [1], equations 1 and 2 were concerned with small amplitudes of the motion, so that
the sine of the angle was replaced by the angle.  As such, they were then used to build the
modified Coulomb damping model of hysteretic (internal friction) developed there.  

For the present work, we are not primarily concerned with the damping constant δ.  We
will be focusing on the elastic properties of the pendulum as determined by c.  We will see that 
the use of  c >1 plus nonlinear (sine) terms can result in diverse pendulum behavior.  For c = 1,
usual simple pendulum behavior is generated; which at low levels corresponds to simple

harmonic motion.  For large enough c, otherwise near-harmonic motion is converted to that of the
Duffing oscillator.  Before arriving at a place where the single-well potential converts to the
double-well of the duffing oscillator, elasticity is cause for an amplitude dependence to the period
that is oppositely trended to that of the simple pendulum.  In principle then, a proper selection for
the value of c, relative to other pendulum parameters, could result in an improved timepiece. 
In spite of its ingenuity, Huygens' technique did not apparently find wide application

among clockmakers.  For whatever similar or dissimilar reasons that may exist, the present
method is also not expected to be significant to precision clock technology, since there the
pendulum has been replaced by quartz and atomic oscillators.  

Consideration of the method is important for a different reason.  As shown in [2], the

long-period compound pendulum is ideally suited to the study of largely unknown, but important
internal friction processes--ones that influence the motion of every pendulum.   A complete
understanding of hysteretic friction requires a complete understanding of the non-dissipative
restoration properties of the instrument used to study it.  It is felt that this pendulum is a useful
pedagogical tool to increase our awareness of the importance of nonlinear damping. 

Simulation Results -- Emphasis on Elastic properties

Because the equations are nonlinear, we resort to numerical integration to investigate the
properties of this pendulum.  To do so, the equations were first rewritten as a coupled pair of first
order expressions, as is customary because roundoff errors are then reduced.  

Shown in Fig. 4 is the trivial case for c = 1.

Figure 2.  Example of oscillation for an assumed rigid pendulum. 

In the limit of small motion, the period for the Fig. 2 case would be 6.347 s.  It is initially
larger than this by 4% (for the initial amplitude of 0.8 rad).  

For all of the theoretical graphs provided, damping is provided by a simpler
(though less realistic) means than what is indicated in Eq. 2.  Damping is accomplished in
the common manner, by multiplying by a constant (0.1) the first derivative of θ1   (angular
velocity) where it occurs in the equation of motion.  For the total pendulum length of 2L = 1 m,
the Q of the pendulum in the small amplitude limit, with c = 1, is therefore given by [1960
∆L/L]1/2.   (The reader less familiar with the use of Q instead of 'β' in the equation of the simple
harmonic oscillator is referred to [2]. )

As the constant c is increased above 1 of the rigid case, there are interesting

consequences.  First of all, flexure causes 'softening' of the pendulum at all frequencies; i.e., the
period of the pendulum is generally lengthened.  Additionally, however (and most interesting)
there is an amplitude dependence of the softening, that will be discussed later in the context of
improving isochronism.  The softening effect is illustrated in Fig. 3, which shows period increase
for c = 1.02 as compared to the rigid pendulum.  For the indicated parameters, a 2% flexure has
caused a 12% reduction in the frequency.  

Figure 3.  Illustration of 'softening' as the result of flexure.

Notice how the initial in-phase condition is quickly lost -- phase reversal after 3 to 4 cycles, and
then after 8.5 cycles the two oscillations are back in phase again.  

We now look at the Duffing extreme of large c, illustrated in Fig. 4.

Figure 4.  An increase of c from 1.10 to 1.11 causes the single-well, anharmonic potential to
convert to a double-well of the Duffing type.  

Notice from Fig. 4, that the case of c = 1.11, with initial positive displacement, winds up in a
different potential well than that of initial negative displacement. 

The sensitive dependence on initial (SDI) conditions that is characteristic of the Duffing
oscillator is illustrated in Fig. 5, where the initial displacements are almost the same, but the final
outcomes are largely different.

Figure 5.  Illustration of SDI that is characteristic of the Duffing oscillator. 

It is instructive to consider the manner in which the potential well changes shape as a function of
c, in the vicinity of the critical value (1.106), where conversion to the Duffing oscillator occurs.
This is shown in Fig. 6.

Figure 6.  Variations in shape of the potential energy as a function of the flex-constant c.  

Tailoring for Improved Isochronism

It was assumed that partial compensation for the change of period with amplitude of the

simple pendulum might be realized for some configurations of the flex-pendulum--if its softening
character should have the 'proper' amplitude dependence.  Fig. 7 shows that the direction of the
change is in support of the premise.  Relative to its value at the start of the decay, the period is

seen to have lengthened by a factor of about 2 by the end of the record.

Figure 7.  Flexure causing an amplitude trend for the period that is opposite to that of the
simple pendulum. 

From Fig. 7 it was noted that flexures smaller than 10% would most likely be required of any
case of serious compensation.  An analytical estimate for the optimum value of c was not deemed
feasible; so a trial and error search for compensation was initiated, using using the computer.

A fixed frequency reference harmonic oscillation was generated, by integrating the

simple harmonic oscillator equation of motion.  The frequency of this reference was chosen to
match the pendulum frequency, for a given value of c, when the pendulum amplitude was set to a
small value.  For all comparisons, the damping was turned off, and the simulated pendulum
oscillation was used with the reference oscillation to produce a Lissajous figure on the monitor of
the computer.  

For the family of results associated with a given value of c, the following procedure was

then used.  With small amplitude synchronization confirmed, the amplitude of the pendulum's
oscillation was increased in steps upward.  From the time required for a beat between the
pendulum and the reference (observed by periodically refreshing the figure on the monitor), the
frequency difference was calculated.  This was done by multiplying the number of cycles per
display (typically n = 19) by the number of refreshes required for a complete beat (N).  Thus the
percentage deviation in the period of the pendulum from the reference was obtained by

  %

  
dev.
=

   

    

100
nN

Results for one value of c are are indicated in Fig. 8.

Figure 8.  Example of improved isochronism for the parameters indicated.  

The reference period of oscillation for the case of Fig. 8 is 5.442 s.  At an amplitude of 1.5 rad the
period of the uncompensated pendulum would increase about 15 %.  The increase for the flex-
compensated pendulum at this same amplitude is more than two orders of magnitude smaller. For
this specifically tailored flex-pendulum--we see that, for motion limited to +π/2, any dependence
on amplitude of the period is virtually undetectable!.  

SUPPORTING OBSERVATIONS FROM EXPERIMENT

A full experimental validation of the proposed method to build a highly compensated

flex-pendulum has not yet been attempted.  Just as the theory used to generate Fig. 8 has required
numerous trial and error computer runs, so building an actual pendulum with the spectacular
properties of Fig. 8, could be very time consuming under the best of conditions.  With less
favorable conditions, fabrication of the mechanical structure could require expertise that is not
possessed by, or readily available to the author. 

What was done experimentally is to show that the pendulum behaves in a manner

consistent with some of the figures that are preliminary to the final result of Fig. 8.  For each of
the cases that follows, two lead masses were used--one (993 g) adjustable-in-position, and
clamped above the axis, and the other (711 g) fixed-position, and clamped at the bottom of the
pendulum rod (40cm below the axis).  

Illustration of the Need for Compensation 

To illustrate the usual amplitude dependence of the pendulum, the upper mass was located 17 cm
above the axis to generate the data shown in Figure 9.  Extra air damping was provided (to show
the effect in a shorter time) by taping a floppy disc to the rod just above the bottom weight.  

Figure 10.  Illustration of non-isochronism in the near-rigid pendulum.

Displayed in Fig. 10 are two traces: (i) the pendulum decay (black), and (ii) the difference
(residuals) between the pendulum motion and a damped sinusoid that was computer fitted to the
data (red).  The frequency and phase of the computer generated fit were selected to give small
residuals in the latter part of the decay, where the motion is more nearly isocrhronous.  At the
start of the record, the pendulum and the reference sinusoid are 180 degrees out of phase, because
of the large amplitude (0.39 rad).  The change in phase over the first 300 s is consistent with the
uncompensated (simple) pendulum curve of Fig. 8.  

Duffing Case

Shown in Fig. 11 is a Duffing case, which was obtained by moving the upper mass to a point 27
cm above the axis.  

Figure 11.  An example of different initial displacements yielding different final equilibrium
positions.  

The Duffing character is illustrated by starting the pendulum at different initial displacements, the
velocity there being zero each time.  For the sensor calibration constant of 3.85 V, the first start
was at 0.44 rad (25 degrees); and the second was at 0.32 (19 degrees).  The ultimate final
'attractor' is different for the two cases in a manner consistent with Fig. 5.  Actual demonstration
of SDI with the pendulum is more difficult experimentally than theoretically because of creep--
which at these long periods is not ignorable.  

In Fig. 12 it is seen that the pendulum can be configured so that the period lengthens

significantly as the amplitude decreases.  It was obtained by lowering the upper mass slightly as
compared to the Duffing case. 

Fig. 12.  Illustration of period vs amplitude variation in the flex-pendulum.   The trend is
opposite to that of a rigid pendulum.

CONCLUSIONS

Although the experimental results only demonstrate feasibility, they are important

because of their good agreement with theory for the cases considered.  It is therefore reasonable
to expect that the flex-pendulum can be configured to be much more isochronous than the simple
pendulum. 

REFERENCES

(1) R. Peters, "Model of internal friction damping in solids" (2002), online at
http://arxiv.org/html/physics/0210121.
(2) R. Peters, "Nonlinear damping of the 'linear' pendulum", (2003), online at
http://arXiv.org/pdf/physics/0306081.

