Acoustic ‘distributed source’ mixing of smallest fluid
volumes

A. Rathgeber, M. Wassermeier
Advalytix AG, Brunnthal, Germany
and
A. Wixforth
Experimentalphysik I, University of Augsburg, Augsburg Germany

(submitted: JUNE 10, 2003)

Acoustically  driven  mixing  of  small  fluid  volumes  is
reported. Using surface acoustic waves on a mixer chip,
conversion of those into bulk waves, and employing wave
guiding  effects  enables  us  to  distribute  a  set  of
"virtual  sources"  for  acoustic  streaming  over  large
areas.  we  demonstrate  the  applicability  of  our  mixing
technique  to  micro  array  applications,  for  mixing  of
individual  wells  in  a  micro  titer  plate,  and  other
state-of-the-art hybridization assays.

Mixing of smallest amounts of fluids is usually a delicate task.
For  liquids  being  confined  to  small  volumes,  the  low  Reynold’s
number  [1]  is  equivalent  to  an  increase  of  the  apparent
viscosity.  As  for  mixing  applications  turbulent  streaming  which
only  occurs  at  high  Reynold’s  numbers  (>2000)  is  advantageous
[1],  this  in  turn  leads  to  insufficient  mixing  in  microfluidic
systems, as only laminar flow processes are allowed.
Hence, the only way for small fluid volumes to effectively mix is
driven  by  diffusion.  Here,  the  smallness  of  the  system  is  in
favour  of  the  diffusion  limited  time  scales,  as  the  respective
length scales are equally small. However, for many applications,
especially  micro  array  based  assays  [2],  [3],  a  deliberate  and
controlled agitation of the fluid under investigation would be of
great importance. This is due to the fact that diffusion driven
mixing  is  effective  only  on  a  short  range.  Micro  array
hybridization,  however,  demands  for  transport  molecules  in  the
fluid over large distances. Here, agitation is necessary.
In  micro  array  applications,  usually  hundreds  or  thousands  of
‚spots‘  containing  a  specific  DNA  sequence  or  more  generally  a
specific  oligonucleotide  are  deposited  in  a  matrix  like  manner,
usually on a microscope slide or similar carrier.

Sample  fluid  containing  for  instance  unknown  sample
oligonucliotides  of  unknown  concentration  is  then  spread  across
this  micro  array  and  brought  to  hybridization  conditions.  This
usually  means  elevated  temperatures  and  controlled  athmospheric
conditions to prevent the evaporation of the precious sample. To
save sample volume or to avoid unnecessary high dilution, usually
very  small  sample  volumes  are  created  by  spreading  the  sample
across  the  micro  array  employing  a  narrow  capillary  slot.  This
capillary slot is then defined by a cover glass located on top of
the micro array at a defined distance provided by an appropriate
spacer material.
In Fig. 1, we depict such a typical arrangement consistsing of a
microarray (a), the cover slide (b), and the sample fluid (c) in
between.

(b)

(c)

(a)

Fig.  1  :  Schematic  of  a  microarray  hybridization  setup  as
described  in  the  text.  An  array  of  functionalized  spots
(indicated  by  the  small  black  rectangles)  containing  target
molecules  is  deposited  on  a  slide  (a).    A  thin  fluid  layer  (c)
containing  the  sample  molecules  is  spread  over  the  spotted  area
of the microarray. A cover slide (b) is used to define the height
of the fluid layer and to confine the sample volume.

The  substrate,  containing  a  large  number  of  spots  defines  the
container  for  the  target  mollecules.  A  thin  (approx.  50..100
microns) layer of buffer solution containing the probe molecules
is  covering  the  spotted  area,  and  a  thin  cover  slide  on  top  of
the  liquid  film  defines  the  closed  volume  of  the  assay  under
consideration.
A quite straight forward way of sample agitation is followed by
external pumping.  Here, thin tubes or channels are connected to
the  substrate  slide,  for  example,  and  either  continous  or  pulse
mode pumping to the liquid is used to agitate the fluid and hence
the  sample  molecules  to  increase  the  speed  of  hybridization.
Other  attempts  rely  on  a  (periodic)  movement  of  the  substrate
slide  with  respect  to  the  cover  lid,  hence  aiming  towards  a

periodic movement of the taret spots with respect to the sample
solution.  However,  both  attemps,  as  well  as  similar  approaches
still do not overcome the ‚problem‘ of the laminar flow  in such
thin liquid films. Moreover, external pumping induces an unwanted
‚dead volume‘ to the process, as some liquid containing precious
sample is residing in the external pumping unit or tubes without
participating to the hybridization process.
Recently, we have applied the idea of acoustic streaming [4] to
the  microarray  hybridization  process  [5],  [6].  Instead  of  using
external  pumps  or  complicated  schemes  to  move  the  spotted  slide
against the liquid and the cover lid, the ‚pumps‘ are part of the
experiment,  being  in  direct  contact  to  the  sample  fluid  under
consideration.  Here,  we  use  surface  acoustic  waves  (SAW),  being
generated on a mixer chip, to effectively radiate acoustic energy
into  the  sample.  SAW  are  excited  using  so-called  interdigital
transducers  [7]  on  a  piezoelectric  substrate.  In  Fig.  2,  we
schematically show this energy transfer process from a SAW to a
liquid layer on top of the substrate.

Fig. 2 : Schematic representation of the energy transfer between
a  SAW  and  a  fluid  layer  on  top  of  the  substrate.  A  Surface
acoustic wave is excited using an interdigital transducer (left)
and  radiates  energy  into  the  fluid.  Phase  matching  conditions
require  the  radiation  under  an  angle  _  with  respect  to  the
surface of the substrate.

In our case, the substrate is a LiNbO3 chip, being glued into a
glass  slide  acting  as  the  cover  lid  in  a  hybridization
experiment. Special fluidic arrangement like small filling holes

and surface functionalization of this ‚mixer card‘ [5],[6] allows
for  a  defined  and  deliberate  filling  of  the  gap  between
microarray and cover slide without inducing any dead volume. The
height of the gap and hence the volume used in the experiment is
defind by, e.g., flat spacers being attached to the mixer card.
The  SAW  is  excited  on  the  mixer  card  by  application  of  a  high
frequency  signal  (approx.  150  MHz)  to  the  transducers  on  the
chip.  Different  transducers  operating  at  slightly  different
frequencies  can  be  addressed  electronically  to  excite  different
SAW  at  different  locations  of  the  chip,  and  hence  creating
different sources for the acoustic streaming in the fluid above.

It can be shown that the absorption of acoustic energy from the
SAW to the liquid is very efficient by coupling to longitudinal
pressure waves in the liquid. As the sound velocity in the fluid
is usually much different from the one in the solid carrying the
SAW,  phase  matching  conditions  require  radiation  of  the  Sound
wave in the fluid under an angle with respect to the plane of the
mixer card and the micro array substrate respectively. This angle
is given by a refraction law, and hence by the ratio of the sound
velocities in the fluid and the substrate, respectively. However,
as the SAW power is strongly absorbed by the fluid,  the sources
for  the  acoustically  induced  streaming  within  the  fluid  are
localized  either  to  the  source  of  the  SAW  itself  (the  IDT,  for
example),  or  to  the  three  phase  boundary,  where  the  SAW  on  a
solid  substrate    enters  the  fluid  (see  Fig.  2,  right).  The
arising  total  flow  pattern  is  hence  governed  both  by  a  local
actuation and viscous damping in the fluid layer.

However, continuity of the mass flow also reqires closed material
folding  lines  in  the  liquid,  which  in  turn  leads  to  a  more  or
less homogenous agitation of the liquid on top of the microarray.
This agitation is more efficient if the fluidic layer is thicker,
as its interaction between the microarray substrate and the cover
lid (here the mixer card) becomes less pronounced in this case.
To  account  for  the  exponential  decay  of  the  fluid  flow  as  a
function of the distance from the exciting transducer, a typical
mixer  card  holds  different  sound  sources  (transducers)  at
different locations on the chip, and larger mixer cards hold more
than one single mixer chip.
Hence, there are multiple sources for ultrasound distributed over
the spotted area of the microarray.

In this manuscript, we wish to report on a different approach for
acoustically  induced  streaming  in  a  thin  layer  of  liquid  spread
over a microarray by distributing a manifold of acoustic sources
across the spotted area. Aprt from ‚simple‘ microarrays the very
same  approach  can  be  evenly  successful  be  applied  to  different
schemes  for  hybridization,  like  micro  titer  plates  (MTP),  or
various  other  sample  holders  for  such  biological  assays.  For
example,  instead  of  employing  conventionally  spotted  micro
arrays, recently, multiwell slides as an in-between approach are
used by defining small volumes of specific fluids by employing a
punched  spacer  foil  between  the  substrate  and  the  cover  slide.
Here,  the  cavities  containing  the  sample  liquid  are  simply
defined  by  the  openings  in  the  spacer.  Although  here,  too,  in
principle  our  SAW  induced  streaming  can  be  sucessfully  applied
(for instance by attaching one or more sound transducers to the
specific location of a micro well in a MTP, or at the locations
of the small cavities in a spacer defined sample holder, we were
able to show that a distribution of sources of ultrasonic energy
can be also achieved making use of internal reflections of sound
in a cover slide.

The  basic  idea  behind  this  approach  is  to  excite  ultrasound  at
some location of the mixer card, and to radiate acoustic energy
into  it  being  then  reflected  at  the  boundaries  of  the  card.  If
the sound velocity in the mixer card is different from the one in
the  generating  chip,  a  bulk  wave  is  excited  in  the  card  again
under  an  angle  with  respect  to  the  plane  of  the  piezoelectric
generator. In Fig. 3, we depict this idea:

Fig. 3 : Basic  idea  behind  the  creation  of  distributed  `virtual
sources‘ to generate acoustic streaming in a fluid in vicinity of
the substrate or the mixer card. A sound wave is generated at the
transducer  indicated  to  the  left  in  black.  Ultrasonic  energy  in
form  of  a  sound  wave  is  radiated  into  the  bulk  of  the  ‚mixer
card‘  under  an  oblique  angle.  Imdedance  discontinuities  at  the
boundaries  of  the  mixer  card  cause  internal  reflections.  The
points  of  reflection  then  act  as  sources  for  the  emission  of
ultrasonic  energy(schematically  indicated  by  the  concentric
circles) into a fluid layer.

The points of reflection of the ultrasound at the boundaries of
the mixer card act as efficient sources of radiation of acoustic
energy  in  to  a  fluid  at  these  boundaries  by  allowing  for  a
leaking  of  ultrasound  into  the  fluid.  Both  the  angle  of  the
radiated power as well as the amount of leakage in to the liquid
can be varied over quite a wide range taking special measures for
the acoustic impedance matching at the respective boundaries. For
instance,  additional  microstructure  like  gratings  or  impedance
matching layers can be imployed for this purpose. Equally simple
and  versatile  is  the  generation  of  a  periodic  array  of  such
‚virtual  sources‘,  being  commensurate  with  the  periodocity  of,
e.g.,  a  micro  titer  plate,  a  microarray  or  similar  small
compartements for the sample fluid located on top (or below) of
this mixer card.

132 MHz

138 MHz

145 MHz

136 MHz

140 MHz

150 MHz

155 MHz

160 MHz

Fig.  4  : Visualization  of  internal  ultrasound  reflections  in  a
parallel  plate  ultrasound  waveguiding  substrate  as  described  in
the  text.  By  variation  of  the  frequency  of  the  sound  wave,  the
relative position of the virtual sources can be varied at will.
In the figure, only two such sources are shown for clarity.

1 cm

In  Fig.  4,  we  depict  the  result  of  an  experiment  where,  by
variation  of  the  frequency  of  the  ultrasound,  the  relative
position of two of such hot spots has been varied simultaneously.
The  initial  ultrasonic  wave  was  generated  using  an  interdigital
transducer  on  a  LiNbO3  substrate  being  glued  to  the  guiding
substrate.  This  guiding  substrate  in  this  case  was  a  2.85  mm
thick non-hardened float glas slide. To minimize internal losses,
various  materials  have  been  tested,  including  single  crystal
quarz, quarz glass, various industrial glasses etc. As expected,
the less internal losses occur, the more virtual sound emitters,
i.e.  internal  reflections  can  be  generated.  The  losses  to  the
fluid,  which  are  intended  to  generate  acoustic  streaming  inside
the  liquid  layer,  also  contribute  to  the  achievable  pattern.
Here,  too,  the  impedance  difference  between  the  fluid  and  the
guiding substrate, are responsible for the actual energy transfer
per virtual source.

In  Fig.  5  and  Fig.  6,  finally,  we  show  the  effect  of  acoustic
streaming to small amounts of fluid contained in the wells of a
384 well micro titer plate (Fig. 5) and a multiwell slide (Fig.
6).  To visualize  the  streaming  and  the  subsequent  mixing,  small

amounts  of  ink  have  been  added  to  the  buffer  solution.  The
ultrasound  in the case of the MTP is coupled to the wells from
the bottom of the well, using special impedance matching layers.
In  the  figure,  however,  only  a  single  well  has  been  adressed
ultrasonically. The snapshots are taken approximately ten seconds
apart from eachother. As can be seen, the acoustic streaming in
the  well  leads  to  an  agitation  and  a  subsequent  mixing  of  the
buffer/ink  solution  after  a  couple  of  seconds.  Using  the
technique  of  distributed  sources  by  internal  reflection  of
ultrasound, a parallel processing of many wells can be achieved.

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Fig. 5 : Time  series  of  snapshots  of  the  ultrasonically  induced
mixing in a well of a 384 well micro titer plate. The images are
taken approximately ten seconds apart from each other. Ultrasonic
energy  is  selectively  coupled  into  the  liquid  in  a  single  well
from the buttom of the well. Acoustic streaming leads to a rapid
and  controlled  mixing  of  the  liquid  as  visualized  by  a  small
amount of ink being dissolved during agitation.

Fig. 6 : Acoustically  driven  agitation  of  a  small  liquid  volume
in  a  multiwell  slide.  In  this  case,  the  acoustic  energy  is
coupled  to  the  liquid  sideways,  using  surface  acoustic  waves  as
described in the text. The lower right picture shows a section of
such a multiwell slide containing 4 separate wells, two of which
are being agitated.

In Fig. 6, we show mixing of a buffer/ ink mixture in a multiwell
slide. Here, the reservoirs are defined by openings in  a spacer
foil,  which  has  been  glued  on  top  of  a  conventional  microscope
slide. A cover lid having two openings for pipetting the sample
defines the volume of the microwell. The ultrasound in this case
is  coupled  in  sideways,  as  can  be  seen  from  the  evolving
streaming pattern.

In  summary,  we  describe  a  technique  employing  the  effect  of
acoustic streaming  for the agitation of small liquid volumes in
thin capillary layers, in multiwell slides, microtiter plates and
similar  containers  forhybridization  assays.  It  turns  out  to  be
favourable  to  distribute  several  sources  of  ultrasonic  energy
over the spotted area of a microarray, or in the case of multiple
small  containers  like  micro  titer  plates,  or  multi  well  slides.
We demonstrate that it is possible to distribute the sources by
taking  advantage  of  internal  reflections  in  an  ultrasonic
waveguiding  layer,  hence  generating  distributed  virtual  sources
in a predetermined manner. The energy losses of a sound wave in a
solid  to  the  liquid  can  be  taylored  at  will,  including  the

adjustment  of  the  geometrical  distribution  and  number  of  the
virtual sources, as well as the amount of energy transferred.
We believe that this technique to mix smalles amounts of liquid
by employing our ultrasonic techniques is advantageous over many
other  approaches  and  will  result  in  a  new  generation  of
instrumentation for biological or chemical assays.

We gratefully acknowledge useful discussions with Christoph Gauer
and  Jürgen  Scriba.  Financial  support  of  this  investigation  has
been provided by the Advalytix AG, Brunnthal, Germany.

References :

[1] V. Hohreiter, J.N. Chung, E.B. Cummings, T. Postlethwaite,

“Size and Surface Effects on Turbulence and Microfluidic
Mixing,”
2nd International Conference on Transport Phenomena in
Microsystems, Banff, Canada, October 2000

[2] R.  Hui  Liu,  R.  Lenigk,  R.L.Druyor-Sanchez,  J.  Yang  and  P.
Grodzinski,  “  Hybridization  enhancement  using  cavitation
Microstreaming”,
Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 75, No. 8, April 15, 2003

[3]  „Micro array technology“ : Nature 416, 885 - 891 (2002)

[4]  Wesley Le Mars Nyborg; “Acoustic Streaming”

Physical  Acoustics  2B;  ED.  W.P.Mason;  Academic  Press  265
(1965)

[5] GIT Laborfachzeitschrift, 5/2002

[6] The scientist, „Nano-Quakes“, April  7, 2003

[7]  R.M.White and F.W.Voltmer, „Direct piezoelectric coupling to

surface acoustic waves”
Appl. Phys. Lett. 7, 314-316 (1965)

