 
 

UCSan Diego,CHEP03 , 23-27 March 2003 

1 

Status of the physics validation studies using Geant4 in ATLAS 

On behalf of the ATLAS Geant4 Validation Team  
 
A.Dell’Acqua 
CERN EP/SFT, Geneva, CH 
dellacqu@mail.cern.ch 

The  new  simulation  for  the  ATLAS detector at  LHC is  performed using  Geant4 in a  complete OO/C++  environment. In this 
framework  the  simulation  of  the  various  test  beams  for  the  different  ATLAS  subdetectors  offers  an  excellent  opportunity  to 
perform  physics  validation  studies  over  a  wide  range  of  physics  domains:  the  electromagnetic  processes,  the  individual 
hadronic  interactions,  the  electromagnetic  and  hadronic  signals  in  calorimeters.  The  simulation  is  implemented  by  paying 
special  attention  to  all  details  of  the  experimental  layout  and  by  testing  all  possible  physics  processes  which  may  be  of 
relevance to the specific detector under test: the resulting simulation programs are often more detailed than the corresponding 
Geant3-based  simulation  suites.  In  this  paper  we  present  relevant  features  of  muon,  electron  and  pion  signals  in  various 
ATLAS detectors. All remaining discrepancies between Geant4 and test-beam data are currently being addressed and progress 
is continuous. This work shows that Geant4 is becoming a mature and useful product for simulating specific features of large-
scale detector systems.     

representation of the experimental detector signal with 
all relevant respects. 

  

 

 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

This work is a brief review of the results obtained in 
more  than  two  years  of  activity  in  the  field  of  the 
simulation  in  Geant4  by  a  large  team  operating  in  all 
sectors of the ATLAS experiment. We will summarize 
the strategies adopted for the Geant4 physics validation 
in  ATLAS.  We  will  also  report  on  the  main  results 
obtained  in  the  studies  of  muon  energy  loss  and 
secondary  production  in  the  ATLAS  calorimeters  and 
in  muon  detectors.  We  then  review  the  studies  about 
the electromagnetic processes in tracking detectors and 
shower 
calorimeters.  Hadronic 
interactions  in  tracking  devices  and  calorimeters  are 
also presented.  

simulations 

in 

2.  STRATEGIES FOR PHYSICS 
VALIDATIONS IN ATLAS 

2.1.  Geant4 physics benchmarking and 
validation 

The  features  of  interaction  models  in  Geant4  are 
compared  with  similar  features  in  Geant3.21  (here 
considered  as  the  baseline  for  detector  simulation) 
including variables not accessible in the experiment. 

The differences in applied models, like the effect of 
cuts on simulation parameters in the different variable 
space  (e.g.  range  cut  vs.  energy  threshold)  are  also 
presented. 

We used available experimental references from test 
beams  for  various  sub-detectors  and  particle  types  to 
determine  the  prediction  power  of  models  in  Geant4 
(and  Geant3)    to  estimate  the  Geant4  performance. 
Different subdetectors are sensitive to different effects 
(energy loss, track multiplicity, shower shape) and can 
be used for a better insight into the simulation models. 
We  tuned  Geant4  models  (“physics  lists”)  and 
for  an  optimal 

range  cuts) 

parameters 

(e.g. 

 
MOMT003 

Fig.  1  –  Hadronic  interaction  of  a  pion  in  an  ATLAS               
silicon pixel module 
 

 

 
Fig.  2    –  The  electromagnetic  barrel  (Accordion) 
calorimeter  

 

2 

 

 
 
 

UCSan Diego,CHEP03 , 23-27 March 2003 

 

 

 

Fig. 5  –  The tile calorimeter test beam layout (2000) 
 

 

 

 
Fig.6 - The combined test beam setup (silicon pixel 
detector (left),tile calorimeter (center), muon barrel 
setup(right). 
 

2.2.  Geant4 validation strategies 

the  beam).  We  also  required 

The  geometry  description  in  the  simulation  should 
be  as  close  as  possible  to  the  real  test  beam  setup 
(active  detectors  and  relevant  elements  of 
the 
experimental  area,  like  magnets  and  inactive  material 
in 
the  geometry 
descriptions in Geant3 and in Geant4 to be as close as 
possible  when  comparisons  were  to  be  made.  To  that 
purpose,  we  tried  to  use  common  databases  or 
parameter  books,  as in the  case  of  the  muon  detectors 
and calorimeters.  

We  generated  particles  in  the  simulation  trying  to 
reproduce  as  much  as  possible  the  real  beam  profile 
(e.g.  in  muon  detectors  and  in  calorimeters)  and  the 
momentum/energy  distribution  in  the test  beam:  when 
needed,  we  tried  to  reproduce  effects  like  beam 
contamination  etc.  The  electronic  readout  features 
which  can  not  be  unfolded  from  the  experimental 
signal  were  modeled  in  the  simulation  (coherent  and 
incoherent  electronic  noise,  digitization  effect  on  the 
signal,  to  give  some  examples).  Some  of  the  ATLAS 
test  beam  setups  which  were  simulated  Geant4  are 

Fig.3  –   The muon barrel test beam layout (CAD  
drawings and simulated setup) 

Fig.4  –  The  Forward  Calorimeter  test  beam  setup 
(FCAL) 

 
 

 
 

 
MOMT003 

 

SSI2002, SLAC, August 5-16, 2002 

3 

 
shown  in  Fig.  1,2,3,4,5  (the  ATLAS  pixel  detectors, 
LAr  electromagnetic  calorimeter,  muon  system, 
forward calorimeter, tile calorimeter and the combined 
setup respectively. 

3.  MUON PHYSICS 

3.1.  Muon energy loss 

The study of the energy lost by muons was performed 
in  the  hadronic  endcap  calorimeter  (HEC)  made  of 
plates.  The 
Liquid  Argon/  Copper 
experimental  signal  distribution  is  reproduced  quite 
well  by  Geant4.  Fig.7  shows  the  calorimeter  signal 
distribution for 180 GeV muons for a .2mm range cut. 
The Geant4 simulation includes also a electronic noise 
simulation. 

parallel 

Fig. 7 – The hadronic endcap calorimeter signal. 

Some range cut dependence of Geant4 signal due to 
contribution  from  electromagnetic  halo  (d -electrons) 
was  observed, also in the case  of tile calorimeter. The 
Geant4/test beam data comparison was performed also  
in  the  case  of  the  electromagnetic  barrel  calorimeter 
(Liquid  Argon/Lead  in  an  accordion-like  geometry) 
and a good agreement was observed in the distribution 
of  reconstructed  energy  for  incoming  muons  at  100 
GeV  incident  energy.  Comparisons  between  Geant3, 
Geant4 and the experimental data show that Geant4 is 
much better at reproducing the signal in the calorimeter 
than Geant3 and that the discrepancy between data and 
simulation is well within 1% for all energies  (Fig. 8). 

 

3.2.  Secondary production by muons 

In  the  case  of  the  muon  detectors,  during  the  data 
taking  period  of  summer  2002,  the  effect  of  dead 
material  in  front  or  between  the  muon  chambers 
(production  of  extra-hits)  was  studied  by  positioning 
Aluminum  or  Iron  targets  (10,20  and  30  cm  thick) 
about  37  cm  from the  first  muon  chamber  or  between 
the  chambers.  The  probability  of  extra  hits  was 
measured at various muon energies (20 and 200 GeV). 
Results show that Geant4 can reproduce the distance of 
a extra hit to the muon track quite well. After a detailed 
simulation  and  reconstruction  of  simulated  beams,  a 
comparison  between  reconstructed  track  segments 
from  simulation  and  reconstructed  experimental  data 
shows  an  agreement  which  is  well  within  1%  in  the 
case of Al or Fe in front of the muon system setup. 

Fig.9  –  Reconstructed 

from 
simulation  and  experimental  data  comparisons  for  the 
muon  test  beam  with    dead material  (Al  or  Fe)  in  the 
setup.  

segments 

track 

 

4.  ELECTRON PHYSICS 

4.1.  Silicon detectors: ionization and PAI 
model 

The standard ionisation model was compared  to PAI 
model  for  100  GeV  pions  crossing  a  Pixel  detector 
module (280 mm thick silicon).  

As  shown  in  Fig.  10  the  distributions  around  the 
peak  are  identical.  The  PAI  model  does  not  seem  to 

 

Fig.8  –  Reconstructed  energy 

the 
and 
electromagnetic 
comparison Geant3-data with Geant4-data for the same 
variable. 
 

calorimeter 

(GeV) 

barrel 

cells 

in 

 

 
MOMT003 

 

 

UCSan Diego,CHEP03 , 23-27 March 2003 

 

4 

 

link  properly  to  d -ray  production  but  (more  important 
in  the  case  of  ATLAS)    the  spatial  distribution  of  the 
produced  d -rays  is  correct:  to  this  effect,  it  has  been 
found  that  the  cut  in  range  should  match  the  desired 
detector  resolution  (10m m  or  less  in  the  case  of  the 
ATLAS pixel detector). 

contribution coming from transition radiation becomes 
obvious as a “shoulder” in the energy distribution, just 
above  the  5keV  threshold.  Whilst  the  effect  from 
transition radiation in the simulation is also noticeable, 
Geat4  does  not  reproduce  the  experimental  data 
accurately.  Moreover  the  use  of  transition  radiation 
models  in  Geant4  has  rather  heavy  repercussions  on 
performance  and  turns  out  to  be  too  demanding  in 
terms  of  geometry  and  tracking.  Hence  it  has  been 
decided to suspend any further study on the subject and 
to  convert  an  existing  “home  grown”  TR  model  to  be 
used from within Geant4. 
 

 

 

Fig.10 – Energy deposition in Silicon detectors (Pixel 
module) (keV) for a 100 GeV pion beam for the PAI 
model and the standard ionization model 

4.2.  Transition radiation detector 

Very  good  agreement  of  Geant4  with  data  (and 
Geant3)  for  pions  and  muons  beams  was  found. 
Several  models  were  developed  and 
for 
describing transition radiation, but none of them could 
accurately reproduce the additional energy deposited in 
the straws. 

tried 

Fig.  11  –  Energy  distribution  in  the  straws  of  the 
ATLAS TR tracker for pion and muon beams. Geant4 
agrees  very  well  with  the  experimental  data  (and 
Geant3)  
 

Fig.  11  shows 

the  distribution  of 

the  energy 
deposited in the straws by pions and muons (energy in 
keV):  both  Geant3  and  Geant4 
the 
experimental data accurately. Fig. 12 shows the energy 
deposited  in  the  straws  by  electrons:  when  radiator 
foils  are  added  in  front  of  the  straw  planes,  the 
 
MOMT003 

reproduce 

Fig. 12 – Energy distribution in the straws, in the case 
of  an  electron  beam.  The  contribution  from  transition 
radiation  is  clearly  visible  as  a  “shoulder”  above  the 
5keV threshold. The Geant4 simulation (in green)  can 
not reproduce exactly the experimental data 

 

4.3.  Electron response in calorimeters 

The characteristics of the electromagnetic showers in 
te  ATLAS  calorimeters  have  been  studied  quite 
accurately and compared with existing test beam data. 
In  general  terms,  we  find  that  Geant4  reproduces  the 
average  electron  signal  in  all  ATLAS  calorimeters  
quite  well.  In  the  case  of  the  electromagnetic  barrel 
calorimeter  (“Accordion”)  the  agreement  between 
simulation  and  experimental  data  is  very  good  (Fig. 
13). Energy fluctuations are reproduced quite well and 
the  shower  shape  reproduces  exactly  what  we  find 
from  the  experimental data: a  little  discrepancy  in  the 
amount  of  energy  deposited  in  the  last  longitudinal 
sampling is being addressed. The energy resolution for 
the  ATLAS  tile  calorimeter  is  reproduced  fairly  well 
(Fig.  14),  while  by  comparing  the  shower  shape  with 
what  one  gets 
that 
electromagnetic showers tend to start earlier and to be 
more  compact  in  Geant4  than  in  Geant3  (Fig.15). 

from  Geant3  we  observe 

 

SSI2002, SLAC, August 5-16, 2002 

5 

 
Simulations of the electromagnetic compartment of the 
Forward calorimeter provide a constant term which, in 
the  case  of  Geant4  is  ~5%, to  be  compared  with  ~4% 
that one gets from the experimental data (and Geant3): 
this discrepancy is also being addressed. 

5.  HADRONIC PHYSICS 

5.1.  Inelastic interactions in the pixel 
detectors 

to 

The  energy  from  nuclear  break-up  released  in 
hadronic inelastic interactions can cause large signals if 
a  pixel  (40m m  X  500m m)  is  directly  hits:  this  effect 
gives  direct  access 
tests  of  single  hadronic 
interactions,  especially  for  what  concerns  the  nuclear 
part. The parametric (“à la GHEISHA”) model and the 
Quark  Gluon  String  model  in  Geant4  have  been 
compared to existing test beam data. The distributions 
of  the  energy  released  in  the  pixel  detector  show 
discrepancies  between  data  and  simulation,  both  in 
shape  and  average  value  (Fig.16  and  17).  The 
parametric  model  fails  to  reproduce  the  fraction  of 
energy deposited in one single pixel  (the average value 
is 26% too small)  

Fig.  16  –  Energy  deposited  in  the  ATLAS  pixel 
detectors  by  180  GeV  pions,  from  experimental  data 
and from two different hadronic models in Geant4 

 

 

Fig.  13  –  Energy  resolution  figures  for  the  ATLAS 
Accordion  calorimeter.  Geant4  reproduces  both  the 
stochastic and the constant term quite accurately. 

 

Fig. 14 – Energy resolution for electrons in the ATLAS 
tile calorimeter. The constant term is reproduced quite 
well,  while  the  stochastic  term  from  the  simulation 
matches  the  experimental  one  within  one  standard 
deviation 

 

 
Fig. 15 – Shower shape in the ATLAS tile calorimeter. 
The shower starts earlier in Geant4 than in Geant3 and 
it is more compact 

 
MOMT003 

Fig. 17 – Fraction of energy deposited in one single 
pixel  from  experimental  data  and  from  two  different 
hadronic models in Geant4 

5.2.  Hadronic physics with the ATLAS 
hadron calorimeters 

Initial attempts of describing hadronic interactions in 
the  ATLAS  calorimeters  provided  rather  poor  results, 
due in part to the inadequacy of the hadronic models in 
Geant4  (parametric  model,  “à  la  GHEISHA”)  and  in 
part  to  problems  in  matching  low  energy  and  high 
energy charged pion models, which produced “bumps” 
in the energy resolution distributions for all calorimeter 
in  simulating  hadronic 
types.  The  performance 

 

UCSan Diego,CHEP03 , 23-27 March 2003 

reproducing  the  experimental  data.  The  problem  is 
under  investigation  and  a  fix  is  foreseen  before  too 
long. 

6 

 

interactions  with  Geant4  increased  substantially  with 
the  introduction  of    new  theoretical  models  (quark-
gluon  string  models,  QGS)  and  of  new,  better  tuned 
parametric  models  (LHEP).  The  QGS  models  in 
particular  seem  to  provide  correct  answers  for  all 
hadron  calorimeters  in  ATLAS  and  show  definite 
improvements  over  the  initial  parametric  model  and 
with respect to Geant3 (Fig. 18 and 19). 

 ratio for the hadronic endcap calorimeter, 

Fig. 18 – e/p
for two Geant4 hadronic models. The QGS models 
seems to reproduce quite accurately the experimental 
data and performs much better than Geant3 

 

 

Fig 20 – Resolution curve for the ATLAS hadronic 
endcap calorimeter. Geant4 reproduces almost exactly 
the experimental data 

 

 

 

Fig. 19 – Pion non-linearity in the ATLAS tile 
calorimeter. The QGS models reproduce the 
experimental data quite accurately 
 

The pion energy resolution is quite well reproduced  
by the QGS models in the case of the hadronic endcap 
calorimeter (Fig. 20): good results are also obtained for 
the tile calorimeter (Fig. 21). 

A  problem  which  is  still  under  investigation  is 
shown  in  Fig.  22,  where  the  fraction  of  energy 
deposited  in  the  four  longitudinal  samplings  of  the 
hadronic  endcap  calorimeter  is  plotted,  for  Geant3, 
Geant4 and the experimental data. It is apparent that in 
the  current  version  of  the  QSG  model,  hadronic 
showers  start  too  early  ,  so  that  too  much  energy  is 
deposited 
two  compartments  and, 
correspondingly,  too  little  is  found  in  the  following 
two:  in  this  case  Geant3  does  a  better  job  at 
 
MOMT003 

first 

the 

in 

Fig  21  –  Resolution  curve  for  the  ATLAS  tile 
calorimeter.  Geant4  (red 
line)  reproduces  almost 
exactly  the  constant  term  while  the  stochastic  terms 
agree within the experimental errors 

 

 

 

SSI2002, SLAC, August 5-16, 2002 

7 

 

 

6.  CONCLUSIONS 

 
Geant4 has been thoroughly tested in ATLAS in the 
last  two  years  in  order  to  evaluate  its  effective 
capability  of  reproducing  and  predicting  the  detector 
behaviour in the complex LHC environment.  

All ATLAS subdetectors (and test beams) have been 
the  detector’s  characteristics  and 
simulated  and 
sensitivities  have  been  exploited.  After  an  initial 
learning  phase  Geant4  was  routinely  used  to  detector 
and test beam simulations and has proven to be a rather 
rugged and dependable tool, which performs quite well 
and which provides in almost all cases a better detector 
simulation than Geant3.  
It  must  be  stressed 

that  a  good  and  solid 
collaboration was established since the beginning with 
the Geant4 team who demonstrated to be quite helpful 
in fixing and overcoming problems.  

Except  for  a  few  open  questions  which  are  being 
addressed,  there  is  general  consensus  within  ATLAS 
that  Geant4  is  becoming  a  mature  detector  simulation 
tool  that  can  be  used  for  the  challenging  task  of 
simulating a complex LHC detector. 

Fig.  22  –  Fraction  of  energy  deposited  in  the  four 
longitudinal  compartments  of  the  ATLAS  hadronic 
endcap calorimeter. Geant4 showers start too early and 
deposit too little energy in the last two compartments 

 

 

 
MOMT003 

 

