 

A Computer Aided Detection system for 
mammographic images implemented on a GRID 
infrastructure 

U. Bottigli, P. Cerello, P. Delogu, M.E. Fantacci, F. Fauci, G. Forni, B. Golosio, P.L. Indovina, A. Lauria,         
E. Lopez Torres, R. Magro, G.L. Masala, P. Oliva, R. Palmiero, G. Raso, A. Retico, A. Stefanini, S. Stumbo,       

S. Tangaro 

 

 

   

 
Abstract— The use of an automatic system for the analysis of 
mammographic  images  has  proven  to  be  very  useful  to 
radiologists  in  the  investigation  of  breast  cancer,  especially  in 
the framework of mammographic-screening programs. A breast 
neoplasia is often marked by the presence of microcalcification 
clusters and massive lesions in the mammogram: hence the need 
for tools able to recognize such lesions at an early stage.  

In  the  framework  of  the  GPCALMA  (GRID  Platform  for 
Computer  Assisted  Library  for  MAmmography)  project,  the 
co-working  of  italian  physicists  and  radiologists  built  a  large 
distributed database of digitized mammographic images (about 
5500  images  corresponding  to  1650  patients)  and  developed  a 
CAD  (Computer  Aided  Detection)  system,  able  to  make  an 
automatic  search  of  massive  lesions  and  microcalcification 
clusters. The CAD is implemented in the GPCALMA integrated 
station, which can be used also for digitization, as archive and to 
perform  statistical  analyses.  Some  GPCALMA 
integrated 
stations  have  already  been  implemented  and  are  currently  on 
clinical trial in some italian hospitals. 

The emerging GRID technology can been used to connect the 
GPCALMA  integrated  stations  operating  in  different  medical 
centers. The GRID approach will support an effective tele- and 
co-working  between  radiologists,  cancer 
specialists  and 
epidemiology  experts  by  allowing  remote  image  analysis  and 
interactive online diagnosis.   

I.  INTRODUCTION 

B 

REAST cancer is reported as one of the first causes of 
woman  mortality  [1].  The  early  diagnosis  of  this 
pathology  in  asymptomatic  women  makes  it  possible  the 
                                                           
Manuscript received May 16, 2003.  
U.  Bottigli,  B.  Golosio,  G.L.  Masala,  P.  Oliva  and  S.  Stumbo  are  with 
Struttura  Dipartimentale  di  Matematica  e  Fisica  dell’Università  di  Sassari 
and Sezione INFN di Cagliari, Italy. 

P.G. Cerello and E. Lopez  are with Sezione INFN di Torino, Italy. 
P.  Delogu,  M.E.  Fantacci,  A.  Retico  and  A.  Stefanini  are  with 
Dipartimento  di  Fisica  dell’Università  and  Sezione  INFN  di  Pisa,  via 
Buonarroti  2,  56127  Pisa  -  Italy.  (telephone:  +39-050-2214397,  fax:  +39-
050-2214333, e-mail:alessandra.retico@df.unipi.it). 

F.  Fauci,  R.  Magro  and  G.  Raso  are  with  Dipartimento  di  Fisica  e 
Tecnologie  Relative  dell’Università  di  Palermo  and  Sezione  INFN  di 
Catania, Italy. 

G. Forni, P.L. Indovina, A. Lauria and R. Palmiero are with Dipartimento 
di Scienze Fisiche dell’Università Federico II and Sezione INFN di Napoli, 
Italy. 

S.  Tangaro  is  with  Dipartimento  di  Fisica  dell’Università  di  Bari  and 

Sezione INFN di Cagliari, Italy. 

reduction  of  breast  cancer  mortality.  In  spite  of  a  growing 
number of detected cancer, the death rate for breast neoplasia 
decreased  in  the  last  10  years  [2],  thanks  also  to  early 
diagnosis  made  possible  by  mammographic-screening 
programs  [3].  In  the  framework  of  a  screening  program 
working in Italy, a mammographic examination is performed 
on  49  to  69  years-old  women.  Mammography  is  widely 
recognized as the only imaging modality that is useful for the 
early  detection  of  the  abnormalities  indicating  the  presence 
of  a  breast  cancer  [4].  It  is  usually  realized  by  screen-film 
modality  but  digital  detectors  are  becoming widespread [5]-
that  screening-programs 
[7]. 
radiologists  fail  to  detect  up  to  approximately  25%  breast 
cancers  visible  on  retrospective  reviews  and  that  the 
percentage  increases  if  minimal  signs  are  considered  [8]-
[10].  Sensitivity  (percentage  of  pathologic  images  correctly 
classified)  and  specificity  (percentage  of  non  pathologic 
images  correctly  classified)  of  this  examination  appreciably 
increase if two radiologists independently analyze the images 
[11].  Independent  double  reading  is  currently  strongly 
recommended  as  it  allows  the  reduction  of  the  rate  of  false 
negative examinations by 5 to 15% [12,13].  

It  has  been  estimated 

The  recent 

the 
technological  progress  has 
development  of  several  Computer  Aided  Detection  (CAD) 
systems  [14]-[16],  which  could  be  successfully  used  as 
second  readers 
the  framework  of  mammographic-
in 
screening programs. 

led 

to 

 We report the characteristics and the performances of the 
CAD  software  currently  implemented  in  the  GPCALMA 
integrated station. We also performed a comparison between 
the GPCALMA CAD and another commercial CAD system, 
the CADx SecondLookTM, and we report their performances 
as  second  readers  [17].  Finally  we  discuss  the  capability  of 
the  GRID  in  providing  the  necessary  tools  for  allowing  the 
tele- and co-working of experts from different GRID-enabled 
medical centers. 

II.  THE CALMA PROJECT  

The  CALMA 

(Computer  Assisted  Library 

for 
MAmmography)  project  involved  italian  physicists  and 
radiologists  from  several  research  institutes  and  medical 
centers between 1998 and 2001. The aim of the project was 
the  building  of  a  large  database  of  annotated  mammograms 

 

 

 

 

and  the  development  of  a  CAD  system  for  the  automatic 
search  of  massive  lesions  and  microcalcification  clusters, 
which  are  the  radiological  signs  of  breast  cancer.  The 
experiment was very successful since the CALMA database 
is  at  present  one  of  the  largest  in  Europe  and  the  CALMA 
CAD  system  has  proven  to  be  very  useful  especially  as 
second reader in the framework of mammographic-screening 
programs. 

III.  THE CALMA DATABASE 

The  CALMA  collaboration  built  a  large  database  of 
digitized  mammographic  images.  It  currently  consists  of 
about  5500 
to  1650  patients), 
images  (corresponding 
acquired in the italian hospitals that joined the project.  

The  images  (18  cm  x  24  cm,  digitised  by  a  CCD  linear 
scanner with an 85 µm pitch and 4096 grey levels) are fully 
characterised: pathological ones have a consistent description 
that  includes  radiological  diagnosis  and  histological  data, 
whereas non-pathological ones correspond to patients with a 
follow up of at least three years [16]. 

IV.  THE CALMA CAD SOFTWARE 

The  CALMA  CAD  approach  consists  in  the  analysis  of 
each  mammogram  available  per  patient.  The  presence  of 
suspicious  areas  for  massive  lesions  or  microcalcification 
clusters  in  one  or  more  mammograms  results  in  a  possible 
cancer diagnosis. The relatively large size of a mammogram 
brings  to  the  need  of  reducing  data  input  with  no  loss  of 
information  before  proceeding  to  the  classification,  in  order 
to  perform  an  efficient  diagnosis  in  a  reasonable  amount  of 
time.  Therefore  the  approach  is  a  multi-level  one.  The  first 
levels  are  demanded  to  reduce  the  amount  of  information 
without  excluding  ill  regions  (demand  of  sensitivity  values 
close  to  100%),  whereas  the  last  levels  are  requested  to 
perform an exact classification in order to reduce the number 
of false positives as much as possible.  

The analysis is organized into three general steps: 

1.  Data  reduction:  non-interesting  regions  of 

the 
mammogram  are  eliminated  with  the  consequent 
reduction  of  the  amount  of  data  passed  to  the 
subsequent step. This is obtained either with a ROI 
(Region  Of  Interest)  hunter  consisting  of  a  first  set 
of algorithms which perform loose cuts and identify 
interesting regions or by down-sampling data points 
to be later on classified (in this case being helped by 
the  relatively  large  size  of  the  objects  to  be 
detected); 

2.  Feature  extraction:  relevant  characteristics  are 

extracted out of the selected regions;  

3.  Classification: the selected regions are classified. 
The  algorithms  used  can  vary  depending  on  the  kind  of 
analysis  (microcalcification  clusters  or  massive  lesions, 
opacities  or  spiculated  lesions,  search  or  analysis,  search  of 
Regions  Of  Interest  or  suspected  regions,  classification  on 
the  basis  of  the  level  of  suspiciousness,  etc.).  The  selection 
and  the  optimization  of  the  suitable  algorithm  to  each  kind 
and  step  of  analysis  are  made  following  both  general  rules 
and  empirical  approaches.  Spatial  frequency  analysis, 

statistical  methods  and  Neural  Networks  (both  supervised 
and  unsupervised)  are  applied  in  order  to  solve  a  given 
problem,  and  the  method  showing  the  best  performance  is 
chosen.    Hybrid  approaches  can  consist  of  many  different 
methods, such as loose cuts, data down-sampling, high- and 
low-pass 
filters,  Fourier  analysis, 
statistical  selection  of  local  and  global  maxima,  Principal 
Component  Analysis  performed  by  self-organizing  maps 
(Sanger’s Neural Networks), Feed Forward Neural Networks 
with different architectures. 

filters,  convolution 

A.  Opacities and Spiculated Lesions 
Masses (Fig. 1) are rather large objects with very different 
shapes  and  show  them  up  with  a  faint  contrast  slowly 
increasing with time.  

 

Fig. 1. Examples of massive lesions. 

We developed algorithms for the recognition of opacities in 
general  and  specifically  for  spiculated  lesions,  which  are 
characterized by a particular spike shape [18,19]. In order to 
detect opacities in a digital mammogram the interesting areas 
are selected by constructing a structure with concentric rings 
centered on local intensity maxima until the mean pixel value 
reaches a fixed threshold. The ROIs are thus identified; they 
consist  in  circles  of  radius  R.  For  opacities,  features  are 
extracted  by  calculating  the  average  intensity,  variance  and 
skewness (index of the asymmetry of the distribution) of the 
pixel value distributions in circles of radius 1/3 R, 2/3 R and 
R,  respectively  (Fig.  2). The features extracted by means of 
this  procedure  are  used  as  input  for  a  feed-forward  neural 
network,  which  perform  the  final  classification.  The  output 
neuron of this network is characterized by a threshold (i.e. a 
number  in  the  0  to  1  range)  that  represents  the  degree  of 
suspiciousness of the corresponding ROI. 

B.  Microcalcification Clusters  
A  microcalcification  is  a  rather  small  (0.1  to  1.0  mm  in 
diameter)  but  very  brilliant  object.  The  presence  of 
microcalcifications  grouped  in  clusters  (Fig.  3)  may  be  a 
strong indication of breast cancer. 

The microcalcification cluster analysis was made using the 

following approach: 

 

 
 

 

 

Fig. 3. Examples of microcalcification clusters. 

V.  RESULTS 

 

A.  Opacities and spiculated lesions 
By  using the CALMA database, the FFNN adopted in the 
procedure  for  the  massive-lesion  detection  and  previously 
described  has  been  trained  on  a  training  set  of  515  images 
(102  containing  opacities  and  413  without)  and  tested  on  a 
test  set  composed  of  515  different  images  (again  102 
containing opacities and 413 without).  

The  results  of  such  a classification are shown in the ROC 
(Receiver Operating Characteristics) curve reported in Fig. 4, 
which  shows  sensitivity  (true-positives  fraction)  versus  1-
specificity  (false-positives  fraction)  for  different  threshold 
values.  The best results we obtained are 94% for sensitivity 
and 95% for specificity. 

 

 
Fig. 4. ROC curve for massive lesions (realized with 515 mammograms, 

102 containing opacities and/or spiculated lesions). 
 

B.  Microcalcification clusters 
A dataset of 676 images containing microcalcifications and 
995 images without microcalcification clusters has been used 
in  the  previously  described  procedure  for  the  detection  of 
microcalcification clusters. In particular, in the training phase 
865  images  (370  with  and  495  without  microcalcification 
clusters)  were  used,  whereas  the  test  set  consisted  in  806 

Fig. 2. Distributions of pathological and non-pathological ROIs of radius 

R, 2/3 R and 1/3 R. 
 

1.  The  digital  mammogram  is  divided  into  60x60 

pixels wide windows; 

 

2.  The windows are shrunk from 60x60 to 7x7 and are 
(with  or  without  microcalcification 
classified 
clusters) using a FFNN with 49 input, 6 hidden, and 
2 output neurons. 

If the window under examination is classified as positive by 
the FFNN, the analysis follows in this way: 

3.  The  windows  are  processed  by  a  convolution  filter 

in order to reduce the large structures; 

4.  A  self-organizing  map  (a  Sanger’s  neural  network) 
analyzes  each  window  and  produces  8  principal 
components; 

5.  The  principal  components  are  used  as  input  to  a 
FFNN  able  to  classify  the  windows  matched  to  a 
threshold  (the  response  of  the  output neuron of the 
neural network); 

6.  The windows are sorted by the threshold;   
7.  A  maximum  of  three  windows,  whose  thresholds 

exceed a given value, is memorized; 
8.  The overlapping windows are merged. 

 

 

images  (306  with  and  500  without  microcalcification 
clusters). 

The results obtained in this test are summarized in the ROC 
curve  reported  in  Fig.  5,  which  is  realized  by  varying  the 
threshold  according  to  which  the  interesting  windows  are 
sorted.  The  best  results  we  obtained  are  92%  for  both 
sensitivity and specificity. 

 
Fig.  5.  ROC  curve  for  microcalcification  clusters  (realized  with  865 

mammograms, 370 containing microcalcification clusters). 
 

C.  Practical use of the CALMA CAD system 
The hardware requirements for the CALMA CAD station 
are  very  simple:  a  PC  with  SCSI  bus  connected  to  a  planar 
scanner. As the size of information to be stored is large, big 
disks  and  a  CD-ROM  recorder  are  recommended.  A  high-
resolution  monitor  helps  the  human  radiological  diagnosis. 
The  station  can  process  mammograms  directly  acquired  by 
the  scanner  and/or  images  from  files  and  allows  human 
and/or  automatic  analysis  of  the  digital  mammograms.  The 
human  analysis  allows  a  diagnosis  of  the  breast  lesions  in 
terms of kind, localization on the image, average dimensions 
and,  if  present,  histological  type.  The  automatic  procedure 
finds  on  the  image  the  ROIs  that  are  characterized  by  a 
chance  (greater 
threshold  value)  of 
the  chosen 
containing a pathological sign. These data are stored as raw 
images,  .pgm and .gif. Raw data are used in CAD analysis, 
the  .pgm  file  is  used  to  show  on  the  monitor  an  8  bit-depth 
resolution image, while the .gif file provides a quick preview 
of the images. For each image of the preview, it is possible to 
open  the  image,  to  enter  or  modify  the  diagnosis,  the 
annotations  and  the  ROI  contours  corresponding  to  the 
is  also  an 
radiologist  geometrical 
interactive window that allows zoom, windowing, gray level 
and  contrast  selection.  The  operator  can  also  start  the  CAD 
analysis  by  choosing  in  other  interactive  windows  the 
threshold  for  ROI  selection  for  microcalcifications  or 
opacities.  The  station  allows  also  for  queries  and  statistical 
studies on the local database. 

indication.  There 

than 

D.  Performance of the CAD systems as second readers 
We  analyzed  the  performances  of  the  CALMA  CAD and 
of another CAD system, the CADx SecondLookTM as second 

readers  [17].  SecondLookTM 
is  a  commercial  system 
developed  by  CADx  Medical  Systems  (Canada)  and 
approved by FDA. Values reported for the sensitivity of this 
system  vary  from  88.7%  for  opacities  to  98.2%  for 
microcalcification  clusters.  Regarding specificity, values are 
reported in terms of false positive per image (FP/IMG): 0.28 
for microcalcification clusters and 0.97 for opacities [20]. 

We  performed  the  test  on  CADx  SecondLookTM  and 
CALMA  CAD  as  second  readers  by  using  the  following 
criteria: two radiologists with different degrees of experience 
made  the  diagnoses  on  a  set  of  mammograms  with  and 
without  the  help  of  the  two  CAD  systems.  The  results 
obtained  show  a  dependence  on  the  radiologist  experience. 
As shown in Table I an increment of sensitivity up to 11.5% 
is  reported  when  CADx  is  used,  and  up  to  15.6%  when 
CALMA  CAD  is  used.  With  respect  to  the  specificity  (see 
Table II), a decrement up to 3.4% is reported when CADx is 
used and up to 3.3% when CALMA CAD is used. It is worth 
noting that no decrement in specificity has been reported for 
the radiologist A (the more expert one) when CALMA CAD 
is used as second reader. 

 

 

TABLE I 
SENSITIVITY  

TABLE II 
SPECIFICITY 

 
Sensitivity  reported  for  the  radiologists  A  and  B  (characterized  by  two 
different degree of experience), radiologists with CADx SecondLookTM, and 
radiologists with CALMA CAD system.  

  
Specificity  reported  for  the  radiologists  A  and  B  (characterized  by  two 
different degree of experience), radiologists with CADx SecondLookTM, and 
radiologists with CALMA CAD system.  

VI.  THE GPCALMA PROJECT 

The success of the CALMA project, but also the necessity 
of solving some relevant issues left open by this experiment, 
led 
italian  physicists  and  radiologists  to  join  a  new 
collaboration,  the  GPCALMA  (Grid  Platform  for  Computer 
Assisted  Library  for  MAmmography)  project,  which  is 
supported  by  the  italian  INFN  (Istituto  Nazionale  di  Fisica 
Nucleare).   

The  emerging  GRID  technology  would  be  extremely 

suitable for solving some CALMA open issues, such as: 

1.  The  management  of  a  rapidly  increasing  (and 

virtually unlimited) database; 

2.  The handling of the legal restrictions on access to 
data  that  reside  in  hospitals  and  are  firewall-
protected; 

3.  The request of making available to each user the 

whole intrinsically-distributed database; 
4.  The securing of file transfer of large images; 

[2]  Lancet 2000, 355, 1822-1823. 
[3]  Blanks, British Medical Journal 321, 655-659, 2000. 
[4]  A.G.  Haus  and  M.Yaffe  (editors),  ”A  cathegorical  course  in  physics. 
Technical  aspects  in  breast  imaging”.  Radiological  Society  of  North 
America,  Presented  at  the  79th  Scientific  Assembly  and  Annual 
Meeting of RSNA, 1993. 

[5]  S.A. Feig, M.Yaffe, “Digital mammography, computer aided diagnosis 

and telemammohgraphy”, Radiol. Clin. N. Am. 33, 1205-1230, 1995. 

[6]  S. Keddache, A. Thilander-Klang, B. Lanhede, “Storage phosphor and 
film screen mammography: performance with different mammographic 
techniques” Eur. Radiol. 9,  591-597, 1999. 

[7]  R.A.  Scmidt,  R.M.Nishikawa,  “Clinical  use  of  digital  mammography: 
the presents and the perspects”, Digit. Imaging 8/1 suppl. 74-79, 1995. 
[8]  N.  Karssemejer,  “A  stochastic  method  for  authomated  detection  of 
microcalcifications in digital mammograms” in Information processing 
in medical imaging, Springer-Verlag New York, 227-238, 1991. 
[9]  N.  Karssmejer,  “Reading  screening  mammograms  with  the  help  of 
neural  networks”,  Nederlands  Tijdschriff  geneeskd,  143/45,  2232-
2236, 1999. 

[10]  C.J. Viborny, M.L. Giger, “Computer vision and artificial intelligence 

in mammography”, AJR 162, 699-708, 1994. 

[11]  S.A.  Feig  and  M.Yaffe,  Radiologic  Clinics  of  North  America,  Vol.33 

n.6, 1205, 1995. 

[12]  R.E.  Bird,  “Professional  quality  assurance  for  mammographic 

programs”, Radiology 177, 587-592, 1990. 

[13]  E.L. Thurfjell, K.A. Lernevall, A.A.S. Taube, “Benefit of indipendent 
double  reading  in  a  population  based  mammography  screening 
program” Radiology 191, 241-244, 1994. 

[14]  C.J.  Viborny  “Can  computer  help  radiologists  read  mammograms?” 

Radiology 191, 315-317, 1994. 

[15]  C.J. Viborny, M.L. Giger, R.M. Nishikawa, “Computer aided detection 
and  diagnosis  of  breast  cancer”,  Radiol.  Clin.  N.  Am. 38(4), 725-740, 
2000. 

[16]  U. Bottigli, P. Delogu, M.E. Fantacci, F. Fauci, B. Golosio, A. Lauria, 
R.  Palmiero,  G.  Raso,  S.  Stumbo,  S.  Tangaro,  “Search  of 
microcalcification  cluster  with  the  CALMA  CAD  station”.  The 
International Society for Optical Engineering (SPIE) 4684:1301-1310. 
[17]  A. Lauria, M.E. Fantacci, U. Bottigli, P. Delogu, F. Fauci, B. Golosio, 
P.L.  Indovina,  G.L.  Masala,  R.  Palmiero,  G.  Raso,  S.  Stumbo,  S. 
Tangaro,  “Diagnostic  performance  of  radiologists  with  and  without 
different  CAD  systems  for  mammography”,  SPIE  Medical  Imaging 
2003, San Diego, California, USA, 15-20 February 2003.  

[18]  S.R. Amendolia, M.G. Bisogni, U. Bottigli, A. Ceccopieri, P. Delogu, 
M.E.  Fantacci,  A.  Marchi,  V.M.  Marzulli,  P.  Oliva,  R.  Palmiero,  M. 
Reggiani,  A.  Stefanini,  S.  Stumbo,  S.  Tangaro,  O.  Venier,  “The 
CALMA  mammograph  database:  image  collection and CAD tools for 
speculated lesion detection and texture classification”, 5th International 
Workshop  on  digital  Mammography,  vol.  Conference  Proceedings, 
302, Toronto, Canada 2000.  

[19]  F. Fauci, R. Magro and G. Raso, Dipartimento di Fisica e Tecnologie 
Relative  dell’Università  di  Palermo  and  Sezione  INFN  di  Catania, 
Italy, personal comunication.  

[20]  A.  Malich,  C.  Marx,  M.  Facius,  T.  Boehm,  M.  Fleck,  W.A.  Kaiser 
(2001).  “Tumour  detection  rate  on  a  new  commercially  available 
computer aided detection system”.  Eur Radiol, 11: 2454-2459 

 

to  reduce  significantly 

5.  The  request  of  enabling  the  tele-diagnosis  in 
order 
in 
examining the acquired mammograms that can be 
associated  to  the  screening  programs  (order  of 
months). 

the  delays 

The  GRID  philosophy  based  on  “moving  code  rather  than 
data”  seems 
images  fitting 
to  be  very  suitable  for 
approximately  10.5  Mbytes,  that  are  stored  locally  in  each 
hospital. At the same time the GRID approach would support 
an  effective  tele-  and  co-working  between  radiologists, 
cancer  specialists  and  epidemiology  experts  by  allowing 
remote image analysis and interactive online diagnosis.  

environment  developed  by 

The approach adopted by the GPCALMA project is based 
on  ROOT  for  the  application  code,  on  PROOF  for  the 
parallel  remote  data  analysis  and  on  AliEn  (the  ALICE 
production 
the  ALICE 
collaboration at CERN) for the distributed data management. 
Thanks to the PROOF functionality, this approach will avoid 
data replication for all the images with a negative diagnosis 
(which are estimated to be about 95% of the sample), while it 
will  allow  a  real-time  diagnosis  for  the  5%  of  images  with 
high cancer probability.  

the 

tool  for 

The  CALMA  CAD  software  has  been  installed  on  the 
GPCALMA  station  with  a  dedicated  GUI  (graphics  user 
interface),  which  has  a  facility 
images 
visualization and elaboration, in order to support the medical 
diagnosis  directly  on  a  high-resolution  screen.  Radiologists 
can  use  the  GPCALMA  integrated  station  also  for  the 
digitization  and  storage  of  mammograms  and  to  perform 
statistical  analyses.  The  implemented  CAD  is  also  directly 
usable  with  digital  mammography  systems  since  it  is 
compatible  with  the  standard  DICOM  (Digital  Imaging  and 
Communications in Medicine). Some GPCALMA integrated 
stations have already been installed and are on clinical trial in 
some italian hospitals.  

Very  recently  (March  2003)  the  first  remote  analysis 
between  two  different  GPCALMA  integrated  stations  has 
successfully been performed. 

VII.  CONCLUDING REMARKS 

The GPCALMA collaboration has very recently achieved 
extremely  encouraging  results  in  the  planned  procedure  of 
GRID  enabling  the  CALMA  experiment.  By  using  a 
GPCALMA  integrated  station,  a  radiologist  can  store 
mammograms,  run  the  CAD  system  for  the  detection  of 
microcalcification  clusters  and  massive  lesions  on  every 
image  stored  in  the  shared  database  and  perform  statistical 
analysis. The basic functionality of the GRID connection that 
would  allow  the  remote  image  analysis  between  different 
medical centers is currently available and tested. In order to 
go  one  step  further,  the  GRID  connection  would  be  made 
available to all the hospitals joining the GPCALMA project. 

 

VIII.  REFERENCES 

[1]  R.A. Smith, “Epidemiology of breast cancer”, in “A categorical course 
physics 
considerations 
in 
responsibilities”,  Madison,  Wisconsin,  1991,  Medical  Physics 
Publishing. 

and  medical 

Imaging 

physics. 

