 
 

UCSan Diego,CHEP03 , 23-27 March 2003 

1 

The full detector simulation for the ATLAS experiment:  
status and outlook 

A. Rimoldi 
University of Pavia & INFN, Italy 
A.Dell’Acqua 
CERN, Geneva, CH 

The  simulation  of  the  ATLAS  detector  is  a  major  challenge,  given  the  complexity  of  the  detector  and  the  demanding 
environment of the LHC. The apparatus, one of the biggest and most complex ever designed, requires a detailed, flexible and, if 
possible, fast simulation which is needed already today to deal with questions related to design optimization, to issues raised by 
staging scenarios, and of course to enable detailed physics studies to lay the basis for the first physics discoveries. Scalability 
and robustness stand out as the most critical issues that are to be faced in the implementation of such a simulation. In this paper 
we  present  the  status  of  the  present  simulation  and  the  adopted  solutions  in  terms  of  speed  optimization,  centralization  of 
services, framework facilities and persistency solutions. Emphasis is put on the global performance when the different detector 
components are collected together in a full and detailed simulation. The reference tool adopted is Geant4.   

 

1.  INTRODUCTION

The  simulation  of  the  Atlas  experiment  is  an  ambitious 
task  since  it  requires  a  careful  and  detailed  design  for 
providing  optimal  functionalities  in  the  different  domains 
characterizing it.  

Its global design is indeed very complex since the detector 
to  be  simulated  is  out  of  scale  respect  to  any  previous  ever 
built:  the  local  environment  is  demanding  because  the 
biggest  collaboration  of  physicists  ever  gathered  is  faced to 
the  most  complete  and  challenging  physics  scenario  of  the 
LHC.  The  simulation  domain  in  Atlas  wraps  as  its  own 
components: 

(cid:127) 
(cid:127) 

(cid:127) 
(cid:127) 

(cid:127) 

the fast simulation project 
 the  digitization  for  the  implementation  of  the 
different detector responses  
the MonteCarlo generators 
the simulation in GEANT3, operatonal since ten 
year and still used for Data Challenges purposes  
the    new  simulation  in  GEANT4,  under  imple- 
mentation and test and ready to be used as Atlas 
baseline starting from mid 2003. 

 
In  particular  the  new  simulation  in  GEANT4  has  been 
developed and tested for physics validation studies to verify 
the  physics  content  in  GEANT4,  it  was  then  carefully 
compared  with 
in 
GEANT3  and  with  real  data  from  testbeam  experimental 
setups, where modules from the subdetectors productions are 
tested on beam lines.  

the  current  simulation  performed 

The  new  simulation  should  also  account  for  staged 
scenarios  and  to  beam  or  machine  constraints  at  the  LHC 
startup. 

Due to the huge amount of details characterizing it and to 
the  need  of  improving  performances,  the  simulation  itself 
should  also  house  a fast-simulation for parts of the detector 
or  should  gain  from  the  implementation  and  use  of 
parameterization techniques for optimization issues, without 
loosing the benefits of a detailed geometry description. 

 
TUMT001 

in  Atlas  with  emphasis 

In  this  paper  is  presented  an  overview  of  the  simulation 
project 
the  most  recent 
applications  in  the  GEANT4  geometry  description  of  the 
whole  detector  and  the  testbeam  setup  implementations, 
while  physics  validation  issues  are  presented  in  a  different 
CHEP03 paper (Ref.1). 

to 

2.  A ROAD TO THE ATLAS SIMULATION 

Data  Challenges (DC) are the software milestones for the 
experiment  and  simulation  is  playing  the  main  role  for 
generating  the  requested  event  samples.  Since  the  end  of 
2001  many  tests  on  event  productions  were  performed with 
the  standard  GEANT3  simulation.  This  phase,  called  DC0, 
was meant for resuming all the functionalities in place at the 
Physics Technical Design Report (TDR) time (1999) and to 
start the procedure for further DCs in the same environment 
with improved functionalities or using new tools. 

During  DC0  the  GEANT4  Atlas  community  performed  a 
dedicated  production  of  single  particle  and  Higgs  events 
(~10**6) for a selected geometry configuration as early test 
for  application  robustness  and  distributed  site  production 
(CERN and Japan).  

The  apparatus  geometry  described  in  this  application 
contained a detailed description of the muon system and the 
tile calorimeter, while rough description of other parts of the 
Atlas detector were fit together.  

  The  following  phase  (DC1),  done  in  the  GEANT3 
environment,  was  characterized,  at  the  beginning,  by  event 
generation  of    small  event  samples  (single  particle, B scans 
and  Higgs),  then  it  continued  through  high  statistics  single 
particle, minimum-bias events, QCD-jets and physics events 
productions.  

These  samples  were  requested  by  the  different  Atlas 
physics  communities  for  testing  purposes  in  view  of  the 
preparation of the subdetectors Technical Design Reports.  

During  this  phase,  lasting  2002  and  continuing  in  2003, 
checks  of  robustness  for  large  production  samples  were 
performed. 

 

UCSan Diego,CHEP03 , 23-27 March 2003 

2 

 

 

For  DC2,  expected  at  startup  in  late  fall  2003,  a  heavy 
plan of event productions will undergo both in GEANT3 and 
in  GEANT4  frameworks  with  goal  to  refine  the  present 
procedures and to add functionalities, being the basis for the 
Computing TDR (2004). 

Since  May  2000  an  extensive  programme  of  physics 
to 

launched 
in  GEANT4  was 
validations 
authenticate the physics content of GEANT4. 

in  order 

The  purpose  was  twofold:  for  the  GEANT4  physics 
benchmarking  and  the  GEANT4  physics  validation  itself. 
The aim was to compare  features of interaction models with 
similar  features  in  the  Geant3.21  baseline  and  try  to 
understand differences in applied models, e.g.: effect of cuts 

on simulation parameters (range cut vs. energy threshold, for 
example). 

For the physics validation itself, the purpose was related to 
the  use  of  available  experimental  references  from  testbeam 
for  various  sub-detectors  and  particle  types  to  determine 
prediction  power  of  models, 
the  Geant4 
performance  using  different  sensitivities  of  sub-detectors 
(energy loss, track multiplicities, shower shapes…),  to tune 
Geant4  models  (“physics  lists”)  and  parameters  (“range 
cuts”)  for  optimal  representation  of 
the  experimental 
detector signal.  

to  estimate 

The  GEANT4  simulation  and 

its  validation  using  
testbeam  results  is  the  only  reality  check  until  there  is  real 
data to compare with. 

3.  SIMULATION DATA FLOW 

In  the  ATLAS  experiment  the  simulation  data  flow  is 
designed in order to optimize the link between the different 
components as shown in Fig.1.  

In the simulation there are a number of steps that need to 
be undertaken. The passage of particles through the detectors 
is recorded as a number of positions throughout the detectors 
themselves.  

The  hits  information  is  combined  with  estimates  of 
internal  noise  and  subjected  to  a  parameterization  of  the 
known response of the detectors to produce simulated digital 

output  (digits).    The  digits  can  be  fed  to  the  pattern 
recognition  and  track  reconstruction  algorithms  as  if  they 
were real data. 

The  diagram  presents  the  simulation  data  flow,  including 
Generator  and  HepMC,  pile-up  and  digitization  when  the 
hits  generation  is  performed  by  the  simulation  itself  and 
merged hits, after pile-up or from the Level1 digitization, are 
passed 
the  ROD  emulation  algorithm  for  further 
to 
processing. 

  

 

 
 

Fig.1 The Atlas Simulation data flow 
 

 
TUMT001 

 

 

SSI2002, SLAC, August 5-16, 2002 

3 

 
4.  THE GEANT3 SIMULATION 

The  GEANT3  simulation  is  the  baseline  for  Atlas  since 
more than ten years; the package was frozen since 1995 and 
it  now  is  representing  the  current  simulation  for  the 
experiment.  

The  detector  components  are  simulated  in  an  evolving 
stable 

they  have  been 

representation,  while 
configuration during all DC1 productions.  

in  a 

Pile  up  was  used  in the latest production, but full pile-up 

The program parameters characterizing it are an operative 

with cavern background should be added.  

(cid:127) 
(cid:127) 

expression of the expected complexity for this experiment: 
27 Millions of distinct volumes copies 
23 thousand of different volume objects 
The  processing  time  per  job  is  about  24  hours  while  the 
typical output file for a production of a sample of ~170-320 
events (comprehensive of hits and digits) is ~200-300 MB. 

The  simulation  program  using  GEANT3  is  still  in 
evolution.  In  its  latest  version  new  implementations  were 
made  in  the  pixel  detector  and  in  the  forward  moderator. 
Inactive  material  description  and  forward  shielding  are 
simulated  and  the  correspondent  material  is  taken  into 
account for background evaluation. 

 

5.  THE GEANT4 SIMULATION 

Since years a big effort was devoted to the developing of 
the  simulation  program  in  the  new  OO  environment.  In  all 
the Atlas subdetectors  a wide program of implementation of 
a  correct,  complete  and  detailed  simulation  was  launched 
and  most  applications  are  already  implemented  in  the 
common  framework  of  Atlas,  among  them  the  complete 
geometry description of the whole apparatus.  

The  new  Geant4  based  simulation  is  meant  for  dealing 
with  the  new  physics  environment,  with  extensive  tests  on 
apparatus  prototypes  against  real data from testbeam before 
and  during  the  massive  productions  of  the  whole  detector 
components for the real experiment.  

Currently  most  applications  are  using  the  GEANT4 
version  4.1.1  and  the  upgrade  to  the  new  version  (5.1R2) 
was  successfully  made  for  the  geometry  part  in  all  the 
detector components  in the standard framework. 

5.1.Framework 

The  simulation  makes  use  of 

the  standard  Atlas 
framework (Athena-Gaudi) for all the domain’s components 
and  also  profits 
for 
development  purposes.  For  the  GEANT4  based  simulation 
most applications are developed in a the specific framework, 
FADS/Goofy (Framework for Atlas Detector Simulation in a 
Geant4 OO FollY).   

standalone  applications 

from 

The framework, born three years ago under redhat6.2 and 
gcc  compiler  version  2.95,  is  successfully  running  since 
more than one year in Redhat 7.2, gcc 2.96; the migration to 
Redhat 7.3.1 gcc 3.2 was successfully completed in 2003. 

The  FADS/Goofy  framework  was  widely  used  for 
subdetector  applications  in  the  development  phase  or  for 
testbeam developments implying physics validation studies.  
This  framework  is  very  light,  portable  and  fast.  The 
dynamic  loading  facility  is  extensively  used  as  well  as  the 
lazy  instantiation  technique,  that  allows  performing  actions 
on  demand  through  uploading  or  downloading  of  specific 
libraries.  

In that way the possibility of collecting detector elements 
at run time, without a predefined detector structure is easily 
possible.  

 
TUMT001 

 
 

 

After  the  development  in  the  simulation  framework,  the 
subdetector  applications  were  implemented  in  the  standard 
Atlas framework (Athena-Gaudi) without any modification.  

5.2. Detector geometry in GEANT4 

The 

four  main  subdetectors  composing  Atlas  are 
implemented  in  the  new  simulation  with  a  high  level  of 
details.  

Figures  2  to  6  show  three-dimensional  views  of  some 
geometry implementation of the Atlas subdetectors: the SCT 
component of the Inner Detector is shown in Fig.2, the LAr 
calorimeter  module  in  Fig.3,  while  the  complete  Tile 
calorimeter in Fig.4.  

The muon system is shown in Fig.5: a cut view shows the 
four  different  components  characterizing  it:  the  precision 
chamber system in the barrel and forward region (MDT and 
CSC chamber system) and the trigger system (RPC and TGC 
system);  the  complete  geometry  for  the  barrel  and  endcap 
toroids in shown in Fig.6. 

Fig. 2 The SCT detector of Atlas 
 
 

 

 

 

 

UCSan Diego,CHEP03 , 23-27 March 2003 

4 

Fig.3 LAr electromagnetic calorimeter testbeam module 

 

The  level  of  details  reached  by  the  new  simulation  in  the 
geometry  description  is  at  least  of  the  same  order  of 
magnitude  with  respect  to  the  one  achieved  in  the  previous 
simulation in Geant3, while the implementation details differ 
in  some  cases  from  the  previous  simulation  due  to  new 
functionalities in GEANT4. 
In  the  muon  system,  for  example,  special  solid  hexagonal 
shapes have been implemented in order to describe the CSC 
 

Fig.4 The tile calorimeter three dimensional view. 

Fig.5 Open view of the muon system with all the precision 
system and the trigger system (barrel and endcap regions) 
 

 
TUMT001 

Fig.6  The  Atlas  toroid  system  with  feet,  rails  and  service 

 

chimneys. 

 
system 

in 

the 

forward 

toroids 
implementation wide use of boolean solids was adopted and 
for  the  description  of  the  LAr  calorimeter  new  solid shapes 
describing the ‘accordion’ geometry were built. 

region, 

the 

for 

5.3.Testbeam geometry in GEANT4 

In  the  past  years  an  extensive  test  of    modules  in  each 
subsystem was performed in dedicated setups on beam lines 
and a parallel and wide effort in the simulation followed, in 
order to verify the physics content of GEANT4.  

Comparisons  with  the  previous  simulation  in  GEANT3 
were  performed,  for 
the  new  simulation  and 
understanding  the  possible  differences  when  tuning  was 
ineffective. 

tuning 

For  each  subdetector  setup  a  detailed  simulation  in 
GEANT4  was  put  in  place.  Emphasis  was  put  in  the 
geometry description and in the implementation of the beam 
line  characteristics  (beam  momentum  tuning,  beam  spread, 
vertex displacement from the nominal position). 

Fig. 7 shows the geometry of the tile testbeam modules as 
simulated  after  the  1996  data  taking  period  (upper  part  of 
Fig. 7) and in a later setup (2001) (lower part of Fig.7). 

Fig.8  presents  a  three  dimensional  view  of  the  complex 
setup  for  the  forward  calorimeter  along  the  beam  line: 
cryostat  containing  the  calorimeter  modules  and  all  the 
components on the setup are described in the simulation. 

In  Fig.9  the  setup  for  the  combined  geometry  of  pixel 

detector, tile and muon system sector is shown.  
 

 

 

 

 

 

SSI2002, SLAC, August 5-16, 2002 

5 

 
Fig.8  The  forward    LAr  calorimeter  (FCAL)  testbeam 

setup 

 
Fig.7 three dimensional view of the tile testbeam modules 

as in the 1996(up) and 2001(down) setups. 

 

 

 

 
Fig.9 Testbeam setup for the combined configuration as in 
CERN H8 testbeam area (summer 2002) with Pixel detector 
elements,  tile  calorimeter  and  barrel  sector  of  the  muon 
system  with  some  extra  material  in  front  of  the  muon  setup 
(Al or Fe blocks). 

 

 
Using these geometries we approached the physics validaton 
studies  in  the  different  Atlas  subdetectors:  we  compared 
features of interaction models with similar features in Geant 
3.21baseline.  For  the  validation  we  used  all  available 

from 

references 

testbeam  and  different 
experimental 
sensitivities  of  subdetectors 
the  Geant4 
performance  and  we  tuned  physics  lists  and  parameters 
(range  cut)  for  optimal  representation  of  the  experimental 
detector signal. 

to  estimate 

Acknowledgments 

The authors wish to thank all the contributors, developers 
and  users:  they  made  possible  the  realization  of  the  Atlas 
simulation since the early times of the Atlas life. 

Their comments were essential for refinements to the final 
design  and  for  developing  new  features  that  made  possible 
 

 
TUMT001 

the realization of this work. The following list of references 
documents  the  huge  amount  of  work  behind  this  short 
presentation (Ref. 2 to  8) performed in the last years from a 
community involving more than 20 people. 

 

 

 

References 

[1] Dell’Acqua,A. (on behalf of the Atlas Geant4 

Validation team).Status of the physics validation 
studies using Geant4 in Atlas (MOMT003) 

 
[2] Dell’Acqua,A. et al.The Atlas Muon Spectrometer 
Simulation using Geant4 ATL-MUON-2000-020 

 [3] Rebuzzi,D. et al. Study of the A/H -> mumu channel in 
the Muon Spectrometer with GEANT4 and comparison with 
ATLFAST ATL-MUON-2002-004 

[4] Rimoldi,A. et al.  Geometrical Acceptance for the 

Trigger Chamber System and study of the reaction H 
-> ZZ* -> four muons from the acceptance point of 
view ATL-DAQ-1998-019 

 

 

UCSan Diego,CHEP03 , 23-27 March 2003 

6 

 
[5] Policicchio,A. et al. Simulation and Reconstruction 
of Muon Events at the H8 Testbeam  (ATL-COM-MUON-

2003-014) 

 
[6] Kortner,O. et al. Shower production by highly energetic 

muons ATL-COM-PHYS-2002-046 

 
[7]http://www.mppmu.mpg.de/~kiryunin/g4_note/ 
 
[8] A.A.Solodkov, V.Tsulaia. TileCal Beam Test Simulation 

Application in the FADS/Goofy Framework 

(GEANT4)  ATL-TILECAL-2003-002 
 

 
TUMT001 

