MAPPING A CLOUD OF ULTRACOLD ATOMS  
ONTO A MINIATURE STORAGE RING 
 

Wilbert Rooijakkers 
Harvard University, Physics Department, 
 Lyman Laboratory, Cambridge MA 02138 
 
 

 
We  describe  how  to  realize  magnetic  and  magneto-optical  confinement  of 
ultracold  atoms  in  a  torus  with  adjustable  diameter  and  how  an  elliptical 
cloud of ultracold atoms can be adiabatically transformed to have a toroidal 
shape.  An  experiment  with  cold  87Rb  atoms  demonstrates  the  feasibility  of 
shape transformations. These techniques can be used for atom interferometry 
and quantum computation.   

 

 

1

 
 
  
Ultracold atoms in a magnetic holding field provide an ideal system for studying 
quantum phase coherence [1] and spin coherence [2], due to the nearly perfect isolation 
from  the  environment  to  where  quantum  information  may  escape.  Indeed,  these  atoms 
can be prepared in distinct quantum states of the holding potential, a single ground state 
in the case of bosons or filled up from the ground state to the Fermi level in the case of 
fermions. The exploitation of the coherence properties of cold atom clouds has only just 
started  but  promises  great  opportunities  in  the  fields  of  atom  interferometry  [3]  and 
quantum information [4].  

Many  groups  are  looking  to  improve  the  integration  and  complexity  of  the 
magnetic fields that hold the atoms, to create what has become known as ‘atom chips’, 
and it has been demonstrated that a Bose Einstein Condensate (BEC) can be manipulated 
at distances as small as 50 µm from a patterned surface [5,6].  Usually the cold atoms are 
collected  and  pre  cooled  far  away  from  the  surface  (>  1mm)  after  which  the  cloud  is 
continuously and adiabatically transported, while maintaining its spherical shape [7]. We 
demonstrate in this work that the same process can be used to adiabatically deform the 
cloud into more complex shapes such as a ring.   

Coherent  particles  confined  to  a  ring  are  a  fundamental  system  in  the  study  of 
quantum mechanics, and have been extensively studied in solid-state physics using liquid 
helium  [8]  and  using  electrons  in  micrometer  sized  solid-state  devices  [9].  Atom 
interferometry  in  a  ring  can  be  used  to  build  an  ultra  sensitive  gyroscope,  using  the 
Sagnac  phase  shift  that  is  incurred  for  atoms  traveling  in  opposite  directions  along  the 
ring. Not only is a ring the simplest structure that could facilitate such a rotation sensor; it 
also  is  robust  to  systematic  errors  due  to  its  inherent  symmetry.  It  has  recently  been 
demonstrated  that  super  conducting  flux  Q-bits  can  be  realized  in  solid  state  devices 
where the system is prepared in a coherent state of oppositely running currents [10], and 
that these Q-bits can become entangled [11]. Essentially the same physics would apply to 
cold atoms in a magnetic holding field, but with much less decoherence.  

On  the  fundamental  level  a  new  physics  regime  is  entered  when  atoms  are 
confined  to  length  scale  of  the  order  of  the  elastic  scattering  length.  In  this  case, 
sometimes described as the ‘Tonks’ gas regime, Bose statistics no longer holds due the 
fact  that  particles  cannot  pass  by  each  other.  Although  this  system  has  been  studied 
theoretically  both  in  straight  [12]  and  ring  [13,14]  geometries,  experimental  realization 
has been elusive. In our novel scheme the question of reaching stronger confinement in a 
toroidal  field  is  purely  answered  by  the  technical  ability  to  increase  the  current  that 
produces the magnetic field, without affecting the longitudinal degree of freedom. Thus 
the atoms will eventually enter the collisional regime and subsequently the Tonks regime, 
for sufficient scaling of the magnetic field.   

We  propose  to  confine  weak  field  seeking  states  of  the  ground  state  Zeeman 
multiplet in a toroidal magnetic field, created by a single hollow cylindrical shield of mu-
metal,  wound  with  kapton  wire  (Figure  1)  combined  with  an  external  bias  field. 
Ferromagnetic material, such as mu-metal, can be used to concentrate the magnetic field 
generated  by  many current carrying wires along the long axis of the shield.  The  spatial 
structure of the magnetic field depends on the specific properties, the treatment and the 
geometry of the shield, but can be described in a very good approximation by a uniformly 

 

2

poled material with constant magnetic field inside. We have demonstrated before that we 
can generate surface fields of up to 500 Gauss, with relatively small electric power (<100 
Watt). Combinations of shields can be used to make confining magnetic guides for cold 
atoms [15], and very recently we have loaded and transported 87Rb atoms along a stadium 
shaped ring with a circumference of 10 cm [16].   

To describe our present system we use capitals X, Y and Z for absolute position 
coordinates,  R  for  the  radius  of  the  hollow  coil  and  D  for  its  length.  Dimensionless 
position  coordinates  in  units  of  R  are  represented  by  small  characters,  e.g.  x=X/R. 
Magnetic field derivatives are given by using an appropriate number of apostrophes, e.g. 
B’x=dB/dX.    Figure  1  shows  the  coil  positioned  such  that  its  symmetry  axis  coincides 
with  the  z-axis  and  its  top  coincides  with  the  x-y  plane.  A  thin  quarter  wave  plate, 
reflection  coated  at  the  bottom,  is  put  on  top  of  the  coil,  and  serves  to  reflect  the  laser 
beam that is used to capture atoms in the magnetic field minima above the coil, with the 
appropriate polarization. 

The  location  of  the  minima  is  a  function  of  the  applied  external  bias  field,  in 
addition  to  the  field  provided  by  the  coil.  Instead  of  integrating  current  filaments  using 
Biot-Savart’s  law,  we  use  the  equivalence  of  electric  and  magnetic  dipoles  to  calculate 
the field at any specific position. An infinitesimal section of the ring shield is considered 
as a magnetic  dipole,  or equivalent:  an electric dipole with opposite charges, located at 
Z=0  and  Z=-D  respectively.  The  field  can  now  be  calculated  as  the  sum  of  the  electric 
field due to individual charges. The electric potential Φ due to a ring with charge Q can 
be expressed analytically in closed form [17]: 
 

Φ

(

,
ρ

Z

)

=

Q
2
4
ρππε

0

(

+

1
)

R

2

2

+

Z

2

kK
(

)

                                                                   (1) 

=ρ

X +

2 Y

2

 and K(k2) is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind, and: 

                                                                                                       (2) 

 
If  the  coil  is  long  (D>>X,Y,Z)  or  close  to  the  top  section  of  the  shield  (X2+Y2~R2  and 
Z<<D) the potential can be considered due to the top charged ring only. This situation is 
likely  to  occur  in  a  typical  experimental  situation  where  one  wants  to  exploit  the  field 
integrating  capacity  of  mu-metal.  Taking  the  gradient  in  cylindrical  coordinates  in 
expression (1) provides an expression for the radial (axial) component of the field. 

We  have  studied  the  location  of  the  field  minima  as  a  function  of  the  applied 
external vertical bias field Bbias, assuming Bbias can be vectorially added to the coil field 
without changing it. This is not unrealistic, as ferromagnetic materials exist with stiffness 
against depolarization that exceeds 1 Tesla. The topology of the field is different above 
and  below  a  characteristic  value  Bbias=Bthres  (Figure  2).  For  Bbias<Bthres  there  are  two 
quadrupole minima with different gradient on the symmetry axis x=0,y=0. Both of these 
can  be  used  to  load  atoms  using  magneto-optical  trapping  techniques,  but  opposite 
circular  polarizations  would  be  required  for  each  of  them.  As  Bbias  is  increased  the 
minima move towards each other until they merge for Bbias=Bthres. At this point a single 

 

with 
 

2

k

=

R
4
ρ
)
2
R

(
ρ

+

2

+

Z

 

3

minimum  exists  with  hexapole  symmetry.  In  the  single  ring  charge  approximation  the 
minimum is located where the z-derivative of Eq. (1) takes its maximum value. This is 
zthres=0.707. When the ring charges on both sides of the dipole are taken into account zthres 
changes,  but  less  than  20%  in  most  cases.  This provides a good estimate for where the 
trapping lasers should cross to capture atoms from a hot background vapor. When Bbias is 
increased further, the holding field assumes a ring topology. The radius of this ring grows 
while increasing Bbias until it reaches the radius of the mu-metal shield. Further increasing 
Bbias will increase the confinement (gradient in the radial direction), but hardly changes 
the location of the ring.  

We emphasize that atoms can be magneto-optically trapped from the background 
vapor in a cell, both for Bbias<Bthres (spherical cloud) but also Bbias>Bthres (ring). Figure 2 
shows a vector plot of the field in both situations. Previous experiments, to be described 
hereafter,  have  shown  that  magneto-optical  trapping  works  well  if  the  propagation 
direction  and  the  magnetic  field  direction  are  within  15  degree  of  each  other  and  if  the 
correct (circular) polarization is applied.  Magneto-optical trapping of a spherical cloud 
of atoms has been studied in detail [18] and serves as a departure point to achieve BEC. 
Specifically,  using  optical  pumping  into  a  dark  state,  a  large  initial  density  –enough  to 
start evaporative cooling- can be created. This could well serve to create phase coherence 
before the cloud is mapped onto a ring. To avoid Majorana transitions an extra plugging 
field  needs  to  be  applied  to  remove  the  magnetic  degeneracy.  For  a  torus  a  current 
carrying wire along the z-axis can achieve this. 

To demonstrate the possibility of continuously transforming a magnetic potential 
from  a  single  well  to  a  double  well,  while  maintaining  magnetic  or  magneto-optical 
trapping, we shall now describe an experiment using a straight guide with four mu-metal 
shields and a horizontal external bias field Bbias. (Fig. 3). We consider the outer shields as 
a  pair  with  equal  but  oppositely  poled  magnetization,  and  likewise  for  the  inner  pair. 
Without  an  external  bias  the  field  of  the  inner  coils  cancels  that  of  the  outer  coils  in 
exactly  one  point  in  the  transverse  x-z  plane,  creating  a  single  waveguide  in  the  y 
direction.  With  a  horizontal  bias  field  two  minima  exist,  corresponding  to  two  parallel 
magnetic guides. By either tuning the external bias field or the inner coil magnetization 
these minima can be made to merge or move apart, in a similar fashion as the ring magnet 
described earlier.  The possibility of splitting two guides has been described before for a 
similar system using parallel wires instead of coils [19].  

We  have  carried  out  an  experiment  to  test  this  splitting  for  magneto-optically 
trapped  87Rb  atoms  using  a  straight  atom  guide.  Due  to  the  different  geometry  of  the 
magnetic field, as opposed to the ring in Fig.1, we use one set of “molasses” laser beams 
along the y-axis and another set at 45 degree angles with the x-y plane, in which a mirror 
is located (no λ/4 plate for this geometry). Immediately after switching off the magneto-
optical trapping beams we take an absorption image along the y-axis, i.e. the long axis of 
the atom guide(s). The results are shown in Fig. 4. Similarly to Fig. 2 a shallow magnetic 
minimum moves closer to the surface while increasing Bbias, and then splits laterally. The 
two  minima  of  the  double  well  are  both  filled  with  atoms  at  the  same  time  using 
magneto-optical  forces.  Small  asymmetries  are  observed  which  may  be  attributed  to 
fabrication  defects  and  alignment  of  the  trapping  laser  beams.  For  large  bias  field  the 
minima  seem  more  separated  in  the  experiment  than  in  the  theory,  which  is  based  on 
infinitely  thin  coils  (thickness  0.5  mm  in  the  experiment)  and  on  the  assumption  that 

 

4

fields  due  to  individual  coils  can  be  linearly  superposed.  This  model  breaks  down  for 
high  field  strengths  due  to  effects  of  saturation  and  depolarization.  In  the  numerical 
model  we  find  that  the  gradient  in  a  minimum  scales  as  B’x =α(Bbias-Bthres)  for 
Bbias>Bthres, with α=17.8 cm-1 for the geometry and settings in the experiment. 

In summary we have presented a novel method to fill a toroidal magnetic guide 
with  ultra  cold  atoms,  using  magneto-optical  trapping  or  adiabatic  transfer  from  a 
previously filled spherical/elliptical reservoir. Being able to reach quantum degeneracy in 
a  ring  that  is  entirely  filled  with  atoms  may  offer  significant  advantages  for 
interferometry:  large  wavelength  perturbations  due  to  a  noisy  environment  will  be 
strongly damped, whereas an applied short wavelength modulation should be retrievable 
after longer times, due to poor overlap with scattering inhomogeneities in the guide.   

The author thanks Prof. Mara Prentiss for sponsorship in the time that this work 

was completed. 

 

5

 
 
References 
 
[1] J. Denschlag et al, Science 287, 97 (2000) 
[2]  D.M.  Harber,  H.J.  Lewandowski,  J.M.  McGuirk  and  E.A.  Cornell,  Phys.  Rev.  A66, 
053616 (2002) 
[3] E. Andersson et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 100401 (2002). 
[4] L.-M. Duan, M.D. Lukin, J.I. Cirac and P. Zoller, Nature 414, 413 (2001) 
[5] H. Ott  J. Fortagh, G. Schlotterbeck, A. Grossmann and C. Zimmermann, Phys. Rev. 
Lett 87, 230401 (2001) 
[6] W. Hänsel, P. Hommelhoff, T.W. Hänsch and J. Reichel, Nature 413, 498 (2001) 
[7]  J.  Reichel,  W.  Hänsel,  P.  Hommelhoff  and  T.  W.  Hänsch,  Appl.  Phys.  B72,  81 
(2001). 
[8] R.W. Simmonds, A. Marchenkov, E. Hoskinson, J.C. Davis and R.E. Packard, Nature 
412, 55 (2001) 
[9] A. van Oudenaarden, M.H. Devoret, Yu. V. Nazarov and J.E. Mooij, Nature 391, 768 
(1998) 
[10] C. H. van der Wal et al, Science 290, 773 (2000). 
[11] Yu. A. Pashkin et al, Nature 421, 823 (2003). 
[12] M. Olshanii, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 938 (1998). 
[13] K.K. Das, M.D. Girardeau and E.M. Wright, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 170404 (2002) 
[14] K.K. Das, G.J. Lapeyre and E.M. Wright, Phys. Rev. A65, 063603 (2002) 
[15] M. Vengalattore, W. Rooijakkers and M. Prentiss, Phys. Rev. A66, 053403 (2002) 
[16] W. Rooijakkers, S. Wu and M. Prentiss, unpublished. 
[17] J.D. Jackson, ‘Classical Electrodynamics’, Wiley Interscience 
[18] C. G. Townsend et al, Phys. Rev. A52, 1423 (1995). 
[19] O. Zobay and B. Garraway, Opt. Comm. 178, 93 (2000) 

 

6

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
Figure  1:  System  used  for  creating  toroidal magnetic trapping field: a mu-metal tube is 
wound  with  isolated  copper  wire.  Combined  with  a  homogeneous  external  field  (as 
indicated)  field  minima  exist  above  the  tube  which  serve  to  contain  an  atom  cloud. 
Increasing  the  bias  field  causes  one  of  the  minima  to  move  towards  the  surface.  The 
point-like minimum changes into a toroidal minimum at a critical height zthres. A quarter-
wave plate with a mirror coating on the back is necessary to reflect the laser beams that 
are used for magneto-optical trapping.  

7

 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
Figure 2: Geometry for magneto-optical and magnetic trapping of a cold atom cloud in a 
torus.  Arrows  indicate  the  laser  beams  for  magneto-optical  trapping.  Top  left: 
Bbias=0.8Bthres, two point-like minima with different gradient. Top right: Bbias=4Bthres, one 
torus-shaped  minimum.  The  minima  are  indicated  by  an  equipotential  surface  with 
constant |B|. Bottom: vector plots around the trap minima indicating the field direction. 

8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Setup for straight waveguide, as used in the experiment. Left: three-dimensional 
schematic  with  arrows  indicating  the  trapping  laser  beams.  A  mirror  (not  shown)  is 
mounted on top of the four mu-metal coils. Right:  two-dimensional cross section of the 
guiding  structure,  using  four  mu-metal  coils  (in  black,  10  windings  each).  Arrows 
indicate the magnetic field emerging from the coils and a homogeneous horizontal bias 
field. A combination of these fields results in line shaped field minima that can split and 
recombine. 
 

9

 

 
Figure 4: Top: Resonant absorption images  (frame size: 4.9 mm x 4.9 mm) in the long 
direction  of  the  atom  cloud,  immediately  after  the  trap  laser  light  is  switched  off,  with 
horizontal  bias  field  Bbias=5,  6,  7,  8  and  11  Gauss  respectively.  The  four  ferromagnetic 
coils  carry  a  constant  current  of  1.0  A  each.  Dotted  line  corresponds  to  mirror  surface. 
Bottom: equipotential contour plots, based on calculation which produces a gradient B’x = 
16, 17, 7, 36, 90 G/cm in the respective minima. Scaling factor of coil field is fitted to 
comply with Bthres=6G.  

 

10

