NUCLEAR MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC EMP, 
SOLAR STORMS, AND SUBSTORMS 

Mario Rabinowitz 
Electric Power Research Institute ; Palo Alto, CA 94303, USA 

Inquiries to: Armor Research; 715 Lakemead Way, Redwood City, CA 94062, USA 

Mario715@earthlink.net 
 
A. P. Sakis Meliopoulos and Elias N. Glytsis 
School of Electrical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA 

George J. Cokkinides 
Electrical Engineering Department, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208 , USA 

Abstract 

In addition to a fast electromagnetic pulse (EMP), a high altitude nuclear burst 
produces a relatively slow magnetohydrodynarnic EMP (MHD EMP), whose effects are 
like  those  from  solar  storm  geomagnetically  induced  currents  (SS-GIC).  The  MHD 
EMP electric field E < 10-1 V/m and lasts < 102 sec, whereas for solar storms E > 10-2 
V/m  and  lasts  >103  sec.  Although  the  solar  storm  electric  field  is  lower  than  MHD 
EMP,  the  solar  storm  effects  are  generally  greater  due  to  their  much  longer  duration. 
Substorms produce much smaller effects than SS-GIC, but occur much more frequently. 
This  paper  describes  the  physics  of  such  geomagnetic  disturbances  and  analyzes  their 
effects. 

 
1. Introduction 
 

Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) effects were observed in conjunction with the first nuclear 
detonation produced by man - the Trinity test of 1945 in New Mexico. At least two kinds of EMP 
have been identified and studied extensively. Both are related to a high altitude burst, and as such 
are  called  HEMP.  One  is  an  extremely  fast  pulse  with  a  duration  ~  10-6  sec  occurring  at  the 
beginning  of  a  burst,  which  we  call  TEMP  (tachy[fast]EMP).  Since  the  TEMP  was  thought  to 
have  an  electric  field  peak  ~  50  kV/m,  ~  106  times  greater  than  the  much  slower 
magnetohydrodynamic EMP (MHD EMP), it was expected that the TEMP would have a much 
bigger  impact;  and  almost  all  the  attention  was  focussed  on  TEMP.  TEMP  was  anticipated  to 
have devastating effects in electrically blacking out huge land masses; and much media coverage 
was given to this possibility. However, Rabinowitz showed that the impact of TEMP would be 
local  rather  than  continental,  and  not  be  much  greater  than  that  of  lightning.[1-3]  Later 
independent  work  by  Millard,  Meliopoulos,  and  Cokkinides  [4]  reached  similar  conclusions. 
Consideration of the radiation reaction force [5] and subtle relativistic effects [6] indicate that 50 
kV/m may not even be achievable for the preponderance of nuclear weapons that exist. 
 

Therefore for completeness, we shall now focus on the relatively slow MHD EMP which 
occurs ~ sec after the burst, and has a duration < 102 sec. We shall see that the effects of MHD 
EMP are similar to, but generally less severe than those of solar storm geomagnetically induced 
currents (SS-GIC) which last > 103 sec, and sometimes continue for days. Both phenomena cause 

 

 

 

 

 

 

flow of very low frequency current (almost direct) in the earth, and transfer or induce this current 
to nearby structures. We shall analyze the effects of the voltages and currents that they produce. 
In  addition  we  will  consider  substorms  which  occur  on  a  daily  basis,  but  whose  effects  at  the 
earth's surface are much smaller than the much less frequent solar storms. 
 
2. Solar Burst EMP 
 
2.1. Solar storms 
 

The sun emits ionized particles into space on both a steady and a transient basis by means 
of  what  is  called  the  solar  wind.  The  steady  interaction  of  the  solar  wind  with  the  earth's 
ionosphere  and  geomagnetic  field  has  no  adverse  effect  on  electric  power  networks.  A  much 
stronger and potentially adverse transient constituent results from sunspot activity when the blast 
wave from a solar flare hits the earth's magnetosphere. This produces electrical system problems 
about every eleven years during the peak of the sunspot cycle. 
 

Interactions of the earth's magnetic field with the solar wind give rise to auroral currents 
or aurora electrojets. [7, 8] These high altitude currents produce variations in the earth's magnetic 
field  that-are  termed  geomagnetic  storms.  The  strength and  severity of the  geomagnetic storms 
are strongly related to solar storms, solar flares, coronal holes, and disappearing solar filaments. 
During  geomagnetic  storms,  the  time  varying  magnetic  field  can  induce  electric  potential 
gradients  called  earthsurface-potentials  (ESP)  whose  magnitude  depends  on  the  severity  of  the 
geomagnetic storm and on the earth's conductivity. [9, 10] 
 

Due  to  the  93  million  mile  journey  that  the  ions,  travelling  4  million  miles/hr  (2  x  106 
m/sec), must take to reach the earth, the effects of a major solar flare are felt here approximately 
a day after it erupts. High sunspot activity is usually followed by magnetic storms on the earth. 
Because  of  this  relatively  long  time  delay,  early  warning  systems  have  been  considered.  One 
system  would  use  an  orbiting  satellite  to  give  us  advance  warning  to  avert  perturbative  and 
potentially  destructive  effects  on  electric  power  systems  from  solar  storms  which  are  likely  to 
occur in the sunspot cycle maximum. 
 

The biggest effects in our hemisphere are felt at northern latitudes. In addition, the effects 
are exacerbated if the ground is poorly conducting in the vicinity of the electric utility network, 
causing  more  current  to  flow  through  the  conductors  connected  to  ground  (at  more  than  one 
point).  Good  conducting  ground  helps  to  reduce  the  effects  on  the  network,  by  diverting  the 
induced currents. The magnetic storm may have high activity producing an electric field ~ 10-2 
V/m  for  periods  ~hour,  with  intermittent  quiescent periods for a  duration  of about 24 hours as 
shown in Fig. 1. 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 1. Induced voltage on a 473 mile (368 km) overhead transmission line from a typical small 
solar  storm  -  orders  of  magnitude  lower  than  from  a  severe  storm.  Raw  data  is  from  a 
magnetogram recording on May 12-13, 1989 at the Magnetic Observatory Fiirstenfeldbruck.  
 
 
 
Slothower and Albertson [11] estimate that "earth potentials of 5 to 10 volts per mile are 
sufficient to produce direct currents in transformer windings of great enough magnitude to cause 
saturation, . . . ".   The saturation of transformer cores for long enough periods of time can cause 
them  to  overheat.  This  can  decrease  transformer  life.  In  rare  occasions,  very  large  and  very 
expensive transformers have been permanently damaged during periods of very high solar storm 
activity.  It is therefore important to determine if the much shorter duration but higher field MHD 
EMP could possibly have equally serious effects. 
 

  Models  that  have  been  developed  for  the  estimation  of  the  SS-GIC  differ  in  the 
representation of the auroral currents and the earth's conductivity. Sometimes the auroral currents 
are  assumed  to  be  at  an  infinite  distance  from  the  earth's  surface.  In  this  case,  the  perturbed 
geomagnetic field is modeled as an electromagnetic plane wave [4] as an upper limit calculation. 
The  earth's  conductivity  is  also  difficult  to  model  due  to  the  earth's  inhomogeneity.  [12]  The 
simplest model assumes a flat earth of a uniform effective conductivity, while more sophisticated 
models  include  multiple  layers  of  differing  conductivities.  However,  the  auroral  currents  are 
known  to  be  at  high  altitudes  (100-300  km)  and  can  be  modeled  like  current  sheet  sources  or 
current  line  sources  (along  the  east-west  direction)  of  infinite  extent  above  the  earth's  surface 
[4,13,14] that is assumed to be flat. The current sheet model gives an upper limit of the induced 
electric field while the current line model gives a lower limit. The general methodology used for 
the  solution  of  these  problems  is  based  on  Price's  analysis.  [15]  More  sophisticated  studies 
include  Gaussian  modeling  [16]  of  the  electrojets,  or  a  nonsymmetrical  [17]  auroral  current 
distribution. 

Independently  of  the  model  used,  the  complexity  of  the  physical  effect  of  the  auroral 
electrojets  is  difficult  to  represent.  In  addition,  all  models  assume  sinusoidal  auroral  currents. 
However, the spectral content of the auroral currents is not known. Due to the above mentioned 
reasons,  the  geomagnetic  field  is  usually  measured  in  several  positions  in  the  areas  of  interest 
using magnetometers. By measuring the horizontal component of the magnetic field, the induced 

horizontal (perpendicular to the horizontal magnetic field) electric field can be roughly estimated 
using the plane wave model of Pirjola. [10] 

 

 
where E(t) is the horizontal component of the induced electric field, µo is the permeability of free 
space, σ, is the earth's conductivity, g is the time derivative of the horizontal component of the 
magnetic field, D is the data time-interval, aj = 0 when j is even and 1 when j is odd, and L is the 
total number of data points that are included in the calculation of E(t). An example, typical of the 
great  majority  of  small  solar  storms,  of  induced  voltage  from  the  horizontal  component  of 
electric field is shown in Fig. 1, as calculated from Eq. (1). Severe solar storms produce voltages 
that are orders of magnitude higher.  
 
2.2. Substorms 
 

 

Substorms  are  a  less  well  known  and  weaker  (with  respect  to  effects  on  the  earth) 
phenomenon than solar storms and MHD EMP, but have the advantage of much more frequent 
occurrence. With sensitive enough instrumentation, we might be able to use substorms on a daily 
basis to study the effects of solar storms and MHDEMP. This would have the advantage of not 
having  to  wait  for  long  periods  of  time  before  observing  an  event.  Substorms  are  magnetic 
storms that occur a few times every day in the center of the earth's magnetosphere. Substorms last 
about an hour. This is less than the period of one day or more for the relatively infrequent high 
activity geornagnetic storms. 

 

Substorms are the means by which vast amounts of stored magnetic energy ~1015 Joules 
 
are  released  on  a  daily  basis.  Substorms  may  be  driven  internally  by  the  stored  energy  in  the 
magnetotail,  however  most  of  the  time  they  are  driven  by  the  solar  wind.  This  is  a  comet-like 
wake ~ 102 earth radii (Re = 6.4 x 106 m) long, which results from the solar wind's interaction 
with the earth's magnetic field. A giant magnetic bubble is formed which makes the MHD EMP 
bubble appear miniscule by comparison. Instead of the MHD EMP bubble radius of hundreds of 
miles, a gigantic bubble of hot plasma 5 x 108m (300,000 miles) long, 106m (80,000 miles) wide, 
and  8  x  107  M  (50,000  miles)  high,  as  depicted  schematically  in  Fig.  2,  is  created  by  the 
interaction of the solar wind conducting plasma which is threaded and held together by loops of 
magnetic  flux.  [18]  This  plasmoid  structure  is  catapulted  as  magnetic  energy  is  converted  into 
plasma motion at 5 x 10' m/sec (1,080,000 miles/hr). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
3. Nuclear Burst Magnetohydrodynamic EMP (MHD EMP) 
 
 
There are two kinds of MHD EMP which are approximately similar in their effects, but 
are  caused  by  physically  different  perturbations  of  the  geomagnetic  field.  Though  different  in 
their origin, they have much in common with solar storm and substorm disturbance of the earth's 
geomagnetic field. We shall look a little closer at the physics of this perturbation. 
 
3.1. Description of magnetic bubble EMP (BEMP) 
 
 
Of the two kinds of MHD EMP, we call the first one BEMP (the B stands for "bubble"), 
in  which  a  magnetohydrodynamic  bubble  is  produced  as  the  nuclear  bomb's  ionized  debris 
expands.  The  high  temperatures  and  copious  x-ray  emission  of  a  nuclear  burst  produce 
vaporization and ionization of the bomb material. This moves out as a quickly expanding plasma 
shell  with  an  initial  velocity  of  ~  106  m/sec.  If  the  shell  were  not  conducting,  it  would  simply 
intercept  and  enclose  more  and  more  of  the  earth's  magnetic  flux  as  it  expands.  However, 
because it is conducting, currents are set up in this shell whose magnetic flux tends to cancel the 
earth's  flux  in  accordance  with  Lenz's  law.  Even  though  the  shell  gets  much  bigger,  its  own 
currents try to limit the flux to the small amount initially inside the small shell. This is the normal 
diamagnetic response of a conductor that is exposed to an external magnetic field. 

The magnetic field will start to diffuse in as governed by Maxwell's equations whose time 

 
 

dependent solution [19] is 

where B is the magnetic flux density, σ is the conductivity, µ is the permeability, and ε is the 
permittivity. The last term in Eq. (2) is 0, since there are no magnetic monopoles in this problem. 
The second term is 0 in the absence of displacement currents. Thus Eq. (2) reduces to the 
standard diffusion equation 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   (3) 

 

 

Solution of Eq. (3) gives the diffusion time constant for a magnetic field into a medium of 
permeability µ and conductivity σ: 
 

 

 

 

 

 

   (4) 

 
where δ is the penetration depth. Separate knowledge of µ, σ, and δ are not needed to determine 
τ. Since                                    
]1/2
[
δ = 2 µσω
 
(ω is the angular frequency), this let's us find τ quite easily: τ = 1/ω. The geomagnetic field will 
be kept out as long as τ is long compared to the time for the external magnetic pressure to build 
up. We will make an approximate calculation of this. 
 

 

As  this  magnetic  bubble  grows,  it  excludes  or  pushes  away  the  earth's  magnetic  field, 
yielding a concentration of flux outside of it and almost no flux inside it, as shown in Fig. 3. As 
the  magnetic  flux  density,  B,  increases  outside  the  bubble,  the  magnetic  pressure  B2/2µ,  and 
damping by the air viscosity act to slow down and finally stop the expanding magnetic fireball. 
This occurs when the magnetic pressure equals the kinetic pressure, and the magnetic field goes 
back inside the bubble, producing an Alfen wave. 

 
 

An initially spheroidal fireball of ionized matter probably distorts into a prolate spheroid 
as  it  expands  due  to  the  disproportionate  enhancement  of  the  magnetic  field  in  the  equatorial 
region  of  the  bubble.  In  the  far  field,  the  effects  that  propagate  to  the earth should  decrease in 
strength rapidly as the distance to the source region increases. The maximum field is quite small, 
only ~ 10-1V/m with a period from 2 to 100 sec. This pulse occurs about 2 to 5 seconds after the 
nuclear explosion. Even small anti-satellite bursts at very high altitudes may produce MHD EMP 
effects. 
 
3.2. Analysis of magnetic bubble EMP (BEMP) 
 
 
Some simple calculations will shed light on the size of the magnetic bubble, the radiated 
power  output,  the  radiation  efficiency,  the  maximum  power  density,  and  the  magnitude  of  the 
radiated electric field from BEMP. This can enable us to check the self-consistency of the various 
parameters, and determine upper limits on them if we wish. 

Fig. 3. Magnetic bubble in the geornagnetic field produced by a nuclear burst causing the    
BEMP form of MHD EMP. 

 

 

In  producing  BEMP,  the  expanding  ionized  (conducting)  shell  pushes  the  geomagnetic 
 
field out of its way. The bubble formed in the geomagnetic field reaches its maximum size when 
the  energy  in  the  excluded  field  equals  the  initial  kinetic  energy,  T,  of  the  conducting  shell 
neglecting  viscosity  effects  such  as  air  damping.  This  approach  allows  use  of  the  initial 
unperturbed  value  of  the  geomagnetic  flux  density,  B,  rather  than  its  larger  compressed  value 
which  could  be  derived  by  equating  magnetic  and  kinetic  pressures  when  the  bubble  stops 
expanding. This latter approach could be done iteratively to get a self-consistent solution. 
 

 

In  this  first  rough  calculation,  assume  that  the  bubble  does  not  break  up  into  smaller 
bubbles,  that  it  maintains  a  spherical  shape  without  distortion,  and  that  atmospheric  damping 
may be neglected. 

 

 

(5) & (6) 

 
{B2}: mean squared value of flux density of the unperturbed geomagnetic field inside the volume 
of the bubble. Take {B}~ 0.5G = 5 x 10-5 Wb/m2. V: maximum volume of the bubble when it 
stops expanding. µ: permeability of medium. R: radius of the bubble. T: initial kinetic energy of 
the conducting  debris of the bomb. Because ~ 70% of the bomb's energy goes into x-rays, one 
may expect T < 30% of the bomb's yield. 
 

Solving Eq. (5) for R yields: 
 

 

 

 

 

(7) 

 
This bubble radius is greater than the height of most bursts. Actually, as we shall see, the bubble 
becomes a prolate spheroid and can thus miss the ground. 
 

 

Taking 100 sec as the given pulse duration, the average power radiated is 

 

 

 

 

 

The maximum radiated power density at points far from the bubble will be much lower than this 
value as the power density decreases with increasing distance. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

To estimate the BEMP-generated electric field near the bubble from the Poynting vector 

and Eq. (10): 

Two approaches may be taken in estimating the average conversion efficiency f. One is to use 
the maximum electric field, E, which is given to be 0. 1 V/m. This implies f ~ 10-5. The other one 
is to note that a period of 100 sec corresponds to a wavelength λ of 3 x 1010 m. The length of the 
radiating antenna is ~ R = 7.5 x 105 m from Eq. (8). When the antenna is so short compared with 
the wavelength, the efficiency is roughly 

We may now use this value of f to determine the average radiated power, (P), and an upper 

limit on the power density near the bubble, (P)/4 π R2 from Eqs. (9) and (10). 

 

Due  to  a  greater  compression  of  the  magnetic field lines in the equatorial region  of the 
bubble, its shape will become somewhat like a prolate spheroid (ellipsoid), as shown in Fig. 3. 
For a diamagnetic sphere, the field is increased most at the equator, and is 1.5 times greater at the 
equator than the unperturbed external field. For a diamagnetic cylinder in a transverse field, the 
field is 2 times larger at the equatorial lines than the unperturbed external field. As the expanding 
sphere distorts into a prolate ellipsoid, the field enhancement is (1-D)` where for an eccentricity 
e, the demagnetizing factor is 

 

By  an  iterative  process,  one  can  calculate  the  shape  of  the  resulting  ellipsoid.  For 
simplicity, let's assume that the ratio of the major semiaxis a, to minor semiaxis b, is about 2 to 1. 
Equation (6) yields the following: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Thus,  the  magnetic  distortion  of  the  bubble  may  keep  the  bottom  of  it  from  hitting  the 
ground for a high enough altitude shot. Of course, viscosity effects such as air damping will act 

to reduce the size of the bubble and to shift the direction of the expansion somewhat more away 
from the earth where the air density decreases. 
 
3.3. Atmospheric heave EMP (AEMP) 
 
A second kind  of magnetic perturbation  is  also  called MHD EMP, and is similar to the 
 
first. It will be called AEMP here to distinguish it from BEMP. AEMP is caused by the heave of 
bomb-heated ionized air across the geomagnetic field, and occurs more than 10 seconds after a 
bomb burst. Figure 4 shows the formation of a small magnetic bubble and the beginning of the 
atmospheric heave for a low-altitude burst. About 70% of the energy released by a bomb appears 
as x-rays that photo-ionize the air. This process forms large ionospheric current loops with mirror 
images in the Earth as illustrated in Fig. 5. The effects of perturbing the geomagnetic field extend 
out more than 106m from the source point and last for ~ 102 sec. Both the field and frequency are 
very low, at 0.001 to 0.03V/m and 0.01 Hz. 
 
3.4. Discussion 
 

 

In  addition  to  instrumenting  utility  networks  to  study  the  effects  of  solar  storms  every 
eleven years, it may be more feasible to instrument a test line to study the effects of substorms on 
a  daily  basis.  With  proper  scaling,  it  may  be  possible  to  extrapolate  the  effects to  SS-GIC and 
MIID  EMP.  Fortunately,  substorms  have  negligible  effects  on  the  earth.  Otherwise  their  daily 
occurrence would be quite troublesome. If we can determine that the effects of MHD EMP are no 
more  severe  than  SS-GIC,  then  we  have  a  relatively  well  known  base  for  comparison  of  the 
probable  effects.  It  is  not  presently  known  whether  the  long  duration  SS  GIC  or  the  higher 
amplitude,  but  significantly  shorter  duration  MHD  EMP  presents the more severe stress  for an 
electric utility network. 
 

It is likely that the SS GIC produces transformer core saturation for much more than 10-1 
of  the  ac  cycle  since  transformer  cores  are  operated  at  from  50  to  90%  of  saturation  (at  the 
maximum magnetization current), to minimize overall costs. Thus it appears that a higher electric 
field  MHD  EMP  acting  for  only  10-2  of  the  time  duration  of  SSGIC  will  probably  not  be  as 
severe - provided that the induced slowly varying current is small compared with the normal line 
current so that the major effects are due to the offset (biased) line current. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

line  orientation, 

The  specific  details  of  latitude,  electric  field  magnitude  and  duration,  ground 
the  problem  sufficiently 
transformer  design,  etc.,  make 

conductivity, 
complicated that a thorough analysis is necessary, which follows. 
 
4. Examination of the Relative Effects of MHD EMP and Solar Storms 
 
 
Although  Rabinowitz  [20]  made  a  brief  analytical  comparison,  a  comprehensive  com-
parison  of  the  effects  of  MHD-EMP  and  solar  storms  (SS)  has  not  previously  been  done.  Our 
work  addresses  the  effects  of  these  geomagnetic  disturbances  on  a  comparative  basis.  For  this 

purpose, a system approach has been adopted to analyze these problems. We simulated a power 
transmission system consisting of transmission lines, transformers, and all associated grounding 
structures  exposed  to  MHD  EMP  or  SS  excitation.  A  model  of  an  electric  power  transmission 
line which takes into account MHD EMP/SS geomagnetic coupling was developed. The form of 
the transmission line model is in terms of a multiple input-multiple output linear system. Since 
the  coupling  of  MHD  EMP  or  SS  induced  voltages  to  power  lines  is  mainly  through  the  line 
grounding system, it is important to accurately model the power line tower grounding as well as 
the  terminal  substation  grounding  system.  For  this  purpose,  the  EPRI  grounding  models 
developed  by  Georgia  Tech  were  used.  Power  transformers  were  modeled  with  their  nonlinear 
magnetization  characteristics.  Using  this  model,  system  studies  have  been  performed  to 
determine  transformer  magnetization  currents  and  reactive  power  requirements.  The  example 
system utilized in the study is a simplification of an actual system provided by Minnesota Power 
Company. 
 

The  effects  of  the  MHD  EMP  on  power  system  grids  are  very  similar  to  those  of 
geomagnetic  storms.  Exact  models  for  the  MHD  EMP  calculations  do  not  exist  to  our 
knowledge. Estimates of the induced electric field can be calculated as indicated in Sec. 3.3, or 
obtained from nuclear test data. The most valuable information about MHD EMP is empirically 
known from the magnetometer data acquired during nuclear tests. The design waveform for the 
simulation  of  MHD  EMP  is  the  one  measured  during  the  Starfish  nuclear  test.  The  induced 
electric  field  shown  in  Fig.  6  was  derived  by  sampling  and  linear  interpolation  from  the 
magnetometer  data of Legro et al.[21]  Rackliffe et al. [22] also looked at the  effects of MHD 
EMP, as did Klein et al. [23] 

 

Fig. 6. Horizontal component of the induced electric field from MHD-EMP as derived from data    
in Ref. 22 

 
  We  will  describe  the  power  delivery  system  model  for  the  study  of  geomagnetic 
disturbances.  The  model  is  based  on  a  time  domain  simulation  algorithm  similar  to  the  EMTP 
(ElectroMagnetic  Transients  Program).  Each  power  system  element  is  modeled  with  a  set  of 
differential  equations  which  are  solved  in  the  time  domain.  For  the  study  of  geomagnetic 
disturbances,  two  power  system  elements  are  very  important:  (I)iron  core  transformers  and  (2) 

 

 

 

the 

transmission 

the  grounding  of 

lines.  Specifically, 

long 
transformer  neutrals  and 
interconnecting long transmission lines provide the gate for geomagnetically induced currents to 
enter  the  power  system.  Magnetic  core  transformers  reach  saturation  when  geomagnetically 
induced currents flow in their windings and cause most of the undesirable effects. This section 
describes in detail these two models. 
 
4.1. Saturation of transformer cores 
 
The  nonlinear  magnetization  characteristics  of  iron core transformers are represented  in 
 
the transformer model utilized in this study. The modeling procedure is illustrated with a simple 
case of a single phase transformer shown in Fig. 7a. Most of the magnetic flux circulates through 
the core and thus links both windings. A part of the flux, however, leaks from the magnetic core 
and links only one winding. These flux paths are represented by the equivalent magnetic circuit 
illustrated  in  Fig.  7b.  Specifically,  the  reluctances,  R1,  R2,  and  R3  represent  the  path  of  the 
leakage  flux,  while  the  reluctances  R4  and  R5  represent  the  path  of  the  flux  through  the  core 
(magnetizing  flux).  Reluctances  R4  and  R5  are nonlinear, since their  value  depends on the  flux 
magnitude.  From  the  magnetic  circuit  of  Fig.  7b,  the  electric  equivalent  circuit  of  Fig.  7c  is 
derived. The leakage reluctances, R1, R2, and R3 , are represented by the inductances Llu and L2u 
and the magnetization reluctances R4 and R5 are represented by the magnetizing inductance L3. 
The  leakage  inductances  are  linear  devices,  and  thus  they  are  represented  by  inductors  of  a 
specific  constant  inductance.  However,  the  magnetizing  inductance  is  nonlinear,  and  its 
representation  is  based  on  expressing  its  flux  linkage  as  a  nonlinear  function  of  the  electric 
current. The equations that describe the transformer equivalent circuit are as follows: 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The leakage inductance is assumed to be constant independent of the saturation level of 
the transformer. This is not exactly true but the influence of the leakage inductance on the level 
of geomagnetically induced currents is secondary and negligible. This has been observed with the 
overall model where even doubling of the leakage inductance did not alter the rise time or level 
of the geomagnetically-induced currents. As a result, the iron core transformer model of Fig. 7c 
is appropriate for the purposes of this study. Three phase transformer banks are represented with 
three  single  phase  transformers,  appropriately  connected  (wye-delta,  etc.).  Three  phase 
transformer  models  are  derived  with  a  procedure  similar  to  the  one  described  for  single  phase 
transformers by modeling the magnetic circuit and subsequently deriving the input/ouput model 
in terms of electrical quantities, i.e. voltage and current. We did not use three phase transformer 
models in this study. 
 
4.2. Transmission line system 
 

A  time  domain  state  space  model  based  on  the  methodology  developed  by  Cokkinides 
and Meliopoulos is used to model the transmission line system. [24]  It is capable of representing 
effects  of  geomagnetically  induced  currents  (GIC),  as  well  as  transmission  line  parameter 
frequency  dependence,  and  line  tower  grounding.  The  transmission  line  model  involves  two 
components: overhead conductors and earth return; and grounding system. Consider the typical 

transmission  line  shown  in  Fig.  8.  The  section  of  overhead  conductors  between  any  two 
consecutive  towers  comprises  a  "conductor  component"  while  each  tower  with  its  grounding 
system  is  a  component  of  the grounding system. Each component is modeled by an  equivalent 
admittance matrix (which is a function of frequency) and equivalent current sources. Then, using 
nodal analysis, the equivalent circuit of the entire transmission line and GIC coupling is formed. 
The resulting model is in the form of a passive circuit of known admittance matrix and lumped 
current  sources  connected  at  the  line  terminals.  This  model  is  finally  converted  to  the  time 
domain  using  Fourier  techniques.  The  derivation  of  the  conductor  and  grounding  system 
equivalent circuits are presented in the following sections. 
 
4.3. Elevated conductors 
 

An  overhead  transmission  line  conductor  section,  in  the  presence  of  geomagnetically 

induced currents, is represented by the equations: 

v: line voltage column matrix (Va, Vb, Vc, vn) with respect to remote earth (volts). i: line current 
column matrix ia, ib, ic, in, (amperes). R: line series resistance matrix (ohms/m). L: line series 
inductance matrix (II/m). G: line shunt conductance matrix (S/m). C: line shunt capacitance 
matrix (F/m). vg: component of geomagnetically induced voltage (GIV) in the direction of the 
line (V/m). U: column matrix, every entry of which is unity. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 8. Typical 3-phase, 4-wire transmission line section: (a) Physical configuration.  
(b) Equivalent circuit. 
 

 

The Fourier transforms of Eqs. (21) are: 
 

 

 

where Z(ω) = R(ω) + jωL(ω), and Y(ω)= G(ω) + jωC(ω). For the present study, the following 
three assumptions have been made: 1) for a short line span, Vg is assumed constant with respect 
to position; 2) the resistance and inductance are computed using Snelson's [25] complex depth of 
return method; 3) the capacitance matrix is independent of frequency. 
 

A Norton equivalent circuit is constructed using Eqs. (22) as follows: 1) with the use of 
eigenvalue  analysis,  Eqs.  (22)  are  transformed  into  a  set  of  decoupled  equations;  2)  a  general 
analytical solution is computed for the decoupled equations; 3) a specific solution is obtained by 
using the voltages and currents at the line ends as boundary conditions; and 4) the solution of the 
decoupled equation is converted back to the original variables, yielding: 

 

 

 

 

 
I1, I2: matrices containing the current phasors at the ends of the line. V1, V2: matrices containing 
the voltage phasors at the ends of the line. Vg: matrix each entry of which is the geomagnetically 
induced  voltage  per  unit  length.  Z:  R(ω)  +jωL(ω),  line  series  impedance  matrix.  Y1,  Y2: 
frequency-dependent matrices derived from containing the voltage phasors at the ends of the line. 
Equation (23) allows the representation of each transmission line segment by a Norton equivalent 
circuit.  The  first  term  on  the  right-hand  side  represents  an  external  current  source,  while  the 
second  term  is  a  shunt  admittance  term  multiplied  by  the  voltage  matrix.  Note  that  this  is  a 
frequency  dependent  model,  and  thus  its  parameters,  must  be  computed  at  every  frequency  of 
interest. 
 
4.4. Supporting towers 
 

Each tower and its grounding structure are represented by a step response. It is defined as 
the current flowing into the tower from the ground wire support point when a unit step voltage is 
applied  at  the  same  point.  The  step  response  of  the  tower  and  its  grounding  system  can  be 
determined  experimentally  as  done  by  Meliopoulos  and  Moharam  [26]  or  analytically.  [25,27] 
When computed analytically, finite element analysis is utilized to solve for the flow of currents in 
the earth. Then a convolution algorithm derived by Papalexopoulos and Meliopoulos is utilized 
to  evaluate  the  tower  and  ground  step  response.[27]  The  tower  model  has  been  validated  with 
data obtained by Bonneville Power Administration (BPA).[26] The admittance of the tower and 
grounding system at any given frequency is computed from the step response with an appropriate 
Fourier transform. 
 
4.5. System integration 
 

The  equivalent  circuit  of  the  entire  transmission  line  is  constructed  by  combining  the 
equivalent  circuits  of  each  conductor  section  and  tower  grounding  systems.  The  procedure  is 
based on nodal analysis method, where all internal node voltages and currents are eliminated, and 
all  internal  current  sources  are  represented  by  equivalent  circuit sources  at  the terminals of the 
line. In order to utilize the developed model in a time domain simulation, the equivalent circuit 
parameters  are  transformed  into  the  time  domain.  Specifically,  the  admittance  matrix  of  the 
passive  part  of  the  equivalent  circuit  is  transformed  to  an  impulse  response  matrix,  and  the 
equivalent current sources (which are also computed as functions of frequency) are transformed 
into time domain waveforms. A discrete Fourier transform method is used for this purpose. 
 

The  Snelson  transformation  is  applied  before  Fourier  transformation  to  minimize 
resulting time domain waveform durations. [27]  Specifically, the voltage and current variables 
are replaced by B and F variables as follows: 

where G is a real appropriately selected 2n x 2n matrix (n = number of conductors). Applying the 
above transformation to Eq. (23) yields: 

 

 

 

 

 
The matrix M(ω) and the column matrix Ag(ω) are next transformed into time domain functions 
using the FFT algorithm. The function matrices m(t) and ag(t) comprise a time domain model of 
the entire transmission line with GIV coupling. Specifically, m(t) contains the impulse response 
of the transmission line (based on Snelson's transformation) and the functions ag(t) represent the 
GIV effects. These functions are utilized in a convolution based algorithm, in order to simulate 
the  operation  of  transmission  lines  with  GIV  coupling  in  the  integrated  power  system.  This 
algorithm is described in the following section. 
 
4.5. Solution methodology 
 

By means of a discrete convolution procedure, the transmission line model is cast into a 
resistive companion form. This algorithm allows the model to be interfaced with models of other 
power  system  components,  thus  forming  a  model  of  an  integrated  power  system.  (This  is  the 
standard technique followed by several time domain simulation programs such as the EMTP and 
the PSTS, Power Systems Transients programs.) Specifically, combining Eqs. (24) and (25) and 
upon transformation into the time domain, yields Yv(t) = b(t) +bg(t) + i(t) where 

 

The  above  equation  can  be  solved  by  discrete  time  techniques  in  terms  of  the  impulse 
response model defined in the previous section. Specifically, let vn and in represent the values of 
the voltage and current matrices at the line ends at the nth time step. Then: 

 

Yvn = bn-1 + bgn. + in  

(26) 

 

 
where Y = G[I + So]-1[I - So], 
 

(
)
vn −k

− G

−1in −k

)I − So
[

]and bgn

[
= G I + So

]−1

[
= G I + So

]−1

N∑
k =1

(
Sk

− Sk −1

bn−1
  
 where Si represents the transmission line step response (at the ith time interval), i.e. it is the 
integral of the impulse response m(t), performed in discrete time. The above equation is a 
resistive companion form representation of a transmission line with GIV coupling. Specifically, 
the real matrix Y is the admittance matrix of a resistive network (Y in Fig. 9). The matrix bn-1 
represents the past history dependent current sources. The entries of the current source matrix 
bn-1 are computed by discrete convolution as shown in Eq. (26). The matrices bgn are the 
independent current sources (bg , in Fig. 9), representing the effects of GIV. 
 

agn

 

 
4.6. The prototype network 
 
Our prototype network is a simplified and  modified  version  of  the  Minnesota  Power Company 
500 kV line between Dorsey and Minneapolis.- Specifically it consists of a 500 kV transmission 
line, terminated by three phase transformer banks at both ends, It is assumed that no intermediate 
substations  exist.  Figure  10(a)  illustrates  a  single  line  diagram  of  the  test  system.  The 
transmission line data are listed in  Table 1.  During normal  operation,  the  ground wires are not 
electrically  connected  to  the  transmission  line  towers.  Tower  configuration  data  specifies  the 
location  of  the  center  of  each  phase  bundle  and  each  ground  wire  with  respect  to  a  Cartesian 
coordinate system with its origin located at the center of the tower base. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

It is assumed that each of the three phase transformer banks consists of three single phase 
transformers connected DELTA/GROUNDED Y. As shown in Fig. 10 (b), the grounded Y side 
is  connected  on  the  500  kV  transmission  line.  The  characteristics  of  each  single  phase 
transformer are as follows: voltage = 115/288 kV, power rating = 350 MVA, leakage reactance 
0.10  pu,  magnetizing  current  =  0.01  pu,  winding  resistance  (high  voltage  side)  1.5ohms.  The 
transformer core magnetization characteristics are described by the piecewise-linear function g, 
Eqs. (20). 

 
The  effects  of  GIV  to  the  test  system  are  assessed  in  two  steps.  First,  the  steady  state 
direct current through the transformer is computed for a set of GIV levels and various values of 
line parameters. Next, the transient response of the transformer excitation current is computed for 
a  set  of  GIV  levels  to  determine  the  time  constants  involved  to  reach  saturation.  Finally,  the 
design  GIV  waveform  from  MHD  EMP  and  solar  storms  are  applied  to  the  test  system  to 
determine the relative effects. 
 
5. System Equilibrium Response 
 

this  simple  model, 

is  constructed.  Using 

We  next  calculate  the  equilibrium  steady  state  response  of  the  test  system  under  GIV 
excitation. In order to gain insight into the system parameters that determine the system behavior 
under GIV excitation, a simple approach is first used. Specifically, an equivalent dc model of the 
system 
the  magnitude  and  distribution  of 
geomagnetically induced currents are evaluated. The dc model of the test system is constructed 
by considering only the resistances of each system component. Specifically, an equivalent circuit 
is constructed containing the dc models of the transformers, transmission line, grounding system, 
and  geornagnetically  induced  voltage.  This  equivalent  circuit  is  constructed  containing  the  dc 
models  of  the  transformers,  transmission  line,  grounding  system,  and  geomagnetically  induced 
voltage.  This  circuit  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  11.  The  equivalent  circuits  of  each  component  are 
described next. 

 

The transformers are represented by their winding resistances. Specifically, the windings 
of the Y connected (high voltage) side of the transformer exhibit three parallel paths to the flow 
of  the  electric  current  injected  at  the  transformer  neutral.  Assuming  that  the  windings  are 
identical, the equivalent resistance is 1/3 of the winding resistance of each high voltage winding. 
The  transmission  line  is  represented  by  a  dc  equivalent  circuit.  Each  of  the  phase  wires  is 
represented  by  a  resistance  equal  to  the  total  dc  resistance  of  the  phase  conductor.  The neutral 
wire is represented by its dc resistance. The neutral wire may or may not be multiply grounded. 
Figure  11 illustrates the tower footing grounding which is represented by its dc resistance. The 
substation  grounds  at  each  line  end  are  represented  by  1  ohm  resistances,  connected  from  the 
transformer Y side neutral to remote earth. 
 

Finally, the equivalent circuit of the earth containing the geomagnetically induced voltage 
is represented by a series of Thevenin equivalent circuits connected between consecutive tower 
grounds and substation grounds. Thus, for each line segment, a separate Thevenin equivalent of 
the  earth  is  used.  Each  Thevenin  equivalent  consists  of  a  voltage  source  representing  the 
geomagnetically induced voltage, and a resistor representing the earth path resistance. The earth 
path resistance is highly dependent on frequency. The earth path resistance computed at 0.6 Hz 
was used. This model was employed to study the effects of multiply-grounded ground wires on 
the  steady  state  direct  current  through  the  transformer  winding.  The  values  used  for  the 
parametric study are listed in Table 2. 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

Table 2. List of parameter values used in the study. 

 
GIV 

Earth path resistance 

Tower footing resistance 

Tower spacing 

Equivalent phase 
conductor resistance 
Ground conductor 
resistance  
 
Total line length 
 

1 volt/mile 
 
0.001 ohm/raile 
 
5, 30, 100 and infinite 
ohnis 
 
0.25 mile 
 
0.00889 ohms/mile 
 
4.435 and 1.240 ohms/niile 
 

473 miles 
 
 

Figure 12 shows the results of the parametric study which gives the dc current through the 
transformer  winding  as  a  function  of  the  tower  footing  resistance  and for two  different  ground 
wire sizes. Note that there is a substantial effect of the line grounding parameters on the steady 
state  value  of  the  direct  current  through  the  transformer.  For  example,  for  a  line  with  5  ohm 
tower  footing  resistance,  and  ground  wire  of  1.24  ohms/mile,  the  steady  state  dc  current 
throughout the transformer will be about one-half of what it would have been if the transmission 
line tower was insulated from the ground wire (37 amperes versus 65 amperes). 
 

 

 
6. Saturation Time Constants 
 

The  test  system  of  Fig.  10  was  simulated  in  the  time  domain  to  determine  the  time 
constants involved to reach steady state operation. Specifically, the time constants were defined 
as  the  time  required  to  reach  63%  of  its  steady  state  value.  Figure  13  illustrates  a  typical 
simulation and demonstrates the time constant. The figure also illustrates the parameters of the 
simulation as well. The time constants were computed for the parameter values listed in Table 2. 
The  results  of  the  parametric  study  are  illustrated  in  Table  3.  Note  the  wide  variation  of  time 
constants (145 to 2.3 seconds). System parameters drastically affect time constants. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 13. Time domain simulation results of the typical test system for : geomagnetically induced 
voltage = 1 V/mile; tower footing resistance = 5 ohms; and ground wire resistance 4.435 
ohms/mile. 
 

Transformer tests which  have  been  performed at Minnesota Power have shown that the 
electric load has a substantial effect on transformer saturation time constants. This experimental 
result suggests that a proper power system model should exhibit the same behavior. To verify this 
fact, the model described in this paper has been utilized to study the effects of electric load on 
saturation time constants. For this purpose, a system similar to that of Fig. 10 with the following 
parameters  was  selected.  GIV  =  20  volts/km,  soil  resistivity  100  ohm-m,  line  length  =  30  km, 
span length = 0. 1 miles, tower footing resistance = 25 ohms. 
 

The GIV was assumed  to  be  a  step  voltage. The transformer was assumed to be loaded 
with  0,  20%,  40%,  and  100%  three  phase  load  which  is  wye  connected.    The  same  values  of 
saturation  time  constants  were  obtained  when  the  electric  load  was  assumed  to  be  delta 
connected. The computed saturation time constants are: 

 

   Transformer Load    

 Saturation Time Constant 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
0% 
 
20% 
40% 
 
100%   

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

48 seconds 
17 seconds 
11 seconds 
6 seconds 

 

 

Table  3.  Test  system  time constant to  saturation* (in  seconds)  versus  GIV level,  tower footing 
resistance (Rt), and ground wire resistance (Rg). 
 
 

The  observed  results  can  be  explained  with  a  simplified  model  of  the  zero  sequence 
network.  Specifically  one  can  think  of  the  saturation  time  constant  as  determined  by  an 
equivalent R-L circuit in the model. In the equivalent model, the inductance is dominated by the 
transformer inductances and  the  resistance is dominated by the transformer winding  resistance 
and partly from the load resistance. The transformer magnetizing inductance can be thought of 
as being connected in parallel. The influence of the electric load on the equivalent resistance of 
the  zero  sequence  model  can  be  computed  with  standard  circuit  analysis  methods.  As  an 
example,  assuming  a  20%  electric  load  for  a  transformer  with  leakage  impedance  of  0.001 
+jO.10  pu,  the  effect  of  the  electric  load  is  to  double  the  equivalent  resistance  from  0.001  to 
0.002 pu. Doubling the equivalent resistance will cause a substantial decrease of the saturation 
time constant due to the nonlinear characteristic of the magnetization inductance. 

7. Comparison of the Effects of MHD-EMP and Solar Storms 

The  relative  effects  of  MHD  EMP  and  solar  storm  geomagnetically  induced  currents 
(SS-GIC) on power systems can be ascertained by the level of saturation reached due to typical 
values  of  geomagnetically  induced  voltages  (GIV)  from  MHD  EMP  or  solar  storms.  The 
maximum levels  of saturation will be computed for the parameter values listed in Table 2. For 
this test the following two comparable strength MHD EMP and SS-GIV will be assumed: 

 

Case 1. The geomagnetically induced voltage due to MHD EMP has a time variation as in Fig. 6 
and a peak value of 100 volt/mile. The geomagnetically induced voltage due to a solar storm is 
practically dc and has a maximum value of 10 volt/mile. 
 
Case 2. Same as in Case I except that the peak values are 10 and 1 volt/mile, respectively. 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

The results are illustrated in Tables 4 and 5. Note that for Case 2, even with the MHD EMP 
GIV ten times higher than the SS GIV, the maximum saturation level is comparable. For Case 1, 
the  saturation  level  is  much  higher  for  MHD  EMP  excitation.  In  order  to  evaluate  the 
significance  of  these  results,  it  is  important  to  recognize  that  the  dc  current  through  the 
transformer  causes  increased  harmonic  currents.  Transformer  losses  increase  causing  the 
operating  temperature  of  the  transformer  to  rise.  To  determine  the  temperature  rise,  one  must 
couple the electric model of the transformer with its thermal model. Such an integrated model 
has  been  developed  by  Meliopoulos  and  Cokkinides  and  validated  in  the  laboratory.  [28,29] 
Figure 14 illustrates the temperature response of a distribution transformer to step changes in the 
electric  current  through  the  transformer.  Note  that  the  time  constants  are  quite  long.  We  have 
determined  that  the  increased  losses  in  the  transformer  windings  alone  increase  about  20%  of 
full load losses for each 10% of dc current through the transformer, using the transformer model 
and typical values. 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

8. Conclusions 
 

Since  the  power  system  periodically  copes  fairly  well  with  solar  storms  which  have  an 
eleven year cycle related to sunspot activity, an important question we considered is how well it 
would cope with MHD EMP from a nuclear burst. For long transmission lines, i.e. 300 miles or 
longer, the dc-like induced current from geomagnetic perturbations offsets the 60 Hz ac and may 
saturate transformer cores, with secondary results such as high magnetization currents, increased 
harmonics, and concomitant effect on power system operation. The level of the transformer core 
saturation  depends  on  the  time  constant  of  the  saturation  process,  and  on  the  duration  and 
magnitude of the direct current through the transformer windings.  Thus, models of transmission 
lines which explicitly represent grounding, earth potential, and frequency dependent phenomena, 
and  power  transformers  with  explicit  representation  of  nonlinear  magnetization  characteristics 
were utilized. 
 
Although  the  occurrence  of  substorms  is  by  far  the  most  frequent  of  the  three 
geomagnetic perturbation phenomena, and their size dwarfs MHD EMP, the effects of substornis 
are  relatively  negligible  on  the  earth.  Comparative  studies  of  MHD  EMP  and  SS-GIV 
indicate'that (1) for low values of GIV, an MHD EMP level of 10 times the SS-GIV will cause 
comparable  effects,  and  (2)  for  high  values  of  GIV,  the  short  duration  of  the  MHD  EMP 
mitigates the results only marginally. Since transformer thermal time constants are much larger 
than the duration of MHD EMP, the general conclusion is that the thermal effects due to MHD 
EMP  induced  voltages  on  power  systems  are  less  severe  than  those  due  to  solar  storm  GIV. 
Shorter lines will be affected less. 

 
With  techniques  developed  in  this  paper,  a  parametric  analysis  of  saturation  time 
constants was performed and the effects of MHD EMP and SS GIC compared. A comprehensive 
model for studying the effects of geomagnetically induced voltages on power systems has been 
presented. The model has been used to study the time constants involved in reaching transformer 
saturation due to GIV (geomagnetically induced voltages) and the saturation level versus system 
parameters  for  a  473-mile  long  line.  The  most important parameters determining the effects  of 
GIV on power systems are: 

 
1. Level of GIV 
2. Duration of GIV  
3. Line length 
4. Tower grounding impedance 
5. Ground wire resistance 
 

Based upon our analysis, we reached the following additional conclusions: 

 
Heating:  Heating  is  probably  not  a  major  consideration  for  GIV  excitation  due  to  MHD  EMP 
because of  its  relatively  short duration  of  high  dc  offset  flux.  As  a  matter of fact, saturation in 
this case lasts for about 100 seconds. On the other hand, GIV excitation due to solar storms lasts 
several hours. In this case, heating becomes a major consideration. 
 
Equipment  shutdown:  Due  to  GIV  excitation  (SS  or  MHD  EMP),  transformers  become 
generators  of  harmonics  and  absorbers  of  reactive  power.  Protective  relaying,  sensing  this 
situation, may trip the transformer. In this case, irrespective of the duration of the GIV excitation, 
reversible  equipment  trips  will  occur  with  possibly  major  consequences  such  as  the 
Hydro-Quebec blackout. 
 
Acknowledgments 
 

The  authors  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  help  of  Dr.  V.  Albertson  and  Mr.  J. 
Kappemann  for  providing  the  data  of  the  test  system.  The  discussions,  inputs,  and  suggestions 
provided by Messrs. R. Barnes, F. Tesche, and R. Walling are appreciated. The investigation of 
the  effects  of  load  on  saturation  time  constants  was  suggested  by  R.  Barnes.  This  work  was 
supported by the Electric Power Research Institute. 
 
References 
 

1. M. Rabinowitz, IEEE Trans. Power Delivery PWRD-2, 1199 (1987). 
 
2. M. Rabinowitz, The Nuclear Electromagnetic Pulse and the Electric Power Grid: A Different 

Perspective (EPRI Report EL-4351-SR, 1987). 

 
3. M. Rabinowitz, "Nuclear electromagnetic pulse", Encyc. Sci. & Tech. Yearbook (McGraw 

Hill, New York, 1986), pp. 34-47. 

 
4. D. P. Millard, A. P. Sakis Meliopoulos, and G. J. Cokkinides, IEEE Trans. Power Delivery 

PWRD-2, 1224 (1988). 

 
5. C. N. Vittitoe and M. Rabinowitz Phys. Rev. A37, 1969 (1988). 
 
6. M. Rabinowitz, "Limitations of the fast nuclear electromagnetic pulse", in Proc. Minne. 

Power Sys. Conf, 1987, pp. 1-12. 

 
7. Syun-Ichi Akasofu, Scientific American 90 (May 1989). 
 

 

 

 

1968). 

8. S. Chapman, Solar Plasma, Geomagnetism, and Aurora (Gordon and Breach, New York, 

 
9. V. D. Albertson, "Geomagnetic disturbance causes and power system elfects", 1989 IEEE 

PES Meeting, Long Beach, CA, July 12, 1989. 

 
10. R. Pirjola, IEEE Trans. Power Appar. Sys. PAS-104, 2825 (1985). 
 
11. J. C. Slothower and V. D. Albertson, J. Minne. Acad. Sci. 34, 94 (1967). 
 
12. P. Chodhury, IEEE Trans. Power Delivery PWRD-4, 1185 (1989). 
 
13. J. R. Wait, Geo-Electromagnetism (Academic Press, New York, 1982), pp. 184-208. 
 
14. R. Pirjola and A. Vi1janen, IEEE Trans. Power Delivery PWRD-4, 1239 (1989). 
 
15. A. T. Price, Quart. J. Mech. Appl. Math. 3, 385 (1950). 
 
16.  R. D. Hibbs and F. W. Jones, Geophys. J. R. Astr. Soc. 46, 433 (1976). 
 
17. R. D. Hibbs, Jr. and F. W. Jones, J. Geomag. Geoclcctr. 25, 75 (1973). 
 
18. M. Saunders, Nature 339, 659 (1989). 
 
19. M. Rabinowitz, "The science & tech. of superconductivity in Proc. EPRI Workshop on   
     High- Temperature Superconductivity, pp. 2-13-2-33 (EL/ER-5894P-SR 1987). 
 
20. M. Rabinowitz, "MHD EMP, solar storm GIC, and substorms", in Conf. on Gcomagnetically 

Induced Currents, EPRI Proc. (TR-10045) pp. 3-1-3-11 (1989). 

 
21. J. R. Legro, N. C. Abi-Samra, J. C. Crouse, and F. M. Tesche, IEEE Trans. Power Delivery 

 
22. G. B. Rackliffe, J. C. Crouse, J. R. Legro, and V. J. Kruse, IEEE Trans. Power Delivery 

 
23. K. W. Klein, P. R. Barnes and H. W. Zaininger, IEEE Trans. Power Appar. Sys. PAS-104, 

PWRD-1, 203 (1986). 

PWRD-3, 392 (1988). 

1571 (1985). 

 
24. G. J. Cokkinides and A. P. Meliopoulos, Elec. Power Sys. Res. 14, 109 (1988). 
 
25. J. K. Snelson, IEEE Trans. Power Appar.Sys. PAS-91, 85 (1972). 
 
26. A. P. Meliopoulos and M. G. Moharam, IEEE Trans. Power Appar. Sys. PAS-91, 389 (1983). 
 
27. A. Papalexopoulos and A. P. Meliopoulos, "Frequency dependent modeling of grounding 

systems, in Proc. Midwest Power Symp, 1985, pp. 1-13. 

 

 

28. A. P. Meliopoulos and G. J. Cokkinides, "Effects of harmonics on power transformers", in 

Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Harmonics in Power Sys, Canada, 1986 pp. 201-203. 

 
29. R. P. Webb and A. P. Meliopoulos, "Transformer tests and simulation results", Report to 

Southern Company Services,1986. 

 

 

 

