C5.1-D4.1-0027-02 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

NUMERICAL SIMULATION AND ANALYSIS OF THERMALLY 
EXCITED WAVES IN PLASMA CRYSTALS 

K. Qiao and T. W. Hyde  

CASPER, (Center for Astrophysics, Space Physics and Engineering Research) 
Baylor University, Waco, TX. 76798-7310, USA 

ABSTRACT 

 
A  numerical  model  for  a  2D-monolayer  plasma  crystal  was  established  using  the  Box_tree  code.  Box_tree  is  a 
Barnes_Hut  tree  code  which  has  proven  effective  in  modeling  systems  composed  of  large  numbers  of  particles. 
Thermally  excited  waves  in  this  plasma  crystal  were  numerically  simulated  and  dispersion  relations  for  both  the 
longitudinal  and  transverse  wave  modes  were  found.  These  were  compared  with  the  dispersion  relations 
extrapolated  from  experiment  as  well  as  a  theory  based  on  harmonic  approximation.  The  results  were  found  to 
agree  with  theoretical  dispersion  relations  under  different  wave  propagation  directions  with  different  particle 
charges and over a range of 0.9<κ<5. 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
     Dusty  plasma  systems  play  an  important  role  both  in  astrophysical  environments  (for  example,  proto-stellar 
clouds and ring systems) and laboratory situations (plasma processing and nanofabrication). In general, there is still 
little or no evidence of strongly coupled dusty plasmas in nature.  However, over the past two decades it has been 
shown  that  dust  particles  immersed  in  a  plasma  or  radiation  environment  collect  charges  with  their  subsequent 
dynamics becoming influenced - or in some cases dominated - by the local electric and magnetic fields (Matthews 
and  Hyde,  1998).  (This  is  in  addition  to  the  usual  mechanisms  which  modify  grain  dynamics  such  as  the 
gravitational,  radiation  pressure  or  gas  drag  effects.)    There  are  a  number  of  unusual  observations  –  such  as  the 
spokes at Saturn or the dust streams escaping Jupiter - that can still only be understood through recognizing dusty 
plasma effects.   
     In addition, the formation and stability mechanisms for ordered colloidal (Coulomb) crystals within a tenuous 
dusty  plasma  is  of  great  interest  in  protoplanetary,  protostellar  and  accretion  disk  formation  as  well  as  spiral 
galaxies  and  dark  matter  research.  Ever  since  crystal  formation  within  dusty  plasmas  was  discovered 
experimentally  at  the  Max  Plank  Institute  by  Thomas,  et  al.  (1994),  interest  in  plasma  crystals  has  increased 
dramatically.   
     Recent  research  has  focussed  (both  theoretically  and  experimentally)  on  the  different  types  of  wave  mode 
propagation which are possible within plasma crystals. This is an important topic since several of the fundamental 
quantities for characterizing such crystals can be obtained from an analysis of the wave propagation/dispersion.  
     Waves in 2D plasma crystals for both longitudinal and transverse modes have been observed in several recent 
experiments  (Homann  et  al.,  1997  and  1998,  Nunomura  et  al.,  2000  and  2002a).  In  all  of  these,  the  2D  plasma 
crystals  are  initially  formed  by  levitating  polymer  microspheres  in  a  rf  discharge  plasma.  The  particles  are 
negatively charged by the plasma and interact with each other through a screened Coulomb repulsion 

rU
)(

=

Q

4(

πε
0

r

)

exp(

−

r

/

λ
D

),

1
−

 
where λD is the Debye length. Particles are levitated in the vertical direction by the DC self-bias and trapped in the 
horizontal direction by an electric field in the sheath region above the powered electrode with the rarefied neutral 

gas  in  the  plasma  damping  any  collective  particle  motion.  Due  to  the  screened  Coulomb  interaction  between  the 
particles and the neutral gas drag which limits the particle’s kinetic energy, the particles form an ordered lattice in 
the  horizontal  direction.  Generally,  the  lattices  formed  are  determined  to  be  a  monolayer  hexagonal  lattice 
characterized by a screening parameter κ = a/λD, where a is the interparticle spacing. 
     In some experiments, the observed waves were produced by exciting the lattice intentionally. Modulated laser 
beams produced a sinusoidal waveform which was then used to perturb particles in a specific region of the lattice. 
The subsequent waves produced propagated away from the region and were analyzed, yielding dispersion relations. 
Two wave modes, longitudinal (Homann et al., 1997 and 1998, Nunomura et al., 2002a) and transverse (Nunomura 
et al., 2000), were found having different dispersion relations. The dispersion properties of the waves, especially the 
transverse mode, were found to be dependent on the direction of propagation relative to the lattice. The dispersion 
relations evaluated in this manner were shown to agree with the theoretical model of Wang et al. (2001).  
 
 
SIMULATION MODELS AND METHODS 
      
     In  the  past,  dispersion  relations  determined  experimentally  using  laser  excitation  of  waves  such  as  those 
described above, have been unable to show the negative group speed predicted by theory and the wave experiences 
heavy damping at high frequencies. However, recently, an experiment verified the theoretical dispersion relations to 
the first Brillouin zone by detecting the random particle motion within the lattice (Nunomura et al. 2002). In this 
work, the Box_tree code was used to simulate such a thermally excited (spontaneous) wave within a plasma crystal. 
Dispersion  relations  were  determined  using  the  data  and  then  analyzed  for  different  parameters,  including  the 
particle charge and Debye length. 
     The Box_Tree code is a Barnes-Hut tree code first written by Derek Richardson (1994) for planetary ring and 
disk studies. It was later modified by Lorin Matthews (1998) to include electrostatic interactions and then by John 
Vasut (2001) to simulate the formation of plasma crystals. It has proven to be an effective tool for modeling real 
time systems composed of large numbers of particles with specific interparticle interactions. The Box_Tree code 
models a dusty plasma system by first dividing it into self-similar patches, where the box size is much greater than 
the  radial  mean  excursions  of  the  constituent  dust  grains  and  the  boundary  conditions  are  met  using  twenty-six 
ghost boxes. A tree code is incorporated into the Box_Tree routine to allow it to deal with interparticle interactions. 
Since most such interactions can be determined by examining the multipole expansion of collections of particles, 
the code scales as N•logN instead of N2, resulting in greater CPU time efficiency. Data files showing each particle’s 
position and velocity are output for analysis after a user defined time interval. Particle charge, mass, density, Debye 

length and output data intervals are all adjustable parameters in the code. 
Fig. 1.  Dispersion relation from the simulation of (a) longitudinal and (b) transverse waves in a coulomb crystal. (κ 
= 1.4 (λD  = 570 µm), q =1.92*10-15 C.) 
 
 

      The interparticle interactions include gravitational and electrostatic forces. The electrostatic force is assumed to 
be a 3D screened Coulomb repulsion or Yukawa potential. The simulation box is a 3D box and all calculations are 
handled  in  a  3D  manner.  3D  periodic  boundary  conditions  are  met  using  twenty-six  ghost  boxes  as  mentioned 
above. However, the initial positions of the particles are constrained to lie in a horizontal plane (as is often the case 
in  an  experimental  setting)  and  their  initial  velocities  are  specified  to  contain  only  XY  components.  The 
gravitational  force  from  the  earth  and  the  electrostatic  force  produced  by  the  (lower)  powered  electrode  are  not 
assumed to balance one another and are neglected. Therefore, the particles are restricted to a 2D plane (within the 
3D box) throughout the simulation since they are not acted upon by forces (or velocities) in the Z direction. 

Fig.  2.    Dispersion  relations  of  (a)  longitudinal  and  (b)  transverse  waves  propagating  parallel  to  the  primitive 
translation  vectors,  and  of  (c)  longitudinal  and  (d)  transverse  wave  propagating  perpendicular  to  the  primitive 
translation vectors. κ = 1.4 (λD  = 570 µm), q =1.92*10-15 C.  
 
 
      Initial conditions include a random distribution of 679 particles in a 20×20×20mm3 box. The neutral gas drag is 
included with a specified Epstein drag coefficient of γ =1.22. After about 20 seconds, the state of the system was 
determined to be in a crystalline form (solid) using the pair correlation function. The lattice was determined to be 
triangular (hexagonal) using the Voronoi diagram (Vasut and Hyde, 2001). In all of the simulations, the diameter of 
the embedded particles is 6.5 µm, the density is 1.51 g/cm3, the charge is 14,500 e and the interparticle distance as 
determined from the pair correlation function is around 825 µm. The initial position of the particles are generated 
by Box_tree in a random manner subject to the condition that the system’s center of mass should be located at the 
center of the box. The initial velocities of the particles are generated using a Gaussian distribution with a mean of 
zero in both the x and y directions. The size of the standard deviation as measured from zero is supplied as a run-
time parameter. As time goes on, particle velocities are simply calculated from former particle positions, velocities 
and interparticle forces. System temperatures can be determined from the average kinetic energies (velocities). 
      Once the system is shown to be in the form of a solid crystal, subsequent particle data, including position and 
velocity,  are  output  using  a  time  interval  of  0.01  seconds  and  collecting  1000  data  files  for  each  simulation. 
Depending  on  the  equilibrium  particle  position,  the  particles  are  divided  into  bins  with  the  particle  velocity 

averaged over each bin, yielding velocity data which is dependent upon position. Combining data files, a velocity 
matrix  depending  on  time  and  position  is  obtained  with  a  double  Fourier  transformation  of  this  matrix  yielding 
particle velocities in ω-k space. Figure 1 shows this matrix with pixel brightness corresponding to velocity value. 
The  bright  areas  show  the  dispersion  relation  of  the  spontaneous  wave  for  κ  =  1.4  (λD  =  570  µm)  and  particle 
charge, q =1.92*10-15 C. To obtain the dispersion relation for a particular wave mode (longitudinal or transverse) 

with  a  specific  propagation  direction,  the  bins  have  to  be  chosen  perpendicular  to  the  propagation  direction  and 
velocity components perpendicular to the bins for longitudinal waves and parallel to the bins for transverse waves 
must be used, i.e., the velocities sampled are thus parallel to the propagation direction for the longitudinal mode and 
perpendicular to the propagation direction for the transverse mode. 
Fig. 3.  Same as Figure 2 but q =2.72*10-15 C.  
 
 
      The possibility of temperature fluctuations of the system (temperature control / system thermostat) is carefully 
monitored and has been shown to be negligible for all conditions examined by this simulation (Vasut and Hyde, 
2001). The dispersion relations were also examined for various temperatures to ensure that they did not depend on 
the overall system temperature. 
  
RESULTS 
 
    X. Wang et al. (2001) analytically derived the dispersion relations for both longitudinal and transverse waves in a 
2D perfectly triangular lattice with the primitive lattice vectors all in the same direction. He also assumes a Yukawa 
potential between the particles and a harmonic approximation of the motion of the particles about their equilibrium 

positions.  The  resulting  dispersion  relations  were  shown  to  depend  upon  the  direction  of  propagation.  For  both 
modes, the dispersion relations for waves propagating parallel to the primitive translation vectors are different from 
those  perpendicular  to  the  primitive  translation  vectors  (Figure  2)  as  has  been  shown  by  experiment  (Nunomura, 
2002b).  In  this  case,  the  dispersion  relations  for  both  wave  modes  and  propagation  directions  were  obtained  by 
simulation and analysis, as shown in Figure 2. Superimposing the dispersion relation obtained from Wang’s theory 
as a solid line over the data allows a fit between the two to be determined. As can be seen in Figures 2 (b) and (d), 
the  dispersion  relation  is  very  different  for  the  transverse  mode  for  the  two  propagation  directions,  while  the 
longitudinal mode has nearly the same dispersion relation for the two directions, as can be seen in Figures 2 (a) and 
(c). 
     The simulation was run for varying κ values over the regime 0.9<κ<5. Dispersion relations for all values within 
this range were found to agree with theoretical curves (Qiao and Hyde, 2003). For κ > 5, the dispersion curve is too 
low  (and  the  shape  is  no  longer  clear  enough)  to  obtain  distinguishable  data.  On  the  other  hand,  when  κ  is  too 

small, the system will not form a crystal lattice and instead will remain in a liquid form.  
Fig. 4.  Same as Figure 2 but q =1.52*10-15 C.  
 
 
     Additionally,  the  simulation  was  run  for  two  other  different  particle  charges,  q  =  1.52*10-15C  and  q  = 
2.72*1015C.  Dispersion  relations  for  longitudinal  and  transverse  wave  modes  under  different  wave  propagation 
directions for both charge values are again found in agreement with the theoretical curves, as shown in Figure 3 and 
Figure 4. 
 

 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
     As can be seen, Box_tree produces dispersion relations shown to agree with theory over a larger range of κ than 
experimentally possible. Additionally, the code allows adjustment of the fundamental parameters in a much easier 
manner than does experiment and has no limit on what parameters can be examined. (For example, the code can 
easily  cover  high  frequencies  when  needed.)  Finally,  the  only  assumptions  made  in  the  program  are  a  Yukawa 
potential and the assignment of various constant parameters (such as particle charge, mass or Debye length). This 
will allow it to be effective in simulating nonlinear effects and dusty liquids. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Homann, A., A. Melzer, S. Peters et al., Determination of the dust screening length by laser-excited lattice waves,                   

Phys. Rev. E, 56, 7138-7141, 1997. 

173-180, 1998.  

Letters, 73, 652-655, 1994. 

261, 396-414, 1993. 

plasma science 29, 231-237, 2001.  

Homann, A., A. Melzer, S. Peters et al., Laser-excited dust lattice waves in plasma crystals, Physics Letters A, 242, 

Thomas, H., G.E. Morfill, V. Demmel et al., Plasma crystal: coulomb crystallization in a dusty plasma, Phys. Rev. 

Richardson,  D.  C.,  A  new  tree  code  method  for  simulation  of  planetesimal  dynamics,  Mon.  Not.  R.  Astron.  Soc, 

Vasut, J. and T. Hyde, Computer simulations of coulomb crystallization in a dusty plasma, IEEE transactions on 

Matthews,  L.  and  T.W.  Hyde,  Numerical  simulation  of  gravitoelectrodynamics  in  dusty  plasmas,  in  Strongly 
Coupled Coulomb Systems, edited by Kalman et al., pp.199-202, Plenum Press, New York, 1998.  
Nunomura, S., D. Samsonov, J. Goree, et al.,  Transverse waves in a two-dimensional screened-Coulomb crystal 

(dusty plasma), Phys. Rev. Letters 84, 5141, 2000. 

Nunomura, S., J. Goree, S. Hu, et al.,  Dispersion relations of longitudinal and transverse waves in two-dimensional 

screened Coulomb crystals, Phys. Rev. E  65, 66402, 2002a.  

Nunomura, S., J. Goree, S. Hu, et al., Phonon spectrum in a plasma crystal, Phys. Rev. Letters 89, 35001, 2002b.  
Wang, X., A. Bhattacharjee, S. Hu et al., Longitudinal and transverse waves in Yukawa crystals, Phys. Rev. Letters 

86, 2569, 2001.  

Qiao,  K.  and  T.  Hyde,  Dispersion  relations  for  thermally  excited  waves  in  plasma  crystals,  in  press,  J.  Phys.  A, 
2003. 
 
Ke_Qiao@Baylor.edu,  Truell_Hyde@Baylor.edu 
 
Manuscript received                                 ; revised                               ; accepted                               . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

