First International Conference on
Microchannels and Minichannels
April 24-25, 2003, Rochester, New York, USA
ICMM2003-1012

KEYNOTE PAPER

CELL-SURFACE ADHESIVE INTERACTIONS
IN MICROCHANNELS AND MICROVESSELS

Michael R. King, mike_king@urmc.rochester.edu

Department of Biomedical Engineering
University of Rochester
601 Elmwood Ave., Box 639
Rochester, New York 14642 USA

ABSTRACT

the  strength  of 

Adhesive  interactions  between  white  blood  cells  and
the  interior  surface  of  the  blood  vessels  they  contact  is
important  in  inflammation  and  in  the  progression  of  heart
disease.  Parallel-plate  microchannels  have  been  useful  in
characterizing 
in
conditions  that  are  much  simplified  over  the  complex
environment  these  cells  experience  in  the  body.  Recent
several
computational 
laboratories  have  attempted  to  bridge  this  gap  between
behavior  observed  in  flow  chamber  experiments,  and  cell-
surface 
the  microvessels  of
anesthetized animals.

experimental  work  by 

interactions  observed 

interactions, 

these 

and 

in 

INTRODUCTION

The  interplay  between  transient  chemical  bonding  and
hydrodynamic  forces  in  the  microcirculation  controls  the
eventual  fate  of  blood  cells.  Spherical  white  blood  cells
(neutrophils)  reversibly  bind  to  the  interior  surface  of
venules  through  a  family  of  adhesion  molecules  known  as
selectins  and  translate  at  an  average  velocity  much  lower
(0.1-50%)  than  that  of  freely  suspended  particles  near  the
wall (Lawrence and Springer, 1991). This enables the bound
neutrophil  to  communicate  with  the  layer  of  endothelial
cells  that  line  venules  through  a  cell  signaling  cascade
(Ebnet  and  Vestweber,  1999),  at 
the
neutrophil  to  firmly  deposit  at  a  site  of  injury  as  needed.
Disruption of the normal function can lead to inflammatory
diseases  or  interfere  with  lymphocyte/stem  cell  homing
(Springer,  1995).  Obtaining  an  accurate  picture  of  cell
rolling  in  vivo  is  complicated  by  the  large  number  of
chemical  species  involved,  with  at  least  three  selectin
molecules  and  five  nonexclusive  binding  partners,  each

times  causing 

in  binding  kinetics
exhibiting  quantitative  differences 
(Ebnet  and  Vestweber,  1999).  Furthermore,  physical
parameters are constantly varying such as the wall shear rate
and  the  local  surface  coverage  of  adhesion  molecules  as
cells  become  activated  or  relax  to  baseline  levels.  These
complexities have been effectively dealt with by recreating
the  rolling  phenomena  in  a  cell-free  system,  replacing  the
endothelium with an immobilized layer of a single adhesion
molecule  and  perfusing  this  surface  with  either  neutrophils
(Goetz et al., 1994) or carbohydrate-coated spherical beads
(Brunk et al., 1996). Computational models have also been
quite effective at integrating information such as kinetic rate
constants  and  surface  compliance  derived  in  idealized
experimental systems, and predicting the resulting nonlinear
behavior  in  concentrated  cell  suspensions  encountered  in
vivo.

Biologists  have  identified  many  of  the  molecular
constituents  that  mediate  adhesive  interactions  between
white  blood  cells,  the  cell  layer  that  lines  blood  vessels,
blood  components,  and  foreign  bodies.  However,  the
mechanics of how blood cells interact with one another and
with  biological  or  synthetic  surfaces  is  quite  complex:
owing  to  the  deformability  of  cells,  the  variation  in  vessel
geometry  with  diameters  ranging  from  O(10-6-10-2)  m,  and
the 
large  number  of  competing  chemistries  present
(Lipowski et al., 1991, 1996). There have been few attempts
to model cell adhesion between that of considering a single
isolated  cell  and  large  scale  continuum  approaches  that  do
not  account  for  the  finite  size  (and  resulting  physical
interactions)  of  suspended  or  surface-bound  cells.  Finite
element analyses of the flow in large arteries, approximating
the blood suspension as a single phase with bulk rheological
properties  of  a  viscoelastic  fluid,  have  been  useful  in
identifying  areas  most  prone  to  the  development  of
reversal  and
atherosclerotic  plaques  due 

flow 

to 

recirculating  eddies 
(Hyun  et  al.,  2000).  However,
progression  of  atherosclerosis  and  acute  cases  of  platelet-
mediated thrombosis are controlled by the adhesion of cells
to the vessel wall. Close to the wall the finite size effects of
blood cells become important and their neglect will remain a
barrier  to  accurate  models  of  the  accumulation  rate  of
adherent cells on the surface of vessels or surgical implants
(King and Leighton, 1997).

mediate  transient  chemical  adhesion  between  leukocytes,
platelets,  and  endothelial  cells  physiologically,  can  be
attached to a glass or polymer substrate, while carbohydrate
selectin-binding  ligand  is  attached  to  spherical  polymer
beads.    The  advantages  of  the  cell-free  assay  are  that  a
specific receptor-ligand pair can be isolated for study, with
molecular  densities  on  both  surfaces  precisely  controlled.
Flow  chamber  experiments  with  human  leukocytes  and
endothelial  cell  monolayers  have  also  been  performed  by
several laboratories (e.g., Alon et al., 1995).

A.

B.

A.

B.

Figure 1. The experimental and theoretical systems. A.
The  flow  chamber  consists  of  two  parallel  plates,  with
the lower plate functionalized with adhesion molecules.
B.  Schematic  of  MAD:  a  rigorous  calculation  of
suspension  flow  near  a  wall  is  coupled  to  a  stochastic
model  of  specific  surface  adhesion  through  reversible
receptor-ligand bonds.

Another  example  of  a  physiological  flow  where  the
effects  of  finite  cell  size  are  important  is  in  capillaries  that
can be smaller in diameter than a resting leukocyte (Bathe et
al.,  2002).    Adhesive  cells  or  leukocyte-platelet  aggregates
can  plug  such  small  vessels,  resulting  in  either  chronic
conditions such as venous stasis ulceration or interfere with
the  effective  radio-  or  chemotherapeutic  treatment  of  solid
tumors.

Computer  simulations  have  begun  to  find  success  in
bridging  the  gap  in  understanding  between  single  cell
behavior  and  large  scale  flows  in  the  vasculature  (King  et
al., 2001; King and Hammer, 2001b).  Such theories model
each molecular bond between cell and substrate as a linear
spring with stochastic formation and breakage kinetics.  The
motion  of  cells  suspended  in  a  viscous  fluid  can  be  solved
via  boundary  integral  methods  that  are  well  suited  to
parallelization. 
investigators  have  developed
techniques  to  study  cell  adhesion  experimentally,  by
reconstituting the biological adhesion molecules in cell-free
assays  (Brunk  et  al.,  1996).    Selectin  molecules,  that

  Other 

Figure 2. A. Screen capture from in vitro experiment of
sialyl  Lewis(x)-coated  beads  rolling  on  P-selectin.  A
pair of beads is marked for binary analysis. B. Pairs of
rolling  beads  (model  cells)  prefer  certain  center-to-
center  separation  orientations  over  others.  Deviation
velocity map represents 209 pairs of beads.

METHODS

Parallel-plate flow chamber

2

multiparticle  problem  is  considerably  more  complex  than
the  case  of  an  isolated  sphere,  for  which  closed  form
solutions

B.

Figure  1.A  depicts  a  flow  chamber  to  study  the
adhesion  of  cells  to  a  functionalized  surface,  consisting  of
two  parallel  plates,  the  lower  surface  coated  with  a
biological  adhesion  molecule.  A  parabolic  pressure-driven
flow is produced using a computer-controlled syringe pump.
The  cells  or  beads  are  slightly  negatively  buoyant,  causing
them  to  settle  to  the  lower  wall  and  interact  adhesively.
These 
the
translational  velocity  of  the  cells  in  the  near-wall  region
from  below  using  an  inverted  microscope.  At  the  length
scale  of  a  single  cell  (radius  a  ~  4  µm)  the  local  flowfield
near the wall can be approximated as a linear shear flow.

interactions  are  detected  by  monitoring 

A.

Multiparticle adhesive dynamics

We  have  developed  a  computational  simulation  of
specific  adhesive  interactions  between  cells  and  surfaces
under  flow  (Figure  1.B;  King  and  Hammer,  2001a).  In  the
adhesive  dynamics  formulation,  adhesion  molecules  are
modeled as compliant springs. One well-known model used
to describe the kinetics of single biomolecular bond failure
is due to Bell

0
r

r

b

)

k

k

=

r F k T
/
0

exp(
which relates the rate of dissociation kr to the magnitude of
the  force  on  the  bond  F.  Typical  values  for  the  unstressed
0 and reactive compliance r0 are 2 s-1 and 0.04 nm
off-rate kr
for P-selectin binding with P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1
(PSGL-1; Smith et al., 1999). The rate of formation directly
follows  from  the  Boltzmann  distribution  for  affinity.  The
expression  for  the  binding  rate  must  also  incorporate  the
effect  of  the  relative  motion  of  the  two  surfaces.  The
solution algorithm is as follows: (1) All unbound molecules
in  the  contact  area  are  tested  for  formation  against  the
k
− ∆ ; (2) All of the currently
probability 
f
bound  molecules  are  tested  for  breakage  against  the
k
− ∆ ;  (3)  The  external  forces
probability 
r
and  torques  on  each  cell  are  summed;  (4)  The  mobility
calculation  is  performed  to  determine  the  rigid  body
motions of the cells; (5) Cell and bond positions are updated
according to the kinematics of particle motion.

1 exp(

1 exp(

= −

= −

P
f

P
r

)

)

t

t

Unless  firmly  adhered  to  a  surface,  white  blood  cells
can  be  effectively  modeled  as  rigid  spherical  particles,  as
evidenced by the good agreement between bead versus cell
in  vitro  experiments  (Chang  and  Hammer,  2000).  Typical
values  of  physical  parameters  yield  Reynolds  numbers
s-1 is the shear rate,
Re
a  =  4  µm  is  the  cell  radius,  and  ν  =  1  cS  is  the  kinematic
viscosity  of  the  suspending  fluid.  Thus,  inertia  can  be
neglected  and  fluid  motion  is  governed  by  the  Stokes
equation

a O
=

3
−
(10 )

, where 

100

γ =(cid:5)

(cid:5)
γ

=

2

p

2
u
µ∇ = ∇

,
where  u  is  the  velocity,  µ  is  the  fluid  viscosity,  and  p  the
local pressure. No-slip boundary conditions hold at the cell
surfaces,  and  at  z  =  0,  the  position  of  the  planar  wall.  The

u
∇ ⋅ =

0

Figure  3.  A.  In  the  MAD  simulation,  a  nearby  pair  of
rolling  cells  is  approximated  as  two  spheres  above  a
plane.  B.  At  high  resolution,  the  simulation  predicts
that  separation  distance  between  two  rolling  cells
undergoes a random walk in x-y space.

are  available  (e.g.,  Goldman,  et  al.,  1967).  We  use  a
technique  called  the  Completed  Double-Layer  Boundary
Integral Equation Method (CDL-BIEM) (Phan-Thien et al.,
1992).  Applying  the  standard  boundary  element  method  to

3

A.

B.

y  (pix)

x  (pixels, 3.1 pix = 1 micron)

Figure  4.  In  vivo  microcirculatory  flow  experiments.  A.  Digitized  image  of  the  cross-section  of  a  36  µm  post-
capillary venule in the cremaster muscle tissue of an anesthetized mouse. Several white blood cells interacting with
the vessel wall are evident. B. Fluid streamlines yielded by tracking the motion of 0.5 µm fluorescent tracer beads in
a 48 µm vessel similar to that pictured in A. Arrows show where the flow is diverted by adherent white blood cells at
the vessel wall.
the  Stokes  flow  problem  produces  a  Fredholm  integral
equation of the first kind, which is generally ill-conditioned.
By  posing  the  mobility  problem  in  terms  of  a  compact
double  layer  operator  and  completing  the  range  with  the
velocity  field  resulting  from  a  known  distribution  of  point
forces  and  torques  placed  inside  each  particle,  one  can
derive a fixed point iteration scheme for solving the integral
representation of the Stokes equation,
∫ K(cid:118)
x
=
(

and particle-plane lubrication forces, which are added from
known solutions as “external” forces.

Intravital microscopy

⋅
ξ φ ξ
( )

∞−
u

u x
( )

ξ
( )

x
( )

x
( )

dS

−

+

u

RC

)

S

where  u∞  is  the  ambient  velocity  in  the  absence  of  any
particles, uRC is a “range completing” velocity generated by
point  forces  and  torques  that  accounts  for  the  fact  that  the
ill-behaved single layer integral has been discarded, K is the
double  layer  operator,  and  φ  is  the  unknown  double  layer
distribution.  After  reducing  the  spectral  radius  of  the
corresponding  discretization,  the  CDL-BIEM  equation  is
found  to  converge  rapidly.  The  presence  of  the  wall  is
treated  by 
solutions
corresponding  to  a  point  force  near  a  plane.  The  large
separation  of  length  scales  between  the  deviation  bond
lengths  and  the  particle  radii  requires  very  small  time
increments  (∆t  =  10-7  s).  To  speed  the  calculation  a  coarse
discretization  is  used  that  does  not  resolve  particle-particle

incorporating 

singularity 

the 

4

      We  are  fortunate  to  collaborate  with  Ingrid  Sarelius
(Pharmacology  &  Physiology,  Univ.  of  Rochester),  whose
laboratory  studies  the  inflammation  cascade  in  live  animal
models.  Male  mice  weighing  28  to  32g  and  older  than  8
weeks are used in their experiments (Sarelius et  al.,  1981).
Animals  are  anesthetized  with  an  initial  dose  of  sodium
pentobarbital  and  maintained  with  supplemental  doses  as
needed.    Anesthetic  level  is  monitored  by  observing
withdrawal  reflexes  initiated  by  toe  or  tail  pinch.    Body
temperature iss maintained by placing the animal on a glass
heating coil connected to a water circulator set at 37°C.  The
animal  is  tracheotomized  to  establish  a  patent  airway  and
two catheters placed in the right jugular vein for delivery of
anesthetic  and  fluorescent  flow  tracer  beads,  respectively.
The  right  cremaster  muscle  is  exteriorized  for  in  situ
microscopy, producing a tissue section thin enough to allow
light to pass through the sample (Baez, 1973; Sarelius et al.,
1981).  The tissue is superfused with a bicarbonate buffered
the  surgical  preparation  and
salt  solution 

throughout 

subsequent  observation.    The  superfusate  is  maintained  at
physiological temperature (36±0.5°C) and equilibrated with
to  maintain
gas  containing  5%  CO2  and  95%N2 
physiological  pH  (7.40±0.05). 
  At  the  end  of  each
experiment,  the  animal  is  euthanized  by  i.v.  injection  of  a
lethal dose of anesthetic.

In  this  manner  post-capillary  venules  can  be
observed using intravital confocal fluorescence microscopy.
A microscope equipped with a water immersion objective, a
Nipkow  disk  scanning  confocal  head,  and  a  GenIII+
intensified  CCD  video  camera  are  used  to  visualize
fluorescent  microspheres  used  as  flow  markers.    For  most
venules,  the  confocal  observation  plane  is  focused  at  the
center of the vessel lumen where the vessel walls outlining
the observed cross-section are in clear focus.  The thickness
of 
to  be
approximately 1 µm, defined as the distance where 50% fall
off from source intensity occurred above and below a point
source  (Carlsson  and  Aslund,  1987).    Flow  patterns  have
been  observed  under  control  conditions,  where  slight
inflammatory  activation  was  present  due  to  the  surgical
preparation of the tissue, and also under activated conditions
induced  by  local  injection  of  inflammatory  cytokines  prior
to surgical preparation.

the  confocal  slice  has  been  calculated 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Flow chamber experiments

Figure 2.A shows a digitized image of an in vitro flow
chamber experiment of sialyl Lewis(x)-coated beads (10 µm
diameter) flowing over a P-selectin-coated surface at a shear
rate of 100 s-1. Sialyl Lewis(x) is the tetrasaccharide domain
presented  by  many  physiological  ligands  to  the  selectin
molecules.  Molecular  densities  on  both  surfaces  were
comparable to that found on wild-type cells, 90 sites/µm2 on
the  beads  and  180  sites/µm2  on  the  lower  wall  of  the  flow
chamber.  As  can  be  seen  in  Fig.  2.A,  phase  contrast
microscopy produces images of good contrast, and cell/bead
motions can be tracked via automated computer algorithms
(e.g.,  using  Matlab  Imaging  Toolbox  or  LabView).  King
and  Hammer  (2001a)  studied 
interactions
between  pairs  of  beads  rolling 
in  close  vicinity,  a
comparable situation shown in Fig. 2.A. From a compilation
of  many  such  occurrences,  the  deviation  motion  of  the
rolling  pair  can  be  quantified  (Figure  2.B).  As  shown  in
Figure 2.B, pairs of rolling beads will tend to separate when
in  certain  configurations,  however,  the  separation  between
the two beads will often evolve to a configuration where the
beads are aligned with the flow direction in single-file. Such
observations are consistent with previous in vitro studies of
neutrophils  (a  subtype  of  white  blood  cells)  where  long
linear  trains  of  rolling  cells  have  been  observed  to
spontaneously form (Walcheck et al., 1996).

the  binary 

Adhesive dynamics simulations

The  cell-surface  interactions  observed  in  flow
chambers  have  been  successfully  recreated  in  detailed
computer simulations. In particular, the interaction between
pairs  of  cells  rolling  in  close  vicinity  can  be  modeled  as  a
true two-particle system (Figure 3.A). One advantage of the
computer simulation is that behaviors can be examined at a
much higher resolution (~1 nm) than is possible with optical
microscopy. At this higher resolution it is apparent that the
separation  distance  between  two  rolling  cells  undergoes  a
random walk in two-dimensions. From this random walk an
apparent  self-diffusivity  in  the  plane  can  be  defined.  It  has
been  shown  that  this  diffusivity  in  the  plane  is  decreased
dramatically  due  to  hydrodynamic  cell-cell  interactions  for
nearly-touching  cells,  as  compared  to  widely-separated
spheres (King and Hammer, 2001a).

Intravital microscopy in live animal models

An  ultimate  goal  of  the  multiparticle  adhesive
dynamics simulation is to predict the dynamics of blood cell
adhesion  in  the  microcirculation,  where  the  adhesion  of
white  blood  cells  to  the  vessel  wall  is  most  important.
Figure  4.A  shows  a  digitized  image  of  a  real-time  flow
experiment  in  a  cremaster  muscle  preparation  in  an
anesthetized  mouse.  The  post-capillary  venule  shown  is
about 36 µm in diameter, typical of vessels  found  between
the  smallest  capillaries  and  larger  collecting  venules.  From
the  surgical  preparation,  mildly  inflammatory  conditions
result in the presentation of P-selectin adhesion molecule by
the vessel wall and subsequent cell adhesion. The wall shear
rate  in  such  vessels  has  been  previously  characterized  as
between  50-400  s-1  (Kim  and  Sarelius,  in  press).  Tracking
the motion of small fluorescent tracer beads introduced into
the  local  microcirculatory  network  provides  a  means  of
visualizing  the  fluid  streamlines  (Figure  4.B).  Previous
investigators have used fluorescently-labeled red blood cells
for  this  purpose,  however,  such  larger  tracers  do  not  move
with  the  local  fluid  velocity  close  to  the  wall  and  tend  to
collect  at  the  vessel  centerline  due  to  well-understood
mechanisms. Such flow measurements in intact vessels give
the best estimates of the wall shear stress experienced by the
endothelial  cell  layer  lining  the  vessel  interior,  and  will  be
useful in deriving improved estimates of mass transfer rates
in this milieu of the circulation.

CONCLUSIONS

Various  in  vitro,  in  vivo,  and  computational
methods  have  been  developed  to  understand  the  complex
range  of  transient  interactions  between  cells,  neighboring
cells, and bounding surfaces under flow. Knowledge gained
from  studying  physiologically  realistic  flow  systems  may
prove useful in microfluidic applications where the transport
of  blood  cells  and  solubilized,  bioactive  molecules  is
needed,  or  in  miniaturized  diagnostic  devices  where  cell
mechanics  or  binding  affinities  can  be  correlated  with
clinical pathologies. Current work in our laboratory focuses
on  improving  the  MAD  simulation  to  consider  deformable

5

cells  of  nonspherical  (platelet)  shape,  cylindrical  and
complex branching geometries, and multiple receptor-ligand
pairs, as well as the fabrication of  glass  capillary  networks
presenting  biochemically  realistic  surfaces 
to  flowing
suspensions of cells.

REFERENCES

times 

transit 

the  P-selectin-carbohydrate  bond  and 

Alon,  R.,  Hammer,  D.  A.,  and  Springer,  T.  A.,  1995,
Lifetime  of 
its
response  to  tensile  force  in  hydrodynamic  flow,  Nature,
Vol. 374, pp. 539-542.
Baez,  S.,  1973,  An  open  cremaster  muscle  preparation  for
the  study  of  blood  vessels  by 
in  vivo  microscopy,
Microvasc. Res., Vol. 5, pp.384-394.
Bathe M., Shirai, A., Doerschuk, C. M., and Kamm, R. D.,
2002,  Neutrophil 
through  pulmonary
capillaries:  The  effects  of  capillary  geometry  and  fMLP-
stimulation, Biophys. J., Vol. 83, pp. 1917-1933.
Brunk, D. K., Goetz, D. J., and Hammer, D. A., 1996, Sialyl
Lewis(x)/E-selectin-mediate  rolling  in  a  cell  free  system,
Biophys. J., Vol. 71, pp. 2902-2907.
Carlsson, K., and Aslund, N., 1987, Confocal imaging for 3-
D  digital  microscopy,  Applied  Optics,  Vol.  26,  pp.  3232-
3238.
Chang,  K.-C.,  and    Hammer,  D.  A.,  2000,  Adhesive
dynamics simulations of sialyl-Lewis x/E-selectin-mediated
rolling in a cell-free system, Biophys. J., Vol. 79, pp. 1891-
1902.
Ebnet, K., and Vestweber, D., 1999, Molecular mechanisms
that  control  leukocyte  extravasation:  the  selectins  and  the
chemokines, Histochem. Cell Biol., Vol. 112, pp. 1-23.
Goetz, D. J., El-Sabbab, M. E., Pault, B. U., and Hammer,
D. A., 1994, Dynamics of neutrophil rolling over stimulated
endothelium in-vitro, Biophys. J., Vol. 71, pp. 2902-2209.
Goldman,  A.  J.,  Cox,  R.  G.,  and  Brenner,  H.,  1967,  Slow
viscous  motion  of  a  sphere  parallel  to  a  plane  wall.  II.
Couette flow. Chem. Eng. Sci., Vol. 22, pp. 653-660.
Hyun,  S.,  Kleinstreuer,  C.,  and  Archie,  Jr.,  J.  P.,
Hemodynamics  analyses  of  arterial  expansions  with
implications  to  thrombosis  and  restenosis,  Med.  Eng.  &
Phys., Vol. 22, pp. 13-27.
Kim, M. B., and Sarelius, I. H., Distributions of wall shear
stress in venular convergences of mouse cremaster  muscle,
Microcirc., in press.
King  M.  R.,  Rodgers,  S.  D.,  and  Hammer,  D.  A.,  2001,
Hydrodynamic collisions suppress fluctuations in the rolling
velocity  of  adhesive  blood  cells,  Langmuir,  Vol.  17,  pp.
4139-4143.

King,  M.  R.,  and  Hammer,  D.  A.,  2001a,  Multiparticle
Adhesive  Dynamics.  Interactions  between  stably  rolling
cells, Biophys. J., Vol. 81, pp. 799-813.
King,  M.  R.,  and  Hammer,  D.  A.,  2001b,  Multiparticle
Adhesive  Dynamics:  Hydrodynamic  recruitment  of  rolling
leukocytes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, Vol. 98, pp. 14919-
14924.
King M. R., and Leighton, Jr., D. T., 1997, Measurement of
the  inertial  lift  on  a  moving  sphere  in  contact  with  a  plane
wall in a shear flow, Phys. Fluids, Vol. 9, pp. 1248-1255.
Lawrence, M. B., and Springer, T. A., 1991, Leukocytes roll
on  a  selectin  at  physiological  flow-rates  –  distinction  from
and  prerequisite  for  adhesion  through  integrins,  Cell,  Vol.
65, pp. 859-873.
Lipowsky, H. H., Riedel, D., and Shi, G. S., 1991, In vivo
mechanical  properties  of  leukocytes  during  adhesion  to
venular endothelium, Biorheology, Vol. 28, pp. 53-64.
Lipowsky,  H.  H.,  Scott,  D.  A.,  Cartmell,  J.  S.,  1996,
Leukocyte  rolling  velocity  and  its  relation  to  leukocyte-
endothelium  adhesion  and  cell  deformability,  Amer.  J.
Physiol., Vol. 270, pp. H1371-H1380.
Phan-Thien, N., Tullock, D., and Kim, S., 1992, Completed
double  layer  in  half-space:  a  boundary  element  method,
Comput. Mech., Vol. 9, pp. 121-135.
Sarelius,  I.  H.,  Damon,  D.  N.,  and  Duling,  B.  R.,  1981,
Microvascular  adaptations  during  maturation  of  striated
muscle, Am. J. Physiol., Vol. 241, pp. H317-H324.
Smith,  M.  J.,  Berg,  E.  L.,  and  Lawrence,  M.  B.,  1999,  A
direct  comparison  of  selectin-mediated  transient,  adhesive
events using high temporal resolution, Biophys. J., Vol. 77,
pp. 3371-3383.
Springer,  T.  A.,  1995,  Traffic  signals  on  endothelium  for
lymphocyte  recirculation  and  leukocyte  emigration,  Annu.
Rev. Physiol., Vol. 57, pp. 827-872.
Walcheck B., Moore, K. L., McEver, R. P., and Kishimoto,
T.  K.,  1996,  Neutrophil-neutrophil 
interactions  under
hydrodynamic shear stress involve L-selectin and PSGL-1 –
A  mechanism  that  amplifies  initial  leukocyte  accumulation
on  P-selectin  in  vitro,  J.  Clin.  Invest.,  Vol.  98,  pp.  1081-
1087.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was funded by the National Institutes of
Health, Grant No. HL18208. Figures 1.B, 2.B, and 3.B have
been  reproduced  from  King  and  Hammer  (2001a),  by
the  Biophysical  Society.
copyright  permission  of 

6

