1

The CALMA system: an artificial neural network method for 
detecting masses and microcalcifications in digitized 
mammograms 

A. Lauria   a,?

, R. Palmiero a, G. Forni a, P. Cerello b, B. Golosio c,d, F. Faucie, R. Magroe, G. 

Rasoe, S. Tangaroc,f, P.L. Indovina a 

aUniversità “Federico II” and Sezione INFN di Napoli, via Cinthia, 80126 Napoli, Italy 

bSezione INFN di Torino, via P. Giuria, 10125 Torino, Italy 

cSezione INFN di Cagliari, 09042 Monserrato (CA), Italy 

dUniversità di Sassari, via Vienna, 07100  Sassari, Italy  

eUniversità di Palermo, viale delle Scienze, 90128  Palermo, Italy 

fUniversità di Bari, via Amendola, 70126  Bari, Italy 

Abstract 

The CALMA (Computer Assisted Library for MAmmography) project is a five years plan developed in a physics research 
frame  in  collaboration  between  INFN  (Istituto  Nazionale  di  Fisica  Nucleare)  and  many  Italian  hospitals.  At  present a large 
database  of  digitized  mammographic  images  (more  than  6000)  was  collected  and  a  software  based  on  neural  network 
algorithms for the search of suspicious breast lesions was developed. Two tools are available: a microcalcification clusters 
hunter, based on supervised and unsupervised feedforward neural network, and a massive lesions searcher, based on a hibrid 
approach. Both the algorithms analyzed preprocessed digitized images by high frequency filters. Clinical tests were performed 
to evaluate sensitivity and specificity of the system, considering the system as alone and as secon reader. Results show that the 
system is ready to be implemented by medical industry. The CALMA project, just ended, has its natural development in the 
GPCALMA  (Grid  Platform  for  CALMA)  project,  where  distributed  users  join  common  resources  (images,  tools,  statistical 
analysis). 

Keywords: CAD; mammography; breast cancer; neural networks. 

 

 

                                                 
* Corresponding author: Tel.: ++39 081 676 121;  fax: ++39 081 676 346;  e-mail: adele.lauria@na.infn.it. 

 2

1. Introduction 

In  recent  years  different  computerized  systems 
have  been  developed  to  support  diagnostic  work  of 
radiologists  in  mammography  [1].  The  goal  of  these 
systems  is  to  focus  the  radiologist’s  attention  on 
suspicious areas. They work in three steps: i. analogic 
mammograms  are  digitised;  ii. images are segmented 
and  preprocessed;  iii.  Regions  of  Interests  (ROI)  are 
found and classified by neural netwoks.  

At  present,  many  CAD  systems  are  commercially 
available,  but  only  two  of  them  obtained  the  FDA 
approval.  Preliminary  studies  showed  that  the  use  of 
computerized  detection  in  mammography  lead  to  a 
significant  increment  in  sensitivity,  both  for  masses 
and for microcalcification clusters [2, 3]. 

In  the  present  work  we  report  the  performance  of 
CALMA  system  in  the  search  of  cancer  lesions  in 
terms of sensitivity and specificity.  Moreover it was 
tested  as  second  reader  in  the  support  of  the 
diagnostic  work  of  the  radiologists,  evaluating  how   
their  sensitivity  and  specificity  change  with  and 
without the CALMA system. 

Results show that CALMA is ready to be used in 
the  clinical  practice  as  second  reader.  Moreover  the 
large  number  of  images  collected  in  many  hospitals 
suggests  to  realize  a  distribuited  system  for  remote 
consultation  of  images.  This  is  an  application  of  the 
GRID  technology  that  allows  remote  users  to  access 
common resources, like software, images, data. 

2.  Material and Methods 

The CALMA hardware is composed by a personal 
computer  (operative  system:  linux)  and  by  a  CCD 
linear  scanner.  Mammograms  are  first  digitised 
(85? m,  12  bit/pixel),  then  are  preprocessed  by  high 
frequency filters and saved in a special format.  

Two  different  approaches  are  followed  for  the 
mass  or  the  microcalcification  cluster  research.  The 
microcalcification  analysis  is  performed  using  two 
different  Neural  Networks.  The  first  one  is  a  FFNN 
that  classifies  windows 
images  are 
segmented,  the  output  of  this  NN  becames  the  input 
the  principal 
for 

the  second  NN, 

that  using 

in  which 

component  method  classifies  ROIs.  If  the  output 
value  exceeds  a  threshold,  the  selected  areas  are 
pointed by a marker, as shown in figure 1. 

The  analysis  of  masses  consists  of  three  steps.  In 
the  first  step  not  interesting  data  are  eliminated;  then 
an  image  analysis  in  the  frequency  domain  is 
performed,  at  the  end  interesting  areas  are  classified 
as ROIs by a FFNN. 

 

Further  software  and  hardware  characteristics  of 
the CALMA system can be found in the literature  [4, 
5].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  1.  Output  of  the  CALMA  research  of  the 
the 
lesions: 
microcalcification  cluster,  and  the  squares  are  the 
ROIs pointed by the CALMA system. 

the  area  containing 

the  circle 

is 

A  dataset  composed  by  180  images  of  healthy 
cases  (with  a  three  years  follow  up)  and  145  images 
of  malignant  cases  (with  histopatological  diagnosis) 
was  considered  to  evaluate  the  sensitivity  and  the 
specificity  of  CAD  in  the  search  of  masses.  At  the 
same  way  to  test  the  system  for  microcalcification 
search  500  images  of  healthy  cases  (with  a  three 
years 
of 
microcalcification  clusters 
(with  histopatological 
diagnosis) were collected. In each malignant case, the 
lesion  was  pointed  by  expert  radiologists  and  the 
mean  diameter  is  2.1  cm  for  masses  lesions  and  2.3 
cm  for  microcalcifications  clusters.  The  system  was 
evaluated in terms of sensitivity and specificity. 

images 

follow 

306 

and 

up) 

 

3

Table1: sensitivity values of radiologists without and with 
CALMA System. 

 
A 
B 
C 

Conventional  
87.5 % 
91.7 % 
74.2 % 

With CALMA 
87.5 % 
88.4 % 
70.9 % 

Table2: specificity values of radiologists without and with 
CALMA System. 

References 

[1]  L.J. Warren Burhenne, S.A. Wood, C.J. D’Orsi, S.Feig, D.B. 
Kopans, K.F. O’Shaughnessy, E.A. Sickles, L. Tabar, C.J. 
Viborny, R.A. Castellino. Radiology 215 (2000) 554.  
[2]  R.L. Birdwell, D.M. Ikeda, K.F. O’Shaughnessy, E.A. 

Sickles. Radiology 219 (2001) 192. 

[3]  T.W. Freer, M.J. Ulissey. Radiology 220 (2001) 781.  
[4]  M. E. Fantacci, U. Bottigli, P. Delogu, F. Fauci, B. Golosio, 
A. Lauria, R. Palmiero, G. Raso, S. Stumbo, S. Tangaro.  
Proc. SPIE, Vol.4684, pg. 1301-1310, 2002 

[5]  A. Lauria, M.E. Fantacci, U. Bottigli, P. Delogu, F. Fauci, B. 
Golosio, P.L. Indovina, G. L. Masala, P. Oliva, R. Palmiero, 
G. Raso, S. Stumbo, S. Tangaro. . Proc. SPIE, Vol.5031, 2003 
(in press).  

 

to 

this  aim 

the  radiologists.  To 

For  a  complete  characterization  of  the  CALMA 
system  it  is  important  to  evaluate  the  diagnostic 
support 
three 
radiologists  (A,  B,  C)  of  different  experience  in 
mammography  were  considered  (5,  3  and  2  years  of 
experience  in  a  public  hospital,  respectively).  A 
dataset  composed  of  70  images  of  cancerous  breasts 
(with  microcalcification  lesions)  proven  by  biopsy 
and  120  images  of  healthy  cases,  proven  by  three 
years  follow  up  was  collected.  Radiologists  viewed 
all the images in the conventional way (looking films 
on  diaphanoscope)  indipendently  each  other  and 
blind  to  the  final  diagnosis.  After  8  months  they 
reviewed images in a random order and with the help 
of  CALMA  system. 
  The  radiologists  examine 
images  on  a  screen  using  several  visualization  tools 
(e.g.,  zoom,  contrast  enhancement,  etc.).  When  the 
microcalcification  icon  is  clicked,  the  automatic 
search  program  starts.  Programs  containing  both 
algorithms  and  neural  networks  perform  the  lesions 
analysis.  In  a  few  seconds,  red  markers  point  out 
regions of interest (ROI) where suspicious lesions are 
recognized by the system.  To digitalize and visualize 
ROIs  on  images  2.5  minutes  are  necessary.  To  each 
ROI is associated a probability value, ranging from 0 
to 1, of  containing a lesion. 

 

 
Results 

In  the  research  of  masses  the  system  get  a 
sensitivity of 90% and a specificity of 85%; while for 
the  microcalcification clusters 92% of sensitivity and 
92%  of  specificity  were  obtained.  In  table  1  and  2 
values  of  sensitivity  and  specificity,  respectively,  of 
radiologists without and with CAD were reported. 

Meaningful  results  were  obtained  considering  the 
increment  in  sensitivity  of  radiologists  supported  by 
CALMA,  ranging  from  10.0%  (reader  B)  to  15.6% 
(reader C). 

The  results  are  comparable  with  other  CAD 
that 
systems  commercially  available,  and  show 
CALMA  system  can  be  used  as  second  reader  and 
also that  it can be industrially developed.  

 

 
A 
B 
C 

Conventional  
82.8 % 
80.0 % 
71.5 % 

With CALMA 
94.3 % 
90.0 % 
87.1 % 

