C5.1-D4.1-0012-02 

DIGITAL IMAGING AND ANALYSIS OF DUSTY PLASMAS 

C. M. Boessé, M. K. Henry, T. W. Hyde, and L. S. Matthews 

CASPER (Center for Astrophysics, Space Physics, and Engineering Research) 
Baylor University, P.O. Box 97310, Waco, TX 76798-7310, USA 

ABSTRACT 

Dust  particles  immersed  within  a  plasma  environment,  such  as  those  found  in  planetary  rings  or  cometary 
environments, will acquire an electric charge.  If the ratio of interparticle potential energy to average kinetic energy 
is high enough the particles will form either a ‘liquid’ structure with short-range ordering or a crystalline structure 
with long-range ordering.  Since their discovery in laboratory environments in 1994, such crystals have been the 
subject of a variety of experimental, theoretical, and numerical investigations.  Laboratory experiments analyzing 
the  behavior  of  dust  grains  in  a  plasma  rely  on  optical  diagnostics  to  provide  data  about  the  system  in  a  non-
perturbative manner. In the past, capturing, imaging, and analyzing crystalline structure in dusty plasmas has been a 
non-trivial problem.  Utilizing digital imaging and analysis systems, data capture, image formatting, and analysis 
can  be  done  quickly.    Following  data  capture,  image  analysis  is  conducted  using  modified  Particle  Image 
Velocimetry  (PIV)  and  Particle  Tracking  Velocimetry  (PTV)  algorithms.    The  data  extracted  is  then  used  to 
construct Voronoi diagrams, calculate particle density, inter-particle spacing, pair correlation functions, and thermal 
energy. From this data other dust plasma parameters can be inferred such as inter-particle forces and grain charges. 

INTRODUCTION 

 
Studies  of  complex  dusty  plasmas  and  associated  phenomena  are  known  to  have  applications  in  many 
astrophysical  environments,  such  as  protoplanetary  systems,  cometary  tails,  and  planetary  rings,  as  well  as  in 
laboratory environments, primarily those which arise in the plasma-aided etching of silicon wafers (Thomas, 1994).  
In laboratory environments, dusty plasmas form when the plasma temperature is low and dust is introduced into the 
plasma.  The immersed dust then generally acquires a  high negative charge from plasma fluxes to the dust grain 
surfaces.  The charged dust particles interact via shielded Coulomb potentials and may form a regular ordered array 
if grain size and charge dispersion are small (Pieper, 1996a).  The recent discovery of this Coulomb crystallization 
has  led  to  advances  in  the  understanding  of  dynamics  and  phase  transitions  in  solids,  as  well  as  a  better 
understanding  of  the  interactions  between  the strongly coupled dust grains (Pieper, 1996a; Thomas, 1994).  This 
has  resulted  in  a  rapidly  growing  body  of  literature  published  on  the  topic  (Barkan,  1994;  Melzer,  2000;  Pieper, 
1996a).  

Both experimental and theoretical dusty plasma research investigate the charging process of dust grains within 

dusty plasmas and the resulting dynamics of the complex system.  Of these, the formation of lattice structure and 
the perturbation of grains within the crystal are two of the most interesting (Barkan, 1994).  In laboratory settings, 
different lattice structures in dust crystals, including close packed hexagonal, body centered cubic, and face 
centered cubic have been observed (Pieper, 1996a; Pieper, 1996b; Morfill, 1999; Quinn, 1996).  Perturbation 
effects such as Mach cones and wave propagation are also becoming subjects of interest experimentally (Melzer, 
2000; Homann, 1998; Samsonov, 1999; Samsonov, 2000; Smith, 2002; Zuzic, 1996). Dust particles have been 
found to form ordered structures under various types of conditions, and several parameters have been established to 
describe these experimentally (Thomas, 1994; Pieper, 1996a; Pieper, 1996b).  Two of these are Γ, the ratio of the 
average potential energy of the dust grains to the thermal energy, and κ, the ratio of the interparticle spacing to the 
Debye length, λ, which helps define the effective shielding radius around a charged dust grain.  Efforts have 
recently been made to associate the properties of dust crystals to the values of these parameters (Pieper, 1996b). 

In  order  to  create  a  controlled  plasma  environment  and  make  meaningful  quantitative  and  qualitative 
observations of these systems, the GEC rf reference cell was introduced as a standard tool in which to produce and 
collect data (Hargis, et al., 1994; Samsonov, 2000).   Obtaining and analyzing data from the reference cell without 
perturbing the plasma requires an efficient optical diagnostic system.  In the process outlined in this paper, images 
are taken straight to digital format by means of a frame grab board with MATLAB scientific computing software 
then used to analyze the resulting data.  Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) algorithms have been used to analyze the 
motion  of  dust  grains  in  a  plasma  (Thomas,  2001)  while  other  studies  tracked  individual  particles  via  Particle 
Tracking  Velocimetry  (PTV)  in  order  to  determine  the  direction  and  magnitude  of  the  particle  flow  (Samsonov, 
2000).  The  system  described  here  utilizes  both  methods  and  then  integrates  the  data  giving  estimated  velocity 
vectors and/or statistical estimations of intensity shifts.   

 

 

 

 

METHODS 

GEC Reference Cell 

Experimental procedures for the formation of dust crystals are conducted in a GEC reference cell utilizing an 
argon  rf  discharge  of  13.56  MHz  (Hargis,  1994).  The  discharge  is  created  using  two  strongly  biased  electrodes, 
placed two centimeters apart, in the plasma chamber.  The lower electrode is a disk 10 cm in diameter, while the 
upper  electrode  is  a  ring  of  10  cm  outer  diameter  and  9  cm  inner  diameter.    Once  the  plasma  is  established, 
melamine  formaldehyde  particles  8.9  µm  in  diameter  are  introduced  into  the  plasma  environment.  The  discharge 
region  is  illuminated  by  vertical  and  horizontal  diode  laser  sheets,  and  imaged  using  two  CCD  cameras--one 
mounted  horizontally  and  another  mounted  vertically  above  the  cell,  as  can  be  seen  in  Figure  1.    Both  cameras 
utilize band pass filters in order to view particles within the illuminated planes while minimizing ambient light due 
to glow discharge and are focused on the laser sheet perpendicular to their respective observation positions.   
 
 

 

 

 

Fig. 1. GEC reference cell and optical system of two cameras 
mounted at right angles – one top-mounted and one side-mounted. 

 

 

For the upper camera, a large field of view is desirable in order to best observe long-range crystalline structure.  

Crystals formed from dust particles of seven to ten microns have been observed having interparticle spacing of 128-
250 micrometers (Pieper, 1996a; Thomas, 1994).  To adequately resolve individual particles within such a crystal 
lattice, the top mounted camera utilizes a Close Focus brand zoom lens with a variable focal length of 18-108 mm, 

 

 

a six to one magnification ratio, and a lens magnification doubler which produces a field of view of approximately 
11 mm by 11mm.  

The horizontal lattice structure is observed from the upper camera, while the separation distance between 
vertical layers is observed from the side camera.  As vertical layer spacing, approximately 20-100 µm (Pieper, 
1996), is much smaller than horizontal interparticle spacing, approximately 128-250 µm, an Infinity brand K2 long 
distance microscope lens system was utilized on the side-mounted camera, which allowed for more detailed 
observations of particle positions and perturbative effects.  The primary use of the side mounted microscopic lens is 
to determine if a crystal consists of individual particles or conglomerates and the results of external perturbations on 
individual particles. 

Digital Imaging and Analysis 

Data  images  are  captured  and  transferred  by  means  of  a  Coreco  PC-RGB  frame  grabber  board.    The  frame 
grabber board has the capability of transferring images of 1600 by 1600 pixels from each camera at the rate of 30 
frames per second, interlaced.  Each image from the camera contains 512 by 480 pixels and occupies approximately 
250 Kb of disk space as bitmap files.  Image data consists of a directory of grayscale intensity images with pixel 
values ranging from zero to one (Figure 2).  Prior to image capture and transfer, the contrast may be set such that 
there  is  maximum  differentiation  between  particles  and  background.    This  reduces  the  effects  of  digital  filtering 
during analysis, which may lead to loss of data.    

The image data were analyzed using an image segmentation algorithm, as well as both PIV (Particle Image 

Velocimetry) and PTV (Particle Tracking Velocimetry) techniques.  Generally, PIV algorithms are used to obtain 
data from a densely seeded field, where individual particles cannot be easily distinguished.   PTV techniques are 
used when the field is sparsely seeded and particles are well defined.  The limiting factor for the utility of PTV is 
interparticle spacing since when the dust grains are closely situated PTV algorithms are inefficient.  When particle 
velocities are such that they move over half the interparticle spacing, the probability of positively identifying such a 
particle in sequential images is unreliable.  Essentially, when all particles in an image remain within their respective 
voronoi cells in sequential images, PTV techniques can be used reliably.   

   

 

       

 

     

Fig.  2.    Raw  unfiltered  digital  image  of  dusty 
plasma     
 

Fig. 3. Grayscale image converted to black and 

white and magnified to show ordering. 

In  the  first  data  analysis  technique,  the  images  are  analyzed  using  an  image  segmentation  process  where  image 
contrast is maximized (Liberzon, 2001). The image is then converted to a binary form using a threshold intensity 
where all values below the threshold value are set to zero, resulting in a black pixel, while all pixel values above the 
threshold value are set to one, resulting in a white pixel as seen in Figure 3.  In order to identify individual dust 
grains, groups of adjacent white pixels are identified and then determined to be either valid dust grains or noise by 
means of a minimum pixel filter.  Adjacent white pixels which meet or exceed the filter size are considered dust 

 

 

 

 

 

 

      
 

 

 

grains, while other pixel groupings less than the filter size are ignored and are considered noise or representations 
of  dust  in  other  parallel  planes.    A  list  of  the  positions  and  sizes  of  the  dust  particles  is  then  stored  in  memory.  
From this list of particle positions, interparticle spacing and pair correlation functions are determined (Fig. 4a) and 
a Voronoi diagram is constructed (Fig. 4b). 

 

       

 

Fig. 4a.  Pair correlation function with 
respect to interparticle distance 

Fig. 4b.  Voronoi diagram 

 
 
After the particles have been located in each image, the list of particle positions for each pair of sequential images 
is compared in order to detect the motion of each dust particle.  This particle tracking velocimetry (PTV) technique 
implements  a  radar-type  detection  system  to  find  where  each  particular  particle  is  represented  in  the  next  image.  
Knowing the location of a particular particle in the first image, sequentially larger areas centered about that same 
point could be examined in the second image for the particle.  The search area begins with a radius of ten percent of 
the interparticle distance and grows by increments of ten percent until it finds a particle.  If no particle is found after 
the search area radius has grown to fifty percent of the interparticle distance, the particle is considered lost.  If two 
particles are found in a single search area, the closest one is chosen.  When a particle is found, the system verifies 
by the same technique that the particle in the first image is the closest particle in that image to the particle found in 
the second image.  Using the PTV analysis technique on data of known wave position and velocity as a test of the 
routine, the algorithm produced the required values (Goree, 1996).  By determining the distance and direction of the 
motion of each particle, along with the known time step between frames, the velocity information for each particle 
can  be  calculated  and  a  PTV  velocity  vector  plot  generated,  as  shown  in  Figure  5.    After  confirmation  of  the 
analysis technique, the routine was applied to experimental data obtained from the CASPER GEC reference cell.  
Random velocities with a maximum amplitude of 2.0 mm/sec and no propagated waves were obtained.  

 
The  PIV  technique,  which  is  a  separate  algorithm,  does  not  make  use  of  the  list  of  particle  positions  or  the 
image  filtering  system,  but  rather  divides  the  image  into  a  user-specified  number  of  equal  sized  squares,  or 
interrogation regions.  Each interrogation region is then assigned a velocity vector based on the collective shift of 
pixel intensity in that region from one frame to the next.  In this way, average velocities for small groups of dust 
grains are calculated rather than individual particle velocities.  Because the image is not converted to binary, more 
noise is present in the image, and a signal to noise limit, l, must be set.  This means that when an intensity peak is 
found in an interrogation region, it must be at least l times the intensity of the average value of the pixels in that 
region in order to be considered valid.  Also, an upper limit for the velocity magnitude may be set based on the time 
step and image size.  After these validation processes, a list of region velocities and a PIV velocity vector plot is 
generated, as shown in Figure 6.  PIV has been shown to have advantages over many conventional techniques for 
selected experimental conditions (Thomas, 1999). 

 

 

 

     

 

Fig. 5. PTV velocity vector plot 

Fig. 6. PIV velocity vector plot 

 
 

 

 
 
RESULTS 
 

Data  analysis  generated  Voronoi  diagrams  and  pair  correlation  functions,  and  two  types  of  velocity  vector 
plots,  which  prove  useful  for  observing  the  crystalline  structure  formed  by  the  dust  grains.  The  pair  correlation 
function seen in Figure 4a has two well-defined peaks, indicating a high degree of order at a distance of at least the 
second nearest neighbor in the horizontal plane.  The Voronoi diagram (Figure 4b) displays 54 five-sided cells, 127 
six-sided  cells,  and  30  seven-sided  cells  (a  1.5:4:1  ratio)  where  the  high  number  of  six-sided  Wigner-Seitz  cells 
indicates  a  highly  ordered  system  of  two  dimensional  hexagonal  lattice  points.    The  information  provided  by 
Voronoi diagrams and the pair correlation function demonstrates a large amount of order in the crystalline lattice.  
PIV and PTV analysis of the video of the dust crystal demonstrated a longitudinal wave propagating horizontally 
through the crystal.  Position of this wave is represented in the velocity vector plots (Figures 5 and 6).  The crest of 
this wave is on the right side of the image, represented in the plot as a vertical section of large horizontal velocity 
vectors.    The  left  side  of  the  images  show  the  trough  of  the  wave  represented  by  velocity vectors of nearly zero 
magnitude.  Graphical data provided by the Matlab program make it possible to describe the discrete velocities of 
the dust grains as well as the collective dynamics of the system.    
 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 

The  development  and  implementation  of  a  completely  digital  optical  and  analysis  system,  which  minimizes 
the loss of data in all stages of acquisition and processing, has been completed.  This allows data to be acquired 
much more quickly and efficiently than in previous methods.  Analysis is also greatly improved, due primarily to 
uncompromised  raw  data.  Matlab  provides  a  user-friendly  analysis  tool  for  processing  data  via  PIV  and  PTV 
algorithms.  PIV algorithms have the advantage of greatly reducing computation time and the ability to calculate 
particle  velocities  when  individual  particles  are  not  resolvable,  while  PTV  algorithms  provide  more  specific 
information  about  dust  grain  interactions  and more precise velocity calculations. The current analysis program is 
unique  in  that  it  performs  both  PIV  and  PTV  techniques  and  can  be  programmed  to  dynamically  decide  which 
algorithm is most appropriate for a certain image frame.  In future developments, a hybrid adaptive scheme will be 
integrated into the process, which will utilize the PIV data as a validation technique for PTV data and data from the 
two  cameras  will  be  utilized  to  produce  three  dimensional  diagrams  of  the  crystal  lattice  and  provide  further 
information concerning interparticle forces and grain charging processes.   

 

1994. 

REFERENCES 
Barkan, A., N. D’Angelo, R.L. Merlino, Charging of Dust Grains in a Plasma, Physical Review Letters, 73 (23), 

 

 

Goree, J., http://dusty.physics.uiowa.edu/~goree/movie_index.html, 1996. 
Hargis, P. J., K. E. Greenberg, P.A. Miller, et al., The Gaseous Electronics Conference radio-frequency reference 
cell:  A defined parallel-plate radio-frequency system for experimental and theoretical studies of plasma-
processing discharges, Review of Scientific Instruments, 65 (1), 1994. 

Homann, A., A. Melzer, S. Peters, R. Madani, A. Piel, Laser-excited dust lattice waves in plasma crystals, Physics 

Letters A, 242, 1998. 

Liberzon, A., R. Gurka, U. Shavit, http://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange, 2001. 
Melzer, A., Laser-excited Mach cones in a dusty plasma crystal, Physical Review E, 62 (3), 2000. 
Morfill, G., J. Thomas, Konopka, M. Zuzic, The plasma condenstation: Liquid and crystalline plasma, Physics of 

Plasmas, 6, 1999. 

Physical Society, 77 (13), 1996. 

Pieper,  J.  B.,  J.  Goree,  Dispersion  of  plasma  dust  acoustic  waves  in  the  strong-coupled  regime,  The  American 

Pieper, J.B., J. Goree, R. A. Quinn, Experimental studies of two-dimensional and three-dimensional structure in a 

crystallized dusty plasma, Vacuum Science Technology A, 14 (2), 1996a. 

Pieper, J. B., J. Goree, R. A. Quinn, Three-dimensional structure in a crystallized dusty plasma, Physical Review E, 

Quinn, R. A., C. Cui, J. Goree, J. B. Pieper, J. Thomas, and G. Morfill, Structural analysis of a Coulomb lattice in a 

Samsonov,  D.,  J.  Goree,  Z.  W.  Ma,  A.  Bhattacharjee,  Mach  cones  in  a  coulomb  lattice  and  dusty  plasma,  The 

Samsonov, D., J. Goree, H. Thomas, and G. Morfill, Mach cone shocks in a two-dimensional Yukawa solid using a 

complex plasma, Physical Review E,  61 (5),  2000. 

Smith,  B.,  J.  Vasut,  T.  Hyde  et  al.,  Dusty  plasma  correlation  function  experiment, submitted to Adv. Space Res., 

Thomas, Jr., E., Direct measurements of two-dimensional velocity profiles in direct current glow discharge dusty 

plasmas, Physics of plasmas, 6, 1999. 

Thomas, E., Observations of high-speed particle streams in dc glow discharge dusty plasmas, Physics of plasmas, 8 

Thomas,  H.,  G.  E.  Morfill,  V.  Demmel,  Plasma  crystal:    Coulomb  crystallization  in  a  dusty  plasma,  Physical 

Zuzic,  M.,  V.  Ivlev,  J.  Goree,  et  al.,  Three-Dimensional  Strongly  Coupled  Plasma  Crystal  under  Gravity 

Review Letters, 73 (5), 1994. 

Conditions, Phys Rev Letters, 85, 2000. 

Zuzic, M., H. Thomas, J. Morfill, Wave propagation and damping in plasma crystals, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 14 

2002. 

(1), 2001. 

(2), 1996. 

54 (5), 1996b. 

dusty plasma, Phys Rev E, 53, 1996. 

American Physical Society, 83 (18), 1999. 

 
 
Email address of T. W. Hyde     Truell_Hyde@baylor.edu 
Manuscript received 19 October 2002; revised 10 February 2003; accepted 
 
 

