On the astronomical orientation of the IV dynasty Egyptian pyramids 
and the dating of the second Giza pyramid.  
 
 
Giulio Magli 
Dipartimento di Matematica, Politecnico di Milano 
P.le Leonardo Da Vinci 32, 20133 Milan, Italy 
magli@mate.polimi.it 
 
 
 
It is very well known that the five main pyramids of the fourth dynasty (the main three at 
Giza and the two Snefru pyramids at Dashur) were oriented with a high degree of 
precision. It is difficult to fully establish today the original orientation since the casing is 
almost lost, a part for the so called "bent" Dashur pyramid, the top of the second Giza 
pyramid, residual blocks in the lowest course of Khufu pyramid, and part of the granite 
lintel of the third Giza pyramid. However, reasonable data for the orientation can be 
obtained also from such remains and from accurate measurement of distances between 
corners.  
 
We shall make use here of the data giving the deviation of the est side from true north, 
since a complete set of data is avaliable. These are:  
 
Meidum1 –20’ – 1.0'            [1] 
Bent Pyramid -17.3' – 0.2',  [2] 
Red Pyramid -8.7'  –  0.2',   [2] 
Khufu -3.4' –  0.2',               [2] 
Khafre -6.0'  –  0.2'.             [2] 
Menkaure  +12.4'  – 1.0'      [1] 
 
In recent literature (Spence [3] and Belmonte [4]) also the data for  two pyramids of the 
fifth dynasty (Sahure and Neferirkare)  are considered. Such data are taken from the work 
by Zaba [5] and reported with an error of only 10’. However both buildings are so inferior 
in work and in a so badly damaged state today, that a measurement of orientation looks 
difficult and claims of having measured it with a great accuracy look extremely unsound. 
Actually for the aim of the present paper what might be relevant is the case of the Sahure 
pyramid  which is claimed to be oriented -23' within 10' accuracy. This is, however, absurd 
since it is well known that the basis of this pyramid was laid down with a displacement of  
more than 1.5 degrees [6].  
 
Regarding the considered data, although a confidence of only 0.2' (=12 arcseconds) can be 
questionable in view of the aforementioned difficulties, for the aim of the present paper 
even a error of one arcminute (certainly exaggerate for modern measures) would not 
invalidate our theses, so that we shall not discuss further the issue of precision of the 
modern measures. The errors originally made by the builders in identyfing a chosen 
direction should be assumed of the order of the best naked-eye observation error, namely 1-

                                                 
1 The datum is somewhat unclear, since Dorner [2] reports a value pratically equal to that of the Bent pyramid 
(which could imply that the projects started together, see below) while in the literature it is usually reported the 
datum to which we conform here and due to Petrie.  

2 arcminutes. The deviations from north are greater than  this value and, in addition, it 
looks quite strange that their behavior exhibits a minimum at the Great Pyramid. This can 
be viewed (and will be viewed here) as an experimental datum obtained by a physical 
measure, which must be explained in physical terms. If we assume, as it is natural to do, 
that the ability of the builders in checking alignments remained constant in time during the 
4 dynasty, it is obvious that there must exist a time-dependent font of systematic error. The 
unique available phenomenon able to produce this error is, obviously, precession. Thus, as 
first noticed by Haack [7], all the orientation methods which give precession-independent 
results all ruled out, including the - otherwise quite sound - method proposed by Edwards 
consisting in the bisection of the rising and setting positions of a star on a artificial horizon. 
 
The problem aimed Kate Spence [3] to propose a new method of orientation which 
explains the phenomenon including a time-dependent systematic error due to precession. 
This method accounts very well for the observed variation of orientation errors keeping 
fixed the abilities of the builders, and consists in observing the cord connecting two 
circumpolar stars, namely Kochab (b UMi) and Mizar (z UMa) . When one of the two stars 
is in the upper culmination the cord is orthogonal to the horizon. Spence proposes this 
direction to be identified with the north direction sought by the pyramid builders. Due to 
the precessional motion of earth axis, it is an easy exercise to check that the cord  does not 
identify always the same direction: it actually has a slow movement which brought it from 
the `left` to the `right` of the pole in the 25 century B.C. Plotting the deviation from north 
against time, Spence shows that the corresponding straight line fits well with the deviation 
of the pyramids w.r. to true north if the date of "orientation ceremony" occurred for the 
Khufu pyramid in 2467 BC –5y.  If one, in turn, accepts the method as the one effectively 
used, the plot can be used to calibrate the date of construction of  all the fourth dynasty 
pyramids, which turn out to be somewhat 80 years later than usually accepted. No evidence 
of orientation ceremony exists for the old kingdom pyramids, however the "Stretching of 
the Cord" foundation ceremony in which the astronomical alignments were fixed is well 
documented for the orientation of temples and it is actually already present in the old 
kingdom stela called "Pietra di Palermo" [3]. 
 
Further to Spence work, Belmonte [3] proposed that the method actually used consisted in 
measuring alignments as Spence proposed but using two stars (probably Megrez (d UMa) 
and Phecda (g UMa)) which are not each other opposite to the pole. The pole is thus 
obtained by elongation of a cord lying below or over it. This looks more natural (at least for 
modern naked-eye sky-watchers) and reconciles the astronomical chronology with the 
usually accepted one. However, it should be noted that the astronomical dating of the so 
called "air shafts" of the Khufu pyramid points rather to support Spence's earlier 
chronology [8]. 
 
The orientation of Khafre pyramids reported above fits in the calibration line if and only if 
the corresponding point is "lifted up" in the positive region. This of course is a serious 
objection to the method based on the alignment of two stars.  To solve the problem, Spence 
speculates that the orientation of the  second pyramid was carried out in the opposite season 
with respect to the others. It is obvious, that in this case the cord has the opposite position 
with respect to the pole it would have the same year in the opposite season, and so the 
"flipped" data fit again. Spence thus proposes that Khafre pyramid was the unique to be 
oriented in the summer season, all the other pyramids being instead oriented in winter. Also 
in the Belmonte proposal the problem has to be solved by assuming a special procedure for 
the orientation of the Khafre pyramid. In this case, one has to assume that this pyramid was 

the unique one to be oriented with the two proposed stars in lower culmination, all other 
pyramids being oriented with the stars in the upper culmination. 
 
In both cases, it is clear that the exceptionality of the second pyramid is `embarrassing`. In 
the case of Spence's theory, it is rather strange that a procedure which should by any 
evidence be intended as being of religious and deep nature, such as the orientation of a 
giant king's tomb, could occur scattered in time rather then in a fixed, precise time dictated 
by astronomical counting, such as e.g. those rituals connected with the Sirius cycle. It is, 
therefore, difficult to agree with Spence's ingenious explanation for the "lifting up" of the 
Khafre point on the calibration line due to inverse season orientation. In the case of 
Belmonte's proposal, it is clear (and it is, in fact, thoroughly discussed by the same author) 
that it is rather simple and natural the use of the lower culmination rather than the upper 
one. For instance, in the case of the lower culmination an instrument such as the very well 
documented Merkhet could be used (due to the relatively small angle formed by the 
alignment and the horizon) while for a measure based on the upper culmination a new sort 
of instrument must be supposed (see [3] for details). 
 
The fact that Khafre orientation deviates on the opposite side with respect to Khufu had a 
curious consequence. It is well known that the two giant pyramids were constructed in such 
a way that their diagonals lie on the same line with high precision. This makes it obvious 
that, when the second pyramid was constructed, a measurement was made, to check the 
alignment of the diagonal with respect to the orientation of the basis. In other words, the 
north line was already available not only as the direction individuated by the 
north side of the existing pyramid (quite difficult to be compared with high precision with a 
newly calculated, almost parallel direction) but also as the line forming a 45(cid:176) angle with the 
line on which the diagonal of the monument was laid. Now, suppose that Khafre's pyramid 
was not oriented in the opposite season (or in the lower culmination of the stars if 
Belmonte method is adopted). Then the error in the Khafre alignment would be positive 
and therefore the deviation between the two orientations would sum up to reach more than 
9 primes instead than subtract to give some 3 primes. As a consequence, the corresponding 
deviation of the astronomically calculated  diagonal - by bisection of the north corner -  
with respect to the existing Khufu diagonal, implied by such a measure, would change from 
almost unobservable (less than 20 cm) to visible. If the curious coincidence, that the Khafre 
and the Khufu pyramids had quite comparable errors of the same sign did not occur, than in 
the analysis of the orientation of the second Giza pyramid we would encounter another of 
the various examples which led N. Lochyer to suppose a possible discovery of the 
precession by the ancient Egyptians (as is well known, such examples include the 
astronomical orientations of part of temples which were constructed in different periods 
and deviate each other due to precession). 
 
Coming back to our problem, we observe that there is a simple, natural, nearly obvious it 
physical interpretation of the data which leads to a simple solution for the problem of the 
"wrong sign" of Khafre's orientation. The error in the orientation of the second pyramid 
would fit perfectly well in the calibration line if the points representing Khufu and Khafre 
are exchanged each other on the time axis.2 
 

                                                 
2 It is worth noticing that, if the datum for the Sahure pyramid (-21’) given by Zaba and reported  
by Spence is taken seriuously then our proposal has no chance to work, since it would lead to a 
foolish, earlier datation for this pyramid. However,as already noticed, this datum cannot be 
considered as correct.  

Let us review which kind of evidence is available regarding the fact that the second Giza 
pyramid was constructed after the first. Is such an assumption well grounded on sound 
archeological data?  Leaving aside the 2000 y later attribution by Herodotus of the Giza 
pyramids, the first pyramid is soundly attributed to Khufu due to the so called "quarry 
marks" discovered in the upper four of the five so called "relieving chambers" of the King 
chamber, while no inscription, of any kind and nature, mentioning Khafre or any other 
fourth dynasty king and dating to the same period has ever been found in the whole second 
pyramid complex namely the pyramid, the causeway, the valley temple, the Sphinx temple, 
the Sphinx itself. The unique available proof  consists in the discovering of the famous 
Khafre diorite statue in the valley temple (the very debated presence of Khafre name as the 
owner of the sphinx in the "dream stela" is anyway on a 1000 years later inscription). 
However the presence of the statue cannot be considered as a definitive proof of ownership, 
taking also into account that "robbing" of monuments was rather common in ancient Egypt. 
  
 

 

 
                                                                         Figure 1 
The solid line is a plot of the deviation from true north (in arcminutes) of the cord between Kochab and Mizar 
vs. time. If the method used for the alignment of the pyramids is that proposed by Spence, than the numbered 
points allow a recalibration of the dating: 1.Meidum 2.Bent  3.Red  4.Khafre  5.Khufu  6.Menkaure. The 
second pyramid here occurs before Khufu for the reasons explained in the text. The point (4) represents the 
same pyramid in the standard relative cronology while the point (4') represents again the same pyramid but 
`flipped` in the positive region in accordance to Spence's `inverse season` proposal. 
 
  
 
On the other side, there are hints pointing to a pre-building of the second pyramid with 
respect to Khufu pyramid. First of all, everybody visiting Giza knows that, although being 
slightly smaller than Khufu, the Khafre pyramid looks greater because it was constructed 
on a more elevated position. Why did not Khufu choose such a position, being the first? 
Why Khafre choose to build a smaller pyramid, but not a much smaller one, justifiable by 
economical reasons? Usually, people having the possibility of building greater things, do 
not build smaller things. Michelangelo in building the S. Peter cupola in Rome stated "Piu' 
grande ma non piu' bella" ("greater, but not more beautiful") referring to the Brunelleschi 
cupola of St. Maria del Fiore in Florence. 
 

 

in itself new and has been proposed by 

The idea that ``Khafre could precede Khufu'' is not 
various authors before, on the basis however of different motivations (see e.g. [9]). 
Actually, there are geological evidences showing that the construction of the Khafre 
causeway took place before that of the Khufu pyramid, since the causeway strangely seems 
to delimitate one of the borders of the Khufu quarry [10]. Notice also that the explanation 
proposed here allows for the small error of alignment of the diagonals bringing it back to a 
unobservable value also in case that  combined  measures (i.e. astronomical plus corners 
alignments of diagonals) were carried out repeatedly, a cross-check that of course looks 
quite reasonable. 
 
If we accept for a moment that the second pyramid was the first to be constructed the 
astronomical data suggest a period very close to the year 2500 b.c. (close to 2580 B.C. if 
Belmonte's method is adopted). If this pyramid was really built before Khufu's one, then it 
is necessary to understand who was the builder. One could however also speculate that it 
was Khufu himself to build two pyramids as probably Snefru did at Dashur. It is, in fact, 
not very clear the reason for which Snefru was the builder of two pyramids, and this reason 
need not necessarily be of technical nature. There are evidences of structural problems in 
the Bent pyramid, consisting essentially in a dislocation of the exterior mantle of core 
blocks in the whole monument, but it is far from clear that such problems arised during 
construction, leading to the decision of varying the angle first and then building a new 
pyramid [11].  
 
It is obvious, that our proposal can have a chance to work only if Khafre's tomb can be 
accomodated elsewhere. Actually however there is no clear evidence for the attribution of 
the IV dynasty unfinished pyramid of Zawyet el Arian which thus could be assigned to 
Khafre. 
 
All in all, since there is no striking evidence for the standard chronology between the two 
pyramids, the possibility of an inverse chronology suggested by purely astronomical data 
cannot be rejected on available purely archeological data. There are some other chances of 
high precision dating of the fourth dynasty pyramids via dendrochronology which seem to 
have been overlooked in the past, since - as far as the present author is aware - neither the 
cedar beams of the burial chamber of the Bent pyramid nor the wood of Khufu's boats have 
been dated. In addition it seems that an original wood beam is also present in the lower 
northern shaft of Khufu [12]. From the archaeo-astronomical point of view it would be of 
extreme interest comparing the data on the orientation of the Sphinx and of the Khafre 
Valley Temple with those of the pyramids, as well as obtaining data from the Abu Roash  
and the Zawyet el Arian sites (the author has been unable to find such data in the literature 
so far). Definitive evidence could also come from rigorous geological analysis of the 
quarries at Giza, which waits since many years to be carried out in a systematic way. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
[1] F. Petrie,  The pyramids and temples of Gizeh, Field & Tuer, London 1883 (available at 
members.optushome.com.au/fmetrol/petrie/ ); Maidum, Nutt, London 1892. 
[2] J. Dorner, Die Absteckung und astronomische Orientierung ägyptischer Pyramiden; Ph.D. 
Thesis, Innsbruck University 1981; Form und Ausmasse der Knickpyramide, Mitt. Deutsch. 
Archaeologisch Inst. Abteilung Kairo 42, 43, (1986). 
[3] K. Spence,  Ancient Egyptian chronology and the astronomical orientation of pyramids, 
Nature  408, 320 (2000). See also D. Rawlins and K. Pickering, Nature  412, 699 (2001) and 
Spence's reply (same page). 
[4] J.A. Belmonte,  On the orientation of old kingdom egyptian pyramids, Archeoastronomy  
26, 2001, S1. 
[5] Z. Zaba, L’orientation astronomique dans l’ancienne Egypte et la precession de l’axe du 
monde, Ed. Ac. Tchec. Sci., Prague 1953. 
[6] D. Arnold, Building in Egypt: pharaonic stone Masonry, Oxford Un. Press, Oxford 1991. 
[7] S.C. Haack, The astronomical orientation of the Egyptian pyramids, Archeoastronomy  7, 
1984, S119. 
[8] V. Trimble,  Astronomical investigations concerning the so called air shafts of Cheops 
pyramid M.I.O.A.W.B. 10 (1964) 183; A. Badawy  The stellar destiny of pharaoh and the so 
called air shafts in Cheops pyramid M.I.O.A.W.B. 10  (1964) 189; R. Bauval, Cheop' s 
pyramid: a new dating using the latest astronomical data, Disc. Egypt. 26, 1993, 5. V. 
Castellani, Il cielo degli antichi, Giornale di Astronomia, Vol. 24, n.3, 1998; see also 
www.mporzio.astro.it/~vittorio/Arclez4.htm 
[9] E. Moyer, www.gizapyramid.com/ernest_moyer4.htm 
[10] C. Reader, A geomorphical study of the Giza necropolis with implications for the 
development of the site, Archeometry 43 (2001) 149. See also M. Lehner,  The complete 
pyramids, Thames and Hudson, London (1999). 
[11]  V.Maragioglio and C. Rinaldi, L' architettura delle piramidi menfite, Rapallo-Torino, 
1966.  
[12] See R. Gantenbrink report on the website www.cheops.org (unpublished). 
 
 
 

