 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
Free energy transduction in a chemical motor model  
 

Josh E. Baker 

Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405  

 
To whom correspondence should be addressed: Josh E. Baker, University of Vermont, 
Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, 115 HSRF, Burlington, VT 05405. 
Phone: (802) 656-3820. Fax: (802) 656-0747. E-mail: jbaker@physiology.med.uvm.edu.  
 

 

1

Abstract  

Motor  enzymes  catalyze  chemical  reactions,  like  the  hydrolysis  of  ATP,  and  in 

the process they also perform work.  Recent studies indicate that motor enzymes perform 

work with specific intermediate steps in their catalyzed reactions, challenging the classic 

view (in  Brownian  motor  models) that work can only be performed within biochemical 

states.    An  alternative  class  of  models  (chemical  motor  models)  has  emerged  in  which 

motors perform work with biochemical transitions, but many of these models lack a solid 

physicochemical  foundation.    In  this  paper,  I  develop  a  self  consistent  framework  for 

chemical  motor  models.    This  novel  framework  accommodates  multiple  pathways  for 

free energy transfer, predicts rich behaviors from the simplest multi motor systems, and 

provides important new insights into muscle and motor function. 

 

 

2

Introduction  

Adenosine triphosphate, or ATP, molecules are ubiquitous in cells and react with 

water (hydrolyze) to form the products ADP and Pi.  Under physiological conditions, the 

ATP hydrolysis reaction is energetically favorable (the free energy for ATP hydrolysis, 

∆GATP,  is  negative)  but  slow  (ATP  molecules  have  a  half-life  of  hours).    Enzyme 

catalysts  dramatically  accelerate  the  rate  of  hydrolysis  and,  in  the  process,  can  harness 

∆GATP  to  repeat  a  cyclical  sequence  of  catalytic  events  capable  of  carrying  out  useful 

functions.  Scheme I is a chemical representation of an enzyme-catalyzed ATP hydrolysis 

reaction,  in  which  an  enzyme  (E)  binds  ATP  (E.ATP),  facilitates  its  hydrolysis  by 

forming  a  stable  enzyme-products  complex  (E.ADP.Pi),  and  then  releases  products  in 

returning to its original apo state (E). 

 

 

E  + ATP ↔ E.ATP ↔ E.ADP.Pi ↔ E + ADP + Pi. 

Scheme I 

Molecular  motors  are  enzymes  that,  over  the  course  of  their  catalytic  cycle,  can 

generate  force  and  perform  work,  Fx,  in  moving  along  a  track  a  distance  x  against  a 

constant force F (Fig. 2).  Yet after decades of study, the relationship between a motor’s 

enzymatic  mechanisms  and  its  mechanisms  for  force  and  work  production  remains 

uncertain.    In  1957,  A.F.  Huxley  developed  a  Brownian  motor  model  (Huxley,  1957), 

later  formalized  by  T.L.  Hill  (Hill,  1974),  in  which  myosin  motors  in  muscle  generate 

force with biochemical transitions and perform work only within biochemical states (Fig. 

1a).  Similarly, in thermal ratchet models (Magnasco, 1993;Astumian and Bier, 1994) a 

motor generates force when an asymmetric potential is switched “on”, presumably with a 

 

3

biochemical transition, and performs work only within the “on” state (Fig. 1b).  Common 

to these models and to all subsequent Brownian motor models (Wang and Oster, 1998) is 

the  assumption  that  a  motor’s  translocating  mechanism  (in  these  models,  a  relaxation 

down a potential well) is temporally separated from a motor’s enzymatic mechanism (the 

thermal activation of a motor over a potential barrier).  However, it now appears that this 

might not be an accurate depiction of how motor enzymes really work. 

Recent studies indicate that the work performed by a motor is not neatly separated 

from its biochemical transitions (Wang et al., 1998;Baker et al., 1999;Baker et al., 1998), 

and that the thermal fluctuations that activate motor enzymatic transitions might actually 

perform  work  (Fig.  1c).    Based  on  these  studies,  H.  Qian  and  others  have  developed 

chemical  motor  models  in  which  motors  perform  work  concomitant  with  specific 

biochemical  steps  in  their  catalyzed  reactions  (Qian,  1997;Fisher  and  Kolomeisky, 

1999;Baker  and  Thomas,  2000b;Baker  and  Thomas,  2000a).    However,  most  current 

chemical  motor  models  lack  the  self-consistency  found  in  the  Brownian  motor  models 

put  forth  by  Huxley,  Hill,  Magnasco,  Astumian  and  Bier.    Specifically,  they  violate  a 

basic tenet of enzymology by assuming that the free energy for ATP hydrolysis, ∆GATP, is 

diminished  by  the  work,  Fx,  performed  by  the  motor  enzyme  (Qian,  1997;Howard, 

2001).  This assumption is implicit in any model that describes the net free energy change 

around  an  enzyme-catalyzed  reaction  cycle,

RT

ln[

(

k

i

/

k

−

i

)]

∆=

G

ATP

,  as  a  function  of 

M

∏

i

1
=

Fx.    Here  k

i  and  k-i  are  the  forward  and  reverse  rates  for  step  i  of  an  M-step  ATPase 

reaction. 

Enzymes,  regardless  of  the  forces,  F,  exerted  on  them,  do  not  diminish  the  free 

energy  of  the  reactions  they  catalyze,  and  so  it  follows  that Fx  cannot  be  a  function  of 

 

4

∆GATP.  An equivalent thermodynamic argument is that because the work performed with 

the  ATP  hydrolysis  reaction  is  path  dependent  (work  is  only  performed  through  the 

catalyzed pathway, see Fig. 2), it cannot be a state function of the hydrolysis reaction, or 

∆GATP ≠ ∆GATP(Fx). 

Nevertheless, Fx is certainly derived from ∆GATP, and describing this relationship 

lies at the heart of understanding free energy transduction.  According to Brownian motor 

models, this relationship is inherently muddled because the work performed by a motor, 

Fx,  is  formally  separated  from  the  free  energy  changes  associated  with  specific 

intermediate  steps  in  the  motor-catalyzed  reaction  (see  above).    Hill  states,  “The  whole 

cycle is involved in the transduction process and acts as an indivisible unit” (Hill, 1989).  

This  is  not  true  for  a  chemical  motor  model  in  which  the  work,  Fx,  performed  with  a 

biochemical transition is derived from the free energy change for that transition.  Thus to 

understand free energy transduction in a chemical motor model, the transfer of chemical 

free  energy  to  mechanical  work  must  be  made  explicit  at  the  level  of  specific 

translocating  biochemical  steps  in  the  enzyme-catalyzed  reaction.    Here,  formally 

extending the model of Baker and Thomas (Baker and Thomas, 2000b), I establish a self 

consistent  framework  for  free  energy  transduction  in  a  chemical  model  of  motor 

enzymes.  This model is applicable to motor enzymes, like myosin and kinesin, that move 

along  a  track  while  catalyzing  a  hydrolysis  reaction.    I  distinguish  this  model  from 

existing  motor  models  and  develop  further  its  implications  for  muscle  and  motor 

function. 

 

 

5

Free energy transduction through a working biochemical step.  A motor enzyme has 

many internal degrees of freedom, a1,a2,a3… aN, within its N-dimensional state space (SM 

in  Fig.  2),  where  each  possible  combination  of  a1,a2,a3…  aN  values  describes  a  motor 

structural state having an energy E(a1,a2,a3… aN).  Ligands, such as ATP, ADP, and Pi, 

contribute to the state space of a motor (SM in Fig. 2) when they interact with the motor, 

but free in solution they contribute only to the state space of the ligand system (SATP in 

Fig.  2). 

  Figure  3  illustrates  a  standard,  two-dimensional  “energy  landscape” 

representation  of  the  average  change  in  the  energy,  E,  of  a  motor  (M)  as  it  binds  and 

releases  ligands  (including  its  track,  A)  along  a  hypothetical  motor-catalyzed  ATP 

hydrolysis reaction pathway. 

The basic assumption of a chemical motor model is that a motor enzyme performs 

work  with  a  specific,  reversible  biochemical  step  in  its  catalyzed  reaction  (M.D.Pi  ↔ 

A.M.D  in  Fig.  3).    In  other  words,  some  of  the  same  thermally  activated  enzyme 

structural changes that facilitate the conversion of free ATP into free ADP and Pi can also 

perform  work.    Specific  mechanisms  are  discussed  below  (see  Motor  Working 

Mechanisms). 

reaction cycle is zero, or  

At  a  constant  external  force,  the  net  change  in  a  motor’s  energy  around  one 

aaadE
,
1

(

,

2

3

...

Na

0)
=

, 

(1)  

where  the  integral  is  taken  around  the  reaction  cycle  through  any  of  the  innumerable 

pathways that exist between any two identical motor structural states.  By studying these 

 

 

∫

 

6

motor  pathways,  it  is  possible  for  structural  biologists  and  molecular  dynamicists  to 

describe  motor  mechanisms  (both  mechanical  and  catalytic)  in  exquisite  detail 

(McCammon and Harvey, 1987), but because a motor experiences no net energy change 

around  its  catalytic  cycle  (Eq.  1),  this  motor-centric  (SM)  perspective  provides  little 

insight into how motors use chemical free energy to perform mechanical work. 

Indeed, the work performed by a motor enzyme is not derived from changes in its 

internal  energy,  E(a1,a2,a3…  aN),  but  is  instead  derived  from  free  energy  changes  that 

occur outside of a motor’s state space, SM, when free ATP molecules are converted into 

free ADP and Pi molecules in SATP.  We know this to be true for energy transduction by 

enzymes  in  general.    Enzymes  experience  no  net  free  energy  change  (∆GE = 0) around 

their  reaction  cycle  (Scheme  I),  but  when  they  catalyze  an  energetically  favorable 

reaction like ATP hydrolysis,  

ATP ↔ ADP + Pi (∆GATP < 0 under physiological conditions), 

enzymes  advance  unidirectionally  around  their  cycle  because  the  combined  free  energy 

change (∆GATP + ∆GE = ∆GATP) for the coupled reaction (Scheme I) is negative. 

In  other  words,  contrary  to  biased  diffusion  models  of  motor  enzyme  function, 

∆GATP  does  not  somehow  tilt  the  motor  energy  landscape  (SM)  to  make  ∆GE  negative 

(Keller  and  Bustamante,  2000;Bustamante  et  al.,  2001),  nor  does  it  introduce  into  the 

motor  landscape  forcing  potentials  that  are  capable  of  biasing  motor  diffusion  in  one 

direction around the reaction cycle (Mogilner et al., 2002).  In fact, by focusing only on 

the details of motor diffusion within SM and ignoring the details of ligand diffusion and 

 

 

 

7

the free energy changes that occur in SATP, Eq. 1 implies that biased diffusion models are 

inaccurate  representations  of  free  energy  transduction.    In  general,  molecularly  explicit 

models  of  enzyme  function  that  do  not  address  an  enzyme’s  interactions  with  its 

surroundings – whether it be interactions with ligands or with ions, protons, water, etc. – 

are untestable, largely unconstrained, and, in the end, more nebulous than explicit. 

Solution 

thermodynamics  provides  a  means  of 

imposing  exact  physical 

constraints  on  models  of  enzyme  function.    Within  this  classic  chemical  framework, 

biochemical  states  are  coarse-grained,  and  biochemical  transitions  are  described  as 

discrete steps.  This means that, in a chemical motor model, working transitions are also 

described as discrete working steps (Fig. 1c and see Motor Working Mechanisms below).  

In contrast, in a Brownian motor model, even when biochemical states are coarse grained, 

working  transitions  are  described  as  continuous  power  “strokes”  along  smooth 

mechanical  trajectories  (Figs.  1a  and  b).    As  discussed  below  (see  Alternative 

Mechanisms), power strokes are possible within the context of a chemical motor model 

but only as secondary working mechanisms.  

Coarse-grained  chemical  states  (and  here 

the  associated  coarse-grained 

mechanical states) are demarcated by energy barriers in the enzyme’s energy landscape, 

and  within  the  intricately  textured  landscapes  of  most  enzymes,  the  number  of 

experimentally  observable  mechanical/chemical  states  is  usually  limited  by  the  time 

resolution of the experimental technique used in making the observation (Frauenfelder et 

al.,  1991).    For  a  steady  state  model,  mechanical/chemical  states  must  be  resolved 

(horizontal lines  Fig. 2) for all wells within which motors equilibrate on the time scale of 

a steady state motor flux through the landscape. 

 

8

Unlike the structural states that comprise an energy well, a mechanical/chemical 

state describes a time- or population-averaged motor ensemble and has a discrete energy 

level corresponding to the Boltzmann weighted average of all energies, E(a1,a2,a3…aN), 

within the well it represents.  Ideally we would use statistical mechanics to describe the 

energetics  of  the  wells  underlying  chemical  states,  but  the  fact  remains  that  we  know 

remarkably little about these wells, not to mention how they are affected by temperature, 

osmotic  pressure,  ionic  strength,  pH,  etc.    Standard  chemical  potentials  are  used  in 

solution thermodynamics to deal with our ignorance.  The chemical potential of state i is 

µi  =  µºi  +  RTln[i],  where  µºi  is  the  standard  chemical  potential  (defined  at  a  standard 

temperature, pressure, ionic strength, pH, etc.), and [i] is the concentration of motors in 

that state (in a single motor analysis, µi = µºi + kTlnpi, where pi is the probability that a 

motor occupies state i). 

in Fig. 2), or 

At  fixed  standard  conditions,  the  free  energy  of  the  motor  system,  SM,  does  not 

change when one mole of motors goes around the reaction cycle (e.g., from A.M to A.M’ 

∆GM (= µAM – µAM’) = 0.   

(2) 

This is the coarse grained chemical equivalent of Eq. 1.  In contrast, when one mole of 

ATP molecules is hydrolyzed through either a catalyzed or uncatalyzed reaction pathway, 

the free energy of the ligand system, SATP, changes by  

∆GATP = µD + µPi – µT = ∆GºATP + RTln([ADP][Pi]/[ATP]), 

(3) 

 

 

 

 

9

 

 

where ∆GºATP (= µºD + µºPi – µºT) is the standard reaction free energy for ATP hydrolysis.  

When ATP molecules hydrolyze spontaneously in solution (through SATP in Fig. 2), the 

free energy change, ∆GATP, occurs in entirety with the hydrolysis event itself; however, 

when ATP is hydrolyzed through an  enzyme-catalyzed pathway (through SM in Fig. 2), 

the  free  energy  change  in  SATP  occurs  in  three  steps,  none  of  which  is  the  actual 

hydrolysis step. 

The free energy of SATP decreases by µT when ATP molecules bind to an enzyme, 

and the free energy of SATP increases by µD or µPi when ADP or Pi molecules are released 

from  an  enzyme.    Because  these  free  energy  changes  occur  in  SATP,  they  must  be 

harnessed at the time of ligand binding/release if they are to be used by a motor for work.  

A  ligand  chemical  potential  (µT,  µD,  or  µPi)  can  be  directly  transferred  to  work  if  that 

ligand  is  bound/released  concomitant  with  the  working  step,  or  a  ligand  chemical 

potential  can  be  indirectly  transferred  to  work  by  a  motor  if  ligand  binding/release 

induces  a  mechanical  (see  Alternative  Mechanisms  below)  or  chemical  gradient  (see 

below) that is subsequently used for work. 

In  Fig.  2,  the  free  energy  change  associated  with  Pi  release,  µPi,  can  be  directly 

used  for  external  work  by  a  motor’s  working  step,  whereas  the  free  energy  changes 

associated  with  ADP  release,  µD,  and  ATP  binding,  µT,  are  indirectly  used  for  external 

work  as  follows.    ADP  release  and  ATP  binding  effectively  transfer  motors  from  the 

A.M.D  state  to  the  M.D.Pi  state,  establishing  a  motor  concentration  gradient  across  the 

working step and a negative working step free energy, ∆G (not exceeding µD – µT) that 

can  be  used  for  work  upon  the  chemical  relaxation  of  the  working  step.    The  total  free 

10

energy available for work by a motor’s working step is thus ∆µ ≡ ∆G + µPi, and this free 

energy  can  be  transferred  through  a  motor’s  working  step  to  external  work,  wext 

(irreversible work, such as the net work, Fx, performed in moving a distance, x, against a 

dissipative force, F), internal work, wint (reversible work, such as the work performed by 

working steps in extending compliant elements in motors, tracks, or associated elements), 

or heat, q.  Thus n∆µ = nwint + wext + q , or  

n(∆µ – wint) = wext + q,  

(4) 

where the left side of Eq. 4 is the free energy change in the combined SM + SATP system 

(Fig. 2) associated with n working steps, and the right side of Eq. 4 is the corresponding 

macroscopic work and heat lost to the surroundings (q and wext in Fig. 2). 

Here  the  free  energy  change  for  the  working  step  is  diminished  by  wint  not,  as 

assumed in most current chemical motor models, by wext.  This is because wint is part of 

the motor system (it is the work performed on the motor), whereas wext is performed on 

something outside of the motor system.  Because no net force is generated by motors in a 

steady  state,  the  net  internal  work  performed  around  the  entire  motor  reaction  cycle  is 

zero, which means that wint performed on the motor system with the working step must be 

lost as heat or work elsewhere in the cycle.  Thus in accord with Eqs. 2 and 3, ∆GATP is 

independent of both the steady state force, F, and the net external work, Fx, performed by 

a motor around its reaction cycle.  This is clearly not the case for a model in which Fx 

diminishes the free energy for the working step. 

 

 

 

11

The time derivative of Eq. 4 gives an expression for the rate at which ∆µ – wint is 

transferred to external work, wext, and heat, q, by a steady state flux, v = dn/dt, of motors 

through the working step: 

v(∆µ – wint) = dwext/dt + dq/dt. 

The net flux, v, of motors through the working step can be determined from the kinetics 

of  the  entire  motor-catalyzed  reaction  (Baker  and  Thomas,  2000b).    According  to 

Arrhenius kinetics, the forward and reverse working step rates depend on wint  as  

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

respectively,  where  b  is  the  fraction  of  wint  performed  before  the  transition  state  (Hille, 

1984) and f+º and f–º are the forward and reverse working step rates when wint  = 0. 

Motor  Working  Mechanisms.    Most  models  of  motor  working  mechanisms 

involve  thermally  induced  changes  in  a  motor’s  structure/position  that  are  required  to 

accommodate motor-track binding.  In 1957, Huxley proposed an Eyring-like mechanism 

for  work  (Fig.  1a)  in  which  a  thermally  induced  extension  of  myosin  elastic  elements 

12

f+ = f+ºe-bwint/kT  

and  

f–  = f–ºe-(b-1)wint/kT,  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

accommodates  actin  binding,  and  the  subsequent  relaxation  of  these  elastic  elements 

performs external work (Huxley, 1957). 

The chemical model equivalent of Huxley’s Eyring-like working mechanism is a 

Kramer-like mechanism for work (Hanggi et al., 1990) in which the thermally activated 

changes  in  a  motor  required  for  track  binding  directly  perform  external  work.    For 

example,  the  motor  in  Fig.  4  performs  work  when  its  thermal  fluctuations  are  funneled 

into a rigid stereospecific motor-track complex upon track binding.  The motor might be 

funneled  as  a  rigid  body  moving  toward  the  track  (or  vice  versa),  but  the  motor  might 

also be funneled to undergo a conformational change that contributes to movement (see 

Fig. 4).  For myosin motors, the latter model is implied both by structural studies showing 

a  discrete  rotation  of  the  myosin  motor  upon  actin  binding  (Baker  et  al.,  1998)  and  by 

mechanical studies showing a linear relationship between the length of a myosin motor 

and the distance it displaces an actin track upon actin binding (Warshaw et al., 2000). 

Alternative  pathways  for  free  energy  transfer.    As  discussed  above,  ligand 

binding energies, ∆µ, can be transferred via a motor’s working step to external work, wext, 

internal  work,  wint,  and  heat,  q.    Here  we  describe  how  wint  performed  with  a  discrete 

working  step  mechanism  can  be  subsequently  transferred  to  wext  via  a  smooth  power 

stroke mechanism.  In the following examples we assume that a motor has an effective 

stiffness, k, and a working step of size d (i.e., the average distance a motor working step 

moves a track against no load). 

∆µ → wint.  Figure 5a shows that when the position of a track is fixed relative to a 

single (N = 1) motor, the motor performs work on itself, wint = ½kd2, with a working step.  

The  heat  dissipated  with  this  transition,  ∆µ  –  ½kd2  (Eq.  5),  can  be  reabsorbed  with  a 

 

13

working  step  reversal,  resulting  in  a  transfer  of  wint  back  to  ∆µ.    In  other  words,  the 

working step is microscopically reversible. 

wint    →  wext.    Following  the  working  step  in  Fig.  5a  (first  step),  the  track  is 

allowed  to  move  (Fig.  5a,  second  step)  against  a  constant  force,  F,  and  the  motor 

performs  external  work,  wext  =  F(d  –  F/k)  with  a  power  stroke  mechanism.    The 

controlled  transfer  of  free  energy  from  ∆µ  →  wint    →  wext  illustrated  in  Fig.  5a  is  the 

assumed  sequence  of  force-then-work  generating  events  in  Brownian  motor  models 

(Figs. 1a and 1b).  In essence, Brownian motor models can be thought of as the extreme 

limit of a chemical model in which all of ∆µ is transferred to wint (Baker et al., 2002) and 

 

Next  consider  a  system  consisting  of  N  =  2  motors  with  a  constant  force,  F, 

none is transferred to wext. 

exerted on the track (Fig. 5b). 

∆µ  →  wint    and  wext.    Figure  5b  illustrates  what  happens  when  one  motor  (M1) 

undergoes  its  working  step  while  a  second  motor  (M2)  is  already  attached  to  the  track.  

Motor M1 performs external work, wext = Fx1, in moving the track a distance x1 against a 

force, F, as well as  internal  work both on itself, wint1 = ½k(½(d + F/k))2, and on motor 

M2,  wint2  =  ½k(½(d  –  F/k))2.    For  simplicity,  I  have  assumed  that  F  <<  kd  and  that  the 

sum of the two spring displacements is d, which is the case if the detached motor is in 

register with its binding site on actin. 

wint  →  wext.    As  illustrated  in  Fig.  5b  (second  step),  after  M2  detaches  from  the 

track, M1 performs external work, wext = Fx2, with a power stroke mechanism in moving 

the track a distance, x2, against a force, F, resulting in a partial transfer of wint1  to wext. 

 

14

The two work producing transitions (a working step followed by a power stroke) 

in Fig. 5b provide a novel interpretation for the observed sub-steps performed by single 

myosin  V  molecules  –  processive  motor  dimers  (N=2  motor  units)  involved  in 

intracellular transport [for review see (Mehta, 2001)].  Here I suggest that M1 and M2 in 

Fig. 5b accurately represent the lead and trail heads of myosin V, noting that in “hand-

over-hand” models of myosin V, M2 swings to the right of M1 following its detachment 

from  actin.    According  to  Fig.  5b  the  working  step  of  the  lead  head  is  associated  with 

actin binding and Pi release and, when F = 0, the working step moves an actin filament a 

distance x1 = d/2 where d has been shown to be roughly 36 nm (Mehta, 2001).  A second 

actin  displacement  of  comparable  size  (x2  =  d/2)  is  generated  by  a  power  stroke  of  the 

lead head, following the ATP-induced actin dissociation of the trail head.  It can easily be 

shown  that  this  symmetry  between  the  working  step  and  power  stroke  is  broken  if  the 

lead head is out of register with its actin binding site. 

In  the  one-  and  two-motor  examples  in  Fig.  5,  wint  is  a  discrete  molecular 

parameter  (well  defined  for  each  motor)  that  is  coupled  to  free  energy  changes  of 

individual  motors.    However,  in  large  multi-motor  ensembles,  it  becomes  virtually 

impossible to localize wint to individual motors, and mechanochemical coupling (i.e., the 

relationship between wint  and ∆µ) is most easily described by a continuous, macroscopic 

wint that is coupled to the molar free energy changes of the bulk motor system.  In active, 

isometric  muscle  it  has  been  shown  that  wint  =  ¯Fd,  where  ¯F  is  the  molar  muscle  force 

(Baker and Thomas, 2000a). 

In a chemical model of a bulk motor system, the exchange of free energy between 

two  continuous  forms  (∆µ  ↔  wint)  makes  mechanochemical  oscillations  a  distinct 

 

15

possibility.  I begin by considering the mechanical response of a bulk motor system to a 

force pulse.  When a collection of motors reaches a stall force and is then mechanically 

perturbed by δ = ∆¯Fd through a force jump, the motor system responds with a chemical 

relaxation of the working step and a corresponding force response (Fig. 6a).  Assuming 

that f+ = f– at stall (Baker and Thomas, 2000b), the initial recovery rate is r = f+ + f– = 

A(exp[-b∆¯Fd/RT]  +  exp[-(1  –  b)∆¯Fd/RT])  (Eqs.  6  and  7).    This  equation  (with  b  =  0) 

resembles  the  equation  used  by  Huxley  and  Simmons  (Huxley  and  Simmons,  1971)  to 

describe  the  initial  rate  of  force  recovery  following  a  rapid  step  in  the  length  of  an 

isometric  muscle,  only  here  the  operative  mechanical  parameter  is  a  macroscopic  force 

not, as in the Huxley-Simmons equation, a molecular strain. 

In many muscle types, the complete force response of muscle to a rapid length or 

force step resembles that of a damped harmonic oscillator (time and frequency domains 

plotted  in  Figs.  6d  and  e).    This  response  is  most  often  described  as  a  sum  of  multiple 

processes [phases 2 and 3 in the time domain and processes “C” and “B” in the frequency 

domain (Kawai and Brandt, 1980)].  However, it may be that motor ensembles in muscle 

behave  as  resonant  systems.    The  energetic  requirements  for  resonance  are  met  in  this 

model by an exchange of free energy between wint and ∆µ, and a dynamic instability of 

the  motor  ensemble  provides  a  possible  kinetic  mechanism  for  resonance  (see  Fig.  6).  

Further experimental and theoretical studies will be needed to test this novel hypothesis, 

but its implications for oscillatory motor systems, like the heart and insect flight muscle, 

are immediately clear.  For example, it may be that the heart functions optimally when its 

mechanics  and  kinetics  are  tuned  for  resonance  and  that  the  loss  of  mechanochemical 

 

16

resonance,  as  well  as  compensatory  attempts  to  regain  it,  might  be  a  basic,  yet 

unexplored, cause of certain heart diseases. 

DISCUSSION 

Over the past twenty years, major technological advances have enabled us to directly 

measure the relationship between motor enzyme structure, mechanics, and chemistry in 

single  molecules  and  in  bulk  motor  systems.    Many  of  these  studies  have  challenged 

conventional perspectives on how motors work (Brownian motor models in Figs. 1a and 

b) and have led to the emergence of an alternative class of motor models referred to as 

chemical  motor  models.    Here  I  discuss  some  of  the  fundamental  differences  between 

Brownian  and  chemical  motor  models  and  summarize  the  basic  physicochemical 

requirements for chemical motor models, established in this paper. 

The  first  Brownian  motor  model  was  proposed  by  A.F.  Huxley  (Huxley,  1957), 

formalized by T.L. Hill (Hill, 1974), and subsequently adapted in thermal ratchet models 

(Astumian and Bier, 1994).  The basic features of this model include: 

1.  Work  and  force  production.    A  motor’s  translocating  mechanisms  are  formally 

separated from its enzymatic mechanisms.  That is a motor’s reaction and position, x, 

coordinates  are  assumed  to  be  orthogonal  (see  Figs.  1a  and  b).    A  motor  generates 

force with a thermally-activated biochemical transition (often described as a coarse-

grained  discrete  step)  and  performs  work  only  subsequently  with  a  power  stroke  (a 

smooth change in x in Figs. 1a and b). 

 

 

 

17

2.  Mechanochemical  coupling.    Reaction  free  energies  are  defined  as  a  function  of  a 

motor’s  position  coordinate,  x,  with  the  assumption  being  that  x  remains  constant 

during a biochemical transition (i.e., x is not a reaction coordinate).  Indeed Brownian 

motor  models  are  uniquely  characterized  by  x-dependent  reaction  free  energies  and 

3.  Free energy transduction. The transfer of chemical free energy to mechanical work is 

not  localized  to  a  specific  biochemical  step  in  the  motor  catalyzed  reaction  (see 

reaction rates. 

introduction). 

 

 

include: 

Recent studies have challenged the Brownian motor paradigm, indicating that motors 

perform work with relatively discrete translocating steps that are closely associated with 

biochemical steps.  In accord with these observations, numerous chemical motor models 

have  been  proposed  (Qian,  1997;Fisher  and  Kolomeisky,  1999;Baker  and  Thomas, 

2000a;Howard,  2001).    However,  most  current  chemical  motor  models  erroneously 

assume  an  enzyme-dependent  ∆GATP.    In  this  paper,  I  have  developed  a  more  self-

consistent  framework  for  chemical  motor  models.    The  basic  features  of  this  model 

1.  Work  and  force  production.    A  motor’s  translocating  mechanisms  and  enzymatic 

mechanisms are inseparable and must be treated on equal footing (i.e., x need not be 

constant during a biochemical transition; Fig. 1c).  A motor can generate both force 

and  work  with  a  thermally  activated  biochemical  transition  (Fig.  3).    In  a  coarse 

grained  chemical  motor  model,  a  motor  working  transition,  like  its  associated 

 

18

chemical  transition,  is  described  as  a  discrete  step  (not  a  power  stroke)  and  is 

presumably  driven  by  a  motor  conformational  change  that  is  induced  by  ligand 

binding/release  (Fig.  4).    In  a  chemical  motor  model,  power  strokes  can  occur  as 

secondary  working  mechanisms  (Fig.  5)  and  contribute  to  rich  behaviors  from  the 

simplest multi motor systems (see alternative pathways above). 

2.  Mechanochemical coupling. In this paper, I have argued that the free energy available 

for work by the working step, ∆µ, is diminished by the internal work, wint, performed 

with  the  working  step  not,  as  assumed  in  most  chemical  motor  models,  by  the 

external  work,  wext  (Eq.  4).    In  a  steady  state,  the  net  internal  work  performed  by  a 

working motor around its catalyzed reaction cycle is zero and thus neither wint nor wext 

diminish ∆GATP in accord with Eqs. 2 and 3.   

3.  Free energy transduction.  ∆µ can be transferred to external work, wext, either directly 

through a working step mechanism or indirectly through a power stroke mechanism 

(wint → wext). In either case, the transfer of chemical free energy to mechanical work 

can be explicitly traced back to the motor working step. 

A  third  class  of  motor  enzyme  models,  referred  to  as  biased  diffusion  models, 

assumes that motor diffusion is biased by a net tilt or driving potential across the motor 

landscape  (Keller  and  Bustamante,  2000;Mogilner  et  al.,  2002).    This  model  might  be 

applicable  to  motor  systems  that  modify  (tilt)  their  landscape  during  translocation,  like 

DNA  repair  enzymes.    However,  the  potential  gradient  that  drives  translocation  by  the 

class of motors discussed in this paper (i.e., motors that catalyze a hydrolysis reaction as 

they move along a track) is a potential gradient in the ligand system (∆GATP in SATP) not 

 

 

19

in the motor system (SM).  Thus, as discussed in this paper, biased diffusion models do 

not apply to these motors. 

Before  we  can  claim  to  understand  how  molecular  motors  really  work,  we  must 

develop  explicit  models  for  both  force  and  work  generation  by  motors  in  relation  to  a 

motor’s  enzymatic  mechanisms;  we  must 

legitimize 

these  models  using  basic 

physicochemical principles; and we must experimentally test these models to determine 

which ones most accurately describe motor enzyme function.  This paper’s contribution 

is to legitimize the chemical motor hypothesis and explicitly distinguish it from Brownian 

and other motor models. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

I thank the members of the Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics at the 

University  of  Vermont,  with  special  thanks  to  D.  Warshaw,  J.  Moore,  N.  Kad,  and  G. 

Kennedy for their insight and guidance. 

 

 

20

 

 

Reference List 
 

Astumian,R.D. and M.Bier. 1994. Fluctuation driven ratchets: Molecular motors. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 72:1766-1769. 

Baker,J.E., C.Brosseau, P.B.Joel, and D.M.Warshaw. 2002. The biochemical kinetics 

underlying actin movement generated by one and many skeletal muscle Myosin 

molecules. Biophys. J. 82:2134-2147. 

Baker,J.E., I.Brust-Mascher, S.Ramachandran, L.E.LaConte, and D.D.Thomas. 1998. A 

large and distinct rotation of the myosin light chain domain occurs upon muscle 

contraction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 95:2944-2949. 

Baker,J.E., L.E.LaConte, I.Brust-Mascher, I, and D.D.Thomas. 1999. Mechanochemical 

coupling in spin-labeled, active, isometric muscle. Biophys. J. 77:2657-2664. 

Baker,J.E. and D.D.Thomas. 2000a. A thermodynamic muscle model and a chemical 

basis for A.V. Hill's muscle equation. J. Muscle Res. Cell Motil. 21:335-344. 

Baker,J.E. and D.D.Thomas. 2000b. Thermodynamics and kinetics of a molecular motor 

ensemble. Biophys. J. 79:1731-1736. 

Bustamante,C., D.Keller, and G.Oster. 2001. The physics of molecular motors. Acc. 

Chem. Res. 34:412-420. 

Fisher,M.E. and A.B.Kolomeisky. 1999. The force exerted by a molecular motor. Proc. 

Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 96:6597-6602. 

21

Frauenfelder,H., S.G.Sligar, and P.G.Wolynes. 1991. The energy landscapes and motions 

of proteins. Science 254:1598-1603. 

Hanggi,P., P.Talkner, and M.Borkovec. 1990. Reaction-rate theory: fifty years after 

Kramers. Rev. Mod. Phys. 62:251-341. 

Hill,T.L. 1974. Theoretical formalism for the sliding filament model of contraction of 

striated muscle. Part I. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 28:267-340. 

Hill,T.L. 1989. Free Energy Transduction and Biochemical Cycle Kinetics. Springer-

Hille,B. 1984. Ionic Channels of Excitable Membranes. Sinauer Associates Inc., 

Howard,J. 2001. Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the Cytoskeleton. Sinauser Associates, 

Verlag, New York. 

Sunderland. 

Inc., Sunderland. 

Huxley,A.F. 1957. Muscle structure and theories of contraction. Prog. Biophys. & 

Biophys. Chem. 7:255-317. 

Huxley,A.F. and R.M.Simmons. 1971. Proposed mechanism of force generation in 

striated muscle. Nature 233:533-538. 

Kawai,M. and P.W.Brandt. 1980. Sinusoidal analysis: a high resolution method for 

correlating biochemical reactions with physiological processes in activated skeletal 

muscles of rabbit, frog and crayfish. J. Muscle Res. Cell Motil. 1:279-303. 

 

22

Keller,D. and C.Bustamante. 2000. The mechanochemistry of molecular motors. Biophys. 

J. 78:541-556. 

Magnasco,M.O. 1993. Forced thermal ratchets. Phys. Rev. Lett. 71:1477-1481. 

McCammon,J.A. and S.C.Harvey. 1987. Dynamics of Proteins and Nucleic Acids. 

Cambridge University Press, New York. 

Mehta,A. 2001. Myosin learns to walk. J. Cell Sci. 114:1981-1998. 

Mogilner,A., H.Wang, T.Elston, and G.Oster. 2002. Molecular Motors: Theory & 

Experiment. In: Computational Cell Biology. Springer-Verlag, New York. 

Qian,H. 1997. Biophys. Chem. 67:263-267. 

Wang,H. and G.Oster. 1998. Energy transduction in the F1 motor of ATP synthase. 

Nature 396:279-282. 

Wang,M.D., M.J.Schnitzer, H.Yin, R.Landick, J.Gelles, and S.M.Block. 1998. Force and 

velocity measured for single molecules of RNA polymerase. Science 282:902-907. 

Warshaw,D.M., W.H.Guilford, Y.Freyzon, E.Krementsova, K.A.Palmiter, M.J.Tyska, 

J.E.Baker, and K.M.Trybus. 2000. The light chain binding domain of expressed smooth 

muscle heavy meromyosin acts as a mechanical lever. J. Biol. Chem. 275:37167-37172. 

 

 

 

23

FIGURE LEGENDS 

Figure 1. Motor models.  (a) According to the Huxley-Hill model, reaction (ordinate) and 

position (abscissa) coordinates are orthogonal.  Motor force (the slope of a potential well) 

is  generated  with  a  motor  biochemical  step  (down  arrow)  and  work  is  subsequently 

performed  (curved  arrow)  when  a  motor  relaxes  within  the  potential  well  of  a 

biochemical state.  (b) Similarly, according to thermal ratchet models, reaction (ordinate) 

and position (abscissa) coordinates are orthogonal.  Motor force (the slope of a potential 

well)  is  generated  when  a  ratchet  potential  is  switched  on,  and  work  is  subsequently 

performed  when  a  motor  relaxes  within  the  potential  well  of  the  “on”  state.    (c)  In  a 

chemical motor model, reaction and position coordinates are intimately linked.  Force is 

generated and/or work is performed with a thermally activated biochemical transition.  In 

all three models, the biochemistry is coarse-grained and discrete. 

Figure  2:  Pathways  for  ATP  hydrolysis  and  energy  transfer.    In  system  SATP,  held  at 

constant temperature and pressure, ATP molecules hydrolyze to form the products ADP 

and  Pi.    ATP  hydrolysis  can  occur  in  solution  (straight  arrow  in  SATP)  or  through  an 

enzyme-catalyzed  pathway  (curved  arrow  through  the  motor  enzyme  system,  SM).  

Regardless  of  the  pathway,  when  one  mole  of  ATP  molecules  is  hydrolyzed,  the  free 

energy  of  SATP  changes  by  ∆GATP.    In  SM,  motor  enzymes  (double  ovals)  move  a  track 

(helix)  against  a  force,  F,  as  they  catalyzed  the  ATP  hydrolysis  reaction,  generating 

external work, wext, and heat, q. 

 

 

 

 

 

24

Figure 3: A motor energy landscape.  The curved line represents hypothetical changes in 

a  motor’s  average  energy  along  its  catalyzed  ATP  hydrolysis  reaction  pathway.    The 

straight lines represent chemical potentials of coarse grained motor chemical states.  The 

landscape  excludes  chemical  potentials  of  ligands.    A  common  feature  of  many  motor 

enzymes is that their track affinity is modulated along their enzymatic reaction pathways.  

Here  the  modulating  biochemistry  resembles  that  of  the  actin-myosin  catalyzed  ATP 

hydrolysis reaction.  Briefly, ATP (T) binds to myosin (M), inducing the dissociation of 

myosin from actin (A).  ATP bound to myosin (M.T) is then hydrolyzed (M.D.Pi).  Actin 

accelerates  the  release  of  Pi,  and  work  is  performed  (arbitrarily  illustrated  by  a  turning 

wheel against a force, F) upon actin-binding and Pi release (M.D.Pi to A.M.D).  Myosin 

returns to its original state (A.M) with the release of ADP. 

Figure  4.    A  possible  mechanism  for  a  motor’s  working  step.    To  structurally 

accommodate  binding  to  a  track  (black  notched  rectangle)  a  motor  (scissors-like 

structure)  undergoes  an internal structural change, resulting in a displacement,  x,  of the 

track.  For myosin and actin, the biochemistry of the motor-track binding transition is the 

M.D.Pi to A.M.D transition. 

Figure  5.    Multiple  pathways  for  energy  transfer  in  one-  and  two-motor  systems.  (a)  A 

single  motor  can  perform  internal  work,  wint,  in  extending  an  elastic  element  (spring) 

upon  track  binding  if  the  track  is  held  at  a  fixed  position  (first  step).    (b)  This  internal 

work can subsequently be transferred to external work, wext = Fx, if the track is allowed to 

move a distance, x, against a load, F (second step).  (c) If one motor (M1) undergoes its 

 

 

 

25

working step (M.D.Pi → A.M.D) while a second motor (M2) is already bound to a track, 

M1 performs wint on both M1 and M2 as well as wext = Fx1 in moving the track a distance, 

x1,  against  a  load,  F  (first  step).    When  M2  subsequently  detaches  from  the  track,  the 

internal work that was performed on M1 is transferred to wext = Fx2 in moving the track a 

distance, x2, against a load, F (second step). 

Figure 6. Mechanochemical oscillations.  (a) At a steady state stall force, ∆µ = wint (Baker 

and Thomas, 2000a).  (b) When wint is rapidly increased by δ through a jump in the force 

exerted  on  a  track,  motors  respond  with  a  net  working  step  reversal,  a  decrease  in  wint 

(i.e.,  force),  and  a  corresponding  increase  in  ∆µ.    The  opposite  response  is  elicited 

following  a  rapid  decrease  in  wint.    (c)  If  the  motors  in  (b)  undergo  a  mechanically 

concerted  working  step  reversal,  cooperatively  preventing  forward  working  steps  from 

occurring,  motors  cannot  redistribute  for  maximal  entropy,  and  the  free  energy 

perturbation δ is transferred to ∆µL.  The motor system will oscillate until δ is dissipated 

as heat or the motors are able to redistribute for maximal  entropy.  (d) A polar plot of the 

response of a damped harmonic oscillator, having a characteristic frequency of 170 sec-1 

(comparable  to  the  working  step  relaxation  rate  of  skeletal  muscle  myosin)  and  a 

damping coefficient of 100 (black), 70 (dark gray), and 50 (light gray).  (e) The response 

of the three oscillators in (d) to a force step. 

 

 

26

Figure 1 

 
 
 
 
 

 

a. Huxley-Hill

b. Thermal ratchet c. Chemical

y
g
r
e
n
e
 
e
e
r
f
 
c
s
a
b

i

y
g
r
e
n
e
 
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p

biochemical
step

w

o

r

k

x

w

o

r

k

l

a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p

n
o

x

l

a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
l
a
c
m
e
h
c

i

biochemical 
step/work

reaction

27

Figure 2 

SATP

SM

F

∆GATP

ATP        ADP + Pi

∆GM = 0

T,P,F

T, P

heat

w
e
x
t

q

 

28

Figure 3

)
e
p
a
c
s
d
n
a
l
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
e
m
y
z
n
e
 
r
o
t
o
M

)
s
e
n

l

i
l
(
 
s
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
l
a
c
m
e
h
c
 
r
o

i

M.D.Pi

M.T

A.M

A.M.D

A.M’

F

Motor catalyzed ATP hydrolysis reaction coordinate

 

29

Figure 4

x

A + M.D.Pi

A.M.D

 

30

Figure 5

a. N = 1

x

x1

F

F

b. N = 2

A.M2.D

M1.D.Pi

F

A.M2.D

x2

F

A.M1.D

F

M2.T

A.M1.D

 

31

Figure 6 

a. ∆µL = wint

M.D.Pi

A.M.D

d. Frequency domain

270º

180º

0º

90º
e. Time domain

t
i
l

e
d
u

t
i
l

0.6
e
d
u
p
m
A
p
m
0.0
A

0

0

30

30
Time (msec)
Time (ms)

60

60

b. ∆µL < wint + δ

wint to ∆µL

c. ∆µL + δ > wint

∆µL to wint

 

32

