A  stochastic  model  for  retinocollicular  map 
development 
 
Alexei A. Koulakov and Dmitry N. Tsigankov 
Cold  Spring  Harbor  Laboratory,  One  Bungtown  Road,  Cold  Spring  Harbor,  NY, 
11724 

Abstract  

Background 

We examine results of gain-of-function experiments on retinocollicular maps 
in knock-in mice [Brown et al. (2000) Cell 102:77]. In wild-type mice the temporal-
nasal  axis  of  retina  is  mapped  to  the  rostral-caudal  axis  of  superior  colliculus  (SC). 
The established map is single-valued, which implies that each point on retina maps to 
a single termination zone (TZ) in SC. In homozygous Isl2/EphA3 knock-in mice the 
map is double-valued, which implies that a single point on retina maps to two TZs in 
SC. This is a reflection of the fact that only about 50 percent of cells in retina express 
Isl2.  In  heterozygous  Isl2/EphA3  knock-ins  the  map  is  intermediate  between  the 
homozygous and wild-type: it is single-valued in temporal and double-valued in the 
nasal parts of retina. 

Results 
 

We study the map formation using stochastic model based on Markov chains. 
In  our  model  the  map  undergoes  a  series  of  reconstructions  with  probabilities 
dependent  upon  a  set  of  chemical  cues.  Our  model  suggests  that  the  map  in 
heterozygotes is single-valued in the temporal region of retina due to reduced gradient 
of  ephrin  in  the  corresponding  region  of  SC.  The  remaining  map  is  double-valued 
since  the  gradient  of  ephrin  is  high  there.  We  predict  therefore  that  if  gradient  of 
ephrin  is  reduced  by  a  genetic  manipulation,  the  single-valued  region  of  the  map 
should occupy a larger portion of temporal retina, i.e. the point of transition between 
single- and doulble-valued maps should move to a more nasal position in Isl2-EphA3 
heterozygotes. We also discuss the importance of inhomogeneous EphA gradient.  

Conclusion 

We  present  a  theoretical  model  for  retinocollicular  map  development,  which 
can  account  for  intriguing  behaviors  observed  in  gain-of-function  experiments  by 
Brown et al., including bifurcation in heterozygous Isl2/EphA3 knock-ins. The model 
is  based  on  known  chemical  labels,  axonal  repulsion/competition,  and  stochasticity. 
Mapping in Isl2/EphB knock-ins is also discussed. 

 

 

1

Background  

Topographic  ordering  is  an  important  feature  of  the  visual  system,  which  is 
conserved among many visual areas [1]. Thus, the projection from retina to superior 
colliculus  (SC)  is  established  in  a  way,  which  retains  neighbourhood  relationships 
between neurons [2-4]. This implies that two axons of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), 
which originate from neighbouring points on retina, terminate proximally in SC. It is 
assumed  that  this  facilitates  visual  processing,  which  involves  wiring  local  to  the 
termination zone [5].  

The mechanisms responsible for topographic ordering have been lately under 
thorough examination. Following the original suggestion by Sperry [6], it was shown 
that  chemical  labels  play  an  essential  role  in  formation  of  the  map  (reviewed  in  [3, 
7]). For the projection from retina to SC the Eph family of receptor tyrosine kinases 
and  their  ligands  ephrins-A  were  shown  to  be  necessary  for  establishing  correct 
topographic  maps  [7-10].  The  coordinate  system  is  encoded  chemically  in  retina 
through graded expression of the Eph receptors by the RGCs. Thus, in mouse retina, 
two  receptors  of  the  family,  EphA5  and  A6,  are  expressed  in  the  low  nasal  –  high 
temporal  gradient  [11-14].  The  recipient  coordinate  system  in  the  SC  is  established 
through  high  caudal  –  low  rostral  gradient  of  ephrin-A2  and  A5  ligands  [15].  Since 
RGC axons expressing EphA receptors are repelled by high levels of ephrin-A ligands 
this  dual  system  of  gradients  allows  sorting  of  the  projecting  axons  in  the  order  of 
continuously increasing density of receptors, whereby contributing to the formation of 
topographic map [10, 15, 16] (Figure 1A). Thus, the dual gradient system is involved 
in formation of topographic representation along the nasal-temporal axis, albeit some 
additional tuning is provided by activity-dependent mechanisms [17-19].  

In this study we address the results of gain-of-function experiments, in which the 
retinocollicular maps were modified by genetic manipulations [20]. RGCs of the wild-
type  mouse  express  the  LIM  homeobox  gene  Islet2  (Isl2)  [21].  Retina  of  a  single 
animal is composed of two types of cells with regard to their expression of Isl2 gene, 
Isl2+ and Isl2-, which are intermixes in roughly equal proportion throughout the RGC 
layer  (Figure  1B).  To  test  the  mechanisms  of  the  retinocollicular  map  formation 
Brown et al. [20] generated “knock-in” mice, in which the Isl2 and EphA3 genes are 
coexpressed.  This  implies  that  each  Isl2+  RGC  and  its  axons,  in  addition  to  EphA5 
and A6, also expresses EphA3 gene, not found in the wild-type RGCs. The Isl2- cells 
remain  EphA3-,  as  the  wild-type  cells.  By  doing  so  Brown  et  al.  [20]  increased  the 
total level of EphA receptors in a given fraction of retinal cells. Since the overall level 
of EphAs is increased in Isl2+/EphA3+ cells, axons of two neighboring cells, knock-
in and wild-type, should terminate in quite different places in SC (Figure 1B).  The 
knock-in  cell,  interacting  more  strongly  with  the  repellent  should  terminate  at  the 
position of decreased density of ephrins, i.e. more rostrally with respect to the wild-
type cells. The neighborhood relationships between axons should be lost, the new map 
should lose its continuous nature, and it should split into two maps: one for wild-type 
RGCs,  one  for  knock-in  cells.  This  prediction  was  confirmed  by  experiments  of 
Brown et al. (Figure 2). 
 

 

2

 

 

A

 

B

 

          

 

 

Figure 1  - Chemical labelling system in retinocollicular map in mice 

A.  Formation of the map in the wild-type mouse. Retinal ganglion cells (RGC) express EphA5/6 
receptors in temporal > nasal gradient (bottom), whereas the cells in SC express the ephrin-A 
ligands in caudal > rostral gradient (top). Since axons of Eph+ RGC (red arrows) are repelled 
by ephrins this distribution of chemical markers leads to establishing of ordered topographic 
map in which nasal/temporal retina projects to caudal/rostral SC. This is because RGC axons 
expressing highest levels of Eph receptors (temporal) experience the largest repulsion and are 
expelled to the rostral part of SC, where such repulsion is minimal. Axons of nasal RGC are 
more  indifferent  to  the  action  of  ligands  and  occupy  more  caudal  positions.  Such  system 
allows  positioning  of  RGC  axons  in  the  order  of  increasing  expression  level  of  EphA 
receptors. 

B.  Map  in  the  mutant  mouse  from  Ref.  [20].  The  expression  level  of  EphA  receptors  was 
artificially increased in every second cell by genetic manipulations (dark gray). This is done 
by co expressing EphA3, which is absent in the wild-type RGCs (see A), with another gene, 
Isl2, which is expressed roughly in 50% of RGCs. Since ephrin ligands bind and activate all 
receptors from EphA family, albeit with different affinity, this results in anomalous projection 
to  SC,  based  roughly  on  the  total  levels  of  EphA  in  each  axon.  Similarly  to  A  this  leads  to 
sorting of axons in the order of increasing density of EphAs (red arrows). Note that two RGC 
neighboring  in  retina  become  separated  in  SC  (bold  arrows).  This  aberration  in  the 
topographic  map  leads  to  two  termination  zones  (TZs)  in  SC  for  two  neighboring  cells  in 
retina, rather than a single zone in wild-type [20]. 

 
 
In  addition  to  the  observation  of  the  overall  map  doubling  in  homozygous 
knock-ins  (Figure  2C),  Brown  et  al.  discovered  a  curious  behavior  of  the  map  in 
heterozygous animals. In these animals the exogenous levels of EphA3 were reduced 
roughly by a factor of two with respect to the homozygous knock-ins (Figure 2B). In 
terms of the expression density of EphA3 these animals stand between the wild-type 
and knock-in animals. Accordingly, the structure of the map resembles a hybrid of the 
wild-type and homozygous maps. The more rostral part of the map is single-valued, 
similarly  to  the  wild-type,  whereas  about  60%  of  the  caudal-most  part  is  double-
valued,  like  in  the  homozygous  animals.  This  observation  suggests  that  the  map 

3

bifurcates  somewhere  between  double-  and  single-valued  regions.  Although  overall 
doubling  of  the  map  in  homozygotes  is  easy  to  understand,  any  true  model  for  the 
retinocollicular map formation should be able to account for the bifurcating behavior 
of  map  in  heterozygotes.  Therefore,  experiments  in  heterozygotes  represent  a 
powerful tool to falsify various theoretical models.  
 
Ref. [20] suggests that the bifurcating behavior of the map is consistent with 
the importance of relative rather than absolute values of the expression levels. Indeed, 
the  relative  difference  of  exogenous  EphA3  to  endogenous  EphA5/6  is  maximal  in 
nasal  retina  (caudal  SC),  where  the  doubled  map  is  observed  (Figure  2B).  In  the 
temporal retina (rostral SC) the EphA3 to EphA5/6 ratio is not so large, which may 
account  for  the  fact  that  the  map  is  single-valued  there.  Thus  a  model  for  the 
topographic map from retina to SC should rely on the relative but not absolute levels 
of EphA signaling.  
 
The point, which we make in this study, is that 
more experimental tests are needed to justify the suggestion about relative expression 
levels.  To  make  our  point  clear  we  present  a  model  for  the  retinocollicular  map 
formation,  which  is  based  upon  differences  in  the  absolute  values  of  Eph/ephrin 
expression  levels,  rather  than  relative  differences.  Our  model  manages  to  reproduce 
all the essential features of experiments described in Ref. [20], including bifurcation 
of the map in heterozygotes. This model was previously reported in [22]. In the model 
presented  here  the  map  is  single-valued  in  rostral  part  of  heterozygous  SC  due  to 
inhomogeneous gradient of ephrin ligand and its receptor, rather that reduced relative 
difference  of  EphA  receptors.  Below  we  suggest  experimental  tests,  which  may 
distinguish these two classes of models. 
 
To quickly test various hypotheses we developed a model for retinocollicular 
map  formation  employing  stochastic  Markov  chain  process  (explained  below).  Our 
model  is  based  upon  three  principles:  chemoaffinity,  axonal  competition,  and 
stochasticity. The implementation of the model used here is available in [23]. 
 

Figure 2  - Maps in Isl2+/Eph3+ mice 
The  top  row  is  reproduced  from  Ref.  [20]  (Figure  5).  The  bottom  row  illustrates  the  corresponding 
distribution of EphAs. 

 

 

4

Results  

Markov chain model 

100

...1=

, where  i

Let us first describe the 1D version of the model. We consider a linear chain of 
100  RGC,  each  expressing  individual  level  of  EphA  receptors  given  by  function 
)(iRA
 is the RGC index, which also determines a discrete position 
of the cell in the retina. We have verified that results presented below do not depend 
on the number of cells, as long as this number is large enough. Each RGC is attached 
by  an  axon  to  one  and  only  terminal  cell  in  SC,  which  has  an  expression  level  of 
  is  the  index  in  SC,  also  describing  the 
ligand  given  by 
100
terminal  position.  The  receptor  density  RA
  is  an  overall  increasing  function  of  its 
i
index 
, while the ligand density 
 (caudal) 
to 
  (rostral)  positions  (Figure  3).  This  determines  the  layout  of  chemical 
=k
100
“tags” used to set up map’s “topography”. An additional feature is that no two cells 
can  project 
to  mimic  axonal 
repulsion/competition for positive factors in SC, described in detail by Refs. [10].  

 is decreasing, when going from  k

the  same  spot 

in  SC,  which 

is  meant 

,  where 

)(kLA

=k

...1

1=

LA

to 

 

Figure 3  - Description of the 1D model 
 
 
We  then  modify  the  map  probabilistically,  using  the  following  rule.  We 
consider two axons projecting to the neighboring points in SC (1 and 2 in Figure 3). 
We attempt to exchange these axons in SC with probability  

PEXCHANGE

1
[
RA
+= α
2

)1(

−

RA

)2(

][
LA

)1(

−

LA

)2(

] 

0>α  is the only parameter in our model. The probability of the axons to stay 
  and  is  therefore  given 

  is  determined  from 

P
EXCHANGE P

+ RETAIN

P
RETAIN

1=

Here 
unchanged 
by 

PRETAIN

1
[
RA
−= α
2

)1(

−

RA

)2(

][
LA

)1(

−

LA

)2(

]. 

Since  the  only  difference  between  these  probabilities  is  the  sign  in  front  of α, it is 
important to understand the nature of this sign.  
Assume that the product of gradients in Eq. (1) is negative, i.e. the gradients 
 
run  in  the  opposite  directions,  which  corresponds  to  the  correct  order  of  axonal 
, i.e. the probability or 
terminals in SC. Then 
retaining  the  current  ordering  of  the  axonal  pair  is  larger  than  changing  it.  This  is 

P
EXCHANGE P

P
EXCHANGE

2/1<

 and 

RETAIN

<

(1) 

(2) 

 

5

consistent  with  the  chemorepellent  interactions  of  receptors  and  ligands.  In  the 
opposite  case  of  the  wrong  order,  i.e.  when  the  product  of  gradients  in  Eq.  (1)  is 
  by  the  same 
positive  and  gradients  run  in  the  same  directions, 
reasoning.  The  described  process  will  tend  to  exchange  the  order  of  gradients  and, 
therefore  establish  the  right  order  of  topographic  projections.  By  using  probabilities 
described  by  Eqs.  (1)  and  (2)  we  incorporate  the  chemoaffinity  pronciple  into  our 
stochastic  model.  The  step  is  then  repeated  for  another  nearest  neighbor  couple, 
chosen randomly, and so on, until a stationary distribution of projections is reached. 
 

P
EXCHANGE P

RETAIN

>

A

C

 

 B

 
 D

 

  

 

Figure 4  - Typical solutions of 1D model 

α

30=α

0= . Red dots 
A. Distribution of ligand (top) and receptor (bottom). B. Solution of the model for 
represent  terminal  positions  of  individual  axons,  originating  at  various  points  in  retina.  If  the  case 
0=α  the map is completely random, since all the chemical cues are multiplied by zero in Eq. (1), 
and,  therefore,  cannot  contribute  to  the  solution.  D.  α  is  very  large.  Solution  represents  perfect 
ordering  of  axons  in  SC  in  the  order  of  increasing  density  of  receptor.  This  is  because  the  chemical 
cues are extremely strong in this case, much stronger than noise. C. 
. At the intermediate value 
of α solution is a compromise between chemical signal and noise.   
 
How unique is the choice of probabilities (1) and (2)? Our investigations show 
 
that (1) and (2) describe a very broad class of models, which tend to align gradients of 
receptor  and  attractor  levels  in  the  opposite  directions.  One  can  certainly  imagine  a 
more complicated function of densities than (1) (see also Discussion), but this more 
sophisticated function could be reduced to (1), which becomes the first order of the 
Taylor expansion. The latter expansion is valid if noise in the system is small enough, 
so that the size of the projection spot is much smaller than dimensions of retina. This 
technical point will be discussed in [24].  
 
The  process  defined  by  (1)  belongs  to  the  class  of  Markov  chain  processes, 
invented by a Russian mathematician Andrei Markov. This class is general enough to 
describe  many  processes  in  biology,  chemistry,  and  physics,  such  as  ion  channel 
kinetics, probabilistic synaptic models [25], processes of Brownian motion [26], etc. 
Markov chain is defined as a process in which probability of transition from one state 
to another is determined only by the present state of the system. In other words, this is 

 

6

a process in which memory of distant past is irrelevant. The most important for our 
purposes  is  the  theorem  about  Markov  processes  of  this  sort  [27]  called  ergodic 
theorem.  It  states  that  the  process  will  eventually  converge  to  some  final  stationary 
distribution  of  probabilities  [26].  This  is  in  contrast  to  other  processes,  in  which 
distributions  could  go  through  cycles  as  a  function  of  time  or  collapse  to  a  single 
solution. Such property of ergodicity is obviously very helpful when considering the 
processes of development. Below we calculate the final distributions of probabilities 
as well as the intermediate states of the system in development. 
 
A

 C

B

 

  

    

 

 

   

    

 

 

 

Figure 5  - 1D maps in wild-type and knock-in animals.  
The  top  row  represents  distributions  of  chemical  labels.  The  middle  row  shows  the  probability 
distributions, which are obtained from scattered plots similar to 4C by averaging over many trials. The 
brightness  of  color  at  each  point  in  the  middle  image  represents  probability  that  an  axon  originating 
from the point’s abscissa projects to the point’s ordinate. The bottom row shows positions of maxima 
of  probability  density  distributions  above.  The  red  markers  correspond  to  wild-type  cells;  black 
markers  determine  maxima  of  distributions  for  Isl2+/EphA3+  RGCs.  A.  column  of  results  for  wild-
type  conditions.  B.  Column  corresponding  to  heterozygous  Isl2/Eph3  knock-in  conditions.  The 
bifurcation  of  the  probability  distribution  is  similar  to  results  of  Ref.  [20]  (cf.  Figure  5  or  Figure  2 
above). C. Results for homozygous knock-in conditions.  
 

 

To  understand  these  results  better  we  suggest  to  consider  cases  in 
which  solution  is  obvious  and  can  be  obtained  exactly.  The  model  described  by  (1) 
0=α  and α is very large. In the 
can be solved exactly for at least two limiting cases: 
former case the information about chemical labels cannot affect the solution, since it 

7

  

  
 

 

is  multiplied  by  0  in  Eq.  (1).  Hence,  the  map  is  completely  random  in  this  case 
(Figure  4B).  In  the  latter  case  the  molecular  cues  are  very  strong.  They  eventually 
produce  solution  in  which  the  axons  are  perfectly  sorted  in  SC  in  the  order  of 
increasing  density  of  receptor  (Figure  4D).  An  intermediate  situation  with  certain 
finite  value  of  parameter  α  is  described  by  a  compromise  between  noise  and 
chemical  cues,  with  former  randomizing  the  map  on  the  finer  scale,  while  the  latter 
inducing the overall correct ordering (Figure 4C). We conclude that mean position of 
projections is controlled by the chemical signal, while the spread of projections or the 
size of TZ is determined by noise (Figure 4C).   
 
 

 

 

Figure 6  - Results for heterozygous conditions and reduced by 25% density of ligand 
The bifurcation point is shifted caudally, compared to Figure 5B, as predicted by increased impact of 
noise. Notice that the bifurcation transition is discontinuous, as in Figure 5. 

 
The  notion  of  interactions  between  signal  and  noise  is  important  in 
understanding  maps  in  heterozygotes.  Indeed,  maps  in  both  wild-type  mice  and 
homozygotes can be trivially understood on the basis of axonal sorting in SC in the 
order of monotonously increasing levels of EphAs. This is clear from Figures 1A and 
B.  The  impact  of  noise  in  those  two  cases  is  simply  to  produce  some  scattering  of 
axons and smear termination zones, as explained in the previous paragraph. However, 
in case of heterozygotes, noise leads to qualitative changes in the map (Figure 5B). In 
this  case  the  distance  between  two  branches  of  the  map,  wild-type  and  EphA3+,  is 
intermediate  between  the  wild-type  and  homozygotes.  Indeed,  the  distance  between 
maps in homozygotes is about 40% (Figure 5C); in heterozygotes it is about twice as 
small.  The  chemical  signal,  in  the  form  of  distance  between  two  maps,  is  therefore 
reduced  in  heterozygotes  by  a  factor  of  two  with  respect  to  homozygotes.  But  the 
 is all three cases in 
strength of noise is preserved, at least, in our model, since 
Figure 5. Therefore smearing of the map remains the same. Thus, two maps acquire 
potential to blend, as we see in Figure 5C.  
 
Why  does  the  blending  of  two  maps  first  occur  in  rostral  SC?  Our  analysis 
shows  that  two  factors  contribute  to  this  phenomenon.  The  first  factor  is  reduced 
gradient  of  ligand  in  rostral  SC.  The  second  factor  is  inhomogeneous  endogenous 
EphA5/6 density. Both these factors are discussed below in some detail.  

30=α

Let us first discuss the impact of ligand. The degree of noise is determined not 
only by parameter α but also by the gradient of ligand, since the smaller the gradient 
of  ligand,  the  more  disordered  is  the  map  [10].  But  the  gradient  suffers  significant 
reduction  in  rostral  SC,  at  least  in  our  model.  Therefore,  noise  is  stronger  in  rostral 
SC, and the size of the TZ is the largest there. To see this examine the TZs obtained in 
a 2D simulation (described below) in Figure 7. The lowest central picture shows two 
TZs  for  homozygous  animal.  The  more  rostral  TZ  has  the  largest  extension  in  the 
rostral-caudal  direction.  But  larger  rostral  TZs  can  blend  sooner  that  smaller  caudal 

 

8

To 

the  bifurcation 

is  controlled  by 

illustrate  once  again 

ones. Therefore for given equal distance between two maps blending is more likely to 
occur in rostral rather than in caudal SC. We conclude that in our model the single-
valued region in rostral SC is in part due to smearing of the two maps by noise. 
 
the 
that 
inhomogeneous  gradient  of  ligand  in  SC  we  reduce  the  density  of  ligand  in  SC 
uniformly by 25% (Figure 6). Since reduced gradient entails increased impact of noise 
and  enlarged  TZs,  we  expect  the  single-valued  part  of  the  map  to  expand.  This 
prediction is confirmed by the numerical experiment (Figure 6). Notice that the only 
difference  between  Figure  5B  and  6  is  the  reduced  density  of  ligand.  The  point  of 
transition is located more caudally in Figure 6. Hence, one can affect the transition in 
a predictable fashion by changing the density of ligand only. 
Let  us  now  briefly  discuss  the  impact  of  EphA  distribution  on  bifurcation. 
 
Assume  for  a  moment  that  the  impact  of  noise  is  very  small.  Then  receptor  is 
perfectly sorted in colliculus. This situation is described approximately by Figure 5C 
(bottom).  One  can  observe  that  the  distance  between  two  maps  is  smaller  in  rostral 
than in caudal part. Thus, chemical signal itself is reduced there. This occurs because 
the  gradient  of  ligand  is  inhomogeneous  in  retina.  We  further  discuss  why  this 
happens in Discussion.  
 

Results for 2D model 
 

We  simulated  2D  development  using  the  hypothesis  that  another  pair  of 
chemical tags, EphB family of receptors and their ligands, ephrins-B, are responsible 
for  establishing  topographic  projection  from  dorsal-ventral  (DV)  axis  on  retina  to 
lateral-medial  axis  in  SC  (see  [9]  for  review).  EphB2/3/4  are  expressed  in  high-
ventral-to-low-dorsal  gradient  by  RGCs  [28-30],  while  ephrins-B  are  expressed  in 
high-medial-to-low-lateral  gradient  in  tectum/SC  [30].  Since  dorsal/ventral  axons 
project to lateral/medial SC this implies attractive interactions between EphB+ axons 
and ephrin-B rich environment [31] (see, however [32]). In our model the attractive 
interactions  are  modeled  by  the  following  exchange  probability  of  two  axonal 
terminals in the DV direction: 

PEXCHANGE

[
RB
β

)1(

−

RB

)2(

][
LB

)1(

−

LB

)2(

] 

(3) 

, 

, 

)1(LB

)1(RB

)2(LB

)2(RB

Here
  are  EphB  receptor  and  ephrin-B  ligand 
densities at neighboring points 1 and 2 in SC. This probability is similar to Eq. (1). 
  if 
Notice  a  sign  change  compared  to  Eq.  (1),  which  insures  that 
the  order  of  gradients  is  wrong,  i.e.  if  the  gradients  of  receptor  and  ligand  are 
antiparallel. By choosing this sign we therefore ensure attraction between axons and 
ligands.    
 
 
 

EXCHANGE

RETAIN

P

P

>

=

−

1
2
,  and 

 

9

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 7  - Numerical simulation of labelling in the 2D model.  
The  top  row  shows  anterograde  “labeling  spots”  in  retina.  The  following  three  rows  display 
corresponding distribution of label in SC. The size of both retinal and collicular arrays is 100 by 100 
cells. The three rows show results for wild-type, heterozygous knock-ins, and homozygous knock-ins, 
as marked on the left. Notice the doubling transition, when going from temporal to nasal injection in 
heterozygotes. This Figure is to be compared to Figure 4 from Ref. [20]. 
. The color map 
is shifted in each image for visibility. 
Abbreviations: D, dorsal; V, ventral; N, nasal; T, temporal; C, caudal; R, rostral; L, lateral; M, medial. 
 

= βα

30=

The details of our simulations are described in Methods. Our model allows not 
only exploration of two-dimensional maps (Figure 7) but also observing and modeling 
temporal  development  (Figure  8).  Videos  with  detailed  evolution  of  the  map  are 
available in [23]. 
 

 

10

 

 

Figure 8  - Map’s refinement  
Wild-type (left) and ki/ki (right) map development for axons in the central retina. The retinal injection 
site is the same as in Figure 7, top row and central column. The temporal evolution of the map is shown 
for t = (0, 8, 16, 24, 32, and 100) × 10000 iterations. The orientation of images is the same as in Figure 
7. The color map is rescaled in each image for visibility. 

 

11

Discussion  

Why does the map in heterozygotes bifurcate? 

In  our  model  the  map  is  formed  through  an  interaction  of  three  factors: 
repulsion/competition  between  axons  for  space  (discussed  in  [10]),  Eph/ephrin 
chemorepulsion/attraction, and noise. It is the latter that mixes two maps together in 
the  rostral  SC  (Figures  5B,  6,  7).  To  understand  how  this  behavior  emerges  in  our 
model  consider  the  main  equation  of  our  model  (1)  (Figure  9A).  The  part  of  the 
equation, which is proportional to α, carries information about chemical signal, while 
½ is responsible for noise. The chemical signal is also proportional to the gradient of 
.  Here  1  and  2  are  two  neighboring  receptacles. 
ephrin  ligand  in  SC, 
But the gradient of ligand is smaller in rostral than in caudal SC (Figure 9B). Hence, 
signal  is  smaller  in  rostral  part  and  the  impact  of  noise  is  the  largest  there.  Noise 
mixes two maps (wild-type and knock-in) and produces a single-valued map in rostral 
SC.  The  hypothesis  that  impact  of  noise  is  stronger  in  rostral  SC  is  consistent  with 
ephrin-A  knock-out  experiments  [10],  since  the  effects  of  reduced  density  of  ligand 
first occur in rostral SC. 

LA −
)1(

)2(

LA

 

Figure 9  - Interplay between signal and noise.  
 

To illustrate that the distribution of ligand controls doubling in our model, we 
“knock-out” some of the ligand in “SC” in our numerical simulation by reducing the 
ligand  density  by  25%  (Figure  6).  We  observe  a  caudal  displacement  of  the 
bifurcation  point.  Such  manipulation  could  be  done  if  Isl2/Eph3  knock-ins  [20]  are 
crossed with ephrin-A knock-outs [10].  

The  second 

to  bifurcation 

factor  contributing 

is 
inhomogeneity of EphA gradient in retina. Consider the case of no noise. Mapping is 
obtained  by  sorting  axonal  terminals  in  the  order  of  increasing  density  of  EphA 
(Figure 10). Separation between two maps is smallest in the rostral part (Figure 10B). 
This is because of inhomogeneous gradient of receptor in “retinal” cells (Figure 10A). 
Therefore,  even  if  noise  were  the  same  in  all  parts  of  the  map,  rostral  part  has  the 
smallest signal in terms of separation between two maps, and the largest potential to 
be blended by noise. Of course all these claims apply only to this model.  

in  heterozygotes 

 

12

 

 
Figure 10  - Mapping for heterozygotes in case of no noise.  
The  separation  between  wild-type  and  EphA3  knock-in  axonal  terminals  is  larger  in  caudal  than  in 
rostral SC, due to inhomogeneity in EphA profile. 
 

We conclude that two factors, increased noise and reduced signal, cooperate in 
rostral SC. This leads to the formation of single-valued map. In caudal part both noise 
is reduced and distance between maps is larger. Hence, the map is double-valued. Is it 
possible  to  distinguish  these  two  factors?  To  do  so  we  performed  a  numerical 
experiment  on  the  Isl2/EphB  “knock-in”  conditions.  This  may  have  relevance  to 
mapping in DV direction. The results are shown in Figure 11. 
 

 

 
Figure 11  - Mapping in Isl2/EphB knock-ins.  
Two bifurcations are observed, one in medial, another in lateral SC. 
 
 
Two  bifurcations  observed  in  Figure  11  confirm  the  hypothesis  about  two 
factors. The ventral bifurcation is associated with receptor, since separation between 
two  maps  in  perfectly  ordered  conditions  is  the  smallest  in  medial  SC.  The  second 
bifurcation, dorsal, occurs due to noise, since noise is maximal where the gradient of 
ligand  is  the  smallest,  i.e.  in  lateral  SC.  Thus,  we  suggest  that  experiments  on 
Isl2/EphB knock-ins should make clear if inhomogeneity in receptor density or noise 
is more important.  
 

Absolute versus relative 

Ref. [20] undoubfully demonstrates that retinocollicular mapping is based on 
relative  levels  of  EphA/ephrin-A  expression  in  the  broad  meaning  of  this  term. 
Indeed,  the  absolute  value  of  EphA  density  does  not  determine  where  an  axon 
terminates  in  colliculus.  In  fact,  wild-type  axons  terminate  more  caudally  in  the 

 

13

presence  of  Isl2+/EphA3+  axons.  Thus,  an  important  factor  is  the  presence  of  other 
axons, relative to which given axon establishes its termination point. This idea is also 
evident from retinal and collicular/tectal ablation experiments in rodents [33, 34] and 
other species [2].  

Can  we  take  this  idea  to  the  next  level  and  say  that  relative  differences 
between  neighboring  retinal  cells  represent  the  chemical  signal?  In  this  study  we 
present a model, which takes absolute values of the chemical label as input, as seen 
from Eq. (1). In our model adding a constant value to all densities does not change the 
result,  since  (1)  depends  only  on  differences  in  expression  levels.  But  this 
manipulation  decreases  the  relative  differences  in  the  expression  of  EphAs  between 
knock-in  and  wild-type  cells.  Hence,  our  model  is  not  based  on  relative  differences 
between receptor densities. Yet, we demonstrate that it can account for experimental 
results in detail. Thus, we suggest that existing experimental evidence is not sufficient 
to  distinguish  relative  and  absolute  labeling  in  the  narrow  sense,  suggested  by  Ref. 
[20], if we are to interpret these findings conservatively.    
Of course, our model also accounts for the caudal displacement of wild-type 
 
TZs,  thus  resulting  in  a  relative  labeling  system  in  the  broad  sense.  In  the  first 
approximation, this model performs a sorting procedure, understood mathematically, 
of the fibers based on the expression levels of EphA. Our procedure uses differences 
in  absolute  values  of  EphA  densities  rather  than  relative  differences.  More 
experiments are needed to distinguish these two “relativity principles”.   
Relative  labeling  in  the  narrow  sense  can  be  incorporated  in  our  model,  if 
 
 
LA
)
coefficient  α  is  a  function  of  label  densities.  Thus,  the  condition 
ensures the Weber’s law for axonal “perceptual thresholds”, since chemical signal is 
proportional  to  the  relative  differences.  The  exact  form  of  coefficient  α  or  if  the 
nomenclature  based  on  this  coefficient  can  account  for  all  phenomenology  is 
impossible to establish at the moment.  
 

∝α

RA ⋅

/(1

On the biological realism 
 
When dealing with numerical simulations one always faces the question of the 
degree of realism with which to model the data. Does one have to model behaviors of 
individual atoms, or description on the level of axons is sufficient? In this work we 
choose  the  level  of  description  on  the  basis  of  what  we  know.  We  realize  that  our 
model does not capture many exciting behaviors, but we argue that the mechanisms 
involved  are  unclear  at  the  moment  to  be  incorporated  into  a  more  detailed  model. 
Our  approach  also  fulfils  its  original  goal,  which  is  to  reproduce  the  results  of 
experiments [20] and to generate experimentally testable predictions, thus satisfying 
the requirement of parsimony. 
 
Model  presented  here  does  not  describe  difference  between  development 
along  TN  and  DV  axes.  The  former  mapping  is  controlled  by  original  axonal 
overshoot  along 
in  SC,  with  subsequent  elimination  of 
topographically inappropriate projections [3, 9]. In contrast, axons from the same DV 
retinal  position  enter  SC  in  a  broad  distribution  along  ML  axis.  Topographically 
precise termination is provided by producing additional interstitial branches in the ML 
direction [31, 32, 35, 36]. These findings cannot be reproduced by our model, since 
no distinction is made between the original RGC axon and its branches. Instead, our 
model deals with terminal points of interstitial branches produced by RGC axons. It 
cannot address the mechanism by which this point is connected to a RGC.  

the  RC  direction 

Above we presented some results for mapping in 2D. The exact mechanism of 
mapping  in  2D  is  unclear.  We  introduce  this new component into our consideration 

 

14

for  illustrative  purposes  only.  Some  curious  observations  can  be  made  however.  It 
was  suggested  earlier,  that  ephrins-B  must  have  a  bifunctional  action  on  interstitial 
branches, both as a repellent and attractant, to implement topographic mapping in ML 
direction (see Ref. [32] for elaborated discussion of this point). Interstitial branches, 
which  originate  laterally  from  TZ  must  be  attracted  up  the  gradient  of  ephrins-B, 
while branches originating medially, must be repelled toward TZ by high density of 
ligand. Although we do not treat interstitial branches in our model, we can observe the 
location  of  their  terminal  points  as  a  function  of  time  (Figure  8).  Indeed,  the 
termination  points  located  medially  from  the  TZ  are  retracted  and  inserted  more 
laterally  in  their  drift  toward  TZ,  thus  moving  opposite  to  the  gradient  of  ephrin-B 
(Figure 8). In our model this behavior is mediated by axonal competition for space, 
since each axon can occupy only one terminal in SC. Indeed, axons with higher levels 
of EphB experience higher attraction to the ligand, expelling other axons to the region 
with lower density of ligand, effectively inducing chemorepulsion. This phenomenon 
is  similar  to  behavior  of  passengers  in  a  subway  during  rush  hour.  Although  many 
passengers attempt to enter a newly arrived train, only limited number of them can, 
due  to  excluded  volume  interactions.  The  less  motivated  individuals  left  on  the 
platform may seem to be repelled by the train, which is, of course, purely spurious. 
Thus, excluded volume interactions may generate effective repulsion by an attractive 
agent. This is what is observed on Figure 8 in our model. 

Conclusions  

We present a model for retinocollicular map development, which can account 
intriguing  behaviors  observed  in  gain-of-function  experiments  by  Brown  et  al.  [20], 
including bifurcation in heterozygous Isl2/EphA3 knock-ins. The model is based on 
chemoaffinity,  axonal  repulsion/competition,  and  stochasticity.  We  discuss  mapping 
in ephrin-A-/Isl2+/EphA3+ knock-out/ins and Isl2/EphB knock-ins. 

 

15

Methods 

1D model 

To  find  a  stationary  distribution  of  the  RGC’s  axons  in  the  SC,  we  use  the 
following computational procedure. We consider a linear chain of 100 RCG that are 
connected  to  one  and  only  terminal  cell  in  SC  each.  The  receptor  and  ligand 
expression  level  profiles  used  in  the  computations  for  wild-type,  heterozygote  and 
homozygote  are  shown  at  Figure  5A-C.  We  start  with  the  random  map  where  the 
position of every axon in SC does not depend on the level of its receptor expression. 
Then we perform stochastic reconstructions through an exchange of the positions of 
the neighboring axons in SC. Namely, at each step we randomly choose one pair of 
axons out of 99 neighboring pairs and switch their positions with the probability given  
by  Eq.  (1).  In  both  cases,  whether  the  positions  of  the  axons  are  exchanged  or  they 
retain at their old locations we proceed to the next step when we choose a new pair of 
neighboring  axons.  We  repeat  the  process  until  a  stationary  distribution  of  the 
probabilities for the positions of the RGC’s axons in SC is reached. 

The typical stationary solution for one realization is shown at Figure 4. Here 
the  number  of  iterations  is  106.  The  only  parameter  of  the  theory  is  taken  α=30 
throughout  the  paper.  It  is  chosen  to  fit  the  experimental  data  from  Ref.  [20].  The 
probability distribution and the position of the maximums shown at Figure 5 and 6 are 
obtained  by  temporal  averaging  over  5×104  realizations  of  stationary  solution 
separated in time by 103 iterations.  
 
2D model  

Here we describe our 2D model in more detail. We consider an array of 100 
by 100 RGC, which are connected to 100 by 100 different points in colliculus. Each 
RGC  is  characterized  by  two  levels  of  expression  for  two  receptors,  EphAs  and 
EphBs, described in the text. The concentration profiles are taken to be the same for 
EphA  and  EphB  receptors  in  the  wild-type  species.  In  the  homozygote  and 
heterozygote cases the concentration of EphA is taken as shown at Figure 5, while the 
concentration of EphB is unchanged. RGCs do not express ligand in our model. The 
collicular  receptacles  are  described  by  two  ligand  concentrations  with  the  same 
profiles  as  shown  at  Figure  5  but  with  different  gradient  directions  discussed  in  the 
text.  

The  process  of  development  is  modeled  as  follows.  We  randomly  choose  a 
pair  of  axons  in  SC  separated  either  in  RC  or  in  ML  direction.  We  exchange  their 
positions with the probability given by Eq. (1) or Eq. (3) respectively. We then repeat 
the  process  until  a  stationary  distribution  of  probabilities  is  reached  in  the  same 
manner  as  for  1D  case.  Note,  that  this  time  a  chosen  pair  of  axons,  say  in  RC 
direction, may not be a neighboring pair, but consist of two axons separated by any 
distance  in  SC.  This  procedure  dramatically  decreases  the  convergence  time  to  the 
stationary  distribution,  which  is  the  same  as  in  the  case  when  we  choose  the 
neighboring axons only. The discussion of this may be found in Ref. [24]. The noise 
level is taken to be the same for both RC and ML directions, that is α=β=30. 

The  spatial  2D  distribution  of  the  axons  corresponding  to  labeled  RGCs  is 
shown  at  Figure  7.  The  “labeling  spot”  in  retina  is  a  circle  with  radius  R=7.3,  the 
coordinates  of  the  center  are  (15,50),  (50,50)  and  (85,50)  on  the  100×100  grid.  The 
distribution  is  obtained  by  averaging  the  positions  of  the  labeled  axons  in  SC  over 
1000  realizations  after  it  reached  the  stationary  solution  at  1×106  iterations.  The 

 

16

temporal evolution of the map for the label in the central retina is shown at the Figure 
8. It corresponds to averaging over 1000 different realizations at each time interval.     
 
In both 1D and 2D cases the calculations were performed on Dell PowerEdge 
1600SC server. The programs, written on Matlab (MathWorks, Inc.), are available for 
download in [23]. 
 

 

17

References  
 
1. 

Kaas JH: Topographic maps are fundamental to sensory processing. Brain 
Res Bull 1997, 44(2):107-112. 
Fraser SE, Hunt RK: Retinotectal specificity: models and experiments in 
search of a mapping function. Annu Rev Neurosci 1980, 3:319-352. 
O'Leary DD, Wilkinson DG: Eph receptors and ephrins in neural 
development. Curr Opin Neurobiol 1999, 9(1):65-73. 
Goodhill GJ, Richards LJ: Retinotectal maps: molecules, models and 
misplaced data. Trends Neurosci 1999, 22(12):529-534. 
Cowey A: Cortical maps and visual perception: the Grindley Memorial 
Lecture. Q J Exp Psychol 1979, 31(1):1-17. 
Sperry RW: Chemoaffinity in the orderly growth of nerve fiber patterns 
and connections. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 1963, 50:703-710. 
Flanagan JG, Vanderhaeghen P: The ephrins and Eph receptors in neural 
development. Annu Rev Neurosci 1998, 21:309-345. 
Drescher U: The Eph family in the patterning of neural development. Curr 
Biol 1997, 7(12):R799-807. 
McLaughlin T, Hindges R, O'Leary DD: Regulation of axial patterning of 
the retina and its topographic mapping in the brain. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
2003, 13(1):57-69. 
Feldheim DA, Kim YI, Bergemann AD, Frisen J, Barbacid M, Flanagan JG: 
Genetic analysis of ephrin-A2 and ephrin-A5 shows their requirement in 
multiple aspects of retinocollicular mapping. Neuron 2000, 25(3):563-574. 
Cheng HJ, Flanagan JG: Identification and cloning of ELF-1, a 
developmentally expressed ligand for the Mek4 and Sek receptor tyrosine 
kinases. Cell 1994, 79(1):157-168. 
Flenniken AM, Gale NW, Yancopoulos GD, Wilkinson DG: Distinct and 
overlapping expression patterns of ligands for Eph-related receptor 
tyrosine kinases during mouse embryogenesis. Dev Biol 1996, 179(2):382-
401. 

family receptors and their ligands distribute in opposing gradients in the 
developing mouse retina. Dev Biol 1996, 180(2):786-789. 
Zhang JH, Cerretti DP, Yu T, Flanagan JG, Zhou R: Detection of ligands in 
regions anatomically connected to neurons expressing the Eph receptor 
Bsk: potential roles in neuron-target interaction. J Neurosci 1996, 
16(22):7182-7192. 
Frisen J, Yates PA, McLaughlin T, Friedman GC, O'Leary DD, Barbacid M: 
Ephrin-A5 (AL-1/RAGS) is essential for proper retinal axon guidance 
and topographic mapping in the mammalian visual system. Neuron 1998, 
20(2):235-243. 
Feldheim DA, Vanderhaeghen P, Hansen MJ, Frisen J, Lu Q, Barbacid M, 
Flanagan JG: Topographic guidance labels in a sensory projection to the 
forebrain. Neuron 1998, 21(6):1303-1313. 
Katz LC, Shatz CJ: Synaptic activity and the construction of cortical 
circuits. Science 1996, 274(5290):1133-1138. 
Simon DK, Prusky GT, O'Leary DD, Constantine-Paton M: N-methyl-D-
aspartate receptor antagonists disrupt the formation of a mammalian 
neural map. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992, 89(22):10593-10597. 

18

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

 

13.  Marcus RC, Gale NW, Morrison ME, Mason CA, Yancopoulos GD: Eph 

Debski EA, Cline HT: Activity-dependent mapping in the retinotectal 
projection. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2002, 12(1):93-99. 
Brown A, Yates PA, Burrola P, Ortuno D, Vaidya A, Jessell TM, Pfaff SL, 
O'Leary DD, Lemke G: Topographic mapping from the retina to the 
midbrain is controlled by relative but not absolute levels of EphA 
receptor signaling. Cell 2000, 102(1):77-88. 
Tsuchida T, Ensini M, Morton SB, Baldassare M, Edlund T, Jessell TM, Pfaff 
SL: Topographic organization of embryonic motor neurons defined by 
expression of LIM homeobox genes. Cell 1994, 79(6):957-970. 
Koulakov AA: Doubling transition in retinocollicular maps of 
heterozygous knockin mice. In: Society for neuroscience annual meeting 
abstracts: 2001; San Diego, CA; 2001. 
Computer codes and supplementary information for this study are 
available at [http://koulakovlab.cshl.edu/~rc] 
Koulakov AA, Tsigankov DN: In preparation. 
Dayan P, Abbott LF: Theoretical neuroscience : computational and 
mathematical modeling of neural systems. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press; 2001. 
Borovkov AA: Probability theory. Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Gordon and 
Breach; 1998. 
Described here is a non-periodic and non-separable chain. See Ch.12 in 
Borovkov for more detail. 
Holash JA, Pasquale EB: Polarized expression of the receptor protein 
tyrosine kinase Cek5 in the developing avian visual system. Dev Biol 1995, 
172(2):683-693. 
Henkemeyer M, Orioli D, Henderson JT, Saxton TM, Roder J, Pawson T, 
Klein R: Nuk controls pathfinding of commissural axons in the 
mammalian central nervous system. Cell 1996, 86(1):35-46. 
Birgbauer E, Cowan CA, Sretavan DW, Henkemeyer M: Kinase independent 
function of EphB receptors in retinal axon pathfinding to the optic disc 
from dorsal but not ventral retina. Development 2000, 127(6):1231-1241. 
Hindges R, McLaughlin T, Genoud N, Henkemeyer M, O'Leary DD: EphB 
forward signaling controls directional branch extension and arborization 
required for dorsal-ventral retinotopic mapping. Neuron 2002, 35(3):475-
487. 

34. 

33. 

32.  McLaughlin T, Hindges R, Yates PA, O'Leary DD: Bifunctional action of 
ephrin-B1 as a repellent and attractant to control bidirectional branch 
extension in dorsal-ventral retinotopic mapping. Development 2003, 
130(11):2407-2418. 
Finlay BL, Schneps SE, Schneider GE: Orderly compression of the 
retinotectal projection following partial tectal ablation in the newborn 
hamster. Nature 1979, 280(5718):153-155. 
Simon DK, Roskies AL, O'Leary DD: Plasticity in the development of 
topographic order in the mammalian retinocollicular projection. Dev Biol 
1994, 162(2):384-393. 
Simon DK, O'Leary DD: Development of topographic order in the 
mammalian retinocollicular projection. J Neurosci 1992, 12(4):1212-1232. 
Simon DK, O'Leary DD: Influence of position along the medial-lateral axis 
of the superior colliculus on the topographic targeting and survival of 
retinal axons. Brain Res Dev Brain Res 1992, 69(2):167-172. 

35. 

36. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 
25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

 

 

19

