Lilienfeld Transition Radiation Brought to Light 

 
 

 

 

Mario Rabinowitz 
Electric Power Research Institute 

Palo Alto, California 94303 

Inquiries to: Armor Research  
715 Lakemead Way, Redwood City, CA 94062 
Mario715@earthlink.net 
 
 
 
Abstract 

 

Presently, the term transition radiation tends to denote a 

somewhat different physical phenomenon than the original 

transition radiation discovered by J. E. Lilienfeld in 1919, and re-

employed in different forms again in 1953 and 1971.  Lilienfeld 

transition radiation is a subtle kind of radiation with distinctive 

properties that may often be unexpected in prospect, yet is intuitive 

and readily understood in retrospect.  This paper distinguishes in 

clear terms between the different kinds of  transition radiation, and 

shows its link to modern apparatus such as possible applications in 

the area of x-ray microscopy, microholography, and the 

free-electron laser .  

 
 
 
I.  Introduction 

 

For a static charge, it is well known that the solution for the net field 

outside a flat metal surface is the superposition of the field of the charge and that 

of its mirror-image opposite charge in the metal.  For a negative charge, this is 

due to the repulsion of the free electrons in the metal.  For a positive charge this 

is due to the attraction of the free electrons.  In more mathematical terms, the net 

field may be found by solving Laplace's equation with the appropriate boundary 

conditions to obtain the potential.  The field is minus the gradient of the 

potential.  The result is clearly an electric dipole. 

 

Thus for a charge moving slowly, its field penetrates well into the metal 

and a simple field pattern results.  For a very fast moving charge, the field only 

penetrates with an exponential decay so that the field is largely limited within a 

skin depth of the metal's surface.  Easily tractable fields result when the distance 

to the surface of the charge is small compared with the penetration depth.  As we 

shall see, in either case radiation results even when no external force is applied to 

accelerate the charge, if the metal surface is not smooth.  

II.  Radiation from Uniform motion  

The radiation described above is not the only effect in which radiation 

occurs from seemingly uniform motion.  Cerenkov radiation also occurs with no 

acceleration of the charge, when its speed exceeds the speed of light in a given 

medium as first predicted by Arnold Sommerfeld. 

 Analogously, if a charge moves at constant velocity through a junction 

between two materials having different opitical properties, radiation results from 

the change in the field the charge is carrying.  The term "Transition Radiation" is 

used to denote radiation emanating when charged particles go from one medium 

to another.  The theory of this radiation was presented by Frank and Ginsburg [1] 

in 1944, and is not at all the same as Cerenkov radiation; or the next described 

Lilienfeld transition radiation.  

III.   Comparing Different Kinds of Radiation 

In 1919 Lilienfeld found that in addition to x rays, radiation ranging from 

visible light through the ultraviolet is emitted when electrons approach a metal 

electrode.[2]  This radiation has a characteristic polarization, spectrum and 

 

 

 

 

 

intensity. Lilienfeld transition radiation can be considered to originate from the 

time rate of change of the virtual dipole between charged particles and their 

image charges that forms as the charged particles move near a conducting 

surface, as described in Section I. In Lilienfeld's original experiment, the charged 

particles were low-energy electrons moving toward a metallic anode.  This was 

originally called, "Lilienfeld Transition Radiation."  Largely because of high 

energy phyics applications Cerenkov Radiation and Transition Radiation are 

currently well known. Unfortunately, Lilienfeld Transition Radiation  has been 

largely forgotten.   

 

In a variation of Lilienfeld transition radiation, the charged particles move 

roughly parallel to a conducting serrated surface, producing an oscillating virtual 

dipole whose frequency is related to the particle velocity and the serration 

spacing.  This 1953 work has been called "Smith-Purcell Radiation." [3] In 1992, 

Michael M. Moran [4] calculated the potential of x-ray generation by the Smith-

Purcell effect.  He concluded that "although the radiated power may be low, the 

source brightness could be surprisingly large because of the microscopic source 

area.  This together with the tunability and inherent spatial coherence of S-P 

radiation, suggests possible applications in the area of x-ray microscopy or 

microholography."  In 1992 Doucas et al [6] used a beam of 3.6 MeV electrons to 

generate far infrared radiation by the S-P effect.  Until then low-energy electrons 

were used to produce visible radiation.  Their "emphasis is on a spectral region 

where the population of sources is sparse."  

  

In some ways Lilienfeld's work anticipated the 1953 experiment of S. J. 

Smith and Edward M. Purcell [3], and possibly even John M. J. Madey's 

invention of the free-electron laser.  In 1971, John M. J. Madey [5] used the 

Weizsacker-Williams method to calculate the gain due to the induced emission of 

radiation by a relativistic motion of an electron moving through a periodic 

transverse grating.  The magnetic grating may be considered analogous to the 

periodically serrated conducting surface of Smith and Purcell, with the important 

added bounus of laser gain.  Each may be considered to be an important and 

novel variation of the prior work, as reflected in much of the progress of science.  

As a graduate student I observed Lilienfeld transition radiation in 1961 in 

connection with my doctoral thesis research, before I had ever heard of it. A 

literature search led quickly to Lilienfeld's work. Visible polarized blue light is 

easily seen at the anode of a high voltage vacuum tube. 

 

References 

1.  J. E. Lifienfeld, Physik Zeitschrift XX, 280 (1919).  

2.  I. Frank, and V. Ginsburg, Journal of Physics, IX, 353 (1945).  

3.  S. J. Smith, and E. M. Purcell, Physical Review 93, 1069 (1953) 

4.  M. J. Moran, Physical Review Letters 17, 2523 (1992).   

5.  J. M. J. Madey, Journal of Applied Physics 42, 1906 (1971). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

