CHEP03, La Jolla, California, March 24-28, 2003 

1 

Development of a pipeline CAMAC controller with PC/104-Plus single 
board computer 

Y. Yasu, E. Inoue, H. Fujii, Y. Igarashi, M. Ikeno, M. Tanaka, K. Nakayoshi and H. Kodama  
High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK), Tsukuba, Japan 
S. Harada 
TOYO corporation, Tokyo, Japan 
H. Kyoo 
Fird corporation, Tokyo, Japan 

A pipeline CAMAC controller with PC/104-Plus single board computer has been developed. The architecture of the pipeline 
CAMAC  controller  is  completely  different  from  that  of  traditional  CAMAC  controller.  The  pipeline  CAMAC  controller 
adopted truly pipelined command and data paths from/to computer memory to/from CAMAC. The pipeline method enabled the 
controller  maximum  speed  of  CAMAC,  approximately  up  to  3  MB/sec  with  24-bit  data.  The  controller  also  has  a  DAQ 
function  such  as  event  numbering  for  co-existence  with  other  equipment  such  as  VME.  Not  only  the  functionality  and  the 
performance but also the pipeline architecture and the design concept are described. 

 
 

 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

The  Pipeline  CAMAC  controller  occupies  2  slots 
(stations  24th  and  25th  )  in  a  CAMAC  crate  [1].    In 
Figure 1, there are the controller in a CAMAC crate and 
a PC connected to the controller via Fast Ethernet.  The 
controller  consists  of  a  PC/104-Plus-based  single  board 
computer,  PCI  interface  (PCI  control)  and  CAMAC 
interface (CAMAC control).  Thus, the controller can be 
used as an intelligent controller. 
 

 

 

Figure 1: Pipeline CAMAC controller. 
 

The  PC/104-Plus  is  a  standard  PCI  specification  for 
embedded  systems  [2].  The  board  computer  with  low 
power  consumption  includes  a  flash  disk  with  IDE 
interface, Fast Ethernet, USB and so on. Many PC/104-
Plus  based  single  board  computers  are  available  in  the 
industry. 

The  PCI  and  CAMAC  interfaces  consist  of  an 
ALTERA  FPGA,  respectively  [3].    Those  VHDL  codes 
for  the  interfaces  have  been  also  developed.    The  PCI 
control  is  originally  designed  for  the  pipeline  CAMAC 
from 
controller  while 
commercial are not convenient from the pipeline point of 
view.  The  PCI  control  is  also  designed  in  general 
purpose.  The  communication  protocol  between  the  PCI 

the  PCI  cores  available 

 
TUGP004 

and the CAMAC is well defined. Thus, the PCI control is 
usable for other I/O devices. 

The  controller  has  a  DAQ  function  such  as  event 
numbering.  The  signal  handling  of  trigger-input  and 
busy-out  are  implemented  while  the  event  count  can  be 
read out.  This feature is important to co-exist with other 
equipment  such  as  VME  which  already  implements 
timing & trigger control signaling. 

From application point of view, the pipeline CAMAC 
controller  will  make  the  traditional  system  based  on 
CAMAC powerful because  it  is  an  intelligent  controller 
including CPU with Fast Ethernet and realizes maximum 
speed of CAMAC access. 

 

2.  FUNCTIONALITY 

The  pipeline  CAMAC  controller  is  located  into  24th 
and  25th  slots  of  CAMAC  crate.  It  mainly  consists  of 
PC/104-Plus  Single  Board  Computer,  PCI  control  and 
CAMAC control. 

The board computer adopted is Advantech PCM-9370, 
3.5  inch  (145  x  102  mm)  Transmeta  Crusoe  500  MHz 
processor  single  board  computer  including  TM5400 
processor, 320 MB memory, two IDE UltraDMA33 with 
512  MB  flash  disk,  LCD/CRT  controller,  10/100  Mbps 
Ethernet  controller,  two  1.1  compliant  USB  ports, 
connector for keyboard, PS/2 mouse and so son [4]. The 
power  consumption  is  typically  10.7W  [4].  Those 
devices  are  available  at  the  front  panel of  the  controller 
as in Figure 2. 

On  the  front  panel,  there  are  several  indicators  and 
switches.  “Busy”  indicates  CAMAC  Busy  signal.  Light 
“NO-Q”  and  light  “NO-X”  indicate  that  the  CAMAC 
access  does  not  response  Q  and  X.  Light  “L-SUM” 
means there is at least a CAMAC module issuing Look-
At-Me  in  the  CAMAC  crate.  When  “Online/Offline” 
switch  is  toggled  to  “Online”,  CAMAC  is  accessible.  
CAMAC Z and C signal can be manually issued by using 
“Z  /  C”  switch.  “TRG-IN”  and  “BSY-OUT”  are  NIM 
signals with LEMO connectors for trigger input and busy 
out, respectively. 

 

2 

 

CHEP03, La Jolla, California, March 24-28, 2003 

That  for  the  reply  frame  additionally  contains  CAMAC 
status  such  as  Q  &  X  and  read  data  if  the  CAMAC 
function is 'read'. That for CAMAC LAM includes 24-bit 
LAM  pattern  and  that  for  DAQ  Trigger  includes  32-bit 
event  count.  DAQ  Executor  can  clear  Busy-out  signal 
while  the  signal  disables  next  event  trigger.      Figure  4 
and Figure 5 show the frame format of CAMAC function 
and DAQ function, respectively. 

 

 

 

Figure 2: Front Panel of Pipeline CAMAC controller. 
 

In the CAMAC control, there are a CAMAC Executor, 
a CAMAC LAM Handler (CAMAC Interrupter), a DAQ 
Executor and a DAQ Trigger Handler (DAQ Interrupter).  
Figure 3 shows the architecture of CAMAC control. The 
Executors accept a packet including at least a command 
frame or more from CPU via PCI, execute them and then 
send  reply  frames  to  CPU.  The  frame  is  a  unit  of 
CAMAC  access.  The  pipeline  CAMAC  controller  can 
execute  CAMAC  command  with  small  overhead 
continuously  by  getting  the  command  frames  from  a 
computer  memory  and  then  sending  the  reply  frames  to 
the computer memory, via PCI bus. The command FIFO 
and the reply FIFO have the size of 256 frames each. The 
Interrupters  generate  a  packet  including  a  reply  frame 
and  then  send to  CPU. When  LAM or  Trigger  interrupt 
occurs  during  the  Executor  processes  a  packet,  the 
generation  of  interrupt  reply  frame  will  be  postponed. 
After  the  packet  is  processed,  the  interrupt  reply  frame 
will be sent. 

 

 

Figure 3:  Architecture of CAMAC control. 

 
The  command  and  reply  frames  have  64-bit  fixed-
length. It consists of an 8-bit header and a 56-bit payload. 
The payload for basic CAMAC command frame contains 
CAMAC  station  number  N,  CAMAC  sub-address  A, 
CAMAC function F and data to be written if necessary. 
 
TUGP004 

Figure 4: Frame format of CAMAC function 

 

 

Figure 5:  Frame format of DAQ function 

 
The  architecture of  PCI  control  is  shown  in Figure  6. 
There  are  Tx/Rx  FIFO,  Tx/Rx  engines  and  PCI 
multiplexer  for  Tx/Rx.  Tx  and  Rx  engines  work 
independently  while  PCI  multiplexer  manages  the  PCI 
usage  for  Tx  and  Rx  engines.  Tx/Rx  FIFOs  have  the 
depth of 256 with 32-bit width each. Tx/Rx engines have 
two modes, master and slave. The slave means PCI slave 
which  the  PCI  interface  becomes.    In  master  mode,  the 
PCI  interface  can  transfer  data  from/to  memory  in 
computer without CPU intervention. Thus, master mode 
not  only  reduces  CPU  usage  but  also  realizes  fast 
transfer  in  comparison  with  the  slave  mode.  From  the 
programming  point  of  view,  the  programmed  I/O  uses 
the PCI slave mode while Block I/O (DMA) uses the PCI 
master mode. 

On  one  hand,  the  pipeline  CAMAC  controller  sends 
multiple  command  frames,  which  include  N,  A,  F  and 

CHEP03, La Jolla, California, March 24-28, 2003 

3 

 
data if necessary, via Tx I/O registers. On the other hand, 
the controller receives multiple reply frames, which also 
includes N, A, F, status (Q and X) and data if necessary, 
via  Rx  I/O  registers.  The  operations  to  Tx  and  Rx  are 
done  concurrently,  independently,  or  asynchronously.  If 
DMA  is  used  in  both  sides,  the  throughput  reaches 
is  provided  on 
maximum  speed.  DMA 
traditional  CAMAC  controller  [5],  but  the  function  is 
limited such as Address-scan, Q-stop and so on. For the 
pipeline CAMAC controller, any operations to CAMAC 
can be executed in DMA mode. There is no limitation. 

function 

 

 

In  block  I/O,  memory  address  register  is  used  for 
pointing  to  address  of  kernel  command/reply  frame 
buffers  and  preset  count  register  represents  the  number 
of frames in quad-word (8 bytes) to be transferred. After 
the  transfer  is  initiated  by  setting  DMA-start  flag,  the 
actual  count  register  counts  the  number  of  frames  in 
quad-word (8 bytes) transferred actually. Control register 
and 
status 
register  contains  control  and 
information related to interrupt and block transfer. 
System register is used by system administrator. 

status 

Table 2: PCI I/O Register Map 

 

Figure 6:  Architecture of PCI control 

 
There  are  special  CAMAC functions  to  the  controller 
itself.  For  examples,  CAMAC  C  and  CAMAC  Z  are 
generated  by  those  functions.  All  of  the  functions  are 
shown in Table I. The fast cycle means S2 timing will be 
ignored  in  this  mode.    This  is  illegal  from  CAMAC 
protocol  point  of  view,  but  there  are  lots  of  CAMAC 
modules usable in this mode. 
Table 1: Special CAMAC Function 

 

3.  OPERATION 

The  PCI  I/O  register  map  includes  three  kinds  of 
registers. One is for Tx and another is for Rx. The other 
is system register. Those registers are located in PCI I/O 
space  and  the  size  of  those  registers  is  32-bit.  Table  2 
shows the map. 

In  programmed  I/O,  data1  and  data2  registers  for  Tx 
and  Rx  are  used  for  sending  command  frames  and 
receiving reply frames, respectively. FIFO count register 
contains  number  of  data  in  long-word  (4bytes).  For  an 
example,  Rx  FIFO  count  register  is  used for getting  the 
number  of  data  to  be  transferred  as  reply  frames  after 
sending command frames.  

 
TUGP004 

4.  SOFTWARE 

The  choice  of  a  suitable  Operating  System  (OS)  for 
PC  compatible  hardware  is  dependent  on  the  expected 
functionality.  Since  the  software  tools,  like  compilers 
and utilities are, Open Source Software / GNU products, 
a commodity Open Source OS, Linux is chosen. A Linux 
distribution  kit  tailored  by  KEK  is  implemented  for  the 
pipeline CAMAC controller.   

The  board  computer  has  a  flash  disk.    The  flash  disk 
has  a  limited  life  expectancy.  The  life  expectancy  is 
measured 
the  number  of  erase  cycles.  Linux 
frequently  erases  the  directories  of  /var  and  /tmp.  Thus, 
they are implemented as RAM disk. 

in 

The  device  driver  and  the  library  for  the  pipeline 
CAMAC  controller  have  been  developed.  CAMAC  and 
DAQ  command  frames  are  generated  and  then  stored 
into  a  frame  buffer  by  the  frame  generator.    The 
command  frames  in  a  frame  buffer  are  executed  by 
Programmed  I/O  routines,  Block  I/O  routines  or  the 
combined  routines  in  same  manner.    The  reply  frames 
are  stored  into  another  frame  buffer  as  result  of  the 
command  frame  executions.  The  reply  frame  includes 
CAMAC status and data. The extractors of the status and 
the  data  from  the  reply  frames  are  provided.  The  wait 
routines for LAM interrupt and Trigger interrupt are also 
available [6], [7]. 
 
 

 

 

4 

 

5.  DESIGN CONCEPT 

CHEP03, La Jolla, California, March 24-28, 2003 

The  pipeline  CAMAC  controller  adopted 

truly 
pipelined  command  and  data  paths  from/to  computer 
memory to/from CAMAC. The pipeline method enabled 
the  controller  maximum  speed  of  CAMAC  access, 
approximately  up  to  3  MB/sec  with  24-bit  data.    In  the 
pipeline  method,  the  multiple  command  frames  and  the 
multiple  reply  frames  are  processed  asynchronously, 
independently  or  concurrently.  This  feature  is  different 
from that of the traditional CAMAC controller [8]. 

As  described  in  previous  section,  DMA  function  on 
traditional  CAMAC  controller 
limited  such  as 
Address-scan,  Q-stop  and  so  on.  For  the  pipeline 
CAMAC  controller,  any  operations  to  CAMAC  can  be 
executed in DMA mode. There is no limitation. Thus, the 
pipeline CAMAC controller is different from traditional 
CAMAC controller, from DMA point of view, too. 

is 

 The  design  concept  of  pipeline  CAMAC  controller 
expands  the  feasibility  of  I/O  method.  The  pipeline 
method  is  best  for  the  speed  up  of  I/O  throughput.  The 
method  applied  to  the  pipeline  CAMAC  controller  is 
generally  usable,  namely,  as  the  access  method  to  I/O 
object  controller,  which  includes  not  only  CAMAC  but 
also readout equipment such as Flash ADC as in Figure 7. 
 

 

Figure 7:  Access to I/O object 

6.  PERFORMANCE 

CAMAC  executor  executes  a  CAMAC  command 
frame  in  1.04  usec.  Figure  8  shows  CAMAC  timing.  
There are CAMAC Busy signal and CAMAC S1 signal 
in the vertical axis. The horizontal axis is timing in unit 1 
usec.  Each  CAMAC  cycle  is  continuously  done  in  1.04 
usec. The speed was achieved by the DMA operation. 

In fast mode which ignores CAMAC S2 timing signal, 

it executes the command frame in 0.72 usec. 

7.  CONCLUSIONS 

A  pipeline  CAMAC  controller  with  new  architecture 

has been developed. 

The  CAMAC  access  speed  reached  up  to  maximum 
speed  of  CAMAC,  approximately  3  MB/s  with  24-bit 
data. 

The  pipeline  method  will  be  useful  for  not  only 
CAMAC  controller  but  also  other  controller,  generally, 
I/O object controller. 

Acknowledgments 

The  authors  would  like  to  thank  the  people  in  KEK 

online and electronics group for their support. 

References 

[1] 

IEEE, "IEEE Standard Modular Instrumentation 
and Digital Interface System (CAMAC) 
(Computer Automated Measurement and Control) 
IEEE Std 583-1975. 

[2]      PC/104 Embedded Consortium, PC/104-Plus 
Specification Version 1.2, August 2001 

[3]  Altera Corporation, http://www.altera.com/ 
[4]  Advantech Co., Ltd., Board computer PCM-9370 
http://www.advantech.co.jp/epc/SBC/biscuit/pcm
9370.html 

[5]  KineticSystems Corp., VME  to 3922 Interface 

w/DMA  model 2917-Z1A  &  Model 2915-Z1A  
& PCI Interface to 3922  Model 2915-Z1A  & 
Parallel Bus Crate Controller Model 3922-Z1B     
http://www.kscorp.com/www/products/camac.htm 

[6]  Home page of Parallel CAMAC project, 
http://www-online.kek.jp/~yasu/Parallel-
CAMAC/ 

[8] 

[7]  Yet another page of  Parallel CAMAC project in 
Japanese, http://www-online.kek.jp/~inoue/para-
CAMAC/ 
TOYO Corp., CAMAC Crate Controller type 
CC/7700 and Host Interface Board types CC/ISA 
and CC/PCI in Japanese 
 http://www.toyo.co.jp/daq/index.html 
 

 

 

 
TUGP004 

Figure 8:  CAMAC timing 

 

