SLAC-PUB-9686 
 
 
 

 
FUTURE PROOF FOR PHYSICS: 
Preserving the Record of SLAC  

Jean Marie Deken 
 
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center 
Stanford University 
2575 Sand Hill Road MS82 
Menlo Park CA 94025 
 
 
 
 
Invited talk presented at   
Future proof: delivering scientific archives in the twenty-first century (Co-operation on 
the Archives of Science), 4/9/2003-4/11/2003, Edinburgh, Scotland 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

Abstract 
Paper provides a brief introduction to SLAC, discusses the origins of the SLAC Archives 
and History Office, its present-day operations, and the present and future challenges it 
faces in attempting to preserve an accurate historical record of SLAC’s activities. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Work supported by Department of Energy contract DE-AC03-76SF00515 
 
 

 

 

2 

SLAC occupies 430 acres of the Stanford University campus near the intersection 

The idea for a two-mile linear accelerator at Stanford University was conceived in 

What is SLAC? 
 
 
1956, proposed in 1957, and authorized by the United States (US) Congress in 1961. 
Initially called "Project M," the venture was renamed "The Stanford Linear Accelerator 
Center" (SLAC) in August of 1960. The original contract between Stanford University 
and the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission was signed on April 30, 1962: construction 
began the following July and was completed February 10, 1966. SLAC's official 
dedication occurred on September 9, 1967. 1  SLAC is owned by the United States 
government, and is operated for the US Department of Energy by Stanford University.  Its 
present-day mission is to design, construct and operate state-of-the-art electron 
accelerators and related experimental facilities for use in high-energy physics and 
synchrotron radiation research. 
 
 
of Sand Hill Road and US Highway 280 in northern California.  In fiscal year 2002, its 
budget was $209 million: it employed a staff of 1,467 (full-time equivalents); and hosted 
3,000 users from a variety of institutions, including universities (147), industry (46), 
government laboratories (30), and foreign countries (162).2 We are proud to serve the 
large international user community at SLAC, whose time on site can range from days to 
weeks to years. . 
 
 
the design and construction of particle detectors enables its researchers to pursue answers 
to basic questions about the structure of matter and about the fundamental forces that 
operate in our universe.  To date, 3 Nobel Prizes in Physics have been awarded for 
research conducted here.3 The laboratory’s major high-energy physics program for the 
next decade is the B-Factory, which is a multi-national collaboration utilizing the PEP-II 
storage rings and the BaBar detector to investigate the asymmetry of matter and anti-
matter.  
 
At SLAC, scientists utilize the SPEAR synchrotron light source facility (being 

SLAC’s expertise in the acceleration of electrons, in theoretical physics, and in 

rebuilt in 2003 to become “SPEAR3”) to probe the structure of matter at the atomic and 
molecular scale. The SPEAR facility is an electron storage ring that makes use of the 
intense, highly polarized x-rays emitted when electrons are forced to travel in a circular 
path.  Such x-rays are highly prized by researchers in biology, chemistry, environmental 
and materials science, and related fields.   
 

Although it began as a land-based, high-energy physics laboratory, research 

developments at SLAC and in both the high-energy physics and particle astrophysics 
fields have led to increasing collaboration among physicists, astrophysicists, and 
cosmologists to use advanced detector-based technologies in space.  SLAC is presently 
collaborating on the Gamma Ray Large Area Space Telescope (GLAST) project, and this 
year has become the home of the new “Kavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics and 

 

 

3 

Cosmology” which will foster collaboration between SLAC faculty and staff and Stanford 
faculty in the Physics and Applied Physics Departments.    

 
SLAC has a continuing and important role in the development of new 

technologies, and maintains a deep and enduring commitment to the training of 
tomorrow’s scientists and engineers.  Educational programs at SLAC include graduate 
programs such as the SLAC Summer Institute, undergraduate science laboratory 
internships, a high school teacher curriculum development assistance program, an active 
tour program, a Visitor’s Center, and a web-based “Virtual Visitor’s Center.”4  
 
 
 History of SLAC Archives and History Office 
 

 
The SLAC Archives and History Office began its life in February 1986 as the 

 
 

“SLAC History Project.”  Bill Kirk, Assistant to the Director, and Louise Addis, 
Associate Head Librarian, began the project with a records survey in administrative 
groups throughout the lab. Identification of important records was followed by creation of 
an inventory database (SLACHIST) for some 500 separate records collections, and by the 
inauguration of a physical archive of important records no longer needed for current 
business. The records survey was followed up with an oral history program to gather 
information not fully documented in the available records.5  A long-time SLAC 
employee, Marie LaBelle, with deep contacts in the SLAC community and wide 
knowledge of past projects at the site, was convinced to join the Project as Acting 
Archivist.6 

 
Impetus for the SLAC project can be traced to several converging sources.  The 
1980’s were marked by high interest in the history of particle physics both generally in 
the United States, and more locally at Stanford University. Early in the decade, the 
American Institute of Physics (AIP), working on contract with the US Department of 
Energy (DOE), completed a study of the records management and archives programs at 
several DOE contract laboratories. A final report and several guides for the selection and 
preservation of permanent records at physics laboratories resulted from this study.7  
Following the completion of their DOE project, AIP then initiated a much larger research 
project, called the “Study of Multi-Institutional Collaborations.” To assist in organizing 
the new project it tapped – among others – Stanford Curator of University Archives 
Roxanne Nilan, known to the American Institute of Physics for her interest in the history 
of science and for her work on the AIP’s Committee for the History of Physics.8 

 
Joan Warnow of the AIP had been actively encouraging Bill Kirk and Louise 

Addis, as well as two successive SLAC Directors – W. K. H. Panofsky (1962-1984) and 
Burton Richter (1984-1999) – to take steps to preserve SLAC’s history.  Warnow also 
began encouraging Nilan to take an active interest in the history of SLAC, and to do what 
she could to support Kirk and Addis in their efforts.  Locally at SLAC, awareness was 
growing among senior management that the laboratory was beginning an important 
transition period as the founding generation began to reach retirement age. Further 

 

 

4 

motivation for the SLAC History Project was provided in 1982, when Peter Galison, 
Stanford University professor of philosophy and of physics, began conducting research on 
problems in the history of physics at Stanford, including the history of physics at SLAC.9   
 

SLAC’s History Project officially became the “SLAC Archives and History 
Office” (AHO) in Fall 1989, when Roxanne Nilan joined SLAC for a year’s sabbatical to 
establish the new office to “evaluate, gather and make available” SLAC historical 
materials.10 Nilan also continued to work as SLAC’s and Stanford’s representative on the 
AIP multi-institutional collaboration study.  She was succeeded as head of the Archives 
and History Office by Robin Chandler, who served as SLAC Archivist from 1990 to 
1995.11  Throughout this period, Nilan, Chandler, Addis and Kirk made significant 
contributions to the American Institute of Physics’ first, high-energy physics phase of 
their multi-institutional collaborations research by conducting oral histories, collecting 
data for a sociological census study, and supporting Peter Galison’s related research on 
the history of the discovery of the J/Psi particle at SLAC in 1974.12 During this period a 
number of publications – including a volume entitled Big Science – focused on the 
evolution of SLAC over time.13  
 

The period 1993 to 1995 saw some growth in the SLAC Archives program, 
although staff support fluctuated.  The program began a second growth spurt in mid 1996, 
when I was hired as permanent full-time archivist and, later that same year, when I hired a 
permanent halftime archives assistant.  Work on a dedicated 2400-cubic-foot capacity 
state-of-the-art archival storage area was completed in 1996, and an Archives Program 
Review Committee comprised of internal and external stakeholders was established in 
1999 to advise SLAC management on the goals, policies, and activities of the Archives 
program.14  In 2000, a processing grant was awarded by the American Institute of Physics 
to support the arrangement of the papers of Burton Richter, SLAC Director and Nobel 
Laureate. By the end of calendar year 2002, the Archives and History Office had collected 
and at least partially processed over 1600 cubic feet of SLAC historical records, and had 
accumulated a processing backlog of roughly equivalent proportions.        
 
Rules We Live By 
 
 
agency’s records regulations. Originally a contractor for the US Atomic Energy 
Commission (AEC), SLAC now contracts with an AEC successor agency, the US 
Department of Energy (DOE).  DOE is, in turn, bound by the regulations of the US 
National Archives and Records Administration (NARA).  Under the Federal Records Act, 
44 United States Code (chapters 21, 29 and 33), it is the authority and responsibility of 
the Archivist of the United States to determine the retention and disposition of Federal 
Records.15 This determination is made in consultation with the creating Federal agency 
and its contractors, and is documented with mutually approved instruments called 
“records retention schedules.”   
 

As a United States government contractor, SLAC is subject to its governing 

 

 

5 

After a multi-year period of study and negotiation, a work group composed of 
 
NARA appraisal archivists, DOE and DOE-contract-laboratory records managers and 
archivists produced a records retention schedule for the research and development records 
of the Department. DOE Schedule N1-434-96-9, United States Department Of Energy 
Research And Development Records Retention Schedule, was approved by DOE and 
NARA for implementation in 1998.  This schedule, heavily influenced by the findings of 
the just-completed AIP Study of Multi-Institutional Collaborations, bases appraisal and 
disposition of research records on the importance of the projects or experiments which 
created them.16    
 

Experiments or projects are divided by the schedule into three levels.  Level I 
experiments are those which received national or international awards of distinction; 
involve the active participation of nationally or internationally prominent investigators; or 
conduct research which results in a significant improvement in public health, safety, or 
other vital national interests.  The significant records of Level I experiments are 
scheduled for permanent retention.  Level II experiments involve research that leads to 
the development of a "first of its kind" process or product; improve an existing process, 
product, or application, or have implications for future research.  Significant records of 
Level II experiments are scheduled to be retained for 25 years.  Level III experiments are 
those which do not fall into Level I or Level II; the records of these experiments or 
projects are scheduled for ten-years’ retention. 
 
 
the leadership of the experiment or project, and the records of the administrators who 
oversee the facility where the project or experiment was housed. 
  
How We Operate  
  

Significant records of a project or experiment are those created and maintained by 

 

Records management and archives at SLAC, although separately administered, are 

closely coordinated operations. SLAC’s Records Management Office is located in the 
Business Services Division, where the largest volume of temporary-retention, short-term-
value records is created. The Archives and History Office is located in the Research 
Division of SLAC, where most of the long-term retention, continuing-value records of the 
organization are created and used.   
 

All operating units at SLAC are requested to designate a “Records Liaison” for 
their unit: this individual is the major point of contact for Records Management and the 
Archives and History Office, and receives periodic training from the laboratory Records 
Manager and Archivist on records policies and procedures.  Day-to-day guidance for the 
handling of archival records is available by personal consultation and from the Archives 
and History Office website,17 which features a separate section for Records Liaisons with 
instructions for records storage and transfer, links to records disposition schedules, and 
definitions of records and archives-specific terms.   
 

 

 

6 

Once records have been transferred to the Archives and History Office, they are 

 
processed according to a “triage” approach.  Basic processing is accomplished as quickly 
as possible on all receipts, and a skeletal database record is created for each accession.  
As accessioned records are consulted in response to reference queries, they are processed 
further, and their electronic guides are improved and expanded.  This second-level 
processing is sometimes followed – when resources permit and the importance of the 
records warrants – by the more traditional folder-level archival processing and collection 
guide preparation.   
 
 
drawings, are handled individually, and are indexed in a separate database 
(PHOTOINDEX).  Since 1999 this database has been web-accessible18, and in 2002 
thumbnail images were added to the database records for a subset of the “most-requested” 
images.     
 

Images transferred to the Archives and History Office, including photographs and 

Reference requests come to the Archives and History Office via personal visits, 

telephone calls, correspondence, and email.   
 

The Archives and History Office web site, created in 1997, consists of a suite of 

pages grouped by the topics resources, policies and procedures, and historical information 
(Figure 1). The “Resources” portion of the web site allows access to our PHOTOINDEX 
database, and to a database glossary of SLAC-related vocabulary and acronyms we 
maintain called “SLACSpeak.” The “Policies and Procedures” pages provide guidance to 
SLAC records liaisons, and to researchers wishing to use our collections. The “Historical 
Information” portion of our site provides highlights and milestones of SLAC history, 
information about the Nobel Prizes won for research completed at SLAC, and responses 
to a series of SLAC history-related “frequently asked questions.”   

 
 On a monthly basis, the Archives and History Office now averages 9 personal-

contact reference requests, and 26,000 web site hits – 90 to 95% of which visit a 
particular feature of our site described below.  Personal contact reference requests have 
dropped significantly since the time that thumbnails of the most requested photos have 
been made web-accessible.        
 
Challenges and Opportunities  
 

Challenges facing the SLAC Archives and History Office are both physical and 
intellectual.  “Getting the goods,” that is, getting materials deposited in the archives, fits 
both categories.   Our large community of international users is a fluid population with 
varying sources of support, affiliations, and connections to SLAC.  As such, they pose a 
unique challenge for the archival program. Many of them create records that belong to 
them personally or to their home institutions, but some of them create records that are 
appropriate for inclusion in the archives at SLAC. In sorting out what belongs where, we 
emphasize the importance of preserving significant records in the appropriate repository – 
whether at SLAC or at another institution.  We work with records liaisons, individual 

 

7 

researchers, collaboration committees, administrative associates, and sometimes the Site 
Engineering and Maintenance Department, to locate records; identify, appraise and 
collect abandoned records; and explain to all relevant parties what records should be 
retained and when they should be retired.  
 

Another physical challenge is the size and nature of our processing backlog.  

Although the laboratory has been around for 40 years, the Archives and History Office 
has been in operation less than half that time, and has some serious catching up to do.  
Some of the backlog materials have been at least viewed by current staff, but many of 
them are and will remain “mystery boxes” until time and resources can be found to 
complete the most basic level of processing on them. A special FY 2003 backlog 
processing project, funded by the SLAC Research Division, will assist us in solving some 
of the mysteries. 
 
One of the biggest physical challenges facing our operation is the lack of storage 
 
space on site at SLAC.   We have nearly reached capacity for our archival storage area, 
and in the past year have had to move all remotely stored backlog materials to an offsite 
location as the need for laboratory, shop and office space on site has grown.   
 

The most significant intellectual challenge we face is the one posed by electronic 

 
records.  SLAC has been at the leading edge of some developments in computing in 
physics, and has been an early adopter in others.  We have a large backlog of 
experimental data tapes, as well as volumes of new materials that have been born digital.  
Like other archives around the world, we are struggling to find the most appropriate 
methods to identify electronic records of continuing value and to preserve them so that 
they are useful – and useable – in the long term.  While the computer scientists working 
with the BaBar experiment wrestle with what is arguably the largest database in the world 
(as of Thu Apr 3 00:01:10 2003, over 751.5 TB had been stored in 580,850 files), the 
archives must plan to deal with an equally intimidating constellation of BaBar 
collaboration electronic technical notes, newsletters, email messages, design drawings, 
and specifications.  

A small pilot project undertaken in the electronic records area has been the 

documentation of SLAC’s early web site: the first one in the United States.  Working 
with the SLAC “Web Wizards” who developed and maintained the site, and with special 
support from the Research Division, the Archives and History Office has been able to 
document the development of the first pages and the first site at SLAC. We have 
collected both paper and electronic records of the site, and were able to mount an online 
exhibition on our early web in time for its 10th anniversary on 13 December 2001.19   
These particular pages – this online exhibition – are the features of our web site that 
receive 90-95% of the monthly traffic (Figure 2).  

 

 

 

8 

Conclusions 

Ongoing experiments at SLAC present the Archives and History Office with an 

opportunity to develop a plan for electronic archiving that collects records as they are 
created, but they also present a challenge, given that there are currently no storage media 
standards nor any well-developed tools for electronic archiving.  While keeping a keen 
eye on electronic records archiving developments abroad and in the US, we are beginning 
work on developing a protocol to archive the BaBar experiment’s electronic records by 
developing a digital equivalent of collecting and accessioning boxes of documents as they 
are created.     

Tightening government budgets for scientific research impact all levels of 
laboratory operations, including archival efforts.  In the US there have been encouraging 
signs that support for high-energy physics research is on the upswing, but those signs 
have not yet translated into improved budget totals.  For this reason, flexibility in meeting 
the needs of the SLAC community, and in meeting the requirements of our government 
oversight agencies, will continue to be an important job requirement in the Archives and 
History Office. 

However, despite recent funding challenges, the level of resources provided by 

SLAC to the archival efforts is at an all-time high, and over the past few years the 
Archives and History Office has matured into a program that is serving the needs of the 
SLAC community as well as preserving the history of the important scientific work 
performed at SLAC. 

 

 

______________________________________________ 

 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
I wish to thank Peter Harper, National Cataloging Unit for the Archives of Contemporary 
Science (UK) for the invitation to present this talk to the CASE Conference.  Thanks are 
also extended to Louise Addis, Joe Anderson , Robin Chandler, Anita Hollier, Pat Kreitz, 
Roxanne Nilan, Laura O’Hara, James Reed, and SLAC’s Library and its Communications 
Group for their review of and comments on the work in progress.  
 
This work was supported by the US Department of Energy Contract No. DE-AC03-
76F00515. 
 

__________________________________________ 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

9 

Figure 1: SLAC Archives and History Office web site home page 
(http://www.slac.stanford.edu/history) 
 

 

 

10 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Home page of the SLAC Archives and History Office  
online exhibit on the early web at SLAC  
(http://www.slac.stanford.edu/history/earlyweb/)

 

 

11 

REFERENCES and BIBLIOGRAPHY: 

 
 
Addis, Louise and William Kirk. “The SLAC History Program.” AIP Center for the 
History of Physics Newsletter. Volume XIX, No. 2, December 1987. 
 
AIP Study of multi-institutional collaborations: phase 1: high-energy physics.  
Edited by Joan Warnow-Blewett, Spencer R. Weart, Lynn Maloney, Roxanne Nilan, 
Bridget Sisk, Joel Genuth, Peter Galison, John Krige, and Frederik Nebeker. American 
Institute of Physics, Center for History of Physics: New York, 1992. 
 
The Birth of particle physics: Lectures and round table discussions. Edited by Laurie M. 
Brown, Lillian Hoddeson. (International Symposium on the History of Particle Physics, 
Batavia, Ill., May 28-31, 1980). New York: Cambridge University Press, 1983. 
 
Chandler, Robin.” Future of the Archival Program at SLAC.” [Unpublished report] 
March 1995.   
 
Chandler, Robin. “SLAC and The History of The J/psi Discovery.” SLAC, The 
Interaction Point, April 1991. 
 
Galison, Peter and Bruce Hevly (editors). BIG SCIENCE: the growth of large - scale 
research..  Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1992 
 
Guidelines for Records Appraisal at Major Research Facilities: Selection of Permanent 
Records of DOE Laboratory Management and Policy and Physics Research. Joan 
Warnow and the AIP Advisory Committee on the Documentation of Postwar Science. 
New York: AIP, 1982, revised 1984 
 
Neal, R.B., General Editor. The Stanford Two-Mile Accelerator. New York: W. A. 
Benjamin, 1968.  
 
Nilan, Roxanne. “Listening to Physics:  The use of oral history in documenting modern 
science.” Stanford Historical Society, Sandstone & Tile, Summer 1990, p. 9-12. 
 
Nilan, Roxanne. “A “Wonderland Chess Game” or Dante’s Inferno? Coming to grips 
with the documentation of modern science and technology at Stanford University.” 
(Society of American Archivists Annual Meeting, October, 1983). [Unpublished paper.] 
 
Panofsky, W. K. H. “Big Physics and Small Physics at Stanford.” Stanford Historical 
Society, Sandstone & Tile, , Summer 1990. 
 
Pions to quarks: Particle physics in the 1950s: Based on a Fermilab symposium.  
Edited by Laurie M. Brown, Max Dresden, Lillian Hoddeson, May West. (International 

 

 

12 

Symposium on Particle Physics in the 1950s, Batavia, Ill., May 1-4, 1985). New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1989. 
 
The Rise of the standard model: Particle physics in the 1960s and 1970s: Proceedings.  
Edited by Lillian Hoddeson, Laurie Brown, Michael Riordan, and Max Dresden. 
(International Symposium on the History of Particle Physics: The Rise of the Standard 
Model, 3rd, Stanford, Calif., 24-27 Jun 1992). New York: Cambridge University Press, 
1997. 
 
United States Department Of Energy. United States Department Of Energy Research And 
Development Records Retention Schedule (N1-434-96-9) 1998. (http://www-
it.hr.doe.gov/records/doe_rd2.htm, 21 March 2003) 
 
United States National Archives and Records Administration (NARA).  NARA Basic 
Laws & Authorities. General Counsel and Policy and Communications Staff, National 
Archives and Records Administration. 2000 Edition. 
(http://www.archives.gov/about_us/basic_laws_and_authorities/basic_laws_and_authoriti
es.html, 21 March 2003) 
 
Warnow, Joan et al. A Study of Preservation of Documents at Department of Energy 
Laboratories. New York: American Institute of Physics, 1982. 
 
Wolff, Jane. Files Maintenance and Records Disposition: A Handbook for Secretaries at 
Department of Energy Contract Laboratories. (DOE Report No. C00-5075.A000-16) New 
York: American Institute of Physics, 1982, Revised 1985. 
 
 
NOTES: 
                                                 
1 Neal (1968). 
2 http://www.slac.stanford.edu/slac/media-info/glance.html (3 April 2003). 
3 1976: Burton Richter (shared with Sam C.C. Ting) for the discovery of the J/Psi particle. 1990:  Jerome 
Friedman, Henry Kendall and Richard Taylor "for their pioneering work in the discovery of a heavy 
elementary particle of a new kind." 1995: Martin Perl (shared with Frederick Reines) for discovery of the 
Tau Lepton. 
4 Material in this section, as well as additional information on research and educational programs, is 
available from http://www.slac.stanford.edu/welcome/aboutslac.html (20 March 2003). 
5 Addis and Kirk (1987) and “Historical Chronology” section of Chandler (1995).  Date and volume data 
are from SPIRES database SLACHIST (21 March 2003).  
6 Per email communication, L. Addis to J. Deken, 4 April 2003.  
7 Guidelines for Records Appraisal... (1982); Warnow, et al. (1982); Wolff (1982).  
8 Nilan was co-founder, along with Henry Lowood, of the Stanford University Libraries’ “Stanford and the 
Silicon Valley Project,” documenting the rise of microelectronics and personal computing in Northern 
California as well as the evolution of academic science and technology on the campus. 
9 Meanwhile, Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab) in Illinois was sponsoring a series of 
international symposia on the history of particle physics. The first two, The Birth of Particle Physics (1980) 
and Pions to Quarks (1985), had been held at Fermilab; the third was co-sponsored by SLAC and Fermilab, 
and held at SLAC on June 24-27, 1992.  Participants in the third symposium, The Rise of the Standard 
Model: Particle physics in the 1960’s and 1970’s, included five SLAC staff members. 

 

 

13 

                                                                                                                                                 
10 R. Nilan, undated essay, 02-026, box 1; Chandler (1995); Stanford Historical Society Sandstone & Tile, 
Summer 1990 p. 12.   
11 Roxanne Nilan was with the AHO from 1989–1991 (full-time 1989-1990). Robin Chandler was on the 
AHO staff from 1990-1995 (full-time, 1990-1993). 
12 Chandler (1995) and (1991).   
13 Galison and Hevly (1992) 
14 The program review committee meets biennially, and its reports are available online at 
http://www.slac.stanford.edu/history/progrev/charge.html.  
15 NARA (2000) 
16 See “Review Philosophy and Guidelines” section of N1-434-96-9. 
17 http://www.slac.stanford.edu/history/  
18 http://www.slac.stanford.edu/history/photos.shtml  
19 SLAC Special Collection., World Wide Web 00-072.  Exhibit is online at: 
http://www.slac.stanford.edu/history/earlyweb/index.shtml  

