Dispersion Relations for Thermally Excited Waves in Plasma Crystals 
 
K. Qiao and T. W. Hyde 
Center for Astrophysics, Space Physics and Engineering Research 
Baylor University 
P.O.Box 97310, Waco, TX. 76798-7310, USA 
 
Short title: Dispersion Relations for Thermally Excited Waves in Plasma Crystals 
 
Classification numbers: 
52.27.Lw  Dusty or Complex plasmas; Plasma crystals 
25.52.2b   Complex (dusty) plasma 
 
Abstract 
 
Thermally  excited  waves  in  a  Plasma  crystal  were  numerically  simulated  using  a 
Box_Tree  code.  The  code  is  a  Barnes_Hut  tree  code  proven  effective  in  modeling 
systems composed of large numbers of particles. Interaction between individual particles 
was  assumed  to  conform  to  a  Yukawa  potential.  Particle  charge,  mass,  density,  Debye 
length  and  output  data  intervals  are  all  adjustable  parameters  in  the  code.  Employing  a 
Fourier  transform  on  the  output  data,  dispersion  relations  for  both  longitudinal  and 
transverse  wave  modes  were  determined.  These  were  compared  with  the  dispersion 
relations  obtained  from  experiment  as  well  as  a  theory  based  on  a  harmonic 
approximation to the potential. They were found to agree over a range of 0.9<κ<5, where 
κ is the shielding parameter, defined by the ratio between interparticle distance a and dust 
Debye length λD. This is an improvement over experimental data as current experiments 
can only verify the theory up to κ = 1.5.  
 
1. Introduction 
 
      There has been increasing interest in the field of Complex plasmas for the past two 
decades, especially after Coulomb crystals were first experimentally observed at various 
labs [1-3]. Recently, the study of waves in Plasma crystals has become one of the more 
active  research  fields,  since  as  in  condensed  matter  systems,  wave  propagation  is  a 
research topic with both theoretical and practical value. 
      Experimental research has been conducted [4-8] on both longitudinal and transverse 
waves  in  2D  Coulomb  crystals.  In  these  experiments,  a  2D  hexagonal  lattice  of  dust 
particles was established within the sheath region of the lower electrode in a rf discharge 
plasma.  Dust  particles  introduced  into  the  plasma  become  charged  and  are  subject  to 
mutual  Coulomb  interactions.  The  particles  interact  with  each  other  through  a  Yukawa 
potential,  V(r)  =  (Q/r)exp(-r/λD),  where  λD  is  the  Debye  length,  which  helps  determine 
the manner in which the charge will be shielded by the plasma. The particles are levitated 
by an electric field in the sheath region and make a 2D Coulomb crystal. The Coulomb 
crystal is primarily characterized by two parameters, the shielding parameter κ=a/λD and 
the  coulomb  coupling  parameter  Γ=Q2/4πε0akBT,  where  a  is  the  mean  interparticle 
spacing and T is the kinetic temperature of the particles. 

     Several  laboratory  experiments  have  determined  that  exciting  particles  in  a  shaped 
region  [4-7]  of  the  lattice  can  produce  both  longitudinal  and  transverse  waves.  In  these 
experiments,  particle excitation was  created using  a sinusoidally modulated laser beam. 
Under the radiation pressure created by the laser, the particles within the excitation region 
oscillate sinusoidally, and a wave propagates through the lattice. Fourier analysis of the 
subsequent  particle  motion  allows  the  dispersion  relations  to  be  determined.  More 
recently,  experiments  [8]  examining  waves  created  via  thermal  excitation  have  been 
conducted. The dispersion relations for both the longitudinal and transverse waves were 
again determined employing Fourier analysis of the spontaneous motion of the particles 
within the lattice. Comparison of the results of the two experiments show that they agree 
with one another, even though the results from thermally produced waves cover a larger 
region in k space.  
     A theoretical model has recently been given [9] to explain these experimental results. 
X. Wang et al. analytically derived the dispersion relations for both the longitudinal and 
transverse waves on a 2D hexagonal lattice assuming a harmonic approximation for the 
motion  of  the  particles  about  their  equilibrium  position  and  a  Yukawa  interparticle 
potential. Wang et al. showed that not only do the dispersion relations depend upon the 
direction  of  propagation  but  that  waves  propagating  parallel  to  the  primitive  translation 
vectors  have  different  dispersion  relations  than  those  propagating  perpendicular  to  the 
primitive translation vectors. In both cases, the dispersion relations were shown to agree 
with experiment.  
 
2. Methods 
 
     In this research, a Box_Tree code was employed to simulate the spontaneous thermal 
wave  in  a  Coulomb  crystal.  The  results  were  Fourier  analyzed  to  obtain  the  dispersion 
relations  and  then  compared  with  both  the  theoretical  results  discussed  above  and 
experimental data. 
      The Box_Tree code is a Barnes-Hut tree code first written by Derek Richardson [10] 
for  planetary  ring  and  disk  studies.  It  was  later  modified  by  Lorin  Matthews  [11]  to 
include electrostatic interactions and then by John Vasut [12] to simulate the formation of 
plasma  crystals.  Box_Tree  is  proving  to  be  an  effective  tool  for  modeling  real  time 
systems,  particularly  those  composed  of  large  numbers  of  particles  with  specific 
interparticle interactions.  
     The Box_Tree code models a dusty plasma system by first dividing it into self-similar 
patches,  where  the  box  size  is  much  greater  than  the  radial  mean  excursions  of  the 
constituent dust grains  and  the  boundary  conditions  are  met  using  twenty-six  ghost  boxes. A 
tree code is incorporated into the routine to allow it to deal with interactions between the 
particles. Interparticle interactions are calculated by examining the multipole expansions 
of collections of particles, so the code scales as N•logN instead of N2. Data files showing 
each particle’s position and velocity are output for analysis once a certain user specified 
time  interval  is  reached.  Particle  charge,  mass,  density,  average  initial  velocity,  Debye 
length and output data intervals are all adjustable parameters within the code. 
     All  interparticle  interactions  include  both  gravitational  and  electrostatic  forces.  The 
interparticle  electrostatic  force  is  assumed  to  be  a  3D  screened  Coulomb  repulsion  or 
Yukawa potential. The simulation box is a 3D box and all calculations are handled in a 

3D  manner.  However,  the  initial  positions  of  the  particles  are  constrained  to  lie  in  a 
horizontal plane (as is often the case in an experimental setting) and their initial velocities 
are specified to contain only XY components. The gravitational force from the earth and 
the  electrostatic  force  produced  by  the  (lower)  powered  electrode  are  not  assumed  to 
balance  one  another  and  are  neglected.  Therefore,  the  particles  are  restricted  to  a  2D 
plane  (within  the  3D  box)  throughout  the  simulation  since  they  are  not  acted  upon  by 
forces (or velocities) in the Z direction. 

Fig.  1:  Dispersion  relations  from  the  simulation  of  (a)  longitudinal  and  (b) 
transverse waves with an arbitrary propagation direction in a Coulomb crystal 
with κ = 1.4 (λD = 570 µm).  

 
      Initial  conditions  include  a  random  distribution  of  679  particles  in  a  20×20×20mm3 
box. The neutral gas drag is included with a specified Epstein drag coefficient of γ =1.22. 
After about 20 seconds, the state of the system was determined to be in crystalline form 
(solid)  using  the  pair  correlation  function.  The  pair  correlation  function  was  employed 
(along  with  ordering  and  Voronoi  diagrams)  instead  of  the  usual  phase  space  diagrams 
often seen in MD simulations since the kinetic energy (temperature) of the particles will 
continue to decrease throughout the simulation due to gas drag. This manifests itself in a 
cooling of the system making the usual phase space diagrams difficult to use due to their 
time  dependence  (Ref.  12).  In  all  of  the  simulations,  the  diameter  of  the  embedded 
particles is 6.5 µm, the density is 1.51 g/cm3, the charge is 14,500 e and the interparticle 
distance as determined from the pair correlation function is around 825 µm.  
     The number of particles (or the box size) will limit the resolution of any subsequent 
graphs but the minimum wavelength is only determined by the width of the bins chosen 
to  analyze  the  data.  For  best  results,  the  binwidth  must  be  comparable  to  the  minimum 
interparticle spacing along the specified propagation direction. Waves with wavelengths 
shorter than the minimum interparticle spacing are not detectable.  

Fig.  2:  Comparison  of  dispersion  relations  as  obtained  from  simulation  and  Wang’s 
theory.  Dots  represent  data  obtained  from  simulation.  Solid  lines  are  dispersion 
relations from Wang’s theory. In all cases, κ = 1.4 (λD = 570 µm). 

 
     The possibility of temperature fluctuations of the system (temperature control / system 
thermostat) is carefully monitored and has been shown to be negligible for all conditions 
examined by this simulation. (See [12] for complete details of this method.) Briefly, the 
initial  velocities  are  specified  with  a  user  defined  average  value  and  a  Gaussian 
distribution.  From  them,  the  system  temperature  is then  calculated and any temperature 
fluctuations  compared  to  the  dust  temperature  to  assure  they  are  negligible.  The 
dispersion relations were also examined for various temperatures to ensure that they did 
not depend on the overall system temperature.  
     Once  the  coulomb  lattice  is  established,  the  random  thermal  motion  of  the  particles 
within this lattice is tracked for 10 seconds by choosing the data output time interval to be 
0.01  second  and  collecting  1000  data  files.  Depending  on  the  equilibrium  particle 
position, the particles are divided into bins with the particle velocity averaged over each 
bin,  yielding  velocity  data,  which  is  dependent  upon  position.  Combining  data  files,  a 
velocity  matrix  depending  on  time  and  position  can  then  be  obtained  using  a  double 
Fourier  transformation  of  this  matrix  as  given  below.  This  yields  a  matrix  representing 
the particle velocity in space.  

V

k

,
ω

=

/2

TL

T

L

∫ ∫

0

0

),(
txv

exp[

−

(
kxi

−

t
ω

)]

dxdt

3. Results 
  
     Fig. 1 shows this matrix with pixel brightness corresponding to velocity value and the 
bright  areas  showing  the  dispersion  relation  of  the  (a)  longitudinal  and  (b)  transverse 

spontaneous  waves for κ = 1.4 (λD = 570 µm) and particle charge q =1.92*10-15 C. To 
obtain  the  dispersion  relation  for  a  particular  wave  mode  (longitudinal  or  transverse), 
velocity components perpendicular to the bins for longitudinal waves and parallel to the 
bins for transverse waves must be used.  

Fig. 3: Same as for Figure 2 but with κ = 0.9 (λD =0.92mm). 

 
     Fig.  1  was  obtained  for  arbitrary  propagation  direction.  To  choose  a  particular 
propagation direction, the bins should be chosen perpendicular to that specified direction. 
     The shape of the dispersion relation shown in Fig. 2 is obtained by setting a minimum 
intensity  level  on  the  data  in  a  figure  similar  to  Fig.1  but  with  specified  propagation 
directions. Superimposing the dispersion relation obtained from Wang’s theory as a solid 
line,  it  can  be  seen  that  the  raw  simulation  data  is  a  solid  fit.  As  mentioned  above,  the 
possible  wavelengths  observed  are  limited  by  the  width  of  the  bins,  which  is  in  turn 
limited by the interparticle spacing. Thus, the maximum wave number k is about 4 mm-1 
for  propagation  perpendicular  to  the  primitive  translation  vector  and  6  mm-1  for 
propagation parallel to the primitive translation vector. The finite width of the bins is also 
responsible  for  longitudinal  dispersion  relation  data  points  sometimes  falling  along  the 
transverse dispersion relation, and vice versa. As can also be seen, for example, in Fig. 3 
(b),  sometimes  the  data  points  from  simulations  of  waves  propagating  perpendicular  to 
the  primitive  translation  vector  agree  with  the  theoretical  dispersion  relation  of  waves 

propagating parallel to the primitive vector, and vice versa. This is because the Coulomb 
crystal examined is not an ideal solid lattice.  

Fig. 4: Same as for Figure 2 but with κ = 5 (λD = 0.17mm). 
 

      The  simulation  was  run  for  different  average  initial  velocities  ranging  from  0  to 
1.0×10-3 m/s. The dispersion relations were seen to be almost identical, showing them to 
be temperature independent. 
     The  simulation  was  run  also  for  different  κ  values,  over  the  regime  0.9<κ<5.  The 
results for κ = 0.9 (λD = 0.92mm) and κ = 5 (λD = 0.17mm) are shown in Figures 3 and 4. 
The dispersion relations obtained from the raw data were again found to be in agreement 
with  the  theory  for  both  longitudinal  and  transverse  waves.  For  values  of  κ  >  5,  the 
dispersion  curve  is  too  low  and  the  shape  is  no  longer  clear  enough  to  obtain 
distinguishable data. 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
      As  can  be  seen,  Box_Tree  produces  dispersion  relations,  which  are  in  excellent 
agreement  with  current  theory  and  can  be  run  over  a  larger  range  of  κ  than  is 
experimentally possible. This allows Box_Tree to be used as an effective numerical tool 
for simulation of Yukawa systems. System parameters are much easier to adjust than in 
an experimental setting and can cover regimes (such as for high frequencies) which are 
difficult (if not impossible) to reach physically.  

     Finally,  the  code  is  not  predicated  on  the  assumptions  of  a  harmonic  approximation 
and/or  lattice  structure.  The  only  assumptions  required  by  the  program  are  a  Yukawa 
potential and the specification of  constant parameters  (i.e., charge, mass,  Debye length, 
etc)  by  the  user.  This  should  allow  Box_Tree  to  become  a  effective  tool  in  simulating 
nonlinear effects or complex plasma liquids. 
 
References: 
 
[1] J. H. Chu and I. Lin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 4009 (1994).  
[2] Y.Hayashi and K. Tachibana, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 33, L804 (1994).  
[3] H. Thomas and G.E. Morfill (1994) Phys. Rev. Letters, 73, 652-655.  
[4] A. Homann et al. (1997) Phys. Rev. E 56, 7138.  
[5] A. Homann et al. (1998) Physics Letters A 242, 173.  
[6] S. Nunomura et al. (2000) Phys. Rev. Letters 84, 5141.  
[7] S. Nunomura et al. (2002) Phys. Rev. E  65, 66402.  
[8] S. Nunomura et al. (2002) Phys. Rev. Letters 89, 35001.  
[9] Xiaogang Wang et al. (2001) Phys. Rev. Letters 86, 2569.  
[10] D. Richardson (1994), Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc, 269, 493-511.  
[11] L. Matthews (1998) Ph.D. dissertation, Baylor University.  
[12] J. Vasut and T.W. Hyde, IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science 29, 231-237, 2001. 

