E-print physics/0308010
Preprint Budker INP 2003-46
Submitted to IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science

 First results from cryogenic avalanche detectors

based on gas electron multipliers

A. Buzulutskov * , A. Bondar, L. Shekhtman, R. Snopkov, Y. Tikhonov

Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia

Abstract

We  study  the  performance  of  gaseous  and  two-phase  (liquid-gas)  cryogenic  detectors  of  ionizing
radiation, based on gas electron multipliers (GEMs). For the first time, high gas gains, exceeding 104,
were obtained in pure He, Ar and Kr at low temperatures and the stable avalanche mode of operation
was observed in the two-phase cryogenic detector in Kr. The electron avalanching at low temperatures,
in the range of 120-300 K, is systematically studied.

Keywords: Gas Electron Multipliers; noble gases; low temperatures; two-phase detectors.
PACs: 29.40.Cs, 29.90.+r.

1.  Introduction

Cryogenic  detectors  of  ionizing  radiation
based  on  noble  gases  are  widely  used  in  high-
energy  physics,  in  particular  in  noble  liquid
calorimetry.  Practically  all  such  detectors  are
operated  in  an  ionization  mode,  i.e.  without
internal  amplification.  On  the  other  hand,  for
scores  of  experiments  with  low  background
physics  it  would  be  very  attractive  to  have
electron  avalanching  at 
temperatures.
However, the attempts to obtain high and stable
avalanche  amplification  at  low  temperatures
had a limited success: either low gains, in noble

low 

                                                     

*  Corresponding author. Email: buzulu@inp.nsk.su

liquids  [1-3],  or  unstable  operation,  in  two-
phase  cryogenic  detectors  [4,5]  were  observed
using wire or needle proportional counters.

In  the  present  paper  we  show  that  the
low
problem  of  electron  avalanching  at 
temperatures,  and  consequently  that  of  the
development  of  cryogenic  avalanche  detectors,
might  be  solved  using  gas  electron  multipliers
(GEMs). The GEM [6] is a thin (50 m m thick)
kapton  foil  metal  clad  from  both  sides  and
perforated  by  a  dense  matrix  of  micro-holes,
with a typical hole diameter of 70 m m and inter-
hole  distance  of  140  m m,  inside  which  the  gas
amplification  occurs.  It  has  been  shown  [7,8]
that  the  multi-GEM  structures  provide  high

1

two-phase 

gain  operation  in  pure  noble  gases  in  a  wide
pressure  range,  at  room  temperature.  This  is  a
remarkable  property,  which  is  unusual  for
traditional  gas  avalanche  detectors.  On  the
other hand, there is  an  attractive  idea,  relevant
to 
cryogenic  detectors  being
currently  developed  for  dark  matter  [9]  and
to  use  gas
solar  neutrino  [10]  detection, 
avalanche  devices  operated  at  cryogenic
temperatures  for  the  signal  readout.  These
provided  the  rationale  to  begin  the  present
study.

In  this  paper  we  briefly  present  first  results
on  the  GEM  operation  at  low  temperatures  in
gaseous and two-phase modes. More elaborated
presentation will be done elsewhere [11].

2. Results

The  cryogenic  avalanche  detector  comprised
a cryostat chamber cooled with liquid nitrogen,
with  a 
triple-GEM  amplification  structure
mounted  inside  (Fig.1).  The  GEM  electrodes
were  biased  through  a  high-voltage  resistive
divider,  the  bottom  of  the  chamber  acting  as  a
cathode. The detector was filled with pure He,
Ar or Kr and could operate in either gaseous or
two-phase  (liquid-gas)  mode.  In  the  latter,  the
ionization produced in the liquid was extracted
into the gas phase by an electric field, where it
was  detected  with  the  help  of  the  multi-GEM
multiplier  operated  in  saturated  vapor.  The
detector  was  irradiated  with  X-rays,  at  typical
fluxes varying from 102 to 105 s-1mm-2, or with
b -particles through a thin window at the bottom
of  the  chamber.  The  liquid  layer  thickness  in
the  two-phase  mode  was  3  mm,  providing  full
absorption  of  the  radiation.  More  detailed
description  of  the  experimental  setup  and
procedures will be presented elsewhere [11].

Fig.2  shows  the  temperature  dependence  of
the  triple-GEM  gain  (gas  amplification  factor)
in He, Ar and Kr at a constant operation voltage
and  constant  gas  density,  corresponding  to  a

pressure at room temperature of 3, 1 and 1 atm,
respectively. The latter conditions allow one to
observe  fine  temperature  effects  in  avalanche
mechanism, since in first approximation the gas
gain depends only on the electric field and the
gas  density.  The  errors  shown  in  this  and
following figures are systematic.

One can see that in He the gain is practically
independent of the temperature, in the range of
120-300 K. This presumably rules out the effect
of  organic  impurities  (which  might  exist  for
example due to outgassing of kapton and teflon
insulation) on the avalanche mechanism in He.
Indeed,  they  would  be  frozen  out  at  low
temperatures.  Also,  this  may  speak  in  support
of the hypothesis of associative ionization  (the
Hornbeck-Molnar  process 
[12])  proposed
recently  in  order  to  explain  the  unexpectedly
low operation voltages and high gains observed
in dense He  [13].

In Ar and Kr the gain increased by a factor of
2-3  when  decreasing  temperature.  Obviously,
this  gain  increase  cannot  be  explained  in  the
frame  of 
ionization
mechanism and is presumably due to the atomic
collision-induced  ionization,  in  particular  the
associative ionization.

the  electron 

impact 

Fig.3  shows  gain-voltage  characteristics  of
the triple-GEM at low temperatures in gaseous
He,  Ar  and  Kr.  One  can  see  that  rather  high
gains  are  reached  in  all  the  gases  studied.  In
particular,  the  maximum  gain  exceeds  105  and
few  tens  of  thousands  in  He  and  Ar  and  Kr,
respectively. In addition, we do not observe any
unusual properties in the shape of anode pulses,
induced just by low temperatures.

It is known that the electron emission from a
liquid  into  the  gas  phase  has  a  threshold
behavior as a function of the electric  field  due
to a potential barrier at the liquid-gas interface
[4,5].  This  is  illustrated  in  Fig.4  showing  the
anode  current  recorded  in  the  cathode  gap,
induced  by  X-ray  absorption,  as  a  function  of
the  electric  field,  in  Kr.  In  the  gaseous  mode

2

the  current  is  independent  of  the  field.  In
contrast,  in  the  two-phase  mode  there  exist
some  critical  electric  field,  of  about  2  kV/cm:
the  electron  emission  from  the  liquid  takes
place  only  when  exceeding  this  field  value,  in
accordance  with  earlier  observations 
[5].
Therefore, during the measurements in the two-
phase  mode,  the  electric  field  in  the  cathode
gap was kept above the critical value, at about 3
kV/cm.

the 

Fig.5 

The  gain-voltage  characteristic  of  the  triple-
GEM  in  saturated  Kr  vapor  in  a  two-phase
mode  is  shown  in  Fig.3.  The  maximum  gain
exceeds  104.  The  detector  could  operate  for  at
least  an  hour  in  the  two-phase  mode  without
visible degradation of the gain.
illustrates 
further 

detector
performance in a two-phase mode in Kr: anode
signals  of  the  triple-GEM  are  shown  at  a
temperature  of  119  K,  corresponding  to  a
saturated  vapor  pressure  of  0.94  atm.  The
signals are induced by b
 -particles of 90Sr. From
this  figure  one  can  roughly  estimate 
the
collection efficiency of electrons created in the
liquid, taking into account the measured triple-
GEM  gain,  amplifier  calibration,  average
energy deposited in the liquid by b -particle and
energy needed for ion pair creation in liquid Kr.
The collection efficiency turns out to be of the
is  compatible  with
order  of  20%,  which 
estimations  accounting  for  the  electron  life-
time  in  the  liquid  (at  given  Kr  purity)  and
electron  emission  probability  at  the  liquid-gas
interface (at given electric field).

3. Conclusion

To 

studied 

summarize,  we  have 

the
performance  of 
the  cryogenic  avalanche
detector  of  ionizing  radiation  based  on  triple-
GEM  multiplier  and  operated  in  gaseous  and
two-phase (liquid-gas) mode in pure He, Ar and
Kr. For the first time, high gas gains, exceeding
104, were obtained at low temperatures in noble

the  stable  avalanche  mode  of
gases  and 
two-phase
in 
the 
operation  was  observed 
in  Kr.  The  electron
cryogenic  detector 
in  He,  or
avalanching  has  either  weak, 
moderate, 
temperature
and  Kr, 
in  Ar 
dependence in the range of 120-300 K. Another
conclusion  is  that  the  GEM  structures  can
successfully operate at low temperatures, down
to 120 K. Further studies  of  this  technique  are
on the way.

References

[1]  S.  E.  Derenzo,  T.  S.  Mast,  H.  Zaklad,  and  R.  A.
Muller, “Electron avalanches in liquid xenon,” Phys.
Rev. A, vol. 9, pp. 2582-2591, 1974.

[2]  A.  P.  L.  Policarpo,    V.  Chepel,  M.  I.  Lopes,  V.
Peskov, P. Geltenbort, and R. Ferreira Marques et al.,
“Observation  of  electron  multiplication  in  liquid
xenon  with  microstrip  plate,”  Nucl.  Instr.  Meth.  A,
vol. 365, pp. 568-571, 1995.

[3]  J. G. Kim, S. M. Dardin, K. H. Jackson, R. W. Kadel,
J. A. Kadyk, V. Peskov, and W. A. Wenzel, “Studies
of electron avalanche behavior in liquid argon,” IEEE
Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 49, pp. 1851-1856, 2002.
[4]  B. A. Dolgoshein, A. A. Kruglov, V. N. Lebedenko,
V.  P.  Miroshnichenko,  and  B.  U.  Rodionov,
“Electronic  technique  for  particle  detection  in  two-
phase  systems  liquid-gas,”  Physics  of  Elementary
Particles  and  Atomic  Nuclear,  vol.  4,  pp.  167-186,
1973 (in Russian).

[5]  A.  Bolozdynya,  V.  Egorov,  B.  Rodionov,  and  V.
Miroshnichenko,  “Emission  detectors,”  IEEE  Trans.
Nucl. Sci., vol. 42, pp. 565-569, 1995, and references
therein.

[6]  F. Sauli, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A, vol. 386, pp. 531-

534, 1997.

[7]  A. Buzulutskov, A. Breskin, R. Chechik, G. Garty, F.
Sauli, and L. Shekhtman, “The GEM photomultiplier
operated with noble gas mixtures,” Nucl. Instr. Meth.
A, vol. 443, pp. 164-180, 2000.

[8]  A.  Bondar,  A.  Buzulutskov,  L.  Shekhtman,  V.
Snopkov, and A. Vasiljev, “Triple GEM operation in
compressed  He  and  Kr,”  Nucl.  Instr.  Meth.  A,  vol.
493, pp. 8-15, 2002.

[9]  D.  Y.  Akimov,  “Experimental  methods  for  particle
dark matter detection,” Instr. Exp. Tech., vol. 44, pp.
575-617, 2001, and references therein.

[10] J.  Dodd,  M.  Leltchouk,  V.  Radeka,  P.  Rehak,  V.
J.  Willis, 
private
Tcherniatine, 
communication  and 
the  report  on  “The  Nevis
Laboratories  Summer  2000  Education  Workshop”,

and  W. 

3

BNL and Columbia University (Nevis  Laboratories),
2000, unpublished.

[11] A.  Bondar,  A.  Buzulutskov,  L.  Shekhtman,  R.
Snopkov,  and  Y.  Tikhonov,  “Cryogenic  avalanche
detectors  based  on  GEMs,”  in  preparation,  to  be
submitted to Nucl. Instr. Meth. A.

[12] B.  Sitar,  G.  I.  Merson,  V.  A.  Chechin,  and  Yu.  A.
Budagov, Ionization measurements, Berlin: Springer,
1993.

[13] A. Buzulutskov,  “Physics  of  multi-GEM  structures,”
Nucl. Instr. Meth. A , vol. 494, pp.148-155, 2002.

Fig.1  Schematics  of  the  GEM-based  cryogenic  avalanche
detector operated in gaseous and two-phase mode.

Fig.2  Triple-GEM  gain  as  a  function  of  temperature  at  a
constant operation voltage and constant gas density in He,
Ar and Kr. The appropriate atomic densities are indicated.

Fig.3  Triple-GEM  gain  as  a  function  of  the  voltage
applied across each GEM at low temperatures, in gaseous
He (at 123 K and 1.25 atm), Ar (at 165 K and 0.56 atm)
and Kr (at 175 K and 0.59 atm) and in saturated Kr vapor
in  two-phase  mode  (at  118  K  and  0.84  atm).  The
appropriate atomic densities of the gas phase are indicated.
 

Fig.4  Anode  current  recorded  in  the  cathode  gap  as  a
function of the electric field, in Kr, in two-phase (at 122 K
and 1.23 atm) and gaseous (at 137 K and 1.67 atm) mode.
The current is induced by X-rays.

 

 

4

 

Fig.5 Anode signals from the triple-GEM in two-phase Kr,
after  a  charge-sensitive  amplifier,  induced  by  b -particles
of  90Sr  and  obtained  at  a  triple-GEM  gain  of  900,
temperature of 119 K and pressure of 0.94 atm.
 

5

