Students’ Models of Newton’s Second Law in Mechanics and Electromagnetism 

Salomon F. Itza-Ortiz, N. Sanjay Rebello and Dean Zollman 

Kansas State University, Department of Physics, Physics Education Research Group, 

PRE-PRINT 

August 28, 2003 

Manhattan KS, 66506 

 

Abstract 

We  investigated  students’  use  of  Newton’s  second  law  in  mechanics  and  electromagnetism 

contexts by interviewing students in a two-semester calculus-based physics course.  We observed 

that  students’  responses  are  consistent  with  three  mental  models.  These  models  appeared  in 

mechanics  contexts  and  were  transferred  to  electromagnetism  contexts.    We  developed  an 

inventory to help instructors identify these models and direct students towards the correct one. 

PACS: 01.40.Fk, 01.55.+b 

I  Introduction 

Perhaps  the  most  important  topic  taught  in  classical  mechanics  is  Newton’s  laws.  

Newton’s  second  law,  “F=  ma,”  has  preoccupied  authors  for years.[1-9]    Previous  research  has 

suggested  that  students  bring  their  own  understanding  of  the  physical  world  into  the  classroom 

[10] making the teaching and learning of Newton’s laws a challenge.[11]  Research also shows 

that  acquisition  of  knowledge  does  not  happen  immediately.    One  way  the  acquisition  of 

knowledge  can  be  conceptualized  is  that  students  acquire  different  understandings  of  relevant 

concepts,  which  coexist  and  compete  with  previous  informal  understandings.[12]    It  has  been 

suggested  that  teachers  should  be  prepared  to  draw  on  their  students’  prior  understandings  and 

help them to shape it into one that reflects accepted scientific knowledge.[13]  Cognitive science 

finds  that  people  tend  to  organize  their  experiences  and  observations  into  patterns  or  mental 

model(s. [14]  Thus, by investigating what mental models students use for physics concepts and 

making  this  information  accessible  to  teachers  we  can  help  them  build  upon  their  students’ 

understanding.  

In  this  paper  we  present  part  of  our  research  on  students’  mental  models  of  Newton’s 

second  law.    We  have  probed  whether  students  apply  these  models  consistently  across  various 

contexts,  through  two  consecutive  semesters  of  physics,  addressing  concepts  in  mechanics  and 

electricity and magnetism.  This kind of research has not been done previously in electricity and 

magnetism  contexts.    We  found  students  used  three  models  for  Newton’s  second  law:  the 

Newtonian model (“f=ma”), the Aristotelian model (“f=mv”) and a hybrid model that combines 

 

 

1

the Newtonian and Aristotelian models.  In Section II we present definitions for the main terms 

we  use  in  this  work.    Section  III  describes  our  research  methodology,  Section  IV  presents  our 

results and in Section V we discus pedagogical applications and conclusions. 

II  Mental Models 

We  use  the  term  mental  model  to  refer  to  an  internal  representation,  which  acts  as  a 

structural analogue of situations or processes.  Its role is to account for the individuals’ reasoning 

when  they  try  to  understand,  explain  and  predict  physical  world  behavior.[15]    We  consider 

mental models consist of more fundamental cognitive and knowledge elements, e.g. p-prims [16, 

17]  or  conceptual  resources.[18,  19]    These  elements  are  assembled  consistently  and  are  often 

called features or aspects of the model.[20]  A few characteristics of mental models include: (1) 

they consist of propositions, images, rules of procedure and statements as to when and how they 

are to be used; (2) they may contain contradictory aspects; (3) they may be incomplete; and (4) 

aspects  of  a  mental  model  don’t  have  firm  boundaries;  therefore  similar  aspects  may  get 

confused.[21]  The mental models used by the student must be understood in terms of their own 

internal  consistencies,  not  as  “errors”  when  compared  with  an  expert’s  model.    Mental  models 

used  by  the  students  may  depend  on  the  context  of  the  problem,  e.g.  mechanics  or 

electromagnetism.    It  is  possible  for  a  learner  to  use  several  different,  yet  stable  and  coherent, 

explanatory elements when tasks are related to different contextual settings pertaining to the same 

concept.[22] 

Several studies of students’ intuitive ideas about motion and forces have been conducted. 

[23-31]  Researchers have found that students generally use two ways of thinking about Newton’s 

second  law:  “Newtonian”  and  “Aristotelian.”    Newtonian,  when  students  recognize  that  a 

constant non-zero net force on a body, causes it to increase speed and/or change its direction of 

motion, (f=ma) [23, 24] and  Aristotelian, when students conclude that every motion has a cause; 

an increase in speed is achieved by an increase in force (f=mv).[23, 24]  These common ways of 

thinking meet the definition of mental models; therefore, in this paper we will refer to them as the 

“Newtonian” mental model and the “Aristotelian” mental model.  In our research we also found 

some  of  our  students  used  aspects  from  these  two  main  models.    We  called  this  new  way  of 

thinking  a  “hybrid”  mental  model.[20,  32]    Students  who  consistently  used  any  of  these  three 

mental  models  throughout  an  interview  are  considered  to  be  in  a  “pure  mental  model  state.”  

Conversely,  students  who  used  more  than  one  mental  model  during  a  single  interview  are 

considered  to  be  in  a  “mixed  mental  model  state.”[33]    In  this  paper  we  will  also  say  that  the 

students use a pure mental model or a mixed mental model. 

III  Goals and Method 

2

 

 

 

The overarching goal of our research is to develop a multiple-choice instrument, a mental 

model inventory that allows educators and researchers to probe the mental model states of large 

numbers  of  students.    To  develop  such  an  instrument,  we  began  by  exploring  the  knowledge 

structures  that  students  use  in  several  contexts  through  in-depth  interviews.    Our  interviews 

addressed  three  main  research  questions:  (1)  are  the  students  consistent  in  their  application  of 

models?    (2)  are  students’  mental  models  context  dependent?  and  (3)  do  particular  variables 

trigger a student's choice of model?  We interviewed a cohort of 16 students in a calculus-based 

physics  class  six  times  over  the  two-semester  course  sequence.    The  class  operates  in  a  studio 

format  with  two  one-hour  lectures  and  two  two-hour  labs  integrated  with  the  recitation.    The 

students  were  volunteers  who  received  monetary  compensation.    The  entire  class  section 

consisted of 240 students; majors in different engineering areas, physics and math.  About 90% of 

the students had physics in high school and approximately 5% have taken a physics class at the 

college  level  to  prepare  for  the  calculus-based  physics  class,  which  normally  is  taken  in  the 

sophomore  or  junior year.    About  one third  of  the  students  were  women.    The  interviews  were 

tape  recorded  and  lasted  between  30  and  45  minutes.    We  proceeded  in  two  phases:  Phase  I 

occurred during the first semester when classical mechanics was covered and Phase II occurred 

during  the  second  semester  when  electricity  and  magnetism  were  covered.    In  Phase  I,  eleven 

men  and  five  women  participated  in  the  study.    The  first  interview  was  conducted  prior  to 

instruction on Newton’s laws, early in the semester.  The second interview was conducted after 

instruction on Newton’s laws and, the third interview was conducted near the end of the semester.  

The contexts used in the interviews will be discussed in the next section.  In Phase II we had ten 

male  and  six  female  participants.    Interview  4  (first  interview  in  Phase  II)  was  conducted  after 

instruction on electric fields.  Interview 5 was conducted after instruction on magnetic fields, and 

interview  6  after  instruction  on  induction.    Ten  of  the  students  --six  men  and  four  women-- 

participated in both phases, completing all six interviews.  For the purpose of this paper we limit 

our analysis to the results from these 10 students.  This sample size is considered appropriate for 

this type of research.[35] 

 

 

IV  Results and Discussion 

The protocol for Phase I interviews included two contexts: vertical and horizontal.  We 

used  the  well-known  “Force  Concept  Inventory”  (FCI)  [36,  37]  as  the  basis  for  our  research 

questions.  FCI questions 25, 26 and 27 were used for the horizontal context: a woman exerting a 

constant horizontal force on a large box. As a result, the box moves across a horizontal floor at a 

constant speed.  Question 17 was used for the vertical context: an elevator is being lifted up in an 

elevator shaft at constant speed by a steel cable.  Each student received a sheet of paper with a 

figure depicting the problem, a statement of the problem and one or two questions.  They were 

3

given the opportunity to write notes or make drawings in order to explain their answers.  Table 1 

presents the protocol question for both contexts and figs. 1(a), (b) show the figures representing 

the problem. 

The  three  variables  explored  in  these  contexts  are  the  magnitude  of  the  force,  the  mass 

and the speed of the object.  Table 2 shows the students’ models through the first semester.  An 

example of a student using the Newtonian model in the horizontal context, interview 1, is student 

S3.  Student S3 responded to question 1, “it is moving at constant speed, is not accelerating …the 

woman's force has to overcome friction for the box to start moving, but once moving the forces 

are equal.”  The same student responded to question 2 in the vertical context, part (a), “the steel 

cable  has  a  force  on  the  elevator…  and  gravity.    Because  it  is  at  rest  they  are  equal.”  part  (b) 

“there is gravity and the force by the cable... the upward force is greater because it is moving up. 

The force from the cable is larger than it was at rest…gravity is bigger than the force of the cable, 

gravity  does  not  change…the  cable  is  not  exerting  as  much  of  an  upward  force.”    In  the  last 

context  S3  is  using  the  Aristotelian  model;  the  elevator  is  moving  up  or  down,  therefore  the 

biggest force must be in that direction.  Observe that S3 responded to question 1 in the horizontal 

context by stating the condition of constant speed, while in response to question 2 in the vertical 

context  there  is  no  reference  to  this  condition.    This  student  used  the  Newtonian  model  for  the 

horizontal context, but Aristotelian for the vertical context; therefore, we say the student uses a 

mixed model state in mechanics contexts.  An example of a student who used the hybrid model is 

S7.  S7 responded to question 2 in the horizontal context, “it [the box] will go faster… it would 

increase its speed to about twice because it is twice the force… it [the speed] increases and then it 

will become steady to twice the speed [sic].”  It is clear that S7 used a combination of Newtonian 

and  Aristotelian  models  in  this  response;  that  is  the  hybrid  model.    For  the  vertical  context  S7 

used the Aristotelian model, thus S7 used a mixed model state in mechanics contexts on the first 

interview. 

The protocol for interview 2 included the same two contexts, horizontal and vertical, plus 

variants: (1) a woman pushing a box across a horizontal floor (original); (2) a woman pulling a 

box; (3) a bulldozer pushing a box; (4) a motor pulling a box –with a string; (5) a motor pulling 

up a box with a cable (originally an elevator); (6) a forklift raising a box vertically, (7) a woman 

lifting up a box; and (8) a woman standing in a balcony pulling a box with a cable.  The variables 

explored in these scenarios are the same as in interview 1.  The interview occurred a few weeks 

into the term.  By this time the students had received two lectures and performed two laboratory 

activities  on  Newton’s  laws.    Two  students  made  unexpected  changes  in  their  mental  models 

(Table 2).  One student (S10) remained in a pure Aristotelian state, while the other (S4) moved 

from a mixed model state to a pure hybrid state.  The other eight students moved to or remained 

in a pure Newtonian state. These eight students used the line of reasoning “constant speed means 

 

4

no acceleration, that is no net force; then the forces are equal.”  Students S4 and S10 did not use 

this  logic.  Therefore,  we  believe  by  failing  to  recognize  this  idea,  students  S4  and  S10  did  not 

improve like the other students.  S4 did recognize the idea of constant speed as implying equal 

forces, but when the question about “double the force” or “double the constant speed” was asked, 

S4  used  the  Aristotelian  model.    We  noticed  that  the  change  in  the  magnitude  of  the  force  and 

speed as variables induced a student to use the Aristotelian model.  This finding is in accordance 

with  other  researchers’  findings  in  other  contexts.[24]    Students  used  formulas  and  free  body 

diagrams  before  attempting  to  respond  to  the  questions.    One  of  them  pointed  out  that  “the 

formulas  give  me  a  guide  for  answering  questions.”    However,  another  student  showed  that 

having a list of formulas might not be of much help at all.  Student S10 used the formula “f= ½ m 
v2” to respond to our questions.  At the time S10 was interviewed the students had covered some 

energy topics in lecture.  S10 drew responses from a wrong formula.  We asked the students if 

they considered the horizontal context problems different from the vertical contexts.  The general 

response  was  “you  just  need  to  think  logically,  they  are  the  same,  forces  are  forces.”    We  also 

asked  if  any  particular  context  was  more  challenging  and  what  kind  of  problem  was  most 

difficult.  The general consensus was “forces in a horizontal or vertical plane are the same, the 

only thing [sic]… friction is different from gravity.”  And “…inclined planes …you have to work 

out the components.”  

For the final interview in Phase I we again used the slightly modified horizontal context -

-a block on a table pulled using a rope.  We also used a modified Atwood’s machines --pulleys 

(Fig.  2).    Research  has  shown  that  this  last  context  poses  difficulties  to  students.[28]    The 

variables explored in the interviews were again force, mass and speed.  Table 2 shows students 

who used the Newtonian model on interview 2 did not necessarily continue using this model.  For 

instance,  student  S7  switched  from  using  the  pure  Newtonian  model  in  interview  2,  to  using  a 

mixed model (hybrid and Aristotelian).  Once again the questions that caused the students to use 

the  Aristotelian  model  were  related  to  “double  the  force”  and  “double  the  speed.”    When  we 

asked  what  is  the  force  used  to  pull  the  block  at  a  constant  speed,  the  response  was  invariably 

“the force equal [sic] to friction… in opposite direction.”  The students who continued using the 

Newtonian model also used the line of reasoning “no acceleration, no net force.”  Thus, regarding 

mechanics  contexts,  the  model  used  by  the  students  depended  on  the  context  and  not  much  on 

when  (time  frame)  the  contexts  were  explored.    The  idea  of  “no  acceleration,  no  net  force,” 

brought up by students after instruction played an important role in their reasoning. 

During the spring term we conducted Phase II of our research.  The second semester of 

the course traditionally starts with electrostatic concepts and then moves to magnetism.[34]  The 

fourth  interview  (first  in  Phase  II)  in  our  research  was  conducted  after  instruction  on  electric 

fields.  Our interest was not the students’ knowledge on electric fields, but their use of Newton’s 

 

5

second law.  As the basis for the electric field context we used question 10  from the Conceptual 

Survey  in  Electricity  and  Magnetism  (CSEM)  [38]  with  slight  modifications:    A  positively 

charged  sphere  is  released  from  rest  in  a  region  with  a  uniform  electric  field  (Fig.  3).    The 

questions focused on five variables -- the magnitude of the field, the mass, the magnitude of the 

charge, its sign and the speed.  A second problem statement within this context was, A positively 

charged  sphere  moves  at  a  constant  speed  in  a  uniform  electric  field.    Table  3  shows  the 

questions  asked  in  this  context.    For  the  second  problem  we  added  one  more  question:  If  the 

speed of the sphere is twice the original, how does the E field change?  Following our protocol 

from Phase I, all students received a sheet of paper with a figure, the statement of the problem 

and  two  questions.    To  continue  exploring  whether  the  students’  models  change  with  time, 

besides context, we gave the students two problems relating to Phase I -- the horizontal context 

FCI #25 [36, 37] and a box sliding from an incline plane.  The question was, describe the force(s) 

acting  on  the  box.    We  found  that  two  months  after  the  last  interview  students  who  used  the 

Newtonian  model  continued  to  do  so.    They  still  used  the  line  “no  acceleration,  no  net  force.”  

Student S1 responded to question 1, in the case where the sphere moves at constant speed:  “My 

instincts from mechanics… say constant speed is net force equal zero… so there is a force from E 

to the right [looking at the figure on the paper] some force should be pushing to the left … I am 

not sure what force [referring to the force to the left].”  For this student the E field context was 

asked before the FCI question, so no triggering by mechanics contexts can be claimed.  Table 4 

shows the models used by students during Phase II.  Thus, though electric fields contexts are not 

frequently  related  to  the  use  of  Newton’s  laws,  students  did  use  the  Newtonian  model,  when 

appropriate, if they recalled basic principles.  A few of the students used the equation “F =qE” 

and drew arrows before responding.  All students answered that the force is proportional to the 

magnitude  of  the  charge  and  that  of  the  electric  field.    When  we  asked  question  4,  double  the 

mass  of  the  sphere,  we  did  not  give  clues  as  to  the  size  of  the  sphere.    A  few  of  the  students 

commented that in “this class” (referring to their physics lecture) “mass is negligible.”  We do not 

know if this idea came from their instructor or through solving problems.  However other students 

did consider the mass of the sphere and gave appropriate answers by using “F=qE = ma.” 

For  interview  5  we  used  a  similar  protocol  to  the  one  for  electric  fields,  but  instead  of 

electric field we used uniform magnetic fields B.  In the first problem the charged sphere was set 

at rest.  In the second problem the sphere moves at constant speed with a horizontal direction into 

an  area  with  a  magnetic  field  with  the  same  direction;  and  the  third  problem  differs  from  the 

second in that the direction of the magnetic field is  perpendicular to the velocity of the sphere.  

The  interviews  were  conducted  after  instruction  on  B  fields.    To  identify  what  model  students 

used, we took into account only the way they used forces.  When the sphere was set at rest, three 

of the students responded by considering an E field instead of a B field; that is, they explained 

 

6

that there is a force in the direction of the field, instead of no force since the sphere was set at 

rest.  Two of these students changed their answers later when we brought up the second problem 

statement; the idea that the sphere must have a speed to have force acting upon it came back to 

them.    We  noticed  that  students  again  used  formulae  before  answering  the  questions.    For 

example, student S8’s response to the question: describe the force(s) acting on the charged sphere 

(when the sphere is at rest) was “the speed is zero, and… F=qVxB… the magnetic field cross the 

speed is equal zero…so no force is acting on the charged sphere. no force is no acceleration, the 

sphere  does  not  move.”    The  line  of  reasoning  “no  force-no  acceleration-constant  speed”  is 

present.    Student  S9  also  responded  to  this  same  question  using  the  same  line  of  reasoning.  

However, when the same question was asked in the case where the magnetic field’s direction is 

perpendicular to the velocity’s direction, student S9 responded: “the sphere cross the direction of 

B  [sic]…B  in  the  y  direction  when  sphere  enters  the  field  region  the  force  is  out  of  the  page 

[gestures of using right hand rule].  The motion of the sphere is F=qVB…. As the particle enters 

it will come out… it will come out at constant speed.”  Student S9 is one of the students who has 

used  the  line  “no  force-no  acceleration-constant  speed,”  but  failed  to  use  it  correctly  in  this 

context.  Again, the context does influence the model students use (Table 4). 

In  the  final  interview  we  explored  the  context  of  induction.    We  used  two  typical 

problems.  The first one was A loop is pulled, with constant speed, out of a region with a uniform 

magnetic field B.  The second was A rod of length L moves at constant speed on two rails in a 

uniform magnetic field B [34, p 718,740].  We asked two questions for each problem. The first 

question  was  to  describe  the  forces  acting  on  the  loop  (or  rod).    The  second  question  related 

forces and motion of the loop (or rod) when pulling was stopped (or the B field is turned off).  In 

addition we asked the students about how their thinking on these problems related to their first 

semester course, especially about Newton’s second law.  Table 4 shows that none of the students 

used the Aristotelian  model on the induction context.  We could claim that the  students  moved 

forward on their understanding since the use of a hybrid model implies the use of aspects of the 

Newtonian  model.    However,  students  S7  and  S10  switched  from  the  Newtonian  to  the  hybrid 

model.    To  find  what  might  have  caused  this  change  we  carefully  reviewed  student  S10’s 

transcript.    S10  responded  to  the  question  related  to  turning off  the  B  field  on  the  rod  problem 

“well, there is no longer a B field, since the force F = I L x B  is zero… the rod should come to a 

stop.”    S10’s  response  to  the  extra  questions  was:  “I  do  not  remember  using  Newton’s  second 

law…uh...  F=ma  [respect  to  the  motion  of  the  rod].  …If  there  is  a  force  there  must  be  an 

acceleration,  and  if  there  is  one  force  there  is  no  net  force.”    We  concluded  that  student  S10 

forgot about the meaning of “net force” or perhaps has not understood its meaning.  S10 used the 

Newtonian model only in the B field context. 

 

 

7

 

 

 

V Teaching Implications and Conclusions 

We found that students solved problems related to Newton’s second law using two main 

mental models labeled “Newtonian,” and “Aristotelian.”  They also used a third model which we 

labeled hybrid model.  When a student used only one of these three models in an interview it is 

said that the student used a pure mental model. When the student used more than one model, it is 

said that the student used a mixed model.  Other authors say the students are in a pure or mixed 

model  state.[32,  33]    In  tables  2  and  4  we  follow  the  progress  of  10  of  the  students  through 

different contexts and time.  In the first semester, before instruction, only one student (S5) used a 

pure  Newtonian  model.    After  instruction  six  more  students  used  the  pure  Newtonian  model.  

Perhaps the most important idea that produced this change was the line of reasoning: “constant 

speed  means  no  acceleration,  that  is  no  net  force;  then  forces  are  equal.”    The  Aristotelian  and 

hybrid models were mostly triggered by questions relating to double the force, double the mass or 

double  the  speed;  perhaps  because  of  the  word  “double”  which  indicated  proportionality.  

Students  transferred  their  models  to  the  second  semester.    Seven  of  the  students  used  a  pure 

Newtonian  model  on  the  first  interview  of  Phase  II.    This  was  expected  since  the  students  had 

received  instruction  on  Newton’s  second  law. 

  It  is  also  important  to  note  that  in 

electromagnetism contexts, when students are faced with abstract contexts, they are more likely 

to  base  their  responses  on  instruction  and  not  on  intuitive  reasoning  as  they  might  do  in 

mechanics contexts.  The understanding of basic concepts like “vector” and vocabulary such as 

“net force” also has a role on the model a student might use.  It is important that the instructor 

reviews  concepts  and  vocabulary  for  Newton’s  second  law.    Students  might  be  using  incorrect 

models  because  of  the  misunderstanding  of  the  background  and  not  because  of  the 

misunderstanding of Newton’s second law.  For the transfer of models from electromagnetism to 

mechanics  contexts,  it  is  important  how  electromagnetism  contexts  are  introduced.    Some 

students  considered  that  the  transfer  of  Newton’s  laws  from  mechanics  to  electromagnetism 

contexts  was  not  clear.    They  pointed  out  that  in  most  of  their  homework  problems  mass  is 

negligible, things are small and there are many approximations. 

With  the  results  of  these  six  interviews  we  have  developed  a  mental  model  inventory 

(multiple-choice instrument).  This inventory is a tool for instructors to help them determine the 

models  students  use;  then  the  instructor  can  use  the  information  to  tailor  a  class  to  correct  the 

students’ models.  The inventory consists of five surveys that address the same  contexts as our 

interviews.  Each survey has five to eight questions with four or five options.  The options refer to 

the possible models students might use.  The number of questions is short to facilitate use of the 

surveys in class.  If the instructor uses a personal response system, (s)he could obtain immediate 

8

feedback on the model students used.  Survey 1 focuses on the contexts of interview 1, horizontal 

vertical contexts.  Survey 2 focuses on Atwood’s machines, survey 3 on electric fields, survey 4 

on magnetic fields and survey 5 on induction.  The surveys can also be used as an assessment tool 

and possibly to continue research on mental models.  The entire inventory is available online as 

portable document format (PDF) files at http://web.phys.ksu.edu, under “Research in Education,” 

and then “Model-Based Assessment.” 

 

Acknowledgments 

This  work  was  supported,  in  part,  by  the  National  Science  Foundation  under  grant  # 

REC-0087788.  We thank Zdeslav Hrepic and Erin Itza for comments and suggestions. 

References 

1.  Domann, F.E. 1982, An improved Newton's second law experiment, Am. J. Phys. 

50 (2), pp. 185-186 

2.  Herrmann F. and Mühlbayer, T, 1983, A constant force generator for the 
demonstration of Newton's second law, Am. J. Phys. 51 (4), pp. 344-346 

3.  Bryan, R. A, Clark, R. B. and Sadberry P, 1988, Illustrating Newton's second law 

with the automobile coast-down test,  Phys. Teach. 26 (7), pp 442-445 

4.  Keller, J.B. 1987, Newton's second law, Am. J. Phys. 55 (12), pp. 1145-1146 
5.  J. Matolyak and Matous, G., 1990 Simple variable mass systems: Newton's 

second law, Phys. Teach. 28 (5) pp. 328-329 

6.  Kurtze, D. A, 1991, Teaching Newton's second law—A better way, Phys. Teach. 

7.  Hood C.G, 1992, Teaching Newton's second law—Another viewpoint, Phys. 

8.  Knollenberg III, R.B., 1996, Newton's second on the highway, Phys. Teach. 34 

9.  Chandler D, 2000, Newton's second law for systems with variable mass, Phys. 

29 (6) pp. 350-351 

Teach. 30 (6) pp. 358-359 

(3) p. 135 

Teach. 38 (7) p. 396 

10. Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. (Eds.), 1999, How People Learn: 
Brain, Mind, Experience and School, Washington, DC: National Academy Press 

11. McCloskey, M., 1983, Naive theories about motion in Mental Models, D.S. 
Gentner, A. (pp. 299-324). Ed, Hillsdale, New York, Lawrence Erlbaum.  
12. Maloney, D.P., 1993, Conceptual competition in physics learning, Int. J. Sci. 

Educ. 15, p 283 

13. Donovan, M. S., Bransford, J. D., & Pellegrino, J. W. (Eds.). 1999, How People 
Learn: Bridging Research and Practice, Washington, DC: National Academy 
Press 

14. Johnson-Laird, P. N., 1983, Mental models. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 

University Press  

15. Greca, I. M. & Moreira, M. A., 2002, Mental, physical, and mathematical models 
in the teaching and learning of physics, Science Education 86(1), pp106-121 

9

 

 

 

 

16. diSessa, A. A., 1993, Towards an epistemology of physics. Cognition and 

Instruction, 10 (2-3), pp 105-225. 

17. diSessa, A. A., 1996, What do "just plain folk" know about physics? in D. R. 

Olson & N. Torrance  (Eds.), Handbook of Education and Human Development: 
New Models of Learning, Teaching, and Schooling, Oxford: Blackwell 
Publishers, Ltd.  

18. Hammer, D., 1996, More than misconceptions: Multiple perspectives on student 
knowledge and reasoning, and an appropriate role for education research, Am.  J. 
of Phys 64 (10), pp 1316-1325 

19. Hammer, D., 2000, Student resources for learning introductory physics, Am. J. of 

Phys, Physics Education Research Supplement 68(S1), pp S52-S59 

20. Vosniadou, S., 1994, Capturing and modeling the process of conceptual change, 

21. Redish, E. F., 1994, The implications of cognitive studies for teaching physics, 

Learning & Instruction 4, pp 45-69 

Am. J. of Phys. 62(6), pp 796-803  

22. Bao, L., Zollman, D., Hogg, K. & Redish, E. F., 2000, Model analysis of fine 

structures of student models: An example with Newton's third law, Am. J. of Phys 
70 (7), pp 766-778 

23. Gabel, Dorothy L., Ed, 1994, Handbook of Research on Science Teaching and 

Learning, Macmillan Publishing Co., Chapter 5 

24. Halloun, I. A. & Hestenes, D.,1985, Common-sense concepts about motion, Am. 

J. of Phys. 53(11), pp 1056-1065. 

25. McCloskey, M., 1983, Intuitive Physics, Scientific Am 248 (4) pp 122-130 
26. Maloney, D. P., 1990, Forces as Interactions, Phys. Teach. 28 (6) pp 386-390 
27. Whitaker, R. J.,1983, Aristotle is not dead: Student understanding of trajectory 

motion, Am. J. of Phys, 51 (4) pp 352-357 

28. McDermott, L. C.,1984, Research on conceptual understanding in mechanics, 

Phys. Today 37(7), pp 24-32. 

29. Lythcott, J.,1985, “Aristotelian” was given as the answer, but what was the 

question?, Am. J. of Phys 53 (5) pp 428-432 

30. Allbaugh, A. Zollman D. and Rebello S., 2003, The problem-context dependence 

of students’ applications of Newton’s Second law, paper in preparation 
31. Thornton, R. and Sokoloff D, 1998, Assessing students learning of Newton’s 

laws: The force and motion Conceptual Evaluation and the Evaluation of Active 
Learning Laboratory and Lecture Curricula, Am. J. Phys. 66 (4) pp 338-352 

32. Hrepic, Z., Zollmann, D.A. and Rebello, N.S., 2002, Proceedings, Physics 

Education Research Conference, August 7-8, Boise ID 

33. Bao, L. & Redish, E. F., 2001, Model analysis: Assessing the dynamics of student 

learning, submitted to Cognition & Instruction 

34. Halliday, D., Resnick, R. and Walker, J., 2001,Fundamentals of Physics, 6th Ed., 

JohnWiley & Sons. Inc. 

35. Creswell, J. W., 1998, Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among 

five traditions, Thousand Oaks, CA, SAGE Publications, Inc. 

36. Hestenes, D., Wells, M. & Swackhamer, G., 1992, Force concept inventory. The 

37. Mazur, E., 1997, Peer Instruction, A user’s manual,  Upper Saddle River, New 

Phys. Teach. 30(3), pp 141-166 

Jersey, Prentice Hall 

38. Maloney, David P., O’Kuma, Thomas L., Hieggelke, Curtis J. and Van Heuvelen, 

Alan, 2001, Surveying students’ conceptual knowledge of electricity and 
magnetism, Phys. Educ. Res. Supp, Am. J. Phys. 69 (7), pp S12-S22 

 

10

 
 

 

11

TABLES 

Table 1 

Horizontal context 

Vertical context 

1.-How does the force exerted by the woman 

1.-How does the force exerted by the cable 

compare with other forces acting on the box? 

compare with other forces acting on the 

(FCI #25) 

elevator? (FCI #17) 

2.-How will the speed change if her force is 

2.-What  is(are)  the  force(s)  acting  on  the 

doubled? (FCI # 26) 

elevator  when  (a)  it  is  held  at  rest?  (b)  it  is 

3.-What force is needed to double the speed? 

3.-What is the force if the speed is doubled? 

4.-What force is needed to steadily increase the 

4.-What is the force if the speed is steadily 

moving up or down at constant speed 

speed? 

# 27) 

increasing? 

doubled? 

5.-What happens if she stopped pushing? (FCI 

5.-How does the speed change if the force is 

6.-What would happen if she exerts the same 

6.-What force is needed to move an elevator 

force on two boxes, one of top of the other? 

twice as massive at the same speed? 

Interview / 
Context 

1/ Horizontal / 
Vertical 
2/ Horizontal 
/ Vertical 

3/ Horizontal 
/ Pulleys 

 
S1 

H  
A  

N 
N  

N  
N  

 
S2 

H 
N 

N 
N  

N  
N  

Table 2 

 
S3 

 
S4 

 
S5 

 
S6 

N 
A  

N  
N  

N  
N  

H  
N  

H 
H 

H 
H 

N 
N 

N  
N  

N  
N  

N 
H 

N  
N  

N  
N  

 
S7 

H  
A  

N  
N  

H 
A 

 
S8 

A 
A  

N  
N  

N  
N 

 
S9 

A 
A  

N 
N 

N  
H 

 
S10 

A 
A  

A 
A 

H 
A 

Electric field context 

Table 3 
 

1.-Describe the force(s) acting on the charged 

4.-If  the  mass  of  the  sphere  is  doubled, 

sphere. 

describe its motion. 

2.-Does  the  motion  of  the  sphere  change  if 

5.-How  would  the  motion  of  the  sphere 

the magnitude of the E field is doubled? 

change  if  the  direction  of  the  E  field  were 

reversed? 

3.-If  the  charge  of  the  sphere  is  doubled, 

6.-How  would  the  motion  of  the  sphere 

describe its motion. 

change if the E field were turned off? 

12

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

Interview / 
Context 

S1 

S2 

S3 

S4 

S5 

S6 

S7 

S8 

S9 

S10 

4/ Horizontal / 
E field 
5/ B field 
6/ Induction 

N  
N  

N 
N   

N  
N  

N 
N   

N  
N  

N 
N   

N  
N  

N 
N   

N  
N  

N 
N   

A  
H  

N 
H 

N  
N  

N 
N   

N  
N  

H 
N   

A 
A 

N 
H 

Table 4 

H  
H  

A 
H   
 

13

FIGURES 
 
 
Figure 1 (a), (b) 
 
 

a

Steel Cable 

b

Elevator 

  

 

 

 
 
 

 

Figure 2 

1

Figure 3 

1 

2 

2

Sphere moving 
at a constant 
Speed. 

+

E

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

14

CAPTIONS 

 
Table 1 Questions asked to students in interview 1 of Phase I, mechanics. 
 
Table 2: Students' models in interviews, Phase I.  The ‘A’ indicates “Aristotelian” model; ‘N’ 
indicates “Newtonian” model and H indicates Hybrid model. 
 
Table 3. Questions asked to students in interview 1 of Phase II, electromagnetism. 
 
Table  4:  Students'  models  in  interviews,  Phase  II.    The  ‘A’  indicates  “Aristotelian”  model;  ‘N’ 
indicates “Newtonian” model and H indicates Hybrid model. 
 
Figure 1 (a) From FCI questions 25-27, a woman pushing a box. (b) From FCI question 17, an 
elevator being lifted up. 
 
Figure 2. Pulley system used in protocol for interview 3 (Atwood’s machine). Masses 1 and 2 are 
identical. 
 
Figure 3. A charged sphere moving at constant speed in a uniform electric field E. Modification 
from CSEM question 10. 
 
 

 

15

