ELECTROPORATION OF BIOLOGICAL CELLS 
EMBEDDED IN A POLYCARBONATE FILTER

William A. Hercules, James Lindesay, Anna Coble
Computational Physics Laboratory
Howard University, Washington, D.C.   20059

Robert Schmukler
Pore Squared Bioengineering, Inc.
13905 Vista Drive, Rockville, MD.   20853

ABSTRACT

The electropermeabilization of biological cell membranes by

the application of an external field occurs whenever an applied
field exceeds a threshold value.  For fields above this threshold
value but less than another critical value, the pores formed in
the membrane are transient or reversible.  Several mechanisms
have been proposed for the formation of these transient pores.  
Here we examine the local electric fields generated for the
configuration of cells embedded in a polycarbonate filter, both
in the region in and around the pore. We consider the shear
forces created in the membrane due to the gradient of the field
along the surface of the membrane, and the interaction of the
charged molecules in the membrane with this field. A relationship
between the electric field strength and the size of the pore
formed is derived.

Chapter I    Introduction
I.1    Membrane structure 

2

All living cells have a membrane separating the cell
contents  from the cells environment.  This membrane allows the
cell to maintain an internal environment that is suitable for the
survival of the cell.  Since cells exists in some external
environment,  it is necessary that some form of interaction occur
between the cell and its external environment.  The cell membrane
is a site of a large variety of cellular processes,  ranging from
communication, transport and excitability to intercellular
interaction,  morphological differentiation, and fusion.  

The cell membrane functions as a barrier to the unrestricted

movement of substances between the intracellular region and the
environment of the cell.  This barrier is selectively permeable
to certain materials in the fluids surrounding the cells,
allowing these materials to cross the membrane relatively
unhindered while preventing the movement of others.  It is
thought that the selective permeability of the cell membrane for
certain types of material in the intracellular or extracellular
fluids is due to the presence of very small ionic channels which
traverse the membrane and allow for the movement of small ionic
species across the membrane. The cell membrane is composed of
phospholipids arranged in an architecture that is commonly
referred to as a lipid bilayer.  Figure 1 shows a schematic of
the cross section of the membrane illustrating the arrangement of
the phospholipid molecules.  The lipids present
in the membrane are amphipathic, containing a polar head group
and a non-polar lipid portion that is typically composed of
relatively straight chain alkyl groups ranging from 17- 25 carbon
atoms long.  In this bilayer structure the lipid portions are
apposed leaving the charged regions apart.  This arrangement of
the phospholipids results in an interior region of the membrane
which is much less polar than the interfacial region.   

Figure 1.
structure

Schematic of membrane

Isolated membranes are white flocculent solids of density

1.05 - 1.35 gm/cm3 [40].  Membranes are relatively unstable
structures, not only in the sense that they fuse and that their
components undergo exchange, but also that they can be readily

3

disrupted and dissociated [40].  They can be disrupted by
sonication,  freeze thawing,  osmotic shock and extensive
mechanical shaking.  The membrane may be dissociated into its
chemical components by treatment with detergents, 
phospholipases,  mixtures of organic solvents and chaotropic
agents [40].

The membrane components may be resolved into two main
classes of compounds, lipids and protein.  In addition to these
two main classes, there is a third class of compound ,
carbohydrates, accounting for up to 10 % by weight of the
membrane components. The membranes of different organelles and
cell types contain on a dry weight basis 20-60 % protein, 30-80 %
lipid and up to 10 % carbohydrates [40].  The components of the 
membrane matrix are held together largely by non-covalent 
forces.  These phospolipids are arranged with their polar
phosphate head groups aligned in the ionic medium of the interior
and exterior of the cell, while the nonpolar lipid chain are
apposed on the interior region of the membrane. The acyl chains
of the phospholipids interact with each other and with proteins
primarily by Van der Waals interactions, while the interactions
of the polar groups at the interface are expected to be largely
of the Coulombic and hydrogen-bonding types [40].  

In the membrane, specific interactions between the

components lead to a selective ordering and segregation of these
components in the plane of the membrane.  A consequence of this
segregation of components may be the establishment of a long-
range order and cooperativity within segregated domains. 
Separating these domains are regions of discontinuity and
mismatch,  referred to as patch boundaries.  Due to the fluid-
like state of the membrane, the molecules within the membrane
matrix can undergo a variety of motions; rotational motion along
the axis perpendicular to the interface, trans-gauche
conformational changes in the acyl chains and lateral diffusion
in the plane of the membrane.  The geometric constraints are such
that the polymethylene chain forms a hydrophobic cylinder.  To
maximize the interaction between neighboring atoms, a chain can
assume a stretched all-trans conformation.  This arrangement
gives a cylindrical structure with a theoretical cross sectional
area of about 18 Å2 and yields an average increase in chain
length of 1.27Å per methylene residue.
 
nothing more than a plasma membrane, hemoglobin and electrolytes.
The cells are shaped like bi-concave discs, with a diameter of
approximately 7 
membrane is about 1.2:1 with the lipid component made up of
glycerophospholipids, sphingomyelin and cholesterol in a mass
ratio of about 1:0.3:0.5. There are two major intrinsic membrane
proteins, both of which traverse the bilayer. In addition to the
intrinsic protein, a network of extrinsic protein are associated
with the cytoplasmic surface of the membrane. The membrane also
has binding sites for numerous hormones, various enzymes for
active ion transport, and mechanisms to facilitate the passage of

Human erythrocytes are relatively simple cells comprising

m. The mass ratio of protein to lipid in the

(cid:1)

4

small molecules such as glucose and glycerol. 

The membrane skeleton comprises two major filamentous
proteins, spectrin and actin, and a number of globular proteins.
In the erythrocyte membrane the actin firms short filaments which
link spectrin tetramers together to form a continuous network.
The majority of the spectrin dimers are attached to the membrane
by means of a protein known as ankyrin, a large globular protein
which links the flexible end of spectrin proteins.  

I.2    Electroporation

Electroporation is the phenomenon in which a cell exposed to

an electric field is permeabilized, as if aqueous pores are
introduced in the cell membrane. The usual method of performing
electroporation is to place cells in a suspension medium between
the plates of a parallel plate capacitor and apply a potential
difference between the plates of the capacitor.

Stampfli observed the breakdown of the membrane of nodes of

Ranvier by the application of an electric field [78].  Sale and
Hamilton observed that  treatment of  cells with intense electric
pulses led to cell lysis [65] and suggested that the membranes of
the cells were damaged by the transmembrane potential induced by
the applied electric field.  Further studies by Neumann and
Rosencheck [55] ; Benz, Zimmermann et. al  [9], Kinosita and
Tsong [42] showed that the cell membranes of pulse treated cells
were permeable to molecules with a size less than a certain
limit, which suggested that some  porous structure was created in
the membrane.  While the structure of the pores created by
electroporation is not known, it is generally believed that they
may be transient aqueous pathways that perforate the membrane. 
While most of these transient pores are believed to close
rapidly, some may remain open orders of magnitude longer than the
duration of the pulse.  Diffusion and movement directly due to
the electric field ( eg.  Electrical drift and electro-osmosis )
are likely mechanisms of molecular transport across the cell
membrane due to electroporation [56].  While the mechanism of
electroporation is not completely understood, numerous
experiments show that electroporation occurs for short pulses
when the transmembrane voltage reaches approximately 1 V.  The
electric field pulses causing the electroporation of cells are
typically of magnitude 1-20 kV/cm and have duration of 10 µs to
10 ms. Visual demonstrations of the pores formed in the cell
membranes were not made until the electron microscope studies of
Chang and Reese [14] in 1990, due to the difficulty of detecting
the pores, which are small, transient structures. 

A few studies have made quantitative measurements of
molecular transport ( Mir et al., [48] 1988; Chakabarti et al.,
[12] 1989; Lambert et al., [43] (1990 )  particularly on a
transport per cell basis ( Bartoletti et al., [5] 1989 ). 
Quantitative study of molecular transport is necessary in order

5

to better understand electroporation. These studies are needed to
;
.
.

suggest and test theoretical models
provide a basis for comparing data from different molecules
and experimental conditions
guide applications of electroporation in research,
biotechnology and medicine.

.

Most electroporation studies have used one of the following four
methods of analysis ;
.
.
.
.

expression of an introduced gene
total population methods
image analysis
flow cytometry 
Kinosita et. al.[43,44] used voltage sensitive dyes to
measure the transmembrane potential required to cause poration. 
In their analysis they calculated the transmembrane potential
that existed when the cell was placed in a uniform external
electric field.  The primary event that leads to pore formation
is believed to be the induction of a large transmembrane
potential by the applied electric field ( Kinosita et. al. 1992
).  For a spherical cell of radius, a , in a uniform electric
(cid:1)
field, E0 , the potential difference,  
intracellular and extracellular surfaces of the cell membrane (in
the absence of pores) is assumed to be given by

V , between the

(1.1)

with  

where, t, is the time after the constant field is turned on,  Cm
is the membrane capacitance per unit area, ri and re are specific
resistances of the intra and extra cellular media, and Gm is the
membrane conductance per unit area [39].   Following the
application of the electric field, the potential undergoes an
exponential rise according to the equation above, and the steady
state transmembrane potential difference reached from the
equation above is the value given by the steady state solution to
Laplace's equation (where 

 so that f ~ 1).

(1.2)

When biological cells are placed in an external electric

, can be visualized using
field, the transmembrane potential, 
the voltage sensitive fluorescent dye, stryl dye RH292 following
Grinvald et. al. [30]. When added to the extracellular medium,
the dye (which has a hydrophilic head and two hydrophobic tails)

6

.  The image of the fluorescence therefore indicates the

is expected to orient itself with its head in the extracellular
fluid.  When the dye is bound to the membrane, it fluoresces
brightly with an intensity of the fluorescence that is sensitive
to 
spatial variation of 
microscope, the cells were imaged at a temporal resolution of 0.3
µs. The resulting membrane potential was found to follow the
equation (1.1) for the expected spatial distribution of the
potential.  

.  Using a pulsed laser fluorescence

For low electric field strengths  ~ 100 V/cm the steady

(cid:2)

 was greater than 1 V,  the observed behavior of

state potential in the membrane was achieved in a time of less
than 2µs from the application of the external field.  It was also
found that the membrane could withstand a trans-membrane
potential of up to 0.75 V,  for at least tens of microseconds.
When a larger external field was applied, for which the
calculated 
the fluorescence was different.  The actual change observed was
much smaller than calculated and indicated saturation of the
membrane potential.  The spatial distribution of the potential
deviated from  the theoretical cos 
flattened top and bottom indicating saturation of the membrane
potential.  The saturation level was found to occur at a
potential of  ~ 1 V.  After a period of  ~ 2µs the fluorescence
intensity level slowly returned toward the original level on a
microsecond time scale.  The interpretation of these results was
that when 
is porated and starts to conduct current. The conduction prevents
any further increase in the membrane potential.  The slow return
of the fluorescence is interpreted as the gradual increase in the
number of pores and/or the pore size.  In RBC’s the poration
(cid:1)
takes place within 1ms after 
1V.  Longer pulses are thought  to  produce larger pores or a
greater number of  pores.  When 
 exceeds 1V,  a large current
flows across the membrane because of the much larger conduction
of the pore compared to the membrane.

 reaches a critical value of about 1V the membrane

 dependence and shows a

V reaches a critical value of about 

Coster and Zimmerman [21] (1975) directly injected current

into a cell of Valonia Utricularis  and measured the
transmembrane potential.  When the potential,  augmented by the
injected current reached a critical value of about 1V, any
further increase was counteracted by a dramatic increase in the
membrane conductance, which was just large enough to keep the
potential at the critical value.  When the current was held
constant after the breakdown , the potential gradually decreased
on a microsecond time scale.  The interpretation of this was that
once the trans-membrane potential reached the critical value, the
membrane became locally permeable. This increased permeability
results in a large increase in the conduction across the
membrane, which was enough to prevent the further increase in the
transmembrane potential. 

Experimentally, electroporation caused by short pulses

7

universally occurs at a transmembrane voltage of about 1000 mV
for many different types of cells and artificial membranes. 
Initial attempts to explain the rupture of plasma membranes were
based on a theory involving the normal oscillating compression of
the entire membrane and the  resulting instability produced by
the electrocompression of specific regions.  Chizmadzhev et. al.
suggested that pores were caused by local defects in the
membrane.  Similar pore approaches were developed independently
by Weaver and Mintzer ‘81 [], and Sugar ‘81[80].  The models
developed gave reasonable predictions for a critical
transmembrane voltage for rupture, Vc, but none could
simultaneously describe the phenomenon of rupture and reversible
electrical breakdown in charge injection experiments.  Reversible
electrical breakdown is not a true dielectric breakdown since
there is not enough energy to ionize molecules.  Instead it can
be understood as a rapid electrical discharge due to the high
ionic conductance caused by a gentle structural membrane
rearrangement, that is pore formation.  More recent theories
provide a more reasonable explanation of the pore formation
process.  The general elements of these models are,

i) a resting membrane conductance containing an
equilibrium population of hydrophilic pores,
ii) a membrane conductance G(t) due to the pores,
iii) transmembrane voltage V(t) induced changes in the
pore population,  
iv) The transient behavior determined by calculating
how the  pore population changes with V(t),
v) feedback between V(t) and G(t) involving both the
pore population and external electrical resistances of
the experimental system,
vi) Reversible electrical breakdown ( REB) caused by
large ionic conduction through the transient pore
population,
vii) Rupture of the plasma membrane caused by the
appearance of one or more large unstable pores.
Hibino et. al.[34]  suggests that if the electroporation
uniformly increased the membrane conductance over the entire cell
(cid:1)
surface,  then 
proportional to cos 
direction of the applied field and the position on the cell.
Their experimental data, however,  showed  that was not the case. 
The finite membrane conductance caused by the pores was
introduced in the two regions facing the electrodes of the
external applied field.  The spatial distribution of the
conductance could be described by the function G(

V, in the porated cell should still be

 is the angle between the

,  where 

);

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

8

where, 
(cid:2)
c is the angle
G0 is the maximal conductance of the membrane and 
at which the transmembrane potential reaches the critical value. 

This equation suggests that the conductance of the membrane

only increases in the region of the membrane within an angle of
(cid:2)
c of the direction of the applied electric field.  Implicit in
this equation is the suggestion that only those regions of the
cell membrane where the potential exceeds the critical value, 

, are porated,  and that the conductance of different regions

V reaches the

of the membrane are symmetrical around the direction of the
applied electric field. It means that the conductance introduced
is proportional to the excess potential that could be attained in
the absence of pores minus the critical potential for poration. 
(cid:2)
(cid:1)
c is interpreted to be the angle at which 
critical value for poration.  The value of G0 depends on the
intensity and duration of the applied field.  For field
intensities of a few hundred V/cm  and field durations of tens of
microseconds, G0 was in the range 1-10 S/cm2 both at high and low
ionic strengths.  This observed conductance is calculated to be
equivalent  to the replacement of approximately 0.1 % of the
total membrane area by aqueous openings.  The above equation
implies that the two regions opposing the electrodes are equally
conductive.  This is confirmed by the experimental indication of
(cid:1)
V in fluorescence experiments that  both regions are equally
fluorescent.  This can be explained from a theoretical view as
follows.  If one side of the cell is porated, immediately the
potential difference across the other end of the cell increases
to the critical value.  This results in the other side of the
membrane becoming porated. This means that the conductance of the
membrane is also symmetric, the symmetric G does not mean that
the changes taking place in the membrane are the same for each
side of the cell,  since different combinations of  pore size and
number of pores can produce the same conductance.  Kinosita et.
al.  found evidence to indicate that the structural changes
taking place on each side of the cell was observed to be
asymmetric.

The poration takes place well within 2µs of the

transmembrane potential reaching the critical value.   Kinosita
and Tsong [42] (1977) found that in red blood cells (RBCs), the
poration takes place within 1 µs after the transmembrane
potential reaches the critical value of 1 V.  In a low salt , low

9

ionic strength, extracellular medium,  where the rise of the
potential is relatively slow, the poration takes place at the
moment that the transmembrane potential reaches the critical
value of approximately 1 V.  This critical potential of about 1 V
for poration applies only to short pulses.  Kinosita et. al.
found that an applied field of 100 V/cm, which gave a theoretical
transmembrane potential of 0.75 V , applied for 1 ms produced the
same saturation of the membrane potential as did higher fields
applied for a shorter duration. This suggests that the
combination of the time and the intensity of the applied field
determines the poration in the membrane.  

After poration, the recovery of the cell membrane (in the

case of reversibly porated membranes) can be inferred from
measurements of the transmembrane potential.   Using pulses of
magnitude less than that required  to porate the membrane, the
response of the membrane to these pulses was examined.  If the
response of the membrane to the subcritical probe pulse was the
same as the response of an intact cell, the porated cell was
determined to have recovered, since it now showed no signs of
increased conductivity, or pores in the membrane.  Using this
method, Kinosita et. al. determined that for sea urchin eggs
treated with an electric field of 186 V/cm, 20 µs pulse, the
cells recovered within 2 s [43] ( Kinosita 1988 ).  However,
immediately after poration the membrane was still highly
conductive.  At a time of 20 µs after the pulse, the conductance
of the membrane, G0 measured with a probe pulse of 67 V/cm was
determined to be as high as 0.3 S/cm2.   This value may well be
due to the conductance of the pores in the membrane, as well as
partially closed pores reopened by the test pulse.  After a time
of 1 ms the value of G0 decreased by an order of magnitude. 

In studying the influx of fluorescent dyes into porated eggs

after exposure of the egg to a long intense pulse ( 800 V/cm for
1ms ), it was found that relatively large molecules such as RH292
or its zwitterionic relative RH160 were seen to penetrate into
the cell interior.  Penetration was slow , requiring seconds in
low salt medium, to minutes in Ca2+  free seawater.  

(cid:1)
Although the field induced potential,  

V is symmetric with
respect to the direction of the applied field, it has often been
found that the permeation of ions or molecules through the
porated membrane have been asymmetric (Rossignol et. al. 1983
[65]). In sea urchin eggs, the dye and Ca2+  permeation was much
higher on the negative-electrode side, whereas the dye burst was
seen mainly on the positive side of the liposomes.  It was also
found, that  in liposomes in particular,  the formation of holes
in the membrane in the presence of the field was always
symmetric. 

To understand the phenomenon of electroporation many

questions must be addressed. 
(cid:127)
(cid:127)

How does an electric field interact with the cell membrane?
What are the subsequent events leading to the breakdown of
the membrane permeation barrier?
What would happen to a cell during the time that the

(cid:127)

10

(cid:127)

membrane function is disrupted?
How would a cell then repair the damaged membrane and
restore its normal functions?
Tsong states that the field interaction with the membrane is

electrostatic, since any other interaction would violate
thermodynamics.  The potential differences required for
electroporation of the membrane ( ~ 1V ) is not sufficient to
cause true dielectric breakdown of the membrane.  

Gross, Loew and Webb [31] (1986), used changes in the

fluorescence intensity of a charge shift potentiometric dye
incorporated into the cell plasma membrane and measured by
digitally intensified video microscopy to measure the changes in
the cell membrane potential induced by the application of an
external electric field.  Optical methods used for the
measurement of fluorescence or absorption was first reported in
the early 1970s. In their study Gross et. al. used a new stryl
fluorescent indicator of membrane electric field 1-(3-
sulfonatopropyl)-4-[ß] [2-(di-n-butylamino)-6-napthyl vinyl]
pyridinium betaine,  (di-4-ANNEPPS) developed by Loew and
colleagues. They used the probe because it responded linearly to
membrane potential at a level of ~ 9 % fluorescence change per
100 mV change in membrane potential. It also had characteristics
that made it suitable for microscopy, since it could also be
incorporated reversibly into one leaflet of an artificial
bilayer. The molecule also possessed no net charge at neutral pH
and the mechanism of its response to membrane potential was
thought to be electrochromic in nature. 

Artificial membranes provide a method of studying the

properties of the cell membrane.  A BLM formed from the lipid
extract of cell membranes is a good permeation barrier for ions
and hydrophilic molecules.  The membrane specific conductance for
 is usually smaller than 10-8 S /cm2. Since lipid

 or 

molecules are either charged or polarizable, an electric field
imposed across the membrane will disturb the highly ordered
bilayer arrangement of lipids.  For a BLM of a single lipid
component, the conformation of the lipid molecules is controlled.
At low temperatures, the molecules are arranged with CH2- CH2
bonds aligned in a trans configuration in the hydrocarbon chain. 
When the temperature is raised above a critical point, Tc, many
of these bonds are converted to cis conformation.  These cis
bonds can cause the bilayer to become disorganized [82] (Thompson
et. al. ).  As a result, for temperatures above Tc, the bilayer
exists in the fluid like phase ( F-state).  A bilayer in the F-
state has a higher conductivity for ions than when it is in its
usual S-state.  Experiments show that the permeability of a lipid
bilayer to ions is maximal at Tc, a temperature for which the
lipid exists half in the S-state and half in the F-state [83]
(Tsong et. al . 1977),  [26] (El-Mashak and Tsong) (1985).    
Neumann et. al. [55] suggests that studies using electro-

optic and conductometric measurements are consistent with
electric field induced changes in the membrane structure of the

11

vesicles.  Relatively few electrical measurements have been made
on isolated cells, because the measurement of the transmembrane
voltage, 
 (Benz and Zimmermann ‘79 ) or voltage sensitive dyes [43] (
Kinosita et. al. ‘88 ,  [46] Kinosita et. al. ‘92  ).

, requires the use of either microelectrodes, [9]     

Studies of pore formation in artificial bilayer membranes

have demonstrated four different types of behavior.  These
behaviors may be classified in terms of the effect on the
membrane.  For the largest pulse sizes the membranes showed
irreversible electrical breakdown, in which the membrane
discharged to a potential of zero.  For pulse sizes slightly
smaller,  the membrane showed incomplete reversible electrical
breakdown, in which the membrane discharged to a potential
different from zero.  For still smaller pulses, the membrane
showed mechanical rupture, and showed a slow, sigmoidal shaped
electrical discharge.  For the smallest pulse sizes, the membrane
was charged without any dramatic change of the membrane
potential.  The ability of a single membrane to exhibit  four
different outcomes by changing only the electric pulse
characteristics is striking.  

Initial attempts to explain the rupture of planar membranes

were based on electrocompression [22 ] ( Crowley ‘73).  This
approach could not explain the rupture of  “solvent free” and
biological membranes, which have small values of compressibility. 
More complex models based on the viscoelastic behavior of a
membrane, identified reversible permeabilization or REB, with the
instability of the membrane,  even though the subsequent behavior
of the membrane potential was not treated.  A theoretical model
for pore formation in artificial membranes was proposed by Sowers
and Lieber [77] utilizing a statistical model.  Their model was
based on the normal thermodynamic distribution of energies in the
molecules with those regions having above average energies being
more likely to spontaneously form pores.

I.3    Theories of Pore Formation 

Crowley [22]  (‘73) first examined the effects of a high,

transverse, electric field on the mechanical equilibrium of a
flat isotropic, elastic membrane sheet.  Using linear stability
analysis, he demonstrated that when the interfaces of the
membrane are perturbed by disturbance waves, the transverse
electric field gives rise to electric surface stresses which
destabilize the system and cause squeezing deformations of the
bilayer.  Crowley obtained an expression for the compression of
the membrane by equating the squeezing Maxwell tension to the
elastic stress due to the transverse strain.  Crowley proposed
that pore formation results when the membrane potential exceeds
the threshold value, and the growth of the squeezing disturbance
eventually causes the membrane to rupture, locally creating a
hole.  His results gave the correct order of magnitude for the
critical potential, Vc , but underpredicted the critical

12

potential by approximately a factor of 2.  

His approach could not explain the rupture of  “solvent

free”  and biological membranes, which have smaller values of
compressibility. The explanation of electroporation as a linear,
electromechanical instability has since  been criticized in the
literature, primarily  because it predicted an inordinately large
value for the compression of the bilayer at the critical
potential.  Experimental results and other lines of theoretical
study suggest that the compression is no more than a few percent
[54].

Maldarelli and Stebe [48] proposed a re-examination of the

study of the theory of electropore formation based on the
instability mechanism of the membrane due to the mechanical
anisotropy of the lipid bilayer.  They concluded that in the
theory proposed by Crowley,  the incorrect predictions for the
unacceptably large electrocompression at the critical potential
could be traced to an incorrect assumption that the lipid bilayer
is isotropic in its elastic response.

Abidor, Chizmadzhev and co-workers suggested that local

defects (pores) in the membrane are responsible for  the
reversible breakdown of the membrane [1]. 

One point that has been established about pore formation and

cell fusion is that they are result of the field induced
transmembrane potential.  Under the influence of  an external
electric field, the potential drop across the cell is sustained
by the cell membrane, which is a poor conductor, while the field
in the much more conductive ionic medium of the interior of the
cell is small.  

Studies were carried out by Sowers and Lieber [77] on the

size, lifetimes, numbers and location of the pores formed in
erythrocyte membranes using low level video microscopy techniques
on RBC ghosts. Two sets of experiments were carried out on
labeled membranes.  The first was to determine the effect of  a
1.2 ms pulse,  the second was to determine the effect of a 0.6 ms
pulse.  To probe the diameter of the electropores they used
soluble fluorescent molecules.  These  included  6-deoxy-N-(7-
nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazol-4-yl) aminoglucose ( NDB-G) , several 
fluorescent dyes of average molecular weight 10000,  70000,
156000 Daltons. These molecules have average unhydrated and
unconjugated sphere radii of 0.45, 0.54, 0.75 ( from C-C bond
lengths), 2.3, 5.8, 8.4 ( from chromatography ), and 1.8, 2.8,
4.3 from ( 0.00151 nm3/Da ).  

In their experiments, they found that regardless of the
pulse characteristics, efflux occurred for all fluorescent labels
except fluoresceinated bovine serum ( FB) , fluoresceinated
myoglobin (FM) and R-phycoerythrin (RP), and that whether the
pulses were 0.6 ms pulses or 1.2ms pulses, each pulse always
induced only some of the fluorescence to leave the ghost. 
Additional  pulses eventually caused the membrane to lose all
visible fluorescence.  This suggested that after induction the
electropores were self resealing, i.e. reversible pores, at least
to a radius equal to or smaller than the size of the  probe

13

molecule.  It also indicated that the labels used did not bind to
the membrane.  They also found that a distinct cloud of
fluorescence appeared outside the hemisphere facing the negative
electrode after a single 1.2 ms pulse.  The cloud developed  20-
50 ms after the pulse and was visible for about 200 ms after the
pulse.  During the existence of the cloud  they estimated that
the total pore area as a fraction of the total membrane area was
about 0.0006.  

Since the largest dextran used  ( m 156000 ), was able to

escape the cell via the pores formed in the membrane, the pores
were determined to be at least  8.4 nm in diameter, corresponding
to the size of the largest dextran molecule.  The loss of
fluorescence occurs in increments; a large immediate loss over a
very short period followed by little or no loss over a much
longer interval. This suggests that the pore opens to some finite
size for a finite time and then reseals rapidly.  They observed
continuous loss of fluorescence  only when NDB-G was used as a
probe, suggesting that the pores must reclose to a residual
radius which is smaller than LY (0.75nm) but larger than NBD-G    
    (0.45 nm) and remain at that radius.  They concluded that the
formation of electropores were unlikely to be involved in the
electrofusion mechanism.  Other studies measured the effective
diameters and provide an estimate of the numbers of the
electropores formed.  

Bliss et.al [13] (‘88) used flow cytometry to measure

properties of RBCs.  Flow cytometry is useful for providing rapid
optical measurements, both light scattering and fluorescence, on
large numbers of individual cells.  It also provides a means of
investigating morphological changes and uptake of fluorescence-
labeled test macromolecules caused by electroporation.  The use
of fluorescence measurement in flow cytometry provides a flexible
and sensitive analytical technique in biological investigations.
The forward blue scatter ( FBS) signal from the flow cytometry is
widely used as an indicator of the size and shape of cells
[51,75,84]  The FBS signal with a threshold is used to establish
whether a significant optical event had occurred.  

In these experiments, a single 50 µs pulse was applied to

the cells in a PBS suspension containing 0.1mM FITC-dextran
(70,000 dalton). The test molecule was chosen because it has a
relatively small electrical charge.  The FITC -dextran provides a
good probe for the existence of relatively large openings or
pores in the cell membranes.  The applied electric field was
determined from measurements of the current flow, and using the
medium resistivity and the geometry of the chamber.   This
overcame the possibility of large voltage drops which can occur
between the electrode-electrolyte interface. Their results
indicated that the percent of electroporated cells with large
pores, as revealed by the significant uptake of  FITC-dextran,
was greater than 20% for even a single pulse of optimal amplitude
( 8.8 KV/cm ) .

Klenchin et.al [46] (1991), using transfection of Simian
Cos-1 cells with DNA, concluded that the uptake of the DNA by the

14

cells following the application of a porating pulse was
electrophoretically driven.   In their experiments they found
that the uptake of the DNA was an order of magnitude larger when
the electric field was oriented so that the DNA moved in the
opposite direction of the field toward the cells as compared to
when the direction of the field was such that the DNA had to move
in the direction of the field in order to enter the cells.  DNA
is slightly negatively charged.  Their results also suggests that
the uptake of the DNA by the cell is a fairly rapid process that
occurs within a time period of less than 3 seconds.  If the DNA
is placed in the bathing solution prior to the application of the
pulse they found that the transfection rate was much larger than
if the DNA was introduced after the application of the pulse. 
The efficiency of penetration of the DNA into the cell was found
to be two orders of magnitude higher in the case where the DNA is
introduced before the pulse as compared to when it is introduced
after the pulse.  

Their results indicated that there was a characteristic time

for the penetration of the DNA into the cells.  This time was
estimated to be approximately 3 seconds following the application
of the pulse.  This suggests that the pores formed in the
membrane are only able to allow the passage of the DNA for a time
of 3 seconds.  They also investigated the effect of varying the
electrophoretic mobility of the DNA in the pulsation medium. 
Ficoll-400 was added to the pulsation medium to increase the
viscosity of the medium and hence decreases the mobility of DNA. 
Other factors that may also affect the mobility of the DNA in
solution include the effective charge on the molecule and the
ionic environment.  Results indicated that as the concentration
of the Ficoll-400 in the medium was increased the transfection
efficiency of the DNA decreased.  One can conclude then that
electrophoresis may play a significant role in the penetration of
DNA into the cell.  They also suggested that it may be possible
for the DNA to enter the cell even when the size of the pore is
less than the size of the DNA molecule. They proposed that the
presence of the field may allow the DNA molecules in contact with
the cell membrane to produce a force on the molecule that causes
the membrane to create an evagination so that the DNA with the
surrounding membrane sac is taken into the cell. 

Chapter II    Experimental basis of present theory 

The normal method for performing electroporation is to

place the cells in suspension within a region of an
externally applied electric field. The electric field is
usually set up by the plates of a parallel plate capacitor,
with plate separation of from approximately 0.1 to 1 cm. 
The cells undergoing electroporation are placed in a
suspension that fills the spaces between the plates of the
capacitor.  In the capacitor space, the cells are freely
mobile and can translate as well as rotate in the field. 
This freedom of movement of the cells means we have no
specific information about the position or orientation of
the cells when it is exposed to the porating electric field. 
This makes it difficult to determine the particular region
of the cell exposed to the maximal electric field.   

(cid:3)

The transmembrane potential 

V for a spherical cell in

a uniform field it has been shown in eq. (1.1).  For a
typical cell of 1 µm radius, to achieve a transmembrane
potential of ~ 1V, the  applied field E, should have a
magnitude of approximately 1 x 106 V/m or 104  V/cm.  In order
to obtain the required magnitude of the field with a plate
separation of from 0.1 to 1 cm, a voltage between the plates
of 103 to 104  volts is required.  This magnitude of a
voltage results in large currents and Joule heating effects
when the suspending solution is normal saline solution.  The
Joule heating can result in severe damage to the cells in
the suspension medium. 

In one approach used to minimize the effect of the

Joule heating, the cells are placed in a suspension medium
which is much less conductive than normal isotonic saline
solution.  This approach leads to other problems, in that
the cells are now no longer in their normal environment, and
are thus likely to suffer damage to the cell membrane from
exposure of the cell to a foreign environment.  While using
less conductive solution may address one problem, it does
not address the free motion of the cells in the suspension,
so that their orientation in the field is still unknown, and
thus attempts to relate the position of pores formed in the
membrane, to the position of the maximal transmembrane
potential is difficult.  

The electroporation method we utilize differs from the

(cid:1)

normal method of performing electroporation.  This technique
makes use of a polycarbonate chamber in which is placed a
very thin ( ~ 10 - 15 
system consists of a cylindrical polycarbonate chamber
formed from mirror halves that can be separated at the
middle. Figure 2 shows a vertical sectional view of the
chamber. The chamber has an inner lumen of 1 centimeter
diameter and a height of 2 cm.  A thin polycarbonate filter

m ) polycarbonate filter [ 71].  The

15

can be placed in the middle of the chamber.  The filter
serves as a partial barrier between the upper and lower
parts of the chamber since it has small cylindrical pores
which extend through its thickness,.  

Figure 2 Schematic of
Impedance Chamber.
(From: Schmukler [70]
)

Located at  the top and bottom of the chamber are

carbon/graphite electrodes which are used to apply an
electric field to the contents of the chamber. The side
walls of the chamber have openings for the insertion of
voltage  measuring electrodes. These measuring electrodes
are positioned on either side of the filter so that the
potential difference across the filter can be measured.  The
top and bottom parts of the chamber have ports that permit
the chamber to be individually filled with isotonic saline
solution.  These also provide ports for the introduction of
other materials into the chamber.  The filter is placed in
the middle of the chamber which is then filled with isotonic
saline solution.  When a potential is applied across the
ends of the chamber, a substantial potential difference
forms across the filter. Since the filter is less conductive
than the surrounding saline solution, the potential
difference across the filter is a significant part of the
applied potential. 

When cells are trapped in the pores of the filter, the
portion of the cell membrane that is embedded in the filter
pore is exposed to approximately the same potential
difference that exists across the filer. This potential
difference may be reduced because of the current leakage
around the cells trapped in the pores. If however the
leakage is relatively small, then the cell membrane that is
positioned in the pores of the filter experiences the
potential difference across the filter.  This potential
difference across the thin filter (~ 15 
large field across the filter. 

m) results in a

(cid:1)

16

The present technique overcomes some of the problems of

electroporation in suspension, while introducing others. 
One of the main advantages of the present method is that the
cells are held In a fixed position by embedding them in the
pores.  Because the cells are held in a fixed position
relative to the external field, it is possible to make
determinations of the location of pores formed in the
membrane relative to the direction of the applied electric
field. Another advantage is that the external electric
potential is small enough to minimize Joule heating.

Since the cells are also placed in an isotonic solution

the surrounding environment is similar to the environment
that the cell normally experiences.  In addition, since
lower potentials can be applied across the chamber to
achieve the same magnitude field across the cells embedded
in the filter as that achieved in suspension media, it is
possible to perform more precise measurements and obtain
information about the response of the cell membrane than is
possible using a suspension system. 

  With the given dimensions of the chamber, the field

that exists between the electrodes is approximately uniform. 
In this procedure cells are allowed to sediment and become
layered onto the filter and then made to embed in the filter
by the application of a slight negative hydrostatic pressure
( ~ 40 cm H2O). The application of the negative pressure
causes a small portion of the cell membrane to be drawn into
the pore of the filter.  With the cells embedded in the
filter, the electric field is applied simultaneously to the
entire sample of cells ( ~ 3.3 x10 5 cells ). 

The protocol for an experiment with Red Blood Cells is

as follows:
(cid:127)

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

The chamber is rinsed out with saline and thoroughly
dried
The filter is placed in the chamber and the chamber
reassembled
The chamber is carefully filled with saline solution to
avoid stretching the filter and to avoid forming any
air bubbles in the chamber.
The Red Blood cells (RBC) are prepared from 5-6 drops
of blood suspended in approximately 15 cc of saline
solution. The mixture is shaken to ensure uniform
mixing and then centrifuged at low speed for   ~ 5
minutes to wash the RBC’s.
The supernatant is removed along with the top layer of
cells, which contain the buffy coat.  This layer
contains most of the white blood cells.
The cell precipitate is then re-suspended in 0.5cc
saline and mixed thoroughly.
Approximately 0.1 cc of the re-suspended cells are
injected into the chamber just above the filter.
The cells are injected into the chamber with the
chamber upright and allowed to sediment onto, and

17

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

disperse across the filter,  for approximately 5
minutes. 
The lower  portion of the chamber is attached to a
pressure head via a 3- way stop-cock. 
With the upper portion of the chamber open a downward
positive pressure equal to approximately 40 cm of water
is applied from the lower portion of the chamber by
maintaining a lower hydrostatic level, in the connected
pressure head.
The applied pressure causes the cells to seat into the
pores of the filter. The extent of the cell-filter seal
can be determined by checking the flow rate of fluid
through the filter.  If the cells form a proper seal
the flow rate of fluid across the filter is essentially
almost zero.
With the pressure on,  the chamber is then inverted and
the loose cells allowed to sediment away from the top
of the filter.  These loose cells are then washed away
with saline.
It is important to remember that the orientation of the
chamber is inverted from the original position, so that
the top of the chamber is now at the bottom 
Using our method , the cells are held in a fixed
position relative to the external applied field since they
are embedded in the filter. The pores in the filter are made
by etching the tracks left by alpha particles incident on
the polycarbonate filter material to produce roughly
cylindrical pores with an average diameter of 1.85 µm.  The
pores may have a maximum deviation in the axis of symmetry
from the vertical of about 30°.

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

Figure 3a. Electrical model of the Chamber with filter.

18

Figure 3b. Electrical model of chamber with filter and
cells.
R
(cid:1)
(cid:2)
(cid:20)

(cid:2)
(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:3) (cid:11)(cid:12) (cid:4)(cid:11)(cid:13)(cid:8)(cid:14)
(cid:2)
(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:3) (cid:11)(cid:12) (cid:12)(cid:5)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:17)
(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:7)(cid:21)(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:3) (cid:11)(cid:12) (cid:12)(cid:5)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:17) (cid:20)

(cid:1)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:3)
(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:3) (cid:11)(cid:12) (cid:18)(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:3)
(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:7)(cid:21)(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:3) (cid:11)(cid:12) (cid:18)(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:3)

(cid:4)

(cid:3)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

The setup of the chamber with the filter in place may

be modeled in terms of combinations of resistors and
capacitors.  The main resistances are due to the solution
filling the chamber, the filter and the cell membrane.  For
the chamber setup without the filter, the system may be
viewed as a resistance due to the solution. With the filter
in place, the system can be represented in terms of the
combined series resistances of the saline solution and the
filter. The resistance of the filter may also be viewed in
terms of the conductance due to the channels in the filter. 
Since the filter is made of a dielectric material, it also
has some capacitance.  Thus the filter may be represented
electrically as a resistance or conductance in parallel with
a capacitance.  

The total conductance of the filter is due to the
combined conductance of the pores in the filter.  Thus from
a determination of the resistance of the filter and a
knowledge of the average number of pores in the membrane it
is possible to determine the resistance of a single pore. 
With the filter in place, the chamber may be modeled as
shown in figure 3a. 

The addition of the cells to the chamber and the
embedding of the cells into the filter pores modifies
resistance and capacitance of the system. In addition to the
cell contributions, there is a leakage current due to the
layer of liquid between the cell membrane and the walls of
the filter pore. With cells embedded in the filter the

19

system may be modeled as shown in figure 3b.

Using differential measurements, we can determine the

contributions of the various elements to the impedance of
the system.   An impedance measurement on the chamber,
without the filter in place, gives the magnitude of the
saline impedance between the voltage measuring electrodes.
The addition of the filter gives the impedance of the saline
and the filter. The difference between these two
measurements gives the impedance of the filter only. The
addition of the embedded cells permits us to determine the
contribution of the cell membranes and the leak resistances
around the cells. 

Once the electropores are formed in the cells, an
impedance measurement gives the total impedance of the
system with pores. From this measurement, and the value of
the system before the electropore is formed, we can
determine the change in the impedance due to the formation
of the electropores. This change may be used to model the
formation of the electropores.

We seek to relate the pore size determined from the

impedance measurement to that determined from a theoretical
consideration. The simplest approach is to approximate the
cell as a spherical cell and treat the problem as that of a
dielectric sphere in a uniform external electric field.  The
major problem is then one of determining the potential
distribution in the region of the pore as well as over the
remaining surface of the cell.  

In the present approach the simplest model of the pore

is one of a cylindrical opening in a flat membrane.  This
model leads to a solution of Laplace's’ equation in
cylindrical coordinates. Unfortunately the boundary
conditions at the top and bottom of the cylinder can not be
uniquely specified.  This limitation leads to an incomplete
specification of the solution.  In cylindrical coordinates
the solution involves a sum of Bessel functions.  Due to
these difficulties in describing the boundaries and
potentials everywhere on the cylinder wall, the expansion
coefficients cannot be uniquely determined.

20

21

Chapter III    Theoretical approach to the problem

The goal of our theoretical approach is to relate the

size of the pore formed in the cell membrane to the
magnitude of the applied field. We seek to determine the
form of the electric field in the region of the electropore
formed in the membrane. In considering the fields existing
in the pore, we take the membrane to be a single layer of
uniform conductivity. The internal structures of the cell as
well as other membrane components are also ignored.  The
microscopic details of the cell membrane, i.e.,  membrane
proteins, microcalyx, microtubules, membrane  glycoproteins
and other structures, are not included in this model.  The
possible impact of the cell nucleus where applicable,
endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria etc., on the field
distribution is also ignored for this treatment.

The intracellular region is viewed as essentially a

(cid:1)

3.  The

uniform medium with a single conductivity 
conductivity  of the intracellular contents is taken to be
much larger than the conductivity of the membrane.  This is
in accordance with the composition of the cell membrane as
composed mostly of non-conducting lipid components.  The
intracellular components on the other hand are mostly ionic
in nature, which results in the interior of the cell having
a much larger electrical conductance than the membrane.   We
can therefore model the cell as a spherical shell with an
outer radius of R and shell thickness, t.

The initial approach used was to solve Laplace’s

equation in spherical coordinates and thus determine the
potential over the entire shell. Next, we
would determine how the potential distribution changed when
a pore was formed in one region of the cell. The pore was
treated as a cylindrical pore in a flat sheet, which leads
to a description of the pore in cylindrical coordinates. The
potential distribution in the pore was sought. The form of
the solution involves the Bessel functions, but because of
limitations in specifying the boundary conditions on the
cylinder, the analytical form of the solution could not be
found. In addition to the difficulty in describing the
boundary conditions in the cylindrical pore, we see that the
description of the pore as a cylinder in a flat sheet is not
a biophysically realistic model. Because the membrane is
essentially a fluid sheet, the edges required in the
cylindrical model would not be present. Thus, we seek an
alternative description of the pore. The description of the
pore and surrounding membrane should be such that it more
realistically models the membrane around the pore. The model
should account for the relatively constant thickness of the
membrane as well as the fluid nature of the membrane itself.
The membrane model geometry was expressed in oblate
spheroidal coordinates. In this view, when the pore is

22

formed, the upper and lower portions of the membrane must
join around the lumen of the pore.  Thus we expect that
around the pore, the membrane must be greatly curved. We can
therefore use the curvature of the membrane to specify the
particular coordinate surface chosen to represent the
membrane. 

Due to the limitations of determining the analytic form

of the potential in the pore from a solution of Laplace’s
equation, an alternate method is sought for obtaining a
solution. The method uses Maxwells equations and boundary
conditions on the field, as well as the continuity condition
to determine a functional form for the potential in the
pore. With the potential in the pore determined we find the
current flow in the system. Through the continuity
condition, we relate the current in the different regions of
the system and thus the fields existing in the different
regions. This allows the determination of the relationship
between the applied field and the field in the electropore. 
In order to achieve the theoretical goal of determining
a relationship between the applied field and the size of the
pore formed, we utilize a simple interaction between the
field and the membrane. This interaction examines the  force
due to the inhomogeneity of the field in the pore and the
charges in the charged heads of the phospholipid components
of the membrane. We argue that this force is counteracted by
the surface tension of the membrane such that the
electropore will expand until the forces due to the field is
equal to that due to the surface tension effects on the
hole. 

III.2    Oblate spheroidal coordinates

We will briefly review the transformations needed to

calculate the form of the fields in and around the pore.  A
more detailed calculation of the transformations is given in
the references (Hercules, et.al., 2002).  In oblate
spheroidal coordinates the transformation equations from
Cartesian coordinates can be written as 

We will also need the scale factors which relate
infinitesimal coordinate changes to infinitesimal lengths:

23

 

(cid:22)(cid:5)(cid:23)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:3) (cid:25)(cid:14)
(cid:29)(cid:12)(cid:17)(cid:11)(cid:18) (cid:30)(cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:16)(cid:3)(cid:8)(cid:14) (cid:31) !"

(cid:26)(cid:19)(cid:13)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:3) (cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:27)(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:11)(cid:5)(cid:28)(cid:7)(cid:13) (cid:9)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:17)(cid:28)(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:4)

III.3    Determination of Field Configuration in
ElectroPore

We make use of the field conditions that are to be

satisfied by the electromagnetic fields:
  

i.)  

ii.) 

the normal component of J is
continuous across a boundary,
the tangential component of
the electric field is
continuous at an interface.

The field can be written in terms of its components as 

For steady state conditions, the fields are found to be of
the forms

24

(cid:29) (cid:14)#"

(cid:29) (cid:14)$"

(cid:2)
 The z axis corresponds to the value of  

 = 1, and is

included in the region of the pore in the membrane.  From
the expression for  

, points on the z axis would have

an electric field with a magnitude which is undefined, thus
 .  We see therefore , that in the pore, the
we take 

field is entirely in  the   direction.

III.4    Curvature of the membrane

In order  to find the potential distribution on the

membrane we must first find some way to describe the
membrane in the coordinate system chosen.  In an attempt to
do this, the curvature of the edge of the membrane when the
pore is formed will be calculated.  This curvature for a
(cid:3)
particular value of the coordinate 
membrane in the region of the pore.  We will take this shape
to be consistent independent of the size of the pore.  From
the relational equations, the shape of this curve z can be
 viz. 
written as a function of 

 gives the shape of the

(cid:4)

The curvature K of this curve can be found from the
definition 

(cid:29) (cid:14) "

25

(cid:29) (cid:14)(cid:25)"

(cid:29) (cid:14)%"

(cid:29) (cid:14)&"

(cid:29) (cid:14)’"

Writing the apex pore radius as

a direct calculation for K gives 

From this expression for K, it can be determined that the
maximum curvature will occur at the point 
the maximum curvature is found to be,

 = b, for which

(cid:4)

(cid:2)
The membrane must be described by a 

 that approximates

0 used to describe the membrane.  The
 result in a z value that  is a

the real physical parameters of the  membrane.   The real
physical parameters of the membrane, including the length of
the lipid molecules, the closest separation between the
phosphor heads, the separation of the lipid tails and the
thickness of the membrane,  must be related to the
(cid:2)
particular value 
(cid:2)
curves of constant 
monotonically increasing function, and it is thus necessary
to determine the value of the parameter 
thickness of the model membrane is equal to the true
membrane thickness, t.  This value of 
which the use of the oblate spheroidal coordinates is
applicable. The point denoted by ( 
distance  
from the axis through the pore given by 
the position at which the membrane thickness is the required

0) corresponds to a
0 from the axis of the pore .  With the distance
(cid:4)
 and parametrizing

 forms the limit for
(cid:2)
0, 

o  for which the

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

(cid:5)

(cid:5)

value, it is possible to write  

,  

 and K in terms

of the parametrization   
maximum curvature , Km we obtain

(cid:4)

(cid:6)
 = b + 

 .  Using the region of

and in terms of  

 the terms 

 , 

  and K can

(cid:4)

(cid:6)
 = b + 

be expressed as,  

26

(cid:29) (cid:14)("

(cid:29) (cid:14))"

(cid:29) (cid:14)#*"

In order to determine the particular choice of the

0 that will be used to describe the membrane, we

(cid:2)
parameter 
will use certain properties of the membrane components.  The
phospo-lipid molecules that comprise the membrane have a
given length , L.  The minimum separation of the phospo
heads in the membrane is given by a distance, d. 

We can construct an approximation to the membrane shape

around the pore by arranging the phosphor-lipid molecules
such that the minimum head separation is d, with the closest
approach between the tails of adjacent lipids constrained to
a minimum distance 
membrane can be constructed that resembles the properties of
the membrane sufficiently far away from the pore.  Figure 7
illustrates this model.

. Using this approach, a model of the

(cid:7)

27

(cid:22)(cid:5)(cid:23)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:3) ’(cid:14) +(cid:9)(cid:27)(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:9) (cid:11)(cid:12) (cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:21)(cid:5)(cid:28) (cid:15)(cid:7),(cid:11)(cid:24)(cid:6) (cid:5)(cid:8) (cid:6)(cid:27)(cid:3) -(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:3) .(cid:11)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:14)

The equation of the curve, however cannot be determined

from purely geometrical requirements, and we make an
approximation for the curve based on the maximum curvature
of the membrane determined from the biophysical membrane
parameters.  We need to find some way of defining the
(cid:2)
particular 
membrane, primarily that the thickness of the membrane
remains relatively constant at a value t.  We determine the
curvature  of the curve based on the model shown in figure
8.  

 that has the properties required of the

(cid:22)(cid:5)(cid:23)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:3) ((cid:14)
(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:17)0(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:3)

/(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:18)(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:11)(cid:8) (cid:11)(cid:12) -(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:3)

28

In this model we assume that we can construct the membrane
from the phospho-lipid molecules starting with one
horizontal and placing the adjacent molecules so that the
heads are a minimum distance d apart, and the tails have a
closest  distance 
might not have the same center, however since 
we can make the approximation that the centers are the same. 
From the figure we can relate the angles by 

. Based on this model adjacent molecules
 is ~ 0.1 L,

(cid:7)

(cid:7)

Thus we can express the distances from some fixed point,
chosen to be the origin, to the head of the adjacent
molecule as

This means that the position of the head of the adjacent
lipid can be expressed as

The tangent vector to the curve is given by 

From the parametric expression for the curvature 

which is calculated to be

(cid:2)
of the curve 

From the previous expression for the maximum curvature

(cid:2)
0 
0, we can now calculate the value 

(cid:2)
solving this equation for  

0 in terms of L and b gives

(cid:29) (cid:14)##"

29

(cid:29) (cid:14)#$"

We express the membrane thickness t, in terms of the
parameters L, 

 thus

(cid:7)

We will henceforth assume that 
can be ignored.

 is much less than L, and

We can now find the value of 

0 for which the membrane

thickness is attained.  When the membrane has a thickness t,
we can write the z coordinate of the parametric curve to be
given by z=L.  Using the transformation equation to oblate
spheroidal coordinates

(cid:7)

(cid:5)

Substitution gives 

Using the relationship 

we obtain the expression for the coordinate parameter a
expressed in terms of the biophysical parameters desired

(cid:2)
Using 

(cid:5)
0 from 3.12 we can write 

0 as

(cid:29) (cid:14)#$"

(cid:29) (cid:14)# "

We can find the distance from the z axis to the position
where the thickness of the membrane reaches the value L.
This distance is given by

At this location, the slope of the membrane is found from
equation (3.8) as

(cid:29) (cid:14)#(cid:25)"

30

which gives a measure of the geometrical mismatch between
the oblate spheroidal pore and the membrane which away from
the pore has vanishing slope.

At the position (

) the geometrical bound of the

electropore described in oblate spheroidal coordinates meets
the remainder of the membrane described in spherical
coordinates,  which, for regions close to the pore, may be
taken as being essentially flat. From the slope we see that
the curve makes a
non-negligible angle in the region where it transitions to
the remainder of the membrane. Thus at the edge there is a
small region of mismatch between the fields, represented in
one region by oblate spheroidal coordinates and in the other
region by spherical coordinates. We must therefore relate
the fields in the two different regions from a consideration
of the continuity of the components of the field. The
quantity expressed in the two different coordinate systems
represents the same field, thus the magnitude and direction
of the field in each region should approximately match that
in the other region. At the edge 
two regions can be written in terms of the its components in
Cartesian coordinates. 

 the fields in the

In the region asymptotic represented by spherical

coordinates, the field   can be expressed as  

.

These components can then be expressed in terms of cartesian
coordinates as,

The components of the field in spherical coordinates

are found from the potential distribution found,

with 

 given in the reference [36] (Hercules, et.al.,

2002).  The field is given by

31

We can then calculate the magnitude of the vector 

 . Ignoring terms of second order in small

parameters, this gives the magnitude of the vector in
spherical coordinates as

with, R equal to the cell hemisphere radius, which is taken
(cid:6)
to be the same as the radius of the filter pore, 
oblate spheroidal coordinates, the field at the position

.  In

 is given by equation (3.1)

This can be written in terms of the parameters L and b,
using the values found for    ( 3.12) and   (3.13). This

gives

(cid:29) (cid:14)#%"

Setting the magnitudes of the fields to be equal, we have

(cid:1)
where, R, in this expression is set equal to, 
field in the near region of the remainder of the membrane is
related to the field in the electropore by

.  Thus the

32

At the position 

 the polar angle, denoted  , can be

found from the relation 

(cid:29) (cid:14)#&"

Substituting for    gives

Thus the field in the region of coordinate matching 

becomes 

We can use this expression to calculate the current

flowing through the remainder of the membrane.

(cid:29) (cid:14)#’"

III.5    Shear forces in the membrane

We determine the relationship between the magnitude of

the electric field and the pore size by relating the shear
force between adjacent molecules in the lipid bilayer to the
force due to the surface tension in the membrane. We then
relate the field in the electropore to the applied field in
the chamber, and thus we establish the relationship between
the applied field and the pore radius. 

The force between any two charges in the membrane due

to the electric field must be calculated in order to relate
the electric field to the size of the pore.  The shear force
on adjacent charge sites is given by

33

where E2 , and E1 are the effective electric fields at the
different positions, r1, r2.
This difference in the fields between the charges can be
written as 

Thus the shear force in the membrane can be written as 

where  

. The shear force in the membrane is along

the surface of the membrane in the direction of 
means that the directional derivative is the gradient in the
direction of 

.  This

. 

(cid:5)

(cid:5)

(where h is the local scale factor) so that the shear force
is

The charge separation d corresponds to the separation of the
polar heads of the lipid molecules.  This separation is the
distance of closest approach of the phospholipid heads.  The
force opposing the shear effect is due to the surface
tension in the membrane.  The force due to the surface
tension is typically written in the form 

(cid:8)
where l = circumference of the pore and 
the surface tension of the membrane.  In this case,

 is defined to be

(cid:4)

(cid:4)

=

o is the previously calculated radius of the pore

where 
at the position where the thickness of the membrane has the
value t.  This gives a force from surface tension of

From the form of the electric field found previously in
equation (3.1) and the transformation factor h we have 

34

(cid:29) (cid:14)#("

(cid:29) (cid:14)#)"

Equating the shear force in the membrane to the surface
tension yields

This can be written in terms of the parameters b and L as

This equation relates the electric field in the electropore
 to the radius of the electropore and the surface tension

(cid:8)
of the membrane, 

. Thus we find that

The field in the electropore can then be related to the
externally applied field through the continuity condition
giving a relationship between the applied field, the size of
the electropore formed, and the surface tension of the
membrane.  Under the effect of the shear force in the
membrane the pore will increase in size until the shear
force is balanced by the surface tension due to the change
in the pore diameter.

III.6    Continuity condition

Experimentally, RBC’s are trapped within the pores of a

nonconducting polycarbonate filter.  When an electric field
is applied to the end electrodes, a potential difference is
established across the filter and there is a current flow
within the chamber. For the chamber with filter and cells,
the only field boundary conditions that can be written
involves current conservation and the asymptotic values of
the potential.  The applied potential will be assumed as +V
at -Z0 and   -V at +Z0 .

The current  flowing through the circuit can be

directly measured.  Since the filter has a large resistance,
we can assume that all of the current flows through the
pores in the filter.  With the cells embedded In the filter,

35

the current flowing through the filter pores must be the
same as that flowing through the cell membrane plus the
leakage current.  In addition, since the asymptotic value of
the  electric field is known, and the applied field is
essentially uniform, the current flowing can be related to
the asymptotic field.  This relationship is used to relate
the magnitude of the field in the pore of the filter to the
magnitude of the externally applied field. 

The continuity conditions require the current flowing

through the solution in the upper and lower portions of the
chamber be equal to the current flowing through the pores of
the filter.  Thus we have that

where N is the number of filter pores.

When the cells are embedded in the filter pores, the
current through the filter pore is the sum of the current
through the cell and the leakage current around the cell. We
can write this as

where 
If = current through the filter pore
Ip = current through the electropore
Il = leakage current around the cell
Imem = current through the remainder of the membrane

For the cell embedded in the filter, the application of

an external field leads to the flow of current across the
cell membrane. Conservation of charge requires that the
current flowing through the lower part of the cell membrane
be equal to the current through the electropore plus the
current through the remainder of the membrane in the filter
pore.  This condition on the current flow through the cell
may be written as,

where the terms on the right indicate the contribution
through the electropore and the remainder of the membrane at
the top.  

The integral of the current density in the pore is over
the region of the pore formed in the membrane.  The limit of
the integral of the current density through the membrane is
(cid:6)
from the radius of the electropore to the radius 
(cid:6)
filter  pore (
integrals,, the shape of the membrane within the filter pore
is assumed to be in the shape of a hemisphere with a radius
equal to the radius of the filter pore. 

 ~0.925 µm).  To determine the limits of the

, of the

The cells embedded in the filter do not make a perfect

seal with the walls of the filter, thus we make allowances

36

for the leakage current around the cell.  The leakage
current flows through the thin film of liquid that exists
between the cell membrane and the edge of the filter.  This
current is driven by the electric field that exists at the
edge of the filter pore. 

We want to calculate the current flowing through the
membrane pore, using the form of the electric field found
previously.  The current flow through the pore is in the
direction  
in the 

 , so from the component of the electric field

 direction we have

(cid:5)

(cid:5)

The general area element is

with the scale factors given by

and

Substitution into the integral gives the current flowing
through the membrane pore as

(cid:2)
The upper limit of  
to be

(cid:2)
 is 1, and we have already determined 

0

thus the current through the pore is 

37

Substituting for a from (3.12) gives

(cid:29) (cid:14)$*"

We can next calculate the current flowing through the

remainder of the membrane, from the edge of the pore to the
walls of the filter.  The current flow through the membrane
is due to the normal component of the field at the membrane,
this component is the radial component of the field at the
membrane.  We assume that for a small electropore, the
potential distribution over the membrane is not
significantly altered, thus we use the functional form of
the potential already found with the coefficients evaluated
on the membrane around the electropore. The outer radius of
the portion of the cell in the filter pore is equal to the
(cid:6)
radius of the filter pore, 
remainder of the membrane is thus

.  The current through the

The lower limit of this integral, 
the electropore. We can determine the angle 
relation 

0, is the angle formed by

(cid:9)

1 from the

(cid:9)

(cid:6)
where   is the radius of the electropore and 
radius of the filter pore. Evaluating the integral yields

 is the

(cid:29) (cid:14)$#"

This can be written in terms of the field in the filter
pore. Equation (3.17) relates the field in the electropore
to the field in the remainder of the membrane, thus in terms
of the field in the electropore the current through the
remainder of the membrane is 

38

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:6)

We must now relate the current in the filter pore to

the current in the chamber, using the conditions already
stated.  We have calculated the current through the
electropore and the remainder of the membrane. Since we do
not have an analytic expression for the field in the pore of 
the filter nor the thickness of layer of liquid between the
cell and the wall of the filter, the leakage current must be
determined from experimental parameters. 

The current conservation conditions give

Substituting for 

,  , and   gives the relationship

between the applied field and the field in the electropore
and the remainder of the membrane

where 

 and 

 are related to   and  

  by the

expressions

We can then relate the applied field to the radius of the
electropore formed, b.
Combining the relation between the field in the electropore
and the radius of the pore gives

39

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:6)

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:8)(cid:6)

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:9)(cid:6)

Substituting the dependance of the leak current on the
applied field, we obtain the relation

The field required to produce an electropore of a given

size may then be found from this relation.  We can utilize
values found in the literature to obtain a graph of the
expected pore size resulting from a given field applied to
the chamber.  The field applied to the chamber is expected
to be multiplied by the factor

to obtain the field that is applied across the filter given
in equation (3.23).  The surface tension is expected to vary
considerably with the local temperature of the membrane. 
Rand, [63] reported a value of the surface tension of 0.007
- 0.018 dynes/cm. The erythrocyte membrane thickness is
approximately 8 nm . With values ranging from about 5 - 10
nm reported. The resistivity of the saline solution is
approximately 65 
/cm [72] and the resistivity of the
saline is approximately 3.5 times that of the cytoplasm

(cid:10)

[72].  Using these values, the expected relationship between
pore size and field applied across the chamber is shown in
the graphs of figure 9.

40

(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:15)(cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:7) (cid:18) (cid:8)(cid:4)
(cid:19)(cid:14)(cid:7)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:16) (cid:22)(cid:23)
(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:14)(cid:15) (cid:14)(cid:7)(cid:24)(cid:11)(cid:13)(cid:16) (cid:14)(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:11)(cid:27)(cid:12) (cid:23)(cid:14)(cid:22)(cid:28)
(cid:23)(cid:11)(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:24) (cid:7)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:11)(cid:15)(cid:24) (cid:26)(cid:22) (cid:29)(cid:21)(cid:7)(cid:28)(cid:8)(cid:15)(cid:14)

III.7    Comparison of results with experimental data

Calculation of the pore size from experimental data
[72] is shown in the appendix, and gives an approximate pore
radius of from  
difference of 15V applied to the ends of the chamber. This
potential difference generates an electric field of 750 V/m
in the chamber.   A calculation of the field required to
produce a pore of radius 7.5 nm, shows that the field
required is approximately 
chamber. 

 for an ideally operating

 when using a potential

41

Chapter IV    Discussion and Conclusion 

We can compare the prediction of the theory proposed by
Crowley [22] and later modified by Maldarelli and Stebe [49]
with that of the present theory. Crowley considered the
instability produced in the membrane due to the compression
effects of the electric field existing across the membrane. 
This compression produces an instability in the membrane.
For a small steady pressure applied to the ends of an
elastic medium, the medium compresses according to Hookes
law

  
The total compression resulting for a finite pressure p, is
obtained by integrating Hooke’s law under the assumption
that E is constant.  Thus we have 

Viewing the membrane as capacitor plates with a spring
separating them, the elastic force is balanced by the
electric compressive tension, giving

In this approach it is assumed that the instability develops
as a monotonic growth of some small initial disturbance, as
opposed to an oscillation of increasing amplitude. To
determine the instability of the system, a small disturbance
of the system is assumed, and the resulting changes in the
electric and elastic stresses are calculated. If the net
effect of the change in stress is to accelerate the
departure from equilibrium, the system is unstable.  We see
that when the field acts on the capacitor membrane, it
produces a small displacement from equilibrium.  If the
displacement is compressive, the elastic force will
increase, thus tending to return the plates to its original
position. As the plates approach each other, however, the
electric pressure increases, according to its definition

 
This increase in the electric pressure tends to pull the
plates even closer together. If the electric pressure
dominates, the equilibrium is unstable. 
At some critical measure of the instability he was able to
calculate the critical potential existing across the

membrane when the mechanical instability reached its
critical value, which he considered the stage at which pores
were likely to be formed. This value was found to be given
by the expression 

42

where 

 is the permitivitty of the membrane

 is the critical transmembrane potential at breakdown

 is the Youngs modulus of the membrane
 is the thickness of the membrane.

The value 0.18 corresponds to the measure of the critical
membrane instability. 
While this theory may predict the formation of pores in the
membrane, it does not provide a relationship between the
applied field and the size of the pore formed. 

Maldarelli and Stebe, using a modification of Crowley’s
theory to include the anisotropy of the membrane response to
the electrocompressive effects of the electric field derived
the relationship giving the critical membrane voltage. 

The present theory is similar to that presented by
Crowley in that it relates the electric field effects to the
mechanical properties of the membrane. In this model, the
shear effect of the field is related to the surface tension
of the membrane. It might be expected that the surface
tension of the membrane would be less than than the
compressibility of the membrane, since, to compress the
membrane requires a physical overlap of the lipid tails of
the membrane components. The shearing of the membrane,
however, requires the separation of the molecules in the
membrane. The forces between the molecules are mainly Van
der Waals forces and hydrogenic bonding. Thus we might
expect that the separation of the molecules in the membrane
would be more easily accomplished than the compression of
the molecules.
  
predicted for a detectable pore size, compared to the
experimental value of the field gives essentially no
correlation. We can therefore infer that the disruption of
the membrane based on a simple mechanical model of the 
forces in the membrane due to the electrical field does not
provide an adequate description of the electroporation
phenomenon. 

Comparison between the theoretical value of the field

While the model does not take in to account the effects
of other structures in the membrane (specifically, proteins)
the presence of these structures is unlikely to produce a

43

correction of the orders of magnitude necessary to provide
agreement with experiment. The mechanical properties of the
membrane may also be greatly affected by these structures.
The surface properties of the membrane are affected by the
presence of the membrane skeleton, which forms a network of
filaments attached to the surface of the cytoplasm and has
the function of maintaining the membrane integrity in its
passage through the vessels. This membrane skeleton serves
to reinforce the lipid bilayer, and allows the membrane to
withstand the stresses encountered in passage through the
blood vessels while still permitting it considerable
flexibility [Warren ‘89].

While the measured properties of the membrane, based on

whole cell measurements [63,64 ], includes the effects of
the membrane skeleton,  the regions of electroporation may
be those parts in between the meshwork of protein fibers.
Thus the whole cell measurements may not reflect the
properties of the membrane affected by the applied field.

The system in which cells are embedded in a

polycarbonate filter provides a unique method for studying
the properties of biological cells. The system provides
advantages over the usual method of performing
electroporation in that the normal high voltages are
avoided. The method also allows the use of normal, isotonic
saline solution so that the cells are in a natural
environment for the study. This method also has the
advantage that the cells are held in a fixed position in the
applied field.

Due to the difficulties of modeling the membrane as a
cylindrical pore in a flat sheet and adequately describing
the membrane in cylindrical coordinates,  we have chosen to
model the membrane using oblate spheroidal coordinates . The
fields have been developed, based on the requirements of the
field conditions, namely that the field must satisfy
Maxwells equations and continuity equation.

A simple view of the membrane has been developed based

on the physical parameters of the membrane components ,
which are primarily phospholipid molecules.  The shape of
the membrane around the pore formed was determined based on
the closest packing of these phospholipid  molecules.   This
shape was  determined by considering the curvature of the
membrane around the lumen of the pore, the maximum curvature
being limited by the minimum separation of the heads and
tails of the phospholipid molecules.  No attempt has been
made here to take into account the presence of other
molecules embedded in the membrane such as proteins or
carbohydrates.

We determined the effect of the applied electric field
on the charged polar heads of the phospholipid molecules in
the membrane and showed that the applied field creates a
shear force in the membrane which leads to an enlargement of
the electropore formed. This effect is opposed by the

44

surface 
tension of the membrane, thus establishing a natural balance
between the applied field and the restoring effect of the
membrane. A relationship has been derived between the
magnitude of the applied field and the size of the
electropore formed, given by equation (3.23). 

The effects are related to simple parameters of the

field and membrane. This model does not attempt to describe
the vast body of experimental data that exists, but instead
seeks to establish a direct relationship between the field
and the pore size formed.  

DEDICATION 

I dedicate this effort to the memory of my Mother and

Father, who started me on the journey but did not make it to
the end with me. Their ideas of perseverance kept me going
through the many difficult times.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

I wish to acknowledge the support of the many
individuals who made it possible for me to successfully
complete this work.  

My deepest thanks goes to Dr. Anna Coble for all the
support over the many years as well as her advice on this
project. I am indebted to my thesis advisor Dr. James
Lindesay for the guidance provided along the way.  Many
thanks to Dr. Robert  Schmukler for allowing me the use of
his laboratory and equipment as well as the many valuable
suggestions made. Thanks also to Dr. Mark Esrick for the
time and effort he provided on this project.  Much thanks to
Dr. Tristan Hübsch for his continued encouragement and
assistance, as well as the facilities so willingly made
available for my use, and his willingness to listen to my
ideas and make suggestions. Special thanks to Dr. Demetrius
Venable for providing support and encouragement. To Dr.
Lewis Klein for unhesitatingly making his resources
available to me.  To Dr. Robert Catchings for providing
necessary support.  

I am indebted to the Department of Physics and

Astronomy and the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences for
their continued support. 

I also extend my gratitude to the staff of the

Department of Physics and Astronomy  especially Ms. Mary-ann
Tann for the many problems which she helped solve, and Mr.
Ronald Talley for making my chamber. 

I am grateful to Dr. Walter Lowe for making his
facilities and staff at MHATT-CAT available to assist, in
particular I am deeply grateful to Mr. Steven Bassen for the

45

time and care put into making my chambers.

Special thanks go to Dr. Winston Anderson for his

willingness in providing materials for the experiment. 

Special thanks to my brothers, Merrydale and Robert,
and to my sister Margaret, for their considerable support
over the years.

Finally, I am eternally indebted to Lisa Charles for

her unending love and unconditional support over the
duration of this undertaking, without her support this work
would never have been completed.

Appendix
Calculation of the approximate pore size from experimental
data

 = Impedance of chamber with saline

 24

46

Z1  = Impedance of chamber with saline and filter

= 42 

Z2 = Impedance of chamber with filter and cells before
poration  = 192 

 = Impedance of chamber with filter and cells after

poration  = 180 
The leakage impedance   is determined from 

(cid:10)

ZL = 192 - 24 = 168 
The leakage impedance is due to N parallel leakage
resistances. The leakage impedance is in series with the
filter and saline impedance. We can therefore say that 

 

so 

after poration the conductance of the membrane changes due
to the formation of the pore. The total impedance of the
system is now due to the impedance of the saline, plus the
impedance of the filter now with the parallel combination of
the leak resistance and the impedance of the pore in the
cell membrane. We can thus write the total impedance after
poration as 

where 

 =

 indicates the parallel combination of    and  . We can

calculate   from the expression 

This

gives 

Writing   in

from which 

terms of   and   we have 

The total
impedance of
the pores is due to N pores in parallel, thus the resistance

of each pore is 

We can
thus estimate the radius of the electropore from a 15 V
pulse from the relation 

47

 = resistivity of the saline =65 
 = thickness of the membrane = t 
 = cross sectional area of the electropore

 cm [73]

 

(cid:10)

where 

and 

This gives the radius of the pore as
r =1.69 nm
We can find the range of pore size if we consider that the
electropore may be filled with intracellular fluid, which
has a resistivity approximately 3.5 times that of the
saline. Using this value of the resistivity 

(cid:10)

= 227.5 

 cm 

gives the size of the pore as
r = 3.17 nm 

When an 8 V pulse is used, experimentally it is
difficult to detect the formation of an electropore using
the changes in the impedance of the system. With an
instrument sensitivity of 
the pore that would be electrically undetectable. Since the
electropore is in parallel with the leak resistance we
expect that a pore resistance greater than approximately 
 would be undetectable. This gives an upper limit of

 we can estimate the size of

the pore resistance of detectable pores of 

  which gives 

. 

We can use this to determine the limits of the radius of a
pore that can be electrically detected.  For the pore filled
with solution of resistivity 65 

 cm we find 

(cid:10)

for which we find 

With a solution resistivity of 227.5 

 cm we get

(cid:10)

48

for which
we find 

The radius of the pore is therefore on the order of the size
of separation of the lipids in the membrane or the water
channels in the membrane. We can therefore expect that these
pores would be undetectable from the other similar
structures. 

We find that at an applied potential of 15 V, the
.  

electropore formed has limits of 
At an applied potential of 8V we find that the pores are
undetectable which gives pore limits of 

. 

49

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6

7 

8 

9 

REFERENCES

Abidor, I. G.,  Arakelyan, V. B.,  Chernomodik, L
.V., Chizmadzhev, Y. A., Pastushenko, V. F., and
Tarasevich, M. R.  Electrical breakdown of BLM:
Main experimental facts and their qualitative
discussion.  Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg.  6, 1979,
37-52.

Abidor, Iziaslav G., Lin-Hong Li and Arthur E.
Sowers . Membrane electrofusion yields in
membrane fractions obtained with colloid-osmotic
hemolysis and electrohemolysis procedure.
Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg. 34, 1994,  31-37.

Arfken, George.  Mathematical Methods for
Physicists 2nd. Edition.   Academic Press, New
York and London. 1970.

Bao, Jian-Zhong, Christopher C. Davis, and Robert
Schmukler .  Frequency domain impedance
measurements of erythrocytes: Constant phase
angle impedance characteristics and a phase
transition. Biophysical Journal   61, 1992, 
1427-1434. 

Bao, Jian-Zhong, Christopher C. Davis and Robert
E. Schmukler . Impedance Spectroscopy of Human
erythrocytes: System Calibration and Nonlinear
Modeling. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering. 40,  1993,  364-378. 

Bao, Jian-Zhong, and Christopher C. Davis. Study
of fringing-field effects on the capacitance of a
dielectric disk with a circular conducting hole.
Physical Review E. Vol 47 No. 5,  1993,  3670-
3676.

Barnett, Weaver “Electroporation: A Unified
quantitative theory of reversible electrical
breakdown and rupture.”   Bioelectrochem.
Bioenerg.  25, 1991, 163-182. 

Bartoletti, D. C., G. I. Harrison, and J. C.
Weaver.. The number of molecules taken up by
electroporated cells: quantitative determination. 
FEBS letters  256, 1989,  4-10.

Benz, R., Beckers, F., and Zimmermann, U. . 
Reversible electrical breakdown of lipid bilayer
membranes: A charge pulse relaxation study. 
Journal of Membrane Biology. 48, 1979,  181-204.

50

10  Benz, R. And U Zimmermann.  Pulse-Length

Dependence of the Electrical Breakdown in Lipid
Bilayer Membranes. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta,
597, 1980,  637-642.

11  Benz, Roland and Franco Conti. Reversible

Electrical Breakdown of Squid giant Axon
Membrane. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 645, 
1981, 115-123.

12  Benz, R. And U Zimmermann. The Resealing Process

of Lipid Bilayers After Reversible Electrical
Breakdown. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 640, 
1981, 169-178.

13  Bliss, Jonathan G., Gail I. Harrison, Judith R.

Mourant, Kevin T. Powell and James C. Weaver. 
Electroporation: the population distribution of
macromolecular uptake and shape changes in red
blood cells following a single 50 µs square wave
pulse. Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg.. 20,  1988,  57-
71.

14

Bryant, Gary and Joe Wolfe. Electromechanical
stresses produced in the Plasma Membranes of
suspended cells by applied electric fields. J.
Membrane Biol. 96,  1987,  129-139.

15  Chakrabarti, R., D. E. Wylie, and S. M. Schuster.

Transfer of monoclonal antibodies into mammalian
cells by electroporation. J of Biol. Chem.  264,
1989, 15494-15500.

16

17

Chang, Donald C.  Cell Poration and Cell Fusion
Using an Oscillating Electric Field. Biophysical
Journal   56,  1989,  641-652.

Chang, D. C., and Reese, T. S.  Changes in
membrane structure induced by electroporation as
revealed by rapid-freezing electron microscopy.
Biophysical Journal   58,  1990,  1-12.

18  Chen, Wei and Raphael C. Lee. Electromediated
permeabilization of frog skeletal muscle
membrane: effect of voltage-gated ion channels. 
Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg.. 34,  1994, 157-167.

19  Chernomordik, L. V., S. I. Sukharev, I. G. Abidor

and Yu A. Chizmadzhev.  Breakdown of Lipid
Bilayer Membranes in an Electric Field.
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta. 736, 1983,  203-
213.

51

20

21

22

26

27

28

Chernomordik, L.V., S. I. Sukharev, S.V. Popov,
V.F. Pastushenko, A. V. Sokirko, I.G. Abidor and
Y. A. Chizmadzhev.  The electrical breakdown of
cell and lipid membranes: the similarity of
phenomenologies. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta.
902,  1987,  360-373. 

Coster H. G. L., and Zimmermann, U. The mechanism
of electrical breakdown in the membranes of 
Valonia Utricularis. J .Membrane Biol. 22,  1975, 
73-90.

Crowley, J. M.  Electrical breakdown of
bimolecular lipid membranes as an electro-
mechanical instability.  Biophysical Journal   13
, 1973,  711-724.

23  Dimitrov, D. S.  Electric Field-Induced Breakdown
of Lipid Bilayers and Cell Membranes: A Thin
Viscoelastic Film Model. J. Membrane Biol., 78, 
1984,  53 - 60.

24  Dimitrov, Dimiter S. And Rakesh K. Jain. 

Membrane Stability. Biochimica et Biophysica
Acta, 779,  1984,  437-468.

25  Drago, D. P. And S. Ridella.  Evaluation of

electrical fields inside a biological structure.
Br. J. Cancer  45, Suppl. V,  1982,  215-219.

 El-Mashak, E. M., and Tsong, T. Y.  Ion
selectivity of temperature -induced and electric
field induced pores in
dipalmitrolphosphatidylcholine vesicles. 
Biochemistry  24,  1985, 2884-2888. 

Ehrenberg, Benjamin, Daniel L. Farkas, Eric N.
Fluhler, Zenobia Lojewska, and Leslie M. Loew. 
Membrane Potential Induced by External Electric
Field Pulses can be Followed With a
Potentiometric Dye. Biophysical Journal .  51,  
1987,  833-837.

Fung, Y. C., and P. Tong. Theory of the Sphering
of Red Blood Cells. Biophysical Journal B   8,
1968, 175-198.

29  Glaser, Ralf W., Sergei L. Leikin, Leonid V.

Chernomordik, Vasili F. Pastushenko and Artjom I.
Sokirko.  Reversible electrical breakdown of
lipid bilayers: formation and evolution of pores.
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta. 940,  1988,   275-

52

287. 

30

Grinvald, A., R. Hildesheim, I.C. Farber, and L
Anglister.  Improved Fluorescent probes for the
measurement of rapid changes in Membrane
potential. Biophysical Journal   39,  1982,  301-
308.

31  Gross, David ,  Leslie M. Loew, and Watt W.Webb.
Optical Imaging of cell membrane potential
changes induced by applied electric fields. 
Biophysical Journal  50,  1986,  339-348.

32

Gruen. David, W. R., and Joe Wolfe. Lateral
Tensions and Pressures in Membranes and Lipid
Monolayers. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta.  688,
1982, 572-580.

33  Gupta, R.  K., B. M. Salzberg, A. Grinvald, L. B.
Cohen, K. Kamino, S.Lesher, M. B. Boyle, A.S.
Waggoner, and C. H. Wang. Improvements in Optical
Methods for Measuring Rapid Changes in Membrane
Potential. J. Membrane. Biol. 58,  1981,  123-
137.

34

Harrison, Roger and George G. Lunt. Biological
Membranes: Their Structure and Function. John
Wiley and Sons, New York, 1975. 

35  Hibino. M., Shigemori, M., Itoh. H.,  Nagayama,
K.,  and Kinosita, K., Jr. Membrane Conductance
of an electroporated cell analyzed by
submicrosecond imaging of transmembrane
conductance.  Biophysical Journal   59,  1991, 
209 - 220.

36

37

38

Hercules, W.A., Lindesay, J., and Coble, A.,
Theoretical Calculation of the Electric Field in the
Vicinity of a Pore Formed in a Cell Membrane,
physics/0206027

Hochmuth, R. M., N. Mohandas, and P. L.
Blackshear, Jr. Measurement of the Elastic
Modulus For Red Cell Membrane Using a Fluid
Mechanical Technique. Biophysical Journal. 13,
1973, 747-762.

Hyuga, H., Kinosita, K.,Jr., and Wakabayashi, N.  
Deformation of vesicles under the influence of
strong electric fields.  Japan Journal of Applied
Physics,  30,  1991,  1141 -1148. 

53

39

40

43

44

46

Jackson, John David . Classical Electrodynamics.
Second Edition.   John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New
York London Sydney Toronto. 1975.

Mahendra K. Jain, Roger C. Wagner,  Introduction
to Biological Membranes 1980, John Wiley and Sons
, New York.

41  Jain,  Mahendra Kumar.  Introduction to

Biological Membranes. 2nd. Edition. John Wiley
and Sons. New York, Chichester, Brisbane,
Toronto, Singapore.  1988.

42  Jordan, Peter C. Electrostatic modeling of Ion
Pores: Energy Barriers and Electric Field
profiles. Biophysical Journal   39,  1982, 157-
164. 

Kinosita, K., Jr. And Tsong, T. Y. Formation and
resealing of pores of controlled sizes in human
erythrocyte membrane. Nature  268,  1977, 438-
441.

Kinosita, Kazuhiko,  Ikuo Ashikawa, Nobuyuki
Saita, Hideyuki Yoshimura,  Hiroyasu Itoh,
Kuniaki Nagayama and Akira Ikegami.   
Electroporation of cell membrane visualized under
a pulsed laser fluorescence microscope. 
Biophysical Journal   53,  1988,  1015-1019.

45  Kinosita. K., Ashikawa, I., Hibino, M.,

Shigemori, M,. Yoshimura, H., Itoh, H., Nagayama.
K., and Ikegami, A. Submicrosecond imaging under
a pulsed- laser fluorescence microscope.  Proc
SPIE ( Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineering)  909 ,   1988,  271-277.

Events of Membrane Electroporation Visualized on
a Time Scale from Microsecond to Seconds : 
Kinosita, Kazuhiko., Masahiro Hibino, Hiroyasu
Itoh, Masaya Shigemori, Kenichi Hirano,  Yutaka
Kirono and Tsuyoshi Hayakawa. 1992 .  Guide To
Electroporation and Electrofusion..  Donald C
Chang, Bruce M. Massey,  James A. Saunders, 
Arthur E. Sowers. Eds. Academic Press Inc. San
Diego, New York, Boston, London, Sydney, Tokyo,
Toronto. 1992.

47

 Klenchin, V.  A. , S.  I.  Sukharev, S.  M. 
Serov, L.  V.  Chernomordik and Yu.  A. 
Chizmadzhev.  Electrically induced DNA uptake by

54

cells is a fast process involving DNA
electrophoresis.  Biophysical Journal   60, 1991, 
804-811.

48

Lambert, H., R. Pankov, J. Gauthier, and R.
Hancock. Electroporation mediated uptake of
proteins into mammalian cells. Biochem. Cell
Biol. 68, 1990, 729-734.

49  Maldarelli, Charles and Kathleen Stebe.  An

Isotropic, elastomechanical instability theory
for electropermeabilization of bilayer-lipid
membranes. Electrical Trauma: The
Pathophysiology, manifestations and Clinical
Management. Edited by R. C. Lee, E.G. Cravalho,
J. F. Burke. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, England, 1992.

50

51

52

53

54

55

Marchesi, M.,  M. Parodi. Study of the electrical
field inside biological structures.  Med. & Biol.
Eng. & Comput., 20,  1982, 608-612.

Marszalek, J. J. Zielinsky, M Fikus, and Tian Y.
Tsong. Determination of electric parameters of
cell membranes by a dielectrophoresis method.
Biophysical Journal   59 , 1991,  982-987.

 Melamed, E. R.,  P. F. Mullaney and M.L.
Mendelsohn (Eds.), Flow cytometry and Sorting,
Wiley, New York , 199. 

 Mir, L. M., H.  Banoun and C.  Paoletti. 
Introduction of definite amounts of nonpermeant
molecules into living cells after
electropermeabilization; direct access to the
cytosol. Exp. Cell. Res. 175,  1988, 15-25.

Muraji, Masafumi, Wataru Tatebe, Takayoshi
Konishi, Tomoo Fujii and, Hermann Berg.  Effect
of electrical energy on the
electropermeabilization of yeast cells.
Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg. 31, 1993,  77-84.

 Needham, D. And Hochmuth, R. M.  Electro-
Mechanical permeabilization of lipid vesicles:
role of membrane tension and compressibility. 
Biophysical Journal  55,   1989, 1001-1009.

56  Neumann, E., and Rosencheck, K.  Permeability

changes induced by electric pulses in vesicular
membranes. J. Membrane Biol. 10,  1972,  279-290.

55

57

58

Electroporation and Electrofusion in Cell
Biology. Eberhard Neumann, Arthur E. Sowers and
Carol A. Jordan Eds. 1989 Plenum Press, New York.

 Neumann, Eberhard ,  Andreas Sprafke,  Elvira
Boldt, and Hendrik Wolf.  Biophysical
Consideration of Membrane Electroporation.   
Guide To Electroporation and Electrofusion.. 
Donald C Chang, Bruce M. Massey,  James A.
Saunders,  Arthur E. Sowers. Eds. Academic Press
Inc. San Diego, New York, Boston, London, Sydney,
Tokyo, Toronto. 1992.

59  Peitzsch, Robert M., Moisés Eisenberg, Kim A.

Sharp, and Stuart McLaughlin.  Calculations of
the electrostatic Potential Adjacent to Model
Phospholipid Bilayers. Biophysical Journal. 68,
1995,  729-738.

60  Plonsey, Robert . The Nature of Sources of

Bioelectric and Biomagnetic Fields. Biophysical
Journal   39,  1982, 309-312.

61

Prausnitz, Mark R., Becky S. Lau, Christina D.
Milano, Stewart Conner, Robert Langer, and James
C. Weaver.A Quantitative Study of Electroporation
Showing a Plateau in Net Molecular Transport.  
Biophysical Journal  65 ,  1993,   414-422.

62  Prausnitz, Mark R. , Christina D.  Milano, J. 

Aura Gimm, Robert Langer, and James
Weaver.Quantitative Study of Molecular Transport
Due to Electroporation: Uptake of Bovine Serum
Albumin by erythrocyte Ghosts.  Biophysical
Journal  66, 1994,  1522-1530.

63

64

65

Rand, R. P., and A. C. Burton. Mechanical
Properties of the Red Cell Membrane: I. Membrane
Stiffness and Intracellular Pressure. Biophysical
Journal. 4, 1964, 115-135.

Rand, R. P. Mechanical Properties of The Red Cell
Membrane: II Viscoelastic Breakdown of the
Membrane. Biophysical Journal. 4, 1964, 303-316.

Rols, M. P. and J. Teissié.  Implications of
membrane interface structural forces in
electropermeabilization and electrofusion.
Bioelectrochemistry and Bioenergetics. 24,  
1990,  101-111.

66

Rossignol, D. P., Decker, G. L., Lennarz, W. J.,

56

Tsong, T. Y., and Teissie, J. Introduction of
calcium-dependent, localized cortical granule
breakdown in sea-urchin eggs by voltage
pulsation.  Biochimica et Biophysica Acta,  148, 
1983,  346 -355. 

Sale, A.J. H., and Hamilton, W.A. Effects of high
electric fields on microorganisms.  1.  Killing
of bacteria and yeasts. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 
148,   1967,  781-788.

Sale, A. J. H. and Hamilton, W. A.  Effects of
high electric fields on microorganisms. III.
Lysis of erythrocytes and protoplasts. 
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 163,  1968,  37-
43.

69  Saulis, G. and M.S. Venslauskas. Cell

Electroporation. Part 1. Theoretical simulation
of the process of pore formation in a cell.
Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg. 32,  1993,  221-235.

Saulis, G. and M. S. Venslauskas. Cell
electroporation. Part 2. Experimental
measurements of the kinetics of pore formation in
human erythrocytes.  Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg. 
32,   1993,  237-248.

Schmukler, Robert. Electrical Impedance and
properties of Cells embedded in an insulating
filter. Poster Gordon Conference on Biochemistry,
(1994).

Schmukler, Robert.  Impedance spectroscopy: The
measurement of electrical impedance of biological
materials. From: Electrical Trauma: The
pathophysiology and clinical management. Eds. R.
C. Lee, E.G. Cravalho, J.F. Burke. Cambridge
University Press. (1992).

Schmukler, Robert.  Personal communications.

Schwister, K., and B. Deuticke. Formation and
properties of aqueous leaks induced in human
erythrocytes by electrical breakdown. Biochimica
et Biophysica Acta. 816,   1985,  332-348.

67

68

70

71

72

73

74

75  Serpersu, Engin H., Kazuhiko Kinosita, Jr. And

Tian Yow Tsong      . Reversible and irreversible
modification of erythrocyte membrane permeability
by electric field. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta.
812, 1985,  779-785.

57

76

Shapiro, H. M.  Practical Flow Cytometry, A. R.
Liss, New York, 1985.

77  Sokirko, Artjom V. Distribution of the electric

field in an axially symmetric pore.
Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg.  33, 1994,  25-30.

78  Sowers, Arthur, Michael Lieber.  Electropore

diameters, lifetimes, numbers, and locations in
individual erythrocyte ghosts. FEBS,   205 No. 2, 
1986,  179-184.

79

Stämpfli, Robert. Reversible Electrical Breakdown
of the Excitable Membrane of a ranvier Node. Ann.
Acad. Brasil. Ciero., 30,   1958,  57-63.

80  Sugar, I.P.   Effect of External Fields on the
Structure of Lipid Membranes. (Proc. Of 5th
Neurobiological Lectures in Gif, France, 1980) J.
de Physiol.  77,  1981, 1035-1042.

81  Takashima, S. and H.P. Schwann.   Alignment of

Microscopic particles in Electric Fields and its
Biological Implications. Biophysical Journal  
47,  1985,  513-518.

82  Takashima, S., K. Asami, and Y Takahashi. 
Frequency domain studies of impedance
characteristics of biological cells using
micropipet technique. Biophysical Journal   54, 
1988,  995-1000.

83

84

85

86

87

Thompson, T. E., and Huang, C. H.  ( 1980 ). 
Dynamics of lipids in biomembranes.  In “
Membrane Physiology” T. E. Andreoli, J. F.
Hoffman, and D. D Fanestil ( eds.), Plenum, New
York, pp 27-48.

Tsong, T. Y., Greenberg, M., and Kanehisa, M. I. 
Anesthetic action on membrane lipids.
Biochemistry  16,  1977,  3115 - 3121. 

Van Dilla, M. A., P. N. Dean, O. D. Laerum and M.
R. Melamed        ( Eds.) Flow Cytometry: 
Instrumentation and Data Analysis Academic Press,
London, 1985.

Volkenshtein, M. V. Biophysics. Mir Publishers.
Moscow. 1983.

R. C. Warren (1987). Physics and the Architecture
of Cell Membranes. Adam Hilger, Bristol and

58

Philadelphia.

88

89

Philip Yeagle (1987). The membranes of cells.
Academic Press Inc. Orlando, San Diego.

Zhelev, D.V., D. S. Dimitrov and P. Doinov.
Correlation between physical parameters in
electrofusion and electroporation of protoplasts.
Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg.  20,  1988, 155-167.

