 A Model of Morphogenesis 
F. W. Cummings 1 
 

Abstract 

 

A new model is presented of a patterning mechanism in animals. It is 

argued that the ‘Wnt’ signaling pathway often acts in binary conjunction with a 

variety of other pathways to produce complex patterning. This patterning 

follows while involving little of the detailed biochemistry of either of the two 

pathways involved. The patterns arise spontaneously from a state of zero pattern 

activation upon achieving a specified (epithelial) sphere radius. Gastrulation 

follows from the simplest solution, and assuming a simplest form for the 

coupling of the Gauss and Mean curvatures to the morphogens. Numerical 

solutions are presented, and predictions of the model are discussed.  

Keywords: animal development, pattern formation, signaling pathways, Wnt. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1Present address: 2365 Virginia St., Berkeley, Ca. 94709 

email: “fredcmgs@uclink.berkeley.edu 

 

 

               1. Introduction;  Patterning and Morphogens 

 

 

Morphogens are secreted signalling molecules that provide patterning 

for a field of surrounding cells. One well-known and widely discussed 

hypothesis is of a gradient of concentration emanating from a localized source, 

which determines the fate of cells according to the amplitude or concentration of 

the morphogen (Wolpert 1989; Wolpert 1998; Gurdon & Bourillot 2001). In this 

picture, cells interpret a concentration gradient. An alternate hypothesis for the 

establishment of patterns in developing organisms was introduced by Turing 

(Turing 1952). The ‘reaction-diffusion’ mechanism, while sharing some 

similarities with the first mentioned mechanism, has significant differences. A 

minimum of two morphogens is of course required for a reacting system, and the 

patterns arise autonomously without reference to a source. Nonlinearity is an 

essential ingredient in the latter model and is the source of the instability (Turing 

1952; Koch & Meinhardt 1994). Also, in Turing type models an essential 

ingredient is the existence of two diffusion constants of disparate values. A more 

recent interesting approach to patterning is based on interacting gene networks 

(Von Dassow et. al. 2000; Salazar-Ciudad, Newman & Sole 2001). These 

models contain ~ fifty parameters and give a segmentation pattern. An 

interesting model of morphogenesis has been given recently by Beloussov 

(2003). 

The present work develops a simple alternate conceptual model for the 

establishment of morphogenetic patterns, one based on a pair of interacting 

signalling pathways, and referred to here as the “ISP” (interacting signaling 

pathways) model. The emphasis here is on the straightforward way in which 

patterns extending over many cell diameters may emerge from coupled 

signalling pathways. Rather than dealing with the complexities of the signalling 

pathways, only those necessary components involved in the patterning need be 

included.   

The present model differs conceptually in two important respects from 

the well-known Turing type model. First of all, pattern formation arises 

spontaneously in the ISP without invoking the essential role of nonlinearities, 

although nonlinearities certainly and importantly enter; nonlinearities in the 

reaction terms of the ‘reaction-diffusion’ conceptualization in Turing models are 

the source of spontaneous pattern formation. Secondly, the two ligands in the 

present model diffuse only one or a few cell diameters, and their diffusion 

constants are not required to be different. After fifty years it cannot be said that 

there is good evidence in a developing biological organism for a ‘reaction-

diffusion’ mechanism where two ‘morphogens’ with different diffusion 

constants travels over many cell diameters and form developmentally relevant 

patterns. The present model is then conceptually very different from such 

‘reaction-diffusion’ mechanisms, and, it is believed, conceptually simpler and 

more realistic, being based on signaling pathways. The patterning achieved is in 

many, perhaps most cases, very similar in the two models, even though the 

conceptual basis is here very different.  

There have been a number of previous works that obtain patterns by 

modeling signaling pathways, and especially notable among these are those of 

the Delta-Notch system. These latter give patterns on a much smaller spatial 

scale than those of the present model, and may be viewed as possibly acting in 

conjunction with the present pattern mechanism, coming into play subsequently 

to the ISP (Bosenberg and Massague 1993; Collier et. al. 1996; Lewis 1998; 

Owen, Sherratt & Wearing 2000; Sekimura et. al. 1999).   

In section 3, plausible signaling pathways are discussed as stand-ins for 

the symbols of the model.  The principal one is the ‘Wnt’ pathway, in 

conjunction with associated G proteins. Only the essential ingredients necessary 

to establish the pattern are considered; the model is formulated with as little 

extraneous detail so as to emphasize the crucial elements. Further, the intent is 

 

 

to give a model of morphogenesis, as contrasted with simple patterning, so that 

in particular the signalling pathways are envisioned as those most closely 

coupled to and influencing such key early developmental events as cell 

architecture (and thus epithelial sheet folding), adhesion, differentiation and cell 

division (Miller et. al. 1999; Gerhart & Kirschner 1997; Raff 1997).   

 

The elements of the model are two (free) extracellular ligands, with 

densities (# per unit area) L1 and L2, and the densities of their activated 

pathways (or simply their activated receptors) R1 and R2. The latter two consist 

of a combination of a receptor with its associated ligand. The ligands are 

supposed to diffuse in the extracellular space, and the diffusion length need be 

only as large as a few cell sizes, but not necessarily so small.  

There are two simple elements of the model. Attention is focused on a 

small cluster of cells, when use of such terms as ‘ligand density’ and ‘receptor 

density’ has meaning. These cells are to be thought of as comprising a closed 

epithelial surface, so that the densities of the model are ‘numbers per unit area’. 

Variation of the morphogens (the R’s or L’s) along the apical-basal direction is 

not considered, or rather thought of as being an averaged value in this 

dimension.  First of all, each such ‘cell’ produces ligand of like kind 

proportional to the level of receptor activation; R1 stimulates production of L1, 

otherwise the process would be limited to a purely local one if “like-ligand” 

production were not induced, and the particular cell in question would act as a 

‘sink’. The second key element in the model is that each activated pathway acts 

to inactivate the other; as R1 increases, the level of ligand production L2 is 

decreased, and similarly for R2.  

The equations representing such a process are  

 

 

 

L
1

D
∇=
1

L
1

+

α

R
1

−

β

R

2

+

NL
.

2

,                  1)                                                                                    

∂
t
∂

 

 

  

∂
t
∂

∂
t
∂

∂
t
∂

L

2

D
∇=
2

2

L

2

+

β

R

2

−

α

R
1

+

NL
.

,                 2) 

   

 

R
1

=

LRC
1
1

1

µ−

R
1

,                           3) 

 

 

               

R

2

=

LRC

2

2

2

ν−

R

2

.                            4) 

The first two terms in eqs.1), 2) represent in the usual way diffusion of the 

ligands in the extracellular space. All parameters in the model (e.g., α, β, D1, µ, 

ν) have positive values, as do also, of course, the densities L1, L2, R1 and R2. 

The terms αR1 in eq.1) and βR2 in eq.2) represent the production of ‘like’ ligand 

by the corresponding activated receptor. These same terms are used to represent 

the fact that activation of receptors of density R2 deactivate or turn off 

production of free ligands of density L1, and vice versa. The system acts as a 

‘toggle’; a region of high activation of one implies low activation of the second. 

The term NL on the r/h/s of eqs.1) and 2) indicate that there are expected to be 

nonlinear additions to the toggle; saturation will set in for large enough values of 

either active receptor density. The transmembrane receptors, which reside in the 

lateral cell membrane, are relatively immobile. The respective activated 

densities decay at rates µ and ν, and this ‘decay’ returns the receptors to their 

inactive state.  Two first terms on the right side of eqs.3), 4) say that there is a 

positive rate of change of R1 or R2 proportional to both the density of empty 

receptor sites  (

1 , RR

2

) and also to the density of free ligands at the particular 

local cell site.  The density of empty sites may be obtained from the expression 

 

R
1

+

R
1

=

R

o η+

R
1

,        

R
0(

=

const

.

)

, 

where the last term on the r/h/s expresses the possibility that the total number of 

receptors of each type (e.g., ‘1’) increases with activation of that same type 

receptor, and new (empty) receptors are thus added. Then the empty receptor 

site density may be written      

 

 

    

R
1

=

R

1(

ε−

R
1

)

1

o

,         ( 

0

<

ε

≤

,1

ε

1

1(
−≡

η

oR/)

1

),      5) 

 

and similarly for type ‘2’. The values ε = 1 (and η = 0), implies that there is no 

receptor augmentation ~ R1, while ε ~ 0 implies either that there is a new empty 

receptor created for (almost) every one occupied, or that there are very many 

more empty sites than occupied ones. When eq.5) and the analogous equation 

for type ‘2’ is used in eqs.3), 4) to eliminate the unoccupied site densities, the 

model then comprises four coupled equations for four unknowns. The coupling 

from epithelial shape to morphogen, and back, has not as yet been specified (cf. 

section 4). 

 

The process of producing ligand upon activation of the cell surface 

receptor could possibly involve numerous steps, involving (e.g.) gene 

transcription, the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the Golgi complex, and finally 

secretion from the cell. This time is expected to be considerable compared to the 

time for a free ligand in a given spatial region to become attached to its receptor 

and to activate the pathway. However, it is supposed here instead that R acts to 

release already stored ligand, (stored at, e.g., a constant rate by an unspecified 

cellular mechanism). The cell maintains a relatively constant store of ligand 

awaiting a release signal ~ R  (analogous (in this respect only!) to the situation 

of neurotransmitters in neurons). The two times (emission time of new ligand ~ 

R and empty receptor uptake of ligand L) can thus be comparable. This is the 

situation envisioned here, and will have to serve as a prediction of the model at 

this point: the activated receptor R1,2 releases ligand already stored in vesicles, 

so that this time is appreciably shorter than ligand production and storage via 

gene activation, ER and Golgi. Importantly for the model, Wnt (cf. sec. 3) has 

two known modes of action, one that bypasses the nucleus, and a second  

‘canonical’ pathway leading to gene activation via stabilization of beta-catenin. 

The former ‘non-canonical’ path bypassing the nucleus acts (at least in part) to 

release stored Wnt ligand relatively rapidly. 

 

Wnt has recently been purified (Willert et. al., 2003), so that there is the 

possibility that the prediction that receptor activation by Wnt ligand leads to 

relatively rapid stimulated secretion of further Wnt ligand can be checked 

experimentally, perhaps by the use of GFP (green florescent protein) as a marker 

for the inducing ligand. This time difference between stimulation and release 

should be significantly shorter than the time expected if the process occurred by 

way of transcription. 

 

The particular solution picked out to eqns.1-4) will be determined by 

boundary conditions. Most generally, the boundary conditions are expected to be 

zero slope conditions. Imagine as the simplest example a hollow sphere of some 

surface thickness, and a one dimensional pattern on the middle surface of this 

sphere of the morphogen R1(u), where u is the coordinate which runs from the 

north to south pole. Then requiring continuous slope at the north and south poles 

requires zero derivatives of R at these two points. When this is the case for the 

morphogens, then the solution to the Laplace equation of the model (eq.10 

below) will be a constant. 

 

2. Stability of the Morphogens near Zero Activation 

An important requirement of any model is that it gives spontaneous 

pattern formation when the shape reaches a certain critical minimum size. In 

particular, as will be seen on hand of the present model, such a critical size 

provides a point of onset of patterning leading to gastrulation when the blastula 

reaches a specified radius (of the middle surface). A Hydra segment, for 

example, below a certain size will not regenerate. This is a criterion given in 

terms of the parameters of the model, and one not previously given.  

In order to find the point at which a pattern spontaneously begins to 

emerge in the present model, one considers the small amplitude (linear) version 

of the model equations, and sets all four variables of the ISP in section 1 

 

 

 

 

proportional to Exp(-s⋅t+k⋅x) in the usual way (Murray 1990), where ‘t’ is time 

and ‘x’ is space. A fourth order polynomial equation is obtained from eqs. 1→ 

4) for the variable ‘s’, and the condition s < 0 is sought, when a pattern will 

emerge spontaneously. It turns out straightforwardly that s < 0 when the 

condition k2 < kc

2 ≡ k1

2 + k2

2 is satisfied, where k1 and k2 (~ length-1) are defined 

by the parameters of the model by 

 k1

2 = αC1Ro/(D1µ),           and             k2

2 = βC2Ro/(D2ν).             6) 

This is easily seen by setting s = 0 in the fourth order polynomial F(s) 

below and requiring that the resultant expression F(0) be less than zero, which is 

sufficient to ensure that at least one root will be negative. The parameters of the 

model are such as to give only one real negative root so in parameter ranges of 

most interest. The dimensionless variable F(S) is  

  F(S) = (S–x2d)⋅(S–x2/d)⋅(S–m)⋅(S–1/m)−p⋅(S–x2d)⋅(S–m)−q⋅(S–x2/d)⋅(S−1/m).    

In eq.7) the definitions of the relevant dimensionless quantities S, x, d, m, p and 

a) S = s/√µν;        b)  x2 = k2⋅√D1D2/(µν) ≡ k2/ko

2;      c)  d = √D1/D2;   

d)   m = √µ/ν;         e)  p = βC2Ro/(µν);         f)  q  = αC1Ro/(µν).            

7) 

q are  

8) 

It is also helpful to rewrite eq.7) in a form so that F(S) = 0 implies that  

G(S) = p⋅q,    or     ((S–x2d)⋅(S–m)−p)⋅ ((S–x2/d)⋅(S−1/m)−q) = p⋅q.        7’) 

      

Now since each of the two factors in eq.7’) is a quadratic, we can obtain the four 

roots of the left hand side quartic G(S) at once. They are all real. Then, upon 

graphing a quartic G with four real roots, we look for its intersection with the 

constant curve p⋅q, and in particular ask when this intersection has a negative 

root So. Clearly then, this occur at the maximum value of k (~ minimum animal 

size) such that there is an intersection of the quartic G of eq.7’) with the S = 0 

axis at a point just below intersection of G with the constant curve p⋅q.  As x (or 

k) decreases, this root becomes increasingly negative, as shown in Figure 1.  

There are two imaginary roots S of the function F = G − p⋅q when the maximum 

of G is below the constant curve p⋅q. There are always at least two real roots, 

and one of these is negative in the appropriate range where k2 < kC

2 (or x2< xC

2 = 

q/(md)+p⋅(md)). The minimum size then corresponds to a ‘length’ 2π/kC, and no 

pattern is possible for a smaller length. Figure 1 shows a typical plot of the four 

roots si of the equation F(s) = 0, shown as a function of the (dimensionless) 

‘wave vector’ k/ko. It is of interest to note that the other two roots can be 

complex in general, as the imaginary part provides for oscillating (and 

exponentially dying) solutions.  

For sufficiently small amplitudes, the linear steady state equations are  

2

∇

(

R
1

−

fR

2

)

+

(

k

1

+

k

2

)(

R
1

−

fR

2

)

=

,0

             9) 

2

2

(2∇

  

kR
/
1

1

2

+

fR

2

/

k

2

2

)

=

.0

 

           (ƒ ≡ β/α).               

and  

 

10) 

It is seen that the variable (R1−f⋅R2) obeys the well-known Helmholtz equation 

(c.f., e.g., Murray 1990), while the variable  (R1/k1

2 + f⋅R2/k2

2) obeys the equally 

famous Laplace equation.  Murray (1990) has shown that many suggestive 

animal coat patterns arise from the Helmholtz (or ‘time-independent wave’) 

equation. The variety of patterns obtainable from the above equations is 

extremely rich, and any given pattern depends critically on the geometry as well 

as the boundary conditions. It is to be noticed that upon inclusion of the 

indicated nonlinear terms, the discrete eigenvalues nature of solutions no longer 

obtains, and while the form of the patterns are generally maintained, the 

amplitude of the R’s will increase with increasing size or area. A limiting size is 

reached when the R’s can no longer remain positive with the given boundary 

 

 

 

 

conditions, whereupon the new solution must become the next allowed low 

amplitude and more complex one.   

It is also of some interest that the linear (small amplitude) version of 

the model eq.9) already gives the largest majority of plant patterns, namely, the 

spiral phyllotaxis specified by the Fibonacci series, as well as the ‘whorled’ 

phyllotaxis, and also the bijugate, trijugate, … (Cummings & Strickland 1998). 

It is interesting to note that there is no a priori structural reason for the observed 

very low relative rate of occurrence of four leaves on a stem, as compared to 

two, three or five in spiral phyllotaxis. Natural selection of course acts in 

choosing the adaptive patterns, but clearly does not address the relative 

uncommonness of a spiral ‘four’ pattern, remembering that a ‘three’ or ‘five’ 

Fibonacci spiral is common. This perhaps indicates that there is an analogue in 

plants to the signaling pathway patterning mechanism of the present model, 

although the plant biochemicals involved are expected to be quite different than 

the animal ones (Meyerowitz 2002). 

Figure 2 shows a typical numerical solution of the ISP for the two-

receptor densities, as well as the derivatives, in the steady state (when 

t∂∂ /

= 

0), on a cylindrical-like axially symmetric shape in one (dimensionless) space 

coordinate ‘u’. Complex patterns are expected from this model as can be seen 

when it is realized that the linear version of the model in the steady state gives 

the well known associated Legendre patterns on a sphere 

 (see Murray 1990, 

p.398), and generally gives periodic behavior in one dimension. When 

nonlinearities are included, eigensolutions no longer exist, and the patterns 

change as the sphere radius increases, and the amplitudes of the solutions 

increase as the total area ‘A’ increases.  The ISP contains an original handful of 

parameters, and these group into only four significant ones. (excluding 

parameters (~ 2−3) which enter into the connection between the epithelial 

surface curvatures and morphogens in section 4).  

 

    

 

3.  Biochemical Interpretation for the Model    

Here are reviewed recent findings to suggest elements of two different 

signaling pathways as prime candidates that may be best represented by the 

symbols of the model. Much evidence suggests that one symbol pair of the 

model (say, L1, R1) represents the ‘Wnt’ (wingless, ‘Wg’, in the fly) pathway. It 

is suggested that the Wnt pathway is coupled to any one of a number of possible 

other candidates. One example is the interaction between Wnt and Vg1 signaling 

pathways initiating primitive streak formation in early chick embryos 

(Skromme, I. & Stern, C., 2001), while a second is that between Wnt and 

Hedgehog, affecting segmentation in Drosophila (Gerhart and Kerschner, 1997). 

Yet another example is the combination of a dorsal signal provided by the 

BMP4 homologue Decapentaplegic (Dpp) with a ventral signal provided by the 

Wnt homologue Wingless (Wg) establishing the PD (proximal-distal) axis, in 

addition to organizing the dorsal-ventral appendage pattern (Galindo et.al, 

2002). Evidence from other arthropods and vertebrates suggest that this PD 

patterning mechanism is probably conserved and ancestral. Epithelial bud 

development is due to the combined action of Wnt and BMP (bone 

morphogenetic protein) signaling pathways. In this case, the β-catenin activated 

Lef1 transcription complex is combined with the ‘noggin’ inhibition of BMP 

signaling, leading to reduced production of the adhesion protein E-cadherin, the 

latter mediating cell-cell contacts (Jamora et.al, 2003; Perez-Moreno, Jamora & 

Fuchs, 2003). Another most interesting example of Wnt signaling (and Wnt6 in 

particular) is that given by Bonner-Fraser and colleagues. Neural crest cells are a 

pleuripotent, migratory population of cells that differentiate into an enormous 

array of cell types, tissues and organs in vertebrates. Wnt6 is both necessary and 

sufficient for instructing neural crest formation in the chick embryo (Garcia-

Castro, Marcelle & Bonner-Fraser, 2002). The present ISP model suggests that it 

 

 

will turn out that a synergy between BMP and Wnt is required for neural crest 

formation. A further example is the coupling of Wnt to the Notch pathway, as in 

animal segmentation. 

A molecular oscillator underlies vertebrate segmentation, and involves the 

interaction of Wnt with the Notch pathway (Purnell, 2003; Pourquie, 2003). 

Apparently the Notch pathway lies at the heart of the vertebrate oscillator, 

although there has been one cycling Wnt gene uncovered also, namely the Wnt 

inhibitor gene axin2. Notch is not involved in Drosophila segmentation, 

although involved in other arthropods, suggesting that vertebrates and 

arthropods may have shared a common ancestral segmentation program with 

Wnt/Notch signaling at the core, and parts of this program was lost in particular 

descendant lineages such as Drosophila (Stollewerk, Schoppmeir & Damen, 

It also seems possible that, besides the possibilities mention just above, 

there may be more than one version of the Wnt protein, since Wnt is known to 

associate with lipids and become hydrophobic. Then it may be possibly think of 

Wnt1 and Wnt2 in this case as the two ligands of the model (Willert et. al., 

2003).     

2003).  

Signaling pathways are accompanied with their modulating ‘G’ 

proteins (GTP and GDP), the G proteins playing the role of the ‘switches’ of the 

model.  To use a mechanical analogy, the Wnt pathway seems to act as a sort of 

permissive gate, perhaps a sort of  ‘main drive shaft’ off of which other ‘shafts’ 

are driven or interact.  The ‘Wnt’ pathway may be looked on as a sort of primal 

pathway, participating along with numerous other pathways (e.g., Hedgehog and 

Notch (Gerhart & Kirschner 1997; Cooper 1997)) in early development of an 

organism. Cell signalling via the Wnt ‘Frizzled’ receptor has evolved to 

considerable complexity within the metazoans. The Frizzled–dependent 

signalling cascade comprises several branches, whose differential activation 

 

 

 

 

depends on specific Wnt ligands, Frizzled receptor isoforms as well as the 

cellular context (Moon & Shah 2002; Niehrs 2001; Tetsu & McCormick 1999; 

Taipale & Beachy 1998; Wodarz & Nusse 1998). For example, in Xenopus 

laevis embryos, the canonical β-catenin pathway contributes in a crucial way to 

the establishment of the dorsal-ventral axis, involving interaction between the 

Wnt/β-catenin ‘canonical’ branch and a Wnt/Ca2+ branch. Mutations in the 

protein APC, a key regulator in the Wnt pathway, leads to accumulation of β-

catenin, which in turn activates genes which respond to transcription factors of 

the TCF/LEF family, with which β-catenin interacts (Tetsu & McCormick 

1999).  Members of the large Wnt family of proteins control many 

developmental processes, including a pathway involving cell adhesion (Niehrs 

2001; Wodarz & Nusse, 1998). This pathway is a crucial factor in construction 

of the colon (Peifer, 2002). Of most interest from the present point of view of 

the model is the non-canonical action, a pathway which bypasses the nucleus 

altogether.  

It is proposed that the ‘switch’ activity of the present model is likely 

provided by the small guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases, and especially Rho), 

and is modeled by the R terms in eqs.1) and 2). GTPases are molecular switches 

that use a simple biochemical strategy to control complex cellular processes. 

They cycle between two conformational states; one bound to GTP (the ‘active 

state’), the other bound to GDP (‘inactive state’), and they hydrolyze GTP to 

GDP.  In the ‘on’, or GTP state, GTPases recognize target proteins and generate 

a response until GTP hydrolysis returns the switch to the ‘off’ state.  This idea 

has been elaborated throughout evolution, with a mammalian cell containing 

several hundred GTPase switches.  The Ras superfamily of GTPases are master 

regulators of numerous aspects of cell behavior. These small monomeric 

GTPases fall into five major groups: Ras, Rho, Rab, Arf and Ran. Rho GTPases 

are an important example (Etienne-Manneville & Hall, 2002). They participate 

most importantly in the regulation of cell polarity. Typical epithelial cells, such 

as those of interest in the present model, and such as (e.g.) those lining the colon 

and also forming the Drosophila wing, form monolayers of packed cuboidal 

cells with specialized cell-cell contacts and a distinctive asymmetric distribution 

of proteins at the basolateral and apical membranes. It is these asymmetrically 

distributed proteins which determine the cell shape, and thus the epithelial 

surface shape, and are then most interesting from the point of view of the model 

here.  The GTPases of course have their regulators. A most important example, 

Moesin, acts antagonistically to the Rho pathway to maintain epithelial integrity. 

In Drosophila, Moesin functions to promote cortical actin assembly and apical-

basal polarity. Cells lacking Moesin lose their epithelial character and adopt 

invasive migratory behavior. When Moesin is mutated in the fly imaginal 

epithelium, a single layer of tall columnar cells with an obvious apical basal 

polarity, their cells lose intercellular junctions and epithelial polarity, and are 

extruded basally from the epithelium. Apparently Moesin facilitates epithelial 

morphology not by providing an essential structural function but rather by 

antagonizing activity of the small GTPase Rho, thus regulating cell-signaling 

events that affect actin organization and polarity (Speck et. al., 2003).     

Studies of Xenopus embryos and cultured cells show that Wnt/Frizzled 

signaling activates the cytoskeleton regulator Rho through activation of 

Dishevelled. Dishevelled is a multifunctional protein that regulates cell polarity 

through the non-canonical pathway, but also regulates cell fate through the 

canonical Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. These results link Wnt/Frizzled signaling 

during epithelial sheet movement to the Rho family of GTPases. (R. Keller, 

2002). The non canonical Wnt/Frizzed pathway leading to production of further 

Wnt ligand (represented by the ‘+’ terms in eqs.1),2)) seems by best present 

guess to go by way of Wnt/Frizzled → G protein → Ca++ → PKC → Cdc42 → 

? (Keller, 2002, fig.4; Harwood & Braga, 2003).  The conjecture is that this is 

 

 

the pathway that turns off the release of ‘2’ ligand at the same time that it 

stimulates release of ‘same’ ligand L1, and symbolized by the r/h/s of eqs.1) & 

2). A similar ‘2’ pathway is conjectured to operate in an analogous way to turn 

off release of ligand ‘1’ (Wnt), at the same time as stimulating release of the 

already stored ligand ‘2’. Such a pathway has as not been described, but is 

predicted by the present model. 

The density R1 of the model then represents a ‘Wnt+Frizzled’ (ligand + 

receptor) combination, while L1 represents unbound (‘free’) Wnt ligand. Then 

the ‘2’ subscript represents the second pathway coupled to Wnt, e.g., the 

Hedgehog (Hh), BMP or Notch pathway (or homologues). 

4. Gastrulation 

 

A speculation is that discovery by evolution of this simple coupling of 

two already existing signaling pathways could possibly have been a key event at 

or near the Cambrian boundary leading to the abrupt transition from single 

celled organisms to multicellulars, esp. those animals with definite patterning 

and defined, polarized epithelial cell sheets. Of course the setting must have 

been accommodating also, e.g., complex eukaryotes had evolved over one to 

two billion years, the oxygen level was adequate, and an initial fierce 

competition was lacking. Arguments as to the adaptive value of such a coupling 

between signaling pathways, one giving patterned epithelial closed surfaces, will 

be more apparent if the case is made for gastrulation occurring in a 

straightforward manner from an initial hollow ball of cells.  

All animals have two or three cell layers, ectoderm, endoderm and 

mesoderm. Gastrulation is the most fundamental and earliest epithelial folding 

process in any animal’s life, and is the process of producing an inner layer 

(endoderm) and an outer layer (ectoderm). These two layers are the primal ‘gut’ 

or digestive zone, and the outer protective layer. Most animals have a third type 

 

 

 

 

called mesoderm comprising the ‘middle’ organs between the last mentioned, 

giving rise to such organs as heart, lungs, kidneys, etc. 

 

Evolution of a ‘proto’ digestive zone offers an apparent advantage in 

the struggle for survival, since such a relatively large animal can devour many 

single celled animals and plants at a gulp. At the same time, it is realized that 

formation of a patterned clump of cells is clearly not adaptive ‘per se’; such 

must at the same time be adept at catching and devouring prey. The following 

points out that gastrulation follows easily from the patterning scheme laid out 

above, with a couple of extra key assumptions. We need to ask next how the 

morphogens affect the surface curvatures, and vice versa. 

 

For purposes of visualization, it is helpful to imagine for the moment a 

‘cell’ (or rather, a small collection of actual cells) as a deformable ‘can’, a right 

cylindrical figure with height ‘h’. It can be visualized that one of the 

morphogens acts to constrict the apical area at the same time as increasing the 

basal area, while the action of the second morphogen is the opposite. In 

mathematical terms, we assume that we may express the Mean curvature of the 

thick surface at any point by the expression 

 

 

H = 

(
1
⋅ +

λ
1

(

R R
−
2

1

)) .                         11) 

4
π
Area

Here λ1 is a constant and ‘Area’ indicates the total (closed, middle) surface area, 

and R1, R2 are here taken as (dimensionless) morphogens.  

This form for the Mean curvature arises from the consideration that the 

surface will remain a hollow sphere (the shape of minimum adhesive energy) as 

long as the size is too small (radius = R < Ro) to admit a solution ( R1, R2 ≡  0) 

to the model equations, in particular to the Helmholtz equation, in which case H 

= 1/R. Here we will assume steady state, ∂⁄∂t = 0, while the much slower time 

dependence  will  be  carried  by  the  total  (increasing)  area,  ≡  A.  While  a  sphere 

with a radius R < Ro, no pattern can exist, and A = 4πR2. Then eqn.11) gives the 

answer that H = 1/R for any R<Ro, as required. A small amplitude pattern only 

begins to emerge when k2R2 ≥ 2, as is well known, and this gives the critical size 

Ro of the blastula in terms of the parameters of the model, k2 = k1

2+k2

2. In the 

present  discussion,  it  is  assumed  that  the  epithelial  sheet  thickness  ‘h’  is 

constant,  although  this  is  not  a  necessary  condition  in  general  (Cummings, 

2001). 

 

The surface is uniquely described only when two curvatures are given 

(do Carmo, 1976), and the second, besides H of eq.11), is the Gauss curvature 

‘K’. From their definitions as the average (‘H’) and product (‘K’) of the two 

principal curvatures in orthogonal directions, it is clear that K ≤  H2, so that we 

may write K = H2 − D2, with D = 0 for a sphere, or in any local region where the 

surface is ‘sphere-like’. In the case of axial symmetry, the case of present 

interest, we see that D → 0 at the two ‘poles’ on the axes, where the 

morphogens must have zero slope. The function ‘D’ is simply the difference 

(divided by 2) of the principal curvatures. At the same time, K is an invariant, 

independent of coordinates, as are the morphogen functions. The three 

constraints of a) invariance, b) positive definiteness, and c) D (cid:198) 0 at 

boundaries, strongly limits the possible form of D, and suggests taking K of the 

form 

 

 

 

 

 

K =

 

H

2

λ−
2

r
∇

(

(

R R
−
2

1

2

)

)

.

                              12) 

Clearly both H and K have been taken of the simplest form, and complications 

and further parameters can sensibly be added. Here λ2 is a constant parameter. 

The morphogens affect the geometry as in eqns.11) and 12), but how 

does the surface geometry affect the morphogens? Circa 1860, Gauss gave the 

equation (see Cummings, 2001)  

∇

2 ln

(

g u v
( , )

=

2
− ⋅

K

)

                                       13) 

 

 

connecting the surface metric coefficient ‘g’ to the Gauss curvature K in a most 

nonlinear way. A sphere, for example, in one space coordinate ‘u’ has a most 

simple metric of g = R2⋅(1/cosh(u))2, when K=1/R2; this g provides a covering 

for the sphere excluding only two points, at the north and south poles. Now in 

the conformal coordinates which we have employed in eq.13), where any 

surface is always and everywhere divided into small (infinitesimal) squares, the 

Laplacian takes the form in terms of the coordinates u, v 

 

 

 

2
∇ =

2

∂
u
∂

2





+

g

2

∂
v
∂

2



                                 14) 
.

The metric in these special (and convenient) coordinates is

t
g

=

t
g u v I
( , )

, that 

is, it is the unit 2×2 matrix times g. Then it is remembered that g alone has no 

physical interpretation, but only in combination with other quantities, such as 

(e.g.) the invariant path-length (ds)2 = g⋅(du2+dv2), the invariant Laplacian 

operator ∇2, or the squared gradient operator (∇f)2 in eq.12), and most 

importantly, the element of area dA = g⋅dudv. It is useful to define a ‘shape’ 

function ‘G’, whose integral is unity, i.e., g ≡ A⋅G(u,v) where A is the total area.  

Equation 14) serves to show how the geometry, represented by ‘g’, affects the 

morphogens, since the Laplacian operator ∇2 enters the equations eqs.1)-2) 

determining the morphogens.  

 

The eqs.1)-5), together with eqs.11)-14) constitute a set of three 

coupled second order differential equations. These have been numerically 

integrated in the case of axial symmetry and in steady state (∂/∂t = 0) , when the 

single coordinate ‘u’ runs from ‘u’ = +∞ (~ +10) at one ‘pole’ and −∞ (~ −10) at 

the opposite ‘pole’. Sample solutions are shown in Figures 4 and 5. (The 

numerical integrations were carried out with student ‘MatLab’, and the program 

is available by email request). 

 

 

 

 

 

Of particular note is that it is required that the famous (and remarkable) 

Gauss-Bonnet theorem be obeyed at all times. This theorem says that the 

integral of the Gauss curvature K over the entire area be a constant = 4πn, where 

n is an integer or zero. For a ‘donut’ shape, n = 0, while for any surface 

topologically equivalent to a sphere, such as the gastrula, n = 1. It is noticed that 

the region of the surface in the case of gastrulation where the mean curvature H 

changes sign is necessarily a region of negative Gauss curvature, which may be 

inferred by consideration of the Gauss curvature at the gastrula ‘cusp’, where it 

takes on a ‘half-donut’ shape; at the cusp, K goes to zero, and the point where K 

is most negative is where H ~ 0. For the solutions shown, λ1 = 7 and  λ2 = 7, but 

solutions are available for a range of these two parameters, e.g., λ1 = 10 and  λ2 

= 5 

 

5. Discussion 

The present work presents a morphogenetic pattern algorithm based on 

the simplest of notions. The key assumption is that activation of one signaling 

pathway acts to suppress a second, and vice versa. Further details of the 

signaling pathways are not necessary to establish pattern formation. Arguments 

are presented that one of these pathways is expected to be the ‘Wnt’ pathway. 

This Wnt pathway is coupled to any one of several other possible signaling 

pathways involved in early development, e.g. Hedgehog (Hh), BMP, Notch (and 

even possibly to a second ‘Wnt’ pathway). Such coupling leads easily to 

complex patterning, involving cell differentiation and epithelial sheet 

deformations.  These pathways are those most crucially affecting cell 

architecture, the cytoskeleton, adhesion, cell division and cell death in early 

development. It is a speculation that this discovery of patterning by evolution 

may have been one of the crucial steps along the path to multicellularity.  

 

 

The present model is consistent with the commonly seen periodic 

segmentation patterns, which in both arthropods as well as vertebrates involve 

both Wnt and Notch. This may indicate a common ancestral origin, while 

particular later arthropods (e.g., Drosophila) may have evolved a somewhat 

different mechanism, nevertheless involving Wnt in a key role. Within the 

complex Drosophila segmentation pattern it is worth noting the apposition of 

Hedgehog and Wingless (Wnt) expression stripes which appear (of course) after 

cellularization. Then Wnt is the one invariant patterning pathway, acting in 

conjunction with an alternating second pathway, with Notch as the most 

frequent second partner in segmentation. Different partnering of second 

signaling pathways with Wnt may occur sequentially. Thus it is a prediction that 

Wnt will always be one of the partners when two signaling pathways act 

together to produce segmented patterns. 

A second prediction of the model, mentioned earlier, is that Wnt ligand 

activation of the Frizzled receptor will induce further production of Wnt ligand, 

and in a time short compared to the time for transcription and translation. 

 

Morphogenetic shape transformations are coupled to a plausible pattern 

formation mechanism, and pattern formation is in turn affected by the geometry 

of the epithelial surface (Cummings, 2001). Three coupled second order 

differential equations result. All present numerical solutions are given in axial 

symmetry, although this is not a necessary restriction of the model.  

It is particularly to be noticed that the onset of gastrulation from an 

original hollow sphere of epithelial cells is shown to be a consequence of the 

model, so that the fact that there is a spontaneous morphogenetic pattern arising 

only upon achievement of a finite size of the (middle) sphere radius is a 

noteworthy result of the present model.  

  

 

                                     

References 

 

 

Beloussov, L.V. “A geometrico-mechanical model for pulsatile morphogenesis”, 

Computer Methods in Biomechanics  and Biomedical Engineering” 6, 53-63 

(2003). 

Bosenberg, M. & Massague, J., “Juxtacrine cell signalling molecules”, Curr. 

Opin. Cell Biol. 5, 832-838 (1993). 

Collier, J., Monk, N., Maini, N., & Lewis, J., “Pattern formation by lateral 

inhibition with feedback: Mathematical model of Delta-Notch intercellular 

signalling”, J. Theor. Biol. 183, 429-446 (1996). 

Cummings, F.W. & Strickland, J.C., “A model of phyllotaxis”, J. Theor. Biol. 

192, 531-544 (1998). 

doCarmo,  M.,  Differential  Geometry  of  Curves  and  Surfaces,  (Prentice  Hall, 

Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1976). 

Etienne-Manneville, S & Hall, A., “Rho GTPases in cell biology” (review), 

Nature 420, 629-635 (2002). 

Galindo, M., Bishop, S., Greig, S & Couso, J., “ Leg patterning by proximal-

distal interactions and EGFR signaling”, Science 297, 256-259 (2002). 

Garcia-Castro, M., Marcelle, C. & Bonner-Fraser, M. “Ectodermal Wnt function 

as a neural crest inducer”, Science 297, 848-851 (2002 ). 

Gerhart, J. & Kirschner, M. Cells, Embryos and Evolution, (Blackwell Science, 

Gurdon, J.B. & Bourillot, P-Y. “Morphogen gradient interpretation”, (review) 

Harwood, A. & Braga, V. “Cdc42 & GSK-3: signals at the crossroads”, Nature 

Oxford, New York, 2001). 

Nature , 413, 797-803 (2001). 

Cell Biol. 5, 275-277 (2003). 

Jamora, C., DasGupta, R., Kocieniewski, P. & Fuchs, E. “Links between signal 

transduction, transcription and adhesion in epithelial bud development”, Nature 

422, 317-322 (2003). 

 

 

Keller, R., “Shaping the Vertebrate Body Plan by Polarized Embryonic Cell 

Movements”, Science 298, 1950-1954 (2002).  

Meyerowitz, E. “Plants compared to animals: the broadest comparative study of 

development” (review) Science 295, 1482-1485 (2002). 

Miller, J.R., Hocking, A.M., Brown, J.D. & Moon, R.T. , “Mechanism and 

function of signal transduction by the Wnt/β-catenin and Wnt/Ca2+ pathways”, 

Oncogene 18, 7860-7872 (1999).  

Moon, R. & Shah, K., “Signaling polarity”, Nature 417, 239-240 (2002). 

Murray, J.D. Mathematical Biology (Springer-Verlag, New York, London, 

1990). 

(2000). 

Newman, S.A. and Sole, R., Evol. Dev. 3, 95-103 (2001). 

Niehrs, C. “Solving a sticky problem” Nature 413, 787-788 (2001). 

Owen, M., Sherratt, J. & Wearing, H., “Lateral induction by juxtacrine 

signalling is a new mechanism for pattern formation”, Dev. Biol. 217, 54-61 

Peifer, M., “Colon Construction”, Nature 410, 275-277 (2002). 

Pourquie, O. “The segmentation clock: converting embryonic time into spatial 

pattern”, Science 301, 328-330 (2003). 

Perez-Moreno, M., Jamora, C. & Fuchs, E., “Sticky business orchestrating 

cellular signals at adherens junctions”, Cell 112, 535-548 (2003). 

Purnell, B. “To every thing there is a season”, Science 301, 325. 

Raff, R. The Shape of Life: Genes, Development, and the Evolution of Animal 

Form, (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1996). 

Salazar-Ciudad, I., Newman, S.A. and Sole, R., “Phenotypic and dynamical 

transitions in model genetic networks, I: Emergence of patterns and genotype-

phenotype relationships”, Evol. Dev.3, 84-94 (2001), and  (ibid), Evol. Dev. 3, 

95-103, (2001). 

 

 

Sekimura, T., Zhu, M., Cook, J., Maini, P. & Murray, J. “Pattern formation of 

scale cells in lepidoptora by differential origin-dependent cell adhesion” Bull. 

Math. Biol. 61, 807-827 (1999). 

Skromme, I. & Stern, C. “Interactions between Wnt and Vg1 signaling pathways 

initiate primitive streak formation in early chick embryos”, Proc. Natl. Acad. 

Sci. USA 128 (15) 2915-2927 (2001). 

Speck, O., Hughes, S., Noren, N., Kulikauskas, R. & Fehon, R., “Moesin 

functions antagonistically to the Rho pathway to maintain epithelial integrity”, 

Nature 421, 83-86, (2003). 

Stollewerk, A., Schoppmeir, M. & Damen, W. “Involvement of Notch and Delta 

genes in spider segmentation” Nature 423, 863-865. 

Taipale, J. & Beachy, P.A. “The Hedgehog and Wnt signalling pathways in 

cancer”, Nature 411, 349-354 (2001). This review gives references to numerous 

other key papers. 

Tetsu, O. & McCormick, F., “β-Catenin regulates expression of cyclin D1 in 

colon carcinoma cells”, Nature 398, 422-423 (1999). 

Von Dassow, G., Meir, E., Munro, E.M., and Odell, G.M. “The segment polarity 

network is a robust developmental module”, Nature 406, 131-132 (2000).   

Willert, K., Brown, J., Danenberg, E., Duncan, A., Weissman, I., Reya, T., 

Yates, J., & Nusse, R. “Wnt proteins are lipid modified and can act as stem cell 

growth factors”, Nature 423, 448-452 (2003).  

Wodarz, A. & Nusse, R., “Mechanisms of Wnt signalling in development”, Ann. 

Revs. Cell Biol. 14, 59-88 (1998). 

Wolpert, L. “Positional information revisited”, Development (Suppl.), 3-12, 

Wolpert, L.,  Principles of Development, (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 1998). 

(1989). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

Figure 1: 

  Shown above are four curves resulting from solution of the quartic of eq.7) with 

the definitions of eq.8). The four roots are shown as a function of the parameter 

k/ko, the dimensionless wavevector. There is always a region of spontaneous 

pattern activation, where one root has a negative region, when k/ko is below a 

critical value given by (k/ko)c = q/(md)+p(md). The parameter values of the figure 

are m=1.2, d=0.8, p=2 and q=1 

 

 

Figure 2:  

 

Shown is a sample numerical solution of the model of eqs.1-5) in the 

case of constant metric, i.e., on a cylinder in axial symmetry, as a function of the 

dimensionless parameter ‘u’. Both the (dimensionless) morphogens and their 

derivatives are shown. Solutions shown in all figures are in steady state, where 

∂/∂t has been taken as zero in eqs. 1-5).  

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3: 

 

  A sample solution to eqs.1-5) on a sphere is shown, giving both morphogen and 

derivative. The sphere has a fixed radius and does not respond to the morphogen 

pattern. The sphere area is here 1.5 times the critical area Ao, where (k1

2+k2

2)Ao = 

8π. As the radius increases the amplitude of the solutions increase, as the 

gradients become progressively steeper.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4: 

  Two axi-symmetric solutions for each of the two morphogens are shown above 

as a function of the coordinate ‘u’. The coordinate ‘u’ runs from -∞ to +∞ at the 

two ‘poles’, although –10 to +10 suffices numerically. In contrast to Figure 3, the 

epithelial shape, via the surface curvatures, is now coupled to the morphogens and 

vice versa, as discussed in section 4. The two solutions shown correspond to total 

areas of A=1.7⋅Ao and A=2⋅Ao, where Ao is the sphere radius below which the 

morphogens are ≡ 0. The numerical integration has been carried out for three 

coupled second order differential equations indicated in the text, and significant 

surface deformation occurs as the area increases, and growth occurs. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 5: 

  Shown are the (middle) surfaces in three cases, for total area A=1.3⋅Ao, 1.7⋅Ao 

and 2⋅Ao, the last two areas corresponding to the curves of Figure 4. Growth is 

simulated by increasing total area, and represents the ‘slow’ time dependence of 

the model in contrast to the faster patterning reactions. It is worth noting that at 

the place denoted by the arrow, the Gauss curvature must become negative. 

Consideration that any torus (donut) has an integral of K (Gauss curvature) over 

the donut surface = 0 tells us to expect a Gauss curvature which changes sign at 

this point. The curvature K crosses zero again to become positive inside the ‘gut’. 

The integral of K over the closed surfaces of the three figures are all given 

correctly by the Gauss Bonnet theorem as 4⋅π. Gastrulation-like movement, 

resulting in a primitive ‘gut’, is the most fundamental step in the formation of the 

first two epithelial types, endoderm and the ectoderm, of any animal. The program 

integrating the three coupled second order equations is available by email request. 

 

 

 

   
 

 

