C5.1-D4.1-0013-02 
 
 
 
 

DUSTY PLASMA CORRELATION FUNCTION EXPERIMENT 
 
 
B. Smith, J. Vasut, T. Hyde, L. Matthews, J. Reay, M. Cook, J. Schmoke 
 
Center for Astrophysics, Space Physics and Engineering Research (CASPER), 
Baylor University, P. O. Box 97310, Waco, TX 76798-7310, USA 
 
 
ABSTRACT 

 
Dust  particles  immersed  within  a  plasma  environment,  such  as  those  in  protostellar  clouds,  planetary  rings  or 
cometary  environments,  will  acquire  an  electric  charge.    If  the  ratio  of  the  inter-particle  potential  energy  to  the 
average kinetic energy is high enough the particles will form either a “liquid” structure with short-range ordering or 
a crystalline structure with long range ordering.  Many experiments have been conducted over the past several years 
on such colloidal plasmas to discover the nature of the crystals formed, but more work is needed to fully understand 
these  complex  colloidal  systems.    Most  previous  experiments  have  employed  monodisperse  spheres  to  form 
Coulomb  crystals.    However,  in  nature  (as  well  as  in  most  plasma  processing  environments)  the  distribution  of 
particle sizes is more randomized and disperse.  This paper reports experiments which were carried out in a GEC rf 
reference cell modified for use as a dusty plasma system, using varying sizes of particles to determine the manner 
in which the correlation function depends upon the overall dust grain size distribution.  (The correlation function 
determines  the  overall  crystalline  structure  of  the  lattice.)    Two  dimensional  plasma  crystals  were  formed  of 
assorted glass spheres with specific size distributions in an argon plasma.  Using various optical techniques, the pair 
correlation function was determined and compared to those calculated numerically. 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
In recent years, the study of systems consisting of dust and plasmas has become especially significant.  This is 
perhaps  due  to  the  almost  universal  existence  of  the  combination  of  dust  and  plasma  in  systems  ranging  from 
protostellar  clouds  to  plasma  processing  environments.    Such  complex  plasmas  also  exist  in  planetary  rings, 
cometary  environments,  and  in  the  Earth’s  ionosphere  and  magnetosphere.    Not  only  do  dusty  plasmas  model 
naturally occurring systems like those above it is now thought that they can also mirror the structure, dynamics, and 
phase  transitions  of  certain  condensed  matter  physics.    Therefore,  an  understanding  of  the  processes  involved  in 
such systems is important. 
  Whether  these  systems  are  characterized  as  dusty  plasmas,  dust  in  plasma,  colloidal  plasmas,  or  crystalline 
plasmas, they are governed by the same basic physics.  Dust immersed in a plasma will acquire an electric charge 
through  the  processes  of  ion  and  electron  collisions,  photoemission,  and  secondary  electron  emission.    In  low 
temperature  plasmas,  without  ultraviolet  light,  secondary  electron  emission  and  photoemission  can  be  ignored.  
Charging,  therefore,  depends  only  on  the  ion  and  electron  currents.    Usually,  the  charge  obtained  by  a  grain  is 
negative, since charging is ruled by the incident flux of the faster electrons from the enveloping plasma (Morfill et 
al., 1999). 
 
Colloidal plasmas can be loosely defined as a dusty plasma in which the dust can no longer be considered a 
contaminant  but  should  instead  be  considered  an  integral  component  of  the  plasma.    Structures  called  Coulomb 
crystals can form within colloidal plasmas, once certain criteria are met.  The Coulomb coupling parameter (Γ), the 
ratio of interparticle potential energy to the particles’ thermal energy, determines how ordered these structures can 
become.  If Γ is greater than 170 (Ichimaru, 1982), the system behaves like a solid, forming a crystalline lattice.  In 
other  words,  long-range  ordering  is  present.    Thomas  and  colleagues  experimentally  observed  such  types  of 
crystallization in 1994, since then Coulomb crystals have been observed in a variety of plasma environments.  If 

short-range  ordering  is  present  in  the  system,  the  crystal  is  said  to  be  in  a  liquid  phase.    Finally  if  the  colloidal 
plasma exhibits no ordering the system is said to be in a gas phase. 
  Most experiments have used monodisperse spheres in single component plasmas to examine Coulomb crystals 
(e.g. Pieper et al., 1996a; Pieper et al., 1996b; and Zuzic et al., 2000).  However, astrophysical environments, as 
well as many laboratory ones, have significant size variation within the dust distribution which probably affects the 
ordering present in the system.  In this experiment, we seek to discover how a broader distribution of particle sizes 
affects the crystalline structure of a colloidal plasma.  Recently, it has been theoretically shown that a system with a 
more diffuse particle distribution will form a more liquid like crystal (Vasut et al., 2002b). 
 
EXPERIMENT 
 
 
These  experiments  were  carried  out  in  a  Gaseous  Electronics  Conference  (GEC)  radio  frequency  (rf) 
Reference  Cell  (Hargis  et  al.,  1994).    The  upper  electrode  of  the  GEC  rf  Reference  Cell  was  replaced  with  a 
grounded cylidrical electrode.  To allow the dust crystal to be imaged from above, an optical window was installed 
in the upper electrode port with a feed-through for dust particles.  The lower electrode was capacitively coupled to a 
rf  generator and  amplifier  though  a  T-type  matching  network.   The  walls  of  the  cell  also  serve  as  grounds.   The 
lower electrode has a stainless steel sheath ground shield and a Teflon insulator.  An aluminum dish with a circular 
cutout rests on the lower electrode.  The cutout sets up boundary conditions which constrain the dust particles to 
remain above the electrode. 
 
The discharge region was illuminated using a horizontal diode laser sheet and imaged using a CCD (charge-
coupled  device)  camera  mounted  vertically  above  the  cell.    This  camera  contained  a  band  pass  filter  to  reduce 
ambient  light  created  by  the  glow  discharge  plasma,  allowing  the  viewing  of  the  particles  in  the  perpendicularly 
illuminated plane.  To adequately resolve individual particles within the crystalline lattice, the top mounted camera 
used  a  zoom  lens  with  a  variable  focal  length  of  18-108  mm,  a  six  to  one  magnification  ratio,  and  a  lens 
magnification doubler, producing a field of view of approximately 11 mm by 11 mm.  This camera system is ideal 
for observing the horizontal lattice structure. 
A frame grabber board captures and transfers the data images to a computer.  In this experiment the pictures 
 
were taken at a rate of 30 frames per second, interlaced.  Each image had a resolution of 512 by 480 pixels and 
occupied about 250 kilobytes of disk space.  These pictures were then analyzed via a MATLAB program (Boessé et 
al., 2002) in order to obtain the Voronoi diagrams and pair correlation functions needed to analyze the crystals. 
The  object  of  this  study  was  to  examine  the  level  of  ordering  present  when  the  particle  distribution  is  not 
 
monodisperse.    To  that  end,  plasma  crystals  were  formed  from  glass  spheres  having  a  3  –  10  micron  Gaussian 
distribution  which  was  peaked  at  7  microns.    These  particles  were  purchased  from  Polysciences,  Inc.,  and  were 
quoted as having 60% of the particles between 6 and 8 microns.  The experiments were performed at 1 Torr, the 
critical pressure for argon (Pieper et al. 1996a), with an applied voltage of 30 Vrms in an argon plasma.  At pressures 
of 1 Torr and above for the monodisperse particles used by Pieper et al. (1996a) “trapping was stable at all available 
powers.”    Collected  data  was  then  compared  to  data  taken  under  the  same  conditions  using  8.9-micron 
polymethylene melamine spheres. 
The  experimental  results  were  compared  to  theoretical  results  from  a  computer  model  previously  used  to 
 
examine Coulomb crystallization (Vasut and Hyde, 2001).  This computer model employs a Barnes-Hut tree code 
(1986)  known  as  “Box_Tree”  developed  by  Derek  Richardson  (1994).    The  code  was  later  modified  to  include 
electrostatic  forces  and  Debye  shielding  in  order  to  better  simulate  dusty  plasma  environments  (Matthews  and 
Hyde, 1998; Matthews and Hyde, 2002; Swint and Hyde,  2002; Vasut et al., 2002a; Qiao and Hyde, 2002a; and 
Qiao and Hyde, 2002b). Box_Tree calculates all near-field forces directly, even as the code approximates medium- 
and far-field forces using multipole terms for collections of particles. 
 
RESULTS 
 
 
Visual inspection of the resulting crystals show that the glass spheres do not form as ordered a structure at 1 
Torr compared to the crystal formed from 8.9 micron polymethylene melamine spheres.  By stepping the horizontal 
laser vertically through the particle cloud, it was noted that the particle cloud had two vertically diffuse layers.  For 
the  purposes  of  this  experiment,  the  bottom  layer  was  chosen  for  analysis.    While  sedimentation  of  the  larger 
particles was minor, it is believed that the bottom layer had a higher concentration of the largest particles.  Samples 
of  the  raw  images  of  the  ordered  system  for  both  the  glass  and  polymethylene  melamine  spheres  are  shown  in 
Figure 1 and Figure 2 respectively.  Although it is possible to approximate ordering directly from the images taken 

of the crystal, more accurate methods for determining the order present must be used before system classification 
can occur. 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
Fig. 1.  Raw image of 3-10 micron glass spheres.  The 
bright spots are the dust particles. 
 
 
 
There  are  several  methods  for  measuring  the 
amount  of  order  in  a  complex  plasma  system.    One 
simple  method  is  to  find  the  number  of  nearest 
neighbors for a typical dust particle.  In two dimensions 
this  can  be  done  by  dividing  any  single  plane  into  a 
series  of  cells,  with  the  boundary  between  the  cells 
comprised  of  points  equidistant  from  two  or  more 
particles.  Such a figure is known as a Voronoi diagram, 
an example of which is shown in Figure 3. In a perfect 
hexagonal  lattice,  each  cell  will  be  a  hexagon  with  the 
six  sides  representing  its  six  nearest  neighbors.    After 
the  Voronoi  diagram  is  generated,  the  average  number 
of  neighbors  a  cell  has  and/or  the  variation  in  that 
number  can  serve  as  an  indication  of  overall  order  for 
the  system.    Similar  diagrams  and  nearest  neighbor 
calculations  may  be  performed  for  three  or  higher 
dimensions,  but  in  this  work  the  standard  Voronoi 
technique  is  used  in  which  only  two-dimensional  cases 
are  studied.    As  can  be  seen  in  Figure  3,  the  glass 
spheres do not form a solid crystalline lattice.  However, 
over 80% of the cells are 5, 6, or 7-sided with over 40% 
of  the  cells  being  6-sided;  therefore,  some  degree  of 
ordering is present. 
In  order  to  more  fully  examine  the  crystalline 
 
structure  of  the  Coulomb  crystal,  the  pair  correlation 
function, g(r), is used.  This function is also known as the 
radial  or  pair  density  distribution.    This  technique  has 
been  used  in  two-dimensional  colloidal  science  analysis 

 
Fig. 2.  Raw image of 9 micron polymethylene melamine 
spheres.  The bright spots are the dust particles. 

 

Fig.  3.  Voronoi  diagram  for  the  image  of  3-10  micron 
glass  spheres  shown  in  Figure  1.    In  this  image,  there 
are  94  5-sided  cells,  157  6-sided  cells,  and  71  7-sided 
cells out of a total of 386 cells. 

 

for some time and was first used to describe order within 
dust  crystals  by  Quinn  and  colleagues  (1996).    The 
correlation 
two-
dimensional  studies,  but  has  also  been  used  in  three 
dimensions  (Zuzic,  2000)  where  it  can  help  identify  the 

is  most  often  used 

function 

in 

7

3

2

0

1

8

8

4

5

9

9

2

6

0

1

 

 

  This 

indicates  a 

 
type of lattice (body-centered cubic, face-centered cubic, or hexagonal closed-packed). 
The  pair  correlation  function  represents  the 
 
probability  of  finding  two  particles  separated  by  a 
distance r.  It is generated by considering each particle, 
measuring  the  distance  to  every  other  particle  and  then 
counting the number of particles a distance r to r + δ r 
from  the  particle.    This  is  repeated  for  every  particle 
until  an  average  value  is  determined  which  is  then 
normalized  by  dividing  by  the  annular  area  between  r 
and  r  +  δ  r.    This  is  sometimes  normalized  again  by 
setting the asymptotic value equal to one, in which case 
it  may  be  referred  to  as  the  normalized  pair  correlation 
function (Quinn et al., 1996).  The correlation functions 
generated for this paper follow this practice. 
 
For  a  perfect  crystal  with  zero  thermal  energy, 
g(r)  will  be  a  series  of  Delta  functions.    For  a  physical 
lattice  at  finite  temperature,  the  Delta  functions  will 
spread  out  and  overlap,  as  seen  in  Figure  4.    The 
correlation  function  shown  in  Figure  4  exhibits  several 
distinct peaks.  The fact that so many peaks can be seen 
indicates  system  ordering  to  several  times  the  nearest-
long-range 
neighbor  distance. 
correlation among the particles and an overall crystalline 
structure.  In  Figure  4,  the  initial  peak  is  much  larger 
than  the  others.    This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  even  in 
the  correlation 
long-range  ordering, 
systems  with 
between  nearest  neighbors  is  stronger  than  for  more 
distant  pairs.    Because  of  this  stronger  correlation,  the 
first  peak 
significantly  narrower  causing  a 
corresponding increase in the height of the peak. 
 
In  a  liquid  state,  characterized  by  only  short-
range  ordering,  there  is  only  one  primary  peak  or  a 
primary peak followed by a small second or third peak.  
In  a  gaseous  state  there  is  no  correlation  between  the 
particles  and  the  correlation  function  shows  no  clear 
peaks,  although  often  the  mutual  repulsion  of  the 
particles  prevents  them  from  close  approaches  to  each 
other.  This can cause the correlation function to be zero 
for  small  distances  instead  of  one,  as  in  an  ideal  gas.  
Examples  of  the  correlation  functions  for  a  gaseous, 
liquid, and crystalline state are shown in Figures 4-6. 
the 
 
Gaussian distribution of glass spheres is shown in Figure 
7.    The  prominent  first  peak  and  absence  of  second  or 
third  peaks 
liquid  crystal  structure.  
Comparison  with  the  pair  correlation  function  obtained 
numerically  (Figure  8)  shows  good  agreement  between 
theoretical calculations and experimental results. 
 
 
 
 
 

The  normalized  correlation 

indicates  a 

function 

for 

is 

 

3

3

1

5

2

4

6

0

7

2

2

6

4

1

5

0

8

7

9

1

0

0

1

2

 

Fig.  4.    Example  of  a  normalized  pair  correlation 
function for a solid crystal. 

3

4

5

 

Fig.  5.    Example  of  a  normalized  pair  correlation 
function for a liquid crystal. 

3

4

5

 

3

4

5

 

Fig.  6.    Example  of  a  normalized  correlation  function 

for a gaseous crystal. 

 

)
r
(
g

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0

1

2

3

4

5

0

1

2

3

4

5

 

Fig.  7.    Normalized  pair  correlation  function  for  3-10 
micron  glass  spheres  averaged  over  10  frames.    The 
x-axis  has  been  normalized  such 
first 
maximum  occurs  at  one  regardless  of  differences 
between successive frames. 

that 

the 

Fig.  8.    Normalized  pair  correlation  function  for 
numerical  simulation.    Particles  were  given  a  thirty-
percent distribution in charge and mass. 
 

 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
In this preliminary work, it has been shown that, while monodisperse particles will form solid Coulomb crystals, a 
Gaussian  distribution  of  particles  forms  liquid  Coulomb  crystals  instead.    This  is  not  a  surprising  result  since 
Coulomb crystallization is particle charge dependent which in turn depends on the particle radius.  However, the 
fact that a diffuse distribution forms a crystal at all is interesting since most naturally occurring systems will have 
some type of distribution in particle size.  More work is necessary to fully explore the effects of a size distribution 
on  Coulomb  crystallization.    This  should  include  examining  system  ordering  over  additional  power  and  pressure 
ranges and for various dust composition.  Additionally, in situ methods of determining particle sizes within each 
layer should be included to examine the effects of the sedimentation of the larger particles. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
The  writers  gratefully  acknowledge  all  those  who  have  made  the  existence  of  CASPER  possible,  but  would 
especially like to thank Vicky Santiago for her tireless work on this project.  This research was funded in part by 
the National Science Foundation and the Office of Research at Baylor University. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Barnes, J., and P. Hut, A hierarchical O(N log N) force calculation algorithm, Nature, 324, 446-449, 1986. 
Boessé,  C.  M.,  M.  K.  Henry,  T.  W.  Hyde,  and  L.  S.  Matthews,  Digital  imaging  and  analysis  of  dusty  plasmas, 

Morfill, G. E., H. M. Thomas, U. Konopka et al., The plasma condensation: liquid and crystalline plasmas, Phys. 

submitted to Adv. Space Res., 2002. 

Plasmas, 6(5), 1769-1780, 1999. 

Hargis, P. J., K. E. Greenberg, P. A. Miller et al., The Gaseous Electronic Conference radio-frequency reference 
cell:  A  defined  parallel-plate  radio-frequency  system  for  experimental  and  theoretical  studies  of  plasma-
producing discharges, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 65(1), 140-154, 1994. 

Ichimaru, S., Strongly coupled plasmas: High density classical plasmas and degenerate electron liquids, Rev. Mod. 

Phys., 54, 1017-1059, 1982. 

 

)
r
(
g

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

 

 
Matthews,  L.  S.,  and  T.  W.  Hyde,  Gravitoeletrodynamics  in  Saturn’s  F  ring:  Encounters  with  Prometheus  and 

Pandora, submitted to Journal of Physics A, 2002. 

Matthews, L. S., and T. W. Hyde, Numerical simulations of gravitoelectrodynamics in dusty plasmas, in Strongly 

Coupled Coulomb Systems, edited by T. Kalman et al., Plenum Press, New York, USA, 199-202, 1998. 

Pieper, J. B., J. Goree, and R. A. Quinn, Experimental studies of two-dimensional and three-dimensional structure 

in a crystallized dusty plasma, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 14, 519-524, 1996a. 

Pieper,  J.  B.,  J.  Goree,  and  R.  A.  Quinn,  Three-dimensional  structure  in  a  crystallized  dusty  plasma,  Physycal 

Qiao,  K.,  and  T.  W.  Hyde,  Numerical  simulation  and  analysis  of  thermally  excited  waves  in  plasma  crystals, 

Qiao, K., and T. W. Hyde, Dispersion relations for thermally excited waves in plasma crystals, submitted to Adv. 

Review E, 54(5), 5636-5640, 1996b. 

submitted to Adv. Space Res., 2002. 

Space Res., 2002. 

E, 53, R2049-R2052, 1996. 

1311-1316, 2002. 

Review Letters, 73(5), 652-655, 1994. 

on Plasma Science, 29(2), 231-237, 2001. 

Space Res., 29(9), 1295-1300, 2002a. 

Quinn, R. A., C. Cui, J. Goree et al., Structural Analysis of a Coulomb Lattice in a Dusty Plasma, Physical Review 

Richardson, D., Tree code simulations of planetary rings, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 269, 493-511, 1994. 
Swint, G. S., and T. W. Hyde, Modeling chondrule melting using a resizing Box_Tree code, Adv. Space Res., 29(9), 

Thomas, H., G. E. Morfill, V. Demmel et al., Plasma crystal: Coulomb crystallization in a dusty plasma, Physical 

Vasut, J. A., and T. Hyde, Computer simulations of Coulomb crystallization in a dusty plasma, IEEE Transactions 

Vasut,  J.  A.,  M.  D.  Lennek,  and  T.  W.  Hyde,  Plasma  condensation  and  the  one  component  plasma  model,  Adv. 

Vasut, J. A., T. W. Hyde, and L. Barge, Finite Coulomb crystal formation, submitted to Adv. Space Res., 2002b. 
Zuzic, M., A. V. Ivlev, J. Goree et al., Three-dimensional strongly coupled plasma crystal under gravity conditions, 

Physical Review Letters, 85(19), 4064-4067, 2000. 

 
Email address of T. W. Hyde  
Manuscript received 19 October 2002; revised 

Truell_Hyde@baylor.edu 
 

 

; accepted 

 

 

 

 

