Manuscript Number: C5.1-D4.1-0036 
 
 
 

FINITE COULOMB CRYSTAL FORMATION 
 
 
J. Vasut, T.W. Hyde, and L. Barge 
 
Center for Astrophysics, Space Physics and Engineering Research (CASPER) 
Baylor University, Waco, TX 76798-7310, USA 

 
 

ABSTRACT 

 
Dust  particles  immersed  within  a  plasma  environment,  such  as  those  found  in  planetary  rings  or  comets,  will 
acquire an electric charge. If the ratio of the inter-particle potential energy to average kinetic energy is large enough 
the particles will form either a “liquid” structure with short-range ordering or a crystalline structure with long-range 
ordering. Since their discovery in laboratory environments in 1994, such crystals have been the subject of a variety 
of  experimental,  theoretical  and  numerical  investigations.  Most  numerical  and  theoretical  investigations  have 
examined infinite systems assuming periodic boundary conditions. Since experimentally observed crystals can be 
comprised  of  a  few  hundred  particles,  this  often  leads  to  discrepancies  between  predicted  theoretical  results  and 
experimental  data.  In  addition,  recent  studies  have  concentrated  on  the  importance  of  random  charge  variations 
between individual dust particles, but very little on the importance of size variations between the grains. Such size 
variations naturally lead to inter-grain charge variations which can easily become more important than those due to 
random charge fluctuations (which are typically less than one percent). Although such size variations can be largely 
eliminated experimentally by introducing mono-dispersive particles, many laboratory systems and all astrophysical 
environments contain significant size distributions. This study utilizes a program to find the equilibrium positions 
of a dusty plasma system as well as a modified Barnes-Hut code to model the dynamic behavior of such systems. It 
is shown that in terms of inter-particle spacing and ordering, finite systems are significantly different than infinite 
ones, particularly for the most-highly ordered states. 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
Complex (dusty) plasma systems are common in a variety of terrestrial and astrophysical environments such as 
planetary  ring  systems,  cometary  environments,  planetary  nebulae,  and  plasma  processing  equipment.  Dust 
particles immersed in a plasma will acquire an electric charge and often have a significant impact on the plasma. 
The presence of the dust influences the plasma and in some situations can become a component of the plasma, in 
essence, a giant ion. Since the dust particles have such a large mass and charge as compared to the other plasma 
species, the resulting “complex” plasma will have several interesting properties. 
  One of the most interesting these is the possibility of the dust particles arranging themselves into either a well-
ordered crystalline state or a “liquid” state with short-range ordering. Such Coulomb crystallization of negatively-
charged dust particles was first predicted in 1986 (Ikezi), observed experimentally in 1994 (Thomas, et al., 1994; 
Chu  and  I,  1994)  and  has  since  been  observed  in  a  variety  of  plasma  environments.  Most  of  these  have  been  in 
laboratory  plasma  cells  on  earth,  although  there  have  been  a  limited  number  of  experiments  in  microgravity 
conditions as well (Fortov et al., 1998; Morfill et al., 1999). 
  Until recently, most theoretical and numerical simulations of Coulomb crystallization have considered infinite 
crystals  with  periodic  boundary  conditions.  Although  this  allows  the  bulk  properties  of  the  systems  to  be 
investigated, it neglects any edge effects. Since an experimentally observed crystal may typically have only a few 
hundred to a few thousand particles, such edge effects can be significant. During the past few years small systems 
have begun to be studied (Lai and I, 1999; Melzer et al, 2001; Joyce et al, 2001; Peeters et al, 2002; Melzer, 2003). 
Another  important  feature  of  finite  clusters  is  that  the  entire  particle  cloud  may  oscillate  in  response  to  external 
conditions  (Wang,  et  al,  2000;  Tskhakaya  and  Shukla,  2001).  The  majority  of  theoretical  and  numerical  models 

have also assumed mono-dispersive particles. Since most experiments use particles with only a small size variation, 
this is a relatively accurate representation of these systems. However, astrophysical environments, as well as many 
laboratory  ones,  have  significant  size  variation  within  the  dust  distribution  which  will  likely  effect  the  ordering 
present in the system.  
 
METHODS 
 
  Numerical studies of dusty plasma dynamics have been carried out using the Box_Tree computer program over 
the last several years (Vasut and Hyde, 2001; Vasut, 2001; Vasut et al., 2002; Qiao and Hyde, 2002). Box_Tree, 
written by Richardson (1994) and modified by Mathews (2000) uses a Barnes-Hut (1986) algorithm to calculate the 
inter-particle  forces.  The  Barnes-Hut  algorithm  calculates  the  forces  from  near-by  particles  directly  but  uses  an 
approximation  to  calculate  the  force  from  more  distant  particles,  allowing  it  to  scale  with  particle  number  as      
O(N  logN).  Box_Tree  allows  a  large  number  of  parameters  to  be  varied  independently  and  can  follow  the 
trajectories of the particles throughout the simulation. Since observed crystals tend to be primarily formed in the 
horizontal plane due to the presence of gravity and effects such as ion wakes, the simulations were restricted to a 
horizontal plane. The inter-particle interaction in this plane is given by the shielded Coulomb potential (Konopka et 
al. 2000) 

U

=

r λ/−

Qe
r

 

 

 

(1) 

where Q is the particle charge, r is the inter-particle spacing and λ is the Debye shielding length. 
 
Typically,  boundary  conditions  in  Box_Tree  are  provided  by  the  use  of  periodic  boundary  conditions,  thus 
allowing  bulk  effects  to  be  investigated.  When  modeling  finite  systems,  the  periodic  boundary  conditions  are 
replaced by a highly-charged ring of particles in order to provide confinement.  
 
Size variation within the dust distribution is created by modifying the initial configuration of the particles to 
include  a  Gaussian  deviate  to  the  size  of  each  particle.  The  size  of  the  deviate  is  specified  as  a  user-supplied 
fraction of the initial particle’s radius. Since the particle charge tends to vary linearly with the radius, the charge is 
also adjusted by the same factor. Particle mass and velocity are also adjusted proportionally to preserve a constant 
temperature. Box_Tree is then run again with, excepting what has just been changed, identical parameters to obtain 
a new distribution of particles. 
In some circumstances, Box_Tree calculates more information than is needed. This is most significant when the 
 
goal  is  to  simply  find  the  equilibrium  position  for  a  series  of  particles.  In  such  cases,  the  gas  drag  option  of 
Box_Tree  may  be  used  to  eliminate  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  particles,  allowing  them  to  reach  their  equilibrium 
state.  Such  a  process  can  take  a  prohibitively  long  period  of  time  before  equilibrium  is  reached.  In  such  cases 
another  program,  named  Equilibrium_Finder,  is  used.  This  program  finds  the  equilibrium  position  for  a  set  of 
particles subject to a specified confining potential. It does this by examining the potential at each particle as well as 
at points immediately adjacent to the particle. The particles are then moved in the direction of the lowest potential. 
This process is repeated until no particles are moved (or the program reaches a user-supplied maximum number of 
steps).  Since  the  particles  are  simply  moved  without  being  given  a  velocity  this  allows  the  final  equilibrium 
positions to be quickly reached. The primary danger in this method is the possibility of reaching a local minimum 
energy state instead of a global one. This danger is reduced by either creating the system in an initially ordered state 
and/or adding a random noise factor to the particle positions at each step. 
 
RESULTS 
 
One Dimensional Systems 
To  examine  the  simplest  case  of  a  finite  system,  a  one-dimensional  line  was  studied  using  a  version  of 
 
Equilibrium_Finder. A number of particles (ranging from 10 to 1000) were uniformly placed 100 units apart along 
a line with boundary conditions provided by two outside, immobile particles whose charge was arbitrarily set at 100 
times  the  interior  particle  charge.  For  this  study  the  Debye  length  was,  again  arbitrarily,  held  at  twice  the  inter-
particle separation. (Cases with different values of the Debye length will be the topic of further study.) 
 
The  equilibrium  state  of  these  systems  is  based  on  the  interaction  of  the  inward  compression  from  the 
confinement potential and the mutual repulsion of the particles. The inter-particle separation for the first three runs 
(particle number of 10, 50 and 100) are shown in Figure 1. A feature common to all of the runs, except for the one 
with only 10 particles, is the presence of a large central region where the inter-particle separation is nearly constant.  

Near the end of the chain the particle spacing increases significantly, especially for the outer-most pair of particles. 
It  is  worth  noting  that,  excepting  the  N=10  case,  the  number  of  particles  comprising  this  boundary  between  the 
outside of the chain and the interior bulk is around 4 particles. In every case the outermost four particle pairs have a 
separation  that  is  at  least  1%  greater  than  the  minimum  particle  separation  while  the  5th  pair  of  particles  has  a 
separation  within  1%  of  the  minimum.  This  seems  to  suggest  that  (at  least  for  systems  up  to  1000  particles)  the 
“skin” of such systems is only 4 particles deep. The amount of “stretching” of the end of the chain, defined here as 
the ratio of inter-particle separation for the end particles as compared to the minimum separation, is nearly constant 
for N≥50 but does increase slowly with increasing numbers of particles, as shown in Table 1. 
 
 

65

60

55

50

100

90

80

110

100

90

80

10       
 

1

4

7

1

11

21

31

41

1

26

51

76

      

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) 

50 

10 

  b) 

500 

250 

100 

1000 

15.2% 

15.3% 

15.2% 

14.4% 

15.3% 

15.4% 

 (c) 
 
Fig 1.  Inter-particle separation for one-dimensional systems with (a) 10, (b) 50 and (c) 100 particles. 
 
 
Table 1.  Increase in inter-particle separation for end particles compared to the minimum separation. 
Number of 
Particles 
Variation 
 
 
Two Dimensional Systems 
 
Two  dimensional  systems  were  examined  using  a  combination  of  Equilibrium_Finder  and  Box_Tree. 
Equilibrium_Finder was used when only the final, equilibrium position was desired and Box_Tree was used when 
dynamic systems (such as oscillating systems) or systems at finite temperatures were examined. 
 
Edge Effects 
To  study  the  edge  effects  of  two  dimensional  systems,  Equilibrium_Finder  first  generated  an  ordered  lattice 
 
and then allowed it to either relax or expand naturally to its equilibrium position. An example of the final state for a 
system composed of 2611 particles is shown in Figure 2(a), with an enlarged view of one quadrant shown in Figure 
2(b). 
The  most  important  effect  which  can  be  seen  in  Figure  2  is  the  transition  from  hexagonal  symmetry  in  the 
 
interior of the lattice to cylindrical symmetry near the boundary as imposed by the system boundary conditions. As 
can  be  seen,  to  a  large  degree,  the  outer-two  most  rings  have  cylindrical  symmetry  while  the  interior  is  solidly 
hexagonal with a transition layer several layers thick between the two, consistent with results from other authors 
(Joyce, et al, 2001; Peeters et al, 2002)    
 
Examination  of  different  simulations  reveals  that  the  “thickness”  of  the  intermediate  layers  between  the 
hexagonal  interior  and  the  circular  exterior  is  not  constant  and  can  range  from  3  to  8  layers.  This  thickness 
increases with the number of particles in the system; the exact relationship between the two will be the subject of 
additional study. 
 
The  transition  between  the  two  types  of  symmetry  naturally  produces  a  breakdown  in  ordering  within  the 
system  as  can  be  seen  in  the  pair  correlation  function  for  the  interior  and  exterior  particles.  The  dividing  line 
between the two was chosen here to be the distribution radius divided by 0.7071, thus half of the particles will be in 
each  section.  As  expected,  the  interior,  with  its  greater  symmetry,  has  an  strongly-peaked  correlation  function, 
showing a true hexagonal lattice. The  outer half of the system is also strongly-peaked, but to a significantly less 
degree than. This can be seen in Figure 3 which shows the marked difference between the two halves. 
 

 

(a) 

 
Fig.  2.    Two-dimensional  lattice  with  2611  particles under  cylindrical  boundary  conditions. Figure  (a)  is the  entire 
crystal while (b) is the upper-right quadrant at a higher magnification. 
 

(b) 

   

 

 

 

 

 

(a) 

(b) 

     

 
 
Fig. 3.  Pair correlation function for the (a) interior and (b) exterior of a finite lattice. 
 
 
 
Since the number of particles in each shell is dependent upon the square of the radius of that shell, a significant 
percentage of the particles will be part of the non-hexagonal boundary and/or the transition between the boundary 
and the interior. In the system shown in Figure 2, comprised of roughly 26 shells, the outer-most two are clearly 
circular and the transition layer is at least 4 to 5 shells thick. This means that roughly 15% of the particles are in the 
circular region and 26-32% are in the transition region, leaving between only 53 to 59% in the interior. 
  
Dusty Plasma Oscillations 
In  addition  to  finding  the  equilibrium  positions  of  a  finite  system  of  dust  particles  at  zero  temperature, 
 
oscillations of dust particle systems are also of interest. In such cases the dynamics of the system are important and 
Box_Tree  must  be  used.  In  these  simulations,  the  particles  are  initially  placed  within  a  circle  with  some  given 
radius. The particle cloud will then either collapse down to a smaller radius or expand to a larger one. Due to the 
particles’ inertia they generally over-shoot their equilibrium state and then proceed to oscillate about that position. 
Typically such large-scale oscillations are not observed since Coulomb crystals normally come to an equilibrium 
condition gradually as the particles settle into the lattice with their excess kinetic energy absorbed by the effects of 
neutral gas drag. Such oscillations could occur, however if the bias voltage on the electrode was changed suddenly. 
A similar change could occur in planetary ring systems as portions of the ring enter and leave the planetary shadow, 
thus changing the in-situ plasma conditions. 
 
The  rate  of  oscillations  of  the  particle  cloud  depend  upon  a  variety  of  parameters,  ranging  from  the  particle 
mass and charge to the strength of the confining field and/or the Debye length (Tskhakaya and Shukla, 2001). In 
this  study  only  the  effect  of  particle  charge  and  mass  were  studied.  The  data  for  this  series  of  runs  is  shown  in 
Figure 5. A best fit to this data yields a dependence of  
 

52.0
mq
which is in good agreement with Tskhakaya and Shukla (2001). The slight difference in the charge dependence is 
primarily due to the fact that the confining potential is not harmonic.  

(2) 

50.0

=

f

 

 

−

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

25

20

15

10

5

0

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

1.50E-15

2.00E-15

1.00E-15

0.00E+00

5.00E-16

2.50E-12  

2.50E-15       

0.00E+00

5.00E-13

1.00E-12

1.50E-12

2.00E-12

 

(a) 

(b) 

 
 
Fig. 5.  Frequency dependence upon (a) particle charge and (b) particle mass. 
 
 
Effect of Size Variation on Coulomb Crystallization 
 
In most astrophysical environments there will be a significant size variation among the particles. This is also 
true  in  many  laboratory  systems  as  well.  Typically  in  laboratory  environments  this  variation  is  minimized,  but 
many systems still have significant size distributions (Smith, et al, 2002). For large size variations the larger (and 
more  highly  charged)  particles  will  tend  to  move  toward  the  center  of  the  particle  distribution.  If,  however,  the 
charge variation is small and/or the system becomes ordered quickly, it is possible that such particles will reach a 
local equilibrium where the size variation is present randomly through the system. In this study it is assumed that 
the size/charge distribution is indeed random and follows a Gaussian distribution. 
  As seen in Figure 6, the charge variation has the effect of damaging the hexagonal structure of the system, an 
effect which can be most clearly seen in the correlation functions. The correlation function for the case with mono-
dispersive  particles  as  well  as  a  15%  size  variation  is  shown  in  Figure  6(a)  where  the  particles  have  no  kinetic 
energy and are therefore very highly-ordered. In such cases the size variation makes a large impact on the ordering 
present, but leaves the system in a very highly ordered state. At finite temperatures, such as the one shown in Figure 
6(b), the system is not nearly as ordered and the size variation, while making a significant impact, is less important. 
 

    

 

 

(a) 

(b) 

 
Figure 6.  Pair correlation function with size/charge variation of 0% and 15% (dashed line) for (a) zero temperature 
and (b) finite temperature. 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
 
Finite  dusty  plasma  systems  have  been  shown  to  have  significant  edge  effects,  consistent  with  results  from 
 
other authors (Joyce et al, 2001; Peeters, et al 2002). In one dimension these are largely limited to the four outer-
most pairs of particles having significantly larger inter-particle separation than those in the bulk of the system. This 
effect depends only very weakly upon the number of particles (at least when the number of particles is more than 
10 or so). In two dimensions the edge of the crystal is forced into a circular shape by the confining potential. Since 
the interior of the system has hexagonal symmetry this creates a layer several particles thick where the exterior and 
interior come together in a relatively disordered state (when compared to the order present in the interior).  
 
Finite systems may also oscillate if the system is not at an equilibrium state. Such oscillations could easily be 
induced by a rapid change of the plasma and/or confining potential. In such cases the dust distribution will oscillate 

with a frequency that closely depends on √(q/m). Such results are again consistent with other work (Tskhakaya and 
Shukla, 2001) 
  Dusty plasma  systems  may  also  have  a  size  variation,  especially astrophysical  ones.  Such  size  variation  lead 
naturally to a charge variation which can have a significant impact on the amount of ordering present within the 
system. The size of this impact is greatest at zero temperatures where there is naturally more order present than at 
finite temperatures. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Barnes, J. and P. Hut, A hierarchical O(N log N) force calculation algorithm, Nature, 324, 446-449, 1986. 
Chu, J.H. and L. I, Direct observation of Coulomb crystals and liquids in strongly coupled rf dusty plasmas, Phys 

Rev Letters, 72, 4009-4012, 1994.  

Fortov, V.E., A.P. Nefedov, O. S. Vaulina, et al., Dusty plasma induced by solar radiation under microgravational 
conditions:  an  experiment  on  board  the  Mir  orbiting  space  station,  Journal  of  Experimental  and  Theoretical 
Physics, 87, 1087-1097, 1998.  

Ikezi, H, Coulomb solid of small particles in plasmas, Physics of Fluids, 29, 1764-1766, 1986. 
Joyce,G., M. Lampe and G. Ganguli, Particle simulation of dust structures in plasmas, IEEE Transactions on 

Plasma Science, 29, 238-246, 2001. 

Konopka, U., G.E. Morfill and L. Ratke, Measurement of the interaction potential of microspheres in the sheath of 

a rf discharge, Phys Rev Letters, 84, 891-894, 2000. 

Lai, Y and L. I, Packing and defects of strongly coupled two-dimensional Coulomb clusters: Numerical simulation, 

Phys. Rev. E, 60, 4743-4753, 1999. 

Matthews,  L.  and  T.W.  Hyde,  Numerical  Simulations  of  gravitoelectrodynamics  in  dusty  plasmas,  in  Strongly 

Coupled Coulomb Systems, edited by G. Kalman, et al, Plenum Press, New York, 199-202, 2000. 

Melzer, A., M. Klindworth and A. Piel, Normal modes of 2D finite clusters in complex plasmas, Phys. Rev. Letters, 

Melzer, A, Mode spectra of thermally excited two-dimensional dust Coulomb clusters, Phys Rev. E, 67, 016411, 

Morfill,  G.E.,  H.M.  Thomas,  U.  Konopka,  et  al.,  Condensed  plasmas  under  microgravity,  Phys  Rev  Letters,  83, 

Peeters, FM, M Kong and B Partoens, Geometry induced defects in a confined Wigner lattice, Dusty Plasmas in the 
New Millenium, R. Bharuthiam et al, Ed, AIP Conf. Proceedings #649, Melville, New York, p. 192-195, 2002. 

Qiao,  K.  and  T.W.  Hyde,  Numerical  simulations  and  analysis  of  thermally  excited  waves  in  plasma  crystals, 

submitted to Adv. Space Res., 2002. 

Richardson, D., Tree code simulations of planetary rings, Mont. Not. R. Astron. Soc, 269, 493-511, 1994.  
Serezhkin,  Y.G.,  Formation  of  ordered  structures  of  charged  microparticles  in  near-surface  cometary  gas-dust 

atmosphere, Proceedings of SPIE, 4137, 1-12, 2000. 

Smith, B., J. Vasut, T.W. Hyde, et al., Dusty plasma correlation experiment, submitted to Adv. Space Res., 2002. 
Thomas, H., G.E. Morfill, V. Demmel, et al, Plasma crystal: Coulomb crystallization in a dusty plasma, Phys Rev 

Tskhakaya ,DD and PK Shukla, Theory of dust crystal and its oscillations in plasmas, Physics Letters A, 286, 277-

Letters, 73, 652-655, 1994. 

281, 2001. 

University, Waco, Texas, USA, 2001. 

on Plasma Sci, 29, 231-237, 2001. 

Res, 29, 1295-1300, 2002. 

Tsytovich, V.N., Dust plasma crystals, drops, and clouds, Physics-Uspekhi, 40, 53-94, 1997. 
Vasut,  J.A.,  Numerical  Simulations  of  Strongly-Coupled  Dusty  Plasma  Systems,  Ph.D.  Dissertation,  Baylor 

Vasut, J.A. and T.W. Hyde, Computer simulations of coulomb crystallization in a dusty plasma, IEEE Transactions 

Vasut, J.A., M.D. Lennek and T.W. Hyde, Plasma condensation and the one component plasma model, Adv Space 

Wang, Y., W. Juan and L. I, Self-organized oscillations of strongly coupled dust Coulomb clusters in 

67, 115002, 2001. 

2003. 

1598-1601, 1999. 

plasma traps, Phys Rev E, 62, 5667-5671, 2000. 

 
Email address of T.W. Hyde: Truell_Hyde@baylor.edu 
 
Manuscript received 

19 October 2002 

; revised 

12 February 2003 

; accepted 

