Geo-engineering Gone Awry: A New Partial Solution of 

Fermi’s Paradox 

 

 

By 

 

 

Milan M. Ćirković 

Astronomical Observatory Belgrade 

Volgina 7, 11160 Belgrade 

SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO 

arioch@eunet.yu 

Richard B. Cathcart 

Geographos 

1608 East Broadway, Suite #107 

Glendale, California 91205-1524 

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

rbcathcart@msn.com 

Abstract.  Another  partial  solution  of  Fermi’s  famous  paradox  is  proposed,  based  on  our 

increased understanding of geophysics, geo-engineering and climatology. It has been claimed in 

the recent astrobiological literature (for instance, in the recent controversial “rare Earth” theory 

of  Ward  and  Brownlee),  that  geological  activity  of  a  terrestrial  planet  is  an  important 

precondition  for  the  emergence  of  complex  metazoan  life  forms.  Technological  civilizations 

arising on such planets will be, at some point of their histories or another, tempted to embark 

upon  massive  geo-engineering  projects.  If,  for  some  reasons  only  very  recently  understood, 

large-scale  geo-engineering  is  in  fact  much  more  dangerous  than  previously  thought,  the 

scenario  in  which  at  least  some  of  the  extraterrestrial  civilizations  in  the  Milky  Way  self-

destruct  in  this  manner  gains  plausibility.  In  addition,  we  speculate  on  possible  reasons,  both 

physical and culturological, which could make such a threat even more pertinent on an average 

Galactic terrestrial planet than on Earth.     

Keywords: astrobiology, geophysics, extraterrestrial intelligence, existential risks 

 

 

 

1

1. INTRODUCTION 

 

 

 

The absence of extraterrestrial intelligent beings within Earth’s biosphere could 

be best explained by the conjecture that advanced technological aliens are non-existent 
in our Galaxy—as claimed by Enrico Fermi (1901-1954) at a lunch party in May 1950.1  

Assuming  another  Earth-like  planet  elsewhere  in  the  Milky  Way  that  is  inhabited  by 

persons similar to us in both epistemic capacities and technology, then it is necessary to 

imagine  those  particular  aliens  wondering  why  there  have  been,  thus  far,  no  official 

reports  of  Earthling  visits!  In  this  report  we  examine  a  variant  of  the  possibility  that 

intelligent  extraterrestrials,  natives  of  a  terrestrial  planet,  have  exterminated  their 

species  accidentally,  ending  all  technological  examination  of  their  planet  and  its 

surroundings as well as macro-engineering alterations of it. To add realism’s flavor to 

our scenario, we take as our chief example the world we know best, the Earth—and, in 

particular,  how  a  self-induced  geological/Macroengineering  extermination  event-

process  might  result  in  an  Earth-biosphere  without  human  beings  present.  In  our 

scenario,  extant  Earthlings  function  as  stand-ins  for  typical  aliens,  according  to  the 

Copernican Principle.  

During the 20th Century, a wartime global thermonuclear winter was postulated 
 
as  a  potential  terminal  event-process  for  Homo  s.  Sapiens’  extinction.2    Now,  we 
postulate  a  future  inadvertent  Earth  Venuforming—terraforming’s  exact  opposite3—

which  will  remove  any  possibility  for  humans  to  engage  with  aliens,  ever.  Another 

appropriate term is “ecocide”: a peacetime activity that destroys or damages the Earth-

biosphere on a massive geographical scale, ultimately making the Earth unfit for human 
life.4  In this instance, we will blame a single rapidly completed macroproject, David J. 
Stevenson’s May 2003 proposal for a “Mission to Earth’s Core” (MTEC)5, undertaken 

for a noble purpose by unwary and uninformed human macro-engineers. However, it is 

used mostly as a prototype of the sort of Macro-engineering activities intelligent beings 

could undertake with incomplete understanding of the potential dangers involved and/or  

willingness to take the risk. The potential danger belongs, as we shall elaborate below, 
to  the  class  of  existential  risks,6  to  which  we  shall  have  to  focus  our  attention  in  the 

years  to  come.  Economists  have  very  recently  warned  that  “…environmental  impact 

assessments  [“impacts”  are  all  on  human  society]  of…  macroprojects…  are  often 

restricted  to  check-listing  procedures  that  stress  well-established  knowledge  on  local 
impacts, while ignoring interregional, global, systemic or long-term effects.”7 

2

 

Geological maps of Earth, drawn after observation of our planet’s surface, form 

a  fundamental  basis  for  interpreting  our  homeland’s  geological  history  that,  in  turn, 

forms the basis for understanding operative planetary event-processes through its unique 
Geological  Time.8    The  first  planetary  geologic  maps  were  made  of  the  Moon,  a 

relatively tectonically inactive Solar System body.  Completed geologic maps are partly 
fact  and  partly  “best  guess”  interpretation.    Earth’s  volume  is  ~108  x  1010  km3.    Its 
present-day continental surface area (~148 x 106 km2) includes 24.7% complex exposed 

rock, 10.9% shale, 22% sandstone, 5.7% basalt, 18.2% granite, 8.3% carbonate and the 

remainder (15.1%) is ice-covered and therefore what kind of rock supports the ice is as 

yet unknown.  Only a future-perfected seismology can inform us about the solid, liquid 

and  gaseous  substances  which  make  up  Earth’s  body.  The  interior  of  our  planet  is  a 

legitimate  target  for  scientific  exploration,  and  potential  future  resource  management, 

but our quite incomplete understanding of it hides very serious dangers.  

2. MACRO-ENGINEERING AND THE CATASTROPHE SCENARIO 

Sir  Martin  Rees,  the  Astronomer  Royal,  assigned  disturbingly  high  probability 

to humanity’s termination due to a catastrophe instigated by scientists or technologists 

in Our Final Century: Will the Human Race Survive the Twenty-First Century? (2003).  

Certainly we act together as a globalized civilization when people observe the Universe 

and  discuss  the  consequences  of  our  observations,  including  the  most  pertinent 

technological consequences. In the same time, this globalized civilization is threatened 

by  a  relatively  recently  acknowledged  spectrum  of  existential  risks,  being  (in  the 

definition of Ref. 6) those “...where an adverse outcome would either annihilate Earth-

originating intelligent life or permanently and drastically curtail its potential.” Some of 

the very well-known existential risks are of natural origin, the prototype being collision 

of  a  large  asteroid  or  comet  with  Earth.  Others  are  of  anthropogenic  nature—the 

example  of  global  nuclear  war  comes  immediately  to  mind,  but  there  are  also  many 

others. There are two crucial insights stemming from still scarce scholarly research on 

the topic of existential risks: (i) they are not subject to the standard procedures of risk 

analysis  and  management,  and  (ii)  those  existential  risks  of  anthropogenic  origin  in 

general heavily outweight those of natural origin. These insights of Rees, Bostrom and 

others may be absolutely correct in his environmental impact assessment and projection, 

 

 

 

 

3

while  still  missing  some  additional  anthropogenic  (specifically,  geologic)  threats  for 
Homo s. Sapiens.9   

 

We hereby propose an apocalyptic scenario of greenhouse gases vented from the 

Earth’s crust and mantle because humans undertook Stevenson’s MTEC macroproject, 

as a prototype of these additional existential risks. Since humans are currently without 

means of escape from the planet (the state-of-affairs likely to persist for at least several 

decades  and  probably  much  longer),  and  their  Macro-engineering  experiment  meets 

with  misfortune,  they  will  perish  as  a  species  due  to  the  excessive  heat  possibly 

Venuforming the Earth, i.e. permanent locking in the runaway greenhouse heating. Of 

course,  it  is  possible  that  the  Earth-biosphere  continues  to  function  and  that 
subsequently,  owing  to  the  atmosphere’s  increased  perennial  warmth10  and  the  aerial 

fertilization  of  expelled  CO2,  vegetation  will  be  caused  to  flourish.  Surface  life  forms 

must  thereafter  endure  much  different  solar  ultraviolet  radiation  (UVR):  under  heavy 

cloud  cover  the  scattered  UV  component  of  sunlight—often  termed  “skylight”—is 

seldom  less  than  10%  of  that  under  a  clear,  blue  sky;  very  heavy  storm  clouds  can 

almost eliminate terrestrial UVR even in summertime. 

 

Ironically enough, Macro-engineering projects are often suggested as schemes to 

successfully mitigate adverse effects of anthropogenic technological activities. The idea 
most investigated so far aims to counter the industrial emission of greenhouse gasses.11 

Although  the  conclusions  of  a  recent  study  is  that  “there  are  many  reasons  why  geo-
engineering is not a preferred option for climate stabilization”12, it is still very much a 

new  professional  field  in  which  many  different  conclusions  may  be  reached.  It  is 

conceivable  that  our  civilization  will  be  forced  to  undertake  some  form  of  geo-

engineering, especially if it is confirmed that there are no natural climate forcings that 
are  able  to  counteract  anthropogenic  destabilization  of  our  habitat.13  If  our  case  is 

typical, according to the Copernican Principle, we are entitled to envisage a significant 

fraction of all extra-terrestrial civilizations undertaking Macro-engineering, with a wide 

spectrum  of  possible outcomes,  some of  which are bound to be catastrophic (we shall 

return to this topic in Secs. 5 and 6 below). 

3. MISSION TO EARTH’S CORE 

 

 
Most persons know that many geologic event-processes occur at rates similar to 
rates  of  change  in  everyday  life.14    However,  there  are  event-processes  that  are  very 

 

 

4

rapid  and  extra-ordinarily  powerful  as,  for  example,  volcanic  super-eruptions.15  There 

are  strong  indications  that  such  events  (in  particular  the  Toba  super-eruption  about 
74,000  yrs  ago)  already  almost  caused  humanity’s  extinction.16  About  4  P.M.  on  20 

February  1943,  in  a  Paricutin,  State  of  Michoacan,  Mexico  maize  field  owned  by 

Dionisio Pulido, a volcano commenced its lava eruption onto Earth’s land surface.  [On 

20 December 1944, in Excelsior: The Newspaper of National Life (XXVIII Year-Vol. 

VI,  No.  10,005),  in  Mexico  City,  Pulido  offered  his  volcano  for  sale.]    Although  the 

Paricutin  Volcano  became  “dormant”  circa  1952,  by  1950  a  pioneering  geomorphic 

study of gully development was possible because of Paricutin’s accurately dated natural 
construction.17  And, just a few years later, all the major ecological changes consequent 
to  the  surprise  1943  eruption  were  documented  carefully.18  Ultimately,  volcanoes 

everywhere are powered by heat generated at Earth’s core as well as above it. 

Let  us  suppose,  for  the  purposes  of  this  speculation,  that  an  anthropogenic 

volcano  becomes  active  through  Macro-engineering’s  misapplication.  What  might  be 

the main effects of its appearance and constant operation? 

Techno-thriller  audiences  watched  THE  CORE  in  cinemas  everywhere  during 

2003; its  Jules Verne-inspired storyline  enthralled many science fiction  fans  that  were 
favorably impressed by the film’s state-of-the-art, computer-generated special effects.19  

No living scientist actually knows with categorical certainty of what material(s) Earth’s 

core is composed and what is its current physical state. At our planet’s center of mass 
there  may  be  a  tiny,  3  km-diameter  “nuclear  reactor”.20  Starting  in  1943,  A.J. 

Shneiderov  speculated  that  Earth’s  core  was  super-dense  hot  plasma  energized  by  the 

continuous,  variable  flux  of  cosmic  particles  modulated  by  the  Sun,  Moon  and  other 
Solar System planets.21 Whatever its contents, Earth’s core must influence all materials 

and  life  situated  above  its  position  inside  the  rotating  planet.    And,  MTEC  has  as  its 

primary goal a visit by a remote sensing device descending to the core gravitationally.  

It  is  conceived  as  a  mission  to  Earth’s  core  in  which  a  probe  is  embedded  in  a  large 

volume of liquid iron alloy that migrates to the core along a crack propagating under the 
action of gravity. In addition to at least 108 kg of melted iron, a convenient crack has to 

be found, or even more likely, artificially made using a thermonuclear explosion of the 

order  of  several  megatonnes.  The  completely  solid-state  probe  would  contain 

miniaturized  instrumentation  for  performing  geophysical  measurements  and  for 

communicating its results via acoustic waves detectable by low-frequency gravitational 

wave  detectors  at  the  surface.  (Overlooked  by  Stevenson,  William  Mansfield  Adams, 

 

 

 

5

during  1965  offered  a  device  to  obtain  a  sample  of  mantle  material  and  to  return  any 
obtained sample to Earth’s surface.22) MTEC deep-Earth probe would descend at nearly 

100 kph, reaching Earth’s core in approximately seven days. The probe’s descent can be 

expected 

to 

initiate  remarkably  unnatural  geological  event-processes 

that  are 

exceedingly dangerous for the Earth-biosphere, potentially causing an anti-biotic crust-

mantle geological upheaval. 

4. COMMENCEMENT OF EXTINCTION EVENT-PROCESS 

How could humankind’s MTEC-caused extinction begin?  Hans Keppler and his 

colleagues offer a tentative answer: mass extinctions can be caused by the liberation of 
carbon formerly lodged in the Earth-mantle.23  It is already demonstrated that methane 

hydrates form a voluminous reservoir of carbon and the quick, punctuated release of this 
frozen  methane—the  “Clathrate  Gun  Hypothesis”24—results  in  global  warming  of  the 

Earth-atmosphere. This might have actually happened at the end of Permian (cca. 251 

Myr ago), causing the greatest mass extinction ever recorded in the history of terrestrial 
life,  according  to  the  newest  study.25  MTEC,  taken  as  a  whole,  amounts  to  a  hasty 

assemblage  of  all  the  necessary  basic  components  for  a  “Carbon  Dioxide  Gas  Gun 

Hypothesis”!    If  misused,  Stevenson’s  MTEC  macroproject  could  eliminate  humans 

the  Earth-biosphere  for-ever  since 

from 
the  atmosphere’s  heating  will  cause 
reproductive sterility and bodily heat stress far beyond normal tolerance.26  At the site of 

its  inauguration,  the  “Mission  to  Earth’s  Core”  probe  may  permit  and  construct  a 

volcano-like  “crust-mantle  cannon”  shooting  unwanted—that 

is,  biologically 

undesirable—greenhouse  gases  upwards.  Interestingly  enough,  a  well-considered 

speculation  linking  atmospheric  CO2  buildup  to  biological  extinctions  repeatedly 
appears in the literature.27  

 

When  Stevenson’s  probe  encounters  groundwater  it  will  certainly  cause  the 

interaction  of  freshwater  with  magma.    Earth-normal  thermal  equilibration  between 
freshwater in a ratio of 1013 gram-moles of 250 C freshwater to one cubic kilometer of 
12000 C  magma then evolves 1012 gram-moles of gaseous hydrogen.  Freed hydrogen 
gas may have a deleterious effect on Earth’s atmosphere28, before it leaves the planet.29  

Human  environmentalists  have  consistently  promoted  early  hydrogen  gas  use 

technology as a panacea for Earth-biosphere and international economic ills, including 
urban  and  regional  air  pollution  as  well  as  atmospheric  warming.30    Hydrogen’s 

 

 

 

 

6

industrial usage worldwide would inject anthropogenic water into the stratosphere and, 

consequently,  cooling  of  the  lower  stratosphere  and  a  disturbance  of  the  ozone 

chemistry;  human-made  hydrogen  will  cause  Earth’s  atmosphere  to  become  cloudier!  

At  still  greater  depths,  hydrogen  may  be  commonly  present  in  large  quantities,  all  of 
which  could  interact  dangerously  with  the  Stevenson  probe.31    During  a  very 

abbreviated  period  of  Earth’s  Geological  Time—namely,  a  recorded  (historical)  time 

period  of  only  one  week—the  MTEC  macroproject  eventually  may  obviously 

transmogrify  the  Earth-mantle’s  constituents  (pollute)  and  render  the  shear-cracked 

Earth-crust  less  naturally  integrated.    (Around  10  GJ  is  required  to  vaporize  a  cubic 

meter of Earth-crust material.)  Penetration to the mantle using the MTEC device could 

also, perhaps,  indirectly substantiate  a  nowadays quite nebulous geological hypothesis 

on  a  very  controversial  subject  that  was  formulated  by  Vladimir  A.  Epifanov  of  the 

Siberian Research Institute of Geology, Geophysics and Mineral; at the 2002 Moscow, 

Russia,  “Conference  on  Degasification  of  the  Earth”,  Epifanov  proposed  the  30  June 

1908  Podkamennaya  Tunguska  Explosion  was  not  caused  by  a  meteorite  or  comet’s 

violent  impact  upon  the  ground  surface  but,  rather,  by  a  fluid  carbohydrate  jet  which 

shot  upwards  under  high  pressure  from  a  large  subterranean  reservoir!    Epifanov 

assumed  the  massive,  and  radiative  tree  felling  in  that  almost  uninhabited  Siberian 

region  was  chiefly  instigated  by  atmospheric  pressure  waves  caused  by  an  aerial  gas 

explosion (fireball). 

5. IMPLICATIONS FOR ASTROBIOLOGY 

Fermi’s  Paradox  is  the  contradiction  between  the  apparent  absence  of  recognizable 

aliens, and the common expectation that humans ought to observe and/or hold in their 

hands some perceivable evidence of alien existence. It has been realized long ago that 

the straightforward explanation for the “paradox” is that the intelligent communities in 

the  Galaxy  are  too  short-lived  for  communicating  or  colonizing  over  the  typical 

interstellar distances. The obvious cause of such short life in the communication phase 

is succumbing to an existential risk (appropriately generalized to apply to any intelligent 

life). In particular, those risks incurred by irresponsible use of science and technology 

are  what  we  can  call  “suicidal”  scenarios.  In  fact,  Stevenson’s  “Mission  to  Earth’s 

Core”  could  be  considered  a  new  form  of  “suicidal”  type  solution—additional  to 

thermo-nuclear Armageddon or nanotechnological “gray goo” catastrophe—for Fermi’s 

 

 

 

7

paradox.  In  the  terrestrial  context  the  scenario  is  quite  simple:  our  globalized 

civilization  overdevelops  Macro-engineering  earlier  than,  say,  colonization  of  other 
planets, nanotechnology, or advanced forms of biotechnology32, and as a direct follow-

on destroys our species by a misguided intra-Earth exploration. 

 

The  idea  that  geological  event-processes  may  influence  the  tally  of  extra-

terrestrial  civilizations  receives  further  support  from  some  recent  astrobiological 
results.33  Notably,  Peter  Ward  and  Donald  Brownlee  argue  in  their  influential 

monograph  Rare  Earth  that  geological  activity  in  general,  and  plate  tectonics  in 

particular are essential for the development of complex metazoan life on any Galactic 
planet.34 If that claim is correct, then natural preconditions for the catastrophic scenario 

outlined above are a fortiori present for any technological species; the total frequency of 

such  locations  (the  most  controversial  claim  of  the  Ward  and  Brownlee  theory)  is 

unimportant from our present point of view.  

 

One  step  further  would  be  to  conclude  that  geological  activity  of  terrestrial 

planets  has,  in  fact,  been  stronger  in  the  Galactic  past.  This  is  due  to  the  increased 
chemical  abundances  of  radioactive  elements,  notably  U,  Th,  and  isotope  40K,  main 

generators—other  than,  of  course,  incident  solar  energy—of  planetary  geological 

activity  and  its  interaction  with  the  atmosphere.  It  has  been  shown  recently  that  most 

terrestrial  planets  in  the  Milky  Way  Galaxy  are  significantly  older  than  Earth;  in  fact, 

the average age of a terrestrial planet is 6.4 ± 0.9 Gyr, according to the calculations of 
Lineweaver.35 Thus, the oldest civilizations should have arisen in the epoch in which the 

cosmic  abundance  of  radioactive  supernovae-created  elements  was  higher  than  today, 

and thus the terrestrial planets were, on average, more geologically active. It is precisely 

the oldest civilizations that present the biggest problem from the viewpoint of Fermi’s 

paradox!  The  “Great  Silence”  would  be  explained  more  easily  if  we  assume  that  the 

“mortality  rate”  of  technological  societies  was  higher  in  the  past,  anti-correlated  with 

the  amount  of  average  geological  activity.  Part  of  this  story  perhaps  resides  with  the 

natural  geological  causes,  notably  super-volcanism  mentioned  above;  but  another  part 
may lay with technogenic geological catastrophes.36    

It is important to emphasize that this proposition is suggested only as a partial 

solution to Fermi’s paradox; it complements other “self-destruction” hypotheses (many 

of  which  are  listed  in  the  Ref.  1),  such  as  those  having  extra-terrestrial  civilizations 

destroying  themselves  through  thermo-nuclear  wars  (and  subsequent  global  “Nuclear 

Winters”), or nanotechnological “gray goo”. It would be naive to claim that any single 

 

 

8

cause  is  the  solution  for  the  absence  of  extra-terrestrials;  rather,  it  would  be  some 

combination of causes, including both “gradual” (like various transcendence/devolution 
scenarios,  or  even  the  “Zoo”37  and  “Interdict”38  hypotheses)  and  “catastrophic” 

scenarios.  Obviously,  it  is  of  foremost  importance  to  investigate  the  latter,  since  it  is 

those  that  will  reveal  to  us  aspects  of  both  hypothetical  aliens  and,  quite  probably, 

humankind’s future prospects.    

6. CULTUROLOGICAL AND CLIMATOLOGICAL FACETS  

One  cannot  avoid  speculation  upon  possible  reasons 

leading  or  compelling 

technological  civilizations  to  undertake  potentially  hazardous  geo-engineering.  These 

reasons belong to the realm of sociology of science and culturology, and thus are bound 

to be speculative excursions focused on the human mind or human-like alien mind. The 

argument of this Section should, therefore, be taken with caution.  

Revolutionary impact of astronomical observations on the history of science and 

technology  here  on  Earth  has  been  noticed  and  investigated  in  various  contexts.  The 
best-studied  case  is,  undoubtedly,  the  Copernican  Revolution39  which  led  directly  to 

modern science and technology, but there is a plethora of others. It has not been said in 

vain  that  “…it  was  really  the  Moon  that  provided  the  principal  ideas  as  well  as  the 
crucial tests for our understanding of the Universe”.40 On an even broader cultural basis, 

one  may  cogently  argue  for  characterization  of  human  civilization(s)  as  essentially 

“upward-oriented”.  In  most  of  human  cultures  at  all  epochs,  deities  inhabit  mountain 

peaks, sky, specific celestial objects or abstract “heavenly” realm. Most holy places of 

humanity  are  either  topographically  elevated  in  order  to  be  closer  to  the  sky  (Lhassa, 

Mt.  Olympus,  Sinai,  Mt.  Athos,  Teotihuacan)  or  associated  with  the  upward 

motions/ascensions  (The  Dome  on  the  Rock  in  Jerusalem,  European  cathedrals, 

Buddhist pagodas, Islamic minarets).  The nascent science of Astro-archaeology traces 

the  influence  of  celestial  bodies  on  human  life  and  culture  for  at  least  6,000  years.  

The  necessary  precondition  for  all  this  is,  obviously,  the  fact  that  Earth’s 

atmosphere is largely transparent at tropical and continental mid-latitudes (or at least it 

was before the advent of the industrial age and both aerosol and urban nighttime light 

pollutions.)    A  United  Nations  Organization  scientific  inquiry,  Project  Asian  Brown 

Cloud, is underway to examine the spreading, fuliginous atmospheric shroud over India 

and  China.  What  if  humans,  with  perfect  vision,  could  never  see  the  Moon  or  the 

 

 

 

 

 

9

Universe’s ~6,000 stars viewable from Earth?  Let us suppose Earth’s sky was a thick 

deck  of  clouds  through  which  only  hazy  sunlight  could  penetrate,  as  a  distinguished 
mathematician  E.  Brian  Davies41  has  with  a  speculative  historical  essay  “The  Role  of 
Astronomy in the History of Science”.42  Stephen Webb offered “Solution 29: Cloudy 

Skies Are Common” in cited Ref. 1 as a solution why some or most of extra-terrestrial 

civilizations  do  not  have  the  means  of  communicating  with  us.  We  find  his  asserted  

idea  that  such  dense  cloud  cover  entirely  prevents  the  emergence  of  science  and 

technology rather extreme and unsupported.   Prof. Davies,  on the other hand, defends 

the  contrary  scenario:  namely  that  science  and  technology  will  develop,  albeit  slower 

and  somewhat  differently,  even  in  the  absence  of  astronomical  observations  and  the 

challenge they presented for wise men during the millennia. However, a possible catch 

lies  in  the  nature  of  that  difference.  Civilizations  arising  on  planets  with  dense  cloud 

covers (similar to those shrouding the surfaces of Venus and Titan) will presumably be 

more  “downward-oriented”.  They  will  tend  to  develop  geosciences  at  the  expense  of 

astronomy and related sciences. Financial and material resources of such a civilization 

will  be  allocated  to  travel  downwards  rather  than  upwards.  Perhaps  equivalents  of 

NASA,  ESA,  and  other  space  agencies  will,  in  that  case,  spring  into  existence  with 

purpose of exploting the interior of the globe instead of its cosmic surroundings. This 

would  have  a  profound  impact  on  the  possibility  and  likelihood  of  their  developing 

potentially  dangerous  geo-engineering.  In  addition,  a  lack  of  clear  example  of  the 

greenhouse  effect  (the  historical  role  Venus  plays  for  our  civilization)  will  probably 

decrease awareness of such threats in both scientific and laymen’s circles.   

 

(This is not to say that the influences from below were unimportant in the course 

of human history. It is worth noting that a succession of Greek maidens, induced into a 

revelatory  trance  by  various gases emanating from the earth below the Delphic oracle 
temple  site,  scouted  the  course  of  Greece’s  history!43  Today,  there  is  an  increasing 
world-public interest in subterranean living.44 On the other hand, this seems to indirectly 

corroborate  the  idea  of  Davies  that  advanced  cultures  which  include  science  can,  in 
principle, form under “downward oriented” influences.45) 

We speculate that a typical global human civilization of a look-alike Earth will 

be  prompted  to  penetrate  their  Earth’s  subsurface  vigorously  since  that  is  the  only 

physical realm open to easy preliminary exploration; furthermore, we speculate that this 

collectively  intelligent  group  would  enthusiastically  endorse  and  practice  Macro-
engineering.46  Ultimately, invention of aerospace plane technology would allow people 

 

 

10

to appreciate that “The heavens are telling the glory of God” (Psalm 19:1), since they 

could then move into the essentially limitless continuum extending from Earth’s surface 

outwards  through  the  atmosphere  to  the  farthest  parts  of  the  observable  Universe, 
especially embracing attainable parts of the Solar System.47  But, since even present-day 

humans  have  no  such  flying  aerospace  vehicles,  it  seems  reasonable  to  ignore  the 

implications of their absence or existence.  There is a formulaic classical phrase often 

appearing  in  epic  ancient  poetry  which  labels  the  borderless  ocean  “misty”  or  “airy” 

suggesting,  obviously,  a  “cloak  of  fog”,  which  is  a  cloud  that  touches  the  ground’s 

surface.    Some  macro-engineers  take  this  artistic  Greek  phrasing  to  be  a  comment  on 

Earth’s Hydrologic Cycle, water vapor circulating, in part, in Earth’s atmosphere.  But, 

to our purpose, the ancients also used clouds as designated physical boundaries for the 

known  world  (the  Greeks’  oecumene).    Our  report  deals  with  a  horizontal  planet-

engulfing cloud, while our ancestors of two millennia past had to imagine a peripheral 

(Mediterranean  Sea  Basin)  vertical  cloud  preventing—or  at 
demarcating—their ship-borne explorations of the eastern Atlantic Ocean!48  

least  usefully 

 

Our  Earth’s  current  natural  cloud  coverage  ranges  from  ~65%  to  68%,  plus  or 

minus 4.8%.  Galactic cosmic particles—especially the solar cosmic particles emanating 

from  the  Sun’s  chromosphere—collide  with  other  particles  in  the  atmosphere  and 
thereby cause some clouds to form.  In other words, the Sun modulates Earth’s sky!49 

Important  additional  modulation  can  come,  it  has  been  recently  claimed,  from  the 

Galactic  cosmic-ray  sources,  concentrated  in  the  Milky  Way’s  spiral  arms  and  central 
(bulge)  regions.50  Thus,  it  is  possible  that  there  are  entire  vast  regions  of  the  Galaxy 

(sub-regions of the Galactic Habitable Zone) in which predominantly cloudy terrestrial 

planets prevail, and most arising civilizations are of this, “downward-oriented” type.  

 

How can this scenario be empirically tested? As with most “local” explanations 

of Fermi’s paradox, it is a rather difficult task to perform, but there are a few clues. The 

detection of  terrestrial planets  around other stars remains probably the most important 

observational  task  in  astronomy  of  the  next  decade;  several  ambitious  projects, 
including the DARWIN51 and GAIA52 space-based observatories, are designed for this 

exact purpose. Since astronomers have already investigated the atmosphere of a gigantic 

Jovian  extra-solar planet, it is not unreasonable to expect that future observations will 

offer humans a glimpse of extra-Solar System terrestrial planet geophysical properties. 

This will enable us to investigate how commonplace cloudy planet skies are throughout 

the  Galaxy.  On  the  other  hand,  we  certainly  would  not  wish  to  empirically  test  the 

 

11

safety  of    Stevenson’s  MTEC  device  and  all  similar  contraptions;  however,  non-

invasive  geophysical  studies  will  certainly  shed  more  light  on  the  issues  of  carbon 

release,  and  effects  of  perturbations  on  the  delicate  known  mantle-crust-atmosphere 
feedbacks.53  Finally,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  future  studies  in  sociology  of  science  and 

technology  will  reveal 

to  humans  precisely  how 

typical  our  relatively  poor 

understanding  of  geosciences  is  in  comparison  to  a  set  of  model  cultures.  In  this 

manner, the “geo-catastrophe” scenario is more amenable to empirical verification than 

most other similar scenarios for resolution of Fermi’s paradox.  

7. CONCLUSIONS 

We present a novel “catastrophic” solution to the problem of absence of advanced extra-

terrestrial  civilizations  or  their  manifestations  (“Fermi’s  paradox”).  In  addition  to 

already  discussed  variations  on  the  topic  of  technological  traps  awaiting  intelligent 

communities—like  the  nuclear  or  nanotechnological  catastrophes—we  point  that 

advanced geo-engineering can, for accidental or intentional reasons, bring the biological 

downfall  of  such  remote  industrialized  communities.  Only  very  recently  we  have 

reached the stage in which such a macroproject, Stevenson’s “Mission to Earth’s Core” 

(MTEC)  device, can  be  technologically achieved. Besides suggesting increased  public 

attention  to  this  producible  new  existential  risk,  we  suggest  that  this  fate  has  befallen 

and can potentially befall at least some other Galactic civilizations. We indicate some, 

still very speculative, reasons why this climatic calamity can actually be more serious 

on  inhabited  planets  other  than  Earth.  When  this  existential  threat  is  added  to  other 

better-known threats, it is just possible that the total risk function facing civilizations is 

high enough to explain the total absence of their manifestations.  

 

                                                 
1 S. Webb, Where Is Everybody? Fifty Solutions to the Fermi Paradox (NY: Copernicus Books, 2002) 
288 pages. 
2 E.C. Prosh and A.D. McCracken, “Post-apocalypse stratigraphy: Some considerations and proposals”, 
Geology 13, pp.4-5 (January 1985). 
3 G.A. Landis, “Astrobiology: The Case for Venus”, Journal of the British Interplanetary Society 56, 
pp.250-254 (July-August 2003). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12

                                                                                                                                               
4 L.A. Teclaff, “Beyond Restoration—The Case of Ecocide”, Natural Resources Journal 34, pp.933-956 
(Fall 1994). 
5 D.J. Stevenson, “Mission to Earth’s Core—a modest proposal”, Nature 423, p.239 (15 May 2003). 
6 N. Bostrom, “Existential Risks”, Journal of Evolution and Technology 9 (2001). 
7 B. Flyvbjerg et al., Megaprojects and Risk: An Anatomy of Ambition (NY: Cambridge UP, 2003) 
pp.49-50. 
8 C. Vita-Finzi, Monitoring the Earth: Physical Geology in Action (NY: Oxford UP, 2002) 189 pages. 
9 E.L. Wright and J.D. Erickson, “Incorporating Catastrophes into Integrated Assessments: Science, 
Impacts, and Adaptation”, Climatic Change 57, pp.265-286 (April 2003). 
10 R.A. Pielke, “Heat Storage Within The Earth System”, Bulletin of the American Meteorological 
Society 84, pp.331-335 (March 2003). 
11 B. Govindasamy and K. Caldeira, “Geoengineering Earth’s radiation balance to mitigate CO2-induced 
climate change”, Geophysical Research Letters 27, pp.2141-2144 (2000). 
12 B. Govindasamy, S. Thompson, P. B. Duffy, K. Caldeira, and C. Delire, “Impact of geoengineering 
schemes on the terrestrial biosphere”, Geophysical Research Letters 29, pp.2061-2065 (2002). 
13 C. Bertrand, J.-P. Van Ypersele, and A. Berger, “Are natural climate forcings able to counteract the 
projected anthropogenic global warming?” Climate Change 55, pp.413-427 (2002).  
14 Z. Kukal, “The rate of geological processes”, Earth-Science Reviews 28, pp.7-259 (July 1990). 
15 M. R. Rampino, “Supereruptions as a Threat to Civilizations on Earth-like Planets”, Icarus 156, pp.562-
569 (April 2002). 
16 S.H. Ambrose, “Late Pleistocene human population bottlenecks, volcanic winter, and differentiation of 
modern humans,” Journal of Human Evolution 34, pp.623-651 (1998). 
17 K. Segerstrom, “Erosion studies at Paricutin, State of Michoacan, Mexico”, Bulletin 965A, United 
States Geological Survey (Denver, Colorado, USA). 
18 J.D. Rees, “Paricutin Revisited: A Review of Man’s Attempts to Adapt to Ecological Changes 
Resulting from Volcanic Catastrophe”, Geoforum 4, p.7 (1970). 
19 D. Meakin, “Jules Verne’s Alchemical Journey Short-Circuited”, French Studies: A Quarterly Review  
XLV, pp.152-165 (1991). 
20 J.M. Herndon, “Nuclear georeactor origin of oceanic basalt 3He/4He, evidence, and implications”, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 100, pp.3047-3050 (18 March 2003). 
21 A.J. Shneiderov, “The exponential law of gravitation and its effects on seismological and tectonic 
phenomena”, Transactions of the American Geophysical Union 3, pp.61-88 (1943). 
22 W.M. Adams, “A Thermal Tool for Direct Investigation of the Interior of the Earth”, Pure and Applied 
Geophysics 61, pp.113-122 (1965). 
23 H. Keppler et al., “Carbon solubility in olivine and the mode of carbon storage in the Earth’s mantle”, 
Nature 424, pp.414-416 (24 July 2003). 
24 J.P. Kennett et al., Methane Hydrates in Quaternary Climate Change (Washington DC: American 
Geophysical Union, 2003) pp.105-107. 
25 M. J. Benton, “When Life Nearly Died: The Greatest Mass Extinction of All Time” (Thames & 
Hudson, New York, 2003).  
26 R.B. Cathcart, “Greenhouse atmospherics: mega-deaths or macro-engineering?”, Speculations in 
Science and Technology 20, pp.17-20 (March 1997). 
27 D. S. Robertson, “Palaeo-variations in the atmospheric concentration of carbon-dioxide and the 
relationship to extinctions,” Speculations in Science and Technology 21, pp.171-185 (1998). 
28 T.K. Tromp et al., “Potential Environmental Impact of a Hydrogen Economy on the Stratosphere”, 
Science 300, pp.1740-1742 (13 June 2003). 
29 V. Pierrard, “Evaporation of hydrogen and helium from the atmospheres of Earth and Mars”, Planetary 
and Space Sciences 51, pp.319-327 (2003). 
30 R.L. Olson, “The Promise and Pitfalls of Hydrogen Energy”, The Futurist, 37, pp.46-52 (July-August 
2003). 
31 F. Freund et al., “Hydrogen in Rocks: An Energy Source for Deep Microbial Communities”, 
Astrobiology 2, pp.83-92 (2002). 
32 S. Van Ooteghem et al., “Hydrogen production by the thermophilic bacterium Thermotoga 
neapolitana” Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology 98-100, pp.177-189 (2002). 
33 S. Franck et al., “Planetary habitability: is Earth commonplace in the Milky Way?”, 
Naturwissenschaften 88, pp.416-426 (2001). 
34 P. D. Ward and D. Brownlee, Rare Earth: Why Complex Life is Uncommon In the Universe  (Springer, 
New York, 2000). 

 

13

                                                                                                                                               
35 C. H. Lineweaver, “An Estimate of the Age Distribution of Terrestrial Planets in the Universe: 
Quantifying Metallicity as a Selection Effect,” Icarus 151, pp.307-313 (2001). 
36 R.B. Cathcart, “Radioactive Waste Element Liquefying Device for Geologic Fault Fusion”, 
Speculations in Science and Technology, 4, pp.103-104 (1981). 
37 J. A. Ball, “The Zoo Hypothesis,” Icarus 19, pp.347-349 (1973). 
38 M. J. Fogg, “Temporal Aspects of the Interaction among the First Galactic Civilizations: The 'Interdict 
Hypothesis',” Icarus 69, pp.370-384 (1987). 
39 Thomas Kuhn, “The Copernican Revolution” (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1957). 
40 M.C. Gutzwiller, “Moon-Earth-Sun: The Oldest Three-Body Problem”, Reviews of Modern Physics 
70, pp.589-636 (April 1998). 
41 E. B. Davies, “The role of astronomy in the history of science”, Los Alamos preprint physics/0207043 
(2002). 
42 M. Chown, “Grey-sky idea puts astronomers in the shade”, New Scientist 175, p.22 (10 August 2002). 
43 J.Z. de Boer et al., “New evidence for the geological origins of the ancient Delphic oracle (Greece)”, 
Geology 29, pp.707-710 (2001). 
44 G.S. Golany and T. Ojima, Geo-Space Urban Design (John Wiley, New York 1996) 380 pages. 
45 M. Wells, "An underground utopia", The Futurist 36, pp.33-36 (March-April 2002). 
46 D.S. Greenberg, “Mohole: Geopolitical Fiasco”, pp.343-348 IN I.G. Goss, P.J. Smith and R.C.L. 
Wilson (Eds.), Understanding the Earth: A Reader in The Earth Sciences (Cambridge: MIT Press) 355 
pages. 
47 D. Ashford, Spaceflight Revolution (London: Imperial College Press, 2002) 182 pages. 
48 J.S. Romm, The Edges of the Earth in Ancient Thought: Geography, Exploration, and Fiction 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992) pages 21-22. 
49 K.S. Carslaw et al., “Cosmic rays, Clouds, and Climate”, Science 298, pp.1732-1737 (29 October 
2002). 
50 N. J. Shaviv “The spiral structure of the Milky Way, cosmic rays, and ice age epochs on Earth”, New 
Astronomy, 8, pp.39-77 (2002). 
51 A. Leger et al. “The DARWIN Project”, Astrophysics and Space Science 241, pp.135-146 (1996). 
52 M. A. C. Perryman, “GAIA: An Introduction to the Project” in Proceedings of "GAIA: A European 
Space Project", edited by O. Bienaymé and C. Turon (EDP Sciences, 2002), pp.3-26. 
53 P. Machetel and E. Thomassot, “Cretaceous length of day perturbations by mantle avalanche”, Earth 
and Planetary Science Letters 202, pp.379-386 (2002). 

 

14

