 

 

 

 

  

 
 

 
 

(12)  United States Patent 
 
 
 
(54) MINI-OPTICS SOLAR ENERGY CONCENTRATOR 
 
(76) Inventors:Mark Davidson, 807 Rorke Way, Palo Alto, CA (US) 94303 
 
 
Notice: Subject to any disclaimer, the term of this patent is extended or adjusted under 35 U.S.C. 

      Mario Rabinowitz, 715 Lakemead Way, Redwood City, CA (US) 94062-3922 

(10) Patent No.:   US 6,612,705 B1 
(45) Date of Patent:  Sep.2, 2003 

154(b) by 8 days. 

 

28 Claims, 5 Drawing Sheets 

References Cited 
 
U.S. PATENT DOCUMENTS 

(21) Appl. No.: 10/079,168 
(22) Filed:   Feb.19,2002 
(51)  Int. C1.7 ....................... G02B 7/182 
(52)  U.S. Cl . ……………... 359/851; 359/853; 359/873; 359/872 
(58)  Field of Search  359/851,853, 359/873, 872, 220, 221, 223, 224, 225, 226; 126/600, 684 
 
(56)  
 
 
*  7/1980   Escher ……… 136/246 
 4,210,463 A 
*   9/1983  Jacobs ……… 359/225 
 4,402,575 A 
 5,751,490 A       * 5/1998    Johnson ……..359/605 
 5,851,309 A       * 1V1998   Kousa ……… 136/248 
* cited by examiner 
Primary Examiner-Mohammad Sikder   
 
(57) 
This  invention deals  with the broad  general concept for focussing light. A mini-optics tracking 
and  focussing  system  is  presented  for  solar  power  conversion  that  ranges  from  an  individual's 
portable  system  to  solar  conversion  of  electrical  power  that  can  be  used  in  large  scale  power 
plants for environmentally clean energy. It can be rolled up, transported, and attached to existing 
man-made, or natural structures. It allows the solar energy conversion system to be low in capital 
cost and inexpensive to install as it can be attached to existing structures since it does not require 
the  construction  of  a  superstructure  of  its  own.  This  novel  system  is  uniquely  distinct  and 
different  from  other  solar  tracking  and  focussing  processes  allowing  it  to  be  more  economical 
and practical. Furthermore, in its capacity as a power producer, it can be utilized with far greater 
safety, simplicity, economy, and efficiency in the conversion of solar energy. 

ABSTRACT 

 

 

 

 

28 Claims, 5 Drawing Sheets 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MINI-OPTICS SOLAR ENERGY CONCENTRATOR 

BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION 

1. Field of the Invention 

Due  to  an  ever  growing  shortage  of  conventional  energy  sources,  there  is  an  increasingly 
intense interest in harnessing solar energy. A limiting factor in the utilization of solar energy is 
the high cost of energy converters such as photovoltaic cells. Our invention provides a low cost 
means  for  achieving affordable solar energy by  greatly reducing the  cost  of solar  concentrators 
which increase (concentrate) the density of solar energy incident on the solar energy con verter. 
For example, for the purpose of generating electricity, a large area of expensive solar cells may 
be replaced by a small area of high-grade photovoltaic solar cells operating in conjunction with 
the inexpensive intelligent mini-optics of our invention. Thus our invention can contribute to the 
goal of achieving environmentally clean energy on a large enough scale to be competitive with 
conventional energy sources. 

Our invention is less expensive than conventional solar concentrators for two reasons. First due 
to miniaturization, the amount of material needed for the optical system is much 2S less. Second, 
because our mini-optical solar concentrator is light-weight and flexible, it can easily be attached 
to  existing  structures.  This  is  a  great  economic  advantage  over  all  existing  solar  concentrators 
which require the construction of a separate structure to support and orient them to intercept and 
properly  reflect  sunlight.  Such  separate  structures  must  be  able  to  survive  gusts,  windstorms, 
earthquakes,  etc.  The  instant  invention  utilizes  existing  structureswhich  are  already  capable  of 
withstanding such inclement vicissitudes of nature. 
2. Description of the Prior Art 

There  are  many  prior  art  patents  that  deal  with  twisting  balls  (gyricon)  displays  or  separable 
balls displays. Electric or magnetic fields are used to orient or move these polarized or charged 
balls.  To  our  knowledge  none  of  the  prior  art  utilizes  the  balls  to  optically  concentrate  (focus) 
light as in our invention. Furthermore the prior art neither teaches nor anticipates our application 
of the conversion of solar energy to electricity or any other form of energy. In one embodiment 
our invention incorporates balls with a shiny planar reflecting surface such as a metallic coating 
to  give  a  high  coefficient  of  reflectance.  When  the  prior  art  refers  to  superior  reflectance 
characteristics,  they  mean  this  in  the  context  of  displays  with  bi-colored  balls  e.g.  black  and 
white; or separable colored balls. In fact, the gyricon and separable so ball prior art do not teach 
the focussing of light in any capacity. These verities are evident from an examination of the prior 
art.  A  large  representative  sample  of  the  prior  art  will  now  be  enumerated  and  described. This 
together  with  the  references  contained  therein  constitutes  a  comprehensive  compendium  of  the 
prior art. 

U.S. Pat. No. 5,754,332 issued to J. M. Crowley on May 19, 1998 deals with gyricon bi-colored 
balls  whose  reflectance  is  comparable  with  white  paper.  Ile  object  is  to  produce  a  monolayer 
gyricon display. 

U.S. Pat. No. 5,808,783 issued to J. M. Crowley on Sep. 15, 1998 deals with gyricon bi-colored 
balls "having superior reflectance characteristics comparing favorably with those of white paper." 
Again the objective is a display application. 
  U.S. Pat. No. 5,914,805 issued to J. M. Crowley on Jun. 22,1999 utilizes two sets of gyricon 
bi-colored balls "having superior reflectance charactreristics comparing favorably with those of 
white paper" for display purposes. 
  U.S. Pat. No. 6,055,091 issued to N. K. Sheridon and J. M. Crowley on Apr. 25, 2000 utilizes 
gyricon bi-colored cylinders. Again the objective is a display application. 

 

 

 

  U.S. Pat. No. 6,072,621 issued to E. Kishi, T. Yagi aud T. Ikeda on Jun. 6, 2000 utilizes sets of 
different mono-colored polarized balls which are separable for a display device. 
  U.S. Pat. No. 6,097,531 issued to N. K. Sheridon on Aug.1, 2000 teaches a method for making 
magnetized elements (balls or cylinders) for a gyricon display. 
  U.S. Pat. No. 6,120.588 issued to J. M. Jacobson on Sep. 19, 2000 describes a display device 
which uses mono-colored elements that are electronically addressable to change the pattern of the 
display. 
  U.S. Pat. No. 6,174,153  issued  to  N.  K. Sheridon on Jan. 16,  2001 teaches apparatus for this 
purpose for a gyricon display. 
  U.S. Pat. No. 6,192.890 B1 issued to D. H. Levy and J.-P. F. Cherry on Feb. 27, 2001 is for a 
changeable tattoo display using magnetic or electric fields to manipulate particles in the display. 
  U.S.  Pat.  No.  6,211,998  BI  issued  to  N.  K.  Sheridon  on  Apr.  3,  2001  teaches  a  method  of 
addressing a display by a combination of magnetic and electric means.  
  U.S. Pat. No. 6,262,707 B I issued to N. K. Sheridon on Jul. 17, 2001 has a similar teaching for 
a gyricon display. 
  A large number of prior art devices have been described, all of which are directed at addressing 
and  changing  the  pattern  of  a  display  device.  While  there  are  other  such  prior  art  teachings, 
none of them teaches or anticipates our invention. 

DEFINITIONS 

"Bipolar" refers herein to either a magnetic assemblage with the two poles north and south, 

or an electric system with + and - charges separated as in an electret. 

      "Collector" as used herein denotes any device for the conversion of solar energy into other 

forms such as electricity, heat, pressure, concentrated light, etc. 

"Compaction"  refers  to  increasing  the  density  of  a  collection  (ensemble)  of  objects  by 

geometrical arrangement or other means. 

"Elastomer" is a material such as synthetic rubber or plastic, which at ordinary temperatures 
can be stretched substantially under low stress, and upon immediate release of the stress, will 
return with force to approximately its original length. 

"Electret" refers to a solid dielectric possessing persistent electric polarization, by virtue of a 

long time constant for decay of charge separation. 

"Electrophoresis  or  Electrophoretie,  is  an  electrochemical  process  in  which  colloidal 
particles or macromolecules with a net electric charge migrate in a solution under the influence 
of an electric current. It is also known as catapboresis. 

    "Focussing planar mirroe, is a thin almost planar mirror constructed with stepped varying 
angles so as to have the optical properties of a much thicker concave (or convex) mirror. It can 
heuristically be thought of somewhat as the projection of thin equi-angular segments of small 
portions of a thick mirror upon a planar surface. It is a focusing planar reflecting surface much 
like a planar Fresnel lens is a focusing transmitting surface. The tracking-focussing property of 
an ensemble of tiny elements which make up the focussing planar mirror are an essential feature 
of the instant invention. 

"Hehostat"  denotes  a  clock-driven  mounting  for  automatically  and  continuously  pointing 

apparatus in the direction of the sun. 

"Immiscible" herein refers to two fluids which are incapable of mixing. 
"Packing  fraction"  herein  refers  to  the  fraction  of  an  available  volume  or  area  occupied  by  a 

collection (ensemble) of objects. 

 

 

 

 

"Polar gradient" as used  herein relates  to  magnetic optical elements  that  are  controlled in the 

non-gyricon mode such as in the magnetic field gradient mode. 

"Monopolar" as used herein denotes mono-charged optical elements that are controlled in the 

non-gyricon mode such as the electrophoretic mode. 

"Rayleigh  limit"  relates  to  the  optical  limit  of  resolution  which  can  be used to  determine  the 
smallest  size  of the  elements that constitute a mini-mirror. Lord Rayleigh discovered this  limit 
from a study of the appearance of the diffraction patterns of closely spaced point sources. 

"Spin  glass"  refers  to  a  wide  variety  of  materials  which  contain  interacting  atomic  magnetic 
moments.  They  possess  a  form  of  disorder,  in  which  the  magnetic  susceptability  undergoes  an 
abrupt change at what is called the freezing temperature for the spin system. 

"Thermoplastic" refers to materials with a molecular structure that will soften when heated and 
harden  when  cooled.  This  includes  materials  such  as  vinyls,  nylons,  elastomers,  fuorocarbons, 
polyethylenes, styrene, acrylics, cellulosics, etc. 

"Translucent" as used herein refers to materials that pass light of only certain wavelengths so 

that the transmitted light is colored. 
 

SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION 
There are many aspects and applications of this invention. Primarily this invention deals with 
the broad general concept of method and apparatus for focussing light. A particularly important 
application is the focussing of sunlight for power conversion and production. 

It  is  a  general  object  of  this  invention  to  provide  a  focussing  planar  mini-optic  system  for 

reflecting light with a substantially higher power density than the incident light. 

One  object  is  to  provide  an  inexpensive,  light-weight,  and  flexible  mini-optical  light 
concentrator  that  can  easily  be  attached  to  existing  structures,  and  thus  does  not  require  the 
construction of a superstructure of its own. 

Another  objective  is  to  provide a solar  energy  conversion system that  is not only low capital 

cost, but that is also inexpensive to install. 

A particularly important object is to provide a unique tracking and focussing system for solar 

power conversion. 

Another  object  is  to  provide  a  system  that  holds  or  locks  the  mini-mirror  elements  in  rigid 

orientation with minimal to no-power expenditure between rotational focussing operations. 

Another object is to provide a means for unlocking the mini-mirror elements so that they may 

rotate freely when being guided into the proper orientation. 

Another object is to provide an inexpensive system for photovoltaic conversion. 
Another  objective  is  to  provide  daily  peaking  power  when  the  load  is  highest  on  the 

conventional power grid. 
  Another objective is to provide electricity to remote villages or rural settlements. 
  Another object is to provide a rugged system for conversion of solar energy to heat. 
  Another objective is to provide electricity for communications installations. 
  Another object is to provide large-scale environmentally clean energy. 
  Another objective is to help in the industrialization of developing countries. 
  Another object is to provide a low-cost, tough, lightweight, concentrated efficient solare energy 
converter that is highly portable. 
  Another objective is to provide a minitiarized planar heliostat field configuration that can either 
track  the  sun  temporally,  or  follow  the  sun  with  a  photomultiplier  which  searches  for  a 
maximum output. 

  Another object is to provide a portable system that can easily go anywhere man can go, to track 
and concentrate the sun's energy. 

 

 

  Other  objects  and  advantages  of  the  invention  will  be  apparent  in  a  description  of  specific 
embodiments thereof, given by way of example only, to enable one skilled in the art to readily 
practice the invention as described hereinafter with reference to the accompanying drawings. 
   In accordance with the illustrated preferred embodiments, method and apparatus are presented 
that are capable of producing and maintaining a high concentration of light relative to the original 
source such as sunlight. The embodiments are all capable of secure attachment to sturdy existing 
structures to provide an inexpensive application with a long and trouble-free life. 
 

BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS 

 
  FIG. 1 is a cross-sectional view of an electrically charged bipolar sphere with an equatorial flat 
reflecting surface. This sphere is one of a multitude of optical elements which track the sun and 
focus the sun's light beam onto a collector. 
  FIG. 2 is a cross-sectional view of a magnetically charged bipolar sphere with an equatorial flat 
reflecting surface. This sphere is one of a multitude of optical elements, which track the sun and 
focus the sun's light beam onto a collector. 
  FIG. 3 is a cross-sectional view of a circular disk with a backside-reflecting surface. This disk is 
one of a multitude of optical elements which track the sun and focus the sun's light beam onto a 
collector. 
  FIG.  4  is  a  cross-sectional  view  of  a  cylinder  with  an  internal  flat  reflecting  surface.  This 
cylinder is one of a multitude of optical elements which track the sun and focus the sun's light 
beam onto a collector. 
  FIG. 5 is a cross-sectional view of a circular disk with a frontside reflecting surface. This disk is 
one of a multitude of optical elements which track the sun and focus the sun's light beam onto a 
collector. 
  FIG. 6 is a cross-sectional view of a monopolar electric cell filled with two immiscible fluids, 
and shiny charged particles of the same sign in the bottom one. 'Ibis cell is one of a multitude of 
optical elements which track the sun and focus the sun's light beam onto a collector. 
  FIG. 7 is a cross-sectional view of a ferrofluid cell partially filled with a colloidal suspension of 
shiny ferromagnetic particles in a fluid. This cell is one of a multitude of optical elements which 
track the sun and focus the sun's light beam onto a collector. 

FIG.  8  is  a  cross-sectional  view  of  a  mini-optics  ensemble  of  elements  of  two  or  more 
populations  of  sizes  to  increase  the  packing  fraction  and  hence  the  reflectance.  Each  element 
tracks the sun and focuses the sun's light beam onto a collector. 

FIG. 9 is a cross-sectional view of a mini-optics ensemble of elements showing the overlay of a 
transparent  ground  plane  on  top  and  a  resistive  grid  on  the  bottom  to  locally  produce  varying 
mini-electric fields for orienting the mini-mirrors to focus the incident light onto a collector. 

FIG.  10  is  a  perspective  view  of  a  two-dimensional  array  of  the  rotatable  elements  of  a 

focussing planar mirror. 

elements of a focussing planar mirror. 

FIG. 11 is a schematic top view showing the electronic control grid for rotating the reflecting 

FIG.  12  illustrates  method  and  apparatus  for  significantly  increasing  the  degree  of 
concentration  of  solar  energy  reaching  the  collector  by  utilizing  two  or  more  focussing  planar 
mirrors. 
 

DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE PRESENTLY PREFERRED EMBODIMENTS 
FIG.  1  shows  a  rotatable  element  1  of  a  focussing  planar  mini-mirror  with  an  equatorial  flat 
reflecting  surface  2  which  25  reflects  a  wave  beam  of  sunlight  3.  The  element  I  shown  is  a 

 

 

cross-sectional view of an electrically charged bipolar sphere 4 with charge +q in one hemisphere 
and charge -q in the opposite hemisphere, that is operated in the well-known electrical gyricon 
mode. This sphere 4 is one of a multitude of rotatable optical elements 1 which track the sun and 
focus the sun's light wave beam onto a collector by means of an electric field E. 

 
FIG.  2  shows  a  rotatable  element  1  of  a  focussing  planar  mini-mirror  with  a  flat  equatorial 
reflecting  surface  2  which  reflects  a  wave  beam  of  sunlight  3.  The  element  1  shown  is  a 
cross-sectional view  of a magnetically charged bipolar sphere 4 with north magnetic field N in 
one  hemisphere  and  south  magnetic  field  S  in  the  other  hemisphere,  that  is  operated  in  the 
well-known  magnetic  gyricon  mode.  This  sphere  4  is  one  of  a  multitude  of  rotatable  optical 
elements  1  which  track  the  sun  and  focus  the  sun's  light  beam  onto  a  collector  by  means  of  a 
magnetic field B. 

 
FIG. 3 shows a rotatable element 1 of a focussing planar mini-mirror with a backside reflecting 
surface 2 which reflects a light wave beam 3. The element I shown is a cross-sectional view of a 
circular  disk  5  with  rounded  edges,  that  is  operated  in  any  of  the  well-known  modes,  such  as 
gyricon, electrical monopolar, magnetic, polar gradient, etc. Ibis disk 5 is one of a multitude of 
rotatable optical elements 50 1 which track the sun and focus the sun's light wave beam onto a 
collector  by  means  of  an  electric  field  or  magnetic  field,  or  combination  thereof.  It  should  be 
noted that in display modes, a spherical or cylindrical shape is necessary for the elements, as they 
must be able to rotate 180 degrees without binding up in order to display a black or white side 
up. In the instant invention, a 90 degree rotation of the element I is more than sufficient as this 
produces a 180 degree reflection of the beam of sunlight. Since the angle of reflection is equal to 
the angle of incidence on the reflecting element 1, a doubling of the angle is produced. 
  FIG.  4  shows  a  rotatable  element  I  of  a  focussing  planar  mini-mirror  with  an  internal  flat 
reflecting surface 2 in the plane of the hemicylinders which reflects a wave beam of sunlight 3. 
The  element  1  shown  is  a  cross-sectional  view  of  a  cylinder  6  that  is  operated  in  any  of  the 
well-known  modes,  such  as  gyricon,  electrical  monopolar,  magnetic,  polar  gradient,  etc.  This 
cylinder 6 is one of a multitude of rotatable optical elements I which track the sun and focus the 
sun's light beam onto a collector by means of an electricfield or magnetic field, or combination 
thereof. 
  In the case of non-front-surface reflection such as shown in FIGS. 1-4, the material of element 
1 needs to be clear or transparent so the incident light can easily reach the reflecting surface 2. 
   
  FIG. 5 shows a rotatable element 1 of a focussing planar mini-mirror with a frontside reflecting 
surface  2  which  reflects  a  light  wave  beam  3.  This  is  a  presently  preferred  embodiment  of  the 
rotatable  element  1.  The  element  I  shown  is  a  cross  sectional  view  of  a  circular  disk  5,  with 
rounded  edges  that  is  operated  in  any  of  the  well-known  modes,  such  as  gyricon,  electrical 
monopolar, magnetic, polar gradient, etc. Ibis disk 5 is one of a multitude of optical elements 1 
which track the sun and focus the sun's light wave beam onto a collector by means of an electric 
field E or magnetic field B, or combination thereof. The case is illustrated where two-axis control 
is possible in mutually orthogonal directions by means of embedded charge +q and -q at top and 
bottom, and embedded magnetic field with north magnetic field N at one end and south magnetic 
field S in the other as shown. TWo-axis control can also be accomplished with either an E or B 
field singly. 
   It should be noted that in prior art display modes, a spherical or cylindrical shape is necessary 
for the elements, as they must be able to rotate 180 degrees without binding up in order to display 
a black or white side up. In the instant invention, a 90 degree rotation of the element I is more 

 

 

than sufficient as this produces a 180 degree reflection of the beam of sunlight, since the angle of 
reflection is equal to the angle of incidence on the reflecting element 1. Thus a doubling of the 
angle is produced herein. 
FIG.  6  shows  a  fixed  element  10  of  a  focussing  planar  mini-miffor  which  is  a  cross-sectional 
view  of  a  monopolar  electric  cell  2  partially  filled  with  a  bottom  fluid  7  with  shiny  charged 
particles 8 of the same sign (shown here as +, but which could also all be -), and a top transparent 
fluid 70. The two fluids are immiscible. When an electromagnetic field E' is applied, the particles 
8 coalesce to form a flat reflecting surface at the interface between fluid 7 and fluid 70, as also 
influenced  by  surface  tension  and  meniscus.  Fluid  70  could  be  air,  but  a  transparent  fluid  of 
substantially less density than fluid 7 is preferred so that gravity will act to maintain their relative 
top/bottom  orientations.  If  the  particles  8  are  small  enough  to  form  a  colloidal  suspension,  the 
density of the particles 8 and the fluid 7 may differ. However, it is generally preferable to have 
the density of the particles 8 approximately matched to the fluid 7. 
    The orientation of this flat reflecting surface can be controlled by E to reflect light 3. Until the 
electric field E is applied, as an optional capability the particles 8 and the fluid 7 can function as 
a transparent window when the particles 8 are nanosize i.e. much smaller than the wavelength of 
the incident light and the fluid 7 is transparent or translucent while they are dispersed in the fluid 
7. For the case of dispersed transparency' the particles 8 should be <<4000 A (4x 10-7 in). This 
cell 2 is one of a multitude of optical elements I which track the sun and focus the sun's wave 
beam  onto  a  collector.  7be  particles  8  may  include  a  wide  variety  of  electomagnetically 
interactive  materials  such  as  electret,  optoelectric,  conducting,  thermoelectric,  electrophoretic, 
resistive,  serniconductive,  insulating,  piezoelectric,  magnetic,  ferromagnetic,  paramagnetic, 
diamagnetic, or spin (e.g. spin glass) materials. It should be noted that the reflecting area remains 
constant  for  spherical  and  circular-cylindrical  cells,  as  the  orientation  of  the  reflecting  surface 
changes. However, the increase in reflecting area is not a serious problem for the non-spherical, 
non-4ircular cell geometry shown. 

 
FIG. 7 shows a fixed element 11 of a focussing planar mini-mirror which is a cross-sectional 
view  of  a  ferrofluid  cell  3  partially  filled  with  a  ferrofluid  9  containing  shiny  ferromagnetic 
particles 10 of high permeability, shown here as u, and a top transparent fluid 90. The two fluids 
are  immiscible.  When  an  inhomogeneous  electromagnetic  field  B  of  increasing  gradient  is 
applied, the particles 10 are drawn to the region of increasing gradient and coalesce to form a flat 
reflecting  surface  at  the  interface  between  fluid  9  and  fluid  90,  as  also  influenced  by  surface 
tension  and  meniscus.  Fluid  90  could  be  air  or  a  transparent  fluid  of  substantially  less  density 
than  fluid  9  so  that  gravity  will  act  to  maintain  their  relative  top/bottom  orientations.  The  ori-
entation of the flat reflecting surface can be controlled by B to reflect light 3. This cell 3 is one of 
a  multitude  of  optical  elements  I  which  track  the  sun  and  focus  the  sun's  wave  beam  onto  a 
collector.  The  particles  10  are  small  enough  to  form  a  colloidal  suspension,  and  are  coated  to 
prevent  coalescence  until  B  is  applied,  as  is  well  known  in  the  art.  It  should  be  noted  that  the 
reflecting area remains constant 20 for spherical and circular-cylindrical cells, as the orientation 
of  the  reflecting  surface  changes.  However,  the  increase  in  reflecting  area  is  not  a  serious 
problem for the non-spherical, non-circular cell geometry shown. 
 

FIG. 8 is a cross-sectional view of a mini-optics ensemble 4 of rotatable elements 1 of two or 
more populations of particle sizes to increase the packing fraction and hence increase the energy 
of the reflected wave 30. The particles are contained between two elastomer sheets 11 of which 
the top sheet 11' is transparent. The large particles 12 and the small particles 13 can already be 
rotatable,  or  rendered  rotatable  by  expanding  the  clastomers.  11  by  the  application  of  a  fluid 

 

 

thereto. TU small particles 13 are disposed in the interstices of the monolayer arrangement of the 
large  particles  12.  Thus  the  small  particles  13  just  fit  into  the  small  pockets  created  by  the 
conjunction of the large particles 12, to create more reflecting area than the very small area that 
these small particles 13 block of the large particles 12. Each element I tracks the sun and focuses 
the sun's light beam onto a collector. 
 

Let us here consider the packing (compaction) of spheres in broad terms so that we may better 
understand the various trade-offs that may be undertaken in the choice of one set of particles 12 
versus  two  sets  of  particles  12  and  13,  or  more;  and  the  relative  advantages  that  are  also  a 
function of the packing array. (The spheres are chosen for convenience. We could equally well be 
discussing circular disks as in FIGS. 3 and 5) With one set of particles 12 of radius R in a square 
monolayer array in which any adjacent four particles have their centers at the comers of a square, 
the maximum packing fraction of the circular mirrors is 
 

 
 
This  means  that  as  much  as  21%  the  reflecting  area  is  wasted,  with  less  than  79%  of  the  area 
available  for  reflection.  If  a  second  population  of  particles  13  are  put  into  the  interstices,  their 
radii would need to be just slightly greater than 
 

 

 

 
 
 
so that they would fill the interstices of a monolayer of spheres (first population), and yet not fall 
through the openings. The maximum packing fraction in square array of two such sets of circular 
mirrors is 
 

 
  Thus just by the addition of a second population of particles 13, of the right size, the reflecting 
area can increase from about 79% to about 92% in a square array. 

 

Now lot us consider one set of particles 12 of radius R in a hexagonal monolayer array in which 
any  adjacent  six  particles  have  their  centers  at  the  comers  of  a  hexagon.  In  this  case,  the 
maximum packing fraction of the circular is mirrors is 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
This  means  that  only  about  10%  the  reflecting  area  is  wasted,  with  about  90%  of  the  area 
available for reflection with one population of particles 12, by just going to a hexagonal array. If 
a second population of particles 13 are put into the interstices, their radii would need to be just 
slightly greater than 
 

 

 

 
 
so that they would fill the interstices of a monolayer of an hexagonal aff ay of spheres (first 
population of particles 12), and yet not fall through the openings. The maximum packing fraction 
in hexagonal array of two such sets of circular mirrors is 
 

 
Thus just by the addition of a second population of particles 13, of the right size, the reflecting 
area can increase from about 90% to about 95% in an hexagonal array. 

The following two tables summarize the above results on 

 

packing fractions. 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
Hexagonal Packing 
Square Packing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.155 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

Comparison of Hexagonal and Square Packing Fractions 

 

PF1 

PF2  

 

PF2/PF1 

 
 

  0.907 
  0.785 

 
0.951 
0.920    

1.049 
1.172 

 

 

 

TABLE 1 

 

 
 

TABLE 2 

Relative Gain of Hexagonal versus Square Packing 

PFhl/PFsl 

 

PFh2/PFs2  

PFh2/PFsl 

  

1.034    

1.211 

 

 

   Interesting conclusions can be drawn from TABLES 1 and 2 which can be guides for design 
tradeoffs  even  though  the  calculated  quantities  are  upper  limits  of  what  can  be  attained  in 
practice.  TABLE  2  shows  that  just  by  going  from  a  square  monolayer  array  to  an  hexagonal 
monolayer  array  the  reflecting  area  can  be  increased  by  about  16%.  When  two  populations  of 
particles  12  and  13  are  used,  there  is  only  about  a  3%  improvement  by  going  to  an  hexagonal 
array.  The  largest  improvement  is  about  21%  for  a  two  population  hexagonal  array  compared 
with a one population square array. 

FIG.  9  is  a  cross-sectional  view  of  a  mini-optics  ensemble  5  of  an  individually  rotatable 
monolayer  of  elements  I  showing  the  overlay  of  a  transparent  ground  plane  14  on  top  and  a 
resistive  grid  15  on  the  bottom  to  locally  produce  varying  mini-electric  fields  for orienting  the 
mini-mirrors 2 to focus the incident light 3 as concentrated light of the reflected wave 30 onto a 
collector  16.  The  collector  16  as  used  herein  denotes  any  device  for  the  conversion  of  solar 
energy  such  as  electricity,  heal,  pressure,  concentrated  light,  etc.  The  rotatable  elements  1  are 
situated in ridged cells 17 15 between two elastomer sheets. For spherical or cylindrical elements 
A  the  ridged  cellular  structure  17  is  conducive  but  not  necessary  to  hold  the  elements  in  grid 
position in the array structure. For elements 1 of disk shape 5 as in FIGS. 3 and 5, the ridged cells 
17  are  a  valuable  adjunct  in  maintaining  the  array  structure  and  avoiding  binding  between  the 
elements 1. 

Because the mini-optics system  is tough  and light-weight it is highly portable unlike existing 
light  concentrating  optical  systems  that  are  heavy,  bulky,  and  cumbersome.  Furthermore,  the 
mini-optics system can easily be mass produced at low cost since it is mainly two sheets of thin 
plastic with millions of smart-beads sandwiched between the sheets. The mini-optics system can 
be rolled up, transported, and attached to existing man-made, or natural structures such as trees, 
rocks, hillsides, and mountain tops. Therefore, in addition to providing solar energy in conven-
tional urban settings, the mini-optics system is also ideally suited for rugged terrain and can be 
used by campers, mountain climbers, explorers, etc. It is unmatched as a portable system that can 
easily go anywhere man can go, and track and concentrate the sun's energy. 

When rotation of the elements I is desired, the effect of the torque applied by the field can be 
augmented by injecting a fluid 18 from a plenum reservoir 19 by a pressure applying means 20 to 
expand the separation of the sheets 11. In the case of non-front-surface reflection such as shown 
in  FIGS.  1-4,  it  is  desirable  to  utilize  a  fluid  18  whose  index  of  refraction  matches  the  clear 
hemisphere  or  clear  hemicylinder.  In  addition  to  providing  a  means  to  pressure  the  elastomer 
sheets  11  apart,  the  fluid  18  acts  as  a  lubricant  to  permit  the  elements  1  to  rotate  freely  when 
being guided into the proper orientation. 

The ridged cells 17 can be created in thermoplastic elastomer sheets 11 by heating the sheets 11 
to a slightly elevated temperature and applying pressure with the elements 1 between the sheets 
11. In the case of elements  1  of  disk  shape 5, the ridged cells 17 can be created on each sheet 
individually. This gives twice the height for the cells, when two such sheets are put together to 
hold the elements 1. 

A  presently  preferred  maximum  for  the  diameter  of  elements  1  is  -10  mm  or  more  for  this 
figure and for FIGS. 1-5. The minimum diameter of elements I can be assessed from the Rayleigh 
limit 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
where d is the minimum diameter of elements 1, λ ~ 4000 A is the minimum visible wavelength, 
n is the index of refraction -1 of element I (the medium in which the incident light is reflected), 
and u is the half angle admitted by elements 1. Thus d ~ 40,000 A (4 x l0-6 m) is the minimum 
diameter of elements 1.   
   If the focussing planar mini-mirrors concentrate the solar radiation by a factor of 100, the total 
increase in power density reaching the collector would be 100 times greater than the incident 
power of the sun. Thus the collector area need be only ~ 1% the size of one receiving solar 
radiation directly. Although the total capital and installation cost of this improved system may be 
more than 1% of a direct system, there will nevertheless be substantial savings. 

FIG.  10  is  a  perspective  view  of  a  two-dimensional  array  of  the  rotatable  elements  1  of  a 
focussing  planar mini-mirror with an equatorial flat reflecting surface 2 which reflects incident 
light 3 and focuses it as a concentrated light wave 30 to a collector 16. 
   FIG. 11 is a schematic top view showing the electronic control grid 33 for rotating the 
reflecting elements of a focussing planar mini-mirror. Except for the cylinders of FIG. 4 which 
have a one-axis response, the preferred non-cylindrical geometry of each of the other elements 1, 
10, or 11 is capable of rotating in any direction (two-axis response) in response to a selectively 
applied electric field by the electronic control grid 33. The electronic control grid 33 is made of 
resistive components 21. The mini-mirror/lens array with elements 1, 10, or 11 is sandwiched 
between the resistive electronic control grid shown here and the transparent ground plane as 
shown in the cross-sectional view of FIG. 9. The orientation of the elements 1, 10, or 11 (cf. 
FIGS. 1-7) is determined by controlling the voltages V at the nodes of the grid such as those 

shown V00 , V01 , V02 , V10 , V11, with voltage Vij at the ij th node. The voltage Vij can be 
controlled by a very small inexpensive computer with analog voltage outputs. Once in operation, 
this system can be powered by the solar energy conversion device which collects the 
concentrated light. The electronic control grid 33 is similar in construction and function to 
analogous grids used in personal computer boards, and in flat panel monitors. 

The  voltage  between  successive  nodes  produces  an  electric  field  in  the  plane  of  the  planar 
mini-mirror,  and  the  voltage  between  a  node  and  the  ground  plane  produces  an  electric  field 
perpendicular to the planar mini-mirror to control the orientation angle of the reflecting/focussing 
mini-mirrors. The number of elements 1 , 10, or 11 per grid cell is determined by the degree of 
focussing desired: the higher the degree of focussing, the fewer the number of elements per grid 
cell.  In  the  case  of  elements  1  which  contain  orthogonal  electrical  and  magnetic  dipoles  as  in 
FIG.  7,  the  orientation  function  may  be  separated  for  orientation  in  the  plane  and  orientation 
perpendicular to the plane by each of the fields. 
   After  being  positioned  for  optimal  focussing  angles  of  reflection,  elements  1  (cf.  FIGS.  1-5, 

and 9) may be held in place by the elastomer sheets 11 (cf. FIGS. 8 and 9) with the voltages Vij 
being turned off to eliminate unnecessary power dissipation. When a new angular orientation of 
the elements I and 2 is desirable due to the sun's motion relative to the earth, the sheets 11 (cf. 
FIG. 9) are separated by injecting a fluid 18 from a plenum reservoir 19 by a pressure applying 
means  20.  In  the  case  of  elements  10  or  11  the  reflecting  angle  needs  to  be  held  fixed  by  the 

control  function  which  is  the  electronic  control grid 33. To  minimize  power  dissipation in this 
case it is desirable to make resistive components 21 highly resistive so that a given voltage drop 
is  accomplished  with  a  minimum  of  current  flow  and  hence  with  a  minimum  of  power 
dissipation. 
   FIG.  12  illustrates  method  and  apparatus  for  significantly  increasing  the  degree  of 
concentration  of  solar  energy  reaching  the  collector  by  utilizing  two  or  more  focussing  planar 
mini-mirrors. Shown are a cross-sectional view of two sets of mini-optics ensembles 6 and 7 of 
rotatable elements I wherein the sunlight 3 is incident on the first ensemble 6 and the reflected 
light 40 from this first ensemble 6 is focussed on the second ensemble 7 to reflect light 50 which 
is further concentrated and focussed on the collector 16. The mini-optics ensembles 6 and 7 are 
attached to a structure 100 which preferably is a pre-existing structure such as a building. 
   To illustrate the magnification capability of this configuration, in the ideal case where all the 
incident  light  is  reflected  without  absorption  or  losses,  if  the  two  sets  of  focussing  planar 
mini-mirrors  each  concentrated  the  light  energy  by  a  factor  of  100,  the  total  increase  in  power 
density reaching the collector would be a factor of (100)' -10,000 times greater than the incident 
power. For n such  reflectors each feeding into the other until finally reaching the collector, the 
increase would be (100r. Similarly, if two focussing planar mini-mirrors were positioned to have 
n concentrating reflections between them before the light is reflected to the collector, the increase 
would also be (100r. Of course in a real case the increase would be less than this due to losses. 
The thermodynamic limit of such a scheme would be an effective temperature of the radiation at 
the collector no higher than the source temperature which in the case of the sun is ~ 6000 K. A 
practical limit would occur much before this related to temperatures well below the melting point 
of  the  materials  used.  There  is  also  an  optical  limit  that  the  power  per  unit  area  per  steradian 
cannot be increased by a passive optical system. 

A  major  advantage  of  the  instant  invention,  is  that  the  focussing  planar  mini-mirrors  can  be 
attached to an already existing structure 100, ranging from buildings to trees t; rocks, or even flat 
on the ground. Since the necessary structural strength is already built into the existing structure, 
no additional funds need be expended to construct mirror supporting edifices which are capable 
of withstanding harsh winds, earthquakes, and other natural disturbances. 

While the instant invention has been described with reference to presently preferred and other 
embodiments,  the  descriptions  are  illustrative  of  the  invention  and  are  not  to  be  construed  as 
limiting the invention. Thus, various modifications and applications may occur to those skilled in 
the  art  without  departing  from  the  true  spirit  and  scope of the invention as summarized by the 
appended claims. 

What is claimed is: 

1. A miniature optics system for concentrating reflected sunlight, comprising: 

(a) an array of miniature rotatable reflecting balls having two hemispheres positioned in the 
space between two sheets holding said array of miniature reflecting balls; 

   (b) the top sheet of said two sheets being transparent; 

  (c) means to individually rotate the array of balls within said sheets; and 
  (d) a dipole embedded in each ball for coupling to at least one of the sheets. 

2. The apparatus of claim 1, wherein each said rotatable miniature reflector is a ball comprising: 

3. The apparatus of claim 1, wherein each said rotatable miniature reflector is a ball comprising: 

   (a) a reflector embedded in said ball; and 
   (b) charge of opposite sign in each said ball. 

   (a) a reflector embedded in said ball; and 
   (b) a magnetic dipole each said ball. 

4. The apparatus of claim 1, wherein each said rotatable miniature reflector is a disk comprising: 

 

 

   (a) a reflector on one of the surfaces of said disk; and 
   (b) bipolar charge in each disk. 

5. The apparatus of claim 1, wherein each said rotatable miniature reflector is a disk comprising: 

apart said sheets. 

 reflected light is caused to produce power. 

(a) a reflector on one of the surfaces of said disk, and 
(b) a magnetic dipole and an electric dipole embedded in said disk. 

  (a) a reflector on one of the surfaces of said disk; and 
  (b) a magnetic dipole embedded in said disk. 
6. The apparatus of claim 1, wherein each said rotatable 
  miniature reflector is a disk comprising: 
 
 
7. The apparatus of claim 1, wherein each said rotatable 
  miniature reflector is a cylinder comprising: 
 
(a) a reflector embedded in said cylinder; and 
(b) means for coupling to an electomagnetic field. 
 
8. The apparatus of claim 1, wherein said sheets maintain 
 
said reflectors in fixed azimuthal orientation. 
9. The apparatus of claim I with means for spreading 
 
10. The apparatus of claim 1, wherein the diameter of each said rotatable miniature reflector is in   
      the range 4x10-6 m to 10-1 m . 
11. The apparatus of claim 1, wherein at least one sheet forms a cellular array. 
12. The apparatus of claim 1, wherein said concentrating 
 
13. The apparatus of claim 1, wherein said concentrating reflected light is caused to produce   
      electrical power. 
14. A miniature optics system for concentrating reflected sunlight, comprising: 
       (a) an array of rotatable miniature reflectors positioned in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15. The apparatus of claim 14, wherein each said rotatable 
  miniature reflector is a body comprising: 
 
 
16. The apparatus of claim 14, wherein the said sheets maintain the reflectors in fixed azimuthal   
     orientation. 
17. The apparatus of claim 14 with means for spreading 
      apart the sheets. 
18. The apparatus of claim 14, wherein said concentrating reflected light is caused to produce   
     power. 
19. The apparatus of claim 14, wherein said concentrating reflected light is caused to produce   
     electrical power. 
20. The apparatus of claim 14 wherein the concentrated light is used in a process to charge a fuel  
    cell. 
21. The apparatus of claim 14 wherein the concentrated light is used in a process to de-salinate   
    water. 

    the space between two sheets; 
  (b) means for rotating said rotatable miniature reflectors; 
  (c) means for tracking the source of light; 
  (d) means for focusing said reflecting system unto a collector; and 
  (e) a dipole embedded in each reflector for coupling to at 
    least one of the sheets. 

  (a) a reflector embedded in said body; and 
  (b) field producing sources in each quadrant of said body. 

 

 

22. The apparatus of claim 14 wherein the concentrated light is used in a process to charge   
     batteries. 
23. The apparatus of claim 14 wherein the concentrated light is used in a process to produce   
    hydrogen fuel. 
24. The apparatus of claim 14 wherein the concentrated light is used to heat a building. 
25. The apparatus of claim 14 wherein the concentrated light is used to melt snow or ice. 
26. The apparatus of claim 14 wherein the concentrated light is used to heat water. 
27. The apparatus of claim 14 wherein the concentrated light is used to provide heat for a   
    distillation process. 
28. The apparatus of claim 14 wherein the concentrated light is used to provide heat or electricity 

for powering an ocean-going vessel. 

 

 

