 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

         
 

SLAC-PUB-10125 
        August 2003 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject Access through Community Partnerships:  A Case Study 
 
 

 
 
Patricia A. Kreitz and Travis C. Brooks 
 
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford University 
Stanford, California 94309 

 

 
 
 
 

Invited paper to be published in 
Science & Technology Libraries 

 
 
 
Abstract  
Innovations in scholarly communication have resulted in changing roles for authors, 
publishers and libraries. Traditional roles are disappearing and players are actively 
seeking or reluctantly assuming new roles.  Library roles are changing as they become 
involved in building and indexing electronic (e-) repositories and support new modes of 
e-research.  A library-run service, the SPIRES particle physics databases, has not only 
weathered, but also lead, many of the transitions that have shaped the landscape of e-
publishing and e-research.  This has been possible through an intense and in-depth 
partnership with its user community.  The strategies used and lessons learned can help 
other libraries craft cost-effective roles in this new environment.  
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
Work supported by Department of Energy contract DE-AC03-76SF00515 

 

 

Introduction 

 
The rise of the Web combined with a growing ease of writing and publishing 
electronically have begun a revolution in scholarly publishing and communication.  
Profoundly transformative innovations such as arXiv.org plus internet indexing and 
retrieval software such as Google™ are changing the academic information landscape. 
One area with the greatest potential for change is in the traditional processes and the 
players involved in providing access to the scholarly literature.  In an e-research world, 
how will scholars be able to have persistent, useful, accurate, and timely access to that 
subset of the scholarly literature which is relevant to them?  How will the roles of the 
players in the scholarly communication process evolve in the emerging e-publishing and 
e-researching world? Will authors become publishers and catalogers as well?  Will 
journal publishers completely replace libraries or abstracting and indexing services? Will 
libraries, in turn, extend their roles both ‘backwards’ into the publication process and 
‘forwards’ into more comprehensive subject access?   
 
 
defined role for libraries with regard to the digital resources accessible through the Net".1  
He challenges libraries to find a way to provide free and open searchability to the ‘deep 
Web’ of scholarly disciplines using a combination of software and humanware and 
judicious collaboration and partnering.  How can libraries take such a leadership role?  In 
this paper we look at some of the ways this might be achieved, particularly by involving 
authors and libraries in new partnerships as traditional roles change.  We examine an 
active model of this new partnership, looking at how one library-managed system has 
worked with users to cost-effectively provide useful, persistent, accurate, and relevant 
access to the subset of particle physics scholarly literature.  
  
 

Brian Hawkins, past-president of Educause, observed that "There is no clear and 

Changing Roles 

 
Researchers, now known as 'content producers,' whose past role was to write 

articles and books that they handed off to other players in the publishing structure, have 
many more options today.  They are often bypassing traditional publishers and are now 
self-publishing or publishing to an institutional archive or a subject-based archive.   
Reflecting the beginning stages of this revolution, many authors are choosing to combine 
new publication methods with traditional ones.  The publication process for authors will 
continue to evolve in new ways as traditional copyright control is redefined and as 
institutional or subject-based repositories become part of the mainstream.  
 

This trend of scholars retaining more control over their documents is being 
extended into the arena of subject access through a variety of experiments.2   Some 
projects currently underway are testing the expectation that researchers should self-
catalog their own works at the point of self-publishing them.3  Creating the access points 
and indexing terms for their own works would replace the need for what had been in the 

2

past the ’down-stream’ cataloging or metadata creation functions that have traditionally 
been performed by libraries or abstract/indexing services.  

 
 Having authors index their own works is appealing both intellectually, because 
researchers know their own writings best, and practically, because this would avoid the 
inevitable delays caused by relying on third party indexing.  But are authors willing and 
able to assume this new role?  Academic authors typically want to focus on research and 
teaching and may be extremely reluctant to become ’lifetime catalogers’ of their written 
materials.4  Will authors create sufficient metadata so that nothing will be needed but a 
’Google™ on steroids'?  We are too early in this revolution to know what new paths will 
be taken, but it is certain that the wealth of experimentation that is taking place will alter 
radically the traditional roles authors have played in the past.   

 
Publishers as well are finding and taking advantage of new opportunities created 
by the upheaval in research communication.  Both commercial and scholarly publishers 
have traditionally provided reviewing, editing, copyright control over, and persistent 
access to, scholarly works. They are now analyzing what roles they may play in a world 
where the act of publishing is no longer a single event, frozen in time, but distributed and 
dynamic, and the power of exclusive copyright control is weakening.5  They are also 
pondering the effect that some of the changes already well underway may have on their 
enterprise. In particular, electronic repositories, inspired by the first e-print archive, 
arXiv.org, have now grown into adolescence.  Not only have other subject-based e-print 
servers been started, but universities such as CalTech and MIT and collaborations of 
scholars such as the Public Library of Science are building an electronic-based role in 
publishing by creating successful digital repositories of scholarly works.  These 
structured electronic repositories are now enabling the dissemination of a scholarly work, 
a traditional role of a publisher, to be separated from all other parts of the scholarly 
communication process, including ‘publication’.6 
 

Publishers may focus solely on their refereeing and certification role.7  But if they 
do, how can they generate sufficient revenue?   Will institutions, universities, or authors 
be willing to pay publishers sufficient income for the cachet of inclusion of a particular 
article in a journal?  Not willing to trust their existence and revenue stream to a somewhat 
beleaguered publication function, journal publishers are experimenting with value-added 
services that extend their roles in new directions.  Many are assuming that they will 
continue to provide electronically based peer reviewed scholarly publications, but also 
are contemplating a variety of other content, tools, and access systems that could be pay-
per-use.8  Will they try to build the kinds of products and services that have, in the past, 
been the responsibility of other parts of the scholarly communication process?  Recent 
developments such as IOP's BEC Matters! portal 9 and Elsevier’s SocSciNet.com10 are 
expanding traditional journal publisher activities into subject searchable databases built, 
at present, on their own suite of products but attempting to reach beyond them to broader 
subject access through subfield Web portals.  Will such experiments grow to a point 
where journal publishers control the access to and mining of their electronic full text 
resources so fully that they completely replace libraries or abstracting/indexing 
services?11 If libraries allow this trend to continue, might subject access through 

 

3

publishers soon present the same pitfalls and monopolies that have plagued libraries in 
the current journal system?   
 
 

Library Challenges 

 
While new roles for authors and publishers are clearly of interest to libraries, 

foremost in the minds of libraries and librarians are the new roles that they themselves 
will be asked to assume.  How will the changing publication and communication 
landscape impact the library’s functions?   And how in turn, will libraries respond?   
Erosions of responsibility in some areas are often compensated by opportunities in other 
areas.  Let us examine some traditional library roles such as creating collections and 
access to those collections, and how those roles may evolve in the coming years.  

 
One of the most basic functions of a library is collection development, acquiring 
materials from publishers and other sources to meet the academic research and teaching 
needs of their campuses.  However, libraries are now are moving ’backwards’ into a 
publishing role through experiments in building and supporting institutional repositories 
of faculty publications. While e-repositories are not ubiquitous, they are well along the 
way to institutionalization.  In fact, MIT’s development of D-Space and the University of 
Southampton's EPrints.org12 are predicated on the assumption that universities and other 
organizations need a suite of technical implementation tools and best practices to help 
them as they collect, organize, and make available the scholarly output of their faculty.  
Consensus is growing that the university – and often the university library – should play a 
leadership role in providing ‘publishing space’ for scholars13.  Providing this publishing 
space can be defined as an extension of that traditional collection development role.  By 
managing institutional repositories, libraries are collecting the intellectual products of 
their faculty.  This is electronic collection development at a finer level of granularity than 
libraries have ever done, intentionally, in the past. 
 

But there is as yet no consensus about who should take the lead in ensuring 
persistent, efficient, and useful access to these scholarly materials.  Universities and their 
libraries are recognizing that institutional repositories require some form of structured 
information about the documents that is made publicly accessible in a standardized 
way.14  As libraries assume a greater role in publishing with e-repositories, they must 
define the purpose and extent of their involvement in these repositories. Should they 
simply provide a warehouse or should they build sophisticated subject access to the 
publications within their repositories—in essence, performing a value-added aggregator 
role?15  Or, conversely, might this subject access role of aggregators—or at least that part 
that libraries play—become unnecessary?  Perhaps software could become sufficiently 
sophisticated that it is able to perform that aggregation function for a field autonomously.   
Perhaps software could even provide services similar to what a library does in crafting 
collections to support an academic department's research needs or what the American 
Psychological Association does with Psychological Abstracts to 'collect' and provide 
access by an academic subject?16 

 

 

4

Not only might software replace these sorts of aggregation functions, but the 

author could replace many of the cataloging and indexing functions at the point of 
inception.  These burdens may be falling more heavily on the information creator through 
ideas such as author-supplied metadata.   Could authors evolve into self-publishers and 
self-catalogers thus rendering commercial publishers and libraries obsolete?  Would 
authors be willing to play an active or a passive role in metadata creation and indexing?  
Is it likely that authors would take the time to supply enough information?  If there were 
sufficient data in each publication or information object to harvest, would there be any 
need for additional human mediation beyond what the author creates initially? How could 
the inevitable corrections or changes be effected?  How would standardization of search 
elements and terms across distributed repositories be controlled?  Building on their past 
collaboration with faculty, their experience in ‘metadata creation (aka, cataloging), and 
their new e-repository role, libraries could be leaders in helping authors who found 
themselves in their new roles of document meta-data creators.   
 

Self-publishing and indexing of scholarly e-publications will take, in the most 

optimistic view, a multiplicity of solutions.  Some technical developments, such as XML, 
seem on the brink of providing a partial solution. However, software aggregation and 
structured authoring are only two ways of approaching the problem.  It is likely that 
solutions will need to be tailored, especially in this inchoate period, to the authors’ 
readiness, the technology, and the end result.  Because libraries have subject specialists 
who have solid experience working with the scholarly authoring, researching, and 
educational communities, they can be extremely successful in partnering with content 
producers and users to create the access to this new breed of publications housed in e-
repositories.  
 
Providing information access and helping information seekers are again basic 

library functions.  What role should libraries play in providing subject access to what has 
been characterized as the 'deep Web' of scholarly electronic literature?17  Some libraries 
are beginning to explore this with the institutional repositories that they are creating.   An 
example is the University of California’s eScholarship initiative. Its repository “provides 
persistent access and makes the content easily discoverable”.18 The author agreement 
commits the Repository to creating a full bibliographic entry for each item deposited, and 
one of the benefits described on their Website is sophisticated searching.19  A variety of 
other experiments with subject indexing are starting, such as those registered with the 
Open Archives Initiative as 'service providers’.20  Through institutional and subject-based 
repositories, there is an increasingly available body of electronically published scholarly 
materials which can provide the raw material for experiments in subject access. 
 

But, libraries are already involved in simply building these electronic repositories. 

Could they also assume the additional burden of leadership and cost to develop 
sophisticated search systems for these repositories?  There are rarely simple or 
completely cost-free solutions to such complex and broad problems. John Ewing, 
Executive Director of the American Mathematical Society is rightly wary of "miraculous 
solutions to previously intractable problems…at no cost to anyone”.21  How expensive 
might search systems be?  In an era of severely declining budgets, the need to take on yet 

 

5

another (potentially costly) leadership role is not what academic library managers wish to 
hear. Neither is it what library specialists in collection development, metadata cataloging 
and retrieval, or reference services wish to have added to their already overflowing job 
descriptions.  However, libraries, which are masters at both understanding information 
needs and mediating between researchers and third-party information producers, are in an 
excellent position to help define the context and outcomes of experiments in this infant 
area of subject access to the scholarly e-literature.  

 
Libraries also have extensive experience with setting standards, collaborating to 

create shared cataloging, and listening keenly to the information needs of their user 
communities.  If any group is uniquely positioned to provide subject-specialized 
organization and access to the scholarly deep Web, academic libraries are.  The cost of 
taking on this function may not be as prohibitive as it could appear at first.  Not only are 
many new experiments trying to develop cost-effective alternatives to labor-intensive 
cataloging, indexing and abstracting, there are some substantially successful current 
models already functioning.22  Studying such ongoing efforts will provide useful data and 
experience that can be applied to further experimentation.  
 
 

SPIRES Collaboration as a Model 

 
In this paper we describe such an effort, which has been working for 
approximately thirty years.  It has helped lead the transition from a totally print-based 
system to an almost totally electronic-based system.  In the process, it has expanded to 
provide worldwide subject-specialized access not only to the field’s journal literature, (as 
do database vendors), but to a wider set of information objects comprising a significant 
amount of the intellectual ‘ecology’ of the field.23  This is not an effort that is particularly 
well-funded.  In fact, it operates only through a careful use of every (automated, cost-
lowering) software program it can implement, a judicious use of hands-on intellectual 
oversight and cataloging, an aggressive commitment to collaborative and consortial 
information sharing, and – most radically and uniquely – the volunteer efforts of many of 
our users.  
 
 
people, institutions, research, and experiments in the fields of particle and astroparticle 
physics.  First invented and developed by the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC) 
Library in 1974 to acquire, catalog and provide access to high-energy physics pre-prints 
(advance copies of papers submitted to journals), it is now managed and developed by an 
international collaboration of laboratories and universities, with substantial volunteer 
assistance from  publishers and researchers.  In 1975 an average of 70 papers per week 
were added to the Research Literature database by the SLAC Library staff. In the first six 
months of 2003 an average of 700 papers per week were added.  The core work of 
content identification, data entry, subject/access point indexing, authority control, and 
URL linking, are performed through a blend of software and humanware.  We have 
estimated that, worldwide, there are currently approximately 12 'people' (full time 

The SPIRES High-Energy Physics databases provide access to the literature, 

 

6

equivalents) dedicated to the work of building these databases. This number contrasts 
with an estimate of approximately 5 total ’people’ who worked on the databases in 1975.   
 

Combined, the six core databases (research literature, experiments, conferences, 

institutions, people, and jobs) contain about 700,000 records. However, this type of 
statistic is not a full reflection of the complexity and depth of the information available in 
and through the databases.  In the Research Literature database, for example, one 
bibliographic record may contain, for example, 150 unique searchable elements, as well 
as links to a variety of other distributed information such as full text published and 
unpublished versions, abstracted data, reviews, conference websites, and experimental 
information. A typical record for a theory paper (which tend to have relatively few 
authors) is shown in figure 1. 

 
In the Experiments database, each record for an experiment contains the equivalent of a 
multi-page ’encyclopedic’ entry which describes the scientific proposal, lists all the 
experiment members and their institutional affiliations (many experiments have hundreds 
of scientists), includes some of the past history of that experiment, and provides a 
comprehensive, up-to-date bibliography of its publications.   
 
 
research databases it manages, said, "Over the years its cutting-edge systems and services 
have helped transform the way we do research in our field."24  How can a library have 

Recently a Nobel Laureate in physics, writing about the SLAC Library and the 

 

 

7

One of the most traditional instances of user quality control is common in many 

such a profound effect?  With our secret weapon—our users!  There are several broad 
ways in which users have collaborated with us over time: quality control of the 
information in the databases; collection development and collection creation; software 
development, and pure creative genius.   
 
 
academic libraries. How many of us have had an irate faculty member point out a catalog 
entry which has that individual's name, affiliation, or work displayed incorrectly?  We are 
typically alerted to such errors by authors emailing us.  Because we are a leading 
information resource in the field, our world-wide users perceive it as important that our 
information about their publications be correct.  Thus a “bootstrap” effect is at work here, 
as we become important to the field, it becomes easier to maintain good data because we 
receive more help. We also make use of their interest in having correct personal data by 
asking them to review their entry in our directory of people in particle physics.  We run 
an automated program periodically that requests that each person in our directory 
database review the data we have about that person and let us know if it is current and 
correct.  From the replies of authors and researchers we are able to fairly painlessly 
update this directory of approximately 40,000 entries.  This database, while a useful 
resource itself, also helps build our name authority control system.   
 

In addition to authors pointing out errors in the bibliographic information about 

their own works, we also fairly regularly receive emails from users who point out 
typographical errors in the bibliographic entries for works which they did not author.  
Most frequently, we receive emails pointing out the omission of a particular citation from 
the list of references for a paper in the research database.  While some errors are ones our 
automated system or human review didn’t catch, other errors are made by the original 
author, for example, while citing someone else’s work.25  After receiving such an email, 
we check the cited reference against other instances of it in our database and correct, if 
needed, the author’s mistake.  Our ability to catch citation errors means that we can 
correct trails of errors that have developed over time.  Errors may accumulate because an 
author re-uses older reference lists, and so an error once made is inadvertently repeated.  
They also may develop because another author cuts and pastes from a colleagues’ paper 
and adds to the reference list s/he is developing.  Even if authors have read the original 
papers, they are very unlikely to compare the citations with the reference list, and thus 
can easily propagate an incorrect reference through many papers. 

 
Our reference lists, then, can be more accurate than those of the original papers.   

To make use of this we have developed a way for authors to build their reference lists 
directly out of our research database in a format that can be simply and efficiently added 
to their paper.  Commercial products, such as EndNote and ProCite, permit this kind of 
downloading and formatting also.  This saves the author from the tedious business of 
reformatting citations to meet a particular journal's editorial requirements and primarily 
functions as a service to our users.  However, in the markup language, we have buried 
data that makes the processing of that list now far more automatic than reference lists that 
are not pre-searched.  This enables us to save tremendous amounts of staff time 
reviewing error lists of non-matched references. 

 

8

 
A related service we provide to our users is automated reference checking for a 

list of references an author sends to us via email.  An author submits a paper’s 
bibliography to be matched against our database.  Then, if the bibliographic information 
matches, the author knows there are no typographical errors in the new paper’s reference 
list.  Non-matching entries are highlighted and the author is alerted to check them for 
errors.  In this way, we help the authors’ quality control of their papers and ensure that 
the reference lists which are eventually added to our database from those papers are 
correct.  
 
With these volunteer opportunities, building references lists from our database 

and checking reference lists against the database, users are taking actions that they would 
do, perhaps with a slight extension or variation, as part of the normal authoring process.  
Authors have to list and format the works they reference in their papers.  They also (we 
hope!) have to check those lists for typographical errors.  By giving them a way to 
perform both of these functions via systems that help us, there is mutual benefit.  We 
trade their ease of getting or checking references for reference lists that we can process 
quickly and accurately into our database. When building systems that plan to rely on 
effort from authors beyond the traditional boundaries of writing a paper, there has to be 
some direct incentive for them to change or take on additional tasks.  The benefit of the 
community in general is often not a strong motivator, while direct personal benefit in 
terms of saving time and effort, will alter behavior quickly.  
 

Another area of quality control our users participate in heavily is in catching 
citations that were added after the e-print was posted and before the paper is published in 
a journal.  One informal study estimates that about thirty percent of e-prints have some 
substantial revision (not simply typographical changes) but a change in wording, data, or 
papers added to the reference list before they are published in their final version in a 
journal.26  Our cataloging begins with the e-printed paper and so the bibliographic data 
that we process comes from that version.  We have automated systems that compare core 
data, such as the title and author lists between the unpublished and published versions.  
However, comparing reference lists for additional citations added between posting to 
arXiv.org and publication in a journal is not sufficiently automated that we can afford to 
repeat this procedure on all papers.   

 
Again, we rely heavily on users to help us with this—either the authors 
themselves or, often, the people whose own works were added to that reference list after 
the e-print was posted to arXiv.org.  Without help, we could replace the draft reference 
list with the completed one in proportionately few papers.  For many papers we have no 
automated process to replace the e-print reference list with the published version, and so, 
at present, the additional labor to identify and replace these reference lists would be 
prohibitive. Some journals send us the reference lists of papers they have published and, 
again, we are able to replace the draft lists in those circumstances without additional 
labor.  In some cases, the author sends us a new reference list to replace the draft list 
using a Web form that automatically formats the bibliographic information to fit our 
database.  To help users with this, we have developed a Web page which they can use to 

 

9

send us references that were omitted from a paper.  When using this form, the data can be 
put into the database with no additional keystrokes from our staff.  Typically, users 
employ this form to send us an omitted citation when it is their work that was added after 
the e-print version was posted at arXiv.org.  They have an additional motive for doing 
this since an updated reference list that includes their work leads to a higher citation 
count (and greater glory) for the user.  Our thousands of users provide a much-needed 
additional set of eyes and typing fingers!   
 

Occasionally users will send a full reference list via our Web form for a paper that 

is in the database but lacking references.  A reference list may be left of, for example, 
because the paper was neither e-printed nor published in a core journal in the field. For 
such non-central publications, we do not have the manpower to create reference lists 
manually. .  In the majority of the cases, there is a measure of self-interest involved in 
sending a full reference list to us. The paper without a list is usually one either they’ve 
authored or that cites a paper they’ve written.  But we do have other volunteers who send 
lists for papers which do not include them in any way and which they simply wish to 
have more fully represented in the database.  The most active example of this activity is a 
user who sends reference lists from hundreds of papers where he is neither an author nor 
cited by the author.  In this volunteer’s case, there is no self-interest involved, simply a 
lot of work he performs gratis to help improve the database content. In another helpful 
user's case, he has said he feels obligated to balance requests involving his own works 
with more altruistic error corrections. In typical physics tradition he quantified his effort 
at a 10% personal to 90% communal ratio. We need to research user motivation further to 
see if or how we could encourage such volunteerism more broadly. 

 
There is another area of complex information in the research database that is 
improved in quality from user cooperation.  Papers written by an experimental group can 
have a large number of authors.  Anywhere from 50 to 800 authors, along with each 
author’s institutional affiliations, can be listed on a single paper.  For the particle physics 
community it is important to track all the author names and to link those names with each 
author's institutional affiliations.  Generally, authors have one or two institutional 
affiliations, the university at which they work, for example, and the laboratory at which 
they have experimental privileges.  This can make for a complex and error prone ‘author 
field’.   With some large experimental groups, we have co-developed a system where the 
experimental group scientific publication coordinator sends an electronic file of each 
paper’s author/affiliation list formatted for automatic input. Since the hundreds of names 
on these lists may change from one paper to the next, such user-generated input ensures a 
high level of quality control without our time editing or comparing records. Again, this 
system works well if the experimental group is well motivated (i.e., sees SPIRES as an 
important information resource) and conversely tends to fail if this motivation is absent. 
 
 
content we offer is to let us know when we have missed a paper, a conference, an 
institution or an experiment they believe should be included. Many libraries encourage 
their local faculty to recommend books or journals for their collections. We receive 
around thirty of these emailed recommendations per week alerting us to a new 

Another way that users participate with us to improve the quality of database 

 

10

Besides correcting errors and omissions, our user community helps us in many 

experiment that’s been formed or to articles that are often on the edges of the fields we 
traditionally cover.  Many of these come via a simple email but we do have a Web page 
that prompts the user for the bibliographic data elements of an omitted article in a 
structured way and formats that information so it can be added with little human effort.  
Some of our users are using this form to prepare, in essence, cataloging records, for 
papers that we’ve missed.   
 
 
other ways.  They create content or software that adds value to what we offer.  Our user 
community is incredibly inventive, extremely computer literate and unabashedly assumes 
they can ’do anything’.  Particle physicists have a long tradition of building computer 
‘hacks’ to make their lives easier.  SPIRES is, in some sense, a repository and a 
beneficiary of that habit of hacking. Often they invent something that turns out to be an 
extremely useful tool, product, or service that integrates well with our services and 
mission.  At times they have invented something directly for us, but at other times, they 
have been middlemen for us with other innovators, helping us to take advantage of 
inventions as they are being developed.  The result of this support from our users has 
been that, at times even during the initial development phase, those inventions have been 
optimized for our needs.   
 

One example of a user building content was the creation of a directory of people 
involved in particle physics research.  A physicist approached the SLAC library with the 
idea for this reference tool.  The librarian built the database structure and the physicist 
worked to populate it with content.  One of his strategies was to persuade colleagues at 
other physics departments, schools and institutions to send him regular feeds of electronic 
records of their scientists and staff.  He then wrote programs to help bring that data into 
the SPIRES database.  While the SLAC Library has coordinated the management of this 
database, called HEP Names (High-Energy Physics), there has been, over time, a series 
of physicists who have taken the lead role in building its content.   

 
Sometimes our users create a system or develop content that provides an 
additional level of analysis about the information residing in a database.  Two examples 
of this of this are the software programs that analyze citations or consolidate citation rates 
for an individual author.  We count how often an e-print and its subsequent appearance as 
a published paper are cited by other authors.   A Japanese physicist wrote a program that 
analyzed citations for all of an author's papers and produced a citation summary 
displayed graphically.  Originally he did this as part of a broader analysis he was doing 
for the Japanese government on the impact of Japanese science.  He and the SLAC 
library both recognized that it could be a very popular addition to our suite of services 
and it was installed at SLAC but maintained by him remotely for many years.  Recently 
another user of the databases has sent us software he wrote for us to update the original 
analysis program.   

 
We also have ‘power users’ who participate in advising us on and helping us with 
the databases on many levels.  Just one example of this level of user is a particle physics 
theorist.  Using an analysis we produce yearly which ranks the top-cited papers for the 

 

11

past year and the all-time top-cited papers in the entire research literature database, he 
writes an annual review article that discusses the papers and explores the trends in 
particle physics based on these citation counts.  The ‘all-time’ highest cited papers 
average roughly 100 articles that have received more than 1,000 citations recorded since 
1974 when we began to track citations in the database.  This annual review of 'top cites' is 
the most popular and eagerly awaited content in the database.  He also edits “A SPIRES 
Guide to the Review Literature in High-Energy Physics” which organizes thousands of 
review articles into subjects and into further subfields. This bibliography is a particularly 
valuable teaching tool since it provides quick access not only to the review literature, but 
full text access to the review itself as well as to all the research publications which the 
review examines. 
 
A profoundly important example of SPIRES users acting as middlemen between 

 
SPIRES and other services grew out of the feedback a theoretical physicist, Paul 
Ginsparg received when he invented the e-print archives, originally called xxx.lanl.gov, 
now arXiv.org.  When he created this automated repository of electronic versions of 
preprints, he thought it would be a good way to eliminate the cost and waste of the 
previous tradition of physicists sending out advance copies of their papers (pre-prints) to 
their colleagues for discussion.  He wanted to eliminate the enormous amount of paper 
and postage involved, and to create a system that was easy to use to 'post' a paper and 
would provide broad and convenient access to these advance copies.  Since, at the time, a 
paper submitted for publication to a physics journal took an average of a year to appear in 
print, having an almost instantaneously available electronic copy was an incredible 
innovation.   
 

Ginsparg built the archive system and then asked his colleagues to test it out for 

him. Enthused by the innovation, scientists at SLAC told SLAC librarians about it 
immediately and encouraged them to develop a connection between the electronic full 
text papers in the archive and the SPIRES bibliographic database.   This led to a 
collaboration in which the SLAC librarians advised him about what minimum 
bibliographic information to require from authors (perhaps this was the first 
electronically author-supplied metadata?).  In turn, the SPIRES research database began 
putting e-print archive identifying numbers into the bibliographic records.  Perhaps even 
more significant for individual authors who posted e-prints, SPIRES began to include 
citations to the e-print version of a paper in that paper's total citation count.   

 
From this collaboration, the SPIRES system gained the ability to download 

nightly both the bibliographic data authors supplied and the electronic versions of the 
reference lists.  This enabled a record for a paper to appear in the database literally within 
hours of the paper first appearing “in e-print”.  We also shared key elements of the data 
we added into the literature database with the e-print archive so that their records could 
display the list of cited references (linking back to our database) and could have 
information about where an e-print was eventually published.  The e-print archive of 
electronically accessible papers created a repository of data that we could bring into the 
literature database far more quickly and with less human intervention than previously.27 
 

 

12

Another innovation that saved SPIRES labor costs was a software program 
written by a Brown University physicist that converted documents written in the TeX text 
formatting system, the ubiquitous authoring tool in particle physics, into postscript so that 
they could be easily printed or displayed on a computer screen.  In order to catalog fully 
the e-print papers downloaded from arXiv.org, the SLAC Library was ftp-ing from the 
archives TeX papers and converting them to postscript.  Scientists who heard about this 
software recognized that an automated approach could bring the SLAC library significant 
labor savings and helped persuade the physicist to install his software at SLAC where he 
continued to maintain remotely for several years.  Eventually, the staff at arXiv.org took 
over the software processing producing postscript for viewing or printing directly from 
the TeX files on the archive server.  Both the original software and the assumption of the 
TeX to postscripting function by arXiv.org saved the SLAC library a great deal of time 
spent obtaining eye-legible copies of the e-prints. 

 
One of the most profoundly important examples of an innovation created by a 
physicist which was then used to improve the services we offer was the World Wide 
Web.  Tim Berners-Lee, the inventor of the Web, had invited a SLAC computational 
physicist, to see a very early demonstration on his NeXt computer which was at CERN, 
the European high-energy physics laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland.  The SLAC 
physicist almost did not make the time to go to Berners-Lee’s office, but did and 
recognized immediately that this program could become a useful interface to the SPIRES 
particle physics databases.28   He brought a copy of the program back with him on a 
floppy and enthusiastically showed it to the SLAC librarian, insisting that it could be the 
Internet search interface for which the SPIRES databases had been waiting.  With the 
help of other physicists and programmers who volunteered their time, they had the first 
website in the U.S. up and running within a couple of months and were writing html out 
of the database on-the-fly.  When Berners-Lee learned that his software was the new 
search interface to the SPIRES research database, he was delighted, saying that this 
would be the ’killer app’ for his invention.29  And, in fact, it was by using SPIRES 
through the Web interface that the first Web user community, particle physicists, was 
born. 
 

 
The history of the SPIRES databases and their continued successful existence is 
intimately connected with the contributions—both large and small—that users make to 
the databases’ quality, content, and continued innovation.  But, is this simply the story of 
an isolated set of behaviors by a unique and unreplicatable community?  What lessons, if 
any, can be learned that might be of use to the future development of the scholarly 
publishing and communication process?   
 
 

Conclusions 

Lesson One:  Users need and value in-depth subject access.  This fact is shown 

 
 
by the willingness of users to help us at all, as well as by our use statistics.30 Some 
emailed comments from users around the world express how central they feel the 
literature database is to their research.  

 

13

"Thank you so much for what you are doing. You are building 
the greatest science library in the history of mankind…" 
"Thank you for the eminently useful service you provide for the 
HEP community." 
"The virtual library [the SLAC Library] provides to the 
worldwide particle physics community levels the scientific 
playing field"  

Lesson Two:  With volunteer efforts, particularly continued automation 

Their willingness to spend time helping in so many ways is based on their need for and 
appreciation of the databases.  In particular the kinds of software development, content 
development and mediating between other innovators and SPIRES are motivated by this 
broader loyalty to the SPIRES system. 
 
 
improvements, and a distributed approach to building the resources, in-depth subject 
specialized databases are not prohibitively expensive.  Because SPIRES is seen as 
important to the field, users are motivated to help us.  What might start as a relatively 
small and expensive project, particularly until use grows, can turn into a very helpful, 
appreciated service, by this ‘bootstrap’ effect.  Of course, the timescale needed to build 
'brand loyalty’ is not always short plus there may be significant front-end costs during the 
start-up period.  However, one motivation that does certainly contribute to success is the 
feeling of ownership among the user community.  By encouraging and using volunteer 
efforts we have made the users feel as though SPIRES is not a third-party service, but 
instead an extension of particle physics, as indeed it truly is.  This encourages the type of 
loyalty and helpful spirit that permeates our user community today.   
 
 
Lesson Three:  There are successful ways to motivate authors to take an 
expanded role in the scholarly publication and communication process beyond their core 
efforts of research and writing.  It is clear from our experiences that enlightened self-
interest is a strong motivator for author participation.  Giving authors some carrot or 
reward works effectively.  Additionally, getting them to make minor changes in a part of 
their writing or publication process also seems to work.   While some users are motivated 
by the long-term benefit to the field in general, this is the exception not the rule.  Most 
authors do not want to take the time to format their documents, or add metadata to a 
database, unless there is some clear benefit to them.  For this reason third-party services 
may always be useful, and services that do rely solely on author-supplied information, 
need to think carefully about the motivations of the authors doing the work.  There needs 
to be a ‘fair trade’ of benefits between the author and the information service. 
  
 
emerge, change, or grow moribund in the next decade, researchers and students will 
continue to need persistent and consistent access to scholarly literature.  While its exact 
future may not be clear, there is a clear continuing need for collection selection and 
access, in essence, that aggregator function.  While libraries may not become the 
exclusive providers of this service they should take a leadership role in ensuring that the 
best possible systems for scholarly access are developed through partnerships with other 
players in the publication and communication system.  The SPIRES consortium’s system 

While many parts of the scholarly publishing and communication structure may 

 

14

of identifying relevant research, data, and other information objects, and enabling in 
depth subject access to that body of information via a sophisticated suite of databases and 
services provides a model of in-depth support of scholarship at a cost-effective level.  
The SPIRES system is a prime example of the utility that libraries can continue to 
provide in an increasingly electronic environment.  Perhaps more importantly, the 
SPIRES experience shows that collaboration with authors, users, and others in the 
academic community is not only possible but essential if one is to build collection and 
access systems that continue to evolve to meet researchers’ information needs an 
increasingly e-Research world. 
 
 
 

Acknowledgements 

 
We are grateful to Ann Redfield and Louise Addis, and our colleagues in the SLAC 
Library for discussions and assistance with the issues presented here. 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 Brian L. Hawkins, “Information Access in the Digital Era: Challenges and a Call for Collaboration” 
EDUCAUSE Review 51 (Sept/Oct. 2001), p. 54. 
2 Charles W. Bailey, Jr., Scholarly Electronic Publishing Bibliography, Houston: University of Houston 
Libraries, 1996-2003. In this bibliography, “Chapter 7: New Publishing Models” lists 143 articles calling 
for, describing or analyzing the evolving publishing revolution.  Available from 
http://info.lib.uh.edu/sepb/models.htm. 
3 Paul Jones, "Open(Source)ing the Doors for Contributor-Run Digital Libraries" Communications of the 
ACM 44, no.5 (May 2001): 46. 
4 Several authors have addressed the problem of how much self-cataloging and publishing management to 
expect of scholarly authors.  Erik Dugan, et al., "The Ariadne Knowledge Pool System" Communications of 
the ACM 44, no.5 (May 2001): 73-78.  This article is a useful introduction to the issue of when author-
supplied metadata is best captured and the need for additional third-party intervention.  Jeffrey R. Young 
"'Superarchives' Could Hold All Scholarly Output" The Chronicle of Higher Education 43 (July 5, 2002): 
A29. 
5 Representatives Sabo, Kaptur, and Frost introduced a bill into the House of Representatives on June 26, 
2003, H.R. 2613, the ‘Public Access to Science Act’, which proposes to ”amend title 17, United States 
Code, to exclude from copyright protection works resulting from scientific research substantially funded by 
the Federal Government”.  Available from http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-
bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=108_cong_bills&docid=f:h2613ih.txt.pdf 
6 Peter J. Denning and Bernard Rous, The ACM Electronic Publishing Plan, (1995), p. 4.  Corrected 
version available from the Communications of the ACM  http://acm.org/pubs/epub_plan.html.  
7 Unpublished presentations: “Peer Review in the Age of Open Archives”, May 24-25, 2003.  Sponsored by 
the Interdisciplinary Laboratory of the International School of Advanced Studies (SISSA), Trieste, Italy. 
Contact workshop organizers: Marco Fabbrichesi (marco@he.sissa.it), Stevan Harnad 
(harnad@ecs.soton.ac.uk), Stefano Mizzaro (mizzaro@dimi.uniud.it), and Corrado Pettenati 
(corrado.pettenati@cern.ch).  Marco Fabbrichesi and B. Montolli, “Peer Review: A Case Study”.  
Available from http://tips.sissa.it/docs/peer_review.pdf. 
8 Discussions held Jan. 16-18, 2001 at SLAC with Stewart C. Loken, et al. APS Task Force on Electronic 
Information Systems. (Report in draft form, contact: scloken@lbl.gov. 
9 Available at http://www.iop.org/EJ/S/UNREG/EGeUUag1CjHJf25bGOmSIA/ejs_extra/-coll=becm 
10 Available at http://www.socscinet.com/evaluation/index.html 

 

15

                                                                                                                                                 
11 Andrew Odlyzko, “Competition and Cooperation: Libraries and Publishers in the Transition to Electronic 
Scholarly Journals” The Journal of Electronic Publishing 4, no. 4 (June 1999): 13 (reprint edition). 
Available from http://www.press.umich.edu/jep/04-04/odlyzko0404.html 
12 D-Space: http://www.dspace.org/ and EPrints.org: http://www.eprints.org/ 
13 Ann J. Wolpert “The Future of Electronic Data” Nature 420 (November 7, 2002): 18. 
14 Summary of Ian Mowatt's closing comments at the OCLC/SCURL New Directions in Metadata 
conference, August 2002, Edinburgh, reported in: Pete Johnston "Collaboration, Integration and 
'Recombinant Potential'" Ariadne 33 (September-October 2002): 4.  Available at http://www.ariadne.ac.uk 
/issue33/oclc-scurl/intro.html   
15 While libraries have traditionally performed a ‘value-added aggregator’ role for their communities, the 
term has most recently been applied to developers of search ‘aggregation’ software that will harvest from 
metadata repositories.  Alison Buckholtz, et al., “Open Access: Restoring Scientific Communication to its 
Rightful Owners” European Science Foundation Policy Briefing 21(April 2003): 6.  ISRN ESF-SPB-03-
21-FR+ENG available at: http://www.esf.org 
16 Available at http://www.apa.org/psycinfo/products/psycabs.html 
17 Michael Bergman, “The Deep Web: Surfacing Hidden Value” The Journal of Electronic Publishing 7, 
no. 1 (August 2001): http://www.press.umich.edu/jep/07-01/bergman.html  
18 “More about the eScholarship Repository” available at 
http://repositories.cdlib.org/escholarship/more_about.html 
19 eScholarship author agreement: http://repositories.cdlib.org/assets/author.doc and Repository benefits: 
http://repositories.cdlib.org/escholarship/benefits.html 
20 Open Archives Initiative Service Providers: http://www.openarchives.org/service/listproviders 
21 John Ewing, “Predicting the Future of Scholarly Publishing” The Mathematical Intelligencer 25, no. 2 
(2003): 3. 
22 NASA Astrophysics Data System [http://adswww.harvard.edu/]; Human Genome Project Genomic 
Sequence Assembly Process [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/guide/build.html] and Human Genome 
Project LocusLink Collaborators [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/collaborators.html]; Stanford 
Public Information Retrieval System (SPIRES) Collaboration High-Energy Physics Databases 
[http://www.slac.stanford.edu/spires/] 
23 “The Internet has in the most recent years been becoming an integral part of this so-called ecology of 
knowledge…” p. 1, Johan Bollen, “Adaptive Hypertext Networks that Learn the Common Semantics of 
their Users” available at http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/papers/namurart.html  
24 Burton Richter, “Exciting Things Happen @ your library®” Chronicle of Higher Education (April 2, 
2002) full page advertisement.  Available at 
http://www.ala.org/Content/NavigationMenu/ACRL/Issues_and_Advocacy1/Marketing_@_Your_Library/
chroniclead3.pdf 
25 Judith A. Harper “citation Inaccuracy in a Scientific Journal: A Continuing Issue” Science & Technology 
Libraries 20, no. 4 (2001):39-44. 
26 Private communication from APS Editorial staff and Michael Peskin, SLAC, Stanford University. 
27 However, sometimes, such collaboration can slightly backfire.  When preprints were added into the 
database before the arXiv.org was invented, SPIRES database users quickly became accustomed to not 
having access to the latest week of papers until each Friday, when the new records became available and 
were sent out first in paper and then as electronic lists to eager physicists all over the world.  Once they 
started self-publishing to the e-print archive, authors posted papers any time of the day or night.  After 
midnight each night, archive software produced a list of the latest 24-hours of posted papers which was 
then sent out to listserv subscribers.  Physicists receiving the listing of the prior day’s papers assumed they 
were fully accessible.  In fact, the “References” list for each paper was not allowed to be an active link until 
it was reviewed by a SLAC cataloger.  Both the e-print archives and the SLAC library received many 
complaints from irate physicists who wanted active links to all the referenced papers first thing in the 
morning.  Irritated by the complaints, Ginsparg began returning a message driven by a piece of code that 
said: “This record is 0.002 days old, the SLAC Library has not had time to process it.” His software would, 
in the high-precision tradition of particle physics, calculate the exact time since ‘birth’ of each paper and 
return accurate data to the complaining user! 

 

16

                                                                                                                                                 
28 SLAC Archives and History Office, “The Early World Wide Web at SLAC: Documentation of the Early 
World Wide Web at SLAC (1991-1994) available at 
http://www.slac.stanford.edu/history/earlyweb/history.shtml  
29 Tim Berners-Lee with Mark Fischetti, Weaving the Web: The Original Design and Ultimate Destiny of 
the World Wide Web by its Inventor.  New York: HarperCollins, 1999, p. 45 & 46. 
30 Currently, searches of the SPIRES Research Literature database (from all sites) average 30,000 per day. 

 

17

