Brief Report: submitted to Physical Review E

Title: Interactions Between Stably Rolling Leukocytes In Vivo

Authors:

Michael R. King, Aimee D. Ruscio, Michael B. Kim

Department of Biomedical Engineering

University of Rochester

Rochester, NY 14642

Department of Pharmacology & Physiology

Ingrid H. Sarelius

University of Rochester

Rochester, NY 14642

Abstract:

We have characterized the two-dimensional spatial dependence of the hydrodynamic

interactions between two adhesively rolling leukocytes in a live venule in the mouse

cremaster muscle. Two rolling leukocytes were observed to slow each other down when

rolling together in close proximity, due to mutual sheltering from the external blood flow

in the vessel lumen. These results are in agreement with a previous study of leukocyte

rolling interactions using carbohydrate-coated beads in a parallel-plate flow chamber and

a detailed computer model of adhesion in a multicellular environment.

PACS codes: 87.19.Tt, 87.18.-h, 47.15.Pn.

Main text:

The slow rolling motion of leukocytes (white blood cells) along the vessel wall in post-

capillary venules is necessary step in the cellular immune reponse [1]. The dynamics of

leukocyte rolling, as controlled by the kinetics of selectin-carbohydrate bond dissociation

and other factors, has been mostly studied in flow chamber systems at very dilute

concentrations of cells [2]. However, in vivo, leukocyte adhesion with the vessel wall

occurs in the presence of a dense suspension of blood cells. The effects of the

surrounding suspension of cells on leukocyte adhesion to the endothelium have not been

fully elucidated. In previous studies we have begun to determine these effects by

formulating a computational model of cell-surface interactions under flow in a

multicellular environment, that fuses a stochastic simulation of receptor-ligand binding

with a rigorous boundary elements calculation of suspension flow at zero Reynolds

number [3]. The multiparticle adhesive dynamics (MAD) simulation agrees quite well

with flow chamber experiments using carbohydrate-coated beads rolling on a purified P-

selectin surface [3-5]. One of the main results of this work has been to demonstrate that a

leukocyte will roll at a lower velocity when in close proximity to another rolling

leukocyte. Ref. 3 shows the spatial dependence of this effect in both the flow (x) and

transverse (y) directions, since in the flow chamber experiments the entire substrate

surface is viewed from below. Recently, we have shown that some of these

hydrodynamic effects may be observed in live hamster microvessels [6]. By taking

midplane cross-sections of straight, unbranched vessels to produce a side-view of

leukocyte-wall interactions, we were able to show a correlation between leukocyte rolling

velocity and the distance between rolling leukocytes in the flow direction only. A

decrease in rolling velocity with decreasing cell-cell separation was observed, in

agreement with a 1/r hydrodynamic scaling and in qualitative agreement with previous

microsphere and computational results.

In this Brief Report we describe new experiments in anesthetized mice, in which the

upper wall of large (~40 µm diameter) post-capillary venules was focused on. This

produced a top-view of an approximately planar surface near the center of the region, and

the relative x-y positions of rolling leukocytes can be measured. Thus, the fully two-

dimensional spatial relationship of leukocyte-leukocyte hydrodynamic interactions as

predicted in Ref. 3 could be tested in a live animal vessel. Indeed, we show that the two-

dimensional map of rolling velocities of pairs of rolling leukocytes is in good qualitative

agreement with our previous report.

All protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the

University of Rochester. Male C57BL/6J mice weighing 28 to 32g and older than 8

weeks were used for these experiments. Animals were anesthetized with an initial dose of

sodium pentobarbital (75mg/kg ip) and maintained with supplemental i.v. doses as

needed. Anesthetic level was monitored by observing withdrawal reflexes initiated by toe

or tail pinch. Body temperature was maintained by placing the animal on a glass heating

coil connected to a water circulator set at 37°C. The animal was tracheotomized to

establish a patent airway and a catheter (PE tubing) was placed in the right jugular vein

for delivery of anesthetic. The right cremaster muscle was prepared for in situ

microscopy as previously described [7]. The tissue was superfused with a bicarbonate

buffered salt solution throughout the surgical preparation and subsequent observation.

The superfusate was maintained at physiological temperature (36±0.5°C) and equilibrated

with gas containing 5% CO2 and 95% N2 to maintain physiological pH (7.40±0.05). At

the end of the experiment, the animal was euthanized by i.v. injection of a lethal dose of

anesthetic. The upper wall of post capillary venules of ~40 µm in diameter was observed

using an Olympus BX50WI microscope equipped with a water immersion objective

(Olympus LumPlanflo 40X, 0.80 NA).

Following the surgical procedure to exteriorize the mouse cremaster muscle tissue, mild

inflammation consistent with P-selectin-mediated adhesion was observed. Figure 1 shows

digitized video images of pairs of rolling leukocytes in a typical vessel. Only pairs of

rolling leukocytes far from other cells were used in our measurements, to focus on binary

leukocyte-leukocyte interactions. The center-to-center separation distance in the flow (x)

and transverse (y) directions was measured for each pair, as well as the translational

rolling velocity of each cell from successive video frames. Time intervals of 0.2-1 s were

used to determine cell velocities, with each cell producing ~5 velocity measurements, for

a total of 1500 values.

Figure 2 shows the two-dimensional map of leukocyte rolling velocity for the 150 cell

pairs tracked in the mouse venule. The wall shear rate in this vessel was determined to be

220 s−1, by tracking the motion of fluorescent tracer particles as described previously [8].

Velocities are plotted as function of the separation distance between the two cells that

comprise each cell pair. As can be seen from the blue region of low velocity, when two

cells are close to one another the average rolling velocity is reduced by a factor of two as

compared to the average velocity for isolated cells (30 vs. 60 µm/s). Furthermore, this

effect is more pronounced when the cells are aligned in the direction of flow, as opposed

to two cells rolling side-by-side which translate at a somewhat higher velocity of 40 µm/s

on average. For cell pairs separated by 4 cell radii (16 µm), the rolling velocity is equal to

55 µm/s, or ~90% of the isolated cell velocity.

The spatial dependence of hydrodynamic interactions between rolling leukocytes, as

indicated in Figure 2, is in complete agreement with our previous work using 10.8 µm

sialyl LewisX-coated microspheres rolling on a P-selectin surface, as well as the detailed

MAD simulation of concentrated cell rolling. This phenomenon is due to each spherical

leukocyte reducing the drag force on each other, by creating a disturbance flow that

decays as 1/r from each tethered cell. This Brief Report thus represents the first

demonstration that the two-dimensional spatial dependence of leukocyte interactions as

predicted by MAD is in fact measurable in real in vivo microvessels. The biological

implication of these results is that as leukocytes accumulate at a site of inflammation,

there will be a collective physical effect acting to slow their progress through the

circulation. Future work with these experimental and computational models of cellular

interactions will fully determine the effects that the multicellular nature of whole blood

has on leukocyte recruitment and adhesion.

Acnowledgement:

This work was supported by NIH Grant HL018208.

[1] M. B. Lawrence and T. A. Springer, Cell 65, 859 (1991).

[2] M. B. Lawrence, in Physiology of Inflammation, edited by K. Ley (Oxford Univ.

References:

     Press, 2001).

[3] M. R. King and D. A. Hammer, Biophys. J. 81, 799 (2001).

[4] M. R. King, S. D. Rodgers and D. A. Hammer, Langmuir 17, 4139 (2001).

[5] M. R. King and D. A. Hammer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 14919 (2001).

[6] M. R. King, M. B. Kim, I. H. Sarelius and D. A. Hammer, Microcirc. 10, 401 (2003).

[7] S. Baez, Microvasc. Res. 5, 384 (1973); I. H. Sarelius, D. N. Damon, and

     B. R. Duling, Am. J. Physiol. 241, H317 (1981).

[8] M. B. Kim and I. H. Sarelius, Microcirc. 10, 167 (2003).

Figure Captions:

Figure 1. Digitized video images of leukocytes rolling on the upper wall of a 40 µm

venule in mouse cremaster muscle. A. and C. show pairs of cells with center-to-center

separation distances of (∆x,∆y) = (16,5.5) and (1,10) µm, respectively. For comparison,

the diameter of each leukocyte is about 8 µm. B. defines the coordinate system.

Figure 2. Map of rolling velocities of pairs of leukocytes in a live post-capillary venule

of diameter 40 µm in an anesthetized mouse. The average rolling velocity is plotted

versus the center-to-center separation distance between the two cells in the flow (x) and

transverse (y) directions. The red box in the upper right corner of the graph represents the

average rolling velocity of isolated leukocytes (N = 8) in the same vessel.

Figure 1.

M.R. King et al.

Figure 2.

M.R. King et al.

