 

1

Time and Classical and Quantum Mechanics: Indeterminacy vs. Discontinuity  
 
1
 
 Peter Lynds

                                                                         

Time, Classical Mechanics, Quantum Mechanics, Indeterminacy, Discontinuity, Relativity, 
Cosmology, Imaginary Time, Chronons, Zeno(cid:146)s Paradoxes. 
 
It is postulated there is not a precise static instant in time underlying a dynamical physical process at which 
the  relative  position  of  a  body  in  relative  motion  or  a  specific  physical  magnitude  would  theoretically  be 
precisely determined. It is concluded it is exactly because of this that time (relative interval as indicated by a 
clock)  and  the  continuity  of  a  physical  process  is  possible,  with  there  being  a  necessary  trade  off  of  all 
precisely  determined  physical  values  at  a  time,  for  their  continuity  through  time.  This  explanation  is  also 
shown  to  be  the  correct  solution  to  the  motion  and  infinity  paradoxes,  excluding  the  Stadium,  originally 
conceived  by  the  ancient  Greek  mathematician  Zeno  of  Elea.  Quantum  Cosmology,  Imaginary  Time  and 
Chronons are also then discussed, with the latter two appearing to be superseded on a theoretical basis.  

 

 
1. Introduction   
 
   Time  enters  mechanics  as  a  measure  of  interval,  relative  to  the  clock  completing  the  measurement. 
Conversely, although it is generally not realized, in all cases a time value indicates an interval of time, 
rather than a precise static instant in time at which the relative position of a body in relative motion or a 
specific  physical  magnitude  would  theoretically  be  precisely  determined.  For  example,  if  two  separate 
events are measured to take place at either 1 hour or 10.00 seconds, these two values indicate the events 
occurred  during  the  time  intervals  of  1  and  1.99999(cid:133)hours  and  10.00  and  10.0099999(cid:133)seconds, 
respectively.  If  a  time  measurement  is  made  smaller  and  more  accurate,  the  value  comes  closer  to  an 
accurate  measure  of  an  interval  in  time  and  the  corresponding  parameter  and  boundary  of  a  specific 
physical  magnitudes  potential  measurement  during  that  interval,  whether  it  be  relative  position, 
momentum, energy or other. Regardless of how small and accurate the value is made however, it cannot 
indicate  a  precise  static  instant  in  time  at  which  a  value  would  theoretically  be  precisely  determined, 
because there is not a precise static instant in time underlying a dynamical physical process. If there were, 
all physical continuity, including motion and variation in all physical magnitudes would not be possible, 
as they would be frozen static at that precise instant, remaining that way. Subsequently, at no time is the 
relative  position  of  a  body  in  relative  motion  or  a  physical  magnitude  precisely  determined,  whether 
during a measured time interval, however small, or at a precise static instant in time, as at no time is it not 
constantly changing and undetermined. Thus, it is exactly due to there not being a precise static instant in 
time  underlying  a  dynamical  physical  process,  and  the  relative  motion  of  body  in  relative  motion  or  a 
physical  magnitude  not  being  precisely  determined  at  any  time,  that  motion  and  variation  in  physical 
magnitudes is possible: there is a necessary trade off of all precisely determined physical values at a time, 
for their continuity through time.      
    In  the  present  report  this  simple  but  very  counter-intuitive  conclusion  is  developed  and  explored  in 
further  detail  and  its  general  implications  have  important  significance  to  time  and  its  relationship  to 
classical  and  quantum  mechanics,  while  also  providing  an  insight  into  the  reason  and  purpose  for 
indeterminacy and uncertainty in nature. An overview of the main theoretical results reported, presented 
in the numerical order in which they later appear follows: (3) A body (micro and macroscopic) in relative 
motion does not have a precisely determined relative position at any time, and all physical magnitudes are 
not  precisely  determined  at  any  time,  although  with  the  parameter  and  boundary  of  their  respective 
position  and  magnitude  being  determinable  up  to  the  limits  of  possible  measurement  as  stated  by  the 
,  but  with  this  indeterminacy  in 
general  quantum  hypothesis  and  Heisenberg(cid:146)s  uncertainty  principle
precise  value not  being a  consequence  of  h  and  quantum  uncertainty.  This  illustrates  that  in relation  to 
indeterminacy  in  precise  physical  magnitude,  the  micro  and  macroscopic  are  inextricably  linked,  both 
being a part of the same parcel, rather than just a case of the former underlying and contributing to the 
latter.  (3.1)  The  explanation  provided  is  then  also  shown  to  be  the  correct  solution  to  the  motion  and 
infinity paradoxes, excluding the Stadium, originally conceived by the ancient Greek mathematician Zeno 
of Elea. (4) It is not necessary for time to (cid:147)emerge(cid:148) and (cid:147)congeal(cid:148) out of the (cid:147)quantum foam(cid:148) and highly 

(1)

                                                          
1
 c/- 21 Oak Avenue, Paremata, Wellington, New Zealand. PeterLynds@xtra.co.nz : http://www.peterlynds.net.nz 

 

2

)

1/2

(2-7)

(2, 3, 5-7)

3
  just  after  the  big  bang  (new 
contorted  space-time  geometry(cid:146)s  present  preceding  Planck  scale  (Gh/c
  Continuity  would  be 
inflationary  model),  as  has  often  previously  been  tentatively  hypothesized.
present  and  naturally  inherent  in  practically  all  initial  quantum  states  and  configurations,  rather  than  a 
specific few, or special one, regardless of how microscopic the scale. (4.1) Furthermore, the cosmological 
 is not compatible with a consistent physical description, both, as a 
proposal of (cid:147)Imaginary Time(cid:148),
consequence  of  the  above  consideration,  and  secondly,  because  it  is  the relative  order  of  events  that is 
relevant, not the direction of time itself. As a consequence, it is not possible for the order of a sequence of 
events  to  be  imaginary  (at right  angles) relative  to  another sequence  of  events.  (5)  Lastly,  (cid:147)Chronons(cid:148), 
 also appear to be superseded on a theoretical basis, 
proposed particles of indivisible intervals of time,
as  their  possible  existence  is  incompatible  with  the  simple  conclusion  that  the  very  reason  physical 
continuity is possible in the first instance is due to there not being a quantum or atom of time.   
    Before proceeding further however, I think it is important to stress that although I have attempted to be 
as  quantitative  and  rigorous  as  possible,  the  subject  of  time  does  not  readily  lend  itself  to  such  a 
description, particularly in the context in which it is treated here, and readers may initially find that they 
will  need  to  really  grapple  with  the  contents  before  they  are  able  to  achieve  a  clear  and  genuine 
understanding. I apologize for this, but I can find no other way  of  conveying the same information and 
laying the initial foundations for the physics that subsequently follow, of which, in relation to importance, 
I consider to quite easily outweigh any undesirable, although unavoidable and necessary aspects  of this 
paper.       
 
  
2. Motion and Continuity 

(2, 8)

 
    We  begin  by  considering  the  simple  and innocuous  postulate:  (cid:145)there  is not  a  precise  static  instant in 
time underlying a dynamical physical process.(cid:146) If there were, the relative position of a  body in relative 
motion  or a  specific  physical  magnitude,  although  precisely  determined  at  such  a precise  static  instant, 
would also by way of logical necessity be frozen static at that precise static instant. Furthermore, events 
and  all  physical  magnitudes  would  remain  frozen  static,  as  such  a  precise  static  instant  in  time  would 
remain frozen static at the same precise static instant. (Incidentally, the same outcome would also result if 
such  a  precise  static  instant  were  hypothetically  followed  by  a  continuous  sequence  of  further  precise 
static instants in time, as by their very nature a precise static instant in time does not have duration over 
interval in time, so neither could a further succession of them. This scenario is not plausible however in 
the first instance, as the notion of a continuous progression of precise static instants in time is obviously 
not  possible  for  the  same  reason).  Rather  than  facilitating  motion  and  physical  continuity,  this  would 
perpetuate a constant precise static instant in time, and as is the very nature of this ethereal notion i.e. a 
physical process frozen static at an (cid:145)instant(cid:146), as though stuck on pause or freeze frame on a motion screen, 
physical  continuity  is  not  possible  if  such  a  discontinuous  chronological  feature  is  an  intrinsic  and 
inherent  property  of  a  dynamical  physical  process,  and  as  such,  a  meaningful  (and  actual  physical) 
indicator  of  a  time  at  which  the  relative  position  of  a    body  in  relative  motion  or  a  certain  physical 
magnitude  is  precisely  determined,  as  has  historically  been  assumed.  That  is,  it  is  the  human  observer 
who  subjectively  projects,  imposes  and  assigns  a  precise  instant  in  time  upon  a  physical  process,  for 
example, in order to gain a meaningful subjective picture or (cid:145)mental snapshot(cid:146) of the relative position of a 
body in relative motion.  
    As a natural consequence of this, if there is not a precise static instant in time underlying a dynamical 
physical  process,  there  is  no  physical  progression  or  flow  of  time,  as  without  a  continuous  and 
chronological progression through definite indivisible instants of time over an extended interval in time, 
there can be no progression. This may seem somewhat counter-intuitive, but it is exactly what is required 
by nature to enable time (relative interval as indicated by a clock), motion and the continuity of a physical 
process  to  be  possible.  Intuition  also  seems  to  suggest  that  if  there  were  not  a  physical  progression  of 
time, the entire universe would be  frozen motionless at an instant, again as though stuck on pause on a 
motion screen. But if the universe were frozen static at such a static instant, this would be a precise static 
instant of time: time would be a physical quantity. Thus, it is then due to natures very exclusion of a time 
as a fundamental physical quantity, that time as it is measured in physics (relative interval), and as such, 
motion and physical continuity are indeed possible. 
    It might also be argued in a more philosophical sense that a general definition of static would entitle a 
certain physical magnitude as being unchanging for an extended interval of time. But if this is so, how 
then could time itself be said to be  frozen static at a precise instant if to do so also demands it must be 

 

3

unchanging for an extended interval of time? As a general and sensible definition this is no doubt correct, 
as we live in a world where indeed there is interval in time, and so for a certain physical magnitude to be 
static and unchanging it would naturally also have to remain so for an extended duration, however short.  
There  is  something  of  a  paradox  here  however.  If  there  were  a  precise  static  instant  underlying  a 
dynamical  physical  process,  everything,  including  clocks  and  watches  would  also  be  frozen  static  and 
discontinuous, and as such, interval in time would not be possible  either. There could be no interval in 
time for a certain physical magnitude to remain unchanging.  Thus this general definition of static breaks 
down  when  the  notion  of  static  is  applied  to  time  itself.  We  are  so  then  forced  to  search  for  a  revised 
definition  of  static  for  this  special  temporal  case.  This  is  done  by  qualifying  the  use  of  stasis  in  this 
particular  circumstance  by  noting  static  and  unchanging,  with  static  and  unchanging  as  not  being  over 
interval,  as  there  could  be  no  interval  and nothing  could  change  in  the  first  instance.  At  the  same  time 
however, it should also be enough just to be able to recognize and acknowledge the fault and paradox in 
the definition when applied to time.  
    It  might also  be  argued  by  analogy  with  the  claim  by  some  people  that  the  so-called  ’block  universe 
model(cid:146),  i.e.  a  4-dimensional  model  of  physical  reality,  incorporating  time  as  well  as  space,  is  static  or 
unchanging. This claim however involves the common mistake of failing to recognize that unless there is 
another time dimension, it simply doesn’t make sense to say that the block universe is static, for there is 
no ’external’ time interval over which it remains the same. If we then apply the same line of reasoning to 
the hypothetical case being discussed presently, we could say: It doesn’t make sense to say that everything 
would be static at an instant, (with physical continuity and interval in time not being possible), as there 
would be no time interval for such an assertion to be relative to, referenced from, or over which such an 
instant would remain the same etc. This objection is valid.  However, as it applies to the hypothetical case 
under  investigation,  it  should  also  be  clear  that  it  is  not  any  more  applicable  or  relevant  than  being  a 
semantical problem of the words one employs to best try to put across a point and as being a contradiction 
in  terms,  rather  than  pertaining  to  any  contradiction  in  the  actual  (in  this  case,  hypothetical)  physics 
involved. One could certainly also assert that there were no interval in time, and so if one wishes, there 
were a precise static instant underlying a physical process, without it being dependent on there actually 
being interval: as is the case with the hypothetical absence of mass and energy, and the resulting absence 
of 3 spatial dimensions.  
    It  is  also  important  to  note  this  conclusion  is  compatible  with  the  dynamical  manner  in  which  time 
enters the equations, geometry and description of the universe in Albert Einstein(cid:146)s theories, special and 
  It  is  relative  interval  as  measured  by  all  clocks  (whether  digital,  atomic,  light, 
general  relativity.
biological  or  other)  that  is  warped  and  mutable  at  relativistic  velocities  and  in  the  spatial  vicinity  of 
gravity,  not  any  physical  progression  of  time.  Indeed,  it  could  be  said  it  is  due  to  there  not  being  a 
physical  instant and  physical  progression  of  time,  that  the continuity,  propagation and  constant relative 
velocity  of  electromagnetic  radiation,  and  thus,  a  warping  of  relative  duration  is  possible  in  the  first 
instance.  Subsequently,  this  conclusion  is  also  consistent  and  compatible  with  Minkowski  space-time: 
time as a dimensional representation applies to the universe: the universe is not in time. Likewise, space 
is in the universe: the universe is not in a region of space. Time (the dimension) takes space, and space 
(the  dimensions)  take  time, and  space-time  is  independent and  unaffected  by  the  absence  of  a  physical 
instant  and  physical  progression  of  time.  To  the  contrary,  as  many  readers  will  be  aware,  Minkowski 
space-time  also  illustrates  time  to  be  a  derivative  notion,  not  actually  (cid:145)flowing(cid:146)  as  our  subjective 
conscious perceptions often seem to suggest. 

(9)

 

 
3. Time and Classical and Quantum Mechanics: Indeterminacy vs. Discontinuity 
 
    The absence  of a precise static instant in time underlying a dynamical physical process means that a 
body (micro and macroscopic) in relative motion does not have a precisely determined relative position at 
any  time,  and  that  all  physical  magnitudes  are not  precisely  determined  at any  time,  although  with  the 
parameter and boundary of their respective position and magnitude being determinable up to the limits of 
, but with this indeterminacy in precise value 
possible measurement as stated by the quantum hypothesis
not  being  a  consequence  of  h  and  quantum  uncertainty.  The  reason  why  can  be  demonstrated  by 
employing Albert Einstein(cid:146)s famous 1905 train and the other theoretical device it is associated with, the 
thought experiment. An observer is watching a train traveling by containing a young Albert Einstein.  At 
any given time as measured by a clock held by the observer, Einstein(cid:146)s train is in motion. If the observer 
measures the train to pass a precisely designated point on the track at 10.00 seconds, this value indicates 

(1)

 

4

the  train  passes  this  point  during  the  measured  time  interval  of  10.00  and  10.00999(cid:133)seconds.  As 
Einstein(cid:146)s train is in motion at all measured times, regardless of how great or small its velocity and how 
small  the  measured  time  interval  (i.e.  10.0000000-10.0000000999...seconds),  Einstein(cid:146)s  train  does  not 
have a precisely determined relative position to the track at any time, because it is not stationary at any 
time while in motion, for to have a precisely determined relative position at any time, the train would also 
need  to  be  stationary  relative  to  the  track  at  that  time.  Conversely,  the  train  does  not  have  a  precisely 
determined  relative  position  at  an  ethereal  precise  static  instant  in  time,  because  there  is  not  a  precise 
static  instant in time  underlying the  trains motion.  If  there were,  Einstein(cid:146)s trains motion  would not  be 
possible. 
    As the time interval measurement is made smaller and more accurate, the corresponding position the 
train  can  be  said  to  (cid:145)occupy(cid:146)  during  that  interval  can  also  be  made  smaller  and  more  accurate.  
 and time keeping restrictions, these measurements could hypothetically be 
,
T
Momentarily forgetting L
P
P

 

-21

(cid:150)25

s Einstein(cid:146)s train traverses the distance of 2.7

made almost infinitesimally small, but the train does not have a precisely determined position at any time 
as it is in motion at all times, regardless of how small the time interval. For example, at 100km/hr, during 
cm. Thus, it is exactly due to the train 
the interval of 10
not  having  a  precisely  determined  relative  position  to  the  track  at  any  time,  whether  during  a  time 
interval, however small, or at a precise static instant in time, that enables Einstein(cid:146)s train to be in motion. 
Moreover,  this is not  associated  with the  preciseness  of  the  measurement,  a  question  of  re-normalizing 
infinitesimals  or  the  result  of  quantum  uncertainty,  as  the  trains  precise  relative  position  is  not  to  be 
gained by applying infinitely small measurements, nor is it smeared away by quantum considerations. It 
simply does not have one. There is a very significant and important difference.   
    If a photograph is taken (or any other method is employed) to provide a precise measurement of the 
trains  relative  position  to  the  track,  in  this  case  it  does  appear  to  have  a  precisely  determined  relative 
position to the track in the picture, and although it may also be an extremely accurate measure of the time 
interval during which the train passes this position or a designated point on the track, the imposed time 
measurement  itself  is  in  a  sense  arbitrary  (i.e.  0.000000001  second,  1  second,  1  hour  etc),  as  it  is 
impossible to provide a time at which the train is precisely in such a position, as it is not precisely in that 
or  any  other  precise  position  at  any  time.  If  it  were,  Einstein(cid:146)s  train  would  not,  and  could  not  be  in 
motion.  
    On a microscopic scale, due to inherent molecular, atomic and subatomic motion and resulting kinetic 
energy, the particles that constitute the photograph, the train, the tracks, the light radiation that propagates 
from  the  train  to  the  camera,  as  well  as  any  measuring  apparatus  e.g.  electron  microscope,  clock, 
yardstick etc, also do not have precisely determined relative position(cid:146)s at any time. Naturally, bodies at 
rest in a given inertial reference frame, which are not constituted by  further smaller particles in relative 
motion,  have  a  precisely  defined  relative  position  at  all  measured  times.  However,  as  this  hypothetical 
special  case  is  relevant  to  only  indivisible  and  the  most  fundamental  of  particles,  whose  existence  as 
independent  (cid:145)massive(cid:146)  objects  is  presently  discredited  by  quantum  physics  and  the  intrinsic  (cid:145)smearing(cid:146) 
effects  of  wave-particle  duality  and quantum  entanglement,  if  consistent  with these  considerations,  this 
special  subatomic  case  would  not  appear  to  be  applicable.  Furthermore,  and  crucially,  as  we  shall  see 
shortly, because once granted indeterminacy in precise relative position of a body in relative motion, also 
subsequently means indeterminacy in all precise physical magnitudes, including gravity, this also applies 
to  the  very  structure  of  space-time,  the  dynamic  framework  in  which  all  inertial  spatial  and  temporal 
judgments of relative position are based. As such, the previously mentioned possible special case, isn(cid:146)t 
actually one, and the very same applies.  
    Consequently, the absence of a precise static instant in time underlying a dynamical physical process 
and the resulting lack of a precisely determined relative position at all times, but with the parameter and 
boundary  of  the  position  (cid:147)occupied(cid:148)  being  determinable  up  to  the  limits  of  the  time  interval  and  the 
corresponding position measurement, similarly applies to all physical magnitudes and values at all times: 
if  displacement  (relative  position)  d  of  a  body  in  relative  motion  is not  precisely  determined  at time  t, 
neither is  a  velocity  v=∆d/∆t,  so  neither  is momentum  p=mv,  acceleration  a=∆v/∆t,  g,  all rotational and 
angular  kinematic  magnitudes  e.g.  angular  momentum,  L=Iw  etc,  wave  speed  c,  frequency  (cid:131), 
2
+v)ψ=ih ∂ψ/∂t, 
wavelength λ, period T, kinetic energy E
current  I=Qt,  and  so,  charge  Q=I/t,  voltage  V=E/Q  etc,  time  dilation  t=γt
/γ, 
relativistic mass and relativistic momentum p=γmv. Likewise, if p is not precisely determined, neither is 
, relativistic mass and c are not precisely determined, according to 
de Broglie(cid:146)s matter wave λ=h/p. If E
k

, Schrodinger(cid:146)s wave equation (- h

,  length  contraction  L=L
o
o

=1/2mv
k

2
, neither is rest mass and energy. If (cid:131) is not precisely determined, neither is radiation energy per 
E=mc
quantum E=h(cid:131). If m, a and r are not precisely determined, neither is Newton(cid:146)s universal gravitation F=G 

2
/2m ∇

2

5

 

(M

2
/r
m
2

1

),  force  F=ma,  so  neither  is  pressure  p=F/A,  electric  field  strength  E=F/Q,  impulse  F∆t=m∆v, 

torque T=Fx, work W=Fs, Fd, so neither is power P=W/t, E/t, Fv, VI etc. If m, g and relative position h 
are not precisely determined, neither is gravitational potential energy E
=mgh, and in conjunction with (cid:131), 

p

according to Einstein(cid:146)s general theory of relativity, neither is a precise interval of time as indicated by a 
clock under the influence of gravity, relative to another clock. Moreover, if v, (cid:131), E and m are not precisely 
determined, neither is any physical magnitude, and as this includes gravity, this also applies to the very 
structure of space-time. Crucially however, this universal indeterminacy in precise physical magnitude is 
not a consequence of h and quantum uncertainty.         
 
 
3.1 Newton and Zeno of Elea(cid:146)s Motion and Infinity Paradoxes 
 
    The only situation in which a physical magnitude would be precisely determined was if there  were a 
precise  static  instant  in  time  underlying a  dynamical  physical  process  and  as a  consequence  a  physical 
system were frozen static at that instant. In such a system an indivisible mathematical time value, e.g. 2s, 
would correctly represent a precise static instant in time, rather than an interval in time (as it is generally 
assumed to in the context of  calculus, and traceable  back to the likes of Galileo, and more specifically, 
Newton,  thus  guaranteeing  absolute  preciseness  in  theoretical  calculations  before  the  fact  i.e.  ∆d/∆t=v). 
Fortunately  this  is  not  the  case,  as  this  static  frame  would  include  the  entire  universe.  Moreover,  the 
universe(cid:146)s  initial  existence  and  progression  through  time  would  not  be  possible.  Thankfully,  it  seems 
nature has wisely traded certainty for continuity. 2  
    Another way to look at this is if a physical value were precisely determined at a precise instant in time, 
it could never change, as it would firstly have to proceed to another precise value. But before it could do 
this, it would  firstly have to proceed to half of that value. But before it could do this, it would have to 
proceed  to  half  of  that  value  again,  and  so  on,  and  so  on,  to  infinitum.  Thus,  in  this  manner  it  can  be 
demonstrated  that  if  a  physical  value  were  precisely  determined,  it  could  never  change.  There  is  a 
necessary  trade  off  of  between  certainty  at  a  time,  for  continuity  through  time.  Please  note  that  the 
explanation provided here and previously throughout this paper is also the correct solution to the motion 
and infinity paradoxes the Dichotomy, Achilles and the Tortoise, the Arrow, and their other more modern 
  That is, they all have the 
variations, originally conceived by the Greek mathematician, Zeno of Elea.
same  general  solution  through  such  reasoning  as  has  been  discussed  here,  and  are  not  distinct  and 
different problems requiring different and distinct proposed solutions as has historically been assumed. 3   
 
 
3.2  A Consistent Classical and Quantum Mechanical Description 
  
    In  relation  to  quantum  mechanics  then,  this  conclusion  illustrates  that  the  relationship  between h, 
wave-particle duality, quantum entanglement etc, and the constant indeterminacy in all precise physical 
values  due  to  the  absence  of  a  precise  static  instant  in time,  although indistinguishable  for  all  practical 
purposes  when  quantifying  the  overall  state  of  a  physical  system  at  a  microscopic  level,  are  in  fact 
separate and distinct variables, playing quite separate and distinct roles. As such, a revised and seemingly 
more  appropriate  description  is:  all  physical  magnitudes  are  not  ever  precisely  determined  due  to  the 
absence  of a precise static instant in time underlying a dynamically physical process, although with the 
parameter  and  boundary  of  the  their  respective  value  being  determinable  up  to  the  limits  of  possible 
 but with this 
measurement as stated by the quantum hypothesis and Heisenberg(cid:146)s uncertainty principle,
indeterminacy  in  precise  magnitude  not  being  a  consequence  of h  and  quantum  uncertainty.  Following 
with  the  introduction  of  uncertainty  and/or  statistics  in  quantum  values  due  to h,  wave-particle  duality, 
quantum entanglement etc. This illustrates that in relation to indeterminacy in precise physical magnitude, 
there  is  not  a  distinction  between  the  large  and  macroscopic  and  the  microscopic  realm  of  quantum 
mechanics,  in  the  sense  that  both,  the  micro  and  macroscopic,  are  directly  subject  to  inherent 
indeterminacy,  rather  than  just  a  case  of  the  former  underlying  and  contributing  to  the  latter.  In  this 
regard, they are both actually a part of the same parcel, being inextricably linked.   
                                                          
2 Please note that there is obviously no fault in the actual mathematics here, but rather in the historical assumption 
underlying them regarding determined physical magnitudes at a time and/or instant. 
3 For a detailed explanation of Zeno(cid:146)s paradoxes and their resolution, please see, Lynds, P. Zeno(cid:146)s Paradoxes: A 
Timely Solution, http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001197/ 

(10)

(1)

 

6

    I would suggest that there is possibly much more to be gleaned from the connection between quantum 
physics and the inherent need for physical continuity, and even go as far to speculate that the dependent 
relationship  may  be  the  underlying  explanation  for  quantum  jumping  and  with  static  indivisible 
mathematical time values directly related to the process of quantum collapse. Time will tell.4 

 
4. Time and Quantum Cosmology  

  

(2-7)

(2-7)

1/2
)

 
    Detailed calculations have been completed in the theoretical field of quantum cosmology in an attempt 
to  elucidate  how  time  may  have  (cid:147)emerged(cid:148)  and  (cid:147)congealed(cid:148)  out  of  the  (cid:145)quantum  foam(cid:146)  and  highly 
3
  just  after  the 
contorted  space-time  geometry(cid:146)s  and  chaotic  conditions  preceding  Planck  scale  (Gh/c
  More  specifically,  it  has  been  tentatively  hypothesized  that  it 
big  bang  (new  inflationary  model).
would require particularly special initial quantum configurations for the (cid:147)crystallization(cid:148) of time and the 
  This  conclusion  however, 
emergence  of  macroscopic  (non-quantum)  phenomena  to  be  possible.
illustrates that temporality wouldn(cid:146)t need to (cid:147)emerge(cid:148) at all, but would be present and naturally inherent 
in practically all initial quantum states and configurations, rather than a specific few, or special one, and 
regardless of how microscopic the scale.   
    As soon as there is any magnitude of space (as a property of mass-energy), you naturally get the time 
dimension by default.  If there is no mass-energy, there is no space-time. Because the reason continuity is 
possible is due to there not being a physical instant and physical progression of time, it is not necessary 
for time to (cid:147)emerge(cid:148) in the first instance. The more appropriate question remains: how can mass-energy, 
and  as  such,  space-time  emerge?,  simultaneously  bringing  continuity  with  it  due  to  the  absence  of  a 
physical instant and physical progression of time i.e. temporality or continuity would only be required to 
emerge  from  possible  initial  quantum  configurations,  states  or  histories  in  which  time  were  a  physical 
quantity.         
 
 
4.1 Imaginary Time  

1/2

(2, 3, 5-7)

 
    This  conclusion  is  also  not  consistent  with  the  cosmological  proposal  of  (cid:147)Imaginary  Time(cid:148)  and  (cid:147)no 
 both, as a consequence of the above consideration, and secondly, because it is 
boundary condition(cid:148),
the relative order of events that is relevant, not the direction of time itself. It is not possible to assert using 
a model of the universe that includes a description of the sum over histories or path integrals of the actual 
structure of space-time, that time goes in any direction, let alone at 90 degrees to real time or linear time 
and takes on some of the properties, or is identical to that of spatial dimensions at approximately Planck 
s, while still being bounded by the big bang (or possible big crunch, in a 
scale (Gh/c
now seemingly obsolete closed universe) singularities in real or linear time, but having no boundaries in 
imaginary time. Neither real nor imaginary time exist in a consistent physical description, as time does 
not go in any direction. 
    It is the relative order of events that is relevant, not the direction of time itself. The order of a sequence 
of events can take place in either one order relative to its reverse order, or in the reverse order, relative to 
the first. It is not possible for the order of a sequence of events to be imaginary in the mathematical sense 
as it is logically contradictory and meaningless to describe the order of a sequence of events as being at 
right angles relative to that of another sequence of events. The opposite to this could be posited for the 

cm, 10

 ~ 10

3
)

-43

-33

                                                          
4 Considerations to do with time discontinuity presented in this paper also have relation to similar investigations 
performed in the framework of p-adic mathematical physics. By using p-adic numbers, instead of continuous real 
numbers, we can get models (with p-adic noncontinuous time) that have both classical and quantum features. Please 
refer to:  
A. Y. Khrennikov, Non-Archimedean analysis:quantum paradoxes, dynamical systems and biological models. 
Kluwer Acad. Publishers, Dordreht, (1997). Especially Chapter 4. and pg. 164-166 on Heisenberg uncertainty 
relation. 
S. Albeverio and A. Y. Khrennikov, Representation of the Weyl group in spaces of square integrable functions with 
respect to p-adic valued Gaussian distributions. J. of Phys. A, v. 29, pg. 5515-5527, (1996). 
A. Y. Khrennikov, Ultrametric Hilbert space representation of quantum mechanics with a finite exactness. Found. of  
Physics, 26, No. 8, 1033-1054, (1996). 
 

 

7

relative  spatial  direction  of  events,  but  events  take  place  at  right  angles  relative  to  others  on  a  regular 
basis, and this has nothing to do with their direction, or the direction of time becoming imaginary.   
    The fact that imaginary numbers appear when computing space-time intervals and path integrals does 
not  facilitate  that  when multiplied  by  i,  that  time  intervals become  basically  identical  to  dimensions  of 
space. Imaginary numbers show up in space-time intervals when space and time separations are combined 
at near the speed of light, and spatial separations are small relative to time intervals. What this illustrates 
is  that  although  space  and  time  are  interwoven  in  Minkowski  space-time,  and  time  is  the  fourth 
dimension, time is not a spatial dimension: time is always time, and space is always  space, as those i(cid:146)s 
keep  showing  us.  There  is  always  a  difference.  If  there  is  any  degree  of  space,  regardless  of  how 
microscopic, there would appear to be inherent continuity i.e. interval in time.     
 
 
5. Chronons 
  
  are  also  not 
    (cid:147)Chronons(cid:148),  proposed  theoretical  particles  or  atoms  of  indivisible  intervals  of  time,
compatible with a consistent physical description. There is not a need for quantum or atomic indivisible 
time  operators  to  stitch  microscopic  events  together  to  facilitate  physical  continuity,  as  this  overall 
conclusion  illustrates  that the  very  reason  events  are  continuous  in  the  first  instance  is  due to  there  not 
being an atom or quantum of time. Simply, if there were, physical continuity, motion and time (relative 
interval) would not be possible.  
 
 
6. Conclusion 
  
    In  summary,  it  was  shown  there  is  a  necessary  trade  off  of  all  precisely  determined  physical 
magnitudes  and  values  at  a  time,  for  their  continuity  through  time,  although  with  the  parameter  and 
boundary  of  their  respective  magnitude  and  value  being  determinable  up  to  the  limits  of  possible 
 but with this indeterminacy in precise value not 
measurement as described by the quantum hypothesis,
being  a  consequence  of  h  and  quantum uncertainty.  This  illustrated  that  in relation to  indeterminacy  in 
precise  physical  magnitude,  the  macro  and  microscopic  are  inextricably  linked,  rather  than  being  a 
variable only directly associated with the quantum world. The explanation provided was also shown to be 
the correct solution to the motion and infinity paradoxes, excluding the Stadium, originally conceived by 
  It  is  not  necessary  for  time  to  (cid:147)emerge(cid:148)  from  the 
the  ancient  Greek  mathematician,  Zeno  of  Elea.
 and the proposals of 
scale,
(cid:147)quantum foam(cid:148) present just after the big bang at approximately (Gh/c
  have  been  shown  to  be  incompatible  with  a  consistent 
  and  (cid:147)Chronons(cid:148),
(cid:147)Imaginary  Time(cid:148),
physical description, and would appear to be superseded on a theoretical basis.   

(2,  3,  5-7)

(2,  8)

(2,  8)

(2-7)

1/2 

(9)

(1)

)

3

                 

Conversations  and  correspondence  with,  and  encouraging  words  received  from  J.  A.  Wheeler  of  Princeton,  A. 
Khrennikov of Sweden, J. J. C. Smart and H. Price of Australia, C. Grigson of New Zealand, A. P. French of MIT 
and B. Yigitoz of Canada are most gratefully acknowledged.  
 
References 
 
1.  J. A. Wheeler and W. H. Zureck (Eds.), Quantum Theory and Measurement. Princeton University                 
     Press (1983). 
2.  P. C. W. Davies, About Time: Einstein(cid:146)s Unfinished Revolution. Viking, London, (1995). 
3.  S. W. Hawking, Quantum Cosmology. In 300 years of Gravitation (ed. S. W. Hawking and W.  
     Israel), Cambridge University Press, (1997). 
4.  H. D. Zeh, The Physical Basis of the Direction of Time. Springer-Verlag. Berlin, 1989. 
5.  J. B. Hartle and S. W. Hawking, Wave function of the universe. Phys. Rev, D28, 2960, (1983). 
6.  S. W. Hawking, Black holes and baby universes. Bantam Press, UK, (1993). 
7.  T. Yulsman, Give peas a chance. Astronomy, September, p. 38, Kalmback Pub Co, WI, (1999). 
8.  K. J. Hsu, In search of a physical theory of time. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  
     of the United States Of America, V89, 10222(5), Nov 1, (1992). 
9.  A. Einstein, On the electrodynamics of moving bodies, reprinted in English in Einstein: A   
     Centenary Volume, ed. A. P. French, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass, (1979). 
10.  R. Morris, Achilles in the Quantum Universe. Redwood Books, Trowbridge, Wiltshire, (1997).  

 

