 
 
Light Concentrators for Borexino and CTF 

L. Oberauera,   C. Grieba,b,   F. von Feilitzscha,   I. Mannoc 

 
 
 

 
 
 
a) Technische Universität München, Fakultät für Physik, E15 
    James-Franck-Str., D-85747 Garching 
 
b) Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University 
    Physics Department, Robeson Hall 
    Blacksburg, Virginia 24061 
 
c) KFKI Research Institute for Particle and Nuclear Physics, 
   Hungarian Academy of Sciences, PO Box 49 
   H-1525 Budapest 
 
 

Abstract 

 
 
Light  concentrators  for  the  solar  neutrino  experiment  Borexino  and  the  Counting  Test 

Facility have been developed and constructed. This paper describes the technical goals, 

challenges  and  the  concepts  to  overcome  the  difficulties.  In  addition  results  of 

measurements  according  to  the  long-time  stability  in  different  media  are  reported. 

Results  of    gamma  spectroscopy  measurements  of  the  concentrators  are  presented  and 

the impact on the background in Borexino and CTF is discussed.   

Motivation and requirements 
 
 
Borexino is an experiment dedicated for rare-event neutrino physics at low energies (i.e. 

 

in  the  sub-MeV  range).  Solar  neutrino  spectroscopy  via  elastic  neutrino  electron 

scattering  is  the  main  goal  of  the  experiment.  Especially  it  is  of  interest  to  detect  the 

recoil  electron  spectrum  of  the  mono-energetic  (i.e.  861  keV)  solar  7Be-neutrinos. 

Target as well as detection medium are ~300t of a liquid scintillator. It consists of the 

1 

solvent  PC  (1-2-4  Trimethylbenzene)  and  the  additive  of  about  1.5  g/l  PPO  (2,5-

Diphenyloxazole). The light yield of this scintillator is ~ 104 photons for a beta-particle 

which deposits an energy of 1 MeV. The light is viewed by photomultipliers (PMs) with 

their sensitivities matched closely to the maximum of the light emission spectrum which 

is  at  ~390nm.  The  chosen  PPO  concentration  ensures  large  absorption  lengths  in  the 

interesting wavelength region. A detailed description of the properties of the scintillator 

and  the  PMs  is  given  in  [1].  An  overview  about  the  construction  of  the  Borexino 

detector as well as the background requirements is given in [2]. 

 For  Borexino  a  light  yield  as  high  as  possible  is  crucial.  Signature  of  the  7Be  recoil 

spectrum is a steep step-like function at the highest possible recoil energy of 660 keV. 

To  make  this  step  function  visible  against  background  events  an  energy  resolution  as 

good  as  possible  at  this  low  energy  is  mandatory.  In  addition  Borexino  will  apply 

position reconstruction of events by using information of the flight of time of photons 

registered in the individual PMs. In this way a fiducial inner volume can be defined and 

only  events  reconstructed  inside  (~100t)  are  counted  as  good  neutrino  candidates.  On 

the  other  hand  the  by  far  dominant  part  of  external  background  events  should  only 

create  signals  outside  this  volume.  This  external  background  may  arise  from  gamma 

decays  in  the  environment  of  the  experiment  (e.g.  from  the  rock  of  the  underground 

laboratory) or from the detector material (e.g. from the PMs) itself. In order to obtain a 

good rejection factor for such external background events a high light yield is necessary 

as  the  position  resolution  scales  with  the  square-root  of  the  number  of  photoelectrons 

measured.  A  third  motivation  to  aim  for  an  optimal  light  yield  comes  from  the 

background  contribution  which  may  be  expected  from  alpha-decays  occurring  in  the 

scintillator liquid. They stem from a -decays present in the radioactive U and Th-chains. 

As  the  alpha  events  are  quenched  in  a liquid scintillator by a factor ~10, most of  the 

multi-MeV  signals  fall  inside  the  region  of  interest  for  solar  7Be  neutrino  detection, 

2 

which is below ~800 keV [2]. Identification of alpha-events is possible via the analysis 

of  the pulse shape of the individual events. As for energy and position resolution also 

pulse  shape  analysis  depends  significantly  on  the  strength  of  the  signal,  i.e.  on  the 

number of photoelectrons. 

These  considerations  show,  that  an  optical  coverage  as  high  as  possible  is  desired. 

However, the total number of PMs used is restricted due to the fact that they contribute 

to  the  external  background  by  themselves.  Therefore  it  was  decided  to  equip  the  PMs 

with  light  concentrators which should allow a high light yield by keeping the external 

background 

low  enough 

to  ensure  solar  neutrino  measurements.  The  same 

considerations apply also the Counting Test Facility CTF of Borexino, where scintillator 

properties  can  be  studied  with  high  precision  [3].  The  geometry  as  well  as  the 

environmental medium in the CTF are completely different as in Borexino. In the CTF 

only  100  PMs  observe  the  light  from  a  scintillator  sphere  with  a  radius  of  ~1m.  In 

Borexino the concentrators are immersed in PC, an organic solvent, whereas in the CTF 

the  concentrators  are  immersed  in  deionized  water.  Hence  the  requirements  on  the 

materials as well as the geometric form is different for both cases. 

 The  main  specifications  for  the  concentrators  in  Borexino  are:  highly  efficient  light 

collection  uniformly  from  the  scintillator  region,  low  background  contribution 

(compared  to  other  detector  materials)  in  the  energy  spectrum  of  solar  neutrinos,  and 

long  term  stability  against  corrosion  in either PC or deionized water as environmental 

medium. 

 
Shape of the concentrators optimized for Borexino and CTF 
 
 
The  profile  of  the  light  guides  for  Borexino  and  CTF  is  designed  with  the  "string 

method''  (e.g.  [4]).  These  concentrators  collect  the  light  from  the  scintillation  vessel 

uniformly. The radius of the scintillator vessel in Borexino is 4.25 m and the front of the 

3 

PMs  are  6.52  m  far  from  the  center.  Light  emitted  from  the  scintillator  enters  a 

concentrator over a range of angles from zero degrees to some maximum angle d max. All 

photons entering with d  < d max  are directed, after one reflection at most, to the rim of 

the exit aperture (Fig. 1). Photons from other directions should therefore be not accepted 

by  the concentrator, a phenomenon that is intuitively appealing and works perfectly in 

two dimensions and nearly perfectly in three dimensions. The surface of the light guide 

is designed in such a way that it uniformly collects the light from a spherical effective 

volume  (r  =  4.45  m)  on  the  curved  photocathode  of  the  Thorn  EMI  9351  PM,  whose 

shape  is  a  spherical  section  (the  maximum  radius  of  the  cathode  is  9.5  cm  and  its 

curvature radius is 11.0 cm, the height of the spherical section is equal to 5.5 cm). The 

larger effective radius of 4.45 m was chosen to allow for small misalignments of both 

the PMs as well as the scintillator vessel. In two dimensions both the photocathode and 

the effective fiducial volume are circular. In the "string method'' the light ray, which is 

tangential to the effective volume, is directed into the extreme point of the exit aperture 

after  one  reflection  on  the  light  guide  profile  or  it  is  reflected  in  such  a  way  that  it  is 

tangential  to  the  photocathode  too  (Fig.  2).  One  may  design  the  profile  using  a  string 

whose length is constant (Fig. 2). The length of the string is determined by fixing one 

end of the string to an extreme point of the spherical effective fiducial volume, the other 

end is fixed to an extreme point of the photocathode. The length of the string is chosen 

so that it is taut when it is pulled to the other extreme point of the photocathode. The 

whole  string  consists  of  two  arches  and  one  straight  section.  Alike  to  the  so  called 

gardener's method of drawing an ellipse, one may draw the profile with a pencil keeping 

the string taut with it.  

The  calculated  transmission  curve  of  the  light  guide  is  shown  in  Fig.  3  for  three 

dimensions.  It  shows  the  collection  efficiency  of  the  concentrator  as  a  function  of  the 

angle of incidence d . The radius of the entry and exit apertures are 15,1cm and 9,5cm 

4 

respectively. The critical angle of incidence is ~44o (Fig. 3). The average reflectivity of 

the cone was chosen to be 86%. With this value the collection efficiency is ~0.88 within 

a wide range of d  and coincides with the experimentally observed value (see discussion 

below).    The  length  of  the  light  guide  was  reduced  due  to practical reasons to 23 cm. 

Hence, the distance between the center of the scintillator vessel and the PM (the plane 

which contains the maximum radius of the cathode) is 6.25 m. With this numbers one 

may calculate that the geometrical amplification factor for one PM with concentrator is 

2.9 compared to one without light guide. In Fig. 4 the average number of reflections for 

photons  as  a  function  of  the  angle  of incidence is depicted as calculated in a program 

which follows the track of each photon. The deviation from the ideal two-dimensional 

case, where the number of reflection is one, is clearly visible. 

In the CTF the distance from the PMs to the center of the detector is 3.3 m, the effective 

radius chosen is 1.2 m (the real radius of the scintillator sphere is ~1 m). Therefore the 

critical  angle  of  incidence  of  the  CTF  is  27o  only  and  the  shape  of  the  CTF-cones  is 

more  oblong  compared  to  the  Borexino  type.  With  a  length  of  57  cm  and  a  radius  of 

25,3 cm the geometrical amplification factor in the CTF for a single PM is ~10. This is 

the  reason  why  it  is  possible  to  study  in  the  CTF  the  properties  of  liquid  scintillators 

with  large  masses  of  ~4 to 5 tons at very low energy thresholds of about 20 keV (see 

discussion  below)  with  the  use  of  only  100  PMs  at  a  large  distance  (to  reduce 

background) of  3.3 m. 

In  Borexino  2214  PMs  are  installed,  1870    PMs  of  them  are  equipped  with 

concentrators. Hence, the total effective geometrical coverage is 29.8%. The motivation 

for  equipping  400  PMs  without  concentrators  is  to  improve  the  separation  power 

between  point  like  events  (e.g.  due  to  neutrinos)  and  the  signal  which  arises  due  to 

muon-tracks  in  the  buffer  region  [2]  which  can  produce  a  non-negligible  background 

contribution as observed in CTF-runs [5]. High energy muons which traverse the buffer 

5 

region create Cherenkov as well as scintillation photons (the latter is reduced due to the 

fact that there is no PPO present in the buffer liquid) along their tracks. Many of these 

photons  will  be  not  accepted  by  the  light  concentrators as the angle of incidence is  to 

large.  However,  PMs  without  cones  can observe those photons. Therefore the fraction 

of  photoelectrons  seen  by  PMs  with  cones  divided  by  the  number  observed  in  PMs 

without  cones  is  significantly  lower  for  muon  events  which  have  tracks  through  the 

buffer  region  as  compared  to  point  like  events  emerging  from  the  scintillator  region. 

The  number  of  PMs  with  and  without  concentrators  have  been  optimized  in  Monte-

Carlo calculations. 

Construction and reflectivity of the concentrators for Borexino and the CTF 
 
 
The  reflectivity  of  the  mirror's  surface  is  crucial  for  it's  function.  The  wavelength 

regime important for the detection of the scintillation photons in Borexino and CTF is at 

about 370nm to 450nm. This window is determined by the emission spectrum of PPO-

molecules and the efficiency function of the PMs. Within this wavelength band we have 

chosen  two  metals  to  act  as  reflective  layers:  aluminum  and  silver.  Both  have  a  bulk 

reflectivity of ~90% at around 400nm. Any other metal shows a significantly decreased 

reflectivity at this wavelength.  

As de-ionized, high purity water may corrode aluminum quite efficiently we decided to 

use silver as reflective layer for the CTF-concentrators. On the other hand silver reacts 

with  PC  and  the  surface  gets  a  purple  color.  Hence,  we  decided  to  use  aluminum  for 

Borexino. During the development of Borexino we found a procedure which allows to 

produce aluminum-cones which can also resist ultra-pure water for ~10 years (see text 

below).  This  development  was  important  as  it  allows  to  clean  the  installed  PMs  and 

cones with highly purified water after installation. In addition it allows to fill Borexino 

6 

first  with  water  and  then  later  to  replace  it  by  PC  which  may  have  certain  strategic 

advantages.  

 

Construction  of  CTF  concentrators:  The  bulk  material  chosen  are  UV-transparent 

acrylic plates with polished surfaces. The material was tested on radioactive impurities 

by gamma-spectroscopy with Ge-detectors. Only upper limits on U and Th in the range 

of 10-9 g/g were found. The measured values for natural K of ~10-7 g/g  are acceptable 

for the purpose of the CTF as the contribution of background events due to 40K gamma 

rays  with  1.46  MeV  at  this  level  is  negligible.  Due  to  the  massive  passive  shielding 

(water  in  the  CTF,  pure  PC  in  Borexino)  the  highly  penetrating  2.6  MeV  gamma 

emission  from  208Tl  is  the  most  dangerous  source  of  external  background.  As  208Tl 

occurs  in  the  lower  part  of  the  thorium-chain  the  Th-concentration  is  the  most  crucial 

parameter.  After  cutting,  the  plates  were  heated  in  an  oven  to  release  humidity.  Both 

surfaces  were  sheltered  with  a  removable  plastic  layer.  The  plates  were  shaped  by 

thermal deep drawing against a positive form which has the shape as calculated by the 

string method described in the chapter before. During this process only the inner layer 

of  the  plastic  was  removed.  The  outer  layer  still  shielded  the  surface  against  the 

exposure  of    radon  daughters  which  are  attached  to  air-molecules  in  form  of  aerosols 

and  dust.  After  the  drawing  process  the  cones  were  cut  on  both  ends  and  four  acrylic 

holders have been glued to each concentrator at the rim for linking the cone to the PM. 

All  cones  were  carefully  sealed  in  plastic  bags.  Only  just  before  the  evaporation  of 

silver onto the outer surface the plastic layers were removed. Thereafter a thin layer of 

copper  was  evaporated  onto  the  silver.  In  several  laboratory  tests  we  found  that  this 

double-layer shows very good properties concerning adhesion on acrylic plates as well 

as a strong resistance against corrosion in de-ionized water. In a final step a thin acrylic 

layer was sprayed on the outer surface for additional protection. The cost for one CTF-

7 

(cid:0)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:3)(cid:2)(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:10)(cid:12)(cid:11)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:8)(cid:15)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:18)(cid:10)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:16)(cid:9)(cid:14)(cid:8)(cid:14)(cid:22)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:16)(cid:9)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:24)(cid:22)(cid:11)(cid:6)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:24)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:28)(cid:18)(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:11)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:8)(cid:10)(cid:29)(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:11)(cid:6)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:11)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:28)(cid:18)(cid:28)(cid:9)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:16)(cid:9)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:20)(cid:30)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:8)(cid:16)(cid:9)(cid:24)(cid:8)(cid:28)(cid:9)(cid:31)! #"

concentrator was ~230

plus electronics. 

 
Long  term  stability  of  CTF  concentrators:  In  several  accelerated  aging  tests  in  the 

laboratory  the  long  term  stability  of  the  material  composition  of  the  cones  has  been 

tested.  These  accelerated  aging  tests  were  performed  using  de-ionized  water  with  the 

same quality as used in the CTF, but at higher temperatures. According to general laws 

of corrosion it is assumed that each increase of 10 degrees corresponds to a time factor 

of ~2. Indeed this relation was tested during the development of the Borexino cones and 

it was found to be valid in good approximation. The CTF concentrators were built in the 

detector  during  July  1994.  From  December  1994  until  March  1997  the  concentrators 

were used and no deterioration in the light yield in PMs which survived this period was 

observed.  After  emptying  the  CTF  tank  several  concentrators  were  replaced  by  new 

ones. The reason was the development of a thin gray layer on the outside. This of course 

had no impact at all on the light yield. Nevertheless we decided to exchange those cones 

with  new  types  which  have  an  additional  silver  layer  outside  instead  of  the  acrylic 

spray.  In  addition  some cones had scratches on the surface, presumably caused during 

the  installation  period.  The  concentrators  were  then  used  in  water  from  1999  until 

March  2001.  Again  no  deterioration  of  the  light  yield  was  observed.  After  the  CTF 

campaign where a new scintillator (PXE) was tested, the scintillator sphere (a thin nylon 

balloon)  was  destroyed  in  an  accident  during  the  water-emptying  of  the  CTF.  Many 

liters  of  PXE  (an  organic  solvent)  did  go  into  the  CTF-water  and  wetted  most  of  the 

concentrators which were placed on the lower hemisphere. Due to this contact basically 

all  of  these  cones  developed  several  cracks  within  a  few  days.  This  effect  was 

confirmed  in  laboratory  tests.  Many  of the CTF-cones could be fixed by gluing, some 

8 

had to be replaced by new concentrators. Since fall 2001 the CTF is running again and 

no deterioration of the concentrators and hence the light yield is observed.   

 

Construction  of  Borexino  concentrators  and  long  term  stability:  Due  to  the  obvious 

incompatibility  of  acrylic  glass  with  organic  solvents  the  Borexino  type  concentrators 

were  made  out  of  aluminum.  The  most  serious  problem  was  to  find  aluminum  pure 

enough concerning radioactive elements (especially in thorium), not too expensive and 

easily machinable. After we succeeded in finding the right species (see text below), thin 

3mm plates with smooth surfaces were produced. The forming of the round plates was 

done  in  a  spinning  process.  In  order  to  improve  the  smoothness  of  the  surface  the 

mirrors  have  been  mechanically  ground  and  polished  on  the  inside.  Afterwards  they 

were  anodized  in  several  steps  ~7m m  deep.  This  makes  them  extremely  inert  without 

reducing  the  reflectivity  too  much.  In  fact,  accelerated  aging  tests  showed  that  those 

concentrators have long life times even in de-ionized water. One cone immersed in hot 

water  for  several  months  (corresponding  to  a  life  time  of  ~10  years  at  150C)  only 

showed  corrosion  at  the  holding  points  where  the  anodizing  layer  is  violated.  In 

addition, we made a corrosion experiment in which the material to be tested was used as 

electrode, and the corrosion current was measured. This experiment yielded a corrosion 

rate which is equivalent to a loss of material of (3.0– 0.5)nm per year. Immersed in PC 

the material showed no visual deterioration at all for several years of testing. This was 

tested  by  visual  observation  and  by  weight  measurements.  The  cost  for  one  Borexino 

concentrator  was  ~100

-channel  (encapsulated  PM  plus 

(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:3)(cid:2)

(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:28)

(cid:24)(cid:8)(cid:11)(cid:6)(cid:24)(cid:8)(cid:16)(cid:9)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:11)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:20)(cid:24)

(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:11)(cid:6)(cid:23)

(cid:11)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:28)

 #"

electronics) amounts to ~2000

ut 2.5 (see discussion 

(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:5)(cid:4)

(cid:7)(cid:6)

(cid:4)(cid:10)

(cid:24)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:28)

(cid:16)(cid:9)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:8)(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:16)(cid:9)(cid:24)(cid:8)(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:11)(cid:6)(cid:13)

(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:16)(cid:9)(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:24)(cid:8)(cid:11)(cid:6)(cid:23)

(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:10)

(cid:6)(cid:11)

below) the use of light concentrators to reach a high light yield is fully justified: in order 

to obtain the same light yield without concentrators additional ~10M

(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:11)(cid:6)(cid:30)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:8)(cid:31)

(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:16)

(cid:6)(cid:28)

(cid:6)(cid:28)(cid:9)(cid:28)(cid:9)(cid:13)

(cid:7)(cid:8)

(cid:9)(cid:6)

needed. 

9 

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:16)
(cid:0)
  
Reflectivity  of  the  CTF  and  Borexino  concentrators:    The  diameters  of  the  cones  as  a 

function  of  the  height  have  been  found  to  be  in  agreement  with  the  theoretical  curve 

within  ~1mm.  This  uncertainty  introduces  only  a  negligible  loss  in  the  collection 

efficiencies. The Borexino concentrators show a less smooth inner surface compared to 

the acrylic CTF-type. A parallel laser beam hitting the surface under 45o shows typically 

a  broadening  of  ~3o  after  one  reflection.  According  to  calculations  and  in  agreement 

with  our  measurements  (see  below)  this  has  only  a  marginal  influence  to  the  photon 

collection efficiency. 

 We measured the photon collection efficiency of the mirrors for both, CTF as well as 

Borexino  concentrators,  with  scintillation  photons.  For  this  we  used  a  small  (5cm  in 

diameter) glass sphere, filled with a PC/PPO solution at the same concentration as used 

in Borexino. Gamma rays with 660 keV emitted from a 137Cs gamma-ray source hit the 

scintillator sphere. Compton-scattered photons with »

 180° scattering angle are detected 

in coincidence by a NaI detector placed behind the source and a PM which is close to 

the sphere. At several distances  (varying from 29cm to 98cm) a second PM is placed. 

We measured the ratio of triple coincidences n3 between all three detectors and double 

coincidences  n2  between  NaI  and  near  PM.  The  comparison  of  data  with  and  without 

concentrator  in  front  of  the  far  detector  at  different  distances  between  source  and  PM 

allows  to  determine  the  overall  collection  efficiency.  The  average  number  m 0  of 

photoelectrons  registered  in  the  case  no  cone  is  placed  in  front  of  the  PM  is  

m =
0

const

2

p
r
p
4 d

2

,  where r is the radius of the PM entrance window (r=9.5cm), d is the 

distance  between  source  and  PM,  and  the  constant  includes  the  light  yield  of  the 

scintillator  events  in  the  energy  window  selected  by  the  double  coincidence  and  the 

efficiency  of  the  PM.  The  corresponding  number  m +  in  the  case  of  a  concentrator  in 

10 

front of the PM is 

m

=+

const

, where R and l are the radius of the entrance 

p

2

e

R
d

p
(4

2

l

)

side (R=15.1cm) and the length of the concentrator respectively, and e is the collection 

efficiency we are looking for. The average number of  photoelectrons registered can be 

determined  experimentally  by  measuring 

the  ratio  n3/n2  and  by 

the  relation 

-=m

o

1ln(

n-
n

3

2

)

, which follows from Poisson's statistic. Experimentally the threshold 

of the PM was adjusted to be fully sensitive to single photon pulses. The distance d was 

chosen in such a way, that the values of n3/n2 vary between 0.3 and 0.6 in order to avoid 

large  uncertainties.  The  comparison  of  measured  values  of  m 0  and  m +  delivers  directly 

the  quantities  const  and  const  e.  Assuming  that  the  value  of  const  is  the  same  in  the 

measurement with and without cone one gets the collection efficiency e. The result for 

the Borexino type concentrators is 

88.0

04.0

 and by accident the same result was 

=e

obtained  for  the  longer  CTF-cone.  Direct  measurements  of  the  reflectivity  (angle  of 

incidence)  of  anodized  aluminum  done  by  the  manufacturing  company  showed  values 

around  80%.  This  reduction  compared  to  the  theoretical  maximal  value  of  91%  (at 

400nm)  is  due  to  the  anodizing  process.  As  the  average  angle  of  incidence  in  our 

measurements  (and  also  in  the  case  of  CTF  and  Borexino)    is  significantly  lower  the 

effective  reflectivity  should  be  increased  and  our  experimental  results  are  plausible. 

Indeed a Monte-Carlo calculation agrees with our experimental result if we choose the 

average reflectivity r = 0.86 (Fig. 3). The laboratory measurements were performed in 

air. The average angle of incidence of light on the glass of the PM is increased when a 

concentrator is placed in front of it. This may reduce slightly e  as the reflectivity of the 

glass increases. In CTF and Borexino the medium is water and PC respectively and the 

indices  of  refraction  between  medium  and  glass  match  much  better.  Hence  it  may  be 

that e  in the real application is slightly higher as measured in the laboratory. Neglecting 

11 

-
–
this  effect  and  using  the  measured  laboratory  values  the  amplification  factors  in 

Borexino  and  CTF  are  2.5  and  8.8,  respectively.  In  2001  basically  all  concentrators 

were  mounted  in  the  Borexino  detector.  First  test  measurements  using  a  small 

scintillator  sphere  loaded  with  Radon  show  good  results  concerning  the  light  yield. In 

the  CTF  the  photoelectron  yield  is  ~300pe/MeV  [3].  The  threshold  is  set  for  a 

coincidence of 6 PMs. This threshold is high enough to reduce accidental trigger events 

due to the thermal noise of the PMs to < 1 count/day. As this threshold is equivalent to 

~6pe, the achieved energy threshold in the CTF is ~20keV.  

 
Radiopurity of the concentrators 
 
 
Borexino is a ultra-low background detector. It will observe between 12 to 55 neutrino 

events per day (depending on the neutrino oscillation scenario assumed) mainly due to 

7Be-neutrino electron scattering in a fiducial mass of 100 tons of scintillator in the recoil 

energy window between 250 keV and 800 keV [2]. In the energy window 0.8 MeV to 

1.5  MeV  solar  neutrinos  from  the  pep-reaction  and  the  CNO-cycle  should  be  counted 

with a rate between 0.7 and 3.5 events per day. To distinguish the neutrino signal from 

the  radioactive  background,  all  components  of  the  detector  are  carefully  selected  to 

avoid radioactive contamination. Aluminum usually has a small content of thorium (and 

it’s daughter isotopes), which can be removed at great cost. The contents of uranium in 

aluminum  is  typically  small.  We  selected  the  raw  aluminum  by  making  field 

measurements  of  different  types  of  aluminum.  Unfortunately  we  had  to  use  several 

batches  of  aluminum  for  the  production.  The  measurements  were  done  in  our 

underground  laboratory  by  gamma-spectroscopy  with  a  115  cm3  Germanium  detector 

and in Heidelberg at the MPIK. We found that the equilibrium in the uranium as well as 

in the thorium decay chain is usually broken, presumably during the production process. 

The  concentrations  of  radioactive  isotopes  vary  between  the  different  types  of 

12 

aluminum. Most important for us is the content of  208Tl, because it’s decay produces a 

2615  keV  gamma-ray  with  a  high  branching  ratio.  Gamma  rays  at  such  high  energies 

can penetrate the shielding of Borexino. The concentrations of thorium in our aluminum 

samples varied between 7 and 220ng/g. Also samples of 'Kryal' (99.9995% purity) have 

been analyzed. Their averaged value of ~30ng/g in thorium with only a small variability 

was quite good. However, the rather high costs as well as severe technical difficulties to 

process  the  soft  material  to  plates  which  can  undergo  the  further  steps  (i.e.  spinning, 

polishing,  and  hard  anodization)  caused  us  to  stay  with  usual  99.8%  pure  aluminum. 

The averaged value for the material finally used was 180ng/g. Only upper limits on the 

concentrations  in  uranium  (<1ng/g)  below  226Ra  and  potassium  (<1mg/g)  could  be 

found.  In  principle,  26Al,  which  is  produced  in  reactions  of  cosmic  rays  in  the 

atmosphere,  could  play  a  role  due  to  the  1809keV  gamma  emission.  However,  the 

measured  upper  limit  of   

(cid:215)<

104

13

gg /

  for  26Al  in  our  samples  excludes  this 

possibility.  The  typical  values  for  uranium  above  226Ra  were  around  100ng/g,  clearly 

showing the break of the radioactive equilibrium (radium is depleted). Fortunately, the  

high energy lines of the uranium chain are below 226Ra and hence no contributions from 

this chain has to be expected for the external background. The same holds for the  235U 

chain. Here only an upper limit of 2ng/g could be determined in gamma spectroscopy. 

The  energy  of    the  40K-line  with  1460keV  is  too  low  to  penetrate  the  shielding  of 

Borexino in a substantial way. Hence, even though the limit of 1mg/g is rather high, no 

contribution to the background has to be expected. Therefore all background events in 

the energy region of interest are basically due to the 2.6 MeV 208Tl-line. 

The  specification  for  the  choice  of  material  was  to  restrict  the  contribution  of 

background events in the  7Be-neutrino window to an almost negligible level. This was 

studied  in  Monte-Carlo  calculations.    The  external  background  due  to  the  aluminum 

used  in  the  light  concentrators  in  the  fiducial  volume  (i.e.  in  the  inner  300t  of 

13 

-
scintillator)  was  determined  to  be 

n

=

08.0(

7

Be

,

conc

/)04.0

day

  in  the  energy  interval 

0.25  -  0.8  MeV  ("7Be-neutrino  window").  This  corresponds  to  ~0.2%  of  the  solar 

neutrino  signal  in  this  energy  region  for  no-oscillations  and  ~0.3%  for  the  LMA-

solution. The contribution is lower as the not avoidable in-situ cosmogenic background 

due  to  the  production  of  radioactive  7Be-nuclei  (~0.35/day)  [6]    which  occurs  in 

spallation processes with high energy muons intersecting the scintillator's sphere. Hence 

the  background specifications are accomplished. This contribution in this window is  a 

little 

lower  compared 

to 

the  background 

introduced  by 

the  PMs 

itself  ( 

15.0(

/)05.0

day

) . As the amplification factor is ~2.5 the use of the concentrators is 

justified also from this point of view: in order to achieve the same light yield without 

cones by additional PMs the total external background would increase to ~0.4/day.  

The  background  due  to  the  concentrators  in  the  so-called  pep-neutrino  window  (0.8  - 

1.5  MeV)  is 

n

pep

,

conc

=

20.0(

/)05.0

day

  and  accounts  only  for  ~25%  of  the  total 

background PM plus cone. As the pep-neutrino flux is much lower, the background to 

signal  ratio  here  is  ~5.7%  for  no-oscillations  and  ~11%  for  the  LMA-solution.  Hence 

the  radiopurity  of  the  concentrators  is  good  enough  to  allow  solar  neutrino 

measurements  also  in  this  energy  region.  However,  it  must  be  expected  that 

contributions  from  other  sources  (like  the  PMs)  to  the  total  external  background  will 

exceed  this  number.  In  addition  the  in-situ  cosmogenic  background  due  to  11C-decays 

will dominate with 

/11~

day

 [Tanja]. Also the requirements to the internal radiopurity 

of the scintillator are very challenging. In order to allow pep-neutrino measurements the 

concentrations in uranium and thorium should be below 10-17 g/g. Hence, the feasibility 

of solar pep-neutrino measurement is not clear yet. 

 
 

14 

–
–
–
Conclusions 

 
In  the frame of the solar neutrino experiment Borexino and the Counting Test Facility 

CTF  at  the  Gran  Sasso  underground  laboratory  light  concentrators  with  high  photon 

collection  efficiencies  have  been  realized.  For  Borexino  and  the  CTF  low  energy 

thresholds,  a  good  energy  and  position  resolution  as  well  as  a  sufficient  beta-alpha 

separation is essential. The developed concentrators allow to achieve these goals with a 

relatively small number of PMs. The amplification factors for the CTF and Borexino are 

8.8  and  2.5,  respectively.  The  costs  are  only  about  12%  (CTF-concentrator)  and  5% 

(Borexino-concentrator)  compared  to  the  cost  of  a  fully  equipped  PM.  Hence  the 

performance  of  the  CTF-  and  Borexino-detectors  are  substantially  enhanced  at  low 

costs. No appreciable additional external background to the experiments is introduced. 

It is assured that the devices are applicable in the organic solvent PC as well as in highly 

purified water for a long (~10 years) period. Fig. 5 shows a CTF light concentrator and 

Fig. 6 shows a Borexino light concentrator, both mounted on a PM. 

Acknowledgement 

This  work  was  supported  by  the  "Bundesministerium  für  Bildung,  Wissenschaft, 

Forschung und Technologie" (BMBF), the "Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft" (DFG), 

and  the  "Technischen  Universität  München"  (TUM).  We  acknowledge  the  technical 

support from the companies "Klobe&Sohn" (evaporation techniques), "Metalldrückerei 

Wender" (spinning processes), and "Süd-Eloxal" (hard anodization of aluminum) . Our 

special  thanks  to  our  former  colleague  Dipl.-Ing.  K.H.  Schuhbeck.  We  would  like  to 

thank  the  whole  Borexino  collaboration,  especially  L.  Cadonati  and  J.  Maneira  for 

Monte-Carlo  calculations,  G.  Heusser  for  gamma  spectroscopy 

  measurements 

performed in Heidelberg, and the crews which did a marvelous job in installing the PMs 

plus concentrators in Borexino and CTF. 

 

15 

 
 
References 
 
[1] G. Alimonti et al., Borexino Collaboration, NIM A 440 (2000) 360 

[2] G. Alimonti et al., Borexino Collaboration, Astroparticle Physics 16 (2002) 205 

[3] G. Alimonti et al., Borexino Collaboration, NIM A 406 (1998) 411 

[4] W. T. Welford, R. Winston, High Collection Nonimaging Optics, Academic Press, 

Inc., (1989). 

[5] G. Alimonti et al., Borexino Collaboration, Astroparticle Physics 8 (1998) 141 

[6] T. Hagner et al., Astroparticle Physics 14 (2000) 33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16 

 

Fig. 1: String Cone for Borexino. The radius of the entry and exit apertures are 16 cm 
and 0.0950 m respectively. The length of the light guide is 27 cm. Due to practical 
reasons the manufactured concentrators are truncated at a height of 23 cm. The critical 
angle of incidence is d max = 44o. For values above d max the light will be reflected. The 
geometrical amplification factor of the concentrator in the configuration of Borexino is 
2.9.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 

 

Fig.2: Illustration of the string method for constructing the shape of the concentrator 
(see Text). This example corresponds to the case of the CTF. Here the geometrical 
amplification factor is ~10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 

 
 
 
 
 

 

Fig. 3: Transmission curves (i.e. the collection efficiency for photons as a function of  
the angle of incidence) of the string cone designed for Borexino. The critical angle of 
acceptance is at 44o. For the realistic 3D-case a loss in the collecting efficiency starts at 
~38o due to tilted rays. Data are obtained in Monte-Carlo calculations. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

19 

 

 
Fig. 4: Calculated number of average reflections of a photon inside the Borexino-
concentrator until it hits the photocathode of the PM as a function of the angle of 
incidence. Obviously the ideal case of a two-dimensional cone with one reflection only 
is achieved within good approximation. 

20 

 
Fig. 5: CTF light concentrator mounted on PM. 

 

21 

 
Fig. 6: Borexino light concentrator mounted on PM. 

 

22 

