1

The Ideal Electromechanical Oscillator System. 

Osvaldo F. Schilling 

Departamento de Física, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Campus, 

Trindade, 88040-900, Florianópolis, SC. Brazil. 

email: osvaldof@mbox1.ufsc.br        fax: +55-483319946 

 

 

Abstract: 

Oscillators and rotators are among the most important physical systems.  For 

centuries the only known rotating systems that actually  reached the  limits of 

the  ideal  situation  of  undamped  periodical  motion  were  the  planets  in  their 

orbits.  Physics  had  to  develop  quantum  mechanics  to  discover  new  systems 

that  actually  behaved  like  ideal,  undamped,  oscillators  or  rotators.  However, 

all  examples  of  this  latter  systems  occur  in  atomic  or  molecular  scale.  The 

objective  of  the  present  letter  is  to  show  how  the  limit  of  ideal  oscillating 

motion  can  be  challenged  by  a  man-made  system.  We  demonstrate  how  a 

simple  model  electromechanical  system  consisting  of  a  superconducting  coil 

and  a  magnet  can  be  made  to  display  both  mechanical  and  electrical 

undamped  oscillations  for  certain  experimental  conditions.  The  effect  might 

readily  be  attainable  with  the  existing  materials  technologies  and  we  discuss 

the conditions to circumvent energy losses. The result is a lossless system that 

 

2

might generate hundreds of Ampere of rectified electrical current by means of 

the  periodical  conversion  between  gravitational  potential,  kinetic,  and 

magnetic energies.  

“  We  will  start  by  doing  the  possible.  As  time  goes  on  we  will  end  up 

achieving  even  the  impossible...”.  President  Luis  Inacio  Lula  da  Silva  of 

Brazil, during his 2002 presidential campaign. 

3

 

 

One  of  the  many  unattainable  dreams  that  have  challenged  the  human  mind 

and ingenuity since ancient times is that of the practical implementation of the 

so-called  perpetual  motion.  The  actual  achievement  of  a  perpetual  motion 

presupposes  either  the  existence  of  an  infinite  supply  of  energy    to  promote 

motion  in  a  dissipative  system  or  the  complete  conservation  of  the  initial 

energy of the system. From the days of Kepler and Newton until the advent of 

Quantum  Mechanics  planetary  gravitational  motion  was  the  only  known 

example  of  conservative  rotational  motion,  that  is,  a  system  that  would 

perform  periodical  rotational  motion  in  a  way  akin  to  the  ideal  perpetual 

motion.  With  the  development  of  atomic  and  molecular  physics  many 

oscillating  and  rotating  systems  in  their  fundamental  states  were  found  to 

behave  like  ideal  quantum  oscillators  or  rotators.  The  existence  of  discrete 

energy  levels  in  the  atomic  scale  would  maintain  stability  of  motion  and 

conservation  of  energy.  These  however  are  atomic-scale  systems.  All  other 

man-made  macroscopic  oscillating  systems  have  however  remained  affected 

by  limitations  imposed  by  energy  dissipation,  so  that  the  ideal  perpetual 

 

4

motion  has  never  been  achieved  for  such  systems.  The  development  of 

superconductor materials in some way renewed hopes that at last a man-made 

system  displaying  complete  energy  conservation  might  eventually  be 

designed.  As  Fritz  London  put  it  in  the  1930s,  a  superconductor  contains 

electrons  in a  macroscopic  quantum state. The stability of a detached energy 

level  separated  by  a  gap  from  a  continuum  of  states,    and  the  so-called 

“rigidity”  of  the  wave-function  across  the  material  give  rise  to  perfect 

conductivity. A superconducting ring can be made to transport an effectively 

resistanceless current  for an  indefinite  period of  time. Such  motion  might be 

considered  perpetual  and  the  associated  magnetic  and  electron  kintetic 

energies are conserved in the motion. However such example still involves the 

motion  of  atomic-scale  particles  only.  That  is,  the  energy-conserving  motion 

of some macroscopic object that would actually fulfill the ancient ideal of the 

perpetual motion has never been achieved by any man-made system.  

As  we  now  show,  superconductivity  has  eventually  been  the  key  for 

obtaining an acceptable solution for this puzzle. In fact, although not explicit 

in  the  idea  of  resistanceless    electronic  motion,  as  we  show  below  such 

concept bears within  itself the potential  for the development of a  method  for 

its  own  conversion  into  dissipationless  mechanical  motion.  The  idea  is 

demonstrated for a simple system consisting of a rectangular superconducting 

 

5

coil and a magnet. To achieve such electromechanical motion conversion the 

superconducting coil is submitted simultaneously to a constant magnetic field 

and  to  an  external  force.  For  such  conditions  the  coil  will  oscillate 

mechanically  around  an  equilibrium  position,  and  will  have  induced  in  it  a 

supercurrent containing an alternating component of same frequency. We will 

discuss the conditions necessary for such system to conserve its initial energy.  

Let´s  consider  the  model  experimental  setup  described  in  Figure  1.  A 

rectangular superconducting coil of mass m is submitted to a magnetic field B 

from a system of  magnets. It is important that the entire coil be submitted to 

such field, as discussed later. The ( say) lower side of size a must be covered 

by  a  coating  of  an  electrically  insulating  high-magnetic  permeability 

substance, to produce on  this side of the coil a  magnetic  field which will be 

different from the field in the ( say) upper side. The coil is pulled away from 

the  magnets  by  an  external  force  F,  which  is  assumed  independent  of  time. 

According to Faraday’s Induction Law the motion of the coil in the presence 

of B  will  induce  in  it a transport supercurrent  i. Such current will  generate a 

magnetic force with strength Fm1= iaB1 in the upper side ( of length a) of the 

coil  in opposition to  F, and another  force  of strength  Fm2= iaB2  in the  lower 

side.  Here  B1  and  B2  are  the  effective  magnetic  fields  at  the  position  of  the 

sides of length a, and the forces must not cancel each other otherwise no effect 

 

6

is  obtained.  B1  should  be  the  constant  and  uniform  field  produced  by  the 

magnet(  corrected  for  demagnetization  factors).  We  will  assume  B1>B2>Bc1, 

where Bc1  is the superconductor  lower critical  field. The coil will  move with 

speed v described by Newton´s Law: 

m d v/dt = F – ia(B1 − B2)                                             (1) 

We 

introduce 

the  parameter  B0 ≡ B1−B2   to  simplify 

the  notation. The 

displacement of the coil gives rise to an induced electromotive force ε, given 

by Faraday’s Induction Law[1]: 

ε = − dΦm /dt – L di/d t                                               (2) 

Here  Φm  is  the  magnetic  flux  from  the  external  source  that  penetrates  the 

rectangular area bound by the coil, and L is the self-inductance of the coil. In 

(2),    dΦm  /dt  =  −B0av.  A  consequence  of  perfect  conductivity  is  that  the 

electromotive  force  may  be  considered  zero,  so  that  equation  (2)  implies 

magnetic flux conservation. It is important to stress the absence of dissipative 

terms  in  (2) ,  a  crucial  consequence  of  perfect  conductivity  that  will 

extensively  be  discussed  later.  Taking  the  time  derivative  of  (1)  and 

eliminating di/dt from (2) one obtains: 

m d2v/dt2= − ( B0

2a2/L ) v                                           (3) 

 

7

This means that the coil should perform an ideal oscillating motion under the 

action of the external and magnetic forces. Assuming zero initial speed and an 

initial acceleration equal to F/m equation (3) can be solved: 

v(t) = F/(mΩ)  sin ( Ω t)                                            (4) 

The natural frequency of the oscillations is Ω= B0a/(mL)1/2. The amplitude of 

the  oscillating  motion  will  be  x0=  F/(mΩ2).  It  is  possible  then  to  combine 

(1)−(3) to obtain an equation for the current i(t): 

(B0a/ Ω2) d2i/ dt2 = F − B0ai                                (5) 

whose solution is 

i(t) =( F/ (B0a)) ( 1 − cos(Ωt))                               (6) 

for    i(0)  =  di/dt(0)  =0.  From  equation  (6)  we  conclude  that  the  supercurrent 

induced in the coil is already rectified. It never changes sign, and it looks like 

the  result  of  submitting  an  alternating  current  of  frequency  Ω /2  to  a  diode 

bridge  rectifier.  Two  details  make  this  machine  different  from  usual 

superconductor motors or generators. Firstly, the motion is linear and does not 

involve  high  speeds.  Secondly,  levitation  does  not  involve  highly  hysteretic 

repulsion  forces  against  dipolar  magnetic  fields,  but  comes  straight  from 

Lorentz  forces  acting  upon  the  currents  in  the  coil.  Typical  figures  for  the 

speed  amplitude  (vo),  oscillation  amplitude,  and  rectified  current  amplitude  ( 

io= F /(B0a)) may be obtained. Let’s take L= 10-7 H, B0= 0.3 T, m= 1 kg, F= 

 

8

10 N, a= 0.1 m. For these parameters, Ω= 95 rad/s, io=  333 A, vo= 11 cm/s, 

and xo=  1.1  mm. That is, a large rectified current may be obtained with low 

speed and frequency of oscillation, and very small displacements of the coil. 

The set of eq. (1)-(6) was deduced under the assumption of the absence 

of  energy  losses.  Let’s  discuss  the  conditions  for  such  assumption  to  apply. 

First of all, it is important to stress that the predicted mechanical motion can 

be  made  perfectly  frictionless  with  this  design,  since  in  the  vertical  position 

the  motion is independent of any physical contact between the levitating coil 

and  the  magnet.  If  friction  losses  are  negligible,  the  next  issue  that 

immediately  arises  is  that  of  the  possible  losses  related  to  the  alternating 

current  in  the  wire  and  to  inductive  coupling  between  the  coil  and  resisive 

conductors  in  the  surroundings.  Inductive  coupling  between  the  coil  and  a 

conducting  magnet  like Nd-Fe-B   will produce resistive eddy currents  in the 

magnet. This source of dissipation might be eliminated by using an insulating 

magnet like ferrite, at the possible cost of having to work at lower fields. For 

the  same  reason  the  lower  coil  side  coating  must  be  electrically  insulating. 

Assuming  that  this  source  of  energy  dissipation  may  be  circumvented  let’s 

discuss how to avoid losses associated with the transport of  ac currents by the 

superconductor wire[2-3]. Such losses may be classified in resistive losses and 

hysteretic 

losses.  Resistive 

losses  might  arise  due  to  partial  current 

 

9

transportation by normal electrons. The influence of normal electrons may be 

avoided  by  working  at  low  frequencies[3].  We  note  that  the  number  of  free 

parameters  of  the  model  allows  the  frequency  Ω  to  be  set,  e.g.,  in  the  10  ~ 

1000  rad/s  range,  so  that  the  influence  of  eddy  current  losses  due  to  normal 

carriers  expected  already  in  the  upper  MHz  range[3]  may  be  entirely 

neglected.  Alternating  currents  give  rise  to  a  resistive  response  from  the 

superconducting electrons also[4]. However, well below Tc  such resistivity is 

smaller  than  the  normal  state  resistivity  by  a  factor  ≈  hΩ/∆ ,  where  ∆  is  the 

energy gap[4]. Such factor is of the order of 10-9  for low frequencies, so that 

the  resistive  behavior  of  superconducting  electrons  may  safely  be  neglected. 

Hysteresis  losses  occur  whenever  the  flux  line  (FL)  lattice  inside  a  type-II 

superconductor is cyclically rebuilt by an oscillating magnetic field[2]. In the 

present case such self-fields ( ripple fields) are created by the alternating part 

of the current. The work of Campbell, Lowell, and others[5-7] has shown that 

provided  the  displacements  do  of  the  FL  from  their  pinning  sites  are  small 

enough, such displacements are elastic and reversible, and no hysteresis losses 

occur.  The  threshold  value  of  d0  was  found  to  be  a  fraction  of  the  inter-FL 

spacing, as small as the coherence  length  ( 2 ~ 6 nm)[5]. Let b represent the 

ripple-field  amplitude  at  the  surface  of  the  wire,  and  B  the  static  magnetic 

field. Campbell[5] has shown that there will be no losses if b < (µ0BJc d0)1/2 = 

 

10

b0, where Jc is the critical current density and d0 is given above( we must point 

out that demagnetization effects must be taken into account in the value for B 

in this formula). This explains why the entire coil should be submitted to the 

static magnetic fields. To avoid self-field hysteresis losses the value of B must 

be  large  compared  to  b,  otherwise  the  inequality  will  not  be  satisfied.  The 

current i will flow within a surface sheath of thickness (Bd0/(µ0 Jc))1/2. There 

will  be  no  losses  associated  with  this  current  provided  it  generates  a  surface 

field  µ0i/(2πr)  smaller  than  b0  .  Just  to  give  a  numerical  example,  if  a  cold-

drawn Nb-Ti wire of radius r = 0.085 mm, and Jc= 5x109 A/m2[8] is used to 

make the coil, there will be no hysteresis losses for a transport current as high 

as  1.5  A  in  such  thin  wire  (  adopting  B  =  1  T).  A  thicker  cable  might  carry 

hundreds of  Ampere. One  might  mention  also  flux-creep as another  possible 

source of dissipation, but the use of a temperature of operation well below Tc , 

and a strong-pinning material should discard the possibility of creep.  

In  conclusion,  according  to  the  foregoing  discussion  present  day 

technology  of  magnet  manufacturing  together  with  superconductor  materials 

technology  may  lead  to  a  complete  elimination  of  energy  dissipation  for  the 

oscillating  system  analysed 

in 

this  work.  Therefore,  a  man-made 

electromechanical  system  that  conserves  energy  (  and  thus  performing  a 

perpetual motion ! ) is technically feasible.  

 

11

The author wishes to thank  Prof. Said Salem Sugui Jr.  for  his support. 

Other applications may be found in: arXiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0309043. 

 

References.  

12

1.  B.S.Chandrasekhar,  in  Superconductivity ( R.D. Parks, editor),  volume 

1, ch. 1 ( M. Dekker, New York, 1969). 

2.  M.N.Wilson,  Superconducting  Magnets  (  Oxford  University  Press, 

3.  W. L. McLean, Proc. Phys. Soc. (London) 79, 572 (1962). 

4.  M.  Tinkham,  Introduction  to  Superconductivity(  Krieger,  Malabar, 

Oxford, 1989). 

1980). 

5.  A.M.Campbell, J. Phys. C 4, 3186 (1971). 

6.  J. Lowell, J. Phys. F 2, 547 and 559 (1972). 

7.  W.S.  Seow,  R.A.  Doyle,  J.D.  Johnson,  D.  Kumar,  R.  Somekh,  D.J.C. 

Walker, and A.M. Campbell, Physica C 241, 71 (1995). 

8.  C.  Meingast,  P.J.  Lee,  and  D.C.  Larbalestier,  J.  Appl.  Phys.  66,  5962 

(1989). 

 

Figure caption. 

13

Figure 1: A rectangular coil is submitted simultaneously to an external force F 

and  a magnetic field B1  perpendicular to it. The lower side of the coil feels a 

different field B2  since it is covered by a high-permeability coating. As shown 

in  the  text  the  predicted  motion  is  oscillatory,  with  an  alternating  current  of 

same frequency being induced in the coil. 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
  

14

 

B1 

iaB1 

a 

B2 

F 

iaB2 

Figure 1 
Schilling 

