Is Second Law of Thermodynamics Violated for Electron Transition
 from Lower-Energy Level  to  Higher-Energy Level

Dr.R.C.Gupta
Professor & Head, Mechanical Engineering Dept.,
Institute of engineering & Technology (I.E.T.),
Lucknow, India
rcg_iet@hotmail.com

Ruchi Gupta
Graduate Student, Electrical Engg. Dept., Consultant, Avesta Computers
Stanford University, USA.

California, USA

Sanjay Gupta

ABSTRACT

Second law of thermodynamics is applied to a few electronic processes. It is seen that the 
second  law  of  thermodynamics  holds  good  for  all  except  one  mentioned  here.  The 
classical  approach,  based  on  exact  equivalence  of  emission  and  absorption  spectra,   for 
electron  transition  from  lower-energy  level  (first  orbit)  to  higher-  energy  level  (second 
orbit)  (hν  =  E2  –E1)   violates  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics. But  since  second law 
which  implies  irreversibility  and  is  universally  true;  a  new  explanation  of  electron 
transition  from  lower  to  higher  energy  level  is  proposed  which  leads  to  better 
understanding  of  several  topics  such  as  Fraunhofer  lines,  Optical  laser.  Also, 
interestingly,  it  is  shown  that  widely  different  fields  such  as  ‘second  law  of 
thermodynamics’  and  ‘special relativity’  are in fact closely linked to each other. Also,  
possible  links    between  ‘supersymmetry’  and  new  concept  of ‘quaternion-mass’  are 
mentioned.

1. INTRODUCTION

Second  law  of  thermodynamics  implies  that  ‘although  work  can  be  fully 
converted to heat, but heat can not be fully converted to work’. For conversion of heat to 
work: out of heat supplied Q1 from source, only a part of the heat is converted to work W  
and the remainder heat Q2 ( > 0 ) is wasted to surrounding (or sink). Mathematically,

 Q1 - Q2 = W

 Efficiency of the process is given by,

η = W/Q1 = (Q1-Q2)/Q1

(1)

(2)

The  second  law  also  leads  to conclusion of ‘irreversibility’. It may be noted that 
is  generally  used  for  study  of 
although 
thermodynamic  processes,  the  law  seems  to  be  universally  valid  and  no  exception  has 
been found as yet  except the one reported in this paper.

thermodynamics 

the  second 

law  of 

In  the  present  paper;  it  is  shown  that  when  the  validity  of  second  law  of 
thermodynamics is tested to a few electronic processes, it works very well except the one 
mentioned here. It is noted that the current approach of electron transition from first orbit 
to second orbit (hν = E2 – E1) based on the assumption that emission spectra & absorption 
spectra  are  ‘exactly’  same,    violates  second  law  of  thermodynamics. So  a  new  possible 
explanation of electron transition from lower to higher orbit is suggested in this report in 
accordance  with  the  second  law.    Interestingly,  it  is  found  that  two  differently  looking 
subjects  ‘second  law  of  thermodynamics’  and  ‘special  relativity’  are  inter-linked.  One 
can  be  derived  from  other,  and  fall  of  one  means  fall  of  the  other.    In  view  of  vast 
literature  available  in  libraries  and  on  internet  on  thermodynamics,  relativity  and 
electronic processes,   the author prefers to quote only a few general books [1-5].

2. HEAT AND WORK

In thermodynamic processes ‘heat’ and ‘work’ are generally obvious, but there is 
some  misconception  too.  The  so-called  heat  of  a  hot  body,  as  per  second  law  of 
thermodynamics,  is  in  fact  not  ‘heat’  but  ‘work’  due  to  vibration/motion  of 
atom/molecules.    In  electronic  processes  where  usually  ‘energy’  transfer/transition  takes 
place,  recognition  of  heat  &  work  is  even  more  difficult  .  What  is  energy?  Is  energy 
‘heat’  or  ‘work’?  A  little  consideration,  however,  will  reveal  that  all  energies  such  as 
potential  energy,  kinetic  energy,  electrostatic  energy,  chemical  energy,  nuclear  energy, 
mass  energy  mc2  etc.  in  a  way  are  ‘work’,  except  the  ‘radiation  energy  hν  ’  which  is 
‘heat’. In fact ‘heat’ is the energy carried by mass-less particle such as photon  whereas 
energy  carried by massive particle is ‘work’. In other words; boson (photon) carries the 
‘heat’  as 
(electron  or  fermion-groups  as 
atoms/molecules)  carries  ‘work’  as  kinetic  &  potential  energy  of  particle.  In  the 
following  electronic  processes  these  concepts  of  ‘heat  ‘  and  ‘work’  is  used  to  test  the 
validity of second law of thermodynamics.

radiation  waves,  whereas 

fermion 

3. SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS APPLIED TO ELECTRONIC   
    PROCESSES

Electronic processes under consideration for testing the validity of second law of 
thermodynamics are grouped in two categories as mentioned below and are discussed in 
sections 3.1 and 3.2  respectively:

1.  Electronic  processes  where  ‘work  is  converted  to  heat’  ;  second  law  of 

thermodynamics allows full (100%) conversion of work into heat.

2.  Electronic processes where ‘heat is converted to work’ ; as per second law of 

thermodynamics only a partial (<100%) conversion of heat into work is possible.

3.1 Work  to  Heat

3.1.1 Heating of electric wire by passing current

The energy supplied V.i.t delivered towards kinetic energy of electrons  finally at 

steady-state situation   converts fully to radiation-heat.

3.1.2  X-ray

3.1.3 Annihilation 

The  kinetic  energy  of  electron  (½  mv2  =  e.V)   may  be  fully  converted  to  X-ray 
radiation (hν) of  min. wavelength  (=h.c/(e.V) .

A  particle  (say,  electron)  and  an  antiparticle  (say,  positron)  can  annihilate  each 
other giving two -ray photons i.e.,  e- + e+ =  +  . The total mass energy 1.02 
MeV plus kinetic energy of the particles  converts 100% to the energy of photons.

3.1.4 Electron transition from higher orbit to lower orbit

The energy of an electron in second orbit is E2  and in first orbit is E1. When the 
electron  jumps  down    from  second  orbit  to  first  orbit,    the  difference  of  energy 
(work) E2-E1 is fully converted to radiation (heat) energy h ν12.

            Work  to   Heat

100% conversion (work to heat) possible  i.e.,

E2 – E1 = h.ν12

(3)

3.2 Heat  to  Work

3.2.1 Photoelectric effect

The  photo-electric  equation    hν –  hνo  =  ½  mv2      is  indeed  in  accordance 
with the second law of thermodynamic equation  Q1 – Q2 = W , which means that 
the work function (hνo) corresponding to Q2 can never be zero. The efficiency of 
the process is therefore η = (ν – νo)/ν  <  1  .

3.2.2 Compton effect

The  Compton  effect  equation  for  energy  conservation  (first  law  of 

thermodynamics)  hν –hν / = ½ mov2  or more precisely ,

hν – hν / =  moc2/(1 – v2/c2)1/2 – moc2  

  is also in accordance with second law of thermodynamics equation  Q1 –
Q2 = W , which means that ν / can never be zero. The efficiency of the process is , 
similar to that for photo-electric effect, therefore 

(4)

(5)

 η = (ν – ν /)/ν  <  1  

3.2.3  Pair-production

If  a  -ray of energy (heat) 1.02 MeV could produce in empty space the electron 
positron pair  2mc2 (work) then it would be 100% conversion of heat to work  against the 
second  law  of  thermodynamics;  but  it  is  known  that  this does not happen. In fact some 
other object such as nucleus is involved in the pair-production process to carry away part 
of initial photon’s energy, thus only  less than 100% of photon’s energy (heat) is utilized 
in producing the electron positron pair  2mc2 (work).  The author opines/predicts  that :  
if, however, pair-production would ever to happen in empty space, then it would be like  
 = e- + e+ + o  giving out a low energy photon (o) such that    should be more than 1.02 
MeV according to second law of thermodynamics.

3.2.4 Electron transition from lower orbit to higher orbit

The classical approach suggests that if the radiation (heat) energy  hν12  is 
given to an electron in the first orbit  then it should jump up to the second orbit,  
utilizing it for energy (work) increase E2-E1 implying that

h.ν12 = E2 –E1

(6)

i.e.,     Heat  to Work

100% conversion (heat to work) possible 

But this NOT POSSIBLE as 100% conversion of  Heat to Work  is strictly 

prohibited by second law of thermodynamics

4. THERMODYNAMICS AND RELATIVITY  LINKED TOGETHER

Consider the Compton effect again. The  outgoing  photon  ought  to exist, 
i.e.,    ν  /    can  never  be  zero  (which  is  in  accordance  with  second  law  of 
thermodynamics) is analyzed further considering the two possibilities :

(i)

If the incident photon strikes the electron in x-direction  and if after 
collision electron deviates from x-direction, photon ought to come 
out to balance the momentum of electron in y-direction.

(ii)

If    the  incident  photon  strikes  the  electron  in  x-direction    and  if 
after  collision  electron  too  moves  in  x-direction  ,  there  is  no 
momentum in y-direction ; there are two possibilities
(a) Photon after impact may be absent (ν / = 0)  or
(b) Photon  after  impact  may  come  out  (ν  /  >  0)  in  x-direction 

forward or backward.

But  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  (Q2  >  0)  to  hold  good  the 
possibility (a) is ruled out and possibility (b) is to occur, ν / > 0 , thus the 
energy equation (eq.4) for Compton effect written earlier can be re-written 
using ν / > 0   as follows,

hν > moc2/(1 –v2/c2)1/2 – moc2                               

and the conservation of momentum in x-direction yields,

hν = mo/(1 – v2/c2)1/2. v.c

Putting  value  of  hν  from  Eq.(8)  into  Eq.(7)  and  after  a  few  steps  of 
simplification , the following interesting result is found to emerge out as

v < c

which is well in accordance with the theory of Relativity.

(7)

(8)

(9)

This  means  that  the  result  of second law of thermodynamics (ν  / is never 
zero,  or  heat  to  work  conversion    η  =  W/Q1  <  1  )   is    compatible  with  the  essence  of 
special  relativity  (  v  <  c    i.e.;    no  matter  how  energetic  may  be  the  incident  photon,  
velocity of the electron can not exceed  velocity of light c, implying  β = v/c < 1 ). It is 
amazing  that  how  two  quite different fields of study  -  ‘Thermodynamics (η < 1)’   and  
‘Relativity (β < 1)’ are inter-supportive and inter-linked to each other  and appear to be 
two faces of the same coin.

5. IS  SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS  REALLY VIOLATED FOR   
    ELECTRON TRANSITION FROM LOWER ORBIT TO HIGHER ORBIT

Although  the  processes  explained  in  section  3.1.1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, 3.2.1, 3.2.2  support 
the second law of thermodynamics; but as explained in section 3.2.3   the second law of 
thermodynamics  is  ‘violated’  if  the  existing  concept  (Eq.6)  is  assumed  to  be  true    or in 
other  words  if  absorption-spectra  frequency  is  considered  to  be  ‘exactly’  equal  to  the 
emission-spectra  frequency  for  corresponding 
law  of 
thermodynamics  which  implies  irreversibility  is  universally  true.  Moreover  the  second 
law  of  thermodynamics  is  closely  linked  to  well  established  special-relativity.  Fall  of  
second law of thermodynamics means fall of  relativity. The author opines that-  to come 
out  of  this  crisis    there  is  a  need  for new  explanation  of  electron  transition  from  lower 

  But  second 

transition. 

energy-level  to higher energy-level  which must be in accordance with the second law of 
thermodynamics.  The new explanation is proposed as following.

6. NEW EXPLANATION FOR ELECTRON TRANSITION FROM LOWER TO        
    HIGHER  ENERGY-LEVEL (ORBIT)

Consider an electron in the first orbit with energy E1. The energy levels of second 
and third orbits are E2 and E3 respectively. Although ν13 is the frequency of radiation that 
would be emitted  if the electron comes from third orbit to first orbit;  but if the radiation 
‘exactly’ equal to νh13 is given to the electron in the first orbit, it would not go to third 
orbit because this too would ‘violate’ the second law of thermodynamics as mentioned in 
section  3.2.3  for electron  transition from first to second orbit. However, the electron of 
the first-orbit   after receiving the radiation hν13 can easily go to second orbit absorbing a 
part  (hν12)  of  the  supplied  energy  (h13)  and  rejecting  the  remainder  (hν13-hν12),  in 
accordance with the second law of thermodynamics,

  Q1 = W + Q2     or ,

hν13 = E2 – E1 + h (ν13 – ν12)

Efficiency of the process in this case would be, from Eq.2 is given as:

η = [{hν13 – h (ν13 – ν12)}/(hν13)]  =  ν12/ν13       

(10)

But consider   what happens if radiation hν12 falls upon electron of the first orbit. 
It  can  not  go  to  the  second  orbit    otherwise  second  law  of  thermodynamics  would  be 
violated as mentioned in section 3.2.3.  It can, however, go to a ‘meta-stable energy level 
M’  between  first  &  second  orbits, absorbing  a part (hν1M) of the supplied energy (hν12) 
and rejecting the remainder (hν12 - hν1M).  Again; since  Q1 = W + Q2  and η = W/Q1 ,

η = [{hν12 – h (ν12 – ν1M)}/hν12)]  =  ν1M/ν12

(11)

7. CONSEQUENCES OF THE NEW EXPLANATION OF ELECTRON 
    TRANSITION FROM LOWER TO HIGHER ENERGY LEVEL

The  new  explanation,  which  is  in  accordance  with  the  second  law  of 
thermodynamics    has  far  reaching  consequences  for  better  understanding  of  Fraunhofer 
lines,  Laser,  Fluorescence & phosphorescence  briefly described as follows.

7. 1 Fraunhofer Line

Fraunhofer  lines  are  the  dark  lines  in  the  continuous    solar  spectra    and  are 
considered  to  be  present  due  to  absorption    of  certain radiations  into the few elements 
present  in  the  atmosphere.  Since  absorption  and  emission  are  now  shown  to  be  ‘not 

exactly  same  but  different’  in  this  paper,  in-principle  a  re-identification  of  the  elements 
present  in  the  atmosphere  corresponding  to  Fraunhofer  lines  may  be  needed.  Although 
the  emission-spectra  and  absorption-spectra  are  be  different,  but  possibly  the  difference 
may be so little to be noticed.

7. 2 Laser

Consider ruby-crystal optical laser. In optical laser conventionally it is considered 
that pumping (for population inversion) is done as follows: electrons from the first orbit 
goes  to  second  and  third  orbits  after  absorbing  radiations  hν12(yellow)  and  hν13(green) 
respectively,  and after losing some energy to lattice come down to meta-stable state M 
which can then liberate hν1M(red) if the electrons from M-state fall back to the first orbit.  
But according to the present explanation (as per section 6), the electrons in the first orbit 
receiving  hν12(yellow)    instead  of  going  to  second  orbit      directly  goes  to  meta-stable 
state;  and receiving hν13 do not go to the third orbit  but after some rejection (hν13-hν12
considered  to  be  used  up  for  lattice)    go  up  to  second  orbit  from  where  the  electron 
eventually  comes  to  the  first  orbit  radiating  hν12.    This  (hν12)    in  turn    sends  another 
electron  to  meta-stable  state  M  which  can  finally  liberate  hν1M(red)  if  the  electron  falls 
back to the first orbit.

7. 3 Fluorescence and Phosphorescence

On  similar  lines  as  explained in section 7.2 for optical laser,  it is suggested that 
for fluorescence and phosphorescence too,  electrons in the meta-stable state do not come 
from higher orbit but reach directly from first orbit.

8. POSSIBLE  THERMODYNAMIC LINKS  OF    SUPERSYMMETRY 
    TO    QUATERNION MASS

8.1 Supersymmetry

Supersymmetry  means  that  there  is  transformation  which  relates  the  particles  of 
integral spin such as photon (boson)  to  the particles of half-integral spin such as electron 
(fermion). Bosons are the ‘mediators’ of the fundamental forces while fermions make up 
the  ‘matter’.  The  supersymmetry  solves  the  ‘hierarchy  problem’  for  grand-unification. 
Also,  for  unification  of  forces,  with  supersymmetry    the  promising  string-theory  
becomes  the  better  &  famous  superstring  theory  [6].  But  as  yet,  no  supersymmetric-
partner particles have been found. An ambitious attempt is made, as follows, to answer : 
‘why  superpartners exist in principle  but  not in reality’.

8.2 Quaternion Mass

The author in another interesting paper [7]  has proposed a novel concept of mass, 
i.e.,  mass of a moving body is neither scalar nor vector but rather  ‘mass is a quaternion 

(scalar + vector) quantity’ as  M = mg + mp  where mg is the grain(scalar)-mass governing 
the particle-behavior  &  mp is the photonic(vector)-mass exhibiting the wave-properties  
2 .  The 
and  the total magnitude-of-mass [M] is the Pythagorean sum as [M] = mg
proposed  concept  of    ‘Quaternion  Mass’  gives  a  mathematical  blend  to  the  de-Broglie 
hypothesis  and  explains  well  the  wave-particle  duality.  Also,  in  a  way,  it  unifies  the 
quantum-mechanics and the special-relativity.

2 + mp

8.3 Links between Quaternion-Mass and Supersymmetry

Referring  to  the  ‘quaternion  mass  concept’, it  may  be  noted  that  the  grain-mass 
mg  signifies  the  material  content  due  to  atoms/molecules  (group  of  fermions)    whereas 
the photonic-mass mp is due to associated photon (boson).  So, in a way, the quaternion 
mass  M  =  mg  +  mp      is    ‘marriage’  of  fermiom  plus  photon.  Thus  the  supersymmetry 
seems  to  be  inherently  embedded  in  the  quaternion  mass  concept. It  is  as  if, fermion  & 
boson are coupled to each other  and that fermion behaves as particle & boson shows the 
wave  nature.  Wave-particle  duality  seems,  thus  in  a  way,  due  to  supersymmetry 
embedded in quaternion mass.

It is mentioned in section 2 ‘Heat & Work’ of this paper, that thermodynamically 
‘heat’ is carried by ‘boson’ whereas ‘work’ is carried by ‘fermion’.  Also it is mentioned 
in  section  3    that  as  per  second-law  of  thermodynamics,  although  all  ‘work’  can  be 
coverted to ‘heat’  but  all ‘heat’ can-not be converted to ‘work’.  This (second-law) thus 
that  although  all  fermions(carrying  ‘work’)  may  have  its  superpartner 
implies 
bosons(carrying  ‘heat’)    but    all  bosons(carrying  ‘heat’)  may-not  have  its  superpartner 
fermion(carrying  ‘work’).    Thus,  although  the  supersymmetry  is  embedded  into  the 
concept  of  quaternion  mass    but    the  second-law  of  thermodynamics  limits  the 
supersymmetry      i.e.,    all  fermions  may  have  its  superpartner  bosons      but    all  bosons  
will-not  have  its  superpartner  fermions.  Logically  it  can  be  argued  that,  therefore,  the 
existence  of  supersymmetric-partners  (of  fermion  &  boson  ,  both)  and  thus  the 
supersymmetry itself is doubtful.

It seems that supersymmetric partners (& thus the supersymmetry) can exists only 
in ‘married’ state as quaternion sum as  M = mg + mp  and that their separate existence is 
forbidden by the second-law of thermodynamics. 

9. DISCUSSIONS

Heat is considered to be an averaged quantity, so question arises whether applying 
second law of thermodynamics to single photon inter-action such as Compton-effect etc. 
is reasonable or not ?  The author opines that it is indeed reasonable because: (i) average 
of a single data  average is the data itself, a photon of energy hν has its average energy 
too as hν  , (ii) who says  or what prohibits  that  the second law of thermodynamics can 
not be applied to single photon interaction system,  (iii) when the second law is applied to 
single  photon  interaction  such  as  Compton-effect,  it  not  only  holds  good  very  well  but 
also  shows  new  light(understanding)  i.e.,  it  leads  to  conclusion  that  not  only  the 

Compton-effect  is  in  accordance  with  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics    but  also  that 
the law of Thermodynamics is in accordance with the theory of Relativity, (iv) Theory of 
relativity is applicable well to single particle  so is the second law of thermodynamics, as 
both  are  shown  to  be  linked,  (v)  all  avenues  for  Truth  must  be  kept  open;  when  the 
second law is applied to the electronic processes or elsewhere described in the paper, its 
success is striking .

10. CONCLUSIONS

Although many electronic processes considered are  in support to the second law 
of thermodynamics but conventional approach (h12 = E2 –E1) of electron transition from 
lower to higher orbit violates the second law of thermodynamics. Thus a new explanation 
of  electron  transition  from  lower  to  higher  orbit,  in  accordance  with  the  second  law  is 
suggested,  which  leads  to  possibly  fine  re-defining  of  the  Fraunhofer  lines    and  better 
understanding  of  optical  laser,  fluorescence  &  phosphorescence.  Interestingly,  special-
relativity  and  second-law  of  thermodynamics  are  found  to  be  closely  linked.    Also,  it 
seems that the supersymmetry is embedded in coupled-state into the quaternion-mass and 
that  the  second-law  of  thermodynamics  prohibits  the  separate  existence  of    the 
superpartners. 

  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The author is thankful to Dr.M.S.Kalara, Professor, I.I.T.Kanpur and Dr. V. Johri. 
Prof. Emeritus, Lucknow University for their advice  & discussions. The author is  also 
thankful to Veena, Shefali, Dr.Chhavi Gupta & Dr.Sanjiv Sahoo for their assistance.

  REFERENCES / BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1. Herbert B Callen, ‘Thermodynamics’, John Wiley, 1985.
2. Albert Einstein, ‘The Meaning of Relativity’, Princeton Univ. Press, 1966.
3. David F Griffith, ‘Introduction to Electrodynamics’, Prentice Hall, 1998.
4. Stephen W Hawking, ‘A Brief History of Time’, Banton books, 1990.
5. Aurther Beiser, ‘Concept of Modern Physics’, Mc Graw Hill, 2000.
6. Brian Greene, ‘The Elegant Universe’, Vintage, 2000.
7. R.C.Gupta, ‘Concept of  Quaternion-Mass towards Wave-Particle Duality: A   
    Novel Approach’, arxive.org:physics/0305024, May 2003.

