 

Realization of Maxwell’s Hypothesis 

An Experiment Against the Second Law of Thermodynamics 
 
Xin Yong Fu, Zi Tao Fu, Shanghai Jiao Tong University , Email: xyfu@sjtu.edu.cn 

Address: Room 302, Number 7, Lane 7, South Yili Road, Shanghai 101103, P.R.China 

     

Abstract.  This  is  an  experiment  report  on  a  special  energy  conversion.  Two  similar  and  parallel 

Ag-O-Cs cathodes in a vacuum tube eject electrons at room temperature continuously. A static magnetic 

field applied to the tube plays the role of the famous “Maxwell’s demon”. The thermal electrons are so 

controlled by the magnetic field that they can fly only from one cathode to the other, resulting in a charge 

collection and an electric potential. A load, a resistance for example, is connected to the cathodes, getting 

an electric power from the tube continuously. Here, the air within the laboratory is a single heat reservoir 

and  all  of  the  heat  extracted  by  the  electronic  tube  from  the  reservoir  is  converted  into  electric  energy, 

without  producing  any  other  effects.  The  authors  believe  that  the  experiment  is  in  contradiction  to 

Kelvin’s statement of the second law of thermodynamics. 

 

1.    Introduction 

In  1850  and  1851,  Clausius  and  Kelvin  established  the  famous  second  law  of 

thermodynamics. According to this law, all actual energy conversion and transmission processes 

happened in the universe have a general direction-----from useful energy to useless one. Every 

such process is accompanied with increase in entropy, and is intrinsically “irreversible”. Hence, 

for any piece of energy that the Nature grants us, we can poorly use it once only. Energy can only 

go forward in the direction that leads to its “degeneration”, and finally, to its death (Clausius’, 

“heat death”). 

Aiming  at  this  law,  the  prominent  British  physicist  James  Clerk  Maxwell  put  forward  a 
hypothesis  in  1871  (1),  the  so-called  Maxwell’s  demon.  The  hypothesis  starts  with  an  initially 

equilibrium  gas  contained  in  a  vessel,  which  is  divided  into  two  equal  parts,  portion  A  and 

portion B, as shown in Fig.1. The function of Maxwell’s demon is to observe the motions of the 

individual molecules of the gas and open and close a small door in the division between A and B 

at proper times so as to interfere with the random thermal motion of the molecules. The demon 

can work in either of two different modes. In the first mode, as shown in Fig. 1(a), it lets only 

swifter  molecules  pass  the  door  from  A  to  B,  and  slower  ones  pass  from  B  to  A,  causing  a 

difference in temperature between A and B.    In the second mode, as shown in Fig. 1(b), the     

 
 
 

- 1 - 

 

 

- 2 - 

(a)  By the first method, demon makes   
An inequality in temperature 

(b)  By the second method, demon makes   
        an inequality in pressure 

Fig. 1    Maxwell’s demon 

 

demon lets the molecules, both swifter ones and slower ones, pass the door only from A to B, 

never  from  B  to  A,  causing  a  difference  in  pressure.  Getting  a  difference  in  temperature  or  a 
difference in pressure means a renewing of energy----from waste one to useful one (2).   

The  authors  hold  that  Maxwell’s  hypothesis  will  be  much  easier  to  realize  if  we,  instead  of 

relying on the neutral molecules, turn for help to the thermal electrons ejected by cathodes in a 
vacuum  electronic  tube  (3).  To  illustrate  this,  let  us  imagine  an  electronic  tube  whose  essential 

part  is  an  insulated  plate  (a  quartz  plate  for  example)  coated  with  two  similar  and  parallel 

cathodes on its upper surface, as shown in Fig. 2(a). We, after Maxwell, refer to them as cathode 

A and cathode B. There is a narrow interval between A and B, keeping A and B well insulated 

each  other.  The  whole  electronic  tube  should  be  immersed  in  a  single  heat  reservoir  whose 

temperature is high enough that the cathodes can eject thermal electrons continuously. 

In  order  to  satisfy  “to  extract  heat  from  a  single  reservoir  and  convert  it  completely  into 

work  without  producing  any  other  effects,”  it  is  a  convenient  choice  to  choose  cathodes  like 

Ag-O-Cs photoelectric cathodes, which can eject thermal electrons at room temperature, and let 

the  air  within  the  laboratory  be  the  single  heat  reservoir,  and  the  whole  circuit  be  at  a  same 

temperature.     

Fig. 2 (a) illustrates the electrons ejected from two points on A and B near the interval when 

there  is  no  exterior  magnetic  field  applied  to  the  electronic  tube.  It  is  apparent  that  a  part  of 

electrons ejected by A can fly onto B, while an equal part of electrons ejected by B can also fly 

onto A. The two tendencies cancel each other, resulting in no collection of net charge.   

Now, if we apply a uniform magnetic field to the electronic tube in the direction parallel to 

the  interval  between  A  and  B,  the  tracks  of  the  ejected  electrons  will  change  into  circles  with 

different radii-swifter electrons move along bigger circles and slower ones move along smaller 

 

 
 
 

 

- 3 - 

      (a)    Electrons ejected without a magnetic field 

          (b)    Electrons ejected in a magnetic field 

 

 

Fig. 2    A modern demon works with thermal electrons 

circles.  Now,  a  part  of  the  electrons  ejected  by  A  can  fly  easily  onto  B,  but  all  the  electrons 

ejected by B can no longer fly onto A, as shown in Fig. 3(c). Such a net transition of electrons 

from  A  to  B  will  quickly  result  in  a  charge  distribution,  with  A  positively  charged  and  B 

negatively  charged.  A  potential  difference  is  formed  simultaneously  between  A  and  B.    (The 

situation  is  similar  to  the  second  mode  of  Maxwell’s  demon  by  which  the  gaseous  molecules 

move only from portion A to portion B, causing a difference in pressure, as shown in Fig.1 (b)).   

Connecting cathodes A and B with two metal wires to an outer load, a resistor for example, the 

load will obtain a current and a voltage, both small but macroscopic. 

Such  a  current,  together  with  the  voltage,  means  a  small  but  macroscopic  electric  power. 

The  electronic  tube  is  now  supplying  electric  energy  for  the  load  continuously.  One  may  ask, 

where does this electric energy come from?  

It  comes  from  the  heat  extracted  by  the  electronic  tube  from  the  surrounding  air.  Once 

cathode  A  gets  positively  charged  and  cathode  B  gets  negatively  charged,  these  charges  will 

produce immediately a static electric field over the interval between A and B. Such a field tends 

to  prevent  thermal  electrons  ejected  by  cathode  A  from  flying  onto  cathode  B.  The  electrons, 

nevertheless,  have  thermal  kinetic  energy.  At  room  temperature,  T  =  300  K  for  example,  the 
mean value of the kinetic energy of electrons is  ε = 3kT/2 = 6.21 x 10-21 J = 0.0388 eV, and the 
  = 117 km sec-1. Relying on this kinetic 

corresponding speed (r.m.s. speed) is vrms = 

3
mkT /

energy, the electrons can break through the obstruction of the static electric field and fly from A 

to B. On arriving at B, each electron has got a small amount of electric potential energy at the 

 

 
 
 

cost  of  losing  an  equal  amount  of  its  kinetic  energy.  The  electrons  are  thus  cooled  down 

(slightly),  and  consequently  the  temperature  of  the  electronic  tube  also  drops  down  (very 

slightly), which can be compensated by extracting heat from the surrounding air. 

In  the  above  process,  the  electronic  tube  extracts  heat  from  the  air  and  all  of  the  heat  is 

converted into electric energy, without producing any other effects. We hold that the process is in 

contradiction to Kelvin’s statement of the second law of thermodynamics 

The following is a detailed description of an actual experiment based on the above idea with 

two practical electronic tubes made by the authors, FX1-1 and FX1-6.   

   

2.    Electronic tube FX1 

(1)  The  cathodes  (electron  ejectors)  The  two  cathodes  A  and  B  in  FX1  are  common 

Ag-O-Cs photoelectric cathodes. As is well known, due to their particularly low work function 

of  0.7  to  0.9  eV,  Ag-O-Cs  cathodes  are  sensitive  to  near  infrared  rays  and  they  can  eject  the 
greatest  amount  of  thermal  electrons  at  room  temperature  among  all  existing  cathodes  (4). 

Generally  speaking,  at  room  temperature,  the  dark  thermal  current  density  ejected  from  the 
surface of an Ag-O-Cs cathode may range from 10-9 to 10 -14 A cm-2.   

  (2) Structure of FX1    The structure of FX1 is shown in Fig.3. The upper surface of A 
and  B  are  two  similar  and  parallel  Ag-O-Cs  cathodes,  each  with  an  area  of  4  x  40  mm2.   

Between A and B, there is a mica sheet 0.07 ~ 0.09 mm in thickness, which keeps A and B very 

close  (about  0.10  mm)  but  well  insulated  from  each  other.  M,  N  and  P  are  three  molybdenum 

supporting rods. M and N are also used as lead out wires for A and B respectively. P is actually 

also a temporary anode, which hangs 6 mm over A and B and is parallel to the interval. P, as an 

anode, is used in the process of making the Ag-O-Cs cathodes ----- oxidizing the silver films on 

the upper surfaces of A and B by oxygen-discharge.   

For a common photoelectric tube or a photoelectric multiplier tube, the less the dark thermal 

electron current, the better the quality of the tube. In our experiment, however, we prefer a rather 

strong dark thermal-electron emission from the cathodes. The typical dark thermal-electron 

current for each cathode of an FX1 tube ranges from 0.1 ~ 2. 5 nA. 

The leakage resistance between the two cathodes A and B should be higher than 100MΩ. 

Otherwise, according to our experience, the tube is unqualified for the experiment. The leakage 

resistance depends mainly on the final exhausting process of the extra cesium. 

 

- 4 - 

 

 
 
 

 

         

     

 

 

    (a) Cathodes A and B, mica 

    (b) The general structure of       

        sheet, supports, and so on   

        an electronic tube FX1 

    (c) A photo of an electronic   
        tube FX1 

         

(1) Magnetic field   

Fig. 3    Electronic tube FX1 

3.    Ways of measurements used 

The magnetic field applied to deflect the track of the thermal electrons is produced by a pair 
of magnets of the size 150 x 100 x 25 mm3 (Ceramic 8, MMPA Standard), as shown in Fig. 4(a). 

Let L stands for the distance between the two magnets, and B stands for the magnetic induction 

at the center of the central axis of the two magnets. The L ~ B relation is measured in advance 

with a gauss meter. 

 

(a)  Magnetic  field  produced  by  a  pair  of 

(b)  Current-measuring  circuit.  ZC43 

magnets.  B  depends  on  L,  and  the 
relation is measured in advance. 

electrometer, whose two scales with minimum 
values of 10-13 A and 10-14 A are used. 

 
is  an 

 

Fig. 4 

- 5 - 

 
 
 

 

(2) Output current and voltage 

In this experiment, tube FX1 is an electric power. We will take the input resistance of an 

electrometer Model ZC43 as a load to this electric power. The electrometer ZC43 can be used at 

the same time to measure the output current and voltage of the power. The measuring circuit is 

shown in Fig. 4(b). 

The current measuring range of ZC43 (produced by Shanghai Sixth Electric Meter Factory) is 
from 1 x 10-5A to 1 x 10-14A. Two measurement scales with minimum scale values of 1 x 10-13A 
and 1 x 10-14A respectively are used in our experiment. Both of the voltages corresponding to the 

minimum scale values for the two scales are the same, namely, 0.01volts. 

The  whole  circuit,  including  the  electric  power  and  the  load,  is  kept  at  the  same  room 

temperature.   

 

4.    The experiment and results 

Put  an  electronic  tube  FX1  in  a  copper-screening  box  and  connect  the  circuit.  The  four 

walls of the copper-screening box, as well as its cover and bottom, are all 6 mm in thickness, so 

visible  light  and  other  electromagnetic  waves  are  all  well  kept  out  of  the  box.  The  expected 

output current of the tube FX1 is transferred from the box to the electrometer ZC43 through an 

accessory concentric cable.   

At  first,  we  do  not  apply  a  magnetic  field  to  the  electronic  tube,  and  there  should  be  no 

current in the circuit. Regulate carefully the indicating pointer of ZC43 to zero. (In the next steps 

of the experiment, pay attention closely to the possible drift of the pointer). Now, if we apply a 

positive magnetic field with a rather weak magnetic induction B+ to the tube (B+ = 3.6 gausses 

for example, corresponding to L = 100cm) in the direction parallel to the interval between A and 

B,  a  weak  positive  output  current  I+ appears  immediately.  Then,  step  by  step,  strengthen  the 

magnetic induction B+ by reducing L, giving a sufficiently long pause for every step (to eliminate 

Farady’s motional electric motive force), we get every time a stable current I+ corresponding to a 

stable magnetic induction B+. At the beginning, I+ increases as B+ increases. There is then a peak 

of I+ , after which I+ decreases as B+ increases further. Such a peak is easy to explain-----as B+ 

getting stronger, the radii of the electron orbits getting smaller; after the peak, as more and more 

electrons (the slower ones first) can no longer cross the 0.10mm interval between A and B, the 

current drops down. 

        Reverse the direction of the magnetic field, and we have B- now. The electrometer shows 

that the direction of the output current, as expected, reverses, too-----we now call the current I-. 

 
 
 

- 6 - 

 

As the distance L reduces step by step, B- gets stronger and stronger, and I- increases first, then 

decreases after a similar peak in a similar way. 

        We  refer  to  the  currents  I+ and  I- briefly  as  Maxwell’s  current.  Generally  speaking,  for  a 

giving tube FX1, Maxwell’s current I is decided by two factors: the magnetic induction B and the 

temperature t. We may write 

                                        I = I ( B , T ).     

        The detailed results of the experiment are shown in tables and by curves as follows. 

Table 1 and Table 2 illustrate the data of two tests about the I ~ B relation of the electronic 

tube FX1-6, and Fig. 5 (a) and (b) are the corresponding I ~ B curves. In each of the two tests, 

the temperature is regarded as a constant parameter. 

 
Table 1 I ~ B relation of FX1-6    (t = 23.0oC ) 
100 
3.6 

80 
6.2 

60 
13 

50 
21 

40 
36 

30 
73 

+2 

-1.5 

5 

-5 

6 

-8 

6.5 

 

8 

-9 

6.5 

-10.7 

-9 

-7.5 

25 
108 

5.5 

20 
166 

5 

18 
203 

5 

-7 

Table 2 I ~ B relation of FX1-6    ( t = 22.0 ~ 22.8oC ) 
21 
0 
0 
5 
-4.5 
0 

108  166 
6 
-7.5 

13 
3 
-3.5 

73 
7 
-6.5 

6.2 
1.5 
-2 

36 
5.5 
-5 

3.6 
0 
0 

5 
-4.5 

203  ∞ 
0 
3 
0 
-3 

∞ 
0 

0 

0 

L    (cm) 
B (gauss) 
I+(10-13A) 
I-(10-13A) 

 

B (gauss) 
I+(10-13A) 
I-(10-13A) 

(a) I ~ B relation of FX1-6 (1) 

(b) I ~ B relation of FX1-6 (2) 

 

 

Fig. 5 

- 7 - 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

Table 3 and 4 illustrate the data of two tests about the I ~ B relation of tube FX1-1, and Fig. 

6 (a) and (b) are the corresponding I ~ B curves. In each of the two tests, the temperature is also 

regarded as a constant parameter. 

Table 3 I ~ B relation of FX1-1        (t = 23.8oC ) 
2 
2 

18.5 
7 

8.5 
9 

3.5 
4 

37 
6 

11 
8 

7 
8 

-4 

-6 

-7 

-6 

-6 

-5.5 

-4.5 

57 
5 

-3 

87 
4 

-2 

0 
0 

-2 

Table 4 I ~ B relation of FX1-1        (t = 22.2oC ) 
2 
3.2 

18.5 
4.2 

3.5 
6.0 

8.5 
 

7 
7.0 

37 
2.7 

11 
5.0 

57 
2.5 

87 
2.0 

0 
1.0 

0 

-5 

-5.5 

 

-5.0 

-3.8 

-2.8 

-2.1 

-1.0 

-0.5 

0 
0 

0 

0 
0 

0 

B (gauss) 
I+(10-14A) 
I-(10-14A) 
 

B (gauss) 
I+(10-14A) 
I-(10-14A) 
 
       

(a) I ~ B relation of FX1-1    (1) 

(b) I ~ B relation of FX1-1    (2) 

 

 

Fig. 6 

The experiment can be finely repeated. 

The  output  currents  of  the  experiment  are  very  small,  but  they  are  already  macroscopic 

currents.  In  the  case  of  I  =8.0  x  10-13 A,  the  peak  value  in  Fig.  5(a),  the  number  of  electrons 

passed from A to B in each second is N = 8.0 x 10-13 A / 1.6 x 10-19 Col = 5.0 x 10 6 sec-1. With 

five  million  electrons  move  in  the  same  direction  each  second,  we  should  say,  this  is  a 

macroscopic current. The corresponding voltage is 8.0 x 0.01 V = 0.08 V. Such a DC voltage is 

 
 
 

- 8 - 

obviously  a  macroscopic  one.  A  large  number  of  such  direct  currents  can  be  added  up  by 

connecting them in parallel, and the voltages can be added up by connecting them in series, to 

form a considerable electric power.     

Such  macroscopic  direct  currents  and  voltages,  though  still  very  small,  are  distinctly 

different from the fluctuating currents and voltages in the famous Johnson effect (caused by the 

fluctuations of the random thermal motion of the free electrons in a metal). Johnson fluctuating 

currents and voltages are microscopic ones. They are random. They alternate ceaselessly, having 

no stable period or frequency. They cannot be added up to form a considerable electric power. 

The experiment points at a completely new way of direct generation of electricity, too. 

 

5.    Conclusion 

In  the  above  experiment,  the  heat  extracted  by  the  electronic  tubes  from  the  air  converts 

completely  into  electric  energy  without  producing  any  other  effects.  The  experiment  shows 

clearly  that  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  is  not  universally  valid  and  there  are  ways  by 

witch energy can convert from waste one to useful one again!             

Thus,  after  so  long  a  delay,  Maxwell’s  cherished  wish  has  eventually  been  realized.  The 

human  beings  have  recognized  a  major  and  deeply  hidden  truth  of  the  nature:  Energy  is 

immortal, its vitality (conversion ability) lasts forever! 

Acknowledgement 

The authors are very grateful to Professor Fang Junxin and Professor Meng Zaoying, but for 

their encouragement and support, we could not have progressed step after step in this research. 

Gu Weijia, an engineer in the Medical Equipment Center of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and 

Xu Ping, an engineer of Yi Zheng Electronic Tube Factory, both helped much in making the test 

tube FX1. We express here our gratefulness to them as well as all the others who have helped us 

 

 

 
 
 

in this work.     

         

 

 

 

- 9 - 

 

REFERENCE 

1. James Clerk Maxwell      Theory of Heat, P.328, (1871)   

2. W. Ehrenberg      Maxwell’s Demon, Scientific American, pp.103-110 (1967)                                       

3. Fu Xinyong      An Approach to Realize Maxwell’s Hypothesis, Energy Conversion and   

  Management Vol.22 pp1-3 (1982). 

4.  A.  H.  Sommer    PHOTOEMISSIVE  MATERIALS  Preparation,  Properties,  and  Uses         

John Wiley & Sons (1968)    Section 10.7.1, Chapter 10. 

 

 
 
 

        APPENDIX      Maxwell’s original idea about the being (the demon) 

One  of  the  best  established  facts  in  thermodynamics  is  that  it  is  impossible  in  a  system 

enclosed  in  an  envelope  which  permit  neither  change  of  volume  nor  passage  of  heat,  and  in 

which both the temperature and the pressure are everywhere the same, to produce any inequality 

of  temperature  or  of  pressure  without  the  expenditure  of  work.  This  is  the  second  law  of 

thermodynamics, and it is undoubtedly true as long as we can deal with bodies only in mass, and 

have no power of perceiving or handling the separate molecules of which they are made up. If 

we conceive a being whose faculties are so sharpened that he can follow every molecule in its 

course, such a being, whose attributes are still as essentially finite as our own, would be able to 

do what is at present impossible to us. For we have seen that the molecules in a vessel full of air 

at  uniform  temperature  are  moving  with  velocities  by  no  means  uniform,  though  the  mean 

velocity of any great number of them arbitrarily selected, is almost exactly uniform. Now let us 

suppose that such a vessel is divided into two portions, A and B, by a division in which there is a 

small hole, and that a being, who can see the individual molecules, opens and closes this hole, so 

as to allow only the swifter ones to pass from A to B, and only the slower ones to pass from B to 

A. He will thus without expenditure of work, raise the temperature of B and lower that of A, in 

contradiction to the second law of thermodynamics.”                                                       

           

                                                                  From    James Clerk Maxwell    Theory of Heat, 1871     

- 10 - 

