 

Low-Cost Data Acquisition Card for School-
Network Cosmic Ray Detectors 

Sten Hansen, Thomas Jordan, Terry Kiper , Fermi National Laboratory, Batavia IL 

Dan Claes, Gregory Snow, Univ.of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE 

Hans Berns, T. H. Burnett, Richard Gran, R. Jeffrey Wilkes, Univ. of Washington, Seattle, WA 

   

 

 

 
Abstract—The  Cosmic  Ray  Observatory  Project  (CROP)  at 
University of Nebraska/Lincoln and the Washington Area Large-
scale  Time  coincidence  Array  (WALTA)  at  University  of 
Washington/Seattle  are  among  several  outreach  projects  siting 
cosmic-ray  detectors  at  local  high  schools  in  cities  around  North 
America,  to  study  the  origins  and  interactions  of  high-energy 
cosmic  rays.  In  a  collaboration  between  QuarkNet,  the  outreach 
program based at Fermilab, CROP, and WALTA, a low-cost data 
acquisition  electronics  card  has  been  developed  to  collect  and 
synchronize  the  data  from  each  detector  site.  The  cost  for  each 
card is under US$500 for parts, functionally replacing much more 
expensive electronics crates and modules at each high school site. 
The  card  has  4  analog  discriminator  inputs  for  photo-multiplier 
tube  signals,  a  4-channel  Time-to-Digital  converter  for  local 
coincidence  and  time-over-threshold  measurements  at  0.75  ns 
logic  via  a  CPLD  and 
trigger 
resolution,  programmable 
microcontroller,  and  a  built-in  low-cost  GPS  receiver/antenna 
module (via external cable) to provide event trigger time stamps at 
better  than  100  ns  accuracy.  Temperature  sensors  and  a 
barometer are also integrated to record environmental data along 
with the counter data. The card connects to any PC or laptop via a 
standard  RS-232  serial  port  for  data  output  and  control.  The 
microcontroller and CPLD are field programmable and therefore 
make the card functionality flexible and easy to upgrade. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

T

HE QuarkNet [1] DAQ card for school-network cosmic 
ray detectors [2] provides a low-cost alternative to using 
standard  particle  and  nuclear  physics  fast  pulse  electronics 
modules.  The  board,  which  can  be  produced  at  a  cost  of  less 
than  US$500,  produces  trigger  time  and  pulse  edge  time  data 
for 2 to 4-fold coincidence levels, via a universal RS-232 serial 
port interface, usable with any PC.  
Individual  detector  stations,  each  consisting  of  4  scintillation 
counter  modules,  front-end  electronics,  and  a  GPS  receiver, 
produce a stream of data in the form of ASCII text strings, in a 
set of distinct formats for different functions. 
The  card  includes  a  low-cost  GPS  receiver  module,  which 
permits  time  stamping  event  triggers  to  about  50  ns  absolute 
accuracy  in  UTC,  between  widely  separated  sites  [3].  The 
technique  used  for  obtaining  precise  GPS  time  was  adapted 

                                                           

Manuscript received October 29, 2003. This work was supported in part by 
the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy,  Quarknet,  and  the  U.S.  National  Science 
Foundation. Contact: wilkes@u.washington.edu.  

the  QuarkNet  DAQ  card 

from  the  procedure  developed  for  the  K2K  long-baseline 
neutrino experiment [4]. 
Development  of 

followed 
discussions  between  QuarkNet,  CROP 
and  WALTA 
participants,  during  and  after  the  SALTA  Workshop  held  as 
part  of  the  Education  and  Outreach  program  at  Snowmass-
2001  [5].  The  need  for  low-cost  but  highly  capable  front-end 
electronics  suitable  for  very  small  air  shower  arrays  became 
clear.  A  prototype  DAQ  card  previously  developed  for 
QuarkNet served as a starting point, but it did not yet include 
GPS  time  synchronization  or  pulse  edge  time  digitization 
functionality. 

CROP  [6],  WALTA  [7]  and  SALTA  [8]  all  aim  to  create 
large-area extensive air shower (EAS) detector arrays for ultra-
installing  mini-arrays  of 
high  energy  cosmic  rays,  by 
scintillation  counter  detectors  in  secondary  schools,  in  the 
Lincoln, NE, Seattle, WA, and Aspen, CO areas, respectively. 
Data  taken  at  individual  school  sites  (Fig.  1)  are  shared  via 
Internet  connections  and  scanned  for  multi-site  coincidence 
events.  

together, 

These  projects,  working 

salvaged  plastic 
scintillators, photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) and associated high 
voltage supplies from surplus equipment at the CASA detector 
[10]  site  at  Dugway,  UT.  Preliminary  training  of  secondary 
school teachers and students was conducted using NIM crates 
and  fast  electronics  (discriminators,  coincidence  and  scaler 
modules) loaned from Fermilab. However, the NIM electronics 
used  did  not  include  GPS  timing  or  a  simple  computer 
interface. 

The  availability  of  surplus  TMC  devices  purchased  for  the 
D0  experiment  at  Fermilab  (Time  Measurement  Chips  [9], 
pipeline  TDCs  implemented  on  an  ASIC,  and  originally 
developed  for  ATLAS  [11])  made  enhanced  functionality 
possible at low cost. Development of the QuarkNet DAQ card 
represents  a  significant  step  in  making  highly  capable  fast 
electronics  available  at  much  lower  cost  than  presently 
available  VME  and  FASTBUS  modules,  for  applications 
requiring only a few channels.  
 
 
 

 

 

PMTs 

GPS 
antenna 

GPS Module 

NIM Crate or DAQ card

but  not  fast  relative  timing  or  GPS  time  synchronization).  A 
functional block diagram of the DAQ card is shown in Fig. 3.  
Input  signals,  assumed  to  be  negative-going  PMT  pulses  of 
height  on  the  order  of  a  few  hundred  mV  and  width  on  the 
order  of  a  few  tens  of  ns,  are  first  passed  through  a  pre-
amplifier  stage,  with  gain  field-adjustable  by  replacing 
resistors.  Cards  are  produced  with  gain  resistors  selected  to 
match  the  recipient  project’s  PMTs,  but  this  feature  permits 
later adjustment as required.  

 

 

Fig.  2.    The  QuarkNet  DAQ  card  (Version  2).  Scale  is  indicated  by  the 

standard DB-9 connector at upper left. 
 

Following 

preamplification, 

to 
discriminators,  implemented  with  voltage  comparators  and 
trimpot-adjustable reference voltages. 

signals 

sent 

are 

PC 

Internet

Scintillator 
counters 

Fig.  1.    School-network  air  shower  detector  stations.  CROP  and  WALTA 
use  PMTs  and  counters  salvaged  from  the  CASA  experiment.  Initial 
installations used NIM crates borrowed from Fermilab PREP, which are being 
replaced by the DAQ cards described in this paper. 

 

II.  SPECIFICATIONS AND DESIGN 

The QuarkNet DAQ card (Fig. 2) was designed to meet the 

following requirements: 

•  Four PMT channels with 0-20 dB pre-amplifiers. 
•  Discriminators with adjustable thresholds. 
•  Selectable 1- to 4-fold majority trigger logic. 
•  Leading  and  trailing  edge  (relative)  arrival  times 

measured with ~1 nanosecond precision. 
•  Estimate pulse area via time over threshold. 
•  Onboard scalers for singles and coincidence rates. 
•  Coincidences stamped with GPS time to ~20 ns. 
•  Simple digital interface to any PC via serial port. 
•  Low cost (under US$500 per board for parts). 
•  Reliable and robust. 
•  Sufficiently  user-friendly  for  use  by  high  school 

students. 

Nanosecond-scale  relative  timing  on  a  single  board  allows 
rough  determination  of  air  shower  arrival  direction  at  a  given 
school site via time-of-flight. Inter-site timing on the order of a 
few  tens  of  nanoseconds,  achieved  by  timestamping  triggers 
with GPS data, is more than adequate for correlation of large-
scale air shower events over a many-kilometer scale network of 
sites. 

These  specifications  were  met  or  exceeded  by  the  design 
used  in  Version  2  of  the  QuarkNet  DAQ  card.  (Version  1, 
released  in  2001,  included  discriminator  and  logic  functions 

 

Fig. 3.  Hardware block diagram (Version 2). 

  

trigger 

logic,  scalers 

An  Altera  EP1K30  CPLD  chip  implements  command-
controlled 
to  record  singles  and 
coincidence  counts,  and  other  fast-logic  functions.  The  user 
may  define  the  coincidence  level,  read  out  or  reset  counter 
transmitting 
contents,  or  perform  other 
commands  to  the  board  from  the  host  PC.  Commands  and 
functions of the CPLD are defined in firmware, which may be 
altered  and  updated  as  needed,  by  downloading  precompiled 

functions,  by 

 

binary  code  to  the  CPLD.  Users  may,  among  other  functions, 
set  the  time  window  for  coincidences  from  48  ns  to  100 
microseconds, and define the effective pipeline length for pulse 
edge storage in the TDC. 

The CPLD is clocked at 41.667 MHz, generated by a 12.50 
MHz temperature-compensated quartz oscillator and a 1:3.333 
PLL frequency multiplier in series.  Thus the basic clock cycle 
is 24 nsec.  

The KEK TMC chip [9] provides a pipeline TDC with 0.75 
ns  resolution.  Leading  and  trailing  edge  times  from  pulses 
output by the discriminators are stored and made available for 
readout when a trigger is declared by the CPLD.  

The card reports up to one of each (rising and falling) edge 
per  24  ns  clock  cycle,  for  every  clock  cycle  up  to  the  user-
specified  gate  width,  thus  capturing  the  full  time-structure  of 
air shower events up to as much as 50 microseconds. However, 
multiple short, closely spaced pulses may be lost if they occur 
within a single 24 ns clock cycle. 

Board-level  control  functions  and  host  PC  interfacing  are 
handled  by  a  Texas  Instruments  MSP430  microcontroller 
(MCU)  chip.  The  microcode  defining  MCU  operation  can  be 
updated by reprogramming the onboard flash RAM.  

In  addition  to  the  features  mentioned,  the  card  includes  an 
LED display showing the current contents (in hexadecimal) of 
the  coincidence  counter,  has  onboard 
temperature  and 
barometric  pressure  sensors,  and  includes  a  trigger  output 
connector and manual reset button.  

GPS time synchronization data are obtained from a LeadTek 
GPS  receiver module, with receiver electronics integral to the 
weatherproof  antenna  module.  The  GPS  receivers  used  were 
modified from the manufacturer’s stock Model 9532 to provide 
the 1PPS (1 pulse per second) fast timing signal in addition to 
the  standard  ASCII  data  stream  containing  time,  geographical 
position  and  satellite  information.  A  standard  DB9  connector 
was  specially  adapted  to  handle  the  1PPS  signal,  add  an 
outdoor temperature sensor, and supply 5VDC power from the 
DAQ  card  to  the  GPS  module,  eliminating  the  need  for  a 
separate power supply [14]. 

III.  OPERATION AND PERFORMANCE 

From  the  user  standpoint,  the  DAQ  card  is  very  simple  to 
operate.  BNC  connectors  accept  coaxial  cables  from  up  to  4 
PMTs,  and  the  GPS  module  is  connected  with  its  special 
adapter  plug.  The  user’s  host  computer,  which  may  have  a 
Windows,  Mac  or  Linux  OS,  is  connected  via  a  standard 
RS232  serial  cable.  For  schools  that  have  relatively  new 
Macintosh models with USB ports only, a commercial USB-to-
RS232  adapter  can  be  inserted.  The  board  and  GPS  unit 
require a stable 5VDC, 800mA power supply, for example one 
of  the  conventional  AC  adapters  available  at  consumer 
electronics stores.  

The  simplest  way  to  operate  the  board  is  by  opening  a 
terminal  window  connected  to  the  serial  port.  Commands  can 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

be directly entered via the keyboard, and output viewed (and if 
desired, captured to a log file) from the screen.  

the  functions 

Table I shows the help screen displayed upon board startup, 
listing 
time  of  writing 
implemented.  At 
(November,  2003),  the  current  CPLD  and  MCU  firmware 
release is termed Version 2.3.  

In typical operation, the user enters commands to define the 
trigger logic level (1- to 4-fold majority), and enable counting. 
At  the end of a data taking run, counting can be disabled and 
the trigger count read out. For each trigger, the display shows 
one or more lines of hexadecimal encoded data, providing time 
of trigger, pulse leading and trailing edge times relative to the 
trigger  time,  and  information  needed  to  determine  the  GPS 
time of the trigger to 24 ns precision. Other commands can be 
used  to  directly  interrogate  the  GPS  module,  or  act  upon  the 
counter  registers,  etc.  Users  may  also  prepare  a  script  to 
implement  a  sequence  of  commands,  or  compile  custom 
software to operate the card directly. 

As  an  example  of  card  performance,  Fig.  4  shows  a 
histogram of the measured time separation between pulses from 
muons  penetrating  two  counters  which  are  in  contact  (so  the 
actual time of flight is essentially zero). The fitted Gaussian has 
standard deviation 1.0 ns, only slightly larger than the intrinsic 
TMC resolution of 0.75 ns. 

We have begun development of card interface software [12] 
using  the  LabView  system  from  National  Instruments  [13]. 
This allows development of user-friendly GUIs by students and 
teachers,  who  can  make  use  of  extensive  resources  available 
from the large LabView user community. In addition to direct 
data  displays,  these  applications  can  produce  output  in  many 
formats, including files formatted for direct use with Excel and 
other applications familiar to school students and teachers. 

While  we  have  focused  on  cosmic  ray  air  shower  detector 
applications  here,  the  Quarknet  DAQ  card  has  additional 
features, and can be used for experiments which do not require 
GPS  time  synchronization,  such  as  muon  telescopes,  muon 
decay  detectors,  and  other 
tabletop  particle  physics 
experiments.  For  example,  the  card  includes  the  option  of 
setting  one  channel  as  a  veto  in  the  coincidence  logic,  as 
needed in a muon lifetime measurement experiment. 

DAQ  cards  have  been  extensively  tested  by  the  CROP  and 
WALTA groups, and have been used to log useful cosmic ray 
data from prototype detector sites. Cards have been distributed 
to  over  20  schools  and  are  currently  being  brought  into 
operation in QuarkNet programs around the USA. 

and WALTA teachers for their patience with the development 
process.  
 

VI.  REFERENCES 

[1]  See http://quarknet.fnal.gov/. 
[2]  See http://csr.phys.ualberta.ca/nalta; see also refs. [5]-

[8] below. 

[3]  See, for example,  http://tycho.usno.navy.mil/gps.html. 
[4]  H.G.  Berns  and  R.J.  Wilkes,  "GPS  Time  Synchronization  System  for 
K2K", IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. vol. 47, p. 340  (2000). See also H. Berns, 
et al, paper N26-84, this conference. 

[5]  See 

http://snowmass2001.org/outreach/education2.html 
[6]  See http://physics.unl.edu/~gsnow/crop/crop.html. 
[7]  See http://www.phys.washington.edu/~walta/. 
[8]  See http://faculty.washington.edu/~wilkes/salta/ 
[9]  Y.  Arai  and  M.  Ikeno,  “A  time digitizer CMOS gate-array with 250 ps 
time resolution,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 31, pp. 212–220, Feb. 
1996.. 

 

[10]  M. Borione, et al, Nucl. Instr. And Meth. A, vol. 346, p. 329, 1994 
[11]  The ATLAS Collaboration, CERN/LHCC/94-43 P2, 1994. 
[12]  T. H. Burnett et al, paper N26-119, IEEE-NSS 2003 Conference Record. 
[13]  See http://www.ni.com/labview/. 
[14]  H. G. Berns, et al, paper N26-84, IEEE-NSS 2003 Conference Record. 

 

 

TABLE I 
DAQ CARD COMMANDS (HELP SCREEN DISPLAY) 

IV.  FUTURE PLANS 

We  are  currently  performing  intensive  testing  of  the  DAQ 
cards  and  plan  to  implement  a  new  firmware  version  within 
about 6 months, to repair some firmware bugs and add desired 
features.  The  card  described  is  has  been  distributed  to  about 
twenty schools. It is hoped that the present hardware design is 
sufficiently  robust  and  capable  to  meet  users’  needs  for  some 
years,  with  possible  future  firmware  upgrades  as  applications 
develop. 

 

 

Fig. 4.  Histogram of measured time differences between leading edges of 
pulses from two counters in contact, from a muon telescope experiment at the 
University of Washington. Actual time differences should be on the order of a 
few ps. The fitted Gaussian has 1 ns standard deviation, consistent with TMC 
resolution. 
 

V.  ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

We  wish  to  thank  Mark  Buchli,  Paul  Edmon,  Erich  Keller, 
Ben  Laughlin,  Jeremy  Sandler  and  Jared  Kite  for  valuable 
assistance in testing and debugging the boards, and the CROP 

