PAPER REFERENCE: H – VII.3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CLUSTER EMISSION UNDER FEMTOSECOND  
LASER ABLATION OF SILICON 
 
 
A. V. Bulgakov 1, I. Ozerov 2, and W. Marine *2
 
 

1 Institute of Thermophysics SB RAS, Prospect Lavrentyev 1, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia 
2 GPEC, UMR 6631 CNRS, Faculté des Sciences de Luminy, Case 901, 13288 Marseille Cedex 9, France. 

 Abstract 

 
 

 Rich populations of clusters have been observed after femtosecond laser ablation of 

bulk silicon in vacuum. Size and velocity distributions of the clusters as well as their charge 

states have been analyzed by reflectron time-of-flight mass spectrometry. An efficient 

emission of both neutral silicon clusters Si n (up to n = 6) and their cations Si n

+ (up to n = 10) 

has been observed. The clusters are formed even at very low laser fluences, below ablation 

threshold, and their relative yield increases with fluence. We show the dependencies of the 

cluster yield as well as the expansion dynamics on both laser wavelength and laser fluence. 

The mechanisms of the cluster formation are discussed. 

 
Keywords: Silicon; Nanoclusters; Femtosecond laser ablation; Coulomb Explosion 
 
 
 
 

                                                        
* Corresponding author: Tel.: +33 491 829 173; Fax: +33 491 829 176; 
marine@gpec.univ.mrs.fr (W. Marine) 
  E-mail: 

 

 

1 

 
 
 
1. Introduction 

 The recent development of femtosecond lasers expands the possible applications of 

laser ablation. However, the fundamental mechanisms of light-material interactions are still 

poorly understood. A study of the plume composition and its expansion helps in the 

understanding of the fundamental processes involved into the interaction and in the 

development of new laser applications. Recently, surface modifications under femtosecond 

laser irradiation of bulk silicon have been analyzed for laser pulse durations from 5 to 400 fs 

[1]. The pump-and-probe studies show the moment of the plasma initiation and allow one to 

follow the plume expansion at the very early stages close to the target [2]. The first 

observation of the silicon plume expansion at larger time scale after the femtosecond ablation 

by time-of-flight methods was reported in [3], where the authors also mentioned the 

observation of small nanoclusters. However, very few information is available on the 

formation of silicon nanoclusters after the ablation by short laser pulses. The dimer desorption 

under resonant nanosecond excitation has been recently reported in the case of (2x1) 

reconstructed (100) silicon surface [4]. The use of high energy photons of 6.4 eV (ArF laser) 

induces very strong desorption and ablation of atomic species and small clusters from both the 

bulk material and the nanostructured Si surfaces [5]. However, there is no systematical 

information neither on composition nor on the dynamical properties of the plumes induced by 

femtosecond irradiation. In this work, we present evidence for the formation of clusters with 

sizes up to 10 atoms under ultrashort laser ablation of bulk silicon and analyze the dynamics 

of their expansion. 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

 

 

 

2. Experimental 

The experiments were performed with Si [100] surface under ultrahigh vacuum 

conditions (~ 10 -10 mbar). The monocrystalline Si target was irradiated at an angle of 

incidence of 45 (cid:176)  using a Ti:sapphire laser system (Mai-Tai coupled with TSA amplifier, 

Spectra Physics, 80 fs pulse duration, 10 Hz repetition rate, up to 30 mJ energy per pulse) 

operating at wavelengths of 800, 400, and 266 nm. A part of the laser beam was selected by 

an aperture to provide a nearly uniform intensity distribution over the irradiated spot. The 

target was rotated/translated during measurements to avoid considerable cratering. For each 

wavelength, series of craters at several laser energies were produced on the stationary sample. 

By measuring the crater areas, the absolute calibration of laser fluence was performed. The 

laser fluence on the target was varied in the ranges 80

- 800, 20 - 200,  5- 50 mJ/cm 2 at 

wavelengths of 800, 400, and 266 nm, respectively.  

The abundance distributions of neutral and cationic particles in the laser-induced 

plume were analyzed by a reflectron time-of-flight mass spectrometer (TOF MS). When ions 

were studied, the plume was allowed to expand under field-free conditions. While the neutral 

particles of the plume were analyzed, the ionized species were rejected using a simple plasma 

suppressor [6]. The latter consisted of a pair of deflection plates placed along the plume axis 

in front of the ion source of the MS where neutral particles were ionized by impact of 110 eV 

electrons. At a distance of 11 cm from the target, the ions, either ablated or post-ionized, were 

sampled parallel to the plume expansion axis by a 500 V repeller pulse after a delay time

 td, 

following the laser pulse. All mass spectra were averaged over 300 laser shots. 

 

 

3 

 

3. Results and discussion 

 

 

Efficient emission of both neutral silicon clusters Si

n (up to  n = 6) and their cations 

Sin

+ (up to n = 10) have been observed for all investigated wavelengths. Si atoms and Si + ions 

were the most abundant particles at all laser fluences. Though, at certain irradiation regimes, 

the cluster fraction exceeded 10% of that of Si atoms and ions in the ablation plume. Fig. 1 

shows the typical mass spectra of cationic and neutral plume species, respectively. The 

spectra were obtained under the irradiation conditions corresponding to the maximum relative 

yield of the clusters with respect to monatomic particles. The abundance distributions are 

smooth under these conditions with peak intensities monotonously decreasing with cluster 

size. As will be discussed below, the velocity distributions for ionized plume particle are 

strongly dependent on particle mass. The ion mass spectra are therefore different for particles 

expanding in the faster and the slower parts of the plume. The mass spectrum shown in Fig. 

1a was obtained at the time delay corresponding to the maximum yield of Si2

+ dimer. 

A variation in the time delay  td allowed the analysis of particle velocity distributions 

and the characterization of the temporal evolution of the plume composition. Fig 2 shows the 

typical TOF distributions of Si

+ ions for different fluencies. We have found that the 

distributions are weakly affected by both laser wavelength and fluence. In all cases, they 

reach the maximum at ~9 

m s time delay that corresponds to the ion velocity of around 12 

km/s, or to a kinetic energy of ~20 eV. An increase in laser fluence results only in a 

broadening of the distributions with a negligible shift towards higher velocities. At the same 

time, the total number of Si + ions increases strongly with fluence. The ion yield at a given 

fluence can be evaluated by integrating the TOF distributions in time. To obtain the values 

proportional to the total number of the plume particles at various fluences, this procedure 

4 

should be corrected for angular distributions of expanding particles as a function of their 

velocity (usually fast plume species are more forward directed than slow ones [7,8]). The 

angular distributions were not measured in this work, but, since the ion velocity distributions 

are similar for different conditions (Fig.2), such a correction is not necessary for Si+ ions.  

Figure 3 shows the yields of plume ions as a function of laser fluence for three laser 

wavelengths. These dependencies show a steep gradient that is nearly identical for 800 and 

400-nm wavelengths. For 266-nm, it is slightly weaker. We note that the total number of 

detected particles varies by around 6 orders of magnitude in the studied fluence ranges. The 

threshold fluences,  Fth, for ion appearance in the plume, as deduced from MS measurements 

are around 100, 40, and 10 mJ/cm 2 for 800, 400, and 266 nm, respectively. It should be noted 

that our ion detection system has a high sensitivity to detect a single plume ion. As a result, 

the obtained values correspond to the  real thresholds for ion appearance but not to the ion 

detection threshold.  

Cluster ions Si n

+ were observed throughout the laser fluence range studied, even at 

very low fluences close to the threshold for Si ions (at least for dimers). The clusters are 

found to be considerably slower than atomic ions. The TOF distributions for Si

+ dimers are 

2

maximized at  td  @

 18  m s for all wavelengths.   The most probable velocity of the dimers is 

therefore approximately two times lower than that of Si

+. This means that these plume 

particles have nearly the same momentum under these conditions. However, the Si

+ trimers 

3

are faster than it would be expected for constant momentum (the TOF distributions are 

maximized at around 21 m s). 

By integrating the cluster TOF distributions in time, the total number of clusters in the 

plume as a function of fluence was also evaluated. For low fluences, the total number of the 

detected dimers increases with fluence and reaches maximum at  F/Fth @

 2 for 800 nm and at 

F/Fth @

 4 for 400 nm. The maximum values of the population ratios Si

+/Si+ are around 0.18 

2

 

5 

and 0.22 for 800 and 400 nm respectively. Further increase in fluence results in an abrupt fall 

of the relative concentration of the dimers. This decrease of the Si2

+ abundance in the plume is 

due to both overall decrease of the relative cluster yield at high fluences and to a conversion 

of Si2

+ into larger cluster. The performed TOF integration shows the fast increase of the Si

+ 

4

and Si6

+ cluster abundance with fluence at F > 400 mJ/cm2. 

In contrast to Si + ions, the TOF distributions of clusters strongly depend on the laser 

fluence. Figure 4 shows the evolution of the TOF distribution for the Si

+ dimer at different 

2

fluences. These results were obtained for excitation at 800 nm. At very low fluences, below ~ 

200 mJ/cm2 (@

 2Fth), the distributions are rather narrow, single-peaked, and maximized at ~18 

m s. For laser fluences above 2 Fth , the behavior of Si 2

+ changes dramatically. In the fluence 

range between 2Fth and 4Fth, the TOF distribution is still single-peaked but the maxima of the 

distributions are significally shifted towards higher time delays (lower velocities). At 

F = 

4Fth, the maximum is at ~25  m s (the corresponding most probable velocity is ~ 4.4 km/s). The 

fast cluster ions are still present in this ablation regime, as can be seen in Fig. 4, but their 

distribution is masked by slower ions. With further increase in laser fluence the second slower 

population of Si 2

+ ions with the most probable velocity of around 2.7 km/s appears in the 

plume. At fluences above ~5.5   Fth, this slow population becomes dominant. The first faster 

peak in the distribution (corresponding to the cluster ions detected in the (2

- 4)  Fth fluence 

range) is still present, well separated from the second peak, and is still maximized at ~25 

m s. 

However, its intensity is much lower then at low fluences. The fast cluster ions (those 

observed at F < 2Fth) are not detected anymore.  

The fluence dependency of the TOF distributions for larger Si

+ clusters  ( n =  3 - 6) 
n

under excitation at the wavelength of 800 nm is found to be qualitatively similar to that for 

Si2

+. At a threshold fluence of around 450 mJ/cm 2, the distributions are transformed from the 

single-peaked one to the double-peaked with the second (slow) cluster population becoming 

 

6 

rapidly dominant with further increase in fluence. The most probable velocity of the second 

population slightly decreases with cluster size from 2.5 km/s for Si

+ to 2 km/s for Si 6

+. The 

2

abundance distribution for this slow cluster population is remarkably different from that for 

fast clusters (shown in Fig. 1a). The Si4 and Si6 cluster ions are more abundant than their odd-

numbered neighbors. For larger time delays, the Si 6 cluster becomes dominant particle in the 

plume. 

Based on the obtained results, we can address the fundamental questions on the 

mechanism of cluster formation. Are the observed clusters formed primarily by their direct 

ejection from the target or by gas-phase aggregation of ablated atoms? Which process is 

responsible for such a transformation of the cluster velocity distribution as shown in Fig. 4? 

The set of the obtained TOF distributions and fluence dependencies provides a clear evidence 

for cluster formation mechanisms at different irradiation regimes. At very low laser fluence, 

from ion appearance threshold Fth up to ~2 Fth, Si+ and Si2

+ ions are produced by an impulsive 

Coulomb explosion (CE) from a charged surface. We argue this by the following: 

(a) The observed momentum scaling for the particles and a very weak dependence of 

their expansion velocities on laser fluence and wavelength in the low fluence regimes 

indicates directly the CE mechanism [7]. The repulsive electric field induced in the target by 

the fs-laser pulse lasts for a short period of time (~1 ps). Both Si + and Si2

+ spend roughly the 

same time in the action range of this field. The time of electrostatic interaction leading to the 

ion removal is thus many orders of magnitude shorter than the ion flight time to the mass 

spectrometer that results in equal momenta for the ejected Si

+ and Si 2

+ ions as seen 

experimentally (Fig.4). We suggest that the electric field under these conditions is strong 

enough to repulse positive ions from the surface but not so strong to break the bonds of 

ejected clusters. Note that thermally desorbed particles are characterized by equal kinetic 

energy rather than momentum [7]. 

 

7 

(b) An additional support for the CE is the high velocity of Si

+ ions at low fluences. 

2

For fluences beyond ~2 Fth, the most probable velocity decreases that indicate the appearance 

of an additional ablation channel. For thermally desorbed particles one would expect the 

opposite behavior with fluence. 

Contrarily, the slower Si n

+ clusters (which overshadow the Coulomb explosion ions in 

the  2Fth -4 Fth  fluence range and form the fast cluster population at higher fluences) can be 

interpreted as "plasma ions", i.e., ions formed in the gas-phase ionized vapor plume. Also, we 

should take in consideration the direct thermal evaporation of small clusters from the surface 

(desorption of Si n clusters up to  n = 6 was observed from thermally heated Si [9]). The 

velocities of these "plasma ions" decrease only slightly with cluster size and scale by a law 

intermediate between constant kinetic energy and constant velocity. 

In conclusion, we present the first analysis of expansion dynamics of monoatomic 

species and small clusters after femtosecond laser ablation of clean (100) Si surface. While 

our results unambiguously show the domination of nonthermal mechanism of nanocluster 

emission at low laser fluence, more studies is needed to be certain about the origin of the ions 

under all the irradiation conditions. 

4. Conclusions 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

 

 

 

References 

 

 
 

 

 

 

1. J. Bonse, S. Baudach, J. Krüger, W. Kautek, M. Lenzner, Appl. Phys. A 74 (2002) 19. 

2. T.Y. Choi, C.P. Grigoropopulos, J. Appl. Phys. 92 (2002) 4918. 

3. A. Cavalleri, K. Sokolowski-Tinten, J. Bialkowski, M.Schreiner, D. von der Linde, J. Appl. 

Phys. 85 (1999) 3301. 

4. J. Kanasaki, M. Nakamura, K. Ishikawa, K. Tanimura, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (2002) 257601. 

5. L. Patrone, I. Ozerov, M. Sentis, W. Marine, J. Phys. IV 11 (2001) Pr7-121. 

6. A.V. Bulgakov, O.F. Bobrenok, V.I. Kosyakov, Chem. Phys. Lett. 320 (2000) 19. 

7. R. Stoian, D. Ashkenasi, A. Rosenfeld, E.E.B. Campbell, Phys. Rev. B 62 (2000) 13167. 

8. N.M. Bulgakova, A.V. Bulgakov, O.F. Bobrenok, Phys. Rev. E 62 (2000) 5624. 

9. H. Tanaka, T. Kanayama, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 15 (1997) 1613. 

9 

 

 

 

 

 

Reference number of Manuscript: H – VII.3 

List of figure captions: 

indicated in the figure. 

Fig. 1. Mass spectra of cationic (a) and neutral (b) species. The irradiation conditions are 

Fig. 2. Typical time-of-flight (TOF) distributions of Si

+ ions for different fluences. Laser 

wavelength was 800 nm.  Fth  = 100 mJ/cm² is the threshold fluence corresponding to 

the ion appearance in the plume. 

Fig. 3. The ion yield as a function of laser fluence for 800, 400 and 266 nm wavelengths of 

irradiation. 

of 800 nm. 

Fig. 4. TOF distributions of Si 2 for irradiation with different fluences at the laser wavelength 

10

 

 
Figure 1 

 

 
Figure 2 

 

 
Figure 3 

 

 
Figure 4 

