LASER ABLATION SYNTHESIS OF ZINC OXIDE CLUSTERS: 

A NEW FAMILY OF FULLERENES? 

Alexander V. Bulgakov a, Igor Ozerov b, Wladimir Marine b 

a Institute of Thermophysics, Prospect Lavrentyev 1, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia,  

e-mail: bulgakov@itp.nsc.ru 

b Université de la Méditerranée, GPEC, UMR CNRS 6631, Marseille, France 

ABSTRACT 

 

Positively charged zinc oxide clusters Zn nOm (up to n = 16, m 

 n) of various stoichiometry 

were synthesized in the gas phase by excimer ArF laser ablation of a ZnO target and 

investigated using time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Depending on ablation conditions, either 

metal rich or stoichiometric clusters dominate in the mass spectrum. When the irradiated target 

surface is fairly fresh, the most abundant clusters are metal rich with Zn

n+1On and Zn n+3On 

being the major series. The stoichiometric clusters are observed with an etched ablated surface. 

The magic numbers at n = 9, 11 and 15 in mass spectra of (ZnO)

n clusters indicate that the 

clusters have hollow spheroid structures related to fullerenes. A local abundance minimum at n 

= 13 provides an additional evidence for the presence in the ablation plume of fullerene-like 

(ZnO)n clusters. 

 

 

1 

 

 

 

£
 Recently much interest has been shown in ZnO nanostructured materials owing to their 

promising applications in chemical sensors, photocatalysis, nanoscale optoelectronic devices. 

A variety of ZnO nanocluster materials have been recently synthesized including nanorods [1] 

and nanotubes [2]. Bulk ZnO is an amphoteric oxide which exhibits both acid and basic 

properties. One might thus expect various structural forms of zinc oxide clusters with 

predominantly covalent or ionic chemical bonds depending on cluster size and stoichometry. It 

was theoretically predicted that (ZnO)n clusters with spheroid fullerene-like structures could be 

stable at n = 11, 12, and 15 [3]. Other calculations suggest stable spheroid structures for n = 8 

and 9 [4]. However, the theoretically suggested structures have not yet been experimentally 

confirmed. 

 We report here on the observation of cationic Zn

nOm clusters of different stoichiometry 

in a laser-ablation plasma plume. The effect of ablation conditions on the relative cluster 

abundance is analyzed. The possible structures of clusters are discussed. 

The apparatus used for laser ablation and cluster detection has been described 

previously [5]. In brief, a sintered ZnO disk was ablated under high vacuum conditions by a 15 

ns ArF laser pulse at 193 nm. The laser fluence on the target was varied in the range 0.2 – 2 

J/cm2 at a fixed spot area of about 0.3 mm 2. At a distance of 57 mm from the target, positively 

charged particles of the laser-ablation plume were sampled parallel to the plume axis by a 500 

V repeller pulse after a time delay,  td, following the laser pulse. The relative abundance of the 

cations was analyzed using a reflectron time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometer. We 

distinguished roughly two different regimes in respect to cluster formation: (i) ablation of a 

relatively fresh surface (less than ~50 laser shots accumulated at the same spot), and (ii) 

ablation of an etched surface irradiated previously with at least 500 pulses. In all cases, we 

avoided considerable cratering at the surface. 

 

2 

 

At a relatively narrow range of laser fluence of 0.5 – 1 J/cm 2 for both fresh and etched 

surfaces, a wide spectrum of zinc oxide clusters of various stoichiometry was observed. Figure 

1a shows a mass spectrum of cationic species produced with a fresh ZnO surface at a laser 

fluence of 0.7 J/cm2 corresponding to the maximum yield of clusters. The main Zn nOm clusters 

are metal rich under these conditions and may be gathered into few series depending on the 

metal/oxygen ratio. The major series corresponds to Zn n+1On clusters with rather smooth size 

distribution. Clusters containing more than one excess metal atom are also present in high 

abundance and the Zn n+30n series is generally more abundant than Zn

n+20n clusters. The 

stoichiometric clusters (ZnO)n with n = 2, 3, and 6-9 are present in low abundance under these 

conditions. The observation of metal-rich Zn

nOm clusters consists with the theoretically 

predicted "metallization" of small ionic clusters [6]. It has been speculated that anion vacancies 

are occupied by electrons donated from the excess metal atoms that results in stabilization of 

oxide cluster ions. 

 When the etched surface is ablated, the mass spectrum is significantly modified (Fig. 

1b). The abundance of the stoichiometric clusters increases for n > 6 and becomes comparable 

to that of the Zn n+1On series. The (ZnO) n clusters contain mainly an odd number of zinc atoms 

with the magic numbers at n = 9, 11, and 15. However, there is a prominent local minimum at 

n = 13. The clusters are found to have nearly equal expansion velocity (~ 400 m/s under these 

conditions) over a wide mass range that implies that the clusters are formed due to gas-phase 

aggregation in the plasma plume rather than by direct emission from the surface [7]. 

 The observed magic numbers and the fact that the stoichiometric (ZnO)

n clusters 

dominate at fairly large sizes (n > 6) indicate, according to calculations [3,4], that the clusters 

have hollow cage-like structures related to fullerenes. The cages are made up of triply 

coordinated Zn and O atoms arranged with 6 rhombuses and an arbitrary number of hexagons. 

 

3 

The plausible structures for the magic (ZnO) n clusters are shown in Fig. 1b. A local abundance 

minimum at n = 13 provides an additional evidence for the presence of fullerene-like (ZnO)

n 

clusters in the plume. It is reasonable to suggest that such clusters are more stable, the more the 

smaller polygons are isolated from each other (similar to the isolated pentagon rule for carbon 

fullerenes [8]). In the considered case of (ZnO)n cages, the structures with none of the rhombus 

to share an edge become geometrically possible at n > 11, except for n = 13. Moreover, the 

spherical structures at n = 13 are geometrically forced to have an additional rhombus or a 8-

membered ring [9]. Therefore, the formation of cage-like (ZnO)

13 clusters in the kinetic 

pathway of zinc oxide cluster growth appears to be unfavorable since the adjusted four-

membered rings impose the increased steric strains. 

 It is a pleasure to thank N.M. Bulgakova, N.A. Bulgakova, and V.I. Kosyakov for 

useful discussions. This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research 

(grant 02-03-32221) and by the International Science and Technology Center (project 2310). 

 

4 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Dai, Y., Zhang, Y., Li, Q.K., Nan, C.W. Synthesis and Optical Properties of Tetrapod-like 

Zinc Oxide Nanorods. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2002, 358 (1-2), 83-86. 

[2]  Wu, J.-J., Liu, S.-C., Wu, C.-T., Chen, K.-H., Chen, L.-C. Heterostructures of ZnO-Zn 

Coaxial Nanocables and ZnO Nanotubes. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2002, 81 (7), 1312-1314. 

[3]  Behrman, E.C., Foehrweiser, R.K., Myers, J.R., French, B.R., Zandler, M.E. Possibility of 

Stable Spheroid Molecules of ZnO. Phys. Rev. A 1994 49 (3), R1543-R1546. 

[4]  Matxain, J.M., Fowler, J.E., Ugalde, J.M. Small Clusters of II-IV Materials: ZniOi, i = 1-9. 

Phys. Rev. A 2000 62 (5) 053201. 

[5]  Bulgakov, A.V., Bobrenok, O.F., Kosyakov, V.I., Ozerov, I., Marine, W., Hedén, M., 

Rohmund, F., Campbell, E.E.B. Phosphorus Clusters: Synthesis in the Gas-Phase and 

Possible Cage-like and Chain Structures. Phys. Solid State 2002 44 (4), 617-622. 

[6]  Rajagopal, G., Barnett, R.N., Landman, U. Metallization of Ionic Clusters. Phys. Rev. Lett. 

1991 67 (6), 727-730. 

[7]  Bulgakov, A.V., Bobrenok, O.F., Kosyakov, V.I. Laser Ablation Synthesis of Phosphorus 

Clusters. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2000 320 (1-2), 19-25. 

[8] 

Smalley, R.E. Self-Assembly of the Fullerenes. Acc. Chem. Res. 1992 25 (3), 98-105. 

[9]  Roberts, C., Johnston, R.L. Investigation of the Structures of MgO Clusters using a Genetic 

Algorithm. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2001 3 (22), 5024-5034. 

 

 

5 

FIGURE CAPTION 

 Fig. 1.

 TOF mass spectra of cationic zinc oxide clusters produced by laser ablation of 

(a) fresh ZnO sample at fluence  E = 0.7 J/cm 2 and time delay  td = 42  m s and (b) etched ZnO 

surface at  E = 0.7 J/cm 2 and  td = 42  m s. The time delays correspond to maximum yields of 

clusters. The numbers above the peaks correspond to the numbers of Zn and O atoms, 

respectively. The insets show the mass spectra of low mass particles. Several peaks due to 

sample impurities are observed with the fresh sample. Plausible cage-like structures for the 

magic (ZnO)n clusters are shown in (b). 

 

 

 

6 

 
Fig 1 

 

