Raining lead around 250mya : a smoking gun for an Australian
impact origin of the Permian Extinction.

Jim Standard and C. Austen Angell
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Arizona State University,
Tempe, AZ 85287

Recent documentation of extreme atmospheric sulfur and methane contents at the time
of the vast Permo-Triassic (P-T) extinction makes it possible to interpret an observation
that has lain unnoticed in the geological literature for 40 years. This is the finding of
microscopic metallic lead tear drops in the fluvial strata of the early Triassic sandstones
that overlie Permian coal beds and other sedimentary deposits in the Sydney basin of
Australia. Elemental lead is almost unknown in nature, so its occurrence in these
graphite-loaded sandstones is a provocative finding. While climate change and
vulcanism could explain the carbon and sulfur anomalies, the only way to account for
metallic lead aerodynamic droplets is by massive impact and vaporization of lead
mineral-containing formations. Since lead occurs geologically as the sulfide and since
lead is an easily reduced element, its occurrence in conjunction with sulfur and carbon
count anomalies suggests a bolide impact on carbon-loaded strata in a sulfide mineral-
rich region. From these clues, and from stream cross-bedding data, we identify a
probable site for the impact, in Bass Strait between Tasmania and Victoria. A
gravitational anomaly, similar to that known at the site of the Cretacious-Tertiary (C-T)
impact site, conforms with a central uplift. The sudden compression at an Australian
impact site would provoke tension fissuring on the opposite side of a shell- structured
planet, hence is consistent with the unprecedented flood basalts initiated in Siberia at the
P-T boundary. Our interpretation requires that lead microspheres and graphite occur
together elsewhere, possibly in Antarctic sandstones.      (242 words)

   Since the impact origin of the T-C boundary extinction [1] was established to the
satisfaction of most [2], there has naturally arisen a great interest in the possibility that the
even more catastrophic die-off at the P-T boundary has a similar origin. The possibility has
been strengthened recently by the evidence from Rampino et al. [3,4] and others [5] that the
boundary is extremely sharp on the geological time scale. Based on the study of Austrian
alpine rocks at the P-T boundary, Rampino et al concluded that the period in which the
extinction occurred was no more than 60,000 yr, perhaps less than 8,000 yr. Fungal studies by
Steiner et al [4] in the Karoo Basin of South Africa suggest an interval less than 40,000 years
(also a geological eye-blink). Coupled with suggestions[6,7] that non-terrestrial  isotope ratios
of gases were encapsulated in buckey-balls (that can form intense heat spikes], these
observations may be construed to imply that a large bolide struck the earth at that time.
However, unlike the iridium-rich layer of clay that is found across the world at the T-C
boundary, there has been no "smoking gun" found for the P-T boundary. Likewise, no
convincing impact site, or even the usual shocked quartz impact markers [8] have been
discovered [9]. On the other hand, glass spherules [10], and particularly Fe-Si-Ni grains [11]

1

previously associated with impact events have been reported  in the Meishin beds  of China
that have been so well studied[10,11,12]  and precisely dated at 251.4 ± 1 m.y. ago [13].

An observation that would constitute a "smoking gun" for a nearby impact event, if it could be
proven free of any artifactual origin, is that of metallic lead microspheres (~0.5mm diam) in
the early Triassic sandstones of the Sydney basin, Australia, reported 40 years ago by Bayliss
and Standard.[14] and ignored ever since. Unlike most sandstones, the Hawkesbury
sandstones are quite rich in graphite [15]. Graphite grains are the most obvious non-quartz
component of these quartz-rich sandstones. Al though graphite is common in nature, it has
also been associated with impacts sites [16] and interpreted in terms of the high temperatures
required for its formation from less structured forms of carbon (either in the impactor itself or
in the impact site).  Graphite is found throughout the Hawkesbury formation. Pieces as large
as 1 cm in diameter have been recovered [15]. The low chemical potential of oxygen
associated with its presence provides a possible explanation for the (seemingly improbable)
persistence, through geologic time, of lead in its metallic state. Certainly, persistence of lead
under such thermodynamic conditions is as feasible as the persistence of the more
electropositive FeSiNi  alloy, an accepted impact marker, found in the south China P-T
boundary layer in ref. 11). Here we couple the metallic lead observation with other sets of
observations from the present work [15], and previous observations on the early triassic
atmosphere [11, 17-19],  to argue for a bolide impact in the Bass Strait region of Australia,
where a tell-tale circular uplift in the center of an otherwise rather flat area of seabed is
identified from seafloor and gravity maps.

We develop this idea in four stages. The first is a thermodynamic argument for the origin of
tiny lead tears (in the intense dust/vapor cloud or proximal ejecta) in terms of an impact in a
sulfide mineralized area in the presence of hydrocarbons from seabed methane clathrate
and/or peat deposits in the impact area. Support is drawn here from recent information on the
extraordinary nature of the atmosphere in the early Triassic period described in refs. 11 and
17-20. We couple this argument with some cautionary comments on possible artifactual
origins of the metallic lead, which we have of course made diligent efforts to eliminate. The
second is an analysis of the flow directions and graphite content of the Hawkesbury
sandstones. The third concerns the distribution of sulfide mineral deposits in Tasmania and
their projection into Bass Strait, and the fourth invokes the sea-floor contours and gravimetric
anomalies at the implicated impact site.

Next to the copper, mercury, and the noble metals noble metals, lead occurs lowest on the
activity series of the familiar metals, reflecting its low stability in the oxidized form. Of the
common metal oxides, PbO and CuO are the oxides that are reduced to metal at the lowest
temperature in the presence of one atmosphere pressure of reducing gas. A common
representation of the stability of oxides in relation to temperature and the presence of reducing
agents is that of Jeffes and Richardson [21], reproduced in the modified Ellingham diagram
form [22] in Fig. 1. There are two lines cutting across those of ∆Gºf  (free energy of oxide
formation) for solid oxides. These are the free energies of combustion ∆Gº of carbon to give
carbon monoxide and combustion of methane CH4 to give  gaseous H2O and CO2.  Their
intersections with a given metal curve tell the temperature, under standard conditions, at
which graphite, or CH4  respectively, will reduce the metal oxide to the metal. It is seen that an

2

atmosphere rich in methane will produce metallic lead at much lower temperatures than for
any other common metal except copper, and likewise, during a cooling process from high
temperatures, lead and copper will be the last metals to recombine with oxygen (e.g. during
descent from an apocalyptic atmosphere). Naturally occurring sulfide mineral desposits
impacted by a bolide would be vaporized with decomposition to the elements and, in the
presence of atmospheric oxygen, will form the abundant sulfur dioxide identified in the early
Triassic atmosphere. The majority of the metals will reoxidize in excess oxygen on cooling,
but Pb and Cu will be the last to do so. In view of its high density and, in the present case also
greater abundance, lead metal will be the first to "rain out" of the cooling gases. This is the
most chemical means of accounting for the tear drop shape, and uniform size, of the metallic
lead microspheres  reported by Bayliss and Standard [14], examples of which are reproduced
(from refs. 16 and 23) in the lower panel of Fig. 1. An equivalent but simpler notion is that the
droplets form in the ejecta curtain of the impact by thermal decomposition of sulfide and
capture of the sulfur by atmospheric oxygen. This idea has the advantage that it would allow
the globules to be randomly dispersed in the ejecta rim that formed the source material for the
Hawkesbury formation.

The lead microspheres (microtectites?) were discovered by the sifting of disaggregated
samples of sandstone which were mostly taken from surface outcrops [15], and unfortunately
we therefore have no in situ cases to render their natural origin unambiguous. Also no copper
droplets have been found. Thus we must give some consideration to possible artifactual
origins (particularly as the lead is of terrestrial isotope abundance (age 109 yr) and is depleted
in silver [14]). One that comes immediately to mind is debris from the shot gun blasts of bird
and animal hunters. Lead shot fragments can be imagined to reach melting point by freak
frictional encounters with nearby rocks and hence, during air passage, to develop the tear drop
character found in the recovered spheres. We have made efforts to produce such debris from
shotgun blasts, but to date have had no success. The uniformity of size (0.5 mm diam), as well
as the teardrop shape seen in Fig. 1 insert [15,23], favors a vapor condensation origin.

In the following we will make the assumption that the lead microspheres are naturally
occurring, and follow it to an interesting conclusion that merits study in its own right. We
recognize the degree of speculation involved, but argue that the means are justified by the end.

The Hawkesbury formation lies atop other early Triassic sandstones, that are generally
described as the Narabeen formation. At the New South Wales coast (Coalcliff), the Narabeen
formation lies unconformably on Permian coal. The dividing layer, which is a 8-10cm black
claystone breccia, has been identified by Retallack [17,18] as the Permian-Triassic boundary
layer, on the basis of the great loss of biological diversity, and high level of fungal spores, in
the layers above. The description "black claystone breccia" has also been applied recently to
the better known  P-T boundary layer in South Africa's Taroo Basin [19]. Accepting this
identification of the location of the 251.4 m.y. P-T event, the Hawkesbury sandstone must be
of more recent origin, by an interval of some 5 m.y. according to Retallack [17] though the
dating seems to be rather uncertain. The presence or otherwise of lead microtears in the
Narabeen formations has not been properly investigated (although two occurrences of the lead
microtears in the ref. 15 study were in Narabeen rocks).

3

 The cross bedding of the Hawkesbury sandstones in which microtears were found, has been
analyzed in great detail [15]. The material for the graphitized sandstones came from the
southwest, superimposing on an existing filled basin (the Permian coal lies hundreds of feet
below Sydney under Narrabeen sandstones and perhaps other strata), and creating new
formation thicknesses that increase to a present day maximum of nearly 300 m near the mouth
of the present Hawkesbury river. Retallack [17] describes early triassic deposits that came
from the northwest but, on the basis of heavy mineral content, these are quite distinct from the
Hawkesbury formation of the ref. 15 study. Thus, if the material making up the graphitized
sandstone from the south-west is in some way linked to the bolide impact, then the impact lies
very far to the south of the Sydney basin.

Fig. 2a shows the thickness contours of the southern Hawkesbury sandstone formation while
Fig. 2b shows the mean crossbedding directions of the river responsible for the formation.
The Hawkesbury formation at its south-western extreme lies unconformably on the Permian
coal without intervening Narabeen sandstones, implying that the coal beds had already been
tilted (the XX syncline) at the time that the Hawkesbury sandstones were laid down.

The Hawkesbury formation terminates abruptly at an escarpment caused by erosion from the
more recent Shoalhaven river system that was created by the Tertiary uplift that formed the
Australian Alps. The largest graphite sample ( ~1 cm diam) was found near the southern
extremity of the formation where there would have been least opportunity for flow abrasion.

If the source material containing lead spherules and also graphite fell on the rather flat granite
plane that existed in the southern New South Wales/Northern Victoria region at that time, then
an impact site some 4-5 crater radii to the south would be suggested [8,24,25]. To locate this
site another indicator line is needed.

Since we have argued for a sulfide mineral deposit impact site origin, both of the lead and of
the sulfur dioxide that suddenly became so abundant at the P-T boundary [11], it is natural to
seek the trajectory of the nearest major sulfide mineralization region. This is located in
Tasmania where extensive lead/zinc ore deposits  (with proportionately very little copper)
occur, in a Cambrian volcanic mineralized belt. Examining the density of lead/zinc mines in
Tasmania (see Supplementary Material) we obtain a rough ribbon running North-easterly
across the Tasmanian mainland and projecting out into Bass Strait as indicated in Fig. 3.  Bass
Strait, 250 m.y. ago, may have been a shallow sea area rich in the methane hydrates that have
been proposed by others [18,26] as a source of impact-generated [19] or other-cause anoxia
[27] involved in the P-T extinction. Additionally, the area may have contained Permian coal
seams which occur in Tasmania on either side of the mineralized region. At the time of
impact, this coal would have been in the form of peat and could have provided the source of
carbon for the hydrocarbon gases (primarily methane in the intense heat of impact) in the
atmosphere at that time [19-20], and of the graphite in the sandstones.

In support of our sulfide minerals impact site hypothesis, we note that, in the report of Kaiho
et al [10] on the P-T boundary in southern China, the enrichment ratio of the element copper
in the bed no. 24-3 (small grain component), greatly exceeds that of nickel. However this
anomaly was passed over without comment in ref. 10. No data for zinc were reported. We

4

would expect a zinc anomaly like that for copper but larger. Thus we are lead to an impact site
in Bass Strait, as shown in Fig. 3. The solid rings drawn in Fig. 3 are for 100 and 200 km
diameter craters, and dashed rings indicate the corresponding bounds for 90% of the proximal
ejecta, according to Melosh [24,25] and French [8]. For a 200 km crater, the 90% boundary
passes across Southern New South Wales, hence the source material for part of the
Hawkesbury sandstones can be accounted for.

The ecological devastation downwind from heavy metal sulfide smelting sites is well known
from modern times. The gargantuan heavy metal blast furnace, that we here suggest was
operating, during the impact, some 250 m.y. ago, may have produced most of the 4 x 1019
moles (105 billion tons) of H2SO4 estimated by Kaiho et al [11] to have formed at that time -
all of which would have been promptly dumped onto the continents and into the oceans. That
anything at all survived is miraculous. In view of the toxic character of the impact products,
the impact need not have been as huge as is often supposed in order to account for the extent
of the extinction. The precise impact site indicated in Fig. 3, is suggested on the following
basis.

Impact craters from large magnitude events have a characteristic form [8]. A salient feature is
a central uplift peak caused by bounceback of the most highly compressed zone at the center
of the impact. Data are available for the sea floor contours of Bass Strait [28] and are
reproduced in Fig. 4a. There is a telltale, roughly circular, uprise no doubt greatly smeared out
by overlying sediments, located near the center of Bass strait. The uprise region correlates
with a weak gravitational anomaly indicated by arrow in Fig. 4b. The latter, which has been
taken as the impact center in constructing Fig. 3, is reminiscent of the anomaly at the
Chicxulub  crater in Yucatan, though gravimetric anomalies do not always accompany impact
craters, according to French [8]

In the light of these coincidences, there are several locations along the north coast of
Tasmania that would seem to warrant closer examination. For instance, near Ulverstone, early
geological maps identify a two mile stretch of coastline as Megabreccia, and also list a
location called Washbrook Chaos. We expect these sites to contain the compelling planar
deformation features (PDF s) [8] needed to confirm the site. Shocked grains may be identified
among the photomicrographs from ref. 15, but are not abundant. An example is shown in Fig.
5.

Finally, we note that mechanical models relate a compressive impact event on one side of a
layered solid, to a tension crack on the opposite side [29]. Our planet is a (spherical) layered
solid so, by extension of the model, a compressive event in the Bass Strait area should be
accompanied by a tension crack in the terrestrial crust on the opposite side of the planet  -
which corresponded to Siberia 250 m.y. ago. Thus we link the impact event in Bass Strait to
the extraordinary flood basalts of the Putorana plateau in Siberia which occurred at the P-Y
boundary within the ± 1 my. uncertainty of measurement [30] and are often invoked to help
explain the P-T extinction [27,31] (but not its geologically abrupt character). Similar links
between the C-T impact and the Deccan traps flood basalts have been discussed elsewhere
[32,33].

5

We wish to acknowledge helpful comments on this work from George Wolf and Peter
Buseck, and the untiring support of Cliff Kwan-gett.

Acknowledgements.

References

1. 

2. 

3. 

 4.

5.

6.

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11.

L. W. Alvarez, W. Alvarez, F. Asaro, H. V. Michel, Extraterrestrial cause for the
Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction, Science, 208, 1095-1108 (1980).

D. A. Kring, The dimensions of the Chicxulub impact crater and impact melt
sheet, J. Geophys. Res., 100, 16979-16986 (1995).

M. R. Rampino, A. Prokoph, A. Adler, Tempo of the end-Permian event: High-
resolution cyclostratiography at the Permian-Triassic boundary, Geology 28, 643-
646, (1999).

M. R. Rampino, A. C.  Adler, Geology 26, 415-418 (1998).

M. B. Steiner, Y. Eshet, M. R. Rampino, D. M. Schwindt, Fungal abundance
spike and the Permian-Triassic boundary in the Karoo Supergroup (South Africa),
Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 194, 405-414 (2003).

L. Becker,  R. J. Poreda, A. G. Hunt, T. E. Bunch, M. Rampino, Impact event at
the Permian-Triassic boundary: evidence from extraterrestrial noble gases in
fullerenes. Science, 291, 1530-1533 (2001).

R. J. Poreda, L. Becker, Fullerenes and interplanetary dust at the Permian-Triassic
boundary, Astrobiology, 3, 75-90 (2003).

B. M.  French, Traces of Catastrophe; A handbook of shock-metamorphic effects
in terrestrial meteorite impact structures, LPI contribution no. 154, Lunar and
Planetary Institute, Houston. 120 pp., (1998).

G. J. Retallack, A. Seyedolali, E. S. Krull, W. T. Holser, C. P. Ambers, F. T.
Kyte,  Search for evidence of impact at the Permian-Triassic boundary in
Antarctica and Australia Geology, 26, 979-982 (1998).

Y.-G. Yin Y. Wang, Q. H. Shang, C. Q. Cao and D.H. Erwin, Pattern of Marine
Extinction  near the Permian-Triassic boundary in South China. Science, 289,
432-436, (2002)

K. Kaiho, Y. Kujiwara and Y. Miura,  End-Permian catastrophe by a bolide
impact: evidence of a gigantic release of sulfur from the mantle, Geology, 29,
815-818, (2001).

6

12.   H.-F.  Yin  in  Permo-Triassic  events  in  the  Eastern  Tethys,  W.  C.  Sweet,  Z.  Y.
Yang, J.M. Dickins, H. F. Yin, Eds., (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1992).

13. 

S. A. Bowring, D. H. Erwin, Y. G. Jin, M. W. Martin, K. Davidek, W. Wang,
U/Pb zircon geochronology and tempo of the end-Permian mass extinction,
Science, 280, 1039-1045, (1998).

14. 

P. Bayliss and J. C. Standard,  Mineralogical Mag. London,  36,  141-142, (1967)

(a) J. C. Standard, Stratigraphy, structure and petrology of the Hawkesbury
sandstone Ph.D. Thesis, University of Sydney, 1964. (Fig.X)
(b) J. C. Standard, Hawkesbury Sandstone, in The Geology of New South Wales.
Geological Society of Australia, Inc., vol. 16, part 1, 407-417 (1967)

B.M. French, Graphitization of organic matter in a progressively metamorphosed
Precambrian iron formation. Science, 146, 917-918, (1964)

G. J. Retallack, Postapocalyptic greenhouse paleoclimate revealed by earliest
Triassic paleosols in the Sydney basin, Australia, GSA bulletin 111, 52-70, (1999)

18.

G.J. Retallack, Permian-Triassic life crisis on Land. Science, 267, 77-81, (1995)

G.  J  Retallack.  R.  M.  H.  Smith,  and  P.  D.  Ward,  Vertebrate  extinction  across
Permian-Triassic boundary in the Karoo Basin, South Africa, Geolog. Soc. Amer.
Bull. 115, 1133-1152 (2003)

20. 

N. D. Sheldon and G. J.  Retallack, Low oxygen levels in earliest Triassic soils.
Geology, 30, 919922 (2002)

 Jeffes and F. D. Richardson, in Non-Ferrous Metallurgy, to be supplied

 P.W. Atkins and J. de Paula, Physical Chemistry. 7th ed., Freeman Pub. , 2002, p.239

J.  C.  Standard,  Abstract  (paper  no.  61-17),  Annual  meeting  of  the  Geological
Society of America. 2002.

24.   H.J. Melosh, Impact Cratering, A Geologic Process, Oxford Univ. New York,

(1989) 245 pp.

H. J. Melosh and A. M. Vickery, Melt droplet formation in energetic impact
events, Nature, 350, 494-497,  (1991)

G. Ryskin, Methane-driven oceanic eruptions and mass extinctions. Geology,
31 (9): 741-744, (2003)

15. 

16.

17. 

19. 

21.

22.

23.

25.

26. 

7

27. 

D. H. Erwin, The Permo-Triassic extinction. Nature, 367, 231-236, (1994)

28. 

Bass Strait : Publication  of Geol. Soc. America. Adapted from Baines and
Fandry, 1983, Copyright 1996, M. Tomczak.

29.   Mechanical engineering presentation at the Haifa International Symposium on the

properties of water, (1999). (water and plasticization of brittle materials) (to be
recovered)

P. R. Rennes, Z. Zichao, M. A. Richards, M. T. Black, A. R. Basu, Synchrony and
Causal Relations Between Permian-Triassic Boundary Crises and Siberian Flood
Volcanism Science 269, 1413, (1995).

I. H. Campbell, G. K. Zarmanske, V. A. Fedorenko, R. L. Hill, V. Stepanov,
Synchronism of the Siberian Traps and the Permian-Triassic Boundary Science
258, 1760, (1992)

J. J. Veevers, P. J. Conaghan, and S. E. Shaw, Turning point in Pangean
environmental history at the Permian/Triassic (P/Tr) boundary Geol. Soc. Am.
Spec. Pap. 187 (1994)

33. M. R. Rampino, S. Self, R. B. Stothers, Volcanic Winters Annu. Rev. Plan. Sci.,

16, 73, (1988).

It is often said that the flood basalts of the Deccan in India could not have been caused
by the 65 mya Yucatan impact because the earliest parts of the flow (which have been
precisely dated), were in place in advance of the impact event. However, the flow
volume increased greatly after the impact, which may have exploited a pre-existing
crustal weakness. This would account for the fact that the Deccan was not exactly
antipodeal to the Chicxulub site at that time in geological history.

30. 

31.

32. 

34. 

Figure Captions

Figure 1. (a) Ellingham diagram for the free energy of metal oxides in relation to
temperature. The negative slope reflects the entropy increase on decomposition due to the
fact that oxygen is a gas. All divalent metal oxides have comparable slopes on this plot. If
the plot falls below the value zero, the oxide decomposes to gaseous oxygen and native
metal. This only happens for silver and copper in Fig. 1. However in the presence of one
atmosphere of methane all the oxides shown in Fig. 1 will be reduced to metal below
2500ºC. The line of positive slope is that for combustion of graphite in oxygen to give
carbon monoxide gas (∆Sº is positive). The almost horizontal line is for the combustion
methane in oxygen (per 1/2 mole of oxygen consumed in order to correspond to the other
plots) to give water vapor and carbon dioxide. These lines intersect the metal oxide
decomposition plots, at temperature above which reduction occurs to the metal occurs.
Note that, in the presence of methane, or graphite, the metallic states of lead, copper and

8

silver are the stable states at ambient temperature. We note that Fig. 1 does not follow the
original Jeffes-Richardson plot [21] which show the free energy increasing upward, but
rather gives the inverse representation of the same physico-chemical idea, as used in the
popular Physical Chemistry  text book by Atkins [22].  Fig. 1 also contains a plot for the
sulfide of lead  (dashed line) which shows that it will decompose thermally  (∆Gºf
positive) to lead and sulfur vapor at any temperature above about 1000ºC.

(b) a collection of the lead microspheres found in the disaggregated sandstone samples.
Note the aerodynamic tails on the droplets. After 250 m.y. of annealing, each sphere is
essentially a single crystal of lead (lead anneals at room temperature).

Figure 2.
(a) Contour map of the total thickness of the lead and graphite-carrying Hawkesbury
sandstones of the southern part of the Sydney basin, showing thickness increasing in the
direction North-north-east.
(b) cross-bedding directions over the whole of the exposed parts of the Hawkesbury
component of the early Triassic Sydney basin sandstones, confirming the average
direction of flow from the south-south-west sediments making up the Hawkesbury. These
beds are believed to have been laid down, over earlier Triassic sediments, within 6 m.y.
of the P-T extinction.

Figure 3.  Map of South-Eastern Australia and Tasmania, showing lead/zinc sulfide
mineralized belt of Tasmania projected into the middle of Bass Strait, and the proposed
crater site. The 90% ejecta limits for 100 km and 200 km diameter craters are shown by

9

dashed circles. The overlap with the suggested source area for the lead and graphite-
containing Hawkesbury sandstones of the Sydney basin (upper right), is indicated by an
elipse

Figure 4.    (a) Depth contour  map of Bass Strait, showing possible uplift peak affecting
sea floor sediments in the generally flat sea bed. This is found at the same point as the
ring-like gravitational anomaly in part (b).

      (b) Gravitational anomaly corresponding to the depth contour peak of part (a)

indicated by arrow. The center of this anomaly was used as the impact point in the
construction of Fig. 3b.

Figure 5. Photomicrograph of quartz grain from the Hawkesbury, showing the damage
typical of shock effects.

10

