 

GPS Time Synchronization in School-Network 
Cosmic Ray Detectors 

Hans-Gerd Berns, Toby H. Burnett, Richard Gran, R. Jeffrey Wilkes 

  ? 

 

 
Abstract—The QuarkNet DAQ card for school-network cosmic 
ray  detectors  provides  a  low-cost  alternative  to  using  standard 
particle  and  nuclear  physics  fast  pulse  electronics  modules.  The 
board,  which  can  be  produced  at  a  cost  of  less  than  US$500, 
produces  trigger  time  and  pulse  edge  time  data  for  2  to  4-fold 
coincidence  levels  via  a  universal  RS232  serial  port  interface, 
usable with any PC. 

Individual  detector  stations,  each  consisting  of  4  scintillation 
counter  modules,  front-end  electronics,  and  a  GPS  receiver, 
produce  a  stream  of  data  in  form  of  ASCII  text  strings  in 
identifiable  set  of  formats  for  different  functions.  The  card 
includes  a  low-cost  GPS  receiver  module,  which  permits  time-
stamping event triggers to about 50 nanosecond accuracy in UTC 
between widely separated sites. The technique used for obtaining 
precise GPS time employs the 1PPS signal, which is not normally 
available  to  users  of  the  commercial  GPS  module.  We  had  the 
stock  model  slightly  custom-modified  to  access  this  signal.  The 
method  for  deriving  time  values  was  adapted  from  methods 
long-baseline  neutrino  experiment. 
developed  for  the  K2K 
Performance of the low-cost GPS module used is compared to that 
of a more expensive unit with known quality.  

I.  INTRODUCTION 

S

EVERAL projects around the world are aiming at building 
ray  detector 
large-scale  ultra-high-energy  cosmic 
networks  using  secondary  schools  as  detector  sites.  Three 
groups  began  a  collaboration  in  2001  to  design  and  build  a 
low-cost data acquisition (DAQ) module [2] for distribution to 
high  school  networks:  QuarkNet  [3],  based  at  Fermilab;  the 
Washington  Area  Large-scale  Time-coincidence  Array 
(WALTA)  [4][5],  based  at  the  University  of  Washington, 
Seattle; and the Cosmic Ray Observatory Project (CROP) [6], 
based  at  the  University  of  Nebraska,  Lincoln.  One  of  the 
requirements  for  the  DAQ  module  design  was  to  implement 
accurate time-stamping of each detector trigger, with accuracy 
on  the  order  of  1  microsecond  or  better  in  absolute  Universal 
Time (UTC), as a means to synchronize the cosmic ray data at 
widely  separated  school  sites.  The  Global  Positioning  System 

                                                           

Manuscript received November 14, 2003.  This work was supported in part 

by the U.S. Department of Energy and QuarkNet. 

 
The  Authors  are  with  the  University  of  Washington,  Physics  Department, 

Seattle, WA 98195-1560, USA. 

H. G. Berns  
T. H. Burnett 
R. W. Gran   
R. J. Wilkes  

(tel.: 206-685-4725, e-mail: berns@phys.washington.edu).  
(tel.: 206-543-8963, e-mail: tburnett@u.washington.edu). 
(tel.: 206-543-9584, e-mail: gran@phys.washington.edu). 
(tel.: 206-543-4232, e-mail: wilkes@phys.washington.edu). 

(GPS)  [7]  provides  an  ideal  method  of  synchronized  tracking 
around  the  world  at  a  low  cost  for  the  user.  This  paper  will 
describe how the GPS time synchronization is implemented in 
the  QuarkNet  DAQ  system.  Details  about  the  DAQ  card  are 
also available in these proceedings [2].  

II.  GPS TIMING 

The  Global  Positioning  System  consists  of  at  least  24 
satellites maintained by the US Department of Defense (DOD), 
each  transmitting  coordinated  “GPS  Time”  according  to  its 
onboard atomic clock. GPS Time differs from UTC only in the 
absence of the leap seconds, which are periodically inserted in 
UTC. Most GPS receivers (including ours) automatically take 
the  shift  into  account  using  data  downloaded  from  the 
satellites,  so  time  reported  is  UTC.  The  satellites’  onboard 
clocks are regularly conditioned to match GPS time according 
to  a  ground-based  reference  clock  system  (actually  a  large 
number of high-precision atomic time standards). The satellites 
also broadcast their ephemerides, so their position in space can 
be accurately calculated as a function of time. The ephemerides 
also  are  regularly  recalculated  and  updated.  With  each 
satellite’s  position  in  space  known  to  high  accuracy  from  its 
ephemeris,  users’  receivers  can  fit  for  their  position  and  time 
(x,y,z,t) if four or more satellites are simultaneously in view. 

Since  the  GPS  satellites  are  constantly  referenced  to  a 
national  standards  laboratory  time  base,  the  GPS  system 
provides a simple and inexpensive way to obtain high precision 
absolute  time,  synchronized  to  UTC,  without  purchasing  and 
constantly  recalibrating  a  set  of  atomic  clocks.  The  GPS 
system is designed to give standard errors of about 150 meters 
on  a  single  position  fit  and  150  nanoseconds  relative  to  UTC 
on  a  single  time  fit.  For  a  fixed  antenna  location,  long-term 
averaging  of  the  measured  antenna  coordinates  provides 
improved accuracy. 

III.  GPS RECEIVER: LEADTEK GPS-9532W 

We  adapted  a  low-cost  commercial  GPS  receiver,  Leadtek 
Research,  Inc.  model  GPS-9532  [8].  The  basic  specifications 
are as follows:  

?? 12-channel GPS receiver and antenna in one unit. 
?? Small, light weigh and weatherproof package: approx. 63 

mm diameter, 20 mm height, and 3 meter cable. 

?? Special modifications for the QuarkNet DAQ (W-suffix): 

 

 

o  1-pulse-per-second  (1PPS)  signal  available  at  output 
and enabled, i.e. power savings disabled at power-up. 
o  Single  DB-9  connector  for  all  signals:  serial  data, 

1PPS, and 5VDC supply power 

o  Default NMEA serial output at 9600 baud. 
?? Low cost: approx. US$100 each (at qty. 250). 

 

Fig. 1. GPS receiver and antenna module, in a weatherproof package, and a 

3-meter cable providing supply power and data connection. 

 
Our  customized  units  had  the  1PPS  signal  made  available. 
We  prepared  a  custom  mating  connector  to  deliver  the  1PPS 
signal over 30-meter cables, and power the GPS units from the 
DAQ card instead of a separate external power supply. 

IV.  EVALUATION TEST RESULTS 

A  sample  Leadtek  GPS-9543  module  was  tested  for  1PPS 
jitter  and  accuracy  at  the  WALTA  test  stand  over  a  ~52-hour 
period  in  December  2001.  The  test  stand  was  set  up  with  a 
Motorola UT-Plus Oncore [9] as a reference GPS module. An 
equivalent  Motorola  Oncore  receiver  has  already  been  used 
successfully as a backup precision timing source for the Super-
Kamiokande and K2K project for several years, and this unit is 
known to be accurate within approx. 70 nanoseconds rms (+/-
400  ns  worst  case)  of  absolute  UTC  [1].  The  1PPS  pulse 
arrival  times  of  the  two  GPS  receivers  were  simultaneously 
recorded  via  a  50-MHz  VME  clock  counter  module.  The 
antennae of both receivers were placed close to each other at a 
location  on  the  University  of  Washington  campus  where  the 
full  sky  view  essentially  clear,  perfect  for  GPS  satellite 
tracking.  

The  evaluation 

test  revealed  some  minor  bugs  and 

unanticipated “features” of the customized device:  

A.  Always  in  Navigation  Mode:    The  low-cost  Leadtek  GPS 
receiver has no option to run in “position-hold” mode, but always 
runs in “navigation” mode. This means the unit continuously fits 
its  position,  and  so  requires  a  minimum  of  4  GPS  satellites 
tracked  simultaneously  at  all  times  to  continuously  recalculate 
the position and timing solution. This tracking condition is often 
not  satisfied,  and  performance  is  known  to  be  sensitive  to 
electrical  noise  (e.g.  radio  or  TV  towers),  other  environmental 
conditions, and even reflections from high-rise buildings nearby. 
At  a  stationary  location  with  known  3-D position parameters, a 
GPS  receiver  in  “position-hold”  mode  would  only  need  to 

compute the timing solution, and thus only require a single GPS 
satellite tracked at a time  

B.  1PPS  and  serial  data  unsynchronized:    Also  the  1PPS 
pulse  and  serial  data  stream  of  the  Leadtek  unit  turn  out  to  be 
unsynchronized, and in addition, the 1Hz period of the serial data 
output  was  measured  to  be  slightly  higher  than  1Hz  (also 
confirmed with all other units purchased later), i.e. drifting away 
from  the  1PPS  pulse  edge  time  by  1  millisecond  every  20-23 
seconds (or a full-period shift every 5.5~6 hours). However, for 
our application, since the serial data are used only to determine 
the  time  down  to  integer  seconds,  this  problem  can  be 
compensated in user software.   

C.  1PPS  glitches:    The  GPS  module  showed  periodic  100 
millisecond  offset  jumps  every  ~32  minutes,  and  skipped  a 
1PPS  pulse  every  ~5.3  hours  (every  10th  occurrence  of  the 
~32-minute  glitch).  Later  production  units,  showed  similar 
1PPS  irregularities  with  slightly  varying  periodicies  between 
30-35  minutes.  This  is  probably  related  to  the  1PPS-vs-1Hz 
asynchronous  shift  problem  mentioned  above.  Therefore, 
additional  error  detection  and  correction  methods  have  been 
implemented in our DAQ firmware and offline software. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Leadtek  device  showed  superior 
short-term  1PPS  stability  than  the  Motorola  device,  i.e.  less 
jitter, and faster reacquisition times after power interruptions. 
 

 
Fig.  2.  Time  series  of  the  difference  between  Leadtek  GPS-9543  and 

Motorola UT-Plus Oncore 1PPS arrival times, in a 52-hour test period. 
 

  

Fig. 3. Histogram of time series shown in fig.2 

 

Comparison result: Figs. 2 and 3 show that the 1PPS of both 
the Motorola UT-Plus Oncore and the Leadtek GPS unit agree 
very nicely after the drift and jump problems mentioned above 
are  corrected  in  software.  The  ~390  nanosecond  offset  in  the 
plots  comes  from  internal  propagation  delays  in  the  receivers 

 

 

which were not compensated during the test period and can be 
ignored  here.  The  standard  deviation  is  approx.  45  ns,  and 
95.6% of the pulses are within  +100 ns of the mean. 

V.  IMPLEMENTATION IN THE QUARKNET DAQ CARD 

The  Leadtek  GPS-9532W  module  is  connected  to  the 
QuarkNet DAQ card via a custom cable, specially made for the 
DAQ  card,  with  a  male  10-pin  RJ-45  connector  at  the  DAQ 
card end and a female 9-pin D-sub (DB9) connector at the GPS 
receiver  end.  Inside  the  DB9  connector  housing  is  a  small 
circuit board with RC filters for the 5VDC supply voltage for 
the GPS receiver and RS232 serial signals, and an LVDS line 
driver for the 1PPS pulse, to allow transmission of the signals 
over long cable lengths up to 100 feet without degradation. In 
addition,  the  circuit  board  contains  a  temperature  sensor  to 
allow  monitoring  of  the  outdoor  temperature  at  the  GPS 
receiver. 
 

Fig. 4. QuarkNet DAQ card and cabling [2]. 

 

After power-up, the GPS receiver immediately scans the sky 
for  suitable  GPS  satellite  signals  and  by  default  goes  into 
“navigation”  mode,  automatically  self-surveying 
its  own 
position  (latitude,  longitude  and  altitude)  and  time.  No  user 
action is needed to set the survey and power modes. Depending 
on  the  satellite  conditions  and  previous  operating  conditions, 
the  receiver  might  need  several  minutes  to  lock  onto  its 
position  and  time  accurately.  As  soon  as  it  tracks  the  first 
satellite,  the  1PPS  signal  becomes  active.  This  will  initialize 
the CPLD counter on the DAQ card, which is used for logging 
the  time  of  event  triggers  with  24-nanosecond  accuracy  [2]. 
However, the timing will not be accurate until it tracks at least 
the  minimum  for  calculating  all 
is 
4  satellites,  which 
parameters for 3-D positioning and UTC offset. 

The  user  can  check  the  GPS  reception  status  via  the  DAQ 
card ‘DG’ command (Display GPS status). The 1PPS timing is 
unreliable if the GPS status shows an ‘invalid’ flag (“V” flag in 
the  NMEA  data  stream).  Once  the  GPS  flag  becomes  ‘valid’ 
(“A” NMEA flag), the 1PPS signal will usually stay accurately 
aligned  to  absolute  UTC  with  an  estimated  error  of  50 
nanoseconds rms or better, and DAQ operations may begin. 

VI.  EVENT TIME-STAMPING 

Two types of data are periodically transmitted from the GPS 
receiver  to  the  DAQ  card:  a  1PPS  square-wave  signal  whose 
leading  edge  is  synchronized  with  the  beginning  of  UTC 
seconds to within ~50 ns rms typically, and a serial ASCII data 
stream  (NMEA  format  at  9600  baud  by  default)  containing 
complete  GPS  data  such  as  latitude,  longitude,  altitude,  date, 
time down to milliseconds, and housekeeping data. 

On the DAQ card, each 1PPS signal leading edge is latched 
by  clock  counter  logic  in  the  CPLD  and  used  to  calibrate  the 
counter  frequency.  The  CPLD  is  clocked  at  41.667  MHz, 
generated  by  a  12.50  MHz  temperature-compensated  quartz 
oscillator  and  a  1:3.333  PLL  frequency  multiplier  in  series. 
Thus the timing resolution is 24 nanoseconds, and with 32-bit 
register  width,  the  CPLD  clock  counter  rolls  over  every  103 
seconds. 

The  GPS  serial  data  is  processed  by  the  microcontroller 
(MSP430) on the DAQ card through its secondary UART port. 
As  mentioned  above,  the  serial  NMEA  stream  of  the  GPS-
9532W  device  is  not  sent  synchronously  with  the  1PPS  pulse 
stream,  but  is  updated  at  an  internal  frequency  slightly  higher 
than 1 Hz. As a result, the start of the serial data stream and its 
time information keeps drifting away from the 1PPS pulse at a 
slow  rate,  approx.  1  ms  shift  every  20-23  seconds,  which 
makes  alignment  of  these  two  data  streams  difficult  for  the 
user. Therefore, additional code had to be implemented in the 
DAQ  firmware  to  measure  the  offset  drift,  so  the  serial  data 
can  correctly  be  aligned  with  the  most  recent  1PPS  pulse  and 
vice versa. 

At  each  event  trigger,  the  DAQ  card  records  the  current 
CPLD  clock  counter  value  (trigger  time).  These  data  are 
immediately  sent  out  the  primary  serial  port  in  hex  format, 
appended  with  1PPS  and  GPS  data,  at  least  one  string  per 
trigger,  with  additional  strings  as  needed  for  multiple  pulse 
edges or command responses.  
 

 

Fig. 5. DAQ output data example. 
 
A  typical  data  output  example  is  shown  in  fig.  5.  The  first 
number  in  the  first  data  line  is  the  32-bit  CPLD  count  at  the 
trigger  time:  C8B8E2A0  (hex)  =  3367559840  (decimal).  The 
next 8 hex numbers represent TDC edge timing information of 
the  4  input  channels  (one  each  for  rising  edge  and  falling 
edge). The 10th number is the 32-bit CPLD count of the most 
recent  1PPS  leading  edge:  C8033BA6  (hex)  =  3355655078 
(decimal).  The  following  numbers  are  time,  date  and  GPS 
status info, extracted directly from the most recent GPS serial 
data in NMEA format: “212554.156” corresponds to UTC time 
21:25:54  and  156  milliseconds,  “121003”  corresponds  to 
October  12,  2003,  and  “A”  means  that  the  GPS  status  was 
“valid” (sufficient number of tracked satellites for position and 
time solution). The next field, “08”, means 8 GPS satellites are 

  
Fig.  7.  Time  series  plot  of  the  time-stamping  comparison  between  two 

independent DAQ cards. 
 

 

  

 

tracked  simultaneously,  “0”  means  good  DAQ  status  (no 
pending data or error bits), and finally, “-0266” represents the 
delay between the 1PPS leading edge and the start of the serial 
data  set.  In  this  case,  the  1PPS  pulse  was  ahead  of  the  serial 
data by 266 ms. 
 

Fig. 6. Event time-stamping illustration. 

Fig.6  is  a  timing  diagram  illustration  of  how  the  actual 
trigger  time  is  computed,  where  event  trigger  pulse  #1 
corresponds to the first example line shown in fig.5. First, the 
CPLD oscillator frequency is computed by keeping track of the 
differences  between  the  CPLD  counts  of  consecutive  1PPS 
leading  edges.  Here,  the  average  is  41666670  Hz.  Secondly, 
the difference between the CPLD counts of the trigger leading 
edge and the 1PPS leading edge is computed and then divided 
by the averaged oscillator frequency. The result represents the 
fractional  time  duration  of  the  trigger  leading  edge  since  the 
last  1PPS  pulse;  here:  0.285714265  seconds.  Next,  the  UTC 
time down to integer seconds of the corresponding 1PPS pulse 
is  computed;  here:  ROUND(212554.156  –  266/1000)  = 
212554,  which  is  21:25:54.000.  Finally,  these  numbers  are 
added  to  get  the  accurate  UTC  time  of  the  event  trigger  #1: 
21:25.54.285714265 on October 12, 2003 in the example. 

On October 11, 2003, two DAQ card sets were set up on the 
roof  of  the  Physics-Astronomy  building  of  the  University  of 
Washington  to  directly  compare  their  time-stamping  accuracy 
over a ~45-hour period. A test generator fed the inputs of both 
cards  with  identical  short  “event  trigger”  pulses  at  a  rate  of 
1Hz.  The  GPS  antennae  of  the  two  cards  were  placed  on  the 
roof such that each of them could only “see” a separate half of 
the  sky  and  thus  necessarily  each  used  a  different  subset  of 
GPS satellites for their location and time fixes. 

Fig.7  shows  the  resulting  time  series  plot  of  the  time 
differences between the data of the two DAQ cards, and fig.8 is 
the  corresponding  histogram  of  the  same  data.  The  histogram 
shows a nearly gaussian distribution with a slight offset in the 
mean, which comes from systematic differences (mostly cable 
length)  not  yet  compensated  in  the  calculation.  The  standard 
deviation  is  55  nanoseconds,  and  99.9%  of  the  data  agrees 
within +/-350 ns between the two DAQ sets. This accuracy is 
more than sufficient for the school-network cosmic ray detector 
application where the DAQ cards are being used. 
 

VII.  DAQ PERFORMANCE 

Fig. 8. Histogram of DAQ time-stamping comparison in Fig. 7. 

  

VIII.  ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

We wish to thank Tom Jordan, Sten Hansen and Terry Kiper 
at Fermilab, and Greg Snow and Dan Claes at the University of 
Nebraska (CROP) for their support and assistance.  

IX.  REFERENCES 

[1]  H.  G.  Berns  and  R.  J.  Wilkes,  “GPS  Time  Synchronization  for  K2K,” 

IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 340-343, April 2000. 

[2]  S. Hansen, et al., “Low-Cost Data Acquisition Card for School-Network 
Cosmic  Ray  Detectors,”  IEEE  Trans.  Nucl.  Sci.,  submitted  for 
publication. 

[3]  See website http://quarknet.fnal.gov 
[4]  See website http://www.phys.washington.edu/~walta 
[5]  R. J. Wilkes, H. G. Berns, T. H. Burnett, and R. Gran, “WALTA school-
network  cosmic  ray  detectors,”  IEEE  Trans.  Nucl.  Sci.,  submitted  for 
publication. 

[6]  See website http://physics.unl.edu/~gsnow/crop/crop.html 
[7]  See, for example, website http://tycho.usno.navy.mil/gpsinfo.html 
[8]  See website http://www.leadtek.com/gps/gps_9532_1.html 
[9]  See website http://www.motorola.com/ies/GPS/products/produt.htm 

