 

LabView® Interface for School-Network DAQ 
Card 

Hans Berns, T. H. Burnett, Richard Gran, Graham Wheel, R. Jeffrey Wilkes, Univ. of Washington, 
Seattle, WA 

Dan Claes, Jared Kite, Gregory Snow, Univ.of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE 

   

 

 

 
Abstract—  As  described  elsewhere  at  this  conference,  a 
low-cost DAQ card has been developed for school-network 
cosmic ray detector projects, providing digitized data from 
photomultiplier  tubes  via  a  standard  serial  interface.  To 
facilitate  analysis  of  these  data  and  to  provide  students 
with a starting point for custom readout systems, a model 
the  National 
interface  has  been  developed  using 
Instruments  LabVIEW® 
system.  This  user-friendly 
interface  allows  one  to  initialize  the  trigger  coincidence 
conditions for data-taking runs and to monitor incoming or 
pre-recorded  data  sets  with  updating  singles-  and 
coincidence-rate 
user-selectable 
and 
histograms. 

other 

plots 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

T 

HE  WALTA  [1]  project  aims  to  create  large-area 
extensive air shower (EAS) detector array for ultra-high 
energy  (UHE)  cosmic  rays,  by  installing  mini-arrays  of 
scintillation  counter  detectors  in  secondary  schools,  in  the 
Seattle,  WA  area.  Data  taken  at  individual  school  sites  are 
shared  via  Internet  connections  and  searched  for  multi-site 
coincidence events.  

WALTA  collaborated  with  CROP  [2],  a  similar  project 
based  at  the  U.  of  Nebraska  at  Lincoln,  to  salvage  plastic 
scintillators, photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) and associated high 
voltage supplies from surplus equipment at the CASA detector 
[3] site at Dugway, UT.  

Individual  detector  stations  each  consist  of  4  scintillation 
counter modules, front-end electronics, and a GPS receiver, as 
shown  in  Fig.  1.  Preliminary  training  of  secondary  school 
teachers  and  students  was  conducted  using  obsolete  NIM 
crates  and  fast  electronics  (discriminators,  coincidence  and 
scaler modules) loaned from Fermilab. These modules are now 
being replaced by the new DAQ cards, which add GPS timing 
and a simple RS232 computer interface.  

The QuarkNet [4] DAQ card provides a low-cost alternative 
to  standard  particle  and  nuclear  physics  fast  pulse  electronics 
modules.  The  board,  which  can  be  produced  at  a  cost  of  less 

                                                           

Manuscript received October 29, 2003. This work was supported in part by 
the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy,  Quarknet,  and  the  U.S.  National  Science 
Foundation. Contact: wilkes@u.washington.edu. 

 

 

than  US$500, produces  trigger  time  and  pulse  edge  time  data 
for 2 to 4-fold coincidence levels, via a universal RS-232 serial 
port  interface,  usable  with  any  PC.  Details  of  the  DAQ  card 
have been presented elsewhere [5]. 

The  DAQ  cards  produce  a  stream  of  data  in  the  form  of 
ASCII  text  strings,  in  distinct  formats  for  different  functions. 
However,  the  highly  compact  data  format,  using  hexadecimal 
coded data items  without user-friendly prompts, makes use of 
the  card  via  a  simple  terminal  window  rather  challenging  for 
typical users. 

The user’s  host computer, a desktop PC  which  may have  a 
Windows, Mac or Linux OS, is connected to the DAQ card via 
a standard RS232 serial cable. For schools that have relatively 
new  Macintosh  models,  with  USB  ports  only,  a  commercial 
USB-to-RS232  adapter  can  be  inserted.  The  board  and  GPS 
unit  are  powered  by  a  conventional  5VDC,  800  mA  power 
adapter of the type available at consumer electronics stores.  
 

GPS 
antenna 

GPS Module 

NIM Crate or DAQ card

PMTs

PC

Internet

Scintillator 
counters 
Fig.  1.    School-network  air  shower  detector  stations. CROP  and  WALTA 
use  PMTs  and  counters  salvaged  from  the  CASA  experiment.  Initial 
installations  used  NIM  crates  borrowed  from  Fermilab  PREP,  which  will  be 
replaced by the DAQ cards described in this paper. 

 

The  simplest  way  to  operate  the  board  is  by  opening  a 
terminal window linked to the PC’s serial port. Table I shows 
the  help  screen  displayed  upon  board  startup,  listing  the 
functions implemented. Fig. 2 shows a typical terminal screen 
during data-taking. 

Commands can be directly entered via the keyboard, and the 
resulting output viewed (and if desired, captured to a log file) 
from the screen. Typically, the user would enter commands to 
define the trigger logic level (1- to 4-fold majority), and enable 
counting. At the end of the desired time interval, counting can 
be disabled and the trigger count read out. For each trigger, the 
display shows one or more lines of hexadecimal encoded data, 
providing time of trigger, pulse leading and trailing edge times 
relative  to  the  trigger  time,  and  information  needed  to 
determine the GPS time of the trigger to 24 ns precision. Other 
commands can be used to directly interrogate the GPS module, 
or act upon the counter registers, etc.  

 

 

 
The QuarkNet LabView® interface software allows the user 
to send setup and operating commands to the card, and to log 
data  of  various  types.  Log  files  can  be  output  in  MS  Excel-
compatible  format,  for  direct  handling  by  users  who  do  not 
have programming skills. 

The GUI is divided into pages  with different  functions,  for 
setup,  housekeeping  data,  routine  data-taking,  etc.  Figure  3 
shows  the  configuration  window,  which  can  be  opened  from 
any tab of the GUI. Figures 4 through 6 show examples of the 
console, GPS record [7] and event timing windows. 

 

 

Fig.  2.    Typical  terminal  window,  showing  raw  data  stream  from  the 
QuarkNet  DAQ  card.  Commands  and  responses  shown  illustrate  reading  the 
on-board  barometer  and  temperature  sensor,  reading  scaler  contents,  and  the 
data stream produced while logging coincidences. These data serve as input to 
the LabView module. 

 
Users may also prepare a script to implement a sequence of 
commands,  or  compile  custom  software  to  operate  the  card 
directly.  

II.  THE WALTA LABVIEW INTERFACE 

We have developed an interface to the QuarkNet DAQ card 
using  the  National  Instruments  LabView®  environment  [6]. 
This  interfacing  environment  is  available  at  low  cost  to 
educational institutions, has a very large user base worldwide, 
and  provides  a  simple  graphical  user  toolkit  with  which  it  is 
possible  to  construct  highly  capable  real-time  programs.  The 
large base of applications and program elements makes it easy 
for users to acquire help and training. 

 

TABLE I 
DAQ CARD COMMANDS (HELP SCREEN DISPLAY) 

Fig. 3.  DAQ card configuration window.. 
 
 
 

III.  FUTURE PLANS 

We are currently refining the software described, with high 
school  groups  as  well  as  UW  undergraduates  serving  as  beta 
testers.  We  anticipate  that  participating  students  and  teachers 
will contribute to the further development of this software. 

IV.  ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

We wish to thank Mark Buchli, Paul Edmon, Ben Laughlin, 
and  Jeremy  Sandler  for  valuable  assistance  in  testing  and 
debugging  the  boards,  and  the  CROP  and  WALTA  teachers 
for their patience with the development process. Special thanks 
are due to Tom Jordan, Director of the QuarkNet program, for 
his support. 
 

V.  REFERENCES 

[1]  See http://www.phys.washington.edu/~walta/. 
[2]  See http://physics.unl.edu/~gsnow/crop/crop.html. 
[3]  M. Borione, et al, Nucl. Instr. And Meth. A, vol. 346, p. 329, 1994 
[4]  See http://quarknet.fnal.gov/. 
[5]  See S. Hansen, et al, Paper N8-1, this conference. 
[6]  See http://www.ni.com/labview/. 
[7]  See H. Berns, et al, Paper N26-84, this conference. 

 

 

Fig. 4.  Event timing data window. 

 
Fig. 6.  GPS record data tab. 

 

 

Fig.  5.    “Console”  data  tab,  showing  raw  hexadecimal  data  stream  and 

allowing manual input of commands. 
 

 

