 

 

 

 

   

TAUP 2754-03 
The Cosmic Ray Hodoscopes for Testing Thin 
Gap Chambers at the Technion and Tel Aviv 
University 

 

E. Etzion1,2, H. Abramowicz2 , N. Amram2 , Y. Benhammou2, M. Ben-Moshe2, G. Bella2,               
J. Ginzburg2, Y. Gernitzky3, A. Harel3, H. Landsman3 , N. Panikashvili3, Y. Rozen3,                   

S. Tarem3,  E. Warszawski3, J. Wasilewski 4, L. Levinson 5 

Abstract--Thin  gap  chambers  (TGCs)  are  built  for  the 
muon  trigger  chambers  in  the  endcap  region  of  the  LHC 
experiment  ATLAS.  More  than  2500  ATLAS  TGCs  are 
being produced at the Weizmann institute in Israel, and in 
Shandong  University  in  China.  Detailed  testing  of  these 
chambers  is  performed  at  the  Technion  and  at  the  Tel-
Aviv University. Two cosmic ray hodoscopes for testing the 
operation  of  these  detectors  were  built  in  Israel.  In  these 
hodoscopes  the  response  of  the  chambers  to  energetic 
cosmic  ray  muons 
is  recorded  and  analyzed.  The 
hodoscopes  measure  the  exact  time  and  space  location  of 
the  cosmic  ray  hit  and  read  out  the  chambers  which  are 
being  tested  to  verify  that  they  produce  a  corresponding 
signal  within  the  required  time  interval.  The  cosmic  ray 
hodoscopes  built  at  the  Technion  and  at  the  Tel  Aviv 
University for the test of ATLAS TGCs are described. The 
mechanical structure, readout electronics, data acquisition 
and  operating  scheme  are  presented.  Typical  TGC  test 
results are presented and discussed. 
 

                                                           

Manuscript  received  July  1,  2003.    This  work  is  supported  by  the  Israel 

Science Foundation and the German Israeli Foundation.  
   1. CERN, European Organization for Nuclear Resaerch, CH-1211 Geneve 
23 Switzerland (telephone: +41227671153, e-mail: erez.etzion@cern.ch).       

2.  School  of  Physics  and  Astronomy,  Raymond  and  Beverly  Sackler 
Faculty  of  Excat  Sciences,  Tel  Aviv  University,  Tel  Aviv  69978,  Israel  
(telephone: +97236407722). 

3.  Physics  Department,  Technion,  Haifa  32000,  Israel  (telephone: 

+97248963553). 

Poland 

 

4.  Tel  Aviv  University,  currently  at  the  Technical  University  of  Lodj, 

5.  Particles  Physics  Department,  Weizmann 

Institute  of  Science, 

Rehovot 76100, Israel (telephone: +97289342084). 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

THE  Large  Hadron  Collider  (LHC)  is  a  new  proton-proton 

collider under construction at the European Center for Nuclear 
Research (CERN). Two 7 TeV proton beams will collide at the 
highest  energy  ever  reached  in  a  particle  accelerator  with  the 
design  luminosity  of  1034  cm-2s-1.    The  ATLAS  detector  at 
LHC expects to receive beam events at a rate of up to 109 Hz. 
The trigger system is designed to reduce the event rate to about 
100  Hz.  Amongst  the  primary  goals  of  the  experiment  are 
understanding of fundamental symmetry breaking which might 
manifest  itself  in  the  observation  of  the  Higgs  boson  and 
possibly  new  phenomena  or  new  objects.  Therefore  while 
requiring  an  overall  rejection  of  about  seven  orders  of 
magnitude, an excellent triggering efficiency must be retained 
for  the  detection  of  rare  new  physics  processes.  The  trigger 
equipment [1] accepts data at the full LHC bunch-crossing rate 
of 40 MHz (every 25 ns) and must identify the bunch crossing 
containing  the  interaction  of  interest  and  introduce  negligible 
dead time.  
ATLAS is a cylindrical shape four π detector, 44 m long and 
22 m high. The TGCs [2] are dedicated to form a muon trigger 
in  ATLAS  two  end-cap  regions.    The  Seven  TGC  layers 
consist of one triplet (three wire planes) and two TGC doublets 
(each consists of two wire planes) are mounted on big wheels 
in the end-cap about 14 m away from the interaction point [3]. 
A TGC consists of a plane of closely spaced wires maintained 
at  positive  high  voltage  (HV),  sandwiched  between  resistive 
grounded cathode planes. A TGC is characterized by an anode 
wire  to  cathode  plane  gap  distance  which  is  smaller  than  the 
wire-to-wire  spacing.  ATLAS  TGCs  are  produced  with  1.4 
mm wire to cathode plane distance and 1.8 mm for the wire to 
wire spacing. The sizes of TGC units depend on their position 
and vary between 1.31 m2 to 2.27 m2. 

 

The TGCs are well suited for triggering the high transverse 
momentum  muons  at  the  LHC  as  they  operate  in  a  saturated 
proportional mode, giving fast signals with a typical rise time 
below 5 ns. The saturated proportional mode is gained under a 
strong  electric  field  obtained  with  50  microns  gold  plated 
tungsten  wires  and  a  very  narrow  gas  gap.  The  shower 
amplifications are optimized with a mixture of 45% n-pentane 
and  55%  CO2.  This  operation  mode  leads  to  strong  signals 
with reduced Landau tails and a high signal to noise ratio. To 
form a trigger signal, between 4 to 20 anode wires are grouped 
together and fed to a common readout channel. The wire and 
strip signals emerging from the TGCs are fed into a two-stage 
amplifier  in  an  Amplifier  Shape  Discriminator  (ASD)  circuit 
[4].  Four  such  circuits  are  built  into  a  single  ASD  chip  and 
four ASD chips are incorporated into an ASD Board.  

Three  production  lines  build  the  TGCs  for  ATLAS.    The 
construction  of  the  3,600  chambers  is  shared  between 
Weizmann  Institute  of  Science  (Israel)  building  2,160 
chambers,  KEK  (Japan)  building  1,056  chambers  and 
Shandong  University  (China)  building  384  chambers.  The 
chambers built in Japan are tested in a testing facility in Kobe 
University  [5],  the  chambers  built  in  Israel  and  China  are 
tested in the two cosmic ray (CR) hodoscopes constructed for 
that purpose in the Technion and Tel Aviv University. 

II.  COSMIC RAY MUONS 
  Most of the CR muons are produced high in the atmosphere 
(typically  at  15  km  above  earth)  by  the  decay  of  charged 
mesons.  They  reach  the  ground  with  a  mean  energy  of 
approximately  4  GeV  [6].    The  integral  intensity  of  vertical 
muons above 1 GeV/c at sea level is approximately 70 m-2 s-1 
sr-1,  which  can  be  written  in  the  form  I  ≈  1  cm-2  min-1  for 
horizontal  detectors.  The  overall  zenith  angle  distribution  of 
muons at the ground is proportional to cos2θ. 

III.  THE TESTBENCH GENERAL STRUCTURE 

The  hodoscopes  use  cosmic  muons  to  measure  the  time 
response  and  detection  efficiency  of  the  TGCs.  The  two 
systems  are  similar  but  minute  differences  exist.  Hence,  the 
following  is  an  accurate  description  of  the  Tel  Aviv  system 
[7], and reliably portray the Technion system [8] as well. Up to 
eight  TGC  units  (doublets  or  triplets)  which  are  tested  in 
parallel are interleaved between two precision chambers (PRC) 
and  two  layers  of  triggering  scintillators.  A  Schematic 
structure of the testbench is shown in Fig.  1. A picture of one 
of the hodoscopes is shown in Fig 2.  
The  information  that  a  muon  crossed  the  PRC,  and  therefore 
the  tested  stack,  is  provided  by  two  scintillator  planes,  one 
above  the  upper  PRC  and  one  below  the  lower  PRC.  Each 
scintillator  plane  consists  of 
slabs, 
disconnected optically, 60 cm wide, 140 cm long, and 1.2 cm 
thick.  The  scintillator  material  has  a  high  index  of  refraction 
(n=1.58), and it is polished accurately to have total reflection, 

scintillator 

four 

not  allowing  light  produced  inside  to  escape.    The  emittance 
spectrum of the scintillator material is in the visible range. 
The  two  ends  of  each  scintillator  slab  are  glued  to  triangular 
light-guides  that  guide  the  collected  light  to  respective  Photo 
multipliers (PMT).  
 

Fig.  1 A schematic structure of the CR hodoscopes in the Technion and Tel 
Aviv University. The tested TGC units are interleaved within triggering layers 
(the scintillators) and position measurement units (the precision chambers). 

 

  

Fig.  2  A photograph of the testbench at Tel Aviv. 

 
We  use  Hamamatsu  R329-02  PMTs,  which  are  active  in  the 
range  of  300-650  nm  and  have  a  rise  time  of  2.6  ns.  A 
coincidence  between  a  hit  in  the  upper  and  the  lower 
scintillator planes is used to trigger the data taking. 
For calculating the hit position we use the readout of dedicated 
Precision Chambers (PRC). The PRCs are special rectangular 
shape  TGCs,  which  consists  of  two  perpendicular  layers  of 
strips and one layer of HV wires between them. There are 361 
strips along the X-axis of the rectangle, and 458 strips along its 
Y-axis.  Each  strip  has  a  width  of  3.6  mm.    The  signals  from 
the two layers are latched and read sequentially providing the 
X and Y coordinates of a hit position.  
The precision chambers and the TGC detectors need a constant 
gas  flow.  The  gas  system  produces  a  mixture  of  45%              
n-pentane  and  55%  of  CO2,  which  prevents  discharges  in  the 
chambers. This right mixture is achieved by bubbling CO2 gas 

 

through  liquid  n-pentane  at  temperature  of  a  170  C.  Two  gas 
lines supply gas from the gas mixing system. One line goes to 
the  chambers  in  the  testbench  and  the  other  to  the  batch  of 
chambers in the pre-test stage. A single gas supply line carries 
about 20 l/h of the gas mixture.  
The  TGCs  and  the  PRCs  operate  at  2.9-3.0  kV.  This  is 
supplied by a CAEN 40 channels SY127 HV unit. The SY127 
supply  also  the  negative  HV  required  by  the  scintillators 
PMTs. The SY127 is locally monitored and controlled via on-
board  alpha-numeric  keypad  and  display.  It  is  also  remotely 
controlled  via  RS-232-C  port  and  the  VME  Controller  mod. 
V288. 
The  electronic  readout  system  is  mounted  on  a  two  racks 
equipped with standard NIM crate and a VME crate. 

IV.   READOUT SCHEME 

The  following  electronic  units  are  installed  on  the  TGC  and 
PRC chambers: 
•  TGC  readout  -  ASD  board  which  is  the  Amplifier  Shape 
Discriminator (ASD) board to be used to read both wires 
and  strips  signals  in  ATLAS.  The  ASDs  are  attached  to 
the edge of a TGC chamber and enclosed inside the TGC 
electrical shielding.  

•  PRC readout - Gassiplex chip was developed at CERN to 
read  and  amplify  the  signal  from  each  strip  channel,  to 
which  it  is  connected  by  a  protection  card.  The  latter 
protects the Gassiplex from high currents. 
 

A VME bus is used as a common interface between a CPU and 
the  lab  measuring  equipment.  The  following  cards  are 
connected through the VME bus:  
•  A  CPU  module  -  a  1GHz  Pentium  III  runs  a  Linux 
operating  system,  with  256  MB  SDRAM.  It  includes  all 
standard  PC  I/O  (keyboard,  mouse,  SVGA,  IDE,  FDC, 
COM1/2, LPT1), a Flat Panel, 10/100BaseTX, Fast/Wide 
SCSI-2, VME64 support; optional transition module CD-
ROM/floppy and IDE hard drive.  

•  TDC – CAEN V767 is a multi-hit time to digital converter 
(TDC), a one-unit wide VME module, houses four chips, 
each  with  32  time  to  digital  conversion  channels  (128 
channels in total). 

•  C-RAM  –  CAEN  module  V550  is  an  analog  to  digital 
converter  (ADC).  C-RAM  is  a  one-unit  wide  VME 
module  houses 
to  digital 
conversion blocks. 

independent  analog 

two 

•  SEQUENCER – CAEN module V551B is a one-unit wide 
VME  module  that  handles  the  Data  Acquisition  from the 
PRC.  The  SEQUENCER  has  been  developed  to  control 
the signals from/to the C-RAM boards.  

•  HV  –  CAEN  module  V288  is  a  High  Speed  VME 
Controller  Interface.  This  unit  controls  the  HV  SY127 
distribution of power to the scintillators and the TGC and 
PRC chambers.  
 

The following units are connected to NIM crates:  
 

•  CAEN  NIM  -  TTL  adapter  module  N89  houses  two 
sections of four NIM to TTL converters and two sections 
of four TTL to NIM converters. 

•  CAEN  NIM  -  ECL  adapter  converts  the  NIM  standard 

signals to ECL standard signals. 

•  ASD  readout  board  and  ASD-TDC  units  which  were 
designed  by  the  Weizmann  institute  electronic  and  data 
acquisition  unit,  reads  the  signals  from  the  on-chamber 
ASD  boards,  and  sends  the  signal  to  the    TDC  card    in 
ECL  format.  Each  of  the  two  boards  in  these  modules 
receives  32 signals in LVDS format from two ASDs and 
output  two  differential  ECL  signals.  Each  output  signal 
represents  the  OR  of  16  odd  or  16  even  wires  or  strips 
signals. 

•  LeCroy constant fraction discriminator generates a precise 
digital  logic  pulse,  from  an  analog  one,  if  the  latter 
exceeds a given threshold. 

•  LeCroy  OR/AND  logical  units  generates  an  AND  or  an 
OR signal between two discriminator generated signals. 
 

The signals from the scintillators are used to trigger the system 
and set a time reference to the measurements. The eight PMT 
signals  of  each  scintillator  plane  are  connected  via  the 
discriminators to an OR unit. The output of the two OR units 
are then passed to an AND logical unit, which its output serves 
as a trigger signal for the readout system. 

 
The signals from the OR units, delayed by 100 ns go through 
the  NIM-ECL  converter  to  the  TDC  unit,  via  the  ASD-TDC 
card. 
 
The  signals  from  the  TGCs  go  through  the  ASD,  the  ASD 
readout board and the ASD-TDC converter to the TDC for the 
TGC time response measurement.  
 
The PRC signals are serially read through the Gassiplex to the 
ADC unit. It is controlled by the SEQUENCER using CLOCK 
HOLD and CLEAR signals. The CLOCK determines the time 
length for reading one channel. The HOLD signal freezes the 
information that is currently in the Gassiplex chip; the CLOCK 
pushes  the  signal  to  the  output  (C-RAM)  and  then  a  CLEAR 
signal resets all Gassiplex chips. The readout process takes 2-4 
microsecond per channel, but the channels are read in parallel 
into several ADCs. 
The  electronic  connections  between  all  the  different  units  in 
the readout systems are schematically depicted in Fig.  3 

V.  ANALYSIS METHOD 

The  Quality  Assurance  (QA)  of  the  chambers  produced  in 
Israel begins at the production site [9]. 
All the chambers are flushed with CO2 and run with 2.9 kV for 
one day. After that the gas is changed to the operation mixture 
of  CO2  and  n-pentane  (45%-55%  respectively)  and  the 
chambers  are  kept  two  days  with  that  mixture.  Then  it  is 
operated  with  the  nominal  voltage  (3  kV)  and  3.2  kV.  After 
checking  that  the  entire  channels  are  operative  the  chambers 

 

 

are tested with radioactive source searching for potential noise 
problems.  Each  detector  is  irradiated  with  2500  Ci  CO60 
source  at  a  nominal  operating  voltage  and  at  photon  rate 
several  times  above  the  expected  background  (for  further 
details  [10]).  This  radiation  test  is  used  to  detect  hot  spots  in 
the chambers.  
 

 

Fig.  3 The layout of the readout system 

Chambers that pass these preliminary tests are delivered to Tel 
Aviv or the Technion for further detailed check. 
The QA in the test laboratories is as follows: 
 

A.  Preliminary check  

 Incoming  TGC  units  are  identified  by  their  barcode  number 
and  are  registered  in  the  database.  Then  they  go  through  the 
following tests: 
1.  Mechanical  integrity  inspection  -  A  visual  inspection  of 
the  incoming  TGC  units  is  performed  to  check  that  no 
mechanical damage was done. 

2.  Gas  integrity  of  chambers  -  Each  TGC  unit,  that  passed 

the  mechanical  inspection,  is  flushed  with  CO2  at             
40  ml/min,  for  one  day.  Then,  it  is  flushed  with  the 
operating gas (CO2-n-pentane mixture) for additional two 
days. 

3.  HV check - After 48 hours of flushing the gas mixture, the 
module is tested under HV. The HV is first ramped to the 
nominal  2.9  kV.  If  no  HV  trip  is  observed,  the  HV  is 
further  increased  to  3  kV.  At  this  voltage,  the  current  of 
each counter should be below 15 Aµ . No sparking should 
be encountered. The current and number of sparks (if any) 
are recorded in the database. 

B.  Cosmic Ray efficiency test 

Units  that  pass  the  preliminary  tests  are  moved  to  the  CR 
efficiency testbench, simultaneously the gas HV studies of the 
next batch are performed. The scope of the efficiency test is to 
measure  the  time  response  and  the  efficiency  of  the  TGC 
counters. An online Data Acquisition (DAQ) program, running 
on the VME based Pentium CPU, is controlling the test. Every 
DAQ  run  begins  with  readout  of  2,000  events  with  software 

generated  random  trigger.  This  is  used  to  set  the  reference 
noise  level  threshold  for  each  of  the  ADC  channels.  When  a 
trigger is detected the DAQ reads the data from the TDC, the 
ADC  (C-RAM),  and  the  HV  controller,  and  stores  it  in  a 
binary  output  file  for  further  offline  analysis.  In  parallel  the 
program  continuously  plots  a  set  of  histograms  which  enable 
to  online  monitor  the  quality  of  the  data  and  the  equipment 
performances. The histograms are automatically stored on the 
database and are online accessible via the WEB. 
For  safety  reasons  a  slow  control  program  running  on  a 
separate  computer  serves  as  a  watch  dog  and  sends  SMS 
warnings  messages  when  its  sensors  detect  changes  in  
parameters  like  room  temp,  water  temp  or  unexpected 
problems in the HV system. 
Events accumulation for a period of about four days, allows a 
full mapping of the efficiency of each detector in the stack, to 
a precision of 1%.  
 

C.  Validation procedure 

the  ADC  channels.  Then 

A good chamber must have at least 95% of its active area more 
than  95%  efficient.  The  time  response  should  be  less  than      
25 ns. 
A C++ offline analysis program reads the binary output of the 
DAQ code and processes it. The offline program first reads the 
threshold  parameters  of 
it 
sequentially  reads  the  information  stored  for  each  muon 
crossing. Combined with the geometric setup of the chambers 
in  the  stack,  which  is  directly  read  from  the  database,  the 
program  can  calculate  the  expected  position  of  the  muon 
intersection  with  every  chamber  and  check  if  within  25  ns 
relative to the trigger a hit was detected by the wires and/or the 
strips  of  each  chamber.  The  results  of  these  comparisons  are 
two dimensions efficiency histograms of the tested chambers.  
The  hit  position  in  the  PRCs  is  calculated  as  a  weighted 
average of the ADC pulse height in each coordinate. A single 
muon signal is typically spread over four to ten strips in each 
coordinate.    The  program  requires  one  cluster  of  adjacent 
strips  in  each  of  the  four  coordinate  (X  and  Y  on  top  and 
bottom PRCs). A cluster is considered as a good muon hit only 
if 90% of its charge is concentrated in the center of the cluster 
+/-  five  close  neighbors.  Wx   in  (1)  represents  the  position 
calculated  in  the  PRC  and  its  error,  where  xi  and  pi  are  the 
position and the pulse height of a specific channel i,  Psub is the 
pulse  height  contained  within  a  restricted  range  of  ±five 
iP∆  depends on the fluctuation of 
channels from the peak and 

the signal in a single strip. 

x P
i
i

∑

i

P
sub

x
W

=

( 1 ) 

±

−∑
x
(
i

2

x

W

)

(
(cid:0)

i

∆

P
i

2

)

P
sub

Events with more than one cluster in one of the coordinates are 
rejected.    The  muon  trajectory  is  assumed  to  go  in  a  straight 
line  between  the  two  calculated  intersections  with  the  PRCs. 

 

This  assumption  is  used  to  interpolate  the  position  of  the 
intersection  with  the  scintillators  and  with  each  of  the  tested 
chambers.  
Comparison  between  the  weighted  average  and  the  expected 
Gaussian distribution showed a difference of less than 2 mm. 
A study of the measurement error as defined in (1) resulted in 
an error below 1 mm. 
Additional  error  could  occur  from  multiple  scattering  of  the 
muon traveling through the chambers. This effect was studied 
with  a  dedicated  Monte  Carlo  program  which  simulated  the 
interaction of minimum ionizing particle going through a set of 
TGCs.  It  showed  that  the  deviation  from  the  straight  line 
assumption at the TGC layers is at the level of 2 mm. This all 
goes  well  with  the  1x1  cm2  granularity  we  choose  for  our 
measurement resolution.  
 

 

Fig.    4    Left:  Expected  distribution  of  TGC  hits  where  the  position  is 
extrapolated from the hit position in the precision chambers. Right: Measured 
distribution of TGC hits. The clear difference seen between the two plots is the 
low efficiency lines on the right plot which are the result of the inactive area in 
the TGC support lines.  

Fig.  4  presents the two dimensions TGC hit histograms, which 
are used to calculate a chamber efficiency plot. Plotted on the 
left  side  is  the  distribution  of  the  number  of  hits  expected  in 
one  of  the  TGCs  as  extrapolated  from  the  hits  in  the  two 
precision chambers. On the right hand side we have the same 
histogram  but  counting  only  the  hits  which  had  also  a  signal 
detected in the strips of that chamber. The granularity of these 
histograms  is  1x1  cm2.  The  efficiency  map  is  the  results  of  a 
bin by bin division of the above two histograms. An example 
of a strips efficiency map of one of the chambers is shown in 
Fig.  5. 
One  can  clearly  see  in  the  figure  the  active  area  of  the 
chamber, (the white area) as well as the five support lines and 
the 60 support buttons.  
Separate plots are produced for the chamber’s wires and strips; 
hence  for  a  doublet  it  provides  two  wires  and  two  strips 
efficiency plots. For a triplet there is an additional plot for the 
wires in the middle. 
 
 

 

 

Fig.    5    A  strips  efficiency  map  of  one  of  the  chambers.  The  bin  efficiency 
level  is  color  coded  with  white  standing  for  efficiency>95%  and  black  for 
efficiency below 50%. The scale is given on the right side of the plot. 

To quantify the quality of a chamber it was decided to use the 
following criteria: 
• 

Inefficient  area  is  defined  as  a  contiguous  area  of  more 
than  25  cm2  that  extends  by  more  than  five  cm  in  each 
direction (x & y), with every point in that area having an 
efficiency of less than 95%. 

•  The decision if a chamber passes the test is based on the 
integrated  size  of  surface  of  all  the  dead  or  inefficient 
areas in a detector. 

To demonstrate the rules above see Fig.  6. The plot shows the 
strips efficiency distribution of the second chamber in the unit 
shown in Fig.  5. The main clear difference is that this chamber 
has a low efficiency region on one of its corners. The program 
has  counted  it  as  two  small  contiguous  areas  with  a  total 
inefficient region of 2.96%.  
  

Fig.  6  An efficiency map of a chamber with low efficiency region on its left 
low corner. 

Figure 7 presents the distribution of the total inefficient region 
in  the  so  called  T6  and  T8  type  chambers  tested  in  Israel.  It 
clearly  demonstrates  that  the  majority  of  the  tested  chambers 
passed  the  criterion  of  inefficient  region  below  5%  of  the 
active area. 

VIII.  REFERENCES 

                                                           
[1]  ATLAS  Collaboration,  “ATLAS  High  Level  Trigger  Technical  Design 

[2] 

Report”, CERN/LHCC/90-014, 1998. 
ATLAS  HLT/DAQ/DCS  Group,  “ATLAS  High  Level  Trigger  Data 
Acquisition  and  Controls  Technical  design  Report”,  http://atlas-proj-
hltdaqdcs-tdr.web.cern.ch/atlas-proj-hltdaqdcs-tdr/tdr-v1-
r4/PDF/TDR.pdf, 2003. 
 S.  Majewski  et  al.,  “A  thin  multiwire  chamber  operating  in  the  high 
multiplication mode”, Nucl. Inst. Meth. 217, 1983, pp. 265. 
G. Mikenberg, “Thin Gap gas chambers for hadronic calorimetry”, Nucl. 
Inst Meth. A265, 1988, pp. 223. 
D.  Lazic  et  al.,  “Measurement  of  drift  velocity  in  several  n-pentane 
based  gas  mixture  and  the  influence  of  working  gas  composition  on 
timing  properties  of    Thin  Gap  Chambers”,  Nucl.  Inst.  Meth  A410, 
1998,        pp. 159. 
Mincer  et  al.,  “Chareg  Production  in  Thin  Gap  Multiwire  chambers”, 
Nucl. Inst. Meth. A439, 2000, pp. 147-157. 

 

[4] 

[3]      ATLAS  Muon 

Spectrometer 

Technical 

Design 

Report, 

CERN/LHCC/97-22, 1997. 
 O. Sasaki, “ATLAS Thin Gap Chamber Amplifier Shaper Discriminator 
ICs 
1999, 
http://online.kek.jp/~sosamu/ASD-PRR.pdf 

Boards”, 

PRR, 

ASD 

ASD 

and 

 

[5]   T.  Sugimoto  and  the  ATLAS  Japan  TGC  group,  “Cosmic  Ray  test 
system for the Thin Gap Chamber modules at Kobe”, this proceedings.   
[6]  K.  Hagiwara  et  al.,  The  Review  of  Particle  Physics,  Phys.  Rev.  D66, 

2002 

[7]   J. Wasilweski, “Data acquisition system for quality tests of the ATLAS 

muon  endcap  trigger  chambers”,  MSc  Thesis  Technical  University  of 
Lodj, Tel Aviv, July 2002. 
J. Ginzburg “Analysis and quality tests of the ATLAS  
muon  endcap  trigger  chambers”,  MSc  Thesis  Tel  Aviv  University, 
January 2003. 

[8]   Y. Gernitzki et al., “The cosmic ray hodoscope for testing Thin Gap 

Chambers at the Technion”, ATL-MUON-2003-005, CERN, July 2003. 
[9]   ATLAS  TGC  Collaboration,  “Thin  Gap  Chambers  Construction 

Manual”, 
http://atlas.web.cern.ch/Atlas/project/TGC/www/TGC_cons_man.pdf 

[10]   V.  Smakhtin  and  the  ATLAS  TGC  Group,  “General  gamma-radiation 

test of  TGC detectors”, this proceedings. 

The  plot  does  not  include  chambers  which  were  returned  to 
Weizmann  for  well  defined  fixing  like  disconnected  strips  or 
wire group. 
 

 
 

Fig.  7  A distribution of the total inefficient regions for the T6 and T8 
chambers tested in Israel.  

VI.  SUMMARY 

TGCs are tested in three different CR testing laboratories one 
in Japan and two in Israel, all using similar testing facility, and 
common testing schemes. 
The  CR  test  is  a  critical  stage  in  the  QA  procedure  of  the 
chambers  and  successfully  detects  problematic  chambers, 
providing  efficiency  map  of  each  chamber  and  suggests 
operational parameters such as voltage and readout thresholds. 
The  laboratories  at  the  Technion  and  Tel  Aviv  have  tested 
already  more  than  300  T8  Units  and  40  T6  type  units  (both 
doublets  and  triplets).  The  first  two  T9-type  chambers  which 
were  produced 
in  Shandong  University  were  already 
successfully  tested,  and  additional  batch  of  60  units  will  be 
shipped  to  Israel  next  month.  About  20%  of  the  Israeli 
chambers quotas are already at CERN after they completed all 
the test stages in Israel. 
The  results  of  the  tests  are  stored  in  database  which  is 
accessible via standard WEB tools.  

VII.  ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

We  thank  our  colleagues  from  the  ATLAS  group  of  the 
Weizmann  Institute  of  Sciences.  We  thank  Z.  Tarem  for  his 
contribution to the software design. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

