A LOW-LOSS FIBER ACCESSIBLE PLASMON PHOTONIC CRYSTAL 
WAVEGUIDE FOR PLANAR ENERGY GUIDING AND SENSING 

 
 
Stefan A. Maier*, Paul E. Barclay, Thomas J. Johnson, Michelle D. Friedman, and Oskar 
J. Painter 
 
Thomas J. Watson Laboratory of Applied Physics, California Institute of Technology, 
Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 
 
 
Submitted to Applied Physics Letters 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
A  metal  nanoparticle  plasmon  waveguide  for  electromagnetic  energy  transport  utilizing 

dispersion  engineering  to  dramatically  increase  lateral  energy  confinement  via  a  two-

dimensional  pattern  of  Au  dots  on  an  optically  thin  Si  membrane  is  described.  Using 

finite-difference time-domain simulations and coupled-mode theory, we show that phase-

matched evanescent excitation from conventional fiber tapers is possible with efficiencies 

> 90 % for realistic geometries. Energy loss in this waveguide is mainly due to material 

absorption,  allowing  for  1/e  energy  decay  distances  of  about  2  mm  for  excitation  at 

telecommunication frequencies. This concept can be extended to the visible regime and 

promises applications in optical energy guiding, optical sensing, and switching. 

 
Corresponding Author: 
 
Stefan A. Maier 
Thomas J. Watson Laboratory of Applied Physics, California Institute of Technology 
Mail Code 128-95, Pasadena, CA 91125 
tel 626 395 6160 
fax 626 795 7258 
stmaier@caltech.edu 
 
*electronic address: stmaier@caltech.edu 

1 

  Research into electromagnetic surface modes or surface plasmon polaritons confined 

to interfaces between a metal and a dielectric has a rich history dating back to the mid-

20th  century  [1,  2].  More  recently,  the  emergence  of  sophisticated  nanofabrication 

techniques  has  allowed  fabrication  of  nanoscale  metal  patternings  and  led  to  intense 

research  efforts  due  to  potential  applications  in  novel  metal-based  wavelength-  and 

subwavelength-scale photonic devices [3]. One basic building block of such devices are 

plasmon  waveguides  that  guide  electromagnetic  energy  in  the  visible  and  near-infrared 

regime  of  the  electromagnetic  spectrum.  Indeed,  energy  transport  at  telecommunication 

wavelengths  using  micron-size  metal  slabs  has  been  demonstrated  [4],  and  guiding  at 

near-infrared  and  visible  frequencies  using  nanowires  [5]  and  arrays  of  closely  spaced 

metal nanoparticles [6] has been achieved as a step towards the ultimate goal of building 

highly integrated photonic circuits [7] with spatial dimensions below the diffraction limit. 

These  guiding  structures  may  find  practical  applications,  such  as  delivering  energy  to 

“hot-spots” for biological sensing [8], if two obstacles can be overcome. 

 

The  first  of  these  issues  concerns  the  difficulty  of  efficient  excitation  of  localized 

plasmons in nanowires and nanoparticle structures. While plasmons on planar metal films 

can be efficiently excited using either prism or grating couplers [2], such methods cannot 

easily probe localized states in waveguides or resonators. Therefore, most investigations 

of  localized  states  have  employed  either  diffraction-limited  far-field  excitation  with 

estimated efficiencies of about 15 % [9], or near-field optical fiber probes as local light 

sources  with  typical  light  throughputs  well  below  0.1  %  [10].  Furthermore,  neither  of 

these  methods  is  mode-selective.  For  metal  slabs  embedded  in  SiO2  [4]  and  polymers 

2 

[11], end-fire coupling has been demonstrated, but its efficiency is expected to decrease 

for asymmetric environments [12] necessary for surface sensing applications. 

 

The  second  obstacle  is  the  inherent  trade-off  between  confinement  and  loss  in 

plasmonic guiding structures. For metal slabs, it has been shown that the confinement of 

all  supported  long-ranging  plasmon-polariton  modes  diminishes  as  the  cross  section  of 

the  waveguide  (and  thus  losses  due  to  ohmic  resistive  heating)  are  reduced  [12]. 

Furthermore, asymmetry in the dielectric environment leads to a cut-off metal slab height 

for all long-ranging modes that increases both with dielectric contrast between the sub- 

and  superstrate  and  decreasing  width  as  nanowire  dimensions  are  approached.  For 

nanowires or one-dimensional nanoparticle waveguides, in order to reduce radiative loss, 

excitation  near  the  plasmon  resonance  is  necessary  to  provide  the  large  lateral  wave 

vectors  required  for  a  tight  confinement  to  the  submicron  guiding  structures.  The 

requirement of resonant excitation increases the resistive heating losses, and further limits 

such  waveguides  to  the  visible  regime  of  the  spectrum.  Therefore,  typical  1/e  energy 

attenuation  distances  are  in  the  micron  and  sub-micron  regime  for  nanowires  and 

nanoparticle waveguides, respectively. 

 

In this paper, we present the design of a two-dimensional metal nanoparticle plasmon 

waveguide  that  shows  negligible  radiative  losses  even  for  non-resonant  excitation  and 

analyze  its  guiding  properties  and  excitation  by  conventional  fiber  tapers  using  a 

combination  of  finite-difference  time-domain  (FDTD)  simulations  and  coupled-mode 

theory.  Due  to  the  employment  of  design  principles  developed  initially  for  defect 

waveguides  in  dielectric  photonic  crystals,  the  energy  attenuation  length  is  mainly 

determined  by  the  wavelength-dependent  absorptive  losses  of  the  constituent  metal 

3 

nanoparticles. The confinement of the optical modes is ensured by a hybrid structure of 

SOI  (silicon-on-insulator)  and  lithographically  defined  metal  nanoparticles  on  the 

optically thin silicon membrane. Figure 1 shows this geometry both in top (b) and side (c) 

view for a plasmon waveguide based on  a  square lattice with a lattice constant of Λz = 

500 nm chosen to allow efficient excitation of the waveguide around a wavelength of 1.5 

micron  as  discussed  below.  The  metal  dots  are  50  nm  in  height,  and  have  lateral 

dimensions of 100x100 nm2 in the center of the waveguide with a linear lateral grading 

down to 70x70 nm2 after three lateral periods. We chose gold with a dielectric function as 

described by Johnson and Christy [13] as the material system for our FDTD simulations. 

 

Figure 1a shows the FDTD – calculated band structure of plasmon waves propagating 

in  the  z-direction  for  this  geometry  near  the  Χ  –  point  of  the  first  Brillouin  zone  (blue 

dots).  Due  to  the  periodicity  of  the  structure  in  the  propagation  direction,  a  small  band 

gap appears at the zone boundary, whose size can be adjusted by scaling the size of the 

metal  nanoparticles.  Another  consequence  of  the  periodicity  is  the  characteristic  zone-

folding  of  the  dispersion  relation.  This  way,  the  upper  plasmon  band  crosses  both  the 

light-line of silica and air, suggesting the possibility of phase-matched excitation of the 

waveguide  by  using  silica  fiber  tapers  [14]  as  discussed  below.  Note  that  while  this 

waveguide was designed for operation in the near-infrared regime of the electromagnetic 

spectrum,  simple  adjustment  of  the  lattice  constant  should  allow  guiding  of  energy  at 

visible  and  other  frequencies,  although  with  commensurate  increase  in  ohmic  heating 

loss. 

 

Figure  1b  and  1c  show  the  optical  mode  profile  (electric  field  intensity)  of  the 

waveguide  mode  at  phase-matching  with  the  silica  light  line  in  top  and  side  geometry. 

4 

Due  to  the  lateral  grading  in  dot  size  of  the  lattice  [14],  the  mode  is  laterally  well 

confined  to  the  center  of  the  waveguide  akin  to  metal  slab  waveguides  with  a 

width/height  ratio  >>  1  [12].  Vertically,  the  confinement  is  ensured  both  by  bound 

metal/air surface plasmons and the undercut geometry of the underlying silicon slab. In 

our FDTD model, the power flow through the boundaries of the simulation volume was 

analyzed,  confirming  good  lateral  waveguide  confinement  even  for  only  three  lateral 

grading periods of the lattice. 

 

The energy attenuation in the direction of power flow is thus mainly determined by 

resistive  ohmic  heating  losses  in  the  metal.  Since  the  lateral  confinement  of  the  guided 

mode  is  provided  by  the  extended  two-dimensional  lattice  structure,  the  metal 

nanoparticles  can  now  be  excited  far  below  their  individual  plasmon  resonances,  thus 

minimizing  the  absorptive  losses.  Indeed,  for  operation  around  1.6  micron  our 

calculations  based  upon  values  of  the  dielectric  properties  of  gold  in  the  literature  [13] 

predict  an  energy  decay  constant  of  α  =  4.9  cm-1,  corresponding  to  a  1/e  energy 

attenuation  length  of  about  2  mm.  The  attenuation  length  is  significantly  less  than  that 

predicted  for  plasmons  propagating  along  continuous  Au  slab  waveguides  of  the  same 

thickness  embedded  in  silica  or  in  polymers  [4,  11]  due  to  the  small  amount  of  metal 

employed  in  our  waveguide,  and  is  expected  to  diminish  even  further  with  decreasing 

metal  thickness.  Note  that  the  energy  attenuation  in  actual  fabricated  devices  will  be 

higher than the predicted value based on resistive heating alone, due to scattering losses 

induced by the metal surface morphology and fabrication imperfections. For waveguides 

with  a  smaller  lattice  constant  that  operate  in  the  visible  regime  of  the  spectrum,  the 

absorptive  losses  and  thus  the  energy  decay  will  increase,  which  can  be  partially 

5 

counteracted by a material change to silver. The waveguides can thus easily be adapted to 

desired  applications  such  as  low-loss  energy  guiding  in  the  near-IR  or  short-distance 

sensing applications in the visible regime of the spectrum. 

 

The high intensity of the electric field at the top surface of the waveguide due to the 

bound plasmon state makes this mode easily accessible optically. In particular, efficient 

overlap  with  a  fundamental  mode  of  a  fiber  taper  placed  at  a  gap  d  on  top  of  the 

waveguide as depicted in the inset of Fig. 2 is possible. Following the theory developed 

in  [14]  for  dielectric  photonic  crystal  waveguides,  Figure  2  shows  the  power  transfer 

characteristics  between  the  taper  and  the  plasmon  waveguide  versus  gap  height  and 

coupler  length.  A  high  power  transfer  efficiency  of  90  %  over  a  distance  of  70  lattice 

periods (35 µm) can be achieved for a gap of d = 250 nm. For dielectric photonic crystal 

waveguides, it has recently been shown experimentally that high power transfer at such 

small gaps can indeed be achieved [15]. Furthermore, the transverse coupling coefficient 

between  the  taper  and  plasmon  waveguide  mode  is  significantly  larger  than  the 

theoretical  energy  attenuation  α,  suggesting  that  high  coupling  efficiencies  can  be 

realized experimentally even in the presence of fabrication non-idealities. 

  Apart from allowing a highly efficient excitation of the waveguide using fiber tapers, 

the  high  electric  field  intensities  at  the  metal-air  surface  of  the  particles  also  allow  for 

other  intriguing  applications  apart  from  energy  guiding.  Specifically,  the  high  field 

intensities can serve as “hot-spots” for the attraction and subsequent sensing of biological 

molecules [16] or for enhancement  of non-linear interactions for  switching applications 

in  a  suitable  adapted  waveguide  geometry  after  the  coupling  region.  Thus,  a  new 

6 

generation of wavelength and sub-wavelength scale photonic devices as proposed in [7] 

seems feasible. 

 

In  summary,  we  have  shown  that  a  hybrid  SOI  and  metal  nanoparticle  waveguide 

structure based upon a laterally graded two-dimensional lattice of metal nanoparticles can 

serve  as  an  efficient  optical  waveguide.  The  energy  attenuation  in  these  waveguides  is 

limited only by resistive ohmic heating losses. Efficient, phase-matched excitation of the 

waveguide using tapers formed from standard silica optical fiber is shown to be possible, 

with theoretical power transfers of > 90 % in the near-infrared. 

 

7 

References 

 
1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

1988, Springer (Berlin) 

25(11), 844 (2000) 

Powell, C. J. and J. B. Swan, Physical Review 118(3), 640 (1960) 

Raether, H., Surface Plasmons on smooth and rough surfaces and on gratings. 

Barnes, W. L., A. Dereux, and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature 424, 824 (2003) 

Charbonneau, R., P. Berini, E. Berolo, and E. Lisicka-Shrzek, Optics Letters 

5. 

Krenn, J. R., B. Lamprecht, H. Ditlbacher, G. Schider, M. Salerno, A. Leitner, 

and F. R. Aussenegg, Europhysics Letters 60(5), 663-669 (2002) 

6. 

Maier, S. A., P. G. Kik, H. A. Atwater, S. Meltzer, E. Harel, B. E. Koel, and A. A. 

G. Requicha, Nature Materials 2, 229 (2003) 

7. 

Maier, S. A., M. L. Brongersma, P. G. Kik, S. Meltzer, A. A. G. Requicha, and H. 

A. Atwater, Advanced Materials 13(19), 1501-1505 (2001) 

8. 

Raschke, G., S. Kowarik, T. Franzl, C. Sönnichsen, T. A. Klar, J. Feldmann, A. 

Nichtl, and K. Kürzinger, Nano Letters 3(7), 935-938 (2003) 

9. 

Ditlbacher, H., J. R. Krenn, A. Hohenau, A. Leitner, and F. R. Aussenegg, 

Applied Physics Letters 83(18), 3665 (2003) 

10. 

Courjon, D. and C. Bainier, Reports on Progress in Physics 57, 989-1028 (1994) 

11. 

Nikolajsen, T., K. Leosson, I. Salakhutdinov, and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Applied 

Physics Letters 82(5), 668 (2003) 

12. 

Berini, P., Physical Review B 63, 125417 (2001) 

13. 

Johnson, P. B. and R. W. Christy, Physical Review B 6(12), 4370-4379 (1972) 

8 

14. 

Barclay, P. E., K. Srinivasan, and O. Painter, Journal of the Optical Society of 

15. 

Barclay, P. E., K. Srinivasan, M. Borselli, and O. Painter, Electronics Letters 

America B 20(11), 2274 (2003) 

39(11), 842 (2003) 

16. 

Xu, H. and M. Käll, Physical Review Letters 89(24), 246802 (2002) 

 

 
 

9 

Figure captions: 

 

 

 

 

Au dot size 

color scale. 

Figure  1.  3D  finite-difference  time-domain  simulation  of  a  plasmon  photonic  crystal 

waveguide.  a)  Photonic  band  structure  (blue  dots)  showing  phase-matching  of  a 

waveguide mode with the silica light line. b) Electric field distribution of this mode in top 

view (Au metal dots outlined in white). c) Lateral distribution of the electric field for this 

mode  through  silicon  membrane.  d)  Scanning  electron  micrograph  of  waveguide 

including end-mirrors fabricated from Au nano-dots on SOI, showing the lateral grade in 

Figure 2. Efficiency of contradirectional power transfer into a plasmon photonic crystal 

waveguide  upon  phase-matching  with  a  silica  fiber  taper  of  diameter  1  µm  placed  at  a 

gap d above the top of the waveguide as depicted in the inset. The contour plot shows the 

totally coupled power versus taper gap and coupling length in lattice constants on a linear 

10 

(a)

0..5

0..4

0..3

)
0

λ
/
a
(
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
 

d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

air

taper - waveguide 
coupling

(b)

(c)

(d)

z

y

x

y

0..2

silica

0..1

silicon

0

0..3

0..4
βz (2π/Λz)

0..5

Figure 1 (color, double-column size) of 2 
Stefan A. Maier, submitted to Applied Physics Letters

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

 
 
)

m
µ
(
 
d
 
p
a
g
 
r
e
p
a
T

0

0

20

40

60

100

140
80
Coupler length L/ Λ

120

z

160

180

200

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

Figure 2 (color) of 2 
Stefan A. Maier, submitted to Applied Physics Letters

