Research on the Software of Track Reconstruction 

in Vertex Chamber of BESII∗
 
ZENG Yu1)      MAO Ze-Pu 
(Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100039, P.R.China) 

 

Abstract        The software of track reconstruction of the vertex chamber of BESII-VCJULI was 
studied  when  it  was  transplanted  from  the  HP-Unix  platform  to  PC-Linux.  The 
problems  of  distinct  dictionary  storage  and  precision  treatment  in  these  two 
different  platforms  were  found  and  settled  in  the  modified  software.  Then  the 
obvious  differences  of  the  candidate  track  number  in  an  event  and  some  track 
parameters caused by them were reduced from 74% to 0.02% and from 5% to 0.5%, 
respectively. As a result, the quality of the track finding was greatly improved and 
the CPU time saved. 

 
Key words    vertex chamber, track dictionary, track reconstruction, HP-Unix, PC-Linux 
 

1  Introduction 

The  Beijing  Spectrometer  II  (BESII),  which  records  information  from  electron 
positron interactions in the tau-charm energy region from 3-5GeV to study τ leptons, 
D mesons, J/ψ, and ψ’ physics, consists of several components [1]: the vertex chamber 
(VC), the main drift chamber (MDC), the time of flight counters (TOF), the shower 
counters  (SC),  muon  counters  (µC),  luminosity  monitor  (LUM),  solenoid  magnet, 
electronics and its calibration system. 

The  BESII  vertex  chamber  consists  of  640  aluminized  Mylar  drift  tubes 
distributed in totally twelve layers. Except for the four middle stereo layers, which are 
used in Z directional track finding, the remaining eight layers are all axial ones used 
in  track  finding  in  r-φ  plane.  The  whole  twelve  layers  of  tubers  are  divided  into  six 
snake  layers,  each  snake  layer  is  composed  of  two  adjacent  wire  layers  from 
innermost to outermost. The two wire layers in one snake layer is offset by 1/2 tube to 
ensure that each will have at least two high resolution measurements in each group of 
four wire layers. 

The vertex chamber can be used as a trigger to suppress background, and it can 
be  also  used  in  matching  reconstruction  with  other  sub-detectors.  The  study  of 
matching  reconstruction  of  MDC  and  VC  shows  the  resolution  of  momentum  is 
greatly  improved  when  VC  is  used  in  track  reconstruction  of  BESII,  and  10MeV  is 
improved when analyze J/ψ→e+e− [2]. 

Before 2000, the environment of reconstruction of BES is made up of HP-Unix 

                                                        
* High Energy Phys. and Nucl. Phys., 2003, 27(9): 808-812 
∗ Supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (19991480) 
1) E-mail: zengy@mail.ihep.ac.cn 

system,  and  all  the  reconstruction  software  can  run  on  HP-Unix  platform.  With  the 
rapid development of PC machines, they have considerably superior cost performance 
to  HP  ones,  however.  IHEP  thus  began  to  adopt  PC-FARM  to  construct  its 
environment of physics analysis [3] just as other HEP labs do. PC-FARM is a multi-PC 
computation  environment  with  many  characteristics  such  as  powerful  computation 
ability,  good  cost  performance,  convenient  management  and  handy  upgrade  etc., 
which  make  it  an  ideal  program  to  establish  large-scale  computation  environment. 
Because  of  the  difference  between  PC-Linux  and  HP-Unix,  hardware  and  software 
included,  the  reconstruction  results  of  BES  events  on  two  platforms  have  obvious 
differences. To make full use of the superiorities of PC machines, systematic study of 
reconstruction  software  must  be  done  when  the  software  is  transplanted  from 
HP-Unix platform to PC-Linux platform. 

2  Track reconstruction 

The  function  of  track  reconstruction  is  to  redisplay  particle’s  track  of  flight  by 
making use of raw data. According to the principal that the projection of a particle’s 
track is an arc when the charged particle flies in the magnetic field, values such as the 
momentum, the charge and so on are obtained. 

The software of track reconstruction in vertex chamber (VCJULI [4]) consists of 

two parts: track finding and track fitting. 

1) By the use of track dictionary, the part of track finding, adopting the method 
of global track recognition  [5], has the characteristic of rapidness and high efficiency. 
Track  dictionary  consists  of  template  dictionary,  cell  dictionary  and  auxiliary 
dictionary. Among them, all the constituents of cells are stored in template dictionary 
and all the track patterns can be found by using MINUIT [6]; Cell dictionary is a list of 
templates,  which  pass  through  each  cell  in  the  chamber;  Auxiliary  dictionary  is 
generated  to  suppress  spurious  tracks  [7].  All  the  work  is  done  in  r-φ  plane  with  the 
information provided by axial layers. When taking into account the information such 
as time of drift, geometric position and the principal that the projection of a charged 
particle’s track is an arc, related parameters can be obtained through fitting [7].   

2) Parameters obtained in r-φ plane and information supplied by stereo layers are 
used in track fitting to get Z position. According to the function of charged particle’s 
movement in even magnetic field [7], five parameters describing the helix function, i.e., 
the position and the momentum of particle [8] are thus obtained. 

3  The study of reconstruction software 

With  the  effort  of  many  people  of  BES  collaboration  in  transplanting  software 
from HP-Unix platform to PC-Linux platform, BES offline analysis software (Version 
102) has successfully been used in the analysis of J/ψ data. Track number and track 
parameters  have  distinguished  differences  between 
two  platforms,  however. 
Systematic check and study show the main reasons as listed in the following: 

1) Although Linux system and Unix system are very much alike, the FORTRAN 
compilation of the BES code on Linux requires strict adherence to FORTRAN rules, 
however, it is less stricter on Unix [9]; 

2) There still exists in the BES code, originated from old FORTRAN version 18 
years  ago,  many  irregular  codes,  which  lead  to  different  results  on  those  two 
platforms or cannot even run on Linux. 

3) Current PC machines use 32 bits in calculation while HP workstations use 64 
bits. Differences thus occur when some high precision in calculations are carried out 
on those two systems.   

4) Different data storage and transaction exist between two platforms. 
Therefore, to establish the environment of the BES offline analysis on PC-Linux 
platform, systematic check and study of the BES code on HP-Unix are required. To 
reconstruct on PC platform, we have studied the BES reconstruction software (V102) 
in detail. 

The  procedure  of  check  can  be  divided  into  two  steps:  ①Reconstruct  on  two 
platforms  respectively,  then  gather  statistics  of  track  numbers  of  each  event  and 
compare the track numbers of each subtype;  ②Compare the parameters of each track 
when  the  track  numbers  found  on  HP-Unix  and  PC-Linux  have  no  difference.  We 
define that if the difference is greater than 1%×（RiU-RiL）/RiU (RiU and RiL are the values 
of  ‘i’th  parameter  on  HP-Unix  and  PC-Linux,  respectively),  the  parameters  on  two 
platforms are different. The study of VC shows track number and track parameter on 
HP-Unix  and  PC-Linux  are  quite  different,  the  main  reason  is  distinct  dictionary 
storage and precision treatment in these two different platforms. 

3.1 check on track number 

Through  reconstruction  on  data  Run15254.raw,  we  found  74%  events  have 

different track numbers. The main reason is: 

The dictionary of MDC is generated in the type of binary system, which will not 
cause  differences  in  two  platforms.  The  dictionary  of  VC  is  generated  by  means  of 
ASCII, however. Since the storage of an integer on those two platforms are different 
and  ‘bit  operation’  is  required  in  track  finding,  ASCII  number  is  read  in  from  the 
dictionary and the value is transferred through the equivalence with a logical variable. 
However, when execute the equivalence between a logical variable and an integer one, 
the way to read and store is significantly distinct, which results in the differences in 
candidate track number. 

Considering  the  equivalence  of  one-byte  array  (each  cell  occupies  1  byte) 
VCSDCT(100000) 
cell  occupies  4  bytes) 
array 
VCSDC4(25000)(that  is,  EQUIVALENCE  (VCSDC4(1),VCSDCT(1))),  e.g.,  for 
value 2047=(11111111111)2, the way to deal with is shown in Figure 1.   

four-byte 

(each 

and 

Figure 1.    One way to deal with ‘dictionary’ on HP-Unix and PC-Linux, respectively 

 

As can be seen, if we need to get value from a certain byte, for example, from 
byte(2),  the  result  on  HP-Unix  is  (00000000)2,  however  (00000111)2  on  PC-Linux. 
When  converted  into  decimalism,  it  is  0  on  HP-Unix  and  7  on  PC-Linux.  Through 
comparison,  we  found  the  storage  of  each  four  byte  is  totally  reversed  on  HP 
platform. 

By  the  same  token,  as  to  the  equivalence  of  one-byte  array  (each  cell  occupies 
one byte) VCSDCT(100000) and two-byte array (each cell occupies two bytes) (i.e., 
EQUIVALENCE(VCSDC2(1),VCSDCT(1))), 
value 
2047=(11111111111)2, to get value from byte(2), for example. It is (11111111)2, equals 
to –1 when converted into decimalism on HP platform while (00000111)2 , equals to 7 
when converted into the decimal system on PC platform. See Figure 2. 

considering 

same 

the 

Figure 2.    Another way to deal with ‘dictionary’ on HP-Unix and PC-Linux 

As  can  be  seen  from  the  above,  we  can  find  the  differences  and  the  law  in 
equivalence  between  one-byte  array  and  four-byte  array  and  the  law  in  equivalence 
between  one-byte  array  and  two-byte  array.  Because  of  these  reasons  between  HP 
platform  and  PC  platform,  program  VCTKFD.f  (used  to  search  candidate  track)  get 
different  value  from  array  VCSDCT(*),  where  the  contents  of  dictionary  are  stored. 
Thus, candidate track number found in r-φ turns out to be different. This problem is 
successfully solved through the settlement of the software. 

With data Run15254.raw, the result of reconstruction on 5,000 events is shown in 
Figure 3. No.1 and No.13 on horizontal coordinate represent candidate track number 
and  final  track  number  of  VC,  respectively,  while  vertical  coordinate  represents  the 
corresponding  ratio  of  the  events  that  have  differences  in  track  number  in  two 
platforms. Among them, candidate track is the track found in r-φ plane, and final track 
can be obtained when information of stereo layers are added. 

 

 

Figure 3. Ratio of events with different candidate track number before modification and after modification 

1 VC candidate track；2 Neutral events；3 MDC;4 TOF;5 SC;6 Muon;7 dE/dx;8 Vertex Constrained Track Fit; 

9 MDC Pointers;10 SC Pointers;11 Projected/Decay Coordinates of MDC Tracks;12 Virtual Track; 

13 VC;14 VC Pointers;15 Projected/Decay Coordinates of VC Tracks;16 MDC-VC Matching Info. 

As  can  be  seen  from  Figure  3.,  the  number  of  events  with  different  candidate 
track number in r-φ plane has reduced from 3611 to 1 (event ID: 828), that is, from 
74%  (before  modification)  to  0.2‰  (after  modification).  Meanwhile,  although  the 
way  to  deal  with  the  dictionary  in  PC  platform  and  HP  platform  is  different,  which 
results  in  the  distinction  of  candidate  track  number,  final  track  number  has  little 
difference. The main reason is: The software will do the same ‘bit operation’ on most 
content  of  the  dictionary,  thus,  taking  into  account  the  first  ‘bit  operation’  in  track 
finding  in  r-φ  plane,  the  software  has  operated  even  times  which  makes  little 
differences in final track number on two platforms, however, track finding efficiency 
is very low. As to the part has not been carried out with the same ‘bit operation’ when 
adding information of stereo layers, that is, only been operated odd times, final track 
number  will  differ.  Besides,  after  modification  on  the  software  of  VC,  other  parts 
related  to  VC,  such  as  TOF,  SC  (No4  and  No5  in  horizontal  coordinate  showed  in 
Figure 3.) will have corresponding variation. Careful study of the event (event ID 828) 
shows  that  if  run  the  event  alone,  there  is  no  difference  between  two  platforms. 
Difference occurs when run a series of events passing through it, however. The reason 
is the software is not strict enough and some rules on HP-Unix is somewhat not rigid, 
consequently, track number on HP-Unix is one more that on PC-Linux. See Figure 4. 

Figure 4. Display of event 828 on HP-Unix and PC-Linux, respectively 
Therefore, after modification on the software in charge of reading the dictionary, 

candidate track number is completely the same and so is final track number. 

 

3.2 check on parameters 

To  improve  the  precision  of  physics  analysis  and  reduce  the  differences  of 
analysis results between different platforms, each parameter of an event is required to 
be identical. 

The reason why track parameter differs is determined by the following reasons: 
PC machines calculate in 32 bits while HP workstation in 64 bits. Differences occur 
when deal with some high precision calculations. After some modifications, including 
the  change  of  variable  type  from  single  precision  to  double  one,  the  differences  in 
track parameter decreased significantly. Figure 5. shows the results of reconstruction 
on 5,000 events with data Run15254.raw on two platforms.   

Figure 5. Ratio of events with different track parameter before modification and after modification 

As shown in Figure 5., parameter 26,29,32,34 (parameters related to error matrix) 
has  decreased  from  about  5%  to  less  than  5‰.  Ratio  of  events  on  some  important 

track parameters, such as

PPPP
,
y

,

,

x

z

,
φθ,

(4-9), is less than 4%. 

   

4  Summary 

After  systematical  check  and  modification  on  the  track  reconstruction  software 
on Vertex Chamber of BESII on PC-Linux, the quality and efficiency of track finding 
have  been  greatly  improved.  Candidate  track  number  has  become  completely  the 
same  on  two  platforms,  and  the  ratio  of  events  with  different  track  parameter  has 
reduced  to  5‰  or  so.  Since  VC  locates  at  inner  part  of  spectrometer  and  matches 
with TOF, MDC and ESC in track extrapolation, to further improve the precision in 
track extrapolation, check and modification are required in corresponding programs. 

We  would  like  to  thank  the  staffs  of  Calibration  Group  at  the  Institute  of  High 
Energy  Physics,  Beijing.  This  work  was  supported  by  the  National  Natural  Science 
Foundation of China under Contact No.19991480.   

 

 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] BES Collab. Nucl. Instr. Meth., 2001, A458:627 
[2] LIU Jing. Postdoctoral Report of CCAST, 1998(in Chinese) 
[3] LIU T.R. et al. Proceedings of CHEP 2001, 2001, 97   
[4] CHEN G.P. et al. The 5th BES Annual Meeting, 1996, 115 
[5] Grote H. Rep. Prog. Phys., 1987, 50:473 
[6] James F. MINUIT-Users guide, Program Library, CERN, 1992, D506 
[7] CHEN Guang-Pei et al. High Energy Phys. and Nucl. Phys., 1998, 22:985(in Chinese) 
[8] MAO Ze-Pu et al. High Energy Phys. and Nucl. Phys., 1993, 17:193(in Chinese)   
 

