Transmission of Hologram Image using a Zone Plate for Hard
X-ray Radiation

A. V. Kuyumchyan1

, A. Yu. Souvorov2
K. Trouni3

, T. Ishikawa2
, and E. Sarkisian3

, A. A. Isoyan1

, V.V. Aristov 1,

1Institute of Microelectronics Technology and High Purity Materials of RAS, Russian Federation,
Chernogolovka, 142432,
2SPring-8, JASRI, 1-1-1 Kouto, Mikazuki-cho, Sayo-gun Hyogo 679 5198, Japan and
3International Academy of Science and Technology, P.O. Box 4385, CA 91222, USA

The  images  of  the  silicon  test  object  has  been  carried  out.  An  image  for  in-line  hard  X-

ray  hologram  is  presented.  The  transmission  of  a  hologram  image  for  hard  X-ray

radiation using Fresnel phase zone plate has been investigated.

PACS numbers: 41.50.+h, 42.40.-i, 07.85.Tt, 87.59.-e

Introduction

The  development  of  X-ray  optics  opens  new  possibilities  for  diagnostics  in  the

field  of Biology, microelectronics  and  nanotechnologies.  Methods  of  X-ray  holography

for soft X-ray radiation [1,2] and transmission of the image of phase objects for both hard

and  soft  X-ray  radiation  [3-5]  have  rapidly  develop  in  recent  years.  The  absence  of

coherent  beams  (X-ray  lasers)  and  recording  devices  for  three-dimension  images  is  the

main  difficulty  to  obtain  X-ray  holograms  by  optical  method.  In  the  present  work  the

following experimental results are given: recordings of a  Gabor  hologram  for  hard  X-ray

radiation and transmission of a hologram image using a silicon phase zone plate (ZP) [6].

Experimental scheme and results

The images of the test silicon object consisting of the word-combination “X-RAY

phase  contrast,  IPMT  RAS  CHERNOGOLOVKA”  have  been  investigated.  The  test

objects  have  been  prepared  on  the  silicon  crystal  membranes  4 mm  thick  by  electron-

beam lithography and ion-plasma etching. The width of the small letters is 2 mm and the

height  is  3 mm  for  one  case  and  1.5 mm  for  the  other  (Fig.1a).  The  transmission

coefficient is equal to 98.9% for 3 mm and 99.4% for 1.5 mm (the X-ray radiation energy

is 12.4keV).

The  experimental  investigations  have  been  conducted  on  the  station  BL29XU,

Spring-8  [7].  Two  different  experimental  schemes  are  considered:  1)  The  experimental

scheme  to  obtain  a  Gabor  hologram  at  the  X-ray  radiation  energy  in  the  range  8-18keV.

(Fig.1b). 2) The experimental scheme to transmit a hologram image at the X-ray radiation

energy of 10kev (fig.1c).

In the first case an X-ray beam of synchrotron radiation from the 25 mm  source  is

monochromatized by a two-crystal monochromator Si (111), then it is transmitted to the

test  object   as  far  as  987.35 m  which  is  set perpendicularly to the falling X-ray beam.

Figure 1. (a) SEM image of the test object. (b) Scheme of the experiment for recording a hologram

image. (c) Scheme of the experiment for transmitting a hologram image.

Behind  the  test  object  an  interference  image  is  formed,  which  is  recorded  by  a  CCD-

camera  with  the  resolving  power  0.3 mm  at  the  distance  from  0.03  m  up  to  3  m.  The

images  of  interference  patterns  at  the  different  distances  from  the  test  object  have  been

examined.  The  experimental  patterns  for  different  distances  from  the  test  object  at  the

12.4 keV energy of the falling X-ray beam are shown in Figures 2a, 2b. As is seen in the

patterns,  the  image  contrast  changes  depending  on  the  distance.  The  experimental

investigations have shown that the images appear beginning with the particular distance

from  the  test  object  (e.g.  for  12.4  keV  energy  this  distance  is  2.5  cm).  To  confirm  the

reliability  of  the  results  obtained  the  additional  experiments  have  been  conducted.  The

image of the phase test object with the diffuser has been obtained. It is well known that

the  phase  contrast  can  be  extinguished  by  a  diffuser.  Experimental  investigations  have

shown  that  a  diffuser  insignificantly  affects  interference  images.  The  contrast  has  been

shown to improve for high energies when changing the energy of the falling X-ray beam

from 8 keV to 18 keV.

In  the  second  case  (Fig.1c)  to  obtain  the  image  transmission  the  10  keV  X-ray

beam behind the test object is collimated through a 160mm x 90mm S1 slit and falls on the

phase  zone  plate.  Then  the  X-ray  beam  is  overlapped  by  a  150mm  x  80mm  S2  slit.  The

parameters of the phase ZP used are the following: the radius of the first zone is 8.42mm,

the number of zones is 112, the size of the last zone is 0.4mm, an aperture is 178.2mm, the

focal distance is 57.5 cm, the relief height is 10.5mm,  the  membrane  thickness  is  16mm.

The  transmission  coefficient  of  the  membrane  is  79%  for  the  energy  of  10keV.  The

average transmission coefficient of the surface relief is 93%. The transmission of the test

object  image  has  been  carried  out  experimentally  using  the  order  phase  zone  plate.  The

images have been recorded more than 100 times, with the step of the CCD camera equal

to  1  cm.  The  transmission  of  the  test  object  image  is  shown  in  Figures2  (c,d,e,f)  for

different  distances  from  the  ZP.  It  should  be  noted  that  these  images  correspond  to  the

fixed position of the test object, namely as far as 90 cm from the ZP.

The transmission of the image has also been investigated when: a) the test object

was  situated  between  the  ZP  and  the  minus  first  order  of  the  phase  zone  plate,  it  is  an

imaginary  image;  b)  the  test  object  was  situated  as  far as – 3mm from the minus first

Figure 2. Experimental results. The hologram image of the test object at the distance: (a)  l  = 75 mm,

(b) l = 325mm. Transmission of a hologram image by a zone plate at the distance: (c)  l =115 cm, (d)

l=130 cm, (e) l =160 cm, (f) l=190 cm.

order  of  the  ZP,  the  image  of  the  test  object  goes  to  infinity.  In  both  cases  the  image  of

the test object at the different planes of observation has not been recorded.

Based on the additional results obtained it makes it possible to state that the lens

formula  for  geometrical  optics  is  applied  also  for  the  ZP.  But  on  the  other  hand,

comparing the images obtained one can see that they differ only in magnification, which

is dubious for geometrical optics.

Discussion of experimental results

The contrast obtained cannot be of an amplitude character because the absorption

coefficient  of  the  silicon  test  object  is  comparatively  small.  Moreover,  the  amplitude

contrast  should  be  observed  in  the  nearest  field.  The  obtained  contrast  cannot  be  of  a

phase character only because the diffuser very weakly affects the image. To transmit the

image by the ZP, a first-order phase plate, which gives a  p/2 shift, should be installed in

the focus [3- 5]. But when transmitting the image a phase plate has not been used in the

scheme.  Consequently  the  contrast  obtained  cannot  be  of  a  phase  character  only  even

though the 3mm (for the energy of 10keV) letters on the test object result in a 0.3p shift.

The reason for the image formation is diffraction on the letters which has an edge

enhanced  contrast  at  letters  boundaries  where  appearing  a  jump  of  the  phase.  After  the

diffraction  the  beam  gains  a  certain  divergence  a =  l/d,  where  l  is  the  radiation

wavelength,  d  is  the  letter  width;  then  the  beam  is  interfered  by  the  basic  beam  which

travels  past  the  letters  without  deflection  and  forms  a  holographic  image  (a  Gabor

hologram), which showed in Fig.2a,b. When fixing the coordinates of the test object the

image  obtained  (Fig.2c,d,e,f)  is  a  direct  evidence  that  the  image  formed  is  holographic.

Since  a  three-dimensional  image  is  continuously  formed  behind  the  object  up  to  the  ZP,

the same contrast with different magnification is obtained when transmitting the image.

Conclusion

The  transmission  of  a  hologram  image  for  hard  X-ray  radiation  has  been  carried

out and recorded for the first time. The results of the work open prospects to create new

diagnostic devices for X-ray radiation. With advances in  nanotechnologies a ZP with the

resolving power of several  nanometers can be created, and a hologram image of an object

with  the  magnification  from  10-10 4   times  can  be  transmitted,  which  has  specific

application in both Biology and nanotechnologies.

References

[1] S.Lindaas, B.Calef,  K.Dowing,  M.Howells ,  C.Magowan,  D.Pinkas,  C.Jacobsen,  X-Ray  Holography

of Fast-frozen Hydrated Biological  Samples,  in X-ray Microscopy and Spectroscopy, Thieme,  J.,  G.

Schmahl, E. Umbach, D. Rudolph, (Ed) (Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1997), pp.75-86.

[2]

I.Kodama,  M.Yamaguchi,  M.Ohyama ,  T.Honda,  K.Shinohara,  A.Ito,  T.Matsumura ,  K.Kinoshita,

K.Yada, Optics Communications 125, 36-42 (1996).

[3] D.Rudolph,  G.Schmahl,  H.Miemann, Modern Microscopies, Techniques  and Applications, edited by

A.Michette&P.Duke , (London: Plenum Press, 1990), pp.59-67.

[4] Y.Kagoshima,  Y.Yokoyama,  T.Ibuki,  T.Niimi,  Y.Tsusaka,  K.Takai,  J.Matsui,  J. Synchrotron

[5] Y.Kagoshima, T.Ibuki, Y.Yokoyama , Y.Tsusaka, J.Matsui, K.Takai, M .Aino, Jpn. J. Appl.  Phys. Vol.

[6] A.Kuyumchyan,  A.Isoyan,  E.Shulakov,  V.Aristov,  M.Kondratenkov,  A.Snigirev,  I.Snigireva,

A.Souvorov,  K.Tamasaku,  M.Yabashi,  T.Ishikawa ,  K.Trouni,  Proceedings  of  SPIE  4783,  92-96

Radiation 9, 132-135 (2002).

40, part 2, L1190-L1192 (2001).

(2002).

[7] T.Ishikawa,  K.Tamasaku,  M.Yabashi,  S.Goto,  Y.Tanaka,  H.Yamazaki,  K.Takeshita,  H.Kimura ,

H.Ohashi, T.Matsushita, T.Ohata, Proceedings of SPIE 4145, 1-10 (2001).

