Ozone Layer and the Formation of the Ozone Hole

A.A. Mikhailov

Yu.G. Shafer Institute of Cosmophysical  Research and
Aeronomy, 31 Lenin Ave., 677891 Yakutsk, Russia

                                                                                              A hole frightens. The hole is one
                                                                                              of the meaning which we still will
                                                                                              have to understand. And also it
                                                                                              means that when you see a bullet,
                                                                                              flying to you,then it is already
                                                                                              late to run away.     K.Moore.

                                                     Abstract

The current state of this problem has briefly been considered. The

                            hypothesis on the formation of the ozone hole due to the action
                            of some molecules emitted by the rockets has been suggested.

1.  Introduction

   A  way  of  contaminating  substances  from  the  troposphere  into  the  stratosphere  is  by  no  means
simple.  The  laws  of  atmospheric  dynamics  are  that  the  transport  of  the  air  mass  across  the
tropopause does practically not occur. Therefore, the small component molecules cannot penetrate
from  the  troposphere  into  the  stratosphere  moving  directly  upwards.  The  very  cold  and  large-
altitude (17-18 km) tropopause of tropical latitudes, where that transport is takes place, is the one
exception.  As a result, the small component molecules, penetrated in the troposphere of the middle
latitudes,  must  pass  the  long  way:  at  first  in  the  troposphere  to  the  equator  (horizontal  transport),
then through the tropical tropopause(vertical transport) and, at last, backwards, to middle latitudes
but at stratospheric altitudes(horizontal transport). Note, in the way to the equator the greater part of
small  component  molecules  is  returned  back  to  the  ground  together  with  along  the  precipitation.
That is why no significant decrease of the ozone layer from volcanoes and earthquake last centuries
was observed.
   Apparently, the addition to the above mechanism is the penetration  of  powerful cumulus clouds
into the  atmosphere,  which are usually formed in the Antarctic. In this case,  the  movement  of  air
inside of clouds transfers the small admixtures immediately into the stratosphere.

2. Observations

   First information on the detection of a deficit of total amount of ozone above the Antarctic dates
to 1979. The considerable decrease of ozone is observed every year in October, i.e. in the period of
the  Antarctic  spring.  The  total  amount  of  ozone  decreases  up  to  50%  in  different  places  [2].  In
August  1987  the  record  depleted  amount  of  ozone  was  registered,  the  ozone  layer  thickness  was
only 100 u.D. [2] .
   A region of the considerable ozone depletion is named an ozone hole. Recently the depleted ozone
concentration was detected above Arctic, Western Europe, South America and Eastern Siberia. For

2

example, the ozone layer thickness above the Great Britain, at Lerwick station (Scotland Islands) on
March 5, 1996 was 195 u.D.[2] .
   A  correlation  between  the  ozone  hole  and  one  of  small  component,  in  particular,  the  chlorine
oxide  has  been  established.  In  the  ozone  hole  region  above  the  Antarctic  the  chlorine  oxide  was
more by a factor of 120 than beyond the ozone hole.
    Decribe briefly a popular hypothesis to form the ozone holes above the South Pole in spring. In
winter in the polar stratosphere of the Southern Hemisphere a stable cyclone exists, what is known
as the circumpolar vortex.  In air inside the vortex moves mainly along closed trajectories not going
out of its boundaries. By the late winter it cools strongly (up to -80°C) and the polar clouds appear
in the stratosphere, which consist of the ice crystals and drops of supercooling liquid. The particles
of polar clouds connect the nitrogenous compounds and give scope to the action of chlorine cycle to
destruct ozone. As the Antarctic stratosphere is warming up, the circumpolar vortex is destructed. In
this  case,  an  exchange  with  air  richer  by  ozone  at  middle  latitudes  is  restored,  the  stratospheric
clouds  disappear,  released  molecules  of  nitrogenous  compounds  connect  the  chlorine  oxide
molecules, distracting action of the chlorine cycle to ozone become weaken, and the ozone amount
is restored to its unperturbed values.
    If chlorine penetrates somehow into the stratosphere, then under  its  interaction with ozone the
chlorine oxide is produced, and further a chain of destruction of ozone is occurred. One molecule of
the oxide may destruct up to 100 thousand molecules of ozone.
   The ground measurements show that the total amount of ozone for 1969-1986 is reduced, on the
average, by  2-3%  [2] .  The  ultraviolet  (UV-B)  of  wavelength  λ  =  250  nm  is  decreased  due  to  its
absorption in the ozone layer by a factor of 1017(one with 17 zeros) when the thickness of average
ozone layer (300 u.D.) is  decreased to 250 u.D., the ultraviolet intensity is increased by  a factor of
600  (the  major  danger  is  that  the  ultraviolet  intensity    is  increased  as  an  exponential  law,  see
Figure), to 200 u.D. - by 400 000 times; to 150 u.D. - by 300 billion times;  to 100 u.D. - by 200
billion times. We for the present not realize what danger is from the depletion of the ozone layer.
   As  it  was  reported  in  newspapers  several  years
ago,  one  fine  day  above  the  southern  region  of
is
Chile,  near  Punta-Arenas 
appeared.  As  a  result  of  the  ultraviolet  action,  the
hundreds  of  cows  and  sheep’s  became  blinded,
people caught burns. Also, the decrease of the total
the
thickness  of 
noticeable warming of climate, because ozone takes
an  active  part  in  the  creation  of  a  frame  effect.
Thereby, the significant changes of weather in some
regions  of  the  Earth,  floods,  a  higher  of  the  ocean
water  level  and  other  very  serious  consequences
would be expected. As a result of people activities,
more  and  more  pollution  substances  penetrate  into
the  atmosphere.  A  part  of  these  substances  is
harmful  for  ozone,  promoting 
its  destruction.
Among  these  are  the  compounds  of  nitrogen,
hydrogen and chlorine. Nitrogen penetrates into the
atmosphere  in  the  shape  of  nitrogenous  oxides,
when  nitrogenous  fertilizers  are  used  and  at  an  ejection  of  spent  gases  in  flights  of  high-altitude
airplanes.  The  enterprises  emitting  methane  into  the  atmosphere  and  also  the  flights  of  the  high-
altitude airplanes and rockets are the major contributes of hydrogen compounds. Chlorine penetrates

Fig. Intensity of U/V radiation and thickness of the
ozone layer

layer  will  cause 

the  ozone  hole 

the  ozone 

3

into the atmosphere as a result of the use of chlorine’s organic components, first of all freon, in the
home and industrially.
   Freon is a chlorine-fluorine-carbons compound. It is used in the refrigerators, in the manufacture
of  aerosols  (deodorants,  varnishes,  insecticides  etc.)  and  also  in  different  fields  of  technology
(greases, the preparation of foam etc.).
   The  scientists  suppose  that  chlorine  compounds  are  of  the  greatest  danger  for  ozone,  in  the
stratosphere.  The  ejections  of  chlorine’s  substances  are  catastrophically  increased  in  the  last
decades. For example, the ejection of freon -11 increased by a factor of 300 for 1950-1980 [2]. The
lifetime of it, up to the disappearance by the solar emission action or chemical reaction, is 70-100
years,  on  the  average.  As  noted  above,  contaminating  substances  emitted  into  the  atmosphere  at
middle  latitudes,  where  the  preponderance  of  enterprises,  do  not  penetrate  at  once  into  the
stratosphere.  The  calculations  show  that  substances  penetrating  into  the  atmosphere  to  date,  will
penetrate into the stratosphere, on the average, approximately in 100 years, but freons by now are
detected in the stratosphere. The manner in which they penetrated so quickly into the stratosphere, if
their preparation has begun only 1930’s, and mass preparation - in the middle of 1960's remains a
mystery. Some scientists assume [2] that freons are no major reason to form the ozone holes(if this
is not the case, they are no more than 30%).

3.  Rockets

   In my opinion, the rockets are the major reason that dangerous for ozone substances penetrate into
the stratosphere, and a source of the ozone layer depletion. A shock wave starting from a rocket or
falling finished off stage can form a peculiar corridor between the troposphere and stratosphere. For
example, when the American rocket "Atlas" was launched, a "hole" (the electron flux was as small
as one order of magnitude in a circle of diameter of several hundreds of kilometers) was registered
in  the  region  of  ionosphere  F-layer.  Along  that  corridor  the  dangerous  for  ozone  substances  may
directly penetrate into the stratosphere omitting a process of return back on the ground together with
the precipitation on their way to equator. A perchlorate, which is a source of chlorine and a part of
solid fuel, penetrates into the stratosphere directly from rockets.
    Water  of  great  quantity  and  other  hydrogen  oxides  are  also  ejected  from  the  rockets.
Unfortunately,  I  not  know  exactly  what  other  dangerous  for  ozone  substances  are  ejected  from
rockets.  Note  the  rocket  is  usually  of  the  oblique  trajectory,  which  extending  in  the  atmosphere
several  thousands  of  kilometers  at  altitudes  of  100-200  km,  ejects  the  gas  sprays  above  the
stratosphere.
    While the rocket motor is running, the velocity of flux of combustion product from a nozzle is 3-
4 km/s and temperature is 3000°C. A  mass of combustion  products  is  up  to  300  kg/s.  When  it  is
considered, that the rocket motors operate more than 1 hour, then in each launching  of  the rocket
more  than  1000  tons  of  combustion  products  are  ejected  into  the  atmosphere.  Under  the  normal
regime of operating motor, combustion products are of the gaseous phase. But in the period of the
start  or  stop  of  the  motor  (transitional  operating  regime)  the  combustible  is  not  consumed
completely, and aerosols are beginning to form. At the separation of the finished off rocket stage the
combustible remainders, what is known as a guaranteed reserve (up to 1-2 % of refueled mass), are
poured out from the tanks through drain-pipes into the atmosphere. The ejection is also of the third
stage and the braking of the rocket by means of the decrease of pressure in the combustion camera.
Those dangerous for ozone substances propagate by means of the shock wave, high- altitude wind
and  latitudinal  drift  to  vast  distances  up  to  the  Earth's  poles.  Arguments  in  favor  of  the  above
hypothesis are:
1. Investigations of the ozone layer above the Antarctic shown that the significant decrease of the
ozone concentration is observed in the outer stratosphere. This demonstrates that the dangerous for

4

ozone substances penetrate into the stratosphere from above. The only rockets pollute the air at the
altitudes of 30-200 km.
2. It is found that in the period between 1969 and 1993 in the stratosphere between latitudes of 45°
N and 65° N the ozone concentration was decreased by about 14% [2]. That latitude range coincides
with a flight corridor of rockets launched from the Northern Hemisphere.
3. The large size ozone holes were detected over Yakutia and South America where the production
and mass application of freon absent. But namely above those regions of the Earth over prolonged
periods the second and third stages of Russian rockets fallen.
4. When the American solid-fuel rocket "Space Shuttle" is launched, up to 10000 tons of ozone are
destructed [3].  In the  Earth's  atmosphere there  are  only  3  billion  tons  of  ozone.  The  fact,  that  the
launching of rockets is growing year after year, is disturbing. In recent years, most of launchings are
realized with the commercial goal.
   Thus,  the  American  Company    "Iridium"  realizes  already  a  project  of  the  installation  for
telecommunications  of  69  satellites  (to  profit  by  international  talks).  Other  project  "Teledesik-
Internet on Sky" is developed for which 40 satellites are required. In 1995 20 commercial satellites
were launched all over the world, in 1997 it is planed to launch 76 satellites, in 1998-121. If we are
not want to lost, it is necessary to decrease by this time the number of launchings of rockets, making
them only as a last resort. The rocket launchings are to be stopped above high latitudes where the
greatest  ozone  concentration  is  observed,  and  in  the  future  all  launching  must  be  made  from  the
equator  along  the  vertical  trajectories.  It  is  desirable  to  launch  the  monolithic  rockets  without  the
stages after the ecological expert opinion.

   If  we  now  take  no  precautions,  the  following  situation  can  occur.  After  a  time,  extraterrestrial
people will arrive on our lifeless Earth and see a placard "No rockets!" One of the new-comers will
say the another "Evidently, they realized the danger starting from the rockets, but here just one of
the ozone holes covered them”.

4.  Conclusions

5.  References

1. Roush Sh. Crisis of a ozone. Moscow, Mir, 1993.
2. Priroda, Moscow, journal in russian,: 1989, n.6, 106; 1994, n.5, 85; 1995,n.2,117; 1996, n.1, 110.
3. Egorov T.A. Rockets over the Verchoyansk. Yakutia, Yakutsk, 1993, 20 March.

