Nuclear Waste Transmutation in Subcritical Reactors Driven by Target-Distributed 
Accelerators 
 
 
 
 
Anatoly Blanovsky  
Teacher Technology Center, 7850 Melrose Ave., Los Angeles, CA 90046, USA 
E-mail ablanovs@lausd.k12.ca.us 

 
 
 
Abstract-A radioactive waste transmutation system based extensively on existing nuclear power technology is 
presented. By replacing the control rods with neutron generators, we could maintain good power distribution and 
perform long-lived waste burning in high flux subcritical reactors (HFSR). To increase neutron source intensity the 
HFSR is divided into two zones: a booster and a blanket. A neutron gate (absorber and moderator) imposed 
between two zones permits fast neutrons from the booster to flow to the blanket. Neutrons moving in the reverse 
direction are moderated and absorbed.  The design is based on a small pressurized water reactor (PWR), fission 
electric cell (FEC), target-distributed accelerator (TDA) and power monitoring system with in-core gamma-ray 
detectors, now under development in several countries. The FEC is essentially a high-voltage power source that 
directly converts the kinetic energy of the fission fragments into electrical potential of about 2MV. The TDA, in 
which an FEC electric field compensates for lost beam energy in the target, offers a new approach to obtain large 
neutron fluxes. 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 

I. 

HFSR CONCEPT 

 

In the conventional reactor, nuclear energy 
(electrical in nature) is converted to thermal, then to 
mechanical and then to electrical energy. To achieve 
the high degree of the burn-up, only fresh low 
enriched uranium fuel is used. As the surplus 
reactivity is large, a large amount of the burnable 
poison material has to be put in the conventional 
reactor at the expense of the neutron economy.  

A typical fuel assembly remains in the PWR 

for 3 years to a total burn-up of thirty thousand 
MWD/ton. The burn-up limitation is mainly because 
of criticality, but not due to radiation damage to the 
fuel elements. The burn-up for a total of sixty  
thousand MWD/ton is possible with conventional 
zircaloy clad fuel elements.  

The majority of the fission wastes have a 

half-life of less than one year. However, some fission 
waste products, as well as actinides, need the long-
term storage. The loss of about 99% of the fuel 
energy content and concern about safety of the burial 
solution justify alternative studies. One such 
alternative is the HFSR with circulating fuel. The 
HFSR module could be placed in the PWR-type 
pressure vessel, and a traditional reactor system could 
be used to pump coolant to steam generators. The 
HFSR internal separators include heat exchangers for 
heat transfer and some fission product deposition1.  

 

 

With self-amplifying due to feedback, 

blanket and booster multiplication factors of k=0.95 
and 0.98, respectively, an external neutron source 
rate of at least 10.sup.15 n/s is needed to drive the 
HFSR that produces 300MWt. Most of this power 
could be generated in the blanket with solid and 
liquid fuel. Use of a liquid actinide fuel permits 
transport of the delayed-neutron emitters from the 
blanket to the booster where they can provide 
additional neutrons or all the necessary excitation 
without an external neutron source2.  

Managing the waste is significantly 
influenced by fission of the actinides (primarily Np-
237 and Am-241). The most effective way using the 
HFSR is to burn the actinides dissolved in water or in 
molten salt. Since Np-237 and Am-241 fission cross-
sections are relatively low they would serve as an 
absorber in low neutron flux of the dense absorber 
zone. In high thermal neutron flux of the blanket, 
they would serve as a fuel. In this design, the 
plutonium-neptunium fuel circulates in the blanket 
and the booster; the americium-curium fuel circulates 
in the outer reflector and absorber zone. A 
preliminary analysis indicates that an average thermal 
neutron flux of about 10.sup.15 n/cm2s is achievable 
in the blanket with an average power density of 300 
W/cm3 and tight heavy water lattice3. 

 

I.A. Actinide Transmutation 
 

The HFSR is mainly a neutron amplifier 

controlled by external neutron source intensity 
(source-dominated mode) or by variable feedback 
(self-amplifying mode). The self-amplifying HFSR is 
a quasi-critical system in which the blanket flux 
depends on its power density. The effect of the fuel 
circulation on the HFSR reactivity is in the increasing 
role of delayed neutrons in the blanket. The HFSR 
module includes the distributed target, the booster 
and the blanket that consists of vented fuel 
assemblies arranged in annular rings. In order to 
prevent the loss of neutrons, the reflectors surround 
the booster and the blanket (see Fig.1). 

The design considered here has a fuel 

assembly configuration utilizing the flux trap 
principle. The modified PWR fuel assemblies include 
a central zone with several channels containing liquid 
actinide fuel. It functions as a flux trap area with high 
thermal neutron flux. A zone of depleted uranium 
and/or thorium-based fuel surrounds the central zone. 
Removing gas and volatile precursors of fission 
products with high thermal cross sections in the 
internal separators could reduce a neutron poison. 

The actinide fractional loading is optimized 

to control reactivity, flatten power distribution and 
produce a partial isotopic separation of nuclides. To 
achieve a significant actinide burning efficiency, the 
volume ratio of the heavy water moderator to fuel in 
the central region of the fuel assembly is high as 
possible. In high thermal neutron flux, the number of 
neutrons required for destruction of Np-237 and Am-
241 by fission is substantially less than if decay 
allowed Np-238 and Am-242 to proceed farther up in 
the neutron capture chain4.   

In the central zone, the Pu-239 content will 

be much reduced because physical separation of U-
238 and actinides. Plutonium with the high Pu-241 
content that has an extremely high value of eta at 
epithermal energy and the delayed-neutron emitters 
are then continually transported into the booster. To 
convert U-238 or thorium into fissionable nuclei, the 
moderator/fuel volume ratio in the depleted fuel 
region is considerably lower than that in the liquid 
actinide fuel zone. To satisfy thermal hydraulic 
constraints the moderator/fuel volume ratio in the 
depleted fuel region is in the range of 1.0-2.0.  

By increasing depleted fuel loading from 
zero up to 2000 kg, the blanket can be designed to 
have desired effective enrichment and radius. To 
have power density in the desired range, the blanket 
volume is about 106cm3. Photoneutrons produced in 
the blanket play an important part in the actinide 
transmutation rate (about 100 kg/year). 

 

 
As the plutonium inventory in the depleted 

zone increases, it compensates for fissile fuel 
consumption. At fissile fuel loading of about 5 kg, 
the blanket would have k=0.95 up to maximum burn-
up. After a few fuel cycles with a fertile fuel 
replacement, the next feed for actinide transmutation 
is prepared by removing the cladding metal and 
separation of the uranium. A Purex process can be 
used to separate neptunium and a Truex process to 
separate americium and curium from bulk waste. 

 Long-lived radioactive waste transmutation 
could be based on a microwave separator, in which a 
feed material consisting of mixed isotopes is ionized 
at first stage by electron cyclotron resonance. The 
ionized material is then fed to an ion cyclotron 
resonance unit, which is tuned to preferentially excite 
the minor species. After actinide and long-lived 
radioactive waste transmutation, direct conversion of 
radioactive decay energy of short-lived waste to 
electrical energy can be performed. 
 

I.B. HFSR Control System 
 

Feedback signals from the FEC arrays and 
calorimetric gamma-ray detectors could be used to 
control the power of the accelerator sections. This 
concept of in-core control system was tested at the 
VVER-440 of the Armenian nuclear power plant. 
The power distribution and thermal state of the core 
were computed every 20 seconds on the basis of 2K 
signals. The time-dependent power-to-signal 
conversion factor was determined by simple recurrent 
formula from the previous values. Off-line 
calculations were used for real-time synthesis of the 
signals into 3-D power distribution5.  

As the relaxation length of the power release 
is L/(1-k)1/2,  where L is the neutron migration length, 
the HFSR axial and radial distributions is similar to a 
commercial PWR. Since the control can be basically 
performed electronically without use of boron 
chemical control and slow complicated control rods, 
this simplifies core control and improves neutron 
economy.  Conventional poison rods can be only 
employed for emergency shutdown of the reactor. 

The HFSR control system could also include 
a digital reactivity meter for subcriticality monitoring 
and a TV satellite dish with a built-in GPS receiver to 
analyze the ultrasonic concept the plant seismic 
resistance increase. To monitoring crustal 
deformation of the earth, the system that partially 
based on U.S. patent #6247367 requires radio signals 
received by antennas on a long baseline. As such 
motions are preceded an earthquake, a GPS-based 
earthquake prediction technique could be developed.

 
 
 
 
 

 

II. 

PHOTONEUTRON TDA 

  

The electron TDA has a high voltage 

Now the most used photoneutron target is a 

The distributed transformer-rectifier circuits 

 
thick tungsten layer followed by a beryllium layer. 
As the photon yield has maximum at about 0.3-0.5R, 
where R is the range of electrons, the target made of 
a thin high-Z metal, such as tungsten, lead or 
tantalum, with heavy water cooling could be used. 
Monte Carlo calculations of the total neutron yield 
per incident electron (n/e) were made using MCNPX 
code. With 10 thin lead targets (0.2cm) in a thick lead 
tube and 30MV post acceleration, n/e is about 0.02 at 
electron energy of 18MeV. 
 
accelerating tube composed of insulating rings and 
metal electrodes. To enhance the efficiency the tube 
module is divided into an active zone and a trapping 
zone that contains a reverse biased electrode. This 
comprises a pair of spaced grids between which an 
annular metal electrode-target is installed. After 
impacting the thin target, the electrons are post-
accelerated by the distributed transformer-rectifier 
circuits or the FEC.  
 
could include capacitors that are made by placing 
tantalum foils on an insulating sheet (tantalum 
oxide). The foils can form radially arranged 
capacitors in a Cockcroft-Walton voltage multiplier. 
However, the FEC with monitoring feedback and 
small internal resistance is inherently high-voltage 
power source for in-core applications6. 
 
since main energy loss by electron beam is radiative. 
Photoneutrons are mostly generated in tantalum, 
heavy water and beryllium surrounded photon 
production targets. The possible candidates of the 
target materials are uranium salt in heavy water as an 
electrolyte is a highly condensed plasma, and thorium 
oxide as it has high dielectric constant in optical 
range of frequency. Also, the TDA, in which an 
electric field compensates for lost beam energy in the 
gas neutron production target, can be used7.  
 
The FEC array forms a high-voltage power 
source connected to the TDA. Each FEC has a tube-
type thin fuel cathode with ribs and a quasi-spherical 
or cylindrical anode, nested in a hexagonal 
moderator. As this design has an extremely low fuel 
inventory, liquid phase fuel might be used. After the 
fuel fission, the more massive fission fragments can 
reach the anode and deposit their charges. If the FEC 
cathode is used as a part of the target, it could be 
separated from the electron guide by a metal 
membrane. Since in-core applications would benefit 
from more compact accelerators, a relativistic 
magnetron driven by the FEC can be used as a 
microwave power sources for the TDA. 

Target heating should not be a problem 

Since the fission fragments are naturally 

The charge deposited by the electron beam 

 
separated into two energy groups, a high efficiency 
and better electrical field distribution can be obtained 
through the use of a multistage collector (anode). For 
a two-stage collector, second collector is made 
opaque. The first collector made of the thin metal 
ribbons is essentially transparent to the incoming 
fragments but it is opaque to the fragments that are 
turned around. This technique gives the highest 
efficiency of about 60% because of its excellent 
space-charge handling ability8.  
 
in the target could be used to suppress the flow of 
secondary electrons across the gap between the FEC 
electrodes. As the stopping power is slightly 
increased, when the charge state of ions increases, the 
additional electric field across the cathode could 
increase the FEC electrical efficiency. The possible 
candidates of the cathode materials are colored alkali 
halides to extreme the field strength at the cathode.  
 
S and macroscopic absorption cross-sections Σa, the 
average flux is F≈S/π*(Σa+DB2) and leakage 
probability P=B2L2/(1+ B2L2). Here the buckling is 
B=π/R and the diffusion mean free path is L2=D/Σa. 
Feedback is important in this design. Use of a liquid 
fuel that transports the delayed-neutron emitters from 
the blanket could essentially improve the FEC 
performance. If D=0.7cm, Σa=10-3cm-1, R=15cm, 
L=25cm and a fraction of the delayed-neutrons is 
0.001, we have S≈1012 n/s*cm3 and  F≈7*1012 
n/s*cm2 . The fission fragment current is about 
500µA/g for the FEC fuel thickness of 1.5µm.  
 
III. CHARGED PARTICLE MOTION IN THE TDA  
 

For a sphere with uniform density of sources 

 
In the TDA, an external electric field acts 

counter to the stopping power in the target or 
between the thin targets. As the beam energy E is 
constant, neutron yield per particle is approximately 
Y(E)= d/L(E), where d is the thickness of the target. 
For n thin targets, in which the energy loss is 
regained by acceleration of the particles between 
targets, the total neutron yield per particle is nY. The 
targets except the last one should have a thickness 
smaller than the range of the particles in the target.  
The electron-screening effects that 

controlled by the number allowed energy states in 
medium and vacuum could play essential role in this 
design. If a slab dielectric material fills space 
between the charged parallel plates, it must set up an 
electrical displacement and reduce the field in the 
dielectric. As the plates are connected to a power 
supply, the potential remains constant. On the other 
hand, the screening effect will reduce the ionization 
loss energy of relativistic electrons. 

 
(

k −

)1

2

k

The additional electric field is reduced to 

of its vacuum value. Here k is the optical 

dielectric constant of the target material. A radial 
electric field in the spherical FEC will set up an 
electrical displacement partially in the dielectric 
cathode and partially also in the vacuum field 
medium. The latter is associated with the Maxwell’s 
displacement currents in electromagnetic theory. As 
metal has a dielectric constant, an electric field 
gradient can exist in a metal cathode.  

There are no other nuclear engineering 

systems today in which both relativity and quantum 
electrodynamics have so many applications as 
accelerator transmutation of waste. However, there is 
a difficulty with the mathematical formulation theory 
of electromagnetic wave propagation that is based on 
the postulate about constancy of the light velocity.  
The Lorentz transformation is a 

mathematical tool that preserves a wave equation in a 
moving reference system instead of time invariance 
in Galilean transformation. As it equally applies to 
any values of the characteristic wave velocity, 
anisotropy values of light or sound velocity are used 
in all applications of the Lorentz transformation.  
The theory of dispersive waves gives the 
simplest model of observed phenomena. It leads to 
the natural introduction of the group velocity and 
intensity of de Broglie waves into Maxwell's 
equations9. Recently, this wave model and its 
possible applications were resented at the 5th 
Sakharov Conference and 7th Wigner Symposium10. 

  

CONCLUSION 

Although the low energy accelerators are 

mainly seen as support equipment, recent advances in 
neutron generator technology have made it possible 
to use them for energy generation systems. Different 
neutron producing reactions (D-T, p-Li, γ-n, etc.) can 
be used. The initial design could be based on the 
intense D-T neutron sources and circulating-fuel 
reactor technology. The final design would require 
analysis of the relativistic effects in the electron 
TDA, and experiments with the vacuum fission 
chamber.  
 

ACKNOWLEDGES 

 

 

In 1979, it was discovered by members of 
the Soviet scientific elite that I had the intention to 
break the code of silence and perhaps emigrate. So I 
had to leave my work at the Institute for Nuclear 
Research (Kiev). 
  
 

Let me say that I am very grateful to my 

former colleges (Dr. V.A. Libman, Dr. Y.L. Tsoglin, 
etc.). They helped me to continue my non-classified 
study and my supervisor (Dr. V. A. Pshenichny) 
crossed out his name from our joint article in 
isomeric nucleus study to protest that my name was 
crossed out from it.  

I am very grateful to my colleges at Fairfax 
Community Adult School for all the good they have 
done for me. I am also very grateful to Governor 
Davis for his support, even though the subject of this 
study is a federal rather than a state issue.  

 

REFERENCES 

 
1. A.BLANOVSKY, "Prospects for Nuclear Waste 
Transmutation Using High Flux Subcritical 
Reactors”, to be published in Nuclear Engineering 
and Design (see also ICONE11-36579 at 
http://www.conferencetoolbox.org/icone11/). 
2. L.BORST, "The Convergatron, a Neutron 
Amplifier", Phys.Rev.107, No 3, p.9, (1957). 
3. A.BLANOVSKY, "System for Nuclear Waste 
Transmutation Based on Target-Distributed 
Accelerators", poster NSS/93-8, IEEE Nuclear 
Science Symposium, San  Francisco, Oct. 30-Nov. 6, 
1993 (see also "An Alternative to ATW", Nuclear 
News, p.11, July 1998 and patent application 
#60/394071, July 2002). 
4. C.D. BOWMAN et al, "Nuclear Energy 
Generation and Waste Transmutation, NIM A320, p. 
336, (1992). 
5. A.BLANOVSKY, V.GERASKO, Y. TSOGLIN,   
"In-core Power Monitoring System SEVAN", 
unpublished, (1985). 
6. ERIC S. PEDERSEN, "Nuclear Energy in Space", 
Prentice-Hall, Inc., New York (1964). 
7. A.BLANOVSKY, "Conceptual Design of a 
Target-distributed Accelerator for Boron Neutron 
Capture Therapy," First International Workshop on 
Neutron Sources for BNCT, p.459, (1994). 
8. R.V.MOIR, W.I.BARR  “Venetian-Blind Direct 
Energy Converter for Fusion Reactors”, Nuclear 
Fusion 13, p. 35, (1973). 
9. A.BLANOVSKY, "Classical Field Theory beyond 
the Standard Model", in  "Fundamental Problems of 
High Energy Physics and Field Theory", ed. 
I.Filimonova and V.Petrov, Proceedings of the 22nd 
International Workshop, pp. 165-177, June 23-25, 
1999, Protvino, Russia. 
10. A.BLANOVSKY, " Application of the Lorentz 
Group to Classical Field Theory”, to be published in 
Proceedings of the 7th Wigner Symposium, see 
Blanovsky at http://www.physics.umd.edu/robot/).  

