Lunar and Planetary Science XXXII (2001)

1158.pdf

COMPUTER MODELING OF EDGE EFFECTS IN PLASMA CRYSTALS.    J.  A.  Vasut  and  T.  W.  Hyde,
Center for Astrophysics, Space Physics and Engineering Research, Baylor University, Waco, TX 76798-7316, USA,
phone: 254-710-2511 (email: John_Vasut@Baylor.edu & Truell_Hyde@Baylor.edu).

Introduction:  Dusty plasma systems play an im-
portant role both in astrophysical environments (proto-
stellar  clouds  and  ring  systems)  and  laboratory  situa-
tions (plasma processing).

Plasmas  are  generally  regarded  as  a  highly  dis-
ordered state of matter.  However, under certain con-
ditions a plasma can exist in a crystalline state[1]. Such
an  ordered  state  will  almost  never  occur  (except  per-
haps in the interior of white dwarf stars) for a simple
electron-ion plasma. However, it has been shown that
the  addition  of  dust  grains  as  a  component  to  the
plasma makes such a crystallization possible[2].  This
was first experimentally observed in 1994[3].

Such plasma crystals, also referred to as dust crys-
tals or Coulomb crystals, are generally experimentally
formed in a GEC RF reference cell where the bottom
electrode provides the repulsion necessary to counter-
act  the  particle’s  weigh[4].  The  crystals  form  in  the
plasma  sheath  between  the  electrode  and  the  bulk  of
the plasma and usually take the form of a “two and a
half”  dimensional  crystal.  This  peculiar  situation  is  a
result of gravity which allows the formation of crystals
with  sheets  of  a  few  hundred  particles  in  hexagonal
lattices  in  the  horizontal  plane  but  only  a  few  such
sheets stacked upon each other in the vertical direction.
The primary interparticle force in the horizontal plane
is the shielded Coulomb (Yukuwa) force while in the
vertical directions the particles interact in a more com-
plicated manner due to the wake effects of ions passing
through the plasma sheath.

Computer  Simulation:    Computer  models  have
been developed in order to better understand such sys-
tems[5-7].  In  the  majority  of  these,  only  interactions
between  near  neighbors  are  considered  since  the
shielded  Coulomb  interaction  decays  exponentially.
Such  simulations  typically  examine  only  the  bulk  of
the  system  by  employing  periodic  boundary  condi-
tions. Under these assumptions, the longer-range inter-
actions  between  particles  is  negligible  due  to  the  de-
caying  exponential  of  the  Coulomb  interaction  and
overall system symmetry.

However,  it  is  becomingly  increasingly  clear  that
much  of  the  interesting  behavior  of  dusty  plasma
crystals may be due to edge effects where the symme-
try of the system breaks down. Few, if any, computer
simulations  have  been  conducted  to  examine  such  fi-
nite crystals where the symmetry is reduced.

A  finite  two-dimensional  crystal  is  modeled  here
using a Barnes-Hut tree code known as Box_Tree[7-9].

Box_Tree includes interactions due to gravity in addi-
tion to either the shielded or unshielded Coulomb  in-
teraction. As can be seen in Figure 1, tree codes divide
the  system  into  a  set  of  nested  boxes  with  every  box
being  empty  or  containing  either  a  single  particle  or
four  sub-boxes  (eight  for  three  dimensional  simula-
tions).

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Figure 1. Tree structure.

When  calculating  the  force  on  a  particle  the  code
transverses the tree starting with the largest box (which
contains  every  particle)  and  subsequently  examining
smaller and smaller boxes. It subsequently checks each
box to determine if the box contains a single particle or
sub-boxes and examines the ratio of the size of the box
to the distance from the box to the particle. For boxes
containing a single particle the force is calculated di-
rectly between the particles. If the ratio of the box size
to  the  distance  is  smaller  than  a  user-defined  critical
value  the  force  is  calculated  by  examining  the  multi-
pole  moments  of  the  particles  in  the  box.  For  most
near-by particles the force will be calculated directly.
For more distant particles the force is typically found
using the multi-pole moments of the box. This allows
all interparticle interactions to be included while treat-
ing  near-field  interactions  with  greater  accuracy.  An
additional  benefit  is  that  the  code  scales  as  N•logN
instead  of  N2  since  most  interactions  are  calculated
using  the  multi-pole  moments  of  collections  of  parti-
cles. The particles are confined by a ring of immobile

Lunar and Planetary Science XXXII (2001)

1158.pdf

COMPUTER MODELING OF EDGE EFFECTS:  J. A. Vasut and T. W. Hyde

charged particles, simulating the outer wall of the ref-
erence cell.

Results  and  Conclusions:    Box_Tree  has  been
used  to  study  a  number  of  different  configurations.
Both the charges on the particles are varied as well as
the charge on the containing ring.

References:
[1] E. Winger (1939) Trans. Faraday Soc. 34, 678-
685.  [2] H.  Ikezi  (1986) Phys  Fluids,  29,  1764-1766.
[3] H.  Thomas  and  G.  Morfill,  (1994) PRL,  73,  652-
655. [4] P. J. Hargis and K. E. Greenberg (1994) Rev.
Sci.  Instruments,  65,  140-154.  [5] S.  Hamaguchi
(1997) PRE, 56,4671-4682 [6] H. Totsuji (1997) PRL,
78, 3113-3116. [7] J. Vasut and T. Hyde (2001) Adv. in
Space  Res.,  in  submission  [8] D.  Richardson  (1994)
Mon.  Not.  R.  Astron.  Soc,  269,  493-511.  [9] L.  Mat-
thews (1998) Ph.D. dissertation, Baylor University.

