The Signal Space Separation method

Samu Taulu, Matti Kajola and Juha Simola

Elekta Neuromag Oy, Helsinki, Finland
Corresponding author: Samu Taulu, Elekta Neuromag Oy, Elim채enkatu 22 A, 00510 Helsinki, Finland.
Email: samu.taulu@neuromag.fi

Introduction

Extraction  of  the  weak  biomagnetic  signals  from
multichannel measurements dominated by environmental
interference  sources  is  a  basic  problem  in  biomagnetic
recordings.  Traditional  methods  to  attack  this  problem
include  magnetically  shielded  rooms,  gradiometers,  and
software  compensation,  such  as  the  signal  space
projection (SSP) [1], or extrapolation based on reference
channels [2]. SSP is capable of reducing the interference
signals  by  a  factor  of  several  thousands.  It  also  changes
the  appearance  of  the  biomagnetic  signals  though  this
change  is  usually  small  and  easy  to  take  into  account  in
the  modeling.  On  the  other  hand,  the  reference  channel
method assumes that any interference seen by the signal
channels can be modeled and compensated for by a small
number of reference channels. In order to be sensitive to
the  interference  only,  the  reference  channels  need  to  be
located far away from the signal sensors, which increases
the  extrapolation  distance  and  limits  the  capability  of
removing signals from nearby interference sources.

 Signal Space Separation (SSS) [3] is a new method
for  compensation  of  external  interference  and  sensor
artifacts.  This  method  is  based  on  the  fact  that  modern
multichannel  MEG  devices  with  the  number  of  signal
channels  exceeding  300  provide  generous  oversampling
of the magnetic fields consisting of both biomagnetic and
interference fields. The oversampling condition is true for
all fields arising from sources located about or more than
two  centimeters  away  from  the  nearest  sensor  in  the
array.  The  magnetic  fields  produced  by  such  sources
form  the  set  of  possible  magnetic  signals,  the  magnetic
subspace, having a dimensionality less than about 150  in
practical measurements [4].

The  relatively  low  dimension  of  the  magnetic
subspace is based on the fact that all sensors are located
in  a  volume  free  of  sources  of  the  magnetic  field.  Thus,
the  magnetic  field  must  be  derivable  from  a  harmonic
scalar potential which is spatially quite a smooth function
because  of  the  distance  between  the  sensors  and  the
sources. The harmonic scalar potential can be represented
as a truncated expansion of harmonic basis functions by
terms  representing
leaving  out 
unmeasurable fine details. The signal vectors obtained by
evaluating  the  harmonic  basis  functions  for  all  channels
span  a  signal  space  containing  all  signals  related  to
magnetic fields.

the  high-order 

The  crucial  observation  in  the  SSS  method  is  that
there are separate basis functions for signals arising from
inside of the sensor array and for signals arising from the
environment surrounding the sensor array. Consequently,
the magnetic subspace contains two linearly independent
subspaces:  one  for  the  interesting  biomagnetic  signals
and one for the interference signals.

In  this  way  a  unique  decomposition  of  the  measured
signal vector with separate components for the interesting
and interference signals is obtained. The decomposition is
based  on  proper  signal  channels  with  no  need  for
dedicated  reference  channels.  The  interesting  signal  can
be  reconstructed  from  the  components  corresponding  to
the  interesting  subspace.  As  a  consequence,  the
morphology  and  amplitude  of  the  interesting  signal  do
not change.

The  decomposition  of  the  magnetic  field  is  device-
independent  when  evaluated  in  a  coordinate  system
attached  to  the  subject's  head.  Thus,  the  decomposition
can be used to transform signals between different sensor
configurations. This also enables an effective movement
correction  method  comprising  of  disturbance  removal
followed  by  a  virtual  signal  calculation  for  the  desired
reference position of the head. The movement correction
method    also  leads  to  another  interesting  application:  it
can be used to separate and model magnetic fields arising
from DC sources.

Methods

The  sensors  of  the  multichannel  devices  used  in
biomagnetic  recordings  are  located  in  a  source-free
volume.  Thus,  the  magnetic  field  in  that  volume  is  a
gradient of a harmonic scalar potential V:

Because  of  the  linearity  of  the 

(1)
  operator,  the
potential V  can  be  expressed  as  a  linear  combination  of
the  basic  solutions  of  Laplace's  equation,  e.g.  using  the
spherical harmonic functions 

:

 and 

where 
 are scalars and 
The  first  part  (A)  of  the  expansion  diverges  at  the
origin,  thus  characterizing  sources  that  are  closer  to  the
center  of  the  expansion  than  any  of  the  sensors.  In

.

(2)

contrast,  the  second  part  (B)  diverges  at  infinity,  and
corresponds to sources that are more distant to the center
of the expansion than any of the sensors.

  and 

The  magnetic  subspace  is  formed  by  calculating  the
signal  vectors 
  corresponding  to  the
individual terms of the expansions A and B, respectively,
up  to  sufficiently  high  orders 
.  Then  any
measured  signal  vector 
  is  expressed  as  a  linear
combination of the basis vectors (here the monopole term
l = 0 is left out):

  and 

leading to a compact matrix notation

where

(3)

(4)

N > n, where N is the number of channels.

With  this  requirement  fulfilled,  one  gets  a  linearly
independent  SSS  basis  spanning  the  subspace  of  all
measurable magnetic signals. In this basis, the interesting
signals  and  the  interference  signals  are  simultaneously
modeled  with  separate  signal  vectors.  Because  the  SSS
basis  is  linearly  independent,  this  separation  is  unique,
and  the  interesting  signal  can  easily  be  reconstructed
from the estimated components corresponding to 

:

where 

 is the pseudoinverse of S.

,

(5)
This  approach  offers  an  elegant  method  to  construct
the magnetic subspace by starting from the lowest spatial
frequencies and adding basis vectors to S until they start
to represent fine details having amplitudes that are below
the  noise  level  of  the  device.  Furthermore,  the
biomagnetic signals will be spanned by the basis 
  and
, if the origin of
the external disturbances by the basis 
the expansions is placed inside the volume including the
interesting sources.

The  possibility  to  divide  the  interesting  signals  and
interference  signals  into  separate  subspaces  can  be
understood  from  the  schematic  illustration  in  figure  1.
Here  Iin  and  Iout describe the interesting and interference
sources, respectively. The harmonic potentials associated
with these sources are given in the different volumes by
either  A-  or  B-parts  of  the  expansion  as  indicated.
Specifically,  in  volume  3  where  the  sensor  array  is
located,  the  potential  associated  with  Iin  is  given  by  the
A-part of the expansion, and the potential associated with
Iout  is  given  by  the  B-part  of  the  expansion.  The
resolution  between  the  interference  and  interesting
magnetic  subspaces  in  the  SSS  method  is  based  on  this
fact.

The  dimension  of  the  SSS  basis  as  a  function  of  the

orders 

 and  

 is given as

In  practice, 

(6)
  =  9  is  sufficient  for  biomagnetic
sources  and  even  for  the  most  complicated  interference
 = 6 is enough. Consequently, n = 147 justifying the
applicability of the SSS method for modern multichannel
measurement  devices  as  the  fundamental  requirement  is

Fig.  1  Geometry  of  a  typical  neuromagnetic  measurement
including  the  interesting  source  and  a  disturbance  source.  The
origin is in the center.

The  harmonic  amplitudes  can  be  calculated  in  the  head
coordinate  system.  Then 
  is  device-independent  and
can  be  used  to  transform  biomagnetic  signals  between
different sensor arrays. The transformation is done simply
by  using  the  basis 
  of  the  desired  sensor  array  in  the
SSS  reconstruction,  and  this  array  need  not  be  the  same
that was used for measuring the signal and determination
of the harmonic amplitudes. The same idea generalizes to
a  movement  correction  method,  provided  that  a
continuous  movement  detection  is  available.  In  this
correction  method,  one  calculates  and  possibly  averages
the  harmonic  amplitudes  attached  to  the  head  and
calculates  the  signals  in  a  virtual  array  locked  to  the
subject's  head.  The  basic  idea  is  the  same  as  that
described  in  [5]  extended  by  the  ability  to  remove  the
external disturbances: the components of x are estimated
from the measured signal vector and then 
  is  used  in
reconstructing  the  signal  corresponding  to  a  reference

head position by 
the reference head position.

, where 

 corresponds to

Results

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

A very interesting application of the above movement
correction  method  is  its  possibility  to  perform  DC
measurements. The SQUID sensors used in MEG devices
are insensitive to static fields. However, when the subject
moves,  the  DC  sources  produce  time-varying  signals
detected  by  the  SQUIDs.  When  performing  movement
correction by always estimating the harmonic amplitudes
in  the  head  coordinate  system,  the  time-varying  signal
caused  by  the  DC  sources  modulated  by  the  movement
will be demodulated and appears as a static component in
.  In  this  way,  movement-related  artifacts  caused  by
magnetic  impurities,  for  example,  can  be  trivially
removed  from  this  movement-corrected  result  by  a
baseline  correction.  On  the  other  hand,  interesting
biomagnetic  DC  currents  can  be  measured  using
voluntary  head  movements  followed  by  a  movement
correction as described above. This leads to much easier
DC measurements than proposed earlier [6].

SSS  relies  on  the  physics  and  geometry  of  the
magnetic fields and the sensor array. Thus, it is of utmost
importance  to  know  the  calibration  and  geometry  of  the
measurement  device  as  accurately  as  possible.  The
achievable  shielding  factor  against  external  interference
is roughly the inverse of the relative calibration accuracy.
An accuracy better than 1 % is crucial for SSS to perform
optimally.

Figures 2 and 3 demonstrate the SSS reconstruction in
the  case  of  an  evoked  response  of  a  newborn
measurement. The response is expected to be seen on the
occipital  area  of  the  sensor  array  but  no  dipolar  field
pattern can be recognized from the original data which is
dominated  by  interference  signals  arising  from  sources
both  far  away  and  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the
helmet. The interference contaminates the magnetometer
signals badly but it also affects the gradiometers as can be
seen in figure 3. Thus, the relatively small but significant
artifact  on  the  gradiometers  could  be  interpreted  as  a
brain response if no interference reduction were done.

artifact  generated  in  the  vicinity  of  the  sensor  array.
Being a spatially complex field, the nearby artifact affects
some  of  the  gradiometers also. All artifacts are removed
by the SSS reconstruction.

Fig. 3 Signals of some of the occipital channels before (dotted
red) and after (solid blue) the SSS reconstruction.

Figure 4 demonstrates that SSS does not mix signals
coming  from  external  and  internal  sources.  The  original
empty  room  signal  of  the  magnetometer  channel  is
dominated  by  low  frequency  fluctuations  and  the  50  Hz
power line interference. In the absence of internal sources
the SSS reconstructed signal bin is practically zero while
there  is  a  very  high  correlation  between  the  original
signal and the SSS reconstructed bout. The rejection ratio
against  the  external  disturbances  is  seen  to  be  several
hundreds.

Sample Magnetometer Channel

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

1
Time (s)

Fig.  4  Upper  figure  shows  the  original  empty  room  signal  b.
The  second  and  third  figures  are  the  SSS  reconstructed
interesting  bin and disturbance bout respectively. Note that the
figure  showing  bin  is  a  close-up  with  the  amplitude  scale  by
factor 100 smaller than in the other figures.

-12

x 10

original

-10

x 10

1.5

0.5

0
x 10

-13

-5

1.5

0
x 10

-10

1

5

0

1

0.5

0

 1

0

-1

-2

Fig. 2 The field distribution of a newborn measurement before
(left) and after (right) the SSS reconstruction. Both figures are
based  on  magnetometer  signals  and  have  the  same  contour
step.

Figure  3  shows  a  close-up  of  the  signals  of  some  of  the
occipital  channels.  The  magnetometers  show  a  large-
amplitude  low  frequency  drift  superimposed  on  a  fast

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Fig.  5  Removing  baby  heart  artifact.  Dotted  red;  as  measured,
dashed  black;  field  derivatives  up  to  order  2 removed,  solid
green; field derivatives up to order 5 removed.

 = 6.

Figure  5  illustrates  the  complexity  of  an  interference
signal  generated  by  a  source  in  the  immediate  vicinity
of  the  sensor  array:  the  heart  of  a  newborn  subject.  In
this  case  a  sufficient  artifact  rejection  requires  an
interference subspace including derivates up to order 5,
corresponding to 
The movement correction along with the idea to do DC
measurements  was  tested  by  performing  a  SEF
measurement for a subject with small magnetic particles
attached  to  the  surface  of  the  head.  First,  a  reference
SEF  measurement  was  performed  while  the  subject
stayed absolutely still. After that, the subject voluntarily
moved his head continuously. The movement made the
static fields of the small magnetized particles appear as
time-varying signals in the sensor output. Consequently,
the  averaged  response  was  contaminated  by  the
movement  artifact.  However,  by  using  the  information
obtained by the continuous head position monitoring for
demodulating  the  AC  signals  due  to  the  magnetized
particles, the SEF response was recovered, as illustrated
in figure 6.

Fig.  6  Somatosensory recording with magnetic impurities on
the  subject's  head.  Upper  left;  data  as  recorded  with  head
moving.  Lower  left;  SEF  signal  after  impurity  artifact
removed  by  SSS.  Upper  right;  the  demodulated  DC  field.
Lower right; reference SEF recording with head immobilized.

Discussion

SSS is a new method to remove external disturbances
and  movement  artifacts,  to  calculate  virtual  signals,  and
to  perform  movement  correction  and  DC  measurements.
SSS  efficiently  exploits  the  fact  that  the  number  of
channels  in  modern  multichannel  MEG  devices  clearly
exceeds  the  number  of  degrees  of  freedom  of  the
measurable magnetic fields.

By  using  harmonic  functions,  SSS  creates  a
fundamental  subspace,  the  magnetic  subspace,  for  all
measurable  multichannel  signals  of  magnetic  origin.
Furthermore,  SSS  models  both  the  interesting  and
external  interference  signals  simultaneously  by  separate,
linearly independent subspaces for the signals caused by
sources    inside  and  outside  of  the  sensor  array,

respectively.  Consequently,  any  measured  signal  can  be
uniquely  decomposed 
into  separate  components
representing  the  biomagnetic  signals  arising  from  inside
of the array and external interference signals arising from
outside of the array.

In  addition  to  the  interference  removal,  the  device-
independency  of  the  harmonic  amplitudes  calculated    in
the signal decomposition leads to further applications for
the  SSS  method.  The  most  obvious  of  these  is  the
transformation  of  the  measured  signals  into  any  desired
virtual  sensor  array.  The  same  idea  can  be  used  for  a
robust  movement  correction  method  in  which  the
movement of the head is taken into account in calculating
the  device-independent  harmonic  amplitudes  that  are
used in transforming the signals to a sensor array locked
to the subject's head. It also turns out that the movement
correction  method  automatically  enables  one  to  do  DC
measurements.  This  is  based  on  the  fact  that  the  DC
signals  are  measurable  because  the  movement-induced
signals will appear as static components in the harmonic
amplitudes related to the head coordinate system.

As a conclusion, SSS greatly improves the quality of
MEG data without requiring extensive user intervention,
a  particularly  important  feature  in  clinical  MEG  work.
SSS  allows  measurements  with  varying  interference
sources  in  the  environment,  even  inside  the  shielded
room  and  on  the  subjects.  Even  moving  subjects  having
moderately  magnetic  impurities  or  implants  can  be
measured and the data analyzed.

References

in

[1]  Uusitalo  MA,  Ilmoniemi  RJ.  Signal-space  projection
method. Med. Biol. Eng. 1997, 32: 35-42.
[2]  Vrba  J,  Robinson  SE.  Signal  Processing 
Magnetoencephalography,  Methods 2001, 25: 249-271.
[3]  Taulu S, Kajola M, Simola J. The Signal Space Separation
method. Biomed. Tech. 2003, 48, in press.
[4]  Uutela K. Estimating Neural Currents from Neuromagnetic
Measurements. PhD thesis, Helsinki University of Technology,
2001.
[5]  Uutela K, Taulu S, H채m채l채inen M. Detecting and correcting
for head movements. NeuroImage 2001, 14: 1424-1431.
[6] 
  Carbon  M,  Wuebbeler  G,  Trahms  L,  Curio  G.
Hyperventilation-induced human cerebral magnetic fields non-
invasively  monitored  by  multichannel 
'direct  current'
magnetoencephalography. Neurosci. Lett. 2000, 287: 227-230.

Acknowledgements

The  authors  would  like  to  thank  prof.  Patricia  Kuhl,
prof.  Toshiaki  Imada,  and  prof.  Marie  Cheour  for
providing  us  with  their  infant  MEG  data  that  formed  a
crucial  stimulation  for  the  SSS  method  development.

