A causal approach to first-order optical equivalency of inertial systems, by means of a beam-
pointing test-experiment based on speed-induced deflection of light.

1

G. Sardin
gsardin@ub.edu

PACS: 06.90.+v, 07.90.+c, 03.30.+p

Abstract

Within the framework  of  test-experiments,  an  original  pointing  set-up  based  on  speed-induced  deflection  of  a  light-
beam and using a high-resolution opto-electronic array as a position detector, is proposed. The device would provide
a new way to ratify the first order optical equivalency of inertial systems and to sound its causal groundwork. The type
of  test  provided  applies  to  any  device  using  beams,  but  here  it  has  been  adapted  for  an  up-dated  check-up  of
Michelson's  experiment  and  to  bear  out  the  interpretation  derived  from  its  null  result.  Rather  than  searching  for  a
speed-induced phase-shift as Michelson's experiment was conceived for, the present set-up would instead detect any
deviation  from  first-order  equivalency  through  any  speed-induced  lateral-shift  between  the  two  split  beams  on
recombining.  In  effect,  any  eventual  slight  shift  would  affect  the  beam  path  and  hence  the  interferometric
performances. Taking into account the conceptual transcendence of the deductions derived from this experiment and
that  it  constitutes,  through  the  invariance  of  its  result,  one  of  the  most  relevant  historical  experimental  proofs
considered to back the theory of special relativity, and in particular its first postulate on the exhaustive equivalency of
inertial  systems,  it  cannot  be  superfluous  to  carefully  update  its  performances  and  the  derived  deductions.  So,  the
presence  as  well  as  the  absence  of  speed-induced  beam  deflection  have  been  considered,  and  their  respective
implications analyzed and related to the null result of this archetypal interferometric experiment, which is still much
adequate  for  a  conceptual  analysis.  A  causal  approach  to  the  first-order  optical  equivalency  of  inertial  systems  is
advanced.

I. Introduction

Here  is  proposed  an  original  set-up  to  sound  the  origin  of  the  equivalency  of  inertial  systems.  Its
usefulness  in  regard  to  conceptual  grounds  is  also  discussed.  In  effect,  we  think  that  the  experiment
proposed  should  not  be  separated  from  its  conceptual  frame,  otherwise  the  set-up  utility  may  not  be
clearly perceived nor the novelty of its contribution. Let us point out that the most accurate experiments
made  to  check  the  electromagnetic  equivalency  of  inertial  systems,  and  from  which  their  formal
equivalency has been deduced, are mainly of the interferometric type. Therefore, the beams path length
is  a  crucial  parameter  for  the  interpretation  of  their  experimental  results.  The  set-up  proposed  has  the
purpose  of  checking  this  critical  point,  i.e.  to  determine  the  beam  path  and  so  its  effective  length.  On
conceptual grounds it should help developing a causal understanding of the optical equivalency of inertial
systems.  The  proposed  experiment  has  been  correlated  to  Michelson's  one  in  view  that  both  are
concerned with beams path and that the latter constitutes a widely known archetypal experiment, most
appropriate for a phenomenological analysis, including those modern versions based on resonant optical
cavities.

Michelson's  experiment,  made  back  in  1879  [1],  is  presented  as  one  of  the  most  relevant  historical
experimental proof backing the theory of Special Relativity and most particularly its first postulate which
assumes all inertial systems to be formally equivalent. In view  of  the  conceptual  transcendence  of  the
deductions  made  from  it  [2-5],  it  cannot  be  superfluous  to  carefully  update  its  experimental  analysis,
contrasting all possible interpretative issues, and to subject it to any new insight. Since its emergence,
Michelson's  experiment  has  lead  to  different  interpretations.  Three  main  ones  were  proposed  in  an
attempt to account for the null result of this speed-related interferometric experiment, yet preserving in
great  part  compatibility  with  the  classical  theories  then  in  existence.  These  were  the  aether  drag
assumption,  the  Lorentz  contraction  hypothesis,  and  the  emission  theories  [2,3].  The  aether  drag
hypothesis  assumed  that  the  aether  frame  was  bound  to  all  bodies  of  finite  mass.  The  Lorentz
contraction assumed that all material bodies contract by a factor of (1 - v2/c2)1/2 in the direction of motion
to their speed relative to the aether. In the emission theory Maxwell's equations are modified such that
the speed of light remains dependent on its source own speed. However, none of these efforts to adapt

2

classical  standpoints  has  been  thought  tenable  and  finally  a  break  with  all  these  classical  framed
attempts was made by Einstein in 1905, introducing an interpretative framework laying in a new metric
based on a speed-induced affectation of space and time and their union into a unique space-time entity
conceived by Minkowsky [2-5].

In textbooks dealing with Michelson's experiment it is implicitly assumed that the beam reflected on the
beam-splitter invariantly impinges back exactly at the same place after reflecting on the top mirror [2,3].
This determinant assumption cannot be taken as implicit since the interferometer is moving into space by
its link to the earth's motion, and it requires thus to be carefully experimentally checked, in view of the
extreme relevance of the related deductions. This decisive point has apparently been taken for granted
rather  than  directly  sounded,  leaving  thus  under  shadow  any  eventual  small  lateral  shift  between  the
recombined  beams  and  its  repercussion  on  the  length  of  their  effective  path,  and  thus  on  its  null
interferometric  result.  In  effect,  depending  on  the  incident  beam  being  considered  to  exactly  reflect  at
right  angle  or  to  slightly  deviate  from  it  due  to  a  scanty  speed-induced  deflection,  the  paths  of  the
transmitted and reflected beam of the interferometer have a different relationship (fig.1.a and 1.b). Such
a check-up is therefore essential for any interpretation of the null result of Michelson's experiment and
related  ones,  in  view  of  the  drastically  different  conceptual  conclusions  that  may  derive.  A  common
framework  for  testing  special  relativity  is  the  test  theory  of  Mansouri  and  Sexl  [6]  which,  in  order  to
appraise  the  suitability  of  a  given  experiment  for  testing  special  relativity,  conveniently  employs  a
framework which allows its transgression. In a similar compliance, conformity with special relativity would
be  fulfilled  in  paragraph  2.1.  (Reflection  with  deflection)  and  would  not  in  2.2.  (Reflection  without
deflection). However, our main purpose will not center on revising interpretations derived from the null
result  of  Michelson's  experiment,  but  instead  on  checking  crucial  parameters  determining  the  speed-
independent  performance  of  this  interferometer.  From  a  purely  formal  standpoint,  the  two  different
possibilities  corresponding  to  the  transmitted  and  reflected  beams  to  coincide  or  not  at  the  very  same
time and position on the beam-splitter, should be considered. So, let us ponder these two alternatives
and their associated implications.

Let  us  point  out  that  special  relativity  introduces  also  an  oblique  path  for  the  transverse  beam  of
Michelson's experiment and thus a deflection, as seen by an external observer. However, the difference
lays in that within the framework of special relativity the beam deflection is an observational effect and
the transverse beam has consequently as many paths as observers, while in the present framework the
beam path is unique and the way different observers may see it, is just a matter of appearance.

2. Description and working way of the set-up to detect the presence or absence of speed-induced
beam deflection

The  incident  beam  is  split  by  means  of  a  thin  layer  beam-splitter  into  a  reflected  and  a  transmitted
component, such as in the Michelson interferometer. Right behind the thin layer a high definition array
photo-detector whose resolution can reach 5 µm [7,10], is fixed in contact to it, and so the transmitted
beam impinges right on it. Alternatively, a half-transparent gold coating may be deposited directly on the
array.  The  beam  reflected  on  the  beam-splitter,  on  its  way  back  to  it  after  reflection  on  the  top  mirror,
impinges  too  on  the  detector  array.  The  traces  that  the  two  beams  leave  on  the  array-detector  are
recorded and computerized.

This arrangement allows the recording of the cross-section distribution of the incident beam as well as its
distribution after reflection on the top mirror. Assuming e.g. a gaussian distribution, the deconvolution of
the  recombined  beams  radial  distribution  would  allow  the  differentiation  between  the  two  alternatives,
according to the maintenance of a unique distribution or its splitting in two ones. Still, the beam images
on the array detector may be better differentiated by using a convergent beam impinging on the beam-
splitter instead of a collimated one (Fig.3.a and 3.b), since having then a different size. The transmitted
beam  area  and  cross-section  distribution  are  first  measured  by  the  high-resolution  array-detector,  with
the reflected beam path being blocked by means of a shutter. Afterwards, the path of the reflected beam
is unlocked, and in being convergent it impinges back on the beam-splitter as a spot, which superposes
to the wider area of the incident beam. Due to the smallness of the deflection angle at ordinary speeds,
the mechanical angular resolution of the beam-splitter and top-mirror should be of the order of second of
arc. However, there is a way to skip such a strict requirement by centering the trace of the beam when
first  impinging  on  the  beam-splitter  with  its  trace  upon  reflection  on  the  top  mirror.  To  be  fulfilled,  the

equivalency  of  inertial  systems  implies  that  the  two  beam  spots  on  the  array-detector  should  remain
immobile in changing the system orientation. They should also remain steady under the variation of the
speed module.

L

L + ∆L

L - ∆L

v

v

> L

L + ∆L

L - ∆L

Detector Array

Fig.1a

Detector Array

Fig.1b

Fig.1.a and 1.b: Deflection and deflectionless alternatives in Michelson´s experiment

3

v

c

α

cx

v

c

  v

c

v

c

         Fig.2a           Fig.2b

         Fig.2c

    Fig.3a

  

         Fig.3b

Fig.2a and 2b. Reflection with deflection: The reflected beam impinges back exactly at the same point.
This implies that it has been slightly deflected and hence its Y up-down path is slightly longer than the
double of the distance d between beam-splitter and mirror. So, with deflection the path length up to the
X-axis is: Y = 2 (d + ∆d), where ∆d=d /2 (v2 / c2)

Fig.2c. Reflection without deflection: The reflected beam is not deflected and so it does not impinge
back at the same point. So, without deflection the path length of the Y beam up to the X-axis is: Y = 2 d.
Its length up to the beam-splitter is shorter or longer according to the relative direction of the beam and
the system speed

Fig.3a. Convergent beam with deflection: Epicentric traces of the incident beam and once impinging
back on the detector array. This case implies inertial frames to be equivalent at first order dependence on
(v / c)

Fig.3b.  Convergent  beam  without  deflection:  Off-centric  traces  of  the  incident  beam  and  once
reflected back. In that case inertial frames would not be equivalent at first order (v / c)

4

Thus, the device plays simultaneously two functions, that of a beam-splitter and that of a high definition
array detector, providing at once three important beam parameters by measuring the spot size, its cross-
section distribution and its position on the array. There are crucial data to ascertain the interpretation of
the  underlying  cause  of  the  interferometer  null  result,  allowing  to  discriminate  between  the  two
alternatives considered in order to achieve a complete analysis.

2.1. Reflection with Deflection

For simplify, let us select the case in which the interferometer is moving in the same direction as the light
beam  (fig.2.a  and  3.a).  For  first-order  equivalency  to  be  fulfilled  the  reflected  beam  must  invariantly
coincide  precisely  at  the  same  position  in  its  way  up  and  down,  and  hence  the  component  cx  of  the
speed of light along the direction x of the interferometer motion must necessarily be equal to the system
speed v.

cx = v

where: 

cx = c . sin α

This implies that the beam is deflected by an angle equal to:

α = arc sin (cx / c) = arc sin (v / c)

The deflection has always the direction of the system motion. For example, if the speed v points to the
right and the speeds cx and v are parallel (c→ v→) then the rotation of α is clockwise (Fig.2.a), and if cx
and v are anti-parallel (←c v→) it is anticlockwise (Fig.2.b). In both cases the beam impinges at the same
point  on  the  beam-splitter,  since  the  deflection  always  goes  in  the  direction  of  motion  and  exactly
counterbalance the beam-splitter dislodge. This requires it to reflect at 90º ± α according to the relative
speed directions of the beam and the beam-splitter. So, the reflected beam will impinge back at the same
position as the incident beam only if the speed component cx of light along the system motion direction is
equal to the system speed v, since in that case there is no relative speed between them. Consequently,
the  lateral  speed  of  the  beam  is  equal  to  the  system  speed  and  thus  their  motion  along  the  axis  is
synchrone, and from the point of view of the moving system there is no beam deflection, nor shift when
impinging back on the beam-splitter.

(a) Let us stress that the deflection angle is assumed to be independent of the beam wavelength used,
and so is it for the result of Michelson's experiment.

(b)  The  effective  deflection  angle  α  of  the  beam  path  is  not  fixed  by  the  relative  velocity  between  the
system and any eventual observer, but exclusively by the relative velocity between the beam-splitter and
light.  This  relative  velocity  fixes  the  impact  energy  of  photons  on  the  mirror,  which  in  turn  fixes  the
deflection angle.

(c) The definition of this angle is single, since it is independent of the source speed but only fixed by the
relative velocity between the system and light, in contrast with its definition within the context of special
relativity, in which there are as many deflection angles as observers. In the present framework the beam
trajectory within space is unique and it corresponds to the viewpoint of the impinging photons, which is
single, and not to that of observers, which leads to a multiplicity of deflection angles and beam paths.

(d) Which could be the physical cause of the deflection angle? It appears as a function of the ratio v / c,
however this relation may be regarded as the simplified result of the ratio pc / mc2. Hence:

sin α  = Er / Ei = pc / mc2 = mvc / mc2 = v / c

where Er = pc = hν and Ei = mc2 = hν0. Er stands for the relative collision energy, i.e. that measured by a
detector on the moving system, and Ei for the intrinsic collision energy, i.e. that a detector at absolute rest
would  measure  [9,13,14],  ν  is  the  frequency  perceived  by  the  inertial  system  and  ν0  the  absolute
frequency.  Here  what  is  regarded  as  absolute  rest  is  the  absence  of  motion  relative  to  the  Cosmic
Microwave Background (CMB) in the same way as absolute speed is defined for mechanical waves, e.g.
such as the air for sound. In fact, any field can be considered to be at rest when taken as a whole, since
their carrier speed is constant and equal to that of light. Consequently, fields cannot have a drift velocity

5

and thus the electromagnetic field may gainfully be used as an extended absolute reference.

The deflection angle can be looked at as determined by the ratio of the collision energy of the impinging
photons  against  the  beam-splitter  and  the  intrinsic  energy  of  the  impinging  photons.  The  collision
strength determines the magnitude of the deflection [8,9] and may be defined as:

S = k (v / c) = k (pc / mc2) = k (mvc / mc2) = k (hν / hν0)

Equivalently, the beam deflection would be the consequence of a tangential momentum of the reflected
photons,  i.e.  in  the  direction  of  the  beam-splitter  motion  (fig.1.b,  2.a  and  3.a).  The  same  applies  to
photons from the light source itself [9].

(e) In order to impinge back at the same position on the beam-splitter, the deflection angle must be equal
to: α = arc sin (v / c). Its formulation is similar to Bradley aberration of light: α = arc tg (v / c), even though
their underlying physical processes are different, since respectively due to a deflection (sin α = Er / Ei =
mvc / mc2  = v / c) and to a time of flight (tg α = Lx / Ly = v ∆t / c ∆t = v / c). A suggestive coincidence.
 
(f) The speed-induced beam deflection would keep constant the spot position on the beam-splitter.

2.2. Reflection without Deflection

This  second  alternative  assumes  that  the  beam  reflects  perpendicularly  to  itself  whatever  the  system
motion, or in other words, independently of the beam-splitter speed and therefore independently of the
beam collision strength on it. In that case the beam does not impinge back at the same point since the
beam-splitter has meanwhile moved away, laterally to the beam path, while it was going up and down,
apart from the system motion. So, in the case of no speed-induced deflection the beam would impinge
back slightly shifted from the initial impinging point on the beam-splitter (Fig.2.c and 3.b). Consequently,
since the beam-splitter is inclined at 45º, the beam impinges on it at a lower or upper position than its
initial one, depending on both speeds c and v having the same or opposite orientation, respectively.

Let us define the order of magnitude of the effect to be measured, i.e. that of the speed-induced lateral
drift of the beam in absence of deflection. In that case, while the reflected beam reaches back the beam-
splitter, the latter would have drifted a distance:

Thus the length the reflected beam (Y) must cover to reach back the beam-splitter at the same position
is:

2 ∆x = v . t = v (2 d / c) = 2 d ( v / c)

d(Y) = 2 (d2 + 

∆x2)1/2

So, the reflected beam (Y) must cover a path excess ∆L to the distance between beam-splitter and top
mirror:

∆L =  2 d(Y) -  2 d = 2 (d2 + ∆x2)1/2  - 2 d = 2 (d2 + d2. v2 / c2)1/2 - 2 d = 2 d (1+ v2 / c2)1/2 – 2 d

∆L ≅  2 d (1 + 1/2 . v2 / c2) – 2 d = 2 d (1/2 . v2 / c2) = d (v2 / c2)

For d = 1 m and the earth orbital speed v ≈ 30 km/s, 2 ∆x = 2 (30 / 300000) = 2.10-4 m ≈ 200 µm and 
2∆L = 2.10-8 m ≈ 0.02 µm.

Let us point out that the lateral drift ∆x has a first order dependence (v / c), while the longitudinal path
stretching  ∆L  relative  to  the  distance  d  between  beam-splitter  and  top  mirror  has  a  second  order
dependence (v2 / c2). A lateral drift of the order of magnitude calculated would be easily detected by the
high  resolution  array,  but  since  it  should  be  expected  that  such  a  shift  would  have  been  detected  by
earlier analogue experiments, it can be anticipated that the alternative of deflection absence can hardly
be retained.

6

In  order  to  get  optimized  performances,  some  critical  parameters  of  the  set-up  are  the  beam  shape,
divergence, beam pointing stability, and optics surface quality, but we think that the present state of the
art  would  allow  to  achieve  easily  the  required  resolution  to  back  first-order  equivalency.  Also,    the
computer-treatment  of  the  digitalized  image  of  the  spots  on  the  high-resolution  array-detector  would
allow to further improve experimental efficiency.

3. Discussion

Let us highlight that the speed-induced deflection angle α is not an observational effect, in the sense that
it  does  not  correpond  to  the  relative  perception  of  an  arbitrary  observer,  as  it  is  in  special  relativity  in
which there are as many deflection angles as inertial observers. It is instead an actual deflection, whose
angle α is absolute since fixed by the absolute speed v of the inertial system. So, the standard definition
from the theory of relativity of the system speed v which is always relative has been avoided in view that
this  standpoint  leads  to  as  many  beam  paths  and  deflection  angles  as  observers,  whose  multiplicity
necessarily  implies  all  these  paths  to  be  only  apparent.  The  beam  path  into  space  is  logically  unique
since a unique beam cannot have at once different paths, and the many ways observers may see it are
therefore not relevant in the present analysis, which is only concerned with the intrinsic path traced by
the beam in its journey through space, independently of the point of view of any observer. However, let
us  highlight  that  the  proficiency  of  Minkowski  metric  and  special  relativity  is  not  queried  but  only  are
specific interpretative aspects of their physical meaning. The fact that the specific equivalency of inertial
systems considered here has been attributed to a speed-induced deflection of light rays instead of to a
speed-induced alteration of space and time as in special relativity, does not imply a mutual exclusion.
In effect, it should be avoided to mix the properties of the metric with those of physical reality itself.
The  map  should  never  be  confounded  with  the  territory  itself,  in  other  words  the  theoretical
mathematical  construct  should  never  be  assimilated  to  the  proper  physical  reality.  Different
conceptualizations may provide different grades of access to the underlying reality.

However,  the  speed-induced  deflection  angle  α  cannot  be  covered  by  the  fundamentals  of  special
relativity since it denies the possibility of any absolute reference, and keeps denying it in spite of the latter
discovery of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB). This is a self-imposed limitation which restrains
its  application  range  and  impedes  an  exhaustive  access  to  physical  reality.  For  example,  the  actual
deflection  angle  in  Michelson  experiment  is  not  dependent  on  the  relative  velocity  between  the  light
source  and  the  observer,  but  dependent  instead  on  the  system  absolute  velocity.  Let  us  mention  that
absolute  speed  has  already  been  defined  relative  to  the  CMB.  In  effect,  for  practical  means  the  CMB
constitutes  a  suitable  absolute  reference  since  being  highly  isotropic,  shaped  according  to  a  perfect
blackbody spectrum, and of universal range. It has already been established that our solar system drifts
at an absolute speed of about 370 km/s towards the Leo constellation.

In view of the postulated denial in 1905 of any absolute reference, sixty years before the discovery of the
CMB in 1965, and based on the then recent aether refutal, special relativity still wants to regard the CMB
just  as  a  mere  "preferred"  referential  frame,  not  affecting  in  any  way  its  grounds.  However,  this  is  a
doctrinal  standpoint  neglecting  the  fundamental  fact  that  the  CMB  is  a  unique  non-local  reference.  In
other words, the CMB constitutes a unique extended referential frame which covers the whole universe.
The CMB differs fundamentally from local references used by special relativity, all being inertial systems,
since  it  is  neither  an  inertial  nor  a  local  system.  To  disregard  these  facts  leads  to  cut  down  physical
reality. Furthermore, it allows to normalize the speed of all inertial systems and can be used just as the
presumed aether was intended to. In fact, since there are 109 photons per massive particle, mostly stars
hydrogen, the usual conceptual perspective can be inverted and the material part of the universe can be
seen  as  a  disperse  condensed  residue,  immerse  in  an  electromagnetic  "atmosphere".  The  effects  of
motion  on  material  and  thus  finite  inertial  systems  can  hence  be  advantageously  referred  to  this  non-
inertial, non-local and non-finite but instead wholly extended, steady system.

Nevertheless,  absolute  speed  does  not  necessarily  need  a  medium  to  be  referred  to,  as  commonly
thought. Absolute speed can be conceptually defined just from the intrinsic properties of light, and so in
the  definition  of  the  deflection  angle  α  the  absolute  reference  to  which  speeds  are  referred  to  is  light
itself,  through  the  path  of  light  rays  taken  as  a  reference.  Furthermore,  the  deflection  angle  has  been
correlated to the ratio between the beam energy perceived by the moving system and the corresponding
one if it would be at rest into space. Let us stress that this standpoint on absolute speed does not appeal

7

to  any  interpretation  of  the  nature  of  space.  Our  main  concern  has  been  to  experimentally  relate  by
means of the original set-up proposed the optical equivalency of all inertial systems to the unique path of
the reflected beam, which would be deflected according to the absolute speed of the reflecting element.
This is equivalent to consider the relationship between light and the system motion, or more concretely,
between the component cx of the speed of light along the direction of the beam-splitter motion and its
own speed v. For the reflected beam to always impinge back at the same position on the beam-splitter
whatever its speed v, the deflection angle must be such that cx = v. In other words, for the speed-induced
deflection to lead to the same result on any inertial system, the speeds cx and v must always be equal.
This is an imperative requirement for inertial systems to be  equivalent,  on  first-order,  in  regard  to  light
beams.

Moreover, the fact that special relativity postulates that all inertial systems are equivalent, implies taking
for  granted  that  not  a  single  physical  effect  could  be  dependent  on  the  system  absolute  speed  into
space,  concept  that  does  not  even  make  sense  within  its  framework.  Nevertheless,  an  amazing  point
arises from the fact that what would make all inertial frames to be equivalent, at least on first-order (v/c),
depends just on their absolute speed into space. That is to say, the validity of special relativity would rely
on  a  magnitude  that  it  denies,  since  what  makes  all  inertial  frames  to  be  first-order  equivalent  would
derive from the speed-induced deflection of light, which ironically is determined by the system absolute
speed, since the speed v is referred to c through its component cx along the direction of motion (v = cx = c
.sin α).  But,  as  the  speed  of  light  is  constant  in  vacuum  it  constitutes  an  absolute  reference  by
excellence, and since the value of v is related with c, it expresses thus an absolute speed, which can be
conveniently  defined  through  the  CMB.  Let  us  mention  that  finding  a  way  to  avoid  or  to  act  upon  the
presumed  speed-induced  deflection  of  light  would  allow  to  detect  the  own  speed  of  inertial  systems
[7,9,13].

We have proposed a causal explanation for the first-order optical equivalency of inertial systems, at least
of the specific one concerned with the path of light beams. The assumption of speed-induced deflection
brings a causal grasp to the specific equivalency of inertial systems since it allows the invariance of the
spot position on the array detector of the reflected beam and its coincidence with the direct beam spot.
We  have  replaced  the  speed-induced  alteration  of  space  and  time  of  special  relativity  by  the  speed-
induced  deflection  of  light  rays.  The  underlying  cause  for  all  physical  effects  to  apparently  behave
independently of the system motion, or so to say, for inertial systems to appear exhaustively equivalent,
might so be better understood. It would be worthwhile to keep deepening the causal understanding of the
pertinence  of  the  postulated  equivalency  of  all  inertial  systems,  and  to  sound  experimentally  some
epistemological  aspects  of  special  relativity  in  an  effort  to  deepen  and  widen  our  knowledge  beyond
postulated grounds up to causal foundations. It should be avoided to be definitively "formatted" by any
theory, and carefulness should prevail when making a transcription of any mathematical description to a
physical  one.  The  worst  enemy  of  scientific  progress  is  the  progressive  settlement  of  a  theory  as  a
dogma.

4. Conclusion

The  experimental  set-up  proposed  would  allow  to  define  a  type  of  optical  equivalency  based  on  ray
optics and specific to the effect of speed on the reflection of light beams and of first order dependence on
v. In a similar way as the null result of Michelson experiment has endorsed the emergence of a specific
metric assuming space contraction and time dilatation, the invariance of the spot position on the high-
resolution photo-detector array, acting also as beam-splitter, would back a specific equivalency of inertial
system based on the speed-induced deflection of light. As far as we know it is the only design that would
detect any deviation from first-order optical equivalency through the detection of any speed-induced shift
between the trace of an impinging beam on a high-resolution array-detector and its trace on impinging
back  to  it  after  reflection  on  a  top  mirror.  Let  us  point  out  that  the  beam  perceives  the  velocity  of  the
inertial system exclusively in the instant of interaction with its components, i.e. beam-splitter, mirror and
detector. In vacuum, during the lapse of time the beam is travelling in between them, it is not interacting
with the inertial system and thus it cannot be affected by its velocity. Both are moving independently as
long  as  the  refractive  index  is  equal  to  one,  and  therefore  there  is  no  Fresnel  partial  drag  of  the  light
beam [2,3].  In the hypothetical deflectionless case the set-up would have a first order (v/c) sensitivity to
its  own  speed    through  space,  but  in  the  case  of  deflection  it  is  blind  to  it.  In  assuming  a  priori  the

8

equivalency of inertial systems it is expected the experiment to prove the two beam traces on the array-
detector  to  remain  steady  independently  of  the  orientation  of  the  speed  vector  and  of  its  module,
providing thus a novel experimental proof of the optical equivalency of inertial systems on the first order.

Let  us  point  out  a  consequence  of  the  equivalency  of  inertial  systems.  The  failure  so  far  to  measure
absolute speed of inertial systems through the exclusive use of local light sources would derive from their
equivalency, and this leads to a vicious circle. In effect, how could we expect apparatus not to provide
systematically the same value for the speed of light relative to themselves if they are unable to detect
their own speed? How could they sum up the speed of light to a magnitude they do not detect? So, it is
proper  to  consider  invariant  the  speed  of  light  but  it  is  also  tenable  to  wonder  about  the  intrinsic  or
extrinsic  nature  of  the  invariance  of  the  speed  of  light.  Couldn't  we  be  systematically  measuring  the
intrinsic  speed  of  light  through  space,  since  optical  set-up  are  unable  to  detect  their  own  speed?  The
article aims to highlight that the invariance of the speed of light may not necessarily be a formal property,
in other words it could be the consequence of experimental shortcuts. The difference between these two
issues is extreme, since in the first case it would represent an intrinsic property of nature whereas in the
second case it would only be an extrinsic property rising from experimental limitations in the detection of
specific properties, leading thus to an incomplete access to physical reality. We should be careful not to
attribute to nature ultimate properties that could only derive from our present experimental state of the art
and might not stand technical breakthroughs. The device proposed has the collateral purpose of helping
unravel why apparatus do not detect their own speed through space, and at the same time sounding if
the invariance of the light speed is an intrinsic or extrinsic property. We have proposed an original set-up
to  evidence  a  specific  equivalency  of  inertial  systems  and  have  based  the  related  analysis  on  causal
grounds,  founded  on  the  speed-induced  deflection  of  light  rays.  Let  us  suggest  that  searching  for  an
access  to  the  parameters  governing  the  speed-induced  light  rays  deflection  could  allow  envisioning  to
reach  self-speed  detection,  e.g.  looking  for  an  eventual  way  to  cancel  out  or  alter  the  speed-induced
beam  deflection.  Hence,  we  would  like  to  bring  our  contribution  to  the  understanding  of  the  cause  of
experimental failure in the detection of the proper speed, and despite odds, to encourage the retaking of
the search for self-speed sensitive devices, making the most of current technological possibilities.

References

1. A. Michelson, "The relative motion of the earth and the luminous aether", Amer.J.Sci., S.3, vol.22, 120-
129 (1881)
2. R. Resnick, "Introduction to Special Relativity", John Wiley & Sons, Inc., London (1968)
3. W. G. V. Rosse,  "An Introduction to the Theory of Relativity", Butterworths Ed., London (1964)
4. H. P. Robertson, "Postulate versus observation in the special theory of relativity", Rev. Mod. Phys. 21,
378-382 (1949)
5. Y. Terletskii, "Paradoxes in the Theory of Relativity", Plenium Press, New York (1968)
6. R. Mansouri and R.U. Sexl, "Gen. Relativ. Gravit.", 8 497, 515, 809 (1977)
7. B. Saleh, M. Teich, "Fundamentals of Photonics", Wiley-Interscience Pub., John Wiley & Sons, N.Y.
(1991)
8. T. Theocharis, "The Optical Translational Velocimeter", Atti del Convegno Internazionale "Galileo Back
in Italy - II, Bologna Conference 26-28 Maggio 1999, Inediti n. 134, 447-449 (1999)
9. G. Sardin, "Measure of absolute speed through the Bradley aberration of light beams on a three axis
frame", Europhys. Lett., 53 (3), p. 310 (2001)
10. Electronic position array: www.kodak.com (image sensors series)
11. J. Bradley, 1728 "Philos. Trans.", 35 637 (1728)
12.  C.  Renshaw,  "Space  interferometry  Mission  as  a  Test  of  Lorentz  Contraction",  IEEE  Aerospace
Conf., Snowmass, Colorado, March 1999
13.  D.  Johnson,  "On  the  transverse  emission  and  propagation  of  light  from  moving  sources",  Galilean
Electrodynamics  (2001)
14. J. P. Wesley, "Absolute Space Time Physics in Causal QuantumTheory", Benjamin Wesley Pub.
(1983)

Author's other related articles:

First and second order electromagnetic equivalency of inertial systems, based on the wavelength

and the period as speed-dependant units of length and time.

A dual set-up based on Bradley's aberration of light, using simultaneously stellar and local light
sources.

lanl.arXiv.org e-Print archive (url: xxx.lanl.gov),  Physics, Subj-class: General Physics

9

Registered text. All rights reserved

