In-situ acoustic-based analysis system for physical and chemical

properties of the lower Martian atmosphere

F.A. Farrelly, A. Petri, L. Pitolli, G. Pontuale*

CNR – Istituto di Acustica “O.M. Corbino”, Roma, Italy

ABSTRACT

The  Environmental  Acoustic  Reconnaissance  and  Sounding  experiment  (EARS),  is

composed  of  two  parts:  the  Environmental  Acoustic  Reconnaissance  (EAR)

instrument and the Environmental Acoustic Sounding Experiment (EASE). They are

distinct, but have the common objective of characterizing the acoustic environment

of Mars.

The  principal  goal  of  the  EAR  instrument  is  "listening"  to  Mars.  This  could  be  a

most significant experiment  if one thinks of everyday life experience where hearing

is  possibly  the  most  important  sense  after  sight.  Not  only  will  this  contribute  to

opening up this important area of planetary exploration, which has been essentially

ignored up until now, but will also bring the general public closer in contact with our

most proximate planet.

EASE  is  directed  at  characterizing  acoustic  propagation  parameters,  specifically

sound  velocity  and  absorption,  and  will  provide  information  regarding  important

physical  and  chemical  parameters  of  the  lower  Martian  atmosphere;  in  particular,

water  vapor  content,  specific  heat  capacity,  heat  conductivity  and  shear  viscosity,

which  will  provide  specific  constraints  in  determining  its  composition.  This  would

enable  one  to  gain  a  deeper  understanding  of  Mars  and  its  analogues  on  Earth.

1

Furthermore, the knowledge of the physical and chemical parameters of the Martian

atmosphere, which influence its circulation, will improve the comprehension of  its

climate  now  and  in  the  past,  so  as  to  gain  insight  on  the  possibility  of  the  past

presence of life on Mars. These aspect are considered strategic in the contest of its

exploration, as is clearly indicated in NASA's four main objectives on "Long Term

Mars Exploration Program" (http://marsweb.jpl.nasa.gov/mer/science).

Keywords: Mars, atmosphere, physical composition, chemical composition

*Corresponding author.

  E-mail address: pontuale@idac.rm.cnr.it

1.  Introduction

No direct information about the  acoustic environment on Mars’ surface is available

at  present  and  the  EAR  instrument  will  therefore  investigate  a  fresh  field  of  study.

Sound can be generated by meteorological activity; in particular wind, sandstorm and

lighting during these as well as little Martian tornadoes referred to as “dust devils”

will most likely be a major source of acoustic. Aeroacoustic sounds associated with

the Lander and Rover as well as those related to their activities will be major acoustic

sources,  due  to  their  proximity  to  the  microphone.  However,  the  most  interesting

sounds may be those that are not easily predicable and some way of detecting these

must be found. In regard to meteorological phenomena, there is much to be gained

by  the  efforts  made  to  study  these  on  Earth  once  the  differences  in  their  acoustic

propagation parameters are taken into account.

Regarding the characterization of the acoustic propagation properties of the Martian

atmosphere,  EASE  will  adapt  standard  measurement  techniques  to  the  particular

requirements of the mission. The physical and chemical properties of the atmosphere

2

of Mars are based on information gained from numerous unmanned space missions.

As  carbon  dioxide  is  the  main  component  of  Mars'  atmosphere,  the  fact  that  the

presence  of  small  quantities  of  water  vapor  significantly  modifies  the  acoustic

propagation  parameters  is  important,  as  this  enables  a  sensitive  mechanism  for  the

measurement of this fundamental compound.

2.  Scenario

Acoustic measurements in the context of space planetary exploration were proposed

as  early  as  1966;  their  concept  was  to  measure  the  sound  speed  in  a  temperature-

controlled  spiral  duct,  thus  constraining  the  relative  molecular  mass  and  ratio  of

specific heats. The application in mind was to resolve the relative abundance of CO2,

N2, Ar in the then-unknown Martian atmosphere.

More recently, the first acoustic sensors for the outer planets have been sent on their

way  as  part  of  the  Cassini/Huygens  mission.  The  Cassini  spacecraft  will  carry  the

ESA Huygens probe to Saturn's moon Titan. One of the probe’s experiments carries

the Surface Science Package (SSP) which includes a speed-of-sound velocimeter and

an  acoustic  sounder  (Zarnecki,  1997).  This  sounder,  acting  as  a  SODAR  (SOund

Detection  And  Ranging),  will  be  used  to  infer  the  landscape  roughness  around  the

landing  site  prior  to  touch  down.  Additionally,  it  will  constrain  the  depth  of  any

liquid  hydrocarbon  deposit  the  probe  might  land  in.  The  Huygens  Atmospheric

Structure  Instrument  (HASI)  carries  a  passive  microphone  (ACU)  to  search  for

acoustic events due to possible thunder (Fulchignoni, 1997).

Passive  acoustic  sensors  have  been  also  flown  on  Soviet  Venus  landers,  with  the

intent  of  detecting  thunder.  Although  events  were  detected,  it  is  unclear  whether

these  were  indeed  due  to  thunder  or  merely  aeroacoustic  noise  caused  by  the

3

turbulent airflow over the probe. Data from these sensors were used in order to place

constraints on surface windspeeds. For more detailed information see the review by

Lorenz (1998).

More recently, a microphone was launched towards Mars on the unsuccessful Mars

Polar Lander. This purely passive instrument was principally intended for listening to

unexpected sounds from another world. It was characterized by confined resources,

and thus was strongly limited both in how much sound it could record, and also in

the  fidelity  of  those  recordings.  An  improved  version  of  this  instrument  has  been

proposed in the framework of the French Net Lander mission, which is planned to be

launched in 2007 (http://sprg.ssl.berkeley.edu/marsmic/team.html).

This,  to  our  knowledge,  is  the  current  state  of  the  acoustic  research  in  planetary

exploration. It is evident enough that, despite their limited resource requirements, the

potential  of  acoustic-based  techniques  in  planetary  exploration  have  not  yet  been

3.  EASE - Environmental Acoustic Sounding Experiment

exploited.

3.1 Instrument overview

The  basic  structure  of  the  EASE  experiment,  whose  functional  block  diagram  is

shown  in  fig.  4,  is  composed  of  two  main  parts:  the  acoustic  wave  guide  and  the

experiment controller and data treatment unit. The cylindrical wave guide (length: 22

cm; diameter: 3 cm) is bounded at the two sides with the transmitting and receiving

transducers, although the dimension of the cavity are still somewhat preliminary.

The goal of the EASE experiment is to measure acoustic propagation parameters so

that  physical  and  chemical  properties  of  the  lower  Martian  atmosphere  can  be

constrained with the help of established models. That is, by directly determining the

4

wave  velocity  and  absorption  as  a  function  of  frequency  and  temperature,  the

properties  of  the  gas  composition  can  be  inferred.  Specifically,  by  analyzing

absorption as a function of frequency, molecular relaxation processes can be resolved

thus  allowing  H2O  vapor  content  to  be  obtained;  similarly,  viscosity  and  thermal

conductivity of the gas composition are also determined. Furthermore, by analyzing

sound velocity as a function of frequency, the specific heat ratio can be determined.

As  a  result  it  will  possible  to  verify  the  compatibility  among  various  proposed

atmospheric models.

 3.2 Acoustic propagation parameters

In the case of monofrequency motion the wave equation is reduced to the Helmholtz

equation: 

+∇
2

pkp

2

=

0

 with k being the complex wavenumber and p the acoustic

pressure  field.  The  solution  to  this  equation  for  a  plane  wave  traveling  in  the  +x

direction  is 

p

=

eP
0

−

α
xe

i

(

ω
t

−

kx

)

  where  P0  is  the  maximum  acoustic  pressure,  α  is  the

attenuation coefficient, ω is the angular frequency and the complex wavenumber is

resolved into its components: 

k −=k

αi

.

In general the attenuation coefficient takes into account absorption processes, losses

due  to  geometrical  attenuation  and  those  due  to  scattering.  The  latter  two  are  not

applicable to the experimental configuration here described as propagation occurs in

a  confined  acoustically    homogenous  medium,  whereas  absorption  processes  are

subject  to  two  types  of  mechanisms,  those  due  to  losses  in  the  medium  and  those

associated  with  losses  at  the  boundaries  of  the  medium  (wall  effects).  Absorption

processes  occur  when  acoustic  energy  is  transferred  into  other  energy  forms;

ultimately  all  acoustic  energy  is  degraded  into  thermal  energy  (Kinsler,  2000).  A

sudden  change  of  local  pressure  conditions  will  augment  the  internal  energy  of  the

5

system.  This  excess  energy  gained  is  lost  exponentially  in  time  by  absorption

processes, each of which is characterized by a relaxation time τ. Losses that occur in

the  medium  through  relaxation  mechanisms  are  divided  into  three  basic  types:

viscous,  heat  conduction  and  those  associated  with  molecular  relaxation  processes.

The general form of the absorption coefficient can be expressed as:

α ω
(

) ====

ω

c

1
2

L
MMM
N

++++

1

ωτ

−−−−

1

d
++++

1

i

2

i

2

d

ωτ

1

2

O
PPP
Q

                                 (1)

where c is the sound velocity and τ is the relaxation time (Hill, 1986). Viscous losses

result whenever there is a relative motion between adjacent portions of medium, such

as  during  compression  and    expansion  that  accompany  the  propagation  of  a  sound

wave. Heat conduction losses result from the conduction  of thermal energy between

higher temperature condensations and lower temperature rarefactions. The relaxation

times associated to these phenomena are typically in the range of 10-10 s. According

to the theory developed by Stokes and Kirchhoff, the so-called classical absorption

equation is derived from eq.1 by applying the constraint ωτ<<1, so as to obtain:
L
NM

a
++++
η γ

α ω
(
CL

ω
2
ρ
0

K
C

f
1

O
QP

) ≅≅≅≅

4
3

−−−−

2

c

P

3

                                     (2)

where Cp is the specific heat at constant pressure and ρ0 is the steady-state density, η

is the coefficient of shear viscosity and K is the thermal conductivity.

Molecular  relaxation  processes  can  also  lead  to  absorption  and  include  the

conversion of kinetic energy of the CO2 molecule into its various degrees of freedom

(Bass,  1972,  Vesovic,  1990,  Trengove,  1987);  for  this  molecule,  the  internal

vibrational  states  have  the  longest  relaxation  time  (τM)  enabling  this  process  to  be

resolved  acoustically  at  low  ultrasonic  frequencies.  Specifically,  measurements  for

dry pure CO2 at 20°C, confirm that for this process the transition frequency (1/2πτM)

6

is  about  30  kHz.  Water  vapor  content  in  CO2  has  a  considerable  influence  on  this

frequency:  a  1%  concentration  of  H2O  raises  this  frequency  to  2MHz.  This  is  not

directly due to its presence but through its indirect action which lowers the average

number of collisions required to transfer energy to the vibrational states of the carbon

dioxide molecule, thus acting as a catalyzer. The absorption coefficient αM is given

by eq. 1 in which τ is replaced by τM.

The expected value for transition frequency in Martian atmosphere, relative to water

vapor  content  estimates  (~1 0/00)  and  temperature  values  (~220 K),  may  be

reasonably  located  inside  EASE  frequency  range  (Petropoulos,  1989).  Because

relaxation  time  decreases  with  increasing  humidity  and  does  so  most  rapidly  when

the  gas  is  almost  dry  this  instrument  is  expected  to  be  particularly  sensitive  to  H20

vapour  content.  The  actual  value  for  the  relaxation  time  depend  not  only  on

temperature,  pressure and H20 concentration but it is also affected by the presence of

other gases (Shields, 1967). It is therefore necessary to perform specific experiments

in order to determine τM as a function of these parameters.

Wall  effects  in  the  low  frequency  range  are  the  principal  source  of  sound  energy

absorption associated with viscous resistance offered to fluid motion at the walls of

the  cavity  and  the  exchange  of  heat  energy  between  the  walls  and  the  fluid.  When

these effects dominate, their contribution to the  absorption coefficient is:

α
W

====

1
rc

ηω
e
ρ
0

2

       ;      

====
η η

++++

1

e

γ

−−−−

                      (3)

L
MM
N

a

f

1

K
γη
p

C

O
PP
Q

Where r is the radius of the cavity and ηe is the effective viscosity (Morse, 1968).

The complete absorption coefficient is therefore given by the sum:

++++
α ω α ω α ω α ω
                                   (4)
)

====

++++

(

(

(

)

)

(

)

M

W

CL

7

This theoretical expression is shown as solid line curve in fig.1, where the effects of

the  various  contributions  are  clearly  distinguishable;  in  particular  the  logarithmic

scales  show  a  quadratic  dependency  on  the  frequency  in  the  classical  (dashed  line)

and molecular (dot-dashed line) relaxation regions when their approximated form is

valid, and the square root dependency in the region where the wall effect dominates.

Preliminary experiments of an acoustic cavity (see fig. 2) have been conducted in a

custom  built  simulation  chamber  capable  of  reproducing  the  pressure  and

temperature characteristics of the lower Martian atmosphere. The vacuum facility is

composed  of  a  rotary  pump  and  condenser-type  pressure  meter,  while  the

temperature is controlled by immersing the simulation chamber in a melting mixture

of distilled water and anti-freeze. Two thermocouples placed inside the chamber are

used  to  measure  temperature.  Some  test  runs  have  been  conducted  in  physical

conditions close to those expected “in-situ” and show promising results (see fig. 3).

In  particular,  both  transmitting  and  receiving  transducers  have  functioned  properly,

exhibiting  good  signal  to  noise  ratio  even  at  low  transmission  powers,  at  pressures

down to 7 mbar and temperatures of about 240 K.

3.3 Instrument description and operating modes

Various techniques can be used to measure the propagation parameters, and they can

be  classified 

in 

two  categories;  spectral  methods 

in  which  a  continuous

monofrequency  signal  is  transmitted,  and  time-of-flight  methods  in  which  a

modulated signal is used.

In the spectral method resonance peaks in the acoustic cavity’s transmission function

are determined by its boundary conditions and the medium’s propagation parameters:

phase  velocity    and  attenuation.  The  amplification  given  to  the  propagating  wave

with a frequency near a resonance peak makes this technique suitable for very low

8

power  measurements,  particularly  when  a  lock-in  amplification  system  is  used  for

detecting  the  received  signal.  The  discrete  set  of  frequencies  which  can  be  studied

are  determined  by  the  geometry  of  the  wave  guide  and  the  phase  velocity  of  the

medium.

For  the  time-of-flight  methods,  one  interesting  technique  uses  a  Pseudo  Random

Noise  (PRN)  modulated  continuous  wave  signal  in  order  to  determine  the  acoustic

propagation parameters: in this mode the  signal received after travelling the length

of the acoustic cavity is correlated to a delayed version of the transmitted signal code

sequence and a peak value of this correlation product is found when the delay (td) is

set to the time of flight of the propagating signal. By changing the carrier frequency

of the transmitted signal, its spectral content can be altered to some degree, making it

possible  to  determine  the  acoustic  propagation  properties  of  the  medium  as  a

function  of  frequency.  Due  to  the  high  noise  rejection  capabilities  of  this  detection

technique, it is possible to implement a low-power system which is both tolerant to

electrical noise and produces an insignificant amount of interference.

The  current  design  of  the  EASE  instrument  enables  several  operating  modes  to  be

performed  allowing  in  this  way  to  choose  between  tradeoffs  in  these.  A  block

diagram of the instrument is shown in fig. 4. Three Direct Digital Synthesis (DDS)

wave generators are used; DDS0 for the transmission signal, while the other two are

used  in  the  detection  phase  as  part  of  a  lock-in  circuit,  when  operating  in

monofrequency mode. For PRN measurements the relative phase between DDS0 and

the other two is varied until the maximum of the correlation is found.

9

4.  EAR - Environmental Acoustic Reconnaissance

4.1 Instrument overview

The  operative  rational  of  EAR  is  to  deliver  as  much  scientifically  valuable

information  regarding  the  acoustic  environment  on  Mars,  as  can  be  had  under  all

foreseeable  conditions.  As  a  secondary  objective,  it  would  be  nice  to  know  what

Mars would “sound” like to a human ear.

One important aspect is determining the frequency range over which the instrument

is  to  operate;  infrasonic  sounds  could  be  valuable  in  furnishing  information  from

distant  sources  as  for  example  meteorites  (Williams,  2001),  but  in  order  to

discriminate  between  pressure  waves  caused  by  gusts  of  wind  and  sound

propagation,  they  require  large  distributed  detectors.  Strong  winds  however,  which

are likely to be found in this case, introduce noise severely degrading signal quality,

even  when 

sensors 

are 

properly 

designed 

(see, 

for 

example,

www.nemre.nn.doc.gov/review2001/CD/Print/07-06.pdf).  This  makes  infrasound

measurements  difficult  to  perform  given  mission  constraints  and  the  local

environment. As frequency increases, attenuation increases sharply as is described in

the  section  dedicated  to  the  EASE  instrument,  so  one  can  expect  that  only  nearby

sources (e.g. elements of the mission itself) will contribute to the higher end of the

audio frequency spectrum (10 kHz ca.).

In  planetary  exploration  missions,  instruments  contend  over  a  pool  of  constrained

resources,  the  most  critical  of  which  in  EAR’s  case  are  telemetry  and  power  while

the  requirements  on  mass  and  volume  are  relatively  moderate.  The  power  and

telemetry  pair  are  in  someway  tied  together,  as  sophisticated  “in-situ”  analysis

10

requires  complex  calculations  which  are  power  intensive  but  can  in  return

dramatically reduce telemetry requirements.

 To achieve this, a self-adaptive scheme shall be implemented in such a way as to be

able to hand over the best available data over a wide range of telemetry rates; even if

telemetry  resources  should  be  greatly  reduced  due  to  say,  transmission  fault

conditions,  EAR  must  deliver  whatever  valuable  information  it  can,  given  its

operating  constraints.  On  the  other  hand  it  should  be  able  to  take  advantage  of

favorable  conditions,  should  these  come  up,  to  hand-over  as  much  data  as  can  be

handled.  In  fact,  considering  what  little  knowledge  there  is  of  the  acoustic

environment  of  Mars,  it  would  be  interesting  to  have  continuous  monitoring  of  a

large  spectrum  of  frequencies,  from  multiple  transducers.  However,  technical

restraints  must  be  considered;  even  using  the  most  sophisticated  compression

techniques telemetry requirements for such an experiment would be quite substantial.

A  single  CD  quality  channel  (16 bit  resolution  and  over  40 ks/s)  would  generate,

with a 4:1 compression ratio (see below), almost 2 Mbits for a 10 second sample. It

is therefore essential to provide a mechanism for selecting acoustic events, so that the

most promising ones will be transmitted with higher priority and compress the data

so that redundant information content is reduced to a minimum.

4.2 Instrument description

The  EAR  instrument  is  composed  of  two  subsystems  (see  fig.  5);  the  Microphone

and  Mounting  (MM),  and  the  Basic  Reconnaissance  Analysis  and  Interface  Node

(BRAIN)  subsystem,  where  the  main  electronics  system  is  housed.  The  MM

subsystem  will  be  suitably  located  so  as  to  have  as  little  acoustic  interference  as

possible  on  the  part  of  the  lander  and  its  mission  packages.  The  microphone  itself

will probably be a preamplified electret and will have an appropriate wind-shielding

11

device.  Electret  microphones  have  a  frequency  response  (~20 ÷ 18,000  Hz)  and

sensitivity  (~50  mV/Pa)  that  are  adequate  for  the  purposes  of  this  instrument  and

require  a  far  lower  polarization  voltage  than  condenser  and  piezoelectric  types  of

microphones enabling the use of simpler electronics.

The  BRAIN  subsystem  will  filter  the  analogue  signal  and  digitise  it  (conceivably

with  a  16 bit  resolution  at  40 kilo-samples  per  second),  identify  potential  acoustic

events and store them in a workspace for further processing. Statistical data will be

gathered  giving  general  characteristics  for  long  term  coverage,  and  this  concise

information will be imparted with high priority.

4.3 Operational Modes

To improve the selection criteria it would be useful to take into account all additional

information  available  regarding 

lander/rover  activities, 

local  meteorological

conditions,  nighttime/daytime  operations,  etc.,  during  the  acoustic  acquisition

periods, so as to operate in the most appropriate experiment profile. Because of the

uncertainties  associated  with  hearing  unexpected  sound  sources,  the  availability  of

near  real-time  command  (24-36  hour  delay  times)  operations  may  be  particularly

useful  for  the  EAR  instrument  so  that,  for  example,  priority  hierarchies  may  be

modified. Various types of acoustic events shall be available for handling; e.g., along

with transformed time series data, statistical data concerning average power spectrum

will  be  collected  and  treated  as  specific  types  of  acoustic  events.  This  valuable

information  will  be  very  concise  and  will  have  high  dispatch  priority.  The

mechanism  foreseen,  which  shall  be  in  charge  of  providing  the  proposed  self-

adapting  telemetry  scheme,  will  involve  subdividing  the  acquired  acoustic  signals

into  data  events,  classifying  and  attributing  a  dispatch  priority  level  to  them.  This

way scientifically important data, with low data transmission requirements shall have

12

the  best  chance  of  being  delivered,  whereas  events  with  less  chance  of  getting

through  tight  transmission  bottlenecks  will  have  a  lower  dispatch  priority.  This

adaptive  dispatch  scheme  requires  a  memory  management  system  to  deal  with

contrasting memory requirements. A similar priority system will be implemented to

enforced  the  planned  mission  modes  and  ensure  optimal  scientific  data  availability

for the scientific effort.

4.4 In Situ Analysis

EAR  can  potentially  implement  sophisticated  computations  so  that  the  available

telemetry  can  be  used  efficiently.  Lossy  time  series  compression  is  the  most

promising technique to deliver rich data to earth for further analysis; essentially this

entails choosing which aspect in the original signal is to be preserved most faithfully.

A  very  popular  form  of  compression  is  that  based  on  psychoacoustic  analysis  in

which the properties of the Human ear are taken into account so that the listener does

not notice a significant difference when hearing the compressed version as compared

to  the  original  one.  The  most  significant  result  of  these  algorithms  is  to  eliminate

frequency  components  masked by  a  nearby  robust  frequency  component.  This  may

severely affect the quality of the information content of the signal so other techniques

should also be investigated.

Time-series data, subdivided into acoustic events, will be transformed into wavelet or

Fourier  space  so  as  to  perform  functions  similar  to  undersampling  with  data-loss

compression techniques and to aid in the event selection and prioritization process.

In fig. 6 a time series signal (a) and its Short Time Fast Fourier Transfer (STFFT) (b)

are shown as an example of an acoustic event. In STFFT the signal is subdivided into

short  time  slots  which  are  then  decomposed  into  a  set  of  equally  spaced  frequency

bins, whereas in wavelet transformations the signal is processed by constant-Q filters

13

(Van den Berg, 1999), so that bins are spaced in constant frequency ratios. The local

nature of wavelet functions is an advantage when relatively short duration signals are

analyzed. Data loss compression techniques based on wavelet compression typically

keep,  once  the  data  has  been  transformed,  only  the  strongest  components  with  the

highest  resolution  while  weaker  coefficients  are  either  represented  in  a  coarser

fashion  or  discarded  altogether  (Press,  1996).  Upon  reconstruction  through  the

inverse wavelet transformation, a modified signal similar to the original may be had.

In order to establish to what extent a signal has been degraded after such a process,

an  appropriate  index  of  the  information  content  should  be  determined.  One  such

index  is  the  energy  content  of  the  signal.  Fig.7  (a)  shows  an  example  of  how  this

index can be used; the ratio of the energy content of the modified signal to that of the

original one (E) is plotted versus the ratio of the number of coefficients used to their

original  number  (n).  In  part  (b)  of  the  figure,  a  portion  of  the  original  (gray)  and

modified (black) time series signal is shown in which 12.5% of the coefficients have

be kept, the rest having been set to 0, prior to reconstruction. The principal detriment

appears  to  have  a  local  nature  and  set  in  a  weaker  portion  of  the  original  signal.

Techniques such as this may be useful also in the identification of the acoustic events

and their prioritization, which will be mandatory due to the limitations in telemetry

rate which impose a severe restraint on number, length and bandwidth of the sound

samples  available  for  further  analysis  on  Earth.  If  one  cannot  be  totally  sure  that

these  samples  will  all  be  sent  back,  then  it  is  wise  to  establish  a  priority  queue  for

their  transmission.  To  obtain  as  wide  a  selection  of  sounds  as  possible,  the  criteria

used in establishing the priority of the acoustic events should be varied. The actual

criteria  will  be  established  through  testing  between  simulated  and  acquired  sounds.

Possible selection mechanisms can be very simple or quite sophisticated. The Mars-

14

Mic  instrument,  for  example,  chooses  the  loudest  sound  splice  during  the  listening

phase prior receiving the send-sound telecommand. A more complex selection can be

had performing a correlation of the acoustic event with a set of sounds so as to reject

or  select  sound  with  specific  characteristics.  This  can  be  done  quite  efficiently  by

transforming the sound splice into Fourier space and multiplying each coefficient by

that of the response function stored directly in Fourier space. However, in this way

unexpected sounds may not crop-up. Clustering in time-frequency space, a technique

used typically in image processing, may potentially be used to select sounds which

have a sufficient time-bandwidth product.

5.  Conclusions

The  two  instruments  of  the  EARS  experiment  have  been  described  on  a  baseline

configuration both in theoretical rationale and practical implementation. For the EAR

experiment  possible  “in  situ”  analyses  have  been  described  indicating  some  data

reduction  schemes  and  event  selection  criteria.  The  sound  propagation  parameters

measured  by  EASE  experiment,  allow  the  evaluation  of  various  physical  and

chemical  parameters  of  the  Martian  atmosphere  and  could  therefore  be  used  to

establish  fixed  points  in  atmosphere  models  to  be  adopted  for  the  Martian

This work was supported by a grant from Agenzia Spaziale Italiana (ASI).

We  would  like  to  thank  the  reviewers  for  useful  comments  and  suggestions  that

environment.

Acknowledgments

greatly improved the paper.

6.  Bibliography

15

                                                            

                  

Bass, H. E., Bauer, H. J., 1972. Atmospheric absorption of sound: analytical expressions. J. Acoust.

Soc. Am. 52, 821-825.

Fulchignoni, M., et al., 1997. The Huygens Atmospheric Structure Instrument (HASI). In: Huygens,

Science Payload and Mission.'' ESA Special Publication, SP-1177, pp. 163-176.

Hill, T. L. , 1986. An Introduction to Statistical Thermodynamics. Dover Publications Inc., New York.

Kinsler,  L.E.,  Frey,  A.R.,  Coppens,  A.B.,  Sanders,  J.V.,  2000.  Fundamentals  of  Acoustics  (fourth

edition). John Wiley & Sons, New York.

Lorenz, R.D., 1998. Speed of sound in outer planet atmosphere. Planet. Space. Sci. 47, 67-77.

Morse, P.M., Ingard, K.U., 1968. Theoretical Acoustics. McGraw – Hill, New York.

Petropoulos, B., Macris, C., 1989. Physical parameters of the Martian atmosphere. Earth, Moon, and

Planets. 46, 1-30.

Press, W. H., Teukolsky, S.A., Vetterling, W.T., Flannery, B.P., 1996. Numerical Recipes: The Art of

Scientific Computing (second edition). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (U.K.).

Shields, F. D., Burks, J. A., 1967. Vibrational relaxation in CO2/D2O mixtures. JASA 43, 510-515.

Trengove,  R.  D.,  Wakeham,  W.  A.,  1987.  The  viscosity  of  carbon  dioxide,  methane,  and  sulfur

hexafluoride in the limit of zero density. J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data. 16 (2), 175-187.

Van den Berg, J.C., 1999. Wavelets in Physics.  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (U.K.).

Vesovic,  V.,  Wakeham,  W.A.,  Olchowy,  G.A.,  Sengers,  J.V.,  Watson,  J.T.R.,  Millat,  J.,  1990.  The

Transport Properties of Carbon Dioxide. J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data.  19 (3), 763-808.

Williams, J.P., 2001. Acoustic environment of the Martian surface. J. Geophy.  Res. 106, 5033-5041.

16

