A dual set-up based on Bradley's aberration of light, using simultaneously stellar and
local light sources.

G. Sardin
gsardin@ub.edu

Pacs: 06.20.-f, 07.87.+v, 95.55.-n

Abstract

A dual optical set-up is proposed to detect simultaneously the different behavior of light from stellar
and local sources, in relation to speed-induced aberration. A small laser is set at the center of the
objective lens of a telescope, allowing to record at once the two spots on an array detector. Their
positions are recorded during a yearly earth orbit, so stellar aberration can be visualized as a tiny
circle.  But  no  aberration  has  been  observed  from  local  sources,  hence  the  laser  spot  should
remain still. The simultaneous recording of both spots allows highlighting their different behavior.
Einstein related aberration to the transverse speed between light source and observer, and since
for local sources it is null, no aberration ensues. Despite this explanation conforms with the correct
result  for  local  sources,  it  cannot  however  be  retained  since  stellar  aberration  does  not  vary
although relative speed differs for each star. Consequently, the null transverse velocity cannot be
considered the cause of the null aberration from local sources. A causal approach to this different
behavior between stellar and local light is advanced, based on the combined effects of a speed-
induced deflection of emitted light rays and a speed-induced aberration upon detection.

1. Introduction

Already  about  1680  the  french  astronomer  J.  Picard  observed  that  the  position  of  star  was  not
steady  but  underwent  small  shifts,  feature  verified  by  the  english  astronomer  J.  Flamsteed.  In
1725, Bradley (1) carefully determined that in fact the observed position of stars undergo a yearly
small  rotation.  He  deduced  that  it  could  not  be  attributed  to  the  parallax  effect  and  found  out  its
actual cause, correctly interpreting it as an aberration due to the earth speed around the sun, now
referred  as  the  stellar  aberration  of  light.  Bradley  established  in  its  article  of  1728  that  the
aberration angle is constant for all stars and expressed it as:

tn α = v / c

( where v is the earth orbital speed and c that of light).

However, when using light from a local source, i.e. located on earth, instead of that from stars, no
aberration  has  been  observed  (2-5).  It  is  commonly  trusted  that  special  relativity  has  solved  the
absence  of  aberration  from  local  sources,  in  view  that  Einstein  linked  aberration  to  the  relative
speed between the light source and the observer (6-10). Since for sources on earth  the relative
speed  is  null  no  speed-induced  aberration  is  thus  expected.  However,  despite  this  explanation
complies with the actual outcome for local sources, it should be discarded since stellar aberration
has  been  experimentally  set  to  be  constant  for  all  stars  and  thus  independent  of  their  different
speed relative to us, resulting to be determined only by the earth speed around the sun (11-17).
Therefore, the fact that for local sources the relative speed is null cannot coherently be considered
the accurate reason for the null aberration and some other causal clarification should be searched
(18).

The device proposed takes advantage of the presence of aberration of light from stars and of its
absence  from  local  sources,  in  order  to  ratify  it  and  to  allow  improving  the  causal  insight  of  this
different  behavior  of  light  depending  on  the  source  type,  stellar  or  local.  Indeed,  light  rays  from
stellar sources undergo the Bradley effect, i.e. the aberration of stellar light which leads to a mirage

1

position of stars due to an apparent inclination of their rays caused by the earth speed. However,
since no aberration is detected from local sources, it can be expected that the rays from these two
different sources will undergo, in a year, paths gradually deviating from each other. Based on this
oddity, a specific set-up is broached in order to experimentally evidence these different behaviors
and at the time to arouse the search for solving  the speed-induced aberration dilemma between
stellar and local sources.

2. Experimental: description and  working way of the dual set-up

The working way of the device proposed is specifically based on the  behavior  difference  of  rays
from stellar and local light sources. Since one leads to an aberration and the other one does not, a
simultaneous differential measure of the two cases should provide a conducive contrasted result.
In effect, one spot should stay immobile on the array-detector while the second should be mobile in
accordance to the earth motion around the sun. So, an hybrid set-up based on the simultaneous
detection  of  light  rays  from  a  star  and  from  a  laser  has  been  devised.  The  system  is  made  of  a
telescope  on  whose  objective  is  added  a  laser  fixed  on  its  center.  At  the  telescope  focal  a  high
resolution  photo-detector  array  is  set,  allowing  to    simultaneously  track  the  position  of  the  spots
from the star and the laser. If the telescope is pointed e.g. toward the polar star, in the course of
one year the apparent position of the star will describe a quasi circular ellipse. However, since no
aberration  has  been  detected  from  any  local  source  it  is  thus  expected  that  on  its  part,  the  spot
from the laser beam placed on the telescope objective will remain still on the array-detector.

Stellar
light rays

Laser

Bradley angle

Speed-induced
deflection of the
laser beam

    V

Direction
of motion

Photo-detector
array

Fig.1: Hybrid Bradley speed-meter, based on the simultaneous detection of the spot position on a
photo-detector array of the impinging light rays from stellar and local (laser beam) sources.

The  working  procedure  sets  in  pointing  the  laser  beam  such  as  its  spot  on  the  array  detector
superposes to that from the star and to daily record at the same sideral hour their position during a
year, in order to clearly display the temporal difference of behavior of the two spots. In effect, within
the telescope, during the time-of-flight of the light rays from the objective to the focus, the detector
array  has  slightly  moved  sideways  from  its  position  in  space  at  the  very  moment  the  rays  were
impinging  on  the  objective.  This  creates  an  apparent  tilt  of  the  incoming  light  rays  leading  to  a
mirage position of stars, whose angle is expressed by tn α = v / c and known as Bradley constant
(corresponding to an aberration angle of 22.4"). For a telescope with a focal length (f) of 1 m the
time of flight of photons is:

2

t = f / c = 1 / c = 1/ 3.10-8 m/s

and the earth speed being of 30 km/s the meanwhile lateral shift of the detector is:

∆x = v.t = (3.104)(1/3.10-8) = 10-4 m = 100 µm

Equivalently, dx can be directly formulated as:
∆x = f.tn(v/c) = 1. tn(30 / 300000) = tn (10-4) ≈ 10-4 m = 100  µm

So, after one year the spot from the stellar light should have drawn a tiny circle of a 100 µm radius,
while the spot from the local source should have remained still. Already after six months the earth
speed vector is inverted and hence the shift from the stellar spot is inverted too. In contrast, the
laser  spot  remains  immobile  since  the  beam  undergoes  a  speed-induced  deflection,    which  is
always  oriented  in  the  direction  of  motion.  Let  us  now  apply  the  speed-induced  aberration  upon
detection and contrast it with the speed-induced actual deflection of light rays.

3. Discussion

Contrasting the different results from the stellar and the local sources should help developing an
adequate  causal  interpretation  of  the  Bradley  effect  for  both  cases,  since  it  has  been  previously
expressed that the relative speed between source and observer does not manage to differentiate
suitably the two cases. In effect, it has already been highlighted in the introduction that the relative
speed  between  source  and  observer  cannot  be  taken  as  an  accurate  cause  for  the  Bradley
aberration. In its place, an alternative is advanced, based instead on the resultant of  two effects,
one  proceeding  from  the  source  motion  and  the  other  one  from  the  observer  motion.  It  appears
necessary to consider these two factors in order to provide a congruent causal interpretation of the
difference of behavior between stellar and local sources.

3.1. Speed-induced deflection of light rays upon emission

The deflection of emitted light-rays induced by the source speed is considered an actual physical
effect,  the  rays  path  being  truly  deflected  and  it  should  not  be  mistakenly  taken  for  the  mirage
deflection induced by the observer speed. The equivalency of inertial systems implies that the spot
on the array must stay still under any change of motion of the inertial system. This requirement is
fulfilled  only  if  the  component  cx  of  the  speed  of  light  in  the  direction  of  motion  is  equal  to  the
system speed v (fig.1). This implies the reflected beam to be deflected by an angle α such that:

Let us suggest causal grounds for the assumed speed-induced deflection. The deflection angle is
equal to:

cx = c . sin β  = v

β = arc sin (cx / c) = arc sin (v / c)

It appears as a function of the ratio v / c, but this relation may be regarded as the reduced result of
the energy ratio pc / mc2. Hence sin α can be rewritten in terms of an energy ratio:

sin β  = Er / Ei = pc / mc2 = mvc / mc2 = v / c

where  Er  =  pc  =  hν    and  Ei  =  mc2  =  hν0.  Er  stands  for  the  relative  collision  energy,  i.e.  that
measured by the detector of the inertial system, and Ei for the intrinsic collision energy, i.e. that a

3

detector  at  absolute  rest  would  measure.  So,  the  deflection  angle  can  be  looked  at  due  to  a
transverse  momentum  of  the  emitted  photons,  i.e.  a  momentum  in  the  direction  of  the  source
motion.

3.2. Speed-induced aberration of light rays upon reception

Let us now attend the cause of the proper aberration. The aberration of light rays relative to the
observer  is  due  to  its  own  motion,  and  being  an  apparent  effect  the  rays  are  in  fact  not  truly
deflected but they appear so to the observer. The speed-induced aberration of light rays ensues
from the finite speed of light,  which  implies  a  finite  time-of-flight  of  light  from  the  objective  to  the
eye-piece or detector. This leads to an apparent deflection equal to:

tn α  = Lx / Ly = v. t  / c. t = v / c

A  simple  way  to  depict  the  exclusive  local  nature  of  stellar  aberration  could  be  by  considering  a
long tube with pin-hole diaphragms at its ends. Light rays parallel to the tube axis passing across
the top pin-hole diaphragm will not come out from the tube if it has moved tangentially during the
rays time-of-flight, due for e.g. to the earth motion. To highlight this point let us cite the pertinent
quotation  of  C.  Renshow  (19):  "Aberration  is  therefore  clearly  a  local  phenomenon.  Light  from  a
distant star could be heading toward Earth for a billion years, say from due north. As it is viewed on
Earth, it will be aberrated one way or another, depending on the particular season it reaches us.
Due to extreme distance of the star, aberration will cause the apparent line-of-sight to betray the
star's "true" position by hundreds to thousands of light years. The source is certainly not jumping
around like this, and the light must be coming directly from the actual source location to the Earth
along the line joining the location of the star and Earth, not along the aberrated line of sight".

Let  us  now  outfit  causal  grounds  for  the  presence  of  aberration  from  stellar  light  and  of  its
detectionless  in  the  case  of  local  light,  on  the  basis  of  the  adjoined  contribution  of  the  speed-
induced deflection and aberration. As already stated the presence of aberration is considered due
to two speed-induced effects, i.e. speed-induced deflection and speed-induced aberration. Let us
analyze their net outcome for stellar and local light sources.

3.3. Cause of stellar aberration

It has been assumed that speed induces a deflection of light rays in the direction of motion whose
angle β = arc sin (v/c), but the emission of light from star has a spherical symmetry and thus the
deflection  of  the  rays  cannot  be  discerned  since  the  net  effect  is  then  null.  This  leads  to  an
independence from the effect of speed on stellar light and the expected result is the same as if it is
considered that there is no speed-induced deflection of light-rays, just like if the star would be at
absolute rest. In view that the spherical symmetry leads to the same result in both cases, deflection
or  deflectionless,  why  then  any  need  in  assuming  a  speed-induced  deflection  since  it  seems
useless? Its usefulness emerges when considering the absence of aberration from local sources.
In  any  case,  the  effect  of  speed  upon  the  direction  of  emission  of  light  rays  from  sources  with
spherical symmetry is not observable and so does not affect the observed aberration from star.

It ends up therefore that  the observed aberration from star light is determined exclusively by the
effect of the observer motion on the apparent direction of the oncoming rays upon detection. This
observational effect leads to a fictitious inclination of light rays due to the observer motion, which
are actually impinging parallel to the telescope axis. This apparent tilt (tn  α = v/c) of light rays is
determined by the objective position in space at the instant the rays impinge on it and the ocular
position at the time they reach it. Equivalently, in terms of drift (∆x = d.tn α), the aberration derives
from  the  shift  between  the  ocular  position  in  space  at  the  very  moment  the  rays  impinge  on  the
objective, and the ocular new position at the time the rays reach it.

4

3.4. Cause of local aberrationless

Let us consider  now the case of the light rays from the laser set on the center of the objective lens.
In this specific case the emitted rays have no spherical symmetry but are instead directional and
embodied  into  a  beam  whose  path  is  affected  by  the  system  speed  and  tilted  in  the  direction  of
motion  of  an  angle    β  =  arc  sin(v/c).  It  ensues  that  the  emitted  rays,  being  slightly  tilted  in  the
direction  of  motion,  impinge  on  the  telescope  with  an  angle  of  incidence  equal  to  that  of  the
Bradley aberration and hence aberration cannot be observed since the two effects offset. This is
due to the time of flight (t) of photons to cover the length from the objective to the ocular, and so
the aberration (∆x = cx.t) is exactly balanced by the meanwhile corresponding dislodge (∆x = v.t) of
the eye-piece or detector, so rays impinge at the very same point on the photodetector array (fig.1).

Conclusion

The proposed dual arrangement allows to contrast the different behavior of light from stars or from
local sources in regard to the Bradley effect.  It has been highlighted that in spite of the fact that
effectively no aberration has been observed from local sources, the apparently seemly explanation
formulated by Einstein which relates aberration to the relative speed between the light source and
the observer cannot be retained although it conforms with the null observation in the case of local
sources, since both being on earth their velocity relative to the observer is then null and thus no
aberration  should  consequently  be  expected.  But,  on  another  part  it  has  been  experimentally
settled that stellar aberration is independent of the relative speed between star and observer since
whatever the star observed, the aberration remains constant in spite of the different relative speed
in  each  case.  Therefore,  despite  the  null  relative  speed  between  local  source  and  observer  this
cannot logically be considered the cause of the absence of aberration.

This remark calls for a different cause to explain the different behavior of light from stars and from
local  sources,  other  than  the  relative  speed.  The  interpretation  proposed  stands  instead  on  the
relative speed (cx ) between the component of the speed of light along the direction of motion and
the speed (v) of the optical system. When both are equal (cx = v) there is no aberration of light. In
the case of stellar light, cx is null since the rays are then impinging parallel to the optical axis, and
the aberration angle is thus only dependent on v. In the case of local sources the speed induced
deflection of light rays is equal to the Bradley angle and thus the relative speed ∆v is then null (∆v =
cx - v = 0).

So, the described set-up aims to bring a contrasted experimental proof of the different behavior of
light  according  to  its  origin,  stellar  or  local.  In  both  cases,  their  light  rays  impinge  on  the  same
objective  and  their  traces  on  the  same  array  detector  are  simultaneously  recorded,  allowing  to
detect  any  variation  of  their  position,  during  e.g.  the  yearly  cycle  of  earth  around  the  sun.  The
linked conceptual aim of the experiment stays in providing crucial clues in order to apprehend the
factors determining the difference of behavior of light from stellar and local sources. The cause for
the  difference  has  not  been  deeply  analyzed  due  to  the  common  belief  that  Einstein  theory  of
relativity has provided the answer. An alternative causal explanation has been proposed, based on
the  combined  effects  of  two  factors:  the  speed-induced  deflection  of  light  rays  from  moving
sources, which is an effective effect, and the speed-induced apparent deflection of the light rays
path through observation, which is an optical mirage induced by the observer speed. In the case of
local sources both effects compensate and the net result is null, due to the fact that rays impinge
on the objective with an incident angle equal to the aberration angle.

References

1. J. Bradley, Phil. Trans. 35 (1728)
2.  L. Respighi, Mem. Accad. Sci., 2 (1861)
3. M. Hoek, Astr. Nach., 73 (1868)

5

4.  E. T. Whittaker, A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity (Longman Green & Co, London, 1910)
5. T. Theocharis, Speculation in Science and Technology, 15, 1 (1992)
6. R. Resnick, Introduction to Special Relativity (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York ,1968)
7.  A.  French,  Special  Relativity:  The  M.I.T.  Introductory  Physics  Series  (W.  W.  Norton,  New  York,
1968)
8. W. K. Panofsky and M.Phillips, Classical Electricity and Magnetism (Addison-Wesley, 1955)
9. J.P. Cedarholm, C.H. Townes, Nature, 184 (1959)
10. T. Jaseva, A. Javan, J. Murray, C. Townes, Physical Review 133,  A (1964)
11. P. Naur, Physics Essays 12, 2 (1999)
12. E. Eisner, Am. J. Phys. 35 (1967)
13. T.E. Phipps, Am. J. Phys. 57 (1989)
14. H.E. Yves, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 40 (1950)
15. H. C. Hayden, Galilean Electrodynamics 4 (1993)
16. P. Marmet, Physics Essays 9, 1 (1996)
17. D. Johnson, Galilean Electrodynamics (to be published)
18. G. Sardin, Europhys. Lett., 53, 3 (2001)
19. C. Renshaw, IEEE Aerospace Conf. (Snowmass, Colorado, March 1999)

Author's other related articles:

First and second order electromagnetic equivalency of inertial systems, based on the wavelength and
the period as speed-dependant units of length and time

A causal approach to first-order optical equivalency of inertial systems, by means of a beam-
pointing test-experiment based on speed-induced deflection of light.

lanl.arXiv.org e-Print archive (url: xxx.lanl.gov),  Physics, Subj-class: General Physics

Registered text. All rights reserved

6

