19 January 2004 

 

1 

 
GPM Ground Validation  
Basic Radar Products and  
Implications for Observation Strategies 
 
Report from Working Group 4b 
1st International GPM GV Requirements Workshop 
4 – 7 November 2003; Abingdon, U.K. 
 
Sandra Yuter, Jarmo Koistinen, Sabatino Di Michelle, 
Martin Hagen, Anthony Illingworth, Shuji Shimizu, and Dave Wolff 

 
 
 
 
 
Summary ............................................................................................................................. 1 
1. Background ..................................................................................................................... 2 
2. General Recommendations ............................................................................................. 2 
3. Archival of Original Radar Measurements ..................................................................... 3 
4. Text Products .................................................................................................................. 3 
5. 2D Near-surface Scan Products ...................................................................................... 4 
6. 3D Volume Scan Products .............................................................................................. 6 
7. Time-integrated Products................................................................................................ 9 
8. Regional Composite Products......................................................................................... 9 
9. Ancillary Data............................................................................................................... 10 
10. Some Remaining Challenges ...................................................................................... 10 

 

Summary 
 
 
Recommendations are made for NASA/JAXA Global Precipitation Measurement 
(GPM) satellite Ground Validation (GV) program. This report details recommended GV 
site local radar products based on data from surface-based scanning radars including S-
band, C-band, and X-band polarimetric and non-polarimetric radars. Three general 
categories of products are described: text products summarizing information on the 
statistical characteristics of the radar data and derived parameters, 2D products providing 
maps of the horizontal variability of near surface radar observed and derived parameters, 
and 3D products describing volumetric echo structure. Regional composites could 
include products based on several of the 2D and 3D single radar products. Several types 
of time-integrated 2D and 3D products are also recommended. A brief discussion of 
useful ancillary data from other sources and remaining challenges concludes the report. 

19 January 2004 

 

2 

1. Background 
 
 
The recommended GV radar products address the scientific objectives defined at 
the GPM GV Working Group meeting in Seattle, Washington in February 2002 (Yuter et 
al. 2002). These objectives are:  
 

a)  Determination of minimum detectable surface precipitation rate. 
b)  Classification of precipitation in (x,z) and (x,y) dimensions into hydrometeor 

categories such as rain, snow, mixed, and graupel/hail. 

c)  Classification of the three-dimensional precipitation structure. 
d)  Determination of spatial pattern of surface precipitation intensity 
e)  Quantitative estimation of surface precipitation rate. 
f)  Description of errors associated with each of the above items (a-e). 
 

During the October 2003 Precipitation Measurement Missions meeting in 

Greenbelt, Maryland, tasks related to the evaluation of the satellite estimated vertical 
profile of latent heating were added to the GPM GV responsibilities. The specific 
objectives for latent heating validation are still being defined but include collection of 
volumetric horizontal divergence data and classification of radar echo into convective 
and stratiform precipitation components.  

 
The working group focused on potential GV products associated with surface-
based scanning radars including S-band, C-band or X-band Doppler polarimetric and 
non-polarimetric radars. Based on presentations at the meeting, potential GV partner 
radars include a mixture of operational radars with fixed scan strategies and research 
radars with flexible scan strategies.  It is anticipated that logistical, geographical, and 
operational constraints will limit partner radars to data collection for a subset of the 
recommended products. The full list of recommended products in this document 
represents a superset of products from a variety of radar types and locations.  

These recommendations represent the consensus of the working group.  

2. General Recommendations 
 
 
 
1) It is vital that information on uncertainties be routinely included with every GV 
observed and derived product.  
 
2) Polar coordinate data from participating radars will be archived and available for use 
by all GV partners (see Section 3).  
 
3) Cartesian products are easier to compare to satellite data than polar coordinate data 
since range dependencies can be minimized when a Cartesian grid is appropriately scaled 
for the radar characteristics and a maximum product range.  Since some interpolation 
schemes can introduce artifacts and degrade information, a common high quality 

19 January 2004 

 

3 

objective interpolation methodology needs to be agreed upon and adapted to insure 
quality and consistency among Cartesian products from different sites. 
 
4) For all GPM applications, snow accumulation should be expressed in units of 
equivalent liquid per unit time. Snow accumulation depths vary with crystal shape and 
temperature and hence are difficult to compare among sites and storms. 
 
5) Observed products such as radar reflectivity should have non-meteorological echoes 
identified with a bad quality flag and confidence level. Non-meteorological echoes are to 
be removed before derived products are calculated.  

Polar coordinate radar data represent a key data set for GV. All other products are 

3. Archival of Original Radar Measurements 
 
 
derived (and reprocessed) from the originally recorded polar data.  It is vital to the 
success of GV that the originally recorded radar data be archived and accessible. The 
archived format should either be a public domain format or one that is readily 
transferable to a public domain format. The archived polar coordinate data must preserve 
information on the azimuth angle relative to true north, the elevation angle, and the range 
gate spacing. 
 
 
To be of value for error characterization products utilized by operational users, 
 
GV radar data needs to be available soon after data collection. Ideally, partner radar data 
should be deposited at the designated GV archive within 48 hours of data collection. It is 
recognized that some radar data sets may not be available within 48 hours. These data 
sets will be valuable for detailed analysis and climatological applications which have less 
stringent latency requirements.  
 
 
Quality control (QC) should be applied to the polar coordinate data prior to 
processing of derived products. Local knowledge should be applied as much as possible 
in the removal of non-meteorological echoes especially for QC parameters which vary 
with space and time. GPM GV may find it useful to apply a second round of QC if it is 
capable of detecting additional non-meteorological echoes or if the automated national 
system does not include advanced QC techniques. 
 
 
signal will likely be a demanding task. The latter category includes beam blocking due to 
mountains which can vary with the thermodynamic profile and radar beam overshooting 
of shallow precipitation at long ranges which can vary storm to storm. Individual quality 
factors at each pixel could be summed into a general quality class flag. 

Distinguishing pixels with no precipitation from those with lost precipitation 

4. Text Products 

 
The purpose of text products is to provide an easy to use summary of radar 
observed and derived products. Likely applications of text products are to identify times 

19 January 2004 

 

4 

of interest for detailed study within the GV data sets, and for comparison of basic 
statistics among the GV sites, GPM satellites, and regional model output.  
 
Table 1. Recommended Text Products. By definition all products contain information on 
the uncertainty of their constituent variables. 
Name 
Precip Area above Z thresholds 

Surface precipitation types present 
Presence of distinct melting layer 
Rain layer depth 

Ice layer depths for Z thresholds 

Echo top height for Z thresholds 

Attenuation correction  (X- and C-band 
radars) 
Coincident GPM core and constellation 
satellite overpasses 
Z, (ZDR) calibration 

Description 
X km2 of precip within radar domain of Y 
km2 for Z thresholds of 0, 10, 20 dBZ 
Rain, snow, mixed, graupel/hail 
Yes or No in volume 
km – average, standard deviation, min, max 
within volume 
km - average, standard deviation, min, max 
within volume for Z thresholds of 0, 10, 20 
dBZ 
km – average, standard deviation for Z 
thresholds of 0, 10, 20 dBZ 
Whether attenuation correction is applied 
and some information on its application. 
Time, distance to nadir, ascending or 
descending and name of the satellite 
Offset and its uncertainty versus recorded 
data   

Suggested Z thresholds include values below and above expected GPM core 

 
Notes on text products 
 
 
satellite DPR sensitivity.  
 
Echo top height is dependent on radar sensitivity and scan strategy which varies 
 
from radar to radar. Hence echo top height statistics will be difficult to compare among 
sites.  

5. 2D Near-surface Scan Products  
 

The purpose of 2D near-surface scan products is to document the horizontal 

variability of observed and derived parameters. 2D products are based on a single low-
level elevation angle PPI scan (≤ 1°) These products are distinguished from 3D products 
which require volume scans, i.e. a set of PPIs at different elevation angles. Applications 
of 2D products include comparison with a wide range of satellite intermediate and final 
map products.  
 
All the products on the table below are recommended to be on an objectively 

interpolated Cartesian grid (Trapp and Doswell 2000). Since radar characteristics such as 
beam width and the maximum usable product range vary among radars and precipitation 

19 January 2004 

 

5 

vertical structures, the optimal Cartesian grid resolution and size may be radar and 
seasonally specific.  

 
When multiple coordinated radars are available within a region, some of the 2D 

map products below may be able to be produced as regional composites (Section 8).  

 
As part of GV site documentation, a detailed map is needed of the surface 
background types in terms of water, land, and potentially land-surface type (urban, forest, 
grassland etc) for each pixel in the 2D Cartesian grid.   

 

Table 2. Recommended 2D Products. QC- stands for quality controlled variables. By 
definition all products contain information on the uncertainty of their constituent 
variables. 
Name 
QC-Z long range surveillance scan 

QC-observed radar variables within lowest 
tilt of volume scan 

Location of non-meteorological echoes 
 

Attenuation correction (X- and C-band 
radars) 

Range where radar beam overshoots 
precipitation. 

Precipitation echo locations 

Surface precipitation hydrometeor type 

Convective and stratiform precipitation 

R derived from Z 

Description 
Cartesian map of observed reflectivity 
based on low PRF surveillance scan at low 
elevation angle 
Cartesian map of each of the observed 
parameters which serve as input for derived 
2D products. 
Diagnostic map. Non-meteorological echo 
tagged with bad quality flag and 
confidence. May be incorporated into QC-
Z and QC-observed products. 
Diagnostic PPI scan showing attenuation 
correction values in dB at each polar 
coordinate pixel.  
Diagnostic map of usable radar range for 
each volume.  Of particular interest for 
shallow precipitation. 
Derived Cartesian map. Existence of 
precipitating echo for various Z thresholds 
(0, 10, 20 dBZ). For some applications 
mm/h thresholds may be useful. 
Derived Cartesian map of estimated surface 
values. Including rain, snow, mixed rain 
and snow, graupel/hail. Of particular 
interest in midlatitudes. 
Derived Cartesian map. Objective 
classification of radar echo regions. Of 
particular interest in the tropics for use in 
partitioning latent heating. 
Derived Cartesian map of estimated surface 
precipitation intensity (rainrate or snowfall) 
based on reflectivity, scan geometry, and 
storm structure without use of polarimetric 

19 January 2004 

 

6 

parameters. The vertical profile correction 
applied to each pixel should be included as 
a field in this product. 
As above except including available 
polarimetric variables as appropriate. 

Hybrid R 

Overlaying the surface precipitation intensity and surface precipitation 

A -10 dBZ threshold within 50 km range of the radar would be useful for 

2D maps include products representing both data at the height of the radar beam 

 
Notes on 2D products: 
 
 
and estimates of the real ground/sea surface value derived from measurements at the 
height of the radar beam which is always above the surface. The precipitation type and 
rain rate will be compared to surface-based in situ instruments. These categories of map 
products are by definition estimates of the surface values which take into account the 
vertical profile of the precipitation. 
 
 
hydrometeor type maps will distinguish snow rates from rain rates. 
 
 
precipitation echo locations in snow. 
 
 
modified for GPM it may become a 3D product. The current TRMM GV convective 
stratiform product is a 2 km x 2 km horizontal resolution Cartesian grid to 150 km range 
based upon information in the lowest tilt of the radar volume scan (Steiner et al. 1995). 
The algorithm parameters are tuned for a particular precipitation climatology and radar 
with volumetric data (Yuter and Houze 1997). The current TRMM PR convective 
stratiform algorithm utilizes a combination of horizontal (5 km x 5 km) and vertical (250 
m at nadir) precipitation echo information (Awaka et al. 1998).  
 
 
The maximum range that hybrid techniques for estimating R can be successfully 
applied is a subject of active research within the radar community. Within the literature, 
these techniques are often restricted in range compared to non-polarimetric methods.  

Depending on how the GV convective/stratiform classification algorithm is 

3D products require volume scans containing several elevation angles.  These 

6. 3D Volume Scan Products  
 
 
products document the 3D variability of observed and derived parameters. Some of these 
products are 2D maps derived from volumetric data. The working group decided it made 
more sense to group products by type of radar scan needed to produce them as compared 
to their output format. For example, echo top height is a 2D map but 3D data are required 
to derive it so it is classified as a 3D product.  
 

Primary applications are comparison to 3D observed and derived products from 
the DPR and for assessment of physical assumptions regarding the 3D storm structure 

19 January 2004 

 

7 

used in estimating surface precipitation from satellite passive microwave observations. 
Divergence products are for evaluation of satellite-derived latent heating estimates. 

 
With the exception of the RHI product (see notes below) and the VVP and VAD 

products, the balance of products in the Table 3 below are recommended to based on data 
objectively interpolated to a 3D Cartesian grid. See comments on 2D products (Section 5) 
regarding grid resolutions and sizes.  
 
Table 3. Recommended 3D Products. QC- stands for quality controlled variables. By 
definition all products contain information on the uncertainty of their constituent 
variables. 
Name 
RHI along satellite track during GPM core 
satellite overpasses with precipitation. 

QC-observed radar variables within 
volume 

Location of non-meteorological echoes 
 

Attenuation correction  (X- and C-band 
radars) 

Echo top 

Rain layer height 
 
Hydrometeor classification 

Vertically integrated LWC and IWC 

Velocity Volume Processing (VVP)-yields 
profiles of horizontal winds, divergence 
and Z 
Velocity Azimuth Display (VAD)-
horizontal wind and divergence profiles 

CFADs of Z by categories 

Description 
For comparison to DPR observations, and 
satellite-derived attenuation correction, and 
Do.  
3D Cartesian volume of observed 
parameters which serve as input for derived 
Cartesian 3D products. 
Diagnostic volume. Non-meteorological 
echo tagged with bad quality flag and 
confidence. May be incorporated into QC-
observed products. 
Diagnostic PPI volume showing 
attenuation correction values in dB at each 
polar coordinate pixel. 
Derived Cartesian map of maximum height 
of precipitating echo for various Z 
thresholds (0, 10, 20 dBZ). 
Derived Cartesian map. Expected to vary 
across baroclinic fronts. 
Derived Cartesian 3D volume. Echo 
volume pixels classified by hydrometeor 
type, requires polarimetric parameters 
Derived Cartesian map of vertically 
integrated values based on Z or 
polarimetric parameters. 
Derived profiles based on cylindrical 
volume of radial velocity and Z data within 
30-40 range of radar. 
Derived profile based on conical volume of 
radial velocity data within precipitation 
echo. 
Derived array of joint frequency 
distribution with height of Z for categories 
of precipitation echo within 3D Cartesian 
volume. 

19 January 2004 

 

8 

Vertical profiles of Z by categories 

CFADs of horizontal divergence by 
categories for multiple Doppler or bistatic 
sites. 

Derived from precipitation echo within 3D 
Cartesian volume. 
Derived array of joint frequency 
distribution with height of divergence for 
categories of precipitation echo within 3D 
Cartesian volume. 
Derived from precipitation echo regions 
within within 3D Cartesian volume. 

Echo top height, see notes in Section 4.  Also a -10 dBZ threshold would be 

Rain layer height is similar but not identical to bright band height. Rain layer 

Vertical profiles of horizontal divergence 
by categories for multiple Doppler or 
bistatic sites. 
 
Notes on 3D products 
 
 
The working group makes a strong recommendation to obtain RHIs parallel to the 
GPM core satellite track within the DPR Ku-band swath. To be of most value, the largest 
dimension of the GV radar’s effective beamwidth should not exceed the ground 
resolution of the DPR instrument. Only a subset of GV partner radars will have the 
operational flexibility to obtain these RHIs. Applications of this RHI product may require 
both polar coordinate and objectively interpolated Cartesian versions.  
 
 
useful within 50 km range of radars with sufficient sensitivity. 
 
 
height is a parameter used in radiative transfer calculations.  
 
 
by categories are a current TRMM GV product. Their purpose is to provide concise 
information on the frequency distribution with altitude of Z such as skewedness, modes, 
min, and max etc. 
 
 
of total, convective, and stratiform precipitation components with the surface types of 
land, ocean, coastal, and all used for TRMM. For GPM, additional categories are added 
for midlatitude sites related to surface precipitation types such as rain, snow, mixed, and 
graupel/hail.  
 
 
et al., 1982) and VAD (Lhermitte and Atlas, 1961; Browning and Wexler, 1968) products 
is a function of the volume scan strategy, i.e. the number and spacing of elevation angles 
and the maximum elevation angle, and how well the assumption of horizontal 
homogeneity holds within the analyzed volume.  Stratiform precipitation, which is more 
uniform in the horizontal, usually yields higher quality VVP and VAD output than 
convective precipitation. In practice, these products are usually derived for a subset of the 
scanned volume less than 50 km range from the radar. 

Contoured frequency by altitude diagrams (CFADs, Yuter and Houze 1995) of Z 

Categories of precipitation for the profiles and CFADs include the combinations 

The quality of the VVP (Waldteufel and Corbin, 1979; modified by Koscielny 

19 January 2004 

 

9 

7. Time-integrated Products 
 
 
which can be combined by users into a variety of customizable time scales such as 5-day, 
calendar months, 30-day periods, seasonal, etc. The two recommended time scales are: 
 

The working group recommends the use of only two accumulation time periods 

•  24 hours (0000 UTC-2359 UTC)  
•  Storm duration 

Storm duration may be difficult to define precisely. We suggest guidelines be 

 
 
developed for GPM GV on this topic. Based on working group discussions and the 
current TRMM products the time-integrated products in Table 4 are suggested. 
 
Table 4. Recommended time-integrated products for both 24 hour and storm duration 
time periods. See discussion in Section 6 on precipitation categories. By definition all 
products contain information on the uncertainty of their constituent variables. 
Name 
Rainfall accumulation maps in units of mm height per m2 area 
Snowfall accumulation maps in units of equivalent liquid mm height per m2 area 
Accumulated vertical profiles of Z by precipitation categories 
Accumulated CFADs of Z by precipitation categories 
 
 
interval between the radar scans used to compute the product. The time interval between 
low level scans should ideally be ≤ 5 min. For each time-integrated product, information 
on data gaps and the associated confidence level are also needed. For example, for days 
with no data gaps or if the radar was taken down during a non-precipitating period for 
scheduled maintanence, the confidence that the 24 hour total represents the actual 
accumulation would be high. In contrast, if the radar broke down in the middle of a 
storm, the confidence would be low. Note that confidence level in this context relates to 
temporal sampling gaps. Information on the total uncertainty of the time-integrated 
products based on their sampling interval and on the uncertainties in the instantaneous 
precipitation rate and Z products is also needed.  

Included with all time integrated products should be information on the time 

8. Regional Composite Products 
 
 
Regional composite products based on data from multiple coordinated radars 
(Michelson et al. 1999, Raschke et al. 2001, Koistinen and Michelson 2002) have the 
benefits large area, overlapping coverage, and often enhanced quality compared to single 
radar products. Since these data are likely to be processed and reprocessed for multiple 
applications, data arrays are needed for GPM GV applications.  Potential regional 
composite products may be able to be adapted from a subset of the 2D and 3D products 
discussed in Sections 5 and 6.  

19 January 2004 

 

10 

9. Ancillary Data 
 
 
The working group briefly discussed several other types of surface-based 
measurements that would add significant value to the weather radar observations. These 
are: 
 

•  Ceilometer cloud base heights 
•  Vertical profiles of water and ice content from cloud radars. 

 
 
Additionally, NWP outputs for the GV radar domain including the hourly 
thermodynamic profile above each site, 3D winds, and cloud and rain parameters would 
be very useful to have in a form that facilitates comparison with the radar products. It is 
recommended that the NWP outputs over the GV sites data be developed as a GV 
product and archived with the local radar site products. 

In the course of writing up this report, several issues arose which will need to be 

The successful validation of satellite-derived snow estimates requires progress on 

10. Some Remaining Challenges 
 
 
several challenges in snow measurement from the ground. Current methods for 
estimation of snow rate from observed radar reflectivity are widely considered to be 
unreliable.  A research focus on this problem is needed in order to characterize and 
potentially reduce uncertainties to acceptable levels for GPM applications. Another 
important challenge is the validation of light snow rates which is difficult with current 
instruments. Some new instruments including the DRI/NCAR hotplate and weighing 
gauges by Geonor and OTT need to be tested for GPM applications and their 
uncertainties characterized under a range of conditions.  
 
 
addressed at future meetings: 
 
 
Given differences in radar beam widths and maximum usable range, to what 
degree should Cartesian product grid resolutions and sizes be standardized among partner 
radars. 
 
 
observed radar parameters? Is it to be flagged at the local site before the data is sent on to 
the GV archive or should QC be performed on the archived data prior to product 
processing? It may be difficult to require a standardized QC methodology to be 
performed by operational radars.  
 
 
References 
 
Awaka, J., T. Iguchi, and K. Okamoto, 1998: Early results on rain type classification by 

Where is the responsibility for the removal of non-meteorological echo in the 

the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) precipitation radar. Proc. 

19 January 2004 

 

11 

URSI-F Symp. on Wave Propagation and Remote Sensing. Aveiro, Portugal, 143-
146. 

Browning, K.A. and R. Wexler (1968): The determination of kinematic properties of a 

wind field using Doppler radar. J. Appl. Meteor., 7, 105 - 113. 

Koistinen, J., and D. B. Michelson, 2002: BALTEX weather radar-based precipitation 

products and their accuracies. Boreal Env. Res., 7, 253-263. 

Koscielny, A.J., R.J. Doviak and R.Rabin (1982): Statistical considerations in the 

estimation of divergence from single Doppler radar and application to prestorm 
boundary layer observations. J. Appl. Meteorol., 21, 197 - 210. 

Lhermitte, R.M. and D.A. Atlas (1961): Precipitation motion by pulse Doppler radar. 

Proc. 9th Weather Radar Conf. Boston, Amer. Meteor. Soc., Boston, 218 - 223. 
Michelson, D. B., T. Anderson, C. G. Collier, Z. Dziewit, J. Koistinen, S. Overgaard, J. 
Riedl, and V. Zhukov, 1999: The international radar network for the Baltic Sea 
Experiment. Preprints, 29th Radar Meteorology Conference, 12-16 July 1999, 
Montreal, Canada, AMS, Boston, 317-320.  

Raschke E., J. Meywerk, K. Warrach, U. Andrae, S. Bergström, F. Beyrich, F. Bosveld, 
K. Bumke, C. Fortelius, L. P. Graham, S. –E. Gryning, S. Halldin, L . Hasse, M. 
Heikinheimo, H. –J., Isemer, D. Jacob, I. Jauja, K. –G. Karlsson, S. Keevallik, J. 
Koistinen, A. van Lammeren, U. Laas, J. Launiainen, A. Lehmann, B. Liljebladh, 
M. Lobmeyer, W. Matthäus, T. Mengelkamp, D. B. Michelson, J. Napiorkowski, 
A. Omstedt, J. Piechura, B. Rockel, F. Rubel, E. Ruprecht, A. –S. Smedman, and 
A. Stigebrandt, 2001: The Baltic Sea Experiment (BALTEX): A European 
contribution to the investigation of the energy and water cycle over a large 
drainage basin. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 82, 2389-2413. 

Steiner, M., R. A. Houze, Jr., and S. E. Yuter, 1995:  Climatological characterization of 
three-dimensional storm structure from operational radar and rain gauge data.  J. 
Appl. Meteor., 34, 1978-2007. 

Trapp, R. J., and C. A. Doswell III, 2000: Radar data objective analysis. J. Atmos. Ocean. 

Waldteufel, P. and H. Corbin (1979): On the analysis of single Doppler radar data. J. 

Tech., 17, 105-120. 

Appl. Meteor., 18, 532 - 542. 

Yuter S. E., and R. A. Houze, Jr., 1995:  Three-dimensional kinematic and microphysical 

evolution of Florida cumulonimbus, Part II: Frequency distributions of vertical 
velocity, reflectivity, and differential reflectivity. Mon. Wea. Rev., 123, 1941-
1963. 

Yuter, S. E., and R. A. Houze, Jr., 1997:  Measurements of raindrop size distributions 

over the Pacific warm pool and implications for Z-R relations. J. Appl. Meteor., 
36, 847-867. 

Yuter, S., R. Houze, V. Chandrasekar, E. Foufoula-Georgiou, M. Hagen, R. Johnson, D. 
Kingsmill, R. Lawrence, F. Marks, S. Rutledge, and J. Weinman, 2002: GPM Draft 
Science Implementation Plan Ground Validation Chapter. accessible at: 
www.arxiv.org, arXiv:physics/0211095, 22 pp. 

 

