Bidirectional propagation of cold atoms in a “stadium” shaped 

magnetic guide 

Saijun Wu, Wilbert Rooijakkers*, Pierre Striehl, Mara Prentiss 

Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, 02138 
Division of Engineering and Applied Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, 02138 

PACS: 32.80.Pj, 03.75.Be, 39.20.+q 

Abstract: 

We demonstrate the bi-directional propagation of more than 107 atoms (87Rb) around a 

“stadium” shaped magnetic ring that encloses an area of 10.9 cm2, with a flux density 

exceeding 1011 atoms sec-1 cm-2.  Atoms are loaded into the guide from a 2D+ MOT at 

one side of the “stadium”. An optical standing wave pulse is applied to increase the 

propagation velocity of atoms along the waveguide. The atom sample fills the entire ring 

in 200 ms when counterpropagating atom sections of the original atom cloud recombine 

at their initial positions after a full revolution. We discuss a possible extension of this 

result to a guided atom ring interferometer. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

*) Present address: University of Melbourne, School of Physics, Victoria 3010, 

AUSTRALIA

Introduction 

There is great interest in exploiting atom waveguides to improve precision measurements. 

In particular, fully reciprocal guided wave interferometers with large enclosed areas may 

be  able  to  significantly  increase  both  the  accuracy  and  the  sensitivity  of  atom  based 

rotation  sensors.  Rotation  sensing  requires  that  two  halves  of  the  initial  wavepacket 

propagate around a path that encloses an area. If the interferometer is rotating, then the 

Sagnac  effect  produces  opposite  phase  shifts  in  the  two  wavepackets,  where  the  phase 

shifts  are  proportional  to  both  the  rotation  rate  and  the  area  enclosed  by  the  paths 

traversed  by  the  wavepackets.    Measurements  of  the  phase  difference  between  the  two 

wavepackets can then be used to determine rotation, where the sensitivity is proportional 

to the enclosed area.   

In  demonstrated  atom  interferometers,  the  area  A  enclosed  by  the  two  arms  is  typically 

~10 mm2 (A = 22 mm2 in [1]), limited by the splitting  angle of the atomic beam splitter. 

In contrast, in a guided wave interferometer the wave paths may be separated much more. 

Guided  wave  interferometers  that  permit  the  separated  wavepackets  to  traverse  the 

reciprocal  path  should  provide  good  common  rejection  of  phase  shifts  associated  with 

time independent energy variations along the path of the interferometer. Time dependent 

perturbations will also be cancelled if the time scale for the changes in the perturbation is 

longer than the time required for the wavepacket to traverse the interferometer, or when 

they occur in a region of negligible atom density.  

 

 

It has already  been shown that guided atoms can circulate around a closed path with an 

effective  area  as  large  as  4400  mm2

 [2].  However,  in  that  experiment  the  atom  sample 

could  not  easily  be  split  into  two  counterpropagating  wave  packets  whose  phase 

difference could be used to determine rotation. Indeed, a major experimental challenge in 

proposals  for  guided  matter  wave  interferometers  is  the  realization  of  coherent 

beamsplitters  [3-6].  As  was  suggested  in  [7,  8],  optical  standing  waves  may  be  used 

instead of the more cumbersome method of using a bifurcation in the guiding potential.  

Matter  wave 

interferometers  using  diffraction  from  optical  standing  waves  as 

beamsplitter  have  proved  to  be  efficient  and  reliable  in  free  space  [9-11].  Such  beam 

splitters may also coherently split the atom wavepackets confined by waveguides. If the 

momentum  impacted  by  the  standing  wave  is  along  the  propagating  direction  of  the 

waveguide, the resulting atom sample can be used in guided atom interferometers.  

 

It has been shown theoretically that single mode guided atoms can be split with an optical 

standing wave and interfere on a ring [7]. In that article, the authors carefully examined 

the  influence  of  the  atom-atom  collisions,  and  pointed  out  that  a  reliable  interference 

signal  can  be  prepared  from  either  fermions  or  bosons.  For  bosons  the  phase  shift  is 

complicated  by  the  mean  field  interaction  in  the  limit  of  large  density.  However,  the 

authors of [7]  show that in the Tonks gas regime the phase shift still faithfully represents 

rotation  as  a  consequence  of  boson- fermion  mapping  theory.  Similar  interference  is 

expected for a dilute atom sample that populates multi modes of the ring waveguide [12].  

These  proposals  require  an  atom  waveguide  loop  that  can  be  combined  with  standing 

wave beamsplitters. 

In this paper, we demonstrate a novel type of magnetic waveguide ring that is compatible 

with the standing wave beamsplitter. The magnetic waveguide ring is composed of two 

half  circles  which  are  connected  with  two  straight  parts,  thus  composing  a  “stadium” 

shape.  (Fig.1).  The  atoms  are  loaded  into  the  waveguide  from  a  2D+  MOT  operated  at 

one  straight  part  of  the  “stadium”,  with  the  same  technique  described  in  [13].  After  the 

transfer, an optical standing wave is applied to increase the velocity of atoms along the 

direction of waveguide. The atoms propagate in opposite directions around the ring and 

recombine  at  the  original  location.  We  expect  a  similar  device  can  be  used  for  guided 

atom interferometry. 

 

Experiments with a magnetic “stadium” 

Our magnetic waveguide ring is composed of 2D magnetic trap in a stadium shaped loop. 

The  2D  magnetic  trap  is  not  generated  by  current  carrying  wires  alone  to  avoid  a  large 

potential discontinuity at the point where the current enters and leaves the ring.  Instead 

we use the 4- foil magnetic structure [13] to generate the 2D magnetic trap (Fig.1.b), and 

construct  the  ring  simply  by  connecting  the  4-foil  magnetic  structure  into  a  loop. 

Specifically, four stadium shaped rings with sorted size, each individually wound with 42 

turns of  400 mm -diameter Kapton ® wire are assembled to form a closed loop (Fig.1). 

The foils  are 0.5  mm thick and spaced from each other by 3 mm. The foils are made of 

magnetizable  material  to  create  enough  magnetic  gradient  for  guiding  at  a  distance  ~  1 

mm from the surface [13,14]. Mu metal (80%Ni, 15.5% Fe, 4.5% Mo) is chosen since it 

can  easily  be  poled  by  current  carrying  wires,  and  has  negligable  remnant  magnetism 

when the current in the wires is switched off. A linear waveguide based on this type of 4-

foil  magnetic  structure  has  been  discussed  in  [13],  where  we  demonstrated  that  4-foil 

ferromagnetic  structures  can  create  2D  magnetic  traps  with  field  gradient  tunable  from 

zero up to 1000 G/cm. Folding a linear ferromagnetic waveguide to the shape of a ring 

opens  a  possibility  to  study  the  properties  of  atoms  stored  in  a  ring  with  very  tight 

confinement. 

 

 

Figure 2 shows the calculated magnetic field strength |B| for the structure. The boundary 

conditions  for  the  simulation  were  measured  directly  with  a  Gauss- meter  while  the 

currents were set to be the same as in atomic experiment, and the calculation is confirmed 

by comparing the location of magnetic minimum in measurement and simulation. When 

the current is 800 mA through the smallest two coils and 1.68 A through the largest two 

coils  the  B  fields  from  the  four  mu- metal  foils  cancel  approximately  2.5  mm  above the 

foils (2.2 mm above the mirror surface) near the top of 2nd (2nd largest) foil, with d|B|/dr = 

100 G/cm at the straight parts. Alternatively, one may apply an external B field to cancel 

the B field generated by the smallest two foils, thus forming a  2D magnetic trap in only 

one  straight  section  of  the  stadium.  Experimentally  we  find  the  second  configuration  is 

more favorable for the operation of a 2D+ MOT. In situ loading of cold atoms from the 

MOT to the first configuration is realized by slowly ramping down the external B field 

while increasing the currents for the four foils in proper ratio. 

It’s important to point out that, the resulting “stadium” shaped magnetic field minimum is 

not  a  field  zero  loop.  In  fact  the  calculation  in  Fig.2  indicates  only  in  four  points    (the 

center of the straight sections and in the center of the curved sections) does the magnetic 

field cancel exactly, everywhere else we find a small magnetic field along the loop. Also, 

the  waveguide  becomes  “looser”  for  atoms  entering  the  curved  section  (85  G/cm  at  the 

center  of  the  curved  parts  compared  to  100  G/cm  at  the  center  of  the  straight  parts).  In 

addition,  the  minimum  is  slightly  elevated  in  the  curved  parts  (Fig.2),  and  hence  the 

atoms  have  to  climb  a  gravitational  potential  while  entering  the  curved  parts.  In  the 

experiment  we  observe  that  atoms  propagating  towards  the  curved  parts  are  partially 

scattered back from  both sides (Fig. 3).   This variation in potential would be absent in a 

waveguide with circular symmetry. 

 

In  the  first  stage  of  the  experiment,  a  2D+  MOT  is  created  at  one  side  of  the  stadium, 

where the 2D magnetic trap is generated by external magnetic field and the smallest two 

foils.  The  cooling  light  has  detuning  d  =  -14  MHz  to  the  red  of  the

F

ﬁ=
2

F

=
3'

 

hyperfine transition in 87Rb and repumping was provided by an additional laser locked on 

the  F=1  ->  F’=2  hyperfine  transition  of  the  D2  line.  The 

/1 e  beam  diameters  of 

2

transverse  and  longitudinal  laser  beam  are  2  cm  and  1.5  cm,  respectively.  The  laser 

intensities are 8 mW/cm2 for each longitudinal beam and 5 mW/cm2 for each transverse 

beam. During a period of 5 seconds 2· 107 atoms are accumulated from the background 

vapor (3 · 10-9 mbar), producing a cigar shaped sample of cold atoms that is 3 mm long 

and 0.5 mm wide. After that the currents for the four foils are ramped up, and the external 

B  field  is  ramped  down  to  zero  in  such  a  way  that  the  magnetic  minimum  remains  at 

about  the  same  position,  but  the  gradient  increases  from  5  G/cm  to  100  G/cm.  The 

compression is completed in 60 ms. During the first 30 ms the cooling light is kept on, 

but shifted from  d

 = -2.4 G

 to d = - 4.5  G

, and is then extinguished. A circularly polarized 

standing wave is pulsed for various durations after the cooling light is switched off. The 

evolution  of  the  atom  density  along  the  guide  is  examined  using  resonant  absorption 

imaging. 

 

+7 G

Fig. 3a) shows a sequence of the absorption images at one side of the stadium, after a d

 = 

  (blue  detuned)  standing  wave  with  saturation  parameter  s~5  is  pulsed  for  300 m s 

(defined as time zero in the following discussion). Combination of a 0.1 Gauss plug field 

and  the  circular  polarized  standing  wave  optically  pumps  the  atoms  to  the  weak  field 

seeking  states.  From  the  absorption  image  we  find  that  more  than  107  atoms  are 

transferred from 2D+MOT to the straight part of the magnetic waveguide, an efficiency of 

more  than  50%.  The  transverse  temperature  of  the  magnetically  trapped  atoms  is 

estimated from the extension of atom sample in waveguide to be about half the Doppler 

temperature.  The  mean  longitudinal  expansion speed of the sample is approximately 20 

cm/s. The atom sample expands symmetrically, moves beyond the imaging aperture in 30 

ms.  As  shown  in  Fig.  4,  a  “stadium”  shaped  atom  distribution  emerges  after  200ms  of 

propagation inside the waveguide. Since  the CCD chip is 10 mm by 7.1 mm, we realign 

the  absorption  image  system  to  observe  atoms  in  different  sections  of  the  11.2  cm  long 

loop  while  fixing  the  time  delay  at  200  ms.  The  images  taken  at  different  positions  are 

then used to re-construct the cloud over the full extension of the magnetic guide.  

 

Fig. 4 provides a static picture of atom distribution around the ring. To confirm that the 

atoms  actually  propagate  around,  we  use  an  on-resonant  light  to  “cut  away”  part  of  the 

atom sample, and observe the propagation of the “cut” via absorption images (Fig. 3b). 

At  t  =  100  ms  when  the  atom  sample  has  filled  over  3  quarters  of  the  stadium,  an  on-

resonant standing wave (1/e2 beam diameter: 0.8 cm) is pulsed for 5 ms so that the entire 

half  of  the  stadium  on  the side  where  the  atoms  were  originally  loaded  is  depleted. 

Absorption  images  were  then  taken  to  study  the  propagation  of  the  “cut”  in  time  and 

position.  The  left  column  of  Fig.  3b  shows  the  edge  of  the  atom  cloud  propagating 

clockwise  towards  the  straight  section  of  the  waveguide,  with  speed  approximately  25 

cm/s. At t’ = t  – 105 ms = 20 ms after the cutting operation a dilute trace blurs out the 

previously  well  defined  edges.  At  this  time  the  fastest  atoms  from  the  other  curved 

section of the guide have arrived and start populating the empty region. As time advances 

the other edge should start to appear moving counterclockwise. This is observed at t’=160 

ms (right column of Fig 3b). Again, the edge is not sharp because by this time the fastest 

atoms  that  had  originally  started  from  the  right  have  fulfilled  an  entire  revolution  and 

penetrated  through  the  atoms  from  the  left  to  blur  out  the  edges.  Nevertheless,  the 

sequence of images shows clearly how the edge from the left moves upwards through the 

curved section of the guide indicating that the atoms really perform an entire revolution. 

Notice  that  the  atoms  keep  revolving  in  the  closed  waveguide,  only  limited  by  the 

lifetime of trapped atoms in vacuum, which presently is around 1 second.    

 

Extension to a guided atom ring interferometer 

Although  the  current  experiment  has  demonstrated  the  bidirectional  propagation  of 

guided  atoms  around  a  loop,  various  experimental  limitations  have  so  far  prevented  us 

from exploring the coherence properties in the transport  of atoms. In this section we will 

discuss a possible extension of our experiment towards a guided atom ring interferometer. 

 

 

The proposed guided matter wave ring interferometer works in pulsed mode, similarly to 

experiment described above. The atoms are initially localized at one side of the circularly 

symmetric  waveguide  ring,  tightly  confined,  and  longitudinally  subject  to  optical 

standing waves which coherently split the guided matter wave into velocity class v+nvr 

and v–nvr [15], where n is an integer,  vr =

 is the recoil velocity which is 6 mm/s in the 

kh
m

case  of  rubidium.  The  atoms  are  then  allowed  to  propagate  along  the  waveguide.  The 

loop structure of the ring imposes a periodic boundary condition and the atom amplitudes 

of the two  velocity classes recombine at the time when atoms with velocity nvr traverse 

the  entire  ring.  Similar  to  the  Talbot-Lau  type  interferometer  [11,  16],  the  resulting 

interference  patterns  from  atoms  with  different  initial  velocity  v  add  up  constructively. 

Depending  on  the  initial  velocity  spread  of  the  atom  sample,  the  fringe  pattern  may 

extend over the entire ring. The fringe pattern near the original location of atom sample 

takes  advantage  of  reciprocal  symmetric  evolution  and  is  robust  against  static  potential 

variations along the guide. The position information of the resulting interference fringe is 

related  to  non-reciprocal  perturbations  such  as  rotation,  and  can  be  read  out  in  various 

ways with light fields [11, 12], such as phase recovery using heterodyne detection of back 

scattered probe light. 

The proposed ring interferometer can be used as a gyroscope operating in pulsed mode. 

A  single  round  operation  is  composed  of  three  steps:  loading  and  splitting  of  atoms, 

propagation around the ring, and detection. The period of operation is limited by T =

S
rnv

, 

where S is the circumference of the ring. The sensitivity of the gyroscope to rotation is 

given by 

Wd ~df

, where  df  is the resolution of the optical phase of backscattered 

h
mA4

probe  light  out  of  2p ,  A  is  the  area  covered  by  the  ring.  Different  from  a  gyroscope 

working  in  continuous  mode,  the  bandwidth  of  a  gyroscope  working  in  pulsed  mode  is 

limited by the operation period T, which requires that the rotation rate of the system does 

not  exceed  the  “free  rotation  rate” W

f  ~   2p

  for  reliable  readout.  This  can  be 

h
mA4

achieved  by  mounting  the  whole  system  on  a  platform  that  is  actively  stabilized  via  an 

optical  gyroscope,  which  keeps  the  angular  velocity  of  the  system  smaller  than  W

f and 

gives a rotation readout that is periodically corrected by the atomic gyroscope operation.  

 

The combined gyroscope system will possess the large bandwidth of an optical gyro and 

the high sensitivity of an atomic gyroscope. Similar to the analysis in [17, 18], in the shot 

noise limit, the optical phase of a back scattered probe  light from a matter wave grating 

composed  of  N  non-degenerate  atoms  can  be  resolved  to  the  order  of  df ~

. As an 

1

N

example, let us consider a circular waveguide ring with radius R=1 cm.  Take  df =10-3 in 

shot  noise  limit  if  N=106  atoms  contribute  to  coherent  backscattering.  Consider  the 

splitting  order  n=11,  we  have:  T=  0.5  second, 

Wd = 8  ·

 10-6

,  W

E

f  =  0.05 E

, where 

 is the rotation rate of the earth. Compared with a free space version, the guided atom 

E

gyro system proposed here has a  larger sensing area while still being relatively compact. 

The sensitivity and accuracy of the system can be boosted further by combining several 

atomic gyros on the same rigid platform sharing the same optical  setup,  where the rings 

W
W
W
may be loaded sequentially permitted nearly constant rotation measurements even if each 

individual ring is operated in a pulsed mode. 

In  the  proposed  guided  atom  ring  interferometer,  small  variation  of  guiding  potential 

along  the  waveguide  is  tolerable  due  to  the  reciprocal  symmetry.  Potential  variation 

comparable  or  even  larger  than  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  guided  atoms  would  certainly 

degrade the interference. For the “stadium” shaped magnetic assembly demonstrated here, 

the variation of the guiding potential can in principle be reduced to arbitrarily small level 

by reducing the separation of the 4-foils, and carefully adjusting the separation of 4-foils 

along  the  curved  parts.  The  variation  of  guiding  potential  along  a  circular  magnetic 

waveguide  [19,  20]  should  be  much  smaller,  a  result  that  has  been  confirmed  by 

preliminary measurements on such structures. 

We emphasize that the single mode guiding is not necessary for the atomic interferometer 

proposed  here.  A  tight  waveguide  that  separates  the  guided  motion  of  atoms  from  the 

transverse motion is compatible enough with the principle of the interferometer discussed 

above.  Actually,  compared  to  a  guided  atom  interferometer  configuratio n  with  non-

reciprocal paths [3-6], we expect the interferometer proposed here to be more tolerant to 

coupling  of  the  guided  motion  with  the  transverse  motion.  The  tolerance  to  multi- mode 

operation  allows  the  proposed  atom  interferometer  to  work  with  dilute  instead  of 

quantum degenerate atom gases, thus reducing the complications from collisional phase 

shifts [7]. 

 

 

 

To  conclude,  we  have  demonstrated  bidirectional  propagation  of  107  cold  atoms  in  a 

novel  magnetic  waveguide  ring.  We  propose  a  guided  atom  ring  interferometer,  which 

combined with an optical gyro may make a precise and compact rotation sensing system.  

 

Acknowledgement 

The authors are indebted for valuable suggestions by Mukund Vengalattore on the 

optimization of trap loading, and valuable discussions with Yanhong Xiao, Scott Sanders, 

and Richard Conroy. WR acknowledges support from the Commonwealth of Australia 

DEST Contract CG02-0135. This work is supported by U.S. Department of the Army, 

Agreement Number DAAD19-03-1-0106. 

 
 
[1] Precision Rotation Measurements with an Atom Interferometer Gyroscope 
T. L. Gustavson, P. Bouyer,* and M. A. Kasevich Physical Review Letters 78 (11): 2046 
Mar 17 1997 
 
[2] Storage ring for neutral atoms, Sauer JA, Barrett MD, Chapman MS 
PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS 87 (27): Art. No. 270401 DEC 31 2001 
 
[3] Multimode interferometer for guided matter waves, 
Andersson E, Calarco T, Folman R, Andersson M, Hessmo B, Schmiedmayer J 
PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS  88 (10): Art. No. 100401 MAR 11 2002 
 
[4] Trapped-atom interferometer in a magnetic microtrap 
Hansel W, Reichel J, Hommelhoff P, Hänsch TW, PHYSICAL REVIEW A  
64 (6): Art. No. 063607 DEC 2001 
 
[5] Theory of a one-dimensional double-X-junction atom interferometer 
Girardeau MD, Das KK, Wright EM 
PHYSICAL REVIEW A 66 (2): Art. No. 023604 AUG 2002 
 
[6] Two-wire waveguide and interferometer for cold atoms 
Hinds EA, Vale CJ, Boshier MG PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS  
86 (8): 1462-1465 FEB 19 2001 
 

[7] Interference of a thermal Tonks gas on a ring 
Das KK, Girardeau MD, Wright EM, PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS  89 (17): Art. No. 
170404 OCT 21 2002 
 
[8] M. Prentiss, unpublished. 
 
[9] ATOM WAVE INTERFEROMETRY WITH DIFFRACTION GRATINGS OF 
LIGHT, RASEL EM, OBERTHALER MK, BATELAAN H, SCHMIEDMAYER J, 
ZEILINGER A PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS 75 (14): 2633-2637 OCT 2 1995 
 
[10] Contrast interferometry using Bose-Einstein condensates to measure h/m and alpha 
Gupta S, Dieckmann K, Hadzibabic Z, Pritchard DE, PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS  
89 (14): Art. No. 140401 SEP 30 2002 
 
[11] Periodic structures generated in a cloud of cold atoms 
D. V. Strekalov, Andrey Turlapov, A. Kumarakrishnan, and Tycho Sleator 
PHYSICAL REVIEW A 66, 023601 ~2002 
 
[12] A detailed investigation will be given in a future publication, generally, interference 
of atoms in a ring waveguide does not alter from single mode to multimode, as long as 
the waveguide is tight enough to prevent coupling between the guided and transverse 
motion.  
 
[13] Ferromagnetic atom guide with in situ loading 
Vengalattore M, Rooijakkers W, Prentiss M, PHYSICAL REVIEW A  
66 (5): Art. No. 053403 NOV 2002 
 
[14] Mapping a cloud of ultracold atoms onto a miniature storage ring 
Rooijakkers W, preprint physics/0306188 (2003) 
 
[15] The splitting order n is preferred to be large so that influence from phase broadening 
due to variation of the guiding potential can be ignored. To achieve this one may either 
use a Bragg pulse or a blazed grating pulse with optical standing waves. See, e.g.,  
P.Meystre, E.Schumacher, E.M.Writht. Ann.Phys. (Leipzig), 48:141, 1991; Johnson KS, 
Chu AP, Berggren KK, Prentiss M, OPTICS COMMUNICATIONS, 126 (4-6): 326-338 
MAY 15 1996 
 
[16] P.R. Berman et al, Atom Interferometers, Academic Press, Dec, 1996 
 
[17] Noise limits in matter wave interferometry using degenerate quantum gases 
Search C, Meystre P, PHYSICAL REVIEW A67, 061601(R) (2003). 
 
[18] Quantum noise limits to matter wave interferometry 
Scully M, Dowling J, PHYSICAL REVIEW A48, 3186-3190 (1993) 
 

[19] A curved 2D+ MOT were successfully demonstrated at the curved part of the 
“stadium” magnetic assembly here. We expect the loading of atoms to a circular 
waveguide would have similar behavior. 
 
[20] In the tight waveguide limit, momentum exchanged between light field and the 
guided atom is the projection of the photon momentum along the guiding direction, thus 
in a circular waveguide the misalignment between the light field and a curved waveguide 
end up in a broadening of the momentum exchange.  
 
 

 

 
Figure 1 (Color Online): Top: Photograph of the stadium-assembly (without mirror). 
Kapton ® wires are wrapped around each foil and attached to the mu-metal with Torr 
Seal glue ®. Bottom: top view and side view of the experimental setup. Same laser beam 
is used for standing wave (SW) operation (d = +7G ) and as a cutting beam (CB, on-
resonance). 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Figure 2 (Color Online):  Left: Top view of the isopotential surface of calculated 
magnetic field strength |B|=2 Gauss for the stadium assembly.  Field strength is also 
shown in y=0 and x=0 planes, coinciding with the long and the short axis of the stadium 
respectively. Right: Results of a numerical minimum search routine along the 
circumference s of the guide (see text). Right Up: distance from mu-metal surface, solid 
line for the magnetic minimum, dashed line for the potential minimum including gravity, 
assuming MF=2 atoms. Right Bottom: field strength in the magnetic minimum along the 
guide. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 3: a) Evolution of the atom cloud in the straight part of the stadium after loading at 
t = 0 ms. Two groups of atoms which make 30% of total atom number come back at 
around t=160 ms, due to back-scattering from the curved parts.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Top: Sequence of absorption images of trapped atoms along the circumference 
of the stadium after 200 ms of free evolution.  Observation angle (~18o), magnification 
(1:1) and grayscale of each image may vary slightly. Mirror image is also visible. Bottom: 
Calculated isopotential surface of |B|=2 Gauss, the observation angle is set to be 18o. The 
initial distribution and propagation directions of atom sample are also indicated.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Absorption images near the right curve of the stadium. “BC” = “Before Cut”, 
taken 100 ms after SW operation. The images taken at t’ = t – 105 ms (0 ms to 30 ms 
after cut) show the edge of the cloud propagating “down-left” (clockwise). The images 
from t’= 150 ms to 190 ms show the edge propagating “right-up” (counterclockwise). 
This indicates bidirectional propagation around the entire ring. White arrows were added 
to clarify the edge of the atom cloud. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

