What happened to modern physics? 
Paul Shabajee and Keith Postlethwaite 
20th Century physics appears to tell us that our world is relativistic, quantum 
mechanical and chaotic. Why do we teach children that it is not? 
 
[Original Paper: Shabajee, P. and Postlethwaite, K. (2000) What happened to modern physics?, School 
Science Review, 81(297), p51-56.] 

Abstract 

Relativity, Quantum Mechanics and Chaos theory are three of the most significant 
scientific advances of the 20th Century - each fundamentally changing our 
understanding of the physical universe. The authors ask why the UK National 
Curriculum in science almost entirely ignores them. Children and young people 
regularly come into contact with the language, concepts and implications of these 
theories through the media and through new technologies, and they are the basis of 
many contemporary scientific and technological developments. There is surely, 
therefore, an urgent need to include the concepts of '20th Century physics' within the 
curriculum. 

The Problem 

One of the major theories in the physical sciences in the 20th Century suggests that the 
physical world is relativistic, in the sense that measurements of time, space and mass 
depend on the relative motion of the object and the observer.  This theory challenges 
our expectations which are derived from experiences of everyday objects which 
normally move at speeds much below the speed of light.  However, it still leaves us 
with a deterministic view of the physical universe in which variables are related in 
such a way that a change of one variable produces a definite and predictable change in 
another dependent variable.   
 
Another 20th Century theory suggests that the world is quantum mechanical.  This 
theory introduces many counter-intuitive ideas to predict the behavior of the physical 
world.  For example, the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle which confronts us with 
the notion that some properties of particles (e.g. time and energy, or momentum and 
position) are linked in ways that make it impossible to know both with perfect 
precision at the same time. In addition to mapping these counter-intuitive behaviours 
of the small scale universe, quantum theory undermines the concept of determinism 
through the central role which it gives to probability.  For example, the square of the 
amplitude of a particle’s wave function at a given point is the probability of that 
particle being at that point.  What is particularly important here is that probability is 
not seen to be the consequence of our lack of knowledge about the system, not 
something we could hope to write out of the model by more complex calculations with 
more complete data, rather it is fundamental to the system.  
 
The third example of a massive change of view in modern physics is not as well 
established as relativity or quantum theory.  Nevertheless it has overturned the way in 
which we might seek to model complex behaviors in the physical world, in part by 
asserting that tiny differences in initial conditions can produce massive differences in 
outcome, even in systems described by fairly simple and entirely deterministic 

Page 1 of 8 

equations.  This is the theory of chaos (Gleick 1988). Chaos theory provides insights 
into turbulent fluid flow, the behaviour of weather patterns, the behaviour of traffic, 
the fluctuations of animal populations, and the behaviour of the heart.  
 
It follows that at a fundamental level, Newtonian mechanics, Cartesian geometry and 
linear causality fail to describe this world adequately even though they still serve us 
well as  working models for many everyday experiences.  However, the current UK 
National Curriculum in Science 5-16 contains no reference to the physical theories 
which do offer at least some appropriate descriptions: relativity, quantum mechanics, 
statistical processes and chaos theory.  Furthermore, in a recent edition of this journal 
covering the current National Curriculum Review, although Campbell (1998) and 
Millar et al (1998) propose significant, interesting and largely welcome changes to the 
pedagogical approach to science education, there was still no mention of introducing 
‘modern’ physical theories into the curriculum.   
 
At higher levels, the situation is somewhat different in that some aspects of quantum 
behavior get attention in the AS and A2 subject criteria  (QCA 1999), some A2 
courses contain aspects of modern cosmology, and there are some A2 options which 
address, for example, special relativity (eg the AQA option, ‘Turning Points in 
Physics’ (http://www.aeb.org.uk/)).  However, even at A-level, 20th Century physics 
gets only limited attention and, for example, chaos theory is still largely overlooked.  
Even the AQA AS syllabus ‘Science for Public Understanding’ (which might be 
expected to pick up issues which are prominent in the general media’s reporting of 
science) fails to connect significantly with many of the revolutionary aspects of 20th 
century physics.  This situation at A-level needs (and will undoubtedly get) further 
attention.  However, it is the lack of 20th Century physics in the pre-16 curriculum that 
is our main concern. 

Why is this a problem? 

The  new  National  Curriculum  draws  attention  to  a  range  of  purposes  for  science 
education  (e.g.  understanding  the  use  of  experimental  evidence)  which  can  perfectly 
well be achieved through study of pre-20th century science.  However, it also argues 
that:  
 

"Science stimulates and excites pupils' curiosity about phenomena and events in the 
world around them. It also satisfies this curiosity with knowledge. Because science 
links direct practical experience with ideas, it can engage learners at many levels. 
Scientific method is about developing and evaluating explanations through 
experimental evidence and modelling. This is a spur to critical and creative thought. 
Through science, pupils understand how major scientific ideas contribute to 
technological change - impacting on industry, business and medicine and improving 
quality of life. Pupils recognise the cultural significance of science and trace its 
worldwide development. They learn to question and discuss science-based issues that 
may affect their own lives, the direction of society and the future of the world." 
 

We feel that these aspects of the revised curriculum are significantly undermined by 
the  absence  of  attention  to  20th  Century  physics.    We  argue  that  there  are  many 
reasons  why  this  situation  is  problematic;  here  we  briefly  discuss  four  of  the  most 
fundamental. 

Page 2 of 8 

 
1) Omission of 20th Century physics from the pre-16 curriculum has a negative 
impact on subsequent learning:  
There is a great deal of research evidence that once children assimilate a mistaken or 
limited  understanding  of  their  world  into  their  cognitive  framework,  it  is  difficult  to 
change  it    (Driver  1985,  1994  ).      Hence,  for  example,  by  providing  children  with  a 
‘cognitive framework’ derived from Newtonian mechanics and presenting this both as 
unproblematic  and  all-powerful  (when  we  know  that  although  it  is  an  excellent 
working  model  for  predicting  ‘normal’  experiences,  it  is  nevertheless  fundamentally 
conceptually incorrect), we are taking steps designed to make any subsequent learning 
of 20th Century relativistic ideas extremely difficult.   
 
Another important instance is found in the examples used in lessons, which imply that 
the world works in an “A leads to B, which leads to C” fashion, most often described 
by linear equations. Chaos theory indicates the contrary. Indeed only in very special 
and controlled circumstances, is simple linear causality the case in the physical world.  
 
A  cognitive  model  based  on  these  elements  of    Newtonian  mechanics  and  simple 
linear causality will not prepare pupils to embrace modern physics. Little wonder then, 
that  if  ‘modern  physics’  is  encountered  in  a  later  stage  of  education  it  is  viewed  as 
obscure and impenetrable.   Stannard (1999) argues this case strongly: 

“Our first introduction to the mind-blowing world of modern physics should be when 
we  are  young,  when  our  minds  are  still  open  and  flexible.    As  we  become  older  we 
become  set  in  our  thinking,  our  view  of  the  world  fossilizes;  we  become  resistant  to 
new modes of thought” 

 
2) It reduces the likelihood that the school curriculum will excite pupils:  
In the context of a search for  ways in which science education can foster a sense of 
wonder, enthusiasm and interest in science it seems to us to be a missed opportunity of 
tragic  proportions  to  deny  pupils  access  to  those  ideas  in  physics  which  are 
overflowing  with  intrigue,  mystery,  beauty  and  bizarre  complexity.  Surely  carefully 
guided  access  to  such  ideas  could  stimulate  a  lifelong  excitement  about  science. 
Stannard (1999) again argues,  
 

“It (i.e. relativity) is absolutely wonderful, amazing science.... But I was angry that no 
one  had  told  me  about  it  before  (undergraduate  level).    It  seemed  a  scandal  that 
Einstein’s  theories  had  been  around  for  so  long  but  were  not  part  of  everyday 
culture.” 

 
Our  general  point  here  is  also  made  with  regard  to  ‘A’  level  students  by  Ogborn 
(1998) when he says “ It cannot be right that much of what appears in popular science 
books and television programmes is at best marginal in 16-19 courses”.   
 
3) It reduces the perceived relevance of school physics:  
Science in general, and 20th Century physics in particular, are important as elements 
in the culture to which education seeks to give pupils access.  We have a duty to help 
pupils value science for its cultural importance. The present curriculum denies us the 
opportunities to explore the cultural relevance of modern physics.  
 

Page 3 of 8 

Relevance  can  also  be  seen  in  terms  of  the  links  between  science  and  technology. 
Certainly  it  can  be  argued  that  much  theoretical  physics  does  not  have  direct 
technological application and that the people who work within it are not driven by an 
interest in technology.  However, key aspects of 20th Century physics do relate to the 
technological innovations of our century.  We argue that it is this relationship which is 
likely, initially, to help pupils recognise the relevance of science.   
  
As  we  move  ‘Beyond  2000’,  the  technologies  of  TV,  CD  ROM  and  the  Internet 
regularly expose children to talk of galaxies, black holes, alternative universes, hyper-
space  and  theories  of  time  travel  (see,  for  example,  the  1999  Royal  Institution 
Lectures,  details  on  the  BBC  website  -  see  further  reading).    Children  use  computer 
systems  whose  semiconductor-  based  processors  and  CD-ROM  lasers,  harness 
quantum mechanical effects.  Newer technologies are reported on popular science TV 
programmes  using  terms  like  ‘super  conductors’,  ‘positron  emission  tomography 
scanners’,  ‘quantum  computers  and  cryptography’  and  ‘relativity’,  the  last,  for 
example in relation to ‘atomic clocks’ in ‘global positioning system satellites’.   There 
is a startling contrast between the physics that is relevant to these technologies and the 
physics that children are taught in schools, which deals predominantly with batteries 
and  bulbs,  trolleys  on  ramps,  and  weightless  strings  and  frictionless  pulleys.    We 
argue  that  it  is  important  that  the  science  that  relates  to  the  discovery  and 
understanding  of  20th  Century  technologies  should  described,  discussed  and  debated 
with pupils.   
 
Some  seek  to  weaken  this  argument  by  suggesting  that  20th  Century  technologies 
might have been developed without  input from physicists working in ‘pure science’.  
However,  in  the  majority  of  cases  they  were  not:  for  example  transistors  were 
invented by people who “were versed in and contributed to the theory of solids”, and 
computer  circuits  were  designed  by  people  “dealing  with  the  counting  of  nuclear 
particles” (Hey & Walters, 1987 p vi).   
 
These  three  issues  may  make  school  physics  less  engaging,  and  the  prospect  of 
moving  on  to  radically  different,  and  as  yet  unmentioned  ‘modern’  ideas,  quite 
daunting.    In  both  these  ways  the  present  curriculum  might  contribute  to  the 
difficulties which physics courses in higher education face in recruiting students.  Our 
final  reason  for  questioning  the  omission  of  20th  century  physics  is  of  a  somewhat 
different character: 
 
4) It limits our pedagogical imagination: 
If you spend an evening at home with many primary school age children you are likely 
to see that concepts of hyper-space and time travel, alternative/multiple realities and 
the  implications  of  chaos  theory  are  well  with  in  their  grasp,  as  they  see,  talk  about 
and explore TV programmes, and computer games.  However, the relative ‘safety’ of 
the National Curriculum does little to encourage teachers to explore ways to deepen 
pupils’  understanding  of  these  and  other  elements  of  modern  physics.    The  present 
authors  certainly  do  not  claim  to  have  the  answers  to  how  this  might  best  be  done, 
though it is clear from authors such as Feynman that answers can be found (Feynman 
1988).   
 

Page 4 of 8 

Feynman diagrams express the complex physics of Quantum Electrodynamics through 
'visual' models which are simple to understand and conceptually accurate, and do not 
have to be unlearned in order for the learner to add the more 'difficult' mathematical 
models to her or his understanding at a later stage.  Visual models like these (which 
may be particularly suited to animated presentation via ICT) may be one way to get 
the ideas across.  Krauss (1998) suggests a different route: he argues that, with care, it 
may be productive to use science fiction to teach physics. This is an approach taken by 
Stannard (1991) who has written about relativity for 11 year olds. 
 
We are excited by a third approach. The ‘space’ children inhabit is no longer limited 
by their personal physical experience or their physical human scale. It is through the 
extension  of  their  nervous  systems  by  technology  that  they  experience  ‘very  small’, 
‘very large and indeed ‘entirely fictitious’ realities on a daily basis. In this approach, 
computer  graphics  technology  can  again  have  a  key  role,  enabling  pupils  (and 
teachers)  to  begin  to  ‘visualize’  these  realities.    The  21st  century  Virtual  Reality 
equivalent of ‘Mr Tomkins in Wonderland’ (Gamow, 1939)  is therefore a real (and 
exciting) possibility! 
 
The absence of 20th Century physics in the curriculum reduces the need for teachers to 
think  creatively  about  these  aspects  of  innovative  pedagogy  –  aspects  which,  once 
explored, might well enhance our teaching of more traditional curriculum areas too. 
 

The Reasons? 

Why then do we not teach these fundamental physical principles to young children? 
 
Perhaps we feel that children are not able to cope with the ideas of modern physics, 
but  what  is  the  real  evidence  for  this?  Perhaps  we  think  that  the  effects  of  these 
theories are not relevant to pupils’ lives; but how, then, do we counter the argument 
that the entertainment world of the school children is full of direct references and the 
technology they use is dependent on the theories?  Perhaps we think that children will 
learn best if they are taught in the chronological order of theoretical development, but 
again, what is our evidence, and how do we account for the fact that a truly historical 
approach to the current curriculum would take us up a variety of backwaters? Perhaps 
we  feel  that  because  the  mathematics  of  modern  physics  is  complicated,  the 
phenomena  and  concepts  themselves  cannot  be  adequately  taught.  If  so  Feynman 
diagrams  (see  above)  provides  a  startling  counter  example,  demonstrating  that  the 
concepts are themselves not ‘difficult’. Perhaps we fail to emphasize modern physics 
because  there is not a  widespread  understanding of the importance of its insights by 
the public or policy makers? Perhaps we think that the theories are of no practical use.  
Perhaps we are concerned that we simply do not have the teachers able to teach it? 
 
We believe the answers are likely to be all of the above (and no doubt many more). 
We also believe that few, if any, of these supposed answers are valid.  
 
A survey of the literature seems to offer little help, as the question we have posed does 
not  seem  to  have  been  widely  asked,  except  in  papers  that  seem  to  start  with  the 
premise  that  learning  of  these  principles  starts  in  early  adulthood.  We  feel  that  it  is 

Page 5 of 8 

time for these issues to be discussed more widely and in depth.  It is too late for any 
such  discussions  to  make  an  impact  on  the  recently  completed  schools  curriculum 
review. Perhaps during the next review, 20th Century physics can take its place in the 
21st Century curriculum.  
 

Moving Forward? 

The  above  critique  it  is  clearly  meant  to  stimulate  discussion  and  puts  forward 
arguments  for  the  teaching  of  ideas  and  concepts of ‘modern physics’ from an early 
age.    If  we  were  to  assume  that  in  principle  this  is  desirable,  how  might  we  move 
forward?  
 
This is a complex issue, approachable at a number of levels.  Some approaches could 
be implemented fairly simply.  One such short-term approach (that any of us could use 
in our own classrooms) is to begin to embed some of the most fundamental lessons of 
'new physics', into our day to day teaching, without actually changing the content of 
what is taught. For example, by carefully replacing language of 'absolute causality' by 
that  of  the  more  probabilistic  and  complex  world  view  indicated  by  quantum 
mechanics and chaos theory - replacing "this is what will happen when…' to 'this is 
the  most  likely  thing  that  that  will  happen  when…"    or    "this  is  the  equation  which 
describes…" with "this equation gives us a good approximation of …". The potential 
impact on this relatively simple change could be dramatic - since the more conditional 
phrasings  are  both  more  accurate  (and  honest)  and  automatically  beg  the  questions 
which  form  the  basis  of  what  for  many  physicists is the joy of  physics, that there is 
always a 'better' model waiting to be discovered... for the moment at least. 
 
There  are  many  other  changes  that  could  be  made  to  the  curriculum  which  would 
'bring' modern physics more directly into schools. We do not claim to have answers in 
that  regard.  Some  very  fundamental  issues  arise  in  that  direction  and  many  debates 
about  those  need  to  take  place.  The  issues  include:  the  aims  and  role  of  science 
education  in  our  society,  the  detailed  nature  of  any  such  changes,  the  pressures  that 
any desired change would cause to an already over burdened profession, the potential 
of  children  to  understand  these  'complex'  ideas,  how  teachers  could  be  supported  to 
teach these topics and the political implications of any and all of the above.  What is 
clear  to  us  is  that  such  debate  cannot  be  replaced  by  centrally  imposed  curriculum 
change.    Teachers,  educationalists  and  physicists  need  to  be  engaged,  together,  in 
creating new ways of working. 

Conclusion  

We have put forward a range of arguments for the urgent need to consider teaching the 
ideas and concepts of ‘20th Century physics’ as a fundamental part of school science 
education across the age range. We are not arguing that this must be the case, only that 
there appear to be some very good reasons for such a stance, that reasons for not doing 
so appear open to question, and that a debate about such issues is called for.  
 
The urgency is highlighted by the following eloquent quotation from a paper by Eric 
Rogers (1969) in which he asked whether the content of the physics curriculum was 
useful or necessary, and offered some specific ways forward with regard to teaching 

Page 6 of 8 

quantum mechanics at school.  
 

 “In  thinking  towards  the  future  of  our  teaching,  I  do  not  know  how  much  we  can 
throw out; I do not know how much new teaching we can bring in; and I cannot yet see 
clearly how we shall present our teaching; but I would make prediction, based on my 
trust  in  flexibility  of  mind.  Remember  Whitehead's  dictum  that  the  aim  of  education 
should be to foster and preserve flexibility of mind. If we are flexible in our ideas and 
look forward to quantum mechanics being a principal part of our teaching, we can go 
so far, that in the Year 2000, our teaching will be different: it will do justice to modern 
science. Our young students will say: "I am acquainted with the way physicists think, 
talk,  and  speculate  about  the  physical  world".  That  is  my  hope,  but  it  is  for  a  new 
generation of teachers to carry it out.”  

 
Sadly, there seems to have been little change in relation to these issues over the last 30 
years.  Can we become the “new generation of teachers” of whom Rogers spoke? Not 
it  seems,  in  the  year  2000,  but  perhaps  we  can  begin  hotly  debating  these  ideas  and 
questions, and bringing the fundamental lessons of 20th Century physics to the science 
classrooms of the 21st Century. 

Further Reading 

(2000)  Royal 

BBC 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/rilectures/ (23/3/2000) 

Institution,  Christmas 

lectures 

details 

[on-line] 

Campbell,  P.  (1988)  Pre-16  physics:  dreaming  of  what  might  be.  School  Science 
Review 80(291)35-38 

Driver R et al  (1985) Children’s ideas in science (Buckingham: Open University 
Press) 

Driver R et al (1994) Making sense of secondary science (London, Routledge)  

Feynman  R.  (1988),  QED  The  Strange  Theory  of  Light  and  Matter  (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press) 

Gamow,  George.  (1939)  Mr.  Tomkins  in  Wonderland,  (Cambridge:  Cambridge 
University Press) 

Gleick, James. (1988) Chaos: Making a New Science (Harmondsworth: Penguin ) 

Hey,  Tony  &  Walters,  Patrick.  (1987)  The  Quantum  Universe  Cambridge: 
(Cambridge University Press) 

Krauss,  Lawrence.  (1998)  Selling  physics  to  unwilling  buyers:  physics  fact  and 
fiction, Physics World 11(7) pp13-14 

Millar, R., Osborne, J. and Nott, M. (1998) Science education for the future. School 
Science Review 80 (291) pp19-24 

Ogborn, Jon. (1998) Attracting teenagers to physics, Physics World 11 (2) pp55-56 

QCA (1999) GCE advanced subsidiary (AS) and advanced (A) level specifications, 
subject criteria for physics [on-line] http://www.qca.org.uk/a-as-level/ (23/3/2000) 

Rogers,  Eric  M.  (1969)  Comments  on  the  future  of  quantum  mechanics  teaching, 
Proceedings  of  the  GIREP  Seminar  on  the  Teaching  of  Physics  in  Schools  in 
Copenhagen,  Gylendal,  Copenhagen.  Reprinted  in  Marx,  George  (ed)  (1981) 

Page 7 of 8 

Quantum  Mechanics  in  the  School:  A  collection  of  Essays,  International 
Commission of Physics Education, IUPAP. 

Stannard, R (1991) Black holes and Uncle Albert (London: Faber and Faber) 

Stannard R. (1999) ‘The relativity translator’ TES 25th June 1999 pp20 

Page 8 of 8 

