Bandwidth comparison of photonic crystal fibers 
and conventional single-mode fibers  

M.D. Nielsen1,2*, J.R. Folkenberg1, N.A. Mortensen1, and A. Bjarklev2  
 
1 Crystal Fibre A/S, Blokken 84, DK-3460 Birkerød, Denmark 
 
2 COM, Technical University of Denmark, 
DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
 
*mdn@crystal-fibre.com 
 

Abstract:  We  experimentally  compare  the  optical  bandwidth  of  a 
conventional  single-mode  fiber  (SMF)  with  3  different  photonic  crystal 
fibers (PCF) all optimized for visible applications. The spectral attenuation, 
single-turn  bend  loss,  and  mode-field  diameters  (MFD)  are  measured  and 
the PCF is found to have a significantly larger bandwidth than the SMF for 
an  identical  MFD.  It  is  shown  how  this  advantage  can  be  utilized  for 
realizing  a  larger  MFD  for  the  PCF  while  maintaining  a  bending  resistant 
fiber.  
©2004 Optical Society of America  

OCIS codes:  (060.2400) Fiber Properties, (060.2430) fibers, Single-mode, (999.999) Photonic 
crystal fiber 

References and Links 

 

963 (1997).  

1.   T.A. Birks, J.C. Knight, and P.St.J. Russel, "Endlessly single-mode photonic crystal fiber," Opt. Lett. 22, 961-

2.   N.A. Mortensen and J.R. Folkenberg, "Low-loss criterion and effective area considerations for photonic crystal 

fibers," J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt. 5, 163-167 (2003). 

3.   M.D. Nielsen, N.A. Mortensen, and J.R. Folkenberg, "Reduced microdeformation attenuation in large-mode-

area photonic crystal fibers for visible applications," Opt. Lett. 28, 1645-1647 (2003). 

4.   W.A. Gambling, D.N. Payne, and H. Matsumyra, "Cut-off frequency in radially inhomogeneous single-mode 

5.   D. Marcuse, "Gaussian approximation of the fundamental modes of graded-index fibers," J. Opt. Soc. Am. 68, 

fibre," Electron. Lett. 13, 139-140 (1977).  

103-109 (1978). 

6.   N.A. Mortensen, J.R. Folkenberg, M.D. Nielsen, and K.P. Hansen, "Modal Cut-off and the V-parameter in 

Photonic Crystal Fibers," Opt. Lett. 28, 1879-1881 (2003).  

7.   M.D. Nielsen, N.A. Mortensen, J.R. Folkenberg, and A. Bjarklev, "Mode-field radius of photonic crystal fibers 

expressed by the V-parameter," Opt. Lett. 28, 2309-2311 (2003). 

8.   M.D. Nielsen and N.A. Mortensen, "Photonic crystal fiber design based on the V-parameter," Opt. Express 11,  

2762-2768 (2003), http://www.opticsexpress.org/abstract.cfm?URI=OPEX-11-21-2762 

9.   T. Sørensen, J. Broeng, A. Bjarklev, E. Knudsen, and S.E.B. Libori, "Macro-bending Loss Properties of 

Photonic Crystal Fibre," Electron. Lett., 37, 287-289 (2001).  

10.   O. Humbach, H. Fabian, U. Grzesik, U. Haken, and W. Heitmann, "Analysis of OH absorption bands in 

synthetic silica," J. Non-Cryst. Solids 203, 19-26 (1996).  

 

 

Introduction 

In  conventional  single-mode  fibers  (SMF),  the  single-mode  optical  bandwidth  is  typically 
limited  by  a  higher-order  mode  cutoff  at  short  wavelengths  and  macro-bend  loss  at  long 
wavelengths.  The  characteristics  of  the  photonic  crystal  fiber  (PCF)  are  fundamentally 
different  from  this  picture.  Most  important  is  the  fact  that  the  PCF  can  be  designed  to  be 
endlessly single-mode (ESM), a term first coined by Birks et al. [1] referring to the fact that 
no higher-order modes are supported regardless of the wavelength. The ESM property has the 
specious  consequence  that  the  waveguide  can  be  scaled  to  an  arbitrary  dimension  while 

remaining single mode. However, as the scale of the structure is increased, the susceptibility 
towards  attenuation  induced  by  variations  in  structural  parameters  as  well  as  external 
perturbations  such  as  bending  increases  [2,3]  limiting  the  practical  dimensions  that  can  be 
realized. 

Often  the  question  of  which  fiber  type  is  most  bend  insensitive  is  raised:  A  PCF  or  a 
conventional  SMF?  The  problem  when  trying  to  answer  this  question  is  that  it  is  not  very 
precise  because  the  fibers  to  be  compared  need  to  be  identical  in  terms  of  other  optical 
properties  in  order  for  the  comparison  to  be  meaningful.  Most  relevant  is  to  compare  fibers 
with the same mode-field diameter (MFD) since bend loss in general increases with increasing 
MFD.  Even  though  one  should  have  a  PCF  and  a  SMF  with  identical  MFD  at  a  given 
wavelength,  another problem  arises  from  the  fact that  the  MFD of  the  two  fibers vary quite 
differently as function of wavelength making comparison difficult. Also, the MFD of one or 
both  of  the  fibers  might  not  necessarily  result  from  an  optimal  choice  of  parameters  and, 
finally, the spectral dependency of the bend loss is quite different for the two types of fibers. 
In  this  paper,  we  address  these  issues  and  attempt  to  make  the  comparison  of  the  optical 
bandwidth  taking  the  mentioned  difficulties  above  into  account.  For  the  comparison  we  use 
fibers that are single mode at visible wavelengths and focus on their applicability red, green, 
and  blue  light  (RGB)  applications.  The  considered  PCFs  are  all  made  of  pure  silica  with  a 
triangular arrangement of air holes of diameter, d, pitch, Λ, and a core formed by omitting the 
central air hole of the structure. 

   

Theory 

A good way to illustrate the differences in the spectral properties of the SMF and the PCF is 
through the V-parameter. The V-parameter for the SMF, VSMF, has traditionally been applied 
to derive the higher-order mode cutoff [4] as well as the MFD [5]. Recently, we suggested a 
V-parameter  for  the  PCF  [6],  VPCF,  and  showed  that  this  also  held  the  property  of  uniquely 
determining  both the higher-order  mode  cutoff [6] as  well as  the  MFD [7]. The expressions 
for VSMF, and VPCF, are given by: 

 

 

 
a
λ

V

SMF

=

2
π

2
n
co

−

2
n
cl

 

V

PCF

=

2
π

n

2
FM

( )
λ

−

n

2
FSM

( )λ

 

Λ
λ

(1a) 

(1b) 

 
In Eq. (1a), a is the core radius and nco and ncl are the refractive indices of the core and the 
cladding, respectively. In Eq. (1b), nFM(λ) and nFSM(λ) are the wavelength dependent effective 
indices  of  the  fundamental  mode  (FM)  and  the  fundamental  space  filling  mode  (FSM), 
respectively  (see  ref.  [6]  for  a  detailed  discussion  on  VPCF).  In  the  expression  for  VSMF,  the 
refractive indices are taken to be constants and VSMF, therefore, depends on the wavelength as 
1/λ. The spectral dependency of VPCF is very different from that of VSMF, since the effective 
indices  are  strongly  wavelength  dependent  resulting  in  the  fact  that  the  index  difference 
counteracts the effect of the 1/λ dependency and results in VPCF → V0 for λ → 0, where V0 is a 
constant  dependent  on  d/Λ [8].  It  is,  thus,  the  decreasing  effective  index  difference  with 
decreasing wavelength that limits the number of modes and also has the effect that bend loss 
is observed at short wavelengths for the PCF [9]. From a MFD point of view, the increasing 
index  difference  as  function  of  the  wavelength  ensures  a  close  to  constant  strength  of  the 
guiding  resulting  in  a  MFD  that  can  be  almost  constant  over  a  broad  wavelength  range  [7]. 
This  is  in  contrast  to  conventional  fibers,  where  the  constant  index  difference  becomes 
insufficient,  when  the  wavelength  is  increased,  causing  the  mode  to  expand  until  guiding  is 
lost and, thereby, limiting the bandwidth at longer wavelengths.  

When attempting to compare two different types of fibers as in the case of the SMF and the 
PCF, ensuring identical MFD are not sufficient. As an example, a PCF with a MFD of 10 µm 
at an operating wavelength of 1µm can both be realized with the parameters d/Λ = 0.19, Λ = 5 
µm and  with d/Λ = 0.45, Λ = 8µm. In the first case, VPCF = 1.0, whereas the other example 
yields VPCF = 3.1, and since a high VPCF value is preferred from a robustness point of view [8], 
these two designs will have a very different bending loss properties. Basing a comparison on 
PCFs with relative small values of d/Λ, therefore, holds limited relevance.  Thus, in order to 
ensure  a  fair  comparison,  both  fibers  should  be  designed  and  operated  where  they  are  most 
robust, i.e., close to cutoff, and it should, furthermore, be insured that the MFDs are identical. 

 

Experimental 

The experimental investigation is based on a commercially available conventional SMF and 3 
different PCFs. The SMF has a Ge-doped core region, a numerical aperture of 0.13, a MFD of 
3.5 µm +/-0.5 µm, a cladding diameter of 125 µm, and a long term minimum bend radius of 
13 mm. The PCFs all have a cladding diameter of 125 µm, and the structural parameters are 
listed in table 1.   

Table 1.  Characteristics of the tested PCFs 

ID 

LMA-5 

LMA-8 

LMA-11 

Λ 
[µm] 

2.9 

5.6 

7.0 

d/Λ 

0.44 

0.49 

0.44 

 
The spectral attenuation characteristics of the investigated fibers were measured using a white 
light source and the cutback technique. In Fig. 1, the attenuation spectra from 400 nm to 1700 
nm  for  the  conventional  SMF  and  the  LMA-5  PCF  are  shown.  The  attenuation  spectra  of 
LMA-8 and LMA-11 are very similar to that of the LMA-5 and, therefore, left out for the sake 
of simplicity.  

For  the  conventional  SMF  (red  curve)  a  sharp  peak  is  observed  at  430  nm  originating 
from  the  higher-order  mode  cutoff.  At  a  wavelength  of  around  820  nm  the  fiber  no  longer 
guides  and  a  steep  loss  edge  is  observed.  For  the  LMA-5  PCF  (black  curve),  no  cutoff  is 
observed (the peaks at 1380 nm, 1245 nm, and 945 nm results from OH contamination [10]), 
and the fiber, thus, guides a single mode in the entire spectral range investigated. Although the 
attenuation level of the LMA-5 PCF is slightly higher than what can be realized, it is actually 
lower than or comparable to that of the conventional SMF for wavelengths lower than around 
600  nm.  This  is  due  to  the  benefit  of  the  pure-silica  core,  which  does  not  suffer  from 
attenuation  bands  from  defect  centers  at  short  wavelengths  to  the  same  degree  as  Ge-doped 
silica.  When  comparing  the  curves  shown  in  Fig.  1,  a  significantly  larger  single-mode 
bandwidth  is  apparently  available  for  the  PCF  than  for  the  conventional  SMF.  In  order  to 
check,  if  this  large  bandwidth  comes  at  a  price,  the  bend  loss  properties  and  the  MFDs  are 
compared. 

 

Figure  1  –  The  red  and  the  black  curve  show  the  measured  attenuation  spectra  of  the 
conventional  SMF  and  the  LMA-5  PCF,  respectively.  The  peak  at  430  nm  on  the  red  curve 
indicates the higher order mode cutoff.  

 
 
The  bend  loss  properties  of  the  investigated  fibers  were  characterized  by  measuring  the 
induced attenuation from 360° bends (single-turn bends) while varying bend radius, R. First, 
white light was coupled into the fiber and a reference spectrum was recorded with an optical 
spectrum analyzer, while ensuring R > 80 mm. The fiber was then given a single turn around a 
cylinder  and  a  new  transmission  spectrum  was  recorded.  This  procedure  was  repeated  for 
cylinders with R from 10 to 80 mm (10 mm increments) and the attenuation was taken relative 
to  the  initial  reference  spectrum.  The  shortest  bend  radius  of  10  mm  is  below  the  specified 
long term minimum bend radius for the conventional SMF and, therefore, not a value, which 
should be considered for most practical situations. It is, however, useful in order to test how 
far  from  the  operational  limit  a  fiber  with  good  properties  at  R  =  20  mm  is.  For  this 
investigation the spectral range from 400 nm to 1000 nm was chosen since the conventional 
SMF, based on Fig. 1, will not operate at longer wavelengths. 

In Fig. 2, the measured attenuation spectra are shown in panels A to D. Panel A shows the 
measurements  for  the  conventional  SMF.  The  shifting  peaks  in  the  spectral  region  between 
400 and 450 nm results from bending induced shifting of the cutoff wavelength of the higher-
order mode. It is, furthermore, observed, how the single-mode operating bandwidth decreases 
from the long wavelength side. At the smallest tested bend radius of 10 mm,  the bandwidth 
extends from approximately 430 nm to 700 nm.  

Panel B shows the corresponding measurements for the LMA-5 PCF and in this case no 
influence of the bending is observed. The LMA-5 PCF is, therefore, more robust than it needs 
to be  for  RGB  applications  and  this unutilized  potential could, therefore,  preferably be used 
for  realizing  a  larger  MFD  in  the  case  where  improved  power  handling  is  an  issue.  When 
increasing  the  structural  scale  by  switching  to  the  LMA-8  PCF,  the  sensitivity  towards 
bending in increased as shown in Panel C. For the smallest applied bending radius of 10 mm, 
light  is  completely  lost  at  wavelengths  just  below  500  nm.  However,  increasing  the  bend 
radius  to  20  mm  again  results  in  the  entire  bandwidth  being  available  with  only  a  small 
indication of attenuation levels around 1 dB at 400 nm. 

 

Figure 2 – Attenuation spectra from 400 nm – 1000 nm for single-turn bends with diameters as 
specified in the legend. Panels A, B, C, and D represent the conventional SMF, LMA-5, LMA-
8, and LMA-11, respectively.  

 
The measurements shown in panel C indicate that the structural parameters of the LMA-8 are 
in  fact  very  close  to  being  optimum  in  terms  of  having  a  fiber  with  the  largest  possible 
structure that is still robust towards any practical bend radius at any RGB wavelength. Bends 
of 10 mm are as mentioned not suited for long term operation. However, if the requirements 
for  the  robustness  are  less  strict,  further  scaling  of  the  structure  is  of  course  feasible.  This 
point is illustrated in panel D, showing measurements for the LMA-11 PCF. In this case, the 
attenuation  at  400  nm  reaches  1  dB  for  R  =  70  mm,  and  the  fiber  becomes  dark  for  the 
shortest RBG wavelengths at R = 30 mm. 
 
For investigation of the MFDs, we used a CCD camera to record an image of the fundamental 
mode at a number of wavelengths for each fiber. Light from light-emitting diodes (LEDs) at 
470  nm,  525  nm,  570  nm,  and  660  nm  is  coupled  in  and  out  of  the  fiber  using  microscope 
objectives. For each of the obtained images, a Gaussian function is fitted to the mode profile 
to yield a measure of the MFD. In order to calibrate the absolute scale of the profile, light is 
coupled  into  a  short  piece  of  PCF  (~10  cm),  which  is  kept  as  straight  as  possible.  By 
defocusing the coupling at the input, it is possible to guide light in the cladding region over 
this relatively short distance and to record the spatial distribution with the CCD camera. Since 
light is guided by the high-index silica regions of the cladding, the image will be an image of 
the fiber structure with a pattern of dark regions resembling the air holes. By measuring the 
period along such a line of dark regions, the pitch given in pixels can be determined. From an 
optical- or an electron micrograph, the pitch can afterwards accurately be determined and the 
absolute MFD of the near fields determined. 

 

Figure 3: MFD data for the investigated fibers. The green, black, and red solid curves show the 
theoretical  MFD  calculated  from  the  V-parameter  of  the  LMA-11,  LMA-8,  and  LMA-5, 
respectively. The green, black, red, and blue circles indicate measured values of the MFD for 
the LMA-11, LMA-8, LMA-5, and the conventional SMF, respectively.  

 
In Fig. 3, measured and calculated MFD data are shown. The green, black, and red solid lines 
represent calculated data for LMA-11, LMA-8, and LMA-5, respectively. The calculations are 
based  on  the  relations  given  in  ref.  [8]  and  the  structural  parameters  listed  in  Table  1.  The 
open  green,  black,  red,  and  blue  circles  indicate  measured  data  for  the  LMA-11,  LMA-8, 
LMA-5,  and  the  conventional  SMF,  respectively.  Good  agreement  between  calculated  and 
measured data is observed showing the strength of the relatively simple expressions given in 
[8]. It is actually possible  to  accurately extract the  MFD as  function of  wavelength  from  an 
image of the fiber cross section, which is in contrast to the conventional fiber. The MFDs of 
the  LMA-11  and  LMA-8  are  close  to  9.0  and  6.9  µm,  respectively,  while  the  MFDs  of  the 
LMA-5 and the conventional SMF are both very close to 3.9 µm at the inspected wavelengths. 
The measurements of the MFDs and the fact that both fibers are operated close to their cutoff 
wavelength,  where  robustness  is  optimum,  make  it  possible  to  conclude  that  a  direct 
comparison of the bandwidth from Fig. 1 and panels A and B from Fig. 2 can be justified. 
 

Conclusion: 

We  have  compared  the  optical  bandwidth  of  a  conventional  SMF  and  3  different  PCFs 
intended  for  RGB  applications.  The  MFDs  of  the  LMA-5  PCF  and  the  conventional  SMF 
were  identical  at  the  inspected  wavelengths.  The  PCF  showed  to  be  more  robust  towards 
bending  at  any  of  the  investigated  wavelengths  from  400  nm  to  1000  nm  compared  to  the 
conventional  SMF.  The  enhanced  properties  of  the  PCF  are  explained  through  the  strong 
wavelength  dependency  of  the  effective  index  difference  between  the  guided  mode  and  the 
cladding modes and can be utilized for realizing a larger MFD with the benefit of improved 
power handling properties.  
 

Acknowledgements 

M.D.  Nielsen  acknowledges  financial  support  from  the  Danish  Academy  of  Technical 
Sciences.  

