Three Dimensional Annihilation Imaging of 
Antiprotons in a Penning Trap1 

M.C. Fujiwaraab2, M. Amorettic,  G. Bonomid, A.Bouchtad, P.D. Bowee, C. 
Carrarocf C.L. Cesarg, M. Charltonh, M. Doserd, V. Filippini i, A. Fontanaj, 
R. Funakoshia, P. Genova j, J.S. Hangstf, R.S. Hayanoa, L.V. Jørgensenh, 
V. Lagomarsinocf, R. Landuad, D. Lindelöf k, E. Lodi Rizzinil, M. Macric, 
N. Madsene, M. Marchesotti i, P. Montagna ij, H. Pruys k, C. Regenfusk, P. 
Rielderd, A. Rotondi ij, G. Testerac, A. Variolac, D.P. van der Werf h 

 

(ATHENA Collaboration) 

a Department of Physics, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033 Japan  
b Atomic Physics Laboratory, RIKEN, Saitama, 351-0189 Japan 
c Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Genova, 16146 Genova, Italy 
d EP Division, CERN, Geneva 23 Switzerland 
e Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Aarhus, DK-8000 Aarhus, Denmark 
f Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Genova, 16146 Genova, Italy 
g Instituto de Fisica, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro 21945-970, Brazil 

h Department of Physics, University of Wales Swansea, Swansea SA2 8PP, UK 

i Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy 
j Dipartimento di Fisica Nucleare e Teorica, Università di Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy 
k Physik-Institut, Zürich University, CH-8057 Zürich, Switzerland 
l Dipartimento di Chimica e Fisica per l‘Ingegneria e per i Materiali, Universit`a di 
Brescia, 25123 Brescia, Italy 
 

Abstract.  We  demonstrate  three-dimensional  annihilation  imaging  of  antiprotons  trapped  in  a 
Penning trap. Exploiting unusual feature of antiparticles, we investigate a previously unexplored 
regime in particle transport; the proximity of the trap wall. Particle loss on the wall, the final step 
of  radial  transport,  is  observed  to  be  highly  non-uniform,  both  radially  and  azimuthally.  These 
observations  have  considerable  implications  for  the  production  and  detection  of  antihydrogen 
atoms. 

INTRODUCTION  

Imaging techniques have played  an  important  role  in  trapped  particle  studies. 
Dumping  particles  onto  a  collimated  Faraday  cup,  or  on  a  screen  viewed  by  a  CCD 
camera, is now a standard technique which gives a  z-integrated plasma shape [1-3] (z 
is  the  direction  along  the  magnetic  axis).  Detection  of  laser  fluorescence  is  another 

                                                 
1 Invited talk at NNP03, Workshop on Non-Neutral Plasmas 2003 
2 Corresponding author: e-mail: Makoto.Fujiwara@cern.ch 

common  technique  for  trapped  atomic  ions  where  convenient  transition  lines  exist 
[4,5]. This method can also provide particle velocity from the laser Doppler shift [6].  

Antiparticle  annihilation  imaging  can  give  information  complementary  to  the 
above more conventional methods. Depending on the density of the residual gas in the 
system (see below), antiprotons can annihilate either on gas, or on the trap wall as a 
result of radial transport. If the vacuum is sufficiently high and the annihilation on the 
gas is negligible, antiproton imaging is uniquely sensitive to particle losses at the trap 
wall. It thus allows investigation of particle transport processes in the yet un-explored 
regime, the proximity of the trap wall. 

O’Neil’s confinement theorem [7] states  that, for an axially symmetric system 
in a uniform magnetic field, due to the  conservation of canonical angular momentum, 
the  mean-square  radius  of  trapped  particles  is  approximately  constant,  ensuring 
confinement of non-neutral plasmas. In actual experiments, however, plasmas expand 
at  a  finite  rate,  eventually  leading  to  deconfinement.  Starting  from  the  pioneering 
works  of  the  1980s  [8],  radial  particle  transport  across  magnetic  field  lines  has  been 
the subject of extensive studies. As such, there is now a large body of evidence which 
suggests  that  the  radial  transport  is  driven  by  mechanical  and  field  asymmetries, 
inherent  in  all  trap  constructions  [9].  However,  while  there  are  notable  recent 
developments  [10],  the  exact  mechanism  is  not  yet  completely  understood.  With  our 
imaging  technique,  we  show  in  this  report  that  the  particle  loss  at  the  trap  wall,  the 
final step of the radial transport, occurs in a manner that is highly non-uniform, both 
axially and azimuthally.  

 

Figure 1.  A schematic view of the apparatus. Two layers of double-sided silicon strip detectors and 192 
CsI crystals surround the mixing trap. The signal from total of 8192 detector channels are read out via 
flash analogue-to-digital converters (ADCs) and written onto a disc at a rate of up to 40 Hz.   

 

EXPERIMENT 

The  present  measurements  are  performed  using  the  ATHENA  apparatus, 
which recently achieved the first production of cold antihydrogen atoms [11]. Detailed 
descriptions  of  ATHENA  are  given  elsewhere  [11-15].  The  Antiproton  Decelerator 
(AD), located at the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Geneva, 
provides a pulse of 5 MeV antiprotons every 100 s. This is presently the world’s only 
source of low energy antiprotons. The antiprotons are dynamically captured by briefly 

opening the potential wall at the entrance side. Cold electrons, preloaded  in the trap, 
cool the antiprotons via Coulomb collisions [16]. The antiproton capture and cooling 
can take place  in either of two separate traps; the  catching trap, or the mixing trap. In 
the former case, the cooled antiprotons are adiabatically transferred to the mixing trap 
after  the  catching  and  cooling  [17].  The  traps  (inner  radius  1.25  cm)  are  held  at  a 
temperature between 15 and 40 K. The imaging detector  is kept at 140 K and housed 
in  a  separate  vacuum  (Fig.  1).  Typically,  103  to  104  antiprotons  together  with  107  to 
108  electrons  are  stored  in  the  mixing  trap  for  these  measurements.  Antiprotons 
annihilate  either  on  the  residual  gas,  or  if  they  reach  the  trap  wall,  on  the  surface  of 
gold-plated electrodes. 

We  observe  that  keeping  the  electrons  together  with  the  antiprotons  shortens 
the storage time of the latter. This effect, illustrated by the data presented in Fig. 2, is 
possibly  due  to  an  enhancement  of  the  radial  transport  of  the  antiprotons  due  to 
electron collective effects, and merits further dedicated study. For the purpose of the 
work here, however, we used this effect simply to accelerate the radial loss.  It should 
be noted, though, that the number of the electrons, or lack thereof, does not affect the 
main conclusions reported here. 

 

FIGURE 2.  Number of antiprotons as a function of storage time. The squares refer to measurements 
with  108  electrons  kept  in  the  trap,  whilst  the  circles  are  with  less  than  105  electrons  remaining.  The 
trapped  antiprotons  are  counted  with  external  annihilation  detectors  [17],  and  are  normalized  to  the 
incoming antiproton number, which in turn is measured by a calibrated beam detector [18].   

 

ANTIPROTON IMAGES 

Antiproton  annihilations  produce  several  charged  and  neutral  mesons  (mostly 
pions). The average charge multiplicity depends on the target nucleus; 2.6 for gold and 
3.0 for a proton [19]. The charged particles are detected by two layers of double-sided 

silicon micro-strip detectors. A signal in one of the layers is a “hit”, and two hits from 
two layers are fitted to a straight line to determine a “track”. From the intersection of 
two or more charged tracks, an annihilation “vertex” is determined. A collection of the 
vertices  thus  represents  the  three-dimensional  distribution  of  antiproton  positions  at 
the  time  of  their  annihilations.  Unmeasured  curvature  of  the  pion  tracks  in  the  3  T 
magnetic  field  is  the  dominant  source  of  the  4  mm  (1s )  vertex  reconstruction 
uncertainty.   
 

y (cm) 

x (cm) 

Figure 3. Three dimensional imaging of trapped antiprotons 

z (cm) 

 

 
Figures  3  and 4-I  (a)  show  measurements  in  a  harmonic  trap  with  a  depth of 
30V  and  length  about  5  cm  with  a  relatively  high  gas  pressure  in  the  system,  of  the 
order  of  10-11  mbar  as  estimated  from  the  antiproton  lifetime.  In  these  conditions, 
annihilations  on  the  residual  gas  (or  ions)  dominate.  Thus,  the  image  obtained 
corresponds  to  the  distribution  of  antiprotons  in  a  quadratic  potential  trap,  and  is 
azimuthally symmetric, as expected.   
A striking pattern emerges if the residual gas pressure is reduced to below 10-13 
 
mbar,  as  shown  in  Fig.  4-I  (b).  Annihilations  are  then  observed  to  be  highly  non-
uniform  both  azimuthally  and  axially,  and  are  localized  in  a  few  “hot  spots”.  As 
illustrated  in  Figs.  4-II  and  III,  the  existence  of  hot  spots  is  a  universal  feature  of 
charged particle loss in our trap. 
 
Figure  4-II  shows  images  from  a  series  of  measurements  using  only  one 
electrode  to  create  a  trap  well.  A  potential  of –140 V, with respect  to  the  rest  of  the 
grounded  electrodes,  was  applied.  The  antiproton  annihilations  take  place  in  the 
potential well regions, as expected, but they are localized in both z and f
 is 
the  azimuthal  angle  of  the  vertices  seen  from  the  trap  axis.  Figure  4-III  illustrates 
results  of  measurements  with  different  numbers  of  electrodes  used  to  form  wells. 
Either –140 V or –50 V was applied, the value of which did not change the features of 
the  images.  Again,  annihilations  are  localized.  We  observe  that  the  annihilation  hot 
spots  are  clustered  near  the  edge  of  the  electrodes,  and  their  number  grows  with  the 
number  of  electrodes  used  for  the  well.  Azimuthally  segmented  four-sectored 
electrodes are seen to enhance annihilations in some (but not all) cases. For example, 
see the top panel of Fig. 4-III, where the segmented electrodes are depicted as “SE”.   
 

, where f

  

(I) 

 

(II) 

(III) 

 

 

 

 
Figure 4. Antiproton annihilation images. See text for details. 

MONTE CARLO SIMULATIONS 

In order to quantitatively understand the observed images,  we have performed 
 
detailed Monte Carlo (MC) simulations, based on the GEANT simulation package. In 
our  simulations,  antiproton  annihilation  on  protons  is  assumed,  and  a  tabulated 
branching  ratio  is  used  to  generate  annihilation  products,  both  charged  and  neutral. 
Interactions  of  these  particles  with  our  detector  and  the  apparatus  are  simulated, 
including  electromagnetic  and  hadronic  cascades  in  the  magnet  materials.  The 
apparatus  geometry  is  directly  imported  from  a  CAD  program,  and  the  measured 
module-by-module  detector  efficiencies  are  included  in  the  calculations.  The  code 
generates  simulated  data  in  the  same  structure  as  the  experiment,  and  the  same 
analysis program is applied to both. 

The  results  of  the  simulation  are  compared  with  the  data  in  Fig.  5.  A  radial 
distribution  of  antiproton  annihilations  for  the  high  vacuum  case  (from  Fig.  4-I  (b)), 
and a simulated distribution assuming a point annihilation source on the trap wall are 
plotted in Fig. 5 (a). The good agreement between the experiment and the simulation 
establishes that most of the annihilations occur on the wall (r=1.25 cm). The structure 
near the peak of the simulated distribution is due to reconstruction errors caused by the 
curvature of the charged track. It disappears in simulations with the magnetic field set 
to zero.  

The radial distribution of the measured data for the high density case from Fig. 
4-I (a) are also plotted in Fig. 5 (a).  As is evident, our imaging can clearly distinguish 
between the distributions for predominantly gas annihilations and those resulting from 
wall annihilations.     

   

 
FIGURE  5.    (a)  Comparison  of  radial  (r)  annihilation  distributions  (dN/rdr)  for  the  data  from  the 
measurement  at  low  background  gas  pressures  (error  bars)  and  the  MC  simulations  assuming 
annihilations  on  the  trap  wall  (dark  histogram).  Also  shown  are  the  data  for  the  high  pressure 
measurement  (diagonally  filled  histogram).  (b)  The  azimuthal  (f )  angular  distribution  of  the 
annihilation  (error  bars)  and  its  comparison  with  the  MC  assuming  point  source  annihilation  (dark 
histogram). Also shown is a MC assuming an extended annihilation source (±4 mm).   

 
 

We now focus on one of the hot spots from Fig. 4-I (b), in order to study the extent to 
which it is localized. Figure 5 (b) is a comparison of the annihilation azimuthal angle 
distributions  for  the  experimental  data  and  the  simulations.  Also  included  are 
histograms  for  Monte  Carlos  assuming  both  a  point  source  annihilation  on  the  wall, 
and  assuming  an  extended  source  spot  of  ±4  mm.  From  the  comparison,  we  can 
exclude a source extent of this size. 

DISCUSSION 

While it is clear that the presence of hot spots is a result of asymmetries in the 
 
system,  the  underlying  mechanism  resulting  in  loss  localization  is  not  completely 
understood  at  the  present  time.  The  effects  due  to  image  charge  and  surface  field 
irregularities complicate the dynamics of particle transport in the proximity of the trap 
wall.  
 
Various measurements were performed to establish the universality of the loss 
localization. We observed the hot spots in all cases when antiprotons annihilate on the 
wall.  This  was  regardless  of  the  details  of  the  antiproton  and  electron  (re)loading 
procedure  and  the  values  of  the  potentials.  Hot  spots  are  present,  even  though 
electrons were removed the electrons from the trap, indicating that the loss localization 
mechanism is not due to collective plasma effects of the electrons, but is dominated by 
the  single  particle  transport  properties  of  the  antiprotons.  Note  that  the  antiproton 
density of is low (<103 cm-3) in these measurements.  
 
 
The  present  observations  have  major  implications  for  the  detection  of 
antihydrogen  annihilations.  Our  initial  observation  of  antihydrogen  was  based  on 
simultaneous  detection  of  antiproton  and  positron  annihilations  at  the  same  place. 
While  antiproton  annihilation  detection  is  efficient  (the  vertices  can  be  reconstructed 
with about 50% efficiency), positron detection is more difficult due to the low intrinsic 
efficiency  of  the  CsI  crystals,  and  the  presence  of  background.  Thus,  the  overall 
efficiency was about 0.2% for fully reconstructed antihydrogen events, where both the 
charged vertex and back-to-back gamma rays were detected. Our finding that neutral 
antihydrogen atoms annihilate on the wall in a radially uniform manner [11], whereas 
charged  antiprotons  produce  hot  spots,  can  provide  a  new  and  effective  signature  of 
antihydrogen  annihilations.  An  antihydrogen  detector  without  the  need  to  register 
gamma-rays  can  be  envisioned,  a  considerable  simplification  when  compared  to  the 
present system.  
Imaging profiles of antiprotons obtained in high density cases (Fig. 4-I (a)) can 
 
provide  useful  information  relevant  in  our  quest  to  understand  the  antihydrogen 
production  processes.  The  image  obtained  represents  the  spatial  distribution  of 
antiprotons,  convoluted  with  the  gas  (or  ion)  distribution  on  which  they  annihilate. 
The observed distributions of the antiproton cloud in Figs. 3 and 4-I (a) have an aspect 
ratio of approximately 2. This is in contrast to the positron plasma aspect ratio (4 - 7), 
as determined by modes analysis [15] based on Dubin’s cold fluid model [20]. If we 
assume  that  the  effects  of  residual  gas  on  the  particle  dynamics  is  negligible  on  the 
time scale of the measurements (a few minutes), the observed difference in the cloud 

radii  may  explain  the  apparent  partial  mismatch  in  the  radial  overlap  between 
antiprotons  and  positrons,  indicated  by  our  measurements  of  positron  cooling  of 
antiprotons [21].  
 
Another  application  of  antiproton  imaging  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  6.  By  moving 
the  trap  well,  and  measuring  the  annihilation  positions,  we  can  determine  our  trap 
electrode  positions,  relative  to  the  detector,  over  a  wide  range  of  axial  positions  as 
shown  in  Fig.  6  [22].  Imaging  of  antiproton  annihilations  thus  permitted  detector 
position calibration at 1 mm precision, a task otherwise nontrivial in the present setup. 
The precise calibration shown here is an important input to the physics analyses using 
the ATHENA antihydrogen annihilation detector.  
 

As  we  have  previously  stated,  our  imaging  position  resolution  is,  at  present, 
limited by the unmeasured curvature of the charged tracks. This could be improved in 
a future apparatus by using three or more layers of Si strips. Our detector readout rate 
(~40 Hz) limits the physical processes that can be imaged to relatively slow ones (such 
as the radial loss reported here), and much faster processes, e.g. bursts of annihilations 
due  to  diocotron  instability,  cannot  be  readily  imaged.  The  implementation  of  the 
signal level discrimination at the ADC level (so called zero suppression) is in progress 
and can improve the readout rate by up to a factor of 10. 

 

Figure 6. The correlation between the trap well positions and the measured annihilation positions. 

 

CONCLUSIONS 

In 

this  paper,  we 

 
imaging  of  antiproton  distributions  via 
reconstruction  of  annihilation  vertices.  With  this  new  technique,  we  probed  the 
previously unexplored final step in the radial transport of trapped charged particles; a 

reported 

regime in the proximity of the trap wall. We observed that antiproton annihilations on 
the  trap  wall  are  localized  in  all  cases,  an  effect  which  may  be  applicable  to  other 
Penning  (and  related)  systems.  Several  implications  for  antihydrogen  production  and 
detection were discussed. 
 
The main disadvantage of the antiproton imaging technique for trapped particle 
studies is the scarcity of antiprotons. In the near future, we will extend our antiparticle 
imaging  studies  by  using  positron  annihilations,  much  like  positron  emission 
tomography in medical applications.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

 
We  gratefully  thank  CERN’s  AD  crew  and  J.  Rochet  for  providing  essential 
support,  Professors  J.  Fajans,  H.  Higaki,  A.  Mohri,  and  Y.  Yamazaki  for  valuable 
discussions, and A. Cavanagh for a critical reading of the  manuscript. This work was 
supported  in  part  by  MEXT  and  RIKEN  (Japan),  CNPq  (Brazil),  SNF  (Denmark), 
INFN (Italy), SNF (Switzerland), and the EPSRC (UK). 
 

REFERENCES 

1.  Dubin, D. H., and O’Neil T. M., Rev. Mod. Phys. 71, 87 (1999).  
2.  Davidson, R. C., Physics of Nonneutral Plasmas, (Imperial College Press, London, 2001) 
3.  Non-Neutral Plasma Physics, edited by  Anderegg, F., et al. Vol. 4 (AIP Conference Proceedings , 

New York, 2002). 

4.  Larson, D. J., et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 70 (1986). 
5.  Brewer, L. R., et al., Phys. Rev. A 38, 859 (1988).  
6.  Mitchell, T. B., et al., Opt. Express 2, 314 (1998). 
7.  O’Neil, T. M., Phys. Fluids 23, 2216 (1980). 
8.  Malmberg, J. H., and Driscoll, C. F., Phys. Rev. Lett. 44, 654 (1980); Driscoll, C. F. and Malmberg, 

J. H., ibid. 50, 167 (1983); Driscoll, C. F., et al., Phys. Fluids 29, 2015 (1986). 

9.  Notte, J., and Fajans, J., Phys. Plasmas 1, 1123 (1994); Eggleston, D. L., and O'Neil, T. M., ibid. 6, 
2699 (1999); Chao, E. H., et al., ibid. 7, 831 (2000); Kriesel, J. M., and Driscoll, C. F., Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 85, 2510 (2000); Kabantsev, A. A., et al., ibid.  87, 225002 (2001); Sarid, E., et al., ibid.  89, 
105002 (2002). 

10.  Kabantsev, A. A., and Driscoll, C. F., Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 245001 (2002); Kabantsev, A. A., et al., 

Phys. Plasmas 10, 1628 (2003). 

11.  Amoretti, M., et al., Nature 419, 456 (2002). 
12.  Amoretti, M., et al. submitted to Nucl. Instr. Meth. A., 2003 
13.  Regenfus, C., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 501, 65 (2003). 
14.  Fujiwara, M. C., et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods B. in press (e-print archive: hep-ex/0306023). 
15.  Amoretti, M., et al., Phys. Plasmas 10, 3056 (2003); Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 055001 (2003). 
16.  Gabrielse, G., et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 2504 (1986); 63, 1360 (1989). 
17.  Fujiwara, M. C., et al., Hyperfine Interact. 138, 153 (2001). 
18.  Fujiwara, M. C., and Marchesotti, M., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 484, 162 (2002).  
19.  Bendiscioli, G., and Kharzeev, D., Rivista Nuovo. Cim. 17(6), 1 (1994). 
20.  Dubin, D. H., Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 2076 (1991).  
21.  Amoretti, M., et al., to be published.  
22.  Bouchta, A., and Fujiwara, M. C., ATHENA Technical report (2002).  
 

