MS# TPSO254 
 

1

Effects of the Charge-Dipole Interaction on the 
Coagulation of Fractal Aggregates 

Lorin Swint Matthews and T. W. Hyde, Member, IEEE 

  

 

Abstract—A  numerical  model  with  broad  applications  to 
complex (dusty) plasmas is presented. The self-consistent N-body 
code  allows  simulation  of  the  coagulation  of  fractal  aggregates, 
including the charge-dipole interaction of the clusters due to the 
spatial arrangement of charge on the aggregate. It is shown that 
not  only  does  a  population  of  oppositely  charged  particles 
increase  the  coagulation  rate,  the  inclusion  of  the  charge-dipole 
interaction  of  the  aggregates  as  well  as  the  electric  dipole 
potential  of  the  dust  ensemble  decreases  the  gelation  time  by  a 
factor of up to twenty. It is further shown that these interactions 
can  also  stimulate  the  onset  of  gelation,  or  “runaway  growth,” 
even  in  a  population  of  particles  charged  to  a  monopotential 
where  previously  it  was  believed  that  like-charged  grains  would 
inhibit  coagulation.  Gelation  is  observed  to  occur  due  to  the 
formation  of  high-mass  aggregates  with  fractal  dimensions 
greater than two which act as seeds for runaway growth.  
 

Index  Terms—complex  (dusty)  plasma,  dust  coagulation, 

fractal aggregates, preplanetary dust aggregation 
 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

T

HE  coagulation  of  micrometer  sized  particles  in  a 
complex (dusty) plasma is a fundamental process that has 
become an increasingly important area of study in the last ten 
years, not only in the context of astrophysical systems [1], but 
also  in  many  parts  of  chemistry,  physics,  and  colloidal 
systems  such  as  aerosols.  At  the  same  time,  as  feature  size 
continues  to  decrease,  particle  coagulation  has  also  become 
germane  to  contamination  problems  in  the  fabrication  of 
semiconductor wafers through plasma processing [2].  

Interest  in  coagulation  in  astrophysical  systems  has  been 
spurred  by  recent  discoveries  of  extrasolar  planets,  renewing 
attention to the physics of planet formation. The most widely 
accepted  theory  of  the  origin  of  planets  is  that  they  formed 
through  mutual  collisions  of planetesimals, bodies ranging in 
size from 1 to 10 km [3]. The planetesimals in turn are thought 
to  have  formed  from  the  dominant  constituent  material  of 
circumstellar  disks;  gas  and  dust  [4].  With  the  advent  of  the 
Hubble  Space  Telescope,  direct  observations  of  the  gas/disk 
systems  around  T  Tauri  stars  have  dramatically  increased 

Manuscript received July 15, 2003. This work was supported in part by the 

National Science Foundation grant PHY-0097386. 

L.  S.  Matthews  and  T.  W.  Hyde  are  with  the  Center  for  Astrophysics, 
Space  Physics,  and  Engineering  Research,  Baylor  University,  Waco,  TX 
  USA  (phone:  254-710-3763;  fax:  254-710-7309;  e-mail: 
76798-7310 
lorin_matthews@baylor.edu). 

interest  in  the  coagulation  of  dust  within  astrophysical 
environments [5], [6].  

As  the  gas  in  a  protoplanetary  disk  cools,  coagulation  of 
dust  particles  begins  as  inelastic,  adhesive  collisions  occur. 
The  primary  factors  that  affect  the  coagulation  rate  are  the 
relative velocity between grains, collisional cross-section, and 
sticking  probability.  Several  experimental  and  numerical 
studies  have  made  it  evident  that  coagulation  results  in  the 
formation  of  fluffy  fractal  aggregates  [7]  –  [9].  Fractal 
aggregates  exhibit  stronger  gas-grain  coupling,  suppressing 
the  relative  velocities  between  aggregates  [10],  and  have 
greater collisional cross sections due to their open nature. This 
has been shown to initially increase the coagulation rate [11], 
[12] and can lead to “runaway cluster growth” where a single 
aggregate rapidly accumulates a large fraction of the mass in 
the system [13], [14]. Thus the physical geometry of the dust 
grains  is  an  important  factor  in  properly  modeling  dust 
coagulation. 

In  the  primordial  solar  nebula,  the  dust  is  imbedded  in  a 
plasma  and  can  become  charged.  For  low  dust  densities,  the 
greater thermal speeds of the electrons result in a higher flux 
of  electrons  than  ions  and  consequently  the  dust  grains 
become negatively charged. For isolated grains in a hydrogen 
plasma,  the  equilibrium  surface  potential  is  on  the  order  of 
-2.51 kT/e [15], where T is the temperature of the plasma. The 
resulting repulsive grain potential necessarily leads to reduced 
coagulation rates, though it is still possible for coagulation to 
occur as long as the dust grains have relative velocities large 
enough to overcome the Coulomb barrier, yet smaller than the 
critical sticking velocity [16].  

The  above  can  be  moderated  by  temperature  fluctuations 
and  differences  in  the  secondary  electron  yield,  which  can 
lead  to  the  formation  of  dust  populations  with  oppositely 
charged grains depending on the size of the grains [17] – [21]. 
This in turn can lead to enhanced coagulation rates. Evidence 
of rapid charge-induced coagulation has also been observed in 
a  neutral  gas  environment,  where  particles  or  clusters  can 
become charged through collisions [14].  

A  variety  of  works  have  studied  the  effects  of  various 
parameters on the coagulation of dust particles. Many of these 
employ statistical techniques to solve the coagulation equation 
[11], [14], [22]. However, the complexity of the problem has 
shown that it is advantageous to use a self-consistent N-body 
approach  to  fully  model  and  understand  the  processes 
involved [12],[23].  The coagulation of µm-sized particles has 
also been the subject of several recent experimental studies (e. 

MS# TPSO254 
 

g.  [7],  [24],  [25]).  Most  of  these  have  looked  at  the 
coagulation  of  a  monodisperse  size  population,  given  that 
coagulation  due  to Brownian motion tends to form cluster of 
similar size [23]. Only a few groups have examined the effects 
of particle charge on coagulation [11], [14], [17], [22].  

In  this  study,  we  employ  a  self-consistent  N-body  code  to 
model the effects of grain charge on coagulation. By modeling 
a dust population with a given size distribution, the effects of 
a population with oppositely charged grains can be compared 
to  those  with  grains  that  are  neutral  or  charged  to  a  mono-
three-dimensional 
potential.  The  code  also  allows 
geometry of the fractal aggregates to be tracked, enabling the 
investigation of the effects of the distribution of the charge on 
fractal aggregates, including the charge dipole moment and it 
influence on the force calculation. 

the 

II. NUMERICAL MODEL 

A.  Overview 

interacting 

The numerical model employed in this study is based on the 
box_tree  code  developed  by  Richardson  [12],  [26],  [27]  to 
model  the  dynamics  of  a  large  number  of  particles  in  a 
through 
protoplanetary  disk  or  ring  system 
gravitational  forces.  The  box_tree  code  is  a  hybrid  of  two 
computer  algorithms,  a  box  code  and  a  tree  code.  The  box 
code,  first  used  to  study  dynamic  ring  systems  [28],  allows 
distant regions of a system to be represented by copies of the 
simulated  region.  The  box  code,  in  providing  the  external 
potentials acting on the grains, specifies a coordinate system, 
the  linearized  equations  of  motion,  and  a  prescription  for 
handling  boundary  conditions.  The  tree  code  [29]  provides  a 
method  for  a  fast  calculation  of  the  interparticle  forces  by 
means  of  a  multipole  expansion.  The  interparticle  forces  are 
then  included  as  a  perturbation  to  the  equations  of  motion. 
Using  this  code,  a  full  treatment  of  rigid  body  dynamics, 
including  rotation,  is  possible  allowing  for  both  cluster 
trajectories  and  the  orientation  of  fractal  aggregates  to  be 
followed.  Additional  modifications were made to the code to 
allow for charges on the grains, electrostatic Debye shielding, 
external  magnetic  fields  and  the  charge  dipole  interaction  of 
fractal  aggregates.  Thus  a  variety  of  astrophysical 
environments  can  be  examined,  from  free  space  to  rotating 
disk systems [30] – [33]  as well as strongly coupled complex 
plasmas such as dust crystals and coulomb clusters [34] - [37].  

B.  Multipole Expansion of the Tree 

As part of the tree code, the box containing the particles in 
the  system  is  divided  into  2n  cells,  where  n  is  the  number  of 
dimensions  of  the  box.  Each  cell  is  further  divided  into  2n 
cells until each cell contains only a single particle. If a cell is 
sufficiently far away from the grain of interest, as defined by a 
critical opening angle [27], the multipole moments calculated 
using  the  particles  in  that  cell  are  employed  to  calculate  the 
self-gravitational  and  electrostatic  forces  on 
the  grain. 
Otherwise  the  forces  due  to  the  grains  within  a  cell  are 
calculated directly without the use of a multipole expansion. 

2

(1) 

 

 

 

  The  multipole  terms  for  the  tree  structure  for  the  self-
gravitational  and  electrostatic  forces  are  expanded  about  a 
cell’s center of mass. The gravitational dipole moment of the 
cell  is  zero  due  to  this  choice  of  origin;  however  the 
electrostatic  dipole  moment  is  non-zero  for  both  oppositely 
charged and like-charged populations. Debye shielding of the 
grain  potentials  is  incorporated  into  the  code  by  scaling  the 
electrostatic force, Fe, using a screening factor 

F

 
=′
e F
  
 

(
r1

λ+

)
d e

e

r
λ−

d

 

where  λd  is  the  Debye  length  of  the  plasma  and  r  is  the 
distance from a grain. 

C.  Collision Resolution 

As  mentioned  above,  the  outcome  of  a  collision  between 
grains  depends  strongly  on  the  energies  involved.  Two 
colliding particles may bounce, stick, fragment, crush, melt, or 
vaporize. The physics of the collision process was developed 
by  Chokshi  et  al.  [16]  in  which  they  calculated  the  critical 
velocity  for  sticking,  vcr,  depending  on  a  grain’s  physical 
characteristics. They found that colliding particles must have a 
relative velocity less than vcr in order for sticking to occur.  

For particles with radii less than 10-4 m, Brownian motion is 
the  dominant  source  of  collisions  among  particles  [8]. 
Brownian  motion  also  dominates  the  motion  of  fractal 
aggregates  up  to  approximately  10  µm  in  size,  or  a  few 
hundred  1  µm  particles.  Thus,  thermal  motion  leads  to  a 
Maxwellian velocity distribution with a mean thermal velocity 
given by [11] 

 
vth =

8kT

πm

 

 

(2) 

 
where  T  is  the  kinetic  temperature,  k  is  the  Boltzmann 
constant,  and  m  is  the  mass  of  the  particle.  Calculating  the 
average relative velocity between the grains, 
 

v

=

mm)mm(kT8

π

+

, 

1

2

1

2

 

(3) 

 

 

 
using temperatures and masses appropriate for nebular clouds 
or protoplanetary disks, it can be seen that the average relative 
velocity  will  always  be  less  than  the  critical  velocity  for 
sticking [11]. Thus the energies required for restructuring are 
probably not available during the early stages of dust particle 
growth.  

The box_tree code allows for two primary types of merging 
events. In a simple merge, two spherical particles collide and 
form  a  single  spherical  particle  having  a  mass  m = m1 + m2. 
Linear and angular momentum about the center of mass of the 
colliding  particles  are  conserved.  The  second  option  allows 
the particles to form fractal aggregates in which the colliding 
particles  stick  together  at  the  point  of  contact.  Linear  and 
angular  momentum  are  conserved  during  the  collision  by 
calculating the moment of inertia of the resultant particle and 

MS# TPSO254 
 

then utilizing Euler’s equations for rigid body rotation [12]. 

D.  Rearrangement of Charge on Fractal Aggregates 

  For  spherical  particles,  the  charge  (consisting  of  free 
electrons and ions) is evenly distributed over the surface with 
the  potential  of  the  charged  grain  that  of  a  point  charge 
located  at  the  center  of  the  particle.  However,  on  fractal 
aggregates  the  charge  is  allowed  to  rearrange  itself  in  such a 
way  as  to  minimize  the  overall  potential  on  the  surface. 
Therefore it is unrealistic to treat the aggregate’s potential as 
that  of  a  point  charge  residing  at  the  aggregate’s  center  of 
mass.  It  would  be  quite  difficult,  as  well  as  extremely  time 
consuming,  to  explicitly  calculate  the  exact  potential  of  each 
fractal aggregate. Thus some approximation of the distribution 
of charge on the aggregate is in order. 

  Due to the mutual repulsion between charges on the grain 
surface,  the  majority  of  the  charge  on  the  particle  should 
reside on the aggregate’s extremities. Additionally, because of 
the  “open”  nature  of  the  fractal,  the  central  particles  in  the 
aggregate  will  also  have  exposed  surface  area,  and  some 
fraction  of  the  charge  could  be  expected  to  reside  there  as 
well.  As  a  first  approximation  for  dealing  with  this  problem, 
box_tree  assumes  that  each  monomer  in  the  aggregate  has  a 
charge 
 
q =
 
where Q is the total charge on the aggregate, Di is the distance 
of  the  ith  monomer  from  the  center of mass of the aggregate, 
and DT is given by 
 
D
 
Thus  particles  farther  away  from  the  center  of  mass  have  a 
larger  charge  than  do  particles  near  the  center  of  the 
aggregate.  

∑=

i D

QD

(4) 

(5) 

D

. 

T

T

 

i

E. Multipole Expansion of the Aggregate 

  The overall potential of the aggregate is calculated via a 
multipole expansion about the center of mass, with this result 
then  used  to  calculate  the  force  on  all  other  particles.  The 
dipole-dipole  interactions  between  two  fractal  aggregates  are 
not  calculated,  rather  the  charge  of  the  second  aggregate  is 
assumed  to  reside  solely  at  the  center  of  mass.  It  is  also 
assumed that all of the charge resides at the aggregate’s center 
of  mass  when  calculating  the  multipole  moments  of  the  tree. 
The orders of the multipole expansion to be used in the force 
calculations are specified at run time. 

III.  SIMULATIONS 

A. Initial Conditions 

  As mentioned above, the coagulation of micrometer sized 
dust  particles  begins  early  in  the  formation  of  protostellar 
clouds  and  continues 
stages  of 
through 
protoplanetary  disk  development.  Since  the  scale  of  the  box 

the  early 

3

size  within  the  numerical  model  is  small  when  compared 
against  the  scale  of  a  protostellar  or  protoplanetary  system, 
dust grain coagulation can be modeled as taking place in free 
space  in  a  non-rotating  frame.  Particles  were  given  an  initial 
uniform  random  distribution  and  velocity  dispersion  with 
5000  particles  having  radii  ranging  in  size  from  1  –  6  µm 
examined.  A  particle  number  density  n  =  105/cm3  was 
assumed, which is comparable to the dust density at the center 
edge of a protostellar cloud and about an order of magnitude 
greater  than  the  density  at  the  outer  edge  [38].  Since  the 
Debye  length  in  protostellar  clouds  is  much  greater  than  the 
average interparticle distance, Debye shielding has little effect 
on  the  aggregation  process  and  was  omitted  from  this  study. 
For illustrative purposes, the grains’ potentials were chosen to 
correspond  to  those  of  Horanyi  and  Goertz  [17]  in  which 
temperature  fluctuation  or  transient  heating  events  were 
assumed  to  introduce  a  charge  separation  in  the  dust 
population. Grains with radii less than 4 µm have an average 
surface potential of -1V, while those with radii greater than or 
equal  to  4  µm  have  an  average  surface  potential  of  +4V 
(model  1).  The  resulting  coagulation  rate  was  compared  to 
that determined for populations of uncharged grains (model 2) 
and like-charged grains with surface potentials of -1V (model 
3).  For  each  of  the  three  models,  four  runs  with  different 
random  number  seeds  were  performed  and  the  results  then 
averaged  together.  As  a  first  approximation  and  in  order  to 
speed  up  the  computation  time,  only  the  monopole  moments 
of the tree were used. In the original three models, charge was 
not distributed over the fractal aggregate, but was assumed to 
reside at the aggregate’s center of mass.  

Four  additional  models  were  used  to  study  the  effects  of 
including the electric dipole moments of the fractal aggregates 
as  well  as  the  tree  structure.  Models  4  and  5  consisted  of 
oppositely  charged  grains  as  in  model  1.  Only  the  dipole 
moment  of  the  aggregates  was  used  in  the  force  calculations 
of model 4, while model 5 included the dipole moments of the 
tree structure as well. Models 6 and 7 correspond to model 3 
(like-charged  grains)  with 
the 
aggregate  and  dipole  moments  of  the  aggregates  and  tree 
structure included in the force calculations, respectively. Due 
to the CPU time required for these simulations (ranging from 
10 days to two months on a DEC Alpha EV67 PS 667) only 
one run was conducted for each of these models. A summary 
of the models is given in Table I. 

the  dipole  moments  of 

 

TABLE I 
SUMMARY OF TEST MODELS 

Model 

CHARGE OF 
POPULATION 

Multipole Moments Used in Force 
Calculation 

Fractal Aggregate 

Tree Structure 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 

Oppositely charged  Monopole 
Monopole 
Neutral 
Monopole 
Like-charged 
Oppositely charged 
Dipole 
Dipole 
Oppositely charged 
Dipole 
Like-charged 
Dipole 
Like-charged 

Monopole 
Monopole 
Monopole 
Monopole 
Dipole 
Monopole 
Dipole 

4

a 

b 

a

b

MS# TPSO254 
 

  As  mentioned  in  Section  II,  grains  must  have  relative 
velocities  large  enough  to  overcome  the  Coulomb  barrier  in 
order  for  coagulation  to  occur.  For 1 µm grains charged to a 
-1V  potential,  this  minimum  relative  velocity  is  ~16  cm/s 
while for a 6 µm grain charged to a 4V potential this velocity 
is  2.7  cm/s.  Although  this  is  somewhat  greater  than  the 
to  Brownian  motion, 
thermal  velocities  expected  due 
turbulence  in  a  protoplanetary  disk  can  easily  lead  to  such 
velocities [39]. As a result, the grains in this model were given 
initial  velocities  on  the  order  of  10  cm/s.  Laboratory 
experiments  on  the  aggregation  of  µm-sized  solid  grains  and 
dust  agglomerates  have  shown  that  the  sticking  efficiency  is 
always  unity  for  moderate  collision  velocities  v  ≤  1  m/s  and 
that  monomers  merge  to  form  fractal  aggregates  [24]. 
Therefore,  the  collisions  in  the  simulation  were  required  to 
produce fractal aggregates with no restructuring or restitution. 

B.  Size Distribution of the Population 

A  defining  characteristic  of  collisional  growth  is  the 
evolution  of  the mean aggregate mass of the population over 
time.  The  mean  aggregate  mass  can  be  expected  to  grow  as 
m ∝  t2  if  the  collisional  cross-section  is  proportional  to  the 
aggregate mass [23] and as m ∝ exp(t) which results when the 
collision cross section scales as 
, where Df is the fractal 
dimension, described in the next section [40].  

fD2/ m

  The evolution of the mass of the aggregates (normalized 
to  the  mean  monomer  mass,  mo)  versus  time  is  plotted  for 
models  1-3  in  Fig.  1.  Increased  coagulation  can  be  seen  in 
model  1  (oppositely  charged  grains)  as  compared  to  that  of 
model  2  (neutral  grains).  At  t  =  5.0  s,  model  1  had  100%  of 
the  mass  aggregated  with  one  cluster  accounting  for  an 
average of 31±14% of the total mass. This is in comparison to 
model 2, which had 98% of the particles incorporated into an 
aggregate  structure  with  the  largest  aggregate  accounting  for 
3.4±0.6%of the total mass and model 3, which also had 98% 
of the of the particles incorporated and a mean largest mass of 
1.1±0.2% at the same elapsed simulation time. As expected, a 
population  of  like-charged  grains  retards  the  coagulation 
process.  

Fig.  1.  Temporal  evolution  of  the  aggregate  size  in  models  1-3.  a) 
Evolution of the aggregate with the largest mass. b) Evolution of the 
average mass of all aggregates. The dashed line in is an exponential 
fit to the data for model 1 indicating exponential growth.  

 

tot

ij /mm

The evolution of the differential mass distribution functions 
is  shown  for  models  1-3  in  Fig.  2.  The  mass  fraction  per 
logarithmic  interval,  Ni  = ∑ j
,  is  plotted  where  i 
indicates  the  ith  logarithmic  bin  and  j  is  the  index  of  each 
aggregate  populating  the  bin.  The  data  from  the  individual 
runs  was  binned  and  averaged  for  each  model.  The 
distributions are given for times t1 = 0.2 s, t2 = 1.0 s, t3 = 2.0 s, 
t4 = 3.0 s, and t5 = 4.0 s. The evolution of the mass distribu-
tions for both models 2 and 3 compare qualitatively with those 
seen  in  experimental  studies  for  uncharged  grains  [24].  In 

MS# TPSO254 
 

5

Fig. 2. Evolution of differential mass distribution function at times t1 = 0.2 s, t2 = 1.0 s, t3 = 2.0 s, t4 = 3.0 s, and t5 = 4.0 s for a) model 1, b) model 2, 
and c) model 3. The population of oppositely charged grains (model 1) rapidly shifts to higher masses with a high mass tail. Subsequent curves have
been shifted by a factor of 2 for clarity. 

 
 

 

d 

Fig. 3. Evolution of mass distributions for a) model 4, b) model 5, c) model 6 and d) model 7. Data is shown for times t1 = 0.2 s, 
t2 = 1.0 s, t3 = 2.0s in c) and d). Some curves have been shifted by factors of two for clarity. 

contrast,  the  mass  distribution  functions  for  model  1  rapidly 
shift to larger masses and develop the high mass tail indicative 
of  the  onset  of  gelation,  or  “runaway  growth”.    This  corres-
ponds to the formation of a few aggregates with large masses 
that  have  incorporated  most  or  all  of  the  small-mass 

aggregates.  

The mass fraction distributions for models 4-7 are shown in 
Fig. 3. As can be seen, the coagulation for oppositely charged 
grains takes place on a much shorter time scale with the onset 
of  gelation  occurring  in  less  than  a  second.  When  the  dipole 

MS# TPSO254 
 

moment  of  the  fractal  aggregates  is  considered,  the  gelation 
time  is  decreased  by  a  factor  of  ten  (compare  Fig.  3a  to  Fig. 
2a)  The  inclusion  of  the  dipole  moment  of  the  tree  structure 
further  decreases  this  time  by  a  factor  of  two  (Fig.  3b). 
Including  the  dipole  moment  of  the  fractal  aggregates  alone 
has very little effect on the coagulation rate (compare Figs. 2c 
and  3c).  However,  for  like-charged  grains,  including  the 
dipole  moment  of  the  tree  structure  as  well  (Fig.  3d) 
stimulates the production of a high-mass tail with subsequent 
runaway  growth,  as  seen  in  the  populations  with  oppositely 
charged  grains.  The  gelation  time  for  like-charged  grains  is 
about ten times that for oppositely charged grains. 
C.  Structure of Aggregates 

The  growth  process  is  strongly  dependent  on  the  fractal 
dimension  of  the  aggregate  structures  [40].  The  fractal 
dimension, Df, is related to the size and number of constituent 
particles by  

 

)r(N ∝
 

fDr

 

(6) 

the  accretion  method, 

where N(r) is the number of grains within a volume of radius r 
the  fractal 
[41].  Depending  on 
dimension  can  range  from  1.3  <  Df  <  3.  Models  of  ballistic 
particle-cluster accretion (BPCA) produce dense clusters with 
Df  ≈  3  [42],  while  ballistic  cluster-cluster  accretion  (BCCA) 
predicts  fluffier  aggregates  with  1.7  <  Df  <  2.1[43]. 
Laboratory experiments have shown aggregate growth follows 
BCCA  [7],  though  microgravity  experiments  have  produced 
aggregates  with  very  low  fractal  dimension  of  1.3  [9],  [25]. 
The formation of a large compact aggregate can act as a seed 
in 
for  “runaway  growth”,  a  well-known  phenomenon 
aggregation theory [13], [44].  
  The  fractal  dimension  of  the  aggregates  formed  in  this 

 Fig. 4. Distribution of fractal dimension for all aggregates at time t = 5.0s for 
a single run of model 2. The error bars show the uncertainties in the calculated 
values. 
 

simulation  is  calculated  from  the  slope  of  a  log-log  plot  of 

6

radius  measured  from  the  center  of mass versus the enclosed 
particle  number  [12].  The  values  of  Df  obtained  by  this 
method  must  be  considered  as  estimates  and  are  less  reliable 
for small aggregates, as the aggregates are finite structures and 
Df  is  only  strictly  defined  for  objects  extending  to  infinity 
[45].  

A sample plot of Df versus NA, the number of monomers in 
an  aggregate,  is  shown  in  Fig  4.  The  data  plotted  is  for  all 
aggregates consisting of three or more monomers and is taken 
from a single run of model 2 (neutral grains) at time t = 5.0 s. 
The  uncertainties  in  the  calculation  of  Df  are  shown  by  error 
bars, which are quite large for small aggregates. The values of 
Df  for  large  aggregates  converge  near  two,  while  the  mean 
value of Df for the population is 1.7 ± 0.7. 

A comparison of the results for models 1-3 is shown in Fig. 
5.  In  Fig.  5a-c,  the  probability  density  estimate  of  the  fractal 
dimension  is  shown  for  aggregates  with  more  than  10 
monomers at time t = 4.0 s. The data for the four runs in each 
of the models was binned according to Df and then averaged, 
with  error  bars  denoting  the  standard  deviation  of  the  mean. 
Model  1, which has undergone substantial coagulation, has a 
very  broad  distribution  with  40%  of  aggregates  having  a 
fractal  dimension  greater  than  two.  Models  2  and  3  have 
narrower distributions which peak at lower fractal dimensions. 
Only  20%  and  14%  of  the  aggregates  in  models  2  and  3, 
respectively, have aggregates with Df  > 2.  

The mean size of the aggregates contributing to the bins is 
shown  in  Fig  6.  The  mean  maximum  and  minimum  cluster 
mass  contributing  to  each  bin  is  also  indicated.  These  broad 
distributions  are  typical  of  those  seen  in  both  numerical  [23] 
and experimental studies [24]. However, model 1 also shows 
several  large-mass  clusters  with  high  fractal  dimensions. 
(Note  the  difference  in  scale  for  the  three  graphs.)    These 
dense clusters act as seeds for runaway growth.  

A comparison of the fractal dimension of the aggregates for 
models  4-7  is  shown  in  Fig  7.  It  is  readily  apparent  that  a 
significant fraction of the aggregate population in models 4, 5, 
and  7  have  Df    >  2,  while  model  6  has  a  probability  density 
that  is  centered  around  a  lower  fractal  dimension  (Fig  7a). 
Furthermore,  models  4,  5,  and  7  all  have  high  mass  clusters 
with Df > 2, which act as seeds for runaway growth (Fig. 7b). 
While  this  is  not  unduly  surprising  for  populations  of 
oppositely  charged  grains,  which  are  expected  to  exhibit 
enhanced coagulation, is it surprising that even populations of 
like-charged grains (e. g. model 7) can exhibit this behavior. It 
is clear that the electric dipole moment of the dust ensemble as 
well  as  that  for  fractal  aggregates  is  responsible  for  this 
behavior. This has important implications for coagulation in a 
protoplanetary  disk,  as  the  demonstration  that  larger  bodies 
can  form  from  the  constituent  dust  is  yet  an  open  issue  [1]. 
Rapid  coagulation  due  to  runaway  growth  of  charged  grains, 
whether like-charged or oppositely charged, may prove to be a 
necessary ingredient for this process.  

MS# TPSO254 
 

7

a 

b 

c 

Fig. 5. Normalized probability density estimate of fractal dimension for aggregates consisting of more than ten monomers. Data taken 
at time t = 4.0 s for a) model 1 – oppositely charged grains, b) model 2 – neutral grains, and c) model 3 – like-charged grains. 

 

a 

b 

c 

Fig. 6. Mean cluster mass (open circles), in bins for fractal dimension at t = 4.0s for a) 1, b) model 2, and c) model 3. The size variation 
of the clusters contributing to each bin is also indicated. 

IV.  CONCLUSION 

agglomeration on coagulation.  

through  Debye  shielding,  and 

A new numerical model with broad applications to complex 
(dusty)  plasma  physics  has  been  presented.  This  self-
consistent  fractal-aggregate  model  allows  accurate  numerical 
simulations of coagulation, while including the calculation of 
electrostatic  forces  between  charged  grains,  the  inclusion  of 
screened  potentials 
the 
rearrangement  of  charge  on  fractal  aggregates.  The  model 
produces  a  full  treatment  of  rigid  body  dynamics,  including 
rotation,  enabling  the  examination of both cluster trajectories 
and  the  orientation  of  fractal  aggregates.  The  coordinate 
system,  particle  size,  particle  charge,  dust  density,  Debye 
length  of  the  plasma,  external  potentials,  and  interparticle 
forces  can  all  be  specified  by  the  user.  The  algorithm  is 
robust,  allowing  application  to  a  variety  of  interesting 
problems 
rotating 
(protoplanetary/protostellar  disks)  and  non-rotating  frames 
(protostellar  clouds),  and  the  effects  of  charge  and  fractal 

coagulation  within 

such 

as 

 It  has  been  shown  that  populations  of  grains  that  become 
oppositely  charged  due  to  a  dust  size  distribution  have 
significantly  enhanced  coagulation  rates,  when  compared  to 
similar populations of like-charged or neutral grains. This is in 
agreement  with  previous  statistical  studies  [17].  The  mass 
distribution  among  fractal  dimension,  distribution  of  fractal 
dimensions,  and  temporal  evolution  of  mass  distribution 
functions also have been shown to agree with those found in 
other  self-consistent  N-body  codes  [23]  and  experimental 
studies [24]. 

Horányi  and  Goertz  [17]  assumed  that  oppositely  charged 
grains  could  only  occur  during  large  fluctuations  in  plasma 
temperatures  caused  by  transient  heating  events  such  as 
lightning,  magnetic  reconnection,  or  shocks,  and 
thus 
enhanced coagulation rates would be intermittent at best. The 
fact that oppositely charged grains can also occur in relatively 
cool plasmas as a result of the size distribution of the dust in 

MS# TPSO254 
 

implies 

the  plasma 
to 
oppositely  charged  grains  may  play  a  large  role  in  the 
evolution of the protoplanetary disk.  

that  enhanced  coagulation  due 

Of even greater significance is the decrease in gelation time 
due  to  the  charge-dipole  interaction  of  the  fractal  aggregates 
as well as the electric dipole moment of the dust ensemble (as 
modeled  by  the  tree  structure).  Recently  observed  in  the 

a 

b 

 
Fig. 7. Aggregate statistics for models 4-7, showing the effect of including the 
dipole moments of the aggregate and tree structure in the force calculations.  
 
 “PlasmaKristall-Experiment – Nefedov” experiments onboard 
the International Space Station and modeled analytically [14], 
this is the first treatment of the interaction by a self-consistent 
numerical model. The decrease in gelation time occurs due to 
the formation of high-density, high mass aggregates which act 
as  seeds  for  runaway  growth.  This  phenomenon  is  shown  to 
occur  even  for  a  population  of  particles  charged  to  a 
monopotential,  which  previously  was  assumed  to  retard 
coagulation rates. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  S. V. W. Beckwith, T. Henning, and Y. Nakagawa, “Dust properties and 
assembly  of  large  particles  in  protoplanetary  disks,”  in  Protostars  and 
Planets IV, V. Mannings, A. P. Boss, and S. S. Russell, Eds., University 
of Arizona Press, pp. 533-558, 2000. 

8

[2]  L.  Boufendi,  and  A.  Bouchoule,  “Particle  nucleation  and  growth  in  a 
low-pressure argon-silane discharge,” Plasma Sources Sci. Technol., vol. 
3, pp. 262-267, 1994. 

[3]  S.  J.  Weidenschilling,  and  J.  N.  Cuzzi,  “Formation  of  planetesimals  in 
the  solar  nebula.,”  in  Protostars  and  Planets  III,  E.  H.  Levy  and  J.  I. 
Lunine, Eds., University of Arizona Press, pp. 1031-1060, 1993. 

[4]  S. E. Strom, S. Edwards and M. F. Skrutskie, “Evolutionary time scales 
for  circumstellar  disks  associated  with  intermediate-  and  solar-type 
stars,”  in  Protostars  and  Planets  III,  E.  H.  Levy  and  J.  I  Lunine,  Eds., 
University of Arizona Press, pp. 837-866, 1993. 

[5]  D.  J.  Hollenbach,  H.  W.  Yorke,  and  D.  Johnstone,  “Disk  dispersal 
around young stars,” in Protostars and Planets IV, V. Mannings, A. P. 
Boss, and S. S. Russell, Eds., University of Arizona Press, pp. 401-428, 
2000. 

[7] 

[6]  D. J. Wilner and O. P. Lay, “Subarcsecond millimeter and submillimeter 
observations  of  circumstellar  disk,”  in  Protostars  and  Planets  IV,  V. 
Mannings,  A.  P.  Boss,  and  S.  S.  Russell,  Eds.,  University  of  Arizona 
Press, pp. 509-532, 2000. 
J.  Blum  and  M.  Münch,  “Experimental  investigations  on  aggregate-
aggregate collisions in the early solar nebula,” Icarus, vol. 106, pp. 151-
167, 1993. 
J. Blum, G. Wurm, S. Kempf, and T. Henning, “The Brownian motion of 
dust  particles  in  the  solar  nebula:  an  experimental  approach  to  the 
problem  of  pre-planetary  dust  aggregation,”  Icarus,  vol.  124,  pp.  441-
451, 1996. 
J.  Blum,  G.  Wurm,  T.  Poppe,  S.  Kempf,  and  T.  Kozasa,  “First  results 
from  the  cosmic  dust  aggregation  experiment  CODAG,”  Adv.  Space 
Res., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 497-503, 2002. 

[8] 

[9] 

[10]  P.  Meakin,  and  B.  Donn,  “Aerodynamic  properties  of  fractal  grains: 
implications for the primordial solar nebula,” Ap. J., vol. 329, pp. L39-
L41, 1988. 

[11]  V.  Ossenkopf,  “Dust  coagulation  in  dense  molecular  clouds:  the 
formation  of  fluffy  aggregates,”  Astron.  Astrophys.,  vol.  280,  pp.  617-
646, 1993. 

[12]  D.  C.  Richardson,  “A  self-consisten  numerical  treatment  of  fractal 

aggregate dynamics,” Icarus, vol. 115, pp. 320-335, 1995. 

[13]  M. H. Lee, “On the validity of the coagulation equation and the nature of 

runaway growth,” Icarus, vol. 143, pp. 74-86, 2000. 

[14]  A.  V.  Ivlev,  G.  E.  Morfill  and  U.  Konopka,  “Coagulation  of  Charged 
Microparticles  in  Neutral  Gas  and  Charge-Induced  Gel  Transitions,” 
Phys Rev Lett, vol. 89, no. 19, 2002. 

[15]  L.  Spitzer,  Physical  Processes  in  the  Interstellar  Medium,  New  York: 

John Wiley and Sons, 1978. 

[16]  A.  Chokshi,  A.  G.  G.  M.  Tielens,  and  D.  Hollenbach,  “Dust 

coagulation,” Ap. J., vol. 407, pp. 806-819, 1993. 

[17]  M.  Horanyi  and  C.  K.  Goertz,  “Coagulation  of  dust  particles  in  a 

plasma,” Ap. J., vol. 361, pp. 155-161, 1990. 

[18]  V. W. Chow, D. A. Mendis, and M. Rosenburg, “Role of grain size and 
particle  velocity  distribution  in  secondary  electron  emission  in  space 
plasmas,” J. Geophys. Res., vol. 98, pp. 19,065-19,076, 1993. 

[19]  L.  B.  Barge  and  T.  W.  Hyde,  “The  Calculation  of  Grain  Charge  in  a 
Dense  Dusty  Plasma  With  A  Nonuniform  Surface  Potential,”  Adv.  Sp. 
Res., vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 1277-1282, 2002. 

[20]  L. B. Barge and T. W. Hyde, “Charging In A Dusty Plasma With A Size 
Distribution:    A  Comparison  of  Three  Models,”  Adv.  Sp.  Res.,  vol.  29, 
no. 9, pp. 1283-1288, 2002. 

[21]  L. B. Barge and T. W. Hyde, “A Charging Model For a Dust Cloud with 
a Size Distribution and A Nonuniform Potential,” Adv. Sp. Res., vol. 29, 
no. 9, pp. 1289-1294, 2002. 

[22]  I. A. Belov, A. S. Ivanov, D. A. Ivanov, et al., “Coagulation of Charged 
Particles  in  a  Dusty  Plasma,”  J.  Exp.  And  Theor.  Phys.,  vol.  90,  no.  1, 
pp. 93-101, 2000. 

[23]  S.  Kempf,  S.  Pfalzner,  and  T.  K.  Henning,  “N-Particle-Simulations  of 

dust growth,” Icarus, vol. 141, pp. 388-398, 1999. 

[24]  G. Wurm and J. Blum, “Experiments on preplanetary dust aggregation,” 

Icarus, vol. 132, pp. 125-136, 1998. 

[25]  J.  Blum,  G.  Wurm,  S.  Kempf,  et  al.,  “Growth  and  form  of  planetary 
seedlings:  results  from  a  microgravity  aggregation  experiment,”  Phys 
Rev Lett, vol. 85, no. 12, 2000. 

[26]  D.  C.  Richardson,  “A  new  tree  code  method  for  simulation  of 

planetesimal dynamics,” MNRAS, vol. 261, pp. 396-414, 1993. 

[27]  D. C. Richardson, “Tree code simulations of planetary rings,” MNRAS, 

vol. 269, pp. 493-511, 1994. 

9

MS# TPSO254 
 

[28]  J.  Wisdom  and  S.  Tremaine,  “Local  Simulations  of  Planetary  Rings,” 

Astronom. J., vol. 95, no. 3, pp. 925-940, 1988. 

[29]  J.  Barnes  and  P.  Hut,  “A  hierarchical  O(N  log  N)  force-calculation 

algorithm,” Nature, vol. 324, pp. 446-449, 1986. 

[30]  L.  S.  Matthews  and  T.  W.  Hyde,  “Numerical  modeling  of  gravito-
electrodynamics in dusty plasmas,” in Proc. Of the Intl. Conf. on SCCS, 
I. Kalman, ed., pp. 231-235, 1998. 

[31]  L.  S.  Matthews  and  T.  W.  Hyde,  “Charged  Grains  In  Saturn's  F-Ring: 
Interaction With Saturn's Magnetic Field,” Adv. Sp. Res., in press, 2003. 
[32]  L.  S.  Matthews  and  T.  W.  Hyde,  “Dynamics  of  Charged  Grains  in 
Saturn's  F  Ring:  Encounters  with  Prometheus  and  Pandora,”  J  Phys  A, 
vol. 36, no. 22, pp. 6207-6214, 2003. 

[33]  L.  B.  Barge,  L.  S.  Matthews  and  T.  W.  Hyde,  “Coagulation  in  Dust 
Clouds Immersed in Transient Plasma Environments,” Adv. Sp. Res., in 
press, 2003. 

[34]  J. Vasut, T. W. Hyde and L. Barge, “Finite coulomb crystal formation,” 

Adv. Sp. Res., in press, 2003. 

[35]  J.  Vasut  and  T.  W.  Hyde,  “Computer  simulations  of  coulmb 
crystallization in a dusty plasma,” IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci, vol. 29, no. 
2, pp. 231-237, 2001. 

[36]  K.  Qiao  and  T.  W.  Hyde,  “Numerical  simulation  and  analysis  of 
thermally  excited  waves  in  plasma  crystals,”  Adv.  Sp.  Res.,  in  press, 
2003. 

[37]  K.  Qiao  and  T.  W.  Hyde,  “Dispersion  relations  for  thermally  excited 
waves in plasma crystals,” J. Phys. A, vol. 36, pp. 6109-6115, 2003. 
[38]  S. J. Weidenschilling, and T. V. Ruzmaikina, “Coagulation of grains in 
static and collapsing protostellar clouds,” Ap. J., vol. 430, pp. 713-726, 
1994. 

[39]  S. J. Weidenschilling, “Evolution of grains in a turbulent solar nebula,” 

Icarus, vol. 60, pp. 553-567, 1984. 

[40]  P. Meakin, “Fractal Aggregates in Physics,” Rev. Geophys, vol. 29, pp. 

317-354, 1991. 

[41]  B.  Donn  and  J.  M  Duva,  “Formation  and  properties  of  fluffy 

plantesimals,” Astrophys. and Sp. Sci., vol. 212, pp. 43-47, 1994. 

[42]  H.  Kimura,  H.  Okamoto,  and  T.  Mukai,  “Radiation  pressure  and  the 
Poynting-Robertson effect for fluffy dust particles,” Icarus, vol. 157, pp. 
349-361, 2002. 

[43]  P. Meakin, “Effects of cluster trajectories on cluster-cluster aggregation: 
A  comparison  of  linear  and  Brownian  trajectories  in  two-  and  three-
dimensional simulations,” Phys Rev, vol. A29, pp. 997-999, 1984. 
[44]  M. H. Ernst, in Fractals in Physics, Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 289-

[45]  B. B. Mandelbrot, The Fractal Geometry of Nature, San Francisco, CA: 

302, 1986. 

Freemont, 1982.  

 

