A System for Nuclear Waste Transmutation Driven by Target-Distributed Accelerators 
 
 
 
Anatoly Blanovsky  
Teacher Technology Center, 7850 Melrose Ave., Los Angeles, CA 90046, USA 

 
 
 
Abstract-A radioactive waste transmutation system based extensively on existing nuclear power technology is 
presented. By replacing the control rods with neutron sources, we could maintain good power distribution and 
perform long-lived waste burning in high flux subcritical reactors (HFSR). To increase neutron source intensity the 
HFSR is divided into two zones: a booster and a blanket. A neutron gate (absorber and moderator) imposed 
between two zones permits fast neutrons from the booster to flow to the blanket. Neutrons moving in the reverse 
direction are moderated and absorbed.  The design is based on a small pressurized water reactor (PWR), fission 
electric cell (FEC), target-distributed accelerator (TDA) and power monitoring system with in-core gamma-ray 
detectors, now under development in several countries. The FEC is essentially a high-voltage power source that 
directly converts the kinetic energy of the fission fragments into electrical potential of about 2MV. The TDA, in 
which an FEC electric field compensates for lost beam energy in the target, offers a new approach to obtain large 
neutron fluxes. 
 

INTRODUCTION 

I. 

HFSR CONCEPT 

 

In the conventional reactor, nuclear energy 
(electrical in nature) is converted to thermal, then to 
mechanical and then to electrical energy. To achieve 
a high degree of burn-up, only fresh low enriched 
uranium fuel is used. Because surplus reactivity is 
large, a large amount of the burnable poison material 
has to be put in the conventional reactor at the 
expense of the neutron economy. A typical fuel 
assembly remains in the PWR for 3 years to a total 
burn-up of thirty thousand MWD/ton. The burn-up 
limitation is mainly because of criticality, but not due 
to radiation damage to the fuel elements. The burn-up 
for a total of sixty thousand MWD/ton is possible 
with conventional zircaloy clad fuel elements.  

Several nations have programs to convert 

the PWR or fast breeder for waste burning. However, 
fast reactors have the high cost and long campaign. 
The thermal breeder is less expensive and safer than 
fast reactor. The concept is based on the use of a 
seed-blanket unit (SBU) pioneered at the Light Water 
Breeder Reactor. By lower the ratio of the volume of 
light water to the volume of fuel material, we can 
raise the average energy of neutrons to increase the 
conversion rate in the PWR.  

The majority of the fission wastes have a 

half-life of less than one year. However, some fission 
waste products, as well as actinides, need long-term 
storage. The loss of about 99% of the fuel energy 
content and concern about the safety of the burial 
solution justify alternative studies. One such 
alternative is the HFSR with solid and liquid fuels.  
    

 

The HFSR is mainly an epithermal breeder 

controlled by external neutron source intensity 
(source-dominated mode) or by variable feedback 
(self-amplifying mode). Managing the waste is 
significantly influenced by fission of the actinides. 
The most effective way of using the HFSR is to burn 
the actinides dissolved in water or in molten salt.  

In this design, the plutonium-neptunium fuel 

circulates in the blanket and the booster; the 
americium-curium fuel circulates in the outer 
reflector and absorber zone. Use of a liquid actinide 
fuel permits transport of the delayed-neutron emitters 
from the blanket to the booster where they can 
provide additional neutrons or all the necessary 
excitation without an external neutron source1. 

With blanket and booster multiplication 

factors of k=0.95 and 0.98, respectively, an external 
neutron source rate of at least 10.sup.15 n/s is needed 
to drive the self-amplifying HFSR that produces 
300MWt. Most of this power could be generated in 
the blanket that has actinide transmutation rate of 
about 100 kg/year.  

Since Np-237 and Am-241 fission cross-

sections are relatively low they would serve as 
absorbers in the low neutron flux of the dense 
absorber zone. In the high thermal neutron flux of the 
blanket, they would serve as a fuel. The effect of the 
fuel circulation throughout the core and cooling 
system on the HFSR reactivity is in the increasing 
role of delayed neutrons in the blanket. 

 
 

 I.A. Actinide Transmutation in the HFSR 

As the plutonium inventory in the blanket 

 

The HFSR module includes the distributed 

target, the separators, the booster and the blanket that 
consists of the SBU arranged in annular rings. It 
could be placed in the PWR pressure vessel, and a 
traditional system could be used to pump coolant to 
steam generators. The internal separators include 
well-shielded mini-tanks loaded with actinides from 
PWR spent fuel, and heat exchangers for heat transfer 
and some fission product deposition. In order to 
prevent the loss of neutrons, the reflectors surround 
the booster and the blanket (see Fig.1). 

The modified SBU includes a central zone 

with several channels containing liquid actinide fuel. 
Preferably the actinides would be in the form of a 
suspension or salts dissolved as fluorides in water. A 
zone of vented depleted uranium or thorium fuel rods 
surrounds the central zone. By replacing light water 
with heavy water in the PWR fuel assemblies, we can 
shift the neutron spectrum to higher energies and 
efficiently convert U-238 into fissionable nuclei. 
Removing gas and volatile precursors of fission 
products with high thermal cross sections could 
reduce a neutron poison.  

A preliminary analysis indicates that 

average thermal neutron fluxes of about 10.sup.15 
n/cm2s are achievable in the blanket with a power 
density of 300W/cm3 and tight heavy water lattice. 
To achieve a significant actinide burning efficiency, 
the volume ratio of the heavy water moderator to fuel 
in the central region of the fuel assembly is set as 
high as possible. In the high thermal neutron flux, the 
number of neutrons required for the destruction of 
Np-237 and Am-241 by fission is substantially less 
than if decay allowed Np-238 and Am-242 to 
proceed farther up in the neutron capture chain2.  

In the central zone, the Pu-239 content will 
be much reduced because of the physical separation 
of U-238 and actinides. Plutonium with a high Pu-
241 content that has an extremely high value of eta at 
epithermal energy and the delayed-neutron emitters 
are then continually transported into the booster. At a 
fissile fuel concentration of about 0.007 kg/l and 
depleted fuel concentration of 2.5 kg/l, the blanket 
would have k=0.95 up to maximum burn-up.  

There is also about 10kg of actinide fuel in 

the mini-tanks outside of the core. It is continually 
fed into the core at the rate up to 300 g/day, and 
water with equilibrium concentration of actinides is 
removed to a temporary waste storage. As the 
primary purpose of the actinide feed is reactivity 
control, a flow control valve for each mini-tank 
provides preset flow rate. The actinide fractional 
feeding is optimized to flatten power distribution.  

2 

increases, the actinide feeding can be reduced. After a 
few fuel cycles with a solid fuel replacement, the 
next feed for actinide on-site transmutation is 
prepared by removing the cladding metal and 
uranium separation. For example, a Purex process 
can be used to separate neptunium and a Truex 
process to separate americium-curium from waste. 

 Long-lived radioactive waste transmutation 
could be based on a microwave separator, in which a 
feed material consisting of mixed isotopes is ionized 
by electron cyclotron resonance. The ionized material 
is then fed to an ion cyclotron resonance unit, which 
is tuned to preferentially excite the minor species.  

At present, the cost of small power reactors 
is about $2 billion (the reactor component 33%, the 
turbine/generator 25% and other 42%). If the TDA 
cost were about $100 million, the HFSR cost would 
be equal or less than the cost of the present PWR, 
especially with the use of out-of-commission 
reactors. 
 

I.B. HFSR Control System 
 

Feedback signals from the FEC arrays and 
calorimetric gamma-ray detectors could be used to 
control the power of the accelerator sections. These 
detectors were tested at the Armenian nuclear power 
plant. The power distribution and thermal state of the 
VVER-440 were computed every 20 seconds on the 
basis of 2K signals. The time-dependent power-to-
signal conversion factor was determined from the 
previous values by using a simple recurrent formula. 
Off-line calculations were used for real-time 
synthesis of the signals into 3-D power distribution3.  
As the relaxation length of the power release 
is L/(1-k)1/2,  where L is the neutron migration length, 
the HFSR axial and radial distributions is similar to a 
commercial PWR. Photoneutrons produced in the 
blanket play an important part in the reactor control. 
Since the reactivity control can be basically 
performed electronically by using liquid fuel flow 
control valves, this simplifies core control and 
improves neutron economy. Conventional poison 
rods can be employed only for emergency shutdown 
of the reactor.  

The HFSR control system will also include a 

digital reactivity meter for subcriticality monitoring 
and a TV satellite dish with a built-in GPS receiver to 
analyze the ultrasonic concept of the plant seismic 
reinforcement. To monitor crustal deformation of the 
earth, the system requires radio signals received by 
antennas on a long baseline. As such motions are 
preceded by an earthquake, a GPS-based earthquake 
prediction technique might be developed. 
 

 
 

 
 

3 

 

II. 

PHOTONEUTRON TDA 

  

Target heating should not be a problem 

Since an external electric field acts counter 

Now, the most used photoneutron target is a 

 
thick tungsten layer followed by a beryllium layer. 
As the photon yield has maximum at depth of about 
0.3-0.5R, where R is the range of electrons, the target 
made of a thin high-Z metal, such as tungsten, lead or 
tantalum, with heavy water cooling could be used. 
After impacting the thin target, the electrons are post-
accelerated by the distributed transformer-rectifier 
circuits or the FEC.  
 
to the stopping power in the target or between the 
thin targets, the beam energy E is approximately 
constant. As a result, the neutron yield per particle is 
Y(E)= d/L(E), where d is the thickness of the target. 
For n thin targets, in which the energy loss is 
regained by the acceleration of the particles between 
targets, the total neutron yield per particle is nY.  
 
The Monte Carlo calculation of the total 
neutron yield per incident electron was made using 
MCNPX code. With 10 thin lead targets (0.2cm) in a 
thick lead tube and 30MV post acceleration, nY is 
about 0.02 at electron energy of 18MeV. With 
current 0.05A and total accelerating potential 48MeV 
the electron beam power is about 2.5MW. 
 
since the main energy loss by electron beam is 
radiative. Photoneutrons are mostly generated in 
actinides, heavy water and beryllium surrounded 
photon production targets. The possible candidates of 
the target materials are actinide salt in heavy water as 
an electrolyte is a highly condensed plasma, and 
thorium oxide as it has high dielectric constant in 
optical range of frequency. Also, the TDA, in which 
an electric field compensates for lost beam energy in 
the gas D-T target, can be used.  
 
The FEC array forms a high-voltage power 
source connected to the TDA. Each FEC has a tube-
type thin fuel cathode with ribs and a quasi-spherical 
or cylindrical anode, nested in a hexagonal 
moderator. As this design has an extremely low fuel 
inventory, a liquid actinide fuel might be used. After 
the fuel fission, the more massive fission fragments 
can reach the anode and deposit their charges.  
 
separated into two energy groups, a high efficiency 
and better electrical field distribution can be obtained 
through the use of a multistage collector (anode). 
With a two-stage collector, the second collector is 
made opaque. The first collector made of thin metal 
ribbons is essentially transparent to the incoming 
fragments but it is opaque to the fragments that are 
turned around. This technique is the most efficient 
(about 60%) because of its excellent space-charge 
handling ability4.  

Since the fission fragments are naturally 

The charge deposited by the electron beam 

 
in the target could be used to suppress the flow of 
secondary electrons across the gap between the FEC 
electrodes. As the stopping power is slightly 
increased, when the charge state of ions increases, the 
additional electric field across the cathode could 
increase the FEC electrical efficiency. The possible 
choices for the cathode materials are colored alkali 
halides to maximize the field strength in the cathode. 
Also, a relativistic magnetron driven by the FEC can 
be used as a microwave power sources for the TDA. 
The electron-screening effects that are controlled by 
the number of allowed energy states in medium and 
vacuum could play essential role in this design. 
 
S and macroscopic absorption cross-sections Σa, the 
average flux is F≈S/π*(Σa+DB2) and leakage 
probability P=B2L2/(1+ B2L2). Here the buckling is 
B=π/R and the diffusion mean free path is L2=D/Σa. 
Feedback is important in this design. As a liquid fuel 
transports a fraction of the delayed-neutrons α from 
the blanket, it could essentially improve the FEC 
performance. If D=0.7cm, Σa=10-3cm-1, R=15cm, 
L=25cm and α=0.25, we have S≈1012 n/s*cm3 and  
F≈7*1012 n/s*cm2 . The fission fragment current is 
about 0.5mA/g for the FEC fuel thickness of 1.5µm5.  

 
For a sphere with uniform density of sources 

III. 

CONCLUSION 

 

Although low energy accelerators are 
mainly seen as support equipment, recent advances in 
neutron generator technology have made it possible 
to use them for energy generation systems. Different 
neutron producing reactions (D-T, p-Li, γ-n, etc.) can 
be used. The initial HFSR design could be based on 
the intense D-T or resonance neutron sources and 
circulating-fuel reactor technology. The final design 
would require analysis of the relativistic effects in the 
electron TDA and in the FEC.  

  

 

REFERENCES 

 
1. L.BORST, "The Convergatron, a Neutron 
Amplifier", Phys.Rev.107, No 3, p.9, (1957). 
2. C.D. BOWMAN et al, "Nuclear Energy 
Generation and Waste Transmutation, NIM A320, p. 
336, (1992). 
3. A.BLANOVSKY, V.GERASKO, Y. TSOGLIN,   
"In-core Power Monitoring System SEVAN", KINR 
Report, Institute for Nuclear Research, Kiev (1985). 
4. R.V.MOIR, W.I.BARR  “Venetian-Blind Direct 
Energy Converter for Fusion Reactors”, Nuclear 
Fusion 13, p. 35, (1973). 
5. A. WEINBERG and E. WIGNER, "The Physical 
Theory of Neutron Chain Reactors", Chicago, (1958). 

  

