SIMILARITY  OF  SKELETAL  STRUCTURES  IN
LABORATORY AND SPACE AND
THE PROBABLE ROLE OF SELF-ASSEMBLING OF
A FRACTAL DUST IN FUSION DEVICES*

A.B. Kukushkin and V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov

RRC "Kurchatov Institute",
Moscow, 123182, Russia

ABSTRACT

This  papers  briefly  reviews  the  progress  in  studying  the  long-lived  filamentary
structures  of  a  skeletal  form  (namely,  tubules  and  cartwheels,  and  their  simple
combinations) in electric discharges in various fusion devices. These include fast Z-pinch,
tokamak  and  laser  produced  plasmas.  We  also  report  on  the  results  of  a  search  for  the
phenomenon  of  skeletal  structures  --  formerly  revealed  in  laboratory  data  from  fusion
devices -- at larger and much larger length scales, including the powerful electromagnetic
phenomena in the Earth atmosphere and cosmic space. It is found that the similarity of,
and  a  trend  toward  self-similarity  in,  the  observed  skeletal  structures  more  or  less
uniformly  covers  the  range  10-5-1023  cm.  These  evidences  suggest  all  these  skeletal
structures,  similarly  to  skeletons  in  the  particles  of  dust  and  hail,  to  possess  a  fractal
condensed  matter  of  particular  topology  of  the  fractal.  The  probable  role  of  the
phenomenon of self-assembling of a fractal dust in fusion devices and outside the fusion
is discussed briefly.

1. 

INTRODUCTION

The present paper gives a brief review of
(i) the progress that have been achieved since the last Symposium in our studies
of  long-lived  filamentary  structures  of  a  skeletal  form  (namely,  tubules  and
cartwheels,  and  their  simple  combinations)  in  electric  discharges  in  various  fusion
devices, and

(ii) the results of a search for the phenomenon, formerly revealed in laboratory
data from fusion devices [1-4], at larger and much larger length scales, including the
powerful electromagnetic phenomena in the Earth atmosphere and cosmic space.

The hypothesis [1,2] suggested the long-lived filaments  to possess a microsolid
skeleton  which  might  be  assembled  during  electric  breakdown,  prior  to  appearance
of major plasma, from wildly produced carbon  nanotubes (or similar  nanostructures
of  other  chemical elements). The proof-of-concept studies revealed the presence of
tubular and cartwheel-like structures in

(i) the high-resolution (visible light and x-ray) images of plasma in tokamaks, Z-
pinches,  plasma  focus,  and  laser-produced  plasmas  (in  the  range  100  m m  -  10  cm)
[1-4],  including  the  images  taken  at  electric  breakdown  stage  of  discharge  in

                                                            
* This is a shortened version of the paper to be published in «Current Trends in
International Fusion Research» (Proc. 5-th Symposium, Washington D.C., USA,
March 2003). Eds. C.D. Orth, E. Panarella, and R.F. Post. NRC Research Press,
Ottawa, Canada.

tokamak, plasma focus and vacuum spark [3,4], (ii) various types of dust deposits in
tokamak T-10 (10 nm - 10 m m) [5].

Here  we  append  previous  evidences  [3]  for  skeletal  structuring  with  the
evidences  (Sec.  2)  found  in  the  data  on  imaging  the  fast  Z-pinch  [6]  and  the  laser-
produced plasmas [4], as well as on electron microscopy of dust deposits in tokamak
[7(a,b)].

Then  we  briefly  discuss  the  problems  of  diagnosing  the  filamentary  structures
in fusion plasmas (Sec. 3). These include (a) the observability of skeletal  filamentary
structures  in  plasmas  of  a  fast  Z-pinch  [6],  besides  the  observability  in  a  slow  Z-
pinch [1-4], and (b) the missed diagnostic opportunities of streak camera imaging in
tokamaks [8].

Further, we extend the evidences for skeletal structuring to larger length scales
(Sec. 4). We present some results of analyzing the images of hail particles (1-10 cm),
tornado  (103-105  cm),  and  of  a  wide  class  of  objects  in  space  (1011-1023  cm),
including  the  solar  coronal  mass  ejection,  supernova  remnants,  and  some  galaxies
[9].  This  will  enable  us  to  hypothesise  for  the  probable  presence  of  a  fractal
condensed  matter  of  particular  topology  of  the  fractal  in  the  entire  range  10-5-1023
cm.

In Sec. 5,  we  discuss  the  present  status  of  the  qualitative  model  [1,2],  These
include (i) recent findings of anomalous magnetism of, and low dissipation of trapped
magnetic  flux  in,  carbon  nanotubes  and  their  assemblies,  (ii)  conservation  of
topology  in  a  growing/expanding  skeleton,  (iii)  survivability  of  skeletons  in  an
ambient plasma.

In  Sec.  6,  we  briefly  discuss  probable  role  of  the  phenomenon  of  self-

assembling of a fractal dust in fusion devices and outside the fusion science.

2.  MORE  EVIDENCES  FOR  SKELETAL  STRUCTURING  IN  THE
LABORATORY

2.1 Longevity of Skeletal Structuring in Fast Z-pinch

The  longevity  of  skeletal  structures  in  the  slow  gaseous  Z-pinch  E-2  (discharge
tube 60 cm long, 20 cm diameter, energy store ~30 kJ; initial voltage ~
 30 kV; initial
pressure  of  deuterium  gas  1.2  Torr;  maximal  current  ~150  kA)  has  been
demonstrated via tracing the dynamics of the few centimeters long, straight filaments
directed nearly transverse to major electric current of the Z-pinch (see Figure 2 in [1]
or Fig. 1 in [2(b)]). Those images were taken in the same discharge at different time
moments - during about half a microsecond -- and different observation angles  q
  in
the plane orthogonal to Z-pinch axis.

Here we present the data from the fast Z-pinch facility S-300  [10].  These  data
were obtained in the experiments on studying the fine structure of fast Z-pinches for
the program of plasma x-ray radiation sources. In these discharges in the S-300, the
total electric currents amounts to 1-3 MA, with the current growth front of  ~ 100  ns
duration. The load was a tailored cylinder (8 mm long,  3-5 mm  in  diameter,  with  a
neck of  ~ 1  mm  diameter),  made  of  agar-agar  with  various  heavy-element  fillings.
The  analyzed  images  were  taken  with  the  help  of  electronic  optical  converters
(exposure 3  ns, interframe interval 15  ns, spatial resolution 50-100  m m).  In  a  single
discharge, from 3 to 5 images were successively taken in the visible light and/or soft
x-rays (SXR), with covering a part of vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) spectral range.

The  original  images  were  processed  with  the  help  of  the  method  of  multilevel
dynamical contrasting (MDC)  [11(a,b)] (this method may increase spatial resolution
by  an  order  of  magnitude).  Basically,  for  the  images  of  high  spatial  resolution  the
structures  under  search  are  practically  resolvable,  however,  without  any  MDC
processing:  it  is  merely  suffice  to  magnify  the  original  image  to  a  proper  size.  The
MDC processing resolves the fine structure and makes it more distinct.

Below we present the pictures which are obtained from original images using a
«homogeneous»  map  of  contrasting,  i.e.  a  single  map  for  the  entire  image  (in
general,  the  map  of  contrasting  is  a  dependence  I1  vs.  I0  which  prescribes  that  the
given value I0 of image’s blackening is to be replaced at all points where this value is
encountered in the original image, by the certain value I1). The reliable identification
of structuring requires  [11(a,b)], however, a variable (i.e., «breathing», «dynamic»)
map -- to avoid artifacts and select an optimal final image. The best would be having
an  optimal  map  for  each  patch  of  the  image  (we  call  this  a  mosaic  MDC).  This,
however,  makes  the  image  either  unreasonably  complicated,  because  of  boundary
effects,  or  requesting  additional,  non-contrasting  procedures.  Therefore  we  present
here the images obtained with a homogeneous map of contrasting and additionally, in
the  special  windows  (see  Figs.  2,8),  we  give  a  schematic  drawing  of  the  structuring
that  has  been  revealed  through  the  mosaic  MDC  processing,  to  help  a  reader  in
recognizing the structuring in the presented image.

The  use  of  MDC  method  enabled  [6]  to  (i)  observe  the  long-lived  skeletal
structures (SSs) in plasma, (ii) reveal the continuity of SS in the core and periphery,
(iii) roughly trace dynamics of  SSs  during  the  entire  discharge,  (iv)  resolve  the  fine
structure of SS. The properties of skeletal structures are found to be much different
from  chaotic  filaments.  The  observed  longevity  of  SSs  means  that  they  may  exist
during  the  time  period  which  largely  exceeds  the  lifetimes  predicted  by  the  MHD
approach  and  plasma  kinetics  (for  the  slow  Z-pinch  E-2  the  lifetime  of  the  above-
mentioned  straight  blocks  exceeded  respective  predictions  by  the  orders  of
magnitude).  The  phenomenon  of  longevity  for  the  case  of  the  fast  Z-pinch  is
illustrated  with  Figure  1  which  shows  two  successive  images  (positives)  with
interframe time  ~ 15  ns,  taken  in  soft  x-rays  in  a  single  discharge  by  two  different
electronic  optical  converters  from  almost  the  same  position  (the  observation  angles
differ by the few degrees only).  Both  images  are  analyzed  with  respect  to  probable
existence of objects which conserve their structure during the interframe period (note
that  the  relative  position  of  such  objects  may  differ  due  to  internal  restructuring  or
global rotation of the entire structure). Such structures are found in the windows 1-4
where  the  original  image  is  processed  with  the  MDC  method.  Also,  typical
recognizable dark spots are marked (see labels  5 and  6). All the windows  1-4  (and
respectively  1’-4’)  exhibit  the  presence  of  the  same,  conservative  and  quite
distinctive structuring that indicates on the longevity of these structures.

The fine structure of skeletal structuring, whose recognizability allows tracing the
dynamics  of  discharge,  is  illustrated  with  Fig.  2  which  shows  magnified  images  of
windows  2  and  3  from  Fig.  1.  The  windows  show  tubular  structures  of  various
diameter  and  declination  with  respect  to  observer.  The  tubules  in  the  window  2
seems  to  have  a  thick  bright  region  in  the  base  of,  presumably,  a  larger  coaxial
structure. The tubule in the window 3 has a small bright point on the front edge. For
each image, we give schematic drawing of the structuring, which is obtained with the
help of mosaic MDC method.

Fig. 1. Two successive images (positives, exposure 3 ns) with interframe time ~ 15 ns, taken in the Z-pinch facility
S-300  in  soft  x-rays  in  a  single  discharge  by  two  different  electronic  optical  converters  from  almost  the  same
position. Figure height ~ 1 cm. Detailed comparison of the images suggests the longevity of skeletal structuring.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. The magnified images of the windows 2 and 3 from Fig. 1 (figures (a) and (b), respectively). The width of the
images  is  ~1  mm  (a)  and  1.75  mm  (b).  Schematic  drawings  of  the  structuring,  given  in  the  corner  windows  ,  are
obtained with the help of mosaic MDC method (see Sec. 2.1).

2.2 Skeletal Structuring in Dust Deposits in Tokamak

One  of  the  most  direct  verification  of  hypotheses  [1,2]  for  the  presence  of  a
self-similar  skeletons  made  of  a  condensed  matter  may  come  from  an  analysis  of
dust  deposits  in  electric  discharges.  This  seems  to  be  the  case  for  the  studies  of
various types of dust deposit in tokamak T-10. The presence of skeletal structures in
the range 10 nm - 10 m m was found [5] in the images obtained by the high-resolution
transmission  (TEM)  and  scanning  (SEM)  electron  microscopy  of  dust  particles  and
thin  films.  The  original  database  has  been  produced  within  the  frame  of  the  safety
and environmental program of the ITER project (see the survey [12]). These studies
were aimed, in particular, at analyzing the origin of unusual, non-trivial structures in
the  dust  deposits  (e.g.,  those  of  a  cauliflower-like  form  [13]  observed  in  tokamaks
TEXTOR  [14]  and  T-10  [12]).  The  enhancement  of  spatial  resolution  up  to  ~10

nm,  via  using  the  transmission  electron  microscopes,  allowed  [12]  to  find,  besides
cauliflower-like structures, new types of structuring originated from the presence of
an internal  dendritic  skeleton,  composed  of  nanotubular  blocks,  in  certain  types  of
dust particles and films.

In  the  literature,  the  aggregation  of  cauliflower-like  structures  is  interpreted  in
different ways. The concept of dusty plasmas suggests (see e.g. [15]) that in fusion
devices,  similarly  to  plasma  processing  devices,  such  an  aggregation  takes  place  in
the  peripheral  plasma  and  results  from  the  action  of  the  ambient  plasma  on  the
highly-charged  dust  microparticles.  Alternatively,  experiments  on  modeling  the
plasma-surface  interaction  in  fusion  devices,  via  studying  the  interaction  of  an  ion
beam  with  a  solid  target,  suggest  such  a  structuring  to  take  place  essentially  on  the
surface of fusion facility’s wall [12,16].

tokamak  T-10, 

this  component 

Here,  we  make  a  stress  on  the  progress  in  appending  the  former  evidences
[5,3] with those from [7(a,b)] to show that the skeletal structures in the dust deposits
may posses a dendritic form and that such skeletons may be hidden in an amorphous
component  (in 
the
hydrocarbons). Such a component may hide the internal skeleton either fully (to give
a solitary dust particle, e.g. of  submicron  size)  or  partly  (to  give  an  agglomerate  of
visually separate particles (AVSP)). The example of AVSP may be found in Figures
4-6 in [7(a)]. It follows from analysis of AVSPs that the skeletal blocks inside AVSP
may  be  arranged  in  a  more  or  less  ordered  unified  skeleton.  The  visually-separate
quasi-spherical  formations  appear  to  be  the  blobs  of  an  amorphous  component
trapped by (or deposited on) basic blocks of a  dendritic skeleton. Roughly speaking,
the quantity of amorphous component in this dust particle seems to be not sufficient
to fill in the gaps between the neighboring blocks of the skeleton.

is  formed  mostly  by 

Note that compatibility of dendricity and tubularity in the same tubular skeleton
[7(a,b)]  supports  the  hypothesis  [1,2]  for  a  streamer-like  mechanism  of  self-
assembling of macroscopic tubular skeletons from  nanotubular blocks during electric
breakdown.

2.3 Skeletal Structuring in Laser-Produced Plasmas

Tracing  the  dynamics  of  self-assembling  of  skeletal  structures  in  laboratory
electric  discharges  would  require  high  time  resolution  of  imaging  the  initial  stage  of
discharge  to  check  not  only  the  assembling  as  itself,  but  also  the  conservation  of
topology in a growing/expanding skeleton. These is also an implicit way to study the
skeletal structuring, namely an analysis of time-integrated images of a plasma system
where the formation of skeletal structures is expected to happen. In the latter case, if
the  growth/expansion  of  a  skeletal  structure  during  observation  time  is  slow  enough
or  the  expansion  slows  down,  i.e.  saturates,  the  structure  might  be  seen  on  the
background of the time-integrated image of the expanding plasma component of the
discharge [4].

The skeletal structures are expected to be formed even in such a  bursty system
like  the  plasma  corona  produced  by  the  irradiation  of  a  solid  foils  by  a  pulsed  laser
beam.  Indeed,  the  expanding  plasma  may  produce  the  electric  current  directed
opposite  to  the  laser  pulse.  This  pulsed  current  produces  a  strong  magnetic  field
which,  in  turn,  may  produce  a  return  electric  current  and  thus  close  an  effective
electric  circuit  at  the  periphery  of  the  plasma  corona.  Regardless  of  specific  kinetic
mechanism  of  the  above  qualitative  picture,  the  central  near-axis  region  of  the
expanding  plasma  corona  may  possess  the  properties  of  a  Z-pinch  plasma  column.
Therefore,  one  could  expect  to  observe  some  properties  of  a  Z-pinch  column  in

certain  regions  of  the  laser-produced  plasma  corona  [4].  Indeed,  the  expected
examples  of  transverse-to-axis  straight  filaments  have  been  found  in  respective
experimental data (see [3]).

Here, we present an exciting example of unusual fine structuring -- a sort of the
walking-stick  with  toroid-like  handles  (see  e.g.  the  end  knob)  --  seen  as  a  three
dimensional  formation,  thanks  to  the  presence  of  above-mentioned  handles  and
geometric perspective of a straight formation declined with respect to image’s plane
(Fig. 4). Moreover, it looks like there is a cartwheel-like structure located at this stick
as a wheel at an axle.

Fig. 3. The filtered X-ray pinhole image (negative) of the
typical  plasma  corona  produced  by  the  Nd  laser  pulse
( l = 1.06  m m,  2.5  ns  duration,  power  density  5  1013
W/cm2) incident on the  lavsan  foil  with  aluminum  dots.
The  original  is  taken  from  the  database  of  experiments
[17]. The target was located approximately on the bottom
of  the  image,  the  beam  was  directed  downward.  Image
height  ~  5  mm.  The  magnified  image  in  the  frame  is
shown in Figure 4.

Fig. 4. A fragment of the image of Figure 3 marked with a frame. Image’s width ~750 m m. One may see the image of a
walking-stick whose end knob (of diameter ~ 80  m m)  is  seen  on  the  right-hand  side  on  the  figure.  This  stick  is
oriented horizontally and declined with respect to figure’s plane. One more handle-like structure of smaller diameter
is seen on the stick behind the end knob. There is one more structure, though less distinct one, which is located on
the stick, behind the latter structure - it looks like a cartwheel-like structure for which the stick serves as an axle-
tree.

Another  type  of  plasma  dynamics  which  exhibits  similar  type  of  a  skeletal
structure, is found in the data from experiments [18] on laser irradiation of a  fractal

target, namely «agar-agar» (C14H18O7). Here, in contrast to the case of an expanding
plasma  corona,  major  plasma  is  formed  inside  the  fractal  target.  The  transversely
directed filamentary formation appears to possess a coaxial structure, namely a ring-
shaped  structures  on  a  common  thin  axle  (see  the  right-hand  side  of  the  bottom
image in Fig. 5).

Fig. 5. The X-ray pinhole images (negatives) of the brightest part of a plasma produced by the Nd laser pulse ( l =
1.054 m m, 2.5 ns duration, power density 5 1013 W/cm2) in the inner part of the «agar-agar» (C14H18O7) film target of
thickness 0.5 mm and mass density 2 mg/cm3. The originals are taken from the database of experiments [18]. The
upper edge of the target was located approximately on the top of each image, the beam was directed downward.
The images are taken through aluminum filters. Four time-integrated images correspond to different thickness of
these filters, in the range 5  m m to 20  m m,  with  the  thinnest  one  for  the  bottom  image.  Image’s  width  is  720  m m.
Spatial resolution is 20 m m. A straight filament directed orthogonal to laser pulse direction is seen on all the images
whereas the elliptical images of the circular filaments centered around the above-mentioned filament are distinct
mostly for the thinnest filter (see right-hand side of the bottom image).

For more examples of skeletal structures in laser-produced plasmas see ref. [4].
The  original  data  from  experiments  [17,18]  (Figures  3,5)  have  been  kindly

presented by N.G. Kovalskyi  and V.V. Gavrilov.

3.  ON  DIAGNOSING  FILAMENTARY  STRUCTURES  IN  FUSION
PLASMAS

The role of high time resolution for the identification of skeletal structures (and
tracing  their  dynamics)  was  discussed  in  Sec.  2.1  for  the  case  of  the  fast  Z-pinch.
The  problem  of  diagnosing  the  fine  structure  of  filaments  in  tokamaks  has  been
discussed in [3] with regard to severe limitations imposed by the fast toroidal/poloidal

rotation of both the plasma and skeletal components. It appeared that time resolution
(~15 m s)  sufficient  for  identification  of  skeletal  structures  at  the  very  initial  stage  of
discharge in tokamak T-6 (in particular, at a time t ~300 m s before appearance of the
plasma current signal in  Rogowski coil), via visible light imaging with the help of an
electronic optical converter, has to be enhanced by an order of magnitude to identify
similar  structures  at  the  steady-state  stage  of  discharge,  because  of  the  fast  rotation
of  plasma  at  this  stage.  Even  the  best  available  diagnostics  of  filaments  in  tokamak
plasmas, namely ultra-high speed CCD camera used at  tokamaks NSTX and  Alcator
C-Mod  (see  [19]  and  references  therein),  has  space-time  resolution  still  insufficient
to  detect  fine  structure  of  the  filaments  observed.  Such  a  diagnostics  allows  tracing
the  dynamics  of  the  few  centimeters  structuring  [19]  whereas  the  fine  structure  of
filaments to be detected in the periphery of tokamaks TM-2, T-4, T-6 and T-10 was
shown  (see  [3]  and  references  therein)  to  require  at  least  a  few  millimeters
resolution.

The uniqueness of skeletal blocks, particularly the distinct layout of bright spots
(«hot  spots»)  within  a  skeletal  structure,  makes  it  possible  to  measure  the  dynamic
characteristics of both the skeletal and plasma components in various fusion devices.
Here,  the  best  way  would  be  the  high  time  resolution  diagnostic  with  short  enough
interframe  time  (e.g.  via  imaging  with  the  help  of  an  electronic  optical  converter).
There  is  also  a  simple  way  to  use  streak  camera  imaging  whose  opportunities  have
been  shown  [8]  to  be  missed.  This  follows  from  an  analysis  of  the  data  on  streak
camera  imaging,  with  effective  time  resolution  of  the  order  of  one  microsecond,  in
the  visible  light  in  the  former  experiments  in  tokamaks  TM-2,  T-4,  and  T-6.  The
streak  camera  imaging  in  tokamaks  provides  diagnostic  opportunities  based  on  the
existence  of  a  long-lived  fine  structure  of  filaments  (of  luminosity)  in  plasmas  (here
the  longevity  implies  that  the  structure  is  identifiable  during  the  time  period
comparable  with  the  slow  MHD  times,  e.g.,  with  the  period  of  plasma  toroidal
rotation). The conclusions of analysis [8] are as follows.

First, skeletal structures do rotate in tokamaks, probably at a speed close to that
of plasma. Indeed, just the relative motion, with respect to the diagnostic slit, of both
the  plasma  column  and  the  internal  skeletons  makes  it  possible  to  obtain  a  side-on
image  of  the  plasma  column  (of  course,  under  condition  of  simultaneous  motion,
with  respect  to  the  slit,  of  the  exposed  film,  or  under  similar  conditions  for  an
electronic reading of the signal). Thanks to plasma’s radiation emission, the image on
the film is produced in regime of a self-scanning of electric discharge’s interior. Note
that rotation of the plasma is visible because of perturbations of radiation  emissivity
of plasma in the regions of density/temperature perturbations (at the plasma column
periphery,  these  perturbations  are  seen  in  the  visible  light  and  practically  coincide
with  magnetic  perturbations  measured  with  magnetic  probes).  The  fine  structure  of
streak camera’s images taken in tokamak T-6 (major/minor radii 70/20 cm; BT ~ 0.9
T; Ip ~ 100 kA; Te(0) ~0.4 keV, ne(0) ~ 2 1013 cm-3) is illustrated with Figures 6-8.

Fig. 6. A fragment of the streak camera image (positive, height 40 cm)) of the plasma column (toroidal direction is
horizontal) taken in tokamak T-6 through a vertical slit. Thick horizontal lines are the reference marks (namely, the
wires) on the outer surface of diagnostic window.

Fig. 7. The fragment of the image of Fig. 6 marked with a window. The original of Fig. 6 is only slightly processed
here with the method of multilevel dynamical contrasting (MDC)  [11(a,b)]. The width of the image is evaluated to
be ~15 cm (the velocity of the exposed film motion was empirically adjusted to minimize the blurring of bright spots
in toroidal direction in the given type of tokamak discharge; this allowed to evaluate the horizontal length scale in
the image, for the given optical scheme of imaging). The perspective in the images of straight filaments may be
seen as a continuous, smooth screening of the filament by the ambient plasma.

Fig. 8. The left part of the image in Fig. 7 which is
processed  with  the  MDC  method.  The  scheme  in
the right corner insert is obtained with the help of
mosaic  MDC  method  (see  Sec.  2.1).  Thanks  to
empirically  adjusted  coincidence  of 
toroidal
rotation of the skeletal structures and (respectively
scaled, for the given optical scheme) velocity of the
exposed  film,  the  blurring  of  bright  spots  takes
place only in poloidal direction. In such a situation,
both  torodial  and  poloidal  rotation  velocities  of
bright  spots  (and  skeletal  structures)  have  been
evaluated [8].

Second,  a  new  method  of  streak  camera  imaging  was  suggested  [8]  which
allows  the  determination  of  time  evolution  of  direction  and  magnitude  of  rotation
velocity  of  skeletal  structures  in  a  tokamak.  This  exploits  the  «blurring»  of  bright
spots (within these filaments) in  toroidal and  poloidal  directions,  for  a  wide  enough
slit. The above determination in a  single discharge requires a special optical scheme
and  preliminary  optimization,  trying  only  few  discharges,  of  the  time-dependent
velocity  of  pulling  the  exposed  film  (or  its  electronic  analog).  The  examples  are
presented  [8]  of  evaluating  the  velocities  from  the  data  from  tokamak  T-6
experiments  in  the  ordinary  scheme  which  requires  trying  many  discharges  to
optimize the imaging.

4.  SKELETAL  STRUCTURES  AT  GEO-  AND  ASTROPHYSICAL
LENGTH SCALES

We  try  to  draw  a  bridge  between  laboratory  experiments  and  space  with
presenting  a  short  gallery  of  cartwheel-like  structures  --  probably  the  most
inconvenient  objects  for  being  described  universally  for  the  entire  range  of  length
scales  under  consideration  [9].  The  cartwheels  of  dramatically  different  size  have
been  found  (see  [9])  in  the  following  examples  of  (i)  big  icy  particles  of  a  hail,  of
several centimeters  in  diameter,  (ii)  a  fragment  of  tornado  of  estimated  diameter  of
some  hundred  meters,  (iii)  a  fragment  of  solar  coronal  mass  ejection  of  estimated
diameter ~5 1011  cm,  and  (iv)  supernova  remnant,  «a  flaming  cosmic  wheel»  forty
light-years across, i.e. ~4 1019 cm.

We may add to the last item of this list the wheel-like supernova remnant G11.2-
0.3 which is also 40 light years across (see [23] .../cycle1/1227/1227_xray.tif), and a
two-ring  coaxial  structure,  with  the  inner  ring  of  one  light  year  in  diameter,  in  the
centre  of  the  Crab  nebula  (see  [23]  .../0052/0052_x-ray_lg.jpg,  where  radial
structures  are  less  distinct  though).  The  gallery  of  cosmic  wheels  is  obviously  to  be
finished  with  the  object  named  by  the  astronomers  the  Cartwheel  galaxy,  150,000
light years across, i.e. ~1.4 1023 cm (see [24] .../gif/cartknot.gif).

Significantly,  most  distinct  example  of  cosmic  wheel’s  skeleton  (Fig.  4  in  [9])
tends  to  repeat  the  structure  of  the  cartwheel,  coated  with  ice,  (Fig.  1  in  [9])  up  to
details  of  its  constituent  blocks.  For  instance,  some  of  radially  directed  spokes  are
ended  with  a  tubular  structure  seen  on  the  outer  edge  of  the  cartwheel.  Moreover,
there  are  evidences  for  the  trend  toward  self-similarity  because,  e.g.,  the  cartwheel
structure  of  the  icy  particle  contains  a  smaller  cartwheel  as  a  constituent  block  (see
the  edge  cross-section  of  the  tubule  in  the  left  lower  window  in  Fig.  1  in  [9]).  This
fact extends to larger length scales the evidences for such a trend in tubular skeletons
in the dust deposits [5,7].

The  ring-shaped  structure  of  supernova  remnant  may  be  reproduced  within  the
frame  of  hydrodynamic  description  of  an  expanding  magnetized  plasma-gaseous
medium  (see,  e.g.,  [25]  for  the  formation  of  the  three-ring  structure  around
supernova 1987A). However, we didn’t find in the literature an attempt  to  model  a
ring-shaped system with radial bonds, i.e. the cartwheel.

Besides the distinctive topology (e.g., the cartwheels) of general layout of bright
spots  within  skeletal  structures,  another  evidence  for  the  phenomenon  of  skeletons
comes  from  the  resolution  of  fine  structure  of  luminosity  around,  at  first  glance,
solitary  bright  spots.  The  best  relevant  evidence  seems  to  be  the  shining  edge  of  a
truncated  straight  filament  which  belongs  to  a  skeletal  network  (see  [9]).  The
similarity of an electric torch-like structure of bright spots at different length scales is
found  in  various  laboratory  electric  discharges  and  in  space,  in  the  range  10-2-1022

cm.  Such  a  similarity  suggests  that  the  blocks  of  skeletons  may  work  as  a  guiding
system for (and/or a conductor of) electromagnetic signals. Therefore, the open end
of a dendritic electric circuit or a local disruption of such a circuit (e.g., its sparkling,
fractures, etc.) may self-illuminate it to make it observable.

Some 

indications  on 

the  probable  presence  of  skeletal  structuring  at
cosmological lengths, namely in the clusters of galaxies in the range 1024-1026 cm, are
found [26] in analysing the galaxy redshift surveys.

5.  THE PRESENT STATUS OF HYPOTHESES [1,2]

The prediction [1,2] of the phenomenon of skeletons in a wide range of lengths,
starting  from  nanoscale  structures,  was  based  on  appealing 
to  exceptional
electrodynamic  properties  of  their  hypothetical  building  blocks  --  first  of  all,  the
ability  of  these  blocks  to  facilitate  the  electric  breakdown  in  laboratory  discharges
and 
to  assemble  macroskeletons.  The  carbon  nanotube  (CNT)  or  similar
nanostructures  of  other  chemical  elements  have  been  suggested  to  be  such  blocks.
The self-assembling of skeletons was suggested to be based dominantly on magnetic
phenomena. This, in fact, assumes the following simultaneous processes, namely

(a )  externally  driven  expansion/inflation  of  a  self-assembling  network  (in
laboratory  discharges,  there  is  an  inflow  of  magnetic  field  from  the  external  electric
circuit, which is especially intense at initial stage of discharge; in space, an expansion
may result, e.g., from nuclear energy release produced by gravitational instability and
collapse),

(b ) sticking of the blocks together -- due to trapping of magnetic flux by  CNTs,
and/or  their  assemblies,  and  respective  mutual  magnetic  dipole  attraction;  at
macroscopic scales this mechanism agrees with the experimentally verified trend [27]
in  magnetically  confined  plasmas  to  form  the  so-called  force-free  configuration
which sustains a balance between longitudinal and transverse magnetic confinement,
and thus always produces a longitudinal attraction both in the entire plasma column
and individual electric current filament, and

(g ) partial solidification due to welding of blocks by the passing electric current.
We  believe  that  the  mechanisms  (a ),(b ),  and  (g )  may  give  a  parachute-like
expansion of a  dendritic  network  (namely,  a  parachute  with  the  «liquid»  strops  and
the  localised  explosive  sources  of  dendricity),  which  selects  the  structures  of  a
matter-saving and survivable geometry (first of all, tubules and cartwheels, and their
combinations) regardless of specific source of expansion/inflation.

The indications on plausibility of the anomalous magnetism and, in particular,  on
the ability of CNTs, and/or their assemblies, to trap and almost  dissipationlessly hold
the  magnetic  flux,  with  the  specific  magnetization  high  enough  to  stick  the  CNTs
together,  come  from  observations  of  superconductor-like  diamagnetism  in  the
assemblies of  CNTs  at  high  enough  temperatures.  Such  evidences  are  obtained  for
the self-assemblies of CNTs (which contain, in particular, the ring-shaped structures
of  few  tens  of  microns  in  diameter)  inside  non-processed  fragments  of  cathode
deposits, at room temperatures, [28] and for the artificial assemblies, at 400 K [29].

The indications on the  conservation of topology in a growing/expanding skeletal
structure  (i.e.  on  the  compatibility  of  rigidity  of  certain  blocks  with  the  global/local
expansion)  come  from  the  available  data  --  at  this  point,  unfortunately,  rare  ones  --
on tracing the dynamics of a cosmic explosion, namely such in the young star system
XZ Tauri, ~0.01 light years across (.../PR/2000/32/ [24]). Here, we found the signs
of  a  two-dimensional  expansion  (it’s  worth  to  call  this  a  «planar  explosion»).  This

example  seems  to  be  an  inflationary  production  of  the  cartwheel-like  structures  on
the  common  axle  and  is  compatible  with  the  interplay  of  the  mechanisms  (a )  and
(b ).Another  example  (though,  a  static  one)  of  a  distinct  planar  structuring  is  the
«large  thin  equatorial  disk»  (.../PRC96-23a  [24])  less  than  one  light  year  across
around  the  star  Eta  Carinae  (.../EtaCarC.jpg  [24])  which  has  been  released  as  a
supernova explosion.

At  this  point,  the  signs  of  the  saturation  of  the  growth/expansion  of  a  dendritic
network  are  only  implicit  ones.  For  instance,  the  revealed  phenomenon  [9]  of  an
open,  «shining»  ends  of  the  network  could  result  not  only  from  local  disruption  of
the  network  but  also  from  local  termination  of  a  dendritic  growth  because  of  local
exhaust  of  the  proper  material.  Another  argument  in  favour  of  saturation  is  the
presence of typical skeletal structures in the  time-integrated  x-ray  images  of  one  of
the most  bursty phenomenon in the laboratory, namely plasma corona produced by
the irradiation of a solid target with a short laser pulse (see Sec. 2.3).

Regarding  all  the  above-mentioned  evidences  for  the  dendricity  of  skeletal
structures, we have to note that the typical block of skeletons, namely the cartwheel
on  an  axle  and  the  tubule  with  the  central  rod  and  the  cartwheel  in  the  edge  cross-
section,  are  topologically  the  dendrites.  An  example  of  simultaneous  dendricity  and
tubularity of the skeleton composed of tubular  nanofibers is found in the  submicron
dust particle (see Sec. 2.2 and [7(a,b)]).

The solution to the problem of survivability of skeleton in hot plasmas has been
suggested within the framework of the problem of non-local (non-diffusive) transport
of  heat  observed  in  high-temperature  plasmas  for  controlled  thermonuclear  fusion
(cf.  the  survey  [30]).  The  microsolid  skeletons  were  suggested  [31]  to  be  self-
protected  from  an  ambient  high-temperature  plasma  by  thin  vacuum  channels  self-
consistently  sustained  around  the  skeletons  by  the  pressure  of  high-frequency  (HF)
electromagnetic waves, thanks to the skeleton-induced conversion of a small part of
the incoming slow, quasi-static magnetic field (poloidal, in tokamaks, or azimuthal, in
Z-pinches)  into  HF  waves  of  the  TEM  type  (a  «wild  cable»  model,  see  P2_028  in
Ref. [31]). This model allows to evaluate the width and length of vacuum channels
around  straight  blocks  of  skeletons  from  the  measurements  of  HF  electric  fields,
both  inside  and  outside  the  plasma  column.  The  respective  results  [31,32]  for  the
case of tokamak T-10 and gaseous Z-pinch reasonably agree with visible dimensions
of observed straight blocks of skeletons.

6.  CONCLUSIONS.  PROBABLE  ROLE  OF  A  FRACTAL  DUST  IN
FUSION DEVICES. SOME IMPLICATIONS OUTSIDE FUSION SCIENCE.

We  start  with  a  conclusion  related  to  basic  physics.  The  following  two

observational facts revealed in the range 10-5-1023 cm, namely

(i) topological identity (i.e. the similarity) of skeletal structures (especially of the

«cartwheel» as a structure of essentially non-hydrodynamic nature), and

(ii)  a  trend  of  assembling  bigger  structures  from  similar  smaller  ones  (i.e.  the

self-similarity),

suggest all these skeletal structures, similarly to skeletons in the particles of dust
and hail, to possess a  fractal  condensed  matter  of  particular  topology  of  the  fractal
[9].  Specifically,  this  matter  may  be  self-assembled  from  nanotubular  blocks  in  a
way similar to that in the skeletons found in the submicron dust particles [5,7].

The probable implications of this hypothesis  inside the fusion science are based
on  the  probable  positive  role  of  skeletal  structures.  These  include,  in  particular,  the

following  problems  related  to,  respectively,  creation  and  maintenance  of  relevant
regimes of electric discharge in fusion devices.

(1)  The  practical  necessity  to  attain  higher  reproducibility/predictability  of  the

very initial stage of discharge in fusion devices . These include:
•  facilitation of electric breakdown of the working gas in the discharge chamber (e.g.,
extension  of  the  stimulating  role  of  graphite  and  graphite  composites  in  electric
breakdown  phenomena,  as  identified  in  various  applications,  to  the  case  of
conditions peculiar to fusion devices),
•  identification of microscopic mechanisms responsible for the existing algorithms --
at  best,  semi-empirical  ones  --  of  attaining  the  successful  regimes  of  electric
discharge in fusion devices.

(2)  The  second  problem  assumes  improving  the  plasma  thermal  energy
confinement.  Here,  an  application  of  the  «wild  cable»  model  [31]  to  particular
diagnostic  algorithms  of  plasmas  in  fusion  devices  may  contribute  to  resolving  the
following significant problems :
•   probable  control  of  the  nonlocal,  non-diffusional  component  of  heat  transport  in
tokamaks,  which  has  been  observed  in  experiments  on  the  fine  resolution  of  heat
pulse  propagation  from  an  instant  point  source  of  the  heat  or  cold  (cf.,  e.g.,  the
«cold pulse» experiments);
•   further  optimization  of  experiment  schemes  in  the  wire-array  fast  Z-pinches  and
identification of physical roots of the still unresolved discrepancy between the visible
dynamics of plasma implosion and the unexpectedly high values of parameters of the
soft  x-ray  radiation  pulse  (namely,  unpredictably  high  radiation  yield  and  especially
high  radiation  power,  unpredictably  high  efficiency  of  conversion  of  discharge’s
magnetic energy into radiation pulse, etc.).

The  probable  implications  of  this  hypothesis  outside  the  fusion  science  are
suggested by the manifestations of the phenomenon of skeletal structuring at various
length scales. These include:
(1) Material science.
Skeletal structures observed in high-current discharges in laboratory may be the
prototype  of  a  new  nanomaterial  which  might  be  of  interest  for  a  wide  range  of
potential  industrial  applications.  (Recall  that  nanomaterial  is  such  whose  major
properties are determined by its constituent blocks whose size lies in the  nanometer
range).

(2) Geophysics.
Identification  of  skeletal  structuring  in  severe  weather  phenomena  (tornado,
etc.)  may  improve  the  state  of  the  science  in  this  field.  The  importance  of  such  an
analysis is suggested by the fact that the mechanism which triggers the tornado is not
identified  yet.  Specifically,  it  is  not  possible  to  differentiate  between  tornadic  and
non-tornadic mesocyclones and, correspondingly, predict the tornado event up to the
very birth of this monster.

(3) Astrophysics and cosmology (see [26]).
(3a)  Certain  mechanical  strength  (rigidity)  of  skeletal  structures  at  galactic  and

extragalactic length scales may eliminate the necessity to introduce a «dark matter».
(3b)  Purely  gravitational  description  of  large-scale  structure  of  the  Universe  is
likely  to  be  appended  with  a  contribution  of  hypothetical  skeletons  composed  from
nanotubular  structures  (note  that  the  integrity  of  such  skeletons  is  governed  by  the
quantum  electrodynamics;  in  particular,  chemical  bonds  are  responsible  for  the
integrity of carbon nantotubes).

(3c)  A  combination  of  two  observational  facts  –  namely,  the  presence  of
skeletal  structures  in  the  range  10-5  cm  -  1023  cm  [9]  and  the  signs  of  skeletal
structuring in the range 1024-1026 cm [26], as suggested by an analysis of the  redshift
surveys of galaxies and quasars – hints at the presence of a baryonic cold skeleton of
the  Universe.  This  hypothesis  may  be  shown  to  have  no  conflict  with  the  ultrahigh
isotropy of cosmic microwave background radiation and the high enough  uniformity
of Hubble’s expansion of the Universe.

Acknowledgments

We  thank  all  our  colleagues  who  presented  their  original  databases  and
collaborated  with  us  at  various  stages  of  the  present  research,  especially  to  B.N.
Kolbasov and P.V. Romanov. Our special thanks to V.I. Kogan for his support.

Partial  financial  support  from  the  Russian  Federation  Ministry  for  Atomic

Energy and the Russian Foundation for Basic Research is acknowledged.

REFERENCES

1.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  In:  Current  Trends  in  Int.  Fusion
Research:  Review  and  Assessment  (Proc.  3rd  Symposium,  Washington  D.C.,
March 1999), Ed. E. Panarella, NRC Research Press, 2002, Ottawa, Canada, pp.
121-148.

2. A.B. Kukushkin, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov, (a) In: Fusion Energy 1998 (Proc. 17th
IAEA  Fusion  Energy  Conference,  Yokohama,  Japan,  October  1998),  IAEA,
Vienna, 1999, IAEA-CSP-1/P, Vol. 3, pp. 1131-1134; (b) Proc. 26-th Eur. Phys.
Soc.  conf.  on  Plasma  Phys.  and  Contr.  Fusion  (Maastricht,  Netherlands,  June
1999), pp. 873-876 (http://epsppd.epfl.ch/cross/p2087.htm).

3.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  In:  Current  Trends  in  Int.  Fusion
Research:  A  Review  (Proc.  4-th  Symposium,  Washington  D.C.,  March  2001),
Eds. C.D. Orth, E. Panarella, and R.F. Post, NRC Research Press, 2004 Ottawa,
Canada.

4.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  In:  Advances  in  Plasma  Phys.
Research, Vol. 2. Ed. F. Gerard, Nova Science Publishers, 2002, New York, pp.
1-22.

5.  B.N.  Kolbasov,  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  and  P.V.  Romanov,
Phys. Lett. A 269, 363-367 (2000); Plasma Devices and Operations  8,  257-268
(2001).

6.  P.I.  Blinov,  V.D.  Korolev,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov.  Contr.  Fusion  and  Plasma
Phys.  (Proc. 29th  Eur.  Conf.,  Montreux,  Switzerland, 2002),  Eur.  Phys.  Soc.,
Geneva, 2002, vol. 26B, P-4.015.

7. B.N. Kolbasov, A.B. Kukushkin, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov, and P.V. Romanov, (a)
Phys. Lett. A  291, 447-452 (2001); (b)  Fusion  Energy  2002  (Proc.  19th  IAEA
Conf., 
EX/P3-05
(http://www.iaea.org/programmes/ripc/physics/fec2002/pdf/exp3_05.pdf)

Vienna, 

IAEA, 

2002), 

Lyon, 

2002, 

8.  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov.  «Missed  diagnostic  opportunities  of  streak  camera
method in  tokamaks».  In:  The  problems  of  atomic  science  and  technology,  ser.
Thermonuclear fusion (in Russian). 2002, No. 1-2, pp. 40-63.

9. A.B. Kukushkin, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov, Phys. Lett. A 306, 175-183 (2002).
10.  A.S.  Chernenko,  Yu.M.  Gorbulin,  Yu.G.  Kalinin,  et.  al.  S-300,  new  pulsed
power installation in  Kurchatov  Institute:  investigations  of  stable  wire  implosion.
Proc.  Int.  Conference  «Beams’96»,  Prague,  Czech  Rep.,  1996,  v.1,  pp.  154-
157.

11.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  (a)  Laser  and  Part.  Beams,  16,  445

(1998); (b) Rev. Sci. Instrum., 70, 1387 (1999); (c) Ibid, p. 1421.

12. B.N. Kolbasov, et. al., Fusion Eng. Des., 54, 451 (2001).
13. L. Boufendi, A. Boushoule, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol., 3, 310 (1994).
14. J. Winter, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 40, 1201 (1998).
15. V.N. Tsytovich, J. Winter, Physics-Uspekhi, 41, 815 (1998).
16.  M.I.  Guseva,  D.A.  Davydov,  B.N.  Kolbasov,  P.V.  Romanov.  Safety
Implications  of  Source  Term  Studies.  ITER  Work  Order  Final  Report  by  RF
Home Team, RF 1 F 235 20/06/01 E, June 2001.

17. L.A. Bolshov, et. al., Sov. Phys. JETP 65, 1160 (1987).
18. A.E. Bugrov, et. al. Zh. Eks. Teor. Fiz. (JETP), 111, 903 (1997).
19. S.J. Zweben, R.A. Maqueda, J.L. Terry, et. al. Contr. Fusion and Plasma  Phys.
(Proc. 29th Eur. Conf., Montreux, Switzerland, 2002), Eur. Phys. Soc., Geneva,
2002, vol. 26B, P-3.220.

20.  Australian  Severe  Weather,  http://australiasevereweather.com/photography/

photos/1996/0205mb11.jpg; .../0205mb12.jpg.

21.  National  Oceanic  &  Atmospheric  Administration  Photo  Library,  Historic
Collection,

National 
http://www.photolib.noaa.gov/historic/nws/images /big/wea00216.jpg.

Weather 

Service 

22.  NASA/ESA  SOHO  (Solar  and  Heliospheric  Observatory)  Hot  Shots,

http://sohowww.nascom.nasa.gov/hotshots/2002_01_08/c3cmem.tif.
23. Chandra X-Ray Observatory - Home. http://chandra.harvard.edu/photo/...
24. Space Telescope Science Institute - Hubble Space Telescope Public Information,

http://oposite.stsci.edu/pubinfo/...

25. T. Tanaka, H. Washimi, Science 296, 321 (2002).
26. A.B. Kukushkin, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov,  «Similarity  of  structuring  in  the  range
10-5 cm to 1023 cm hints at a baryonic cold dark skeleton of the Universe».  Bull.
Am. Phys.  Soc.,  2002,  v.  47,  November  2002,  FO1.012; Preprint  arXiv:  astro-
ph/0205534, 2002, 11 pp.

27. J.B. Taylor, Rev. Mod. Phys. 58, 741 (1986).
28. V.I. Tsebro, O.E. Omel'yanovskii, Phys. Usp. 43, 847 (2000).
29. G. Zhao, Y.S. Wang, Preprint arXiv:cond-mat/0111268 (to be published in Phil.

30.  J.D.  Callen,  M.W.  Kissick, Plasma  Phys.  and  Contr.  Fusion,  39,  Suppl.  12B,

Mag. B).

173 (1997).

31.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  Contr.  Fusion  and  Plasma  Phys.
(Proc. 27-th  Eur.  Conf.,  Budapest,  Hungary,  2000),  Eur.  Phys.  Soc.,  Geneva,
2000, 
(b)
.../p2_028.pdf; (c) .../p2_051.pdf .

http://epsppd.epfl.ch/Buda/pdf/p2_029.pdf; 

24B, 

vol. 

(a) 

32.  A.V.  Demura,  V.I.  Kogan,  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  ««Wild
cables»  in  fusion  plasmas  and  their  diagnostics  with  spectral  line  Stark
broadening». Preprint arXiv: physics/0201030, 2002, 13 pp.

