Evidences for Skeletal Structures in the Ocean  
from the Images Analyzed by Multilevel Dynamical Contrasting Method  
 
V. A. Rantsev-Kartinov 
 
INF RRC "Kurchatov Institute", Moscow, 123182, Russia 
rank@nfi.kiae.ru 
 
 
Abstract. 

  
An  analysis  of  databases  of  photographic  images  of  ocean’s  surface,  taken  from 
various altitudes and for various types of rough ocean surface, revealed the presence 
of  an  ocean’s  skeletal  structures  (OSS),  which  exhibit  a  tendency  toward  self-
similarity of structuring at various length scales (i.e., within various «generations»). 
The topology of OSS appears to be identical to that of skeletal structures (SS) which 
have  been  formerly  found  in  a wide  range of length scales, media and for various 
phenomena. The typical OSS consists of separate identical blocks which are linked 
together to form a network. Two types of such blocks are found: (i) coaxial tubular 
(CT) structures  with internal radial bonds,  and (ii) cartwheel-like (CW) structures, 
located  either  on  an  axle  or  in  the  edge  of  CT  block.  The  OSSs  differ  from  the 
formerly  found  SSs  only  by  the  fact  that  OSS,  in  their  interior,  are  filled  in  with 
closely  packed  OSSs  of  a  smaller  size  (i.e.  OSSs  of  former  «generations»).  We 
specially  discuss 
form  of 
the  phenomenon  of  skeletal  blocks 
vertically/horizontally  oriented  floating  cylinders  (VFC/HFC).  The  size  of  these 
blocks is shown to grow with increasing rough water.  
 
PACS: 92.10.Pt 
 

the 

in 

1. Introduction. 

 
The  author’s  studies  of  skeletal  structures  have  started  from  analyzing  the 
photographic  images  of  the  plasma  with  the  help  of  the  method  of  multilevel 
dynamical  contrasting  (MMDC)  [1a,b].  This  method  is  based  on the variability of 
the computer-made maps of contrasting the image (the above variability is needed to 
avoid  the  artifacts  resulted,  sometimes,  from  contrasting  the  image).  The  MMDC 
allows  (a)  to  resolve  the  fine  structure  of  separate  formations,  hardly  seen  in  the 
images, and reveal the almost imperceptible links between such; (b) reveal the OSS 
even at some depth under water surface. The MDC allows to significantly eliminate 
the masking background in  the image  and identify  the correlation, if any, between 
the elements.  

The  skeletal  structures  (SSs)  --  namely,  tubules,  “cartwheels”  and  their 
simple combinations, with  certain properties (longevity of these structures, a trend 
toward  self-similarity  of  their  structuring,  and  toward  their  self-assembly)  --  have 
been found in a very wide range of phenomena in laboratory, Earth atmosphere and 
space [1-3]. The formulation of hypotheses [1c,d,f,g] for the exceptional role, in the 
observed phenomena of a SS, of quantum bonds, which are presumably provided by 
a  nanodust    (presumably,  carbon  nanotubes  or  similar  nanostructures),  allowed  to 
explain  some  properties  of  SSs.  An  extension  of  major  hypothesis  [1c,d,f,g]  to  a 

 

1 

very wide range of length scales have covered [1e, 2a] as much as about 30 orders 
of magnitude. 

In the present paper it is shown that similar skeletal structures are found in 
the ocean. We call them an ocean’s skeletal structures (OSS). The OSSs differ from 
the formerly found SSs only by the fact that OSS, in their interior, are filled in with 
closely packed OSSs of a smaller size (i.e. OSSs of former «generations»).      

 
2. Hypotheses for the formation of ocean skeletal structures (OSS). 
 
According to [1e,h;2а,c], tornado - a special dusty plasma in the atmosphere 
with the key role of nanodust. This conjecture leads to seeking for the source and the 
nature  of  the  structure-producing  dust.  The  study  of  trajectories  of  tropical 
hurricanes for more than a century period of observations suggests the hypothesis, I, 
for  a  direct  link  between  the  origin  of  severe  weather  phenomena  (SWP)  and  the 
location of intense volcanic activity.  

This hypothesis naturally follows from [1e,h;2a,c] because the volcano may 
inject structure-producing dust to atmosphere. As far the oceanic surface amounts to 
2/3 of the Earth surface, a question naturally arises about the probable implications 
of the presence of such a dust, and of SSs, in the upper layers of the ocean and in the 
lower  atmosphere.  Therefore,  the  established  approaches  to  dynamics  in  these 
regions  may  be  substantially  influenced  by  this  factor,  especially  if  we  will  not 
ignore  the  impact  of  electromagnetic  factors  on  the  weather  in  these  regions  and 
allow for the possibility of self-assembly of SS in the presence of an electric field. 
This  gives  the  hypothesis,  II,  for  the  role  of  electric  field  of  the  Earth,  and  of 
atmospheric electricity, in forming the SS which may invoke the SWP.  

The  SS  possesses  certain  mechanical  strength  and  exceptional  chemical, 
physical, and electromagnetic properties. The presence of such SS in the sea water 
which  possesses  electrolytic  properties  and  contains  mineral  and  biological 
components, may give many interesting implications. This suggests the hypothesis, 
III, for initiating, by the SS immersed in the sea, of a number of phenomena, namely 
osmosis, division of electric charges, formation of double layers etc.  

The presence of carbon nanotubes of small diameter in SS assumes that they 
are not fully filled in with sea water, because of the presence of water clusters and 
particulate of phytoplankton. This gives the hypothesis, IV, for the buoyancy of SS 
in the sea water.  

This idea is supported by the adsorption of air bubbles in the water by the SS 
to  give  a  partial  flotation  of  SS.  In  the  sea  water,  various  substances  in  different 
phase  states  of  matter  are  in  touch.  This  may  substantially  change  the  formerly 
suggested  scenarios  for  SS  formation in  other cases. This suggests the hypothesis, 
V, for the possibility of the action of surface tension even on the blocks of SS which 
is  immersed  in  the  sea.  This  phenomenon  results  in  the  aggregation  of  blocks 
deposited from the atmosphere on the ocean’s surface, to form eventually an OSS. 
The skeletal structuring assumes that the individual straight and rather strong blocks 
may be joined flexibly, similarly to joints in a skeleton.  

 

3. Evidences for SSO. 

 
The identification of the OSS is attractive in a sense that this is feasible for 
everybody  interested  because,  at  preliminary  stage,  this  does  not  require  special 

 

2 

diagnostic apparatus and skills, and may give results easily. This, however, requires 
anyway (i) having a high-resolution, low-contrast image and (ii) a priori knowledge 
of the structure under search, (iii) a capability of being a good observant.  

We  start  with  evidences  for  OSS  in  the  case  of  cartwheel  (CW)  structures 
which often appear at the ocean surface. An example, the ocean surface for the case 
of the force-one wind, is given in Fig. 1.  

 

 

 

Fig.  1.  An  example  of  a  cartwheel  (CW)  structure  under  the  force-one  wind 
(image’s width is 4 m). The CW structure, seen in the center of the image, is distinct 
even  without  MDC  processing.  The  outer  diameter  of  CW  is  ~  2  m.  Cylindrical 
(tubular) blocks which compose this structure, are of 5-10 cm in diameter; diameter 
of the near-axis region is ~ 40 cm. 

 
It is seen that the CT seems to be not a separate block but a part of an OSS 
whose  elements may  also  be  seen on  the surface. This structure seems to be not a 
vortex because it  fwas a steady-state one during the exposure time. The side surface 
and near-axis  part of  the  structure  are located a little  bit  above sea-level, that also 
differs from the case of a vortex. The major difference of CW from the vortex is the 
presence  of  distinct  radial  bonds/spokes  between  the  axle  and  the  rim,  with  the 
spoke being sometimes piercing the rim. These facts are in odds with hydrodynamic 
origin of such structures.  

Now  let’s  turn  to  evidences  for  straight  coaxial  -  tubular  (CT)  blocks  in 
OSSs.  The  CT  blocks  may  be  of  various  size,  may  have  various  structure  of  side 
surface  (varying  from  smooth  or  waver-like  to  a  braided  or  squirrel  wheel-like 
form), may be floating on the surface with horizontal or vertical orientation of axis 
(i.e. being a vertically/horizontally oriented floating cylinders (VFC/HFC)), may be 
of  a  multi-layer  structure  and  possess  either  radial  bonds  or  a  CW  in  the  edge.  A 
slightly  sunk  VFC  with  CW  in  its  edge,  which  may  be  seen  in  the  rough  water, 
looks like a structure seen in Fig. 1. Sometimes, a part of the VFC of larger diameter 

 

3 

is located fully under water or visible partly, if located slightly above the sea level. 
In such a case, the inner part of smaller diameter may look like a vertically oriented 
fishing float. An example of such a VFC is given in Fig. 2. 
 

 
Now  we  turn  to  what  happens  with  OSS  and  its  blocks  under  sea  storm 
conditions.  An  analysis  of  photographic  images  of  the  sea  surface,  taken  by  the 
flying laboratory in stormy regions, lead us to a conclusion that a strong wind strips 
the  OSS,  with  the  size  of  the  stripped  blocks  being  increased  with  the  increasing 
wind. To demonstrate the evolution of OSS blocks stripped by the storm, let us look 
at  the  above-mentioned  type  of  VFC.  The  fragment  of  the  images  of  sea  surface, 
taken  during  the  Hurricane Belle from 500 feet altitude  (NOAA collection [4]),  is 
given in Fig. 3. 
 

level,  with 

Fig.  2.  An  example  of 
vertically  oriented  floating 
cylinder 
(image’s 
(VFC) 
width 1 m). In the center the 
image,  one  may 
see  a 
structure  ~40  cm  above  the 
sea 
almost 
orthogonal branches. There is 
a  dip  in  the  center  of  the 
structure.  Within 
the  dip, 
there  is  a  vertically  oriented 
rod, like a fishing «float»,  of 
6 cm diameter. The float has 
a thinner rod of diameter ~ 1 
cm, which juts out.  

the 

feet 

Fig.  3.  A  fragment  of 
the image of sea surface, 
the 
taken 
during 
from 
Hurricane  Belle 
500 
altitude 
(NOAA  collection  [4]). 
Image’s width is ~15 m. 
One  may  see,  in  the 
front  of 
image, 
almost  a  half  of  a 
oriented 
vertically 
floating cylinder (VFC), 
of  diameter  ~  10  m. 
central 
Diameter 
axial  tube  is  ~  2  m, 
diameter of dark rings in 
the  edge  of  VFC  is  ~1 
m.  The  VFC  is  ~  1  m 
above  the  sea’s  local 
level. 

of 

 

4 

An example of the image of a stormy ocean surface was found by the author 
in  the  available  databases,  which  --  when  MDC  processed  --  shows  a row of four 
identical  VFC,  whose  edges  sustain  the  parallel  orientation  under  a  strong  storm, 
thus  suggesting  the  presence  of  a  strong  link  between  these  VFC.  An  interesting 
fragment from similar data [5] is given in Fig. 4. The original image was taken in 
the  center  of  the  Hurricane  Caroline.  The  image  demonstrates  an  increase  of 
diameter of CW structure, under hurricane conditions, up to ~10 meters, i.e. larger 
by a factor of 6, as compared to that at conditions of the relatively quiet sea. 

 
 

 

 

 
Fig. 4. A fragment of the image of sea surface, taken in the center of the Hurricane 
Caroline  (NOAA  collection  [5]).  Image’s  width  is  ~  15  m.  There  is  a  distinct 
cartwheel  (CW) structure of  diameter ~ 10 m in the upper part of the image. This 
CW  seems  to  be  a  second  storey  with  respect  to  a  dark  coaxial  tubular  (CT) 
structure which is ahead of CW by few tens of meters. Between CT and CW, there 
is a boundary between two waves directed to the observer to the left. 

 
The crest often appears to be a horizontally oriented floating cylinder (HFC), 
with the water wave rolling over HFC’s side surface, i.e. transversely to HFC’s axis. 
In  the  case  of  a  collision  of  two  mutually  orthogonal  HFCs,  a  disruption  of  the 
envelope of one of them reveals the internal structure of HFC. An analysis of such 
structures suggests that the large scale cylinders, observed in the waves in a stormy 
ocean,  seem  to  be  a  multi-layer  telescopic  tubes  with  internal  radial  bonds.  It 
appears that the ratio of diameters for neighboring layers amounts to a factor of 2. 
Such a phenomenon is illustrated with Fig. 5. 

 

5 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 5. The image of a horizontally oriented floating cylinder (HFC) whose envelope 
is disrupted. Image’s width is ~ 6 m. At the image’s rear, one may see a disruption 
of  a  cylinder,  as  a  cut  in  cylinder’s  horizontal  direction.  Also  some  details  of 
internal  structure  of  HFC  are  seen,  namely:  the  remains  of  radial  spokes  between 
internal  and  outer  shells;  a  net-like  structure  of  internal  cylinder.  Diameter  of  the 
entire cylinder is ~ 3 m, and those of internal nested shells are ~ 1.5 m, 0.75 m, and 
0.3 m, respectively (i.e., the ratio of neighboring shells’ diameters is a factor of ~ 2).  
 

4. Conclusion and comments. 

 
The results of the present research allow to suggest an existence of the ocean 
skeletal structures (OSS). The separately floating blocks of OSS, which are found in 
the available databases, tend to form a structure determined by the local level of sea 
waves. The time of formation of a stable and long-livid structure seems to be finite 
and  strongly  dependent  on  the  weather  conditions  and  local  physics  parameters. 
This allows to explain the longevity (seen for a day) of the traces of sea ships, up to 
half a thousand of kilometers in length - as it is seen from observations of the ocean, 
during the calm time, from space satellites. Indeed, as far as the reflectivity of ocean 
surface  may  depend  on  the  hypothetical  presence  of  OSSs  and  their  structure,  the 
ship’s  water  screw  may  destroy  the  homogeneity  of  the  established  structuring  on 
the ocean’s surface, and some time is needed to come back to the undisturbed state. 
It looks like the peculiar features of the structure in a certain region are determined 
by the history of its formation.  

The  author  is  deeply  grateful  to  A.B.  Kukushkin  for  a  decade  long 
collaboration. Special thanks to V.I. Kogan for invariable support and interest to a 
research of skeletal structures.  

 

6 

 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  a)  Laser  and  Particle  Beams,  16, 
445,(1998); b) Rev.Sci.Instrum., 70, 1387,( 1999); c) Proc. 17-th IAEA Fusion 
Energy  Conference,  Yokohama,  Japan,  3,  1131,  (1998);  d)  Proc.  26-th  EPS 
PPCF, Maastricht, Netherlands, 873, (1999); e) Phys. Lett. A, 306, 175 (2002); 
f)  Current  Trends  in  International  Fusion  Research:  Review  and  Assessment 
(Proc.  3rd Symposium, Washington D.C., March 1999), Ed. E. Panarella, NRC 
Research  Press,  Ottawa,  Canada,    121,  (2002);  g)  Preprint  of  Kurchatov 
Institute, IAE 6111/6, Moscow, October (1998); h) “Advances in Plasma Phys. 
Research”, (Ed. F. Gerard, Nova Science Publishers, New York), 2, 1, (2002);.     

 
[2]  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  (a)  Sicence  in  Russia,  1,  42,  (2004); 
(b)  Microsystem  technology  (in  Russian),  3,  22  (2002);  (c)  Mat.  IV  Russian 
Seminar  «Modern  methods  of  plasma  diagnostics  and  their  application  to 
substance probing and environmental control», MEPhI, Moscow, 2003, p. 151.  

 
[3] B.N. Kolbasov,  A.B. Kukushkin, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov, P.V. Romanov, Phys. 
Lett.  A,    269,  363,  (2000);  Ibid.,  291,  447,  (2001);  Plasma  Devices  & 
Operations, 8 , 257, (2001).  

 
[4] http://www.photolib.noaa.gov/flight/images/big/fly00164.jpg 
 
[5] http://www.photolib.noaa.gov/flight/images/big/fly00166.jpg 

 

7 

