Draft copy, please do not quote without contacting the authors.

Learning-focuses in physics simulation learning situations
Åke Ingerman, Cedric Linder*, and Delia Marshall
Department of Physics, University of the Western Cape, South Africa, and *Uppsala
University, Sweden.
aingerman@home.se; cedric.linder@fysik.uu.se; dmarshall@uwc.ac.za

This  is  a  report  on  a  qualitative  study  of  students’  learning  where  a  physics  computer  simulation
session  is  used  to  supplement  lectures  on  the  topic.  Drawing  on  phenomenography  as  the  analytical
framework, the students’ learning-focuses were analysed. The result is a description of four distinctly
different  learning-focuses  that  emerged  when  the  students  involved  in  the  study  interacted  with  the
computer simulations. These learning-focuses were then analysed in terms of the level of interaction,
the nature of physics knowledge and views of learning experienced by the students. These results were
then used to identify advantages and disadvantages of learning through interaction with simulations.

Introduction and background

There is a growing recognition that the passiveness inherent in much traditional undergraduate physics
teaching  often  contributes  to  poor  learning  outcomes  (for  example,  see  Redish  &  Steinberg,  1999).
Hence  undergraduate  physics  teaching  is  increasingly  drawing  on  active  supplements  to  traditional
teaching, such as computer simulations (Christian and Bellani, 2001; Bates, 2002). However, there has
been  little  associated  research,  which  problematizes  this  kind  of  supplemental  teaching  from  the
learners’ perspective. This paper reports on part of a project that is aimed at addressing this shortfall in
terms of characterizing physics learning from simulations. We characterize the learners’ experiences
of the process of learning through the means of a simulation of a physics phenomenon, as ‘learning-
focuses’.  With  ‘learning-focus’  we  mean  to  describe  the  kind  of  (or  class  of)  features  which  are
apparent for the students in the learning situation and thus are dominating the students’ experience of
it. To put it more theoretically, with ‘learning-focus’ we mean to capture what features constitute the
students’ experience, describing the distinctive quality these features have (and also implying what is
taken for granted and what is in focal awareness for the learners).

These  learning-focuses  are  at  a  general  level.  What  is  not  captured  by  such  a  description  is  a
characterisation  of  learning  at  a  micro-level,  i.e.  the  specific  learning  around  the  particular  physics
phenomena represented by the simulation. In other words, a description of what important aspects of
the phenomena themselves are brought into students’ focal awareness during the simulation session,
and  how  this  occurs.  However,  the  investigation  at  the  general  level  opens  up  the  path  to  such
investigations at the micro-level (an aspect of our research project not reported here), while still being
interesting in itself.

Analytic framework and data collection

Our intended research question shifted during the study. We started out trying to describe learning on
a micro-level. This was done by drawing extensively on the phenomenographic research tradition and
its  anatomy  of  awareness theory  as  sketched  out  by  Marton &  Booth  (1997), and  its  applications as
exemplified  by  Marton  &  Morris  (2002).  In  particular,  constructs  such  as  focal  awareness,  intended
and enacted object of learning, and variation of critical features, were important. We collected data in
different  situations,  and  in  different  ways.  While  trying  to  organise  and  analyse  our  data,  some
structure  emerged  about  the  apparent  features  the  students  saw  in  the  different  learning  situations,
showing  similarities  on  the  general  level.  We  followed  this  strand  of  analysis,  seeing  that  these
apparent features (now developed  into  learning-focuses) might  offer insights into  learning situations
aided by a simulation, both on the micro-level and a general level.

In  this  regard  the  analysis  can  be  characterised  as  being  an  extensive  qualitative  exploration  of
variation  in  meaning  that  learners  see  in  particular  simulation  situations  and  in  the  physics

Ingerman, Linder & Marshall – Learning-focuses in physics simulation learning situations
Page 1 of 6

Draft copy, please do not quote without contacting the authors.

phenomenon the simulations are representing and presenting. The outcomes described emerged from
analysis of video-audio observations and interview descriptions centred around students’ interactions
with physics simulations in areas of electric  potential,  field  and  force (introductory level), the Bohr
model of the atom (introductory level), and the quantum mechanics scattering of a wave function at a
barrier (senior level). The participating students - physics undergraduates - were from a South African
and  a  Swedish  university.  Hence  the  data  collection  was  situated  in  different  levels  of  learning
complexity  (introductory  and  advanced  undergraduate  physics),  different  physics  concepts  and
phenomena, different prior learning experiences with both simulations and computers (from being the
first  encounter  with  simulations  to  having  created  simulations  themselves),  and  in  different  cultural
settings (South Africa and Sweden).

Results

The  analysis  led  to  the  identification  of  four  qualitatively  different  learning-focuses  used  when
interacting with one of the given physics simulations. This variation in learning-focus we characterised
as follows:

Learning-focus A - Focusing on simulations as given assignments

Framing  a  simulation  session  with  learning-focus  A  implies  being  mainly  concerned  with  the
constraints  and  features  of  the  situation  as  an  assignment  that  needs  to  be  completed.  External
demands  and  expectations  dominate  the  experience,  while  the  simulation  and  the  phenomenon  it
represents are not really discerned at all, with respect to their meaning.

In  this  transcript,  two  students  are  working  with  a  Bohr’s  model  simulation1, going through the
‘tutorial’ questions that come with the simulation, and are presently dealing with Tutorial Question 2
(Q2).  Before  starting,  they  had  been  instructed  to  explore  the  simulation,  guided  by  the  questions,
which  were  to  be  used  as  a  background  when  discussing  their  experience  of  working  with  the
simulation. In the simulation, the students have a visual presentation of an atom with circular orbits
with an electron going round in one of the orbits. The simulation also provides them with a diagram of
the orbits’ corresponding energy levels (E1,...,E6). The students can initiate transitions between these
levels and see to which spectral lines the transitions correspond.

S1: [Reads Q2 aloud.] “How will the wavelength of the emitted photon, as the electron returns
to  the  ground  state,  compare  with  the  wavelength  of  the  absorbed  photon,  which  originally
excited the electron to the 5th orbit?” What?!? [Seems puzzled.]
S2: [Having read Q2 silently again.] I don’t understand this.
S1: Okaaay…. I understand. We first have to take it to the 5th orbital, and then return to the
ground state, comparing the wavelengths. [They move the electron from the ground state (E1)
to the 5th orbit (E5).]
S2: So, now we take it back to the ground state. [They do E5 to E1.] There’s no change!
S1: Is it? Do it again. [Sounds doubtful.]
S2: [Repeats transitions.] There’s no change.
S1: Okay, there’s no change. Now go to ground.

Here all that matters is that they get to an answer -- there is no discussion of why they observed what
they  did.  They  then  spent  a  long  time  writing  down  their  answer,  followed  by  a  discussion  about
which question to do next.

S1: She [the interviewer] said we must leave out Q4 and Q6.
They  proceed  to  Q3;  do  that  in  rather  a  perfunctory  way.  The  only  discussion  is  about  how
much time they have left to complete the simulation tasks and about an assignment due later in
the day.

                                                  
1 Taken from ActivPhysics by van Heuvelen A & D’Alessandris, 1999, Addison-Wesley.

Ingerman, Linder & Marshall – Learning-focuses in physics simulation learning situations
Page 2 of 6

Draft copy, please do not quote without contacting the authors.

S1: Okay, onto Q3.
S2: We’ve done Q3. This [S2 points to chunk of text.] – this they just tell you. Now, let’s go
down….
They omit the important part of the text in Q3, instructions to check the correctness of their
answer  to  Q3  by  checking  that  they  did  indeed  produce  the  wavelength  on  extreme  right  of
spectrum. They then press on to finish.

The focus of the students is on what they think is expected by the interviewers from working with the
simulation.  They  seem  to  be  mainly  concerned  about  getting  to  an  answer  and  not  on  achieving  a
learning outcome.

Learning-focus B - Focus on the presentation

In this learning-focus the simulation is distinctly in the foreground -- learning is primarily about the
simulation. The physics situation the simulation is meant to illustrate and represent is not really part of
the experience, apart from the simulation being seen as a visual representation, which can be taken at
face value. The relationship to the learning situation is passive, the simulation session is experienced
as a demonstration that can be seen, possibly explained, and understood.

This  transcript  is  from  the  same  session  used  to  illustrate  learning-focus  A,  but  occurred  when  the
students were working with Question 1, still being not totally familiar with the simulation:

S1: [Reads  Question  1.] ”Does it take more energy for the electron to jump from the ground
state to the 2nd orbit or from the ground state to the 3rd orbit?”
S1: Okay, so if you want the electron to move to the 2nd level, it needs energy.
S2: How do you know that?
S1: [Reads  aloud.] “In order for the electron to occupy a higher energy state, it must receive
energy…”. Meaning that if you want to move the electron to the 2nd energy level, it requires
energy. Do you understand?
S2: [Looks at the screen.] What level is it in at the moment?
S1:  It’s  currently  at  E3.  [Points  to  E3  on  energy  level  diagram.]  That’s E1  [Points.]  …  E2
[Points.] … E3. [Points.]
S2: Meaning this is E1? [Points to innermost orbit on orbital diagram.] Then E2, E3? [Points.]
Okaaay! [Aha!]

The student S2 after a while realises that a relationship exists between the energy level diagram and
the orbit level diagram shown in the simulation. S1 helps by demonstrating and explaining: In contrast
to  the  transcript  illustrating  learning-focus  A,  where  we  interpreted  that  the  two  students’  learning-
focus was the same, here only student S2 uses learning-focus B.

Learning-focus C - Focus on manipulating the simulation

Here the simulation is actively used to understand something. Through the means of the simulation,
the underlying physics phenomenon (or ‘reality’), which is taken to be one with the simulation, can be
understood. However, the simulation is the primary focus. Unlike learning-focus B, here the learner is
the active agent choosing what is to happen (and be learnt), and is not just a passive observer.

This transcript is from an interview with two students on their experience of working with a simulation
of electric potential, field and force.

S1:  Because  when  you  actually  -  it’s  like  an  experiment,  the  simulation  itself  is  like  an
experiment, because when you actually do it, then it actually clicks in your mind already, and
then after you go through the text it’s sort of like ‘ag, I know that’.
S2:Yes,  for  instance  when  you  have  point  charges,  because  when  you  made  one  bigger  -  I
mean,  you  played  already  with  them  -  you  made  one  bigger  and  you  could  see  the  force

Ingerman, Linder & Marshall – Learning-focuses in physics simulation learning situations
Page 3 of 6

Draft copy, please do not quote without contacting the authors.

changing, and you move them apart and you could see the arrows changing, that sort of thing.
And then you read it [the explaining text that goes with the simulation] afterwards and it was
just…an afterthought.

Here an appreciation may be obtained about how – through the simulation – the students can control
the physics phenomenon and thus feel able to claim they understand it.

Learning-focus D - Focus on exploring the phenomenon

Using learning-focus D implies an awareness of the representational nature of the simulation, and of
the limits of both the simulation and the phenomenon as tools to understand the world. The simulation
is used as a conceptual tool, which can be used to explore and understand the phenomenon. On the one
hand, learning about the simulation happens in relation to the phenomenon it is meant to represent and
on the other hand, learning about the phenomenon happens with the limitations of the simulation in
mind.

In this transcript, a student is describing working with a simulation on scattering of an electron wave
packet on a potential barrier in quantum mechanics -- working with the simulation is a self-constructed
exercise  with  the  clear  aim  of  exploring  the  phenomenon,  giving  access  to  exploring  aspects  of  the
phenomenon not easily accessible otherwise.

We  tried  a  lot  and  ...  looked  at  it  and  we  sat  for  hours,  just  tried  different  potentials  and,
somewhere, that interest, [we] must have had an interest in doing that, otherwise we wouldn’t
have spent an entire Sunday just sitting with different potentials. And our project was finished
more or less, but we couldn’t let go, so there I think, it looks nice, its quite funny with these
little things that are flopping around and as it comes to understanding and relevance to what
we were doing in the actual course …. And as I said earlier, when you think about electron
configuration  you  don’t  really  have  to,  you  never  have  to  interpret  the  wave  function  as  a
particle somewhere, it is more that you have a static solution that is, you don’t really have to
think  about  what  it  is  you  have.  A  model  that  someone  has  thought  up,  and  you  have
experiments verifying them. This model works pretty good, and since we are not able to see it,
we will never be able to know exactly what it is and then it is fine and you calculate with it...

The student describes a process of trying things out, pondering about the nature of the phenomenon of
the wave function as representation of the electron, how it is shown in the simulation, and how they
could  be  used  to  understand  more  about  the  behaviour  of  electrons.  The  simulation  is  taken  to  be  a
good  representation  of  a  model,  which  someone  thought  up,  being  related  to  'reality'  through
experiments, while still recognising the non-tangible nature of this type of physics phenomena.

Discussion

In  analysing  the  learning-focuses,  trying  to  bring  out  more  of  their  essence,  we  found  it  useful  to
analytically  differentiate  between  three  different  levels  of  learning  interaction:  the  level  of  the
situation, the level of the simulation and the level of the phenomenon.

•  The level of the situation. This analytic level is about the setting of the situation in terms of
what is seen to be relevant (by the learner) for the associated learning. For example, seeing a
situation as being similar to other situations already experienced, general perceptions of what
it  means  to  learn  physics  and  work  with  a  computer,  and  the  experienced  demands  and
expectations – how working with the simulation is understood as a learning situation.

•  The  level  of  the simulation.  This  analytic  level  reflects  the  kinds  of  understandings  formed
about how a simulation ‘works’ and thus what the learners see as being prominent features of
the simulation, and the logical and conceptual links between the different aspects of a given
simulation.

•  The  level  of  the  phenomenon.  This  analytic  level  is  about  what  is  experienced  by  learners
when  they  create  conceptual  links  between  the  simulation  and  the  represented  phenomenon.

Ingerman, Linder & Marshall – Learning-focuses in physics simulation learning situations
Page 4 of 6

Draft copy, please do not quote without contacting the authors.

For example, learners need to have some notion of a phenomenon in order to relate to what the
simulation is representing.

Of course in the experience of a given simulation all of these levels are interrelated, but at a particular
time,  learners working with the  simulation maybe  focally aware of all  three levels in  quite  different
ways. In this regard, an analysis of learners’ learning focuses in terms of these three levels was made.
Here it is important to point out that if focus is found to be directed primarily to one level it cannot be
concluded that there is no awareness or response to the other levels. But it does provide a good insight
into where the essential learning interaction is taking place.

We  found  that  the  learning-focuses  could  be  characterized  as  having  a  main  level  of  interaction.
Further, we could see two other important aspects of the learning-focuses: the view of learning and the
view of the nature of physics implied. The analysis in terms of these three aspects is summarized in
Table 1.

Table 1: Overview of the essence of different aspects of the learning-focuses.
Learning focus:
(Focus on)
A - the situation
B - the presentation

Nature of physics knowledge

Main level of
interaction

situation
simulation

View of learning physics

physics not really present
physics phenomenon to be seen
and explained
physics phenomenon to be
controlled
ways of seeing, predicting and
interpreting phenomenon

fulfilling demands, tasks
learning by seeing and
someone explaining
learning by doing yourself
and understanding
explorative creation of a
body of knowledge

C - manipulating

simulation

D - exploring

phenomenon

Obviously all the learning-focuses are not as productive in terms of learning. Learning focus A is non-
productive,  while  we  see  different  degrees  of  value  in  the  others.  Learning  focus  B  and  C  have  in
common that their main level of interaction is the simulation, and the simulation is taken as a window
into ‘reality’. Learning focus C presupposes an understanding of how the simulation itself works, thus
implying  that  learning  focus  B  at  some  point  has  been  used.  However,  employing  learning  focus  B
does not imply that learning focus C will be taken. In most of the simulation sessions we studied, we
characterised the learning focus as B or C. Learning focus C gives the possibility of developing some
new  understanding about  the  physics phenomenon.  However, what  can  be  learnt  is  restricted in  that
the  simulation  is  taken  at  face  value  and,  for  example,  what  is  not  included  in  the  simulation  is  not
considered.  If  only  learning  focus  B  is  used,  the  learning  outcome  is  even  more  restricted  and
comparable to what a video or demonstration can ‘tell’ the students.

Learning focus D in some ways sidesteps the other learning-focuses in that here the difference in the
view  of  learning  and  nature  of  physics  knowledge  implies  different  ways  of  engaging  with  the
simulation. The view implied in learning-focuses B and C - that the simulation should and could be
taken at face value - is not compatible with the recognition in learning focus D that both the simulation
and the underlying phenomenon are representational in nature, having limitations in their validity and
applicability.  The  learners’  epistemological  beliefs  and  views  of  learning  can  make  creating  and
retaining learning  focus D  very  difficult, and  severely restrict what  is  possible to  be  learnt. It  is  not
surprising  that  we  did  not  observe  any  introductory  students  taking  such  a  focus,  since  introductory
students are unlikely to have developed such a sophisticated view of physics. Even though the change
in the view of physics required to adopt learning focus D instead of B and C must be part of a broader
learning  about  physics,  the  simulation  situation  offers  students  some  extra  possibilities  of  not  only
learning  about  the  phenomenon  itself  but  also  of  developing  their  views  of  physics  or  views  of
learning physics, in particular if supported by a mindful and attentive teacher.

What  then  are  the  implications  of  the  learning-focuses  for  a  teacher  employing  simulations  as  a
support in creating good learning contexts for students? Clearly from our data, the level on which we
can  expect  students  to  engage  is  with  learning-focus  B  and  C.  With  these  learning-focuses,
interventions  are  important  and  can  be  catalysts  for  the  learners’  learning.  For  learning  through

Ingerman, Linder & Marshall – Learning-focuses in physics simulation learning situations
Page 5 of 6

Draft copy, please do not quote without contacting the authors.

simulations, things taken for granted need to be brought into focal awareness. This might happen by
students spontaneously bringing two aspects presented by the simulation together, being shown by the
simulation and observed by the students, or questioned by an intervener, for example a fellow student
or a teacher. From the analysis of all our data, we conclude that a mindful intervention by a teacher,
juxtaposed  with  the  simulation  possibilities,  is  a  powerful  tool  for  learning.  In  itself,  the  learning
possibilities in a simulation session can easily be glossed over by the learner. Of course, simulations
working as a powerful tool for learning presupposes that the simulation has relevant features, that the
learning tasks are manageable and seem relevant to the students, and that interventions are mindful - in
short,  that  the  simulation  learning  context  shows  attributes  of  'good  teaching',  as  characterised  by
research  (see  for  example,  Ramsden,  1992).  However,  we  recognise  that  learners  working  with
learning-focus  D  could  probably  meaningfully  be  working  on  their  own,  setting  their  own  learning
agenda, and taking the responsibility of making mindful use of the simulation’s learning possibilities.

We can also conclude that the passiveness inherent in much traditional undergraduate physics teaching
is  not  necessarily  eliminated  by  the  use  of  interactive  simulations,  but  that  simulation  learning
situations  can  also  support  poor  learning  outcomes.  However,  simulations  can  be  a  powerful
pedagogical  tool  for  bringing  central  features  of  a  phenomenon  into  focal  awareness  for  students,
creating wider possibilities for learning. Metaphorically, the space of potential learning is spanned by
the  students’  learning-focus,  by  the  possibilities  of  showing  variation  in  important  aspects  of  the
phenomenon  in  the  simulation,  by  the  interveners’  mindfulness  and  by  the  appropriateness  of  the
learning tasks.

This  project  has  been  financially  supported  by  the  South  African  National  Research  Foundation
(NRF),  the  Swedish  International  Development  Cooperation  Agency  (SIDA),  the  Swedish  Research
Council  (VR),  and  the  Swedish  Foundation  for  International  Cooperation  in  Research  and  Higher
Education (STINT).

Acknowledgements

References

Bates,  S.  (2002).  Interactive  simulations  for  introductory  physics  (final  report).  School of Physics,

Christian, W. and Bellani, M. (2001). Physlets: Teaching physics with interactive curricular material.

University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh.

Prentice Hall, New Jersey.

Marton,  F.  &  Morris,  P.  (Eds.)  (2002).  What  matters?  Discovering  critical  conditions  of  classroom

learning. Göteborg Studies in Educational Sciences 181: Acta Universitatis Gothoburgenus.

Marton, F. & Booth, S. (1997). Learning and Awareness. Mahwah NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Ass.
Redish, E. F. & Steinberg, R. N. (1999). Teaching physics: figuring out what works. Physics  Today

52: 24-30.

Ramsden, P. (1992). Learning to teach in higher education. Routledge, London.

Ingerman, Linder & Marshall – Learning-focuses in physics simulation learning situations
Page 6 of 6

