Some Features Of The Flow In The Holweck Pump

Institute of Thermophysics, 630090, Novosibirsk, Russia

P. A. Skovorodko

ABSTRACT

Numerical algorithm  for direct simulation of the gas flow in the Holweck pump is  developed. The  results
illustrating the important features of the flow in the pump are reported. An attention is paid to the problem of
the pump design optimization.

Algorithm And Results

This  study  is  a  continuation  of  Ref.  1  where  the  flow  in  the  Holweck  pump  was  investigated  under  free
molecular conditions. To take into account the effect of molecular collisions the direct simulation of the flow in
the frames of the usual DSMC approach [2] is applied. Unlike the approach of Ref. 3, where the flow is treated
in the rotating reference system, we use the laboratory reference system with stationary stator. The trajectories
of  molecules  between  collisions  represent  the  straight  lines  while  the  rotation  of  the  domain  of  simulation  is
taken  into  account.  Two  molecular  models  -  solid  spheres  and  Maxwell  molecules  (VSS)  [2]  with  the
parameters derived from the viscosity were applied, though no noticeable effect of the model of molecules on
the  results  were  found.  The  simulations  were  performed  for  the  pump  used  in  Ref.  4  for  theoretical  and
experimental investigations. The results obtained in test calculations for collisionless flow were found to be in
good agreement with those previously obtained by test particle Monte Carlo method [1].

Fig. 1 illustrates the distribution of pressure averaged over radial coordinate in the flow field obtained with
(a) and without (b) taking into account the effect of molecular collisions. The results correspond to the helium
 rps. Only a part of
flow with inlet pressure 0.1 Torr, back pressure 1 Torr and rotational speed of rotor 
the total surface of the rotor corresponding to the flow field period (60 degrees [4]) is shown. The bottom of the
pictures corresponds to the pump inlet, the groove channel origin being placed on the right corner. Due to the
symmetry  conditions  the  parameters  on  the  left  and  right  sides  of  the  pictures  are  identical.  The  isobars  are
shown through 0.02 Torr.

=N

400

As  can  be  seen  from  Fig.  1  on  significant  part  of  the  flow  field  the  isobars  are  perpendicular  to  the  inlet
surface but not to the back surfaces of the groove channel. This peculiarity is typical of the flow in the screw-
grooved pump and reflects an important feature of the flow from the point of view of its approximate models.
The effect  of  molecular  collisions  in  the  considered  conditions  is  mainly  pronounced  for  the  inlet  part  of  the
pump, the gas flow rate being reduced by about 20% compared to the free molecular flow.

Concerning  the  problem  of  the  pump  design  optimization  it  should  be  noted  that  a  large  number  of
parameters  determines  the  pump  performance.  Since  the  parameters  of  "optimum"  pump  depend  on  many
factors such as working gas, the pressure range, etc., the process of the pump design optimization represents the
finding of some compromise solution of the problem. In this study the effect of two determining parameters on
the pump operation is analyzed: the number of the groove channels on the rotor surface 
)(n  and the helix angle
(α   between  the  direction  of  the  groove  channel  and  the  inlet  surface.  These  parameters  were  varied  in  the

)

°

, 

°
2≥n
10 α
≤
range 
, while in the original pump 
[4]. The study was performed for air as
rps. To check the idea that the parameters of "optimum" pump operating in the free
a working gas and 
molecular conditions will be close to those in a real flow on the preliminary stage of the study the optimization
was  performed  for  collisionless  flow. The  obtained   results  are  as  follows:  the  optimum  value  of  α  for

°
= 25α

≤
=N

60
400

6=n

, 

150

100

50

m
m

 
,

Z

150

100

50

m
m

 
,

Z

a

0

0

20

40

60

Angle, Deg.

b

0

0

20

40

60

Angle, Deg.

FIGURE 1.  Radially averaged pressure distribution in the flow field obtained with (a) and without (b) taking
into account the effect of molecular collisions.

°45  and it doesn't depend significantly on  n . The optimum  value of  α for
maximum throughput is close to 
6=n
maximum  compression  ratio  depends  on  n   and  is  about 
.  The
optimum value of  n  for maximum compression ratio is close to 12. Therefore, the pump with the parameters
12≈n

seemed to be more optimum than the original one [4].

  and  about 

°30   for 

°25   for 

30α
=

12=n

and 

÷°

35

°

Conclusion

Though the direct simulation of the flow in the Holweck pump allows one to predict quite adequite results
the possibilities of this approach to the pump design optimization seemed to be limited due to high requirements
of  computational  resources  and  a  large  number  of  the  parameters  determining  the  pump  performance.  The
approach based on the optimization of the pump operating in the collisionless flow seemed to be perspective.
The development of approximate models of the flow [4,5] is still quite actual too. Such models should be based
on the real properties of the flow, that may be just found by DSMC approach. One of the features of the flow in
the Holweck pump is that on significant part of the flow field the isobars are perpendicular to the inlet surface
but not to the back surfaces of the groove channel.

REFERENCES

1.  Skovorodko, P., A., “Free Molecular Flow in the Holweck Pump”, in Rarefied Gas Dynamics-2000, edited by T. J. Bartel
     and M. A. Gallis, 22nd International  Symposium  Proceedings, AIP Conference Proceedings, 2001, Vol. 585, pp. 900 -
     902.
2.  Bird, G. A., Molecular Gas Dynamics and the Direct Simulation of Gas Flows, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1994.
3.  Hwang, Y.-K., and Heo, J.-S., “Molecular Transition and Slip Flows in Rotating Helical Channels of Drag Pump”, in
     Rarefied Gas Dynamics-2000, edited by T. J. Bartel and M. A. Gallis, 22nd International  Symposium  Proceedings, AIP
     Conference Proceedings, 2001, Vol. 585, pp. 893-899.
4.  Kanki, T., “Flow of a Rarefied Gas in a Rectangular Channel with a Moving Plate”, in Rarefied Gas Dynamics-1994,
     edited by J. Harvey and G. Lord, 19th International  Symposium  Proceedings,  Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1995,
     Vol. 1, pp. 375 - 381.
5.  Spagnol, M., Cerruti, R., and Helmer, J., J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 16(3), 1151-1156 (1998).

