1

First and second order electromagnetic equivalency of inertial systems, based on the
wavelength and the period as speed-dependant units of length and time

G. Sardin
gsardin@ub.edu

PACS:  06.20.-f  - Metrology         06.30.Bp - Spacial dimensions         03.30.+p-Special relativity

Abstract

The  cause  for  first  and  second  order  electromagnetic  equivalency  of  inertial  systems  is
approached from a different point of view than that of special relativity. While special relativity
applies  dilatation  to  time  and  contraction  to  space  itself,  the  proposed  framework  applies
restrictively these  effects to the units of space and time, embodied in the beam  wavelength and
period,  as  perceived  on  the  inertial  system  due  to  the  Doppler  effect.  It  is  not  space  and  time
themselves that would actually vary but the electromagnetic units of space and time constituted
by  the  wavelength  and  period.  Mathematical  constructs  accept  indifferently  both  setting  out,
which provide identical results, so their valuation must be made on physical grounds. The reader
is invited to ponder on interpreting physical reality through the contraction of space and dilatation
of time or through the variation of the natural units of space and time provided by the wavelength
and the period. These two issues, mathematically equivalent, lead however to drastically different
conceptions of the physical world.

Introduction

Electromagnetic  equivalency  of  inertial  systems,  as  inferred  from  optical  experiments  such  as
Michelson's archetypal one and its new versions relying on optical cavities, is addressed from a
new  perspective  of  generalised  application  to  the  whole  electromagnetic  framework,  that
accounts  for  the  Doppler  effect.  An  extension  of  this  perspective  has  been  applied  to  the
dependance on speed of the rate of atomic clocks and of the life-time of elementary particles such
as the muon and the pion, seen as elemental clocks (*). First-order equivalency, corresponding to
the invariance from speed of the light spots position on the beam-splitter, most often overlooked
presumably  being  given  for  granted,  is  here  carefully  analysed  in  view  of  its  crucial  relevance.
Second order equivalency, i.e. interferometric invariance, is interpreted in terms of units of time
and space provided by the period and the wavelength, and their dependence on speed, instead of
inferring time dilatation and contraction of space itself. Time dilatation and space contraction are
viewed as mere mathematical wits, void of any actual physical reality. Let us underline that it is
indeed  highly  incorrect  to  extract  them  from  their  mathematical  context  and  to  project  them  as
factual  physical  features.  In  effect,  the  interferometric  optical  experiments  do  not  actually
measure any time dilatation or space contraction, but rely instead on the properties of light beams
in regard to the conveying system motion. These set-up do not directly measure time but provide
only a differential measure of time, i.e. the two beams time-of-flight difference through the phase.
Since  what  is  observed  is  the  invariance  of  the  phase,  this  null  result  should  be  accurately  and
restrictively interpreted in terms of electromagnetic properties, instead of those of time and space.

2

Special  relativity  has  interpreted  the  equivalency  of  inertial  systems  appealing  to  space
contraction and time dilatation [1-5]. Here it will be demonstrated that it is not necessary to resort
to  these  effects  to  give  account  of  their  equivalency.  But  let  us  make  previously  a  very  brief
introductory review. The recurring experimental failure to detect effects due to the earth motion
led to controversy between theorists such as G.P. Fitzgeralt, H.A. Lorentz and J.H. Poincaré, until
1905  when  A.  Einstein  proposed  a  special  mathematical  construct,  stating  that  the  Galilean
transformation  should  be  supplanted  by  a  new  space-time  transformation,  called  the  Lorentz
transformation.  In  regard  to  experimental  back-up  it  is  not  overt  that  Einstein  was  straightly
impelled in his setting out by the Michelson experiment, but in his 1905 publication he alludes to
"the unsuccessful attempts to discover any motion of the earth relative to the light medium".

In fact Maxwell's theory of electrodynamics does not satisfy the principle of Galilean relativity.
Maxwell equations foresee that the speed of light through free space is a universal constant c, but
this will not be fulfilled in any inertial system defined by the Galilean transformation. Maxwell
thought  that  the  electromagnetic  waves  were  carried  by  a  medium,  so  that  his  equations  would
only hold in a restricted group of Galilean inertial frames, i.e. in those at rest with respect to the
referential spatial medium. The theory of relativity does not actually solve the antinomy between
absolute and relative space, it just discards the former. On experimental grounds, even though the
earth has a velocity of 30 km/s relative to the sun and about 230 km/s relative to the centre of our
galaxy,  all  attempts  to  measure  the  earth  velocity  with  respect  to  the  space  medium  failed.
Nevertheless, using instead the electromagnetic spectrum of the cosmic microwave background,
latterly  discovered  and  which  can  suitably  supplant  for  practical  means  the  early  hypothetical
spatial medium as a universal extended reference, it has been unveiled that our galaxy has a drift
velocity of about 600 km/s with respect to it, outcoming a net drift velocity of our solar system of
about 370 km/s.

In order to study the significance of a given experimental test of special relativity, it is useful to
employ a framework allowing its transgression. A popular one for this purpose is the "test theory"
of  Mansouri  and  Sexl  [6].  In  a  similar  way,  in  order  to  check  the  adequacy  of  the  digressing
framework let us use an approach consisting in establishing a conceptual layout transgressing that
of special relativity. If the postulates of special relativity are presumed to be correct, transgressing
ones  should  lead  to  results  not  fitting  with  experimental  ones.  In  other  words,  since  from  the
initial  premise,  right  predictions  are  the  patrimony  of  special  relativity,  transgressing
fundamentals  should  hence  lead  to  wrong  predictions  [7-12].  However,  what  happens  if  the
surmised  postulates,  incompatible  with  those  of  special  relativity,  equally  provide  the  same
correct predictions? But let us first define the clauses of the transgressing framework and let us
check if its predictions fit experimental results.

The transgressing postulates are:

(1) In all optical experiments, the referencial frame must be light itself. So, experimental results
should be analyzed in terms of the relationship between light and the inertial observer, i.e. of the
way  the  fundamental  properties  of  light  are  perceived  on  the  inertial  system  due  to  its  motion
relative to the beam.

(2)  The  absolute  speed  of  light  (c)  is  an  intrinsic  property,  which  is  constant  exclusively  in
relationship to space itself. This implies that c is independent of the source speed.

3

(3) The Doppler effect should always be accounted for since the proper inertial system is actually
moving within space and has a velocity relative to that of light. Hence, the relative speed of light
is not at all independent of the observer speed.

Let us express two corollaries:

(1) First order  optical  equivalency,  as derived from  Michelson-like  experiments  (fig.1),  implies
the  tangential  speed  (cx)  of  the  reflected  light  beam  and  that  of  the  inertial  system  to  be  equal
(cx = v).

(2) Second order optical equivalency, i.e. interferometric invariance (fig.1 and 2), implies that the
wavelengths perceived by the inertial observer are tuned by the Doppler effect, in a way that the
two split beams meet back with the same phase.

1. First order equivalency

In monographs and textbooks dealing with special relativity, reference to Michelson's experiment
only addresses second order equivalency, i.e. the invariance of the interferometric pattern. First
order equivalency, i.e. the invariant concurrence of the beam spots at the same steady position on
the beam-splitter under any directional change, after the detached journey of the two split beams,
is  systematically  overlooked  (fig.1).  However,  this  is  not  an  obvious  fact  and  it  should  be
appraised carefully. In effect, once the two split beams have been adjusted such that they impinge
back  on  the  beam-splitter  at  the  very  same  point  this  setting  endures  with  time  and  under  any
rotation  of  the  interferometer.  Hence,  it  has  been  inferred  that  the  position  of  the  spots  is
independent of any change of the conveying inertial system motion.

This  crucial  and  not  at  all  trivial  point  deserves  an  acute  analysis.  In  effect,  after  the  incident
beam impinges on the beam-splitter, the split parts ensue self-reliant round-trip trajectories, but
both still coincide back at the very same initial position on the beam-splitter, despite it has drifted
away  during  their  time-of-flight,  which  moreover  differ.  Most  particularly,  the  fact  that  the
reflected  beam,  after  departing  from  the  beam-splitter,  meets  it  back  at  the  same  point
independently of the motion of the conveying inertial system, and thus of the resultant variable
spatial dislodge of the beam-splitter, must necessarily be ruled by some very skilful physical law.

B

B

   Ty1

Ty

λy1

λy

A'

A

 v

α

A

c

∆x

λx1

A

λx2

A'

    v

A

λx

Tx1

Tx2

Tx

B

B

B

Fig. 1: Actual path, wavelength and period of the
reflected  beam  (left),  and  as  perceived  by  the
inertial optical set-up (right)

Fig.  2:  Actual  path,  wavelength  and  period  of  the
transmitted  beam  (upper 
two  graphs)  and  as
perceived by the inertial optical set-up (lower graph)

4

Let  us  stress  that  the  law  governing  this  invariance  of  the  spots  position,  obeying  a  first  order
dependence  on  speed,  appears  to  be  ruled  by  the  transfer  of  momentum,  which  in  turn  implies
that  the  tangential  speed  of  the  reflected  beam  must  be  equal  to  that  of  the  inertial  system.
Without this fulfilment the reflected beam would be unable to catch back the beam-splitter at the
precise  initial  spot  position.  In  other  words,  this  requires  the  reflected  beam  to  be  slightly
deflected in the direction of the system motion, so that its tangential speed (cx) balances that of
the system (cx = v).

1.a. Equality of the drifts from the reflected beam and the beam-splitter

First order equivalency necessarily implies that no effect related to the inertial system speed can
ensue. Therefore, if the mirror on the Y axis is adjusted so that the beam reflects at exactly the
same  position  on  the  beam-splitter,  then  any  variation  of  the  speed  should  leave  unaltered  the
spots position. In other words, whatever the speed the reflected beam on the beam-splitter must
impinge back on it, after its round-trip time-of-flight (t) at the very same place as at first. Since
the  beam-splitter  has  meanwhile  drifted  of  a  distance  ∆x  =  v.t,  this  implies  both  incident  and
reflected beam spots to be spacially separated by the same distance ∆x (fig.1).

∆x = v.t = cx.t

So,  the  beam  reflected  on  the  beam-splitter  must  necessarily  deflect  in  the  direction  of  motion
such that its speed component (cx ) in that direction matches that of the inertial system (cx = v).

Actually, the physical law governing the deflection is rooted on the transfer of momentum, so:

cx = c.sin α 

thus:

sin α =  cx / c = v / c

sin α = px / po = mcx /mc = cx / c = v / c

where  po  is  the  momentum  of  the  incident  photons  and  px  their  remnant  component  in  the
direction of the inertial system motion, after reflection on the beam-splitter.

2. Second order equivalency (or interferometric equivalency)

2.a. Round-trip time-of-flight of the transmitted beam along the X axis (fig.2)

Actual  length  along  the  X  axis  run  by  the  beam  in  its  round-trip  from  and  back  to  the  beam-
splitter:

x1 = c.t1 = d + v.t1

and

x2 = c.t2 = d + v.t2

Therefore the corresponding round-trip time-of-flight is:

tx = t1 + t2 = d / (c - v) + d / (c + v)

Let  us  remark  that  the  speeds  c  and  v  subtract  and  add  algebraically.  This  formulation  can  be
rewritten in the form:

tx = t1 + t2 = [(d / c) / (1 - v / c)] + [(d / c) / (1+ v / c)] = 2.(d / c)/(1 - v2/c2)

5

2.b. Round-trip time-of-flight of the reflected beam along the Y axis (Fig.1)

Effective length run by the beam reflected on the beam-splitter up to the top mirror:

Ly

2 = (c.t)2  = d2 + (v.t)2

so, for one-way:

 t2 = d2 / (c2 - v2)

The round-trip time-of-flight is thus:

ty = 2.(d / c) / sqr(1 - v2/c2)

 2.c. Inequality of the reflected and transmitted beams time-of-flight

tx = 2.(d / c).(1 + v2/c2)

and

tY = 2.(d / c).(1 + 1/2  v2/c2)

and therefore the temporal mismatch is equal to: ∆t = tx - ty  = (d / c).(v2/c2).

So, from a classical analysis based on ray optics the two beams impinge back on the beam-splitter
at the same position but at a different time, there time-of-flight differing increasingly with speed.
However,  second  order  equivalency  of  inertial  systems  implies  the  two  beams  to  recombine
preserving the phase against any speed variation, thus requiring the two time-of-flight to remain
constant.  Special  relativity  has  solved  this  apparent  paradox  appealing  to  the  Lorentz
transformation,  directly  applied  to  space  and  time.  Let  us  now  see  if  it  can  be  solved  within  a
transgressing  framework.  A  priori  such  a  framework  based  on  discordant  postulates  should  not
provide the right answer, neither conform with the predictions from special relativity.

Let us stress that what actually measures Michelson’s interferometer is the phase and not directly
the time-of-flight. Thus, let us centre on how the device perceives the period and wavelength. Let
us be aware that they constitute the actual units of time and length, settling through the phase the
differential measure of the beams time-of-flight and path length. Hence it is crucial to know how
these units are perceived on the inertial system, and for any interferometric analysis the deduction
of  the  beams  path  length  and  their  time-of-flight  should  imperatively  be  made  using  these
mutable units and not the standard ones which are fix units. When these units are used the beam
time-of-flight and path length stay invariant under any variation of the system speed.

2.d. Period and wavelength perceived by the inertial system (fig.1 and 2)

In the direction of motion (X axis) the periods perceived by the system of the beam forward and
backward paths AB and BA' (fig.2) are:

Tx1 = λ / (c - v)

  and 

      Tx2 = λ / (c + v)

Since the intrinsic speed of light through space is equal to c, the respective wavelengths are:

λx1 = c.Tx1 = c. λ / (c - v) = λ / (1 - v / c)

  and

λx2 = c.Tx2 = c. λ / (c + v) = λ / (1 + v / c)

To  account  for  the  null  interferometric  result  of  Michelson's  experiment,  i.e.  the  independence
from speed of the fringe pattern, one must logically count the number of period (Nx) perceived by
the system during the beam round-trip time-of-flight.

Nx1 = tx1 / Tx1 = [d / (c - v)] / [λ / (c - v)] = d / λ

6

Nx2 = tx2 / Tx2 = [d / (c + v)] / [λ / (c + v)] = d / λ

Nx = Nx1 + Nx2 = 2.(d / λ)

In the direction perpendicular to the system motion (Y axis) the period and wavelength perceived
by the inertial system of the beam forward path AB and backward path BA' (fig.1) are:

Ty1 = (λ / c) / sqr(1 - v2/c2)

 and

λ y1 = c. Ty1 = λ / sqr(1 - v2/c2)

Since the beam round trip time-of-flight ty = 2. ty1 = 2.(d / c) / sqr(1 - v2/c2), the resultant number
of periods perceived by the inertial system is:

Ny = ty / T y1 = 2.[(d / c) / sqr(1 - v2/c2)] / [(λ / c) / sqr(1 - v2/c2)] = 2.(d / λ)

It appears that the number of periods perceived by the inertial system along the X and Y axis is
exactly the same: Nx = Ny = 2.(d / λ) and thus the two split beams preserve the same phase upon
recombination, independently of the system speed.

Accounting for both, the beam time-of-flight and the actual unit of time embodied in the wave's
period, as perceived by the system, it comes out that their number is independent of the system
speed  and  always  determined  by  the  ratio  (d  /  λ).  So,  when  the  speed  of  an  inertial  system
changes, the time of flight and the period evolve identically and so the corresponding number of
periods stays invariant and hence the phase. Let us point out that the current approach stands in
taking  into  account  a  well  established  speed-dependent  physical  effect,  namely  the  Doppler
effect,  instead  of  a  mathematical  handling  of  time  and  space  by  means  of  the  Lorentz
transformation.  So,  from  the  transgressing  framework  the  wavelength  and  period  are  the  basic
units of length and time, and these are the physical entities which vary, and not space and time
themselves.

2.e. Interferometric invariance

The expected phase shift between the two beams upon recombination was:

∆L = c.(tx - ty) = c.(d / c).(v2/c2) = d.(v2/c2)

However, this expectation presumes the equality of the units of time along the X and Y axis, i.e.
of the period Tx and Ty perceived by the inertial system. But this assumption is quixotic since the
proper  conveying  system  is  actually  moving  through  space,  not  only  the  beam.  So,  when  the
speed  dependence  of  the  period  is  accounted  for,  it  appears  that  the  number  of  periods  of  the
transmitted  and  reflected  beams  are  equal  (Nx  =  Ny)  and  stays  invariant  whatever  the  system
speed.  What  emerges  thus  from  this  analysis  is  that  Michelson's  interferometer  being  blind  to
speed, is unsuitable for its pretended purpose.

So,  the  conventional  extrapolation  that  the  speed  of  light  is  constant,  independently  of  the
observer  speed  lacks  of  analytic  rigor,  besides  digressing  rationality.  Contrarily  to  the
expectations put on Michelson's interferometer, these do not stand an accurate analysis that must
include  the  Doppler  effect,  since  it  just  cannot  be  arbitrarily  omitted  that  the  proper  system  is
actually  moving.  The  only  conclusion  wisdom  upholds  is  that  the  interferometric  pattern  is
independent of the system speed, due to the phase invariance resulting from the constancy of the

7

number  of  periods,  as  a  result  of  their  speed  dependence.  So,  it  is  not  space  and  time  which
actually vary, as assumed by special relativity, but the units of space and time embodied in the
wavelength and  period. This confusion  has lead to a grievous misleading conception  of  reality,
allowed  by  the  fact  that  mathematics  do  not  catch  the  difference.  The  transposition  of
mathematical  tools,  such  as  most  particularly  space  contraction,  to  an  actual  physical  reality
should be carefully questioned in view of the risk of inadvertently being building up a pseudo-
reality.  Besides,  whatever  the  preferred  conception,  the  conceptual  dilemma  arising  from  two
mutually exclusive standpoints to provide the same result should be scrutinised.

Conclusion

 Let us stress that the transgressing postulates provide the same result as that of special relativity.
The  emerging  dilemma  stands  on  the  two  sets  of  postulates  being  incompatible.  So,  it  appears
imperative  to  find  an  explanation  to  this  incongruence.  While  special  relativity  applies  a
dilatation state to time and a contraction state to space itself, the transgressing framework applies
contraction and dilatation effects to the units of space and time, respectively physically embodied
in  the  beam  wavelength  and  period.  Mathematical  constructs  accept  indifferently  both
formulations and provide identical results, so their valuation must be made on physical grounds.
The  point  is  that  these  mathematically  equivalent  layouts,  since  providing  matching  outcomes,
lead  however  to  completely  different  conceptions  of  physical  reality:  one  leads  to  a  concurrent
multiplicity  of  states  of  space,  while  the  other  one  appeals  to  the  relative  perception  of  the
wavelength and the period on inertial systems. Let us also mention that, on physical grounds, it is
quite painful to conceive how space could have coexistent distinct states from different systems
speed.

The mathematical efficiency of special relativity is not at all brought into play (**) in spite of its
confusion upon the actual cause of the equivalency of inertial systems, however our underlying
concern is the safeguard of physical realism by taking care of avoiding the construct of imaginary
worlds  with  fictitious  features,  based  on  a  pseudo-reality  aberrantly  derived  from  mathematical
frameworks.  For  example,  let  us  somewhat  analyse  the  concept  of  space  contraction  and  its
implications. What should be understood by the generic contraction of space, that of the whole
universe? This is what it implies as long as a limited range of contraction is not justified, and thus
the whole universe is concurrently in multiple different states of contraction, one for each inertial
body,  from  elementary  particles  to  cosmic  bodies.  So,  special  relativity  accounts  for  the
equivalency  of  inertial  systems  at  the  cost  of  leading  to  the  inequivalency  of  space,  i.e.  a
multiplicity  of  concurrent  contraction  states  of  space,  one  for  each  inertial  system.  Such  a
conceptual  construct  may  bring  a  doubtful  intellectual  gain.  Is  it  clever  to  extract  space
contraction  from  its  mathematical  framework  and  to  extend  its  conception  beyond  being  a
mathematical wild card? Shouldn't be wiser not to transcript it to an actual physical reality?(***).

Furthermore,  special  relativity  postulates  the  constancy  of  the  speed  of  light  relative  to  any
inertial system. But, Michelson interferometer as well as its modern versions as optical cavities
are indeed not evidencing the invariance of the relative speed of light as commonly thought, but
are instead highlighting the incapacity of this type of optical devices to detect any net effect of
speed,  therefore  being  inadequate  for  their  presumed  objective.  Improvement  of  their  accuracy
just better sound their degree of blindness to the conveying system speed. Extrapolating that the
speed of light is constant relative to any inertial observer lacks of deductive rigor besides being
irrational.  It  can  only  be  deduced  that  such  optical  systems  are  unable to  measure  the  speed  of
light  relative  to  the  inertial  observer  and  instead  provide  invariably  the  intrinsic  speed  of  light
through  space,  independently  of  the  conveying  system  motion.  This  confusion  has  been  very

8

harmful  on  conceptual  grounds,  by  introducing  pseudo-effects  such  as  the  contraction  of  space
(13), which in fact is circumscribed to the mathematical construct which handles it. Here it has
been  shown  that  there  is  no  need  of  appealing  to  these  effects  to  give  account  of  the
electromagnetic  equivalency,  and  space  is  indeed  formally  independent  of  the  speed  of  inertial
systems. It is essential to focus the analysis on the relationship between light and the optical set-
up,  i.e.  in  the  properties  of  light  as  perceived  by  the  observer  and  not  to  extrapolate  these
properties of light to properties of space and time.

The  constancy  of  the  speed  of  light  relative  to  the  observer  and  the  consequent  concept  of
contraction  of  space  may  be  used  as  mathematical  master  keys,  but  are  however  considered  to
falsify physical reality. In effect, the electromagnetic first and second order invariance of inertial
systems has been straightforwardly accounted for through the standard addition of speeds, once
the Doppler effect is taken into account. There is no need to dismiss the ordinary logic since it is
not the speed of light relative to any inertial observer that is constant, but actually it is the phase
that  is  oblivious  to  speed.  We  have  expressed  and  justified  our  opinion  and  our  conceptual
criterion which is the safeguard of rationality and realism, in contrast to the conceptual surrealism
of special relativity. Now it is the reader's turn to ponder on interpreting physical reality through
the contraction of space and dilatation of time or through the variation of the units of space and
time, embodied in the wavelength and the period. These two issues, mathematically equivalent,
lead however to drastically different conceptions of our physical world.

Comments

(*) Special relativity applies to other ambits such as to clocks. Indeed, pions or muons, seen as
elementary  clocks,  do  exhibit  a  dilatation  of  their  lifetime  with  speed.  From  a  mathematical
approach this effect has been attributed to the dilatation of time itself, however from a physical
approach  this  effect  is  attributed  to  a  decrease  of  the  probability  of  disintegration,  i.e.  of  the
system's  transition frequency  from  one state to another  one. This equally applies to  atomic and
nuclear clocks. So, in all cases what is actually measured is the rate of transition as a function of
speed,  which  effectively  slow  down.  From  it,  the transition  period  is  deducted,  similarly  to  the
electromagnetic case in which it is the period of the wave that is defined as a function of speed.
So,  the  affectation  of  the  period  by  speed  applies  in  all  cases,  and  in  all  measures  of  time  the
actual unit is the period which is a speed-dependant unit.

(**) The  mathematical  efficiency  of  special  relativity,  which  is  not  questioned,  is  based  on  the
fact that it does not specify to which specific physical entity it should be applied, relying instead
on  generic  parameters  represented  by  space  and  time.  Certainly  this  offers  great  advantages  on
mathematical grounds, since there is then no need to know the specificity of each experiment, but
in counterpart this has lead to the naive belief in the contraction of empty  space (13),  which is
today's "blind point" and is rooted on the endemic confusion between map and territory.

(***)  Within  the  framework  of  special  relativity,  when  considering  the  case  of  atmospheric
muons, for them, space has shortened due to their high speed, while for any external observer it is
instead  time  that  has  slow  down.  Consequently,  two  different  causes  are  attributed  to  the  same
phenomenon. This is an evident example of causal schizophrenia in which two different causes
are attributed to the same effect, depending on the proper or outer observer, and which is however
dogmatically defended on theoretical grounds and tought in Universities (13). From the author's
point of view, the belief in the contraction of space as an actual physical effect is as erred as the
belief of medieval scolastics in the epicentrality of earth by relying on Aristotle's doctrine and the
Ptolemaic formalism.

9

References

1. E.T. Whittaker, "A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity", AIP (1987)
2. D. Bohm, "The Special Theory of Relativity", W.A. Benjamin, Inc., New York (1965)
3. Y. Terletskii, "Paradoxes in the Theory of Relativity", Plenium Press, New York (1968)
4. S.G. Brush, "Why was Relativity accepted?", Phys. Perspect., 184-214 (1999)
5. H.P.  Roberton,  "Postulate  versus  Observation  in  the  Special  Theory  of  Relativity",  Reviews  of
Modern Physics 21, 3 378-382 (1949)
6. R. Mansouri, R.U. Sexl, Gen. Relativ. Gravit. 8, 487, 515, 809 (1968)
7. J.P. Cedarholm, C.H. Rownes, "A new experimental test of special relativity", Nature 184, 1350
(1959)
8. T.P. Krisher et al., "Test of the isotropy of the one-way speed of light using H-maser frequency
standards", Phys. Rev. D  42, 2, 731-734 (1990)
9. E. Riis  et al., "Test of the isotropy of the speed of light using fast-beam laser spectroscopy", Phys.
Rev. Lett. 60, 2, 81-84 (1988)
10. P. Wolf et al., "Tests of Lorentz Invariance using a microwave resonator", Phys.Rev. Lett. 90, 6
(2003)
11. C. Braxmaier et al., "Testing Relativity using ultra-stable oscillators"
http://www.uni-konstanz.de/quantum-optics/qmet/cores/
12. S. Schleif, "What is the experimental basis of the Special relativity Theory?"
http://www2.corepower.com:8080/~relfaq/experiments.html
13. P.A. Tipler, "Physics": chapter on relativity, Worth Publishers, Inc., New York (1991)

Author's other related articles:

A dual set-up based on Bradley's aberration of light, using simultaneously stellar and local light sources.

A causal approach to first-order optical equivalency of inertial systems, by means of a beam-pointing test-
experiment based on speed-induced deflection of light.

lanl.arXiv.org e-Print archive (url: xxx.lanl.gov),  Physics, Subj-class: General Physics

Registered text. All rights reserved

