IMPACT STUDIES USING A ONE STAGE LIGHT GAS GUN.  Jorge Carmona, Mike Cook, Jimmy Schmoke,
Katie Harper, Jerry Reay, Lorin Matthews and Truell Hyde, CASPER (Center for Astrophysics, Space Physics and
Engineering Research), Baylor University, Waco, TX 76798 E-mail: Truell_Hyde@baylor.edu.

Introduction:   The  Center  for  Astrophysics,
Space  Physics,  and  Engineering  Research  (CASPER)
has completed construction and calibration of a Light
Gas Gun (LGG), which is used for low velocity impact
studies.   At  geosynchronous  orbit,  space  debris  can
impact  commercial  satellites  at  velocities  of  500  m/s
[1] reducing their useful lifetime.   Additionally, there
is  an  ever-increasing  population  of  abandoned  non-
operational satellites and related debris in these orbits
[2]. Therefore, it is important to clearly understand the
physics  behind  how  such  collisions  can  cause  struc-
tural  damage.  This  is  most  easily  determined  by
measuring the damage incurred on representative ma-
terial exposed to test collisions in  the laboratory.  Data
collected in this manner will not only help illuminate
the  shock  physics  involved  but  can  also  aid  in
providing methods for   designing advanced shielding
for satellites.

 LGG:  The LGG employs a simple design incor-
porating  interchangeable  barrels  of  various  bore  di-
ameters. The gun mount is adjustable for both azimuth
and  elevation,  allowing  an  accuracy  of  ±  1.5  cm  for
impactor placement.   Since the gun uses inert gas as a
propellant,  little  maintenance  is  required  and  several
shots per hour are possible.   Barrels can easily be in-
terchanged  allowing  the  gun  to  fire  spherical  projec-
tiles as small as 635 microns and as large as 2381.25
microns  in  diameter.  The  light  gas  gun  operates  by
releasing  high-pressure  gas  behind  a  projectile  into  a
very  low-pressure  chamber  (Figure  1).  Currently,  the
gas used in the high-pressure chamber is either nitro-
gen or helium.  Helium allows for higher velocities due
to its lower molecular mass and is used the majority of
the time. The low-pressure chamber is established us-
ing a vacuum system attached to the target end of the
LGG.  This  system  establishes  a  base  pressure  of  100
mTorr, removing most of the air molecules from inside
the system and virtually eliminating air resistance for
the projectile, thus increasing its final velocity. Projec-
tile velocities of 783 ± 10m/s are consistently recorded
using  1000psi  helium  (2/3-pressure  capacity  of  the
system) while firing 1587.5 µm aluminum projectiles.
Velocities as small as 115 m/s with an accuracy of ± 5
m/s can also be achieved using nitrogen.  The theoreti-
cal  upper  bound  for  velocities  attainable  by  the  LGG
are in the range of 1.0 km/s. There are several current
limitations to the system. A much higher pressure must
exist on the pressurized side of the valve than on the
target chamber side of the valve for rough vacuum to
be achieved in the system. This places a lower limit on
the minimum velocity that can be achieved. A second
limitation is the total number of shots that can be fired
in a given configuration. Each piece in the LGG assembly is

Figure  1.   LGG  Impact  System.  The  barrel  is  contained
within a pressurized chamber (in dark green); a valve allows
the target chamber to be kept under vacuum (green arrows).
As the particle travels through the chamber, it passes through
two laser fans used to detect both  velo city and particle size
before  striking  the  target  plate  to  which  is  attached  a  PZT
crystal which detects the impact.

subject  to  wear,  with  the  barrel  capable  of  handling  about
one hundred shots before requiring replacement.

LGG Diagnostics: System diagnostics consist of
both  optical  and  impact  sensor  devices.  As  shown  in
Fig. 2, projectile velocities are determined using a laser
detection  system  capable  of  providing  a  presentable
signal  over  a  wide  range  of  velocities  and  particle
sizes.   This laser diagnostic system is designed to reg-
ister both the speed and pulse width of the change in
the  photon  current,  which  in  turn  depend  on  the  size
and velocity of the particle. The measured signal must
not exceed either the gain bandwidth product (GBP) or
the slew rate (in volts/µs) of the amplifier.  Since these
are a measure of the amplifier’s ability to change the
output voltage with respect to input voltage, an ampli-
fier  with  a  large  slew  rate  and  high  GBP  is  needed.
The primary drawback to such high gain amplifiers is
that the gain bandwidth is indirectly proportional to the
maximum pulse width that can be amplified at a con-
stant  rate.   (Gain  bandwidth  is  defined  as  GBP/Acl
where Acl is the amplifier’s closed loop gain.)   Once
beyond  the  gain  bandwidth,  amplification  is  greatly
reduced and decreases rapidly at a predetermined rate.
To avoid this problem, several amplification stages are
required so that the GBP of each stage remains within
the desired pulse width regime.   Since a single ampli-
fier with extremely high gain would severely limit the
overall bandwidth of the system, multiple cascade am-
plifiers are used.   This design provides an overall sys-
tem gain <40dBv with a bandwidth of 23 MHz and a
gain flatness  of  15  MHz  with  0.1  dB  deviation.   The

IMPACT STUDIES USING A ONE STAGE LIGHT GAS GUN:  Jorge Carmona Reyes, et al

system has proven highly effective under actual labo-
ratory  conditions  as  a  way  to  accurately  analyze  ve-
locities of various sizes of particles. In the lower size
limit, the capability of the electronics to record a sig-
nificant amount of voltage gain is also necessary due to
the almost negligible amount of photocurrent reduction
created by the particle when passing through the beam.
Since  photon  current  is  proportional  to  the  electron
current  existing  in  the  circuit,  a  relationship  can  be
determined  between  the  size  of  the  particle  and  the
amount  of  change  in  the  photon  current.  The  circuit
employed is optimized for these conditions and analy-
sis has shown that high gain amplification provides the
amount of gain necessary to detect micron size parti-
cles.   Preliminary circuit analysis has also shown that
high  gain  amplification  can  be  achieved  without  ad-
versely affecting the fidelity of the output waveform.

Figure 2.  Side View of the Laser Fan. A top hat lens is used
to  fan  the  beam  from  a  Lasiris  SNF  670  nm  Diode  Laser,
providing a large target area for the projectile (whose trajec-
tory  is  into  the  page).   The  laser  light  is  then  focused  by  a
second  lens  onto  a  Motorola  Photo  Detector  MRD500  and
the  subsequent  signal  is  measured  by  a  Tektronix  TDS
3032B oscilloscope.

The data from both laser fans as well as the PZT (pie-
zoelectric lead zirconate titanate) crystal is recorded by
two  Tektronix  TDS  3032B  oscilloscopes,  which  are
interfaced to a computer via a General Purpose Inter-
face  Bus  (GPIB).    The  data  is  then  analyzed  using
LabVIEW 6.1.  A Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) analy-
sis  is  conducted  on  the (PZT)  data  to  determine  the
resonant frequency and the voltage output of the PZT
plate.  To  minimize  noise,  a  Butterworth  filter  is  em-
ployed.  The laser fan data is then passed through trig-
ger  levels  that  extract  the  information  needed  to  cal-
culate  the  velocity  of  the  particle.   Once  the  velocity
and voltage response are known they are used to cal-
culate the overall sensitivity of the plate.   Finally, the
raw data is saved for future analysis.

Data  and  Analysis: Currently  the  LGG  is  being
used  to  conduct  experiments  on  a  stainless  steel  disk
plate with a PZT crystal clamped at its center. Before
the plate could be used with the LGG, it was first nec-
essary  to  construct  a  sensitivity  map  (with  sensitivity

defined as peak-to-peak voltage divided by momentum
in  V/Ns)  so  that  subsequent  collected  data  could  be
properly understood.   Such a map is extremely impor-
tant since the sensitivity of the plate is greatly reduced
for impacts displaced from the location of the PZT (in
this  case,  the  center  of  the  plate).   A  properly  cali-
brated sensitivity map can also help locate the specific
impact point on the plate. After this map is obtained,
the  plate  is  again  mapped  using  the  LGG.  The  meas-
ured  velocities  from  the  PZT  are  then  compared  to
known  velocities  from  the  optical  diagnostics.   The
craters formed on the plate as well as the response of
the PZT are both analyzed and then calibrated against
particle velocity in order to provide the data necessary
for  gain ing  a  better  understanding  of  the  potential
damage to structures on orbit when subjected to space
debris  impacts.   Specifically,  data  collected  from  the
laser fan is collected using LabVIEW and then corre-
lated to the PZT voltage response.   It is then analyzed
to find the relationship between the impactor diameter
and  velocity  and  the  depth  of  the  crater  formed.  The
data shown in Figure 3 represents the results from the
first 100 shots with the LGG system.   As can be seen,
nearly  half  (43)  fell  within  the  5-7  V/Ns  range.   As
expected, the data shows  a linear relationship between
particle  velocity  and  voltage  response  from  the  PZT.
The  slope  of  the  curve  is  used  to  determine  the  ex-
pected response for higher velocities.  Particle velocity
can also be determined given a known particle size and
voltage response.

Figure 3.  Shots with a sensitivity of 5-7 V/Ns

Conclusion  and  Future  Research:  A valid, low
velocity  light  gas  system  has  been  developed  and
tested for use in orbital debris research.   Future areas
of research include employing additional PZTs to pre-
cisely  locate  the  point  of  impact  on  the  plate,  higher
velocity  (hypervelocity)  impacts  of  1.0  to  2.0  km/s
using a two stage light gas gun, and studies using aero-
gel as  an  advanced  shielding  material  or as  an  inter-
planetary dust particle (IDP) capture mechanism.

References:  [1]  R.  Westerkamp,  J.  Bendish,  S.
Theil  and  P.  Wegener  (1997)  Adv.  Space  Res. 2,  p.
361-364. [2] M. Hechler (1985) Adv. Space Res. 5(2),
p. 47-57.

