1/12/04

Multimer Radical Ions and Electron/Hole Localization

in Polyatomic Molecular Liquids: A critical review.

Ilya A. Shkrob and Myran C. Sauer, Jr.

Chemistry Division , Argonne National Laboratory,  Argonne, IL 60439

The submitted manuscript has been created by the University of Chicago as
Operator of Argonne National Laboratory ("Argonne") under Contract No.
W-31-109-ENG-38 with the U. S. Department of Energy.  The U. S.
Government retains for itself, and others acting on its behalf, a paid-up,
nonexclusive, irrevocable worldwide license in said article to reproduce,
prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly
and display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government.

Abstract.

While  ionization  of  some  polyatomic  molecular  liquids  (such  as  water  and
aliphatic  alcohols)  yields  so-called  “solvated  electrons”  in  which  the  excess  electron
density is localized in the interstices between the solvent molecules, most organic and
inorganic liquids yield radical anions and cations in which the electron and spin densities
reside  on  the  solvent  molecule  or,  more  commonly,  a  group  of  such  molecules.  The
resulting  multimer  ions  have  many  unusual  properties,  such  as  high  rates  of  diffusive
hopping. The “solvated electron” can be regarded as a variant of a multimer radical anion
in which the charge, while perturbing the solvent molecules, mainly resides in the space
between these molecules. We give several examples of less known modes for electron
localization  in  liquids  that  yield  multimer  radical  anions  (such  as  C6F6,  benzene,
acetonitrile, carbon disulfide and dioxide, etc.) and holes localization in liquids that yield
multimer radical cations (such as cycloalkanes). Current understanding of the reaction
properties for these high-mobility solvent radical anions and cations is discussed.

This preprint is a shortened version of chapter 11 (“Radical Ions in Liquids”) in
collective volume "Charged Particle and Photon Interactions with Matter: Chemical,
Physicochemical, and Biological Consequences with Applications",  eds.  H.  Hatano
and A. Mozumder (Marcel-Dekker, scheduled to appear in 2004).

                        

Work performed under the auspices of the Office of Science, Division of Chemical
Science, US-DOE under contract number W-31-109-ENG-38.

tel 630-2529516, FAX 630-2524993; e-mail  shkrob@anl.gov.

1

1/12/04

RADICAL IONS IN LIQUIDS ....................................................................................... 1

I. Introduction ......................................................................................................... 3

II. Electrons and solvent anions in supercritical CO2. .............................................. 4

III. Solvent anions in liquid CS2, C6F6, and aromatic hydrocarbons. ...................... 11

IV. Solvent anions and electron localization in liquid acetonitrile. ......................... 15

V. Solvent radical cations in liquid cycloalkanes. .................................................. 23

VI. Concluding remarks. ....................................................................................... 31

2

1/12/04

I. Introduction

Interaction of ionizing radiation – fast electrons, α-particles, x- and γ- rays, and

UV and VUV photons - with molecular solids and liquids causes the formation of short-

lived electron-hole pairs that, in such media, thermalize and, eventually, localize yielding

radical ions and/or trapped (solvated) electrons and holes. The distinction between the

radical  anions  and  the  solvated  electrons  is  arbitrary.  For  the  time  being,  it  will  be

assumed that "radical ions" have an excess electron or electron deficiency in the valence

orbitals of a single solvent molecule ("molecular ions", "monomer ions") or a small group

of such molecules ("dimer ions" or "multimer ions") that do not share charge with neutral

solvent molecules that "solvate" them. Naturally, the excess electron in a “radical anion”

is  indistinguishable  from  other  valence  electrons  in  this  anion.  By  contrast,  in  the

"solvated electron" (also known as " cavity electron"), the electron density resides mainly

in interstitial sites between the solvent molecules ("solvation cavity") that are polarized

by  the  negative  charge  at  its  center  (thereby  forming  the  outer  shell  of  a  "negative

polaron"). The underlying assumption of this visualization is that the "solvated electron"

is a single-electron state whose properties can be given by a band model in which the

valence electrons in the solvent and the excess electron in the cavity are treated wholly

separately [1] - in the exact opposite way to how the electronic structure of the solvent

"radical ion" is viewed. An additional assumption is usually made that the excess electron

interacts with (rigid, flexible, or polarizable) solvent molecules by means of an empirical

classical potential. Both of these simplifying assumptions find little support in structural

studies  of  “trapped  electrons”  in  vitreous  molecular  solids  using  magnetic  resonance

spectroscopy [2].

The  “primary”  species  –  solvated/trapped  electrons/holes  and  solvent  “radical

ions” - are efficient donors and acceptors of electrons and protons; they readily react with

the  solvent,  the  solute  and  dopant  molecules,  each  other,  and  the  short-lived  species

(radicals,  molecular  fragments  and  excited  states)  generated  in  the  ionization  and

excitation events along with these “primary” charges. In most radiation chemistry studies,

the species of interest are the resulting "secondary" ions, radicals, and excited neutrals.

3

1/12/04

Quite  often  in  such  studies,  the  radiolysis  is  complemented  by  other  techniques  for

radical  ion  generation,  such  as  plasma  oxidation,  electron  bombardment  –  matrix

deposition, and chemical and electrochemical reduction or oxidation.

There  are  many  excellent  books  and  reviews  on  the  structure  and  reactions  of

secondary radical ions generated in radiolytic and photolytic reactions. Common topics

include  the  means  and  kinetics  of  radical  ion  production,  techniques  for  matrix

stabilization,  electronic  and  atomic  structure,  ion-molecule  reactions,  structural

rearrangements, etc. On the other hand, the studies of primary radical ions, viz. solvent

radical ions, have not been reviewed in a systematic fashion. In this paper, we attempt to

close this gap. To this end, we will concentrate on a few better characterized systems

(there  have  been  many  scattered  pulse  radiolysis  studies  of  organic  solvents;  most  of

these studies are inconclusive as to the nature of the “primary” species).

Before  we  review  specific  systems,  note  that  the  primary  species  should  be

considered on a different footing than the secondary radical ions. The latter ions are well-

isolated  from  their  parent  molecules  by  the  matrix  or  the  solvent.  By  contrast,  in  the

primary species, the charge is residing on a molecule(s) that is surrounded by like solvent

molecules.  This  often  results  in  unusual  properties  because  the  barriers  for  charge

hopping and charge delocalization are lowered. We will examine several examples of the

reaction  and  migration  dynamics  of  such  primary  radical  ions;  the  multiplicity  of

examples and commonality of the observed behavior suggest a general pattern.

As demonstrated below, a primary charge viewed as a solvated electron or the

molecular ion residing in an inert liquid does not account for experimental observations

in many if not most of the systems. While we cannot offer a specific, general model of

these "exceptional" ions, we provide a general introduction to the known properties of

such species. Furthermore, we argue that these species comprise the rule rather than the

exception. The reader is invited to reach his or her own conclusions.

II. Electrons and solvent anions in supercritical CO2.

The  first  "exceptional"  system  that  we  review  is  carbon  dioxide  [15-21].

Supercritical (sc) CO2 finds numerous industrial applications as a “green” solvent, and

this  practical  consideration  stimulates  interest  in  its  radiation  chemistry.  Though  the

4

1/12/04

studies  of  sc  CO2  are  recent,  this  system  is  particularly  interesting  because  of  the

simplicity of the solvent molecule and extensive gas phase and matrix isolation studies of

the corresponding ions (see below).

Like other sc fluids, sc CO2 is a collection of nanoscale molecular clusters that

rapidly  associate,  dissociate,  and  exchange  molecules  among  each  other  [22].  Pre-

thermalized  electrons  in  sc  CO2 attach  to  these  (CO2)n  clusters.  In  the  gas  phase,  the

attachment can be dissociative (reaction (2)) and or non-dissociative (reaction (1)),

e- + (CO2)n  →  (CO2)n

-

(1)

→  CO + O

(CO2)n-1   → CO + CO3

(CO2)n-2

(2)

-

-

depending on the electron energy (for n=2, reaction (2) is 3.6 eV more endothermic) [23].

Although in radiolysis, a large fraction of electrons have initial excess energies > 10 eV,

the yield of CO3

- in 20 MeV electron radiolysis of dense sc-CO2 does not exceed 5% of

the total ionization yield [20].

In the gas phase, anions formed in reaction (1) have been extensively studied [24].

A linear CO2 molecule has negative gas-phase electron affinity (EAg) of -0.6±0.2 eV. The

metastable C2v monomer anion, CO2

- (with OCO angle of 135o and autodetachment time

of < 100 µs) exhibits vertical detachment energy (VDE) of 1.33 to 1.4 eV. This  energy

increases  to  2.6-2.79  eV  in  the  stable,  D2d symmetric C-C bound dimer anion, C2O4

-,

shown in Fig. 1a (with lifetime > 2 ms), and further increases to 3.4 eV for n=6 clusters.

In larger clusters, the VDE first decreases to 2.49 eV (n=7), then monotonically increases

to 3.14 eV (n=13), then, for n≥14, the VDE suddenly increases to 4.55 eV. The onset of

the photoelectron spectrum increases from 1.5 eV for n=2-7 clusters to 1.8-2 eV for n=8-

13 clusters to 3 eV for n=15-16 clusters. Tsukuda et al. [24] argue that while the core of

small (n≤6) and large (n≥14) clusters is a D2d dimer anion, the core of 6<n<14 clusters is

a  monomer  anion  weakly  coupled  to  several  CO2  molecules  (with  binding  energy  ca.

0.22 eV per molecule). Both of these forms coexist in n=6 and n=13 clusters. It appears

5

1/12/04

geometry.

that  the  two  isomers  are  close  in  energy,  and  core  switching  occurs  readily  when  the

cluster  geometry  and  size  change.  Since  in  sc  fluid  there  is  a  wide  distribution  of  the

cluster  sizes  and  shapes  [22],  the  solvent  radical  anion  does  not  have  a  well-defined

In  CO2  gas,  the  density-normalized  electron  mobility  µeτe  is  independent  of

temperature  (2x10

  molecule/cm.V .s  [25]),  though  the  apparent  mobility  steadily

22

decreases with the pressure: free electrons are trapped by neutral (CO2)n clusters (n≈6)

with nearly collisional rates, and the electron affinity of these clusters > 0.9 eV.  When

extrapolated to solvent densities of (2-15)x10

 cm

 typical for sc CO2, these estimates

suggest that the free electron mobility µ

e is ca. 1 cm
τe < 30 fs [18]. If the lifetime were this short, the electrons would contribute negligibly

/Vs and its collision-limited lifetime

21

-3

2

either to the conductivity or the product formation. However, this extrapolation is not

supported by experiment [18,20].

In low-temperature solid matrices (e.g., Ne and Ar at 5-11 K), the CO2

- monomer,

-)(CO2)n  multimer  anion  (n = 1, 2), and the C2O4

(CO2
spectroscopy;  the  latter  species  was  the  only  one  stable  at  25-31  K  [26]. In  nonpolar

- dimer were observed using IR

liquids,  monomer  CO2  is  an  efficient  electron  scavenger.  Still,  the  electron  can  be
detached from the monomer anion both thermally and photolytically [27]. For instance, in

iso-octane,  reaction  (1)  is  exothermic  by  1.08  eV,  the  VDE  peak  is  at  3  eV,  and  the

photodetachment threshold is at 1 eV [27].

As  seen  from  the  above,  the  mode  of  electron  trapping  in  sc-CO2  cannot  be

deduced from the results obtained in the gas phase or matrix isolation studies. It is not

obvious whether the solvent radical anion should be similar to multimer cluster anions

found in the gas phase, dimer cation(s) in solid matrices, or monomer CO2

 anions in inert

-

liquids. Such a situation is typical for other molecular liquids.

Time-resolved  laser  dc  photoconductivity  and  pulse  radiolysis  -  transient

(electro)absorbance studies of sc-CO2 showed that ionization of the solvent (or UV-light

absorbing  solute)  yields  two  negatively  charged  species:  a  metastable  (quasifree)

6

1/12/04

conduction  band  (CB)  electron  and  a  rapidly  hopping  multimer  anion  (a  self-trapped

electron) [18,20]. Both of these species exhibit unusual properties that account for many
oddities observed in radiolysis of sc CO2. Quasifree electrons in sc CO2 have lifetime τe <

2

200 ps and mobility µe > 100 cm
/Vs [18]. For reduced solvent density ρr > 1.2 (defined
as the ratio of the solvent density ρ and the critical density ρc = 0.468 g/cm3) the product
ρrµeτe exponentially increases with ρr. The onset for the formation of rapidly migrating

quasifree electrons coincides with the emergence of the CB in the solvent [18]. Exactly

the  same  behavior  was  observed  by  Holroyd  and  co-workers  for  sc  saturated

hydrocarbons.  Their  studies  suggest  that  the  electron  mobility  increases  exponentially
with density between ρr = 1 and 2 and then stabilizes and/or slightly decreases at greater
density [28]. In sc CO2, the product µeτe shows signs of saturation at the reduced density
of  1.8  (reaching  ca.  2.5x10-9  cm2/V)  [18].  Both  this  behavior  and  the  high  mobility

indicate  that  the  quasifree  electron  is  not  attached  by  CO2  clusters,  even  temporarily,

before it is finally trapped. This is surprising, given the extremely rapid rate of electron

attachment to (CO2)n clusters in the gas phase. Apparently, once the CB is formed in a

dense liquid, the electron dynamics changes dramatically.

In sc CO2, both the solvent viscosity and the mobility of solute ions (e.g., halide

anions and aromatic and alkylamine cations) are a function of the solvent density rather

than  the  solvent  temperature  and  pressure  separately  [18,21].  In  other  words,  if  the

density is constant, the ion mobilities do not change with the solvent temperature. At a
given temperature, the ion mobility decreases rapidly with ρr  for  0.2  <  ρr  <1  and  then
decreases slowly for 1 < ρr < 2 [18,21]. In contrast to this behavior, the mobility of the
solvent anion exponentially increases with ρr, being 2-10 times greater than the mobilities

of all other ions in sc CO2 [18]. The activation energy of the solvent anion migration is
0.46 eV (for constant ρr ) whereas for the solute ions (Fig. 1c), this energy is less than 20

meV [18,21]. Careful analysis of the data on the solvent anion and electron dynamics and

thermochemistry  indicate  that  an  equilibrium  between  the  quasifree  and  trapped

electrons,  similar  to  that  observed  in  saturated  hydrocarbons,  cannot  account  for  the

observed dynamics. This is reasonable, given that the trapping energy of the electron is

almost an order of magnitude larger in sc CO2 than in these hydrocarbons.

7

1/12/04

Anomalously  high  mobility  and  large  activation  energy  for  migration  of  the

solvent  anion  suggests  that  this  anion  migrates  by  rapid  charge  hopping  between  the

solvent  clusters  (Fig.  1b);  this  hopping  easily  outruns  Brownian  diffusion  of  the  core

anion  [18].  The  hopping  mechanism  is  also  suggested  by  the  fact  that  the  mobility
exponentially increases with ρr, at any temperature: as the solvent density increases, the

cluster-to-cluster  distance  decreases,  and  the  coupling  integral  becomes  greater;  the

hopping rate increases accordingly.

Electron photodetachment upon laser excitation of the solvent anion above 1.76

eV  was  observed  (Fig.  2a,c)  [18].  The  cross  section  of  photodetachment  linearly

increases  between  1.76  and  3  eV  (Fig.  2b).  Under  the  same  physical  conditions,  the

photodetachment and absorption spectra of the solvent anion are identical (Fig. 2b) [20],

suggesting a bound-to-CB transition; the quantum yield of the photodetachment is close

to unity. The photodetachment spectrum is similar to the photoelectron spectra of (CO2)6-
-

 clusters observed by Tsukuda et al. in the gas phase [24]; it is distinctly different from

9

the electron photodetachment spectra of CO2

- in hydrocarbon liquids [27]. This suggests

that a C-C bound, D2d symmetric dimer anion constitutes the core of the solvent radical

anion [18,19].

Both the electrons and the solvent anions react with nonpolar electron acceptor

solutes with EAg > 0.4 eV [18]. For oxygen (EAg of 0.4 eV), the electron transfer from
- anion) is reversible (Fig. 3);

the solvent anion to the solute (which yields a stable CO4

the  free  energy  of  the  corresponding  reaction  is  -0.42  eV.  The  rates  of  the  electron

attachment and solvent anion scavenging correlate with each other and the EAg. On the
other  hand,  the  correlation  of  these  rate  constants  with  the  free  energy  (∆Go)  of  the

overall reaction (expected from Marcus' theory of electron transfer) is very poor [18]. The

same pattern is observed for high mobility solvent cations in nonpolar liquids (section V).
The reason for this behavior is that while the overall ∆Go depends on what happens to the

products  (e.g.,  solute  ions)  after  the  electron  transfer  (structural  relaxation,  solvation,

fragmentation, and bonding to the solvent), the activation energy of the reaction depends

only on the vertical electron affinity (ionization potential) of the solvent anion (cation)

and the solute [18]. This can be rationalized assuming that the scavenging reaction occurs

8

1/12/04

by  direct  electron  transfer  to  (or  from)  the  solute:  if  the  solute  or  solute  needs

"reorganization" in order to accept (donate) the electron, the reaction does not occur and

the  solvent  ion  migrates  away  from  the  solute  molecule.  In  other  words,  due  to  the

extremely  fast  charge  hopping,  the  lifetime  of  the  collision  complex  is  always  shorter

than  the  time  needed  for  stabilization  of  the  solute  ion  by  solvation  and/or  structural

relaxation.  No  such  anomalies  are  observed  for  (relatively  slow)  electron  transfer

reactions that involve regular ions in the same nonpolar liquids, and those do conform to

the  Marcus  theory  (though,  to  our  knowledge,  the  inverted  region  has  never  been

observed in such reactions). For example, rate constants for charge-transfer reactions of

solvent  holes  in  sc  CO2  with  electron  donors  (CO,  O2,  N2O,  and  dimethylaniline)

systematically increase with the ionization potential of the solute [15,16]. These solvent
+ cations that exhibit a prominent charge

holes  are  C2h symmetrical O-O bound (CO2)2

resonance band in the visible, which suggests strong coupling in the dimer [15,16,19,20].

These solvent cations exhibit normal diffusion properties and rate constants of diffusion-

controlled electron transfer reactions [15,16,20]; no ultrafast charge hopping is suggested

by the data [20]. Such a situation is common: no known liquid or solid yields both high-

mobility anions and high-mobility cations. The likely reason is that at least one of these

species  has  a  tendency  to  form  strongly  bound  dimer  radical  ions  that  cannot  migrate

rapidly by the hopping mechanism (see below).

In sc CO2, only solutes with EAg > 2 eV exhibit diffusion-controlled kinetics for

reaction  with  the  solvent  anion  (which  is  consistent  with  the  electron  trapping  energy

between 1.6 and 1.8 eV that was estimated from the photodetachment spectrum) [18]. For
ρr  >  0.85,  the  scavenging  radii  of  these  diffusion-controlled  reactions  systematically
decrease  with  the  solvent  density,  ρr  [18].  Interestingly,  in  addition  to  the  electron

transfer  reactions,  solvent  anions  in  sc  CO2  form  1:1  and  1:2  complexes  with  polar

molecules  that  have  large  dipole  moments,  such  as  water,  aliphatic  alcohols,  alkyl

halides, and alkyl nitriles [29]. None of these polar low-EAg solutes directly reacts with

quasifree  electrons  in  sc  CO2.  The  complexation  rate  is  10-50%  of  the  diffusion

controlled rate, the equilibrium constants of the 1:1 complexation range from 10 to 350

-1

M

  depending  on  the  solute,  the  reaction  heat  is  -  15  to  -21  kJ/mol,  and  the  reaction

entropy  is  negative  [29].  The  stability  of  these  complexes  increases  with  the  dipole

9

1/12/04

moment of the polar group and decreases with substitution at the α-carbon. It appears that

these complexes are bound by weak electrostatic interaction of the negative charge and

the  molecular  dipole.  Previously,  such  dipole-bound  complexes,  with  monomers  of

acetonitrile  [30]  and  dimers  and  higher  multimers  of  aliphatic  alcohols  [31],  were

observed  for  "solvated  electrons"  in  saturated  hydrocarbons.  For  these  electrons,  the

complexation  manifests  itself  through  a  precipitous  decrease  in  the  electron  mobility

upon the addition of the solute: thermal emission of trapped electrons from the complexes

to the CB is much less efficient than that of free "solvated electrons". No changes in the

absorption  band  of  the  "solvated  electron"  in  the  NIR  are  observed  upon  the

complexation of these electrons with the monomers and dimers of polar molecules [32].

Higher alcohol multimers, such as tetramers, provide very deep traps for these electrons;

absorption spectra of such cluster-trapped electrons are almost identical to the spectra of

"solvated electrons" in neat aliphatic alcohols [33].

That  the  solvent  anion  in  sc  CO2  demonstrates  behavior  similar  to  that  of

"solvated electrons" in saturated hydrocarbons suggests that the mechanism of binding to

the polar molecules must be similar. Apparently, increasing the trapping energy by ca.

0.15 eV due to the electrostatic binding to a monomer or dimer molecule with a dipole

moment  of  (2-4)  Debye  is  sufficient  to  halt  the  charge  hopping  completely  [29].  The

same effect of polar solutes on the hopping rate of high-mobility solvent radical cations

(with fairly similar thermochemistry) was observed in neat cis- and trans-decalin (section

V).

Sc CO2 is not the only liquid for which high-mobility solvent anions are observed

(see below), but it is the simplest one. In monoatomic liquids (liquefied Ar, Kr, and Xe),

ammonia,  and  simple  hydrocarbons  (CH4,  C2H6),  solvent  anions  are  not  formed

(quasifree or "solvated electrons" are formed instead).  In diatomic liquids, such as N2

and O2, solvent anions are generated, but the formation of strongly-bound dimer anions

precludes rapid electron hopping. Even for CO2, high mobility anions are not observed in

the low-temperature liquid: considerable thermal activation is needed to break the dimer

anion  prior  to  every  hop  of  the  electron.  In  liquids  whose  solute  molecules  show  less

tendency to form strongly bound dimer anions, the electron hopping is faster and requires

10

1/12/04

much less activation energy. As argued below, such a situation occurs in carbon disulfide,

hexafluorobenzene, benzene, and toluene.

III. Solvent anions in liquid CS2, C6F6, and aromatic hydrocarbons.

Carbon disulfide is isovalent to carbon dioxide and it also has a bent monomer

anion. While gas-phase CO2 has negative EAg of –0.6 eV [24], for CS2, EAg is +0.8 eV

[34]. Despite this very different electron affinity, Gee and Freeman observed long-lived
“electrons” in CS2 (with life time > 500 µs) with mobility ca. 8 times greater than that of

solvent cations [34]. Over time, these “electrons” converted to secondary anions whose

mobility was within 30% of the cation mobility. Between 163 and 500 K, the two ion

mobilities  scaled  linearly  with  the  solvent  viscosity,  as  would  be  expected  for  regular

ions. Of course, Gee and Freeman's identification of the long-lived high mobility solvent

anions  as  “electron”  is  just  a  manner  of  speech:  obviously,  quasifree  or  "solvated"

electrons cannot survive for over a millisecond in a positive-EAg liquid.

To the best of our knowledge, pulse radiolysis – transient absorption studies of
-  anion”  in  0.1  M  cyclohexane  and  0.1  M  THF

neat CS2 have not been reported. “CS2

solutions appears as a single 275 nm peak [35]; there is no charge-resonance band that

can be attributed to the dimer anion, at early (< 10 ns) or later times.

(CS2)n

previous section [24]. Similarly to the (CO2)n

The studies carried out in the gas phase and low-temperature matrices suggest that
- anions discussed in the
- anions have somewhat different structure from the (CO2)n
- monomer and C-C bound
- anion [36]. However, unlike
- anions coexist in the clusters of

- dimer anions are switching as the core of the (CS2)n

- anions, the CS2

- anions, CS2

- and C2S4

the two core anions in the (CO2)n

C2S4

all sizes (n=2-6) with the monomer core being statistically prevalent [36]. The dimer core

is responsible for the 1.5-1.8 eV peak observed in the photodestruction spectra of n=2-4

anions; no matching peak is observed in the liquid [37]. The dimer anion has either D2h

C-C  bound  C2O4

(C-C bound) or C2v symmetry (C-C and S-S bound) rather than the D2d symmetry of the
- anion  [36,37,38].  It  is  almost  certain  that  the  S-S  bound  structure  is
-(CS2)n-2  anions
- and S2 [37]. The dimer anion was
results in the fragmentation of the dimer core to C2S2
also observed in the EPR spectra of γ-irradiated CS2-doped frozen alcohols; the g-tensor

energetically  preferable,  because  the  UV-vis  photoexcitation  of  C2S4

11

1/12/04

parameters suggested S-S bonding [39]. Interestingly, while C2O4

-  is  readily  observed

using IR spectroscopy when electrons are injected in frozen CO2/Ne or CO2/Ar mixtures
- is observed in similar mixtures doped with CS2 [40]. It seems that

at 4 K [26], only CS2

dimerization of the molecular anion in CS2 is less favored than in CO2, both in the gas

and solid phase - perhaps, due to the positive electron affinity of the monomer molecule.

Despite  these  structural  differences,  both  liquid  CS2  and  sc  CO2  yield  high-

mobility solvent anions whose mobilities are similar. The most striking difference is the

activation energy for the anion migration. For CS2, this activation energy is only 5 kJ/mol

[34] whereas for CO2 it is 46 kJ/mol [18]. Such a large difference is surprising because

similar  transport  mechanisms  were  suggested  for  both  of  these  anions.  This  result

becomes  more  understandable  when  other  examples  of  high  mobility  anions  are

examined.

A relatively long-lived (> 100 ns) high-mobility solvent anion has been observed
by microwave conductivity in room-temperature β-irradiated liquid hexafluorobenzene

(C6F6) [41]. Like CS2, hexafluorobenzene has positive EAg estimated to be between 1 and

2  eV  [41].  The  anion  mobility  is  40  times  greater  than  that  of  the  solute  ions  and  the

activation  energy  for  the  solvent  anion  migration  is  0.11  eV  [41].  The  electron  in  the

solvent  anion  is  strongly  bound:  the  anion  does  not  react  with  such  efficient  electron

acceptors  as  SF6,  although  it  reacts  with  CBr4,  CCl4,  and  (NC)2C=C(CN)2  (with  rate
constant  as  large  as  1.5x1011  M-1 s-1).  Addition  of  small  amounts  of  inert  solvents

(benzene, saturated hydrocarbons, C6F12) results in the exponential decrease in the anion

mobility with the molar fraction x of the inert solvent [41,42]. E.g., addition of 5 mol %

of cyclohexane drops the mobility by 50% relative to neat C6F6 [41]. This decrease can
be  approximated  by  (1-x)n,  where  the  exponent  n=15-20.  A  "percolation"  model  of

charge  migration  [42]  suggests  that  the  negative  charge  in  C6F6 is  spread  over  ca.  12

solvent molecules; this is why even slight dilution has strong effect. The multimerization

is  also  consistent  with  the  emergence  of  a  675  nm  anion  band  (with  molar  extinction
coefficient of 5,000 M-1 cm-1) in pulse radiolysis of neat C6F6 [41]. This band is different
-  band  observed  in  dilute  solutions  of  C6F6 in  inert  liquids;  the  latter  is

from  the  C6F6

centered at 480 nm [41]. Thermochemistry considerations suggest that the 675 nm band

cannot be from a sandwich dimer anion similar to the dimer cations of benzene and other

12

1/12/04

planar aromatic hydrocarbons [43]. This conclusion is consistent with optically-detected

magnetic resonance (ODMR) and magnetic level-crossing data that indicate that in cold
 results  in  diffusion-controlled

hydrocarbon solutions, the encounter of C6F6

-  with  C6F6

degenerate  electron  transfer  rather  than  anion  dimerization  [44].  Thus,  while  the  data

clearly point to charge sharing and charge hopping, there seems to be no evidence that a

metastable  dimer  is  formed.  Once  more,  one  needs  to  postulate  a  flexible-structure

multimer anion in which fractional negative charge freely exchanges between the solvent

molecules.

Importantly, both for liquid C6F6 and CS2, there is a relatively high yield of ortho
positronium (o-Ps) observed in e+ irradiation of the fluids [34]. The o-Ps is formed in the
e+e- recombinations that occur in the end-of-track spurs. The higher is the negative charge
mobility, the higher is the probability that these e+e- recombinations occur before the e+

undergoes pick-off annihilation with an electron bound in a solvent molecule. Following

Gee  and  Freeman  [34],  we  suggest  that  high  o-Ps  yield  is  a  general  indicator  for  the

presence of high-mobility solvent anions in molecular fluids with positive EAg.

Yet another example of a high-mobility anion is given by benzene and toluene

[45], whose molecules have negative EAg of -1 eV. In dilute solutions of benzene and

toluene in saturated hydrocarbons and tetramethylsilane, there is an equilibrium between

the  "solvated  electrons"  and  benzene/toluene  anions  [45].  This  equilibrium  is  shifted
towards the anion (∆Go of - 9 kJ/mol), and this shift becomes greater at higher pressure.

At low pressure, the data for neat liquid benzene and toluene can be interpreted the same

way.  However,  at  high  pressure  (1-2  kbar),  the  negative  charge  mobility  becomes

independent of pressure, which indicates that no volume change occurs during the charge

migration [45]. Any mechanism that requires thermal emission of the electron from the

bound state back into the CB would require such a change; only resonant charge transfer

can account for the zero reaction volume. That the electron in pressurized benzene is not

quasifree also follows from the extrapolation of medium-pressure equilibrium constants

to the high-pressure range. These estimates give an equilibrium constant of 10-100 for the

bound electron. Simple calculation shows that the estimated fraction of free electrons is

too  small  to  account  for  the  observed  negative  charge  mobility.  Interestingly,  the

activation  energy  for  anion  hopping  in  liquid  benzene  and  toluene  (0.12  and  0.13  eV,

13

1/12/04

respectively  [45])  is  very  close  to  that  in  hexafluorobenzene  (0.11  eV  [41]),  despite  a

large difference in their EAg; the corresponding anion mobilities are also comparable.

Liquid  benzene  and  toluene  provide  the  only  known  examples  of  a  pressure-induced

switch from the thermally-activated electron detrapping to charge hopping.

As  in  the  case  of  hexafluorobenzene  solvent  anion,  EPR  and  ODMR

spectroscopies suggests that no dimerization of monomer radical anions of benzene and

toluene  occur  in  liquid  benzene  and/or  in  alkane  solutions  of  benzene  (whereas  the

radical cation of benzene is known to dimerize rapidly). The conductivity studies also

indicate that there is no volume change associated with the dimerization [45].

We conclude this section with the following observations:

First, high mobility anions occur both in liquids whose molecules have negative

and  positive  EAg.  The  gas  phase  electron  affinity  has  no  effect  on  the  rate  and  the

activation barrier of electron hopping in neat liquid solvents.

Second,  the  formation  of  strongly  bound  dimer  anions  is  detrimental  for  rapid

charge hopping. Indeed, the dimer must dissociate every time the negative charge moves;

this  requires  thermal  activation.  As  discussed  in  section  II,  high-mobility  anions  in  sc

CO2 have dimer radical anions as their chromophore core; this only results in a higher

activation barrier for hopping and a moderate increase in the anion mobility relative to

that of solute ions (a factor of two at the critical temperature). By contrast, high-mobility

solvent  anions  in  liquid  CS2,  hexafluorobenzene,  benzene,  and  toluene  (for  which  the

tendency for anion dimerization is weak), have 3-5 times lower activation barriers for the

charge hopping and substantially higher migration rates (up to 15 times) than the solute

ions. We speculate that the only reason why high mobility solvent anions are observed in

sc CO2 at all is the fact that the core rapidly switches between the monomer and dimer

anion with change in the cluster size.

Third, charge delocalization over many solvent molecules, perhaps as many as

10-15, seems to be the only way to explain the observations (such as the effect of the

dilution on the conductivity and the emergence of new absorption bands in the UV-vis

spectra). Classifying these solvent anions as molecular ions "solvated" by their parent

liquids or "solvated electrons" does not explain these properties.

14

1/12/04

It may appear from the above that only nonpolar  liquids  yield  "non-molecular"

solvent anions upon the ionization. Perhaps this is misleading: Most polar liquids studied

by radiation chemists are aliphatic alcohols and water, and these liquids yield "solvated

electrons" rather than radical ions. Though there has been sporadic interest in other polar

liquids (e.g., neat acetone), the current state of knowledge of such systems does not allow

one  to  reach  any  conclusion  as  to  the  nature  of  the  reducing  species  observed  therein

(although, see section IV).

It  may  also  appear  that  the  few  nonpolar  liquids  considered  above  do  not

comprise  the  rule.  Again,  we  stress  that  the  most  extensively  studied  nonpolar

polyatomic liquids are saturated hydrocarbons; it so happens that these fluids also yield

"solvated  electrons"  (that  are  in  a  dynamic  equilibrium  with  quasifree  CB  electrons).

Actually, very few nonpolar liquids other than alkanes and liquefied rare gases have been

studied by pulse radiolysis or photoconductivity. In almost all such systems, either the

"hole"  or  the  "electron"  exhibit  unusual  migration  or  reaction  dynamics  that  are

suggestive of rapid charge hopping. Given that in many liquids the primary solvent ions

are short-lived, we hazard a conjecture that most liquids which do not yield "solvated

electrons"  yield  high-mobility,  multimer  solvent  anions  or  (as  shown  in  section  V)

solvent  holes.  The  true  scope  for  the  occurrence  of  such  ions  is  not  known,  but  the

number of examples steadily increases.

IV. Solvent anions and electron localization in liquid acetonitrile.

The  previous  examples  of  high  mobility  solvent  radical  anions  were  all  in

nonpolar liquids. What happens in polar liquids? In some polar liquids (whose molecules

have negative EAg) such as water, mono- and poly- atomic alcohols, and ethers, "solvated

electron" is observed. In this species, the excess electron density is mainly outside the

solvent molecules. The electron resides at the cavity center and interacts as a point-like

negative charge with the surrounding solvent dipoles. The greater the dipole the more

stable is the "solvated electron". A link between these energetics and the solvent polarity

is  observed  in  the  bell-like  vis  or  NIR  spectra  of  the  "solvated  electrons"  [1].  The

maximum of the band systematically shifts towards the blue as the polarity of the solvent

increases.  For  obvious  reasons,  these  "solvated  electrons"  are  not  observed  in  liquids

15

1/12/04

whose molecules have positive EAg. However, there is no a priori reason to believe that a

given negative-EAg polar liquid will yield "solvated electrons" upon ionization. Even if

the monomer has negative EAg, the dimer may have positive electron affinity, especially

in a liquid solution where the electrostatic field of the solvent (considered as a polarizable

dielectric  continuum)  can  stabilize  the  corresponding  dimer  anion.  For  hydroxylated

molecules, such as water and aliphatic alcohols, stabilization via the formation of a dimer

(or  multimer)  anion  is  lacking,  because  no  low-lying  unoccupied  MO's  are  readily

accessible  for  the  excess  electron.  By  contrast,  many  organic  molecules  have  readily

accessible C and N 2p orbitals in their LUMO's; these are the atomic orbitals involved in

the formation of C-C bound dimer anions in CO2 and CS2 considered in sections II and

III, respectively.

Below,  we  consider  a  polar,  negative-EAg  liquid  -  acetonitrile  -  in  which  the

dimer  anion  formation  (due  to  the  electron  accessing  low-lying  (cid:5)*  orbitals)  competes

with electron stabilization due to the formation of a polarized solvent cavity [30,46]. The

outcome of this competition depends on the solvent temperature, as the dimer anion is in

a  dynamic  equilibrium  with  a  more  energetic  cavity  electron.  The  latter  cannot  be

regarded as “solvated electron” since the partition between the valence electrons in the

solvent  molecules  and  the  excess  electron  at  the  cavity  center  is  incomplete  [30].  We

argue that the properties of these two electron states can only be understood when the

traditional one-electron approximation is abandoned in favor of many-electron model.

Like water and aliphatic alcohols, gas phase CH3CN monomer has a large dipole

moment (4.3 D) and negative vertical EAg of -2.84 eV (adiabatic EAg is +17 meV) [47].

CH3CN

-
  is  a  classical  example  of  a  dipole-bound  anion,  with  the  electron  in  a  diffuse

orbital (> 3 nm) [47]. While neutral dimers, in which the CH3CN dipoles are coupled in

an  antiparallel  fashion,  readily  form  in  vapor  and  in  liquid  [48],  the  dimer  anion,

{CH3CN}2

-

,  has  not  been  observed  in  the  gas  phase.  In  the  neutral  trimer,  one  of  the

monomers couples sideways to the antiparallel pair; this molecule binds the electron in

the same way as the monomer; the adiabatic electron affinity of this trimer (14-20 meV)

is higher than that of the monomer [47]. Higher multimer anions, {CH3CN}n

, were found

-

only for n > 12 [49]. The stabilization of excess electron in solid and liquid acetonitrile is

16

1/12/04

a concerted effect of many solvent molecules. One would expect that the electron in solid

and  liquid  acetonitrile  localizes  in  the  same  way  as  the  "solvated/trapped  electron"  in

water and alcohols. This expectation is not borne out.

Solid acetonitrile exists in two crystalline forms, a high-temperature phase, α, and
a  low-temperature  phase,  β [50].  When  ionized  at  77  K,  α-acetonitrile yields a dimer
radical anion, while β-acetonitrile  yields  a  monomer  radical  anion  [51].  The  observed
dichotomy follows from the crystal structure: In α-acetonitrile, the dimer anion retains

the  same  reflection  plane  and  inversion  center  as  the  symmetric  antiparallel  pair  of
CH3CN molecules [52]. β-Acetonitrile consists of infinite chains of parallel dipoles (no

antiparallel  pairs  are  present)  and  a  monomer  anion  is  formed  instead  [51,52].  EPR

experiments and ab initio calculations of Williams and co-workers [51] indicate that the

dimer  radical  anion  is  C2h  symmetrical  and  has  the  staggered,  side-by-side  structure

shown  in  Fig.  4a  [46,52].  The  mechanism  for  orbital  stabilization  of  bent  acetonitrile

molecules in the dimer is illustrated in Fig. 4b. The CCN angle is 130º and the distance

between  cyanide  carbons  is  0.165  nm.  The  negative  charge  and  spin  are  mainly  on

carbonyl N and methyl C atoms. This structure accounts for the observed EPR parameters

and  vibronic  progressions  observed  in  the  charge-resonance  band  of  the  dimer  radical
anion [51,52]. The monomer radical anion in β-acetonitrile is also bent; the CCN angle is

close to 131º [52]. In both of these anions, the C-C bond is stretched to 0.153 nm (vs.

0.1443 nm in neutral CH3CN). Photoexcitation of these radical anions (< 650 nm) causes

further  elongation  of  the  NC-CH3  bonds  (due  to  the  promotion  of  electron  into  the

corresponding C-C antibonding orbital) which leads to their fragmentation to CH3  and

CN

-
  (see  Fig.  4b).  Except  for  the  vibronic  progressions,  both  radical  anions  exhibit

similar absorption spectra in the visible (see Fig. 3 in ref. [51]). For the dimer radical

anion, the absorption band is centered at 530 nm, for the monomer radical anion - at 420
nm [51].  The positions of these bands are in good agreement with ab initio calculations

[52].  These  calculations  indicate  that  no  bound-to-bound  transitions  in  the  IR  are

possible, either for the monomer or the dimer radical anion [46,52].

In  liquid  acetonitrile,  there  are  two  radical  anions  present  shortly  after  the

ionization event: anion-1 that absorbs in the NIR (whose band is centered at 1.45 µm)

17

1/12/04

and anion-2 that absorbs in the 400-800 nm region (whose band is centered at 500 nm);

see Fig. 5a [46,53]. These two anions are in a rapid dynamic equilibrium (Fig. 5b): as the

liquid is cooled, the 1.45 µm band becomes more and the 500 nm band less prominent

[53].  From  the  temperature  dependencies  of  the  transient  absorption  spectra,  it  was

estimated that anion-2 is 0.36 eV more stable than anion-1 [53]. The transformation of

anion-1 to anion-2 is rapid at room temperature [40,46,53] but fairly slow at the lower

temperature; at -30ºC, it takes 20-50 ns [53].

While  it  was  initially  suggested  that  anion-1  and  anion-2  are,  respectively,  the

monomer and the dimer radical anions of acetonitrile [53], more recent work suggests

that anion-1 cannot be a monomer anion (which in any case has a different absorption

spectrum from anion-1, as explained above) [30,46]. Actually, the absorption spectrum of

anion-1 is very similar to that of “solvated electron” in saturated hydrocarbons. This is

understandable  because  the  CN  dipole  has  negative  charge  on  the  nitrogen.

Consequently, if a cavity electron were formed in acetonitrile, this cavity would be lined

by methyl rather than CN groups [30], i.e., the first solvation shell of the s electron would

resemble that of the "solvated/trapped electron" in liquid and vitreous alkanes.

The  NIR  location  of  the  absorption  band  for  a  hypothetical  cavity  electron  in

acetonitrile makes even more sense if one recalls that there is a linear correlation between

the position of the band maximum of a cavity electron in a given polar liquid and the

position of the CTTS band maximum for a given halide anion in the same liquid [46,54].

The absorption band of anion-1 fits perfectly on this correlation plot (predicted 1.48 µm

[54] vs. the observed 1.40-1.45 µm [46]).

Not  only  does  anion-1  differ  from  the  molecular  anions  of  acetonitrile  in  its

absorption properties, but its dynamic properties are also anomalous. While anion-2 has

normal  mobility,  anion-1  is  a  high-mobility  anion  whose  room-temperature  diffusion

coefficient is more than three times higher than that of solute ions and anion-2 [30]. The

activation energy for this migration is just 3.2 kJ/mol while the value for normal ions

(including anion-2) is 7.6 kJ/mol [30]. Electron-transfer reactions that involve anion-1

proceed with rate constants approaching 1011 M-1 s-1  [30,46].  These  reactions  can  be

directly  observed  on  a  subnanosecond  time  scale  (before  the  equilibration  of  the  two

anions)  using  ultrafast  pump-probe  laser  spectroscopy.  To  this  end,  Kohler  and  co-

18

1/12/04

workers injected the electron into room temperature liquid acetonitrile using one-photon

CTTS excitation of iodide [46]. Both anion-1 and anion-2 were observed within 300 fs

after  the  excitation  with  a  200  fs,  260  nm  pulse,  and  rapid  decay  of  anion-1  in  the

presence of CHCl3 was observed [46]. The same experiment gave an estimate of 0.26 ns

for the settling of the equilibrium between the two anions.

In the time-resolved photoconductivity experiments carried out at Argonne [30],

the  anion  equilibrium  was  observed  via  non-Arrhenius  temperature  dependencies  of

anion mobility and rate constants of scavenging by electron acceptors, such as CCl4 [30].

These  conductivity  experiments  clearly  demonstrate  that  the  high-mobility  anion  is

anion-1  rather  than  anion-2,  contrary  to  previous  suggestions  [55].  To  distinguish

between  the  two  anions,  anion-1  and  anion-2  were  photoexcited  in  their  respective

absorption  bands  using  1064  nm  and  532  nm,  6  ns  fwhm  laser  pulses;  this
photoexcitation causes anion fragmentation to CH3 and CN- (with quantum yields of 0.01

and  0.32,  respectively)  and  a  decrease  in  the  dc  conductivity.  Using  532  nm
photobleaching  of  anion-2,  the  equilibrium  fraction  of  this  anion  between  –20°C  and
50°C was determined; knowing this fraction, the mobility and reaction constant for each
anion were determined and the equilibrium constant (1.3 at 25°C) and the heat of anion

conversion (which is ca. –0.46 eV) were estimated. The photon fluence dependencies of

the  photobleaching  efficiency  gave  estimates  for  the  anion  conversion  rate.  These

measurements suggested a longer time constant of 3 ns (vs. 0.26 ns obtained in ref. [46])
for settling the equilibrium between the two anions at 25oC.

The  formation  of  CH3CN

-
 in solid β-acetonitrile  is  due  to  its  favorable  crystal

structure [50]. According to x-ray diffraction and NMR data, the short-range structure of
liquid acetonitrile is similar to that of crystalline α-acetonitrile, with a pentamer as the

basic unit [56]. The prevalent orientation of the acetonitrile molecules in the liquid is the
antiparallel  pair  of  the  type  found  in  α-acetonitrile.  Given  that  dimerization  strongly

reduces the energy of the anion [46,51,52], it seems likely that the monomer anion cannot

form  in  liquid  acetonitrile,  where  the  "special  arrangement"  of  neighboring  molecules

needed for the formation of the monomer anion is not possible.

While anion-2 is clearly the dimer radical anion of acetonitrile, identification of

anion-1 as a cavity electron requires caution. First, we stress that anion-1 cannot be the

19

1/12/04

monomer  anion  of  acetonitrile.  The  monomer  anion  does  not  absorb  in  the  NIR

[30,46,52]. For the monomer anion to occur at all, the neighboring acetonitrile molecules
should all be oriented in the same direction, as in β-acetonitrile; otherwise, coupling to a

neighboring (antiparallel) molecule reduces the overall energy and causes instant dimer

formation. It is difficult to see how such a fortuitous orientation could persist for 0.3-3 ns

in a room-temperature liquid. Also, it is not clear why a monomer anion would migrate

rapidly. The only migration mechanism possible for this anion would be charge hopping.

Assuming that this hopping is between neighboring molecules (separated by 0.4 nm) and

2
the diffusion coefficient is 8.3x10-4 cm

/s (estimated from the room-temperature mobility

2
of 3.3x10-4 cm
/Vs [30]), the residence time for the charge on a given molecule is 2 ps.
This implies that 102-103 hops occur prior to the transformation of the monomer anion-1

to anion-2. The lowest bending modes of the CCN fragment of acetonitrile molecules and

anions  are  300-330  cm

 which is equivalent to 0.1 ps in time units. Thus, though the

-1

diffusion  is  fast,  the  lifetime  of  a  given  "monomer  anion"  is  sufficiently  long  for  the

structural relaxation; in other words, this "monomer anion" must be a bent species like
- in β-acetonitrile.  Thus,  the  low-barrier  resonant  charge  transfer  needed  to

CH3CN

explain the high mobility would have to be between a strongly bent anion and a linear

neutral  molecule.  Such  a  process  cannot  proceed  with  a  low  activation  energy,  since

bending of the neutral molecule and solvation of the resulting anion require much energy.

Furthermore,  never  once  in  a  series  of  these  102-103  hops  could  the  two  molecules

involved  in  the  resonant  charge  transfer  be  in  the  antiparallel  orientation,  since  then

anion-1 would couple to the neighboring molecule yielding anion-2. It appears that the

monomer anion cannot account for any property of anion-1.

It is more likely that the high mobility anion-1 is a multimer anion in which the

charge  is  spread  over  several  acetonitrile  molecules,  like  the  analogous  species  in

nonpolar liquids that were examined in section III. Due to the reduction in the charge on

the individual molecules, their bending is less strenuous and the barrier for the migration

of the multimer anion is low. Such a multimer anion is actually no different from the

"solvated  electron"  in  alkanes  (see  below),  which  accounts  for  the  striking  similarity

between the absorption spectra of anion-1 and "solvated/trapped electrons" in saturated

20

1/12/04

anion.

hydrocarbons. We suggest that acetonitrile provides a rare example of a liquid in which

the  "solvated  electron"  (multimer  anion)  coexists  with  a  molecular  -  dimer  -  radical

To investigate possible structures of the multimer anion, a {CH3CN}3

 cluster was

-

modeled  using  a  density  functional  (B3LYP) method  [30].  A  6-31+G**  basis  set  that

included  polarized  (d,f)  and  diffuse  functions  was  used  and  the  C3h symmetry  was

imposed.  A  "ghost"  hydrogen  atom  with  zero  charge  was  placed  at  the  center  of  the

cluster to provide s-functions for the “solvated electron”. The polarizable (overlapping

spheres)  continuum  model  was  implemented  in  the  integral  equation  formalism.  The

lowest energy state was a "propeller-like" 2A' state shown in Fig. 6. The CCN angle in
o in the neutral

the acetonitrile subunits is 178

 in solution (vs. 180

 in vacuum and 168

o

o

molecule). This bending is considerably smaller than in the monomer and dimer anions

(ca. 130o). The solvated cluster anion is compact: the closest methyl hydrogens are 0.171

nm  away  from  the  symmetry  center.  The  C-C  bond  in  the  acetonitrile  subunits  is

elongated from 0.144 nm to 0.148 nm, while the C-N bond is changed very slightly. In

this structure, the SOMO envelopes the whole cluster anion. The main negative nodes are

on methyl carbons, while the main positive nodes are at the center of symmetry, on the

in-plane hydrogens, and on carbonyl carbons. This structure may be viewed both as a

multimer anion and a "solvated electron: the SOMO has a noticeable s-character at the

symmetry center (ca. 0.34), though the main spin density is on the methyl carbons. The

latter atoms exhibit large hyperfine coupling constants (hfcc) for 13C: the isotropic hfcc is

6.9  mT;  the  anisotropy  is  negligible.  Isotropic  hfcc  for  methyl  protons  are  relatively

small: 0.19 mT for in-plain hydrogens (the principal values of the dipole tensor are -0.29,

-0.15, and 0.44 mT) and -0.086 mT for out-of-plane hydrogens (-0.29, -0.16, and +0.45

mT, respectively). The isotropic hfcc for cyanide 13C and 14N nuclei are 0.4 mT and 0.36

mT, respectively.

The  structure  bears  strong  resemblance  to  the  "trapped  electron"  in  saturated

hydrocarbons  studied  by  Kevan  and  co-workers  [2].  The  "electron"  is  "solvated"  by

methyl  groups;  the  positive  charge  on  these  groups  is  increased  due  to  considerable

elongation of C-C bonds. This elongation, as demonstrated by our DFT calculations, is

21

1/12/04

the  consequence  of  large  electron  density  on  the  skeletal  carbon  atoms.  In  the

semicontinuum  model  of  Kevan  and  coworkers  [2]  this  (multielectron)  interaction  is

treated  in  terms  of  a  "polarizable"  C-C  bond;  our  calculation  justifies  their  ad  hoc

approach. The size of the solvation cage, the juxtaposition of methyl groups, and the hfcc

tensors  for  methyl  protons  compare  favorably  with  those  obtained  experimentally  by

Kevan  and  co-workers  for  the  "trapped  electron"  in  frozen  3-methylpentane  [2].
-  anion  absorbs  much  like  the

Therefore,  it  is  reasonable  that  the  multimer  {CH3CN}n

"solvated/trapped electron" in alkanes.

While a first-principle calculation for a larger cluster is impractical, it is possible

to  make  an  educated  guess  as  to  what  happens  to  the  anion  when  the  cluster  size

increases. The "propeller" structure obtained for the {CH3CN}3

 anion is similar (save for

-

the elongated C-C bonds) to that of the {CH3CN}n X

-
 (X=I, Br) cluster for n=3 [57]. One

may expect that this trend will pertain to larger size clusters. When the halide anion is

solvated by less than seven acetonitrile molecules, the core anion is a "star" structure with

radial  CH3CN  dipoles  looking  away  from  the  halide  anion  [57].  For  n>9-12,  the

molecules in the first solvation shell couple in an antiparallel fashion to the molecules in

the second solvation shell, so that some molecules in the first solvation shell are oriented
-  anions (n≤6) are also
tangentially rather than radially [57].  Perhaps, small {CH3CN}n
star-shaped.  Due  to  the  further  spread  of  the  electron  density  in  such  clusters,  the  s-

character  of  the  SOMO  increases  while  the  CCN  bending  and  C-C  bond  elongation

decreases: such an anion would be more like a "solvated electron".

To  conclude  this  section,  acetonitrile  is  an  example  of  a  polar  liquid  in  which

stabilization  of  the  excess  electron  via  the  formation  of  a  dimer  anion  is  favored

energetically over the formation of a cavity electron, despite the fact that the molecule

has one of the largest dipole moments and very negative EAg. The cavity electron still

occurs in this liquid as a metastable state at the high-temperature. This state cannot be

truly regarded as solvated electron since the electron density is shared both by the solvent

molecules  and  interstitial  sites;  the  excess  electron  is  not  separable  from  the  valence

electrons  of  the  solvent.  A  similar  situation  exists  for  “trapped  electrons”  in  vitreous

hydrocarbons.  These  species  should  be  regarded  as  multimer  anions  with  flexible

22

1/12/04

geometry and extensive delocalization of the charge. These “solvated electrons” are just

variants of multimer radical anions that occur in many liquids, both polar and nonpolar,

including the several examples examined above.

V. Solvent radical cations in liquid cycloalkanes.

At first glance, it may appear that extensive delocalization and/or rapid charge

hopping should not occur for solvent radical cations because the valence "hole" is more

strongly associated with the molecule than the excess electron. We have already seen that

such  expectations  are  not  supported  for  solvent  anions,  were  the  delocalization  and

degenerate electron exchange occur for liquid solvents whose molecules differ by more

than 2 eV in their electron affinity. The same applies to the solvent holes: the fact that a

given molecule forms a well-defined radical cation when this molecule is isolated in an

inert matrix does not mean that the same species is formed in a liquid where all molecules

are alike. The last few examples discussed in this paper are high-mobility solvent holes in

cycloalkanes:  cyclohexane,  methylcyclohexane,  and  decahydronaphthalenes  (decalins)

[58,59,60].

We forewarn the reader that the formation of high-mobility holes is not peculiar

to these four cycloalkanes: for instance, cyclooctane [61], squalane [62,63,64], and CCl4

[65] also yield such holes. However, in these other liquids, the holes are unstable and,

consequently, more difficult to study (the lifetimes are 5-20 ns vs. 1-3 µs). This explains

why  convincing  demonstrations  for  the  occurrence  of  high  mobility  holes  are  slow  to

come.  E.g.,  squalane  (by  virtue  of  its  high  viscosity)  has  been  frequently  used  in  the

studies on fluorescence and magnetic and spin effects in pulse radiolysis. Despite these

many studies, only recently has it been recognized that its short-lived hole (with lifetime

< 20 ns) has abnormally high diffusion and reaction rates [62]. Shortly after this fact was

established  using  transient  absorption  spectroscopy,  subsequent  studies  confirmed  the

hopping mechanism, as fast diffusion with degenerate electron exchange and high-rate

scavenging reactions of the squalane holes were observed using time-resolved ODMR

[62], magnetic level-crossing, and quantum beat spectroscopies [63]. Rapid scavenging

reactions  of  the  squalane  hole  were  also  found  to  account  for  the  anomalies  in  the

magnetic  field  effect  observed  for  delayed  fluorescence  in  the  VUV  excitation  of

23

1/12/04

techniques.

squalane [64]. Basically, in such systems, one needs to know where to look; once the

property  is  established,  it  can  be  demonstrated  in  several  ways,  using  different

In cyclooctane, high-mobility solvent holes were observed using time-dependent

electric-field-modulated  delayed  fluorescence  [61]  and  by  observation  of  rapid

scavenging  of  cyclooctane  holes  by  aromatic  solutes  in  the  initial  stage  of  radiolysis.

Recently there has been a suggestion of the presence of such holes in cyclopentane and

cycloheptane [61]; their natural lifetimes must be < 5 ns. Faster-than-normal scavenging

of  short-lived  isooctane  holes  by  diphenylsulfide  and  biphenyl  was  observed  using

quantum beat and transient absorption spectroscopies [66]. A controversy exists as to the

presence of high-mobility holes in liquid CCl4 [65].

These  disparate  findings  hint  that  there  may  be  many  examples  of  rapidly

migrating  (delocalized)  solvent  holes  in  molecular  fluids:  the  known  systems  are  few

because  it  is  difficult  to  establish  these  properties  for  short-lived  species.  As  the  time

resolution  improves,  more  examples  might  follow.  In  most  saturated  hydrocarbons,

fragmentation  and  proton  transfer  limit  the  lifetime  of  the  solvent  hole  to  several

nanoseconds (or less) [58] and, therefore, little is known about their dynamics. On the

other hand, the most studied alkane liquids, paraffins, do not seem to yield high-mobility

solvent cations [67]. This is due to the fact that many conformers coexist in these liquids,

some  of  which  have  higher  ionization  potential  than  others.  Variations  in  the  binding

energy of the hole stall its rapid hopping since thermal activation is needed to detrap the

hole from the low-IP conformers. That conformation dynamics and isomerism play an

important  role  in  the  charge  hopping  is  supported  by  many  observations  (note,  for

example,  that  high  mobility  solvent anions  are  known  to  occur  only  in  liquids  whose

molecules  are  rigid).  As  for  the  paraffins,  while  no  rapid  hole  hopping  is  observed  in

liquid alkanes, in low-temperature crystals (where all molecules have the same extended

conformation) this exchange is very fast and can be readily observed by means of time-

resolved and/or cw ODMR [68]. Ironically, in these n-alkane crystals, the hole migrates

much faster than the hole in frozen cycloalkanes, because the latter solids exhibit more

structural disorder (due to formation of plastic crystal and glass phases) detrimental to

hole  hopping;  thus,  the  situation  is  exactly  opposite  to  that  in  a  liquid.  The  recent

24

1/12/04

magnetic level-crossing spectroscopy study of Borovkov et al. places an upper estimate
of just 108  M-1 s-1 for degenerate electron exchange between n-nonane+ and the parent

alkane molecule in room-temperature solution [68].

The  reader  may  notice  that  only  saturated  hydrocarbons  (with  a  possible

exception  of  CCl4)  have  been  observed  to  yield  rapidly  migrating  solvent  holes.  As

mentioned above, part of this bias is explained by the fact that the holes are usually short-

lived, so their dynamic properties are difficult to study. However, in many liquids (such

as aromatic hydrocarbons and sc CO2) the solvent holes are relatively stable, yet no rapid

hole  hopping  is  observed.  In  such  liquids,  the  solvent  hole  has  a  well-defined  dimer

cation  core  with  strong  binding  between  the  two  halves  (in  the  first  place,  it  is  this

dimerization that causes the hole stability). For example, solvent holes in aromatic liquids

are  sandwich  dimer  cations  with  overlapping  (cid:5)  systems  [43];  in  sc  CO2,  the  solvent

cation is an O-O bound molecular dimer [19], etc. This strong dimerization is detrimental

to charge delocalization and rapid hopping. High temperature is needed to overcome this

hindrance;  perhaps  high-mobility  holes  more  readily  occur  in  hot  (e.g.,  supercritical)

liquids. In many room-temperature liquids, a catch-22 situation occurs: for the solvent

radical cations to be stable towards fragmentation and proton transfer, these holes must

dimerize. The dimer radical cations are long lived and can readily be studied, however,

they  have  ordinary  dynamic  properties.  The  holes  that  do  not  dimerize  might  have

interesting dynamic properties but they are unstable and, therefore, difficult to study. As a

result, one is limited to the studies of the few solvent holes that do not dimerize and yet

are long-lived.

In cycloalkanes, proton transfer is weakly endothermic, conformational dynamics

is slow, dimerization is not favored, and the high mobility solvent holes can be readily

observed  [60].  Ionization  of  cyclohexane,  methylcyclohexane,  trans-decalin  and  cis-

decalin produces cations whose mobilities are 5-to-25 times greater than the mobilities of

normally-diffusing  molecular  ions  and  (in  some  cases)  thermalized  electrons  in  these

liquids  [58,59,60].  Long  lifetime  and  high  mobility  makes  it  possible  to  study  the

reactions of these holes using time-resolved microwave and dc conductivity, an option

that does not exist for other saturated hydrocarbons. The activation energies for the hole

mobility range from -(3±1) kJ/mol for trans-decalin and cyclohexane to +(7-8) kJ/mol for

25

1/12/04

methylcyclohexane and cis-decalin [58]. Methylcyclohexane has the largest temperature

interval where it is liquid at atmospheric pressure and exhibits a single activation energy

of  hopping  (7.8  kJ/mol)  between  133  and  360  K  [69].  The  activation  energies  for  the

highest-rate  scavenging  reactions  of  the  cycloalkane  holes  range  from  4  kJ/mol  to  9

kJ/mol [58]. All these activation energies are small, suggesting low barrier for resonant

charge transfer.

Dynamic and chemical properties of the cycloalkane holes have been reviewed

[58,59], and we refer the reader to these publications for more detail. Below, we briefly

summarize the main findings. Although the cycloalkane holes are paramagnetic species,

these  holes  cannot  be  observed  by  magnetic  resonance  techniques,  whether  in  neat

cycloalkanes  or  in  dilute  solutions  in  high-IP  liquids.  Only  recently  has  it  been

understood  that  rapid  spin-lattice  (T1) relaxation  in  the  high-symmetry  cycloalkane

radical cations precludes their detection using ODMR [70]. This relaxation is caused by

dynamic averaging between the nearly degenerate ground and excited states of the radical

cations;  this  degeneracy  results  from  the  Jahn-Teller  distortion.  For  example,  trans-

decalin cation isolated in room-temperature cyclohexane has T1 < 7 ns [70]. Since it takes

several tens of nanoseconds to flip the electron spin for detection, radical cations of these

cycloalkanes cannot be detected by ODMR.

In  the  early  studies,  the  cycloalkane  holes  were  viewed  as  molecular  radical

cations  that  undergo  rapid  resonant  charge  transfer.  At  any  given  time,  the  positive

charge was assumed to reside on a single solvent molecule and, once in 0.5-2 ps, to hop

to a neighboring molecule. The low activation energy was explained by the similarity

between the shapes of cycloalkane molecules and their radical cations [60].

This model is consistent with many observations. Dilution of cycloalkanes with

high-IP alkanes (or higher-IP cycloalkanes) results in a decrease in the hole mobility

that correlates with the mole fraction of the cycloalkane in the mixture: the hopping rate

decreases when the density of the like molecules decreases. The occurrence of resonant

charge hopping is firmly established experimentally. Charge transfer between c-C6D12

+

and c-C6H12 was observed in the gas phase, where it proceeds at 1/3 of the collision rate

[71].  The  hopping  was  also  observed  for  radical  cations  and  molecules  of  cis-  and

trans-decalins  in  dilute  cyclohexane  solutions  (where  it  proceeds  with  a  diffusion-

26

1/12/04

controlled rate) [70]. In low-temperature solid hydrocarbons (4-30 K), hole hopping

was observed by ODMR [68]. At higher temperatures, the spectral diffusion caused by

the hopping causes the ODMR spectrum to collapse to a single narrow line observed

using magnetic level-crossing and quantum beat spectroscopies [64,65].

On the other hand, matrix-isolation EPR and ab initio calculations suggest that

neutral  cycloalkanes  and  their  cations  have  rather  different  geometries.  In  cis-  and

trans-decalins  the  bridging  bond  elongates  from  0.153-0.156  nm  in  the  neutral

molecule  to  0.19-0.21  nm  in  the  radical  cation  [73].  Upon  charging,  the  molecules

undergo  considerable  structural  relaxation,  losing  0.5-0.7  eV  [73].  If  the  electron

transfer were a single-step process, it would require an activation energy of 1-2 eV.

What then makes the resonant charge transfer possible? In the gas phase, the electron

exchange proceeds through the formation of a collision complex in which the charge is

shared by both of the cycloalkane moieties [71]. This sharing considerably reduces the

barriers for the structural relaxation. It may be assumed that in liquid cycloalkanes the

charge  is  shared  between  several  solvent  molecules  (analogous  to  the  situation  for

solvent anions) and this sharing further reduces the hopping barrier.

The sharing of charge causes delocalization of the hole. The best evidence for

the delocalization of cycloalkane holes was provided by large scavenging radii (> 2 nm)

in  cold  methylcyclohexane  [69]  and  by  hole  dynamics  in  cyclohexane-

methylcyclohexane  mixtures  [74].  While  the  addition  of  less  than  5-10  vol  %  of

methylcyclohexane  to  cyclohexane  reduces  both  the  dc  conductivity  signal  and  its

decay  rate,  further  addition  of  methylcyclohexane  yields  little  change  in  the

conductivity  signal  and  kinetics.  The  initial  reduction  is  accounted  for  by  rapid

reversible  trapping  of  cyclohexane  holes  by  methylcyclohexane  [74].  At  higher

concentration of methylcyclohexane, the equilibrium fraction of the cyclohexane holes

becomes very low and the conductivity should decrease. Experimentally, the migration

of methylcyclohexane hole in 5 vol % methylcyclohexane solution is as rapid as that of

the solvent holes in neat methylcyclohexane. When the methylcyclohexane is diluted

by  n-hexane  instead  of  the  cyclohexane,  the  conductivity  signal  decreases

proportionally  to  the  fraction  of  n-hexane.  These  results  suggest  that  the

methylcyclohexane holes are coupled to the cyclohexane solvent (the difference in the

27

1/12/04

liquid  IPs  is  <  0.11  eV  [74]).  This  coupling  makes  the  charge  migration  of

methylcyclohexane  holes  in  cyclohexane  as  efficient  as  in  neat  methylcyclohexane.

From  the  critical  concentration  of  methylcyclohexane,  the  delocalization  radius  was

estimated  as  1  nm,  or  4  to  5  molecular  diameters  [74].  Thus,  the  degree  of  charge

delocalization in cyclohexane (for the hole) and hexafluorobenzene (for the electron)

are comparable.

We  turn  to  the  chemical  behavior  of  cycloalkane  holes.  Several  classes  of

reactions were observed for these holes: (i) fast irreversible electron-transfer reactions

with solutes that have low adiabatic IPs (ionization potentials) and vertical IPs (such as

polycyclic  aromatic  molecules);  (ii)  slow  reversible  electron-transfer  reactions  with

solutes that have low adiabatic and high vertical IPs; (iii) fast proton-transfer reactions;

(iv)  slow  proton-transfer  reactions  that  occur  through  the  formation  of  metastable

complexes; and (v) very slow reactions with high-IP, low-PA (proton affinity) solutes.

Class  (i)  reactions  were  observed  in  all  four  cycloalkanes.  The  highest  rate

constants  were  observed  for  reactions  of  cyclohexane  hole  with  low-IP  aromatic

solutes, (3-4.5)x10

11

-1 s

-1

o
 at 25

 M

C [75]. In these irreversible reactions, a solute radical

cation is generated. Class (ii) reactions were observed for reactants 1,1-dimethylcyclo-

pentane,  trans-1,2-dimethylcyclopentane,  and  2,3-dimethyl-pentane  in  cyclohexane

[74],  trans-decalin, bicyclohexyl,  and iso-propylcyclohexane  in  methylcyclohexane

[69], and benzene in cis- and trans-decalins [76] (Fig. 7). In these class (ii) reactions,

biexponential  scavenging  kinetics  of  the  solvent  hole  results  due  to  the  dynamic

equilibrium between the solvent hole and the corresponding solute cation (in the latter

case, the kinetics are complicated by the subsequent dimerization of the benzene cation,

Fig. 7). For methylcyclohexane in cyclohexane, the equilibrium is reached so rapidly

that  the  decay  kinetics  are  single  exponential  at  any  temperature.  Similar  equilibria

exist for high-mobility holes in mixtures of cis- and trans-decalins.

The rate constants of the forward class (ii) reactions are much slower than those

of  the  class  (i)  reactions,  though  some  of  electron  donors  have  comparably  low

adiabatic IPg's.  These  rate  constants  do  not  correlate  with  the  free  energies  of  hole

scavenging  reactions  obtained  from  the  temperature  dependencies  of  equilibria

parameters [74]. An explanation proposed was that the rate constants are controlled by

28

1/12/04

the height of the activation barrier determined by the difference in the vertical IP of the

solute  and  the  adiabatic  IP  of  the  solvent  (section  II)  [74].  A  similar  mechanism

accounts for the chemical behavior of the high mobility solvent radical anion in sc CO2

(vide supra) [18].

Class  (iii)  reactions  include  proton-transfer  reactions  of  solvent  holes  in
cyclohexane and methylcyclohexane [71,74,75]. The corresponding rate constants are

10-30% of the fastest class (i) reactions. Class (iv) reactions  include proton-transfer

reactions in trans-decalin and cis-trans decalin mixtures [77]. Proton transfer from the

decalin hole to aliphatic alcohol results in the formation of a C-centered decalyl radical.

The proton affinity of this radical is comparable to that of a single alcohol molecule.

However,  it  is  less  than  the  proton  affinity  of  an  alcohol  dimer.  Consequently,  a

complex of the radical cation and alcohol monomer is relatively stable towards proton

transfer; when such a complex encounters a second alcohol molecule, the radical cation

rapidly deprotonates. Metastable complexes with natural lifetimes between 24 ns (2-

propanol) and 90 ns (tert-butanol) were observed in liquid cis- and trans- decalins at

o
25

C [77]. The rate of the complexation is 1/2 of that for class (i) reactions; the overall

decay rate is limited by slow proton transfer in the 1:1 complex. The rate constant of

6
unimolecular decay is (5-10)x10

 s

-1

; for primary alcohols bimolecular decay via proton

transfer to the alcohol dimer prevails. Only for secondary and ternary alcohols is the

o
equilibrium reached sufficiently slowly that it can be observed at 25

C on a time scale

of > 10 ns. There is a striking similarity between the formation of alcohol complexes

with the solvent holes (in decalins) and solvent anions (in sc CO2).

A detailed analysis of the thermodynamics and energetics of the complexation

reactions is given in ref. [77]. The forward reaction has near-zero activation energy,

whereas the proton transfer within the complex is thermally-activated (20-25 kJ/mol).

The  stability  of  the  complex  increases  with  the  carbon  number  of  the  alcohol;  the

standard heat of the complexation decreases in the opposite direction (from -39 kJ/mol
for ethanol to -25 kJ/mol for tert-butanol). Complexes of cis-decalin+ are more stable

than complexes of trans-decalin

+
 since for the former, the standard reaction entropy is

-1

-1

35 J mol

 K

 more positive. The decrease in the entropy is small for both decalins (> -

29

1/12/04

-1

-1

80 J mol

 K

) and approaches zero for higher alcohols. Similarly small changes in the

standard entropy were observed for class (ii) reactions of the methylcyclohexane

hole

 

[69]. Since the molecular complex formation can only reduce the degrees of freedom,

to account for the small change in the entropy there must be an increase in the solvent

disorder. This is consistent with a hole ordering solvent molecules around itself. When

the positive charge is compensated, the solvent becomes disordered, and the reaction

entropy  increases.  The  same  effect  is  expected  to  occur  for  all  solvent  radical  ions

considered in this paper.

Extremely  slow  class  (iv)  reactions  were  observed  for  scavenging  of  (a)

cyclohexane hole by cyclopropane [60] and (b) cyclohexane and decalins holes by O2

[75]. H atom transfer from the hole to O2, and H2

 transfer from cyclopropane to the

-

hole were suggested as the possible reaction mechanisms.

In conclusion, the behavior of high-mobility solvent anions and cations is similar.

Both  occur  only  in  liquids  whose  molecules  have  rigid  bodies  and  exhibit  little  or  no

conformational dynamics. Both do not occur in liquids where solvent radical ions have a

strong tendency to form dimers with neutral solvent molecules. Both migrate by rapid

hopping  -  sometimes  over  the  entire  liquid  range  of  the  solvent  -  and  involve  charge

delocalization  over  several  molecules.  The  activation  energies  and  the  degree  of

delocalization are roughly the same. Delocalization is required for the hopping to be rapid

because it reduces geometric adjustment to charge placement and thereby decreases the

activation  barrier  for  charge  transfer.  Both  species  rapidly  react  with  electron

donors/acceptors with rate constants that are determined only by vertical IPg or EAg of

the solute. In nonpolar liquids, both species display a strong tendency to form metastable

complexes  with  polar  molecules,  such  as  alcohols  and  nitriles,  in  which  the  charge  is

electrostatically  bound  to  the  solute  dipole.  With  respect  to  this  propensity,  the  high-

mobility ions are similar to "solvated electrons" in saturated hydrocarbons. Even in polar

solvents, solvent anions (e.g., the dimer anion in acetonitrile) are protonated only after

formation of a complex with the alcohol monomer; the transfer occurs when a second

alcohol molecule encounters the complex [30].

30

1/12/04

VI. Concluding remarks.

The take-home lesson of this paper is that there are many ways in which a charge

can  be  localized  in  a  molecular  system,  and  quite  a  few  liquids  localize  electrons  and

holes  in  ways  that  defy  easy  classification.  One  does  not  need  to  look  far  for  such

"exotic" systems; ordinary solvents will do. In liquid acetonitrile [30,46], a high-energy

electron  state,  a  cavity  electron,  coexists  in  a  dynamic  equilibrium  with  a  low-energy

state, a dimer radical anion. In liquid benzene [45], the negative charge can migrate both

by thermal emission into the CB and by degenerate electron hopping, depending on the

pressure. Actually, most liquids seem to exhibit unique charge dynamic properties; there

are few general rules.

In the previous four sections, several solvent radical ions that cannot be classified

as molecular ions ("a charge on a solvent molecule") were examined. These delocalized,

multimer radical ions are intermediate between the molecular ions and "cavity electrons",

thereby bridging the two extremes of electron (or hole) localization in a molecular liquid.

While  "solvated  electrons"  appear  only  in  negative-EAg  liquids,  delocalized  solvent

anions  appear  both  in  positive  and  negative-EAg  liquids.  Actually,  from  the  structural

standpoint, "trapped electrons" in low-temperature alkane and ether glasses [2] are closer

to the multimer anions since their stabilization requires a degree of polarization in the

molecules that is incompatible with the premises of one-electron models.

How general is the formation of multimer solvent ions? We reiterate the argument

made  in  section  III  that  very  few  systems  apart  from  water,  alcohols,  saturated

hydrocarbons, and ethers have been studied by pulse radiolysis and laser photolysis, and

for most of these liquids the ionic species observed were not primary ions. The incidence

of high-mobility primary ions among neat organic liquids is actually high. It should also

be  kept  in  mind  that  if  a  given  liquid  does  not  yield  high-mobility  solvent  ions  under

normal  conditions,  this  does  not  necessarily  hold  for  other  conditions.  High-mobility

solvent anions in sc CO2 occur only in the supercritical phase [18,20]; in the cold liquid,

the binding of the dimer anion core is too strong for the rapid charge hopping to occur.

High-mobility  solvent  anions  in  benzene  [45]  are  observed  only  under  high  pressure

conditions, etc. Furthermore, as discussed above, many organic liquids yield solvent ions

that  are  short-lived  (  <  10  ns),  and  their  dynamic  properties  cannot  be  studied  using

31

1/12/04

existing  pulse  radiolysis  techniques.  Finally,  only  in  a  small  subset  of  liquids  (whose

molecules have rigid bodies and whose ions do not dimerize), can the delocalization of

the excess charge be observed through faster-than-Brownian-diffusion hopping.

The  authors  believe  that  the  formation  of  "peculiar"  solvent  ions  is  common;

however,  only  in  a  handful  of  cases  can  one  clearly  demonstrate  that  such  ions  are

formed. Far from being exotic species, these ions may constitute the rule, whereas the

textbook species, "solvated electrons" and molecular ions, could be rare exceptions. That

these exceptions loom large in the collective mind of chemical physicists is due to the

fact that aqueous solutions surround us in everyday life, and most radiation chemistry
studies  have  been  carried  out  on  aqueous  solutions  at  25oC.  Overcoming  this

anthropocentric bias, by expanding the range of physical conditions and the number of

systems studied, might rejuvenate the 21st century radiation chemistry.

Acknowledgment.

The preparation of this review was supported under contract No. W-31-109-ENG-38 with

US-DOE Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Chemical Sciences.

32

1/12/04

References.

[1]

[2]

"Excess  Electrons  in  Dielectric  Media",  eds.  C.  Ferradini  and  J.-P.  Jay-Gerin,
CRC Press, Ann Arbor (1991); A. K. Pikaev, "The solvated electron in radiation
chemistry", Israel Program for Scientific Translations, Jerusalem (1971).

L. Kevan, J. Phys. Chem. 82, 1144 (1978); L. Kevan and T. Ichikawa, J. Phys.
Chem.,  84,  3260  (1980);  T.  Kimura,  K.  Fueki,  P.  A.  Narayana,  and  L.  Kevan,
Can. J. Chem., 55, 1940 (1977); D.-F. Feng, L. Kevan, and H. Yoshida, J. Chem.
Phys., 61, 4440 (1974); M. Nishida, J. Chem. Phys., 65, 5242 (1977); S. Noda, L.
Kevan, and K. Fueki, J. Phys. Chem. 79, 2866 (1975).

NB: References  [3-14]  are  omitted  from  this  preprint;  the  refrence  numbering
adopted here corresponds to that used in the book version, which is more extensive
in its breadth.

[15] N. M. Dimitrijevic, D. M. Bartels, C. D. Jonah, and K.  Takahashi, Chem. Phys.

Lett., 309, 61 (1999).

[16] N. M. Dimitrijevic, K. Takahashi, D. M. Bartels, C. D. Jonah, and A. D. Trifunac,

J. Phys. Chem. A, 104, 568 (2000).

[17] K. Takahashi, S. Sawamura, N. M. Dimitrijevic, D. M. Bartels, and C. D. Jonah,

J. Phys. Chem. A, 106, 108 (2002).

[18]

I. A. Shkrob and M. C. Sauer, Jr., J. Phys. Chem. B, 105, 4520 (2001).

[19]

I. A. Shkrob, J. Phys. Chem. A, ASAP #jp0214918 (2002), in press.

[20]

I. A. Shkrob, M. C. Sauer, Jr., C. D. Jonah, and K. Takahashi, J. Phys. Chem. A,
ASAP #jp021494K (2002), in press.

[22]

S. C. Tucker, Chem. Rev. 99, 391 (1999).

[21] K. Itoh, R. A. Holroyd, and M. Nishikawa, J. Phys. Chem. A, 105, 703 (2001).

[23]

C. E. Klots and R. N. Compton, J. Chem. Phys., 69, 1636 (1978).

[24] K. H. Bowen and J. G. Eaton, in "The Structure of Small Molecules and Ions",
eds. R. Naamna and Z. Vagar, Plenum, New York (1987); p. 147; M. J. DeLuca,
B.  Niu,  and  M.  Johnson,  J.  Chem.  Phys.,  88,  5857  (1988);  T.  Tsukuda,  M.
Johnson,  and  T.  Nagata,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.,  268,  429  (1997);  M.  Saeki,  T.
Tsukuda, S. Iwata, and T. Nagata,  J. Chem. Phys., 11, 6333 (1999).

[25]

F. M. Jacobsen and G. R. Freeman, J. Chem. Phys., 84, 3396 (1986).

[26] M. Zhou and L. Andrews, J. Chem. Phys., 110, 2414 and 6820 (1999);

33

1/12/04

W. E. Thompson and M. E. Jacox, J. Chem. Phys., 111, 4487 (1999); J. Chem.
Phys., 91, 1410 (1989).

[27]

R.  A.  Holroyd,  T.  E.  Gangwer,  and  A.  O.  Allen,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.,  31,  520
(1975); L. V. Lukin and B. S. Yakovlev, High Energy Chem., 11, 440 (1978).

[28] K. Itoh, K. Nakagawa, and M. Nishikawa, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 32, 221 (1988); J.
Chem.  Phys.,  84,  391  (1986);  M.  Nishikawa,  R.  A.  Holroyd,  and  U.  Sowada,
Chem. Phys. 72, 3081 (1980).

[29]

I. A. Shkrob and M. C. Sauer, Jr., J. Phys. Chem. B, 105, 7027 (2001).

[30]

I. A. Shkrob and M. C. Sauer, Jr., J. Phys. Chem. A, 106, 9120 (2002).

[31]

J. H. Baxendale and P. H. G. Sharpe, Chem. Phys. Lett., 41, 440 (1976); M. Ito, T.
Kimura, and K. Fueki, Can. J. Chem., 59 , 2803 (1981).

[32]

J. H. Baxendale and E. J. Rasburn, J. Chem. Soc. Farad. Trans. I, 70, 705 (1974).

[33] G. A. Kenney-Wallace and C. D. Jonah, J. Phys. Chem. 86, 2572 (1982); T. E.
Gangwer, A. O. Allen, and R. A. Holroyd, J. Phys. Chem. 81, 1469 (1977).

[34] N. Gee and G. R. Freeman, J. Chem. Phys., 90, 5399 (1989); O.-E. Mogensen, J.

Chem. Phys., 60, 998 (1974).

[35]

T.  Azuma,  M.  Washio,  Y.  Tabata,  Y.  Ito,  K.  Nishiyama,  Y.  Miyake,  and  K.
Nagamine, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 34, 659 (1989).

[36]

T. Tsukuda, T. Hirose, and T. Nagata, Chem. Phys. Lett., 279, 179 (1997).

[37]

[38]

T. Maeyama, T. Oikawa, T. Tsumura, and N. Mikami, J. Chem. Phys., 108, 1368
(1998).

S. W. Zhang, C. G. Zhang, Y. T. Yu, B. Z. Mao, and F. C. He, Chem. Phys. Lett.,
304,  265  (1999);  K.  Hiraoka,  S.  Fujimaki,  K.  Aruga,  and  S.  Yamabe,  J.  Phys.
Chem.,  98,  1802  (1994);  A.  Sanov,  W.  C.  Lineberger,  K.  D.  Jordan,  J.  Phys.
Chem. A, 102 2509 (1998).

[39]

J. S. Lea and M. C. R. Symons, J. Chem. Soc. Farad. Trans. I, 84, 1181 (1988).

[40] M. Zhou and L. Andrews, J. Chem. Phys., 112, 6576 (2000).

[41]  C. A. M. van den Ende, L.  Nyikos, U. Sowada, J. M. Warman, and A. Hummel,
J.  Electrostatics, 12, 97 (1982); Radiat. Phys. Chem., 19, 297 (1982); J.  Phys.
Chem., 84, 1155 (1980).

[42]

R. Schiller and L. Nyikos, J. Chem. Phys., 72, 2245 (1980)

34

1/12/04

[43]

B. Badger and B. Brocklehurst, Trans. Farad. Soc., 65, 2582 (1969); J. H. Miller,
L. Andrews, P. A. Lund, and P. N. Schatz, J. Chem. Phys., 73, 4932 (1980); R.
Mehnert,  in  "Radical  Ionic  Systems",  Kluwer,  Amsterdam  (1991),  p.  231;  R.
Mehnert  and  O.  Brede,  Radiat.  Phys.  Chem.,  26,  353  (1985);  R.  Mehnert,  O.
Brede, and W.  Naumann, Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem., 88, 71 (1984).

[44] O. A. Anisimov, V. M. Grigoryants, and Yu. N. Molin, Chem. Phys. Lett., 74, 15
(1980); Yu. N. Molin and O. A. Anisimov, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 21, 77 (1983);
V.  M.  Grygoryants,  S.  D.  McGrane,  and  S.  Lipsky,  J.  Chem.  Phys.  109,  7355
(1998); D. W. Werst, Chem. Phys. Lett., 202, 101 (1993); see also ref. [72].

[45] K. Itoh and R. A. Holroyd, J. Phys. Chem., 94, 8850 (1990).

[46]

C. Xia, J. Peon, and B. Kohler, J. Chem. Phys., 117, 8855 (2002).

[47]

E. Illenberger, Chem. Rev., 92, 1589 (1992); H. Abdoul-Carime, Y. Bouteiller,
C. Desfrançois, L. Philippe, and J. P. Schermann, Acta. Chem. Scand., 51, 145
(1997);  C.  Desfrançois,  H.  Abdoul-Carmie,  C.  Adjouri,  N.  Khelifa,  and  J.  P.
Schermann, Europhys. Lett., 26, 25 (1994)

[48]

T. A. Renner and M. Blander, J. Phys. Chem., 81, 857 (1977); J. G. Siebers, U.
Buck, and T. A. Beu, Chem. Phys., 129, 549 (1998)

[49] K. Mitsuke, T. Kondow, and K. Kuchitsu, J. Phys. Chem., 90, 1505 (1986).

[50] M.  J.  Barrow, Acta Cryst. B, 37, 2239 (1981); B. H. Torrie and B. M. Powell,

Mol. Phys., 75, 613 (1992).

[51]

F. Williams and E. D. Sprague, Acc. Chem. Res., 15, 408 (1982).

[52]

I. A. Shkrob, K. Takeda, and F. Williams, J. Phys. Chem. A, 106, 9132 (2002).

[53]

I. P. Bell, M. A. J. Rodgers, and H. D. Burrows, J. Chem. Soc., 315 (1976).

[54] M. J. Blandamer, R. Catterall, L. Shiddo, and M. C. R. Symons, J. Chem. Soc.,
4357  (1964);  M.  F.  Fox  and  E.  Hayon,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.,  25,  511  (1974);  J.
Chem. Soc. Farad Trans. I, 72, 1990 (1976).

[55] Y. Hirata, N. Mataga, Y. Sakata, and S. Misumi, J. Phys. Chem., 87, 1493 (1983);
J. Phys. Chem., 86, 1508 (1982); Y. Hirata and N. Mataga, J. Phys. Chem., 87,
1680 (1983).

[56] H.  Michel  and  E.  Lippert,  in  "Organic  Liquids",  eds.  A.  D.  Buckingham,  E.
Lippert,  and  S.  Bratos,  Wiley,  New  York  (1978)  p.  293;  see  also  p.  13;  S.  L.
Whittenburg and C. H. Wang, J. Chem. Phys., 66, 4255 (1977); K. Knozinger, D.
Leutloff,  and  R.  Wittenbeck,  J.  Mol.  Struct.,  60,  115  (1980);  H.  Kovacs,  J.
Kowalewski, A. Maliniak, and P. Stilbs, J. Phys. Chem., 93, 962 (1989)

35

1/12/04

[57] G. Markovich, L. Perera, M. L. Berkowitz, and O. Cheshnovsky, J. Chem. Phys.,
105, 2675 (1996); R. Ayala, J. M. Martinez, R. R. Pappalardo, and E. S. Marcos,
J. Phys. Chem. A, 104, 2799 (2000).

[58]

I.  A.  Shkrob,  M.  C.  Sauer,  Jr.,  and  A.  D.  Trifunac  in  "Radiation  Chemistry:
Present Status and Future Prospects", eds. C. D. Jonah, C. D. and B. S. M. Rao,
Elsevier, Amsterdam (2001); p. 175.

[59] A. D. Trifunac, M. C. Sauer, Jr., I. A. Shkrob and D. W. Werst, Acta Chem.

Scand., 51, 158 (1997).

[60]

J.  M.  Warman,  in  "The  Study  of  Fast  Processes  and  Transient  species  by
Electron-Pulse Radiolysis", eds. J. H. Baxendale and F. Busi, Reidel: Dordrecht,
The Netherlands (1982); p. 433.

[61] V. I. Borovkov, O. M. Usov, T. V. Kobzeva, V. A. Bagryanskii, and Yu. N.

Molin, Dokl. Phys. Chem. (Engl.), 384, 97 (2002).

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

I. A. Shkrob, M. C. Sauer, Jr., and A. D. Trifunac, J. Phys. Chem. 100, 5993
(1996); I. A. Shkrob and A. D. Trifunac, J. Phys. Chem. 100, 14681 (1996).

B. M. Tadjikov, D. V. Stass, O. M. Usov, and Yu. N. Molin, Chem. Phys. Lett.,
273, 25 (1997); O. M. Usov, D. V. Stass, B. M. Tadjikov, and Yu. N. Molin, J.
Phys. Chem. A, 101, 7711 (1997).

B. Brocklehurst, Radiat.  Phys.  Chem., 50, 213 (1997);  J.  Chem.  Soc.  Farad.
Trans., 93, 1079 (1997).

The main problem with CCl4 is that the absorption band, the yield, and the fate of
solvent  radical  cation  are  poorly  known  since  cation  fragmentation  (with  the
+ + Cl) and contact ion pair formation (with Cl-) are a serious
formation of CCl3
concern. See M. Washio, Y.  Yoshido, N. Hayashi, H. Kobayashi, S. Tagawa, and
Y. Tabata, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 34, 115 (1989); R. E. Buehler, J. Phys. Chem.,
90, 6293  (1986); H. Miyasaka, H. Masuhara, and N. Mataga, Chem. Phys. Lett.,
118, 459 (1985); T. Sumiyoshi, S. Sawamura, Y. Koshikawa, and M. Katayama,
Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 55, 2341 (1982); O. Brede, J. Boes, and R Mehnert, Ber.
Bunsenges.  Phys.  Chem.,  84,  63  (1980); Radiochem.  Radioanal.  Lett.,  51,  47
(1982); R. Cooper and J. K. Thomas, Advan. Chem. Ser., 82, 351 (1968).

[66] V. M. Grigoryants, B. M. Tadjikov, O. M. Usov, and Yu. N. Molin, Chem. Phys.

Lett., 246, 392 (1995).

[67]

R. Mehnert, in "Radical Ionic Systems, Properties in Condensed Phase", eds. A.
Lund and M. Shiotani, Kluver, Dordercht, The Netherlands (1991), p. 231; F. B.
Sviridenko, D. V. Stass, and Yu. N. Molin, Chem. Phys. Lett., 297, 343 (1998).

36

1/12/04

[68]

I.  A.  Shkrob,  D.  W.  Werst,  and  A.  D.  Trifunac,  J.  Phys.  Chem.  98,  13262
(1994); I. A. Shkrob and A. D. Trifunac, J. Phys. Chem. 98, 13262 (1994); B.
M. Tadjikov, N. N. Lukzen, O. A. Anisimov, and Yu. N. Molin, Chem. Phys.
Lett., 171, 413 (1990); B. M. Tadjikov, V. I. Melekhov, O. A. Anisimov, and
Yu. N. Molin, Radiat.  Phys.  Chem.,  34,  353  (1989);  V.  I.  Melekhov,  O.  A.
Anisimov, V. A. Veselov, and Yu. N. Molin, Chem. Phys. Lett., 127, 97 (1986);

V. I. Borovkov, V. A. Bagryansky, I. V. Yeletskikh, and Yu. N. Molin, Molec.
Phys., 100, 1379 (2002).

[69]

I. A. Shkrob, A. D. Liu, M. C. Sauer, Jr., and A. D. Trifunac, J. Phys. Chem. A,
105, 7211 (2001); A. D. Liu, I. A. Shkrob, M. C. Sauer, Jr., and A. D. Trifunac, J.
Phys.  Chem.,  51,  273  (1998);  R.  E.  Buehler,  Res.  Chem.  Intermed.,  25,  259
(1999); R. E. Buehler and Y. Katsumura, J. Phys. Chem. A, 102,111 (1998); Y.
Katsumura, T. Azuma, M. A. Quadir, A. S. Domazou, and R. E. Buehler, J. Phys.
Chem., 99, 12814 (1995).

[70]

B.  M.  Tadjikov,  D.  V.  Stass,  and  Yu.  N.  Molin, J.  Phys.  Chem.  A, 101, 377
(1997).

[71]

S. G. Lias, P. Ausloos, and Z. Horvath, Int. J. Chem. Kinet., 8, 725 (1976).

[72] D.  V.  Stass,  N.  N.  Lukzen,  B.  M.  Tadjikov,  V.  M.  Grigoryants,  and  Yu.  N.

Molin, Chem. Phys. Lett., 243 (1995) 533.

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

I. A. Shkrob, A. D. Liu, M. C. Sauer, Jr., K. H. Schmidt, and A. D. Trifunac, J.
Phys. Chem., 102, 3363 (1998) and references therein.

I. A. Shkrob, A. D. Liu, M. C. Sauer, Jr., K. H. Schmidt, and A. D. Trifunac, J.
Phys. Chem., 102, 3371 (1998).

I. A. Shkrob, M. C. Sauer, Jr., and A. D. Trifunac, J.  Phys.  Chem.,  100,  7237
(1996); M. C. Sauer, Jr., I. A. Shkrob, J. Yan, K. H. Schmidt, and A. D. Trifunac,
J. Phys. Chem., 100, 11325 (1996).

I. A. Shkrob, M. C. Sauer, Jr., and A. D. Trifunac, J. Phys. Chem. B, 104, 3760
(2000).

I. A. Shkrob, M. C. Sauer, Jr., and A. D. Trifunac, J. Phys. Chem. B, 103 (1999)
4773; J. Phys. Chem. B, 104, 3752 (2000).

37

1/12/04

Figure captions.

Fig. 1

- dimer radical anion. (b) Visualization of rapid
(a) The structure of D2d symmetric (CO2)2
resonant charge hopping in sc CO2. The hopping barrier is 0.46 eV; the residence time of
the  charge  on  a  given  (dimer)  molecule  is  0.6  to  4  ps,  depending  on  the  solvent
temperature [18]. (c) Reduced density (ρr) dependence of solvent anion mobility µ(-) for
four  temperatures.  The  activation  energy  does  not  depend  on  density;  the  mobility
exponentially increases with the solvent density.

- (with mobility > 10 cm2/Vs) is trapped by
(a) When metastable quasifree electron, eqf
-, with µ(-) of 10-2 cm2/Vs is
dense sc CO2 solvent, a high-mobility radical anion, (CO2)n
formed. The binding energy of the electron is 1.6-1.8 eV; the electron can be detrapped
by absorption of a photon with energy > 1.76 eV. (b) Electron photodetachment (empty
symbols) and photoabsorption (filled circles) spectra of solvent radical anion in sc CO2.
The arrow points to the onset of the photodetachment band. (c) Photoinduced electron
detachment  in  sc  CO2  observed  by  dc  photoconductivity.  The  initial  (clipped)  narrow
peak is the prompt conductivity signal from free electrons; the time profile of this signal
follows  the  shape  of  the  248  nm  excitation  laser  pulse.  The  arrows  indicate  the  delay
times at which a second (532 nm) laser pulse was fired. 532 nm photoexcitation detraps
the electrons that subsequently trap within the duration of the 532 nm laser pulse (sharp
"spikes").

Reversible electron transfer reaction of the solvent radical anion in sc CO2 with dioxygen.
-  anion  rapidly  forms  O-O  bound  complex  with  a  solvent  molecule,
The  resulting  O2
-. (a) 532 nm photoexcitation can detach an electron
yielding a stable radical anion, CO4
- is a 0.44 eV deeper trap and the electron cannot be
from the solvent anion (Fig. 1a). CO4
detached from it. By determining the magnitude of the "spike" from quasifree electrons
(generated  by  532  nm  laser  excitation  of  the  pholysate)  as  a  function  of  time  one  can
obtain the decay kinetics of the solvent anion. (b) Experimental realization of this concept
for a sc CO2 solution containing 120 µm of O2. The conductivity signal (σ) shown on the
-.
double logarithmic scale shows a gradual transformation of the solvent anion to CO4
The ratio ∆σ/σ of the 532 nm laser induced conductivity signal to the conductivity tracks
- and
the concentration of the solvent anion in a reaction mixture that contains both (CO2)n
-.  After  the  first  10  µs,  this  fraction  persists  at  a  small  value;  this  represents  the
CO4
settling of the equilibrium between the solvent anion and CO4

-.

(a)  Singly  occupied  molecular  orbital  (SOMO)  of  dimer  radical  anion  of  acetonitrile
(from a density functional calculation); (b) A scheme for the formation of the SOMO and

Fig. 2

Fig. 3

Fig. 4

38

1/12/04

Fig. 5

Fig. 6.

the  doubly  occupied  subjacent  orbital  from  π  and  π *  orbitals  of  neutral  acetonitrile
molecules.

(a)  Typical  end-of-pulse  absorption  spectra  obtained  in  pulse  radiolysis  of  room-
temperature liquid acetonitrile (7 ns fwhm pulse of 20 MeV electrons). The 500 nm peak
is  from  anion-2  (dimer  radical  anion);  the  1450  nm  peak  is  from  anion-1  (cavity
electron). (b) Energy diagram and sketches of anion-1 and anion-2 (see the text).

Singly  occupied  molecular  orbital  (SOMO)  of  a  propeller  like  trimer  radical  anion  of
acetonitrile obtained using density functional theory. The structure was "immersed" in a
polarizable  dielectric  continuum  with  the  properties  of  liquid  acetonitrile.  Several
isodensity surfaces are shown. The SOMO has a diffuse halo that envelops the whole
cluster; within this halo, there is a more compact kernel that has nodes at the cavity center
and on the molecules.

39

1/12/04

Fig. 7

A typical reversible reaction of a cycloalkane hole. (a) Trans-decalin hole rapidly reacts
with  benzene  transferring  positive  charge  to  the  solute.  The  reverse  charge  transfer
reaction is relatively slow (the free energy decreases by 200 meV), and the lifetime of
benzene monomer is ca. 7 ns. This lifetime is further shortened by dimerization of the
monomer; this dimerization shifts the equilibrium to the right side. The charge transfer
competes with slow, with the formation of decalyl radical and benzonium carbocation by
an irreversible proton transfer. (b) The populations of solute monomer and dimer cations
(e.g., benzene cations) can be tracked using a “hole injection” technique analogous to the
electron  photodetachment  technique  discussed  in  the  caption  to  Fig.  3c.  Photoexcited
solute radical cations oxidize the solvent and their dynamics can be followed through the
observation  of  increase  in  conductivity  due  to  generation  of  the  high-mobility  solvent
hole; this increase is analyzed as a function of the delay time of the excitation pulse [76].

40

(a)

X 2A1
D2d

(b)

0.46 eV

0.6-4 ps

6x10

(c)

-2

4

2

s
V
/

2
m
c
 
,
)
-
(
µ

338K

330K

322K

314K

0.8

1.2
r / r
reduced density

c

1.6

2.0

Figure 1

(a)

cond. band

(b)

eqf-
>10 cm 2/Vs

< 200 ps

hn

V
e
 
6
7
1

.

-

(CO2)n
10-2 cm 2/Vs

n
o
i
t
c
e
s
-
x
 
t
n
e
m
h
c
a
t
e
d
o
t
o
h
p

a
b
s
o
r
b
a
n
c
e

l, nm

-

eqf

(CO 2)n

-

532 nm excitation

(c)

-

eqf

Figure 2

conduction band

2.3 eV

-

eqf

(CO 2)n

-

1.76 eV

(a)

O2

-
CO4

0.44 eV

(CO 2)n

- + O 2 

(n-1) CO 2 + CO 4

- 

(CO 2)n

-

s/s

(b)

-
CO4

-

eqf

m
n
 
 
8
4
2
 
x
 
2

m
n
 
2
3
5

persistent
signal

Figure 3

s
D
(a)

*

p 1

*

p 2

Me

p 1

*  +  p 2

*

p 1

 -  p 2

Me

Me

(b)

p 1

p 2

Me

Me

Me

Me

Me

a g

b u

l
i

g
h
t

t
h
g

i
l

Figure 4

(a)

dimer
anion

D
O

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

cavity
electron

400

800

1200

1600

wavelength, nm

conduction band

V
e
 
6
0

.

V
e
 
6
4
0

.

cavity
electron

31 meV

3 ns

dimer anion

(b)

Figure 5

D
Figure 6

1.1x10

11

-1

-1

s

 M

DG o = -0.2 eV

7 ns

9

6x10

 M

-1

-1

s

(a)

valence band

2.33 eV

2.33 eV

1.165 eV

2 x5eV

(b)

Figure 7

