ACCELERATOR PHYSICS ISSUES IN THE BEPCII 

L. M. Chen, Y. Luo, Q. Qin, J. Q. Wang, S. Wang, G. Xu, C. H. Yu, C. Zhang,  

IHEP, Beijing 100039, China

Abstract 

The  Beijing  Electron-Positron  Collider  (BEPC)  has 
been  running  for  both  high  energy  physics  (HEP)  and 
synchrotron  radiation  (SR)  researches  since  1989.  Good 
performance of BEPC accomplishes a lot of achievements 
in the τ-charm region over the past decade, and in many 
fields of SR applications as well. As an upgrading scheme 
from  BEPC,  the  BEPCII  project  was  approved  by  the 
Chinese government in the early time of this year, with a 
micro-β  scheme  and  multi-bunch  collision  in  a  double-
ring  machine  installed  in  the  current  BEPC  tunnel.  The 
design work of the BEPCII is being carried on. This paper 
will  describe  the  main  progresses  on  the  design  of  the 
BEPCII in the field of accelerator physics. 

1 BEAM-BEAM INTERACTION 
To  achieve  the  high  luminosity  in  the  factory  class 
collider,  high  beam  currents  and  small  beam  sizes  are 
necessary. These induce a strong beam-beam interaction. 
The  successful  performance  of  KEKB  and  PEPII 
indicates that the beam-beam limit can be reached without 
any  single  bunch  instability.  This  means  the  beam-beam 
interaction  limits  the  peak  luminosity.  It  is  an  important 
issue  to  study  the  beam-beam  interaction  in  the  design 
and performance of such a high luminosity collider. 

taking 

The  simulation  studies  are  done  by 

the 
advantages  of  the  code  BBC  (Beam-Beam  interaction 
with a Crossing angle) developed by K. Hirata [1]. BBC 
is  a  weak-strong  simulation  code  in  6-D  phase  space, 
including the effect of crossing angle. Although the weak 
strong  simulation  can  not 
the  coherent 
phenomena of beam-beam interaction, it is generally used 
during the design of a collider. Because of the CPU time 
consuming,  the  strong-strong  simulation  in  a  large  scale 
tune scan so far has not yet been done.  

investigate 

The effect of a finite bunch length is taken into account 
by  dividing  a  strong  bunch  into  5  slices  longitudinally, 
and  the  weak  one  is  represented  by  50  randomly 
generated super particles, with a Gaussian distribution in 
6-D phase space. The simulation is done for more than 5 
radiation damping time.  

The  tune  scan  is  performed  for  optimizing  the  tune 
from  the  viewpoint  of  high  luminosity.  Figure  1  shows 
the simulated luminosity on the tune grid (fractional part 
only) of δνx ∈ (0,1) and δνy ∈ (0,1) with a crossing angle 
of  φc=  11  mrad(cid:175)2,  in  which  the  luminosity  reduction 
factor  L/L0  is  given  instead  of  the  luminosity  itself.  The 
mesh  size  is  set  as  0.02,  which  is  smaller  than  the 
synchrotron  tune  νs  =0.034.  It  indicates  that  the  high 
luminosity  region  is  just  above  the  half  integer  in 
horizontal  plane,  and  there  is  no  significant  difference 

to 

between just above half integer and just above the integer 
in  vertical  plane.  According 
the  commissioning 
experiences of KEKB and PEPII [2], a vertical tune above 
half  integer  is  preferable  because  the  orbit  distortion  is 
much  stable  than  that  of  above  an  integer.  The  high 
luminosity is expected at around δνx=0.53 and δνy=0.58, 
and these tune values are set as the design working points. 
To  achieve  higher  luminosity,  a  larger  beam-beam 
parameter ξy  is  preferable.  However,  the  maximum ξy  is 
limited by beam-beam interaction. The simulation results 
show  that  the  maximum  ξy  is  decreased  because  of  the 
large  crossing  angle  of  φc=11  mrad(cid:175)2,  but  the  design 
value of ξy = 0.04 is reasonable and reachable.  

For BEPCII, the crossing angle of φc=11 mrad(cid:175)2 is the 
basic  requirements  of  the  interaction  region.  From  the 
viewpoint  of  beam-beam  interaction,  the  crossing  angle 
not  only  limits  the  maximum ξy,  as described  above, but 
also induces some additional luminosity reductions due to 
the  geometric  effects.  The  simulation  shows  that  the 
luminosity reduction factor due to the finite bunch length 
effect  and  the  crossing  angle  is  about  80%  while  the 
luminosity  reduction  factor  is  86%  for  the  head-on 
collision. However, the crossing angle of φc = 11 mrad(cid:175)2 
is  still  acceptable.  The  simulation  also  indicates  that  the 
bunch  length  should  be  controlled  carefully  to  avoid 
further luminosity reduction due to the finite bunch length 
effect. 

 
Figure  1:    Luminosity  survey  with  a  crossing  angle  of 

φc= 11 mrad(cid:175)2 

2 LATTICE DESIGN OF THE BEPCII 
STORAGE RING 
With a new inner ring installed inside the old one in the 
existing BEPC tunnel, BEPCII will provide the colliding 

beams with the center-of-mass energy from 1.0 GeV×2 to 
2.1  GeV×2  and  also  the  dedicated  synchrotron  radiation 
beam at 2.5 GeV. For the colliding beams the luminosity 
is  optimized  at  1.89  GeV  with  the  peak  luminosity  of 
1×1033  cm-2s-1.  As  to  the dedicated  synchrotron radiation 
mode,  the  beam  current  reaches  250  mA  with  an 
emittance as low as possible.  

There have been several beam-lines in the BEPC for the 
synchrotron radiation experiments, so the current bending 
magnets and insertion devices in the southern region have 
to be fixed at their present positions. In order to increase 
the average luminosity, the “top-off” injection scheme up 
to  1.89  GeV  is  adopted.  This  requires  that  the  injection 
and collision optics be the same. The main parameters of 
the  storage  ring  for  both  collision  and  SR  modes  are 
shown in Table 1. 

 
Table 1  Main Parameters of the BEPCII storage ring 
Unit 
GeV 
m 
MHz 
 
MV 

Parameters 
Energy 
Circumference 
RF frequency 
Harmonic 
RF voltage 

Due to the space limit, the only way to separate the two 
beams is to use the crossing angle at the interaction point 
(IP). The crossing angle of BEPCII is chosen as 11 mrad 
×  2.  Since  the  crossing  angle  cannot  give  a  sufficient 
separation, the first pair of defocusing quadrupoles of the 
IR will deflect the beams further to 26 mrad × 2 and then 
a  pair  of  septum  magnets  deflects  the  beam  in  the  inner 
rings to 65.5 mrad, avoiding the SR background in the IR 
in  the  meantime.  A  bridge  is  needed  in  the  SR  mode 
connect  the  two  half  outer  rings.  Two  superconducting 
dipole coils on both sides of the IP are used to accomplish 
this function. The beam will have 6 mm horizontal offset 
at  the  bending  coils  for  the  SR  mode.  In  the  RF  region, 
the  crossing  angle  of  the  particle  trajectories  is  154.7 
mrad×2. Vertical local bumps will be used to separate two 
beams, so that the optics of two rings can be symmetric. 
In  the  operation  of  the  SR  mode,  the  bridges,  which 
connect  the  inner  and  outer  rings,  will  be  powered  off. 
Thus,  the  electron  beam  will  go  straight  through  the 
bending magnets. In this case, both of the RF cavities can 
provide the power to the electron beam. Fig. 2 shows the 
BEPCII complexity. 

RF

SR

RF

SR 
2.5 
241.13 
499.8 
402 
3.0 
8.28/5.18

Collision 
1.89 
237.53 
499.8 
396 
1.5 
6.53/7.58 
6.53/5.58 
25/25/12.5  12/12/6 
0.91 
93 
121 
110 
5.16×10-4 
0.0235 
1.5 

0.25 
Multi 
336 
84 
6.66×10-4
0.016 
1.18 
120/ 
− 
− 
− 
− 
− 

ms 
A 
 
keV 
kW 
 
 
cm 
nm⋅rad  144/2.2 
1/0.015 
m 
mrad 
11× 2 
2.4 
m 
 
0.04/0.04 
cm-2s-1  1.0×1033 

Transverse tunes 

 

Damping time 
Beam current 
Bunch number 
SR loss per turn 
SR power 
Energy spread 
Compact factor 
Bunch length 
Emittance 
β function at IP 
Crossing angle 
Bunch spacing 
Beam-beam Parameter 
Luminosity 
 

2.1 Geometric Design 

rings” 

Being  upgraded  from  BEPC,  BEPCII  will  use  the  old 
tunnel  and  keep  the  present  beam-lines,  so  that  the 
circumferences  of  “three 
(two  horizontally 
separated colliding rings and an SR ring) and the distance 
between the outer and inner rings are only adjustable in a 
few  tens  of  centimeters.  The  RF  frequency  of  the 
colliding  rings  is  constrained  by  the  linac  frequency  and 
the  demands  of  the  harmonic  number  from  the  data 
acquisition  system  of  the  BESIII  detector.  The  final 
choice of the RF frequency is 499.8 MHz, which is 7/40 
of  the  linac  frequency  2856  MHz.  Corresponding  to  this 
frequency, the harmonic numbers for the colliding and SR 
rings are 396 and 402, respectively. The distance between 
the outer and inner rings is 1.18 m. The north half ring of 
BEPC must be shifted 0.36 m northward.  

II

I

North

e+

e-

1W1

4W1

4B9

III

3W1

3B3

3B1

IP

IV

4W2

Figure 2: The BEPCII Complexity 

 

2.2 Interaction Region Design 

The  design  of  the  interaction  region  (IR)  has  to 
accommodate  competing  and  conflicting  requirements 
from  the  accelerator  and  the  detector.  Many  equipment 
including  magnets,  beam  diagnostic  instruments,  masks, 
vacuum pumps, and experiment detector must coexist in a 
very small region. So the most difficult part of the design 
of a new collider is that of the IR.  

The IR of BEPCII is about ±14 m long from the IP, in 
which  about  20  main  magnets  need  to  be  installed.  The 
space is very tight. The design criteria for the BEPCII IR 
configuration  are  based  on  the  experiences  from  other 
machines  and  some  special  requirements  of  the  BEPCII. 
The two beams collide at the IP with a horizontal crossing 
angle  of  22  mrad.  The  IR  configuration  provides  an 
effective  compensation  scheme  of  high  field  detector 
solenoid. The aperture of vacuum chamber in the IR must 

be  designed  at  least  2×(14σ  +2  mm)  for  the  beams 
(uncoupled  in  the  horizontal  plane  and  fully  coupled  in 
the  vertical  plane).  And  the  background  level  of  both 
synchrotron  radiation  and  lost  particles  in  the  detector 
must be sufficiently low. 

The  BESIII  detector  consists  of  a  cylindrical  drift 
chamber,  surrounded  by  an  electromagnetic  calorimeter, 
which is immersed in about 1 T magnetic field of a 3.7 m 
long superconducting solenoid. The geometry of the drift 
chamber  requires  that  the  accelerator  components  inside 
the detector should fit the conical space with an opening 
angle  of  21.5˚.  The  first  accelerator  component,  which 
follows  the  central  drift  chamber,  can  only  approach  to 
0.552  m  on  each  side  of  the  IP.  The  superconducting 
magnet SCQ and the septum bend magnet ISPB are fully 
located  inside  the  detector  boundary.  The  schematic 
layout of the IR is shown in Fig 3. 

 

R3I

IQ2

-e

Q1b

Q1a

+e

OQ2

ISPB

QSC

IP

QSC

R4I

θ

=
0
.
8
3

θ

θ

=
0
.
9
3

Q1a

Q1b

ISPB

e+

e-

IQ2

OQ2

 

Figure 3:  Schematic layout of the IR 
 
In  order  to  avoid  the  parasitic  bunch  crossing,  a  quick 
beam  separation  after  collision  is  necessary.  Our  design 
choice is to introduce a horizontal crossing angle of 2×11 
mrad  at  the  IP  and  to  incorporate  with  a  horizontal 
bending  magnet  labeled  ISPB  for  a  larger  separation 
between e− and e+ beams. The ISPB is a septum magnet 
with a narrow septum coil, located at 2.3 m away from the 
IP with a length of 0.6 m and the field strength of 4.6 kGs. 
It acts on the outgoing beam only.  

also 

On  each  side  of  the  IP,  a  doublet  of  quadrupoles  on 
each  beam-line  is  used  to  provide  the  focusing  optics 
*=1.5 cm). The first vertical focusing 
needed at the IP (βy
quadrupole is a superconducting magnet (SCQ) shared by 
both  beams.  The  SCQ  package 
includes 
compensation  solenoid  magnets,  dipole  magnets  for  SR 
mode and skew quadrupole coils. Its cryostat has a warm 
bore  with  an  inner  diameter  of  φ134  mm  and  an  outer 
diameter of φ302 mm. The endcan of the cryostat has an 
outer  diameter  of  φ635  mm.  The  second  elements  of  the 
doublets  are  horizontal  focusing  quadrupoles  Q1a  and 
Q1b  with  a  distance  of  0.3m  between  them.  In  order  to 
keep the symmetry for the two rings and save the space, 
Q1a  and  Q1b are designed  as  a  two-in-one  structure  and 
two  separated  beam  channels  for  the  incoming  and 
outgoing  beams  with  the  same  field  strengths.  These 
quadrupoles  have  to  meet  some  special  difficulties  in 
design  because  the  two  beam  pipes  at  their  positions  are 
still very close to each other. The next machine elements 

are  quadrupoles  Q2,  Q3  and  Q4,  where  the  sufficient 
separation of the two beams is available to allow them to 
be  installed  side  by  side  in  the  two  rings.  Those 
quadrupoles match the IR optics to that of the arc region. 

2.3 Optics Design of the Collision Mode 

The  double-ring  geometric  structure  of  BEPCII  causes 
each  ring  not  to  be  a  4-fold symmetric  structure,  but  the 
electron  and  positron  rings  are  symmetric  while  the  SR 
ring is east-west symmetric. Each ring for collision can be 
divided  into  four  regions:  IR,  arc,  injection,  and  RF 
regions.  

In  the  IR  region,  two  superconducting  quadrupole 
(SCQ)  are  located  at  both  sides  of  the  IP  to  squeeze  the 
*.  It  also  bends  the  beams  further  from  11  mrad  to  26 
βy
mrad.  5  warm  bore  quadrupoles  are  used  for  connecting 
the  arc  and IP.  A  low  field  bending  magnet  is  located  at 
the  beginning  of  the  arc  to  decrease  the  synchrotron 
radiation to the IP. Since the longitudinal space in the IR 
is  very  tight,  it  is  difficult  to  adopt  a  compensation 
scheme  using  skew  quadrupoles.  Thus,  the  coupling  is 
locally  compensated 
the  detector  with  anti-
solenoids and skew quadrupole coils. 

inside 

In  the  RF  region,  there  are  seven  quadrupoles  to 
connect the arc regions of the inner and outer rings. Part 
of the RF region is dispersion free, and the β functions at 
the RF cavities in both vertical and horizontal planes are 
less than 15 m.  

At the injection points, dispersion is zero as well as the 
symmetry  position  in  the  inner  ring.  The  horizontal  β 
function  is  larger  than  20  m  to  reduce  the  sigma 
amplitude of the remnant oscillation of the injected beam. 
The phase advance between two kickers is π.  

The main consideration of the optics in the arc region is 
to  meet  the  designed  emittance,  momentum  compaction 
factor,  tunes  and  a  sufficient  dynamic  aperture.  The  β 
functions  in  both  vertical  and  horizontal  planes  are  less 
than  25  m,  and  the  dispersion  is  less  than  2.5  m.  The 
horizontal  β  functions  at  focusing  sextupoles  and  the 
vertical β functions at defocusing sextupoles are as large 
as possible. Moreover, the limited vertical aperture at the 
insertion  devices  leads  to  the  constraint  of  vertical  β 
function. 

2.4 Chromaticity Correction and Dynamic 
Aperture 

A  sufficient  dynamic  aperture  is  necessary,  either  for 
efficient  beam  injection  or  long  beam  lifetime.  Though 
the requirements for the injection and the colliding beams 
are slightly different, we use the condition of the injection 
beam  for  both  cases,  which  means  a  large  momentum 
acceptance (~10σε) and large transverse apertures. For the 
tracking results evaluated here, the horizontal RMS beam 
size is taken from the natural horizontal emittance at 2.1 
GeV  (0.18  µm),  and  the  vertical  size σy  from  the  fully-
coupled  emittance,  i.e.,  half  of  the  uncoupled  horizontal 
emittance. In the dynamic aperture tracking with SAD [3] 
program, particles are launched at the IP with 1000 turns. 

36 sextupoles are used to correct natural chromaticities 
in each storage ring, powered by 18 power supplies. With 
these  sextupoles,  chromaticities  of  the  BEPCII  storage 
ring are corrected to 1.0.  

Fig.  4  shows  the  tracking  results  for  the  BEPCII 
dynamic aperture. One can see that the dynamic aperture 
is  significantly  reduced  if  errors  from  magnets  are 
included.  Studies  show  that  for  6.53/7.58  region  the 
dynamic aperture is sensitive on K1 errors for the dipoles 
and quadrupoles and more sensitive if the horizontal tune 
is  closer  to  the  half  integer,  this  means  the  linear  lattice 
must  be  well  performed  otherwise  it  will  be  difficult  to 
operate  the  machine  close  to  the  half  integer,  for 
6.53/5.58  region  the  situation  is  better  than  6.53/7.58 
region. 

y

40

30

20

10

x

 

5

10

30

25

15

20
Figure  4:  Dynamic  aperture  for  BEPCII.  The  3  most 
outer lines are for bare lattice: solid one is on-momentum, 
dotted and dot-dashed ones ±10σε off momentum. The 3 
inner  lines  for  the  average  of  20  random  seeds  with 
misalignment  (after  COD  correction)  and  multiple  errors 
(without K1) : dashed line is on-momentum, solid and dot-
dashed ones ±10σε off momentum. 

2.5 Optics design of the SR mode 

In  the  BEPCII  complex,  an  electron  ring  called  SR 
mode  which  can  be  used  as  a  dedicated  light  source  is  
formed  by  connecting  the  two  outer  half  rings  of  the 
electron  and  positron  rings.  The  design  goal  of  the  SR 
mode  is  to  operate  electron  beam  at  2.5  GeV  with  a 
maximum  beam  current  of  250  mA.  The  betatron  tunes 
are chosen as νx/νy = 8.28/5.18. The emittance is thus 120 
nm⋅rad  at  2.5  GeV.  If  the  dispersion  at  RF  cavities  is 
allowable,  the  emittance  can  reach  100  nm⋅rad    or  less. 
The  maximum  beta  functions βx and βy  are  smaller  than 
23 m. The maximum horizontal dispersion function Dx is 
about 1.65 m. The natural chromaticity is ξx0 = −11.6 and 
ξy0  =  −9.7  for  the  horizontal  and  vertical  planes, 

respectively.  The  dynamic  aperture  is  larger  than  25σ 
even with 0.8% energy spread. 

2.6 Beam Injection 

BEPCII  will  keep  the  BEPC’s  horizontal  phase  space 
multi-turn injection, and maintain its beam transport lines, 
which connect the linac and the ring. In order to achieve a 
high average luminosity, the beam injection rates have to 
be greatly improved, which are expected to be higher than 
200  mA/min  and  50  mA/min  for  e−  and  e+  beams, 
respectively.  To  ensure  this  high  injection  rates,  for  the 
positron  beam,  two-bunch  injection  scheme  will  be 
adopted  with  an  adjustable  injection  repetition  (12.5  Hz, 
25 Hz, and 50 Hz). 

The  BEPC  beam  transport  lines  are  upgraded  in  many 
aspects, such as replacing the old power supplies, adding 
four new independent power supplies to free some lattice 
matching  constraints  and  installing  new  beam  position 
monitors  along  the  lines  to  keep  close  and  real  time 
control of the beam central orbits. In order to reduce the 
number  of  the  particles  lost  in  the  ring,  especially  in  the 
interaction  region,  collimators  are  needed  in  the  beam 
transport  lines  to  clean  the  particles  with  large  betatron 
amplitude  or  energy  deviation.  Instead  of  the  BEPC’s 
injection  through  windows  separating  the  transport  line 
and the storage ring, the beam pipes of transport line will 
be directly connected to the storage ring to minimize the 
emittance dilution. So the vacuum condition in the end of 
the transport lines should be improved. 

Two  horizontal  kickers  with  a  phase  advance  of  π  are 
employed  to  create  the  horizontal  closed  orbit  bump  for 
the  circular  beam.  The  Lamberston  septa  of  BEPC  are 
still kept. Since the bunch spacing is changed, new kicker 
magnet  power  supplies  and  vacuum  chamber  are  being 
studied.  The  physical  apertures  given  by  the  IR  are 
14σx,y,0  +2  mm  (COD),  which  impose  strict  constraint  to 
the beam  injection path.  The half  aperture of  collimators 
in the ring is designated to ~12.5σx,y,0 . Simulations of the 
injection bunch’s motion with collimators are carried out 
to  decide  the  injection  efficiency.  Top-off  injection  will 
be adopted to achieve the higher average luminosity. 

instability.  This  corresponds 

3 COLLECTIVE EFFECT 
In BEPCII, to achieve the high luminosity, the micro-β 
scheme is adopted. This requires that the bunch length be 
well  controlled  to 1.5cm.  However,  bunch  lengthens due 
to the potential well distortion and microwave instability. 
Normally, we chose the design bunch under the threshold 
of  microwave 
to  an 
impedance  threshold  of  0.97  Ω  at  the  design  current  of 
9.8mA.  Calculation  and  beam  measurement  have  shows 
that  the  broadband  impedance  of  the  present  BEPC 
storage ring is about 4 Ω, thus a strict impedance budget 
has  been  made  with  efforts  on  designing  and  optimizing 
the  main  vacuum  components  to  reduce  the  impedance. 
The  main  impedance  generating  elements  and  their 
impedance  are  listed  in  Table  2.  The  budget  of  (Z/n)0  is 
estimated as 0.23 Ω.  

No. 

Table 2: Impedance and loss factor of each component 
Component 
HOM 
(kW) 
4.74 
0.78 
0.57 
0.14 
0.02 
0.42 
 
0.35 
0.05 
0.28 
0.21 
1.34 
0.07 
0.42 
12.47 

SRF 
Resist. Wall 
BPMs 
Bellows 
Flange 
Mask 
Pump. ports 
Taper 
Injection port 
Inj. kicker 
X-cross 
Y-shape 
IR 
Collimator 
Total 

kl 
(V/pC) 
0.67 
0.11 
0.08 
0.02 
0.003 
0.06 
 
0.005 
0.005 
0.04 
0.03 
0.19 
0.01 
0.06 
1.76 

L 
(nH) 
 
 
3.3 
0.48 
3.0 
2.8 
0.5 
4.4 
0.17 
0.8 
0.8 
2.2 
0.8 
3.81 
28.9 

1 
 
68 
67 
200 
40 
 
8 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
3 
 

longitudinal  effective 

 
The 
is  calculated 
according  to  the  Heifets-Bane  broadband  impedance 
model, and the threshold bunch current for the microwave 
instability  is  around  36  mA,  which  has  the  reasonable 
margin. At 9.8 mA, the bunch lengthens by about 5%. 

impedance 

The coupled bunch instabilities can arise from the high-
Q  resonant  structures,  such  as  the  RF  cavities  and  the 
resistive-wall  impedance  of  the  beam  pipe.  In  BEPCII, 
superconducting cavities (SC) are adopted, so HOMs can 
be  well  damped.  The  up  bound  of  the  growth  rates  is 
firstly  estimated  by  assuming  symmetric  filling  pattern 
with  99  equally  spaced  bunches  and  each  bunch  has 
currents  of  9.8  mA.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  multi-
particle  tracking  results.  The  growth  time  of  the  fastest 
growing  instability  modes  is  at  the  same  level  of  the 
synchrotron  radiation  damping  time,  so  longitudinal 
feedback  system  will  be  considered.  The  growth  rate  of 
the  most  dangerous  mode  due  to  resistive-wall  is  of  4.3 
ms,  so  this  should  be  damped  with  bunch-to-bunch 
transverse feedback system.  

To  avoid  ion  trapping,  a  clearing  gap  with  5%  of  the 
total buckets absent is required, i.e. with one bunch train 
of  93  bunches.  The  Fast  Beam-Ion  Instability  (FBII)  has 
been studied with analytical formulae as well as tracking 
code, the growth time of FBII is about 3 ms which should 
be damped with the feedback system. 

In analogy to other two ring colliders such as , KEKB 
and  PEPII,  the  electron  cloud  instability  (ECI)  may  lead 
to  the  beam-size  blow-up  and  luminosity  degradation  in 
BEPCII.  With  the  existing  formula  [4],  the  threshold 
electron cloud density leading to transverse mode-coupled 
instability is higher than that of two B-factories. This may 
attribute  to  the  smaller  circumference  of  BEPCII.  To 
guarantee 
against  ECI, 
antechamber with the inner surface of beam chamber TiN 
coated  is  used  in  the  arc  to  reduce  the  primary  and 
secondary  electron  yields,  and  in  the  straight  section 
space may be reserved to wind solenoids to suppress the 
concentration  of  electrons  near  the  beam  axis.  Besides, 

performance 

beam 

the 

we are also investigating the possibility to install clearing 
electrodes  to  sweep  out  electrons.  A  simulation  code[5] 
has been developed to estimate the electron cloud density 
taking  into  account  each  effect  due  to  the  antechamber 
structure, 
the  TiN  coating  and  clearing  electrode, 
respectively.  A  typical  distribution  of  electron  cloud 
density in the antechamber is shown in Fig.5. 

 

 

Figure 5:   The electron cloud density in the antechamber. 
 
Simulation shows that with antechamber and TiN coating, 
the  EC  density  is  substantially  lower  than  the  instability 
to 
threshold,  and  feedback  system 
overcome the coupled bunch instabilities.  

is  still  needed 

In BEPCII, the beam lifetime is  mainly determined by 
beam-beam bremsstrahlung during beam collision, which 
is  calculated  as  5.1  hours  at  the  peak  luminosity.  Other 
limits are from the beam-gas scattering which gives beam 
lifetime of about 26 hrs at the vacuum pressure of 8×10-9 
Torr,  and  the  Touschek  effect  of  about  7.1  hrs.  So  the 
total  beam  lifetime  is  around  3.0  hrs.  With  the  top-off 
injection the maximum average luminosity is expected as 
60% of the peak luminosity 

4 SUMMARY 
The  main  issues  in  BEPCII  accelerator  physics  design 
are  described.  The  beam-beam  simulation  shows  the 
crossing  angle  of  2×11mrad  is  acceptable  and  the  beam-
beam parameter of 0.04 is reasonable and reachable. The 
geometry satisfies the requirements for both colliding and 
synchrotron  radiation  mode.  The  IR  design  realizes  the 
rapid  separation  of  two  beams  and  can  meet  all  the 
requirements from hardwares. The optics for the collision 
mode is very flexible on emittance and tunes, with a good 
dynamic aperture even for 10σε, off-momentum particles 
and  with  multipoles’  error  as  well  as  the  misaliagnment 
effects. The injection design satisfies the requirements for 
the  top-off  injection  scheme.  For  collective  effects,  a 
strict  impedance  budget  is  made  and  there  is  no  show 
stoppers. However, feedback systems are required.  

5 REFERENCES 
[1] K. Hirata, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74(1995) 
[2] K. Oide, Operation Experience and Performance 

Limitations in e+e- Factories, Proceedings of EPAC 
2002, Paris, France, 2002 

[3] http://www-acc-theory.kek.jp/SAD/sad.html 
[4] K. Ohmi and F. Zimmermann, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 

3821 (2000) 

[5] Y. Liu et al, Simulation of the Electron Cloud Density 

in BEPCII, to be published.  

