Still Shrouded in Mystery: The Photon in 1925 

 
 

 
 

 

Richard A. Campos 
Department of Physics and Astronomy 
Lehman College, the City University of New York 
Bronx, New York, 10468-1589, USA 
 
(1 January 2004) 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 

We present a translation of Albert Einstein’s Rio de Janeiro manuscript on 
light  quanta.    In  it,  Einstein  focuses  exclusively  on  the  Bohr-Kramers-Slater 
refutation  of  causality  and  energy-momentum  conservation  for  individual 
processes,  which  was  concurrently  the  subject  of  intense  empirical  scrutiny 
on  two  continents.    Written  shortly  before  Heisenberg’s  discovery  of 
quantum  mechanics,  the  manuscript 
last 
published remark on the reality of photons in the historical period known as 
the old quantum theory.  It clearly shows that in 1925 the photon concept is 
still incomplete. 

likely  represents  Einstein’s 

1. Introduction 
 

As we approach the centennial of Einstein’s introduction of light quanta, it is 
well worth the student of quantum physics to consider just how long it takes for 
some very good ideas to make their way into the scientific schema.   The journey 
can be tortuous, and in the case of the photon [1], it is great fun to recollect the 
legendary  remarks  about Einstein’s “reckless” hypothesis [2], which should  not 
be “held against him” for having “missed the target” [3].  In truth these remarks 
are not so much amusing posters of resistance to change, as they are, at the end 
of the day, a reaffirmation of the scientific method as a tight weave of conceptual 
and empirical elements.  In the particular case of Einstein’s photons, two decades 
would pass before the conspiracy of theory and experiment left little option but 
to incorporate them into physical theory. 

 
Once shunned, the photon is today’s accepted truth, presented up front next 
to matter waves and indeterminacy in the introductions to quantum theory. This 
is  as  it  should  be,  when  the  educator’s  first  mission  is  to  distill  the  intellectual 

1 

journey into key  recognizable signposts.  Otherwise, there would be little room 
to  capture  quantum  theory’s  increasing  range  of  applicability.    But  where  does 
the busy student go to get a detailed evolution of the photon concept ?  

 
There are of course the original scientific papers,  not always readily available 
nor translated in their entirety (cid:1) as is the case with the 1905 Einstein classic [4].   
But even the original papers are not the complete story, and as Richard Feynman 
put  it  so  frankly  in  his  Nobel  lecture  :  “We  have  a  habit  in  writing  articles 
published in scientific journals to make the work as finished as possible, to cover 
all the tracks, to not worry about the blind alleys or to describe how you had the 
wrong idea first ” [5].  So, the tale is finally left for the historians to unravel from 
the  written  and  oral  evidence,  in  a  process  not  unlike  that  of  an  archeological 
excavation.   

 
Today  we  loosely  speak  about  the  history  of  quantum  mechanics  as  an 
encyclopedia  with  two  great  volumes.  The  first,  the  “old”  quantum  theory, 
begins  with  Max  Planck’s  introduction  in  December  1900  of  the  fundamental 
constant  now  bearing  his  name  [6];  the  second,  the  modern  quantum  theory, 
begins with Werner Heisenberg’s discovery of matrix mechanics in June 1925 [7].   
Both  of  these  great  advances  resulted  from  intensely  concentrated  intellectual 
efforts, in Planck’s case an “act of desperation” to resolve an inconsistency borne 
out of measured hot-body spectra, and in Heisenberg’s case an inspiration “from 
the  fog”  of  remote  Helgoland  island  to  resolve  the  insufficiency  of  classical 
mechanics to describe atomic phenomena. 
 

This  paper  highlights  an  interesting  manuscript  by  Einstein  on  the 
constitution of light, penned May 7, 1925 for the express occasion of his visit to 
the  Brazilian  Academy  of  Sciences  [8].    The  fact  that  Einstein  wrote  about 
photons  while  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  is  not  widely  known,  let  alone  the  fact  that  he 
added  South  America  to  his  itinerary  during  the  ‘travel  years’  [9].    The  letter, 
unearthed quite recently by Brazilian historians, is translated here in its entirety.  
It shows clearly that Einstein was still promoting his photon concept only weeks 
before  Heisenberg  discovered  quantum  mechanics,  in  mid-June  of  that  year.   
Since Einstein sailed the 12th of May from Rio on a two-week return trip to Berlin, 
the letter may also represent Einstein’s very last written impression of the photon 
as the curtains closed on the old quantum theory.  To understand its importance, 
we will need first to review the insufficiency of the photon concept leading up to 
1925.      Along  the  way,  we  highlight  some  readily  available  resources  for  the 
student to penetrate deeper into the vast literature on the subject. 

 

2 

 

2. A brief history of the photon 
 

A. From independent particles to field equations 
 
 

Einstein’s  “reckless”  hypothesis  wrestles  Planck’s  discrete  quanta  of  energy 
away  from  confined  material  oscillators,  assigning  them  a  reality  of  their  own 
within  the  electromagnetic  field  that  fills  the  intervening  spaces.    The  year  was 
1905,  Einstein’s  reputation  was  on  the  rise,  and  the  heuristic  basis  of  the  light-
quantum hypothesis was carefully advertised for everyone to see the in the very 
title of his acclaimed paper [4]. Einstein is very clear about his initial vision of the 
photon 
behaves 
radiation 
thermodynamically  as  though  it  consisted  of  a  number  of  independent  energy 
quanta”, and going even further,  “the energy of a light ray spreading out from a 
point source is not continuously distributed over an increasing space but consists 
of a finite number of energy quanta which are localized at points in space, which 
move  without  dividing,  and  which  can  only  be  produced  and  absorbed  as 
complete units.”     

“monochromatic 

density… 

low 

of 

: 

 
This  primordial  view  of  the  photon  as  a  Newtonian  particle  with  separable 
and  independent  reality  did  not  go  well  with  the  majority  of  Einstein’s 
contemporaries.  The main reason, simply stated, is that it could not account for 
the  interference  properties  of  light  (cid:1)  after  all,  they  withstood  a  century  of 
empirical  support  before  Einstein  ever  arrived  on  the  scene.  Thomas  Young, 
father  of  the  classic  double-slit  experiment,  explained  the  concept  of  optical 
coherence like this: “In order that the effects of the two portions of the light may 
thus be combined, it is necessary that they be derived from the same origin, and 
that  they  arrive  at  the  same  point  by  different  paths,  in  directions  not  much 
deviating from each other.” [10]  

 
There  is  plenty  of  evidence  that  this  was  the  essential  sticking point against 
the  photon.      Chief  among  the  critics  was  Hendrik  Lorentz,  not  only  for  his 
synergistic  rapport  with  Einstein,  but  also  because  he  nailed  the  case  shut  by 
incisive  appeal  to  the  technology  of  his  day.      The  argument  he  voiced  at  a 
conference  in  Utrecht  on  17  April  1909  is  this  [11]  :  based  on  the  latest  world’s 
records  for  interference  (2  million  ultraviolet  fringes)  and  diffraction  (150-cm 
Mount  Wilson  telescope),  he  figured  that  the  photon  extends  by  at  least  one 
meter or so in both the longitudinal and transverse directions.    How is a photon 
supposed to cohere like that, if it is localized and indivisible ?  The interference 

 

3 

argument shows up in the Nobel lectures by Max Planck (1918) [12], Niels Bohr 
(1922)  [13]  and  Robert  Millikan  (1924)  [14].    It  is  carried  over  into  the 
controversial  Bohr-Kramers-Slater  paper  that  concerns  the  Rio  de  Janeiro 
manuscript [15]. And, it is mentioned by Wolfgang Pauli and Walter Heitler, in 
their  later  recollections [16].  Needless  to say, the point really stuck, but we are 
jumping ahead a bit. 

 
Whether  stirred  by  Lorentz  or  not,  we  know  that  Einstein  had  already 
reached  the  same  conclusion  before  January  1909,    because  in  that  month  he 
publishes an indirect proof of it using the old quantum theory [17].  The idea was 
to look at energy fluctuations out of the Planck hot-body spectrum, and when the 
derivation  was  done,  Einstein  sees  the coexistence  of  separate terms rooted on 
particle  and wave phenomenologies.   No doubt about it, Einstein’s photon had 
to  have  an  extended  property  as  well.    An  important  letter  from  Einstein  to 
Lorentz dated 23 May 1909 confides [18]:  “I am not at all of the opinion that one 
should  think  of  light  as  being  composed  of  mutually  independent  quanta 
localized  in  relatively  small  spaces.”      The  photon’s  burden  of  proof  had  just 
gotten larger, and it was up to Einstein to resolve it, after all he started the whole 
thing ! 
 
By early  1909, then, it was clear to Einstein that simple statistical arguments 
would have to give way to a proper wave equation of photons: “the fluctuation 
properties of radiation… offer few formal clues on which to build a theory.”   In 
his  May  letter  to  Lorentz,  he  also  presents  the  line  of  attack:  look  for  localized 
solutions  of  nonlinear  differential  wave  equations.      He  explains  the  reason 
clearly 
linear  (and 
homogeneous),  then  the  sum  of  two  solutions  is  again  a  solution…  it  is 
impossible  to  deduce…  an  interaction  between  bodies,  which  can  be  described 
separately by means of solutions of the system. For this reason all theories up to 
now required, in addition to the field equations, special equations for the motion 
of material bodies under the influence of the fields” [19].  

in  his  autobiographical  notes:  “If  the  field-law 

is 

 
Einstein  knew  that  a  successful  theory  would  have  to  account  for  both 
localized  and  extended  properties.    For  him,  the  familiar  electric  field  of  an 
electron  serves  a  good  starting  analogy,  and  he  motivates  it  by  a  simple 
dimensional  argument  linking  Planck’s  constant  to  the  electric  charge,  or,  as 
Einstein  calls  it,  the  ‘quantum  of  electricity’  [20,21].    His  optimism  is  plainly 
evident  at  the  September  1909  conference  of  German  scientists  in  Salzburg:  “It 
probably  wouldn’t  be  as  difficult  to  incorporate  the  interference  phenomena  as 
one thinks… I  picture  a quantum  as  a  singularity surrounded by a large vector 
field.  By  using  a  large  number  of  quanta  one  can  construct  a  vector  field  that 
does not differ much from the kind of vector field we assume to be involved in 

 

4 

radiations…  I  do  not  see  any  fundamental  difficulty  in  the  interference 
phenomena” [22].     
 

Einstein is well rewarded by his optimism when he applies such ideas to the 
foundations of gravity during the decade of 1910.  His intense efforts culminate 
in the spectacular confirmation of gravitational bending during a solar eclipse in 
1919 [23], an event which transforms Einstein overnight into a recognizable and 
admired world figure [24].  But on the matter of photons, his program is far less 
successful.  In 1924, he writes to Max Born: “my attempts to give tangible form to 
the quanta have foundered again and again” [25].   Part of the problem was the 
arrival of a radical new result to drive physics even farther from classical forms. 

 

B. The Bohr atom and the BKS controversy 

 
 

 

 

Niels  Bohr’s  theory  of  the  quantized  atom  in  1913  [26]  brings  fresh  new 
worries for  Einstein.  To  account for emission line spectra from atomic elements 
and specifically hydrogen, Bohr concludes that “energy radiation is not emitted 
(or  absorbed)  in  the  continuous  way  assumed  in  the  ordinary  electrodynamics, 
but only during the passing of the system between different ‘stationary’ states.”    
Bohr’s remarkable deduction is this: the fact that an atom emits or absorbs light 
at  discrete  frequencies  predicates  that  its  electronic  configurations  are  also 
discrete.   The frequency of light is no longer tied, as was in classical imagery, to 
the mechanical motion of orbiting electrons. This seems, as Planck emphasizes, a 
“monstrous” and “practically intolerable demand. But numbers decide” [12].  

So  here  was  the  photon,  very  clear  in  hindsight,  mediating  the  transitions 
between  discrete  atomic  energy  levels.      Why  did  the  debate  on  the  reality  of 
photons not end here ?  The answer is that the electromagnetic field can exist in 
vacuum, completely free of any atom, so it was still insufficient to also declare its 
energy  structure  discrete  without  additional  evidence.    Einstein  used  a  good 
analogy here: “Even though beer is always sold in pint bottles, it does not follow 
that beer consists of indivisible pint portions.” [27]. 

Niels  Bohr  tried  to  retain  the  classical  electromagnetic  field  well  into  the 
1920’s.  In his Nobel lecture [13], he argues as Lorentz did in 1909:  “In spite of its 
heuristic  value,  however,  the  hypothesis  of  light-quanta,  which  is  quite 
irreconcilable  with  so-called  interference  phenomena,  is  not  able  to  throw  light 
on  the  nature  of  radiation.”    But  an  asymmetry  between  quantized  matter  and 
nonquantized  light  raises  disturbing  questions.    If  light  energy  arrives  in 
distributed fashion, but is absorbed only in bundles, what mechanism triggers an 

 

5 

atomic jump between stationary states ?  What establishes a correlation between 
atomic jumps in two atoms ? 

 
Bohr  tackles  these  questions  with  collaborators  Hendrik  Kramers  and  John 
Slater in January 1924 [15].  The BKS proposal assumes that atomic transitions are 
not  externally  triggered  at  all  –  an  intrinsic  ‘virtual’  field  was  supposed  to 
determine them probabilistically.  A consequence of the independent behavior of 
each  atom  is  the  abandon  of    “any  attempt  at  a  causal  connexion  between  the 
transitions in distant atoms, and especially a direct application of the principles 
of  conservation  of  energy  and  momentum,  so  characteristic  for  classical 
theories.”      The  conservation  theorems  would  hold  on  the  average,  but  not  for 
individual  events.      So,  the  price  for  ignoring  the  photon  is  very  high  indeed.  
Einstein had been frustrated in the past, but now he ponders giving up physics 
to  become  “a  cobbler,  or  even  an  employee  in  a  gaming-house.”  [25].    What 
happened next is a beautiful illustration of the scientific method at its best.  But 
before we discuss the important experiment of Walther Bose and Hans Geiger (of 
Geiger  counter  fame),  we  have  to  consider  the  final  pillar  of  Einstein’s  light-
quantum concept, the proposal of photon momentum. 

C. The photon carries momentum 
 
 

While Einstein struggles with a constructive theory of photon interference, he 
moves brilliantly to sharpen the evidence for the localized behavior of photons.  
He does this by squeezing out yet another property – photon momentum – from 
statistical  arguments  for  radiation  pressure  on  a  moving  mirror    [17].    In  1909,  
Einstein already declared: “The elementary process of radiation seems to be directed” 
(his  italics)  [20].    The  great  significance  of  this  discovery  is  impressed  by 
Wolfgang  Pauli’s opinion :  “Einstein’s report on the constitution of  radiation  at 
the  physics  meeting  in  Salzburg  in  1909,  where  he  appeared  before  a  larger 
audience  for  the  first  time,  can  be  considered  as  one  of  the  landmarks  of  the 
development of theoretical physics. It … contains the important conclusion that 
the  elementary  process  must  be  directed  (needle  radiation)  not  only  for 
absorption,  but  also  for  emission  of  radiation,  although  this  postulate  was  in 
open conflict with the classical idea of emission in a spherical wave” [16]. 

 

Einstein strengthens his conclusion in 1917 with a paper widely considered a 
precursor to the discovery of the laser [28].   Instead of a mirror, he now imagines 
a  moving  gas  molecule  bathed  by  cavity  radiation.  Amazingly,  Einstein  finds 
that  the  Planck  spectrum  (and  the  Bohr  jump  condition,  to  boot)  emerges  only 
when  the  molecule  experiences  momentum  transfer  during  absorption  or 

 

 

6 

emission processes. “If the molecule undergoes a loss of energy of magnitude hν 
without  external  influence,  by  emitting  this  energy  in  the  form  of  radiation 
(spontaneous emission), this process is also a directed one.  There is no emission in 
spherical waves.”  The reality of the photon now seems inevitable to Einstein, but 
as he notes in 1918, “I still stand quite alone in this conviction.” [29]. 
 

The laser is everyday evidence of the directed nature of light, recognizable in 
pointers,  scanners  and  other  fun  gadgets.    But  during  the  1920’s,  the  proving 
ground  for  photon  momentum  arrived  not  by  way  of  research  on  visible  light, 
but rather on X-rays [30].  The science of X-rays ( “As I will call the rays, for the 
sake of brevity” [31] ) was still young [32] when Einstein introduced the photon.  
At  Salzburg  in  1909,    Johannes  Stark  rose  up  in  support  of  the  photon  on  the 
basis of X-rays : “I have in mind the phenomenon that even at great distances, up 
to 10 m, electromagnetic radiation that has left an X-ray tube for the surrounding 
space can still achieve concentrated  action on a single  electron” [22].   Does the 
extensive  influence  of  the  X-ray  result  from  the  packing  of  greater  energy  and 
momentum ?  

 
Decisive evidence for photon momentum arrives in December of 1922, within 
two  days  of  Niels  Bohr’s  Nobel  lecture,  as  Arthur  Compton  reports  the 
spectroscopic  signature  of scattered X-rays in matter [33].  In the classical view, 
electrons move in forced oscillations and so the scattered radiation is matched in 
frequency  to  the  incident  radiation.    But  something  decisively  nonclassical  is 
going on here: many of the scattered X-rays have a lower frequency, and what is 
even  more  surprising,  their  shift  does  not  depend  on  the  incident  frequency.   
The simplest model for this behavior,  Compton  [33] (and independently Peter 
Debye  [34]  )  suggest,  is  a  billiard-like  collision  between  an  X-ray  photon  and  a 
nearly free electron.  The electron takes up some momentum when it is knocked 
off  the  atom,  and  this  correlates  to  an  outgoing  X-ray  of  lower  frequency.    In 
Compton’s words, “The corresponding effect with light would be for one’s hand 
to  appear  green  when  illuminated  with  a  blue  light,  to  appear  yellow  when 
illuminated with green light, red when lighted by a yellow lamp and so on” [35]. 
 

The theory of the Compton effect provides an extra bonus.  Since it assumes 
energy-momentum conservation at the microscopic level, it potentiates a key test 
of  the  BKS  assumptions.    What  is  needed  is  verification  of  the  correlated  exit 
directions  of  the  recoiling  electron  and  the  scattered  X-ray,  using  a  suitable 
coincidence detector. A refutation of BKS is precisely what Bothe and Geiger in 
Berlin [36] , and also Compton, Simon and Bennett in Chicago [37], report within 
ten  days  of  each  other  in  April  of  1925.    From  Bothe’s  Nobel  lecture  :  “The 
readings of  both counters were recorded side by side on a moving paper chart.  
In  this  way  we  succeeded  after  a  few  failures  to  establish  the  accuracy  of  any 
temporal ‘coincidence’ between the two pointer readings as being 10-4 sec.  Film 

 

7 

consumption however was so enormous that our laboratory with the film strips 
strung up for drying sometimes resembled an industrial laundry” [38].  Figure 1 
reproduces  a  drawing  from  Compton’s  report  to  the  National  Academy  of 
Sciences,  which  shows  clearly  the  message  borne  out  of  the  preliminary  data 
from his research group [37]. 
 

The  antipodal  position  of  BKS  relative  to  the  photon  explains  why  the 
indicated experiments changed so decisively the course of theoretical physics in 
the last century.  Einstein was not at his Berlin residence for the official demise of 
BKS, and the resurrection of his photon.   He was rather in South America on a 
three-month invited tour of Argentina, Uruguay, and Brazil, the backdrop to the 
Rio de Janeiro manuscript. 

 

 

 

3.  Einstein in South America 
 

A. Summary of the tour 
 

Einstein’s  tour  of  South  America,  stretching  from March  through  May  1925, 
occurs  between  his  highly  popularized  visits  to  the  United  States  (1921,1931), 
France  (1922),  Japan  and  Spain  (1922-23)  [39].      Out  of  his  ‘travel  years,’    the 
South American tour seems the forgotten middle child, receiving only minimalist 
exposure  in  the  traditional  literature.    In  one  case  even  the  basic  chronology  is 
inaccurately  stated  [9].  Thanks  to  the  work  of  South  American  and  other 
historians, however, it is now drawing greater interest [40-42], facilitated also by 
the online availability of Einstein’s travel diary through the Einstein Archives in 
Jerusalem  [43].    The  political  and  scientific  impact  of  Einstein’s  visit  was 
extensive  –  ranging  from  amplified  Zionism  in  the  Jewish  communities  to 
overturned positivist attitudes of Brazilian physicists [42]. 

The  story  of  how  Einstein  ends  up  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  begins  in  1922  with 
membership  to  the  League  of  Nations’  International  Committee  on  Intellectual 
Cooperation (ICIC), an invited position also shared by Marie Curie and Hendrik 
Lorentz    (UNESCO,  the  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural 
Organization, is the modern version of the original directive).  At ICIC, Einstein 
meets Leopoldo Lugones, the Argentine journalist and writer who seminated the 
idea  of  a  lecture  tour  in  his  country.    By  the  time  the  invitation  is  accepted  in 
1924,  Brazil  and  Uruguay  are  also  added  to the  itinerary and  Einstein  prepares 
for a long absence from Berlin. 

Looking  into  Einstein’s  diary  [43],  we  see  a  physically  demanding  journey. 
He  sails  from  Hamburg  on  March  5,  1925,  making  stops  in  Boulogne,  Lisbon, 

 

8 

Tenerife.  He travels alone, and on March 14, he is warmed by a postcard for his 
46th birthday.   There are brief ports of call in Rio de Janeiro and Montevideo on 
March 21 and 24, on the way to Buenos Aires.  In Argentina, a monthlong circuit 
of  lectures  and  receptions  begins  in  the  capital,  then  moves  to  La  Plata  and 
Córdoba.  The last two weeks of the tour are divided between Montevideo (April 
24-May1) and Rio de Janeiro (May 4-12), with a similarly packed agenda.  There 
are  some  refreshing  breaks.  He  is  delighted  by  Rio’s  natural  splendor  (“An 
indescribable  wealth  of  impressions  in  a  few  hours”),  and  by  Montevideo’s 
unpretentious  elegance  (“I  found  here  love  for  one’s  country  without  any 
delusion of grandeur”).  He has a few chances to practice his beloved violin [44].   
Still,  by  anyone’s  measure,  Einstein  is  justifiably  exhausted.    On  May  3  he 
declares:  “My  nerves  are  spent,”  and  on  the  last  day  of  the  tour  he  breathes: 
“Free at last, but more dead than alive.”  He is back in Berlin on June 1, 1925 [45]. 

 

 

Einstein’s  lectures  in  South  America  are  almost  exclusively  dedicated  to  the 
relativistic  theories.        There  is  particular  resonance  here  with  the  fact  that  the 
National Observatories of Rio de Janeiro and Córdoba played leading roles in the 
confirmation  of  Einstein’s  predictions  for  gravitational  bending  of  light  [46].  
Their  directors,  Henrique  Morize  [47]  and  Charles  Perrine,  are  by  1925  veteran 
chasers of gravitational bending,  as they guided two solar eclipse expeditions on 
Brazilian soil (Passa Quatro in 1912 and Sobral in 1919).   The theory of relativity 
is  also  known  in  the  academic  circles,  consider  for instance, that Rio de Janeiro 
hosts  a  lecture  on  that  subject  by  the  mathematician  Émile  Borel  in  1922  [48].  
Einstein is well aware of the South American participation in the landmark 1919 
event and points out, “The problem conceived by my head, the luminous sky of 
Brazil  had  to  solve”  [42].    One  can  imagine  the  pride  and  honor  that  Morize 
experiences  as  Einstein  enters  Rio  de  Janeiro’s  National  Observatory,  and  the 
Brazilian Academy of Sciences (BAS). 

Without  a  doubt  the  visit  to  the  BAS  on  May  7  is  the  most  prestigious 
scientific  event  of Einstein’s  sojourn in Brazil.  For this important occasion,  the 
Academy  names  Einstein  its  first  corresponding  member  and  institutes  a 
National Prize in his name.  In the welcoming speech, Einstein is lauded for his 
work  on  relativity:  “You  brought  a  fundamental  contribution  to  almost  every 
field  of  physics.  Without  mentioning  all  your  works,  the  study  of  Brownian 
motion,  of  specific  heat,  of  the  law  of  light-quanta,  alone  would  suffice  to 
consecrate  you  as  an  eminent  physicist.    However  it  was  in  the  theory  of 
relativity…  that  your  genius  was  manifested”  [49].      But  Einstein  was  surely 
spent on relativity, because for this occasion he decides to discuss the reality of 
photons,  despite  the  implied  anticipations  of  the  Academy  !      The  incident  is 
unique – because no similar document appears from Einstein’s other travels e.g. 
to  the  United  States,  Japan,  Spain,  France,  where  relativity  was  once  again  the 
focus of attentions. 

 

9 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

Einstein’s letter to the BAS is a concise statement about the photon concept as 
it  stands  in  1925,  at  the  moment  when  the  Bohr-Kramers-Slater  proposal  is 
receiving  decisive  empirical  scrutiny  in  Chicago  and  Berlin.    Einstein  speaks 
about the photon as “controversial,”  with the tone of a provisional concept still 
subject  to  verification,  and  as  yet  unable  to  achieve  a  “logical  synthesis”  of 
continuous and localized optical properties.   Evidently in 1925, the photon is still 
cloaked in mystery. 

B. The Rio de Janeiro manuscript 
 

A  few  words  about  how  this  letter  appears  in  the  Einstein  Archives  are  of 
interest.  Dr. Arthur Getúlio das Neves, head of Einstein’s reception committee, 
filed the manuscript after the BAS lecture.  It was translated into Portuguese and 
published in the inaugural issue of the BAS proceedings [8].   Neves died in 1928, 
and  the  letter  was  forgotten.    In  the  1990’s,  his  grandson  Jorge  Getúlio  Veiga 
reopened the stacks and placed a copy of it in the Einstein Archives.  The present 
work provides a previously unavailable, complete, English translation. 

Remarks on the Present Situation of the Theory of Light 

Until quite recently it was believed that, with the wave theory of light in its 
electromagnetic  form,  a  conclusive  knowledge  was  gained  about  the  nature  of 
radiation.    However  it  is  known  for  about  25  years  that  while  this  theory 
describes  in  a  more  precise  way  the  geometric  properties  of  light  (refraction, 
diffraction,  interference,  etc),  it  cannot  explain  the  thermal  and  energetic 
properties of radiation.  A new theoretical concept, the quantum theory of light, 
┌which  is  close  to  Newton’s  emission  theory,┐  appeared  suddenly  beside  the 
wave  theory  of  light  and  gained  through  its  achievements  (explanation  of 
Planck’s radiation formula, of photochemical phenomena, Bohr’s atomic theory) 
a  sure  position  in  science.    Despite  all  the  effort  of  physicists,  a  ┌logical┐ 
synthesis  of the  quantum and wave theories was unsuccessful to date.  For this 
reason,  the  question  about  the  reality  of  corpuscular  light  quanta  is  very 
controversial. 
 

10 

Recently N. Bohr, together with Cramers and Slater, conducted an interesting 
research  which  tried  to  theoretically  explain  the  energetic  properties  of  light, 
without  invoking  the  hypothesis  that  the  radiation  consists  of  corpuscle-like 
quanta.      According  to  the  insight  of  these  researchers,  one  should  continue  to 
envision  that  light  radiation  consists  of  waves  that  propagate  in  all  directions, 
and  in  the  sense  of  the  wave  theory  are  steadily  absorbed  by  matter,  but 
nevertheless  produce  quantumlike  effects  in  individual  atoms  following  purely 
statistical  laws,  exactly  as  if  radiation  consisted  of  quanta  of  energy  hν  and 
momentum hν/c.  For the sake of this concept, the authors abandoned the exact 
validity of energy – and momentum – conservation theorems and in their place 
substituted a relation which only claims statistical validity. 
 

To  test  this  view  empirically,  the  Berlin  physicists  Geiger  and  Bothe 
undertook  an  interesting  experiment  to  which  I  would  like  to  draw  your 
attention.      Some  years  ago,  Compton  derived  a  very  important  consequence 
from  the  quantum  theory  of  light,  which  he  confirmed  by  experiment.    When 
hard  Röntgen  rays  are  scattered  by  electrons  which  constitute  the  atoms,  it  is 
possible for the momentum (impact) of the incoming quantum to be sufficiently 
large to knock an electron out of the atomic shell.  The necessary energy for that 
is removed from the quantum during the collision and expresses itself, according 
to the principles of the quantum theory, as a reduced frequency of the scattered 
radiation  compared  to  that  of  the  incident  Röntgen  rays.    This  phenomenon, 
which  was  surely  verified  qualitatively  and  quantitatively  by  experiment,  is 
called the ‘Compton effect.’ 

 
In  order  to  understand  the  Compton  effect  by  the  theory  of  Bohr,  Cramers 
and Slater, one must treat scattered radiation as a continuous process in which all 
atoms  of  the  scattering  substance  participate,  while the ejection of the electrons 
has the character of isolated events following only statistical laws.  According to 
the theory of light quanta, the scattering of light must also possess the character 
of isolated events, and there must exist an emitted electron in a definite direction 
each  time  the  scattering  radiation  produces  a  secondary  effect  in  matter.   
According to the theory of light quanta, there is a statistical dependence between 
the  scattered  radiation  in  Compton’s  sense  and  the  electron  emission,  a 
dependence which in the theoretical view of the said authors must not exist. 
 

In  order  to  verify  how  it  behaves  in  reality,  one  must  have  an  instrument 
capable  of  registering  a  single  elementary  process  of  absorption  and  a  single 
emitted electron, respectively.  This instrument is made possible by an electrified 
needle  wherein  a  single  captured  electron  generates,  through  the  secondary 
formation of ions, a momentary measurable discharge.  With two such properly 
disposed  needles,  Geiger  and  Bothe  can  successfully  answer  the  important 

 

11 

question  of  statistical  dependence  or  independence  of  the  secondary  processes 
mentioned above. 
 

At  the  time  of  my  departure  from  Europe,  the  experiment  was  not  yet 
completed.    However,  according  to  the  results  attained  so  far,  such  statistical 
dependence appears to exist.  If this is confirmed, then there is a new important 
argument for the reality of light quanta.  
 
Einstein, 7.V.25 
 

Note:  The  symbols  (┌,┐)  and  the  strikethrough  (—)  indicate  the  additions  and 
subtractions Einstein made to the document, as evident in the German original.  
Figure 2 reproduces the last paragraph of the document.  The correct spelling of 
Hendrik Kramers’ name eluded Einstein. 
 
 

4. Final remarks 

 
 
Einstein’s letter to the Brazilian Academy of Sciences demarcates pre and post 
modern  quantum  mechanics.    It  summarizes  the intensification of the quantum 
paradox  relative  to  the  constitution  of  light  and  chronologically  represents  the 
last  known  document  of  Einstein’s  on  the  subject  –  and  realistically,  the  last 
opportunity for Einstein to do so before Heisenberg’s creative leap in Helgoland. 
The fact that the photon concept is not fully formed, nor fully accepted, in 1925 
may  come  as  a  surprise  to  those  students  who  make  the  inference,  from  the 
condensed nature of their education, that the photon is ‘all set’ after the Compton 
effect is discovered.  While the notion makes sense for the acceptance of photon 
momentum, it cannot hold true for the description of photon coherence because a 
theory  that  captures  both  facets  of  the  problem  was  not  available  at  the  time, 
despite two decades of Einstein’s intellectual fervor. 

 

The insufficiency of the purely corpuscular photon of 1905 is echoed by many 
of  Einstein’s  contemporaries,  and  is  recognized  by  Einstein  himself  in  1909, 
possibly even earlier.   Recycled remarks about Einstein’s “reckless hypothesis” 
may  appear  humorous  when  taken  out  of  context,  but  if  viewed  with  the 
historical  eye  they  offer  valuable  insights  into  the  real  business  of  science.  
“Physicists,”  writes  Abraham  Pais,  “are  conservative  revolutionaries,  resisting 
innovation as long as possible and at all intellectual cost, but embracing it when 
the evidence is incontrovertible” [50].   Millikan puts it cogently when it comes to 
the  photon:  “It  may  be  said  then  without  hesitation  that  it  is  not  merely  the 

 

12 

 

 

 

Einstein  [photoelectric]  equation  which  is  having  extraordinary  success  at  the 
moment,  but  the  Einstein  conception  [of  the  photon]  as  well.  But  until  it  can 
account for the facts of interference and the other effects which have seemed thus 
far  to  be  irreconcilable  with  it,  we  must  withhold  our  full  assent”  [14].    This 
remark was written in 1924. 

We  reviewed  in  this  paper  how  Einstein’s  constructive  program  to  build 
coherence  out  of  independent  photons  landed  nowhere,  so  providing  Planck, 
Bohr and numerous other quantum innovators a key reason not to abandon the 
classical  electromagnetic  field.      There  is  tantalizing  evidence  from  Einstein’s 
travel  diary  to  South  America  that  he  is  preoccupied  with  photon  coherence  in 
1925  even  during  his  transatlantic  crossing:  “Idea  for  explanation  of  coherence 
from  radiation  emitted  in  different  directions.  18  March”  [51].  While  the  diary 
does not elaborate on his idea, we believe that Einstein would feel an urgency to 
address the problem. 

Only  a  few  months  before  leaving  Berlin  for  South  America,  Einstein 
completed  a  series  of  papers  on  the  quantum  statistics  of  a  molecular  gas  [52].  
These  are  the  papers  well  known  for  their  treatment  of  Bose-Einstein 
condensation and for the proposal of atomic diffraction, all influenced by Louis 
de Broglie’s discovery of matter waves earlier in 1924 [53].  Einstein begins to see 
that  the  rules  of  quantum  statistics  are  quite  different  than  those  of  classical 
physics,  so  that  the  “distribution  of  molecules  among  the  [phase  space]  cells  is 
not  treated  as  a  statistically  independent  one,”  reflecting  perhaps  “a  mutual 
influence of the molecules – for the time being of a quite mysterious kind.”    The 
fact  that  material  particles  also  exhibit  interference  effects  akin  to  light  raises 
coherence once again to the forefront.  In March 1926, Einstein questions optical 
coherence  from  separated  atoms  [54],  after  all  the  classical  connection  of 
radiative frequencies to oscillating electrons is denied by Bohr’s quantum theory.  
Einstein’s  paper  coincides  with  Erwin  Schrödinger’s  publication  of  the  wave 
equation  whose  solutions  finally  lifts  the  insufficiency  of  the  photon  concept. 
From Paul Dirac’s treatment of the quantum electromagnetic field in 1927 [55], to 
Roy  Glauber’s  theory  of  quantum-optical  coherence  in  1963  [56],  the  photon 
grows ever more indispensable to modern physics. 

 Ironically,  the  price  paid  for  the  photon’s  final  assurance  remained 
unacceptable to Einstein for the rest of his life.   Paraphrasing from Don Howard, 
“The  history  of  quantum  mechanics  until  1926,  which  is  often  described  as  a 
search  for  a  way  consistently  to  marry  the  wave  and  particle  aspects  of  light 
quanta  and  material  particles,  is,  I  think,  better  described  as  a  search  for  a 
mathematically  consistent  and  empirically  correct  way  of  denying  the  mutual 
independence  of  interacting  quantum  systems”  [57].      The  non-separable, 
entangled  quality  of  an  interacting  system’s  Schrödinger  wave  function  is 

 

13 

rejected by Einstein and leads him down the path of the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen 
controversy,  a  subject  which  is  treated  in  depth  by  Howard’s  work,  for  the 
interested student to pursue further. 

A  plaque  at  Princeton  University  celebrates  Einstein’s  famous  opinion  that 
God  is  not  malicious,  only  refined.    Anyone  who  is  lucky  enough  to  study  the 
properties of light for more than 50 years, as Einstein did, ought to reconsider the 
question, “Was sind Lichtquanten”  from the  vantage point that the photon will 
always remain, as do all valuable scientific ideas, an unfinished refinement. 

Acknowledgments 

Permission  to  publish  the  Einstein  letter  is  granted  by  The  Albert  Einstein 
Archives, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.  Permission to reproduce 
Compton’s  figure  is  granted  by  the  Washington  University  in  St.  Louis.    It  is  a 
pleasure  to  thank  Barbara  Wolff  of  the  Albert  Einstein  Archives  (Jerusalem), 
Robert  Schulmann,  Diana  K.  Buchwald  and  Rudy  Hirschmann  of  the  Einstein 
Papers  Project  (Caltech),  Alfredo  Tiomno  Tolmasquim  of  the  Museu  de 
Astronomia  e  Ciências  Afins  (MAST/Rio  de  Janeiro),  David  Kasmier  of  the 
National Academy of Sciences, and Carole Prietto of the Washington University 
in  St.  Louis  for  their  help  with  reproduction  permissions.    I  also  thank  Dario 
Vasconcellos Campos of the Brazilian Consulate in New York, and Alex Lvovsky 
of  the  University  of  Konstanz  for  invaluable  assistance  with  the  translations. 
Harold  Metcalf  and  Wolfgang  Ketterle  generously  provided  me  copies  of 
Einstein’s papers listed in Ref 52.  Support from the National Science Foundation 
Grant No. 403350001 is gratefully acknowledged. 

References 

 

 

[1]  To  call  Einstein’s  original  light-quantum  a  ‘photon’  is  an  anachronistic 
indulgence  we  use  for  convenience.    The  term  historically  emerges  after  the 
discovery of modern quantum theory, as it was introduced by the chemist G.N. 
Lewis in the paper, “The conservation of photons,” Nature 118, 874 (1926).  It of 
course postdates the period considered in the main body of this work. 

[2] R.A. Millikan, “A direct photoelectric determination of Planck’s ‘h’,” Physical  
Review 7, 355-388 (March 1916). 

14 

 

 
   
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

[3]  Petition  signed  by  Max  Planck  and  Walther  Nernst,  among  others, 
recommending  Einstein  to  the  Prussian  Academy  of  Sciences  (1913),  quoted  in 
Max  Jammer,  The  Conceptual  Development  of  Quantum  Mechanics  (McGraw-Hill, 
New York, 1966)  Sect 1.3, p. 44, and in Martin J. Klein, “Einstein, specific heats, 
and the early quantum theory,” Science 148, 173-180 (1965). 

[4]  A.  Einstein,  “Über  einen  die  Erzeugung  und  Verwandlung  des  Lichtes 
betreffenden  heuristischen  Gesichtspunkt,”  Annalen  der  Physik  17,  132-148 
(1905).  English  translation,  “Concerning  an  heuristic  point  of  view  toward  the 
emission  and  transformation  of  light  “,  by  A.B.  Arons  and  M.  B.  Peppard, 
American  Journal  of  Physics  33,  367-374  (1965).    For  a  discussion,  see  Martin  J. 
Klein, “Einstein’s first paper on quanta,” The Natural Philospher 2, 59-86 (1963). 

[5]  Richard  Feynman,  “The  development  of  the  space-time  view  of  quantum 
electrodynamics,”    Nobel  Lecture  (December  11,  1965),  Nobel  e-Museum.  
Reprinted in Physics Today, 31-44 (August 1966). 

[6] Max Planck, “Ueber das Gesetz der Energieverteilung im Normalspectrum”, 
Annalen der Physik 4 ,553-563 (1901).  Translation: “On the law of distribution of 
energy  in  the  normal  spectrum,”  in  Great  Experiments  in  Physics:  Firsthand 
Accounts from Galileo to Einstein, edited by Morris H. Shamos (Dover, New York, 
1987)  pp.  305-314.    For  a  recent  discussion  see  Helge  Kragh,  “Max  Planck:  the 
reluctant revolutionary,” Physics Today, 31-35 (December 2000). 

[7]  Werner  Heisenberg,  “Über  quantentheoretische  Umdeutung  kinematischer 
und  mechanischer  Beziehungen,”  Zeitschrift  für  Physik  33,  879-893  (1925).  
English  translation:  “Quantum-theoretical  re-interpretation  of  kinematic  and 
mechanical  relations,”  in  Sources  of  Quantum  Mechanics,  edited  by  B.L.  van  der 
Waerden (Dover, New York, 1968) pp. 261-276 and p. 25. 

[8]  A.  Einstein,  “Bemerkungen  zu  der  gegenwärtigen  Lage  der  Theorie  des 
Lichtes,”  Einstein  Archive  83-865,  published  in  Portuguese  as  “Observações 
Sobre  a  Situação  Atual  da  Teoria  da  Luz,”    Revista  da  Academia  Brasileira  de 
Ciências  1,  1-3  (1926),  translation  by  Roberto  Marinho.    German  transcription 
published in Ref. 40 below. 

[9]    Serious  attention  is  needed  to  catch  mention  of  the  South  American  trip  in 
many of the best-known Einstein biographies: Philipp Frank, Einstein: His Life and 
Times (Da Capo Press, 2002), translated from the German by George Rosen. See 
p.  204:  “For  Einstein  the  end  of  1923  was  the  end  of  a  period  of  journeys 
throughout the world… in 1925 he made a trip to South America, but in general 
he spent the following years in Berlin.”  See also A. Pais, ‘Subtle is the Lord’: The 

 

15 

Science  and  the  Life  of  Albert  Einstein  (Oxford  University,  Oxford,  1982)  p.  527: 
“1925.    May-June.  Journey  to  South  America.  Visits  to  Buenos  Aires,  Rio  de 
Janeiro and Montevideo.” The chronology is corrected in the present work. 

[10] Thomas Young, reprinted in Great Experiments in Physics, edited by Morris H. 
Shamos (Dover, New York, 1959) p. 102. 

[11] Hendrik A. Lorentz “De hypothese der lichtquanta,” Nederlandsch natuur- 
en geneeskundig  congres Handelingen  12, 129-139 (1909), published  in German 
as  “Die  Hypothese  der  Lichtquanten,”  Physikalische  Zeitschrift  11,  349-354 
(1910).    The  latter  is  reprinted  in  H.A.  Lorentz  Collected  Papers,  Volume  VI 
(Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague, 1934).   A lecture delivered in England on June 1, 
1923  communicates  a  similar  message  :  H.A.  Lorentz,  “The  radiation  of  light,” 
Nature 113, 608-611 (1924). 

[12] Max Planck, “The genesis and present state of development of the quantum 
theory,” Nobel Lecture (June 2, 1920), Nobel e-Museum. 

[13] Niels Bohr, “The structure of the atom,” Nobel Lecture (December 11, 1922), 
Nobel e-Museum. 

[14] Robert A. Millikan, “The electron and the light quant from the experimental 
point of view,” Nobel Lecture (May 23, 1924) , Nobel e-Museum. 

[15] N. Bohr, H.A. Kramers and J. C. Slater, “The quantum theory of radiation,” 
Philosophical  Magazine  47,  785-802  (1924).    Reprinted  in  Sources  of  Quantum 
Mechanics, see Ref. 7. 

[16]  Wolfgang  Pauli,  “Einstein’s  contributions  to  quantum  theory,”  and  Walter 
Heitler,  “The  departure  from  classical  thought  in  modern  physics,”  in  Albert 
Einstein,  Philosopher-Scientist,  Volume  VII  in  the  Library  of  Living  Philosophers, 
edited by Paul A. Schilpp (MJF Books, New York, 1970) pp. 149-160 and pp. 181-
198. 
 

[17]  A.  Einstein,  “Zum  gegenwärtigen  Stand  des  Strahlungsproblems,” 
Physikalische  Zeitschrift  10,  185-193  (1909).    Translated  into  English  by  Anna 
Beck,  Doc.  56,  “On  the  present  status  of  the  radiation  problem,”  The  Collected 
Papers of Albert Einstein, Volume 2, The Swiss Years: Writings, 1900-1909 (Princeton 
University Press, Princeton, 1989) p. 357. 

[18] A. Einstein, Letter to Hendrik A. Lorentz (23 May 1909), Einstein Archive 16-
419.  Reprinted  as  Doc.  163,  The  Collected  Papers  of  Albert  Einstein,  Volume  5,  The 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

16 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Swiss  Years:  Correspondence,  1902-1914  (Princeton  University  Press,  Princeton, 
1993) p.192. 

[19]  Albert  Einstein,  “Autobiographical  Notes,”  in  Albert  Einstein,  Philosopher-
Scientist, Ref. 16. 

[20] A. Einstein, “Über die Entwicklung unserer Anschauungen über das Wesen 
und die Konstitution der Strahlung,” Physikalische Zeitschrift 10, 817-825 (1909).  
Translated  into  English  by  Anna  Beck,  Doc.  60,  “On  the  development  of  our 
views concerning the nature and constitution of radiation,” The Collected Papers of 
Albert  Einstein,  Volume  2,  The  Swiss  Years:  Writings,  1900-1909  (Princeton 
University Press, Princeton, 1989) p. 379. 

[21]  Russel  McCormmach,  “Einstein,  Lorentz,  and  the  Electron  Theory,” 
Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences 2, 41-87 (1970). 

[22]  Doc.  61,  “Discussion”  following  lecture  version  of  Doc.  60,  “On  the 
development of our views concerning the nature and constitution of radiation,” 
Physikalische  Zeitschrift  10,  825-826  (1909).    In  The  Collected  Papers  of  Albert 
Einstein,  Volume  2,  The  Swiss  Years:  Writings,  1900-1909  (Princeton  University 
Press, Princeton, 1989) p.395. 

[23]  F.  W.  Dyson,  A.S.  Eddington  and  C.  Davidson,  “A  determination  of  the 
deflection of light by the sun’s gravitational field, from observations made at the 
total eclipse of May 29, 1919,”  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London,  Series  A  220,  291-333  (1920)      For  some  interesting  additional 
background information see C. M. Will, “Henry Cavendish, Johann von Soldner, 
and the deflection of light,” American Journal of Physics 56, 413-415 (1988). 

[24]  Frederic  Golden,  “Albert  Einstein,  Person  of  the  Century”,  Time  154,  62 
(December 31, 1999). 

[25] Albert Einstein, Letter to Max and Hedwig Born (29 April 1924), in The Born-
Einsten  Letters,  The  Correspondence  between  Albert  Einstein  and  Max  and  Hedwig 
Born  1916-1955  (Walker  and  Company,  New  York,  1971)  p.  82,  Translated  by 
Irene Born. 

[26]  N.  Bohr,  “On  the  constitution  of  atoms  and  molecules,”  The  London, 
Ediburgh  and  Dublin  Philosophical  Magazine  and  Journal  of  Science  26,  1-25; 
476-502;  857-875  (1913).    Partially  reprinted  in  Great  Experiments  in  Physics,  see 
Ref. 10. 
 

[27] Philipp Frank, Ref. 9, p. 71.   

 

17 

[28]  A.  Einstein,  “Quantentheorie  der  Strahlung,”  Physikalische  Zeitschrift  18, 
121-128  (1917).    English  translation:  “Quantum  theory  of  radiation,”  in  The  Old 
Quantum Theory (Pergamon, New York, 1967) p. 167-183.   See also R. Friedberg, 
“Einstein  and  stimulated  emission:  a  completely  corpuscular  treatment  of 
momentum balance,” American Journal of Physics 62 ,26-32 (1994). 

[29] Albert Einstein, Letter to M. Besso (29 July 1918) Albert Einstein-Michele Besso 
Correspondence 1903-1955 (Hermann, Paris 1972), P. Speziali, editor.  See also Pais, 
‘Subtle is the Lord,’ p. 411. 

[30]  B.R.  Wheaton,  The  Tiger  and  the  Shark:  Empirical  Roots  of  Wave-Particle 
Dualism,  (Cambridge  University,  Cambridge,  1992).    See  also  Paul  Kirkpatrick, 
“Confirming  the  Planck-Einstein  equation  hν=(1/2)mv2,”  American  Journal  of 
Physics 48, 803-806 (1980). 

[31] W. C. Röntgen, “On a new kind of rays,” Nature 53 , 274-276 (1896). 

[32]  H.  H.  Seliger,  “Wilhelm  Conrad  Röntgen  and  the  glimmer  of  light,” 
Scientific American, 25-31 (November 1995). 

[33] Arthur H. Compton, “A quantum theory of the scattering of x-rays by light 
elements,” Physical Review 21 ,483-502 (1923). 

[34]  P.  Debye,  “Zerstreuug  von  Röntgenstrahlen  und  Quantentheorie,” 
Physikalische Zeitschrift 24 ,161-166 (1923). 

[35]    Arthur  H.  Compton,  “What  things  are  made  of  –  II,”  Scientific  American,  
234-236 (March 1929). 

[36]  W.  Bothe  and  H.  Geiger,  “Über  das  Wesen  des  Comptoneffekts;  ein 
experimenteller  Beitrag  zur  Theorie  der  Strahlung,”  Zeitschrift  für  Physik  32 
,639-663 (1925). 

[37] Arthur H. Compton, “On the mechanism of x-ray scattering,” Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences 11 , 303-306 (1925).    See additionally Arthur 
H.  Compton  and  Alfred  W.  Simon,  “Directed  quanta  of  scattered  x-rays,” 
Physical Review 26, 289-299 (1925), and A.H. Compton, “The scattering of X-rays 
as particles,” American Journal of Physics 29 , 817-820 (1961). 

[38]  W.  Bothe,  “The  coincidence  method,”  Nobel  Lecture  (1954),  Nobel  e-
Museum. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

18 

[39]  Ippei  Okamoto  and  Kenkichiro  Koizumi,  “Albert  Einstein  in  Japan:  1922,” 
American  Journal  of  Physics  49  ,  930-940  (1981).        For  an  account  of  Einstein’s 
trip to Spain, see Thomas F. Glick, Einstein in Spain: Relativity and the Recovery of 
Science (Princeton University, Princeton 1988). 

[40] A.T. Tolmasquim and I.C. Moreira, “Einstein in Brazil: the communication to 
the  Brazilian  Academy  of  Sciences  on  the  constitution  of  light,”  in  History  of 
Modern Physics, Proceedings of the XXth International Congress of History of Science, 
Liège 20-26 July 1997 (Brepols, 2002) pp. 229-242.    

[41]  Ildeu  de  Castro  Moreira  and  Antonio  Augusto  Passos  Videira,  Einstein  e  o 
Brasil (Editora UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro, 1995).  A fine collection of commentaries and 
reprints  of  other  Einstein  articles  published  in  South  America,  including  “Non-
Euclidean geometry and physics,” Revista Matemática Hispano-Americana 1, 72-
76 (1926), and “Pan-Europa,” La Prensa (24 March 1925). 

[42] Thomas F. Glick, “Between science and zionism: Einstein in Brazil,” Episteme, 
Porto Alegre , 101-120 (July-December 1999). http://www.ilea.ufrgs.br/episteme. 

[43]  Albert  Einstein,  Diary  of  trip  to  South  America  between March 5  1925 and 
May 11 1925, Einstein Archives 29-132. 

[44]    Samuel  Liondas,  “El  primer  médico  judio  graduado  en  la  Universidad 
Mayor  de  la  República,”  Noticias  n.100  (Sindicato  Médico  del  Uruguay, 
September  1999).    Einstein  declined  official  lodging  in  Montevideo  and  stayed 
with the family of Dr. José Rossemblatt, who also played the violin: “El Ing. Luis 
P.  Ponce,  le  dio  da  bienvenida,  en  nombre  de  la  Municipalidad,  ofreciéndole 
alojamento  en  el  Parque  Hotel,  pero  Einstein,  agradeciéndole  la  atención,  tuvo 
que  declinarla  ya  que  previamente  lo  habian  invitado  a  residir  en  la  casa  de  la 
familia  Rossemblatt,  en  la  Avenida  18  de  Julio.  Allí,  nuestro  joven  medico  le 
sirvióde cicerone durante su estadía en nuestro país, y también tuvo ocasión de 
practicar  el  violin  junto  a  su  ilustre  huésped,  ya  que  esta  sabio,  tal  como  lo 
declaró en una conferencia de prensa ‘como todo matemático, era un entusiasta 
por la música.’ ”  http://www.smu.org.uy. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

[45] Albert Einstein, Letter to M. Besso (5 June 1925), Ref. 25, p.121.  
 
[46]  Jean Einsenstaedt and  Antonio Augusto  Passos  Videira,  “A prova cearence 
das  teorias  de  Einstein,”  Ciência  Hoje  20  (November  1995)    Translated:  “The 
proof of Einstein’s theories, from Ceará”  (Brazil). 
 
[47] Henrique Charles Morize is an important figure in Brazilian science history.  
Besides  his  pivotal  role  in  the  1919  solar  eclipse  as  director  of  Rio’s  National 

 

19 

  A.  Einstein,  “Quantentheorie  des  einatomigen 

Observatory, he founded the Brazilian Academy of Sciences,  won the adoption 
of  Greenwich  time  zones  (1913),    brought  in  X-ray  technology,  and  still  found 
time to co-establish the country’s first radio station (1923).   
 
[48]  Alfredo  Tiomno  Tolmasquim,  “Constituição  e  diferenciação  do  meio 
cientifico  brasileiro  no  contexto  da  visita  de  Einstein  em  1925,”    Estudos 
Interdisciplinarios de America Latina y el Caribe, 7 (July-December 1996).   
 
[49] Roberto Vergara Cafarelli, “Einstein no Brasil,” in Einstein e o Brasil, Ref. 41, 
p. 120. 
 
[50] ‘Subtle is the Lord’, Ref. 9, p.384. 
 
[51]    “Idee  zur  Begründung  Erklärung  der  Kohärenz  von  nach  verschiedenen 
Richtungen emittierter Strahlung” 18.III,” Ref. 43. 
 
[52] 
idealen  Gases,” 
Sitzungsberichte  der  Preussische  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften,  Phys.-math. 
Klasse,  Bericht  22  (1924)  261-267;    “Quantentheorie  des  einatomigen  idealen 
Gases, Zweite Abhandlung,” ibid Bericht 1 (1925) 3-14;. “Zur Quantentheorie des 
idealen Gases,” ibid Bericht 3 (1925) 18-25.  All three papers are translated in Ian 
Duck  and  E.C.G.  Sudarshan,  Pauli  and  the  Spin-Statistics  Theorem  (World 
Scientific, Singapore, 1997) 81-107. 
 
[53]  Louis  de  Broglie,  “Recherches  sur  la  théorie  des  quanta,”  Annales  de 
Physique  3  ,22-128  (1925).    Chapter  1  of  de  Broglie’s  thesis  is  translated  in  
Gunther Ludwig, Wave Mechanics (Pergamon, Oxford, 1968) 75-93. 
 
[54]  A.  Einstein,  “Vorschlag  zu  einem  die  Natur  des  elementaren  Strahlungs-
Emissionsprozesses betreffenden Experiment,” Die Naturwissenschaften 14, 300-
301 (1926). 
 
[55]  P.A.M.  Dirac,  “The  quantum  theory  of  the  emission  and  absorption  of 
radiation,”  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of  London  Series    A  64,  243-265 
(1927). 
 
[56] Roy J. Glauber, “The quantum theory of optical coherence,” Physical Review 
130, 2529-2539 (1963). 
 
[57]  Don  Howard,  “  ‘Nicht  sein  kann  was  nicht  sein  darf,’  or  the  prehistory  of 
EPR,  1909-1935:  Einstein’s  early  worries  about  the  quantum  mechanics  of 
composite  systems,”    in  Sixty-Two  Years  of  Uncertainty,  edited  by  A.I.  Miller 
(Plenum, New York, 1990) pp. 61-111. 

 

20 

 
 
 
 

Figures and Figure Captions 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure  1.  This  reproduction  from  Arthur  Compton’s  paper  to  the  National 
Academy of Sciences shows the results of an auditory coincidence method, used 
by R. D. Bennett in his research group, to demonstrate simultaneity of a scattered 
photon  and  a  recoil  electron  produced  in  the  Compton  effect.    The  correlated 
angular  relationships  more  importantly  serve  to  verify  energy-momentum 
conservation.  “Mr Bennett has connected each of a pair of head phones with one 
of  the  counting  chambers  through  a  3-stage  amplifier,  and  has  listened  for 
simultaneous impulses in the two phones.  He uses a thin strip of mica to scatter 
the X-rays, and places the counting chambers inside an evacuated vessel to avoid 
effects due to the curving of recoil electrons in air.   His results for three different 
settings of the electron counter are shown in Figure 1.  The fact that coincidences 
are more  frequent when the quantum counter  is  near the  theoretical angle is in 
support of the quantum theory.”  

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  2.    Last  paragraph  of Einstein’s Rio de Janeiro manuscript: “Zur  Zeit 
meiner Abreise von Europa waren die Versuche noch nicht abgeschlossen.  Nach 
den bisherigen Ergebnissen jedoch scheint statistiche Abhängigkeit vorzuliegen.  
Wenn sich dies bestätigt, so liegt ein neues wichtiges Argument für die Realität 
der  Lichtquanten  vor.    A.  Einstein,  7.V.25”.    Translation  :  “At  the  time  of  my 
departure  from  Europe,  the  experiment  was  not  yet  completed.    However, 
according  to  the  results  attained  so  far,  such  statistical  dependence  appears  to 
exist.  If this is confirmed, then there is a new important argument for the reality 
of light quanta. A. Einstein, 7 May 1925.”   

22 

