Draft copy, please do not quote without contacting the authors.

Making sense of studying physics
Åke Ingerman1 & Shirley Booth2
1Department of Physics, University of the Western Cape, Cape Town, South Africa
2Department of Education, Lund University, Sweden
aingerman@home.se; Shirley.Booth@pedagog.lu.se

With an investigation into how students in a physics Master of science program make sense of their
whole first year study experience in one of the years following a programme reform, we try to offer
insights  and  advice  to  consider  when  involved  in  similar  changes.  We  conclude  and  argue  that  by
trying to support the students’ in making sense of their studying in terms of physics and empowering
them  in  their  understanding  of  the  nature  of  physics  and  their  study  situation,  both  the  potential  for
productive, meaningful and positive learning of physics as something which is relevant in the students
life,  and  the  way  in  which  the  students  analyse  and  make  sense  of  things  they  encounter,  both
physically and academically, are advanced.

Introduction and background

In  South  Africa,  there  is  a  strong  movement  to  curriculum  change  and  the  implementation  of  new
ideas,  in  physics  as  well  as  in  most  other  subjects,  to  adapt  to  the  changing  situation  there.  These
changes and the design of new programmes and courses are generally made with teaching as the sole
starting point. However, even if a new design might look complete from the teachers’ perspective, the
ways in which the students make sense of the content and their study situation in this new programme
may be radically and essentially different from those intended. With an investigation into how students
made sense of their first year of studying physics at a Swedish top engineering university (Chalmers
University of Technology) a few years after the implementation of a programme reform, we will try to
offer some insights and advice to consider when involved in similar changes. The programme which
the  students  were  taking  is  a  four-and-a-half  year  Master  of  science-programme  in  physics.  It  is
structured around a  large number of content  specific courses, primarily in  physics and  mathematics,
but also having a substantial part of general engineering subjects. The students taking the programme
have generally been very successful and hard working students during high school, but their results in
the programme range from success to complete failure.

Phenomenographic approach

The study (which is fully reported in Booth & Ingerman, 2002) was carried out with a predominantly
phenomenographic  approach  (Marton,  1981;  Marton  &  Booth,  1997).  This  implies  that  we  were
interested  in  variation  in  the  ways  in  which  the  students  experienced  their  first  year  of  studying
physics with respect to its content and structure. Data was collected primarily through interviews with
20  students  at  some  time  in  their  second  year  of  studies,  selected  to  represent  a  cross-section  of
success.

In line with the phenomenographic approach, the interviews (and the transcriptions of them) are seen
as  forming  a  ‘pool  of  meaning’  in  which  the  variation  in  ways  of  experiencing  the  phenomenon  of
interest is to be seen. By reading the interviews repeatedly, now as expressions of individual students,
now as series of extracts related to specific issues, we delved more and more deeply into the meaning
of  ‘studying  physics’  as  seen  by  the  students.  Categories  were  formed  and  reformed;  extracts  from
interviews were sought to support and give substance to the categories; and logical and empirical links
between  categories  were  explored.  The  aim  was  to  offer  a  hierarchy  of  empirically  grounded  and
logically consistent categories of description, which capture the essence of the whole experience and
reveal the essential variation in the structure of that experience. This result of this process is described
in the next section.

Ingerman & Booth – Making sense of studying physics
Page 1 of 6

Draft copy, please do not quote without contacting the authors.

Ways of making sense of studying physics in the first year of study

The outcome of our analysis is six distinct, qualitatively different categories, describing different ways
of making sense of studying physics, ranging from focusing on the demands and elements of the study
situation as such, trying to cope with unrelated fragments of physics knowledge, to making sense of
courses starting from the physics itself, constructing a physics knowledge object in the context of ‘real
world’ physics.

We  introduce  the  term  "knowledge  object"  (Entwistle  &  Marton,  1994)  in  two  different  forms:  the
"physics knowledge object" refers to the developing body of knowledge of physics and the structure
and  complexity  it  takes  on  as  it  emerges  from  the  courses in  mathematics,  physics  and  engineering,
while  the  "study  knowledge  object"  refers  rather  to  the  structure  and  complexity  of  the  approach  to
studying courses. They can be seen as distinctly different senses being made of the study situation.

Table 1: Summary of the different ways of making sense of studying physics in the first year of study.
Category

Description

Courses are identified
with the study situation

Here  the  engineering  physics  programme  has  been  experienced  as  a
discrete set of courses, a means to the end of a degree. These are related to
authority,  i.e.  teachers  and  tradition,  and  common  features,  such  as  the
ways in which courses were organised.

One course is seen as a
prerequisite for another
course

Courses  are  now  related  to  their  content  to  the  extent  that  a  preordained,
correct sequence of acquisition of knowledge fragments is assumed. A ‘red
thread’ is sought in terms of needs and demands. Authority for the thread
— content and structure — is still the domain of teachers and tradition.

One course is seen as
being useful in other
courses

Courses now support one another, but they still are necessarily arranged in
a  specific  order.  Reference  is  made  to  the  knowledge  fragments  that
constitute the courses, which mesh into one another, course-to-course.

Courses are related
through mutual
illumination

Courses fit together into
an adaptable whole

Here  is  to  be  found  sense-making  for  the  first  time.  Courses  now  lend
meaning to each other and understanding in an earlier course can be found
in  a  later  course.  There  are  now  networks  that  mesh  and  unmesh,
knowledge  fragments  might  be  grouped  together  in  different  ways  and
offer  different  perspectives.  There  is  a  dynamic  in  what  is  focal  or  non-
focal, and thematic or non-thematic. The Physics that is constituted takes
on  a  dynamic  form  and  begins  to  resemble  a  ‘physics  knowledge  object’
rather than a ‘study knowledge object’.

The  courses  are  seen  as  constituting  parts  of  a  whole,  and  the  strict
ordering  structure  of  the  educational  programme  knowledge  content  is
broken  apart.  An  internal  dynamic  enables  a  picture  to  develop  which  is
different  on  different  occasions,  depending  on  what  aspects  are  brought
into focus.

Courses in physics come
into physics of the world

The  borders  between  courses  are  erased,  a  physics  knowledge  object  is
constituted, physics and the physics world are one with the knower.

Discussion

Clearly, the programme is very important for framing the students’ experiences. It can justifiably   be
said that for the students, the physics programme was the major factor in creating the conditions for
learning  they  made  sense  of  in  different  ways.  Even  though  we  cannot  say  much  about  individual
courses  and  teachers,  it  is  clear  that  the  programme  as  a  whole,  its  organisation  and  reality  had  an

Ingerman & Booth – Making sense of studying physics
Page 2 of 6

Draft copy, please do not quote without contacting the authors.

overwhelming impact. From this observation, we argue that any programme that is organised as this
one  is, as a  set of courses given  by  subject specialists, (and degree programmes mostly are), should
have as an overriding goal that the students come to see the subject matter as a related whole, and that
this provides them with ways of seeing and coping with a world as yet unknown. Or to state the goal
differently, that the students should make sense of their learning primarily in terms of physics. We can
describe as the goal that the students should, as a result of their extensive physics studying, create a
physics knowledge object – a tightly integrated, independent and flexible body of physics knowledge
– which can function as a lens through which one can experience and analyse both academic physics
problems and everyday real world physics contexts.

Some of the students we interviewed could indeed be characterised as having formed such a physics
knowledge object. However, that was far from true for the majority of students. We propose that two
major  obstacles  in  formulating  and  implementing  such  goals  is  firstly  the  fact  that  the  goals  are
unarticulated  and  allowed  to  remain  abstract  (by  the  collective  of  teachers),  and  secondly  that  the
teachers’  perspective  dominates  while  the  students’  perspective  is  taken  for  granted  or  ignored.  To
articulate  goals  of  this  kind  and  to  explore  how  they  can  be  manifested  in  practice  in  teaching  and
creating  learning  environments,  can  only  be  achieved  by  a  collective  engagement  and  effort  among
teachers and students to discuss them, negotiate around them and try them out in cooperation.

To  articulate  goals  might  seem  quite  straight-forward  (even  though  it  often  turns  out  to  be  more
complicated than you expect), but what does it mean to take the students’ perspective of studying and
learning physics seriously into account? We mean that it is a stand which has implications on many
different  levels.  To  take  students’  perspective  into  account  is  not  restricted  to,  or  even  mainly,  a
question of listening to their opinions. Firstly, it is a question about continuously exploring and being
aware of different ways of seeing physics phenomena and contexts, that is to strive to see the object of
learning from the students’ perspective. Secondly, it is a question which also has roots in the view of
the nature of physics knowledge, that is to be able to (and to actually) see (and supporting students to
see)  further  than  the  physics  at  hand,  to  be  explicitly  aware  of  the  very  nature  of  how  physics
knowledge  is  constructed  and  how  we  want  it  to  be  understood.  Thirdly,  it  is  also  a  question  of
communicating,  appreciating  and  empowering:  communicating  with  the  students  on  their
understanding and their study situation; appreciating the students’ ways of understanding the physics;
empowering  the  students  to  analyse  their  own  physics  understanding  and  their  study  situation;  and
empowering  them  to  reflect  on,  articulate  and  discuss  both  their  understanding  and  features  of  their
situation,  and  thus  potentially  find  new  ways  of  understanding  and  address  problematic  features  of
their study situation.

Addressing  the  implications  of  our  results  and  reasoning  are,  we  must  regretfully  admit,  not
instantaneously done, but takes some consideration, cooperation and effort. The path to progress is not
to  be  walked  by  either  students  or  teachers  alone.  But  it  is  we,  as  teachers,  who  are  morally
responsible for opening up the path. For the students, it is important that they are supported in taking
control  of  their  studies  and  becoming  aware  of  why  and  how  they  make  sense  of  and  manage  their
study situation. At Chalmers University of Technology, we have during recent years been offering a
course  focusing  on  these  issues  based  on  our  results,  called  ‘Towards  better  leaning’.  In  the  next
section,  we  will  briefly  outline  the  course  as  well  as  the  considerations  made  and  the  experiences
gained.  For  the  teachers,  we  see  that  the  efforts  of  individual  teachers  would  dramatically  benefit  if
supported by a collegiality of teachers, openly discussing how, both on the general programme level
and in the local course context, to bring – to the highest possible degree – the physics, its structure and
its  internal  relations  within  and  between  courses,  into  the  students’  awareness.  In  the  section
‘Conceptual  physics’  we  will  outline  some  experiences  drawn  from  the  conceptual  physics  courses,
which  are  being  given  at  Uppsala  University  in  Sweden,  and,  in  the  South  African  context,  at  the
University  of  the  Western  Cape.  In  these  courses  the  teachers  have  developed  an  ‘internal’  form  of
collegiality,  as  well  as  ways  of  addressing  issues  of  being  aware  of  the  students’  different  ways  of
experiencing  physics  phenomena  and  the  nature  of  physics,  and  empowering  the  students  in  their
studying of physics. In the final section, we will round off this article by discussing possible ways of
developing a collegiality of teachers.

Ingerman & Booth – Making sense of studying physics
Page 3 of 6

Draft copy, please do not quote without contacting the authors.

Towards better learning

The  starting point  for  the  course was  the  conjecture  that  students through  articulation and  reflection
around  their  learning  can  become  more  aware  about  their  own  learning,  and  make  more  conscious
choices  about  their  study  situation.  The  course  was  organised  as  a  set  of  meetings  during  the  first
semester,  between  the  students  in  groups  of  6  to  8  and  a  supervisor,  revolving  around  a  series  of
assignments  and  discussions  based  on  and  relating  to  those  assignments.  Following  this  string  of
assignments, the students gradually were led into systematically exploring their own study situation,
considering  wider  and  wider  perspectives  on  it,  and  trying  out  ways  of  becoming/being  the  most
important  actor  in  that  situation.  Starting  out  with  self-observation,  they  proceeded  to  explore  other
students’ perspectives and a teacher’s perspective, and then they returned to set goals and objectives
for their own situation.

The  assignments  took  their  individual  starting  points  in  an  observation  the  students  should  make
concerning their own study situations, and often had both abstract and more practical objectives. The
core  was  often  about  relating  action  in  practice  to  underlying  perspectives,  motives  and  alternative
actions.  In  practice  this  meant  that  the  students  were  required  to  report  in  the  form  of  a  (short)
reflective  essay,  in  which  they  were  expected  to  use  ‘academic  argumentation’  –that  is,  start  with
some  observation,  engage  in  some  kind  of  rational  reasoning  and  come  to  some  conclusion  or
suggestion for action or change. On the basis of their assignments, the group discussed the topic (as
well  as  others  related  to  it)  and  on  the  basis  of  their  essays,  the  students  got  feedback  from  the
supervisor, similar to what in the academic world is called peer review. In other words, in the feedback
we tried to recognise the students’ views and opinions, but we urged them to (and supported them in)
problematizing the things they might be taking for granted.

We will not discuss all of the assignments here, but just briefly outline two of them, the ‘study diary’
and the ‘interview with a teacher’. The students meet the study diary assignment twice, once in each
term.  Over  a  period  of  a  week,  they  have  to  write  down  all  study  activities  they  are  involved  in,
including lectures. The first time, the aim is to make the students get a realistic view of what and how
they are studying, and whether they are ‘effective’ when doing it. The second time, they first have to
articulate  their  (qualitative  and  quantitative)  goals,  and  the  assignment  is  to  evaluate  their  activities
against their goals. In the interview with a teacher, their assignment is to meet and discuss with one of
the  teachers  they  have  met  so  far  in  one  of  their  courses,  to  get  some  insight  into  their  view  on
teaching and learning, and critically evaluate it. More details around the course and a more elaborated
discussion of its ideology can be found in Ingerman et al. (2003).

The  course  is  in  its  essence  about  empowerment  of  the  students,  to  enable  them  to  analyse  and  be
creative in being students, changing the way in which their study situation is delimited and set up by
the teachers. In its prolongation, it also has implications and potential for changing the ways in which
the teachers understand what teaching is about, when interacting and entering into a dialogue with the
empowered students.

Conceptual physics

The  Conceptual  physics-courses  at  University  of  the  Western  Cape  and  at  Uppsala  University  are
slightly different from most courses in physics. Apart from the physics content, there is an additional
focus on reflection on learning, and supporting the students in becoming aware of their own learning.
In comparison with the ‘Towards better learning’ course, this is integrated much more tightly with the
course  content,  the  physics.  The  reflection  is  encouraged  through  in-class  discussion  and  reflective
assignments.

Within  the  course,  issues  ‘outside’  normal  physics,  like  beliefs  around  the  nature  of  physics
knowledge  and  scientific  inquiry,  are  also  addressed,  for  example  through  discussions  and  essays

Ingerman & Booth – Making sense of studying physics
Page 4 of 6

Draft copy, please do not quote without contacting the authors.

aimed at such issues. In particular, this is framed by the teachers to bring out contradicting or puzzling
physics situations with philosophical undertones for discussion (in the whole class or in smaller group
tutorials), or to ponder in an essay.

Another important strand is the ambition (and practice) of relating physics concepts and physics ways
of organising reasoning and knowledge to everyday life and the world view of the students. That is, to
try  to  bring  out  the  everyday  meaning  of  physics  concepts  on  the  one  hand  (e.g.  mechanics  when
driving  a  car)  and  analysing  everyday  situations  in  physics  terms  on  the  other  (e.g.  scrutinizing  the
news  and  the  claims  made  in  newspapers).  In  general,  this  means  talking  and  discussing  physics  in
wider  contexts,  such  as  social  (e.g.  what  implications  has  physics  knowledge  in  the  context  of
particular  political  questions),  historical  (e.g.  what  disputes  have  physicists  been  involved  in  over
physics concepts which today look as if they were set in stone) and environmental contexts (e.g. issues
of the spread of pollution and nuclear radiation risks). Differently framed, these activities fall under
the heading of trying to achieve the goal of empowering students to think critically about phenomena
related to physics, in the academic world and beyond.

To  teach  and  develop  the  course  described,  a  certain  kind  of  discourse  has  evolved  between  the
teachers  involved,  as  an  expression  of  an  approach  to  their  common  teaching  obligation,  which
encompasses a discussion of student learning (and goals of learning) in physics, and allows them to
deal  articulately  with  issues  otherwise  taken  for  granted.  This  discussion  is  the  essence  of  what  we
would like  to  describe as a  scholarly collegiality. How did  that  collegiality of scholarly approach to
teaching (Boyer, 1990; Kreber, 2001) develop and how does it manifest itself in practice? Here, it has
developed  out  of  teaching  in  a  team,  which  problematizes  various  matters  of  concern,  and  acts
accordingly,  taking  into  account  research  on  students  approach  to  physics  learning  and  on  students’
conceptions  of  particular  physics  concepts.  It  manifests  as  systematically  discussing  the  students’
views  on  learning,  identifying  difficult  concepts,  what  is  difficult  with  those  particular  concepts,  as
expressed  in  class  (lecture  and  tutorials)  and  in  discussions  with  individual  students.  It  includes
inventing and trying out new ways of supporting students to change their views on learning and in this
case also doing research about things which emerged as puzzling (see e.g. Linder & Marshall, 1997;
1998)

The  course  was  conceptual,  which  means  that  it  focused  on  the  concepts  rather  than  on  the
mathematical  calculations.  However,  the  features  of  the  course  outlined  here  is  not  tied  to  the
conceptual nature in particular, but rather is an expression of a certain way of seeing teaching physics,
which we regard as an example of taking the student’s perspective seriously.

Collegiality of teachers

Unfortunately,  the  examples  we  have  discussed  in  the  previous  two  sections  are  isolated;  they  lack
embeddedness in a ‘college of teachers1’. Whole departments and/or the college of teachers teaching
in a programme need to participate and engage in developing a discourse in which students’ learning
can be discussed and goals and approaches to achieving those goals can be discussed and developed.
That is, to incorporate elements of students’ learning in physics into the normal production of physics
knowledge,  and  employing  that  knowledge  in  a  scholarly  approach  to  teaching.  We  see  three
important  directions  in  which  to  go  simultaneously  to  develop  a  scholarly  collegiality  on  a
departmental level:

We need to embark on a discussion aimed at exploring students’ experiences in our departments. To
our aid there are simple means as talking and listening to students one by one, using tools as the study
diaries to get a more broad input on how students handle their study situation and the general student
learning research literature.

                                                  
1 Where ‘college’ is being used in the sense of “a society of persons joined together generally for literary or
scientific purposes, and often possessing peculiar or exclusive privileges” (Chalmers English Dictionary)

Ingerman & Booth – Making sense of studying physics
Page 5 of 6

Draft copy, please do not quote without contacting the authors.

We need to develop in the college a shared and detailed awareness and understanding about different
ways  of  understanding  physics  concepts.  To  aid  us  there  is  the  educational  research  on  students
understanding  of  certain  concepts,  misconceptions  and  conceptual  change.  And  most  importantly,
every  teacher  can  explore,  in  a  scholarly  way,  ways  of  understanding  the  main  concepts  they  are
teaching, of course with the aid of students.

Finally, we need to engage in a creative dialogue with students, empowered to analyze, articulate and
discuss  their  study  situation  to  deal  with  the  problems  we  meet  in  the  present,  appreciate  the  good
things that are done and decide on the path into the future.

Acknowledgements

References

We  thank  Delia  Marshall  and  Cedric  Linder,  with  whom  we  have  had  many  enlightening  and
interesting discussions around the ‘Conceptual physics’ courses at University of the Western Cape and
Uppsala  University.  Åke  Ingerman  has  been  supported  financially  by  The  Swedish  Foundation  for
International Cooperation in Research and Higher Education (STINT).

Booth, S: & Ingerman, Å. (2002). Making sense of Physics in the first year of study. Learning  and

Instruction, 12, 493-507

Boyer,  E.L.  (1990).  Scholarship  Reconsidered:  Priorities  of  the  Professoriate.  Princeton,  N.J.:  The

Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching

Entwistle,  N.  &  Marton,  F.  (1994).  Knowledge  objects:  understandings  constituted  through  intense

academic study. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 64, 161–178.

Ingerman, Å., Carling, K., & Booth, S. (2004). The paradox of studying effectively – Supporting first

year physics engineering students in their learning situation, manuscript

Kreber,  C.  (Ed)  (2001)  Scholarship  revisited:  perspectives  on  the  scholarship  of  teaching.  San

Fransisco: Jossey-Bass

Linder, C.J. & Marshall, D. (1997). Introducing and evaluating metacognitive strategies in large-class
introductory  physics  teaching.   In  C.  Rust.  and  G.  Gibbs  (Eds)  Improving  student  learning
through course design. Oxonian Rewley Press: Oxford.

Linder,  C.J.  &  Marshall,  D.  (1998).  Linking  physics  students’  development  as  independent  and
reflective  learners  with  changes  in  their  conceptions  of  science.   In  C.  Rust  (Ed)  Improving
students as learners. Oxonian Rewley Press: Oxford.

Marton, F. (1981). Phenomenography—describing conceptions of the world around us. Instructional

Science, 10, 177–200.

Marton, F. & Booth, S. (1997). Learning and Awareness. Mahwah NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Ass.

Ingerman & Booth – Making sense of studying physics
Page 6 of 6

