To appear in Optics Letters 
 
Second harmonic optical coherence tomography 

Yi Jiang, Ivan Tomov, Yimin Wang, and Zhongping Chen* 

Beckman Laser Institute and Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California, Irvine,  
Irvine, California 92612 

 

Received November 8, 2003 
 
Second  harmonic  optical  coherence  tomography,  which  uses  coherence  gating  of  second-order  nonlinear  optical 
response of biological tissues for imaging, is described and demonstrated.  Femtosecond laser pulses were used to 
excite  second  harmonic  waves  from  collagen  harvested  from  rat  tail  tendon  and  a  reference  nonlinear  crystal.   
Second harmonic interference fringe signals were detected and used for image construction.   Because of the strong 
dependence  of  second  harmonic  generation  on  molecular  and  tissue  structures,  this  technique  offers  contrast  and 
resolution enhancement to conventional optical coherence tomography.  
  OCIS codes:  170.4500, 170.3880, 190.4160 

[2]; 

Spectroscopic  OCT 

 
Optical  coherence  tomography  (OCT)  is  a  noninvasive, 
noncontact  imaging  modality  for  cross-sectional imaging of 
biological  tissue  with  micrometer  scale  resolution  [1].    OCT 
uses coherence gating of backscattered light for tomographic 
imaging of tissue structures.  Variations in the light scattering 
properties  of  tissue,  due  to  inhomogeneities  in  the  optical 
refractive index, provide imaging contrast.  In many instances 
and  especially  in  the  early  stages  of  disease,  the  change  in 
tissue scattering properties between normal and diseased tissue 
is  small  and  difficult  to  meas ure.    To  enhance  the  image 
contrast of OCT, a number of extensions have been developed:  
Optical Doppler Tomography combines the Doppler principle 
with  OCT  to  obtain  tissue  structural  image  and  blood  flow 
simultaneously 
combines 
spectroscopic analysis with OCT to obtain the depth-resolved 
tissue  absorption  spectra  [3];  Polarization  Sensitive  OCT 
combines  polarization  sensitive  detection  with  OCT  to 
determine  tissue  birefringence  [4].    Engineered microsphere 
contrast  agents  for  OCT  have  also  been  developed  [5].  
Recently,  Coherent  Anti-Stokes  Raman  Scattering  inter-
ferometry  has  been  proposed  [6],  but  no  image  has  been 
demonstrated to date using this method.  
    Optical  second  harmonic  generation  (SHG)  is  the  lowest 
order  nonlinear  optical  process  where  the  second-order 
nonlinear  optical  susceptibility 
the 
generation  of  light  at  the  second  harmonic  (SH)  frequency.   
Because  the  second-order  nonlinear  optical  susceptibility  is 
determined  by  detailed  electronic  configurations,  molecular 
structures 
and 
ultrastructures,  using  SHG  for  biomedical  imaging  can  give 
unique  information  regarding  tissue  structure  symmetry  [7].   
The  quadratic  power  dependence  of  SHG  on  the  refractive 
index  provides  greater optical contrast for visualizing tissue 
structures  than  conventional  linear  reflectance  microscopy 
does.  SHG signal is typically detected in transmission mode 
for bulk transparent medium [8].  However, detection of SHG 
signal  in  reflection  mode  has  been  widely  used  to  study 
nonlinear  effects  at  surfaces  and  interfaces  [7].    Recently, 
back-reflected  SHG  signals  from  unstained  biological  tissues 
has been investigated and used for imaging [9].   Quantitative 

local  morphologies, 

is  responsible  for 

symmetries, 

and 

 

second-harmonic  generation  microscopy  in  collagen has also 
been reported [10].   
    In  this  letter,  we  demonstrate  an  optical  tomography 
technique, Second Harmonic Optical Coherence Tomography 
(SH-OCT), which combines the sample structural sensitivity 
of  SHG  with  the  coherence  gating  of  OCT.    The  system 
consists  of  an  interferometer  illuminated  by  a  low-coherence 
light source.  If the sample possesses certain structures lacking 
a center of symmetry, the incoming light is converted into SH 
waves at the sample site.  SH waves are also produced in the 
reference  arm  through  a  nonlinear  crystal.    The  temporal 
interference  pattern  of  these  SH  waves  is  then  detected  and 
used for image construction.  Because of coherence gating, the 
depth  resolution  of  imaging  is  determined  by  the  coherence 

 

FIG.  1.  SH-OCT  experimental  setup:  ISO,  isolator;  HWP1-
HWP3,  half-wave  plates;  GLP,  Glan  laser  polarizer;  F1-F4, 
filters;  M1-M2,  mirrors;  PBS,  polarization  beam  splitter; 
NLC,  nonlinear  crystal  BBO;  BS1-BS2,  broadband  non-
polarization  beam  splitter;  DBS,  dichroic  beam  splitter;  L, 
objective;  PP,  prism  pair  dispersion  compensator;  PD, 
photodiode; PMT, photomultiplier tube. 

 

1 

length  of  the  SH  wave and is independent of the objective.  
Thus,  high  depth  resolution  is  achievable  even  using  a  low 
numerical  aperture  objective. 
  SH-OCT  also  provides 
considerable  imaging  contrast  and  resolution  enhancement 
over conventional OCT because of the high selectivity of SHG 
on 
tissue  molecular  structure  and  shorter  measuring 
wavelength. 
    The  experimental  configuration  of  SH-OCT  system  is 
shown  in  Fig.  1.    The  light  source  was  a  mode-locked 
femtosecond Ti:sapphire laser centered at 800 nm with 110 fs 
pulse duration and 76 MHz repetition rate.  A long-wave pass 
filter (F1) filtered out the spurious SHG produced by the laser.  
A polarizing beam splitter (PBS) split the input beam into the 
two  arms  of  the  interferometer,  and  the  split  ratio  was 
controlled by a half-wave plate (HWP2).  In the reference arm, 
a 0.1 mm-thick nonlinear crystal (NLC)  of ß-BaB2O4 (BBO) 
was  oriented  for  type  I  phase  matching  to  convert  the 
fundamental wave into a SH wave at 400 nm.  An important 
requirement for the nonlinear crystal in the sample arm is to be 
phase-matched  for  the  whole  spectrum  of  the  fundamental 
radiation.  A moving mirror (M2) acted as the delay line.  In 
the signal arm, the fundamental wave was focused onto the 
sample by a low numerical aperture objective  (L, N.A.=0.2, 
f=31.8  mm).    When  the  sample  had  second-order nonlinear 
properties, the fundamental wave generated a SH wave.  Back-
reflected  fundamental  and  SH  waves  were  collimated  by  the 
same  objective  (L)  and  directed  by  a  dichroic  beam  splitter 
(DBS) toward the combining beam splitter (BS2).  The DBS 
reflected  most  of  the  SH  wave  and  about  5%  of  the 
fundamental  wave. 
  The  waves  from  both  arms  were 
recombined after passing BS2.  By changing the optical path 
delay  in  the  reference  arm,  the  pulses  overlapped  temporally 
and  interference  fringes  at  SH  and  fundamental  wavelengths 
were generated.  With proper filtration provided by F2 and F3, 
the  fundamental  and  SH  interference  fringe  signals  were 
detected  by  a  photomultiplier  tube  (PMT)  and  a  photodiode 
(PD)  respectively.    A  prism-pair was inserted into the signal 
arm  to  compensate  for  the  group-velocity  dispersion of the 
fundamental  and  SH  waves,  thus  enabling  simultaneous 
detection of SH-OCT and conventional OCT signals. 
 
To  measure  the  coherence  lengths  in  this  hybrid 
OCT  system,  the  sample  was  replaced  by  a  polished  GaAs 
crystal  to  produce  surface  SH  waves  (a  nonlinear  optical 
mirror)  [7,  11].    Interferences  at  both  wavelengths  were 
measured as shown in Fig. 2, where SH interference occurs at 
exactly double the frequency of fundamental interference.  It 
is well known that for a Gaussian pulse                                              
2
]2ln)
with  pulse  duration      , the  coherence  length      is given by    
                                  ,  where       is the center wavelength and          
0l
cl
                                    is the spectral width (full width at half-
=
maximum).  A relationship of                            and                 
2
2
2lD
can be obtained from simple calculations, where       and  
are the spectral widths of  fundamental and SH waves,       and    
1cl
      are  the  coherence  lengths  of  the  fundamental  and  SH 
2cl
waves.  The fundamental laser radiation has a spectral width 
of 8.1 nm (Fig. 3a).  The spectral width of SH wave from the 
BBO  crystal  was  measured  to  be  3.0  nm  (Fig.  3b).    The 
coherence  lengths  of  the  fundamental  and  SH  waves in free 
space were measured to be 33 µm (Fig. 3c) and 24 µm (Fig. 

2
)(
lp
0
2
)(
lp
0

exp[
cl

l
1lD

=
l =

)
l
pct

2ln2(

2ln2(

tI
~)(

pt

l
2

l
1

2(

l
c

=

2

4

t

)

t

c
1

p

 

FIG.  2.  Interference  signals  of  fundamental  waves  (upper 
curve)  and  SH  waves  (lower  curve).    The  SH  interference 
signal  is  at  double  the  frequency  of  the  fundamental 
interference signal. 

 

3d), respectively.  All measured values are in good agreement 
with theoretic predictions.   
    The sample used in our study was Type I collagen harvested 
from rat tail tendon [8].  The sample consisted of two ~30 µm-
thick  collagen  layers  sandwiched  among  three  170  µm-thick 
glass slides (schematic shown in the top of Fig. 4).  Using the 
Gaussian beam approximation, the objective (L) has a depth of 
focus of 0.52 mm.  The average excitation power entering the 
objective  was  approximately  50  mW,  and  estimated  peak 
power density at the beam waist in the sample was about 3.2 
GW/cm².    This  peak  intensity  is  two  orders  of  magnitude 
smaller  than  the  peak  intensity  threshold  for  the  loss  in  cell 
viability demonstrated by König et al. [12].  The tomographic 
imaging  experiment  was  conducted  by  scanning  the  mirror 
(M2) in the delay line and recording the fundamental and SH 
interference  signals  with  a  lock-in  amplifier.    The  lock-in 
amplifier demodulated the interference fringe envelope signal 
with  high  sensitivity  and  precision.    The  measured  OCT 
signals of one typical depth (z direction) scan are shown in Fig. 
4.  The conventional fundamental OCT signal in Fig. 4a shows 

 
FIG.  3.  Coherence  length  measurements  of  the  hybrid  OCT 
system:  A, spectrum of the fundamental wave; B, spectrum 
of SH wave from the nonlinear crystal; C, Fundamental wave 
interference fringes; D, SH wave interference fringes. 

 

2 

D
D
-
D
D
 
FIG. 5.  A SH-OCT image of two collagen layers sandwiched 
among glass slides. 

 

to 

image  contrast  and  resolution 

of using this technique to image biological samples.  SH-OCT 
offers  enhanced 
the 
conventional OCT using the same light source, wh ich extends 
the  capability  of  conventional  OCT  for  detecting  small 
changes in tissue and molecular structure and symmetry. 
    This work was supported by research grants awarded by the 
National  Science  Foundation  (BES-86924)  and  National 
Institutes  of  Health  (EB-00293,  NCI-91717,  RR-01192). 
Institute  support  from  the  Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific 
Research 
the  Beckman  Laser 
Institute Endowment is also gratefully acknowledged. 
    * Electronic address: zchen@laser.bli.uci.edu  
 
Reference  
 
1.  D. Huang, E. A. Swanson, C. P. Lin, J. S. Schuman, W. 
G. Stinson, W. Chang, M. R. Hee, T. Flotte, K. Gregory, 
C. A. Puliafito, and J. G. Fujimoto, Science 254, 1178 
(1991). 

(F49620-00-1-0371)  and 

2.  Z. Chen, T. E. Milner, D. Dave, and J. S. Nelson, Opt. 

Lett. 22, 64 (1997). 

3.  U. Morgner, W. Drexler, F. X. Kärtner, X. D. Li, C. 

Pitris, E. P. Ippen, and J. G. Fujimoto, Opt. Lett. 25, 111 
(2000). 

4.  M. R. Hee, D. Huang, E. A. Swanson, and J. G. Fujimoto, 

J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 9, 903 (1992). 

5.  T. M. Lee, A. L. Oldenburg, S. Sitafalwalla, D. L. Marks, 

W. Luo, F. J. Toublan, K. S. Suslick, and S. A. Boppart, 
Opt. Lett. 28, 1546 (2003). 

6.  D. L. Marks, J. S. Bredfeldt, S. Hambir, D. Dlott, B. 

Kitchell, M. Gruebele, and S. A. Boppart, in Coherence 
Domain Optical Methods and Optical Coherence 
Tomogra phy in Biomedicine VII, V. V. Tuchin, J. A. Izatt 
and J. G. Fujimoto eds., Proc. SPIE 4956, 9-13 (2003). 

7.  Y. R. Shen, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 40, 327 (1989). 
8.  P. J. Campagnola, M. Wei, A. Lewis, and L. M. Loew, 

Biophysical J. 77, 3341, (1999). 

9.  A. Zoumi, A Yeh, and B. J. Tromberg, Proc. Nat. Acad. 

Sci. USA 99, 11014 (2002). 

10.  P. Stoller, P. M. Celliers, K. M. Reiser, and A. M. 

Rubenchik, Appl. Opt. 42, 5209, (2003). 

11.  J. Ducuing and N. Bloembergen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 10, 474 

(1963). 

12.  K. König, T. W. Becker, P. Fischer, I. Riemann, and K. J. 

Halbhuber, Opt. Lett. 24, 113, (1999). 

 
FIG. 4. SH-OCT and conventional OCT signals of one depth 
scan.  The sample structure is shown in the top of this figure.  
A: Conventional OCT interference fringe envelope signal at 
the fundamental wavelength;  B: SH-OCT interference fringe 
envelope signal. 

the sandwich structure of the sample.  The strong reflectance 
occurring  at  the  first  air-glass  interface  suppresses  signals 
from the deeper layers.    The SH-OCT signal in Fig. 4b shows 
two peaks that correspond to the two -layer structure since SH 
signals  are  only  produced  in  the  two  collagen  layers.  
Comparison of Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b shows that there is no SH-
OCT signal coming from the air-glass interface, indicating that 
SH-OCT  provides  good  contrast  for  nonlinear  media.    SH-
OCT  signals  reveal  information  regarding  the  second-order 
nonlinear properties of the sample that cannot be provided by 
conventional OCT signals.  Fig. 5 is a SH-OCT image of the 
center part of the sample, where two layers of collagen can be 
clearly observed. 
    SHG  serves  as  a  unique  contrasting  mechanism  for  tissue 
structure  since  SH  signals  are  highly  dependent  on  the 
orientation,  birefringence,  and  local  symmetry  properties  of 
the tissue.  SHG efficiency in the collagen sample depends on 
orientation of collagen fibrils relative to the incident electrical 
field  polarizations.    In  the  experiment,  the  half-wave plate 
HWP3 was used to control the input beam polarization to the 
sample.    Another  half-wave  plate  optimized  for  the  SH 
wavelength  can  be  inserted  into  the  reference  arm  after  the 
reference  crystal.    By  matching  the SH wave polarization in 
both arms, collagen fibrils with different orientations can be 
preferentially  highlighted  to  produce  polarization  dependent 
tomographic images. 
    In  conclusion,  we  have  presented  a  noninvasive  optical 
tomography  technique  of second harmonic optical coherence 
tomography  and  experimentally  demonstrated  the  feasibility 

 

3 

