Isolated Electrostatic Structures Observed Throughout the Cluster 
Orbit:  Relationship to Magnetic Field Strength 
 
   
J. S. Pickett1, L.-J. Chen1, S. W. Kahler1, O. Santolίk2,1, D. A. Gurnett1, B. T. Tsurutani3, 
and A. Balogh4
 
 
1Department of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA 
2Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic 
3Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA 
4The Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College, London, UK 
 
Correspondence and Offprint Requests to:  J. S. Pickett (pickett@uiowa.edu) 
 
 
 
Abstract.  Isolated electrostatic structures are observed throughout much of the 4 RE by 

19.6 RE Cluster orbit.  These structures are observed in the Wideband plasma wave 

instrument’s waveform data as bipolar pulses (one positive and one negative peak in the 

electric field amplitude) and tripolar pulses (two positive and one negative peak, or vice 

versa).  These structures are observed at all of the boundary layers, in the solar wind and 

magnetosheath, and along auroral field lines at 4.5-6.5 RE.  Using the Wideband 

waveform data from the various Cluster spacecraft we have carried out a survey of the 

amplitudes and time durations of these structures and how these quantities vary with the 

local magnetic field strength.  Such a survey has not been carried out before, and it 

reveals certain characteristics of solitary structures in a finite magnetic field, a topic still 

inadequately addressed by theories.  We find that there is a broad range of electric field 

amplitudes at any specific magnetic field strength, and there is a general trend for the 

electric field amplitudes to increase as the strength of the magnetic field increases over a 

range of 5 to 500 nT.  We provide a possible explanation for this trend that relates to the 

structures being Bernstein-Greene-Kruskal mode solitary waves.  There is no 

 

 

 

2

corresponding dependence of the duration of the structures on the magnetic field strength, 

although a plot of these two quantities reveals the unexpected result that with the 

exception of the magnetosheath, all of the time durations for all of the other regions are 

comparable, whereas the magnetosheath time durations clearly are in a different category 

of much smaller time duration.  We speculate that this implies the structures are much 

smaller in size.  The distinctly different pulse durations for the magnetosheath pulses 

indicate the possibility that the pulses are generated by a mechanism which is different 

from the mechanism operating in other regions. 

1  Introduction 

There have been numerous reports of observations of isolated electrostatic structures 

(IES), also referred to as solitary waves and electrostatic solitary waves, and their onsets 

in the dynamical regions of Earth’s magnetosphere (Franz et al., 1998; Kojima et al., 

1999; Franz, 2000; Tsurutani et al., 2003; Cattell et al., 2003; Lakhina et al., 2003; and 

references therein), as well as of theoretical (Schamel, 1986; Muschietti et al., 1999a,b; 

Chen and Parks, 2002a,b; Chen et al., 2003) and simulation (Omura et al.,  1996; 

Oppenheim et al., 1999; Muschietti et al., 2000; Singh, 2000, Singh et al., 2000) studies 

of IES.  However, no observational studies on how bipolar IES characteristics depend on 

the local magnetic field strength have been carried out, and there have been no systematic 

studies on tripolar IES.  Most theories of IES provide only analytical solutions for either 

purely one dimension (Muschietti et al., 1999a,b) or strong magnetic field where the 

cyclotron radius has been taken as zero (Schamel, 1986; Muschietti et al., 2002; Chen 

3

and Parks, 2002a,b; Chen et al., 2003).  On the other hand, in three dimensional 

unmagnetized plasmas, it has been shown that fully localized solitary wave solutions do 

not exist if the ambient plasma is isotropic (Chen, 2002).  Several simulation studies have 

shown that in more than one dimension, bipolar IES are short lived if the magnetic field 

is zero or so weak that the cyclotron frequency is less than the plasma frequency (Morse 

and Nielson, 1969; Oppenheim et al., 1999; Muschietti et al., 2000).  In space, however, 

bipolar IES have been observed in much weaker magnetic fields than what is thought 

possible by simulation and theoretical studies.  In this paper, using data from the Cluster 

spacecraft, we report on a statistical survey of the dependence of electric field amplitudes 

and time durations of bipolar and tripolar IES on the magnetic field strength. 

Cluster began its mission operations phase on 1 February 2001 following a five-month 

commissioning phase.  The Cluster quartet is in an approximate polar orbit with an 

apogee of about 19.6 RE and a perigee of 4 RE.  This allows Cluster to cross all of Earth’s 

boundaries and spend considerable amounts of time in the near-Earth solar wind, 

magnetosheath, magnetotail and auroral zone.  The Cluster orbit precesses through all 24 

hours of Magnetic Local Time (MLT) in one Earth-year.  Thus, the Cluster spacecraft are 

always in the same local time sector for any given month each year as described in 

Escoubet et al. (2001) and as depicted in their Figure 1.  Although not important for the 

current study, the inter-spacecraft separations of the four satellites have been changed on 

a 6- to 12-month time frame since operations began, with the smallest ideal tetrahedron 

separation being 100 km and the largest 5,000 km as of this date.   

 

 

 

4

The Cluster WBD instrument obtains high resolution waveforms in three different filter 

bandwidths, providing time resolution between samples varying from 5 to 36.5 µsec (see 

Gurnett et al., 1997 and Pickett et al., 2003 for a full description of the WBD instrument 

and its sampling characteristics).  This allows for the resolution of periodic or single 

period (pulse) waveforms with extremely short durations.  Since WBD makes only a 

single axis electric field measurement, it is not possible to transform the waveforms into 

any other coordinate system.  However, it is possible to transform other Cluster three axis 

measurement and position vectors into the antenna coordinate system used by WBD, thus 

providing the antenna’s position at any moment in time in some reference system, such as 

a magnetic field-aligned coordinate system.  The WBD instrument is unique among all 

the Cluster instruments in that it does not record its data onboard.  Rather, the spacecraft 

transmits the WBD data in real time to a Deep Space Network ground station.  This 

allows WBD to obtain extremely high time resolution measurements with tens of µsec 

accuracy in absolute time.  In order to obtain these unique capabilities, WBD data are 

only obtained for a total of 8 hours across all 4 spacecraft (or about 2 hours per 

spacecraft) for each 57-hour Cluster orbit.   

 

 

The combination of the Cluster orbit characteristics and the WBD instrument on each 

spacecraft provides the unique capability for the first time to obtain high resolution 

digital waveform data from multiple spacecraft from all regions near Earth in which 

isolated electrostatic structures are observed.  Although wave instruments on several 

single spacecraft such as Freja, Geotail, WIND, Polar and FAST have observed IES, 

none of them explore as many of the regions where IES are observed as Cluster does.  

5

Furthermore, most of the waveform instruments on these spacecraft are unable to observe 

the extremely short duration IES as WBD does, or those that do cannot sample as many 

of the IES regions.  As will be shown below, IES are observed along magnetic field lines 

that map to the auroral zone, in the magnetosheath and near-Earth solar wind, and at all 

boundary layers.  In general, wherever there is turbulence or a mixing of plasmas, IES are 

observed. 

Below we begin by providing samples of the IES of interest.  We follow this by the 

results of the survey, specifically the amplitude and time duration of the IES vs. the 

magnetic field strength, and end with some possible explanations for the observed 

 

 

 

 

features. 

2  IES Examples 

Figure 1a shows a typical 6-minute spectrogram of data obtained by WBD on 12 June 

2002 on all four spacecraft in the auroral zone at about 4.8 RE and 53º magnetic latitude.  

This spectrogram has increasing time, in UT, plotted on the horizontal axis and 

frequency, in kHz, on the vertical axis with color indicating power spectral density, in 

V2/m2/Hz.  The spectrogram was created by taking 1024 samples of the time series and 

transforming these data to the frequency domain by using a Fast Fourier Transform.  The 

white line in each panel is the electron cyclotron frequency as determined from the 

Fluxgate Magnetometer, FGM (see Balogh et al., 1997).  Figure 1b shows a 25 msec line 

plot of the waveform beginning at 02:48:42.546 UT obtained by WBD on C4 (Cluster 4) 

6

from the 6-minute interval seen in the spectrogram.  The line plot in Figure 1b has 

increasing time, in sec from 02:48:42.546 UT, plotted on the horizontal axis and electric 

field amplitude, in mV/m, plotted on the vertical axis.  The total angle of the electric field 

antenna to the local magnetic field using transformed FGM data is shown on the right 

vertical scale.  The spectrogram at the time of the waveform in Figure 1b shows only a 

broad band signal ranging in frequency from the lower cutoff of the filter around 50 Hz, 

where its greatest intensity is observed, up to its higher cutoff around 19 kHz, where a 

much lower intensity is observed.  The broad band signal results from the fact that the 

pulses observed in the waveform in Figure 1b contain all frequencies.  When one or more 

of these pulses are dominant in a 1024 point sample and are transformed to the frequency 

domain via Fast Fourier Transform, the expected result is a broad band signal as 

observed. 

 

 

Two types of IES are pointed out in Figure 1b.  The first is a tripolar pulse, defined as 

having either two positive peaks and one negative peak in the electric field, as in this 

case, or two negative peaks and one positive.  This tripolar pulse has a fairly typical 

duration of about 2 msec and amplitude of 55 mV/m peak-to-peak.  As shown in Pickett 

et al. (2004), when the electric field of these pulses is integrated over the duration of the 

pulse, a significant potential shift is obtained.  The second type of pulse pointed out in 

Figure 1b is the bipolar pulse (one positive and one negative peak).  Likewise, the bipolar 

pulses have typical durations of 760 µsec and amplitudes of 75 mV/m peak-to-peak.  No 

potential shift will result from integrating the electric field of the bipolar pulse over the 

duration of the pulse.  Figure 1b also shows that the total angle of the electric antenna 

being used by WBD to the local magnetic field is around 157º, or nearly antiparallel.   

7

 

 

We now highlight some of the differences between the IES in the near-Earth auroral zone 

presented in Figure 1, and the magnetosheath.  Figure 2 (same format as Figure 1 with the 

exception that the electron cyclotron frequency, plotted as a white line, has been omitted 

in Figure 2a as it would appear at the very bottom of the frequency band) contains WBD 

data taken during a pass through the dayside magnetosheath at 13-14 RE and 20º-30º 

magnetic latitude.  Figure 2a shows the spectrogram for a two-hour period of time on 6 

April 2002 when the spacecraft were separated by about 100 km.  Note that the horizontal 

lines seen around 40 kHz and 65 kHz in all panels are spacecraft interference and the 

numerous horizontal lines seen in the C1 and C3 panels are interference from the Cluster 

EDI experiment.  Although the signatures of the IES, i.e., the broad band signals, in this 

spectrogram, are observed to be very similar from one spacecraft to the next, we have 

been unable to conclusively correlate any one structure as propagating from one 

spacecraft to the next, but this is the subject of ongoing work and not pertinent to this 

study.  Here we see that the broad band signals extend up to about 40-60 kHz, which is 

indicative of the pulses being much shorter in duration (see Pickett et al., 2003) than 

those from the auroral zone.    Indeed, when we look at the 5 msec sample waveform 

from C4 beginning at 22:25:01.2566 UT (Figure 2b), we see that the duration of these 

bipolar pulses is 54 µsec.  The interesting aspect of these bipolar pulses is that they are 

seen almost every 1.4 msec at a certain phase of the lower frequency, nearly sinusoidal, 

wave.  This would imply that the pulses are being created through some mechanism that 

 

 

 

 

 

involves the low frequency wave, but this topic is also left to future work.  In addition we 

observe that the amplitudes of the pulses, 0.02 to 0.10 mV/m, are much lower than in the 

8

auroral zone. 

3  IES Survey 

Since the primary purpose of this paper is to provide a geophysical basis, in this case the 

local magnetic field strength, for the various amplitudes and time durations of the pulses, 

we resort to a survey of the IES observed in various parts of the Cluster orbit.  Because it 

would be computationally prohibitive at this time to run an automatic IES detection 

program on all of the data obtained to date, we have instead turned to choosing 

representative events from the various regions that Cluster traverses in which IES are 

observed, and only then analyzing the first second of every minute of data. 

The automatic bipolar and tripolar IES detection algorithm works as follows.  First the 

range of the background noise is determined by taking the standard deviation of the raw 

count values over 2 or 3 minor frames of data (approximately 80-120 µsec).  Then 

looking within this span of data, the program finds the first data point that falls outside 

the noise range.  For this data point, a local minimum and maximum raw count value are 

found.  The following tests are now run to determine if the data represent a bipolar pulse: 

1.  Ensure that the maximum and minimum raw count values for the pulse do not 

occur at the beginning or ending of the pulse, 

9

2.  Ensure that the slope of a linear best-fit line between the peaks of the pulse is 

greater in magnitude than the slope of a linear best-fit line between the start and 

the first peak and the slope for the line between the second peak and the end of 

the pulse. 

3.  The ratio of the amplitudes for the two peaks (amplitude measured from the mean 

of the pulse) must be smaller than 2:1. 

4.  There are no significant raw count values within 1/4 the period of the pulse.  A 

significant value is one who's amplitude (measured from the mean of the pulse) is 

greater than 10% of the pulse's peak-to-peak amplitude. 

5.  The time duration of each peak must be roughly the same.  The largest ratio 

accepted for the time duration of each individual peak is 14:11. 

 

If all the above five conditions are met, the pulse is confirmed to be a bipolar pulse.  If 

any one of conditions 3 through 5 is NOT met, then another local minimum or maximum 

(i.e., if the second peak found previously was a minimum, then we are looking for a 

maximum) is identified.  The following tests are now run to determine if the data 

represent a tripolar pulse: 

 

 

1.  Ensure  that  the  maximum  and  minimum  raw  count  values  for  the  pulse  do  not 

occur at the beginning or ending of the pulse. 

2.  Ensure that the slopes of a linear best-fit line between the first and second peaks 

and the line between the second and third peaks are the greatest in magnitude for 

the pulse, i.e., the same as test applied above for bipolar pulses. 

10

3.  Ensure that the second peak (center peak) is the farthest removed from the mean 

raw count value of the pulse. 

4.  There are no significant raw count values within 1/4 the period of the pulse.  A 

significant value is one who's amplitude (measured from the mean of the pulse) is 

greater than 10% of the pulse's peak-to-peak amplitude. 

5.  The amplitudes (measured from the mean of the pulse) of the two peaks on one 

side of the mean of the pulse individually should at least be 1/4 the amplitude of 

the single pulse on the other side of the mean. 

6.  The  time  duration  of  the  two  peaks  on  the  same  side  of  the  pulse's  mean  raw 

count  value  must  be  similar.    The  largest  ratio  accepted  for  the  time  duration 

comparison of these two individual peaks is 3:1. 

 

If all the above six conditions are met, then the pulse is confirmed to be a tripolar pulse.   

This method of pulse detection will not result in false positives.  However, because of the 

various fluctuations naturally present in the data, i.e., other plasma waves and 

electrostatic turbulence, some pulses may be missed.  Since many of these missed pulses 

are questionable, they are best left out of this survey.  The pulses that are confirmed have 

been extensively checked manually for authenticity.  In addition, the confirmed pulses are 

also labeled as “clipped” if the instantaneous dynamic range of the instrument is 

insufficient to provide an accurate amplitude.  In the plots that follow below, all 

“clipped” pulses have been omitted.  

 

 

 

11

The results of the IES survey are shown in Figures 3 and 4 for the bipolar and tripolar 

pulses, respectively.  These plots contain 7,104 confirmed bipolar pulses and 668 

confirmed tripolar pulses.  First we examine the bipolar pulses.  Figure 3a shows a scatter 

plot of the amplitude, in mV/m, on the horizontal axis vs. the total magnetic field 

strength, in nT, on the vertical axis, color coded according to the region in which the 

bipolar pulses were detected.  Note that the region labeled Plasma Sheet is applicable 

only for distances of 18-19 RE and that the Polar Cap represents crossings of the polar 

cap boundary layer at two different distances, 5 and 10 RE.  For all regions we have 

plotted an “x” within a bracketed line.  These are the mean values and standard 

deviations, respectively, of the points within that region.  Although there is a range in the 

observed amplitudes of the bipolar pulses at any given magnetic field strength, the trend 

for the amplitude to be larger as the strength of the magnetic field increases is clearly 

evident through the provided values of mean and standard deviation.  We will present our 

attempt to understand this trend in the next section.  From this figure we also see that the 

range of amplitudes varies from a few hundredths mV/m to several tens of mV/m.  Since 

WBD employs an automatic gain function implemented in its hardware to add and 

remove gain in 5 dB steps at an update rate of once every tenth of a second, it should not 

be missing many structures over the 1 second interval because the gain will adjust 9 times 

in this period if necessary to keep the amplitudes within its dynamic range.  If, however, 

all of the gain has been taken out of the system and the structures are still being clipped, 

WBD would be unable to determine the full amplitude.  As can be seen from Figure 3a, 

this is most likely to occur in the auroral zone where the largest magnetic fields are 

 

 

 

observed for the Cluster orbit.  As stated previously, structures with clipped waveforms 

are not plotted in Figure 3.   

12

The survey of the time durations of the same sample of bipolar pulses is shown in Figure 

3b.  Here we have plotted the time duration of the pulses on the horizontal scale, in msec, 

vs. the strength of the magnetic field, in nT, on the vertical axis, color coded by region 

with mean and standard deviation values provided within each region.  We observe that 

there is no dependence of the time duration of the pulses on the magnetic field.  However, 

we do observe that there appears to be two distinct classes of time durations:  1) those 

greater than 100 µsec up to about 5 msec, and 2) those less than 100 µsec down to the 

lowest duration that WBD can resolve at about 20 µsec.  Clearly the magnetosheath 

structures fall into category 2 and all others into category 1.  The reason for this 

distinction will be discussed in the next section and simply point out here that for a 

typical flow velocity of a few hundred km/sec in the magnetosheath and a time duration 

less than 100 µsec, we obtain a scale size on the order of tens of meters. 

We have also examined the tripolar pulse amplitudes and time durations for dependences 

on the magnetic field strength.  The survey results are provided in Figures 4a and 4b 

(same format as for Figures 3a and 3b).  Although fewer tripolar structures are detected in 

any sample interval, similar trends, or lack thereof, to the bipolar structures are seen, i.e., 

the tripolar pulse amplitudes increase as the magnetic field strength increases over a finite 

spread of amplitudes, and the time durations show no dependence on the magnetic field 

strength.  However, just as for the bipolar pulses, the tripolar pulses in the magnetosheath 

13

are from a different, shorter time duration class.  Similar results for the tripolar pulses as 

for the bipolar ones point to the conclusion that they are coherent structures of the same 

nature but of different shapes.  The fact that the tripolar pulses are sometimes observed in 

groups without the presence of bipolar pulses (see, for example, Figure 2b of Pickett et 

al., 2004) indicates that they are themselves coherent structures and less likely to be an 

intermediate stage in the generation of bipolar pulses.  There is no apparent reason for 

why there are more bipolar than tripolar pulses (10:1) detected in any given sample 

interval.  However, it is the case that the automatic detection algorithm will reject more 

possible cases of tripolar than bipolar pulses due to the added complexity of cleanly 

detecting a third peak.   

4  Discussion 

 

 

 

In this section, we discuss our attempts to understand the observational features shown in 

Figures 3(a)-4(b).  The large spread in the electric field amplitudes for a fixed magnetic 

field strength is consistent with the key property of Bernstein-Greene-Kruskal (BGK) 

solitary waves whose widths and potential amplitudes are constrained by inequalities 

(Chen and Parks, 2002a,b; Muschietti et al., 2002; Chen et al. 2003).  For a given size of 

a BGK solitary structure, there is a continuous range of allowed potential amplitudes, and 

vice versa.  Therefore, a large range of continuous electric field amplitudes (potential 

amplitudes divided by size) are naturally expected for BGK solitary waves.  On the other 

hand, for fluid solitons such as KdV solitons (Washimi and Taniuti, 1966), their widths 

increase with decreasing amplitudes.  For a certain amplitude, there is only one allowed 

width for a fluid soliton, and as such, it is less likely that there is a wide range of electric 

field amplitudes for a particular geomagnetic region.   

14

There are so far no theories that describe how tripolar pulses are self-consistently 

supported by a collisionless plasma, how they are generated, and what their properties 

are, and no knowledge about how they would behave in finite magnetic fields.  For the 

tripolar pulses themselves to be coherent structures, trapping of both ions and electrons 

must be involved (Pickett et al., 2003).  We therefore extrapolate that their size and 

amplitudes are also constrained by inequalities based on the BGK theory of Chen and 

Parks (2002a,b) and Chen et al. (2003) for bipolar pulses that require either ion trapping 

or electron trapping.  The large span in electric field amplitudes is consistent with our 

extrapolation. 

How the properties of solitary waves vary with the strength of the magnetic field is still 

poorly addressed by theories.  The width-amplitude inequality relations for BGK solitary 

waves derived in the strong magnetic field limit have been shown to hold at least in the 

regime where the cyclotron radius of the particles trapped in the solitary structure is much 

less than the size of the structure (Chen et al., 2003).  This condition is based on the 

stability requirements of a BGK solitary wave when the lowest order effects of a finite 

magnetic field are considered, and can be written as the following: 

 

 

 

 

 

<<

1

 

 

 

 

(1) 

em
Ψ

/

B

δ
z

 

 

 

2

em
Ψ

/

B

δ
r

<<

1

 

 

 

 

(2) 

15

where Ψ is the peak potential amplitude, B is the magnetic field strength, δz is the parallel 

size, δr is the perpendicular size, and e,m are the charge and mass of particles (electrons 

for electron mode solitary waves, and ions for ion mode), respectively.  The above 

conditions point to a trend that for a much weaker magnetic field, either the potential 

amplitude would decrease or the size would increase in order for the structures to be 

stable, and this results in smaller electric field amplitudes.  The Cluster observational 

results shown in Figures 3(a) and 4(a) are consistent with this, i.e., the typical electric 

field amplitude for a particular magnetic field strength tends to decrease with decreasing 

magnetic fields.   

We now discuss the possible underlying reason for the feature that the magnetosheath 

pulse durations form a different class while the rest of the pulses forms a group with no 

dependence on the magnetic field strength.  The time duration that a pulse is observed 

scales with the ratio of its size to its velocity.  If the pulses are generated by the two-

stream instability, this ratio would be roughly constant with a certain spread. The reason 

is as follows.  The typical size of these pulses is determined by the wavelength of the 

fastest growing mode in the linearly unstable stage, and this wavelength is proportional to 

the relative streaming velocity of the two beams (Gurnett and Bhattacharjee, 2003).  On 

the other hand, the velocities of the pulses generated by the two-stream instability are 

roughly half of the two stream velocity with some deviation, if the observing frame is 

16

taken to be one of the two streams.  Hence, the average ratio of size to the velocity of the 

pulses would stay roughly the same for different regions if they are generated by unstable 

two streams even with different relative velocities.  In this scenario, the fact that the 

magnetosheath pulse durations themselves form a different category would then indicate 

that these pulses are not generated by a two-stream instability. 

 

 

What mechanism could generate the magnetosheath pulses?  As suggested by Chen et al. 

(2003), BGK solitary waves may be spontaneously generated by turbulence in the 

absence of a two-stream instability.  We suspect that the magnetosheath pulses are 

examples of such spontaneous generation since the magnetosheath is known to be rich in 

turbulence.  If this is the case, the much shorter time durations of magnetosheath pulses 

may just reflect the scale lengths of the turbulence there.  We note that although the 

magnetosheath pulses may well be generated by a different mechanism, once they are 

generated, the conditions for their stability are the same as the pulses in other regions.  

Therefore, the magnetosheath pulses are not expected to stand out from the trend in the 

electric field amplitude vs. magnetic field plots. 

   

 

5 Conclusions 

We have presented new observational features of isolated electrostatic structures in finite 

magnetic fields that call for new theories.  We have observed electric field structures in 

the form of bipolar and tripolar pulses in all of the following regions crossed by the 

Cluster quartet:  numerous boundary layers, the near-Earth solar wind, magnetosheath, 

17

magnetotail and auroral zone.  These IES have amplitudes ranging from a few hundredths 

of mV/m up to almost 100 mV/m, and time durations from about 20 µsec, the shortest 

time duration that can be resolved, up to about 5 msec.  The electric field amplitudes of 

the IES show a wide range of scattering even within a given geomagnetic region, and 

exhibit a trend of increasing electric field amplitudes with increasing strength of the 

magnetic field.  No dependence is found for the duration of the IES pulses on the strength 

of the magnetic field.  However, plotting the time durations of the IES vs. the magnetic 

field strength clearly points out that the magnetosheath IES come from a different class of 

structures than those found in all other regions.  We have speculated that the IES are 

BGK mode and that the trend in the electric field/magnetic field comes from the stability 

requirements of the BGK mode in finite magnetic fields.  The lack of dependence of the 

time duration (or size/velocity) is indicative of the generation mechanism in most regions 

(except the magnetosheath) being the two-stream instability.  The difference in the time 

durations of the magnetosheath IES vs. all other observed IES is most likely due to a 

much different generation mechanism. 

 

 

Acknowledgments.  This work was supported under NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center 

Grant No. NAG5-9974 and NSF Grant ATM 03-27450.  We thank all of the many groups 

on the European side for their part in obtaining the WBD data (ESA, ESTEC, ESOC, 

JSOC, Sheffield University, and the Cluster Wave Experiment Consortium), as well as 

those on the U.S. side (JPL/DSN).  We also thank ESA and NASA for valuable analysis 

support tools, namely, CSDSWeb, SSCWeb and CDAWeb).  Portions of this work were 

performed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology under 

18

 

 

NASA contract. 

 

 

References 

19

Balogh, A., Dunlop, M. W., Cowley, S. W., Southwood, D. J., Thomlinson, J., et al.:  

‘The Cluster Magnetic Field Experiment’, Space Sci. Rev., 79, 65-91, 1997. 

Cattell, C., Neiman, C., Dombeck, J., Crumley, J., Wygant, J., et al.: ‘Large amplitude 

solitary waves in and near the Earth’s magnetosphere, magnetopause and bow shock:  

Polar and Cluster observations’, Nonlinear Proc. In Geophys., 10, 13-26, 2003. 

Chen, L.-J.:  ‘Bernstein-Greene-Kruskal electron solitary waves in collisionless plasmas’, 

Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 2002. 

Chen, L.-J., and Parks, G. K.:  ‘BGK electron solitary waves in 3D magnetized plasma’, 

Geophys. Res. Lett, 29(9), 10.1029/2001GL013385, 2002a. 

Chen, L.-J., and Parks, G. K.:  ‘BGK electron solitary waves:  1D and 3D’, Nonlinear 

Proc. in Geophys., 9, 111, 2002b. 

Chen, L.-J., Thoule, D. J., and Tang, J.-M.:  ‘Width-amplitude relation of Bernstein-

Greene-Krukal solitary waves’, http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0303021, 2003. 

Escoubet, C. P., Fehringer, M., and Goldstein, M.:  ‘The Cluster mission’, Annales 

Geophys, 19, 1197-1200, 2001. 

Franz, J. R., Kintner, P. M., and Pickett, J. S.:  ‘POLAR observations of coherent electric 

field structures’, Geophys. Res. Lett., 25(8), 1277-1280, 1998. 

Franz, J. R.: ‘A study of electron phase-space holes in the polar magnetosphere’, Ph.D. 

Dissertation, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 2000. 

Gurnett, D. A. and Bhattacharjee, A.:  ‘Introduction to plasma physics with space and 

laboratory applications’, submitted for publication to Cambridge University Press, 

20

 

2003. 

Gurnett, D. A., Huff, R. L., and Kirchner, D. L.:  ‘The Wide-Band plasma wave 

investigation’, Space Sci., Rev., 79, 195-208, 1997. 

Kojima, H., Matsumoto, H., and Omura, Y:  ‘Electrostatic solitary waves observed in the 

geomagnetic tail and other regions’, Adv. Space Res., 23, 1689-1697, 1999. 

Lakhina, G. S., Tsurutani, B. T., and Pickett, J. S.:  ‘Association of Alfven waves and 

proton cyclotron waves with electrostatic bipolar pulses:  magnetic hole events 

observed by Polar’, Nonlinear Proc. In Geophys., in press, 2003. 

Morse, R. L., and Nielson, C. W.:  ‘One-, two-, and three-dimensional numerical 

simulation of two-beam plasma’, Phys. Rev. Lett., 23, 1087, 1969. 

Muschietti, L., Ergun, R. E., Roth, I., and Carlson, C. W.:  ‘Phase-space electron holes 

along magnetic field lines’, Geophys. Res. Lett., 26, 1093-1096, 1999a. 

Muschietti, L., Roth, I., Ergun, R. E., and Carlson, C. W.:  ‘Analysis and simulation of 

BGK electron holes’, Nonlinear Proc. in Geophys., 6, 211, 1999b. 

Muschietti, L., Roth, I., Carlson, C. W., and Ergun, R. E.:  ‘Transverse instability of 

magnetized electron holes’, Phys. Rev. Lett., 85, 94, 2000. 

Muschietti, L., Roth, I., Carlson, C. W., and Berthomier, M.:  ‘Modeling stretched 

solitary waves along magnetic field lines’, Nonlinear Proc. in Geophys., 9, 101, 2002. 

Omura, Y., Matsumoto, H., and Kojima, H:  ‘Electron beam instabilities as generation 

mechanism of electrostatic solitary waves in the magnetotail’, J. Geophys. res., 101, 

2685-1688, 1996. 

21

Oppenheim, M., Newman, D. L., and Goldman, M. V.:  ‘Evolution of electron phase-

space holes in 2-D magnetized plasma’, Phys. Rev. Lett., 73, 2344, 1999. 

Pickett, J. S., Menietti, J. D., Gurnett, D. A., Tsurutani, B., Kintner, P. M., et al.: ‘Solitary 

potential structures observed in the magnetosheath by the Cluster spacecraft’, 

Nonlinear Proc. In Geophys., 10, 3-11, 2003. 

Pickett, J. S., Kahler, S. W., Chen, L.-J., Huff, R. L., Santolik, O., et al.:  ‘Solitary waves 

observed in the auroral zone:  The Cluster multi-spacecraft perspective’, Nonlinear 

Schamel, H.: ‘Electron holes, ion holes and double layers’, Phys. Rep., 140, 161-191, 

Proc. In Geophys., in press, 2004. 

1986. 

Singh, N.:  ‘Electron holes as a common feature of double-layer-driven plasma waves’, 

Geophys. Res. Lett., 27, 927-0930, 2000. 

Singh, N., Loo, S. M., Wells, B. E., and Deverapalli, C.: ‘Three-dimensional structure of 

electron holes driven by an electron beam’, Geophys. Res. Lett., 27, 2469-2472, 2000. 

Tsurutani, B. T., Dasgupta, B., Arballo, J. D., Lakhina, G. S., and Pickett, J. S.:  

‘Magnetic field turbulence, electron heating, magnetic holes, proton cyclotron waves, 

and the onsets of bipolar pulse (electron hole) events:  a possible unifying scenario’, 

Nonlinear Proc. In Geophys., 21, 27-35, 2003. 

Washimi, H., and Taniuti, T.:  ‘Propagation of ion-acoustic solitary waves of small 

amplitude’, Phys. Rev. Lett., 17, 996, 1996. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure Captions 

22

Figure 1: Cluster WBD data taken on 12 June 2002 in the auroral zone.  a)  Spectrogram 

showing the frequency and power spectral density of the emissions.  The broad band 

signals ranging up to about 10 kHz are indicative of times when IES are observed.  b)  

Representative waveform from a time of the broad band signals, showing the two types 

of IES:  bipolar and tripolar pulses.   

Figure 2:  Cluster WBD data taken on 6 April 2002 in the dayside magnetosheath.  a)  

Spectrogram showing the frequency and power spectral density of the emissions.  The 

broad band signals in this region, unlike the auroral zone, range in frequency from the 

lowest frequency measured up to 40-60 kHz.  b) Representative bipolar pulse waveforms 

from a time of the broad band signals, showing that the pulses are much shorter in 

duration in this region and that they are tied to a certain phase of the low frequency wave. 

Figure 3:  Survey of the bipolar pulses observed by Cluster WBD over a two-year period.  

a) Electric field amplitude vs. magnetic field strength showing a trend of increasing 

electric field amplitude with increasing magnetic field strength.  The over plotted 

bracketed lines with an imbedded “x” within each regional grouping represent the 

standard deviation and mean of that group, respectively.   b)  Pulse duration vs. magnetic 

field strength showing no trend between the two, but pointing out the obvious difference 

of the time durations of the magnetosheath pulses to pulses in all other regions.  

Bracketed lines with the imbedded “x” represent the standard deviation and mean of each 

regional group. 

23

Figure 4:  Survey of the tripolar pulses observed by Cluster WBD over a two-year period. 

a) Electric field amplitude vs. magnetic field strength showing a trend of increasing 

electric field amplitude with increasing magnetic field strength, just as for the bipolar 

pulses. b) Pulse duration vs. magnetic field strength showing no trend between the two, 

but pointing out the obvious difference of the time durations of the magnetosheath pulses 

to pulses in all other regions, just as for the bipolar pulses. 

 

   

 

 

