E-print physics/0403066
Accepted for publication in  Nuclear Instruments and Methods A

 Cryogenic avalanche detectors

based on gas electron multipliers

A. Bondar, A. Buzulutskov * , L. Shekhtman, R. Snopkov, Y. Tikhonov

Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia

Abstract

We  study  the  performances  of  gaseous  and  two-phase  (liquid-gas)  cryogenic  detectors  of  ionizing  radiation
based  on  gas  electron  multipliers  (GEMs)  and  operated  in  an  avalanche  mode  in  pure  noble  gases.  The  gas
amplification in He, Ar and Kr is systematically studied at low temperatures, using triple-GEM multipliers. High
gains,  exceeding  104,  were  obtained  in  these  gases  in  the  range  of  120-300  K.  Stable  electron  avalanching  was
demonstrated in a saturated Kr vapor in the two-phase mode.  These results are relevant for understanding basic
mechanisms  of  electron  avalanching  at  low  temperatures  and  for  applications  in  cryogenic  particle  detectors,  in
particular in dark matter and solar neutrino detectors.

Keywords: Gas Electron Multipliers; cryogenic detectors; two-phase detectors; noble gases.
PACs: 29.40.Cs; 34.80.My.

1.  Introduction

in 

high-energy 

Cryogenic  detectors  of  ionizing  radiation  are
relevant  mostly  in  the  field  of  noble  liquid
calorimetry, 
physics
experiments.  Practically  all  such  detectors  are
operated  in  an  ionization  mode,  i.e.  without
internal  amplification.  On  the  other  hand,  for
those cryogenic experiments where the primary
ionization signal is weak, such as those of solar
neutrino  [1]  and  dark  matter  detection  [2],  it
would  be  very  attractive  to  operate  in  the
electron-avalanching mode.

                                                     

*  Corresponding author. Email: buzulu@inp.nsk.su

It  should  be  remarked  that  the  choice  of  the
gas mixture for operation at low temperatures is
limited  due  to  the  fact  that  most  organic
additives used in wire chambers are frozen out.
Moreover,  some  of  them  should  be  avoided:  it
was  reported  that  the  wire  chamber  aging  is
dramatically  enhanced  at  low  temperatures  in
mixtures  containing  CH4  [3].  Obviously,  the
operation  with  pure  noble  gases  would  solve
the  problem.  Namely,  the  solution  might  be  if
one  would  obtain  the  electron  avalanching
either in the noble liquid itself, in single-phase
detectors, or in the gas phase above the liquid,
in  two-phase  detectors.  However,  the  attempts

1

high 

obtain 

to 
avalanche
and 
amplification  at  low  temperatures  had  a  rather
limited success.

stable 

rather 

Indeed, 

low  gains 

(<100)  were
observed at low temperatures in liquid Xe [4,5]
and  Ar  [6]  and  in  gaseous  Ar  [7]  using  wire,
needle  or  micro-strip  proportional  counters.
Moreover,  two-phase  detectors  [8-12],  which
initially  seemed  to  solve  the  problem,  turned
out to have unstable operation in the avalanche
mode:  gain  instabilities  observed  in  two-phase
Kr and Xe [9-12] were believed to arise due to
condensation  of  a  saturated  vapor  on  wire
electrodes.

The  electron  avalanching  in  dense  noble
gases (i.e. at low temperatures, in liquid phase,
at  high  pressures)  has  a  fundamental  interest
itself. For example, it was proposed that a new
avalanche  mechanism,  namely  the  associative
ionization  (the  Hornbeck-Molnar  process  [13])
dominates in light noble gases at high densities
[14].  And  the  temperature  dependence  of
avalanche  processes  might  help  to  test  this
hypothesis.  Another  interesting  feature  is  the
possible  formation  of  ion  clusters  at  low
temperatures  [15].  Little  is  known  however
about electron avalanching at low temperatures.
To our knowledge, there are only a few  works
dealing with this matter: in liquid Xe [4] and in
gaseous He near 4 K [16].

it 

is  known 

temperatures, 

at 
low 
that  of 

We  will  show  that  the  problem  of  electron
and
avalanching 
consequently 
the  development  of
cryogenic avalanche detectors, might be solved
using  Gas  Electron  Multipliers  (GEMs)  [17].
the  multi-GEM
Indeed, 
that 
structures provide high gains (‡
 104) in all pure
noble gases at room temperatures [18-21]. First
evidences  that  the  multi-GEM  structures  can
successfully  operate  at  low  temperatures  in
gaseous  and 
two-phase  modes  have  been
recently  presented  in  our  work  [22].  In  the
present  paper  we  elaborate  on  this  subject.
Namely, we present the detailed description of
experimental  procedures,  describe  the  triple-
GEM  performance  at  low  temperatures  in

systematically 

gaseous  and  two-phase  modes  (in  He,  Ar  and
Kr), 
electron
avalanching  as  a  function  of  temperature  and
give the interpretation of the results.

study 

the 

2. Experimental setup and procedure

The  experimental  setup  is  shown  in  Fig.1.
The  cryogenic  avalanche  detector  is  a  cryostat
with  three  GEM  foils  mounted  in  cascade
inside.  The  cryostat  consists  of  a  vacuum-
insulated chamber of a volume of 2.5 l, coupled
to  a  flange  with  a  number  of  high-voltage
feedthroughs  using  an  In  seal.  Two  stainless
steel  windows,  0.1  mm  thick  and  10  mm
diameter  each,  are  made  at  the  bottom  of  the
chamber  to  transmit  ionizing  radiation.  The
cryostat  is  cooled  using  a  heat  exchanger
mounted  on  the  flange,  filled  with  liquid
nitrogen.  The  temperature  inside  is  measured
using a thermocouple, placed in the vicinity of
the GEM assembly. The GEMs were produced
by 
the
the  CERN  workshop.  They  have 
following  parameters:  50  m m  thick  Kapton,  70
and  55  m m  hole  diameter  on  the  metal  and
kapton  center  respectively,  140  m m  hole  pitch,
28· 28 mm2 active area. The distances between
the  first  GEM  and  the  chamber  bottom  and
between  the  GEMs  are  5  mm  and  2  mm,
respectively.  Electrical  connections  inside  the
chamber  are  provided  using  teflon-insulated
wires.

The  cryostat  was  operated  at  pressures
reaching  3  atm  either  in  the  gaseous  mode,  in
He, Ar and Kr, or in the two-phase (liquid-gas)
mode, in Kr. It was filled with He, Ar or Kr of
a  purity  higher  than  99.99%.  In  addition,  the
oxygen impurity in Kr was reduced to a level of
2· 10-6 using a purification system of the liquid
Kr  calorimeter  [23].  To  further  minimize
impurities  in  He  and  Ar,  these  gases  were
passed  through  a  liquid  nitrogen  trap  when
filling the chamber.

The  detector  was  irradiated  with  an  X-ray
tube,  having  a  molybdenum  or  rhenium  target.
The  voltage  and  current  supplied  to  the  tube

2

were  in  the  range  of  20-40  kV  and  below  60
m A,  respectively.  Typical  X-ray  fluxes  (fluxes
of  absorbed  photons)  vary  from  102  to  104  s-
1mm-2. In the two-phase mode, the detector was
b -particles  from  90Sr
also 
source.

irradiated  with 

is 

important 

In  the  gaseous  mode,  either  the  copper  foil
(not  shown  in  Fig.1),  in  He  and  Ar,  or  the
bottom  of  the  chamber  made  of  stainless  steel
(SS),  in  He  and  Kr,  acted  as  a  cathode,  thus
providing two different cathode materials. This
for  studying  photon
option 
feedback  effects.  In  the  two-phase  mode,  only
the  bottom  of  the  chamber  acted  as  a  cathode:
an  ionization  produced  in  the  liquid  was
extracted into the gas phase by an electric field,
where  it  was  detected  with  the  help  of  the
multi-GEM  multiplier  operated  in  a  saturated
vapor  (Fig.1).  The  characteristic  properties  of
operation  in  the  gaseous  and  two-phase  modes
will be presented in appropriate sections.

a  divider  protects 

The  GEM  electrodes  were  biased  through  a
resistive high-voltage divider placed outside the
cryostat,  as  shown  in  Fig.2.  The  characteristic
property of the divider was that it consisted of
three  identical  circuits  connected  in  parallel,
each  GEM  element  being  connected  to  one  of
them.  Such 
against
discharges  induced  by  ion  feedback  between
GEM  elements:  even  if  one  element  breaks-
the  electrical  potentials  on  other
down, 
elements  do  not  increase.  This  is  not  the  case
when  using  a  single-circuit  divider:  we
observed  that  all  GEM  elements  could  be
destroyed after even a few discharges in Kr and
Xe.

i.e. 

The  anode  signals  were  recorded  from  the
last  electrode  of  the  third  GEM  (GEM3  in
in  a  “3GEM”  configuration
Fig.1), 
according to terminology of Ref. [18], either in
a  current  or  pulse-counting  mode.  In  the  latter
case, a charge-sensitive amplifier was used with
a  10  ns  rise  time,  8  m s  decay  time  and
sensitivity of 0.5 V/pC.

Both in the gaseous and two-phase modes, the
gain  value  was  defined  as  the  anode  current,

in 

induced 

recorded  from  the  third  GEM,  divided  by  the
primary  ionization  current 
the
cathode gap.  The latter current was determined
in special measurements where the cathode gap
was operated in ionization mode, the first GEM
acting  as  an  anode.  The  maximum  attainable
gain  was  defined  as  that  at  which  no  dark
currents or discharges were observed for half a
minute.

in 

that 

than 

rather 

The  basic  idea  of  operation  in  the  3GEM
configuration 
of
3GEM+PCB,  i.e.  without  a  printed-circuit-
board  (PCB)  electrode,  is  to  be  sensitive  to
signals  induced  by  ions  drifting  through  the
GEM  holes.  In  principal,  this  would  allow  to
see  whether  the  ion-induced  signal  in  an
avalanche  depends  on  temperature,  which  may
occur  for  example  due  to  the  formation  of  ion
clusters. In order to be sensitive to such signals
ions
those 
only  and  not 
backdrifting  between  the  third  and  second
GEMs,  the  grounding  capacitor  (C1  in  Fig.2)
was connected to the first electrode of the third
GEM.

induced  by 

to 

3. Gaseous mode in He, Ar and Kr

impact 

3.1 Experimental procedure
In  the  gaseous  mode  the  measurements  were
performed  at  a  constant  gas  density:  after  the
filling was completed, the gas supply was shut
off. This allows to observe temperature effects
induced  by  avalanche  mechanisms  other  than
the  electron 
is
independent  of  temperature),  in  particular  by
those  of  atomic  collisions.  In  addition,  this
allows  to  estimate  the  average  temperature
inside the chamber monitoring the pressure: for
an ideal gas at a constant density the pressure is
proportional  to  temperature.  And  all  the  gases
studied  can  be  considered  as  ideal  with  an
accuracy of a few percents.

ionization 

(which 

Cooling and measurement procedures in light
(He)  and  heavy  (Ar  and  Kr)  noble  gases  were
somewhat different. In He, the cooling and the
measurements were carried out simultaneously.

3

Such  a  procedure  benefits  from  additional
purification of He, since most impurities would
condense  on  the  heat  exchanger,  at  liquid
nitrogen temperature.

In  contrast,  in  Ar  and  Kr  the  measurements
were  carried  out  after  the  cooling  procedure
was  completed  (down  to  a  given  temperature),
namely  after  the  liquid  nitrogen  evaporated
completely  from  the  heat  exchanger.  This  was
to avoid Ar and Kr gas condensation at the heat
exchanger during  the  measurements;  otherwise
the gas density would decrease to an uncertain
value  (the  absence  of  condensate  inside  the
chamber  was  verified  monitoring  pressure  and
temperature).

These  procedures  however  may  result  in  the
appearance  of  some  temperature  gradients  (up
to 5 degrees) between the top and the bottom of
the  chamber,  in  particular  induced  by  a  heat
inleakage  from  the  flange.  The  temperature
gradient results in some density gradient, which
is presumably responsible for systematic errors
shown in the following figures. The errors were
determined  comparing  data 
from  several
measurement runs. The temperatures presented
in the following figures, relevant to the gaseous
the
mode, 
thermocouple, i.e. near the chamber bottom.

those  measured  using 

are 

3.2 Electron avalanching
The electron avalanching at low temperatures
was  observed  in  all  the  noble  gases  studied.
Fig.3 shows the triple-GEM gain as a  function
of the temperature in He, Ar and Kr at constant
operation  voltages  and  constant  gas  densities
corresponding to pressures at room temperature
of 3, 1 and 1 atm respectively.

that 

in  He 

the  gain 

One  can  see 

is
independent of the temperature in the range  of
120-300  K.    The  fact  that  the  gain  does  not
decrease when decreasing temperature rules out
the  effect  of  all  organic  and  most  inorganic
impurities  on  the  avalanche  mechanism:  they
would  be  frozen  out.  That  means  that  the
unexpectedly  high  gains 
ionization
coefficients  observed  earlier  in  dense  He  at

and 

room  temperatures  [20,14]  are  not  due  to
Penning ionization of impurities. Consequently,
alternative
supports 
this 
of
the 
explanation, 
associative ionization [14].

the 
hypothesis 

indirectly 

namely 

In  Ar 

and  Kr 

the  gain-temperature
dependence is somewhat different from that of
He  (Fig.3):  the  gain  first  increases  by  a  factor
of  2-3  when  decreasing  temperature  by  50
degrees  and  then  goes  onto  plateau.  The
variation in gain of a factor of 2 corresponds to
a  considerably  smaller  variation  in  ionization
coefficient, of about 10% at a gain of 1000, due
to  the  fact  that  the  gain  is  an  exponential
function of the ionization coefficient. Therefore
the  relative  contribution  of  the  mechanism
responsible for the gain increase in Ar and Kr is
small, of about 10%. This mechanism might be
due  to  the  atomic  collision-induced  ionization,
ionization.  It
the  associative 
in  particular 
should  be  remarked  that  the  cross-section  of
associative  ionization  could  increase,  decrease
or be independent of temperature, depending on
atomic  potentials  and  collision  energies,
similarly 
[24,25].
Unfortunately,  theoretical  predictions  for  He,
Ar  and  Kr  are  not  available,  so  that  the
associative  ionization  hypothesis  cannot  be
tested  at 
temperature
the  moment  using 
dependence.

to  Penning 

ionization 

Gain-voltage  characteristics  of  the  triple-
GEM at room and low temperatures in gaseous
He  and  Ar  are  shown  in  Fig.4  and  in  gaseous
Kr  in  Fig.5(top).  In  He,  the  characteristic  is
shown  at  123  K  only,  since  it  coincides  with
that of room temperature. In He and Ar, the gas
densities  correspond  to  pressures  at  room
temperature of 3 and 1 atm respectively. In Kr,
the data sets for two different gas densities are
presented  corresponding  to  pressures  at  room
temperature of 1 and 2.5 atm. The latter density
is equal to the density of saturated Kr vapor in
the  two-phase  mode  at  1  atm;  a  comparison
between the gaseous and two-phase modes will
be done in section 4.3.

4

 One  can  see  that  rather  high  gains  are
reached  in  all  gases  at  low  temperatures.  In
particular, the maximum gain exceeds 105 and a
few  tens  of  thousands  in  He  and  Ar  and  Kr,
respectively.  Note  that  the  slopes  of  the  gain
curves  in  Ar  and  Kr  slightly  increase  at  low
temperatures,  thus  suggesting  a  small  increase
of ionization coefficients as discussed above.

3.3 Charging-up effect
One  of  the  main  objectives  of  the  current
study  was  to  check  if  GEMs  could  operate  at
low  temperatures.  It  is  known  that  GEMs  may
undergo  charging-up  effects  at  high  incident
fluxes  and  high  anode  current  densities,
induced by positive ion deposition on a kapton
surface  [26,27,18].  The  charging-up  effect
manifests 
the  gain-voltage
characteristic  depends  on  the  flux:  the  gain
increase with voltage is faster for higher fluxes.
And  it  might  be  possible  that  the  charging-up
would be so strong at low temperatures due  to
an enhanced resistivity of kapton that the GEM
would  not  be  able  to  operate  even  at  very  low
incident fluxes.

itself 

that 

in 

in 

Indeed, the resistance of a GEM foil increases
by  an  order  of  magnitude  per  30  degrees  as
seen  from  Fig.6:  the  leakage  current  across  a
single  GEM  is  shown  as  a  function  of  the
reciprocal  temperature,  in  He  and  Ar.    Direct
calculations  using  the  surface  resistivity  of
kapton  (about  1016  Ohm  per  square  at  room
temperature  [28])  indicate  that  the  leakage
current  can  be  entirely  dominated  by  surface
the
current 
contribution  due  to  the  bulk  conduction  (with
kapton resisitivity of 1017 Ohm(cid:215) cm [28]) can be
neglected.
The 

the  GEM  holes,  while 

of 
conductivity,  bulk  or  surface,  obeys 
Boltzman-type law:
E A

0
Here  EA 
the
conduction.  Extrapolating  this  dependence  in
Fig.6,  the  kapton  surface  conductivity  would

the  activation  energy  of 

temperature 

dependence 

exp(
is 

the
the

= s

kT

s

)

/

.

decrease  considerably,  by  6  orders  of
magnitude,  when  decreasing  temperature  from
295 to 120 K.

Nevertheless,  we  did  not  observe  any
indication  on  charging-up  effects  at 
low
temperatures,  as  well  as  at  room  temperatures.
In  particular,  Fig.7 
shows  gain-voltage
characteristics  of  the  triple-GEM  in  He  at  144
K  at  different  primary  ionization  fluxes.  One
can see that there is no dependence on the flux,
despite  the  fact  that  the  flux  value  varies  by  2
orders  of  magnitude,  from  9· 103  to  8· 105
electron/(mm2s).    In  Ar,  the  gain  was  also
independent  of  the  flux  at  low  temperatures.
These observations demonstrate that GEMs can
operate  at  low  temperatures  at  high  gains  and
high fluxes regardless of the kapton resistivity,
probably even down to liquid He temperatures.

3.4 Pulse shape and photon feedback
Figs.8-10 show typical anode signals from the
triple-GEM  in  He,  Ar  and  Kr,  using  either  the
Cu  or  stainless  steel  cathode.  Gain  values
indicated  in  the  figures  are  those  estimated  in
the current mode. In general, we do not observe
any  unusual  properties  in  the  shape  of  anode
pulses  induced  just  by  low  temperatures.  This
is  seen  when  comparing  Fig.8(middle) 
to
Fig.8(bottom),  showing    the  anode  signals  in
He  at  295  and  124  K  respectively,  using  the
stainless steel cathode. In both cases the anode
pulse  has  a  characteristic  triangular  shape:  the
linear  pulse  rise  corresponds  to  integration  of
the  primary  signal  induced  by  electrons  and
ions  drifting  through  the  holes  of  the  third
GEM.  This was also valid for signals in Kr at
all temperatures (Fig.10,top) and in Ar at room
temperature  (Fig.9,top).  The  width  of 
the
primary signal in all gases is independent of the
temperatures:  it  is  in  the  range  of  100-200  ns
(FWHM).

Fig.10(top)  shows  a  sample  of  signals
obtained in Kr using the X-ray tube with a Mo
target,  providing  characteristic  X-ray 
lines
around 18 keV. One can see here two groups of
pulses: the group with smaller pulses obviously

5

-
corresponds  to  the  “escape  peak”.  The  rather
high  gain  obtained  in  Kr  at  180  K,  of  about
1.8· 104, should be emphasized.

We did not observe any indication of photon
feedback  using  the  stainless  steel  cathode.  On
the other hand, using the Cu cathode the photon
feedback  effect  was  observed  in  He  at  all
in  accordance  with  earlier
temperatures, 
observations [21]: at high gains, exceeding few
thousands,  the  primary  signal  is  accompanied
by  a  secondary  signal  (Fig.8,top).  Detailed
analysis  of  the  data  of  the  present  work  and
Ref.  [21]  leads  to  a  conclusion  that  secondary
signals are induced mainly by photon feedback
between the last GEM element and the cathode.
The photon feedback results also in faster gain
increase with voltage at high gains: one can see
this comparing data in Fig.4 obtained using the
in  Fig.7
to 
stainless  steel  cathode 
obtained using the Cu cathode.

those 

The photon feedback in He is explained by a
relatively  high  value  (of  about  10%)  of  the
quantum  efficiency  of  the  Cu  photocathode  in
the emission region of He (80 nm) [29]. On the
other  hand,  the  quantum  efficiency  of  Cu  is
considerably reduced at the emission region of
Ar  (130  nm)  and  Kr  (150  nm).  Therefore  the
anode  signal  in  Ar  and  Kr  has  no  secondary
signals at room temperatures, even using the Cu
cathode  (see  Fig.9,top  and  Ref.  [21]).  An
the  photon
interesting  observation 
feedback  in  Ar  appears  at  170  K  as  seen  from
Fig.9(bottom). One of the possible explanations
might  be  the  enhancement  of  the  quantum
low
efficiency  of  Cu  photocathodes  at 
temperatures, similarly to that observed for CsI
photocathodes in liquid Kr and Xe [30].

that 

is 

4. Two-phase mode in Kr

4.1 Experimental procedure
of 
characteristic 
The 

and
two-phase
measurement  procedures 
mode  was  that  the  cryostat  was  connected  to
the  gas  supply  at  all  times,  namely  to  a  40  l
bottle  of  Kr  at  an  initial  pressure  of  1.9  atm.

cooling 
the 

in 

Such an amount of Kr in the system provides a
3  mm  thick  liquid  layer  at  the  end  of  the
cooling  procedure,  at  a  temperature  of  120  K;
such  a  layer  thickness  is  enough  for  full
absorption of X-rays and b -particles.

Since there were no level meters in the setup,
we  used  some  test  procedures  to  be  convinced
of the formation of the liquid phase. It is known
that the electron emission from a liquid into the
gas  phase  has  a  threshold  behavior  due  to  a
potential barrier at the liquid-gas interface [10-
12]:  it  takes  place  only  if  the  electric  field
exceeds  a  critical  value,  of  about  2  kV/cm  in
Kr.  Therefore, the signature for the liquid layer
formation  should  be  a  disappearance  of  the
anode current recorded in the cathode gap (first
GEM acting as an anode) at a field value close
or below the threshold.

This is illustrated in Fig.11 showing the time
evolution,  during  the  cooling  cycle,  of  the
following  quantities:  the  anode  current  in  the
cathode gap at a field of 1.9 kV/cm induced by
X-rays,  the  thermocouple  temperature  and  the
pressure-to-temperature ratio. One can see, that
the current first increases  due  to  increasing  X-
ray  absorption:  this  is  because  the  gas  density
increases  when  decreasing  temperature.  At
some  point,  it  stops  increasing,  corresponding
to full X-ray absorption, and then rapidly drops,
indicating the liquid phase formation.

In  addition,  the  p/T  curve  in  Fig.11  shows  a
kink  at  the  time  corresponding  to  liquid  phase
formation.  This  is  because  the  dependence
between the vapor pressure and the temperature
is  much  stronger  in  two-phase  systems  than  in
single  phase.  Due  to  this  fact,  the  pressure
monitoring in the two-phase mode gives a more
precise  temperature  estimation  than  using  the
thermocouple.  Accordingly,  the  temperatures
presented  in  the  following  figures,  relevant  to
the  two-phase  mode,  are  those  of  estimated
from pressure monitoring.

4.2 Electron collection in the cathode gap
 The  electron  emission  from  liquid  Kr  as  a
function  of  the  electric  field  is  illustrated  in

6

Fig.12.  In  the  gaseous  mode  the  anode  current
recorded  in  the  cathode  gap  is  independent  of
the field. In contrast, in the two-phase mode the
current is recorded only when the electric field
exceeds  2  kV/cm,  as  discussed  above.
Therefore, during the measurements in the two-
phase  mode,  the  electric  field  in  the  cathode
gap  was  kept  above  the  critical  value,  in  the
range of 2.5-3.5 kV/cm. To this extent, the last
resistance  in  the  voltage  divider,  defining  the
electric field in the cathode gap, was increased
by  a  factor  of  3.5  as  compared  to  the  gaseous
mode (Fig.2).

the  collection 

Let  us  estimate 

time  of
electrons  from  liquid  Kr.  The  electron  drift
velocity in liquid Kr at 3 kV/cm is 3· 105 cm/s,
and  the  absorption  length  of  a  20  keV  photon
and  the  range  of  a  1  MeV  electron  are  75  m m
and  1.9  mm  respectively.    Consequently,  the
average drift times of electrons produced by X-
rays  and  b -particles  in  a  3  mm  thick  liquid
to  be  1  and  0.7 m s,
layer  are  estimated 
respectively.   

Now  we  can  estimate  the  electron  collection
efficiency  from  liquid  Kr.  For  the  given
impurity level of oxygen of 2· 10-6, the electron
life-time in liquid Kr is 0.4 m s [12]. Therefore,
the primary ionization signal in liquid Kr would
be  reduced,  due  to  the  electron  capture,  by  a
factor  of  12  and  6  for  X-rays  and  b -particles,
respectively.  The  signal  would  be  further
reduced  due  to  the  fact  that  the  electron
emission  probability  from  liquid  Kr  is  about
60%  at  3  kV/cm  [10,12].  In  addition,  the
electron-ion  recombination  in  the  liquid  may
also  reduce  the  signal,  by  a  factor  of  1.1-1.2
[12,31].  Combined  effect  of  these  factors
results in that the electron collection efficiency
in the cathode gap in the two-phase mode is by
a  factor  of  20  and  10  lower  than  that  in  the
b -particles
gaseous  mode,  for  X-rays  and 
respectively.  This  is  seen  in  Fig.12  for  X-ray-
induced signals.

4.3 Electron avalanching

We have observed the electron avalanching in
the two-phase mode in Kr, in a saturated vapor.
The detector operated for at least an hour in the
two-phase mode without visible degradation of
the  gain.  The 
appropriate  gain-voltage
characteristics  of  the  triple-GEM  are  shown  in
Fig.5(bottom).  Two  data  sets  are  presented,  at
saturated vapor pressures of 0.84 and 1.32 atm
corresponding  to  temperatures  of  118  and  123
K.  At both temperatures the gain  reaches  104.
At 
the  maximum  gain,  some  secondary
processes seem to start playing a role, since the
gain increase with voltage becomes too fast.

The  gaseous  and  two-phase  data  are  in
reasonable  agreement.  At  equal  gas  densities,
the operation voltages and  the  maximum  gains
in the two-phase mode are generally similar to
those  of  the  gaseous  mode:  this  is  seen
comparing 
and
in 
Fig.5(bottom).  This  means  that  the  electron
avalanching  in  the  saturated  vapor  does  not
differ from that of the normal gas, in general.

Fig.5(top) 

data 

Fig.10(bottom) further illustrates the detector
performance  in  the  two-phase  mode:  anode
signals of the triple-GEM are shown at a vapor
pressure  of  0.94  atm,  corresponding  to  a
temperature of 119 K. The signals are induced
by b -particles of  90Sr. From this figure one can
deduce  the  collection  efficiency  of  electrons
created in liquid Kr by b -particles. Taking into
account  the  average  pulse-height  (A=0.6  V),
amplifier calibration (k=0.5 V/pC), triple-GEM
gain  (G=900),  average  energy  deposited  in  the
b -particles  (E=1  MeV),  energy
liquid  by 
needed for ion pair creation in liquid Kr (W=20
eV) and using the formula
kA
/
the collection efficiency turns out to be e=17%.
This  is  not  far  from  the  value  calculated  in
section 4.2 (10%).

/
WEG

e=

,

Comparing  Fig.10(top)  and  Fig.10(bottom),
one  may  conclude  that  the  pulse  shape  in  the
two-phase mode does not differ from that of the
gaseous mode. One should notice however that
the pulse-height in the two-phase mode is larger

7

than that in the gaseous mode, despite  the  fact
that the gain is by a factor of 20 lower. This is
because  the  energy  deposited  by  b -particles  in
liquid  Kr  (~1  MeV)  is  much  larger  than  that
deposited by X-rays in gaseous Kr (~20 keV).

coefficients 

It  is  interesting  to  estimate  the  Townsend
ionization 
from  gain-voltage
characteristics and to compare them at different
temperatures and gas densities. Here we follow
the  approach  described  in  Ref.  [14]:  the  GEM
hole is approximated by a parallel-plate counter
with  an  electric  field  taken  equal  to  that
calculated  in  the  center  of  the  hole.  The  result
is  presented  in  Fig.13:  the  reduced  ionization
coefficient (i.e. normalized to atomic density) is
shown  as  a  function  of  the  reduced  electric
field.  The important observation is the scaling
behavior  of  ionization  coefficients  obtained  in
the two-phase mode at different pressures: this
confirms  that  the  data  presented  in  Fig.5  are
consistent.  Also,  the  data  obtained  at  room
temperature  are  in  reasonable  agreement  with
those  taken  from  literature  obtained  at  low
pressures 
the
ionization  coefficients  obtained  in  the  two-
phase  mode  at  118  and  123  K  are  somewhat
larger  than  at  room  temperature,  by  about  a
factor of 1.5. This fact supports the conclusion
made 
the  avalanche
mechanism in Kr is somewhat modified at low
temperatures.

the  other  hand, 

in  section  3.2 

[32].  On 

that 

 In section 4.2 we demonstrated the existence
of  the  liquid  phase  in  an  ionization  mode
(Fig.12).  To  demonstrate  this  in  an  avalanche
mode,  special-purpose  measurements  were
carried out. The idea is based on the fact that a
considerably  larger  energy  is  deposited  by  b -
particles  in  the  liquid  compared  to  that  of  the
ionization
gas.  Accordingly, 
current  in  the  cathode  gap  in  the  two-phase
mode  was  compared  to  that  of  the  gaseous
mode.  This  current  is  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the
anode  current  of  the  triple-GEM  to  its  gain:
IC=IA/G. Fig.14 shows this ratio as a function of
the  pressure.  Gain  values  in  the  two-phase
mode,  for  given  voltages  and  gas  densities,

the  primary 

in 

the 

were  calculated  from  Fig.13  using  the  fitted
(dashed)  curve.  The  gain  variations  are  rather
range  of  7· 102-1.5· 104.
large: 
Nevertheless,  two-phase  data  points  in  Fig.14
are  grouped 
the  difference
together  and 
between  the  two-phase  and  gaseous  modes  is
distinctly seen: it is of a factor of 10.

in 

the 

One  can  notice,  that  systematic  errors  in
Figs.5,12-14 in the two-phase mode are always
larger than in the gaseous mode. This is due to
rather  large  fluctuations  of  primary  ionization
two-phase  mode
current  observed 
(Fig.12).  We  suppose  that  these  fluctuations
were  induced  by  surface  waves  in  the  liquid,
generated  by  drops  of  condensed  Kr  falling
the
the  heat  exchanger.  Indeed, 
from 
measurements  where  the  liquid  nitrogen  in  the
heat exchanger was replaced with cold gaseous
nitrogen,  thus  providing  lower  condensation
rate of Kr, the fluctuations were  reduced.  This
is  seen  in  Fig.5(bottom),  where  the  data  set
with  larger  errors  was  obtained  with  liquid
nitrogen in the heat exchanger, while that with
smaller errors with cold gaseous nitrogen. This
also  means  that  in  the  future  design  of  two-
phase  detectors  one  should  avoid  the  presence
of the surface waves.

in 

  5. Conclusions

We have studied the performances of gaseous
and  two-phase  (liquid-gas)  cryogenic  detectors
of  ionizing  radiation  based  on  gas  electron
multipliers 
in  an
avalanche  mode  in  pure  noble  gases.  We
confirmed the results obtained in Ref. [22].

(GEMs)  and  operated 

Using  triple-GEM  multipliers,  the  electron
avalanching  was  systematically  studied  in  He,
Ar  and  Kr  in  the  range  of  120-300  K.    High
gains,  exceeding  104,  were  obtained  in  these
gases  at  low  temperatures.  In  He,  the  electron
avalanching is independent of  the  temperature.
In  Ar  and  Kr,  it  has  moderate  temperature
dependence: the gain increases by a factor of 1-
5 when decreasing temperature.

8

The performances of triple-GEM structures in
the two-phase mode in Kr were investigated. In
particular,  a  stable  electron  avalanching  was
demonstrated  in  a  saturated  vapor  in  Kr;  gain
values,  exceeding  103,  were  obtained.    In
general, the electron avalanching in a saturated
vapor  does  not  differ  from  that  of  the  normal
gas, in terms of gain-voltage characteristics and
pulse-shapes.

No  charging-up  effects  were  observed  in  He
and Ar indicating  that  the  GEM  structures  can
temperatures,
successfully  operate  at 
probably even down to liquid He temperatures.
Using  a  Cu  cathode,  photon  feedback  effects
were observed in He and Ar.

low 

The 

relevant 

results  obtained  are 

for
understanding  basic  mechanisms  of  electron
avalanching  at 
temperatures  and  for
applications  in  cryogenic  particle  detectors,  in
particular  for  dark  matter  and  solar  neutrino
detectors.  Further  studies  of  this  technique  are
on the way.

low 

Acknowledgements

The  research  described  in  this  publication
was made possible in part by Award No. 2550
of  the  U.S.  Civilian  Research  &  Development
Foundation  for  the  Independent  States  of  the
Former  Soviet  Union  (CRDF).  This  work  has
the  possible
been  partially  motivated  by 
application  in  cryogenic  two-phase  detectors
for  solar  neutrino  and  dark  matter  search.  We
are  indebted  to  Prof.  W.  Willis  and  Drs.  J.
Dodd  and  M.  Leltchouk,  of  the  Columbia
University,  and  Dr.  D.  Tovey,  of  the  Sheffield
University, 
these
applications.

for  having 

suggested 

References

1. 

J.  Dodd,  M.  Leltchouk,  V.  Radeka,  P.  Rehak,  V.
Tcherniatine,  W.  J.  Willis,  Private  communication
and  the  report  on  “The  Nevis  Laboratories  Summer
2000  Education  Workshop”,  BNL  and  Columbia
University  (Nevis  Laboratories),  2000,  unpublished.
See also http://www.nevis.columbia.edu/~ebubble/.

2.  D. Y. Akimov, Instr. Exp. Tech. 44 (2001) 575, and

references therein.

3.  L.  M.  Barkov  et  al.,  Proc.  of  Int.  Conf.  on  Instrum.
for  Colliding  Beam  Physics,  SLAC,  Stanford,  1982,
p.58.

4.  S. E. Derenzo, T. S. Mast, H. Zaklad, R. A.  Muller,

Phys. Rev. A 9 (1974) 2582.

5.  A. P. L. Policarpo et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 365

6. 

(1995) 568.
J. G. Kim, S. M. Dardin, K. H. Jackson, R. W. Kadel,
J. A. Kadyk, V. Peskov, W. A. Wenzel, IEEE Trans.
Nucl. Sci. 49 (2002) 1851.

7.  V.G. Grebinnik, V. K. Dodokhov, V. A. Zhukov, A.
B.  Lazarev,  A.  A.  Nozdrin,  V.  A.  Stolupin,  V.  I.
Travkin, Instr. Exp. Tech. 30 (1978) 44.

8.  B. A. Dolgoshein, V.N. Lebedenko, B. U. Rodionov,

JETP Letters, 11 (1970) 513.

9.  B. A. Dolgoshein, A. A. Kruglov, V. N. Lebedenko,
V.  P.  Miroshnichenko,  B.  U.  Rodionov,  Physics  of
Elementary  Particles  and  Atomic  Nuclear  4  (1973)
167 (in Russian).

10.  A. Bolozdynya, Instr. Exp. Tech. 28 (1985) 265, and

references therein.

11.  A.  Bolozdynya,  V.  Egorov,  B.  Rodionov,  V.
Miroshnichenko,  IEEE  Trans.  Nucl.  Sci.  42  (1995)
565, and references therein.

12.  A.  S.  Barabash,  A.  I.  Bolozdynya,  Liquid  ionization

detectors, Energoizdat, Moscow, 1993 (in Russian).

13.  J. Hornbeck, J. Molnar, Phys. Rev. 84 (1951) 621
14.  A. Buzulutskov, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 494 (2002)

148, and references therein.

15.  A.  G.  Khrapak,  I.  T.  Iakubov,  Electrons  in  dense
gases  and  plasma,  Nauka,  Moscow,  1981  (in
Russian).

16.  S.  Masaoka,  R.  Katano,  S.  Kishimoto,  Y.  Isozumi,

Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B 171 (2000) 360.

17.  F. Sauli, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 386 (1997) 531.
18.  A. Buzulutskov, A. Breskin, R. Chechik, G. Garty, F.
Sauli,  L.  Shekhtman,  Nucl.  Instr.  and  Meth.  A  443
(2000) 164, and references therein.

19.  A.  Bondar,  A.  Buzulutskov,  L.  Shekhtman,  Nucl.

Instr. and Meth.  A 481 (2002) 200.

20.  A.  Bondar,  A.  Buzulutskov,  L.  Shekhtman,  V.
Snopkov,  A.  Vasiljev,  Nucl.  Instr.  and  Meth.  A  493
(2002) 8.

21.  V.  Aulchenko,  A.  Bondar,  A.  Buzulutskov,  L.
Shekhtman,  R.  Snopkov,  Y.  Tikhonov,  Nucl.  Instr.
and Meth. A 513 (2003) 256.

22.  A.  Buzulutskov,  A.  Bondar,  L.  Shekhtman,  R.
Snopkov,  Y.  Tikhonov,  First  results  from  cryogenic
avalanche detectors based on gas electron multipliers,
E-print  at  www.arxiv.org  physics/0308010,  IEEE
Trans. Nucl. Sci 50, No.6 (2003).

23.  V.M. Aulchenko et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 394

(1997) 35.

24.  R. E. Olson, Phys. Rev. A 6 (1972) 1031.

9

25.  B.  M.  Smirnov,  Excited  atoms,  Energoizdat,

Moscow, 1982 (in Russian).

26.  R. Bouclier, W. Dominik, M. Hoch,  J.  C.  Labbe,  G.
Million,  L.  Ropelewski,  F.  Sauli,  A.  Sharma,  G.
Manzin, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 396 (1997) 50.
27.  A. Bressan, A. Buzulutskov, L. Ropelewski, F. Sauli,

L. Shekhtman, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 423 (1999) 119.

28.  DuPont 

High 
http://www.dupont.com/kapton.

Performance 

Materials,

29.  B. B. Cairns, J. A. R. Samson, J. Opt. Soc. Amer. 56

(1966) 1568.

30.  E. Aprile, A. Bolotnikov, D. Chen, F. Xu, V. Peskov,

Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 353 (1994) 55.

31.  S.  Kubota,  M.  Hishida,  M.  Suzuki,  J.  Ruan,  Phys.

32.  Yu.  P.  Raizer,  Gas  Discharge  Physics,  Springer,

Rev. B 20 (1980) 3486.

Berlin, 1997.

Fig.1 Schematic view of the cryogenic avalanche detector
operated  in  the  gaseous  and  two-phase  modes  in  He,  Ar
and Kr.

Fig.2 Electrical connections of  the  triple-GEM  to  a  high-
voltage divider and readout electronics.

10

Fig.3 Triple-GEM gain as a function of the temperature at
constant  operation  voltages  and  constant  gas  densities  in
He,  Ar  and  Kr.  The  appropriate  atomic  densities  are
indicated.

Fig.5 Triple-GEM gain as a function of the voltage across
each  GEM  in  Kr  in  the  gaseous  (top)  and  two-phase
(bottom) modes. The appropriate temperatures and atomic
densities of the gas phase are indicated.

Fig.4 Triple-GEM gain as a function of the voltage across
each  GEM  in  He  and  Ar.  The  appropriate  temperatures
and atomic densities are indicated.

11

Fig.6 Leakage current of a single GEM as a function of the
reciprocal  temperature  in  He  and  Ar,  at  constant  gas
densities and constant GEM voltages. The atomic densities
are 7.5· 1019 and 2.5· 1019 cm-3, respectively.

Fig.7 Triple-GEM gain as a function of the voltage across
each  GEM  in  He  at  144  K,  at  three  primary  ionization
fluxes  induced  by  X-rays.  The  appropriate  pressure  and
density are indicated.

Fig.8 A typical anode signal from the triple-GEM in He, at
room  and  low  temperatures,  at  an  atomic  density  of
7.5· 1019 cm-3. Top: at 295 K and gain of 3· 104, using the
Cu cathode. Middle: at 295 K and gain of 6· 103, using the
stainless  steel  cathode.  Bottom:  at  124  K  and  gain  of
6· 103,  using  the  stainless  steel  cathode.  The  signals  are
induced by X-rays.

12

Fig.9 A typical anode signal from the triple-GEM in Ar, at
room  and  low  temperatures,  using  the  Cu  cathode,  at  an
atomic density of 2.5· 1019 cm-3. Top: at 295 K and gain of
2· 103.  Bottom:  at  170  K  and  gain  of  6· 103.  The  signals
are induced by X-rays.

Fig.10  Anode  signals  from  the  triple-GEM  in  Kr  in  the
gaseous and two-phase modes. Top: in the gaseous mode
at  180  K,  0.61  atm  and  gain  of  1.8· 104.  Bottom:  in  the
two-phase  mode  at  119  K,  0.94  atm  and  gain  of  9· 102.
The  signals  are  induced  by  X-rays  and  b -particles,
respectively.

13

Fig.11  Time  evolution  of  several  parameters  during  the
cooling  cycle  in  the  two-phase  mode.  Shown  are  the
thermocouple  temperature,  pressure-to-temperature  ratio
and anode current recorded in the cathode gap at a field of
1.9 kV/cm (induced by X-rays).

Fig.13 Reduced ionization coefficient as a function of the
reduced  electric  field  in  two-phase  and  gaseous  Kr,
obtained  from  gain-voltage  characteristics  of  Fig.5.  Also
shown  are  the  data  taken  from  literature  obtained  at  low
pressures [32] (solid curve) and the fit by two-phase data
points (dashed curve).

Fig.12  Anode  current  recorded  in  the  cathode  gap  as  a
function  of  the  electric  field  in  Kr,  in  the  two-phase  (at
122 K and 1.23 atm) and gaseous (at 137 K and 1.67 atm)
modes. The current is induced by X-rays.

Fig.14 Ratio of the anode current to the gain of the triple-
GEM  as  a  function  of  the  pressure,  in  gaseous  and  two-
phase Kr, at gains varying in the range of 7· 102-1.5· 104.
The current is induced by b -particles.

14

