SUMMARY OF WORKING GROUP ON SINGLE BEAM HIGH
LUMINOSITY ISSUES

S. Guiducci, LNF, Frascati, Italy, C. Zhang, IHEP, Beijing, CHINA

confirmed model calculation and results of magnetic field
measurement.

Abstract

The  aim  of  the  Working  Group  on  Single  Beam
Behaviour  was  to  concentrate  on  the  items  limiting  the
achievement of high luminosity. Some are related to high
current  and  short  bunch  distance,  as  electron  cloud
instability  (ECI),  the  others  to  the  lattice  design,  as
Dynamic  Aperture  (DA),  wigglers,  Interaction  Region
(IR)  design,  lifetime  and  background.  These  arguments
have  been  discussed  to  explore  the  feasibility  of  a  very
high luminosity F-factory.

INTRODUCTION
Effect  of  wigglers  on  the  beam  and  electron  cloud
instability,  which  affect  the  possibility  of  achieving  high
luminosity,  was  discussed  in  two  dedicated  talks.  A
general  presentation  on  the  Beijing  t-charm  project,  the
BEPCII,  has  reviewed  all  the  accelerator  physics  issues
relevant  to  a  low  energy  collider.  Other  talks  have  been
focused  on  the  study  of  an  ultra  high  luminosity  F -
factory.  For  this  design  a  new  lattice,  was  presented  and
the  problems  related  to  the  IR  design,  lifetime  and
background were discussed.

WIGGLERS
To  increase  the  beam-beam  limit  threshold  it  is
necessary  to  have  strong  radiation  damping.  Wiggler
magnets  are  used  to  increase  radiation  damping  at  low
energy  machines  as,  for  example,  in  DAFNE.  A  large
number  of  superconducting  wigglers  (B  =  2.1T,  length
18.2 m) will be used in CESR-c to operate the collider at
a  lower  energy  as  a  t-factory  [1].  In  order  to  avoid  the
harmful  effects  of  nonlinearity  in  the  magnetic  field
special care has been adopted in the following operations:

Simulations

•  Magnetic design and field calculation
•  Magnetic measurements
• 
•  Beam based characterization.
poles) and  asymmetric  (8  poles)  structure  have  been
developed, built and tested. Magnetic field measurement

Two  versions  of  wiggler  magnets  with  symmetric  (7

revealed that the magnets with asymmetric structure have
significantly  less  variation  of  integrated  magnetic  field
properties with excitation.

  Beam  based  characterization  has  been  done  by

measuring  the  vertical  beam  size  in  the  tune  plane  (see
Fig.  1),  showing  the  coupling  resonances,  and  by
measuring  the  tunes  as  a  function  of  a  displaced  orbit.
Beam  based  characterization  of  the  wiggler  magnets

Fig. 1: Vertical beam size vs. tune at various wiggler
fields.

ELECTRON CLOUD INSTABILITY
A  general  description of  the  problem  and  the  status of
simulations  and  measurements  [2]  have  been  presented.
In  particular  the  work  done  at  CERN  and  the  simulation
code  developed  there  have  been  described.  This
instability is an important luminosity limitation for the B-
factories.  Up  to  now  currents  as  large  as  2A  have  been
stored  in  DAF NE  and  no  evidence  of  ECI  has  been
observed.  In  order  to  make  predictions  for  future
machines  it  is  important  to  find  an  agreement  between
measurements  and  calculations.  Study  is  needed  on
simulations  to  improve  the  model  used,  but  also
measurements  on  the  electron  yield  in  the  vacuum
chamber are very important as input to simulation codes.
At  LNF  a  solid  state  physics  laboratory  to  make  these
measurements  is  in  preparation.  DAFNE  is  a  good
benchmark  for  simulation  codes  because  they  foresee  a
large effect that has not been observed. Some effects that
might  explain  the  discrepancy,  like  the  special  shape  of
the vacuum chamber (with antechamber) and the fact that
magnetic elements are very close to each other, have to be
included in the code.

A  new  code,  based  on  Ohmi’s  model,  has  been
developed to evaluate this effect for BEPCII. Fig. 2 shows
how the EC density is reduced for an elliptical pipe with
antechamber.  To guarantee the beam performance against
ECI, precaution methods, successfully adopted in PEP-II
and KEKB, have been foreseen:

•  Antechamber
• 
• 
•  Clearing electrodes (R&D)

TiN coating of the inner surface
Solenoid winding (as backup)

Fig.2: EC density with and without antechamber.

ACCELERATOR PHYSICS ISSUES IN
BEPCII
BEPC-II  is  the  upgrade  of  the  present  BEPC  to  a
double ring collider with a luminosity increase by a factor
100 at 1.89 GeV. It has to be operated also as synchrotron
radiation  source,  at  2.5  GeV,  using  the  existing  beam
lines. The main machine parameters are listed in Table 1.
A very general review of the accelerator physics issues of
the BEPCII has been given [3] including lattice, dynamic
aperture,  lifetime,  ion  trapping,  ECI,  impedance  budget
and instabilities, beam-beam effects.

Table 1- BEPC-II parameters

Energy range
Luminosity @1.89 GeV
Circumference
Natural emittance
bx*, by*
Bunch length length
Crossing angle
Bunch distance
Current @1.89 GeV

1 ~ 2 GeV
1033 cm-2 s-1
238 m
0.14 m rad
1.0, .015 m
0.015 m
± 11mrad
2.4 m
0.91 A

A  summary  of  the  single  beam  effects  study  is  given

below:

•  With the present impedance budget a bunch length

less than by

* is estimated

•  Coupled  bunch  instabilities  and  fast  beam  ion
instability  in  e-  ring  can  be  damped  with  a
feedback system.

•  A  gap  in  the  bunch  train  is  needed  to  avoid  ion

trapping.

•  Antechamber  (TiN  coated)  is  adopted  to  reduce

• 

EC; further study is underway.
Single beam lifetime is about 3.1 hours; with top-
off  injection  the  average  luminosity  should  be
larger than 6¥1032 cm-2 s-1.

Beam-beam  simulations  have  been  done  to  choose  the
working  point  and  study  the  effect  of  crossing  angle.
According  to  simulations  the  luminosity  is  reduced  by  a
factor  .8,  due  to  hourglass  and  crossing  angle,  and  the
design  value  x y  ~0.04  is  reachable.  Some  further
simulations  should  be  done  including  coherent  beam-
beam effects by strong-strong simulations.

ULTRA HIGH LUMINOSITY F-FACTORY
In  a  low  energy  collider  as  a  F -factory,  increasing
currents  and  number  of  bunches  is  not  enough  to  reach
ultra high luminosity.  The  beams  have  to  be  squeezed  at
the  Interaction  Point  (IP)  as  much  as  possible  and  the
beam-beam  tune  shift  has  to  be  increased.  Hence  new
ideas are needed.

At  present  there  are  two  catalogues  of  approach  for
high  luminosity  :   one  is  the  methods  used  at  present
factories  (two  rings,  crossing  angle,  flat  beam,  many
bunches and very high current) and other one is proposed
approach, such as the round beam scheme in Novosibirsk
for  VEPP2000  [4].  A  lattice  design  based  on  the  first
approach  has  been  presented  in  this  session  [5].  For  this
scheme considerations on the IR design [6], the expected
beam  lifetime  [7],  and  the  machine  background  in  the
detector have also been presented [8].

Lattice

To achieve ultra short bunches at the IP  a  new  idea  to
use strong longitudinal focussing in order to have a bunch
length  variation  along  the  ring  [9]  has  been  proposed.
With this scheme the bunch can be very short only at the
IP  and  longer  elsewhere  in  the  ring,  where  the  vacuum
chamber  impedance  is  critical  and  produces  lengthening
and instabilities.

The plot of RF voltage, bunch length at IP  (sIP) and at
RF  cavity  (scav) versus the longitudinal phase advance is
shown in Fig. 3. The bunch lengths sIP and scav are equal
for  small  phase  advance;  when  the  longitudinal  phase
advance ml increases, the bunch length at the IP decreases
while  that  at  the  cavity  s cav  increases.  Very  high  RF
voltage  and  large  and  negative  [10]  momentum
compaction  are  needed  to  achieve  very  small  bunch
length at IP.

A  lattice  suitable  for  the  strong  longitudinal  focusing
has  been  presented.  In  order  to  get  large  (negative)
momentum  compaction,  keeping  the  dispersion  function
small, the cell is made of alternating positive and negative
dipoles  (see  Fig.  4).  In  this  way  a  very  high  radiation
damping (a factor 3 larger than present DAFNE value) is
obtained without using wigglers, which can have harmful
effect on the beams due to field nonlinearity.

dependence  on  the  RF  voltage  and  synchrotron  tune  due
to  resonances  in  3-dimensional  space.  This  dependence
has  to  be  further  explored  for  the  strong  RF  focusing
parameters to see if a proper choice of the working point
can improve the DA.

IR design

The design of an IR with a very small vertical beta is a
challenging  task  and  is  a  common  Machine  &  Detector
business.  The  following  list  of  constraints  and  design
requirements  has  been  presented;  where  (D)  means
detector and (M) machine.
•  Maximum  detector  solid  angle,  try  to  keep
accelerator components far enough from the IP (D)
Large high-field detector solenoid (D)
Push  first  quadrupole  close  to  IP,  to  minimize  IP
spot size (M)

• 
• 

•  Horizontal crossing angle (M) (DAFNE experience)
• 
Small quadrupoles, inside detector field (M,D)
•  Coupling correction (M) (DAFNE experience)
•  Adequate shielding from background (M,D)
•  Ultra-vacuum (M,D)
• 
• 
• 

Impedance budget (M)
Thin beam pipe (D)
“Instrumented” IR (D)

The choice of crossing angle has been discussed taking
into  account  the  effects  of  parasitic  crossings,  the
reduction of tune shifts and luminosity and the constraints
due to the IR geometry and aperture requirements.

Fig.3: RF voltage and bunch length vs. longitudinal phase
advance.

Fig. 5: Preliminary layout of half IR

A  preliminary  design,  with  permanent  magnet
quadrupoles,  has  been  presented  (see  Fig.  5).  Machine
elements  are  inside  a  ±9°  cone  with  ±30  mrad  crossing
angle.  The  vertical  beta  at  the  IP  can  be  varied  between
1.5 and 5 mm.

As a conclusion the following list of items, which need

to be addressed in the future, has been given:

Technical design
Engineering studies of permanent quads

• 
• 
•  Chromaticity correction study
•  Coupling correction scheme
•  Background evaluation
•  Beam pipe design
•  Vacuum design
• 
• 
• 

Impedance budget
Trapped HOM study
Temperature control

Fig. 4: Lattice cell

The two rings layout is similar to the present DAFNE
one  and  fits  in  the  same  hall.  There  is  only  one  IR;  the
opposite straight section, where the beams are separated,
can be used for injection, RF and diagnostics.

DA is a critical item for this machine. The lattice cell is
very good for chromaticity correcting sextupoles because
they  are  placed  where  the  dispersion  and  the  separation
between  bx  and  b y  is  maximum.  The  resulting  DA,
without  synchrotron  oscillations, 
large;
nevertheless when synchrotron oscillations are taken into
account  the  DA  is  strongly  reduced,  showing  a  strong

is  very 

Lifetime

At  the  F  energy,  beam  lifetime  is  mainly  limited  by
Touschek  scattering.  Touschek  lifetime  is  inversely
proportional  to  the  bunch  density  and  therefore  it
decreases  essentially  as  the  inverse  of  luminosity.  It  is
also  nearly  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  energy
acceptance of the ring. Therefore in the design of such a
machine  it  is  very  important  to  increase  as  much  as
possible  the  energy  acceptance,  which  is  limited  by
vacuum chamber aperture, DA and RF acceptance. In the
strong focusing case the RF parameters, and therefore the
energy acceptance, are determined by the requirements on
the bunch length.

Expected  single  beam  lifetimes  have  been  calculated
[10] for the proposed lattice in different configurations. In
each  case  lifetime  is  of  the  order  of  ten  minutes  at  a
luminosity  of  1034  cm-2  s-1.  Thus  continuous  injection,
with  detector  on,  is  required.  Moreover  a  procedure  to
optimize  the  machine  with  a  rapidly  decreasing  current
must be studied.

Detector background

A  preliminary  simulation  of  the  trajectories  of  the
Touschek scattered particles [11]  for  the  proposed  lattice
has been shown (see Fig. 6).

Sensitivity  to  different  parameters  has  been  presented.
The background in the detector poses some constraints on
the IR design, in particular the aperture of the IR vacuum
chamber has to be increased in the critical positions where
particles get lost.

A system of scrapers (very effective in DAFNE) has to
be  studied  to  reduce  the  background.  In  particular  the
positions of the scrapers have to be optimized by tracking.
Moreover,  as  was  done  for  DAFNE, the particles lost in
the IR have to be tracked inside the detector, by a Monte
Carlo  simulation,  in  order  to  evaluate  the  effective
background and to study the design of tungsten masks to
reduce it.

Fig. 6: trajectories of Touschek scattered particles near the
IR (the IP is at zero)

CONCLUSIONS
Aspects  of  single  beam  behaviour  critical  for  the
achievement of very high luminosity have been presented.
The  feasibility  of  an  ultra  high  luminosity  F-factory has
been  discussed.  A  preliminary  design,  based  on  dipoles
with alternating polarity and strong longitudinal focusing,
has  been  presented.  This  scheme  is  promising  but  more
work is still needed. As a result of the discussion, a list of
the items to be still addressed is given below:

•  Optimize  longitudinal  parameters  and  define  the

RF system.
•  More simulations:

- Dynamic aperture with Synchrotron oscillation
- Magnetic errors and fringing fields
- Longitudinal dynamics
- Impedance budget
- Beam-beam effect

• 

Test of Negative ac  at DAFNE  (done  at  KEK  B-
factory [11])
Test of longitudinal strong focusing
Final IR design

check 

the 

agreement  between

• 
• 
•  Lifetime: 

simulations and measurements at DAFNE
Instability and feedbacks

• 
•  Dipole design
•  Design of superconducting IR quadrupoles.

REFERENCES
[1]  A.  Temnykh,  “Beam  Based  Characterization  of

CESR-C Wiggler Magnet”, These proceedings.

[2]  R.  Cimino,  “The  Electron  Cloud  Problem  and

Potential Remedies”, These proceedings.

[3] C.  Zhang,  “Accelerator  Physics  Issues  in  BEPC-II”,

These proceedings.

[4] Y.  Shatunov  et  al.  “Project  of  a  New  e+e-  Collider
VEPP2000”,  Proc.  Of  EPAC02  conference,  Paris,
2002.

[5] C.  Biscari, “Lattice for Longitudinal Low b”,  These

proceedings.

[6] M. E. Biagini, “IR Design”, These proceedings.
[7] S. Guiducci, “Lifetime”, These proceedings.
[8] M. Boscolo, “Background”, These proceedings.
[9] A. Gallo, M. Zobov, “Short Bunch at the IP”, These

proceedings.

[10] M.  Zobov,  “Negative  momentum  compaction  at

DAFNE”, These proceedings.

  [11]

H.  Ikeda,  “Negative  momentum  compaction  at

KEK-B”, These proceedings.

