4
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
5
1
 
 
 
9
7
0
3
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

 

 

 

 

 

 

Design and construction of new central and forward muon counters for CDF II 

A. Artikov1, J. Budagov, I. Chirikov-Zorin, D. Chokheli2, V. Kolomoets, M. Lyablin, O. Pukhov, A.Sissakian 

G. Bellettini, F. Cervelli, M. Incagli, A. Menzione, F. Palmonari, A. Scribano, A. Stefanini 

JINR, Dubna, Russia 

INFN, Pisa, Italy 

D. Cauz, H. Grassmann, G. Pauletta, L. Santi  

INFN and University of Udine, Italy 

G. Introzzi, A. Penzo 

University of Treste, Italy 

M. Iori 

University of Rome, Italy 
B. Grinyov, V. Lagutin, V. Lebedev, V. Lyubynskiy, V. Senchyshyn 

Institute of scintillating materials, Kharkiv, Ukraine 

V. Kovtun, I. Zaljubovsky 

Kharkiv Karazin National University, Ukraine 

I. Fedorko, S. Tokar 

Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia 

V. Giakoumopoulou, N. Giokaris, A. Manousakis-Katsikakis 

University of Athens, Greece 

 

 

 

Abstract 

New scintillation counters have been designed and constructed for the CDF upgrade in order to 

complete  the  muon  coverage  of  the  central  CDF  detector,  and  to  extend  this  coverage  to  larger 

pseudorapidity.  A  novel  light  collection  technique  using  wavelength  shifting  fibers,  together  with 

high  quality  polystyrene-based  scintillator  resulted  in  compact  counters  with  good  and  stable light 

collection  efficiency  over  lengths  extending  up  to  320  cm.  Their  design  and  construction  is 

described and results of their initial performance are reported. 

1 – leave from NPL, Samarkand State University, Uzbekistan. 
2 – leave from HEPI, Tbilisi State University, Georgia.

 

 

Introduction. 

The  importance  of  detecting  muons  at  CDF  and  of  measuring  their  momentum  accurately  can 

hardly be overstressed. Drell-Yan muon-pair production are a means for testing the basics of the EW 

theory and for searching for new vector bosons, for leptons and quark substructures, as well as for 

possible extra-dimensions. Muons originate with large branching fractions from the decay of the top 

quark and of beauty-flavored hadrons. Detailed studies of production and decay properties of the top 

quark  are  eagerly  awaited  and  can  be  best  performed  in  the  muon  decay  channels.  An  extended 

beauty  physics  program,  ranging  from  relatively  simple  lifetime studies to  the study of subtle CP-

violation effects can be performed on a muon event sample. A search for the light Higgs boson, that 

is expected  to decay predominantly  into b-quark pairs, can be made in the muon b-decay channel. 

Finally, muons are expected to appear as products of the decay chain in most SUSY processes.  

A considerable effort was therefore made in the CDF upgrade to increase the muon acceptance. 

As a result the refurbished CDF detector that has started a new run of data taking (Run II) in March 
2001 features nearly complete muon coverage up to a pseudorapidity η of ± 1.5. 

Over  most  of  the  solid  angle  the  muon  detector  is  a  sandwich  of  drift  chambers  and  plastic 

scintillation counters, which can be used to trigger on penetrating muon candidates, to identify their 

bunch  crossing  and  to  signal  their  trajectory.  In  particular,  the  fast  response  of  the  scintillation 

counters will be important in associating a muon track with its corresponding bunch crossing. 

The complex and compact CDF geometry (see Fig. 1 and Ref. 1) has required the construction 

and  installation  of  a  large  set  of  counter  hodoscopes  employing  a  total  of  about  1200  plastic 

scintillators with diverse dimensions and light collection assemblies.  

Those constructed for the CDF upgrade were designed to overcome the space restrictions and to 

improve on light collection from long counters. This paper describes the design and performances of 

these  counters,  which  distinguish themselves by  their unconventional and compact light collection 

system.  

The  performances  of  the  overall  muon  detector  in  terms  of  muon  triggering  efficiency  and  of 

background rejection will be the subject of a future publication.  

1. Counters for CDF II. 

In  CDF,  muon  momenta  are  measured  by  the  central  tracker  in  the  solenoid  magnetic  field. 

However,  a  key  signature  is  obtained  from  specialized  muon  chambers  and  counters  which  are 

deployed  behind  of  the  calorimeter  so  as  to  exploit  the  muons’  ability  to  traverse  thick  absorbers. 

Counter  areas  are  large  in  order  to  keep  their  number  within  a  manageable  limit.  Conventional 
 

1

 

 

collection  systems  rely  on  plexiglas  light  guides  mounted  on  the  counter  extremities.  These  light 

guides are large and often conflict with other detector parts. Because of this difficulty, the coverage 

of  the  Run  I  muon  detector  was  incomplete.  Light  collection  through  the  counter  extremities  also 

involves a large optical path length in the scintillator and is therefore susceptible to deterioration in 

the  scintillator  properties.  This  susceptibility  seriously  affected  the  performance  of  the  Run  I 

counters [2]. The new Run II counters were designed to overcome these problems. 

The locations of the CDF II muon detectors are shown in Fig. 1. The coverage of the new system 
in  the  η-ϕ  space  is  compared  to  that  of  Run  I  in  Fig.  2.  There  are  a  total  of  about  1200  muon 

scintillation counters in the CDF II detector. The longest (up to 320 cm) of these counters cover the 
central   (IηI< 0.6)  region and are known as the Central Scintillator Upgrade (CSP) counters. They 

are  laid  on  the  outside  of  the drift chamber of the Central Muon Upgrade  (CMP) chamber stacks, 

behind 61 cm of steel shielding located outside the central calorimeter. The new CSP-s cover the top 

and bottom of the detector (see Fig. 1). The older counters cover the north and south walls.  Because 

of deterioration in their transmission properties these older scintillators were refurbished [2] by the 

addition  of  a  light  collection  system  inspired  by  the  new  counter  design.    The  design  of  the  new 

scintillators, described in this paper, should reduce their susceptibility to this kind of deterioration.  

The  scintillation  counters  of  the  Central  Muon  eXtension  (CSX)  are  arranged  in  a  conical 
hodoscope to cover the region 0.6<IηI<1.2. The CSX azimuthal coverage was also completed in the 
course of the upgrade by the addition of two 90o sectors (the “miniskirts”) in the lower parts of both 
east and west cones [3] and of a 30o sector (the keystone) in the upper part of the west cone. These 

counters (of the conventional type) had already been designed and constructed before RUN Ib, but 

their installation had been delayed by several obstructions. The light collection system of a subset of 

them had to be modified according to the new design in order to overcome these conflicts.    

To  extend  the  muon  coverage  to  IηI=1.5  two  overlapping  barrel  hodoscopes  of  160  cm-long 

scintillators (BSU-s) were constructed to cover a barrel of drift chambers (BMU-s) which surround 

the steel of the former toroid magnets (now decommissioned and used for shielding) for about ¾ of 

the azimuth  (see Fig. 1, 2). The bottom of the toroid steel is obstructed by its supports.  Finally, a 

pinwheel  counter  hodoscope  (TSU)  is  located  between  the  toroids  and  covers  the  region  from 
IηI~1.2 to IηI~1.5. Together with the outer BSU ring, these counters form a projective trigger for the 

BMU-s in the region. The TSU counters were constructed at Michigan State University according to 

a different design [4].   

 The design, construction and initial performance of the CSP and BSU counters constructed for 

the CDF upgrade will be described below. A major improvement in the new counters was achieved 

2

 

 

 

 

by  employing  ribbons  of  wavelength  shifting  (WLS)  fibers  suitably  coupled  to  the  sides  of  the 

plastic  bars  for  optimal  light  collection.  Bulky  light  guides  were  thus  avoided  and  light  could  be 

collected more uniformly and more efficiently from the scintillating material. Light collection from 

plastic  scintillators  by  means  of  wavelength  shifting  fibers  was  adopted  in  the  past  in  several 

sandwich  calorimeters  [5,  6,  7].  This  application  is  different  because  of  the  much  higher  light 

collection  efficiency.  In  our  trigger  counters  it  was  vital  to  reach  full  efficiency  on  traversing 

Minimally  Ionizing  Particles  (MIP).  In  calorimeters,  the  amount  of  light  collected  from  each 

scintillator layer is not as critical since the detector response is the sum of the signals from a large 

number of layers. 

2. The R&D stage. 

 

2.1. Merits of fiber readout. 

It is customary to  collect  light from plastic scintillator bars from the short side of the bar with 

plexiglas light pipes which are either of a “fish tail” type, or an assembly of suitably bent plexiglas 

strips.  However,  since  the  plastic  scintillator  bars  of  the  CDF  II  muon  detectors  are  up  to 320 cm 
long and their transverse dimensions are relatively small ( ≤ 30 cm wide and  ≤ 2 cm thick) and light 

collection through conventional light pipes in counters of this geometry creates several problems: 
•  The light transmission efficiency in the scintillator is limited by the non-perfect transparency of 

the bulk material and by the internal reflection efficiency. In our counters both the optical path 

length  and  the  number  of  reflections  are  large.  It  follows  that  the  plastic  surface  must  be 

accurately  polished  to  optimize  internal  reflection  and  that  the  bulk  transparency  must  be 

extremely  good.  Furthermore,  since  the  counters  will  be  used  for  many  years,  both  these 

properties  must  be  time  and  radiation  resistant.  Even  a  small  deterioration  of  the  bulk 

transparency  or  of  the  surface  quality  leads  to  a  large  reduction  in  the  amount  of  light  which 

reaches the photomultiplier (PMT).  

•  For  efficient  light collection the area  of the PMT photocathode must be as large as that of the 

scintillator surface which  is optically  coupled  to  the light pipe. Since this can be as large as  
60  cm2,  large  and  expensive  PMT-s  would  be  required  for  optimal  light  collection.  Moreover, 

large phototubes are particularly sensitive to stray magnetic fields. 

•  Large light guides and large PMT-s occupy a lot of space, and overlaps and conflicts with other 

detectors can be generated. 

3

 

Fig. 3.  

These  problems  were  addressed  and  solved  to  a  large  degree  by  the  new  CDF  counter  design, 

which is based on the use of WLS fibers for light collection. This collection method was used for all 

new counters  with mirror differences depending on  counter shape.  It is  schematically  shown in 

The merits of this method are: 
•  Light can be collected from counters of any shape with no concern for possible obstructions by 

light  pipes.  It  is  therefore  possible  for  hodoscopes  to  obtain  complete  coverage  even  in 

complicated geometries and when one is short of space. 

•  Since  light  is  collected  from  the  long  edge  of  the  scintillator  bar  the  number  of  multiple 

reflections  suffered  by the light before exiting the edge of bar is much reduced with respect to 

conventional  light  pipes,  particularly  where  the  ratio  of  the  transverse  to  the  longitudinal 

dimensions  is  small.  As  a  result  the  tolerance  in  the  quality  of  bar  surface  polishing  is greatly 

increased. It also follows that good transparency and light yield of the bulk scintillator become 

less critical and that scintillator aging and radiation damage can be better tolerated. The overall 

result is a more reliable and durable detector. 

•  One  is  no  longer  subject  to  Liouville’s  theorem  and  the  total  cross  section  of  the  WLS  fibers 

comprising  the  light–collecting  ribbons,  which  must  be  optically  connected  to  the  PMT 
photocathodes  is  small  (~0.5  cm2  in  our  case).  Small  PMT-s  can  therefore  be  used  and  the 

detector can be made more compact with significant cost saving. 

•  Small PMT-s are less sensitive to magnetic fields. Magnetic shields are often not required or can 

be much simpler and less expensive. 

•  The labor costs are greatly reduced with respect to those of light-guide fabrication. When WLS 

fibers are used one can glue the fiber ribbons to the scintillator and obtain a mechanically solid 

counter with a relatively simple assembly procedure. 

 In some cases, multi-anode PMT can be used to read-out several counters with a corresponding 

reduction in the cost of the electronic instrumentation. 

The  design,  construction  and  performances  of  the  new  counters  are  described  in  the  following 

sections.  

• 

 

 

 

 

 

4

 

 

2.2. Manufacturing and testing of prototypes.  

To  test  the  viability  of  collecting  light  by  means  of  WLS  fiber  ribbons  as  outlined  above  a 

number  of  prototypes  of  different  shapes  and  sizes  were  built  [8-12]  and  their  light  yield  was 

measured. 

30 cm long. 

 The study addressed the expected performance of counters with geometries corresponding to the 
BSU, CSP and WSU1 counters. The BSU prototype was  a  rectangular  scintillator  180 cm  long, 

17 cm wide and 2 cm thick. The CSP prototype was 300 cm long, 30 cm wide and 2 cm thick. The 

trapezoidal WSU counter prototypes were 180 cm long and 1.5 cm thick, with bases of  40 cm and 

Counters were wrapped in aluminized paper for diffuse internal light reflectivity and backed by 

black plastic foil for outside light tightness. An absolute calibration of the PMT (response to single 

photo-electron  (ph.e.))  [13,  14]  was  obtained  by  flashing  the  photocathode  with  a  fast  LED.  The 

response  of  each  counter  in  terms  of  ph.e./MIP  was  measured  using  cosmic  muons  which  were 
selected by a small counter telescope (4×7 cm2).  

The  PMT  was  joined  to  the  fiber  ribbon  bundle  by  optical  grease.  The  other  end  of  the  fiber 

ribbon was  blackened in  a first set  of measurement, than grinded flat with sand paper and a small 

piece  of  aluminum foil was applied to it with  optical glue. This very simply technique provided a 

reflectivity about 60%. The most relevant results of these tests are shown in Fig. 4.  

Unlike in the scintillator the WLS fibers are rather transparent to their own emission. Therefore, 

the  effective  attenuation  length  in  such  counters  depends  basically  on  the  fiber  transparency.  The 

scintillator transparency is of minor importance. 

The  effective  attenuation  in  the  WSU  prototype  (λ≈350  cm)  is  larger  than  in  BSU  prototype 

(λ≈290 cm) due to the configuration of the bars that causes a larger absorption of scintillating light 

in the WSU counter. 

The  dopant  Y11  features  partial  overlap  of  the  emission  and  absorption  spectra.  The 

reabsorption  effect  shifts  the  emission  spectrum  to  the  long  wave  region,  where  the  absorption  is 

less significant while photons are propagating in the   fibers.   The   partial reabsorption   process   

increases   the   effective attenuation length in long counters relative to shorter ones. Therefore, the 
effective attenuation length in the CSP prototype (λ≈470 cm) is larger than in BSU (λ≈290 cm). 

                                                 
1  The  WSU  counters  were  originally  intended  for  the  back  of  the  Wall  calorimeters  and  were  similar  to 
TSU’s, but on the basis of later considerations they were finally not built. 
 

5

 

 

 

 

3. Mass production. 

The  scintillator  of  choice  was  UPS  923A  of  Ukrainian  fabrication.  It  was  produced  at  the 

Institute  of  scintillating  materials  in  Kharkiv  under  the  supervision  of  JINR  personnel.  The  bulk 

material was polystyrene doped with 2% PTP and 0.03% POPOP. The light yield of this scintillator 

measured  in  1992  at  the  INFN  Pisa  laboratory  [15]  was  found  to  be  superior  by  ~25%  to  another 

commercial  scintillator  (NE  110)  produced  at  that  time.  Since  then  new  techniques  were 

implemented at Institute of scintillating materials for polymerizing and machining plastic into long 

bars  [16].  The  surface  machining  technique  was  also  changed.  After  cutting,  bar  sides  were 

accurately polished until a very smooth surface was reached. The overall light yield from the counter 

far  end  (defined  as  a  number  of  photoelectrons  emitted  from  the  cathode  when  the  counter  is 

traversed normally by a MIP) was appreciably improved (Fig. 5). 

3.1. Final counters design. 

The final dimensions of the CSP and BSU counters are listed in Table. 

Three  different  types  of  CSP  counters  were  needed  to  cover  parts  of  the  central  detector  with 

different space restrictions. Long counters (CSP) were 2 cm thick. The BSU, whose length did not 

exceed  163.8  cm,  were  made  1.5  cm  thick.  Prototype  tests  have  shown  that  this  was  sufficient  to 

ensure efficient counter performances. The typical BSU attenuation curve is presented in Fig. 6. 

Table. Dimensions of the scintillator bars.  

Counters  Length 

Wide 

Thick 

(cm) 

(cm) 

(cm) 

CSP L1 

CSP L2 

CSP L3 

240 

310 

320 

BSU 

163.8 

30.5 

30.5 

30.5 

16.6 

2 

2 

2 

1.5 

A small notch  was machined on one corner of the scintillator bars to house the PMT (Fig. 3). 

The area occupied by the notch is only a few tenth of a percent of the total scintillator area, causing 

only a very small reduction in the geometrical acceptance of the counter. Flat WLS ribbons for light 

collection were made by gluing 15 or 20 (depending on counter thickness) 0.1 cm-diameter fibers, 

with optical cement (BC 600), directly on the scintillator bar edge. The fiber ribbon protruding into 

the notch was shaped into a bundle and the bundle was glued inside an adaptor. The ends protruding 

6

 

 

from the adaptor were cut flat and the surface was grinded and polished as required for good optical 

contact with the PMT photocathode. In order to maximize light collection the ribbon ends opposite 

to the PMT were “mirrored”. This was accomplished by grinding the flat ribbon end with sand paper 

and gluing on it a small mirror (see part 3.2).  

All  faces  of  the  scintillator  bars  –  except  the  one  carrying  the  WLS  fiber  ribbon  –  were 

accurately polished. Strips of aluminum foils were laid on the side opposite to the ribbon to reflect 

the light back into the scintillator. A light-reflecting aluminum strip was glued by optical glue to the 

outer side of the WLS ribbon for increased light capture efficiency. 

The  large  area  bar  faces  were  covered  with  “orange  skin”  aluminum-backed  paper  for  light 

reflection.  

Blue light is emitted by the wavelength-shifter POPOP in the scintillator. This light reaching the 

fiber  ribbon  is  absorbed  by  Y11  (K27  formulation)  shifter  with  subsequent  emission  in  the  green 

region  of  the  spectrum  (Fig.  7,  8).  The  green  light  propagates  by  total  internal  reflection  in  both 

directions  along  the  fibers.  The  mirror  located  on  the  far  edge  reflects  the  light  back  towards  the 

PMT greatly increasing the light collection efficiency [8-12]. 

Multi-clad S-type WLS Y11 (250 ppm) fiber, produced by Kuraray (Japan), was used for most 

of  the  WLS  fiber  ribbons.  The  fiber  core  is  polystyrene  with  Y11  shifter,  the  inner  cladding  is 

polymethilmetacrilate (PMMA) and outer cladding is fluorinated PMMA (Fig. 7).  

Pol.Hi.Tech  (Italy)  K27  (200  ppm)  fibers  were  produced  in  several  different  lots.  Samples  of 

each  lot  were  quality  controlled  at  the  University  of  Rome.  The  fibers  were  excited  at  different 

distances from the PMT by light from LED. The LED spectra peaked at 450 nm and its intensity was 

varied changing the LED voltage. During each  measurement the LED current was monitored. The 

3.3 m long fiber was mounted on an aluminum bar and the LED shifted on the bar by a small trolley. 

For  each  fiber  we  took  at  least  7  measurements  between  50  cm  and  300  cm  and  fitted  points  by 

single  exponential  function.  Average  attenuation  lengths  for  samples    from  each  lot  are  shown  in 

Fig. 9. The attenuation length of the Kuraray fibers Y11 (250 ppm) are seen to be ~20% longer than 

those of Pol.Hi.Tech fibers K27 (200 ppm). Pol.Hi.Tech fibers were used for about 30% of the BSU 

counters. 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  light  capture  efficiency  in  multi-clad  fibers  (~5.35  %,  Fig.  7)  is 

significantly  superior  to  that  of  single-clad  fibers  (~3.14  %).  This  improvement  was  essential  in 

bringing the light collection efficiency of WLS fibers into the range which made them useful for the 

application described here. 

7

 

 

 

The 2.2 cm wide, 2.2 cm high and 6 cm long H5783 photosensor manufactured by Hamamatsu 

Photonics,  which  incorporated  the  1.5  cm  wide,  1  cm  long  R5600  PMT,  was  used  as  photon 

detector.  The  effective  diameter  of  the  photocathode  of  this  detector  is  0.8  cm  and  its  quantum 
efficiency is of ≈12 % at the average wavelength of the Y11 (or K27) emission spectrum (~500 nm).  

3.2. Assembly site. 

About  600  muon  scintillation  counters  were  built  at  JINR  for  the  CDF  II  CSP  and  BSU 

hodoscopes.  Although  shapes  and  dimensions  were  different,  the  same  light  collection  method  as 

shown in Fig. 3 was applied to all counters. 

During  production  the  counters  were  subjected  to  strict  quality  controls.  These  included 

precision  in  mechanical  dimensions,  quality  of  gluing,  quality  of  surface  polishing,  accurate  light 

shielding and, finally, robust packing for safe shipping. The importance of a very careful gluing of 

the fragile WLS fibers warrants special mention. Air bubbles must be avoided when gluing because 

they seriously degrade light collection. Only experienced and adequately trained technical staff was 

able to perform the work to the required quality. 

A  custom  building-berth  was  designed  and  built  for  gluing  fiber ribbons onto scintillator bars. 

This device allowed to safely gluing ribbons up to 330 cm long and up to 31 cm wide onto 1.5 and 2 

cm thick bars. The building-berth had to be flat and smooth to obtain good gluing quality (without 

bubbles)  scintillator-ribbon  sandwich.  For  this  purpose  one  usually  makes  use  of  massive  granite 

plates  with  specially  machined  surfaces.  An  original  (and  considerably  less  expensive)  solution  to 

the problem was obtained by exploiting the simple property of liquids to settle into a flat horizontal 

surface under the influence of gravity. 

The building-berth is shown in Fig. 10. It was assembled in a number of steps. First, the berth 

support  frame  was  firmly  anchored  on  the  lab  floor.    Next,  a  solid  box  was  created  inside  it  with 

plastic  walls  suitably  supported  by  girders  on  the  perimeter.    The  box  was  then  filled  with  epoxy 

diluted with acetone to increase its fluidity. After the epoxy hardened an excellent flat surface was 

obtained. The maximum deviation from flatness over 4 m was < 100 microns.  

A  7  cm  wide  Teflon  strip  was  fixed  with  bolts  along  the  full  length  of  the  hardened  epoxy 

surface  of  the  building-berth  (Fig.  11).  A  1.5  cm  wide  groove  and  a  2  cm  wide  groove  were 

machined  along  each  strip  in  such  a  way  that  departure  from  perfect  flatness  did  not  exceed           

50 microns. Four such building-berths were built, allowing up to 4 “ribbon/bar” in the CSP case or 

up to 8 “ribbon/bar” in the BSU case to be glued onto the scintillator bar each day. 

8

 

 

 

 

 

Counters  were  manufactured  according  to  the  following  procedure.  First,  a  strip  of  aluminum 

foil was laid in the groove and held in place with scotch tape. Then, the appropriate number (15 or 

20) of fibers, which had already been joined on one end and glued into an adaptor were laid in the 

groove. The fiber lengths were chosen to be some 5-6 cm longer than the ribbon. The adaptor was 

housed on the counter with the aid of a billet simulating the PMT. 

Fibers  were  carefully  stretched  out  side  by  side  to  form  a  flat  ribbon  in  the  groove  and  a 

temporary rod was used to keep the ribbon in place at the scintilODWRU(cid:3)HQGV(cid:17)(cid:3))LQDOO\(cid:15)(cid:3)
cement was poured into the groove and spread out evenly until it covered the entire surface of the 

-600 optical 

ribbon. By working on such a flat support the amount of glue needed for gluing a WLS bundle was 

only ~9 g for the BSU and ~21 g for CSP counters. 

The scintillator bar was then laid on the ribbon and fixed in position at its top edge by means of 
a clamp. Then nuts were tightened to ~ 6-8 Newton×m (Fig. 11) for providing the optimal pressure. 

About 24  hours  were  needed for the epoxy to harden. Finally the scintillator-ribbon sandwich was 

carefully removed from the building-berth and positioned on a special table for the further work.   

The  WLS  ribbon  was  cut  at  its  far  end,  milled,  grinded  and  polished.  A  “five-minute”  optical 
epoxy (Devcon, USA) was used to glue the mirror on this ribbon end. The mirror is a ~0.2 µm thick 

Ag layer evaporated in vacuum on a plexiglas plate. After about one hour the plexiglas plate could 

be removed. As a result the Ag foil remains glued on the fibers. An aluminum foil was glued over 

the Ag layer as a protection.  

The counter surface was then carefully cleaned of the glue spills, fat spots etc. by wiping it first 

with  a  soft  cloth  moistened  with  warm  water.  The  operation  was  repeated  with  a  50%  C2H5OH 

(ethyl-alcohol) solution. Finally, the plastic surfaces were wiped dry.  

The counter was then moved by hand (cotton gloves were used) to an adjacent table and its large 

area side was laid on aluminized “orange skin” paper that had been cut to fit the counter shape. The 

bar edges were covered with aluminum strip so that the counter was fully wrapped in its reflecting 

coating. Black lightproof ~0.4 mm thick plastic sheets were laid on the two large area sides covering 

them up to 5-6 mm from the perimeter. The counter perimeter was then covered by black lightproof 

50 mm wide electric tape to complete the light isolation of counter. The completed counter was thus 

ready to be tested with cosmic muons and radioactive sources. 

9

 

 

4. Counter performance and quality control. 

Detectors performance and quality control were studied with cosmic muons. The block diagram 

of the measurement is shown in Fig. 12. The analog signal from the PMT was amplified by a high-

speed amplifier Model 777 «Phillip Scientific» (~150 MHz band width) and measured by an ADC 

(Le Croy 2249A). The width of the gate signal was ~80 ns. 

The PMT signal was suitably amplified to obtain a single photoelectron spectrum of appropriate 

amplitude for calibration of a spectrometric channel. An attenuator (ATT) was used to increase the 

dynamic range of measured signals. The ADC output was read and processed by means of a PC. The 

test setup operated in two regimes with different triggers. Trigger 1 was used to measure the cosmic 
muon  spectra  (cosmic  muons  selected  by  a  telescope of three small 7×7 cm2 scintillation counters 

S1, S2, S3 in coincidence), and trigger 2 – for calibration of the spectrometric channel.  

The counter to be tested was sandwiched between S1 and (S2, S3). Moving the telescope along 

the counter axis the dependence of the light yield on the distance from the bar edge was measured. 

Trigger 2 was provided by a pulse generator and was used for the measurement of the light emission 

diode  (LED)  spectra.  The  fast AlGaAs LED  HLMP8100  (“Hewlett Packard”)  was   driven by a 

~10 ns long pulse. The photon flux incident on the PMT photocathode was tuned by changing the 

supply  voltage  to  the  LED.  The  LED  spectra  were  used  to  determine  the  spectrometric  channel 

parameters and to monitor their overall time drift. For these purpose measurements of LED spectra 

we carried out both before and after each cosmic muon run. 

The spectrometric channel was calibrated by measuring, in absolute units, the distribution of the 

number of photoelectrons emitted by the PMT photocathode for a traversing muon. 

The light yield in absolute units characterizes the counter performance. In principle, it would be 

sufficient if it is  at  least  as large as needed  to obtain full efficiency, but in practice it is important 

that it is substantially larger to accommodate degradation with time. The knowledge of light yield in 

absolute  units  is  very  important  as  it  enables  not  only  to  find  the  efficiency  of  counters  and  to 
compare parameters of different detectors, but also to gauge the counters long-term stability [11, 12, 

15]. 

The calibration was done by means of a LED using light flashes of low intensity. The basic idea 

of  the  calibration  method  consists  in  a  deconvolution  of  the  LED  spectrum  with  small  number  of 

photoelectrons (1-2) using a realistic PMT response function. A typical deconvoluted LED spectrum 
is  shown  in  Fig.  13.  It  corresponds  to  an  average  of  µ=1.5  photoelectrons  emitted  by  the  PMT 

photocathode.  The solid line shows  the PMT response function, with fitted parameters as given in 

figure.  The  dashed  curves  represent  the  charge  distribution  for  photoelectrons  emitted  by  the  first 

10

 

 

dynode  (where  can  be  reached  by  light  because  the  photocathode  is  partially  transparent).  These 

photoelectrons  can  be  captured  by  the  downstream  PMT  dynode  system.  The  charge  distributions 

for n=1, 2, 3… photoelectrons collected by the PMT photocathode are also shown in the figure. The 

response function has 8 parameters. Six of them describe the part of spectrum corresponding to the 

input light signal: 

Q0, σ0 – pedestal height and its width; 
Q1, σ1 – mean output charge initiated by a single photoelectron created on photocathode and 

the corresponding standard deviation; 

K1 – secondary emission coefficient of the first dynode; 
σ2  –  standard  deviation  output  charge  when  the  signal  is  initiated  by  a  single  photoelectron 

originating from first dynode; 

µ  –  mean  number  of  photoelectrons  emitted  by  the  photocathode  and  captured  by  the  PMT 

µ1  –  mean  number  of  photoelectrons  emitted  by  the  first  dynode  and  captured  by  the  PMT 

dynode system; 

dynode system. 

 

Q1  (in  ADC  channels  per  photoelectron)  gives  the  spectrometric  channel  calibration  which  is 

needed to measure the counter light yield (in ph.e./MIP). Details of this method of calibration can be 

found  in  Ref.  17.  Using  the  calibration  constant  Q1  the  yield  dependence  on  the  longitudinal 

coordinates was measured with cosmic muons. During this measurement the dynamic range of the 

ADC was adjusted as convenient by varying an attenuator. About two hours long runs were needed 

for each measurement in order to reach the required statistical precision (~4%). 

The  calibration  measurements  were  carried  out  before  and  after  each  cosmic  muon  run  and 

calibration coefficient <Q1> was found as on average of the two Q1 values [15]. 

A  typical  cosmic  muon  spectrum  of  a  CSP  counter  is  shown  in  Fig.  14.  The  dashed  line 

represents  the  pedestal  centroid  Q0.  From  this  spectrum  one  finds  the  average  muon  signal  in 

photoelectrons as: 

where  Q  is an average spectrum amplitude and Katt is the attenuation coefficient. 

All  BSU  and  CSP  counters  were  tested  as  described  above.  Fig.  15  shows  the  distribution  of 

photoelectrons over the entire sample for muons traversing close to the far end of counters. 

=

N

pe

−
QQ

0

Q
1

K

att

,

 

11

 

 

Note that all tests of counters were made without optical grease between bundle ribbon and face 

of PMT. Using optical grease the light yield can be increased by ≥10%. 

 

Conclusion. 

A novel technique for collecting light from large area scintillation counters has been developed 

and  successfully  applied  to  the  construction  of  more  than  600  new  counters,  between  160  cm  and 

300 cm in length, for the CDF muon upgrade. The technique relies on a wavelength shifter fiber to 

extract the light from the longer side of the scintillator bar, thereby reducing the path length of the 

light in the bulk material and consequently the importance of good light transmission in the counter. 

Performances  of  long  bars  are  therefore  less  dependent  on  the  scintillator  transmission  properties 

and are less susceptible to its deterioration than with conventional light-guides. 

Another  important  feature  of  this  technique  is  the  reduced  cross-section  of  the  fiber  bundle, 

which  allows  using  smaller  area  phototubes.  The  elimination  of  lucite  light  guides  and  of  large 

photomultipliers results in a much more compact design for which the ratio of sensitive to total area 

is close to one.  The reduced sensitivity of small photomultiplies to magnetic fields can also be an 

important feature. 

The  scintillator  used  to  construct  the  counters  (UPS  923A)  was  a  polystyrene  based  plastic 

developed by the Institute of scintillating materials  in Kharkiv, under the supervision of JINR and 

the  counters  were  constructed  at  JINR  using  a  cost–effective  technique  which  was  developed  in 

collaboration with INFN Pisa and finalized at JINR. The results of quality control tests performed at 

JINR show that the average light–output ranges between 21 ph.e./MIP (for the longer counters) and 

28 ph.e./MIP (for the shorter ones) for muons traversing the counters normally at the ends furthest 

from the photomultipliers. This light collection efficiency is more than adequate for 100% efficiency 

over  the  entire  counter  area.  Allowing  for  a  typical  deterioration  rate  of  5–10%  per  year,  full 

efficiency should be retained for the entire useful lifetime of CDF. 

Final assembly and quality control of the counters was performed at FNAL. This procedure and 

the performance of the counters during data taking will be reported on in a forthcoming article. 

12

 

 

   List of figures. 

Figure 1.  The CDF II detector. 

Figure 2.   Comparison of the muon counter coverage in Run I (left) and in Run II (right), as a 

function of azimuth φ  and pseudorapidity η. 

Figure 3.  Counter construction employing a WLS fiber light guide. 
Figure 4.  Test  results  for  the  BSU  (180×17×2  cm3),  WSU  (180×40  (30)×1.5  cm3)  and  CSP 

(300×30×2 cm3) counter prototypes. 

Figure 5.  Dependence  of  the  light  yield  from  the  far  end  (in  ph.e.)  of  CSP  L3  counters  from 

different Kharkiv scintillator lots. The scintillator bars quality improved by about a 

factor  of  2  from  lot  #1  to  lot  #3.  However,  the  light  yield  was  in  all  cases  good 

enough for our purposes.   

Figure 6.  Measurements of light yield of a BSU counter (15 WLS fibers, KURARAY). 

Figure 7.  Principle of the light collection using WLS fibers. 

Figure 8.  POPOP  emission  spectrum,  fluorescence  converter  Y11  (K27  formulation) 

absorption and emission spectra and PMT R5600 quantum efficiency. 

Figure 9.  The average attenuation length of the Kuraray and Pol.Hi.Tech fibers as a function of 

lot number. 

Figure 10.  Assembly building-berth. Front and side view.  

Figure 11.  The clamping system. 

Figure 12.  Block diagram of the setup used for the counters test. 

Figure 13.  A typical deconvoluted LED spectrum of PMT R5600. 

Figure 14.  A typical cosmic muons spectrum  taken from the far end of a counter. The dashed 

line shows the pedestal. 

Figure 15.  Distribution of counter light yield from the far end for BSU and CSP counters.  

 

 

References. 

248. 

1.   “The CDF-II Detector Technical Design Report”. The CDF II collaboration, Fermilab-Pub-

96/390-E (1996), chapter 10. 

2.   S.  Cabrera  et  al.,    “Making  the  Most  of  Aging  Scintillator”,    NIM  A453  (2000)  245-

13

 

 

3.   A.Artikov  et  al.,    “The  “Miniskirt”  counter  array  at  CDF  II”,    Particles  and  Nuclei, 

Letters. 2002. No. 5[114], http://www1.jinr.ru/Pepan_letters/panl_5_2002/03_art.pdf 

4.   C. Bromberg, DPF 2000, Ohio, Aug. 2000, published in the Int. Journal of Modern Physics, 

Vol. 16, Suppl. 1C (2001) 1143 – 1146. 

5.   J.  Freeman  et  al.,  “The  CDF  Upgrade  calorimeter”,  in  the  Proceeding  of  the  Second 
International  Conference  on  Calorimetry  in  High  Energy  Physics”,    Ed.  A.  Ereditato, 

6.   F. Ariztizabal et al., NIM, A349 (1994) 384. 
7.   Yu. K. Akimov  Physics of Elementary Particles and Atomic Nucleus, 1994, vol. 25, part 

8.   J. Budagov et al., “IMU Trigger Scintillators: BSU prototype Results”,  CDF Note 4210, 

9.   J. Budagov et al., “CMU Trigger Scintillators: CSP prototype Results”,  CDF Note 4211, 

World Scientific, 1993. 

2, p.496 (in Russian). 

June 25, 1997. 

July 1, 1997. 

10. J. Budagov et al., “IMU Trigger Scintillators: WSU-TSU Prototype Results and Summary of 

all IMU Prototype Results”,  CDF Note 4254, July 14, 1997. 

11. Yu.  Budagov  et  al.,  “Long  Scintillation  Counters  with  the  Shift-Spectrum  Fiber  Light 

Guides”,  JINR Preprint, Dubna, 1998, P13-93-304 (in Russian). 

12. Yu.  Budagov  et  al.,  “Test  of  Long  Scintillating  Counter  Prototypes  for  CDF  II”,    JINR 

Preprint, Dubna, 2000, E13-2000-127. 

13. S.  Tokar  et  al.,  “Single  Photoelectron  Spectra  Analysis  for 

the  Metal  Dynode 

Photomultiplier”,  Acta Phys. Univ. Comeniana, vol. 40, 1999, p. 114. 

14. E.  H.  Bellamy  et  al.,  “Absolute  Calibration  and  Monitoring  of  a  Spectrometric  Channel 

Using a Photomultiplier”,  NIM A339 (1994) 468-476. 

15. E.  H.  Bellamy  et  al.,  “Test  Of  Long  Scintillation  Counters  For  Large  Supercollider 

Detectors”,  NIM A343 (1994) 484-488. 

16. V.  G.  Senchyshin,  “Polystyrene  Scintillators  for  High  Energy  Physics”,    Doctor  of 

Technical Sciences Thesis, Kharkiv, 2001. p.30. 

17. I. Chirikov-Zorin et al., “Method for Precise Analysis of the Metal Package Photomultiplier 

Single Photoelectron Spectra”,  NIM A456 (2001) 310-324. 

14

 

 

 

Figure 1. The CDF II detector. 

Figure 2.  Comparison of the muon counter coverage in Run I (left) and in Run II (right), as a 

function of azimuth φ  and pseudorapidity η. 

Figure 3. Counter construction employing a WLS fiber light guide. 

 

 

 

15

 

 

Figure  4.  Test  results  for  the  BSU  (180×17×2  cm3),  WSU  (180×40  (30)×1.5  cm3)  and  CSP 

 

(300×30×2 cm3) counter prototypes. 

Figure  5.  Dependence  of  the  light  yield  from  the  far  end  (in  ph.e.)  of  CSP  L3  counters  from 

different Kharkiv scintillator lots. The scintillator bars quality improved by about a factor 

of 2 from lot #1 to lot #3. However, the light yield was in all cases good enough for our 

purposes. 

Figure 6. Measurements of light yield of a BSU counter (15 WLS fibers, KURARAY). 

 

 

16

 

 

Figure 7. Principle of the light collection using WLS fibers. 

 

 

17

Figure  8.  POPOP  emission  spectrum,  fluorescence  converter  Y11  (K27  formulation) 

absorption and emission spectra and PMT R5600 quantum efficiency. 

 

Figure 9. The average attenuation length of the Kuraray and Pol.Hi.Tech fibers as a function of lot 

number. 

 

 

Figure 10. Assembly building-berth. Front and side view. 

Figure 11. The clamping system. 
 

 

18

 

Figure 12. Block diagram of the setup used for the counters test. 

 

Figure 13. A typical deconvoluted LED spectrum of PMT R5600. 

 

 

Figure 14. A typical cosmic muons spectrum taken from the far end of a counter. The dashed 

line shows the pedestal. 

Figure 15. Distribution of counter light yield from the far end for BSU and CSP counters.  
 

19

 

