 
Creativity and the New Structure of Science 
 

Andrei P. KIRILYUK*  
Institute of Metal Physics, Kiev, Ukraine 03142 
 
 
 
A qualitatively new, much more liberal and efficient organisation of science 
is  proposed  and  justified in connection with emerging international science 
structures,  such  as  the  European  Research  Council,  and  growing  debates 
about further role and development of fundamental science. 

 
 
 

4
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
6
1
 
 
 
4
8
0
3
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
Increasing international cooperation in science today constitutes an important part of the growing 
globalisation tendency and leads to intense activity of science organisation at the emerging superior level of 
explicitly  globalised  knowledge.  A  fresh  example  is  provided  by  the  proposition  to  create  the  European 
Research  Council  (ERC)  [1,2]  that  would  monitor  the  fundamental  science  development  in  Europe, 
complementing various existing institutions and tools, which are oriented mainly to practical, technological 
applications  of  science  [3].  However,  fundamental  science  organisation  and  purposes  form  a  subject  of 
vivid  discussion  in  recent  years  revealing  a  number  of  intrinsic,  deeply  rooted  problems  [4-39],  and  it 
would be quite relevant to take into account the emerging conclusions and to choose only those solutions 
for the new, international science organisation that would not reproduce (and inevitably amplify) its well-
known  limitations  at  the  previous  (basically  national)  level.  In  this  connection  one  should  not  forget  an 
essential  difference  between  the  applied  and  fundamental  science  development:  while  the  former  is 
naturally guided by the powerful pressure of immediate practical purposes, the latter is largely left with its 
own, internal “criteria of truth” and estimates (referring only to hypothetical, less predictable consequences 
in a remote enough future), which multiply increases the danger of various spurious, subjective influences 
in fundamental science, leading to impasses and harmful practical effects, especially in the current situation 
of socially high stakes and globally amplified ambitions. 
It is a well-known fact (see e.g. [3-6,12,13,24,27,38,39]) that practical organisation of fundamental 
 
science  is  dominated  now  by  the  rigidly  fixed  and  highly  centralised  (pyramidal)  kind  of  structure,  or 
unitary system, which reproduces the main properties of the administrative, or command, type of economic 
organisation within a totalitarian system of power (exemplified by the recently fallen Communist regime in 
the former Soviet Union and its ideological satellites).1 The “central power” decides eventually everything 
in  that  kind  of  organisation  (though  most  often  not  by  direct  orders),  contrary  to  mainly  “personal” 
(independent)  kind  of  elementary  decisions  and  the  “distributed”,    dynamically  emerging  evaluation  of 
their  results  in  the  non-totalitarian,  liberal  (or  “free-market”)  system,  whose  dynamics  is  always  more 
                                                
* Address for correspondence: Post Box 115, Kiev-30, Ukraine 01030. E-mail address: kiril@metfiz.freenet.kiev.ua. 
1 Those who still yield to the “officially” maintained illusion of “liberal” dynamics of modern science organisation can have a 
closer  look at its practical details, where a large enough Central Committee, realised as a top-level bureaucratic monster (a 
National  Academy,  Science  Foundation,  a  Continental  Ministry,  etc.),  serves  to  impose  to  “masses”  of  totally  dependent 
“ordinary”  researchers  practical  decisions  that  directly  involve  the  essential  science  content  and are actually produced by a 
much  more  narrow  group  of  top  priests,  Politburo,  including  a  formal  “Board”,  but  even  more  a  few  of  informally  related 
authorities,  remaining  hidden  behind  the  formal  structures,  but  actually  promoting  arbitrary  decisions  in  their  personal 
favour.  Often  presenting  itself  as  a  kind  of  meritocracy  (“rule  of  the  best”),  the  self-chosen  scientific  mafia  quickly 
degenerates  into  pretentious,  but  vain  mediocracy  and  then  to  spoiled  merdocracy,  with  the  only  result  of  omnipresent 
destruction of the very essence of science. While making reference, similar to all totalitarian regimes, to intense “consultation 
with the people”, the privileged top priesthood looks exclusively for prolongation of its parasitic dominance and increase of 
unmerited profits by reproduction of the same kind of unitary subordination at ever smaller scales within science structure. 

 

1 

chaotic in the details. The unitary formal structure of science is efficiently supported also by less formal, 
emerging tools of centralised control, such as the notorious “peer review” system [10-16] that determines 
eventually every real action (publication, financial support) in fundamental science and is considered for the 
moment  as  a  key  instrument also for the new national or international institutions, such as ERC [1,2]. It 
does not need to be proved that practical efficiency of the unitary system is intrinsically low and cannot be 
increased without changing its nature for a liberal type of structure. Whereas the economic version of this 
conclusion has been progressively recognised almost everywhere, in the fundamental science structure we 
remain  strangely  at  the  level  of  the  most  centralised  regimes  of  the  past  and  continue  to  suffer 
unnecessarily  from  the  inevitable  destructive  consequences  of  that  outdated  “intellectual  totalitarianism” 
exerted in various, explicit and implicit, forms [4-6,10-16,21-24,27-30,34-39].2 
 
But  similar to social system case, the time comes when the current unitary system, because of its 
intrinsic deficiency, cannot maintain and develop its activity any more, even if the system is not subjectively 
challenged  from  the  outside.  Today  we  have  attained  just  that  “critical  state”  in  European  (and  world) 
science,  irrespective  of  material  prosperity  or  technological  successes.  The  sacramental  “to  be  or  not  to 
be?” quickly loses its rhetorical flavour and acquires the rough practical meaning of dramatic degradation 
and  effective  disappearance  of  the  whole  large  and  once  flourishing  disciplines,  especially  among 
fundamental  and  “exact”  sciences,  such  as  various  branches  of  physics.3  The  long  stagnation  in  their 
essential  development  (absence  of  fundamental  “discoveries”)  leads  inevitably  to  considerable  loss  of 
public interest (especially on the background of purely empirical, technological successes), which in turn 
provokes  further  decrease  of  creativity,  thus  closing  the  self-amplifying  “positive  feedback  loop”  of 
destructive tendency that quickly grows and invades the whole system. Numerous and detailed discussions 
of  this  and  other  aspects  of  modern  situation  in  fundamental  science  can  easily  be  found  in  a  variety  of 
serious  enough  sources  [5-37]  which  cannot  be  suspected  of  artificially  organised  subjective  attack, 
especially if one takes into account the accompanying much larger body of informally transmitted opinions 
and attitudes. But whereas particular criticism of the existing science organisation grows “exponentially”, 
the root of the problem is not clearly specified in a unified manner and therefore the proposed solutions are 
reduced  either  to  “treatment  of  symptoms”,  i.  e.  illusive  “amelioration”  of  the  evidently  outdated, 
fundamentally  irrelevant  kind  of  science  organisation,  or  to  mechanistic  support  of  its  occurring 
degradation presented as a new, progressive “mode” (cf. e. g. [24-26]), despite the evident drop of quality. 
                                                
2 It is not difficult to see that the same conclusions refer, in principle, to the whole structure of state power, or more generally 
“public  institutions”,  including  most  “democratic”,  formally  liberal  versions  of  their  organisation.  Indeed,  today  that 
traditional  organisation  of  “common  services”  becomes  also  inefficient  and  dangerously  degrading  in  all  its  results,  which 
only confirms the serious necessity to consider other possible kinds of organisation that could be conveniently tested just for 
the case of science organisation, remaining relatively independent of other state functions. In any case, the unitary structure 
in science is especially outdated and harmful with respect to other public services because efficient science is an intrinsically 
creative,  individually  structured  and  unpredictable  in  detail,  kind  of  activity,  the  property  that  contradicts  directly  and 
permanently the unitary general organisation of state. A good scientist is always bad in the role of a standard state “clerk” or 
“official”  (and  still  worse  as  a  “bureaucrat”),  and  the  reverse.  Whereas  the  “traditional”,  unitary  organisation  of  science  is 
inherited from previous epochs of hot and cold wars, where one of the main arguments in favour of science at a “national” 
level  has  been  creation  of  ever  more  powerful  weapons  and  other  “strategically”  important  tasks  (national  energy  sources, 
communication  means,  etc.),  the  emerging  more  and  more  “globalised”,  inter-dependent  continent  and  world  structure  is 
incompatible  with  fundamental  scientists  being  considered  as  small  soldiers  of  big  armies  engaged  in  a  military fight with 
each other (certain current attempts to provoke an artificial return to the “old good times” of the “hot”, and bloody, history 
only demonstrate the deep crisis of the conventional, unitary organisation of society and civilisation). 
3 A visibly much more prosperous state of “soft”, especially biological sciences should not be misleading: these branches of 
fundamental  knowledge  only  repeat,  in  a  compressed  form,  the  previous  evolution  of  physics,  starting  from  an  impressive 
series  of  “epochal”  discoveries  and  ending  in  successful  applications  that  leave  no  place  for  creative  development  of 
fundamental  knowledge.  The  latter  is  certainly  necessary  as  persisting  “mysteries”  and  growing  inconsistencies  in  physics 
convincingly  demonstrate,  but  it  is  possible  only  within  a  qualitatively  new  kind  of  science  organisation  at  a  “high-tech” 
civilisation  stage.  The  conventional,  unitary  science  organisation  will  inevitably  tend  to  strongly  limit  its  development  to 
purely  empirical,  short-sighted  technology  support:  the  hardest  barrier  for  development  is  always  created  by  a  successful 
development itself, and the unitary organisation of science is intrinsically unable to propose a way out of that auto-impasse, 
while the conceptually blind, but empirically omnipotent technology necessarily becomes fatally destructive (cf. [40]). 

 

2 

 
A more radical, but well substantiated and quality-guided cure I would like to defend here can be 
understood by analogy to the transition from the command to liberal economy, but is provided also with a 
deep  scientific  basis  in  terms  of  the  new,  universal  concept  of  complexity,  where  it  is  described  as  the 
emerging,  inevitable  ascent  to  a  “higher  complexity  level”  of  system  dynamics  by  a  “generalised  phase 
transition”  [38].  This  rigorous,  scientific  interpretation  only  confirms  the  evident,  common-sense 
application  of  the  above  economic  analogy  and  states  that  the  exhausted  unitary,  centralised  type  of 
organisation  should  and  can  be  progressively  replaced  now  by  a  qualitatively  different,  much  more 
variable,  highly  interactive  community  of  (usually)  small  and  independent  enterprises,  tentatively 
designated here as Creative Research Units (CRU), each of them constituting the minimum self-sufficient 
unit  of  professional  scientific  research  or  management  related  to  science.  The  proper  research  units  are 
engaged in scientific problem solution as such, whereas its evaluation and presentation for various funding 
opportunities is performed by separate enterprises of management which obtain their part from successful 
project  funding  (or,  say,  from  unmerited  funding  they  reveal  by  their  specially  attributed  function)  and 
compete among them for larger numbers of more successful results. Total professional and public openness 
of each project results, their evaluation and use is another feature of the new structure of science, closely 
related  to  the  independent,  liberal  operation  mode  of  the  main  structural  units  (similar  to  the  regulated 
market  economy).  A  variety  of  CRUs  with  different,  and  suitably  changing,  dynamically  adaptable 
purposes and sizes will naturally, “spontaneously” emerge and evolve, at a national, European, and world 
scale,  similar  to  the  dynamics  of  developed,  sustainable  market  structure.  This  transition  to  the  superior 
complexity  of  science  structure  is  inevitable  because  of  the  increasingly  and  now  critically  growing 
complexity  in  the  science  content  and  the  universal  law  of  correspondence,  or  symmetry,  of  complexity 
[38,39] rigorously confirming the practically obvious requirement of correspondence between complexity 
of the system form (organisation) and content (it is now critically missing in the unitary science structure). 
 
In  particular,  initiation  of  several  enterprises  of  the  new kind and the corresponding “interactive” 
monitoring within the future ERC activity represents a convenient opportunity for introduction of the new 
kind  of  science  structure  in  Europe  and  elsewhere.  Certain  “germs”  of  the  new  kind  of  structure 
spontaneously appear (and grow), by the way, already within the unitary system (and often in opposition to 
it),  in  the  form  of  various,  more  or  less  independent,  science  “foundations”  and  special,  usually  private, 
“institutes” (cf. e. g. [13,24]), but they cannot fully realise the potentialities of the new kind of organisation 
they  actually  represent  because  of  the  absence  of  other  essential  members  of  the  community  (such  as 
management  enterprises)  and  their  provisional,  unstable  status  with  respect  to  the  dominating  unitary 
system.  On  the  other  hand,  various  informal  “groups  of  support”  of  particular  initiatives  (“lobbies”) 
emerge within the unitary system management, but they also preserve their formally “underground” status 
and  restricted  efficiency  of  final  results  (where  today's difficulties in advancement of any new idea about 
the content or structure of science provide many real examples of those limitations). In all those situations 
one deals with “subcritical seeds” of the new structure, in terms of the physics of structure formation, in 
which an intuitively transparent result is rigorously demonstrated, namely that the appearing small germs of 
the new, objectively favoured structure should nevertheless possess a big enough (though generally small) 
size in order to ensure its further stable growth. One can say thus that creation and support of a number of 
small, but “above-critical” seeds of the new structure of science, as it is outlined here, can be seen as an 
important  practical  purpose  of  science  development  within  new  initiatives,  such  as  ERC,  which  can 
provide an additional, conceptually strong support and meaning for those initiatives themselves. 
The  new  system  is  intrinsically  oriented  towards  explicit  creation  in  research  [38,39],  which  is 
 
appreciated  most  and  practically  determines  everything  else,  contrary  to  the  domination  of  formal 
“positions”  in  the  unitary  system,  inevitably  brought  to  a  collapse  because  of  the  inherent  contradiction 
between its structure and formally announced “high” purposes. In particular, due to the knowledge market 
dynamics  itself,  the  efficiency  of  new  knowledge  production  is  naturally  and  independently  estimated  by 
qualitative  properties  of  the  results,  i.  e.  the  explicit,  consistent,  and  thus  certainly  useful  problem 
solutions,  as  opposed  to  apparently  senseless,  but  inevitably  dominating  quantitative  estimates  of  the 
“intensity of attempts” in the self-seeking unitary structure. The creative scientist is now liberated from the 

 

3 

routine “paper work” imposed by the exhausting fight for “positions”: instead, he is actually “attacked” by 
requests  to  do  this  work  for  him, coming from competing management enterprises which look anxiously 
for “promising” projects, the main source of their existence (but the same reasons will also force them to 
reject, or considerably improve, low-quality projects that constitute a potential source of their losses). The 
intrinsic creativity of genuine science finds thus its new and unlimited realisation within the new kind of 
organisation,  in  close  relation  to  the  intrinsically  high, sustainable quality of results, whereas the unitary 
system  is  inevitably  opposed  to  any  true  novelty  and  hence  creative,  high-quality  science,  the  latter 
remaining,  however,  the  unique  source  of  subjective  “interest”  of  both  scientists  and  “general  public” 
(giving,  in  particular,  each  next  generation  of  scientists).  The resulting living, self-developing knowledge 
market  will  naturally  eliminate  the  dangerously  growing  separation  of  “professional”  science  from  other 
spheres of activity, “practical life”, “amateur scientists”, and the related “public interest”, which is another 
“irresolvable”, inevitably growing problem within the unitary science structure [17-26,35-39]. 
 
Note that the conventional, commercial market, though being liberal intrinsically, operates within a 
unitary  kind  of  social  structure  (including  the  most  “democratic”  versions  of  unitary  system),  whose 
modern realisation is closely related to the industrial, massive and simplifying, way of production and life 
style.  This  omnipresent  “industrialisation”  is  objectively  opposed  to  the  unreduced  creativity  of  the 
formally  liberal  market  dynamics and largely kills its “evolutionary” advantages, especially at the modern 
stage of the “developed” (democratic) unitary system (cf. e.g. ref. [41]). In this respect, the proposed non-
unitary science organisation is designed to avoid not only authoritarian centralisation of power, but also its 
“liberal”  version  appearing  as  industrial,  standardising  and  complexity-destroying  approach, in science as 
well  as  in  material  production.  Such  qualitative  change  of  tendency  is  possible  due  to  the  intrinsically 
creative  character  of  scientific  activity,  now  liberated  from  the  formal  subordination  to  the  unitary 
bureaucratic  hierarchy  of  imposed  “governors”.  In  that  way  one  performs  also  the  necessary  transition 
from  the  industrial,  severely  reduced  and  eventually  destructive  “liberty”,  to  the  unreduced  creativity  of 
interactive  CRUs,  provided  the  underlying  basic  principles  outlined  above  are  maintained  in  practical 
initiation of the emerging new system (that becomes then autonomously, dynamically sustainable above a 
critical size/age). 
And  finally,  it  is  important  that  both  rigorous  justification  of  transition  to  the  qualitatively  new, 
 
nonunitary kind of science structure and the experience of practical transition realisation are naturally and 
directly  extendible  to  other  spheres  of  “common-service”  activity,  with  the  evident  relevance  to  the 
currently  emerging  “critical”  situation  in  unitary  governance  of  any  public  and  private  structures  of  all 
scales (cf. popular discussions about “open society” [24,41] or “non-governmental organisations” and the 
related  problems  of  development  [42]).  The  role  of  Europe  and  its  intellectual  elites  in  this  larger, 
inevitably  forthcoming  transition  to  the  new  structure  of  society  [38]  must  be  active  and  “decision-
making”, if the current tendency of stagnation and decline is ever to be replaced by the intrinsic creation. 
 

Acknowledgement 

 
 
The  author  gratefully  acknowledges  the  support  by  Euroscience  of  his  participation  in  the  recent 
conference  “New  Science  and  Technology  Based  Professions  in  Europe”  (Bischenberg,  France,  6-9 
November  2002,  http://www.euroscience.org/WGROUPS/YSC/bischenberg2002.htm)  which  stimulated 
the appearance of this article (although its ideas remain at the author’s responsibility and do not seem to be 
divided  by  many).  Discussion  of  the  article  content  with  Françoise  Praderie  (Observatoire  de  Paris)  has 
contributed to the presented result formulation. 

 

4 

 

References 

[1] “New research council needed”, Nature 418 (2002) 259. 

Q. Schiermeier, “A window of opportunity”, Nature 419 (2002) 108. 

I.B. Holland, “Europe is not yet ready for a research council”, Nature 419 (2002) 248. 

W. Krull, “A fresh start for European science”, Nature 419 (2002) 249. 

“New structures for the support of high-quality research in Europe”, ESF position paper, April 2003, 
http://www.esf.org/newsrelease/63/ERC.pdf. 

[2] J.P. Connerade, “Will Europe have its research area?”, Euroscience News, No. 22, Winter (2003) 1. 
Electronic version is accessible at http://www.euroscience.org/MBSHIP/Bulletin/Euro22.pdf. 

F. Sgard, “The view of Euroscience”, Euroscience News, No. 22, Winter (2003) 4. 

W. Krull, “Climbing the steps towards a European Research Council”, 
Euroscience News, No. 22, Winter (2003) 5. 

G. Schatz, “Do we need a European Research Council? A scientist's view”, 
Euroscience News, No. 22, Winter (2003) 6. 

O. Postel-Vinay, “European Research Council expected for 2004”, TRN, July 1 (2003), 
http://trn.rampazzo.com/W22Y03/leader.asp. 

[3] See e. g. the official European Commission's research website including the rules for the 

forthcoming Sixth Framework Programme, http://europa.eu.int/comm/research/fp6/index_en.html. 
For a discussion, see also: “Frameworks can be too rigid”, Nature 420 (2002) 107. 

[4] T. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago University Press, 1970). 

First edition: 1962. 

[5] L. de Broglie, “Nécessité de la liberté dans la recherche scientifique”, 

In Certitudes et Incertitudes de la Science (Albin Michel, Paris, 1966). Original edition: 1962. 

L. de Broglie, “Les idées qui me guident dans mes recherches”, 
In Certitudes et Incertitudes de la Science (Albin Michel, Paris, 1966). Original edition: 1965. 

[6] G. Lochak, Louis de Broglie. Un prince de la science (Flammarion, Paris, 1992). 

[7] J. Maddox, “Restoring good manners in research”, Nature 376 (1995) 113. 

J. Maddox, “The prevalent distrust of science”, Nature 378 (1995) 435. 

[8] J. Ziman, “Is science losing its objectivity?”, Nature 382 (1996) 751. 

[9] J. Horgan, The End of Science. Facing the Limits of Knowledge in the Twilight 

of the Scientific Age (Addison-Wesley, Helix, 1996). 

J. Horgan, “From Complexity to Perplexity”, Scientific American, June (1995) 74. 

J. Horgan, The Undiscovered Mind: How the Human Brain Defies Replication, Medication, 
and Explanation (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, New York, 1999). 

[10] A. Sangalli, “They burn heretics, don't they?”, New Scientist, 6 April (1996) 47. 

[11] Y. Farge, “Pour davantage d'éthique dans le monde de la recherche”, 

Science Tribune, October 1996, http://www.tribunes.com/tribune/art96/farg.htm. 

 

5 

[12] A.A. Berezin, “Hampering the progress of science by peer review and by the “selective” funding 
system”, Science Tribune, December 1996, http://www.tribunes.com/tribune/art96/bere.htm. 

[13] D. Braben, “The repressive regime of peer-review bureaucracy?”, 

Physics World, November (1996) 13. 

[14] C. Wennerås and A. Wold, “Nepotism and sexism in peer-review”, Nature 387 (1997) 341. 

[15] K. Svozil, “Censorship and the peer review system”, e-print physics/0208046 at http://arXiv.org. 

[16] D. Adam and J. Knight, “Publish, and be damned ...”, Nature 419 (2002) 772. 

[17] J. Brockman, The Third Culture: Beyond the Scientific Revolution (Touchstone Books, 1996). 
Online edition can be found at http://www.edge.org/documents/ThirdCulture/a-TC.Cover.html. 

J. Brockman, “The Third Culture”, Edge, http://www.edge.org/3rd_culture/index.html. 

The New Humanists: Scientists at the Edge,  edited by J. Brockman (Barnes & Noble Books, 2003). 
See also Edge, http://www.edge.org/3rd_culture/brockman/brockman_print.html. 

[18] The Flight from Science and Reason, eds. P.R. Gross,  N. Levitt, and M.W. Lewis (New York 
Academy of Sciences, 1996). Also: Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, vol. 775. 

[19] J. Bricmont, “Le relativisme alimente le courant irrationnel”, La Recherche, No. 298, mai (1997) 82. 

[20] A. Sokal and J. Bricmont, Impostures intellectuelles (Odile Jacob, Paris, 1997). 

[21] J. de Rosnay, “Du pasteur au passeur”, Le Monde de l'Education, de la Culture et de la Formation, 

No. 245, fevrier (1997) 20. 

[22] O. Postel-Vinay, “La recherche menacée d'asphyxie”, Le Monde de l'Education, de la Culture 

et de la Formation, No. 245, fevrier (1997) 47. 

O. Postel-Vinay, “La défaite de la science française”, La Recherche, No. 352, avril (2002) 60. 

O. Postel-Vinay, “L'avenir de la science française”, La Recherche, No. 353, mai (2002) 66. 

[23] Sciences à l'école: De désamour en désaffection, Le Monde de l'Education, Octobre (2002), 25-42. 

[24] S. Fuller, The Governance of Science: Ideology and the Future of the Open Society 

(Open Society Press, Buckingham, 1999). 

S. Fuller, Thomas Kuhn: A Philosophical History for Our Times 
(University of Chicago Press, 2000). 

[25] M. Gibbons, “Science's new social contract with society”, Nature 402 Supp (1999) C81. 

[26] H. Nowotny, P. Scott, and M. Gibbons, Rethinking Science: Knowledge and the Public 

in an Age of Uncertainty (Polity Press, 2001). 

M. Gibbons, H. Nowotny, C. Limoges, M. Trow, S. Schwartzman, and P. Scott, Evolution 
of Knowledge Production: The Dynamics of Science and Research in Contemporary Societies 
(Sage, London, 1994). 

[27] D.S. Greenberg, Science, Money, and Politics: Political Triumph and Ethical Erosion 

(University of Chicago Press, 2001). 

[28] M. Lopez-Corredoira, “What is research?”, e-print physics/0201012 at http://arXiv.org. 

Ciencia Digital 8 (2000). 

M. Lopez-Corredoira, “What do astrophysics and the world's oldest profession have in common?”, 
e-print astro-ph/0310368 at http://arXiv.org. 

 

6 

[29] C. Chiesa and L. Pacifico, “Patronage lies at the heart of Italy's academic problems”, 

Nature 414 (2001) 581. 

[30] P.A. Lawrence, “Rank injustice”, Nature 415 (2002) 835. 

P.A. Lawrence, “The politics of publication”, Nature 422 (2003) 259. 

“Challenging the tyranny of impact factors”, Nature 423 (2003) 479. 

P.A. Lawrence and M. Locke, “A man for our season”, Nature 386 (1997) 757. 

[31] G. Brumfiel, “Misconduct in physics: Time to wise up?”, Nature 418 (2002) 120. 

“Reputations at risk”, Editorial, Physics World, August (2002). 

E. Check, “Sitting in judgement”, Nature 419 (2002) 332. 

[32] L. Stenflo, “Intelligent plagiarists are the most dangerous”, Nature 427 (2004) 777. 

[33] M.V. Simkin and V.P. Roychowdhury, “Copied citations create renowned papers?”, 

e-print cond-mat/0305150 at http://arXiv.org. 

M.V. Simkin and V.P. Roychowdhury, “Stochastic modeling of citation slips”, 
e-print cond-mat/0401529 at http://arXiv.org 

[34] M. Gad-el-Hak, “Publish or Perish – An Ailing Enterprise?”, Physics Today 57, March (2004) 61. 

Accessible at http://physicstoday.org/vol-57/iss-3/p61.html. 

[35] S. Nagel, “Physics in Crisis”, FermiNews 25, No. 14, August 30 (2002), 
http://www.fnal.gov/pub/ferminews/ferminews02-08-30/p1.html. 
Also: Physics Today 55, September (2000) 55. 

P. Rodgers, “Hanging together”, Physics World, October (2002), Editorial. 

[36] K.H. Elliott, “Physics with Everything”, Editorial, Eur. J. Phys. 24, 3 March (2003). 

[37] S. Sengupta, “Science as a Culture – Its Implications”, e-print physics/0310161 at http://arXiv.org. 

[38] A.P. Kirilyuk, Universal Concept of Complexity by the Dynamic Redundance  Paradigm: 

Causal Randomness, Complete Wave Mechanics, and the Ultimate Unification of Knowledge 
(Naukova Dumka, Kiev, 1997), 550 p., in English. For a non-technical review see also: 
e-print physics/9806002 at http://arXiv.org. 

[39] A.P. Kirilyuk, “Dynamically Multivalued, Not Unitary or Stochastic, Operation of Real Quantum, 
Classical and Hybrid Micro-Machines”, e-print physics/0211071 at http://arXiv.org. See especially 
section 9 for a detailed discussion of modern science structure and development. 

[40] M. Rees, Our Final Hour: A scientist’s warning: How terror, error, and environmental 

disaster threaten humankind’s future in this century (Basic Books, New York, 2003). 

[41] G. Soros, Open Society: Reforming Global Capitalism (Public Affairs Press, New York, 2000). 

G. Soros and G. Shandler, The Crisis of Global Capitalism: Open Society Endangered 
(Public Affairs Press, New York, 1998). 

G. Soros, “Toward a Global Open Society”, The Atlantic Monthly 281, January (1998) 20. 
Accessible at http://www.theatlantic.com/issues/98jan/opensoc.htm. 

[42] Terms for Endearment: Business NGOs and Sustainable Development, ed. by J. Bendell 

(Greenleaf Publishing, 2000). 

 

 

7 

