MEASURING THE FORCE EJECTING DNA FROM PHAGE.

Alex Evilevitch, Martin Castelnovo+, Charles M. Knobler, and William M. Gelbart*

Department  of  Chemistry  and  Biochemistry,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles,
California 90095-1569, USA

+Present  address:  Laboratoire  de  Dynamique  des  Fluides  Complexes,  3  Rue  de
l'Universite,  Strasbourg, 67000 FRANCE

ABSTRACT

We discuss how a balance can be established between the force acting to eject DNA
from  viral  capsids  and  the  force  resisting  its  entry  into  a  colloidal  suspension  which
mimics the host cell cytoplasm. The ejection force arises from the energy stored in the
capsid as a consequence of the viral genome (double-stranded DNA) being strongly bent
and crowded on itself. The resisting force is associated with the osmotic pressure exerted
by  the  colloidal  particles  in  the  host  solution.  Indeed,  recent  experimental  work  has
demonstrated that the extent of ejection can be progressively limited by increasing the
external  osmotic  pressure;  at  a  sufficiently  high  pressure  the  ejection  is  completely
suppressed.  We  outline  here  a  theoretical  analysis  that  allows  a  determination  of  the
internal (capsid) pressure by examining the different relations between force and pressure
inside  and  outside  the capsid, using the experimentally measured position of the force
balance.

1. INTRODUCTION.

Viruses  that  infect  bacteria  are  among  the  simplest  biological  objects1,2. Bacterial
viruses,  or  phage,  often  consist  of  a  single  molecule  of  double-stranded  DNA
surrounded/protected by a rigid capsid formed from a polyhedral arrangement of many
copies  of  a  low-molecular-weight  protein.  Most  phage  also  have  a  long,  hollow,
cylindrical tail that is attached to the hole at a vertex of the capsid. The phage is able to
propagate only by getting its DNA inside a cell whose biochemical machinery will do the
job of replicating the whole virus – making many copies of its DNA and expressing the
genes  that  are  responsible  for  templating  the  syntheses  of  its  proteins.  After  the  self
assembly of the capsid and tail from their respective constituent proteins, the loading of
the DNA into the capsid is directed by a motor protein (also encoded in the viral genes),
followed by the subsequent joining of the tail to the phage head. All of these exquisitely
orchestrated activities are set into motion upon the initial step of DNA injection into the
cytoplasm.

It is not surprising, then, that a great deal of work has been devoted to determining
how  DNA  is  transferred  from  the  viral  capsid  through  the  tail  into  the  bacterial  cell

1

cytoplasm3-5. In most cases the process is known to be initiated by the binding of the tail
to a “receptor” protein that resides in the outer membrane of the bacterium. This binding
leads to a conformational change of the viral tail, opening of the capsid, and subsequent
ejection of its contents – the viral DNA – into the cell. The capsid remains outside the
cell,  as  first  demonstrated in  the  classic  Hershey-Chase  experiment just  over  50  years
ago.6  Yet  today  there  is  still  very  little  understanding  of  the  mechanical  and  physical
properties  of  viral  capsids  and  encapsidated  DNA,  i.e.,  of  the  forces  and  pressures
operating while a genome is packaged or ejected. These properties are not only central to
elucidating the infection mechanism, but are also relevant to the strength of viral capsids
and are of importance for investigating the possibility of using them as containers for
non-genomic materials.7,8

When a virus is assembled in an infected bacterium, its DNA, which may be tens of
micrometers  long,  must  be  compressed  into  a  (capsid)  volume  whose  diameter  is
hundreds of times smaller. More significantly, there is only room to accommodate the
DNA inside if the spacing between neighboring chain segments is slightly larger than
their  diameter.  Also,  the  inner  diameter  of  the  capsid  is  comparable  to  or  often  even
smaller than the DNA persistence length. Based on these facts it has been recognized that
this compressed DNA must exert a very high pressure on the inside of the capsid due to
the strong repulsions between the neighboring DNA portions, as well as elastic forces due
to the bending of the stiff DNA rod.9-11 This stored energy density inside the capsid is
responsible  for  the  mechanical  force  that  ejects  the  DNA  into  the  cell,  without  ATP
hydrolysis or the intervention of any other external source of energy.

Recent theoretical work9-11 has established that the driving force for ejection, feject,
decreases  monotonically  with  decreasing  length  of  genome  remaining  in  the  capsid.
Calculation showed that forces for a fully packaged genome inside the viral capsids reach
very high values – tens of pN – corresponding to pressures up to tens of atmospheres
exerted  by  DNA  on  the  capsid  walls.  The  experimental  work  of  Smith  et  al.12  is
consistent with these predictions. In their single-molecule experiment, the force exerted
by the motor protein upon loading of DNA into a phage capsid is measured by stalling
the  motor  with  optical  tweezers  for  increasing  lengths  of  packaged  DNA.  The  motor
exerts its maximum force at the end of the loading process, when the whole genome is
packaged. This force corresponds to the maximum force ejecting DNA, at the start of the
ejection.

The  question  asked  in  recently  reported  experimental  work13  was  whether  it  is
possible  to  progressively  suppress  the  ejection  of  the  genome  from  a  capsid  that  is
exposed to an increasing osmotic pressure difference between its inside and outside.  This
situation  is  present  in  the  in  vivo  situation  where  the  viral  genome  is  ejected  into  a
bacterial  cytoplasm  whose  macromolecular-induced  osmotic  pressure  is  several
atmospheres.14-16  In  the  experiment  we  mimicked  the  bacterial  cytoplasm  with  a  host
solution of an osmotic stress polymer and showed that the osmotic pressure difference,
due to the PEG (polyethylene glycol) polymer that remains outside the capsid, gives rise
to a resisting force, fresist, that balances the force driving ejection (in this case, from the
bacteriophage  lambda);  see  the  illustration  in  Fig.  1.  Progressively  smaller  extents  of
ejection are measured upon increase in the concentration of polymer, ultimately leading
to complete inhibition of the ejection. Conversely, in the absence of PEG the ejection is
complete  because  there  is  no  force  acting  to  resist  the  ejection;  this  has  indeed  been

2

demonstrated in many experiments.17-20  We  showed  further13  that  the  external  osmotic
pressures  necessary  to  inhibit  ejection  can  be  drastically  lowered  by  addition  of
polyvalent cations, in agreement with many theories (see, example, the references cited in
several  recent  papers21-24)  and  measurements25-28  on  interhelical  interactions  in  DNA
condensates  and  hexagonal  phases.   We  report  elsewhere  the  dependence  of  critical
osmotic pressures on the genome lengths in different phage strains.29

Strictly speaking, our osmotic pressure inhibition experiments do not lead to direct
measurements of the forces or pressures operative in viral capsids.  Rather, they establish
the existence of a balance between the force acting to eject the DNA from the capsid and
the force resisting its entry into the surrounding solution.   Furthermore, they show how
the  position  of  this  force  balance  is  controlled  by  the  concentration  of  osmolyte  in
solution,  e.g.,  how  increasing  the  PEG  concentration  leads  to  the  forces  becoming
balanced with a longer length of genome remaining inside, and hence a larger value of
the ejection force. To deduce actual values for the forces, however, requires a systematic
theory  of  the  relationship  between feject  and  the  length  of  DNA  remaining  inside  the
capsid, and between fresist and the concentration of osmolyte outside.

  Recently  we  formulated  a  theory  for  the  force  resisting  chain  insertion  into  a
colloidal suspension, which relates the resisting osmotic force to the concentration of the
solute.30  Our  theoretically  predicted  osmotic  force  estimates  were  shown  to  be  of  the
same order of magnitude as the forces associated with the DNA ejection, as estimated by
various calculations of the state of stress of DNA confined in the capsid as a function of
genome length inside.9-11 In the present work we apply these theories and estimates to the
case  of  phage  lambda  and  relate  the  measured  length  of  ejected  genome  to  the  force
resisting the ejection; in this way we deduce the force acting to eject the genome as a
function of its length remaining inside the capsid.  A central goal of this work is to treat
the  balance  between  ejecting  and  resisting  forces,  thereby  explaining  the  physical
meaning and the origin of these forces in relation to the pressures inside and outside the
viral  capsid.   In  particular,  we  account  for  how  the  force  balance  is  consistent  with  a
significant difference between inside and outside pressures.

2. FORCE / PRESSURE RELATIONSHIPS.
A. Force-balance experiment

The origin of the force resisting the ejection of DNA from the capsid lies in the
osmotic pressure caused by molecules in solution that cannot penetrate the capsid. The
physics of this osmotic force that resists the entry of DNA into the external solution is the
following. In order for the DNA to be inserted into the colloidal suspension, particles
have to be removed from an effective volume associated with DNA in the solution. In
other words, a cavity must be made in the solution to accommodate entry of this stiff
chain. Creating this cavity involves a double energetic price: work must be performed
against  the  pressure  of  the  polymer  solution  (pressure-volume  contribution),  and  an
interface must also be established (surface-tension term). Additionally, formation of the
cavity costs some conformational entropy associated with the polymers. The total energy
per unit length associated with the insertion of the DNA in the polymer solution gives the
quasistatic force resisting the ejection, which to leading order does not depend on the
length of the DNA chain being inserted into solution.30 Note that the actual process of
DNA ejection is also a dynamical one, and additional effects need to be considered to

3

fully address this problem, e.g., the molecular friction of the DNA inside the phage tail
and in the polymer solution.   This effective viscosity determines the rate of ejection, as
the genome is pushed out of the capsid through the tail. However, all these effects are
irrelevant when an equilibrium state is reached; our experiments demonstrate that there
indeed  exists  a  static  force  capable  of  balancing  the  ejection  force,  resulting  in  PEG-
dependent partial ejection of DNA from viral capsids.

The experiment was carried out in the following way13. The spontaneous DNA
ejection from phage lambda (EMBL3 with a 13kb insert) is triggered in vitro by mixing
the  phage  with  its  receptor  protein  LamB  isolated  from  the  bacterial  membrane  of
Escherichia Coli. The DNA is ejected into a buffered aqueous solution of PEG polymer
at  varying  PEG  concentrations.  The  endonuclease  DNaseI  is  also  present  in  the  host
solution,  and  it  digests  all  of  the  DNA  that  is  ejected.  This  DNA  is  separated  by
centrifugation  from  the  phage  capsids  (with  unejected  DNA  inside),  and  the
concentration of DNA digested into non-sedimenting nucleotides is measured directly by
UV  absorption  at  260  nm.  Since  the  relationship  between  the  osmotic  pressure  and
temperature  for  PEG8000  solutions  for  a  wide  range  of  concentrations  has  been  well
established25a, the fraction of DNA ejected from the phage can be deduced as a function
of the osmotic pressure in the surrounding solution, ∏out; see Fig. 2a. The solid curve in
Fig. 2a shows that DNA ejection is monotonically suppressed with increasing osmotic
pressure  and  is  completely  inhibited  at  20  atmospheres,  corresponding  to  29%  wt/wt
PEG8000.   The  time  for  the  ejected  DNA  to  be  digested  by  DNaseI  is  an  order  of
magnitude  longer  than  the  time  for  its  ejection  from  the  phage  (minutes31,  versus
seconds19  for  the  later  process).  However,  the  fraction  of  ejected  DNA  is  measured  at
long times after complete digestion into nucleotides has occurred and no more DNA is
entering the solution from the phage; indeed, no time dependence is observed once the
ejected DNA is digested. Therefore, we are establishing a force balance, at equilibrium,
between  the  ejecting  force,  feject,  pushing  the  DNA  from  inside  the  capsid,  and  the
resisting  force,  fresist,  exerted  by  PEG  from  the  outside.  We  emphasize  again  that  this
experiment provides little information about the nonequilibrium aspects of the dynamical
process  of  DNA  ejection;  nor  does  its  interpretation  depend  on  any  of  those  features.
Rather, we show here how feject can be determined from fresist by analyzing the equilibrium
nature of an osmotic force balance. To learn the actual values of feject we need to know the
relationships between force and pressure inside and outside the viral capsid. We start with
an analysis of the force and pressure resisting the DNA ejection outside the capsid.
B. Force vs pressure outside the capsid

The  relation  between  force  and  pressure  in  the  external  solution  has  been
determined in a previous paper.30 The work needed to create a cavity to accommodate a
colloidal particle (e.g., the inserted DNA) in the host solution is commonly decomposed32
into  a  sum  of  a  pressure-volume  energy,  a  surface  term,  and  a  contribution  from  the
conformational  entropy  of  the  osmotic  stress  polymer.  More  explicitly,  the  work  of
S = πDL (where L is
insertion of a rodlike particle of volume 
the rod length) is given by

V = π(D /2)2 L and surface 

W = Π outV +σS + cLD1/ 3b5 / 3.

c are, respectively, the external osmotic pressure, the surface tension
Here Πout, σ and 
€ 
and the monomeric concentration of the polymer solution32; 
b is the monomer size. The
last term is important in the DNA case only if its diameter, D, is small compared to the

€ 

€ 

€ 

(1)

4

€ 

ξ the
characteristic length scale of the polymer solution –
correlation length, in dilute and semi-dilute solution, respectively. In our situation, where
D  is comparable to Rg, the pressure-volume work term is dominant.

Rg , the radius of gyration, or 

€ 

Since  the  calculation  of  the  resisting  force  uses  a  scaling  description  of  the
€ 
polymer solution, it implicitly misses numerical prefactors. However similar calculations
used to describe experimental data on the DNA condensation in a PEG solution show that
those  numerical  prefactors  can  be  approximated  by  unity  to  within  a  factor  of  two.33
Furthermore, as remarked above, the osmotic force (work of insertion per unit length) is
strongly  dominated  by  the  leading  term  involving  pressure-volume  work.  Combining
theoretically calculated curves of force vs volume fraction of PEG (see Eq. 23 in ref. 30)
with similarly calculated curves of osmotic pressure Πout vs volume fraction (see Eqs.
19-2230),  we  obtain  the  resisting  force,  fresist,  as  a  function  of  osmotic  pressure  of  the
polymer,  ∏out.  This  force,  computed  with  unit  prefactors,  is  shown  in  Fig.  2b  as  a
function  of  osmotic  pressure  for  b=0.4nm  (approximate  size  of  ethylene  glycol
monomer)34 and M=130  (degree of polymerization of  PEG8000).34  We  use  theoretical
values of both force and osmotic pressure here in order to be self-consistent in expressing
the  relation  between  them.  Moreover,  since  the  force  and  pressure  are  theoretically
determined only up to unknown numerical constants, this procedure minimizes the effect
of these scaling prefactors.

The theoretical result shown in Fig. 2b is then combined with the experimental
result in Fig. 2a to obtain the ejection force of DNA as a function of genome fraction
ejected; see solid curve in Fig. 2c. This force is an increasing function of the fraction of
genome  inside,  and  is  in  qualitative  agreement  with  single-molecule  experiments  on
bacteriophage φ2912 and with theoretical predictions.9-11  As  is  evident  from  Fig.  2c  the
ejection  force  for  the  fully  packaged  phage  is  18±4  pN  (where  the  uncertainty  is  that
associated with the measured curve13 shown in 2a). Here it is important to note that the
experiment was carried out with a lambda mutant whose genome is 14% shorter than in
the  wild-type  lambda  (41.5  kb  vs  48.5  kb).  Therefore,  we  would  expect  to  find  much
higher ejection forces for a fully packaged wild-type phage, which would consequently
require  a  higher  osmotic  pressure  to  completely  suppress  ejection.   Experiments  and
theory illustrating the effect of genome length on ejection forces and pressures will be
discussed elsewhere.29

We have also performed experiments in which a concentration of 1 mM spermine
tetrachloride (+4 cation) was added to the incubating samples of phage, receptor, DNase I
and PEG. Polyvalent counterions such as spermine (+4) or spermidine (+3), which are
present in significant concentrations in most bacterial cells, act as condensing agents by
introducing  attractive interaction  between  the  DNA  strands13,25-28.  They  reduce  the
electrostatic repulsion and therefore should decrease the ejection force; the phage capsids
are permeable to spermine, just as they are to simple salts (and of course to water).  We
chose a concentration of 1 mM spermine because this is the minimal amount required to
condense  free  lambda  DNA  at  a  concentration  corresponding  to  that  of  the  phage-
encapsidated DNA present in our solutions. We find that ejection in the presence of 1
mM  spermine  is  completely  suppressed  at  a  pressure  of  4  atmospheres  (15%  w/w
PEG8000), much lower than the 20 atmospheres (29% w/w PEG8000) required when no
spermine is present; see dot-dash vs solid curves in Fig. 2a.  In the presence of spermine a
dramatic  suppression  of  the  DNA  ejection  is  already  evident  at  only  1  atmosphere

5

osmotic pressure (7% w/w PEG8000), where almost 50% of the genome still remains in
the capsid. In the absence of spermine only 15% of the genome remains in the capsid
after  opening  the  phage  under  comparable  osmotic  pressure.  The  experimental  result
presented in Fig. 2a demonstrates that in the presence of spermine a significantly smaller
resisting force is sufficient to stop the ejection.

Combining the dot-dash data in Fig. 2a with the calculated force-pressure curve in
Fig. 2b allows us, once again, to plot ejection force as a function of fraction of the ejected
DNA, now in the presence of added spermine; see dot-dash curve in Fig. 2c. It is evident
that the DNA ejection force for a fully packaged genome is now about 5 pN, almost 4
times smaller than in the absence of polyvalent counterions.
C. Force vs pressure inside the capsid

The numerical estimates of the resisting  force above can be compared to recent
analytical and computational work on the ejection force in λ phage.9-11 In all these cases,
the internal force associated with the packaging of DNA inside a spherical viral capsid is
computed through the balance of bending and “crowding” energies of DNA. The former
energy gives a non-negligible contribution since the size of the capsid is comparable to
the persistence length of DNA (about 50nm). But the crowding energy gives by far the
largest contribution when the full viral genome is packaged, because of the dominance of
short-ranged electrostatic and hydration interactions among neighboring portions of the
strongly  confined  DNA.  Of  course  the  interaxial  spacing  characterizing  the  packaged
genome varies with its (mode of organization and) length. To obtain this relation we use
diffraction results on the  interaxial spacing as a function of the genome length in fully
packaged capsids of different mutants of lambda phage.35,36  These  data  suggest  a  local
hexagonal packing and an interaxial spacing of 2.49 nm for the fully packaged EMBL3
mutant. As discussed in previous work,10 where the bending energy contribution is shown
to be relatively small, the ejection force, 

f eject (d) , can be approximated by

+∞
∫
f eject (d) = 3 dxΠ in (x)x
d

€ 

Here  Πin(d)  is  the  osmotic  pressure  as  a  function  of  interaxial  distance,  d,  in  the
hexagonal phase of DNA measured by Rau and Parsegian25b. That is, we assume that the
osmotic  pressure  measured  for  hexagonally  ordered  DNA  in  concentrated  solutions
f eject (d)  calculated in
applies locally to the packaged DNA in phage capsids. In Fig. 3 
this way is plotted for two different sets of solution conditions.  We can do this because
the viral capsid is fully permeable – not only to water, but also – to all of the salt species
involved.

€ 

Since the measured pressure equation of state data are not available for precisely
the conditions of our buffer solution, namely 10mM MgSO4/50mM TrisCl, we use the
Πin(d) measured25b for the nearest composition – 0.5M NaCl/10mM TrisCl/1mM EDTA.
Integrating this Πin(d) according to Eq. (2) gives the dashed curve in Fig. 3. The ejection
force for DNA inside the fully loaded capsid, i.e., at an inter-axial spacing of 2.49 nm
(marked with the vertical dotted line), is about 11 pN (upper horizontal dotted line). Since
the ionic strength of the buffer solution used in our experiments was lower than for the
result shown in Fig. 3, we expect our measured estimate of the resisting force (see Fig.
2c) to be larger than the value of the ejecting force obtained from Eq. (2) and the Fig. 3

€ 

(2)

6

data  because  in  our  case  there  is  less  screening  of  the  electrostatic  repulsion  between
DNA strands. Consistent with this, our estimate for the resisting force, obtained by using
the  measured  value  of  the  minimum  PEG  concentration  required  to  completely  stop
ejection (fully packaged capsid), is 18± 4 (vs 11) pN.

On the other hand, only 4 atm of osmotic pressure is required to completely stop
ejection when 1mM tetravalent cation is present in the solution. As in the case where no
spermine  is  present,  it  is  possible  to  obtain  an  estimate  of  the  ejection  force  from  the
equation of state of hexagonal-phase DNA in the presence of polyvalent ions. The closest
3+ with buffer conditions
available pressure data are those measured for 20 mM Co(NH3)6
of  0.25  NaCl/10  mM  TrisCl25b.   Integrating  this  Πin(d)  as  in  Eq.  (2)  we  find  the  dot-
dashed curve in Fig. 3. The ejection force is about 2 pN, as shown by the lower horizontal
dotted  line  in  Fig.  3,  which  is  once  again  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  our
experimentally deduced value (5 pN) for the force resisting ejection in Fig. 2c. Because
of the lower ionic strength in our experiment (1mM spermine (+4)/10mM MgSO4/50mM
TrisCl) as compared with that used by Parsegian and Rau25b, we obtain a slightly higher
ejection  force  (almost  5  pN)  for  the  fully  packaged  capsid,  due  to  the  stronger
electrostatic repulsion between the DNA strands in the capsid.

For  the  cases  of  both  simple  salt  and  of  polyvalent  salt,  the  estimation  of  the
ejection force (using a combination of the experimental pressure required to completely
stop DNA ejection and the theoretical prediction of the associated resisting force) is in
qualitative  agreement  with  the  forces  obtained  from  integrating  the  independently
measured  pressure  equations  of  state.  In  addition  to  the  ejection  force,  the  theoretical
treatments of packaged DNA9-11 also predict directly the pressures associated with this
force inside the phage; these turn out to be significantly higher than the pressures outside
that are found sufficient to inhibit ejection.  To explain this apparent discrepancy we need
to analyze the force versus pressure relationship inside the capsid in comparison with the
force-pressure relationship outside the capsid (shown in Fig. 2b).
D. Inside/outside pressure imbalance

The pressure that DNA exerts inside the capsid can be calculated by combining
the  force  feject(d)  in  Fig.  3  with  the  pressure  measured  by  Parsegian  and  Rau25b  for
hexagonally-packed DNA; we identify this pressure with , Πin(d).  Recall that feject(d) in
Fig. 3 came from integrating Πin (d) according to Eq. (2). For the case without polyvalent
counterions  and  with  buffer  conditions  (0.5M  NaCl/10mM  TrisCl/1mM  EDTA)  that
differ  only  slightly  from  our  experimental  one,  a  fit  to  Πin(d)=f0  exp(-d/c) with f0  =
550,000 atm and  c = 0.28nm leads to an analytical expression for feject(d).   Since both
Πin(d)  and feject(d)  are  elementary  functions  of  the  d-spacing  between  the  strands  we
obtain immediately the force vs pressure plot shown by the dashed curve in Fig. 4. The
solid curve shown there is the plot of force fresist vs pressure Πout outside the capsid, from
Fig. 2b. Recall that partial ejection involves a force balance between the packaging stress
from inside and the osmotic resistance from outside.   It is evident from Fig. 4 that the
pressures inside and outside are not equal.

Consider,  for  example,  the  point  of  force  balance  for  a  fully  packaged  phage
without polyvalent salt (marked with the horizontal dotted line at f = 11 pN); according to
the dashed curve, the inner pressure of the fully loaded capsid is about 77 atm (shown by

7

vertical  dotted  line  1)  while  the  outer  pressure  is  only  of  order  10  atm  (shown  by  the
vertical dotted line 2 in the same figure). [In our experiment we measured 20 atm outer
pressure, Πout; 20 vs 10, as mentioned above, results from the slightly different solution
conditions (lower ionic strength) used in our experiments compared to the ones used to
calculate pressure/force here.]  The difference (67 atm) in osmotic pressures arises from
the  fact  that  the  viral  capsid  is  essentially  a  closed  rigid  object,  so  that  no  osmotic
pressure equilibrium of the DNA  is expected between the inside and the outside even
before  the  addition  of  an  osmotic  stress  agent.  Unlike  in  the  classical  osmometer
experiment  in  which  an  open  system  allows  for  volume  changes  in  the  sample
compartments,  thus  allowing  the  spacing  between  DNA  strands  to  adjust  to  its
equilibrium value, the phage capsid maintains its constant volume where DNA is from
the beginning compressed to a d-spacing (2.5 nm) below its equilibrium value.

We  can  also  analyze  the  pressure  difference  that  obtains  at  the  point  of  force
balance  for  the  case  where  polyvalent  ions  are  present.  Using  once  again  the  relevant
osmotic  stress  data  for  Πin(d)25b  we  plot  in  Fig.  4  the  force  versus  pressure  inside  the
3+; see dot-dashed curve. Here the force is again
capsid for the case with 20 mM Co(NH3)6
calculated by integrating the pressure, but now – unlike the purely repulsive interaction
where pressure goes to zero only at infinite spacing –there is a preferred (finite) spacing,
d0,  where  the  osmotic  pressure  vanishes  because  of  the  attractive  component  in  the
interaction  between  neighboring  portions  of  DNA.  The  form  of  the  pressure  is  now
Π in (d) = f0[exp((do − d) /c ) −1]  with  f0=4.8  atm,  d0  =  2.8nm,  and  c=  0.14nm,  with  the

d 0

∫

d

force obtained again from 

f eject (d) =

dx 3xΠ in (x)

. Once again the pressures inside and

outside are not balanced.  Fig. 4 shows that at the force balance point of 2 pN marked by
the lower horizontal dotted line (deduced from Fig. 3 for this set of solution conditions)
the  pressure  inside  the  viral  capsid  is  about  36  atm  (vertical  dotted  line  3),  but  the
pressure  outside  is  only  about  2 atm (vertical dotted line 4). Because of the attractive
interaction  between  the  DNA  strands  introduced  by  the  presence  of  polyvalent
counterion, the pressure difference is about two times smaller [(Πin - Πout ) = 34 atm] than
in the earlier, simple salt, case [where (Πin - Πout ) = 67 atm].
3. CONCLUSION

€ 

We have analyzed the forces and pressures inside and outside a bacterial virus, as
functions of the length of DNA remaining inside and of the concentrations of salts and
osmotic  stress  polymers  in  the  host  solution.   Because  of  the  geometry  and  physical
properties of the virus, i.e., a rigid capsid and a long straight tail through which DNA is
ejected, the extent of ejection into a colloidal suspension is determined by a balance of
inside and outside forces rather than pressures. The outside force is determined by the
osmotic pressure exerted by the colloidal particles in solution, while the inside force is
determined by the confinement stress associated with the crowding of the packed portions
of DNA within the capsid. As the ejection proceeds the inside force drops monotonically
until  feject  has  dropped  to  the  value  of  fresist  set  by  the  osmolyte  concentration  in  the
external  solution.   Furthermore,  the  inside  force,  feject,  for  a  given  length  of  confined
DNA, is set by the ambient values of the simple and polyvalent salt concentrations.  For
each  set  of  salt  conditions  one  finds  a  different  value  of  the  outside  osmotic  pressure

€ 

8

(1)

(2)

(3)
(4)

(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

(9)

crit) that is sufficient to completely inhibit ejection. In the case of simple salts we
(Πout
find at this force balance point that the pressures inside and outside differ by as much as
70 atm.  In the presence of multivalent cations these pressures, and their difference, can
be many times smaller.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We  are  pleased  to  acknowledge  many  helpful  discussions  with  Avinoam  Ben-
Shaul, Shelly Tzlil, Markus Deserno, Rob Phillips, Prashant Purohit, Mandar Imandar,
Bengt  Jönsson,  Ulf  Olsson  and  Håkan  Wennerström.  The  work  has  been  financially
supported by the National Science Foundation, through grants #CHE00-7931 to CMK
and #CHE99-88651 to WMG, and by the Swedish Foundation for Internationalization of
Research and Higher Education (STINT) through a grant to AE.
REFERENCES:

Phage and the Origins of Molecular Biology; Cairns, J.; Stent, G. S.;

Watson, J. D., Eds.; Cold Spring Harbor Press, 1992.

Alberts, B.; Bray, D.; Lewis, J.; Raff, M.; Roberts; Watson, J. D.

Molecular Biology of The Cell, 3 ed.; Garland Publishing: New York, 1994.

Black, L. W. Ann. Rev. Microbiol. 1989, 43, 267.
Mosing, G.; Eiserling, F. Chapter 9 in The Bacteriophages; Calendar, R.,

Ed.; Plenum: New York, 1988; Vol. 2.

Murialdo, H. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 1991, 60, 125.
Hershey, A. D.; Chase, M. J. Gen. Physiol. 1952, 36, 39.
Douglas, T.; Young, M. Nature 1998, 392, 152.
Slilaty, S. N.; Berns, K. I.; Aposhian, H. V. J. Biol. Chem. 1982, 257,

Kindt, J. T.; Tzlil, S.; Ben-Shaul, A.; Gelbart, W. M. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.

(10)

Tzlil, S.; Kindt, J. T.; Gelbart, W. M.; Ben-Shaul, A. Biophys. J. 2003, 84,

Purohit, P. K.; Kondev, J.; Phillips, R. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 2003,

6571.

USA 2001, 98, 13671.

1616.

(11)
100, 3173.
(12)

Smith, D. E.; Tans, S. J.; Smith, S. B.; Grimes, S.; Anderson, D. L.;

Bustamante, C. Nature 2001, 413, 748.

Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 2003, 100, 9292.

(13)

Evilevitch, A.; Lavelle, L.; Knobler, C. M.; Raspaud, E.; Gelbart, W. M.

Serwer, P. Biopolymers 1988, 27, 165.

(14)
(15) Mitchell, P.; Moyle, J. Symp. Soc. Gen. Microbiol. 1956, 6, 150.
(16)
(17)
(18) Graff, A.; Sauer, M.; Van Gelder, P.; Meier, W. Proceedings of the

Stock, J. B.; Rauch, B.; Roseman, S. J. Biol. Chem. 1977, 252, 7850.
Roa, M. FEMS Microbiology Letters 1981, 11, 257.

National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2002, 99, 5064.

(19) Novick, S. L.; Baldeschwieler, J. D. Biochemistry 1988, 27, 7919.
(20)

Evilevitch, A.; Gober, J. W.; Phillips, M.; Knobler, C. M.; Gelbart, W. M.

manuscript in preparation 2004.

(21)
Lau, A. W. C.; Pincus, P. A. P. Phys. Rev. 2002, E66, 041501.
(22)  Nguyen, T. T.; Rouzina, I.; Shklovskii, B. I. J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 112,

9

2562.

Solis, F. J.; Olvera de la Cruz, M. Phys. Rev. 1999, E60, 4496.

(23)
(24) Arenzon, J. J.; Stilck, J. F.; Levin, Y. Eur. Phys. J. 1999, B12, 79.
(25)

a. Parsegian, V. A.; Rand, R. P.; Fuller, N. L.; Rau, D. C. Methods in

Enzymology 1986, 127, 400. Rau, D. C.; b. Parsegian, V. A. Biophys. J. 1992, 61, 246.
Leikin, S.; c. Parsegian, V. A.; Rau, D. C. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 1993, 44, 369.

(26)

a. Raspaud, E.; de la Cruz, M. O.; Sikorav, J. L.; Livolant, F. Biophys. J.

1998, 74, 381. b. Pelta, J.; Livolant, F.; Sikorav, J.-L. J. Biol. Chem. 1996, 271, 5656.
(27) Wilson, R. W.; Bloomfield, V. A. Biochemistry 1979, 18, 2192.
Baldwin, R. L.; Widom, J. Biopolymers 1983, 22, 1595.
(28)
Evilevitch, A.; Grayson, P.; Phillips, R.; Knobler, C. M.; Gelbart, W. M.
(29)

manuscript in preparation 2004.

2003, 10, 191.

(30)

Castelnovo, M.; Bowles, R. K.; Reiss, H.; Gelbart, W. M. Eur. Phys. J. E.

(31) Maniatis, T.; Fritsch, E. F.; Sambrook, J. Molecular Cloning A Laboratory

Manual, seventh ed.; Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1983.

(32)

de Gennes, P. G. Scaling Concenpts in Polymer Physics; Corenll

University: Ithaca: N. Y., 1979. See also: de Gennes, P.G.  C. R. Acad. Sci. B. 1979, 288,
359.

de Vries, R. Biophys. J. 2001, 80, 1186.

(33)
(34) Abbott, N. L.; Blankschtein, D.; Hatton, T. A. Macromolecules 1992, 25,

3917.

(35)
(36)

Earnshaw, W. C.; Casjens, S. R. Cell 1980, 21, 319.
Earnshaw, W. C.; Harrison, S. C. Nature 1977, 268, 598.

10

FIGURE CAPTIONS:

Figure 1

Schematic  of  the  experiment  in  which  viral  DNA  ejection  is  inhibited  by  the
osmotic  force  due  to  PEG  in  the  external  solution.  The  force  balance  is  measured  at
equilibrium after all the ejected DNA has been digested by DNaseI. The ejected DNA is
pictured as a short stiff chain that extends into the host solution. For the sake of clarity,
the proteins LamB and DNase I have not been pictured.

Figure 2

Analysis of the experimental data to deduce the ejection force for different lengths
of external DNA. (a) Experimental results: percentage of ejected DNA as a function of
Πout, the osmotic pressure (atm) of the surrounding PEG solution in the spermine-free
(circles and solid curve) and spermine-added (diamonds and dot-dashed curve) cases. In
each case only one set of data13 (from one batch of phage) has been shown and error bars
have been omitted for clarity. (b) Theoretical results for fresist, the force (pN) resisting
DNA  insertion  into  the  PEG  solution  as  a  function  of  the  Πout,  the  external  osmotic
pressure  (atm),  for  degree  of  polymerization M=130 and monomer size b=0.4nm. (c)
Combination  of  the  two  previous  plots  to  give  the  ejection  force  (under  equilibrium
conditions) as a function of the DNA fraction ejected for both cases: with (dot-dashed
curve) and without spermine (solid curve).

Figure 3

Ejection force (pN) as a function of interaxial spacing (nm), as calculated from
Eq.  (2),  for  two  different  sets  of  solution  conditions,  assuming  hexagonal  packing  of
DNA. The first set of conditions (dashed curve), 0.5M NaCl/10mM TrisCl/1mM EDTA,
mimics the ejection experiment in the absence of spermine. The second set (dot-dashed
curve), 20mM Co(NH3)6Cl3/0.25M NaCl/10mM TrisCl, shows the effect of the addition
of polyvalent ions, with composition close to that of our spermine-added experiment. The
dotted horizontal lines show the forces in the two cases when the interaxial distance is
2.49 nm, which corresponds to the measured values in the lambda mutant used here (86%
of wild-type lambda genome).

Figure 4

Force (pN) as a function of the outside pressure (Πout: top, solid curve) and the
inside pressure (Πin: bottom two). The force outside, fresist, is calculated as described for
Fig.  2b.  The force inside, feject, is calculated by assuming hexagonal packing of DNA
using the Rau-Parsegian measurements for the two solution conditions discussed in Fig. 3
(dashed and dot-dashed curves). The vertical dotted lines (1) and (2), and (3) and (4),
show the pressures inside and outside at maximum ejection force without (see lines 1 and
2), and with (3 and 4), added polycation. Note the large differences in pressures (67 atm
and 34 atm, respectively) when the system is at force equilibrium.

11

Figure 1

12

Figure 2

13

Figure 3

14

Figure 4

15

