ENERGY RAMPING FOR DAFNE-2

C. Milardi, LNF-INFN, Frascati, Italy

DAFNE experience, can be obtained with currents of the
order  of  .5  A  per  beam  stored  in  30  buckets,  out  of
the 120 available, with a rather low current per bunch. In
this  context  the  rings  can  be  even  operated  without
wiggler magnets.

Wigglers had been introduced in the DAFNE lattice to
increase  damping,  which  helps  in  fighting  beam-beam
driven  instabilities  as  well  as  multi-bunch  effects.  Since
the  wigglers  operate  at  their  maximum  field  already  at
510  MeV,  a  lattice  without  wigglers  can  be  ramped  at  a
constant  optical  configuration,  limiting  the  ramping
process  to  a  simple  synchronous  scaling  involving  all
magnetic  elements.  In  presence  of  wiggler  magnets  an
efficient  approach  would  require  interleaving  each
ramping  step  with  slow  feedbacks  for  closed  orbit  and
betatron tunes.

Abstract

The  aim  of  this  paper  is  to  overview  the  energy
ramping  main  issues  for  DAFNE-2,  the  high-energy
upgrade  of  the  Frascati  e+e-  DAFNE  collider  in  order  to
understand  the  feasibility  of  the  process  itself  and  to
define the tools to be developed for its implementation.

INTRODUCTION
Two  possible  evolutions  have  been  considered  for  the
DAFNE  [1]  future.  The  first  scenario  assumes  a  com-
pletely new machine providing collisions at the energy of
the f-factory,  1.02  GeV  in  the  center  of  mass,  with  a  lu-
minosity  at  least  two  order  of  magnitude  higher  than  in
the  present  DAFNE  configuration,  which  has  reached  a
peak  luminosity  of  .8  1032  cm-2  s-1.  This  machine  should
be of interest for high-energy physics studies especially in
the  field  of  kaon  rare  decays  and  the  related  flavor
physics.

A  second  scenario  considers  a  smooth  upgrade  of  the
existing  collider  to  increase  the  collision  energy  in  the
range of  2  ÷  2.4  GeV in the center of mass; it offers the
opportunity  to  investigate  events  close  to  the  neutron-
antineutron threshold and improve the statistics about the
nucleons  form  factor  measurements.  The  so  called
DAFNE-2 [2] option is much less challenging and much
less demanding in terms of design, manpower, realization
time  and  cost,  especially  if  the  modifications  are  limited
to the bending magnets and to the interaction region and
if  the  existing  injection  system![3],  see  Fig.  1,  can  be
reused  injecting  the  beam  at  .51  GeV  energy  and  then
ramping the rings to the colliding energy.

DAFNE-2 GENERALITIES
DAFNE-2  uses  only  one  out  of  the  two  available

interaction regions.

a  maximum  magnetic 

Each ring is supposed to work in the energy range 1 ÷
1.2  GeV,  circumstance  asking  for  an  upgrade  of  the
bending  magnets  [4];  in  fact  the  existing  dipoles  can
provide 
equal
to ≈  1.8 T while 2.35 ÷ 2.8 T will be required unless the
present  bending  radius  (1.4  m)  is  not  increased.  Such
magnetic field variation corresponds to a ≈ 520 A current
increase  on  the  power  supplies,  assuming  to  reuse  the
same devices presently working on DAFNE.

field 

The  design  of  the  low-b  section  relies  on  two  super-
conducting  quadrupole  doublets;  each  quadrupole  is
installed  with  a  proper  rotation  angle  in  order  to  follow
the rotation of the betatron oscillation plane introduced by
the detector solenoid having a field integral of 0.7 Tm.

A  luminosity  in  the  range  of  1032  cm-2  s-1  has  been
required for the experiments proposed for the high energy
update  of  DAF NE  [5].  This  luminosity,  relying  on

Figure 1: Present DAFNE layout showing the e+e-
colliding rings and the injection system.

INJECTION STRATEGY
In principle the energy ramping procedure in a collider
such  as  DAFNE-2  can  be  implemented  in  three  simple
steps:

- separation of the two beams at the crossing point

- synchronous  ramping  of  both  rings  from  injection

energy to the desired interaction one

- removal of beam separation.

I  (A)

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

Figure  2:  Vertical  component  of  the  field,  at  the  magnet
center,  as  a  function  of  the  coil  current  for  the  DAFNE
long dipoles.

Beam  separation  can  be  realized  in  the  longitudinal

plane by a fast phase jump of the RF cavity in one ring.
 This method [6] has been tested and used routinely

during  DAFNE  operation  before  finding  an  efficient
procedure  for  injection  in  collision.  It  has  proved  to  be
reliable with trains of 30 and 40 bunches and jumps of 1
and 1.5 buckets.

RAMPING MAIN ISSUES

The  main  issue  in  an  energy  ramping  process  is  to
change the accelerator energy in a time as short as possi-
ble preserving the beam current and stability while keep-
ing tunes, closed orbit and chromaticity constant.

A  stable  beam  current  during  ramping  is  necessary  to
maintain  the  best  collider  performances  in  term  of  peak
and integrated luminosity, limiting the background hitting
the  detector.  Longitudinal  and  transverse  beam  stability
must  be  preserved  as  well  to  avoid  beam  loss  and  the
related background showers.

Last  but  not  least  ramping  at  fixed  betatron  tunes
minimizes  the  time  necessary  to  set  up  the  rings  for
collision.

Elements involved in the ramping process

In a collider the ramping process involves all magnetic
elements  (with  the  related  physical  quantities);  for
DAFNE they are:

•  Dipoles (reference orbit xref and yref.)

•  Quadrupoles (betatron tunes nx and ny)

Sextupoles (chromaticity xx and xy)

At  DAFNE   four  different  kinds  of  bending  magnets
are installed: sector and parallel short [7] and sector and
parallel  long  [8]  providing  respectively  40.5o  and  49.5o
deflection angles while ordinary quadrupoles are of three
different  kinds,  small  [9],  large  [10]  and 
large
aperture [11].

In  practice  the  magnetic  field,  for  each  ramp  step  i
and  for  each  element  j  must  be  changed  by  setting
the  current  provided  by  the  corresponding  power
supply  according  to  the  calibration  curve  specific  to  that
element:

Bji = f(IPS

ji)        i =1,….nstep      j =1,….nele

Calibration  curves  for  long  and  short  dipoles  and  for
small  quadrupoles  are  presented  in  Figs.  2,  3  and  4
respectively.

Dedicated  High  Level  Software  (HLS)  applications,
running  within  the  collider  Control  System,  will  be
necessary  to  compute  IPS  arrays  to  implement  the
ramping process.

B  (T)

B  (T)

∫Gdl  (T)

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

5.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0

• 

• 

• 

Splitters  (horizontal  crossing  angle  at  the
interaction point qcross)

0.0

0

Steering magnets (closed orbit)

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

I  (A)

Figure  3:  Vertical  component  of  the  field  at  the  magnet
center  as  a  function  of  the  coil  current  for  the  DAFNE
short dipoles.

I(A)

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

Figure  4:  Average  integrated  gradient  versus  excitation
current for the DAFNE small quadrupoles.

Wigglers and ramping

Beam  stability  at  injection  energy  could  be  improved
by keeping the wigglers on. For this reason we still keep
this option for DAFNE-2, although it would have a strong
incidence on the power bill and would add some compli-
cations  to  the  ramping  process.  In  this  case  the  wiggler
magnets  will  be  operated  at  fixed  field,  while  ramping,
and  the  tune  and  orbit  shift  during  ramping  will  be
recovered by implementing slow feedbacks for the closed
orbits and the betatron tunes to be included in the ramping
procedure.

Coupling and ramping

The ramping option requires a design for the DAFNE-2
IR  based  on  superconducting  quadrupoles  instead  of  the
present  system  of  permanent  magnet  ones.  The  low-beta
quadrupoles  are  rotated  by  the  corresponding  average
rotation  introduced  by  the  detector  solenoid  at  their  azi-
muth to minimize the betatron coupling. Experience with
DAFNE  has  shown  that  a  careful  coupling correction is
mandatory  to  reach  the  best  performances  in  terms  of
luminosity  [12].  The  design  value  for  DAFNE-2
k = 0.3 % has already been reached at DAFNE.

Special attention deserves coupling evolution: in fact it
will be no longer compensated neither at the injection nor
during the ramping process due to the practical difficulty
in  rotating  continuously  the  superconducting  low-b
quadrupoles.  This  point  does  not  seem  relevant  to  beam
stability  because  the  two  beams  are  ramped  out  of  colli-
sion and at constant betatron tunes to avoid resonances. In
terms  of  beam  lifetime  a  larger coupling during ramping
could  even  introduce  some  advantages  since  lifetime  is
Touschek  dominated  and,  as  a  consequence,  strongly
dependent on the bunch size.

It is worth recalling that the Touschek lifetime depends
on  the  inverse  cubic  power  of  the  beam  energy  and  for
this reason it is much shorter at injection energy.

Therefore,  a  longer  lifetime  during  ramping  could  be
helpful in improving the integrated luminosity. However,
betatron coupling correction can be assured, even during
ramping, adding skew quadrupole windings to the perma-
nent magnet quadrupoles, or implementing coupling cor-
rection procedure based on skew quadrupoles.

Ramping speed and Synchronization

Rspeed =

IE coll - IE inj
Dt

Rspeed  must  be  evaluated  for  each  class  of  elements
taking into account the calibration curve so to implement
the  same  energy  variation  in  the  same  time  range,  and
having  care,  at  the  same  time,  to  avoid  eddy  current
related problems.

† 

All  DAFNE  elements  are  laminated  and  therefore  the
main  limitation  to  the  ramping  speed  comes  from  the
vacuum chamber.

The slew rate of the dipole power supply can be tuned

in the range:

corresponding,  for  a  ≈  520  A  current  variation,  to  a
ramping time tramp

sr = 7.5 ÷ 75 A/s

tramp = 7. ÷ 70 s

The  maximum  ramping  speed  is  not  compatible  with
the characteristics of the DAFNE vacuum chamber, while
a slower ramp, up to 40 s, would not create any problem.

However,  in  order  to  linearize  the  different calibration
curves  of  the  magnetic  elements  between  injection  and
operation  energy  it  will  be  necessary  to  implement
ramping process in steps.

Ramping time evaluation

In  order  to  estimate  the  time  necessary  to  inject  from
scratch  0.5  A  in  each  beam  and  reach  the  colliding
condition, we must take into account that:

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 
• 
• 

30 steps are a quite reasonable choice to linearize
the different calibration curves and a tramp ≈ 2 s is a
conservative  assumption  for  varying  the  dipole
power supply current.
at each step 2 s are required for the slow orbit and
betatron tunes feedbacks
30 s are needed to inject 0.5 A in each beam
the injection system requires 180 s to switch from
electron to positron mode

the typical operation will be:

ramp  down  from  operation  to  injection  energy:
120  s  (2  s  for  the  magnets  +  2  s  for  the  slow
feedback a step)
electron injection: 30 s
switch from electrons to positrons: 180 s
positron injection: 30 s
ramp up to operation energy: 120 s

The  total  time  is  ≈  8  minutes.  This  time  is  quite
reasonable if compared with the estimated beam lifetime
in collision, of the order of 2 h [13].

Although  the  DAFNE  power  supplies  are  not  used
presently  in  a  synchronous  configuration,  synchronized
ramps can be implemented within the accelerator Control
System [14] since all the power supplies have a remotely
settable slew-rate and accept an external hardware trigger.
So, once the proper slew-rates have been computed by the
HLS  procedure  and  applied  to  the  corresponding  power
supply  by  a  command  executed  by  a  remote  CPU,  the
synchronized  ramp  can  be  started  by  sending  a  trigger
signal, see Fig. 5.

The  average  ramping  speed  for  a  given  magnetic

Power supply ramp synchronization

element is defined as:

Serial Bus

Power
Supplies

Trigger

Front end
CPU
Serial
Interface

Trigger Fan-out

Figure 5: Power Supply ramping synchronization scheme.

TRANSVERSE AND LONGITUDINAL
FEEDBACKS

The  DAF NE  colliding  rings  are  equipped  with
transverse  [15]  and  longitudinal  [16]  feedbacks  to  cope
with the effects of coupled-bunch instabilities.

The energy  ramping  process  does  not  affect transverse
feedback  operation  as  long  as  the  beams  are  ramped
without  changing  the  orbit  position,  in  particular  at  the
pick-up  where  the  bunch-by-bunch  offset  is  detected.
Moreover  they  will  be  also  useful  to  damp  possible
coherent  oscillations  driven  by  slightly  negative
chromaticity.

Special  attention  deserves  the  longitudinal  feedback,
which  is  sensitive  to  the  variation  of  the  synchrotron
oscillation  frequency ns  induced  by  the  energy  ramping.
The  simplest  solution  for  this  problem  consists  in
compensating  the  n s  shift  by  adjusting  the  Radio
Frequency voltage.

However  it  might  be  even  possible  to  exploit  the
adaptive  feature  provided  by  the  feedback  system  itself,
able to scan eight different kinds of filters in real time. Yet
more  sophisticated  systems  providing  advanced  adaptive
features, presently under study [17], can be considered if
necessary.

SLOW FEEDBACKS

Orbit

The  DAFNE  closed  orbit  acquisition  system  samples
the beam position at a rate of 6 Hz [18]. Without further
improvements  it  will  be  possible  to  implement  a  slow
orbit feedback working at the rate of 2 Hz.

The  beam  position  monitor  readouts  are  acquired  by
four  parallel  remote  processors,  which  elaborate  the
information  from  the  BPMs,  giving  the  horizontal  and
vertical beam position. A CPU at the second level of the
Control  System  reconstructs  the  beam  orbit  from  these
raw  data  taking  into  account  the  BPM  alignment  offsets,

the  reference  system  transformation  affecting  BPMs
installed  within  the  detector  solenoid  and  provides
averaging; the result is displayed on the user interface.

Presently  the  closed  orbit  correction  works  under  the
operator control, and the measured response matrix Am of
the  steering  magnet  deflections 
means  of  the  singular  value  decomposition  numerical
z  [19].
technique, the beam orbit 

q  is used to find, by

z = AmDq 
† 

† 

This orbit correction method can be easily included in
an  automated  process  running  at  the  second  level  of  the
Control  System  under  the  control  of  the  ramping
procedure.

† 

Betatron tunes

The  DAFNE  betatron  tune  measurement  system  is
being upgraded exploiting the hardware developed for the
beam  transverse  feedback.  It  delivers  a  fast  analog  to
digital  sampling  of  the  signal  from  a  four  buttons  beam
position  monitor  [20].  Once  operative  this  system  will
provide,  by  injecting  a  bunch  out  of  collision,  a
continuous  real-time  measurement  of  the  tunes  for  the
two beams. Moreover it will be a natural front end for a
betatron  tune  slow  feedback  consisting  in  an  application
able  to  measure  the  tunes,  to  compute  the  proper
quadrupole  configuration  compensating  the  tune  shifts
and  to  restore  the  initial  tune  values  by  varying  the
quadrupole  power  supplies  set  points.  The  quadrupole
configuration will be computed at each step by means of
the machine model integrated in the Control System and
routinely  used  for  optics  computation,  fine  tuning  and
energy scan [21].

CONCLUSIONS
The energy ramping process for DAFNE-2 does not show
any special problem in principle. It asks only for a careful

hardware  configuration  and  an  intense  HLS  applications
development in order to implement the required ramping
procedures  and  to  develop  the  slow  feedbacks  on  closed
orbit and betatron tunes.

The  time  necessary  to  execute  the  whole  ramping
process has been estimated to be 8 minutes, which is quite
negligible if compared with the expected beam lifetime in
collision.

For  a  final  evaluation  of  the  total  ramping  time  it  is
necessary to frozen the design of the new dipoles and that
of the superconducting quadrupoles in the IR.

AKNOWLEDGMENTS
The  author  wishes  to  thank  C.  Biscari,  A.  Drago,  M.
Preger,  R.  Ricci,  M.  Serio,  A.  Stecchi  for  many  useful
discussions.

REFERENCES
[1] G.  Vignola,  The  DAFNE  Project  Team,  "DAFNE:
the  Frascati  Phi-Factory",  PAC’91,  San  Francisco,
May 1991.
C. Milardi on behalf of the DAFNE  Commissioning
Team:  "Status  of  DAF NE",  Frascati  Phys.
Ser. 16: 75-84, 1999.

[2] G.  Benedetti,  “DAFNE-2:  Lattice  for  a  2  GeV

Electron Collider”, these proceedings.

[3] M. Preger: "Injection Scheme for the DAFNE  Main
Ring", DAFNE Technical note, I-2, October 1990.
[4] C.  Ligi  et  al.,  “Preliminary  Feasibility  Study  on
1.1÷2.4  T  Ramping  Dipoles  for  DAFNE-2”,  these
proceedings.

[5] T.  Bressani,  “Summary  on  Workshop  Groups  on
Hypernuclear Physics, Nuclear Form Factor and Low
Energy Spectroscopy”, these proceedings.

[6] R. Boni et al.,“Operational Experience with DAFNE
Radio-Frequency  System,”  PAC’99,  New  York,
March 29 – April 2, 1999.

[7] B.  Bolli  et  al.,  “The  Short  Dipoles  of  the  DAFNE
Main  Ring  Achromats”,  DAFNE  Technical  note,
MM-19, August 1996.

[8] B.  Bolli  et  al.,  “The  Long  Dipoles  of  the  DAFN E
Main  Ring  Achromats”,  DAFNE  Technical  note,
MM-25, August 1997.

[9] B.  Bolli  et  al.,  “Field  quality  of  the  Small
Quadrupoles for the DAFNE Main Rings”, DAFNE
Technical note, MM-10, February 1996.

[10] B.  Bolli  et  al.,  “Field  Quality  of  the  Large
Quadrupoles  for  the  DAFNE  Main  Rings",  MM-24,
April 1997.

[11] B.  Bolli  et  al.,  “The  Large  Aperture  Quadrupole
Prototype  for  the  DAF NE  Interaction  Regions”,
MM-22, January 1997.

[12] M.  Zobov,  “Beam  Dynamics  Issues  in  DAF N E
f-factory”,  ICFA  Beam  Dyn.  Newslett.  31:  14-29,
2003.

[13] S.  Guiducci,  “Touschek  Beam  Lifetime”,  these

proceedings.

[14] A. Stecchi, to be published.
[15] A.  Drago  et  al.,  "Fast  Electronics  for  the  DAFN E
Transverse  Feedback  Systems",  ICALEPCS-20015
San Jose, California, 27-30 Nov 2001.

[16] A. Drago et al., “Longitudinal Quadrupole Instability
and Control in the Frascati DAFNE  Electron  Ring”,
Phys. Rev. ST – Accel. Beams, Vol. 6: 052801, 2003.
[17] J.  Fox  et  al.,  “Multi-Bunch  Feedback  and  High-
Current  Factories:  Operational  Experience,
Theoretical  Limits  and  Technology  Options  for
future upgrades”, these proceedings.

[18] C. Milardi et al.,”DAFNE Control System Status and
Performances”,  PAC’98,  Stockholm,  22-26  June
1998.

[19] C. Milardi, to be published.
[20] A. Drago, to be published.
[21] C. Milardi, to be published.

