Polarization maintaining large mode area 
photonic crystal fiber 

J.R. Folkenberg1, M.D. Nielsen1,2, N.A. Mortensen1, C. Jakobsen1, and H.R. Simonsen1 
1Crystal Fibre A/S, Blokken 84, DK-3460 Birkerød, Denmark 
2COM, Technical university of Denmark, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
 
jrf@crystal-fibre.com 

Abstract:  We  report  on  a  polarization  maintaining  large  mode  area 
photonic  crystal  fiber.  Unlike,  previous  work  on  polarization  maintaining 
photonic  crystal  fibers,  birefringence  is  introduced  using  stress  applying 
parts. This has  allowed us to  realize fibers, which are both single mode at 
any  wavelength  and  have  a  practically  constant  birefringence  for  any 
wavelength.  The  fibers  presented  in  this  work  have  mode  field  diameters 
from about 4 to 6.5 micron, and exhibit a typical birefringence of 1.5(cid:152)10-4.  

 2004 Optical Society of America 

OCIS  codes:    (060.2270)  Fiber  characterization,  (060.2280)  Fiber  Design  and  Fabrication, 
fibers. 
(060.2420)  Fibers,  polarization  maintaining, 
 

(999.999)  Photonic 

crystal 

Reference and Links 

 

1. 

T.A. Birks, J.C. Knight, and P.S.J. Russell, “Endlessly single-mode photonic crystal fiber,” Opt. Lett. 22, 961-
963 (1997). 
J.C. Knight, “Photonic crystal fibres,” Nature 424, 847-851 (2003). 

2. 
3.  A. Ortigosa-Blanch, J.C. Knight, W.J. Wadsworth, J. Arriaga, B.J. Mangan, T.A. Birks, and P.S.J. Russell, 

4. 

“Highly birefringent photonic crystal fibers,” Opt. Lett. 25, 1325-1327 (2000). 
T.P. Hansen, J. Broeng, S.E.B. Libori, E. Knudsen, A. Bjarklev, J.R. Jensen, and H. Simonsen, ”Highly 
birefringent index-guiding photonic crystal fibers”, IEEE. Phot. Technol. Lett. 13, 588-590 (2001). 

5.  M.D. Nielsen, J.R. Folkenberg, N.A. Mortensen, and A. Bjarklev, “Bandwidth comparison of photonic crystal 

fibers and conventional single-mode fibers,” Opt. Express 12,  430-435 (2004), 
http://www.opticsexpress.org/abstract.cfm?URI=OPEX-12-3-430 

6.  K. Suzuki, H. Kubota, S. Kawanishi, M. Tanaka, and M. Fujita, “Optical properties of a low-loss polarization-

maintaining photonic crystal fiber,” Opt. Express 9, 676-680 (2001),  
http://www.opticsexpress.org/abstract.cfm?URI=OPEX-9-13-676 
J. Noda, K. Okamoto, and Y. Sasaki, “Polarization-Maintaining Fibers and Their Applications,” J. Lightwave 
Technol. LT-4, 1071-1088 (1986). 
T.P. White, R.C. McPhedran, C.M. de Sterke, L.C. Botten, and M.J. Steel, “Confinement losses in 
microstructured optical fibers,” Opt. Lett. 26, 1660-1662 (2001). 

7. 

8. 

9.  C.D. Poole and D.L. Favin, “Polarization-Mode Dispersion Measurements Based on Transmission Spectra 

Through a Polarizer,” J. Lightwave Technol. 12, 917-929 (1994). 

10.  M.J. Steel, T.P. White, C.M. de Sterke, R.C. McPhedran, and L.C. Botton, “Symmetry and degeneracy in 

microstructured optical fibers,” Opt. Lett. 26, 488-490 (2001). 

11.  L.N.G. Filon, “On the variation with the wave-length of the double refraction in strained glass,” Proceedings of 

the Cambridge Philosophical Society XI,  478-492 (1902). 

12.  L.N.G. Filon, “On the variation with the wave-length of the double refraction in strained glass,” Proceedings of 

the Cambridge Philosophical Society XII,  313-337 (1904). 

13.  Z. Zhu and T.G. Brown, “Stress-induced birefringence in microstructured optical fibers,” Opt. Lett. 28, 2306-

14.  N.A. Mortensen, M.D. Nielsen, J.R. Folkenberg, A. Petersson, and H.R. Simonsen, “Improved large-mode area 

endlessly single-mode photonic crystal fibers,” Opt. Lett. 28, 393-395 (2003).  

2308 (2003). 

1. Introduction 

Since  the  invention  of  the  so-called  endlessly  single-mode  fiber  [1],  photonic  crystal  fibers 
(PCFs) have attracted much attention, because of the many novel fiber properties that may be 
realized. For a recent review see [2]. In particular, the ability to make large-mode area fibers 

(cid:0)
(LMA-fibers) which are single-mode at any wavelength and the large birefringence that may 
be  achieved  [3,4]  is  very  interesting  for  fiber  devices  such  as  fiber  lasers  and  fiber  based 
gyroscopes. 

LMA-fibers  have  been  studied  quite  thoroughly  [5],  and  it  has  been  shown  that  the 
practical  bandwidth of  single-mode  operation  is limited  at  short  wavelengths  by  micro-  and 
macro  bending  losses,  and  at  long  wavelength  by  leakage  losses.  Different  approaches  to 
polarization maintaining fibers have also been investigated [3,4,6], all of which are based on 
form  birefringence.  Generally,  the  form birefringence is largest  for  wavelengths,  O,  close  to 
the pitch,  /, of the cladding hole structure [4], but for larger values of //O the birefringence 
decreases  rapidly  such  that  LMA-fibers  with  a  birefringence  on  the  order  of  10-4  cannot  be 
realized using form birefringence. 

It  is  well  known  from  solid  silica  fibers,  that  birefringence  may  be  introduced  using 
stress-applying  parts  (SAP),  for  an  overview  of  conventional  polarization  maintaining  (PM) 
fibers  see  [7].  That  is,  a  part  of  the  fiber  consists  of  a  material  with  a  different  thermal 
expansion coefficient than that of silica which gives rise to a stress field in the fiber when it is 
cooled  below  the  softening  temperature  of  silica  during  fabrication.  In  this  way  the  fiber  is 
given  a  built-in  stress  field  and,  because  of  the  elasto-optic  effect,  the  glass  becomes 
birefringent.  

In the present work we report on the first combination of PCF LMA-fibers and SAPs, to 

make polarization maintaining large-mode area fibers (PM-LMA). 

2. Description of fibers 

In Fig. 1, a microscope image of the realized PM-LMA structure is shown. It consists of an 
undoped  silica  core  region  surrounded  by  four  periods  of  air  holes  in  a  triangular  lattice, 
which forms the cladding. Outside the cladding, two SAPs are placed opposite to each other. 
The  SAPs  are  made  of  boron-doped  silica,  with  properties  similar  to  the  ones  used  for 
PANDA fibers [7]. 

The core and cladding region of the fiber resembles the so-called endlessly single-mode 
fibers  [1],  where  the  pitch,  /,  and  hole  size,  d,  has  been  chosen  to  minimize  leakage  and 
macro bending losses in the visible to near infrared region. Three different values of the pitch 
are realized, all having a relative holes size, d//, of approximately 0.48. In the following the 
three fibers will be referred to as PM-LMA-1 (/ = 3.20 Pm), PM-LMA-2 (/ = 4.40 Pm) and 
PM-LMA-3  (/  =  5.94  Pm).  The  fibers  have  all  been  fabricated  from  the same  preform,  by 
varying the outer diameter of the fibers. 

 

 

Fig. 1. Microscope image of PM-LMA fiber. 

 

3. Optical properties 

In  Fig.  2,  the  spectral  attenuation  of  the  three  fibers  is  shown,  measured  using  the 
conventional  cut-back  method  with  a  Tungsten-halogen  white  light  source.  For  PM-LMA-1 
an increased attenuation is observed at long wavelengths, which is ascribed to leakage losses 
[8]. The attenuation spectra indicate that the fiber is single-mode at all wavelengths, since no 

spectral features are observed which may be ascribed to a higher-order mode cutoff. This was 
verified by inspecting the near fields of the fibers at 635 nm and 1550 nm, showing only the 
fundamental mode. 

 

Fig. 2. Spectral attenuation for the three fibers. 

 
The  birefringence  of  the  fibers  was  measured  using  the  so-called  crossed  polarizer 
technique [9], illustrated in Fig 3. Linearly polarized white light is launched into the fiber with 
the polarization oriented at 45 degrees with respect to the polarization axis of the fiber. On the 
fiber  output,  a  second  polarizer  (analyzer)  is  oriented  at  45  degrees  with  respect  to  the 
polarization axis of the fiber. The transmitted light is focused into a multi-mode fiber and the 
spectrum  recorded  with  an  optical  spectrum  analyzer.  Using  a  Jones  matrix  analysis  of  the 
setup, it may be shown that the intensity transmission is given by: 

T

2

cos

 

(cid:11)
E’

(cid:12)L

  

(1) 

Here ’E = Ex - Ey is the difference between the propagation constants of the polarization axes 
of the fiber and L is the length of the fiber. The crossed polarizer setup yields a transmission 
with spectral oscillations, the period of which may be related to the birefringence. In Fig. 4, 
typical  spectra  are  shown  for  PM-LMA-1  at  long  wavelengths  and  PM-LMA-3  at  short 
wavelengths. 

Fig. 3. Measurement set-up for group birefringence. GT1 : Input Glan-Thomson polarizer. L1 : 
Coupling lens into fiber under test (FUT). L2 : Collamating lens for fiber output. GT2 : Output 
Glan-Thomson polarizer (analyser). L3 : Focussing lens. MM : Multi-mode fiber for light 
collection and detection in optical spectrum analyser (OSA). 

 
It  is  emphasized,  that  the  analysis  of  the  spectral  oscillations  yields  the  group 
birefringence,  which  may  be  shown  by  calculating  the  derivative  of  the  phase  in  Eq.  (1), 
M(cid:3) (cid:3)’EL , with respect to the wavelength: 

 

w

M

w

O

 

2

L
S
2

O

O

“

«

‹

n

ph

’w

w

O

’(cid:16)

n

ph

 

n

g

 

’

 (cid:11)(cid:21)(cid:12)(cid:3)

2

L
S
2

O

”

»

…

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Here  ’nph  is  the  phase  birefringence  and  ’ng  is  the  group  birefringence.  One  oscillation 
period, ’O, of the spectrum in Fig. 4 corresponds to ’M = 2S, from which the group index on 
the right hand side of  Eq.  (2)  may  be  calculated.  The  results  are shown in  Fig.  5,  and  have 
been averaged over intervals of 100 or 200 nm. 

Fig. 4. Measured polarization osciallations, for the largest (left) and smallest (right) values of 

the relative wavelength,  (cid:0) / (cid:1)

. 

 

 

Fig. 5. Group birefringence vs. wavelength for the three fibers. 

 
Finally, the polarization holding parameter (h-parameter) was also investigated using the 
setup  shown  in  Fig.  3.  For  this  experiment  the  first  polarizer  was  aligned  with  one  of  the 
optical axis of the fiber, and at the output the transmitted intensity in the polarization axis was 
measured  using  the  second  polarizer.  For  PM-LMA-1  we  obtained  13.3  dB  extinction  on  a 
length of 390 m at 650 nm, corresponding to h=1.2(cid:152)10-4 m-1. This value may be influenced by 
many intrinsic or extrinsic factors, such as the fiber homogeneity, the wavelength, the bending 
radius and, probably most important, the magnitude of the birefringence itself. However, this 
investigation will not be discussed further here. 

4. Discussion of results 

The  likely  contributions  to  the  birefringence  in  the  present  fiber  may  be  divided  into  the 
categories  known  from  solid-glass  fibers,  namely  form  birefringence  and  stress-induced 
birefringence.  It  has  previously  been  shown  that  the  six-fold  symmetry  of  the  cladding  of 
large-mode area fiber does not allow inherent birefringence [10]. Furthermore, any asymmetry 

of  the  core  region  will  only  contribute  negligibly  to  the  birefringence  measured,  since  the 
magnitude  of  the  relative  wavelength,  O//,  is  too  large  [4].  Hence,  the  birefringence  is 
expected to originate only from the stress field, and since the mode field diameter is known to 
be almost constant for LMA fibers [5], we may expect that the birefringence does not depend 
on the wavelength as it does for step-index fibers at small V-parameters [7]. 

Indeed, the values plotted in Fig. 5 show that the birefringence is practically constant for 
the  three  fibers  that  have  been  studied  here.  The  small  birefringence  variation  observed  is 
attributed  to  diameter  variations  of  the  SAPs  used  in  the  preform,  which  are  typically  10% 
along the  length. Indeed, the SAP diameter  as function of position in the preform correlates 
very well with the observed birefringence variations. Because the wavelength dependence is 
very  small,  we  may  assume  that  the  term  O  d/dO(cid:11)’n)  in  Eq.  (2)  is  negligible  and  the  phase 
birefringence is equal to the group birefringence. 

For all three fibers the birefringence is increasing for decreasing wavelengths in the 400 
nm – 900 nm region of the spectrum. We attribute this effect to the dispersion of the elasto-
optic coefficient, which was discovered for bulk glasses in the beginning of the 20th century 
[11,12], but to our knowledge never reported for optical fibers. The birefringence is increasing 
in PM-LMA-1  for  O  >  900  nm  and  to  a smaller  extend in  PM-LMA-2  for  O(cid:3)> 1200  nm.  In 
PM-LMA-1  this  coincides  with  the  spectral  region  showing  leakage  losses,  and  may  be 
explained by the gradual expansion of the mode into the cladding region. Since the stress field 
cannot exist in the air holes, the magnitude of the stress field in the silica regions between the 
6 air holes must be larger than in the core region itself, explaining the observed increase. For 
PM-LMA-2 no leakage losses are seen, but the increase of birefringence could be explained 
by dispersion of the elasto-optic coefficient at long wavelengths. 

The SAPs used for the present fibers were designed to yield a birefringence of 3(cid:152)10-4 if 
used  in  a  solid-glass  PANDA  fiber  with  similar  SAP  sizes  and  spacing.  The  reason  for  the 
lower  birefringence  in  the  present  fibers  is  attributed  to  screening  of  the  strain  field  by  the 
holes.  For  d//=1  the  core  is  mechanically  detached  from  the  SAPs  and  thus  not  strained, 
while for d//=0 the fiber is solid and thus comparable to a conventional PANDA fiber. Hence 
as d// increases above zero, the strain experienced by the core is expected to decrease if the 
rest of the structure is kept constant. Yet, the level of birefringence obtained here is promising 
for  fiber  designs  where  SAPs  are  placed outside  a  cladding  with  air  holes,  and the  result  is 
somewhat  surprising  in  the  light  of  recent  work.  E.g.  in  [13]  it  is  shown  that  an  externally 
applied  stress  field  on  a  photonic  crystal  fiber,  obtained  by  a  lateral  force  on  the  fiber 
cladding, yields a significant reduction of the birefringence even for relative hole sizes, d//(cid:15) 
smaller than 0.5. For the fibers studied here, the screening of the stress field may be reduced 
further, either by decreasing the number of periods of air holes or by using fiber designs with 
smaller holes [14]. 

We have demonstrated, to our knowledge for the first time, a polarization maintaining large 
mode  area  endlessly  single  mode  PCF.  The  birefringence  is  induced  by  SAPs  positioned 
outside the cladding region of the PCF. The optical properties of the LMA-PCF lead to a close 
to wavelength independent birefringence in the order of 1.5·10-4. 

5. Conclusion 

 

 

Acknowledgements 

M.D. Nielsen acknowledges financial support by the Danish Academy of Technical Sciences. 
 

