 

Study of Capillary-based gaseous detectors 

C. Iacobaeus, T. Francke, M. Danielsson, J. Ostling, V. Peskov  

 

 

   

 
 Abstract—  We  have  studied  gain  vs.  voltage  characteristics 
and position resolutions of multistep capillary plates (two or three 
capillary plates operating in a cascade), as well as capillary plates 
operating in a mode when the main amplification occurs between 
plates  or  between  the  capillary  plate  and  the  readout  plate 
(parallel  plate  amplification  mode).  Results  of  these  studies 
demonstrated  that  in  the  parallel-plate  amplification  mode  one 
can  reach  both  high  gains  (>105)  and  good  position  resolutions 
(~100  µm)  even  with  a  single  step  arrangement.  It  offers  a 
compact  amplification  structure,  which  can  be  used  in  many 
applications.  For  example,  in  preliminary  tests  we  succeeded  to 
combine it with a photocathode and use it as a position sensitive 
gaseous photomultiplier. CsI coated capillary plates could also be 
used as a high position resolution and high rate X-ray converter. 
 

Index  Terms—Capillary,  GEM,  PPAC,  CsI  cathode,  Portal 

imaging. 

  

I.  INTRODUCTION 

 R

ecently a great interest arose for various hole-type gas 
multiplication structures: capillaries [1], capillary plates 
(CP)  [2],  gaseous  electron  multipliers  (GEM)  [3].  The  main 
fields  of  application  for  these  detectors  are  similar  to 
traditional gaseous detectors (wire-type or parallel-plate type), 
namely:  detection  of  particles  [4],  X-ray  and  gamma  imaging 
[5], detection of UV and visible photons [6,7]. However, hole-
type  detectors  have  several  advantages  over  the  “traditional” 
ones. The most important among these advantages are: 
1)  A  possibility  of  charge  extraction:  primary  electrons  or 
electrons  created  due  to  the  multiplication  could  be  extracted 
from 
to  another 
multiplication structure or to the readout plate. 
2)  Efficient  suppression  of  ion  and  photon  feedback,  which 
could  be  essential  in  designing  photosensitive  detectors 
sensitive  to  visible  or  UV  light  (often  called  Gaseous  Photo 
Multipliers or GPMs). 

the  capillary’s  holes  and  directed 

A  special  place  among  hole-type  detectors  belongs  to  CPs. 
This is because they are made of glass which is a well suited 
material  for  the  high  level  of  cleanliness  necessary  for  the 
GPM [7].  
Unfortunately, the maximum achievable gain of the hole-type 
detectors  including  CPs  is  usually  relatively  low,  around  104; 
this is marginal for the detection of single primary electrons. In 
order  to  boost  the  maximum  achievable  gain,  a  multistep 
configuration is used; the so called “cascade mode”. This was 
especially useful for the design of GPMs: only multistep CPs 
and  GEMs  allow  gains  of  ~105  to  be  reached  whereas 
traditional    detectors  combined  with  photocathodes,  sensitive 
to  visible  light,  suffered  from  feedback  even  at  low  gains 
(~100) [7]. However, in other applications where the feedback 
is not a problem (detectors with CsI photocathodes or without 
any photocathode at all) the same gain could be reached with 
traditional  gaseous  detectors,  for  example  with  parallel-mesh 
avalanche  chamber  (PMAC),  filled  with  mixtures  containing 
low ionisation potential additives like ethylferrocene, see [8,9] 
and  explanations  in  sec.  IV.  One  of  the  practical  problems 
restricting a wide range of usage of the PMAC is the necessity 
to use mesh-type electrodes. Difficulties associated with these 
are:  the  stretching  of  these  meshes,  bulky  supporting  frames 
and non-uniform detector response. In this work we have tried 
to explore the fact that CPs themselves could play the role of 
the  mesh  in  some  configurations.  Indeed,  CPs  are  rigid,  have 
high quality and flatness of the surface and one can easily drift 
electrons through the CP. Large size (10 cm x 10 cm) CPs are 
commercially available. This may offer very compact detectors 
that  will  be  able  to  operate  at  high  gains  in  a  parallel-plate 
amplification  mode  and  at  the  same  time,  being  able  to 
suppress the feedback. 
The aim of this work is to compare two modes of operation of 
CPs:  the  traditional  multistep  capillary  amplification  (CA) 
mode and the parallel-plate amplification (PPA) mode. 
This  comparison  may  allow  us  to  optimize  the  design  of  the 
GPM as well as X-ray and γ detectors using CPs. 
 

                                                           
Manuscript received November 14, 2003. 
C.  Iacobaeus  is  with  the  Department  of  Medical  Radiation  Physics, 
(e-mail:  Christian@ 

Institutet,  17176  Stockholm,  Sweden 

Karolinska 
radfys.ki.se). 

T.  Francke  is  with  X-Counter  AB,  Svärdv.11,  18233  Danderyd,  Sweden 

(email: tom.francke@xcounter.se). 

M.  Danielsson  and  V.  Peskov  are  with  the  Department  of  Physics,  Royal 
Institute  of  Technology,  Albanova,  KTH  Particle  Physics,  10691  Stockholm, 
Sweden (e-mail: mats.danielsson@mamea.se; Vladimir.peskov@cern.ch). 

J. Ostling is with the Department of Medical Radiation Physics, Stockholm 

University, 17176 Stockholm, Sweden (e-mail: ostling@particle.kth.se). 

II.   EXPERIMENTAL SET UP 

 
Our  experimental  set  up  consists  of  a  gas  chamber  inside  of 
which a single CP or a cascade of CPs could be installed - see 
Fig. 1(a, b). The chamber had two windows: one made of CaF2 
which is transparent for UV and the other one made of a thin 
beryllium foil, transparent for X-rays. Two types of CPs were 
used  in our measurements. The first type had a sensitive area 
of 20 mm in diameter and a thickness of 0.8 mm. The diameter 

 

in  contrast 

these  studies  because 

of  the  capillaries  were  100  µm  and  the  pitch  was  126  µm. 
Optical transparency was 57 %  [10].  
The  second  type  of  CP had a thickness of 1cm, a rectangular 
sensitive area of 4 cm x 5 cm, and holes diameter of 0.5 mm  
[11]. Most of the CPs had a resistivity of > 1015 Ω between the 
electrodes,  but  we  also  tested  several  H2  treated  capillaries 
with resistivities of ~ 1010 Ω. 
 In  the  measurements  aiming  for  the  CP’s  gain  and  electron 
extraction  efficiency  we  used  a  metallic  collecting  electrode 
placed 0.5 - 2 mm below the last CP (CP-3 in Fig. 1(a, b)). 
For  the  position  resolution  measurements,  the  readout  plate 
was a Pestov glass plate placed 0.5 mm or 1 mm below the last 
CP.  The  inner  and  outer  surfaces  of  the  Pestov  glass  were 
coated with metallic strips of 50 µm pitch. To separate the CPs 
from  each  other  or  from  the  readout  plate,  special  ceramic  or 
G10 rings were used. Due to the careful design of these rings 
we  were  able  to  apply  voltages  up  to  a  few  kV  between  the 
CPs.  This  allowed  us  to  test the CPs in two basic modes: the 
CA and the PPA mode. 
Since  our  present  studies  were  mainly  focused  on  the 
optimization  of  the  GPM,  in  most  of  the  measurements  the 
CPs were combined with CsI photocathodes and UV light was 
used to create primary electrons. The CsI photocathodes were 
to  other 
chosen  for 
photocathodes (e.g. SbCs [7]), they can be exposed to air for a 
few  minutes  without  a  significant  drop  in  their  quantum 
efficiency.  This 
the 
experimental studies: the test chamber could be opened to air 
many times and necessary changes and modifications could be  
made inside.  
The  20  nm  thick  semitransparent  CsI  photocathode  was 
deposited  on  a  CaF2  disc  coated  with  a  thin  layer  of  Cr.  The 
disc was then placed inside the test chamber 1-2 mm above the 
CPs,  see  Fig.  1(a,  b).  A  negative  voltage  was  usually  applied 
to this disc. 
Depending on measurements, various UV sources were used: a 
pulsed  H2  lamp  (pulse  duration  of  a  few  ns)  lamp,  a  corona 
discharge in air or a continuous Hg lamp. 
UV 
the  CsI 
photocathodes,  which  were  then  injected  to  the  CPs.  Pulses 
produced  by  the  H2  lamp  or  the  corona  discharge  were 
detected  by  charge-sensitive  amplifiers.  The  photocurrent 
produced  by  the  Hg  lamp  was  measured  with  a  Keithley 
picoampermeter. A system of calibrated neutral density filters 
was often used to attenuate the UV beam on several orders of 
magnitude. 
Experiments  with  the  CPs  were  performed  in  various  Ar,  Xe 
and  Kr-based  gas mixtures with 5-20% of various quenchers: 
CH4, CO2 or isobutane at a total pressure of 1atm. 
In some measurements X-rays with energies between 6 and 20 
keV were used. They were produced either by a 55Fe source or 
by a Kevex or a Philips tube. In these measurements the CaF2 
disc was placed at a distance of 1 cm above the CP-1 top and 
this space was used as an absorption/drift region (see Fig. 1(a, 
b)). 

light  created  primary  electrons 

dramatically 

simplified 

feature 

from 

Alpha particles (241Am) were used in some studies. The alpha 
source  was  installed  3  cm  above  the  CP-1  on  a  special  mesh 
which  at  the  same  time  served  as  a  drift  electrode.  The  alfa 
source  faced  into  the  drift  region  without  any  collimation 
except  its  flat  mounting  media  and  the  metallic  mesh  drift 
electrode. 
 

III.   MEASUREMENT PROCEDURES AND RESULTS 

     III.1 MEASUREMENTS WITH UV SOURCES 
    III.1-1.MEASUREMENTS IN CA MODE 
 
The gain of the CPs and the charge extraction efficiency were 
measured  by  the  following  procedure.  We  connected  all 
electrodes  of  the  CP-1  and  measured  the  charge  signal.  The 
signal  was  produced  by  the  electrons  extracted  from  the  CsI 
photocathode as a function of the applied voltage between the 
CaF2  disc  and  the  CP-1.  Typically,  this  signal  increases 
sharply  with  the  voltage  and  then  reaches  a  saturation  value. 
The  saturation  value  is  determined  by  the  convolution  of  the 
UV  source  emitting  spectra  with  the  CsI  quantum  efficiency.  
The  absolute  value  of  the  signal  (we  call  it  the  “injection 
signal”) Qinject could be changed in a controllable way, on the 
order  of  magnitudes,  with  the  help  of  neutral  density  filters. 
After  adjusting  the  injection  signal  to  a  desired  value,  we 
performed a series of measurements with it. This allowed us to 
determine the gain of the capillaries and the charge extraction 
efficiency from them. For example, to measure the gain of the 
CP-1  as  a  function  of  applied  voltage,  we  connected  the  top 
electrode  of  the  CP-1  to  the  HV  power  supply,  and  kept  the 
other  CPs  electrodes  (CP-1  bottom  and  CP-2)  connected 
together.  Then  at  a  fixed  voltage  drop  between  the  CaF2  disc 
and the cathode of the CP-1 we measured the signal Qmeas. on 
the CP-1 bottom as a function of the voltage drop over the CP-
1. 
The  measured  signal  was  in  fact  the  sum  of  two  signals:  one 
the  CP  parasitic  capacitance 
induced 
(capacitance  between  CP’s  electrodes)  Q  induced  and  a  real 
signal due to the electron extraction and/or multiplication Qmult. 
Hence 
Qmeas.= Qinduced + Qmult. (see [12] for more details).                     
For our CPs the signal Qinduced was const=0.1 Qinject , so in gain 
measurements  it  could  be  neglected.  If  we  define  K= 
Qmeas./Qinject  then  the  gain  A  is  A=K  at  K>1.  In  a  similar 
procedure we measured overall gains of double and triple CPs. 
Some of these measurements are presented in Fig. 2. One can 
see that gains up to 104 were possible to achieve with a single 
CP and up to 3*105 with triple CPs.  
Usually, for an equal voltage drop over the CP-1 and the CP-2 
(let’s call them “CP-1 voltage” and “CP-2 voltage”), gains up 
to  10  times  higher  were  safely  (without  any  sparks)  achieved 
with two CPs operating in tandem, compared to a single one, 
see  Fig.  2.  However,  stable  operations  at  gains  of  more  than 
4•104  were  difficult  to  achieve  due  to  sparks  and  their 
propagation from one CP to another. Brief studies showed that 

through 

signal 

 

the  feature  of  this  phenomenon  was  very  similar  to  the  one 
which occurs in muti step GEMs, see [13]. 
Overall  gains  of  ~105  were  achieved  only  when  the  CP-2 
voltage  was  ~50  V  higher  than  CP-1  voltage  and  the  CP-3 
voltage  was  ~50  V  higher  than  on  the  CP-2  voltage.  Some 
results  of  the  gain  measurements  at  such  voltage  settings  are 
indicated in Fig. 2. At this condition it was possible to observe 
pulses  produced  by  single  photoelectrons  extracted  from  the 
CsI photocathode. 
In  a  similar  procedure,  to  the  one  described  above,  we  were 
also  able  to  measure  the  electron  extraction  efficiency  from 
one  CP  to  another.  For  example,  to  measure  the  electron 
extraction  efficiency  from CP-1 to the CP-2, all electrodes of 
CP-2  were  connected  together  to  a  charge  sensitive  amplifier 
(see Fig. 1(a)). We measured the signal from this amplifier as a 
function of the voltage drop between the CP-1 bottom and the 
CP-2  (at  a  constant  CP-1  voltage).  As  an  example,  Fig.  3 
shows some results both for thin and thick CPs (marked as CP-
1 in Fig 1(a)) obtained in Ar + 10%CH4 at 1 atm. One can see 
that  in  both  cases  it  was  possible  to  fully  extract  the  primary 
electrons  drifted  through  the  capillaries.  The  only  difference 
was  in  the  CP-voltage  value  at  which  a  100%  transfer 
efficiency was reached. 
For  the  position  resolution  measurements  we  replaced  the 
metallic  collecting  electrode  with  the  Pestov  glass  plate 
covered with metallic strips. This readout plate was placed 0.5 
mm  below  the  CP-3.  A  screen  with  a  slit  of  30  µm  was 
attached  to  an  alignment  table  that  was  put  in  close  contact 
with  the  CaF2  disc.  The  alignment  table  was  controlled  by 
stepper motors and allowed not only to rotate the slit, but also 
to  move  it  in  one  direction  with  micron  accuracy.  With  the 
help of this table the slit was aligned to be exactly  parallel to 
the readout strips. The corona discharge source was moved far 
away enough (~20 cm) from the screen to avoid any geometric 
smearing  effects.  The  small  size  of  the  corona  discharge 
(<1mm)  allowed  us 
to  perform  very  accurate  position 
resolution measurements. The corona discharge could operate 
both in continuous and in a pulsed mode. Fifteen central strips 
facing  the  slit  were  connected  to  individual  charge  sensitive 
amplifiers.  This  allowed  us  to  measure  the  induced  charge 
zone on the readout strips. In some measurements the slit was 
moved perpendicular to the readout strips and a signal from a 
single  readout  strip  was  measured  as  a  function  of  the  slit 
position.  Some  results  are  presented  in  Fig.  4.  In  these 
measurements the slit was oriented in parallel with one of the 
hole rows and aligned to the hole centers. As one can see, the 
FWHM of this distribution is about 0.5 mm. With a single CA 
(see Fig. 1b) it was ~ 350 µm. 
Note  that  the  size  of  the  induced  charge  is  directly  related  to 
the  position  resolution.  The  size  of  the  induced  charge  signal 
becomes crucial at high rate operation, because in this case: 1) 
a pileup of pulses is possible, 2) it is difficult to apply a centre 
of  gravity  method  online,  or  any  other  analog  interpolation 
method. 
 
 

                       III.1-2 MEASUREMENTS IN PPA MODE  

                                       A.   PULSED UV SOURCE 

in  a  current  or 

 
As  was  mentioned  in  the  introduction,  the  main  goal  of  this 
work was to compare the conventional CA mode with the PPA 
mode.  For  measurements  of  gain  and  position  resolutions  in 
the  PPA  mode,  the  set  up  shown  in  Fig.  1(b)  was  used.  The 
CaF2 window and the readout plate were placed at distances of 
2 and 0.5 mm respectively from the CP. 
Gain measurements were performed with the corona discharge 
in  a  pulsed  mode. 
operating  either 
Photoelectrons  extracted 
the  semitransparent  CsI 
from 
photocathode  were  directed  by  the  electric  field  towards  the 
CP.  The  CP  voltage  was  kept  at  about  ~1  kV  to  ensure  full 
transparency  for  the  primary  electrons  drifted  through  the 
capillaries  (without  any  multiplication  inside  the  capillaries). 
The multiplication occurred only in between the anode of the 
CP and the readout plate, where gap voltages up to 3 kV were 
applied. The procedures of the gain and the position resolution 
measurements  were  similar  to  the  ones  described  in  section 
III.1-1. Some of our results are presented in Fig. 5. As one can 
see,  gains  over  105  were  easily  achieved  in  a  single-step 
multiplication  mode.  In  some  gases,  for  example  Ar  + 
isobutane, even a single electron peak was possible to observe, 
which is essential for the efficient detection of UV and visible 
photons. No feedback pulses were observed up to gains of 105. 
The FWHM of the induced charge zone on the readout strips 
was extremely narrow, ~100 µm. Note that the exact value of 
the FWHM  critically dependeds on the alignment. It had the 
least value when the slit image was projected on to one of the 
readout  strips  and  was  parallel  to  this  strip  and  to  one  of  the 
CP’s  hole  row  and  aligned  exactly  at  the  hole  centers. 
However,  when  the  slit  was  aligned  in  between  two  strips  or 
was not parallel to the holes row, the FWHM increased up to a 
factor 2.5 - 3. When the length of the slit was reduced to 100 
µm  the  FWHM  was  varied,  depending  on  the  alignment, 
between  150  and  300  µm.  One  may  consider  this  charge 
distribution  as  a  kind  of  “point  spread  function”  for  this 
particular  alignment.  Thus  due  to  the  excellent  alignment  set 
up we have reached the limit where the FWHM was sensitive 
to the alignment and at the best alignment was determined by 
the hole diameter and the trip pitch. 
  We  also  performed  some  measurements  in  a  combined  CA 
and PPA mode. For this test the CP operated at a voltage drop 
of 1.3 kV to ensure an avalanche gain inside the capillaries of 
~5.  Some  results  are  presented  in  Fig.  4  and  5.  One  can  see 
that overall gains close to 106 and position resolutions of ~100 
µm were safely achieved at a proper alignment. 
 The  general  conclusion  one  can  derive 
these 
measurements  is  that  the  PPA  mode  may  offer  a  simple  and 
compact detector design able to operate at high gains and with 
a  potentially  very  narrow  induced  charge  distribution  at  the 
readout plate. 
 
 

from 

 

 

         B.   MEASUREMENTS WITH CONTINUOUS UV SOURCES 

 
It is known that PMAC can operate at extremely high counting 
rates,  see  for  example  [14].  Thus  it  will  be  important  to 
investigate  what  limit,  on  the  rate  characteristics  of  the 
detector  operating  in  PPA  mode,  will  be  imposed  by  the  CP 
used as a cathode, see Fig. 1b.  For this reason we performed a 
series of measurements in a current mode. 
First  we  connected  the  CP’s  electrodes  together  with  the 
readout  plate,  and  measured  the  current  from  them  as  a 
function of the applied voltage between the CaF2 disc and the 
CP. This current increased with the voltage V and then at V > 
1  kV  reached  the  saturation  value  Iinject.  This  saturation  value 
was  determined  by  the  convolution  of  the  Hg  lamp  emitting 
spectra, with the CsI quantum efficiency. 
Then we measured the CP’s gain and extraction efficiency as a 
function of the voltage applied to its electrodes at various light 
intensities  (or,  more  precisely,  at  various  currents  from  the 
CP). For this test we connected the CP bottom electrode with 
the collecting plate, and measured the current Icp as a function 
of  the  voltage  drop  over  the  CP  electrodes.  The  voltage  drop 
between  the  CaF2  disc  and  the  CP  was  fixed  at,  ∆V=  1.5kV, 
see  Fig.  3.  The  ratio  of  Icp  /  Iinject  gave  us  the  gain  of  the  CP 
operating in a current mode, or in other words at high counting 
rate. Some of the results of these measurements are presented 
in  Fig.  6.  To  avoid  any  possible  risk  of  breakdowns,  which 
may fatally damage our picoamperemeter, such measurements 
were  performed  only  at  low  gains  of  the  CPs  (below  50).  At 
this condition one can see that only at a current of > 100 pA a 
conventional  CP  starts  to  exhibit  some  signs  of  charging  up 
effects.  In  a  similar  procedure  we  measured  the  “extracted” 
current  from  the  CP  (H2  treated  in  this  case)  to  the  readout 
electrodes  at  a  voltage  drop  between  the  CP  bottom  and  the 
readout electrode of 2 kV. Results are presented in Fig 6. One 
can  conclude  that  in  the  case  of  the  H2  treated  CPs,  no 
charging up effect was observed up to a current of 500 pA. At 
Iinject  =3  pA  the  maximum  achievable  gain  of  the  detector  in 
the  PPA  mode  was  ~2•103,  which  is  remarkable  for  this 
counting rate (see [14] for more details).  
 
 

III.2   COMPLIMENTARY MEASUREMENTS WITH X-
RAYS AND ALPHAS 

 
 
 
In  several  of  the  early  works  [2,  15,  16]  CPs  were  used  for 
detection  of  X-rays  photons.  In  these  works  X-rays  were 
absorbed  in  a  gas  drift  volume  and  the  created  primary 
electrons were amplified inside the capillaries. In recent works 
(see [5, 17] and references within) CPs coated with CsI layers 
were  used  also  as  X-ray  converters.  Primary  electrons 
extracted from the CsI layer drifted through capillaries without 

any amplification, were extracted from the capillary holes and 
directed  to  an  independent  amplification  structure.  As  was 
shown  in  [18],  the  maximum  achievable  gain  of  CPs  and 
PPACs  for  UV  and  X-ray  photons,  may  be  very  different. 
Thus it is important to compare the maximum achievable gain 
reached  with  UV  and  with  X-rays  for  both  the  CA  and  the 
PPA modes of operation. 
For measurements in the CA mode we used a set up as shown 
in Fig. 1(a, b), but with the CaF2 disk replaced by a mesh. The 
space  between the drift mesh and the CP-1 (about 1 cm) was 
used as an absorption region for X-rays. For measurements in 
PPA mode the set up was similar to the one shown in Fig. 1b, 
but without any CaF2 disc (it was replaced with a mesh). The 
drift space was reduced to 2 mm. In some comparative studies 
CP  coated  with  CsI  were  used  as  well  (see  [5]  for  more 
details).  In  this  case  the  drift  mesh  was  put  in  direct  contact 
with CP-1. In all the measurements the Pestov-glass plate with 
metallic strips was used.  
For gain measurements, all strips were connected to one single 
charge sensitive amplifier. Fig. 7 shows a typical pulse shape 
of  the  charge  signal  measured  with  20  keV  X-rays  in  a  CA 
mode.  
For  position  resolution  measurements,  an  X-ray  beam 
collimated  to  30  µm  was  used.  To  achieve  the  best  result  the 
alignment of the X-ray beam was the same as described in sec. 
III.1-1. As in the previous case, 15 strips facing the collimated 
beam  were  connected  separately  to  15  charge-sensitive 
amplifiers. In some control measurements the collimated X-ray 
beam  was  moved  in  the  direction  perpendicular  to  the  strips 
and  the  induced  charge  signal,  was  measured  from  a  single 
strip. 
The results obtained with X-rays were qualitatively similar to 
the ones obtained with the UV (see Fig. 4). Fig. 2 and 5 shows 
gains vs. voltage curves for two modes: the CA and the PPA. 
As  one  can  see,  gains  up  to  ~105  were  possible  to  achieve  in 
single  step  PPA  mode  or  cascaded  CA.  Note  that  the  gains 
reached  with  X-rays  were  almost  the  same  as  in  the  case  of 
UV photons. 
Fig.  4  shows  some  results  of 
the  position  resolution 
measurements. One can see that in the case of the PPA mode 
the size of the induced charge zone was much narrower that in 
the case of the CA mode. 
 Final measurements were done with an alpha source to check 
the  reaction  of  CPs  on  heavily  ionizing  charged  particles. 
Results  are  presented  in  Fig.  2.  Much  lower  gains  were 
achieved  with  alpha  particles,  which  is  expected  due  to  the 
limit  imposed  by  the  Raether  criteria  (see  [14]  and  next 
section). 
 

IV.    DISCUSSION  

 
Table  1  summarizes  the  most  important  results  presented  in 
this  paper.  These  results  clearly  demonstrate  that  the  PPA 
mode offers a higher gain in one step and potentially a better 
position resolution. 

 

As was shown in [18], the maximum achievable gain of usual 
micropattern  detectors  (not  combined  with  photocathodes)  is 
determined by the Raether limit:  

Arn0=const (106-108 electrons), 
where  Ar  is  the  gas  gain,  n0  the  number  of  primary  electrons 
triggering the avalanche. The exact value of the Raether limit 
depends  on  the  detector’s  geometry  and  n0  [18].  As  was 
established earlier [18], the Raether limit for PMAC is higher 
than  for  CPs.  On  the  other  hand  one  could  expect,  that  if  the 
cathode  of  the  PPAC  is  made  of  a  CP,  it  will  have  the  same 
gain  limit  as  a  usual  PPAC.  Note  that  this  was  confirmed 
experimentally in this work, see Fig. 5. 
It is known also [7] that if micropattern gaseous detectors are 
combined  with  photocathodes  the  maximum  gain  may  be 
limited by photon and ion feedback processes. In this case the 
maximum achievable gain Af  is determined by  the equation: 
                                          Af •γ=1,                                             
where  γ  is  the  probability  of  secondary  electrons  appearing 
due to the feedback mechanisms. It is important to note that γ 
depends on the value of the electric field near the cathode and 
on the ionization potential of the gas [19]. For example it has 
the  lowest  value  for  gas  mixtures  with  small  ionization 
potential,  and  this  is  why  one  could  reach  very  high  gains 
without feedback problems in mixtures with etylferrocene (see 
sec.I).  
Usually  Af  <  Ar  -  the  maximum  gain  achieved  without 
photocathodes.  However,  in  the  case  of  PPA  mode,  due  to 
efficient feedback suppression by the capillaries, Af ~Ar even 
when the detector was combined with the CsI photocathode. 
This  approach  may  offer  a  simple  and  compact  design  of 
detectors  for  UV  and  X-ray  photons.  Based  on  the  obtained 
results,  one  can  also  expect  that  in  the  case  of  CPs  coupled 
with a photocathode sensitive to visible light a combination of 
CA  and  PPA modes looks like a very attractive way to reach 
high gains [20]. 
Besides  the  maximum  achievable  gain,  the  other  important 
issue  is  the  position  resolution  of  the  CP-based  gaseous 
detectors.  In  the  case  of  a  bunch  of  single  primary  electrons 
(UV  light)  and  a  proper  alignment,  the  size  of  the  induced 
charge zone was significantly smaller for the PPA mode. This 
was because there was no multiplication inside the capillaries 
and  avalanches  developed  in  the  parallel  plate  structure  only. 
Since the charge in the avalanche grew exponentially with the 
distance  from  the  anode,  the  maximum  induced  signal  was 
when the avalanche was close to the readout strips. As a result, 
the  size  of  the  induced  charge  zone  was  significantly  smaller 
than  in  the  case  of  an  electron  cloud  drifting  to  the  readout 
plate without any multiplication (CA mode). 
 In  the  case  of  X-rays,  the  size  of  the  induced  charge  zone  is 
mostly  determined  by  the  range  of  photoelectrons.  The  last 
one,  depending  on  photon  energy,  may  be  rather  large  and 
reach  several  mm.  In  this  case,  to  improve  the  position 
resolution,  analogue  interpolation  methods  should  be  used. 
Unfortunately  there  could  be  some  difficulties,  to  implement 
this  method  at  high  counting  rates  (close  to  or  above  105 
Hz/mm2)  due  to  signal  pile-ups  and  on  line  electronics  speed 

limitations. On the other hand, in some applications where the 
energy  resolution  is  not  very  important,  one  can  use  CP  as  a 
converter of X-ray photons to primary electrons. Two options 
were  experimentally  tested:  conversion  of  X-rays  in  the  gas 
volume  inside  the  capillaries  and  conversion  in  capillary 
surfaces  coated  with  a  CsI  layer.  In  both  cases  a  position 
resolution of 100 µm was easy to achieve. 
 
 
 

V.   CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK 

 
Performed  studies  allowed  us  to  optimize  the design of GPM 
with  CsI  photocathodes  as  well  as  X-ray  detectors  using  CPs 
as X-ray converters. In particular, it was found that PPA mode 
offers  both  high  gas  gains  and  high  position  resolutions. 
Special  benefits  may  exist  when  CPs  operate  in  a  combined 
mode of both the CA and the PPA.  
Results  of  these  studies  could  also  be  useful  for  the 
optimization  of  other  CP–based  detectors,  for  example:  a 
portal imaging device [5, 21],  X-ray and γ polarimeters. 
 

VI.  REFERENCES 

 
[1] 

I.  Fujieda,  T.  Mulera,  V.  Perez-Mendez,  A.  Del  Guerra  “Further 
measurements of electron transmission and avalanche gain in narrow lead 
glass  tubing”  IEEE  Trans.  Nucl.  Sci.,  vol.  33,  No  1  pp.  587-590, 
February 1986. 

[2]  H.  Sakurai,  T.  Tamura,  S.  Gunji,  and  M.  Noma,”A  new  type  of 
proportional counter using a capillary plate” Nucl. Instrum. Methods, vol. 
A 374, pp. 341-344, 1996. 

[3]  F.  Sauli,”GEM:  A  new  concept  for  electron  multiplication  in  gaseous 
detectors”, Nucl. Instrum. Methods, vol. A 386, pp. 531-534, 1997. 
[4]  F. Sauli, ”Micropattern gaseous detectors” Nucl. Instrum. Methods A471 

[5] 

(2002), pp. 1-7. 
J.  Ostling,  A.  Brahme,  M.  Danielsson  et  al.,”Study  of  hole–type 
multiplication  structures  for  portal  imaging  and  other  high  count  rate 
applications” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. vol. 50, No 4, August 2003, pp.809-
819. 

[6]  A.  Breskin  ,  M.  Balcerzyk,  R.  Chechik  et  al.,“Recent  advances  in 
gaseous imaging photomultipliers”  Nucl. Instrum. Methods, vol. A513, 
pp. 250-255, 2003 

[7]  T.  Francke,  V.  Peskov,  I.  Rodionov,  T.  Sokolova,”Novel  position-
sensitive gaseous detectors with solid photocathodes,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. 
Sci. vol. 49, pp.977-983, June 2002. 

[8]  P. Fonte, V. Peskov, F. Sauli, “Feedback and breakdown in parallel-plate 

chambers” Nucl. Instrum.  Methods, vol. 305, pp. 91-110, 1991. 

[9]  G.  Charpak,  P.  Fonte,  V.  Peskov,  F.  Sauli,  D.  Scigocki  et 
al.,”Investigation of operation of a parallel-plate avalanche chamber with 
a CsI photocathode under high gain conditions” Nucl. Instrum. Methods, 
vol. 307, pp. 63-68, 1991. 

[10]  Obtained from Hamamatsu Inc., Japan. 
[11]  Obtained from A. Del Guerra, Pisa, Italy. 
[12]  A. Breskin , R. Chechik, D. Moermann et al., “Study of capillary plates 

for UV imaging,” submitted to Nucl. Instrum,  Methods. 

[13]  M. Wallmark, A. Brahme, M. Danielsson, P. Fonte , C. Iacobaeus et al, 
“Operating range of a gas electron multiplier for portal imaging”, Nucl. 
Instr. Methods, vol. A 471, pp. 151-155, 2001. 

[14]  P.  Fonte,  V.  Peskov, B. Ramsey, “The fundamental limitations of high-
rate gaseous detectors,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci vol. 46, pp.321-325, April 
1999. 

[15]  V. Peskov, E. Silin, T. Sokolova, I. Rodionov, “First attempts to combine 
capillary tubes with photocathodes” Nucl. Instrum. Methods, vol. A 433, 
pp. 492-502, 1999. 

[16]  V.  Peskov,  E.  Silin,  T.  Sokolova,  I.  Rodionov,  S.  Gunji,  H.  Sakurai 
“Glass capillary tubes as a high granularity gaseous detectors of photons 
and  charged  particles”  IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. vol. 47, No 6, December 
2000, pp.1825-1828. 

[17]  M.  Danielsson,  P.  Fonte,  T.  Francke,  C.  Iacobaeus,  J.  Ostling  et  al.., 
“Novel gaseous detectors for medical imaging” Nucl. Instrum. Methods, 
vol.  A518, pp. 406-410, 2004  

[18]  V.  Peskov,  P.  Fonte,  M.  Danielsson,  C.  Iacobaeus,  J.  Ostling,  W. 
Wallmark  “The  study  and  optimization  of  new  micropattern  gaseous 
detectors for high-rate applications,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 48, No 
4, pp. 1070-1074, August 2001. 

[19]  V.  Peskov  “  Secondary  processes  in  a  gas  counter  I”.  Sov.  Phys.  Tech. 

Phys. Vol 20 pp. 791.794, 1975. 

[20]  V.  Biteman,  S.  Guinji,  V.  Peskov,  H.  Sakurai,  E.  Silin  et  al.,  “Position 
sensitive gaseous photomultipliers” Nucl. Instrum.  Methods vol. A 471, 
pp. 205-208, 2001. 

[21]  C. Iacobaeus, A. Brahme, M. Danielsson, P. Fonte, J. Ostling et al., “A 
novel  portal  imaging  device  for  advanced  radiation  therapy,”  IEEE 
Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 48, No 4, pp. 1496-1502, August 2001. 

 
Fig.  1  (a)  Set  up  for  studies  of  CP’s  operating  in CA mode.(b) Set up for 

studies of CPs operating in a PPA mode. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

10 6

10 5

10 4

10 3

10 2

10 1

i

n
a
G

]

V
m

[
 
e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
a
 
l
a
n
g
S

i

1400

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

0

0

 

 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7

 

1200

1400

1600

1800

Voltage [V]

Fig. 2. Gain vs. voltage for CPs operating in CA mode. Results obtained with 
the UV  and the CPs operating in a CA mode: 
1. Overall gain of 3 CPs at the CP-3 voltage being 50 V higher than on the CP-
2 and the CP-2 voltage being 50V higher than on the CP-1. 
3. Overall gain of 2 CPs at the CP-2 voltage being 50 V higher than on the CP-
1, 4. Gain of 2 CPs at equal voltages over the CP-1 and the CP-2;  6.  Gain of a 
single CP;  
Results  with  X-rays:    2. Overall gain of 3 CPs measured at the same voltage 
setting as the “1” curve. 
Results  with  alphas:  5.  Overall  gains  measured  with  double  CPs.  7.  Gains      
measured with a single CP. 

 

 

 1
 2
 3

500

1000

1500

2000

Voltage [V]

Fig. 3. Results of measurements of the charge extraction from the CP-1 to the 
CP-2  as  a  function  of  the  voltage  in  between  the  CPs.  Signals  on  CP-1 
bottom.2.Signal from the CP-2 top (0.8 mm thick). 3. Signal measured at the 
same conditions as for the 1 cm thick CP. 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

]
s
t
i
n
u
 
e
v
i
t
a
e
r
[
 
l
a
n
g
S

l

i

106

105

104

103

102

i

n
a
G

103

102

101

]

A
p
[
 
t
n
e
r
r
u
C

100

800

 

treated CP at Iinject=10 pA and at voltage drop between the CP and the readout 
plate of 2kV. 
 

 1
 2
 3

 

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Strip number

Fig. 4. The best results obtained with induced charge profile measured with 

UV and X rays.  Collimated UV:    
1.    Three  CPs  operating  in  a  CA  mode.2.  A  single  CP  operating  in  the  PPA 
mode  (note  that  almost  the  same  profile  was  measured  in  the  case  of  the 
combined CA and PPA modes). 3. Results obtained with 6 keV x-rays and the 
CP operating in the PPA mode. 
 

 

 

 

 1
 2
 3

 

1800

2000

2200

Gap voltage [V]

Fig. 5. Gain vs. gap voltage for CPs operating in PPA mode and in a combined 
mode  of  CA  and  PPA,  measured  with  UV  and  X-rays.  1.    Gains achieved in 
combined CA and PPA modes, UV. 2.  Gain of a single CP operating in a PPA 
mode, UV. 3.  Gain of single CP operating in the PPA mode, X-rays. 
 

 

 

 1
 2
 3
 4
 5

1000

1200

1400

1600

Voltage [V]

Fig. 6.  Results of measurements in a current mode vs. voltage drop over the 
CP for two values of the I inject: 70 pA (plot 1) and 10 pA (plot 2). 3.  Current 
measured on the CP bottom for at Iinject=70 pA. 4.  Current on the CP bottom at 
Iinject=10  pA.  5.  Current  measured  on  the  readout  plate  in  the  case  of  a  H2 

 

 

Fig. 7.  A typical pulse shape measures with CP operating in the CA mode. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
Table I 
 

Set ups: 
 

Fig. 1a 
double 
CPs 
Fig. 1a 
triple CPs 
Fig. 1b 
CA mode 
Fig. 1b 
PPA 
mode 

Max. 
achiev. 
gain with  
pulsed 
UV 
 
4*104

 
3*105
 
104
 
105

 
105
 

 
5*104

 

 

  Fig. 1b 
CA+PPA 
mode 

 
3*105

Max. 
achiev. 
gain with 
X-rays 

Max. 
achiev. 
gain with  
alphas 

FWHM  
(µm) with 
pulsed 
UV 

FWHM  
(µm)  
with X-
rays 

 

 

 

 
~300 

 
~300 

 
103

 

 
1.5*102
 

 

 

 
~500 
 
350 
 
100-300  
(dependin
s on 
alignment
) 
 
100-300 
(depends 
on 
alignment
) 
 

