Sociophysics: a personal testimony

Serge Galam

Laboratoire  des Milieux  Désordonnés  et  Hétérogènes,  Tour  13,  Case  86,  4  place Jussieu,
75252 Paris Cedex 05, France
CNRS UMR 7603

The origins of Sociophysics are discussed from a personal testimony. I trace back its history
to the late seventies. My twenty years of activities and research to establish and promote the
field  are  reviewed.  In  particular  the  conflicting  nature  of  Sociophysics  with  the  physics
community is revealed from my own experience. Recent presentations of a supposed natural
growth from Social Sciences are criticized.

I. In the late seventies: the high rise of Statistical Physics

During the years 1975-80 Statistical Physics is blooming with the exact solving of the enigma
of critical phenomena, one of the most resistant problems of physics. The so-called Modern
theory  of  phase  transitions  with  the  renormalization  group  techniques  and  the  epsilon
expansion made condensed matter physics to enter its Golden Age [1].

The Mecca of this rebirth of Physics was at Cornell University in the US with all over the
world  several  locations  promptly  established.  Several  hundreds  of  young  physicists  were
entering the field with a great deal of excitement and a huge number of papers were published
on the subject. Among the active spots was the physics department at Tel-Aviv University in
Israel. And among the excited students was me.

After a doctorate at the University Pierre et Marie Curie in Paris I moved to Israel to complete
a  Ph.D.  During  my  research  I  started  to  advocate  the  use  of  Modern  theory  of  phase
transitions to describe social, psychological, political and economical phenomena. My claim
was motivated by an analysis of some epistemological contradiction within physics. On the
one hand, the power of concepts and tools of Statistical Physics were enormous, and on the
other hand, I was expecting that physics would soon reach the limits of investigating inert
matter.  On  this  basis  to  compensate  the  frustration,  which  would  result  from  that
contradiction,  I  was  suggesting  physicists  to  start  applying  Physics  outside  Physics.  In
particular to deal with the rich variety of behavior related to all kind of human activities. I
published a long series of papers, several of them with P. Pfeuty, to legitimate and elaborate
my suggested strategy of [2-9].

But such an approach was strongly rejected by almost every one, leading and non-leading
physicists, young and old. To suggest humans could behave like atoms was look upon as a
blaspheme to both hard science and human complexity, a total non-sense, something to be
condemned. And it has been indeed condemned during fifteen years.

II. The founding of Sociophysics

1

At  that  time  I  was  aware  of  2  papers  along  the  spirit  of  my  call  for  the  creation  of
Sociophysics.  One  was  by  Callen  and  Shapiro  in  Physics  Today  [10]  about  fish  bands,
imitation and Ising spins. It was very enlightening but with no follow up. The other one was
much more elaborated by Weidlich about the dynamics of opinion forming [11]. However it
was more of an application of partial differential equations in the spirit of Volterra work than
an application of the Modern theory of phase transitions.

On this basis, while keeping arguing with physicists about the possibility of Sociophysics, I
wrote my first contribution to it in 1982 [12]. I applied Carnot principle of maximum entropy
to societies to demonstrate that, contrary to the claimed ineluctability of the thermal death
argument, there are no reasons to get pessimistic about it. However as for the above papers
[10, 11] it was of a factual contribution and moreover written in French. Then, at the same
time, with 2 other Ph.D. colleagues, Y. Gefen and Y. Shapir, we published a paper to state a
global frame for Sociophysics as a new field of research [13]. In addition to modeling the
process of strike in big companies using an Ising ferromagnetic model in an external reversing
uniform field, the paper contains a call to the creation of Sociophysics. It is a manifesto about
its  goals,  its  limits  and  its  danger.  As  such,  it  is  the  founding  paper  of  Sociophysics  [13],
although it is not the first contribution per se to it.

It is worth to stress that we choose to submit our manuscript not to a physical journal, but to
the  Journal  of  Mathematical  Sociology.  It  took  over  2  years  to  get  the  paper  accepted  for
publication after many exchanges with several referees. The paper appeared in 1982. But in
the time being, we all have left Tel-Aviv University to pursue our physicist career as post
doctorates in the US and I did not hear much about eventual reactions.

III. The story behind the scene

To illustrate the frame of mind of the physicists at that time with respect to the creation of
Sociophysics it is very suggesting to mention what happened at the Department of Physics
and Astronomy from Tel-Aviv University during the typing of our manifesto of Sociophysics
[13]. First it must be recalled that the whole story occurred more than twenty years ago. At
that  time  there  were  no  personal  computer  and  writing  a  paper  was  a  real  challenge  with
respect to have a typed manuscript with equations. You had to put your hand written work in
line to the secretary who had the skill to do the job and no question of coming back and forth
to make changes. And it is what we did, but once our paper was typed, ready to be sent to the
Journal, the Chairman without notice, took it over and put it in a locked place.

Our manuscript has thus been sequestrated under the authority of the chairman and with the
support of most of the faculty. It was a big scandal. We were denounced as putting at stake
the  department  reputation  of  excellence  while  we  were  claiming  our  right  to  academic
freedom. Then, the chairman denied academic freedom to us with the argument that we were
not  on  tenured  positions.  In  this  context  with  our  manuscript  under  arrest,  A.  Voronel,  a
former member of the refusenik seminar from Soviet Union and a tenured professor at Tel-
Aviv  University,  endorsed  our  manuscript  under  his  responsibility.  Using  his  right  to
academic freedom, he allowed us to submit our paper for publication and we did [13].

Besides, its own interest, above story illustrates how hard was the opposition to Sociophysics
from  inside  Physics.  I  could  tell  many  more  stories  along  this  one  which  occurred  during
these fifteen years of personal and lonely fight to create and develop Sociophysics. Always
the  opposition  arose  due  to  the  general  frame  in  which  I  was  positioning  my  various

2

contributions. It was the idea of creating a new field of research within Physics to deal with
human behaviors, which was disturbing the physicists, not a factual contribution which could
always be looked upon as a marginal and exotic isolated event.

IV. In place of playing tennis

Although I was totally convinced of both the validity and the necessity of Sociophyics, I was
not fool enough to jeopardize my academic career by putting all my research energy in it.
Accordingly, to survive as a physicist, I kept doing orthodox physics, which at that time was
also  really  exciting.  I  was  presenting  my  Sociophysics  activity  as  a  “hobby”.  In  place  of
playing  tennis,  I  was  playing  Sociophysics.  And  as  a  matter  of  fact  I  did  survive  as  a
physicist. But it took me a lot of effort before I was able to produce another work to establish
further the feasibility of Sociophysics.

After  an  additional  paper  using  entropy  in  1984  [14],  it  is  only  in  1986  that  I  was  able  to
produce another significant contribution based on renormalization group concepts. I studied
dictatorship  effects  induced  by  the  use  of  the  democratic  rule  of  majority  voting  in
hierarchical bottom-up elections [15]. I submitted my paper to the Journal of Mathematical
Psychology and again it took two years of ongoing arguments with several referees before it
was accepted. And after publication, as before I had again no feedback.

Few  years  latter  while  visiting  the  physics  department  at  Tel-Aviv  University,  I  met  D.
Stauffer who was yet doing only physics, but showed a real interest in my Sociophysics work.
He encouraged me to submit a paper in the Journal of Statistical Physics, which I did. The
paper was accepted in 1990 [16], yet with a letter from J. Lebowitz, the chief Editor, stressing
he was accepting the paper because the referee reports were positive but that he personally did
not believe at all in the validity of such an approach. And once again I got no feedback after
publication. I later on published 3 more papers to extend my voting model [17, 19] with again
no much reaction.

V. The collaborating with a social scientist

After all these efforts and contributions with no visible reaction, neither physicists not social
scientists, I thought to reorient my strategy in seeking to collaborate directly with a social
scientist along my using Physics to describe social behavior. While I was in New York, I met
by chance S. Moscovici, a leading French social psychologist, who appeared rather interested
in the adventure. We then start a very fruitful few years cooperation, which yielded a series of
papers  published  during  1991-1995,  most  of  them  in  the  European  Journal  of  Social
Psychology [20-24]. But again, I got no feedback, except one invited paper in a book edited
by a social scientist [25].

On this basis, I changed once more my strategy to come back to my initial postulate about the
emerging  of  Sociophysics.  It  should  come  from  physicists,  so  I  started  to  publish  my
Sociophysics papers in physical journals (Thanks to Stauffer) [26]. And yet not much of a
reaction came out of it. Nevertheless in the mid nineties some physicists were also turning
“exotic”, but to do Econophysics, with emphasize on analyzing financial data. Though this

3

new trend was validating my earlier eighties prediction [2-9], I stayed isolated in my working
field keeping on studying political and social behaviors [27].

V. And the sun finally rose and failed

And finally, more than fifteen after my first publications calling for Sociophysics [2-9], few
additional  physicists  at  last  started  to  join  along  it.   I  was  very  happy  to  realize  I  was  not
crazy, or at least not the only one. However, most of these works either did not cite my earlier
founding  papers  or  did  in  a  general  manner  along  with  other  more  recent  works.  Such  a
phenomenon being rather common in science, I sent some occasional mails mentioning my
contributions to the relevant authors. But more recently few papers including Physical Review
Letters  presented  “original”  works,  which  were  indeed  reproducing  exactly  parts  of  my
models. This prompted me to send more energetic mails, but I felt rather unease sounding like
acting paranoiac so I cool off and stopped looking to cond-mat archives in too much details.
However two very recent papers discussing the nature and origins of Sociophysics [28, 29],
made me to react in writing with this very paper. It is not motivated only to release my “hurt
ego”,  but  mainly  to  restore  the  historical  truth  on  the  origins  of  Sociophysics  since  I  am
convinced it is a necessary condition to have Sociophysics to strength and established as a
solid field of research. Especially to preserve the conflicting nature of Sociophysics which is
an essential ingredient to it.

Accordingly it is of particular interest to note that both papers [28, 29] while different in the
approach  and  style  based  the  presentation  of  Sociophysics  along  a  very  politically  correct
view. They both create the illusion Sociophysics is a natural outgrowth of sociology, ignoring
deliberately  all  of  its  very  conflicting  nature,  with  both  the  concerned  scientists  and  the
epistemological content. To support they idyllic view, they trace back its foundation to the
work of Schelling [30] who according to them, was already doing Physics even without being
aware  of  it.  A  significant  “tour  de  passe-passe”  to  wrongly  legitimate  Sociophysics  as  a
natural extension from social sciences as proven wrong in my testimony. One of them [28]
relies  strongly  on  Axelrod  and  Bennet  [31]  who  developed  a  model  for  coalitions  from
Physics without mentioning I showed the approach was misleading [32], that is exactly the
danger to be avoided with the kind of Sokal-Bricmont syndrome [33] when social scientists
used Physics to justify their a priori theories.

VI. Conclusion

The paradoxical aspect of my testimony is the fact that physicists doing Sociophysics (me
included) would like to have social scientists to get interested in their work. They complain
social scientists do not read their contributions published in Physical Journals while they are
all claiming an organic link to the 2 papers from social scientists [30, 31], papers most of
them did not read. And at the same time, they do not read my earlier papers because either
being published in non Physical Journals, they are not immediately at hands, or and they were
published too many years ago while their memory is of only the last few months. Moreover
while hoping for a real link from within social sciences, they mostly ignored my extended
work in collaboration with a social scientist, S. Moscovici, a rather rare case.

All these facts should be interesting for the study of history of sciences. But at present, they
shows we, as a community including myself, are much more interested in producing papers

4

than really establishing a new field of research which could eventually turn helpful in solving
some of the huge and major problems our societies are facing. But let us be optimistic and
consider all these weaknesses are the direct outcome form the fact Sociophysics is still at its
childhood.

 At this stage and in conclusion I feel to claim paternity over Sociophysics, even If I don’t
really know what such a claim would imply. Of course I am fully aware that to be the “father”
does not mean to be the first one, as know in many aspects of life, and as clearly showed from
the references I am giving. In addition, paternity always contains a little bit of a doubt, how to
perform  an  ADN  check.  And  on  top  of  all,  the  question  of  the  mother  is  open.  So  I  am
expressing here a feeling from my more than twenty years of fight for Sociophysics.

Poscriptum

References

1) K. G. Wilson and J. Kogut, The renormalization group and the epsilon expansion, Phys.
Reports 12C, 75-200 (1974)

2) S. Galam, Physicists as a revolutionary catalyst, Fundamenta Scientiae 1, 351-353 (1980)

3)  P.  Pfeuty  and  S.  Galam,  Les  physiciens et  la  frustrations  des  électrons,  La  Recherche,
(July-August 1981)

4) S. Galam, Sauver la nouvelle Byzance, La Recherche, Lettre, 127, 1320 (1981)

5) S. Galam and P. Pfeuty, Physicists are frustrated, Physics Today, Letter (April 1982)

6) S. Galam, Misère des physiciens, Pandore, 18, 57-58 (April 1982)

7) S. Galam, About imperialism of physics, Fundamenta Scientiae 3, 125 (1982)

8) S. Galam and P. Pfeuty, Should God save the queen? Physics Today, Letter (October 1983)

9) S. Galam and P. Pfeuty, Chaotic computer? Physics Today, Letter (October 1983)

10) E. Callen and D. Shapiro, A theory of social imitation, Physics Today, 23-28 (July 1974)

11) W. Weidlich, The statistical description of polarization phenomena in society, Br. J. math.
statist. Psychol. 24, 251-266 (1971)

12)  S.  Galam,  Entropie,  désordre  et  liberté individuelle, Fundamenta Scientiae 3, 209-213
(1982)

13) S. Galam, Y. Gefen and Y. Shapir, Sociophysics: A mean behavior model for the process
of strike, Journal of Mathematical Sociology 9, 1-13 (1982)

5

14) S. Galam, Entropy, Semiotext(e) 4, 73-74 (1984)

15)  S.  Galam,  Majority  rule,  hierarchical  structures  and  democratic  totalitarianism:  a
statistical approach, Journal of Mathematical Psychology 30, 426-434 (1986)

16) S. Galam, Social paradoxes of majority rule voting and renormalization group, Journal of
Statistical Physics 61, 943-951 (1990)

17)  S.  Galam,  Political  paradoxes  of  majority  rule  voting  and  hierarchical  systems,
International Journal of General Systems 18, 191-200 (1991)

18)  S.  Galam,  Real  space  renormalization  group  and  social  paradoxes  in  hierarchical
organisations, in Models of self-organization in complex systems (Moses), Akademie-Verlag,
Berlin V.64, 53-59 (1991)

19) S. Galam, Paradoxes de la règle majoritaire dans les systèmes hiérarchiques, Revue de
Bibliologie 38, 62-68 (1993)

20) S. Galam and S. Moscovici, Towards a theory of collective phenomena: Consensus and
attitude changes in groups, European Journal of Social Psychology 21, 49-74 (1991)

21) S. Galam and S. Moscovici, Compromise versus polarization in group decision making, in
Defense Decision Making, Springer-Verlag, 40-51 (1991)

22) S. Galam and S. Moscovici, A theory of collective decision making in hierarchical and
non-hierarchical groups, Russian Psychological Journal 13, 93-103 (1993)

23) S. Galam and S. Moscovici, Towards a theory of collective phenomena: II. Conformity
and power, European Journal of Social Psychology 24, 481-495 (1994)

24) S. Galam and S. Moscovici, Towards a theory of collective phenomena: III. Conflicts and
forms of power, European Journal of Social Psychology 25, 217-229 (1995)

25)  S.  Galam, When humans interact like atoms, in Understanding group behavior, Vol. I,
Chap. 12, 293-312, Davis and Witte, Eds., Lawrence Erlbaum Ass., New Jersey (1996)

26) S. Galam, Fragmentation versus stability in bimodal coalitions, Physica A230, 174-188
(1996)

27) S. Galam, Rational group decision making: a random field Ising model at T=0, Physica
A238, 66-80  (1997)

28) P. Ball, Utopia theory, Physics World (October 2003)

29) D. Stauffer, Introduction to Statistical Physics outside Physics, Physica A, this issue

30) T.C. Schelling, J. Mathematical Sociology 1, 143 (1971)

31) R. Axelrod and D. S. Bennett,  A landscape theory of aggregation , Br. J. Political Sci. 23,
211-233 (1993)

6

32) S. Galam, Comment on A landscape theory of aggregation, Br. J. Political Sci. 28, 411-
412 (1998)

33) A. Sokal and J. Bricmont ,  Intellectual Impostures, Profile Books Ltd, London (1999)

7

