Comment on “Why is the DNA Transition First Order?” and “Griffiths Singularities 

in Unbinding of Strongly Disordered Polymers” 

 

The papers [1,2] consider  unbinding of a disordered heteropolymer. They find the 

first order phase transition [1] when disorder is strong (i.e. the ratio v of the binding 

energies is large; in DNA v is~1.1) and the Griffiths singularity, i.e. infinite order 

transition, otherwise [2].  The problem is important, since many physical phenomena 

map onto the same model (see refs. in [1, 2]).  Drastic non-universality in the strength 

of disorder is unanticipated. Unfortunately, both titles are misleading: they claim the  

results which are proven for homopolymers only.  

Kafri and Mukamel (KM, [2]) consider infinite v, they assume that the larger binding 

energy is infinite. This invalidates the very applicability of the Gibbs statistical 

mechanics, where all parameters must be small compared to the number of particles N 

(i.e. the first limit must be infinite N, not v. Any alternative is meaningless: to justify 

v>>N, the larger binding energy must grossly exceed the nuclear energy even for very 

moderate N).  In such singular case, the component with infinite binding energy 

divides a random heteropolymer into random length homopolymers with bounded 

edges, which exclude their interaction.  This replaces the unbinding of a disordered 

heteropolymer in Eq. (1) in [1] with a different problem of unbinding in an ensemble 

of random length homopolymers in Eq. (2). Since only an infinite homopolymers 

length L implies singularity, and since the probability of such length is exponentially 

small in N, the ensemble unbinding may (but must not) yield only a Griffiths 

singularity. Accurate calculation [from Eq. (2) to Eq. (16)] verifies this statement by 

proving the continuity of all finite derivatives. However, even in the considered case 

calculation neither specifies the Griffiths singularity (which is a generic name for any 

“exponentially weak” singularity) analytically, nor proves the existence of any 

singularity.  The only “insight of the singularity” is provided by Eq. (17), which 

yields the second order phase transition. The latter is in sharp contrast to Griffiths 

singularity, and demonstrates only the invalidity of the corresponding approximation.  

The final KM speculation “The fact that v is finite but large is not expected to modify 

the nature of the singularity” is certainly not a substitute for an accurate generalization 

of the special case.     

The same authors and Peliti (KMP, [2]) analytically accounted for the excluded-

volume interactions between unbounded loops and the rest of the polymer to 

calculated the  loop entropy [2]. In a homopolymer such entropy yields the first order 

phase transition [3]. The authors “comment on disorder” and argue: “Analysis 

strongly suggests that the transition is first order… in agreement with experiments, 

[where] sharpness of the jumps [in the DNA unbinding curve] suggests that the 

transition from bound to unbound is first order”.  (The authors do not specify whether 

and how it is related to weak disorder). In a heteropolymer both suggestions are 

invalid. Contrary to the second suggestion, multiple, progressively (with increasing 

temperature T) sharper and higher, peaks imply stepwise unbinding of heterogeneous 

DNA. The length of progressively refractory bound domains increases, and ultimately 

diverges; the length of unbound domains between them is exponentially larger [4]. 

(This crucial implication of heterogeneity is disregarded in [2]). Experimental peaks 

[5] quantitatively agree with analytical theory [4] and allow for DNA sequencing [6]. 

(Not by chance, the titles of the Wartell, Benight and Gotoh papers [4] are “Thermal 

denaturation of DNA molecules-a comparison of theory with experiments” and 

“Prediction of melting profiles and local helix stability for sequenced DNA”).   In 

sharp contrast to the first suggestion, accurate theory [7], which properly accounts for 

DNA heterogeneity), yields a high (~100) order phase transition in the extraordinary 

narrow vicinity of the transition temperature. At lower temperatures the transition is 

preceded with the specified Griffiths type dependence.  Such singularity is slightly 

smoother than the Kosterlitz -Thouless singularity in the case of strong  disorder [8]. 

However, the difference may be related to directed heteropolymers considered in [8], 

and to possibly insufficient accuracy of their renormalization approach in the 

extraordinary narrow region of the high order transition.    

To summarize. Contrary to KMP [2], the transition in a disordered heteropolymer is 

never first order. KM [1] established (but not specified analytically) the Griffiths 

singularity in an ensemble of random length homopolymers only.     

Mark Ya. Azbel’ 

School of Physics and Astronomy, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978 Israel   

References 

1. Y. Kafri and D. Mukamel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 055502-1 (2003) 

2. Y. Kafri, D. Mukamel, and L. Peliti, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 4988 (2000) 

3. M.E. Fisher, J. Chem. Phys. 45, 1469 (1966) 

4. M. Ya. Azbel’, Phys. Rev. A 20, 1671 (1979).    

5. A. S. Benight, R. M. Wartell, D. K. Howell, Nature 289, 203 (1981); O. Gotoh, 

Adv. Biophys. 16, 1 (1983); R. M. Wartell, A. S. Benight, Phys. Rep. 126, 67 (1985) 

6. M. Ya. Azbel’, Proc. Nat. Acad. USA 76, 101 (1979); Biopolymers 19, 61, 81, 95, 

1311 (1980) 

7. M. Ya. Azbel’, Phys. Rev. E 68, 050901 (R) (2002) 

8. L.-H. Tang and M. Chate, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 830 (2001) 

 

  

