The Duel: Strings versus Loops 
 
Physicists in search of the foundation of the world: how tiny objects can create matter, 
energy and even space and time (cid:150) and possibly countless other universes 
 
By R(cid:252)diger Vaas 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
An icy wind blows over the flat farmland close to the small German village of Golm, 
which was incorporated into the city of Potsdam in 2003. Outside Golm, in the middle of 
open fields, starts a new world. A spooky world it seems. For there fluctuate mysterious 
superposition of fabrics whose threads are supposed to be everything, and between which 
there is supposed to be nothing.  
 
Strings vibrate in their highest tones, creating objects unknown to the surrounding 
people: photinos, gluinos, winos and zinos. But the familiar world is also a melody of 
strings. And it becomes stranger: allegedly, six or seven additional space dimensions 
exist curled up (cid:150) in formal terms, compactified (cid:150) like thin paper; higher-dimensional 
branes which flap like magic sheets in bizarrely formed Calabi-Yau spaces; moduli 
fields, mysterious anti-de Sitter spaces, a strange holographic principle which declares 
people to be holograms; unstable vacua, so that our universe could disappear with a 
whimper, and maybe even more universes than a person could possibly count (cid:150) not only 
if he had to dedicate his entire lifetime, but also if he had the whole age of the universe at 
his disposal.  
 
And all that, although these impressions would have surprised or disturbed a clueless 
hiker, belongs to the everyday business of a small but bustling group of researchers who 
met (cid:150) steadfastly ignoring the rain soaked days outside (cid:150) in the airily constructed building 
of the Max-Planck-Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert-Einstein-Institute, AEI). 
 
The atmosphere is cooperative but the occasion competitive. Although the conference 
theme sounds so conciliatory (cid:150) "Strings Meet Loops" (cid:150) it is debated keenly. At stake is 
literally everything: the universe and its foundation. Two well-developed theoretical 
approaches wrestle for a deeper basis of science. General relativity and quantum theory 
are the two undisputed pillars supporting the magnificent construction of contemporary 
physics, but on small space-time scales and at high energies they do not get along. For 
reconciliation, an even bolder theory is necessary. And on top of that this theory should (cid:150) 
physicists being allowed to be immodest sometimes (cid:150) unify the basic forces of nature and 
explain the riddles of the big bang and black holes. 
 
String theory and quantum geometry (also known as loop quantum gravity) are the names 
of the two competitors. They follow the goal in different fashions and with different 
results. Hundreds of most gifted physicists worldwide have joined this project (cid:150) and even 
invented new mathematical methods. For, in this unknown territory, there are no trails let 
alone a royal pathway. Thus the scientists have to fight their way through an exotic jungle 
(cid:150) without any guarantee that they would not be hopelessly lost. Nobody can show 

1 

concrete experimental proof yet. But many bizarre discoveries have already been made (cid:150) 
and along the way quite a few precious fruits have been found. Nevertheless, string 
theorists and quantum geometers are not always friends. 
 
"There is a certain reluctance to communicate in both camps, which we want to 
overcome. It would be better for everybody to think sometimes about problems from the 
others’ perspective or to take their lessons to heart,(cid:148) says Hermann Nicolai, director of the 
AEI. To foster these communications and to inspect the successes and weaknesses was 
the main motivation for the meeting. Abhay Ashtekar, who organized the meeting with 
Nicolai, agrees and adds: "There have been many misconceptions about what the other 
side has assumed and achieved. So, we wanted the two communities to clarify the 
situation, set a language to communicate and, most importantly, learn from each other." 
 
Ashtekar, professor of physics at the Pennsylvania State University and director of the 
Center for Gravitational Physics and Geometry located there, has developed quantum 
geometry together with Lee Smolin and Carlo Rovelli. According to this theory, space 
and time are not fundamental and independent of matter (cid:150) they do not just represent a 
background metric as physicists say (cid:150) but are themselves built from elementary objects 
called spin networks or sometimes loops. They form a fine mesh with "gaps" in between 
where literally nothing exists. Not even empty space, for space is only woven from the 
network and happens to look homogeneous from our blurred, distanced perspective (cid:150) 
similar to pictures on these pages which on closer look do not appear smooth and 
connected but as patterns of individual pixels. Excitations of the spin networks (cid:150) 
changeable states of lines and knots (cid:150) build matter and energy in the universe. Also the 
forces of nature "live" on this weave. Time emerges, at least according to one idea, from 
those tiniest of the tiny changes in the spin network. Thus arises the picture of spin 
foams. 
 
"A spin network is like a cross section through a spin foam, a kind of still picture,(cid:148) 
explains Robert Oeckl from the Universidad Nacional Aut(cid:243)noma de MØxico. "Vice versa, 
we can understand a spin foam as the temporal evolution of a spin network. The smallest 
parts of a spin foam then correspond to space time atoms. Thus time would also be 
discrete. The ’beats’ of time, certainly, are local (cid:150) the universe does not evolve in 
simultaneous steps everywhere." String theory in comparison is much less radical. Oeckl: 
"In perturbative approaches to quantum gravity, and string theory is one example, the 
metric is decomposed into a background, which characterizes Euclidean space, and a 
second part which describes fluctuations of space. A big disadvantage is that there the 
causal structure is assumed to be static despite being changed dynamically by gravity." 
 
This problem does not appear in quantum geometry (cid:150) but at a price. "Imagine there is no 
space and time in the background; no canvas to paint the dynamics of the physical 
universe on. Imagine a play in which the stage joins the troupe of actors. Imagine a novel 
in which the book itself is a character,(cid:148) says Abhay Ashtekar, straining the imagination of 
his audience enormously. And he knows how to look at the bottom of things (cid:150) i.e., how 
to glance so deeply into the structure of the world that in the glaring spotlight of the 

2 

theory even space and time literally dissolve. "Yes, one can still do physics without 
sacrificing any mathematical precision." 
 
Time and again Ashtekar returns to Albert Einstein whose legacy he continues, and 
whose theory of general relativity is to be extended. "In classical physics, Einstein taught 
us how to do this by weaving the gravitational field into the very fabric of space-time. In 
the resulting theory, general relativity, there is no background space-time, no inert arena, 
no spectators in the cosmic dance. Matter, through its gravity, tells space-time how to 
bend and curved space-time, in turn, tells matter how to move. However, classical 
physics is incomplete; it ignores the quantum world. Can we fuse the pristine, geometric 
world of Einstein’s with quantum physics, without robbing it of its soul? Can we realize 
Einstein’s vision at the quantum level?" 
 
Still in the seventies the answer of every theorist would have been in the negative. But 
nowadays there are better reasons for finding a working theory of quantum gravity. 
 
"Every great and deep difficulty bears in itself its own solution,(cid:148) Amitabha Sen quotes 
the physics Nobel laureate Niels Bohr. In 1981 Sen, as a student at the University of 
Chicago introduced a new mathematical description into physics, which allowed 
Ashtekar to express Einstein’s general relativity in a new equivalent language (cid:150) the basis 
for developing quantum geometry. 
 
The central statement of this theory of quantum gravity according to Lee Smolin from the 
Perimeter Institute in Waterloo, Canada: "Space is not continuous but like atoms." This 
means that space has a discrete structure characterized by the Planck length 10-33 cm. 
"The smallest possible nonzero area is about a square Planck length, or 10-66 cm2. The 
smallest nonzero volume is approximately a cubic Planck length, 10-99 cm3. Thus, the 
theory predicts that there are about 1099 atoms of volume in every cubic centimeter of 
space. The quantum of volume is so tiny that there are more such quanta in a cubic 
centimeter than there are cubic centimeters in the visible universe (1085)." Space atoms 
are made from the spin network. Smolin: "If we could draw a detailed picture of the 
quantum state of our universe (cid:150) the geometry of its space, as curved and warped by the 
gravitation of galaxies and black holes and everything else (cid:150) it would be a gargantuan 
spin network of unimaginable complexity, with approximately 10184 nodes." 
 
Hermann Nicolai appears little impressed by quantum geometry. Beyond its highly 
developed mathematical formalism, he says, it is not yet completely clear if this theory 
can really transfer safely all the essential physical features of Einstein’s theory, in 
particular its four dimensional covariance, to quantum theory. Furthermore, quantum 
geometry tries, first and foremost, to describe only gravity. The theory of matter is added 
by hand but not explained by deeper principles. "Here string theory is by far more 
ambitious because it not only wants to describe gravity correctly, but also explain the 
origin of matter,(cid:148) says Nicolai. Here the basic contradiction is that string theory says: 
Matter interactions cannot be ignored even in principle in order to make quantum gravity 
consistent. And the followers of quantum geometry: No, we simply try to transform 
Einstein’s theory of relativity into a consistent quantum theory of gravity. Nicolai, who 

3 

says of himself to have worked "on both sides of the fence,(cid:148) is not satisfied by this 
situation. "This contradiction has to be resolved at some stage." And he does not hold 
back his preference: "Personally, I tend toward the string side. There must be a reason for 
matter to exist in the world. If Einstein’s theory would be consistent as quantum gravity 
one would have to ask: Why is there any matter at all?" 
 
String theory claims to have the answer to this question. It understands elementary 
particles as excited states of tiny vibrating threads and can, in contrast to quantum 
geometry, describe all four forces of nature in a unified way. Its disadvantage is that it 
can be formulated only in nine or ten space dimensions. (Strictly speaking there are five 
different ten dimensional string theories and one eleven dimensional super gravity theory. 
All of them turned out to be closely related to one another and are nowadays seen only as 
boundary points of an encompassing, mostly unknown super theory christened M theory 
by the string theorist Edward Witten from the Institute of Advanced Study in Princeton.) 
 
In view of its abstractness and exoticness the widespread popularity of string theory is 
astonishing. Last year the higher dimensional Calabi-Yau spaces even made it into the 
New Yorker, where Woody Allen humorously mocked them and other fuss of theoretical 
physics in a story of an office affair. Also, in the academic world the community of string 
theorists is at least ten times bigger than that of quantum geometry. 
 
"String theory has more appeal within the physics community because it uses the 
standard language of background dependent quantum field theory. Since it is compatible 
with other areas of theoretical physics, many people were able to make a continuous 
transition from particle physics to string theory. The framework of loop quantum gravity, 
on the other hand, is new and different from anything else. Therefore, one needs to invest 
a lot of time to develop a new intuition,(cid:148) says Jerzy Lewandowski who gave a talk at the 
AEI about diverse "miracles" in the context of quantum geometry (cid:150) theoretical 
breakthroughs and interrelations which enhanced his confidence in this approach. With 
Abhay Ashtekar, Thomas Thiemann and others, he contributed substantially to the proof 
of uniqueness and mathematical well-definedness of quantum geometry. In addition to 
that, Lewandowski emphasizes a different kind of unification in quantum geometry: "All 
forces ’live’ in similar ways within the spin network and are treated alike in quantum 
geometry, although they are not unified in the same sense as in string theory." 
 
Ashtekar suspects a further sociological reason for the numerical dominance of string 
theorists: There are simply many more particle physicists than relativists. "String theory 
naturally arose as a continuation of perturbative quantum field theory techniques which 
have been so successful in describing the other forces of nature. Quantum geometry arose 
from conceptual ideas that are at the heart of general relativity." And since, as one may 
speculate, many particle physicists were underoccupied following the fantastic 
confirmation of the standard model of matter and the subsequent wait for next generation 
accelerators to reach higher energies, they were forced to find themselves a new and 
spectacular area of research. 
 

4 

"Never in the history of physics has there been such an all-encompassing intellectual 
effort,(cid:148) says Nicolai about the string theorists. Compared to that the results are (cid:150) except 
for much high calibre mathematics (cid:150) certainly meagre. "The situation just shows that 
nature is still a bit more subtle than us." 
 
Brian Greene who landed a best seller with his book The Elegant Universe (1999) spoke 
similarly in a recent interview with the Scientific American: "The universe in a sense 
guides us toward truths, because those truths are the things that govern what we see. 
String theory has been built up out of a lot of smaller ideas that a lot of people have 
contributed and been slowly stitching together into an ever more impressive theoretical 
edifice. But what idea sits at the top of the edifice, we still don’t really know. When we 
do have that idea, I believe that it will be like a beacon shining down; it will illuminate 
the edifice, and it will also, I believe, give answers to critical questions that remain 
unresolved." 
 
In the eyes of other scientists this is just wishful thinking, particularly since string theory 
with all its intellectual efforts has not really earned merits with physical applications and 
testable predictions (cid:150) apparently it would not even be in contradiction with completely 
different data. Lee Smolin, for one, teases: "So far, no string theory background is known 
which is consistent with all features of the observed universe. They all have one or more 
of the following features, which each disagree with observation: no positive cosmological 
constant, unbroken supersymmetry, massless scalar fields." 
 
"What’s the good of a theory that can accommodate anything and the contrary of 
anything?" Carlo Rovelli from the University of Marseille has a sharp quantum geometry 
student saying to a string theory professor. "Our arguments have to be about the world we 
experience, not about a world made of paper." Exactly this sentence can be found already 
in the work Dialog concerning the two chief world systems (1632) of Galileo Galilei, 
which Carlo Rovelli took as the model for his also fictitious but biting article A dialog on 
quantum gravity (2003). There, the student and the professor continue the Galilean 
contest in a new guise. With much pleasure Rovelli dissects the weaknesses and 
unfulfilled promises of string theory. "The history of science is full of beautiful ideas that 
turned out to be wrong. In spite of the tremendous mental power of the people working in 
it, in spite of the string revolutions and the excitement and the hype, years go by and the 
theory isn’t delivering physics. All the key problems remain wide open. The connection 
with reality becomes more and more remote." 
 
That would not be Nicolai’s judgment. "In fact I see some danger here. I do not believe, 
in particular, that string theory can survive twenty more years without a definitive and 
experimentally verifiable prediction." But this is a problem which quantum geometry also 
has to face. "The quantization of areas and volumes on the Planck scale will be even less 
verifiable than the supersymmetric particles in accelerator experiments, which are a 
consequence of string models." 
 
Leonard Susskind brings this to the point: "Either all matter is strings, or string theory is 
wrong. This is one of the most exciting features of the theory." The professor of physics 

5 

at Stanford University is one of the fathers of string theory, but certainly without being 
slavishly devoted to it. "String theory is either a theory of everything or a theory of 
nothing. The final evaluation of string theory will rest on its ability to explain the facts of 
nature, not on its own internal beauty and consistency. String theory is well into its fourth 
decade, but so far it has not produced a detailed model of elementary particles or a 
convincing explanation of any cosmological observation." 
 
In 2003 Susskind tormented his colleagues with several unpleasant talks. For instance, 
many of the renowned cosmologists who met in Davis, California, to celebrate the new 
observations from the early universe, pulled a long face. Susskind shocked his audience 
with a number which gave pause to even those researchers who are familiar with large 
numbers from their everyday work. String theory would predict or need 10100 or even 
10200 different vacuum states (cid:150) at least. In other words: String theory has astronomically 
many physical solutions, and each of them could correspond to a universe with its own 
laws and constants of nature. If physicists are lucky, one among them is in accordance 
with our universe. But not even that is certain. 
 
"The problem does not seem to be a lack of richness, but rather the opposite. String 
theory contains too many possibilities,(cid:148) summarized Susskind. "For most physicists, the 
ideal physical theory is one that is unique and perfect, in that it determines all that can be 
determined and that it could not logically be any other way. In other words, it is not only 
a theory of everything but it is the only theory of everything. To the orthodox string 
theorist, the goal is to discover the one true consistent version of the theory and then to 
demonstrate that the solution manifests the known laws of nature, such as the standard 
model of particle physics, with its empirical set of parameters." 
 
Instead, string theorists stumbled upon a giant landscape they slyly call "stringscape." 
Yes, an enormously complex space of possibilities. "To mix metaphors: it is a stupendous 
haystack that contains googles of straws and only one needle. Worse still, the theory itself 
gives us no hint about how to pick among the possibilities." 
 
At least, there is support for the stringscape from cosmologists who, in the context of the 
model of so-called eternal inflation, assume a multitude of different universes too. 
Susskind: "Thus it may be that the enormous number of possible vacuum solutions, 
which is the bane of particle physics, may be just what the doctor ordered for 
cosmology." 
 
Michael Douglas from Rutgers University tries to make a virtue out of this necessity. At 
the "Strings Meet Loops" meeting he gave a talk via video-link, which was discussed 
with much controversy. 
 
Douglas likewise takes at least 10200 different string vacuum states for granted. (Twenty 
years ago, even the number 101500 was mentioned which, however, Douglas considers 
"out of the question.(cid:148) This prompted Hermann Nicolai to compare the situation with 
medieval theologists discussing the number of angels that can fit on the tip of a needle.) 
But he imagines certain selection principles would prevail allowing string theorists to 

6 

pick the solutions interesting for our own universe, out of the many possible. Douglas 
even works on statistical methods to sift through the stringscape in search of prominent 
landmarks, and to scout out the structure of the stringscape in more detail. 
 
To critics this effort appears futile as long as it is not even known whether any "realistic" 
universes are offered at all (cid:150) or whether an infinite number of vacuum states indeed exist. 
Consequently, it would be impossible to verify the physics. 
 
Susskind has invoked the so-called anthropic principle: We should not be surprised to 
live in our universe, for almost all others would not allow us to exist there (cid:150) because there 
are no stars, for instance. Douglas is more cautious: "A valid physical theory must 
describe what we observe, but may or may not explain why we observe it. Anthropic 
arguments, while interesting, are not really central to fundamental physics, whose basic 
problem I would state as: Find the laws which describe all observations, and see if they 
can emerge from some complete and consistent framework." 
 
A possible grasp into the hay stack to find the proverbial needle has been managed by a 
group of physicists around Shamit Kachru at Stanford. With some tricks they succeeded 
in finding a string vacuum which has at least a little resemblance to the vacuum state of 
our physical universe. Fernando Quevedo from Cambridge and his colleagues have in the 
meantime discovered more such "de Sitter spaces" in string theory which, so far, are not 
realistic but at least have a positive cosmological constant, a feature which appears 
necessary for the observed accelerated expansion of our universe. Certainly: If there are 
so many different vacuum states there is a danger of our own one existing only 
temporarily, being unstable in the long term, and decaying into a less energetic one. That 
would be the end of our universe. But Quevedo reassures: "All these transitions have a 
very large life-time (cid:150) usually much bigger than the age of our universe." 
 
"The awe for the math in string theory should not blind us. I think it is time to explore 
something else,(cid:148) is Rovelli’s advertisement for quantum geometry. "The conventional 
mathematical formalism of quantum field theory relies very much on the existence of 
background space. There are therefore two possible strategies that we can adopt to 
construct a quantum theory of gravity. One is to undo Einstein(cid:146)s discovery and to 
reintroduce a fictitious background space. This is the strategy adopted by those who do 
not regard the general-relativistic revolution as fundamental, but as a sort of accident. 
And this is the strategy adopted in string theory. The second strategy is the one adopted 
by loop gravity: take general relativity seriously, directly face the problem that there is no 
background space in nature, and reconstruct quantum field theory from scratch in a form 
that does not require background space." 
 
Abhay Ashtekar is more conciliatory: "Both communities agree that the final theory 
should be both background independent and should unify all interactions. The question is 
what one begins with, what one emphasizes to get the program going." Lee Smolin, who 
has also contributed to string theory, has a similar view: "Science works best when there 
is a variety of viewpoints investigated, and when there is room in the community for 
people who investigate a range of viable approaches to any unsolved problem." 

7 

 
Brian Greene likewise emphasizes common points: "My hope is that ultimately we’re 
developing the same theory from different angles. It’s far from impossible that we’re 
going down our route to quantum gravity, they’re going down their route to quantum 
gravity, and we’re going to meet someplace. Because it turns out that many of their 
strengths are our weaknesses. Many of our strengths are their weaknesses." 
 
"Before coming to a final judgment one has to see if and how all the pieces fit together in 
the end. For separate aspects one can always present some solutions,(cid:148) says Hermann 
Nicolai wrinkling his brow. Despite his preference for string theory he admits: "The aim 
is to find a theory which describes all of physics. Einstein already had the dream to 
condense everything into a single formula fitting on a sheet of paper. That is the dream of 
string theory, too (cid:150) it just has not arrived there yet." Quantum geometry certainly does 
not provide that either. And it is also an open question whether one can succeed by 
joining forces. Nicolai: "I doubt that both approaches will finally mix harmoniously into 
a single theory since they start from diametrically opposite assumptions. It is not clear at 
all that in the end everybody will arrive at the same target. The purpose of our meeting 
was in fact to point out the differences and disputes." 
 
It is certain that Einstein’s dream has not come to its end yet. The great physicist called 
the two sides of his relativistic field equations (cid:150) on one side geometry, on the other 
matter (cid:150) "marble" and "wood.(cid:148) Following Einstein, Ashtekar and his colleagues also 
believe that in the end the world is built on the solid foundation of geometry rather than 
the brittle wood of matter. String theorists, on the other hand, can sound both tones with 
their vibrating strings. It remains to be seen who will toll the final sound (cid:150) or if maybe 
even a third party is necessary. 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 

Acknowledgements: 
I am very grateful to Martin Bojowald, Michael Douglas, Jerzy Lewandowski, Hermann 
Nicolai, Robert Oeckl, Fernando Quevedo, Carlo Rovelli, Amitabha Sen, and Lee Smolin 
for their time, patience and great cooperation (cid:150) and especially to Abhay Asthekar.  
 
Contact: 
Ruediger.Vaas@t-online.de 

 

8 

Strings versus Loops: Comparing the Opponents 

quantum geometry 
spin network or  
   spin foam 
3 (more possible) 
1 
no 
yes 
 
yes 
no 
spin network states 
not required, not possible
no 
no 
possibly 
no (?) 
yes 
no, but permitted 
no 
no (ambiguity of the  
   Hamiltonian) 
unclear 
yes 
possible 
possible 
in early research stage  
not yet succeeded 
in early research stage 

string theory 
space, time,  
   strings and branes 
9 or 10 
1 
yes 
yes 
 
no 
yes 
excitations of strings/branes
in early research stage  
yes 
possibly 
possibly 
no (?) 
not of space and time 
yes 
yes 
no (many string vacua) 
 
possible 
partly 
possible (several) 
possible 
in early research stage 
yes 
in early research stage,  
   partly falsified 

 
properties and features 
fundamental objects 
 
number of spatial dimensions 
number of time dimensions 
spacetime as a background metric 
modification of quantum theory and general relativity 
conceptual unification of  
   quantum theory and general relativity 
new physical principles necessary  
nature of matter 
explanation of the standard model of matter 
prediction of unknown elementary particles 
explanation of dark matter in the universe  
explanation of dark energy in the universe 
problems with infinities in the formalism  
unification of quantization 
unification of interactions (forces of nature) 
supersymmetry required and predicted 
uniqueness  
 
existence of many other universes 
explanation of black hole entropy 
explanation of the big bang 
explanation of cosmic inflation 
contact with low energy physics (everyday world) 
description of scattering experiments 
testable predictions  
 
 
Further reading: 
 
1. Brief introductions into quantum gravity: 
http://www.damtp.cam.ac.uk/user/gr/public/qg_home.html 
http://superstringtheory.com 
http://www.qgravity.org  
 
2. Strings Meet Loops conference website: 
http://www.aei-potsdam.mpg.de/events/stringloop.html 
 
3. Welcome to Quantum Gravity 
Physics World (2003), vol 16, no. 11, pp. 21-22 and 27-47. 
Special issue with articles by Fernando Quevedo, Leonard Susskind, Carlo Rovelli, and 
Giovanni Amelino-Camelia about string theory, quantum geometry and future 
experiments. 
 
4. Woody Allen: Strung Out. The New Yorker (2003), July 28. 
http://www.eps.org/aps/apsnews/1103/110319.html 
 

9 

5. Abhay Ashtekar’s homepage:  
http://cgpg.gravity.psu.edu/people/Ashtekar/ 
 
6. Abhay Ashtekar: Addressing Challenges of Quantum Gravity Through Quantum 
Geometry: Black holes and Big-bang. In: Daniel Iagolnitzer, Vincent Rivasseau, Jean 
Zinn-Justin (eds.): International Conference on Theoretical Physics. Ann. Henri PoincarØ, 
vol. 4, suppl. 1, pp. 55-69. Birkh(cid:228)user, Basel 2003.  
See also: http://arxiv.org/abs/math-ph/0202008 
 
7. Brian Greene: The Elegant Universe. W. W. Norton, New York 1999. 
 
8. Brian Greene, interview: 
Scientific American (2003), vol. 289, no. 5, pp. 48-53. 
 
9. Carlo Rovelli’s homepage:  
http://www.cpt.univ-mrs.fr/~rovelli/ 
 
10. Carlo Rovelli: A dialog on quantum gravity. International Journal of Modern Physics 
(2003), vol. D12, pp. 1509-1528. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0310077 
 
11. Lee Smolin: Three Roads to Quantum Gravity. Phoenix, London 2001. 
 
12. Lee Smolin: How far are we from the quantum theory of gravity?  
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0303185  
 
13. Lee Smolin: Atoms of Space and Time. Scientific American (2004), vol. 290, no. 1, 
pp. 56-65.  
 
14. Leonard Susskind: A universe like no other. New Scientist (2003), vol. 180, no. 2419, 
pp. 34-41. 
 
15. R(cid:252)diger Vaas: Beyond Space and Time.  
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0401128 
An introduction to quantum geometry. Translated from:  
Jenseits von Raum und Zeit. bild der wissenschaft (2003), no. 12, pp. 50-56. 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
 
Translated by Martin Bojowald and Amitabha Sen with permission from 
R(cid:252)diger Vaas: Das Duell: Strings gegen Schleifen. 
bild der wissenschaft (2004), no. 4, pp. 44-49.  

10 

