An Application of Transfer Hamiltonian Quantum Mechanics to Multi-

Scale Modeling 

Aditi Mallik1, Carlos E. Taylor2, Keith Runge1 and James W. Dufty1 

1Department of Physics, University of Florida, FL-32611 

2Department of Chemistry, University of Florida, FL-32611 

 Abstract In quantum/classical (QM/CM) partitioning methods for multi-scale modeling, 

one is often forced to introduce uncontrolled phenomenological effects of the environment (CM) 

in the quantum (QM) domain as ab initio quantum calculations are computationally too intensive 

to  be  applied  to  the  whole  sample.  We  propose  a  method,  in  which  two  qualitatively  different 

components  of  the  information  about  the  state  of  the  CM  region  are  incorporated  into  the  QM 

calculations.  First,  pseudoatoms  constructed  to  describe  the  chemistry  of  the  nearest  neighbor 

exchange interactions replace the atoms at the boundary of the CM and the QM regions. Second, 

the  remaining  effect  of  the  CM  bulk  environment  due  to  long-range  Coulombic  interactions  is 

modeled in terms of dipoles. We have tested this partitioning method in a silica nanorod and a 3-

membered silica ring for which ab initio quantum data for the whole system is available to assess 

the quality of the proposed partitioning method. 

Key words: QM/CM  methods; Transfer Hamiltonian; pseudoatoms; silica; 

embedding 

 

1

 

Introduction 

Despite  the  latest  computational  advances,  ab  initio  methods  for  studying  complex 

phenomena  like  crack  propagation,  enzymatic  reactions,  stress  corrosion,  hydrolytic 

weakening  of  silica  etc.  are  still  far  from  routine.  Such  phenomena  occur  in  macroscopic 

samples  and  quantum  mechanical  (QM)  methods  that  include  the  effects  of  electron 

correlation are still limited to relatively small molecules. The alternative approach of classical 

molecular dynamics (MD) does not have this limitation, but an accurate description cannot be 

made using classical few body potentials, as they fail to work in states far from equilibrium or 

which involve breaking of chemical bonds or charge transfer. In such domains one requires 

QM methods to explicitly consider the electrons.  

A  promising  tool  for  studying  such  phenomena  is  the  application  of  ab  initio  QM 

techniques to small reactive regions (like the crack tip in case of studying crack propagation 

where bonds are breaking between atoms) and classical MD to describe the bulk (where the 

deformation  is  less).  Such  methods  are  referred  to  here  as  quantum  mechanical  /  classical 

mechanical  (QM/CM)  methods.  Over  the  past  decade  there  has  been  intensive  work 

developing such methods1-9. The first basic algorithm was laid by Warshel and Levitt10.  

One of the major problems with this approach is how to include the relevant effects of 

the bulk environment on the reactive region.  There are two qualitatively different effects of 

the  environment.  The  first  is  the  short-range interaction at the QM/CM boundary where the 

partitioning  involves  cutting  of  covalent  bonds  between  the  two  regions.  Such  a  division 

results in a mismatch of geometry, forces, charge density etc., across the boundary of QM and 

CM regions. The second is the long range Coulomb interaction between the rest of the bulk 

 

2

and the QM region. As will be seen below, both effects must be accounted for to describe the 

QM region accurately. A successful QM/CM treatment will need a strategy to treat the bond 

cutting  region,  called  termination  schemes,  and  the  longer  range  interactions  through 

embedding. 

There  are  various  termination  schemes  for circumventing  the  problem  of  division  of 

bonds. The most predominantly used scheme is the link atom (LA) method, first presented by 

Singh  and  Kollman11.  In  this  method,  hydrogen  atoms  are  added  to  the  CM  side  of  broken 

covalent bond to satisfy the valency of the QM system. Interactions between link atoms and 

CM atoms are not included since link atoms do not have a physical existence in the system 

under study. Because of its simplicity, the LA method is still widely used in many types of 

QM/CM applications. 

Another termination scheme is the frozen orbital method. Frozen orbital methods vary 

in the details of their implementations. In one of these methods, known as local self-consistent 

field  (LSCF)12,  the  electronic  density  along  the  frontier  bond  is  represented  by  a  strictly 

localized frozen atomic orbital, which has a preset geometry and electronic population. Reuter 

and co-workers13 have compared the results for proton affinities and deprotonation enthalpies 

for  a  number  of  molecules  using  LA  and  LSCF  methods  and  found  the  results  to  be 

comparable. 

Gao  et  al.  have  proposed  a  refined  LSCF  method  known  as  a  generalized  hybrid 

orbital (GHO) method14 in which hybrid orbitals are divided into auxiliary and active orbitals, 

the latter of which are then optimized in the QM calculations. But both of these frozen orbital 

methods require substantial computational work. 

 

3

There  are  numerous  other  termination  schemes  for  the  QM/CM  boundary  like  the 

'connecting  bond'  approach  by  Thiel  et  al.,  'pseudobond'  scheme  by  Yang  et  al.,  'IMOMM' 

and  'ONIOM'  procedures  by  Morokuma  and  co-workers15,  'effective  group  potential  (EGP)' 

by Poteau et al.16 However these methods are not discussed here.  

Here  we  report  an  approach,  based  on  the  application  of  the  previously  developed 

transfer  Hamiltonian  (TH)17,  which  employs  a  newly  parameterized  pseudoatom  to  describe 

the  short  range  interaction.  The  TH  is  a  semi-empirical  Hamiltonian  which  has  been 

reparameterized to yield coupled cluster (CC) quality forces. MD is driven by the forces on 

the  atoms,  so  that  the  TH  is  particularly  trained  to  drive  high  quality  MD  results  while 

requiring  only  the  computational  intensity  of  semi-empirical  methods  which  are  orders  of 

magnitude  less  demanding  than  CC  calculations  on  the  same  systems.  We  consider  the 

application of pseudoatoms to a silica system. In the investigation of sample silica systems, 

the  role  of  the  remote  environment  becomes  clear.  The  Coulomb  interaction  with  the 

environment beyond the nearest neighbors is represented by its dipole to good accuracy, the 

subsystems having been chosen to be electrically neutral. 

 Method 

We  give  only  a  brief  introduction  to  the  TH  strategy  as  details  are  published 

elsewhere.17  High  level  correlated  quantum  chemical  calculations  are  very  computationally 

intensive. The goal of the TH strategy is to provide forces for realistic MD simulations of the 

quality  of  the  coupled  cluster  singles  and  doubles  (CCSD)  in  computationally  accessible 

times. To that end, a semi-empirical form of the Hamiltonian, (neglect of diatomic differential 

overlap-NDDO)  has  been  reparameterized  to  reproduce  CCSD  forces  from  a  representative 

 

4

small molecule. Pyrosilicic acid (Figure 1) has been used for the reparameterization of silicon 

and oxygen parameters and the results applied to silica systems. 

Part replaced by modified F 

F 

Figure 1: Training of Pseudoatoms on small system like Pyrosilisic acid 

This  TH  strategy  serves  as  the  framework  within  which  we  investigate  termination 

schemes for the embedding of a QM region inside a CM region. In the current application, we 

have  presumed  that  the  forces  that  arise  from  the  TH  are  the  reference  forces  by  which  the 

termination scheme is to be judged. A new embedding scheme is proposed for use in multi-

scale  simulations  where  the  TH  is  used  for  the  QM  region,  a  pseudoatom  is  placed  at  the 

location of each boundary atom, and the electric dipole describes the remainder of the system.  

In  keeping  with  the  TH  strategy,  we  have  based  the  parameterization  of  the 

pseudoatom by matching forces for the QM portion of the system.  We intend that the short-

range interactions, particularly the exchange interaction, will be taken into account using the 

 

5

pseudoatom, and we assume that they are transferable from the small model system to large 

systems.  Beginning  with  NDDO  parameters  for  fluorine,  we  modified  these  parameters  to 

account for the near environment as based on a molecular model, pyrosilicic acid (Figure 1). 

We include the long range interaction with the environment through its electric dipole. 

The  long  range  interaction  arises  predominately  from  the  Coulomb  interaction  of  the 

environment  with  the  QM  region.  The  leading  term  in  a  multipole  expansion  of  this  long 

range  effect  is  the  electric  dipole  as  the  subsystem  is  taken  to  be  electrically  neutral.  We 

confirm  the  sufficiency  of  the  truncation  of  the  multipole  expansion  at  the  dipole  term  in  a 

system of modest size by comparing with the effect of the complete charge distribution. 

We  consider  this  partitioning  problem  in  some  benchmark  systems  for  which  a 

quantum treatment of the whole system is possible to assess the quality and physical basis for 

the proposed scheme. The results for two systems are described here: a silica nanorod, and a 

3-membered silica ring associated with the surface structure of amorphous silica. 

The  silica  nanorod,  (developed  by  S.  Yip  et.al.)18  contains  108  nuclei  and  is  16Å  in 

length. It is made up of SiO2 rings stacked one above another at an approximate distance of 

3Å  connected  by  oxygen  atoms  (Figure  2).  It  has  been  seen  that  “these  nanorods  are  small 

enough  to  be  authentic  nanoscale  objects  and  to  be  computationally  tractable  even  for 

moderately refined QM approximations. Yet they are large enough to have authentic material 

properties e.g., stress strain curves and Young's modulus."18 Moreover, the size of the system 

can be readily adjusted by the addition or the removal of rings.  

 

6

CM region

CM region

QM region 

O 

Si 

Figure  2(a):  Partitioning  of  silica  nanorod          Figure  2(b)  Valence  electron  cloud  of  CM   

region  

In this rod, one of the rings near the center of the rod is chosen to be the QM domain 

A and rest of the rod is treated classically [Figure 2(a)]. The localized nature of the valence 

electron charge density of the CM region B [Figure 2(b)] ensures the appropriateness of such 

a  partitioning.  The  lighter  shades  represent  electron  higher  densities,  the  black  region  in-

between  shows  there  is  no  overlap  between  the  two  clouds.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  the 

partitioning we have chosen will allow a good first test of our newly developed termination 

scheme  within  the  TH  technique.  The  oxygen  atoms  that  are  bound  to  region  A  will  be 

replaced  with  pseudoatoms  and  the  remainder  of  region  B  will  be  represented  by  it  electric 

dipole to account for it Coulomb interaction with region A. 

We  also  present  an  analysis  of  the  systems  based  on  the  reproduction  of  the  charge 

density in the QM region. This test for the fidelity of a termination scheme is the subject of 

our  current  examination  and  a  development  of  the  theoretical  basis  of  our  approach  will 

appear elsewhere.19  

 

7

Our analysis has three components. First, using the TH17 - NDDO method20, the forces 

and the charge density for the entire rod are calculated as the reference 'exact' QM description. 

In particular, it provides a description of the selected sub domain A with its correct chemical 

environment for the entire rod. Next, these forces and charge densities are calculated for the 

isolated QM region A with a simplified representation of the environment B: nearest neighbor 

pseudoatoms plus dipoles for the remainder of B above and below. For comparison we also 

study the choice of link atoms instead of pseudoatoms. 

Our characterization of the partitioning method is based on the quality of the predicted 

charge densities and forces in the QM domain A.  First, the charge density of the (i) ring with 

LA, and (ii) ring with pseudoatoms is compared to that of ring in bulk (i.e., the charge  

Results 

 

 

 

8

 

 

 

Figure 3(a) 

Figure 3(b)

Figure 3(c) 

Figure 3(d)

 

9

density for A resulting from the benchmark QM calculation for the entire rod). The density is 

calculated on a planar grid placed parallel to the plane of ring (which is taken to be at z=0). 

Visualization  of  the  charge  densities  provides  some  insights  into  the  descriptive  differences 

between the pseudoatom and LA. Figure 3(a), Figure 3(b), Figure 3(c) and Figure 3(d) show 

the charge density of the isolated ring, the ring with LA, the ring with pseudoatoms, and the 

ring  in  bulk  respectively  in  the  plane  of  the  ring.  The  six  red  spots  (high  density)  on  the 

contour  of  Figure  3(a)  correspond  to  the  six  oxygen  nuclei  of  the  ring.    The  six  blue  spots 

(low density) in contour of Figure 3(b) correspond to the link atoms. In the contour of Figure 

3(c), an overlap between the spots indicates the bonding between the nuclei similar to the ring 

in  the  bulk  [Figure  3(d)].    Note  that  in  Figure  3(d)  the  contour  is  projected  on  the  top  for 

clarity. These plots also indicate that pseudoatoms are a more realistic  representation of the 

bulk compared to the link atoms because it takes into account the bonding of the ring. Table 1 

shows the normalized difference of the square of the charge density in these two cases with 

respect to ring in bulk. Note that as the z coordinate gets larger we approach the pseudoatom 

location where we would not expect the termination scheme to reproduce the ‘exact’ result, 

hence we stop at z = 0.8 Angstroms. The right most column of the table shows that, while the 

difference is least for the ring with pseudoatoms, still the discrepancy from the ‘exact’ result 

is  greater  than  1%  even  in  the  best  case  and  the  relative  agreement  gets  worse  the  further 

away  from  the  ring  we  look.  Hence,  even  though  the  pseudoatom  provides  reasonable 

chemical bonding behavior, there is still some impact from the rest of the system.  

The forces on the nuclei of the ring with LA and pseudoatoms were compared to those 

of ring in bulk (the benchmark). Figure 4 shows the magnitude of the forces on one of the Si  

 

10

Table 1: Comparison of charge densities with various termination schemes 

Distance 

Density in 

Normalized difference 

from plane of 

ring in  

ring (in Ao) 

bulk 

Ring with 

Ring with 

Link-atoms

Pseudoatoms 

Z=0.2 

942 

0.05 

0.02 

Z=0.4 

507 

0.12 

0.05 

Z=0.6 

246 

0.32 

0.19 

Z=0.8 

171 

0.42 

0.42 

)

A

/
l

o
m

/
l
a
c
k
 
n
i
(
 
e
c
r
o
f

1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

Ring with links Ring with pseudo-

Ring in rod 

atoms

Figure 4: Comparison of forces on Si nuclei with different termination schemes 

 

11

nuclei of the ring resulting from the LA or pseudoatom termination schemes. Since the ring in 

the rod is in equilibrium, there should not be any forces as is evident from the graph. It is seen 

that neither the LA nor the pseudo-atom method alone is sufficient to represent the bulk, and 

additional  contributions  from  the  rest  of  the  rod  are  necessary.  These  are  the  longer  range 

Coulomb  interactions  for  which  the  detailed  quantum  mechanics  is  not  expected  to  be 

important. 

To improve our embedding procedure, we describe the remainder of the environment 

as two dipoles for the top and bottom portions of B (Figure 5).  The values of the dipole have 

Pseudoatoms

Rest  of  the
rod 

QM domain

Rest  of  the
rod

Figure 5: Approximation of the top and bottom portions of the rod by two dipoles 

been calculated using the TH-NDDO charge density for these two portions of the rod. These 

domains are taken to be charge neutral, but are polarized by the presence of the QM domain 

A. The validity of the approximation of the rod with dipoles has been checked by finding the 

difference between the force on Si nuclei due to all the charges and that due to the dipole and 

its  found to be very small of (about 6.25kcal/mol/Å). It is found that even with dipoles placed 

 

12

externally above and below the ring, the force on Si nuclei is 364.7 kcal/mol/Å. Hence, it is 

clear  that  using  pseudoatoms  or  external  dipoles  alone  will  not  lead  to  a  satisfactory 

embedding.   

The  problem  of  large  forces  was  solved  by  including  the  two  dipoles  in  TH-NDDO 

calculation to incorporate the effects of polarization of the ring due to the dipoles. Figure 6(a) 

and 6(b) show the significant improvement in the values forces and charge densities with the 

incorporation  of  dipoles  respectively.  From  Figure  6(b),  it  is  seen  that  the  normalized 

difference of charge density is reduced by an order of magnitude.  

Figure 6(a) 

Figure 6(b)

pseudo-
atoms

dipoles

dipoles in
NDDO

in
equlibrium

0.1

0.3

0.5

0.7

0.9

distance from plane of ring

This  method  was  found  to  be  applicable  to  strained  situations  and  other  systems  as 

well. (Table 2 shows all the cases studied.)  

Without dipoles

With dipoles

 

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d
d
e
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
n

1

0.1

0.01

0.001

13

)

A

/
l

o
m

/
l

 

a
c
k
n
i
(
 
e
c
r
o
f

800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

 

 

 

 

Table 2: Comparison of actual forces and charge densities with those obtained 

from our method, in various cases 

 Various Other Cases 
studied   

Comparison of forces (in 
kcal/mol/A) 

Actual (in 
presence of 
bulk) 

With 
pseudoatoms 
+ dipoles 

Fractional  
normalized charge 
density difference 
with respect to bulk 

I. For the rod with 6 

rings 

 

 

a) 5% radially expanded   

central ring 

214 

223 

0.005 

b)  A distorted central 

418 

c) Uniaxially strained  

0.5 

ring 

rod 

II. For a longer rod 
with 10 rings 

 

a) In Equilibrium  

39 

b) 5% radially expanded 

central ring  

c) A distorted ring 

III.  3-membered ring 

256 

571 

17 

 

437 

29 

 

32 

241 

639 

52 

14

* in each of above the cases it has been verified that pseudo-atom method is a better termination scheme 

As  a  further  test,  we  have  used  this  method  to  partition  a  highly  strained  small  molecule, 

which  is  a  3-membered  silica  ring21  (Figure  7).  These  types  of  ringed  structures  are  found 

 

 

0.002 

.007 

0.001 

0.007 

0.005 

0.008 

abundantly  on  surface  of  amorphous  silica.  Again,  the  results  are  quite  satisfactory  (see  the 

last row of Table 2). 

QM r

egion

Si

CM region

H 

 

Conclusion and Discussions 

Figure7 Partitioning of 3-membered silica ring 

It  is  seen  that  the  pseudoatoms  together  with  the  dipoles  in  the  TH-NDDO  can 

effectively  represent  the  CM  region.  The  generality  of  the  proposed  scheme  extends  to 

systems such as strained rods and 3-membered cyclic silica ring. Thus, we have succeeded in 

developing a tool for simulating the exchange interactions and simplifying the environment of 

the QM region. Furthermore the pseudoatom, in the context of TH, is a better representation 

of the exchange interactions compared to the LA method. 

So  far  we  have  calculated  the  dipole  moments  from  TH-NDDO.  This  has  been 

possible since the systems under study are small enough to allow full quantum calculations. 

15

 

 

For  very  large  systems,  like  amorphous  silica  surface,  we  hope  to  find  a  dipole  moment 

associated with Si-O bond from the known dipole moments in these calculations, which then 

can be included easily in the quantum calculations.  

This  method  provides  an  example  for  multi-scale  modeling  that  is  internally  self-

consistent  and  based  at  all  scales  in  the  fundamental  underlying  quantum  mechanics. 

Although the study has been limited to Si based materials, it should provide the guidance for 

extension to other materials as well. 

Acknowledgements  

Ping Cheng for their helpful discussions. 

References 

This  work  was  supported  partly  by  Department  of  Energy  under  Grant  No.  DE-FG03-

98DP00218 and by NSF-DMR-0325553.  The authors thank Dr. Samuel B. Trickey, Dr. Hai-

1  Field, M.J.; Bash, P. A.; Karplus, M. J. Comp. Chem. 1990, 11, 700 

2  Combined Quantum Mechanical and Molecular Mechanics Methods, ACS Symposium Series 712, edited by J. 

Gao and M. A. Thompson ~American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 1998 

3  Cui, Q.; Guo, H.; Karplus, M. J. Chem. Phys. 2002, 117, 5517. 

4  Bakowies, D.; Thiel, W. J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100, 10580. 

5  Zhang, Y.; Lee, T. S.; Yang, W. J. Chem. Phys. 1999, 110, 46. 

6  Gao, J.; Xia, X. Science 1992, 258, 631. 

7  Loferer, M. J.; Loeffler, H. H.; Liedl, K. R. J. Comp. Chem. 2003, 24, 1240. 

16

 

 

 

 

8  Pu, J.; Gao, J.; Truhlar, D. G. J. Phys. Chem. A  2004, 108, 632. 

9  Kongstead, J.; Osted, A.; Mikkelsen, K. V. J. Phys. Chem. A 2003, 107, 2578. 

10 Warshel, A.; Levitt, M. J. Mol. Biol. 1976, 103, 227. 

11 Singh, U. C.; Kollman, P. A. J. Comp. Chem. 1986, 7, 718. 

12 Assfeld, X.; Rivail, J. L. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1996, 263, 100. 

13 Reuter, N.; Dejaegere, A.; Maigret, B.; Karplus, M. J. Phys. Chem. A 2000, 104, 1720. 

14 Gao, J.; Amara, P.; Alhambra, C.; Field, M. J. J. Phys. Chem. A 1998, 102, 4714. 

15  Maseras,  F.;  Morokuma,  K.  J  Comp.  Chem.  1995,  16,  1170;  Dapprish,  S.;  Kormaromi,  I.;  Byun,  K.  S.; 

Morokuma, K.; Frish, M. J. J. Mol. Struct: THEOCHEM 1999, 461-462, 1. 

16 Poteau, R.; Ortega, I.; Alary, F.; Solis, A. R.; Barthelat, J-C.; Daudey, J-P. J. Phys. Chem. 2001, 105, 198. 

17 Taylor, C. E.; Cory, M.; Bartlett, R. J. Comp. Mat, Sci. 2003, 27, 204. 

18 Zhu, T.; Li, J.; Yip, S.; Bartlett, R. J.; Trickey, S. B.; Leeuw, N. Proceedings Yangtzee Conference 2002. 

19 Mallik, A.; Runge, K.; Dufty, J. W. in preparation. 

20 Hsiao, Y-W; Runge, K.; Cory, M. G.; Bartlett, R. J. J. Phys. Chem. A 2001, 105, 704. 

21 Du, M. H.; Cheng, H. P. J. Chem. Phys. 2003, 119, 6418. 

17

