DAFNE

S. Guiducci for the DAFNE team, LNF, Frascati, Italy

Abstract

The  results  of  2002  DAFNE  operation  for  the  two
experiments  KLOE  and  DEAR  are  described.  During
2003  a  long  shutdown  has  been  dedicated  to  the
installation  of  new  Interaction  Regions  (IR)  and  to
hardware  modifications  and  upgrades.  In  the  last  section
optics studies and performances expectations for the new
machine configuration are reported.

KLOE AND DEAR RUNS
Peak,  daily  and  integrated  luminosity  delivered  to

KLOE and DEAR experiments in 2002 is shown in Fig.1.

*

are listed in Table 2.

The main machine parameters in the two configurations

Table 1 – 2002 machine performance

Configuration
Number of bunches
Total current per beam (A)
Peak luminosity (cm-2s-1)
Beam-beam tune shift
Average luminosity (cm-2s-1)
Best daily luminosity (pb-1)
Luminosity lifetime (h)
Number of fillings per hour
Injection frequency e-/e+ (Hz)
Data acquisition during inject.

KLOE
49 + 49
0.8/1.1
.75 x1032
~ .02
0.5 x1032
4.8

≈ 3
2/1
on

DEAR
95+95
1.3/1.0
.7 x1032
~ .016
0.2 x1032
2.2
0.6
≈ 1.7
2/1
off

Table 2 – Main machine parameters

e ( m·rad)
bx( m) @ IPKLOE
by ( m) @ IPKLOE
bx( m) @ IPDEAR
by ( m) @ IPDEAR
q( mrad)

KLOE
.74 10-6
2.7
.026
2.7
.09
±11.5

DEAR
.62 10-6
1.7
13.
1.7
.030
±14.5

During  2002  the  integrated  luminosity  delivered  to
KLOE experiment (300 pb-1 in 5 months) was larger by a
factor 1.5 with respect to 2001 (200 pb-1 in 7 months).

Fig.1- Peak , daily and integrated luminosity for 2002.

During  2002  four  months  were  dedicated  to  DEAR
operation.  This  allowed  to  optimize  the  machine
configuration obtaining nearly the same luminosity as for
KLOE  and  to  complete  the  first  phase  of  the  DEAR
physics  program.  The  results  of  machine  performance
during 2002 runs are listed in Table 1.

KLOE  IR  has  permanent  magnet  low-b  quadrupoles
while  DEAR  has  electromagnetic  ones.  This  makes  a
difference between the two machine configurations: when
the beams are colliding in KLOE, it is possible to remove
the low b and keep the beams well separated at the other
Interaction Point (IP), thus improving the luminosity. This
is not possible for DEAR.

Fig. 2 – KLOE currents and luminosity in 24 hours

                                                            
*
 D.Alesini, G. Benedetti, M.E. Biagini, C. Biscari, R. Boni, M.
Boscolo, A. Clozza, G. Delle Monache, G. Di Pirro, A. Drago, A. Gallo,
A. Ghigo, F. Marcellini, G. Mazzitelli, C. Milardi, L. Pellegrino, M.A.
Preger, P. Raimondi, R. Ricci, C. Sanelli, M. Serio, F. Sgamma, A.
Stecchi, C. Vaccarezza, M. Zobov

The bs at the IP were lowered (by from .03 to .026 m,
bx  from  5.6  to  2.7  m)  to  increase  the  luminosity.  The
reduction  of  the  horizontal  b  at  the  IP  was  also  very
effective in reducing machine background in the detector.
Moreover  a  continuous  optimization  of  the  parameters
affecting  background,  lifetime,  and  luminosity  was
performed:  old  and  new  scrapers’  position,  closed  orbit
correction, crossing angle, separation in the non colliding
IR,  working  point  in  the  tune  plane,  coupling,  dynamic
aperture (by tuning sextupole and octupole strengths and
bs  at  sextupoles  and  wigglers),  horizontal  emittance
(0.96mm Í 0.76mm)

The peak luminosity was increased by a factor 1.5 with
respect  to  2001  [1]  and  the  machine  background  in  the
detector  was  reduced  by  a  factor  ~3.  Luminosity  and
currents for a typical KLOE run (24 hours) are shown in
Fig.  2.  The  average  luminosity  is  kept  very  close  to  the
peak one by injecting with data acquisition on.

95 BUNCHES OPERATION FOR DEAR
During  DEAR  runs  DAF NE  has  been  operated  by
filling  95  consecutive  buckets  out  of  120,  with  an  ion
clearing gap [2]. This operation was made possible by an
optics  modification  and  by  a  very  accurate  setup  of
transverse and longitudinal feedbacks.

Optics modification

 To reduce the effect of parasitic crossings, which occur
at  0.4  m  distance,  the  optics  of  the  DEAR  IR  has  been
modified  by  lowering  the  horizontal b-function at  the  IP
and by increasing the crossing angle.

The  FDF  low  beta  triplet,  optimized  for  10  mrad
crossing angle, was changed to a DF doublet which yields
a  larger  crossing  angle  anda  smaller  value  of  the  b
functions at the IP, with the same chromaticity.

With  a  crossing  angle  q = ±14.5 mrad and bx  =  1.7  m
the distance between the beam centres at the first parasitic
crossing is 11 sx  and  therefore the  beam-beam  effect on
the particles in the tails of the distribution does not affect
beam lifetime.

Longitudinal quadrupole instability

During  2002  this  phenomenon  has  been  deeply
investigated [3]. It appears in both rings, at high currents,
but  with  different  single  bunch  thresholds:  ~20%  higher
for e+ than for e-. The positron beam power spectrum with
100 bunches, 900mA, during collision is shown in Fig. 3.
It exhibits a large longitudinal quadrupole instability.

The  longitudinal  feedback  is  able  to  control  the
instability.  A  multi-mode  filter  response  has  been
implemented to simultaneously optimize the longitudinal
feedback performances at the zero, dipole and quadrupole
modes. This allowed storing stable beams at high currents
(more than 1.8 A) in 95 contiguous bunches. An increase
of  peak  luminosity  due  to  the  smaller  by*  value  was
achieved in April: L = 0.45 1032 cm-2 s-1 with 47 bunches.

Fig. 3 - Positron beam power spectrum with 100 bunches,
900mA, during collision

In November, doubling the number of bunches, a peak

luminosity of 0.7 1032 cm-2 s-1, at the same background

level,  was  obtained.  The  results  of  95  bunches

operation are shown in Table 1.

MAIN HARDWARE MODIFICATIONS
In 2003  a  long  shutdown was dedicated to  the following
hardware installations:
• 
Finuda IR
•  New Kloe I.R.

Moreover various systems were modified:

• 
Injection straight sections and kickers
• 
Scrapers
•  Bellows
• 
•  Wigglers.

Ion Clearing Electrodes

New Interaction Regions

The simple DEAR IR (electromagnetic quadrupoles, no
solenoid,  very  small  detector)  was  replaced  by  the
FINUDA one with a large detector, high field solenoid (B
=  1  T),  compensating  solenoids  and  permanent  magnet
quadrupoles  inside  the  detector.  The  supports  allow
variable  quadrupole  rotation  to  compensate  the  coupling
at  different  magnetic  fields  (from  0  to  maximum)  in  the
solenoids.

KLOE IR was taken out from the detector, removing all
the elements in the nearby straight sections, modified and
inserted  again.  The  supports  were  modified  as  in
FINUDA  to  provide  variable  quadrupole  rotation.  In
order  to  decrease  the  IP  beta-functions  and  the  lattice
chromaticity  the  FDF  triplet  was  converted  into  a  DF
doublet by removing the first F quadrupole and increasing
the  gradient  integral  of  the  other  one  by  adding  a  new
permanent  magnet  quadrupole  adiacent  to  it.  Masks  to
optimise background rejection were inserted.

These  new  IRs  will  allow  100  bunches  operation
because, as demonstrated in last DEAR shifts, bx at the IP
is low enough to make the parasitic crossing not critical.

Injection straight sections

Injection straight sections have been rearranged, adding
two quadrupoles and one sextupole, to improve injection
efficiency and dynamic aperture. The kicker pulse length
has  been  shortened  in  order  to  improve  multibunch
injection  efficiency,  at  the  price  of  a  smaller  peak  field;
this has been compensated by increasing the R12 element
of the transfer matrix between the kicker and the injection
septum.

Scrapers, bellows and Ion Clearing Electrodes

The overall scrapers efficiency is satisfactory but some
had problems with the tapers. Tapers were removed in the
horizontal  ones,  less  critical  to  the  ring  impedance,  and
modified in the vertical ones.

Some copper bellows were found to  be  distorted; they

have been flattened with the insertion of pins.

About 50% of Ion Clearing Electrodes were broken due
to  faulty  welding.  Most  of  them  were  replaced  with
welding-free electrodes.

Wiggler field modifications

The strong sextupole components and the field roll off
at  large  offsets  in  the  wiggler  magnetic  field  produced  a
significant reduction of the dynamic aperture [4,5]. A new
wiggler,  identical  to  those  installed  on  the  collider,  was
purchased from the same builder, in order to find a proper
pole  shape  capable  of  reducing  the  nonlinearities.  The
resulting  profile  [6]  was  applied  to  a  set  of  iron  plates
glued  on  the  poles  of  all  wigglers  in  the  rings.  The
horizontal distribution of the field at pole center is shown
in  Fig.  5  for  the  different  pole  profiles  tried  during  the
optimization.  Comparison  between  the  field  with  new
plates, not modified, and the final configuration shows a
larger extension of the flat field region.

Fig. 5 - horizontal field distribution  at pole center for
different configurations. The solid line is the final one.

Fig. 6 - Sextupole component on the beam axis for the
original (dashed) and modified (solid) wiggler pole
profile.

Moreover  the  sextupole  component  on  the  beam  axis,
shown  in  Fig.  6,  has  been  significantly  reduced  in  the
final configuration so that its average over the polealmost
vanishes.

One  of  the  two  terminal  poles  has  been  modified  in
order  to  increase  its  sextupole  component.  This
modification is beneficial to the dynamic aperture, at least
as the reduction of the main poles non-linearity.

An  example  of  the  improvement  of  the  dynamic
aperture is given in Fig. 7. Particle trajectories with initial
value x = (2, 4, 6, 8 etc.) sx are shown.

OPTICS STUDIES
A  new  lattice  for  FINUDA,  which  will  be  used  at
machine  start-up,  has  been  designed.  The  main
characteristics are summarized below:
Low emittance: 0.42mm
Low  betas  in  the  wigglers  to  minimize  effect  of
non-linearity
• 
IP bx=1.7m to allow 100 bunches operation
• 
IP by=27mm, nearly equal to the bunch length
•  Additional  sextupoles  in  the  wigglers  and  at  the

• 
• 

septum

•  Optimized phase advance between the sextupoles
• 
• 

Low invariants to minimize background
Straight sections optimized for injection efficiency
and dynamic aperture

FINUDA will take data in the first months of 2004, then
will be moved out of the beam line and the machine will
be operated for KLOE.

The KLOE lattice, based on the new IR, will have the
same characteristics listed above, moreover the low-b  in
the  second  IR  will  be  removed.  Therefore  a  large  beam
separation  and  a  lower  chromaticity  will  allow  a  higher
luminosity.  During  2004  we  expect  to  reach  in  100
bunches  operation  the  same  single  bunch  luminosity
obtained for KLOE in 50 bunches.

The  performance  expected  for  2004  runs,  extrapolated
by 2002 results and taking into account the improvements
made during the shutdown, is summarized in Table 3.

Commissioning of the rings with the new FINUDA optics
just started, beams have been already stored in both rings.

Table 3 - Expected performance for 2004 runs
Number of bunches
Current/beam
Single bunch luminosity
Lifetimes
Daily integrated luminosity
Integrated luminosity

100-110
2 A
2 1030 cm-2 s-1
>1hr
10 pb-1
2.0 fb-1/year

Further  studies  to  increase  the  luminosity  are  in
progress.  The  reduction  of  machine  nonlinearity  should
allow  more  flexibility  in  choosing  the  working  point  in
the  tune  plane.  Therefore  it  should  be  possible  to
minimize the beam-beam blow-up by exploring different
working points much closer to the integer or half-integer
(as in other factories).

The  possibility  to  reduce  the  bunch  length  by  using  a
negative  momentum  compaction  has  been  discussed.
Measurements done at KEK confirm this effect. Tests of a
negative  momentum  compaction  lattice  are  foreseen  in
DAFNE to study if it can be used for collision in order to
further  reduce  the  vertical  beta  function  at  the  IP  and
increase luminosity. [7,8].

PRESENT STATUS
Hardware installation has been completed mid July and
all  machine  subsystems  have  been  checked.

REFERENCES
[1] M.  Zobov  et  al.  "Luminosity  Performance  of
DAFNE", EPAC2002, 3-7 June 2002, Paris, France.
[2] A.  Drago  et  al.  “100  Bunches  DAFNE  Operation”

PAC2003, Portland, Oregon, May 12-16, 2003.

[3] A.  Drago,  A.  Gallo,  A.  Ghigo,  M.  Zobov,  J.D.  Fox,
D.  Teytelman,  "Longitudinal  Quadrupole  Instability
and Control in the Frascati DAFNE Electron Ring",
Physical  Review  Special  Topics  -  Accelerators  and
Beams, Volume 6, 052801 (2003).

[4] C.  Milardi,  "Effects  of  Nonlinear  Terms  in  the
Wiggler  Magnets  at  DAFNE",  PAC2001,  18-22
June, 2001 - Chicago, USA, p. 1720.

[5] C.  Vaccarezza,  "Non  Linear  Beam  Dynamics  at
DAFNE",  PAC2001,  18-22  June,  2001  -  Chicago,
USA, p. 443.

[6] M.  Preger  et  al.  "The  Modified  Wiggler  of  the
DAFNE  Main  Rings".  DAFNE  Technical  Note
MM-34, 7/1/2004.

[7] M.  Zobov,  “Negative  Momentum  Compaction  at

DAFNE”, These proceedings.

[8] H.  Ikeda,  “Negative  Momentum  Compaction  at

KEK-B”, These proceedings.

