Cold free radical molecules in the laboratory frame 
 

J.  R. Bochinski, Eric R. Hudson, H. J. Lewandowski, and Jun Ye 

JILA, National Institute of Standards and Technology and Department of Physics, University of 

Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0440 

 

 

 

A special class of molecules that are important to many subfields in molecular dynamics and 
chemical  physics,  namely  free  radical  molecules,  now  enjoy  a  significant  degree  of  center-of-mass 
motion control in the laboratory frame. The example reported in this paper concerns hydroxyl radical 
(OH),  which,  after  the  internal  degrees  of  freedom  are  cooled  in  a  supersonic  expansion,  has  been 
bunched,  accelerated,  and  slowed  using  time-varying  inhomogeneous  electric  fields.  In  situ 
observations  of  laser-induced  fluorescence  along  the  beam  propagation  path  allows  for  detailed 
characterization of the longitudinal phase-space manipulation of OH molecules by the electric fields. 
The creation of a pulse containing 10^3 (cid:150) 10^6 molecules possessing a longitudinal velocity spread 
from 2 to 80 m/s around a mean laboratory velocity variable from 550 m/s to rest with only a few 
mm  spatial  extent  represents  an  exciting  and  useful  new  experimental  capability  for  exploring  free 
radical  dynamics.  This  paper  offers  the  most  detailed  study  of  the  Stark  deceleration  dynamics  to 
date. 
 
 
33.55.Be, 33.80.Ps, 39.10.+j  
 
Introduction 
 
  
Efforts  to  create,  study,  and  utilize  samples  of  cold  molecules  are  at  the  forefront  of 
experimental atomic and molecular physics1 2 3 4 5.  Scientific explorations of cold molecular samples 
will allow spectroscopy to be performed at the fundamental level where vibrational relaxation can be 
directly revealed and extremely weak interactions can be investigated. Metrological applications will 
surely follow. The long interrogation times that cold molecules will provide is critical to a number of 
precision  measurement  projects  such  as  the  search  for  the  permanent  electron  electric  dipole 
moment6  7  and  improved  values  of  fundamental  constants  like  the  fine  structure  α.  At  low 
translational energies, molecular orientation will play an important role in novel cold collisions8 9 10 
11 12 and ultracold molecular dynamics13. Observations of cold atom(cid:150)molecule interactions may also 
reveal  new  regimes  in  physical  chemistry14.    Further,  there  has  been  a  proposed  application  in 
quantum computing15 for trapped ultracold polar molecules. 

Heteronuclear  molecules  possess  permanent  electric  dipole  moments  that  create  new 
opportunities  for  control  of  intermolecular  interactions.  While  a  number  of  research  groups  are 
actively  pursuing  experiments  to  form  ultracold  polar  molecules  utilizing  photoassociation 
techniques  to  create  weakly  bound,  vibrationally  excited  molecules  from  double-species  magneto-
optical traps of cold atoms16 17 18, some other groups have focused on ground-state molecules that are 

manipulated by buffer gas cooling1 19 20 or Stark deceleration21 22 23 24 25. In this paper we focus on a 
particular species of stable molecules, namely the diatomic hydroxyl radical (OH).  We note, as with 
most  molecular  systems,  it  is  not  technically  practical  to  create  cold  OH  samples  using  the 
abovementioned cold atom approach.  Nevertheless, while alternate techniques must be employed to 
produce the cooled sample, neutral free radicals remain an extremely attractive and significant class 
of particles for cold molecule research.  Historically important as a focal point of study in physical 
chemistry26  27,  astrophysics28  29,  atmospheric30  and  combustion  physics31  32  33,  these  chemically 
reactive molecules typically possess large electric and magnetic dipole moments, thus supporting a 
variety  of  interactions.  In  the  low  temperature  regime,  these  interactions  may  create  interesting 
effects;  for  example,  at  temperatures  of  ~1  µK,  the  translational  energy  becomes  less  than  the 
intermolecular  electric  dipole-dipole  interaction  energy.  Considering  that  the  relative  orientation  of 
these dipoles determines whether the interaction is attractive or repulsive, these polar molecules can 
easily  influence  each  other(cid:146)s  trajectory  and  lead  to  complex  dynamics.  In  principle,  an  external 
electric  field  can  then  be  used  to  guide  collisions  and  perhaps  even  to  exert  a  new  means  for 
management of chemical reactions.  Interestingly, this mechanism represents a profoundly different 
type  of  control  over  collisions  than  the  usual  resonant  scattering  between  cold  atoms  exerted  by  a 
magnetic field. The relatively strong dipolar interaction should also open new analogies to condensed 
matter  systems,  particularly  those  systems  that  interact  by  strong  spin-dependent  forces34.  It  may 
even  be  possible  that  the  cold  molecules  could  form  a  (cid:147)dipolar  crystal(cid:148),  in  analogy  with  an  ionic 
crystal formed in ion traps35. Finally, we note experimental conditions under which both electric and 
magnetic  fields  simultaneously  interact  with  the  cold  molecules  may  naturally  provide  even  more 
useful and interesting dynamics to investigate36. 

Hence, production of a large collection of neutral free radical molecules populating a single 
quantum state and having a small center-of-mass motion in the laboratory frame represents a critical 
first step towards realizing these potential cold molecule experiments. We employ the technique of 
Stark  deceleration  to  prepare  cold  packets  of  the  OH  molecules.  Molecules  produced  at  low 
temperatures by the Stark slowing process will be in their rovibrational ground states, and therefore 
do  not  suffer  from  rovibration-changing  collision  losses.  However,  at  low  temperature  limit  and 
under certain external electric fields and sufficient densities, the molecules in a weak-field seeking 
state can still experience non-negligible inelastic scattering losses to strong-field seeking states 9. The 
Stark deceleration approach21 22 23 24 25 has worked effectively with molecules such as CO, ND3, OH, 
and  YbF,  resulting  in  experimental  observations  of  slowing  and  trapping.  Our  previous  work24 
demonstrated  deceleration  of  stable  packets  of  OH,  with  a  minimum  translational  velocity  in  the 
laboratory frame of 140 m/s and a velocity spread less than 2.7 m/s. In the present work, we report 
further  progress  along  this  research  direction,  culminating  with  the  present  capability  to  produce 
phase-stable  packets  of  molecules  with  a  molecular-frame  temperature  from  ~1K  to  ~  tens  of 
millikelvin  around  a  mean  laboratory  velocity  variable  from  550  m/s  to  essentially  zero.  We  also 
document detailed technical approaches at various stages of our cold molecule machine. 

The complex structure of the molecular states and the associated energy levels of OH will be 
described  in  the  next  section.  The  Stark  shift  of  the  relevant  molecular  states  due  to  an  external 
electric field is also introduced, along with the molecular detection scheme based on sensitive, laser-
induced  fluorescence  (LIF)  measurement.  Section  III  gives  a  general  description  of  the  entire 
experimental setup, with a brief discussion regarding construction of the supersonically cooled OH 
beam source, which combines a novel discharge apparatus with a pulsed supersonic expansion valve. 
Armed with the understanding of the Stark effect of OH, we describe in Section IV beam propagation 
into the acceptance aperture of the decelerator. This process is aided by an electric hexapole(cid:150)based 
molecular  lens  that  provides  initial  state  selection  and  focusing.  Section  V  provides  underlining 
principles and mechanisms responsible for the Stark deceleration process. Theoretical descriptions of 

the  longitudinal  phase-space  evolution  and  comprehensive  numerical  simulations  using  realistic 
molecular  parameters  and  modeled  spatial  distributions  of  inhomogeneous  electric  fields  are 
presented. Practical information concerning the design, fabrication, construction, and preparation of 
the Stark decelerator is given in Section VI.  The simulation model presented in Section V generates 
results  that  provide  excellent  agreement  to  the  experimental  observations  reported  in  Section  VII. 
The in situ LIF detection enables detailed characterization of the experimental phase-space evolution 
of  the  molecular  packets  at  various  stages  along  the  entire  decelerator  and  within  the  quadrupole 
electrostatic trap region. These observations demonstrate a thorough understanding and control of the 
molecular  slowing  process  and  reveal  that  the  present  experimental  system  is  fully  functional  for 
ongoing  research  in  molecular  trapping  and  cold  molecule  collisions.  Finally,  in  Section  VIII  we 
discuss future directions of the experiment involving improved electrostatic and magnetic trapping, 
limited  laser  cooling,  as  well  as  collision  experiments  between  trapped  atomic  and  molecular 
samples. 
 
 

Structure of OH 
 

The  neutral  hydroxyl  free  radical  (OH),  though  extremely  chemically  reactive,  is  a  stable, 
diatomic molecule.  As the basic molecular energy structure is well understood, here we will discuss 
only  the states  relevant  to  the  current  experiment.    For  low rotation  levels,  the  angular  momentum 
coupling of the  2Π electronic ground state of the  OH molecule is sufficiently described by Hund(cid:146)s 
case (a)37.  Under this interaction scheme, both the electron orbital angular momentum L and electron 
spin S are coupled to the intramolecular axis, leading to the definition of the total electron angular 
momentum as Ω = Λ + Σ, where |Λ| = 1 (|Σ| = 1/2) represents the projection of L (S) onto this axis.  
This  coupling  results  in  two  spin-orbit  states,  where  the  2Π3/2  state  lies  ~126  cm-1  below  the  2Π1/2 
state  as  shown  in  Figure  1.  Strong  spin-orbit  coupling  (ASO  =  -139  cm-1)  is  responsible  for  the 
observed  large  splitting  between  the  two  Ω  branches.    The  molecular  angular  momentum  J  in  the 
laboratory  frame  is  defined  as  J  =  L  +  S  +  R,  where  R  represents  the  nuclear  rotation  angular 
momentum.  The allowed values of J in the laboratory frame are given as J = Ω, Ω + 1, Ω + 2, (cid:133)  
The  relatively  large  energy  splitting  between  J  states  is  due  to  the  small  moment  of  inertia  of  the 
molecule and subsequent large rotational constant. The coupling between the nuclear rotation and the 
electron  angular  momentum  (projection  of  L  along  the  internuclear  axis)  results  in  lambda-type 
splitting (λ-doubling) of each state, denoted as f and e states.  In the figure, these energy separations 
are exaggerated for clarity.  For 16OH with an intrinsic nuclear spin I of 1/2, the free radical molecule 
is a boson.  The total angular momentum is given by F = I + J.  Each λ-doublet component is split 
into hyperfine states that are characterized by a symmetry index p that defines the state(cid:146)s parity (±).   
The hyperfine energy separations have also been exaggerated for clarity of presentation. 
 
The 2Σ+ first electronic excited state of the OH molecule has an electron spin of 1/2 but no electron 
angular momentum; thus, the appropriate couplings are well-described by Hund(cid:146)s case (b).  For this 
angular  momentum  configuration,  the  only  important  interaction  is  between  the  nuclear  rotation  of 
the molecule R and the electron spin S -- so-called ρ-doubling.  This coupling separates every J state 
that has non-zero R into two states of the same parity.  Figure 1 shows the important energy levels 
and  schematically  depicts  the  excitation  (solid  arrow)  and  detection  (dashed  arrow)  pathways,  as 
described in detail below. 

Because the λ-doublet states possess opposite parity and small energy separations, adjacent 
levels of the ground state OH readily mix under the interaction of the molecule(cid:146)s permanent electric 
dipole (1.67 D38) with an external electric field.  The energy of these mixed states increases (weak-

field  seeking  states)  or  decreases  (strong-field  seeking  states)  as  a  function  of  the  electric  field 
strength, as shown for the rovibrational ground state of OH in Figure 2(a).  The Stark energy shift 
evolves  from  quadratic  to  linear  when  the  energy  change  due  to  the  applied  field  exceeds  the  λ-
doublet  splitting  value  of  0.055  cm-1.    The  ground  state  shift  is  unaffected  by  the  next  higher 
rotational state due to the large energy separation of ~ 84 cm-1.  In the high electric field regime, the 
complex energy levels depicted in Fig. 2(a) emerge as four distinct families. As shown in Fig. 2(b), 
for the Stark slowing experiment discussed here, the weak-field seeking states are most relevant, with 
the 2Π3/2 F = 2, mF = 2,1 states experiencing approximately three times the Stark energy shift of the 
2Π3/2 F = 2, mF = 0 and  2Π3/2 F = 1, mF = 0,1 states.  The horizontal dashed line corresponds to 
the zero energy level while the vertical dotted line represents the peak electric field magnitude under 
the  normal  operating  voltages  of  the  Stark  decelerator.    We  note  molecules  in  strong-field  seeking 
states  do  not  survive  the  first  state-selection  device,  namely  the  hexapole  acting  as  a  molecular 
focusing lens, and therefore do not contribute to any observed signals thereafter. 

Optical detection via fluorescence measurement is a powerful tool in atomic and molecular 
physics experiments. A relatively favorable branching ratio, a large difference between the excitation 
and  decay  wavelengths,  and  a  reasonable  quantum  efficiency  in  fluorescence  detection  make  laser 
induced fluorescence (LIF) a versatile approach for measuring the hydroxyl radical.  The excitation 
source is tuned resonant with the X2Π3/2 (v = 0) → A2Σ+ (v = 1) electronic transition at 282 nm for 
subsequent detection of the red-shifted radiative decay around 313 nm A2Σ+ (v =1) → X2Π3/2 (v = 1), 
as  shown  in  Figure  1.  The  separation  in  wavelength  allows  effective  optical  filtering  to  reduce  the 
background scattering, as discussed in detail in the next section. The characteristic fluorescence 750 
ns decay lifetime provides a distinctive signature of the presence of OH molecules. 

 

OH beam source and detection 
 

Supersonic  expansion  in  molecular  beam  experiments  is  a  widely  used  technique.  Under 
proper operating conditions, rotational and vibrational temperatures are significantly lowered along 
with the benefit of a reduced translational velocity spread in the molecular frame.  Within the present 
experiment,  collisions  during  the  expansion  represent  the  only  true  cooling  mechanism.  The 
maximum phase-space density achievable in the experiment is determined at this stage since during 
the  subsequent  deceleration  process  the  phase-space  distribution  of  the  molecules  undergoes 
conservative rotation without any enhancement in density. Therefore, as long as the relatively large 
translational speed of the molecular beam can be compensated for by the slowing capability of the 
Stark  decelerator,  a  supersonic  expansion  provides  a  very  useful  initial  source  for  creation  and 
experimentation of cold molecules. 

Figure  3  illustrates  the  overall  experimental  setup,  showing  the  discharge  and  the  pulsed 
valve  configuration,  along  with  the  subsequent  skimmer,  hexapole,  decelerator  stages,  and  the 
electrostatic  quadrupole  trap.  The  experiment  utilizes  a  seeded,  pulsed  supersonic  beam  combined 
with  electric  discharge  to  realize  an  efficient  free  radical  source.    The  source  apparatus  creates  an 
intense  OH  molecular  beam,  possessing  both  narrow  initial  temporal  width  and  small  longitudinal 
velocity  spread,  primarily  populating  only  the  lowest  rotational  ground  state  energy  level.    Xenon 
(Xe),  due  to  its  large  mass,  is  employed  as  an  inert  carrier  gas  to  minimize  the  initial  molecular 
velocity.    At  a  stagnation  pressure  of  ~3  atmospheres,  Xe  bubbles  through  a  small  reservoir  of 
deionized (> 10 MΩ cm), distilled water (H2O).  When the valve opens, the carrier gas (~99%) and 
seeded  H2O  (~1%)  expand  supersonically  into  the  vacuum  chamber.  The  0.5  mm  diameter  exit 
nozzle valve is operated at a 5 Hz repetition rate, creating a molecular supersonic beam with a full 
pulse width of <100 (cid:181)s. 

We  utilize  an  electric  discharge  to  generate  the  hydroxyl  radical  molecules  during  the 
supersonic  expansion.    Such  methods  have  been  used  previously39  40  41.    Our  approach42  contains 
several  key  ingredients,  including  the  use  of  a  hot  filament  to  aid  in  discharge  initiation,  selected 
voltage  polarity  for  maximum  discharge  stability,  geometry  of  the  discharge  electrodes  to  ensure 
where  the  discharge  creates  molecules  is  well-defined,  as  well  as  utilization  of  a  µs-scale  high 
voltage (HV) pulse to control precisely when the discharge occurs.  These beneficial improvements 
over earlier work lead to a dramatic reduction in the discharge heating of the molecules, resulting in 
the  production  of  a  rotationally  and  longitudinally  colder  radical  beam,  well-suited  for  the 
deceleration experiment. 

For  the  most  stable  discharge  operation,  the  voltage  polarity  is  selected  such  that  electrons 
are  accelerated  against  the  propagation  direction  of  the  expanding  supersonic  jet.    Application  of 
sufficiently  high  voltage  to  the  electrodes  during  the  molecular  supersonic  expansion  enables  self-
initiating  of  an  electric  discharge  that  produces  the  hydroxyl  radical  (OH)  by  disassociating  the 
H2O43.    When  the  OH  creation  occurs  spatially  near  to  the  nozzle  in  the  expansion  region,  the 
diatomic molecule is subsequently cooled by collisions with the more abundant Xe atoms, resulting 
in rotationally cold free radicals.  Empirically, we learned that operating the discharge voltage in a 
short duration, pulsed manner significantly reduces undesirable heating of the molecular beam by the 
discharge.  Moreover, employing a current-driven filament within the vacuum chamber in addition to 
the pulsed high voltage ignites the discharge at a significantly lower voltage level, further minimizing 
heating  to  molecules  during  the  supersonic  expansion.    We  utilize  a  fast  switch  to  pulse  the  high 
voltage  (typically,  for  2  (cid:181)s  at  -1.4  kV),  resulting  in  increased  OH  production,  lower  rotational 
temperature, narrower longitudinal velocity spread, and reduced mean longitudinal velocity.  Under 
normal operating conditions, the source produces a free radical molecular pulse having a mean speed 
around  385  m/s  with  a  FWHM  velocity  spread  of  16%  at  a  rotational  temperature  of  <  27  K, 
corresponding to ~ 98.5% of the molecules in the J = 3/2 lowest rotational state. 

The  filament(cid:150)assisted  discharge  can  occur  at  virtually  any  molecular  density  during  the 
supersonic  expansion.    Hence,  the  narrow-pulsed  HV  discharge  can  selectively  create  OH  over  a 
broad range in time within the ~100 µs wide molecular pulse envelope. As the discharge duration is 
much shorter than the molecular pulse, OH molecules generated at different times within the pulse 
reflect the different instantaneous characteristics of the supersonic expansion at the moment of their 
creation.  This effect is most directly manifested as the ability to tune the mean longitudinal velocity 
of  the  molecular  pulse,  as  depicted  in  Figure  4.  In  this  figure,  pulses  of  rotationally  cold  OH  are 
measured by LIF after they have propagated from the source to just in front of the molecular beam 
skimmer.  The pulses were created using identical discharge voltage amplitudes and pulse widths but 
varying the discharge initiation time within the molecular pulse.  This initial creation time difference 
has been normalized for the three data traces where time zero represents the discharge initiation; the 
subsequent  change  in  arrival  time  demonstrates  the  differences  in  pulse  mean  velocity.    As  the 
discharge initiation time is varied from earlier to later within the overall molecular pulse envelope, 
the  amplitude  and  mean  speed  of  the  OH  signal  decreases  while  the  velocity  width  increases, 
consistent with sampling OH production within the diminishing supersonic expansion.  

Potentially,  background-free  resonance  fluorescence  is  a  highly  sensitive  technique  for 
detecting small numbers of molecules. In analytical chemistry and biology, resonance fluorescence is 
used extensively for efficient detection and identification of single molecules44. The sensitivity of the 
fluorescence  detection  technique  depends  upon  the  characteristics  of  the  decay  channels  of  the 
excited states, namely that the radiative branching ratios are favorable and quenching processes are 
not significant. Further, for maximum detected signal, the decay photons should be collected over as 
large  a  solid  angle  as  possible;  in  our  experiment,  intra-vacuum  optics  provide  solid  angle 
efficiencies of 0.5-4.5%, depending on the specific spatial location.  With quantum efficiencies in the 

range of 10% for the cathode surfaces of modern photomultipliers, one then expects a photoelectron 
event for every ~200 fluorescent decays.  The dark current of the quantum detector is a few to a few 
tens of counts per second. However, various phenomena may degrade the signal-to-noise ratio. Even 
with  careful  baffling  and  shielding,  the  most  severe  limitation  on  the  detection  sensitivity  in  the 
present  experiment  is  due  to  scattered  excitation  laser  photons,  which  dominate  stray  background 
light, even after careful imaging. 

A key benefit of utilizing fluorescence detection  as opposed to a spatially fixed ionization-
based  scheme  is  the  ability  to  detect  in  situ  molecules  at  multiple  locations,  greatly  increasing  the 
experimental flexibility and level of understanding. OH signals are measured within the decelerator 
during  the  actual  slowing  process,  giving  insight  into  the  active  longitudinal  phase-space 
manipulation  of  the  molecules  by  the  pulsed,  inhomogeneous  electric  fields.    Specifically,  in  the 
experiment we employ LIF detection to monitor the hydroxyl radicals after the discharge, observe the 
focusing effects of the hexapole on the molecules, measure the molecular packet spectra at various 
positions within the Stark decelerator, and finally, detect the molecules within the electrostatic trap 
region. 

Using  a  beta  barium  borate  (BBO)  crystal  to  frequency-double  a  564  nm  dye  laser  output 
(~10  ns  pulse  duration)  creates  the  ultra  violet  (UV)  excitation  light  at  282  nm  with  high  peak 
intensity.    The  excitation  laser  is  counter-propagated  to  the  molecular  pulse  traveling  down  the 
central  axis  of  the  Stark  decelerator.  The  relatively  spectrally  broad  light  source  (~2  GHz) 
encompasses  any  Doppler-induced  frequency  shifts  in  the  OH  resonance  as  the  molecular 
longitudinal  velocity  changes  during  the  deceleration  process.  Reduction  of  the  laser  scatter  is 
paramount  for  optimized  signal  collection.  First,  due  to  the  separation  of  the  excitation  and 
fluorescence  wavelengths,  the  carefully  selected  photomultiplier  tube  (PMT)  has  a  photocathode 
responsivity  that  is  severely  reduced  at  the  laser  wavelength  versus  the  fluorescence  wavelength.  
Next, an interference filter selectively inhibits the laser light (103 suppression) versus the fluorescent 
photons (~ 20%  transmission  coefficient).  We  also  utilize  a switched  PMT  whose  dynode  voltages 
are  quickly  arranged  during  the  laser  pulse  so  as  to  actively  repel  photoelectrons  liberated  by  the 
scattered UV light on the cathode material.  The first, third, and fifth dynodes are used rather than the 
photocathode itself for improved switching speed, while the rest of the elements in the dynode chain 
remain at their normal voltages.  The usual state of the PMT is (cid:147)interrupted(cid:148); in order to observe the 
OH molecular decay signal an externally applied control pulse rapidly turns the detector (cid:147)on(cid:148) for ~5 
(cid:181)s  with  the  appropriate  dynode  voltage  levels  for  normal  PMT  operation.  In  this  manner,  a  ~104 
suppression  of  the  measured  laser  intensity  is  achieved,  at  a  small  expense  of  a  fast  noise  spike 
generated by the switching currents. This repeatable noise feature caused by the PMT switching is 
subtracted off as a background signal. We note additionally, this system also works well using fewer 
switched  dynodes.    For  example,  utilizing  only  two  dynodes  (e.g.,  the  first  and  fourth  dynode) 
provides attenuation of laser scatter by ~103.    

The OH molecular signal is measured as a function of time at a particular spatial location in 
the  following  manner.    First,  immediately  prior  to  the  measurement  (~  1  (cid:181)s),  all  high  voltage 
electrodes  within  the  vacuum  chamber  are  grounded  to  avoid  Stark  shifting  of  the  OH  transition 
frequency.  Subsequently, before the molecules have had an opportunity to exit the specific detection 
region,  the  excitation  laser  pulse  fires,  generating  the  OH  fluorescence  signal.    The  detected 
photoelectrons  from  the  PMT  are  amplified,  averaged  300  times,  and  displayed  on  a  digital 
oscilloscope over a ~5 (cid:181)s time window to fully encompass the appropriate state decay lifetime.  Next, 
a background spectrum consisting of an equal number of averaged traces with the source discharge 
voltage off (and thereby, consisting of laser scatter, switching, and other intrinsic noise contributions) 
is subtracted from the measured signal, resulting in the corrected molecular fluorescence spectrum. 
This  spectrum  is  then  integrated  by  the  oscilloscope,  giving  a  value  directly  proportional  to  the 
number of OH molecules present in the detection area at that time.  The laser is stepped later in time 

relative to when the valve opens, and the entire measurement is repeated.  In this iterative manner, a 
spectrum consisting of the OH signal as a function of time is generated. 
  
Figure 5 shows time-of-flight (TOF) LIF measurements of OH molecules at different spatial 
locations in the experiment as indicated in Figure 3.  Figure 5 trace (a) shows OH signals detected 
just  before  the  skimmer  (1.58  cm  in  height,  1.5  mm  diameter  central  aperture)  tip.    The  peak 
amplitude of Fig. 5(a) corresponds ~3 x 106 molecules at a density of ~109 cm-3, with an total pulse 
population ~3 x 107 molecules.  With no voltages present on the molecular focuser, the OH packet 
traverses  the  skimmer  and  hexapole  region  as  shown  in  Figure  5  trace  (b).    The  approximate  two 
orders of magnitude signal loss is due to transverse spreading of the OH beam.  Operating the pulsed 
hexapole  with  high  voltages  provides  state  selection  and  transverse  focusing,  leading  to  enhanced 
signal sizes after the hexapole.  Measurements are made further downstream when the hexapole is in 
operation,  as  well  as  with  constant  voltages  applied  to  all  electrode  stages.    These  unswitched 
voltages  result  in  no  net  longitudinal  velocity  change  but  provide  transverse  confinement  to  the 
molecular pulse as it propagates down the slower; we refer to this mode of operation as (cid:147)transverse 
guidance.(cid:148)  Figure 5, traces (c), (d), and (e) are observed OH signals as the pulse propagates before 
the  23rd  stage,  the  51st  stage,  and  into  the  center  of  the  electrostatic  trap  region.    The  increase  in 
molecular  pulse  width  corresponds  to  the  expected  (cid:147)stretching(cid:148)  in  the  longitudinal  direction  that 
occurs  under  free  flight  as  faster  molecules  move  ahead  and  slower  molecules  lag  behind.  
Integration of measured peak areas at different observation points reveal transverse loss of molecules 
within the slower, as discussed in more detail in Section VII (e.g., see Figure 10(d)). 
 
 
Electric hexapole as a molecular focuser 
 

Electrostatic hexapoles have been widely used in beam experiments to perform state-selected 
focusing45  46  47  48  49and  spatial  orientation50  51  52  53  54  of  weak-field  seeking,  Stark-sensitive 
molecules.  In  contrast  to  those  experiments,  the  hexapole  utilized  here  is  quite  short  in  length  and 
functions to increase the OH beam flux by matching molecules from the source into the acceptance 
aperture of the Stark decelerator. The hexapole is formed by six, hardened steel, 3.175 mm diameter, 
50 mm long cylindrical shaped rods, set every 60(cid:176) at a center-to-center radius of 4.39 mm, mounted 
to an insulated macor support disk.  The rods are mechanically polished and the ends are rounded to a 
smooth  curvature.    Alternate  rods  are  electrically  connected,  thus  forming  two  sets  of  three  rods.  
Each  set  is  charged  to  equal  magnitude  but  opposite  polarity  high  voltage.  The  hexapolar  field 
distribution  in  the  transverse  plane  allows  a  weak-field-seeking  molecule  to  be  confined  and  even 
focused  in  this  plane,  leading  to  transverse  phase  space  (cid:147)mode-matching(cid:148)  between  the  supersonic 
nozzle and the Stark decelerator. 
r
The electric field  E

 of an ideal hexapole is given as55: 

 

 

r
E =

2

rV
3
o
3
r
o

 

                                               (1) 

where  Vo  is  the  absolute  value  of  the  symmetric,  opposite  polarity  voltages  applied  to  each  set  of 
rods, ro is the radius of the hexapole (from the center of the hexapole to the inner edge of the rods), 
and  r  is  the  radial  spatial  coordinate.    A  weak-field  seeking  molecule  will  thus  experience  Stark 
potential energy as: 
. We define an (cid:147)effective(cid:148) dipole moment of the molecule as µeff = 

W

E

effµε =

µ 〈cos θ〉, where µ is the magnitude of the electric dipole moment, θ the angle between the moment 

 

 

 

and the electric field direction, and 〈cos θ〉 represents quantum mechanical averaging over all angles. 
r
The radial force  F
 

is written as: 

r
F

−=






 

eff

r  6
V
µ
o
3
r
o

(cid:136)
r






   .                                                   (2) 

This  linear  restoring  force  results  in  radial  harmonic  motion  of  the  weak-field  seeking  molecules 
inside the hexapole field region.  Thus, in analogy to ray tracing in optics, it is possible to define the 

focal length f of the hexapole in the thin-lens limit (for l→ 0 as 

 remains constant) as: 

6 µ
V
o
eff
3
mr
o

l
v

f

=

3
r
o
6µ
eff















2

mv
lV
o






 ,                                                  (3) 

where l is the longitudinal length of the hexapole, v is the molecule(cid:146)s longitudinal velocity, and m is 
the  molecular  mass.    Equation  3  demonstrates  the  focusing  strength  of  a  given  hexapole  linearly 
increases (decreases) with applied voltage (molecule kinetic energy).  For a (cid:147)real world(cid:148) hexapole, 
the finite size of the rods can lead to deviation from Equation (1)56.  Accounting for this effect, as 
well as the full Stark shift as illustrated in Fig. 2 (a), detailed numerical simulations of the hexapole 
focusing  effect  are  shown  in  Fig.  6.    The  trajectory  simulations  deterministically  map  an  initial 
volume in phase-space to a final volume, which is then matched to the corresponding experimental 
data  by  proper  weighting  of  initial  molecular  numbers.    The  figure  shows  three  sets  of  focusing 
curves  consisting  of  OH  signals  measured  directly  after  the  hexapole,  under  conditions  where  the 
applied hexapole voltage has been pulsed to match to the corresponding input molecules(cid:146) velocity. 
Operating  the  hexapole  in  such  a  switched  manner  is  designed  to  give  maximum  benefit  to  a 
particular velocity class, wherein the hexapole voltages are controlled by fast switches that rapidly 
charge the rods when the selected molecules enter -- and then terminate the voltages to ground when 
the molecules exit -- the hexapole region.   Thus, molecules with speeds significantly different than 
the targeted velocity class experience less focusing power of the hexapole, minimizing the aberration 
effect from the distribution of velocities in the molecular pulse.  Symbols in Figure 6 correspond to 
data  points  measured  for  350  m/s  (squares),  385  m/s  (diamonds)  and  415  m/s  (triangles)  velocity 
classes, while the solid lines joining the data represent simulation predictions.  From comparison of 
the  simulations  to  the  hexapole  focusing  data,  the  transverse  temperature  of  the  OH  beam  is 
determined to be ~4 K, consistent with a supersonically cooled molecular beam. The upper inset in 
the figure depicts the contributions from the two weak-field seeking states to the 385 m/s trace (see 
Figure  2(b)),  where  molecules  in  the  2Π3/2  F  =  2,  mF  =  0  and    2Π3/2  F  =  1,  mF  =  0,1  states  are 
marginally focused (dashed line) by the hexapole fields, in contrast to the strong effect experienced 
by molecules populating the 2Π3/2 F = 2, mF = 2,1 states (dotted line).  The two weak-field seeking 
states are included in the simulations with equal weighting. 

This figure demonstrates the powerful molecular-focusing capability of the electric hexapole, 
as  the  OH  molecules  are  observed  only  a  few  millimeters  past  the  end  of  the  hexapole  rods.  
However,  for  the  deceleration  experiment,  the  hexapole  is  operated  only  to  provide  efficient 
molecular coupling into the physical opening of the slower.  This task requires simply matching the 
transverse  velocity  and  spatial  spreads  with  the  decelerator  cross-sectional  acceptance  and  the 
subsequent  requisite  focal  length  is  thus  longer  than  that  needed  to  bring  the  molecules  to  a  sharp 

spatial  focus.    Experimentally,  we  find  utilizing  ~  ±  7-9  kV  applied  voltages  results  in  sufficient 
transverse  coupling.    This  empirical  result  agrees  well  with  computer  simulations  of  the  process.  
Unless otherwise specified, all subsequent data traces shown in this paper are taken with operating 
the hexapole in this described pulsed manner.  

 
 

Theory and simulations of the Stark decelerator 
 

An initial, well characterized, and relatively high phase-space density source of molecules in 
the  ground  state  is  critical  for  the  most  efficient  use  of  Stark  deceleration.  Supersonic  expansion 
provides  a  direct  and  convenient  approach  towards  this  goal.  The  conservative  reduction  of  the 
pulse(cid:146)s  mean  velocity  is  accomplished  by  exploiting  the  Stark  effect  associated  with  weak-field-
seeking molecules. As such a polar molecule moves from a low electric field into a high electric field 
region,  its  internal  energy  increases  at  the  expense  of  its  kinetic  energy;  thus  it  slows  down  as  it 
climbs the potential energy hill created by the increasing electric field.  If the electric field is rapidly 
extinguished, the molecule will lose this Stark potential energy. This procedure may be repeated as 
many times as necessary to lower molecule(cid:146)s speed to any arbitrary final velocity. Critical parameters 
associated with the deceleration process, such as the number of molecules and the associated velocity 
spread at the end of deceleration can be determined from a detailed understanding of the deceleration 
process and the related experimental conditions. 

To  understand  the  decelerator,  it  is  necessary  to  examine  the  electric  field  distribution 
produced  by  the  spatially  alternating-oriented  electrode  stages  (see  Fig.  3).  First,  considering  the 
plane  perpendicular  to  the  molecular  propagation  direction,  there  is  a  local  minimum  of  the 
transverse electric field in between a pair of slowing electrodes. Since neighboring stages alternate in 
their  respective  orientations,  the  transverse  minimum  similarly  alternates.  Thus,  the  electrode 
geometry  results  in  a  stage-to-stage,  transverse  guiding  of  weak-field  seeking  molecules, 
simultaneously  as  their  longitudinal  velocity  is  modified  by  interaction  with  the  inhomogeneous 
electric  fields.    Second,  in  order  to  minimize  the  required  number  of  expensive,  fast  high  voltage 
switches, all the horizontal (vertical) electrodes of the same polarity are connected to a single switch, 
thus allowing four switches in total to operate the entire 69 stages of the slower.  A consequence of 
this  practical  switch  minimization  is  that  when  the  high  voltage  at  a  particular  slowing  stage  is 
removed and simultaneously turned on at the following (and preceding) stage, the local electric field 
does not go to zero but rather to a value generated by the now active set of electrodes.  While this 
effect reduces the amount of energy per stage that can be extracted by the decelerator, it beneficially 
maintains the quantum mechanical state identity of the molecules, as the hydroxyl radicals are phase-
stably slowed. 

Figure  7(a)  shows  the  longitudinal  potential  energy  distribution  experienced  by  OH 
molecules  with  our  present  experimental  electrode  geometry,  generated  under  normal  operating 
conditions of ± 12.5 kV.  The dark line corresponds to the active set of electrodes and the dashed line 
indicates the other (off) set, where the horizontal axis (spatial phase angle) is defined below.  Figure 
7(b) demonstrates how switching the electric field between the successive stages leads to a change in 
the  molecular  kinetic  energy  per  slowing  stage  that  depends  critically  on  the  position  of  the 
molecules at the switching time. This dependence is conveniently characterized by utilizing a spatial 
coordinate ϕ,  called  the  phase  angle,  which  is  defined  at  the  instant  of  electric  field  switching  and 
written as:  

 

=ϕ

o

180

 ,   

 

     

(4) 

z
L

where z is the longitudinal position of the molecule and L is the stage-to-stage separation.  We define 
z  =  0  (ϕ  =  0”)  as  the  point  midway  between  two  adjacent  stages.    To  analyze  the  net  effect  of 
deceleration  on  a  spatially  distributed  pulse  of  molecules,  it  is  useful  to  define  the  synchronous 
molecule as one that is at exactly the same phase angle ϕo at the moment  of each switching of the 
electric fields; thus, losing an identical amount of energy per stage. While the region 0o < ϕ0 < 180o 
does  lead  to  deceleration  of  the  synchronous  molecule,  only  operating  in  the  range  0o  < ϕ0  <  90o 
results in phase stable deceleration of a molecular packet.  This can be seen in Figure 7(b), that on 
the positive slope of the potential hill do molecules which are slightly ahead (i.e. faster) or behind 
(i.e.  slower)  the  synchronous  molecules  experience  a  net  restoring  force  towards  the  synchronous 
molecule position. Detrimentally, operating on the negative slope of the hill (i.e., in the range 90o ≤ 
ϕ0 < 180o) results in faster (slower) molecules becoming progressively faster (slower) relative to the 
synchronous  molecule.    By  similar  arguments,  phase  stable  acceleration  of  a  molecular  packet  is 
only possible on the positive slope of the potential hill in the range 0o > ϕ0 > -90o.  The phase stable 
ranges  are  indicated  by  the  shaded  portions  in  Figure  7(b).    This  restoring  force  experienced  by 
nonsynchronous  molecules  when  the  slower  is  operated  in  the  proper  regime  is  the  underlying 
mechanism  for  the  phase  stability  of  the  molecular  packet  trapped  in  moving  potential  wells.  For 
example,  given  that  the  spacing  between  the  successive  stages  is  uniform  in  the  decelerator,  if  the 
electric field switching time is also uniform, then the position of the synchronous molecule will be ϕo 
=  0,  leading  to  the  so-called  (cid:147)bunched(cid:148)  molecular  packet  traveling  at  a  constant  speed  down  the 
slower. For ϕo > 0, the proper switching period of the electrodes systematically lengthens from at the 
beginning of the slower to at the end of the slower.  

Defining  the  excursion  of  a  nonsynchronous  molecule  from  the  synchronous  molecule 
and with the help of a sine function fit to the change of kinetic energy per 

oϕϕϕ −=∆

position as 

stage, it is straightforward to write for the time evolution of ∆φ:  
 

d

2

ϕ
∆
2
dt

+

W
π
max
2
mL

(

Sin

(

+∆

ϕϕ
o

)

−

Sin

(
ϕ
o

)

) 0
=

                            (5) 

 
where  Wmax  is  the  maximum  work  done  by  a  slowing  stage  on  a  molecule  and  m  is  the  molecular 
mass.  This  equation  is  the  same  as  the  one  describing  an  oscillating  pendulum,  with  an  offset 
equilibrium  position  (ϕ0).  The  longitudinal  phase-space  distribution  of  the  nonsynchronous 
molecules will thus rotate inside an asymmetric oscillator potential.  From numerical integrations of 
Equation  (5),  solutions  for  the  stable  regions  of  phase-space  are  shown  as  a  function  of  the 
synchronous molecule phase angle ϕ0 in Figure 8(a).  The most relevant feature of this figure is the 
rapidly decreasing area of stable evolution, defined as the area inside the separatrix.  This decrease in 
phase stable area is easily understood by analogy to a pendulum driven by a constant torque. As the 
torque increases, the amplitude of stable oscillation decreases.  This effect results in an asymmetric 
oscillator potential for nonsynchronous molecules as shown in Fig. 8(b).  As the original phase-space 
distribution of the molecular source before the decelerator populates the phase stable area for ϕ0 = 0, 
then  as ϕ0  increases,  the  stable  phase-space  area  decreases,  which  translates  into  a  decrease  in  the 
velocity  spread  of  the  molecular  packet  as  well  as  the  number  of  slowed  molecules,  setting  a 
practical, observable limit to the ultimate temperature of the molecular packet. 

From  Figure  7(b),  it  is  seen  that  for  molecules  ahead  of  the  synchronous  molecule  the 

maximum stable excursion, i.e., the separatrix upper spatial bound, is given as: 
 

∆

ϕ

max,

+

=

180

o ϕ
2
−
o

 ,    

 

(6) 

 
since molecules with ϕo < ϕ  < 180o - 2ϕo will be slowed more than the synchronous molecule.  A 
molecule with zero velocity at this position (i.e., at ϕ  = ϕo + ∆φmax) will have the maximum stable 
velocity at the ϕo position, thus the longitudinal acceptance of the slower in velocity as a function of 
ϕo is given as: 
 

v
∆

(
ϕ
o

)

=

2

max

Cos
(

(
ϕ
o

)

−

−

ϕ
o

)

Sin

(
ϕ
o

)

. 

(7) 

W
m

max
π

π
(
2

 

Figure 9 usefully summarizes the results of the calculation given above, giving an intuitive 
expectation  of  performance  under  different  modes  of  slower  operation.    The  solid  square  symbols 
represent  stable  areas,  A,  in  phase  space,  plotted  as  a  function  of  slowing  phase  angle  ϕo  and 
normalized to that of the bunching case (A0).  The open circles are plotted along the right axis and 
depict the maximum longitudinal velocity spread of the phase stable packet.  As seen in the figure, 
operation  at  increasing  phase  angles  results  in  fewer  but  also  cooler  molecules  in  the  phase  stable 
packet.    Hence,  with  an  eye  toward  experimental  goals,  a  careful  balance  between  the  required 
number  of  molecules  in  the  phase  stable  packet  and  the  desired  longitudinal  temperature  must  be 
considered  when  using  the  Stark  decelerator.    While  Equation  (7)  allows  for  the  estimation  of  the 
longitudinal temperature of the stable molecular packet, the dependence of the transported molecule 
number on ϕ0 must be determined. For an initial velocity distribution of ∆vFWHM (full width at half 
maximum),  the  number  of  molecules  successfully  loaded  into  the  phase  stable  bucket  N(φ0), 
normalized to that for the bunching case, is shown to be:  
 

N

(
ϕ
o

)

≈

1(

−

ϕ
o
2/
π

)

Erf

(

v
∆

max

FWHM

)

(
ϕ
o
)2ln(

)

v
∆

2

Erf

(

v
∆

FWHM

W
π

m

max
)2ln(

)

 , 

(8) 

 
where  Erf  is  the  Error  function.    In  the  above  derivation,  the  area  inside  the  separatrix  is 
approximated as square since we are only concerned with variation relative to molecular bunching.  
Also,  we  assume  that  at  the  input  of  the  decelerator  there  is  no  spatial  variation  of  the  molecular 
packet over the dimension of one slowing stage separation, as well as ignore any convolution of the 
input distribution due to free flight from the creation region.  A more limiting assumption made for 
the sake of a closed form solution is that the lower separatrix bound relative to ϕo varies in the same 
manner as the upper bound (i.e. ∆φmax,- = -∆φmax,+).  Nonetheless, the results of Equation (8) are in 
good  agreement  with  the  measured  molecule  number  as  seen  in  Fig.  15,  where  a  more  detailed 
numerical  solution  for  Equation  (8)  that  accounts  for  the  proper  variation  of  ∆φmax,-  is  also  shown, 
along with the results of a full Monte Carlo simulation of the slowing process.   

The Monte Carlo simulations are performed not only for comparison of the expected stable 
molecule number, but also more importantly for assessment of the detailed TOF spectra observed, as 
well as to aid in the understanding of the deceleration process.  From the geometrical and electrical 
properties (sizes, distances, and applied voltages) of the decelerator, a three-dimensional electric field 
map  of  the  slower  is  constructed,  which  when  coupled  with  the  understanding  of  the  OH  energy 
structure,  gives  complete  information  on  the  forces  experienced  by  radical  molecules  within  the 
decelerator.    The  initial  input  distribution  parameters  are  determined  from  both  experimental 
dimensions  (spatial  parameters)  and  measurements  on  hexapole-focused,  transversely  guided 

molecular  pulses  (velocity  parameters).    The  trajectories  of  four-million  molecules  (with  equal 
weighting of the two weak-field seeking states) sampled from the initial distribution are calculated 
for  the  appropriate  Stark  manipulation  process  (i.e.,  bunching,  slowing,  or  accelerating),  starting 
from  the  skimmer  entrance,  then  traversing  the  focusing  hexapole  and  decelerator,  and  finally 
reaching the appropriate detection region.  All simulation curves displayed in this paper are generated 
with input parameters of an initial velocity of 385 ± 50 m/s, a transverse spread of ± 32 m/s, and a 
longitudinal spatial extent of 1.25 cm at the input of the skimmer. We point out the importance of 
including the lower weak-field seeking state (2Π3/2 F = 2, mF = 0 and 2Π3/2 F = 1, mF = 0,1 levels) 
to properly reproduce the measured spectra.  While its contribution to the signal observed after the 
hexapole is small (because the molecular focuser more dominantly effects radicals in the 2Π3/2 F = 2, 
mF = 2,1 states; i.e., see Figure 6), as molecules with large transverse velocities are progressively 
lost from the phase stable packet during propagation down the slower, the percentage contribution of 
the lower weak-field seeking state to the observed signals increases since the molecules in this level 
entering the decelerator have smaller transverse velocity spread.  

 

Practical construction and operation of the slower 
 

A  particularly  important  practical  issue  is  the  stable  operation  of  high  voltages  (~  25  kV) 
between  electrodes  spaced  only  a  couple  of  millimeters  apart  inside  the  decelerator  and  the 
electrostatic  trap.  Discharge  between  electrodes  will  not  only  disrupt  normal  operations  of  the 
decelerator,  but  could  also  inflict  permanent  damages  to  the  electrodes.  A  high  vacuum  system  is 
helpful in terms of enhancing the threshold for unwanted discharges in the apparatus. Additionally, 
high  vacuum  is  also  useful  for  reducing  OH  background  collision  events.  The  skimmer  acts  as  an 
effective differential pumping hole that separates the supersonic expansion source chamber from the 
decelerator chamber. During quiescence, the source (slower) chamber reaches ~ 10-8 torr (~10-9 torr) 
(1 torr = 133.3 Pa). Under active conditions, the source (slower) chamber is at ~ 10-4 torr (~10-7 torr).  
High  voltage  components  are  fabricated  from  304L  stainless  steel,  or  hardened  steel,  and 
subsequently mechanically polished and then electro-polished (for 304L) for the best possible surface 
finish.  These high voltage elements are mounted on insulating materials (macor, alumina, or boron 
nitride)  in  such  a  manner  to  avoid  close  proximity  to  ground  or  opposite  high  voltage  polarities.  
When opposite polarity voltage elements are attached to the same insulating support, grooves were 
fabricated  into  the  insulating  surface  in  order  to  create  longer  surface  path  lengths  to  minimize 
current  leakage  between  the  components.  Once  under  vacuum,  the  electrodes  are  subject  to  a 
sequence of high voltage conditioning sessions to ensure stable operation.  The conditioning consists 
of  two  related  but  distinct  methods:  DC  current  and  glow-discharge  modes57,  both  of  which 
essentially create (cid:147)microdischarge(cid:148) events that help clean the surfaces and prepare the electrodes for 
HV  operation.    Under  DC  current  conditioning,  all  electrodes  are  gradually  brought  up  to  1.2  -  2 
times their nominal operating level in incremental voltage steps.  A limiting resistor (~ 0.1 GΩ) in 
series with the HV power supplies limits the possible discharging current to small values.  The series 
current can be actively monitored by a floating digital voltmeter and also via the chamber vacuum 
pressure.  It  was  empirically  discovered  that  the  Bayard-Alpert  type  ionization  gauge  that  actively 
monitored  the  chamber  pressure  was  also  inducing  low  level  discharging  during  the  conditioning 
process.  UV  lamps  have  also  been  utilized  to  purposefully  create  these  beneficial  microdischarges 
during  the  current  conditioning  process.  When  the  apparatus  fails  to  DC  current  condition  to 
satisfaction, we utilize a sparking glow discharge technique.  The chamber is backfilled with a few 
tens  of  millitorr  of  helium  gas,  and  a  Tesla  coil  is  used  to  spark  a  discharge  between  the  relevant 
electrodes  for  approximately  ten  minutes.    The  system  is  then  vented  and  this  procedure  repeated 

with a backfill of nitrogen gas.  Subsequently, the system is DC current conditioned with significant 
improvements. 

Successful  operation  of  the  Stark  decelerator  relies  on  thorough  knowledge  of  the  initial 
position and velocity distribution of the OH, and temporally accurate control of the inhomogeneous 
electric  fields  in  order  to  ensure  stable  manipulation.    We  rely  on  machining  precision  in  the 
manufacture  of  slower  components  (<  ±50  µm  stated  tolerance)  to  ensure  that  any  physical 
discrepancies  from  the  specified  dimensions  are  minimized.    The  applied  electric  fields  are  pulsed 
using commercially available, fast high voltage switches with a specified ~10-8 s rise time. External 
current  limiting  resistors  are  used  both  to  protect  the  switches  from  excessive  current  and  to  slow 
down  the  rise  time  to  ~  1  µs  to  minimize  the  generated  electromagnetic  interference  (EMI).    The 
molecules are insensitive to the switching speed reduction, as even on the (cid:181)s-time scale, the fastest-
moving  molecules in the system are almost stationary. We note the importance of reduction of the 
overall EMI from the system when high voltages are being switched actively. 

Two HV power supplies (one devoted to each polarity) generate the requisite high voltage for 
the slowing stages.  Each individual power supply output is coupled in parallel with a ~ 2 (cid:181)F high 
voltage capacitor on the input side of the fast switch in order to provide the large currents (12 A peak 
current) required for the rapid charging of the slowing electrodes.  A similar arrangement generates 
the slightly lower high voltage and current used for the pulsed electric hexapole operation and for the 
electrostatic  trap.  A  digital  delay  generator  (DDG)  acts  as  the  master  clock  for  the  experiment, 
controlling the firing of the pulsed laser, as well as triggering a computer-based timing board.  The 
timing  board  repetitively  generates  user-defined  timing  signals  to  subsequently  drive  the  fast  HV 
switches that control the OH-generating discharge, hexapole, slowing stages, and trap elements.  The 
timing  pattern  incorporated  into  the  timing  board  is  derived  from  computer  simulations  of  the 
deceleration process as discussed in Section V. 

 
 

Phase-space manipulations of the OH molecules: experimental results 

 
In-situ  experimental  observations  of  OH  molecules  undergoing  longitudinal  phase-space 
manipulation  inside  the  properly  timed  decelerator  provide  firm  confirmation  to  the  theoretical 
understanding.    Time-of  flight  spectra  from  three  representative  and  distinct  spatial  locations  -- 
before 23 stages, before 51 stages, and in the electrostatic quadrupole trap region -- are selected to 
demonstrate the evolving character of the phase-stable molecular packet.  Where present in all data 
figures that follow, a downward-pointing arrow indicates the location of the phase-stable molecular 
packet. 

Figure 10 depicts the OH TOF spectra when the decelerator is operated under a phase angle 
φ0 = 0(cid:176); i.e., the net longitudinal velocity of phase stable molecules is not changed but the molecular 
packet  maintains  tight  spatial  confinement  due  to  bunching.    Unlike  the  transverse  guiding  effect 
shown in Fig. 5, spectra generated under properly timed and pulsed electric fields exhibit peak and 
valley  structures,  demonstrating  the  velocity  and  spatial  selectivity  of  the  inhomogeneous  electric 
fields acting on the evolving molecular packet.  The experimental data in Fig. 10 (a), (b), and (c) are 
plotted with symbols (filled circles) while the full 3-D simulation results are displayed as solid lines.  
The simulation traces are offset vertically for clarity of presentation.  Figure 10 (a) shows the spectra 
before  23  stages  of  bunching  (φ0  =  0(cid:176)).    With  such  few  stages  of  interaction,  longitudinally  phase 
unstable  molecules  are  still  dominantly  present  and  detected  by  the  LIF  technique,  generating  the 
side peak features and contributing to the broad pedestal that the central peak sits on. By the time the 
molecular pulse has propagated in front of the 51st stage under the same experimental conditions, the 
phase  stable  packet  has  become  the  only  distinct  feature  remaining,  as  shown  in  Fig.  10  (b).    The 

molecules that correspond to untrapped orbits in phase-space generate the small, broad background 
on top of which the phase-stable peak sits.  Similarly, the bunched, phase-stable packet dominates the 
spectrum  in  Fig.  10(c),  where  the  molecules  have  exited  the  slower,  propagated  a  short  free-flight 
distance, and passed through the center of the electrostatic trap region where they are detected. 

In principle, all molecules within the selected phase stable packet are transported without loss 
down  the  decelerator;  the  difference  in  peak  amplitude  between  Fig.  10(b)  and  (c)  is  a  result  of 
molecular  loss  due  to  molecules  with  too  high  transverse  velocities  being  progressively  removed 
from the molecular pulse, inefficient coupling between the decelerator and trap region, and scattering 
from  background  gas.  Figure  10(d)  depicts  the  bunched  packet  peak  areas  at  different  spatial 
locations from both experimental data and simulations, normalized to the peak before the 23rd stage. 
This  figure,  along  with  the  understanding  gained  from  simulations,  demonstrates  that  the  apparent 
loss of signal is primarily due to the (cid:145)boiling(cid:146) away of longitudinal phase unstable molecules as they 
propagate  down  the  slower,  as  well  as  molecules  possessing  transverse  velocities  ≥  5  m/s  slowly 
escapes from the phase stable packet throughout the deceleration process.  Essentially, the focusing 
power  of  the  hexapole  is  boosting  the  initial  total  number  of  molecules  coupled  into  the  slower. 
However, many of these molecules are ultimately not useful as they do not enhance the population of 
the  phase  stable  packet  and  are  subsequently  lost.    The  simulation  results  provide  excellent 
agreement with the observed spectra, confirming good understanding and control of the decelerator. 

We  gain  more  insight  into  the  slowing  process  by  examining  in  detail  the  TOF  spectra 
obtained at a single specific spatial location as the phase angle is varied.  Figure 11 focuses on LIF 
measurements  made  before  the  23rd  stage.    Figure  11(a)  shows  the  expected  broad,  basically 
featureless  peak  as  the  packet  spreads  longitudinally  while  being  transversely  guided  down  the 
central  axis  of  decelerator  under  steady-state  high  voltages  applied  to  all  slowing  stages.    Figure 
11(b) depicts the spectra under bunching operation (φ0 = 0(cid:176)), creating the multi-peaked structure, as 
also shown in Fig. 10(a), wherein the spatial periodicity of the high voltage stages is imprinted onto 
the OH pulse. The phase angle φ0 is then increased to 20(cid:176), 40(cid:176), 60(cid:176), 67(cid:176), and 80(cid:176) in Fig. 11(c), (d), 
(e), (f), and (g), respectively. 

Careful examination of  the data  traces reveals small changes in amplitudes and subtle time 
shifts in the location of the peaks as φ0 increases. However, the basic structure of the spectrum at this 
spatial  location  is  mostly  unchanged,  as  the  signals  from  phase  unstable  molecules  dominate  the 
spectra.  The downward-pointing arrow indicates the location of the phase stable packet (cid:150) however, 
its presence is substantially masked by the signal from unstable molecules.  This effect is expected 
and  clearly  seen  in  Fig.  12,  where  the  results  of  a  3-D  Monte  Carlo  simulation  after  22  stages  of 
deceleration (i.e., in front of 23rd stage) are shown for bunching and slowing with φ0 = 60ο.  Figure 
12  represents  a  snapshot  of  the  longitudinal  phase-space  distribution  of  the  molecular  packet,  with 
each dot corresponding to the longitudinal position and velocity of a simulated molecule.  Along the 
horizontal  (vertical)  axis  is  shown  the  spatial  (velocity)  projection  of  the  distribution,  and  a 
horizontal (vertical) dashed line represents the expected position (velocity) of the phase stable pulse 
at  this  instant.  Figure12  (a)  shows  the  result  of  bunching  to  the  23rd  stage,  revealing  that  phase 
unstable molecules are (cid:145)boiling(cid:146) away symmetrically around the stable molecule bunch. On the other 
hand, when φ0 = 60ο, Fig. 12(b) demonstrates that unstable molecules are lost in only one direction as 
the phase stable packet is pulled to lower velocities (consistent with the non-synchronous molecule 
potentials  shown  in  Fig.  8(b)).    These  phase  unstable  molecules  lead  to  dramatic  effects  in  the 
observed TOF spectra of Fig. 11.  In the bunching case (Fig. 11(b)), because the unstable molecules 
are  lost  symmetrically  the  bunched  peak  is  only  broadened.  However,  in  the  case  of  slowing  or 
acceleration (Fig. 11(c) through (h)), the molecular loss is directional and the center of the observed 
peak is shifted from the expected location in addition to broadening.  From the projection onto the 
horizontal  axis  it  is  evident  that  a  peak  does  indeed  occur  at  the  spatial  location  expected  for  the 

phase stable molecule packet. However, because of convolution with the detection window this peak 
is unresolved in the large central peak in the TOF data.  Also in Fig. 12(b) the manipulation of the 
input  velocity  distribution  (Vm  =  385m/s,  ∆vFWHM  ~  75  m/s)  is  beginning  to  become  evident  as 
molecules  are  moved  from  the  central  region  (385  m/s)  towards  smaller  velocities.    The  stable 
molecules  have  been  incrementally  slowed  from  the  initial  385  m/s  (Fig.  11(b))  to  309  m/s  (Fig. 
11(g)),  although  this  corresponds  to  only  a  ~  40  (cid:181)s  shift  in  the  peak  location  at  this  position.    We 
point out that the spectrum is simpler than previously observed (i.e., Fig. 2 in Reference [18]) at this 
spatial location, when only 14 stages of slowing were utilized, coupled with an additional 9 stages of 
transverse  guidance.  Generally  speaking,  the  more  stages  used,  the  more  straightforward  the 
interpretation  of  the  spectrum  will  be,  as  contributions  from  the  interesting  though  complicated 
dynamics of the longitudinally phase unstable molecules will be reduced.  For display purposes, Fig. 
11(g) shows similar characteristics as we select φ0 = 80(cid:176). At this aggressive slowing phase angle, the 
selected  molecules  will  actually  come  to  rest  before  the  end  of  the  69-stage  Stark  decelerator.  
Finally,  demonstrating  the  flexibility  of  this  experimental  technique,  phase  stable  acceleration  is 
depicted in Fig. 11(h), where a negative phase angle is utilized (φ0 = -45(cid:176)).  The OH molecules have 
been  accelerated  from  385  m/s  to  424  m/s.  However,  similar  to  the  slowing  data  traces,  the 
acceleration spectrum is complicated by signals from molecules with open trajectories (not contained 
inside the separatrix) in longitudinal phase-space. 

We next observe molecular packets after 50 stages of operation.  Similar to above, Fig. 13(a) 
shows the TOF spectrum solely under continuous, transverse guidance fields. From Fig. 14 it is clear 
that after 50 stages of operation (i.e. observed in front of the 51st stage) essentially all of the phase 
unstable  molecules  have  boiled  out  of  the  phase  stable  region.    This  significantly  simplifies  the 
interpretation of TOF spectra since only the well-characterized stable molecules remain in the peak 
of interest.  Indeed, under bunching operation experimentally (i.e., φ0 = 0), Fig. 13(b) shows a single 
tall central peak representing the phase stable molecules that are maintained together with their net 
longitudinal velocity unchanged. The much smaller, lower-lying broad feature again arises from the 
phase  unstable  molecules.    As  the  slowing  phase  angle  is  further  increased,  the  behavior  of  the 
decelerated packet becomes manifestly clear in the data at this spatial location unlike after 22 stages. 
The  slowed  peak  corresponding  to  the  phase-stable  packet  evolves  towards  later  arrival  times, 
demonstrating its steadily decreasing velocity.  In Fig. 13(c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) , the slowed peak 
appears at later time positions as the velocity of the OH molecules is reduced to 337 m/s, 283 m/s, 
220 m/s, 198 m/s, and 168 m/s, respectively.  As expected, the peak amplitude decreases as the phase 
angle gets larger, reflecting the reduced stable area in phase-space.  Again, from Fig. 14(b) for φ0 = 
60(cid:176),  we  see  this  expected  behavior  in  the  snapshot  projections  of  the  longitudinal  phase  space 
distribution.  In the horizontal projection we observe a single phase-stable peak that has been moved 
towards the rear of the molecule pulse, while in the velocity projection we see that the input velocity 
has been significantly modified, resulting in a single packet of decelerated molecules traversing the 
slower.  

Interestingly, there are distinctly different spectra features generated under bunching versus 
slowing conditions at this spatial location.  In contrast to in front of the 23rd stage where the spectra 
maintain essentially the same characteristics at all operating phase angles, after the 50th stage at any 
non-zero phase angle, the spectrum changes from a single peak to a distinct triplet of peaks, where 
one of these structures corresponds to the phase stable packet of molecules that shifts to later (earlier) 
times for stable deceleration (acceleration) in the TOF observation.  Within the presented data(cid:146)s time 
resolution, the other two peaks remain essentially at the same temporal locations for the same sign of 
phase angle, but these positions undergo a large time shift for opposite sign phase angles, as seen by 
comparison  with  Fig.  13(h).    These  structures  may  result  from  phase  unstable  molecules  hopping 
around neighboring traveling potential wells.   

We  now  examine  OH  signals  observed  beyond  the  final  (69th)  stage  of  the  decelerator  and 
moving  within  the  trap  region.    The  electrostatic  trap  consists  of  three  elements  which  produce  a 
quadrupole-configuration  confinement  field  in  order  to  spatially  contain  sufficiently  slowed,  Stark-
sensitive molecules in three dimensions.  A stainless steel ring with 2 pairs of orthogonally-oriented 
3 mm holes for fluorescence detection forms the central axis of the trap, located ~14 mm from the 
middle of the final slowing stage.  Two identical end cups with 2 mm apertures along the decelerator 
beam axis create the symmetric end-caps of the trap.  The trap element surfaces -- the inner ring and 
inner  end-cap  sides  --  are  machined  to  a  specific  curvature  from  304L  stainless  steel  and  held  in 
precise  orientation  and  separation  by  insulating  support  rods.    The  three  pieces  are  electrically 
isolated  both  from  earth  ground  and  each  other,  enabling  voltages  to  be  applied  independently  for 
user-defined, precisely timed, molecular loading and trapping sequences.  In order to provide high-
efficiency molecular fluorescence detection within the trap region, an in-vacuum, 25.4 mm diameter 
lens is mounted one focal length away (f = 35 mm) from the trap center, axially-aligned to one pair 
of the ring element apertures.  A second identical relay lens is mounted 2f away (70 mm) to transport 
the  fluorescence  photons,  forming  an  image  of  the  trap  central  region  at  the  photocathode  of  an 
external PMT for molecular detection.  While the back end-cap is always grounded, high voltage of -
12.5  (-9.0)  kV  is  applied  to  the  central  ring  (front  end  cap)  during  the  loading  sequence. 
Subsequently,  the  front  end-cap  is  terminated  to  ground,  resulting  in  an  eventual  trap  volume 
confinement of ~ 1 mm3. 

While we have recently observed the first signatures indicating OH radicals slowed to ~27 ± 
6  m/s  are  successfully  loaded  into  the  trap,  and  spatially  confined  by  the  high  electric  fields,  this 
topic is beyond the scope of the present paper and will be presented in a separate, future publication. 
We  present  here  further  TOF  spectra  of  OH  molecules  observed  moving  with  varying  velocities 
through  the  trap  region  after  the  decelerator,  which  is  operated  under  various  conditions.    Where 
appropriate, the simulation results are plotted as lines that have been offset vertically from the data 
trace for viewing clarity. Figure 15(a) shows the transversely guided pulse of OH molecules in the 
trap region with a mean pulse velocity of 385 m/s.  Under bunching conditions selected for this mean 
velocity, the expected narrow, single, phase-stable packet shows up as a single large peak depicted in 
Fig. 15(b), arriving at 1.37 ms. In Fig. 15(c) at a phase angle φ0 = 45(cid:176), the slowed peak arrives later 
in  time  as  the  molecular  speed  is  further  slowed  to  210  m/s.  In  fact,  the  peak  has  been  moved 
completely off of the residual signals from phase unstable molecules that form the broad pedestal in 
Fig. 15(b).  This complete separation occurs at a smaller value of φ0 than that for 51 stages since the 
entire  69  stages  of  decelerator  are  utilized  for  kinetic  energy  extraction.    Finally,  phase-stable 
acceleration is shown in Fig. 15(d), wherein the molecular packet is accelerated to 541 m/s, arrives 
correspondingly earlier in the TOF spectrum and creates the narrow peak at 1.19 ms. Interestingly, 
similar  to  the  observations  after  the  51st  stage,  at  non-zero  phase  angles,  the  double  peak  structure 
appears to persist in the data even after an additional 18 stages of high electric field manipulation.  
Above the data traces, simulation spectra with higher temporal resolution are plotted.  Consistency 
between  simulation  and  measurement  is  quite  good,  with  locations  of  the  phase  stable  packet  and 
relative peak heights demonstrating excellent agreement. 

We now focus with higher temporal resolution on measuring solely the phase stable packets 
generated by the decelerator moving through the trap region.  Successful operation of the decelerator 
relies  on  precise  knowledge  of  the  molecular  packet(cid:146)s  velocity  and  location  in  order  to  be  able  to 
stably slow the packet. Hence, we can easily predict when the pulse of molecules will arrive in the 
trap region after it exits the decelerator.  We note, that at low phase angles, when the velocity change 
of  the  molecules  is  not  that  large,  the  analytic  expression  (i.e.,  sine  fit)  to  the  potential  energy hill 
presented  in  Fig.  7(b)  enables  sufficient  accuracy  to  predict  the  peak  arrival  times.  However,  at 
higher  phase  angles,  the  deviation  between  the  analytical  calculation  and  the  actual  shape  of  the 

potential  becomes  a  significant  factor such  that  a  numerical  determination  of  the  potential  must  be 
used to generate the proper time sequence to operate the decelerator.  In fact, both simulations and 
measurements  demonstrate  that  the  molecular  packet  actually  becomes  phase  unstable  once  φ0 
becomes greater than 40(cid:176), unless the more accurate calculation of the time sequence is used.  Finally, 
as a minor detail, when the molecules are exiting the decelerator through the last stage, the voltage on 
the last electrodes is switched off, while the voltage on the preceding stage is turned on. The presence 
of this non-zero electric field results in a small accelerating force to the molecules. This effect needs 
to  be  taken  into  account  to  determine  accurately  how  the  molecules  propagate  from  the  last 
decelerator stage through the essentially field-free region into the trap. 

In  Fig.  16,  we  detect  the  molecules  with  2.5  µs  timing  resolution  per  point.    Phase  stable 
packets are measured over a broad range of operating parameters, both in acceleration, bunching, and 
slowing for -70(cid:176) ≤ φ0 ≤ 65(cid:176).  Fig. 16 traces (a), (b), (c), and (d) represent OH radicals that have been 
accelerated from an initial velocity of 385 m/s to a maximum speed of 545 m/s.  The phase stable 
molecules  arrive  earlier  in  time  relative  to  the  bunched  peak  (Fig.  16  trace  (e))  and  create  the 
observed  increasingly  narrow  structures.    The  bunched  packet  corresponds  to  ~104  molecules  at  a 
density  of  ~106  cm-3.    Traces  (f),  (g),  (h),  (i),  (j),  (k),  (l),  and  (m)  show  phase  stable  OH  packets 
which have been decelerated to correspondingly lower velocities, as indicated in the figure.  As the 
molecular  packet  is  increasingly  slowed,  the  molecules  arrive  progressively  later  in  time.  For φ0  > 
40(cid:176),  the  slowed  peak  is  completely  separated  from  the  broad  background  signals  produced  by 
residual  phase  unstable  molecules.    In  contrast  to  the  accelerated  molecules,  the  slowed,  stable 
molecular packets broaden as the phase angle increases, due the reduced molecular speed. 

As  the  molecules  slow  down  towards  rest,  there  is  an  artifact  in  detection  of  molecular 
numbers due to the finite spatial size of the detection window. Basically, slow molecules are counted 
multiple  times  as  they  move  through the  detection  region where  the  LIF  light  pulses  are  shifted  in 
fine time steps to obtain high resolution TOF spectra. When this effect is properly de-convolved from 
the  actual  underlying  signal  size,  the  number  (N)  of  OH  molecules  in  a  phase  stable  packet  as  a 
function of phase angle can be determined.  The measured results (filled circles), normalized to the 
bunching  peak  number  N0  are  plotted  in  Fig.  17.  In  addition,  points  generated  under  Monte  Carlo 
simulations (open diamonds) as well as theory curves from the simple analytic expression of Eq. (8) 
(solid  line)  and  the  more  accurate  numerical  calculation  (dotted  line)  are  shown.    The  agreement 
between  experimental  results  and  simulation  is  quite  good.  The  main  sources  of  error  are  peak 
reproducibility  and  accurate  estimation  of  the  peak  area  of  the  bunched  packet  as  it  is  temporally 
coincident  with  signals  from  phase  unstable  molecules.  Disagreement  between  the  measured  data 
points  and  the  simulation  results  are  within  experimental  error.  Deviation  of  the  data  points  under 
acceleration conditions (φ0 < 0(cid:176)) are primarily due to insufficient time resolution in the data points, 
making peak area estimates difficult. 
 
 
Conclusions, future directions, and other discussions 
 

The work reported in this paper has centered on providing cold hydroxyl radicals through the 
use  of  the  Stark  deceleration  of  a  supersonic  beam.  Specifically,  our  work  from  both  experimental 
and modeling perspectives has been focused on uncovering the complex dynamics, which govern the 
evolution  of  the  molecules  within  the  decelerator,  as  well  as  efficiently  produce  molecules  for 
trapping  and  subsequent  study.  In  our  current  experiments  we  accelerate/decelerate  a  supersonic 
beam  of  free  radicals  to  a  mean  speed  adjustable  between  550  m/s  to  rest,  with  a  translational 
temperature tunable from tens of milliKelvin to 1 K. These velocity-manipulated packets contain 103-

6 molecules (depending on the translational temperature) at a density of ~104-6 cm-3 inside the moving 
potential wells.   

Improvements  will  come  from  several  different  fronts.  One  of  the  most  important  future 
developments  is  to  enhance  the  number  and  phase  space  density  of  the  initial  supersonic  beam 
expansion source. Since a Stark decelerator cannot enhance the phase space density, progress along 
this  line  will  be  particularly  important  in  order  to  push  the  low  temperature  limit  of  the  cold 
molecular  samples.  We  will  explore  improvements  to  the  existing  system  as  well  as  alternative 
techniques such as photolysis to attempt to produce colder and more intense OH beams.  

Of  course,  one  of  the  most  effective,  demonstrated  approaches  to  enhance  the  phase  space 
density is to laser cool the sample, especially when the sample density is not sufficiently high or the 
ratio of elastic vs. inelastic collision rates is not favorable to afford direct evaporative cooling.  For 
OH  radicals,  it  will  be  interesting  to  explore  laser  cooling  effects  through  specific,  relatively 
radiatively  closed  electronically  excited  pathways.  For  example,  due  to  the  large  Franck-Condon 
overlapping factor, OH molecules excited from the v(cid:148) = 0 level in the ground electronic state to the 
v(cid:146)  =  0  level  in  the  first  electronic  state  will  return  to  the  same  ground  state  at  ~  99.3%  branching 
ratio. The cooling force associated with this electronically allowed transition is comparable to laser 
cooling of alkali atoms. Within this 0 (cid:150) 0 transition band, with strict selection rules (∆J = 0, –1; ∆J = 
0, –1; and + ↔ - for parity operation), the slowed and trapped molecules in the (J =3/2, (cid:147)f(cid:148), F = 2) 
state would need only two independent repumping lasers, in addition to the cooling laser, to close the 
cooling  cycle.  There  are  actually  five  leakage  states,  however,  small  frequency  gaps  between 
hyperfine levels can be bridged using electro-optical modulators. Although we still have a 0.7% un-
repumped leakage to other vibration levels, when the molecules are already prepared at a few tens of 
millikelvin temperature, noticeable cooling effects should take place.   

Because  of  the  existence  of  an  unpaired  electron,  the  OH  molecule  also  possesses  a  large 
magnetic  moment  (~1.4  µB)  and  is  suitable  for  magnetic  trapping.  We  are  exploring  a  hybrid  trap 
configuration combining both electrostatic and magnetic fields for trapping of cold OH. Such a trap 
will provide an ideal environment to study cold, intermolecular interactions with a varying electric 
field  to  influence  the  molecular  dipoles,  as  well  as  cold  collisions  between  atomic  and  molecular 
samples.  
  
We  are  grateful  to  H.L.  Bethlem  and  Gerard  Meijer  for  fruitful  interactions  and  technical 
advice. We also thank C. Lineberger, S. Leone, and J. Daily for equipment loans, and J. Bohn and D. 
Nesbitt for useful discussions. We acknowledge important help we have received from A. Pattee and 
T. van Leeuwen. This research work is supported by the Keck Foundation, NSF, and NIST.  H. J. L. 
acknowledges support from N.R.C.    

OH energy structure
OH energy structure

2Σ+
2Σ+

excited state
excited state
ground state
ground state

3565 cm-1
3565 cm-1
300 cm-1
300 cm-1

5/2  f  +
5/2  f  +

5/2  e  -
5/2  e  -

3/2  f  +
3/2  f  +

3/2  e  -
3/2  e  -

1/2  f  -
1/2  f  -

1/2  e  +
1/2  e  +

J ε p
J ε p

0 cm-1
0 cm-1

3/2  -
3/2  -

3/2  f  +
3/2  f  +

3/2  e  -
3/2  e  -

7/2  f  +
7/2  f  +

7/2  e  -
7/2  e  -

5/2  f  -
5/2  f  -

5/2  e  +
5/2  e  +

3/2  f  +
3/2  f  +

3/2  e  -
3/2  e  -
J ε p
J ε p

3
3
2
2
3
3
2
2

2
2
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
F
F

V = 1
V = 1

V = 1
V = 1

V = 0
V = 0

2
2
1
1

2
2
1
1
2
2
1
1

4
4
3
3
4
4
3
3

3
3
2
2
3
3
2
2
2
2
1
1
2
2
1
1
F
F

2Π1/2
2Π1/2

2Π3/2
2Π3/2

Figure 1: Relevant energy level structure of OH, showing the first electronically excited state and the 
first two vibrational levels in the electronic ground state. ε indicates symmetry ((cid:147)e(cid:148) and (cid:147)f(cid:148) states) 
from λ-doubling and p indicates overall parity.  The transition (solid arrow) and decay (wavy, dotted 
arrow) pathways used for laser induced fluorescence detection of OH are also indicated.    
 

  
 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1  Bochinski et al.  

 

 

| = 2
|m
F

| = 1
|m
F

 =  0
m
F

| = 1
|m
F
m
 =  0
F

 =  0
m
F

|m
| = 1
F
m
 =  0
F
|m
| = 2
F

|m
| = 1
F

X2

Π

3/2 f state

F = 2

F = 1

F = 2

F = 1

)

1
 
-

 

m
c
 

 
3
-
0
1
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

 

 

67.5

65.0

62.5

60.0

57.5

55.0

2.5

0.0

-2.5

-5.0

-7.5

)

 
1
-

m
c
 

 

3
-
 
0
1
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2 (a) Bochinski et al.  

X2

Π

 e state

3/2

-10.0

0.00

0.25

0.75
Electric Field Magnitude (kV/cm)

1.00

0.50

1.25

1.50

 

 

 

| = 2, 1
F = 2, |m
F

| = 0
F = 2, |m
F
| = 0, 1
F = 1, |m
F

F = 2, |m
| = 0, 1
F
| = 0
F = 1, |m
F

 

0

-3

-2

25

| = 2
F = 2, |m
F
| = 1
F = 1, |m
F

75
Electric Field Magnitude (kV/cm)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: (a) The Stark energy shift for ground state OH molecules in low electric fields.  The initial 
e (f) state is shown in the lower (upper) panel, where the hyperfine levels are indicated next to the 
traces. (b) The Stark shift for ground state OH molecules in high electric fields.  The vertical dotted 
line  indicates  the  regime  where  the  Stark  decelerator  operates;  the  dashed  horizontal  line  denotes 
zero energy. 
 

100

125

150

50

3

2

1

0

-1

)

1
-

m
c
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2(b) Bochinski et al.  

Figure  3:  System  schematic  of  Stark  decelerator,  displaying  the  pulsed  valve,  the  molecular  beam 
skimmer,  the  electric  hexapole,  the  electrode  stages,  and  the  trap  region.    The  electrode  stages 
alternate orientation (vertical (cid:150) horizontal) as shown in the figure.  The spatial locations indicated by 
arrows correspond to the measured data traces in Figure 5. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3 Bochinski et al.  

 

             Vm          ∆V/Vm
 465 m/s      16%
 390 m/s      17%
 323 m/s      19%

 

0.08

0.12

0.16

0.24

0.28

0.32

0.20
Time (ms)

Figure 4: Controlled tuning of the initial mean molecular speed; varying the discharge initiation time 
creates OH pulses with differing mean speeds (Vm), FWHM velocity widths (∆V), and amplitudes. 
 

s
e
l
u
c
e
l
o
M
H
O

 

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4 Bochinski et al.  

(a)
0.005x

(b)

 

(a) at skimmer
(b) after hexapole
(c) before 23rd stage
(d) before 51st stage
(e) trap region

(c)
5x

 

(d)

5x

(e)

5x

)
e
l
a
c
s
 
r
a
e
n
i
l
(
 
s
e
u
c
e
l
o
M
H
O

 

5.6

4.8

4.0

3.2

2.4

1.6

0.8

0.0

 

0.4

0.0

0.8
1.2
Time (ms)
Figure 5: TOF LIF measurements of the propagation of an OH molecular pulse (a) before skimmer, 
(b)  after  hexapole,  (c)  before  the  23rd  stage,  (d)  before  the  51st  stage,  and  (e)  in  the  trap  region.  
Traces (c), (d), and (e) are taken with the hexapole operated as described in Section IV and constant, 
transverse guidance voltages applied to the slower. 
 
 

1.6

2.0

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 5 Bochinski et al.  

 

 

 

 

 

 = 2, 1 
 F = 2, m
F
 = 0
 F = 2, m
F
           F =1, m
 = 1, 0 
F

 sum 

 

 

r
o
t
c
a
F
 
n
i
a
G

 
r
a
l
u
c
e
l
o
M

12

8

4

0

20

16

12

8

4

0

350 m/s 
385 m/s 
415 m/s 

0

4

8

12

 

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Applied Hexapole Voltage (±kV)

Figure 6: Hexapole focusing curve for different OH molecular velocities.  The symbols represent 
the data points for molecules with velocities of 350 m/s (squares), 385 m/s (diamonds), and 415 
m/s (triangles), while the solid lines represent the corresponding simulation result.  The inset 
depicts the contribution of the 2Π3/2 F = 2, mF = 2, 1 states and the 2Π3/2 F = 2, mF = 0 and 
2Π3/2 F = 1, mF = 0, 1 states  
to the observed signals for the 385 m/s trace.  
 
 

Figure 6 Bochinski et al.  

 

1
-

)

2.0
                 (a) 
m
c
1.6
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

1.2

 

 

0

)

1.0

0.4

0.0

0.8

450

180

270

-270 -180 -90

 
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
P

 ∆KE numerical 
 ∆KE sine fit 

90
360
phase angle φ (degrees)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.0
                  (b) 
1.5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Phase stable operation of the decelerator. (a) Longitudinal Stark energy potentials 
generated by the two sets of electrodes, where the solid (dotted) line represents the potential from 
the active (grounded) set of electrodes. (b) Kinetic energy loss per stage (∆KE) experienced by 
molecules from switching between the two potentials given above.  Solid (dashed) line 
corresponds to a numerical calculation (sine function fit). 
 

90
phase angle φ (degrees)

m
c
(
 
E
K
∆

phase stable
slowing

phase stable
acceleration

-1.5

-2.0

-1.0

-0.5

270

180

-90

0.5

0.0

1
-

0

 

Figure 7 Bochinski et al.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

)
)

1
1
-
-

0.0
0.0

m
m
c
c
(
(
 
 
l
l
a
a
i
i
t
t
n
n
e
e
t
t
o
o
P
P
 
 
l
l
a
a
n
n
i
i
d
d
u
u
t
t
i
i
g
g
n
n
o
o
L
L

-0.2
-0.2

-0.4
-0.4

-0.6
-0.6

-0.8
-0.8

-1.0
-1.0

-1.2
-1.2

o = 0o
o = 0o
 φ
 φ
 = 30o
 = 30o
 φ
 φ
o
o
o = 60o
o = 60o
 φ
 φ

 
 

-180 -135 -90
-180 -135 -90

90
90

135 180
135 180

-45
45
45
0
0
-45
∆φ (degrees)
∆φ (degrees)

Figure 8: (a) Phase stable area (separatrix area) versus phase angle for φ0 = 0(cid:176), 30(cid:176), and 60(cid:176).  As the 
phase  angle  is  increased,  the  stable  area  is  reduced;  equivalently,  the  stable  longitudinal  velocity 
width  narrows,  decreasing  the  numbers  of  molecules  in  the  phase  stable  packet.  (b)  Longitudinal 
traveling potential wells at various phase angles of φ0 = 0(cid:176), 30(cid:176), and 60(cid:176).  
 

Figure 8 Bochinski et al.  

 

40

30

20

10

0

)
s
/
m

(
 

x
a
m
V
∆
 
±

15

30
0
60
90
 (degrees)
synchronous phase angle φ
0

45

75

 
Figure  9:  Phase  stable  area  (separatrix  area)  A  versus  slowing  phase  angles  φ0,  normalized  to  the 
phase stable area under bunching operation A0.  The subsequent maximum allowed velocity spread 
of the phase stable packet ∆Vmax is shown with respect to the right axis.   
 
 

1.00

0.75

0

 
A
 
A

/

0.50

0.25

0.00

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 9 Bochinski et al.  

 

 

(a) before 
23rd stage

 data
 simulation

(b) before 
51st stage

 data
 simulation

0.0

0.4

0.6

0.8
Time (ms)

 

0.00

1.0

0.8

(c) in the 
trap region

 data
 simulation

1.0

1.2
Time (ms)

 

(d) molecular loss: bunched peak areas

 simulation
 data

 

1.4

 

0.75

0.60

0.45

 

0.30

0.15

1.0

0.8

0.6

 

0.4

0.2

0.0

1.5

1.2

0.9

0.6

0.3

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

)
e
l
a
c
s
 
r
a
e
n
i
l
(
 
s
e
u
c
e
l
o
M
H
O

 

)
e
l
a
c
s
 
r
a
e
n
i
l
(
 
s
e
l
u
c
e
l
o
M
H
O

 

0.00

1.0

1.2

1.4
Time (ms)

1.6

1.8

0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40
Position (cm)

Figure 10: OH LIF TOF spectra under bunching (φ0 = 0(cid:176)) decelerator operation (a) before the 23rd 
stage, (b) before the 51st stage, and (d) within the electrostatic trap region.  The data points are drawn 
as squares, circles, and triangles while the simulation results are shown as solid lines, with a vertical 
offset for viewing clarity.  Figure 10(d) shows both experimental and simulation results on bunched 
peak  areas,  normalized  to  the  23rd  stage;  the  reduction  in  peak  height  with  position  is  due  to 
longitudinally phase unstable molecules as well molecules with radial velocities ≥ 5 m/s being lost 
from the packet.  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 10 Bochinski et al.  

 

 

 

 

(a) transverse guidance

(b) φ
0

 = 0°

 

 

(c) φ
0

 = 20°

(d) φ

0 = 40°

 

 

 = 60°
(e) φ
0

(f) φ

0 = 67°

 

 

 = 80°
(g) φ
0

(h) φ

0 = -45° 

 

 

 

 

 

 

)
e
l
a
c
s
 
r
a
e
n
i
l
(
 
s
e
u
c
e
l
o
M
H
O

 

)
e
l
a
c
s
 
r
a
e
n
i
l
(
 
s
e
l
u
c
e
l
o
M
H
O

 

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

)
e
l
a
c
s
 
r
a
e
n
i
l
(
 
s
e
u
c
e
l
o
M
H
O

 

)
e
l
a
c
s
 
r
a
e
n
i
l
(
 
s
e
l
u
c
e
l
o
M
H
O

 

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.4

0.6
Time (ms)

0.8

1.0

0.4

0.6
Time (ms)

0.8

1.0

 
Figure 11: OH packet of molecules in front of the 23rd stage under (a) transverse guidance, (b) φ0 = 
0(cid:176) [385 m/s], (c) φ0 = 20(cid:176) [365 m/s], (d) φ0 = 40(cid:176) [344 m/s], (e) φ0 = 60(cid:176) [323 m/s], (f) φ0 = 67(cid:176)[317 
m/s], (g) φ0 = 80(cid:176) [309], and (h) φ0 = -45(cid:176) [424], where the number in square brackets indicates the 
mean velocity of the phase stable packet.  At this spatial location, under all operating conditions the 
spectra are dominated by signals from still present phase unstable molecules. 
 

Figure 11 Bochinski et al.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) φ0 = 0(cid:176)
(a) φ0 = 0(cid:176)

(b) φ0 = 60(cid:176)
(b) φ0 = 60(cid:176)

Distance from skimmer (m)
Distance from skimmer (m)

Distance from Skimmer (m)
Distance from Skimmer (m)

Figure  12:  3-D  Monte  Carlo  simulation  of  the  OH  packet  in  front  of  the  23rd  stage  under  the 
bunching  and  slowing  (60o)  conditions.  Molecules  are  shown  in  longitudinal  phase  space  as  dots.  
Projections along the longitudinal spatial and velocity coordinates are both shown.   
 
 

)
)
s
s
/
/
m
m

(
(
 
 
y
y
t
t
i
i
c
c
o
o
l
l
e
e
V
V
 
 
e
e
l
l
u
u
c
c
e
e
l
l
o
o
M
M

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 12 Bochinski et al.  

 

 

 

 

(a) transverse guidance

(b) φ

0 = 0° 

 

 

(c) φ
0

 = 20°

(d) φ
0

 = 40°

 

 

(e) φ

0 = 60°

(f)  φ

0 = 67°

 

 

 = 80°
(g) φ
0

(h) φ

0 = -45°

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

)
e
l
a
c
s
 
r
a
e
n
i
l
(
 
s
e
u
c
e
l
o
M
H
O

 

)
e
l
a
c
s
 
r
a
e
n
i
l
(
 
s
e
l
u
c
e
l
o
M
H
O

 

)
e
l
a
c
s
 
r
a
e
n
i
l
(
 
s
e
u
c
e
l
o
M
H
O

 

)
e
l
a
c
s
 
r
a
e
n
i
l
(
 
s
e
l
u
c
e
l
o
M
H
O

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.0

0.8

1.0
Time (ms)

1.2

1.4

0.8

1.0
Time (ms)

1.2

1.4

Figure  13:  TOF  LIF  measurements  of  OH  molecules  before  the  51st  stage  under  (a)  transverse 
guidance, (b) φ0 = 0(cid:176) [385 m/s], (c) φ0 = 20(cid:176) [337 m/s], (d) φ0 = 40(cid:176) [283 m/s], (e) φ0 = 60(cid:176) [220 
m/s], (f) φ0 = 67(cid:176)[198 m/s], (g) φ0 = 80(cid:176) [168], and (h) φ0 = -45(cid:176) [470], where the number in square 
brackets indicates the mean velocity of the phase stable packet.   
 
 

Figure 13 Bochinski et al.  

(a) φ0 = 0(cid:176)
(a) φ0 = 0(cid:176)

(b) φ0 = 60(cid:176)
(b) φ0 = 60(cid:176)

Distance from Skimmer (m)
Distance from Skimmer (m)

Distance from Skimmer (m)
Distance from Skimmer (m)

Figure 14: 3-D Monte Carlo simulation of the OH packet in front of the 51st stage under the bunching 
and slowing (60o) conditions. Molecules are shown in longitudinal phase space as dots.  Projections 
along the longitudinal spatial and velocity coordinates are both shown.  
 
 

)
)
s
s
/
/

m
m

(
(
 
 
y
y
t
t
i
i
c
c
o
o
l
l
e
e
V
V
 
 
e
e
l
l
u
u
c
c
e
e
l
l
o
o
M
M

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 14 Bochinski et al.  

(a) transverse guidance

(b)  bunching
0 = 0°
      φ

 

 

 

 

 

 

(c)  slowing
      φ
0 = 45°

(d) acceleration
      φ
0 = -67°

 

 

0.00

1.00

1.25

1.50
Time (ms)

1.75

2.00

1.00

1.25

1.75

2.00

1.50
Time (ms)

Figure  15:  Observations  of  OH  molecules  moving  through  the  trap  region  under  (a)  transverse 
guidance,  (b)  bunching  (φ0  =  0(cid:176),  v  =  385  m/s),  (c)  slowing  (φ0  =  45(cid:176),  v  =  210  m/s),  and  (d) 
acceleration (φ0 = -67(cid:176), v = 541 m/s).  Monte Carlo simulation traces are plotted above the data.      
 
 

0.24

0.18

0.12

0.06

0.00

0.16

0.12

0.08

0.04

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
r
a
e
n
i
l
(
 
s
e
u
c
e
l
o
M
H
O

 

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
r
a
e
n
i
l
(
 
s
e
l
u
c
e
l
o
M
H
O

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 15 Bochinski et al.  

1.6

1.2

0.8

0.4

)
s
t
i
n
u

 
r
a
e
n
i
l
(
 
s
e
u
c
e
l
o
M
H
O

 

0.0

1.0

(d)

(e)
(f)

(g)

(h)

(c)

(b)

(a)

 

(a) -70(cid:176)             545 m/s
(b) -60(cid:176)             529 m/s
(c) -40(cid:176)             487 m/s
(d) -20(cid:176)             437 m/s
(e)     0(cid:176)             385 m/s
(f)   10(cid:176)             352 m/s
(g)  20(cid:176)             318 m/s
(h)  30(cid:176)             280 m/s
(i)   40(cid:176)             236 m/s
(j)   50(cid:176)             182 m/s
(k)  55(cid:176)             149 m/s
(l)   60(cid:176)             118 m/s
(m) 65(cid:176)               58 m/s

(m)

 

(i)

(j)

(k)

(l)

1.5

2.0

2.5

Time (ms)

Figure  16:  Slowed,  accelerated,  and  bunched  molecular  packages  traversing  the  trap  region  at 
varying  phase  angles.    Here,  the  downward-pointing  arrow  indicates  solely  the  position  of  the 
bunched  (trace  (e)  φ0  =  0(cid:176))  packet,  as  all  observed  peaks  are  the  result  of  phase-stable  packets.  
Molecular  peaks  arriving  earlier  in  time  result  from  accelerated  OH  packets  with  corresponding 
negative phase-angles as denoted in the figure.  Peaks arriving later in time are similarly the result of 
slowed molecules, generated by using positive phase-angles.  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 16 Bochinski et al.  

 

 analytical approximation
 numerical calculation
 data
 Monte Carlo simulation

 

-60

-90
30
-30
90
 (degrees)
synchronous phase angle φ
0

60

0

Figure 17: Observations within the trap region: numbers of molecules in the phase stable packet N 
relative to the number in the bunched packet N0, for varying slowing and accelerating phase angles.  
Data  points  (solid  circles)  and  three-dimensional  Monte  Carlo  simulations  (open  diamonds)  are 
shown.    For  comparison,  theory  traces  generated  from  the  simple  analytic  expression  (Eq.  8,  solid 
line) and the numerical calculation (dotted line) for stable areas in phase space are shown. 
 

0.6

0

 
N
 
/
N
 

1.0

0.8

0.4

0.2

0.0

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 17 Bochinski et al.  

References:  

                                                 

1  Jonathon D. Weinstein, Robert deCarvalho, Thierry Guillet, Bretislav Friedrich, and John M. 
Doyle,  Nature (London) 395, 148 (1998).  
2  R. Wynar, R. S. Freeland, D. J. Han, C. Ryu, and D. J. Heinzen,  Science 287, 1016 (2000).  
3  H. Bethlem and G. Meijer, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem 22, 73 (2003).  
4  P. Pillet, N. Vanhaecke, C. Lisdat, D. Comparat, O. Dulieu, A. Crubellier, and F. Masnou-Seeuws, 
Phys. Scripta 105, 7 (2003).  
5  C. A. Regal, C. Ticknor, J. L. Bohn, and D. S. Jin,  Nature (London) 424, 47 (2003).  
6  D. DeMille, F. Bay, S. Bickman, D. Kawall, D. Krause, S. E. Maxwell, and L. R. Hunter,  Phys. 
Rev. A 61, 52507 (2000).  
7  J. J. Hudson, B. E. Sauer, M. R. Tarbutt, and E. A. Hinds,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 23003 (2002).  
8  N. Balakrishnan, R. C. Forrey, and A. Dalgarno,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 3224 (1998).  
9  J. L. Bohn,  Phys. Rev. A 63, 52714 (2001).  
10  A. V. Avdeenkov and J. L. Bohn,  Phys. Rev. A 64, 52703 (2001).  
11  A. Volpi and J. L. Bohn,  Phys. Rev. A 65, 52712 (2002).  
12  A. V. Avdeenkov and J. L. Bohn,  Phys. Rev. A 66, 52718 (2002).  
13  Pavel SoldÆn, Marko T. Cvita(cid:154), Jeremy M. Hutson, Pascal Honvault, and Jean-Michel Launay,  
Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 153201 (2002).  
14 Pavel SoldÆn and Jeremy M. Hutson, Phys. Rev. Lett., in press. 
15  D. DeMille,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 67901 (2002).  
16  J. P. Shaffer, W. Chalupczak, and N. P. Bigelow,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1124 (1999).  
17  C. I. Sukenik and H. C. Busch,  Phys. Rev. A 66, 51402(R) (2002).  
18  Andrew J. Kerman, Jeremy M. Sage, Sunil Sainis, Thomas Bergeman, and David DeMille,  Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 92, 33004 (2004).  
19  R. deCarvalho, J. M. Doyle, B. Friedrich, T. Guillet, J. Kim, D. Patterson, and J. Weinstein, 
EuroPhys. J. D. 7, 289 (1999).  
20  Dima Egorov, Thierry Lahaye, Wieland Sch(cid:246)llkopf, Bretislav Friedrich, and John M. Doyle,  
Phys. Rev. A 66, 43401 (2002).  
21  Hendrick L. Bethlem, Giel Berden, and Gerard Meijer,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1558 (1999).  
22  Hendrick L. Bethlem, Giel Berden, A. J. A. van Roij, Floris M. H. Crompvoets, and Gerard 
Meijer,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5744 (2000).  
23  Hendrick L. Bethlem, Giel Berden, Floris M. H. Crompvoets, Rienk T. Jongma, AndrØ J. A.  van 
Roij, and Gerard Meijer,  Nature (London) 406, 491 (2000).  
24  J. R. Bochinski, Eric R. Hudson, H. J. Lewandowski, G. Meijer, and Jun Ye, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 
243001 (2003).  
25 M. R. Tarbutt, H. L. Bethlem, J. J. Hudson, V. L. Ryabov, B. E. Sauer, G. Meijer, and E. A. Hinds, 
physics/0312119. 
26  S. A. Nizkorodov, W. W. Harper, and D. J. Nesbitt, Chem. Phys. Lett. 341, 107 (2001).  
27  X. H. Liu, J. J. Lin, S. Harich, G. C. Schatz, and X. M. Yang,  Science 289, 1536 (2000).  
28  M. Wardle and F. Yusef-Zadeh,  Science 296, 2350 (2002).  
29  Jeremy Darling,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 11301 (2003).  
30  R. P. Wayne, Science Progress 74, 379 (1990).  
31  G. P. Smith, J. Luque, C. Park, J. B. Jeffries, and D. R. Crosley, Combustion and Flame 131, 59 
(2002).  
32  N. Vora, J. E. Siow, and N. M. Laurendeau, Combustion and Flame 126, 1393 (2001).  

                                                                                                                                                             

33  H. E. Siow and N. A. Laurendeau, Combustion and Flame 136, 16 (2004).  
34  Steven M. Girvin, Phys. Today 53, 39 (2000).  
35  D. G. Enzer, M. M. Schauer, J. J. Gomez, M. S. Gulley, M. H. Holzscheiter, P. G. Kwiat, S. K. 
Lamoreaux, C. G. Peterson, V. D. Sandberg, D. Tupa, A. G. White, R. J. Hughes, and D. F. V. 
James,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2466 (2000).  
36 J. L. Bohn, private communication 
37  Gerhard Herzberg, Molecular Spectra and  Molecular Structure, 2nd edition (Krieger Publishing 
Company, Malabar, Florida, 1989) 
38  W. L. Meerts and A. Dymanus,  Chem. Phys. Lett. 23, 45 (1973).  
39  A. T. Droege and P. C. Engelking,  Chem. Phys. Lett. 96, 316 (1983).  
40  M. C. van Beek and J. J. ter Meulen,  Chem. Phys. Lett. 337, 237 (2001).  
41  R. Schlachta, G. Lask, S. H. Tsay, and V. E. Bondybey,  Chem. Phys. 155, 267 (1991).  
42 see H. J. Lewandowski, Eric R. Hudson, J. R. Bochinski, and Jun Ye, in preparation 
43  Kiyohiko Tabayashi and Kosuke Shobatake,  J. Chem. Phys. 88, 835 (1988).  
44  W. E. Moerner and D. P. Fromm,  Rev. Sci. Instrum. 74, 3597 (2003).  
45  T. Kasai, T. Fukawa, T. Matsunami, D. -C. Che, K. Ohashi, Y. Fukunishi, H. Ohoyama, and K. 
Kuwata,  Rev. Sci. Instrum. 64, 1150 (1993).  
46  Toby D. Hain, Michael A. Weibel, Kyle M. Backstrand, and Thomas J. Curtiss, J. Phys. Chem A 
101, 7674 (1997).  
47  Michael A. Weibel, Toby D. Hain, and Thomas J. Curtiss,  J. Chem. Phys. 108, 3134 (1998).  
48  Toby D. Hain, Robert M. Moision, and Thomas J. Curtiss,  J. Chem. Phys. 111, 6797 (1999).  
49  M. C. van Beek, J. J. ter Meulen, and M. H. Alexander,  J. Chem. Phys. 113, 628 (2000).  
50  M. Volkmer, Ch. Meier, J. Lieschke, A. Mihill, M. Fink, and N. B(cid:246)wering,  Phys. Rev. A 53, 
1457 (1996).  
51  M. Volkmer, Ch. Meier, J. Lieschke, R. Dreier, M. Fink, and N. B(cid:246)wering,  Phys. Rev. A 56, 
1690R (1997).  
52  Toby D. Hain and Thomas J. Curtiss, J. Phys. Chem. A 102, 9696 (1998).  
53  Peter W. Harland, Wan-Ping Hu, Claire Vallance, and P. R. Brooks,  Phys. Rev. A 60, 3138 
(1999).  
54  M. C. van Beek, J. J. ter Meulen, and M. H. Alexander,  J. Chem. Phys. 113, 637 (2000).  
55  R. B. Bernstein, Chemical Dynamics via Molecular Beam and Laser Techniques (Oxford 
University Press, New York, 1982), Chap. 3 
56  Roger W. Anderson, J. Phys. Chem A 101, 7664 (1997).  
57  R. V. Latham, in High Voltage Vacuum Insulation, edited by R. V. Latham (Harcourt Brace & 
Company, New York, 1995), Chap. 2 
 

