 

1

 Thick GEM-like hole multipliers: properties and possible 
applications  

R. Chechika, A. Breskin, C. Shalem and D. Mörmann  

Department of Particle Physics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, 76100 Rehovot, Israel  

Elsevier use only: Received date here; revised date here; accepted date here 

Abstract 

The properties of thick GEM-like (TGEM) gaseous electron multipliers, operated at 1-740 Torr are presented. They are made 
of a G-10 plate, perforated with millimeter-scale diameter holes. In single-multiplier elements, effective gains of about 104, 
106, and 105 were reached at respective pressures of 1, 10 Torr isobutane and 740 Torr Ar/5%CH4, with pulse rise-times in the 
few  nanosecond  scale.  The  high  effective  gain  at  atmospheric  pressure  was  measured  with  a  TGEM  coated  with  a  CsI 
photocathode. The detector was operated in single and cascaded modes. Potential applications in ion and photon detection are 
discussed.    

Keywords: GEM; gaseous electron multipliers; low-pressure avalanche multiplication; photon detectors; ion detectors.  

1. Introduction 

Gas avalanche multiplication within small holes is 
attractive  because  the  avalanche-confinement  in  the 
hole  strongly  reduces  secondary  effects,  and  they 
provide  true  pixilated  radiation  localization.  Hole-
based  multiplication  has  been 
the  subject  of 
numerous  studies  in  a  large  variety  of  applications. 
Recently,  proportional  gas  multiplication  was 
demonstrated in glass channel plates (CP) [1, 2]. The 
most  attractive  and  extensively  studied  hole-
multiplier  is  the  Gas  Electron  Multiplier  (GEM)  [3], 
made of 50-70-µm diameter holes etched in a 50-µm 
thick  metalized  Kapton  foil.  It  operates  in  a  large 
variety  of  gases 
including  noble-gas  mixtures, 
providing a gain of ~104 in a single element and gains 
exceeding  106  in  a  cascade  of  3-4  elements  [4,  5]. 
The  avalanche  process  is  fast  (typical  rise-time  of  a 
few  ns)  and  generally  free  of  photon-mediated 
secondary  effects  [6].  In  addition  to  its  use  for 
particle  tracking  and  in  TPCs,  the  GEM  is  also 
efficiently  coupled  to   gaseous   or   solid   radiation  

 
 
 

converters, resulting in a large variety of GEM-based 
radiation  detectors  developed  for  imaging  of  x-rays, 
neutrons and UV-to visible light [7].  

The success of the GEMs and glass CPs triggered 
the  concept  of  a  coarser  structure  made  by  drilling 
millimetric  holes  in  a  2mm  thick  Cu-plated  G-10 
printed  circuit  board  (PCB)  [2,  8].  These  yielded 
gains of 104 in Ar/5% isobutane and in pure Xe and 
103 
in  pure  Xe,  when  combined  with  a  CsI 
photocathode (PC).  

In 

The 

pixilation. 

thick  GEM-like 

(TGEM)  multiplier 
investigated here is a simple and robust detector, with 
millimetric 
combination  with 
appropriate  radiation  converters,  it  has  potential 
applications  for  the  detection  of  light,  neutrons,  x-
rays, charged particles etc. We describe its operation 
properties at very low gas pressures, in view of low-
energy  ion  detection,  and  at  atmospheric  pressure 
(with a CsI photocathode), for Cherenkov UV-photon 
imaging.  

 2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2. Experimental setup and procedures  

The  TGEMs  were  manufactured  with  standard 
PCB  technology  of  precise  drilling  and  Cu  etching, 
out  of  double-face  Cu-clad  G-10  plate,  of  1.6  –  3.2 
mm thick. A gap of 0.1mm was kept between the rim 
of  the  drilled  hole  and  the  edge  of  the  etched  Cu 
pattern (fig. 1).  

Figure 1. A scheme of the thick GEM-like multiplier. 

 
The  effective  gain  was  measured  in  a  “current” 
mode with a continuous Hg(Ar) UV-lamp irradiating 
either a semitransparent (ST) CsI PC, placed at 8mm 
above the TGEM, or  a reflective (REF) PC deposited 
on  its  top  face.  In  the  first,  normalization,  step  the 
photo-induced  current  was  recorded  on  the  TGEM 
with its two sides interconnected (ST PC, fig. 2a), or 
on the mesh installed 6.5mm above the TGEM (REF 
PC,  fig.  2b),  with  a  drift  field  Edrift  resulting  in 
photoelectron  collection  plateau.  In  the  second  step, 
with the ST PC we maintained the same Edrift field in 
the gap above the TGEM and recorded the current at 
the  bottom  electrode  as  function  of  the  voltage 
difference  between  its  both  sides,  keeping  a  slightly 
reversed  field  in  the  gap  below  the  TGEM  (fig.  2c). 
With the REF PC we maintained Edrift=0 for optimal 
electron extraction and focusing [9] and recorded the 
current  in  the  same  way  (fig.  2d).  By  dividing  the 
currents from the second measurement to that of the 
first  one,  we  obtained  the  absolute  effective  gain 
curve; it represents the product of the true gain in the 
holes  and  the  efficiency  to  focus  the  photoelectrons 
into the holes. The latter also varies as function of the 
field in the holes.   

Some  effective-gain  measurements  were  carried 
out  in  a  “pulse”  mode,  with  a  pulsed  H2  lamp 
providing  multi-photon  bursts.  Here,  the  charge-
signal’s  pulse-height  was  recorded  at  the  bottom 
electrode,  as  a  function  of  the  voltage  across  the 
TGEM; 
the  field  configurations  were  kept  as 
explained  above.  The  results  of  the  “pulse”  mode 
measurements  were  normalized 
the 
“current”  ones.  Fast  current  pulses  of  single-  and 
multi-photons  were  also  recorded  from  the  bottom 
electrode with a fast (1ns rise-time) amplifier. 

that  of 

to 

In  a  cascaded-mode  operation,  two  TGEMs  were 
mounted  at  a  distance  of  10mm  (fig.  2e);  currents 
were  recorded  at  the  bottom  electrode  of  the  second 
TGEM,  maintaining  a  transfer  field  between  the 
elements  and  a  slightly  reversed  field  in  the  gap 
in  cascaded  mode, 
below.  This  effective  gain 
involves  the  product  of  the  true  gains  in  both 
TGEMs,  the  efficiency  to  focus  electrons  into  both 
and  the  efficiency  to  extract  electrons  from  the  first 
one into the gap between them. These efficiencies are 
a-priory  unknown  and  must  still  be  optimized;  they 
depend  on  electron  diffusion  and  on  the  different 
electric fields configurations [10].  

3. Electric field calculations  

MAXWELL  software  package  [11]  was  used  to 
study  the  role  of  the  TGEM  geometrical  parameters 
and  its  expected  performance  in  terms  of  electron 
transport  into  the  holes.  We  can  summarize  the 
following:  the  field  in  the  hole’s  center  does  not 
depend  on  the  distance  between  adjacent  holes  but 
rather on the TGEM thickness. The field at the center 
of  a  1.6mm  thick  TGEM,  operated  at  atmospheric 
pressure under a maximal voltage difference of 3 kV, 
is  of  17  kV/cm;  it  is  ~6  times  smaller  than  the 
corresponding field in a standard GEM. 

  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3

 
Figure 2. Schemes for normalization and absolute effective-gain measurement in semitransparent (a,c), reflective (b,d) and double TGEM 
(a,e) modes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Equipotential- and electric-field lines calculated for TGEMs of 1.6mm thick and 1mm holes. Results are shown for pitch=4mm (a, 
b) and 1.5mm (c, d) and for Edrift=0 and 0.3kV/cm. Notice the different scales in the schemes. 

 
The field penetration outside the holes is also very 
small,  of  about  0.3kV/cm  at  atmospheric  pressure. 
This  implies  that  Edrift  in  the  gap  above  the  TGEM 
has  to  be  very  carefully  optimized  for  maximal 
focusing of electrons into the holes. A too large field 
will  transport  the  electrons  into  the  metallic  surface 
between the holes, while a too low field implies large 
electron diffusion, and thus inefficient focusing. Fig. 

field-map 

3  shows  a  vectorial 
representation, 
depicting the electric-field direction and strength. It is 
shown for 1 mm holes in 1.6 mm thick TGEM having 
1.5  and  4  mm  pitch,  under  two  configurations: 
Edrift=0 and Edrift = 0.3 kV/cm. For a 4 mm pitch and 
Edrift  =  0.3  kV/cm  (fig.  3b)  there  is  no  efficient 
focusing  into  the  holes.  With  Edrift=0  (fig.  3a),  the 
filed-lines  direction  permits  focusing  of  electrons 

 4 

originating  either  from  the  gap  above  the  TGEM  or 
from  a  converter  deposited  on  its  top  electrode,  into 
the  holes.  However,  since  the  field  strength  on  the 
TGEM surface is practically 0, while at atmospheric-
pressure  operation  a  field  ≥1  kV/cm  is  required  to 
overcome  backscattering  losses  [12],  it  will  not 
provide efficient electron extraction. For the 1.5 mm 
pitch,  the  field-line  configuration  is  more  adequate; 
with  Edrift=0  the  field  strength  at  the  top-TGEM 
electrode 
is  >1kV/cm  at  atmospheric  pressure 
operation  conditions,  which  guarantees  minimal 
backscattering losses. 

4. Results  

All  results  presented  in  this chapter  refer  to  a 1.6 

mm thick TGEM, with 1mm holes and 1.5mm pitch. 

Fig. 4a depicts the effective gain measured at 740 
Torr  Ar/5%  CH4,  of  a  single  TGEM  with  ST  and 
REF  CsI  PCs.  An  effective gain  ~105 was  measured 
with both. For the same voltage difference across the 
TGEM  the ST  mode  effective  gain  is by  a factor 10 
smaller  than  the  REF  one;  it  indicates  upon  a  ~10-
the  holes. 
fold  poorer  electron 
Moreover,  in  the  double-TGEM  mode  the  same 
effective  gain  was  reached  as  with  a  single-TGEM 
under 
the  same  voltages  across  each  TGEM, 
indicating  upon  considerable  electron  losses  in  the 

focusing 

into 

transfer between them. These observations point at a 
low efficiency of electron focusing from the gap into 
the holes, with Edrift in the range of 0.3-0.5kV/cm in 
this gas mixture.  

the  gain  curve  deviates 

Fig.  4b  depicts  the  effective  gain  measured  at  1 
Torr  of  isobutane.  The  total  effective  gain  is  104  (at 
∆VTGEM>450V 
from 
proportionality)  and  the  results  from  the  ST  and  the 
REF  PC  modes,  measured  independently,  seem  to 
overlap  particularly  in  the  higher  gain  range;  this 
indicates at an identical electron focusing efficiency, 
which  is  most  probably  high.  In  the  double-TGEM 
operation mode the total effective gain is also 104, but 
obtained  under  a  much  smaller  voltage  difference 
across  each  element;  it  indicates  at  efficient  electron 
transfer  between 
two  multipliers.  Both 
observations  point  at  an  efficient  focusing  from  the 
gap into the holes, under Edrfit =20-25V/cm in this gas 
and pressure.  

the 

Fig.  4c  depicts  the  data  measured  at  10  Torr  of 
isobutane;  the  results  are  very  similar  to  those  at  1 
Torr,  with  a  total  effective  gain  approaching  106, 
though there is a slight difference between the ST and 
REF PC modes. Similar observations and conclusions 
hold  for  the  double-TGEM  operation  at  10  torr,  and 
for  the  electron  focusing  efficiency  under  Edrift  of 
~200V/cm in this gas and pressure.  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 4. Absolute effective gain measured at 740 Torr Ar/5%CH4 (a) and at 1 (b) and 10 (c) Torr i-C4H10, in reflective mode (closed circles) 
and in semitransparent “current” (open squares) and “pulse” (open circles) modes.  
 

 

5

Fast  pulses  recorded  in  a  single-TGEM  with 
single- and multi-photon bursts show respective rise-
time of 10, 5 and 3.5 ns, at 740, 10 and 1 Torr (Fig. 
5).  

pressure  TGEMs  could  also  become  adequate 
economic  imaging  and  timing  detectors  for  heavy 
ions in nuclear- and atomic-physics applications. 

5. Summary and applications 

in 
Thick  GEM-like  elements,  manufactured 
standard PCB technology are robust multipliers; they 
have  astonishingly  high  gains:  ~105  at  atmospheric 
pressure  and  ~104-106  at  1-10  Torr.  The  signals  are 
fast, with rise times in the ns range. The operation of 
cascaded TGEMs was demonstrated at low pressures, 
where the electron focusing efficiency into the holes 
is  probably  high.  This  operation  mode  is  important 
for  the  suppression  of  secondary  effects,  and  in 
particular  the  reduction  of  ion  back-flow  [13].  We 
have stressed the importance of the electron transport 
issue;  it  requires  further  studies  for  the  optimization 
of the geometry and the electric fields.  

TGEMs  operated  at  atmospheric  pressure  have 
many  potential  applications.  An  example  is  in  Ring 
Imaging Cherenkov (RICH) detectors, where photon 
detection  over  several  square  meters  is  required, 
generally  with  moderate  (millimetric)  localization 
accuracies; 
pad-readout  with  modern  VLSI 
electronics [14, 15] permits operation at gains in the 
104-105  ranges.  The  TGEM  with  a  REF  PC  is  an 
attractive robust solution, with very low sensitivity to 
background ionizing radiation [9]. Other applications 
could  be  the  detection  of  scintillation  light  in  large 
noble-gas detectors, e.g. in search for WIMPS [8] and 
in  x-ray  and  neutron  detectors  with  appropriate 
converters, where the gain reached in a single TGEM 
could  be  sufficient.  For  such  applications  detector 
optimization is in course.  

The operation at  very  low pressures, of 1  Torr or 
less,  is  interesting  for  ion  detection;  an  example  is 
tracking  nanodosimetry,  where  radiation-induced 
ions in a very dilute gas are detected and localized to 
provide the ionization track structure. The dilute gas 
provides  a  factor  106-dimension  expansion  of  the 
radiation-track  image,  as  compared  to  condensed 
matter such as tissue, resulting in track-structure data 
relevant to the scale of the DNA molecule [16]. The 
TGEM coupled to an appropriate ion converter could 
be  the  basis  for  such  an  ion-imaging  detector.  Low-

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Figure 5. A fast single-photon pulse, of 5ns rise-time, at 10 Torr i-
C4H10, gain~6×105. The after-pulses are due to electronic noise. 

Acknowledgments 

The  work  was  supported  in  part  by  the  Israel 
Science  Foundation,  project  No.  151-01  and  by  the 
Binational Science Foundation, project No. 2002240. 
C.S. was supported in part by the Fund for Victims of 
Terror  of  the  Jewish  Agency  for  Israel.  A.B.  is  the 
W.P.  Reuther  Professor  of  Research  in  the  peaceful 
use of Atomic Energy.   

References 

[1]  H. Sakurai et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A374 (1996) 341. 
[2]  J. Ostling et al., IEEE Trans. NS50 (2003) 809 and refs. 

therein. 

[3]  F. Sauli, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A386 (1997) 531. 
[4]  S. Bachman et al. Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A438 (1999) 376. 
[5]  A. Buzulutskov et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A443 

[6]  A. Breskin et al. Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A513 (2003 )250 

(2000) 164. 

and refs. therein. 

[7]  R. Chechik et al., Recent Investigations of Cascaded GEM 
and MHSP detectors. IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. in press.  
 http://www.arixiv.org/abs/nucl-ex/0311020/0311020.pdf 
[8]  L. Periale et al. Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A478 (2002) 377. 
[9]  D. Mörmann et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A478 (2002) 230. 
[10] C. Richter et al. Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A478 (2002) 528.  
[11] MAXWELL 3D, ANSOFT, Anaheim, USA. 
[12] A. Breskin et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A483 (2002) 670. 
[13] D. Mörmann et al. Nucl. Instr. Meth. A516 (2004) 315. 
[14] P. Weilhammer, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A433 (1999) 413. 
[15] F. Piuz, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A502 (2003) 76. 
[16] G. Garty et al. Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A492 (2002) 212. 
 

