QUEST FOR A NUCLEAR GEOREACTOR1 
R.J. de Meijer, E.R. van der Graaf and K.P. Jungmann 
Kernfysisch Versneller Instituut, Rijksuniversiteit Groningen 
Zernikelaan 25, 9747AA Groningen, the Netherlands 
(email correspondence: demeijer@kvi.nl) 
(27 november 2004) 

Introduction 
In a time when astronauts orbit the Earth and visit the Moon, and mankind has brought 
vehicles to Mars and telescopes into orbit, we seldom realise that we have penetrated the 
Earth by only 10km, a distance smaller than we commute daily to our work or equivalent to 
the cruising altitude of airplanes. Consequently we know, except from seismic information 
and study of the composition of meteorites, little about the interior of our planet. Recently our 
knowledge about antineutrino’s has reached the stage that they can be used as a tool, allowing 
us to look at radiogenic heat sources in the interior part of the planet and associated processes. 
The current understanding of the interior of our planet starts from seismological 
investigations by e.g. Oldham (1906) and Gutenberg (1914) that lead to the hypothesis that up 
to half the radius of the Earth is occupied by a fluid core. From the interpretations of 
earthquakes Lehmann (1936) recognised a small, solid inner core. The fact, that meteorites 
consist of nickelferrous iron, lead to the assumption that the fluid core of the Earth consists of 
molten nickel-iron. Density information stems from the work of Birch (Birch, 1952). He 
hypothesised from seismological models and knowledge on high-pressure equations of state 
that the outer core was composed of a liquid iron alloy and an inner solid core of crystalline 
iron. The melting temperature of the alloy at the respective pressure defines the boundary. 
Estimates for this temperature at a pressure of 330 GPa range between 5000 and 6000 K. 
Figure 1 presents the principal divisions and physical states of the Earth’s interior. The 
absence of shear velocity Vs of earthquake waves is the basis for a fluid core. The density 
curve shows in addition to the major changes at the principal sections steps in the upper 
mantle at about 420km and 660km depth. 

Heat loss from the core depends on the radial temperature gradient at the boundary of 

core and overlying mantle and is strongly related to mantle dynamics. Here exists a large 
uncertainty in(cid:3)ß7(cid:15)(cid:3)GXH(cid:3)WR(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)WHPSHUDWXUH(cid:3)DW(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)LQQHU-FRUH(cid:3)ERXQGDU\(cid:29)(cid:3)ß7 (cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:3)WR(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:27)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:3).(cid:3)
(Anderson, 2002) over a layer of a few hundred kilometres (Lay et al., 1998). Including the 
thermal conductivity of the mantle silicates yield a heat flow of 0.04-0.08 W/m2, leading to a 
total heat flow from the core of 6-12TW (Buffett, 2003); a considerable part of the estimated 
total heat flow from the Earth of 40-50TW. The total heat flow at the core-mantle boundary 
raises vital questions on the thermal evolution of the core and its heat sources in relation to 
power required to maintain the magnetic field. Radiogenic elements like 40K are thought to 
play an essential role (Rama Murthy et al, 2003). 

In his paper Buffett concludes that “the thermal state of the core remains unclear and 

that better knowledge of the partitioning of all radiogenic elements between various reservoirs 
in the planet will help to reduce some ambiguity”. 

An intriguing issue is the presence of Helium in our atmosphere and in particular its 
isotope3He. Whereas 4He is continuously produced by alpha decay, the only way to obtain 
3He is either as a primordial relict (e.g. Seta et al., 2001) or by decay of tritium. For the 
primordial relict the assumption has to be made that the mantle contains a degassed and a, 
deeper lying, less-degassed reservoir. The former one shows up at the mid-ocean ridge 
basalts, the latter one in mantle-plumes basalts. Mantle plumes with extreme high 3He/4He 
ratios are found at some oceanic islands such as Iceland, Hawaii, Samoa and Galapagos 

                                                 
1 Paper submitted to Nuclear Physics News International. 

 

1 

(Kurtz and Geist, 1999) One assumption commonly made in interpreting noble gas data from 
mantle plumes is that the source of mantle plumes is relatively non-degassed lower mantle 
material. Under this assumption, high 3He/4He ratios indicate plume-like upwelling, since the 
deep Earth is believed to be a source of primordial 3He with a relatively low time-integrated 
(U+Th)/He ratio (Georgen et al., 2003)  At oceanic islands not only high 3He/4He ratios are 
found but also normal mid-oceanic island values. This is explained by assuming mixed 
reservoirs (Stuart et al., 2003).  

Recently Bercovici and Karato (2003) proposed a filtering of the mantle at the 410km 

Recently a possible explanation for some of these questions was given by 

discontinuity of the density (see Figure 1). They propose that the ascending mantle rises out 
of a transition zone, between the 410 and 600km discontinuities, into the upper mantle above 
410km. The material undergoes dehydration-induced partial melting which filters out 
incompatible elements, including He and other noble gases. They propose that this filter 
model can explain geochemical observations without the need for isolated mantle reservoirs. 
This model could bridge the gap between geochemists supporting a two-layer model at a 
boundary of 660km and seismologists, supporting a whole-mantle model of circulation 
(Hofmann, 2003).  
 
hypothesising a 8km diameter, nuclear georeactor at the centre of the Earth. The hypothesis 
for such a reactor originates from the work of Herndon (1992) in applying Fermi’s nuclear 
reactor theory to demonstrate the feasibility of planetary scale nuclear fission reactors.  
Calculations at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (Hollenbach and Herndon, 2001) show that a 
planetary-scale nuclear reactor can operate over the lifetime of the Earth as a breeder reactor 
and can produce by ternary fission substantial tritium (decaying to 3He) to explain the high 
3He/4He ratios observed in oceanic basalts and fumes of volcanoes at Iceland and Hawaii. 
Seifritz (2003) shows that the operation of such a breeder reactor is consistent with our 
knowledge on breeder reactors and corresponds to a stable state.  

The possibility of a nuclear georeactor is linked to the state of oxidation in the deep 

interior of the Earth. Herndon has convincing arguments for a state of oxidation like an 
enstatite chondrite, different from the more oxidised, ordinary chondrites considered by Birch. 
As a consequence of the highly reduced state some so-called lithophile elements including 
some Si, Mg, Ca, U and possibly Th occur in part of the core. These elements, tending to be 
incompatible in an iron alloy, are expected to precipitate at relative high temperatures. Due to 
their density MgS and CaS will float to the core-mantle boundary, whereas uranium sulphide 
(US) and nickel silicide will sink to the Earth’s centre. 

 At pressures that prevail in the core, U and Th, being high-temperature precipitates 

and the densest substances would tend to concentrate in the Earth core by the action of 
gravity. In that process it will ultimately form a fissionable, critical mass. Fission produces 
less (half) dense fission products that tend to separate from the more dense actinides. In this 
way a critical reactor condition can maintain. 

According to Herdon (1993) and Hollenbach and Herndon (2001) the frequent, but 

irregular variability in intensity and direction of the Earth’s magnetic field may be 
understandable from such a fission reactor. The production of fission products counteracts the 
operation of the reactor and if the rate of production exceeds the rate of removal by 
gravitational diffusion, the output of the reactor will decrease and may even shut down, 
leading to a diminishing and ultimately disappearing of the Earth’s magnetic field. As fission 
products diffuse out of the reactor region and actinides diffuse inwards, the reactor restarts 
and the geomagnetic field re-establishes itself, either in the same or in the reverse direction. 
The coupling between the georeactor and the geomagnetic field cannot be directly (Hoyng, 
2003) and has to proceed through changing heat-flow patterns in the core and ultimately in the 
mantle. 

 

2 

 

Although the georeactor hypothesis seems to be able to explain, in principle, phenomena such 
as elevated 3He/4He ratios and reversal of the geomagnetic field also some questions remain 
about the specific mechanisms involved. Regarding the working of the georeactor it is 
assumed that fission products are separated from the fuel by diffusion or by buoyancy effects. 
For both processes it still has to be shown if they are effective enough. First estimates for 
diffusion, based on an extrapolation (using Arrhenius law) to core temperatures of diffusion 
coefficients and activation energies for helium in apatite (Dunai, 2000) indicate that transport 
over a distance of 1 km in a solid metal inner core will take 1 Ma. This is probably at least an 
order of magnitude to slow to explain geomagnetic reversals every 200 000 years by fission 
products drifting outwards and so cleaning up the core for a reactor restart. To estimate 
transport velocities due to buoyancy detailed calculations are needed but these velocities are 
expected to be insignificant because of the micro-gravity conditions in the inner part of the 
core (Seifritz, 2003). 

Also it is difficult to imagine a sufficiently large outward flux of 3He (needed to 
explain elevated 3He/4He ratios) produced inside the georeactor because an intact solid inner 
core will form an almost impenetrable barrier for transport. Moreover also the heat produced 
by the georeactor has to be removed through the solid inner core and normal heat 
conductivities for solids are not large enough to prevent the reactor from heating up to very 
high temperatures. 

These estimates are based on extrapolating transport coefficients at ambient conditions 

to the high temperatures and pressures inside the core and assume a uniform metallic core 
being one solid piece. A more granular structure of the inner core with a structure of “pores” 
or fissures will allow a larger and faster transport of gaseous substances and heat. In such a 
case it is hard to imagine that the core will be uniform and likely preferential pathways may 
exist, which act as chimneys and may cause a non-uniform heating of the inner-outer core 
boundary.  
  
Antineutrino’s as a tool to probe the Earth’s interior 

Because of the work of Herndon it is no longer a question what the distribution is of U 

and Th in the core and the mantle but it is also required to find out whether their 
concentrations decline along their decay series or by fission. One of the few methods to 
investigate the distribution of natural radionuclides in various reservoirs of the Earth and/or 
the existence of a nuclear georeactor are antineutrino’s prRGXFHG(cid:3)LQ(cid:3)(cid:21)-decay and/or fission, 
respectively. Fortunately the decay and fission can be distinguished by the energy of the 
antineutrino’s; 2-3 MeV for decay and up to 10 MeV for fission. 

As also pointed out by Mantovani et al (2003), the distribution of Th and U in  both 
the oceanic and continental crust is relatively well known, some information is available on 
the concentrations of these radionuclides in the upper mantle, but their distribution in the 
deeper parts of the Earth are unknown. In general for the lower mantel it is assumed that the 
distribution is homogeneous and spherical symmetric. The fact that surface layers of the Earth 
have moved significantly throughout geological time is believed to be a surface expression of 
deeper motions within the Earth. If the heat sources would be homogeneously distributed 
there would be hardly a reason for these motions. As shown in Figure 2 the heat flow at the 
Earth surface ranges over an order of magnitude. 

 Already in 1983 Sheridan made a comparison between a number of features at the 

Earth surface such as spreading rate of the continents, sea-level stand and calcium-carbonate 
deposit rates (CCD) and the stability of the magnetic field (see Figure 3). He finds higher 
spreading rates, higher sea level stands and larger CCD rates at times that the magnetic field is 
quiet, and relates these phenomena to changes in the circulation patterns in the core and the 

 

3 

mantle and the occurrences of mantle plumes at the Earth’s surface. Changes in the circulation 
pattern in the mantle may influence the heat flow at the ocean floors and thereby have an 
influence on global climate. 

All these pieces of information require a better insight of the radiogenic heat sources 

in the deeper parts of the mantle and especially their inhomogeneities and their deviation from 
a spherical distribution. The strength of the antineutrino-flux signal at various sites on Earth 
will therefore be an indication of the distribution of these radionuclides in the compartments 
of the Earth. According to calculations by Raghavan et al. (1998) 40% of the signal will come 
from sources in the crust within about 450km, 70% from within 1200km and 90% from about 
6000km. The sensitivity of the measurements for antineutrino from parts of the mantle and a 
possible georeactor will therefore be influenced by the location of the detector relative to 
other (known) sources of antineutrinos such as those coming from the radionuclides in the 
crust or power reactors. Consequently the project requires directional sensitivity in 
antineutrino detection and a location that favours the detection of antineutrino sources in the 
mantle and in the core. 

The science and technology of detecting antineutrinos ,

, is well established. 

n

e

Recently the KamLAND collaboration has confirmed the oscillation phenomena in 
antineutrinos (Eguchi, 2003) as observed in solar neutrinos. Also the oscillation parameters 
based on solar neutrinos and fission reactor antineutrinos seem to be established (see 
Mantovani et al. 2003). Like in many experiments we propose to use the detection reaction 
EDVHG(cid:3)RQ(cid:3)LQYHUVH(cid:3)(cid:21)-decay: 
n + p :(cid:3)H+ + n. The visible energy of the positron signal directly 
n

)-0.78. The signal can be tagged by 
provides the 
the signal produced after several tens of microseconds by the thermalised neutron captured by 
hydrogen in the aromatic organic liquid scintillator. The delayed coincidences suppress 
background enormously and the chance coincidence rate in a kiloton scintillator mass detector 
such as installed at Kamioka, Japan, can be limited to several events/year (Rhagavan, 2002). 
n
7KLV(cid:3)FRUUHVSRQGV(cid:3)WR(cid:3)D(cid:3)VHQVLWLYLW\(cid:3)OLPLW(cid:3)RI(cid:3)DQ(cid:3)DQWLQHXWULQR(cid:3)IOX[(cid:3)-(cid:11)

e
energy (E(MeV)= E( e

)-1.8+1.022= E( e

n

n

e

,Q(cid:3)(cid:21)-decay of members of the decay series of U and Th antineutrino’s ,

produced. The antineutrinos from the geo-reactor will be identical in energy spectrum as those 
SURGXFHG(cid:3)LQ(cid:3)SRZHU(cid:3)UHDFWRUV(cid:17)(cid:3),Q(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)8(cid:3)VHULHV(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)(cid:21)-decay of 234mPa, 214Bi with Q-values of 2.29 
and 3.26MeV, respectively and 228Ac, 212Bi and 208Tl with Q= 2.11, 2.25 and 1.8 MeV, 
respectively, can contribute. Geo U/Th signals cut off at Ee+ of about 2.5MeV.  

For reactors, either power reactors or a geo-reactor, the antineutrino spectrum follows 

from their mean fuel composition, the numbers of antineutrinos per fission event and their 
spectrum ( see Achkar et al., 1996 and references therein). Also for these neutrinos the flux 
depends on the distance between power reactor and detector. The existing underground 
laboratories at Gran Sasso, Italy, and Kamioka, Japan, are both situated on the crust and, 
especially Kamioka, near power stations. 

A 3-(cid:20)(cid:19)7:(cid:3)JHRUHDFWRU(cid:3)ZRXOG(cid:3)\LHOG(cid:3)DW(cid:3)DQ\(cid:3)SRLQW(cid:3)QHDU(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)VXUIDFH(cid:3)D(cid:3)IOX[(cid:3)-(cid:11)

n

)geo~1-

e

3(cid:220)(cid:20)(cid:19)5 cm-2 s-1 and is an order of magnitude larger than the estimated detector background of 
~104 cm-2 s-1. So the detection of antineutrino’s from the core is a valid proposition provided 
the background, primarily from operating commercial power reactors within several 1000km, 
is sufficiently low.  A georeactor is spectrally nearly indistinguishable from power reactors, 
but the georeactor provides a strongly directional signal. Model calculations indicate that such 
measurements are feasible in an underground laboratory, provided the background due to the 
geological formation and antineutrinos produced in nuclear power reactors is sufficiently low. 
This condition hampers observation in the existing underground laboratories such as Borexino 
at Gran Sasso, Italy, and Kamland at Kamioka, Japan and favours locations such as Hawaii, 

e

)min~104 cm-2 s-1.  
, are 

n

e

 

4 

the Aleuts and the Antilles. Figure 4 shows the positron energy spectrum for Hawaii and 
Kamioka (taken from Raghavan, 2002). It shows that the background at Kamioka is too large 
for proper detection. This is recently confirmed by measurements with the Kamland detector 
yielding 9±6 geo-antineutrino’s from an exposure of 1.4(cid:220)(cid:20)(cid:19)31 protons year (Fiorentini et al., 
2003). 

In a low-background environment one would expect from a ten times larger fiducial 

volume a signal of some one hundred events per year in a detector following the basic design 
of the KamLAND or Borexino experiments. Directional information could be extracted from 
n + p :(cid:3)H+ + n, for which the recoil angle on average is 
the recoiling neutron in the reaction 
<F 
antineutrinos of geophysical interest the neutron travels of order few cm between the locations 
of positron creation and respectively neutron absorption.  

recoil>= arccos (2/(3A)) with A the mass number of the scattering material. For the 

e

Therefore development of large antineutrino detectors with sub-MeV threshold and 
directional sensitivity will allow us to map the radiogenic heat sources in the mantle and to 
settle the question if the Earth has a planetary-scale nuclear reactor at its centre. 

 
Proposed underground laboratory at Curaçao. 
 
We like to propose an underground laboratory to investigate the internal state of the 
Earth. We propose such a laboratory to be built on e.g. Curaçao. The geology of Curaçao, as 
studied by Klaver (1987) indicates that Curaçao is a mantle plume originating from the 
boundary of the core and the mantle, some 80 Ma ago. Sample analysis by Klaver (1987) 
indicate that indeed the Curaçao basalt is more than an order of magnitude lower in K,Th and 
U compared to sands in e.g. The Netherlands. Parts of the island of Curaçao, represent the 
magma after 5km of material has been eroded. 

The proposal foresees in a step by step approach, starting from re-examination of 

surface rock formations, drilling for deeper material and finally excavating an underground 
laboratory. Curaçao is more than 1000km away from the Florida power reactors and from the 
mountain ranges of the Andes (see Figure 5). It provides therefore not only a very low 
background of natural radionuclides, but since it is surrounded by a considerable mass of 
oceanwater, the antineutrino flux from crustal sources and power reactors will be strongly 
reduced. That means that the laboratory will be especially sensitive to antineutrino sources 
from the mantle and a possible geo-reactor. We expect that the calculation for Hawaii will be 
more or less indicative for Curaçao.  

In addition to the antineutrino detection, such a very low background laboratory can 

be a base for low-EDFNJURXQG(cid:3)H[SHULPHQWV(cid:3)VXFK(cid:3)DV(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)VHDUFK(cid:3)IRU(cid:3)GRXEOH(cid:3)(cid:21)-decay. The creation 
of such an underground laboratory will be quite unique and will also include some 
technological challenges. One of them is drilling into basalt; the other is the development of 
low-energy dissipating electronics. Despite Curaçao being a plume sticking out of the ocean 
floor and cooled by ocean water at a depth of about 1km, high temperatures are expected. In 
the underground laboratory we expect a high density of electronic devices in the detector 
setup. Since additional cooling is complicated, low-energy dissipating electronics will be 
required. Low-energy dissipating electronics is directly linked to the telecommunication 
technology and its industry. 

It should be noted that the geological formation of the island of Curaçao would allow 

calibration of an antineutrino detector with the aid of nuclear power driven vessels which 
could be positioned at various locations and at variable distances from the detector. 

As initial steps the re-examination of the surface rock formation and a deep drill are 

foreseen. This includes the location of the centre of the magma plume. Already in each of the 
stages valuable information is expected from the analysis of the cores, such as the content of 
K, Th and U and of 3He/4He and 10Be/9Be ratios as well as ratios of stable isotopes and other 

 

5 

radionuclides like 26Al. These results will already help to test the physics and geochemistry 
aspects of the various models. A prototype of a detector will be designed and built. Its 
directional sensitivity is anticipated to be tested in the vicinity of a power reactor. By this 
paper we invite interested people with expertise in one of the fields, who like to participate in 
this proposed project to contact us. 

  
Finally: we like to refer to this project as CURACAO (Curaçao Underground 

The authors like to acknowledge the stimulating discussions with J.M. Herndon, P. 

Research Arena for Core Antineutrino Observations). 
 
 
Hoyng, G. Th. Klaver and A.E.L. Dieperink. 
 
Literature: 
Achkar, B.et al., 1996, Phys. Lett. B374, 243-248. 
Anderson, O.L., 2002, Phys. Earth Planet. Int., 131, 1-17. 
Bercovici, D. and Karato, S.I., 2003, Nature, 425, 39-44. 
Birch, F, 1952, J. Geophys. Res., 66, 227-286. 
Buffett, B.A., 2003, Science, 299,1675-1677.  
Dunai, T.J., 2000, J. Conf. Abstracts, 52, 364.  
Eguchi, K. et al., 2003, Phys. Rev. Lett, 90, 021802-1 – 021802-6. 
Fiorentini, G.,. Mantovani, F., and Ricci, B., 2003, Phys. Lett B, 577, 139-146. 
Gutenberg, B., 1914, Göttinger Nachr. 166, 218. 
Georgen, J.E., Kurz, M.D., Dick, H.J.B., and Lin, J., 2003, Earth and Planetary Science 
Letters, 206, 509-528. 
Herndon, J.M., 1980, Proc. R. Soc. Lond., A372, 149-154.  
Herndon, J.M., 1992, Naturwissenschaften, 79, 7-14. 
Herndon, J.M., 1993, J. Geomag. Geoelectr., 45, 423-437. 
Herndon, J.M., 2003, Proc. Natl. .Acad. Sci USA., 100, 3047-3050. 
Hofmann, A.W., 2003, Nature, 425, 24-25. 
Hollenbach, D.F. and Herndon, J.M., 2001, Proc. Natl. .Acad. Sci USA., 98, 11085-11090. 
Hoyng, P., 2003, private communication. 
Klaver, G.Th., 1987, PhD thesis, University of Amsterdam,. 
Kurtz, M.D., and Geist, D., 1999, Geochim. Et Cosmochim. Acta, 63, 4139-4156. 
Lay, T., Williams, Q., Garnero, E., 1998, Nature, 392, 461-468. 
Lehman, I., 1936, Publ. Bur. Centr. Seism. Internat. Serie A 14, 3-31. 
Mantovani, F., Carmignani, L., Fiorentini, G., and M. Lissia, 2003, arXiv: hep-ph/0309013. 
Oldham, R.D., 1906, Q.J. Geol. Soc. London, 62, 456-475. 
Raghavan, R.S., 2002, Hep-ex/0208038. 
Raghavan, R.S., Schonert, Enomoto, S., Shirai, J., Suekane, F. and Suzuki, A., 1998, 
Phys.Rev. Lett, 80, 635-638 
Rama Murthy, V., van Westrenen W., and Fei, Y., 2003, Nature, 423, 163-165. 
Seifritz, W. 2003, Kerntechnik, 68, 193-196. 
Seta, A., Matsumoto, T., Matsuda, J., 2001, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 188, 211-
219. 
Sheridan, R.E.,1983, Tectonophysics, 94, 169-185. 
Stuart, F.M., Lass-Evans, S., Fitton J.G., and Ellam, R.M., 2003, Nature, 424, 57-59. 

 

6 

 
 
Figure Captions 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the principal partitions and physical states of the Earth’s 
interior. The compressional and shear velocities of earthquake waves, presented in the right 
panel, are indicated by Vp and Vs, respectively. In the right panel the density as function of 
depth is presented. (Figure taken from Herndon, 1980). 
 
Figure 2.Map of the heat flow at the Earth’s surface. Based on the data of Pollack et al., 1993, 
and taken from http:// http://www.geo.lsa.umich.edu/IHFC/heatflow.html. 
 
Figure 3. Correlation over time between magnetic activity, ocean spreading rates, sea-level 
stands an calcium-carbonate depositon (CCD). This figure is taken from Sheridan, 1983. 
 
Figure 4. Calculated positron energy spectrum for two locations: Hawaii and Kamioka. The 
two locations differ quite strongly in the flux from U/Th antineutrinos and from the 
antineutrinos produced in nuclear power stations. The situation of Hawaii will be quite similar 
to the one expected at Curaçao. (Figure taken from Raghavan, 2002.) 
 
Figure 5. World map with nuclear power stations. The stations at Cuba and Puerto Rico, are 
not operational. (Figure taken from the International Nuclear Safety Center at Argonne 
National Laboratory http://www.insc.anl.gov). 
 

 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.1 
 

 
Fig. 2 

 

 

8 

 
 

 

Fig.3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.4 

 

 

9 

Curacao 
Curacao 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. 
 

 

10 

