Electronic film with embedded micro-mirrors  
for solar energy concentrator systems 

Mario Rabinowitz*a and Mark Davidsonb  

April 16, 2004 

 

aArmor Research, Redwood City, CA 94062-3922  USA     Mario715@earthlink.net 
bSpectel Research Corp., Palo Alto, CA 94303  USA           mdavid@spectelresearch.com 

Abstract 
 

A novel electronic film solar energy concentrator with embedded micro-mirrors that 

track the sun is described.  The potential viability of this new concept is presented.  Due to 

miniaturization, the amount of material needed for the optical system is minimal.  Because it 

is light-weight and flexible, it can easily be attached to the land or existing structures.  This 

presents an economic advantage over conventional concentrators which require the 

construction of a separate structure to support them, and motors to orient them to intercept 

and properly reflect sunlight.  Such separate structures must be able to survive gusts, 

windstorms, earthquakes, etc.  This concentrator utilizes the ground or existing edifices 

which are already capable of withstanding such vicissitudes of nature.  

1.  Introduction 
Solar energy has proven to be as elusive as it is alluring because the power we receive from the 

sun isn’t concentrated, being only about 1.4 kW/m2 at its highest above the atmosphere.  On 

earth it is 1 kW/m2 , at best, on a sunny day.  Despite problems of pollution and relentless 

resource attrition, fossil fuel furnaces provide high power density giving them an attractive 

appeal if one isn't concerned about long term consequences.  In contrast, the promise of 

pollution-free renewable solar energy can be achieved by utilizing modern micro-fabrication and 

 

1

micro-electronics to focus sunlight from a large area onto a small area by means of a relatively 

inexpensive, thin, flexible, electronic film attached to the ground or existing structure.     

 

At this time all forms of Solar Energy represent only a small percentage  of the power 

generated in the U.S.  Presently it costs 2 to 5 times more to generate electricity using solar than 

from fossil fuels with current production costs of electricity, of about 2 to 4 ¢/kWh (van der 

Zwaan and Rabl).  Consumer costs are much higher.  Conventional concentrator-PV systems 

may at best cost about 6 to 10 ¢/kWh (Swanson, 2000).  The electronic film concentrator can 

have much lower costs. 

2.  Concentrating sunlight 
Since the solar energy flux is low, concentrating it seems like a natural thing to do.  A large 

number of concentrator technologies have already been proposed (Swanson, 2000).  The analysis 

of solar power systems are complicated by a large number of variables (Duffie and Beckman, 

1974;  Rabl, 1985).  The problem with conventional concentrator systems is that they are not 

much better than unconcentrated systems for the following reasons:   

1.  Structural requirements for worst-case weather conditions. 
2.  Cost of high quality optical surfaces. 
3.  Cost of machinery (motors and gears) for orienting the collectors. 
4.  Cost of computers for tracking and selectively orienting collectors. 
5.  Cost of installation, maintenance, and cleaning. 
 
3.  Electronic film solar tracking solution  
We propose a solar concentrator that has very low mass because it is so thin, and yet has the 

toughness and durability of mylar sheet.  Thus it can easily be attached to existing structures 

such as buildings or the ground.  It utilizes the type of technology that has been developed for 

electronic paper such as the gyricon concept (Sheridon and Berkovitz, 1977) and (Sheridon et al, 

1999).  This new kind of electronic film has small rotatable mirrors embedded in it which can be 

rotated and controlled by electronic means (Davidson and Rabinowitz, 2003).  Solar 

 

2

concentrators must withstand harsh winds, gusts, windstorms, earthquakes, etc. Meeting these 

requirements adds significantly to the cost of traditional concentrators, but not ours.  In the 

concept proposed here, the structural strength is already built into an existing edifice, and so the 

cost of the concentrator is greatly reduced.  It can be used to concentrate sunlight incident on the 

film at any angle onto a small area where a solar photovoltaic surface or other energy conversion 

device can utilize the increased flux of solar light in order to produce electricity or heat.   

 

There are many variations of this basic idea.  In one variation the individual mini-

reflectors consist of spheres, one hemisphere of which is transparent, with a mirror in the 

equatorial plane (cf. Fig. 1).  This sphere would be small, ~ 200 microns (0.2 mm) in diameter, 

and would be suspended in a lubricating liquid that would allow it to rotate freely.   The liquid 

would be index of refraction matched to the clear hemisphere, and it should have the same 

density as the sphere to minimize buoyant forces.   The spheres should be roughly balanced to 

minimize  gross gravitational orientation .  The spheres can be manufactured so as to have either 

an electric dipole moment (electret), a magnetic dipole moment (magnet), or both, and these 

electromagnetic dipole moments can be used to control the orientation in tracking the sun.    

 

In the technology developed by Xerox in the 1970's referred to as Gyricon (Sheridon and 

Berkovitz, 1977) and (Sheridon et al, 1999) , the electric dipole moment of a spherical ball made 

from two dielectrically different hemispheres originates from the shear-interaction of the sphere 

with the fluid that it is immersed in. Shear results as motion is induced by electrostatic grid 

interaction with an embedded electret shown in the left side of Fig. 1.  The spheres have a 

surface charge, with equal and opposite charge in the adjacent liquid, called the electrical double 

layer.  The "zeta potential," is the net surface and volume charge that lies within the shear 

slipping surface resulting from the motion of the ball through the liquid (Sheridon and Berkovitz, 

 

3

1977) and (Hunter, 1981).  The zeta potential is an electrical potential that exists across the 

interface of all solids and liquids.  It is also known as the electrokinetic potential.   Figure 1 

shows how the zeta potential can lead to a net electric dipole moment.  Charges are shown only 

for the transparent material, although similar charge layers (approximately of equal and opposite 

sign) are formed on the gray back hemisphere’s surface as well.    

Electrets with volume electric dipoles are commercially available and are commonly used 

in sensitive microphones.  The old problem of maintaining charge separation seems to be well in 

hand.  Electrets are now almost as stable as magnets (Sessler, 1998).  The strength of the dipole 

moment does not need to be the same for each ball as it relates to the angular acceleration of a 

ball rather than its orientation. 

Figure 1. Gyricon Twisting-Ball Model Showing a Simple Embedded Dipole  

 
Spheres such as that in Fig. 1 would fill a monolayer (Fig. 2) or more. The electric dipole 

and an Induced Zeta Potential Dipole. 

 

moment of each sphere can be oriented by electric fields in the gyricon technology (Sheridon and  

 

 

4

Figure 2.  Embedded Rotatable Mirrors in a Concentrator 

Showing Incident Light Reflected to a Converter. 

 

 

Berkovitz, 1977) and  (Sheridon et al, 1999). Resistive networks (Fig. 3) with controlled voltage 

nodes can be used to create an electric field that is variable in direction and magnitude. 

 

5

 

Figure 3.  Resistive Grid to Control the Electric Field for Concentrator Ball Alignment. 
 

The mirror array could be sandwiched between two such resistive planes or one grid and 

a ground plane as in Fig. 4.  The plane sheets are an elastomer, mylar, silicone, or other plastic 

material upon which a conducting, but highly resistive material like Indium/Tin Oxide (ITO) can 

be sputtered to form the ground plane and/or the grid.  Silicone elastomer is preferred for 

longevity in an ultraviolet environment.  For the same reason, making the balls out of glass 

would be preferable.  The substantial optical transparency of ITO makes it ideally suited for 

addressing the balls.   

 

The orientation of the spheres is controlled by voltages vij at the nodes of the grid using a 

small computer with analog voltage outputs. The number of mirrored spheres per grid cell would 

be a design variable.  When there are many spheres per grid cell, the field may not be uniformly 

strong in the alignment direction over all the spheres. However by symmetry, this is not a 

problem as long as the main components of the field are in the alignment direction, and the other 

 

6

components cancel.  The field strength only relates to how fast each sphere lines up.  The cost of 

electronic control is rapidly decreasing.  Over time and in sufficient quantities it should become a 

negligible fraction of the total system cost. 

Figure 4.  Cross-sectional View of Resistive Grid Electric Field  
Orientation of Mirrored Balls. 

 
The  voltage  nodes  would be fed to the resistive  ITO grid by a  backplane which 

 

would  be  a  piece  of  plastic  with  electronic  traces  and  possibly  circuitry  on  it.      The 

problem  of  feeding  the  various  voltages  on  the  grid  is  similar  to  the  types  of  problems 

routinely faced in flat panel and PC board design.    It is expected that optimal routing 

and switching techniques will be developed by electronic designers for this phase.  The 

speeds that are required for tracking the slow motion of the sun are very modest, and so 

quite inexpensive forms of interconnect circuitry can be envisioned for this task.   

 

Figure 5.  Perspective View of Mirrored Balls. 

 
Figure  6  shows  some  other  possible  ways  to  implement  electrically  steerable  micro-
mirrors in rugged electronic film. 

 

 

7

 

Figure 6.  Electrophoretic, Magnetophoretic, and Magnetic Moment Mirrors in Balls. 

 

4.  Modest concentrations and alignment accuracy 
For residential applications it would be desirable to limit the concentration level to a very safe 

 

value, ~10x.  For industrial applications, this new technology can provide sufficient initial 

economic incentive even as low as 10x to 20x.  Concentration ratios of factors of 100x to 1000x 

should be achievable as the technology matures. Of course at even modest concentration, a PV 

module requires cooling, or its performance would degrade. A demonstration that such cooling is 

feasible has been done at a number of facilities.  For example, the Polytechnical University of 

Madrid has successfully operated a concentrator and PV module combination  that has an 

enhancement of over 1000x (Swanson, 2000). Unlike the novel electronic micro-mirror 

concentrator, the drawback of these high enhancement concentrators is that they are bulky and 

require large motors and gears for tracking the sun.   

Aiming the mirrors so that the reflected sunlight strikes the PV receiver is not a 

difficult requirement to meet at 10x.  For an easy to visualize example, consider a 

truncated pyramid, with a 3.2 m x 3.2 m receiver, facing downward, 5 m above the center 

of an 11m x 11m concentrator.  The aiming requirement varies from about +/- 4 degrees 

for the furthest mirrors at the four corners of the concentrator to about +/- 8 degrees for 

the mirrors nearest the receiver.  Since these  angles are well within the subtended angles 

between each mirror and the receiver, this 21% increase in concentrator area (compared 

 

8

to 10m x 10m) to achieve an average 10x concentration, should more than compensate 

for receiver shadowing, which decreases as the concentration increases.  Higher 

concentrations have tighter tolerance requirements on mirror flatness and index of 

refraction matching to achieve the necessary degree of alignment.  Random aiming errors 

can be tolerated at low concentration.   If aiming errors are systematic rather than 

random, both for low and high concentrations, a feedback circuit detecting an imbalance 

of an initially balanced  matrix of detectors such as thermistors on the concentrator can 

signal the microprocessor to compensate for the systematic error.  Flux uniformity must 

be considered in the design of a photovoltaic system since a non-uniform flux can be 

detrimental to such a system.  The large number of mirrors in our concentrator suggests 

that flux uniformity may not be a big problem.  As an adjunct to a feedback circuit to 

enhance uniformity,  random errors could be intentionally fed to the mirrors to diffuse 

any systematic aiming bias.  Because the target area is small, it may also be cost effective 

to add an optical diffuser in front of the photovoltaic target.  These come in many forms, 

and implementation would depend on the particular type of non-uniformity that is 

encountered.  
 

Based upon black and white Gyricon display technology, alignment to within a few 

degrees is presently possible.  Since the operation of our concentrator is so similar to that of 

commercially available Gyricon displays, we feel that a minimal experimental proof of the 

viability of our concept already exists -- at least for low concentrations.  Color Gyricons, as well 

as > 10x concentrators need higher alignment accuracy.  Gyricons turn off the electrical system 

once the balls are aligned.  This may also be done after the concentrator mirrors are aligned, and 

they could be held in place by atmospheric pressure on the surrounding dielectric sheets, or other 

means.  When rotation for new alignment is required, a plenum can force a small amount of the 

lubricating liquid in to slightly enlarge the space around each ball (Davidson and Rabinowitz, 

 

9

2003).  To augment programmed alignment of the mirrors, a feedback circuit can correct for both 

cloudy weather and any shifts in the overall concentrator orientation using the same matrix of 

detectors used to detect systematic mirror misalignment.  In this mode, the detectors being 

sensitive to a decrease in solar flux can direct the microprocessor to search for a new orientation 

which maximizes the available signal. 

5.  Blocking and other losses 
 

 We now consider the effects of blocking (shadowing) of one mirror on another.  For one 

layer of balls, this involves a trade-off between the packing fraction and blocking.  Lowering the 

packing fraction decreases blocking since the mirrors are further away from each other.  An 

optimization between these competing factors is needed to give the greatest concentration 

enhancement.  Alternatively, more than one layer can provide near unity packing fraction, and 

make blocking negligible.  

 

Aluminum is a good choice for the reflecting material because it is inexpensive and 

highly reflective.  Other lower melting and boiling point materials that are highly reflective may 

be used, but are also more expensive.  Only about 1000 Angstroms of Aluminum is required to 

get a high efficiency of reflection as is shown in Fig. 7.  Figure 7 shows the unpolarized 

reflection from 1000 Angstroms of Al that is sandwiched between two dielectrics (e.g. a mirror 

sandwiched between two hemispheres), each of index of refraction 1.3. The percentage signal 

reflected is plotted on the vertical axis as a function of  the wavelength (horizontal axis in 

nanometers) of the incident light.  Since this is also a function of the incident angle, the angular 

functionality is plotted in perspective showing data points for angles from 0 degrees to 90 

degrees, in the third axis.  The purpose of this figure is not to give precise values for 

computation, rather it is to give an overview of the data.  As a generalization from this figure, for 

 

10

most of the useful wavelengths the reflectivity is over 88%.  We shall assume that transmission 

through the transparent materials is approximately 100%. 

 

Figure 7. Unpolarized Reflection Dielectric over Aluminum (1000 Å).  The third axis is 
the incident angle  showing data points from 0 to 90 degrees, with 0 degrees in front  and 
90 degrees in back.  (Elsevier Press has placed a color version of Fig. 7 on line.) 

 

Figure 8 gives the reflection coefficients for index of refractions 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, and 1.5 as a 

function of angle are shown. The transmission can be calculated by subtracting these from 1.0 

since there is negligible absorption at the interface.  Our calculations of the transmission 

coefficient include transmission to the mirrors on entering the optical materials, and transmission 

coefficient on leaving the optical materials a second time,  taking into account reflectivity.  The 

thinness of the concentrator minimizes absorption at all wavelengths. 

 

11

Reflectivity for n={1.2,1.3,1.4,1.5} as a function of the angle of 
incidence

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

 

%
n
o
i
t
c
e
l
f
e
r

0

0

 

 

n=1.5

n=1.4

n=1.2

n=1.3

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

angle of incidence (degrees)

Figure 8.  Fresnel Reflectivities of the Film for Index of Refraction n=1.2, 1.3, 1.4, and 1.5  

for Unpolarized Light. 

 

The blocking-packing density calculation we present is a worst case approximation. It 

depends on the assumption that the worst case blocking will occur when the incident ray is 

normal to the film and the exit ray is a grazing angle i.e. almost parallel to the plane of the film.  

 

12

Blocking and shadowing losses depend on time, and may be expected to decrease as the sun 

moves, i.e. changes the angles.  The geometry for the calculation is shown in Figure 9. 

Figure 9.  Efficiency Reduction due to Blocking of Light by One Mirror on Another  

(estimated for normal incidence and grazing angle exit ray). 

 

The worst case combined blocking and packing density fraction occurs when: 

 

1.  The incident solar light is normal to the film.  Deviation from the normal decreases the 

2.  The detector (receiver) is nearly in the plane of the mirror containing sheet. 

We find that the packing density and blocking reduce the efficiency by a factor approximately 

given by f = 1 – sin(θ)tan(θ /2), where θ < π/2  since sin(θ) = 1/n, where n is the index of 

Index of refraction 

Efficiency Factor f 

 
 
 

1.3 
1.4 
1.5 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

0.639 
0.700 
0.745 

blocking. 

refraction. 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

13

If the detector (receiver) is moved towards the normal to the mirror array, the efficiency 

factor, f, approaches 1.   

In addition to the factor in Fig. 9, we include a multiplicative packing density factor of 

0.91 for hexagonal packing of circles in a plane.  We are now in a position to roughly estimate 

the overall efficiency of the concentrator. We estimate the transmission coefficients on entering 

and leaving the films for an overall average angle of incidence and exit of about 45 degrees.   

Table 1 for the three values of n is calculated as follows.  The concentrator optical 

efficiency including blocking effects is the product of the following factors: 

A. Transmission coefficient on entering the film taking into account  
     Reflectivity.   
B. Transmission through the optical materials to the mirror. 
C. Reflection off of the mirror. 
D. Transmission through the optical materials a second time. 
E.  Transmission on leaving the film. 
F.  Reduction factor f due to combination of blocking and packing. 
G. Packing fraction when the mirrors are parallel to the film; 0.79 for   
     square packing,0.91 for hexagonal packing, and 1 for > one layer.  

 
   Factors A and E:  As can be seen from Fig. 8, there is only about a 3% reflection, so 

Factor A the transmission coefficient for light incident on the concentrator in going 

through the film is 1- .03 = 0.97.  Similarly Factor E is 1- .03 = 0.97, since only about 3% 

of the light going back to the receiver is internally reflected in the concentrator.   

   Factors B and D:  We take the incoming and outgoing transmission coefficients to be 

approximately 1 since the thinness of the concentrator minimizes absorption at all 

  Factor C:  As can be seen from Fig. 7, for  most of the useful wavelengths the 

reflectivity is over 88%, so Factor C is taken to be 0.9 within the accuracy of this 

wavelengths. 

calculation.   

  Factor F(f range): This reduction factor, due to a combination of blocking and packing 

varies as a function of angle and is given in the table in Fig. 9.  For index of refraction n 

 
 
 
 
 

 

14

= 1.3, f varies from 0.639 to 1.  For n = 1.4, f varies from 0.700 to 1.  For n = 1.5, f varies 

from 0.745 to 1.   

  Factor G:  This is the packing fraction for one layer.  We use 0.91 for hexagonal 

packing.  For a square array, the results can be multiplied by the factor (.79/.91).  If more 

than one layer of balls is employed, Factor G can approach 1.    

n of film 

 

1.3 
1.4 
1.5 

Calculation 
(A)(B =1)(C)(D =1)(E)(F f range)(G) 
(.97)(1)(.9)(1)(.97)(.639 to 1)(.91) 
(.96)(1)(.9)(1)(.96)(.700 to 1)(.91) 
(.95)(1)(.9)(1)(.95)(.745 to 1)(.91) 

Efficiency: min to max 

 
0.49 to 0.77 
0.53 to 0.75 
0.55 to 0.74 

Table 1 (This is a worst case estimate.) 

 

These worst case estimates of efficiencies ranging from 49% to 77% are conservative at 

the lower end.  One may optimistically expect 60%, but even a lower value is not that 

detrimental since the cost of the concentrator is the key.  If it is low enough then even 49% is 

quite acceptable. Moreover, as a more efficient electric conversion receiver can be used 

economically at the focal point in a concentrator system, low concentrator efficiency can be 

compensated for by the higher efficiency of the receiver.   

One factor that is not included but will be important is dirt on the optical surfaces which 

will ultimately depend on maintenance quality.  The concentrator makes receiver maintenance 

easier, since the receiver is smaller and can face downward toward the concentrator.  Where 

grime builds up rapidly, one may put a very thin plastic sheet over the concentrator, which is 

simply removed when it gets too dirty.  This is much easier to do on our planar concentrator, 

than non-planar (e.g. parabolic) concentrators.      

6.  Economic viability 
In earlier sections we have described the electronic film concentrator.  Next we shall discuss its 

potential economic viability.  We think it can make solar energy competitive even without  credit 

for reduction in environmental pollution and health damage costs of conventional power 

producers.  Because of our personal limited resources and the need for micro-miniaturization, 

 

15

making a concentrator is a slow and difficult process.  It may take between 2 and 5 years to 

complete meaningful tests that will help to pin down efficiencies and costs.  We will be glad to 

report our results when they are available.  We emphasize that, at this time, our estimates are 

preliminary and have large error bars.  We have made a conscientious effort to make 

conservative estimates to the best of our knowledge. 

6.1   Area needed to produce 1 Megawatt peak power 
The sunlight incident on the earth's atmosphere scatters in all directions.  Back-scattering 

decreases the incident peak power density from 1.4 kW/m2 above the atmosphere to about 1 

kW/m2 at best on the earth's surface.  Though  available for direct PV or thermal conversion this 

1 kW/m2 is further diluted by the efficiency of the system.  Even 1 kW/m2 is not always 

available for direct conversion, depending on time and weather.  The diffuse component of the        

1 kW/m2 is not available for specular reflection from the concentrator to the receiver.  So 

depending on atmospheric conditions, air density fluctuations and composition, only a peak 

power density of about 850 W/m2 may be effective in a concentrator system.   We use 1 kW/m2 

as a convenient approximate value that can easily be scaled.   

 

Similarly, 1 MW is a convenient design parameter that can easily be scaled up for 

industrial applications, or down for residential applications.  The area needed to meet a peak 

power demand of 1 Megawatt is   

Area min 1MW =
  

106W
F10 3W / m 2 =

103m 2
F

=

103 m 2
0.1

= 10 4m 2.  

 

 

(1) 

where F is the conversion efficiency.  We have chosen F = 0.1, since a 10% conversion 

efficiency of sunlight to electricity is easily achieved.  

6.2  Material costs 
An overall film thickness of 1mm (10-3 m) is expected for mirrored ball diameters of  

 

16

200 micron (0.2 mm).  Thus from Eq. (1), for a conservative efficiency of F = 0.1, the total 

volume of concentrators to produce 1 MW is  

Volume Conc 1MW = 10−3m (10 3m 2 / F) =
  

1m 3
F

=

1m 3
0.1

= 10 m 3.  

A typical price for plastic resin in the last few years has been about $1.00/kg. The densities 

of most plastics are between 1 and 1.5 g/cm3 (1 to 1.5 kg/m3 ). Conservatively using the higher 

value, the total mass of plastic is: 

Mass Conc 1MW = 10m 3(1.5x103kg / m 3) = 1.5x10 4kg .
  

.  

Hence the total concentrator materials cost would roughly be 

Cost Conc 1MW = 1.5x104 kg($1/ kg ) = $1.5x104.
  

  

 

 

 

This would be about $15 per kW.  With our conservative approximation of   

0.1 kW/m2  for the peak power, this implies a per unit area cost of  

  Cost / area = $15 / kW(0.1kW / m 2) = $1.5/ m 2 ≈ $0.14 / ft2.

   

(5) 

Fourteen cents per square foot is an upper limit, but is only the materials cost.  The balls 

represent a substantial fraction of the volume of the concentrator, and are preferably made of 

glass for longevity considerations in an ultraviolet light environment.  Glass is much cheaper 

than plastic.  However, because glass has a higher melting point and higher reactivity in the 

molten state, manufacturing glass balls with an internal mirror is a formidable challenge.  It is 

expected to be much more difficult than plastic until we have mastered the process.  This is why 

our plans include initial manufacture of plastic balls as part of the learning process.  Since the 

main charge is induced by the physics of the environ with the balls in place, there does not 

appear to be a problem with getting the charge in precise alignment with each micro-mirror. 

 (2) 

(3)  

(4) 

 

 

 

 

17

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Caveats are in order. First, we are only considering peak power requirements. There is 

also the average power requirement which includes nighttime demand.  Depending on location, 

the average annual power density of solar radiation on a 24 hour/day basis is typically in the 

range of 100–300 W/m2.  A number of alternatives are possible such as the production of 

hydrogen for fuel cells in addition to electricity; electrical and non-electrical energy storage; or 

augmental non-solar power must be used to meet the 24 hour/day, 365 day/year demand.  Next 

let us consider additional costs.  

6.3  Fabrication costs of concentrator film 
It’s extremely difficult to estimate the fabrication cost of the finished concentrator, but it may be 

expected to be within an order of magnitude of the material costs, as appears to be the case for 

Gyricons. A value of between 5 and 10 times material costs, or about $75/kW to $150/kW for 

fabrication seems reasonable with sufficient volume production.  We think this is warranted for 

mass production as in the integrated circuit industry. 

6.4  Electronics costs 
It is reasonable that the cost of the microprocessor plus memory could be $10 per kW of 

produced solar power with a microprocessor per 10 m2 concentrator module.  The associated 

analog voltage control of the grid is more complicated. It might be advantageous to embed some 

active logic circuitry on the network grid. By keeping currents very low in the resistive tracking 

grid, the ohmic losses can be minimized. 

6.5  Photovoltaic conversion cost 
 
An excellent source for considering present PV state-of-the-art technology, and the potential for 

cost reductions in the next few decades is van der Zwaan and Rabl (2003).  They analyze PV 

production cost ranges for both installation and generation, for single crystal, multi-crystalline, 

 

18

amorphous silicon and other thin film technologies.  Table 2 shows some typical cost 

breakdowns of current photovoltaic (PV) systems  (Dunlop et al, 2001). 

Year 2000 Status 
PV Module Costs 
Inverter Costs 
Balance of System Costs 
Labor Costs 
Total System Cost 
Operating and Maintenance Costs 

$4,000 to $8,000 per kW 
$750  to $1,300 per kW 
$200 to $4,000 per kW 
$250 to $4,000 per kW 
$6,500 to $17,000 per kWa 
$.01 to $.20 per kWhr 

a  The low and high values do not all occur together in the same sample case and so the total 
system  cost  lies  between  the  two  extremes  obtained  by  summing  the  upper  and  lower 
values. 

 
In 1999, the U.S. PV industry developed a 20-year roadmap which set challenging goals for 

Table 2 

increasing the volume of production and reducing costs to end-users (Dunlop et al, 2001).  The 

roadmap calls for the following costs to be met. 

Year 2020 targets 
PV Module Costs 
Inverter Costs 
Balance of System Costs 
Labor Costs 
Total System Cost 
Operating and Maintenance Costs 

$1,000 per kW 
$200  per kW 
$200 per kW 
$200 per  kW 
$1,500 per kWa 
$.01 per kWhr 

a The total system cost is slightly less than the sum of the targets.  As these are goals, and 
some  of  these  costs  may  actually  be  lower  than  the  target,  this  reflects  some  slight 
optimism due to this effect. 

 
Some of these goals are already close to being met.  For example, some manufacturers are now 

Table 3 

selling solar PV modules for only $2500/kW compared to $6000/kW in the recent past.  Recent 

cost data for concentrator-PV module systems are currently unknown, but may hopefully follow 

similar cost reductions.   

The advent of low cost concentrator technology can significantly impact these numbers 

especially in the near future.  We see from Table 2 that PV module costs are presently between 

 

 

19

about 50% and 80% of the total.  We see from Table 3 that the PV module costs in 2020 are 

expected to be 2/3 of the total cost.  As calculated above, our estimated cost is  

10x Concentrator Cost = Materials + Fabrication + Electronics + Voltage Control 

 

 

= ($15 + [$75 to $150] + $10 + $10)/kW = $110 to $185/kW.     (6) 

The number of photovoltaic modules i.e. the PV area is accordingly roughly reduced in 

inverse proportionality to the area of the concentrator.   Conservatively  assuming that the cost of 

the photovoltaic modules used in conjunction with a electronic film 10x concentrator  is about 

1/5 (rather than 1/10) of the cost of ten times as many unconcentrated PV modules, or about 

$200/kW by the year 2020 (cf. Table 3), we see that a target cost for the PV system plus 

concentrator of $310 to $385 /kW is not unreasonable in the near future.  One may expect the 

concentrator system to accelerate the decrease in PV module costs as it increases the market.  In 

addition, the Labor costs and Balance-of-System costs will be lower since installing a rugged 

flexible plastic film is easier than to install fragile crystalline silicon photovoltaic panels.  

Assuming only a modestly conservative decrease in Balance-of-System and Labor costs: 

Total System Cost = PV Module + 10x Concentrator + Balance of System + Labor 

 

 = ($200 + [$110 to $185] + $150 + $150)/kW = $610 to $685/kW.      

 

(7) 

So a total installed cost of under $700 /kW is not out of the question with this system at 10x.  For 

industrial use, the concentrator can simply be attached to the ground or on building roofs in small 

sections with a small PV module elevated over the centroid of each section.  For a 10x 

concentrator, about 1/10 as many PV modules will be required, and for a 100x concentrator, 

about 1/100 as many PV modules will be required.    

 

A 100x concentrator has the biggest impact in reducing costs at today's high PV prices of 

$2000 - $4000/kW for PV crystalline silicon modules, and $1000 - $3000/kW for PV thin film 

 

 

 

 

20

modules (van der Zwaan and Rabl, 2003).   It would  always be expected to bring more savings 

than a 10x concentrator, but for 100x the PV modules will require cooling.  At concentrations > 

100x, other energy conversion systems may be favored over PV. 

 

For electric power generation, there are three primary types of generation 

requirement: baseload, intermediate load, and peak load.  Baseload is typically the most 

capital intensive but has the lowest fuel cost, and peak power is the least capital intensive 

but has the highest fuel cost.  Peak load in most countries occurs in the summer during 

the afternoon.  Reliability must figure into the applicability of a given technology for 

each of the three types of generation.  It is typical for a utility to target a loss of load 

probability (LOLP) of about 1 day in 10 years for a whole power grid system.  Any 

generation equipment that will degrade this reliability figure must be backed up by other 

equipment.  Solar generation is dependent on availability of sunlight, and concentrator 

solar systems are much more sensitive to clouds than unconcentrated ones.  The easiest 

way to mitigate the effect of LOLP is to have some energy storage capability, and this is 

absolutely essential for baseload applications where power is required 24 hours a day.  

This adds to the cost of the solar generation system, and has traditionally been a 

significant obstacle for solar electric power.  However, furious research and rapid 

improvement in reversible fuel cell technology is occurring now due to the anticipated 

demand in the automotive industry.  Therefore, we can anticipate the availability of much 

lower cost storage technologies in the next 5 years that will also help solar 

competetiveness.  Other types of storage that have been considered are: heat stored in 

eutectic salt reservoirs, chemical batteries, electrolytic production of hydrogen, 

flywheels, supeconducting electromagnetic field storage, pumping water uphill, hydrogen 

production, compressed air storage, etc.  The overall energy yield of a given 

configuration will depend in a complicated way on latitude, atmospheric dust, 

concentrator orientation and design, diurnal variation, etc.  But perhaps the most critical 

 

21

factor is simply the percent of days which have significant cloud cover.  These will be 

very low efficiency days for solar concentrator systems, making such locations unsuitable 

for such systems.  Optimizing a given concentrator configuration for a given location will 

depend on whether it is intended as peak power, baseload power, or intermediate load.  

For peak load the system must be optimized to provide the most energy in the summer 

months in the afternoons, but for baseload systems it must be optimized for average 

annual energy production.  As a crude approximation, we might consider that the total 

radiant energy falling onto a planar array of mirrors is proporional to the cosine of the ray 

to the normal of the plane.  The average value of the cosine from 0 to 90 degrees is 64%.  

This would be a very crude estimate of the ratio one would expect between the 

conversion efficiency for baseload verses peak power applications. 

 

Our cost estimates are preliminary, and it is premature to estimate an error bar for 

them.  However, it is clear that this technology has the potential to significantly lower both 

the peak power and average power costs of solar photovoltaic generating systems.  Our 

analysis was done for peak power.  For average power, the costs for both PV systems with 

and without concentrators would be a factor of  3 to 10 times higher than the peak power 

costs since the average annual power density of solar radiation on a 24 hour/day basis is 

typically in the range of 100 - 300 W/m2.    However the germane issue of providing 

average annual power at lowest unit cost is a site specific problem that would be difficult 

even for the far simpler case of peak power costs.  Maximizing peak power is not sufficient 

for maximizing average annual power as time, geographic locale, and weather involving 

diurnal insolation, cosine effects, shading and blocking as a function of the sun's incidence 

angles, etc. need to be properly accounted for.  At a given design point, the average power 

production during an average clear day may be expected to vary from a low of 20% to a 

high of 60% of the peak power depending on location, requiring up to 5 times more 

concentrator area for comparable power production.  Thus on a superficial level,  it would 

appear that because of it's inherently lower power density solar needs much more area than 

 

22

conventional sources even when solar power can compete economically with them.  

Actually the playing field becomes much more level when all the multitude of non-

apparent areas needed for fossil fuel sources are taken into consideration, such as mines, 

wells, fuel processing plants, cooling sources including rivers and the atmosphere over 

considerable areas and volumes, fuel storage and distribution facilities, security 

deployment, etc. 
 

7.  Other system concepts and advantages 
Solar residential and/or community-based solar energy conversion is a form of distributed power 

that decreases vulnerability to terrorism compared to present central large power generating 

plants.  In general solar energy enhances the security of the energy supply since it is a natural 

resource not confined to national borders. 

Besides residential photovoltaic electricity production, the existence of a low-cost 

electronic film solar concentrator has a number of other applications. 

1. Perhaps the most important is solar farms that can supply low cost electricity 

and/or hydrogen for fuel cells. 

2. The high temperatures which are achievable from high concentration systems could be used in 

the chemical industry for heat-energy intensive processes when high aiming accuracy is 

achieved. 

3. Solar energy could be used to augment fossil fuels in combined-cycle electricity generation 

plants when high aiming accuracy is achieved. 

4. Artistically versatile and flexible solar lighting effects could be implemented using the  

focusing electronic film. 

8.  Conclusions 
New technologies must accomplish at least three goals in order to have an impact on society.  

They must fill an important need, and must further be economically and technically viable.  The 

micro-optics solar energy concentrator can achieve these three goals.  It is less expensive than 

 

23

conventional solar concentrators for two reasons.  First due to miniaturization, the amount of 

material needed for the optical system is much less.  Second, because the micro-optics solar 

concentrator is light-weight and flexible, it can easily be attached to existing structures.  This is a 

great economic advantage over all existing solar concentrators which require the construction of 

a separate structure to support them and heavy machinery to orient them to intercept and 

properly reflect sunlight onto a receiver.   

 

Presently the costs of solar photovoltaic power and solar thermal power are too high to 

consider them seriously as contenders on the economic playing field.  However, with the 

potential for a cost less than $700 per kW installed generating capacity, the electronic film 

concentrator can make solar a major energy competitor because it introduces a multitude of new 

design options and possibilities.   

 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank Laverne Rabinowitz and Joyce Davidson for their invaluable 

support during the course of this work; and Joe Crowley,  Bernard Haisch, Joakim Lindblom, 

and Armand Neukermans for their helpful comments. 

References 
 
Davidson, M. and Rabinowitz, M., 2003, Mini-Optics Solar Energy Concentrator. 
US Patent #6,612,705 B1. pp. 1-12. 
 
Duffie, J. A. and Beckman, W. A., 1974.  Solar Energy Thermal Processes, John Wiley and 
Sons, New York. 
 
Dunlop, J. P., Farhi, B. N., Post, H. N., Szaro, J. S., and Ventre, G. G., 2001. Reducing the Costs 
of Grid-Connected Photovoltaic Systems, presented at Proceedings ofSolar Forum 2001: Solar 
Energy: The Power to Choose, Washington, D. C. 
 
Hunter, R. J., 1981. Zeta Potential in Colloid Science, Principles and Applications, 
Acdemic Press, London. 
 

 

24

Sheridan, N. K. and Berkovitz, M. A.  1977.  The Gyricon—A Twisting Ball Display, 
Proceedings of the Society for Information Display, 18, pp. 289-293,   
 
Sheridan, N. K., 1999. The Gyricon Rotating Ball Display, Journal for the Society for 
Information Display, 7, pp. 141-144, . 
 
Swanson, R. M., 2000.  The Promise of Concentrators, Progress in Photovoltaics: 
Research and Applications, 8, pp. 93-111. 
 
Rabl, A., 1985. Active Solar Collectors and Their Applications, Oxford University Press, New 
York. 
 
van der Zwaan, R. and Rabl, A. 2003. Prospects for PV: A Learning Curve Analysis. 
Solar Energy. 74, pp. 19-31.  
 
*Corresponding author: Armor Research, Redwood City, CA 94062-3922  USA 
Mario715@earthlink.net; fax 650, 368-4466 
 
 
 

 

25

