This paper published in Acta Mechanica Sinica (English Series), 
2001,No.17,pp310-331. 
Aerodynamic Force and Flow Structures of Two Airfoils 
  in Flapping Motions 
Shi Long Lan and Mao Sun 
Institute of Fluid Mechanics, Beijing University of Aeronautics & Astronautics 
Beijing 100083, P.R. China 

    Aerodynamic  force  and  flow  structures  of  two  airfoils  in  tandem  configuration 
performing  flapping  motions  are  studied,  using  the  method  of  solving  the 
Navier-Stokes  equations  in  moving  overset  grids.  Three  typical  phase  differences 
between  the  fore-  and  aft-airfoil  flapping  cycles  are  considered.  The  following  has 
been shown. (1) In the case of no interaction (single airfoil), the time average of the 
vertical force coefficient over the downstroke is 2.74, which is about 3 times as large 
as the maximum steady-state lift coefficient of a dragonfly wing; the time average of 
the horizontal force coefficient is 1.97, which is also large. The reasons for the large 
force  coefficients  are  the  acceleration  at  the  beginning  of  a  stroke,  the  delayed  stall 
and the “pitching-up” motion near the end of the stroke. (2) In the cases of two-airfoil, 
the  time-variations  of  the  force  and  moment  coefficients  on  each  airfoil  are  broadly 
similar  to  that  of  the  single  airfoil  in  that  the  vertical  force  is  mainly  produced  in 
downstroke  and  horizontal  force  in  upstroke,  but  very  large  differences  exist  due  to 
the  interaction.  (3)  For  in-phase  stroking,  the  major  differences  caused  by  the 
interaction  are  that  the  vertical  force  on  FA  in  downstroke  is  increased  and  the 
horizontal  force  on  FA  in  upstroke  decreased.  As  a  result,  the  magnitude  of  the 
resultant  force  is  almost  unchanged  but  it  inclines  less  forward.  (4)  For  counter 
stroking,  the  major  differences  are  that  the  vertical  force  on  AA  in  downstroke  and 
horizontal force on FA in upstroke are decreased. As a result, The magnitude of the 
resultant  force  is  decreased  by  about  20%  percent  but  its  direction  is  almost 
unchanged.  (5)  For  90˚-phase-difference  stroking,  the  major  differences  are  that  the 
vertical  force  on  AA  in  downstroke  and  horizontal  force  on  FA  in  upstroke  are 
decreased greatly and the horizontal force on AA in upstroke increased.    As a result 
the magnitude of the resultant force is decreased by about 28% and it inclines more 
forward. (6)  Among the  three  cases  of phase angles, in-phase flapping produces the 
largest  vertical  force  (also  the  largest  resultant  force);  the  90˚-phase-difference 
flapping  has  the  largest  horizontal  force,  although  it  produces  the  smallest  resultant 
force. 

1. INTRODUCTION 
    The flight of dragonflies is superior to that of other large insects. They are capable 
of fast take-off, long-time hovering and quick maneuver. Scientists have always been 
fascinated  by  their  flight.  Recently,  the  mechanism  of  their  flight  is  gaining  more 
attention due to the possible application in the newly emerging micro-air-vehicles. 
    Kinematic data such as the stroke amplitudes and inclinations of the stroke-planes, 
wing beat frequencies and phase-relations between the fore and aft wings, etc., were 
measured by  taking high-speed pictures of  tethered  dragonflies  (e.g.  by  Alexander1) 
and dragonflies in free-flight (e.g. by Norberg2 and Wakenling and Ellington3). Using 
these  data  in  quasi-steady  analyses  (not  including  the  interaction  effect  between  the 
wings), it was found that the lift coefficient required for flight were much greater than 
the  steady-state  values  that  measured  from  dragonfly  wings.  This  suggested  that 
unsteady  wing  motions  and  flow  interactions  between  the  fore  and  aft  wings  must 
play important roles in the flight of dragonflies2-4. 

 

1

    Force measurement on a tethered dragonfly was conducted by Somps and Luttges5. 
It was shown that for an instant during each stroke cycle, lift force was many times 
larger  than  that  measured  from  dragonfly  wings  under  steady-state  conditions.  This 
clearly showed that the effects of unsteady flow and wing interaction were important. 
Flow  visualization  studies  on  flapping  model  dragonfly  wings  were  conducted  by 
Saharon and Luttges6,7,  and  it  was  shown  that  constructive  or  destructive  wing/flow 
interactions  might  occur,  depending  on  the  kinematic  parameters  of  the  flapping 
motion.   
    In  the  above  works,  only  the  total  force  of  the  fore  and  aft  wings  was  measured, 
and  furthermore,  force  measurements  and  flow  visualizations  were  conducted  in 
separated  works.  In  order  to  further  understand  the  dragonfly  aerodynamics,  it  is 
desirable  to  know  the  aerodynamic  force  on  each  of  the  fore  and  aft  wings  and  the 
flow  structures  during  their  flapping  motions.  In  the  present  paper,  we  obtain  these 
information  by  employing  the  method  of  numerically  solving  the  Navier-Stokes 
equations  with  moving  overset  grids.  Since  the  aspect-ratio  of  a  dragonfly  wing  is 
large, as a first approximation, airfoils are used to represent the wings. Two airfoils in 
tandem  configuration  performing  flapping  motions  in  air  that  is  still  at  infinity  are 
considered in the present study. Dragonflies can alter the phase relationships between 
the fore and aft wings: in-phase stroking may be used to generate more aerodynamic 
force than the usual dragonfly mode of counter stroking (180º phase difference) and 
an approximate 90º phase difference may be used in escape mode where the dragonfly 
exhibits  rapid  forward  and  upward  flight1.  In  the  present  study,  three  typical  phase 
differences between the fore- and aft-airfoil flapping cycles, as sketched in Fig.1, are 
considered, namely, in-phase, 180º phase difference and 90º phase difference.     
 

is  based  on 

2. THE COMPUTATIONAL METHOD 
    The Navier-Stokes equations for incompressible flow are numerically solved using 
moving  overset  grids.  For  flow  past  a  body  in  arbitrary  motion,  the  governing 
equations can be cast in an inertial frame of reference using a general time-dependent 
coordinate transformation to account for the motion of the body.   
    A single-grid solver using the algorithm developed by Rogers etal.8 was written by 
the  present  authors9.  The  algorithm 
the  method  of  artificial 
compressibility  and  uses  a  third-order  flux-difference  splitting  technique  for  the 
convective terms and the second-order central difference for the viscous terms. Time 
accuracy  in  the  numerical  solutions  is  achieved  by  subiterating  the  equations  in 
pseudotime for each physical time step. The single-grid solver is modified to overset 
grids for the present study. 
    With  overset  grids  for  the  present  study,  as  shown  in  Fig.2,  each  airfoil  has  a 
curvilinear  grid  and  they  lie  within  a  background  Cartesian  grid.  Parts  of  the  two 
airfoil-grids overlap when the two airfoils move close to each other. The airfoil grids 
capture  features  such  as  boundary  layers,  separated  vortices  and  vortex/airfoil 
interactions,  etc.  The  background  grid  surrounds  the  airfoil  grids  and  carries  the 
solution  to  the  far  field.  As  a  result  of  the  oversetting  of  the  grids,  there  are  hole 
regions  in  the  airfoil  grids  and  the  background  grid.  As  the  airfoil  grids  move,  the 
holes  and  hole  boundaries  change  with  time.  To  determine  hole-fringe  points,  the 
method known as domain connectivity functions by Meakin10 is employed. Data are 
interpolated  from  one  grid  to  another  at  the  hole-fringe  points  and  similarly  at  the 
outer-boundary points of the airfoil grids.    In the present study, the background grid 
does not move and the two airfoil-grids move in the background grid. 

 

2

    For far field boundary conditions, at the inflow boundary, the velocity components 
are  specified  as  freestream  conditions  while  the  pressure  is  extrapolated  from  the 
interior;  at  the  outflow  boundary,  the  pressure  is  set  equal  to  the  free-stream  static 
pressure  and  the  velocity  is  extrapolated  from  the  interior.  On  the  airfoil  surfaces, 
impermeable wall and no-slip boundary conditions were applied, and the pressure on 
the boundary is obtained through the normal component of the momentum equation. 
    The  airfoil  grids  are  generated  by  using  a  Poisson  solver  based  on  the  work  of 
Hilgenstock11.  They  are  of  O  topology.  The  background  Cartesian  grid  is  generated 
algebraically. Some portions of the grids are shown in Fig.2. 
 

3. TEST OF THE CODE 
    In the previous work of the present authors9, the three dimensional version of the 
single-grid code was used for calculating the unsteady flows around a rotating wing 
and  some  test  of  the  code  was  done  there.  Here  the  two  dimensional  version  of  the 
code is tested by calculating the flow around a circular cylinder, for which there exist 
unsteady  flow  measurements  and  computational  results.  In  Table  1,  the  computed 
amplitudes  of  lift  and  drag  coefficients  and  the  vortex-shedding  frequency  (denoted 
by CL, CD and St respectively) were compared with experimental data12 and also with 
the computational results of Ref.8, and they are in good agreement. A further test is 
done by considering the starting flow around the thin elliptical airfoil that is used in 
the present study, and the results will be shown later in this section.   
    In  order  to  test  the  code  for  moving  overset  grids,  flows  around  the  airfoil  was 
computed  using  both  single-grid  and  the  moving  overset  grids.  The  motion  of  the 
airfoil is similar to a flapping motion and it consists of three parts: the first translation 
(after initial acceleration from rest) at 35° angle of attack, about 2  chord lengths of 
travel; rotation; and the second translation in the opposite direction from the first with 
the same angle of attack. The moving overset grids consist of two grids, i.e. an airfoil 
grid  and  a  background  grid.  During  the  grid  motion,  the  background  grid  remains 
stationary as the airfoil grid translates and rotates in it. Fig.3 gives the comparison of 
the lift coefficients v.s. nondimensional time  τ, calculated by the single-grid and the 
moving  overset  grids.  The  large  peaks  in  the  lift  coefficient  are  due  to  the  fast 
acceleration, deceleration and rotation of the airfoil. Fig.4 compares the vorticity plots 
)  from  the  two  calculations.  It  is  seen  that  results 
at  one  time  instant  (
computed  using  the  moving  overset  grids  are  in  agreement  with  that  of  the 
single-grid. 
  in Fig.3), the force on the airfoil 
    At the beginning of the above motion (near 
should be mainly due to the acceleration of the apparent mass. Since the airfoil is an 
ellipse, the apparent mass force could be calculated  analytically  from  potential  flow 
theory and the result included in Fig.3 (the acceleration is a sine function of  τ, so is 
, the numerical 
the apparent mass force). It is seen that between 
results  are  in  very  good  agreement  with  that  of  analytical  solution.  This  further 
verified the computation code.   
    Grid sensitivity was considered and will be discussed together with the calculated 
results in the next part of the paper. 
 

25.4=τ

15.0≈τ

0=τ

0=τ

  and 

4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
    The kinematics of the flapping of an airfoil is simplified as following. As sketched 
in Fig.1, the airfoil translates upward or downward along the stroke plane and rotates 
around the stroke reversals. The translational speed is assumed as a constant (denoted 

 

3

r

1

2

+

(

−

−

     

=

−

]}

))]

τ
r

0α&

∆+

1[5.0
, 

=+u
Uu

≤≤
τττ
2

τττ
≤≤
r

+
tU=τ

rτ∆   is  specified, 

+
5.0
1{
α
&
0
+
, 
0α&

+
α
&
& =+
Ucαα &

(2
−
ττπ
  is  a  constant, 

by  U ) during a stroke except near the end of the stroke and the beginning of the next 
stroke.  Near  the  end  of a  stroke, the wing decelerates from speed  U   to zero  speed 
and  then,  at  the  beginning  of  the  following  stroke,  accelerates  to  speed  U .  The 
translational speed, u, during the deceleration and acceleration is given by   
cos(
/()
ττττπ
       
1
1
c
  ( c   denotes the airfoil chord length), 

                                                  (1) 
                             
u =+
1τ   is the time at 
Where 
2τ   the time at which the 
which the deceleration near the end of a  stroke starts and 
acceleration at the beginning of the next stroke finishes. During a stroke, the angle of 
attack  of  an  airfoil,  α  is  also  assumed  constant  except  near  the  stroke  reversal. 
Around  the  stroke  reversal,  the  wing  rotates  with  angular  velocity  α& .  In  the 
transition from downstroke to upstroke,  α&   is given by   
cos[
                           

                              (2) 
)
∆
r τ
r
rτ   is  the  time  at  which  the  rotation  starts, 
Where 
rτ∆   is  the  time  interval  the  rotation  lasts.  In  the  time  interval  of 
rτ∆ ,  the  wing 
rotates  from  “downstroke-α ”  to  “upstroke-α ”,  therefore  when  downstroke-α , 
upstroke-α  and 
  .can  be  determined.  During  the  transition 
from  upstroke  to  downstroke,  the  airfoil  would  rotate  from  upstroke- α   to 
downstroke-α   and  the  sign  of  the  RHS  of  Eq.  (2)  should  be  reversed.  The 
rotation-axis of each airfoil is at its 0.25 chord location. Dragonflies have small stroke 
angles (55º~65º) and a typical wing-section travels about 4 chord lengths in a stroke, 
therefore,  in  the  present  calculation  the  time  taken  for  one  stroke  is  such  that  the 
airfoil travels about 4 chord lengths in the stroke. For the cases of in-phase stroking, 
counter-stroking and 90º-phare difference stroking, the flapping cycle of the aft airfoil 
leads that of the fore airfoil by 0º, 180º and 90º respectively (Fig.1).   
    The  airfoils  are  ellipses  of  12  percent  thickness  (the  radius  of  curvature  of  the 
airfoil  leading  or  trailing  edge  is  only  0.007c).  The  stroke  plane  inclines  from 
horizontal  by 
150   (or 
o
o30=′α
,  see  Fig.1).  The  Reynolds  number,  Re,  defined  as 
  (υ  is  the  kinematic  viscosity),  is  set  as  1000.  The  above  values  of 
Re
cU=
inclination angle of stroke planes,  αand Re are typical ones employed in dragonfly 
flight2. The horizontal distance between the fore and aft wings of a dragonfly is about 
zero at the wing root and about 0.5 c   at the wing-tip. Therefore in this study, we used 
the average value, 0.25c.   
    The coefficients of vertical and horizontal forces and pitching moment (taken with 
mC   respectively(the 
respect  to  0.25  chord  location)  are  denoted  by 
force  and  moment  coefficients  are  obtained  by  dividing  the  force  and  moment  with 
2cUρ
  respectively,  where  ρ   is  the  fluid  density).  For 
convenience,  the  horizontal  force  is  taken  as  positive  when  it  is  in  the  negative 
x-direction. As seen in Figs.1 and 2, both the lift (normal to the translational velocity) 
and drag (opposite to the translational velocity) of the airfoil contribute to the vertical 
force  and  to  the  horizontal  force.  In  the  calculation,  the  airfoils  start  the  flapping 
motion in still air and the calculation is stopped when periodicity in the aerodynamic 
force and flow structures is approximately reached. In order to reveal the interaction 
effect between the two airfoils, flow for a single airfoil of the same geometry and in 
the same motion is also calculated. 
4.1 Single Airfoil 

o60 ,  downstroke- α   is  set  as 

o60   and  upstroke- α  

,  where 
υ/

hC   and 

2cUρ

  and 

yC , 

2/2

180

=′

α

α

2/

−

o

 

4

+α&

+u   and 

    The  results  for  the  single  airfoil  (henceforth  called  SA),  can  be  used  to  compare 
with that of the two airfoils to show the interaction effect. Moreover, understanding 
the  force  generation  mechanism  of  SA  provides  background  for  studying  the  more 
complex case of the fore and aft airfoils. 
    Figure  5  gives  the  force  and  moment  coefficients  of  SA  vs.τ  in  one  cycle.  The 
motion of the airfoil, i.e. 
  as functions of  τ, is also shown in Fig. 5. Fig. 
6 gives the vorticity and streamline plots at various  τ. In the vorlicity plots of this 
paper, solid lines denote positive vorticity and dotted lines negative vorticity. In Fig. 5, 
results  by  two  overset-grids  are  given  to  show  the  grid  sensitivity.  In  both 
overset-grids,  the  airfoil-grid  extends  about  0.9 c   from  the  airfoil  surface;  the 
Cartesian background grid has grid points concentrated in the near field of the stroke 
planes (the density here is approximately the same as that near the outer boundary of 
the airfoil grid), and it extends to about 40 chord lengths from the edge of the stroke 
plane. For overset-grids 1, the airfoil grid is the size of 55×153 (in normal direction 
and around the airfoil respectively) and the background Cartesian grid is the size of 
233×114.  For  overset-grids  2,  the  airfoil  grid  is  the  size  of  76×229  and  the 
background Cartesian grid is the size of 291×132. It is seen that there is only a small 
difference between the results of the two grids. Calculation was also conducted using 
larger computational domain. The domain is enlarged by adding more grid points to 
the background Cartesian grid of overset-grids 1. The calculated results showed that 
there  was  no  need  to  put  the  outer  boundary  farther  than  40  chord  lengths  from  the 
stroke  planes.  From  the  above  discussion,  it  was  concluded  that  overset-grids  1  is 
proper for the single-airfoil calculation. For the overset grids for two airfoils, each of 
the  airfoil  grids  is  the  same  as  that  of  overset-grids  1  and  the  background  grid  is 
constructed in a similar way to that of overset-grids 1. The effect of time step value 
was considered and it was found that a numerical solution effectively independent of 
time step was achieved if 
. Therefore, this time step value was specified in 
all the present calculations. 
    As  seen  in  Fig.5,  in  the  beginning  part  of  the  downstroke  (τ=26.4~27.45),  there 
are  a  large  peak  in 
HC   .  In  this  part  of  the 
stroke,  the  airfoil  accelerates  downwards  along  the  stroke  plane  and  continues  the 
anticlockwise  rotation  that  started  near  the  end  of  the  upstroke.  It  was  shown  by 
Hamdani and Sun13 that for an airfoil in fast translational acceleration at large angle 
of attack, large aerodynamic force, which is approximately normal to the airfoil chord, 
could be produced. This may explain the above 
HC   behaviors. In the next 
part  of  the  downstorke  (τ =27.45~29.75),  the  airfoil  translates  downwards  with 
constant speed at 
  and its chord is horizontal (Fig.6(a)~(c)).    In this part of 
the stroke, 
YC   keeps a large value, about 2.7. This is expected because as shown in 
the previous work13, for an airfoil at large α moving at constant speed after a fast start, 
large  aerodynamic  force  can  be  maintained  for  some  time  due  to  the  stall  delay.  As 
HC   is very small in 
seen in Fig.6(a) to (c), the dynamic stall vortex has not shed yet. 
this part of the motion and the total force is approximately normal to the airfoil. From 
the vorticity plot at  τ=27.45, Fig.6(a) (just after the acceleration and rotation finish), 
it  is  seen  that  a  vortical  structure  (a  strong  vortex  layer  on  the  lower  surface  of  the 
airfoil and a pair of vortices near the trailing edge of the airfoil) has been formed. The 
induce velocity of this vortical structure makes the effective angle of attack to become 
o35 (as  seen  from  the  streamline  plot  in  Fig.  6(a)),  which  is  not  small.  If  a 
about 
smaller geometrical angle of attack had been used, the effective angle of attack would 

YC   and  a  moderate  negative  one  in 

YC   and 

01.0≤∆τ

o60=α

 

5

  at 

o30=′α

o75=′α

85.31=τ

  at  τ  =30.8  to 

HC   and  negative  values  for 

be  too  small.  This  may  be  the  reason  for  dragonflies  to  employ  very  large  angle  of 
attack  in  the  downstrokes.  In  the  last  part  of  the  downstroke  (τ=29.75~30.8), 
YC  
first increases rapidly and then decreases sharply, with the peak at τ ≈ 30.2. From  τ 
=29.75  to  τ =30.1,  the  airfoil  rotates  clockwise  (pitching-up  with  respect  to  the 
direction of translational motion) while still translating with constant speed. As shown 
in Ref. 13, this motion can produce fast increases in lift and drag forces. This explains 
the  rapid  increases  of 
YC .  Between  τ =30.1  and  τ =30.8,  the  airfoil  is  in  fast 
deceleration, which would cause sharp decrease in lift and drag forces of an airfoil13, 
YC   in this period. 
resulting in the rapid decreases of 
    In the beginning part of the upstroke (τ=30.8~31.85), there are a negative peak in 
HC . In this period of time, the 
YC , and a positive peak and then a negative one in 
airfoil  accelerates  upwards  along  the  stroke  plane  and  at  the  same  time  rotates 
  (the  airfoil  chord 
clockwise  from 
becomes vertical at 
). If the airfoil only accelerates upward along the stroke 
85.31=τ
plane,  one  would  expect  large  positive  value  for 
YC . 
But  the  clockwise-rotation  of  the  airfoil  (with  rotation-axis  near  the  airfoil  leading 
edge)  has  opposite  effect  from  that  of  the  acceleration,  and  furthermore,  the 
orientation of the airfoil changes, resulting in the positive and negative peaks in 
HC  
and the negative peak in 
YC . In the next part of the upstroke (τ=31.85~34.15), the 
airfoil translates upwards along the stroke plane with constant speed at 
  and 
its chord is vertical (Fig.6(d) to (f)). From the previous discussion, one would expect 
HC   (which is now normal to the airfoil chord) is large and almost 
that in this period, 
HC   is small at  τ=31.85 and increases 
does not vary with  τ. But as seen in Fig. 5, 
with  τ, reaching large values in later time of this period. The reason for this is that 
the induced velocity (“downwash”), which is due to the vortical structure formed after 
the acceleration and rotation, has made the effective  angle  of  attack  almost  zero  (as 
seen  from  the  streamline  plot  in  Fig.6(d),  the  incoming  streamlines  are  almost  aline 
with  the  airfoil  chord).  As  τ  increasing,  the  above  mentioned  vortical  structure 
move  away  from  the  airfoil  (Fig.6(e)  and  (f))  and  the  effective  angle  of  attack 
HC   and 
increases.  In  the  last  part  of  the  upstroke  (τ=38.55~39.6),  large  peaks  in 
YC   appear (Fig.5), which are caused, similar to the case of downstroke, by the fast 
rotation and the following deceleration of the airfoil. 
    The  above  discussion  is  summarized  as  following.  For  an  airfoil  in  the  flapping 
motion  considered  in  the  paper,  positive  vertical  force  is  mainly  produced  in  the 
downstroke  and  positive  horizontal  force  in  the  upstroke.  The  time-averages  of 
yC  
HC   over  the 
over  the  downstroke  (denoted  by 
upstroke  (denoted  by 
is  2.74.  This  is  much  larger 
than the maximum lift coefficient measured from dragonfly wings, which are about 1. 
uHC ,   is 1.97 and is also large. The main reasons for the large force coefficients are: 
the acceleration at the beginning of the stroke, the delayed stall, and the pitching-up 
motion near the end of the stroke. The vortices formed after the stroke reversal cause 
large  induced  velocity,  which  greatly  reduces  the  effective  angle  of  attack  of  the 
airfoil in the early part of the following stroke. This may be the reason for dragonflies 
to employ very large geometrical angle of attack during the downstroke. 
    The vertical and horizontal force coefficients averaged over one complete flapping 

dyC , )  and  the  time  average  of 

uHC , )  are  given  in  Table  2. 

o30=′α

dyC ,

 

6

cycle for SA, denoted by 

yC   and 

HC   respectively, are given in Table 3. It is seen 

that for SA, 

yC   is 1.22, about one half of its 

dyC ,

  (since 

yC   is mainly produced 

uHC , . 

HC   is 0.76, also about one half of 

during the downstroke); 
4.2 Fore and aft airfoils 
    Henceforth the fore and aft airfoils are called FA and AA respectively. As will be 
seen shortly, the time-variations of the force and moment coefficients on FA and AA 
are  broadly  similar  to  that  of  SA,  but  large  quantitative  and  in  some  parts  of  the 
flapping cycle qualitative differences exist. The aerodynamic forces on FA or AA can 
be considered as contributed by two factors, the unsteady motion of the airfoil and the 
aerodynamic interaction between the two airfoils. The general time-variations of the 
force and moment coefficients of FA or AA, which is similar to that of SA, is due to 
the  unsteady  motion  of  the  airfoil.  The  above  differences  between  the  force  and 
moment  coefficients  of  FA  (or  AA)  and  that  of  SA  are  due  to  the  aerodynamic 
interaction. Since the general time-variations of force and moment coefficients of FA 
and  AA  are  similar  to  that  of  SA  and  the  later  were  investigated  in  detail  in  last 
section, we will mainly study the aerodynamic interaction between the two airfoils in 
this section. 
      0˚ phase difference (in-phase stroking) 
    Figure  7  gives  the  force  and  moment  coefficients  v.s.  time  in  one  flapping  cycle 
(the  results  for  SA  is  included  for  comparison).  Figures  8,  9  and  10  show  the  flow 
structures. 
    In  the  downstroke,  as  seen  in  Fig.  7, 
HC   of  FA  and  AA  are  small  (except  at  the 
beginning and the end phases of the stroke) and relatively close to that of SA. In some 
YC of  FA  and  AA  are  different  from  that  of  SA.  In  the 
parts  of  the  downstroke, 
beginning part of the downstroke (τ=26.4~27.45), 
YC   of FA is a little smaller than 
that of SA but 
YC   of AA has a much larger peak. In this period of time, FA and AA 
accelerate  downward  along  the  stroke  planes  and  at  the  same  time  rotate 
.  FA  moves  in  front  of  AA  (see  Fig.1(a)) 
anticlockwise  from 
and the rotation of FA makes its rear part to move towards the leading edge of AA. 
This  could  result  in  a  larger  "incoming  velocity"  seen  by  AA.  Figure  8  (a)  and  (b) 
gives the relative-velocity vectors seen by FA and by AA, respectively (since FA and 
AA have relative motion in this part of the downstroke, their relative velocity vectors 
need  to  be  plotted  on  separated  plots).  It  is  seen  that  a  much  larger  velocity  going 
around the leading edge of AA than that of FA, which may explain the very large peak 
in 
YC   of AA in this period. In the next part of the downstroke (τ=27.45~29.75), at 
first 
YC   of 
YC   of both FA and AA are larger than that of SA, but as  τ  increasing, 
AA  decreases  to  become  smaller  than  that  of  SA.  In  this  period,  FA  and  AA  move 
downward  at  constant-speed  with  their  chords  in  the  same  horizontal  line  (see 
Fig.1(a)).  As  τ   increasing,  the  trailing  edge  vortex  of  FA  (which  has  positive 
vorticity) moves to the neighborhood of the upper surface of AA and interacts with its 
(which  has  negative  vorticity),  see  Fig.9(b).  This 
leading  edge  vortex 
vortex-interaction will reduce the circulation around AA. Moreover, AA acts like an 
extension  of  FA.  As  a  result,  the  flow  develops  into  one  like  that  of  a  slotted 
two-element  airfoil  (with  FA  and  AA  as  its  fore  and  rear  parts  respectively).  The 
surface  pressure  distribution  at 
  (given  in  Fig.11)  also  shows  this  point.  The 
above discussion explains why, in this period, 
YC   of AA is 

YC   of FA is larger but 

o60=α

29=τ

=α

  to 

105

o

 

7

HC   of  FA  is  larger  and 

smaller than that of SA. In the last part of the downstroke (τ=29.75~30.8), similar to 
the case of SA, 
YC   of both FA and AA have large peaks, due to the fast pitching-up 
rotation and the following fast deceleration of the airfoils. As shown Table 2, the time 
YC   over the downstroke for FA is 3.49, about 25 percent larger than that 
average of 
of SA and for AA is 2.57, a little smaller than that of SA.   
YC   of both FA and AA are small and very close to that of SA.    In 
    In the upstroke, 
the  beginning  part  of  the  stroke  (τ  =30.08~31.13), 
HC   of 
AA smaller than that of SA. This may be due to the relative motion of the two airfoils 
which are in clockwise rotation and upward acceleration. In the rest part of the stroke 
(constant-speed  translation  and  the  following  anticlockwise  rotation), 
HC   of  AA  is 
close  to  that  of  SA  and 
HC   of  FA  is  noticeably  smaller  than  that  of  SA.  In  the 
constant-speed  translation,  FA  and  AA  moves  parallely  upward  along  the  stroke 
planes and their chords are vertical, as seen in Fig.9 (d), (e) and (f). It should be noted 
that  AA  moves  in  front  of  FA  in  the  upstroke  (see  Fig.1(a)).  Due  to  the  induction 
effect  of  the  positive  vorticities  at  the  upper  surface  of  AA  (see  Fig.  9(e)  and  (f)), 
there will be "downwash velocity" in front of FA, making its effective angle of attack 
smaller. This can be seen from the streamline plots shown in Fig.10(e) and (f) . It is 
seen that the effective angle of attack of FA is smaller than that of AA. This explains 
HC   of  FA  is  smaller  during  this  phase  of  the  upstroke.  The  same  explanation 
why 
also applies in the following anticlockwise rotation (pitching-up with respective to the 
uHC ,   for both FA and AA are 
direction of translational motion). As shown in Table 2, 
smaller than that of SA, but 

uHC ,   for FA is much smaller. 

    For  the  cases  of  two  airfoils, 
HC   denote,  respectively,  the  vertical  and 
horizontal  force-coefficients  averaged  over  one  complete  flapping  cycle  and  also 
averaged  between  the  fore  and  aft  airfoils.  As  seen  in  Table  3,  for  the  present  case 
(in-phase stroking), 
yC   is larger than that of SA. The main reason for this is that, as 

yC   and 

seen from above discussion, 

yC   on FA in the downstroke is increased greatly by the 

HC   is  smaller  than  that  of  SA  and  the  main  reason  for  it  is  that 

interaction  affect. 
HC   on FA in the upstroke is greatly decreased by the interaction effect. 
180˚ phase difference (counter stroking) 
    Figure 12 gives the force and moment coefficients v.s. time in one flapping cycle. It 
yC  
is seen that in the first half of the cycle (AA in downstroke and FA in upstroke), 
of  AA  is  smaller  than  that  of  SA  (Fig.5),  also  smaller  than  that  of  AA  in  in-phase 
HC   of  FA  is  smaller  than  that  of  SA 
stroking  (Fig.7); 
except  at  the  beginning  of  the  stroke; 
  is  only  1.34.  Figure  13  shows  the 

dyC , of  AA  is  only  1.85. 

uHC ,

vorticity plots. In this and some of the following figures, the vortices shed by FA are 
marked by Fn or F and the vortices shed by AA are marked by An or A, where n is an 
integer.  It  is  seen  that  in  this  half  cycle,  Fig.13(a),  (b)  and  (c),  vortices  carried  and 
shed by FA may produce downwash velocity around AA and vice versa. This can be 
seen  in  the  streamline  plots  in  Fig.14(a),(b)  and  (c),  the  effective  angle  of  attack  of 
AA  is  smaller  than  that  of  SA  in  its  downstroke  (Fig.6(a),  (b)  and  (c))  and  the 
effective angle of attack of FA is also smaller than that of SA in its upstroke (Fig.6(d), 
(e) and (f)), this may explain the above force behaviors.   
    In the second half of the cycle (AA in upstroke and FA in downstroke), as seen in 

 

8

Fig.12, 

yC   of FA is small in the early part of the stroke but becomes large in the later 

dyC ,

  of FA is 2.61); 

part of the stroke (

HC   of AA is negative in a large part of the 
stroke  and  then  sharply  increases  to  large  value  (
uHC ,   of  AA  is  1.67).  From  the 
vorticity  plots,  it  is  seen  that  in  the  early  part  of  the  downstroke  of  FA,  Fig.13(d), 
compared  with  the  case  of  SA  (Fig.6(a)),  there  is  one  more  pair  of  vortex  near  the 
trailing edge of FA. This vortex pair, marked by A1 and A2, is left by AA in its last 
stroke,  and  it  can  induce  a  wind  that  blows  leftwards  over  FA.  This  wind  may 
decrease  the  downstream  motion  of  the  starting  vortex  of  FA  (marked  by  F5), 
resulting  in  the  small 
yC   of  FA  in  this  part  of  the  stroke.  In  the  early  part  of  the 
upstroke of AA, Fig.13(d), compared with the case of SA (Fig.6(d)), there is one more 
vortex pair (marked by A4 and F4) and one more vortex (marked by F3) around AA, 
which  are  left  by  FA  and  AA  in  their  last  strokes.  It  is  clear  that  these  vortices  will 
produce a “down wash” velocity in front of AA. As seen in the streamline plot for AA 
at  this  instance,  Fig.14(d),  the  effective  angle  of  attack  of  AA  is  negative.  As  τ 
increasing, AA moves upwards, away from these vortices, but it becomes close to FA 
which is moving downwards. The strong vortices carried by FA, marked by F5 and F7 
(Fig.13(d) and (e)), may also produce “downwash” effect on AA. From Fig.14(e), it is 
seen  that  even  at  τ  =50.6,  a  little  beyond  the  middle  of  the  upstroke  of  AA,  the 
effective angle of attack of AA is still negative. This may explain why 
HC   of AA is 
negative in this part of the stroke. After τ =50.6, AA and FA have passed each other. It 
is interesting to see that AA “takes” the starting vortex of FA, F5 (which has positive 
vorticity),  and  carries  the  vortex  on  its  upper  surface,  Fig.13(e)  and  (f).  This  vortex 
may increase the circulation of AA greatly, which may explain the sharp increase of 
HC   on AA in this part of the stroke. 
    For the present case of counter stroking, as seen in Table 3, 
HC   are both 
smaller than of SA. From the above analysis and the data in Table 2, it is seen that the 
main  reason  for  this  is  that,  during  the  first  half  of  the  flapping  cycle  (AA  in 
HC   on FA are greatly decreased by the 
downstroke, FA in upstroke), 

yC   on AA and 

yC   and 

interaction effect. 
    90˚ phase difference 
    Figure 15 gives the force and moment coefficients v. s. time in one flapping cycle 
and Figs. 16 and 17 give the flow structures. 
    In the downstroke of AA (the second half of the upstroke and the first half of the 
downstroke of FA), τ =44~48.4, as seen from Fig.15, 
yC   of AA is much smaller than 
that  of  SA  in  its  downstroke  and 
HC   of  FA  is  also  smaller  than  that  of  SA  in  the 
second half of its upstroke. From the vorticity plots in Fig.16(a), (b) and (c), it is seen 
that  similar  to  the  case  of  counter  stroking,  vortices  carried  and  shed  by  FA  may 
produce induced velocity around AA and vice versa; moreover, in the present case, FA 
and AA are more closer to each other. The interaction effect may become more severe. 
As seen in the streamline plots, Fig.17 (a), (b) and (c), the effective angle of attack of 
AA is much smaller than that of SA (Fig.6 (a), (b) and (c)). As seen from Fig.17(a), 
the  effective  angle  of  attack  of  FA  is  also  smaller  than  that  of  SA  at  this  position 
(Fig.6(e)).  This  may  approximately  explain  the  above  force  behaviors.  As  seen  in 
Table 2, 
uHC ,   of FA is only 0.72. They are the smallest 
among the cases considered. 
    In  the  upstroke  of  AA    (the  second  half  of  the  downstroke  and  first  half  of  the 

  of AA is only 1.5 and 

dyC ,

 

9

upstroke of FA), τ =48.4~52.8, as seen in Fig.15, the most noticeable behavior of the 
HC   of AA becomes larger than that of 
force coefficients is that starting from τ =49.5, 
SA in its upstroke. From the vorticity plots, Fig.16(e) and (f), it is seen that in this part 
of the stroke, there are some vortices (F5 and A1) in front of AA. They are in such a 
position  that  they  may  produce  a  wind  that  blows  in  the  direction  opposite  to  the 
motion of AA. This wind could increase the incoming-flow speed of AA and thus its 
HC . As seen in Table 2, 
    For the present case, 
yC   is only 0.78 (see Table 3), the smallest in all the cases. 
As analyzed above, the reason for this is that due to the interaction effect, FA and AA 
HC   is  0.68,  relatively  large  compared  with 
have  small 

uHC ,   of AA is 2, the largest in all the cases considered. 

yC   in  their  downstrokes. 

HC   in the upstroke due to the 

other cases, which is because AA has a relatively large 
interaction affect. 
HC . Let CR denote the magnitude of 
yC   and 
    Finally we look at the resultant of 
the resultant and β the angle between the resultant and the vertical (positive when the 
resultant incline forward), and they are also shown in Table 3. Comparing the results 
for the three cases of two airfoils with that of SA, the effect on CR and β due to the 
interaction can be seen. For the case of in-phase stroking, the interaction almost does 
not change the magnitude of the resultant and only makes it to incline less forward; 
for  the  case  of  counter  stroking,  the  interaction  decreases  the  magnitude  of  the 
resultant  by  about  20%  and  almost  does  not  change  its  direction;  for  the  case  of 
90˚-phase-difference stroking, the interaction decreases the magnitude of the resultant 
by  about  28%  and  makes  it  to  incline  more  forward.  Among  the  three  cases  of  two 
airfoils  in  flapping  motion,  the  in-phase  stroking  produces  the  largest  vertical  force 
(also  largest  resultant  force)  and  the  90˚-phase-difference  stroking  has  the  largest 
horizontal force, although it produces the smallest the resultant force. 

 
5. CONCLUSIONS 

    For the flapping motion considered in the paper, the following has been shown. 
(1) In the case of no interaction (single airfoil), the time average of the vertical force 
coefficient  over  the  downstroke  is  2.74,  which  is  about  3  times  as  large  as  the 
maximum steady-state lift coefficient of a dragonfly wing; the time average of the 
horizontal force coefficient is 1.97, which is also large. The reasons for the large 
force  coefficients  are  the  acceleration  at  the  beginning  of  a  stroke,  the  delayed 
stall and the “pitching-up” motion near the end of the stroke. 

(2) In  the  cases  of  two-airfoil,  the  time-variations  of  the  force  and  moment 
coefficients on each airfoil are broadly similar to that of the single airfoil in that 
the  vertical  force  is  mainly  produced  in  downstroke  and  horizontal  force  in 
upstroke, but very large differences exist due to the interaction. 

(3) For in-phase stroking, the major differences caused by the interaction are that the 
vertical force on FA in downstroke is increased and the horizontal force on FA in 
upstroke  decreased.  As  a  result,  the  magnitude  of  the  resultant  force  is  almost 
unchanged but it inclines less forward. 

(4) For  counter  stroking,  the  major  differences  are  that  the  vertical  force  on  AA  in 
downstroke and horizontal force on FA in upstroke are decreased. As a result, The 
magnitude  of  the  resultant  force  is  decreased  by  about  20%  percent  but  its 
direction is almost unchanged. 

(5) For 90˚-phase-difference stroking, the major differences are that the vertical force 

 

10

on AA in downstroke and horizontal force on FA in upstroke are decreased greatly 
and the horizontal force on AA in upstroke increased.    As a result the magnitude 
of the resultant force is decreased by about 28% and it inclines more forward. 
(6) Among  the  three  cases  of  phase  angles,  in-phase  flapping  produces  the  largest 
vertical  force  (also  the  largest  resultant  force);  the  90˚-phase-difference  flapping 
has the largest horizontal force, although it produces the smallest resultant force. 

   

REFERENCES 

1.  Alexander, D.E.,    “Unusual phase relationships between the forewings and 
hindwings  in  flying  dragonflies”,      Journal  of  Exp.Biol.,  Vol.109,  1984, 
pp.379～383. 

2.  Norberg,R.A.,    “Hovering  flight  of  the  dragonfly  Aeschna  juncea  L., 
kinematics and aerodynamics”,    In Swimming and Flying in Nature (ed. T.Y. 
Wu,  C.J.  Brokaw  and  C.Brennen)  pp.763～781,  NewYork,  Plenum  Press, 
1975. 

3.  Wakenling,  J.M.  and  Ellington,  C.P.,    “Dragonfly  flight,  Ⅱ.  velocities, 
accelerations  and  kinematics  of  flapping  flight”,    Journal  of  Exp.Biol., 
Vol.200, 1997, pp.557～582. 

4.  Weis-Fogh,  T.,    “Quick  estimates  of  flight  fitness  in  hovering  animals, 
including  novel  mechanisms  for  lift  production”,    Journal  of  Exp.Biol., 
Vol.59, 1973, pp.169～230. 

5.  Somps,  C.  and  Luttges,  M.,    “Dragonfly  flight:  novel  uses  of  unsteady 

separation flows”,    Sicence, Vol.28, 1985, pp.1326～1328. 

6.  Saharon, D. and Luttges, M.,    “Dragonfly unsteady aerodynamics: the role 
of the wing phase relations in controlling the produced flows”,    AIAA Paper 
89-0832, 1989. 

7.  Saharon,  D.  and  Luttges,  M.,    “Visualization  of  unsteady  separated  flow 

produced  by  mechanically  driven  dragonfly  wing  kinematics  model”,   
AIAA Paper 88-0569, 1988. 

8.  Rogers,  S.E.,  Kwak,  D.  and  Kiris,  C.,    “Numerical  solution  of  the 
incompressible Navier-Stokes equations for steady-state and time-dependent 
problems”,    AIAA Journal, Vol.29, 1991, pp.603～610. 

9.  Lan,  S.L.  and  Sun,  M.,    “Aerodynamic  properties  of  a  wing  performing 
unsteady  rotational  motions  at  low  Reynolds  number”,    Acta  mechanica, 
(2001)149, pp.135～147. 

10.  Meakin,  R.,    “Moving  body  overset  grid  methods  for  complete  aircraft 

tiltrotor simulations”,    AIAA Paper 93-3350, 1993. 

11.  Hilgenstock,  A.,    “A  fast  method  for  the  elliptic  generation  of  three 
dimensional  grids  with  full  boundary  control”,    Num.  grid  generation  in 
CFM’88,    Pineridge Press Ld., pp.137～146, 1988. 

12.  Kovasznay,  LSG,    “Hot-wire  investigation  of  the  wake  behind  cylinders  at 

low Reynolds numbers”, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A, Vol.198, 1949, pp.179-190. 

13.  Hamdani, H. And Sun, M.,    “Aerodynamic forces and flow structures of an 
airfoil  in  some  unsteady  motions  at  low  Reynolds  number”,    Acta 
mechanica, Vol.145, No.1-4, 2000, pp.1-16. 

 

 
 

 

11

Table 1      Lift and drag coefficients and Strouhal numbers for circular 
cylinder flow at Reynolds number 200 

 

Present 
Kovasznay[12] 
Rogers[8] 

DC  
1.225 ± 0.035 
－－－ 
1.23 ± 0.05 

LC  
± 0.62 
－－－ 
± 0.65 

tS  
0.19 
0.19 
0.185 

Table 2 Values of 

yC   averaged over downstroke 

phase   
difference 
 
 
o0  
 
 
180  
 
 
o90  

o

and 

HC   over upstroke. 

dyC ,

 

uHC ,

 

2.74 (SA) 
 
3.49 (FA) 
2.57 (AA) 
 
2.61 (FA) 
1.85 (AA) 
 
2.03 (FA) 
1.50 (AA) 

1.97 (SA) 
 

1.21 (FA) 
1.56 (AA) 
 
1.34 (FA) 
1.67 (AA) 
 
0.72 (FA) 
2.00 (AA) 

Table 3 The total vertical and horizontal force coefficients 

and the resultant force coefficients. 

phase 
difference 

(SA) 

o0  

180  

o

o90  

yC  

1.22 

1.34 

0.95 

0.78 

HC  

0.76 

0.46 

0.62 

0.68 

RC  

1.44 

1.42 

1.12 

1.03 

β 

o32  

o18  

o33  

o41  

 

 

 

12

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig.4 Comparison between the vorticity contours of a 

moving airfoil at 

25.4=τ

  calculated using single 

grid and moving overset grid. 

Fig.1 A sketch of the flapping motions. (a) in-phase, 

(b) 180°phase difference, (c) 90°phase difference. 

Fig.2 Some portions of the moving overset grids. 

Fig.5 Force and moment coefficients vs.  τ , 

  single airfoil. 

Fig.3  Comparison  between  the  lift  coefficients  of  a 

moving  airfoil  calculated  using  single  grid  and 

moving  overset  grids.  CL  contributed  by  apparent 

mass  force,  obtained  from  potential  flow  theory,  is 

included (the theory is applicable only near 

0=τ ). 

. 

13

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a)  velocity  seen  by  fore  airfoil;  (b)  velocity 

seen by aft airfoil 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig.6  Vorticity  and  streamline  plots,  single 

airfoil 

Fig.9 Vorticity plots, fore and aft airfoils, in-phase. 

Fig.7 Force and moment coefficients vs.τ, 

  fore and aft airfoils, in-phase. 

Fig.10 Streamline plots in the upstroke, 

  fore and aft airfoils, in-phase. 

Fig.8 Velocity vector plots at 

75.26=τ

, in-phase. 

 

14

Fig.11 Surface pressure distribution   

at 

29=τ

, in-phase 

Fig.12 Force and moment coefficients vs.  τ. 

  Fore and aft airfoils,180°phase difference 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig.13 Vorticity plots at various times. Fore and aft 

airfoils, 180°phase difference 

 

15

(b) 

2.46=τ

 

Fig.15 Force and moment coefficients vs.  τ. 

  Fore and aft airfoils,

o90   phase difference 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) 

05.45=τ

 

(c) 

35.47=τ

 

(d) 

45.49=τ

 

(e) 

6.50=τ

 

(f) 

75.51=τ

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig.14 Streamline plots at various times. Fore and aft 

airfoils, 180°phase difference 

16

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(b)

2.46=τ

 

(c)

35.47=τ

 

(d)

4.48=τ

 

(e)

45.49=τ

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig.16 Vorticity plots at various time. 

  Fore and aft airfoils, 

o90   phase difference. 

(f)

75.51=τ

 

Fig.17 Streamline plots at various times.   

Fore and aft airfoils, 

o90   phase difference. 

(a)

05.45=τ

 

 

17

