Evaluation scheme for the design of high power 
single mode vertical-cavity surface-emitting 
lasers 

Young-Gu Ju 
KyungPook National University, Sangyeok, Daegu  702-701  Korea 
ygju@knu.ac.kr 
 

Abstract: A very simple and efficient evaluation procedure is suggested for 
the  design  of  high  power  single  mode  VCSELs  by  reviewing  the  physical 
mechanisms that governs mode transition and simplifying the computation 
steps. In addition, the new structures are proposed and tested following the 
suggested  evaluation  procedure.  As  a  result,  the  proposed  design  exhibits 
much  better  stability  of  the  fundamental  mode  over  a  current  range  wider 
than the conventional one. 
2003 Optical Society of America 
OCIS codes: (140.3430) Laser theory; (140.5960) Semiconductor lasers 

References and links 

 
1.  C. Jung, R. Jager, M. Grabherr, P. Schweitzer, R. Michalzik, B. Weigl, S. Muller, and K. J. Ebeling, “4.8 

mW single mode oxide confined top surface emitting vertical cavity laser diodes,” Electron. Lett. 33, 1790-
1791 (1997). 

2.  H. Unold, S. W. Mahmoud, F. Eberhard, R. Jaeger, M. Kicherer, F. Mederer, M. C. Riedl, and K. J. Ebeling, 

“Large-area single-mode selectively oxidized VCSELs: Approaches and Experimental,” Proc. SPIE, 3946, 
207-218 (2000). 

3.  K. D. Choquette, A. A. Allerman, K. M. Geib, and J. J. Hindi, "Lithographically-defined gain apertures 

within selectively oxidized VCSELs," in CLEO Tech. Dig. 2000, 232-233 (2000),  

4.  Y. A. Wu, G. S. Li, R. F. Nabiev, K. D. Choquette, C. Caneau, and C. J. Chang-Hasnain, “Single-mode, 

passive antiguide vertical cavity surface emitting laser,” IEEE J. Select. Topics Quantum Electron. 1, 629-
637 (1995) 

5.  H. Martinsson, J. A. Vukusic, and A. Larsson, “Single-mode power dependence on surface relief size for 
mode-stabilized oxide-confined vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 12, 
1129-1131 (2000).  
J. A. Vukusic, H. Martinsson, J. S. Gustavsson, and A. Larsson, “Numerical optimization of the single 
fundamental mode output from a surface modified vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser”, IEEE J. of 
Quantum Electron., 37, 108-117 (2001) 

6. 

7.  D. I. Babic, G. H. Gohler, J. E. Bowers, and E. L. Hu, “Isotype heterojunctions with flat valence or 

8. 

conduction band,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 33, 2195-2198 (1997). 
E. R. Hegblom, “Engineering oxide apertures in vertical cavity lasers,” Ph.D dissertation, Electrical and 
Computer Engineering, University of California (1999). 
Takanori Okoshi, Optical fibers, (Academic Press 1982), Chap. 4. 

9. 
10.  Y. G. Ju, J. H. Ser, and Y. H. Lee, “Analysis of metal-interlaced-grating vertical-cavity surface-emitting 
lasers using the modal method by modal expansion”, IEEE J. of Quantum Electron., 33, 589-595 (1997)  

11.  G. R. Hadley, “Effective index model for vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers,” Optics Lett. 20, 1483-

12.  W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, B. P. Flannery, Numerical recipes in C (Cambridge 

1485 (1995)  

University Press, 1982), Chap. 17. 

 
 

1. Introduction 
Vertical-cavity  surface-emitting  lasers(VCSELs)  have  gained  great  attention  as an  attractive 
light  source  for  short-distance  optical  communication systems,  optical  interconnects,  optical 

storage,  and  laser printing.  Many  applications  of  VCSELs,  however,  are  still  limited  by  the 
difficulty  of  high  power  fundamental  mode  operation  in  standard  devices.  Due  to  the 
extremely  short  cavity  length,  the  VCSEL  has  only  one  longitudinal  mode  and  the  large 
transverse dimension leads to lasing in multiple transverse modes. There have been numerous 
approaches  in  trying  to  solve  this  issue.  They  include  small  aperture  oxide  VCSELs[1],  an 
extended optical cavity[2], gain apertured VCSELs[3], anti-guided structures[4] and the use of 
surface relief structures[5]. Some of the results are excellent, but some problems remain in the 
single  mode  power  level,  single  mode  operating  current  range,  device-reliability  and 
fabrication complexity. Along with the experimental results, many theoretical models are also 
suggested  and  several  of  them  are  in  good  correlation  with  the  experimental  results.  The 
excessive effort required to achieve a high accuracy makes the modeling so complicated and 
often  prevents  providing  physical  insights  about  the  key  mechanism  of  mode  control  in 
VCSELs to the device engineers[6]. In this paper, the importance of the thermal issue in mode 
control  is  emphasized  and  a  simple  formula  describing  the  relationship  of  the  device 
temperature  to  device  geometry  is  provided.  Focusing  on  this  thermal  problem,  a  new 
structure is proposed in order to improve mode stability over a wider operating current range 
and it is compared with the conventional structure through simple calculations. 

2. Size dependence of temperature 

In order to achieve a high power fundamental mode, there is a need to remember what causes 
output  power  to  saturate  in  VCSELs.  The  power  rollover  can  be  mainly  attributed  to  the 
mismatch between gain peak and cavity peak as the device temperature increases, especially 
in  the  case  of  a  short  wavelength.  Since  a  small  active  volume  means  a  high  electrical  and 
thermal  resistance, a small  device  has a higher  temperature  increase for  a  given  current  and 
thus  has  earlier  output  power  saturation.  Therefore,  if  the  device  is  large  enough  to  ignore 
optical  scattering  loss,  the  best  way  to  achieve  high  power  operation  is  to  suppress  the 
temperature rise in the device. The temperature rise inside the cavity is a function of electrical 
resistance and thermal conductance of the device since they correspond to heat generation and 
dissipation.  Therefore,  historically,  a  lot  of  effort  has  been  paid  in  reducing  electrical 
resistance  by  modifying  the  doping  profile  around  a  hetero-junction  barrier  in  the  top 
distributed  Bragg  reflector  (DBR)[7].  The  trials  proved  to  be  successful  and  contributed  to 
commercialization  of  850  nm  VCSELs.  Despite  the  great  success  in  reducing  electrical 
resistance,  the  investigation  on  the  relation  between  geometry  and  temperature  profile 
revealed  a  fundamental  limit  of  heat  dissipation  efficiency  in  correlation  with  size 
dependence.   

Table 1. Thermal conductivity used in calculation 

Material 

K(W/(m K)) 

GaAs 

AlGaAs 

Au 

44. 

16. 

3150. 

 
At first, the electrical resistance is inversely proportional to the square of the radius of the 
aperture in a pillar structure in accordance with Ohm’s law. However, if the current spreads 
well above the aperture in place with a large contact pad, it is approximately proportional to 
1/r [8]. Second, the thermal resistance also shows a similar dependence on the radius of the 
current aperture since both temperature and electrical potential follow Laplace’s equation with 
the  exception  of  the  source  term.  For  a  more  exact  expression  of  geometrical  thermal 
dependence,  the  numerical  simulation  was  performed  using  a  commercial  FEM(Finite 
Element Method) solver called ANSYS. In the calculation, the geometry of a standard 850 nm 
oxide  VCSEL  is  used  and the  core temperatures are  measured  for  the  same amount  of  heat 
generated.  The  parameters  used  in  the  calculation  are  shown  in  Table  1.  Since  the  thermal 

conductance  of  the  composing  materials  is  relatively  well  known  and  the  equation  solving 
software has been proven successful in mechanical engineering, the result is expected to agree 
with  real  values.  For  instance, the  core  temperature  with  a  radius of  5  µm  rises  11.5  °C for 
heat  dissipation  of  7.8  mW.  This  temperature  increase  is  within  the  nominal  operating 
temperature  range,  which  is  usually  measured  by  observing  the  wavelength  shift.  The  final 
result  is  summarized  in  Fig.  1.  The  log-log  plot  indicates  that  the  temperature  increase  is 
roughly  proportional  to  1/r1.1.  After  all,  the  core  temperature  rise  is  proportional  to  1/r2.1  in 
oxide type or 1/r3.1 in an etched pillar type for a fixed electrical current. It comes from the fact 
that the heat generation is proportional to electrical power dissipation and the electrical power 
dissipation is again proportional to electrical resistance for a constant current. The strong size 
dependence  of  the  device  temperature  puts  a  lower  boundary  on  the  size  of  the  current 
aperture  because  a  higher  temperature  causes  early  power  saturation  and  limits  the  optical 
peak power. 

70
60
50
40

30

20

10
9
8
7
6
5
4

3

o

)

C

(
e
s
i
r
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

 

 Simulation
 Linear Fit : y = 1.83-1.09 x

2

3

4

5

6

7

8 9 10

Radius of aperture(µm)

 

 

   Fig. 1. Temperature rise versus the radius of the current aperture. 

 
Actually, the size dependence of the temperature limits not only the design of high power 
VCSELs,  but  also  the  design  of  single  mode  VCSELs  because  the  temperature  profile 
severely  influences  transverse  mode  behavior  especially  at  small  aperture.  Reviewing  the 
thermal lens behavior in an implant VCSEL helps to understand the effect of a thermal profile 
on the mode transition of various VCSEL structures. The current path produces a heat profile 
similar  to  its  own  due  to  the  relation  between  power  dissipation  and  heat  profile.  Thus,  the 
size  of  the  current  aperture  can  be  assumed  to  be  equal  to  that  of  the  heat  source.  Heat 
generation  leads  to  a  temperature  profile  based  on  a  heat  conduction  equation.  The 
temperature profile changes the refractive index of the cavity. Finally, the central region has 
the  increased  effective  index  profile  acting  like  a  lens.  This  phenomenon  implies  that  we 
cannot separate the current path and refractive index change and the index profile changes as 
the current increases. Even if a VCSEL starts with a single mode, the increased index around 
the  current  path  makes  higher  order  modes emerge  as the  current  increases. This trend gets 
worse  with  a  larger  diameter  aperture  because  the  single  mode  condition  depends  on  the 
product  of  the  refractive  index  difference  and  the  diameter  of  core[9].  It  is  thought  that  the 
small current aperture may maintain the fundamental mode over wide current range. In reality, 
its temperature increases rapidly with a smaller aperture according to the dependence on size 
of the temperature rise. For a small current aperture, the higher index step prevents a single 
mode  operation  or the  increased core  temperature of the  device  stops  obtaining  high  output 
power. Therefore, it is obvious how important it is to investigate modal behavior as a function 
of the temperature increase at the center in order to find the optimum design for a single mode 
VCSEL.  

3. Evaluation procedure 

The above-mentioned viewpoint can be used to establish an efficient evaluation procedure for 
a  new  design  aiming  at  high  power  single  mode  VCSELs.  In  the  evaluation  procedure,  the 
mode behavior is usually described by modal gain or modal loss because the loss difference or 
gain difference is proportional to the mode suppression ratio[10]. In addition, the temperature 
rise can be replaced by the refractive index change of the cavity since the temperature rise is 
almost  proportional  to  the  index  increase. Then, the  evaluation procedure  of  mode behavior 
can  be  reduced  into  a  plot  of  modal  loss/gain  versus  the  index  change  within  the  current 
aperture.  The  calculation  becomes  purely  optical  and  a  very  simple  problem.  With  this 
approach,  the  only  concern  is  how  large  a  difference  the  modal  loss/gain  maintains  as  the 
index at the center increases. The suggested procedure eliminates the need to obtain complete 
light-current curves by way of a complicated calculation, only to assess the performance of a 
new design of a single mode high power VCSEL. Moreover, the calculation of a mode profile 
for a given index profile is greatly simplified by the introduction of the effective index model 
for  VCSEL[11].  This  model  removes  the  rapid  vertical  variation  of  the  field  from  a  three-
dimensional  field  profile.  In  the  case  of  cylindrical  symmetry,  solving  a  mode  profile  is 
reduced into a one-dimensional problem. Therefore, employing the effective index model for 
the evaluation procedure saves a lot of programming effort and computation time further. In 
this  paper,  the  one-dimensional  scalar  wave  equation,  Eq.  (1)  is  solved  by  a  shooting 
algorithm[12] and the overlap integral is carried out to obtain the modal gain or loss.  

+

2

βµεω
2
[

r
)(

−

)

−

0

]

R

=

.0

 

 

 

(1) 

1
r

d
dr

(

r

dR
dr

 
2 r1

2

m
2
r

2 r1

Implant

Active

Bottom
DBR

2 r2

a

b
Active

Bottom
DBR

0.002
variable

 

variable

       

 

    (a) Structure A 

 

 

 

          (b) Structure B 

Fig.  2.  Two  designs  for  high  power  single  mode  VCSELs.  The  plots  at  the 
bottom represent the refractive index profiles of the respective structures. Parts 
a and b in (b) are an index guiding disc and absorption region. 

 
The two designs shown in  Fig. 2 are tested by the suggested evaluation procedure. The 
first  design  A  is  selected  as  a  control  group  in  order  to  compare  it  to  the  newly  proposed 
structure B. The calculations from the two different 850 nm VCSEL designs are presented in 
Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. The first structure A can be made by an implantation with the radius of the 
current  aperture  equal  to  3  µm.  As  the  refractive  index  at  the  center  increases,  the  higher 
modes appear. The modal gain of the fundamental mode remains higher than those of other 

modes over the entire index change. The modal gain difference, however, is small in absolute 
value and decreases with temperature rise. In the plot, the modal gain of 0.01 can compensate 
the  cavity  loss  when  the  reflectivity  of  the  DBR  is  0.99.  Owing  to  the  absence  of  loss 
difference in the first structure, the mode selection is mainly determined by gain difference. 
As  expected,  the  number  of  modes  is  less  than  that  of  the  larger  current  aperture.  If  the 
aperture size decreases further, the higher modes appear at a larger index change and the gain 
difference  becomes  larger.  In  this  case,  the  gain  difference  at  the  index  change  of  0.01  is 
0.0004.  The  mode  suppression  ratio  with  the  loss  difference  is  about  80.  The  mode 
suppression  ratio  heavily,  however,  depends  on  many  other  parameters  like  output  power 
level and extra loss terms. In this paper, the value is used for comparison purposes between 
the structures. Even though this gain difference is small, it is still greater than that of the large 
current aperture VCSEL.  

 

 

01

11

21

02

31

3.270

3.272

3.274

3.276

3.278

3.280

Refractive index at the center

Fig. 3. Modal gains of structure A as a function of the index change at the 
center. 

0.0120

0.0115

0.0110

0.0105

0.0100

0.0095

0.0090

0.0085

0.0080

i

n
a
G

 
l
a
d
o
M

-0.005

01

-0.010

-0.015

11

s
s
o
L
 
l
a
d
o
M

-0.020

-0.025

-0.030

-0.035

21
02

12

31

03

22

41

32

51

3.270

3.272

3.274

3.276

3.278

3.280

Refractive index at the center

0.0120

0.0115

0.0110

0.0105

0.0095

0.0090

0.0085

0.0080

0.0100

 

-0.020

 

-0.005

-0.010

-0.015

-0.025

-0.030

-0.035

 

 

Fig. 4. Modal losses of structure B as a function of index change at the center.. 

 
From another simulation with the same structure as that of A and with an aperture of 5 
µm  in  radius, the  gain  difference  is  only  0.0001. The  small  gain  difference  at  a  large  index 
change means that the mode discrimination is very weak at a high temperature or high current. 
At a high current, the spatial hole burning effect often changes the modal gains and causes a 
mode  transition  by  making  a  higher  order  mode  have  a  greater  modal  gain  than  the 
fundamental mode. When the performance of the two current apertures is compared, the range 

of index change should be considered carefully. Since the temperature scale depends on 1/r2.1, 
the radius of 3 µm has about three times a larger temperature increase for a given current. In 
other words, the 3 µm device has three times smaller input current at an index change of 0.01 
than the 5 µm device. In this sense, the design should be directed to increase modal loss/gain 
difference by sustaining a large current aperture. Before entering the second structure, more 
should  be said  regarding  the  horizontal  axis  of  the  plot  in  order to  help  grasp  the  idea how 
large it is in the real device. The index scale of 0.01 corresponds to a 2.6 nm shift in the cavity 
wavelength according to Hadley’s results[11]. Considering that the cavity peak moves at the 
rate of 0.05 nm/°C, the temperature change is 52 °C. The elevated temperature also causes a 
mismatch between the cavity peak and gain peak. The offset between the two peaks is about 
13  nm  when  temperature  increases  52  °C. This  mismatch  can result  in  significant  gain  loss 
and eventually a power saturation because the gain width is around 20 nm. 

In  an  effort  to  improve  transverse  mode  behavior,  the  second  structure  B  in  Fig.  2  is 
proposed and the results of the calculation are illustrated in Fig. 4. It maintains a large current 
aperture and  provides  a  selective  loss  mechanism  to  achieve  a high  mode  suppression ratio. 
The radius of the current aperture is 5 µm. The structure consists of the selective absorption 
layer,  which  can  be  patterned  by  a  conventional  lithographic  technique. The  current  path  is 
defined  by  implantation  to  avoid  an  excessive  index  guiding  effect.  While  index  guiding 
reduces optical scattering loss, it deteriorates single mode behavior. Therefore, there should be 
a trade-off in design with regard to index guiding. Structure B contains an index-guiding disc 
causing an index difference of 0.002 at the center for a stable mode behavior. This small index 
step  is  soon  buried  in  the  large  index  step  generated  by  a  thermal  profile  as  the  operating 
current  increases. The  index  disc,  however,  contributes  to  improving  laser  performance  and 
mode  stabilization  right  above  the  threshold  because,  without  it,  the  VCSELs  act  like  a 
conventional  implant  lasers  with  large  threshold  current.  The  modal  loss  difference  at  the 
index change of 0.01 is about 0.007. It is almost 18 times larger than that of A and is 70 times 
larger than that of the 5 µm device without selective loss structure. The increase in the modal 
loss  difference  results  in  the  same  amount  of  increase  in  the  mode  suppression  ratio.  Since 
many  factors  come  into  play  at  a  high  current range, the real  device  may  hardly  show  such 
significant  improvement  in  mode  suppression  ratio.  The  enhanced  modal  loss  difference, 
however,  qualitatively  describes  that  the  new  design  can  make  the  fundamental  mode  more 
dominant  at  a  high  current  level  than  the  conventional  one.  Another  advantage  of  this 
structure is that modal loss can be controlled by changing the thickness of the absorption layer 
inside the cavity. The thickness of the layer can be controlled during crystal growth with great 
precision.  In  the  calculation,  a  40  nm  GaAs  layer  is  used  as  an  absorption  layer  and  it  is 
placed near the first nodal point from the active layer. 

4. Summary 

A  very  simple  and  efficient  evaluation  procedure  is  suggested for  the  design  of  high  power 
single mode VCSELs by reviewing the physical mechanisms that governs mode transition and 
simplifying  the  computation  steps.  In  addition,  the  new  structures  are  proposed  and  tested 
following  the  suggested  evaluation  tool.  As  a  result,  the  new  design  exhibits  much  better 
stability of the fundamental mode over a wide current range than the conventional one. 

Acknowledgements 
This research was supported by the Kyungpook National University Research Fund, 2004. I 
would  like  to  acknowledge  Dr.  Lee,  Myung-Lae  of  the  Electronics  and  Telecommunication 
Research Institute for his help in the calculation using ANSYS. 

