DAΦNE INJECTION SYSTEM UPGRADE

A. Ghigo, LNF-INFN, Frascati, Italy

Abstract

2 PRESENT INJECTION SCHEME

High  luminosity  in  DAΦ NE  [1]  needs  very  high
electron  and  positron  currents  stored.  A  full  energy
(510 MeV)  injection  system  composed  by  a  full  energy
electron  and  positron  linac  and  an  accumulator-damping
ring  is  presently  used.  The  electron  and  positron  beams,
alternatively  accelerated  by  the  linac,  are  injected  and
stacked in the accumulator with high efficiency thanks to
its large acceptance and short damping time. The damped
beams  are  extracted  and  transferred  to  the  main  ring
through  a  long  transfer  line  that  has  been  built  inside
already  existing  buildings.  The  refill  time  of  the  collider
is  limited  by  the  transfer  line  set-up  change  between  the
two  different  beams  modes.  In  this  paper  a  transfer  line
modification  is  proposed  in  order  to  reduce  the  switch
time.  A  possible  injection  scheme  for  the  main  rings  is
also described.

1 INTRODUCTION

The  DAΦNE  High  Luminosity  option  foresees  a  very
powerful  injection  system  to  allow  injection  into  the
collider  of  very  high  average  currents,  distributed  in
150 bunches,  in  very  short  time.  To  obtain  high  average
luminosity, high efficiency injection is mandatory because
the  beam  lifetime  is  limited  to  few  minutes,  due  both  to
the  strong  contribution  of  the  Touschek  effect  enhanced
by  the  very  small  longitudinal  and  transverse  bunch
dimensions and to the beam-beam bremsstrahlung [1].

An injection system composed by a full energy electron
and  positron  linac  and  an  accumulator-damping  ring  is
presently used [2,3]. This system provides injection of 1A
of  electron  current  in  less  than  1  min,  distributed  in
120 bunches;  injection  of  1A  of  positrons  needs
approximately the same time.

The  electron  and  positron  beams  are  transferred  to  the
main ring through one long transfer line passing through
existing  building.  At  least  3  minutes  are  necessary  for
switching the transfer line from electron to positron mode,
and vicecersa, limiting the refill speed.

Two  separate  lines  to  transfer  the  beams  from  the
accumulator  to  the  main  rings  are  here  proposed.  The
injection  time  will  be  decreased  and  the  additional
possibility  to  alternatively  inject  corresponding  electron
and positron bunches will be gained.

High repetition rate injection

Both KLOE and FINUDA experiments on DAΦNE run
in top-up mode, with a refill every 15-20 min. Data taking
is  disabled  in  the  KLOE  detector  for  only  50  ms
(3 damping  times)  at  each  injection  shot,  by  forbidding
the  acquisition  trigger.  Therefore  the  acquisition  duty
cycle is close to 100%. During the switch of the injection
system  from  electron  to  positron  mode  and  viceversa
there  is  a  significant  reduction  of  the  stored  currents  of
both  beams  since  the  lifetime  is  of  the  order  of  half  an
hour. The peak currents of the two beams are not reached
at the same time and the average luminosity decreases not
only  due  to  the  total  current  reduction  but  also  to  the
current difference between corresponding bunches.

The injection system switches from electron to positron

mode with the following operations:

- The  tungsten  target  in  which  the  electron-positron
pairs  are  produced  is  inserted  in  the  Linac,
intersecting the electron trajectory.

- The  gun  current  is  increased  up  to  6  A  and  a
quadrupole triplet focusing the beam on the target is
switched  on.  The  capture  section  solenoids  placed
after the target are powered.

- The  accelerating  sections  phases  are  shifted  to

positron accelerating mode.

- The  positron  beam  produced  and  accelerated  in  the
Linac,  uses  the  same  transfer  line  for  injection  into
the Accumulator ring and (partially) to pass from the
Accumulator  to  the  DAΦ NE  main  rings.  The
magnetic field of the bending magnets, placed in the
common transfer line, must change polarity in going
from electron to positron mode.

- The set up of all quadrupole magnets is changed.

The  most  time  consuming  operation  is  the  polarity
switch  and  set  up  of  the  transfer  line  magnets  between
electron and positron injection.

3 UPGRADED INJECTION SYSTEM

The  proposal  of  two  new  transfer  lines,  one  for  the
electron  beam  and  one  for  positron  one,  between  the
Damping  Ring  and  the  Main  Rings  avoid  the  magnets
polarity switch passing from electron to positron mode.

The  only  common  line  to  electrons  and  positrons  will
be  from  the  linac  to  the  damping  ring;  there  will  be  still
one  pulsed  dipole  magnet  in  it.  The  time  between  two
polarity switches is of the order of 100 ms, equivalent to
5 damping times in the damping ring. This common line
will  have  constant  quadrupoles  currents  settings,  which
match the betatron planes at the damping ring input in the
two  short  separate  arms  placed  before  the  septum
magnets.  The  Damping  Ring  has  a  symmetric  configu-
ration and it is used injecting the electron beam from one
side  through  CW  septa  and  extracting  the  damped  beam
through the septa dedicated to positron injection; the same
configuration  is  used  for  positrons  the  other  way  round.
The ring has a compact design, its 32 m of circumference
are very crowded and modifications should be avoided.

In order to deviate the beam extracted from the DR to
the new lines that transfer the beams to the main rings two
additional pulsed magnets are required.

The current pulse duration in these magnets is 100 ms,
the  same  as  in  the  linac  to  damping  ring  pulsed  magnet.
The kick angle should allow extraction of the beams from
the  present  lines  to  the  new  separated  ones:  it  is  of  the
order of 6 degrees, as presently delivered by the existing
pulsed  magnet  used  in  the  Linac  to  deflect  the  beam
towards the energy analyser.

The two lines exit from the DR hall passing above the
ring and partially over the existing transfer line. As shown
in Fig. 1, a new short shielded tunnel must be realized in
order  to  minimize  the  path,  since  there  is  not  enough
space in the concrete tunnel between the linac tunnel and
the damping ring hall to host two new lines.

new e- line

Figure 1: New transfer lines layout from the damping ring
to the present DAΦNE Main Rings.

The foreseen location for the new tunnel has just been

classified as controlled area.

The  straight  portion  of  these  transfer  lines  could  be  in
common for electrons and positrons with two Y magnets
at  the  ends  merging  and  separating  the  beams  into  the
main  rings  injection  lines.  With  this  configuration  the
injection switch sequences will be:

- The positron target is kept inserted also for electrons,
and  the  capture  section  solenoids  are  always
powered.

- Switch  from  positron  to  electron  mode  consists
therefore  only  in  shifting  the  accelerator  sections
phases.

- The  pulsed  magnet  between  the  linac  and  the
damping  ring  switches  polarity  in  less  than
100 ms.

-  The damping ring injection kickers change the pulser

charging voltage in less than 20 ms.

The extraction sequence will be:

- The  damping  ring  kicker  magnets  change  the

charging voltage.

- The  pulsed  magnet  downstream  the  extraction
septum  exit  is  switched  on,  sending  the  extracted
beam to the damping ring – main ring transfer line.
- The  bunch  is  transferred  to  the  corresponding  main

ring.

With  this  hardware  configuration  and  operation
procedure  the  dead  time  in  the  injection  switch  is
avoided. The injection of interacting electron and positron
bunches  is  also  possible  only  by  switching  the  pulsed
magnets and the linac phases at each shot. This injection
scheme  allows  to  have  equal  currents  in  the  interacting
bunches,  thus  optimising  instantaneous  and  average
luminosity.

This upgrade of the injection system could be very use-
ful also for the present DAΦNE configuration while it is
mandatory for the high luminosity option.

The  high  luminosity  upgrade  of  DAΦNE  is  based  on
the strong RF focusing principle [4], in which the bunch
length changes along the ring passing from the maximum
length  in  the  high  voltage  RF  cavities  section  to  a  mini-
mum in the interaction region.

The  vacuum  components  that  contribute  to  the  beam
coupling  impedance  should  be  concentrated  in  the
section  where  the  bunch  length  is  maximum.  In  the
preliminary  ring  design  a  long  straight  section  for  each
ring  is  dedicated  to  the  RF  cavities  and  the  injection
section.

new e+ line

4 DAΦNE II MAIN RINGS INJECTION

Figure 2: Crossing section schematic layout.

The  electron  and  positron  beams  are  injected  into  the
Main  rings  by  means  of  CW  septa  and  pulsed  kicker
magnets.

In order to keep the beams well separated in the area in
which  the  two  rings  cross,  two  vertically  separated
vacuum chambers are proposed [see Fig. 2].

Vertical dipoles inside the injection straight sections are
used to separate the vacuum chambers of the electron and
positron  rings  at  the  crossing  point  (see  Fig. 2).  The
vertical separation must be the smallest possible in order
to minimize the induced vertical dispersion.

5 CONCLUSIONS

A  modification  of  the  injection  transfer  lines  is
proposed in order to avoid the dead time due to the switch
between  electron  and  positron  modes  in  the  present
configuration.

Already  in  the  present  DAΦNE  configuration  the
integrated  luminosity  would  benefit  from  such  an
upgrade.  For  the  DAΦNE  high  luminosity  option  the
new  transfer  lines  are  mandatory  to  allow  continuous
injection.

6 REFERENCES

[1] C. Biscari, these proceedings.

[2] M.A.. Preger: “A Positron and Electron Accumulator
for  DAΦ NE”,  DAΦ NE  Technical  Note,  I-1,
8/11/1990

[3] M.E.  Biagini  et  al.:  "Performance  and  Operation
 of the DA ΦNE Accumulator ", Proceedings of
the  European  Particle  Accelerator  Conference,
Stockholm (Sweden), 22-26/6/1998, p. 415.

[4] A. Gallo, M. Zobov, these proceedings.

