EVIDENCES FOR SKELETAL STRUCTURES IN TORNADO AND
THE PROBABLE ROLE OF NANOTUBULAR DUST
IN THE ORIGIN OF TORNADO

A.B. Kukushkin, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov
RRC "Kurchatov Institute", Moscow, 123182, Russia

Abstract.  The  results  are  presented  of  an  analysis,  with  the  help  of  the  method  of  multilevel
dynamical  contrasting  of  the  images,  of  available  databases  of  tornado’s  images.  This  analysis
extends some preliminary results on identification of skeletal structures in tornadoes (Phys. Lett. A
306  (2002)  175)  and  enables  us  to  apply  to  the  case  of  tornado  our  former  hypothesis  for  the
probable role of  nanotubular dust in the origin and stability/longevity of  filamentary structures of a
skeletal form in electric discharges. A hypothesis for the contribution of nanotubular dust to initiation
of  tornadoes  is  suggested,  in  which  a  key  role  is  delivered  to  ability  of  the  hypothetical  skeleton
inside the thundercloud to provide fast long-range transport of electricity. Thus, tornado’s initiation
is  suggested  to  be  an  electrostatic  instability  caused  exclusively  by  the  presence  and  special
structuring of a nanodust.

1.  INTRODUCTION.  EXTENDING  THE  SKELETAL  STRUCTURE  PHENOMENON  TO
TORNADOES

Recently a phenomenon of skeletal structures  (namely, those of particular topology – tubules,
cartwheels, and their simplest combinations) have been found in a very wide range of length scales
[1(A)],  in  the  course  of  verifying  the  hypothesis  [1(B)]  which  suggested  the  long-lived  filaments,
observed  in  a  gaseous  Z-pinch,  to  possess  a  skeleton  which  might  be  assembled  during  electric
breakdown,  prior  to  appearance  of  major  plasma,  from  wildly  produced  carbon  nanotubes  (or
similar  nanostructures  of  other  chemical  elements).  The  proof-of-concept  studies  showed  the
presence of tubular and cartwheel-like structures in

(i)  the  high-resolution  (visible-light  and  x-ray)  images  of  plasma  in  tokamaks,  Z-pinches,
plasma focus, and laser-produced plasma (in the range 100 m m - 10 cm), including the images taken
at electric breakdown stage of discharge in tokamak, plasma focus and vacuum spark (see the survey
paper [1(C)]),

(ii) various types of dust deposits in tokamak T-10 (10 nm - 10 m m) [2(A)],
(iii) hail particles (1-10 cm), tornado (103-105 cm), and various objects in space (1011-1023 cm)

Two phenomena observed in the range 10-5-1023 cm, namely
(i) topological identity (i.e. the similarity) of the above structures (especially, of the cartwheel

as a structure of essentially non-hydrodynamic nature), and

(ii) the trend of assembling a structure from similar ones of smaller size (i.e. the trend towards

[1(A)].

self-similarity),

suggest all these skeletal structures, similarly to skeletons in the particles of dust and hail, to be
basically a  fractal  condensed  matter  of  particular  topology  of  the  fractal  [1(A)].  Specifically,  this
matter may be assembled from  nanotubular blocks in a way similar to that in the skeletons found in
the submicron dust particles [2(B)]. The present status of the concept [1(B)] is given in the survey
paper [1(D)].

Here  we  present  the  results  of  analyzing  --  with  the  help  of  the  method  [1(E)]  of  multilevel
dynamical contrasting (MDC) of the images -- the available databases of tornado’s images (Sec. 2).
This  analysis  extends  some  preliminary  results  on  identification  of  skeletal  structures  in  tornadoes
[1(A)]  and  enables  us  to  apply  to  the  case  of  tornado  the  hypotheses  [1(B)].  A  hypothesis  for  the
contribution  of  nanotubular  dust  to  initiation  of  tornadoes  is  suggested,  in  which  a  key  role  is

delivered  to  ability  of  the  hypothetical  skeleton  inside  the  thundercloud  to  provide  fast  nonlocal
transport of electricity (Sec. 3).

The present paper is composed of contributions by  V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov (Sec. 2) and  A.B.
Kukushkin (Sec. 3) and has been prepared for an oral presentation [1(F)] at the 45th Annual meeting
of American Physical Society’s Division Plasma Physics (Albuquerque, NM, USA, October 2003). It
has also been reported at plasma physics meetings [1(G,H)] held in the Russian Federation.

2. SKELETAL STRUCTURES IN TORNADOES: PHENOMENOLOGY

The major features of skeletal structures found -- with the help of the method of multilevel dynamical
contrasting  (MDC)  of  the  images  [1(E)]  --  in  the  available  databases  of  tornado’s  images,  are  as
follows.

2.1 The presence of  skeletal  structures  (tubules,  cartwheels,  and  their  simple  combinations)  in  the
main body of tornado and in its close vicinity. Similarity of these structures to those formerly found
in a wide range of length scales, including the dust deposits in high-current electric discharges [2]
and the hailstones [1(A)].

(a)

Fig.  1.  (a)  The  image  of  a  massive  tornado  (the  original  is  taken  from  collection  [3],
http://www.photolib.noaa.gov/historic/nws/images/big/wea00216.jpg).  The  images  in  the  windows
around  main  body  of  tornado's  column,  are  processed  with  MDC  method  and  magnified  in  the
following figures: (b) lower left; (c) lower right; (d), upper right; (e) upper left;.

 

Fig. 1(b). The cartwheel-like structure is seen in the center of the image. The straight filaments may
posses tubular structure as is suggested by the images of their edges.

Fig. 1(c). This  shows  the  cartwheel  whose  elliptic  image  is  seen  in  the  centre  of  the  picture.  The
cartwheel is located on a long axle-tree directed downwards to the right, and is ended with a bright
spot on the axle’s edge.

Fig. 1(d). This illustrates the presence of a complicated network of filamentary structures.

Fig. 1(e). The cartwheel-like structure with the axis directed to the observer.

2.2. General layout of skeletal structures in the main body of tornado is similar to that in a straight Z-
pinch.  First,  the  cartwheels  on  the  axle-tree  outside  the  main  body  of  tornado  are  directed
transversely to the main body – similarly to cartwheels located outside hot plasma column of the Z-
pinch  (cf.  Fig.  1(c)  and  the  images  of  a  gaseous  Z-pinch  in  [1(B,C)]  ).  Second,  the  main  body  of
tornado  possesses  large  tubular  formations  which  are  also  directed  transversely  to  the  funnel  (see
Figs. 2(b), 3). Similar structuring appears in the funnel arising from the ground (see Fig. 4).

2.3. The resolvability of skeletal structures in the photos taken with large enough exposure suggests
that  these  structures  are  moving  slowly  as  compared  to  gas  motion  --  and  therefore  are,  to  a  large
extent, decoupled from the motion of gaseous component.

2.4. The transient region between  tornadic  thundercloud  and  the  funnel  appears  to  possess  distinct
skeletal structures with a complicated junction of blocks (see Figs. 2(c,d)).

Fig.  2(a).  The  image  of  tornado  at  Norton,  Kansas  (June  1909),  taken  from  collection  [3],
http://www.photolib.noaa.gov/historic/nws/images/big/wea00248.jpg.

Fig. 2(b).  The  MDC-processed  image  of  tornado  of  Fig.  2(a).  The  tubular  formations  in  the  main
body  of  tornado  are  directed  nearly  horizontally  and  sometimes  possess  a  resolvable  coaxial
structure.

Fig.  2(c).  The  MDC-processed  image  of  the  fragment  of  the  image  of  Fig.  2(a),  namely  the  dark
conical formation, which is seen in the right upper part of Fig. 2(a) -- the transient region between the
thundercloud and the funnel. The boundary of the cone is marked with a white curve. The edge of the
cone seems to be the center of tubular formations directed horizontally. One of such skeletal tubules
directed to the left from the cone’s edge, is seen as the parallel ellipses.

Fig. 2(d). The fragment of the image of Fig. 2(c) (namely, the edge of the cone marked with the white
curve).  There  is  a  distinct  vertical  filament  and  the  coaxial  ring-shaped  structures  around  this
filament.

Fig. 3. The image of tornado with the distinct large horizontal branch. Interestingly, there is one more
horizontal  structure  outside  tornado’  funnel  (it  is  located  to  the  right  from  the  funnel),  which
possesses a distinct coaxial structure. The dark spots to the left from tornado may be shown to be the
centers of similar tubular formations.

Fig. 4. This picture illustrates the presence of tubular formations directed transversely to the funnel,
in the case of the funnel arising from the ground.

2.5. Dendricity of tornado’s body [1(A)] (see Fig. 5(a)).

2.6. Electric torch-like structuring of tornado’s funnel (see Fig. 5(a)). (Such a structuring is similar to
that found in a very broad range of length scales, see [1(A)]).

     (a)

   (b)

Fig. 5. (a) A fragment of the MDC-processed photographic image of a dendritic tornado with tubular
funnels/branches  of  estimated  diameter  ~100  m  (cf.  http://www.tornadochaser.net/).  It  looks  like
there is an internal illumination inside the funnels. The edge of major funnel is shown in the insert in
the right upper corner. Two other funnels do not contact the ground. The first is seen in the right-hand
side  of  the  picture  as  a  dark  branch  directed  opposite  to  the  observer.  The  second  (figure  b)  is
located upper to the left from major funnel – it is seen like the bright edge of a light-guiding branch
on the background of the opaque main body of major funnel. This branch seems to possess a tubular
skeletal structure with an internal coaxial dark rod.

2.7. Low-precipitation supercell may produce an intense hailstorm with large enough hailstones.

Vertical Looking LP Supercell 
and Big Hail Producer

This is an example of a LP thunderstorm 
in far western Oklahoma. The hail 
streamers were evident on this storm in 
advance of the main storm cloud. Much 
of the hail came out of the anvil, the ice 
crystal cloud that sweeps down stream in 
the jet stream. Vehicles were struck 
many miles in front of the storm with 
baseball hail while in the sunlight of the 
setting sun. Most did not know where the 
hail came from. In some cases storms like 
this will throw hail out the top and it may 
land anywhere within a few miles of the 
main thunderstorm cloud. This storm 
rotated for hours and had a tornadic
signature on radar but no tornadic
circulation ever made it to cloud base or 
the ground. Cells like this are a hazard to 
aviation flying in the near vicinity.

http://www.chaseday.com/hailstorms.htm

Fig. 6. Vertical Looking Low-Precipitation (LP) Supercell which is a Big Hail Producer (the image
is taken from http://www.chaseday.com/hailstorms.htm).

2.8. The trend toward  self-similarity  in  the  skeletal  structures.  It  appeared  difficult  to  identify  the
trend toward  self-similarity  in  the  images of tornadoes. However, this trend is quite distinct in the
hailstones (see Figs. 7(a,b,c) ).

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 7. The photographs [4] of hailstones of diameter 4.5 cm (a), 5 cm (b), and 5 cm (c). The frame in
the  left  lower  part  of  the  image  ‘a’  is  MDC-processed  (namely,  has  a  higher  contrast)  to  show  an
elliptic  image  of  the  edge  of  the  radially  directed  tubular  structure.  The  entire  structure  seems  to
contain a number of similar radial blocks.. Image ‘b’ shows strong radial bonds between the central
point and the wheel. A distinct coaxial structure of the cartwheel type is seen in the central part of the
image ‘c’. The trend toward self-similarity is manifested itself in the presence of small cartwheels on
the outer side of the entire cartwheel – namely, in the outer edges of the (slightly conical)  radially-
directed tubules which serve as the spokes of the entire wheel.

2.9. Sometimes hailstorm exhibits the signs of a regular structuring and presumably takes place at a
low  enough  speed  of  falling  dawn  that  allows  the  hailstones  to  survive  in  their  collision  with  the
ground.

2.10. The existence of areas of most frequent tornadoes (first of all, Tornado Alley in USA) may be
associated with the delivery of  nanodust  material  from  volcanoes  in  Africa  (see  Fig.  8  taken  from
[3]).

Fig. 8. (see http://www.photolib.noaa.gov/historic/nws/images/big/wea00419.jpg  )

3. A HYPOTHESIS FOR THE ROLE OF NANODUST IN THE ORIGIN OF TORNADO

The current status of treating the tornado’s mystery may be illustrated with the recent findings

[5] from the project VORTEX (Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment):

«VORTEX has produced a number of troubling new findings.
For  example,  it  appears  that  perhaps  many  fewer  supercells  and  mesocyclones  produce
tornadoes than scientists originally believed. At one time, researchers felt that tornadoes somehow
were  caused  directly  by  mesocyclones,  and  that  perhaps  one-half  of  all  mesocyclones  produced
tornadoes.  We  now  know  that  this  is  not  the  case,  and  that  tornado  formation  is  a  complicated
process that depends perhaps only indirectly on the presence of a mesocyclone.

Further, we have learned that the difference between tornadic and non-tornadic mesocyclones
can be very, very subtle. We are examining a case in which a storm shows all indications of being
tornadic on WSR-88D, and in fact in mobile Doppler radar data it has a vortex with a hook and an
"eye" in the hook... indicative of very strong rotation and the centrifuging of raindrops, within about
100 m of the ground. This pattern of reflectivity and velocity is in most respects the same as observed
in the tornadic supercells. Yet, no tornado formed.»

The  quoted  valuable  conclusions  [5]  well  justify  a  search  for  the  contribution  of  an
unrecognized mechanism to initiation of tornadoes. We think it reasonable to formulate the following
hypotheses for the possible contribution of  nanodust  (or  generally  speaking,  of  a  condensed-matter
component) to the origin of tornadoes.

3.1.  Tornadic  thundercloud  may  possess  an  internal  skeleton  which  is  hidden  in  the  water
vapor, air-based dust, etc. The skeleton may be composed of the  nanodust. The  nanodust  particles
(presumably, carbon  nanotubes or similar  nanostructures  involving  other  chemical  elements)  in  the
skeleton, as it was suggested [1(B)], may be magnetically coupled by the magnetic flux trapped in the
nanotubular block. Such a skeleton is flexible and restructurable, being a sort of the fractal aerogel.

The  fractality  of  the  skeleton  is  suggested  by  the  total  combination  of  the  following

observations (Sec. 2):

(i) similarity of skeletal structuring at different length scales (e.g., the presence of cartwheels

both in tornado column and in hailstones),

(ii) self-similarity in the hailstones of cartwheel-like form (see Fig. 7),
(iii) correlation between low-precipitation supercells and intense hailstorms (see Fig. 6).
In  fact,  these  observations  show  that  the  topology  of  the  most  rigid  building  blocks  of  the

skeleton may be of a universal type.

3.2. The skeleton in  tornadic  thundercloud  is  responsible  for  the  fast  long-range  transport  of
electricity (e.g., of that caused by the electric charge acquired by the skeleton during condensation of
charged  water  drops  on  it)  and  for  accumulation  of  large  enough  electric  charge  at  certain  points
determined  by  the  geometry/morphology  of  the  skeleton  (e.g.,  at  the  skeleton’s  edge).  (Here,  the
transport  of  electricity  is  fast  as  compared  to  that  provided  by  the  gaseous/aerosol  medium  in  the
skeletonless thundercloud).

This implies  that actually the  difference between  tornadic  and  non-tornadic  thunderclouds  is
determined by the transport properties (in particular, by the very presence) of an internal skeleton,
namely by the ability of the skeleton to collect, transport and focus the electric (and magnetic) energy.
In  particular,  skeleton  as  a  condensation  center  may  substantially  speed  up  the  conversion  of  the
latent heat into gas/plasma motion.

3.3. The localization of large enough electric charge on/around the skeleton initiates a sort of
electric breakdown between the thundercloud and the Earth. Thus, the initial phase of tornado may be
treated  as  an  electric  breakdown  process  which  is  eye-visible  in  the  real  time.  Presumably,  most
frequently the cathode is the thundercloud, the virtual anode is on the Earth surface. Thus, tornado’s
initiation  is  suggested  to  be  an  electrostatic  instability  caused  exclusively  by  the  presence  and
special, skeletal structuring of the nanodust.

3.4. Tornado’s column/funnel may be interpreted as a  long-lived filament of  (low-magnitude)
electric current which is being resulted from the process of aforementioned electric breakdown. The
skeleton  of  this  filament  is  being  build  up  of  the  restructured  blocks  of  the  skeleton  in  the
thundercloud  during  a  «pullout»  of  the  parent  thundercloud’s  skeleton  downwards  by  the  electric
force  which  disturbs  the  balance  of  the  forces  in  the  stable,  tornadoless  thundercloud.  (Here,
longevity implies that the lifetime largely exceeds that of the lightning).

3.5. Rotation of tornado’s column/funnel seems to be an implication of local restructuring of the
skeletal component inside the thundercloud. That’s why the rotation in the  tornadic mesocyclone is
actually not a source of tornado’s initiation (cf. [5]). Therefore, the problem of tornado rotation may
be decoupled from the problem of tornado’s initiation and has to be treated in terms of the behavior
of the ambient gaseous and aerosol components of the thundercloud in the presence of electric (and
magnetic) field provided by the skeleton in the course of its restructuring.

3.6.  The  early  diagnostics  of  tornado  has  to  be  aimed  at  identifying  a  skeleton  inside  a
thundercloud  and  especially  at  those  patterns  of  skeleton’s  behavior/restructuring  which  might  be
dangerous for tornado’s initiation.

4. CONCLUSIONS

The  contents  of  Secs.  2,3  suggest  the  role  of  electricity  in  tornado  to  be  of  much  larger
importance  than  it  is  thought  by  the  most  of  severe  weather  researchers  community  (cf.  wonderful
comment  on  this  issue  in  [6],  and  the  references  and  web  links  therein).  The  universality  of  the
phenomenon  of  skeletal  structuring  [1(A)],  and  the  recent  progress  in  the  newest  chapters  of
condensed-matter  physics  (first  of  all,  carbon  nanotubes),  enable  us  to  suggest  the  possibility  to
substantially  modify  the  existing  approaches  to  the  probable  significant  role  of  electricity  in
tornadoes (cf., e.g., recent paper [7]). Tornado, because of its exceptional property of concentrating
the energy density in severe weather phenomena, seems to be the best candidate for verifying both the
phenomenon  of  skeletal  structuring  as  itself  and  the  hypothesis  for  the  crucial  role  of  a  fractal
condensed matter (most probably, nanotubular dust) in severe weather phenomena.

REFERENCES

[1] Kukushkin A.B., Rantsev-Kartinov V.A.,

(A) Phys. Lett. A 306 (2002) 174; see also Preprint arXiv: astro-ph/0205534 (2002), 11 pp.
(B) Preprint of Kurchatov Institute, IAE 6111/6, Moscow, October 1998, 32 pp.; Fusion  Energy
1998 (Proc. 17th IAEA  Conf.,  Yokohama,  1998),  IAEA,  Vienna,  1999,  v.  3,  p.  1131-1134
(http://www.iaea.org/programmes/ripc/physics/pdf/ifp_17.pdf);  Proc. 26-th  Eur.  Phys.  Soc.
conf. on Plasma  Phys. and Contr. Fusion,  Maastricht,  Netherlands,  June  1999,  pp.  873-876
(http://epsppd.epfl.ch/Maas/web/pdf/p2087.pdf);  Current  Trends  in  Int.  Fusion  Research:
Review  and  Assessment  (Proc.  3rd  Symposium,  Washington  D.C.,  March  1999),  Ed.  E.
Panarella, NRC Research Press, Ottawa, Canada, 2001, p. 121-148.

(C)  In:  Advances  in  Plasma  Phys.  Research,  2002,  Vol.  2  (Ed.  F.  Gerard,  Nova  Science

Publishers, New York), p. 1-22.

(D) Preprint  ArXiv:  physics/0401027  (2004),  17  pp.  [To  be  published  in  Current  Trends  in
International  Fusion  Research  —  Proceedings  of  the  Fifth  Symposium,  (Washington  D.C.,
2003). Eds. C.D.  Orth, E.  Panarella, R.F. Post. NRC  Research Press, Nat.  Res.  Council  of
Canada, Ottawa, Canada].

(E) Laser and Part. Beams, 16 (1998) 445; Rev. Sci. Instrum., 70 (1999) 1387.
(F) Bull.  Am.  Phys.  Soc.,  v.  48,  BO2.010  (Abstracts  45th  Annual  meeting  of  Am.  Phys.  Soc.

Division Plasma Phys., Albuquerque, NM, USA, October 2003).

(G)  Skeletal  structures  in  tornado  and  possible  directions  of  modeling  the  hypothetical
electrodynamic  properties  of  tornado  in  laboratory  electric  discharges.  Mat.  IV  Russian
seminar «Modern means of plasma diagnostics and their application to environment control».
Moscow, MEPhI, November 2003, p. 151-152 (in Russian).

(H)  Evidences  for  skeletal  structures  in  tornado  and  the  probable  role  of  nanodusty  plasma  in
severe  weather  phenomena.  Abstracts  31-st  Zvenigorod  conference  on  plasma  phys.  &
controlled fusion (Moscow region, Zvenigorod, February 2004), p. 190 (in Russian).

[2] Kolbasov B.N., Kukushkin A.B., Rantsev-Kartinov V.A., Romanov P.V.,
(A) Phys. Lett. A 269 (2000) 363; Plasma Dev. & Oper., 8 (2001) 257.
(B) Phys.  Lett. A  291  (2001)  447;  Fusion  Energy  2002  (Proc.  19th IAEA  Conf.,  Lyon,  2002),

IAEA, Vienna, 2002, EX/P3-05.

[3]  National  Oceanic  &  Atmospheric  Administration  Photo  Library,  Historic  National  Weather

Service Collection, http://www.photolib.noaa.gov/historic/nws/images /...

[4] Australian Severe Weather,

http://australiasevereweather.com/photography/photos/1996/0205mb11.jpg; .../0205mb12.jpg.
[5] The US National Severe Storm Laboratory (NSSL) report of Summer/Fall 1998 «New findings on
the  origins  of  tornadoes  from  VORTEX  (Verification  of  the  Origins  of  Rotation  in  Tornadoes
Experiment)» (see http://www.oar.noaa.gov/spotlite/archive/spot_nssl.html).

[6] Beaty W., «Re: Does a tornado (not  TStorm) create electricity/lightning? If  so, why?»  MadSci
Network: Earth Sciences, http:// www.madsci.org/posts/archives/aug98/899129606.Es.r.html.

[7] Krasilnikov E.Yu., Nonlinear Processes in Geophys., 9 (2002) 51-59.

