Two-dimensional heterogeneous photonic bandedge laser 

Soon-Hong Kwon,a), Se-Heon Kim, Sun-Kyung Kim, and Yong-Hee Lee 

Department of physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology,   

Taejon 305-701, Korea 

Sung-Bock Kim 

Telecommunication Basic Research Laboratory, Electronics and Telecommunications 

Research Institute, Taejon 305-600, Korea 

Abstract–We  proposed  and  realized  a  two-dimensional  (2D)  photonic  bandedge  laser 

surrounded by the photonic bandgap. The heterogeneous photonic crystal structure consists of 

two  triangular  lattices  of  the  same  lattice  constant  with  different  air  hole  radii.  The  photonic 

crystal laser was realized by room-temperature optical pumping of air-bridge slabs of InGaAsP 

quantum wells emitting at 1.55 µm. The lasing mode was identified from its spectral positions 

and  polarization  directions.  A  low  threshold  incident  pump  power  of  0.24  mW  was  achieved. 

The measured characteristics of the photonic crystal lasers closely agree with the results of real 

space and Fourier space calculations based on the finite-difference time-domain method.   

a) Electronic mail: ksunong@kaist.ac.kr 

 

 

 

 

 

1

Since Eli Yablonovitch and Sajeev John firstly demonstrated the concept of photonic 

bandgap  materials  in  1987,  1,  2  they  have  attracted  much  attention  as  new  building  blocks  in 

photonics because of its ability to control photons in the scale of wavelength. Specially, various 

photonic crystal (PC) lasers have been studied by many groups worldwide owing to demand of 

submicron  sized  coherent  sources  for  photonic  integrated  circuits.  In  order  to  fulfill  the 

conditions for efficient small sources, i.e., high quality factor, low threshold, and high coupling 

ratio  with  waveguides,  various  types  of  cavity  structures  like  single  defect,3  ring  type,4  stick 

type,5  slab  edge,6  and  coupled  cavities,7  have  been  proposed  and  studied.  In  the  most  of  PC 

lasers,  PC  functions  as  a  mirror.  On  the  other  hands,  several  groups  have  taken  notice  of 

possibility  that  the  flat  dispersion  curve  near  photonic  bandedge  in  the  band  structure  can  be 

used for lasing operation.8-14 The group velocity near the bandedge is zero because of coupling 

between the Bloch waves, and then photons in the PC can interact with an active material for a 

long  time,  which  result  in  lasing  operation.  Recently,  photonic  bandedge  lasers  have  been 

realized in the organic material,13 semiconductor quantum wells. 8-11 We and Monat et al. have 

shown the lasing operation of the photonic bandedge mode in the sample with small active area 

~ (10×10 µm) using 2D slab structure. 9-11 However, in the real sample, the group velocity of the 

bandedge mode becomes nonzero due to finite size of the PC pattern14 so that in-plane loss, i.e., 

the  propagation  of  the  mode  out  of  the  pattern  through  the  slab,  is  unavoidable.  On  the  other 

hands, the bandedge mode below light line is vertically well-guided inside the slab. Therefore, if 

the in-plane loss can be reduced, the bandedge mode would be a mode with very low loss.   

In this letter, we propose a new cavity structure based on the bandedge mode. In order 

to prevent in-plane loss, photonic bandgap region can be introduced as a mirror outside the PC 

region,  in  which  photonic  bandedge  mode  operates.  If  the  PC  pattern  of  outside  region  is 

different from the bandedge mode operating region so that the frequency of the bandedge mode 

 

2

lies within the photonic bandgap of surrounding structure, then the in-plane loss of the bandedge 

mode would be inhibited. PC pattern can be modified by changing of several parameters such as 

lattice  constant,  air  hole  radius,  and  lattice  geometry.  We  changed  the  air  hole  radii  of  the 

surrounding structure in our PC pattern. Here, we investigate the characteristics of the photonic 

bandedge laser surrounded by the photonic bandgap wall in free-standing slab triangular lattice 

structures at room temperature. Because the photonic bandgap assists the lasing of the bandedge 

mode, we call this type of laser the photonic bandgap-bandedge (PBG-BE) laser. We identified 

the lasing mode from the measurement of the spectral position and polarization characteristics, 

and compare them with theoretical calculation based on three-dimensional (3D) finite-difference 

time-domain (FDTD) method.   

Six pairs of InGaAsP quantum wells with an emission peak at 1.55 µm are embedded 

in  the  center  of  the  slab.  We  constructed  triangular  lattice  structures  by  electron  beam 

lithography  and  Cl2-assisted  Ar-beam  etching  techniques.  The  InP  sacrificial  layer  below  the 

slab was removed using a diluted HCl : H2O (4:1) solution through the etched air holes to form 

free-standing slabs. The thickness of the slab is 282.5 nm, which supports only the fundamental 

transverse electric (TE)-like mode. Figure 1(a) shows a scanning electron microscope image of 

PBG-BE laser sample. Air holes in the central region of the pattern have relatively larger radii 

(0.35a) than that of the surrounding air holes (0.30a). This cavity structure can be understood 

that the hexagon with five larger holes along the ΓK directions is placed inside the defect cavity, 

in which five holes are missing along the ΓK directions. Since the normalized frequency of the 

band  structure  increases  with  respect  to  the  air  hole  radius,  the  frequency  of  the  K  point 

bandedge  mode  operating  in  the  central  region  is  placed  within  the  photonic  bandgap  of  the 

outside region, as shown in Fig. 1(b). In the experiments, the air hole radii of the central region 

were  designed  to  be  in  the  range  of  0.26a  ~  0.38a  and  outside  holes  were  kept  to  be  smaller 

 

3

radii as 0.05a than that of the central region. In order to confine the bandedge mode horizontally, 

11  smaller  air  holes  are  placed  along  the  ΓK  directions  from  the  boundary  of  the  bandedge 

mode  region.  The  lattice  constants  range  from  325  nm  to  414  nm  with  about  20  nm  steps  to 

match  the  gain  region  of  the  InGaAsP  quantum  wells  into  the  first  K  point  bandedge.  The 

fabricated samples with various parameters were pulse-pumped using a 980 nm laser diode at 

room temperature. The pulse width was 7.5 ns and the duty cycle was 0.1 % to avoid thermal 

heating effect. The pumping laser was focused with microscope objective lens and the emission 

of  light  was  collected  with  the  same  lens  positioned  vertically  to  the  sample  surface.  The 

pumping spot diameter is about 3.5 µm. 

A  typical  PBG-BE  mode  pattern  in  the  lasing  sample  was  captured  by  the  charge-

coupled device (CCD), as shown in Fig. 2(a). The bright spot was observed within the central 

region  with  larger  air  holes,  which  means  that  the  lasing  mode  is  localized  by  the  photonic 

bandgap. In addition, the state of polarization was measured to confirm that the lasing mode is 

originated  from  the  first  K  point  bandedge  mode.  Because  one-dimensional  (1D)  distributed 

feedback (DFB) bandedge modes such as the first M, second M points, consist of a pair of anti-

parallel wave vectors, the polarizations become linear, as Ref. 11 shows. On the other hand, the 

oscillations of the first K point bandedge mode result from the coupling of several nonparallel 

wave vectors. 13 Therefore, the mode is expected to be unpolarized. In fact, the measured lasing 

mode shows no definite polarization direction, as shown in Fig. 2(b). In order to further identify 

the lasing mode, the measured normalized frequencies (plotted as dots) for each lattice constant 

are compared with the calculated frequencies (plotted as lines) as a function of air hole radius in 

the central region, as shown in Fig. 2(c). The size of bandedge operating region is finite so that 

the  normalized  frequency  of  the  lasing  mode  differs  slightly  from  it  of  the  first  K  point 

bandedge  due  to  uncertainty  of  the  wavevectors.  Thus,  the  plane-wave-expansion  (PWE) 

 

4

method  can  not  be  used  to  calculate  the  exact  frequency  of  the  PBG-BE  mode.  Therefore,  in 

order to find the exact spectral position, the calculated frequencies in the Fig. 2(c) are obtained 

through the 3D FDTD method. The measured spectral positions agree well with the theoretical 

predictions over broad range of air hole radii for each lattice constant. The difference between 

simulations and experiments is less than 1 % of the normalized frequency, which corresponds to 

the error ~ 0.01a of air hole radius measurement.   

To  analyze  the  PBG-BE  mode  theoretically,  we  compare  the  PBG-BE  mode  and  the 

bandedge mode operating at the sample without surrounding air holes through the electric field 

intensity profiles obtained by the 3D FDTD method. In this simulation, air hole radius of central 

region, and that of outside region were 0.35a and 0.30a, respectively. In the top-view and the 

side-view of the intensity profile of Fig. 3(a) and (b), the electric fields of the PBG-BE mode are 

well  localized  at  the  central  region.  On  the  other  hands,  in  the  case  of  the  bandedge  mode 

operating  at  the  undressed  finite  sample  where  there  are  no  surrounding  air  holes,  significant 

fields are propagating through the slab out of the PC pattern, as shown in Fig. 3(c). In the point 

of  loss  mechanisms,  the  role  of  the  surrounding  air  holes  becomes  clearer.  In  the  PC  pattern 

including 21 air holes along the ΓK direction, which is large enough for lasing, the vertical and 

horizontal quality factors of the undressed bandedge mode are 37000 and 1200, respectively, i.e. 

the in-plane loss is dominant. Here, the definition of the vertical and horizontal quality factor is 

followed  by  the  Ref.  14.  Although  the  quality  factor  of  the  bandedge  mode  increases  as  the 

number of air holes,  14 the PBG-BE mode operating in the PC pattern with only five air holes 

along the ΓK direction has relatively large quality factor ~50000. This high quality factor results 

from the fact that the photonic bandgap prohibits the in-plane loss of the bandedge mode. Thus, 

we can conclude that the surrounding PC pattern with smaller air holes functions as a mirror for 

the bandedge mode. On the other hands, since this hetero-structure can be considered as a large 

 

5

defect structure in which larger air holes are drilled at the central region, the PBG-BE mode can 

be  also  compared  with  the  resonant  modes  of  the  large  defect  cavity  with  five-missing  holes 

along ΓK direction. In our calculation, the quality factors of the modes at such large PC cavities 

are  not  large  ranging  from  several  hundreds  to  thousands,  which  are  hundred  or  ten  times 

smaller  than  that  of  the  PBG-BE  mode.  One  of  the  reasons  is  that  the  group  velocity  of  the 

PBG-BE  mode,  which  is  close  to  zero,  is  much  smaller  than  that  of  the  large  cavity  modes 

which experience almost the effective group index of bulk material. If the group velocity of the 

mode becomes smaller, the scattering loss per unit time would be reduced. Besides, in order to 

know  the  origin  of  the  mode,  2D  Fourier  transform  is  performed  for  the  PBG-BE  mode.  The 

Fourier space field pattern in Fig. 3(d) confirms that the PBG-BE mode originates from the first 

K point bandedge mode. The wavevectors are localized at the six K points in the Fourier space. 

Note  that  the  six  unparallel  wavevectors  construct  the  mode  simultaneously.  It  shows  the  2D 

feedback mechanisms of the first K point bandedge mode.   

  The threshold of the observed PBG-BE laser was 0.24 mW. We believe that this low 

threshold  is  attributed  to  the  high  quality  factor  of  the  PBG-BE  mode.  On  the  other  hand, 

several  non-lasing  peaks  were  observed  in  the  spectrum,  as  shown  in  Fig.  4(b).  The 

polarizations of all peaks have no definite direction like the first K point bandedge mode. The 

nonlasing peaks spread over 40 nm near the PBG-BE mode in the frequency domain. Thus, we 

believe that there may be two possibilities of nonlasing peaks. If any mode satisfies the resonant 

condition of the five unit-cell cavity and experiences the flat dispersion curve near the bandedge, 

then the modes can be the resonant mode. Another possibility is that other resonant peaks near 

the bandedge are created by a little amount of deformation or imperfection in the real sample. 

The identification of non-lasing peaks is under study. 

In  conclusion,  we  have  demonstrated  the  operation  of  the  new  type  of  the  bandedge 

 

6

laser, the photonic bandedge laser assisted by the photonic bandgap, in triangular lattice at room 

temperature.  When  the  air  hole  radii  of  the  surrounded  PC  differ  from  the  bandedge  mode 

operating region, most of in-plane loss of the first K point bandedge mode in the central region 

is suppressed so that the quality factor of the mode become 50000. We identified the PBG-BE 

lasing modes through the spectral position, CCD image, and the state of polarization, which are 

matched  well  with  the  theoretical  predictions.  The  2D  feedback  mechanism  of  the  first  K 

bandedge is proved through the Fourier analysis.  The low threshold peak pump power ~  0.24 

mW is achieved due to the low optical loss of the PBG-BE mode.   

This  work  was  supported  by  the  National  Research  Laboratory  Project  of  KISTEP, 

Korea. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7

References 

 
1 E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2059 (1987).

2 S. John, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2486 (1987).

 

3 O. Painter, R. K. Lee, A. Scherer, A. Yariv, J. D. O’Brien, P. D. Dapkus, and I. Kim, Science 

284, 1819 (1999).

 

Lett. 81, 2499 (2002). 

(2004). 

 S. H. Kim, H. Y. Ryu, H. G. Park, G. H. Kim, Y. S. Choi, Y. H. Lee, and J. S. Kim, Appl. Phys. 

 S. H. Kim, G. H. Kim, S. K. Kim, H. G. Park, Y. H. Lee, and S. B. Kim, J. Appl. Phys. 95, 411 

 J. G. Yang, Y. H. Lee, and S. B. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett. (to be published 26 April 2004). 

 H. Altug and J. Vuckovic, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 161 (2004). 

 S. Noda, M. Yokoyama, M. Imada, A. Chutinan, and M. Mochizuki, Science 293, 1123 (2001)   

 H. Y. Ryu, S. H. Kwon, Y. H. Lee, and J. S. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 3476 (2002).

 

C.  Monat,  C.  Seassal,  X.  Letartre,  P.  Regreny,  P.  Rojo-Romeo,  and  P.  Viktorovitch,  Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 81, 5102 (2002). 

 

(2003).

  S.  H.  Kwon,  H.  Y.  Ryu,  G.  H.  Kim,  Y.  H.  Lee,  and  S.  B.  Kim,  Appl.  Phys.  Lett.  83,  3870 

 J .P. Dowling, M. Scalora, M. J. Bloemer, and C. M. Bowden, J. Appl. Phys. 75, 1896 (1994)   

 M. Notomi, H. Suzuki, and T. Tamamura, Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 1325 (2001). 

 H. Y. Ryu, M. Notomi, and Y. H. Lee, Phys. Rev. B 68, 045209 (2003).

 

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 

11

12

13

14

 

8

Fig. 1. (a) Top-view scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of a fabricated PBG-BE laser. 

The lattice constant is 390 nm. The air hole radius of central hexagon region (I) with five holes 

along  the  ΓK  direction,  and  it  of  the  surrounded  region  (II)  are  137  nm  (0.35a)  and  117  nm 

(0.30a), respectively. The dotted white hexagon indicates the boundaries of the central region. 

(b) The band structures calculated by the 2D plane-wave expansion method. The solid lines and 

the dashed lines correspond to the band structure of air hole radius 0.35a and 0.30a. The regions 

above  light  line  are  filled  by  the  dark  gray,  in  which  modes  are  leaky.  The  transparent  gray 

region  indicates  the  photonic  bandgap  of  the  band  structure  with  radius  of  0.30a.  The  circle 

corresponds to the first K point of the band structure with larger air holes, which is the operating 

point of our PBG-BE laser. 

Fig. 2. (Color) (a) Typical mode pattern images of the PBG-BE lasers taken by a CCD camera. 

The dotted white squares represent the boundary of the PC lasers. (b) The measure polarization 

states of the laser. (c) The normalized frequency of the PBG-BE laser as a function of air-hole 

radius (r/a) for each lattice constant, a, 325 nm, 345 nm, 365 nm, 390 nm, 414 nm, which are 

indicated by black, red, green, blue, and cyan, separately. The dots and the solid lines represent 

the measured lasing positions and the calculated ones by 3D FDTD method. 

Fig. 3. (a) Top-view and (b) side-view of the electric field intensity profile of the PBG-BE mode. 

(c) side-view of the first K point band-edge mode operating at the finite PC pattern without the 

surrounding air  holes.  The  intensity  is  indicated  by  logarithm  scale.  The  white  lines  show  the 

boundaries of the calculated structures. (d) Fourier space field pattern of the PBG-BE mode. 

Fig. 4. (a) Collected output power at the lasing wavelength is plotted for peak pump power. The 

 

 

 

 

9

threshold  is  ~  0.24  mW.  (b)  The  spectrum  of  the  PBG-BE  lasing  mode  at  peak  pump  power 

0.35mW.   

 

10

 

 

Fig. 1 

   

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11

 

 

 

Fig. 2 

 

 

 

12

Fig. 3   

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

13

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

Fig. 4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

14

 

 

 

 

 

