J. Phys. Chem. A

version 4; 4/12/2004

Electron Photodetachment from Aqueous Anions.

II. Ionic Strength Effect on Geminate Recombination Dynamics and
Quantum Yield for Hydrated Electron. 1

Myran C. Sauer, Jr., Ilya A. Shkrob, *  Rui Lian,
Robert A. Crowell, David M. Bartels, a)
Chemistry Division , Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439

Stephen E. Bradforth

Department of Chemistry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089

The submitted manuscript has been created by the University of Chicago as
Operator  of  Argonne  National  Laboratory  ("Argonne")  under  Contract  No.
W-31-109-ENG-38  with  the  U.  S.  Department  of  Energy.    The  U.  S.
Government  retains  for  itself,  and  others  acting  on  its  behalf,  a  paid-up,
nonexclusive,  irrevocable  worldwide  license  in  said  article  to  reproduce,
prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly
and display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government.

Abstract

electron generated by detachment from photoexcited anions (such as I-, OH-, ClO4

In  concentrated  solutions  of  NaClO4  and  Na2SO4,  the  quantum  yield  for  free
-, and
2-) linearly decreases by 6-12% per 1 M ionic strength. In 9 M sodium perchlorate

SO3

solution, this quantum yield decreases by roughly an order of magnitude. Ultrafast kinetic
2- suggest
studies of 200 nm photon induced electron detachment from Br-, HO- and SO3

that the prompt yield of thermalized electron does not change in these solutions; rather,

the  ionic  strength  effect  originates  in  more  efficient  recombination  of  geminate  pairs.

Within  the  framework  of  the  recently  proposed  mean  force  potential  (MFP)  model  of

charge separation dynamics in such photosystems, the observed changes are interpreted

as  an  increase  in  the  short-range  attractive  potential  between  the  geminate  partners.

Association of sodium cation(s) with the electron and the parent anion is suggested as the

most  likely  cause  for  the  observed  modification  of  the  MFP.  Electron  thermalization

kinetics suggest that the cation associated with the parent anion (by ion pairing and/or

ionic  atmosphere  interaction)  is  passed  to  the  detached  electron  in  the  course  of  the

photoreaction.  The  precise  atomic-level  mechanism  for  the  ionic  strength  effect  is

1

presently unclear; any further advance is likely to require the development of an adequate

quantum molecular dynamics model.

___________________________________________________________________________________

1 

* 

a) 

Work  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the  Office  of  Science,  Division  of
Chemical Science, US-DOE under contract number W-31-109-ENG-38.
To  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed:  Tel  630-252-9516,  FAX  630-
2524993, e-mail: shkrob@anl.gov.
present address: Radiation Laboratory, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame,
Indiana 46556, e-mail: bartels.5@nd.edu.

2

1. Introduction.

In Part I of this series, [1] estimates for absolute quantum yields (QYs) and cross

sections for electron photodetachment from miscellaneous aqueous anions were given.

With a single exception of perchlorate, these measurements were carried out in dilute (<

50 mM) solutions of these CTTS (charge transfer to solvent) active anions. In this work,

we  explore  the  electron  dynamics  for  photoexcited  anions  in  high  ionic  strength

solutions.

The motivation for such a study is provided by the recent ultrafast kinetic studies

of electron photodetachment from halide [2,3,4] and pseudohalide [4,5,6] anions. These

studies suggest the existence of a weak attractive mean force potential (MFP) between

the residual radical (such as HO or a halogen atom) and the ejected electron that localizes

in its vicinity. This attractive potential causes bimodality of the electron decay kinetics: in

the first 10-50 ps these kinetics are exponential (due to the fast escape and recombination

of the electrons situated near the bottom of the potential well); [7] these rapid kinetics are
succeeded  by  a  slower  t-1/2  decay  due  to  the  diffusional  escape  and  recombination  of

hydrated  electrons  which  are  thermally  emitted  from  this  potential  well.  [2,5,7]  For

polyvalent  anions,  only  these  slow  kinetics  are  observed;  [4,8]  the  fast  exponential

component is lacking. This is not surprising since long-range Coulomb repulsion between

the  electron  and  a  radical  anion  (derived  from  the  parent  polyvalent  anion)  should  be

much  stronger  than  short-range,  weak  attraction  between  the  electron  and  a  neutral

radical (derived from the parent monovalent anion). For the latter type of geminate pairs,

the  MFP  is  thought  to  originate  mainly  through  the  polarization  of  the  residue  (e.g.,

halide  atom)  by  the  electron,  [9,10]  though  electron  -  dipole  interaction  may  also  be

significant  for  pairs  generated  by  electron  photodetachment  from  polyatomic  anions.

According to Bradforth and coworkers, [9] for geminate pairs derived from monovalent

anions,  the  strength  of  the  interaction  (as  estimated  from  MFP  model  kinetic  fits)

increases with the polarizability of the radical/atom, being maximum for iodine atoms.

For  chloride,  the  MFP  has  been  obtained  theoretically,  using  quantum  molecular

dynamics simulations and umbrella sampling. [10] Unfortunately, these simulations do

3

not point to any specific interactions that are responsible for the MFP: the latter emerges

as a sum total of many interparticle interactions. Still, it is reassuring that the strength of

this simulated MFP (which is a few kT units) is comparable to the strength of the MFP

that  was  extracted  by  Bradforth  and  coworkers  from  the  experimental  kinetics  for

aqueous iodide. [2]

These  MFP  models  were  found  to  quantitatively  account  for  (i)  the  temporal

profile of the geminate recombination kinetics, [2,4,5] (ii) the changes observed in these

kinetics with increasing photoexcitation energy (direct ionization that occurs at higher

energies broadens the spatial distribution of photoejected electrons), [11] (iii) temperature

effects  on  the  decay  kinetics  of  electrons  generated  in  200  nm  photoexcitation  of

hydroxide. [5] The MFP model also qualitatively accounts for the trends in the kinetics

observed for homologous anions (e.g., the correlation between the potential well depth

and the polarizability of the radical), [9] as well as some trends observed for nonaqueous

and mixed solvents. [3a,b]

Impressive  as  this  record  may  appear,  there  is  no  direct,  unambiguous  way  in

which the MFP profile can be extracted from the experimental data, and this leaves room

for fudging the MFP parameters and the initial electron distribution to accommodate any

of the trends observed. E. g., to “explain” temperature effects on the geminate kinetics for
)  pairs generated in electron photodetachment from hydroxide it was postulated
(

, −
OH eaq

that  the  MFP  for  this  pair  becomes  shallower  and  more  diffuse  with  the  increasing
temperature. [5] While the entire set of 8 oC to 90 oC kinetics can be consistently fit with

these  assumptions,  there  is  currently  no  way  of  demonstrating  experimentally  that  the

MFP behaves as postulated or that this attractive potential even exists. This uncertainty

pertains to other studies: in the end, it is not yet clear whether the MFP model is a correct

(though  simplified)  picture  that  captures  peculiarities  of  electron  dynamics  for

photoexcited CTTS anions or merely a recipe for producing kinetic profiles that resemble

those observed experimentally.

We believe that the MFP model does capture the reality, albeit incompletely. E.g.,

the  existence  of  a  short-range  interaction  that  temporarily  stabilizes  close  pairs  is

4

suggested by experimental [12] and theoretical studies [13]  of  Na-  CTTS  by  Schwartz

and coworkers. These authors showed that electrons in the close pairs (observed on the

short time scale) responded differently to IR photoexcitation than the electrons in more

distant pairs. The short-term electron dynamics observed in the sodide photosystem had

been viewed as the dissociation of these close pairs (in which the electron and sodium

atom reside in a single solvent cavity) to solvent separated pairs (in which the species are

separated by 1-2 solvent molecules) that subsequently decay by diffusional migration of

the partners to the bulk.

The purpose of the present study was to validate the use of the MFP model for

aqueous anions. The approach was to modify this potential in a predictable way, through

ionic  atmosphere  screening  of  electrostatic  charges.  It  was  expected  that  for  geminate

pairs derived from monovalent anions, the screening of the electron would weaken the

electrostatic  interactions  of  this  electron  with  its  neutral  partner  and  the  survival
probability  Ω∞  of electrons that escape geminate recombination would thereby increase.

Conversely,  for  polyvalent  anions,  this  probability  would  decrease  because  the  ionic

atmosphere would screen the Coulomb repulsion between the electron and its negatively

charged partner, the radical anion. As demonstrated below, these expectations were not

realized.

The experimental results show that both the survival probability and the quantum

yield of free electron decrease  with  the  ionic  strength  for  all  of  the  systems  studied,

whereas the prompt QY for the solvated electrons does not change. The magnitude of this

decrease  is  the  same  for  monovalent  and  divalent  anions  and  changes  little  from  one

photosystem to another; it also varies little with the salt that is used to change the ionic
strength. While similar magnitude of the decrease in the survival probability  Ω∞  of the

electron with ionic strength was attained for all photosystems, the rate for the attainment

of this decrease varied considerably between different photosystems.

Though  we  cannot  presently  suggest  a  detailed  model  that  accounts  for  these

observations  in  their  totality,  it  is  certain  that  ion  screening  cannot  account  for  these

results  even  at  the  qualitative  level.  We  suggest  that  the  effect  originates  through  the

5

modification of the MFP via alkali cation association with the solvated electron and the

parent  anion  (similar  to  the  case  of  ferrocyanide  CTTS  considered  by  Bradforth  and

coworkers); [8] somehow, this association makes the short-range attraction stronger, for

all anions.

In the view of this latter conclusion, most of this paper constitutes an extended

proof of the assertions given above. That task required combining several spectroscopic

techniques, including ultrafast pump-probe spectroscopy, laser flash photolysis, and pulse

radiolysis.  To  reduce  the  length  of  the  manuscript,  Figs.  1S  to  9S  are  placed  in  the

Supporting Information.

2. Experimental.

Nanosecond flash photolysis and QY measurement. The setup used to determine the QY

for  free  electron  formation  has  been  described  in  Part  I  of  this  series.  [1]  Fifteen

nanosecond fwhm, 1-20 mJ pulses from an ArF (193 nm) or KrF (248 nm) excimer laser

(Lamda  Physik  LPX  120i)  were  used  to  photolyze  N2-  or  CO2-  saturated  aqueous
solutions. The laser and analyzing light beams were crossed at an angle of 30o inside a

1.36  mm  optical  path  cell.  A  fast  silicon  photodiode  equipped  with  a  video  amplifier

terminated into a digital signal analyzer were used to sample the transient absorbance

kinetics (> 3 ns). Two pyroelectric energy meters were used to measure the power of the

incident and transmitted UV light during the kinetic sampling. 200-500 ml of the solution

being studied was circulated through the cell using a peristaltic pump. The typical flow

rate  was  2-3  mL/min;  the  repetition  rate  of  the  laser  was  1.7  Hz.  Purified  water  with

conductivity < 2 nS/cm was used to prepare the aqueous solutions. The UV spectra were

obtained using a dual beam spectrophotometer (OLIS/Cary 14).

The  typical  QY  measurement  included  determination  of  laser  transmission  T
through the sample, transient absorbance  ∆ODλ of the photoproduct at wavelength λ  of

the analyzing light, the laser energy Iabs  absorbed by the sample, and the incident beam
energy  I0.  The  QY  was  determined  from  the  initial  slope  of  ∆ODλ  vs.  Iabs  that  was

corrected  for  the  window  transparency  and  noncolinear  beam  geometry.  If  not  stated

6

otherwise, the absorbance of hydrated electron at λ=700 nm (ε700=20560 M-1 s-1 [14,15])

at the end of the UV pulse (t=30 ns) was used to estimate the electron yield. The anion

concentration and light fluence were chosen so that the decay half time of this electron
(due to cross recombination) was > 5 µs.

Ultrafast laser spectroscopy. The pico- and femto- second kinetic measurements reported

below were obtained using a 1 kHz Ti:sapphire setup at the ANL whose details are given

in refs. [4,5,6]. Stretched 2 nJ pulses from a Ti:sapphire oscillator were amplified to 4 mJ

in  a  home-built  two-stage  multipass  Ti:sapphire  amplifier.  The  amplified  pulses  were

passed through a grating compressor that yielded Gaussian pulses of 60 fs FWHM and 3

mJ centered at 800 nm. The amplified beam was split into three parts of approximately

equal energy. One beam was used to generate 800 nm probe pulses while the other two

were used to generate the 200 nm (fourth harmonic) pump pulses by upconversion of the
third  harmonic.  Up  to  20  µJ  of  the  200  nm  light  was  produced  this  way  (300-350  fs

FWHM pulse). The pump power, before and after the sample, was determined using a

calibrated thermopile power meter (Ophir Optronics model 2A-SH). The probe pulse was

delayed in time as much as 600 ps using a 3-pass 25 mm delay line. The pump and probe
beams were perpendicularly polarized, focused to round spots of 50 µm and 200-300 µm

o
in radius, respectively, and overlapped in the sample at 6.5

. Commonly in the pump-

probe experiments, the pump beam envelopes the probe beam. We reversed this geometry

because of the poor quality of the 200 nm beam ("hot spots" in the beam profile). This

reverse geometry minimizes the sensitivity of the absorption signal to fluctuations of the

"hot spot" pattern and the walk-off of the probe beam relative to the pump beam (which
was  typically  5-10  µm).  The  trade-off  was  a  considerable  reduction  in  the  signal

magnitude that was more than compensated by improved signal-to-noise ratio and shot-

to-shot stability.

The probe and the reference signals were detected with fast silicon photodiodes,

amplified, and sampled using home-built electronics. The typical standard deviation for a

pump-probe measurement was 10

 ∆OD, and the "noise" was dominated by the variation

-5

of  the  pump  intensity  and  flow  instabilities  in  the  jet.  The  vertical  bars  shown  in  the

7

kinetics (e.g., Fig. 1) represent 95% confidence limits for each data point. Typically, 150-

200 points acquired on a quasi-logarithmic grid were used to obtain these kinetics. The
experiments were carried out in flow, using a 150 µm thick high-speed jet. An all 316

stainless steel and Teflon flow system was used to pump the solution.

Pulse radiolysis - transient absorption spectroscopy. 20  MeV,  30  ps  FWHM  electron

beam  pulses  of  20  nC  from  the  Argonne  LINAC  were  used  to  radiolyze  N2-saturated

aqueous solutions being studied in a 20 mm optical path cell (the setup used in this work

was similar to that described in ref. [16]). The analyzing light from a pulsed Xe arc lamp

was coaxial with the electron beam and traveled in the opposite direction. A set of 10 nm

fwhm band pass interference filters was used for wavelength selection. The kinetic traces

were  sampled  and  averaged  at  a  repetition  rate  of  0.3  Hz.  The  typical  time  sampling

interval  was  0.2  ns  per  point.  Cerenkov  light  signal  was  subtracted  from  the  kinetic

traces. A Faraday cup was used to monitor pulse-to-pulse stability of the electron beam.

While  the  accumulation  of  radiolytic  products  slowly  decreased  the  electron  life  time

during the acquisition of the absorption spectra, this shortening had negligible effect on

the absorbance at t=5 ns, the delay time at which these spectra were obtained.

Materials and solution properties. Reagents of the highest purity available from Aldrich

were used without further purification. The solutions were made of crystalline salts with

exception of hydroxide solutions that were made using high-purity 0.989 N analytical

standard KOH.

Density,  viscosity,  activity  and  ion  diffusivity  charts  for  sodium  sulfate  and

sodium perchlorate solutions were taken from the literature (some of the relevant data are

given  in  Figs.  1S,  2S,  and  3S).  [17,21]  In  saturated  room  temperature  solution,  these

molarities and the densities are 1.84 M and 1.21 g/ml for sodium sulfate and 9.32 M and

1.68  g/ml  for  sodium  perchlorate,  respectively.  [18]  The  refractive  indices  of  these

solutions change very little relative to that of neat water (at saturation, 1.368 for NaClO4

[19] and 1.364 for Na2SO4 [20] vs. 1.333 for water; [20] for the sodium line). The density

of the solution scales approximately linearly with the molarity of the salt (Figs. 1S(a) and

3S(a)). [17] This increase in the density results in a higher stopping power for electrons in

8

briny  solutions  and  has  important  implications  for  pulse  radiolytic  experiments.  The

quantity that changes most with the salinity is the bulk viscosity: from 1 cP for water to

1.9 cP for sodium sulfate (Fig. 1S(a)) and to 8 cP for sodium perchlorate (Fig. 3S(a)), for

saturated solutions (for the latter salt, most of the increase in the viscosity occurs between

6  and  9  M,  Fig. 3S(a)). Microscopic diffusion coefficients for the corresponding ions

change less than these bulk viscosities. [21] In 2.5 M NaClO4  and  1.8  M  Na2SO4,  the

sodium cation migrates ca. 30% more slowly than in water (Figs. 1S(b) and 3S(b)). In

0.5-2 M Na2SO4, the diffusion coefficient of sulfate is constant, also ca. 30 % lower than

in water (Fig. 1S(b)). Thus, the drag of the ionic atmosphere on the migration of these

ions  is  relatively  weak.  The  ionic  strength  given  below  was  calculated  assuming  the

absence  of  ion  pairing.  For  sodium  sulfate,  Raman  spectroscopy  [22],  dielectric

permittivity [23], ultrasonic absorption [24],  and  conductivity [25]  studies  suggest  the

occurrence of noncontact ion pairs in which the sulfate anion and the sodium cation are

separated by one or two water molecules. Since the ion activities rapidly decrease with

the salt concentration (Fig. 2S(a)) [23], the association constant decreases by two orders

of  magnitude  from  dilute  to  saturated  solution  (see  Fig.  3  in  ref.  [23]),  and  ion  pair

formation  peaks  at  ca.  0.2  M  (Fig. 2S(b)) [23]. When this ion pairing is included, the

ionic strength of the Na2SO4 solutions is ca. 2.83 times the molarity of the sodium sulfate

(Fig. 2S(b)).

3. Results.

This  section  is  organized  as  follows.  First,  the  choice  of  (inert)  salts  used  to

change the ionic strength of CTTS anion solutions under study is justified. It is shown

that only two types of such salts, perchlorates and sulfates, can be used for studies of the

ionic strength effect in the CTTS photosystems (section 3.1). The addition of these salts

shifts  the  absorption  spectra  of  CTTS  anions  and  the  hydrated  electron  to  the  blue

(sections 3.2 and 3.3, respectively). Since the molar absorptivities of the parent anion and

the electron are therefore concentration dependent, this spectral shift has to be taken into

the  account  for  our  QY  measurements.  Pulse  radiolysis  -  transient  absorbance

spectroscopy was used to observe the effect of ionic strength on the shape of the electron

spectrum in the visible (section 3.3); this approach, however, did not give the absolute

9

molar absorptivity for the electron. To forgo this difficulty, first the product  φε

700 of the

QY and the molar absorptivity of the electron was obtained for several CTTS systems as

a function of the ionic strength of the photolyzed solution (section 3.4). Then, the iodide

photosystem (248 nm excitation) was used to obtain the electron and iodine atom yields

separately;  these  two  sets  of  measurements  were  used  to  estimate  the  ionic  strength

dependence of the electron absorptivity at the observation wavelength of 700 nm (section

3.5). The latter data, taken together with pulse radiolysis data of section 3.2, suggest that

the oscillator strength of the electron transition in the visible does not change with the
ionic strength. Using the estimates for  ε

700 obtained in the iodide experiment, absolute
quantum yields φ were obtained as a function of the ionic strength I (section 3.5). All of

these dependencies were linear, with a negative slope of 6-10% per 1 M of ionic strength.

Ultrafast  pump-probe  spectroscopy was  used  to  demonstrate  that this  effect originates

through  a  perturbation  in  the  recombination  dynamics  of  the  corresponding  geminate

pairs; there is no ionic strength effect on the prompt yield of photoelectrons in the CTTS

excitation  (section  3.6).  The  kinetics  for  electron  photodetachment  from  bromide  are

analyzed using an MFP model of geminate recombination based on the work of Shushin

[7]. These analyses suggest that the short-range attractive potential between the geminate

partners increases with ionic strength.

3.1. The choice of the ion atmosphere.

In  our  experiments,  the  ionic  strength  of  aqueous  solutions  was  changed  by

addition  of  sodium  sulfate  and  sodium  perchlorate.  This  choice  was  dictated  by  the

following practical considerations:

First,  most  anions  are  reactive  towards  the  radical  generated  in  the  course  of

electron photodetachment. Typical reactions include addition (e.g., halogen atoms and
-  are  very

OH  radicals  readily  add  to  halide  anions)  and  oxidation  (OH,  SO3

-  and  SO4

strong oxidizers). The sulfate and perchlorate are two isoelectronic anions for which no

addition  or  oxidation  reactions  have  ever  been  reported.  This  guarantees  that  the  salts

used  for  changing  the  ionic  strength  are  not  chemically  involved  in  the  electron

detachment and/or geminate recombination.

10

Second, the anions must be sufficiently weak absorbers of photoexcitation light,

even at molar concentration of these anions, so that most of the photoexcitation light is

absorbed  by  the  CTTS  anions  of  interest  which  are  present  in  a  relatively  low

concentration. The latter consideration forced us to use CTTS anions that were good light
absorbers (ε > 500 M-1 cm-1) at the photoexcitation wavelength, such as iodide at 248 nm

and  hydroxide  at  193  nm  (see  Table  1  in  ref.  [1])  and  to  use  sufficiently  high

concentrations of these anions so that < 0.1% of the light was absorbed by the buffer salt

(in flash photolysis experiments). Nanosecond observations suggested that neither sulfate

nor  perchlorate  yield  electrons  by  single  248  nm  photon  excitation,  even  in  saturated
solutions (the QY is < 10-4). For 193 nm photoexcitation, sulfate is a relatively strong
light  absorber  (ε193  =  46±7  M-1  cm- 1 [1]),  and  only  perchlorate  can  be  used  (ε193  =
0.565±0.007 M-1 cm-1 [1]). Furthermore, as shown in Part I of this series, [1] perchlorate
yields electrons by one- or two- 193 nm photon excitation (the one-photon QY is 4x10-3

[1]).  Since  the  absorption  band  of  perchlorate  shifts  to  the  blue  with  the  perchlorate

concentration, at least 20-50% of the 193 nm light is observed by 1-2 mM hydroxide,

even in 9 M NaClO4 solution. In dilute aqueous solution, the QY for hydroxide is ca.

0.11, [1,26,27] and < 3% of the electron absorbance signal was from perchlorate, for all

concentrations of the latter. Still, corrections were necessary to determine QYs for the
OH-/NaClO4 photosystem, as explained in section 3.4.

In 200 nm short-pulse photoexcitation of 0.74 M sulfate, a transient from hydrated

electron was observed at 800 nm (Fig. 1(a), trace (i)). The transmission of the 200 nm
light through the 150 µm jet was 0.74, which gives an estimate of 12 M-1 cm-1 for the

molar absorptivity of sulfate at 200 nm. This value is in the correct range for this anion,
judging from our 193 nm estimate of the molar absorptivity (46±7 M-1 cm-1 [1]) and the

spectra  given  in  ref.  [28]  This  absorption  from  the  electron  scaled  linearly  with  the

photon  fluence  of  200  nm  light  (Fig.  4S(a)),  and  the  observed  photoelectron  decay

kinetics, - which did not depend on the laser power (Fig. 4S(b)), - resembled the kinetics
- [4]). From the plot given in Fig. 4S(a),

observed for other polyvalent anions (such as SO3

a relatively large prompt quantum yield of 0.406 was obtained for the electron at 10 ps

(that decreased to 0.27 at 500 ps). A free electron QY of 0.83 was obtained for sulfate at

11

193  nm,  [1,26,27]  and  we  believe  that  the  kinetics  shown  in  Fig.  1(a)  are  from

photoexcited sulfate, rather than an impurity. To make sure that sulfite (that has large

absorptivity  at  200  nm)  is  not  present  in  the  solution,  we  oxidized  it  by  prolonged

bubbling  of  the  sulfate  solution  with  oxygen;  no  change  was  observed  in  the  electron

absorbance. Other impurities (<0.1 wt%) specified by the manufacturer (such as chloride

and metal cations) are weaker absorbers of 200 nm light than sulfate.

A 9.25 M perchlorate solution also yielded 800 nm absorbance from the electron

by 200 nm photoexcitation (Fig. 1(b)). The transmission of this solution at 200 nm was
0.67 (optical density of 0.18) which is equivalent to molar absorptivity of 1.3 M-1 cm-1 vs.
0.26  M-1 cm-1  obtained  for  193  nm. [1]  The  transient  absorption  signal  is  either  from

biphotonic  excitation  of  perchlorate  (as  suggested  by  our  193  nm  results  [1])  or  one-

photon excitation of an impurity in the perchlorate; the signal was too small to distinguish

between  these  two  possibilities.  The  involvement  of  impurity  is  likely:  e.g.,  decay

kinetics shown in Fig. 1(a) look remarkably similar to the decay kinetics observed for 5.4

M chloride (Fig. 1(a), solid line).

Since the optical density of 30 mM bromide ( ε200 of 104 M-1 cm-1) across the 150
µm  jet  was  4.5,  the  absorption  of  light  by  perchlorate  was  <  4  %  of  that  absorbed  by

bromide. Given that the prompt QY for electron in 200 nm photoexcitation of bromide is

ca. 0.91, [4] the contribution of perchlorate to the electron generation in 30 mM bromide

was negligible. In fact, no change in the kinetic profiles was observed when the bromide

concentration was varied between 20 and 160 mM (see Fig. 7S in section 3.6.1).

3.2. The effect of salts on the CTTS bands of anions.

It is known from previous studies that addition of both ionic and nonionic solutes

to water shifts the CTTS absorption bands of anions to the blue. According to Blandamer

and  Fox  [29]  and  Stein  and  Treinin,  [30]  this  shift  changes  neither  the  shape  of  the

absorption band nor the molar absorptivity of the anion at the band maximum. The latter

authors studied the effect of NaClO4 and Na2SO4 on the absorption of aqueous iodide;

however, only band maxima positions were reported. To obtain more detailed data, UV

spectra of 0.7 mM NaI in 1 mm and 10 mm optical path cells were collected as a function

12

of  salt  concentration.  For  λ>205-210  nm,  the  (low  energy  sub-)  band  was  perfectly

Gaussian;  the  band  width  (314±4  meV)  and  the  molar  absorptivity  at  the  maximum
(1.1x104 M-1 cm-1) changed < 2% with the salt concentration (Fig. 2(a)). For both salts,
the blue shift (-∆λ) linearly increased with the nominal ionic strength, and the band shifts

given  by  Stein  and  Treinin [30] were in perfect agreement with those obtained in this

work  (Fig.  2(b)).  In  energy  units,  the  band  shifts  for  sodium  perchlorate  and  sodium

sulfate are 26 meV and 13.4 meV per 1 M ionic strength. Thus, in 9 M NaClO4 solution,

the band shift is ca. 10 nm. Such a large shift strongly changes the molar absorptivity of

the anion at the low energy band tail. Fig. 3(a) shows the plot of the molar extinction
coefficient ε248 of iodide at 248 nm as a function of the ionic strength. These data were

obtained from spectrophotometric data of Fig. 2(a) and compared with values estimated

from  the  transmission  of  248  nm  light  from  the  KrF  laser.  These  two  methods  gave

similar results: As seen from this plot, an increase in the ionic strength causes a large

decrease in the molar absorptivity. For 9 M NaClO4 solution, the molar absorptivity of
iodide decreases by more than a decade. Only for this I-/NaClO4 photosystem was the

blue shift sufficiently large to produce nonlinear dependence of the molar absorptivity (at

the band edge) on the salt concentration. For other photosystems studied at 248 nm and

193 nm, the molar absorptivity linearly decreased with the salinity. For hydroxide at 193

nm (where the anion has a band maximum), the molar absorptivity changed from 3000
M-1 cm-1 in water to 900 M-1 cm-1 in 9 M NaClO4 solution (see Fig. 3(b)). For sulfite at
248 nm, the molar absorptivity changed from 40 M-1 cm-1 in water to 25  M-1 cm-1 in 1.8

M Na2SO4 (see Fig. 3(b)). Thus, for all photosystems (including 200 nm photosystems)

the absorptivity of the solution at the excitation wavelength systematically decreases with

the ionic strength.

3.3. The effect of salts on the electron absorption.

It is well known that hydrated electrons and halide anions show similar trends in

their absorption spectra as a function of solvent polarity, temperature, etc. [1,31] Thus, it

is not surprising that the absorption spectrum of the hydrated electron shifts to the blue in

concentrated salt solutions. For 10 M NaClO4, a large shift of the band maximum, from

710  nm  to  605  nm,  was  reported  by  Anbar  and  Hart.  [32,33]  Since  the  free  electron

13

concentration in our time-resolved QY measurement was determined from the hydrated

electron absorbance at 700 nm, one needs to know how the extinction coefficient of this

hydrated electron changes with the ionic strength of the solution.

To  that  end,  we  obtained  the  spectra  of  hydrated  electrons  generated  by  pulse

radiolysis of sodium sulfate (Fig. 4(a)) and sodium perchlorate (Fig. 4(b)) solutions for

different concentrations of these salts (same dose for all systems). These spectra were

obtained  5-10  ns  after  a  30  ps  pulse  of  20  MeV  electrons.  In  water,  the  absorption

spectrum S(E) of the electron as a function of photon energy E can be approximated by a

Lorentzian-Gaussian dependence:  S E

(

)

(
S E

)

=

S
max

(

1

+

[
−(
E E

)

]
2Γ
L

)

max

=

S
max

  exp

(

[
−(
−
E E

)

]
Γ 2
G

)

max

  for  E E<

max  and

  for  E E>

max,  where  Smax  and  E max  are  the  signal

magnitude and photon energy at the band maximum, respectively, and ΓG and ΓL are the

Gaussian  and  Lorentzian  widths,  respectively.  [15,33]  For  light  water,  our  recent

measurement (which agrees reasonably well with the previous measurement [15]) gives
Emax=1.699±0.005 eV, ΓG=422±5 meV, and ΓL=492±7 meV. As shown in Fig. 5(a) and

5(b), the spectral changes observed in the concentrated salt solutions can be simulated

quantitatively  by  postulating  that  both  Smax  and  E max  linearly  increase  with  the  ionic
strength whereas the spectral shape parameters ΓG and ΓL do not change with the salinity

(a better agreement can be obtained by allowing 5% narrowing of the spectral line at high

salt concentration, but this correction does not make much difference in the absorbance at

700 nm). The band shift is 21.5±0.2 meV (sodium sulfate) and 24.9±0.3 meV (sodium

perchlorate) per 1 M ionic strength. The relative increase in Smax  (relative  to  water)  is

0.054 (sodium sulfate) and 0.014 (sodium perchlorate) per 1 M ionic strength. Using the

plots  shown  in Figs. 5(a) and 5(b),  it  is  possible  to  fit  the  dependence  of  the  700  nm

absorbance shown in Fig. 5(c).

The constancy of the band shape and linear increase in Emax were observed both

for  aqueous  iodide  and  for  hydrated  electron  in  these  concentrated  salt  solutions.  For

iodide, the extinction coefficient at the band maximum does not change with the salinity

because  the  band  shape  and  the  oscillator  strength  are  constant.  [29,30]  If  the  same
p→  band of the electron

pertains to hydrated electrons (the oscillator strength for the 1
s

2

14

[33]  and  the  molar  extinction  coefficient  of  the  electron  at  E=Emax  are  constant),  the
)   at  700  nm  (vs.  water)  can  be  readily
relative  extinction  coefficient  ε ε

I =(

0

700

700

calculated  from  our  data  (these  simulations  are  shown  in  Fig.  7(a)  in  section  3.5).  It

follows from this calculation that this quantity is 0.95 for 1.8 M Na2SO4 and 0.8 for 9 M

NaClO4.  However,  the  constancy  of  the  oscillator  strength  is  not  apparent  from  our

results  because  Smax  actually  increases  with  the  salt  concentration.  It  should  be

emphasized  that  the  optical  density  in Figs.  4  and  5  depends  not  only  on  the  electron

absorptivity but also on the electron yield. The latter depends on (i) the energy absorbed
per volume of the sample (which rapidly increases with the density ρ of the sample) and

(ii)  radiolytic  yield  of  electrons  (whose  dependence  on  the  salt  concentration  is

unknown). Simple calculations suggest that in 9 M (66.4 wt%) NaClO4, ca. 60% of the

absorbed dose is stopped by the salt; i.e., this is not, strictly speaking, "water" radiolysis.

Even when only one of these two factors is taken into account, the increase in the Smax is

negated: e.g., for sodium sulfate,  Smax

ρ is nearly constant with the salt concentration.

Since these pulse radiolytic data alone were insufficient to substantiate our (very

plausible) assumption that the oscillator strength for electron band does not depend on the

ionic strength of the solution, we needed to determine the QY for electron formation that

did not rely on the (unknown) electron absorptivity. From that measurement, the molar

absorptivity  of  the  electron  in  saline  solutions  can  be  estimated.  This  program  is

implemented in section 3.5.

3.4. Relative quantum yields for electron detachment by 248 and 193 nm light.

As explained in the previous section, the absolute extinction coefficient ε700 of the

electron in saline solutions is not known accurately and, therefore, in this section we will
limit ourselves to determination of relative quantum yield Φrel given by

Φ

rel

=

φ φ
(

I

=

×

0

)  

 

ε ε
700

700

(

I

=

0

)

(1)

where I is the ionic strength. The quantity  Φ
rel  can be determined directly from the plots
of end-of-pulse transient absorbance of the electron at 700 nm ( ∆OD700 ) vs. the absorbed

laser power Iabs. Typical plots for 38.5 mM sulfite and 2 mM iodide in Na2SO4 solution

15

are  shown  in  Fig.  6(a)  and  6(b), respectively All of the photosystems exhibited linear
dependencies of  ∆OD vs Iabs
 so that the product  φε
the slopes of the corresponding plots. These φε

700 can be readily obtained from

700 products were then plotted vs. the ionic

700  

. 

strength of the solution; all such dependencies were linear. Extrapolation of these linear
dependencies to zero ionic strength gave the estimate for  φ
(

 by which

)  

=

=

0

0

)

I

I

(

ε
700

Φrel (eq. (1)) was calculated. The estimates for  φ(

I = 0  that were obtained in this work

)

using the known molar absorptivity of hydrated electron in dilute aqueous solutions were

within 3% of the values reported in Table 1, ref. [1].

One of the photosystems studied, OH-/NaClO4 excited by 193 nm light, needed

special  treatment,  because  some  of  the  excitation  light  was  absorbed  by  sodium

perchlorate (Figs.  6(c)  and  5S(a)).  As  explained  in section 3.1, very few electrons are

generated  by  photoexcitation  of  this  anion,  and  this  extra  193  nm  absorbance  has  the

effect of reducing the electron yield from hydroxide. To compensate for this effect, the

absorbance OD193 of the solution at 193 nm was determined and plotted as a function of

hydroxide concentration (Fig. 5S(a)).  These  dependencies  were  linear  and  exhibited  a
]OH − = 0  (due to the light absorbance by perchlorate), from which the

positive offset at  [

fraction  of  photons  absorbed  by  hydroxide  alone  can  be  estimated  (as  the  ratio  of
)−  to the total absorbance). The absorbed laser power

hydroxide absorbance  OD OH

193(

Iabs was corrected by this ratio giving the laser power  I OH
(

anions alone: I OH

(
I OD OH OD
abs

abs (

=

)

193

abs

)

(

)

−

−

193 . As shown in Fig. 6(c), when  ∆OD700

)−  absorbed by hydroxide

is  plotted  against  this  latter  quantity,  the  points  obtained  for  different  hydroxide

concentrations are on the same line, which justifies the whole approach.

Fig. 5S(b) gives the resulting plots of Φrel as a function of the ionic strength (the

data for electron photodetachment from perchlorate itself [1]  are  also  included).  (This

figure has been placed in the Supplement because it is very similar to Fig. 7(b) in the next
section). It is seen that the decrease in Φrel  is  similar  for  all  four  of  the  CTTS  anions

being studied (varying from 0.06 to 0.1 per 1 M of the ionic strength) in either sodium
sulfate and sodium perchlorate solutions. Examination of Fig. 5S(b)  suggests  that  Φrel

decreases mainly due to a decrease in the absolute QY for electron photodetachment; the

16

change  in  the  molar  absorptivity  of  the  hydrated  electron  is  relatively  unimportant.
Indeed, in 9 M NaClO4, Φrel for iodide is ca. 20 times lower than in water; whereas the
estimated decrease in ε700 is just 20% (section 3.3). For 1.8 M Na2SO4,Φrel is 0.4 whereas
the estimated decrease in ε700 is just 5%. As demonstrated in section 3.5, the changes in

the electron absorptivity at 700 nm are as small as suggested by our pulse radiolysis data,

and the decrease in the absolute QY for electron photodetachment is as large as suggested

by the data of Figs. 5 and 7(a).

It should be stressed that we are not first to look for the ionic strength effect on

the electron yield. [8,34,35] These previous studies were excluded from our consideration

so far because we believe that the data were compromised by inadequate choice of anion

photosystems. In particular, Jortner et al. [34] claimed the absence of the effect for 254

nm photoexcitation of aqueous iodide. Specifically, they looked for an effect of addition

of  2.5  M  and  5  M  HCl  on  the  evolution  of  H2 from a solution that contained 0.15 M

iodide and 9 M LiCl. In a different experiment, the effect of addition 1 M KBr on the

formation of iodine in N2O-saturated solution containing 0.15 M KI and 1.8 M H2SO4

was sought. It is difficult to interpret these data since in both of these cases the reference

systems  were  also  concentrated  solutions.  Furthermore,  under  the  experimental
conditions, Cl-  and  Br-  reacted  with  iodine  atoms  and  hydrated  electrons  reacted  with

hydronium  ions  on  a  subnanosecond  time  scale,  i.e.,  the  geminate  dynamics  were

perturbed  in  a  major  way.  Ohno  [35]  observed  that  in  254  nm  photoexcitation  of

hexacyanoferrate(II),  the  electron  yield  estimated  from  N2  evolution  in  N2O saturated

solution  decreased  linearly  with  the  concentration  of  sodium  sulfate  and  sodium

perchlorate (< 1 M) added to the reaction mixture (19% and 32% decrease per 1 M of

ionic  strength,  respectively).  This  decrease  is  much  greater  than  shown  in  Fig.  7(b),
4- is  known  to  strongly  associate  with  1-3  alkali  cations, [8]  even  in

however, Fe(CN)6

dilute solutions, [36] and in that propensity it is different from the anions studied herein.
4-  by Ohno [35] are 2 times lower

Furthermore, the absolute QYs obtained for Fe(CN)6

than any other published estimate for this quantum yield.

3.5. Quantum yields for electron and  I2

−  formation in 248 nm photolysis of iodide.

17

The iodine atom generated from iodide in the course of electron photodetachment

readily reacts with the iodide by hemicolligation (rxn. 3), forming I2

-

−

I

 

ν
 →
h

•

 

I

+

 

−
e
aq

 

•

I

+

 

 

I

−

 

 →

 

−
2

I

k=(1.2-1.3)x1010 M-1 s-1 [37] 

(2)

(3)

This radical anion has almost no absorbance at 590 nm and absorbs strongly at 400 nm
and  720-750  nm  (the  estimates  for  ε400  range  from  8300  to  15600  M-1 cm-1 [37] with
10000  M-1 cm-1  as  the  preferred  value [37];  the  visible  absorption  band  is  ca.  4  times

weaker).  Both  of  these  absorption  bands  are  intramolecular  in  origin; [38]  neither  the

absorption  spectrum  nor  the  oscillator  strength  for  this  radical  anion  are  expected  to
-  from  the

change  with  the  water  salinity,  and  determination  of  the  concentration  of  I2

transient absorbance is straightforward. In the absence of cross recombination, the yield
- equals the yield of iodine atoms which in turn equals the electron yield. Combining

of I2

this  latter  yield  and  the  electron  absorbance  (determined  under  the  identical

photoexcitation  conditions),  one  obtains  the  molar  absorptivity  of  the  electron.  In
-  in  water  is  estimated  using  the  absorbance  of

practice,  since  the  absorptivity  of  I2
electron in water as a reference, the quantity determined is the ratio  ε

 of

I =

0

(

)

/

ε
700

700

the extinction coefficients for the electron (which is needed to separate the first factor in

eq. (1)).

The experimental approach followed that given in section 4.2.3,  ref.  [1].  The  2

mM NaI solution was saturated either by N2  or  by  CO2. The latter solute served as an

electron scavenger that "removed" the 700 nm absorbance of the electron in < 100 ns.
-  can  be  observed  either  at  700  nm  (where  this  relatively  slow

The  formation  of  I2

formation kinetics overlaps in time with the fast decay kinetics of the electron, see Fig.

6S and also Fig. 5 in ref. [1]) or at 400 nm (where the electron absorbance is negligible).
We found that the ratio of the 700 nm and 400 nm absorbances at 0.2-1 µs (where the I2

-

concentration  reaches  the  maximum)  was  0.3  regardless  of  the  ionic  strength  of  the
- indeed does not change with the

solution; i.e., the shape of the absorption spectrum for I2

salinity. At any given excitation light fluence, the maximum 700 nm absorbance from the

18

electrons (in the N2 saturated solution) and I2

- anions (in the CO2 saturated solution) were
-

in the same ratio, which suggests that there is very little decay of iodine atoms and I2
- anions (that migrate and react much slower than hydrated

anions via reaction with CO2

electrons). That much can also be deduced by comparing the decay kinetics of 700 nm

absorbance in these N2 and CO2 solutions: the decay of I2

- in the  I

•

−
2

I

+

−
CO
2

 

 mixture is

almost  an  order  of  magnitude  slower  than  the  decay  of  electrons  in  the  I

•

−
2  

I

+

−
eaq

 

-  and  the  electron  in  dilute
mixture  (Fig.  6S).  To  reconcile  the  QYs  determined  for  I2
aqueous solutions, an extinction coefficient of 2290 M-1 cm-1 was assumed for the former
species at 700 nm (in reasonable agreement with 2500 M-1 cm-1 at 720 nm given by Elliot
−  formation
and Sopchyshyn [37]). Using this estimate and products  φε

700 for I2

that were determined as explained in sections 2 and 4.4, the ratio  ε

obtained (Fig. 7(a)). In full agreement with section 3.3, the molar absorptivity  ε

- and  eaq
ε
700

700

/

(

I =

0

)

  was

700 of the

electron in Na2SO4 is nearly constant with the ionic strength of the solutions; for NaClO4,

this molar absorptivity decreases by 20% in the 9 M NaClO4 solution. Though for the
latter  salt  the ε

  dependence  shown  in  Fig.  7(a)  is  more  curved  than

I =

0

(

)

/

ε
700

700

calculated,  the  accuracy  of  the  latter  measurement  is  perhaps  lower,  and  we  used  the
I = 0  given in Fig. 7(b). Since the decrease in the
calculated data to obtain the ratios φ φ(

)

electron absorptivity is relatively small, the two plots (Figs. 5S(b) and 7(b)) look quite

similar.

To  summarize  these  QY  data,  the  quantum  yield  of  electron  photodetachment

rapidly  decreases  with  increasing  ionic  strength  of  the  solution.  The  magnitude  of  the

decrease in the QY per 1 M ionic strength is similar for all of the photosystems studied.

Note that the decrease in the molar absorptivity of CTTS anions with the ionic strength

has already been factored into the calculation of the QYs since we directly measured the

absorption  of  the  excitation  light  by  these  solutions.  The  concomitant  decrease  in  the

molar absorptivity of the electrons has also been taken into account.

The  QYs  determined  using  flash  photolysis  are  quantum  efficiencies  for  the

formation  of  free  electron  that  escaped  recombination  with  its  geminate  partner.  This

quantity  is  given  by  the  product  of  a  prompt  QY  for  the  electron  formation  (which

19

depends on the details of dissociation of a short-lived CTTS state on subpicosecond time
scale)  and  a  fraction  Ω∞   of  electrons  that  escape  geminate  recombination  on  a  sub-

nanosecond time scale. It is not obvious from the data of Fig. 7(b), which one of these

two factors is responsible for the observed decrease in the (free) electron yield with the

increased ionic strength. The previous observation of an ionic strength effect on electron
4-, by Ohno, [35] was interpreted by the author as the effect of

detachment from Fe(CN)6

solvent cage constriction around the CTTS state; in other words, the decrease in the free

electron  yield  was  thought  to  result  from  the  decrease  in  the  prompt  electron  yield

attained  in  the  course  of  this  CTTS  state  dissociation.  In  the  next  section,  ultrafast

spectroscopy is used to demonstrate that the ionic strength effect is dynamic in origin and

develops on the time scale of hundreds of picoseconds; the prompt electron yield does not

change with the salt concentration.

3.6.  Ultrafast  200  nm  pump  -  800  nm  probe  spectroscopy  of  anions  in  concentrated

solutions.

3.6.1. Bromide.

Bromide  has  an  absorption  maximum  at  200  nm,  [29]  and  blue  shift  of  the

absorption  band  with  the  ionic  strength  has  relatively  little  effect  on  the  molar

absorptivity of this anion at the photoexcitation wavelength (as compared, for example,

with iodide at 248 nm). As explained in section 3.1, due to the large absorptivity of this
anion at 200 nm (10000 M-1 cm-1), photoexcitation of sulfate and perchlorate is negligible

in  the  20-80  mM  NaBr  solutions  that  were  used.  No  change  in  the  electron  dynamics

were  observed  with  bromide  concentration  (<  100  mM)  in  these  solutions  (Fig.  7S).

Another advantage of using bromide is that the decay kinetics of electron generated by

200  nm  and  225  nm  photoexcitation  of  this  anion  were  found  to  be  identical,  i.e.,  it

appears that direct ionization with the formation of a conduction band electron does not

occur for bromide across the low-energy CTTS subband (see Part III of this series [4]).

Typical 800 nm transient absorption kinetics obtained from 30 mM bromide in

sodium  perchlorate  solutions  are  given  in  Fig. 8(a).  The  data  for  sulfate  solutions  are

shown  in  Figs.  7S  and  8S.  The  initial  very  rapid  kinetics  (t  <  3  ps)  are  from  electron

20

thermalization and solvation. For higher concentrations of NaClO4, these kinetics become

progressively faster and the optical density at 5-10 ps systematically decreases. Both of

these trends are due to shifting of the absorption band of thermalized electron to the blue

(section 3.3). The decrease in the prompt signal from presolvated electron with NaClO4

concentration is relatively small (because the change in bromide absorptivity is relatively

small  and  the  absorptivity  of  this  presolvated  species  changes  little  with  the  ionic

strength). In water, the maximum of the electron band is ca. 719 nm, [15,33] which is

close to our probe wavelength (800 nm). In 9 M NaClO4, this band maximum shifts to

636  nm.  From  previous  studies  of  electron  thermalization  in  water  photoionization

[39,40,41]  and  iodide  photoexcitation  [3a]  it  is  known  that  the  band  maximum  of

presolvated electron systematically shifts to the blue in the first 250 fs. After the first

300-500 fs, this maximum reaches its equilibrium position [3a,39,41] and further spectral

evolution is due to narrowing of the band to the red of the band maximum and widening

of  the  band  to  the  blue  of  the  band  maximum  [40].  The  greater  is  the  observation

wavelength  with  respect  to  this  maximum,  the  greater  is  the  reduction  in  the  electron

absorbance during the thermalization process and the faster is the thermalization kinetics.

This can be demonstrated by changing the observation wavelength [40] or by increasing

the  temperature  of  the  solution  and  probing  at  a  fixed  wavelength  (the  spectrum  of

hydrated electron shifts to the red with increasing temperature, and the effect is exactly

opposite to that shown in Fig. 8(a)) [41,42] The decrease of the 800 nm absorbance at the

end of the thermalization process (at 5-10 ps) with [NaClO4] reflects the decrease in the

electron absorptivity; when the latter is taken into account using the data of section 3.3,

there is almost no variation in the prompt yield of the thermalized electron.

In Fig. 8(b), the kinetics shown in Fig. 8(a) were normalized at 5 ps. It is seen that

these normalized kinetics begin to diverge only after the first 40-50 ps. At 500 ps, this
divergence is very large: the probability  Ω( )t  of the electron survival rapidly decreases at

higher  ionic  strength.  The  same  behavior  was  observed  for  sodium  perchlorate  and

sodium  sulfate  solutions  of  bromide.  To  a  first  approximation,  these  kinetics  are
biexponential  [2,3,4,5],  and  the  escape  probability  Ω∞   for  t → ∞  can  be  readily

estimated from the corresponding least squares fits (as explained in section 3.6.3, a more

21

complex type of fit has actually been used, but the main result does not depend on the

specific prescribed profile of the kinetics). These escape probabilities are plotted vs. the

ionic strength of the sodium sulfate and the sodium perchlorate solutions in Fig. 9(a). The

survival probability of the geminate pair decreases linearly with the ionic strength with a

slope of ca. 9 % per 1 M. This slope is close to the slope of 8-12 % per 1 M observed for

the decrease in QY of free electron in 248 nm photoexcitation of iodide and sulfite (Fig.

7(b)). Thus, the answer to the question formulated at the end of section 3.5 is that the QY

of  free electron decreases as a function of the ionic strength due to the decrease in the

fraction  of  electrons  that  escape  geminate  recombination;  the  prompt  yield  of

thermalized  electrons  does  not  change  with  the  addition  of  salts.  Interestingly,  the

transformations of the kinetics with the increasing ionic strength shown in Fig. 8(b) are

exactly  opposite  to  the  transformations  observed  for  the  decay  kinetics  in  200  nm

photoexcitation of hydroxide with increasing temperature. An increase in the temperature

red-shifts  the  spectra  of  halide/pseudohalide  anions  and  the  hydrated  electron  and
increases  Ω∞ ; the main difference between the effect of the salt addition and the effect of

the temperature increase is that for the latter the normalized kinetics diverge on the time

scale of tens rather than hundreds of picoseconds. Still, the overall behavior is strikingly

similar: the effect of increasing the ionic strength largely resembles the effect of lowering

the solution temperature.

We will return to the interpretation of the kinetics in Figs. 8(b) and 8S in section

3.6.3.  For  now,  it  suffices  to  note  that  the  ionic  strength  effect  on  the  geminate

recombination is slow to develop: for electrons photodetached from bromide it takes 300-

500  ps  for  this  effect  to  develop  fully.  As  shown  in  the  next  section,  for  other

photosystems this time lag is even longer.

3.6.2. Sulfite and hydroxide.

Fig.  10(a)  shows  the  decay  kinetics  of  electrons  obtained  in  200  nm

photoexcitation  of  40  mM  sulfite  in  concentrated  Na2SO4  solution  (non-normalized

kinetics  are  shown  in  Fig.  9S).  As  in  the  case  of  bromide  (section  3.6.1),  the

photoinduced optical density at the end of a 200 nm pulse changes little as a function of

22

salinity,  and  the  thermalization  kinetics  follow  the  same  transformations  as  those

observed for bromide in NaClO4 solutions (albeit on a smaller scale, due to a smaller blue

shift of the hydrated electron band in the sodium sulfate solution, Fig. 4). When these

kinetics are normalized at 5-10 ps (at the end of the thermalization kinetics) the "tails" of

these kinetics (t >100 ps) barely diverge, though one can see that the escape of electrons

in water is more efficient than this escape in 1.83 M Na2SO4 solution. Much the same

behavior is observed for hydroxide (Fig. 9S(b)): the changes in the kinetics are confined

to thermalization dynamics; the normalized kinetics after 10 ps are nearly the same, with

barely perceptible divergence after the first 200 ps. The lack of an ionic strength effect on

these t<500 ps kinetics is not completely unexpected: Crowell and coworkers [5,6] have

studied the effect of addition 1-10 M KOH on the electron and OH radical dynamics in

200 nm photoexcitation of hydroxide. No effect was observed. Thus, for hydroxide and

sulfite, not only there is no effect of the ionic strength on the prompt yield; there appears

to be almost no decrease in the survival probability of the geminate pair in the first 500 ps

after the electron detachment.

At first glance, this observation appears to contradict the QY estimates of section

3.5 in which a large effect of the ionic strength on the free electron yield was observed

for 193 nm photoexcitation of hydroxide and 248 nm photoexcitation of sulfite. Given

that all of these photosystems exhibit very similar behavior, we find it unlikely that the

electron dynamics in 200 nm photoexcitation of hydroxide follow an entirely different set

of  rules  than  the  electron  dynamics  in  193  nm  photoexcitation  of  the  same  anion.

Apparently, what distinguishes hydroxide and sulfite from bromide is that the time scale
on which the geminate dynamics diverge (eventually approaching similar  Ω∞ )  is  even

longer: the full effect is attained on the time scale of a few nanoseconds.

3.6.3. Kinetic simulations for bromide.

As stated in the Introduction, electron dynamics observed in the previous studies

of electron photodetachment from monovalent aqueous anions broadly conformed to the

MFP  model.  One  particular  realization  of  this  model  is  the  semianalytical  theory  of

Shushin  [7].  We  refer  the  reader  to  refs.  [5]  and  [7]  for  rigorous  formulation  of  that

23

model. Very briefly, Shushin [7] showed that under most realistic conditions, the time
dependent  survival  probability  Ω( )t   of  a  geminate  pair  is  not  sensitive  to  the  radial

profile  U(r)  of  the  MFP  per  se.  Rather,  this  probability  depends  on  a  few  global

parameters that can be analytically derived from this potential. These parameters are the

Onsager radius a (at which the potential equals the Boltzmann energy,  U a

( ) = −

kT

), the

first order rates Wr and Wd for the recombination and dissociation from the potential well

(r<a), respectively (so that  W W Wd

r

=

+

 is the total rate of the decay of pairs inside the

potential well). From these three parameters and the mutual diffusion coefficient D of the

pair,  two  dimensionless  parameters  can  be  obtained:  the  survival  probability

=

p W W
d

/

d

(

 

Ω
= → ∞
(
t

)

)

 of the geminate pair generated inside the potential well and

α = ap W D

/

d

kinetics  Ω( )  

t

∝

,  which  characterizes  the  rate  with  which  the  short  term  exponential
)π .
Dt

 transforms into long term kinetics tailing as  p

  exp(

Wt

−

a

)

d 1 +(

The overall kinetics is given by a rather complex formula; the important point is that all

experimental traces observed so far can be fit by this formula, or its minor modification

[4,5]  that  provides  for  the  possibility  that  some  geminate  pairs  are  initially  generated

beyond the Onsager radius of the MFP.

The traces for Br- shown in Fig. 8(b) and 8S can also be simulated using Shushin's

theory  equations.  Since  for  bromide  no  difference  was  observed  between  the  kinetics

obtained using 200 nm and 225 nm photoexcitation, we assumed that addition of salts

does not change the initial distribution of electrons around bromine atom and assumed

that this initial distribution is entirely confined within the potential well.

Fig. 8S shows a global fit of normalized kinetics for the Br-/Na2SO4 photosystem
using Shushin's theory equations. In these least squares fits, parameters  W −1 and α were

assumed to be constant (19.5 ps and 0.552, respectively); only the survival probability
Ω∞ = pd  was allowed to change (Fig. 9(a) gives the optimum values for this parameter as

a  function  of  the  ionic  strength).  While  this  way  of  fitting  the  kinetic  data  obviously

works,  all  it  really  conveys  is  that  the  change  in  pd  is  the  main  cause  for  the  kinetic
transformations shown in Figs. 8(b) and 8S. Indeed, since α and pd explicitly depend on

24

W, it is difficult to explain how the constancy of W and α can be reconciled with a large

change in pd, even if the fit quality is good.

For sodium perchlorate solutions, the range of the kinetic change is greater and it

becomes  apparent  that  this  constancy  with  the  ionic  strength  is  not  maintained:  it  is
impossible to find optimum parameters W and α for which a change in pd alone accounts

for  the  observed  kinetic  transformations.  Assuming  constancy  of  the  Onsager  time

τ
c

= 2 /

a D

 with the ionic strength, rate constants Wd and Wr can be determined from the

least squares fits for individual kinetic traces in Fig. 8(b). As shown in Fig. 9(b), these

optimum rate constants, the decay constant W, and the survival probability pd all decrease

linearly with the ionic strength. Since Wd and Wr are complex functions of the potential

U(r), it is impossible (in the framework of Shushin's theory) to pinpoint what specific

modifications of the MFP are required to obtain the changes shown in Fig. 9(b). Provided

that the Onsager radius of the MFP does not change with ionic strength, only lowering of

the  reduced  potential  energy  U r kT

( )

  (i.e.,  making  the  MFP  more  attractive)  can

decrease both of these two rate constants. Thus, the most general conclusion that can be

made from fitting these kinetics using the MFP model in its formulation by Shushin is

that addition of salts strengthens the attraction between the electron and bromine atom.

This  partially  accounts  for  the  qualitative  similarity  of  the  temperature  effect  and  the

ionic strength effect: increase in the temperature decreases this reduced potential energy

( )
U r kT

 and increases  Wd  and  Wr .

25

4. Discussion.

The following picture emerges from the results of section 3: Addition of molar

concentration of salts to aqueous solutions of CTTS anions does not change the prompt

quantum  yield  for  the  formation  of  hydrated  electron;  rather,  it  decreases  the  survival

probability of the geminate electron. Monovalent and polyvalent anions exhibit exactly

the same behavior; the anticipated difference in the effect of ion screening on the two

types of geminate pairs originating from these anions (section 1) was not observed. For
the same ionic strength, the decrease in the survival probability  Ω∞  of hydrated electron

is similar for all anions (Figs. 7(b) and 9(a)), but the rate by which the full ionic strength

effect is attained varies considerably among the photosystems. For one photosystem only,

bromide anion photoexcited by 200 nm light, were we able to observe the limiting value

of the survival probability in 500 ps (which was our observation window, Fig. 8(b)). For

bromide, the kinetics obtained at different ionic strengths started to diverge after 50 ps,

when the fast exponential component was over, and the effect developed fully on the time

scale  of  hundreds  of  picoseconds,  when  the  decay  of  the  electron  was  controlled  by

diffusional migration of the geminate partners to the bulk and their re-encounters. It is

safe to conclude that the ionic strength effect develops slowly and requires many such re-
encounters. Analysis of the kinetics for Br-/NaClO4 photosystem in the framework of the

MFP well model of Shushin [7] given in section 3.6.3 suggests that the changes in the

kinetics  can  be  rationalized  in  terms  of  the  increased  attraction  between  the  geminate

partners in high ionic strength solutions.

Some of these observations broadly agree with the anticipated effect of  charge

screening.  For  polyvalent  anions,  a  decrease  in  the  long-range  repulsion  between  the

geminate  partners  facilitates  their  recombination  thereby  decreasing  the  survival

probability of the electron. Because this repulsion is already screened by water, the effect

can  be  observed  only  at  high  concentration  of  the  screening  ions  and  only  when  the

partners are close; thus, many reencounters are needed. Since photoexcited polyvalent

anions  (unlike  monovalent  anions)  yield  a  broad  distribution  of  separation  distances

between  the  electron  and  its  geminate  partner  (presumably,  due  to  the  occurrence  of

26

direct ionization [4,11,12b]), the average distance between these partners is always very

long (2-3 nm) and the screening (which is a relatively short-range effect) takes a longer

time to perturb the geminate dynamics.

Other observations are more difficult to rationalize. For monovalent anions, the

MFP  potential  is  attractive  and  thought  to  originate  through  weak  electrostatic

interactions between the geminate partners. Screening of these interactions would make

the  attractive  force  weaker  thereby  reducing  the  efficiency  of  recombination  and

increasing the survival probability. This, apparently, does not happen. The most difficult

observation to accommodate is that photosystems having different overall MFPs all show

similar relative decrease in the survival probability when this potential is modified by

intervening ions. In principle, the decrease in the survival probability for pairs originating

from monovalent anions can be "explained" within the MFP model with ion screening.

E.g., it can be postulated that for geminate pairs derived from monovalent anions, short-

range  weak  attraction  gives  way  to  long-range  weak  repulsion  at  greater  distances

between the geminate partners (as is likely to be the case for polyvalent anions), and it is

this  repulsion  that  is  screened  by  the  ions.  Alternatively,  one  can  postulate  that  the

reactivity of close pairs systematically increases with the ion concentration (e.g., due to

pairing  of  the  electron  with  a  cation)  and  this  effect  counteracts  the  weakening  of  the

attractive potential between the partners (though this rationale is incompatible with the

Wr d, data  of  Fig.  9(b)).  In  our  viewpoint,  such  modifications  are  both  forced  and

misguided because the similarity of the ionic strength effect for various photosystems

emerges only as a consequence of fine tuning of the model parameters in each particular

case. Can something other than the ion screening cause the ionic strength effect? Below,

we consider three alternate scenarios in detail.

The first scenario is that the ionic strength effect originates through narrowing of

the initial distribution of the electrons. The idea is that an addition of salt causes a blue

shift in the absorption spectrum of an anion and therefore is equivalent to photoexcitation

of  this  anion  (in  water)  at  a  lower  energy.  Since  it  is  known  that  for  some  anions  an

increase in the excitation energy causes more electrons to escape (due to the broadening

of the electron distribution via enhanced direct ionization), [4,11] the salt-induced blue

27

shift causes the opposite effect. Though this scenario cannot be excluded for sulfite [4]

and hydroxide [4,5], it can be completely excluded for iodide and bromide because for

these two halide anions no wavelength dependence was observed to the red of their CTTS

band maxima. [3,4,11]

The  second  scenario  is  that  the  effect  originates  via  a  purely  kinematic  effect,

such  as  an  increase  in  the  solution  viscosity  and/or  the  ionic  atmosphere  drag  on  the

electron  diffusion.  The  drag  of  a  slowly-migrating  ionic  atmosphere  on  the  rapidly-

migrating ion is a well known effect: the ionic atmosphere needs to readjust itself as the

fast  ion  (e.g.,  hydrated  electron)  migrates.  In  the  Debye-Hückel  theory  of  aqueous

electrolytes (applicable to I < 0.1 M), the relaxation time for the ionic atmosphere is 55/I

ps, i.e., at the upper limit of validity of this theory, it takes the ionic atmosphere ca. 500

ps  to  relax  [5].  Perhaps,  this  relaxation  time  continues  to  decrease  in  concentrated

solutions (although this trend is opposed by slowing of the ion diffusion (Fig. 1S(b) and

ion pairing (Fig. 2S(b)). Thus, it is possible that the diffusion coefficient of the electron

systematically  decreases  with  delay  time  t  in  the  observation  window  of  our  ultrafast

kinetic experiments. However, one would expect that the drag on the electron diffusion

develops on the same time scale in all photosystems. Almost complete lack of kinetic

variation with the ionic strength for some photosystems (e.g., for hydroxide and sulfite,

see refs. [5], [6] and section 3.6.2) suggests that this effect is relatively minor, at least on

a  sub-nanosecond  time  scale.  Furthermore,  while  a  time-dependent  (or  decreased)

electron diffusivity would change the temporal profile of the kinetics, it cannot change

the survival probability: in the MFP model, the latter depends on the potential only. Thus,

this scenario should also be rejected.

The third and last scenario is ion association. Before proceeding any further, let us

consider the existing explanations for salt induced blue shift in the absorption spectra of

halide (e.g., iodide) anions and the hydrated electron. Both of these species exhibit very

similar  blue  shifts  for  a  given  salt  concentration  (cf.  Figs.  2(b)  and  5(b)).  Since  the

original suggestion by Stein and Treinin [30] most authors accounted for this effect by

constriction  of  the  solvation  cavity  around  the  anion/electron  (some  more  exotic

explanations have been considered by Blandamer and Fox [1]), though the cause for this

28

constriction  has  never  been  specified.  The  blue  shift  of  the  solvated/trapped  electron

spectrum is observed both in liquid and solid vitreous solutions, such as alkaline glasses

[43].  For  the  latter,  electron  spin  echo  envelope  modulation  (ESEEM)  spectroscopy

provides direct evidence for the inclusion of sodium cation in the first solvation shell of

the trapped electron through the observation of dipole and Fermi coupling of the unpaired
electron to the spin of 23Na nucleus [44]. In alkaline earth salt aqueous glasses [43a] and

THF  solutions,  [43b]  electrons  associated  with  one  or  several  cations  can  be

distinguished by optical spectroscopy [43a].  In  most  of  these  glasses,  the  visible  band

coexists with an IR band that gradually shifts to the blue; for alkaline glasses the visible

band itself shifts to the blue on a sub-ms timescale. [43a] Many authors speculated that

the cations are actively involved in the trapping site of the electron, and specific "ionic

lattice trap" models detailing this involvement were formulated by Hilczer et al. [45] and

Bartzak et al. [46]. In short, there is much evidence pointing to structural involvement of

alkali cations in electron dynamics observed for low temperature glassy solutions.

We  suggest  that  the  same  process  occurs  in  liquid  aqueous  solutions  at  room

temperature:  sodium  cations  are  included  in  the  solvation  shell  of  the  electron.  The

thermalization kinetics given in section 3.6.1 indicate that in concentrated salt solutions,

the electron spectra blue shift on a time scale similar to that of electron thermalization in

pure  water.  This  means  that  the  postulated  association  of  sodium  cation(s)  with  the

electron  occurs  very  rapidly,  in  less  than  5  ps.  Assuming  a  diffusion  controlled

association of the sodium cation and the electron and taking the diffusion coefficients for
the electron (in water) and the sodium cation as 4.9x10-5 and 1.2x10-5 cm2/s, respectively,

the association in 1 M NaClO4 would take ca. 45 ps, whereas the blue shift in the electron

spectrum develops in < 5 ps. This estimate suggests that the cation associated with the

electron originates either from the dense part of the ion atmosphere around the parent

anion or from a cation that is associated with this anion (thereby causing the blue shift of

the  anion  spectrum).  That  the  latter  association  occurs  to  some  degree  (at  least,  for

polyvalent anions) via the formation of solvent-separated ion pairs, follows from many

independent observations (e.g., see section  3.1)  which  point  to  such  pairs  as  the  main
−   and  Na+  has  been  previously

entity  in  concentrated  solutions.  The  association  of  eaq

29

suggested  by  Gauduel  and  coworkers  to  account  for  electron  thermalization  and

subpicosecond dynamics of geminate pairs generated in 2-photon excitation of aqueous

chloride. [47]

Thus,  we  suggest  that  in  concentrated  salt  solutions,  both  the  anion  and  the

electron are associated with alkali cations and that the cation associated with the parent

anion (or included in the inner part of the ionic atmosphere around this parent anion) is

passed to the electron in the course of CTTS state dissociation on subpicosecond time

scale, possibly, in a manner envisioned by Gauduel and coworkers. [47] The fraction of

associated  anions  and  electrons  rapidly  increases  with  the  ion  concentration.  This

association  makes  the  short-range  potential  more  attractive,  for  all  anions,  including

polyvalent anions. A possible cause for this effect is the increased attraction between the

radical/atom and hydrated electron separated by a cation; rather than screening the weak

attractive  forces,  such  a  cation  might  bind  these  species  together  by  excluding  the

screening water dipoles.

Recently, Lenchenkov et al. studied the effect of addition of 0.04-4 M KBr on the

electron dynamics in 255 nm photoexcitation of ferrocyanide [8]. A 4% decrease per 1 M

of KBr in the survival probability of geminate pairs (extrapolated from the kinetic data

obtained  for  t<400  ns)  was  observed.  Both  ionic  atmosphere  screening  and  ion

association were considered, and the latter was concluded to be the main cause of the

observed effect. Specifically, association of ferrocyanide with 1-3 potassium cations was

suggested to reduce the Coulomb repulsion between the geminate partners. [8] As seen

from the results of the present work, the ionic strength effect occurs even for geminate

pairs in which no such repulsion exists. Still we believe that the root cause of this effect is

the  same  for  all  photoexcited  anions:  the  short-range  MFP  (which  may  or  may  not

include Coulomb repulsion) is modified by the ion association.

While  this  picture  is  incomplete,  it  contains  a  verifiable  rationale:  the  ionic

strength  effect  originates  from  the  modulation  of  short-range  attraction  between  the

geminate partners rather than long-range ion screening. A modification of short-range

(
MFP for the  X

(

n

− −•
1
)

)

−
e
aq

,

 pair due to the involvement of alkali cation(s) in the solvation

30

of  the  parent  anion  ( X n −)  and  the  electron  eaq

−   is  postulated.  For  reasons  not  entirely

understood,  this  association  makes  the  attractive  MFP  interaction  stronger  thereby

causing  all  of  the  changes  observed  in section 3.6. Only detailed molecular dynamics

simulation of this charge separation process (along the lines of refs. [10,13,48,49,50]) can

shed more light on the mechanism. The first step in this direction has already been taken

by Boutin and co-workers who used the umbrella sampling approach of Borgis and Staib
[49] to obtain the MFP for interaction of hydrated electron and Na+.  This simulations
)

 pair with the average distance of ca. 0.2 nm

suggests the existence of a contact  Na eaq

(

,

+

−

and the binding energy of 3-4 kT.

5. Conclusion.

yield for (free) electron photodetachment from CTTS anions (such as I-, OH-, ClO4

It is shown that in concentrated solutions of NaClO4 and Na2SO4, the quantum
-, and
2-) decreases linearly by 6-12% per 1 M ionic strength. In 9 M sodium perchlorate

SO3

solution, this QY decreases by roughly an order of magnitude. Ultrafast kinetic studies on
200 nm photon induced electron detachment from Br-, HO-  and  SO3
2- suggest that the

prompt  yield  of  thermalized  electron  in  these  solutions  does  not  change;  the  ionic

strength effect wholly originates in the decrease in the survival probability of geminate

pairs. Kinetically this effect manifests itself in much the same way as the temperature

effect studied previously, [5] that is, addition of salt and decrease in temperature cause

similar changes in the electron dynamics. In this respect, the ionic strength effect on the

QY follows the same pattern as the shift in the absorption spectra of the CTTS anions and

the hydrated electron itself. [1,31,33]

Within the framework of the recently proposed MFP model of charge separation

dynamics  in  CTTS  photosystems,  [2,5]  the  observed  changes  can  be  explained  by  an

increase in the short-range attractive potential between the geminate partners (possibly,

due to the association of sodium cation(s) with the electron and the parent anion); ion

screening plays minor role. The precise mechanism for modification of the MFP by these

cations  is  presently  unclear,  although  electron  thermalization  kinetics  for  the  bromide
photosystem suggest that the sodium cation associated with the parent Br- anion is passed

31

to  the  photodetached  electron. [47]  Further  advance  in  the  understanding  of  the  ionic

strength  effect  is  predicated  on  the  development  of  a  molecular  dynamics  model  that

directly  includes  the  interactions  of  the  geminate  partners  with  cations  in  the  ionic

atmosphere.

6. Acknowledgement.

We thank Profs. S. E. Bradforth of USC, B. J. Schwartz of UCLA and Dr. S. V.

Lymar of BNL for many useful discussions. The research at the ANL was supported by

the Office of Science, Division of Chemical Sciences, US-DOE under contract number

W-31-109-ENG-38.

Supporting Information Available: A PDF file containing Figs. 1S to 9S with captions.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

32

References.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

Sauer, Jr., M. C.; Crowell, R. A.; Shkrob, I. A., submitted to J. Phys. Chem. A;
Part I of this series (jp049722t); preprint available on
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/physics/0401080

Kloepfer, J. A.; Vilchiz, V. H.; Lenchenkov, V. A.; Chen, X.; Bradforth, S. E. J.
Chem. Phys. 2002, 117, 776.

(a) Vilchiz, V. H.; Kloepfer, J. A.; Germaine, A. C.; Lenchenkov, V. A.;
Bradforth, S. E. J. Phys. Chem. A 2001, 105, 1711; (b) Kloepfer, J. A.; Vilchiz, V.
H.; Germaine, A. C.; Lenchenkov, V. A.; Bradforth, S. E. J. Chem. Phys. 2000,
113, 6288; (c) Kloepfer, J. A.; Vilchiz, V. H.; Lenchenkov, V. A.; Bradforth, S.
E., in Liquid Dynamics: Experiment, Simulation, and Theory (2002), Vol. 820,
pp. 108; Kloepfer, J. A.; Vilchiz, V. H.; Lenchenkov, V. A.; Bradforth, S. E.
Chem. Phys. Lett. 1998, 298, 120.

Lian, R.; Oulianov, D. A.; Crowell, R. A.; Shkrob, I. A.; Chen, X.; Bradforth, S.
E.  in preparation, to be submitted to J. Phys. Chem. (Part III of the series)

Lian, R.; Crowell, R. A.; Shkrob, I. A.; Bartels, D. M.; Chen, X.; Bradforth, S. E.
J. Chem. Phys.; jcpid A4.01.130; preprint available on
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/physics/0401071.

Lian, R.; Crowell, R. A.; Shkrob, I. A.; Bartels, D. M.; Oulianov, D. A.; Gosztola,
D. submitted to Chem. Phys. Lett.; preprint available on
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/physics/0401057.

Shushin, A. I. J. Chem. Phys, 1992, 97, 1954; Chem. Phys. Lett. 1985, 118, 197,
J. Chem. Phys. 1991, 95, 3657.

Lenchenkov, V. A.; Chen, X.; Vilchiz, V. H.; Bradforth, S. E. Chem. Phys. Lett.
2001, 342, 277.

Bradforth, S. E., private communication.

Borgis, D.; Staib, A. J. Chem. Phys. 1996, 104, 4776 and 9027.

Chen, X.; Kloepfer, J. A.; Bradforth, S. E.; Lian, R.; Crowell, R. A.; Shkrob, I. A.
(in preparation).

(a) Martini, I. B.; Barthel, E. R.; Schwartz, B. J.  J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2002, 124,
7622; Barthel, E. R.; Martini, I. B.; Schwartz, B. J. J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 112,
9433; Barthel, E. R.; Martini, I. B.; Keszei, E.; Schwartz, B. J. J. Chem. Phys.
2003, 118, 5916; (b) Barthel E. R.; Schwartz, B. J. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2003, 375,
435.

33

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

Smallwood, C. J.; Bosma, W. B.; Larsen, R. E.; Schwartz, B. J. J. Chem. Phys.
2003, 119, 11263.

Elliot, A. J.; Ouellette, D. C.; Stuart, C. R. The Temperature Dependence of the
Rate Constants and Yields for the Simulation of the Radiolysis of Heavy Water,
AECL report 11658 (AECL Research, Chalk River Laboratories, Chalk River,
Ontario, Canada, 1996).

Jou, F.-Y.; Freeman, G. R. Can. J. Chem. 1979, 57, 591.

Shkrob, I. A.; Sauer, Jr., M. C. J. Phys. Chem. A 2002, 106, 9120.

Zaytsev, I. D.; Aseyev, G. G. Properties of Aqueous Electrolytes (CRC Press,
Boca Raton, 2000), pp. 7 and 164.

Solubilities of Inorganic and Organic Compounds. v. 1. Binary Systems. Part I.
Eds. Stephen, H.; Stephen, T. (Pergamon, New York, 1963).

Kohner, H. Z. Phys. Chem. B 1928, 1, 427.

Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 69th edition, ed. Weast, R. C.; Astle, M. J.;
Beyer, W. H. (CRC Press, Boca Raton, 1988).

ref. [17], pp. 924.

Daly, F. P.; Brown, C. W.; Kester, D. R. J. Phys. Chem. 1972, 76, 3664.

Buchner, R.; Capewell, S. G.; Hefter, G.; May, P. M. J. Phys. Chem. B 1999, 103,
1185.

Fischer, F. H. J. Solution. Chem. 1975, 4, 237; Gilligan III, T. J.; Atkinson, G. J.
Phys. Chem. 1980, 84, 208.

25. Weingärtner, H.; Price, W. E.; Edge, A. V. J.; Mills, R. J. Phys. Chem. 1993, 97,

6290.

Dainton, F. S.; Fowles, P. Proc. Roy. Soc. A 1965, 287, 312 and 295.

Iwata, A.; Nakashima, N.; Kusaba, M.; Izawa, Y.; Yamanaka, C. Chem. Phys.
Lett. 1993, 207, 137.

Rabinovitch, E. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1942, 14, 112.

Blandamer, M. J.; Fox, M. F. Chem. Rev. 1970, 70, 59.

Stein, G.; Treinin, A. Trans. Faraday Soc. 1960, 56, 1393.

Fox, M. F.; Hayon, E. J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans. I 1976, 72, 1990.

34

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

Anbar, M.; Hart, E. J. J. Phys. Chem. 1965, 69, 1244.

Hart, E. J.; Anbar, M. The Hydrated Electron (Wiley-Interscience, New York,
1970).

Jortner, J.; Ottolenghi, M.; Stein, G. J. Phys. Chem. 1964, 68, 247.

Ohno, S. Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 1967, 40, 1776 and 1770.

Cohen; S. R.; Plane, R. A. J. Phys. Chem. 1957, 61, 1096; Davies, C. W. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 1937, 59, 1760.

Elliot, A. J.; Sopchyshyn, F. C. Int. J. Chem. Kinet. 1984, 16, 1247; Devonshire,
R.; Weiss, J. J. J. Phys. Chem. 1968, 72, 3815; Zehavi, D.; Rabani, J. J. Phys.
Chem. 1972, 76, 312.

e.g., Tasker, P. W.; Balint-Kurti, G. G.; Dixon, R. N. Mol. Phys. 1976, 32, 1651.

Lian, R.; Crowell, R. A.; Shkrob, I. A. (in preparation); abstract available in
Abstracts of Papers, 226th ACS National Meeting, New York, NY, United States,
September 7-11, 2003.

see, for example Hertwig, A.; Hippler, H.; Unterreiner, A.-N. J. Phys. Condens.
Matter 2000, 12, A165; Pépin, C.; Goulet, T.; Houde, D.; Jay-gerin, J.-P. J. Phys.
Chem. A 1997, 101, 4351; Laenen, R.; Roth, T.; Laubereau, A. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2000, 85, 50; Assel, M.; laene, R.; Laubereau, A. J. Phys. Chem. A 1998, 102,
2256; Shi, X.; Long, F. H.; Lu, H.; Eisenthal, K. B. J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100,
11903.

Hertwig, A; Hippler, H.; Unterreiner, A.-N. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2002, 4,
4412.

Lian, R.; Crowell, R. A.; Shkrob, I. A.; Pommeret, S. (in preparation).

(a) Kroh, J. in Pulse Radiolysis, ed. Tabata, Y. (CRC Press, Boca Raton, 1990),
Ch. 16, pp. 358; (b) Renou, F.; Archirel, P.; Pernot, P.; Levy, B.; Mostafavi, M. J.
Phys. Chem. A 2004, 108, 987.

Dikanov, S. A.; Tsvetkov, Y. D. Electron Spin Echo Envelope Modulation
(ESEEM) Spectroscopy (CRC Press; Boca Raton; 1992).

Hilcer, M.; Bartczak, W. M. ; Sopek, M. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 1985, 26, 693.

Bartzak, W. M.; Hilczer, M.; Kroh, J. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 1981, 17, 431 and 481.

For  the  ultrafast  dynamics  of  the  tentative  Cl e
discussion  of  possible  mechanisms  for  rapid  in-cage  charge  separation  in
concentrated H+, Li+, and Na+ chloride solutions, see Gauduel, Y.; Gelabert, H.

  complexes  and  the

Na

...

,

(

•

−
aq

+

)

35

Chem. Phys. 2000, 256, 333; Gelabert, H.; Gauduel, Y. J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100,
13993; Gauduel, Y.; Gelabert, H.; Ashokkumar, M. Chem. Phys. 1995, 197, 167;
similar mechanisms were also suggested by these workers for divalent cations,
such as Mg2+ and Cd2+, see Gauduel, Y.; Hallou, A.; Charles, B. J. Phys. Chem.
2003, 107, 2011; Gauduel, Y.; Hallou, A. Res.  Chem.  Intermed.  2001, 27, 359;
Gauduel, Y.; Sander, M.; Gelabert, H. J. Phys. Chem. A 1998, 102, 7795.

48. 

49.

50.

51.

Sheu, W.-S.; Rossky, P. J. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1993, 202, 186 and 233; J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 1993, 115, 7729; J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100, 1295.

D. Borgis and A. Staib, Chem. Phys. Lett. 230, 405 (1994); J. Chim. Phys. 93,
1628 (1996); J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 8, 9389 (1996); J. Mol. Struct. 436, 537
(1997); J. Chem. Phys. 103, 2642 (1995)

Bradforth, S. E.; Jungwirth, P. J. Phys. Chem. A 2002, 106, 1286.

Spezia, R.; Nicolas, C.; Archirel, P.; Boutine, A. J. Chem. Phys. 2004, 120, 5262.

36

Figure captions.

Fig. 1.

(a) Normalized 200 nm pump - 800 nm probe transient absorbance kinetics of electron

generated by photoexcitation of (i) 0.74 M and (ii) 1.84 M (saturated) aqueous sodium

sulfate. Note the logarithmic time scale. These kinetic traces were normalized at delay

time  t=5  ps;  the  difference  in  the  short-term  kinetics  is  due  to  the  blue  shift  in  the

electron  spectrum  that  increases  with  the  ionic  strength  (sections  3.3  and  3.6.1).  The

difference  in  the  long-term  kinetics  is  due  to  ionic  strength  effect  on  the  dynamics  of

(
geminate  SO eaq

−
4

;

−

)

  pairs  (sections  3.6).  (b)  200  nm  pump  -  800  nm  probe  kinetics

obtained for aqueous solutions of 9.3 M sodium perchlorate (empty circles, to the left)

and  5.43  M  sodium  chloride  (solid  line,  to  the  right).  The  vertical  bars  in  this  plot

indicate 95% confidence limits.

Fig. 2.

(a) Solid lines: Absorption spectra of 0.7 mM NaI vs. sodium perchlorate concentration

(1 cm optical path cell). The molar concentrations of the perchlorate (from right to left)

are 0, 1, 2.5, 5, 7, and 9 M (the direction of the increase in the ionic strength I is indicated

with an arrow in the plot). Dashed lines are the Gaussian fits to these absorption spectra.
(b)  Negative  shift ∆λ  of  the  band  maximum  for  aqueous  iodide  vs.  the  nominal  ionic

strength of sodium perchlorate  (circles) and sodium sulfate (squares).  Empty  symbols

indicate the data obtained in the present work; filled symbols are data taken from ref.

[30].

Fig. 3.

Molar  absorptivities  of  CTTS  anions  (given  in  the  units  of  M-1  cm-1)  at  the  laser

photoexcitation wavelength vs. the salinity of photolysate (that was changed by addition

of NaClO4 and Na2SO4). The filled symbols are spectrophotometric data (e.g., Fig. 2(a));

the empty symbols are laser transmission data (sections 2 and 3.4). (a) Molar absorptivity

of aqueous iodide at 248 nm. The circles are for sodium perchlorate and the squares are

37

for sodium sulfate solutions. The solid line is an exponential fit. (b) Molar absorptivities

of aqueous hydroxide at 193 nm vs. [NaClO4] (to the left and to the bottom) and of sulfite

at 248 nm vs. [Na2SO4] (to the right and to the top). The solid lines are linear fits.

Prompt visible transient absorption spectra of solvated electron obtained in radiolysis of

N2-saturated (a) sodium sulfate and (b) sodium perchlorate solutions (section 3.3). The

molar  concentrations  of  these  salts  are  given  in  the  plot.  Solid  lines  are  Lorentzian-

Gaussian fits of constant width (see section 3.3).

Ionic strength dependence of (a) solvated electron absorbance at the maximum (estimated

from the data of Fig. 4), (b) position of the band maximum of the solvated electron in

energy units, and (c) electron absorbance at 700 nm. The data for sodium perchlorate and

sodium sulfate are indicated with open circles and squares, respectively.

Fig. 4.

Fig. 5.

Fig. 6.

Transient absorption of photoelectrons (observed at 700 nm) vs. absorbed laser power.

The  direction  of  increase  in  the  nominal  ionic  strength  I  of  photolyzed  solution  is

indicated by an arrow. The solid lines drawn through the data points are linear fits. (a)

Electron  absorbance  in  248  nm  laser  photolysis  of  38.5  mM  sulfite  in  (from  top  to

bottom) 0.36, 0.73, 1.19 and 1.73 M sodium sulfate. (b) Electron absorbance in 248 nm

laser  photolysis  of  2  mM  iodide  in (from  top  to  bottom) 0.174 M (squares), 0.353 M

(triangles), 0.59 M (diamonds), 0.9 M (circles) and 1.7 M (upturned  triangles) sodium

sulfate. (c) Electron absorbance in 193 nm laser photolysis of hydroxide in (from top to
)−  absorbed by

bottom) 2.1, 4.5, and 9 M sodium perchlorate vs. the laser power  I OH

abs (

the hydroxide. [KOH] was 0.75 mM (squares) and 1.5 mM (triangles) for 2.1 M NaClO4

series, 0.75 mM (squares) and 1.5 mM (upturned triangles) for 2.1 M NaClO4 series, 2

mM (circles) for 4.5 M NaClO4 series, and 1 mM (triangles) and 2 mM (diamonds) for 9

M NaClO4 series.

38

Fig. 7.

Fig. 8.

Fig. 9.

(a) Ionic strength dependence of relative molar absorptivity  ε ε

I =(

)  of solvated

0

700

700

electron at 700 nm in sodium perchlorate (circles) and sodium sulfate (squares) solutions

obtained  as  explained  in  section  3.5.  The  solid  and  dashed  lines  (for  perchlorate  and

sulfate, respectively) were calculated from the data of Fig. 5(b) assuming the constancy

of the oscillator strength of the corresponding optical transition. (b) Relative quantum

yield of electron photodetachment vs. nominal ionic strength for 248 nm photoexcitation

of iodide  (filled  circles) and sulfite (empty diamonds)  in  sodium  sulfate  solutions  and

iodide (empty triangles) in sodium perchlorate solutions and 193 nm photoexcitation of

perchlorate  (empty  circles)  and  hydroxide  (empty  squares)  in  sodium  perchlorate

solutions. The linear plots (solid lines marked (i), (ii), and (iii)) correspond to decreases

of 11%, 9.8%, and 6.2% per 1 M ionic strength, respectively.

(a) 200 nm pump - 800 nm probe transient absorption kinetics of electron in photolysis of

30 mM NaBr in solution containing 2.4 to 9.25 M sodium perchlorate. The molarity of

NaClO4 is indicated in the color scale. Absorption signal (i) is from 9.3 M perchlorate

with no bromide added (under the same excitation conditions). The absorption of 200 nm

photoexcitation light by perchlorate in the bromide solutions was negligible. The vertical

bars are 95% confidence limits. (b) The same kinetic data (circles) normalized at t=5 ps

(the upper trace is for aqueous bromide with no NaClO4 added). The same color coding

used as in (a);  the direction of the increase in the nominal ionic strength I is indicated by

an  arrow.  The  solid  lines  drawn  through  the  symbols  are  simulations  using  Shushin's

theory (section 3.6.3) with the parameters given in Fig. 9.

Simulation parameters used to fit the data shown in Figs. 8(b) and 8S  vs. the nominal

ionic strength of the aqueous solution. (a) The escape probability of the photoelectron in

200 nm photoexcitation of bromide in sodium sulfate (squares) and sodium perchlorate

39

(circles)  solutions. (b) Dissociation (Wd, circles)  and  recombination (Wr,  squares)  rate

, −
constants for caged  Br eaq

(

) pairs in concentrated sodium perchlorate solutions.

Fig. 10.

Normalized  200  nm  pump  -  800  nm  probe  kinetics  of  photoelectron  generated  by

photolysis of (a) 40 mM Na2SO3 and (b) 200 mM KOH in concentrated sodium sulfate

solutions.  The  molarity  of  sulfate  is  given  in  the  color  scale.  These  kinetics  were

normalized at t=5 ps. See Fig. 9S for non-normalized kinetics.

40

.

m
r
o
n

 
,

 
0
0
8
D
O
∆

0

2x10-2

 
0
0
8
D
O
∆

1

0

(i)

(ii)

(a)

1

1 0 0

1 0
time, ps

(b)

1

10
time, ps

100

2

1

0

x
1
0

-
3

 

Fig. 1; Sauer et al.

I

2 0 0

2 2 0

2 4 0

2 6 0

wavelength, nm

(a)

(b)

D
O

0.4

0.8

0.6

0.2

0.0

m
n

 
,

λ
∆

1 0

5

0

0

5
ionic strength, M

1 0

Fig. 2; Sauer et al.

1 0 0 0

)

-

I
(

 

 
8
4
2

ε

5 0 0

0

3

2

1

0

0

0

0

3x10

)

-

H
O
(
3
9
1

ε

(a)

5
[salt], M

[sulfate], M

1 0

2

0

1 0

(b)

5 0

ε

2
4
8
 
(

S
O

3

2
-

)

1

5

[perchlorate], M

Fig. 3; Sauer et al.

)
t
p
m
o
r
p
(

D
O
∆

)
t
p
m
o
r
p
(

D
O
∆

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

4 0 0

6 0 0

8 0 0

wavelength, nm

(a)

(b)

[Na2SO4]

 1.7 M 
 0.85 M
 0 M

1 0 0 0
[NaClO4 ]

 9 M 
 6 M
 3 M
 0 M

4 0 0

6 0 0

8 0 0

1 0 0 0

wavelength, nm

Fig. 4; Sauer et al.

(a)

0.6

 
x
a
m
S

V
e
 
,

x
a
m
E

 
0
0
7
S

0.4

2.0

0

1.8

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0

0

5
ionic strength

1 0

(b)

5
ionic strength

1 0

(c)

5

I, M

1 0

Fig. 5; Sauer et al.

0.05

(a)

 
0
0
7
D
O
∆

 
0
0
7
D
O
∆

0.00

0

0.2

0.1

0.0

 
0
0
7
D
O
∆

0.10

0.05

0.00

I 

4

4

2
Iabs, mJ

(b)

0

2
Iabs, mJ

(c)

0

4

6

2
Iabs(OH

-

), mJ

Fig. 6; Sauer et al.

1.0

0.8

)
0
=

I
(
0
0
7

ε
 
/
 

0
0
7

ε

(a)

0

1 0

5

I, M

1.0

0.5

)
0
=

I
(

φ
 
/
 
φ

( iii)

( ii)

(b)

(i)

0.0

0

5
I, M

1 0

Fig. 7; Sauer et al.

 2.41 
 3.21 
 4.78 
 6.31 
 9.25 

(a)

I 

(i)

1

10
time, ps

100

-2

3x10

0
0
8
D
O
∆

2

1

0

.

m
r
o
n

 
,
 

0
0
8
D
O
∆

(b)

0

4 6 8

2

4 6 8

2

4 6

10

100

time, ps

Fig. 8; Sauer et al.

(a)

0

5

10

ionic strength, M

-2

4x10

(b)

d
p

1
-

s
p

 
 
,
 

r
,
d

W

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

2

0

0

5
[perchlorate], M

10

Fig. 9; Sauer et al.

.

m
r
o
n

 
,

 
0
0
8
D
O
∆

0

.

m
r
o
n

 
,
 

0
0
8
D
O
∆

0

(a)

1

1 0
time, ps

1 0 0

 0
 0.46 
 0.61
 0.92
 1.29
 1.84

(b)

1

1 0
time, ps

1 0 0

Fig. 10; Sauer et al.

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Sauer jp0000000, Supporting Info Page 1

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

jp0000000

Journal of Physical Chemistry A, Received * 2004

Supporting Information.

 Captions to figures 1S to 9S.

(a) Viscosity  (to  the  left),  density  (to  the  right)  and  (b)  ion  diffusivity  vs.  molarity  of
aqueous sodium sulfate (from the data of refs. [17] and [21]).

+

•

•

−
Na OH SO
4

(a) Mean ionic coefficient (empty squares) [17] and (b) the  fraction of solvent-separated
(
 ion pairs  (to the left) and nominal ionic strength I of  the  solution  (to
the right) vs.  molarity of aqueous sodium sulfate (data of  ref.  [23]  were  used  to  obtain
these curves).

)

2

Same as Fig.  1S,  for  sodium  perchlorate.  Reference  data  [17,21]  were  used  to  generate
these plots.

(a) Power  dependence of photoelectron  optical absorbance (at  800  nm)  observed  10  p s
after short-pulse  200 nm laser excitation of 0.74 M  aqueous sodium  sulfate.  This  linear
plot  indicates  that  the  excitation  of  sulfate  anion  is  single-photon  (note  that  water
ionization by the 200 nm light is biphotonic).  An  estimate of 0.406 for the  prompt  yield
2- is calculated from these  data.
of thermalized electron in 200 nm photoexcitation of SO4
(b) A  demonstration of the  invariance of the  kinetic  traces  for  0.74  M  sulfate  with  the
incident  laser  power:  the  kinetic  traces  for  0.35  µJ  (circles)  and  1.63  µJ  (squares)
photoexcitation are identical within  the  experimental  error  (the  vertical  bars  in  the  plot
indicate 95% confidence limits for the data points).

(a)  Concentration  dependence  of  193  nm  absorption  OD193  of  the  photolytic  cell  for
hydroxide in NaClO4 solutions  (L is the  optical path  of the  cell, which  is  1.36  mm),  as
determined from the transmission of ArF laser light. The  molar concentrations of NaClO4
are given in the plot; the hydroxide molarity is given in the  caption  to  Fig. 6(c). Non-zero
offset  of the  linear  plots  is  due  to  the  absorbance  of  193  nm  light  by  perchlorate.  (b)
Relative  quantum  yield  Φ
rel   of  the  photoelectron  as  a  function  of  the  nominal  ionic

Fig. 1S.

Fig. 2S.

Fig. 3S.

Fig. 4S.

Fig. 5S.

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Sauer jp0000000, Supporting Info Page 2

strength I. Photoexcitation wavelengths, CTTS  anions, and salts  used to  change the  ionic
strength of the photolysate are specified in the legend given to the right of the plot.

Fig. 6S.

Fig. 7S.

Fig. 8S.

Fig. 9S.

Transient optical absorbance (700 nm) in 248 nm laser photolysis  of 2 mM  NaI in (a) 0
M,  (b) 3 M,  and (c) 6 M  NaClO4.  Bold  line  (red)  kinetic  traces  are  from  N2-saturated
solutions  (to the right); thin  line (green) traces are from  CO2-saturated  solutions  (to  the
left); these two sets were obtained under the identical photoexcitation conditions. Stronger
absorption  signals  correspond  to  higher  fluence  of  the  incident  248  nm  photons  (from
bottom  up):  0.022,  0.04,  and  0.06  J/cm2.  CO2  was  used  as  an  electron  scavenger;  the
progress  of  this  scavenging  can  be  observed  in  the  590  nm  absorbance  traces  (dashed
- does not  absorb the  590 nm analyzing
(orange) lines plotted in (b) and (c); to the left). I2
light. At 700 nm, in CO2-saurated solutions  one can observe both  the  rapid  decay of the
solvated electron and the slow formation of I2

- by rxn. (3).

200 nm pump - 800 nm probe transient  absorption  kinetics for photoelectron  in aqueous
solutions containing sodium bromide (which is excited by  this  200 nm light) and sodium
sulfate (used to  vary  the  ionic strength of the  photolysate  only).  For  convenience, these
kinetic traces were normalized at t=5 ps.  Molar  concentrations of Na2SO4 and millimolar
concentrations of NaBr are indicated above the  plot.  The  absorption  of 200 nm photons
by  sulfate was  negligible in the  presence of >  20 mM  bromide.  Rxn.  (3)  is  too  slow  to
) pairs  in <  1 ns,  even for 0.16 M  Br- solution. Note  the
, −
change the dynamics of  Br eaq
invariance of the  normalized kinetics in 1.84 M  (saturated)  Na2SO4  solution  with  [Br-].
The systematic  increase in the  short-lived thermalization "spike"  is due to  the  blue shift
in the  absorption  spectrum  of thermalized electron with  the  ionic  strength  (sections  3.3
and  3.6.1).

(

Replotted  data of Fig. 7S for bromide in (from  top to bottom) 0, 037, 0.62,  and  1.84  M
Na2SO4  solution  (circles).  Solid  lines  are  given  by  the  global  least  squares  fit  of  these
kinetics  obtained  using  Shushin's  theory  equations  (section  3.6.3)  with  W-1=19.5  ps,
α=0.552, and the escape probability pd given in Fig. 9(a).

Same as Fig. 10; non-normalized optical  densities  are  shown.  Trace  (i)  is  from  1.83  M
sodium sulfate solution with no sulfite added; the photoexcitation of sulfate in the 40 mM
sulfite solutions is negligible.

P
c

 
,

y
t
i

s
o
c
s

i

v

2.0

1.6

1.2

0.8

2

5
-

 
s
/

m
c
 

0
1
 
,

D

1

0

1.2

1.1

d
e
n
s

i
t
y

,
 

g

/

c
m

3

(a)

1.0

2

0

1
[sulfate], M

+
 Na

 SO4

2-

(b)

0

1
2
[sulfate], M

3

Fig. 1S; Sauer et al.

t
n
e

i

c

i
f
f
e
o
c

 

i

c
n
o

i

s
r
i
a
p

 
f
o

 

n
o

i
t
c
a
r
f

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.2

0

0.1

0.0

0

(a)

1

2

[sulfate], M

(b)

1
[sulfate], M

2

6

4

2

0

i

o
n

i
c
 
s
t
r
e
n
g
t
h

,
 

M

Fig. 2S; Sauer et al.

1 0

5

0

v

i

s
c
o
s

i
t
y

,
 

c
P

 
3

1.6

(a)

m
c

/

g

 
,

y
t
i

s
n
e
d

1.2

0.8

2

s
/

m
c

5
-

+

0
1
 
,
)

a
N

(

D

1

0

0

5
 [perchlorate]

1 0

(b)

0

1

2

3

[perchlorate], M

Fig. 3S; Sauer et al.

3m

(a)

s
p

 

0
1

 
t
a

 

 
0
0
8
D
O
∆

2

1

0

0.0

0.6

0.3
Iabs, µJ

(b)

.

m
r
o
n

 
,

 
0
0
8
D
O
∆

0

1

1 0

1 0 0

time, ps

Fig. 4S; Sauer et al.

(a)

L

 
/
 
3
9
1
D
O

6

4

2

0

[NaClO 4 ]

 2.1 M
 4.5 M
 9 M

0

1
[hydroxide]

2mM

1.0

l

e
r

0.5

Φ

(b)

193 nm

248 nm

 ClO4-/NaClO4

 OH-/NaClO4

 SO3=/Na2SO4

 I-/Na2SO4

 I-/NaClO4

0.0

0

5
I, M

1 0

Fig. 5S; Sauer et al.

 
0
0
7
D
O
∆

150m

100

50

0

60m

 
0
0
7
D
O
∆

 
0
0
7
D
O
∆

40

20

0

20

10

0

(a)

30m

20

10

0

20m

10

0

0

10ns

100ns

1µs

(b)

30m

10ns

100ns

1µs

(c)

10m

10ns

100ns

1µs

Fig. 6S; Sauer et al.

  Na2SO4 NaBr
 1.84  20
 1.84 4 0
 1.84  80
 1.84 1 6 0
 0.62 8 0
 0.37 4 0
2 0
 0

.

m
r
o
n

 
,
 

0
0
8
D
O
∆

0

1

1 0

1 0 0

time, ps

Fig. 7S; Sauer et al.

 
I

∆OD800, norm.

0

s
p

 
,
e
m

i
t

4

2

6

4

2

6

4

0
0
1

0
1

.
l

a

 
t
e

 
r
e
u
a
S

 
;

S
8
 
.

g

i

F

(a)

 0.46
 0.61
 0.92
 1.22
 1.83

(i)

1

1 0

1 0 0

time, ps

(b)

15m

1 0

 
0
0
8
D
O
∆

5

0

0.02

 
0
0
8
D
O
∆

0.01

0.00

1

1 0
time, ps

1 0 0

Fig. 9S; Sauer et al.

