NuMI-CONF-Beam-1028 
5 May 2004 

Ion Chambers for Monitoring the NuMI 
Neutrino Beam at Fermilab 

Dharmaraj Indurthy,1 Ryan Keisler,1 Sacha Kopp,1† Steven Mendoza,1    
Marek Proga,1 Zarko Pavlovich,1 Robert Zwaska,1 Deborah Harris,2 
Alberto Marchionni,2 Jorge Morfin,2 Albert Erwin,3 Huicana Ping,3 
Christos Velissaris,3 Donna Naples,4 Dave Northacker,4 Jeff McDonald,4 
Milind Diwan,5 Brett Viren5 

1Department of Physics, University of Texas, Austin, Texas  78712 
2Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, IL  60510 
3Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706 
4Department of Physics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260 
5Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, Long Island, New York 11973 

Abstract.  The  Neutrinos  at  the  Main  Injector  (NuMI)  beamline  will  deliver  an  intense  muon 
neutrino beam by focusing a beam of mesons into a long evacuated decay volume.  The beam 
must be steered with 1 mRad angular accuracy toward the Soudan Underground Laboratory in 
northern  Minnesota.    We  have  built  4  arrays  of  ionization  chambers  to  monitor  the  neutrino 
beam  direction  and  quality.    The  arrays  are  located  at  4  stations  downstream  of  the  decay 
volume,  and  measure  the  remnant  hadron  beam  and  tertiary  muons  produced  along  with 
neutrinos  in  meson  decays.    We  review  how  the  monitors  will  be  used  to  make  beam  quality 
measurements,  and  as  well  we  review  chamber  construction  details,  radiation  damage  testing, 
calibration, and test beam results. 

INTRODUCTION 

The  NuMI  beamline  [1,2]  at  Fermilab  will  deliver  an  intense  νµ  beam  to  the 
MINOS  detectors  at  FNAL  and  at  the  Soudan  Laboratory  in  Minnesota.    Additional 
experiments  are  foreseen.    The  primary  beam  is  fast-extracted  onto  the  NuMI  pion 
production  target  in  8.56 µsec  spills  from  the  120  GeV  FNAL  Main  Injector.    The 
beam  line  is  designed  to  accept  4×1013  protons/spill.    After  the  graphite  target,  two 
toroidal  magnets  called  “horns”  [3]  sign-select  and  focus  forward  the  secondary 
mesons (pions and kaons) into a 675 m volume evacuated to ~1 Torr to reduce pion 
absorption, where they may decay to muons and neutrinos.  The horns and target may 
be positioned so as to produce a variety of neutrino beam energies [4].  

The instrumentation foreseen to ensure the neutrino beam quality on a spill-by-spill 
basis  combines  primary,  secondary,  and  tertiary  beam  measurements.    The  primary 
beam direction is  monitored  by  segmented  foil  secondary  emission  monitors  [5]  and 
by capacitative beam position monitors.  Its intensity is measured by a beam current  

FIGURE 1.  Layout of the secondary and tertiary beam monitors.  Downstream of the decay volume, 
the  hadron  monitor  measures  flux  and  spatial  profiles  of  remnant  hadrons.    At  three  stations  in  the 
downstream rock, the muon monitors measure rates and spatial profiles of the muon beam. The NuMI 
target and horns are 675m upstream, to the left of this figure. 

 

 

toroid (BCT).  Additionally, the NuMI target  is  electrically  isolated,  so  may  be  read 
out as a Budal-type monitor [6]  of the primary beam’s fraction on target.  The above 
instrumentation measures the quality of the beam reaching the NuMI target. 

The  subject  of  this  paper  is  the  secondary  and  tertiary  beam  monitoring  system, 
shown in Figure 1.  Its purpose is to monitor the integrity of the NuMI target and of 
the horns which focus the secondary meson beam.  This monitoring is accomplished 
by measuring the remnant hadron beam reaching the end of the decay tunnel and by 
measuring  the  intensity  and  lateral  profile  of  the  tertiary  muon  beam  penetrating  the 
beam absorber and the downstream dolomite rock.  Because every muon is produced 
by the pion decays which produce neutrinos, the muon beam provides a good measure 
of the focusing quality of the neutrino beam. 

SECONDARY + TERTIARY BEAM MEAUREMENTS 

The  hadron  monitor  sits  downstream  of  the  NuMI  decay  volume,  immediately  in 
front of the beam absorber.  It measures approximately 1m×1m, and is segmented to 
measure  the  spatial  profile  of  particles  arriving  at  the  detector.    Monte  Carlo 
calculations  indicate  that  the  charged  particle  rate  at  the  center  of  the  decay  pipe  is 
dominated by protons which did not interact in the target.   

Figure  2  shows  the  proton  beam  profile  at  the  end  of  the  decay  volume.    A 
prominent peak is visible at beam center, due to protons which did not react in the 1m 
graphite  NuMI  target.  The  20cm  width  of  this  peak  is  expected,  given  the  mean 
scattering  angle  of  120 GeV  protons  passing  through  the  target  and  the  725 m  drift 
distance from the target to the hadron monitor.  During normal running, this scattering 
width serves as a monitor that the primary beam is centered on the NuMI target.  As 
noted in Figure 2, it also monitors the integrity of the segmented NuMI target, since 
just 1 fin breaking off the target results in a more peaked proton spot.  During initial 
beam  commissioning,  the  hadron  monitor  helps  align  the  primary  proton  beam  to 
within  3cm/725m=42 µRad  angular  precision.    This  compares  well  to  the  14 µRad 
provided by the pre-target SEM’s, which only periodically are inserted in the beam. 

 

FIGURE 2.  Horizontal profile of protons arriving at the downstream hadron monitor, over the band in 
the vertical direction of ±60cm about beam center.  The profile is shown for two cases, normal beam 
operations with a 1m target, and the case in which the first target fin has broken off.  The error bars are 
due to Monte Carlo statistics. 

 
The  3  muon  monitors  are  located  downstream  of  the  beam  absorber.    Because  of 
the  steel and rock upstream of each alcove, they detect muons of increasingly higher 
momentum,  hence  detect  only  the  decay  products  of  higher  energy  parent  pions.    In 
the lowest energy ν beam, the parent pions have energies of 4-5 GeV, so many of the 
tertiary muons do not penetrate into Alcove 0.  In the higher energy beams, the horn-
focused pions have energies 12-30 GeV, so the muons penetrate into Alcoves 0, 1 and 
2.    Multiple  scattering  through  the  rock  broadens  the  beam  as  it  traverses  further 
downstream into Alcoves 1 and 2.   

FIGURE 3.  Monte Carlo calculations of muon beam profiles in Alcove 0 and Alcove 1.  The upper 
plots are for low-energy beam, the two lower plots are for the highest neutrino beam energy.  Shown are 
the profiles for normal beam (black points) and for the case in which the beam is mis-steered due to an 
offset of horn #1 by 3mm (red points).  The error bars are due to limited Monte Carlo statistics. 

 

 
TABLE 1.  Properties of the four ion chamber stations 
 

Muon Monitors           

(Low Energy Beam) 
Alcove 
1 

Alcove 
0 

Alcove 
2 

(High Energy Beam) 
Alcove 
1 

Alcove 
0 

Alcove 
2 

Muon Monitors              

 

Element 

Distance from 
target (m) 
Charged Particle 
Flux (107/cm2/spill) 
Radiation Level 
(106 Rad/yr.) 
Parent Particle 
Threshold (GeV) 
µ Beam Flux(r=0)/ 
Flux(r=1m) 
µ Beam Shift for 
Horn 1 Offset (cm) 

 

739 

751 

769 

739 

0.23 

0.09 

3.0 

1.1 

6.6 

4 

1.3 

0.7 

10 

1.1 

18 

4 

2.1 

0.15 

18 

1.1 

1.3 
±1.5 

751 

1.7 

10 

10 

1.5 

769 

0.22 

0.7 

18 

1.5 

2.5 
±1.5 

0.6 
±1.5 

23.0 
±1.5 

12.8 
±1.5 

3.3  
±1.5 

Hadron 
Monitor 

725 

2500 

~2000 

<1 

-- 

-- 

Table 1 summarizes some parameters of the muon alcoves.  Listed are the distance 
from the target, particle flux, and radiation levels.  Furthermore, Table 1 indicates the 
minimum  pion  energy  whose  daughter  muon  can  arrive  at  an  alcove;    for  the  low-
energy  (high-energy)  ν  beam,  the  desired  pion  beam  energy  is  4  (40)  GeV.    As  a 
demonstration of the fact that the muon beam becomes more sharply peaked at high ν 
energy, Table 1 lists the flux on beam axis (r=0) divided by the muon flux at the edge 
of  the  monitors  (r=1m).    Lastly,  the  table  indicates  the  amount  by  which  the  muon 
beam centroid will shift in the scenario where horn 1 is misaligned by 3 mm.  Figure 3 
shows the muon beam profiles for a normal beam as well as a misaligned horn beam. 

Because of the broad  muon profile in the low energy beam, the muon monitors can 
monitor  only  relative  neutrino  event  rate  spill-to-spill  when  running  in  that 
configuration.    The  beam  centroid  shifts  expected  are  barely  measurable.    Periodic 
short runs are therefore envisioned using the higher energy neutrino beams, which can 
be accomplished by moving the NuMI target remotely.  Such a re-configuration thus 
allows a measure of the alignment of the horn optics on a periodic basis. 

ION CHAMBER CONSTRUCTION 

Because  of  the  large  anticipated  particle  fluences,  signal  strength  will  not  be  a 
significant  issue.    In  fact,  the  greater  consideration  will  be  to  reduce  space-charge 
build-up in the gas volume:  slow-moving positive ions will develop their own electric 
field which screens the applied electric field of the chamber.  Such screening increases 
the  drift  time  across  the  gas  volume,  increasing  the  probability  for  charge 
recombination in the gas.  Such loss of charge manifests itself as a non-linearity in ion 
chamber response vs the incident particle flux.  This consideration motivates the use of 
He gas, which produces the lowest ionization density of any of the inert gases [7,8], 
thereby reducing the space charge effect 

 

 FIGURE  4.    Ceramic  parallel  plate  ion  chambers.  (left)    Each  chamber  has  an  alpha  source  for 
calibrations.    Kapton  cables  bring  HV  in  and  signals  out.    (right)  Bias  curve  for  a  single  chamber 
illuminated by the alpha source. 
 

The  ion  chambers  are  parallel  plates  made  from  ceramic  wafers  with  Ag-Pt 
electrodes  [9].    The  electrode  separation  is  3 mm  (0.8 mm)  for  the  muon  (hadron) 
monitors.  Because of the need to calibrate and track the relative responses of the 243 
chambers in the muon arrays, each chamber is illuminated by a 1 µCi 241Am α source 
(Eα=5.5 MeV),  as  shown  in  Figure  4.    The  ionization  current  from  such  a  source  in 
pure He gas is typically 2-4 pA, which may be measured between spills to monitor gas 
quality, pressure, or temperature variations (see Figure 4). 

The  hadron  monitor  is  an  array  of  49  chambers  mounted  in  a  single  Aluminum 
vessel.    Each  chamber  requires  2  ceramic  feedthroughs  [10],  one  for  signal  readout 
and one for a bias voltage (see Figure 5).  The vessel is sealed with an Indium wire, 
whose  melting  point  of  150°C  is  well  above  the  50-60°C  temperature  at  which  the 
monitor will operate.  The design maximizes use of Aluminum over stainless steel in 
order to reduce the presence of long-lived radionuclides in the detector [11]:  with its 
current proportion of 54lbs Aluminum and 4lbs. Stainless, residual activation will be 
58Rem/hr.    The  signal  and  HV  lines  are  custom-made  “cable”  constructed  of 
aluminum  welding  rod  core,  insulated  by  a  ceramic  tube,  shielded  by  an  aluminum 
sheath.  After 1 m this cable transitions to a kapton-insulated cable [10]. 

The  muon  monitor  stations  are  each  81  chamber  arrays.    The  layout  of  9×9  ion 
chambers is achieved by mounting 9 “tubes” onto a support structure vertically.  Each  
Lid 

Ceramic 
Washer 

Ceramic 
Plates 

PEEK 
Cap 

Stainless 
Nut 

Aluminum 
Gasket 

Stainless 
Bulkhead 

Ceramic 
Feedthrough 

 

 

FIGURE 5.  Construction details of the hadron monitor.  (left) An Al vessel has penetrations through 
its rear plate for ceramic feedthroughs (middle).  (right) Each ion chamber is supported on two of the 
feedthroughs.    The  front  lid  is  a  thin  membrane  welded  to  an  Al  flange,  sealed  to  the  vessel  with  an 
Indium wire.   

FIGURE 6.  Construction details of the muon monitor “tubes.”  Each 6”x2” extruded rectangular tube 
contains  a  tray  to  which  9  ion  chambers  are  mounted.    Each  chamber  has  an  alpha  source  for 
calibrations.  Kapton cables bring HV in and signals out.  All feedthroughs are at one end of the tube. 

 

 

tube contains a tray of 9 ion chambers, as shown in Figure 6.  Because of the lower 
anticipated radiation levels in the muon alcoves, we routed the signals out to one end 
of  the  tube,  where  all  feedthroughs  come  out  one  endplate  of  the  tube.    The  tube  is 
made  from  6”×2”  rectangular  extrusion,  into  which  a  “U”-channel  ‘tray’  is  inserted.  
The  endplates  seal  to  the  tubes  using  a  soft  Aluminum  wire  gasket.    The  HV 
feedthroughs  are  custom-made  using  PEEK  tubes  and  compression  fittings.    The 
signal feedthroughs are 9-pin ceramic feedthroughs [12].  The signal and HV routing 
within the tube is accomplished with shielded kapton-insulated cable [10].  Care was 
taken to minimize any exposed signal conductors to the gas volume, particularly at the 
feedthroughs,  lest  ionization  in  the  surrounding  gas  collect  on  the  conductors.  Such 
“stray  ionization”  which  occurs  away  from  the  ceramic  chambers  degrades  the 
measurements of the muon beam’s spatial profile.  

Tests  were  performed  of  the  radiation  damage  to  detector  components  at  the 
University  of  Texas  1 MW  fission  reactor.    Samples  of  ceramic  circuit  boards  with 
Ag-Pt electrodes, of kapton-insulated coaxial cable, of PEEK plastic and of aluminum 
compression fittings were  exposed to ~1.2×1010 Rad.  After exposure, the dielectrics 
could  hold  off  >1000V  with  <10nA  current  draw.    Interestingly,  the  kapton  cable 
became less flexible, and the PEEK notably was of greater hardness after the test. 

BEAM TESTS 

Two  tests  of  He-filled  ion  chambers  have  been  performed,  both  of  which  are 
described  elsewhere.    The  first  occurred  at  8 GeV  FNAL  Booster  beam  dump  [13], 
with beam intensity varied from 109/spill to 4×1012/spill.  The second occurred at the 
Brookhaven  ATF  [14],  where  the  beam  was  of  40 MeV  electrons,  intensities  from 
107/spill  to  109/spill.    The  observed  space  charge  effects  occurred  at  intensities  an 
order of magnitude larger than required for NuMI (see Table 1).   

BACKGROUND RATES 

The  hadron  monitor  and  the  muon  detectors  in  Alcove  0  are  expected  to  see,  by 
virtue  of  their  close  proximity  to  the  beam  absorber,  relatively  large  rates  of 
background  particles,  viz.  gamma  rays  and  low  energy  neutrons.    Monte  Carlo 
estimates of the neutron rates indicate as much as a factor of 10 more neutrons than 

charged  particles  reaching  those  detectors.    Because  these  neutrons  are  produced  by 
the  proton  beam  hitting  the  absorber,  they  are  largely  uncorrelated  spatially  or  in 
intensity with the neutrino beam.  We attempted to measure using radioactive sources 
the  ionization  rate  from  neutron-induced  recoils  in  our  chambers  [15].    The  results 
indicate a background rate from neutrons of <¼ that expected from charged particles. 

MUON MONITOR CALIBRATION 

The  precise  measurement  of  muon  beam  profiles  requires  a  relative  chamber-to-
chamber  calibration  within  the  muon  monitor  arrays.    In  fact,  the  uncertainties  in 
muon  beam  centroid  position  listed  in  Table  1  are  dominated  by  the  chamber-to-
chamber  calibration  uncertainty,  not  by  the  inter-chamber  spacing  or  the  number  of 
chambers in the array.  We therefore require a 1% chamber-to-chamber calibration. 

The  calibration  procedure  was  to  irradiate  each  of  the  detectors  within  the  muon 
tubes with a source (1 Ci  241Am, 30-60 keV γ rays).  The relative ionization currents 
induced by this source equals the relative calibration factor to be applied to each of the 
243 chambers within the muon system.  All 9 chambers within a tube were read out 
simultaneously  during  one  tube’s  calibration,  so  that  the  relative  sizes  of  the  signals 
from  the  1 µCi  α  sources  could  be  studied  as  well.    We  monitored  temperature  and 
absolute  gas  pressure  within  the  tube  with  dedicated  sensors  to  correct  for  any 
variations  over  the  course  of  testing  all  the  tubes.    As  a  check  of  these  sensors,  a 
“reference  chamber”  was  constructed  and  placed  in  series  with  the  tube’s  gas  flow.  
This reference chamber had a 40 µCi α source mounted inside it to act as a standard 
signal which should change only if gas pressure, temperature, or purity level changes. 

The calibration test stand is shown in Figure 7, and some of the results in Figure 8.  
Bias voltage curves were recorded for each chamber irradiated by the 1 Ci source, and 
plateau ionization currents noted.  As a check of the calibration procedure’s precision 
and  repeatability,  as  well  of  that  of  the  pressure  and  temperature  monitoring,  we 
measured one particular chamber approximately 100 times, as shown in Figure 8.  The 
repeatability is 0.2pA/123.0pA≈0.2%, adequate for our 1% calibration requirement.  A 

FIGURE  7.    Muon  monitor  calibration  test  stand.  The  muon  monitor  tube  is  mounted  on  a  fixed 
structure, in front of which is sanned a 1 Ci 241Am γ-source.     

 

 

 

 

 

 
FIGURE  8.    (left)  Bias  voltage  curve  of  one  chamber  illuminated  by  the  1 Ci  calibration  source.  
(middle)  Study  of  repeatability  of  100  calibrations  of  the  same  chamber  over  the  course  of  8  hours.  
(right) Ionization currents of all 288 chambers calibrated on the test stand.   

histogram of the plateau ionization currents of all the calibrated chambers is shown in 
the  right  plot  of  Figure  8.    The  20 pA  variation  in  chamber  plateau  currents  reflects 
differences in the assembly of each chamber, such as the electrode spacing.   

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

It is a pleasure to thank S. O’Kelley of the University of Texas Nuclear Engineering 
Teaching Center, the staff of the University of Texas Physics Department Mechanical 
Shops,  K. Kriesel  of  the  University  of  Wisconsin  Physical  Sciences  Laboratory,  and 
B.  Baller,  R.  Ducar,  D.  Pushka,  G. Tassotto,  and  K. Vaziri  of  Fermilab  for  valuable 
collaboration on this project.   

REFERENCES 

†Corresponding author.  e-mail kopp@hep.utexas.edu 
1.  J.  Hylen  et  al.,  “Conceptual  Design  for  the  Technical  Components  of  the  Neutrino  Beam  for  the 

Main Injector (NuMI),” Fermilab-TM-2018, Sept., 1997.  

2.  S. Kopp, “The NuMI Neutrino Beam and Potential for an Off-Axis Experiment,” J.Phys.G29, 1757 

(2003). 

3.  S. van der Meer, CERN Yellow Report CERN-61-007 (1961). 
4.  M. Kostin, S. Kopp et al, Fermilab note NuMI-B-783 (2002). 
5.  D. Indurthy et al., “Profile Monitor SEM’s for the NuMI Beam at FNAL,” these proceedings.  
6.  K. Budal, IEEE Trans.Nucl. Sci.14, 1132 (1967). 
7.  I. Christophorou, Atomic and Molecular Radiation Physics (New York:  John Wiley), 1971.  
8.  J. Dutton,  “A Survey of Electron Swarm Data,” J. Chem. Ref. Data 4, 577-856 (1975). 
9.  Ceramic circuit boards fabricated by Cer-Tek, El Paso, TX 
10.  Insulator Seal, Inc., Hayward, CA 
11.  J. Cossair et al., “Fermilab Radiological Control Manual,”  http://www-esh.fnal.gov/FRCM/ 
12. Ceramaseal, Inc., Laurens, South Carolina. 
13. R.Zwaska et al., IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci.50, 1129 (2003) 
14. J.McDonald et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A496, 293 (2003). 
15.  D.Indurthy  et  al.,  “Study  of  Neutron-Induced  Ionization  in  Helium  and  Argon  Chamber  Gases.” 

accepted for publication in Nucl. Instr. Meth. A, arXiv physics/0405016. 

