Experimental demonstration of fiber-accessible metal nanoparticle plasmon 
waveguides for planar energy guiding and sensing 
 
 
Stefan A. Maier*, Michelle D. Friedman, Paul E. Barclay, and Oskar J. Painter 
Thomas J. Watson Laboratory of Applied Physics, California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 
 
 
Submitted to Applied Physics Letters 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Experimental 

of  mode-selective 

evanescent 

evidence 

coupling 

power 

at 

telecommunication frequencies with efficiencies up to 75 % from a tapered optical fiber 

to  a  carefully  designed  metal  nanoparticle  plasmon  waveguide  is  presented.  The 

waveguide  consists  of  a  two-dimensional  square  lattice  of  lithographically  defined  Au 

nanoparticles  on  an  optically  thin  silicon  membrane.  The  dispersion  and  attenuation 

properties  of  the  waveguide  are  analyzed  using  the  fiber  taper.  The  high  efficiency  of 

power transfer into these waveguides solves the coupling problem between conventional 

optics  and  plasmonic  devices  and  could  lead  to  the  development  of  highly  efficient 

plasmonic sensors and optical switches. 

 
Corresponding Author: 
 
Stefan A. Maier 
California Institute of Technology 
Mail-Code 128-95 
Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 
Tel 626 395 8008 
Fax 626 795 7258 
e-mail: stmaier@caltech.edu 
 
 
* electronic address: stmaier@caltech.edu 
 

1 

  Micro-  and  nanostructured  assemblies  of  metals  sustaining  coherent,  non-radiative 

electronic excitations known as surface plasmon polaritons [1] are an intriguing materials 

system promising a wide range of applications in photonics and telecommunications [2]. 

Basic  building  blocks  of  plasmonic  devices  will  be  planar  metallic  waveguides  such  as 

micron-sized  stripes  [3],  nanowires  [4]  and  nanoparticle  arrays  [5]  for  the  transport  of 

electromagnetic energy with a mode confinement on the wavelength and subwavelength 

scale,  respectively.  However,  the  excitation  of  spatially  localized  plasmons  in  such 

waveguides  poses  a  considerable  challenge  due  to  the  small  size  and  complex  mode-

shape of the guided modes, resulting in a huge spatial mismatch with diffraction-limited 

optical  beams  and  conventional  waveguides.  For  far-field  excitation  of  localized 

plasmons in thin Au films, coupling efficiencies of about 15% have been estimated [6], 

while  the  excitation  of  subwavelength-scale  modes  in  one-dimensional  nanoparticle 

waveguides typically employs near-field fiber probes with light throughputs below 0.1% 

[7].  Moreover,  neither  of  the  two  methods  is  mode-selective.  Using  a  novel  design 

concept  for  metal  nanoparticle  plasmon  waveguides  based  on  silicon-on-insulator 

technology,  we  present  experimental  observations  of  mode-selective  energy  transfer  at 

telecommunication frequencies from a conventional fiber taper to a plasmon waveguide 

with  efficiencies  up  to  75  %.  This  concept  is  extendable  to  higher  frequencies  and 

promises applications in energy guiding and optical sensing with high efficiencies. 

 

The demonstration of non-diffraction-limited guiding of electromagnetic energy over 

micron-  and  sub-micron  distances  in  resonantly  excited  metallic  nanowires  [4]  and 

nanoparticle  waveguides  [5]  has  recently  been  achieved  as  a  first  step  towards  the 

ultimate  goal  of  building  highly  integrated  photonic  circuits  for  channeling  energy  to 

2 

nanoscale  detectors.  Due  to  the  heightened  local  fields  surrounding  metallic  guiding 

structures,  such  devices  could  find  useful  applications  not  only  in  photonics  and 

telecommunications  but  also  in  biological  sensing  [8]  of  molecules  in  localized  “hot-

spots”. For this vision to come true, new ways of coupling light into such devices have to 

be  developed  that  are  more  efficient  than  non-mode  selective  techniques  such  as 

diffraction-limited far-field coupling and local excitation using nanoscopic probes. On a 

larger scale, the non-resonant guiding of electromagnetic energy at visible [9] and near-

infrared  frequencies  [3,  10]  using  micron-scale  metallic  stripes  has  been  demonstrated 

over distances up to several hundred microns employing far-field and end-fire excitation 

techniques,  respectively.  However,  such  long-ranging  surface  plasmon  polaritons  can 

only  be  sustained  and  efficiently  excited  for  stripes  embedded  in  a  symmetric 

environment  [11],  making  them  of  limited  use  for  sensing  applications  and  also 

complicating  the  employment  of  these  structures  as  input  ports  to  sub-diffraction-limit 

plasmon waveguides.  

 

To overcome this challenging obstacle, we have developed a new design concept of a 

metal  nanoparticle  plasmon  waveguide  that  can  be  efficiently  excited  via  evanescent, 

phase-matched  coupling  using  small  tapers  drawn  from  standard  silica  fibers  [12,  13]. 

The  waveguide  consists  of  a  hybrid  structure  of  SOI  (silicon-on-insulator)  and  a 

lithographically  defined  square  lattice  of  metal  nanoparticles  on  the  optically  thin, 

undercut  silicon  membrane.  In  order  to  allow  for  non-resonant  excitation  of  the  metal 

nanoparticles  to  reduce  the  absorptive  heating  losses  without  a  concomitant  increase  in 

radiative loss, we employ a lateral grading in nanoparticle size to confine the mode to the 

centre  of  the  waveguide  (Note  that  for  one-dimensional  metal  nanoparticle  chains, 

3 

resonant excitation with significantly higher heating losses is necessary [14] in order to 

tightly  confine  the  mode  to  the  sub-wavelength  guiding  structure).  Vertically,  the 

confinement  is  ensured  both  by  bound  metal/air  surface  plasmons  and  the  undercut 

geometry  of  the  silicon  membrane.  Figure  1a  shows  an  example  of  a  finite-difference 

time-domain calculated optical mode profile (electric field intensity) for the fundamental 

waveguide mode in top and side geometry. Further details on the design will be reported 

elsewhere [15]. 

  Due  to  the  periodicity  of  the  structure  in  the  propagation  direction,  the  dispersion 

relation of the plasmon polariton modes is folded back into the first Brillouin zone. This 

way, the upper plasmon band crosses both the light-lines of silica and air, suggesting the 

possibility  of  phase-matched,  mode-selective  excitations  of  the  waveguide  using  silica 

fibre  tapers  [13]  placed  in  close  proximity  to  the  waveguide.  In  order  to  spatially  and 

spectrally investigate energy transfer in this system, we fabricated a plasmon waveguide 

designed to allow efficient evanescent coupling with a fiber taper at a wavelength of 1.6 

µm  in  the  telecommunication  band.  Figure  1b  shows  scanning  electron  micrographs  of 

the  fabricated  waveguide  based  upon  a  530  nm  square  lattice  of  Au  nanoparticles  on  a 

250 nm Si membrane created by undercutting the 2 µm silica layer of a SOI wafer using 

hydrofluoric  acid.  The  nanoparticles  are  50  nm  in  height,  and  have  a  diameter  of 

approximately 250 nm in the centre of the waveguide with a linear lateral grading down 

to 210 nm after three of the six lateral periods. 

  A  fiber  taper  of  approximately  1.5  µm  diameter  was  fabricated  by  simultaneously 

heating  and  stretching  a  segment  of  a  standard  single  mode  telecommunication  fiber. 

Near-infrared light of a scanning external cavity laser with a wavelength range of 1565 – 

4 

1625  nm  was  coupled  into  the  fiber,  and  the  transmitted  light  detected  with  a 

photodetector.  The  thinnest  part  of  the  fiber  taper  was  positioned  above  and  parallel  to 

the  plasmon  waveguide.  At  a  taper  height  of  several  microns  above  the  centre  of  the 

waveguide,  the  taper  mode  did  not  interact  with  the  waveguide,  resulting  in  unity 

transmission  over  the  entire  wavelength  range.  The  taper  was  then  lowered  until  a 

resonant  drop  in  transmission  indicative  of  coupling  to  the  plasmon  waveguide  was 

observed. Lateral movement of the taper at constant height allowed then the examination 

of the spatial coupling profile. Figure 2a shows a contour plot of the power transmitted 

through  the  fiber  taper  on  a  linear  color  scale  versus  wavelength  and  lateral  taper 

position.  Several  spectral  and  spatial  features  are  clearly  discernible:  The  drop  in 

transmitted power centered around 1590 nm when the taper is placed over the central part 

of the waveguide is indicative of coupling to the fundamental plasmon waveguide mode. 

Upon  taper  displacement  away  from  the  waveguide  centre,  the  1590  nm  fundamental 

mode  is  seen  to  disappear,  and  a  periodic  modulation  of  the  transmitted  signal  occurs 

(Figure 2, dotted vertical lines A and B). We attribute this modulation to enhanced non-

resonant coupling into the underlying Si slab mediated by the metal nanoparticle lattice. 

Also,  a  second,  weaker  transmission  dip  around  1570  nm  is  discernable  in  the 

transmission  data  when  the  taper  is  placed  over  the  outer  parts  of  the  waveguide.  We 

believe  these  dips  to  be  due  to  resonant  excitation  of  the  higher  order  transverse  odd 

waveguide mode, with the different depths of the transmission dips on either side of the 

waveguide probably being due to small height variations during lateral movement of the 

taper.  Note  that  both  for  the  fundamental  and  the  higher  order  transverse  mode 

resonances, the periodic modulations of the transmitted signal due to taper-slab coupling 

5 

are suppressed. When the taper is shifted completely off the plasmon waveguide and sits 

entirely  over  the  Si  slab,  the  transmission  almost  completely  recovers  to  unity,  but  for 

coupling into the Si membrane as evidenced by modulations of the same periodicity but 

weaker amplitude as for the metal-assisted scattering. Figure 2b summarizes these results 

by showing the lateral transmission profile at the centre wavelength of the fundamental 

mode  (1590  nm,  upper  graph)  and  that  of  the  next  higher  order  mode  (1570  nm,  lower 

graph). We have thus demonstrated that fiber tapers allow for mode-selective coupling to 

a carefully designed plasmon waveguide, giving this method significant advantage over 

other  excitation  geometries  such  as  near-field  probes  and  far-field  coupling.  In  our 

experiment,  the  spatial  full-width  at  half-maximum  of  approximately  4  µm  of  the 

fundamental mode was rather large, due to convolution with the finite-width of the fiber 

taper and contributions from the metal-assisted scattering discussed above. 

 

The dispersion of the fundamental mode was further examined by translating the fiber 

in the direction of the waveguide in steps of 200 µm, thereby varying the fiber diameter 

and thus the wave vector of phase-matching. Figure 3a shows the spectral position of the 

fundamental  resonance  (white  dots  correspond  to  minimum  in  transmission  depth) 

overlaid  on  a  contour  plot  of  the  transmitted  signal  versus  taper  position  along  the 

waveguide  direction  and  wavelength.  In  order  to  adjust  for  varying  gaps  between  the 

taper and the waveguide with changing taper diameter, the transmission data have been 

normalized to zero transmission in the centre of the respective resonances. The red-shift 

of  the  resonance  with  increasing  fiber  diameter  as  depicted  in  the  inset  is  indicative  of 

contra-directional  coupling.  Thus  phase-matching  does  indeed  take  place  between  the 

zone-folded upper plasmon band and the taper light line. 

6 

 

The  efficiency  of  power  transfer  into  our  plasmon  waveguide  was  studied  using  a 

newly  drawn  fiber  taper  of  1.1  µm  diameter.  Figure  3b  shows  a  representative 

wavelength scan of the transmitted signal at a height of approximately 1100 nm above the 

waveguide centre after extensive optimization of the alignment of the taper with respect 

to  the  waveguide.  For  this  height,  the  normalized  transmitted  signal  dropped  to  0.12  at 

the centre of the resonance dip, while recovering back to 0.75 at the higher frequency end 

of the laser scan range (red curve). Using a second laser with a scan range between 1510 

and  1580  nm,  a  nearly  complete  recovery  of  the  transmission  to  about  0.87  was 

confirmed (blue curve). We have thus observed a power transfer of about 75 % from the 

fibre taper to the plasmon waveguide [16]. 

 

In  all  our  experiments,  the  depth  of  the  resonance  dip  in  transmission  was  seen  to 

monotonically  increase  with  decreasing  taper  height  as  expected  for  contra-directional 

coupling (i.e. no Rabi-type flopping of power as in co-directional coupling). The inset of 

Figure  3b  shows  examples  of  wavelength  scans  of  the  transmitted  power  for  different 

taper  heights,  decreasing  from  4  µm  to  zero  gap  (defined  as  the  gap  where  taper  is 

touching  the  surface)  in  500  nm  steps.  Note  that  the  wavelength  dependence  of  the 

coupling is broader and not as sharply defined as in an ideal contra-directional coupler, 

which we believe to be due to fabrication non-idealities. 

 

The occurrence of Fabry-Perot resonances due to reflections at the mirror ends of our 

waveguide  superimposed  on  the  transmission  data  allowed  the  estimation  of  the  group 

velocity  and  energy  decay  length  of  the  propagating  plasmon  mode.  By  analyzing  the 

spacing and width of the resonances, the group velocity was thus estimated to about 15 % 

of  the  velocity  of  light  in  vacuum  (corresponding  to  a  group  index  of  6.67)  in  good 

7 

agreement with finite-difference time-domain simulations [15], and the 1/e energy decay 

length  to  about  50  µm.  Note  that  the  decay  length  estimate  assumes  perfect  mirror 

reflectivities. Due to almost certain reflectivities less than unity, the decay length of 50 

µm is thus a lower estimate only. 

  At this point, it is worth noting that our design concept can also be scaled to higher 

frequencies towards the visible regime of the spectrum by an appropriate change in lattice 

constant. The higher absorptive losses for near-resonant excitations at lower wavelengths 

can then be partially counteracted by a change of the materials system to silver. The high 

efficiency  of  power  transfer  into  our  plasmon  waveguide  should  thus  allow  intriguing 

applications at visible and near-infrared frequencies. For example, the use as a coupling 

structure to other planar plasmonic devices such as cavities and resonantly excited one-

dimensional  particle  waveguides  as  presented  in  [5]  can  be  envisioned.  Moreover,  the 

good accessibility of the optical surface mode suggests high promise for this design as an 

efficient optical sensor for biological agents. 

 

In  summary,  we  have  presented  a  novel  plasmon  waveguide  based  on  a  two-

dimensional  lattice  of  Au  nanoparticles  on  a  thin  silicon  membrane  fabricated  using 

silicon-on-insulator  processing  techniques  that  can  be  efficiently  excited  using  fiber 

tapers.  Mode-selective  power  transfer  efficiencies  up  to  75  %  have  been  demonstrated. 

Such  waveguides  could  make  possible  the  interconnection  of  a  wealth  of  recently 

proposed  plasmonic  micro-  and  nanostructures  with  conventional  fiber  optics  and  also 

lead to the design of high-performance plasmonic sensors. 

Acknowledgements 

The  authors  are  grateful  to  M.  Borselli  and  T.  J.  Johnson  for  help  with  fabrication.

8 

1. 

H. Raether, Surface Plasmons on smooth and rough surfaces and on gratings. 

References: 

1988, Berlin: Springer. 

2. 

3. 

7. 

8. 

W. L. Barnes, A. Dereux, and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature 424, 824 (2003) 

R. Charbonneau, P. Berini, E. Berolo, and E. Lisicka-Shrzek, Optics Letters 

25(11), 844 (2000) 

4. 

J. R. Krenn, B. Lamprecht, H. Ditlbacher, G. Schider, M. Salerno, A. Leitner, and 

F. R. Aussenegg, Europhysics Letters 60(5), 663-669 (2002) 

5. 

S. A. Maier, P. G. Kik, H. A. Atwater, S. Meltzer, E. Harel, B. E. Koel, and A. A. 

G. Requicha, Nature Materials 2, 229 (2003) 

6. 

H. Ditlbacher, J. R. Krenn, A. Hohenau, A. Leitner, and F. R. Aussenegg, Applied 

Physics Letters 83(18), 3665 (2003) 

D. Courjon and C. Bainier, Reports on Progress in Physics 57, 989-1028 (1994) 

G. Raschke, S. Kowarik, T. Franzl, C. Sönnichsen, T. A. Klar, J. Feldmann, A. 

Nichtl, and K. Kürzinger, Nano Letters 3(7), 935-938 (2003) 

9. 

B. Lamprecht, J. R. Krenn, G. Schider, H. Ditlbacher, M. Salerno, N. Felidj, A. 

Leitner, F. R. Aussenegg, and J. C. Weeber, Applied Physics Letters 79(1), 51-53 

(2001) 

10. 

T. Nikolajsen, K. Leosson, I. Salakhutdinov, and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Applied 

Physics Letters 82(5), 668 (2003) 

11. 

P. Berini, Physical Review B 63, 125417 (2001) 

12.  M. Cai, O. Painter, and K. J. Vahala, Physical Review Letters 85(1), 74-77 (2000) 

9 

13. 

P. E. Barclay, K. Srinivasan, M. Borselli, and O. Painter, Electronics Letters 

39(11), 842 (2003) 

14. 

S. A. Maier, P. G. Kik, and H. A. Atwater, Physical Review B 67, 205402 (2003) 

15. 

S. A. Maier, P. E. Barclay, T. J. Johnson, M. D. Friedman, and O. J. Painter, 

Applied Physics Letters submitted, (2003) 

16. 

P. E. Barclay, K. Srinivasan, M. Borselli, and O. Painter, Optics Letters 29(7), 

697 (2004) 

 

10 

Figure Captions: 
 
Figure 1 (color). a) Electric field intensity distribution of a plasmon waveguide mode in 

top (upper plot) and side view (lower plot) calculated using finite-difference time-domain 

simulations. b) Scanning electron micrograph of a fabricated plasmon waveguide on an 

undercut Si membrane. The waveguide is terminated by mirrors at both ends. 

Figure 2 (color). a) Contour plot showing the transmitted power through the fiber taper 

on a linear color scale versus wavelength and lateral position of the taper with respect to 

the waveguide. b) Lateral transmission profile at a wavelength of 1590 nm (fundamental 

mode, upper graph) and 1570 nm (higher order mode, lower graph). 

 

 

Figure 3 (color). a) Contour plot showing the normalized transmitted power through the 

fiber taper on a linear color scale versus wavelength and taper displacement in the 

direction of the waveguide. The transmission minimum (marked by white dots) is seen to 

move towards larger wavelength for thicker fiber diameters as depicted in the inset, 

indicative of contra-directional coupling from the fiber taper to the plasmon waveguide. 

b) Wavelength scan of the transmitted power through the fiber taper placed in close 

proximity over the centre of the plasmon waveguide obtained using two different external 

cavity lasers with overlapping scan ranges. The inset shows the evolution of the coupling 

when the taper is successively lowered towards the waveguide in 50 nm steps (every 

tenth step shown). 

11 

