CORNEAL THICKNESS AND ELEVATION MAPS COMPUTED FROM 

OPTICAL ROTARY SCANS 

Sandra Franco1, José B Almeida1 and Manuel Parafita2 

1. Physics Department, Universidade do Minho, Portugal. 

2.  Department  of  Surgery  (Ophthalmology),  Universidad  de  Santiago  de  Compostela, 

 

 

 

 

Spain. 

Authors: 

Sandra Franco, Member of Faculty 

José Borges de Almeida, PhD, Member of Faculty 

Manuel Parafita, PhD, Member of Faculty 

Physics Department, Universidade do Minho 

Correspondig author: 

Sandra Franco 

Campus de Gualtar 

4710-057 Braga 

PORTUGAL 

 

1 

Tel:+351253604067, Fax:+351253678981, E-mail: SFRANCO@FISICA.UMINHO.PT 

ABSTRACT 

Purpose:  Recently  the  authors  presented  a  technique  that  allows  corneal  thickness 

measurements  along  any  meridian  from  optical  sections  obtained  using  a  rotary  scanning 

system. 

This paper presents 3-D mapping of the corneal thickness and topography of both corneal 

surfaces, obtained with the rotary system. 

Method: Corneal thickness and topography  are  computed from optical sections obtained 

by illumination with a collimated beam expanded in a fan by  a small cylindrical lens. This 

lens is provided with motor driven rotation in order to perform automated rotary scan of the 

whole cornea. Two cameras are used to capture the images of the optical sections. 

Results:  With  this  system  it  is  possible  to  obtain  3-D  representation  of  the  corneal 

thickness as well as corneal topography. Corneal thickness and elevation maps are shown. 

Conclusions:  Although  still  under  development,  this  new  optical  system  allows  the 

measurement  of  the  thickness  of  the  whole  cornea  as  well  as  3-D  mapping  of  both  corneal 

surfaces. 

 

2 

With the growing popularity of refractive surgery, the measurement of the corneal shape, 

refractive  power  and  thickness  has  become  increasingly  important.  The  majority  of 

commercial videokeratographers measure the topography of the anterior corneal surface but 

this  information  is  incomplete  because  the  posterior  corneal  surface  also  contributes  to  the 

overall refractive power. Currently, full knowledge of CT is remarkably important once it has 

been shown that corneal response to different physiological and pathological conditions is not 

the same in different areas of the cornea.1 Topographical determinations of CT were applied 

clinically 

to  study  pathological  conditions  as  keratoconus,2-4  research 

in  corneal 

physiology,5,6 and in contact lens research.7-10 However, some of these procedures resulted in 

high variability of measurements and low reproducibility in peripheral locations. 

One  of  the  most  common  approaches  to  corneal  pachometry  is  ultrasound  technology. 

Ultrasonic  pachometers  do  not  require  much  training,  are  portable  and  produce  more  rapid 

and  objective  results  than  other  techniques.  Conversely,  the  measurement  procedure  is 

invasive,  requiring  the  cornea  to  be  anaesthetised,  and  measurements  could  be  affected  by 

hydration  fluxes.  However,  ultrasonic  pachometers  have  been  successfully  applied  to  the 

topographical  determination  of  CT  in  a  variety  of  clinical  situations11-14. A  new  system  for 

the topographical determination of CT by ultrasound pachometry has produced measurements 

with good levels of reproducibility for central and peripheral measurements.15 

On the other hand, optical methods for the measurement of CT involved the use of the slit 

lamp with the pachometry attachment, which had been for long the most commonly available 

optical  method.  Improvements  of  this  system,  allowed  measurements  at  different  corneal 

locations on the horizontal meridian with great accuracy and reproducibility.3, 16 

New pachymetric methods based on optical technology have been recently developed and 

clinically  applied.  Confocal  microscopy,  videopachometry,  three-dimensional  topography 

 

3 

known  as  Orbscan®  technology,  optical  tomography,  non-contact  and  contact  specular 

microscopy and low-coherence interferometry are other techniques used in the measurement 

of CT. A wide review of these methods has been recently published.17 

Nowadays,  the  most  used  instrument  for  the  clinical  topographic  determination  of  CT  is 

the Orbscan Topography System, which uses slit scanning technology providing topographic 

information  of  both  anterior  and  posterior  corneal  surfaces  as  well  as  CT  values  for  up  to 

9000 central and peripheral locations.18 - 20 

In  this  paper  the  authors  present  a  new  optical  corneal  tomographer  that  uses  two  CCD 

cameras  attached 

to  an 

innovative 

illumination  system 

that  allows 

topographical 

determination  of  corneal  thickness  as  well  as  3D  mapping  of  both  corneal  surfaces.  The 

optical principles and technical details of a precursor apparatus have been described.21-23 

MATERIAL AND METHODS 

The  rotary  scanning  system  used  was  the  same  already  described23  with  a  few 

improvements. It consists of an illuminator and two CCD cameras (COU 2252) provided with 

55 mm telecentric lens connected to a data processing computer (Fig. 1).  

The  illumination  system  is  aligned  with  the  visual  axis  and  comprises  a  quartz  halogen 

light source, an optical fiber bundle, a collimator, a small rod shaped cylindrical lens with a 

diameter of 5 mm, a convex lens and an apodizing aperture slit. The cylindrical lens expands 

the collimated beam in a fan and is held by a mount that can automatically rotate to produce 

rotary scanning of the entire cornea. . The fan is focused on the cornea surface by the convex 

lens  and  the  light  diffused  from  the  cornea  produces  an  optical  section  whose  orientation 

follows the cylinder lens orientation. 

The  diffused  light  is  imaged  by  the  two  cameras  placed  at  60°  with  the  light  beam  and 

defining with the visual axis planes perpendicular to each other. These two cameras act like a 

 

4 

single virtual camera that can be rotated with the cylinder lens; the advantage of using two 

cameras is that it allows faster rotation then would be possible if a single camera had to be 

rotated in synchronism with the lens. 

As  referred  before,  the  rotary  scanning  of  the  whole  cornea  is  automatically  performed 

while the cameras images are acquired by the computer. The patient is asked to look at the 

light in the center of the illumination system during the image acquisition process. 

After  the  image  acquisition,  a  considerable  amount  of  image  processing  is  needed  to 

recover the true shape and thickness of the cornea from the distorted optical sections acquired 

by the two cameras. 

Since  we  may  have  a  continuous  rotary  scanning  of  the  cornea,  the  number  of  optical 

sections  acquired  can  be  enormous  and  the  processing  of  such  information  could  take  to  a 

very long time. In order to get results faster, considering the processing is not yet optimized, 

we select information from six meridians. In this study the measurement was done in steps of 

30º but it is possible to decrease or increase this value at the expense of processing time. 

After image acquisition we have six optical sections, one from each meridian, captured by 

the  two  cameras.  The  vertical  optical  section  is  obtained  by  the  camera  lying  on  the 

horizontal  plane;  the  corresponding  image  on  the  vertical  camera  carries  no  information 

because  it  is  reduced  to  a  bright  straight  line.  The  situation  is  reversed  when  the  optical 

section  is  horizontal,  but  for  all  other  situations  there  is  information  in  both  images,  which 

must be processed in order to obtain the image that would be seen by a virtual camera on a 

plane  always  normal  to  the  optical  section.  The  first  processing  step  consists  in  the 

application of simple trigonometric rules to recover the virtual camera’s image. 

The next step is the detection of both corneal edges from the optical sections images using 

the method known as “adaptive thresholding” reported by Hachicha el al.24 This procedure is 

 

5 

done for each measured meridian and gives a set of points from each surface; these points are 

then fitted  with a 4th degree polynomial and the shape of both corneal surfaces  is obtained. 

We  have  also  tried  to  use  spline  rather  than  polynomial  fitting,  but  the  processing  time 

increased drastically. 

The  corneal  thickness  is  then  computed  for  the  six meridians  from  the  distance  between 

the two edges' profiles affected by corrections to allow for the observation angle and corneal 

curvature.  The  former  of  these  corrections  may  be  obtained  by  simple  trigonometric 

calculus23;  the  latter  is  performed  considering  the  optical  magnification  produced  by  an 

average  curvature  and  could  be  improved  by  iterative  processing,  using  pre-determined 

curvature  at  each  point.  The  result  is  a  thickness  profile  along  the  six  meridians  and  it 

becomes possible to interpolate the thickness along all meridians and to compute a thickness 

map of the whole cornea. 

In this paper we present an elevation map for each corneal surface as well as a thickness 

map for one eye measured with the rotary scanning system. 

RESULTS  

Figure  2  shows  an  elevation  map  for  the  anterior  (A)  and  posterior  (B)  surfaces.  They 

represent the difference in height from a sphere of 7.75 mm for the anterior surface and 6.45 

mm for the posterior surface. 

We can observe the typical pattern of an astigmatic surface, in both the anterior and posterior 

cornea, being noticeable even a higher degree of astigmatism in the posterior one as shown 

by elevation values. Such an astigmatism is only noted in the midperipheral region from 6 to 

8 mm where the elevation gradient as represented by the color change is higher with almost 

no change in the central area.  

 

6 

The same patterns were obtained with the Orbscan II system for the same subject displaying 

also  higher astigmatism in the posterior surface.  The absence of  central  astigmatism  is also 

supported by refraction with no cylinder prescription for this patient. 

Knowing  the shape of  both corneal surfaces is very simple to compute the thickness of the 

entire cornea. Figure 3 shows a thickness map of a right eye. The values found with the rotary 

system are in good agreement with those found with Orbscan II for the central cornea; in the 

periphery the values found with the Orbscan II are a slightly higher than those found by us. In 

a  previous  unpublished  work  the  authors  found  the  same  disagreement  between  the  two 

systems for vertical meridians ours being closer to those obtained by ultrasonic pachymetry. 

DISCUSSION 

The authors describe a new optical  system designed to provide topographical maps of both 

corneal  surfaces  and  corneal  pachymetry.  This  system  allows  a  rotary  scan  of  the  entire 

cornea and the capture of optical sections' images from any corneal meridian. A cylindrical 

lens  is  used  to  expand  a  light  beam  in  a  fan  and  produce  the  corneal  optical  sections.  The 

cylinder lens is provided with motor driven rotation about an axis normal to its own in order 

to rotate the fan of light on the cornea such that the projected line scans the whole cornea. 

The  preliminary  findings  reported  in  this  paper  are  consistent  with  those  obtained  with 

current methods of topographic evaluation of the anterior segment. Further developments will 

be  necessary  to  render  the  system  more  user  friendly  and  to  speed  up  the  processing  of 

different pachymetric, elevation and curvature maps similar to those presented in this paper.  

The authors expect to increase the scanning speed in order to produce complete tomography 

maps without consideration of eye movements; at present scanning speed is only limited by 

image acquisition and not by any mechanical constraints. 

. 

 

7 

REFERENCES 

1.  Benjamin  WJ  and  Ruben  CM.  Human  corneal  oxygen  demands  at  superior,  central  and 

inferior sites. J Am Optom Assoc. 1995; 66: 423-428. 

2.  Parafita MA,  González-Meijome JM,  Díaz JA,  Yebra-Pimentel  E.  Paquimetría topográfica  y 

topografía  paquimétrica  en  el  queratocono  posterior  circunscrito.  Arch  Soc  Esp  Oftalmol. 

3.  Mandell RB and Polse KA. Keratoconus: spatial variation of corneal thickness as a diagnostic 

2000; 75: 633-636. 

test. Arch Ophthal 1969; 82: 182-188. 

4.  Edmund  C.  Assessment  of  an  elastic  model  in  the  pathogenesis  of  keratoconus.  Acta 

5.  Tomlinson  A.  A  clinical  study  of  the  central  and  peripheral  thickness  of  the  human  cornea. 

Ophthalmol (Copenhagen) 1987; 65: 545-550. 

Acta Ophthalmol 1972; 50: 73-82. 

6.  El  Hage  SG  and  Beaulne  C.  Changes  in  central  and  peripheral  corneal  thickness  with 

menstrual cycle. Am J Optom Physiol Opt 1973; 50: 863-871. 

7.  Rivera  RK,  Polse  KA.  Effects  of  hypoxia  and  hypercapnia  on  contact  lens-induced  corneal 

acidosis. Optom Vis Sci 1996; 73: 178-183. 

8.  Sanders  TL,  Polse  KA,  Sarver  MD  and  Harris  MG.  Central  and  peripheral  corneal  swelling 

accompanying  the  wearing  of  Bausch  and  Lomb  Soflens®  contact  lenses.  Am  J  Optom 

Physiol Optics 1975; 52: 393-397. 

9.  Bonanno JA  and  Polse  KA.  Central  and  peripheral  corneal  swelling  accompanying  soft  lens 

extended wear. Am J Optom Physiol Opt 1985; 62: 74-81. 

10.  Holden BA, Sweeney DF, Vannas A, Nilsson KT and Efron N. Effects of long-term extended 

contact lens wear on the human cornea. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1985; 26: 1489-1501. 

11.  Patel  S,  Marshall  J  and  Fitzke  FW.  Shape  and  radius  of  posterior  corneal  surface.  Refract 

Corneal Surg 1993; 9: 173-181. 

12.  Gromacki SJ and Barr JT. Central and peripheral corneal thickness in keratoconus and normal 

 

8 

patient groups. Optom Vis Sci 1994; 71: 437-441. 

13.  Longanesi L, Cavallini GM and Toni R. Quantitative clinical anatomy of the human cornea in 

vivo.  A  morphometric  study  by  ultrasonic  pachymetry  and  computer-assisted  topographic 

videokeratoscopy. Acta Anatómica 1996; 157: 73-79. 

14.  Owens  H  and  Watters  GA.  An  evaluation  of  the  keratoconic  cornea  using  computerized 

corneal mapping and ultrasonic measurements of corneal thickness Ophthal Physiol Opt 1996; 

16: 115-123. 

15.  Parafita  MA,  Yebra-Pimentel  E,  Giráldez  MJ,  González-Pérez  J,  Pérez-Martín  MV  and 

González-Méijome  JM.  Further  information  on  the  knowledge  of  topographical  corneal 

16.  Holden BA, McNally JJ, Mertz GW and Swarbrick HA. Topographical corneal oedema. Acta 

thickness. ICLC 1999; 26: 128-137. 

Ophthalmol 1985; 63: 684-691. 

17.  Parafita M. A., Yebra-Pimentel E., Giráldez MªJ., González-Pérez J., González-Méijome J.M. 

and Cerviño A. Optical Methods for Corneal Thickness Measurement. A Review. In: Recent 

Research Developments in Optics. S.G. Pandalai (ed.). Research Signpost. Trivandrum. India. 

18.  Liu  Z,  Huang  AJ,  and  Pflugfelder  SC.  Evaluation  of  corneal  thickness  and  topography  in 

normal  eyes  using  the  Orbscan®  Corneal  Topography  System.  Br  J  Ophthalmol  1999;  83: 

2001. 

774-778. 

19.  Lattimore  MR,  Kaupp  S,  Schallhorn  S,  Lewis  R  4th.  Orbscan  pachymetry:  implications  of  a 

repeated measures and diurnal variations analysis. Ophthalmology 1999; 106: 977-981. 

20.  Yaylali V, Kaufman SC and Thompson HW. Corneal thickness measurements with Orbscan 

Topography System and ultrasonic pachymetry. J Cataract Refract Surg 1997; 23: 1345-1350. 

21.  Franco  S,  Almeida  JB,  Parafita  M.  Measurement  of  the  corneal  thickness  by  video 

pachometry: preliminary results. J. Refrac. Surg. 2000; 16: S661-S663. 

 

9 

22.  Franco  S,  Almeida  JB,.  Parafita  M.  Optical  corneal  tomography,  in  Vision  Science  and  its 

Applications-VSIA,  pp.  148-151,  Optical  Society  of  America  (Monterey,  California,  USA), 

2001. 

23.  Franco S, Almeida JB, Parafita M. Measuring corneal thickness with a rotary scanning system. 

J. Refrac. Surg. 2002; 18: S630-S633. 

24.  .  Hachicha  A,  Simon  S,  Samson  J,  Hanna  K.  The  use  of  gray-level  information  and  fitting 

techniques  for  precise  measurement  of  corneal  curvature  and  thickness.  Comput.  Vision 

Graphics Image Process 1989; 47: 131–164. 

 

10 

 

 

Figure 1: View of the rotary scanning system. 

Figure 2: Elevation maps from the anterior (A) and posterior (B) corneal surfaces. 

Figure 3: Corneal thickness map. 

 

11 

 

 

12 

 

13 

 

 

14 

