Transmission properties of periodic nonlinear structures 
containing left handed materials. 

Ravi S. Hegde, Herbert G. Winful 

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 

Abstract.    We  study  the  transmission  properties  of  a  nonlinear  periodic  structure  containing  alternating  slabs  of  a 
nonlinear right handed material and a linear left handed material. We find that the transmission associated with the zero 
averaged- refractive- index gap exhibits a bistable characteristic that is relatively insensitive to incident angle.  This is in 
contrast to the nonlinear behavior of the usual Bragg gap. 

 

refraction  was 

Negative  index  media,  first  proposed  by  Veselago 
[1],  have  attracted  a  great  deal  of  theoretical  and 
experimental interest in recent years. The phenomenon 
of  negative 
first  experimentally 
demonstrated at microwave frequencies using artificial 
metamaterials  [2]  and  there  are  currently  attempts  to 
extend  this  behavior  to  the  optical  regime  [3-5].    A 
periodic  assembly  of  alternating  positive  index  and 
negative  index  materials  [6-8]  has  been  found  to 
possess exotic properties. It has been shown that in the 
mixed  type  periodic  structure,  a  new  kind  of  gap 
results  [9],  when  the  average  refractive  index  of  the 
structure  becomes  zero.  The  zero-n  gap  has  very 
unusual  properties  in  that  it  is  robust  to  scaling  and 
disorder  [9].  The  gap  exhibits  an  omnidirectional 
feature  [10],  which  makes  it  of  great  interest  for 
applications  requiring  a  wide  field  of  view.  These 
properties  of  the  zero-n  gap  are  quite  different  from 
those  of  the  usual  Bragg  gap.  The  nonlinear  response 
of positive index Bragg structures was first studied by 
Winful, et al, who showed that intensity-tuning of the 
transmission  bandgap  can  lead  to  hysteresis  and 
optical bistability [11].  In this paper we investigate the 
nonlinear  transmission  of  a  positive-negative  periodic 
structure.    We  find  that  the  zero-n  gap  exhibits  a 
hysteretic  response  which  is  relatively  insensitive  to 
input  angle,  in  contrast  to  the  behavior  of  the  Bragg 
gap.  

is 

taken 

to  be 

We consider a structure in which the positive index 
medium  exhibits  Kerr-type  nonlinearity.  The  negative 
index  medium 
linear  although 
nonlinearity in its electric and magnetic susceptibilities 
can  be  easily  included.  We  ignore  absorption  in  the 
structure,  which  can  also  be  readily  included  within 
this  formalism  The  periodic  structure  (as  in  Fig.  1) 
consists of N unit cells occupying the region z = 0, D, 
translationally  invariant  in the  x-y plane and  bounded 
on both sides by free space. Each cell is formed of two 
films  film  1  and  film  2  with  thicknesses  d1  and  d2. 
Film  1  is  a  positive  index  material,  while  film  2  is  a 

negative  index  or  left  handed  material.  The  dielectric 
permittivity  described  by  eqn  (1)  is  taken  to  exhibit 
field intensity dependence. We ignore such effects for 
the magnetic permeability as done in [12]. The implicit 
assumption  in  this  formulation  is  that  the  negative 
index  layer  permits  the  use  of  an  effective  index  for 
the  frequency  range  of  interest,  which  may  not  be  a 
valid approximation in all cases.  

  

FIGURE 1. Schematic of the nonlinear periodic structure. 

 

We solve for TE polarized fields of the form,   

where  θ  is  the  angle  which  the  incident  wave  vector 
makes  with  the  x  axis.  Now  setting  ζ  =  koz.  The 
electric field is in general governed by eqns. (3-4).  

    The  solutions  for  the  most  general  case  have  to  be 
obtained by numerical integration of eqn (3). In case of 
a  Kerr-type  nonlinearity,  the  εiNL(│E│2)  term  in  eqn. 

 

To study the shift in transmission spectra, we employ a 
root  solver  to  maintain  constant  input  intensity.  For  a 
defocusing γIinc = -0.03, Fig 3 shows gap tuning for the 
zero-n gap (θ = 0°, 45°). Two things to be noted are the 
dependence  on  incident  angle  and  the  asymmetry  in 
the shifts.  The zero-n gap results at a frequency when 
the following condition is satisfied.  

 

is 

to 

structure 

expected 

show 
thus 
The 
omnidirectionality.    However  in  a  finite  structure,  the 
gap  center  does  vary  with  the  incident  angle  and  the 
number of layers. This can be attributed to the fact that 
in  a  finite  structure  the  end  reflections  influence  the 
overall  transmission.  The  only  asymmetry  in  the 
problem is due to the dispersion relations in eqns (7-8) 
and this is what leads to the observed asymmetry in the 
transmission shifts. 

(1)  can  be  replaced  by  γ│E│2.  To  obtain  the 
transmission of the structure we specify the E field and 
its derivative at the output face, successively integrate 
eqn (3) all the way to the input end. At the interfaces 
of  two  films  we  apply  the  following  boundary 
conditions. 

In  case  we  have  a  linear  film,  we  can  instead  use  the 
following  transmission  matrix  to  propagate  the  fields. 
Here the subscript refers to the film number in the unit 
cell.  If  the  film  is  a  negative  index  type,  then  a 
negative value of p is used. 

The  procedure  outlined  above  has  been  implemented 
using  MATLAB.  The  numerical  integration  being 
handled  by  a  standard  Runge-Kutta  solver.    Our 
structure  has  d1  =  d2  =10mm.  Film  1  is  a  positive 
index  material  with  ε’  =  2,  µ  =  1.  The  positive  layer 
exhibits a Kerr-type nonlinearity  modeled by γI.  Film 
2 
index  material  whose  relative 
permittivity and permeability variations (f is measured 
in GHz) are of the form 

is  a  negative 

The  dispersion  relations  and  the  linear  transmission 
spectrum  (for  N  =  16,32)  are  shown  in  Fig.  2                      

 

FIGURE 3 Gap tuning for the zero-n gap at θ = 0°, 45°.   
γIinc = -0.03, N = 16. 

 

Next  we  examine  the  hysteresis  effects  that  the 
transmission  shows  as  a  function  of  input  intensity. 
We  vary  γIinc  and  observe  the  transmission  at  a 
particular frequency and incident angle. The hysteresis 
curves for detuning near the first order Bragg gap (Fig. 
4) are very sensitive to incidence angle. In contrast for 
detuning near the zero  gap center  (f   near 3.55 GHz), 
the  hysteresis  curves  (Figs.  5,6)  for  a  wider  range  of 
incidence angles are seen to follow each other closely. 
This  is  the  result  of  the  omnidirectionality  feature.  
Due to the asymmetry in the shifts for detuning to the 
right  and  left  of  the  zero-n  gap,  a  relatively  larger 
nonlinearity  is  essential  to  observe  hysteresis  in  the 
former case. The phenomenon of negative refraction is 
always  accompanied  by  dispersion  [1]  and  hence  it 
will  play  a  key  role  in  nonlinear  gap  tuning.  By 
changing dispersion in the negative index material, the 
gap tuning and hysteresis behavior can be controlled.     

FIGURE 2. Material parameters of the negative layer and 
the transmittance of the structure as a function of frequency 
at normal incidence, N = 16, 32. 
 

 

 

   

 

FIGURE  6.  Hysteresis  behavior  of  transmittance  as  a 
function of a defocusing γIinc for detuning to the right of the 
zero-n  gap  (f  = 3.58  GHz,  N  =  32.)  for  incident  angles  θ  = 
0°, 15°and 30° 

 

REFERENCES 

1.  V.  G.  Veselago,  Soviet  Physics  Uspekhi-Ussr  10, 

509 (1968). 

2.  D.  R.  Smith,  W.  J.  Padilla,  D.  C.  Vier,  S.  C. 
Nemat-Nasser,  and  S.  Schultz,  Physical  Review 
Letters 84, 4184 (2000). 

3.  M. L. Povinelli, S. G. Johnson, J. D. Joannopoulos, 
and J. B. Pendry, Applied Physics Letters 82, 1069 
(2003). 

4.  G. Shvets, Physical Review B 67 (2003). 
5.  C. Luo, S. G. Johnson, J. D. Joannopoulos, and J. 

6. 

B. Pendry, Physical Review B 65 (2002). 
J.  Gerardin  and  A.  Lakhtakia,  Microwave  And 
Optical Technology Letters 34, 409 (2002). 

7.  L. Wu, S. L. He, and H. Chen, Optics Express 11, 

1283 (2003). 

8.  L. Wu, S. L. He, and L. F. Shen, Physical Review 

9. 

B 67 (2003). 
J. Li, L. Zhou, C. T. Chan, and P. Sheng, Physical 
Review Letters 90 (2003). 

10.  H. T. Jiang, H. Chen, H. Q. Li, Y. W. Zhang, and 
S.  Y.  Zhu,  Applied  Physics  Letters  83,  5386 
(2003). 

11.  H.  G.  Winful,  J.  H.  Marburger,  and  E.  Garmire, 

Applied Physics Letters 35, 379 (1979). 

12.  V.  Shadrivov,  A.  A.  Sukhorukov,  Y.  S.  Kivshar, 
A.  A.  Zharov,  A.  D.  Boardman,  and  P.  Egan, 
Physical Review E 69 (2004). 

FIGURE  4.  Hysteresis  behavior  of  transmittance  as  a 
function of a defocusing γIinc for detuning near the first order 
Bragg gap (f = 7.15 GHz, N = 32.) for incident angles θ = 0°, 
3.75°. Note that for θ = 15°, hysteresis is not observed. 
 

 
FIGURE  5.  Hysteresis  behavior  of  transmittance  as  a 
function  of  a  defocusing  γIinc  for  detuning  to  the  left  of  the 
zero-n  gap  (f  = 3.51  GHz,  N  =  32.) for  incident  angles  θ  = 
0°, 15°and 30° 
 

In  summary,  we  introduce  a  new  kind  of  periodic 
nonlinear  structure,  containing  a  left  handed  material.  
A  general  method  to  analyze  nonlinear  transmission 
effects  for  this  class  of  structures  is  presented.  As  in 
the  case  of  a  linear  left  handed  bandgap  structure,  a 
zero-n gap is observed. Gap tuning and hysteresis are 
observed  in  this  structure.  Differences  between  the 
nonlinear  transmission  properties  between  the  zero-n 
gap and the first order Bragg gap are demonstrated. In 
the  scheme  presented,  it  will  be  an  interesting 
extension  to  consider  periodic  nonlinear  structures 
with defect layers.   

 

 

 

 

