J. Phys. Chem. A

JP*******

version 1; March 30, 2004

Solvation, relaxation, and geminate recombination
of electrons generated by
two 200 nm photon ionization of liquid H2O and D2O. 1

Rui Lian, Robert A. Crowell, * and Ilya A. Shkrob.
a Chemistry Division , Argonne National Laboratory,  Argonne, IL 60439

The submitted manuscript has been created by the University of Chicago as
Operator  of  Argonne  National  Laboratory  ("Argonne")  under  Contract  No.
W-31-109-ENG-38  with  the  U.  S.  Department  of  Energy.    The  U.  S.
Government  retains  for  itself,  and  others  acting  on  its  behalf,  a  paid-up,
nonexclusive,  irrevocable  worldwide  license  in  said  article  to  reproduce,
prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly
and display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government.

Abstract

Temporal  evolution  of  transient  absorption  spectra  for  pre-solvated  electron

generated by biphotonic (200 nm) ionization of liquid H2O and D2O has been studied on

femto- and pico- second time scales. These spectra were obtained in the intervals of 50
nm  between  0.5  and  1.7  µm.  Two  distinctive  regimes  of  the  spectral  evolution  were

observed. In both of these regimes, the spectral profile changes considerably with delay

time. The "continuous blue shift" and "temperature jump" models are not supported by
our  data.  For  t<1ps,  two  new  features  (the  1.15  µm  band  and  1.4  µm  shoulder)  were

observed for the electron in the spectral region where O-H overtones appear in the spectra

of light water. These two features were not observed for the electron in D2O. Vibronic

coupling to the modes of water molecules lining the solvation cavity is a possible origin

of  these  features.  On  the  sub-picosecond  time  scale,  the  absorption  band  of  solvated

electron progressively shifts to the blue. At later delay times (t> 1ps), the position of the

band maximum is "locked", but the spectral profile continues to change by narrowing on

the red side and broadening on the blue side; the oscillator strength is constant within

10%. The time constant of this narrowing is ca. 0.56 ps for H2O and 0.64 ps for D2O,

respectively.  Vibrational  relaxation  and  time-dependent  decrease  in  the  size  and

1.

anisotropy  of  the  solvation  cavity  are  suggested  as  possible  causes  for  the  observed

spectral transformations in both of these regimes.

The geminate recombination kinetics for hydrated electrons generated by absorption of

two 200 nm quanta (12.4 eV total energy) in light and heavy water are almost identical. The

kinetic  analysis  suggests  that  the  average  separation  between  the  electron  and  its  geminate

partners (ca. 2.4 nm for light water) in D2O is 13% narrower than in H2O, which suggests that

autoionization  of  water  competes  with  direct  ionization  even  at  this  high  photoexcitation

energy.

___________________________________________________________________________________

1 Work performed under the auspices of the Office of Science, Division of Chemical

Science, US-DOE under contract number W-31-109-ENG-38.

*  To  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed:  Tel  630-252-8089,  FAX  630-

2524993, e-mail: rob_crowell@anl.gov.

2.

1. Introduction.

Although  ultrafast  dynamics  of  the  excess  electron  in  liquid  water  have  been

extensively studied over the last two decades, many questions concerning the mechanism

of  thermalization,  localization,  and  solvation  of  this  electron  still  remain.  []  Using

femtosecond  pump-probe  transient  absorbance  (TA)  laser  spectroscopy,  short-lived

precursors  of  the  thermalized,  hydrated  electrons  (which  in  the  following  will  be

collectively called "pre-solvated" electrons) have been observed on sub-picosecond time

scale. [] Common means of generating these pre-solvated electrons include multiphoton

ionization  of  neat  water  [],  photoionization  of  solutes  and  charge-transfer-to-solvent

(CTTS) photoexcitation of aqueous anions, [] and photoexcitation of hydrated electrons.

[]  The  initial  studies  []  were  limited  to  the  observation  of  the  TA  signal  for  a  few

strategically  chosen  probe  wavelengths  in  the  visible  and  near-IR.  Recently,  the

observation range has been expanded into the UV (out to 200 nm) [] and mid-IR (out to 3
µm). [] The latter studies by Laubereau and co-workers seem to suggest the existence of
− .  One  of  these  species  has  a

two IR-absorbing precursors of the hydrated electron,  eaq

broad absorption band centered at 1.6 µm (suggesting a localized state in a shallow trap

[]),  while  another  species  has  a  featureless  spectrum  that  resembles  that  of  a  free

(extended state) conduction band electron in semiconductor solids [] (it also looks similar

to the long-lived, IR-absorbing electron in low-temperature ice []). While the existence of

the short-lived IR-absorbing species has been hinted at by the pioneering study of Migus

et al., [] subsequent work on electron solvation in photoionization of water favored the

so-called "continuous shift" model in which the existence of these IR-absorbing species
)

("wet" electrons) is not strictly required. In the latter model, the absorption profile  S E t,

(

of  the  pre-solvated  electron  is  postulated  to  shift  to  the  blue  as  a  whole  during  the

solvation, without changing its shape.

In  a  more  recent  variant  of  this  model  suggested  by  Keiding  and  coworkers []

(which  is  referred  to  in  the  following  as  the  "temperature  jump"  model),  the

thermalization is regarded as "cooling" of water around the solvation cavity in which the

absorption  spectrum  of  the  electron  at  any  time  during  the  thermalization  process  is

identical to the spectrum of hydrated electron in the state of equilibrium with the solvent

3.

at  some  higher  temperature.  In  this  model,  the  electron  thermalization  is  viewed  as  a

succession of quasi-equilibrium states that are fully characterized by the time evolution of

the local temperature. [] This model, like the "continuous shift" model considered above

is purely phenomenological: no explanation is given on the theoretical grounds, as to why

such a picture of the electron solvation might be correct. The recent theoretical study of

Borgis and coworkers, [] for example, strongly suggests that the temperature dependence
−   spectrum  is  determined  primarily  by  a  bulk  property  of  water:  namely,  its

of  the  eaq

density; increasing the temperature is just a way of changing this density. Such a property

is not local, as tacitly assumed in the "temperature jump" model. Since the shape of the
−  weakly depends on the water temperature (see Appendix A in

absorption spectrum of  eaq

the  Supplement),  whereas  the  position  of  the  absorption  maximum  is  strongly

temperature  dependent,  from  the  standpoint  of  data  analysis,  the  "temperature  jump"

model of Keiding and coworkers [] is nearly identical to the "continuous shift" model.

Despite their current popularity, the "continuous shift" and "temperature jump" models of

electron solvation are inadequately supported:

First, in many ultrafast studies, the TA spectra were too sparsely sampled: the TA

kinetics  were  obtained  for  just  4-to-10  wavelengths  of  the  probe  light.  This  sparse

sampling makes it impossible to verify the central tenet of the "continuous shift" model,

viz. the constancy of the spectral profile during the thermalization process. Typically, []

this constancy was postulated rather than observed: For a given delay time t of the probe

pulse,  the  (sparse)  TA  spectrum  was  fit  by  a  constant-profile  template  using  the  least

squares optimization. As a result, the experimental spectrum is characterized by a single
( ),  the  photon  energy  corresponding  to  the  absorption  maximum.
t

parameter,  E

max

Naturally, this procedure tells little about the robustness of the template used to fit the

experimental  spectrum  since  any  deviation  from  the  prescribed  shape  is  regarded  as

statistical “noise”. Worse, the exact location of the maximum strongly depends on the

template used to fit the data, inasmuch as the electron spectra are flat at the top, broad,
( ) is determined, implicitly or explicitly, by the extrapolation
t

and featureless, so that  E

max

of the data in the spectral wings towards the center, where the TA signal is maximum. If

the profile of the sparsely-sampled TA spectra were time-dependent (as suggested by our

results), this approach would yield grossly incorrect results.

4.

Second, the TA studies in which the spectral sampling was sufficiently dense (at

least 10-15 wavelengths of the probe light across the spectrum) did not fully support the

"continuous shift" model. [] E.g., the benchmark studies by Gauduel and coworkers []

and  Jay-Gerin  and  coworkers  []  on  electron  dynamics  in  H2O  and  D2O, respectively,

indicated  that  the  “continuous  shift”  alone  cannot  account  for  the  observed  spectral

evolution. In the latter study, an additional long-lived (> 2 ps) species with a spectral
band centered at 1.1-1.3 µm was postulated to explain the evolution of the TA spectrum
for  λ>0.9 µm. Subsequent pump-probe studies failed to verify the existence of such a

long-lived species. Part of the problem was that the spectral evolution of spectrum in the

near-IR was obtained using TA kinetics that exhibited poor signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio

(3:1 to 10:1). The authors [] conceded that more TA studies with dense sampling of the

TA  kinetics  across  a  wider  spectral  region  and  better-quality  kinetic  data  would  be

needed to characterize the spectral evolution and establish the validity of the “continuous

shift” model. The present study implements such a program.

Third,  it  is  now  understood  that  the  electrons  generated  in  different

photoprocesses  have  somewhat  different  thermalization  []  and  recombination  []

dynamics. Specifically, in photoionization of neat water, different excitation mechanisms

operate for photons of different energy. [] Two- or three-photon excitation at the lower

photon energy (so that the total excitation energy < 9 eV) produces the electrons that are,

on average, just 0.9-1 nm away from their parent hole, whereas at higher total photon

energy (> 11 eV), the photoelectrons are at least 2-3 nm away. It is believed that for high-

energy photoexcitation, the electrons are ejected directly into the conduction band of the

solvent; [] at lower energy, the photoionization involves concerted proton and electron

transfers, perhaps to pre-existing traps. [] In the intermediate regime, autoionization of

water  is  thought  to  compete  with  these  two  photoprocesses.  []  The  studies  with  the

densest spectral sampling were carried out in these low-energy and intermediate regimes.

[] Due to the short separation distances between the geminate partners, some electrons

decayed  during  the  fist  few  picoseconds  when  their  thermalization  and  solvation  had

occurred. This decay had to be taken into account, by extrapolation of the picosecond

dynamics to short delay times. Such a procedure implies that the pre-solvated electron

follows the same recombination dynamics as fully thermalized, hydrated electron, which

5.

may not be correct. E.g., recent simulations of spectral evolution for electrons generated

in the iodide CTTS (carried out using the “continuous shift” model) by Bradforth and co-

workers suggested significantly faster decay rate for the short-lived pre-solvated species.

[]

In the present study, femto- and pico- second TA kinetics were obtained for the

electron generated in high-energy ionization photoprocess (12.4 eV total energy); in this

regime,  the  geminate  recombination  on  the  picosecond  time  scale  is  unimportant

(sections 3.1 and 4.1). Short 200 nm (300 fs fwhm) laser pulses were used to photoionize

room temperature H2O and D2O via biphotonic excitation. A set of TA kinetics obtained

with time resolution of 50 fs was sampled out to 5-30 ps in steps of 50 nm from 0.5 to 1.4
µm  (to  1.7  µm  for  D2O).  Throughout  this  entire  spectral  range,  the  S/N  ratio  for  the

individual kinetics was better than 50:1.

Our results suggest that the "continuous shift" model does not fully account for

the spectral evolution occurring during the electron solvation/thermalization in light and

heavy  water.  Neither  the  shape  of  the  TA  spectra  is  constant,  nor  the  thermalization

dynamics  can  be  reduced  to  the  shift  of  the  band  maximum.  For  t>1  ps,  the  electron

spectrum  exhibits  progressive  line  narrowing  in  the  red  (concomitant  with  the  line

broadening in the blue). This change continues well after the spectral shift is completed;

it probably results from the vibrational relaxation of water molecules around the “hot”

ground-state electron. Furthermore, for electron in H2O, new features were observed in

the  near-IR  on  sub-picosecond  time  scale.  One  of  these  features  might  have  been
observed previously by Laenen et al. []  in  H2O and D2O  (a  band  centered  at  1.6 µm),
another, with a band centered at 1.15 µm, might be the tentative IR-absorbing species

predicted by Jay-Gerin and coworkers [].  No  evidence  of  these  two  features  has  been

found  in  heavy  water,  in  a  striking  contradiction  to  the  results  of  Laenen  et  al.  [].  It

appears that these absorption bands do not originate from a purely electronic transition.

Rather, these bands seem to involve vibrations of the water molecules.

We  forewarn  the  reader  that  no  specific  model  that  accounts  for  these

observations is given in this paper. Many models of electron solvation and relaxation, at

all levels of theory, have been suggested. Given the limited success that these theories

met in explanation of experimental observations, offering yet another such model seems

6.

injudicious.  Rather,  we  focus  on  the  spectral  features  themselves  and  what  can  be

glimpsed from these features without the benefit of theoretical insight. Such an insight is

certainly needed, but it is beyond the scope of this study.

2. Experimental.

Materials. Deionized water with conductivity < 2 nS/cm was used in all experiments with

H2O. N2-saturated 1 L sample was circulated using a gear pump trough a jet nozzle. A

500 mL sample of heavy water (99 atom %, Aldrich) was used in all experiments with

D2O. No change in the kinetics was observed after continuous photolysis of this sample.

The details of the flow system are given elsewhere. []

Ultrafast  laser  spectroscopy.  The  pico-  and  femto-  second  TA  measurements  were

carried out using a 1 kHz Ti:sapphire setup details of which are given in refs. []. This

setup provided 60 fs FWHM, 3 mJ light pulses centered at 800 nm. One part of the beam

was used to generate probe pulses while the other part was used to generate the 200 nm
(fourth harmonic) pump pulses. Up to 20 µJ of the 200 nm light was produced this way

(300-350 fs FWHM pulse). The pump and probe beams were perpendicularly polarized

and overlapped at the surface of a 90 µm thick high-speed water jet at 5

. No change of

o

the TA kinetics with the polarization of the probe light was observed.

A  white  light  supercontinuum  was  generated  by  focussing  the  800  nm

fundamental on a 1 mm thick sapphire disk; the probe light was selected using a set of 10

nm FWHM interference filters (Corion). For two wavelengths, 1.6 and 1.7 µm (used in

the  studies  of  electron  in  D2O),  the  intensity  of  the  probe  light  was  weak  and  30  nm

FWHM  bandpass  filters  were  used  instead  (which  resulted  in  a  shorter  probe  pulse).

Appropriate cutoff glass filters were used to block stray 200, 400, and 800 nm light. For

measurements in the near-IR, 0o dielectric mirrors for 800 nm light were inserted in the

path of the probe beam to reduce the leakage of the fundamental. Fast Si photodiodes

(FND100Q from EG&G) biased at -90 V were used for detection of the  λ<1.3 µm light,

fast  Ge  photodiodes  (GMP566  from  GPD  Optoelectronics  Corp.)  biased  at  -9  V  were

used  for  detection  of  λ>1.2  µm.  Due  to  the  considerable  dark  current  for  the  Ge

7.

photodiodes,  the  load  resistance  was  relatively  low,  ca.  0.2  MΩ   vs.  6  MΩ   for  Si

photodiode,  which  lead  to  lower  sensitivity.  The  vertical  bars  in  the  figures  represent

95% confidence limits for each data point. The pump power, before and after the sample,

was monitored using a thermopile power meter (Ophir Optronics model 2A-SH).

To  study  geminate  recombination  of  hydrated  electrons,  150-200  delay  time

points acquired on a quasi-logarithmic grid were used to obtain the decay kinetics of the

electron out to 600 ps. To study the thermalization dynamics of the electron, the delay

time was increased in steps of 50 fs to 5-7 ps and steps of 300 fs to 25 ps. The kinetic
origin  (i.e.,  zero  delay  time  t)  and  the  1 e  width  τ

p   of  the  200  nm  excitation  pulse

convoluted with the probe pulse were determined by following the TA signal from a 1.4
µm thick amorphous Si:H alloy film on suprasil substrate. This sample was mounted on a

translation  stage  and  positioned  into  the  plane  of  the  jet  surface.  The  typical

photoresponse of this semiconductor sample following 200 nm photoexcitation are shown

in Fig. 1S (hereafter, the index "S" indicates that the material is placed in the Supporting

Information available electronically from the journal). The instantaneous increase in the

TA signal near the kinetic origin is from the generation of free electron carriers in the

Si:H  sample,  the  slower  decay  kinetics  are  due  to  the  thermalization,  trapping,  and

recombination of these photocarriers. Deconvolution of these TA signals (represented as

a  Gaussian  pulse  convoluted  with  biexponential  decay  to  a  plateau)  gives  the  "pulse
width"  τ

p  (characteristic of the response function of the setup). Due to the considerable

chirp in the 200 nm pump pulse (introduced by harmonic-generating BBO crystals and
focussing optics),  τ

p  was 190-290 fs, depending on the optimization of the compressor

and  the  probe  wavelength.  The  latter  dependence  is  due  to  the  wavelength-dependent

chirp  in  the  white  light  continuum  and  group  velocity  mismatch  (GVM)  in  the  water

sample (traceable to the difference in the speed of light for the pump and probe pulses).
The shortest  τ

p  were obtained near the 800 nm fundamental, the longest - in the near IR.

This variation and the resulting uncertainty in the time origin made it difficult to obtain
good-quality electron spectra for t<500 fs. For  λ<700 nm, the TA traces exhibit a sharp

"spike" at the time origin (see Fig. 2(a) in section 3.2) whose time profile follows the

response  function  of  the  detection  system.  This  TA  signal  in  the  visible  has  been

8.

observed by other workers [] and originates from nonlinear absorbance of the excitation

and probe light in the sample. It can be used to juxtapose the corresponding kinetics in

time without using the reference Si:H sample. Since the photoexcitation wavelength of

200 nm is right at the onset of one-photon water ionization (the quantum yield of this
ionization is ca. 1.6x10-2 at 193 nm [,]), this artifact may be present even when red and

near-IR light is used to probe the electron dynamics (section 3.3).

The kinetic traces given below were obtained using a 1-5 µJ pump pulse focussed,

using a thin MgF2 lens, to a round spot of 300 µm FWHM; the probe beam was typically

50-60 µm  FWHM.  Radial  profiles  of  these  beams  at  the  jet  surface  were  obtained  by

scanning of a 10 µm pinhole across the beam. The typical TA signal ( ∆ODλ, where λ is

the wavelength of the probe light in nanometers) at the maximum was 10-to-60 mOD.
( ) obtained at the delay time t=10 ps plotted as a
Fig. 2S(a) shows the TA signal  ∆OD t

800

function of 200 nm power, for a tightly focussed UV beam (double logarithmic plot). At

this delay time, the thermalization is complete and the TA signal is from the hydrated
− . The initial slope of this plot (solid line in Fig. 2S(a)) is close to 1.84±0.07,

electron,  eaq

indicating biphotonic ionization of water by the 200 nm light. At high power, this slope

decreases to 1-1.5 due to nonuniform absorbance of the 200 nm light by the sample. []

When the photoinduced TA signal reaches 0.5-1, the sub-nanosecond kinetics plotted on

the logarithmic time scale show the characteristic bend down typical of the bimolecular

cross  recombination  in  the  sample  bulk  (compare traces  (i)  and  (ii)  in  Fig. 2S(b)).  []

These  TA  kinetics  are  power-dependent  and  their  time  profiles  are  different  from  the

profile of geminate recombination kinetics obtained in the low-power regime. In the latter

regime, normalized TA kinetics are independent of the 200 nm light power (Figs. 1 and

2S). Only the latter type kinetics are considered in the rest of this paper.

Reconstruction of the electron spectrum. Time-dependent TA spectra  S

tλ,(

) given below

were  obtained  from  the  TA  kinetics  using  the  following  approach:  []  The  kinetics
(obtained independently for each probe wavelength λ) were normalized by the average of
the TA signal at t=5-10 ps. At this delay time, the  ∆OD tλ( ) kinetics reach a plateau: the

thermalization phase is complete yet the electron decay due to geminate recombination is

9.

still negligible (see section 3.1). These normalized kinetics were then weighted by the
spectrum  S λ( ) of the thermalized (hydrated electron) to obtain time-dependent spectrum
tλ,(

) of the pre-solvated electron:

S

(

S

λ
,

t

) = ( )
λ
S

 

∆

( )
OD t
λ

∆

(
OD t
λ

= −

5 10

 

)

ps

(1)

In  the  near-IR,  where  eaq

−   absorbs  poorly,  the  use  of  this  procedure  requires  more

comment (see also Appendix A and Figs. 3S to 6S in the Supplement).

First, since the TA signal from the hydrated electron at t=5-10 ps becomes very

small relative to the "spike" from the pre-solvated electron (Figs.  2,  3,  and  4),  even  a
small error of a few per cent in the scaling factor  S λ( ) in eq. (1) has a large effect on the
) signal at short delay time. Thus, a high-quality near-IR spectrum of
−  in light and heavy water was needed. To this end, a separate flash photolysis study
eaq

extrapolated  S

tλ,(

was carried out to obtain a spectrum of  eaq

−  in H2O ( λ=0.4-1.4 µm) and D2O ( λ=0.4-1.7

µm)  (Appendix A). Second, one should be aware that the weak, long-lived TA signal
−  since the solvent itself weakly absorbs in

observed at t>5 ps might not be related to  eaq

the  near-IR  (where  overtones  of  the  O-H  stretch  appear).  Specifically,  a  long-lived

thermal signal from laser-heated water could change the transmittance of the probe light.

To address such a possibility, 1 M HClO4 was added to H2O (hyrdronium ion scavenges
−  with rate constant of 2.3x1010 M-1 s-1). [] This scavenging removed most of the TA
eaq

signal in the first 300 ps. By comparing the long-term kinetic traces obtained at different

wavelengths, we were able to demonstrate that at least 90-95% of the TA signal at 1.1-1.3
−   (Fig 7S). However, for  λ>1.3 µm, the long-lived TA signal was too
µm was from  eaq

weak  to  obtain  good-quality  decay  kinetics  on  sub-nanosecond  time  scale.  Thus,  we

cannot presently confirm that all of the long-lived TA signal in the near-IR is due to the
− . This uncertainty introduces ambiguity in the reconstruction of the

absorbance from  eaq

near-IR spectra using eq. (1). We will return to this point in section 3.3.

Third, it is nearly impossible to retain the same characteristics of the probe light

(such as its pulse width, chirp, and GVM) across the entire spectral region of interest. For

10.

this reason, obtaining reliable TA spectra  S

tλ,(

) using eq. (1) for delay times t<500 fs is

impossible without (i) making specific assumptions about these pulse characteristics and

(ii) using ad hoc kinetic schemes for spectrum modeling (as done, for example, in refs.

[]).  Since  these  kinetic  schemes  are  not  unique,  the  robustness  of  such  an  analysis  is

impossible  to  gauge.  Our  philosophy  was  to  analyze  the  data  with  as  few  ad  hoc

assumptions as possible, and for this reason we focus on the evolution of the TA spectra

between 0.5 and 3 ps after the photoionization.

3. Results.

3.1. Long-term kinetics (t>5 ps).

Typical geminate recombination kinetics of  eaq

−  on sub-nanosecond time scale (for

λ=0.8 µm) are shown in Fig. 1. Very similar kinetics for t>5 ps were observed at other
−  and OH radical absorb light
probe wavelengths, including λ=266 nm at which both  eaq

(the  266  nm  light  was  obtained  by  third  harmonic  generation).  []  Fig.  1  shows  the
−   in  H2O and D2O for

comparison between the normalized recombination kinetics of  eaq

t<0.6 ns; these two traces are identical within the confidence limits of our measurement.

Using  the  IRT  model  of  Pimblott  and  coworkers  commonly  used  to  simulate  the
−  for a trial distribution  4 2πr P r( ) of

dynamics of water spurs, [] the decay kinetics of  eaq

the  initial  thermalization  distances  of  the  electron  can  be  obtained.  Typically,  the  r2-
)

22σ , has been used for such simulations. [] Since

Gaussian distribution,  P r

( ) ∝

exp

−(

r

2

G

the  diffusion  coefficients  and  recombination  constants  for  light  and  heavy  water  are

different (see Table 1S in the Supplement), different recombination kinetics are expected
to  be  observed  in  H2O  and  D2O  for  the  same  distribution  P r( ). Conversely, identical
recombination kinetics imply different initial distributions  P r( ). Fitting the kinetics by

the IRT model equations (see ref. [] and caption to Fig. 1 for the parameters and details of
the simulation) yields  σ

G =2.1 nm for D2O: the distribution in

G =2.4 nm for H2O and  σ

the heavy water is narrower than in the light water. This result is discussed in section

4.1.  Due  to  the  large  width  of  the  initial  distribution,  the  electron  decay  by  geminate

11.

recombination is negligible within the first 10 ps. Thus, the spectral evolution observed

within the first 3 ps is driven by the solvation dynamics of the electron alone.

3.2. Short-term kinetics (t<5 ps).

Typical  TA  kinetics  observed  for  pre-solvated  electron  following  two  200  nm

photon  ionization  of  light  water  are  shown  in  Figs.  2,  3,  and  4.  The  complete  set  of

digitized  kinetic  traces  is  given  in  the  Supporting  Information  (see  Appendix  B  for

instructions). Most of the trends observed in these kinetic traces have already been seen
by others. For λ>0.8 µm, the TA signal rapidly increases within the duration of the 200

nm pulse and then slowly decreases to a plateau (Figs. 2(b), 3(b), and 4(a)). The ratio of

the  maximum  TA  signal  to  the  signal  attained  at  t=5 ps increases with the increasing
probe wavelength  λ (e.g., Fig. 4). For D2O, this ratio increases from ca. 5:1 at 1.1 µm to
ca. 10:1 at 1.25 µm to ca. 30:1 at 1.4 µm to ca. 50:1 at 1.6 µm. As the plateau absorbance
becomes  relatively  smaller  with  the  increasing  λ,  the  decay  kinetics  become
progressively  faster  (e.g.,  compare  the  0.85  and  1.5  µm  traces  in  Figs.  3(a)  and  4(a),
respectively). In the visible ( λ=0.5-0.75 µm), the increase in the TA signal is relatively

slow (taking the first 2 ps after the ionization, Figs. 2(a) and 3(a)) and the changes in the

kinetic profiles with the wavelength are less pronounced than in the near-IR.

Qualitatively, these trends can be explained by a blue shift of the absorption band

of the excess electron in the course of its solvation. [] Initially, the electron localizes in a

large cavity and absorbs in the near-IR. At later delay times, the cavity contracts and the
−  is a

band shifts to the visible so that the TA signal in the near-IR rapidly decays (since  eaq

weak absorber in this region) and the TA signal in the visible increases (since  eaq

−  absorbs

strongly in the red). The ratio of the maximum TA signal to the plateau value increases
−   rapidly  decreases  in  the  same
with  the  wavelength  λ  because  the  absorptivity  of  eaq

direction. The change in the TA signal is faster where a small change in the wavelength

results in the large change in the TA signal, as happens in the near-IR (section 3.3). In

this general outline of the spectral evolution, our study fully concurs with the previous

results. However, these features per se do not imply that the profile of the TA spectrum

remains constant during the spectral shift.

12.

3.3. Spectral evolution.

To characterize the spectral evolution of photoelectron during its solvation, the

method  outlined  in  section  2  and  Appendix  A  has  been  used.  For  reasons  explained

tλ,(

The spectra  S

therein, the use of this method is justified only for relatively long delay times, t>0.5 ps.
) obtained using eq. (1) were linearly interpolated in the time domain
= + ∆ ,  to  obtain  the  average
t
)  window.  Figs.  5(a)  and  6(a)  show  several  such

and  then  integrated  between  the  delay  times  t1  and  t

spectrum  for  the  corresponding  t

t
1

2

2,(
t1

spectra for electron in light and heavy water, respectively, for delay times  t1 between 0.5
and  1.2  ps  ( ∆t =100  fs). Figs.  5(b)  and  6(b)  show  the  spectral  evolution  at  later  delay
times,  from  1.3  to  2.7  ps  ( ∆t =200  fs).  For  comparison,  the  spectrum  of  a  fully

thermalized, solvated electron in H2O and D2O is indicated by a bold line. For at t> 1ps,

the spectral evolution of the electron in light water (Fig. 5(b)) is very similar to that in

heavy water (Fig. 6(b)). By contrast, on the sub-picosecond time scale, near-IR spectra

for electron in H2O (Fig. 5(a)) look quite different from those in D2O  (Fig. 6(a)).  See

also Fig. 8S where the data of Figs. 5(a) and 6(a) are plotted vs. the photon energy.

On the short time scale (0.5-1.2 ps), the absorption band of the excess electron

rapidly shifts to the blue. As the band shifts, the spectrum narrows on both sides of the

maximum (Fig. 8S). At t=1-1.2 ps, the position  Emax  of the absorption maximum almost

reaches its equilibrium value. For t>1.2 ps, the band maximum is "locked", however, the

spectral evolution continues: on the red side, the absorption line becomes narrower and

on the blue side, it becomes broader (Figs. 5(b) and 6(b)). Thus, there are two distinctive

regimes in the spectral evolution of the electron: (i) the "fast (sub-picosecond) regime", in

which  the  spectral  features  are  dominated  by  the  band  shift  to  the  blue  and  overall

spectral narrowing and (ii) the "slow (> 1 ps) regime", in which the spectral evolution is

dominated  by  small-scale  spectral  transformations  occurring  after  Emax   reaches  its

equilibrium value.

To better characterize the latter regime, the experimental TA spectra were fit to

the same Lorentzian-Gaussian curves used to simulate the spectrum of hydrated electron:

13.

(
S E

) =

[
−(
E E

+

1

)

W
L

max

(

−
1

)

ν

]

for E E

 

>

 

,

max

(
S E

) =

exp

(

[
−(
E E
 

−

)

max

W
G

)

2

]

for E E

 

<

 

max

(2)

(3)

where  E  is the photon energy (the spectrum  S E(

) is normalized at the band maximum at

E E=

max ),  v=2 is the exponent, and  WL  and  WG  are the Lorentzian and Gaussian widths,
)∆  window has been fit to
t

(
) averaged over the  t

respectively. Each spectrum  S E t,

(

1, +
t

1

eqs. (2) and (3) using the least squares optimization (with a floating scaling factor), and

the optimum parameters  Emax ,  WL , and  WG  were plotted vs. the delay time  t1 ( ∆t =30 fs

slices). The resulting plots are shown in Fig. 7.

It is obvious from these plots that the increase in the band energy  Emax  is much

faster  than  the  decrease  in  the  Gaussian  width  WG   (compare  Figs.  7(a)  and  7(b)).  For

t>0.5 ps, both of these parameters exponentially approach their respective equilibrium

values  Emax

∞ and  WG

∞. For  Emax , the corresponding first order rate constant is ca. 3.1 ps-1

(which  compares  well  with  other  estimates  []).  For  the  Gaussian  width  WG ,  the  time

constants are 1.62±0.4 ps-1 for H2O and 1.45±0.2 ps-1 for D2O. It is this large difference in

the corresponding time constants that accounts for the occurrence of the "slow regime"

discussed  above:  for t>1-1.5  ps,  Emax   is  already  very  close  to  Emax

∞ ,  whereas  WG   still

changes, being 50-100 meV greater than  WG

∞. Based on this observation, one can globally

fit the time evolution for the entire red wing of the electron spectrum  S E t,

(

) for t> 1 ps

using eq. (3) with  E

( ) = ∞  and
t
E

max

max

( ) =
∞
W t W
G

G

(

+

max
W
G

−

∞
W
G

)

−(

t

exp

)

τ
G

(4)

where  WG

max is the Gaussian width extrapolated to  t = 0 and τ

G  is the time constant of the

spectral narrowing. In Figs. 8 and 9 least-squares fits to the  S E t,

(

) kinetics for electron in

14.

light and heavy water, respectively, are shown for traces obtained between 0.85 and 1.3

µm  (see  also  Figs.  9S  and  10S).  As  seen  from  these  plots,  despite  having  only  two

adjustable  parameters,  WG

max  and  τ

G ,  eqs.  (3)  and  (4)  give  surprisingly  good

approximation  to  these  traces.  The  following  estimates  were  obtained  for  these  two

parameters (95% confidence limits):  WG

∞=1.18±0.04 eV and  τ

G =0.56±0.01ps (for H2O)

and  WG

∞=1.2±0.03  eV  and  τ

G =0.64±0.01  ps  (for  D2O).  Thus,  in  agreement  with  the

analysis given in Fig. 7(b), the spectral narrowing in D2O is slower than in H2O, by ca.

15±5%.

Fig. 7(c) shows the evolution of the Lorentzian width  WL  of the absorption line as

a function of the delay time  t1. After the first 1 ps, this width slowly increases from 0.4 to

0.5 eV, in approximately the same fashion for light and heavy water. When the integral

under the spectrum profile is plotted vs. the delay time (Fig. 7(d)), it is almost constant

with  time  (±10%),  suggesting  that  in  the  "slow  regime",  the  oscillator  strength  of  the

transition does not change with time: the narrowing on the red side is compensated by the

broadening on the blue side. Though, it is difficult to establish this constancy accurately

because the TA spectrum on the blue side is followed to λ=0.4 µm only.

We turn to the evolution of the spectra on the short time scale (0.5-1.2 ps).  A

curious  feature  of  sub-picosecond  TA  spectra  shown  in  Figs.  5(a)  and  6(a)  is  an

"isosbestic  point"  at  0.85  µm  observed  both  in  light  and  heavy  water.  []  On  closer

examination, this feature does not constitute a true isosbestic point since the TA spectra

−
obtained  at  different  delay  times  do  not  pass  through  any  particular  point  of  the  eaq

spectrum  within  the  confidence  limits  of  our  measurement.  Some  authors []  view  this

feature  as  evidence  for  the  existence  of  two  or  more  types  of  pre-solvated  electron

coexisting  at  short  delay  time;  the  observed  spectral  dynamics  is  treated  in  terms  of

15.

separate  electron  states  with  time-dependent  spectra.  []  Such  elaborate  schemes  are

impossible to falsify; little in our data suggests that these many-state models might be

correct:

The largest impetus for the two-state model of the electron solvation was given by

the pioneering studies of Gauduel and coworkers [] who observed a broad, short-lived

component at 0.9-1.3 µm for the electron in H2O that decayed in the first picosecond after

the  multi-  310  nm  photon  ionization.  The  overlap  between  this  short-lived  spectral

component  with  the  spectrum  of  thermalized  electron  was  thought  to  account  for  the

"isosbestic point". Since the pump pulse was quite wide (> 500 fs fwhm), [] this near-IR

feature was observed well within the duration of the excitation pulse. Subsequent studies

that used shorter pump pulses [] failed to reproduce this near-IR feature. For the electron

in D2O, the progression of the TA spectra in Fig. 6(a) has the same general appearance as

that observed by Pépin et al. following multi- 600 nm photon ionization of heavy water

[]. Their spectra, in turn, are qualitatively similar to the recent data of Ulterreiner and co-

workers [] and Bradforth and coworkers []  for  the  electron  in  H2O. Either the near-IR

feature  observed  by  Gauduel  and  co-workers  []  is  very  short-lived  (and,  therefore,

requires a relatively long excitation pulse to be observed against the background from a

more stable solvated-electron state) or it is caused by nonlinear absorption (section 2).

The TA spectra obtained in this study within the duration of the excitation pulse
) for

also exhibit a diffuse absorption band in the near IR. In Fig. 11S, the spectra  S E t,

(

the electron in D2O shown for the 0-250 fs and 250-500 fs time windows. The vis data

were excluded from the plot due to the strong contribution from nonlinear absorbance

that interferes with the measurement. While using the method of eq. (1) at these short

delay times is not justified, the resulting spectra closely resemble the ones reported by

Migus et al. [] and Gauduel []. In Fig. 13S, a near-IR spectrum obtained in the point-to-

16.

point fashion within the last 10% of the duration of the 200 nm photoexcitation pulse is

shown for the electron in D2O (no normalization used). Once more, this near-IR spectrum

is flat across the entire band; such a spectrum would be compatible with the existence of

a short-lived species that strongly absorbs at  λ> 0.9 µm. The transformation of this TA

spectrum to that shown in Fig. 6(a) is very rapid, and we conclude that the coincidence of

the excitation and probe pulses in time is needed to observe this diffuse absorption band.

Our  data  are  insufficient  to  make  the  choice  between  the  two  possibilities  discussed

above  (nonlinear  absorbance  vs.  extremely  short-lived  species),  and  we  leave  the

question open.

Recently, Laenen et al. [] obtained the TA spectra in near- and mid-IR after bi-

266 nm photonic ionization of liquid H2O and D2O (see Fig. 2 and 4 therein). In H2O, a

broad  absorption  band  from  a  short-lived  intermediate  (which  the  authors  identify  as

"wet" electron) with the lifetime of 0.54 ps was observed at 1.5-1.7 µm. In D2O, this band

is red-shifted to 2 µm (still, the absorbance at 1.2 µm is ca 30% of the maximum). It is

not clear from the published data how this feature evolves for t > 0.5 ps. Laenen et al. []

give  an  estimate  of  3x104  and  5x104  M-1  cm-1  for  the  molar  absorptivity  of  the  "wet"

electron at 1.2 and 1.6 µm, respectively (in D2O). Then, for these two probe wavelengths,

a "wet" electron with a lifetime of 0.5-0.6 ps would yield a TA signal at t=0.5 ps which

comprises 30-80% of the absorption signal from a fully hydrated electron (with the molar

absorptivity of 2x104 M-1 cm-1 at the band maximum). No such TA signal was observed in

our study.

Instead,  two  features  indicated  by  arrows  in  Fig.  5(a)  were  observed  for  the

electron in light water: the 1.15 µm peak and the shoulder at 1.3-1.4 µm. Both of these

features fully decay within the first picosecond after the photoionization, and their decay

kinetics appear to be similar. Subtracting the 1.15 µm trace from the half-sum of the 1.1

17.

and 1.2 µm traces, one obtains a kinetic profile that decays with a time constant of 0.2-

0.3 ps, which is roughly the same time scale as that for the shift of the band maximum.

The  shoulder  observed  for  λ>1.3  µm  might  be  the  extension  the  1.4-1.8  µm  feature

(from the putative "wet" electron) observed by Laenen et al. [] It also looks similar to the

1.3  µm  feature  observed  by  Migus  et  al.  []  (0.24  ps  life  time  was  estimated  for  this

feature therein).

We believe that these two features are not artifacts of the spectral reconstruction

procedure described in section 2 (which is also suggested by a reasonable agreement with

the previous studies); however, such a possibility cannot be excluded. Since both of these

features are observed in the region were liquid H2O has vibration overtones, the concern

is that the long-lived "absorbance" signal used for normalization of the TA kinetics is

from  the  heat  induced  by  the  absorption  of  UV  light.  The  control  experiments

demonstrated  that  eaq

−   scavenging  by  1  M  acid  removes  >  90-95%  of  the  1.0-1.3  µm

signal, i.e., at most 5-10% of this long-lived TA signal could be from the thermal effect.

This would be insufficient to account for the 1.15 µm feature which comprises ca. 20% of

the TA signal at this wavelength. For the  λ> 1.3 µm shoulder, such a test was difficult to

conduct and we cannot discount the thermal effect entirely. It is, however, unlikely that

the dynamics of such an effect would closely follow the dynamics of the 1.15 µm feature.

4. Discussion.

4.1. Long-term kinetics and the isotope effect.

Fitting  the  geminate  recombination  kinetics  of  eaq

−   generated  by  two  200  nm

photon excitation of liquid water (section 3.1) using the IRT model [] suggests a narrower
initial electron distribution  P r( ) in heavy water:  σ

G =2.1 nm for D2O vs.σ

G =2.4 nm for

H2O. While the quality of the kinetic data is (relatively) poor and it is impossible to put

18.

confidence limits on these estimates, it is clear from Fig.  1  that  only  IRT  curves  with

(

σ
G

D O
2

) <

(

σ
G

H O
2

) can account for the data.

This result is surprising since under our photoexcitation conditions (12.4 eV total

excitation energy), direct ionization of the solvent (i.e., photostimulated ejection of the

electron directly into the conduction band of liquid water) is thought to prevail. [] Due to

the  smaller  vibration  energy  of  accepting  O-D  modes  and,  therefore,  less  efficient

inelastic scattering of the extended-state (quasifree) electron, it has been expected that the

thermalization of the conduction band electron in D2O is less efficient and the average

thermalization path is longer than in H2O. []

(

=

H D
/

Ω

effect  α

Recently,  Sander  et  al.  []  have  analyzed  the  existing  data  on  the  H/D  isotope
1 for the probability  Ω

r of electron recombination at
t = ∞   as  a  function  of  the  total  excitation  energy.  They  suggested  that  the  switchover
from positive to negative  α

 with the increasing energy (which is observed between

H O
2

D O
2

) −

Ω

)

(

r

r

H D/

9.5 and 10 eV) reflects a competition between the photoinduced electron transfer to a pre-

existing trap (that prevails below 9.5 eV) and autoionization of water (that prevails above

9.5  eV).  The  latter  is  initiated  by  a  bound-to-bound transition to a short-lived excited

state; the latter promptly dissociates yielding a conduction band electron. These authors
predicted the second change of the sign of α

H D, from negative to positive, when the total

excitation energy exceeds ca. 11 eV and direct ionization (which involves a bound-to-

continuum transition) prevails. Pulse radiolysis data do suggest that at some excitation
).  []
energy  the  distribution  P r( )  is  wide  (σ

≈ 2-3  nm)  and  σ

) >

(

(

σ
G

H O
2

D O
2

G

G

However, this general result does not indicate what photon energy is required for such an

electron distribution to occur: the required energy might be so high that more than one

electron is generated per excitation event (the average energy needed for water ionization

in radiolytic spurs is 20-25 eV []).

At first glance, our 12.4 eV (2 x 200 nm) data lend support to the suggestions
≈ 0 (in agreement with the predicted second switchover)

made by Sanders et al. []:  α

H D/

and the widths  σ

G  compare well with those in the radiolytic spurs (suggesting the onset

19.

of  direct  photoionization).  On  the  other  hand,  even  at  this  high  excitation  energy  the

distribution  of  electrons  in  D2O  is  13%  narrower  than  in  H2O;  this  difference  is

comparable to 15% obtained by Sanders et al. for 10 eV photoexcitation [] (at which the

autoionization is supposed to prevail). It appears, therefore, that the basic premises of

Sanders et al., []  viz. (i) the prevalence of the direct ionization above 11 eV and (ii) a

broader electron distribution in D2O vs. H2O attained in the course of direct ionization -

are not supported by our results. Either the direct ionization does not prevail at 12.4 eV or

it does not result in a longer thermalization path for D2O. Both of these possibilities hint

at a complex picture of water ionization at high excitation energy.

There  have  been  other  results  suggesting  such  a  complexity.  Synchrotron

radiation  studies  of  Brocklehurst  []  reveal  that  that  the  delayed  luminescence  from

recombination  of  geminate  ion  pairs  generated  by  vacuum  UV  photoexcitation  of  a

viscous hydrocarbon squalane continuously change between 10 and 25 eV, well above

the  threshold  energy  at  which  the  direct  ionization  would  prevail  in  this  liquid.  The

observed change in the recombination dynamics indicates continuous broadening of the

electron  distribution  with  the  increasing  energy.  No  such  broadening  is  observed  for

photoionization  of  aromatic  solutes  in  liquid  alkanes;  the  width  of  the  distribution

stabilizes at 3 eV above the ionization threshold. [] These results suggest that in squalane,

the direct ionization competes with some other photoionization mechanism, even at these

high photon energies. [] The magnetic field effect data of Brocklehurst [] and Jung and

coworkers [] provide evidence for the existence of an ionization channel through which

the singlet correlation between the radical ions in the geminate pair is rapidly lost; spin-

orbit  interaction  in  the  excited  bound  state  of  the  solvent  (which  mediates  the

autoionization) has been suggested as such a channel. [] This loss of spin correlation is

quite notable between 11 and 16 eV, at the very onset of the direct ionization. [] Perhaps,

the  distinction  between  the  direct  ionization  and  autoionization  is  not  as  clear-cut  as

suggested by Sanders et al.: [] both photoprocess compete well above the postulated 11

eV threshold.

4.2. Spectral evolution in the "slow regime": phenomenology.

20.

Why  did  the  "slow  regime"  of  the  spectral  evolution  observed  in  section  3.3

escape the attention of other workers? As explained in the Introduction, in most of the

previous pump-probe studies, the spectral sampling was too sparse and the S/N ratio was

inadequate  to  observe  the  subtle  changes  in  the  spectral  shape.  Furthermore,  the  best-

quality  spectral  data  were  fit  using  the  "continuous  shift"  model;  for  obvious  reasons,

such an analysis fails to identify the occurrence of the small-scale change in the spectral

profile. Lastly, the "slow regime" has actually been observed previously, by Pépin et al. []

These  workers  carried  out  a  Gaussian-Lorentzian  analysis  similar  to  that  outlined  in

section 3.3 for the electron generated by multiphoton ionization of liquid D2O ( λ=0.5 to

1.4  µm).  As  seen  from  Figs.  3  and  4  in  ref.  [],  the  Gaussian  width  systematically

decreased with delay time, much like the same quantity in Fig. 7(b). To account for this

apparent contradiction with the "continuous shift" model, Pépin et al. [] postulated that

the  electron  spectrum  slides  over  a  "supplementary  component"  from  an  unknown

species with the life time of 2 ps that absorbs at 0.8-1.2 µm (see Fig. 6 therein). No other

group was able to identify this species.

Subsequently,  Jay-Gerin  and  co-workers  []  reinterpreted  these  observations  in

terms of a more fanciful two-state model of electron solvation (the "hybrid model" []). In

the  latter  model,  there  are  two  electron  species,  the  "wet"  electron  and  the  "solvated"

electron. Both of the corresponding spectra undergo the "continuous shift" to the blue on

the subpicosecond time scale. The more energetic of these species ("wet" electron) also

rapidly  converts  to  a  more  stable  one  ("solvated"  electron).  Analogies  to  the  electron

solvation  in  aliphatic  alcohols  were  drawn  to  substantiate  the  use  of  this  model  for

electron solvation in water. [] The "hybrid" model assumes that the profile of the electron

spectrum  does  not  change  during  the  solvent  relaxation  (when  the  "continuous  shift"

occurs)  or,  at  the  very  least,  it  is  a  Gaussian-Lorentzian  function.  No  justification  has

21.

been given for either one of these basic assumptions, and the "hybrid model" has as much

fidelity as the "supplementary component" model. Naturally, such models are impossible

to  falsify  because  arbitrary  properties  can  be  assigned  to  the  progenitors  of  various

components.

We believe that it would be more appropriate to interpret these observations at

their face value, i.e., as evidence that the spectrum profile of the electron does evolve

with time and, at short delay times, strongly deviates from the Gaussian-Lorentzian form.

As shown in section 3.3, the entire set of TA kinetics for the electron in H2O and D2O in

the red and near IR can be fit using a simple spectrum-narrowing model with only two

adjustable parameters.

Another concern is whether our observations can be explained using the "thermal

jump" model of Keiding et al. [] or the "cavity contraction" model of Unterreiner et al. []

The  answer  is  negative,  because  in  their  predictions,  these  two  (seemingly  different)

models  are  almost  indistinguishable  from  the  "continuous  shift"  model.  Within  the

framework  of  these  models,  the  change  in  Emax   is  interpreted  either  in  terms  of  the

decrease in the local temperature around the electron [] or the mean square dispersion of

its position with respect to the cavity center []. As for the latter model, the shape stability

is the implicit assumption, i.e., the "cavity contraction" model is a reformulation of the

"continuous shift" model. The temperature jump model of Keiding et al. [], despite its

different  physical  context,  is  also  a  variant  of  the  "continuous  shift"  model:  Since  the

width of the  eaq

−  spectrum change with the increasing temperature much slower than  Emax

(see Appendix A), simulations using this model yield spectral evolution which is very

similar to that given by the "continuous shift" model. Furthermore, cursory analysis of

the data in Figs. 7(a) and 7(b) immediately points out to a major inconsistency: while a

temperature shift of 30 K would suffice to account for the position of the band maximum

22.

at t=0.5 ps, a temperature shift of 200 K would be needed to account for the width of the

electron spectrum (see Fig. 3S(b)). The stated, however, refers to the parameterization of

the  eaq

−  spectra vs. temperature used by Keiding et al., [] and this parameterization is not

supported by more recent studies. [] In particular, Bartels et al. [] observed substantial

deviations of the spectral profile of hydrated electron in hot water from the Gaussian-

Lorentzian curve given by eqs. (3) and (4) with the temperature-independent parameter

ν = 2 . They demonstrated that in hot water, the spectral profile is given by a modified eq.

(3) with  ν that increases with the temperature and a temperature-independent width  WL .

The resulting "hot-water" spectra are increasingly flatter at the top at higher temperature.

[] (see Fig. 4S).

Given these recent developments, we re-analyzed the  S

tλ,(

) set in the spirit of the

"temperature jump" model, using modified eq. (3) for constant  WL  and time-dependent

parameters  Emax ,  WG ,  and  ν  (Appendix A).  Figs.  11S  and  12S(a,b,c)  show  the  least-

squares  fits  to  the  spectra  and  the  time  dependencies  of  the  optimum  parameters  for

electron  solvation  in  D2O.  The  remarkable  feature  of Fig. 12S(b)  is  that  the  Gaussian

width  WG  is constant for t > 1 ps: the entire spectral evolution can be explained in terms

of  a  relatively  slow  increase  in  Emax   with  a  time  constant  of  1  ps  (Fig.  12S(a))  and  a

concomitant decrease in  ν (from 2.5 at 1 ps to the equilibrium value of 1.95, with a time

constant of 0.6 ps (Fig. 12S(c)). In this model, the spectral evolution during the electron

solvation  is  regarded  as  the  slow  spectral  shift  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  the

curvature of the spectrum at the top. Although the use of eq. (3) with constant  WL  and

variable  ν yields as good quality fits as the previously considered model with variable

WL  and constant  ν (and finds equal support in the data on the temperature evolution of

−  spectra), entirely different dynamics for  Emax  were obtained from the least-squares
eaq

fits to the same data set (compare Figs. 7 and 12S). This example illustrates the general

23.

point made in the Introduction: the extraction of  Emax  strongly depends on the template

used  to  fit  the  data.  However,  even  with  this  different  functional  form,  the  optimum

parameters  shown  in Fig.  12S  are  inconsistent  with  the  "temperature  jump"  model  of

Keiding  et  al.:  []  to  obtain  ν ≈ 2 3.

  at  t=1  ps,  a  temperature  jump  of  250  K  would  be

needed  (Figs.  3S(a)  and  3S(b)),  whereas  the  position  of  Emax   at  this  delay  time

corresponds to a modest temperature jump of 40 K. We conclude that the "temperature

jump" model is not supported by our results.

The spectral narrowing described by eq. (3) complemented by eq. (4) (Figs. 8 and

9) naturally accounts for the major trend shown in  Figs. 2, 3, and 4: the greater is the

difference  E

∞ −   (>  0)  for  a  given  photon  energy  E,  the  faster  is  the  decay  of  the

E

max

electron absorbance at the corresponding wavelength. By increasing the bulk temperature

[] or by addition of salt, [] it is possible to, respectively, red- or blue- shift the spectrum

of hydrated electron (i.e., to decrease or increase  Emax

∞ ). Since the initial spectrum of pre-

solvated electron does not change significantly as a function of temperature or salinity,

the basic prediction of the spectrum-narrowing model is that for a fixed probe wavelength

(on the red side of the  eaq

−  spectrum), the decay of the absorption is progressively slower

with the increasing temperature and progressively faster with the increasing salinity. Both

of these trends are consistent with the experimental observations of Ulterreiner et al. []

and Crowell et al. [,] (for the temperature effect) and Lian et al. [] (for the salinity effect).

4.3. Spectral evolution: possible mechanisms.

From the theoretical prospective, the chief appeal of the "continuous shift" model

is a possibility to reduce the complex spectral evolution of the electron to a single time-

dependent parameter  E

max

( ) related to the average electron energy; the latter quantity
t

may  be  obtained  directly  from  molecular  dynamics  (MD)  simulations.  []  If  the

24.

"continuous shift" model were incorrect, such an approach would be insufficient: time-

resolved spectra should be simulated instead. The latter is a more complicated problem []

which  requires  the  detailed  knowledge  of  the  ground  and  excited  state,  transition

probabilities,  etc.  Even  for  hydrated  (thermally  relaxed)  electron,  the  origin  of  the

absorption spectra is the subject of ongoing controversy and continuing research. [] E.g.,

some basic features of this spectrum (e.g., homogeneous vs. inhomogeneous broadening)

are still debated in the literature. []

The emerging consensus is that the vis and near-IR spectrum of cavity electron in

liquid  water  is  from  the  three  partially  merged  s

p→   subbands;  these  subbands

correspond to the three orientations of the p orbital of the final state with respect to the

principal axes of the ellipsoidal solvation cavity. [] While this simple picture is supported

by  numerous  MD  calculations,  []  hole  burning  absorption  anisotropy  experiments  by

Assel  et  al.  []  did  not  yield  the  expected  polarization-depended  TA  dynamics.  Some

anisotropy  was  observed  by  Barbara  and  co-workers,  []  however,  the  depolarization

dynamics were different from the theoretical predictions of Schwartz and Rossky. [] A

possible rationale for these discrepancies was proposed by Bratos and Leicknam [] who

postulated rapid (~10 fs) internal relaxation in the p-state manifold. Another possibility is

that  the  experimental  manifestation  of  the  anisotropy  following  the  s

p→

photoexcitation depends on the photon energy of this excitation. In particular, a single p

subband  was  excited  in  the  experiments  of  Barabra  and  coworkers  []  whereas  in  the

experiments of Assel et al. [] two overlapping subbands (with the orthogonal orientation

of  the  p  orbitals)  were  photoexcited  simultaneously.  In  the  latter  case,  the  anisotropy

would be more difficult to observe. Importantly, rapid decay of photon echo following

the  s

p→  photoexcitation observed by Wiersma and coworkers [] cannot be considered

25.

as unequivocal evidence for fast dephasing in the p manifold since rapid Stokes shift can

also explain these data. []

While a clear-cut demonstration of the substructure in the electron spectrum by

means  of  ultrafast  spectroscopy  is  still  lacking,  indirect  support  for  the  p  state

nondegeneracy and slow dephasing is given by resonance Raman spectra for hydrated

electron:  Tauber  and  Mathies  []  determined  the  depolarization  ratio  across  the  entire

Raman  spectrum  of  eaq

−   in  liquid  H2O  and  concluded  that  this  ratio  (ca.  0.3-0.5)  is

incompatible with a resonant transition to a single nondegenerate state. Their analyses []

suggest  that  homogeneous  broadening  for  eaq

−   is  at  least  100  times  greater  than

inhomogeneous broadening [] and the half width of the  s

p→  band on the red side is

largely  determined  by  vibrational  progressions  from  the  five  strongest  modes  with

vibrational energies between 470 and 3100 cm-1 (for H2O).

It is apparent from these results that the overall shape of the electron spectrum is

controlled by many parameters, and only advanced theory can consistently account for

the spectral evolution in the course of electron solvation. As stated in the Introduction,

given the previous record of kinetic modeling, we do not feel compelled to provide yet

another ad hoc  scheme "explaining" the results. Only a comprehensive, rigorous theory

would be up to this task. Still, it is appropriate to speculate on the origin of the two novel

features reported in this paper, namely, (i) the spectral narrowing/broadening that occurs

in the "slow regime" (t > 1 ps) and (ii) apparent differences between the subpicosecond

TA spectra for the excess electron in H2O and D2O.

The  characteristic  spectral  transformations  observed  in  the  "slow  regime",  viz.

narrowing  of  the  band  on  the  red  side  and  broadening  on  the  blue  side,  bear  some

resemblance  to  the  evolution  of  absorption  bands  for  electronically-excited  molecules

26.

undergoing vibrational relaxation. Such a relaxation involves nonequilibrium populations

of vibrational states which according to Tauber and Mathies [] determine the shape and

the  width  of  the  eaq

−  spectrum. This vibrational relaxation readily explains the isotope

dependence for the time constant of spectral narrowing. The time scale for the vibration

relaxation  in  liquid  water  (ca.  0.75-1  ps  for  the  O-H  stretch  in  the  room-temperature

dilute HOD:D2O) [] compares well with the observed time scale of spectrum narrowing

in our experiment.

Another  possible  rationale  is  a  time-dependent  change  in  the  relative  positions

and weights of different p subbands, although the origin of the isotope effect is less clear

−
in  such  a  case.  As  follows  from  the  analysis  of  Bartels  et  al.,  []  the  spectrum  of  eaq

becomes flatter at the top with the increasing water temperature. Similar changes were

observed by Brodsky et al. [] and Herrmann and Krebs [] for methanol. The likely cause

for this change is the increasing asymmetry of the solvation cavity as it grows in size in

hot  water.  Consequently,  the  splitting  between  the  three p  subbands  increases  and  the

electron spectrum becomes more flat at the top. If the p subbands do define the shape of

the electron spectrum in the visible and near-IR, as suggested by MD calculations, [] the

"slow regime" may be interpreted as gradual decrease in the anisotropy of the solvation

cavity  during  its  relaxation.  That,  in  turn,  suggests  that  the  initial  localization  of  the

electron involves a highly anisotropic trap. Such an assertion is in agreement with the

theoretical models of electron trapping in liquid water. [] Indirect experimental support

for this assertion is provided by the data on electron trapping in crystalline ice: quasifree

electrons  were  shown  to  localize  on  (highly  anisotropic)  Bjerrum  defects; []  after  this

initial localization, the water structure around such a defect relaxes and the a solvation

cavity gradually emerges on picosecond time scale (the resulting spectrum bears strong

27.

resemblance to the spectrum of hydrated electron and changes little between 4 and 270

K). []

It seems likely that the changing anisotropy of the solvation cavity is the ultimate

cause for the failure of the "continuous shift" and "temperature jump" models to capture

the essentials of the spectral evolution. In these models, the environment of the electron

during its solvation is assumed to have the same degree of anisotropy as fully relaxed,

hydrated electron, either at the final or elevated temperature. Perhaps, the increase in the

sphericity of the solvation cavity (both on sub-picosecond time scale and at later delay

times) occurs in concert with the vibrational relaxation of solvent molecules forming the

solvation cavity (see above); such a concerted mechanism would account for the isotope

effect on the spectral narrowing.

On the subpicosecond time scale, the vibrations in water appear to have strong

effect  on  the  spectral  evolution.  Indeed,  for  light  water,  new  spectral  features  were

observed in the near-IR, where the water molecule has O-H stretch overtones. No such

features were observed in D2O for which these overtones are red-shifted to > 1.7 µm. As

explained in section 3.3, the thermal effect (a photoinduced change in the refraction index

of water) does not appear to cause these features. Still, the vibrations of water molecules

are implicated. Due to the extreme isotope selectivity, many potential candidates for the

progenitors  of  these  features,  for  instance,  IR-absorbing  p  state  electron  examined

theoretically by Schwartz and Rossky [] and experimentally by Barbara and coworkers [],

can be excluded since the generation of such a species in the course of photoionization,

while plausible, does not account for these specific features. We stress that our data (as

well  as  the  previous  studies []) do not provide clear-cut evidence either against or for

such  an  involvement.  []  The  same  refers  to  the  involvement  of  the  tentative  "wet"

28.

electron [] and liquid-water analog of the IR-absorbing electron in low-temperature ice []

postulated by others.

We believe that the 1.15 and 1.3-1.4 µm features for the excess electron in H2O

emerge  due  to  collective  excitation  of  the  electronic  and  vibrational  modes  of  pre-

solvated electron by the IR light, when the corresponding energies are close. It is possible

that the same features are present in the TA spectra of  s

p→  excited hydrated electrons;

unfortunately, no spectra in the near- and mid-IR are currently available (only 0.55-1.05

µm spectra have been reported). [] In the photon echo and transient grating experiments

of Wiersma and coworkers, a librational motion of water molecules (ca. 850 cm-1) in the

relaxation  dynamics  of  electron  following  s

p→   photoexcitation  was  observed.

Resonance  Raman  spectra  of  hydrated  electron  indicate  strong  coupling  of  the  s

p→

electronic transition to the O-H stretch and bend modes. []  Such  a  coupling  would  be

expected  on  the  theoretical  grounds  since  the  O-H  groups  with  protons  pointing  out

towards  the  cavity  center  comprise  the  core  of  the  solvated  electron.  []  Vibronic

transitions in the near-IR would be another manifestation of this coupling. Specifically,

we  suggest  that  O-H  vibrations  can  be  excited  when  the  energy  of  the  electronic

transition  is  close  to  that  of  the  O-H  stretch  overtone.  To  our  knowledge,  such  a

possibility has not been addressed theoretically, while it is suggested by the results of the

present work. In the current MD models, water is treated classically and such phenomena

as vibronic coupling and vibrational relaxation for hydrated electron cannot be studied.

The results discussed above suggest that these phenomena might play a prominent role in

the electron solvation dynamics; hence, more advanced models might be needed.

5. Conclusion.

The evolution of vis and near-IR TA spectra for pre-solvated electron following

biphotonic excitation of the room-temperature light and heavy water has been studied.

29.

For two 200 nm photon excitation process, the geminate recombination within the first 5-

10  ps  is  negligible.  A  method  based  on  the  normalization  of  kinetic  traces  by  the

spectrum of hydrated electron was implemented to reliably reconstruct the TA spectra for

delay times t>0.5 ps (for a 300 fs fwhm photoexcitation pulse).

Two regimes of the spectral evolution were observed. In both of these regimes,

the  spectral  profile  changes  with  delay  time;  the  "continuous  blue  shift"  []  and

"temperature jump" models [] that assume the constancy of this spectral profile (as the

electron spectrum shifts to the blue) are not supported by our data. On the sub-picosecond

time scale, the band maximum systematically shifts to the higher photon energy and the

spectrum narrows (Figs. 5(a), 6(a), and 8S). At later delay times (t> 1ps), the position of

the band maximum is "locked", but the spectral profile continues to change, by narrowing

on  the  red  side  and  broadening  on  the  blue  side  (Figs.  5(b)  and  6(b)).  The  oscillator

strength of the transition is constant within 10% during this relatively slow, small-scale

spectral transformation. The spectral narrowing can be accounted for by a two-parameter

model  in  which  the  width  of  the  Gaussian  half-line  exponentially  decreases  with  the

delay time. The time constant of this narrowing is ca. 0.56 ps for H2O and 0.64 ps for

D2O, respectively.

In the first picosecond after photoionization, two new features (the 1.15 µm band
and 1.4 µm shoulder) were observed in the near-IR spectra for the electron in H2O; these

two features were not observed for the electron in D2O. These two features are observed

in the same region were O-H overtones appear in the spectra of liquid water. While it

cannot  be  entirely  excluded  that  these  two  features  are  artifacts  of  the  data  analysis

(despite good agreement with some reported spectra []), it seems more likely that these

bands are genuine and originate through the vibronic transitions of pre-solvated electron.

The isotope-dependent narrowing/broadening of the absorption band of the electron for t

> 1 ps can be interpreted as evidence for the occurrence of vibrational relaxation in the

water molecules lining the solvation cavity. In both of these regimes, continuous decrease

in the size and anisotropy of the solvation cavity causes a time-dependent blue shift and

decrease in the splitting between the three p subbands of the electron. These two trends

would qualitatively account for the observed spectral evolution.

30.

Since the current theories of hydrated electron in liquid water do not involve the

quantum degrees of freedom for vibrations in water molecules, the vibrational relaxation

and the vibronic coupling hinted at by our results cannot be presently modelled. Further

development  of  the  theory  might  be  necessary  for  a  self-consistent  explanation  of  the

spectral evolution during the thermalization/localization/solvation process.

The  geminate  recombination  kinetics  for  hydrated  electrons  generated  by

absorption of two 200 nm quanta (12.4 eV total energy) by light and heavy water are very

similar. Kinetic analyses within the framework of the IRT model suggest that the initial

distribution  of  distances  between  the  electron  and  its  geminate  partners  in  D2O  is

narrower than in H2O. Since the opposite trend is expected in the regime where direct

ionization  prevails,  we  speculate  that  autoionization  of  water  still  competes  with  the

direct ionization at this high excitation energy. The latter ionization mechanism has been

thought  to  prevail  when  the  total  excitation  energy  is  greater  than  11  eV  []  (the

conduction band in water is typically placed between 9 and 10 eV []). While this result is

unexpected,  it  is  consistent  with  the  previous  observations  of  competing  ionization

channels in the vacuum UV photoexcitation of molecular liquids. []

6. Acknowledgement.

We thank Prof. B. J. Schwartz of UCLA and Drs. C. D. Jonah and D. M. Bartels

of ANL for useful discussions. The research at the ANL was supported by the Office of

Science,  Division  of  Chemical  Sciences,  US-DOE  under  contract  number  W-31-109-

ENG-38.

Supporting Information Available: (1.) A PDF file containing (a) Appendix A.

The  absorption  spectrum  of  hydrated  electron,  (b)  Appendix  B.  Instruction  for  the

retrieval of kinetic data from the supplied ascii file, (c) captions to Figs. 1S to 13S, and

(d) Figs.  1S  to  13S; (2.)  A  288  Kb  ascii  file  named  "H2O_D2O_traces.txt" containing
) for the electron in H2O and D2O. This material is available

digitized kinetic traces  S

tλ,(

free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

31.

32.

References

*) 

Such an interpretation, however, is not the only possible. In the theory of Brodsky

and  Tsarevski,  []  the  flattop  profiles  are  explained  quite  differently.  Furthermore,  the

recent MD calculations of Borgis and coworkers [] using floating Gaussian orbitals did

not reproduce this feature though the p subbands were implicit in these calculations.

33.

Figure captions.

Fig. 1.

Geminate  recombination  dynamics  of  hydrated  electrons  generated  by  2  x  200  nm
photoexcitation of neat liquid H2O and D2O at 25  oC. The photoinduced optical density
∆OD800 (observed at  λ= 800 nm and normalized at t=5-10 ps) is plotted vs. the delay

time t on the logarithmic time scale. Note that the origin of the vertical axis is at 80%

recombination efficiency. The data for heavy water are indicated using open circles and

diamonds, for light water - open squares and triangles. The vertical bars indicate 95%
confidence limits. Two series of data obtained at 2 µJ and 5 µJ excitation power (circles

and  squares and diamonds  and  triangles,  respectively)  are  shown  to  illustrate  the

constancy of the time profile with the 200 nm light radiance in the explored excitation

regime (compare with Fig. 2S(b)). All four normalized kinetics are identical within the

confidence limits. Solid lines are IRT model simulations. The simulation parameters are

given in Table 1S in the supplement. The black solid line is the simulation for light water
= 2.4 nm (average separation of 3.83 nm); traces (i), (ii), and (ii) are simulations
with σ

G

for heavy water for σ

= 2.1, 2.4, and 2.7 nm, respectively.

G

Fig. 2

A family of kinetic traces  S

tλ,(

) (section 2 and eq. (1)) for electron generated by bi- 200

nm  photonic  ionization  of  the  room-temperature  light  water.  The  magnitude  of  the
hydrated electron spectrum at the maximum is taken as unity. The probe wavelength  λ

(500 to 1350 nm) is given in the color scales to the right of the plots. The vertical bars are

95%  confidence  limits.  The  "spike"  near  the  kinetic  origin  in  (a)  is  from  nonlinear

absorbance due to simultaneous absorption of 200 nm and probe photons. The sigmoid

curve in (b) is the integral of the response function of the system (which is shown by a

shaded curve in (c)).

Fig. 3

34.

Same as Fig. 2, for heavy water. Only 500 to 1050 nm data are shown.

Fig. 4

Fig. 5

TA  spectra  S
)

=

+

(

t
1

t
1,

t

Same  as  Fig.  2,  for  heavy  water.  Only  1100  to  1700  nm  data  are  shown.  In  (b),  the

vertical scale is expanded to illustrate nonzero plateau attained by the kinetics at t>3 ps.

tλ,(

)  for  electron  in  light  water  at  different  delay  time  intervals

∆ . The delay times  t1 are given in the plots. For (a)  ∆t =100 fs, for (b) - 200
t

fs. The maximum TA signal from the hydrated electron  S

( ) =
λ

(

S

λ
,

t

= ∞

)

 is taken for

unity. The solid lines in (b) are Gaussian-Lorentzian functions obtained by least-squares

fits, as explained in the text (note the logarithmic vertical scale). The vertical bars are
95% confidence limits. The bold solid line is the normalized spectrum ( S λ( )) of fully

thermalized  hydrated  electron.  The  vertical  arrows  indicate  previously  unobserved

features in the near-IR.

Fig. 6

Fig. 7

Fig. 8

Same as Fig. 5, for the electron in heavy water.

Gaussian-Lorentzian analysis of linearly interpolated  S

tλ,(

) data for the electron in light

(open squares) and heavy (open circles) water. Vertical bars are 95% confidence limits

determined by least-squares optimization. The solid lines in (a) and (b) are exponential

fits.  (a)  The  position  of  the  spectrum  maximum,  (b)  Gaussian  width,  (c)  Lorentzian

width, and (d) the integral under the spectrum plotted as a function of the delay time  t1
for  ∆t = 30 fs.

"Global" least squares analysis of  S

tλ,(

) kinetics using the spectrum-narrowing model

(eqs. (3) and (4)) for the electron in light water. The solid lines are simulated kinetics for,

35.

from top to bottom:  λ= 800, 850, 900, 950, 1000, 1050, 1100, 1200, 1250, and 1300 nm.

The vertical bars are 95% confidence limits. Fig. 9S gives the expanded version of this
plot for traces with  λ≥ 1 µm.

Fig. 9

Same as Fig. 8, for the electron in heavy water. The probe wavelengths are 850, 900, 950,

1000, 1050, 1100, 1200, 1250, and 1300 nm. Fig. 10S gives the expanded version of this
plot for traces with  λ≥ 1 µm.

36.

d
e
z
i
l

a
m
r
o
n

 
,
 

 
0
0
8
D
O
∆

1.0

0.9

0.8

 H2O
 D2O

(iii)

(ii)

(i)

simulation:
 D2O
 H2O

2

4

6 8

2

4

6 8

2

4

6 8

10

100

time, ps

1000

Lian et al., Figure 1

1.0

(a)

(b)

0.5

0.0

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.8

0.4

0.0

)
t

,

λ

(

S

lambda, nm

lambda, nm

  5 0 0
  5 6 0
  6 0 0
  6 5 0
  7 0 0

  7 0 0
  7 5 0
  8 0 0
  8 5 0
  9 0 0
  9 5 0
  1 0 0 0
  1 0 5 0

lambda, nm
  1 1 0 0
  1 1 5 0
  1 2 0 0
  1 2 5 0
  1 3 0 0
  1 3 5 0
 pulse

H2O

(c)

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

time, ps

Lian et al., Figure 2

1.0

(a)

(b)

)
t

1.0

,

λ

(

S

0.5

0.0

0.5

0.0

D2O

lambda, nm

  7 0 0
  7 5 0
  8 0 0
  8 5 0
  9 0 0
  9 5 0
  1 0 0 0
  1 0 5 0

lambda, nm

  5 0 0
  5 6 0
  6 0 0
  6 5 0
  7 0 0

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

time, ps

Lian et al., Figure 3

0.5

D2O

(a)

lambda, nm
  1 1 0 0
  1 1 5 0
  1 2 0 0
  1 2 5 0
  1 3 0 0
  1 3 5 0
  1 4 0 0
  1 5 0 0
  1 6 0 0
  1 7 0 0

(b)

0.0

0.1

)
t

,

λ

(

S

0.0

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

time, ps

Lian et al., Figure 4

(a)

(b)

)
t
,
λ
(

S

0.5

)
t
,
λ
(

S

0.1

1.0

0.0

1

8

6

4

2

8

6

4

2

t 1 , ps

 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1.0
 1.1
 1.2

t 1 , ps

 1.3 
 1.5
 1.7
 1.9
 2.1
 2.3
 2.5
 2.7

5 0 0

7 5 0

1 0 0 0

1 2 5 0

λ

, nm

Lian et al., Figure 5

1.0

(a)

t 1 , ps

 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1.0
 1.1
 1.2

(b)

)
t
,
λ
(

S

0.5

0.0

1

6

4

2

6

4

2

6

0.1

)
t
,
λ
(

S

0.01

t 1, ps

 1.3
 1.5
 1.7
 1.9
 2.1
 2.3
 2.5
 2.7

5 0 0

7 5 0

1 2 5 0

1 5 0 0

1 0 0 0
λ

, nm

Lian et al., Figure 6

(d)

(c)

(b)

l
a
r
g
e
t
n

i

V
e
 
,
 

W

L

V
e

 
,
 
G
W

V
e
 
,

x
a
m
E

1.1

1.0

0.9

0.5

0.4

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

1.7

1.6

(a)

 H2 O 

 D2 O 

0

1

4

5

2

3

t 1, ps

Lian et al., Figure 7

H2 O

λ

1.0

0.5

)
t
,
λ
(

S

0.0

0

2

6

4
time, ps

Lian et al., Figure 8

λ

D2 O

0.5

)
t
,
λ
(

S

0.0

0

2

4
time, ps

6

Lian et al., Figure 9

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Crowell jp0*****, Supporting Info Page 1

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

JP****

Supporting Information.

Journal of Physical Chemistry A, Received ****

Solvation, relaxation, and geminate recombination of electrons generated by two
200 nm photon ionization of liquid H2O and D2O.

Rui Lian, Robert A. Crowell, and Ilya A. Shkrob.
 Chemistry Division, Argonne National Laboratory,  Argonne, IL 60439

Appendix A. The absorption spectrum of hydrated electron.

A.1. Background.

Although many  absorption  spectra  of  hydrated  electron  in  H2O  and  D2O  were
reported in the literature, there are very  few such spectra  that  exhibit the  acceptable S/N
ratio  in  the  near  IR.  Good  quality  data  in  this  spectral  region  are  needed  for  the
reconstruction  of  the  time-dependent  TA  spectra  of  pre-solvated  electron  using  the
method discussed in section 2. The  prime concern is the  accuracy of the  Gaussian fit  to
the low-energy wing of the  eaq

−  spectrum.

Recently,  Bartels  and  coworkers  []  obtained  a  large  set  of  spectral  data  for
−  at  25-300  oC and fitted  this  set  globally  to  eqs.  (2)  and  (3)

radiolytically-generated  eaq
using the temperature-dependent exponent

ν =

.
1 9488 0 0012895
.

t .

+

where  t is the temperature in oC. For H2O, they obtained

E

max

(

eV

) =

1 79 0 0025407
.
.
t

−

+

×
2 5384 10 17 5,
.

t

−

(
W eV
G

)

ln

2

                       

=

−

+

.

0 343 0 000290411
.
t
×

4 10413 10
.

8 3
t

+

−

+

6 613 10

.

×

−

6 2
t

5 33721 10
.

x

−

11 4
t

,

and  WL =0.51 eV. For D2O, the width WL =0.49 eV and

E

max

(

eV

) =

t
1 84 0 00268
.
.

−

+

4 13 10 17 6,
.

t

×

−

(
W eV
G

)

ln

2

                         

=

−
4

.

×

+
0 337 5 5 10
.
−
−
−

×
1 9 10
.

10 4
t

+ ×

2 10
−
×
3 55 10
.

t

13 5
t

,

−

8 3
t

(A1)

(A2)

(A3)

(A4)

 (A5)

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Crowell jp0*****, Supporting Info Page 2

−  spectra  acquired in steps  of 50 nm between 0.3 and
To obtain eqs. (A1) to (A5), the  eaq
1.7 µm were fit using eqs. (2) and (3) with the  floating parameters  ν,  WG  and  Emax  using
the least squares method; the optimum parameters were then polynominally interpolated.

Figs. 3S(a) and  3S(b)  show  the  temperature  dependencies  of  the  parameters  ν,
WG , and  Emax  given by eqs. (A1) to (A5). As seen from the  ν t( ) plot  given in Fig. 3S(a),
the high-energy wing of the electron spectrum ( E E>
max) is Lorentzian (ν ≈ 2 ) only  near
the room temperature; e.g., at 300 oC, ν ≈ 2 35.
 and the spectra are much flatter  at  the  top
than  the  room-temperature  spectra,  for  which  ν ≈ 1 95.
  (see  Fig.  4S).  In  the  previous
studies, [] the shape  of the  spectrum  for  E E>
max was  assumed to  be Lorentzian with  a
temperature-invariant exponent ν = 2 ; this assumption is no longer tenable. The  variation
in the Gaussian width  WG  of the half-spectra with  increasing temperature  is nonnegligible
(ca. 20% over the temperature interval of 200 oC), although it is much less than  a decrease
in  Emax  (ca. 50% over the temperature interval of 300  oC). It  is this  relative constancy  of
the spectral  profile vs.  the  temperature  which provides  the  rationale for the  "continuous
shift" and "temperature jump" models discussed in sections 1 and 4.2.

The  blue side of the  electron spectrum  ( E E>

max) is less perfectly  approximated
by eq. (2) than the red side ( E E<
max) is approximated by eq. (3), whether a fixed (ν = 2 )
or variable parameter ν is used (Fig. 3S(a)). While on the  red side the  absolute deviation
of the data points  from the  Gaussian shape  eq. (3) is less than  5-10 %, the  deviation on
the blue side is typically 5-10 %, depending on the wavelength of the analyzing light. The
further into the UV, the  worse  is the  overall fit  quality.  For  this  reason, the  global least-
squares fit is a trade-off: the better  is the  fit  quality  for the  extension of the  spectrum  to
the near-IR, the worse is the fit quality for the extension of this spectrum to  the blue, and
vice  versa.  Hence  the  uncertainty  in  the  position  of  the  absorption  maximum  Emax
reflected in the  scatter  of the  reported  values. Since the  electron  spectrum  is  flat  at  the
top, the location of this maximum depends on the  exact functional form of the  prescribed
profile of the  spectrum.  Inasmuch as this  location depends  on  how  well  the  Lorentzian
curve approximates the  data points  for  E E>
max, the  position  of this  maximum depends
on the  extent of the  spectrum  to  the  blue. As  the  quality  of  the  spectral  reconstruction
−  spectrum  in the
given by eq. (1) in section 2 crucially depends on the  accuracy of the  eaq
near IR, parameterizations were obtained that are most accurate in that  particular spectral
−  spectrum  in the  blue at  400
region. This  feat can only  be achieved by  truncating the  eaq
nm.

A.2. Electron spectrum from flash photolysis data.

To  obtain a good-quality spectrum  of  eaq

− , hydrated  electrons  were  generated  by
248 nm (one-) photon  excitation of 330 µm ferrocyanide (hexacyanoferrate (II)) and  4.8
mM sulfite using 15 ns FWHM, 10 mJ pulses from an ArF excimer laser (Lambda Physik
model  LPX120i)  in  a  1.36  mm  optical  path  cell  with  suprasil  windows.  These  two
aqueous anions photoreact according to

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Crowell jp0*****, Supporting Info Page 3

(
Fe CN

−

)  →

ν

h

 

(
Fe CN

 

4
6

−

) +

3
6

−
e
aq

 

and

−

2
SO
3

 

ν
 →
h

 

−
SO e
3

+

−
aq

.

(A6)

(A7)

The  anion absorptivities  and the  quantum yields  for electron photodetachment  are  4270
M-1 cm-1 and 0.674 for ferrocyanide and 50 M -1  cm-1 and 0.108 for sulfite, respectively.
[] The advantage of using ferrocyanide is the  high electron yield; the  disadvantage is that
ferricyanide anion (hexacyanoferrate (III)) generated in rxn. (A6)  absorbs  light at  λ<450
nm. [] Thus, to  obtain the  electron spectrum  in the  blue, electron photodetachment  from
−  radical generated in rxn. (A9)  does not  absorb >  400 nm
sulfite should be used (the  SO3
[]).

The  248  nm  beam  uniformly  illuminated  a  rectangular  3  mm  x  6  mm  aperture
placed onto  the  front  window  of the  photocell.  This  beam  was  normal  to  the  window.
The analyzing light from a pulsed  75 W Xe lamp was  crossed at  30o with  this  excitation
beam.  After  traversing  the  sample,  the  analyzing  light  passed  through  an  appropriate
cutoff filter and was focussed on the photodiode using a 7 cm focal length achromat. The
wavelength of the  analyzing  light  was  selected  using  the  same  narrowband  interference
filters  used  in  our  pump-probe  kinetic  studies.  The  signal  from  the  fast  Si  and  Ge
photodiodes (of the same type as in section 2) loaded into 50 Ω was amplified using a 1.2
GHz video amplifier (Comlinear model CLC449) and sampled by  a digital signal analyzer
(Tektronix model DSA601). The  response  time of this  detection system  was  3 ns.  Two
energy  meters  (Molectron  model  J25-080)  were  used  to  measure  the  power  of  the
incident and transmitted UV light. 0.2-1 L of aqueous N2-saturated solution of K4Fe(CN)6
or  Na2SO4  (99.99+%  ultrapure  grade,  Aldrich)  was  circulated  through  the  cell  using  a
peristaltic  pump.  The  typical  flow rate was  2-3 ml/min;  the  repetition  rate  of  the  laser
was 1 Hz. All measurements were carried out at 24  oC. Each kinetic trace was  an average
of 20-30 laser shots.  The  time profile of these  kinetic  traces  (for  wavelengths  λ  where
only  electron absorbed) was  independent of λ; no  effect  of  continuous  exposure  of  the
sample to the UV light was observed. The half time of the  electron decay was  400 ns  for
−  was  controlled by  the
ferrocyanide and 5 µs for sulfite, respectively. The  life time of  eaq
homogeneous recombination in the  bulk; for  sulfite,  a  slow  scavenging  reaction  with  an
impurity  (likely, traces of  oxygen)  was  also  significant.  The  time-dependent  TA  signal
was  integrated between 50 and 120 ns  and these  integrals (normalized by  the  integral  at
700 nm) were plotted vs. λ and fit using eqs. (2) and (3) with ν = 2 .

The  composite  spectrum  of  eaq

−  in H2O  is shown  in Fig. 5S. For  λ<500 nm, the
data  for  sulfite  and  ferrocyanide  photolysis  are  both  shown;  at  higher  photon  energy,
only  sulfite data are shown.  The  optimum  fit  parameters  obtained  for  this  data  set  are
Emax =1.699±0.005  eV,  WG =0.422±0.005  eV,  and  WL =0.492±0.007  eV  (the  standard
deviations are given). The data for D2O (only low-energy "tail" of the  spectrum  is shown
in Fig. 6S) can be fit  using the  same  WL   and  WG   and  Emax =1.749  eV  (which  is  ca.  3%

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Crowell jp0*****, Supporting Info Page 4

higher than  the  light water  estimate). As  shown  in Figs. 5S and 6S, all residuals  are  less
−  in H2O  compare well with  the  data given by
than 0.02. For  λ<500 nm, our data for  eaq
Jou  and Freeman [] (see Table 2S), although  the  fit  parameters  are  different.  Ironically,
using the  "optimum"  parameters given by  Jou  and Freeman makes the  fit  quality  in  the
near-IR worse, because their parameters were, apparently,  optimized  to  provide  the  best
−
fit  for the  visible and UV regions. The  same  applies  to  the  parameterization  of  the  eaq
) curve
spectrum by Bartels and coworkers []: As shown in Table 2S and Fig. 5S, the  S E(
calculated  using  the  spectral  parameters  given  by  eqs.  (A1)  to  (A5)  fits  well  the
experimental data on the blue side of the spectrum but much worse  on the red side of the
spectrum. On the red side,  S E(

) is systematically underestimated by as much as 5%.

Since the  reconstruction of  the  absorption  spectrum  of  pre-thermalized  electron
−  spectrum
by the method discussed in section 2 critically depends on the quality of the  eaq
−  absorbs poorly),  the  parameterization given above is preferable
in the near IR (where  eaq
to that given by others. Given that in the near IR, the ratio of the TA signal in the "spike"
to the TA  signal from the  thermalized electron at  t=5 ps  can be as large as 20:1 (Fig. 4),
−  spectrum  S λ( ) used for the  normalization translates
even a small error (1-2%) in the  eaq
) at  short  delay time. These  large error bars
tλ,(
into a 10-50% error in the amplitude of  S
undermine the confidence in the spectral data obtained using the  normalization method on
a very short time scale. Other reasons for treating such data with  caution, viz. the  thermal
effects and wavelength dependence of the  probe  characteristics,  are  briefly  discussed  in
sections 2 and 3 in the text.

While  there  are  several  alternatives  to  the  (obviously,  imperfect)  normalization
method used in this work, these methods proved to be equally problematic for obtaining a
good-quality  sub-picosecond  TA  spectrum  over  a  sufficiently  wide  wavelength  range.
Scanning  the  wavelength  of  the  probe  light  for  a  fixed  delay  time,  by  using  a  set  of
interference filters or a monochromator (as done to  generate the  spectrum  shown  in  Fig.
13S), does not  correct for the  wavelength-dependent  change  in  the  width  (chirp)  in  the
probe  pulse  and  the  group  velocity  mismatch.  []  Obtaining  two-dimensional  TA  data
using diode array or CCD detectors makes it possible to track these  changes better,  [] but
the dynamic range of these detectors is small, and it  is impossible to  cover a large section
−   spectrum  in  the  near-IR,  where  the  intensity  of  transmitted  light  decreases
of  the  eaq
precipitously with the increasing wavelength. Using optical  parametric amplifiers instead
of  the  white-light  supercontinuum  generation  leads  to  the  same  difficulties  when  λ  is
changed over a sufficiently wide range, especially in the  near- and mid- IR. [].  Since  the
pulse  characteristics continuously  change with  the  probe  wavelength, it  is impossible  to
interpret  the  data  without  prescribing  an  ad  hoc  kinetic  model,  and  this  makes  the
resulting TA spectra dependent on the details of such a model. Our  goal was  to  eliminate
such a dependency, hence our reliance on the normalization method.

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Crowell jp0*****, Supporting Info Page 5

Appendix B.  Instruction  for  the  retrieval  of  kinetic  data  from  the  supplied  ascii

file.

in 

Included 

this  Supplement 

a  288Kb-long  ASCII 

file  named
is 
H2O_D2O_traces.txt  containing  the  kinetic  traces  for  light  and  heavy  water.  These
kinetics were sampled with  a time step  of  50  fs  out  to  5-7  ps.  We  also  have  a  nearly
complete set  of such kinetics sampled with  a step  of 500 fs  out  to  25 ps.  The  data  are
formatted as an Igor text wave (suitable for Igor 4.0). It  is simple to  read these  data using
other  graphics packages. Each kinetic trace is tagged by  its  <id> label which  consists  of
the  wavelength  λ in nanometers and identifier "H"  (for  H2O)  or  "D"  (D2O)  at  the  end
(e.g., t1150H is the array of delay times for the electron in light water). The three columns
for  each  section  of  the  record  (that  starts  with  BEGIN  and  ends  with  END)  that
corresponds to a given wavelength are

t<id>: 

delay time  t in picoseconds

od<id>:

photoinduced optical density  S

tλ,(

) (see section 2).

dod<id>:

±95% confidence limits for the quantity above.

The format of the data file is

dod<id1>

t<id1> od<id1> 

IGOR
WAVES/D
BEGIN
<time  t,  ps> <normalized  S
....
END
X SetScale/P x 0,1,"", t<id1>; SetScale y 0,0,"", t<id1>
X SetScale/P x 0,1,"", od<id1>; SetScale y 0,0,"", od<id1>
X SetScale/P x 0,1,"", dod<id1>; SetScale y 0,0,"", dod<id1>

)> <± 95% confidence limits>

tλ,(

t<id2> od<id2>dod<id2>

WAVES/D
BEGIN
...
END
X SetScale/P x 0,1,"", t<id2>; SetScale y 0,0,"", t<id2>
X SetScale/P x 0,1,"", od<id2>; SetScale y 0,0,"", od<id2>
X SetScale/P x 0,1,"", dod<id2>; SetScale y 0,0,"", dod<id2>

.....
etc.

For further instruction, contact IAS at shkrob@anl.gov.

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Crowell jp0*****, Supporting Info Page 6

Table  1S.

Simulation  parameters for IRT modeling  of  recombination  dynamics  (X=H,D)  of
hydrated electron in the room-temperature liquid water (after refs. [])

−
e
aq
−
e
aq

+

+

 

 

 

 

X O
3
•
XO

+

 

 →
k
1

 
 →
k

2

•

 

X
XO

 
−

 

+

 

X O
2

(T1)

(T2)

parameter

H2O

D2O

diffusion coefficients, x10-5 cm2/s

+

−
eaq
X O3
XO

4.9

9.0

2.8

2.3
3.1
4.0

3.9

6.7

2.2

1.0
2.5
1.5

reaction constants, etc. a)

k1, x1010  M-1 s-1
k2 , x1010  M-1 s-1
reaction  velocity  v
(rxn. (T1)), m/s

other parameters b)

σ

G , nm c)

2.4

2.1

a) Reaction radii of 0.5 and 0.54 nm were assumed for rxns. (T1) and (T2), respectively.
+...
b) Dielectric constant of 78 and initial  X O OX
both liquids.
c) The width of the r2-Gaussian electron distribution.

 distance of 0.28 nm were assumed for

3

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Crowell jp0*****, Supporting Info Page 7

Table  2S.

A comparison between the normalized spectra of hydrated electron in H2O at 24oC.

λ, µm

0.5
0.6
0.7 a)
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.35
1.4

this
work
0.290
0.656
1
0.902
0.572
0.313
0.163
0.085
0.045
0.033
0.025

Bartels
et al. [] b)
0.32
0.699
1
0.841
0.502
0.261
0.13
0.066
0.034
0.025
0.018

Jou &
Freeman []
0.293
0.647
1
0.871
0.57
0.295
0.148
0.082
0.042
0.033
0.024

a) the spectra were normalized at this wavelength.
b) calculated using eqs. (2), (3) and (A1) to (A3).

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Crowell jp0*****, Supporting Info Page 8

Figure captions.

Fig. 1S

Time profiles of normalized photoinduced  TA  signals ( ∆ODλ) from a 1.4 µm thick film
of amorphous hydrogenated silicon alloy (8 at % H)  grown by  the  CVD deposition  from
SiCl4/Ar/H2 plasma on a 1 mm thick suprasil  substrate  (this  sample  was  obtained  from
Prof. H. Fritzsche at the James Frank Institute, U. of  Chicago). Kinetic traces obtained at
four different wavelengths  λ are shown  (as indicated in the  plot).  The  TA  signal  at  the
maximum  linearly  scales  with  the  200  nm  photon  fluence.  The  vertical  bars  are  95%
confidence limits; the solid lines are simulations (a Gaussian response function convoluted
with  biexponential decay to  a plateau). The  sample was  inserted in such a way  that  the
plane of the film corresponded to that of the jet surface. Similar kinetics were obtained for
each probe wavelength and used to  determine the  response  function of the  setup  and the
origin of time (i.e., the center of the Gaussian excitation pulse).

(a) The dependence of the TA signal ( λ=800 nm) from hydrated electron in liquid H2O  at
25 oC (observed at  t=10 ps  after the  photoionization)  as a function of the  power  of 200
nm pulse. For this measurement, the pump and probe  beams were tightly  focussed. Note
the double logarithmic scale. The  initial slope  of 1.84±0.07  is consistent  with  biphotonic
ionization of water  by  200 nm light. (b) Normalized TA  kinetics  at  the  extremes of the
dynamic range shown in (a). The traces were normalized at t=5 ps. Trace (i) was  obtained
for the  highest pump  power;  trace (ii) was  obtained for the  lowest  pump  power  in  (a).
The solid lines are guides to  the  eye.  Note  the  logarithmic time scale and non-zero origin
of the  vertical axis.  The  rapid  decay  on  subnanosecond  time  scale  is  due  to  the  cross-
recombination in the water bulk.

Temperature  dependencies of (a) the  parameter  ν  (eq.  (A1))  and  (b)  the  energy  of  the
band maximum  Emax  (to the left; eqs. (A2)  and (A4))  and Gaussian half-width  WG
ln 2
(to the right; eqs. (A3)  and  (A5))  for  hydrated  electron  in  liquid  H2O  (solid  lines)  and
D2O (dashed lines). See Appendix A for more detail.

Simulated absorption spectra  S E(
)of hydrated electron (plotted vs.  the  photon  energy E)
in light (solid lines) and heavy (dashed lines) liquid water at (i) 25 oC and (ii) 200  oC. Eqs.
(2) and (3) with  the  parameters given by  eqs. (A1)  to  (A5)  were used to  simulate  these
spectra.  The  spectra  for  D2O  were  shifted  to  the  red  by  38.5  meV  at  both  of  these
temperatures.  The  spectra  are  normalized  at  E E=
max .  At  the  higher  temperature,  the
spectrum is flatter at the top.

Fig. 2S

Fig. 3S

Fig. 4S

Fig. 5S

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Crowell jp0*****, Supporting Info Page 9

Vide infra: Normalized TA  signal from the  hydrated  electron generated by  248 nm  laser
photolysis  of  ferrocyanide  (filled  circles)  and  sulfite  (open  squares)  in  the  room-
temperature  liquid  H2O.  See  section  A.2  in  Appendix  A  for  more  detail.  Pink  circles
indicate that  data obtained  using  a  Ge  photodiode  detector,  red  circles  are  for  the  data
obtained using a Si photodiode. The red line is the least-squares fit to eqs. (2) and (3) with
ν = 2   (see  section  A.2  for  the  optimum  parameters).  Green  line  gives  the  simulated
spectrum  obtained  using  the  parameters  given  by  eqs.  (A1)  to  (A5).  Vide  supra:  the
residuals (same color coding).

Same as Fig. 5S, for hydrated electron in D2O (ferrocyanide data only).  The  open  squares
and open circles stand  for the  data obtained Ge and Si detectors,  respectively.  The  solid
line is the fit obtained as explained in section A.2 of Appendix A.

The effect of addition of 1 M  perchloric acid to  water  on the  decay kinetics of hydrated
electron in liquid room-temperature H2O. TA signal obtained for the  probe  wavelength of
1.3 µm is shown in the acidic solution (open squares) and neat water  (open circles). The
initial "spike" from pre-solvated electron is not shown; the kinetic traces were normalized
at t=5 ps.  The  vertical bars are 95% confidence limits for each data point.  The  Gaussian
radii  of  the  200  nm  pump  and  1300  nm  probe  beams  were  37  µm  and  14  µm,
respectively.  The  kinetic  traces  indicated  by  the  symbols  were  obtained  using  2.3  µJ
excitation  pulse,  the  traces  indicated  by  slim  vertical  bars  with  caps  were  obtained  at
lower  power,  1.3  µJ.  The  two  series  of  data  match  well,  suggesting  inefficient  cross
recombination.  The  solid  line  is  the  exponential  function  that  corresponds  to  the  time
constant  of  43  ps  which  is  close  to  the  life  time  of  hydrated  electron  that  undergoes
+  in the  bulk ( k = 2.3x1010 M -1  s-1,  see Table  1S).  These  kinetic  data
reaction with  H O3
suggest that at least 90-95% of the  ∆OD1300 signal at t>5 ps is from the hydrated electron.

The  spectral  data of (a) Fig. 5(a) and (b) Fig. 6(a) replotted  as a function of the  photon
energy E of the probe light.

Expanded section of Fig. 8 (the same color coding as in Fig. 8).

Expanded section of Fig. 9 (the same color coding as in Fig. 9).

Fig. 6S

Fig. 7S

Fig. 8S

Fig. 9S

Fig. 10S

Fig. 11S

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Crowell jp0*****, Supporting Info Page 10

TA  spectra  for  the  electron  in  D2O  analyzed  using  eqs.  (2)  and  (3)  with  the  variable
parameter  ν  and  fixed  parameter  WL   (i.e.,  in  the  same  way  as  the  high-temperature
spectra  analyzed  by  Bartels et  al. [] and discussed  in  section  A.1  of  Appendix  A,  eqs.
(A1)  to  (A5)).  See section 4.2 for more detail. The  time windows  are given  in  the  color
scale to the right of the  plot.  The  vertical bars are 95% confidence limits. The  solid lines
are least-square fits; the dashed lines are guides to the eye.  The  bold solid (yellow) line is
the  spectrum  S E(
) of hydrated  electron in D2O.  The  time  dependence  of  the  optimum
parameters is given in Fig. 12S.

Fig. 12S

Fig. 13S

Time profiles of the optimum  parameters (a)  Emax , (b)  WG , and (c)  ν for the  electron in
D2O. See section 4.2 and Fig. 11S for more detail.

Open circles: TA  signal for the  electron in D2O  vs.  the  wavelength  λ of the  probe  light
( λ> 1.1 µm). The delay time between the  200 nm pump  and the  probe  pulses  was  fixed
(this delay time corresponded to the last 10% of the pump pulse duration). The data  were
obtained in a single take; a set of interference filters on a rotating wheel was  used to  select
the probe wavelength from the white light supercontinuum. The solid line is a guide to  the
eye.

     λ, nm

  1 7 0 0
  1 1 0 0
  8 5 0
  7 5 0

d
e
z
i
l

a
m
r
o
n

 
,
 
λ
D
O
∆

1

0

-1

0

1

2

3

4

time, ps

Lian et al., Figure 1S

(a)(a)

 

 
0
0
8
D
O
∆

0.01

0.001

4

2

4

2

4

2

1.84 ± 0.07

2

3

4 5 6

2

3

4 5

0.1

1

200 nm pulse energy, µJ

 
0
0
8
D
O
∆

1.0

0.8

0.6

(ii)

(i)

(b)

1

10

time, ps

100

1000

Lian et al., Figure 2S

(a)

ν

2.4

2.2

2.0

1.8

2.0

V
e

 
,

x
a
m
E

1.5

1.0

G
a
u
s
s

i

a
n
h
a

 

l
f
-

i

w
d
t
h

,
 
e
V

0.50

0.45

0.40

(b)

0

1 0 0

2 0 0

3 0 0

temperature, C

Lian et al., Figure 3S

(ii)

(i)

1

d
e
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
n

 
,
)

E

(

S

0

0

1

2
E, eV

3

4

Lian et al., Figure 4S

5

0

-5

1

0

 

2
-
0
1
x

d
e
z
i
l

a
m
r
o
n

 
,

D
O
∆

H2O 

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

E, eV

Lian et al., Figure 5S

D2O 

 

2
-

0
1
x

d
e
z
i
l

a
m
r
o
n

 
,
 
λ
D
O
∆

2

0

-2
0.2

0.1

0.0

1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

λ, µm

Lian et al., Figure 6S

1.0

0.5

0.0

d
e
z
i
l

a
m
r
o
n

 
,

0
0
3
1
D
O
∆

 H2 O
 1 M HClO4  

0

1 0 0

2 0 0

3 0 0

time, ps

Lian et al., Figure 7S

S
8
 
e
r
u
g
F

i

 
,
.
l
a
 
t
e
 

n
a
i
L

1.0

(a)

H2O

1.0

2.0

2.5

1.0

(b)

D2O

)
t
,

E

(

S

0.5

0.0

)
t
,

E

(

S

0.5

0.0

t 1, ps

 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1.0
 1.1
 1.2

1.5

E, eV

t 1 , ps

 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1.0
 1.1
 1.2

1.0

2.0

2.5

1.5

E, eV

H2O

λ

0.5

)
t
,
λ
(

S

0.0

0

2

4
time, ps

6

Lian et al., Figure 9S

D2O

λ

0.3

)
t
,
λ
(

S

0.0

0

2

4
time, ps

6

Lian et al., Figure 10S

5
.
0
-
5
2
.
0
 

5
7
.
0
-
5
.
0
 

5
2
.
0
-
0
 

1
-
5
7
.
0
 

 
5
2
.
1
-
1
 

5
.
1
-
5
2
.
1
 

2
-
5
.
1
 

5
.
2
-
2
 

3
-
5
.
2
 

4
-
3
 

5
-
4
 

s
p

 
,

w
o
d
n
w

i

S
1
1
 
e
r
u
g

i

F

 
,
.
l
a
 
t
e
 

n
a
i
L

5
.
2

0

.

2

5

.

1

V
e

 
,

E

0
.
1

0
.
0

0
.
1

5
.
0

S(E,t)

2.8

2.4

2.0

ν

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

1.8

1.7

1.6

V
e

 
,
 
G
W

V
e

 
,

x
a
m
E

(c)

(b)

(a)

0

1

2

4

5

6

3
t 1, ps

Lian et al., Figure 12S

-2

3x10

x
a
m
D
O
∆

2

1

0

1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

wavelength, µm

Lian et al., Figure 13S

