J. Phys. Chem. A

JP000000

version 3, May 4/2004

Light-induced temperature jump causes power-dependent ultrafast
kinetics of electrons generated in multiphoton ionization of liquid water.
1

Robert A. Crowell, *a Rui Lian, a Ilya A. Shkrob, a
Jun Qian, a 2)  Dmitri A. Oulianov, a and Stanislas Pommeret a,b

a Chemistry Division, Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 S. Cass Ave., Argonne,
IL 60439.
b CEA/Saclay, DSM/DRECAM/SCM/URA 331 CNRS 91191 Gif-Sur-Yvette
Cedex, France.

Received:

The submitted manuscript has been created by the University of Chicago as
Operator  of  Argonne  National  Laboratory  ("Argonne")  under  Contract  No.
W-31-109-ENG-38  with  the  U.  S.  Department  of  Energy.    The  U.  S.
Government  retains  for  itself,  and  others  acting  on  its  behalf,  a  paid-up,
nonexclusive,  irrevocable  worldwide  license  in  said  article  to  reproduce,
prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly
and display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government.

Abstract

Picosecond  geminate  recombination  kinetics  for  electrons  generated  by

multiphoton ionization of liquid water become power dependent when the radiance of the
excitation light is greater than 0.3-0.5 TW/cm2 (the terawatt regime). To elucidate the

mechanism of this power dependence, tri- 400 nm photon ionization of water has been

studied using pump-probe laser spectroscopy on the pico- and femtosecond time scales.

We suggest that the observed kinetic transformations are caused by a rapid temperature

jump in  the sample. Such a jump  is inherent to  multiphoton  ionization  in  the terawatt

regime,  when  the  absorption  of  the  pump  light  along  the  optical  path  becomes  very
nonuniform.  The  heating  of  water  is  substantial  (tens  of  oC)  because  the  3-photon

quantum  yield  of  the  ionization  is  relatively  low,  ca.  0.42,  and  a  large  fraction  of  the

excitation energy is released into the solvent bulk as heat. Evidence of the temperature

jump is the observation of a red shift in the absorption spectrum of (thermalized) electron

1

and  by  characteristic  "flattening"  of  the  thermalization  dynamics  in  the  near  IR.  The

temperature jump in the terawatt regime might be ubiquitous in multiphoton ionization in

molecular  liquids.  The  implications  of  these  observations  for  femtosecond  pulse

radiolysis of water are discussed.

___________________________________________________________________________________

1 Work performed under the auspices of the Office of Science, Division of Chemical

Science, US-DOE under contract number W-31-109-ENG-38.

*  To  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed:  Tel  630-252-8089,  FAX  630-

2524993, e-mail: rob_crowell@anl.gov.

2  presently at the Experimental facility Division, Advanced Photon Source, Argonne
National Laboratory, 9700 S. Cass Ave., Argonne IL 60439; Tel 630-252-5874, FAX
630-2529303, e-mail: jqian@aps.anl.gov.

2

1. Introduction.

Multiphoton ionization of liquid water exhibits two distinct energetic regimes that are

determined  by  the  total  excitation  energy:  When  this  total  energy  is  below  a  certain
− )
threshold value (ca. 9.5 eV), the spatial distribution of the ejected photoelectrons ( eaq

around their parent holes is narrow (ca. 1 nm in width) and the geminate recombination

of these electrons is relatively fast. Above this threshold energy, the distribution increases

to  2-3  nm  (ca.  12.4  eV)    and  the  geminate  recombination  kinetics  becomes  relatively
slow.  1,2,3  It  is  believed  that  the  photoelectron  ejected  in  the  high-energy  ionization

process is promoted directly into the conduction band of the liquid, whereas in the low

energy photoionization, some other process occurs, because the energy is insufficient to
access  this  band.  1,3  This  (autoionization)  process  should  involve  a  proton  transfer  in

concert  with  the  loss  of  the  electron;  the  latter  is  sometimes  regarded  as  an  electron
transfer to a "pre-existing trap" in the bulk water.  4,5,6 The width of the initial electron
distribution  is  then  defined  by  the  availability  of  suitable  electron  traps.  5,6  Several

models for this low-energy photoprocess have been suggested (see refs. 1 and 3 for more

detail); the important point is that in all of these models, such a photoprocess is viewed

entirely differently from the high-energy ionization.

Interestingly, the transformation of a narrow electron distribution (that manifests

itself through rapid geminate kinetics and low survival probability for the electron) into a

broad  electron  distribution  (that  manifests  itself  through  slow  geminate  kinetics  and

greater survival probability) can be brought about simply by changing the radiance of the
pump  light.  1,7,8,9  Such  changes  have  been  observed  by  several  ultrafast  spectroscopy
groups, including this laboratory. In particular, Crowell and Bartels 1,2 demonstrated that

rapid geminate kinetics of hydrated electrons observed in three 400 nm photon ionization

of  water  becomes  slower  and  the  fraction  of  escaped  electrons  increases  when  the

radiance of the 400 nm light is in the terawatt range. The same trend was observed in the
similar terawatt regime by Schwartz et al.  7  and  Eisenthal  et  al.  8  What  causes  such  a

dramatic transformation?

3

Crowell and Bartels suggested that this changeover is caused by the absorption of

one or more 400 nm photons by a light-absorbing species generated within the duration
of the short excitation pulse (which, in their experiments, was 4-5 ps fwhm).  1,2 In the

following, this mechanism (which may be regarded as the condensed-phase analog of the

above threshold ionization in the gas phase) is referred to as the "3+1" mechanism. The

suggestion  was  made  that  the  species  in  question  is  a  pre-thermalized  or  thermalized

(solvated)  electron  generated  in  the  course  of  photoionization.  Subsequent  studies  by
Barbara and coworkers 10 seemed to support such a scenario: it was shown that one- 400

nm  photon  excitation  of  fully  thermalized,  hydrated  electron  promotes  it  into  the

conduction band of the solvent where it thermalizes and localizes after migrating > 1 nm

away  from  the  hole.  Consequently,  the  geminate  recombination  is  suppressed  and  the

decay of the electron is slowed down. This photoprocess is very efficient: the quantum

yield of the suppression is near unity. Thus, one of the possible mechanisms for the "3+1"

photoprocess  is  the  absorption  within  the  duration  of  the  ionizing  pulse  of  a  400  nm

photon  by  the  electrons  generated  in  the  photoionization  process;  the  electron  gains

sufficient energy to penetrate deeply into the conduction band of the solvent, reaching the

same extended states that are accessed in the course of high-energy water ionization. This

"3+1" mechanism naturally explains why the resulting electron distribution is broad.

While  such  a  mechanism  seems  plausible  for  picosecond  photoionization  of

water, it is less clear how such a mechanism can account for the changeover in the kinetic

behavior  observed  for  shorter,  femtosecond  pulses.  The  thermalization  of  the  electron

takes a relatively long time (up to 2 ps), whereas the pre-thermalized electron is a poor

light  absorber 

in 

the  blue.  In  fact, 

the  spectral  manifestation  of 

the

thermalization/localization  process  is  a  rapid  blue  shift  of  the  absorption  band  of  the
electron initially centered in the near IR to the visible; 11-15 the initial absorbance of pre-
thermalized  electron  at  400  nm  is  negligible.  11,13,14  Even  fully  thermalized,  hydrated
electron has relatively low absorptivity at 400 nm (the molar absorptivity is ca. 2600 M-1
cm-1). 16 Since the photoexcitation of the electron competes with that of the solvent itself,

and absorption of 400 nm light by water is very efficient in the terawatt regime, it seems

unlikely that a large fraction of photoelectrons can be excited within the duration of a

short  excitation  pulse.  The  estimates  given  in  the  Appendix  (see  the  Supporting

4

Information), using the photophysical parameters determined in section 3.1 of the present

work, confirms these suspicions: even in the most favorable scenario, too few electrons

would be photoexcited by 400 nm photons, and the observed transition from one kinetic

regime to another could not occur. Thus, the only way to explain the observed kinetics

changeover using the "3+1" mechanism is to postulate that some other species, perhaps a

short-lived  excited  state  of  water,  absorbs  the  extra  400  nm  photon.  However,  this

explanation is presently not supported by our data since no light-absorbing state with the

postulated properties has been observed on the sub-picosecond time scale (section 3.2).

Either  this  400  nm  light-absorbing  species  has  extremely  short  lifetime  (and  then  it

cannot  absorb  a  sufficiently  large  number  of  400  nm  photons  to  make  the  "3+1"

mechanism efficient) or such a species (e.g., the excited state) does not exist. In the latter

case, it becomes unclear what species is responsible for the "3+1" photoexcitation.

In  this  article,  the  terawatt  regime  of  400  nm  photoionization  of  water  is

reinvestigated on the femto- and pico- second time scales. We argue that the changeover

in the kinetic profiles observed in the terawatt regime is caused by a rapid temperature

jump, which is inherent to multiphoton ionization in the terawatt regime. The heating of
water is substantial (tens of oC) because the 3-photon quantum yield of the ionization is

relatively low, ca. 0.42, and a large fraction of the excitation energy is released into the

solvent  bulk  as  heat.  In  this  terawatt  regime,  the  absorption  of  light  is  extremely
nonuniform (for excitation light radiance > 1 TW/cm2, most of the 400 nm photons are
absorbed in a 10 µm thick layer near the surface; see section 3.1), and the local density of

the ionization and heat-release events is very high. Above a certain critical concentration
(achieved at ca. 1 TW/cm2) the released heat rapidly (< 5 ps) reaches the geminate pair,

and the geminate recombination thereby occurs in hot water. Evidence of the temperature

jump is the observation of a red shift in the spectrum of (thermalized) electron and by

characteristic "flattening" of the thermalization dynamics in the near IR. The latter effect

has also been observed in bi- 266 nm photonic ionization of water in the terawatt regime.
9,17  For  this  266  nm  ionization,  the  2-photon  quantum  yield  is  also  relatively  low,  ca.
0.52.  17a  It  is  possible  that  the  temperature  jump  is  a  general  feature  of  multiphoton

ionization of molecular liquids in the terawatt regime.

5

To save space, the Appendix and some figures (Figs. 1S to 8S) are given in the

Supporting Information.

2. Experimental.

Laser  spectroscopy.  Transient  absorbance  (TA)  measurements  reported  below  were

obtained using a 1 kHz Ti:sapphire setup the details of which are given in ref. 18.  A

diode-pumped  Nd:YVO  laser  was  used  to  pump  a  Kerr  lens  mode-locked  Ti:sapphire

laser operating at 80 MHz (Spectra Physics Tsunami). The 45 fs fwhm pulses from the

oscillator were stretched to 80 ps in a single grating stretcher. Single pulses were then

selected at 1 kHz with a Pockels cell. The 2 nJ pulses were amplified to 4 mJ in a home-

built  two-stage  multipass  Ti:sapphire  amplifier.  The  amplified  pulses  were  passed

through a grating compressor that yielded Gaussian probe pulses of 60 fs fwhm and 3 mJ

centered at 800 nm. The pulse-to-pulse stability was typically 3%.

The amplified beam was split into two parts. One beam was used to generate the

probe pulses while the other was used to generate the 400 nm (second harmonic) pump

pulses by frequency doubling in a thin BBO crystal. The pump power was determined

using a calibrated thermopile meter (Ophir Optronics model 2A-SH). The probe pulse

was derived from the same Ti:sapphire laser beam and delayed in time as much as 600 ps

using a 3-pass 25 mm delay line. For kinetic measurements, 150-200 points acquired on a

quasi-logarithmic grid were typically used. If not stated otherwise, the probe pulse was
800  nm.  To  obtain  probe  light  of  wavelength  λ  other  than  800  nm,  a  white  light

supercontinuum was generated by focussing the 800 nm light on a 1 mm thick sapphire

disk; the probe light was selected using 10 nm fwhm interference filters.

The  pump  and  probe  beams  were  perpendicularly  polarized,  focused  to  round

o
. The spot sizes were determined by scanning the
spots and overlapped in the sample at 5
beam with a 10 µm pinhole or by imaging on a CCD array. The maximum fluence of the
400 nm photons was 0.4 J/cm2. At the high end of this power range, dielectric breakdown

of water was observed.

Fast Si photodiodes were used to measure the transmitted and the reference probe

and  pump  light  for  every  laser  shot.  Testing  these  photodiodes  against  the  thermopile

detector  as  a  function  of  400  nm  light  radiance  showed  perfect  linearity  of  the

6

photoresponse over the entire power range. The photodiode signals were amplified and

sampled using home-built electronics and a 16-bit A/D converter. A mechanical chopper

locked  at  50%  repetition  rate  of  the  laser  was  used  to  block  the  pump  pulses  on

alternative shots. The standard deviation for a pump-probe measurement was typically 10
µOD,  and  the  "noise"  was  dominated  by  the  variation  of  the  pump  intensity  and  flow

instabilities in the liquid jet.

In  some  kinetic  measurements,  the  radius  of  the  pump  beam  was  2-3  times

smaller than the radius of the probe beam (usually, the pump beam envelops the probe

beam at the sample). This "reverse" geometry was used to reduce the sensitivity of the

TA signal to imperfections in the 400 nm beam and thermal lensing and to minimize the

long-term walk-off of the two beams relative to each other as the delay stage is moved.

Naturally, the TA signal obtained with the "reverse" beam geometry is much smaller than

that obtained using the "normal" beam geometry (pump beam enveloping the probe beam

at the sample), and its power dependence is different.

The transmission of 400 nm light  Tp , the pump radiance  J p, and photoinduced
absorbance  ∆ODλ at the probe wavelength  λ were determined from these measurements.

To obtain the power dependencies, 20-50 series of (1-5)x103 pulses were averaged; the

vertical and horizontal bars given in the plots correspond to 95% confidence limits using

Pearson analysis. The pump power was continually monitored, and shots in which the

absolute  deviation  of  the  power  exceeded  1-3%  of  the  mean  value  were  rejected;  the

same protocol was used to obtain the TA kinetics. The typical rejection rate was 10-50%,

depending on the pump power.

The  pulse  widths  of  the  pump  and  probe  pulses  were  determined  by  harmonic

generation in a thin BBO crystal. Alternatively, the rise time of the TA signal from free
photocarriers generated by 400 nm light in a 1.4 µm thick film of amorphous Si:H alloy
(8 at. % H) was determined. 19

Materials and the flow system. The experiments were carried out with a home-made high-
speed  (10  m/s)  jet  with  a  stainless  steel  90 µm nozzle. In some experiments, a better-
quality  jet  with  a  70  µm  sapphire  nozzle  (V.  Kyburz  AG)  was  used.  To  obtain  the

kinetics in the low-radiance limit, the kinetic measurements were carried out using (i) a

7

home-made 560 µm thick high-speed jet or (ii) a 5 mm optical path cell with suprasil

windows (in the latter case, the pump beam was focussed in the center of the cell to avoid

damage to the windows). Pure He- or N2-saturated water with dc conductivity < 2 nS/cm

was circulated by a gear pump in an all 316 stainless steel and Teflon flow system. The

experiments above the room temperature were carried out as explained in ref. 18.

3. Results and Discussion.

3.1. Power dependence of pump transmission and product  yield.

We first consider an idealized photosystem in which the absorbance of the pump

light by the photoproduct(s) is negligible (see ref. 17a for the derivation of equations). A

more complex situation in which the photoproduct (e.g., the electron) also absorbs the
) be the time-

pump light is considered in the Appendix (see the Supplement). Let  I z r t
, ;

(

dependent amplitude

(
I z r t
, ;

) =

J

p

(
  exp

−

2

r

ρ
2
p

−

2

t

τ
2
p

)

of the axially-symmetric, plane-wave Gaussian laser pulse propagating in the direction  z
through the medium with n-photon absorption coefficient  β

n  (here z=0  corresponds  to

the incidence at the sample). In eq. (1),  ρ

p  and  τ

p   are  the  1 e beam radius and pulse

width of the Gaussian pulse, respectively, and  J p is the (peak) pump radiance (so that the

total pump power  I p  is given by  I

p

= π

/
3 2

J

p

ρ τ
2
p
p

). The absorption of the pump light by

the sample is given by equation

(
∂
I z r t
, ;

)

∂
z

= −
 

 

β
n

(
I z r t
, ;

n

) ,

 

and  the  formation  rate  of  the  product  (i.e.,  the  electron)  generated  by  simultaneous
absorption of n photons with quantum yield of φ

n is given by

∂
( , ; )
c z r t

∂
t

 

= −
 

 

φ
n

∂

( , ; )
n I z r t

 

∂
z

,

(1)

(2)

(3)

8

where  c r z t

( , ; )  is  the  concentration  of  the  photoproduct.  We  will  assume  that  this

photoproduct does not absorb the pump light during the laser excitation of water and does

not decay in the time interval before detection. From eq. (3) we obtain that the optical

density of the photoproduct by the end of the photoexcitation pulse is given by

β
pr

 

(
dz c z r t
, ;

 

= +∞

) =
 

 

φ β
 
pr
n

n

 

[
 

(

I

dt

0
, ;
r t

) − (

, ;
I L r t

]
)

,

+∞

∫

−∞

L

∫

0

where L is the sample thickness and  β

pr  is the absorption coefficient of the product at the

probe wavelength. For  n > 1, eq. (2) has the solution

(
I z r t
, ;

) =
 

0
  ( ,
I

, )
r t

+

β
n

−(

 
z n

)
1

0
  ( ,
I

, )
r t

(
1

)−
1 1

n

−(
n

)
1

 

.

Combining eqs. (1) to (5), the transmission of the pump light  Tp  through the sample is

given by

= (

2

T
p

)
π ρ τ   

J

2
p

p

p

 
dr r

 

(
, ;
dt I L r t

 

)

  ,

∞

∫

0

+∞

∫

−∞

and the photoinduced change  ∆Tpr  in the transmission  Tpr  of the probe light is given by

−

∆T

pr

=

 
dr r

   exp 

2
ρ
2
pr

∞

∫

0





−

2

r
ρ
2
pr

−

φ β
n
e
 
n

+∞

∫

−∞

[
 

(

I

dt

0
, ;
r t

) − (

, ;
I L r t


]
)



(

) is given by eq. (5) for  z

where  I L r t
, ;

pr   is  the  1 e  radius of the Gaussian
probe beam. The photoinduced change  ∆OD in the decadic optical density of the sample

L=   and  ρ

(i.e., 

∆

OD

the  TA  signal) 
)

+(
log 1

T Tpr
pr

∆

= −

is  related 

to 

the  quantity  given  by  eq.  (7)  by

. Using eqs. (6) and (7), the absorption coefficient  β

n  and the

quantum yield  φ

n can be determined for the known parameters  ρ

p,  τ

p , and  ρ

pr  from the

dependencies of  ∆OD and  Tp  vs.  J p (Fig. 1). For  ρ
r ≈ 0  can  be  considered,  and  the  averaging  over  the  polar  coordinate  in  eq.  (7)  is

, only the beam of light with

ρ
p

<<

pr

unnecessary. In such a case, the function  C z
( )

=

( ,
c z r

=

0
;

t

= +∞

)

 gives the concentration

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

9

profile of the reaction product along the path of the probe light (Fig. 2(a)). 17a,b The higher

the  pump  radiance,  the  steeper  is  this  profile.  Using  these  concentration  profiles,  the

decay kinetics of the electron due to cross recombination in the bulk can be simulated

(Fig. 2(b) and section 3.4)

In Fig. 1, a typical dependence of the TA signal from the electron for  λ=800 nm

probe light (trace (i)) and 400 nm light transmittance of the pump laser pulse (trace (ii))

vs. the incident pump radiance is shown by symbols. The TA signal of the (hydrated)
electron  along  the  path  of  800  nm  light  traversing  the  L=70  µm  thick  water  jet  was

determined at the delay time of 5 ps, when the thermalization dynamics is over and the

geminate  recombination  of  the  electron  is  still  negligible  (section  3.4).  For  this
measurement,  the  pump  pulse  was  189  fs  fwhm  (τ

beams were 210 µm fwhm ( ρ

p=126 µm) and 40 µm fwhm ( ρ

p =120  fs)  and  the  pump  and  probe
pr =24 µm), respectively.

The refractive index  nw  of water of 1.343 for 405 nm light obtained in ref. 20 was used to
calculate  the  reflectivity  of  the  jet  surface,  R =0.0214  (multiple  reflections  were
)R .
neglected), and the pump radiance used in eq. (1) was corrected by a factor of  1 −(
The decadic molar absorptivity of 18500 M-1 cm-1 for hydrated electron was used. 16 The

solid  lines  in  Fig.  1  are  least-squares  fits  to  eqs.  (6)  and  (7)  assuming  a  3-photon
photoprocess  ( n = 3)  which  gave  the  optimum  parameters  β
3=267±4  cm3/TW2  and
3=0.415±0.006.  The  absorption  coefficient  β
φ
3  obtained  in  this  study  is  considerably
lower than 900 cm3/TW2 given by Naskrecki et al.  20 who used a thicker, 1 cm optical
path sample and low-radiance 400 nm light (< 0.1 TW/cm2) for water photoexcitation.

Such disagreements are fairly typical for measurements of photophysical parameters for
multiphoton excitation. 17a

As seen from the linear section of the plot of  ∆OD800 vs.  J p given in Fig. 1, the
3∝ , holds to  J p < 0.3 W/cm3. Above this radiance, the TA curve

J p

800

power law,  ∆OD

bends down; in the same range, the transmission of 400 nm light rapidly decreases with

increase in the laser power. The bending over of the photoinduced absorption is due to

the  nonuniformity  of  the  400  nm  light  absorption  by  the  jet;  the  typical  (simulated)
concentration profile  C z( ) of the photoelectrons along the beam axis for  J p=1.6 TW/cm2

10

is  shown  in  Fig.  2(a),  trace  (i).  Compare  this  profile  with  the  concentration  profiles
simulated for lower radiance,  J p=1 TW/cm2 (Fig. 2(a), trace (ii)) and  J p=0.5 TW/cm2

(Fig. 2(a), trace (iii)). It is seen that in the terawatt regime, most of the 400 nm light is
absorbed  in  a  thin  10  µm  layer  near  the  jet  surface.  This  shortening  of  the  effective

optical  path  of  the  probe  light  is  the  reason  for  slowing  down  (seen  in  Fig.  1)  of  the
increase in the  ∆OD800 with increasing  J p. When a straight line is drawn on this double
logarithmic plot through the data points for which  J p > 0.5 TW/cm2 (trace (iii) in Fig. 1),

the slope of this line is close to unity, and this behavior initially led us to believe that

"3+1" photoexcitation is vigorous in this terawatt regime. A detailed model for this "3+1"

photoprocess is given in the Appendix and Figs. 1S, 2S, and 3S in the Supplement. As

seen from Fig. 2S therein, the postulated absorption of 400 nm photons by photoproducts

(e.g., electrons) is not needed to explain the power dependencies shown in Fig. 1, insofar

as the inhomogeneous light absorption alone explains the observed trend. Furthermore, as

shown in the Appendix, when the occurrence of the  "3+1" photoexcitation is postulated,

the fit quality in Fig. 1 does not improve.

While  the  general  behavior  shown  in  Fig.  1  was  reproducible,  the  power
dependencies  of  the  TA  for  J p>1  TW/cm2  varied  somewhat  when  the  excitation

conditions and beam geometries were changed between the runs (see several series of the

TA measurements plotted together in Fig. 4S). As shown below, in this terawatt regime,

the heat release and thermal lensing by the photoexcited sample are significant and cause

irreproducibility.

3.2. Thermalization dynamics and the electron spectrum in the terawatt regime.

As mentioned in the Introduction, one of the most striking kinetic transformations

that occur in the terawatt regime is the change of short-term electron dynamics (t<10 ps)

occurring during the thermalization, relaxation, and hydration of the electron. The typical
evolution of  λ= 1.2 µm kinetics as a function of pump radiance is shown in Fig. 3(a) (on

a double logarithmic scale) and Fig. 3(b) (on a linear scale, after normalization at t=5 ps).
As the pump radiance increases from 0.4 to 2.1 TW/cm2 the relative amplitude of the

initial "spike" decreases almost 3 times. This "spike" is from a short-lived precursor of

11

the hydrated electron whose absorption spectrum in the near IR undergoes a rapid blue
shift in the first 2 ps after photogeneration. 11-15,21 In Fig. 4, the ratio of the t=10 ps and
the "spike" absorbance signals for  λ=1.2 µm are plotted vs. the 400 nm light radiance.
For the pump radiance < 1 TW/cm2, the ratio of these two absorbance signals changes
little  as  a  function  of  the  laser  power.  However,  above  1  TW/cm2,  there  is  a  rapid

increase  in  the  ratio  with  the  laser  power,  indicating  considerable  flattening  of  the

thermalization kinetics in the terawatt regime (which is also apparent from Fig. 3(b)). The

remarkable feature of Fig. 4 is the abruptness of the transition between the low-radiance

and high-radiance regimes.

The relative decrease in the amplitude of the "spike" with increasing pump power
becomes  lower  at  shorter  wavelength  of  the  probe  light.  For  λ=1.05  and  λ=1.1  µm
kinetics, the effect is smaller (Fig. 5S); for  λ<800 nm, no change of the thermalization

kinetics with the pump radiance is observed (Fig. 6S). While the thermalization stage is
over in 5 ps, the electron spectra obtained in the terawatt regime ( J p=1.9 TW/cm2)  at

t=50 ps are still red-shifted with respect to the electron spectra of hydrated electrons in

the  room  temperature  water  (Fig.  5(a)).  As  known  from  nanosecond  pulse  radiolysis
studies,  16,22,23  the  latter  spectra  undergo  systematic  red  shift  with  increasing  water

temperature (see the Supplement for the explicit temperature dependencies of the spectral

parameters).  From  these  data,  it  is  possible  to  estimate  the  solvent  temperature

corresponding to the red shift observed in Fig. 5(a). The surprising answer is that this

temperature jump is very substantial, since the position of the maximum of the absorption
band corresponds to a bulk temperature of 80 oC. The origin of this temperature increase

and the red shift of the "thermalized" spectrum (Fig. 5(b)) is discussed in the next section.

Below, we give a qualitative explanation of how the temperature jump accounts for the

observed  changes  in  the  thermalization  kinetics  as  observed  by  pump-probe  TA

spectroscopy:

When the localized, pre-thermalized electron is generated by photoionization of

water, it has > 1 eV excess energy and consequently its spectrum is not too sensitive to

the  temperature  of  the  medium.  From  the  standpoint  of  laser  spectroscopy,  the

thermalization process can be viewed as a systematic blue shift of the absorption band of

12

this electron in the visible and near IR.  11-15,21  Unlike  the  spectrum  of  the  initial,  pre-

thermalized species, the spectrum of thermalized electron strongly depends on the water
temperature, systematically shifting to the red with increasing temperature. 16,22,23 Thus,

in  hot  water  the  blue  shift  of  the  electron  band  during  the  thermalization/hydration

process becomes progressively smaller with increasing temperature. Since the "spike" in

the TA kinetics observed to the red of 800 nm is due to this spectral shift, this "spike"

(after normalization by the t=5 ps absorbance) becomes relatively smaller in amplitude as

the temperature increases. This point is exemplified by Fig. 6 in which thermalization
dynamics  of  electrons  observed  at  λ=1  µm  and  normalized  at  t=5  ps  are  given  as

function of water temperature: 28, 57, and 85 oC (for 3-photon ionization of water with
0.2 TW/cm2 400 nm light). Similar changes in the near-IR kinetics as a function of water
temperature  have  been  observed  by  Unterreiner  and  coworkers.  14 These changes look

remarkably similar to those observed for room temperature water in the terawatt regime.
The fact that the time profiles of thermalization kinetics observed for  λ<800 nm (Fig.

6S)  do  not  change  with  the  laser  power  does  not  contradict  this  picture:  First,  these

kinetics  change  little  in  hot  water  (see  ref.  14).  Second,  our  recent  studies  of  electron

thermalization in 200 nm biphotonic ionization of water suggest that the time profile of
the kinetics observed at  λ=450-700 nm changes little with the wavelength λ. 21 Due to

this weak dependence of the time profile on the water temperature and the wavelength, a

red shift of a few tens of nanometers is inconsequential.

3.3. The temperature jump.

In this section, the origin of the temperature jump observed in the terawatt regime

is  discussed.  We  emphasize  that  this  temperature  jump  is  not  related  to  the  "local"

increase in temperature during electron thermalization. The latter has been postulated by
Keiding and co-workers 24,25 to account for sub-picosecond relaxation of the electron, by

rapid heat transfer to its surroundings. As seen from the previous section, in the terawatt

regime, the water stays hot well after this relaxation stage is completed and the electron is

in  thermal  equilibrium  with  its  environment.  In  other  words,  the  temperature  jump

observed in this regime is a bulk, macroscopic effect.

13

We  suggest  that  the  temperature  jump  is  a  natural  consequence  of  the

photophysics of 400 nm ionization. To demonstrate this point, we consider a particular

set  of  excitation  conditions  given  in  the  caption  to  Fig.  2.  In  Fig.  2(a),  trace  (i),  the
concentration profile of electrons simulated using  φ

n  obtained in section 3.1. is
plotted vs. the penetration depth z of 400 nm, 1.6 TW/cm2 light. At the surface of the jet,
the electron concentration is ca. 90 mM, while the concentration averaged over the 90 µm

n and  β

thick jet is ca. 6 times lower. The deposition of the light energy into water follows the

same profile, i.e., the concentration of electrons is maximum exactly where most energy

is deposited. If all of this absorbed energy were used to ionize the solvent, relatively little

heat  from  the  electron  thermalization  would  be  deposited  into  water  (which  would

account, by a conservative estimate, for the release of 1 eV of heat per ionization event).
However,  as  shown  in  section  3.1,  the  quantum  yield  φ

n  of  ionization  is  only  0.42.

Assuming that water molecules that do not ionize dump the excess energy into the bath,

we obtain that 5.5 to 6.5 eV of the total absorbed energy (equal to 9.3 eV) ends up as heat

(the exact estimate depends on how the energy released in the electron thermalization and

H-OH  dissociation  is  counted).  At  the  surface,  the  density  of  the  energy  absorbed  by
water is ca. 190 J/cm3 which is equivalent to 46 cal/g. The heat capacity  Cw of water is 1
cal g-1 K-1 and the density  ρ
w  is 1 g/cm3. 26 Provided that 60% of the absorbed energy is
released  as  heat,  the  temperature  of  water  would  increase  by  28  oC.  Using  the
spectroscopic data of Bartels and coworkers, 22 it can be shown that to double the 1.1 µm

absorbance of the hydrated electron, by a temperature-induced red shift of its absorption
spectrum, a thermal jump of 33  oC would be sufficient. The temperature jump rapidly

decreases as a function of the penetration depth of the 400 nm light. However, since the

electron  concentration  tracks  the  same  profile,  the  resulting  spectral  shift  is  still
−   spectrum  as  a  function  of  temperature

substantial.  Using  the  parameterization  of  eaq

given by Bartels and coworkers  22 and averaging along the path of the beam, a sample-

average spectrum in Fig. 5(b) was obtained. This spectrum is notably red shifted with

respect to the equilibrium  eaq

−  spectrum at 25 oC.

14

jet would take a long time. The heat conductivity κ

Importantly, once the heat is released, the equilibration of the solvent across the
w  of water is 6 mW cm-1 K-1 so that
 is 1.4x10-3 cm2/s.  26 A temperature gradient over 10

the heat diffusivity  µ κ ρ

=

w

w

w wC

µm (the same as the concentration gradient shown in Fig. 2(a)) would take ca. 0.3 ms to

disappear by diffusive heat exchange. Thus, the temperature stays constant on the sub-

nanosecond  time  scale  of  our  kinetic  observations.  Another  important  point  is  that

homogenization  of  the  heat  on  the  microscopic  scale  would  be  rapid.  In  the  model

discussed above, the heat release and water ionization occur in different excitation events,

i.e., to observe the effect of the heat (the temperature jump) on the electron spectrum and

geminate recombination and thermalization dynamics, the heat released in an excitation

event  should  reach  the  environment  of  the  electron  generated  in  a  separate  ionization

event. It is the latter consideration that explains why the kinetic transformations observed

in the terawatt regime are relatively abrupt: not only should a sufficient amount of heat be

released to generate the temperature jump, the density of the excitation events should be

sufficiently high as well - otherwise, the heat release in spatially isolated events would

have  little  effect  on  the  short-term  dynamics.  Again,  the  photophysics  of  tri-  400  nm

photon excitation are such that the critical density of these events is achieved in the same

regime where the temperature jump is substantial. E.g., the electron concentration at the

surface of the jet in Fig. 2(a), trace (i), is so high that the average distance between the

excitation events is ca. 1.6 nm; on this scale, thermal equilibration of the solvent would

take only 3 ps.

In the estimates for the instantaneous temperature jump given above, H-OH bond

dissociation of photoexcited water molecules was neglected. The branching ratio between

water ionization and bond dissociation in three 400 nm photon excitation of water is not
known. In bi- 266 nm photonic excitation of water, Thomsen et al. 25 estimated that the

branching  ratio  between  the  dissociation  and  ionization  is  0.55:1.  Note  that  rapid

recombination of caged H and OH radicals deposits the heat back into the solvent.

3.4. Geminate kinetics and the escape probability.

15

Since the amplitude of the TA signal from the electron changes very rapidly with

400 nm light radiance, it is difficult to obtain good quality kinetics in the low and high

power  regimes  using  the  same  sample.  At  low  power,  the  absorption  is  weak  and  a
relatively thick sample is needed to obtain a TA signal of (1-10)x10-3 OD to sample the

geminate kinetics with a reasonable signal-to-noise ratio. Conversely, at intermediate and

high pump power, only short-path high-speed jets could be used to avoid damage to the

sample.

In  the  terawatt  regime,  the  yield  of  the  electrons  is  so  high  that  cross

recombination in the bulk solvent begins to occur on the sub-nanosecond time scale. This
effect is mainly the consequence of inhomogeneous absorption of light. 9,17 In Fig. 2(b)

(solid  lines), the decay kinetics for homogeneous recombination of electrons averaged

along the path of the probe light are simulated for the initial concentration profiles shown

in  Fig.  2(a),  as  a  function  of  the  pump  radiance,  assuming  a  (bulk)  recombination
constant of 3x1010 M-1 s-1 (close to the rate constant of  e

 recombination at 25

− + 

OH

 

aq

aq

oC). A slightly greater rate constant of 3.8x1010 M-1 s-1 for cross recombination of  eaq
water  ionized  by  the  intense  266  nm  laser  was  obtained  by  Pommeret  et  al.  17b.  For

−  in

comparison, dashed lines in Fig. 2(b) give the recombination kinetics obtained assuming

homogeneous  generation  of  the  electrons  along  the  path  of  400  nm  light  (the  initial
concentration had the same value as the mean concentration for the corresponding  C z( )

profile shown in Fig. 2(a)). It is seen that the recombination kinetics are much faster for

the  inhomogeneous  distribution,  in  agreement  with  the  experimental  results  discussed

below. Thus, at the higher end of the pump radiance, the kinetic profiles observed within

the first 600 ps after the ionization are strongly affected by the cross recombination; the

latter cannot be fully disentangled from the geminate recombination which occurs on the

same time scale.

Fig. 7, trace (i), shows typical pump-probe kinetics for 800 nm absorbance from
water excited by 400 nm light (0.1 TW/cm2) obtained using a 5 mm optical path flow cell
("normal" beam geometry with  ρ
pr =12.2 µm). The initial "spike", which

p=92 µm and  ρ

has  the  same  time  profile  as  the  response  function  of  our  setup,  is  due  to  nonlinear

16

absorbance  (simultaneous  absorbance  of  400  nm  and  800  nm  photons).  As  the  pump

radiance  increases  and  more  400  nm  light  is  absorbed  by  the  sample,  fewer  400  nm

photons are available for this nonlinear process, and the relative amplitude of the "spike"

decreases  dramatically.  The  slow  decay  on  time  scales  of  10  to  600  ps  is  due  to  the

geminate recombination of hydrated electrons; heat release and cross recombination are

negligible in this low-power regime. Very similar kinetics (save for the smaller amplitude
of the "spike") were obtained for 0.2 TW/cm2 excitation of water in a 560 µm thick high-
speed liquid jet (see trace (ii) in Fig. 7;  ρ

p=85 µm and  ρ

pr =10 µm).

Figs. 8(a) and 8(b) show TA kinetic traces (λ=800 nm) obtained at higher pump

radiances. Fig. 9 shows the TA signals at t=500 ps and t=10 ps plotted as a function of
J p  (these  data  were  obtained  using  the  "reverse"  beam  geometry:  ρ
ρ

pr =190 mm). The ratio of these two TA signals plotted in the same figure is a measure

p=85  mm  and

of the fraction of electrons that escape recombination at t=500 ps. As seen from Fig. 9,
for  J p > 0.3 TW/cm2 this ratio first increases with the pump radiance; then, at around 1
TW/cm2,  it  begins  to  decrease.  The  latter  changeover  occurs  in  the  same  range  where

rapid cross recombination is expected to occur, and the kinetics shown in Fig. 8 (see also

Fig. 3(a), trace (iii) and Fig. 7S) reveal the long-term effects of such a recombination,

which are similar to those simulated in Fig. 2(b). (Note that for the TA kinetics obtained

using  the  "reverse"  beam  geometry,  cross  recombination  is  less  prominent  since  the

average  concentration  of  electrons  across  the  pump  beam  (which  is  probed  using  this

geometry)  is  substantially  lower  than  that  at  r=0,  which  is  probed  using  the  "normal"

beam  geometry).  Even  those  TA  kinetics  that  are  affected  by  the  homogeneous

recombination on a sub-nanosecond time scale show the same short-term behavior as the
kinetics obtained in the 0.3-1 TW/cm2 range (Fig. 8(b) and Fig. 7S). In particular, within

the first 100 ps after the 400 nm photoexcitation, these kinetics are much flatter than the

kinetics shown in Fig. 7. To some degree, this flattening of the kinetic traces is due to the

changes in the thermalization dynamics.  The latter can be eliminated by comparing TA

kinetics normalized at t=10 ps, when the (power-dependent) electron thermalization is

complete. The geminate electron decay certainly slows down (Figs. 8 and 7S) and the

survival probability increases (Fig. 9) with increasing radiance of the 400 nm light. Most

17

of this change occurs in a narrow range of pump radiance, between 0.5 and 1 TW/cm2. At

higher radiance, this trend is difficult to follow because the cross recombination interferes

with the geminate recombination. Importantly, the power range in which the geminate

kinetics change with increasing  J p is the same range in which the thermalization kinetics

also begin to change. The latter kinetics are, actually, less sensitive to the photogenerated

release of heat because a high critical concentration of the excitation events (achieved
only  for  J p  >  1  TW/cm2)  is  needed  for  rapid  homogenization  of  the  heat  on  the

picosecond time scale, as noted in section 3.2.

We  believe  that  the  geminate  recombination  kinetics  observed  in  the  terawatt

regime  are  for  the  hydrated  electron  in  hot  water  and  explain  the  observed

transformations by the temperature jump:

The effect of increasing temperature on the geminate recombination in water has
been studied by Madsen et al.  24 (who followed the electron decay kinetics to t=90 ps).

The main effect is to increase the survival probability of the electron, from ca. 0.55 at 10
oC to 0.75 at 80  oC  (at  t=90 ps, see Fig. 4 in ref. 24). Interestingly, while diffusion is

faster  in  hot  water,  the  geminate  recombination  after  the  first  10  ps  becomes  slower.

Madsen  et  al.  explain  these  observations  by  the  decrease  in  the  dielectric  constant  of
−   ,  with  the  OH  radical  is  not

water and the fact that recombination of the electron,  eaq

diffusion  controlled  at  the  higher  temperature,  so  that  the  probability  that  a  diffusion
)   pair  decreases.  Such  pairs,  by  the
(

, −
encounter  leads  to  recombination  of  the  OH eaq

estimate  of  Keiding  and  co-workers,  24,25 account for 80% of all recombination events
−  with

after water photoionization; the remaining 20% are from the recombination of  eaq

the hydronium ion,  H O3

, −
the  dynamics  of  OH eaq

(

+ . Recently, Crowell et al.  18 studied the temperature effect on
)   pairs  generated  by  200  nm  light  induced  electron

photodetachment  from  aqueous  hydroxide.  The  decay  kinetics  of  the  electron  were
followed out to 600 ps, and the temperature range of 8 to 90 oC was explored (see Figs. 3

and  4  in  ref.  18).  The  changes  of  the  long-term  kinetics  with  increasing  temperature

observed for this closely related photosystem are remarkably similar to those observed by

18

Madsen  et  al.  in  water:  24  the  electron  escape  becomes  more  efficient  and  the  decay

kinetics slow down, so that the diffusional "tail" of the kinetics becomes flatter. These

trends  are  also  present  in  the  kinetics  observed  in  the  terawatt  regime  for  400  nm

photoionization of neat water. While we do not have sufficient data to demonstrate by

rigorous  simulation  that  the  heat  release  alone  causes  all  of  the  observed  kinetic
transformations, 27 the qualitative behavior is consistent with the notion that the changes

in  the  geminate  kinetics  are  of  the  same  origin  as  the  concurrent  changes  in  the

thermalization dynamics.

3.5. Implications for pulse radiolysis of water.

In  pulse  radiolysis  of  condensed-matter  systems,  the  excitation  energy  of  the

ionizing particle is deposited very unevenly: the excitation/ionization events are clustered

in  a  small  volume  of  2-5  nm  diameter  (the  so-called  radiolytic  spur);  these  spurs  are
separated by vast distances (ca. 100 nm along the particle track). 28 It has been speculated
by  Eisenthal  and  coworkers  29 and others  30 that  rapid  heat  deposition  in  spurs  could

change the kinetics observed on the picosecond time scale, before the heat dumped into

the media during electron thermalization escapes from the spur. Until recently, there was

little support for such an assertion. However, recent observations from two laboratories
31,32 seem  to  provide  such  support.  It  appears  that  the  temperature  jump  observed  in

multiphoton ionization of water (see above) also occurs in water radiolysis, though the

dynamics of the two effects are quite different.

Recently, Gauduel et al.  31  studied  the  electron  dynamics  in  room-temperature

liquid H2O using a novel technique of femtosecond pump-probe pulse radiolysis - TA

spectroscopy.  The  700  fs  FWHM  pulse  of  relativistic  (2-15  MeV)  electrons  was

generated by interaction of a 10 TW amplified Ti:sapphire laser pulse with a supersonic
helium  jet.  33  The  TA  signal  from  hydrated  electron  was  observed  at  820  nm  and

followed over the first 150 ps after the radiation-induced water ionization. These kinetics

were  qualitatively  different  from  the  ones  extrapolated  from  the  pump-probe  data
obtained on a longer time scale, both in pulse radiolysis  34 and  multiphoton  excitation.
1,2,3,9,21,24,25 Specifically, instead of smooth, sloping decay curves similar to those shown

19

in Fig. 8, a fast component with an exponential life time of ca. 20 ps was observed. Since
the kinetics observed for  t >50 ps 29,32,34 are indicative of a broad initial distribution of

electron-hole distances, the 20 ps component could not be accounted for by the geminate

recombination.  On  the  other  hand,  the  relatively  long  lifetime  of  this  component  (as
compared to the characteristic time of the solvation dynamics, < 300 fs) 12,13,14 excludes

the involvement of pre-solvated electron. The same 20 ps component, albeit smaller in
the  amplitude,  was  observed  by  Wishart  et  al.  32 at  the  probe  wavelength  of  1000  nm
using  the  picosecond  laser  cathode  driven  linac  facility  (LEAF)  35 at  the  Brookhaven

National Laboratory (Fig. 8S(a)).

This short-term behavior might be qualitatively accounted for by a temperature
jump in the radiolytic spur. 29,30 The difference between the photolysis and radiolysis is

that for the latter, heating of water is localized on the nanoscale.

In  the  near  IR,  the  molar  absorptivity  of  the  electron  plotted  vs.  the  local
temperature  passes  through  a  maximum  at  >  100  oC  (Fig.  8S(b)).  When  the  local

temperature in the spur decreases on the picosecond time scale, this causes the decrease

in the TA in this spectral region. Assuming that the distribution of the local temperatures

follows  that  of  the  electrons  (since  the  heat  is  deposited  during  the  electron
2 µ .  30  For

thermalization), the characteristic cooling time of a spur of the size  a  is  a

w

a=2 nm, an estimate of 20-30 ps is obtained - in reasonable agreement with the observed
time constant for the fast component. 31,32 The substantial temperature jump is reasonable
since the average energy required to ionize water by 2-15 MeV electrons (20-25 eV) 28 is
more  than  twice  the  optical  gap  of  this  liquid  (10-11  eV).  3,4 This  excess  energy  is

released as heat during the electron thermalization, and the local temperature immediately

after  the  electron  hydration  increases  substantially.  Simple  estimates  suggest  a
temperature jump of at least 30-40 oC at the center of the spur. 29 As seen from trace (ii),

Fig.  8S(b),  such  a  temperature  jump  would  be  sufficient  to  account  for  the  fast
component observed at 1000 nm in the experiments of Wishart et al. 32 A simple way to

verify  this  explanation  would  be  to  observe  the  electron  dynamics  at  other  probe

wavelengths.

20

4. Conclusion.

It  is  suggested  that  previously  observed  transformations  of  geminate

recombination  and  electron  thermalization  kinetics  in  multiphoton  ionization  of  liquid

water by 400 nm terawatt light are caused by rapid heat deposition into the bulk sample.

The release of heat during the photoexcitation causes a nearly instantaneous temperature
jump of several tens of oC. The ultimate cause of this jump is the low quantum yield for

the  3-photon  ionization  of  water:  only  42%  of  the  excitation  events  result  in  solvent

ionization; the rest of the energy absorbed by water is released as heat. Consequently, the

electron spectrum shifts to the red, the thermalization dynamics of the electron observed

by  TA  in  the  near  IR  become  flatter,  the  geminate  recombination  dynamics  become

slower, and the survival probability (i.e., the escape fraction) of the electrons increases.

Our analyses suggest that the ionization of water by 400 nm light remains three

photon up to the radiance at which the water begins to break down; there is little evidence

for the occurrence of "3+1" photoionization in which the electron or an excited water

molecule generated during the ionization/excitation process absorbs one or more 400 nm

photons.  Though  our  experiments  do  not  exclude  such  a  possibility  entirely,  this

photoprocess seems to be of little importance for the excitation of water by femtosecond

pulses.  Furthermore,  it  appears  that  the  results  can  be  understood,  albeit  qualitatively,

without such a postulate, by water heating alone. It is likely that other reported instances

of power-dependent kinetics for hydrated electron generated by water ionization in the

terawatt regime can be explained in the same way. It is also possible that the fast (ca. 20

ps)  component  that  was  recently  observed  in  the  ultrafast  pulse  radiolysis  -  transient
absorption studies by Gauduel et al.  31 and Wishart et al.  32 can be accounted for by a

temperature jump in the radiolytic spur, as suggested almost 40 years ago by Ingalls et al

30

5. Acknowledgement.

We thank Drs. C. D. Jonah, D. M. Bartels, S. Pimblott, J. R. Miller, J. F. Wishart,

and V. Malka for useful discussions. IAS thanks Drs. D. M. Bartels of NDRL and J. F.

Wishart of BNL for the permission to reproduce their unpublished data. The research at

21

the ANL was supported by the Office of Science, Division of Chemical Sciences, US-

DOE  under  contract  number  W-31-109-ENG-38.  SP  acknowledges  the  support  of  the

DGA through the contract number DSP/01-60-056.

Supporting  Information  Available:  (1.)  Appendix:  Modeling  of  the  photophysics  for

"3+1"  excitation.  (2.)  Equilibrium  spectra  of  hydrated  electron  vs.  the  solvent

temperature.  (3.)  Captions  to  Figs.  1S  to  8S;  (4.)  Figs.  1S  to  8S.  This  material  is

contained  in  a  single  PDF  file  that  is  available  free  of  charge  via  the  Internet  at

http://pubs.acs.org.

22

Figure captions.

Fig. 1.

(i) Transmittance  Tp  of the 400 nm pump light (to the left, open squares), and (ii) TA
signal  ∆OD800  (obtained  using  λ=800  nm,  60  fs  fwhm  probe  light)  from  the
− , at the delay time of t=5 ps (to the right, open circles) in tri- 400 nm

photoelectron,  eaq

photon laser excitation of the room-temperature water flowing in a high-speed optical
path  L=70  µm  liquid  jet.  These  two  simultaneously  determined  quantities  are  plotted

against  the  (peak)  photon  radiance  J p  of  the  incident  400  nm  light.  The  vertical  bars
indicate 95% confidence limits. The beam parameters are  ρ

p =120 fs, and
pr =24 µm. Solid lines are quantities  Tp   and  ∆OD800 simulated using eqs. (6) and (7)
ρ

p=126 µm,  τ

given in section 3.1 using the optimum fit parameters φ

yield of photoionization and  β

molar  absorptivity  of  18500  M-1  cm-1  for  eaq

3=0.415 for the 3-photon quantum
3=267 cm3/TW2 for the absorption coefficient of water; a
−   has  been  assumed.  The  dashed  line  (iii)

drawn  through  the  data  points  in  the  terawatt  regime  indicates  the  region  where  the

electron absorbance increases linearly with the light radiance (and the tentative "3+1"

photoexcitation might have occurred) .

Fig. 2.

(a) Concentration profiles  C z( ) of the photoelectrons generated by 400 nm laser pulse
along the axis of the 400 nm beam. The electron concentrations, in units of 10-3 mol/dm-3
(mM), at the end of a 80 µm fwhm, 330 fs fwhm, 400 nm pulse are plotted for three peak
radiances  J p of the 400 nm light: (i) 1.56, (ii) 1.0, and (iii) 0.5 TW/cm2. (Trace (iii) is to

the  right,  traces  (i)  and  (ii)  are  to  the  left).  These  concentration  profiles  are  plotted
against the penetration depth z of the 400 nm light for a 90 µm thick water jet. These

traces were simulated using the photophysical parameters given in the caption to Fig. 1.

The  concentrations  of  the  electrons  at  the  jet  surface  (where  z=0)  and  the  mean

concentrations across the jet are, respectively, (i) 90 and 15.5 mM, (ii) 23.5 and 7.5 mM,

and (iii) 2.9 and 1.8 mM. The higher is the light radiance, the shorter is the effective path

23

of  the  excitation  light.  (b)  Evolution  of  the  mean  electron  concentration  for  the  same

photosystem,  assuming  cross  recombination  in  the  water  bulk  with  a  bimolecular  rate
constant  kr  of  3x1010 M-1 s-1 (assuming no geminate recombination). Traces (i) to (iv)
correspond to pump radiances of 0.2, 0.5, 1.0 and 1.56 TW/cm2, respectively. The solid
)  of  the  electron  over  the
lines  are  obtained  by  averaging  the  decay  kinetics  C z t,(

,(
corresponding  concentration  profile:  C z t

) =

( )
C z

(
1

+

)
( )
ktC z

.  The  dashed  lines

correspond to a hypothetical system in which the electrons are generated homogeneously

across the jet, with the initial concentration equal to the mean concentration obtained by

,(
averaging over the profiles given in (a), i.e. for  C z t

) =

( )
C z

(
1

+

( )
kt C z

)

. As the

radiance of 400 nm light increases, spatial inhomogeneity of the electron production has

progressively greater effect on the electron decay by cross recombination.

Pump-probe TA kinetics of photoelectrons (observed at  λ=1.2 µm) generated in three

400 nm photon excitation of water (same beam geometry as that specified in Fig. 2(a)).
The 400 nm light radiance  J p is (i) 0.4 TW/cm2 (open squares), (ii) 1.23 TW/cm2 (open
triangles), and (iii) 2.1 TW/cm2  (open  circles). In (a), the kinetic traces are given on a

double logarithmic plot. Note the relative decrease in the initial "spike" with increasing

pump radiance and the occurrence of second order decay in trace (iii). In (b), the kinetic

traces normalized at t=5 ps are shown. As the pump power increases, the ratio of the t=5

ps signal to the maximum signal in the "spike" increases three times.

Fig. 3.

Fig. 4.

The  power/radiance  dependencies  of  the  TA  signals  (λ=1.2  µm)  for  the  photosystem

shown in Fig. 3. Open squares and open circles (to the right) indicate the TA signals from

the photoelectron at t=5 ps and at the "spike" maximum, respectively. (The points for
J p>1.5 TW/cm2 are not shown). The vertical bars give 95% confidence limits for these

data points. The filled circles (to the left) give the ratio of these two absorbance signals.

The  smooth  line  drawn  through  these  latter  points  is  a  guide  for  the  eye.  The  dashed

24

straight  lines  correspond  to  the  power-law  increase  in  the  TA  signal  amplitude;  their

slopes are close to 3.

Fig. 5.

(a) Trace (i): experimental TA spectrum of the photoelectron observed 50 ps after tri- 400
nm photon excitation of water in a 90 µm thick jet ( ρ

pr =22 µm,  τ

p=73 µm,  ρ

p =176 fs)

at a pump radiance of 1.9 TW/cm2. This spectrum was obtained by selecting probe pulses

from the white light supercontinuum using narrowband interference filters, and focussing

of these different light components at the sample varied slightly across the absorption

spectrum. For the multiphoton ionization, the TA signal is very sensitive to the pump and

probe beam overlap, and the amplitude of the points close to 800 nm (for which the probe

beam was more focussed) is somewhat greater then that in the wings of the TA spectrum.

Even with this (hard-to-avoid) distortion of the TA spectrum in mind, it is apparent that

the spectrum is red-shifted relative to the absorption spectrum of thermalized electron in

room  temperature  water  (trace  (ii)).  Trace  (iii)  corresponds  to  the  spectrum  of
thermalized electron in 80 oC water. (b) The solid line is trace (ii) reproduced from the

plot above; the dashed line is the average spectrum of (thermalized) electrons that was
−  spectrum

obtained using the concentration profile trace (i) shown in Fig. 2(a) and the  eaq

parameterization given in the Supplement (see section 3.3 for more detail).

Fig. 6.

Fig. 7.

Thermalization  kinetics  of  the  electron  observed  using  pump-probe  TA  spectroscopy
(λ=1 µm) for three 400 nm photon excitation of water at 28 oC (open diamonds), 57 oC
(open squares), and 85 oC (open circles). The peak radiance  J p of the 400 nm light was
fairly low,  J p=0.2 TW/cm2, so that the light-induced temperature jump was negligible.

To facilitate the comparison of the time profiles, these TA kinetics are normalized at t=5

ps, at which delay time the thermalization stage is complete. As the water temperature

increases, the relative amplitude of the "spike" decreases.

25

Pump-probe TA kinetics of the electron generated by three 400 nm photon excitation of
water in (i) a 5 mm optical path cell ( J p=0.125 TW/cm2; open circles, to the right) and
(ii) a 560 µm thick liquid jet ( J p=0.2 TW/cm2; open squares, to the left). The solid curve

is the simulation of the geminate recombination dynamics using the IRT model given by

Pimblott and coworkers, ref. 36 (the model parameters are given in the caption to Fig. 1S
in  the  Supplement;  see  also  ref.  2)  for  an  initial  r2-Gaussian electron distribution, eq.
(A1), with a width parameter σ

0=1.1 nm.

Fig. 8.

(a) The evolution of the TA kinetics of the electron ( λ=800 nm,  ρ

p =200 fs,
= 232 µm) generated by 400 nm photoionization of water in a 90 µm thick jet as a

p=83 µm,  τ

ρ
pr

function of the pump radiance for J p= (i) 0.29, (ii) 0.65, (iii) 1.3, and (iv) 2.6 TW/cm2.

Note that the "reverse" beam geometry was used for these kinetic measurements. (b) A

comparison between the time profiles of normalized kinetic traces (i) (open circles) and

(iv) (solid line) from Fig. 8(a).

Fig. 9.

Pump radiance dependencies of the TA signals at (i) t=10 ps (open squares; to the left)

and (ii) t=500 ps (open diamonds; to the left) in three 400 nm photoexcitation of water in
a 90 µm thick jet ( λ=800 nm,  ρ
pr =190 µm; note that  "reverse"

p=85.4 µm,  τ

p =200 fs,  ρ

beam geometry was used ). Trace (iii) (open circles; to the right) is the ratio of the t=500

ps and t=10 ps absorbance signals. The solid line is a guide to the eye.

26

References.

1 Work performed under the auspices of the Office of Science, Division of Chemical

Science, US-DOE under contract number W-31-109-ENG-38.

*  To  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed:  Tel  630-252-8089,  FAX  630-

2524993, e-mail: rob_crowell@anl.gov.

2  presently at the Experimental facility Division, Advanced Photon Source, Argonne

National Laboratory, 9700 S. Cass Ave., Argonne IL 60439; Tel 630-252-5874, FAX

630-2529303, e-mail: jqian@aps.anl.gov.

1.

Crowell, R. A.; Bartels, D. M. J. Phys. Chem.  1996, 100, 17940 and references

therein; Bartels, D. M.; Crowell, R. A. J. Phys. Chem. A 2000, 104, 3349.

Crowell, R. A.; Bartels, D. M. J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100, 17713.

Sander, M. U.; Gudiksen, M. S.; Luther, K.; Troe, J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 258, 257

and references therein; Sander, M. U.; Luther, K.; Troe, J. J. Phys. Chem. 1993,

2.

3.

97, 11489.

4.

Bernas, A.; Ferradini, C.; Jay-Gerin, J.-P. Chem.  Phys. 1997, 222, 151; Houee-

Levin, C.; Tannous, C.; Jay-Gerin, J.-P. J. Phys. Chem. 1989, 93, 7074.

5.

Hilcer, M.; Bartczak, W. M.; Sopek, M. J. Chem. Phys. 1986, 85, 6813; Hilczer,

M.;  Bartzak,  W.  M.;  Kroh,  J. J. Chem. Phys.  1988, 89, 2286; Bartzak, W. M.;

Sopek, M.; Kroh, J. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 1989, 34, 93; Hilczer, M.; Bartzak, W.

M. Radiat.  Phys.  Chem. 1992, 39,  85;  Bartzak,  W.  M.;  Pernal,  K.  Res.  Chem.

6.

Mozumder, A. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 1988, 32, 287; Tachia, M.; Mozumder, A. J.

Intermed. 2001, 27, 891.

Chem. Phys. 1974, 60, 3037.

1994, 231, 504.

7.

McGowen,  J.  L.;  Ajo,  H.  M.;  Zhang,  J.  Z.;  Schwartz,  B.  J.  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.

27

Long, F. H.; Lu, H.; Shi, X.; Eisenthal, K. B. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1991, 185, 47.

8.

9.

Pommeret, S. in preparation.

10.

Son, D. H.; Kambhampati, P.; Kee, T. W.; Barbara, P. F. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2001,

342, 571;. J. Phys. Chem. A 2001, 105, 8269;  J. Phys. Chem. A 2002, 106, 2374.

11.

Pepin, C.; Goulet, T.; Houde, D.; Jay-Gerin, J.-P. J. Phys. Chem. A  1997, 101,

4351; Jay-Gerin, J.-P. Can. J. Chem. 1997, 75, 1310.

12. Gauduel,  Y.  in  "Ultrafast  Dynamics  of  Chemical  Systems",  ed.  Simon,  J.  D.

(Kluwer, 1994, Amsterdam) pp. 81-136.

13. Vilchiz, V. H.; Kloepfer, J. A.; Germaine, A. C.; Lenchenkov, V. A.; Bradforth,

S. E. J. Phys. Chem. A 2001, 105, 1711.

14. Hertwig, A.; Hippler, H.; Unterreiner, A. N.; Vohringer, P. Ber. Bunsenges. Phys.

Chem. 1998, 102,  805;  Phys.  Chem.  Chem.  Phys. 1999, 1,  5663;  J.  Phys.

Condens. Matter 2000, 12, A165.; Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2002, 4, 4412.

15. Keszei, E.; Murphrey, T. H.; Rossky, P. J. J. Phys. Chem. 1995, 99, 22.

16.

Elliot, A. J.; Ouellette, D. C.; Stuart, C. R. The Temperature Dependence of the

Rate Constants and Yields for the Simulation of the Radiolysis of Heavy Water,

AECL  report  11658  (AECL  Research,  Chalk  River  Laboratories,  Chalk  River,

Ontario, Canada, 1996); Jou, F.-Y.; Freeman, G. R. Can. J. Chem. 1979, 57, 591.

17.

Pommeret, S.; Gobert, F.; Mostafavi, M.; Lampre, I.; Mialocq, J.-C. (a) J. Phys.

Chem. A 2001, 105, 11400; (b) Res. Chem. Intermed. 2001, 27, 901.

18.

Lian, R.; Crowell, R. A.; Shkrob, I. A.; Bartels, D. M.; Chen, X.; Bradforth, S. E.

J. Chem. Phys., in press; preprint on http://www.arXiv.org/abs/physics/0401071;

Crowell, R. A.; Lian, R.; Sauer, Jr., M. C.; Oulianov, D. A.; Shkrob, I. A. Chem.

Phys. Lett. 2004, 383, 481;

28

19.

Shkrob,  I.  A.;  Crowell,  R.  A.  Phys.  Rev.  B  1998, 57,  12207;  von  Behren,  J.;

Kostoulas, Y.; Burak Ucer, K.; Fauchet, P. M. J.  Non-Cryst.  Solids 1996, 198-

200, 957; Fauchet, P. M.; Hulin, D.; Vanderhaghen, R.; Mourchid, A.; Nighan,

Jr., W. L. J. Non-Cryst. Solids 1992, 141, 76.

20. Naskrecki, R.; Menard, M.; van der Meulen, P.; Vigneron, G.; Pommeret, S. Opt.

Comm. 1998, 153, 32.

21.

Lian, R.; Crowell, R. A.; Shkrob, I. A., to be submitted to J. Phys. Chem. A.

22.

Bartels,  D.  M.;  Takahashi,  K;  Marin,  T;  Jonah,  C.  D.,  in  preparation;  to  be

submitted to J. Phys. Chem. A.

23. Hart, E. J.; Anbar, M. "The Hydrated Electron" (Wiley-Interscience, 1970, New

York), pp. 39.

113, 1126.

24. Madsen, D.; Thomsen, C. L.; Thogersen, J.; Keiding, S. R. J. Chem. Phys. 2000,

25.

Thomsen, C. L.; Madsen, D.; Keiding, S. R.; Thogersen, J.; Christiansen, O. J.

Chem. Phys. 1999, 110, 3453.

26. Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 69th edition, ed. Weast, R. C.; Astle, M. J.;

Beyer, W. H. (CRC Press, 1988, Boca Raton).

27.

For  such  an  analysis,  one  needs  to  average  over  the  geminate  recombination

kinetics in each layer of the jet, as the temperature decreases with the penetration

depth of the 400 nm light. Presently, the temperature dependence of such kinetics

on  the  sub-nanosecond  time  scale  (in  3  x  400  nm  photoionization  of  water)  is

lacking: these kinetics can be obtained in the low-power regime only, and the S/N

ratio is too poor to track subtle changes in the TA signal. At higher powers, where

the  S/N  ratio  is  more  acceptable,  it  is  impossible  to  discount  the  light-induced

temperature jump.

29

28.

Pimblott, S. M.; Mozumder, A. in "Charged  Particle  and  Photon  Interactions

with Matter" (Marcel Dekker, 2004, New York), pp. 75

29. Wang, Y.; Crawford; McAuliffe, M. J.; Eisenthal, K. B. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1980,

74, 160.

30.

(a) Mozumder, A. in Advances in Radiation Chemistry, eds. Burton, M.; Magee,

J. L. (Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1969), vol. 1; (b) Ingalls, R. B.; Spiegler, P.;

Norman, A. J. Chem. Phys. 1964, 41, 837; R. B. Ingalls, J. Chem. Phys. 1966, 44,

1307;  Burns,  W.  G.;  Barker,  R.  in  Aspects  of  Hydrocarbon  Radiolysis,  eds.

Gaumann, T.; Hoigne, J. (Academic Press, New York, 1968), Ch. 2, pp. 47-51.

31. Gauduel, Y. et al., in preparation.

32. Wishart, J. R.; Funston, A.; Cook, A. R. Rev. Sci. Instr., submitted.

33. Malka,  V.;  Fritzler,  S.;  Lefebvre,  E.;  Krushelnick,  K.;  Mangles,  S.  P.  D.;

Najmudin,  J.;  Walton,  B.;  Dangor,  A.  E.  Phys.  Scripta  2004, T107,  141  and

references therein.

34.

Pimblott, S. M.; LaVerne, J. A.; Bartels, D. M.; Jonah, C. D., J.  Phys.  Chem.,

1996, 100, 9412 and rferences therein.

35.

Takeda, N.; Poliakov, P.; Cook, A. R.; Miller, J. R. J.  Amer.  Chem.  Soc. 2004,

126, 4301.

36.

Pimblott, S. M. J. Phys. Chem. 1991, 95, 6946.

30

(iii)

1.0

0.8

p
T

(i)

(ii)

0.6

3

4 5 6

2

3

4 5 6

2

0.1

1

Jp, TW/cm

2

0

1 0

-1

1 0

-2

1 0

-3

1 0

-4

1 0

∆
O
D
8
0
0
 

Fig. 1; Crowell et al.

(a)

(iii)

3

2

1

0

0

2 0

6 0

8 0

4 0
z, µm

(b)

(i)

(ii)

0

1 0

(iv)

(iii)
(i)(ii)

1 0 0

M
m

 
,
)
z
(

C

5 0

-

M
m

 
,
]
e
[
 

e
g
a
r
e
v
a

2

7
6

5

4

3

2

1

10ps

2

4

6 8
100ps

2

4

6 8

2

1ns

delay time

Fig. 2; Crowell et al.

(a)

(iii)

(ii)

(i)

 (i)
 (ii)
 (iii)

(b)

1

Jp
1 0

1 0 0

1

0.1

0.01

0 . 0 0 1

0
0
2
1
D
O
∆

.

m
r
o
n

 
,

0
0
2
1
D
O
∆

1 0

5

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

time, ps

Fig. 3; Crowell et al.

Jp, TW/cm

2

1

3

4

5

6

7

8 9

2

 
0
0
2
1
D
O
∆

0.1

0.01

0.001

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

r
a
t
i

o

2

3

4

5

6

7

8 9

1 0 0

400 nm power,
µJ

Fig. 4; Crowell et al.

(a)

(i)

(iii)

(ii)

wavelength, nm

(b)

0.4

D
O
∆

 

0.2

0.0

1

.

.

u
b
r
a

 
,

e
c
n
a
b
r
o
s
b
a

0

4 0 0

6 0 0

8 0 0

1 0 0 0

1 2 0 0

wavelength, nm

Fig. 5; Crowell et al.

 85 C
 57 C
 28 C

.

m
r
o
n

 
,

0
0
0
1

D
O
∆

0

T

0

1

2

3

4

5

time, ps

Fig. 6; Crowell et al.

0.04

0

0.02

 
0
0
8

D
O
∆

(ii)

0.01

(i)

0

1

1 0
time, ps

1 0 0

Fig. 7; Crowell et al.

0.01

 
0
0
8
D
O
∆

.

m
r
o
n

 
,

0
0
8
D
O
∆

4

2

8

6

4

2

1

0

(iv)

(iii)

(ii)

(i)

Jp

(a)

0 . 0 0 1

8

1

2

4

6 8

2

4

6 8

2

4

6

1 0

1 0 0

(b)

8

1

2

4

6 8

2

4

6 8

2

4

6

1 0

1 0 0

time, ps

Fig. 8; Crowell et al.

5

4

3

2

6
5

4

3

2

6
5

4

3

 
 
0
0
8
D
O
∆

0.01

0 . 0 0 1

(iii)

1.0

(i)

(ii)

0.8

r
a
t
i

o

0.6

0.4

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

1

Jp, TW/cm

2

Fig. 9; Crowell et al.

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Sauer jp0000000, Supporting Info Page 1

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

JP0000000

Supporting Information.

Journal of Physical Chemistry A, Received:  *********

(1.) Appendix: Modeling of the photophysics for "3+1" excitation.

Below we consider the  extension of the  simple model given in section  3.1  in  the
text to include the possibility of a "3+1" photoprocess (i.e., the absorption  of "extra" 400
nm  photons  by  products  generated  in  the  course  of  photoexcitation  and  ionization).
Though the approach given below is formulated assuming that the  400 nm light absorbing
species is the electron, it  is easy  to  use the same type  of model for other  species, e.g., a
short-lived excited state of water.

−

We will assume that  3-photon  ionization of water  yields  an electron  of  type  e0
which can absorb an extra 400 nm photon,  thus  being injected deep  into  the  conduction
  rapidly
band  (CB).  The  resulting  (mobile)  CB  electron  eCB
thermalizes and localizes after migrating over the  mean distance  σ
L, yielding the  electron
− ;  the  difference
− .  The  latter  has  exactly  the  same  photophysical  properties  as  e0
e1
between these two electron states is their spatial distribution with respect to the  hole. We
−   into  the  CB;  the  subsequent
may  consider  further  photoexcitation  of  the  electron  e1
− ,  etc.  The  distribution
relaxation of the  CB electron would yield the  electron of type  e2
)
( ) =
,σ σ   is  r2-
=
function  of  the  electron  before  the  first  photoexcitation  P r
Gaussian, where

−   with  lifetime  τ

(
P r

τ
p

<<

0

0

f

π
4 2

(
r P r

,

)
σ

 

dr

= (

)
πσ

−

/
3 2

−(

2

r

σ
2

)

exp

 

d

3

r

(A1)

and  σ
Gaussian function, distribution functions  P rm
eq.  (A1)  with  σ σ
2
m
excitation  pulse  is  given  by  P r
concentration of the  electrons of type  em
of the  light  intensity  are  neglected,  it  is  easy  to  demonstrate  that  p

0  is  the  pulse  width.  Since  the  convolution  of  the  Gaussian  functions  is  itself  a
( ) for the  electrons of type  en
−  are given by
.  The  overall  electron  distribution  by  the  end  of  the
)σ ,  where  p m(
)  is  the  relative
− . If the  time and penetration  depth  dependence
  are

( ) = ∑ (

−
p
!
p e m

)
m
( ,
p P r

σ
2
Lm

=

+

=

2
0

av

m

m

m

(

)

given by a Poisson  distribution,  where  p

=

(

)

m

p

=

(

)

m

mp

 is the  mean number of 400

∞

∑

m

=

1

nm photons  absorbed per  electron. In Fig. 1S, geminate recombination dynamics  for  the
electron in water  are plotted  as a function of this  parameter. To  simulate these  kinetics,
the  independent reaction time (IRT)  model of spurs  in  water  developed  by  Pimblott  36
0=0.9 nm and
was used for the initial electron distribution given by a function  P rav
σ
L=2  nm;  other  simulation  parameters  (such  as  the  diffusion  coefficients  and  reaction
radii at 25 oC) were taken from refs. 2 and 36. As seen from this  plot,  the  kinetics change

( ) for σ

1S

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Sauer jp0000000, Supporting Info Page 2

gradually  with  increase  in  the  parameter  p,  and  the  observed  increase  in  the  survival
probability of the electron on sub-nanosecond time scales in the terawatt regime (see Figs.
8 and 7S) would require that  on average at  least one 400 nm photon  is absorbed  by  the
electron.

−   and  e1

Assuming  that  this  Poisson  distribution  also  holds  in  the  general  case,  we  will
neglect  the  subsequent  excitation  of  the  electrons  and  examine  a  two-state  model  that
− .  To  truncate  the  series  of  kinetic  equations
involves  only  electrons  e0
corresponding  to  each  subsequent  excitation,  we  will  assume  that  the  excitation  of
−  results  in  the  relaxation  of  the  CB  electron  to  the  same  state  e1
− .  Another
electron  e1
assumption  is that  the  CB electrons  absorb  neither  the  pump  nor  the  probe  light.  The
)  are
concentrations  C z r t
, ;
given by the equations

−   and  the  CB  electron  C z r t
, ;

)   (m=0,1)  of  electrons  em

CB

(

(

m

∂ ∂
C t
0

 

 =

1 3

φ β
3
3

I

3

−

φβ
1
e

[

] ,
C C I

−

CB

0

∂
C

CB

∂
t

 

 = +

φβ
1
e

+
C C
1

0

−

[

] −
C I C

CB

2

CB

τ
f

,

∂ ∂
C t
1

 

 = −

φβ
1
e

[

−

C C I C
CB

1

CB

] +

τ
f

,

e is the molar extinction coefficient of electrons  e0

1≈  is
where  β
the quantum yield for photoexcitation of these electrons into the CB. The evolution of the
amplitude  I z r t
, ;

) of 400 nm light is given by

−  at 400 nm and  φ

− and  e1

(

1

∂ ∂
z
I

=

v

−1

∂ ∂ β
t
I
3

−

I

3

−

[

β
e

+
C C
1

0

−

]
C I
CB

2

  ,

el

I

I

(

+

=

where v is the velocity of the  400 nm light in the  sample. The  second and third  terms  in
eq.  (A5)  correspond  to  the  absorption  of  400  nm  light  by  water  and  electrons,
respectively.  Integrating these  two  terms  over time and the  volume of the  sample yields
the  total  energies  Iw  and  Iel   absorbed  by  water  and  electrons,  respectively.  The  ratio
)  gives  the  fraction  of  the  total  pump  energy  absorbed  by  the
ξ
energy
electrons.  Similarly,  one  can  introduce  the  ratio  ξ
1   of  the  mean
concentrations  of  the  two  kinds  of  the  electron  at  t = +∞ .  The  latter  ratio  gives  a
reasonable  estimate  for  the  parameter  p  introduced  above.  For  obvious  reasons,  these
. The absorption signal  ∆Tpr  from
two ratios closely track each other, with  ξ
the electrons  e0

−  is given by expression

−  and  e1

+
C C

ξ
conc

≈ 1

C
1

energy

conc

=

3

I

el

w

0

−

∆T

pr

=

2
ρ
2
pr

+∞

∫

−∞

∞

∫

0

 

dt

 

 
dr r

  exp





−

2

r
ρ
2
pr

L

∫

0

−

β
e

[
 
dz C C
1
0

+

−

2

C

CB


]



,

(A6)

and the  transmission of the  400 nm light is given by  eq.  (6)  in  section  3.1.  For  a  given
polar  coordinate r, eqs. (A2)  to  (A5)  were solved numerically on a lattice of 200-500 z-
points,  by  stepping  time  t  in  increments  of  1  fs.  Eqs.  (A2)  to  (A5)  can  be  readily

(A2)

(A3)

(A4)

(A5)

2S

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Sauer jp0000000, Supporting Info Page 3

generalized to  include the  finite lifetime of the  photoproduct;  however, the  efficiency  of
the  "3+1"  process  increases for long-lived extra-photon  absorbers, and we are  interested
in the  most  favorable scenario for such a  photoprocess.  For  the  same  reason,  since  the
efficiency of the  "3+1"  process  increases for shorter  lifetime  τ
f  of the  conduction  band
electron, we assumed that this lifetime is very short, ca. 50 fs. Again, this  (unrealistically)
short  time  was  assumed  to  estimate  the  maximum  possible  efficiency  of  the  "3+1"
photoexcitation. Finally, it  was  assumed  that  pre-thermalized  electrons  that  absorb  the
extra  400  nm  photon  absorb  at  this  photoexcitation  wavelength  as  much  as  fully
thermalized electrons (with a decadic extinction coefficient of ca. 2600 M -1  cm-1).  16 This
assumption  is  manifestly  incorrect:  according  to  other  studies,  11-15,21  pre-thermalized
electrons absorb  in  the  blue  at  least  5-10  times  less  than  the  fully  hydrated  electrons.
Once more, our goal is to  assess  the  feasibility  of  the  "3+1"  photoprocess  in  the  most
favorable (rather than the most realistic) scenario.

−  and  e1

Fig. 2S shows  the  comparison between the  plots  of  ∆OD and  Tp   vs.  the  pump
radiance  J p for (i) the model of section 3.1 and (ii) for the "3+1" model given above (other
simulation  parameters  are  given  in  the  caption).  Typical  concentration  profiles  of
−  at  r = 0  and  t = +∞  for four values of  J p are shown  in Fig. 3S(a). It
electrons  e0
is apparent  from the  latter  plot  that  efficient  electron  excitation  in  the  terawatt  regime
occurs mainly near the  water  surface and requires  J p>0.5-1 TW/cm2  to  be  efficient.  As
seen from Fig. 2S, even though we have  considered  the  most  favorable  scenario  for  the
"3+1"  photoexcitation, the  changes in these  dependencies  due  to  the  electron  excitation
are very slight. The reason for that becomes clearer from Fig. 3S(b) where the  ratios  ξ
and  ξ
conc  are plotted vs. the pump  radiance. Even at  J p=1.6 TW/cm2, the  fraction of 400
nm photons absorbed by the electrons is  ca. 15% of the  total  energy. On  the  other  hand,
−  at this high radiance is substantial,  ca. 50%. Our  simulations
the conversion of  e0
suggest that  no  reasonable  combination  of  photophysical  parameters  can  give  a  greater
conversion rate; in fact, it should be much smaller, given the  unrealistic estimates used in
the  simulations.  This  means  that  the  geminate  kinetics  originate  from  two  distinct
populations of the electrons: those that absorbed one or more 400 nm photons  (which are
always  a  minority)  and  those  that  did  not  (which  constitute  the  largest  fraction);  the
former  type  has  slower  decay  kinetics  and  higher  probability  of  escape.  The  resulting
overall kinetics (for p<0.5) are not  too  different from the  p=0 kinetics in the  absence  of
electron excitation (see IRT  simulation in Fig. 1S). The  transition  from  one  type  of  the
kinetics to another is smooth because  ξ

conc  is a slow function of  J p (Fig. 3S(b)).

−  into  e1

energy

These expectations are poorly supported by our observations. The  transformation
of the  kinetics is rather abrupt  and the  recombination kinetics are slower and the  escape
−  to
fractions are higher than simulated. The photophysics is such that the conversion of  e0
−  is prohibitively low, at most 10-50%, even at the  highest radiance of 400 nm photons
e1
(1-2  TW/cm2)  and  the  most  generous  estimates  for  the  efficiency  of  the  "+1"
photoexcitation.  We  reach  the  conclusion  that  the  "+1"  photoexcitation  of  electrons
generated within the duration of a femtosecond pulse is unlikely, and the  kinetic behavior
expected  from  the  occurrence  of  such  a  photoprocess  has  not  been  observed

3S

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Sauer jp0000000, Supporting Info Page 4

experimentally. The experimental power dependencies shown in Fig. 2S can be accounted
for  without  the  tentative  "3+1"  photoprocess  (Fig.  1),  and  postulating  such  a
photoprocess  does  not  improve  the  fit  quality;  in  fact,  it  has  little  effect  on  these
dependencies  (Fig.  2S).  All  of  these  considerations  are  aside  from  the  fact  that  the
tentative "3+1" mechanism does not account for the results of section 3.2 that indicate the
occurrence of a  temperature  jump  in  the  terawatt  regime.  While  we  cannot  completely
exclude that  "3+1"  excitation occurs in short-pulse  photoionization  of water  by  400  nm
light,  this  photoprocess  seems  to  have  a  relatively  minor  effect.  An  open  question
remains, whether the "3+1" photoexcitation plays  a more prominent  role when relatively
long-duration (picosecond) pump pulses of high peak power are used to ionize water.

(2.) Equilibrium spectrum of hydrated electron vs. solvent temperature.

The  parameterization of the  absorption  spectrum  of  fully  thermalized,  hydrated
electron was  taken from the  unpublished work  of Bartels and coworkers.  The  spectrum
S E(
) of the electron in H2O as a function of the photon energy  E  is given by  a Gaussian
curve on the red side and a (modified) Lorentzian curve on the blue side:

(
S E

) =

S
max

(

1

+

[
−(
E E

)

W
L

max

)

ν

]

 

for E E

 

>

,

max

(
S E

) =

S
max

exp

−

[
−(
2
  ln  
E E

)

max

W
G

 

for E E

 

<

max

)

2

]

(

where  Smax  is the absorbance at the band maximum at  E E=
max  (ca. 21000 M-1 cm-1 for all
temperatures),  WL =0.51  eV  is  the  temperature-independent  Lorentzian  width,  and  the
temperature dependence of the energy  Emax , the Gaussian width  WG , and the  exponent  ν
are given by polynomial expansions

E

max

(

eV

) =

1 79 0 0025407
.
.
t

+

×
2 5384 10 17 5,
.

t

−

(
W eV
G

) =

                       

t
.
0 343 0 000290411
.
−

.
4 10413 10

×

−

8 3
t

+

−

×

.
6 613 10
+

.
5 33721 10

x

6 2
t
−

11 4
t

,

−

+

ν =

t
1 9488 0 0012895
.
.

+

where  t is the  temperature  in  oC. Eqs. (A7)  to  (A11)  give  the  shape  of  the  absorption
band of hydrated electron with  an accuracy better  than  1% for temperatures  between 20
and 300 oC.

(A7)

(A8)

(A9)

(A10)

(A11)

4S

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Sauer jp0000000, Supporting Info Page 5

Figure captions.

Fig. 1S.

m

m

)

A  simulation  of  geminate  recombination  dynamics  for  hydrated  electrons
generated  by  short-pulse  photoionization  of  25  oC  water  using  the  IRT  model  of
Pimblott.  30  In  these  simulations,  the  initial  electron  distribution  is  given  by  equation
(
∑ (
( ) =
,σ   (see  eq.  (A1)  and  the  discussion  in  the  Appendix),  where
)
m
P r
p P r
av
)
(
−
=
m
p
! and the parameter p is the  average number of 400 nm photons  absorbed
p
p e m
by  the  electron  in  the  "3+1"  photoexcitation  model.  A  family  of  kinetic  profiles  for
parameter p between 0 and 2.5 (from bottom to top) is shown.  The  simulation parameters
are σ
 distance of 0.28 nm,  36 the
L=2 nm, 1,10 the  average  H O OH
reaction radii of 0.5 nm and 0.54 nm for recombination of the electron with the hydronium
ion and hydroxyl radical, respectively, and the  diffusion coefficients of 4.58x10-5, 9x10-5,
+ ,  and  OH   radical,  respectively.  2  The  reaction  of  the
and 2.8x10-5 cm2/s for  eaq
electron with the  OH radical is assumed to  be diffusion-controlled at  25  oC; the  reaction
with  the  hydronium cation has a reaction velocity of 4 m/s at  the  recombination  radius.
2,36

0=0.9 nm 1,2,3 and σ

− ,  H O3

+ −

3

Same as Fig. 1 in section 3.1. The  dash-dot  curves are simulated using the  model given in
section 3.1; the solid lines are simulated using the model of "3+1" photoexcitation process
discussed in the Appendix. A molar absorptivity  of 2610 M -1  cm-1 for the  photoelectron
and a lifetime of 50 fs  for the  conduction band electron were assumed in this  simulation;
other parameters are given in the caption to Fig. 1.

(a)  Simulated  concentration  profiles  at  t = +∞   (i.e.,  at  the  end  of  the  photoexcitation
pulse) and  r = 0  (i.e., the axis of the pump beam) for photoelectrons generated by  ρ
p=80
µm, τ
p =200 fs, 400 nm laser pulse vs. the penetration depth z of the light. These  profiles
are calculated for four radiances  J p of the 400 nm light (that are given in the  color scale in
the plot). The (bold) solid and (thin) dotted  lines correspond  to  millimolar concentrations
− , respectively  (see the  Appendix  for more details). (b)  Calculated
of electrons  e0
ratios  ξ
energy (to the right) vs.  the  pump  radiance  J p obtained  using
the  parameters of Figs. 1 and 2S and the  "3+1"  photoexcitation  model  discussed  in  the
Appendix.

−  and  e1
conc  (to the left) and  ξ

Fig. 2S

Fig. 3S.

Fig. 4S.

Double logarithmic plot  of the  TA  signal from the  photoelectron  (t=5 ps,  λ=800  nm) in
tri- 400 nm photonic ionization of liquid water in a 70 µm thick jet vs.  the  fluence of 400

5S

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Sauer jp0000000, Supporting Info Page 6

p =114 fs and  ρ

nm photons (τ
pr =24 µm for all series). Several series of TA  data obtained
on  different  days  using  different  beam  geometries  are  plotted  together  to  illustrate  the
reproducibility  and robustness  of such data (e.g., the  pump  beam radius  ρ
p varied  from
80 to  210 µm). The  straight line drawn through the  data  points  corresponds  to  a  slope
(effective  photon  order)  of  2.9±0.05.  When  the  400  nm  light  radiance  J p  exceeds  1
TW/cm2,  the  power  dependencies  obtained  under  slightly  different  photoexcitation
conditions  diverge  slightly.  Nevertheless,  all  such  power  dependencies  exhibit  stunted
growth  of  the  TA  signal  with  increasing  radiance,  as  compared  to  the  low-power
dependencies.  We  attribute  the  slight  irreproducibility  of  the  TA  data  in  the  terawatt
regime to the high heat load on the sample and thermal lensing.

Pump-probe TA  kinetics for photoelectrons  generated by  tri-  400 nm photon  ionization
of room temperature water in a 90 µm thick high-speed jet. The  probe  light wavelengths
are (a) 1.1 µm and (b,c) 1.0 µm. These  TA  kinetics were obtained using a  ρ
p=80.3 µm,
pr =17.2 µm probe (i.e., "normal" beam geometry, see section 2).
p =200 fs pump and a  ρ
τ
(a) Kinetic traces (i) and (ii) are given on different scales in order to juxtapose the  maxima.
Traces (i) (squares, to the right) and (ii) (circles, to the left) correspond to  pump  radiances
of 0.35 and 1.67 TW/cm2, respectively.  (b,c) The  time evolution of the  TA  signal on (b)
long and (c) short  time scales. In (c), the  TA  signal is normalized at  t=5 ps,  to  facilitate
the  comparison  between  the  traces  obtained  for  different  Jp:  (i)  0.39  TW/cm2  (open
diamonds), (ii) 1.23 TW/cm2 (open  squares),  and  2.1  TW/cm2  (open  circles).  Note  the
logarithmic time scale in (a) and (b).

Normalized  pump-probe  kinetics  of  TA  for  λ=500  nm  (a),  600  nm  (b),  and  (c)  700
nmThe TA  signal is from a  photoelectron  generated  by  3  x  400  nm  photoexcitation  of
liquid water  in a 90 µm thick jet. These  kinetics are normalized at  t=5  ps.  The  400  nm
pr =22 µm). The  filled circles and empty  squares  correspond  to
pulse  is 300 fs  fwhm ( ρ
400  nm  photon  fluences  of  (a)  1.16  and  0.18  J/cm2  and  (b,c)  0.9  and  0.18  J/cm2,
respectively.  For  this  particular  experiment,  the  pump  beam  was  elliptical,  with  1/e
semiaxes of (a) 76 and 71 µm and (b,c) 106 and 65 µm at the front of the jet. Observe that
the time profile of the thermalization kinetics for λ<800  nm is independent of the  pump
radiance. Compare these kinetic traces with  those  for λ>800  nm shown  in Figs. 3(b) and
5S.

Fig. 5S.

Fig. 6S.

Fig. 7S.

Pump-probe  TA  kinetics  of  the  electron  generated  by  3  x  400  nm  photoexcitation  of
heavy  water,  D2O,  in a  300  µm  thick  liquid  jet  ( λ=800  nm,  ρ
p =150  fs,
pr =50 µm). The  estimated pump  radiances are (i) 0.12, (ii) 0.66,  and  (iii)  1.2  TW/cm2
ρ

p=200  mm,  τ

6S

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Sauer jp0000000, Supporting Info Page 7

(for  the  latter  radiance,  two  runs  obtained  on  different  days  are  plotted  together  to
illustrate the  reproducibility).  A  1-m long single pass  delay line  was  used  to  obtain  the
−  on the nanosecond time scale. In (b), the TA signals are normalized at  t=10
kinetics of  eaq
ps. Note the logarithmic scale for the transient  absorbance in (a). At  high radiance of 400
nm  light,  the  slow  decay  of  the  TA  kinetics  is  mainly  due  to  cross  recombination  of
electrons  and  OH  radicals  and  hydronium  ions  in  the  water  bulk  (see  Fig.  2(b)  for
simulations and section 3.4 for more discussion).

Fig. 8S.

(a)  Open  circles:  Pump-probe  TA  kinetics  of  hydrated  electron  in  picosecond  (5  p s
FWHM)  pulse  radiolysis  of  D2O  (1000  nm  probe,  1  cm  cell).  Plotted  from  the  data
obtained,  with  permission,  from  J.  R.  Wishart  of  BNL  (ref.  32).  The  solid  line  is
exponential fit of the fast component.

(b) Temperature  dependence of the  absorptivity  of hydrated  electron in  H2O  at  (i)  820
nm  and  (ii)  1000  nm.  The  value  of  21000  M -1  cm-1  is  taken  for  the  unit  of  molar
absorptivity.  As  the  temperature  of the  spur  rapidly  decreases  on  the  picosecond  time
scale the  absorptivity  of hydrated  electron in the  near IR  slowly  decreases  over  several
tens  of  picoseconds.  Since  the  heat  diffusivity  is  more  than  10  times  greater  than  the
electron diffusivity and the  heat deposition  occurs only  along the  thermalization path  of
the electron, the "cooling" occurs much faster than the geminate recombination.

7S

.

m

r
o
n

 
,
]

e
[

-

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

 0.0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.5
 0.75
 1.0
 1.25
 1.5
 1.75
 2.0
 2.5

p

2

4

6

2

4

6

2

4

6

1

1 0

1 0 0

1 0 0 0

time, ps

Fig. 1S; Crowell et al.

0.8

p
T

1.0

0.9

0.7

0.6

0

1 0

-1

1 0

-2

1 0

-3

1 0

-4

1 0

∆
O
D
8
0
0
 

4

6 8

2

4

6 8

2

0.1

1

Jp, TW/cm

2

Fig. 2S; Crowell et al.

(a)

Jp, TW/cm

2

 0.2
 0.5
 1.0
 1.6

1 0

1

0.1

M
m

 
,
)
z
(

1
,
0
C

0.01

0

2 0

6 0

4 0
z, µm

c
n
o
c

ξ

0.2

0.4

0.0

0.10

ξ

e
n
e
r
g
y

0.15

0.05

0.00

(b)

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

Jp, TW/cm

2

Fig. 3S; Crowell et al.

series
 i
 ii
 iii
 iv
 v
 vi

)

D
O
∆
(
g
o

l

0

-1

-2

-3

-4

 slope=2.9± 0.05

-2.0

-1.5

-0.5

log(fluence), J/cm

-1.0

2

Fig. 4S; Crowell et al.

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

1

0.1

 
0
0
1
1

D
O
∆

0
0
0
1
D
O
∆

0.01

0 . 0 0 1

.

m
r
o
n

 
,

0
0
0
1

D
O
∆

3

2

1

0

10x10

-3

 (i)
 (ii)

(a)

5

0

(b)

1

1 0 0

1 0

(iii)

(ii)

(i)

2

4

6 8

2

4

6 8

2

4

6

1

1 0

1 0 0

(c)

 (i)
 (ii)
 (iii)

0

1

2

3

4

5

time, ps

Fig. 5S; Crowell et al.

.

m
r
o
n

 
,

0
0
7
D
O
∆

.

m
r
o
n

 
,

0
0
6
D
O
∆

1

0

1

0

1

.

m
r
o
n

 
,

0
0
5
D
O
0∆

(c) 700 nm

(b) 600 nm

(a) 500 nm

0

2

8

1 0

4
time, ps

6

Fig. 6S; Crowell et al.

6

4

2

4

2

 
0
0
8
D
O
∆

0.1
8
6

0.01

1.0

0.5

0.0

.

m
r
o
n

 
,

 
0
0
8
D
O
∆

(a)

1

10

100

1000

time, ps

(iii)
(ii)

(i)

(iii)

(ii)

(i)

(b)

10

6

2

4 6

2

4 6

2

100
time, ps

1000

Fig. 7S; Crowell et al.

d
e
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
n

 
,

 
0
0
0
1

D
O
∆

y
t
i

v

i
t
p
r
o
s
b
a

1.0

0.8

0.6

1.0

0.5

0.0

(a)

2

4 6

2

4 6

2

4 6

1

1 0

2

1 0

3

1 0

4

1 0

time, ps

(i)

(ii)

(b)

 820 nm
 1000 nm

0

1 0 0

temperature, 

2 0 0
o
C

3 0 0

Fig. 8S; Crowell et al.

