Chirped Optical X-Type Pulses in Material Media 

Michel Zamboni-Rached 
DMO-FEEC, State University of Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil  
 
Hugo E. Hernandez Figueroa 
DMO-FEEC, State University of Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil 

Erasmo Recami 
Facoltà di Ingegneria, Università Statale di Bergamo, Dalmine (BG), Italy; 
INFN, Sezione di Milano, Milan, Italy 

 

Abstract:  In  this  paper  we  analyze  the  properties  of  chirped  optical  X-type  pulses 
propagating in material media without boundaries. We show that such pulses may recover their 
transverse and longitudinal shape, after some propagation distance, while the standard chirped 
gaussian pulses can recover the longitudinal one only (since gaussian pulses suffer a progressive 
transverse spreading during their propagation). We therefore propose the use of  chirped optical 
X-typed pulses to overcome the problems of both dispersion and diffraction over some distance. 

1.  Introduction 

Today,  the  theoretical  and  experimental  existence  of  localized  (or  nondiffracting)  solutions  to  the  wave 
equation in free space is a well established fact. The corresponding waves propagate for long distances resisting 
the diffraction effects, ie, they maintain their shape during propagation; and the X-type waves are examples of 
these solutions. 

The  theory  of  the  localized  waves  (LWs)  was  initially  developed  for  free  space  (vacuum)  [1]  and  in  some 
situations for waveguides (hollow or coaxial cables)[2]. Subsequently, the theory was extended in order to have 
undistorted wave propagation in material media without boundaries [3,4,5]. In this case the LWs are capable to 
overcome  both  the  difraction  and  dispersion  problems  for  long  distances.  The  extension  of  the  LW  theory  to 
material media was obtained by making the axicon angle θ of the Bessel beams (BBs) vary with the frequency 
[3,4,5]  in  such  a  way    that  a  suitable  frequency  superposition  of  the  BBs  does  compensate  for  the  material 
dispersion. 

In spite of such idea to work well in theory [4] and in its experimental implementation [3], it is not a simple 

one, and requires having recourse to  holographic elements.  

In  this  paper  we  propose  a  simpler  way  to  obtain  pulses  capable  to  recover  their  spatial  shape,  both 
transversally  and  longitudinally,  after  some  propagation  distance.  It  consists  in  using  chirped  optical  X-type 
pulses,  keeping  the  axicon  angle  fixed.  Let  us  recall  that,  by  contrast,  chirped  Gaussian  pulses  in  unbounded 
material media may recover only their longitudinal shape, since they undergo a progressive transverse spreading 
while propagating. 

2.  Chirped optical X-type pulses in material media 

Let us start with a Bessel beam in a material medium with refractive index n(ω): 

 

(1) 

where  it  must  be obeyed  the condition  kρ

wave numbers kρ and β, and the angular frequency ω.  In addition, we impose that kρ
nonphysical behavior of the Bessel function J0(.) and to confine ourselves to forward propagation only. 

2 = n2(ω)ω2/c2  -  β2  ,  which  connects  the  transverse  and  longitudinal 
2 ≥ 0 and ω/β≥ 0 to avoid a 

Once  the  conditions  above  are  satisfied,  we  have  the  liberty  to  write  the  longitudinal  wave  number  as  β  = 
(n(ω)ωcosθ)/c and, therefore, kρ = (n(ω)ωsinθ)/c;  where (as in the free space case) θ is the axicon angle of the 
Bessel beam. 

Now we can obtain a X-type pulse by performing a frequency superposition of these BBs with β and kρ given 

by the previous relations: 

where S(ω) is the frequency spectrum, and the axicon angle is kept constant.  

 

(2) 

 

 

 

 

We  can  see  that  the  phase  velocity  of  each  BB  in  our  superposition  (2)  is  different  and  given  by  Vphase  = 

c/(n(ω)cos(θ)). So, the pulse given by Eq.(2) will suffer a dispersion in its propagation.  

The method developed by Saari et al.[3] to overcome this problem consisted in regarding the axicon angle θ as 

a function of the frequency, to obtain a linear relationship between β and ω.  

Here, however, we want to work with a fixed axicon angle, and we have to find out another way for avoiding 
dispersion  and  diffraction  along  a  certain  distance.  To  do  that,  we  might  choose  a  chirped  Gaussian  spectrum  
S(ω) in Eq.(2): 

where ω0 is the central frequency of the spectrum, T0 is a constant related with the initial temporal width,  and 
C is the chirp parameter.  Unfortunately there is no analytical solution to Eq.(2) with S(ω) given by Eq.(3), so 
that some approximations are to be made.  

Then, let us assume  that the spectrum S(ω) is narrow enough, in the surrounding of the carrier frequency ω0 , 
that ∆ω/ω0<<1, to ensure that β(ω) can be approximated by the first three terms of its Taylor expansion in the 
vicinity  of    ω0,  i.e.,  β(ω)  ≈  β(ω0)  +  β’(ω)⏐ω0  (ω  -  ω0)  +  (1/2)  β’’(ω)⏐ω0  (ω  -  ω0)2;    where,  using  that  β  = 
(n(ω)ωcosθ)/c, 

 

(3) 

 

(4) 

As we know, β’(ω)  is related to the pulse group-velocity by Vg = 1/ β’(ω).  Here we can see the difference 
between the group-velocity of the X-type pulse (with fixed axicon angle) and that of a standard Gaussian pulse. 
This  difference  is  due  to  the  factor  cos(θ)  in  Eq.(4).  Because  of  it,  the  group-velocity  of  our  X-type  pulse  is 
always greater than the Gaussian one’s.  

We also know that the second derivative of β(ω) is related to the group-velocity dispersion (GVD) β2 by       β2 

= β’’(ω).  

The GVD is responsible for the temporal (longitudinal) spreading of the pulse. Here one can see that the GVD 

of the X-type pulse is always smaller than that of the standard Gaussian pulses, due the factor cos(θ) in Eq.(4). 

On using the above results, we can write 

The integral in Eq.(5) cannot be solved analytically, but it is enough for us to obtain the pulse behavior.   Let us 

analyze the pulse at ρ=0.  In this case we obtain:  

 

(5) 

 

(6) 

From Eq.(6) we can immediately see that the initial temporal width of the pulse intensity is T0 and that, after 

some propagated distance z, the time-width T1 becomes 

Relation (7) describes the pulse-spreading behavior. One can easily show that such a  behavior depends on the 

sign (positive or negative) of the product β2C, as is well known from the standard Gaussian pulses [6]. 

In the case β2C > 0,  the pulse will  monotonically become broader and broader with the distance z.  On the 
other hand, if  β2C < 0 the pulse will suffer, in a first stage, a narrowing, and then it will spread during the rest of 
its  propagation.  So,  there  will  be  a  certain  distance  at  which  the  pulse  will  recover  its  initial  temporal  width 
(T1=T0). From relation (7), we can found this distance ZT1=T0 (considering β2C < 0 ) 

 

(7) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(8) 

  One may notice that the maximum distance at which our chirped pulse, with a given T0 and β2,  may recover 
2
  /  β2.    We  call  this 
its  initial  temporal  width  can  be  easily  evaluated  from  Eq.(8),  and  is  given  by  LD  =  T0
maximum  value  LD  the  “dispersion  length”.    It  is  the  maximum  distance  the  X-type  pulse  may  travel  while 
recovering  its  initial  longitudinal  shape. Obviously,  if  we  want  the  pulse  to  reassume  its  longitudinal  shape  at 
some distance z < LD , chosen by us,  we have just to choose the correct value of the chirp parameter.  

Let us emphasize that the property of recovering the initial temporal width may be also verified in the case of 
chirped  standard  Gaussian  pulses[6].  However,  the  latter  will  suffer  a  progressive  transverse  spreading  which 
will not be reversible. The distance at which a Gaussian pulse doubles its initial transverse width w0  is zdiff = 
(3)1/2πw0
2/λ0,  where  λ0  is  the  carrier  wavelength.    So  we  can  see  that  optical  Gaussian  pulses  with  great 
transverse localization will be spoiled in a few centimeters or less. 

Now  we  shall  show  that  it  is  possible  to  recover  also  the  transverse  shape  of    the  chirped  X-type  pulse 

intensity; actually, it is possible to recover its entire form after a distance ZT1=T0.  

To see this, let us go back to our integral solution (5), and rewrite the spatial and temporal coordinate z and t as 
z = z c  + ∆z  and  t = t c =  z c / Vg, where zc is the center of the pulse (∆z is the distance from this point zc), and tc 
is the time at which the pulse center is located at zc. 

In this way, the solution (5) can be written, when  as z c = 0, as 

where we have taken q given by Eq.(3). 
To verify that the pulse intensity reassumes its entire original form at z = ZT1=T0 = -2CT2
[β2(C2+1)],  we can analyze our integral solution at that point obtaining: 

0/ 

 

(9) 

where we have made  ∆z = -∆z’. In this way we immediately see that  

(10) 

(11) 

 

Therefore, from Eq.(11) it is clear that the chirped optical X-type pulse intensity reassumes its original form 
with  just  a  longitudinal  inversion  at  the  pulse  center,  our  method  being,  in  this  way,  an  efficient  and  simple 
procedure for overcoming the effects of diffraction and dispersion in an unbounded material medium: A method 
simpler than the one of varying the axicon angle with frequency.  

Let us stress that we can choose the distance z = ZT1=T0 ≤ LD at which the pulse will retake its spatial shape by 

choosing a suitable value of the chirp parameter. 

3.  Advantages and Limitations of using Chirped X-Type Waves 

The  main  advantage  of  the  present  method  is  its  simplicity.  A  chirped  optical  X-type  pulse  with  a  constant 
axicon  angle  can  be  generated  in  a  very  simple  way,  by  using  an  annular  slit  localized  at  the  focus  of  a 
convergent  lens,  and  illuminating  that  slit  with  a  chirped  optical  Gaussian  pulse  (where  the  chirp  can  be 
controlled directly in the laser modulation). 

However,  we  should  remember  that  here  we  have  taken  into  account  the  dispersion  effects  till  their  second 
order.  In the cases of ultra short pulses, or when the pulse wavelength nearly coincides with the zero dispersion 
wavelength (ie, β2 ≈ 0), it is necessary to include the third order dispersion term β3, which in those cases will 
provide the dominant GVD effect. Correspondingly, the use of chirped optical X-type pulses might not furnish 

the  same  results  shown  above.    A  good  option  in  such  cases  would  be  varying  the  axicon  angle  with  the 
frequency.  

We  must  also  recall  that  a  Bessel  beam,  generated  by  finite  apertures  (as  it  must  be  in  the  real  situations), 
maintains  its  nondiffracting  properties  until  a  certain  distance  only  (its  field  depth),  given  by    Ldiff    =  R  /  tgθ, 
where R is the aperture radius and θ is the axicon angle.  Let us call this distance Ldiff to emphasize that it is the 
distance along which a X-type wave may resist the diffraction effects. 

So, since our chirped X-type pulse is generated by frequency superposition of BBs with the same axicon angle, 
it will be able to reassume its shape at z = ZT1=T0 ≤ LD if those BBs are able to reach that point resistant to the 
diffraction effects; in other words, if 

 

 

 

(12) 

This fact leads us to conclude that the dispersion length LD and the diffraction length Ldiff  play important roles 

in the applications of chirped X-type pulses.  Such roles can be summarized in two cases: 

 
First case: 
When  LD ≤ Ldiff  : 
In this case the dispersion plays the critical role in the pulse propagation, and we can ensure pulse fidelity till a 
0/β2  .  More  specifically,  we  can  choose  a  distance  z  =  ZT1=T0  ≤  LD  at 

maximum  distance  given  by z  =  LD  =  T2
which the pulse will retake its entire spatial shape by choosing the correct value of the chirp parameter. 

 
Second case: 
When  Ldiff  ≤  LD : 
In this case the diffraction plays the critical role in the pulse propagation. When this occurs, we can emit in the 
dispersive  medium  a  chirped  X-type  pulse  that  reassumes  its  entire  spatial  shape  after  propagating  until  the 
maximum value given by z = Ldiff . To do this, we have to choose the correct value to the chirp parameter. 

Let  us  suppose  that  we  want  the  pulse  intensity  to  reach  the  maximum  distance  Ldiff    with  the  same  spatial 

shape of the beginning.   We should have, then, 

Once  T0, β2, R and θ are known, we can use Eq.(13) to find the correct value of the chirp parameter.  

 

(13) 

In this paper we have proposed the use of chirped optical X-type pulses in dispersive media to overcome the 
problems of both diffraction and dispersion. We showed that the dispersion and the diffraction length, LD and 
Ldiff , respectively, play essential roles on the recovering  of the pulse intensity shape.  

4.  Conclusion 

 
References 

 
[1] For a revision see: E. Recami, M. Zamboni-Rached, K.Z. Nóbrega, C.A. Dartora, H.E.Hernández-        
     Figueroa, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, Vol. 9, 59-73 (2003); and references     
     therein. 
 
[2] M. Zamboni-Rached , E. Recami, F. Fontana , Physical Review E, Vol. 64, 6603-+ Part 2  (2001). 
 
[3] H. Sõnajalg, M. Ratsep, P. Saari, Optics Letters 22 (1997) 310. 
 
[4] M. Zamboni-Rached, K.Z. Nóbrega, H.E.Hernández-Figueroa, E. Recami, Optics Communications, Vol.  
     226, 15-23 (2003). 

 
   [5] C. Conti and S. Trillo, Optics Letters, Vol. 28, 1090 (2003). See also M. A. Porras, G. Valiulis and P. Di  
     Trapani, Physical Review E, Vol. 68, 016613 (2003). 
 
   [6] G.P. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fiber Optics, Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 1995. 
 

