Breaking symmetry through speed-induced beam-deflection via centrifugation of the
light source

G. Sardin
Applied Physics Department, University of Barcelona - Barcelona, Spain

Abstract

The experiment proposed aims to evidence and to measure the deflection of light rays induced by
the source speed upon emission, and to discern it from the aberration of light rays induced by the
observer  speed.  The  method  stands  in  creating  a  speed  asymmetry  between  that  of  the  source
and that of the observer, and relies on the centrifugation of a light source at ultrahigh speed. When
source and observer have the same speed, such as when being both on the same inertial system,
the  deflection  and  the  aberration  compensate  and  their  net  effect  is  null.  So,  in  order  to
circumscribe the odds of inertial systems and to isolate these speed-induced effects it has instead
been appealed to a centrifugal system, since it allows infringing symmetry between the source and
the observer speeds. Three cases are considered. (a) Centrifugation of the source fixed at one end
of the rotor arm, while the detector is fixed on the rotor axis. This configuration of the experiment
aims to unveil that due to the peripheral speed of the source the beam is deflected forward, so it
impinges on the centric detector slightly shifted from its position when the system was not rotating.
(b) The positions of the source and the detector are interchanged. It is hence the turn of the source
peripheral  speed  to  be  null  and  thus  no  speed-induced  deflection  ensues,  but  then  due  to  the
observer peripheral speed there is a speed-induced aberration, i.e. by the time the light reaches
the detector this one has slightly moved side-way. However, this time the spot shifts in opposite
direction  and  hence  the  effect  of  centrifugation  is  not  reciprocal  under  the  interchange  between
source and observer. (c) The source and the detector are fixed at the two diametrical ends of the
rotor  arms.  In  this  case  the  beam  deflection  and  aberration  add,  since  their  speed  vectors  have
opposite directions and each shift of the spot on the detector is double since the time-of-flight  is
then double. So, in this rotating experiment the reciprocity of the effect of speed does not hold on,
in  the  sense  that  if  source  and  observer  are  interchanged,  the  corresponding  effect  on  the  light
beam is not reciprocal, and has a distinct cause, i.e. deflection in one case and aberration in the
other one. This lack of reciprocity differentiate them from inertial systems in which the two effects
compensate since their speeds vectors have the same direction, leading thus to a null result that
makes them profitless for the present aim of isolating the speed-induced deflection of light rays.

Introduction

We  have  introduced  elsewhere  (1-4)  the  speed-induced  deflection  of  light  as  an  actual  physical
effect, and it should not be mistaken with an aberration. Here, it will be distinguished between the
speed-induced beam-deflection arising from the source motion and the speed-induced aberration
arising from the observer motion. So, we present an experiment pursuing the specific detection of
the  speed-induced  deflection  and  of  the  speed-induced  aberration.  This  cannot  be  achieved  on
inertial systems using local light sources since then, the source and observer speeds being equal,
the speed-induced deflection of the emitted rays due to the source motion is cancelled out by the
speed-induced aberration due to the equality of the observer motion, and hence the net effect is
null, i.e. the forward shift of the spot due to the source motion is compensated by the forward shift
of the detector due to its motion, and hence no net spot shift ensues and the spot stay still on the
detector array. To turn out this obstacle the experiment proposed has been conceived in order to
create an asymmetry between the source speed and that of the observer. The light source, which
can conveniently  be  a  tiny  solid  state  laser  or  diode,  is  rotated  at  an  ultra-high  speed,  while  the
detector is fixed to the centrifuge rotor, so for practical means the detector peripheral velocity can
be considered null (for r → 0 ⇒ v = ω.r → 0). The photo-detector is constituted by a high-resolution
array, which is always facing the laser since being fixed at the rotor axis.

1

Experimental

Centrifuges rotate at very high speeds, typically from 50000 to 100000 rpm (5,6). Let us pick up an
intermediate  angular  speed:  f  =  60  000  rpm  =  1000  cycles/s.    For  an  arm  length  of  3  m  the
peripheral speed would be:

v = (2πr).f = 2π x 3 x 1000 ≈ 18.850 m/s ≈ 18.85 km/s

The rotating system should be put under high vacuum to ease reaching ultra-high speed and for
the beam to be free of any eventual aberration. There are engineering and materials challenges in
producing such an equipment. The detector should be carefully isolated from any vibration of the
centrifuge.  Also  the  huge  centrifugal  force  (f  =  mv2/r)  due  to  the  huge  acceleration  attained  of
million  times  that  of  gravity  on  earth,  exerted  upon  the  light  source  (diode  laser)  may  eventually
slightly  alter  its  performances.  Also,  this  centrifugal  force  acting  upon  the  device  arms  would
greatly stretch it, the material resistance being thus the factual most restrictive parameter.

(1) Deflection induced by the source speed

In this first arrangement the source is fixed at the end of the rotor arm and the detector on the rotor
axis (fig.1). At first the spot position is recorded, the system being at rest. After while, it is turned
on, so when the source start rotating its peripheral speed induces a forward deflection of the beam
(1-4).  The corresponding beam deflection would be:

tn α = v / c = 18.85 103 / 3.108 ≈ 6.3 10-5

The deflection angle α is hence equal to 63 µrad.

The corresponding shift of the beam spot on the high-resolution detector array will then be:

∆x = r. tn α = 3 x 6.3 10-5 ≈ 19.10-5 m = 190 µm

Since the beam is deflected in the direction of motion so does the spot on the detector array (fig.1).
Inverting the rotation would invert the deflection and hence the direction of the spot shift, so the two
spots separation would be twice 190 µm. Thus for an array resolution of 5 µm the total shift of 380
µm would correspond to 76 pixels, and thus it would be easily discernible.

When the light source is at one end of the gyrator arm of the centrifuge the beam deflection is only
due to the speed of the source, since then the detector peripheral speed is null. Since the source
is  rotating  at  a  peripheral  velocity  of  18.85  km/s  there  is  an  actual  deflection  angle  of  63  µrad.
Even though the source is rotating the detector is always in the same position relative to it, since it
rotates at the same angular velocity and thus it always faces the source. However, by the time the
beam reaches the flat detector array this one has slightly rotated of an angle β = 2π(t/T) = 2π(r/c).f
= 2π(3.103/3.108 = 2π.10-5 rad. Since this angle is extremely small, the corresponding insignificant
inclination will not affect the measure of the spot shift, and can be neglected.

Alternatively, the system may comprise two lasers diametrically located in order to get at once two
spots on the detector. The centrifuge being turned off, the two beams are initially adjusted so that
their spots superpose on a centric half-transparent screen or two oppositely sided array detectors
Once  the  centrifuge  running,  the  beams  would  deflect  in  opposite  direction  and  thus  the  spots
would get apart increasingly with speed up to its maximum. The spots shift would hence be double
than for a single beam: 2 ∆x = 2.(190) = 380 µm.

2

(2) Aberration induced by the detector speed

The laser is now fixed on the rotor axis and the detector at the end of its arm (fig.2). This time there
is  no  deflection  of  the  beam  since  the  source  peripheral  speed  is  then  null,  however  there  is  a
speed-induced aberration due to the detector peripheral speed. This aberration is due to the fact
that while the beam reaches the detector this one has slightly moved sideway, and thus the spot is
slightly shifted from its position when the detector is at rest. This produces an apparent deflection
of the beam, i.e. a speed-induced aberration.

Spot shift due to the beam time-of-flight:

∆x = v. t = (18.85 103).(3 / 3 108) = 18.85 10-5 ≈ 19.10-5 m = 190 µm

This corresponding aberration will be: tn α = v / c = 18.85 103 / 3.108 ≈ 6.3 10-5

The aberration angle α is hence equal to 63 µrad.

If the rotation is inverted so does the deflection and thus the total shift will be equal to 380 µm.

(3) Simultaneous speed-induced deflection and aberration

In this third configuration, the laser and the detector are both fixed at the opposite ends of the rotor
arm, the beam path being then equal to the centrifuge diameter (fig.3).  In this arrangement there
is  a  speed-induced  deflection  of  the  beam  to  which  appends  the  aberration  due  to  the  detector
sideway shift during the beam time-of-flight. Let us point out that the spot shift due to the aberration
and the shift due to the beam deflection have opposite directions, since source and detector being
diametrically  opposed  their  speed  vectors  have  reversed  directions.  On  an  inertial  system  the
source  and  observer  speed  vectors  are  equal  and  point  at  the  same  direction,  so  the  speed-
induced deflection and the speed-induced aberration cancel out, and lead thus to no observable
effect.  Instead,  in  this  rotary  system  the  deflection  and  the  aberration  add  since  at  any  time  the
source and detector speeds have counter directions (fig.3), being diametrically situated. Therefore,
the spot shifts due to the deflection and to the aberration add, leading to a total shift:

 ∆x = 2.(190) = 380 µm

Conclusion

If the rotation is inverted so do the shifts and thus the total shift will be of two ∆x, i.e. equal to 760
µm or equivalently to 152 pixels of 5 µm each.

The point is that this experiment allows identifying separately the speed-induced deflection due to
the source motion and the speed-induced aberration due to that of the observer. This distinction is
of crucial interest on conceptual  grounds.  This  cannot  be  achieved  with  an  inertial  system  since
these  two  effects  of  speed  then  compensate,  source  and  observer  having  the  same  speed  and
hence the net effect is null. So, since on an inertial system no effect related to its own speed is
observed, it may be mistakenly deduced that speed has no effect at all, a conclusion which falsifies
reality. Actually two offsetting effects are taking place, so the effect of speed is present but hidden,
which  is  not  at  all  the  same  that  the  formal  absence  of  any  effect.  A  theory  supported  by  null
results will always be less incisive than one based on positive ones. It emerges thus that inertial
systems, on which basically rely special relativity, are inappropriate to study the effects of their own
speed, since local sources and observers having the same speed, the net effect is always null. The
way to reveal the effect of speed is by means of rotating systems, which allow breaking symmetry
between  the  source  and  observer  speeds.  It  appears  thus  essential  to  overcome  the  inability  of

3

inertial  systems  and  to  appeal  instead  to  rotating  ones.  These  offer  also  the  great  advantage  of
providing an absolute reference embodied in the rotor axis, since on it the peripheral speed is null.
So, the effect of motion can be referred to this absolute reference, allowing hence to distinguish
between the speed of the source and that of the observer.

Let  us  hence  stress  and  sum  up  the  great  advantages  offered  by  rotary  systems  in  sounding
effects  due  to  speed,  allowing  to  analyse  separately  the  influence  of  the  source  speed  on  light
emission and of the observer speed on its detection.  When the observer is fixed on the rotor axis
since  its  peripheral  speed  is  null  any  observed  effect  is  exclusively  due  to  the  source  speed.
Oppositely, when the source is fixed on the rotor axis any effect then observed is exclusively due
to  the  observer  peripheral  speed.  This  contrasts  with  the  limitations  of  inertial  systems,  in  which
any effect can only be expressed in terms of relative speed, without allowing to discern each speed
and  to  identify  and  ponder  separately  the  influence  of  each  one.  Furthermore,  if  source  and
observer are diametrically set, their peripheral speed vector then have always opposite directions,
and  thus  at  any  infinitesimal  instant,  the  rotary  system  simulates  two  vehicles  going  in  opposite
directions, at the same speed with respect to a common absolute reference constituted by the rotor
axis. Hence the effects of speed do not cancel out but they add, and thus turn out observable. The
rotary system presents also the great advantage of ascertaining the effect of speed by turning it on
and off. It would thus be of great interest to construct such an ultra-fast rotary system and sound
the effect of speed, overcoming the limitations of relaying on relative speeds. For example, on an
inertial system interchanging source and observer  has no  effect, but  on a rotary  system it does,
widening our apprehension of the causality of effects.

On  inertial  systems  since  no  net  speed-induced  effect  from  local  sources  has  been  observed,
special relativity has handled the proper system as free of speed. However, this standpoint deeply
falsifies  the  factual  reality.  Actually,  the  proper  inertial  system  is  moving  through  space  even
though its motion is not detected, so during the beam time-of-flight the detector has slightly moved
away. However, since no aberration is observed this necessarily implies the beam to be pointing
forward, reaching so the detector just as if the inertial system had effectively no speed at all nor the
beam any forward deflection. In order to solve this pernicious ambiguity, it has been appealed to a
rotatory experiment, which brakes the symmetry between the source and detector speed, allowing
so to evidence the speed-induced deflection of light rays and to evade the inadequacy of inertial
systems due to the systematically null results they supply. This would allow to amend the improper
conceptual standpoint extrapolated from null results, and to upgrade it with more acute deductions
from  non-null  results.  An  experiment  able  to  evidence  the  speed-induced  deflection  of  light  rays
appears thus of fundamental welfare.

References

(1) G. Sardin, "A causal approach to first-order optical equivalency of inertial systems, by
means of a beam pointing test-experiment based on speed-induced deflection of light"
http://xxx.lanl.gov/ftp/physics/papers/0401/0401091.pdf
(2) G. Sardin, "A dual set-up based on Bradley's aberration of light, using simultaneously stellar
and local light sources"
http://xxx.lanl.gov/ftp/physics/papers/0401/0401090.pdf
(3) G. Sardin, "First and second order electromagnetic equivalency of inertial systems, based on
the wavelength and the period as speed-dependant units of length and time"
http://xxx.lanl.gov/ftp/physics/papers/0401/0401092.pdf
(4) G. Sardin, "Testing Lorentz symmetry of special relativity by means of the Virgo or Ligo set-
up, through the differential measure of the two orthogonal beams time-of-flight"
http://xxx.lanl.gov/ftp/physics/papers/0404/0404116.pdf
(5) Beckman TL 100 ultracentrifuge,
http://www.gmi-inc.com/Products/beckmantl100.htm
(6) Centrifuge enrichment, World Nuclear Association,
http://www.world-nuclear.org/education/phys.htm

4

Figures

V

Diode laser

V

Detector

ω

Detector

ω

Diode lasers

Diode laser

V

Detector

V

Fig.1

Fig.2

V

Diode laser

ω

Detector

V

Fig.3

5

