Catching Attention in Fiber Optics Class 
 
R. Ya. Kezerashvili, L. Leng 
 
New York City College of Technology, The City University of New York 

1. Introduction 

The past 10 years has witnessed the rapid growth of the Internet traffic fueled by World 
Wide  Web  applications.  It  is  estimated  that  nearly  half  a  billion  people  have  Internet 
access and use it regularly. The World Wide Web already hosts over 2 billion web pages, 
and,  according  to  the  estimates,  people  upload  more  than  3.5  million  new  web  pages 
every day. Reports have shown that data traffic flowing over the Internet approximately 
doubles  every  year  [1].  The  increase  of  the  Internet  traffic  has  resulted  in  enormous 
requirements  for  the  bandwidth  of  information  transport.  Among  a  number  of 
technologies,  optical  fiber  is  considered  to  be  the  best  suited  one  for  providing  this 
bandwidth.  

An  optical  fiber  is  a  hair-thin  strand  of  glass  or  plastic  through  which  communication 
signals  are  transmitted  from  one  location  to  another  in  the  form  of  light  generated  by 
lasers or other signal sources. These signals are digital pulses or continuously modulated 
analog  streams  of  light  representing  voice  information,  data  information,  video 
information, or any other type of information. 

Optical  fiber  was  originally  invented  in  the  early  1970s  for  long-distance  voice 
communication.  AT&T  put  the  first  commercial  optical  fiber  telephone  system  into 
service  in  1983  [2].  However,  it  was  the  rapidly  rising  demand  for  the  Internet 
connectivity  that  drove  the  growth  and  development  of  fiber  optic  communications. 
Today optical fiber is gradually replacing the traditional transmission media (copper wire, 
coaxial cable, etc.) because it has larger information capacity, lower loss, less weight, and 
better  immunity  to  electromagnetic  interference.  Further  more,  people  are  trying  to 
replace  electrical  switches,  regenerators,  and  buffers  with  their  optical  counterparts  in 
order to gain higher bandwidth and faster speed. 

Nowadays  there  are  various  optical  networks  deployed  around  the  world,  which  use 
optical  fibers  to  connect  different  locations  and  to  carry  data,  voice,  or  video  signals. 
These  include  backbone  networks  that  provide  country-to-country  or  city-to-city 
transport  services,  metropolitan  area  networks  that  link  access  networks  with  the 
backbone,  and  access  networks  that  provide  cable  TV  and  fiber-to-the-home  services. 
Due  to  these  deployments  we  are  enjoying  cheaper  telephone  calls  and  high-speed 
Internet services. Every day new technologies and bandwidth-hungry applications (such 
as  remote  teaching,  remote  monitoring,  video  on  demand,  etc.  [3])  are  pushing  optical 
fiber closer to our  homes  and  offices.  In addition to  telecommunications, there are also 
many  other  applications  for  optical  fiber  that  are  simply  not  possible  with  metallic 
conductors.  These  include  sensors,  medical/surgical  applications,  subject  illumination, 
image transport, military, automotive, and industrial applications [4]. 

 

 

1 

Since optical fiber technology is growing to be part of our daily lives, the understanding 
of its applications will be critical knowledge for our society, especially for the younger 
generations.  To  better  prepare  the  students  for  the  fast-pacing  information  age,  college 
education and training on fiber optics has apparently become high priority. 
 

2. What is fiber optics? 

 
According  to  American  National  Standard  for  Telecommunications,  fiber  optics  is  the 
branch  of  optical  technology  concerned  with  the  transmission  of  light  through  fibers 
made of transparent materials such as glasses and plastics.  We would like to point out 
that  telecommunication  applications  of  fiber  optics  mostly  use  flexible  low-loss  fibers 
made  of  pure  silica  glass,  which  will  be  the  focus  of  this  article.  Current  plastic  fibers 
suffer from high loss, which presents both technical and economical challenge for their 
wide applications.  
 
Light can be transmitted in an optical fiber with a loss as low as physically possible due 
to  a  blessed  natural  phenomenon:  total  internal  reflection,  which  occurs  when  light 
propagates from a medium with a high index 
of  refraction  to  one  with  a  lower  index  of 
refraction  [5].  In  optical  fiber,  the  core  -  the 
center 
is 
transmitted  -  has  a  slightly  higher  index  of 
the 
refraction 
cladding,  as  shown  in  Fig.  1.  When  total 
internal  reflection  occurs,  the  traveling  light 
in the core hits the cladding and reflects back 
without  losing  any  light  to  the  cladding.  The 
light  experiences  during 
loss 

Fig.  1.  Schematic  illustration  of  the  cross 
section  of  a  typical  optical  fiber  and  light 
propagation in optical fiber 

its  surrounding  ring, 

through  which 

region 

light 

than 

that 

the 

propagation is due to scattering and absorption in the fiber and bending of the fiber. 
 
The idea of guiding light based on total internal reflection dates back to 1870, when John 
Tyndall, a British scientist, used a jet of water flowing from one container to another and 
a beam of light to demonstrate that light inside the water guide followed a specific path. 
The first all-glass fiber came about in the 1950s as an image-transmitting device called 
fiberscope.  However,  these  early  fibers  experienced  excessive  loss  and,  as  a  result,  the 
transmitting  distances  were  severely  limited.  It  was  the  advent  of  laser  technology  and 
low-loss  glass  fiber  that  enabled  the  establishment  of  the  fiber  optics  industry  in  the 
1970s  [6].  Back  then,  military  and  commercial  uses  of  optical  fibers  for  telephone 
networks were the driving force for the progress of fiber optic communications. During 
the  1990s,  the  Internet  started  to  embrace  fiber  optics,  and  its  phenomenal  growth  put 
optical networking into the focus of new technologies.  
 
A basic fiber optic system consists of three elements: a transmitter, which generates light 
signal using a laser or a light-emitting diode; an optical fiber cable, which carries the light 
to  its  destination;  and  a  receiver,  which  accepts  the  light  signal  transmitted.  On  the 
transmitter side, information such as data, voice, and video, is first encoded into electrical 

 

2 

signal  and  then  converted  into  optical  signal  at  the  laser  source.  The  optical  signal 
propagates  along  the  fiber  until  it  reaches  the  receiver,  where  the  optical  signal  is 
converted back into electrical signal. As the last step, the electrical signal is decoded into 
information in the form of data, voice, or video [7].  
 
More sophisticated fiber optic systems may contain fiber amplifiers for compensating the 
transmission  loss,  intelligent  switches  for  directing  the  light  traffic  in  optical  networks, 
signal regenerators for boosting the signal quality and cleaning the noise, etc.  
 

3. How to get students interested? 

 
As  implied  by  its  definition,  fiber  optics  covers  a  broad  range  of  knowledge  and, 
therefore,  is  generally  interdisciplinary.  The  goal  of  a  fiber  optics  course  is  to  teach 
students  of  science  major  the  physical  fundamentals  of  fiber  optics  and  to  stimulate 
interests that may potentially develop into the students’ future careers. The objectives of 
the fiber optics lecture for non-science major students are to explain the basic principles, 
to  present  rapidly  evolving  fiber  optic  technologies  that  are  supporting  our  modern 
society’s  daily  communication  activities,  and  to  foresee  the  impact  of  fiber  optics  on 
various  aspects  of  our  life.  Of  course  these  objectives  are  applicable  for  science  major 
students, too.  
 
Fiber  optics  in  general  requires  some  preliminary  knowledge  of  properties  of  light. 
Suggested  topics  include:  nature  of  light,  refractive  index,  Snell’s  law,  total  internal 
reflection,  polarization  and  birefringence,  dispersion,  interference  and  interferometers, 
diffraction and diffraction gratings. Depending on the students targeted with the course, 
these topics can be either required as preliminary or taught at the beginning of the course. 
After students have the basic knowledge of geometric and wave optics, the fundamental 
theory  of  waveguide  with  the  focus  on  optical  fiber  can  be  introduced.  The  other 
suggested topics, which can be included in the syllabus, are fiber structure and fabrication, 
laser  physics,  opto-electronics,  etc.  Like  any  other  disciplines,  fiber  optics  can  be  both 
challenging  and  boring,  which  makes  it  important  to  keep  the  students  motivated  and 
interested, especially during the lectures. We find that the most effective approach is to 
demonstrate some simple yet revealing fiber optics experiments right before the lectures. 
Often these demonstrations bring out the curiosity in the students and help them to focus 
on  the  following  materials  covered  in  the  lecture.  Such  demonstrations  can  be  also 
modified  and  included  in  the  fiber  optics  laboratory  projects.  We  find  that  students, 
especially of non-science major, can learn more easily and gain better understanding of 
fiber  optics  with  the  help  of  these  demonstrations.  In  this  section,  we  provide  and 
describe a few examples of such experiments.  
 
3.1. A basic fiber optic transmission system 
 
In  the  very  first  few  lectures,  the  teacher  brings  to  the  class  a  laser  pointer,  a  small 
portable light source with fiber-coupled output, a screen, and a strand of fiber optics cable 
with  connectors  on  both  ends.  These  components  can  be  purchased  from  fiber  optics 
manufactures or vendors such as AC Photonics Inc. and Fiber Instrument Sales [8]. First, 

 

3 

at 

up 

the 

Fig. 2. A basic fiber optic transmission system 

the  teacher  aims  the  laser 
pointer 
screen 
through the chalk dust (use 
an eraser to make the chalk 
dust)  and  shows  that  the 
light path is a straight line. 
This also visually helps the 
students  to  understand  the 
concept  of  a  light  ray  in 
geometric  optics.  Then  the 
the 
sets 
teacher 
demonstration as shown in Fig. 2, and shows that light can be coupled into a coiled fiber 
optic cable and still emerges at the other end. How is this possible? Can light be bent? 
What does the fiber cable do to the light so that it can be bent and follows the guide of the 
fiber cable? Naturally those questions arise in the students’ 
minds. Now is the time for the teacher to point out that the 
demonstration  is  a  simplified  version  of  a  real-life 
communication  system,  in  which  information  is  carried 
from one location to another through fiber optics. In fact, 
the  phone  calls  they  make,  the  downloaded  files  in  their 
computers, and their favorite sports TV programs, have all 
traveled  through  some  certain  fiber  cables.  And  the 
answers  to  the  questions  are  exactly  what  the  fiber  optics 
course  is  about.  The  students  are  now  informed  that  they 
have  to  know  about  a  few  physical  aspects  of  light: 
reflection, refraction, and diffraction, before they can truly 
and fully understand the answer. At this time they realize 
that what they are about to learn is not just some formulas 
or  figures  in  the  textbook,  but  also  real-life  phenomena 
that  are  very  close  to  them.  Moreover,  the  level  of 
knowledge absorption will not only affect their grades, but 
also might have an impact on their future careers.  

Fig.  3.  Internal  reflection  tube
of

(Photo 
CENCO) 

courtesy 

 
Corresponding  to  the  lecture  demonstration,  the  students  can  perform  a  no-prior-
experience-needed experiment using an internal reflection tube [9] as a laboratory project. 
The internal reflection tube is a specially designed, clear acrylic tube that measures 7.5 
cm in diameter and 12.5 cm in height, as shown in Fig. 3. In this experimental activity the 
students  can  clearly  witness  internal  reflections  when  they  shine  a  laser  beam  onto  a 
polished step cut into the upper end of this tube. The beam's path is clearly visible as a 
spiral  inside  the  tube  wall  -  making  for  a  fascinating  demonstration  of  internal  light 
reflections.  
 
3.2. Water jet optics 
 
This demonstration is similar to John Tyndall’s experiment in 1870 [10] and essentially 
demonstrates  the  same  principle:  total  internal  reflection.  As  shown  in  Fig.  4,  a  light 

 

4 

the  other  side  of 

Fig. 4. Setup of water jet optics 

source (in our setup, a He-Ne laser, or diode laser) is positioned and adjusted so that its 
output  light  beam  horizontally  enters 
a water container and exits through a 
spout  on 
the 
container.  Now  the  teacher  can  seal 
the  container  with  a  cap  and  ask  the 
students to pay attention to the screen. 
What  do  they  see?  A  light  spot,  the 
students  will  answer.  Then, 
the 
teacher removes the cap and asks the 
same  question  again.  The  students 
will  notice  that  the  light  spot  has 
disappeared  from  the  screen.  What 
happened to the light spot? Now it is 
a good time to encourage them to come up with an answer. When the container is sealed 
with  a  cap,  no  water  flows  out  of  the  spout  due  to  the  air  pressure.  The  light  beam 
continues propagating in its original direction after leaving the container and reaches the 
screen creating a bright spot. When the cap is removed, water will flow through the spout 
naturally  forming  a  water  waveguide.  Since  the  refractive  index  of  water  is  larger  than 
that of air, the condition for total internal reflection can be satisfied. As a result, the light 
beam  exiting  the  spout  goes  through  multiple  total  internal  reflections  within  the  water 
guide thus following the water flow instead of the horizontal path. If the frequency of the 
light  beam  is  within  the  visible  spectrum  range  of  human’s  eyes,  then  one  can  actually 
see the light traveling within the water. In a dark room, the effect of this experiment is 
impressive.  “One  of  the  most  beautiful  and  most  curious  experiments  that  one  can 
perform  in  a  course  on  optics”,  professor  Daniel  Colladon  at  the  University  of  Geneva 
wrote about water jet experiment [6]. 
 
This is an interesting experiment, the students may think, but what does it have to do with 
fiber optics? A question like that would make the teacher happy because now he/she can 
discuss fiber optics. He/she could start with “well, this demonstration shows exactly how 
fiber optics works. Water jet optics and fiber optics are based on the same principle: total 
internal  reflection.  If  you  understand  this  experiment,  you’ve  practically  known  the 
fundamentals  of  fiber  optics.  However,  fiber  optics  is  a  much  better  waveguide  than  a 
water jet, thanks to numerous technology breakthroughs in the last fifty years. And you 
are about to explore all that accumulated knowledge in this course …”  
 
For  the  corresponding  laboratory  project,  a  light  pipe  [9]  can  be  used  to  observe  total 
internal  reflection.  The  students  can  use  a  crystal  clear  0.80-m  long  acrylic  rod  bended 
into a spiral with a long tail. When a laser light is shined into one end of the rod it will 
emerge from the other with almost no attenuation.  
 
3.3. Light wave propagation in a glass rod 
 
The propagation of light wave in optical fiber is the main body of the fiber optics course. 
Students are required to understand the concepts and mechanisms of fiber loss, dispersion, 

 

5 

of 

be 

Fig. 5. Light wave propagation in a glass rod 

birefringence, etc. Since the light wave is confined in the fiber, which is as thin as human 
the 
hair,  most 
phenomena 
physical 
visually 
cannot 
which 
perceived, 
hinders 
students’ 
learning  process.  We 
find  it  a  very  helpful 
demonstration  to  show 
a  blown-up  version  of 
light 
optics: 
fiber 
propagation in a glass rod. This seemingly simple experiment shown in Fig. 5 is actually 
very rich in content.  
 
First, it can help the students to understand how light waves are confined in fiber optics 
through the mechanism of total internal reflection. When a laser light is injected into the 
glass rod at an incident angle α, depending on the value of α, the propagation of the light 
varies significantly. A particularly interesting case is represented by the blue color in Fig. 
5, where the laser light is adjusted to enter the glass rod with a refractive angle of θ1 and 
to subsequently meet the interface between the glass and the air at an angle of β1, so that 
the refracted light travels in parallel with the glass rod. Why does this happen? What does 
this  phenomenon  imply?  The  teacher  can  get  the  students  actively  involved  in  the 
thinking  process  by  presenting  those  questions.  He/she  can  also  explain  that  it  occurs 
because the refractive index of the glass is higher than that of the air. After this step, we 
know that, based on geometric optics, any light that enters the glass rod with an incident 
angle of α that is greater than α0 will reflect back into the glass rod without any loss and 
is, therefore, confined in the glass rod. The green and red arrowed lines plotted in Fig. 5 
are examples of such light rays. On the contrary, an incident angle less than α0 results in 
the loss of the light, as illustrated by the purple lines. Now it is the time for the teacher to 
introduce the concepts of “acceptance angle” and “numerical aperture (NA)”, which are 
commonly  used  terms  for  characterizing  fiber  optics.  The  acceptance  angle  is  the 
maximum angle from the fiber axis at which the light may enter the fiber so that it will 
reflect and travel correctly in the fiber. It is shown in Fig. 5 as the angle θ0. The sine of 
the acceptance angle is the numerical aperture of the fiber. These two parameters of the 
fiber provide a guideline for efficiently coupling light from free space into the fiber core, 
which is one of the most common practices in optical fiber communication systems.  
 
The  same  demonstration  can  be  also  employed  to  assist  the  teacher  to  explain  to  the 
students  a  very  important  loss  mechanism  of  the  optical  fiber:  Rayleigh  scattering. 
Generally  speaking,  Rayleigh  scattering  refers  to  the  scattering  of  light  off  of  particles 
that are small compared to the wavelength of the light, and it accounts for about 96% of 
attenuation in the optical fiber. What causes Rayleigh scattering in the optical fiber? It is 
the  impurities  that  cannot  be  completely  eliminated  during  the  manufacturing  process. 
When the light travels in the glass fiber core, it collides with the impurity atoms in the 
glass and, as a result, the light is scattered. Rayleigh scattering can be considered to be 
elastic  scattering  since  the  wavelength  of  the  scattered  light  is  not  changed.  If  the 

 

6 

the 

timely 

introduction  of  Rayleigh  scattering  aided  with 

scattered  light  maintains  an  angle  that  supports  forward  travel  within  the  fiber  core  (in 
our  demonstration,  the  glass  rod),  no  attenuation  occurs.  If  the  light  is  scattered  at  an 
angle that does not support continued forward travel, the light is diverted out of the core 
and attenuation occurs. Here is a good question for the teacher to toss out to the students 
before the lecture: why can we see the light path sideways, although the light travels in 
the  forward  direction  in  the  glass  rod?  Since  we  can  see  the  light  rays  sideways,  there 
must be some light leaving the glass rod through the side and reaching our eyes. But what 
causes  this  portion  of  the  light  to  deviate  from  its  original propagation  direction  and  to 
exit  the  glass  rod  sooner  than  expected?  As  the  students  are  now  eager  to  know  the 
answer, 
the  visual 
demonstration by the teacher will leave a deep impression in students’ minds.  
 
For no-prior-experience-needed lab experiments, students can use an optical  signal path 
demonstrator set [9] to observe the propagation of light in fiber optics. This set includes a 
straight and a curved acrylic bar. The entire path of a beam of light is visible inside the 
specially  prepared  plastic,  which  contains  tiny  particles  that  scatter  the  light.  Both  bars 
work  with  a  classroom  laser.  Moreover,  the  students  can  learn  fiber  optics  by 
experimenting and building projects using a fiber optics kit, for example [9]. This fiber 
optical kit includes all fiber optic components, connectors and cables. The students can 
get acquainted with the light pipe, the fiber optic receiver and the fiber optic light- pen 
cable.  
 
Teaching  can  be  effective  and  efficient  only  when  one  has  the  students’  attention.  The 
demonstrations  described  in  this  paper  illustrate  our  approach  to  active  involvement  of 
the students into the fiber optics lecture and course. We are currently developing methods 
in the format of laboratory hand-on projects, academic seminars, student group projects, 
etc., to foster a dynamic teaching and learning environment for both the faculty and the 
students. The goal of our effort is for the students to engage productively in their learning 
and to succeed in the course.  

 
4. Conclusion 

 
We  have  briefly  reviewed  the  history  and  the  current  development  of  fiber  optics,  and 
have  addressed  the  significance  of  teaching fiber optics in college for science and non-
science  majors.  Furthermore,  we  have  proposed  several  simple  and  illustrative 
experimental demonstrations for college faculties to use in their teaching in fiber optics. 
These  demonstrations  are  designed  to  aid  the  teaching  and  learning  processes  in  the 
lectures.  More  methods  serving  the  same  purpose  but  in  various  format  including  the 
laboratory projects are currently being developed in our college [11].  
 
References: 
 

1.  A. M. Odlyzko, “Internet traffic growth: Sources and implications,” Proc. ITCOM 

2003, SPIE, 2003. The electronic format of this paper can be also found at 
http://www.dtc.umn.edu/~odlyzko/doc/itcom.internet.growth.pdf 

 

7 

2.  T. Li, “Advances in optical communications: An historical perspective,” Journal 
on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. SAC-1, n. 3, pp.356-372, 1983. 
3.  S. Akiba, “The future of optical communications,” IEEE LEOS Newsletter, Vol. 

17, No. 1, February 2003, pp. 20-23. 

4.  Corning website, 

http://www.corningcablesystems.com/web/college/college.nsf/ehtml/index 

5.  James S. Walker, Physics, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall, 2003, Giancoli D.C., Physics for 

scientists and Engineers, Prentice Hall, 2000. 

6.  Jeff Hecht, The city of light: The story of fiber optics, Oxford University Press, 

1999, Understanding fiber optics, Prentice Hall, 2002. 

7.  G. P. Agrawal, Fiber-optic communication systems, John Wiley & Sons, 1996. 
8.  http://www.acphotonics.com/products/index.html, 

http://www.fiberinstrumentsales.com 
9.  Sargent-Welch Catalog, p. 786, 2002. 
10. http://www.fiber-optics.info/fiber-history.htm 
11. D. Mynbaev and L. Scheiner, Fiber-optic communications technology, Prentice 

Hall, 2001. 

  

 

8 

