 Use of extended and prepared reference objects in 
experimental Fourier transform X-ray holography 

H. He1, M. Howells2, S. Marchesini3, H. N. Chapman4, U. Weierstall1, H. A. 
Padmore2 and   J.C.H.Spence1 
 
1 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 
85287-1504 
2 Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, 
California 94720 
3 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 7000 East Avenue, Livermore, California 
94550 
 
Abstract 

The  use  of  one  or  more  gold  nanoballs  as  reference  objects  for  Fourier 
 
Transform holography (FTH) is analysed using experimental soft X-ray diffraction 
from  objects  consisting  of  separated  clusters  of  these  balls.  The  holograms  are 
deconvoluted against ball reference objects to invert to images, in combination with 
a  Wiener  filter  to  control  noise.  A  resolution  of  ~30nm,  smaller  than  one  ball,  is 
obtained  even  if  a  large  cluster  of  balls  is  used  as  the  reference,  giving  the  best 
resolution yet obtained by X-ray FTH. Methods of dealing with missing data due to 
a  beamstop  are  discussed.  Practical  prepared  objects  which  satisfy  the  FTH 
condition are suggested, and methods of forming them described. 

Lensless X-ray FTH (XFTH) provides a simple geometry for magnified imaging 
which avoids the need for a beam-splitter and the demanding coherence requirements of 
an off-axis reference beam1, while also providing a simple solution to the phase problem 
for  non-crystalline  objects.  Since  only  one  Fourier  transform  is  required  with  digital 
reconstruction, FTH is far superior over all iterative phase retrieval methods in terms of 
computation time. The method allows for complex objects, and is also capable of three-
dimensional (tomographic) reconstruction if the unknown object and the reference object 
both lie on the rotation axis. FTH may be applied to many types of radiation – here we 
consider soft X-ray imaging, which allows diffraction data to be collected from biological 
cells. Despite these appealing attributes, the development of FTH has been slow. The best 
resolution  obtained  since  the  first  introduction  of  FTH  by  Stroke2,3  and  Winthrop  and 
Worthington4 in 1965  was ~ 60nm5 , as demonstrated by McNulty et. al. 6 in 1992 using 
zone plate lens under irradiation of coherent undulator soft X-rays. 

By  comparison,  the  resolution  of  other  forms  of X-ray  holography  have  entered 
the atomic resolution stage 7-9. Two difficulties may account for the slow development of 

1 

 

 

 

high  resolution XFTH.  The first concerns the  contradictory  requirements on the size of 
the reference object. For high resolution, one normally requires a reference much smaller 
than  the  sample.  However,  for  weakly  scattering  spheres  of  radius  s  larger  than  the 
wavelength,  the  scattered  wave  intensity  is  proportional  to  s4.  The  reference-wave 
contribution  therefore  will  usually  be  much  weaker  than  that  of  the  sample.  This  often 
renders a high contrast hologram and high quality reconstruction impractical. The second 
factor concerns the difficulty of fabricating samples with the correct geometry. An object 
and  a  reference-scatterer,  lying  in  the  same  plane  normal  to  a  coherent  beam,  must  be 
arranged  with  a  separation  larger  than  the  sum  of  the  two  objects’  widths  (the  FTH 
condition).  This  is  difficult  to  arrange  for  sub-micron  objects.  These  difficulties  have 
been the main barrier preventing FTH from becoming a practical imaging method rather 
than  a  laboratory  demonstration.  In this paper,  we aim to  address the first problem and 
make  suggestions  for  the  second.  We  show  with  experimental  data  that  high  resolution 
can  be  obtained  even  when  using  a  reference  object  as  large  as  the  sample,  if  suitable 
deconvolution  procedures  and  reference  objects  are  used.  We  also  propose  solutions  to 
the sample geometry problem using modern lithographic techniques.  
 
Whereas the possibility of deconvoluting FTH for improved resolution has been 
discussed  from  the  beginning  2,  a  practical  deconvolution  method  for  X-ray  imaging 
which  prevents  noise  amplification  was  first  discussed  in  detail  by  Howells10.  Howells 
also discusses the special class of objects (with flat scattering distributions) which allow 
high resolution reconstruction after deconvolution. The devonvolution discussed here is a 
procedure  to  retrieve  the  existing  information  hidden  by  the  blurring  of  the  reference 
object.  It  is  essential  that  the  scattering  of  the  objects  under  study,  especially  the 
reference  object,  extend  over  the  whole  detector  for  highest  possible  resolution.    For  a 
detailed  discussion  of  the  trade-off  between    resolution  improvement  and  noise 
amplification, see 11. Howells et al10 suggested that if a reference function (here denoted 
as g) or its spectrum (G) is known, one can deconvolute the hologram IH against G, and 
then apply an inverse Fourier transform. To minimize the effect of zero-crossings in G, a 
Wiener filter12 is used. Thus 

 

ry

x)(

1
= -
F

I

H

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

(cid:7)
(cid:1)
(cid:6)
(cid:1)(cid:5)

G
2

G

F+

(cid:4)
(cid:1)
(cid:3)
(cid:1)(cid:2)

 

 
where yr, the final reconstruction, contains the desired unknown object function, F is the 
ratio  of  the  noise  power  to  signal  power  and  is  usually  treated  as  a  constant  and  F-1 
denotes inverse  Fourier transform.  In this way, a high resolution reconstruction may be 
possible, depending on the form of G, and the extent to which noise is controlled by the 
filter.  Desirable  edges  and  discontinuities  in  the  object  function  will  ensure  that  G 
extends to high frequencies compared to IH 11, thus reducing the likelihood of division by 
zero in the presence of noise. An experimentally convenient reference object consists of 
colloidal gold balls, which have reasonably sharp edges, are simple for modeling, and are 
readily  available  in  known  nanometer  sizes.  We  have  therefore  implemented  the  above 
approach using these balls as the reference for deconvolution-enhanced FTH (DEFTH). 
Below we present a reconstruction of an experimental soft X-ray hologram based 
 
on the above ideas. Data from sample labeled as Au5010713 was used, which consists of 
clusters  of  50  nm  diameter  colloidal  gold  balls  lying  on  a  transparent  silicon  nitride 

 

2 

membrane.  We  refer  the  reader  to  our  early  work  13,14  for  a  detailed  description  of  the 
experiment. Transmission X-ray diffraction patterns were recorded at 588 eV in the far-
field  using  a  CCD  camera.    The  objects  on  the  sample  (clusters  of  gold  balls)  are  well 
separated, which enabled us to undertake a DEFTH analysis.   
Sample  Au50107  consists  of  two  clusters  of  almost  identical  size.  One  cluster, 
 
taken as the reference, was first imaged by both the  hybrid input output (HIO) algorithm 
15 and the Difference Map algorithm  16. As will be discussed later, the modeling of the 
reference is less important than the accuracy of the algorithm. Both the above mentioned 
algorithms  were  found  to  work  well  for  DEFTH  analysis,  and  are  superior  to  direct 
simulation  of  the  reference  from  SEM  pictures.  Fig.  1  (a)  shows  the  resulting 
reconstruction of the hologram using deconvolution against the known cluster (which had 
been  imaged  using  the    HIO  algorithm),  and  a  Wiener  filter  to  control  noise.  To 
demonstrate  the  validity  of  the  results,  we  show  in  fig.  1  (b)  a  scanning  electron 
microscope (SEM) image of the same cluster together with the reference cluster. We note 
here that the Wiener filter12 is crucial for successful deconvolution, without it the image 
is completely unrecognizable.  
 
In  fig.  1  (a),  artifacts  in  the  background  and  on  the  object  are  evident.  Careful 
inspection  of  the  data  shows  that  it  originates  from  spurious  structures  produced  by 
missing  data  in  the  center  of  the  hologram,  due  to  the  use  of  a  beam  stop.  The 
discontinuity  at  the  beam  stop,  when  propagated  into  real  space,  produces  spurious 
structure  which  interferes  with  the  true  image.  One  way  to  minimize  this  effect  is  to 
replace the missing data with a smooth function such as a Gaussian. A better way appears 
to be the following. Starting from fig. 1 (a) and  the reference object, one obtains a full 
image of the sample from which the power spectrum may be obtained. We then use this 
spectrum to fill in only the missing region of the hologram. Such a “renewed” hologram 
is then used for a second DEFTH reconstruction. Fig. 1 (d) shows the result of the above 
process repeated 10 times. As expected, the background “noise” is reduced significantly 
and the image of the balls becomes much smoother. A drawback of this procedure is the 
slightly increased computation time.  

The  most  significant  and  surprising  result  here  is  the  resolution  achieved 
compared to the size of the reference. An investigation based on convoluting a simulated 
ball  with  a  sinc  function17  suggests  a  reconstructed  image  resolution  of  30  nm.  (The 
resolution  of  the  hologram  extends  to  less  than  10  nm).  This  is  about  10  times  smaller 
than the dimension of the reference cluster. The sharp drop at the edge of the ball ensures 
the presence of high frequency information in the hologram11 and Wiener deconvolution 
is  the  key  to  retrieving  this  information.  The  problem  of  improving  resolution  has  thus 
been transformed into one of accurately modeling the reference, rather than  reducing the 
size of the reference. For the irregularly shaped object in sample Au50107 we found it is 
convenient to obtain the reference object using an independent imaging algorithm. This 
extra procedure does not create a problem for the applicability of DEFTH if the reference 
can be reused since only a single prior modeling is needed.  

The  last  problem  is  how  to  arrange  the  sample  and  reference  objects  so  as  to 
satisfy  the  FTH  condition,  as  discussed  in  the  beginning  of  the  paper.  We  propose  the 
following  method.  A  square  lattice  of  heavy  metal  disks  (or  gold  balls)  with  lattice 
parameter a  is deposited lithographically onto  a  silicon nitride membrane window. The 
lattice parameter should be large enough so that when a sample is placed in the middle of 

 

3 

any neighboring two balls, one has a/2 > (d + dd), where d and dd  are the diameter of the 
object  and  disks  (or  balls)  respectively.  The  FTH  condition  can  then  be  guaranteed  no 
matter where the sample appears on the window. This is illustrated in fig 2. The X-ray 
beam  (drawn  as  a  gray  area)  should  be  of  the  correct  diameter    so  as  to  cover  just  the 
object and its nearest two disks. In special cases (shown in the inset of fig. 2 enclosed by 
a dashed line), the object is close to the middle of the common line between  neighboring 
disks,  then  the  beam  must  cover  only  the  object  and  one  of  its  neighboring  disks.  This 
requirement  can  be  dynamically  monitored  using  the  autocorrelation  function  of  the 
scattering  pattern  during  data  collection.  This  ensures  that  there  are  no  overlapping 
convolution objects in the autocorrelation pattern. 

For  a  general  unknown  object  (such  as  a  cell),  this  work  suggests  that  lensless 
imaging with X-rays should be possible at high resolution if a known object (such as one 
or more  gold balls of known dimensions) can  be placed beside it, and that  significant 
resolution  improvement  can  be  obtained  by  deconvolution  using  this  type  of  reference 
object in combination with a Weiner filter. Other deconvolution methods and filters exist 
which  remain  to  be  evaluated,  while  modern  lithography  methods  may  allow 
development  of  prepared  reference  objects  which  show  even  better  noise/resolution 
performance  under  deconvolution.  We  are  actively  developing  the  use  of  metal 
deposition in a dual-beam focused-ion beam microscope for this purpose. 

This  work  was  supported  by  Department  Of  Energy  under  contract  DE-AC03-

76SF00098.  

 

4 

Fig.  1.  (a) Reconstruction of a cluster of  gold balls (sample Au50107) from soft X-ray 
transmission diffraction patterns using deconvolution and a Wiener filter. Constant FFFF = 
100 in equation (1) produces best results. (b) SEM image of the same cluster (upper one), 
the reference (lower one) and their relative position. (c) Reconstruction using the iterative 
DEFTH algorithm (see text) to reduce the effect of missing data due to a beam stop. The 
diameter of each gold ball is about 50 nm. 
 

                  
 
  

 

 

5 

Fig.  2.  Diagram  of  a  sample  substrate  that  always  satisfies  the  FTH  condition.  Two 
typical  cases  are drawn to show how to determine the beam  coverage  area (gray  color) 
depending on the relative positions between disk lattice (the reference) and the unknown 
object,  one  in  the  center  of  the  figure  and  one  at  the  bottom  right  corner  of  the  figure 
(enclosed by dashed line). See text for details.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

•••• 
•••• 
unknown 
object 
•••• 
•••• 

beam 
•••• 
•••• 

d 

•••• 
•••• 

•••• 
•••• 

•••• 
•••• 

•••• 
•••• 

•••• 
•••• 

•••• 

•••• 
•••• 

•••• 
•••• 

•••• 

•••• 

•••• 
•••• 

•••• 

•••• 

•••• 
•••• 

•••• 

•••• 

•••• 
disk lattice 
•••• 
d(cid:1) 
•••• 

a 

•••• 

•••• 

•••• 

•••• 

•••• 

•••• 
•••• 

•••• 
•••• 

•••• 

•••• 

 

6 

References: 
 
1 

Press, New York, 1971.). 
2 

R. J. Collier, C. B. Burckhardt, and L. H. Lin, Optical Holography (Academic 

3 

4 

5 

9 

G. W. Stroke and D. G. Falconer, Phys. Lett. 13, 306-309 (1964). 
G. W. Stroke, Appl. Phys. Lett. 6, 201-203 (1965). 
J. T. Winthrop and C. R. Worthing, Physics Letters 15, 124 (1965). 
The configuration used there has to rely on a "lens" (zone plate) to split the beam. 

Such a configuration is no better than using the same lens to build an X-ray microscope 
in terms of resolution. 
6 

I. McNulty, J. Kirz, C. Jacobsen, E. H. Anderson, M. R. Howells, and D. P. Kern, 

Science 256, 1009-1012 (1992). 
7 

1015 (1990). 
8 

G. R. Harp, D. K. Saldin, and B. P. Tonner, Physical Review Letters 65, 1012-

M. Tegze and G. Faigel, Nature 380, 49-51 (1996). 
B. Sur, R. B. Rogge, R. P. Hammond, V. N. P. Anghel, and J. Katsaras, Nature 

414, 525-527 (2001). 
10 

M. R. Howells, C. J. Jacobsen, S. Marchesini, S. Miller, J. C. H. Spence, and U. 
Weirstall, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section a-Accelerators 
Spectrometers Detectors and Associated Equipment 467, 864-867 (2001). 
11 

P. E. Batson, D. W. Johnson, and J. C. H. Spence, Ultramicroscopy 41, 137-145 

(1992). 
12 

13 

K. R. Castleman, Prentice-Hall. 1979, xvi+429. 
H. He, S. Marchesini, M. Howells, U. Weierstall, H. Chapman, S. Hau-Riege, A. 

Noy, and J. C. H. Spence, Physical Review B-Condensed Matter 67, 174114 (2003). 
14 

H. He, S. Marchesini, M. Howells, U. Weierstall, G. Hembree, and J. C. H. 

Spence, Acta Crystallographica - Section a - Foundations of Crystallography A59, 143-
52 (2003). 
15 

J. R. Fienup, Journal of the Optical Society of America a-Optics Image Science 

and Vision 4, 118-123 (1987). 
16 

20, 40-55 (2003). 
17 

V. Elser, Journal of the Optical Society of America A-Optics & Image Science 

Due to the fact that our imaging system cut off the high spatial frequency in a 
rectangular window, this corresponds to convolution of the image with a square sinc 
function in real space. 
 

 

7 

