Radiation  Chemistry  of  Organic  Liquids:  Saturated  Hydrocarbons.

Ilya A. Shkrob, Myran C. Sauer, Jr., and Alexander D. Trifunac.
Chemistry Division , Argonne National Laboratory,  Argonne, IL 60439

published  in  Radiation  Chemsitry of Organic  Liquids:  Saturated  Hydrocarbons,  in  Radiation
Chemistry:  Present  Status  and  Future  Prospects,  in  Radiation  Chemistry:  Present  Status  and
Future  Trends,  edited  by  C.  D.  Jonah  and  B.  S.  M. Rao,  Elsevier,  Amsterdam,  2001;  p.
175.

The  submitted  manuscript  has  been  created  by  the  University  of  Chicago  as  Operator  of
Argonne  National  Laboratory  ("Argonne")  under  Contract  No.  W-31-109-ENG-38  with  the  U.
S.  Department  of  Energy.    The  U.  S.  Government  retains  for  itself,  and  others  acting  on  its
behalf,  a  paid-up,  nonexclusive,  irrevocable  worldwide  license  in  said  article  to  reproduce,
prepare  derivative  works,  distribute  copies  to  the  public,  and  perform  publicly  and  display
publicly,  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  Government.

AAAAbbbbssssttttrrrraaaacccctttt....
In this review,  several problems of pivotal importance to radiolysis of  saturated  hydrocarbons

are examined. Special attention is paid to the chemistry of radical cations, high-mobility holes,

excited  state  and  spur  dynamics,  and  magnetic  field  and  spin  effects  and  optically  detected

magnetic resonance spectroscopy.

1111 ....

     IIIINNNNTTTTRRRROOOODDDDUUUUCCCCTTTTIIIIOOOONNNN

In this review, we examine radiolysis of neat organic liquids. The better studied and most

common organic  solvents  are  saturated  hydrocarbons  and  alcohols.  By  virtue  of  having  low

dielectric constant and only C-C and C-H  bonds,  hydrocarbons  represent  an  ideal  medium  to

examine the fundamental mechanisms of radiolysis in non-polar media. For  lack of  space,  the

discussion will be limited to paraffins, branched alkanes, and cycloalkanes.

Many studies of saturated hydrocarbons have been carried out over the years; we refer the

reader  to  previous  reviews  by  Hummel  [1],  Swallow  [2],  and  Holroyd  [3].  Here  we  focus

mainly on the last decade and discuss some of the  more  recent  studies.  Not  too  surprisingly,

many  issues  examined  in  this  chapter  relate  to  the  topics  addressed  in  our  own  work;  we

apologize for this deficiency and hope that other reviews in this volume would complement this

chapter.  Specifically,  we  concentrate  on  the  early  stages  of  radiolysis  and  exclude  from  our

scope  chemical  transformations  of  secondary  radiolytic  products,  in  particular,  those  derived

from the solutes.  We also limit our examination to low-LET radiation,  such  as  UV  and  VUV

photons,  x-  and  ©-  rays,  and  fast  electrons.  Significant  progress  has  been  made  in

understanding the chemistry in the high-LET tracks and the omission is only due to the lack of

1.

space.  Finally, we do not review the studies on dynamics  and  chemistry  of  electrons.  Again,

this is not to ignore excellent studies carried out over the last decade. However,  our emphasis is

on the bond-breaking chemical reactions. In radiolysis of hydrocarbons,  these mainly occur in

the excited states and solvent holes.

A brief sketch of radiation events in hydrocarbons is appropriate at this point. The ionizing

radiation interacts with the solvent to produce excited solvent molecules and electron-hole pairs.

Spurs containing one or several electron-hole pairs are generated in scattering events involving

the primary and secondary electrons. A large fraction of the ejected electrons thermalize before

they escape the Coulomb attraction of the positive charges.  Few  of these  electrons  can  escape

beyond the Onsager radius (at which the Coulomb attraction between the charges is »  kT) and

the majority recombine with the holes. The distance an electron travels in the medium reflects its

kinetic energy and the thermalization properties of the medium. Being non-polar, hydrocarbons

are unable to "solvate" the electrons as happens in polar liquids (water,  alcohols) and localized

electrons  remain  close  to  the  conduction  band.  Thermal  promotion  of  these  electrons  to  the

conduction band  leads  to  overall  high  mobility.  As  a  result,  rapid  charge  recombination  is  a

dominant feature of the radiation  chemistry  of  hydrocarbons  and  represents  a  "clock"  against

which all other processes compete.

The  recombination  of  electron-hole  pairs  yields  energetic,  unstable  solvent  excited

molecules. These excited states and pre-thermalized charges are surrounded by the solvent, and

the fate of the excitation is determined by the deactivation, fragmentation, and chemical reactions

of  these  short-lived  species  with  the  surrounding  molecules.  Understanding  these  rapid

processes  is  the  most  important  problem  in  the  radiation  chemistry.  Unfortunately,  the  last

decade witnessed little progress in this field. This impasse may continue since even the  nature

and chemistry of the lower excited states and relaxed solvent holes remains poorly understood.

We believe that solving several long-standing problems in the chemistry of these species was the

main achievement in the last decade. These studies  provide  a  beachhead  for  the  attack  on  the

final frontier: the chemistry of highly excited neutral and charged states. Judging from the past

experience, solving this "radiation chemistry" problem will require going  far  beyond  radiation

chemistry methods such as pulse radiolysis. This is why the ultrafast laser studies on ionization

and excitation in hydrocarbons, started in this decade, are so important.

While one may dream that developments in other fields would bring closure to some of the

"radiation  chemistry"  problems,  other  problems  can  be  solved  only  by  radiation  chemists

themselves. Among the latter problems is the modeling of complex spur  reactions. In multiple-

pair spurs, many reactions occur simultaneously, resulting in tangled, inhomogeneous kinetics:

charges  recombine,  excited  solvent  molecules  fragment  yielding  radicals  and  neutrals,  these

2.

species react with the primary ions and each other,  the secondary ions react with the products,

etc. Due to the high density  of  the  reactive  species,  such  transformations  may  occur  in  mere

nanoseconds.  This complexity makes the analysis of the early  events  a  challenging  task.  Any

understanding of the  radiation  chemistry  will  require  adequately  complex  models  of  the  spur

processes. Development of such models has progressed significantly in this decade. Though the

current computer models are still crude and primitive, they provide a benchmark against which

theoretical ideas may be tested. These modeling efforts have already revitalized old discussions

about the nature of radiolytic spurs. Without doubt, the future belongs to the more involved and

rigorous  models  and,  eventually,  to  the  first-principle  calculations.  At  the  present,  however,

even the most elaborate computer models are as good as the parameters fed into them, and many

of these parameters have not been experimentally measured.

This chapter is  organized  in  the  following  way.  First,  studies  on  high-mobility  solvent

holes in cyclic alkanes  are  discussed.  This  topic  unifies  many  issues  in  the  chemistry  of  the

solvent holes; these are examined along the way. Second,  we summarize the recent advances in

understanding the spur chemistry, starting from the laser and VUV studies of isolated ion pairs

to  modeling  the  multiple-pair  spurs.  The  origins  of  spin  effects  and  the  importance  of  these

effects  for  radiolysis  are  discussed  in  the  same  section.  Third,  we  examine  the  studies  on

solvent and solute excited states in radiolysis of hydrocarbons.  In  the  concluding  section,  we

outline the most important problems to be addressed in the forthcoming decade.

2222 ....

SSSSOOOOLLLLVVVVEEEENNNNTTTT     HHHHOOOOLLLLEEEESSSS     WWWWIIIITTTTHHHH     AAAANNNNOOOOMMMMAAAALLLLOOOOUUUUSSSSLLLLYYYY     HHHHIIIIGGGGHHHH     MMMMOOOOBBBBIIIILLLLIIIITTTTYYYY

2.1  High  mobility  cations.  Ionization  of  several  cycloalkane 

liquids  -  cyclohexane,

methylcyclohexane, trans-decalin and cis-decalin - produces cations whose drift mobilities are 5-

to-25 times greater than the mobilities of normally-diffusing molecular ions and (in some cases)

thermalized  electrons  in  these  liquids  [4-8].  These  high-mobility  cations  are  shown  to  be
cycloalkane  solvent  holes  with  unusually  long  natural  lifetimes  (0.2  µs  to  5  µs).  This  long
lifetime and the high mobility of the cycloalkane holes makes it possible to study their reactions

using microwave [7-9] or direct current (dc) [10-19] conductivity, an option that does not exist

for other hydrocarbons.  Indeed,  in room-temperature paraffins, the solvent  holes  have  natural
lifetimes ranging from 1 ns (C5) to 33 ns (C16) [20,21] due to rapid dissociation of the C-C or
C-H bond(s) and deprotonation,

RH^+ + RH ---“ R^ + RH2+

(1)

3.

Similarly short lifetimes are expected for branched alkanes, such as isooctane [22].  Due to these

lifetime limitations, the chemical behavior of cycloalkane holes is understood in more detail than

that of the solvent holes in other hydrocarbon liquids.

From  conductivity  studies,  it  is  known  that  the  cycloalkane  holes  rapidly  react  with

various  solutes,  typically  by  electron  or  proton  transfer  [7-19].  These  scavenging  reactions

establish  the  identity  of  the  high-mobility  cations  as  the  solvent  holes:  Rapid  generation  of
aromatic radical cations (A^+) in reactions of the holes with aromatic solutes (A) was  observed
using pulse radiolysis - transient absorption spectroscopy [4,5,6,20,23-25]  and,  more recently,

using  pulse-probe  laser-induced  dc  conductivity  [26].  Rapid  decay  of  the  conductivity  and

transient absorbance signals from the cycloalkane holes was also observed [4-25].

It has long been speculated that the high-mobility solvent holes exist in hydrocarbons other

than  the  four  cycloalkanes.  Recently,  high-mobility  solvent  holes  were  observed 

in

2,6,10,15,19,23-hexamethyltetracosane  (squalane)  [24]  and  in  cyclooctane  [27].  In  the

squalane, rapid electron-transfer reactions of solvent holes with low-IP  solutes  were  observed

using transient absorbance spectroscopy and magnetic resonance [24].  Fast diffusion and high-

rate  scavenging  reactions  of  the  squalane  holes  were  also  observed  using  magnetic  level-

crossing  [28,29]  and  quantum  beat  [29]  spectroscopies  (see  reviews  [30]  and  [31]  for  the

principles  of  these  recently  developed  spin  coherence  spectroscopies).  Rapid  scavenging

reactions were also found to account for the anomalies in the magnetic field effect observed for

delayed solute  fluorescence  induced  by  VUV  excitation  of  squalane  [32,33].  In  cyclooctane,

high-mobility  solvent  holes  were  observed  using  time-dependent  electric-field-modulated

delayed fluorescence [27] (with this technique, the electric field is used to sort the radical ions

by their drift mobilities [34]). This study supports previous observation of rapid scavenging of

cyclooctane holes by aromatic solutes in the initial stage of radiolysis [35].  Both in the squalane

and cyclooctane, the natural lifetime of the high mobility solvent hole is less than 20 ns  [24,27-

35].  It is still unclear whether this lifetime is  limited  by  the  inherent  instability  of  the  solvent

holes or by their reactions with impurity. Perhaps,  future  work  will  reveal  more  examples  of

such short-lived high mobility holes. There is a recent suggestion of the presence of such holes

in cyclopentane and cycloheptane; their natural lifetimes must be less than 5-10 ns  [27].  Faster-

than-normal  scavenging  of  short-lived  isooctane  holes  by  diphenylsulfide  and  biphenyl  was

observed  using  quantum  beat  [36]  and  transient  absorption  spectroscopy  [20].  Therefore,  in
addition to a few cycloalkane liquids that yield long-lived high-mobility solvent holes there may
be many more hydrocarbon liquids that exhibit short-lived high-mobility holes.  Importantly, not

all hydrocarbon liquids can yield the high mobility solvent holes: Neither short-lived nor long-

lived high-mobility cations have been found in linear alkanes.

4.

2.2  The solvent holes.  Previous suggestions that high-mobility cations are proton adducts or

carbonium ions have been abandoned  [37].  These  suggestions  originated  by  consideration  of

anomalous chemical and physical properties of cyclohexane and trans-decalin holes [38]. One of

the peculiarities is that these solvent holes, while being paramagnetic species, were not observed

by  magnetic  resonance  techniques,  both  in  neat  cycloalkanes  and  in  dilute  solutions  of

cycloalkanes  in  high-IP  liquids  [39-48].  Instead,  the  resonance  signals  from  olefin  radical

cations were observed (see below) [42,44,48].  This suggested a short life time for the solvent

holes.  The  kinetic  data  on  delayed  fluorescence  [49]  and  transient  absorbance  [6,20,25]  in

radiolysis of cyclohexane supported this conclusion. It  was  concluded  that  the  lifetime  of  the

solvent hole is only 20-30 ns  [6,25],  or 10 times shorter than the lifetime of the high-mobility

cations observed in the conductivity experiments. Only recently was  it determined what causes

the  appearance  of  the  lifetime-limited  kinetics  in  the  pulse  radiolysis  experiments:  Some

impurities in cyclohexane reversibly trap the solvent holes reducing their lifetime [11-14,25].

Another crucial finding  was  the  realization  that  rapid  spin-lattice  (T1)  relaxation  in  the
high-symmetry  cycloalkane  radical  cations  precludes  their  detection  with  optically-detected

magnetic resonance (ODMR) [39-48],  the technique which was  routinely used to study radical
cations in radiolysis of hydrocarbons [38,  50].  For  example, trans-decalin^+ isolated in room-
temperature cyclohexane has T1 « 7 ns [50] while typical solute radical cations have T1 »  1 µs.
Since it takes several tens of nanoseconds to flip the electron spin with the microwave radiation

(which is required for the magnetic resonance  detection)  radical  cations  of  some  cycloalkanes

cannot be detected by ODMR.

The ultrafast spin-lattice relaxation is  caused  by  dynamic  averaging  between  the  ground

and excited states of the  radical  cations.  The  near  degeneracy  of  the  lower  two  states  results

through the Jahn-Teller distortion of highly symmetric radical cations [51,52].  The gap between
the two lower states is greater for methylcyclohexane^+ and cis-decalin^+ and these two radical
cations exhibit more regular magnetic resonance  behavior.  For  cyclohexane^+  in  hydrocarbon
matrices, the dynamic averaging is so  efficient that using ODMR  this  radical  cation  cannot  be
observed even at 4  K  [39-41,  45-47,  50].  In  trans-decalin^+,  the  quasi-degenerate  states  are
very close in energy (ca. 0.43 eV in the gas phase [52]) and van der Waals interaction with the
host can stabilize the "excited" 2Bg  state instead of the "ground" 2Ag  state (see discussion in
references  [50,52]).  Therefore,  for  these  high-symmetry  radical  cations  no  distinction  exists

between  the  "ground"  and  "excited"  states,  especially  at  300  K.  For  less  symmetric  radical

cations, the state mixing was not observed.

Radiolytically-generated solvent holes have initial excess energy of several electron-volts.

It is generally believed that these excited species relax to the "ground" state on a picosecond time

5.

scale  or  even  faster  [37,38,53].  Nevertheless,  some  authors  suggest  that  certain  excited

cycloalkane holes have lifetimes in nanoseconds [54,55].  Such suggestions are not completely

groundless: in conformationally-hindered species, the structural relaxation may take a long time.

For  example,  the  twist-boat  to  chair  transition  in  room-temperature  cyclohexane  occurs  on  a

microsecond time scale. Perhaps, the best supported claim for such a long-lived excited solvent

hole is found in the study of geminate pair dynamics in methylcyclohexane at 143  K  [55,56].

Using transient absorption spectroscopy, it was  concluded that the (high-mobility) solvent hole

[56] has a (high-mobility) precursor with the natural lifetime of 300 ns  [55].  The decay of the
precursor can be accelerated upon addition of N2O; without the quencher, the precursor  either
fragments yielding methycyclohexene radical cations (90 %) or relaxes (10%) [55].

It is difficult to assess the plausibility of this scenario because the data allow for more than
one  interpretation.  N2O  rapidly  scavenges  thermalized  electrons  and  quenches  the  solvent
excited states thus reducing the yield of olefins (that form by the fragmentation of these excited

states) [1]. Since in some hydrocarbons the olefin radical cations may be formed in reactions of

the solvent holes with the olefins in spurs (see below), the yield of these cations will decrease in
the presence of N2O. Therefore, the changes observed upon the addition of N2O are not a clear-
cut evidence for the involvement of the excited solvent holes.

The optical absorption spectra of the high  mobility  solvent  holes  resemble  those  for  the

radical  cations  isolated  in  freon  matrices  [20,22-25].  All  of  these  spectra  are  bell-shaped

featureless curves with maxima in the visible and/or near IR regions. In pulse radiolysis studies,

the absorption signal from the solvent hole always overlaps with the signals from the fragment

(and/or secondary) radical cations ("satellite ions"),  even at the  earliest  observation  times  [22-

25,57].  Therefore,  complex  deconvolutions  are  needed  to  extract  the  spectra  of  the  solvent

holes.  This  leaves  large  uncertainty  as  for  the  exact  shape  of  the  absorption  spectra  and  the

extinction coefficients.

2.3  The mechanism for the high mobility.  In the early studies,  the high-mobility cycloalkane

holes were viewed as radical cations that undergo rapid resonant charge transfer [8]:

RH^+ + RH 

 RH + RH^+

At any given time, the positive charge was assumed to reside on a single solvent molecule and,

once  in  0.5-2  ps,  hop  to  a  neighboring  molecule.  Reaction  (2)  was  believed  to  have  low

activation energy due to similarity between the shapes of cycloalkane molecules and their radical

cations.

(2)

6.

This model is consistent with many observations. Dilution  of  cycloalkanes  with  high-IP

alkanes (or higher-IP cycloalkanes) results in  the  decrease  in  the  hole  mobility  that  correlates

with the mole fraction of the cycloalkane in the mixture:  the  hopping  rate  decreases  when  the

density of the like molecules decreases [8,14].  The activation energies for the hole mobility, as
estimated from conductivity data range from -(3±1) kJ/mol for trans-decalin and cyclohexane to
(6-7)  kJ/mol  for  methylcyclohexane  and  cis-decalin  [7,8,10].  The  activation  energies  for  the

highest-rate  scavenging  reactions  range  from  4  kJ/mol  to  9  kJ/mol  [10].  Apparently,  the

migration of the solvent hole requires little thermal activation.

The  occurrence  of  reaction  (2)  is  firmly  established  experimentally.  Charge  transfer
between c-C6D12^+ and c-C6H12 was observed in the gas phase, where it proceeds at »  1/3 of
the collision rate [58].  Reaction (2) was  observed for radical cations and molecules of cis- and
trans-decalins  in  dilute  cyclohexane  solutions  (where  it  proceeds  with  a  diffusion-controlled

rate) [50,59]. In low-temperature solid hydrocarbons (4-30 K), the hole hopping due to reaction

(2)  may  be  observed  through  the  time  evolution  of  the  resonance  lines  in  ODMR  spectra

[39,45]; the residence time of the self-trapped holes at a given molecule is 0.1-1  µs.  At higher

temperatures, the spectral diffusion caused by the rapid reaction (2) causes the ODMR spectrum

to collapse to a single narrow  line.  For  solvent  holes  in  liquid  cis-decalin,  trans-decalin,  and

squalane, this narrow  line  was  observed,  albeit  indirectly,  using  magnetic  level-crossing  and

quantum beat spectroscopies [28,29,50,59].  In squalane, the residence time of  the  hole  at  the

solvent molecule is relatively long,  ca.  0.2-0.3  ns  [24,28,29],  and any mechanism of the hole

migration  other  than  reaction  (2)  is  implausible.  Thus,  there  is  little  doubt  that  reaction  (2)

occurs in liquid hydrocarbons. Nevertheless, it is doubtful that this reaction per se  is the cause

for the high mobility of the solvent holes in cycloalkanes.

Indeed,  both  matrix-isolation  EPR  experiments  and  quantum-mechanical  calculations

indicate that the neutral cycloalkanes and their ground-state radical cations have rather different
geometries  [50,51,52].  For  example,  in  cis- and  trans-decalins  the  bridging  C9-C10  bond
elongates from 0.153-0.156  nm in the neutral molecules to 0.19-0.21  nm in the 2A1 and 2Ag
states  of  the  radical  cations,  respectively  [10,52].  Upon  charging,  the  molecule  undergoes

considerable  structural  and  energetical  relaxation,  losing  at  least  0.5-0.7  eV.  If  the  charge

transfer reaction (2) were a single-step process, it would require the activation energy of 1-2 eV

[10].

What makes this resonant charge transfer possible? It was suggested that in the gas phase,

reaction (2) proceeds through the formation of a collision complex in which the charge is shared

by both of the cycloalkane molecules [58]. This sharing considerably reduces the barriers for the
structural  relaxation.  According  to  MNDO  calculations,  the  C2-symmetric  cyclohexane2^+

7.

dimer in which the charge is shared equally between the  cyclohexane  monomers,  is  only  150

meV higher in energy than the state in which the charge is localized on a single monomer [10].

Continuing this line of reasoning, it may be assumed that in  liquid  cycloalkanes  the  charge  is

shared between several solvent molecules and this sharing further reduces the hopping barrier.

In such a case, the solvent hole is a small polaron whose  rapid migration is caused by phonon-

assisted hopping [10].

The formation of the polaron causes delocalization of  the  hole.  Unusually  large  reaction

radii in electron-transfer reactions of the solvent holes were first considered as evidence for such

a delocalization [8]. However, more recent measurements of the hole mobility suggest that these

radii were overestimated [10,14].  The best evidence  for  the  delocalization  of  the  solvent  hole

was  provided by studies on dc  photoconductivity  in  cyclohexane-methylcyclohexane  mixtures

[10,11]. While the addition of less than 5-10 vol % of methylcyclohexane reduces both the dc

conductivity signal and its decay rate, further addition of methylcyclohexane yields little change

in the conductivity signal and kinetics. The initial reduction is accounted for by rapid reversible
trapping of cyclohexane holes by methylcyclohexane (ÎG0 « -0.11  eV [11]).  Since the isolated
radical  cations  of  methyl-cyclohexane  in  cyclohexane  have  normal  mobility,  the  excess

conductivity signal is proportional to the equilibrium concentration of the cyclohexane holes.  At

higher concentration of  methylcyclohexane,  the  equilibrium  fraction  of  the  cyclohexane  holes
becomes lower.  When this fraction becomes less than the ratio µh/µi  of  the  mobilities  of  the
high  mobility  (µh)  and  normally  diffusing  (µi)  ions,  the  conductivity  should  decrease
severalfold.  This  decrease  was  not  observed.  We  conclude 
the  migration  of
methylcyclohexane^+ in 5 vol % methylcyclohexane solution is as rapid as  that  of  the  solvent
holes in neat methylcyclohexane. When the methylcyclohexane is diluted by n-hexane instead of
the cyclohexane, the conductivity  signal  decreases  proportionally  to  the  fraction  of  n-hexane.

that 

Thus, it was cyclohexane which made the difference.

This result suggests that the methylcyclohexane holes are coupled to the solvent, forming a

polaron. This coupling makes the charge migration of methylcyclohexane holes in cyclohexane

as efficient as in neat methylcyclohexane. From the critical concentration of methylcyclohexane,

the delocalization radius was estimated as ca. 1 nm, or 4 to 5 molecular diameters [10]. 

2.4. The formation of high-mobility holes and "satellite  ions".    As  was  briefly  mentioned

above,  radiolysis of hydrocarbons results in the formation of several types  of  cationic  species

besides the solvent holes. Most of these "satellite ions" are generated within the first nanosecond

after the radiolytic pulse.

8.

Transient absorption spectra of some "satellite ions" closely resemble the spectra of olefin

radical cations. In cyclohexane, a band centered at 270 nm (at 2 ns  [22]) is observed from 250

ps [25] after the ionization event (this band overlaps with the strong 240 nm band of cyclohexyl

radicals  [22]).  The  scavenging  behavior  and  the  decay  kinetics  of  the  UV-absorbing  species

suggest that they are normally-diffusing radical cations [25].  In the first few nanoseconds after

the ionization event, the VIS absorbance is dominated by solvent excited states [22,57].  When

the thermalized electrons are rapidly scavenged using a suitable electron  acceptor  (halocarbons
or N2O), this absorbance is much reduced and,  in addition to cyclohexene^+, one observes the
absorption bands of cyclohexane holes (the latter may be rapidly scavenged using alcohols) and

some other cations that absorb in the red [25].  The latter signals are  clearly  distinguishable  as

early as 1-5 ns  after the radiolytic pulse (at earlier delay times,  these  signals  are  swamped  by

absorption of the excited states). The VIS spectra of the red-absorbing  cations  resemble  those

from cyclohexene dimer radical  cations  or  cyclohexadiene  radical  cations.  Thus,  shortly  after

ionization of cyclohexane with fast electrons, at least three types of cation species were observed

spectroscopically.

In  some  cases,  the  identity  of  paramagnetic  "satellite  ions"  was  established  by  ODMR
[42,44,48].  For  example,  9,10-octalin^+  was  identified  in  decalins  and  their  solutions  [42].
ODMR spectra of "satellite ions" in cyclohexane were related to EPR spectra of matrix-isolated
cyclohexene^+  (Note  that  in  the  liquid  cyclohexane,  cyclohexene^+  undergoes  a  fast  ring-
puckering motion that averages hyperfine coupling constants for equatorial and axial protons,  so
the the EPR spectra of cyclohexene^+ in liquid and solid matrices are different) [42,44,48].  In
both of these cases,  the olefin radical cations were formed in spurs  rather than in a reaction of

the  solvent  hole  with  the  olefin  in  the  solvent  bulk  [42]  (octalins  gradually  accumulate  as

radiolytic products). Olefin "satellite ions" were also observed in squalane [24].

How do these "satellite ions" form in the early stages of radiolysis ? Two ideas were put

forward [1,37,42]. First, the "satellite ions" could be generated by fragmentation of short-lived

electronically-  and/or  vibronically-excited  solvent  holes  formed  upon  the  ionization  of  the

solvent, for example

RH^+* ---“ olefin^+ + H2

Reaction  (3)  is  exothermic  even  for  the  ground-state  alkane  radical  cations  (0.4-0.6  eV)  but

requires overcoming a high potential barrier. Several authors (e.g.,  [22,  37])  have  considered

the possibility of deprotonation of the excited hole,

RH^+* + RH ---“ R^ + RH2+ or R^ + R+ + H2

(3)

(4)

9.

In  cyclohexane  and  decalins,  reaction  (1)  is  endothermic  by  0.1-0.4  eV  [60]  and  it  seems

reasonable that  the  excitation  of  the  hole  may  facilitate  the  proton  transfer.  Fragmentation  of

matrix-isolated hydrocarbon radical cations upon excitation with 2-4 eV photons was  observed

by EPR (see review [61]). For cycloalkanes, the main photoreaction is reaction (3).  For  radical
cations  of  methyl-branched  alkanes,  the  loss  of  CH4  was  also  observed,  while  the  radical
cations of linear alkanes prefer to fragment to 2-butene^+ and the residual paraffin [60].  Thus,
even the lower excited states of some radical cations are dissociative. One suggestion is that the

recombination of electronically-excited solvent holes with electrons yields strongly dissociative

higher excited states of the solvent [53]. These states are likely to fragment before they relax to
the lowest S1 state. In this way,  it is  possible  to  explain  the  low  yield  of  the  fluorescent  S1
states in some hydrocarbons.

Second, the "satellite ions" could be generated in scavenging reactions of the solvent holes

with  radiolytic  products  in  multiple-pair  spurs  [25,61-65].  The  olefins  are  formed  upon  the

fragmentation of excited solvent molecules generated in  recombination  of  short-lived  electron-

hole pairs [1]

RH^+ + e- ---“ 1,3RH* 

1RH* ---“ olefin + H2

RH^+ + olefin ---“ RH + olefin^+

solvent holes with radicals [65]

RH^+ + R^ ---“ RH + R+

This mechanism would also account for rapid generation of carbonium ions in reactions of the

The results on low-temperature ODMR suggest that in some hydrocarbons,  no "satellite" radical
cations are formed via the dissociation of  excited-state  holes.  No  prompt  generation  of  olefin

radical cations was observed in solid paraffins, decalins, and methylcyclohexane at 4-50 K  [39-

41,45-47]. At these low temperatures, the holes have negligible mobility [39,45]  which makes

electron  transfer  reaction  (7)  slow  and  inefficient,  as  it  may  occur  by  long-range  electron

tunneling only.  Since the excited-state holes should also be formed in  the  solid,  these  ODMR

observations suggest that the "satellite" radical cations are generated mainly in ion-molecule spur

reactions (at least, in some hydrocarbons).

The prompt formation of the "satellite ions" introduces ambiguity in  the  measurement  of

the hole mobility in pulse radiolysis. Indeed, the conductivity is a product of the  mobility  and

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

10.

the yield [8]. The latter quantity is poorly defined since the branching ratio fh  between the high-
mobility solvent holes and the "satellite ions" is unknown.

The way around this problem is to generate solvent holes by means other than radiolysis.

Since the formation of "satellite ions" is partly due to spur  chemistry, in the laser  multiphoton

ionization of neat hydrocarbons [14-18]

RH + n  hˆ ---“ RH^+ + e-

(that  yields  isolated  electron-hole  pairs  only)  the  yield  of  "satellite  ions"  would  be  much

reduced. Another way of generating the solvent holes is by a valence-band electron transfer to

the photoexcited aromatic radical cation ("hole injection") [10-13,26]

A^+ + hˆ ---“ A^+* 

A^+*  + RH ---“ A + RH^+

The photoexcitation of A^+ may be carried out using the same UV pulse that is used to ionize the
solute or using a delayed laser pulse of a different color. The latter method is preferable because
by  using  a  delay  such  that  only  free  A^+  exist  the  solvent  hole  can  be  generated  without  a
geminate counterion. Therefore, the scavenging kinetics can be disentangled from the geminate

recombination.  Both  of  these  approaches  were  used  to  study  long-lived  solvent  holes  in

cycloalkanes.

Solvent holes in neat cycloalkanes were generated by multiphoton ionization (3 x 4 eV or 2
x 5 eV) of the solvent at fluxes in excess of 0.01  J/cm2 [15].  In a typical experiment, the laser-
induced dc conductivity was measured as a function of the delay time with resolution better than
3 ns.  A similar setup was  used to observe the dc conductivity in pulse radiolysis with  fast  16
MeV  electrons  [14].  The  decay  kinetics  of  solvent  holes  in  cyclohexane  and  decalins  were
consistent with the value of fh «1  for multiphoton  laser  ionization.  For  cyclohexane,  a  lower
ratio of fh «0.5 was needed to account for the kinetics observed in pulse radiolysis. (Note that
these ratios refer to the situation at ca. 10 ns after the ionization event; the conductivity signal of

the  holes  cannot  be  measured  at  earlier  time).  To  be  consistent  with  the  observations,  the
simulations  required  a  higher  value  for  the  mobility  µh of  the  cyclohexane  holes  (1.7x10-2
cm2/Vs  [12,14])  than  previously  estimated  [7,8].  High  yield  of  the  "satellite  ions"  is  not  a
universal property: In radiolysis of decalins, the ratio fh >  0.8-0.9.  Apparently, the yield of the
"satellite ions" varies apreciably with the hydrocarbon structure.

(9)

(10)

(11)

11.

Knowing the absolute values of fh is important since using the previous estimates for µh
led  to  unrealistically  large  reaction  radii  for  reactions  of  cyclohexane  and  methylcyclohexane

holes with low-IP solutes (2-3 nm!) [8, 14]. These radii suggested extreme delocalization of the

solvent hole.  Using  the correct mobilities reduces these radii  to  ca.  1  nm  which  is  close  to  a

typical electron-transfer radius in a non-viscous hydrocarbon.

When reaction (11) is induced by the VIS photons (at 2.3 eV), the initial excess energy of

the solvent hole is 0.7-1.2  eV (for low-IP  solvents such as decalins) and the question may  be

raised about the occurrence of reaction (4). The pump-probe conductivity experiment outlined in
reference [26] shows that after the trans-decalin hole produced from triphenylene^+* disappears
by  reacting  with  the  triphenylene  in  solution,  the  ground-state  triphenylene^+  is  completely
recovered. The kinetics of the recovery  mirrors  the  decay  kinetics  of  the  solvent  hole.  These

observations indicate that no "satellite ions" are formed in reaction (11).  Direct photoexcitation

of trans-decalin holes at 2.3  eV also did not result in the reduction of  the  conductivity  signals
from these holes. No  cations other than A^+ and high mobility solvent holes were found upon
the 5 eV photoexcitation of triphenylene in trans-decalin, despite the high excess energy in the

holes  (ca.  3.8  eV)  following  the  UV-photoinduced  "hole  injection".  Apparently,  the  excited

solvent  hole  in  the  trans-decalin  is  very  stable;  even  the  anticipated  deprotonation  does  not

occur. This explains the low yield of "satellite ions" in radiolysis of cis- and trans-decalins. It is

presently unclear what factors control the stability of electronically-excited holes in hydrocarbon

solvents.

reactions:

Quantum yields ƒh for single-photon "hole injection" for aromatic solutes in trans-decalin
correlate well with the gas-phase IP of the aromatic solute. For  triphenylene^+, ƒh «0.016  was
obtained for excitation with 5 eV photons (ca. 3 times the value for 2.3 eV excitation) [26].

2.5.  Ion-molecule  reactions of high-mobility solvent holes. There are several classes of such

(i) 

fast irreversible electron-transfer reactions with solutes that have low adiabatic IPs

(ionization potentials) and vertical IPs (such as polycyclic aromatic molecules);

(ii) 

slow reversible electron-transfer reactions with solutes that have low adiabatic and

high vertical IPs (such as dimethylcyclopentanes);

(iii) fast proton-transfer reactions;

complexes [9,26];

(iv)  slow  proton-transfer  reactions  that  occur  through  the  formation  of  metastable

12.

(v) very slow reactions with high-IP, low-PA (proton affinity) solutes.

Rate constants for cyclohexane holes may be found in references [7,8,11,13,14,17],  for

decalin  holes  -  in  references  [8,9,12,14,26],  for  methyl-cyclohexane  holes  -  in  references

[12,122], for squalane holes - in references [24,30]. The data on the temperature dependence of

rate  constants  of  scavenging  for  the  four  cycloalkane  holes  are  in  reference  [10].  For  these

holes,  most  of  the  rate  constants  were  measured  by  determining  the  decay  kinetics  of  the

transient conductivity signals as a function of the solute  concentration.  The  preferable  way  of

studying the scavenging reactions is by  detection  of  the  excess  dc  conductivity  following  the

"hole injection" reactions (10) and (11) [10-13,26]. In cyclohexane, the determination of the rate

constants is complicated by the fact that the solvent hole is in equilibrium with an impurity in the

solvent [11].

Class (i) reactions  were  observed  in  all  four  cycloalkanes  that  exhibit  long-lived  high-

mobility holes [4-8,10,13,14,17]. These reactions were also observed in squalane [24,  31] and

cyclooctane  [26].  The  reaction  rates  linearly  scale  with  the  hole  mobility  as  a  function  of

temperature  (with  exception  of  trans-decalin)  and  the  fraction  of  cycloalkane  in  the  solvent

mixture [14].  The highest rate constants were observed for reactions of cyclohexane hole with
low-IP aromatic solutes, (3-4.5)x1011 M-1 s-1 at 25oC [13,14].  In these irreversible reactions,
a solute radical cation is generated.

Class (ii) reactions were directly observed for the solvent holes in  cyclohexane  [11]  and

methylcyclohexane [122]. For some solutes (SH), the equilibrium

RH^+ + SH 

 RH + SH^+

(12)

is set on the time scale of the conductivity experiment (> 10 ns).  In this case,  the decay kinetics
of  the  solvent  holes  are  biexponential.  Addition  of  1,1-dimethylcyclopentane,  trans-1,2-
dimethylcyclopentane, and 2,3-dimethyl-pentane to cyclohexane or trans-decalin, bicyclohexyl,
and iso-propyl-cyclohexane to methylcyclohexane results in such bimodal scavenging kinetics.

The former two cyclopentane derivatives are present as impurity in commercial cyclohexane (10-

100 ppm). For addition of methycyclohexane to cyclohexane, the equilibrium (12) is reached so

rapidly  that  the  decay  kinetics  are  exponential.  Similar  rapidly-set  equilibria  exist  for  high-

mobility holes in mixtures of cis- and trans-decalins [14,38]  and the decalin holes and benzene

[26].

The rate constants, k12, of the forward reaction (12) are an order of magnitude lower than
those of the class (i) reactions, though some of the hole-trapping solutes have comparably low
adiabatic IPs. The values of k12  did not correlate with the observed ÎG0 of reaction (12).  An

13.

explanation was  proposed that the rate constants are controlled  by  the  height  of  the  activation

barrier determined by the difference in the vertical IP  of the solute and  the  adiabatic  IP  of  the

solvent  [11].  This  suggests  that  electron  transfer  to  the  rapidly-migrating  solvent  hole  (as  it

passes  by the scavenger molecule) is much faster than the relaxation time of  the  solute  radical

cations.

Class (iii) reactions  include  proton-transfer  reactions  of  solvent  holes  in  cyclohexane,

methylcyclohexane, and squalane [4-8,10,13,14,17,26]:

RH + SH ---“ R^ + SH2+

(13)

The corresponding rate constants are 10-30% of the fastest class (i) reactions and exhibit short

reaction radii of  0.15-0.4  nm.  Unlike  the  electron-transfer  reactions  (that  may  occur  through

space),  the  proton  transfer  requires  close  proximity  of  the  donor  and  acceptor.  Thus,  short

reaction radii of class (iii) reactions suggest a low degree of the solvent hole delocalization.

Class (iv) reactions  include proton-transfer reactions in trans-decalin and decalin mixtures

[9,12,14,26].  In neat trans-decalin, the reaction rates for high-IP solutes correlate poorly  with

the solute IP  and PA [9,  12].  In binary mixtures of cis- and trans-decalin, the  mobility  of  the
solvent hole linearly scales with the fraction of trans-decalin (for which µh  is 4.5  times higher
than in cis-decalin) [14]. While for most of the solutes the rate constants also scale linearly with
the  hole  mobility,  for  aliphatic  alcohols  the  rate  constant  systematically  decreases  with  the
fraction  of  trans-decalin  approaching  the  value  of  (5-6)x109  M-1  s-1  in  neat  trans-decalin
[12,14]. This constant is only 10% of the rate constant for alcohols in cis-decalin.

Recently, it was demonstrated that the scavenging of trans-decalin holes by some alcohols

proceeds through the formation of a metastable complex [26]

RH + SH 

 {RH .. SH }^+

(14)

{RH .. SH }^+ 

 R^ + SH2
 R^ + H+(SH)2

SH

with  a  natural  lifetime  between  24  ns  (2-propanol)  to  90  ns  (tert-butanol)  at  25oC.  In  neat
decalins, the rate of the complexation is ca. 1/2 of the highest electron-transfer rates (the reaction

radius is 0.5-0.7  nm); the overall decay rate is limited by slow  proton-transfer  reactions  (15).
The rate constant of unimolecular decay of  the  complex  is  (5-10)x106  s-1.  Though  for  other
class (iii) reactions the bimodality was  not observed [9,26],  the basic  mechanism  must  be  the

(15)

14.

same. Only for secondary and ternary alcohols is the equilibrium (14) reached so  slowly that it
can be observed at 25oC on the time scale of the conductivity experiment (> 10 ns). For  primary
alcohols, the scavenging kinetics are pseudo-first order.  However,  for C3-C6 alcohols the rate
constants do not scale lineraly with the solute concentration, betraying the fast  equilibria  (14).

For  these alcohols, PA is relatively low and the  decay  of  the  complex  is  mainly  bimolecular.
Termolecular reactions analogous to reaction (15) were observed in the gas phase,  e.g.,  for c-
C6H12^+ and water [60].

A detailed  analysis  of  the  thermodynamics  and  energetics  of  reactions  (14)  and  (15)  is

given in references [26]. Forward reaction (14) has near-zero activation energy; reaction (15) is

thermally-activated  (20-25  kJ/mol).  The  stability  of  the  complex  increases  with  the  carbon

number of the alcohol; the standard heat of the complexation decreases in the opposite direction
(ÎH2980 changes from -39 kJ/mol for ethanol to  -25  kJ/mol  for  tert-butanol).  Complexes  of
cis-decalin^+ are much more stable than complexes of trans-decalin^+ since for the former,  the
standard reaction entropy ÎS2980 is 35 J mol-1 K-1 more positive. The decrease in the entropy
is small for both decalins (ÎS2980 >  -80 J  mol-1 K-1),  approaching zero  for  higher  alcohols
[26].  Similarly small changes in the standard entropy were observed for class (ii)  reactions  of
methylcyclohexane^+  [122].  Since  the  molecular  complex  formation  could  only  reduce  the
degrees of freedom, to account for the small change in the entropy there must be an increase in

the solvent disorder.  This would  be  consistent  with  a  hole  being  a  small  polaron  that  orders

solvent  molecules  around  it.  When  the  positive  charge  is  compensated,  the  solvent  becomes

disordered, and the reaction entropy increases.

Complex mechanism of class (ii) and (iii) reactions may account for the puzzling result in

the studies on radiation-induced fluorescence in cis- and trans-decalins containing 3-100 mM of

benzene  [54],  where  it  was  concluded  that  on  the  time  scale  of  geminate  recombination  of
primary pairs in trans-decalin (< 1 ns),  the hole is scavenged by benzene with rate constant of
7.7x1010 M-1 s-1 (vs. (5-5.5)x109 M-1 s-1 observed in the transient conductivity experiments
[7,8,12,14]).  This was  taken as  evidence  for  the  involvement  of  short-lived,  reactive  excited

solvent holes.

It is more likely that the higher rate constant corresponded to the rate constant of forward

charge transfer reaction (12) or complexation reaction (14).  The gas-phase IP  for benzene  and
trans-decalin are very close.  In trans-decalin solution, ÎIP  «  0.25  eV,  and  benzene^+  readily
transfers positive charge back to the solvent  (ÎH0 «  -0.27  eV  [26]).  This  was  demonstrated
through efficient generation of trans-decalin holes by biphotonic ionization of benzene [14] and

careful analysis of scavenging kinetics [26]. The decay of the solvent hole is due to slow  proton
transfer reaction (13)  and  dimerization  of  benzene^+  with  rate  constant  of  5.7x109  M-1  s-1.

15.

Since benzene2^+ has 0.65 eV lower energy than benzene^+, backward charge transfer from the
dimer cation is inhibited, and the dimerization shifts the equilibrium (12) to the right side [26].
The forward charge transfer (or complexation) proceeds with rate constant  of  (1.1±0.1)x1011
M-1 s-1, while k-12  « 1.3x108 s-1 (at 25oC) [26]. Therefore, while in the fluorescence studies
the solvent holes were observed before  the  equilibrium  (12)  was  reached  (ca.  7  ns  in  3  mM

solution), in the conductivity studies the solvent holes were observed well after this equilibrium

was  reached.  Characteristically,  for  the  low-IP  solute  toluene  (a  class  (i)  solute),  the  rate

constants measured on short [54] and long time scales [9,12,14] are identical.

Although  class  (iv)  reactions    were  observed  for  several  high-IP,  low-PA  solutes
[8,14,17,19,20],  the kinetic data were easy to misinterpret due to traces of low-IP  impurity in
the inert solute (in particular, for C10-C16 paraffins [20]).  The only reliable data were obtained
for scavenging the solvent hole in cyclohexane by cyclopropane [8,17]  and for scavenging the

solvent  holes  of  cyclohexane  and  decalins  by  oxygen  [14,19].  For  the  latter  reactions,  the
reaction constants are (1-3)x108 M-1 s-1  [14],  more than two orders of magnitude lower than
those for class (i) reactions. Our thermochemical analysis suggests that this reaction is initiated
by  the  H  atom  transfer  to  O2  [14].  A  possible  mechanism  for  scavenging  reaction  with
cyclopropane is the H2- transfer [8].

In concluding this section, we observe that though the nature and the migration mechanism

for the high-mobility holes are not yet fully understood,  a consistent picture of their  chemical,

dynamic, and magnetic properties begins to emerge.

3333 ....

SSSSIIIINNNNGGGGLLLLEEEE----PPPPAAAAIIIIRRRR     AAAANNNNDDDD     MMMMUUUULLLLTTTTIIIIPPPPLLLLEEEE----PPPPAAAAIIIIRRRR     SSSSPPPPUUUURRRRSSSS

3.1.   Single-pair spurs.  Single-photon  VUV  or  multiphoton  UV  ionization  of  neat  liquid

hydrocarbons results in the formation of isolated geminate ion pairs,  reaction (9).  The reaction

dynamics  in  such  pairs  is  less  involved  than  the  dynamics  in  multiple-pair  spurs  formed  in

radiolysis. The availability of synchrotron radiation in the 10-40 eV region and short-pulse UV

lasers  led  to  a  rapid  increase  in  the  number  of  studies  on  "single-pair  spurs".  In  particular,

ultrafast pulse-probe laser spectroscopy was  used to study ionization, geminate recombination,

and generation of the solvent excited states in neat hydrocarbons [66-69]. This field is still in its

infancy: Only in 1997 has the first reliable data on the geminate kinetics of  electron-hole  pairs

been obtained [69]. Eventually, these studies will complement the studies using pulse radiolysis

and VUV photoexcitation.

16.

In these  ultrafast  UV  laser  studies,  the  pump  energies  varied  between  4  eV  and  5  eV,

while the probe pulse energies varied between 0.55  eV and 3.1  eV. Upon  biphotonic 5  eV  or

triphotonic  4  eV  excitation,  hydrocarbons  (such  as  paraffins,  isooctane,  cylopentane,
cyclohexane, and trans-decalin) yield  both  the  solvent  excited  S1  states  and  the  electron-hole
pairs [66].  Questions were raised as to  the  significance  of  the  ionization  channel,  since  more
than 75% of the transient absorbance in the VIS range was from the solvent S1 states [67,68].  It
is presently realized that there is a strong spectral overlap between the absorbance signals from
these excited states and the primary charge carriers. The S1 state dominates  the  absorbance  in
the 1.8-3 eV region [67], while below 0.8 eV, the absorbance is from the electrons only [69].  A
biphotonic 3.5-4 eV laser excitation yields the S1 states without the concurrent ionization [70].
Thus, both the S1 state dynamics and the geminate dynamics of single electron-hole pairs may
be studied separately using the appropriate excitation and detection conditions. This option does

not exist in pulse radiolysis studies.

The  results  of  the  ultrafast  laser  studies  are  very  preliminary.  The  observed  geminate

kinetics  suggest  that  the  electron  thermalization  distance  distribution  in  isolated  electron-hole
pairs can better be described as the exponential than the often assumed r2-Gaussian [65].  This
conclusion was  supported  in  the  studies  on  magnetic  field  dependence  of  hexafluorobenzene
fluorescence in recombination of geminate C6F6^- -  solvent  hole  pairs  generated  upon  10  eV
photoionization of isooctane. One study found that even the exponential distribution law was too

steep to account for the data and that a power law tail is  more  appropriate  [71]  (for  radiolytic

spurs,  Gauss-power  distributions  had  long  been  advocated  [72]).  The  results  on  the  solvent

photoionization  are  in  contrast  with  the  data  on  multiphoton  UV  laser  ionization  of  aromatic
solutes in the same hydrocarbons that demonstrated good applicability of the r2-exponential or
r2-Gaussian distributions for simulation of the geminate pair recombination  and  free  ion  yield
(for example, [16]). On the other hand,  no systematic studies on the pump energy dependence

of the geminate kinetics in neat  hydrocarbons  have  been  carried  out,  while  it  is  known  from

other  ultrafast  studies  (in  particular,  on  photoionization  of  liquid  water  [73])  that  the

thermalization distances strongly depend on the pump energy and the ionization mechanism.

Arguably, the greatest import of the forthcoming ultrafast studies would be assessing the

role of short-lived pre-thermalized charges and highly excited states of hydrocarbons.  The first
step in this direction has been made: It was  found that in  n-hexane  and  isooctane  the  electron
band in the near IR is shifted to lower energies in the first 2 ps  after the ionization event [69].

This  finding  suggests  that  the  thermalization  of  electrons  in  hydrocarbons  is  not  as  rapid  as

generally  believed.  Therefore,  a  considerable  fraction  of  reactions  in  spurs  involves  pre-

thermalized charge carriers.

17.

A  recent  study  [74]  demonstrated 

the  potential  of  femtosecond  photoemission

spectroscopy to study localization (thermalization) dynamics of electrons in hydrocarbons.  The
electrons were injected into n-heptane bilayer on Ag(111) surface (at 120 K)  using a powerful 4
eV pump pulse.  The electrons were then ejected to vacuum using a weaker 2 eV  probe  pulse.

The extended and localized electron states were distinguished by the angular dependence of the

kinetic energy spectrum. The lifetime of the localized electrons was  ca.  1.6  ps  (eventually these

electrons recombine with the mirror charge). Initially, the electron is in an extended  state  with
effective mass of 1.2 me. The localization proceeds with rate constants between 4x1011 s-1 and
3x1012  s-1  depending  on  the  electron  wave  vector  (band  energy)  that  determines  the
exothermicity  of  localization  (which  varied  between  10  meV  and  150  meV).  Both  the

thermalization dynamics and energetics were studied simultaneously. Hopefully, more ultrafast

photoemission  studies  will  follow.  It  would  be  particularly  interesting  to  carry  out  such

observations  on  small-diameter  jets  in  order  to  study  chemical  processes  in  the  bulk  of  the

solvent. Studies on photoelectric spectroscopy of liquid jets  (water,  alcohols,  n-nonane)  were

recently reported [75].

3.2. Triplet  state vs. singlet state formation: spin effects.  It is commonly believed that the initial

spin state of the multiple-pair spur  is singlet. Shortly after the ionization  event,  positively  and

negatively charged ions recombine yielding singlet or triplet products.  In the  contact  exchange

approximation, the multiplicity of the product  depends  on  the  spin  phasing  at  the  instance  of

recombination [32,  76].  (Calculations with more realistic spin exchange potentials support this

approximation  [77])  Recombination  of  the  initially  singlet-correlated  ("geminate")  ion  pairs

yields singlet products, including the fluorescent excited states. Random cross-recombination of

ions in multiple-ion pair reduces the singlet yield and increases the triplet yield: statistically, 75%

of the random-pair encounters yield the triplet excited states [76,78]. In squalane, the probability
fs of the singlet recombinations decreases from 80% at 16 eV photoexcitation to less than 40%
at 120 eV photoexcitation [32]. For alkanes, the most probable energy loss is 22-24 eV [79] and
the steep decrease in fs  with the photon energy follows the increasing formation of multiple-pair
spurs.

Coherent  spin  evolution  in  the  geminate  ion  pairs  is  the  basis  for  several  optical

spectroscopies,  including  magnetic  field  effect  [32,33,62-65,71,76,80],  ODMR  [24,39-48],

magnetic  level-crossing  [21,28,50,59]  and  quantum  beat  spectroscopies  [29-31,36,80,81].

Unpaired  electrons  in  radical  ions  interact  with  static  and  microwave  magnetic  fields  of  the

spectrometer  (Zeeman  interaction)  and  local  magnetic  fields  generated  by  protons  (hyperfine

interactions).  These  weak  magnetic  interactions  flip  the  electron  spin  and  cause  intersystem

18.

crossing in geminate pairs, eventually changing the singlet/triplet yields [76]. These spin-sorting

interactions underline the magnetic and microwave field effects in radiolysis of hydrocarbons.

The  importance  of  the  magnetic  and  spin  effects  in  radiolysis  has  been  frequently

discussed and we refer the reader to reviews  by  Brocklehurst  [32,76].  There  is  one  essential

point  which  is  seldom  emphasized  in  the  literature:  Due  to  the  very  nature  of  quantum
entanglement, the triplet and singlet channels exist only in the context of the product formation.
In the absence of spin-sorting reactions or special initial conditions, pairwise  spin  correlations

(i.e., "geminate" pairs) in many-particle spurs are forbidden by the laws of quantum mechanics.

The only exceptions are single-pair spurs and spurs  in which all but one pair have recombined.

Given that the ion escape yield in most of hydrocarbons is <  5 %,  the latter type includes most

of the multiple-pair spurs that remain a few nanoseconds after the ionization event. Put together,

these two types of spurs  contain a large fraction of the  long-lived  "geminate"  pairs  formed  in

radiolysis and account for most  of  spin  correlations  observed  in  magnetic  field  and  magnetic

resonance  experiments.  As  was  noted  by  Brocklehurst  [32],  these  long-lived  pairs  have  a

tendency to be singlet-correlated since most of the stable neutral products are singlet.

The origin of the spin effects in radiolysis has always been murky.  The photoionization of

the  solvent  could  proceed  directly  or  via  short-lived  highly  excited  solvent  states.  This

autoionization may completely change the spur chemistry. A recent study examined the magnetic

field  effect  on  the  solute  fluorescence  in  squalane  as  a  function  of  the  VUV  photon  energy

[32,62].  The  magnetic  field  effect  increased  between  11  eV  and  16  eV  and  reached  the

maximum corresponding to 80% singlet recombination. This probability  is  significantly  lower

than the value of 100% expected for single-pair spurs,  while the photon energies do not allow

one to account for the loss  of spin coherence through  cross-recombination.  Analogous  results

were  obtained  for  other  systems  (alcohols,  benzene)  [32].  Since  ODMR  and  related  studies

indicate that for squalane holes the spin-lattice relaxation is longer than their decay [24,28,29],

this loss of spin coherence cannot be accounted for by spin randomization of primary pairs due

to magnetic interactions in the charges. It appears that the initial state of the electron-hole pair is

not  purely  singlet.  According  to  Brocklehurst  [62],  only  direct  ionization  yields  singlet-

correlated electron-hole pairs while the autoionization results in the partial loss of spin coherence

due to spin-orbital coupling in the highly excited states. This scenario is not entirely unrealistic

given  the  possible  excitonic  nature  of  these  states.  However,  it  must  be  noted  that  the  spin

mixing postulated by Brocklehurst was  not supported by VUV studies on solvent fluorescence

[82].

Another  fundamental  problem  is  the  wavefunction  structure  of  the  initial  singlet  state.
Consider a spur  consisting of two pairs,  (e1h1) and (e2h2). There  are  two  orthogonal  singlet

19.

states, |1¨=|e1h1¨s |e2h2¨s and |2¨=1/Ô–3 {|e1h2¨s |e2h1¨s +  |e1e2¨s |h1h2¨s},  where |..¨s  is the
singlet state of the pair [77]. In the general case, the initial singlet state is a linear combination of

|1¨ and |2¨.  It is  easy  to  demonstrate  that  pairwise  correlations  are  possible  only  if  the  initial
singlet  function  is  multiplicative  (e.g.,  state  |1¨)  [77].  In  order  to  have  these  pairwise
correlations prior  to the spin-sorting recombination, the electron-hole pairs must be generated in

spatially- and electronically-separated events [76,78].  While this assumption seems plausible in

radiolysis of gases, in the condensed phase the excitation and charge delocalization could lead to

significant  mixing  of  the  singlet  wavefunctions.  Another  concern  is  that  ionization  events

induced by low-energy secondary electrons entangle these electrons with the electron-hole pairs.

Such entanglements create complex spin correlation patterns in the spur.

If the initial multiplicity of the spur is singlet, the probability fs  to form the singlet product

is given by the formula [78]

fs « Œ + 1/4 (1-Œ), 

(16)

where  Œ    is  the  probability  of  recombination  of  "spin-correlated  geminate  pairs".  This
expression has been used to calculate the fs  from the data  on  magnetic  field  effects  [32]  and
quantum  beats  [31,80,81]  in  delayed  solute  luminescence  (spin-coherence  spectroscopies).

Given that the premises of these methods are identical, it is understandable that the probabilities
fs determined for fast electron spurs using these spectroscopies are comparable.

A serious complication in the measurements of Œ is the occurrence of spin relaxation in the
charge carriers [33,50]. While the electrons have relatively long spin-lattice relaxation times, the

solvent holes may relax on nanosecond or even subnanosecond  time  scales  (see  section  2.2).

For ion pairs involving such species, the spin coherence is lost on the time scale of the singlet

product  formation.  This  problem  is  exacerbated  when  the  geminate  recombination  is  slowed

down  after  scavenging  of  the  primary  ions  by  the  scintillator.  Even  relatively  slow  spin

relaxation induced by electron  dipole-dipole  coupling  and  anisotropic  magnetic  interactions  in

the radical cations is  capable  of  destroying  the  initial  spin  correlation  on  the  submicrosecond

time scale [33]. This effect must be taken into account in the studies on long-lived ion pairs in

viscous solvents and solids.

The common problem in studies on the efficiency of triplet and singlet recombinations is

that  only  a  fraction  of  the  singlet/triplet  products  are  detected.  Alkane  solvent  holes  rapidly

fragment  or  transfer  a  proton  which  causes  the  loss  of  the  solvent/solute  luminescence.  The

recombination of pre-thermalized holes could yield other products than the lowest excited states

[37,53].  In  dense  spurs,  excited  states  can  be  quenched  by  radicals  and  radical  ions.

20.

Computations  show  that  these  quenching  reactions  can  be  a  significant  mechanism  of

disappearance of the singlet excited  states  [65],  and  experimental  evidence  has  been  obtained
supporting the reduced production of solute  S1 states in spurs of 20-100 eV photons due to the
quenching [32,62,65].  Shortening  of  the  solvent    S1  state  lifetime  with  increasing  excitation
photon energy was  observed in radiolysis of cis-decalin  and  n-dodecane  with  4-to-14  keV  x-
rays [83].  This shortening  was  accounted  for  by  quenching  of  the  alkane  S1  states  by  alkyl
radicals generated in the same spurs.

Even  more  important  are  reactions  of  radiolytic  products  with  the  precursors    of  these

excited states. Results from recent experiments in which the solute luminescence and magnetic

field  effect  were  compared  for  radiolysis  of  cyclohexane  or  isooctane  with  0.5-2.2  MeV

electrons, 1-5 MeV protons, and 2-20 MeV å-particles suggested that the decrease in the solute

luminescence and the magnetic field effect was  due to both the increasing importance of cross-

recombination and the "intervention of radicals or other  transient  species  with  the  precursors"

with the fluorescent states [63]. The effects of spin relaxation and ion-radical reactions in dense

spurs  were identified as likely  causes  for  reduced  magnetic  field  effects,  fluorescence  yields,

and  probabilities  Œ    in  spurs  from  17-40  keV  x-rays  as  compared  to  the  spurs  from  fast

electrons [80].

In  short,  to  model  the  experimentally-determined  singlet-to-triplet  ratio,  the  initial  state

multiplicity, spur  chemistry, and spin relaxation must be given same  attention  as  the  interplay

between the cross- and geminate recombination.

3.3.  Modeling of light -particle spurs.  Many simulations of the spur  kinetics in hydrocarbons

have been reported over the last decade [84-89] (see reference [84] for  a  review).  As  may  be

anticipated, none of these simulations attained the level of complexity needed  to  obtain  a  self-

consistent picture of the early radiolytic events in hydrocarbons.  The  threefold  problem  is  the

uncertainty about the initial spur structure, intractability of the inhomogeneous kinetics and poor

understanding  of  spur  chemistry.  Due  to  the  limited  state  of  knowledge,  the  present-day

simulations  should  be  viewed  as  exploratory.  While  some  researchers  focus  on  the  general

aspects of spur dynamics using stochastic Monte Carlo simulations [84-88], others focus on the

chemical  kinetic  aspects  assuming  simple  (inhomogeneous)  dynamics  [23,24,89].  There  are

also models intended to integrate the chemical kinetics and the charge recombination  dynamics

[25,65].  At  the  present  time,  such  models  are  ahead  of  their  time,  since  only  a  few  of  the

postulated 25-120 spur reactions have been studied experimentally.

Not having enough space to summarize all of the recent work,  we will  give  a  couple  of

examples. A welcome new development is  the  integration  of  energy-loss  calculations  [79,87]

21.

with the stochastic Monte Carlo simulations of charge recombination in order to obtain free ion

yields as a function of the primary electron energy [87]. In these calculations, the charge carriers

are treated as point charges of given mobility that migrate in their mutual Coulombic field. These

simplifications are justifiable since the calculations of the track structure (which yield the initial

positions of the point charges) are even more simplistic. The estimated free ion yields and their

energy dependence  [84,85,87]  correspond  well  to  those  determined  experimentally  for  spurs

from  soft  x-rays  [90].  The  import  of  these  calculations  is  that  the  distance  distribution  for

thermalized electron-hole pairs is independent of the primary electron energy in the keV range,

while  ca.  50%  wider  distributions  are  needed  to  account  for  the  free  ion  yields  for  MeV

electrons [87].  This unexpected result needs further verification. There is  also  a  report  on  the

calculations of the distance distribution in the modified model of Mozumder and Magee [88].  It

was found that in single-pair spurs the distribution was much more diffuse than in the multiple-

pair  spurs.  The  significance  of  this  result  for  the  free  ion  yield  calculations  has  not  been

addressed.

A detailed chemical model of hydrocarbon radiolysis was advanced in order to account for
the radiolytic yields of H atoms and H2 as a function of iodine concentration (the latter was  used
as a radical scavenger) [89].  To simplify the kinetic scheme, it was  assumed that the  electron-

hole pairs recombine yielding only the lowest singlet and triplet states of the solvent. Although

this assumption is thoroughly unrealistic (and large corrections were made to recover the balance

of  radiolytic  hydrogen),  it  allows  simplification  of  the  reaction  scheme  to  just  10  reactions,
using  the  deterministic  diffusion-kinetic  approach.  Time-resolved  yields  of  H  atoms,  H2,
radicals, olefins, and other products were estimated.  From  the  simulation  of  the  experimental
data it appears that while the solvent  S1  states  decay  mainly  via  reaction  (6)  (the  intersystem
crossing was estimated to be only 10-15% efficient), the T1 states decay via reactions

3RH* ---“ R^ + ^H

3RH* + RH ---“ 2 R^ + H2

with relative yields between 1:1 and 3:1, depending on the cycloalkane structure. 

While being useful exercises, both of these simulations were based on  simplified  kinetic

schemes  and  physical  models  of  spur  dynamics.  For  some  problems  (free  ion  yields)  these

considerations may be of little importance, for other (product yields) the oversimplification leads

to ambiguous results. In particular, this applies to calculations of the "singlet yields" (implicitly
identified with the yields of the  lowest  S1  states)  where  the  estimates  entirely  depend  on  the
kinetic scheme [85,86].  Most of such calculations address  only  one  facet  of  the  problem:  the

(17)

(18)

22.

relative  significance  of  "geminate"  recombination  and  cross-recombination  in  multiple-pair

spurs.  In the recent Monte-Carlo  simulations  [85],  the  initial  spatial  distribution  of  ionization

events was calculated using the same approach that was  used in the calculations of the free ion

yield (see above). The total yield of singlet recombination for the primary pairs was estimated.

Superficially, these estimates correlate well with the energy dependence of the singlet ratio
fs    determined  from  the  magnetic  field  effects  on  the  solute  luminescence  yield  [32,64].
However,  some of the latter results were  obtained  using  low-energy  photons  (<  120  eV)  for

which the stochastic Monte-Carlo calculations completely failed to reproduce the photon energy
dependence of the free ion yield [64].  Radiolytic yields of the solvent  S1  states  and  free  ions
upon excitation of decalins and n-dodecane using 4 keV to 15 keV photons have been measured
[83,90]. Even in this energy regime (where the Monte-Carlo calculations gave good estimates of

the free ion yield), agreement between the calculated and measured yields was  observed for one
solvent only, cis-decalin. In the same studies, significant variation of the S1 state lifetimes with
the x-ray energy was  observed which was  a signature  of  quenching  reactions  in  multiple-pair

spurs  [83].  Thus,  the  Monte-Carlo  model  was  inadequate  and  the  good  correlation  obtained

between the experimental and simulated results was  coincidental. Only when an understanding

of  the  dynamics  of  short-lived  excited  states  and  pre-thermalized  charges  is  reached,  will

development of an adequate model of the spur chemistry be possible.

4444....          GGGGEEEENNNNEEEERRRRAAAATTTTIIIIOOOONNNN     OOOOFFFF     SSSSOOOOLLLLVVVVEEEENNNNTTTT     AAAANNNNDDDD     SSSSOOOOLLLLUUUUTTTTEEEE     EEEEXXXXCCCCIIIITTTTEEEEDDDD     SSSSTTTTAAAATTTTEEEESSSS....

4.1. The lower excited states.  Though excited solvent states have been discussed throughout this

chapter, it is worth repeating a few points. Only the lower excited states have been considered, the
fluorescing singlet S1 state [91] and the putative, dissociative, triplet T1 state [92].  These excited
states are produced mainly via charge recombination; the singlet states may also be produced  by
direct excitation of the solvent by secondary electrons and Cerenkov light [93].  The S1 state lives
between  0.5  ns  and  2  ns;  this  lifetime  is  longer  (3-5  ns)  for  long-chain  paraffins  [92,94].  In
multiple-pair spurs,  the S1 state lifetimes are shortened due to quenching of the excited  state  by
radiolytic products [83].  Eventually, the S1 state either fragments  via  reaction  (6)  or  crosses  to
another excited state, possibly T1 [92] or S2 [95]; the radiative decay is very inefficient (< 1%).
For homologous hydrocarbons, the quantum yield of fluorescence depends linearly on the excited
state  lifetime.  For  C7-C17  paraffins,  the  radiative  rate  constant  is  ca.  1.3x106  s-1,  for
alkylcyclohexanes - 7x106 s-1  [94].  The fragmentation is temperature-dependent (with activation
energy of 0.145-0.21 eV), while the crossing is temperature-independent [92,  95,  96].  The yield
of the S1“T1 (or  S1“S2)  crossing for cyclo- and n-alkanes varies between 10% and 40%; for

23.

some  branched  alkanes  (such  as  isopropylcyclohexane  and  2,3-dimethylbutane)  this  yield

approaches 50-60% [92].  

Cyclohexane fluoresces in liquid, solid and vapor, with lifetimes 0.8  ns  (298 K),  1.85  ns

(at 225 K), and 2.07  ns  (298 K),  respectively (7.3  eV excitation) [95].  For  liquid cyclohexane
at 298 K, the rate constant of crossing is 3.6x108 s-1, the activation energy and pre-exponential
factor for the fragmentation are 0.135 eV and 1.6x1011 s-1, respectively, and the quantum yield
of fluorescence is ca.  0.01  at 7 eV photoexcitation  [92].  For  cyclohexane  (and  most  of  other

saturated  hydrocarbons),  this  quantum  yield  rapidly  decreases  with  the  excitation  energy  (to
3.5x10-3 at 8.4  eV,  the  onset  of  photoionization)  [60,82,92,94].  All  of  the  hydrocarbon  S1
states have energies around 7  eV  above  the  ground  state  (bottom-to-bottom)  [92]  and  radiate

between 5 eV and 6.5  eV [91].  The excited singlet states mainly dissociate to olefin/carbene +
H2  or  alkyl  radical  +  H  atom.  For  cyclohexane  (n-hexane),  the  relative  yields  of  these  two
fragmentation channels change from 4:1 (3:1)  upon  7.6  eV  photoexcitation  to  2:3  (1:1)  upon

11.6 eV photoexcitation [97].

The nature of the long-lived  S1  states  has  been  the  subject  of  much  speculation.  Some
authors view these states as  liquid-phase  analogs  of  Rydberg  states  in  the  gas  phase.  Others

identify these states with self-trapped excitons, drawing from solid-state physics.  Both of these

descriptions offer no insight in what defines the experimental properties of these states, such as

their reactions, energetics, and absorption spectra. Apparently, only  first-principle  calculations

and further spectroscopic studies (in particular, in the IR) will be useful.

The lowest triplet states lay ca.  1 eV below the S1 states [92].  These states are presumed
to be extremely short lived (0.1-1  ps).  The putative triplets are believed to decay  via  reactions

(17) and (18). In paraffins and branched alkanes, the C-C bond dissociation is thought to be as

efficient as the C-H bond dissociation; in alkylcyclohexanes, biradical formation was  suggested
[92]. Another study suggested the involvement of the S2 state that dissociates yieding the same
products as reaction (17) [95].

While this much is presumed or accepted, the role of these (and other) excited states in the

radiolysis remains poorly understood. The results obtained over the last decade only add to the

existing uncertainties.

4.2.  Non-fluorescing excited states of alkanes. Several  relatively  long-lived  non-fluorescing

("dark") excited states of hydrocarbons capable of sensitizing singlet solute luminescence have

been proposed in recent years.

24.

The strongest evidence of such states is from the work of Lipsky and co-workers [98-100]

who  have shown  that  the  sensitization  of  solute  fluorescence  by  transfer  of  energy  from  the
photoexcited  solvent  (cyclohexane,  n-hexadecane,  2,3-dimethylbutane,  and  cis-  and  trans-
decalins) can be explained by the participation of two  solvent excited states: the fluorescent S1
state and a "dark" state. In cis-decalin containing 0.01 M of 2,5-diphenyloxazole (PPO), ca 10%
of the solute luminescence is sensitized from this second singlet state. In a 20 µM solution, ca.

70%  of  the  solute  excitations  are  mediated  by  the  "dark"  state,  with  0.25%  of  such  energy

transfers  per  each  7.7  eV  photon  absorbed  or  0.06  per  "dark"  state  produced.  In  0.01  M

solutions,  the  "dark"  state  transfers  energy  with  97%  efficiency.  In  experiments  where  a

biphotonic 3.7  eV or 4 eV laser excitation was  used instead of  7.6  eV  light,  the  same  "dark"

states  were  observed  [99].  These  states  have  a  quantum  yield  of  only  a  few  percent  of  the
fluorescent states and do not yield the S1 states on deactivation. From the laser experiments, the
conclusion was  made that the "dark" states  live  much  longer  than  the  S1  states,  though  their
lifetimes must be less than 10 ns.  Neither this lifetime nor the efficiency of the energy transfer

from the "dark" state varied with the solvent viscosity when cis-decalin was diluted with higher-

IP  alkanes  (2,3-dimethylbutane  and  isooctane).  Lipsky  and  co-workers  suggested  that  the
"dark"  states  are  exciplexes  that  migrate  with  a  diffusion  constant  of  4x10-4  cm2/s  [98].
Because the "dark" states have relatively low yield, their contribution to the solute fluorescence

is most noticeable at low solute concentration.

A "dark" state capable of rapid energy transfer to aromatic solutes has  been  proposed  in
irradiated cyclohexane on the basis of experiments in which the formation of the S1 state of cis-
decalin (added as a scintillator) was  measured and compared with the  amount  of  this  S1  state
expected from ion recombination and energy transfer from the S1 state of cyclohexane [101]. A
significant yield (0.8  per 100 eV) of the cis-decalin S1  state  was  attributed  to  energy  transfer
from the "dark" state of cyclohexane. If one considers concentrated solutions,  this "dark" state

seems to be more important in the radiolysis than the "dark" state identified by Lipsky and co-

workers.  "Dark"  exciton  states  were  also  postulated  to  account  for  the  high  yield  of
luminescence from 2,5-bis-(tert-butylbenzoxazolyl-2)-thiophene in picosecond  pulse  radiolysis
of  decalins  and  cyclohexane  [102].  The  radiolytic  yield  of  this  "dark"  excitonic  state  was

estimated at 1 per 100 eV and the rate of the energy transfer from these states was  estimated as
(1-3)x1011 M-1 s-1. We are inclined to think that the observations of "dark" states in radiolysis
are artifacts of data analysis. It remains to be seen whether these "dark" states are real.

4.3. Low yields of the solvent  S1 states.  Radiolytic yields of the solvent S1 states observed in
the fast electron radiolysis of some alkanes (e.g., C3-C8 paraffins) and cycloalkanes (e.g.,  C5-
C7 cycloalkanes and methylcyclohexane) are unexpectedly low (see tables IX.3-11  in reference

25.

[102] for available data). For example, in radiolysis of cyclohexane, the yield of the S1 states is
only 1.45±0.15 per 100  eV [104] (other estimates are 1.5±0.4  [105],  1.4-1.7  [100],  and 1.75
per 100 eV [89]) while the T1 states are generated at 3.4 per 100 eV [89],  as estimated from the
solvent luminescence yield and the product analysis, respectively. If these S1 states were mainly
produced  in  recombination  of  electron-hole  pairs  (as  follows  from  studies  of  the  effect  of

electron scavengers on the yield of solvent luminescence), the radiolytic yields would seemingly
be equal to the G-value of ionization times the singlet recombination probability, fs.   For fs «
0.5  (see  below),  one  obtains  the  ionization  yield  of  3  pairs  per  100  eV,  whereas  the

experimental estimates are between 4.5  and 5 pairs per 100 eV  [1].  Therefore,  it  appears  that

only  50-65%  of  the  ionizations  produce  the  electron-hole  pairs  that  involve  solvent  radical

cations.

One way to explain this deficit of solvent S1 states is to postulate the prompt formation of
"satellite ions" whose recombination does not yield the solvent S1 states or any other fluorescent
states [37,53].  As discussed in section 2.4,  there are many results suggesting significant yield

of  "satellite  ions"  in  ionization  of  hydrocarbons.  For  cyclohexane,  the  dc  conductivity  data

suggest that ca.  50% of the  cations  observed  10  ns  after  the  ionization  event  are  not  solvent
holes.  Promptly-generated  cyclohexene^+  ions  were  observed  by  ODMR  and  transient
absorbance spectroscopies. In the latter experiments, the "satellite ions" were observed as early

as 250 ps after the ionization event. Very high yields of fragment cations in cyclohexane cannot
be accounted for by scavenging  reactions  (7)  and  (8)  in  radiolytic  spurs.  For  cis-  and  trans-
decalins, where no conductivity or magnetic resonance data exists that indicate a high  yield  of
the "satellite ions", the radiolytic yield of the S1 states is roughly twice that in cyclohexane (see
below). Apparently, in some hydrocarbons there must be rapid fragmentation of pre-thermalized

solvent holes.  Cyclohexane is prone to  such  fragmentations:  In  gamma  radiolysis  of  gaseous
cyclohexane, the radiolytic yields of C6H12^+, C6H11+ (-H),  and C6H10^+ (-H2) cations are
2.0,  0.62,  and 0.35  species per 100 eV, respectively, out of the total ion pair yield of 4.4  per
100 eV [1]. In scavenging experiments with ammonia, the radiolytic yield of c-C6H11+ cations
in liquid cyclohexane was estimated as 0.7 ions per 100 eV [106].

Measurement of the effect of electron scavengers on the 1RH* yield show that  scavengers
are  more  effective  in  reducing  this  yield  than  they  are  in  scavenging  electrons.  A  kinetic
mechanism was proposed in which a fraction of the solvent holes are initially in an excited state
that  does  not  yield  the  solvent  S1  state  upon  recombination  [53].  The  relaxation  and
fragmentation of the pre-thermalized solvent hole is expected to occur on the time scale of a few

picoseconds.

26.

4.4. Estimates of excited state generation by final product analysis. We have already mentioned

the product analysis studies on the yield of the solvent excited states and the products  of  their
decomposition [89].  Using  iodine scavenging, the radiolytic yields of H2,  olefins and radicals
were determined for C5-C8 cycloalkanes as a function of LET [89,107]. To obtain the observed
yield  of  H2,  a  high  yield  of  promptly  generated  H2  (0.75  molecules  per  100  eV  for
cyclohexane) was  postulated. As discussed above,  this hydrogen is likely  to  be  from  reaction

(6). Therefore, it is instructive to compare the data on cyclohexane with such data for decalins,

which  seem  to  yield  more  stable  excited  solvent  holes.  Decalins  also  yield  relatively  stable

highly excited states, since quantum yields of fluorescence vary little with the photon excitation
energy [82]. This suggests efficient relaxation to the lowest S1 state.

A recent study has  provided  the  needed  information  [108].  Product  yields  from  the  S1
state of cis- and trans- decalins were determined in 7.6  eV  photolysis.  Only  40-50%  of  these

states  were  found  to  fragment  (which  is  an  unusually  low  dissociation  yield  for  a  saturated
hydrocarbon). The yields of the solvent S1 states in 3 MeV ∫-radiolysis were determined and,
combined with the photolysis results,  were used to estimate the fraction of  radiolytic  products
that originate from the S1 states. The rest of the products were assigned to the T1 states. Table 1
summarizes the results. As seen from this table, for cis- and trans-decalins the probabilities fs of
singlet recombination are close to  0.5.  This  probability  is  in  fair  agreement  with  the  recently
corrected estimate of fs « 0.65 obtained from the measurements of absolute fluorescence yields
[109].  According to Table 1,  the  S1  yields  in  decalins  are  roughly  twice  that  in  cyclohexane
while the T1 yields for all three of the cycloalkanes  are  comparable.  We  conclude  that  highly
excited  states  of  neutral  and  charged  decalins,  unlike  those  of  cyclohexane  and  many  other

hydrocarbons, exhibit low yields of fragmentation.

TTTTAAAABBBBLLLLEEEE     1111....     

Radiolytic yields of solvent excited states in decalins (3 MeV electrons) [108] and cyclohexane
(60Co ©-radiolysis) [89] estimated from product analysis.

yield per
100eV
S1 state
T1 state a
fs  b
prompt H2

cis-
decalin

trans-
decalin

cyclo-
hexane

3.4

3.0

0.53

c

2.8

3.2

0.47

c

1.75

3.40

0.34

0.75

27.

H2 from S1
H2 from T1

1.43

2.47

1.40

3.00

1.49

1.9 d

a) before S1“T1 conversion [89];
b) probability of singlet recombination for electron-hole pairs;

c) not included in the kinetic scheme;

d) reaction (18) only.

While  product  analysis  is  an  important  source  of  information  on  the  early  stages  of

radiolysis,  this  approach  has  a  serious  problem:  For  all  of  the  alkanes  studied,  the  yield  of

primary decomposition estimated from the total product yields significantly exceed the ionization

yield: 6 to 6.5 per 100 eV vs. 4.5 to 5 per 100 eV [1].  This suggests that some of the products

were counted twice:  i.e.,  that  fragmentation  of  the  excited  states  is  more  extensive  than  was
assumed. For example, instead of H2 elimination, the exited state may eliminate two H  atoms.
Such decompositions were observed in gaseous methane (see discussion in reference [110]).  In

the fast-electron radiolysis of dilute solutions of methane in liquefied  noble  gases,  the  prompt

yield of free H atoms is ca. 5 times higher than the prompt yield of methyl radicals. Using  time-

resolved EPR,  these species were detected several tens  of  nanoseconds  after  their  generation,

and  the  yield  of  the  methyl  radicals  was  unaffected  by  cross-recombination  (extremely  long

thermalization distances in  the  simple  liquids  make  the  kinetics  homogeneous  from  the  onset

[110]). These results suggest that in a large fraction of recombination/excitation events involving

methane and its cations, a methylene and two H  atoms are generated. The implications of such

fragmentations in radiolysis of neat hydrocarbons are obvious.

Alkyl  radicals  are  one  of  the  most  chemically-important  products  of  hydrocarbon

radiolysis [1-3,60]. Their generation is very fast; e.g.,  for cyclohexyl radicals, the rise time of

the  formation  is  <  20  ps  [22].  It  is  generally  believed,  that  the  radicals  are  generated  in
dissociation of the T1 states or higher singlet states, in rapid reactions of "hot" H  atoms and in
"slow"  reactions  of  thermalized  H  atoms  generated  in  reaction  (16)  with  hydrocarbons  (the

relaxed H  atoms have lifetime of ca.  10 ns).  Other pathways include  deprotonation  of  solvent

holes  (reactions  (1)  and  (4))  and  neutralization  of  proton  adducts  and  carbonium  ions  [37].

Radiolytic yields of radicals were estimated from the product analysis: the yield of cross-linking
products,  halocarbons  generated  upon  scavenging  the  radicals  with  TI  and  I2,  and  from  the
isotope sampling [1-3].  For  long-chain paraffins, this analysis  is  complicated  by  uncertainties

about  the  significance  of  hydrogen  ∫-shifts  and  radical  disproportionation  [111].  Promptly

generated radicals (< 100 ns) may be observed using time-resolved EPR; on this short timescale

the secondary radical reactions are unimportant and one can directly  measure  the  absolute  and

28.

relative yields of neutral radicals [112,113]. Interestingly, these prompt yields change little upon

addition of electron scavengers [113],  which suggests that radicals might be generated on time

scales faster than charge recombination (e.g., via reaction (4)).

For paraffins, the ratio of yields of penultimate and interior -H radicals is 20% higher than

expected from the abundance of the corresponding C-H bonds (this was observed using both by

the  product  analysis  [111]  and  EPR  [112]).  Since  the  C-H  bond  dissociation  energies  for

carbon-2  bonds  are  higher  than  those  for  interior  carbon  atoms,  this  preference  cannot  be

explained through the abstraction by H atoms. One way to explain the observed preference is to

assume  the  occurrence  of  reaction  (4):  it  is  known  that  in  low-temperature  solid  paraffins

reaction (1) yields mainly terminal and penultimate radicals [114]. In addition to the -H  radicals,

paraffins  exhibit  high  yield  of  radicals  formed  upon  C-C  scissions,  preferably  for  interior

carbon atoms [3].

For  branched alkanes,  the  fragmentation  patterns  could  be  very  complex  [3,  111].  The

prompt yield of the -H radicals is always minor; the highest yields are of the radicals formed by

scission of skeletal C-C bonds  next  to  the  branches.  For  example,  in  radiolysis  of  isooctane
only 15% of the radicals are of the -H type, the rest being tert-butyl and 2-propyl radicals [111].
In radiolysis of 2,3-dimethylbutane, 70% of radicals are 2-propyl and 30% are -H  radicals (2,3-

dimethyl-2-butyl).  It  is  not  known  what  species  dissociate  (singlets?  triplets?  excited  holes?

excited radicals?) and what controls these fragmentation patterns.

4.5. Generation of solute excited states.    In  radiolysis  of  hydrocarbon  solutions  of  aromatic

scintillators (A), a significant fraction of solute fluorescence in the first several nanoseconds is
sensitized by the energy transfer from the solvent S1 state

1RH* + A ---“ RH + 1A*

(19)

Direct  excitation  of  A  is  usually  unimportant,  but  excitation  of  A  by  Cerenkov  light  is  not

negligible [49].  For  many  solutes,  reaction  (19)  has  large  reaction  radii  (1-1.5  nm)  and  low

activation energy (» 50 meV). 

Solute  fluorescence  is  also  induced  by  charge  scavenging  followed  by  radical  ion  pair

recombination

e- + A ---“ A^- 

RH^+ + A ---“ RH + A^+

RH^+ + A^- ---“ RH + 1,3A*

(20)

(21)

(22)

29.

A^+ + A^- ---“ A + 1,3A*

A^+ + e- ---“  1,3A*

(23)

(24)

Triplet  solute  states  (3A*)  are  formed  only  in  these  reactions.  Since,  typically,  electron
scavenging reaction (20) is faster than hole  scavenging  reaction  (21),  reactions  (22)  and  (23)

account for most of the delayed solute fluorescence. In the first few nanoseconds, only reactions

(19)  and  (22)  are  important.  Reaction  (24)  is  important  only  in  the  studies  on  solute
photoionization  in  hydrocarbons.  The  3A*  +  3A*  annihilation  is  a  minor  source  of  delayed
fluorescence, though there have been reports to the contrary.

Radiolytic  yields  of  solute  1A*  states  have  been  determined  in  several  laboratories  by
measuring the fluorescence from solutions of aromatic scintillators on the subnanosecond  time

scale  [49,100,101,109,115-118].  At  Argonne  [49,118],  the  motivation  was  to  compare  the

experimental values with stochastic Monte-Carlo  simulations  using  a  single  ion-pair  model  in

order  to  determine  whether  the  experimental  kinetics  could  be  matched  by  this  model.  The

approximate  correspondence  between  the  experimental  and  simulated  kinetics  appeared  to  be

possible only by making the assumption that the solvent holes were unstable on the time scale of

the  fluorescence  measurement,  undergoing  a  transformation  that  partially  "disabled"  reaction
(22). This assumption allowed fair agreement with the shapes  of the fluorescence kinetics for 1,
10  and  50  mM  solutions  of  the  aromatic  scintillator,  but  the  agreement  with  the  absolute

radiolytic  yields  was  poor,  and  the  magnitude  of  the  disagreement  varied  with  solute

concentration.

A factor which contributes to the complexity of the analysis is the occurrence of reaction
(19) which accounts for a large fraction of the 1A* states. For  cyclohexane, this process can be
accounted  for  with  reasonable  certainty.  For  n-hexane,  the  simulation  is  less  satisfactory
because the yield of the solvent S1 state has not been accurately measured (1.6±0.5  per 100 eV
[119]), and the estimates of its lifetime vary from 0.3 ns [95] to 0.7 ns [94].

Here we examine again what is perhaps the most puzzling aspect of the results,  i.e.,  rapid
leveling of  the  1A*  yield  in  dilute  scintillator  solutions  (»  1  mM).  Qualitatively,  simulations
show that production of 1A* by energy transfer from the solvent S1 state has a time profile very
similar to the observed kinetics. The question is why  does  not  the  yield  of  1A*  continuously
increase after 2 ns despite the occurrence of reactions (21) and (22)? Since the cyclohexane hole

has  long  lifetime,  the  flatness  of  the  kinetics  must  be  due  to  something  else  than  the  hole

instability. For n-hexane, a re-examination of the results indicates that the occurrence of reaction

(22) is needed to explain the kinetics observed; the latter can be simulated assuming that 50% of

30.

recombinations  (22)  yield  1A*.  However,  the  calculated  G(1A*)  at  5  ns  is  larger  than  the
experimental value of 0.07 per 100 eV by a factor of «1.8,  so  quantitatively, the situation with
n-hexane is not settled.  

While it is an open question whether the  quenching  reactions  in  multiple-pair  spurs  and

sensitization of solute fluorescence by "dark" states can explain the discrepancies, it seems more

likely  that  the  loss  of  the  solute  luminescence  is  due  to  some  irregularity  in  the  behavior  of

cyclohexane  holes.  One  possibility  is  that  rapid  electron  spin-relaxation  in  these  holes
randomizes  {RH^+  A^-}  geminate  pairs  and  reduces  the  1A*  yield  (see  section  2.2).  The
occurrence of such randomization does  not  contradict  the  experimental  estimates  of  fs  «(0.5-
0.6)  for  recombination  of  secondary  pairs:  these  estimates  were  obtained  in  concentrated

solutions (>0.1 M) of the scintillator in which the solvent hole was  scavenged prior to the spin

relaxation (see below). Alternatively, one may speculate that for cyclohexane, reaction (22) does

not produce solute excited states or at least does so with reduced efficiency.

4.6.  Time-resolved measurements of the singlet recombination probability.  For  saturated

hydrocarbons irradiated with fast electrons  and  ©-rays,  the  estimates  of  singlet  recombination
probability  fs    obtained  using  spin  coherence  methods  (such  as  magnetic  field  effect  and
quantum beat spectroscopy) are between 0.4  and 0.65  [31,32,80,81].  These probabilities were
estimated from the fraction Œ  of spin-correlated geminate pairs by implementation  of  formula
(16). Importantly, this fraction was determined for secondary  radical-ion pairs.  To prevent the

loss of spin coherence due to spin relaxation in the solvent holes,  both the solvent hole and the

electron  were  scavenged  in  less  than  1  ns,  using  0.12  M  diphenylsulfide  and  1  mM  para-

terphenyl, respectively [80,81]. Still, the estimates of Œ  were compromised by involvement of

pairs that  included  "satellite"  ions,  such  as  olefin  radical  ions  [81].  In  the  latter  species,  the

electron spin is strongly coupled to protons. This speeds up the spin dephasing of the geminate
pair. Thus, the reported values of Œ  are the low-limit estimates [31].

Given that the validity of formula (16) and the premises of the spin-coherence methods are
not obvious, it was important to determine fs for secondary ion pairs in a direct way.  The time
dependence  of  the  1A*  and  3A*  yields  in  0.1  M  solutions  of  biphenyl  and  naphthalene  in
cyclohexane, n-hexane, and isooctane was  measured [118].  In these solutions,  reactions  (19),
(20), and (21) was over in a fraction of a nanosecond, and reaction (23) was  the only source of
1A* and 3A* states between 1 ns  and 70 ns.  From the derivatives of the G-values of 3A* and
1A*,  the  time-dependent  probability  ft=1-fs  of  triplet  recombination  was  obtained.  This
probability  was  0.5±0.1  regardless  of  the  delay  time.  Surprisingly,  no  experimentally
significant decrease in fs during the first 10 ns  after the ionization event (due to spin mixing in

31.

the  secondary  geminate  pairs,  e.g.,  by  hyperfine  interaction  in  the  radical  ions)  was  found.
Thus, the spin-coherence methods seem to give reliable estimates of fs. 

In the same work, the probability ft  for long-lived secondary pairs was estimated by time-
resolved measurements of G(3A*) and G(A^-) over the solute concentration range 1 mM to 0.1
M and for times out to 1 µs.  Corrections were made to take into account dimerization of A^+,
1A*“3A*  crossing,  triplet-triplet  annihilation,  reactions  of  1A*  and  A^-  with  cyclohexyl
radicals, etc. [118]. No provisions were made to account for spin dephasing in secondary pairs,

though this dephasing is not negligible on  the  long  time  scale.  It  was  found  that  the  kinetics
simulated using ft « 0.5-0.7 were in a reasonable agreement with the experimental ones,  and the
fit quality was not improved by allowing ft  to vary with time.

An interesting result that still awaits theoretical explanation is a remarkable similarity in the
formation  kinetics  for  1A*  and  3A*  states  observed  between  60  ps  to  5  ns  in  concentrated
solutions of aromatic scintillators in n-hexane (0.05-0.1  M) [49,118].  At these concentrations,
the  electrons  are  scavenged  in  <  10  ps  and  the  formation  of  the  solvent  S1  states  is  much
reduced, so that reaction (19) is relatively unimportant. Thus, most of the 1A* states are formed
in the same reaction as the 3A* states, via recombination of the solvent holes (reaction (22)) and
"satellite ions" with A^-. The similarity of the formation kinetics for the 1,3A* states  suggests
that on the short time scale the probability of cross-recombinations and geminate recombinations

are  very  similar.  It  was  concluded  that  "the  spurs  are  made  of  a  collection  of  negative  and

positive ions instead of separate geminate pairs"  [118].  As  was  emphasized  above,  this  view

(the loss of pairwise spin correlations in multiple-pair spurs)  does not contradict the occurrence

of  spin  coherence  phenomena  in  radiolysis.  Whether  this  result  can  be  explained  using  the

conventional Monte-Carlo models of the spur kinetics needs to be determined.

5555....     CCCCOOOONNNNCCCCLLLLUUUUDDDDIIIINNNNGGGG     RRRREEEEMMMMAAAARRRRKKKKSSSS

Radiation chemistry of saturated hydrocarbons is far from being well understood,  and is a

province of numerous controversies and speculations. No closure is in sight.  At the same time,

no other medium with exception of liquid water has been studied as comprehensively as liquid

alkanes and cycloalkanes. Below,  we  provide  our  list  of  the  most  important  and  challenging

problems in the radiation chemistry of saturated hydrocarbons:

•

The chemistry of "hot"  intermediates:  pre-thermalized  charges,  highly  excited

solvent states, energetic fragments (such as "hot" H  atoms). What is  the  nature  of  these

states ? What role do they play in radiolysis? How do they relax and react ? What happens

to the heat dissipated in radiolytic reactions?  What  is  the  mechanism  for  vibrational

32.

deactivation  of  the  products?  Could  the  heat  be  dissipated  through  the  formation  of

unusual conformers and what chemical consequence would that have?  

Understanding the spur structure as a  function  of  the  electron  energy,  especially

• 
below 1 keV. What is the relative significance of ionization and autoionization processes?

What is the origin of the observed spin effects ?

First-principle simulations of the excitation dynamics, charge localization,  and

charge  transport  in  liquid  hydrocarbons.  Are  there  excitons,  Rydberg  states,  and

exciplexes in liquid hydrocarbons? What are the mechanisms for localization of electrons

and holes in non-polar liquids? What is the mechanism  for  rapid  diffusion  of  holes  and

excited states? What determines the fragmentation pathways of triplet  and  singlet  excited

•

•

states?

The role of "silent" species, in particular, hydrogen  atoms,  "dark"  states,  proton

adducts, and carbonium ions.  How  do  these  species  form  and  interact  with  each  other,

excited  states,  and  primary  and  secondary  ions?  Are  there  chemically-significant  short-

lived intermediates, such as carbenes and biradicals or some other unrecognized species?

This list may be expanded to include most of the issues  discussed in this chapter. A lot of

these  problems  stem  from  insufficient  knowledge  of  short-lived  intermediates  and  the

complexity of spur  dynamics. The use  of  traditional  methods  of  radiation  chemistry,  such  as

product analysis or transient absorption and fluorescence spectroscopies, has its limitations. The

"real action" in radiolysis takes  place  within  the  first  few  tens  of  picoseconds,  when  the  hot

species form, relax, fragment, and react. The existing pulse radiolysis facilities provide the time

resolution to 20-30 ps. A new generation of laser-coupled linacs will push this time resolution to

500 fs  [120].  The linac at the Osaka University already provides  pulses  of  800  fs  with  2  nC
charge (3 ps time resolution). Tabletop accelerators that use intense laser light (> 1018 W/cm2)
to  generate  »  1  nC  of  photoelectrons  with  energies  up  to  30  MeV  have  been  demonstrated

[121,123];  with  this  technique,  50-100  fs  electron  pulses  will  be  available.  Thus,  the  time

resolution will soon be improved. Will this improvement bring the closure?

Several  decades  ago,  picosecond  pulse  radiolysis  was  as  eagerly  anticipated  as  the

femtosecond pulse radiolysis today. Knowing what followed thereafter suggests that, by itself,

the improved time resolution would not solve many outstanding problems: Though quite a few
of the intermediates in radiolysis of hydrocarbons (e.g., solvent holes and solvent S1 states) live
for  nanoseconds,  their  nature  remains  elusive  and  their  formation  and  decay  mechanisms

undetermined. The most daunting  task  in  the  development  of  ultrafast  pulse  radiolysis  is  not

33.

only in the generation of short electron pulses.  Rather, it is the development of better detection

techniques  (see  reference  [120],  p.  17).  Transient  absorption  spectroscopy  was  proven

inadequate on the time scales of picoseconds or nanoseconds; there is no reason to expect that it

would fare better on the shorter time scales.  Actually, the situation would be worse  since there

are  fewer  sufficiently  fast  reactions  to  sort  out  light-absorbing  species  by  their  reactivity.

Separating  the  overlapping  absorbance  signals  from  excited  states,  charge  carriers,  and

fragments  would  be  impossible  given  that  none  of  these  species  have  distinctive  absorption

bands. Most of techniques that complemented transient absorption spectroscopy on longer time

scales (magnetic resonance, conductivity,  fluorescence  spectroscopy,  etc.)  cannot  be  used  on

the picosecond and subpicosecond time scales.

We conclude that putting the emphasis  on  the  time  resolution  without  offering  adequate
spectroscopic base would ensure a new stalemate. Therefore,  the development of fast, highly
selective and sensitive techniques for detection of short-lived intermediates in spurs is the most

urgent experimental problem in radiolysis of liquids.  Ultrafast  laser  spectroscopy  must  be

utilized to prepare the ground for the ultrafast pulse  radiolysis  with  the  development  of  better

detection techniques.

TTTThhhhiiiissss     wwwwoooorrrrkkkk     wwwwaaaassss     ppppeeeerrrrffffoooorrrrmmmmeeeedddd     uuuunnnnddddeeeerrrr     tttthhhheeee     aaaauuuussssppppiiiicccceeeessss     ooooffff     tttthhhheeee     OOOOffffffffiiiicccceeee     ooooffff     BBBBaaaassssiiiicccc     EEEEnnnneeeerrrrggggyyyy     SSSS cccc iiii eeee nnnn cccc eeee ssss ,,,,

DDDDiiiivvvviiiissssiiiioooonnnn     ooooffff     CCCChhhheeeemmmmiiiiccccaaaallll     SSSScccciiiieeeennnncccceeee,,,,     UUUUSSSS----DDDDOOOOEEEE     uuuunnnnddddeeeerrrr     ccccoooonnnnttttrrrraaaacccctttt     nnnnuuuummmmbbbbeeeerrrr     WWWW----33331111----111100009999----EEEENNNNGGGG----33338888....

RRRREEEEFFFFEEEERRRREEEENNNNCCCCEEEESSSS

1. A.  Hummel, in The Chemistry of Alkanes and Cycloalkanes, S.  Patai and Z.  Rappoport

(eds.), John Wiley, New York, 1992, p. 743.

2. A. J. Swallow, in Radiation Chemistry: Principles and Applications, Farhataziz and M.  A.

J. Rodgers (eds.), VCH Publishers, 1987, p. 351.

3.

R.  A.  Holroyd  in  Fundamental  Processes  in  Radiation  Chemistry,  P.  Ausloos  (ed.),
Interscience, New York, p. 413.

4. G. Beck and J. K. Thomas, J. Phys. Chem. 76 (1972) 3856.

5. A. Hummel and L. H. Luthjens, J. Chem. Phys. 59 (1973) 654.

6.

E. Zador, J. M. Warman and A. Hummel, J. Chem. Phys. 62  (1975) 3897; Chem.  Phys.
Lett. 23 (1973) 363; J. Chem. Soc. Farad. Trans. I, 75 (1979) 914.

7. M.  P.  de  Haas,  J.  M.  Warman,  P.  P.  Infelta  and  A.  Hummel,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  31

(1975) 382; ibid. 43 (1976) 321; Can. J. Chem. 55 (1977) 2249.

8.

J.  M.  Warman,  The  Study  of  Fast  Processes  and  Transient  Species  by  Electron-Pulse
Radiolysis; J. H. Baxendale and F. Busi (eds.), Reidel, The Netherlands, 1982, p. 433.

34.

J. M. Warman, H. C. de Leng, M. P. de Haas and O. A. Anisimov, Radiat.  Phys.  Chem.
36 (1990) 185.

I. A. Shkrob, A. D. Liu, M. C.  Sauer,  Jr.,  K.  H.  Schmidt and A.  D.  Trifunac, J.  Phys.
Chem. 102 (1998) 3363.

I. A. Shkrob, A. D. Liu, M. C.  Sauer,  Jr.,  K.  H.  Schmidt and A.  D.  Trifunac, J.  Phys.
Chem. 102 (1998) 3371.

12. A. D. Liu, I. A. Shkrob, M. C. Sauer, Jr. and A. D. Trifunac, J.  Phys.  Chem.  51 (1998)

9.

10.

11.

273.

13.

I. A. Shkrob, M. C. Sauer, Jr., K. H. Schmidt, A. D. Liu, J. Yan and  A.  D.  Trifunac, J .
Phys. Chem. 101 (1997) 2120.

14. M.  C.  Sauer,  Jr.,  I.  A.  Shkrob,  J.  Yan,  K.  H.  Schmidt  and  A.  D.  Trifunac,  J.  Phys.

Chem. 100 (1996) 11325.

15. A. D. Liu, M. C. Sauer, Jr. and A. D. Trifunac, J. Phys. Chem. 97 (1993) 11265.

16. K. H. Schmidt, M. C. Sauer, Jr., Y. Lu and A. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. 94 (1990) 244.

17. M. C. Sauer, Jr. and K. H. Schmidt,  Radiat. Phys. Chem. 32 (1988) 281.

18. M. C. Sauer, Jr., K. H. Schmidt and A. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. 91 (1987) 4836.

19. M.  C.  Sauer,  Jr.,  A.  D.  Trifunac, D.  B.  McDonald and R.  Cooper,  J.  Phys.  Chem.  88

(1984) 4096.

20. R.  Mehnert, in Radical Ionic Systems,  Properties in Condensed Phase,  A.  Lund and M.
Shiotani  (eds.),  Kluver,  Dordercht,  1991,  p.  231;  R.  Mehnert,  O.  Brede  and  W.
Naumann,  Ber.  Bunsenges.  Phys.  Chem.  89  (1985)  1031;  O.  Brede,  J.  Bös,  W.
Naumann and R. Menhert, Radiochem. Radioanal. Lett. 35 (1978) 85.

21. F. B. Sviridenko, D. V. Stass and Yu. N. Molin, Chem. Phys. Lett. 297 (1998) 343.

22. S. Tagawa, N. Hayashi, Y. Yoshida, M. Washio and Y. Tabata, Radiat. Phys.  Chem.  34

(1989) 503.

23.

24.

I. A. Shkrob, M. C.  Sauer,  Jr.,  J.  Yan and A.  D.  Trifunac, J.  Phys.  Chem.  100 (1996)
6876.

I. A. Shkrob, M. C. Sauer, Jr. and  A.  D.  Trifunac, J.  Phys.  Chem.  100 (1996) 5993; I.
A. Shkrob and A. D. Trifunac, J. Phys. Chem. 100 (1996) 14681.

25.

I. A. Shkrob, M. C. Sauer, Jr. and A. D. Trifunac, J. Phys. Chem. 100 (1996) 7237.

26.

I. A. Shkrob, M. C. Sauer, Jr. and A. D. Trifunac, J. Phys. Chem. B 103 (1999) 4773;
ibid., B 104 (2000) 3752 and 3760.

27. V. I. Borovkov, S. V.  Anishchik and O.  A.  Anisimov, in Proceedings of the 21st Miller
Conference on Radiation Chemistry, April 24-29,  1999,  Doorwerth, The Netherlands, p.
31.

35.

28. B.  M.  Tadjikov, D.  V.  Stass,  O.  M.  Usov  and  Yu.  N.  Molin,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  273

29. O.  M.  Usov,  D.  V.  Stass,  B.  M.  Tadjikov  and  Yu.  N.  Molin,  J.  Phys.  Chem.  A  101

(1997) 25.

(1997) 7711.

30. A. V. Veselov, O. A. Anisimov and Yu.  N.  Molin, in Pulse Radiolysis, Y.  Tabata (ed.),

CRC Press, Boston, 1991, p. 27.

31. Yu. N. Molin, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc. 20 (1999) 7.

32. B. Brocklehurst, Radiat. Phys. Chem. 50 (1997) 213.

33. B.  Brocklehurst, J.  Chem.  Soc.  Farad.  Trans.  93 (1997) 1079; M.  Okazaki, Y.  Tai, K .

Nunome and K. Toriyama, Chem. Phys. 161 (1992) 177.

34. V.  I.  Borovkov,  S.  V.  Anishchik and O.  A.  Anisimov,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  270  (1997)

35. A. Hummel, private communication.

327.

246 (1995) 392.

36. V. M. Grigoryants, B. M.  Tadjikov, O.  M.  Usov  and Yu.  N.  Molin, Chem.  Phys.  Lett.

37. M. C. Sauer, Jr., D. W. Werst, C. D. Jonah and A. D. Trifunac, Radiat. Phys.  Chem.  37
(1991) 461; A.  D.  Trifunac, M.  C.  Sauer,  Jr.  and C.  D.  Jonah,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  113
(1985) 316.

38. A. D. Trifunac, M. C. Sauer, Jr., I. A. Shkrob and  D.  W.  Werst, Acta Chem.  Scand.  51

(1997) 158.

39.

I. A. Shkrob and A. D. Trifunac, J. Phys. Chem. 98 (1994) 13262.

40. D. W. Werst, M. G. Bakker and A. D. Trifunac, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 112 (1990) 40.

41. A. D. Trifunac, D. W. Werst and L. T. Percy, Radiat. Phys. Chem. 34 (1989) 547.

42. D. W. Werst and A. D. Trifunac, J. Phys. Chem. 92 (1988) 1093.

43. D. W. Werst, L. T. Percy and A. D. Trifunac, Chem. Phys. Lett. 153 (1988) 45.

44.

J. P. Smith, S. Lefkowitz and A. D. Trifunac, J. Phys. Chem. 86 (1982) 4347.

45. B.  M.  Tadjikov, N.  N.  Lukzen, O.  A.  Anisimov and Yu.  N.  Molin, Chem.  Phys.  Lett.

46. B.  M.  Tadjikov,  V.  I.  Melekhov,  O.  A.  Anisimov  and  Yu.  N.  Molin,  Radiat.  Phys.

47. V.  I.  Melekhov, O.  A.  Anisimov, V.  A.  Veselov and Yu.  N.  Molin, Chem.  Phys.  Lett.

48. V. I. Melekhov, O. A. Anisimov, V.  A.  Saik and Yu.  N.  Molin, Chem.  Phys.  Lett. 112

171 (1990) 413.

Chem. 34 (1989) 353.

127 (1986) 97.

(1984) 106.

36.

49. M. C. Sauer, Jr., C. D. Jonah and C. A. Naleway, J. Phys. Chem. 95 (1991) 730.

50. B. M. Tadjikov, D. V. Stass and Yu. N. Molin, J. Phys. Chem. A 101 (1997) 377.

51. A.  Lund,  M.  Lindgren, S.  Lunell and J.  Maruani,  in  Molecules  in  Physcis,  Chemistry,
and Biology, vol.  3,  J.  Maruani (ed.),  Kluwer,  Dordrecht, 1989,  p.  259;  P.  Wang,  M.
Shiotani and S Lunell, Chem. Phys. Lett. 292 (1998) 110, and references therein.

52. V.  I.  Melekhov,  O.  A.  Anisimov,  L.  Sjöqvist  and  A.  Lund,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  174

(1990) 95.

53. C. D. Jonah and M. C. Sauer, Jr., Radiat. Phys. Chem. 46 (1989) 497.

54. D. B. Johnston, Y.-M. Wang and S. Lipsky,  Radiat. Phys. Chem. 38 (1991)  583.

55. R. E. Bühler, Res. Chem.  Intermed. 25 (1999) 259; R.  E.  Bühler and Y.  Katsumura, J .

Phys. Chem. A 102 (1998) 111.

56. Y.  Katsumura, T.  Azuma, M.  A.  Quadir,  A.  S.  Domazou  and  R.  E.  Bühler,  J.  Phys.

Chem. 99 (1995) 12814.

57. M. A. Lewis and C. D. Jonah, Radiat. Phys. Chem. 33 (1989) 1; B. C. Le  Motais and C.

D. Jonah, Radiat. Phys. Chem. 33 (1989) 505.

58. S. G. Lias, P. Ausloos and Z. Horvath, Int. J. Chem. Kinet. 8 (1976) 725.

59. D.  V.  Stass,  N.  N.  Lukzen,  B.  M.  Tadjikov,  V.  M.  Grigoryants  and  Yu.  N.  Molin,

Chem. Phys. Lett. 243 (1995) 533.

60. P.  Ausloos,  R.  E.  Rebbert,  F.  P.  Schwartz  and  S.  G.  Lias,  Radiat.  Phys.  Chem.  21

(1983) 27.

61. E. Haselbach and T. Bally, Pure Appl. Chem. 56 (1984) 1203 and references there.

62. B. Brocklehurst, Radiat. Phys. Chem. 50 (1997) 393.

63.

J. A. LaVerne and B. Brocklehurst, Radiat. Phys.  Chem.  47 (1996) 71; J.  Phys.  Chem.
100 (1996) 1682.

64. B. Brocklehurst, Chem. Phys. Lett. 211 (1993) 31.

65. B. Brocklehurst, J. Chem. Soc. Farad. Trans. 88 (1992) 167 and 2823.

66. H.  Miyasaka and N.  Mataga, in Pulse Radiolysis, Y.  Tabata (ed.),  CRC Press,  Boston,
1991,  p.  173; Radiat. Phys.  Chem.  32 (1988) 177; Chem.  Phys.  Lett. 134 (1987)  480,
ibid. 126 (1986) 219.

67. M. U. Sander, U. Brummund, K. Luther and J. Troe, J. Phys. Chem. 97 (1993) 8378.

68. F. H. Long, H. Lu and K. B. Eisenthal, J. Phys. Chem. 99 (1995) 7436.

69. L. D. A.  Siebbeles, U.  Emmerichs, A.  Hummel and H.  J.  Bakker,  J.  Chem. Phys.  107

(1997) 9339.

37.

70. G.  Orlandi, L.  Flamingi, F.  Barigiletti and S.  Dellonte, Radiat. Phys.  Chem.  21  (1983)

113.

71. V. O. Saik and S. Lipsky, Chem. Phys. Lett.  264 (1997) 649; V.  O.  Saik,  A.  E.  Ostafin

and S. Lipsky, J. Chem. Phys. 103 (1995) 7347.

72.

J. P. Dodelet, K. Shinsaka and G. Freeman, Can. J. Chem. 54 (1976) 744.

73. R. A. Crowell and D. M. Bartels, J. Phys. Chem. 100 (1996) 17940.

74. N.-H.  Ge,  C.  M.  Wong,  R.  L.  Lingle,  Jr.,  J.  D.  McNeill,  K.  J.  Gaffney  and  C.  B.
Harris,  Science 279 (1998) 202 [also see their review in J.  Phys.  Chem.  B  103  (1999)
282].

75. M. Faubel, B. Steiner and J. P. Toennis, J. Chem. Phys. A 106 (1997) 9013.

76. B. Brocklehurst, Radiat. Phys. Chem. 21 (1983)  57; J.  Chem.  Soc.  Farad.  Trans.  II,  72

(1976) 1869; Nature 221 (1969) 921.

77. C. E. Bolton and N. J. B. Green, J. Phys. Chem. 100 (1996) 8807.

78. W. M. Bartczak, M. Tachiya and A. Hummel,  Radiat. Phys. Chem. 36 (1990) 195.

79.

J. A. LaVerne and S. M. Pimblott, J. Phys. Chem. 99 (1995) 10540.

80. S. V. Anishchik, O. M. Usov, O.  A.  Anisimov and Yu.  N.  Molin, Radiat. Phys.  Chem.

81. O.  M.  Usov,  V.  M.  Grigoryants,  B.  M.  Tadjikov  and  Yu.  N.  Molin,  Radiat.  Phys.

51 (1998) 31.

Chem. 49 (1997) 237.

82. A. E. Ostafin and S. Lipsky, J. Chem. Phys. 98 (1993) 5408.

83. R.  A.  Holroyd,  J.  M.  Preses  and J.  C.  Hanson,  J.  Phys.  Chem.  A  101  (1997)    6931;

Radiat. Res. 135 (1993) 312.

84. W. M. Bartczak and A. Hummel, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem. 232 (1998) 7.

85. L. D. A. Siebbeles, W. M. Bartczak, M. Terrisol and A. Hummel, in Microdosimetry. An
Interdisciplinary Approach, D.  T.  Goodhead,  P.  O'Neill and  H.  G.  Menzel  (eds.),  The
Royal Society of Chemistry, Special Publ. No. 204, Cambridge, 1997, p. 11.

86. W.  M.  Bartczak  and  A.  Hummel,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  208  (1993)  232;  Radiat.  Phys.

Chem. 39 (1992) 29.

87. L.  D.  A.  Siebbeles, W.  M.  Bartczak, M.  Terrisol and A.  Hummel,    J.  Phys.  Chem.  A
101 (1997) 1619; W. M. Bartczak and A. Hummel, J. Phys. Chem. 97 (1993) 1253.

88. L. Musolf, W. M. Bartczak, M. Wojcik and A. Hummel, Radiat. Phys.  Chem.  47 (1996)

83.

89.

J. A. LaVerne, S. M. Pimblott and L. Wojnárovits, J. Phys. Chem. A 101 (1997) 1628.

38.

90. R. A. Holroyd and T. K.  Sham,  Radiat. Phys.  Chem.  51 (1998) 37; J.  Phys.  Chem.  89
(1985) 2909; R. A. Holroyd, T. K. Sham, B.-X. Yang and X.-H.  Feng,  J.  Phys.  Chem.
96 (1992) 7438.

91. F. Hirayama and S. Lipsky, J. Chem. Phys. 51  (1969) 3616; F.  Hirayama, W.  Rothman
and  S.  Lipsky,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  5  (1969)  296;    W.  Rothman,  F.  Hirayama  and  S .
Lipsky, J. Chem. Phys. 58 (1973) 1300.

92. L.  Wojnárovits  and  G.  Földiák,  Triplet  States  of  Alkanes,  in  Proceedings  of  the  5th
Working Meeting on  Radiat.  Interact.,  H.  Mai,  O.  Brede  and  R.  Mehnert  (eds.),  ZFI-
Mitteilungen, Leipzig, 1991, p. 64.

93. M. C. Sauer, Jr.,  C.  D.  Jonah,  B.  C.  Le Motais and A.  C.  Chernovitz, J.  Phys.  Chem.

92 (1988) 4099.

94. R.  Hermann, R.  Mehnert, and L.  Wojnárovits, J.  Lumin. 33 (1985) 69; Y.  Katsumura,

Y. Yoshida, S. Tagawa and Y. Tabata, Radiat. Phys. Chem. 21 (1983) 103.

95. M. A. Wickramaaratchi, J. M. Preses,  R.  A.  Holroyd and R.  E.  Weston,  Jr.  ,  J.  Chem.

Phys. 82 (1985) 4745.

96.

J.  M.  Preses  and  R.  A.  Holroyd,  J.  Chem.  Phys.  92  (1990)  2938;  S.  Dellonte,  L.
Flamingi, F. Bargialetti, L. Wojnárovits and G. Orlandi, J. Phys. Chem. 88 (1984) 58.

97. F. P. Schwarz, D. Smith, S. G. Lias, and P. Ausloos, J. Chem. Phys. 75 (1981) 3300.

98. T. S. R. Krishna and S.  Lipsky,  J. Phys. Chem. A 102 (1998) 496.

99. Y.-M.  Wang,  D.  B.  Johnston  and  S.  Lipsky,  J.  Phys.  Chem.  97  (1993)  403  and

references 3 to 10 therein.

100. L. Walter and S. Lipsky, Int. J. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 7 (1975) 175.

101. L. H. Luthjens, H. C. de Leng, L. Wojnárovits and A. Hummel, Radiat. Phys.  Chem.  26

(1985) 509.

Boston, 1991.

102. V. M. Grigoryants and V. V. Lozovoy, High Energy Chem. 30 (1996) 38.

103. Y. Tabata, Y. Ito, and S.  Tagawa, CRC Handbook of Radiation Chemistry, CRC Press,

104. H. T. Choi, D. Askew and S. Lipsky, Radiat. Phys. Chem. 19 (1982) 373.

105. L. Wojnárovits and G. Földiák, Acta Chim. Acad. Sci. Hung. 105 (1980) 27.

106. T.  Wada,  S.  Shida  and  Y.  Hatano,  J.  Phys.  Chem.  79  (1975)  561;  S.  Shida  and  Y.

Hatano, Int. J. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 8 (1974) 171.

107. L.  Wojnárovits and J.  A.  LaVerne, J.  Radioanal. Nucl.  Chem.  232 (1998) 19; J.  Phys.
Chem.  99  (1995)  3168;  J.  Phys.  Chem.  98  (1994)  6046;  J.  A.  LaVerne  and  L.
Wojnárovits, Radiat. Phys. Chem.47 (1996) 353; L.  Wojnárovits and J.  A.  LaVerne, G .
Földiák, M.  Roder and L.  Wojnárovits,  Hung.  Magy.  Kem.  Foly.  100  (1994)  184;  J .
Radioanal. Nucl. Chem. 165 (1992) 385; ibid. 164 (1992) 29.

39.

108. A. Hummel, H.  C.  de Leng,  L.  H.  Luthjens and L.  Wojnárovits, J.  Chem.  Soc.  Farad.

Trans. 90 (1994) 2459.

109. L.  H.  Luthjens,  H.  C.  de  Leng,  W.  R.  S.  Appleton  and  A.  Hummel,  Radiat.  Phys.
Chem. 36 (1990) 213; L. H.  Luthjens, P.  Dorenbos, J.  T.  M.  de Haas,  A.  Hummel and
C. W. E. van Eijk, Radiat. Phys. Chem., in press.

110. I. A. Shkrob and A. D. Trifunac, Radiat. Phys. Chem. 50 (1997) 227; J. Phys. Chem.  99

(1995) 11122.

111. B. Tilquin and and T. Baudston, Radiat. Phys. Chem. 37 (1991) 23.

112. I. A. Shkrob and and A. D. Trifunac, Radiat. Phys. Chem. 46 (1995) 83.

113. D. W. Werst and A. D. Trifunac, Chem. Phys. Lett. 137 (1987) 475.

114. K.  Toriyama,  M.  Iwasaki,  Fukaya,  H.  Muto  and  K.  Nunome,  J.  Chem.  Soc.  Chem.

Commun. (1982) 1293; J. Phys. Chem. 89 (1985) 5278.

115. V.  V.  Lozovoy,  V.  M.  Grigoryants,  O.  A.  Anisimov,  Generation  of  Excited  States  of
Solutes  in  Radiolysis  of  Dilute  Hydrocarbons,  Inst.  Chem.  Kinet.  &  Combustion,
Novosibirsk, Russia, Preprint 28, 1988 (in Russian); V. M. Grigoryants, V. V.  Lozovoy,
Yu.  D.  Chernousov,  I.  E.  Shebolaev,  V.  A.  Arutyunov,  O.  A.  Anisimov  and  Yu.  N .
Molin, Radiat. Phys. Chem. 34 (1989) 349.

116. Y. Yoshida, S. Tagawa, M. Washio, H.  Kobayashi and Y.  Tabata, Radiat. Phys.  Chem.
34 (1989) 493; ibid. 30 (1987) 83; Y. Katsumura, Y. Yoshida, S. Tagawa and Y.  Tabata,
Radiat. Phys. Chem. 21 (1983)  103; S.  Tagawa, Y.  Katsumura,  and Y.  Tabata, Radiat.
Phys. Chem. 19 (1982) 125.

117. L.  Wojnárovits, L.  H.  Luthjens,  H.  C.  de  Leng  and  A.  Hummel,  J.  Radioanal.  Nucl.

Chem. 101 (1986) 349.

118. M. C. Sauer, Jr. and C. D. Jonah, Radiat. Phys. Chem. 44 (1994) 281.

119. L. Wojnárovits and G. Földiák, ZFI-Mitteilungen (Leipzig) 43a (1981) 243.

120.  Research Needs and Opportunities  in  Radiation  Chemistry,  US-DOE  Office  of  Science,

BES-CHEM, Chesterton, Indiana, April 19-22, 1998, p. 13.

    121.  G. A. Mourou, C. P. J. Barty and M. D. Perry, Physics Today 51 (1998) 22;

S. J. Matthews, Laser Focus World 35 (1999) 155.

    122.  I. A. Shkrob, A. D. Liu, M. C. Sauer, Jr., and A. D. Trifunac, J. Phys. Chem. B,

in press.

 123. N.  Saleh,  K.  Flippo,  K.  Nemoto,  D.  Umstadter,  R.  A.  Crowell,  C.  D.  Jonah,  A.  D.

Trifunac, Rev. Sci. Instr. 71 (2000) 2305.

40.

