J. Phys. Chem. B

jp0000000

version 4, May 7/2004

Hole Scavenging and Photo-Stimulated Recombination of Electron-Hole
Pairs in Aqueous TiO2 Nanoparticles a)

I. A. Shkrob* and M. C. Sauer, Jr.
Chemistry Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439

Received: 

, 2004

The submitted manuscript has been created by the University of Chicago as
Operator  of  Argonne  National  Laboratory  ("Argonne")  under  Contract  No.
W-31-109-ENG-38  with  the  U.  S.  Department  of  Energy.    The  U.  S.
Government  retains  for  itself,  and  others  acting  on  its  behalf,  a  paid-up,
nonexclusive,  irrevocable  worldwide  license  in  said  article  to  reproduce,
prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly
and display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government.

Abstract

It is shown that 532 nm and 1064 nm laser photoexcitation of trapped electrons

generated  by  355  nm  photolysis  of  aqueous  titania  (TiO2)  nanoparticles  causes  rapid

photobleaching of their absorbance band in the visible and near IR. This photobleaching

occurs within the duration of the laser pulse (3 ns FWHM); it is caused by photoinduced

electron detrapping followed by rapid recombination of the resulting free electron and a

trapped hole. The quantum yield for the electron photobleaching is ca. 0.28 for 532 nm

and  ca.  0.024  for  1064  nm  photoexcitation.  Complete  separation  of  the  spectral

contributions from trapped electron and hole is demonstrated using glycerol as a selective

hole scavenger. When glycerol is added to the solution, some light-absorbing holes are

scavenged promptly within the duration of the 355 nm photoexcitation pulse, some are

scavenged at a slower rate over the first 200 ns after the 355 nm pulse, and the rest are

not scavenged, even at high concentration of the scavenger (> 10 vol %). A reaction with

chemi- and physi- sorbed glycerol would account for the prompt and the slow hole decay,

respectively. The implications of these results are discussed.

___________________________________________________________________________________
1  Work  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the  Office  of  Science,  Division  of  Chemical  Science,  US-DOE
under contract number W-31-109-ENG-38.
*  To  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed:  Tel  630-252-9516,  FAX  630-2524993,  e-mail:
shkrob@anl.gov.

1.

1. Introduction.

Semiconducting metal oxide nanoparticles, such as aqueous TiO2 nanoparticles,

find numerous applications in photovoltaics and photocatalysis [1,2,3]. Photoexcitation of

these  nanoparticles  in  the  UV  yields  electron-hole  pairs  that  rapidly  recombine;  this

recombination competes with trapping of the free charges by coordination defects at the

surface and by lattice defects in the nanoparticle bulk. Most of these electrons and holes

recombine within the first few tens of picoseconds after the photoexcitation event. [4,5,6]

However, conduction band (CB) electrons injected from dye molecules chemisorbed at

the surface of nanocrystalline TiO2 films can be observed for more than 1 ns, using time-

resolved infrared (IR) [7] and terahertz (THz) [8] spectroscopies, suggesting relatively

inefficient electron trapping rates in these high-quality films. Recent results of Turner et

al. [8] suggest that these (nominally, "conduction band") electrons exhibit features that

are  more  consistent  with  Anderson  localization  and  transport  by  thermally-activated

hopping.  In  particular,  THz  conductivity  is  dominated  by  backscattering,  and  the

electrons have strikingly non-Drude behavior. "Hot" electrons observed in the first 330 fs

after  the  electron  injection  are  more  Drude-like,  [8]  and  only  such  species  can  be

regarded as "free" CB electrons.

In TiO2 nanoparticles, the primary charges rapidly descend into traps, eventually

yielding  well-localized  species  that  decay  slowly  by  bimolecular  and  geminate
recombination  on  a  time  scale  of  10-9-10-1  s.  [4,5,6,9-14]  In  the  low  charge  density
regime, the time profile of this decay exhibits dispersive  t −1 2/

 kinetics typical of trap-to-

trap  hopping  observed  for  other  disordered  systems.  [14,15]  In  the  following,  these

electrons and holes will be referred to as "mobile" since these species can migrate, albeit

slowly,  and  recombine  with  each  other.  We  stress  that  these  localized  species  are

different from the free carriers. While some authors believe that free CB electrons exist in

TiO2  nanoparticles  for  indefinite  time,  time-resolved  conductivity  studies  suggest  the

opposite (see below). With other techniques, it may be difficult to distinguish between

the “free” carriers and band-tail charges in shallow traps (from which thermal emission of

the  free  carriers  can  readily  occur).  The  preceding  does  not  mean  that  metastable  CB

electrons  cannot  occur  in  TiO2  under  favorable  conditions  (e.g.,  such  species  were

observed  in  the  diffuse  reflectance  IR  spectra  of  heat-  and  oxygen-  treated,  UV-

2.

illuminated hydrated rutile surfaces); [16] the point is that such long-lived species do not

occur in aqueous TiO2 nanoparticles.

Following the rapid trapping of free carriers by traps in the TiO2 nanoparticles (<

200 fs, [4] <330 fs [8]), the mobility of the electron is orders of magnitude lower [17,18]

than the drift and Hall electron mobilities observed in high-quality anatase films. [19]

From the extensive data on microwave (GHz) photoconductivity obtained by Warman

and coworkers [17,18] and Martin et al. [20] it appears that the charge migration in these
nanoparticles (typical mobilities are 5x10-4 cm2/Vs  for  holes  and  10-3-10-1 cm2/Vs  for

electrons, depending on the sample) [17,18] is facilitated either by small polaron hopping

or  by  thermal  emission  of  free  carriers  from  shallow  traps;  [18]  direct  trap-to-trap

hopping  is  believed  to  be  inefficient  at  room  temperature  (though,  it  may  be  more

important at cryogenic temperatures). [18] The depth of the traps has been estimated by

different  authors  as  being  from  60-100  meV  [20,21]  to  400-600  meV  [16,22,23]  (the

higher  estimates  are  clearly  incompatible  with  the  thermal  emission  mechanism

mentioned  above).  Many  types  of  electron  traps  may  coexist  in  the  aqueous

nanoparticles,  and  the  scatter  in  the  estimates  reflects  the  fact  that  different  electron

populations are observed in different experiments. No single species can explain all of the

results.

Most of the dynamic and structural studies of "electrons" and "holes" in titania

nanoparticles are done on these trapped species. Though the trapped charges participate

in photocatalysis, they are less reactive than their rapidly migrating, energetic precursors.

For  this  reason,  photocatalytic  reactions  that  involve  molecules  in  the  solution  are

relatively inefficient, [1,2] as only trapped charges can react with such molecules. On the

other hand, photooxidation and photoreduction of molecules that are chemisorbed on the

nanoparticle surface can be very rapid and efficient (see, for example, refs. [2,4,7,12]) as

these processes are due to reaction with the free carriers.

The predominant trapped-electron centers are interior and surface TiIII centers that

yield,  respectively,  narrow  symmetric  and  broad  asymmetric  lines  in  Electron

Paramagnetic  Resonance  (EPR)  spectra  from  UV-irradiated  frozen  solutions  of  TiO2

nanoparticles at 4-77 K. [3,24,25,26] In the absence of the hole scavenger, most of the

electrons in TiO2 nanoparticles recombine with the holes; the only species that survive in

3.

the low-temperature photoilluminated samples are interior electrons (ca. one center per

nanoparticle). In the presence of hole scavengers, this recombination is inhibited and both
types  of  TiIII centers are observed by EPR spectroscopy. [3,24,26] In acidic solutions,

most  of  the  electrons  are  trapped  at  the  surface  of  TiO2  nanoparticles.  These  surface

centers were not observed in alkaline solutions [3,24] and in nanoparticles whose surface

is  modified  by  chelating  agents,  such  as  cysteine.  [3,25]  Frequently,  the  surface

modification  results  in  the  formation  of  new  types  of  surface  electron  centers,  with

different EPR spectra. [3,25,26]

The structure of the hole center(s) has not yet been definitively established. The

holes are trapped mainly at the surface of the TiO2 nanoparticle and, consequently, their

EPR spectra depend strongly on the surface treatment. All of these centers seem to be O
IV − • radical and adsorbed hydroxyl,  HOads

2p radicals, such as  Ti

 [3,24,26] According

O

•

to Ishibashi et al., [27] the quantum yield of the latter species is relatively small (ca. 0.7%

of  the  quantum  yield  for  the  iodide-oxidizing  mobile  hole,  see  below),  however,  this

radical is more reactive towards certain substrates. Gao et al. [28] demonstrated that only

•
HOads

 can oxidize aliphatic monohydroxy alcohols (such as methanol) in aqueous TiO2

nanoparticle solutions, whereas the predominant type of the hole in photoexcited TiO2

does not react with these alcohols on the microsecond time scale. [29]Interestingly, rapid

reaction of holes with alcohols was observed for clean TiO2 surfaces exposed to alcohols,

both as liquid and vapor, by time resolved GHz conductivity [18] and IR spectroscopy,

respectively. [30] These results, as well as EPR studies of Micic et al. [26] suggest that

the  holes  are  scavenged  by  alkoxy  groups  anchored  at  the  titania  surface  [30,31].

Hydrolysis of these groups by water drastically reduces hole scavenging efficiency.

Surprisingly little has been done to ascertain light absorption properties of these

electrons and holes since the initial transient absorbance (TA) studies carried out in the

early  1980's.  [6-12]  At  pH=3-4,  the  absorption  spectrum  of  photoexcited  TiO2

nanoparticles is an asymmetric broad band with a maximum at 600-650 nm that extends

to the IR. [6] In acidic or alkaline solutions containing hole scavenger (e.g., polyvinyl

alcohol), [9-12] it is a broader, more symmetric band centered at 900-1000 nm. [32] A

very similar band was observed by (i) electrochemical reduction of TiO2 nanocrystalline

films (at any pH and salinity of the solution in contact with the film), [33] (ii) by injection

4.

of radiolytically-generated hydrated electrons into TiO2 nanoparticles in pH=3 solutions,

[34] and (iii) in steady-state UV photolysis of the solutions containing a hole scavenger

(typically, an alcohol [9-13] or carboxylic acid [35]). From these convergent results, it

appears  that  the  900  nm  band  is  from  the  relatively  long-lived  trapped  electrons.

However, it remains unexplained why the TA spectra observed from photoexcited TiO2

nanoparticles look different from this characteristic 900 nm spectrum.

Recently, TA spectra of photoexcited bare TiO2 nanoparticles (in transmission)

and  nanocrystalline  films  (in  diffuse  reflection)  in  the  400-700  nm  region  became

available on the pico- and femto- second time scales, by using pump-probe ultrafast laser

spectroscopy.  [4,5,36,37]  Though  no  two  such  TA  spectra  look  alike  (as  there  is

considerable  variation  with  the  particle  size,  surface  treatment,  etc.),  all  of  these

picosecond  TA  spectra  exhibit  considerable  evolution  over  the  first  few  tens  of

picoseconds and change little afterwards, suggesting that the descent to deeper traps and

equilibration of the electrons and holes between different traps is largely over in 1-10 ps.

The  spectral  features  observed  on  nanosecond  to  millisecond  time  scales  are  fully

developed by that delay time. [4,6]

Most workers, following the original suggestion by Graetzel and coworkers [6]

and  Henglein,  [9]  assumed  that  the  400-1000  nm  absorbance  from  photoexcited  TiO2

nanoparticles originated from trapped electrons exclusively. Such a rationale implies that

more  than  one  species  of  light-absorbing  trapped  "electrons"  (i.e.,  Ti III   centers)

contributes to the TA spectra: one kind of traps yields the 900 nm centered spectrum,

another  kind  yields  the  650  nm  centered  spectrum.  Based  on  the  EPR  spectroscopy

studies  discussed  above,  [3,24,26]  one  may  expect  that  the  900  nm  band  is  from  the

electrons  that  are  trapped  in  the  nanoparticle  interior,  whereas  the  650  nm  band  is

composite  (originating  both  from  the  interior  and  surface-trapped  electrons).  Such  a

rationale,  however,  seems  to  be  at  odds  with  the  fact  that  the  TA  spectrum  changes

slightly, if at all, over the first 1 ms after the UV photoexcitation. If different kinds of

trapped electrons originate from different environments, why would all such electrons

decay in exactly the same way over many decades in time? If different subspecies of the

"electron" originate from different traps on the same nanoparticle, what prevents the more

energetic "electron" from descending to deeper traps?

5.

In  this  work,  we  demonstrate  selective  removal  of  a  subset  of  light-absorbing

species  in  acidic  solutions  of  photoexcited  TiO2  nanoparticles  by  using  glycerol  as  a

scavenger. We present several lines of evidence suggesting that a trapped hole rather than

the "electron" is the progenitor of the 650 nm band. The absorption spectrum of the hole

in  the  visible  resembles  the  spectrum  of  oxidizing  species  in  "platinized"  TiO2

nanoparticles  observed  by  Bahnemann  et  al.  [10,11,12]  Our  study  suggests  that  the

(trapped)  electron  in  photoexcited  TiO2  nanoparticles  has  the  same  spectrum  as  the

electron obtained by radiolytic (e.g., ref. 34) and electrochemical (e.g., ref. 33) reduction

of TiO2 nanoparticles and nanocrystalline films.  Photoexcitation of this electron at 532

and  1064  nm  causes  its  detrapping  followed  by  rapid  recombination  with  the  hole.

Scavenging of the hole by glycerol reduces the quantum yield of this photostimulated

recombination to the same degree it reduces the absorption of the hole. To save space,

Figs. 1S to 7S are placed in the Supporting Information.

2. Experimental.

Transient absorbance was observed following 355 nm laser photoexcitation of N2-
saturated  2.4x10-4  M  aqueous  solution  of  4.6±0.5  nm  diameter  anatase  nanoparticles

(1400 units of TiO2 per particle) at pH=4. This solution was prepared and characterized

as described in ref. [38]. The sample contained 45 ppm of aluminum by volume (that

would  be  equivalent  to  7  atoms  per  particle  if  Al III   were  incorporated  into  the  TiO2

nanoparticle) and it is possible that vis-absorbing holes observed in this study originated

from a  Ti

IV

−

−
O Al

III

 or some other impurity center (section 4.3). All other chemicals

were obtained in their purest form available from Aldrich and used as received.

The excitation pulse L1 (355 nm, 3 ns FWHM, 8 mJ ) that was used to induce

charge  separation  in  TiO2  was  derived  from  the  third  harmonic  of  a  Nd:YAG  laser

(Quantel Brilliant). The second excitation pulse (L2) of 532 nm (6 ns FWHM, 10-50 mJ)

and 1064 nm light (6 ns FWHM, 90 mJ) used to photoexcite trapped electrons in TiO2

was derived from the second and the first harmonic, respectively, of another Nd:YAG

laser  (Continuum  model  8010).  This  electron-excitation  pulse  was  delayed  in  time

relative to the 355 nm pulse; the time jitter between these pulses was < 3 ns.

6.

The analyzing light from a superpulsed 70 W Xe arc lamp was filtered and then
crossed at 45o with the 355 nm laser beam inside a 1.35 mm optical path flow cell with

suprasil windows (a 5.6 mm diameter aperture was used for light masking). The duration
of the analyzing light pulse was 300 µs. The optical density (OD) of the solution at 355
nm was 0.8. The 532 nm (or 1064 nm) beam was crossed with the 335 nm beam at 25o,

so that the analyzing light, the UV beam and the 532 (1064) nm beams made the angles
of 31o, -14o, and +11o with the normal to the cell window, respectively.

The transmitted light was passed through an appropriate glass cutoff filter placed

before the sample,  focussed, passed through the sample, and then passed through another

appropriate cutoff glass filter and a grating monochromator (SPEX Minimate; 450 to 950
nm). For detection at wavelengths  λ > 1 µm, the analyzing light was passed through a 4

cm optical path water filter or a 400-700 nm bandpass dielectric filter to reduce the heat
transfer to the sample. For detection at 1.0-1.35 µm, a set of narrowband (10 nm FWHM)
interference filters at increments of 50 nm was used. The cutoff of 1.35 µm was due to
the  strong  IR  absorbance  of  water.  For  detection  near  1  µm,  a  0o  dielectric  mirror

reflecting at 1064 nm was inserted before the detector to reduce the leakage of the first

Nd:YAG harmonic. A fast Si photodiode (EG&G model FND-100Q) biased at -90 V was
used to detect the TA for  λ≤ 1.1 µm. For detection at  λ≥ 1.1 µm, a fast Ge photodiode

(Germanium  Power  model  GMP-566)  biased  at  -10  V  or  an  InGaAs  photodiode

(Germanium Power model GAP-520) biased at -5 V was used. The latter photodiode is

fast, but its temporal response is strongly wavelength dependent. [39] The Ge photodiode

has  a  spectrally  flat  temporal  response,  [39]  however,  it  is  slower  than  the  other  two
photodiodes,  and  TA  kinetics  acquired  at  delay  time  t <30  ns  were  distorted.

Furthermore,  a  thermal  lensing  effect  induced  by  the  absorption  of  355  nm  pulse

unevenly refracted the IR light across the sample causing a parasitic transient that lived

for  the  first  20  ns  after  the  UV  photoexcitation.  Thus,  our  near  IR  spectra  were  not

trustworthy at these short delay times.

The photodiode signal was amplified 10 times using a Comlinear model CLC449

1.2 GHz opamp and sampled using a Tektronix TD360 digital oscilloscope or a Tektronix
DSA-601 digital signal analyzer. Absorption signals as small as 10-4 can be studied with

7.

this setup. Light emission from the sample induced by the 355, 532, and 1064 nm laser

light  alone  was  subtracted  from  the  absorbance  signal.  In  the  following,  355  nm  light
induced TA kinetics are denoted  ∆OD tλ( ), transient absorbance induced by both 355 nm
), where  t21 is the delay
(
(L1) and 532 nm or 1064 nm (L2) light is denoted  ∆OD t

21;

L
λ

t

2

time between the laser pulses L2 and L1, and

∆∆

(
OD t
λ

;

t

21

) =

∆

(
L
OD t
λ

2

;

t

21

) −

∆

OD t
λ

( ) 

(1)

 is the difference trace.

The two-pulse experiment was complicated by laser-induced precipitation of TiO2

nanoparticles:  Regardless  of  the  flow  rate  of  the  solution,  prolonged  355  nm  laser

irradiation caused the deposition of a thin, transparent film of TiO2 particles on the cell

windows, due to the action of a shock wave generated by the 355 nm laser. This deposit

can be removed by boiling the suprasil windows in concentrated HNO3 for 2-3 h. Though

this deposit had no discernible effect on the TA kinetics observed after the 355 nm pulse,

a  strong,  persistent  TA  signal  in  the  visible  was  observed  when  this  deposit  was

photoexcited  by  532  nm  light  10-100  ns  after  the  355  nm  pulse.  For  this  reason,  the

exposure of the cell windows was limited to < 1000 pulses and the cell was periodically

filled  with  pure  water  to  monitor  for  the  formation  of  the  film  deposit.  For  the  same

reason, a cell with detachable optical windows has been used. The typical flow rate was
0.5-2 cm3/min and the repetition rate of the laser was 1-2 Hz.

In  some  experiments,  a  hole  scavenger  (1-5  vol  %  glycerol)  was  added  to  the

reaction mixture. The C-centered radicals generated in the photooxidation of glycerol by
holes in the TiO2 nanoparticles do not absorb light at  λ>400 nm. To prevent the buildup

of  a  permanent  trapped-electron  absorbance  during  continuous  laser  photolysis,  the

sample was saturated with O2. The oxygen reacts with the electrons on a millisecond time

scale,  [40]  making  the  photosystem  reversible.  Control  experiments  with  N2-saturated

TiO2 nanoparticle solutions showed that the oxygen does not react with the electrons on
the time scale of our study (< 10 µs, Figs. 1S and 2S). In another control experiment, an

N2-saturated,  glycerol-containing  solution  of  TiO2  nanoparticles  was  continuously

illuminated  with  300-400  nm  light  from  the  Xe  arc  lamp  for  1  h  to  induce  a  strong

8.

absorbance from the trapped electrons (the OD of this solution at 400-900 nm was 0.07-

0.1) and then TA kinetics were obtained following the 532 nm laser photoexcitation. No

532  nm  light  induced  transient  photobleaching  was  observed,  nor  did  we  observe  any

photobleaching when the UV-photolysed N2-saturated glycerol solution was illuminated

with 1-5 mW of  visible light for 1-2 h.

Since under the conditions of our TA experiment < 1-2 electron-hole pairs per

particle  were  present  at  the  end  of  the  355  nm  pulse,  [31]  scavenging  of  the  hole  by

glycerol results in a long lived TA signal from  electrons which lack hole partners on the

same nanoparticle (referred to as the "persistent" electron in the following).

3. Results.

3.1. Single pulse 355 nm photoexcitation.

Fig. 1 shows typical TA kinetics observed in 355 nm laser photolysis of aqueous
TiO2 nanoparticles ( λ= 700 nm). The initial "spike" whose time profile closely follows

the temporal response function of the setup (Fig. 1a) is rapidly succeeded by the power
law  t −α decay with α ≈0.46 (Fig. 1b). This slow decay kinetics can be followed out to at
least 100 µs. Exactly the same time profiles of transient absorbance are observed across
entire the visible, for  t >5 ns (Fig. 1S), and in the near IR, for  t >20 ns (Fig. 2S). Since

all of these time profiles are identical, there is no time evolution of the TA spectrum. In

Fig. 2, normalized TA spectra in the visible obtained at different delay times are plotted

together  (Fig.  3a  shows  the  typical  evolution  of  the  TA  spectra  prior  to  the

normalization). All of these spectra are identical within the experimental scatter (see also

Fig. 4a below). As seen from Fig. 2S, the same applies to the TA spectra obtained in the
near IR (filled diamonds in Fig. 2). For  λ> 900 nm, minor changes in the spectrum were

observed within the first 20 ns. These changes turned out to be a combined effect of the

slow photoresponse of the Ge photodiode [39] and wavelength-dependent refraction of

the analyzing light by a thermal lens in the sample (section 2).

Qualitatively  similar  TA  spectra  (400-900  nm)  and  TA  kinetics  (<  1  µs)  were

observed for TiO2 nanoparticles in acidic solutions by previous workers. [9-12] Unlike

some of these workers (see, for example, Rothenberger et al. [6] and Bahneman et al.

9.

[12]) we found no evidence of time evolution for TA spectra over the first 10 µs after the

photoexcitation, both in N2- and O2-saturated solutions. Neither did we observe spectral

changes when electron scavengers, such as dimethyl sulfoxide, tetranitromethane, SF6,

and N2O were added to the aqueous solution. Apparently, trapped electrons in the TiO2

nanoparticles  reacted  too  slowly  with  these  scavengers.  Yet  the  reaction  eventually

occurred since addition of these scavengers prevented the development of permanent blue

coloration from the trapped electron in the presence of hydroxylic hole scavengers. We

stress that the signal-to-noise ratio in our TA kinetic traces was better than in the previous

experiments, and we are confident that if there were a spectral evolution similar to that

observed in refs. 6 and 12, it would be observed using our TA setup.

As  mentioned  above,  most  researchers  attribute  the  spectrum  shown  in  Fig.  2,

trace (iii), to trapped electrons, though some studies suggested that trapped holes may

also absorb in the visible. [10,11,12] Our results suggest that the TA spectrum shown in

Fig. 2 is a composite spectrum of the absorbances from the electron and the hole. The

resulting TA spectrum can be decomposed into the individual components by addition of

a suitable hole scavenger, as discussed below:

Addition of 5 vol % of hole scavenger, glycerol, to oxygenated solution of TiO2

nanoparticles  (see  section  2)  strongly  reduces  the  TA  signal  in  the  visible  and

simultaneously increases the TA signal in the near IR, as shown in Fig. 3b (compare with

the  TA  spectra  in  Fig.  3a  obtained  under  the  same  excitation  conditions  and  time

windows for an O2-saturated solution without the hole scavenger). Even the prompt TA

spectrum obtained at the end of the 3 ns FWHM, 355 nm pulse is quite different from the

TA spectrum shown in Fig. 3a. Further evolution occurs within the first 200 ns after the

355 nm photoexcitation pulse; at later delay times the TA spectrum stops changing (Fig.

3b). Importantly, the addition of the hole scavenger has almost no effect on the shape of
the TA spectrum for λ>900 nm. This point can be demonstrated by comparing the TA

spectra obtained at different delay times at 900-1300 nm, as shown in Fig. 3S. In Figs. 4a

and 4b, the TA spectra shown in Fig. 3 were normalized at 900 nm. Without glycerol, all

normalized the spectra are the same. For the glycerol solution, a spectral component in

the  visible  is  missing  from  the  onset.  At  later  delay  times,  more  of  this  component  is

10.

missing, as the species which absorbs light in the visible decays on a sub-microsecond

time scale. This point is illustrated in Fig. 4S, where 450-950 nm TA kinetics in 5 vol %

glycerol solution are normalized at 200 ns (by which delay time the spectral evolution is

over).  These  normalized  kinetics  diverge  in  the  first  50  ns  after  the  photoexcitation,

suggesting rapid spectral evolution on this short time scale.

To obtain the spectrum of the short-lived species, normalized TA spectra obtained

at t<200 ns (Fig. 4b) were subtracted from the normalized spectrum obtained at t>200 ns

(Fig. 5a,  trace (ii)). As shown in Fig. 5b, the resulting difference traces do not change in

shape with the delay time, which implies that the missing spectral component (trace (i) in

Fig. 5b) originates from a single light-absorbing species. Eventually (at t> 200 ns), all of

this species decays and the spectrum shown by trace (ii) in Figs. 5a and 5b is obtained.

This "final" TA spectrum does not depend on the glycerol concentration (1 to 10 vol %).

Since the carbon-centered radicals derived from glycerol do not absorb in the visible, this

final  spectrum  is  mainly  from  a  trapped  electron  (though,  as  shown  below,  a  small

fraction of holes also contributes to the long-lived TA signal).

Spectra from trapped electrons similar to the TA spectrum shown by trace (ii) in

Fig. 5b have been observed by other researchers, in particular, (i) in laser photolysis of

basic solutions of TiO2 nanoparticles, [32] (ii) in steady-state UV photolysis (e.g., refs. 9,

32,  and  35)  and  pulse  radiolysis  [34]  of  acidic  TiO2  solutions,  and  (iii)  by

spectrophotometry of electrochemically reduced thin TiO2 films in contact with basic or

acidic  solutions  [33].  In  all  of  these  experiments,  the  trapped  holes  either  were  not

generated or promptly scavenged after their generation. Apparently, it is the presence of

the hole on the aqueous TiO2 nanoparticle which is responsible for the difference in the

TA spectra shown in Figs. 3a and 3b. The difference traces shown in Fig. 5a thereby give

the absorption spectrum of the hole (trace (i) in Figs. 2 and 5b). These spectra, with peak

absorbances  at  ca.  480  nm  and  gradual  decrease  in  absorbance  towards  the  near  IR,

strikingly resemble the absorption spectra of the species obtained by Bahnemann et al.

[10,11,12]  by  photoexcitation  of  "platinized"  TiO2  nanoparticles  (section  4.3).  The

islands  of  metallic  Pt  deposited  on  the  nanoparticle  surface  serve  as  efficient  electron

11.

traps, and Bahnemann et al. attribute the TA spectra observed from the "platinized" TiO2

nanoparticles to holes.

Importantly, a weighted sum of the spectral contributions from the "hole" (trace

(i) in Fig. 5b) and the "electron" (trace (ii) in Fig. 5b) shown in Figs. 2 and 5a exactly

reproduces  the  TA  spectrum  observed  in  the  TiO2  nanoparticle  solution  that  does  not

contain glycerol (trace (i) in Fig. 5a and trace (iii) in Fig. 2). Thus, both of the spectral

components are also present in the solution that does not contain glycerol.

The  data  shown  in  Fig.  4b  can  be  used  to  estimate  the  proportions  of  the  hole

scavenging  during  and  after  the  photoexcitation  pulse.  The  normalization  at  900  nm,

where the hole does not absorb, allows a determination of the decrease in the absorption

in  the  visible  caused  by  scavenging  of  the  hole.  The  absorbances  for  the  longest  time

window  shown  in  Fig.  4b  are  essentially  all  due  to  electrons  only,  because  as  shown

below, only 5-10% of the holes are not scavenged by 5 vol % glycerol. Therefore, the

difference between traces (i) and (ii) is a measure of the “total” scavengeable holes. For

example, the difference between trace (i) and the 9-13 ns data (open circles) is a measure

of the holes promptly scavenged during the 355 nm laser pulse. In this way we obtain that

ca. 45-50% of the light absorbing holes are scavenged within the duration of the 355 nm

photoexcitation pulse, while another 45% are scavenged over the first 200 ns after the

photoexcitation (these percentages are given relative to the electron concentration present

at the beginning of this reaction, Fig. 4b). Since most of the holes present by the end of

the 355 nm pulse decay by recombination rather than this slow scavenging (see Fig. 9

below), such a reaction contributes very little to the net yield of persistent electrons at
t >200 ns.

As the scavenger concentration increases (Figs. 6a and 5S), the fraction  Φ

e   of
trapped  electrons  observed  at  λ≥ 900  nm  that  avoid  recombination  with  the  hole  and

persist at t> 300 ns steadily increases from ca. 10% towards ca. 50% (see Figs. 7a and

5S(a) and Fig. 2 in ref. 31). This fraction was determined by taking the ratio of the near
IR absorbance at 300-350 ns and the (maximum) prompt absorbance  ∆ODλ

maxat the end

of the 355 nm pulse. Exactly the same fractions  Φ

e  were obtained at  λ=900 nm, 1100

12.

nm,  and  1300  nm  (Fig.  5S(c)),  i.e.,  across  the  whole  spectral  range  where  the  TA
spectrum  is  dominated  by  the  electron  absorption.  The  increase  in  the  fraction  Φ

e   of

persistent electrons follows the Stern-Volmer law (Figs. 7a and 5S(c))

Φ

e

≈

+
A B

(
1

+

[

b

K glycerol

)
]

(2)

with  the  half-effect  concentration  Kb

−1of  0.435  M  (A  and  B  are  empirical  constants).

Very  similar  behavior  was  observed  for  other  polyhydroxy  hole  scavengers,  such  as

carbohydrates. [31] As shown elsewhere, the constant  Kb varies over several orders of

magnitude, depending on the number of the anchoring HO groups. On the other hand,

addition  of  1-50  vol  %  of  monohydroxy  alcohols  has  no  effect  on  the  TA  kinetics

observed  in  the  visible  (where  both  the  hole  and  the  electron  absorb  light)  or  near  IR

(where only electrons absorb light). This result has been previously obtained by Rabani et

al.,  [29]  and  it  is  fully  confirmed  in  the  present  work.  The  same  negative  result  was

obtained for acetic and malonic acid, which were commonly used as hole scavengers in

previous photochemical studies. [35] Neither the TA signal from the hole decreases, nor

the  TA  signal  from  the  electrons  increases.  Apparently,  hole  scavenging  by  these

compounds is slow and inefficient.

Importantly, when the plateau absorbance attained at  t >300 ns is subtracted from

the 900-1300 nm kinetics and the resulting difference traces are normalized at the TA

signal maximum, the resulting  f

tλ( ) kinetics

( ) =
t

f
λ

∆
OD t
λ
∆
max
OD
λ

( ) −
−

∆
∆

=(
=(

OD t
λ
OD t
λ

330
330

)
ns
)
ns

are identical within the experimental error. This point is illustrated in Fig. 7b (for  λ= 900
nm)  and  Figs.  5S(a)  and  5S(b)  (for  λ= 1100  nm  and  λ= 1300 nm, respectively). We

conclude that the decay kinetics of electrons in the presence of a hole scavenger are a

weighted sum of a constant and the decay kinetics obtained in the absence of the hole

scavenger.

These observations suggests that there is a subset of holes which are scavenged

very rapidly by the glycerol (well within the duration of the photoexcitation pulse) or,

(3)

13.

perhaps, whose generation is prevented by the presence of glycerol (if the latter reacts

with  their  short-lived  precursor).  [41]  Thus,  in  the  glycerol  solution,  the  TA  signal  at
λ≥ 900  nm  originates  from  two  types  of  trapped  electrons:  (i)  the  persistent  electron

residing  on  a  nanoparticle  with  a  hole  removed  or  transformed  in  a  reaction  with  the

scavenger and (ii) relatively short-lived electron residing on the nanoparticle which still

has a hole. Naturally, for the latter electrons, the decay kinetics are exactly the same as

those for the electron on a TiO2 nanoparticle in the aqueous solution.

The same effect, viz. the relative increase in the long-lived, persistent TA signal at

t>200 ns with the addition of a hole scavenger, was observed across the entire visible

range (where both the electron and the hole absorb light); see Figs. 6b, 6c, and 7a. The
magnitude of this effect increases with increasing wavelength  λ of the analyzing light. In
Fig. 7a, the concentration dependencies for  ∆ODλ at 330-350 ns for  λ= 470, 600, and

900 nm are fit by the dependencies given by the left hand side of eq. (2) with the same

constant  Kb for all three wavelengths. This plot indicates that the reaction with glycerol

trades  the  spectral  contribution  from  the  hole  for  the  spectral  contribution  from  the

persistent electron which, once formed, does not decay on the microsecond time scale.
The same point is demonstrated by Fig. 8a, where the "final" absorbances  ∆OD470
 and
  attained at  t =330-350 ns are plotted as a function of the "final" optical density
∆OD600
∆OD900  for several glycerol concentrations. These plots are linear. The intercepts of these

plots correspond to the 470 nm and 600 nm absorbances that originate from the holes that

cannot  be  scavenged  by  glycerol  (i.e.,  whose  absorbances  cannot  be  traded  for  the

electron absorbance) even when a large concentration of glycerol is added to the reaction

mixture. The TA signals from these "unscavengeable" holes are shown in Fig. 8b (with

the  arrows  pointing  to  the  corresponding  values).  Traces  (i)  and  (ii)  in  Fig.  8b  are

normalized spectra of the "electron" and the hole given by traces (i) and (ii) in Fig. 2,

respectively. Apparently, this "electron" spectrum is, in fact, composite, because some

light-absorbing holes are not scavenged by glycerol on the microsecond time scale. The

"scavengeable" (> 90 %) and "unscavengeable" (< 10%) holes have similar TA spectra.

Assuming that these absorption spectra are identical, the residual hole spectrum trace (ii)

can be subtracted from the "final" spectrum, trace (i), in the same figure. This procedure

14.

gives a bell-shaped spectrum of the trapped electron alone (trace (iii) in Fig. 8b). The

same spectrum is shown in Fig. 2, trace (iv). Since any TA spectrum which is a linear

combination of traces (i) and (ii) in Fig. 2 is also a linear combination of traces (ii) and

(iv) in the same figure, our conclusion that the TA spectrum in water (trace (iii) in Fig. 2)

is the composite spectrum of the electron and the hole is still correct.

As mentioned above, ca. 45-50% of the vis-light absorbing holes are scavenged

by glycerol promptly and the remaining holes are scavenged slowly over the first 200 ns

after the photoexcitation (Fig. 4b). The kinetics of this slow hole-scavenging reaction can

be  observed  by  normalizing  the  kinetic  trace  obtained  in  the  visible  (where  both  the
electron and the hole absorb, Fig. 6b) and at  λ=900 nm (where only the electron absorbs,

Fig. 6a) by the "final" absorbance attained at t=330-350 ns and then taking the difference

of these two normalized traces:

( ) =

g t
λ

( )
∆
OD t
λ
=(
330

∆

OD t
λ

)

 

ns

−

∆

( )
OD t
900
=(

330

∆

OD t
900

)

 

ns

(4)

This procedure removes the contribution to TA from the electrons and "unscavengeable"

holes,  i.e.  the  resulting  traces  are  the  decay  kinetics  of  the  "scavengeable"  holes.  The

resulting traces are shown in Fig. 9. To facilitate the comparison between these kinetics,

the traces were normalized at the maximum. It is remarkable that these decay kinetics

barely change as a function of glycerol concentration. Furthermore, most of this decay is

due to recombination of the holes with the electrons. The recombination decay of these
electrons in the absence of scavenger (as observed at  λ= 900 nm) is given by trace (i) in
Fig. 9; the decay kinetics of the holes (at  λ= 600 nm) can be obtained by weighting these
kinetics by an exponential function with a time constant τ

h of ca. 130 ns (trace (ii) in Fig.

9).

The fact that this "slow" hole-scavenging reaction shows almost no dependence

on  the  glycerol  concentration  suggests  that  this  reaction  does  not  involve  a  glycerol

molecule  in  solution,  as  otherwise  the  kinetic  mass  law  would  be  obeyed.  Rather,  it

should involve a physisorbed glycerol molecule. Once the coverage of the nanoparticle

by  glycerol  is  total  (which  occurs  at  0.3-0.7  vol  %),  the  reaction  rate  cannot  increase

15.

further. Thus, we suggest that hole scavenging by glycerol (and polyols, in general) is

two-stage: [31] First, the holes are promptly scavenged by chemisorbed molecules that

chelate the titanium cation at the nanoparticle surface (see ref. 31 for more detail). This

reaction  is  very  rapid  (  taking  perhaps  <  10  ps);  [4]  it  competes  with  charge

recombination  and  trapping  of  the  hole  by  other  surface  defects.  Once  this  ultrafast

reaction is over, the surviving holes (which descended to deep traps) slowly react with

physisorbed  polyol  molecules  by  H-abstraction  or  charge  transfer.  The  residual  holes

(which are a small fraction of the total) are trapped by lattice defects in the subsurface or

the interior of the nanoparticle and cannot react with physi- or chemi-sorbed polyols (on

the microsecond time scale). Previously, Bahnemann et al. [12] used nanosecond flash

photolysis  to  study  hole  scavenging  by  thiocyanate  and  dichloroacetate,  and  reached

similar conclusions: Some holes react with the adsorbed hole scavengers promptly within

the duration of the laser pulse (ultrafast pump-probe spectroscopy studies of Bowman et

al. [4] suggest that for thiocyanate, this prompt reaction occurs on the femtosecond time

scale), some holes react more slowly (at least, for dichloroacetate), and some holes do not

react at all, at any concentration of the hole scavenger. While not all of our observations

are in perfect agreement with the study of Bahnemann et al. [12] (e.g., we did not observe

the  effect  of  oxygen  on  the  evolution  of  TA  spectra),  the  general  features  of  the  hole

dynamics observed in the present work (two-stage hole scavenging, different subspecies

of these holes, the absorbance from the holes in the visible) are strikingly similar to those

observed in ref. 12, despite the different experimental approach and the different nature

of the hole scavengers.

Since the TA spectrum shown in trace (iii) in  Fig. 2 is composite, an explanation

is due as to why in the absence of a hole scavenger both of the species that contribute to

this  spectrum  decay  in  exactly  the  same  manner  over  many  decades  in  time.  This

behavior  is  readily  accounted  for  provided  that  the  contributing  absorbances  originate

from the electron and the hole, as suggested above. Indeed, if the latter species decay by

recombination,  there  would  always  be  a  parity  between  their  concentrations.  Another

piece  of  evidence  favoring  this  scenario  is  given  in  the  next  section  which  deals  with

photostimulated recombination of the electron-hole pairs.

16.

3.2. 532 and 1064 nm light induced  photobleaching of the TA absorbance.

Fig. 10a demonstrates a change in the TA kinetics induced by a short pulse of 532
light applied at delay time  t21=24 ns following 355 nm photoexcitation ( λ= 600 nm). In
this plot, trace (i) shows the decay kinetics without the 532 nm pulse, trace (ii) shows the

decay kinetics with the 532 nm pulse, and trace (iii) shows the difference kinetics given

by eq. (1).  As seen from Fig. 10a, the TA signal (trace (ii)) first rapidly decreases within
the duration of this 532 nm pulse, then recovers on the same time scale as the  ∆OD600

kinetics  decays.  Fig.  10a,  trace  (iv)  shows  the  normalized  difference  trace  (iii)  (the
recovery kinetics of the  ∆∆OD600  signal) juxtaposed on the TA kinetics induced by the

absorbance of the 355 nm light alone (trace (i)). As seen from Fig. 10a, these two kinetics
are identical within experimental error, and this situation persists out to at least  t=15 µs.

These observations suggest that the 532 nm photoexcitation promptly depletes at

least  one  of  the  species  that  absorb  600  nm  light  within  the  duration  of  the  532  nm

excitation pulse. However, not all of these species are photobleached; some remain in the

reaction mixture well after the 532 nm photoexcitation and these remaining species have

exactly the same decay kinetics as the 600 nm light absorbing species following 355 nm
photoexcitation. This conclusion pertains not only to the TA kinetics observed at  λ= 600

nm, but to all TA kinetics observed between 400 nm and 1350 nm. Furthermore, it holds

for  both 532 nm and 1064 nm photoexcitation (Fig. 6S).

Let us introduce the fraction  qλ of the TA signal that is promptly photobleached

by the 532 nm (or 1064 nm) light, defined as the ratio

= −

∆∆

q
λ

(
OD t
λ

;

t

21

≈

)

t

21

∆

≈(

OD t
λ

)

 

t

21

(5)

of  the  photobleached  TA  signal  to  the  TA  signal  at  t

t=

21.  As  explained  above,  this

quantity is fully sufficient to characterize the entire photobleaching dynamics because the
)  and  ∆OD tλ( )   kinetics  are  exactly  the  same
(
temporal  behaviors  of  the  ∆∆OD t
λ 12;

t

(traces (iii) and (i) in Fig. 10a, respectively). Due to this similarity, it is possible to fit

both  of  these  kinetics  using  the  same  smooth  function  (for  instance,  a  biexponential

17.

dependence)  and  extrapolate  these  dependencies  to  t

t=

21,  thereby  increasing  the

accuracy with which the quantity  qλ is estimated. The resulting photobleaching fractions

qλ obey the following simple rules, for both 532 nm and 1064 nm photoexcitation: For a

given  photon  fluence  of  laser  L2,  the  fraction  qλ  does  not  depend  on  the  observation
wavelength λ (Fig. 10b) or on  the delay time  t21 between the laser pulses L2 and L1.
This fraction linearly increases with the photon fluence of laser L2. Addition of a hole

scavenger,  such  as  glycerol,  (Fig.  11)  causes  a  decrease  in  qλ; this decrease becomes

greater at longer delay times,  t21, between the laser pulses.

The linear increase in the photobleaching efficiency with increasing 532 nm (or

1064  nm)  photon  fluence  indicates  that  the  photoexcitation  is  1-photon.  The

independence of the ratio  qλ on the delay time  t21 means that a constant fraction of the

532 nm (or 1064 nm) light absorbing species is photoexcited at any time on the TA vs.

time  curve.  The  lack  of  wavelength  dependence  means  that  the  profile  of  the

photobleaching spectrum is identical to that of the species before the 532 nm or 1064 nm

photoexcitation. That would not be remarkable if the TA spectrum shown in Fig. 2, trace

(iii) originated from a single light-absorbing species depleted by the 532 nm or 1064 nm

photoexcitation. However, as shown in the previous section, this does not seem to be the

case. Thus, to account for our observations it is necessary to postulate that the 532 nm or

1064  nm  photoexcitation  of  one  of  the  light  absorbing  species  depletes  both  of  these

species, in exactly the same ratio with which these two species were present prior to the

photoexcitation. For example, as explained in section 3.1, the TA signal at 1064 nm is

from trapped electrons only. If only electrons were depleted in the course of 1064 nm
photoexcitation, the fractions  qλ  at  λ= 600  nm  (where  both  the  electron  and  the  hole

absorb),  and  at  λ= 900  nm  (where  only  the  electron  absorbs),  would  be  different.

Experimentally,  these  two  fractions  are  the  same  within  10%.  The  same  argument

pertains to the 532 nm photoexcitation. Thus, either the spectrum shown in Fig. 1, trace

(iii) is from a single species (section 4.2), contrary to the arguments presented above, or

exactly the same fraction of electrons and holes decays following 532 nm or 1064 nm

photoexcitation. In the latter case, only photostimulated recombination can account for

the observed behavior.

18.

The  effect  of  the  hole  scavenger  on  the  photobleaching  strengthens  the  latter

explanation. A steady state concentration of trapped electrons in TiO2 nanoparticles can

be generated by continuous UV illumination of N2-saturated aqueous solution containing

a hole scavenger (in our case, glycerol). After 30 min illumination by 300-400 nm light,

an optical density  of 0.2-1 at 532 nm from trapped electrons was obtained (in a 1 mm

optical path cell). When this solution was photolyzed using 532 and 1064 nm pulses, no

transient  photobleaching,  either  temporary  or  permanent,  was  observed.  This  negative

result suggests that in the absence of a hole localized on the same TiO2 nanoparticle, laser

excitation of trapped electron does not lead to photobleaching of its absorbance. Rather,

the  electrons  rapidly  relax  to  the  ground  state,  with  no  concomitant  change  in  the

absorbance.

The  same  point  may  be  demonstrated  differently,  by  carrying  out  a  two  pulse

experiment on O2-saturated solution containing 2-5 vol % of glycerol (O2 was used for

photoreversibility, see section 2). As shown in section 3.1, addition of 5 vol % glycerol

causes  ca.  45%  decrease  in  the  prompt  TA  signal  from  the  trapped  hole,  due  to  rapid

reaction with chemisorbed glycerol. Following the same trend, the ratio  qλ decreases by

ca. 50% at  t21=25 ns (Fig. 11). At later delay times, there is a slow decay of the TA signal

from the holes due to their reaction with glycerol (Figs. 4b, 5b, and 9). The fraction  qλ

plotted  as  a  function  of  the  delay  time  t21  tracks  the  hole  scavenging  (Fig.  11).  We

conclude that the presence of a hole on the same TiO2 nanoparticle is required for the

decay  of  the  photoexcited  electron;  in  the  absence  of  the  hole,  there  is  no  decay.

Conversely, any reaction that depletes the hole reduces the photobleaching efficiency.

We turn now to the quantum yield for the 532 and 1064 nm photobleaching. This

quantity  can  be  calculated  from  the  known  photobleaching  fraction  qλ  and  the  laser

fluence  provided  that  the  molar  absorptivity   of  the  species  at  the  photoexcitation

wavelength is known. Unfortunately, there is a large scatter in estimates for the molar

absorptivity of trapped electrons in aqueous TiO2 nanoparticles. Photochemical studies
by Graetzel and co-workers suggested ε620=1200 M-1 cm-1 in acidic [6] and ε780=800 M-1
cm-1  in  alkaline  solutions.  [32]  Pulse  radiolysis  measurements  of  Safrany  et  al.  [34]

19.

suggested ε800=700 M-1 cm-1. Spectroelectrochemical measurements of Fitzmaurice and
coworkers  gave  ε700=900-1000  M-1 cm-1.  [33]  Using  the  absorption  spectrum  of  the

electron given by trace (iv) in Fig. 2 and the estimate given by Safrany et al., [34] the
extinction coefficients for the electron at both 532 nm and 1064 nm are ca. 480 M-1 cm-1,

and the quantum yields for photobleaching are ca. 0.28 and 0.024, respectively.

4. Discussion.

4.1. Synopsis.

Here we briefly summarize our observations. The TA spectrum in the visible is

composite.  Two  species  contribute  to  this  spectrum:  (i)  trapped  electron,  which  has

roughly the same absorption spectrum as the species generated by electron injection and

reduction of TiO2 nanoparticles and films (e.g., refs. 32, 33, and 34) and (ii) trapped hole,

which has an absorption spectrum in the visible. [10,11,12]. These two species decay by

recombination that proceeds over many decades in time; the resulting spectrum does not

evolve in time because both species simultaneously decay in the recombination event.

When the electron is detrapped by 1064 nm or 532 nm photoexcitation, the resulting free,

mobile electron rapidly recombines with the hole, and both species disappear from the

TA spectrum. The quantum yield of the photobleaching by visible light is large, ca. 0.28

for 532 nm photoexcitation. When the hole is scavenged, photostimulated recombination

is suppressed.

Recently,  Boschloo  and  co-workers  [23]  observed  longer  time  of  flight  and

decreased transferred charge when the photocurrent induced by 308 nm laser excitation
of TiO2 films was measured under continuous-wave irradiation by light with  λ> 420 nm.

The  authors  explained  this  behavior  by  "emptying  of  the  initially  filled  traps  by  the

visible  light".  [23]  As  suggested  by  our  results,  this  "trap  emptying"  is  followed  by

electron-hole  recombination  that  depletes  the  charge  flowing  through  the  conductivity

cell.

The light-absorbing hole can be selectively depleted by reaction with chemi- and

physi- sorbed polyols, [9,10,11,31] such as glycerol. Most of this hole scavenging is very

20.

rapid  (occurring  in  <  3  ns),  and  there  are  good  reasons  to  believe  that  it  involves  a

chemisorbed  polyol  molecule  at  the  nanoparticle  surface  (see  ref.  31  for  more

discussion).  However,  this  scavenging  is  not  100%  efficient,  even  at  high  polyol

concentration (> 5 vol % of glycerol). Ca. 45% of the holes survive this rapid process by

descent  into  deep  traps  at  the  nanoparticle  surface  and  slowly  react  with  physisorbed

glycerol molecules over the first 200 ns after the photoexcitation. There is also a small

subset of light-absorbing holes (<10% of the total population) that are not scavenged by

glycerol  in  either  reaction;  these  are  holes  trapped  in  the  nanoparticle  interior  (or,

perhaps, the subsurface). Given the low concentration of electron-hole pairs generated in

our experiments (1-2 pairs per nanoparticle), the depletion of the hole by a reaction with

glycerol  leaves  an  electron  which  does  not  have  a  recombination  partner  on  the  same

nanoparticle. Such electrons persist in solution for many tens of microseconds.

While  these  scenarios  are  consistent  with  our  observations  and  find  support  in

other studies, there is a troubling aspect to such an interpretation of the results. Namely, it

is commonly believed that trapped holes in titania nanoparticles do not absorb light in the

visible. Most researchers, following the original study by Graetzel and coworkers, [6]

assume that only electrons absorb in the visible, and this viewpoint has been supported
by pulse radiolysis studies [42,43] in which the holes were shown to absorb at  λ< 400

nm  (section  4.3).  Although  there  have  been  several  studies  the  results  of  which  are

contrary to the assumption that only electrons absorb in the visible, [10,11,12,36] it is

prudent to consider alternative scenarios in which the hole does not absorb in the visible

to explain our results.

4.2. The alternative scenarios: Two-electron models.

In this section we examine several scenarios in which the spectral transformations

observed in section 3.1 are interpreted in terms of two or more light-absorbing electron

species. In these scenarios, the hole is assumed to absorb in the UV, [42,43] outside of

our observation range.

In the first class of such scenarios, surface modification of TiO2 nanoparticles by

glycerol  results  either  in  the  formation  of  a  new  trapping  site  for  the  electron  or

21.

elimination of a subset of such trapping sites. In particular, EPR studies [3] suggest that

surface modification of TiO2 nanoparticles results in the elimination and/or modification

of electron traps at the nanoparticle surface. Thus, a possible way to interpret our results

is to assume that the TA spectrum observed in glycerol solutions (trace (i) in Fig. 2) is

from  the  interior  electrons  whereas  the  spectrum  in  aqueous  solutions  without  hole

scavenger (trace (iii) in Fig. 2) is a composite spectrum originating from both the interior

and surface-trapped electrons.

First, we consider the possibility that the TA spectrum in the aqueous solution

(without glycerol) is composite. If this were the case, two unlikely coincidences should

occur, namely (i) the decay kinetics for different electron species should be identical over

many decades in time (as otherwise the TA spectrum would be time dependent), and (ii)

the photobleaching of these species by 532 and 1064 nm light should be exactly the same

(as otherwise selective photobleaching of one of these species would occur). The only

way  in  which  such  a  situation  might  occur  naturally  would  involve  rapid  equilibrium

involving  these  different  electron  species  (that  would  have  to  occur  well  within  the

duration  of  the  photoexcitation  pulse).  As  mentioned  in  the  Introduction,  for  some

electron  species  (e.g.,  the  CB  electron  and  electrons  in  shallow  traps)  such  a  rapid

equilibration  is  quite  likely.  [16,18]  To  account  for  our  data  (assuming  that  the  TA

spectrum  is  from  the  electrons  only)  it  is  necessary  to  postulate  that  the  TA  spectrum

observed in the aqueous solution is either from a single electron species or several such

species  in  rapid  equilibrium.  The  spectral  transformation  occurring  in  the  glycerol

solutions has to be interpreted as evidence that the modification of TiO2 nanoparticles by

glycerol  leads  to  the  formation  of  a  new  type  of  electron  trap  or,  alternatively,  to  the

elimination  of  certain  surface  traps  which  shifts  the  equilibrium  between  the  light-

absorbing electron species contributing to the TA spectrum in the aqueous solution.

We turn, therefore, to the scenario, in which the modification of the TiO2 surface

by glycerol results in a new type of the electron trap. [3,25,26] The electrons descend into

such traps in preference to the ordinary traps at the surface of a TiO2 nanoparticle in the

aqueous  solution.  To  distinguish  between  the  corresponding  electron  species,  we  will
−  and the electron in the polyol-modified trap

denote the electron in the regular trap as  ew

22.

as  eg

− .  The  "instantaneous"  transformation  of  the  TA  spectrum  in  Fig.  4b  would  be

interpreted as evidence for the competition between these two traps for the CB electron.

The spectral transformation observed in the first 200 ns would be indicative of the slow
−→  transfer from the shallower to the deeper trap. In such a case, each intermediate

−
e
w

e
g

spectrum in Fig. 4b would be a weighted sum of the initial spectrum (trace (i)) from  ew
− . This is indeed the case (section 3.1). While

and the final spectrum (trace (ii)) from  eg

−

this  interpretation  would  be  consistent  with  our  observations,  it  poses  three  problems.
−  would be required to have exactly the same

First, despite their different nature,  ew
spectra  for  λ> 900  nm.  Second,  it  seems  unlikely  that  eg

−  and  eg

−   (which  is  the  electron  in  a

deeper trap) has an absorption band to the red of  ew

−  (which is the electron in a shallower

trap). Third, absorption spectra similar to traces (ii) and (iv) in Fig. 2 have been observed

from reduced TiO2 nanoparticles and films containing no glycerol. (e.g., refs. 33 and 34).

Thus, this scenario is unsatisfactory. [44]

We are left, therefore, with a scenario in which binding to glycerol eliminates a

subset  of  surface  traps  and  thereby  shifts  the  equilibrium  between  the  light-absorbing

electron species, one of which has the absorption spectrum (mis)identified in section 3.1

as that from the trapped hole. There are data in the literature that seemingly support such

a  scenario:  For  example,  it  has  been  observed  that  electrochemical  reduction  of  thin

anatase films in a certain range of potentials yields an electron species (see Fig. 2 in ref.

22)  whose  spectrum  resembles  the  TA  spectrum  shown  by  trace  (ii)  in  Fig.  2.  This

scenario, however, also poses problems, because not only the prompt but also the "final"

spectrum  (attained  at  200  ns)  would  depend  on  the  glycerol  concentration  since  the

equilibrium between the electron species would depend on the availability of unmodified

surface  traps  which,  in  turn,  would  depend  on  the  extent  of  binding  of  these  traps  to

glycerol. A related problem is how to explain the slow transformation of TA spectra in

Fig.  4b  and  the  results  of  Fig.  11.  Since  the  postulated  equilibrium  between  different

electron species has to be rapid, the slow process can only involve transformations of the

traps themselves while the electron resides in these traps. While it is possible to envision

such transformations, their thermodynamics and kinetics would strongly depend on the

23.

structure of the surface modifier. Since exactly the same "final" spectrum is observed for

all  polyols  and  carbohydrates,  [31]  including  PVA  [32],  this  scenario  is  also

unsatisfactory.  Lastly,  it  is  difficult  to  account  for  the  fact  the  spectra  very  similar  to

these  "final"  spectra  have  been  observed  from  reduced  TiO2  nanoparticles  and  films

containing no hole scavengers or surface modifiers. [33,34]

As seen from our examination, all scenarios involving elimination or modification

of electron traps appear to run into one problem or another. There exists, however, a class

of  the  two-electron  scenarios  that  avoids  these  problems.  Specifically,  it  may  be

postulated that the presence of the hole on the same nanoparticle modifies the absorption

spectrum of the electron in the visible. In other words, the spectrum given by trace (iii) in

Fig.  2  is  from  a  self-trapped  exciton,  whereas  trace  (i)  originates  from  the  decoupled

electron  which  resides  on  a  TiO2  nanoparticle  without  the  hole.  The  dispersive

recombination of electron-hole pairs (Fig. 1) is then viewed as the collapse of the exciton.

As shown in Fig. 7S, when the TA spectrum in water is plotted as a function of photon
> 1.25  eV  is  Gaussian,  as  would  be  expected  for  an

energy  Eph,  the  spectrum  for  Eph

exciton-like species. It is easy to see that all statements made in sections 3 and 4.1 can be

restated in the exciton model by renaming the "light-absorbing hole" or "electron-hole"

pair  as  "trapped  exciton",  because  any  process  that  depletes  the  hole  automatically

converts one kind of spectrum to another. In other words, our results appear to be equally

compatible  with  the  existence  of  a  light-absorbing  hole  or  a  self-trapped  exciton  in

aqueous TiO2 nanoparticles. Below, we consider both of these possibilities in more detail.

4.3. Light-absorbing holes: pro and contra.

A  photogenerated  hole  absorbing  light  in  the  visible  would  account  for  our

observations (sections 3 and 4.1). Such a rationale is not without a precedent, as there

have been previous reports of such holes from photolyzed TiO2 nanoparticles and films,

both  on  the  picosecond  [36]  and  nanosecond  time  scales.  [10,11,12]  Perhaps,  the

strongest evidence of holes absorbing in the visible has been given by Bahnemann et al.

[10,11,12] who observed a TA spectrum from photoexcited aqueous TiO2 nanoparticles

impregnated with small islands of metallic platinum ("platinized" nanoparticles). The Pt

24.

patches rapidly remove photogenerated electrons from the TiO2 nanoparticles, leaving
−  and  has  an  absorption
behind  the  hole.  The  resulting  species  oxidizes  Br −  to  Br2
spectrum with an onset at 700-800 nm [12] and a maximum around 400 nm [10] or 470

nm. [12] This spectrum (Fig. 5b) bears no resemblance to the spectra of "holes" generated

in pulse radiolysis (see below). On the other hand, this spectrum is similar to the one

shown in Fig. 1, trace (ii) and Fig, 5b, trace (i). Despite these observations, the general

consensus  is  in  favor  of  a UV-absorbing hole. Two arguments supporting this may be

given:

First, the reaction of TiO2 nanoparticles with strong oxidizing radicals, such as
•−  and  HO• radicals, yields a species that absorbs in the UV,

radiolytically-generated  SO4

with  an  onset  below  400  nm.  [42,43]  Assuming  that  these  radicals  react  with  the

nanoparticles by electron transfer, it may be inferred that the holes do not absorb in the

visible. To account for the TA spectrum of the tentative holes observed by Bahnemann et

al.  [10,11],  Lawless  et  al.  [42]  suggested  that  this  spectrum  originated  from  the

photoexcitation of Pt islands rather than TiO2 nanoparticles themselves. This argument

does not seem to be supported by the results of the present study, in which the absorbance

in the visible similar to that reported by Bahnemann et al. [10,11,12] was observed in the

absence  of  platinum.  We  may  further  object  that  the  pulse  radiolysis  studies  do  not

provide  decisive  evidence  that  electron  transfer  between  these  radicals  and  the  TiO2

nanoparticle indeed occurs (as also noted by Lawless et al.) [42] The occurrence of the

electron transfer, with a nearly diffusion controlled rate, [42,43] seems unlikely as the

standard  potentials  for  the  sulfate  and  hydroxyl  radicals  are  ca.  0.9  eV  and  0.45  V,

respectively, lower than this potential for holes in hydrated anatase. [43]

It is possible that the reaction of hydroxyl radical with a TiO2 nanoparticle yields
•−  radical). As mentioned in the

 as the main product (the same applies to the  SO4

•
HOads

Introduction,  it  is  presently  believed  that  at  least  two  hole  species,  the  mobile  hole

(observed in our TA experiments) and  HOads

, are generated by UV photolysis of aqueous

•

TiO2 nanoparticles. [27,28,29] The latter species is a minor product with a quantum yield

ca. 100 times lower than that of the more abundant mobile hole. [27] Pulse radiolysis data

25.

alone are insufficient to determine which reaction, surface addition or electron transfer,

occurs  when  these  radicals  encounter  a  nanoparticle  in  the  water  bulk.  A  convincing

demonstration for the occurrence of electron transfer would be the similarity of reaction

patterns  and  rates  for  radiolytically  and  photolytically  generated  holes.  Such  a

demonstration is presently lacking, and this absence of supportive results weakens the

whole argument favoring the UV-absorbing holes.

Second,  the  O p  2   radicals  of  the  Ti

IV − •  type  identified  by  EPR  [3,26]  as

O

possible hole centers are not expected to be strong absorbers in the visible. The obvious

objection to this argument is that the light-absorbing hole might be a different type of

oxygen hole center. In particular, if the hole were trapped on the bridging oxygen of a
+ center, where  M n +  is the (impurity) metal cation, the crystal field of this

−
O M

Ti

−

IV

n

cation would split the degenerate 2p orbitals, resulting in the absorption of visible light

by the hole center. [45] A classical example of such an impurity center is the aluminum

hole center in smoky quartz (SiO2:Al). In this solid, overcoordinated  Al III  ion substitutes
IV − • center does

for  Si IV , providing a negatively charged trap for the hole. While the  Si

O

not absorb visible light,  Si

IV

− •...

O Al

III

 centers strongly absorb across the visible. [45]

Note that an impurity content of just 7 ppm would be sufficient to have one metal ion per

TiO2 nanoparticle in our photosystem (if all such ions are in the TiO2 phase). The typical

concentrations of impurity ions in our colloidal solutions were much higher (> 40 ppm).

Thus, a commonly occurring bi- or tri- valent impurity ion, such as  Al III , might be the

sought-after progenitor of the oxygen hole center. Since such an ion would substitute for

tetravalent  Ti IV , the precursor of the hole would be a negatively charged trap. Such a trap
IV −

can be a deeper trap than  Ti

IV − − or  Ti
O

 groups at the surface that are believed
IV − •  hole.  If  this  impurity  ion  is  diamagnetic  and  has

to  be  the  precursors  of  the  Ti

OH

O

small nuclear dipole moment, no additional fine or hyperfine structure would be observed

in the EPR spectra of the resulting hole center. Given the high crystallinity of anatase

nanoparticles,  [2,38]  it  is  likely  that  such  an  impurity  ion  would  be  at  or  near  the

nanoparticle surface. Since the partition of (impurity) ions between the aqueous and TiO2

phases would be pH dependent, sensitivity of the TA spectrum to pH of the solution [32]

finds a natural explanation.

26.

While  our  identification  of  photogenerated  holes  with  impurity-related  oxygen

hole centers is tentative, this suggestion may be verified without going to the extreme

effort of eliminating the ubiquitous impurity. The unpaired electron on the oxygen would

be  coupled  to  the  nucleus  of  the  impurity  ion  by  weak  dipole  interaction.  Such  an

interaction may be observed using electron spin echo envelope modulation (ESEEM) and

electron nuclear double resonance (ENDOR) spectroscopies.

4.4. Self-trapped exciton.

As discussed in section 4.2, the alternative explanation of our results would be

admitting that the holes in the aqueous TiO2 nanoparticles do not absorb in the visible,

and the vis spectrum shown in Fig. 2, trace (iii) is from a self-trapped exciton. We are

aware of no evidence for the existence of such excitons in aqueous TiO2 nanoparticles,

although  there  is  ample  evidence  that  self-trapped  excitons  are  formed  in  crystalline

anatase [46] and anatase films. [47] In these materials, self-trapped excitons decay by

radiative recombination and yield photoluminescence spectra centered at 2.4 eV.

The chief problem is to explain the absorption spectrum of the tentative exciton.

The exciton in crystalline and thin-film anatase contributes to the smooth Urbach tail at

the band edge; [46] these excitons do not yield the absorption spectrum shown in Fig. 2,

trace (iii). Furthermore, one would expect that strong electron-hole coupling would be

readily  identifiable  in  the  EPR  spectra  of  UV  illuminated  TiO2  nanoparticles.  No

evidence  for  such  a  coupling  has  been  found.  Thus,  the  self-trapped  exciton  scenario,

while plausible, lacks experimental support.

4.5. Photostimulated electron detrapping.

The very fact that photoexcitation of electrons results in their rapid recombination

with trapped holes suggests their identity as trapped charges. A claim is sometimes found

in the literature that the 700-900 nm band of the trapped electron is actually from free CB

electrons. It is difficult to explain how such a free carrier could have existed on the same

TiO2 nanoparticle with the hole over many microseconds, to give the composite spectrum

shown in Fig. 2, trace (iii). As pointed out in the Introduction, the view that the 700-900

27.

nm  absorbance  originates  from  free  electrons  appears  to  be  inconsistent  with  many

observations. Ultrafast kinetic measurements [4] suggest a subpicosecond time scale for

free  electron  trapping.  THz  spectroscopy  of  dye-sensitized  TiO2  films  [8]  suggests

negligible extension of the CB electron spectrum to the IR and points to its polaronic

nature.  Microwave  conductivity  studies  [17,18,20]  suggest  that  the  electrons  in  TiO2

nanoparticles  reside  in  shallow  traps  near  the  CB  edge.  Such  shallow-trap  electrons

would readily account for the diffuse IR absorbances observed in refs. 14 and 16. Indeed,

with  a  few  exceptions  [48]  all  observations  of  persistent  "free  electrons"  in  titania

nanoparticles  can  be  interpreted  as  evidence  for  the  existence  of  such  shallow-trap

electrons. As considerable delocalization of the electron wavefunction is likely in these

shallow-trap  states,  evidence  for  such  a  delocalization  (e.g.,  the  recent  observation  of

Stark effect on the Ti-OH vibrations) [49] does not necessarily indicate the involvement

of the free electron.

In this regard, it is noteworthy that the quantum yield for electron photobleaching

decreases by an order of magnitude from 532 nm (2.33 eV) photoexcitation to 1064 nm

(1.17 eV) photoexcitation (section 3.2). Only electrons in deep traps (0.5-1 eV) would

account  for  such  a  precipitous  decrease  in  the  photobleaching  efficiency.  The  highly

asymmetrical shape of the electron spectrum (trace (i) in Fig. 7S) also suggests that this

spectrum is composite. Specifically, it appears that a broad absorption line centered at ca.
. −  towards the red (this
1.5 eV is juxtaposed on a diffuse absorbance that increases as  λ1 5 2

absorbance may be the blue extension of the IR spectra observed by Hoffmann et al. from

oxygen-treated  photoilluminated  rutile  TiO2  surfaces).  [16]  These  two  spectral

contributions might correspond to the electrons in deep and shallow traps, respectively.

As  discussed  in  section  4.2,  a  composite  nature  of  the  electron  absorbance  would  be

compatible  with  the  observations  on  the  nanosecond  time  scale  provided  that  the

equilibration  of  different  trapped  states  occurs  on  a  much  shorter  time  scale.

Unfortunately,  the  existing  picosecond  data  for  unmodified  TiO2  nanoparticles  are

limited to a narrow spectral interval between 400 and 700 nm where both the electron and

hole  absorb  probe  light  (section  3.1).  While  there  is  considerable  spectral  evolution

within the first 50-100 ps, [4,36,37] this evolution can be interpreted in many different

ways.

28.

Our spectral data hint that at some point, as the wavelength of the analyzing light

increases  towards  the  IR,  there  should  be  a  gradual  transition  from  a  TA  spectrum

dominated  by  electrons  residing  in  deep  traps  (which  add  little  to  the  dc  and  ac

conductivity) to a TA spectrum dominated by electrons in shallow traps (responsible for

the  electron  conduction).  Perhaps,  such  a  transition  occurs  somewhere  in  the  mid  IR,

where the electron absorption in aqueous TiO2 nanoparticles cannot be observed due to

the strong extinction of the IR light by the solvent.

It  is  worth  mentioning  that  there  are  results  in  the  literature  which  appear  to

contradict  the  notion  that  different  trapped-electron  species  on  the  same  TiO2

nanoparticle rapidly equilibrate. Recently, Dimitrijevic et al. [38] used pulse radiolysis to

study  the  reaction  of  TiO2  nanoparticles  with  hydrated  electrons.  The  resulting  TA

spectra did not look like the spectra from "persistent" electrons obtained by Safrany et al.
[34] using the same method for similar nanoparticles. The electron absorbance for  λ>1.2
µm was flat; [38] there was also a bell-shaped absorption band with a maximum at 680

nm. Full coverage of the nanoparticle by dopamine selectively removed that bell-shaped

band, leaving a spectrum which was flat over the entire visible and near IR. One would

expect that the absorption spectrum of the "electron" does not depend on the method used

for its generation, be it photolysis, pulse radiolysis, or electrochemical reduction. While it

is possible that different electron species are generated in photolysis and radiolysis, the

postulated  rapid  equilibration  would  eliminate  any  such  differences.  As  explained  in

sections 3.2 and 4.2, coexistence of several distinctive light-absorbing electron species on

the same nanoparticle, in the absence of the rapid equilibration, is not supported by our

results.

5. Conclusion.

It is shown that 532 nm and 1064 nm laser photoexcitation of trapped electrons

generated in 355 nm photolysis of aqueous titania (TiO2) nanoparticles (diameter 4.6±0.5

nm, pH=4) causes rapid photobleaching of their absorbance band in the visible and near

IR. This photobleaching occurs within the duration of the laser pulse (6 ns FWHM); it is

caused by photoinduced electron detrapping followed by recombination of the resulting

29.

free electron and a trapped hole. The quantum yield for the electron photobleaching is ca.

0.28 for 532 nm and ca. 0.024 for 1064 nm photoexcitation. The drastic reduction in the

quantum efficiency with increasing wavelength of the photoexcitation light suggests that

the absorption spectrum of the electron in the near IR originates both from the electrons

in  shallow  traps  and  the  electrons  in  deep  traps;  there  should  be  rapid  (<  1  ns)

equilibration between all such states.

Complete  separation  of  the  spectral  contributions  from  trapped  electrons  and

holes  is  demonstrated  using  glycerol  as  a  selective  hole  scavenger  (Fig.  2).  The  holes

absorb across the entire visible; their absorption increases towards the UV. The electron

absorption  increases  towards  900-1000  nm  and  then  slowly  decreases  towards  the  IR.

The  characteristic  650  nm  band  of  photoilluminated  aqueous  TiO2  nanoparticles  is

composite. Our results (as well as the results of Bahnemann et al. [10,11,12]) indirectly

suggest that holes obtained by reaction of oxidizing radicals (such as hydroxyl) with TiO2

nanoparticles  [42,43]  have  absorption  properties  different  from  those  of  the

photogenerated holes. We speculate that the vis-light absorbing O 2p holes originate from

a common ion impurity in colloidal TiO2. This suggestion can be verified using advanced

magnetic  resonance  spectroscopies.  There  is  an  intriguing  possibility  that  TiO2

nanoparticles can be doped by this ion on purpose to facilitate hole trapping and improve

photocatalytic efficiency.

In  the  absence  of  the  hole  scavenger  (glycerol),  no  evolution  of  the  transient
absorbance spectra (400 to 1350 nm) was observed out to 10 µs,  both  in  N2-  and  O2-

saturated aqueous solutions. In the presence of 5 vol % glycerol, ca. 45-50% of the light-

absorbing  holes  are  scavenged  promptly  within  the  duration  of  the  355  nm

photoexcitation pulse, another 40-45% of the holes are scavenged at a slower rate over

the  first  200  ns  after  the  photoexcitation  pulse,  and  the  remaining  5-10%  are  not

scavenged, even at the high concentration of the scavenger (>10 vol %). A reaction with

chemi- and physi- sorbed glycerol can account for the prompt and the slow hole decay,

respectively.  The  mechanism  for  this  reaction  is  further  discussed  in  the  companion

paper. [31]

30.

Our results can also be explained by a mechanism in which the absorption spectra

of electrons with and without the hole present on the same TiO2 nanoparticle are different

(sections 4.2 and 4.4). This interpretation can be construed as evidence for the formation

of self-trapped excitons in the anatase nanoparticles. However, at the present time this

explanation  has  little  experimental  support.  Other  scenarios  in  which  the  composite

spectrum shown in Fig. 2 originates from two or more electron species (rather than the

electron and the hole) also seem to be excluded by our results (section 4.2).

6. Acknowledgement.

I. A. S. thanks Drs. T. Rajh, P. Kamat, and D. Meisel for stimulating discussions

and Drs. N. Dimitrijevic and Z. V. Saponjic for the preparation of some TiO2 samples.

This  work  was  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the  Office  of  Science,  Division  of

Chemical Science, US-DOE under contract number W-31-109-ENG-38.

Supporting Information Available: A single PDF file containing Figures 1S to 7S with

captions. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

31.

Figure captions.

Fig. 1

Solid lines: Typical decay kinetics of transient absorbance (TA) detected at  λ= 700 nm

following  355  nm  photoexcitation  of  TiO2  nanoparticles  in  N2-saturated  water  (3  ns
FWHM laser pulse, incident photon fluence of 64 mJ/cm2;  1.35  mm  optical  path  cell,

24% transmission of 355 nm light). This kinetic trace is the average of 40 laser shots; the
sample was flowed at 1.5 cm3/min during the acquisition at 1 Hz. ). See section 2 for the

details  of  the  setup  and  experimental  procedures.  The  TA  signal  at  700  nm  originates

from  the  absorbances  of  trapped  electrons  and  holes  (ca.  1:1);  the  decay  is  due  to

recombination of the electrons and holes residing on the same TiO2 nanoparticle. Under

these photoexcitation conditions ca. 1-2 pairs are generated per nanoparticle. In (a), the

first 300 ns of these kinetics are shown on a linear scale, in (b), the kinetics is shown on
the double logarithmic scale (out to 8 µs). The dashed lines in the same plots correspond
to a power law  t −α dependence with  α ≈0.46. Using our setup, this power-law decay can
be traced out to 50-100 µs. Time profiles of TA kinetics for other wavelengths of the

analyzing  light  are  shown  in  Fig.  1S  (450-950  nm)  and  Fig.  2S  (950-1350  nm)  in  the

Supplement. All of these kinetic profiles are identical within experimental error, and the

shape of the TA spectrum is independent of the delay time (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2

Open symbols: Normalized TA spectra from aqueous TiO2 nanoparticles photoexcited by

355  nm  laser  light.  These  spectra  were  obtained  using  a  fast  Si  photodiode.  The

integration windows are, respectively, 11-13 ns (open circles), 13-20 ns (open squares),

20-50 ns (open upright triangles), and 50-170 ns (open triangles). As seen from this plot,

the spectrum does not change with the delay time (this can also be seen from the data of

Figs.  1S  and  4a).  Filled  diamonds:  near-IR  spectrum  from  the  same  photosystem

obtained using a fast Ge photodiode (50-200 ns integration). The TA spectra in the near

IR also do not depend on the delay time (see Fig. 2S). Traces (i) to (iii) demonstrate the

decomposition  of  the  TA  spectrum  in  the  visible  into  the  contributions  from  trapped

32.

electrons and holes. Trace (i) is the normalized TA spectrum at 200-370 ns from TiO2

nanoparticle solution containing 5 vol % hole scavenger (glycerol). This TA spectrum is

mainly from the electrons (some absorbance is from holes in the nanoparticle interior that

cannot  be  scavenged  by  glycerol).  Trace  (ii)  is  the  normalized  spectrum  of  the  light-

absorbing  holes  (see  Fig.  5  b).  The  sum  of  these  two  absorptions  gives  trace  (iii)

(crosses). Trace (iv) gives the electron absorbance only (see Fig. 8b). The solid lines are

guides for the eye.

Fig. 3

shown in Fig. 3S.

Fig. 4

Time evolution of TA spectra (400-1000 nm) obtained under identical photoexcitation

conditions  in  oxygen  saturated  (a)  aqueous  solution  of  TiO2  nanoparticles  and  (b)  the

same solution containing 5 vol % of glycerol. The integration windows are, from top to

bottom, 9-13 ns (open circles), 13-23 ns (filled squares), 23-45 ns (open squares), 45-75

ns (filled triangles), 75-120 ns (open triangles), 120-200 ns (filled diamonds), and 200-
370 ns (open diamonds), respectively. For  t >300 ns, the spectral evolution is negligible.

The  time  evolution  of  the  near  IR  spectrum  (800  to  1350  nm)  for  glycerol  solution  is

TA spectra from Fig. 3 normalized by the absorbance signal at 900 nm (same symbols as

in Fig. 3; see the legend in (a)). In (b), trace (i) is the prompt TA spectrum from (a) and

trace (ii) is the "final" TA spectrum attained at 200-370 ns. The solid lines are guides to

the eye. While in the absence of the hole scavenger there is no spectral evolution with the

delay time, addition of the hole scavenger results in the removal of the absorbance in the

visible (which originates from the hole). As seen from the plot in (b), ca. 45% of the hole

absorbance is removed during the laser pulse; another 45-50% is removed over the first
200 ns. The residual absorbance at  t >200 ns is mainly from trapped electrons. See also

Fig.  4S,  which  gives  the  TA  kinetics  from  the  5  vol  %  glycerol  solution  that  are

normalized at 200 ns. The short-lived TA signal in the visible is from the holes.

Fig. 5

33.

(a) Symbols: difference TA spectra (same coding as in Fig. 4) obtained by subtraction of

the TA spectrum at 200-370 ns from other traces (excepting curve(i)) in Fig. 4b (5 vol %

glycerol solution). The spectrum at 200-370 ns (open  diamonds) is shown by trace (ii);

trace (i) (open circles) is the same as trace (i) in Fig. 4b, i.e., it is the TA spectrum from

the aqueous solution that contains no hole scavenger. The solid lines are guides to the

eye. Filled circles give a weighted sum of trace (ii) and the prompt TA spectrum of the

hole  (open  circles).  As  seen  from  the  comparison  with  trace  (i),  the  TA  spectrum

observed in the aqueous solution can be accurately represented as the sum of these two

spectral  components  (see  also  Fig.  2)  (b)  Same  as  (a);  the  difference  spectra  were

normalized to illustrate that the spectrum of the species that is "removed" by glycerol

over the first 200 ns after 355 nm photoexcitation does not change with the delay time

(trace  (i)).  For  comparison,  trace  (ii)  from  (a)  is  reproduced.  Filled  symbols  are

normalized  TA  spectra  of  (tentative)  vis-absorbing  holes  on  "platinized"  TiO2

nanoparticles studied by Bahnemann et al.: filled circles are from ref. 10 (Fig. 8 therein),

filled squares are from ref. 12 (Fig. 5 therein).

Fig. 6

Decay kinetics of TA observed, using (a) 900 nm, (b) 600 nm, and (c) 470 nm analyzing

light, from oxygenated aqueous TiO2 nanoparticle solution containing 0, 1, 2.5, 5, and 10

vol % glycerol. These kinetics were obtained under identical photoexcitation conditions

using the same stock solution. Only the first 370 ns after the photoexcitation are shown.

As the concentration of glycerol increases so does the TA signal attained at 200-350 ns.

Observe  the  decrease  in  the  prompt  TA  signal  in  the  visible  with  increasing  glycerol

concentration. The TA kinetics at 900 nm (where only trapped electrons absorb) gives the

decay kinetics of the electron.

Fig. 7

The data of Fig. 6, replotted. (a) TA signals attained at 330-350 ns (at which time all the

holes  that  can  be  scavenged  by  glycerol  have  been  scavenged)  vs.  the  molar
concentration of the glycerol. These TA signals are for  λ= 470 nm (open triangles), 600

nm (open squares), and 900 nm (open circles). The solid lines are least squares fits using

34.

the Stern-Volmer eq. (2); the constant  Kb is the same for all three dependencies. (b) The
( )  given by eq. (3) obtained from the data of Fig. 6a for glycerol
t

plot of functions  f

900

concentrations  given  in  the  legend.  As  seen  from  this  plot,  all  such  functions  are  the
tλ( ) with [glycerol] is observed for all wavelengths  λ≥ 900

same. The persistence of  f

nm  (e.g.,  Fig.  5S),  i.e.,  across  the  entire  region  where  only  trapped  electron  absorbs
tλ( ) means that the kinetics shown in Fig. 6a can

analyzing light. This persistence of  f

always, at any concentration of the hole scavenger, be represented as a weighted sum of a

constant and the kinetics in the aqueous solution that does not contain the scavenger (see

section 3.1).

Fig. 8

(a) The TA signals at  λ= 470 nm (open circles) and  λ= 600 nm (open squares) plotted
as a function of  λ= 900 nm absorbance for several glycerol concentrations. The higher

absorbances  correspond  to  the  higher  glycerol  concentration.  These  dependencies  are

linear,  suggesting  that  addition  of  glycerol  increases  the  TA  signals  in  the  visible

(attained when the hole scavenging is complete) in the same proportion as it increases the

electron absorbance at 900 nm. This means that these TA signals increase because the
yield of persistent electrons at  t >200 ns increases. Note that these linear dependencies

do  not  extrapolate  to  zero  when  the  900  nm  absorbance  tends  to  zero:  As  the

concentration  of  glycerol  increases  and  more  persistent  electrons  are  generated,  the

electron spectrum builds upon an absorption spectrum from some other species. (b) The

"reconstruction" of this residual spectrum. Filled symbols show the TA signals at 470,
600,  and  900  nm  (at  t >200  ns)  as  a  function  of  glycerol  concentration.  The  vertical

arrows point to the "residual absorbances" obtained by linear extrapolation of plots in (a).

Trace (i) (open  squares)  is  the  TA  signal  attained  at  330-350  ns  in  10  vol  %  glycerol

solutions  (which  does  not  change  in  shape  as  a  function  of  [glycerol]).  Trace  (ii)  is  a

scaled absorption spectrum of the hole reproduced from Fig 2, trace (ii). As seen from

this plot, the arrows at 600 nm and 470 nm point to this spectrum. The same is observed

at other wavelengths in the visible (not shown); i.e., the "residual" spectrum is from holes

that cannot be scavenged by the glycerol, at any concentration of this scavenger. When

35.

this "residual" absorbance is subtracted from trace (i), the difference trace (iii) gives the

absorption spectrum of the electron.

Fig. 9

Thin solid lines: Normalized decay kinetics for the vis-absorbing, "scavengeable" holes
( ) given by eq. (4)) at three concentrations of glycerol (1, 5, and 10 vol %,
t

(functions  g

600

as indicated in the color scale). Trace (i) (bold line) is the normalized decay kinetics of

the electron in aqueous solution with no glycerol, obtained at 900 nm (which must be the

same as that of the hole in such a solution). Trace (ii) (dashed line) is trace (i) weighted
by  exp −(

τ  with τ

≈130 ns.

)

t

h

h

Fig. 10

(a)  Photobleaching  of  the  TA  signal  from  N2-saturated  aqueous  solution  of  TiO2
nanoparticles observed at  λ=600 nm. The electrons were photoexcited by a 532 nm laser

(L2) pulse (6 ns FWHM, 40 mJ). The instant at which this pulse is fired, at the delay time
= 24.5 ns after the 355 nm pulse (3 ns FWHM, 10 mJ), is indicated by an arrow. Trace
)

(
( ) kinetics (no 532 nm photoexcitation). Trace (ii) is the  ∆OD t

t21
(i) is the  ∆OD t

t

2
L
600

21;

600

kinetics (following the 532 nm photoexcitation). Trace (iii) is the difference trace given

by eq. (1). Trace (iv) (filled circles) isthe inverted and normalized trace (iii) juxtaposed

onto  trace  (i).  See  section  3.2  for  more  detail.  (b)  The  fraction  qλ  of  the  TA  signal

photobleached by 532 nm light (same photoexcitation conditions as in (a)) plotted as a
function of the wavelength  λ of the analyzing light. To facilitate the comparison, this

fraction  at  800  nm  was  taken  to  be  unity.  As  seen  from  this  plot,  across  the  visible,
( )  within  the  experimental  error,  i.e.,  the  photobleaching  spectrum  is  the
λ

const

=

q
λ

same as the TA spectrum.

Fig. 11

The photobleaching efficiency  qλ given by eq. (5) for  λ= 600 nm vs. the delay time  t21

between the 532 nm and 355 nm lasers. All data points were obtained under identical

excitation  conditions.  The  bleaching  efficiency  in  the  aqueous  solution  of  TiO2

36.

nanoparticles containing no glycerol was taken for unity (filled diamonds); this quantity

does not change with the delay time t21. The concentrations of added glycerol, in vol %,

were 1 (open triangles), 2.5 (open squares), and 5 (open circles). Filled circles indicate
the  data  obtained  for  5  vol  %  glycerol  at  λ=900  nm.  In  glycerol  solutions,  there  is
= 25  ns)

significant  prompt  decrease  in  the  photobleaching  efficiency  (observed  at  t21

with the increasing glycerol concentration. This decrease correlates with the fraction of

holes promptly scavenged by glycerol during 355 nm photoexcitation. The decrease in

the  photobleaching  efficiency  at  later  delay  times  correlates  with  the  "slow"  hole

scavenging (Figs. 5 and 9).

37.

References.

a) 

* 

Work  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the  Office  of  Science,  Division  of

Chemical Science, US-DOE under contract number W-31-109-ENG-38.

To  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed:  Tel  630-252-9516,  FAX  630-

2524993, e-mail: shkrob@anl.gov.

1.

For comprehensive reviews, see, for example, Henglein, A. Pure & Appl. Chem.

1984, 56, 1215; Hoffmann, M. R.; Martin, S. T.; Choi, W.; Bahnemann, D. W.

Chem. Rev. 1995, 95, 69; Linsebigler, A. L.; Lu, G.; Yates, J. T., Jr. Chem. Rev.

1995, 95, 735; Tryk, D. A.; Fujisima, A.; Honda, K. Electrochem. Acta 2000, 45,

2363; Kamat, P. V. J. Phys. Chem. B 2002, 106, 7729.

2.

Rajh, T.; Chen, L. X.; Lukas, K.; Liu, T.; Thurnauer, M. C.; Tiede, D. M. J. Phys.

Chem.  B  2002, 106,  10543;  Chen,  L.  X.;  Rajh,  T.;  Jager,  W.;  Nedeljkovic,  J.;

Thurnauer, M. C. J. Synchrotron Radiat. 1999, 6, 445.

3.

Rajh,  T.;  Poluektov,  O.  G.;  Thurnauer,  M.  C.,  in  Chemical  Physics  of  Nano-

structured Semiconductors; Kokorin, A. I., Ed.; NOVA Science Publ., Inc.: New

York, 2003; Ch. 1.

4.

Cavalieri, J. J.; Colombo, D. P., Jr.; Bowman, R. M. J. Phys. Chem. B 1998, 102,

1341;  Colombo,  D.  P.,  Jr.;  Bowman,  R.  M.  J.  Phys.  Chem. 1996, 100, 18445;

Colombo,  D.  P.,  Jr.;  Roussel,  K.  A.;  Saeh,  J.;  Skinner,  D.  E.;  Cavalieri,  J.  J.;

Bowman, R. M. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1995, 232, 207; Colombo, D. P., Jr.; Bowman,

R.  M.  J.  Phys.  Chem. 1995, 99,  11752;  Skinner,  D.  E.;  Colombo,  D.  P.,  Jr.;

Cavalieri, J. J.; Bowman, R. M. J. Phys. Chem. 1995, 99, 7853.

5.

Serpone, N.; Lawless, D.; Khairutdinov, R.; Pelizzetti, E. J. Phys. Chem.  1995,

99, 16655.

Chem. Soc. 1985, 107, 8054.

6.

Rothenberger,  G.;  Moser,  J.;  Graetzel,  M.;  Serpone,  N.;  Sharma,  D.  K.  J.  Am.

38.

7.

Ellingson, R. J.; Asbury, J. B.; Ferrere, S.; Ghosh, H. N.; Sprague, J. R.; Lian, T.;

Nozik,  A.  J.  J.  Phys.  Chem.  B 1998, 102,  6455;  Ghosh,  H.  N.;  Asbury,  J.  B.;

Weng, Y.; Lian, T. J. Phys. Chem. B 1998, 102, 10208; Ghosh, H. N.; Asbury, J.

B.; Lian, T. J.  Phys.  Chem.  B  1998, 102, 6428; Asbury, J. B.; Ellingson, R. J.;

Ghosh,  H.  N.;  Ferrere,  S.;  Nozik,  A.  J.;  Lian,  T.  J.  Phys.  Chem.  B 1999, 103,

3110; Wang, Y.; Asbury, J. B.; Lian, T. J. Phys. Chem. A 2000, 104, 4291; Weng,

Y.-X.;  Wang,  Y.-Q.;  Ashbury,  J.  B.;  Ghosh,  H.  N.;  Lian,  T.  J.  Phys.  Chem.  B

2000, 104, 93; Asbury, J. B.; Wang, Y.-Q.; Hao, E.; Ghosh, H. N.; Lian, T. Res.

Chem. Internmed. 2001, 27, 393; Asbury, J. B.; Hao, E.; Wang, Y.; Ghosh, H. N.;

Lian, T. J. Phys. Chem. B 2001, 105, 4545.

8.

Turner, G. M.; Beard, M. C.; Schmuttenmaer, C. A. J. Phys. Chem. B 2002, 106,

9.

Henglein, A. Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem. 1982, 86, 241.

10.

Bahnemann, D.; Henglein, A.; Spanhel, L. Farad. Discuss Chem. Soc. 1984, 78,

11.

Bahnemann, D.; Henglein, A.; Lilie, J.; Spanhel, L. J. Phys. Chem. 1984, 88, 709.

12.

Bahnemann, D. W.; Hilgendorff, M.; Memming, R. J. Phys. Chem. B 1997, 101,

13.

Duonghong, D.; Ramsden, J.; Graetzel, M. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1982, 104, 2977.

14.

Yamakata, A.; Ishibashi, T.; Onishi, H. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2001, 333, 271.

15.

Grela, M. A.; Colussi, A. J. J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100, 18214.

16.

Szczepankiewicz, S. H.; Colussi, A. J.; Hoffmann, M. R. J. Phys. Chem. B 2000,

104, 9842; Szczepankiewicz, S. H.; Moss, J. A.; Hoffmann, M. R. J. Phys. Chem.

B 2002, 106, 2922.

11716.

151.

4265.

39.

17.

Savenije, T. J.; de Hass, M. P.; Warman, J. M. Z.  Phys.  Chem. 1999, 212, 201;

Warman, J. M.; de Haas, M. P.; Pichat, P.; Serpone, N. J. Phys. Chem. 1991, 95,

8858.

18. Warman, J. M.; de Haas, M. P.; Pichat, P.; Koster, T. P. M.; van der Zouwen-

Assink, E. A.; Mackor, A.; Cooper, R. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 1991, 37, 433.

19.

Breckenridge, R. G.; Hosler, W. R. Phys. Rev. 1953, 91, 793; Frederikse, H. P. R.

J.  Appl.  Phys. 1961, 32, 2211; Forro, L.; Chauvet, O.; Emin, D.; Zuppiroli, L.;

Berger, H.; Lévy, F. J. Appl. Phys. 1994, 75, 633; see also ref. 49.

20. Martin,  S.  T.;  Herrmann,  H.;  Hoffmann,  M.  R.  J.  Chem.  Soc.  Faraday  Trans.

1994, 90, 3315 and 3323;

21.

Durrant, J. R. J. Photochem. Photobiol. A 2002, 148, 5.

22.

Boschloo, G.; Fitzmaurice, D. J. Phys. Chem. B. 1999, 103, 2228; see also Haque,

S.  A.;  Tachibana,  Y.;  Klug,  D.  R.;  Durrant,  J.  R. J.  Phys.  Chem.  B  1998, 102,

1745; Boschloo, G. K.; Goossens, A. J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100, 19489.

23.

Beerman, N.; Boschloo, G.; Hagfeldt, A. J. Photochem. Photobiol. A 2002, 152,

24.

Howe, R. F.; Graetzel, M. J. Phys. Chem. 1985, 89, 4495; Howe, R. F.; Graetzel,

M. J.  Phys.  Chem.  1987, 91,  3906;  Moser,  J.;  Graetzel,  M.;  Gallay,  R.  Helv.

Chem. Acta 1987, 70, 1596; Jaeger, C. D.; Bard, A. J. J. Phys. Chem. 1979, 83,

213.

3146.

25.

Rajh, T.; Nedeljkovic, J. M.; L. X. Chen, O. P.; Thurnauer, M. C. J. Phys. Chem.

B 1999, 103, 3515; Dubinski, A. A.; Perekhotsev, G. D.; Poluektov, O. G.; Rajh,

T.; Thurnauer, M. C. J. Phys. Chem. B 2002, 106, 938.

26. Micic, O. I.; Zhang, Y.; Cromack, K. R.; Trifunac, A. D.; Thurnauer, M. C. J.

Phys. Chem. 1993, 97, 7277 and 13284.

40.

27.

Ishibashi,  K.;  Fujishima,  A.;  Watanabe,  T.;  Hashimoto,  K.  J.  Photochem.

Photobiol.  A 2000, 134,  139;  see  also    Nosaka,  Y.;  S.  Komori;  Yawata,  K.;

Hirakawa, T.; Nosaka, A. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2003, 5, 4731.

28.

Gao,  R.;  Stark,  J.;  Bahnemann,  D.  W.;  Rabani,  J.  J.  Photochem.  Photobiol.  A

29.

Rabani, J.; Yamashita, K.; Ushida, K.; Stark, J.; Kira, A. J. Phys. Chem. B 1998,

2002, 148, 387.

102, 1689.

30.

Yamakata,  A.;  Ishibashi,  T.;  Onishi,  H.  J.  Phys.  Chem.  B 2002, 106,  9122;

Yamakata, A.; Ishibashi, T.; Onishi, H. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2003, 376, 576.

31.

Shkrob, I. A.; Sauer, M. C., Jr.; Gosztola, D. Chem.  Phys.,  submitted;  preprint

available on http://www.arXiv.org/abs/physics/0401059

32.

Koelle, U.; Moser, J.; Graetzel, M. Inorg. Chem. 1985, 24, 2253.

33.

Boschloo, G.; Fitzmaurice,  D.  J.  Phys.  Chem.  B 1999, 103, 7860; Enright, B.;

Fitzmaurice,  D.  J.  Phys.  Chem.  1996, 100,  1027;  O'Regan,  B.;  Graetzel,  M.;

Fitzmaurice, D. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1991, 183, 89; Redmond, G.; Fitzmaurice, D.;

Graetzel, M. J. Phys. Chem. 1993, 97, 6951; Rothenberger, G.; Fitzmaurice, D.;

Graetzel, M. J. Phys. Chem. 1992, 96, 5983.

34.

Safrany, A.; Gao, R.; Rabani, J. J. Phys. Chem. B 2000, 104, 5848.

35.

Kamat, P. V.; Bedja, I.; Hotchandani. J. Phys. Chem. B 1994, 98, 9137; Kormann,

C.; Bahnemann, D. W.; Hoffmann, M. R. J. Phys. Chem. 1988, 92, 5196.

36.

Furube, A.; Asahi, T.; Masuhara, H.; Yamashita, H.; Anpo, M. J. Phys. Chem.

1999, 103, 3120.

37.

Arbour, C.; Sharma, D. K.; Langford, C. H. J. Phys. Chem. 1990, 94, 331.

38.

Dimitrijevic, N. M.; Saponjic, Z.  V.;  Bartels,  D.  M.;  Thurnauer,  M.  C.;  D.  M.

Tiede; Rajh, T. J. Phys. Chem. B 2003, 107, 7368.

41.

39.

Cline, J. A.; Jonah, C. D.; Bartels, D. M. Rev. Sci. Instr. 2002, 73, 3909.

40. 

Gao, R.; Safrany, A.; Rabani, J. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 2002, 65, 599.

41.

Such a conclusion is in accord with several other kinetic studies, suggesting that

hole scavenging by chemisorbed molecules occurs on picosecond or femtosecond

time scale (e.g., refs. 4 and 7).

42.

Lawless, D.; Serpone, N.; Meisel, D. J. Phys. Chem. 1991, 95, 5166.

43.

Rajh, T.; Saponjic, Z. V.; Micic, O. I. Langmuir 1992, 8, 1265.

44.

A modification of the latter scenario, suggested to us by T. Rajh, is rapid injection

of  the  electron  from  a  C-centered  radical  (formed  by  oxidation  of  polyol)

followed by the formation of a new type of trapped electron (such a process can

be observed by low-temperature EPR, see refs. 3 and 26). Such a scenario seems

unlikely  given  the  low  rate  constants  for  this  electron-injection  reaction  in  the

water bulk (where such reactions occur on the millisecond time scale; see refs. 38

and 40b). Even if the radical anchored at the nanoparticle surface reacted much

faster, this scenario would present the same difficulty as the scenarios considered

above.

2042.

45.

Griscom, D. L., in The physics of SiO2 and its interfaces; Pantelides, S. T., Ed.;

Pergamon Press: New York, 1978; pp. 232.

46.

Tang, H.; Lévy, F. J.; Berger, H.; Schmid, P. E. Phys. Rev. B 1995, 52, 7771.

47.

Tang, H.; Pasad, K.; Sanjines, R.; Schmid, P. E.; Lévy, F. J. Appl. Phys. 1994, 75,

48.

The strongest argument in favor of the persistent vis-absorbing CB electron that

we  found  is  that  the  absorbance  keeps  increasing  linearly  with  the  number  of

injected  electrons  per  TiO2  nanoparticle  even  when  the  density  reaches  100

electrons/nanoparticle, (ref. 34) whereas the density of the electron trapping sites

is  expected  to  be  <  15  traps/particle.  (ref.  22)  In  our  view,  this  observation

42.

suggests  little  more  than  that  the  latter  estimate  is  incorrect.  The  impedance

studies  of  rutile  single  crystals  suggest  surface  densities  that  are  an  order  of

magnitude larger; the trap density for a TiO2 nanoparticle could only be higher.

49.

Szczepankiewicz, S. H.; Moss, J. A.; Hoffmann, M. R. J. Phys. Chem. B  2002,

106, 7654.

43.

(b)

10ns

100ns

1µs

10µs

2x10-2

 
0
0
7

D
O
∆

4

2

2

0.01
6
4

0.001
6
4

(a)

0

0

100

200

300ns

Fig. 1; Shkrob et al.

window, ns
 11-13
 13-20
 20-50
  5 0 - 1 7 0

d
e
z
i
l

a
m
r
o
n

 
,

D
O
∆

1

0

(iii)

(i)

(ii)

(iv)

4 0 0

8 0 0

1 2 0 0

wavelength, nm

Fig. 2; Shkrob et al.

(a)

window, ns
 9-13
 13-23
 23-45
 45-75
  7 5 - 1 2 0
  1 2 0 - 2 0 0
  2 0 0 - 3 7 0

20x10

-3

D
O
∆

D
O
∆

0

-3

18x10

(b)

0

4 0 0

6 0 0
8 0 0
wavelength, nm

1 0 0 0

Fig. 3; Shkrob et al.

(a)

window, ns
 9-13
 13-23
 23-45
 45-75
  7 5 - 1 2 0
  1 2 0 - 2 0 0  
  2 0 0 - 3 7 0

(i)

d
e
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
n

 
,

D
O
∆

d
e
z
i
l

a
m
r
o
n

 
,

D
O
∆

2

1

0

2

1

0

(ii)

(b)

4 0 0

6 0 0
8 0 0
wavelength, nm

1 0 0 0

Fig. 4; Shkrob et al.

(i)

window, ns
 45-75
 23-45
 13-23  
 9-13

(ii)

(a)

(ii)

1

0

1

d
e
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
n

 
,

D
O
∆
∆

d
e
z
i
l

a
m
r
o
n

 
,

D
O
∆
∆

(b)

(i)

0

4 0 0

6 0 0
wavelength, nm

8 0 0

1 0 0 0

Fig. 5; Shkrob et al.

vol%

 0
 1
 2.5
 5
  1 0

(c) 

(b) 

(a) 

[glycerol]

17x10

-3

0

-3

21x10

 
0
7
4
D
O
∆

 
0
0
6
D
O
∆

 
0
0
9
D
O
∆

0
-3

15x10

0

0

2 0 0

400ns

Fig. 6; Shkrob et al.

-3

6x10

(a)

)
s
n

 
0
5
3
-
0
3
3
(
 
λ
D
O
∆

)
t
(
f

3

0

1

0

 900 nm
 600 nm
 470 nm

0

0.5

1.0

1.5

[glycerol], M

(b)

900nm
 
vol %

 0
 1
 2.5 
 5
  1 0

0

1 5 0

time

300ns

Fig. 7; Shkrob et al.

 600 nm
 470 nm

-3

6x10

)
s
n

3

 
0
5
3
-
0
3
3
(
 
λ
D
O
0∆

(a)

0

3
∆OD9 0 0 (330-350 ns)

-3

6x10

-3

6x10

(b)

(i)

)
s
n

 

0
5
3
-
0
3
3
(

D
O
∆

3

0

vol %

(iii)

 0
 1
 2.5
 5
  1 0

(ii)

4 0 0

6 0 0

8 0 0

1 0 0 0

wavelength, nm

Fig. 8; Shkrob et al.

1.0

0.0

d
e
z
i
l
a
m

r
o
n

 
,
)
t
(
g

vol% 

 1
 5
  1 0  

(i)
(ii)

0

1 0 0

200ns

Fig. 9; Shkrob et al.

-2

1x10

(a)

 (i)
 (ii)
 (iii)
 (iv)

L2

 
0
0
6
D
O
∆

0

1

0

d
e
z
i
l

a
m
r
o
n

 
,
 
λ
q

0

1 0 0

2 0 0

300ns

(b)

4 0 0

6 0 0

8 0 0

1 0 0 0

wavelength, nm

Fig. 10; Shkrob et al.

s
t
i

n
u

 
.

b
r
a

 
,

q

1.0

0.5

0.0

0

5 0

1 5 0

2 0 0

1 0 0
t 1 2, ns

Fig. 11; Shkrob et al.

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. B, Shkrob jp0000000, Supporting Info Page 1

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

jp0000000

Journal of Physical Chemistry B, Received            ,2004

Supporting Information.

Captions to figures 1S to 7S.

A family of normalized TA kinetics in the  visible obtained in 355 nm laser photolysis  of
oxygenated aqueous solution of TiO2 nanoparticles (similar excitation  conditions  to  Fig.
1). These  kinetics were normalized at  the  maximum  delay  time  of  t =300  ns.  Note  the
double logarithmic plot. The wavelengths of analyzing light are given in the color scale.

Same as Fig. 1S, for oxygen-free solution. The TA kinetics in the near IR (out to  t =8 µm)
were  obtained  using  a  relatively  slow  Ge  detector  (GMP-566),  so  that  only  the  data
points taken after the first 20 ns are shown. The use of this detector was preferable to  the
use of a faster InGaAs  detectors  because the  response  time was  wavelength-independent
(see ref. [] for more detail).

The  progression of TA  spectra  in the  near IR. These  spectra  were obtained using a  fast
Ge photodiode  under the  same excitation conditions as Fig. 3b from  a  5  vol  %  glycerol
solution of aqueous TiO2 nanoparticles. The integration windows are given in the legend.

A family of normalized TA kinetics (450 to  950 nm) for 5 vol % glycerol solution (Figs.
3b and 3S). These  kinetics are normalized  at  ca.  200  ns,  by  which  delay  time  the  hole
scavenging by glycerol is complete. The difference between these  normalized TA  kinetics
in the visible and at  λ≥ 900 nm is due to the additional absorbance signal from short-lived
holes  (on  top  of  the  signal  from  the  electrons);  this  extra  TA  signal  systematically
increases towards the blue. Only trapped electrons absorb in the near IR.

tλ( ) defined by  eq.  (3)  for  (a)  λ= 1.1  µm  and  (b)  λ= 1.3  µm  vs.  glycerol
Functions  f
concentration (in vol %, indicated in the color scale). Same excitation conditions as in Fig.
6. These  TA  kinetics were obtained using  a  fast  InGaAs  photodiode.  (c)  Fractions  Φ
e
obtained  at  900  nm  (open  circles),  1100  nm  (open  squares),  and  1300  nm  (open
diamonds) are shown. All such plots for  λ≥ 900 nm are identical within  the  experimental
error. The  solid line is a least squares fit  to  eq. (2). These  observations suggest  that  the

Fig. 1S

Fig. 2S

Fig. 3S

Fig. 4S

Fig. 5S

© 2004 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. B, Shkrob jp0000000, Supporting Info Page 2

absorbance  of  the  hole  in  the  near  IR  is  negligible,  and  the  TA  signal  originates  from
electrons only.

Fig. 6S

Fig. 7S

Same as Fig. 10, for 1064 nm photoexcitation (6 ns  FWHM,  91 mJ). The  high fluence of
1064 nm photons is needed due to the low quantum yield of the photobleaching, ca. 0.024
(section 3.2). For 532 nm photoexcitation, this yield is ca. 12 times higher.

The data of Fig. 2 plotted as a function of the photon energy. The solid lines are Gaussian
curves. The indexing is the same except for trace (i) which corresponds to trace (iv) in Fig.
2.

0
8
7
 

0
1
8
 

0
4
8
 

0
2
8
 

0
7
8
 

0
0
9
 

0
3
9
 

0
5
9
 

.

M
R
O
N

0
5
4
 

0
8
4
 

0
1
5
 

0
4
5
 

0
7
5
 

0
0
6
 

0
3
6
 

0
6
6
 

0
9
6
 

0
2
7
 

0
5
7
 

m
n

 
,
a
d
b
m
a
l

456789

3

2

0
1

∆ODλ , normalized

.
l
a
 
t
e
 

b
o
r
k
h
S

 
;

S
1
 
.

g

i

F

s
n
0
0
1

4

3

2

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

s
n
0
1

1

d
e
t
a
r
u
t
a
s
-

2

O

l

o
r
e
c
y
l
g
o
n

 

 
0
5
9
 

0
0
0
1
 

0
5
0
1
 

0
0
1
1
 

0
5
1
1
 

0
0
2
1
 

0
5
2
1
 

0
0
3
1
 

0
5
3
1
 

m
n

 
,
a
d
b
m
a
l

.

M
R
O
N

.
l
a
 
t
e
 

b
o
r
k
h
S

 
;

S
2
 
.

g

i

F

7

6

5

4

3

2

7

6

5

4

3

2

7

6

5

4

3

s
µ
1

s
n
0
0
1

d
e
t
a
r
u
t
a
s
-

2
N

l

o
r
e
c
y
l
g
o
n

 

34567

2

34567

2

1

0
1

∆ODλ, normalized

-2

1x10

D
O
∆

window, ns
 25-82
  8 2 - 3 1 0
  3 1 0 - 1 4 0 0
  1 7 0 0 - 7 2 0 0

0

5 vol% glycerol

6 0 0

8 0 0

1 0 0 0

1 2 0 0

1 4 0 0

wavelength, nm

Fig. 3S; Shkrob et al.

.
l
a
 
t
e
 

b
o
r
k
h
S

 
;

S
4
 
.

g

i

F

s
n
0
0
2

0
0
1

0

.

M
R
O
N

0
5
4
 

0
8
4
 

0
1
5
 

0
4
5
 

0
7
5
 

0
0
6
 

0
3
6
 

0
6
6
 

0
9
6
 

0
2
7
 

0
5
7
 

0
8
7
 

0
1
8
 

0
4
8
 

0
7
8
 

0
0
9
 

0
2
9
 

0
5
9
 

m
n

 
,
a
d
b
m
a
l

l

o
r
e
c
y
l

 

g
%
o
v

l

 
5

d
e
t
a
r
u
t
a
s
-

2

O

4

3

2

1

∆ODλ , normalized

1

m
n

 
0
0
1
1
 
t
a
 
)
t
(
f

1

m
n

 

0
0
3
1
 
t
a
 
)
t
(
f

0

0

0

0

vol %

 0
 1.8
 6
 10.5 

(a)

(c)

 900 nm
 1100 nm
 1300 nm

2 0 0

300ns

1 0 0

0.4

n
o

i
t
c
a
r
f

0.0

(b)

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

[glycerol], M

1 0 0

2 0 0

300ns

Fig. 5S; Shkrob et al.

 (i)
 (i)
 (iii)

L2: 1064 nm

-2

2x10

L2

 
0
0
6
D
O
∆

1

0

0

5 0

100ns

Fig. 6S; Shkrob et al.

(iii)

(ii)

(i)

d
e
z
i
l

a
m
r
o
n

 
,

D
O
∆

1

0

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

photon energy, eV

Fig. 7S; Shkrob et al.

