 
The Zero-n Gap Soliton 

Ravi S. Hegde, Herbert G. Winful 

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 

Abstract.  Periodic structures consisting of alternating layers of positive-index and negative-index materials possess a 
novel band gap at the frequency at which the average refractive index is zero.  We show that in the presence of a Kerr 
nonlinearity,  this  zero-n  gap  can  switch  from  low  transmission  to  a  perfectly  transmitting  state,  forming  a  nonlinear 
resonance or gap soliton in the process.  This zero-n gap soliton is omnidirectional in contrast to the usual Bragg gap 
soliton of positive –index periodic structures. 

 
 

dielectric 

structures 

        Periodic 
in 

frequency  within  which 

possess 
an 
stopbands 
electromagnetic  wave  undergoes  coherent  Bragg 
scattering  and  is  totally  reflected  by  the  structure.    In 
1979,  Winful  et  al  showed  that  the  inclusion  of  an 
intensity-dependent  refractive  index  makes  it  possible 
to  tune  the  stop  band  and  thus  switch  the  structure 
from  a  highly  reflecting  state  to  a  totally  transmitting 
state [1].  In the totally transmitting state, the structure 
exhibits a nonlinear resonance with a field distribution 
that peaks at the center [2].  This nonlinear resonance 
structure associated with the Bragg gap is known as a 
gap  soliton  [3]  and  has  been  the  subject  of  intense 
studies [4].  Recently, a completely new kind of band 
gap  has  been  discovered  in  structures  where  the 
certain 
average 
frequencies [5- 9].  One way to achieve such a zero-n 
gap  is  to  create  a  periodic  structure  with  alternating 
layers  of  positive  index  materials  and  negative  index 
materials  (also  termed  “left  handed  materials”  by 
Veselago [10]).  The zero-n gap differs from the usual 
Bragg  gap  in  that  it  is  invariant  to  scale  length  and 
relatively insensitive to disorder and input angle [5, 6].  
The effect of nonlinearity on this zero-n gap has only 
recently  been  discussed  and  phenomena  such  as 
hysteresis and bistability have been predicted [11, 12]. 

index  vanishes 

refractive 

at 

 

In  this  Letter  we  show  that  a  novel  kind  of 
gap  soliton  associated  with  the  zero-n  gap  exists  in 
periodic  structures  with  alternating  positive  and 
negative  index  layers.    We  call  this  the  “zero-n  gap 
soliton”  and  show  that  it  is  relatively  insensitive  to 
input  angle  unlike  the  usual  Bragg  gap  soliton.    This 
raises the intriguing possibility of an omni-directional 
gap  soliton  that  is  also  robust  in  the  presence  of 
disorder.   

We consider a structure in which the positive index 
medium  exhibits  Kerr-type  nonlinearity.  The  negative 
index  medium 
linear  although 
nonlinearity in its electric and magnetic susceptibilities 
can  be  easily  included.  We  ignore  absorption  in  the 
structure,  which  can  also  be  readily  included  within 
this  formalism  The  periodic  structure  (as  in  Fig.  1) 

to  be 

taken 

is 

consists of N unit cells occupying the region z = 0, D, 
translationally invariant  in  the x-y  plane  and bounded 
on both sides by free space. Each cell is formed of two 
2d  
films  film  1  and  film  2  with  thicknesses 
mm,  each 
the 
electromagnetic  wave.    Film  1  is  a  positive  index 
material,  while  film  2  is  a  negative  index  or  left 
handed material.  The dielectric permittivity of film 1, 
described by Eq. (1) is taken to exhibit field intensity 
dependence.  We  ignore  such  effects  for  the  magnetic 
permeability as done in [13].  

1d   and 
the  wavelength  of 

than 

less 

    The material constants for the left handed layer are 
dispersive  and  given  (as  a  function  of  frequency  f  in 
GHz) by Eq. (2).  

For  this  particular  choice  of  parameters,  this 
material has a negative refractive index for f  < 5 GHz. 
The implicit assumption in this formulation is that the 
negative  index  layer  permits  the  use  of  an  effective 
index for the frequency range of interest.   

 

 

 

FIGURE 1. Schematic of the nonlinear periodic structure. 

  

 Adopting an approach similar to [14], we solve for TE 
polarized fields of the form,   

where  θ  is  the  angle  which  the  incident  wave  vector 
makes  with  the  x  axis.  Now  setting  ζ  =  koz.  The 
electric field is in general governed by Eq. (4-5).  

    The  solutions  for  the  most  general  case  have  to  be 
obtained by numerical integration of eqn (3). In case of 
a  Kerr-type  nonlinearity,  the  εiNL(│E│2)  term  in  eqn. 
(1)  can  be  replaced  by  γ│E│2.  To  obtain  the 
transmission of the structure we specify the E field and 
its derivative at the output face, successively integrate 
eqn (4) all the way to the input end. At the interfaces 
of  two  films  we  apply  the  following  boundary 
conditions. 

d
1

d=

For  N  =  32, 

10
= mm,  the  zero-n  gap  is 
centered  around  3.55  GHz  where  the  following 
condition is satisfied.  

2

     

 

A 

     Inclusion  of  nonlinearity  makes  it  possible  to  tune 
the gaps, resulting in bistability and the creation of gap 
solitons.  Fig. 2 shows the transmission of the structure 
as  a  function  of  incident  intensity  for  a  frequency 
within the zero-n gap.  The transmission is multivalued 
leading  to  hysteresis  and  bistability.    Also  notice  that 
the  hysteresis  curves  for  different  incident  angles 
almost overlap  at  the  high  transmittance  point.  At  the 
point  marked  A  the  transmission  is  nearly  unity, 
signifying  a  transmission  resonance.    The  spatial 
distribution of the magnitude of the E field associated 
with  this  transmission  resonance  is  shown  in  Fig  3.  
This is the zero-n gap soliton.  In the figure, the soliton 
is  overlaid  upon  the  periodic  structure,  with  shaded 
regions representing the negative index material.    

      The  zero-n  gap  exhibits  several 
interesting 
features. It can be seen that for the zero-n gap soliton 
the  maxima  and  minima  of  the  intensity  distribution 
occur  at  the  interfaces  between  the  layers.    In  the 
middle  of  the  soliton  where  the  intensity  is  high,  the 
peaks  begin  to  bifurcate  and thus introduce  a  new  set 
of minima.  The overlaid graphic in Fig. 3 shows this 
feature.  It  can  be  seen  that  the  minima  of  this  soliton 
distribution  do  not  go  all  the  way  to  zero.    A  look  at 
the  phase  variation  of  the  E  field  inside  the  structure 
(Fig.  4)  helps  to  understand  this  behavior.  The  phase 
does not build up to π across a layer.  Because there 
is  not  a  π  phase  shift,  complete  destructive 
interference does not  occur  between layers.    It  is  also 
seen that at the interface between a positive index and 
negative index layer there is a change in the sign of the 
slope of the electric field.  This is a result of the sign 
change in magnetic permeability as one crosses from a 
positive index to a negative index medium.   

 

FIGURE  2.  Hysteresis  behavior  of  transmittance  as  a 
function  of  a  defocusing  γIinc  for  detuning  to  the  left  of  the 
zero-n  gap  (f  = 3.51  GHz,  N  =  32.) for  incident  angles  θ  = 
0°, 15°and 30° 

FIGURE  3.  The  Zero-n  gap  soliton,  Spatial  distribution  of 
the  E  field  magnitude  (normalized  w.r.t.  Einc)  when  a 
defocusing γIinc = -0.064 results in a near unity transmittance 
(f = 3.51 GHz, N = 32.) at normal incidence.  The overlaid 
graphic zooms in, to show the bifurcation observed at the top 
of the soliton. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE  4.  Spatial  distribution  of  the  phase  of  the  E  field 
for conditions as in Figure 3. 

For comparison the gap soliton associated with the 
Bragg gap soliton is shown in Fig. 5.  The frequency is 
chosen  to  lie  in  the  Bragg  gap.    It  is  seen  that  the 
minima  of  the  field  pattern  are  nearly  zero  for  the 
Bragg gap soliton.  This is because the evolution of the 
phase  across  a  bilayer  is  continuous  and  goes  all  the 
way to π.   

FIGURE  6.  Spatial  distribution  of  the  E  field  magnitude 
(normalized  w.r.t.  Einc)  with  the  conditions  as  in  Figure  3, 
but having a near zero transmittance.  

zero-n  gap  with  respect  to  input  angle  persists  in  the 
presence  of  nonlinearity.  The  Bragg  gap  soliton 
disappears  for  detuning  as  small  as  5  degrees.  The 
reason  the  Bragg  gap  soliton  exhibits  a  sensitive 
dependence  on  input  angle  is  simply  because  of  its 
sensitivity  to  lattice  scaling.  To  achieve  a  Bragg  gap 
soliton at the new angle one would have to change the 
incident  frequency  and  increase  the  input  intensity.  
Beyond  a  certain  input  angle,  no  Bragg  gap  soliton 
exists. 

FIGURE  5.  The  Bragg  gap  soliton  observed  when  a 
defocusing γIinc = -0.027 is used. (f = 7.15 GHz, N = 32.) at 
normal incidence.   

For  the  same  input  intensity,  the  field  distribution 
on  the  lower  branch  of  the  hysteresis  curve  for  the 
zero-n gap is shown in Fig. 6.  The minima in this case 
also  does  not  go  all  the  way  to  zero.  This  feature  is 
again 
the 
corresponding Bragg gap case. This behavior can also 
be understood in terms of phase evolution.  

the  distribution 

in  contrast 

for 

to 

FIGURE 7.  The Soliton  for an incident angle of 30° (solid 
line)  as  compared  to  the  one  at  normal  incidence  (dotted 
line). γIinc = -0.064 for both cases and other conditions as in 
Figure 3.  

the 

interesting 

It  is  of  interest  to  see  if  the  zero-n  gap  soliton 
exhibits  some  of 
like 
ominidirectionality and robustness of the linear zero-n 
gap itself. The dependence of the zero-n gap soliton on 
incidence angle is shown in Fig. 7.  For the same input 
intensity it persists for angular detuning as large as 30 
degrees from the normal.  Thus the robust nature of the  

features 

We  have  also  studied  the  behavior  of  the  zero-n 
gap soliton with lattice scaling and inclusion of length 
disorders. In the presence of disorder and scale change, 
the zero-n gap soliton remains relatively robust in the 
sense  that  it  can  be  excited  at  the  same  input 
frequency.    However,  the  intensity  needed  to  achieve 
exact nonlinear resonance changes somewhat.  

 

 

 

 

In  conclusion,  we  have  shown 

that  periodic 
structures composed of alternating layers of nonlinear 
positive-index  and  negative  index  materials  possess  a 
novel  gap  soliton  associated  with  the  zero-average-
permittivity band gap.  Such zero-n gap solitons retain 
the  exotic  features  associated  with  the  linear  zero-n 
bandgap.      

REFERENCES 

1.  H.  G.  Winful,  J.  H.  Marburger,  and  E.  Garmire, 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 35, 379 (1979). 

2.  H.  G.  Winful,  PhD  dissertation,  University  of 

Southern California, 1981. 

3.  W. Chen and D. L. Mills, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 160 

(1987). 

4.  R. E. Slusher and B. Eggleton, Nonlinear Photonic 

5. 

Crystals , (Springer, NY, 2003).  
J.  Li,  L.  Zhou,  C.  T.  Chan,  and  P.  Sheng,  Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 90, 083901 (2003). 

6.  L. Wu, S. He, and L. Chen, Opt. Express, 11, 1283 

(2003); Phys. Rev. B 67, 235103 (2003). 

7.  H.  Jiang,  H.  Chen,  H.  Li,  Y.  Zhang,  and  S.  Zhu, 

8. 

9. 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 5386 (2003). 
I. V. Shadrivov, A. A. Sukhorukov, Y. S. Kivshar, 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 3820 (2003). 
I. V.  Shadrivov, N. A. Zharova, A. A. Zharov, and 
Y. Kivshar, arXiv:physics/0402087  2004. 

10.  V.  G.  Veselago,  Soviet  Physics  Uspekhi-Ussr  10, 

509 (1968). 

11.  M.  W.  Feise,  I.  V.  Shadrivov,  and  Y.  S.  Kivshar, 

arXiv:physics/0401094  2004. 

12.  R.  S.  Hedge  and  H.  G.  Winful,  arXiv: 

physics/0405040  2004 

13.  V.  Shadrivov,  A.  A.  Sukhorukov,  Y.  S.  Kivshar, 
A.  A.  Zharov,  A.  D.  Boardman,  and  P.  Egan, 
Physical Review E 69 (2004).  

14.  U. Trutschel and F. Lederer, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 5, 

2530 (1988). 

 

 

 

