STUDY OF NEW FNAL-NICADD EXTRUDED SCINTILLATOR 
AS ACTIVE MEDIA OF LARGE EMCAL OF ALICE AT LHC 

O. A. GRACHOV†
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Wayne State University,  
Detroit, MI 48201, USA 

T.M.CORMIER 

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Wayne State University,  
Detroit, MI 48201, USA 

A. PLA-DALMAU, A.BROSS 

Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory,  
Batavia, Il 60510, USA 

V.RYKALIN 

         Northern Illinois Center for Accelerator and Detector Development (NICADD), 
                        Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Il 60115, USA 

 

The  current  conceptual  design  of  proposed  Large  EMCal  of  ALICE  at  LHC  is  based 
largely  on  the  scintillating  mega-tile/fiber  technology  implemented  in  CDF  Endplug 
upgrade project and in both barrel and endcap electromagnetic calorimeters of the STAR. 
The  cost  of  scintillating  material  leads  us  to  the  choice  of  extruded  polystyrene  based 
scintillator,  which  is  available  in  new  FNAL-NICADD  facility.  Result  of  optical 
measurements, such as light yield and light yield variation, show that it is possible to use 
this material as active media of Large EMCal of ALICE at LHC.    

Introduction 

The  ALICE-USA  collaboration  proposes  to  build  a  large  area  electromagnetic 
calorimeter (Large EMCal). The main goal in the design of Large EMCal is to 
significantly extend the limit coverage of the PHOS calorimeter [1]. The Large 
EMCal will be central to ALICE’s program for the study of hard processes. 
      The calorimeter will cover the major part of the ALICE central acceptance, 
see Figure 1. The full detector spans ∆η= ± 0.7 with azimuthal acceptance of ∆φ 
=  120°  and  segmented  into  ~20.000  towers  projective  in  φ  and  η  to  the 

                                                           
†e-mail address: grachov@physics.wayne.edu  (Oleg A.Grachov) 

1 

2 

 

interaction vertex.  Minimum size of each tower is approximately 50 mm by 50 
mm.  The  chosen  technology  is  a  tile/fiber  sampling  technique  with  scintillator 
and  absorber  plates  perpendicular  to  the  incident  particles.  The  calorimeter 
structure consists of 25 active 5-mm scintillator layers interspersed with 5-mm 
lead absorption plates. The constant size in ∆φ and ∆η and projective nature of 
the  towers  means  that  there  are  several  thousands  different  sizes  geometries. 
The  technology  chosen  for  the  construction  of  the  Large  EMCal  is  that  of 
megatile  production  as  used  in  the  CDF  Endplug  upgrade  project  and  in  both 
endcap and barrel calorimeters of the STAR. [2, 3, 4]. 
 

             
 
Figure 1.  ALICE end view with proposed Large EMCal.  

 

 
      The Large EMCal required more than 15 tons of scintillating material. The 
thousands  of  different  tile  geometries  make  production  technique  such  as 
injection molding far less attractive and become impractical because of the cost 
of  the  molds.  Cast  plastic  scintillator  sheets  (at  BICRON,  Kuraray)  may  cost 
about $40-$70 per kg. The estimated price for extruded scintillator strips, which 
are become available at Fermilab, ranges between $5 and $8 per kg. [5]. These 
issues first lead us to the choice of extruded scintillator and drove the R&D into 
extruded material at FNAL-NICADD (Northern Illinois Center for Accelerator 
and  Detector  Development,  Northern  Illinois  University)  facility.  One  of  the 

 

3 

most  important  problems  of  optical  system  related  to  the  scintillator  is  to 
achieve a specified minimum light yield and maintain high spatially uniformity, 
so  that  the  resolution  of  calorimeter  is  not  compromised  by  a  lack  of 
photostatistics or position dependence. Physics requirements lead us to require a 
light  yield  more  than  2  photoelectrons  per  minimum  ionizing  particle  (for  full 
optical  chain  including  photo  detector)  and  uniformity  of  response  over  the 
surface  of  tile  better  than  3%  RMS.  Because  the  Kuraray  scintillator  has  been 
used  many  times  in  large  scale,  long  use-time  applications  and  meet  our 
requirements,  we  concentrated  on  comparison  of  Kuraray  and  the  FNAL-
NICADD scintillator. We have compared the light yield and light yield variation 
of  individual  tiles  produced  from  Kuraray  SCSN-81  [6]  and  FNAL-NICADD 
extruded scintillator.  

Measurements 

Kuraray  SCSN-81  and  new  FNAL-NICADD  scintillator  of  5  mm  thickness 
were used for production of tiles.  
      A  first  prototype  production  batch  of  scintillating  strips  was  completed  at 
FNAL in September 2003. This is blue – emitting scintillator with an absorption 
cut-off at ~ 400 nm (for a 1-cm path length) and an emission maximum at 420 
nm.  The  optical  characteristics  of  bulk  material  are  the  same  as  that  of  the 
MINOS extrusions [7].  
      For  measurements  we  used  tiles  with  dimensions  65  mm  x  71  mm 
(maximum  size,  which  required  current  design).  A  set  of  three  identical  tiles 
from  each  material  has  been  produced.  A  peripheral  sigma-groove  was 
machined in each tile, where a Kuraray Y11 (200 ppm) MS WLS fiber diameter 
0.83 mm was inserted.  In order to exclude dependence of results from quality 
of fibers, we used one fiber. Length of fiber was 60 cm. The both end of WLS 
fiber  were  polished  and  than  mirrored  on one  end.  The  other end of fiber was 
coupled to PMT (Hamamatsu R6094) with optical grease. The non-polished tile 
edges are painted white and tile was wrapped with light reflective material. All 
design  parameters  of  WLS  fiber  read-out  groove  such  as  shape,  depth,  width, 
and distance from edges of tile were optimized for SCSN-81 scintillator during 
R&D phase for Barrel calorimeter of STAR at RHIC.  
       In  order  to  measure  the  light  yield  and  monitor  light  yield  variation  a 
specialized test setup has been design and build at Wayne State University, see 
Figure 2. The apparatus consist of DaVinci XYZ positioning system with bridge 
mounted  Y-Z  slide.  Tile  under  test  is  mounted  on  the  trigger  counter.  Trigger 
counter  and  PMT  are mounted on the X slide. Cosmic ray counter is mounted 
below  movable  X  slide.  Radioactive  source  with  collimator  is  mounted  on  the 

4 

 

Y-Z  slide.  Combination  of  independent  movements    of    X  and  Y-Z  slides 
controlled  by  a  personal  computer  allowing  the  light  output  of  a  tile  to  be 
scanned transversely as a function of position of radioactive source. The range 
of motion 
 

         
 
Figure 2. Test setup for light yield and light yield variation measurements. 

 

 
is  200  mm  in  X  –  direction  and  250  mm  in  Y  –  direction.  The  precision  of 
motion is 0.1 mm.   
The light yield from the tiles was measured using cosmic ray. Trigger was made 
with coincidence of two counters positioned behind the tested scintillating tile. 
Due  to  the  difference  in  the  area  between  system  of  trigger  counters  and 
scintillating tile under test there were empty triggers that permitted measuring of 
PED  signal.  Typically  3000  events  were  collected  for  each  tile.  To  obtain  the 
average light yield information, the spectra were fitted with a Gaussian function, 
see Figure 3.  

 

 
 
Figure 3. The amplitude spectrums for cosmic ray crossing scintillating tiles.  

 

 

5 

 
We  estimated  the  absolute  light  yield  using  previous  measurements  of  single 
photoelectron spectra. Tiles produced from two different scintillating materials 
always  show  the  same  light  yield.  The  average  light  yield  is  8  photoelectrons 
per mip; uncertainty of light yield is 5% due to insertion of fiber into read out 
groove.  The  uniformity  of  response  has  been  measured  using  the  collimated 
Sr90  beta ray radioactive source. We used lead collimator of 5-mm thick with 
hole of 2-mm diameter. Face of tiles was scanned with steps 8-mm and 7-mm in 
X and Y directions, respectively, see Figure 4.  

 
                       

 

 
Figure 4 View of scintillating tile with sigma-groove and scheme of two-dimensional scan.  

 
Trigger  was  made  with  trigger  counter  and  additional  coincidence  with  signal 
from  tile  under  test.  4000  events  were  collected  for  each  point.  A  Le  Croy 
2249A  ADC  was  used  for  signal  digitization.  Pulse-height  distributions 
collected  for  each  point  were  fitted  with  a  Gaussian  to  obtain  a  peak  position. 
Transverse  response  maps  are  presented  as  a  surface  plot  with  a  contour,  see 
Figure 5 a), b). Normalization was done on the average response for each tile. 
The  maximum  deviation  is  only  inside  5%  and  6%  for  SCSN-81  and  FNAL-
NICADD  samples,  respectively.  Tile  response  is  highest  around  boundaries 
where  WLS  fibers  exit  from  tile  and  lowest  in  the  center  of  tile.  Overall,  the 
RMS spread in the transverse uniformity, in both of these cases, is less than 3%. 
No  significant  difference  between  the  SCSN-81  and  FNAL-NICADD  samples 
were observed.  

6 

 

 
 
 
 

 
Figure 5. Transverse response variation maps: a) - SCSN-81, b) - FNAL-NICADD  

 

Conclusion 

Our  results  of  tile  measurements  show,  that  for  relatively  small  sizes  of 
scintillating  tiles  with  sigma-groove,  Kuraray  SCSN-81  and  FNAL-NICADD 
extruded scintillating material produces approximately the same results. FNAL-
NICADD  extruded  scintillator  would  be  an  acceptable  choice,  as  active  media 
of ALICE Large EMCal. 
The  final  scintillator  selection  will  be  based  on  mechanical  and  optical 
tolerances and results of beam studies of calorimeter prototype. 
 

References 

1.  “PHOS Technical Design Report”, ALICE-DOC-2003-015 v.1. 
2.  S.Kim, et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth., A360 (1999) 206 
3.  M.Beddo, et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth.,. A499 (2003) 725-739 
4.  C.E.Allgrower, et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth.,. A499 (2003) 740-750 
5.  Anna  Pla-Dalmau,  Alan  D.Bross,  Victor  V.  Rykalin.,  FERMILAB-Conf-

6.  KURARAY  AMERICA,  INC.,  200  Park  Avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.10166, 

03-318-E 

USA 

7.  Anna Pla-Dalmau, FERMILAB-Conf-00/43 January 2001 
 

