 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nuclear Power and the World’s Energy Requirements. 
 
V. Castellano, R. F. Evans and J. Dunning-Davies, 
Department of Physics, 
University of Hull, 
Hull  HU6 7RX, 
England. 
 
J.Dunning-Davies@hull.ac.uk 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Abstract. 
 
   The  global requirements for energy are increasing rapidly as the global population 
increases  and  the  under-developed  nations  become  more  advanced.  The  traditional 
fuels  used  in  their  traditional  ways  will  become  increasingly  unable  to  meet  the 
demand. The need for a review of the energy sources available is paramount, although 
the  subsequent  need  to  develop  a  realistic  strategy  to  deal  with  all  local  and  global 
energy  requirements  is  almost  as  important.  Here  attention  will  be  restricted  to 
examining  some  of  the  claims  and  problems  of  using  nuclear  power  to  attempt  to 
solve this major question. 
 

 

1 

 
Introduction. 
 
    One  of  the  more  important  factors  involved  when  determining  the  overall 
development  of  a  country  is  its  energy  consumption.  It  is  undoubtedly  the  case  that 
this factor provides a major difference between the so-called developed and under (or 
less)  developed  countries  of  the  world.  During  the  post-war  period,  the  rapid 
development  of  the  economies  of  the  Western  World  was  linked  closely  to  oil,  and 
possibly still is. Oil was used for a wide variety of purposes, for electricity production, 
for transport, as well as in the growth of the entire petrochemical industry. However, 
the oil crises of 1973 and 1979 produced a change in attitude and the main change was 
in the effort employed to make the West less vulnerable to the power of the major oil 
providers.  This  change  did  not  affect  the  developed  world  too  drastically,  but  the 
under-developed  countries  fared  less  well  and  many  plunged  even  further  into  debt. 
With  the  population  of  the  under-developed  world  being  larger  than,  and  increasing 
faster than, the population of the West, it seems the situation can only deteriorate.  
 
   In 1999, the United Nations announced that the world’s population had reached six 
billion, a mere twelve years after reaching the five billion mark. It is predicted that the 
figure of seven billion will be achieved between 2011 and 2015. The actual outcome 
depends crucially on the situations in China and India, the two most highly populated 
countries  of  the  world,  which  between  them  are  home  to  some  38%  of  the  world’s 
population. At present, China has 1,281 million inhabitants, India 1,050 million; but 
by 2050 it is predicted that India’s total population will have overtaken China’s total, 
having  approximately  1,600  million  inhabitants  compared  with  China’s  predicted 
figure  of  1,400  million.  The  reason  these  two  countries  are  so  important  in  any 
consideration  of  energy  needs  is  because  both  are  counted  in  the  group  of  under-
developed  countries  and,  while  at  present  the  less  developed  countries  account  for 
approximately 80% of the world’s population, by 2050 it is predicted that that figure 
will  have  risen  to  about  86%  [1].  These  figures  are  of  vital  importance  when 
considering global energy requirements since, at present, the under-developed part of 
the world uses far less energy per head of population than does the developed part. It 
is estimated, as shown below, that twelve times as much energy per person is used in 
the  developed  countries  as  compared  with  the  under-developed  ones.  However,  that 
situation  is  changing  rapidly  as  the  under-developed  countries  desperately  strive  to 
catch up with the rest. A further problem, which could increase in the future, is that 
much of this energy is provided by the combustion of fossil fuels [2], resulting in the 
production  of  large  quantities  of  CO2, SOx and  NOx, with the attendant problems of 
increased global warming and acidification of rain [3].       
 
      It has been estimated [2] that the present energy consumption of the world is in the 
region of 2 ·
 1020 Joules per year, which equates to a rate of working of something of 
the  order  of  0.63  ·
  1013  Watts.  With  the  world  population  being  approximately  six 
and a quarter billion, it follows  that each person accounts for about 1kW. However, 
this  figure  totally  ignores  the  fact  that  the  approximately  20%  of  the  world’s 
population, or about one and a quarter billion people, inhabiting the developed world 
consume  roughly  75%  of  the  energy  produced,  or  about  3.78  kW  per  head  of 
population.  As  a  complete  contrast,  the  five  billion  people  of  the  under-developed 

 

2 

 2.36 ·

world are able to call on the remaining 25% of the energy produced in the world and 
this corresponds to a mere 0.315kW per head of population.  
 
      For  good  and  understandable  reasons,  the  underdeveloped  sections  of  the  world 
are  attempting  to  catch  up  with  the  more  developed  areas.  Achieving  this,  would 
improve  so  many  aspects  of  life  for  so  many  people;  in  particular,  health  should 
improve  and  life  expectancy  increase.  However,  any  such  successful  modernisation 
would  necessarily  include  an  enormous  increase  in  energy  consumption.  At  the 
moment, if all people in the world consumed the same amount of energy as those in 
the developed countries, the total amount of energy required would be »
 1013 
Watts.  This  nearly  quadruples  the  present  level  of  energy  consumption, leading to a 
projected annual energy requirement of »
 7.5 ·
 1020 Joules. Such a requirement, when 
it  arises,  may  be  met  only  by  increased  availability of energy. This extremely rough 
estimate  ignores  the  fact  that  the  world’s  population  is  increasing  quite  rapidly  and 
assumes  that  any  technological  advances  will  not  cause  increased  drains  on  energy 
resources.  The  problem  of  satisfying  the  world’s  energy  needs  is  a  major  one  and 
needs  to  be  addressed  urgently  since  the  solution  cannot  be  simply  increasing  the 
present methods of energy provision. This is so because the energy sources relied on 
now  represent  a  finite  energy  reservoir  and  also  some  of  the  thermodynamic 
implications  of  present  practices  need  examining  if  a  clean  environment  is  to  be 
produced for future generations.  
 
Traditional sources of energy. 
 
      The reserves of fossil fuels are known to be finite and, even at the current level of 
usage, their life-times are fairly small. In fact, it might be noted that already in 1999 
and the first quarter of 2002, the total world demand for oil exceeded the total world 
supply  [4].  These  two  cases  may  be  merely  blips  in  the  statistics  but,  nevertheless, 
sound  a  warning  as  far  as  dependence  on  oil  is  concerned.  Coal,  on  the  other  hand, 
presents different problems. The stocks are diminishing rapidly, the cost of extraction 
in  some  cases  is  increasing  and,  like  oil,  it  contributes  considerably  to  the  planet’s 
environmental  problems  when  used  as  a  fuel.  Another  major  source  in  the  West  is 
provided by natural gas which has the advantage of not producing high quantities of 
CO2  when  burnt,  but  its  stocks  are  strictly  limited.  Furthermore,  when  the  above 
population  figures  and  the  relative  sizes  of  the  developed  and  under-developed 
sections of the world are noted, it is seen that the energy requirements of the world are 
certain  to  rise  drastically  in  the  near  future.  This  means  that,  even  allowing  for  the 
possible discovery of new resources, fossil fuels will be unable to provide the world 
with  sufficient  energy  for  any  significant  length  of  time.  It  might  be  noted  also  that 
fossil  fuels  are  used  extensively  in  both  the  pharmaceutical  and  petrochemical 
industries, where substitutes prove expensive alternatives. 
 
    The unfortunately named ‘renewable’ energy sources, although quite numerous and 
varied,  are  unlikely  to  be  able  to  contribute  significantly  more  than  about  20%  of 
future total energy requirements [5]. These sources include geothermal energy, solar 
energy,  wind  power  and wave power. Numerous though these may seem, it remains 
extremely  unlikely  that,  taken  together,  these  could  combine  to  satisfy  the  world’s 
future energy needs, especially if increased demand is accompanied by a decrease in 
the availability of fossil fuels as seems likely. All these sources of energy must surely 

 

3 

have an important rôle to play, but it should always be remembered that while these 
sources are termed ‘renewable’, and although they truly seem non-decreasing, they too 
represent finite sources ultimately; - the second law of thermodynamics would allow 
nothing else! 
 
       It is well-known that, in the regions of the earth not too far from the surface, there 
is a temperature gradient of roughly 30K/km. In some places, the higher temperatures 
below the suface lead to geysers and other phenomena. However, the heat distribution 
is not uniform, with the temperature gradient being much greater in some places than 
others.  A  geyser  is  formed  if  water  accumulates  deep  down  where  it  is  turned  into 
steam which builds up in pressure before breaking through the earth’s surface. Some 
of  these  naturally occurring phenomena have been harnessed to provide superheated 
steam  which,  in  turn,  may  be  used  to  provide  power.  Such  plants  may  well  make  a 
useful contribution to energy needs but they are unlikely to prove significant globally 
and so geothermal energy sources are not likely to make any worthwhile impact as far 
as global energy needs are concerned. 
 
      Wind and solar power, the two major regenerative sources, face the major problem 
of requiring a substantial portion of the earth’s surface to provide the required energy. 
It has been speculated [2] that, at some time in the future, if the reliance on these two 
sources was increased, that portion could be 10% or more. What is more, such land 
surface  would  have  to  be  in  carefully  chosen,  appropriate  places;  possibly  in  the 
tropics for solar power or in known windy regions for wind power. There would also 
be  associated  transmission  problems  but,  possibly  more  importantly,  although  wind 
and  solar  power  sound  attractive  to  many  people  initially,  as  soon  as  the  amount  of 
land  to  be  committed  to  such  schemes  became  known,  it  is  likely  that  social 
objections  would  be  raised  quite  forcibly.  Further,  both  sources  would  be  unable  to 
guarantee  actual  production  at  any  particular  time  and  so  substantial  high  power 
storage  facilities  would  be  needed  and,  as  yet,  no  such  facility  exists.  It  has  been 
estimated  [2]  that  these  two  sources  could  not  provide  more  than  about  20%  of 
Britain’s  energy  requirements  and  possibly  less  for  some  other  northern  countries. 
These  two  sources  must  be  remembered,  however,  as  long  term  possibilities  for  at 
least helping provide for the world’s energy needs. 
 
      The  harnessing  of  wave  power  presents  its  own  set  of  seemingly  enormous 
engineering problems and, so far, it seems there has been little progress in solving the 
practical problems of energy conversion associated with this form of power. However, 
looming over everything is the shear power of the sea. It will be a truly tremendous 
feat of engineering to produce a device which is able to harness the power of the sea 
for  our  energy  needs;  a  device  that  is  robust  enough  to  withstand  major  storm 
conditions and yet delicate enough to operate efficiently in conditions of relative calm. 
Any deployment of collectors for such a system would inevitably affect shipping and 
it is doubtful that any system would satisfy the worlds’ total energy needs, at least not 
in  the  near  future.  However,  this  is  certainly  another  potential  source  not  to  be 
forgotten. 
 
       Another  source  of  energy,  particularly  popular  in  some  parts  of  the  world,  is 
biomass.  However,  this  source  presents  a  big  danger  because  its  abuse  could 
accelerate the world deforestation process. This source is another which should not be 

 

4 

termed ‘renewable’ since, at present rates, for every ten hectares cut down, only one is 
being replanted. Another disadvantage with this fuel is that it provides another source 
of contamination of the atmosphere. 
 
      Other potential sources, such as ocean thermal power and the hydraulic resource, 
as  well  as  further  details  of  the  above-mentioned  sources  have  been  discussed 
elsewhere [2]. It seems, unfortunately, that wave power, biomass, geothermal energy 
and  tidal  sources  have  all  been  found  lacking  when  it  comes  to  providing  for  the 
worlds’  future  probable  energy  needs;  they  provide  insufficient  power  for  present, 
leave alone future, purposes. This leaves the fossil fuels, which are slowly but surely 
disappearing, and nuclear power.     
       
Nuclear power. 
 
       At present, nuclear fission reactors provide a significant proportion of the world’s 
energy,  with  approximately  four  hundred  nuclear  plants  being  in  operation  and 
producing of the order of 17% of the world’s electricity. High concentrations of these 
plants are to be found in the U.S.A., Japan and Europe. However, once again there is 
reliance  on  a  finite  source  of  fuel,  uranium;  although,  in  terms  of  power  production 
potential, resources are much greater than is the case for fossil fuels. In many ways, as 
far  as  the  projected  time  for  which  mankind  might  survive  is  concerned,  one  major 
sustainable method of energy production is provided by fast breeder reactors. In these 
reactors, under appropriate conditions, the neutrons given off by fission reactions can 
‘breed’ more fuel from otherwise non-fissionable isotopes. The most commonly used 
reaction  for  this  purpose  is  by  obtaining  plutonium  239Pu  from  non-fissionable 
uranium  238U. The term ‘fast breeder’ refers to the situations where more fissionable 
material  is  produced  by  the  reactor  itself.  This  latter  situation  is  possible  because 
uranium 238U is many times more abundant than fissionable uranium 235U and may be 
converted  into  plutonium  239Pu,  which  may  used  as  fuel,  by  the  neutrons  from  a 
fission chain reaction. Attractive though such reactors may appear at first, they prove 
to  be  extremely  expensive,  largely  due to important safety concerns surrounding the 
use of molten metals to remove the huge quantities of heat produced and to the fact 
that  the  fuel  is  highly  radioactive  plutonium.  However,  nuclear  power  always  raises 
great worries with many people on at least two counts: firstly, there is always worry 
over  a  possible  accident  occurring,  and  secondly  there  is  worry  over  the  disposal of 
any radioactive waste. Countries such as the UK and Japan reprocess a proportion of 
the  waste  for  use  in  weapons  and medical facilities. However, this is expensive and 
time  consuming  and  should  be  viewed  as  a  form  of  recycling,  rather  than  waste 
‘disposal’.  In  countries  such  as  France  and  the  USA,  the  majority  of  the  waste  is 
stored in water tanks on the actual sites of the nuclear fission reactors. This has led to 
a  huge  build-up,  over  the  past  fifty  years,  of  a  substantial  stockpile  of  highly 
radioactive  waste.  This  has  prompted  the  need  to  find  essentially  permanent  storage 
facilities  for  the  material  and,  for  example,  the  American  government  is  presently 
having  such  a  storage  facility  constructed  at  Yucca  mountain  in  Nevada.  This 
proposed  facility  is  proving  an  enormously  expensive  exercise  as  reported  in  the 
National Geographic [6]. 
 
      The big growth in the use of nuclear power came approximately thirty years ago 
and  was  probably  due  to  the  oil  crises  of  the  seventies.  As  soon  as  the  price  of  oil 

 

5 

returned  to  normality,  however,  nuclear  energy  ceased  being  competitive,  mainly 
because  of  the  high  costs  associated  with  basic  nuclear  technology.  These  costs  are 
recoverable  in  the  long  term  and  proof  of that claim is provided by realising that in 
2002,  the  cost  in  cents  per  kWh  of  electric  generation  was  1.76  for  nuclear  power, 
1.79 for coal, 5.28 for oil and 5.69 for gas; where these costs cover fuel, operation and 
maintenance,  but  not  capital  costs  [7].    Hence,  nuclear  power  was  able  to  undercut 
other  forms  of  energy  generation  and  so  should,  in  the  longer  term,  be  capable  of 
recovering  the  initial  capital  outlay  without  losing  the  lowest  position  on  the  cost 
scale. It is always worth remembering also that, while there are drawbacks associated 
with the use of nuclear power (drawbacks which are outlined above), its use does not 
produce  the  dangerous  gases  which  are  polluting  the  atmosphere  and  causing  acid 
rain. These may seem small points but everything needs to be taken into account when 
attempting to assess the provision of the worlds’ future energy requirements. 
 
Conventional methods for the disposal of radioactive waste. 
 
      Radioactive  material  that  cannot  be  utilised  directly  in  other  processes  is 
designated nuclear waste and most nuclear processes produce amounts of such waste. 
Long term solutions  for its safe  disposal have been sought for many years but, even 
today,  few  suggested  solutions  have  been  implemented.  There  are,  in  fact,  several 
categories of waste but here attention will be restricted to a consideration of methods 
for disposing of so-called ‘high level’ waste. 
 
        Modern  conventional  nuclear  reactors  (advanced  gas  reactors  and  pressurised 
water reactors) use enriched uranium fuel as a heat source. This is made from natural 
uranium ore which typically contains about 0.7% uranium 235U  , enriched to between 
two and three per cent, depending on the requirements of the particular reactor. This 
leaves a large amount of uranium 238U with a reduced concentration of uranium 235U; 
this  is  classed  as  ‘medium  level’  radioactive  waste.  The  enriched  fuel  is  then 
compacted  into  fuel  rods  as  UO2,  ready  for  use  in  a  reactor  core.  When  exposed  to 
‘thermalised’ neutrons, the uranium  235U undergoes stimulated fission, leading to the 
production of a great variety of radioactive by-products, stored in the fuel rods. Once 
the concentration of uranium 235U drops below about 0.9%, the fuel rod is classed as 
‘spent’ and a new rod replaces it. The ‘used’ fuel rods produce a considerable amount 
of heat due to their high level of radioactivity - approximately 3 ·
 108 times that of a 
new fuel rod - and are stored typically in ten metre deep water pools on site for at least 
twelve  months.  This  storage  is  to  allow  them  to  cool  and  for  their  radioactivity  to 
decrease to a safer level. These ‘cool’ rods are then felt safer to transport and may be 
sent  either  to  a  reprocessing  plant  where  useful  products  such  as  plutonium  and  the 
remaining  uranium  may  be  extracted  or,  more  usually,  may  be  moved  to  a  large, 
longer-term storage facility.  
 
    The  reprocessing  of  the  fuel  rods  is  achieved  by  cutting  them  up  and  dissolving 
them in nitric acid. This releases most of the gaseous fission products into solution; 
the  exception  being  the  noble gases. Most of the radioactivity in the spent fuel rods 
(» 76%)  originates  from  the  fission  products,  except  plutonium.  Since  the  plutonium 
and  remaining  uranium  are  of  use,  they  are  removed  from  the  solution  chemically, 
leaving  the  highly  radioactive  waste  in  solution.  This  solution  is  then  stored  for  a 
number of years before being evaporated and vitrified into glass blocks for long-term 

 

6 

storage.  This  process,  although  seemingly  efficient,  in  that  the  final  waste  material 
contains about 97% of the waste fission products, produces a large amount of low and 
intermediate  waste  which  must  be  disposed  of  also.  However,  once  waste  is  in  the 
form of vitrified waste or cool fuel rods, it may be ‘disposed’ of either by being placed 
sufficiently out of harms way so that it requires no more monitoring or alternatively by 
being ‘neutralised’ by conversion to a harmless substance. 
 
      At  present,  the  most  popular  method  is  to  store  the  waste  deep  underground  in 
very stable geological sites so that, by the time the waste leaks out, it is of no danger 
to life on earth. Such sites are required to be such that the waste may be safely stored 
for of the order of 400,000 years. One major problem with this, however, is that there 
is  little  evidence  to  support the supposition that the containers designed for the task 
would  themselves  survive  for  such  a  long  time.  There  is  also  a  great  deal  of 
controversy over the levels of seepage of radioactive elements from the stored waste, 
since  predictions  over  such  a  long  period  of  time  are  fraught  with  inherent 
uncertainties. 
 
      It is interesting, and possibly instructive, to consider data from what amounts to a 
natural  uranium  reactor,  which  provides  a  precedent  for  radio-isotope  distribution 
over  a  very  long  time  scale.  A  recently  discovered  site  in  West  Africa  had  an 
unusually low concentration of uranium 235U within the uranium ore. The only way it 
is felt this can be explained is if a significant proportion of the original uranium 235U 
underwent  fission.  The  area  of  land  concerned  is  saturated  with  water  which  would 
provide  a  moderator  capable  of  thermalising  the  neutrons.  If  the  concentrations  of 
uranium 235U were sufficiently high, it is perfectly possible for a natural fission reactor 
to operate. Indeed, the concentrations of radioactive products indicate that this natural 
reactor operated approximately 1.8 billion years ago. When measurements were taken 
to see how far the metallic radioactive products had travelled in that time, it was found 
to be less than a metre from the original reactor site. Although the data is specific to 
the  site  in  question,  it  does  suggest  that  the  level  of  transport  of  waste  may  be 
insignificant as far as the human race is concerned. 
 
      Another method of dealing with radioactive waste, which is under consideration at 
present, is the conversion of the waste into less dangerous materials, usually through 
high  intensity  neutron  bombardment.  The  idea  is  currently  still  at  the  development 
stage  but  its  main  disadvantage  is  the  low  volume  of  waste  that  can  be  practically 
converted in this way. 
 
An alternative method for disposal of high-level radioactive waste. 
 
      An  alternative  method  for  disposing  of  high-level  radioactive  waste  has  been 
proposed  recently  by  Santilli  [8].  It  is  a  form  of  neutralisation  but  does  not  use  the 
conventional  methods  currently  being  researched.  Indeed,  classical  formulations  of 
quantum  chemistry  and  nuclear  models  do  not  even  permit  the  practical  method 
proposed.  This  new  method  arises  from  a  number  of  discrepancies  between  the 
theoretical and measured values using the current formulation of quantum mechanics. 
Santilli has attempted to resolve these issues by formulating what might be termed a 
new form of quantum mechanics, known as hadronic mechanics, which is based on a 
new  type  of  mathematics  called  isomathematics  [8].  Although  abstract  in  nature, 

 

7 

isomathematics  has  already  had  some  definite  practical  success.  For  example,  it  has 
been used successfully to predict the growth of sea shells, something which could not 
be  done  previously  using  conventional  mathematical  techniques  [9].  Though  only 
mentioned  in  passing,  hadronic  mathematics  is  an  extensive  rewrite  of  theory  as 
known by most people. It is not, however, excessively complex, merely different and 
it  is  that  that  initially  makes  it  hard  to  grasp.  However,  once  the  basic  formalism  is 
understood, much of what may be deduced follows quite straightforwardly. If this new 
theory is a true representation of nuclear and molecular structure, then it predicts that 
neutrons  may  be  viewed  as  compressed  hydrogen  atoms.  Conventionally,  the 
probability for beta-decay of a neutron into a proton, electron and neutrino is very low 
for  radioactive  elements  on  a  nuclear  timescale;  for  stable  isotopes,  the  lifetime  of 
neutrons is effectively infinite. Hadronic mechanics predicts that such a reaction may 
be stimulated within the nuclei of radioactive materials. 
 
      In essence, a radioactive nucleus is in an excited energy state and is attempting to 
return  to  its  ground  state  energy..  Under  normal  circumstances,  this  is  achieved  by 
spontaneous fission or radioactive emission, the time taken to decay being dependent 
on how much excess energy the nucleus has. This can vary between 10-31 seconds and 
millions of years. An excited nucleus can return to its ground state through emission 
of a photon (gamma emission), an electron (beta emission), or by spontaneous fission, 
where  alpha  emission  is  assumed  to  be  a  form  of  fission.  The  latter  two  processes 
cause a change in the nature of the parent nucleus, altering its nuclear properties. The 
energy value of the excited state determines the method by which the nucleus returns 
to its ground state. If the decay process involves the emission of a beta particle, it may 
be extrapolated that a neutron will have to decay to achieve this.  
 
      From  the  theoretical  calculations,  it  is  hypothesised  that  this  decay  can  be 
stimulated  by  bombarding  the  nucleus  with  so-called  ‘resonant’  photons  with  an 
energy of 1.294 Mev. Under normal circumstances the probability of this interaction is 
extremely  low.  However,  Santilli  claims  that  there  is  a  large  resonance  peak  in  the 
reaction  cross-section  (that  is,  the  probability  of  the  said  interaction  occurring)  for 
incident photons with an energy of 1.294 Mev. It is also feasible, though not stated, 
that  the  simple  existence  of  an  excited  nucleus  makes  it  open  to  interaction  with 
resonant  photons,  regardless  of  the  means  of  decay  ultimately  used  to  return  to  its 
ground state energy. Once a neutron is converted into a proton plus reaction products, 
a  number  of  possibilities  could  occur.  Firstly,  the  new  nucleus  could  be  a  stable 
isotope,  in  which  case  further  interactions  with  the  resonant  photons  would  be 
unlikely  and  the  waste  would  have  been  effectively  neutralised.  Secondly,  the  new 
isotope  could  form  a  new  neutron  deficient  nucleus  and  one  of  the  following  could 
then occur: 
   (i)  the nucleus undergoes spontaneous fission, forming two new nuclei and possibly 
        a number of neutrons, which could interact with other fissile elements in the fuel 
        and generate excess heat; 
  (ii)  the neutron deficient nucleus could form a new excited energy state which can 
        simply be categorised as another target radioactive nucleus for the resonant  
        photons. 
If  this  interaction  is  found  to  be  true,  its  application  for  the  disposal  of  radioactive 
waste is profound. Photons with the correct resonance energy can be produced easily 
within a piece of equipment of small volume, such that the neutraliser could be built 

 

8 

on the same site as the parent reactor itself. Effectively, it would allow all radioactive 
waste to be fissioned until all the isotopes form stable nuclei. However, a point to note 
is  that,  taking  a  typical  sample  of  waste,  the  resultant  treated  material  would  not be 
radioactively  dangerous  but  chemically  could  be  a  totally  unknown  concoction  of 
elements and compounds, which may well contain high levels of toxins. Another point 
to note is that stimulated fission would release a considerable amount of heat energy 
from the fuel, and so some sort of effective coolant would be required. However, since 
this heat energy could be used to produce even more power, there seems no reason in 
principle to suppose that what might be termed a secondary ‘waste reactor’ could not 
be built.  
 
      To  continue  quantitative  scientific  studies  of  the  proposed  new  method  for  the 
disposal  of  nuclear  waste  essentially  requires  three  basic  experiments  to  be  carried 
out.  All  should  be  of  reasonable  cost  and  are  certainly  realisable  with  present-day 
technology. Firstly, the experiments of Rauch and his associates [10], in which direct 
measurements of the alterability of the intrinsic magnetic moments of nucleons were 
made, should be repeated and to as high a degree of accuracy as possible. Secondly, 
don Borghi’s experiment [11] on the apparent synthesis of the neutron from protons 
and  electrons  only  should  be  repeated  also.  It  is  interesting  to  realise  that,  despite 
enormous  advances  in  knowledge  in  recent  times,  fundamental  experimental 
knowledge  on  the  structure  of  the  neutron  is  missing  still. Finally, it is necessary to 
determine whether or not gamma stimulated neutron decay will occur at the resonating 
gamma  frequency  of  1.294  Mev.  One  way  of  achieving  this  is  to  have  Tsagas’s 
experiment on stimulated neutron decay [12] completed. However sceptical someone 
may be of these ideas, it seems sensible to perform these experiments to decide if they 
are valid or not. If they are valid, the rewards would be tremendous.       
 
     Even  assuming  that  the  theory  is  found  to  be  sound  and  the  predicted  resonance 
peak  exists,  there  would  still be further practical considerations  when applied to the 
disposal  of  radioactive  waste.  Nevertheless,  it  is  easy  to  see  that,  if  proven,  such  a 
method would save a truly considerable amount of public funds, given the relatively 
low cost of the apparatus as compared with the removal of the need to transport the 
spent  fuel  to  reprocessing  facilities  and  also  with  the  building  of  long-term  storage 
facilities.  The  possibility  of  producing  toxic  by-products  is, however, a real concern 
and a means for the disposal of such by-products, if they did materialise, would have 
to be sought as a matter of urgency.      
 
Conclusion. 
 
      Hence, the world faces an almost exponentially increasing demand for energy due 
to  the  underdeveloped  sections  of  the  world  becoming  more  industrialised  and 
demanding  an  improved  standard  of  living  and  this  position  is  exacerbated  by  the 
rapid  increase  in  the  worlds’  population.  This  ignores  the  possibility  of  a  further 
increase in demand due to the introduction of new technology. This demand cannot be 
met by the use of fossil fuels and, in any case, if it could, the increased use of such 
fuels  would  surely  have  a  less  than  beneficial  effect  on  the  environment.  The 
regenerative and so-called ‘renewable’ forms of energy production are seen to be able 
to make a contribution, particularly locally, but they do not seem capable of having a 
truly  major  effect.  Although  not  mentioned  previously,  it  may  be  noted  that  the 

 

9 

constructing of a first nuclear fusion reactor seems as far away as ever; indeed, many 
feel such a reactor impossible to build. It seems, therefore, that, with the existing state 
of human knowledge, the only viable energy source sufficient for supplying the future 
energy  needs  of  the  world  is  nuclear  power.  It  has  to  be  recognised  that  there  are 
attendant  problems.  People  are,  and  probably  will  be  for  a  long  time,  very  uneasy 
about nuclear power. They’ve seen its awful potential destructive power and so, quite 
naturally, worry about the possibility of accidents, even catastrophic accidents, at the 
plants  themselves.  People  are  also  very  well  aware  of  the  major  problem  posed  by 
nuclear  waste.  Although  the  traditional  methods  of  dealing  with  this  waste  are 
acceptable, they are politically controversial and/or extremely expensive in monetary 
terms, both factors being highly important in the case of the location of underground 
storage facilities. Various others methods have been advocated over the years but not 
one has remained in favour for long. Here attention has been drawn to the relatively 
new ideas proposed by Santilli. They are revolutionary in concept, they do draw on a 
new  form  of  mathematics  and  quantum  mechanics  but  tests  have  been  carried  out 
already  to  see  if  the  theory  works.  More  tests  are  being  carried  out  but  the  initial 
results are positive. If the ideas are eventually proven, they will provide the possibility 
for  a  means  of  radioactive  waste  disposal  which  satifies  the  requirements  for 
convenience, finality of disposal, political acceptance and cost. As with all new ideas 
there is scepticism within the existing scientific community but, if Santilli’s theories 
are  finally  supported  by  experimental  evidence,  few  grounds  for  objection  could 
remain  for  what  could  be  a  revolutionary  technology.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that 
experimentation to validate, or otherwise, Santilli’s theories will continue.   
 

 

10 

References. 
 
[1]   Population Reference Bureau - World population data sheet 2002. 
 
[2]   Cole, G.H.A., in Entropy and Entropy Generation, J.S.Shiner (ed), pp 159- 173, 
                                       Kluwer Acad. Pub., Netherlands, 1996. 
 
[3]   Bell, A., Energy 1 - Fossil Fuels, p 125, 
                              Open Univ., 1995 
 
[4]     www.eia.doe.gov/emeo/ipsr/t21.xls          
 
[5]     Scott, M. & Johnson, D., Nuclear Power 
                                 Open Univ., 1993 
 
[6]     National Gepgraphic, July 2002 
 
[7]     Access to Energy, September 2002 
 
[8]     Santilli, R.M., Foundations of Hadronic Chemistry and references cited there. 
                                 Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 2001 
 
[9]     Santilli, R.M., Isotopic, genotopic and hyperstructural methods in 
                                                 theoretical biology 
                                 Naukova Dumka Publisher, Ukraine, 1996 
 
[10]   Rauch, H. Et al., Phys. Lett. A54 (1975) 425 
 
[11]   Borghi, C., J.Nuclear Phys. 56 (1993) 147 (in Russian) 
 
[12]   Tsagas, N.F., Hadronic J. 19 (1996) 87 
 

 

11 

