DISCOVERY OF DAEMONS MAKES
POWER GENERATION BY DAEMON-ASSISTED CATALYSIS OF LIGHT NUCLEI
FUSION IN A BALL LIGHTNING A REALITY

E. M. Drobyshevski
Ioffe Physico-Technical Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, 194021 St.Petersburg, Russia
emdrob@mail.ioffe.ru

Abstract. In 1997, we proposed a model of the ball lightning (BL) whose activity is accounted for by
energy release in the fusion of light nuclei, most probably, carbon in organic fibers (Proc. ISBL 97,
p.157).  The  fusion  is  provided  by  catalytic  action  of  superheavy  negative  particles  making  up  the
Galactic Dark Matter. We called them DArk Electric Matter Objects, or daemons. The daemons are
assumed to be elementary black holes (M ~ 10-5 g) carrying a charge of up to Ze = 10e. Experiments
have culminated in 2000 by the discovery of daemons. We used the two-screen scintillation technique
with a scintillator ZnS(Ag). Measurements showed the daemon flux striking the Earth to be ~10-9 cm-
2s-1  for  an  object  velocity  of  as  low  as  ~<10-30  km/s.  The  half-year  periodicity  of  the  flux  was
revealed,  which  can  be  assigned  to  daemons  being  captured  into  helio-  and  geocentric  orbits  as  the
Solar system moves through the DM background (see astro-ph/0402367 in http://www.arXiv.org).
    The next step in creating a daemon-mediated BL to achieve controlled energy generation through
catalytic  fusion  of  carbon  nuclei  will  be  a  search  for  methods  of  capture  and  stable  holding  of  a
daemon, which could involve the use of the tip of a carbon fiber, as it apparently occurs in nature.

I. Introduction. General considerations on the nature of the BL

It is believed that the phenomenon called the BL can on different occasions have different, chemical
or  plasma,  nature.  All  these  manifestations  may  be  described  by  an  eyewitness  as  the  BL.  No
objections can be raised against this. But neither of these approaches can explain the energy of ~1-103
MJ released (in an explosive way) in some of the well-documented events. This energy is comparable
to that of a lightning (up to ~103-104 MJ) while exceeding by far the chemical or plasma energy that
can be contained in the visible volume of a BL. On these grounds, Barry [1],  for  instance,  believes
such reports and the  estimates  based  on  them  to  be  simply  improbable.  The  only  consideration  that
could justify this approach is an a priori belief that the BL phenomenon which had defied explanation
for  centuries  still  can  be  interpreted  based  on  the  already  known  relations  and  laws.  While  this
approach appears reasonable enough, one can readily perceive in it the vicious circle logic.
          In  1996-1997,  we  proposed  a  novel  hypothesis  of  the  BL  phenomenon,  which  is  capable  of
accounting for virtually all of its known properties, conceivably even ~103 MJ explosions. It is based
on modern cosmological concepts postulating that the Universe started from Planckian scales, as well
as on the well established fact that the major part of the mass contained in the galaxies (up to 90%)
consists  of  the  so-called  Dark  Matter.  Despite  considerable  efforts  of  researchers,  the  nature  of  the
DM has been remaining a mystery until recently. Following a number of authors [2-4], we assumed
[5] that the DM is made up of Planckian elementary black holes (M ≈ 2-3×10-5 g, rg ≈ 3-2×10-33
 cm)
carrying  also  an  electric  charge  (Ze  ≈  10e),  whose  repulsive  action  is  counterbalanced  by  the
gravitational field. The concentration of such DArk Electric Matter Objects, daemons, in the Galactic
halo is ~10-19 cm-3 for a velocity dispersion of ~200-300 km/s. There should also be a Galactic disk
population rotating about the center of the Galaxy. The velocity dispersion of DM objects in it was
estimated by Bahcall et al [6] to be 4-30 km/s. In passing through the Sun, some daemons slow down
somewhat and are captured first into elongated orbits with a perihelion within the Sun. The resistance
exerted by the matter makes the orbits contract, with the daemons accumulating inside the Sun. If a
daemon moving in an elongated orbit crosses the Earth’s orbit and traverses its gravitational sphere,
the Earth transforms eventually the daemon’s orbit to quasi-circular. 

1

     Heavy negative particles are capable of catalyzing fusion of the nuclei of light elements. For an
illustration,  recall  the  muon-mediated  catalysis  of  deuteron  fusion,  the  process  which  had  been
believed to offer an alternative to future bulky hot-plasma machines for producing energy. The muons
live, however, only 2.2 µs and can catalyze in this time not more than ~100 fusion events.
     Considered from  this  standpoint,  negative  daemons  have  indisputable  assets.  They  are  massive,
stable,  and,  having  a  large  charge,  are  capable  of  catalyzing  fusion  of  nuclei  up  to  oxygen.  The
catalysis of fusion of carbon nuclei by a daemon that entered a thin carbon fiber is the key element of
our BL hypothesis [5, 7]. The attendant phenomena can account for the BL properties. We are going
to recall this hypothesis in Sec. II.
     In 1996-2004, we undertook considerable efforts to detect daemons by various methods. In 2000,
first promising results were obtained [8]. This work has been continuing successfully but regrettably
slowly since then (detected events build up not so fast as we would like because of the astronomical
nature  of  the  objects),  so  that  our  understanding  of  the  properties  of  these  particles  and  of  the
implications of their existence is progressing. The main results obtained in the detection of daemons
will be covered in Sec. III.
          The  discovery  of  daemons  provides  a  reliable  physical  foundation  for  our  BL  hypothesis.  The
major implication of the existence of a daemon BL is the prospect of developing a clean and compact
source of nuclear power with an output of 1-10 kW or more. We have been discussing this subject as
far back  as  1996-1997.  There  are  now  solid  grounds  for  conducting  research  in  this  promising  area
(see Conclusion).

II. Daemon energy release modes and the nature of the BL

Our  ideas  concerning  the  interaction  of  daemons  with  matter  have  undergone  since  1996-1997  a
considerable  progress.  We  came  to  the  understanding  that  the  principal  mode  of  daemon-mediated
energy release in nature is not the catalysis of fusion of light nuclei, a process we thought in 1996 is
realized  in  the  Sun  [9],  but  rather  that  of  proton  decay.  Indeed,  capture  by  a  daemon,  say,  of  a  Fe
nucleus  releases  an  energy  W  =  1.8ZZnA-1/3  MeV  ≈  120  MeV,  which  results  in  emission  of  ~12
nucleons  and  their  clusters.  The  ground  state  radius  of  the  daemon  in  the  remainder  of  the  nucleus
(with  Zn  >  24/Z)  is  less  than  that  of  the  proton,  so  that  the  daemon  captured  by  a  nucleus  resides
actually inside the proton. Nature did not create forces stronger than the Planckian ones. Therefore,
while the details of this process cannot be established presently, it appears plausible that the daemon
catalyzes proton decay [10, 11]. One could suggest here an analogy with the monopole-assisted decay
of  the  proton,  which  was  proposed  by  Rubakov  (he  estimated  the  decay  time  as  10-6±2  s)  [12].  As
follows from our experiments (see Sec. III below), the daemon-stimulated proton decay time ∆τex ≈
10-6 s. Such a process can account for one half of the heat flux (≈20 TW) and the 3He flux out of the
Earth, part of the energetics, and emission of non-electron neutrinos from the Sun, positron generation
in  the  Galactic  nucleus  [13],  and  other  observations.  At  the  same  time,  the  power  liberated  by  the
daemon  in  proton  disintegration  does  not  exceed  mpc2/∆τex  =  0.15  mW,  a  figure  inconsistent  with
usual ideas of the BL.
          Daemon-mediated  catalysis  of  the  fusion  of  light  nuclei,  particularly  of  carbon,  could  be  more
efficient. This is associated with the large cross section of the process at MeV energies, so that fusion
of daemon-captured nuclei should occur in ~10-20±2 s [14]. Therefore, energy release can depend on
the capture rate of nuclei rather than on the rate of their fusion. In graphite, the capture rate of C4+ ions
is  as  high  as  ~2×1015  s-1  [5],  and  the  energy  release,  ~102-103  W,  a  figure  well  consistent  with  a
stationary BL.
     One could conceive of the following scenario of the formation and evolution of a BL. On entering
a carbon fiber with a diameter ~1-10 µm, the daemon starts to capture carbon nuclei and catalyze their
fusion,  12C +  12C →  24Mg + 13.9 MeV. Capture events with energies measured in many MeV eject
Auger and internal conversion electrons (with energies of up to 104-105 keV). In passing through the
fiber material, they drag along up to ~102-103 new electrons. As a result, the fiber charges positively,
and the electrons surround it with a transparent  luminous  halo  of  excited  air  ~10  cm  in  radius.  The

2

deexcited 24Mg compound nuclei ejected out of the daemon neighborhood by internal conversion slow
down in a few mm of the air to produce an internal core well visible in a BL. The positive charge of
the fiber generates an electric field of ~100 V/nm at its tip where the daemon glides to, which is high
enough to confine the daemon to the fiber. The heavy daemon at the fiber tip orients the fiber with its
tip down. The charge streaming down from the tip creates an “electric wind” making it possible for
the fiber to levitate and, if it is asymmetric, to float horizontally, sometimes even against a weak wind,
although usually a light fiber would be dragged by air motion. The BL phenomenon lasts as long as
new carbon nuclei are available for  the  daemon  to  capture,  and  the  conditions  are  favorable  for  the
latter to keep suspended electrically in the fiber. For an energy release of ~102 W, about ~2×10-8 cm-3
carbon is converted to magnesium per second, which for a 10-µm-thick fiber corresponds to its length
of  ~0.2  mm.  These  figures  sound  quite  reasonable  for  particles  of  soot.  In  the  case  of  long  organic
fibers,  the  BL  lifetime  may  be  measured  in  many  seconds.  The  cases  of  rolling  along  horizontal
surfaces, sometimes interrupted by hopping to leave a charred trace can be readily accounted for by
liberation  of  gas  from  the  surface  under  heating.  Such  processes  force  the  daemon-containing  dust
particle to rise, deflect, end so on.
          The  daemon  model  is  capable  of  accounting  for  all  the  known  properties  of  the  quiet  BL.  In
explaining its behavior, we do not step beyond the concepts of conventional nuclear physics and the
processes of catalysis of light nucleus fusion known from muon physics.
     As for the explosive BL manifestations, the highest energies released here are also comparable to
the daemon energetics,  namely,  Mc2  ≈  2000  MJ.  It  is  conceivable  that  a  daemon  coming  in  contact
with  coherent  structures  of  matter  (like  magnetic  domains  in  iron)  with  a  mass  ~M  may  reveal  its
quantum  relativistic  properties.  One  should  not  exclude  the  possibility  of  its  absorbing  these
structures, replicating etc. At any rate, in all cases of explosion of a BL one may suspect its encounter
with iron.
     It thus follows that the BL is a progenitor of a compact generator of nuclear energy which employs
the potential of the new physics prompted by cosmology.

III. Experimental detection of daemons

Our  experiments  aimed  at  detection  of  negative  daemons  offer  a  solid  footing  for  the  above  BL
hypothesis (although the initial impetus to our study of daemons was provided by an analysis of the
BL properties; the very first our experiments dealing with the nature of the BL assumed the possibility
of phase transitions in superdense plasma [15]). 
     The assumptions underlying our search for daemons were not typical of the standard experiments
on detection of DM objects:
     1. Operating on the premise that the daemon flux from the center of the Galaxy moving with a
velocity of ~250 km/s is ~10-12 cm-2s-1, we, unlike the other groups of scientists, focused attention on a
search  for  slow  (~10-30  km/s)  objects  that  had  been  accumulating  in  heliocentric  orbits.  By  our
optimistic estimates, their flux can reach ~3×10-7 cm-2s-1 [5].
     2. Daemons are nuclear active particles:
         (a) First, they are capable of catalyzing fusion of light nuclei. This is why we made attempts at
constructing detectors of Li or Be plates. These experiments did not, however, yield a positive result
[16];
         (b) Second, the binding energy of a daemon to, say, a Zn nucleus is W ≈ 130 MeV, which in the
case of the capture of a nucleus would result in ejection of atomic electrons and of up to ~12 nucleons
capable  of  initiating  a  scintillation.  This  accounts  for  the  advantages  of  ZnS(Ag)  (light  yield  up  to
28%  of  absorbed  energy)  compared  to  the  organic  scintillators  (light  yield  ≤3-4%;  besides,  for  the
carbon nucleus W ≈ 47 MeV, while the excitation energy of the first level in 12C is 4.4 MeV, which is
larger than ~1 MeV for Zn, so that capture of 12C is less probable than that of Zn). 
         (c) Third, a daemon, if finding itself in a proton, decomposes it in a short time. As a result, with
the  passage  of  time  the  daemon  "digests"  the  captured  nucleus  and  becomes  capable  of  capturing  a
new nucleus.

3

          As  follows  from  items  1  and  2,  in  contrast  to  fast  cosmic  ray  particles  whose  mean  free  path
between  interactions  with  nuclei  in  condensed  matter  ~10  cm,  for  the  slow  (~10  km/s)  negatively
charged  daemons  this  length  reduces  to  ~10-3  cm.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  during  the  fairly  long
time  the  daemon  needs  to  fly  past  a  nucleus  the  latter  will  shift  towards  the  daemon.  Therefore,  it
appears preferable to use for daemon detection thin (~10 µm thick) scintillators with a large enough
atomic weight of the type of ZnS(Ag) and the like. They are suitable for detection of daemons (to be
precise,  of  protons  from  the  nuclei  captured  by  them)  while  being  only  weakly  sensitive  to  the
background  and  conventional  cosmic  radiation  (indeed,  MeV-range  α-particles  and  protons  leave  a
sizable part of their energy in such a layer whereas the β and γ radiation will loose less than 10 keV).
Therefore,  in  the  first  stage  of  experimentation  one  should  not  even  worry  about  protecting  the
detector against the radiation background.
          These  principles  served  as  a  basis  in  designing  a  detector  made  up  of  four  modules  [8].  Each
module consisted of two 0.5×0.5 m2 transparent polystyrene plates 4 mm thick, which were coated on
the underside by 3.5 mg/cm2 layer of ZnS(Ag) powder. Both screens were arranged horizontally at a
distance of 7 cm from one another at the  center  of  a  tinned-iron  cubic  case  (0.3-mm-thick  Fe  sheet
coated on both sides with 2 µm Sn layer), 51 cm on a side. The top lid of the case was of black paper.
Black paper separated also the screens. Each plate was viewed with its PM tube from a distance of 22
cm. The PM output signals were fed to a double-trace digital oscilloscope and fixed during ±100 µs
from the trigger pulse. The trigger signal was taken from the top PM tube. If the second trace also had
a signal, the event was recorded in computer memory. Double events with zero time shifts (frequently
recorded in more than one module simultaneously) were assigned to cosmic rays.
     The signals observed were of two types. The first type, with a short leading edge (≤1 µs) and a
trailing edge determined  by  the  PM  tube  load,  is  typical  of  cosmic  rays  and  intrinsic  multi-electron
PM tube noise. We called them Noise-Like Scintillations (NLSs). 
     The second type, Heavy Particle Scintillations (HPSs), is characteristic of scintillations produced
by α-particles. Their oscilloscope traces have a smooth maximum at 2.5-3 µs from the beginning of
the signal, so that their integrated area normalized against the amplitude is ~ twice that of the NLSs.

a 

time 

signals  with 

          Our  purpose  was  to  find  statistically
shift
correlated 
corresponding to particles with velocities ≤30
km/s. And we found such signals. Fig. 1 plots
a  distribution  N(∆t)  of  paired  signals  in  their
(∆t  >  0
for  March,  2000 
time  shift 
corresponds  to  the  bottom  screen  signal
coming  later,  i.e.,  to  the  object  moving
downward) [8,13]. 
  The  daemon  concept  allows  an
 
uncontradictory  interpretation  of  the  N(∆t)
pattern. One clearly sees a maximum at 20 <
∆t  <  40  µs  corresponding  to  a  flux  of  ~10-9
cm-2s-1. Using only the events with an HPS on
the first trace, its confidence level increases to
99.5%,  despite  the  decrease  in  the  total
number  of  events  from  413  to  212.  This
is  not  a
suggests 
consequence  of  interference  of  some  kind,
and that the scintillations are initiated by protons ejected in the daemon-mediated capture of a Zn (or
S)  nucleus.  The  shift  by  ∆t  ≈  30  µs  can  be  accounted  for  if  we  assume  that  the  daemon,  in  its
downward  motion,  crosses  the  bottom  scintillator  without  interacting  with  it,  because  it  is  still
"poisoned"  by  the  Zn  (or  S)  nucleus  remainder.  In  propagating  further  down  while  continuing  its
digestion, one proton after another, the daemon reduces the charge of the nuclear remainder down to
Zn  ≤  9  by  the  time  it  reaches  the  bottom  lid  of  the  case  ~20-30  µs  thereafter.  At  this  instant,  the

Fig.  1.  (---)  Distribution  N(∆t)  of  pair  scintillation
events on their time shift (relative to the upper chan-
nel events). (___) Similar distribution which takes into
account only HPS type events at the upper channel.

the  maximum 

that 

 

 

 

4

daemon  captures  a  new  Sn  or  Fe  nucleus  with  emission  of  protons  and  electrons  (Auger,  internal
conversion, and refilling). Reaching the bottom scintillator, protons with E ≥ 3.9 MeV and electrons
excite in it a time-shifted scintillation.
     We can draw two important conclusions:
          (1)  The  peak  with  ∆t  ≈  20-40  µs  can  be  identified  with  the  velocity  ~10-15  km/s,  which
corresponds to objects falling from the Near-Earth Almost-Circular Heliocentric Orbits (NEACHOs),
where the daemons are transferred by combined gravitational action of the Sun and the Earth. These
orbits cross the Earth’s orbit in the regions of the shadow and antishadow of the Sun, which it creates
in moving relative to the daemon population of the Galactic disk (see also below);
     (2) A comparison of the numbers of protons in the Zn nucleus evaporated and disintegrated in its
interaction with the daemon provides an estimate of the proton decay time of ~10-6 s.
     An analysis of fine features in the N(∆t) distribution is far from a simple problem. The situation is
complicated also by the fact that after a year of various check experiments including variation of the
detector parameters, we understood that, in addition to a noticeable effect seemingly small changes in
detector design exert on the pattern of N(∆t), there is a strong seasonal variation in the daemon flux. A
three-year exposure of the four-module detector maintained unchanged (although it was clear that its
parameters  needed  improving)  showed  convincingly  that  the  deviation  of  N(∆t)  from  const  has  a
period  of  0.5  yr  and  passes  through  a  maximum  in  January-March  and  July-September  [13],  thus
defining the direction which roughly coincides with the Sun’s apex  relative to the stars.
     An analysis of the N(∆t) distribution shows the existence of an upward daemon flux. In particular,
the well-pronounced minimum at ∆t ≈ -30 µs can be explained as due to the daemon’s not having had
digested in 30 µs a Sn nucleus captured in crossing the bottom lid in the case.
     An essential observation is the manifestation of a daemon population with a velocity of only ~5
km/s  (|∆t|  >  60  µs).  This  means  that  part  of  the  NEACHO’s  daemons  is  captured  into  Geocentric
Earth-Surface-Crossing Orbits (GESCOs). As a result of the resistance the GESCO daemons meet in
crossing the Earth’s material, they slow down gradually to build up eventually in a central kernel to a
mass of up to 1019 g and a few cm in size [17]. In their last emergencies above the Earth’s surface, the
velocity  of  the  daemons  may  drop  down  to  a  few  m/s  (cm/s?)  or  less,  a  feature  essential  for
understanding properly the BL phenomenon.

IV. Prospects of realizing a BL and a compact nuclear power generator

It is hard to grasp the staggering implications of the discovery of the daemon, most likely, a Planckian
particle. We are entering the realm of energies ~1019 GeV ≈ 2000 MJ, a realm unimaginable thus far
for the physics of elementary particles. This is the scale from which the Universe and the matter itself
began their existence.
     Practical consequences of the discovery of daemons are more tangible. Catalysis of the fusion of
light  nuclei  offers  a  possibility  of  building  a  compact  source  of  ecologically  clean  nuclear  power.
Actually, Nature demonstrates it to the Man in the form of a BL. What major stages in the realization
of this idea could be visualized?
     It appears that one will have to address the following two major issues:
          First,  one  has  to  slow  down  the  daemon.  Because  of  the  giant  mass  of  the  daemon,  this  is  a
problem of daunting complexity. Indeed, for Ze = 10e, a potential difference of 10 MV is capable of
stopping the daemon moving with a velocity of only 3-4 cm/s. One would have to search initially for
daemons which have already been decelerated by the Earth in their last emergencies above its surface.
It is quite possible that their kinematics is affected noticeably in thunderstorm conditions by pulses of
atmospheric  electricity.  Thus,  detection  of  superslow  daemons  with  V  ≤  1-0.01  km/s  would  be  a
promising approach. Using the phenomenon of daemon-stimulated proton decay seems to make it a
not  very  difficult  task.  Traversal  by  a  slow  daemon  of  a  massive  enough  block  of  a  CsI(Tl)-type
scintillator  will  be  signaled  by  the  appearance  of  multitooth  scintillations  of  similar  amplitudes
corresponding to ~mpc2 = 938 MeV. These teeth are produced by consecutive proton decays occurring
with an average interval of ~1 µs in the remainder of the captured heavy nucleus (Cs or I). In its turn,
the neutron-excessive remainder must also emit a great deal of a somewhat delayed neutrons.

5

     Detection of such events would be already a landmark in science. On the other hand, this would be
a no-loss experiment, because even the absence of  multitooth scintillations  would be  a  challenge  to
science;  indeed,  it  would  imply  a  manifestation  of  some  new  physics,  with  the  proton  or  its
components dropping under the gravitational radius of the daemon, into other dimensions, and so on.
     Second, in order to create the BL and, thus, to realize controlled catalysis of light nucleus fusion,
one will have to capture a superslow daemon in a carbon fiber. This can be done by different means.
Originally  one  will  possibly  have  to  fabricate  a  piled  carbon  fiber  cloth.  The  layers  of  this  cloth
should  alternate  with  scintillation  detector  layers.  If  a  scintillation  signaling  the  passage  of  a  slow
daemon through the system has appeared, a potential of a few MV should be applied to the cloth with
a certain delay to slow down the daemon as it approaches the cloth. On entering a carbon fiber, the
slowed-down  daemon  will  start  to  capture  and  fuse  carbon  nuclei.  Ejection of  electrons  will  charge
the fiber positively to a potential of a few kV, so that if the daemon slides down to the bottom fiber tip
it  will  remain  in  it  in  an  electrostatically  suspended  state.  Here  the  daemon  will  continue  to  fuse
carbon nuclei, with an electronic and a 24Mg halo surrounding it, i.e., a BL will light up!
     Further steps in development of a continuously operating daemon source of power will be a matter
of correct, purely engineering solutions. The need of capturing the daemons will possibly no longer
arise  in  the  future  if  we  learn  how  to  multiply  them  (this  possibility  is  again  suggested  by  BL
observations, see the end of Sec. II).
          Obviously  enough,  the  availability  in  Man’s  possession  of  a  compact  (a  few  cm  in  size),
ecologically clean nuclear source of power fuelled by ubiquitous carbon and offering a power output
of a few kilowatts would be comparable in its tremendous implications to harnessing the fire, because
it would satisfy for centuries the energy demands of Mankind.

References

  1. J.D.Barry, Ball Lightning and Bead Lightning, Plenum Press, 1980.
  2. M.A.Markov, Progr. Theor. Phys. Suppl., Extra Number, 85 (1965); ZhETF 51, 878 (1966).
  3. J.D.Barrow, E.J. Copeland, and A.R. Liddle, Phys. Rev. D46, 645 (1992).
  4. P.Ivanov, P. Naselsky, and I. Novikov, Phys. Rev. D50, 7173 (1994).
  5. E.M. Drobyshevski, in: Dark Matter in Astro- and Particle Physics, H.V.Klapdor-Kleingrothaus 
      and Y.Ramachers (eds.), World Scientific (1997), pp.417-424.
  6. J.H. Bahcall, C. Flynn and A. Gould, Astrophys. J. 389, 234 (1992).
  7. E.M. Drobyshevski, in: Proc. 5th Intnl. Symp. on Ball Lightning, Tsugawa-Town, Niigata, Aug. 
      1997, pp.157-161.
  8. E.M. Drobyshevski, Astron. & Astrophys. Trans. 21, 65 (2002)
  9. E.M. Drobyshevski, Mon. Not. Royal Astron. Soc. 282, 211 (1996).
10. E.M. Drobyshevski, On interaction of black miniholes with matter, Preprint PhTI-1663, 
      St.Petersburg (1996), pp.1-10.
11. E.M. Drobyshevski, Mon. Not. Royal Astron. Soc. 311, L1 (2000). 
12. V.A. Rubakov, Pis’ma v ZhETF 33, 658 (1981); Nucl. Phys. B203, 311 (1982).
13. E.M. Drobyshevski, astro-ph//0402367 (in http://www.arXiv.org) (2004).
14. J.R.Patterson, H.Winkler, and C.S.Zaidins, Astrophys.J. 157, 367 (1969).
15. E.M. Drobyshevski, Yu.A.Dunaev, and S.I.Rozov, Sov. Phys.-Tech. Phys. 18(6), 772 (1977).
16. E.M. Drobyshevski, Phys. Atomic Nuclei 63, 1037 (2000).
17. E.M. Drobyshevski, Astron. & Astrophys. Trans. 23, 49 (2004); astro-ph/0111042v2 (2001).

6

