3D Reconstruction Using Optical Images 

Edward N. Tsyganov, Pietro P. Antich, Dr. R. Mason , Robert W. Parkey, Serguei Y. 

Seliounine, Nikolai V. Slavine, Alexander I. Zinchenko 

The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas 

Department of Radiology, Advanced Radiological Sciences 

5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, Texas 75390-9071 

Abstract 

Various imaging methods for small animals are rapidly gaining acceptance in biology and 

medical  research.  Optical  imaging  is  a  very  fast  and  convenient  method  of  biological 

interrogation, but suffers from significant disadvantages, such as the absence of 3D image 

reconstruction algorithms. This have up until now impeded progress to a quantitative stage. 

Here  we  propose  a  3D  reconstruction  algorithm  for  imaging  light  emitted  at  depths  in 

small living animals. We believe the methods discussed here are novel and lead to a novel 

imaging paradigm, which we call Light Emission Tomography. 

OCIS codes: 100.3010, 170.3010 Image Reconstruction Techniques; 110.6960 Tomography; 170.3660 

Copyright 2004 

Light Propagation in Tissues. 

 

 

1

Introduction 

Optical  imaging  is  a  powerful  tool  in  biology  and  medical  research.  Optical  imaging  uses 

bioluminescence of injected luciferin, or fluorescence of fluorophore or labeled biomolecule with 

an external light source.1,  2 Cooled CCD permit the acquisition of images at very low intensity 

level  in  a  wide  wavelength  range  and  optical  imaging  is  a  fast  and  convenient  method  of 

biological interrogation. 

Among the disadvantages of optical methods are the strong scattering and absorption effects 

in tissue and complexity of light transport, resulting in the absence of a practical, high-resolution 

3D  image  reconstruction  algorithm.  Some  initial  attempts  of  depth  determination  have  been 

made  3  but  remain  to  be  put  into  practice.  Hence,  optical  imaging  has  not  yet  reached  a  full 

quantitative stage.  

Here  we  propose  a  3D  reconstruction  algorithm  for  small  animal  imaging.  We  believe  our 

approach is original one and different from other proposed approaches. We also discuss ways to 

take  into  account  scattering  and  absorption  corrections  to  make  possible  a  quantitative 

description  of  biological  processes  in  optical  imaging.  The  first  formulation  of  the  contents  of 

this paper is in 4. 

Task Formulation 

Although  one  can  perceive  a  3D  image  from  photographs  using  stereo  projections,  this 

requires a certain amount of human brain processing. 

2

 

 

 

 

The crucial requirement in this type of processing is the identification of the same parts of an 

object  presented  in  both  photographs.  Bubble  chamber  experiments  in  high-energy  physics  are 

an example of stereo measurements. In this example, an observer has a sharp detail to act upon, 

such as a vertex of a particle interaction, presented in both photographs.5 This method, however, 

is not practical for use in optical medical imaging. Instead, we propose to use a mathematically 

defined algorithm to do all of the 3D processing, without any observer. 

We  adopted  an  approach  that  is  closely  related  to  3D  processing  in  other  medical  imaging 

modalities.  The  general  method  to  produce  a  3D  image  from  medical  imaging  scans  is  a 

backprojection of measured intensities into the space occupied by the object. In x-ray Computed 

Tomography  (CT)  the  x-ray  source  and  a  detector  position  is  used  to  define  a  backprojection 

line.  Single  Photon  Emission  Computed  Tomography  (SPECT)  uses  the  position  of  a  gamma 

interaction and a directional collimator to backproject lines. In Positron Emission Tomography 

(PET) the line, connecting the coordinates of the interactions of two co-linear gamma rays from 

positron annihilation defines the backprojection. 

In  optical  imaging,  we  must  first  solve  the  problem  of  backprojection  through  the  optical 

objective. An optical objective is a complex optical system, and the backprojection task does not 

appear  to  be  straightforward,  even  for  the  simplest  case  (see  Figure  1).  Even  if  the  effective 

position  and  the  focus  of  the  objective  are  known,  a  problem  remains:  the  object  O  is  3-

dimensional, and the image I by definition has only two dimensions. 

To  solve  the  problem,  we  first  decided  to  use  for  backprojection  only  the  central  line  in 

Figure  1.  In  this  approximation,  the  center  of  the  objective  acts  as  a  pinhole  collimator  in 

SPECT.  Although  the  central  line  differs  slightly  from  the  real  paths  of  the  all  photons,  it 

pinpoints the same position on the object. The backprojection line is produced when the center of 

 

3

a pixel at the image is connected to the effective center of the objective. After this procedure, the 

powerful methodology of medical imaging can be applied for 3D reconstruction of the image.  

 
Figure 1. Simplified schematics of optical imaging. O – the object, I – the image. 

Experiment 

To test this approach, we considered a simple experimental setup and proceeded as follows. 

The setup for experimental tests of the method is presented in Figure 2. The object was simulated  

Figure 2. Setup for experimental tests of the method. 
 
by  two  light  emitting  diodes.  A  simple  digital  camera,  Sony  DSC-P51,  was  used  to  image 

projections. The camera had an 8-bit 1600x1200 pixel CCD with 3.275 µm pixel sizes; the focal 

4

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

distance  was  6.3-12.6  mm.  The  camera  was  mounted  on  a  simple  goniometer.  Figure  3 

demonstrates a raw image of the object. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3. A photograph of the objects at an angle of 0
 

o

. 

o
Twelve angular views with a step of 30

 were acquired to produce the tomographic 3D image 

o
of  the  objects.  We  estimate  an  angular  position  error  less  than  0.1

  (i.e.,  about  0.3  mm  in  the 

image space).  

Image reconstruction 

To simplify the reconstruction task, we converted the raw images to a gray scale. Then, we 

connected  pixel  centers  to  the  center  of  objective  and  backprojected  the  lines  into  the  object 

volume. We took the number of such lines to be proportional to the light intensity detected by the 

pixel. To reconstruct the 3D image we use the Maximum Likelihood Expectation Maximization 

(ML-EM) method 6 given by: 

n

k
j

1
+ =

M

k
j

n
I

∑
∑ =
a
ij

1

i

i

1
=

a
ij

1
k
q
i

      with     

k
q
i

=

na
ij

k
j

                                        (1) 

J

∑

j

1
=

5

Here 

k
iq  is the expected count in line of response (LOR) i if the voxel intensity is 

k
in  (at the k-th 

iteration), 

ija  is the probability of an emission from voxel j being detected along LOR i, M is the 

number of measured events and I is the number of all possible system LOR’s. J is the number of 

Figure 4 presents a projection of the 3D reconstruction using the maximum intensity voxel 

o
projection  technique  (the  voxel  size  is  0.25x0.25x0.25  mm3).  This  image  is  taken  for  a  0
 

voxels in the image.  

rotation. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4. 2D projection of 3D image of the light emitting diodes. Voxel size is 0.25 mm. 

Figure 5 shows 0.5 mm thick slice of the image in the X-Z plane. 

 

Figure 5. 0.5 mm slice of the LED image in the vertical plane. 
 

6

Figure 6 presents a photograph and a maximal intensity voxel projection of a light emitting diode 

in detail. 

Figure 6. Left – photograph of the light emitting diode, right – the maximum intensity voxel projection of the 3D 
image. Rotation of 3D image reveals the diode’s inner structures. 

Figure 7 shows ML-EM 3D reconstruction of a sculptural portrait of a famous composer. This 

Figure shows that the method works not only for emitted, but also for reflected (diffused) light. 

Figure 7. 3D image of a sculpture. Left – a photograph, middle – maximum intensity voxel projection of 3D image, 
right –0.25 mm central slice of 3D image. 

Figure  8  compares  a  photograph  of  a  nude  mouse  taken  in  a  micro  SPECT  scanner  and  a 

maximum intensity voxel projection of the reconstructed 3D image. Obviously, a 3D image of a 

mouse surface is a good complementary modality to a micro SPECT. 

7

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 8. Left: a photograph of a nude mouse in a micro-SPECT scanner, right: a maximum intensity voxel 
projection of the reconstructed optical 3D image. 

Light Diffusion and Absorption 

Because of the high absorption of green and yellow light in hemoglobin, it has been proposed 

to use red or near-infrared light for optical imaging, i.e., the wavelength region between 600 and 

800 nm using red fluorescence proteins (RFP). However, even with low absorption red-infrared 

light,  scattering  processes  present  the  real  difficulty  in  optical  imaging.  For  example,  the 

scattering attenuation coefficient in muscle tissue is 21 cm-1 for 670 nm light,7 nearly 200 times 

that for absorption. 

The main scattering mechanism is light refraction due to spatial variations in the refractive 

indices of a tissue medium. Monte Carlo simulation of photon scattering in biological tissues has 

been  successful.8  Following  this  direction,  we  intend  to  introduce  scattering  corrections  into 

small  animal  optical  images  similar  to  the  deconvolution  approach  adopted  for  PET  scattering 

corrections and system modeling in 9. 

8

The scattering phantom was a truncated cone of wax with light emitting diodes placed inside 

two holes (Fig. 8). ML-EM with no deconvolution reconstructs a distribution confined essentially 

to the outer surface of the phantom. 

Figure 9. Left – wax phantom with two holes for LEDs. Right – two orthogonal views of the phantom in dark. 

Figure 9, (left panel) presents a 0.5 mm slice of the reconstructed image already shown. Figure 9, 

middle,  presents  the  results  of  our  first  attempt  at  deconvolving  light  scattering  assuming  a 

simple  shift-invariant  scattering  kernel.  This  is  patently  a  false  assumption,  which,  however, 

would serve to indicate further avenues for progress. The slice is again 0.5 mm thick. Figure 9, 

right, is a superposition of two images.  

Thus,  this  first  oversimplified  attempt  is  remarkably  successful  taking  into  account  very 

crude simplification of the light transport process. More correct modeling is now in progress. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 10. Wax phantom reconstructed. Left – with no scattering treatment, middle – with scattering deconvolution, 
kernel 8 mm, and right – superposition of the left and the middle images. 

We  have  outlined  a  possible  algorithm  for  3D  optical  image  reconstruction.  While  the 

algorithm works well in the no-scattering case, scattering corrections are expected to be large in 

a  realistic  tissue  media  case.  Although  the  deblurring  mechanism  looks  straightforward,  its 

computational effectiveness should be optimized and is a topic of our future work. 

Conclusion 

Acknowledgements 

We are thankful to Dr. G. Arbique, Dr. M. Lewis, and T. Soesbe for useful discussions and help, 

and Dr. R. McColl for help in computing. The work was supported in part by the Cancer Imaging 

Program (an NCI Pre-ICMIC) 1P 20. 

10

References 

1.  Christoph Bremer, Sebastian Bredow, Umar Mahmood, Ralph Weissleder, Ching-Hsuan 

 

Tung, “Optical Imaging of Matrix Metalloproteinase-2 Activity in Tumors: Feasibility Study 

in a Mouse Model”, Radiology 2001; 221:523-529. 

2.  Christopher H. Contag and Michael H. Bachmann, “Advances in Vivo Bioluminescence 

Imaging of Gene Expression”, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2002, 4:235-260. 

3.  Oliver Coguos, Tamara L. Troy, Dragana Jekic-MsMullen, Bradley W. Rice, “Determination 

of depth of in-vivo bioluminescent signals using spectral imaging techniques”, Proceedings 

of SPIE, v. 4967, 2003, p. 37-45.  

4.  Edward N Tsyganov, Pietro P. Antich, Robert W. Parkey, Serguei Y. Seliounine, Nikolai V. 

Slavine, “3D Reconstruction In Optical Imaging”, Internal Report of The University of Texas 

5.  D. A. Glaser. “Elementary Particles and Bubble Chambers”, in Nobel Lecture Physics, 1942-

Southwestern Medical Center, May 9, 2003. 

1962, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1964, p. 529. 

6.  L. A. Shepp and Y. Vardi, “Maximum Likelihood Reconstruction for Emission 

Tomography”, IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, v. MI-12, No. 2, p. 113-121, 1982. 

7.  R. Srinivasan, D. Kumar and Megha Singh, “Optical Tissue-Equivalent Phantoms for 

Medical Imaging”, Trends Biomater. Artif. Organs, v. 15(2) pp 42-47, 2002. 

8.  Wilson B.C. and Adam G., “A Monte Carlo model for the absorption and flux distributions 

of light in tissues”, Med. Phys., 10, pp 824-830, 198 

9.  Roido Manavaki, Andrew J. Reader, Claudia Keller, John Missimer and Richard J. Walledge, 

“Scatter Modeling for 3-D PET List-Mode EM Reconstruction”, in Record of IEEE Nuclear 

Science Symposium and Medical Imaging Conference 2002, Norfolk, Virginia, November 

 

11

11-16, 2002; Andrew J. Reader et al., “One-Pass List-Mode EM Algorithm for High 

Resolution 3D PET Image Reconstruction into Large Arrays”, IEEE Transactions on 

Nuclear Science, v.49, no 3, June 2002, p. 693. 

 

12

Figure captions 

1.  Simplified schematics of optical imaging. O – the object, I – the image. 

2.  Setup for experimental tests of the method. 

o
3.  A photograph of the objects at an angle of 0

. 

4.  2D projection of 3D image of the light emitting diodes. Voxel size is 0.25 mm. 

Supplementary data: thir-025.mpg, 838 KB. 

5.  0.5 mm slice of the LED image in the vertical plane. 

6.  Left – photograph of the light emitting diode, right – the maximum intensity voxel projection 

of the 3D image. Rotation of 3D image reveals the diode’s inner structures. Supplementary 

data: phot5-v0125.mpg, 2,035 KB. 

7.  3D image of a sculpture. Left – a photograph, middle – maximum intensity voxel projection 

of 3D image, right –0.25 mm central slice of 3D image. Supplementary data: moz025-mod 

8.  Left: a photograph of a nude mouse in a micro-SPECT scanner, right: a maximum intensity 

voxel projection of the reconstructed optical 3D image. Supplementary data: nudm-v025-

9.  Left – wax phantom with two holes for LEDs. Right – two orthogonal views of the phantom 

OK.mpg, 2,384 KB. 

cut.mpg, 3,453 KB. 

in dark. 

10. Wax phantom reconstructed. Left – with no scattering treatment, middle – with scattering 

deconvolution, kernel 8 mm, and right – superposition of the left and the middle images. 

 

13

