 

 

 

COSPAR02-A-00895 
 

Developing Basic Space Science World Wide: Progress Report 

Hans J. Haubold 1 and Willem Wamsteker 2 

1 Office for Outer Space Affairs, United Nations, Vienna International Centre, P.O. Box 500, 
1400 Vienna, Austria 
2 European Space Agency, Satellite Tracking Station Vilspa, P.O. Box 50727, 28080 Madrid, 
Spain 

Abstract 

 
The  UN/ESA  Workshops  on  Basic  Space  Science  is  a  long-term  effort  for  the  development  of 
astronomy and regional and international co-operation in this field on a world wide basis, particularly 
in developing nations. The first four workshops in this series (India 1991, Costa Rica and Colombia 
1992, Nigeria 1993, and Egypt 1994) addressed the status of astronomy in Asia and the Pacific, Latin 
America and the Caribbean, Africa, and Western Asia, respectively. One major recommendation that 
emanated from the first four workshops was that small astronomical facilities should be established in 
developing  nations  for  research  and  education  programmes  at  the  university  level  and  that  such 
facilities  should  be  networked.  Subsequently,  material  for  teaching  and  observing  programmes  for 
small optical telescopes were  developed or recommended and  astronomical telescope facilities have 
been  inaugurated  at  UN/ESA  Workshops  on  Basic  Space  Science  in  Sri  Lanka  (1995),  Honduras 
(1997), and Jordan (1999). UN/ESA Workshops on Basic Space Science in Germany (1996), France 
(2000), Mauritius (2001), and Argentina (2002) emphasised the particular importance of astrophysical 
data systems and the virtual observatory concept for the development of astronomy on a world wide 
basis. Since 1996, the workshops are contributing to the development of the World Space Observatory 
concept. Achievements of the series of workshops are briefly summarised in this report.  
 

 
 
Access to astronomical literature through the NASA Astrophysical Data System 
                                 
          Space scientists need, on a day-to-day basis, access to scientific literature, published in journals, 
proceedings,  and  books  world  wide.  The  ADS  is  the  search  system  of  choice,  particularly  for 
astronomers world wide (Wamsteker et al., 2003). The searchable database contains over 2.5 million 
records.   In addition the ADS  has over 2  million scanned article pages from about 270,000 articles, 

 

dating  back  as  far  as  1829.  There  are  currently  more  than  10,000  regular  users.  ADS  users  issue 
almost  1  million queries  per  month  and  receive  30  million records  and  1.2  million scanned  article 
pages  per  month.  The  ADS  is  accessed  from  almost 100  countries with  a  wide  range  in  number  of 
queries per country.  Approximately 1/3 of the use is from the USA, 1/3 from Europe, and 1/3 from 
other  regions  of  the  world.  In  order  to  improve  access  from  different  parts  of  the  world,  ADS 
maintains 9 mirror sites in Brazil, Chile, China, England, France, Germany, India, Japan, and Russia. 
Automatic  procedures  facilitate  keeping  these  mirror  sites  up-to-date  over  the  network.  Both  the 
search system and the scanned articles in ADS can be accessed through email.  Email can be used by 
users that are on slow  r unreliable Internet connections. It allows access to ADS for people who do 
not have a connection that is good enough to use a world-wide-web browser. ADS is currently in the 
process  of  developing  a  stand-alone  ADS  system that  can  be  updated  through  Digital  Video  Discs 
(DVDs). This would provide access to the capabilities of ADS from sites that do not have any Internet 
access at all. The capacity of hard disk drives is sufficiently large by now to store a  complete ADS 
system on one large disk. 
 
Archives, databases, and the emerging virtual observatories 
 
          Latest  since  the  UN/ESA  Workshop  in  Germany  (1996),  information  abundance  from  and 
ubiquitous  networking  of  ground-based  and  space-borne  astronomical  facilities  became  immanent 
issues  of  the  workshop  programmes. More  and  more  web-based,  distributed research  environments 
for astronomy with massive data sets became available.  
          An  information  overload  with  more  efficient  ground-based  and  space-borne  astronomical 
instruments, larger detectors, multiple wavelength coverage and an increasing number of ground and 
space-based facilities is currently reached.  At  the  same  time, information technology is catching  up 
and  allows  to  be  able  to  use  the  data  regardless  of  where  they  reside.  An  increasing  need  of 
multi-wavelength  observations  to  understand  the  underlying  physics  of  the  observed  phenomena, 
coupled  with  availability  of  formal  and  informal  data  archives  and  the  realisation  that  peta  byte 
databases present a particular challenge to mine valuable data from them, is leading to a federation of 
archives  to  set  standards,  a  co-operation  among  computer  scientists  and  astronomers  to  create  the 
infrastructure that will lead to a virtual observatory: A cyberspace location where the data is ready to 
be analysed (Wamsteker et al., 2003).   
          Given the high cost of modern astronomical observing facilities it is evident that efforts must be 
made to optimally exploit the data in order to maximise the return on investment. This concept was 
first implemented on a large scale for the International Ultraviolet Explorer mission and subsequently 
by  Hubble  Space  Telescope,  and  has  since  been  taken  over  for  other  space-borne  and  large 
ground-based facilities. The European HST Science Data Archive is located at the European Southern 
Observatory  (ESO)  (Wamsteker  et  al.,  2003).  It  has  been  extended  to  include  data  from  ESO 
telescopes  and  instruments,  especially  the  Very  Large  Telescope  (VLT)  and  Wide  Field  Imager 
(WFI). It  was  thus  natural  to  design  the  archive  such  that  queries  could  be  extended  across  its  full 
content, regardless of the origin of the data. This constituted a first step towards a virtual observatory. 
The ASTROVIRTEL program, first established in 1999-2000 with funding provided by the European 
Commission, makes it possible for scientists to use this facility for their investigations. At the same 
time it allowed to establish science requirements for archive cross queries, and to define capabilities 
required for virtual observatories.  
 
Conclusion 
 
          Over  the period  of  time from 1991  to 2002,  close to 1200  scientists from 124  countries have 
participated  at  or  contributed  to  the  series  of  workshops.  The  UN/ESA  Workshops  in  Mauritius 
(2001)  and  in  Argentina  (2002)  have  undertaken  a  detailed  assessment  of  the  achievements  of  the 
workshop  series  (Wamsteker et  al.,  2003).  This  assessment  will  be  concluded  and  published  at  the 
forthcoming UN/ESA Workshop on Basic Space Science, Beijing, P.R. China, 8-12 September 2003. 
 
References 
 

Hill, H.A. and Kroll, R.J., Long-term solar variability and solar seismology, AIP Conference  
          Proceedings, American Institute of Physics, New York, 1992, pp. 170-180. 
Wamsteker, W., Albrecht, R., and Haubold, H.J., Developing Basic Space Science World Wide: A  
          Decade of UN/ESA Workshops, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 2003. 
 

