 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Hadron thermodynamics, concavity and negative heat capacities” 
 
 
 
J. Dunning-Davies, 
Department of Physics, 
University of Hull, 
Hull HU6 7RX, 
England. 
 
 
J.Dunning-Davies@hull.ac.uk 
 
 
 
 

Abstract. 
     Problems associated with the nonextensivity of a hadron gas were discussed some 
time  ago.  Recently  the  topic  has  come  to  light  again  and  here  earlier  results  are  re-
examined in the light of new knowledge and attention is drawn to problems with the 
more modern work. 
 

 

1 

 
   Hadron thermodynamics deals with a gas of indistinguishable particles whose mass 
spectrum  is  taken  to  have  the  form  Kmaebm.  Some  time  ago  [1],  a  long-standing 
inconsistency  was  revealed  and  corrected.  That  inconsistency  amounted  to  the  non-
extensive nature of the expression for the entropy found in some treatments by way of 
the microcanonical ensemble contrasting sharply with the extensive  nature found by 
way of  the canonical  ensemble. The  former result was shown to be due  to an error. 
After  correction  of  that  error,  the  two  ensembles  were  found  to  lead  to  the  same 
expressions for the thermodynamic quantities if a ‡
 -7/2. However, in the case when  
a  <  -5/2,  the  microcanonical  approach  was  used  to  consider  the  situation  when  one 
particle  was  appreciably  heavier  than  the  rest.  Due  to  the  fact  that  the  resulting 
entropy was not found to be superadditive, it was concluded that this resulting entropy 
expression was unphysical.  However, since that time, it has emerged [2] that it is the 
property of concavity of the entropy which embodies the essence of the Second Law 
of  Thermodynamics,  not  the  property  of  superadditivity  as  used  to  be  felt  to  be  the 
case.  Hence,  that  conclusion  of  the  earlier  article  [1]  must  be  in  error  since  the 
discussion followed the lines of noting that the entropy expression was not extensive; 
then  noting  that  it  was,  in  fact,  concave;  and,  by  using  an  earlier  result  [3]  that 
concavity  plus  superadditivity  implies  extensivity,  making  the  deduction  that  the 
entropy must not be superadditive. Hence, it was shown quite clearly that for a hadron 
gas which had one particle appreciably heavier than the rest and for which a < -5/2, 
the entropy expression is concave and, therefore, since it is the property of concavity 
which  is  now  known  to  embody  the  essence  of  the  second  law,  this  entropy 
expression must be physically acceptable. 
 
    It  is  this  property  of  concavity  which  excludes  the  possibility  of  negative  heat 
capacities in closed systems. It must be realised that that is all that it excludes. As has 
been  pointed  out  previously  [4],  negative  heat  capacities  in  open  systems  are  quite 
acceptable because, since the Euler relation is of the form 
 

TdS  =  dU  + pdV  -m dN, 

 
the expression for the heat capacity in an open system is of the form 
 

C
V

=

T

(cid:6)
(cid:4)
(cid:5)

S
T

(cid:3)
=(cid:1)
(cid:2)

V

(cid:6)
(cid:4)
(cid:5)

U
T

(cid:3)
(cid:1)
(cid:2)

V

m

(cid:6)
(cid:4)
(cid:5)

N
T

(cid:3)
(cid:1)
(cid:2)

V

,

 

 
where  m   and  N  represent  chemical  potential  and  number  of  particles  respectively. 
Since  the  second  term  on  the  right-hand  side  of  this  expression  has  a  negative  sign 
associated  with  it,  the  sign  of  the  heat  capacity  itself  must  remain  indeterminate. 
Hence, the heat capacity of an open system could be negative. This conclusion does 
not violate the Second Law. However, an open system cannot be isolated and, if such 
a  system  and  its  surroundings  are  in  equilibrium  and  are  considered  together  as  a 
composite  system,  then  that  composite  system  will  be  a  closed  system  possessing  a 
positive heat capacity.  
 
   It is often the case when negative heat capacities are discussed that there is a tacit 
assumption that systems possessing such heat capacities are allowable and attention is 
confined  to  drawing  conclusions  based  on  this  assumption.  However,  it  is  clear  [4] 

 

2 

¶
¶
-
¶
¶
¶
¶
that the existence of such heat capacities in closed systems could lead to violation of 
the Second Law of Thermodynamics; it is only in open systems that the existence of 
such heat capacities is permissible.  
 
   It might be noted also that the various ensembles used in statistical thermodynamics 
are merely mathematical tools. A particular ensemble is chosen for use in a particular 
case  either  because  it  corresponds  closely  to  the  experimental  position  being 
investigated or, possibly more usually, because it proves easier to use. However, the 
truly  important  item  is  the  actual  physical  system  under  investigation.  The  results 
obtained  by  using  a  particular  ensemble  are  only  as  good  as  their  reflection  of  the 
behaviour of that system. Hence, if one ensemble leads to one set of conclusions but a 
second leads to a different set, it is the whole theoretical discussion that should come 
under  review.  Obviously,  as  pointed  out  by  Hill  [5],  if  systems  are  extensive,  all 
ensembles lead to the same results. It is only when systems seem non-extensive that 
problems arise. If an entropy does turn out to be non-extensive, it was usual to restrict 
attention to results obtained via the ensemble most closely aligned with the physical 
detail  of  the  system  under  discussion.  The  modern  trend  to  use  so-called  ‘Tsallis’ 
statistics should be viewed with caution, as is evidenced by the article by Nauenberg 
[6] and the series of queries raised by Lavenda [7]. It must be remembered always that 
this ‘Tsallis’ entropy was not simply postulated in 1988, it had been known and used 
by information theorists for many years before that, with many of the results available 
in the book by  Hardy,  Littlewood and Pólya [8]. Hence, questions about  use of this 
expression in physical problems obviously abound. 
 
   Finally,  it  might  be  noted  that  there  are  real  problems  associated  with  both  string 
theory and also inflation as has been discussed elsewhere [9] and all this raises serious 
questions, which need to be answered, about some of the material in the recent article 
by  Cobas,  et  al  [10],  where  the  existence  of  negative  heat  capacities  for  physical 
systems  seems  to  be  regarded  as  acceptable  and  the  fact  that  ensembles  are  simply 
mathematical  tools  which  enable  the  discussion  of  physical  systems  and  no  more, 
having little relevance when separate from those systems, seems overlooked. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

3 

References. 
 
[1]   J. Dunning-Davies and P. T. Landsberg; J. Stat. Phys. 46 (1987) 87 - 98 

    

[2]   B. H. Lavenda and J. Dunning-Davies; Found. Phys. Lett. 3 (1990) 435 - 441 
       B. H. Lavenda; Statistical Physics, A Probabilistic Approach, Wiley, 1991 
 
[3]   P. T. Landsberg and D. Tranah; Collective Phenomena 3 (1980) 73 - 80 
 
[4]   see J. Dunning-Davies: Concise Thermodynamics, Albion Publishing, 1996 
 
[5]   T. L. Hill; Statistical Mechanics, McGraw-Hill, 1956 
 
[6]   M. Nauenberg, Phys. Rev. E67 (2003) 036114 
 
[7]   B. H. Lavenda; see articles listed under arXiv:cond-mat and arXiv:phys 
 
[8]   G. Hardy, J. E. Littlewood and G. Pólya; Inequalities, C.U.P., 1934. 
 
[9]   J. Dunning-Davies; Hadronic Journal 22 (1999) 117 - 122 
 
[10]  M. A. Cobas, M. A. R. Osario and M. Suárez; arXiv:hep-th/0406043 

 

 

4 

