 
Two-dimensional coupled photonic crystal resonator arrays 
 
Hatice Altug* and Jelena Vučković† 
Edward L. Ginzton Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-4088 
 
 
Abstract 

We present the design and fabrication of photonic crystal structures exhibiting electromagnetic bands that 

are flattened in all crystal directions, i.e., whose frequency variation with wavevector is minimized. Such 

bands can be used to reduce group velocity of light propagating in arbitrary crystal direction, which is of 

importance  for  construction  of  miniaturized  tunable  optical  delay  components,  low-threshold  photonic 

crystal lasers, and study of nonlinear optics phenomena. 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

  

* Also at the Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, 
altug@stanford.edu 
† Also at the department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, 
jela@stanford.edu, http://ee.stanford.edu/~jela/jv_files/group.html 
 

 

Small group velocity is crucial in variety of applications, ranging from optical delay components 

and low-threshold lasers, to the study of nonlinear optics phenomena. Although photonic crystals [1,2] can 

be  employed  to  achieve  slow  group  velocities  at  their  band  edges  [3,4],  this  is  limited  to  a  very  narrow 

range  of  wavevectors  in  one  particular  direction.  Moreover,  a  large  variation  of  the  group  velocity  with 

wavevector  (group  velocity  dispersion)  implies  a  significant  distortion  in  the  shape  of  an  optical  pulse 

propagating  through  the  structure  [5].  Recently,  coupled  resonator  optical  waveguides  (CROW’s)  in 

photonic crystals were also proposed for reducing the group velocity in a wide range of wavevectors, but 

still only for propagation in a narrow region along the waveguide axis [6].   

In  this  letter,  we  describe  design  and  fabrication  of  two-dimensional  (2D)  arrays  of  coupled 

photonic  crystal  resonators  that  exhibit  flat  bands  (reduced  group  velocity)  over  the  entire  range  of 

wavevectors  and  in  all  crystal  directions.  This  decreases  the  sensitivity  of  coupling  and  minimizes 

distortion  of  an  optical  pulse  propagating  through  the  structure.  Beside  construction  of  optical  delay 

components,  this  proposal  is  also  of  importance  for  building  low  threshold  photonic  crystal  lasers  with 

increased output powers. Demonstrated distributed feedback photonic crystal lasers [7] can provide larger 

output powers than photonic crystal micro-cavity lasers, as they rely on high density of optical states near 

the band edge. However, it has been predicted theoretically that the reduction in the group velocity over a 

wide range of wavevectors (so called group velocity anomaly) would lead to an even larger decrease in the 

lasing  threshold  [8],  and  this  has  been  in  part  employed  in  lasing  from  one-dimensional  (1D)  CROW 

structures [9]. As a result of a large group velocity anomaly in any photonic crystal direction, our proposal 

can enable even higher output powers while preserving low lasing thresholds. Likewise, electrical pumping 

of  these  structures  is  not  as  formidable  task  as  in  presently  pursued  photonic  crystal  microcavity  lasers. 

Finally,  in  combination  with  nonlinear  optical  materials,  the  proposed  2D  coupled  photonic  crystal 

resonator arrays (CPCRA) could also be used for exploration of 2D discrete solitons [10,11] or construction 

of optical switching arrays. 

                   2D CPCRA’s studied in this article are constructed by periodically modifying holes of a square 

lattice photonic crystal slab; for example, every third lattice hole in both x and y directions can be removed, 

as shown in Fig. 1a. Fig. 1b shows the unit cell and directions of high-symmetry points, Γ, X and M of the 

CPCRA from Fig. 1a. This structure can be viewed as a 2D array of single-defect photonic crystal cavities 

 

2

formed by removing a single air hole. An isolated cavity of this type supports three types of modes: doubly 

degenerate  dipole,  non-degenerate  quadrupole  and  non-degenerate  monopole.  As  the  lattice  perturbation 

increases  (i.e.,  the  defect  hole  radius  decreases)  modes  are  pulled  from  the  air  band  and  localized  in  the 

band  gap.  The  first  mode  to  be  localized  in  this  process  is  the  dipole,  and  the  last  is  the  monopole.  The 

cavity  mode  with  the  highest  quality  factor  (Q-factor)  is  the  quadrupole  that  has  been  discussed  in  more 

detail in Ref. 12.  

                    All  theoretical  results  presented  in  this  letter  were  obtained  by  the  three-dimensional  finite-

difference time-domain (3D FDTD) method [13], and the spatial resolution in discretization of the structure 

is 20 computational points per interhole spacing a. The thickness of the slab is d=0.55a, the hole radius is 

r=0.4a,  and  the  refractive  index  is  assumed  to  be  n=3.5,  corresponding  to  silicon  (Si)  at  optical 

wavelengths. The application of Bloch boundary conditions (BC) to four edges in the x- and y-directions 

allows the analysis of only one unit cell of the structure, and the use of the mirror BC at the lower boundary 

in  the  z-direction  (in  the  middle  of  the  slab)  reduces  the  computation  time  and  enables  the  excitation  of 

Transverse  electric  (TE)  field-like  (even)  modes  only.  The  frequency  resolution  of  our  calculations  is 

2.2.10-3 in normalized units of a/λ, where λ corresponds to the mode wavelength in air.  

When cavities are tiled together in the CPCRA, coupled cavity bands form. Band diagram of the 

structure from Fig. 1a is shown in Fig. 2. Since its unit cell (shown both in Fig. 1b) is three times bigger 

than the unit cell of the original square lattice, it is necessary to fold the square lattice band diagram three 

times in order to plot it together with the band diagram of the CPCRA. In Fig. 2 we assume that positions 

and shapes of the guided bands of the original square lattice photonic crystal remain unchanged inside the 

CPCRA.  This  is  only  an  approximation,  as  their  frequencies  may  decrease  due  to  the  increased  overlap 

with high-index material, and new minigaps may open at high symmetry points of the CPCRA. Dielectric 

and air bands are shaded in gray, as we are primarily interested in the modes located in the band gap; these, 

in turn, are the portions of the band diagram that are easily accessible experimentally. Although the coupled 

dipole bands are located below the top air band edge in the XM direction, they are included in the diagram 

to clarify the explanation of the coupled mode characteristics. The dipole mode is doubly degenerate in an 

isolated  cavity  [12,13],  but  it  splits  into  two  bands  corresponding  to  the  x-  and  y-dipoles  in  the  CPCRA 

structure, as shown in Fig. 2. The x (y) dipole has electric field polarized in the x (y) direction at the center 

 

3

of the defect and radiates mostly in the y (x) direction. The inset (d) of Fig. 2 shows the z-component, the 

only non-zero component of magnetic field in the middle of the slab, for the x-dipole band at X point. Due 

to the previously described radiation pattern, the x-dipole is coupled more in the XM direction than in the 

ΓX direction, and its band is thus flatter in the ΓX than in the XM direction. The situation is opposite for 

the y-dipole. The preferential coupling of the dipole mode in one lattice direction implies that its coupled 

band properties are similar to a 1D CROW case. In the ΓM direction, x- and y- dipoles combine and form a 

diagonal  dipole.  We  have  also  observed  a  coupled  monopole  band  in  this  CPCRA  structure,  whose 

magnetic field pattern at the Γ point is shown in the inset (c) of Fig. 2. Due to its poor confinement and Q-

factor, there is a significant slope in the coupled band. 

The coupled band of our primary interest is the one corresponding to the quadrupole mode. The 

insets  (a)  and  (b)  of  Fig.  2  show  magnetic  field  patterns  of  this  mode  at  X  and  M  points,  respectively.  

Quadrupole  radiates  equally  in  the  four  ΓM  directions  and  its  radiation  pattern  thus  has  a  four-fold-

symmetry; this also implies that the mode couples equally to all of its four neighbors in a particular lattice 

direction  (e.g.,  ΓM  or  ΓX).  The  lack  of  preferential  coupling  directions  and  a  good  lateral  confinement 

(high Q-factor) lead to a flat coupled-quadrupole band. In addition, this mode is non-degenerate and does 

not split into several sub-bands as the coupled-dipole band.  

The coupled-quadrupole band can be made even “flatter” by inserting a larger number of photonic 

crystal  periods  between  the  defects,  and  thereby  reducing  the  coupling  between  individual  resonators,  as 

proposed in the 1D CROW case [6]. Fig. 3 shows the coupled-quadrupole band for 2D CPCRA structure 

with three and four-rows of photonic crystal between cavities, while all other photonic crystal parameters 

(d, a, and r) are the same as previously. As the number of photonic crystal rows between cavities increases 

from  two  to  four,  the  band  becomes  flatter,  and  the  frequency  difference  between  its  maximum  and 

minimum  is  reduced  from  6.6.10-3  to  2.2.10-3  (the  frequency  resolution  of  our  FDTD  simulation). 

Moreover,  it  is  possible  to  control  the  position  of  this  band  within  the  band  gap  by  employing  defects 

consisting  of  holes  with  reduced  radius.  This  increases  the  overlap  of  the  field  with  air  region  inside  an 

individual resonator, and leads to an increase in the mode frequency. As an illustration of this effect, Fig. 3 

shows a coupled- quadrupole band of the same three-row CPCRA, but with reduced effect air holes radius 

 

4

(rd=0.3a)  inserted,  whose  frequency  is  significantly  higher  relative  to  the  three-row  CPCRA  with 

completely removed defect-holes (rd=0). Coupled-quadrupole bands for even and odd number of photonic 

crystal  rows  between  cavities  are  convex  and  concave,  respectively;  this  is  a  result  of  the  difference  in 

refractive index at midpoints between resonators, i.e., different overlap of the coupled mode field with low 

and high-index regions.   

Finally,  in  order  to  demonstrate  the  feasibility  of  our  proposal,  we  have  fabricated  the  designed 

CPCRA  structure  in  silicon  on  insulator  (SOI)  for  an  operating  wavelength  of  1550  nm.    The  desired 

thickness  of  the  Si  membrane  can  be  achieved  by  wafer  thermal  oxidization  followed  by  the  HF-wet 

etching  of  the  formed  oxide  layer.  Fabrication  process  starts  with  spinning  of  the  PMMA  layer  with 

molecular weight of 495K on the sample surface, followed by baking on a hot plate at 170oC for 30 min; 

this results in the measured PMMA thickness of 320 nm. Electron-beam lithography is then performed in 

Raith  150  system  at  10  keV,  and  the  exposed  PMMA  is  developed  in  3:1  IPA:IMBK  mixture  for  50 

seconds  and  rinsed  in  IPA  for  30  sec.  Patterns  are  subsequently  transferred  to  Si  using  magnetically 

induced reactive ion etch with HBr/Cl2 gas combination. After dry etching, remaining PMMA is removed 

by O2 plasma process. Finally the oxide layer underneath Si was removed by immersing the sample into the 

buffered HF, which leads to a freestanding Si membrane. Fabricated structures are uniform over large area, 

as  can  be  confirmed  in  the  SEM  pictures  shown  in  Fig.  1c.  The  experimental  study  of  the  fabricated 

structures is in progress and will be reported in our forthcoming publication. 

In  conclusion,  we  have  shown  that  2D  CPCRA  can  be  used  to  achieve  bands  exhibiting  slow 

group velocity over all wavevectors and in all crystal directions. Design can be modified to tune the band 

slope and its frequency within the band gap. This proposal is important for construction of low-threshold 

photonic  crystal  lasers  with  increased  output  power,  optical  delay  components,  and  study  of  nonlinear 

optics  phenomena.  Furthermore,  use  of  refractive  index  modulation  in  such  structures  could  enable 

dynamically  tunable group  velocity  and realization  of  optical  devices  that  could  store  and  release optical 

pulses. The study presented here can be extended to three dimensional coupled resonator arrays, as well as 

to other types of resonators, including those not based on photonic crystals.  

 

5

Acknowledgement  This  work  has  been  supported  in  part  by  the  MURI  Center  for  Photonic  Quantum 

Information  Systems  (ARO/ARDA  program  DAAD19-03-1-0199),  the  Charles  Lee  Powell  Foundation 

Faculty Award and the Terman Award.  

 

6

References 

[1] E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2059 (1987)  

[2] S. John, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2486 (1987) 

[3] K. Sakoda, Optics Express 4, 167 (1999) 

[4]  M.  Notami,  K.  Yamada,  A.  Shinya,  J.  Takahashi,  C.  Takahashi,  I.  Yokohama,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  87, 

253902-1 (2001) 

[5] J. D. Jackson, Classical electrodynamics, 2nd edition, John Wiley and Sons, New York 1975 

[6] A. Yariv, Y. Xu, R. K. Lee, A. Scherer, Optics Lett. 24, 711 (1999)   

[7] S. Noda, M. Yokoyama, M. Imada, A. Chutinan, M. Mochizuki, Science 293, 1123 (2001)  

[8] K. Sakoda, Optics Express 4, 481(1999 

[9] T. D. Happ, M Kamp, A. Forchel, J. Gentner, L. Goldstein, Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 4 (2003) 

[10] J. W. Fleischer, M.  Segev, N. K. Efremidis, D. N. Christodoulides, Nature 422, 147 (2003) 

[11] D. N. Christodoulides, N. K. Efremidis, Optics Lett. 27, 568 (2002) 

[12] H. Ryu, S. Kim, H. Park, J. Hwang, Y. Lee, J. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 3883 (2002) 

[13] J. Vuckovic, M. Loncar, H. Mabuchi, A. Scherer, Physical Review E 65, 016608, (2002)  

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
                      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure Captions 

Figure 1.  (a) Schematic configuration of the simulated and fabricated structure. (b) Unit cell and location 

of high symmetry points. (c) SEM picture of the fabricated two-layer CPCRA. 

Figure  2.  Band  diagram  for  two  layer  2D  CPCRA  structure  (shown  in  Fig  1.)  for  TE-like  modes  only. 

Dielectric and air bands of the original square lattice are folded three times separately in ΓX, XM and Γ M 

and shaded in gray.  Magnetic field pattern along the z-direction for: (a) quadrupole mode at X point; (b) 

quadrupole mode at M point; (c) monopole mode at Γ point; (d) x-dipole mode at X point. Unit cell in real 

space and location of high symmetry points in the reciprocal space are also shown in the inset. 

Figure 3. Band diagram for the coupled quadrupole band in the CPCRA with two, three, or four photonic 

crystal  rows  between  the  resonators,  and  with  resonators  consisting  of  either  completely  removed  single 

holes  (rd/a  =  0)  or  with  reduced  radius  holes  (rd/a  =  0.3).  Insets  show  unit  cells  of  three  and  four  row 

structures in real space, and locations of high symmetry points in the reciprocal space. Regions below the 

top edge of the dielectric band and above the bottom edge of the air band of the original square lattice are 

shaded in gray. 

8

 
 
 

  

FIGURE 1 
 
Authors: H. Altug, J. Vučković  
 
 

9

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

FIGURE 2 
 
Authors: H. Altug, J. Vučković 
 

10

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

FIGURE 3 
 
Authors: H. Altug, J. Vučković 
 

11

